THE BLACK ROBBER. A ROMANCE

Ulric St. Julien, a younger son, resents having been put into a monastery by his parents while his elder brother is still at large. He falls in love and elopes with a novice named Julia on the proceeds of her diamond rosary. When Julia, some years later, is carried off by vengeful monks whose execution of her is prevented only by her spontaneous death, Ulric joins a band of robbers. He and his comrades kill the guilty abbot and burn the monastery, after which he goes on to become a local legend - the robber dressed in mourning who appears and disappears at will and may be in league with the supernatural.

When Ulric joins the robbers he leaves his child Valentine to the grudging care of its uncle Reginald, whose wife, Matilda Fitz Ormond, is also secretly married to Evlin de Granville, a previous commitment. She and Evlin have a daughter, Issena, with whom Valentine will be in love later on. Evlin is a foundling, but before the end of the first volume he has been identified as the child of an aristocratic hermit. (The hermit, after having been sold into slavery in Constantinople, married a woman named Zelinda just in time to save her from a harem. Evlin as an infant fell through a hole into an old mine and was given up for dead.)

The story has three villains. The first, Ulric's brother Reginald, is perhaps the least vicious of the three. He is unkind to Valentine, permitting him to suppose himself a "victim of icy charity" rather than a nephew, and he dies in his cups, after which Ulric becomes Earl. The second and principal villain is Oswald, who is responsible for and profits from Evlin's murder in the forest. Desiring Issena, who loves Valentine, he has her kidnapped and proposes to her; when she refuses he tries to stab her but is prevented by the specter of murdered Evlin, her father. He does stab her mother Matilda, whose body he throws into a glen, and has Valentine imprisoned for the murder. When, after a melee between the bandits and Oswald's men, Ulric is captured and put in an adjacent dungeon, father and son are reunited and escape by the aid of a faithful servant. Issena escapes too, separately. The escape of Ulric and Valentine introduces the third villain, or villainess, for the useful servant recommends them to the care of the noblewoman Rodolpha, whose life he once saved. After Valentine goes to hunt for Issena, Rodolpha's growing passion for Ulric leads her impulsively (she is sorry immediately afterward) to murder her husband. Ulric is horrified and leaves as soon as he can. He finds Valentine, who has already found Issena, but soon Rodolpha comes and finds all three of them. Through her influence with the king, Valentine and Ulric are brought to trial for various crimes and condemned to death. Matilda's timely arrival clears Valentine of charges that he has murdered her, and Ulric is pardoned for his banditry. But clemency comes too late for the latter; the sight of his son on the verge of execution causes him to die of shock. Rodolpha goes mad, and the severed heads of Oswald and a criminal associate are stuck on the battlements.