THE WITCH OF RAVENSWORTH. A ROMANCE

Ann Ramsey, "better known by the title of the Hag," has one tooth, a gray cat that drinks blood, a large raven, and a reputation for eating babies. Snakes and toads slither through the poisonous plants that grow around her cabin. Her neighbor, Baron La Braunch, though more attractive is comparably wicked; he is dissolute and deceitful, and rumor says that he has been cruel to a woman called Gertrude. As the story begins he marries Bertha, a virtuous widow wfth a small son. At the wedding feast a previously empty chair is suddenly occupied by the Hag, who raises the toast "Misery to the ~bide." She appears again at the christening of La Braunch's new son Hugo and is about to baptize the child herself when they take it away from her. After the birth of Hugo, the Baron begins to wonder whether his little step-son Edward, whom he has begun to dislike, will live to grow up; should he die, Hugo could inherit his estates. Hoping that the Hag will predict an untimely death for Edward, La Braunch asks for a look at the future. The Hag requests a child as payment for her help and the Baron obligingly supplies Edward, which makes his principal question more or less unnecessary; she takes the boy away and returns with a bloody knife to announce that he has been sacrificed to Askar. La Braunch is shown the demon Ugall and a specter woman who terrifies him much more than the demon does. Though invited to a meeting with Askar, he does not return to the Hag until eleven years later. By that time his son Hugo has died and he wishes to be rid of Bertha in order to marry his seduct1ve neighbor Alwena.

The Hag tells La Braunch that this time he must certainly come to the meeting with Askar. There his initiation requires him to stab a loathsome corpse resembling the specter which so terrified him eleven years earlier. Now the Hag promises to kill Bertha, and Bertha suddenly disappears. The marriage to Alwena is not happy, for the two are equally vicious; after an unexpected lecture from the Hag about the sources of felicity, La Braunch feels miserable and somewhat penitent. He and Alwena murder each other - she poisons him, he stabs her - and the castle by La Braunch's will goes to a local woodcutter whose wife has expressed a wish to be rich. A stipulation in the will sends the woodcutter to a tower where he finds the bodies of a woman and a child, and a written confession of La Braunch's crimes, beginning with the seduction and poisoning of Gertrude. Further, the woodcutter discovers that a foundling left by the Hag on his doorstep is the missing Edward. Bertha, too, is alive. Nor is the Baron dead, for the Hag did not provide Alwena with real poison; he has gone into a monastery. The Hag herself is Gertrude, heavily disguised. Edward inherits the castle, which assures the fortunes of both his real and foster parents, and Gertrude, formerly the Hag, enters a convent.