MELMOTH THE WANDERER. A TALE

Melmoth lived his natural life in the late seventeenth century but because he dabbled in the occult has been condemned to wander for 150 years, trying to persuade someone to change places with him. His quest has been fruitless. When the frame story takes place, his 150 years are at an end and he comes home to Ireland to die. His story is pieced together from a series of manuscripts and recitations which provide extraordinarily complicated tales within tales.
First, young John Melmoth inherits the Wanderer's house from his miser uncle. There he finds a disturbing portrait and a manuscript. The manuscript, badly damaged, tells in
fragments the story of
1) Stanton who becomes interested in the mysterious Melmoth and pursues and investigates him. His obsession results in his being put into a madhouse. Melmoth comes there to offer him his bargain. Stanton's manuscript includes a fragment of story about some Spaniards, told to him by a woman in an inn.
2) Later, John Melmoth is told a very long story by a Spaniard. The Spaniard's Story, autobiographical, is the account of a man who, forced to be a monk, ill treated at his monastery, betrayed in an escape attempt, and taken by the Inquisition, is offered Melmoth the Wanderer's bargain. He escapes burning and is taken in by a Jew, who sets him to copying a manuscript, as follows:
3) Tale of the Indians. Melmoth has a long relationship with Immalee, who is an altogether innocent and beautiful child of nature. He loves her so much that he intends to leave her alone, and she loves him. His resolves weaken, and after she goes to live with her Spanish family he secretly marries her and fathers a child. He is at his most human in these passages. But the Inquisition takes her, and he once again offers his bargain. She refuses him though she still loves him. Earlier in this story, Immalee's father hears
4) The Tale of Guzman's Family. Money that should have gone to this family was left to the church. Starving, they turn hostile toward one another. Melmoth makes his offer to the father, but the father tries to kill all his family instead of accepting. Finally the will is proved false and the family can eat again, so Melmoth fails to strike a bargain.
5) Also, Melmoth himself tells Immalee's father a story, The Lovers' Tale. This is a historical tale about the Mertimers. Two cousins love each other, but the girl is left at the altar with no explanation. It seems that an ambitious parent has lied to the boy and said that the pair are brother and sister. He becomes imbecile and she takes care of him for the rest of his life. She too repulses Melmoth's offer.
Melmoth at the end of the story dreams of falling into hell and of all the people who refused his bargain rising past him and leaving him. In the morning he is mysteriously and ominously gone.