THE SISTERS OF ST. GOTHARD. A TALE

Blanchard, esteemed for his virtue and benevolence, is leading an obscure life in Switzerland with his two adolescent daughters, Adelaide and Rosette. Rosette is amiable, warm, pliable, and a bit giddy; her father worries about her and tries to teach her that vice can look like felicity. There is a representative and, one suspects, highly symbolic incident in which Rosette leaves her flock to follow the music of a passing regiment, causing a pet lamb to fall over a precipice and her father to injure himself in a futile attempt to recover it. Rosette subsequently meets and finds herself attracted to Montalvo, a passing nobleman with no honorable intentions. Despite the precautions of her father, Montalvo one day lures her into a carriage with the promise of a secret wedding; she is not heard of again for some time. Adelaide, meanwhile, has met another and very different sort of nobleman. Clementine and his mother, the widowed Countess Rimini, have a vehicular mishap on their way horne from Bern and are assisted by the Blanchards. When the Countess asks to borrow Adelaide for a visit, her father (or foster father, as he suddenly reveals) consents, if reluctantly, for Adelaide is a much steadier character than Rosette.

Clementine and Adelaide fall in love, but Clementine was engaged in infancy to his proud and insensitive cousin Valetta. He is trying to respect the wishes of his dead father, compounded by the injunctions of his rapidly declining mother. Further, he will be disinherited if he does not marry Valetta, so Adelaide refuses him for his own good. He loses his head and offers her a separate establishment as his mistress, causing her to run away, accompanied for protection by a reliable priest. Fortunately Valetta herself breaks the contract and the couple marry with clear consciences. One day, through sheer chance, Adelaide finds Rosette, gravely ill, with her baby; Montalvo gave her a wedding with a counterfeit clergyman. Clementine demands that Montalvo marry Rosette properly; a duel ensues. Nobody is killed, but Montalvo acquires a permanent limp which embarrasses him greatly. Rosette goes home and dies on her father's grave, embracing the turf. Adelaide and Clementine bring up Rosette's little girl, who grows up to marry their son and unite the families of the foster sisters.