COUNT ST. BLANCHARD, OR, THE PREJUDICED JUDGE. A NOVEL

The prejudiced judge is the President De Ransal, and the description is somewhat misleading. His general reputation for impartiality is excellent, but he does harbor a temporary prejudice against the hero of the story, Dubois, because of a long-standing animosity to Dubois's purported father. As a young man the President married secretly, against his father's wishes, a lovely young woman named Eugenia, whose proper fortune had been usurped. When she was eight months pregnant, his father sent him out of town on prolonged legal business, after which he was abducted and detained for six weeks. Home at last, he found that his wife had disappeared and that Eugenia's great uncle had been led by a crafty servant to suspect him of dishonoring and murdering her. Eugenia had in fact been abducted by her father-in-law on her way to Mass but could not be discovered in any of the convents to which her grieving husband appealed. Finally after the death of his father he received a letter from an abbess, asking for his wife's board money, then in arrears. When he recovered Eugenia, she reported that their son at six weeks old had been taken away from her. She feared that he was dead. The couple, reunited for sixteen years, have been unable to find their child but because of a servant's tale they have come to believe that Dubois's father, an old apothecary who calls himself Rhubarbin, knows more about the child than he will tell - hence the prejudice.
Dubois, the hero, has been friends since childhood with the Marquis D'Elcour, an excellent young nobleman who makes no distinction between Dubois's social standing and his own. Dubois is trained as a physician, rather against his inclination, but is enabled by his learning and good sense to save the life of Adelaide, the Marquis's beautiful sister with whom he falls in love. Adelaide understands and fears the class prejudice of her father, who she believes will have Dubois locked up if he discovers that they are in love. Two years later she is obliged to run away to an abbey in order to avoid a forced marriage to a man so impeccably eligible that she can invent no objection to him. On the way she is robbed and tied to a tree by her own footman, but she is rescued by Dubois, who suddenly reappears from Italy. Near the convent to which Dubois is conducting her they are arrested by soldiers in the employ of Adelaide's father. Dubois is jailed and badly treated, while Adelaide is sent to a Parisian convent run by a grudge-holding woman who was jealous of Adelaide's mother. The servant who robbed Adelaide lied about an elopement between his mistress and Dubois, and her irate father fully intends to see Dubois hang. To this purpose he attempts to prejudice the President, who is to be Dubois's judge.
The President begins to find Dubois more convincing than Adelaide's father but plays tough for a while in hopes of frightening information from Rhubarbin. He discovers by this ruse that Dubois is his own lost son. Rhubarbin, who had just lost his own infant, without whom he could not control his elderly wife's estate after her death, found the infant Dubois providentially left on a doorstep. Dubois is identified by the indelible heart painted on his arm with foundling-hospital ink. But when the President and Rhubarbin (who has been forgiven) go to the prison to see Dubois they find him dangerously ill. He is moved to a better cell from which he unwisely tries to escape with a fellow convict. He soon collapses and sends a note to Rhubarbin, after which he is installed in a nearby house belonging to the President. When he is slightly recovered he is introduced to his new parents and his new title - Count St. Blanchard. Dubois's own small estate is made over to a deserving female cousin, who is advised to marry Rhubarbin and is quite willing to do so. Adelaide's father is browbeaten into reasonable behavior and permits Dubois to marry his daughter.