THE DEMON OF SICILY

Ricardo, who lives with his profligate father and a sinister priest in a purportedly haunted castle, falls in love with a beautiful peasant, Louisa. Louisa is kidnapped by three masked men, agents of a lecherous Count, but is rescued by a nobleman formerly ruined by Ricardo's father and currently leading and reforming a troop of banditti. Ricardo inherits from his father and restores the nobleman's fortune. Having discovered that his mother was murdered at his father's instigation, Ricardo explores the haunted wing of the castle for her remains, wishing to bury them, but she is not to be found.
Ricardo and Louisa marry and have two children. The first, a boy, they give to a monastery, as he has no prospect of income. The second, Angellina, grows up to be beautiful and good. Not so a friend's daughter who is left in Ricardo's care. She is vain, passionate, and has affairs. It becomes necessary to send her to a convent, where she is given the name of Agatha. When Ricardo and Louisa die, Agatha's father becomes Angellina's guardian. He desires her and employs the usual villainous devices to make her marry him - threatening, locking her up, etc. She loves a nice young man named Lorenzo who helps her escape to a convent, whence she is extricated by papal decree. She discovers that her grandmother died of stab wounds there, which is why Ricardo did not find her body in the castle. Lorenzo is thrown into a dungeon but escapes in time to break up a forced wedding between Angellina and her guardian. Lorenzo and Angellina elope to a monastery to be married.
At the monastery we find 1) the bones of an unfortunate trio - Ugo de Tracy; his wife, Fair Isabella, who after her suicide was decapitated by her frustrated would-be rapist; the villain, who does ghostly penance once a month; 2) Bernardo the monk, driven by Satan to a frenzy of lust, and willing to sacrifice his soul for a chance at a beautiful woman; 3) bad Agatha, who, when not distracted by sexual opportunity, spends her time trying to escape. Both she and Bernardo kill nuns who hinder their designs. The eloped couple unfortunately ask Bernardo to marry them; the devil puts it into his head to kill the groom and make off with the bride, and the monk nearly succeeds in this piece of villainy. But Lorenzo recovers from the effects of Bernardo's dagger and sounds the alarm, thereby both saving Angellina and causing the apprehension of Agatha, whose current attempt at escape is promising well. Agatha and Bernardo are taken by the Inquisition and burned with generous descriptive detail.