THEODOSIUS DE ZULVIN, THE MONK OF MADRID. A SPANISH TALE, DELINEATING VARIOUS TRAITS OF THE HUMAN MIND

Alphonso de Mellas dies in a shipwreck, leaving his twin sons orphaned. Orlando is educated by his uncle Don Diego, Osmund by his uncle Don John. Their educations are very different, for Diego is a reformed rake who keeps Orlando rather cloistered, while John, dissipated and extravagant since the death of his family, gets Osmund a tutor and sees that he mixes with boys of his own age. Orlando grows up shy and awkward but certain that he can unmask all temptation, none of which he has experienced. Osmund is polished and worldly but has been influenced for the good by his uncle's old steward Fabian. The uncles send both boys, at seventeen, to Madrid with Osmund's tutor Zadok Bellzenipp; they wish to see the effects of their educational systems in practice. On their way to Madrid the boys have experiences, one night at an inn, which will have later repercussions. The monk Father Theodosius, who often stops at the inn and permits nobody to sleep in the room next to his, is there with a young girl. Orlando spies on him and perceives that he is a sorcerer. Things not in the room appear in a mirror, most notably a man with a stabbed and bloody young woman draped over his arm. Orlando keeps his discovery a secret, hoping to unveil the monk's wickedness and consequently to cut a fine figure in Madrid. In the same inn Osmund's servant finds and gives to his master a silver casket, apparently left behind by the girl, with a miniature portrait, gold bracelets, a letter to "Leonora" from Theodo- sius, and some manuscript poetry. Osmund falls in love with the girl in the miniature.
In Madrid Orlando fantasizes and wishes with conspicuous futility that people would admire him. He falls in with a gambler named Don Esau, though warned by his more sophisticated twin that the odds are against him. Despite further warnings from the tutor, he becomes fond of gaming and loses money. Further, he is gulled, seduced, and blackmailed by a prostitute. His servant Otto encourages him in wickedness. Orlando seduces an innocent girl and steals money from his host's desk. Father Theodosius catches him at the latter trick and in return for his protection and silence makes Orlando his slave. He encourages Orlando to rape his host's daughter Cassandra, whom for reasons of his own he wishes ruined or dead, but Orlando is deterred by a mysterious groan. Meanwhile Laura, the victim of Orlando's seduction, has confessed and run away, her mother has gone insane, and her father has killed himself. Following Orlando when he leaves town, Theodosius nearly browbeats him into poisoning a gloomy stranger who turns out to be his own father, Alphonso, alive after all. Wherever he goes Orlando is followed by Theodosius, who can apparently go through locked doors and who shows up when least expected. At one point Orlando is persuaded to steal the life savings of a cottager who has nursed him through a fever. With this stake he starts life in a new spot and cultivates a reputation for piety, even charitably establishing in a hovel the mendicant family of the cottager whom he ruined. When he is caught by the husband in an attempt to rape the wife, he has the man sent to the galleys and the whole family put in jail on a trumped-up charge of robbery. They all die. Later yet he dices with Don Esau on the latter's deathbed and wins all his money. When he attempts to remove Laura, who has turned to prostitution, from the establishment where she works, he discovers that she has taken poison. Once again Theodosius comes just as Orlando is considering repentance and directs him to stab a particular man. As Orlando stands with his dagger ready, an earthquake knocks down part of the castle; his victim, who has been drugged and veiled, is revealed to be Alphonso. The assassination attempt having been thwarted by the arrival of Osmund and his friend Albert, Theodosius kills Orlando and himself.
While all this has been going on with Orlando, Osmund has been having a different set of adventures. It is he whose letter of introduction has installed the twins in the home of Don Everard de Gosmond, father of Cassandra and Albert. Theodosius is the family's confessor, a situation that seems to cause them some unease. Albert admits that his father has some gloomy secret in which the monk seems to be involved. Spending a night in the forbidden east chambers of the house one night after a narrow escape from an amorous assignation, Osmund hears groans and is seized by a cold hand. After he discovers the original of the miniature in a cottage outside the city he becomes involved in further mystery, for the girl disappears after her elderly female companion dies. Ursula, the old woman, earlier told Osmund that Leonora was languishing under her villainous father, Theodosius, and signed an accusation that Theodosius had murdered a girl called Lucretia de Ravillina. Meanwhile Albert's father is trying to make him marry a girl whom he does not know - Leonora again. In fact, Theodosius has carried off Leonora and locked her up in Don Everard's east wing. He is furious that Leonora and Osmund love each other and tortures Osmund by telling him with a smile that Don John is at that moment being stabbed on a forsaken heath, which is true. As we discover after the timely arrival of Osmund and Albert at the attempted assassination above, Leonora is not Theodosius's daughter after all but Don Everard's. As the result of a colorful background of jealousy, assassination, and babyswapping, Theodosius earlier murdered his own daughter Lucretia in mistake for Don Everard's child. He has been a villain all along - guilty of, among other things, seduction, fraud, intimidation, murder, and a manipulation whereby his own father died a slave rather than profiting from a political exchange. Various mysteries about who was groaning, and who had the miniature when, are resolved at the end, and all the good people recover from their illnesses and traumas.