MORE GHOSTS!

Mary Marney lives in a Yorkshire abbey with her father and Thomas Grey, a young man whom her father has raised and intends for her husband. They are constantly in the company of Betsey Bolton, the vicar's daughter, who has an eye to Thomas herself. Hoping to take Thomas away from Mary, she contrives a story about seeing the ghost of Thomas's mother, who sends him the message "Beware of incest!" She manages to persuade him that his guardian Mr. Marney raped his mother and that Mary is doubtless his half-sister. When he confronts Mr. Marney with this fantasy Mr. Marney is highly annoyed and says that if Thomas is such a great fool he will not save Mary for him after all. Thomas's mother is Mr. Marney's sister, who did something so bad that he helped her leave the country. Thomas is sent away to college, and Mary is exposed to a season in London. These expeditions into the world are not altogether successful. Mary does not care for men of fashion, especially since they at first think her Mr. Marney's mistress and are rude to her, but she does meet a nice clergyman named Mr. Seymour, whom she finally marries. She has a light attack of Modern Philosophy but gets over it.
Thomas drinks and gambles and goes to a fortune-teller, wearing feminine clothing for a prank. What is worse, Bet- sey announces that she is pregnant, a plausible story, for she came weeping to Thomas's room the night before he left for college and managed to seduce him. When he refuses to marry her, his guardian threatens to take him out of college and apprentice him. He is extricated from this difficulty at last by the admission of Mary's brother Charles that he has had Betsey too, and that he knows her to have been plot- ting to acquire Thomas.
The "ghost" that has been making occasional appearances in the abbey during the course of these social entanglements is discovered to be Thomas's living mother. She has a com- plicated and bigamous history of her own, which resulted
in her taking the veil in a French convent, where she was thought to have died. In fact, the nuns were evicted dur- ing the French Revolution and she found her way to her old
home, where she has been hiding ever since.