THE MYSTERIOUS WANDERER

As much of the story depends upon events already past, an early explanation of histories will be useful,
Frederick Howard's father and uncle are on bad terms, having quarreled over their father's will and other matters. Frederick has been given by his father to Captain Howard, the uncle, not out of generosity but because the father feels that the pair are disgustingly similar - upright, good-tempered, etc.
Captain Howard as a young man flirted with an ugly spinster named Deborah Tangress, who subsequently proposed to him. His father and brother pressed him into an intolerable
marriage with her. Later he left her and met, loved, and bigamously married Ellenor. When Deborah pursued him to his new home, Ellenor, pregnant, ran away, telling the Captain to look her up after Deborah's death but not before.
Tilton is an old friend of the Captain's. He has been struggling to retain an inheritance in the Barbados. He supplies useful pieces of information, including the tale of
Holly Howard, who was married under duress to Sir Horace Corbet. Sir Horace became a domestic tyrant, while the man Holly really loved died of a broken heart. Since her husband's death her son has been behaving unkindly toward her and has at last run away.
The mysterious wanderer of the title is a desperate seventeen-year-old who asks protection from Captain Howard and begs to come on board his ship, the Argo. He says that he is Henry St. Ledger and sticks to this story, though the Captain questions him closely, secretly hoping - the boy looks like Ellenor - that Henry is his son. Later the Captain discovers that his fugitive is young Sir Henry Corbet and tells him that he will have to go home. Sir Henry leaves and apparently drowns, a circumstance the more painful for the Captain since a letter left behind by the boy demonstrates that he has seen Ellenor and might have effected a reunion. At last Ellenor is recovered and Deborah conveniently dies. The shocker of the story is that Sir Henry (he is still alive and Ellenor is his aunt) had good reason for abandoning his sorrowing mother - she destroyed the will by which he would have inherited, locked him up, planned to have him declared insane, and once threatened his life with a knife. Her confederate is the steward, by whom she was pregnant when she married Sir Horace. The fruit of that union was a girl, Louisa, with whom Sir Henry has been falling in love. Even at the end of the novel the steward tries to kill Sir Henry with a chisel (a nice touch; his name is Mallett) but is prevented. The wicked mother runs away and later dies of fever. The virtuous find suitable mates.