THE CASTLE CHAPEL. A ROMANTIC TALE

After the death of his wife, O'Shaughnessy O'Neill discovers that he can buy back a decayed castle formerly owned by his family. He moves into it with his two children, Eugene and Grace, and his sister, Miss Agnes Flora Judith, who is put in charge of their education. The children are likeable and high-spirited, their aunt well meaning but highly eccentric. She is a great believer in phrenology and decides that if she can shave the children's growing heads and fit them with metal caps their cranial bumps will be certain to turn out on the most desirable pattern. When she suggests this, Eugene is convulsed with laughter, Grace furious. But Miss Agnes Flora Judith is a determined woman and persuades the local barber/apothecary to drug and shave Grace, who faints from rage and horror when she sees herself in the morning. Family relationships are strained for some time. Eugene, who goes as a midshipman, is also affected by his aunt's teaching; he is at one point court-martialed but let off because his examiners find his phrenological justifications so lunatic.
While Eugene is away, Grace acquires as a companion the miller's daughter, Rose. Eugene, home again, falls in love with Rose and persuades her to make private vows of their own devising, though the pair delay both marriage and consummation. At about this time in the story the villain enters; he is Mr. Mordaunt, former owner of the castle, who has stored things in some unused rooms. Rose and Grace, influenced by romance-reading, peep into his storerooms and imagine, when one night they see three men bury a chest in an excavated grave, that the chest contains bones and that Mr. Mordaunt is involved in the business. The author's tone suggests to the reader (certainly to this reader) that the girls are having Radcliffean fantasies. Nevertheless the chest does contain bones, the bones of Mordaunt's wife; not liking her, he impulsively put laudanum among her medicines as she recovered from childbirth, and she died of it as he had half intended. The child (Rose, we discover later) was taken away by a nurse. Mordaunt is shocked and confused to discover his daughter still alive - he had been told that he was dead - and kidnaps her with the apparent and paradoxical intent of restoring her rights. At any rate he proposes to provide for her by marrying her to Eugene, whom he has earlier persecuted to the extent of having him falsely accused of murder. Rose, however, has all along felt so guilty about her indiscreet vows to Eugene that she has once tried to kill herself, and these feelings of shame are now aggravated by the acquisition of a homicidal father. Merdaunt takes her at her request to a furnished cottage in North Wales, whence she wanders off to be brought back in a hearse, dead of a broken heart. Eugene goes away to fight for Greece.
Grace, in the meantime, has been having difficulties of a lighter sort. While little more than a child she promised herself to the orphan William Delamore, her friend, who was leaving for the East Indies. She was not in love with him but found the exchange of letters and locks of hair diverting. The William who returns some years later is an impressive figure, and Grace is obliged to fight for him against a scheming and unscrupulous rival. She is never in much danger of losing him, but there are misunderstandings which delay for a while their happy ending.