DI MONTRANZO, OR, THE NOVICE OF CORPUS DOMINI. A ROMANCE 

As the novel begins, Adelheida is dying an agonizing death. She has been poisoned, presumably by someone in the household, but all the occupants - her secret husband Huberto, who was brought up with her as a foundling; her father, the Conte Alverani; her servant Vannina - are clearly appalled. Not even the Conte's confessor and confederate, the evil monk Father Brazilio, seems in control of events. Dying, Adelheida tells her husband some terrible secret and swears him to slience. That night her father leaves the castle for a life of eternal solitude; his explanatory note vaguely alludes to guilt. The rest of the novel is devoted to explaining the events of this calamitous night and to discovering Huberto's family origins and uncovering various usurpations and villainies.
A few other principal characters are introduced: the Duca di Monte Melissario, whom Huberto nurses after he is attacked by banditti; the pilgrim Isidore, who claims to have an identical twin sister in a convent; a virtuous old canon, who takes an unusual interest in the vicissitudes of the other characters. Major explanations occur on the occasion of Huberto's trial by the Inquisition for the murder of his wife and the concealment of a nun. Isidore is female - hence the "twin sister" fantasy; she has been indulging in transsexual dressing and is in love with Huberto, while Vannina is misguidedly in love with her. The Duca discovers her to be his missing child. The Conte Alverani rushes in and stops Huberto's examination on the rack to announce that he killed Huberto's father (his own brother) and usurped Huberto's inheritance. He is wrong, however; his brother survived his attack. The benevolent canon reveals himself as Di Montranzo, Huberto's living father. Adelheida was accidentally poisoned when Huberto brought her a restorative which had been doctored by the Conte and Father Brazilio on the assumption that he wanted it for himself. Father Brazilio has been responsible for a lot of trouble; he loved Huberto's mother and pursued her so unremittingly that she killed herself rather than be raped by him. Huberto (now Flodoardo) and Hemelfride (formerly Isidore) decide to marry.