THE CASTLE OF OTRANTO

An ancient prophecy asserts that the castle and lordship of Otranto will pass from the present family "whenever the real owner should be grown too large to inhabit it." Thus the usurper Manfred has extra cause for discomfort when a giant helmet falls out of the sky and crushes his only son, who, though unprepossessing, was on the eve of marriage to the beautiful Isabella. Manfred, never very much in control of his passions, takes out his rage and frustration on the peasant Theodore, who has chanced to observe that the helmet is like that on the statue of Alphonso the Good, an earlier Prince of Otranto. Further excited by the news that the statue's helmet is missing, Manfred imprisons Theodore under the giant helmet without any food. Other supernatural portents follow the helmet - a portrait, for instance, sighs and leaves its panel to walk about the castle - but they are perhaps no more alarming than Manfred's increasingly frantic behavior. Spurred by a combination of lust and family ambition, he decides to divorce his almost unbearably virtuous wife Hippolita and marry Isabella himself. Since Manfred has acted for some time as her foster father and has nearly become her father-in-law, the suggestion borders upon incest; Isabella is so shocked and frightened that she flees down a subterranean passage to sanctuary in the church of St. Nicholas. She is aided in her escape by Theodore, who has himself escaped through a gap in the courtyard's paving.
Manfred's troubles increase along with the supernatural phenomena. Father Jerome refuses to render up Isabella or to sanction a divorce; servants report seeing a giant leg and foot in the great chamber. When Theodore, having been recaptured, is brought out for execution, Manfred's daughter Matilda (who has spoken to him from her window) discovers that Theodore looks like the portrait of Alphonso the Good, to which she has always been inordinately attracted, and Father Jerome discovers from the prisoner's bloody-arrow birthmark that Theodore is his own son. Amid the negotiations and pleadings that ensue a hundred gentlemen led by Isabella's father Frederic arrive carrying a gigantic saber. Theodore thereby gains a kind of reprieve that permits him to escape with Matilda's help and to fall in love with her. Later, mistaking the particulars of a situation in which he finds himself, he wounds Isabella's father; he has in another sense wounded Isabella herself, for she has fallen in love with him and is jealous of his affection for Matilda. At last Manfred, who has been trying to obtain Isabella by offering Matilda to Isabella's father, is defeated by a specter which appears to Frederic and reminds him of his duty. He gives in to passion once again and stabs his own daughter in mistake for Isabella, whom he supposes to have spurned him for Theodore. Just as she dies the castle is thrown down by a giant specter of Alphonso the Good. Subsequent revelations make clear that Theodore is the true heir to Otranto; he is finally persuaded to marry Isabella in order to "indulge [his] melancholy" for Matilda in her company. Manfred and Hippolita go into religious houses for the rest of their lives.