THE HAUNTED PALACE, OR, THE HORRORS OF VENTOLIENE. A ROMANCE

As Edward Fitzallan, intent on vengeance, is pursuing his brother-in-law Mr. Owen through a volcanic explosion, he encounters an organization that is interested in punishing the same villain. Owen is guilty of crimes against the Society as well as domestic indiscretions like accidentally shooting his wife in the neck while trying to shoot his mistress. Before the Society can execute Owen he kills himself. Frederick, a gentleman and captain of the Society, makes friends with Edward and relates his own history: Frederick, his brother Charles, and their father all loved the same woman, Mrs. Brisac; both sons left home on the assumption that, whomever she married, relationships would be awkward around the house. After some adventures Frederick was made to join a secret society, taking oaths and drinking animal blood.
The Society appears to have two branches, one dedicated to good and one to evil, which are constantly at war with one another. All members, whether living or dead, are obliged to come to a big annual meeting. Edward is sworn in. Ventoliene, where the friends are staying, fairly bristles with supernatural phenomena, including music, several ordinary ghosts, and a company of phantoms who come out of the lake during a storm and dance around the humans, singing about how they will rip out their insides and drink their blood. On the appointed day Edward and Frederick go off to the annual meeting, which does indeed include dead members, some visibly pursued by demons. The two friends are instructed to go back to Ventoliene and bury some bones. Ghosts direct them to the well-preserved body of a young woman, which has been sunk in a lead-weighted box, and to a one-handed female skeleton in a wall. When they give proper burial to the former, the whole chapel lights up and seraphic voices sing "I know that my Redeemer liveth." The skeleton seems to have been walled up alive for sedition; she also at one point killed a woman - the one in the lake, apparently - with a poisoned orange. The ghosts having been laid, the heroes go on to resolve their romantic difficulties. Frederick finds that Mrs. Brisac married none of the family, preferring to stay single; but, when he contracts a fever from disappointed love, some interested friends persuade her to have him. His brother Charles marries another woman who looks like Mrs. Brisac, and Edward falls in love with the niece of someone he met in the Society.