THE HAUNTED PRIORY, OR, THE FORTUNES OF THE HOUSE OF RAYO. A ROMANCE FOUNDED PARTLY ON HISTORICAL FACT

On a December day sometime in the fourteenth century a large stranger with a harp and a white beard appears in a little village in Castile. Assured that he will be welcomed by the local philanthropist, Don Isidor de Haro, he goes to the castle; his host recognizes him as his old guardian, the Baron de Rayo. Rayo's daughter Maria and his nephew Henry (sometimes in the novel called Henrico) Gonsalvo married and had a child, Alphonso. The baby was put to nurse so that Maria might follow her husband into war. Peter the Cruel (the enemy) won the war and put Gonsalvo in prison for treason, permitting the family estates to be confiscated by Punalada, a deceitful friend of Gonsalvo's. Now Rayo is hunting for his no-longer-infant grandson, having heard that Gonsalvo has been executed. He hopes that Don Isidor's son, who resembles Gonsalvo, is the missing boy, but the resemblance is apparently coincidental; however, he is invited to stay and help educate the boy, who is also called Alphonso.

When Don Isidor's Alphonso grows up and is presented at court, he wins the confidence of the king but makes enemies in consequence. Sent on a trip to Lisbon while the king tries to catch the troublemakers in their deceit, he saves two women from kidnappers. One is beautiful and causes him to fall in love, despite the brevity of the acquaintance. Later he finds himself at the haunted priory, where he hears mysterious organ music and the sound of immense wings, sees and unnatural light, and is confronted with a bloody and sighing figure. A goatherd tells him that the place belongs to Punalada and explains some elaborately nasty family history involving the accidental impalement of a young man intent upon raping his sister. Alphonso goes home and tells Rayo the story, which for various reasons seems of possible relevance to the death of Gonsalvo.

When Alphonso and his household return to the priory they clear away rubbish from a flight of stairs to the accompaniment of spectral sighs and music. At the bottom of the stairs Gonsalvo's ghost leads them to his grave and to various pieces of evidence which they confiscate. Later they discover in the dungeons of the priory, chained in his mother's cell, a local charity boy who looks like Don Isidor. The woman, who is indeed Maria, makes a lunge at young Alphonso, crying "My husband!" The others have to restrain her. She recovers from her shock and is able to nurse Alphonso when he is near death from a wound and deranged from the shock of being informed that the woman with whom he fell in love is his sister; she had been raised in a separate household. The nursing is fortuitous, for Donna Maria discovers on his body a birthmark like a bunch of grapes and knows him for her own son; thus he is not after all the brother of Don Isidor's daughter. An old nurse confesses to some well-meant babyswapping. Punalada has cut his throat after writing his confessions and an evil confederate of his is sent to the Inquisition.