ANCIENT RECORDS, OR, THE ABBEY OF SAINT OSWYTHE. A ROMANCE

Sir Alfred St. Oswythe arrives at his decaying abbey with his small daughter Rosaline. He has been reduced by the villainy of his own brother Rudolph to this gloomy residence where his life and his daughter's will be complicated, as it turns out, by the proximity of two women (one good, one bad) who have loved him unrequitedly. He is pleased to discover that the good one, Lady Ruithvina Urbandine, is his near neighbor. She has been sent to that place by the Baron, her husband, to live with her son Constantine and with Gondemar, her husband's son by a previous marriage. Constantine grows up to be good, Gondemar bad, Rosaline beautiful. Gondemar nurses for Constantine a growing hatred founded in jealousy: Constantine will inherit from his mother; as a child Gondemar was rescued from a fire by a servant while Constantine was saved by the mother; Lady Paulina, whom Gondemar wishes to marry, fruitlessly prefers Constantine. Paulina is important to the story, for (we discover at last) "the House of Edmondville," which mysterious warnings tell Rosaline to beware, refers to her. At the beginning of the novel, however, Paulina is using another title available to her and is living in the Baron's household on the understanding that one of the boys will marry her and thereby enable her to keep her fortune.

Ultimately both of the boys and also their father the Baron want Rosaline for their own, but Constantine is the one she loves. On the side of the lovers is only Lady Ruithvina (Rosaline's father has been called away), and her attempt to marry them secretly is interrupted by the wicked Baron. Gondemar chases and attempts to rape Rosaline and tries, apparently successfully, to murder his brother; subsequent assaults on Rosaline are prevented by Constantine's "ghost." In the midst of these difficulties Rosaline's father dies, leaving her to the care of the Baroness. The caretaking is ineffectual, however, as the Baroness has been locked up by her husband, who also divorces her in order to propose to Rosaline. Paulina surprisingly offers to rescue Rosaline from the Baron's forceful advances but has her carried off to the custody of a fearsome woman named Agnes, who was the other woman unrequitedly in love with Sir Alfred. Since Rosaline is in fact imprisoned in the remoter reaches of her father's own abbey, she finds some family papers which she peruses in the intervals between Paulina's fumbling attempts to poison her. She discovers that Paulina is her half-sister, incestuous product of her wicked uncle Rudolph and her own victimized mother. Paulina has been brought up to hate her. Behind this circumstance lies a complicated tale of religious orders and apostasy: Matilda, Rosaline's mother, was sent by her family into a convent; Sir Alfred St. Oswythe, who wished to marry her, was talked into a monastery by an ecclesiastical agent of his brother Rudolph, who had economic motives; Agnes took the veil to demonstrate her love for Sir Alfred. All three thought better of it and escaped, the former two to marry and Agnes to join Rudolph in villainy which included the subsequent incarceration of his brother, sister-in-law, and niece. Sir Alfred paid Rudolph and Agnes to release him and his child after Matilda had been raped and murdered. Some of this information comes from Agnes herself, who is dying as the result of a fall and repents enough to show Rosaline a way to escape. After a few more adventures Rosaline is restored to her rights and titles and is reunited with Constantine, whose wound was not fatal after all. Paulina is obliged to enter a convent.