3: Beckford, William VATHEK. 1 vol. First published as AN
ARABIAN TALE, FROM AN UNPUBLISHED MANUSCRIPT, WITH NOTES
CRITICAL AND EXPLANATORY London: J. Johnson, 1786

The Caliph Vathek, whose evil eye can kill with an angry

glance and often does, has five special palaces, one for the

gratification of each sense, but despite his passionate and
self~indulgent nature his subjects seem to love him. One

day a demonic stranger, a Giaour, arrives in the kingdom

with a collection of magical knives, sabers, and slippers

for sale. Vathek acquires, among other things, some sabers

with inscriptions which change daily. That the inscriptions

are undecipherable except by one old man does nothing to
improve Vathek's disposition; he falls ill with frustration
and is obliged to drink enormous quantities of cold water.

The Giaour, who has reappeared to cure Vathek on the one
hand and to torment him on the other, promises at last to
take the Caliph to the Palace of Subterranean Fire on condi-
tion that he adore the terrestrial influences and abjure
Mahomet. Pleased with the bargain, Vathek throws the hungry
Giaour the fifty most beautiful little boys in the kingdo,
and when some of his subjects later forgive and attempt to
rescue him from a fire (a magical one, of his mother's de-
vising), he offers them up as well.

Vathek sets off for the Palace of Subterranean Fire with
an uncommonly splendid retinue but is soon exposed to bad
weather, wild animals, and forest fire. Parched, in the
midst of a wasteland, his entourage fairly annihilated, he A
decides to ignore the Giaour's edict not to enter any habi-
tation. Soon Vathek and Nouronihar, his host's beautiful“
daughter, are mutually attracted despite Nouronihar's en-Pg
gagement to and love for her soft and babyish cousin Gul-*}'
chenrouz. She too is eager to see the treasures of the 
terranean Palace and despite her father's efforts to stop:

her - he drugs her, carries her away, and persuades her 
she has died - she leaves home to revel with Vathek in
delights of sensuality. At last, after some goading 
mother and some attempt by benevolent supernaturals to 
him change his mind, the Caliph comes with Nouronihar 
destination. There they meet Eblis, see the treasures
the Pre-adamite Sultans, and encounter Soliman Ben 
himself, but they are unnerved to find all the inhallit
of the Palace pressing their right hands over'theirW1,
quenchably burning hearts . In the few days remai113‘!-“5-
their own hearts catch fire they wander apatheticallv hand-
in-hand through the treasures that once tempted them‘ to make
their journey, but even their companionship at last gives
way to the agony of their flaming hearts and they begin to
hate each other.

Vathek's witch mother Carathis, whom he summons in order
to berate her for his upbringing, is obliged to stay in the
halls of Eblis and burn with the others. As for Nouroni-
har's cousin Gulchenrouz, he was earlier rescued (from Ca-
rathis, who wished to sacrifice him) by the benevolent Geni-
us and is leading a happy life in a magically protected land
of never-ending childhood, as are the fifty little boys whom
we supposed the Gaiour to have eaten.