THE MONK OF UDOLPHO. A ROMANCE

Hersilia is awakened by her father, who has just taken poison and wishes to confess that he is the slave of vice, especially gaming. The sinister family confessor, who wears on his forehead a linen band with a death's head motif, symbol of an order of monks that he has founded, pretends to give him an antidote but in fact makes certain that he dies. Hersilia has always mistrusted the monk and is appalled by his announcement that he and the Prince of Parma, her father's bitterest enemy, are to be her guardians. They forbid her to marry Lorenzo Val-Ambrosio, though his father encourages the match. She is two years under age, has supposedly been disinherited by a deathbed will, and is trying hard to do the proper thing, so the monk has a high degree of control over her. When Lorenzo's father discovers the circumstances (suicide) of her father's death, he renounces Hersilia and prevents an attempted wedding. Having sworn herself to silence for the sake of her father's honor, she is unable even to discuss the topic with him.
When Parma comes to take her property she refuses to fight, though her subjects do not at all wish to transfer their loyalty. Parma is accompanied by a female ward, Hortensia, who was formerly ruined by his nephew Sanguedoni and is now enlisted to aid in the undoing of Hersilia. Parma wants Hersilia to marry Sanguedoni, who is far too importunate for her taste. She refuses. Parma then demands her for himself. The monk offers to take her away and leaves her in a ruined castle. He returns later to reveal his dual identity - he is also Sanguedoni - and to say that Parma has been killed and his body burned in his room on the night she left, a circumstance meant to look incriminating for her. The castle is Sanguedoni's, headquarters for his monks, whom he claims to be the local arm of the Inquisition. He has bandits too. He was instrumental in her father's ruinous gaming. And Sanguedoni has captured Lorenzo, planning to kill him despite Hortensia's eagerness that he be given to her. Sanguedoni and Hortensia threaten each other and bargain for the objects of their lust. Hersilia is awakened from a drugged sleep, in which she is about to be raped, by a voice and a providential dagger. The rape is also deterred by the intervention of the ghost of Eloisa, previous occupant of the room. Later Hersilia discovers Lorenzo's father starving in a dungeon. Lorenzo has been wedded to Hortensia disguised as Hersilia; rejected even under this legal sanction, Hortensia attempts to poison Hersilia and is stabbed by Sanguedoni. Just has Hersilia gives in to Sanguedoni, in order to save Lorenzo from the rack, the monks all unmask and are revealed as soldiers belonging to Lorenzo's family. Hersilia's page Astolpho adds to the confusion by revealing himself as Eloisa, not dead after all, and the illegitimate half-sister of Hersilia. Sanguedoni, who had taken Eloisa out of a convent under false pretexts, stabs both himself and her. The moral is that "Heaven may afflict, but man must not complain."