THE WATCH TOWER, OR, THE SONS OF ULTHONA. AN HISTORICAL ROMANCE

Morcar, the evil Chief of Stroma, comes to Ulthona in the middle of the night to kill its Earl, who has married the woman he loves. The Earl's widow, told that she can save her children's lives by marrying Morcar, immediately stabs herself. She dies asserting that her spirit, and God, will protect her boys. (Here the narrative breaks off while an editorial voice explains that the story is written on a moldy manuscript and describes events c.l300, a very wicked period.) Morcar sets fire to the castle, which subsequently falls to ruin and acquires the reputation of being haunted, perhaps because it contained a number of bodies that could not be retrieved for burial. The Earl's two little boys, carried off by Morcar's hired ruffian Uglio, are saved and raised by Uglio's wife Unna, daughter of Ulthona's faithful servant Uberto.
The boys, Sigismorn and Adelbert, spend their lives hidden in Ulthona's watchtower until Sigismorn's adolescent restlessness drives him to see the world and to hunt for his relatives. Adelbert goes with him. Escaping from a storm they chance to shelter in the ruins of Ulthona itself, where they discover, but naturally do not recognize, their mother's brother Certaldo and his daughter Imogen. Sigismorn and Imogen soon fall in love, but they are at first secretive about it and in any case they have little time to enjoy the condition, for a number of alarming things are going on in the ruins. Certaldo, for one thing, is at best on the brink of lunacy and has been like this ever since his second and much beloved wife Ermangarde disappeared. Sigismorn is wounded by Certaldo, who mistakes him for a villain, and while recovering from his wound is awakened by a specter of his murdered father. It appears the second night in a more alarming shape - blue with fiery eyes and a dagger in its bosom - to lead him around the ruins and make him swear vengeance. On his way back to bed he finds old Uberto, who shows him his parents' grave, the family treasure, parental portraits and later his father's armor. One night Sigismorn dreams of specters who say that Adelbert is lost, and indeed when Sigismorn awakens, his brother is gone from their bed and cannot be found. Sigismorn, sorry that he ever took Adelbert away from the watchtower, goes with Uberto to see Unna again. The tower, however, is empty, and the staircase smeared with blood; it looks as though Unna has been murdered and thrown over the nearby precipice.
Imogen, whose troubles occupy a large part of the plot, is matrilineally a niece of King Robert Bruce. She is pursued ruthlessly and clumsily by Etheldart, Lord Dunbeth, who keeps inventing excuses to save her by carrying her away. Once she was nearly married to him by force, for Edward I had conquered the Scots and given her to Etheldart as a reward for his help. She was rescued just in time by her father, who hid with her in Ulthona; he has since then taken her to a convent. When she declines to take the veil, her only certain way to evade Edward I's orders that she be given up, the abbess refuses to shield her; she escapes in the night but en route to a great-uncle's is overtaken by Etheldart, who apologizes for past behavior and offers to return one of her family's castles and protect her there. (She and her father are accused of treason.) Etheldart's character has not after all changed, and she is obliged to be uncooperative during a marriage ceremony, saying "No" to the vows and tearing up the king's order. Just in time the English troops ride up and she turns herself over to them, thinking that imprisonment would be better than further harassment by Etheldart. Hearing that the king is dead, the leader of the troop is persuaded to take Imogen to the home of her great-uncle. At the castle she is told that her uncle is gravely ill and sees no one, and that a nephew (he has none) has taken over the castle. Though warned by a mysterious nocturnal visitant against curiosity, she creeps to her uncle's room just in time to see him murdered by his "nephew," who turns out to be Morcar. He carries off Imogen and also Sigismorn, who has turned up at the castle and been wounded by Morcar's men. At his own castle Morcar has a sixteen-year-old daughter, Etheline, who has led a sheltered life and believes her father to be lovable and who is at once attracted to Sigismorn. Her efforts to get him out of his dungeon give her a new view of her father. Morcar, like Etheldart, wishes to marry Imogen; when Etheldart appears in the guise of a sentry and once again offers to take Imogen someplace safe, Morcar kills him. Imogen discovers that Morcar's wife is still alive and is the missing Ermengarde, her stepmother; Ermengarde, who according to Curties has more good intentions than brains, was tricked into believing Certaldo dead in battle and is distraught to learn that she is a bigamist. Yet another man, the villain Uglio, whom Imogen has known under a different name, offers to carry her away and even to take along Sigismorn instead of killing him, as he will do if Imogen does not cooperate.
Meanwhile Sigismorn has been taken to Morcar's judgment room. Etheline hides in the shadows and watches. When Sigismorn refuses to abjure his parentage and to acknowledge Edward as king, Morcar shows him the torture alcove, where he sees a pile of mangled corpses with Adelbert, apparently dead, on top. Etheline forestalls Sigismorn's death by rushing out to accuse her father. Later she tries to rescue him by putting on armor and calling herself Donaldine, but they speechify too long and Sigismorn collapses from poison or drugs. Morcar tells Imogen that only by signing herself over to him can she save the life of her now altogether lunatic father. Overcome by filial piety, she gives in at last, and just in time, for Morcar knows that Certaldo is nearly dead from more or less natural causes. He torments his future bride by sending her a bleeding human heart labeled "Sigismorn"; she secretes it in her bosom and faints. Later she follows two guards to her father's cell, lest they kill him, and discovers Ermangarde, for whom a grave is already prepared. (Imogen nearly falls into it.) Before they both die, Certaldo forgives Ermangarde her mistake and asks Imogen to bury them in one grave.
Because King Robert is winning again, Morcar needs to marry Imogen and hastens the wedding. Imogen comes to it with a dagger in case suicide should seem the only escape. Sigismorn arrives as the point is at her bosom and takes Morcar to the king for trial. Etheline begs for her father's life but is told that he is not her father, that she is the sister of Sigismorn and Adelbert, kidnapped in infancy by Morcar and secretly substituted by his wife for an infant of their own which had died while Morcar was out. Unna, not dead after all, supplies much of this information and brings with her Adelbert, who was only drugged. After staying in a convent for some time to rest, Imogen comes back and marries Sigismorn. The halls of Ulthona are restored and refurbished.