CONFESSIONS OF THE NUN OF ST. OMER. A TALE

The nun's narrative is addressed to her son, Dorvil Lindorf; he is not to read it until after her death.
As a child, Cazire, daughter of the Marquis Arieni, is attached to a man named St. Elmer. Though she is only eleven when she and her father move away, both she and St. Elmer are affected by the separation. He is perhaps the last good influence she is to know. Her father, who has earlier run away from debtors, leaving her mother behind, has taken up with the loose-principled Countess Rosendorf. The Countess has two children of her own and in time turns Cazire's father against her by making her the topic of conjugal disagreements. Cazire is sent to board in a convent, where she reads dangerously romantic novels. When she is sixteen St. Elmer comes back and is worried about their effect upon her imagination and principles.
Cazire leaves the convent to live with her real mother, who is depressed and uninteresting. Discussions of philosophy with Fribourg, the exciting freethinker next door, lead to mutal passion. Her religious principles withstand his suggestions that they run away together, but she cannot quite leave him alone. There are renunciations and reconciliations and a lot of emotion. And all the time she is getting warning and moral notes signed "Ariel." In an effort to discourage Fribourg (and reassure his wife) she plays up to his visiting friend Count Lindorf and gradually becomes attached to him. When he goes home, presumably to a forced marriage, she suffers "a sort of partial lunacy" and nearly cuts her throat. On the same day that her conciliatory gestures to her father and the Rosendorf woman are turned down, Lindorf comes back and she goes away with him.
Lindorf takes her to the house of a woman he calls his sister Olivia, and Cazire pretends to be his wife. One morning she wakes up to find both her and Olivia's "husbands" gone. Olivia is willing to take care of Cazire, who is pregnant, but they quarrel when Olivia offers her a new lover. Cazire leaves and nearly starves until she falls in with a neighboring widow, Janetta. Olivia, angry and insulted, submits a bill for room and board, and Cazire is sent to debtor's prison, where the baby is born. St. Elmer, who has been the "Ariel" of the warning notes, frees her and takes her and Janetta to a beautiful house with servants. She hesitates to marry him because she looks up to him and feels entirely unworthy, but because he is pale and tearful she finally gives in. One day Fribourg comes to the house wounded and St. Elmer invites him to stay after he is cured; he wishes to show his confidence in Cazire, but she is terrified. She and Fribourg are left alone too much, and after some buildup of emotion and handholding she loses her head and succumbs to him. Frantic with guilt, she is about to shoot herself when St. Elmer finds and stops her. She confesses and he runs out to duel with Fribourg. St. Elmer is killed and dies forgiving Cazire. After screaming at Fribourg, who subsequently shoots himself, she falls into convulsions and is insane for two years. After her recovery she goes into a convent.