LITERARY HOURS, OR SKETCHES CRITICAL, NARRATIVE, AND POETICAL

Drake's collection includes poetry, essays, and prose narratives. The narratives of principal interest to students of the Gothic are

1) "Henry Fitzowen": At a staghunt the hero is led astray by a phantom light. Meanwhile, evil Walleran, who has some kind of supernatural connections, kidnaps Henry's beloved Adelaine. When Henry gets home he finds his door draped with black, dead servants in a dark castle, his mother and sister locked up, and Adelaine gone. In pursuit of her he is led to a castle by a witch-woman and undergoes a series of horrors and illusions. He falls into a vault and encounters corpses, skeletons, and specters. At last he finds and kills Walleran, whereupon all the apparitions disappear. He finds Adelaine in a cavern and revives her with a kiss. At the kiss the castle collapses and the pair are led by music to some good woodland fairies who identify themselves as helpers of the virtuous.

2) "Montmorenci": Drake intends to show here the mechanics of nonsupernatural horror. Montmorenci and his friends are suspended over a chasm by some bandits. One friend, in armor, is thrown in and the others can hear him bounce all the way down. In order to prolong Henry's agony, the bandits half cut the tree from which he is suspended. In the end, however, he escapes.

3) "The Abbey of Clunendale": Edward de Courtenay comes back from the wars and goes to visit his father's grave. There he sees an old man saved from suicide by a beautiful girl. As it turns out, the man is a brother officer prematurely aged by grief and remorse, for he has killed his brother-in-law in response to gossip that the man was his wife's lover. The gossip was false. The wife died. The beautiful girl, who is the potential suicide's sister, persuades him to believe in the forgiveness of God. Then she marries Edward.

4) "Maria Howard": This tale is written as a letter and has no ending. Maria Howard is essentially virtuous but loses her virginity to the Squire's son. His father, disliking the connection, has sent him off, so he is not at hand to marry her. She has been living at the Squire's and is forced to walk home, in an advanced state of pregnancy. She miscarries. Her father asserts that she has killed him, and when he forgives her she has already gone mad. She dies, and her lover, who has returned, is in some danger of going mad and expiring too. His father is sorry.

5) "Sir Egbert": Sir Egbert is in England look1ng for his missing friend Conrad and Conrad's fiancee Bertha. He shelters with some Knights Templar who point out Gundolph's Tower, where are said to sleep an enchanted couple; five knights have died attempting to rescue them. Egbert decides to try, though without guessing that they are the couple he seeks. He meets Matilda, sister of one of the dead knights. In the tower he finds a series of dangerous illusions. A corpse with a sword locks him in a vault, but he breaks out. He sees Hell Mouth but disperses it by invoking Heaven and leaping in. He is lured to a well by Conrad's voice, but God sends lightning to show the brink just in time. He is almost lured out of a tower door by a counterfeit Matilda. At last he penetrates illusory flame to free Conrad and Bertha. De Weldon, the villain who owns the tower, turns out to be Conrad's uncle. He dies in agonies, seeing demons. Conrad explains that he and Bertha were lured to a cave and drank something just before they went to sleep. They have not aged in six years. Egbert wins Matilda.