THE MYSTERIOUS MONK, OR, THE WIZARD'S TOWER

Bolen's novel takes place in the reign of King John and involves much of the royal family. An explanation of family relationships had better be made from the start, though they are not revealed until the end of the story. Ella di Mortimer, the heroine, and her brother Eric have been raised by Lady Gertrude, who turns out to be their aunt, sister to their father, Lord Pembroke. Lady Gertrude dies at the beginning of the novel and commends them to the keeping of Adolphe, who is the mysterious monk of the title and, as they discover later, their maternal uncle. As Lady Gertrude is dying, two armed men come with a warrant from King John to take Ella to a place of "better security," but on the way she is rescued by Philip Fauconbridge. Since he finally marries Ella (though King John's daughter Matilda would like to have him) his pedigree should be clarified at once. His mother, Lady Fauconbridge, had been twice married, the first time to Philip's father, Philip de Clairville, who subsequently appears to have been murdered. But we discover that he is not dead and that he is really Richard Coeur de Lion so Philip becomes Earl of Monmouth.

A great deal of frenetic activity goes on between Lady Gertrude's death and Ella's marriage to Monmouth, and there are quantities of minor but royal characters, including the dowager queen Elinor and Prince Arthur. Unsettling experiences mark Ella's long struggle to discover her identity and maintain her chastity. Thrice imprisoned, she is pursued by a number of men with dishonorable intentions, including King John - at that time she believes him to be her father - and the Pope. Her arm is accidentally broken by the dowager queen. Her brother is imprisoned and her lover wounded. She also survives the lesser shocks of seeing her first black woman (she has nightmares afterward), discovering that her page is a woman in disguise, and being several times convinced and then unconvinced that she has identified her father. There are some macabre touches as well, for during one imprisonment she sees a villain going past her cell with a dead body, and there is a sibyl who tells her about unearthly and prophetic blue flames. In the end Eric as well as Ella makes a suitable marriage as does Virginia, formerly the page. The rights of the innocent are restored and the bad come to justice.