ALIBEG THE TEMPTER. A TALE WILD AND WONDERFUL

Alhamet, who is bored with his desert home, is lured away by a mysterious and satanic stranger named Alibeg, despite foreboding dreams of falling off precipices. They make a pact, unspecified. There follow for Alhamet a series of episodes, fragments of lives, which are always interrupted by disaster. 1) As Gialdini, in Sicily, he is in love w1th a beautiful girl named Seraphina, whose father disapproves. He suffers capture by pirates and undergoes various other difficulties. At one point he is befriended by an erstwhile fortune-teller named Geronime. After changing his name to Lorenzo during a sojourn in the Azores, Gialdini/Alhamet finds Geronime again, but she is struck by lightning and dies after redirecting him to Sicily. On the way he finds her yet again (alias De Rolphe), commanding another pirate ship. De Rolphe, who makes Lorenzo feel vaguely uncomfortable, finally offers him his dearest wish, i.e., to see Seraphina, and thereupon torments him with the sight of her corpse. 2) Alhamet makes his next appearance as Ozembo, a young hunter in Patagonia. He is happily betrothed to Ora, but a mysterious stranger, a European named Falkland, appears and then reappears after being shot with arrows and drowning. After an enemy attack, Ozembo and Ora and the latter's old father escape; Falkland, now called Ogloo, is still with them. Ozembo tries to kill him but Ogloo will not die. Ora is drowned, her father dies, and their tribe soon forget Ozembo and Ogloo, who have disappeared. 3) In Russia a foreigner named Lovinski (alias Alhamet/Gialdini/Lorenzo/Ozembo) loves Agatha, a noblewoman. She reciprocates and refuses a suitor whom her parents prefer. A servant, Nicolas, murdered by Lovinski for his inefficiency in delivering messages, reappears and is said to be somewhat changed. Agatha wrongly believes Lovinski to have suffocated while hiding in her trunk, and Nicolas demands her person as the price of burying him secretly. When she commits suicide he makes no attempt to stop her, tells Lovinski that  it is his revenge, and disappears without leaving tracks in the snow. 4) In Cornwall, as Edward Penrose, Alhamet is rescued in a storm and becomes involved with Amelia whose brother is supposed to have died in the same storm. But the brother returns, changed for the worse, and makes considerable mischief - gets his "father" to kill his "sister," etc. He intimates to Penrose that he is not who he seems to be. 5) In Circassia Alhamet is called Cassimir and has a family. He is happy until a Tartar enemy (Hassaraic) refuses to stay dead and enters a compact against him with a jealous rival. The latter soon regrets the association, as Hassaraic is somehow unnerving. Nevertheless they attack and nearly everyone is killed except Cassimir, who disappears, and Hassaraic. 6) Suddenly back in the desert, Alhamet as an unrecognized Wanderer hears from his sister that their parents died of grief over him. He is caught in a simeon and drowns from a rudderless boat in the Red Sea. He is buried by strangers.