BUNGAY CASTLE. A NOVEL

Sir Philip de Morney has two children, Edwin and Roseline. Roseline is being educated in a convent but comes home to Bungay Castle for a holiday, bringing her friend Madeline. Although Madeline and Edwin fall in love, Madeline considers herself betrothed to God. Nevertheless the three young people enJoy themselves and go exploring the castle in hopes of finding a prisoner to succor. They find a handsome one named Walter, who begins writing poems to Roseline about his loss of interest in escaping ("No More for Liberty I Pine"). Roseline's father wishes her to marry a particular baron, a widower much older than she. Though unmoved by her father's threats of a nunnery, when he intimates that he will literally die of disappointment, Roseline promises herself to the Baron. The Baron is eager to marry her and leave Bungay castle, where he has been having some rather horrid experiences. (Once, for instance, he heard a voice inside a coffin. When he broke open the lid he found only bones, but the voice went on speaking.) Roseline's wedding is disrupted by Walter, whom the Baron briefly supposes to be the ghost of his wife. In fact, Walter is his son, said by his scheming stepmother to have died in childhood; his identity is established by a birthmark. The Baron gives Walter and Roseline his blessing. Edwin and Madeline elope with the aid of Albert, a servant who understands ventriloquism and has been responsible for the castle's Gothic sound effects. They go to see Walter, who is to travel for a while before his marriage and has unwittingly become involved with the daughter of the proprietress of a local brothel. Albert arrives just in time to prevent their marriage; Walter has been inveigled into the brothel and confronted with a clergyman. So there is a happy ending for Walter after all, and for Roseline, and for Madeline, whose father forgives her for eloping.

An inserted tale about two lovers called Narford and Lucy, however, ends dismally, with Lucy's untimely death and Narford's consequent lunacy.