THE PRIVATE MEMOIRS AND CONFESSIONS OF A JUSTIFIED SINNER

The novel is composed of two narratives, the editor's and the sinner's. The events overlap.
Part I: George Colwan, who likes a good time, marries an intolerant Presbyterian woman. She and her spiritual adviser, Robert Wringham, espouse a particularly vicious species of Calvinism and see most of the world as unregenerate. Against a good deal of resistance Colwan manages to father a son, whom he raises himself. Mrs. Colwan's second child is adopted by, named after, and probably sired by Wringham the minister, to whom Mrs. Colwan flees after a brief and intolerable marriage. Young Robert Wringham is taught to hate his half-brother and, when they meet as young men in Edinburgh, contrives to follow and torment him unbearably. Two particularly dramatic instances stand out. In the first, Robert, black garbed and sinister, haunts George at a game of tennis, mocking the casual profanity of the players and getting underfoot until his nose is bloodied. He continues to follow George and his friends about the court and finally into town, dripping blood and self-righteousness. The second incident takes place at Arthur's Seat, where George has gone in hopes of getting away from his relentless brother; some condition of sun and mist produces an optical illusion that projects the face of the pursu1ng Robert (just then creeping up behind him to push him over the edge), magnified twenty times, onto the empty air before him. George, Jr., is finally murdered under somewhat mys-
terious circumstances, and a friend of his is accused of the murder. Years later his father's housekeeper/mistress and a crony of hers get evidence that Robert Wringham, Jr., is the murderer, but the young man disappears before they can bring him to justice.
Part II: This time the story is told from young Wringham's point of view, which is largely self-satisfied and nasty. On the day his adoptive father gets word from God that Robert, Jr., is one of the Elect, the boy falls 1n w1th a mysterious companion who looks just like him and calls himself Gil-Martin. The reader soon perce1ves that Gil-Martin is Satan but Robert avoids the knowledge for a long time. Under the tutelage of his new friend, Robert is strengthened in the most pernicious points of doctrine and persuaded to commit an impressive series of murders, having appointed himself a scourge of God. He is certainly responsible for the murder of a kind old clergyman who has tried to save him from impending damnation and guilty of at least intending to murder his brother. Worse, he is thought to have murdered his mother, but Gil-Martin, being a shape-changer, may be responsible for any number of atrocities attributed to Robert. Robert's anxiety grows as h1s control diminishes; he is apparently subject to long periods of amnesia after which he awakens to find more horrors perpetrated in his name (or perhaps, after all, by himself). At last he undertakes a futile and nightmarish flight from Gil-Martin during which he himself is suspected of being demonic. In the end he gives up and Gil-Martin apparently persuades him to commit suicide. Hogg asserts at the end of the narrative that the memoirs were found in the grave of a remarkably preserved suicide with a hay rope around his neck.