THE THREE PERILS OF MAN, OR, WAR, WOMEN, AND WITCHCRAFT. A BORDER ROMANCE

This novel divides rather neatly into two separate but connected plots, one of which deals with witchcraft and is of interest to the Gothicist. The other, which deals with war and women, concerns the siege of Roxburg castle. Robert II, king of Scotland, has offered his daughter to the man who can recapture the castle for him, and Douglas decides to try. Princess Margaret and Lady Jane Howard, who wish to help their respective sides, find themselves at the same cottage, both dressed as boys. Margaret suspects and captures Lady Jane for Douglas. Musgrave throws himself off the battlements of Roxburg. Later the Scots get into the castle disguised as cows; the English are hungry. The war-and-women plot involves various jealousies and rivalries between Princess Margaret and Lady Jane.
As for witchcraft, one of the gentlemen involved in the siege sends a delegation to solicit a prediction from his kinsman, Michael Scott the wizard. The wizard is not hospitable; he puts them all in a cell, except Charley, with whom he occupies himself upstairs. The others escape by overpowering the seneschal. They put a stray witch in the cell in their place and rescue Charley, sending away some imps with prayers and curses. Michael Scott is amused and gives them all a magic dinner which sometimes disappears and sometimes simply does not fill. The Friar in the delegation is the Primate of Douay, a master chemist who is invariably persecuted as a necromancer; supposing him to be a fellow wizard, Scott challenges him to a contest. The Friar uses gunpowder and blows up the seneschal; meanwhile the imps are off dividing a mountain for their master. Scott does a lot of magic and is good at illusion. He gives a dinner with the devil (a particularly interesting Satan, with molten insides) in attendance and gets Tam to sell his soul for three years' fat bacon. Witches are disguised as beautiful girls, monsters as lovers for the witches, and at last the men are turned into bulls, for Scott has succeeded in arousing their bestiality. The Friar releases them by removing scrolls from their noses. Finally the devil and Michael Scott have a battle, with the former's forces of fire and earth against the latter's forces of air and water. They conjure up polar spirits and fiery dragons. Scott is killed but dies with some dignity and his eyes open. His magic rod is buried with him.