THE IDIOT HEIRESS. A NOVEL

Leonard Willmot goes home with his friend Viscount Haverford, who is to be married to Lady Azelia, an orphaned cousin who lives with the family. "The idiot heiress" is Haverford's irreverent way of describing his future wife. Azelia is only fifteen and is not an idiot but might properly be described as simple. Ignorance, deliberately maintained by the family, is her principal difficulty; her artless behavior is reminiscent of the country misses from Restoration comedy. Leonard, who dislikes the family's treatment of Azelia, begins to educate her in secret, with the accidental effect that she loves him and is determined to marry no one else. (Her cousin Lady Jane would like to have him as well, but is herself pursued by their lecherous chaplain Skeffington, who consequently becomes jealous of Leonard.) Azelia's backround is clarified by a manuscript given to Leonard by Mrs. Bentley, a Quaker woman whose daughter he rescues from drowning. Azelia's parents were not married when she was born - her father had deluded her mother with a bogus ceremony - but they later legitimized her. When they died, Haverford's widowed father took Azelia to raise with Haverford and Lady Jane.
After Leonard is called to the bedside of a dying uncle, Azelia overhears plans to have her committed. She runs away to London, believing in her simplicity that she can easily find Leonard and that he will marry her. There she stays for some time with a lower-class woman whom she met in the coach to London, but eventually she takes a job as a servant.
Because her family has advertised her as a lunatic, she needs to stay out of sight. After going into service she holds a series of jobs, all of them unsatisfactory in different ways, including one with a troupe of comedians. (It is not coincidental that she carries around with her a favorite copy of Rasselas.) At last she is taken in by friends of her mother, discovers that Leonard is already spoken for, and is proposed to by Sir Lucius Amamore, the son of her hostess. She accepts conditionally, wishing first to establish her paternal rights. This is accomplished through an initially unpromising encounter: Skeffington kidnaps her to a madhouse, and the madhouse keeper proves to be her maternal grandmother. Therefore she is released, identified, and marries Sir Lucius. Skeffington is banished. Lady Jane drinks herself to death.