GONDEZ, THE MONK. A ROMANCE OF THE THIRTEENTH CENTURY

Huberto Avinzo, born in Italy, was brought to Scotland by a man named Alzarro and was subsequently taken in by the family of Sir Alan Macdonald. He survived with Macdonald's wife a siege by the English and was taken with her to a prison in London, where he grew up in a dungeon. When his foster mother died, Huberto managed to escape from his prison and followed a stray dog to a ruined castle where he found two bare-breasted hags surrounded by mangled and decaying snakes; although they did some magic at his request, they were unable to tell him what had happened to Alzarro. As the novel begins, Huberto has joined the Scottish army in support of Robert Bruce. More of his history will be revealed in an Italian subplot which, if I have read it properly, seems to drop a generation back with perfect sangfroid and little or no warning.
Huberto, along with some other soldiers and Robert Bruce himself, takes refuge in a monastery, St. Columba's, of which Gondez is abbot. Gondez, who is a cadaverous color and has an unusually wide mouth, looks bad and mean and crafty. And so he is. Rather horrid things go on in the monastery. For one thing, it is haunted by a nasty specter called the Little Red Woman; she wears a red mantle and is scourged with hissing snakes. While Huberto is in the monastery a crucifix bleeds three drops of blood (which subsequently disappear) onto his hand, and a hag outside the window shrills, "Blood!" Two monks (or one monk twice) say "Murder and Treason" into Huberto's ear. Further, a woman whom Huberto sees at the altar, and with whom he falls instantly and reciprocally in love, warns him to flee the monastery. She herself, she mysteriously says, is involved in working retribution. Huberto warns the king and they all escape just in time to avoid some English soldiers who would have killed them. For this good work Huberto is made a knight and Lord of Scotland's Isles. Later, on his way back to the monastery to find out more about the woman he met at the altar, Huberto encounters more supernatural phenomena, notably the Tall White Man, who haunts Jura, and a specter on skeletal horseback who is pacified by kissing Huberto's gold crucifix. At the monastery he finds the monk John of Dunbar, earlier Gondez's closest friend and confidant, chained to a ring in a subterranean pavement with food in sight but deliberately out of reach. Huberto rescues him and he in turn, after his recovery from Gondez's cruelties, helps Huberto to discover the woman. She is locked in a dungeon, as is her emaciated brother. Her name is Ronilda and her father was the Laird of Finlagen Castle on the island of Ila; he was also the specter earlier put to rest by Huberto's crucifix. Gondez was trying to seduce Ronilda by threatening to torture and kill her brother unless she cooperated. Huberto and Ronilda take Gondez's crimes before the king; the Inquisition wants Gondez too, for heresy, parricide, and murder. At last he breaks down under torture and confesses some things that need to be clarified by the subplot, as follows.
The young Duca Martini Gonzari goes to Rome to see his uncle, the Cardinal Nicolo Gonzari. The Cardinal is depraved, ambitious, and scheming - besides wanting to be Pope (not in itself a sign of depravity), he wants to secure the inheritance of his nephew, whom he hates. The Duca is too innocent to fathom him but has a more astute friend, Count Ferdinando Ozimo. When Ozimo is called home by his mother's illness, the Duca accompanies him partway, during which journey he is hidden from desperadoes by a woman named Valenza, with whom he falls in love. Back at Rome again he cultivates Valenza's father and avoids a loathsome companion thrust upon him by his uncle - the toady Giovanni Maldachini, small and ugly and full of passions repugnant to right-thinking young men. He succeeds in marrying Valenza privately, with her father's consent, but when Ozimo comes back after his mother's death he finds that the Duca, Valenza, and Valenza's father the Marquis have all disappeared or come to sad ends. Giovanni has been involved; at any rate, the Marquis died of poison the same night he took Giovanni into his house. Ruffians have carried off Valenza, and the Duca has disappeared on his way to Rome. Ozimo assumes a disguise as a religious mendicant and searches for his friends through eight months. At last he is addressed by a marble figure on top of a tomb (the wicked Cardinal's) and given, by a nun, some jewels, several letters, and a baby in a basket. The baby is the Duca Gonzari's child. Furthermore, the baby is Huberto of the principal plot, and it is Ozimo who, calling himself Alzarro, takes him to Scotland. Some years later, after imprisonment by the Inquisition, Ozimo is so tired and discouraged that he goes into a monastery - Gondez's monastery, where he helps Huberto without recognizing him.
As for Gondez, we have already seen him as Giovanni. He was the child of the Cardinal and a dissolute abbess and was raised in an especially depraved convent. He and the Cardinal were responsible for all the attacks, abductions, and so on; he himself poisoned the Cardinal, for they both wanted the Gonzari estates and the Duca's wife Valenza. She died after the birth of her child and lay unburied for six days, after which Gondez locked the Duca in with her body and offered him poison to drink. Comforted by her spirit, which told him that he would join her before dawn, he drank it and died. Gondez is condemned to die by slow fire, and Huberto becomes the Duca Gonzari. He prepares to marry Ronilda. (Two other couples, not crucial to the plot, whose nuptials have been delayed by English-Scots animosity, now find their ways clear as well.) The night before his wedding two witches appear at Huberto's bedside, apparently wishing him well; they wave their "ebon crutches" and disappear. At the wedding itself the spirits of Ronilda's parents appear and dispense a blessing.