GLENARVON

Lady Margaret Delaval is upset by the birth of a nephew, for she had expected her son Buchanan to inherit from her brother the Duke of Altamonte. Margaret, who is headstrong, passionate, and ruthless, persuades her current admirer Viviani to kill the baby; afterward she comes to dislike him and he goes away hating her. The murdered infant's mother pines away and dies, leaving her daughter Calantha in Ireland to mature under the influence of her bad Aunt Margaret and a good aunt named Lady Seymour. Calantha is indulged and admired, and although basically sound of principle she suffers from romanticism, excess of sensibility, and a remarkable childishness. By nearly dying of an emotionally induced fever she persuades her father to permit her marriage to Henry Mowbray, Earl of Avondale, though she was intended for her cousin Buchanan. Despite initial tantrums and hysteria at leaving her father's house, she readily adjusts to the atmosphere of Modern Philosophy which she finds in her husband's household. Later in London she falls into what novels call the vortex of fashionable dissipation. She has a good time making bad friends and is given as a gift a little boy named Zerbellini, who makes a fascinating page, but she feels that her life has gone downhill since the first stages of passion with Avondale. Upon her return to Ireland, she is ripe for a new interest.
In Ireland she finds Glenarvon, a glamorous young firebrand who writes revolutionary documents and causes a lot of local political trouble. He is faithless, false, and crafty, but enormously interesting. He is followed about by packs of young ladies who wear green ribbons and recruit. Extreme cases like his former mistress Elinor St. Clare carry harps as well. Calantha and Glenarvon begin a long and passionate relationship which is consummated only by some kind of impious oath of faithfulness. Calantha is not deterred by the sight of former mistresses dying or desperate, or even by Glenarvon's own assertions that he will enslave her and that he is a walking hell. Although she is kept technically chaste by her principles and is prevented from running away to London with him by the sickbed summons of Mrs. Seymour, the good aunt, she finds that her reputation is ruined and her friends alienated. Glenarvon, in London, has lost interest in her and has shown her letters to his friends. Her husband speaks kindly but insists on a marital separation. She pursues him, falls ill and dies in his arms.
Zerbellini the page is discovered to be Calantha's little brother and the heir of Avondale. Due to a highly complicated background of double-crossings and multiple kidnappings, the boy is not dead after all. In the course of the revelations Margaret is stabbed at her own request by one of her confederates.
Glenarvon is becoming unpopular and slightly mad. Elinor curses him and stirs up the local troops to burn his estate. She is wounded and deliberately rides her horse over a cliff. Glenarvon escapes with the British fleet but falls ill and begins to see spirits, the most complicated of which is a phantom ship with black sails and white-faced crew carrying a giant friar and incense and guns. He jumps overboard and hears a voice from below telling him that he should cry out from the lower pits and urge people to repent.