GRAHAM HAMILTON

Graham Hamilton, somewhere in the New World, discusses with an acquaintance the sources of misery. He asserts that weakness and feebleness of will cause more pain to the possessor than decisive vice. He offers his own story as proof.
Graham is raised by his father in the country, where he falls in love, as a child, with his cousin Gertrude. Gertrude is a steadying influence on Graham, who is dreamy and not amenable to discipline. A wealthy uncle in London, much taken with some of Graham's poetry which was sent him with the annual grouse, offers to take the boy to the city and ultimately make him his heir. Although something of a miser, the uncle is generous with Graham and does not protest very much at his frivolous life-style. Home for a holiday, Graham exchanges declarations of love with Gertrude, but upon returning to London falls in with the beautiful Lady Orville.
Lady Orville is only marginally respectable - chaste, but extravagant and given to fast company. Moncrief, whom Lady Orville jilted to marry money, still loves her and takes some pains to protect her reputation. Although Graham would like to be discreet and does not really misbehave, his boyish passion for her begins to cause talk. Lady Orville's extravagances are forcing her to retire to the country, so she plans an unusually lavish farewell-to-society party, wishing to make a spectacular finish. Just then Graham hears from his uncle that cousin Gertrude may be given to a local farmer, but that the family will first come to town to discuss the situation. Immersed in the process of regaining his cousin, whom he finds he still loves, Graham ignores Lady Orville's notes for several days. When he goes to her last extravaganza, he finds that her husband is leaving her and taking their child. Had Graham come when she asked him, he might have explained their relationship and cleared up the scandal for which she is being punished. He embraces her with remorse and is caught at it. Meanwhile the sheriff's officers are carrying away the furniture. Losing his head in all this excitement, Graham offers a warrant of attorney, pledging that he will pay her debts and save her. But the uncle, who is on Gertrude's side, refuses to supply the money, and Graham is jailed. He worries and falls ill. When his family takes him home, he finds that Gertrude has heard a more colorful version of the story, in which Graham is said to have shot himself; in consequence she has burst a blood vessel and is dying. Ultimately the rest of the family dies too. Lady Orville is living a poor and charitable life. Graham explains to his acquaintance that he has no ties and no prospects and is waiting for death, hoping only to expiate his crimes.