ASTONISHMENT!!! A ROMANCE OF A CENTURY AGO

Claudio is brought up by the Di Bartelma family as a foundling. (He came to them with a bracelet, and a note saying that he must never ask who he is.) On his fifteenth birth- day he meets a pilgrim who is interested in his bracelet but who makes no comment. The Marchese di Bartelma's friend, the Count di Ponta, has a son, Lodovico, who is in college with Claudio; Lodovico is a bit wild, but Claudio is a good influence and they are friends. One day an old monk takes Claudio to a seductive woman, Viola, in her hidden and sensuous apartment. When in the midst of an embrace she discovers his bracelet, she faints. Claudio is told to leave her alone in future, as she is under the protection of the Inquisition. Zelia, Viola's attendant, is attracted to Claudio, who receives notes saying what a good wife she will make him. Claudio spends a vacation with Lodovico and rather likes his sister Valeria, home from convent school. These normal activities are interspersed with symbolic dreams on Claudio's part and warnings from mysterious monks and pilgrims to beware Di Ponta. Claudio is kidnapped by Zelia and forced to marry her.
Mysterious relationships are finally made clear when the pilgrim and Di Ponta are accidentally brought together. The pilgrim is Claudio's true father. He once tried to murder Di Ponta for having an affair with his wife but accidentally killed his wife instead. At any rate, he thought he killed her. As it turns out, Viola is really his wife Horatia, which accounts for her earlier alarm at the sight of Claudio's bracelet. Rudolpho, the man she really loved, preceded Claudio's father and sired Valeria, who is not Lodovico's sister after all but was only brought up by Horatia/Viola's friend. So it is just as well Claudio did not marry her. Zelia is, by an earlier indiscretion, the daughter of the monk who succeeded the pilgrim as Horatia/Viola's man. Claudio's sister Fulvia is discovered too; she is the girl Lodovico has been drunkenly pursuing about the estate. She was brought up in Florence and called Nina. Viola, since her monk has been unable to support her, has been the Grand Inquisitor's kept woman and has whored on the side, which is what she was doing when Claudio was first introduced to her. During the revelation she stabs Di Ponta. She repents to some degree. The monk goes into a monastery. Valeria goes back to the convent, which she liked anyway. Claudio learns to get along with Zelia, who really does love him.