FEUDAL TYRANTS, OR, THE COUNTS OF CARLSHEIM AND SARGANS. A ROMANCE. TAKEN FROM THE GERMAN

Feudal Tyrants is a tremendously complicated novel because
it contains so many manuscript memoirs of people who actual- ly have some connection with the plot line as well ~s elab- orate stories of their own. In the frame story, El1zabeth, the Widowed Countess of Torrenburg, corresponds with her old
teacher Conrad who is abbot of Cloister-Curwald. Conrad wants money fo; two girls called Constantia and Ida, the Damsels of Werdenberg, but although Elizabeth wishes to do
the right thing she cannot rid herself of some resentment over Ida's theft of Henry Montfort, the man she love~. The Damsels' manuscript, the fourth to engage our attent1on, makes clear that the apparent theft was misunderstood. Ida and Elizabeth were friends, and Ida's intentions were good, but she discovered at Elizabeth and Henry's wedding that Henry was also Erwin Melthal, a man to whom she had.bee~ un-
officially espoused and whom she believed to have d1ed 1n battle. Equally surprised to find that Ida was not, as he had supposed, dead, Henry fainted. When he recovere~ he
d h d off to find Ida, with no explanations. The s1sters h:~eevarious difficulties including captivity by robbers: but at last they manage to retire to a cottage..~en El1z-
abeth hears the whole story she repents her host1l1:y and ives them Torrenburg. Ida marries Henry, Con~tant1a mar-
;ies an old friend, and Elizabeth takes the ve1l as she had
been planning to do. . h Early in the novel Elizabeth has in her possess1on t e
memoirs of Urania Venosta, who was sent to live with her 1 Uncle Leopold lest by her beauty she outshine the Emperor s daughters. She marries Ethelbert Carlsheim, who has proved himself valiant in trouble but turns out to ~e rather un-
scrupulous and vicious, a circumstance espec1~lly aw~ard since he apparently has some claim to Leopold s hold1ngs. After Urania comes to the aid of some monks whom he has imprisoned, Ethelbert locks her up in shabby Castle Raven- stein. There she discovers Edith Mayfield, also a prisoner, whose child Ludolf she had helped to deliver under emergen- cy conditions. The two women are permitted to correspond. When the castle catches fire they lower three-year-old Lu- dolf down the wall and send him for help, which he in fact procures. Urania's Uncle Leopold is in love with Edith; his apparently lunatic wife, Lucretia, also imprisoned in the castle, conveniently dies, making a new marriage possible. Leopold'~ son Donat becomes a menace after the marriage, for he arrives in the neighborhood bent upon avenging his moth- er. Donat's sister (Adelaide, the Lady of the Beacon-Tower) warns Urania to be wary of Donat and of his terrible wife
Mellusina, and later manages to have her released from a second imprisonment, this one in the Castle of Sargans.
Adelaide's memoirs follow next. Leopold's wife Lucretia was her mother; when Lucretia produced twins she hid the extra one (Adelaide) for safety's sake. Later she decided not to identify Adelaide lest Donat, to whom she had become particularly attached, should have to share his inheri- tance. Adelaide later marries the best of Donat's libertine friends, a man who assassinates the Emperor and is conse- quently tortured and killed. Adelaide spends the rest of her life in a convent.
Yet another tale concerns Donat's twin daughters, Emme- line and Amalberga. Emmeline is ashamed of her wicked rela- tives and steals out with her friend Amabel to visit Urania in her convent cell. Her sister Amalberga has mysteriously disappeared. Later she reappears, disappears again, and is at last rescued by her lover, who marries her. As for Emme- line, she is renounced by her father, falls in love with Herman of Werdenberg, and escapes going to a convent so cor- rupt that the nuns do not even cut their hair. Herman de- spises Emmeline because of her father, but when he rescues her, unrecognizably pale and wasted from a dungeon, he falls in love without suspecting her identity. She discreetly
marries him first and tells him afterward. Other imprison- ments and rescues have to do with Emmeline's friend Amabel and Donat's new wife Helen. Barring some casualties along the way, most of the good triumph and the wicked come to suitably unhappy ends.