THE MONK. A ROMANCE

The monk Ambrosio, whose piety and eloquence are the admiration of all Madrid, falls prey to temptat1on through his lust, pride, and inexperience. His ruin, the process of which constitutes the primary business of the novel, is effected by a demon in the guise of a beautiful woman, Matilda. Matilda, further disguised as a male novice, persuades Ambrosio to let her remain in the monastery by appealing to his lechery and to his gratitude, the latter provoked by her apparently saving his life at the expense of her own, having sucked the poison from a snakebite. She heals herself by sorcery. This is an examples of the web of seduction, deception, and recourse to the demonic which ends in Ambrosio's damnation. Matilda introduces him to the intoxications of "the syren' s luxurious couch," and, when he tires of her, encourages his desire for Antionia, an innocent who resorts to him as confession and whom we uitimately discover to be his long-lost sister. Not even the aid of sorcery turns Ambrosio into a facile seducer; he finally murders Antonia's mother, drugs the girl, and rapes and kills her in the monastic charnel house. His crimes discovered, he escapes the cells for the Inquisition by signing a Satanic pact, whereupon Lucifer transports him to a mountain and, flying up with him, drops him down the side of it to die in slow agonies.
The subplot deals with the obstacles to love and the final reunion of Agnes and Raymond. Two incidents stand out. First, Raymond, supposing himself to be eloping with Agnes disguised as the legendary ghost of a Bleeding Nun, accidentally elopes with the real ghost and calls on the Wandering Jew to undo the match. Second, Agnes is confined to a convent (sister institution to Ambrosio's) and, discovered by Ambrosio to be pregnant, is locked by the prioress in the charnel house to have her child and to watch it die and decay. She is rescued on the night of Antonia's rape, a convent fire, and the destruction of the wicked prioress.