"THERE IS A SECRET, FIND IT OUT!"

The secret is pertinent to the parentage of Frank Yates, the hero. He has been raised by the Wheelers; his foster father is a junior clerk and his foster mother an erstwhile housekeeper / nurse to the Haslemere family. They are a rather unappealing pair, the mother especially, who still wheedles the Haslemeres' patronage for her own ill-bred son John and daughter Caroline. Frank is purportedly the natural child of her brother but he looks more like a Haslemere, which causes rumors and domestic suspicions. Since he can sing, he is admitted to the Westminster Choir School and taken under the special care of the choirmaster Corse, who trains him for a musical career. He is a vast success on the stage. In the meantime Caroline, who has dislocated a hip and become a cripple, is trying hard to find a husband. Her family try both Frank and his friend Kempthorne (John threatens the latter melodramatically with the prospect of his sister's "grimly ghost") but to no avail. As the Wheeler fortunes decline, Frank's rise: he inherits from Corse and again from Corse's cousin, keeps a carriage, associates with the Countess of Bayfield, and becomes friends with the elder Haslemere, who speculates that Frank may be an indiscretion of his son's. Frank injures himself in rescuing a widowed Mrs. Archer from a coach accident and decides to give up his career for the sake of his health, but he no longer needs the income and he wins Mrs. Archer's hand, so the accident is on the whole a happy one.
Caroline and John Wheeler have married respectively a Mr. Eastwood (a villain who absconds with all he can get and causes John to be arrested for forgery) and a Miss Atwood (formerly a kept woman). The Wheelers' troubles are aggravated by the Haslemere son's dying revelation that Frank is his late sister's child, product of a private marriage to the Earl of Merioneth. This makes Frank Lord Caerleon and the Wheelers, whose blackmailing and lying have for years deprived Frank of his rights, the objects of enormous outrage among the knowledgeable. Poor old Wheeler, who was largely manipulated by his wife, weeps and repents, and indeed always loved Frank more than his own son, so people hope that he and Caroline will not suffer unduly; for Mrs. Wheeler, public opinion favors the workhouse at least, and it considers with equanimity the prospect that John may hang. John is acquitted, however - Mrs. Wheeler tells her husband too abruptly and kills him - and gets a job in the dustheap business, fighting pigs for scavenge. Caroline is taken in by a family friend. Mrs. Wheeler sets up a chandler's and green-grocer's shop but takes to drink, breaks a leg, and dies. Frank and Mrs. Archer marry and continue to prosper.