ZELUCO. VARIOUS VIEWS OF HUMAN NATURE, TAKEN FROM LIFE, AND MANNERS, FOREIGN AND DOMESTIC

When Zeluco is ten years old, his father dies, leaving him to the care of an overindulgent mother; hence his evil passions flourish uncurbed and he becomes a walking demonstration of the effects of bad childrearing. In his boyhood he kills a pet sparrow whose tricks dissatisfy him. This incident is representative of the obsessive selfishness which later leads him to abandon several pregnant girls out of boredom, to kill with neglect a widow whom he has married for her money, to be cruel to his subordinates in the army. He is not at first actually sadistic, merely uninterested in the sufferings of his victims, but he learns to enjoy punishing slaves and finally beats one to death. When Zeluco finds Laura, a girl who is not to be had for the asking (she prefers the military hero Carlostein), he pursues her relentlessly and at last leads her a reluctant bride to the altar.
Laura and Carlostein discover that they are in love but suppress their inclinations. Laura's virtue does not save her from her husband's jealousy, however, for his new and wicked mistress Nerina plants in his diseased mind a notion that Laura's new baby too closely resembles its maternal uncle. Nerina's poisonous suggestion leads Zeluco to strangle the baby in a fit of passion, and she suggests that he might kill Laura, who is nearly dying of shock and horror, as well; she hints that laudanum is said to be effective. Laura's hysterical reaction to a Massacre of the Innocents picture - one of the killers looks like Zeluco, she thinks - makes her brother suspicious. He writes "Zeluco" over it to test his brother-in-law, but Carlostein manages to draw Zeluco's consequent rage onto himself to avoid familial slaughter. On his way to duel Carlostein, Zeluco is stabbed by a man whom he discovers in Nerina's bed. Dying, he realizes that other people seem to have a certain nobility which he lacks and understands that he has never had a friend. Laura marries Carlostein and charitably extricates Nerina from prison.