CASTLE OF WOLFENBACH. A GERMAN STORY
En route to Zurich, Matilda Weimar and her servant are forced by a storm to shelter in the Castle of Wolfenbach, said to be haunted. Matilda is not much daunted by the supernatural; what frightens her are the advances of.her guardian/uncle, whom she is fleeing as the story begins. The aunt with whom she had planned to take refuge died before her arrival, so Matilda is on her way to another relative who may protect her. At the Castle of Wolfenbach she finds, living in secret, Victoria, Countess of Wolfenbach, a woman who is popularly supposed to be dead and who gives Matilda a letter of introduction to her sister in Paris. The next night the Countess has disappeared and her attendant is found murdered. Too weak to drag the body away or to dig a grave, Matilda and an elderly servant stuff the dead attendant into a chest.

Later, Victoria's sister in Paris tells Matilda that their father forced the marriage to Wolfenbach, who had evidently abused a former wife into her grave. The lecherous uncle follows Matilda to Paris. First he says that he is not really her uncle and proposes; then he says that anyway he is her guardian and tries to get her back.
The household goes to London, where they find the Countess Victoria, who tells a bloody story of how the Count killed the man she truly and innocently loved, slowly, in front of her eyes, and locked her in a closet with the body. The shock induced labor, and her husband carried off the baby but permitted her to live under a vow of secrecy, from
which a chaplain has just absolved her. Matilda's uncle still following her, arrives in London. She retreats to a convent, but her uncle Weimar gets a king's order to take her out, and they get on a boat for Germany. When attacked by Turks he is led to confess that he really is her uncle and that he killed her father out of jealousy. Matilda and her mother are reunited, while Weimar grows pious and decides to be a monk. De Bouville chases her through half a dozen countries to clear up a misunderstanding and marry her. Count Wolfenbach, dying, repents and receives his wife's forgiveness. He tells her that her son is alive and signs papers to restore everyone to his proper situation.