THE MYSTERIOUS WARNING. A GERMAN TALE

Count Renaud, to please his family, marries a loud woman whom he does not love. This union produces his first son, Rhodophil. When his wife dies he marries Caroline, her more desirable kinswoman, and Ferdinand is born. He has, as well, a mistress of whom he tires after she has borne him a daughter. As the novel begins, the boys, now grown, are very different from each other; briefly, Rhodophil is bad, Ferdinand good. But Rhodophil is so accomplished a hypocrite that Ferdinand fails to see through his displays of fraternal affection. When Claudina, whom they both fancy, chooses and marries Ferdinand, Rhodophil makes a show of soliciting his father's pardon for Ferdinand's unprofitable match. In fact, he manages to keep the two from reconciliation and causes Ferdinand to miss a deathbed blessing. Further, he hides the latest will and magnanimously buys Ferdinand a commission in the army. This enables him to keep and seduce his sister-in-law. When Ferdinand comes home on leave, a mysterious voice (belonging to Ernest the discerning servant) tells him to flee Claudina as he would sin and death. She agrees that this warning is justified and goes to a convent without letting Ferdinand know where.
In the course of subsequent melancholy wandering, Ferdinand finds and rescues a couple who for twelve years have been locked in separate dungeons by a sadistic recluse. The male victim, Count M--, becomes Ferdinand's companion after his wife decides to go into a convent. They meet two girls, one of whom (Louisa) has been victimized by wicked Count Wolfran, who married, discarded, denied, and imprisoned her. The other girl (Theresa D'Allenberg) is saved from a marriage to Wolfran by hearing Louisa's story. After they go back to the army Ferdinand and Count M-- are captured by Turks but later escape, bringing out of Turkey with them a cooperative jailer named Heli and his favorite wife Fatima, a particularly unscrupulous female who embarrassingly turns out to be Ferdinand's illegitimate half-sister. Information she drops seems to make clear that she is also Claudina's sister. After a final crisis in which Heli and Wolfran shoot each other and Ferdinand is jailed for murder and robbery, things begin to improve. Wolfran and Rhodophil die. Heli goes home. Fatima kills herself. Claudina turns out to be the daughter not of Renaud but of Count M--'s elder brother. Both Claudina and Count M--'s wife die, whereupon Ferdinand and the Count marry, respectively, Theresa and Louisa.