ROCHE-BLANCHE, OR, THE HUNTERS OF THE PYRENEES. A ROMANCE 

The year is 1557. Eustache de la Marot de Roche-Blanche, stepfather of the heroine, Aigline, has ludicrously deluded notions of his attractiveness and of his literary and musical ability. His wife is shallow and unfeeling and makes Aigline, her daughter by a previous marriage, wait on her youngest child Celine, who is horribly spoiled. Their other two children are away from home - Lolotte with a relative and Francois with his tutor at Pau. Their neighbor Mr. Willoughby has one son, Clarence, who is Aigline's friend and companion.
Clarence dreams of knighthood and military glory; he especially relishes tales about his hero Adhemar de Bourbon and desires to go in the army. His father holds him back until Clarence meets Adhemar on a wolfhunt and is invited to join his troops. While Clarence is away, Lolotte comes home. She is remarkably beautiful but behaves oddly - gallops through the flower beds and says things that make no sense. Aigline realizes that Lolotte is imbecile and adds her care to her other domestic duties. Lolotte's imbecility notwithstanding, Adhemar, having come home with Clarence, falls in love with her, nor can he altogether overcome his attraction after he assesses her condition. Clarence and Aigline by this time realize that they are in love as well, but Aigline's mother has made her promise to stay single and take care of Celine. For a while things go badly for everyone: Clarence is seeking from the English government acknowledgment of his legitimacy and arouses Queen Elizabeth's ire; he and Adhemar become estranged; Aigline is pining; her stepfather has to flee his creditors; Lolotte is put in a convent - the family is Protestant, but Lolotte's parents think she will not know the difference - to keep her away from unscrupulous money-hunters, but she runs away and dies; Francois loses his job as page; Celine has consumption. Adhemar and Clarence are reconciled when the former dies saving the latter's life. A man whom Aigline dreaded as a suitor reveals himself to be interested in her only because he is her uncle. Queen Elizabeth decides that Clarence is entitled to the claims his father has made for him. The lovers marry and Celine finally dies.