GASTON DE BLONDEVILLE, OR, THE COURT OF HENRY III. KEEPING FESTIVAL IN ARDENNE

Two English travelers go to see Kenilworth and there purchase from an old man an illuminated manuscript apparently from the period of Henry III. The convention of "finding" the principal story in a manuscript is nothing new, but Ann Radcliffe's use of the device is a little unusual. The manuscript is divided into day-by-day accounts of a period when Henry kept festival in Ardenne, and each day is prefaced by an illumination which the author describes in some detail. She also discusses, after the Gaston de Blondeville plot has run its course, whether the traveler has been correct in his dating of the manuscript. I am not aware of any other novels that maintain the notion of the manuscript with comparable scrupulosity.
Gaston de Blondeville, the King's favorite, is to marry Barbara, one of the Queen's prettiest attendants. His felicity is broken by a merchant named Hugh Woodreeve, who accuses him of being a robber and the murderer of Sir Reginald de Folville. He says that Blondeville has Folville's sword, which has mysterious writing on its blade. Blondeville makes counteraccusations. Although the author permits the reader to believe Blondeville for a while, she makes it clear long before the denouement that the merchant's accusation is justified. Woodreeve, who has no influence at court, is imprisoned while the accusations are investigated; Blondeville is not. However, he has trouble at his marriage feast, which is beset by uninvited guests and unscheduled pageants about robbery and murder. A stranger seen at the wedding feast makes a number of appearances, during which he points to an unmarked stone in the priory, bleeds three drops from his forehead onto Blondeville's clothing, and so on. The Prior, who is in league with Blondeville, tries to make Woodreeve run away and inadvertently reveals around his own neck a chain belonging to the murdered Folville. Woodreeve is accused of witchcraft in connection with his identification of the chain. The accusation is false, but the chain appears to have some magical properties: when Blondeville takes it in his hand, the three drops of blood previously shed by the stranger spread all over the side of his garment. Finally Blondeville is challenged to combat by a knight (the stranger again) whose eyes flame through his visor and whose sword bears messages in fire and blood. The guilty knight faints and dies. Still Woodreeve is to be executed, and the mysterious stranger comes yet again, demanding the merchant's release and showing the company where to find his own bones. It is Reginald de Folville. Woodreeve is released. Henry III feels that he has had enough of Kenilworth and never goes back.