THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO. A ROMANCE

Emily St. Aubert is so full of sensibility that her father worries about it. When he dies dur1ng a family trip, he cautions her on his deathbed about this weakness. She needs the warning for she is obliged to move in with a vain, arrogant, and stupid aunt, who makes her life extremely uncomfortable. The aunt quite unjustly suspects Em1ly of indiscretions and forbids her to see Valancourt, whom she met during the trip with her father. She and Valancourt are 1n love; their sensibilities are similar. At one point the aunt has decided to permit their marriage, but then she herself  makes a most indiscreet marriage to the villain Montoni and Emily's real troubles begin.
First the household moves to Venice, where her new uncle tries to force her into marriage with a man she dislikes. From there they move to the castle of Udolpho, which is full of passages, rumors, and unexplained ancestral scandals. Emily's difficulties at Udolpho include the discovery of corpses both real and waxwork, the misapprehensions that her aunt has been murdered and that Montoni is the captain of a bandit troop, the aunt's actual death from misery and neglect, and Montoni's determination to imprison Emily until she signs over her inheritance. Once she thinks that Valancourt is imprisoned in the room beneath hers, but when she falls into the arms of the captive he proves to be a stranger called Du Pont, also in love with her. (It was he who used to leave mysterious sonnets in the fishing house at her old home.) DuPont rescues Emily from the castle and takes her to stay with friends of his. (The young lady of that family, Blanche, provides an interesting instance of a girl who comes to live in a decaying building accompanied by her entire family and consequently finds it pleasantly exciting.) Because an old servant sees in Emily a strong family resemblance to a former employer we are vouchsafed several stories about St. Aubert and his wife and sister, some of which put to rest unspoken anxieties of Emily's that her father had a guilty secret in his past. Valancourt reappears, but as he has acquired a taste for vicious pleasure Emily is prepared to renounce him. After he has cleared himself of some charges, repented of youthful follies, and been caught in acts of secret charity, Emily is reconciled to him and finds fulfillment in love.