A SICILIAN ROMANCE

Upon the death of his wife, Ferdinand (the Marquis of Mazzini) marries again and goes away with the bride and his young son. His two daughters, Emilia and Julia, are left at the castle to be educated and overseen by Madame de Menon, an old friend of their mother's. They are attractive and talented young ladies with little chance at society; Julia especially - she is livelier - is delighted when Ferdinand comes home with his entourage to give a coming-of-age party for his boy. Julia and Count Vereza fall in love right away. This does nothing to endear Julia to the new Marchioness, who is an adulterous sort and has long had her own eye on Vereza. (She has been doing typical stepmother tricks as well - moving the girls to a shabbier set of rooms so that she can have theirs, ignoring their complaints of spectral noises in their new quarters, etc.) The Marquis wants Julia to marry the Duke de Luovo, who is cold and tyrannical; her brother urges her to escape by eloping with his friend Vereza. The execution of the latter scheme is interrupted by the Marquis, who stabs Vereza and puts Ferdinand Jr. in a dungeon. Julia runs away.
The pursuit of Julia by her father and would-be husband is fraught with complications, including the temporary capture of the Duke by a bandit chief revealed to be his own runaway son. At one point the Marquis and Duke capture the wrong girl and are obliged to let her go, while Julia is captured and let go by the pursuing father of the other young lady. She and Madame de Menon, who has left the Marquis's employ upon discovering the Marchioness's infidelity, take refuge in a convent. There they find Vereza's sister; she has been crossed in love and dies. The Abate of the convent succumbs to the Marquis's threats and gives Julia a choice between the Duke and taking the veil without a novitiate, so young Ferdinand is obliged to find and rescue her. Vereza is still alive. Back in the castle, after further complications of escape and capture, Julia discovers that her mother is alive, having been imprisoned, and has been responsible for the ghostly moans in the dungeons. Faced with the embarrassment of two living wives, the Marquis resolves to poison the first one. At the same time he discovers the infidelity of the second and is consequently poisoned by her. She afterward stabs herself. The first wife, having escaped the homicidal machinations of her husband, is discovered by her son Ferdinand to be safe and alive and staying with Julia and Vereza in a lighthouse.