VANCENZA, OR, THE DANGERS OF CREDULITY

Elvira, raised by Count Vancenza and his sister the Marchioness as a companion to his daughter Carline, is known as "The Rose of Vancenza." One day Prince Almanza, son of the Count's old friend, is wounded in a boar hunt and brought to the castle by his companion, the Duke Del Vero. Elvira binds up his wound with a magic veil and heals him; she also falls in love with him. Hence, when she hears a passionate voice under her window asking for a tryst, she hopes it is the Prince and agrees. Upon discovering that she has made an assignation with the Duke by mistake, she falls ill from embarrassment; the Duke wishes to forget the incident too, for she is after all lower class. When the household goes to Madrid, Carline is pursued by the Marquis Petrozi, a flattering snake who presently tries to kidnap her. Her father prevents the abduction but is wounded by the Marquis's poisoned dagger and dies, leaving Elvira a mysterious key.
At  home again, Elvira keeps fruitlessly trying her key in all the locks. She also spends time in contemplation of a melancholy poem scratched on a castle window by some anonymous mother and begins to worry about living on the charity of the Marchioness. Her plans to work are interrupted by a misunderstanding (the Marchioness thinks that Elvira fancies the Duke) which when resolved ends in a proposal from the Prince. Decorating for the wedding, Elvira finds behind a picture in the gallery a little panel with a lock that her mysterious key fits. Inside is a golden casket containing a red velvet case containing in turn a manuscript by Elvira's mother, who also wrote the poem on the window. The details of her mother's confession make it clear that the Prince is Elvira's half-brother. The mere sight of the wedding decorations makes her shudder now, and she lies down and dies in a matter of hours. Carline, some years later, goes into a nunnery. The Prince, who never has any notion why all this is happening, goes into the army. And the Marchioness, having erased all the family names from the manuscript, gives it to the University of Naples library.