BRIDAL OF DUNAMORE, AND, LOST AND WON

Bridal of Dunamore: In this exceedingly complicated novel Roche traces the Glenmorlie family through six generations and an unlikely number of pages to focus at last upon Rosalind, who does nothing spectacular. Dunamore, in Ireland, is part of the Glenmorlie inheritance and the cause of a long-lasting rift in the family. The first Earl of Dunamore was twice married and had a son by each marriage. His second wife persuaded him to pass over his elder boy Rodolphus in favor of her own son George. In the succeeding generations, right-thinking descendants of George adopt or otherwise nurture descendants of Rodolphus, whose side of the family is prone to hard luck. The family tree becomes more and more complex and at last a Colonel Glenmorlie sires the heroine.
Rosalind and her friend Anna Woodburne have a busy social life which occupies the later part of the novel. Rosalind visits people (e.g., the shipwrecked Countess of Monteagle), explores an abbey, and receives a number of suitors, many of whom briefly appear to be the one she will marry, and one of whom commits suicide upon losing her. At last she marries a Lord Dunamore, presumably from the other side of the family, a man formerly engaged to her friend Anna. Both Rosalind and her husband die not long after their marriage, leaving her father Colonel Glenmorlie the only remaining heir to Dunamore.
Lost and Won: When Emily St. Orme's stepfather Mr. Elmore goes to America in hopes of making money, Emily decides to stay with her mother's cousins, the O'Brady family. Emily is a snob (a fault that will be rectified in the course of the novel) and finds the O'Brady household rather second rate. She is attracted to the Duke of Holmsdale, whom she meets on a walk, and sees him several times but is disillusioned about his intentions after one nocturnal tryst. Subsequently she goes to stay with the Tibbs family, relatives of Mrs. O'Brady's who have the advantage of living in London. They introduce her to Mr. Villers, who is smitten, but he is a tradesman and Emily despises trade. After a social season during which Emily snubs old and new acquaintances and is in turn snubbed by others, as opportunity affords, she is faced with accumulating bills and is obliged to take a job as governess with the Somers family. In that position she once again meets Mr. Villers, whom she had encountered intermittently throughout the story, and, despite the efforts of Miss Somers to secure him for herself and the pursuit of Emily by Sir Marmaduke, they finally marry. Mr. Elmore returns from America and lives with them.