THE CHILDREN OF THE ABBEY. A TALE

Fitzalan, scion of a once illustrious and lately impoverished Irish family, fell in love with and secretly married Malvina, the Earl of Dunreath's daughter. The machinations of Malvina's stepmother and stepsister Augusta caused the Earl to disown Malvina and precipitated her early death. The adventures of Fitzalan and Malvina's two children, Oscar and Amanda, especially the latter, provide the substance of the story.
As the story begins, Amanda leaves home to escape the advances of Colonel Belgrave, a libertine who is both her brother's commanding officer and her father's creditor. She goes to stay with her old nurse in North Wales, where she soon meets Lord Mortimer, the son of her father's old friend the Earl of Cherbury. The rest of the plot is concerned principally with the vicissitudes of Amanda and Mortimer's relationship (which quickly identifies itself as love) and the survival of Amanda's reputation under the assaults of jealousy, malice, scandalmongering, and so on. The principal antagonists (besides Belgrave, who continues to be a villain) are Amanda's aunt Augusta and cousin Euphrasia; the latter is an unpleasant and ill-favored girl whose fortune the Earl of Cherbury wishes to annex by marrying her to Mortimer. Toward the end of the novel, just when all the malicious rumors have been cleared away and Amanda has real hope of marrying Mortimer, Cherbury secretly tells her that he will kill himself if she does not give up his son, for he needs a rich daughter-in-law to extricate him from gaming debts. Amanda concurs and further misunderstandings result, but Euphrasia elopes with someone else at the last moment and dies when her carriage falls over a precipice, and Cherbury confesses his interference with Amanda, so Amanda and Mortimer are able to marry.
Oscar, Amanda's brother, has fallen in love with Adela Honeywood, his general's daughter, and has watched her endure an unhappy marriage to Belgrave. Oscar is court-martialed for dueling Belgrave over a matter of excessively severe military discipline, but at last he too has a happy ending. Belgrave takes to drink and dies in mental agony, leaving Adela free to remarry. Further, Oscar ceases to be penniless, for during some of her own difficulties Amanda goes, with a family to whom she is governess, to stay at Dunreath Abbey, her mother's family home. (It is during the abbey visit that identifiably "Gothic" scenes take place.) There she encounters and briefly mistakes for a specter her stepgrandmother, who has been locked away by her own thankless daughter Augusta. The old woman produces her husband's real will, previously concealed, by which Amanda and Oscar inherit through their mother.