CLERMONT. A TALE

Madeline Clermont is brought up in a cottage by her father, who is clearly of good blood but has withdrawn from society. He later gives her into the protection of the Countess de Merville, an old friend. Madeline falls in love with De Sevigne, who is full of sensibility; unfortunately he behaves oddly and seems, like the Countess, to have a private grief. One problem with De Sevigne is his poverty. The Countess promises to give Madeline a good dowry if the young man can produce a respectable reason for his being poor - he must not, for instance, be a peasant or an ex-gamester - but he fails to cooperate.
The Countess is fatally wounded by an assassin sent by her son-in-law D'Alembert, but her daughter Viola, who is not responsible for the wickedness of her husband, becomes friends with Madeline. The lives of the characters at this period are further stimulated by disturbing noises and tales of ghosts. Suddenly D'Alembert arrives with three carriages full of roisterers and pursues Madeline despite Viola's efforts to keep her out of sight. Someone poisons the old servant Agatha. After a terrifying experience of fleeing and being caught on a hook in the dark, Madeline is told to escape to her father. Young Clermont appears and recites a complicated story of disinheritance and frustrated love the gist of which is that he has been done out of his rights on a charge of illegitimacy and must clear his mother's name. Madeline begins to entertain some suspicion that her father has murdered his half-brother Lord Philippe (whose picture looks like De Sevigne).
After Viola dies, D'Alembert proposes to Madeline; she is blackmailed into accepting. Her father admits that he did kill his brother, having been deluded into thinking that the brother had wronged him, and that while he was hiding, Madeline's mother gave birth and died. When Madeline hears a rumor that Viola is still alive, she refuses D'Alembert, and her father goes to secret himself in the wilds. Her servant Lafroy, under pretense of helping her escape, decoys her to Paris and into D'Alembert's clutches. Just when things are worst, De Sevigne comes to the rescue and proves to be the son of Clermont's murdered brother, who did not, after all, die of his wounds. Lord Philippe is restored to his elderly father. Lafroy confesses his considerable involvement in all the villainy. D'Alembert commits suicide, while his father, who helped with the villainy, goes to a monastery. Viola is not dead after all and remarries. Madeline and De Sevigne marry too and live happily.