THE DISCARDED SON, OR, HAUNT OF THE BANDITTI. A TALE

Captain Robert Munro is gifted but has not made a success of his life. He has been cast off by his father (owner of Castle Glengary) for marrying a Spanish girl; her parents have disowned her as well. Munro resorts to farming in an attempt to support his wife and children - they have two, Osmond and Elizabeth - and to pay his son's Oxford fees. Their lives go on in ordinary ways (except that there are rumors of local ghosts) until Lord O'Sinister arrives in the neighborhood. He restores the Captain to military life with a post in the militia and assumes Osmond's university expenses, in exchange for which the Captain signs a bond. Elizabeth is proposed to by an older man, Mr. Eaton, and meets a handsome young stranger, Captain Delacour, in some ruins. Delacour rescues her when someone throws a lighted brand through her window. When an anonymous note warns her against an unnamed villain, her mother thinks that the villain may be Delacour, but Elizabeth hopes that it is Mr. Eaton. Soon Elizabeth is kidnapped by a ruffian claiming to have been hired by Delacour and is rescued by Eaton, who persuades her to marry him in gratitude. The wedding (in a ruined chapel) is interrupted by a figure in gray who announces that Eaton is Lord O'Sinister. Later Elizabeth finds herself subject to the advances of a second villain, Mr. Ruthven; they are guests together at a place called Black Crag, and although Ruthven keeps grabbing her, Elizabeth is afraid to go home, for her father is away and Lord O'Sinister is not.
O'Sinister is making trouble for Osmond too. Rather than giving him the living he promised he wishes to send the young man to Jamaica. Osmond avoids Jamaica by accepting a post as chaplain on Delacour's ship and has assorted adventures - banditti, kidnapping, imprisonment. He and a Miss Cordelia Raymond fall in love, but Osmond's discovery that her father is Lord O'Sinister, whom he has just wounded in a duel, conjures up an apparently unconquerable hindrance to their marriage. Meanwhile Captain Munro has been imprisoned for his debt to O'Sinister and the only way to free him seems to be in Elizabeth's hands: she reluctantly agrees to marry a man who offers in return to get her father out of jail. Just in time Signor Barbarino, Mrs. Munro's father, arrives and releases his son-in-law. So Elizabeth marries Delacour after all, and Lord O'Sinister dies penitent (from another duel), telling Cordelia to marry Osmond.