NOCTURNAL VISIT. A TALE

In the hamlet of Wyefield, between Chester and Holywell, lives the virtuous curate Mr. Greville. He has brought up with his own family a young female named Jacintha; there is some mystery about the girl which Mr. Greville will not reveal even to his wife. Mrs. Greville would be a bad depository for delicate secrets in any case, for she dislikes Jacintha, partly because the child outshines her own daughter Gertrude, and is cruel to her as often as possible. One Christmas when Jacintha and Gertrude make their annual visit to their friends the Franklands, Jacintha, then seventeen, attracts the honorable intentions of Egbert Oswald, second son of the Marquis of Methwold. Greville, although he approves of the match, insists that the marriage wait until Egbert comes of age. Jacintha worries about the London charms of a visiting Miss Woodville, Egbert about the approaching stay of the local nobleman Lord Gwytherin, an attractive libertine. Mr. Greville tries to keep all his family away from the dangerous pleasures of the castle, but Gwytherin's attempts on Jacintha are so pressing that Egbert in desperation undertakes to carry her off to Scotland for a fast wedding, an indiscretion finally prevented by a broken wheel. When Mr. Greville perceives their desperation he admits that he has delayed the marriage because Egbert's fortune has been lost and that he has been trying to save dowry money for Jacintha. Egbert leaves for Jamaica to cope with the embezzlers of his fortune.
After Egbert's departure, Mrs. Decourcy, Mr. Greville's sister, comes with her husband for a visit and befriends Jacintha, whom she takes back to town with her. While Jacintha is away from home her foster father dies. Given the opportunity, Mrs. Greville casts her off, but Mrs, Decourcy promises to take care of her. Soon, however, Mr. and Mrs. Decourcy begin to treat her with coolness, perhaps because they suspect her of being involved with Lord Gwytherin. He has indeed been lurking around the grounds in order to speak to her, but his message is that he is her real father. Her mother, he says, is a sister to Mr. Decourcy; she is the Countess of Dunsane. He himself has complicated the affairs of that family considerably, having seduced and impregnated Mr. Decourcy's sister and having attempted to carry off the present Mrs. Decourcy, who was afterward hired as a companion to the pregnant Miss Decourcy. Some troublemaker spread the rumor that the child subsequently born belonged not to Miss Decourcy but to her companion. Uncertainty and suspicion about the story have poisoned the Decourcy marriage. Jacintha relieves domestic tension by going to stay with the former Miss Frankland, who is now, confusingly, Mrs. Falkland. Troubled there by the attentions of another libertine, she returns to the Decourcy house and finds its owners gone out of town. At that point Lord Gwytherin offers to take her secretly to France to see her real mother, and she goes. The mother is a widow now and Gwytherin hopes to win her back. The Countess is upset to see her long-kept secret made flesh in the person of her daughter; how upset becomes evident when she sends Jacintha to a castle in the Pyrenees, ostensibly so that they may become better acquainted, but in fact so that Jacintha may be locked away for the rest of her life.
In the castle Jacintha discovers a secret panel to a second room. One night when she finds it open she tries to close it and is seized by a cold hand. The hand belongs to Henri, a local shepherd and accomplished flautist. Henri loves her and helps her escape to a convent, but the abbess is not a good woman. Jacintha discovers the Earl of Endermay's wife locked in a tower at the convent; her vow to tell the captive's relatives where she is gives way, for ethical reasons mysterious to this reader, to a later vow of secrecy forced upon her by a sinister nun. When Henri once again helps her escape, she comes back to town to find all her connections dead or out of town indefinitely, except Mrs. Greville, who is not helpful even when Jacintha loses her purse in a coaching accident and is set altogether adrift. Further misadventures include an interlude with a kept woman, and another abduction, this time by a Mr. Loveit whose brother is Lord Endermay. Ultimately an old servant of Endermay's reveals secrets pertinent to Jacintha's mysterious parentage. She is really the child of Endermay and his wife Eglantine, the lady imprisoned in the convent tower. Eglantine and Jacintha have both suffered from the malevolence of Endermay's brother and sister, and from an episode of babyswapping among nurses. Jacintha is identified by a cherry birthmark, Lady Endermay is released from her tower, Henri is shown to be the heir to Dunsane, and Jacintha's foster sister Gertrude, who has been seduced and deserted, dies of grief and infamy. Egbert and Jacintha marry.