FRANKENSTEIN, OR, THE MODERN PROMETHEUS

The frame story concerns a Captain Walton, whose ravenous curiosity has driven him to organize a dangerous expedition to the polar regions. Walton's ship rescues Victor Frankenstein from a drifting fragment of ice and Walton hears his tale.
Victor Frankenstein has a propitious upbringing in the midst of a loving family and is especially blessed in his foster sister Elizabeth and his best friend Henry Clerval. He is consumed, however, with a quasi-scientific lust for knowledge and is drawn to the outmoded alchemical books in his father's library. Later at the University of Ingolstadt he takes up modern science, especially chemistry, and discovers how to create life. The "monster" which crowns his labors, and which he never names, horrifies him with its ugliness, though he had expected to find it beautiful. He goes trembling to bed, leaving his creation unsupervised; later he awakens to see it standing over him and flees the house. When he forces himself to come home the next day, the monster has disappeared. Six months later a letter from his father arrives with the news that his youngest brother William has been murdered. When he arrives at his father's house he sees his monster lurking behind some trees and knows at once what has happened, though the murder is officially blamed on Justine, a devoted member of the household, upon whose person has been found a miniature which the child was wearing before he was killed. Justine is hanged (having falsely confessed in order to be shriven), and Frankenstein feels that he has two deaths on his own conscience.
When the monster arranges a confrontation with his creator, he demands that Frankenstein do his duty and make him a female of his own kind. The story of his tribulations wins some degree of pity from the reader but seems not to impress Frankenstein. After wandering away from the house where he was given life, the monster has various educational experiences pertinent to food, warmth, and human animosity, after which he takes refuge in a little shed attached to a cottage. Watching the cottagers (people of good blood and background) every day, he learns to love them and does them anonymous favors around the grounds. He learns also to speak and to read, after which he educates himself by absorbing three books which he finds by chance - Paradise Lost, Plutarch's Lives, and The Sorrows of Werther. Thus, he explains, he learns to love virtue and to abhor vice. At length his longing for companionship leads him to speak to the blind father of the family when he is alone; the conversation goes well enough until the son comes home and beats the monster with a stick. The family quickly packs up and goes away, after which the monster burns their cottage and sets out again into the world. His intentions, when he sees William Frankenstein, are to capture him and bring him up without prejudice against deformity; when William, who is already past training in that respect, threatens the monster with his father's name, the possibilities of revenge against an unloving creator become clear. The monster incriminates Justine largely because she represents joys from which he knows himself to be hopelessly excluded.
Frankenstein agrees to make his monster a female companion, but at the last moment he changes his mind and destroys her. The monster retaliates by killing Clerval and Elizabeth, the latter on the night of her wedding to Frankenstein. Frankenstein's father dies of shock and grief. After that Frankenstein dedicates himself to the monster's destruction, following him to the arctic, where Walton meets him. He is determined to kill the creature with his own hands, and apparently the monster has something of the same sort in mind, for he leaves behind him on his trail occasional notes and food so that his pursuer can keep up. When the exhausted Frankenstein dies on Walton's ship, as he soon does, the monster comes through a window and grieves over him. Feeling guilty and lonely, the monster announces that he will go farther north and immolate himself on a funeral pyre. Having been persuaded by Frankenstein's tale to give up his analogous folly, Walton turns his ship back toward home.