VALPERGA, OR, THE LIFE AND ADVENTURES OF CASTRUCCIO, PRINCE OF LUCCA

A novel more full of wars and politics than my summary may suggest, Valperga deals with the life of a real Italian nobleman who was an ally of Emperor Louis of Bavaria. Valperga is the name of a castle to which Castruccio and his mother were to escape in case of emergency. It is also the home of his childhood friend Euthanasia, with whom he is later in love. At fourteen Castruccio goes to Florence to see dramatic representations of hell from Dante's then unfinished manuscript. At seventeen he goes out into the world and begins his career. He spends some time in England, where he becomes friends with Piers Gavaston, but he is obliged to leave after he kills a nobleman.
Besides Euthanasia there is another woman in Castruccio's life - Bertha, the daughter of Wilhelmina of Bohemia, who claimed to be the Holy Ghost incarnate, come to earth for the salvation of her sex. Bertha, too, is given to public prophecy and is taken by the Inquisition, who force her to walk on burning plowshares, a task that she accomplishes unscathed. Bertha is beautiful and makes sexual overtures to Castruccio from a conviction that God wishes her to surrender to him. No promises are made but she seems to presume that he is hers permanently; she is in consequence much distressed when he leaves her to go back to Euthanasia. Later she appears at Valperga as a pilgrim on her way to Rome. Euthanasia, in the meantime, has refused Castruccio and has further declined to surrender Valperga. (He and she are on different sides of the Italian wars.) He carries her away to Lucca with no animosity and she forgives him in a detached way, demanding a return to Florence. A flood delays her going back. Bertha, who has once again been captured by the Inquisition, successfully solicits Euthanasia's intercession with Castruccio. Bertha is by now preaching a malevolent God ("Time opens the shell, the seed is poison") and has abandoned all notion of divine guidance. During her wanderings she fell for three years into the power of an evil man, and emerged from the experience feeling more than three years older. She goes to a witch, Fior de Mandragola, who is on nobody's side and is interested only in power, in hopes of achieving control over Castruccio. She is told that she can see Castruccio by magic. At the confrontation, which is not after all magical but real, she collapses; she is too changed for him to recognize and she dies insane.
Meanwhile, politics march on. There is a conspiracy against Castruccio which is eager to enroll Euthanasia. She is told that by joining she can save his life, so she agrees. But the conspiracy is betrayed by a villain and Euthanasia is put into prison. Castruccio releases her and sends her to Sicily, but on the way the ship is lost in a storm. Except for a postscript on the death of Castruccio at forty-seven, the story ends with Euthanasia's demise.
at forty-seven, the story ends with Euthanasia's demise.