ST. IRVYNE, OR, THE ROSICRUCIAN. A ROMANCE

The novel opens with outcast Wolfstein, in the middle of a storm, considering throwing himself off a mountain. Instead he joins a troop of bandits. He becomes good at banditry but competes with the chief for Megalena, a captive. After the chief threatens to rape her, Wolfstein poisons him and escapes with Ginotti, the chief's right-hand man, who saw him put the poison in the cup. Ginotti exacts a promise that Wolfstein will, on demand, listen to his story and will bury him when he dies.
Megalena has escaped too; she and Wolfstein go to Genoa and have a love nest, but he begins to find gaming a more alluring mistress. On several occasions he is disturbed to find Ginotti among the company or in some disguise. Ginotti hints that he is not what he seems. Megalena persuades Wolfstein to kill her rival Olympia, but at the last minute he is unable to do it. Olympia, however, stabs herself at his refusing her, and though Wolfstein now hates Megalena they flee Genoa together. Wolfstein inherits a castle in Bohemia, and when Ginotti appears there, too, he is dreadfully shaken. Ginotti, who was as a youth atheistic, over-curious, and self-loving, seems to have sold himself to the devil for the secret of immortality. He now wishes to be rid of this information by passing it on to Wolfstein. Wolfstein wants it but refuses the stipulation that he deny his Creator. Suddenly the devil carries Ginotti away; although Wolfstein consequently dies of shock, we assume that he is not damned.
In the subplot, Wolfstein's sister Eloise is also an outcast, and innocent as well. When her mother dies she is attracted to a stranger, Frederic de Nempere (really Ginotti, we discover at the end), who seduces her. Nempere's kinder associate Mountfort wins her from him at the gaming table and sends her to live in a cottage with his poetic bachelor friend Fitzeustace. The two fall in love and Fitzeustace accepts Nempere's bastard child. They marry to placate Fitzeustace's father.