PYRENEAN BANDITTI. A ROMANCE

Count St. Angouleme hates his handsomer and more prudent brother. Also, he is jealous of his wife's nephew Theodore St. Leon, for whom she has reserved a portion of her fortune, and shuts her in the castle so she cannot see him. It is into this villain's hands that his niece Adelaide falls upon the death of her father. After inventing and claiming not to believe a rumor that Adelaide was substituted in infancy for his brother's real child, he produces, with signs of regret, a confession to that effect from the nurse whose child Adelaide is said to be. The DeLaunes, a singularly unappealing couple, claim Adelaide and say that she can either come home with them or go into service; the Count with apparent generosity offers to let her stay on at the castle, but not as an heiress. Her main worry, however, is that she cannot seem to love her new father, DeLaune. Soon she is kidnapped by banditti and taken to a purportedly haunted castle; although she has never believed the stories about it, she sees a bloody ghost with a taper and faints. Adelaide is told various lies about who has arranged the kidnapping and why. Perouse, the other "prisoner" who helps her to escape, is really DeLaune's son and one of the villains. The "aunt" to whom he takes her for refuge was hired from a Paris brothel for the occasion. Adelaide is under a good deal of pressure to marry Perouse, but even when she supposes him to be good she finds him unpolished and unattractive. The faithful servant Jacques is her only support until she becomes acquainted with a young man for whom, it later turns out, Jacques's grandmother keeps house.
Adelaide nearly loses the young man, Montroi, when he hears a mistaken report that she is ruined, but truth prevails in the end and the pair marry. Before that Adelaide is arrested for possession of a diamond-studded ring which DeLaune has given her. She refuses to tell where she got it, for she thinks that it proves her father a murderer and feels that she will be a parricide if she tells. Jacques saves her from torture and solitary confinement by arriving at the trial and supplying necessary information about the ring. The Count, who was behind all the trouble and wished DeLaune to kill her, is poisoned by his mistress. (Marrying Adelaide to his son was DeLaune's own idea.) Specters at the castle are explained as special effects supplied by the banditti.