BAROZZI, OR, THE VENETIAN SORCERESS. A ROMANCE OF THE SIXTEENTH CENTURY

Rosalva Barozzi is handsome and spoiled but essentially good. One day he rescues from kidnappers a girl named Rosalina, who unbeknown to him was being carried away by agents of his wicked father, Augustino. Her father has been murdered by the kidnappers. Rosalva puts her under the protection of his aunt, who thinks it best to change her name to Rosa Falieri in case someone is still after her. Some time later at a masquerade a woman dressed as Medea identifies herself as a sorceress and indisputably acts like one. She knows Rosa's real name and that she is in danger from the Marquis de Barozzi. As Rosa is leaving town with her protectress she is kidnapped from the carriage by a woman who gives her a sleeping potion, which she kindly says is for Rosa's own good. At about this time Rosalva finds a ruined castle in which he discovers his father's dagger, a secret panel, and a room containing occult paraphernalia and a woman laid out in a white robe. He also discovers his father in conversation with the sorceress, who is demanding Rosa for a human sacrifice and pointing out that after all he has not scrupled to kill both her parents. A female rises through the floor with a scroll containing the warning, written in blood, that if the Marquis does not get on with the killing, Rosa will inherit the Barozzi fortune. Barozzi tries to stab his son, who has leaped out to say that he does not want to inherit under those circumstances.
At Barozzi's subsequent trial a great deal of information is supplied. In brief, Rosa/Rosalina's father was twin brother to Rosalva's. Her father, Fernando, married her mother secretly and thus exposed himself to the machinations of his sinister twin, who wanted all the inheritance. Augustine, the bad brother, told his sister-in-law that her marriage was invalid, had his brother assassinated, and burned the house over the heads of his sister-in-law and infant niece. He supposed the latter two pieces of villainy to have been successful, but such was not the case. Fernando was rescued by fishermen and later acquired by Algerine corsairs and sold into slavery. The Marchioness was carried off at the time of the fire by a courteous bandit whose booty she later inherited. At the trial Rosalva produces Fernando, and the sorceress appears and reveals herself to be Rosalina's mother. They are all glad of the reunion. Rosalva and Rosalina marry and have a child. The assassins die on the rack.