THE ADVENTURES OF FERDINAND COUNT FATHOM

Sometimes cited as a precursor of the Gothic, Smollett's novel concerns the adventures of Ferdinand, who was born in a wagon between Holland and Flanders, his mother a camp follower and his father unknown. His stepfather, Fadom by name, teaches him to suck brandy and gunpowder through the touch hole of a pistol, but he moves on to higher-class tutelage when he is taken in by Count Melvil, a wounded officer whom his mother forebears to kill and loot on the battlefield. Ferdinand is brought up as a page to Melvil's son Renaldo and given the same education. Because he is canny, and graceful in his bearing, he is able to insinuate himself into the family affections and to make the much more virtuous Renaldo look boorish by comparison.
As he grows up, Ferdinand tries to marry the Melvil's daughter, seduces the daughter's maid, cheats Rinaldo, deserts from two armies, and generally engages in theft, womanizing, and double-dealing. He leaves behind him a rather spectacular train of lunacy and grief, but his most treacherous deed is his coming between Renaldo (who has just forgiven him previous abuses and retrieved him from debtor's prison at great sacrifice) and a lovely and virtuous girl named Monimia. Ferdinand tries both seduction and rape on Monimia but is doubly thwarted. Just as Renaldo is beginning to hear reports about Ferdinand's true character he receives a letter from Monimia which, she says, will arrive after her death. When he recovers from his consequent illness, Renaldo goes to spend a few melancholy nights sobbing on her grave. The scene is solemn and is perhaps after all somewhat Gothic - midnight, the church deserted, owls hooting. The second night Renaldo hears organ music and sees Monimia's spirit, or what he supposes to be her spirit. In fact she is alive, having recovered from her illness, and her friends have conspired to make a test of Renaldo's devotion. Having passed the test, he marries her. Before the wedding, however, she is discovered to be Selina, the long-lost daughter of a secondary character named Don Diego. As for Ferdinand, the virtuous couple find him dying in "extremity of indigence, squalor, and distress," clutching a confession of his sins and watched over by his wife, a woman whom he earlier ruined. Selina and Renaldo procure medical aid that saves Ferdinand's life, and pension him off to England.