THE SIEGE OF KENILWORTH. AN HISTORICAL ROMANCE

Baron Hanslape, doing penance at a cross one rainy night, was presented with a male child by a stranger who then disappeared. A voice said - as it does at intervals throughout the story - "Vows to Heaven savour not of the vows of this world." Hanslape is greatly relieved at the end of the novel to discover that the voice belongs to a live Knight Templar, not to a spirit. (The Knight Templar is obsessed with that line because his wife, a runaway nun, said it as she died at the altar on their wedding day.) Hanslape is inclined to be superstitious; he fears that his wife and one of his children died because he had failed to go on a promised pilgrimage and suspects that his other two children were spared so that God could punish him some more later. Stanhope makes it clear that this is nonsense.
As the story begins, Hanslape is starting on his long-delayed pilgrimage and the children are growing up. Adopted Hubert is nicer than the Baron's son William, but William is not really bad. Isabel, the Baron's daughter, is devoted to Hubert, and it is a sad day when she leaves for convent school. Sixteen years later she is quite ready to come home again, though the country is in such chaos with the rebellion against Henry III that the Baron would rather like her to become a nun for her own safety. William has become a rebel, for he has fallen under the spell of the sinister Ingelrica Fitzparnel. His father tearfully and reluctantly disowns him, but William and Hubert (a royalist like the Baron) manage some secret meetings across enemy lines. At one point Hubert receives a summons, purportedly from William, which is really a trap devised by Ingelrica. She is simultaneously cold and seductive, a thoroughly frightening woman; there is one chilling scene in which she springs between Hubert and the door and throws her gold chain over his head. Hubert is locked up, later to be freed by William, but not before he has been given a harrowing glimpse of the mad Duchess of Kent, whose husband's wrongs are the rebels' rallying cry. After other imprisonings and releases, including Isabel's, family troubles reach a climax: William, who has been feeling increasingly penitent, more or less deliberately dies in battle. Hubert fears that William's intentions were suicidal, but as he dies making a confession of faith we are probably to conclude that he is not damned. At the siege of Kenilworth Hubert finds the Knight Templar, who explains to him his parentage - he is the son of the Duke and Duchess of Kent. Hubert and Isabel marry.