TALES OF THE DEAD

The collection, edited and translated ("principally ... from the French") by Sarah Utterson, contains six tales, as follows:
1) "The Family Portraits": This is a horribly complex tale involving two portraits of people whose ghosts walk. There is a woman's portrait which frightens a young girl and later falls on her and kills her. The other portrait, of a man named Ditmar, is even more frightening; it is said that while it was being painted a child-specter kept making it look deathlike. Ditmar, who has killed an enemy's son by giving him a poison kiss, is condemned to ghosthood and the repetition of his guilty deed - he must kiss the sons of the family and mark them out for death. The narrator and hero of the story has visited the family in question and seen the curse fulfilled. It looks for a while as though the hero, a descendant of the female in the portrait, will be obliged to marry  a girl named Clotilde, thereby somehow tranquillizing his ancestress. It turns out that he can accomplish the same thing by marrying Emily, sister of the ghost-kissed boys, whom he loves. We are informed that Ditmar raised the female in the portrait, though she was the daughter of his enemy, and we learn of his frustrated and bloody deeds. At the end his portrait fades away.
2) "The Fated Hour": Florentina is nervous about her approaching marriage, as a paper left to her by her father predicts that she will die at the ninth hour on the eve of her marriage. Her father died at the ninth hour and so did her sister Seraphina. Seraphina had a doppelganger, or did astral projection, or both. She prophesied her own death, and her father's, and it is perhaps her prophecy that Florentina read. The household also has guilty secrets and flitting lights. At the fatal hour the shade of Seraphina appears and the girls embrace. One of them - friends cannot tell which - says, "I am thine forever." Florentina drops down dead.
3) "The Death's Head": Calzolaro comes back to the town where his schoolmaster father had lived, to dispute his father's will. He is with a carnival troupe and does things with magnetism, electricity, and ventriloquism. Colonel Keilholm asks for a performance of ventriloquism with a death's head, so Calzolaro sends the local sexton to dig up a skull. The sexton craftily digs up the schoolmaster's skull, having heard that a child can bring his parent's head to life. It is evidently so, for Calzolaro faints away during the performance and says, when he comes to, that the skull assumed his father's features and accused him for a parricide, as he more or less broke his father's heart. Calzolaro repents, dismisses the troupe, drops the lawsuit, and comes out of the whole thing well by marrying his father's heiress.
4) "The Death Bride": The frame story is about Ida, a girl whose twin, Hildegarde, has died. Hildegarde had a strawberry birthmark that distinguished her from Ida. A Duke comes and wants to marry Ida, though he seems to have seen the ghost of Hildegarde in a gallery in Paris and to have the two girls confused. The family opens Hildegarde's coffin in case she should be missing, but everything is in order. In order to marry Ida, the Duke has broken an engagement to another woman and he becomes very nervous when the narrator, who knows something about him, tells the following tale.
Felippo and Clara pledge to each other eternal faithfulness and drink their blood mixed with champagne, saying that if one of them proves unfaithful, he or she will be forced to come among the dead to join the other. Felippo later runs off with Camilla and hears mysterious shrieks. A strange and uninvited lady appears at the wedding dinner; she is masked and wearing Camilla's ring. Felippo's white wine looks red to him. The lady will not unmask. There is shrieking. Clara's ghost blows out the candles at the wedding. Felippo dies.
The Duke's wedding proceeds, and the Duke goes away, he thinks, with Ida; the real Ida, however, has not seen him. He is found dead. But the ghost with whom he went away is evidently not Hildegarde; she is a local ghost who can assume various appearances and whose curse is the obligation to seduce away an engaged man.
5) "The Storm": Isabella de Nunez is in perpetual mourning and says she has done something so bad that she is beyond the help of religion. She tells her friend Emily, swearing her to secrecy, that on a certain night something terrible will happen. On that night a carriage is heard to arrive (the arrival impossible, one would think, in such a dreadful storm), a locked door opens, and Isabella dies under "circumstances of unexampled horror." Emily faints and dies of brain fever.
6) "The Spectre Barber": Francis goes to make his fortune and win his love. Once he stays with a man who flagellates guests, but his honesty (i.e., rudeness) so charms the host that the ritual is omitted. Some time later he sleeps in an empty castle and has his hair and even his eyebrows shaved off by a whiskery ghost. As the ghost apparently wishes to be shaved too, Francis cooperates. The ghost is thus freed from a curse and thanks his benefactor by giving him clues to hidden treasure.