THEODORE CYPHON, OR, THE BENEVOLENT JEW

Theodore, a secretive and despondent young man who refuses to reveal his last name, saves the life of Shechem Bensadi, the Jew, who in gratitude takes him in and treats him like a son. The wife of the family is missing, having been "snatched by violence" earlier; the daughter, Eve, fancies Theodore, who once rescued her from a rapist, but he is devoted to a picture of one Eliza Hanson. When Theodore is wounded in a street fight, trying to save an adulteress from her husband, he confesses his whole story.
Squire Cyphon, Theodore's father, was power hungry and opposed his son's attachment to Eliza, the daughter of a poor but exceedingly virtuous clergyman. The Squire kept locking Theodore up and finally put him in a madhouse, where he attempted to kill himself by knocking out his brains against a wall. Followed by threats from his father, who kept track of where he was, he escaped and found the Hansons. Hanson was arrested for marrying Theodore and Eliza, and the marriage was annulled. Theodore's wicked, unscrupulous, and libertine uncle had spies and managed to trick away and ruin Eliza. The rape aborted Theodore's baby. Theodore murdered his uncle and fled. His flight was attended by rumors that he was supernatural, rumors of which he sometimes took advantage to evade capture; once, for instance, he hung on a gibbet and creaked and howled.
Shechem Bensadi's investigations reveal that Theodore's father is so nervous that he is employing guards and tasters. Eliza's brother Jason, who in the course of foreign adventures has crossed paths with Bensadi's kidnapped wife, wants to marry Eve and goes to hunt for Eliza. Eliza, who has been raped and infected by a madhouse keeper, dies of venereal ailments in a workhouse. Theodore goes to jail, confesses, and insists upon the death penalty. At his hanging he makes a speech about obeying the law, and forgives his father. He is buried beside Eliza. Eliza's brother-in-law kills the madhouse keeper and bribes the witnesses. Squire Cyphon commits suicide. Eve and Jason will marry after a year of mourning for Theodore.