FITZMAURICE

Edward Fitzmaurice, whose father is ruined in fortune but honest, is put to work in his maternal uncle Rigby's countinghouse. He leaves behind him two sisters; Helen, the elder, is afflicted with too much sensibility, and Anastasia, the younger, is a bit too cold and prudent. Edward does well in his uncle's business. He has occasional news from home and is told that his father and Helen are dead, and that Anastasia has married Pobjoy, a pompous neighborhood doctor. On his way to visit the Pobjoys, Edward gives money to a needy prostitute and learns her story, in the course of which he discovers her to be his own sister Helen. Helen was seduced by the rector, who is Aubrey Delvalley, Edward's friend. After having been cursed by her father and rejected by an aunt, she fell into bad company and has been whoring for two years. Business has been falling off lately as she is past her prime. This information makes it impossible for Edward to accede to his uncle's desire that he marry Delvalley's sister Augusta, who wants him very much; consequently, the uncle disinherits him. Anastasia and Pobjoy are not sympathetic to Helen's problems, though they admit that the father retracted his curse before he died. They think that Edward should work his way back into the uncle's favor. Anastasia is sluttish, her children monstrous. Edward leaves saying, "Damn the world!"
An apparently demented old man named Withers is so attracted to "Damn the world" as a philosophical statement that he follows Edward back to London, where various problems await. Delvalley avoids a duel with Edward by pretending repentance. Augusta proposes to him and threatens to kill herself when he refuses. The uncle dies and leaves everything to his wife, who takes on Edward as a kind of steward. Helen, who says she cannot quite stop swearing or drinking, joins the Society of Magdalens. Augista, becoming gradually more unbalanced, offers to be Edward s mistress and threatens him with her hatred when he refuses. Augusta's friend Selina claims that Edward seduced her, which he has not; this particular problem ends surprisingly - they fall in love and marry. The aunt remarries, once again stripping Edward of his prospects, and his house is taken over by her loud fundamentalist in-laws. Just when things are at their lowest - Edward sick, dying, imprisoned for debt, Selina considering suicide - Mr. Withers reveals him- self as Edward's paternal uncle. He pays the debts and restores Helen to society. Edward rescues the former Mrs. Rigby from her tyrannical new husband, who has locked her up while he sits around drunk with his drunken mother and drunken grandmother. The aunt admits that she suppressed her husband's final will, so Edward inherits at last. Aubrey Delvalley, his sins revealed to the bishop, takes laudanum. His death is made more garish by the appearance of Augusta, now totally insane, who pounds on his corpse with her fist; she is put in an asylum. The good end happily.