ROMANTIC TALES

1) The Revengeful Turk: or Mystic Cavern. Augustus, after his father dies, is troubled by his aunt, Madame Venome; she is "malignant," "turbulent," "crabbed," etc., and tries to make him court a girl who is likely to get him into trouble. He joins the navy to escape and is captured and imprisoned by the Spanish. The Spanish governor's daughter Circesia sees Augustus, pities him, loves him, and arranges his escape. Since she has been guilty of helping a prisoner and a Protestant, she must go along, and she tells Augustus that he may bring one additional friend. He chooses badly. His friend makes him swim ashore at gunpoint and rows away with the protecting Circesia. She is Bassa's daughter. Bassa kills the would-be rapist and suddenly a blue vapor appears, accompanied by music, with his wife's angelic spirit in the midst of it. She says that the kiss was the Sultan's fault, not hers, and that she was murdered by the same rapist; then she evaporates. Circesia and Augustus marry, and Circesia converts - to Christianity, says Crookenden, though she appeared to be Roman Catholic when we first found her in Spain.

2) The Distressed Nun, or, Sufferings of Herselia di Brindoli of Florence. Herselia's troubles are caused by her brother Vincentio, who believes her to be his father's favorite. He arranges a secret meeting, even a clandestine wedding, for her with Henri, son of a poor nobleman, and then betrays them. Both fathers are furious, and Herselia is clapped into a convent. When his father dies, Vincentio as head of the family demands that she take the veil. But she is rescued by Henri and marries him at last, while Vincento takes an Italian courtesan who ultimately poisons him.

3) The Vindictive Monk, or, The Fatal Ring. Calini is a foundling; he was left on the seashore to drown, accompanied by a ring inscribed "Ollorini." After he grows up he is kidnapped and chained to a wall by Sceloni, an employee of the villain Holbruzi, who wants Calini's beloved Alexa. Alexa continues to refuse Holbruzi, despite Calini's strange absence, and is consequently kidnapped herself. Sceloni is about to kill Calini when he notices the ring and stops; he is Calini's father. The ring belonged to his wife, an avuncular gift misunderstood by Calini to mean that she had a lover. Hence he killed her, left their child to drown, and became a monk. Calini rescues Alexa and they marry.