ZOFLOYA, OR, THE MOOR. A ROMANCE OF THE FIFTEENTH CENTURY

Ardolf, an evil count whose hobby is breaking up good marriages, seduces Laurina, the wife of his host the Marchese de Loredani. Dacre suggests that this influences the future bad behavior of the Loredani daughter, Victoria, but Victoria seems never to have been very nice. Despite strong supervision, she runs away to Venice to join her friend Berenza. Because of her mother's scandal he cannot marry her, but he scrupulously gives her a separate room until he is certain that she loves him. She thinks this odd of him but pretends to languish. One night she saves him from assassination by a man who turns out to be her brother Leonardo. (Leonardo ran away after his mother's abduction and has been taken up by a sinister mistress named Megalena Strozzi. The affair is genuinely passionate, marred chiefly by Megalena's insistence that Leonardo prove his love by stabbing or promising to stab various people whom she dislikes.)
Finally Victoria marries Berenza, but principally as a kind of vengeance. She soon covets his brother Henriquez, who is engaged to an innocent little blonde, and has bizarre dreams about Henriquez's servant Zofloya, in which he effects the deaths and displacements she desires, on the promise that she will be his. This is a dream from which there is no awakening, for Zofloya does fulfill her wishes by providing poisons and potions, and he grows more frightening and seems more supernatural all the time. She poisons Berenza, drives Henriquez to suicide by her ruthless pursuit of him, kills his fiancee Lilla, and, discovering her own dying mother, refuses to comfort or forgive her. She loves no one but herself and fears nothing but the Inquisition. The end of the novel provides a kind of reunion for all the living characters. Leonardo and Megalena, who have become bandits, both commit suicide to avoid capture. Zofloya offers to save Victoria from worldly misery and, after she has given one more pledge to be his, saves her by throwing her off a precipice.