ITALIAN VENGEANCE AND ENGLISH FOREBEARANCE. A ROMANCE 

Relationships in this novel all go on simultaneously but had best be explained one at a time. First, Belgrave brings his bride Evelina home to Belgrave Abbey. She is young and unhappy and not in love with her husband, but her friend Marian Gorden is some comfort to her. Belgrave is a libertine (though Evelina does not know it at first) with a rather scandalous background. He has earlier carried off an Italian woman named Hippolita (not, by the way, his first abduction), wooing her with promises of marriage. He does in fact love her, but was obliged to marry Evelina to avert financial ruin. Hippolita has been in a rage, returning his letters and trampling on his miniature. Later on Hippolita, using the name of Rosalie de M_____, contrives to meet Marian and, playing on the other woman's sense of honor, swears her to secrecy about her plans for vengeance. Hippolita has Belgrave's child, which she sends home to Italy. She becomes enormously grateful for Marian's kindness and nursing; later, as a cloaked stranger, she rescues Marian from an attempted kidnapping. Hippolita's final scheme for vengeance is to kidnap the Belgraves' newborn son and to tell them that she has it. Marian is at last permitted to raise the baby on condition that she not reveal its identity until Belgrave is dead. At the end Hippolita effects his demise by shooting him.
Marian becomes involved as well with an apparently deaf-mute Sunday artist, a stranger who calls himself Mr. Howard. He is really Henry Arlingford, who has been disinherited through Belgrave's manipulations. He offers Marian various bits of good advice and protection, and she sends him anonymous gifts of money. In the end he is restored to his rights and they marry.
Another romance involves Rose Delaval, whom Evelina hires as a companion. She was much loved during her childhood by an aristocrat named Edward, Lord Fortescue. He appears in the neighborhood one day, clearly still in love with Rose and still hunting for her. Because she is now so much older and is calling herself Rose Aylmer he fails to recognize her, though he is much drawn to her and finds that she reminds him of his other Rose. At last he recognizes her and they marry.