SANTA-MARIA, OR, THE MYSTERIOUS PREGNANCY. A ROMANCE

On the morning of her wedding to Prince Rinaldo, Santa-Maria is found apparently dead in her bed. At her funeral she revives and reports a dream of being raped by their kinsman and enemy Contarini. The wedding is next delayed by Rinaldo's illness, and before the event takes place Santa-Maria is discovered to be pregnant. She asserts her chastity but is not widely believed. Her mother thinks it best to send her off in pilgrim's garb lest her father kill her. She is taken in (we discover later) by some peasants who find her in labor, and she is delivered of a premature and stillborn child, after which she acquires a shepherd's costume and vows never to reveal her sex until the mystery of her pregnancy is solved. Twice she stays with families, under different aliases, but is forced to move on when impressionable young ladies are smitten with her beauty and press for marriage. She leaves behind with each girl a piece of her mother's jewelry as a token of affection. At last she saves a starving recluse in a ragged monk's habit and lives with him for a month until he dies. Father Conrad has told her that after his death she should look behind some mysterious black hangings, but she is afraid to do it alone, for she thinks she may find a corpse. So she recruits a passing cavalier, who finds for her a chest of money and a manuscript that makes him too angry at Father Conrad to give him a decent burial. He tells Santa-Maria that she may read it later and takes her to a cottage where she will be safe.
Meanwhile, Count Rudolph, Santa-Maria's father, is taking retributive measures. Suspecting her mother's complicity in the escape, he makes her sleep in a separate room. He sends assassins to murder the Prince and his guardian Manfredi. He wants revenge against the person he reasonably presumes has ruined his daughter, and, further, he is in line to inherit from the Prince, which he needs to do if he is to make a good showing with troops for the Viceroy. Word comes that the Prince and Manfredi are missing - it seems to him extraordinarily fast work - but when Count Rudolph arrives to investigate, he finds the treasure missing too and suspects that the assassins have cheated him. The castle shows signs of being haunted, so Rudolph gives it to D'Arcos, his kinsman, in ostensible gratitude for a gift of money.
When Rudolph comes back from the wars, D'Arcos has given up trying to live with the haunting, and Rudolph decides to move into the castle with his wife. They have had no word from Santa-Maria. On their way to the castle, however, they come across the girls with whom Santa-Maria has left jewelry and discover a number of inns that are decorated with sketches of Prince Rinaldo. Rudolph finds the castle disquieting. It, too, has pictures of Rinaldo and Santa-Maria. Suddenly Rudolph is brought to trial for the murders of Rinaldo and Manfredi, whom he now suspects to be alive. While he is waiting to be sentenced he stabs himself. A number of interesting facts are uncovered on the occasion of the trial. Santa-Maria's brother Ferdinand (who was also the helpful cavalier), heretofore supposed dead, accuses Contarini, who has himself been Rudolph's accuser, of murder, sacrilege, and incest. Father Conrad's manuscript has revealed that he drugged Santa-Maria with a substance previously proved effective on high-principled nuns and let Contarini rape her. Contarini is beheaded, Santa-Maria marries her Prince, who is not dead after all, and brother Ferdinand marries one of the girls who had been misguidedly in love with his sister.