THE MYSTERY, OR, FORTY YEARS AGO. A NOVEL

Charles Harley, a naval officer, comes back to see his old benefactor Sir George Henderson. Sir George's two daughters, "the playful Caroline" and "the pensive Amelia," were Charles's childhood companions. Caroline is already married but Amelia is not, and Charles fancies that Sir George may intend her for him. Both Charles and Amelia come to like the notion, but when Charles, after some colorful but irrelevant adventures with mobs and imprisonment, asks Sir George for her hand, he is given a flat negative which hurts his pride and drives him away from the house. Having received a commission - Sir George arranged it - and an unexpected inheritance, he leaves for Africa and subsequently is believed to be drowned.
In fact Charles manages to reach shore but is pursued by a lion into the jungle, where he is lost for two months before finding some friendly natives with whom to settle down, He stays for several months, making friends and inculcating useful skills, but with the advent of a new and hostile chief he decides to go home. He is encumbered by a female servant/companion who insistently comes along, intent upon marrying him, until partway through their journey a tiger resolves the difficulty by eating her. In one native village he finds Smithers, an English missionary with a long beard, "dead blue eyes," and two long teeth like "the prongs of a toasting fork." His sinister appearance notwithstanding, Smithers is a gentle old man, so high-principled as to be somewhat useless as a companion in adventures. He dies and leaves Charles his Bible and papers.
Though both Amelia and Sir George have been exceedingly woeful at the rumor of Charles's death, she is still forbidden to him after their joyful reunion because, as he now admits, Sir George suspects that Charles is Amelia's half-brother, his own son, fruit of an impulsive moment with his wife's visiting cousin Frederica. Charles moves sadly into the new house which the undertaker Shovelem has procured for him and prepares to live alone. He is visited by a happy Sir George, who has discovered, thanks to Smithers's papers which Charles himself brought home, that Charles is not after all his son. The relieved lovers marry at once.
It is worth noting, though they are impossible to fit into the summary, that long and frequent passages of the novel are devoted to conversation and even informal debate on such topics as society, economics, and marriage.