ST. LEON. A TALE OF THE SIXTEENTH CENTURY

St. Leon is trained to be honorable and upright. Orphaned at eighteen, he fights for Francis I and is knighted, but acquires one disastrous vice - gaming. He marries Marguerite Louise Isabeau de Damville; her father hopes her goodness will reform St. Leon before he is ruined. It almost does, but when he takes his son to college in Paris, St. Leon begins to game again and loses all his fortune. While he is temporarily insane from shock and guilt, his wife settles affairs and moves the family to a cheap Swiss cottage. During a famine the neighbors drive them away and they go through a period of near starvation, selling their clothes to buy food.
After things are a bit better, an old beggar comes to stay in their summer house. He appears to be some kind of Wanderer. In exchange for refuge from the Inquisition he offers St. Leon two secrets which are not to be told to anyone else, including Marguerite. St. Leon is torn between marital loyalty and desire to know the secrets. He chooses the latter and is given instructions for the Philosopher's Stone and the Elixir of Life. The old man dies. St. Leon manufactures money and buys a big house, but his marriage has sustained a blow. Furthermore, because he is unable to explain where his money comes from, people suspect that he has killed and robbed the old man. Charles, the son, leaves his family in order to preserve his honor; worse, St. Leon's wife guesses his secret and says that he has killed her, adding a few remarks about what low creatures alchemists are. He is jailed on suspicion but bribes his way out. A mob burns his house and kills Hector, his faithful friend and servant. Marguerite dies, and he gives his daughters into the care of a friend.
Next the Inquisition seizes him. He is to be burned after twelve years' imprisonment. So much for endless life, he thinks. But he escapes on his way to the stake, mixes the elixir, drops thirty years, and eludes capture. So that they may inherit, he tells his daughters that their father is dead; they are nice girls but recover from their grief too quickly to please him. He tries being a philanthropist, whereupon his friend Bethlem Gabor, a confirmed misanthrope, is so annoyed by his do-gooding that he locks him in a dungeon, finally, however, giving him a key so that he can escape during a siege by the Austrians. St. Leon's son Charles proves to be the Austrian commander, but their warm friendship (Charles treats him like a younger brother) is destroyed by a misunderstanding about Charles's girlfriend. Worse, Charles finds out that St. Leon used to feed infidels and implacably holds this against him. St. Leon refuses to duel with his son and flees. Thirty years later he writes his memoirs, with no good news of his own. He ends by listing his son's virtues and being glad of his happiness.