DECEPTION

Maisuna Cleveland, an East Indian heiress, is travelling in England, accompanied by her parrot, when the coach overturns and the passengers are taken into the house of hospitable Sir William Coats. There Maisuna first meets Mr. Jefferson, to whom she is instantly attracted. He is poor, being inclined to indolence and extravagance, but she has a secret nocturnal meeting with him all the same, during which he warns her against the villainy of Mrs. Bruce and the confessor Jocelyn. Nevertheless she goes to stay with Mrs. Bruce and meets some interesting people, most of whom get her into trouble. Miss Meredith, whose suicide Maisuna prevents, is deeply involved in gaming and constantly requires large sums of money, which Maisuna wheedles from Mr. Mortimer, her guardian; as a result he supposes Maisuna herself to be gaming or at least indefensibly extravagant. This misunderstanding is cleared up when Mortimer is dying and the two young ladies rush to his bedside. Maisuna comes of age and receives her inheritance - her first act is to give Mr. Jefferson ten thousand anonymous pounds - and Miss Meredith reforms and marries a clergyman, so the financial difficulties are over. But the social ones are just beginning.
Mr Berresford, whom Maisuna has earlier declined to marry despite her guardian's endorsement, is an intimate of Mrs. Bruce's house (her bastard son, we discover later) and sill bent on marriage. Toward this end he has Maisuna kidnapped from a masquerade and locked up. Jocelyn attempts to arrange a Roman Catholic ceremony, but Maisuna (though she has had some Roman inclinations, her mother having been a Catholic) informs him that she is a Protestant and that he is false and idolatrous, whereupon Jocelyn suggests that Berresford rape her. She escapes at night in her petticoat with a handkerchief tied around her head and is at last reunited with Mr. Jefferson, with whom she exchanges vows of love. After a somewhat anticlimactic incident in which, instructed by a maternal note, she searches the house for "the talisman of Tippoo Saib, Sultan of the East" (her father), she and Jefferson, who is after all a nobleman and a good match, settle down to a happy marriage.