THE PROPHECY OF DUNCANNON, OR, THE DWARF AND THE SEER. A CALEDONIAN LEGEND

Lorrimond, Laird of Glenwark, is about to marry Margaret, daughter of the dwarf Sir Andrew Draulincourt. Rosilda Dinwoodie (whose woodcutter father raised Lorrimond as a foundling until his own father acknowledged him) has for some time been in love with him but is trying to behave. Shortly before the wedding the seer Duncannon arrives and warns, not for the first time, that the marriage is improper and shame will result from it. Lorrimond, who vows not to marry until he has vanquished his enemies, swims to St. Serf's island to confront the seer. As his new sword, a jeweled gift from Dinwoodie, would be awkward for swimming, he leaves it with Rosilda for safekeeping; she decides to place it on the sand where he can find it on his return, but the miser Ralph Linnecombe finds it first and takes it home.
On the island Lorrimond discovers a beautiful girl named Mora and promptly falls in love. He returns to the island often but he is not for some time permitted to meet the seer or to know whether the seer is Mora's father. Margaret is wondering what has become of Lorrimond and is feeling angry and jilted. At this point her ex-suitor Richard Cadwaller comes to town with a friend, Edward Allandale. They stay at the castle, and Cadwaller, who is both ambitious and too fond of Margaret to hold a grudge, works his way back into her affections. They decide to elope. Allandale has been courting Rosilda, who is under great parental pressure to marry. Even Sir Andrew pushes her on Allandale's behalf, and she is too confused to refuse, but she decides to run away on the eve of her wedding.
On that evening several important things happen simultaneously: Allandale, needing money for a hasty wedding, borrows from the miser, who later is so upset at his own prodigality that he murders Allandale with Lorrimond's jeweled sword and drops it by the body; Cadwaller and Margaret, just stepping into their chaise to elope, hear Allandale's dying voice but are unable to find him in the fog; Lorrimond is allowed to meet with the seer Duncannon, who tells him a long tale of intrigue and baby-swapping, proving that Margaret is his sister and Mora is the true heiress of Draulincourt. Duncannon was a fried and former vassal of Lorrimond's father, promoted for his services. He thinks it best that Lorrimond and Mora marry and leave Margaret alone, since the confusion of identity is not her fault.
When Lorrimond gets back to the mainland he is imprisoned for Allandale's murder. He does not protest, for he supposes that Rosilda still had his sword and must have done it, and he is gallant. Margaret comes with the keys and lets him out, but he insists on returning for his trial. When he reaches the island, Duncannon tells him that Mora is missing with the boat and has apparently gone to look for him. Thanks to Rosilda, who has seen evidence in the miser's cottage, and to several minor characters who come and testify, Lorrimond is acquitted and the miser convicted. He marries Rosilda with the demonstrated approval of Mora's ghost. Duncannon disappears and is seen only once again, on the couple's twelfth anniversary, when he makes an appearance as an elderly minstrel.