HORRID MYSTERIES. A STORY

Because the events in this novel are dominated and manipulated by a secret society called the Confederates, it is full of surprising and unexplained incidents, delusions, spirits, mysterious documents, losses and resurrections, and is difficult indeed to render lucid. The follow1ng summary deals with only the more comprehendible events; the novel is much more complicated.
Carlos is told by his friend Count S-- a strange tale of having been captured by white phantoms and accused of illicit relations with a woman he does not know, called Francisca. Count s-- was at last released and sworn to a year's secrecy, but Francisca was thrown into a pit. Carlos himself is warned, in a vision, about invisible spies. Later the Count returns and tries to assassinate his friend but is stopped by a Superior Being; he does not appear to recall the incident afterward. Carlos marries a girl named Elmira, who also warns him that unknown hands direct things in Spain. Elmira is killed mysteriously just after the wedding. After Elmira's death Carlos meets Don Pedro, who is said to have killed his wife Francisca and her lover. One night when they are dining together Francisca arrives, alive, and begs forgiveness. Later still she confesses that she loves Carlos, and vanishes, to reappear at intervals throughout the novel. Meanwhile, Carlos has reluctantly joined a secret society on the understanding that the "brothers" will find Elmira's murderer, and he spends a voluptuous day with a girl called Rosalia, who is affiliated with the society and, as it turns out, eager to ruin him. Elmira appears again and suggests that she and Carlos elope, which they do despite the warning of a kind of spiritual mentor, the Genius Amanuel. Elmira is shot as they drive away and dies. After complicated wanderings and some brushes with the Confederates, Carlos finds Elmira alive in Switzerland. She knows nothing of the second episode and says she was drugged the first time, not dead. They have a brief but happy marriage; then she and their son fall sick and die. This time she really is dead.
Carlos and Count S--, in Paris, find a girl, Caroline, whom they both like; Carlos asks her to choose between them and she chooses the Count. Carlos marries Adelheid Baroness of V--, with whom Count S-- subsequently falls in love. At about this time the Genius Amanuel fights with Carlos's faithful servant Alfonso, who, dying of the wound received, confesses that he is Carlos's uncle and the head of the Confederates. Carlos has problems with women, finding it necessary to shoot a friend who is discovered making love to his wife and having to cope with the advances of the Count's wife, Caroline. At the end, however, the Count and Carlos are saved from bandits by their two wives, who, wearing male attire, attack the assassins from behind. The couples are reconciled.