THE FOREST OF ST. BERNARDO

Emma Roberts has been sent to a French convent by her father as retribution for her refusal to marry his friend Sir William Maynard. Sir William was especially helpful when General Roberts, after his wife's death, fell in with a whore and took up gaming. But as the novel begins Sir William is sorry that he has caused Emma trouble and effects a reconciliation with Henry Millward, whom she loves. General Roberts removes Emma from the convent, along with her orphaned friend Fanny Edwards. Near the newlywed Emma and Henry's estate lives Father Edmund the hermit, who is doing penance for having left his monastery to elope with a nun; she died during the escape while giving birth to his baby, who also died. Emma and Henry also meet someone who knew an Edwards in India - Fanny's late Uncle Charles, as it turns out, who has left Fanny £10,000.
By the second volume Emma and Henry have two children, Edward and Matilda, and are given a third, Juliana, by Alonza Vaena. Most of the subsequent excitement is Juliana's or Alonza's. Alonza does not wish Juliana to know her family history, which involves his secret marriage. Alonza marries a second time and the son of that marriage is assassinated. Like all the rest of the villainy, this assassination was perpetrated by Gusman (Alonza's cousin) and Triphosa (a woman Alonza once refused to marry). Family affairs reach a crisis when Juliana is kidnapped and her father is discovered to be missing. Gusman and Triphosa have Juliana in a castle; they wish her to become Roman Catholic and to marry their feeble son. Though they try to act friendly, Juliana is not deceived, for she has found her father's ring - diamond, with a hidden miniature of her mother - under a tree and suspects that he was murdered there. And she is quite right. Further, Gusman wishes to rape her, and Triphosa wants to kill her afterward. When Juliana's friends arrive to rescue her they find her father's unburied body, but she is gone, safely escaped to the protection of a good priest. Gusman and Triphosa are to be executed; Juliana marries Edward; and Matilda marries Charles, who with his poor but aristocratic mother was earlier taken into Emma and Henry's family.