ST. MARGARET'S CAVE, OR, THE NUN'S STORY. AN ANCIENT LEGEND

The frame tale takes place in the early seventeenth century near Bremen, when the widowed Baroness De Warminstroct enters the Convent of St. Mary and gives the abbess some family papers to read. The story which they contain, and which took place a century earlier, is the matter of the novel.
St. Margaret's Cave and the adjacent ruins of an old chapel are said to be haunted. They are near Castle Fitzwalter in Northumberland. Young Fitzwalter meets in Germany a nobleman named De Hoffman. The pair do good service against Richard at Bosworth Field. Fitzwalter is supposed to extricate his father from debt by marrying Edith, his father's ward and the daughter of his creditor. Unfortunately Fitzwalter loves his father's other ward, Blanch Stanley, the penniless daughter of an old friend. Blanch and Fitzwalter elope to Germany and stay with De Hoffman, where Blanch dies in childbirth. The infant Margaret is raised by Fitzwalter and Edith, whom he finally consents to marry. Edith is not unkind to Margaret but appears to disapprove of the affection between her and her half-sister Isabel. At one point Fitzwalter brings home a semilunatic friend Austin, who escapes from his host's ministrations to don a Franciscan habit and become a kind of hermit. Later, when Fitzwalter dies Austin becomes an important emotional support for Margaret, whose stepmother is content to raise her but denies her any legal rights. When Edith remarries (Lord De Launcy, whom nobody likes), she and her husband and Isabel go away for three years, leaving Margaret behind.
Subsequent adventures belong to the younger generation. Isabel has kept up an affectionate correspondence with her sister and persuades a virtuous abbess to offer Margaret sanctuary. The abbess is the aunt of Ferdinand de Hoffman (also second generation), who loves Isabel. A boy named Leopold Sternheim arrives bearing papers that testify to Margaret's legitimacy; he is a friend of Ferdinand's, ostensibly a peasant's son, but Ferdinand's father is curiously upset at the sound of his name. When the De Launcys come back and lock Margaret in, Leopold assumes blackface and the role of Cuthbert, a minstrel, so that he and Austin may rescue her. She and her old nurse Alice survive a storm at sea in the course of her escape. Meanwhile the elder De Hoffman, increasingly distraught, sends a hired assassin to dispatch Leopold, but the assassin accidentally stabs Ferdinand (who does in fact look remarkably like Leopold) and in his excitement admits who sent him. The elder De Hoffman apologizes, confesses secrets that we are not told at the time, and dies. We soon discover that Austin is his elder brother and has a lurid tale of his own: he had a mistress who tricked him into false suspicions about his wife's fidelity and led him accidentally to stab their infant in an attempt to kill a supposed lover, really his own sister Clarice. After that his wife and Clarice both took the veil and Fitzwalter brought Austin to England. Leopold is really Austin's son and consequently the real De Hoffman heir. He and Margaret are in love. Isabel, who loves Ferdinand (and vice versa) refuses to marry her stepbrother De Launcy or to forget Margaret's claim to their father's estate. When Margaret's case comes to court, Lady de Launcy relinquishes all except that portion of Fitzwalter's estate to which she is honestly entitled and later relinquishes even that. Margaret and Leopold are married, as are Isabel and Ferdinand, and they all live to old age and die peacefully.