WARBECK OF WOLFSTEIN

Baron Wilhelm of Marchfeldt is sent home from the wars to his sister Louisa. He is dying, not of wounds but of grief for a fiancee three years dead. In the army he had made a true friend, Casimir Vallenstein, and a sinister acquaintance, Warbeck of Wolfstein; the two seem to be particular enemies. Wilhelm would like his sister to marry Vallenstein, though Wolfstein has disconcerted him by seeing and admiring her picture. After Wilhelm's death a miniature of an unknown man is discovered among his possessions. Louisa, who has been warned against Wolfstein, fears (and knows deep down) that it is he, but convinces herself that it is Vallenstein; a somehow potent object, the picture has a sinister effect on her nerves and disposition as she becomes attached to it. On a stormy night the original of the picture arrives, claiming to be Vallenstein and to have been attacked. The reader is aware from a few incongruous speeches and bursts of temper that it is Wolfenstein. An old servant identifies him just in time to prevent a hasty marriage.
Louisa goes to the court at Vienna, where she is cruel to Casimir, who is trying to effect his father's political reinstatement. He pines, though pursued by the Princess Stolberg. Meanwhile Wolfstern arrives and pursues Louisa, who, though fearful, is still attracted to him. When he pretends religious conversion and repentance, even to wearing a hair shirt, she succumbs and, in spite of Stolberg's sincere efforts to warn her, marries him. At once his mask is put by and all his previous plots are revealed, He tries, for his sadistic pleasure, to make her weep; he abandons her servant to the wolves; he throws her priest's religious books into a torrent. She is almost too discouraged to care but not too depressed to convert to Christianity numbers of the troops and banditti in her husband's castle. Casimir is brought to the castle a prisoner. He and Louisa are both death-obsessed. Wolfstein begins to be depressed and wishes someone loved him. Soon he is taking opium and training a feeble-minded child to blow up the castle. Finally the Inquisition closes in on him, so he gives the child orders to set off the gunpowder, and all except the virtuous principals are blown to perdition. The survivors, including servants, pair off into appropriate marriages.