THE BROTHERS, OR, THE CASTLE OF NIOLO. A ROMANCE

Frederic and Leopold Lindamore are brothers; the Castle of Niolo, on Lake Geneva, is their father's. Frederic is home-loving and good, but Leopold is a real terror - kills people, destroys altars, rapes nuns. After Frederic loses his wife in a boating accident, he raises his daughter Adeline with the help of Mademoiselle Schlaffenhausen, who is supposed to be a tutor but, rumor has it, pays more attention to the father than to the daughter. When Adeline is about sixteen her uncle Leopold suddenly ceases decimating Europe and comes home to Niolo, pretending to be reformed and pleading his way into his father's favor. He brings with him his friend Ortano, who decides that he wants Adeline; Leopold encourages him, as he wishes Ortano to assassinate Frederic. While Adeline and her father are on a trip (dur- ing which she falls in love with Adolphus Rosenheim) the villains attack them and Frederic is dragged away and taken to Sazzano, a maimed outcast who lives in a ruined castle. Lindamore pere is subsequently at Leopold's mercy.
Meanwhile Adolphus Rosenheim, visiting Adeline, sees something so terrible in the family vault that he leaves the castle without a word. He overhears a conversation between the villains and asks a friendly abbess to protect Adeline. Leopold demands that Adeline marry Ortano and makes a terrible threat - he will kill Adolphus, after informing him that Adeline could have saved him. In the midst of her forced wedding to Ortano a voice cries "Never," and Adolphus appears; Anselm, the monk who was supposed to poison him, discovered that they were brothers. Adolphus is promptly dragged off to the Western Turret. Villano, an in-law of Frederic's who has been all along engaged in the pursuit of justice, discovers that Frederic still lives, and together they try to find out what Leopold has done to his father - buried him alive they fear. They find only stones in his coffin and are informed later that Adolphus's brother Anselm was supposed to poison the old man with sacramental wine but persuaded the abbot to keep him a prisoner instead. The villains burn a convent in hopes of smoking Adeline out, but although they enjoy raping the nuns who run out of the burning building they miss their principal prey. At last Ortano stabs Leopold in mistake for Adolphus. The villain is buried without coffin or marker. Ortano commits suicide. Adeline and Adolphus marry. Anselm, thoroughly reformed, becomes abbot of Arienheim, and Mademoiselle Schlaffenhausen goes into a convent.