FITZALLAN

Hector Fitzallan is the son of an unusual union. His mother and father eloped and had six weeks together in a cottage before Henry's parents arrived and made their son marry someone else. After the new wife's death, Henry tried to marry Hector's mother again but, refused, he set out for America and apparently died. These circumstances account for some of the more improbable incidents in Hector's life. On his way home from university, on his birthday, he is kidnapped and drugged; he awakens in a room conta1ning his mother's portrait, and his host identifies himself as his father's twin brother, who just wants an avuncular vis1t. After this Hector receives an assortment of notes and warnings pertinent to or purportedly from his father. His mother says that the notes are from an imposter.
Besides these adventures there are excitements of a more ordinary sort. Hector falls in love with Amelia Fortescue, whom the Earl her father intends for a silly snob named Sir Henry Montfort. The dangerous Adeline Gordon, who is "in heart a fiend" but is capable of great emotional heights, falls in love with Hector. She is friends with the libertine William Monckton, who has seduced and abandoned Maria Arnfeld. Maria's father, Major Arnfeld, wanders the roads like a lunatic, raving of hell and serpents and looking for her seducer. When Hector helps Maria, that and other innocent actions are partly misunderstood, and wholly misrepresented, by his enemies, so that his reputation is blackened. Though Amelia faints at hearing the gossip, she does not lose faith in Hector and much prefers him to Sir Henry. Difficulties and dangers multiply - Amelia is kidnapped by a hag and rescued by Major Arnfeld; the Major stabs Hector; Henry is arrested for abducting and possibly killing Maria; Adeline tries to seduce Hector (who is the only man she has ever loved) and revolves the notion of killing Amelia. Finally, though warned by the Earl not to go near Lord Dufresne's house (Dufresne is the father of William Monckton), Hector lurks on the premises partly in hopes of seeing Amelia, who is visiting there, and partly because he suspects that Dufresne is the uncle who once kidnapped him. He is greatly surprised to see Amelia with his mother in the conservatory and to learn that his mother is Lady Dufresne. Monckton sees Amelia and Hector together at the door and over dinner alludes in veiled terms to their meeting. This so incenses Amelia that she tells all she knows about Maria's seduction and the Major's misdirected wounding of Hector - a real conversation-stopper. Monckton rushes out in pursuit of Hector but is discovered and shot by the Major, who afterward kills himself. Lady Dufresne admits that Dufresne is Hector's father. Hector marries Amelia. When Maria hears about the murder of Monckton and her father's suicide, she goes mad and dies. Adeline goes to France to be a nun and dies of consumption.