MADELINE, OR, THE CASTLE OF MONTGOMERY. A NOVEL

This novel deals with the lives and loves of three generations, with principal emphasis on the middle one. The only hints of the macabre are the reputation of part of the castle as haunted and a girl's dream about the fiery death and ascension of her parents. In the first generation, Archibald Montgomery wishes to marry Madeline Clifford, whose father is pushing her to marry old Lord Rutland and £15,000 per annum. When she considers running away, Archibald offers to protect her; three months later they marry, apparently with no sin or cohabitation in the interval. Two of their children, Ellen and Madeline, live to adulthood; Ellen is the more beautiful. The philanthropic Montgomery family establishes an old-age asylum and a little charity school.
Two other local families, the Clevelands and the Primroses, are pertinent to the love interest. Sir Joseph Cleveland has three daughters and an illegitimate son; the Primroses, who are Quakers, have a son (Josiah) and a daughter (Miriam). (When Ellen and Madeline do a performance of The Provoked Husband for their parents' wedding anniversary - a tactless choice? - Miriam is not allowed to participate.) Young Mr. Cleveland proposes to Madeline and propositions Miriam. Josiah Primrose proposes to Madeline too; she does love him but feels that her affection is sisterly and she certainly does not wish to become a Quaker. Miriam is admired by a young man named Glanville.
Through some involvement with Sir Joseph Cleveland, who commits suicide at about this time, Madeline and Ellen's father is arrested for debt as the family are sitting around reading Night Thoughts. Ellen craftily saves the family portraits from a Mr. Solomon by offering instead her mother's jewels, by which she means the aged pensioners and the alms-school children. (Mr. Solomon does not take them.) Madeline is sent to her maternal aunt, who is cold and rude. After supporting herself for a while with her fancy work and preserving her honor, she is at last protected by her uncle and makes a happy marriage. Ellen, on the other hand, marries unhappily, for her husband is too indulgent and she becomes quite useless. Ellen's husband brings Madeline their baby Frederick to nurse; Madeline's husband and sister are both outraged when she matter-of-factly sits down and does it - an indecent display, they think. Miriam has married Glanville, and when his first wife, thought dead, arrives suddenly, he kills himself. Miriam dies in childbirth. The novel goes on long enough to marry the children in Frederick's generation.