ADA REIS. A TALE

Ada Reis is an unscrupulous but handsome adventurer who kills and betrays to satisfy greed and ambition. One of his victims is the woman he loves, murdered in a fit of jealousy, so he raises their love-child Fiormonda alone. He becomes allied with the sinister Jew Kabkarra, who is clearly delighted by Ada Reis's evil deeds. The plot is principally concerned with Kabkarra's attempts to turn Fiormonda's depth of thought and feeling to evil. He gives her gifts and installs his mother, Shaffou Paca, as preceptress. His efforts are opposed by a good spirit named Zevahir, who sings, lectures, and also gives gifts to Fiormonda. The evil in Fiormonda grows - wild anger, love of luxury - and Kabkarra appears from time to time in various forms. At last a game between good and evil is played on a magic chessboard; evil having won, Kabkarra says Fiormonda belongs to him and takes her, Ada Reis, and the old woman off on a ship, the latter two bound like sacks. They go to South America, where they live like royalty. En route they rescue Count Condulmar, to whom Fiormonda becomes attached. Condulmar indulges her and looks fiendish at times, and she loves him. But she doubts that he is her true friend, as Zehavir was. She begins to feel somehow sad and guilty and besmirched. Condulmar is increasingly unkind to her and at last he deserts her, singing a song about the impossibility of restoring her innocence.
The Lima earthquake takes place on the day and hour that were earlier predicted by a ghost for Ada Reis's doom. Fiormonda shows signs of repentance. Ada Reis is washed off to an Indian isle and made king of a tribe which practices human sacrifice; this bores him. He is caught by a huge spider, which is Kabkarra, and transported to new territory to hear a lecture: it seems that Kabkarra's mother mated with a demon and later turned into Niagara Falls; Kabkarra explains his possession of Condulmar and others, and his fight for Fiormonda. He persuades Ada Reis to drink poison and go to hell; Ada finds with disgust that Kabkarra is only
a servant there. Or is this hell? Perhaps it is a sort
of waiting room for Judgment. Ada Reis finds Fiormonda and Condulmar in unhappy majesty at a banquet. They all want a second chance. Given it, they find themselves alive again but all fall into their old errors except Fiormonda, who re- pents. This time the others· are doomed forever, and forever fall into an abyss. Fiormonda is baptized and does good works, but after her death poisonous plants grow on her grave.