THE MIDNIGHT BELL. A GERMAN STORY FOUNDED ON INCIDENTS IN REAL LIFE

Alphonsus is sent away from home under bizarre circumstances: his father has been murdered; his mother has made him swear to kill the murderer, whom she supposes to be the dead man's brother Frederick; but she subsequently appears covered with blood and orders her son to fly forever "as he values life and heaven." Having joined the army, Alphonsus hears the story of his comrade Arieno's sister Lauretta, who loved Alphonsus's uncle Frederick but was deceived by her family into a different marriage. Later Alphonsus falls in love with Lauretta's daughter Lauretta and they are married. She is kidnapped, still weak from childbirth, by a spoiled and covetous young man named Theodore D'Aignon and is locked up in a turret, whence she is released by a fortuitous bolt of lightning which breaks away the wall and permits her to fall out. She is taken in by a hermit who dies the same night, but not before telling his own unrelated tale. Theodore catches Lauretta a second time, but she is rescued by her father (one of the abductors), who recognizes her mother's pearls and crucifix. He too had been tricked into the marriage which produced her. He has been imprisoned in the Bastille as an Italian spy and has escaped by feigning death.
Alphonsus takes Lauretta back to his family castle, concerning which there now flourish local superstitions about bells that toll at midnight. Expeditions discover monks, coffins, and a flagellant mother's accusing "ghost." At last a priest unravels the mystery: Alphonsus pere was given to marital jealousy and persuaded his brother to test his wife's fidelity by making advances to her. Also, he pretended to die. These ruses led to a moment of confusion when he came to his wife, who thought that he was Frederick and killed him. She realized too late that the vow extracted from her son would catch him between matricide and perjury. The church promises to find a loophole for Alphonsus, his mother goes into a convent and dies, and the others are restored to happiness.