FEUDAL TYRANTS, OR, THE COUNTS OF CARLSHEIM AND SARGANS. A ROMANCE. TAKEN FROM THE GERMAN

Feudal Tyrants is a tremendously complicated novel because it contains so many manuscript memoirs of people who actually have some connection with the plot line as well as elaborate stories of their own. In the frame story, Elizabeth, the Widowed Countess of Torrenburg, corresponds with her old teacher Conrad, who is abbot of Cloister-Curwald. Conrad wants money for two girls called Constantia and Ida, the Damsels of Werdenberg, but although Elizabeth wishes to do the right thing she cannot rid herself of some resentment over Ida's theft of Henry Montfort, the man she loves. The Damsels' manuscript, the fourth to engage our attent1on, makes clear that the apparent theft was misunderstood. Ida and Elizabeth were friends, and Ida's intentions were good, but she discovered at Elizabeth and Henry's wedding that Henry was also Erwin Melthal, a man to whom she had been unofficially espoused and whom she believed to have died in battle. Equally surprised to find that Ida was not, as he had supposed, dead, Henry fainted. When he recovered,  he dashed off to find Ida, with no explanations. The sisters have various difficulties, including captivity by robbers, but at last they manage to retire to a cottage. When Elizabeth hears the whole story she repents her hostility and gives them Torrenburg. Ida marries Henry, Constantia marries an old friend, and Elizabeth takes the veil as she had been planning to do.
Early in the novel Elizabeth has in her possession the memoirs of Urania Venosta, who was sent to live with her Uncle Leopold lest by her beauty she outshine the Emperor's daughters. She marries Ethelbert Carlsheim, who has proved himself valiant in trouble but turns out to be rather unscrupulous and vicious, a circumstance especially awkward since he apparently has some claim to Leopold's holdings. After Urania comes to the aid of some monks whom he has imprisoned, Ethelbert locks her up in shabby Castle Ravenstein. There she discovers Edith Mayfield, also a prisoner, whose child Ludolf she had helped to deliver under emergency conditions. The two women are permitted to correspond. When the castle catches fire they lower three-year-old Ludolf down the wall and send him for help, which he in fact procures. Urania's Uncle Leopold is in love with Edith; his apparently lunatic wife, Lucretia, also imprisoned in the castle, conveniently dies, making a new marriage possible. Leopold's son Donat becomes a menace after the marriage, for he arrives in the neighborhood bent upon avenging his mother. Donat's sister (Adelaide, the Lady of the Beacon-Tower) warns Urania to be wary of Donat and of his terrible wife Mellusina, and later manages to have her released from a second imprisonment, this one in the Castle of Sargans.
Adelaide's memoirs follow next. Leopold's wife Lucretia was her mother; when Lucretia produced twins she hid the extra one (Adelaide) for safety's sake. Later she decided not to identify Adelaide lest Donat, to whom she had become particularly attached, should have to share his inheritance. Adelaide later marries the best of Donat's libertine friends, a man who assassinates the Emperor and is consequently tortured and killed. Adelaide spends the rest of her life in a convent.
Yet another tale concerns Donat's twin daughters, Emmeline and Amalberga. Emmeline is ashamed of her wicked relatives and steals out with her friend Amabel to visit Urania in her convent cell. Her sister Amalberga has mysteriously disappeared. Later she reappears, disappears again, and is at last rescued by her lover, who marries her. As for Emmeline, she is renounced by her father, falls in love with Herman of Werdenberg, and escapes going to a convent so corrupt that the nuns do not even cut their hair. Herman despises Emmeline because of her father, but when he rescues her, unrecognizably pale and wasted from a dungeon, he falls in love without suspecting her identity. She discreetly marries him first and tells him afterward. Other imprisonments and rescues have to do with Emmeline's friend Amabel and Donat's new wife Helen. Barring some casualties along the way, most of the good triumph and the wicked come to suitably unhappy ends.