Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
A winter's tale
*■-■■■!)■■ I ■ .......INMIP LI, I, i.W 11,111 II W 1111,11 MWM IMMIM. A WINTER'S TALE. CHAP. J. ** Oh! were it poflible that we could drown *' In dark oblivion but a few paft hours, %t We might be happy.** " When I'm laid low i'th* grave and quite forgotten, *' May'ft thou be happy in a fairtf bride 1 41 But none can ever love thee Hke Monimia! t( When I am dead, as prefently I fliall be, " Speak well ofmes and if thou find iii tongu« «« Too bufy with my fame, don't hear me wrong'd} " 'Twill be a noble juftice to the memory <* Of a-poor wretch once hoaotir'd with thy love." OTWAY» AY had not long broken on the miferable Selina, when one of Lady Ilford's women knocked loudly at die chamber-door, re¬ questing admittance'. Confufed at the noife, Selina ftarted from her bed. It was fome vol, in. b moments
D
moments ere her difturbed mind was fen¬ fible of what furroundcd it. Confcious of her fituation, reftored to that knowledge that a few hours before had been almoft too much for nature to fuftain, no language can defcribe her feelings; fhe clafped her hands, and looked wildly round her. Her foul was all horror and defpair; flie could hardly believe herfelf in her own apart¬ ments, and when aflured of the reality of ihe objects fne beheld, flie fancied nothing looked as it had on the day before. The waiting-woman repeated her fum- mons, calling on " the Lady Selina" with increafed violence. Quickly repairing the diforder of her drefs, Selina hurried to the door. The fervant was pale, and feemed charged with tidings of great import, " Oh my Lady I" flic cried, " you muft haften to the chamber of my Lady Countcfsl { was defired not to mention it to you 5 but,
but, good God! what do you think has happened ?" "Happened!" repeated Selina, whofe fenfes began to be entirely collected, " fpeak quickly, what of the Countefs ?" " Oh my Lady! don't be angry with me. I was not to tell you, but my Lady Countefs is murdered !'* <c Ah, fo I recollect," faid Selina vacantly; for her mind was again loft in the crowd of horrors that preffed on it. " You recollcB^ my Lady?" cried the fervant. " Why, Lord! your Ladyfliip can know nothing about it." "No, nothing," faid Selina, k< I know nothing about it," " But my poor dear Lady is not dead," continued the fervant, " and flie willies to fee your Ladyfliip directly; for fhe feels, flie fays, her dying hour coming on; and indeed I am fure fhe is right, for ihe hai two dreadful wounds in her body, and has bled almoft a room full. So I had better conduct your Ladyfhip there directly." E2 «* Proceed,"
'" Proceed/* faid Selina, The fervant opened the door, and Selina walked forward. In her way fhe met frequently perfons hurrying along the galleries. All told her their dying Lady wiflied her prefence ; none flopped to fay any thing farther. By the length of way fhe had to go before ftie attained the Countefs's room, her mind recovered itfelf fufficiently to fuffer all her.feelings to be alive. When fhe reached the door of the fad chamber, the palpitation of her heart, and agony of her thoughts were fo great, that fhe had not power to enter. Friendly tears fell to her relief, and fhe attained courage to knock flightly at the door. In a few inftants it was opened, and, trembling and overcome by fear and grief, fhe entered.
The
The Countefs lay in her bed of white. Befide her bed fat her Confeftbr, and on the table ftood her golden crucifix. The Countefs had been fhrived j fhe was ready for death, and lay with the calmnefs of a faint, in expedation of its clofing her eyes. She inftantly perceived Selina— <( Bid her come nigh," fhe whifpered. " Approach, daughter,** faid the Prieft. Selina drew to the fide of the bed. Lady liford had ftrength enough to reach out to her her hand. As fhe gave it, flie looked on the wretched girl witli a. fmile of love— "My Selina/* fhe faid, "my child! ' look not on me with fuch an eye , do not, cr you will difturb my laft moments/* " Think of heaven, daughter,'* interpofed the Prieft, i( not of the world. The dying Lady has done with earth j let not your tears remind her of it." b 3 "Leave
" Leaye us to indulge our feelings, Father/* cried the Countefs; "they are fuch as J truft will not pollute my fleeting fpirit 1 . Prefs my hand, my love. There I tbat warm touch of affection went to my heart. Now fit down, and ifl have ftrength, we will difcourfe awhile. You weep,Selina! I thank you for thefe tears : they well be¬ come a daughter**, love. Such I think you feel for me. Heaven is my witnefs, that were 1 indeed your mother, I coukl not feel for you a warmer affection/* — Here fhe paufed, and looked tenderly on Seiina: then (he refumed—«Ah I Selina, this event is not unexpected. The horrid woman in the foi eft, my child—flie was the harbinger of de&. .iome; from that time I knew I was to die, I have had other tokens—I blefs th- Virgin for them! I truft they hwe not ber neglected. Gradually has my fate adv?..ced: well has this holy Father taught me to thank my Maker for it. Who can avoid deftiny? My daughter, I received a fcroll from fome unknown hand, fhortly
Shortly alter you left me yefter-even- mg, faying, that ifl, an hour after midnight, repaired to your chamber, I fhould meet fuch a furprife as it behoved me to become acquainted with. Though my mind much mifgave me, at the appointed time I left my chamber, and paffed acrofs thofe that led to your's. There are circumftances of horror, of fcipernatural horror, attending that hour, that I will refrain to fhock you w i t h ;—ftiffice ir, murderers rufhed on me ! Their poniards fearciied my breait ! I cried, and fell 1 Alarmed by my fcreams, fome domeftics came to where I lay, 1 then feemed dead; but art brought me to, and prolongs my ex-.ftenoe juft long enough to bid you and my honoured Lord farewel for ever 1" While Lady Ilford's feeble breath had meafured out this account of her being wounded to death, Seiina, on her knees by the bed-fide, had regarded her dying friend with a fixed look of horror: tears ftreamed u a down
down her cheeks, but flie was unconfcious that ihe wept. Every dreadful circumftance of the night pafled acrofs her recollection ; flie vvas bewildered in diftreffes, each of which would fingly have given her more lively pain than they did all together ; for defpair ;md horror buried her faculties in a ftupor, ^ hich though dreadful to the laft degree, presented her being fully fenfible of the miferies ihe was encompaflcd by. Lady liford bade her rife, and take a chair by the bed-fide. 14 We are now," my child," refumed fhe, when recovered from the emotion fpeaking had occafioned, " about to part for ever. Oh my love ! you know not with what pain it is I fee you bereft of a friend whofe af¬ fection for you was fo great as mine. The fear of the world containing unhappinefs for you, alone it is that embitters death to me. May I be miftaken, but this is a world of pains, of fevere pains ;—your mother, bleffed
bleffed be her fpirit! found it fo. Yet, my child, it is in the power of every crea¬ ture to be fuperior to the world's afflic¬ tions : the way is Ample—be innocent, be happy! Retain your innocence of heart, and within your own bofom you have a folace for the worft cruelties the world can inflid. Reprefs your grief, my child * this agony of forrow difturbs me. I would fain ( give you what parting advice I am able— 'tis the laft duty t:ie parent owes the child.. What we call innocence, may in part be defined ignorance. My child, nearly every mind, I truft, is, uninfluenced by the world, pofTeffed of noble nefs and mucfi purity. The firft ingenuous feelings of youth foon wear off when the cuftoms of fociety become familiar to the mind; then, perhaps, is innocence no more. My daughter*, when we have loft innocence, virtue is ftill our own. Viraie is the love of purity,- when we know all the allurements of its oppoflte. Remember, that one crime in¬ evitably leads to another* Often think fo b 5 while.
while you are innocent; but when 3'ou have once erred, let that knowledge not difcou- rage you from endeavours to regain the path of reditude, but merely ferve as a remem¬ brancer of the dangers that befet you. My child, - never forget that in the pureft Heaven fits the fpirit of your mother: that her eye is ever on you $ that till yon have ftood the trial, and proved yourfelf good, even Jfie will not be completely bleffed. More woukl I fay* hut 1 have not ftrength j my voice fails, my tongue feems cleaving to my mouth! Would to Heaven my hufband were here!** *« Haften for my Lord/* cried the Prieft; ** his Lady waits but to fee him before fhe; clofes her eyes in peace." Selina now, awakened by the fharp agony into which fome parts of Lady Ilford's fpeech h;.d thrown her, hung on the hand of her f;,ect protcdrefs, bathed it with tearSj and lavifh cd on it kiffes. Lady liford looked on her with all the anguifh that a, mother
mother feels in leaving to a hard world a lovely, friendlefs child. A tear* that ftill lingered on her dying eye, trickled down her cheek as ihe contemplated her. « Join your lips to mine," fhe cried, c < let us breathe a parting, kifs !" While they were fo fituated, the door flowly opened, and Lord liford appeared. He waved his hand to the domeftics; they in obedience retired* Still the holy Father maintained his feat, " Ts your attendance required ?" faid the Earl to him. " It is," replied the Prieft. Lord liford turned from him without faying more; he pafled the foot of the bed; iiis eyes fhunned the objed that there paufed a few inftants to blefs him, between heaven and earth. The Countefs followed him with her look. He went to that fide a 6 where
where knelt Selina; he did not fee her till he was clofe to her. No fooner did fhe encounter his eyes, than he ftarted back. He put his hand to his head— " What would yot, have here ?"he cried, " Wifh you to exult over her dying pangs ? Wifh you to boaft your beauties there V* *« My Lord!" faltered Selina. u Fly ! fly !" he cried abruptly, " leave 'is, leave us: let her not fee you for an empire/' " Command her not away, my Lord," cried the dying Countefs; " let her be near me for the few minutes I have to look on "• this world." « Why, you cannot like her ?" exclaimed the Earl; "you cannot be fo unnatural!" " Unnatural^ my Lord ?'' " Pfha, faid I fo. 1 knew not what I uttered. But ftie had better leave us, my Lady—flie had better leave us !" cc Nay, my hufband," faid the gentle voice of his wife, " not fo; I would give her 3 ni y
my lateft blefling, and recommend her to your care/' " To my care?'* " Yes ; come here, dear girl. My Lordi I truft, (pardon me if I am vain), that I have ever been to you a-fond and good wife ; your will I have never ceafed to ftudy in preference to my own ; your plea¬ fures have been mine, and never fought I any in which you were not to be a parti¬ cipator: I have watched you on the bed of ficknefs; I have been a true widow when wars have called you far away for years. In no duty I hope have I failed/' "You have not," cried he haftily; " but what of that?" " As you value that fond tie that my true affedion has formed—as you value the endearments, the vows of paft days, be to Selina a father ! Guard her youth, her beauties, her inexperience, as though they were indeed your daughter's. Except your preferving love for my fon, as long as he merits affection, and fometimes thinking of her
her who loved you truly, and who will foon, be in the cold tomb, tis all I afk. Take- her hand, my Lord, and feal the promife- your dying wife requires V* Lord liford looked on Selina an inftant, then on his wife: his lips trembled ; tears burft from his eyes ; cold drops ran down. his forehead :—he covered his face wkh both* his hands, and threw himfelf on the bed befide his expiring wife. " Dear faint, dear angel!" was all he could give utterance to* His emotion overcame his manhood, and. he wept like an infant. At kt»?tli he threw himfelf on his wife's seek, and kifted her fervently. He ftarted . *3p; he grafped Selina's hand— " Look there V 9 he cried/pointing to the bed, "and let your foul melt in agony- See you that faint's face ? See you its dying fmile ? Remember that look many a day hence! Behold her wounds ! Oh, 6 fec
fee the blood! wafh the blood from off thofe garments if you can ! Go ftrive to do it, that you may die as fhe does. Go bathe her wounds in tears, and catch her dying bleffing from her lips 1—What, do you fmile, and ftretch out your hand in pity to me ? Oh my w ife! my wife! my wife!" He again threw himfelf on the bed. The Countefs eaft her eyes up to Heaven, as if to implore a bleffing on him. Her hand was locked in his, She eflkyed to put his, hand to her heart, but in making that efiay ihe fpent her laft of life; her eyelids dropped* and her fpirit paffed to the Heavens. When recovered from the agony into which he had fallen, the Earl would have kiffed the cheek of his wife; but on looking up to her face, he perceived it fettled in the vacancy of death. He was motionlefs in horror. At .length madly raifing his arms— « What,
"What, is flie dead?" he cried—«God of Heaven, is fhe dead?—And can you not give to her a little life, juft while I implore her pardon and that of my Maker?—Oh that ftie were again alive ! that I were once more her hufband: how would 1 love her! fyow would 1 cherifh her! Oh that the forfeiture of my miferable being would wipe away thofe cruel, thofe threatening wounds. Hell! helll it cannot be ! E'en now, while here I hold my wretched head, fhe is telling her tale in Heaven. Now flow her tears 1 Now fhe points to her bleeding fide ! and God frowns—the Judge frowns : then, fmi¬ ling o'er the victim,Tooths her with pro¬ mifes of horrible vengeance on the heads of her murderers, when they, ffiivering, rife to his judgment at the laft day ! — Hark ! I hear his thunders ! the world will not hold me 1 Oh God, I am loft I" With his eyeballs ftarting from their fockets, his face black and convulfed, and his
his hands clenched in agony, he fell fenfe- lefs back befide the bed. Selina, during his emotions, had remained trembling on her knees, with ftreaming eyes, and hands folded on her breaft; fhe now wildly fhrieked for help, while the Prieft demanded it with more effect. Four attendants bore the lifelefs Earl from the apartment; and the Prieft, who believed that grief for the death of his Lady had dif- ordeied his brain, followed, in order to adminifter the holy comforts of religion. Female attendants inftantly were called. They performed what few oflices were left for their much-loved loft miftrefs. They long begged, in vain, Selina to retire. With clafped hands, and eyes loft in tears, flie ftood at the foot of the bed, where was extended the form of the Countefs. Some¬ times flie fell on her knees, and hid her face on the bed; then, with a look humble and fearful, her eyes were eaft towards Heaver*, and
and oftentimes, with fervent wretchednefs, flic wifhed herfelf dead befide the deaf friend whole remains* (he wept over,. At length thole two of the attendants whom moft fhe valued, prevailed on her to fuffer their leading her to her own cham¬ ber. Between them both, for now fhe was very faint and fick, fhe paffed to her room. With difficulty (he was faved from finking to entire liieleflbefs. - She defired to be left > but in tender oppofition to her command, one of the ftrvants perfifted on remaining with her. Who can fpeak the fiate of her mind through the long day ? She could not fit; her difordered imagination would not fuffer a fituation fo tranquil. She walked about her chamber, her arms crofted on her bofom> antl her eyes bent to the ground. Tears dimmed her fight, and fometimes feil on her cheek » but fhe was unconfcious of weeping. After
After being buried for awhile in thought, fhe fuddenly would ftart, look wildly round, and repeat to herfelf — "Can it be that I am this miferable creature ? Surely not. Good God! I am not what I was in paft days. Oh wretch that I am I where can I look for comfort ?" Again flie wandered to and fro. Her fteps then perhaps were turned to the ami- chamber j but ftie ftarted as if fhe had be¬ held the dagger of a murderer, haftily crying, as fhe fled away, * c No, no, no, never again, never again will I look on that fatal place! I fhoulddie with guilt and fhame to be furrounded by its objects. Not fo dreadful is death as that filent wit¬ nefs-of my crime, of my difhonour." The foothings of her attendant produced her no fhadow of comfort. Sometimes fhe coldly repulfed them, and at others they only gave birth to more violent emotions of grieft
The whole caftle meantime was one fcene of diftrefs and confufion. Some were employed in unprofitably mourning over the lofs of their Lady, and others in active fearch after her murderers. Immediately cm the Earl being informed of lus lofs, he offered a large 'reward for the apprehenfion of the cruel affaffin : few however were actuated by mercenary motives. " Their Lady,*' the poor domeftics faid, M had been an angel on earth, had been kind to them as a mother, and they would never^reft till they had glutted their rage in the bk>od of her murderers." The difordered Earl applauded their zeal, and permitted them, fhould they difcover the culprits, to tear them piecemeal ere they could fpeak a fentence of defence. Locked in his room, he fuffered the ap¬ proach of no perfon. His prieft only dared wait in the neighbourhood of his chamber. The good man often liftened at the
the door. Deep groans burft from the tortured bofom of the Ear!. Sometimes with hafty ftrideo he paced the room; at others he flung himfelf proftrate on the floor, feemingly loft in an agony of defpair, M .*ch the pious Coafeftbr wiflied to heal the wounds of his Lord's mind with the comforts of religious condolence j but refped long prevented his breaking a command fo pofitively given. Toward evening, how¬ ever, he ca,ded to mind the facred privi¬ lege of his order, and the duty it impofed on him; and knocking thrice upon the door of the Earl's room, faid, in a tender voice— <* Dear my Lord, 'tis I, 'tis Father Fre¬ deric; fufFer me to enter, and comfort your forrows with the voice cf God and his church." *< Leave me 1" cried the Earl, whofe voice was hoarfened by his pains ; '*« leave me j I Kould be alone !" "Be it not fo, my fon," replied the worthy Prieft, in a tone where refped and that
that mild authority that his holy calling gave him, were blended ; " when the heart bleeds, then does Heaven moft bend to cheerings and comforrings. I pray thee admit me ! I have that to fay which will foften your diftrefs." " Ah l" faid the Earl, gloomily fhaking his head as he opened the door, " would to Heaven that thou hadft 1'* " Come, come, my fon," continued Father Frederic, taking the hand of Lord liford, u do not defpair. Heaven that gives, has a right to take away. When we lofe % friend, we lofe him not for ever. All die, all meet again—meet where pains are no more. Take the comfort of experience ; let. religion calm yout thoughts; remember that not even the little bird falls unfeen, unheeded by Heaven !" The Earl looked on his benign face with dread for an inftant as he fpoke the laft fentence. His eyes rolled in his head—he flung from him the Father's hand— 4 " Call
* e Call you this comfort ?" cried lie: ce why remind me of the watchful eye of Heaven ? Why tell me fo often that from HeaVei/s regifter not an earthly action efcapes ? We all know that—aye, you and I, and Kings, and Emperors, that murder thoufands, ail of us know that! And'(in a lowered voice) we fhall know more of it by and by. But let us not talk of it now— it fickens!" and then he with folded arms again haftily paced the chamber floor. "What faid you, my Lord? 1 * aflced the mild old man; "your Lordfhip's forrows are too much for you." "Aye, fo they are indeed, old friend!'* cried the Earl, burfting into a convulfive laugh» "therefore-think no more of what I utter. Alack, good old man, I am goino- mad!" " Now Heaven forefend/' exclaimed the Friar. " But come, my fon/' advancing tenderly to him, " come, you are not now yourfelf. The firft tide of affliction over. whelms you. When you have had com¬ mune
mime with your God, and flept, you will be calmer and better." " Slept!" repeated the Earl, with emo¬ tion, <*when think you 1 fliall fleep a-ain? No, no, no—fleep's gone from my pillow, and widowed wretchednefs and midnight horrors," ftarting violently forward, " dwell there in its Head ' Father," finking again to an horrible lownefs of voice, " tis now fix nights fince theft poor hollow eyes have been trlefcd in forgetfulnefs. Five times heard I the caftle bell toil one; and the fixth time—Oh Father! the fixth time a dagger buried itfelf in my wife's heart! Oh God," looking round him with a wild yet vacant flare, " how did my blood chill when I heard the hell ftrike the dteadfuHiour ! What a n^te it was! and her fcream— Father, I heard her fcream !—It will never be from mine ears!"— " Do not dwell on the fhocking parti¬ culars,'* interrupted the Friar; "they are too much for you. She has dkd guiltlefs, and
and ib, I tu :t, vill you ; t j .nd yc will boM 111/1.1 Iii h/pp; c'a <. ,l> 'jve." i( V, u d - 1" hud he : << Po.r t Id in::' ' '•'Would D l-kvLii,'' continued the Tather, 4t you, am! every one cTe may die a^ free from criir;*,a. much in p 'a c vt.i all men, as Ihc did! JX\ t r f'i-ted L*'dy ! r.earlv t^ her Lft h.vadi di ' ihe be; a p-.rJ.ii ler h.v u;jo . \ 0.\! u-- • Je e;. w/s himh k'lj h L'/r.lv }^ u, ha h. \ \,i i ai;^i'le> of v-, d* c ' u ::.-'■ iV"J :
ihiioit /■;>" bu ,?ft ! 'M , ^ oi
| w j j]!ii 1
ilea'; »^ thrc»i»h thr i ;, -t of •!.}-, 'i^ui.j a; : .v. ' / . .- :;; ol ,i ! : , i'} r , ^ ,'• ,,1 /'_ the ^o ir'M^ o Ins o\:i ^.u; 1 \; ; Yi j v*
t ilat Li"'i i\ V
', ? ! 1 - VI
1 1
* ..elw
o p r : T c r/- i 1 > ;k- up i', ' ', I, i ■, i'\ v 'A-n > 1 h ! I hi u i . l d. \ d.a l-
',iei'., r" Y 1 j *', i :> 1,,'UJ ' ' r. v ; j':c \ Cti " '!, t t : . v e , s 1 >
■ouch ! :\ h h v he f rin\' o: k, a* i '-)
V f i' . i 1 ,
* M \.'>
crrcp within himfelf—he dares not to look up. If the wind howl, or the thunder do Lut chance to rattle, how hib feared eye¬ balls are eaft 1 ootid ! how iiis nerves are convul.ed, his fenfes ap;.a!!ed I for he looks to behold the ghoft of his victim arifing in vengeance. Now, Father, tell me, do you think there's ;m;.iht on earth can compen- fate for the blaft of fuch a confcience :'* Cf Nothing, nothing !" faid the Friar. ci Nothing, indeed!'* cried the Earl; and leaning on the Friar*s anu, he wept. Father Frederic took advantage of this foftened moment to point the Earl's thoughts towards religious fubmiffion to the will of Heaven The End was deaf to all the Friar fpoke. He continued with his fire refted on his arm : he drew from his agonized bofom convulfed groans - 9 huge tears meantime maided Ifts ' ale cheek. After a period he $£off The violence of his emotions had exhaufted his ftrength, and iiis agony knew tome relief j his mind was
was more his own than it had hitherto been. " Bear with me, my pious friend, I pray thee," faid he to his holy companion as he pafled his hand acrofs his eyes; "I am in truth weakened by forrow till I know not vvhat I fay, Tne firft pangs of my lot are (oo much for me ; I fl 1(l !l ft on be better. Leave me again to myfelf, Ni^ht now draws on, and every wretch wcuJdVeck the folace of flecp. I muft have lights—let me have more than ufual, and presently. But ftay : perhaps, pious old man, you would watch befme my couch chrou 0 h ;he difmal hours of nigiit ? 'Th a mournful office, but you ferve F-Teaven, and your eheeiihJneis thinks nought an Iiardfhip. 1 ' " Mcft readily," faid Father Frederic, " will I obey your Lordfliip's wifti ; and till advanced night luds you to /lumbers, together we'll addixis and adore that tri¬ bunal, where fits, among the for ever c 2 bldfed,
t bhftr.k fhe over \shtMn 3 in the ^cikref, of our iv ne, v,e bo;h v.een." The f al*-';* limns bro^g'-tto Selina no rdk-J J )n of hci dikref-,. Krowino herfelf uticilj 1-1 to e rthly h ]\i'nfj 7 in being b'l to i:^ blcff/, o o' a rain to ftience— h J v» InfJf lo'-htd fi «:,,. hv nd Vsho ira/^ !. d')'},c ine w .• ' a'* a p !v ;enc, flie i.n i'.v h:i: h !'c ouc . of iieavcn—an < rih f" ^ it- I.'t. ; • v ; to Le ice,die I. I lei dt , . h v a rut .,n :, h ks to 'jiithy. " : * ^ I ' " f ( d' h-r \>of ti \i \\v--e t hi, e,U ; :. <: m Jk rim : f- to f,k--» t 1 . : bkfi- n N. fhe :^!i.\' I ft ;- f t 'J b;i: ime wi h ^ . -i i t ; >. ; t' at v,r . r<^ i'r: omce m< ie \l \ .n . L ^^ die died. Tietjwkieft t ^ ^ fdl) riiu hi ; i ; bo:b-ii ; rnj amidil ... 1 "'i* "-. h* 5 f J dl le:t (olic.tou') t) re- ]- l l a l , j>.;rj. '* c7uc iui ^weiuiSj that ; j .;. o t k'ih'c r.'j Jier accjuni miJit ..■-'. aft \ he • !bc h,on]vi be no more. .h 1 ' 'V*jh lb- ^ /he ■ tli-s l.-,ft interview, h c J .. d 1^ a v t ;/i tiembli/g drerd ; ftie knew
knew not whether flie could live in the pitfcace of the Prince. His eye—Oh ! could fhe meet it? His touch —what fen¬ fations w T oulcl it not ftrike to her heart? She then thought of writing to bid him the ten- clcrcft adieu, to rdl him fh^ reproached herfelf alone, and to affure him that while fiie be fought h ;n r.vver more to feek her prefence, his image, his heart would ever be he 1.1 d.:.r to her foul—would be tho companions of h:r led tided mifery,* thz obieds on which her dying Umcy ihould na : g. While her thoughts were employed on tini t. pic, the gloom of nlglit unieen fprtad itK.i i%;und the melancholy cafllc. Her a:~eueLmt procured tapers. When thev were P^Uli. on tne table, Sdina comm.mded the don.eiVe to retire. She woul ! fain have co*niim^d her retentions tiiroughout tii^ Jiight, bur SL-.hii j'erlilleJ, end tlw woman obeye 1, *. <\; Left
.E. FFer fob? prevented her articulating more. Mer voice was loft in moaning forrow. A flight noife was dillinguifhable near her room. In breathlefs terror fhe liftened for its repetition. It was repealed. What did fhe hear ? A tap on the rnti-chamber door. Uy a low voice her name was prenouueed. li Gmcious Fatlicr!" c-ied d\c^ " J tis he, 'tis the Prince V* Her difordered fpirits fluttered round her heart. The throbs of her boiom deprived he r of power to mo ve. I n an an x io :.::> n; v n- r.er the Prince repeated her name. When u-co\ cred iiorn the firft effeds of her <ftarm, fhe hefitated but (or a few inftants before ftie opened the door. The Prince ftepped in. He took Selina's hand; her <.;<-$ were eaft on the ground, kcildf fo m.uh agitated, that fhe knew not whit
what he faid or did. He pre fled her hand to his bofom, not, his lips ; he bent on his knee, and looking imploringly up to her face, befought her to repeat her pardon, a;id a:furanee that ihe did not utterly hate h:m. She effayed to fpeak; her lip trembled, but conveyed no found j* fenfations too \j?.'n- ful to be borne, rulhed home to her heart, and ine fank pale and inanimate on his necK. Htr. endeavours reftored her ro iifj. Wlwn Ler knits iv turned, die hid her €\cc i:i his bofom, Uiitl wept convuliivcly. * ( My Selina," lie whifpered, " my breait burns in agony: 1 am very wretched !" She fiiook her head mournfully, ar.d would have faid—"Heaven knows tha: I .-mi io too !" l>ur fobs choaked her urr.-ranc *.
e $
V V l A
" Will } not fpeak my forgivenefs ?" cried the V *ce ; "in pity do, Selina ! You know not v bitter are the reproaches of my own h. ^ Withhold from me your fiier.dlhip,. ^t view me, bereaved of every hope of nueue peace, a miferable exile from happinefs. I'll feek the thickeft of fome battle, and there bury at once the remem¬ brance of* your wretchednefs and my treachery. }> * ( Heaven forbid !" replied ftic, turning to him her avcitcd head; £C no, my dear Lord, let me be the only wretch to weep and die—let fhame and forrow overwhelm me j for my weaknefs and crimes merit them. But you have no reafon to reproach your¬ felf. 'Tis I, on whofe head lies the fault. Think not that 1 harbour of you one unkind thought. Too dearly I love you, Leave tne, and be happy/' No dffcriptioncan do juftice to-the pangs that now wrung the Prince's heart. His was themoft noble of minds. He beheld 6 in
in Selina a female poffeffed of every beauty and every \irtne that can grace nature. He beheld her unprotected and artlefs ; flie had the moft tender of hearts, and in blufhing fimplicity flie gave to him that heart—it was her all, and made his friendfhip the fole folace of her troubles. Inftead of guarding her youth, and watching over the beauties znd the innocence fhe furrendered to his care, he had ftolen from her that innocence, and bereft her beauties of their lnftie. In his own eyes, as he contemplated the dif¬ trefs of her countenance, the pallidncfs of her lip, he appeared the bafeft and moft contemptible of beings; he did not behold lier with more grief and pity, than he did himfelf with reproach and dcteftation. "Friend of my heart," faid he mourn¬ fully, " dearer is your welfare to me than my own. Paffion, not defign, hurried me to fully the honour I prized fo dearly. Let the friendftiip of my life prove how precious, you are to my foul!" v 6 " Friend--
*' Friendfhip of) our life V rc[ cated flie, t( Oh, no, my Lord, that mr.il n< i h: I We are now to bid a laft ad ui. h\ this hour v.e pirt, to fte each other no more 1 In feme d.eaiy reriremtiU, or devoted cbiJUr, I'll Kilobit my ndfenfde davs. Ts.cu.i.c of i. > . foit ui j mwr co,:ie near my heart. With the iill y; fim 1 il uihtr in my uars of penitcn-'e nd .;rief. Tiirou^h thelon:*: d\\\ fmondtd fiom eveiy cu 1 , I'll bt moan my ciiuieb. Shunned b) all, [f t \\ho, w.iat u'oj^ct Wicic », would ii^ld commune v\irh fo r^uik) a creature?) 1 will in my turn avoid the bl.ui'^ of fotx-fy. I fh.'li look v t ith f-;ii':.ducu' ] kaf-rc to the ci ;ilii> in of ;/>ht, f'A' then one cay <A u.i.ciy v/iil be ch, t v ;-. j; {> ai; end. No Lnsj.r \/tll t'ne i •»,*; h A ikv: to reft mc on, bv. v<ne of p.'ace : (hu'h .*. .d ilif.nal ro r-ie v, : II bj the i.i.iht J'.-".! ;. If, p'-ii ( aps, amoii^ die 11.,:^ \rith vhlCi I w-l my ]*i ijw, I c»fl n y tl oumhfs :. lk.,v<'i', dAt] fiyli tcwj.rd ic a prayer, I *; t i\, .riliiout a i.v.\v' cilme, think oi you, and
■*•»
a-itl ic.urmur to myft'h your name. Never but at fuch a feafon fhu!! ir pafs my lips." "Ohtdknotfo!" cried thePri.ice; "you rack my ver)' heart. J wi'.! watch over yv.i with an 1 u.funu b ion.inc!i>: te Ali, m y Lord, how my blood chill:.! Iijw ;r.y Ihui fliu'I iti.>, u.hiie 1 ihhik of th: icene that forbids yo'jr ever doing lb !— A .\'e are ebiuncd to ht u:.!v*ppy. Levwe me to pine a*vay my youm «nr!u,ugr.tof. IUiiiocj fr:>i:i ycu, fiom all the worl.l, 1 can dwindle r.v.ay my hov t ?> till death efts me ol trou¬ bles tliat hav j j jo am with ine i:om t e cradle. AkiJ. 1 I ha/e ever been a child of mhen 1 bl'j h-il, :uy only c^■;^ l^ i^;rL, is i.ow « )i/ ; a "id the guw a'onc can aho:d m: conf -la¬ tion : m iy it loon u^ mire ! - Vv hf n 1 am <kad,and had b.Meatli fo.n; gtuve-fbd, the.i, vay Lord, Oh ! l!;;; 1 , w ;idd you L::t ih- d a tear over where I lay, .vid c id mo Wi *, m y f h -;:, t i: it wc i. hi e \ c r ho v tr i; «a r you, flicutd inh< iiftif ,Ila yi,:r'f, rife luperior t ) the h.:"il j.i..s of the wc.l h »:iJ'bkfsyou ilr itt choien huiband! 7, Kars
Tears ftreamed from her eyes, and fhe hung on the arm of the agonized Prince. His fenfations would not admit words to exprefs them : he clafped her to himNvith as much reverence as he would have done had flic been an angel. For a minute flie fuffered him to prefs her to his heart while fhe wept on his neck; but fuddenly fhe ftarted up, and gently diftngaging herfelf from him, faid— " Now, my Lord, tis time we part. For this world, farewel !'* She was retiring to her chamber, when he flung himfelf before her 3 and feizing her hand, cried— C( Oh Heaven, you would noc leave me for ever?" 46 1 muft," faid flie, turning afide her weeping e> js, " indeed I muft 1" "Never/ 1
» Never,'' exclaimed he, " never while I have life. I know I merit not your regard; I am unworthy of your affection; but yet you muft not forfake me ; by my foul you muft not: I muft ftill be your friend. I muft be allowed to fee you, and to watch over you through life. You fhall go to Court; your forrows (hall be diverted by the pomp of our palace, and foftened by the fondnefs of my mother; fhe will be your tendered friend." «To the Court! The Queen be my friend!" repeated Selina. " And think you, my Lord, I could carry this guilty breaft to fuch a fcene? Think you I coukl hide my confcious biufhes when I approached my own lex, or could bear the glance of the other? And would the Queen ftoop io fondnefs for fo criminal a creature as I? Or,, if me did, cculd I fupport her attentions ? If flic praifed me, could I refiain from fall¬ ing proftrate before her, and confeffing my difgrace, my infamy?—No, no, my Lord, iii fome lone fpot which the innocent and the-
the happy avoid, mufl 1 hide my fhame. Betom the eyes ofmv fellow creatures, Idie, M\ cy wrrd Jhe fpoke u a. a dagger to the Ih \ erhs ht ai c. liu fee) n#s were almoft too |/.\, ■ t t* ! hw oor;:e, 1 fe now exe¬ crate i mm k .ii the worft of traitors and d *fp m ■ i^-i ai^! now wi'h maddtned er.erp-v thtj^ud iiO»v impoffible it was ibv him to qr.it Li. -./thou: the profpeet ot' being re¬ ft y, e / t ct i :e r r- re fe n c e and fi ie nd fliip. All ; h, ciKlea*v T m;rs to petfuadc her to €o;^,iiu' her r-pu^r-aiii-e, and find in the Qv;.\i v.hat l);e lad loix in I/iiy lifortl, v,eic hicffectual. GiiC be.ought him to leave her tu die. <; I fet!," faid fne, putthi^ Ler hjud on l.u* heai*, u uu not k>:i^ I have to ii/c, Ch, my ckar Lord, may ycu, when 1 am ecu! and loivoct.n, be very, very happy ,' Lit i./ thought v i u.c ir.tru.ie icfclf on y n:,
lo t.M.m y'ur f liciry : or if fometim?^ you think of fdt d\yi>+ and of her wh j loved \o i in them, pay me but the tribute of a fl^h, a ihort figh, and be happy a&aiu V* " Happy ! — h^ppv* without you, elm a r (t Oh )-cs! Vrk'i fcire \xds '^orn to afjfter lot. It v.vrc b.. r r [en,!), 1 vote not ai ve io ft- t >:: .. y : ^r eifj molhinks, fo you »v^:c i ap; y, I :; hi b: c numied/'— t fe.c It e wc t. *— 4 - Alad"' ft,: conrinucJ, ^ I ti.ii/: *h i\ ^ ..i'.'J no kid> good cnou_ ii to hi. y m , . :. 1 never law one tha: : ] p- peirai litt'h- ; for you. Much (he o.-^jht to leve you, bu: :he can never feel v.hn my hcut d.,es. Ikcflmg.i ^n your wife, m/ hok!! Ivt nil: 1 am glid tha; I ik/liV/jr n ' er ; i]., 1 * t'\ he h.i ^py with ycu, v/iiic I u.'i i \ the vla.k v> "fo." il Nhi mme ! i p;ay no mote, Sriina," cried the rri.icc, i: I cuiiiot be.*r to ii^.i
\Vcaried
Wearied by forrow, fhe leaned her me¬ lancholy head on his fhoulde% while fome- tinic'ipjinful tears fell flowly from her eyes. His feeling meantime weie fuch as a ee- nerous mind may be fup^oied fufceptible of when it Jiangs over the being to whofe happiiicfj it has innocently given a wound, from which it can never recover. Every figh (lis heaved, went home to his confci¬ ence ; each look of her eyes feemed a re¬ proach to him. At length he fo far prevailed as to gain her confent to his wilting, through the hands of their faithful old Ofborne, and re¬ ceiving in the fame way anfwers to what he wrote. At this period he urged no farther his requeft to be admit tc 1 to her prefence ; but he felt that life would be infupportablc without he were. The minutes he paffed wiih her, though mournful, were fo precious, that he knew not how to tear himfelf from hew What in coarfer minds leffens fondnefs,. in
in his increafed it, and bound him more clofely to the object of his affectum*. His heart was linked indiffolubly to that of the poor unhappy Selina. He made a thoufand foothing proteftations before he attempted to bid her farewel j but to all comfort her ienfe was cold. He wrung from her a pro¬ mife of writing on the following day. 1 Morning broke before he would think of leaving her. What words can picture their emotions at parting ?—Seiina, with a chill, tearlefs look of defpair, hung on his neck : his agitation was violent as the laft ftruggles of life ; his voice was loft ; his head burned to diftrac¬ tion. When he reached the door, he was unable to proceed; and returning, he again preffed her to him in an agony of love and grief; In a broken voice he begged her to be happy—to be fo for his fake. He re¬ minded her that they were not forbidden to live
Iiv; in hkndfnlo. I h' held her in hir arms, and looked on her f-ce with uunyled deii-Jit and diftrefs, A^iu he told h r :\\ if ihe were othciwife than happy, fhe would deflroy that hops: which alone upheld his being. He put hui hand o\er his eyes, and darted on ti:e duikncfs of ehe pafli^e.
CI JAP.
C* x W TV •■ W.^'i -.o > o*. i!.'/.- : ' •>- o'i." ' lA'TTr/.i'-", JDO 1 M the r^v/ard *..ftl'i\ d hy Lord Ilnrd, a*." iho in nil tint ade ."lion made the do- ArJnc, t:k in th ■ c.im h, ])roved 'ntuficienc to i!.e " , "' *;\ I.e..fion cf Lady Ih'md's rnur- dr:\ ; v. 1 appeared rii'.t the men hy whofe ! ;* "- me .<.[ , wi re n ; ber- ; for fome place kej t \\ ihe 'omi v-!iere (lie received her death-bi j.\, \nis rosic, r.nd lev.ral of tho rami's <\.„ly ornaments were t'ehued or f.revc 1 oil tho floor, as it' inteira})ri ui had p. evented
prevented the plunderers bearing them away. The caftle was moft truly a fcene of mourning. Whenever the domeftics met, it was to weep over the lofs of their Lady. Each of them had fome particular inftance of her kindnefs to recount, and 'tis unne¬ ceflary to obferve that thofe obligations appeared, now that flie was no more, of double value. The Earl was locked from morn to night in his own chamber. He admitted the ap¬ proach of no perfon > even the pious and benevolent Father Frederic was denied communication with him. Food, of which he feldom tafted, was carried to him at the ufual hours by a favourite domeftic. Of that man he once enquired how Selina did ; never elfe did he afk after any perfon. Immediately on the dreadful termination of the Countefs's life, meflengers had been difpatched
difpatched to Lord Defmond. With all poflible f P eed he fought the caftle, and ar¬ rived there in time to take on himfelf the management of affairs preparatory to the funeral. During this time the miferable Selina ftrove to hide herfelf trom the light of day in her own dumber. By turns a cold dc- fpa ; r a;»d a feii.'e ol wretel ednefs, quick to ar^onv, occupied herbieaft. Under tlie im¬ pulfe of tliefe, ftie fometimes paced her room, wringing her hands, and fobbing from the bottom of her heart; and fometimes fat motionlefs in ftupor, her head refted on her hand, her eves glazed and fixed, her lips cold and white. At intervals flie would wildly ftart, and become fubjed to ftrange fancies; then flie would fuppofe ftic had been loft in an hideous dream; would regain clear recolledion, and fling herfelf on her bed, diffolvcd in tears. Lord
i
Lord Defmond, frequently idler hU ar- lival, f-Iicited permiflion to v,ao;i her; but fl.e rerflfted in reuuin^, pi^ft-fTi.i; \ er- .•-t unr.ble to bear, at that juncluie, any < "iHVrfidju whatever. V« r h n the nfu\.\d oly c 1 .-:; anb/cd on whh '1 i: "'v.'. i. (cUvkd to inter the remains of the kuii,-.'tt.d 1/i'ly T'fb^d, f:e ;vas in- flnred of it by Lf rj Dc'lucn. 1 , ca\A ie- qutded t> bear? part in the r.wfj tcre- m o iv *. 11 < v a s i n d i ■ iV r n t to h c v w h a t c 1 re ai y ftcrcs flie now \^rd tlvn r t h, and Jier v;e;t.Caicd heart bumrd to pay to h:r be- lovv-d fntndthe lai- Utile trihut.. offtho^'i^g iher Lcm.unj to their grave. It was near eve; ing when two fern a':* fervants fuinrnoncd Se^na to h<.r mourn'' t.:fl; Whr-t luik* ..."nils a^d f^.ih'ir 4 * P:e had uuT-Jnin^, fhe col!.Vied i r tlfs fad liwur. Vef.e ;.: d. trjrihhnr' 11k rofe, aiid pre¬ pared to r K i.y. She \;a^ ef .'yluitetl to the r .oni cf death'. The cohlnj ekeked in ud funereal
funereal honours, was furrounded by Lord Defmond, the venerable Father Frederic, and fome particular friends of her whofe allies it contained. When flie beheld the dear friend of her childhood, the promifed protcctrcfs of her future clays, reduced to a cold, unknowing corfe, about to be hidden from every eye, each other remembrance, for a time, palfed from her bofom, and a ftream of tender 1cars fell from her eyes. An hundred p.ift fcenes cf endearment re¬ curred to her thoughts j flie wept over the Connie is as over a mother. In a faint, faltering voice, flie begged to fee once more the (ace of her left triend; but, owing to the nature of her death, Lady liford was not deemed proper to be feen after decth j— the colfin-lids were faftened down, and even the little folace fhe re¬ quefted, Selina found herfelf unable to attain, vol. in. p The
The good prieft, ever favouring, like Heaven, the weak, paid to her thofe atten¬ tions that he efteeu.ed moft likely to footh the heart of grief He tenderly preffed her hand—he eaft on her, with feeling, his eyes of comfort. " Se of cheer, daughter," faid he, in a low voice, cc I lament, like you, the dear Lady that is gone, but I remember, daugh¬ ter, that 'tis Heaven that has taken her, and learn to be contented." *Tis In vain to r.^ply to the reafon of a mourner. Tlie feelings are the only medium through which comfort can be fpoken. If there be another, 'tis Religion ; but father Frederic now touched that key with but little fuccefs. When tlie bearers lifted the coffin, Selina's little refolution failed her, The fupport of two attendants alone enabled her to walk toward the grave. Every part through which thQ
Jthe body pafTed was hung with black: a difmal ftillnefs reigned in the caftle— a ftillnefs broken on only by burfts of grief, and deep-drawn fighs. The procef- fion entered the chapel "by the South door. The folemnity all the~e was wrapped in, cannot be defcribed. The aiftes were hung with black velvet, as was ihe altar. At cer¬ tain diftances were placed waxen tapers, the light from which illuminated but partially the gloomy place. The chapel bell " flung to the gale its fullen found." Choral hymns of praife were chanted as the mourners and the mourned pafted along. How often did the wretched Selina ftiud¬ der as fhe furveyed the confecrated fpot, where ftie had witneffed fo awful avifttationS and how often did fhe look to Heaven with a wiih that fhe were going to partake of the quiet of the grave with her deareft, beft friend 1 Arrived at the vault, a paufc, to Selin* the mcft dreadful, took place. No whifper d a ftolc
.12
ftolc on filence; the hciw I e 1 ! t<lVl no k n:vr; the \«. ^cls -f i'-e eh^l' \\eiehu.hcd. *Aa turn u I ■ - ( - , f ,'eiv' h iook*"^ or, tlie d-ik ( mc ^ ov.'i h the icm.hr of ii't fii u I v rt t^ U a mm ht 1, r^und her. 1 M, < i \v r met h i io \ ? 'r le roirb of hei i k ilif/1— l' _ u bo, ^'o, L ' t KhM- 11 . ;e i f iui u(ad j ■ /» m i .h ^ 1 urial ili,a b h..d b'ui \ ^. ^ / ii ' av.iul fp.rit! hii. ii :um, i' < . e 1 f i t v< , vvith
1 1
j i ^ .i 3^,,:i ; lid OjJii r*A.,u »n 1 j k. ..
h iu \ iu 1 o, ft ■ i • - i "■'' n ,v\'.n_ th- K'.i,' p. '^ > i ' '- 3 ' Lt * {•.M.r Ii^ck'. K -i tno - i^'^e e. ihe j), id. w.un end ho I »ok t. hen, . \>.ile he poke ; an' 1 'm hi. cncs t>u uxd fo much ol i, i, u phiiunhiv})' ^-d divine love, t .- u \.o. l ld ttii h- vcu <i \ T i fttlei ol Ii , t. i< tinrg to h ] ( iutf> the fput of a |i ( H m k. . \.i-cn l'.v, cht i, in loum 1 . 110 *v
no'.v lowered to the fofteft fymphony, now raifed to the higheft pitch of power, chanted an holy fong, in a paufe of the cetcmony, Selina's mifeiy was loft in awe and venera¬ tion. She then could weep, and as her tears were thofe of adoration, they fpread over her fpirits a fhort- !i\ed calmnefs. The fervice ended, the cotTin was lifted from where it flood; the mourners drew aftde ; every fouxl a^am was huhVd ; the cofnn was bon.c toaard the vault, Invo¬ luntarily Sjlina flai'icd forward — cc You would not take her?" ftie Cd ,tly cried, " you would not t:.ke my mother— take her for ever;" She was about to fling herfelf among the attendants in the^'aiflc, but was withheld by thole friends who were iKar to her. tier phruizied eye loLnved the codin, as it was ftowly carried toward its burial-place. The vault was defcended—the coffin fecn no s>3 more*
more, Selina breathed a deep figh, and fell ftnftlefs into the arms of the females who attended her. While inanimate, ftie was carried to her own chamber, and after being long infen- ftble, reftored to mifcrabh* life. She fpoke no word on recovering Her attendants put her to bed : fhe often drew heavy fighs, but neither feemed to obferve what v/as around her, nor to have recolledion enough to be fenfible of the circumftances fhe was under. Three miferable days, during which ftie had regularly heard from the Prince by O/borne, and as regularly returned anfwers to his fond letters, had eiapfed, when Selina received a meffage from the Earl, in which he requefted her attendance in his room for half an hour, or permiflion to wait on her in her's, as was moft agreeable to her.— Accuftomed to look on him with the de¬ ference of a daughter,, her choice was readily made,
made, and an hour appointed for her re¬ pairing to his prefence. Before that hour arrived, Lord Defmond knocked at the door of her apartment; and a. two female attendants were in her anti- chamber, flie granted him admittance. He came, he faid, (o repeat thofe vows of affection that he fezrzd, when under the difguife of inebriety, he had too rudely tendered, and to exchange fome few words with her before he rejoined the Army on the Continent. His profefiions of love gave her notv more pain than ever. To be the object of efteem was now a dagger's point to her breaft. She felt a melancholy fuisfaclion in hearing he wa^ about to leave the caftle. All fociety flie fancied would be a tormenc to her, and his more than any other. He feemed un¬ willing to relinquifh hopes of fucceeding in his fuit, but could not, in common decency, d 4> urge
unre it with any warmth fo immediately on the death of a mother. Selina save his ex- pediiion her beft wifhes, and put an end to his conference by mentioning the time at which fhe was to be with thQ Earl. On entering the large oaken apartment to which flie had been fummoned, flie found Lord Ilibrd fitting at the farther part of the room. A writing-deik was before him, covered with papers, on which he had been employed. He was arrayed in complete black; his countenance was pale, his checks funk, his eyes hollow, their luftre deadened. When fhe entered, his head was refted on his two clofed hands. He rofe as ihe ap¬ proached, and his lips trembled, though he did not fpeak. Selina drew near, and curtfied. ft Sit you down," faid he, waving his hand*
She
She obeyed. He feated himfelf. He hid his face on the ciefk that flood before him, and appeared afiaid of letting his eyes dwell on her. I ler look was eaft to the ground, ior it was the look of grief and fhame ! At length the Earl lifted up his head. In his countenance was expreffed the cool horror of defpair ; Iris brow fi owned, and his curled lip changed to a ftill paler hue. S 'I fent for you/' faid he, u to tell you I am about to leave the cafllc ; I cannot bear its quiet. The hurry of the army will perhaps,'* and he fighed, " relieve my fpirits. But," he rofe as he fpoke, " I (lull not Hay from you long, Scllna; do not be unhappy while I am away. Thefe, I know, are to both of us, days of ftrange terror j but we are new to fuch fcenes. God fend we may know no more of them ! I fliall foon be back, and then both you and I fliall be happy. We may, it is poflible, leave this ipot, tis true; but there are many oilier d 5 places
places where my Selina may know felicity. We will feek fome fliade, where no tongue will talk to us of paft days; and then a thoufand worlds fhall not prevent our knowing happinefs—fhall they, Selina ?" He walked toward her; he paufed an inftant, then fat down befide her. In a tremulous voice fhe anfwered, fhe hoped his Lordfliip's forrow would not embitter his future life* Hejook no notice of what flie faid ; he crofted his arms on his bofom, and fixed his eyes on the ground, feemingly loft in contemplation* On a fudden he ftarted from his reverie. «< Oh—no, no> no! not in the leaft," he cried, "I thought duly of that beforehand.'* Fie flopped, looked earneftly on her face :n filence, then drew his feat quite clofe to her's. He took her hand, His own trem- 6 bled
bled fo much, that he could fcarcely retain her's. He looked in filence on her delicate hand, and once flightly rai.ed it, as if he would have lifted it to his lips. He folded it between both of his own, and preffed it till the two palms feemed growing to each other. As his eyes met her's, he heaved a £gh that was broken by its own weight.. «' Selina," he at length faid, " while I am far away, let nothing tempt you from the feclufion of my caftle. Of that and all around it, 1 leave you miftrefs : but 'tis my wifti that vou hold converfe with no perfon but thofe fuited domeftics I leave under your direction. I enforce not this as a command: my lips could not ha he a command to you; but 'tis at pre~ fcnt my only entreaty. "There are,'* continuedhe, ina falter¬ ing voice, " many men who would b r proud to call you wife. The beauties of this form, the coral of that lip, the blufh of that cheek, the foul-piercing look of a 6, thofe
thofe eyes, call for love from all that behold them j but recollect, your retaining your affections is the only reward I afk for God knows what that I have done for you ! I talk not of the trifling protection my fair Uy has afforded to you ; I talk of—but • kt it pafs. Speak, lovely (trl, affure me your heart waits my bidding to dilpofc of itlllf; and let me leave you with fome little pittar.ee cf happinefs," 51 lina coidd anfwer only vTith tears. The Tail fparcd her farther reply. "I unchrfumd thofe ttiars," hcciied; " they Lji \\h\\e you ftdnd over a fcene of dc.^th, you c:.nnot think of love ! Ee it fo. Ere ma:.y months have paffed, I fliall again fe ycu: of love, and joy, and happinefs, we will then talk ; throw off thefe wictched, wretched weeds, and enter on a neiv life. h\:r^wel till then!—Willingly could I fit and look en you, and liften to you from morn to eve i but; farewel for the prefent. Once,
Once, ere I go, I will fee you again ; but once, for only feel my brain, my poor brain, how it throbs, and burns like molten lead! My horrors return too. 'Even now I think I fee your hands covered witli blood! — God Almighty, is there not fome one fitting at my writing-table? Oh, no no. But I could have f\orn 1 faw her face. Well, well, Selina, you mufl put up with thefe humours. You fee I am very weak and low, not fit for any company j when I come back, 1 fhall be better; I know I fliall, or elfe indeed I will never come back at ail. God blefs you, Selina 1 But I need not bid him; over the pure heart he is ever watchful. Farewe. P He led her to the door, and after preffing her hand to his lips, fuffered her to with¬ draw. Exceffive grief is inevitably, in fome meafure, a hardener of the huirt. So utter was the wretchednefs of Seiina, that lhe had no
no pity to fpare for the feemingly diftracted" fonow felt by the Earl. At his intention of accompanying his fon to the feat of war flie was rejciccd, if fo taftelefs a feeling as flie was then only fenfible of, might be called joy. She looked forward with dreary pleafure to the hours fhe fhould fpend free from every interruption, and every thing wearing the look of cheerfulnefs, in the gloom of the vaft caftle audits furrounding ftiades. Loft to every profped of happi¬ nefs, long, fhe hoped, before Lord liford returned from his campaign, fliould flie have hidden her forrow in the grave: there only could flie look for peace, and in the worlds it led to only could ftie look for pardon. Very weak was her tie to a world in which fhe could exped neither of thefe. Very few days after the funeral of the Countefs, the Prince, through tht medium of Ofborne, fent to beg, as a laft favour, that Selina would fuffer him to re-enter her prefence before he was forced to quit that.
that neighbourhood, which was of all others to him the deareft. Long flie hefitated; but inclination at length triumphed over every objection, and, in a private part of the park fhe granted the Prince an hour's interview before they parted, perhaps, for ever! At her feet he repeated thofe vows it was fo grateful for him to offer; and again declared that though, awed by the interfer¬ ence of powers againft whom there is no appeal, he might be compelled to give away from her his hand, never could he give to any other than her his heart with it. He extorted from her a promife of conti¬ nuing to correfpond with him, by a channel he had regulated with Ofborne. Twice he preffed her to his heart, and received her tears on his bofom. When he left her, he left his affections and his happinefs. Selina, though in fome fort his prefence was painful to her, ftill fo entirely loved him, that when (he heard his voice bid her its laft adieu* fhe
ihe fdt Jhe was parting from what little comfort the earth contained fur her. Not long after the Earl had communi¬ cated to Se.ina his intention of Jcavinc for a Lime the c<i';le, he and Lord Defmond fummoned ti.tir v..ffals, a:.d departed ; fo tlutScl.na was left, with domeftics only, to the (oha:de and gloom of that fjlemn pile, in v l;:cn fhe had witneffed events terrific ei'Mi^h to deftroy fpirits and courage not bo-vie- down as her's vvere by heart-rooted and immoveable forrow.
CHAP.
•*e©^i<^>!0®»«'*
CHAP. III.
'* A\',':d Lie fh:ary gloom of :Hg!:i I cry, *' Wlicn w'tii the E.^orn's cr.ee j.idifing fcev.ss rtturn ? *' Vet w!i;it ca*i morn's reluming my lup^ly, {i But fuss t!i'.*t triuiiipb, ur but friends that iiiout'rt !"
<( Thus, for your fake, I fii^n sac'i hum;ui eye ; '* I hid the hvects oi i,loonii«g youth ailltu : " To die I irinjiuOij but I ur.ad to die, " Left my uJ r«u fli^ulJ iiourirh pangs for j^i;.'' siii;K£tone*
I
H E laft few words that Lord Ilrord exchanged vrirh Seiina, were to repeat his folemn requeil ti. it ihe would, en no ac¬ count whatever, ica/c the retirement of the caftle, nor fuller her iblitude io be bioken on
on hy any other than a few female friends, whom he pointed out to her. The repe¬ tition of this requeft was however entirely unneceflary \ to Selina's dejected heart no blcflir.? was fo szreat as that of entiie fecfu- fion from a world flie could no longer look on without bhifhing, and which contained no folace for her forrows. As a fort of companion for her during the months flie would be fhut from fociety in the caftle, the Earl appointed an elderly female, whofe name was Edgcumbe. This worthy old woman had once known better days. Her education had been of no com¬ mon fort, but family misfortunes had re¬ duced her to the mifery of dependance. She had been the favoured friend of Selina's mother, and partly on that account, though more on that of her many virtues, and motherly tendernefs of difpofition, ihe had been held in the fame eftimalion by the squally amiable Lady liford, fo lately de- ceafed. By the bounty of this latter pa- tronefs.
tronefs, fhe had been enabled to live in fimpie plenty, in what was indeed little more than an hur, but which anfwered all the wi flies of an humble mind. Of the favours flie had received, the warmeft at¬ tachment was the confequence ; her grate¬ ful heart held its being but as what was at the difpofal of her wiio fhielded ii from want. As much from inclination as a fenfe of duty, this Mrs. Edgcumbe had never failed to pay to Selina the moft tender attentions. The recollection of what peculiar forrows had brought her mother to an early grave, —forrows of a recent date in the mind of old age, gave to her voice, when Jhe ad¬ dreffed the orphan daughter of a formerly beloved miftrefs, an accent of maternal pity that went directly to Selina's heart, and created there an affection of the moft tender kind.
With
With fatisfa-ilion, therefore, Selina heard recommended to her fuch a companion of her retirement; and wkh no fmall pleafure Mrs. Edgcumbe removed to the caftle. The gloomy ftillnefs that pervaded the vaft and melancholy place on the departure of the Earl, and nccrfy all the domeftics, correfponded v.vli with Selina's wretched¬ nefs. Tmeughou: die dixy fcarce a found b:oke the penfive quiet. Sometimes was heard the carelcfs hum of the peafant's fong, as he trod by the caftle walls; at others the diitant echo of the huntfman's or .hawker's horn : zhefe foon pafled away, and fulitary filence again poifeflcd the fcaie. If flie iirayed through the meanders of the park, the fame deferted air prevailed. Scarce a kbourer was feen tailing; hurry¬ ing domeftics ncre no longer perceived through ihe woods in escvy ciheciion $ mufic no longer founded fiom the recefles of the grove, and fwam in melody far and wide over the park. JSulinefi aad pleafure fcemed
feemed to have made a paufe*/ nothing cevikl be heard except the bub' Urn murmur of i. o feme ftream, the lluiuring of neil-birds amid the L.aves of thick trees, and the deprefiing monotony of tlie difcorJ:;;"^ rook. So fian'eJ, SA'n a wc.yi owr lior utter uiiiv ry. IT,dd, ■ n ii ora the evcs of:-. 11, ille loved to fit wiierc irehmcholy ibunds were all li ir conlJ be he^d of life. There It was that tears otV-dn ft;inc! lhe bki!lies of her cheek; iricre (he i wired death to take what remnined of her, whofe bofom had lofr its dearest part, its innocence. Much time had not eiapfed, when ihe gained con-' rage to.enccr the apartments of her dear, k;mei:ted friend. Beyond her common fleep¬ ing room, in which uhen dead ihe had lain, were two others : the one a drcfiinp clofet, ihe other an apartment facred to her retired uies, wliere was her oratory, and tho'.e books ihe was in the habit of frequendy reading. As Selina entered the chamber where flie had beheld the dying feature j of the Countefs, had
had caught her bleffing from her expiring lips, and heard her voice fink to the vacancy of death, a cold ftream of terror ran through her veins, that prevented her immediately proceeding. As fhe by degrees regained refolution, and ftepped on, at every fall of her foot her heart palpitated. With an half averted eye fhe regarded the bed ; a fhiver¬ ing feized her nerves; her breath and ftrength failed her ; fo ftrong were the fua^eftions of her imagination, that fhe fan¬ cied ftie ilill faw, extended on the bed, the dying form of her whole corpfe had lately lain there. Overcome by apprehenfion, fne fell faint on a chair, while her fenfe and fight were loft in horrible imaginings. Convinced of the folly of her alarm, flie rofe, and in light trembling fteps paffed the unoccupied bed. With timid ftownefs fhe opened the door leading to the late Countefs's drefting-room ; with many a fearful look eaft on the folitary apartment flie had left, flie entered. So
So perfect was the grief of thofe who waited on Lady Ilford's laft moments, that not an article on this, her moft frequented fpot, had been removed ; feveral of the ornaments fhe had laft ufed were lying on the table. With penfive pleafure Selina furveyed thefe : flie touched them;—'twas doin-j what n" hand had done fince the cold nefs of death feized that beloved ona which had placed them there. She looked in the mirror that had fo often reflected thofe admired features k never was to reflect again. Strong are the deluuon> of grief! Selina wondered ftie could not fee impreffed on the glafs the face that was wont to ftand tranfieni.ly depictured there. Among the other inconfequential articles fpread on the toilet-table, (the Countefs's jewels were kept in a cabinet, where was fecured the family plate) was a locket, which Lady liford had fet very tender ftore by : it enclofed plaited hair of the Earl. Selina had often feen it cheriflied in the bofom of her
her friend. As what was beloved by one fodtar, ihe innocently tied it round her own neck. She kifled it when (lie had fuf- pended it, and found, in fpite of the many her own diftrefs had wrung from her heart, Iome tears of regret to flied on it. As fl-c ftepucd towards lhe inner apart¬ ment, where Lady litlrd had been accuf¬ tomed ro fpend'her fen ous hours, a trem¬ bling awe pofleffed her. The deor was not clofely (hut. With a ftep light and caution?, as if ihe ftaved the poflibility of being overheard, fiie approached it. She Ilood irrefblute v, hen Vhe reached the fpot j flie threw mi apprehenfive glance toward the oppohte flde of the rcom : the carved top of the oratory met her eye, and the window above, on which were painted cherubims chanting praife. Something was heard like the ruftling of fillc-, and to her imagination, ever on the wing, v/as difcernible the fliade of fome perfon flitting along the room. She flood petrified in apprehenfion; her tongue
tongue cleaved to her mouth j flie would have hidden her eyes, but wanted power* In every inftant did me expect to fee the door open, and fome horrible fhadow ftand before her. When continued fecurity gave her time to collect refolution, fhe knew not whether to return or proceed; fhe felt herfelf almoft inadequate to the taik of entering the room, . by its fituation the moft gloomy, and by its furniture the moft apt to infpire terror; yet fo ftrong was her defire to revifit every fpot on which fhe had known happinefs with her loft friend, that it overcame her fears, and flie ftowly opened the oaken door. The room was wrapped in filence, and dim twilight, the erTed of the few and badly contrived windows it contained; fhe fcarcely dared to let her eyes run round her ; fhe trod foftly to avoid ftriking an echo, for the leaft noife terrified her. vol. ni, e At
'^ ^ At one end of the apartment, clofe be¬ neath an arched window, whofe light was diminilhed by interfecting ftone CRJvir.gs, ftood a table, on which were fome books, an ink ftandifli, and many papeis. She went toward it. The papers on which Lady liford had laft employed herfeH; were there fpread. On one, for Selina's arxious eye ftrupled not to examine them, was wnitten an account of the myfterious warning fie had received in the foreft, togedier with one of other ftrange incidents, of which till then Selina had been ignorant. She now found the nature of Lady Ilford's fhock in her bed chamber. So dreadful was what flie had beheld, that SelinaS flefli feemed moving from her bones, in honor, as fhe read of it. On another paper were fome me¬ lancholy verfes, Thefe it appeared Lady liford had fung*, " As the fwan warbling at his dying hour," on the eve of the night in which flie received her death-blow. As Selina peiufcd thefe laft memorials of her fecond mother, her feelings were almoft too * Draytui. powerful
powerful for her.' When the terrors, occa- fioned by reading thofe lines that defcribed the dreadful form flie had feen, gave place to tendernefs and grief, fhe looked to the chair in which her dear friend had fo often fat. She paufed over each objed fhe had once delighted in, and fancied flie ftill faw her fitting, placid yet gay j ftill heard the foft tones of her voice, that never wero heard difpenfing aught but comfort; and ftill faw her kind fmile, the maternal and benevolent beams of her eyes. When flie approached the oratory> reve¬ rence, not unmixed with dread, took pof¬ feffion of her bofom. She gently withdrew the door, the oratory was vacant, and bu¬ lled in profound ftillnefs. She cafe her trembling eye upwards; fhe crofted her Lands on her breaft ;—through her mind ran a thoufand thoughts. After fhe had conquered thofe apprehenfions that the me¬ lancholy of her fituation gave birth to* ftie became fenfible of feelings more grateful. e 2 Her
Her elevated fancy carried her to the realms of the bleJTed. There, in happinefs like that ftie had enjoyed in her vifion, fhe beheld the murdered form that had fitted itfelf for perpetual blifs, by meditation on the fpot where now fhe knelt and wept over its fate. With a rapt heart (he long knelt, her eyes ftill eaft to Heaven. At length, to fuch a frame had fhe worked her mind, that had defcending fpirits appeared befide her, their prefence would have infpired nought but tranfports of fatisfadion. After flie had enjoyed the mournful luxury of vifiting the apartments full of remem¬ brances of her fhe was to fee no more, and had fhecl tears over the confecrated fpot where her afhes were depofited, fhe thought ihe had nothing to do bpt let forrow wafte her to the grave. To the enquiries of what few perfons fhe called friends, flie was inaccefhble. The fight of fellow-creatures was death to her. If, by chance, flie became fubjed to it, deep blufties overfpread her cheeks,
cheeks, and tears, uncalled for, rufhed to her eyes. The Prince, by means of Ofborne, did not fail to take advantage of the privilege ftie allowed him of correfponding with her. Often, in the courfe of his writing, did he repeat to her, that that correfpondence was his chief delight. His letters continued to breathe the fame tender love. He was about to requeft permiffion to enter her prefence, when (lie wrote to him the follow¬ ing lines.
*' DEAR MY LORD, " Too often, on this fide of the grave, has the wretched Selina to addrefs you. Would to Heaven!—but wifhes are vain. You bid me live t and fay ifl ceafe to love, you no longer value the earth, nor any of the many ties to it that fituation impofes e 3 on
on you. Ah, my Lord [ too well you know to do the latter is not in my power; and, if you hold me dear, can you }Ourfelf wifh n:e to do the former? "Indeed mine are very miferable days, I rife me with the fun, but I rife me to weep and lament! I look round on the morning face of Nature. The fun enlivens every flower that blows; the gay birds tune their morning carol of contentment and grati¬ tude. J once could lift a cheerful voice as they do j but I can do fo no longer! AU look innocent and happy but mc, and I ftand guilty and melancholy. Methinks all around me feems to fay fo I If I ftay within doors, and grow fad in undiverted reflection, not a female but her eye feems to pierce my bofom. Not a word is fpoken, but I apprehend it is an accufation 1 When I go out, and cull me a nofegay of jafmine and violets, the flowers perifh in the inftant that they know my bofom; and then I weep and think the harmlefs buds cannot flourifh
flourifh near fo guilty and polluted a crea¬ ture. The village maidens trip by me; quickly they pafs, and feem fearful of my prefence : all fliun me ; I am a fhame to every thing 1 A poor, weeping miferable, I fit in fome lone fliade, deferted and de- fpifed by alll " Think not, my Lord, I fpeak thus to give you pain, to reproach you. No, alas! I love you too well i 4( Ten times have I begun this letter, and as often have tears drowned my fight, and agony prevented my intention. Oh my Lord, could you fee your poor Selina while fhe writes! Could you fee her guilty blufties, her biufhes of fhame!—But you would be too unhappy ! " I know not how to proceed. *Tis fitting, tis neceffary that I fhould tell you; yet, of all others, to difclofe to you my E 4 mifery
mifery is moft agonizing to me. Oh my Lord ! my dear Lord! —Wretch that I am, too, too foon fliall I be a mother! — " Where can the earth hide me? What fcrecn can conceal my pollution? Who will not look with fcorn on my infamy ? My heart hraves as though it could burft with its load of forrows I But for my child, but for you, would that it might / ** I have wept; and now methinks, that I have divulged the dreadful fecret that bends me to the ground, my mind feels fome little eafier. Do not hear, with dcteftation, that you will be a father j do-not, or it will kill me ! In pity do not think of me with hatred 1 *Tis true, I am a poor weak girl; very troublefome, and quite loft! Weaker, too, now than ever! but ftill I have a guilt¬ lefs heart, and love you truly. " God knows, I would not injure any body j yet I fhall be perfecuted and trampled on
on by all. But do not fea* that I fliall gov mad, notwithftanding. — At times my thoughts are very ftrange ; but I am not ye;, you know, a mother: when 1 am, I will fave myfelf from madnefs for the fake of my dear child. Dear, indeed ! dearer for every tear of wretchednefs that i fliall fhed on it. Oh, the joy of feeing your child—of preffing it to my heart ! How could I kifs its little lips, live on its fmile, and die with it, to fly from a world that cculd find cruelty enough to fcorn it! Yes, the joy of warm¬ ing my offspring on my bofom is what the world cannot take from me. Though it' may banifh me from all its bleffings, and brand me as a wretch whofe touch is conta¬ gious, ftill I can find fome confolation in chcrifliing t!he little infant whole face and look will bring to my heart )ou and your affection. " And yet, may not,—dreadful to think I may not my child, as fenfe rifes in hirn, behold me with reproach and averfion ? i 5 May
May he not tax me with cruelty, in bring¬ ing to life a being who will breathe but to be a mark for the finger of fcorn ?—Good God Almighty, perhaps my child may hate mc !— Oh wretched, wretched girl! Why did I not fade while I hung on my mother's bofom ? while yet I v/as innocent and happy ? Oh, mifery too great to bear, to feel life a curfe, and yet have reafon to wifli for it as the deareft blefling! " Oh fend me comfort if you can, for I am drooping to the earth. Be not alarmed, but I am very ill. Do not, on that account, be uneafy j I will fhake off the fick nefs of entire dejedion, fince I cannot fingly fink to the grave. Send me word you ftill love me i 'tqgll fupport me in all my pains. Sad were our loves, but dear to my heart is their remembrance. Alas! I feldom faw you but to weep. On every fide of my miferable exiftence appear troubles !
« When
« When my child fees the light, or rather when a few years have purchafed him a protedor, may all that furround me pafs from my knowledge as a painful dream, and may I wake to worlds of happinefs! There, Oh there may I meet you ! 'tis there only that you would not blufh to own as your's, the wretched "SELINA." If any thing could add to the diftrefs felt by the Prince for having robbed Selina of the only treafure an unkind fate had left her, it vvas the knowledge of his error pro¬ ducing fuch confecpiences as might occa¬ fion her greater pain even than the fad flings of fecret grief. On returning to Court, he had fallen into a deep defpondency, Tlie image of Selina, pale, woe-worn, wafting to death, pepetually haunted his imagination. Had not an interdidion of fo awful a nature forbidden his thinking for an inftant of fo doing, he would have broken through every tie, and have fnatched her to his bofom as his wife. Often did his £ 6 aching
aching heart picture the blifs of drying thofe bitter tears that ftained her cheek, of re- ftoring that fmile which innocence made appear fo fweetly on her lip, of reviving her faded form on his bofom, and murmur¬ ing in her foothed ear the name of " wife!" It would be, he thought, like raifing, in gentle funfhines, that fweet and tender lilyy which fome eaftern btaft had nipped while yet its beauties were unfolding, and which hung an inftant ere it fell to the ground, weeping the morning dew that was to have cherifhed its charms. Sometimes, for a very few inftants, a thrill of delight paffed acrofs his bofom. It was when, thinking of Seiina ? and his love for her, he whifpered the words * f our child;** but very fliort-lived was this ecftatic feel¬ ing : the bitter thought that he was forbid¬ den by circumftances to lift the dear pledge of their affection o that rank which his fon was entitled to, and that, he fondly thought, a fon of Selina merited, foon obtruded itfelf. Hi*
His anfwer to a letter, fhewing too plainly the extreme wretchednefs of the writer, fpoke a,ll the tender confolation, fond af¬ furances, and promifes of endlefs attach¬ ment that his heart was replete with. Very fhortly after he wrote, he himfelf haftened to the neighbourhood of the caftle. From Ofborne's cottage he apprifed Selina of his vicinity to her, and implored per¬ miflion to fee her. Daily becoming more weak, more wretched, and fubject to more pangs of ficknefs, flie looked to the fond foothings of the ^Prince as the only cordial capable of adminiftering comfort and cou¬ rage. Her fituation confidered, every fcruple paffed from her bofom, and fhe named a time in which he might gain admittance to the caftle, in the difguife himfelf propofed. Vacant as Lord Ilford's manfion now was, he found no difficulty in effecting his defign i and Selina hid her pale face, on which
which however was fpread a tranfient but faint glow, on hb breaft. Never before had he felt fuch fenfations as while ftraining her to him. He felt the deareft delight of a hufband j but very fleet¬ ing vvas his blifs, and bitter the reflections tha^t fucceeded to it. When Selina's languid eye met his, her cheeks were, for an inftant t\\\£\ d with fluctuating crimfon i but her blufli was not that of the timid but happy wife—'twas fingly a blufh of fhame 1 The tender voice of the Prince, however, fucceeded in reviving, in fome meafure, her drooping fpirits. His was the only voice that could do fo, He^ imfufpectedly, re¬ peated for feveral days his vifit. His heart was torn by an hundred different fears and defigns. Ali the folicitude of the fondeft hufband, together wkh all the anxious ap¬ prehenfions of the parent, occupied his bo¬ fom. He propofed removing Selina to fome fecure houfe, folitarily fituatcd, where flie might
might firft, at leaft in'the peace of fafety, experience a mother's fondnefs. There, with what friends fhe might chufe,and could place dependance on, fhe could live in re* rirement and all its calm pleafures, while he, in his heart her hufband, only fhould fee her when lhe granted.him permiflion, and then but as a faithful friend. To eloping from the protection of Lord liford, who, fhe imagined bad obtained by his many fervices, a father's right over her, ftie refolutely objected. The Prince then formed another defign. On learning the fituation of affairs in the caftle, he found that feveral chambers in the eaftern part of it, had been for many years untenanted. Thefe rooms were kept locked up, and for fome caufe or other, appeared not to be confidered as forming a poffibly habitable part of the caftle. Selina had never been in them, but flie had heard that, when in ufe, they had been furnifiied as bed rooms, though, from the remotenefs of their fitu¬ ation, 3
ation, they had never been held as other than occafional chambers. With truth the Prince thought it poflible for Sehna to inhabit, for a few weeks, thefe apartments, could reliance be placed on the perfon appointed to fuperintend the family during the Earl's abience, without her eftrangement being fufpected. No wo¬ man could Selina make the confidante of her fad ftory, with fo little pain as Mrs. Edgcumbe. She commanded breath, then, to tell it to her. With tears of pity, and words of con¬ dolence, it was heard. The good old woman readily vowed to be the faithful retainer of the fecret with which fhe was entrufted, and to ufe every endeavour to effect what Ihe was requefted. She put on a cheerful air. « Come, my dear young Lady," faid fhe, "hold up your head, and think not fo deeply of your 4 troubles.
# troubles. Accident, and not you, is to blame. The world is not to judge us. He that is, looks on you as a wedded wife. Do not look fo fadly, my dear Lady! we can manage every thing with much eafe anoVfe- curity. To your fervice, and that of the dear child you will give life to, I readily devote what little I have left of exiftence/* Though Selina's forrow was deep and immoveable, the divulging of her fad fecret, and receiving fuch kind and requifite pro¬ tection, eafed her heart of much of its pain¬ ful weight. The Prince rejoiced at the proofs of attachment evinced by the worthy Mrs. Edgcumbe. With her, he concerted a plan for their conduct on an event now not very far diftant. The good woman, ufed to perform fervices to the fick bed, and attend her friends through every cir¬ cumftance that required female afliftance, declared herfelf capable of filling every office Selina's fituation would call for. The neceffity there was for her appearing in the family,
family, as wel 1 to avoid fufpicion on her own account, as to conceal the feclufion of Selina, rendered it neceffary * however, for another perJon to become privy to the fecret. Much hefitation was not made, before Ru. hci, the honeft wife of Ofborne,, was fixed on as this unavoidable addition, Very long had (lie been attached to the family of Selina. Her love of it was the affection ever upperrnoft in her heart, If her difcretion might be relied on, each party felt iecure in dependance on her wil- lingnefs and honefty. No perfon better calculated prefented herfelf, and on her ac¬ cordingly the choice was fettled. At mi hour leaft likely to interruption,, Mrs. Edgcumbe examined thofe chambers fixed on for Selina's fecret ion. They ap¬ peared, in every refpect, well adapted to the purpofe they were imagined for. Their furniture ftill remained, though many years* difufe had reduced it to a poor condition. The walls were hung with tapeftry -, the large heavy
heavy chairs were .covered with dirt and ^uft, and their embroidered feats, the pro¬ duce of <c the matron's fiiver-working lcom," were finking faft beneath the en¬ croachments of their natural enemy, the moths. There were three apartments, two funufhed as bed-rooms, the third as an anti, or dreiling-room. Though thefe for- fakentenemems exhibited, at fitft fight, but a comfonleO appearance, Mrs. Edgcumbe did not doubt, with thofe means furnifiied her in abundance by the Prince., ftie could make them in every refped fuitable to the occafion they were wanted on. . She immediately commenced private pre¬ parations for rendering them fit for the reception of h<»r beloved Lady; and in a very little time made them, if not fuch as the exceffive tendernefs of the Prince wifhed them, fuch as well contented the poor Selina, whom few outward objects now interefted.
The
The Prince was never abfent from the neighbourhood of the caftle, but when ne¬ ceffity required it. His delicate attentions and fond endeavours to reftore her peace, and footh, her dejection and her fears, alone upheld Selina's being. For the child that would call him father, fhe ftill wiflied to live ; though when flie thought under how very miferable aufpices their infant would enter life, fhe often wifhed that the hour that gave it birth, might be that in which both herfelf and it would pafs to the cold grave.
CHAP.
— -p »a K »ftf^g^3&»»««-.
CHAP. IV. .'eaven for no trivial caufe ordains • That joy like this fucceeds thy pains j ** But, by this facred pledge demands ** A parent's duty at thy han 's i * f While thou thy infant charge fhalt rear, «* My love ihall lighten every cai'e 1" i ' EK3^ f AS the time approached at which Sl. was to give to the world a new " child ot mifery baptized in tears," contrary to the fears ofher lover and her faithful attendant, her ftrength feemed rather renovated than exhaufted. One of the firft principles that Nature has planted in our bofoms> called on- - her
her to exert her fpirits and her fortitude. Maternal feelings warmed her heart; and ftie who, as the wretched facrifice of an un¬ fortunate love, lamented to feel life beat ftrongiy in her veins, as a mother, lamented at every indication of her conftitution fink¬ ing beneath her trials* The Prince, fraught with a thoufand tender fears, as the period drew nigh that was to make him, though under the moft mournful circumftances, a father, encou¬ raged this gathering fortitude of his beloved Selina in all the cheering ways he could devife. A fortunate dearth of public bufi- neis, occafioned by an armiftice, agreed on by the contending powers, enabled him to be much abfent from the Court, without any other than a common caufe being fuppofed the occafion of it. When the oppreffed Selina walked out in the twilight, to receive the benefit of free air, he was ever at hand to accom¬ pany her. Hanging on his arm, the fup¬ port
*
port of which her weaknefs needed, and liftening to the foft enquiries of his voice, a pt.rfive placidnefs fpread itfelf over her foul. In thefe moments, only, fhe forgot the extent ofher mifery j though, even then, flie dared not look to days to come, but either confined her imagination to the little comtOiC of the prefent moment, or dropped on her bofom tears of defpondency, Rachel was no fooner acquainted with the fervice fhe was required to perform, ihan flie broke into alternate expreifions of forrow ather young Lady warning her af¬ fiftance under painftl circumftances, and cf joy at having it in her power to render her affiftance, under any ciru;rhfla*jccs at all; declaring, with much fincerity, " that flie was ready to lay down any thing fliort of her foul, in the caufe of tne dear lady to whofe family her youth and age were under inch obligations." A few
A few days before it was fuppofed pro¬ bable lhe would be wanted, flie removed to her lonely apartment in the caftle* The zealous Mrs. Edgcumbe had, on her part, made every poflible preparation. Every comfort for a childbed-chamber fhort of thofe afforded by an open commerce with fociety, was provided by her; but ftill the Prince bitterly fighed to think how unlike thofe fimpie preparations that he beheld, were to thofe the chofen friend of his heart merited. For fecrecy, no fituation, however folU tary, appeared better adapted than that chofen. On account of fome fuperftitious fancy, the eaftern rooms were as much dreaded as if an unnatural fight had really been witneffed there : ihey ftood in a part of the building but little reforted to, and never regularly inhabited. The whole floor of the eaftern wing formed a mere refervoir for the lumber gathered in the other parts of the^ caftle. In two of its rooms were depofited
depofited piles of arms, and thofe rooms ad¬ joined the melancholy ones fixed on for the place of Selina's retirement. To this de¬ ferted flight of apartments there was a fliort path from Selina's prefent chamber: it ran through the fecret paffage, ending in the chapel, acrofs that long and fpacious room in which the haplefs Lady liford had fallen the victim of murderers, and then opened to the fpot from a narrow and dark gallery. In the prefent ftate of the cattle, when a very few domeftics remained in it, and what few there were had not the leaft oqcafion to vifit any other rooms than thofe gene¬ rally ufed by the family eftabiifliment, it was nearly impoflible for the retreat of Selina to be difcovered. With the aid of Mrs. Edgcumbe, nothing could be more eafy than to keep the fervants ignorant of Selina being abfent from her own apart¬ ments, to which, it might be reported, flight ftcknefs confined her. When fhe vol. in. 7 fliould
fhould be entirely recovered, her child, if flie could fb foon fuffer it to be taken from her, it was agreed ihould be removed to Ofborne's cottage, where Rachel's utmoft attentions fhould be employed in nurfing its infancy. The little ftrength collected by Selina now, however, began to fink apace, in fpite of all her efforts to retain it. Sicknefs fpread a lafiltudc over her frame, and her fpirits, radically overcome, fell to the ground. Feeling herfelf in each hour grow more faint and drooping, flie caufed herfelf to be removed to the chamber in which fhe was to meet the event of the impending hour. When flie was fettled there, fhe fent to re¬ queft the Prince would come, if he could with fafety, and fee her once more—per¬ haps, fhe faid, for the laft time ! With Cpetd, lent him by his fears, he haftened to her. When he entered her chamber, fhe was fitting in a large old chair j
chair j pillows at her back ; her fweet face pale and full of terrors, refting on the bofom of her comforting Rachel. She was loofely wrapped in a white night-drefs, and by chance, it was that which ihe wore when he fb unfortunately furprifed her in her anti-room. On his firft entering, though he was pre¬ ceded by Mrs. Edgcumbe, fhe did not perceive him. Mrs. Edgcumbe drew to htr chair, and faid— « Well, my dear Lady, how do you find yourfelf now? Here is the Prince come, in obedience toyourwiflies," A momentary flafh of pleafure lightened her languid eyes. She lifted her head, and ftrove to force a fmile to her lip. The Prince tenderly took her hand, and held it to his bofom, " I am very weak and bad," faid fhe - f " Heaven pity and fupport me, but I am very weak and bad !" f 2 « Be
" Be not apprehenfive, my love," he an¬ fwered, in the kindeft tone in wliich affec¬ tion can fpeak; "in a few hours you will be well. Do not give way to alarm. Our two good friends will cherifh your ficfc hours ; thofe hours will foon flit away/* " Oh that they were paft I" flie fighed ; * c that they were paft, and 1 had life ! My heart much mifgives me. My thoughts run only on ftrange and horrible death. And fee too, as if to crufh my hopes, what a drefs they have given me ! a drefs I thought never to ha\e worn again." Seeing the countenance of the Prince ex¬ prefs the moft poignant feeling of folicitude, {he faid, " Do not be uneafy for me, my Lord. I may yet do well, and fhield our infant on my bofom. Ifl fhould prove too weak to live, let-the farewel of this minute furfice ! God, God blefs you ! On my dying lip fhall hang thofe words ; for are you not, in wifhes, my hufband ? And may I not, in death, when my miferable being can no longer
longer be an injury to you, fay how dear you are to my heart? 1 * Here her feelings overcame her, and her head fell, faint, on her bofom. He kiffed her pale lips with an hufband's fondnefs, and, in a tone of comfort, bade her be of cheer, and live to know, as a mother, many happy years. A foft fmile of gratitude rofe to her lip, and very flightly flie preffed that hand which he enclofed her's with. Jn each inftant fhe grew worfe, and the Prince was at length fenfible he could no longer ftay to uphold her with his prefence. But rather would he have forfaken his hopes of royalty, than have quitted, for an inftant, the caftle until affured that Selina had paffed every danger, and was well. With fears and anxiety the moft painful, he paced, through every hour that feemed an age, the apartments joining that of Selina. The ftate of inactivity he was neceffarily in, f 3 added,
i added, in no mean degree, to the torment of his folicitude. Often he alarmed himfelf with reflecting on the poornefs of her at¬ tendance, and dreaded in each minute hear¬ ing her death announced to him. In thefe moments his feelings were little fhort of diftraction. At length Mrs, Edgcurribe brought him the joyful tidings of Selina having given birth to a fon^ and that both mother and child were "likely to do well." The Prince's rapture may be more eafily conceived than defcribed. An ecftacy of grateful joy flafhed in his eyes. He preffed, in tranfport, the hands of the worthy woman who had re¬ lieved him of fufpenfe the moft tormenting. When a few hours had paffed, he was admitted to Selina's room. Weak and ex¬ haufted as ihe was, fhe heard his footfteps acrofs the chamber; fhe flightly trembled as flie heard him approach, and lifted up her eyes as if to implore affiftance and fupport. He
He lightly drew afide the curtain; he preffed her weakened hand to his lips, and then, ftooping, beftowed an hufband's kifs on her cheek. Old' Rachel, who now affumed infinite confequence, and had, indeed, been of much fervice, advanced to the Prince with his fon in her arms. He gently took it from her, and looked, with fondnefs inexpreflible, on its features. He kiffed its forehead, then gazed filently on it for fome moments. Words murmured on his lips. Thefe words were a vow never to forfake its future for¬ tunes while he had life; not more on ac¬ count of thofe warm paternal feelings that rofe with rapture in his breaft, than of its beloved angelic mother. Selina, who, through the dimnefs of the room, difcovered the emotion he experi¬ enced, eaft toward him one look of fond fympathy.
F4 "Be
" Be kind to my child V* flie whifpered; " tis the only way in which I wifh you to fhew your love for me, and your forrow for having robbed my youth of its little, laft hope." The Prince knelt befide her bed, and while he held her hand to his heart, repeated his promife of watching over her offspring with a father's care. f " Tis enough," faid fhe ; <f in that affu- ranee I forget my forrows." As converfation was forbidden by her tender nurfes, the curtain was now clofed, and (lie recommended to ftrive compofing herfelf to fleep. For a time the Prince re¬ tired, and Selina, left to perfect quiet, fell into a flumber, from which fhe awoke in a much better frame than, her ftate of mind confidered, could reafonably have been ex¬ pected.
Once
Once in every day the Prince, difgnifed, vifited the caftle. To the period at which he generally came, Selina looked with a wifhful eye, during each hour of his abfence. The tend-jrnefs with which he hung over her and his child, and the fond careffes he laviflied on the infant, had an effect on her fickened mind, infinitely grateful and footh¬ ing. As it was unfafe for him to enter the caftle fo frequently as his folicitude made him wifh, Oiborne, at a ftated time in each day, found occafion to call there, and by him Mrs. Edgcumbe tranfmitted an account of her patient*s health. The extreme delicacy of Selina's consti¬ tution, joined to the anguifh that preyed on her heart, rendered her recovery flow. Still her endeavours to live were evidently productive of advantage. Her ftrength, by degrees, returned fuiHciently to warrant her fitting up; and fhe, without apparent f 5 detriment
detriment to her health, gave to her infant a mother's nurture. Sweet, though painful, were the feelings of the Prince while he leant on Selina's chair, as his fmiling boy lay in her lap. Jn the infant's face already appeared promifes of that mild lovelinefs which fo eminently graced its mother's features, flrengthened by the bold, mafculine turn that marked the equally fine ones of its father. Sometimes he would fall into a dream of forgetfulnefs s nothing that talked of unhappinefs, would be prefent to him. He remembered only that he was the adorer of Selina; that flie returned, with equal warmth, his love; that he beheld the fweet pledge of their affection. Selina ever caught momentary pleafure from feeing happinefs expreffed in his features. Her penfive lip would foften to a fmile; her hand would fteal to his, and fhe would teli
tell how much fhe loved, by the kiffes fhe beftowed on his child. In thefe minutes, the Prince would often fit at her feet, and entwine their infant's little ringers round one of his own; he would pract ife an hun¬ dred endearments, and Selina would hang delighted over her unconfcious baby, and murmur bleffings on its future days. But, ah 1 fuch feafon^ of forgetfulnefs came feldom. Much oftener did the Prince ftand, with folded arms, contemplating, with agony, the picture prefented in his Selina and her boy. Bitterly did he reflect, that for him and his paffion, fhe was doomed to be (hut from all fociety : no fond friends gathered round her fick bed; no hufband's fmile, and hufband's protection, were her lot! No !—unhappy that he was, of every joy, of all life's comforts, he had bereft her! In fome wretched obfcurity, for his take, would ihe fhun each human eye j and the dear little being to which flie gave birth, and which, as his fon, might expect the f6 flrft
firft poflible rank in fociety, would either pine in the fame obfcurity that fhe did, or enjoy the bleffings of elevation on fuch poor terms, that to have his origin glanced at, would be to have the blufli of fliame raifed on his cheek. When his reflections took this turn, the phrenzy of his brain was paft bearing. To co ceal his emotion he hurried from the prefence of the injured objects, and feeking fome melancholy fpot, now bemoaned the hardnefs of his fate, and now reproached himfelf as the fole caufe of his afflictions. Nothing could be more entirely fecure thm the apartments Selina now inhabited. I ler reiirement was in no fliape fufpected by any of the fervants. The zealous and kind Mrs. Edgcumbe regularly fupplied the fick chamber with every poflible re¬ quisite ; and, under the care of honeft Rachel, the treafured infant of Selina's trou¬ bles
bles increafed daily in health, fength, and beauty. When Selina might be pronounced en¬ tirely recovered from the iilnefs of child¬ bed, the Prince was compelled to prepare for his return to Court. IJe had fo arranged his affairs previous to his leaving it, that had his prefence been called for,, a confi¬ dential friend knew where to find hirn. Though he had not received any fignifi- cation of his abfence being confcqucntial, fo long had he remained in retirement, that he deemed it prudent to leave, now that he could do it with the pleafing affurance of Selina being beyond ail danger, the fpot fo dear and fo attractive. As the period drew nigh at which it was intended Selina fhould refign her infant to the care of Rachel, fhe felt herfelf unable to part from wh.rt was the fingle fource ot her melancholy pleafures. Living but to practife what woukl foften the forrows he had
had brought on her, the Prince fought for means of oLv ining her fecurity, without depriving her of that which afforded her delight. The abfence of the Earl confidered, Mrs. Edgcumbe gav&$t as her opinion, that Rachel and the child might very fafely continue in the chamber they at prefent tenanted, while Selina returned to her own, embracing fuch times as were moft fitting to vifit and nurture her charge. With this opinion the Prince coincided; and it was precifeiy fuch a fyftem as gratified tlie wifhes of Selina. Very melancholy were the laft hours the Prince fpent in the caftle. In his prefence alone had the imagination of Selina been amufed, and her forrows mitigated. As fhe heard him talking for the laft time, and faw the painful emotion he was unable to con¬ ceal, fhe felt all the horrors of folitude and unquiet refledion return. Warned of the confe-
confequences of giving way to agitated thought, fhe however endeavoured to con* quer her feelings. Often did the Prince repeat his promifes of pure and never-end¬ ing friendftiip, and as often did he give affurances of protedion to their darling child. The correfpondence hitherto pre¬ ferved, Selina promifed to continue. While the Prince held his fon in his em¬ brace— « c Oh my Selina 1" he cried, "chink of this dear little innocent, and fcorn the thought of finking beneath what I have expofed you to. Dear angel of my heart's beft wifhes 1 let this little fmiling promife of future happinefs reconcile you to this hard world and all its forrows. Many a day hence, when we ceafe to have the feelings of youth, and have forgotten to think of paft misfortunes, bitterly as we now do 9 this dear proof of our affedion fliall give us a thoufand comforts, join our hands in the
the guiltlefs friendlhip of old age, and teach us the fmile of pear-, i n teaching us to blefs ourfelves as iu. py parents." Selina could make no anfwer. She leant on the Prince*.*- uVuldcr, and looked at her child, then at him, rj-d rlh-n wept, .Mrs. Edgcumbe, well aw-re* of ilic b.id confe¬ quences emotion migh*" p-roiiuce in Selina's fituation, urged the Jfrince to haften his departure. u I will," faid he, while he ftrove to hide the weaknefs of a huiband, and an early father, "my friend, my love, farewel ! Kifs often our boy, and think of me when you do. Never fhall I lay me down, but you and my child will be neareft to my foul." He clafped her to him with fervency; and, often turning back to take one more glance, he flowly left the room.
CHAP.
CHAP. V.
** Pepaint a mothers hopes, a mother's fears j " Her fmiles of pleafure, and her painful tears !" AFTER thefirft emotions of grief, occa¬ fioned by the departure of the Prince, Selina argued herfelf into thinking there was fornewhat of guilt in lamenting the abfence of him, whom to behold with a warmer feeling than that of friendfhip, was to fin againft modefty. Though a languid dejection never left her, her ftrength by flow degrees returned. Her fole delight, the folace of all her for¬ rows, though it was the innocent caufe of many
many of them, was her child. For hours Jhe held him to her foftering breaft. Fondly fhe traced the beauties of his infant counte¬ nance. The pains fhe fuffered in preferving his fecurity, and the thoufand troubles that furrounded his exiftence, did but make him more dear to her; he feemed the more precious part of her foul. Feelings inex- preflible fweiled in her bofom as fhe gazed on him j flie clafped him to her, and fhed tears in the fulnefs of maternal love. The greater part of every day fhe paffed 5n her folitary nurfery. The attentions of Mrs. Edgcumbe, and the fervices of Rachel, were continued with unremitting ardour: for the oflke ihe was appointed to, no per¬ fon could be better fitted than the latter* In her youth her time had been devoted to the care of children ; fhe had been on^ of the bufieft, and not one of the leaft fer¬ viceable attendants on Selina's mother, when lhe gave birth to a daughter, doomed to know many pains. To the circum¬ ftances
age, fhe often glanced; but Selina never failed to filence her ill-judged remarks:— her love of hearing herfelf talk was not how¬ ever to be fo overcome 5 reftrained on one topic, fhe enlarged on another, and told, at no trifling length, divers of thofe hifto- rical tales that fo often grace a lying-in room. Of all her legends her moft favourite was a circumftantial, though not very accu¬ rate account, of the glorious battle of Creffy; the heads of which ihe had received from one of Lord liford's vaffals, who had fought in the engagement in that divilion led to victory by the heroic Edward. Here ihe told "as how the Englifh had but 55,000 and the French had 125,000 men j awl foit pleafed the Saints above to rain down a gerdigious fhower of rain, by which all the French bow-ftrings were wetted, while nofe a drop touched the Englifh ones; and fo the Prince, at the head of his horfe, trampled over the Lord ^ knew
knew how many thoufands of his innimies' $ and fo the Prince cleared the way to where a fine, flout, gigantic King of Bohinme rode, proud, at die head of his warriors -, and then the gallant Prince fought with, conquered, and killed the gigantic Kin?;, and fnatched three feathers from his helmet, which he now wore as a crifl. And then the Prince, after performing more wonders than Rachel had breath to tell of, heard his foes found a retreat, and faw them fly before him like chaff on a windy day." To this tale, never repeated without many additions, and many frefli encomiums on the " hope of his country,'* Seiina fome¬ times condefcended to "lend a liftening ear." Though the applaufe of poor Rachel was homely, it was praife ftill - f and what¬ ever fpoke of the Prince, fhe deemed worthy of her attention. Often, while Rachel, in her way, recounted his exploits, tears fell down her cheek. She looked on her child, s ,and fighed. "Alas!*
" Alas!" thought fhe, "dear companion of my miferies, will you one day emulate your glorious father ? Will your eyes ever fire, as his do, with gallantry and heroifm? and will you, my child, my Prince, will you be gentle, foft, amiable, fond as he is ? Oh 1 if you are, how fweet will be the hours of my old age ! What ecftacy will be in your mother's feelings 1 But, ah my boy ! a fad mift will obfcure the noblenefs of your nature. Doomed, perhaps, to wafte your days in inglorious fecrecy, you will reproach, as night clofes on a day in which nothing has been done, your haplefs, yet cruel mo¬ ther! Oh, if you do, too, too bitter will be my lot to bear!" When forrowful reflections, like thefe, ftole on Selina, and fadnefs fpread itfelf over her lovely features, Rachel, with feeling fimplicity, endeavoured to win her from her melancholy fancies; (lie ever then found fome little want about her dear Lady*s perfon, where her fervices might be accept¬ able;
able» or begged her, wlule "her fweet little Lord flept, juft to liften to a merry tale lhe had never before told her." Though not infenfible to the tendernefs of her old attendant, fadnefs had gained too much afccndency over Selina, to fufFer her to be diverted by her "merry ftories. ,, Sometimes, however, her melancholy affumed a mellow hue, that is, to the mind of af- fliftion, not ungrateful. Moftly it did fo, when of moonlight nights me fat, with her infant in her arms, at a fmall window- that overlooked an unfrequented part of one of the park fhrubberies. While, if her infant flept, the pale and penfive moon Ihewed, in his features, the calm number of happy innocence j or, if he waked, difplayed the fmile, fo fweet to a mother's eye, a languor not painfully unpleafant, foftened her bofom* A faint fmile relaxed her countenance; or if a figh dole from her heart, it was in* voluntary, and not produced by prefent agony of thought. She warbied fome me¬ lancholy
lancholy lullaby, and her imagination fome¬ times carried her to the diftant Prince j and then ftie fancied that, though fur¬ rounded by pomp, he knew not perfect eafe, and that his figh anfwered her*s. So pafled fome few months away. Letters of the tendereft import, and expreffive of all the warmth of parental folicitude, had been duly received from the Prince; to which, anfwers, containing an account of the welfare of herfelf and child, had been regularly tranfmitted. At length, Ofborne arrived at the caftle, and delivered to Selina the following note.
"SWEET FRIEKD OF MY HEART, "I fnatch from the hurry of public affairs, that allow me not an inftant to call my own, the time in which I write thefe few lines. My country requires me to un- fheath
(heath 'my fword. I refume the path of glory, whofe luftre fo dazzled my earlier years, Alas, my Selina, to refume it 1 muft leave you ! Pity me !—You cannot be fully fenfible of the diftradion of my breaft at the idea of quitting you and our dear boy. For God's ftike be not uneafy at the intel¬ ligence. I muft go; but before I do, I will ar leaft have the folace of placing you and our child in fome place of comfort and fe¬ curity. " Exped to fee me at liford very fhortly. Thither will I fly on the wings of the pureft friendfhip and affection. Let me repeat, dear objed of my perpetual thoughts, my prayer that you will not be made uneafy by the purport of this letter. A thouflmd times adieu ! Cherifh our child ; kifs him for him who ever will be your " EDWARD."
Shortly
Shortly after fending this letter, the Prince arrived at Ofborne's cottage. His arrival was immediately fignified to Selina, and in the accuftomed manner he was ad¬ mitted to the caftle* All that a hufband and a father can feel, when, after a long and painful feparation, he beholds his wife and his child, the Prince felt when he clafped Selina and her infant in his arms. 'Twas but one embrace—the impulfe of nature ; and then the Prince was to Selina but a fond and zealous friend. Not till after he had enjoyed fome hours of converfation, did he,force himfelf to tell her that, within a few days, he muft head the army dcftined to France, and proceed with it to the port from whicli it was to embark j and that this one fhort interview was the only exchange of affection they could have before he bade adieu, for an uncertain period, to his native country. vol. in. o "This
" This hour," cried Selina, " Oh 1 is this the laft hour we arc to pafs together ? Am I to be left, with my dear boy, to the mercy of the wide world, deftitute of your pro¬ tedion, after this hour?** " Not foy my Selina," faid the Prince : Ci we are, I truft, to pafs together, in inno¬ cence and friendfhip, many an happy hour of future days. Before I leave you, before —diflrading thought!—I am parted from you by feas, and many dreary waftes of land, I hope to have the confolation of knowing you are fettled in convenience and fecurity, in the retreat I have provided for you. Do not be dejeded, then, my Selina f Remember my life, and even my will, are not my own. Oh, woe the while that they are not! If rhey were------But, however," faid he, with a mournful fmile, * c we muft not talk of what we would do were it in our power, but make the utmoft of what advantages we poffefs. Come, come, my dear friend, conquer thefe apprehenfions;" Selina was now in tears; " remember I am your 4
your foldier,—Summon up the heroine,— Truft me, in the hour of battle I will not difhonour your name. Think of me here¬ after but as I acquit myfelf in fighting as your Knight.'* To thefe generous attempts at difpelling her grief, Selina could make no reply:— fome tears (he flied for the fake of her child ; but more fhe flied for his fake, who would fhortly be expofed to fcenes of death and danger, to think of which made her fliudder in horror. Not one particle of that coolnefs with which, in days of chivalry, fome dames have feen their fworn Knights depart to fields of flaughter, did her bofom poffefs. A thoufand tender thoughts and tender feelings filled her foul, and made the ready tears trickle down her cheeks. The Prince, in the prefence of the wor¬ thy Mrs. Edgcumbe, entered on the fubject of Selina's difpofal during his abfence. c« He
He had provided, in the utmoft readi- nefs, a place for her reception. It was a manfion that, in the reign of John, had been the refidence of one of the armed Barons. Its fituation was remote, unfre¬ quented ; itfelf a building inaccefftble, if fecured by a very few faithful perfons. Suf¬ ficient of the many rooms it contained to accommodate Selina and her few domeftics, he had caufed to be prepared in the moft comfortable manner. Thither he propofed her going, and, with her fo fituated, he pointed out a channel through which he could hold conftant correfpondence. Seiina tremblingly thanked him for the care he took of her whom, flie faid, little merited it; but that unlefs his wi flies to the contrary were of the moft pofitive kind, ihe would prefer flaying where flie was, be her fate what it might. She had every reafori jo believe her child fecure in his prefent htuation, and for him only fhe defired life. Mrs.
Mrs. Edgcumbe, whofe advice Selina afked, agreed with her in this opinion; obferving there vvas ground to ihppofc the Earl would remain abfent for the fame time the Prince did, and-therefore they might rely on remaining undifcovered in poffeflion of the eaftern chambers: fhould Selina fly from the protection of the Earl, flie faid, her fame might be injured, and herfelf rendered neceifarily* reclufe for the remain¬ der of her life; by which not only herfelf might be affected, but her child. Should flie be in danger, Mrs. Edgcumbe remarked, it would nor. be difficult, fhe fuppofed, to make her fituation known to the Prince, who could caufe fuch fteps to be taken as would refcue her. The Prince, apprehenfively anxious for the welfare of thofe who were fo dear to him, ftill foiicited Selina to make ufe of the afylum he had provided ; but finding her reluctance immoveable, he at length yielded his opinion, and confented to leaving her g 3 under
under the oftenflble protection of Lord liford. As the minute drew nigh at which he was to leave her, her dejection, in fpite of her ftruggles to mafter it, pafled all bounds: flie fat, with her infant on her lap, her hands clafped in half-fmothered agony, now looking on the fleeping child's face, now calling her ftreaming eyes up to Heaven. The Prince generoufly placed her emo¬ tions to the account of apprehenfion of future evil falling on herfelf, and employed all his foft rhetoric in proving to her that it was fcarcely poflible for ferious danger to befal her. When he, rifing, took his infant in his arms, and now gazed with delight on its countenance, now kiffed its little lips with parting ardour, the feelings of his own breaft were almoft too powerful to be con* quered $ but care of Selina reftrained the emotion that had nearly broken forth. He affected calmnefs, and talking of the confi¬ dential
dential perfon to whom he. fhould truft letters from the Continent, advanced to Selina, kiffed her cheek, and bade hef, when (he wrote, affure him of her health and tranquillity. At this moment the referve Selina had hitherto preferved was forgotten. Nature proved more powerful than the impofition of forms, perhaps too rigid, and fhe fell on his neck, and fobbed convulfively. Locked to his heart fhe long remained. Neither had power to bid the «laft adieu i" The Prince at length recollected he was but increafing Selina's anguifh by lengthen¬ ing the parting moment, and gently difen- gaging himfelf, cried, in a broken voice— " For a little time farewel! Do not for¬ get me. You will never be from my mind. Preferve our child, and Heaven preferve you!"
G4 ^
As
As he fpoke, he drew to the door. (< Oh ftay/' cried Selina, " one moments one little moment!" But her cry was unanfwered; the Prince was gone. Affured that fhe was left, Selina threw herfelf on a chair, and gave loofe to excef¬ five grief. The whole world now appeared to her an utter blank, worfe than a blank; for lhe figured a part of it, in which the dear friend of her tendereft thoughts was haftening to a dreary fcene of flaughter, where all his glorious bravery would not fave him from a dreadful death. The fight of her child, the charm of its endearments, had not power to tranquillize her mind. Rather did thofe give her frefh pain, in bringing more clofely to her re¬ membrance her abfent Prince, and the frightful
frightful fate her. dejection fancied him haftening to. Several fleeplefs nights of tears did Selina pafs. To her infant's unknowing ear, while pleffed to her bofom, did flie tell her for¬ rows i and 3 as if fhe believed him poffeffed of fenfe to fympathize with her fufferings, fhe joined her weeping face to his, and bade liim ceafe to moan while her heart retained warmth enough to cherifh him. Such an event as the embarkation of an army deftined againft France, could not but be known even at fo remote and vacated a fpot as liford Caftle. Tlie domeilics foon learned it in the village dependant on the Earldom - y and, in the caftle hall, where the few fervants left, ftill regularly aflembled at the important hour ot dinner, nothing but the mighty armament, and its expected fuc* cefa was talked of.
<* 5 Among
Among the very fmall number of meniak now in the caftie, there was one, whofe name was Hugo, to whom Selina had, fome little time paft, done an act of kindnefs. The man had endeavoured to repay it by the moft zealous attentions. Were it fuppofed the Lady Selina would want any office per* formed, Hugo was ever at hand to obey her will. Did fhe intend to walk where a fervant muft attend her, Hugo was always ready, in his beft-trimmed doublet, with his hat under his arm. Selina could not be infenfible to all his ftudied fervices, and Hugo had become a favourite with her. He was not a character to difgrace her pre¬ ference. He was now turned of feventy, fimpie, honeft, and faithful. From Hugo Selina learned the rumour, or, as he termed it, certain news of the fleet having failed j and likewife, which indeed he reported ra¬ ther in conformance to his wifhes than his intelligence, that a fair wind had carried them out of port, and that there was no doubt of the Englifh fwords having, long before
before the time he talked at, been ftained with French blood. Had Hugo been filent on this head, the report would not have been long a fecret to Selina. At the recommendation of Rachel, fhe had lately hired a new maid to attend on her perfon. The girl was a niece of Rachel's, civil, good-humoured, and obedient, but pofleffed of no more prudence than a child, and very fond withal of hear¬ ing her own voice, than which fhe imagined there never was a more mufical one be¬ ftowed :—her difcourfe was, however, fo refpectful, that it could not materially of¬ fend ; and through it there ran a vein of goodnature, mixed with fomething like humour, that not unfrequently made even Selina fmile. Marian was merely engaged as an arf-^ndant- on Selina's chamber; her extreme giddinefs and loquacity making it impoflible for her to be entrufted with the fecret of Selina's child.
g 6
Five
Five days had paffed fince the final de¬ parture of the Prince. The caftle had re¬ mained in its accuftomed gloom—a gloom uninterrupted even by the cafual call of a viftter. Selina had mourned over the lofs of the Prince till fhe opened afrefh thofe wounds that newly-known duties had prompted her to let heal up. The moft bitter pangs that, even in the firft hours of her mifery, flie had experienced, fhe now became fenfible of. Dejedion, and then defpair returned; and once more was the dark wretchednefs of her hours unbroken on by one ray of comfort. From this ftate, which incapacitated her for the duties of a mother, but for finking to which fhe had ample excufe, fhe was routed by the remonftranccs of Mrs. Edg¬ cumbe, who turned her drooping thoughts to her child, and again made her lofe the forrows of the wife in the joys of the parent. Five
?
Five days had eiapfed, and Selina's diffi¬ pated fortitude was returning to her bofom, when Marian haftening to her room, cried, though fhe had hardly breath enough for the fpeech™ ' " Lord, my Lady, here's a man below, a currier, I think they call him, who has come to caftle on a fmoaking horfe, and brings difpatches that he is to deliver only into your Lady (hip's own hand. He is the ftrangeft, outlandilh looking creature 1 they fay he's come from army, and he tells the fervants, who are crowding round him, as your Ladyfliip may fuppofe in the hall, that my Lord, the Earl, is coming home, and that —" " Coming home !" repeated Selina, faintly. «< Yes, my Lady, and he fays there's my Lord Defmond and my Lord------" ** Where is the man?" cried Selina, who had recollected herfelf furftciently to com¬ mand
mand the appearance, at leaft, of compo¬ fure. " He's in the hall, my Lady, the fer- vants'-hall, with Thomas, and Hugo, and Richard, and John - 3 and he*;> very impa¬ tient to fee your La'ihip." **£id him come to me in the oaken parlour/' faid Selina; and to the oaken par¬ lour flie with difficulty tottered. On being introduced, the man informed Selina he had been diipatched by the Earl with letters^ to which he believed no an¬ fwer was neceffary; but, if it were, he had orders to carry it back. Selina bade the man withdraw, while fhe confidered whether he could be made farther ufe of. So ex* ceffive was the trembling of her hand, that a minute paffed before fhe could break the feal of her letter. When opened, fhe read fome lines from Lord Ilfbrd, in which he informed her—" that he had, at length, overcome the moft painful pangs of that grief that was occafioned by the lofs of his Countefs,
Countefs, and judged his tranquillity fuffi¬ ciently reftored to tafte again the pleafures of his accuftomed fociety. That within five days from the writing of the prefent, he hoped to arrive at the caftle. His fon woidd be with him, but would ftay a very fhort time before he returned to his com¬ mand in the army." Lord liford faid, " he had, by the lame hand that delivered his to Selina, fent due notice to Mrs. Edgcumbe to make, on her fide, every preparation for his arrival. A part of his fuite he intended to fend be¬ fore him, in order to affift in thofe prepa¬ rations." In conclufion, he faid—" Grace my return, Selina, with your fmile ; and all that I have fuffered, each day of meian- choly, each fleeplefs night, fhall be forgoc- a ten. From you I expect a welcome to my home. Truft to my — truft to me for the gaiety of days to come atoning for the folitary pain of thofe you have lately paffed," A thun-
A thunder-bolt at Selina's feet would have communicated to her a lefs violent fhock than did the contents of this letter. Her firft thoughts dwelt on her child. < c Good God !" cr'ed fhe, clafping her hands, " my child will be torn from me ! the offended Earl will wreft him from my arms, and fend him where I never, never fliall fee him more ! Oh Heaven, my infant's loft !" In an agony of defpair fhe fell back on her feat; then fuddenly ftarted up, as if apprchenfive of prefent danger, and fled to where her infant flept, fmiling, and un- confeious of the evils that fin rounded him. i iaftening to the bed, fhe gazed on his in¬ nocent face; lhe kiffed with rapture his cheek— "Cruel monfter!" flie cried, "never fliall you force him irom my embrace ! No, thus holding him to my hurt, I will die ere you fliall take him 1" She
She flung heTelf on the bed, by his fide, ;md wrapping his little tender arms round her neck, now neftled him to her bofom in flieltering fondnefs, and now moaned over the mournful idea of lofing him. In this ftate flie was when Mrs. Edg¬ cumbe entered the chamber, and fpoke thofe words fo fweet, fo grateful to the ear of fuffering, the firft words of comfort— " Come, come, my dear Lady/' faid flie, " your forrow is too ferious for the occa¬ fion. * My Lord's coming home—fo much the better: you will have company to divert your reflections. As to your marriage/' for the good woman always fo termed Selina's ill-fated connexion with the Prince, " you dont fuppofe, my Lady, he need know a word of that ? And as for the dear infant, I will anfwer for fecreting him where a dozen Earls together fhould never difcover him/'
» Will
*• Will you ?" cried Selina, ftarting up; " Heaven blefs you then ! Will you keep to me my child ? Angels reward you i" Here fhe held Mrs. Edgcumbe's hand to her weeping eyes, and, forgetful of all but that flie beheld the promifed preferver of her infant, bathed it in tears of grati¬ tude. Mrs. Edgcumbe begged her to compofe herfelf; affured her that fhe had little or nothing to fean and reminded her, that giving way to tranfports of grief would realize her worft apprehenfions, in endan¬ gering the life of herfelf and child. Somewhat reftored by the friendly en¬ deavours of Mrs. Edgcumbe, fhe attained compofure fufficient to con fult on what was expedient to be pradifed in the prefent fituation of affairs, Mrs. Edgcumbe men¬ tioned the retreat provided by the Prince, »nd Selina felt inclined to fly to it j but unfor*
unfortunately, when fhe declined ufmg it on it being offered by the Prince, fhe, fanci¬ fully fecure of the Earl's continued abfence, neglected to procure knowledge of its fitu¬ ation. To gain that knowledge of the Prince before the return of Lord Ilfcrd .va? now impoflible ; of that refource therefore ihe was entirely deprived. Mrs. Edgcumbe then propofed the child being removed to her houfe, where, be¬ tween Rachel and herfelf, every care could be taken of it, and where it might remain in the moft perfect fecurity. But Selina could not bear the mention of being parted from her infant: while flie acknowledged the extreme tendernefs with which Mrs. Edgcumbe would watch over it, ihe declared that where the child went, fhe would go alfo. Both herfelf and con¬ fidant feared it would be unfafe to let the child continue in the chamber it was in at prefent. The danger of it being difcovered appeared,
appeared, in reality, very flight j but to a mother's eye it was a danger not to be en- countered. After propofing and rejecting many ex¬ pedients, both agreed to refer deta mination to the following day; and Mrs. Edgcumbe retired to her own room to ftretch her in¬ vention for means to purchafe peace for her beloved miftrefs, while Selina, with an heavy heart, fat down befide the bed, where lay the objecl: of all her cares. The infant flept long. Rachel was in attendance 5 and, to her, Selina at length refigned her nurfery. She went to her own chamber. In vain fhe looked within her¬ felf for the fuggeftion of fome plan likely to enfure her child's fecurity. In thefe firft hours of furprife and terror, ftie failed to pofiefs that inftindive foreftght and refolu¬ tion that come within the name of parent, aad could but lament. Much
Much time had not eiapfed when flie was joined by Mrs. Edgcumbe. Mrs. Edg¬ cumbe had heard Selina mention the exift- ence of a fecret paffage winding through the main parts of the caftle; and rightly judgeel that fuch a channel could not have been conftruded without having for its ob¬ ject the concealment of perfons or property, imd moft likely the former. The ftory in circulation among the fervants, of a former Lord having kept a Ldy in iome hidden chamber of the caftle, that was over the wine cellars, at the top of a high, lU*m ftair- cafe, fhe did not treat as anabfolutr chimera. She knew that fuch traditional tales generally have foundation in fad; and though flic did not imagine it likely that the ghoft of the " lady's lover,*' ftood behind the " haunted door," nor indeed that a lady fecreted, and her lover had been there killed, flie did fuppofe that in former days fome inhabitant of the caftle had maintained a female in a private apartment, there en¬ joying that love which he dared not enjoy openly.
I
openly. No place was fo likely to contain this apartment, if it really exifted, as the " fecret paffage;" and the fame room that had fheitered, in paft days, the objed of an unhappy love, might now, fhe hoped, the fruits of one, at leaft equally unhappy. Her ideas on this fubject fhe immedi¬ ately communicated to Selina i who, though fhe little expected to profit by the examin¬ ation, readily confented to accompany her on a fearch of the dark, winding way. They cautioufly paffed through the door opening from her anti-chamber. All was, as ufual, dark, ftill, and gloomy as the grave. Mrs. Edgcumbe had prepared a fmaJ! Ian- thorn, which fhe bore in her hand. The faint light ftealing obfcureiy from a fmall chafm afar off, was fufficient for Selina; to whom the paffage, at leaft that part of it near her chamber, was familiar. They
They proceeded a confiderable diftance without meeting aught but rugged walis, covered with unwholefome damps. When they reached that part of it where its width was divided into feveral paths, they pro¬ ceeded through that which appeared moft defirable, by being wideft. "Alas!" faid Selina, 35 fhe flowly fol¬ lowed Mrs. Edgcumbe, " of what ufe is it to look farther for a fhelter for my child, in a place fo very dreary and difmal as this ? It is, I think, impoffible any creature can have been fo wretched as to dwell in the miferable cell this recefs alone can produce. In fuch a fituation I could not truft my infant. Methinks it muft be death to breathe this air long!" Mrs. Edgcumbe begged her to proceed yet a little farther; and, as an inducement, defired her to obferve the difference there was between the flooring of where they now were, and the paffage they had left. This difference
difference was, indeed, fornewhat encou¬ raging. Inftead of the rugged, uneven foot¬ ing they had hitherto met with, this part of the paffage was fmooth ly boarded. The walls too, were lefs uncouth, and the ceiling was not now hidden by unfhaped beams. The furprife of each was excited in no mean de¬ gree, when, after walking a very little way, they found themfelves at the foot of a narrow ftaircafe. They hefitated an inftant before they proceeded. The unufual circumftances fhe ftood in, occafioned Selina's heart: flightly to palpitate at the thought of afcendingj but M/s. Edgcumbe, who now fancied herfelf on the point of difcovering what fhe fo zealoufly fought, fucceeded in perfuading her to bury her terrors in the profped of benefitting her child. The ftairs ran to a confiderable height; at their top was a fhort and narrow paffage. " Blefled be Heaven !° cried Mrs. Edg¬ cumbe, clafping together her hands, " look there,
there, my Lady! look there, and fay if I was not right!" Selina lifted the lanthorn, and beheld a fmall pannelled door. * c Gracious powers that protect us!" faid fhe, " here certainly is a room!" " Yes," cried Mrs. Edgcumbe, " and open too! My eyes deceive me much, or the door is not clofely fhut?" " It is not," faid Selina, " but are you quite fure it will be fafe.to enter? Is there nothing, think you, within ?" "Bleffed Maria !" exclaimed Mrs. Edg¬ cumbe, " what fhould there be, my Lady ? I vow you look quite pale, and are all of a tremble ! Do not give way to your fears, dear Madam; or, if you had rather, fuffer me to go on alone." " No," replied Selina, fuppreffing an ap¬ prehenfive fhuddering that began to chill her blood, " I will accompany you.— Proceed 1" vot. in. ji With
With Selina leaning on her arm, Mrs. Edgcumbe advanced to the door. She puflied, and it flowly moved on its hinges. What was their aftonifhment "when they found it difclofed a room lighted by a fmall window', furnithed even with elegance, anel bearing everv mark of beinff formerly inha- bited ! For an inflant neither could fpeak; when they both could, both broke into expreflions of amazement. After the flrft emotions of furprife, Selina \ en tured into the apartment j ftie looked round her with a fort of reverence. Every arucle ftie beheld, plainly fpoke rhe perfon who had once tenanted the melancholy fpot, to be of no common rank. The chairs were of the bed oak, though their frames were now covered' thickly with duft, and their fearing fhewed ihe remains of embroidery, time-worn and moth-eaten, An inlaid-table ftood
ftood in the room, but it was dropping to pieces through age and long difufe. The apartment had been lined with tapeftry, which had fallen from its faftenings, and hung in mouldering fragments along the walls. On one fide appeared a door, open¬ ing to an inner room. Selina's curiofity conquered her apprehenfions. The door was eafily opened, and flie entered the room it led to. This fecond apartment was furnifhed as a bed-chamber. Tne bed, the toilet, the chairs ftill remained ; but had fuffered more from the inroads of Time than even the fur¬ niture of the fit ting-room. A fmall chafm in the maffive wall admitted an half-lirrht. Small as that aperture was, it vvas obfcured by a grating. All that Selina had heard her attendants fay of their being, fomewhere in die caftle, though nobody knew where, a chamber of ftone, where a Lord liford, of feveral ages
paft, had kept a lady, whom in a fit of jealoufy he murdered, now occurred to her remembrance - 9 and fhe believed there to have been fome origin of the ftrange tale, and thefe to have been the rooms in which the lady refided. A cold fenfation of horror pafled through her bofom, as fhe glanced to the days in which the fpot flic ftood on had pofleffed an in¬ habitant. She figured the form that had numbered the hours of many a wretched day and night, where haply no perfon but herfelf had trodden fince. That was the bed where fleep had been denied to her aching eyes j that the chair on which fhe had fat to indulge the melancholy of her aching heart! —She could not avoid comparing her own fate to that of the poor facrifice who had been fequeftered in this dreary corner j and almoft believed herfelf muft be the more miferable. She endeavoured to look through the fmall window of the chamber, but of fo thick a kind was the glafs, that (lie
fhe could not difcern any of the objects diftinguifhable from it. She returned to the room ftie had left, where fhe found Mrs. Edgcumbe bufy in deciphering fome pencilled lines on the wall. Curiofity urged her to examine them. She found them to be fuch as ftrengthened her conjectures concerning the former tenant of thefe fecluded rooms. On one part of the room-fide where there had been no tapeftry, was written— *' The upland fair, the dingle fweet, *« Where Nature's beauties gaily meet, ** No moie would charm the wandering eye, " If fun-beams ceas'd to deck the iky. " So comfortlefs, fb blank, fo drear, " Would be the walls around me here | " So dark would be my haplefs day, " Were my heart's fun-beams, Love, away4" H3 On
On a fmooth part of the ftone window- frame, were words to this purport— " The fun now finks over the tuft of pines. I fee the merry peafant haftening. to his cot of freedom and happinefs. Afar- ©ff the fheep bleat, and the cattle low ; they are returning to their folds. The evening breeze riles, and fweeps over the foreft. trees. Haften to me, Lord of my wifhes ! Haften to your prifoner, who is alone, fad and mournful!" Selina could not read thefe trifling ex¬ preflions of wearinefs of heart, pencilled by a hand long fince no more, without fhedding a tear of fympathy. Mrs. Edgcumbe's feel¬ ings were fenfibly touched by them. Her mention, however, of theconvenience of thefe apartments recalled Selina to her own dif- trcfics, and the profecution of the errand flie had come on. Wretchedly
Wretchedly as fhe was fituated, flie could but confider thefe ftrange and reclufe rooms as a flielter for her infant not to be rejected. They feemed capable of containing every convenience, and even to her apprehenfive feelings they were too obfcure to be liable to moleftation from the family. In all probability the Earl did not know of their exiftence, or if be did, never thought of entering them. The fecret paflage had, ihe hoped, long fmce ceafed to be vifited by any but her melancholy fteps. The human eye that had caufed her fo many terrors and apprehenfions, flic was almoft inclined to believe was, as the Prince had endeavoured to perfuade her, ftiaped only by fearful fancy. Mrs. Edgcumbe ufed every argument in her power to incline Selina to fix on this fpot for the fecretioa ofher child. She rubbed the duft from the glafs of tlie fitting-room window, and found the apartment fo contrived that it was nearly impoflible for the tenant of it to be h 4 difco-
difcovered from without, Oppofite to the window was the dead wall of one of the caftle turrets : bellow it a part of the park, over which there was little traffic, ftretched its green turf, on one fide, till fight was loft in the verdured hills of diftance; on the other, rofe a foreft of tall and venerable trees. The window was cut in a wall fo maffive, that had a night-light been held there, its beams could hardly have been difcerned from the park; and the aperture, fmall as it was, was obfcured by artfully difpofed rufticated ftones. The decayed ftate of the furniture Mrs. Edgcumbe made no objection to, fince what was unfit for ufe could be well replaced hy the furniture now in the eaftern cham¬ bers. When Selina confidered the danger there would be of her child in any more comfortable of the caftle rooms, being ex¬ pofed to the vengeance of the Earl, and figured the agonies of anxiety fhe would experience if it were removed from her immediate
immediate protedion, fhe hefitated not to determine on adopting the plan recom¬ mended by Mrs. Edgcumbe. The worthy and friendly woman inftantly fet about altering the private rooms for the reception of their little ill-ftarred tenant. Thofe articles that had rendered the eaftern apartment a comfortable nurfery, were re¬ moved, and completed the convenience of this new retreat. Rachel was ftrongiy tainted with that fuperftition which few of her age are with¬ out. The profped of being fhut from all poflibility of help, in a remote corner of an old caftle, and in a corner too around which an air of myftery hung, and where a murder was faid to have been committed, called forth her fears in no mean degree ; but fo great was the honeft creature's attachment, that fhe overcame all perfonal dread, and readily confented to fhare the deftiny of the luck¬ lefs infant with which flie was entrufted. " c Every
Every arrangement completed, Rachel and the child were removed to their new habitation. After Rachel had crofied her¬ felf, and mumbled many prayers to the faints, and promifes of good-will towards them, on condition of having their protec¬ tion from " fwarths, and ghofts, and evil wanderers of the night," fhe looked round her, and bleffed her ftars for having pre¬ pared for herfo comfortable a flielter. One thing was neat, another was charming ; no¬ thing troubled her but the remembrance of the aboriginal inhabitant of her tenement: when flie thought of her, flie very devoutly turned up her eyes, and hoped the lady died in love with all men> and was duly fhrived before fhe took her departure. Selina's melancholy heart was lightened of an infufFerable load by the fecure difpofal of her darling child. Never anight but, before flic fought the oblivion of .a fhort hour's fleep, fhe knelt befide her bed, and with downcaft, tearful eyes begged Heaven not 4
not to vifit her failings on her child's head, but to fpread round his innocent coueh the protection of its blefling: never a morning but, with her child held to her bofom, fhe looked to the mild Father of Mercies, and murmured thanks for the fecurity he had beftowed. Mrs. Edgcumbe, meanwhile, felt all that grateful calmnefs wliich arifes from a con- fcioufhcfs of having done good to a fellow- creature, and confequently well in the eyes of him who gave us being. . r ^
h 6 CHAP,
GRAINGER.
FTER thofe firft pangs of mifery that her own calamities inflicted, Selina had time to mourn over the fad fate of her amiable Lady liford. Many a painful tear did fhe flied over the remembrance of days in which her fecond mother had prefided, cheerful and happy, at the domeftic board. With an aching eye ftie looked back to fcenes of foft endearment, that had, for a while, wiped from her bofom the cruel circumftances of her deftiny. Every virtue, every grace, ftie recalled in her mournful fancy. Some¬ times fhe figured the mildnefs, the maternal pity with which Lady liford would have heard
heard the fatal particulars of her connexion with the Prince. se Yes,*' would fhe cry> " I have loft the fond friend who would have foftered my repentance on her bofom j and my child has loft the proiedrefs of its wretched being." Now that flie figured to herfelf the return of Lord liford a mourning widower, all the poignancy of regret with which ftie looked to the melancholy end of her beloved friend returned to her breaft* On the fourth day after the writing of Lord Ilford's letter, as Selina was fitting, penfive and alone, in her chamber, Marian haftily entered, and cried, as well as the breathleffnefs of her hurry would let her— ct Oh my Lady ! what do you tliink ? I am fure you will hardly believe me.—Lord, there is fuch a pother in the halll" " For
"For God's fake!" exclaimed Selina, whofe thoughts inftantly fixed on her child, " for God's fake what has happened ? Speak, if you value my life ■!" . " Good gracious, my Lady, I declare you be fo eafily frightened. Why it is no¬ thing to alarm you ; quite the contrary. It is the moft pleafant thing you can imagine. Oh we are all fo pleafed in the hall i" "What do you mean?" cried Selina wildly i " explain to me this inftant!" i€ Why, my Lady," faid Marian, " there's a troop of the deareft, drolleft creatures come, that's all. They are fent by my Lord, the Earl. Oh what rare doings we fliall have \ How merrily the old caftle will ring! Why, my Lady, there's morality- men*, mafkers, dancers^, mimics, and fuch preparations for pageants!" " Is that all■?" fiiid Selina. " Good angels be praifed!" and lhe fank back on her chair,
chair, nearly overcome by the violence of her emotion. Regardlefs ofher Lady's fituation, Marian continued, with much volubility, her tale. "Oh, the virgin!" flie cried. "My Lady, what glorious doings there will be ! I faw fuch a fun !—a painted fun^ and the men told me that they could teach me how to make it ihine. And the dancers have fuch fine cloaths, and the mimics are fuch ftrange fouls ! Then fome of the morality- men have fo much majefty in their look! And, la, Ma'am, there are fuch dear pretty little boys, to act the part of women in the fliows, fo taper, fo delicate ! But I told them that, when dreffed for ladies, notwithftand¬ ing their thinnefs, and all that, they'd be feen through. One of them, an impudent rogue, laughed, and told me that would be my cafe too. But only think, my dear Ladv what flocks of fine folk all thefe thinps will bring to the caftle 1 What feafts, what tie- &ant
gant ladies,—and, Oh! what charming young Knights to attend them! Then my Lord intends to keep the caftle open to all comers. Mercy o'me! how many great people we fhall have here to take the wines*! Oh how I blefs the day when I was taken into your Ladyfhip's fervice!" Selina could not refrain from fmiling at this motley account of Marian's. After afking her fome few queftions concerning the new comers, fhe difmiffed her to renew thofe obfervations that a defire of commu¬ nicating fatisfadion alone had induced her to break off. Left to her own reflections, Selina pon¬ dered an inftant on what fhe had juft heard— ** The caftle open to all comers," re- r\t>dtf>A fK/»- "Hanr^rs. mimir«_ ■nacrpa.ntfi I r ■* f Surely
Surely I dream! Can Lord liford fo foon have forgot his murdered wife? Cai\ he already ceafe to bewail her lofs? Surely this is but fidion!" A fliout of pleafure from the hall, on the difcovery of fome new objed, now found its way to her melancholy chamber. The voice of merriment was what the gloomy recefles of the caftle had long been ftrangers to. Selina liftened in furprife. When the Ihout fainted, and then died to nothing, (he fighed, and looked toward the chapel, where lay, perhaps no longer thought of by any but herfelf, the form of that being who once gladdened the heart of every bofom round her, and now would raife the fmile of cheerfulnefs no more I Difturbed and uneafy, fhe fhortly fum> moned Marian to her chamber, and made new enquiries relative to what furprifed her. Marian had a thoufand frefh wonders to tell of. She had feea painted dragons, decorations
decorations for the morality-men's ftage, new apparel for the dancers, ftrange habits for the mafkers, and had heard the min- ftrels play fuch delightful mufic ! Marian's reafon almoft ftaggered in her excefs of joy- Selina heard of thefe things with a cold ear; ftie had loft the power of deriving pleafure from fuch fuperficial objects, and could not help thinking it a fpecies of fa- crilege to break the ilill grief that the caftle fhadcs were wrapped in, with ikouts of fef- tivity and joy. Her amazement at the Earl's fceking, fo foon, the gaiety of riot and excefs, was fo great, that flie could fcarcely give credit to the evidence of her fenfes. On her child, her defolate, her fequeftered child, her principal thoughts refted. In the tu¬ mult of diffipation, what would be his fate ? Would not the noify tribe of merriment moleft his little miferable,unprotect.ed flielter? Many and painful were her fears, but yet her
V*
her reafon told her in no place could he be more fecure than in his prefent. Whenever trouble of any fort afiailed her, .fhe vvas eafy only in the nurfery. Thither flic now went; and while the poor unin¬ formed menials of the caftle were bufy in preparing 1* ->r femes of joy, beyond which thev never thought of looking—ihe fondled her infant toher bofom, drew pleafure from his fmiles, and pain from the anticipation of the trials future days would expofe him to, 1 The day mentioned by Lord liford as that of his return to the caftle, pafled with¬ out brinrrin"' him: but, toward evenine, a courier arrived from him with letters. That addreffed to Selina, informed her he had found it impoflible to reach home at the early period his wifhes named, but that on the fucceeding one fhe might rely on be¬ holding him. On
On this day arrived more men and ma¬ chinery, preparatory to fcenes of fhow and jollity. On the preparations Selina looked with increafing pain. From the retirement fhe.had hoped never to leave, fhe was now about to be taken. The buftle of diffipa¬ tion, and the trivial gaiety it give*- birth to, were what ihe had ever beheld with an un- interefted eye. In her moft tranquil days ftie had done fo ; and now, alas! ihe was for fuch fcenes rendered for ever unfit. Often, while all was hurry around her in making ready for the feftivities (he dreaded, did flie wifh ftie had embraced the offer of the Prince, and hidden herfelf and infant in the calm obfcurity his friendfhip would have afforded. Not long after ftie had rifen on the morn¬ ing of the day named for that of his return in the Earl's laft letter, Marian, who now was all gaiety and fpirits, came running to her room, and informed her— " Goodman
" Goodman Thompfon, of the mill, had juft called at the caftle, and given the fer¬ vants notice of their Lord being only ten miles diftant two hours ago. For Thomp¬ fon, he had feen him, with a brave fuite, refting his cattle at Chipmanftow." Many hours, however, pafted without any further notice of the Earl's vicinity beins received; and the fervants, who were all waiting in their beft trim, began to fear Goodman Thompfon had told them a falfe tale. Again, at length, Marian entered Selina's chamber. c< My Lady," cried fhe, " here is a currier arrived. My Lord, the Earl, is but a little way off. We are ordered all to be in rea¬ dinefs." Selina's heart, full of fears of ihe knew not what r or her child, beat quickly at this
<*
this intelligence. She dreaded the fight of the Earl, and feared to betray, by Hufties and confcious looks, the fecret that preyed on her bofom's peace. A third time Marian appeared. " My Lady, my Lady, we can fee 'em ! They arc in the park ; you dont want me yet, my Lady?" " Yes," cried Selina, " ftay with me. I fhall need your attendance."
Convinced of the neceffity there was for exerting herfelf, flie took a glafs of water, and fummoned up her refolution. She went to the window, and with the direction of Marian perceived the fiiite of the Earl ad¬ vancing from the diftance of the park. The horfcmcn enlarged to the eye -, flie even fancied ike could diftinguifh the Earl. They drew nighcr. Two of the party ad¬ vanced before the reft. They founded an horn. An horn from the caftle poftern an¬ fwered
i»
fwered it. When the fhrill notes' echoes fank to nothing among the foreft trees that ikirted the valley, Selina, affifted by Marian, went to the great audience chamber, where the Earl was accuftomed to receive his guefts. The Earl was attended by his fon and feveral other young Noblemen, whofe pur¬ pofe it was to fpend a few days in the merriment of his caftle, before the actual recommencement of hoftilities on the Con¬ tinent required their pretence in the army. On his caftle gates being opened, the Earl checked his horfe, and paufed a few mo¬ ments. Whatever it might be that caufed his ftoppage, it was but tranfient. He- touched his fteed's fide with his gilded fpur, and entered the court-yard. His Efquires held the bridle of his horfe, and he dis¬ mounted. One of his guefts in either hand, he pro¬ ceeded
ceeded. Lord Defmond followed, introdu¬ cing two guefts in like manner to his father. When the Earl reached the hall, and beheld the well-known objects it contained, fome ftrange feelings arofe in his bofom that occafioned his letting fall the hands he held. His face turned pale i a cold dew overipread hb frame j his hand trembled; his lip moved convulfively j he fell back into the arms of Lord Defmond! The alarmed attendants bore him to a feat. In a few inftants he recovered himfelf^ and ftrove to laugh off his iilnefs. ** My good friends," faid he to the No¬ blemen around him, " do not jeer me for a woman, but I really believe my journey has overcome me. I fuppofe I grow old, and unfit for toil. But I am well again now —quite well. But bring, bring me a goblet of wine," Wine
Wine was inftantly brought, and after drinking a large draught, he feemed him¬ felf again. He rofe, and, with a gay air, cried— i( Come, my Lords, now you have done tending, on one .weak girl, I'll introduce you to another \ and fuch an one as few caftles can boaft their own. But remember the conditions. 5 ' So faying, he proceeded to the room in which he vvas informed Selina waited his coming. Pale and trembling, there he found her. He took her hand, he gazed on her face, then raifed her hand, and met it with his lips. Lord Defmond alfo approached, and kiffed her hand. The Earl haftily in¬ troduced her to the Noblemen who accom¬ panied him, and then taking her hand, led the way to the room in which was fpread the banquet. VOL.121. i During
During the repaft Selina was feated at the Earl's right hand. After the firft few minutes of his being feated, his gaiety could not be exceeded, though it was eafy to perceive in it more of conftraint than natural cheerful¬ nefs. Lie drank deeply of high-flavoured wines, infilling on his guefts pledging him in the intoxicating draught. The min¬ ftrels attended, and he bade them play to him the mcrrieft tunes. Sometimes would a deep gloom overfpread his countenance ; but then he called for frefh goblets, and drank the one he took, to the bottom. He was frecmcnrlvloft "within himfelf, and then would he, though in the choiceft part of a mhiftrel's meafure, or in the midft of a gueft's fpeech, afk of the attendants fome queftion entirely foreign to what he was about. Meantime, warmed with the inebriating draughts, the banquctters increafed in noife and mirth. Selina's fituation became, in - each minute, more painful. At length ihe arofe,
arofe, and curtfeying, would have with- dmwn; but Lord liford ftarting up, feized her han<J> and tried — <€ Whither would you go, Selina ? You for whom we have come fo many lon^ miles, would not leave us yet?" "With your leave, my Lord/' ft<r fil¬ tered, " I will retire now. Her own cham¬ ber beft fuits a fimpie female/' " Does it ?" faid he. » Sometimes, 'tis true, it does, but not now. Stay, fwceteft girl, at leaft while another courfe of goblets is emptied." Thus conftrained, Selina with reluctance refumed her feat. On a fional bcino- o-; ye n the notes of harps, pfalteries, hautboys, cym¬ bal : , again tuned to mirth every avenue of the caftle. On the ftrain coaling, Selina a fecond time rofe ; and as tlie Earl, whom the mufic had lulled to intenfe thought, no longer oppofed her defign, Ihe retired to the folitude of her own chamber. t ^ r^
Ere evening clofed in, Marian attended to know if her Lady wanted her fervices, and to do herfelf the very great pleafure of unburthen*ig her bofom of all the won¬ drous particulars flie had there collected. " Oh my Lady," dud fhe, "what rare times thefe are! To be fure, what a merry Nobleman my Lord is! Who'd think he had loft a Lady fo lately ? But he'll foon get hirn another, I warrant, and then '— Mercy upon me, what doings he'll kick up then, if he's fo fond of merriment now ! I peeped into the banquet-room juft this minute, and there was my Lord (landing up, with one of the great fiiver goblets in his hands, hallooing out—" This to her fweet blue eyes!" All the Knights, as to be fure it might be expected, clapped their hands, and lhouted whde they drank the toaft. And to-morrow the /ports begin. We bjlow laugh and fay, my Lord has a mind to give forrow the flip/' " You
<f You take many liberties, I doubt not," replied Selina, ''but I beg, Marian, you will not repeat to me what freedoms you may indulge in.** "Why, la, my Lady," faid Marian, "we only juft talk a little ; and I am fure we^ talk no harm. But I'm fure, whether I fay it or no, my Lord is very merry, and all that. And if 1 did not fay fo, the fports would be begun to-morrow." "What fports?" cried Selina, fretfully. * e Why, dear my Lady, they lay as how we are to begin with moralities j and a very grand one is in preparation for to-morrow. And it is to be about a King, and I have feen his cloaths, and a brave one I'll war¬ rant he'll be. And then his fon, a very fine young Prince, though a naughty one, is to TafGnate him j and I've feen his cloaths too, my Lady, and I'll tell you what they are— a pair of the fineft beantifullefl fcarlet crac- kowes*, very long, (harp-pointed, andfaf- i 3 tened
tened to the knee with a gold chain (though I believe it's only gilt). Stockings, one of the deareft blue, the other of the fwectcft green. His breeches, (begging your Ladvfhip's pardon, and faving your Ladyfhip's pre¬ fence) ven- fh6xt& about half— Crimini ! I don't like to taik about fuch things—about half way down his tliLhs i and thev are of the charmingeft bright purple. His coat one half black, the other white, and a filk hood—Oh ! the lovelieft filk hood that ever I came nigh, which is embroidered with flowers and butterflies, and I don't know what i and fet with jewels and diamonds, and it's to button under the chin*. To be fure, if he has any thing of a face, how delightful he muft look in fo becoming a drefs!" Selina had been far from Jiftenina: to this defcriptive harangue of Marian. She now afked for Mrs. Edgcumbe, and defired
Marian
Marian to beg lhe would attend her in her chamber. « Yes, to be fure," Marian faid, "but flie hoped her Ladyfhip would nor. be of¬ fended if Mrs. Edgcumbe did not obey her immediately ; for ihe had fo much bufinefs on her hands now, that fhe did not know which way to turn herfelf. Only confider, my Lady," faid fhe, " what a fuite my Lord has, and how many vifiters there are, and how many more are expected; and Mrs. Edgcumbe fhe has the management oi all the" matters of the caftle. Oh my Lady ! I did not tell you of the fool. Why my Lord has brought home a fool 1 but 1 be- lieve he's more a knave too. His drels is cut out of all the colours in the rainbow, and both his ftockings are alike ! You never faw fuch a figure in your life ! And he's fo fmall; not taller than this.-- 4 So, Mr. Fool, faid 1, by way of a jeft, 'who do you make your gibes 0111 —' not on fimpietons/ faid he, turning on his heel.
* By my troth/ cried Thomas of the pantry, who was ftand ing by, 'this fellow's no fool! Tue little dwarfifli creature made him a low bow, and faid, ' he wiihed he coukl return the compliment/—So Thomas he fneaked away, and I gave him the comfort of a good laugh as he went." " tVdCe V faid Selina, interrupting her, "your talk diflrafts me. Good Marian, learn to ufe- fewer words. I am ill at reft, and cannot brook interruption." Marian curtfeying, begged pardon fo many times, and in fo many different ways for her loquacity, that in endeavouring to apologize, fhe repeated her offence Seiina bade her leave her, and deliver the meffage fhe had given her to Mrs. Edgcumbe. The firft of thefe Marian foon did; but, inter¬ cepted in her way to Mrs. Edgcumbe by fome of her feafting fellow-fervants, flie en¬ tirely forgot the latter; and Selina, after long waiting, fuppofed neceffity confined Mrs,
Mrs. Edgcumbe, and repaired to Rachel and her child. In her new apartments Rachel was by no means deftitute of thofe ftrange fancies that fhe had often been fubject to in her old ones. Shut from all converfe with the world, in little better than a cell—confined, without any voice to cheer her, in a foli- tarv room of an old vaft building, through the channel of which often flie heard the creeping wind groan, and as often heard the f >nc of the nieht-birds on its battle- ments, her fears could not avoid being awakened ; but fo entire was her love for the daughter ofher former miftrefs, that not one word of difcontent ever paffed her lips, and all her imacrinkurs and fancied warn* ings fhe kept to her own breaft. Tier lovely charge grew daily in ftrength and charms. To fee him do fo vvas Senna's fole comfort, In him fhe preffed to her inmoft heart her beloved Prince, in a pure embrace. His fmile was to her the fure hartunq-er of 1 5 temporary
temporary peace. When flie kifled Ins fmi- ling lips, fo ftroiiii is a mother's love, fhe forgot all the riiitrefiing circumftances of his birth, and remembered only that he was the fon for whom lhe lived. The morning was ufhered in with the found of the clarion, hautboy, pfaltery, and merry pipe and tabor. The revellers of the preceding night appeared ready for new pleafures. Nothing was heard throughout the caftle but fhouts of laughter and jol¬ lity. Selina ate a flight breakfaft in her own apartment. From its window flie faw the Earl and his party proceed on horfe¬ back acrofs the park. She followed them with her eyes, till an intervening thicket hid them from her fight, and then was about to leave the window, when flic was furprifed to perceive Lord Defmond walking, thought¬ ful and alone, befide the caftle walls, Flis former rude attempt on her perfon was ftill frefh in her fears, antl .flic deter¬ mined
mined to remain,.clofe 1 in her apartment, till the return of t the Ifarl and his guefts cave her afil.ranee oi fatety. Little time, however, had pafled, when Lord Deimond lent to requeft Selina would favour him .with her company in any apart!rent (he "Chofe to name. Her diiin- c'iination to meeting him was more violent than the ciicumftance feemed to account for; and (he fent to excufe \^rd:\( on the ground of ill heaUh. Lord Defmond was not to be fo fatisned. Hii melfenger re¬ turned with a note, in which he " begged fne would, for once, grant him the iik.uI- jrence he, pei haps, did not merit j but affairs of no common confequence compelled hi.n to be thus urgent." Still Selina's averfion to the interview was unconquerable. She thought of it with fiiudderbg. She could not bear the picrc- \\yo; eve of Defmond., and felt herkif unable to ant what he requefteL On lev re-
turning him an anfwer to that purport, fhe received from him a fcroll to this effect! " Defmond laments Lady Selina rejects what might be productive of much good to her. Selina, however, is at prefent, miftrefs of her own actions. Should ftranoc circumftances arife-fhould Selina be no longer fo, kt her not reproach Defmond. Defmond will trouble the Lady Selina with no more folicitations." ^ Thefe myfterious and feemingly threat¬ ening lines Selina read with mixed fenfa¬ tions of furprife and apprehenfion. She in vain ftrove to unravel their meaning. She only could difcover that danger lurked beneath them, and her ready fears inftantly fixed on her child's fafety as the point that danger was to be expected in. She overcame her reluctance, and was about to fend word to Defmond fhe would meet him in the Updlry parlour when the poftcrn 4
poftern horn founded ; horfes* feet were heard on the paved court-yard, and the found of many voices proclaimed, the return of the Earl's party. To have an explanation from Defmond was, therefore, for the pre¬ fent rendered impoflible; and fhe remained torturing her fancy with the indulgence of her fears, till a notification from the Earl of his expecting her to dine with him, and his increafed party of friends, in the great 'hall, made her lofe apprehenfions of future danger in prefent uneafinefs and pain. Alive only to regret and a certainty of unhappinefs, fhe had not thrown off that mourning drefs which flie wore in memory of the loft Countefs. The Earl, who was himfelf clad in the gayeft attire, could not bear the filent remembrance of his Lady's death, contained in Selina's black and mournful habit. By Mrs. Edgcumbe he begeed fhe would, as he, whofe intereft was nearer, had done, forget her caufe for forrow and the emblem of it together. Though
Though her heart felt fhocked at fuch a defire, flie in part obeyed. Her fuit of black was eafily laid afide, but the forrow ofher bofom remained in 1 pi te of her gayer habit. Mrs. Edgcumbe, who had accepted the office of houfekeeper to the Earl, in order to be near her beloved Lady, fnatched every moment in her power to fly to Sehna's 'chamber. In all the folicitude that dwelt there, fhe moft truly fympathized. Con¬ vinced of the infant's fecurity, flie alfo com¬ forted and re-aflured Seiina when flie gave way to the apprehenfions that crouded on her feclincs: and in this fhe rendered her moft eflential fervice; for what is fo footh¬ ing to the anxious mind as the voice of friendfhip, fpeaking arguments of fafety? Mrs. Edgcumbe gave Selina an account of the various preparations for amufement froins: forward in the caflle. Some weie *0 i ~f^ bufied in getting ready the dreffes for a maf- querade.;
querade ; others were forming fcenery for a pageant} the minftrels were rehearfing a metrical romance, which they were to fing to mufic before the Karl and his friends j and for the prefent evening, a dramatic piece was in readinefs. "Ah, my dear Lady," faid M ... Edg¬ cumbe, " thefe gay doings ill fuit your turn! but give way, for once, to thoughts of plea¬ fure, even of this diffipated fort. Rely on the fecurity of your dear baby, and forget even yourfelf in the noife and buftle that prevail. 'Tis eafy to fee the Earl's motive. Poor dear man!—Ah ! he feels feverely, in fpite of his joyous air!—Why, my Lady, all his gaiety is affected. He has thefe fhews only to drive grief from his bofom. He could not bear to be alone on his fit ft return to the caftle afrer the fhocking late of his adored Lady, and fo he has brought all this company, and afked the Lord knows how much more; but 1 warrant if we coukl but
but fee his retired hours, we fhould hear many a groan, and fee many a tear." " Think you fo?" laid Selina5 "I had almoft believed he had forgotten his fweet wife, and revelled in nurrinefs of heart/' " Oh no, my Lady !" replied Mrs. Edg¬ cumbe, u he does not give orders for the banquet with the calmnefs of an eafy mmd. JniifS manner there is really, I think, fome¬ thing of diftraction.'—'More mufic/ he cries, 5 and let the feaft be fplendid. I hate ftillnefs in an entertainment F—And, then, he looks as if thinking of quite a different thing;—-his lips move, his eyes range from object to object, as if he were debating fome momentous queftion within himfelf: in fliort, he feems deeply agitated, and per¬ petually endeavouring to fly from his own thoughts. Hark ! blefs me, there's the horn of fome new vifiter. Only look, my Lady. Surely, by the retinue, it muft be Lord Elgin. I heard the Earl called there in his way home/' Selina,
Selina, with flow fteps, approached the window; and, as fhe approached, the loud horn from below founded in anfwer to that proclaiming an arrival of confequence at the caftle. The cavalcade ftretched to a confiderable diftance. Firft, came two trumpets, richly clad in yellow and red. The grooms in coats, two and two. The gentlemen of the horfe to the noble vifiter, fucceeded. Pages followed him, and numerous vaftals, attired in a fplendid livery, filed off on each fide to make way for Lord Elgin himfelf, who rode on a decorated fteed, his furcoat, on which were embroidered the armorial bearings of his family, fupported behind by one of his Efquires. After him came Knights, inmates of his houfehold, accord¬ ing to their degrees; and vafTals, in rich coats, each bearing thereon the device of their Lord, clofed the procemon.*
Selina
Selina faw the laft of Lord Elgin's attend- ants difappear in .entering the caftie gates, and theii left the window to put on the habit Lord liford defired flie would refume. With an heart fll-difpofed to mirth, fhe faw herfelf once more drefled in fuch a gay fuit as flie had worn when her lamented Countefs took pleafure and pride in decking her charms to advantage. Her tafte ever led to neatncfs and fimplicity in drefs. She now wore a robe of white j a band of .filk con¬ fined her hair*; no colour fpoke of cheer¬ fulnefs of heart, except a fmall knot of pink, which held, in a fingle feftoon, her robe on either fide. She looked " fweet to fenfe, and lovely to the eye," though in her countenance there was fo much of melan¬ choly, that, like Milton's penfive Nun, flie feemed difpofed, u in holy paffion, to forget herfelf to marble/ 3 Attended by two females, flie, at an ap¬ pointed hour, entered the great hall. Con¬ fufion at being introduced to fo large an affembly
affembly as flie there met, called up, once more to her cheek, thofe blooming biufhes that had nothing in them of confcioufnefs; and once more did her charms, though foft, appear dazzling. The banquet waited her. She feated her¬ felf. Fler female attendants placed them¬ felves, one on each fide of her chair. To the gentle accompaniment of the hautboy and the flute, the minftrels chanted a blef¬ fing on the repaft. Their ftrain ended, and the feaft begun. The board was thrice covered with a pro¬ fusion of viands. The Earl was all merri¬ ment. The coblet was freely circulated. While an health paffed the board, bold notes of mufic filled the hall. Temporary joy fat on every countenance, fave Selina's ; and from, her heart joy was for ever fled! The Earl could not, in propriety, objecl: to her retirement on the fe ait concluding; but
but his eyes followed her in common with thofe of the other banquetiers, as if he thought its deareft grace forfaking the board. When night clofed in, and all without doors was dark and cheerlefs, the caftle was plunged in revelry and mirth. The mo¬ rality-men were in perfect readinels. The Earl motioned, and his guefts, rifing, ad¬ journed to the room in which a new amufe¬ ment waited ihem. To that room Selina was fummoned, and thither fhe went. The Earl advanced on her appearing, and taking her hand, led her to a decorated feat prepared for her, and threw himfelf on a form that was clofe befide her. Many young Noblemen preffed to the fpot, anxious to be near, and converfe with her ; but Lord Defmond kept in z farther part of the room. His arms were folded on his bofom, and his eyes invariably fixed on Selina. The
s
The morality was not unfkilfully con¬ ducted, and gave moft of the fpectators much fatisfaction. The hero of the tale was a King's fon, bold, proud, ambitious. With no fmall judgment, the author fhewed how inevitably the commiffion of one crime leads to that of another. From ciiibbedience the Prince proceeded to rebellion, from rebellion to ufurpation, and from ufurpation to the blackeft of murders—that of a father! The firft part of this dramatic piece in¬ terefted the Earl much; he fhifted his feat. talked loudly, and burft into laughter with little viable caufe. Twice he called for wine, and drank of it ib largely, that his eyes rolled in intoxication. Selina readily attri¬ buted to grief his difordered demeanor; and feeling for him, as Lady Ilford's huf¬ band, the refpect due to a father, flie ftrove to win his attention by tender words. ror
For a time he liftened to her, and ap¬ peared to lofe himfelf in her difcourfe. "He falls!" cried the mock murderer of the poor old King, "he falls 1 ftrike bome! ,, The pretended blow was given, and the victim, ffroanins:, fell. The Earl madly fprang forward—"Save her! fave her!" he cried, <c bleilings on her! fave her!' 5 The guefts remembered the recent lofs the Earl had fuftained. An afiafiin's hand inflicted that calamity. To the fimilitude of circumftances, they attributed the Earl's frantic manner, and, tenderly fupporting him, bcffffed he would retire; but he had now remembered himfelf. He repeatedly and with much fervency, affured thofe around him, nothing but fome traces acrofs his bram of an event he hoped foon to forget,
forget, had occafioned his wild actions and internal trouble. His friends foothed his emotion^, and, again, as he left the room, he begged them to attribute his behaviour to the horror ftill green in his bofom. Selina was amazed by his deportment. An air of diftraction pervaded his features, that terrified her. " However," thought fne, " thefe fcenes of his former happinefs arc yet new to him. When he has been longer accuftomed to behold thofe objeets that fpeak of his mangled wife, he will be¬ come more tranquil ; and will once more know that happinefs and peace are not to be found in diilipation. In her chamber Mrs. Edgcumbe at¬ tended Selina, to enquire how fhe did after the troubles of io long a day. In conver¬ fation with that good woman, flie paffed fome little time j then, accompanied by lier, ftie went to the felitary fpot chat contained her
.* V
her child. He-was awake, and more lovely, ihe thought, than ever. For the firft time throughout the day flie knew minutes of comfort and'peace. Her fweet infant flie lulled to fleep on her bofom* Then flie gently placed bim in his bed, kifled his forehead, and, with a linger¬ ing look thrown toward where he lay, left him for the night.
CHAP.
CHAP. VIL ** Horror covers all t!ie healli, " Clouds olcarnage Met tlie fun, « Sifters weave the web of death I" # * # GftAY. Ji*VERY fucceeding day brought with it new celebrations of feflivity in liford Caftle* Noife and varied amufements fcemed ne¬ ceilary to the Earl's exiftence. Still, how¬ ever, Selina's hopes that time would footh the violence of his feelings, were not falla¬ cious. Of that diftracted air fhe had re¬ marked him to poffefs, he got the better. He was fubject to intervals of deep gloom, but more frequently was boiftcroufly gay. Often, he faid, his party was not large vol. ut. k enough*
enough, and lamented he could not fill every recefs of the cattle with revelry and mirth. He perfuaded thofe Noblemen who had accompanied him from the army, lo ftay with him till an order from their General compelled them to haften ba^k to their pofls. Their 1 ;fs was fup.plnd hy the en¬ tertainment of every ncbic family within reach of liford, and the Earl's O.efuc oi much fociety fcemed to increafe with wjud might have been expected to fatiate it. Of a fudden he became mere t h rv.rr.Iit ful ar.d referved. lie feemed deliberating on feme gw x event, and frcquc nlly betrayed fymp¬ toms of impatience and uneafinefs. Loid Defmond feldom accofled Selina, and ap¬ peared immerfed in the pur tut of pleafure, through the medium of thofe fplendid en¬ tertainments that his father ftrove to bury his feelings in. Selina, meantime, acquired confidence from the continued fecurity of her child. For
For more than two weeks the Earl had now inhabited the caftle, and no hint had flie difcovered of the winding paffage being frequented by any perfon but herfelf. The myfterious note flic had received from Defmond, for fome time gave her much uneafinefs. By degrees, tlie remembrance of it fank from her mind; and flie chofe, whenever it for an inftant occurred toher, rather to fubject herfelf to the danger It ap¬ peared to threaten, than undergo that which an explanatory interview would contain. Tdis meaning looks ftill did not fail to give her fome pain. There appeared in his countenance much fubtlety, deep thought, and a kind of triumphant flufti that terrified her. To her great joy, however, a dwy was fixed for his departure. When he fhould be gone, flie thought, fhe and her child would be delivered from the chief evil that at prefent threatened them. The day before that on which he was to leave the caftle, was dull and overcaft, k 2 though
though the heat of the air was extreme. A few vifiters only remained at the caftle ; but they caroufed with the utmoft jollity, on account of IX fmond leaving them when the enfuing morning broke. As night drew on, the fulphureous heat of the atmofphere in¬ creafed ; big drops of rain fometimes fell; and, from athr off, weie heard the hoilow rumblings of thunder. When the ea ly dark¬ nefs fpreal itfelf over the park and the heaths beyond it, gufts ofw ind bent the trees, and fwept over the heath furze j all foretold an impending' tempeft. The caftle ft rvants ran from room to room, fhuiting up the \vindows, taking care to bar them fecurcly, that they might keep as much of the ftorm out as they could. The grooms faw to the horfes being pro- vendt red ibr the night j the chamber-maids to tne bed-rooms of the guefts being in diK order, that they might not have occafion to vifit them again. Good ftore of ale was procured j a blazing fire made up in the fervants'-
fervants'-hall, which was fubject to the in¬ roads of the northern wind, and wis large, chill, and dreary; and then all the domeftics fat' down to tell difmal tales of ghofts. They had not fat long, when a loud crafh in the great hall, whicli was contiguous, burft on their ears, and produced an uni¬ verfal fcream. Each expected tlie appear¬ ance of a fpectre ; but they looked to the hall-door for one in vain. At length, creep¬ ing clofe to each other, they communed on the fubject of their alarm. To know the caufe of what they had heard, each pofTeffed a vehement defire; but, for a time, fear prevailed over curiofity. The recollection of their number at laft lent them a little refolution; but who was to be leader of the party produced a conteft that did not ftern likely to end fhortly. Every man thought his neighbour better fuited than himfelf. After much debate, an old woman, whofe duty lay in the 'ftill-room, courageoufty k 3 ftepped
ftepped forward, and faid—" fhe had lived fpinfter, wife, and widow fixty-five years and three months. In all that time, though flie had feen many ftrange things, fhe had never feen a ghoft; flie, therefore, verily believed flie never fhoukl, and was very ready to head the party deftined for the hall." A general applaufe took place, and old Drone Margery, followed by a troop of flout young men and buxom d.mift Is, proceeded to the fpot from whence the alarming noife hid iifticd. The pale flafhes of lightning through the windows, in the glare of which were loft the beams of the tapers they carried, by no means tended to difptl the fears of theie brave fellows as they paffed along the hall. Very coldly flowed their blood as they drew to the farther end - 3 for there they imagined it to be that the founds came from. When fome Aiming objed was difcovered on
on the floor, a general ftart was made, and it was a queftion in every bofom, whether it were better to run away, or ftand ftill ? The latter, however, was unanimoufly agreed on 1 and their amazon-leader flopping can- tioufly on, raiftd from the ground the breaft- plate-piece of Lord Defmr^d's armour. The reft of it was perceived laying fcatt-red hard by. Plf-vm n-nv \as exchanged fo* grk*fand f nvbodi.c^- L ;rd T). fmo.vd's ar.n.»ur had -been tised on t.ie wall; without a.iy iaiman touch it had falkn from its ficuati'm. Too certain did th 1 ;/ TilI themfelves that fjme dreadful cJ^Aif overhung thtir yo-mg Lo:d. 11:n dvJ:h, at haft, thry imagined iwo fettled on by f,cluus.j and the cir- cim lance of the ihattticd armour being tlie fo-etc.ler of it, they imagined implied he vould fdi in batile. With many a rueful look, thev ai 1 ;! eed on huddling up the coat of mail as w^l as they could, and keeping fecret all that l^xd happened from their k 4 iucklefi
lucklefs Lord. The armour replaced, the) returned to their fire-fide, round which thev ht ia dreadful expectation oi ta^h moment producing foa;c new and terrific omen. While a fiknce of fear took place, their cars \v? ;AYJ\,' •, y a hiud halL^ on rhtir f;ue tf tat i .ifu'.. Tht v(j c. n.'» iw , T n t'*f " .'is, a , ,'o.u the Yi v,l^./-I a.J w :• t ,-n th. r..r.j, .:k. T. rm.is fad u * "' Jji'* L' ( i .t ( t - ope » t.iC d nj; ; J^cob, .o v i h is iiis t ha:^:".;. ^ trcih wou J kr him, rcftw*\l v<e cfli.e t > Peter, aad Peter lOLTidly fw^rj (pra '.ir f r forgivemfa ar thw (~n^ thm), that hr wou'd not open t! e door if the Earl would <;r»e him the caillc for his pains. One, mere cuurageoLs than the r v ft, fjid he wou'd go if any body would bear him company. A companion was, with fome difficulty, found j and, in a very lowng pol- ture, tLty together advanced to the plate of action, where fuddenly flinging open the door,
door, they took ro their heels, and hk the fummoner it it to fpeak fjr himielf- Alarmed at the circumftance of their flight, every ma.t, in an inflant, w:s on his feet; but before they could exercife their po er of running, they recognized their felloe- fervmg man, Nicholas,drenched with rain, and breathiefs irom the expedition he had I'fed. ** Mercy o'me 1" cried he, as making the rain ftvrn his cap, he made toward the fire, <f what a night k here ! Fifty years have I feen, man and boy, and never faw a ftorm promife fo ill as this doe?," u A lad night, indeed I" anfwered one of the party. * e Sad !*' repeated Nicholas, *" I tell you it is a night of wonders. But make way, lads; kt me dry myfelf by the fire, and comfort my poor limbs -a ith a draught of your ale/* k 5 ** What
"What did yor fay, Nicky?" faid one of the ferva*:r.-, Hooping forward, and fixing his liaiid^ on his knees, * ( a nijht of non* derf. s " * f .V.r, I did indeed, Ro^er/* anfiv^rcd Nichi,L', kL jHtf; thunder! k does fo make thj cluuds. It's Lr ,v.\\iy y r, lut I was afraid in fpite <■,-" :-:y ru; iu,ig, it \\<>uid o\tn~!.c me. S\::d t c li.hrrd/t: doc* io gh'..:i.! 1 i-iii ii c.'.i',* l^'j g r/.-^i'.h, and 1 vj* it m.uic tv-iy fir^ loo* hue ibrne fra.^e, ;j)nf!.:-u^ d.i-.^ c^-ature ! The wind, it va the Lad,cr ;h:reaoout, v.hiflks among t!.e bufli.5: buJy cf me, but I thou. 1 -, hi it Vv^s a hun.an lr >i»tc c r \h r \' 7 ' once or L-.vk't ! And the ruin! Fll f^y no¬ thing cf it; but if the dror s arc noc as Lrgc as v.jlnu'.^ r.tver believe n;e a t ;ain !" ts But the vender?, Nxholasr'^uid Roger, ia a doleful yet inqiufuive voice. * f .-\h, the \»'or.dtrs V 9 echoed every tongue, each perion ac the fime time moving his chair nearer to his neighbour's "Why,"
" Whv/' replied Nicholas, fhud'lenn^:, e 'lf 1 muft fpeak a> 1 think, 1 have ften what b k1c > no good. ThereS a Will othc Wifp runn : ng about the paik at this mi.iure. The tic uds, m the bouth, look juft a !'(rv n r , r ! >e' J.j before my L^lv died. A* t p uf di- .: .-*' I, .vhtn 1 -- it our, I faw ptr^Iitd a tu. - i i .*'. tM'-h cr w ; mi, v.dl vou ttiiuc .:u, .is 1 codvd the eeu r r- yaid iuit n- /, 1 ii.ard th^t '.*. -y i ) \* ^ .v/ i'ro u f e wi'» ; he \»herr 1 ,-aj i^, ^ fci n him puwKvl. \a lo^'.er Ui ! I hr;r ; n.y t' <» "ft. i > ihw ruii.t rurst t, t.f.i r i .ic fntuuvi ti." «h, a.*d then------th. -„• t.ie p'^.r ih.n.; ,le^— nC ^' t'p tic i.t*! M'.i^ '.'!• , 4 ,- . , ,.^ . .: w . /. ;...: e' .r i ; :- .r: .. m ^L« , i.ave r.L cy i.j J f i " !/ f n *t* j t»t ^ f::v va!h' t ; u:'- 'j.. r the r »muhcrj icv ijii.i i. Li- ". i. > i rt iv wcr i > ji '; *. 11 uiur— dcixd, the re ia ;! *, il.-Ui^eu f.au.c o; light, not much hi^f'T thai ;i,\ hf:. Nimetunes it moves, but v.ry IlUjui, and th' n not far from the f]'ot. If nothing corre., of tnefc, I hwe djne with warnings that's al 1 /' k 5 " Ah,
"Ah, NiehdLs' NKhotat'" ejaculated the nill of tht 5 ftjvanta tha: coukl zoam \nd iirn'raricc, ik .( '»e drctcifu) t nj.s a**e m hand, Heaven kttp item from u '—But ue may Iouk to htui oi them, 1 fear, htiortr we aic m • n * k. *.' * fc Yt-V c tu'ft"" a. -1 j*Irtr, " I Var wc mav. I k 4 o^ ft ha: * i v a h^ht u ib on thi. rifl'e r^ jr I ^ "-c i vtr tv ha her ufrd c^ Us ^rifpo^fr it J:.p<arrd* :ome d*.ad I ody mmt ' m r.i r^?n ' * fl And thr a .' »u r /' C:d a third, ** th;." 3t'( ks ,i m* 'f^'i ! .. s *- Dor, it?" c - * a ' .:-,n, vtrrn *. "it a/'k^, 4i ; u hav? t-icu^h for t ! Is *rir J the?, I ^ r^rt yrt s ' Whi> t* * ferv - r *t en :h j* cp^kered (trror *V > jj ev* ry o>>"- l ar mn J th.rru th j Karl's ]v.Uv irof t '■ >^ r»c nwiV <>> bat! wearntr )i rh .i « f ftfl^vrv. Lu i D^ f"nend was not t : * y U« i ?> \ , rf C * {.au^, thni.^h r,j av* » -i * /* 'n: t . :- im^dr^u^ht^. thst tn- r.v.c^ tw . full frerl-.
On account of the early hoar at ivh\h he int^ :i't'«i t > Ht «-ut 01 th'- app-uMcni ■£ niecmrc l -': v\a* f::1Vred r o wirhdra*v ib'>.".er than lie ^ v .-, :x ud^rmd to d ». The party o.i'e b- V. r\ : i.vn ii.'pjm T .*d. ir. !, v it'i nary a n.erry 1 ,':;::v each to..k the **.*.y c* ni' o*»vn Jif."., lAnCAi, Thf is: it' n;i' f'vr'i of rr- -> Uwghrer rca^ncd fhe t! d.. r :t ^thr.o.. ^.'.d f . n... . er !. 1 - Ui'h AJ'- ab >ut co he \>'\:;,'- > I r die falm ^ if' flv^p. Wi-h a t . ti i.„* fra;s huf\ in her heai:» fl-c iie^rd thr peals ot thunde** draw ri-«ir*er to tho *'cf ui rapped r-vv+Ti." t»f ..i.' rath*. Vi if: a*, ,d;n.ed <,/ she li'ur.d rn rhe i.eavs -iui j l \ut beat ,.gu:'ft th- x:\ wjIU, .m h ;r «.h' ng ir^m tiu.ii. * ii tr 5 ''" - 1 -" t i !: - <. " *iu cow-^ bc'ow, i'hc f-riU vj ,! , w»t>, thnt? ^rou'ttd a;id ivJmuv i t'j'aa: . o t^v^rs pt-.e^t^a t> her ' iia L i(r.ation a fan of dan^ r> f " her jufanr. fo fo-jph.te hez a-isi^fv- t n.| irouhk% a i>:u', 'r u^rhr to t.i'-c^ir^t " re of rhe Kni^'..! 1 \ , i.ror , s, ^as her cut^ ar.tni In her cumber,
ih^mher, til! informed r^thc tftirement of *i e i .;' ±rd \ *■- ii < nu^, a"d t >ld, n an- t».« r : j ! vr t,i4' iv that l. tu s t tMiuh Sa * rneralK i.u/unif, \ a ^/u | aued. i 1 1 . ' ' ^ *'. 1 It * i s i < c I ^*h *■ * 5 f E. v
1 t
r 1 -i
. ! V, ^ A 1 * « -. * , ^ 1 , - M -*t, 1 1 vt t i t ( * u i. Js l 1.1
070 - 1 en **h)C\ Hk kpp d, k.n.l to f* (1 ^ . *iv ui h^. * c Oh a .n *«it ' m/ ;r < ,ci l. 'ut ' / ** * r o'^ h^r *»p-» - if w. *■> 'h * : "^ 1 j t
j - < - 1-, ' * ^, {^ j
f^> 1
I
Oil . . ' , , 1
fip
flap he cam<" againft the glaf^.—God fend we may aft fe this dxy twelvemonth !** A£ Amen !*' f&vd St lina, ki fling h;-r child. '* Dear n.y La' ( y," continued Rachel, * ? I thought to W lure \ou were loft: and then i have had fuch ftrange Unties! Mercy upon rm ' - -■ Oh mv I, J. ! onlv come hfie. See what I h«\t dAc -v^red. Oh Lo:d, I lritttV.tr no** t - 01U uu it! 7 ' u What ?" faid Suu , i.»*>i. ng to the floor in tne direction Rachel pointed out, * f what Ih it r* F ** W u 27> my Lady'—Whv, blood! —The blood of rhe poor dear i*>ul that 1 have heard taik of (o often when I lived here ia the caftle. Oh, to tliink I fhould be ak.ne ail nh* .t in a room where a murder was committed!—Not an inftant do I I rear he, but I expert to fte the figure, paL* wd daubed with blood, of the unhapj.y Lady Hand before meV* " Silt net !*" cried Selina 5 whofe very k»l! thrilled while Rachel ipoke iu km raicj znd fimpiiwi.yi <( what have you to fcv: Van the
v '„ fpirits of the dead ? Tou do no wrong; exped not, then, the inierpofition of Heaven !" In SelhM*s manner there was a f cred wi'JnLii th.: maJe Rachel ikrir.k wkhin hcrielf, in confcficd inferiority. For fome time fhe wia filent; during which perod Sehna recovered rlut oignity which a con¬ fcious love of nuioceiiCJ inf,»:red, in f.-.te of the dreadful remembrances that wtic piefcnt to h;r imagiiution. * c 'Tis true/' laid Rachel, ** that I am a pjcr, weak, old creature; thrcefcore and upwards, and fooliih enough wi h my years> God knows I But ftill, (hoping your Lady¬ fhip will not l»e offended), 1 could not help believing, that is thinking a little, that I heard aa unaccountable noife along the walls of th^t dark path that leads to theie cham¬ bers.'* " A noife P* repeated Sclba. " Yes, my Lady/' ie Heavens'
" Heavens! fure it was not that of fome perfon palling ? Sure no eye lias difcovered my child 1" " Oh no, my Lady,'* replied RacheJ, fiiakmg her head, "you need not be afraid. It wa.-s nothing of tr-at fon, 'Twas fuch a melancholy, faint, howling, fereeking kind of noife, that it could come from nothing human, I am fure. And then it glided al-ing fo qisickly too !—as quick as that ihxih of l:o;;tning. No fooner hid the horrid cry died away, than adogukhout tiie caftle walls, gave Jack a ho*\I:—Oh 1 think I hear it now !*' Stltna liftened to th? old w man with more than common art.ntion. Trie noifes tliat had been heard prevhur- t» the de.ith of t\;e Countefs, by the Prinze a::d herfelf, were recalled to her ndnd, Cf th-t ni-^hr, ;»r.d thofe ibund>, (he flniddered to thii.k. S,'ie hung lur hea^t on h^~ bofom, and re¬ mained Iome few minutes hi deep thought. A playful action of her infant rouftd her fiom
from refledion. Fler child fmiled in her face ; and, ftooping, fhe kifM his little lips, and rocked him in her arms. When the gentlenefs ofher motion lulled him to fleep, fhe ftill felt unwilling to leave him. Through the crevices of the ftmtter with which Rachel always fhut in her light of evening, the lightning ft reamed, and glided uwidioufly round the room. The thunder gr^w fo terrift\ai!y loud, and low, that the clouds fremed to be hovering im¬ mediately over the caftle-roof; and the win !, in fudden gufts, howled teanu iy. All alarm on her own account Selina loft in anxiety for her child. Notkk.g prevented her flftelding him (^n her b -ibm through th* 4 ftormy night, hut t'10 circumftance of Marian c\cr entering her chamber at day¬ break. When ihe roie to go, fhe found herftlf utterly unable to exitt away from him; and determined, notwithftanding the dangerous
dangerous inconveniences it would be at¬ tended by, to fpend the n:ght in his room. Firft, however, it w.is neecflfary to fecire the door uf hrrov.p, -a hich fl*e renicmbcitd to have left ud' f'mj-h Iv:fvnir.7 hz? in- fantto Ra-.! . J, who was fenfible of no fmall joy in havi :g the piof K ct of a companion in the tern, -ft, ihc u,u : ;ht the way to the chamber fhe had come from. Dread of being encountered by thofe noifes that flie believed RarS^l to I ave heard, ^ave fpeed to htr let ble foot.Lpi. Unmoleftedly fhe reached htr chamber- door. There, as fhe pan fed to iii lei;, the fancied ike heard breathing from wiih in. With difficulty fhe faved hcrfcif from rail¬ ing to the ground. While flie: ftood, eagerly watching to affure herfelf ;f the trutii or other*he of her fears, in the extremity of the private paffage a ray of light broke on the gloom. It was vtfible but tor an inftant. Ail
All the paflage vvas a^ain buried in dreary darknefs. After the firft moments of alarm, fhe perfuaded herfelf it muft be the effecls of a flafh of lightning, to whole power even this excnatLd pa»h was not impervious. She heard n > more of the noife ihe h «d fancied h" ..;!:■:. I'd r.t u-n^th felt affured ihe \ : ,t ; r*>o rca^.y wav to imainnati>>n. K . '. . e opened the door, and with tii:v 'A• j; c.:ud;n enteral. The chamber v\.i ' . I ' iv ,-S lhe left ir. 1 (er t2y>e£ flill l/.jr.'i i > .1 the table ; theie were no marks if .; y p r on luvis^g bur. there. She f or:*d the out*r door, and then, in hafte, ttllected f^jii.e few ti ings that fhe had bif^u- f ~^ot:<*n to carry f> her nurfery. Tii':,. tivi'i.'s ec'ik'Cied, lhe ent. red her anti- ch.:mbtr, hom die table ot wliich flie took htr .rucirix. She ws about to extingutfh the taper, but flie Hopped an inftant to liften to or.e ot thofe dreary noifes that often in a tempeft found like human cries or groans. She
She fhuddered as flie heard fall the torrents of rain that were deluging the country, and liftened to the (brill fantaftic notes of the hicrh wir-k She eaft a look round the room, rr, if to examine whether fhe had for¬ gotten any thing. What did flie perceive ? A Lrgc eye gazing on her, through the fame aprrture that formerly one had done on the* Prince and hcrielf. Screaming wildly, the fank on a chair. She did not faint: her agony wa-> of a quicker nature. The eye difappcared; the fpring was touched, the door rkw open, and. flic beheld Lord Cef- nior.d in the opening. Terror rendered her motionlefs. Panting fo- breath, flie fixed her eyes wildly on him. He clofed u\c J <or, and drew toward her. The efforts of niture at klf-prefervation then prevailed ov-t the htlplcfliicfs of fear, in Selina's broil; ihc ftarted from her feat, and ftrove to fly, but Defnund caught her robe, and retained her, while he fell on his knee,
knee, and begged her to conquer her al irm, and liften to him. " LifienP* repeated Selina, ftruggling for breath; '*v/hjtjuft morivc can brin^ you to my chamber at this lonely feafon?" Dumor " f.'izd his eye on her's, and paufed before I e fpoke. When he did, his voice was f/emulouuy foft, and broken by emo¬ tion. t{ Cam , or/ , hz frd, " cannot Selina eucfs the came ? J Aies not her bofom tell a talc that c::phfms v.hit the motive muft be that urges Defmond to feek her in the filence of the night?" In Selhia's b'^aft was ever upperrnoft fear ofher Juki's difcovery. Tiiat Def¬ mond ha 1 penetrated the recefs he was im¬ mured in, dnd now was come to tax her with degradation, was the apprehenfion moft aclivc in her mind as he uttered thefe words.
words. Her limbs trembled, her bofom heaved, and flie clafped her hands implo¬ ringly together— "Speak, I befeech you!" cried flie j ** my deareft brother, (if you will yet let me call you fo), tell me what you mean, and have mercy on me!" " Deareft girl I" exclaimed he, taking her hands, "why all this terror? You know the ftate of my heart \ you know the feelings that beat there; you know—" Here he paufed j his cheeks Sehna be¬ held, as ihe fearfully looked on him, covered with a foveriih flufti j his eyes, though fwim- rnins in tears of foftnefs, were fiery, and i tmingly burfting from their fockets. He tkew hts breath with difficulty, and his bunhng hands trembled as they grafped her's. " You know,*' continued he, " I love you!—This night is the laft I pafs here. I could 6
could not, could not leave you in ignorance of---------. I have dared to enter your chamber. Here I ftoop a fuppliants take pity, and raife me to your arms." The terror of Selina now affumed a new and even a more pallid hue. She recol¬ lected the former violence of the unprin¬ cipled difturber of her quiet; flie glanced to her defolate fituation, and fancied herfelf already finking beneath the embraces of a ravifher. " Oh mercy!" fhe cried; "have mercy on,me!—Guardian powers, protect me!" Defmond, with a fmile tha' feemed a fmile of infult and triumphant confciouf¬ nefs of the power he had over her, cx^ claimed—" Why this terror ? Why this diforder? You behold me* your devoted flave. The touch of this dear perfon, the kifs of this foft hand, is more precious to me than the love of glory.—All gentlenefs VOL. in. L and
and fondnefs am I, for 1 am your lover.—To tender emotions then give way, and lofe all your fears on my bofom." " On thy bofom i" cried flie faintly: " Oh Heaven 1 help an haplefs wretch, whom none but thee pities Stoop to guard rue, g'>od angeL ! In mercy. Defmond, fj\irc me ! In compaffion of a poor defti¬ tute wiet-.h, 1 ave me to weep, unllained by you!" <e Idie and ridiculous!" returned he:— * c if the world be ignorant of our loves, wlicrj is the ft:vn ? Will Seiina be more deftitute, more ur.liaj py, fi-r changing her protestor ?—No, no,—And mine is an heart that wit never d. fcrt you. lndrh;ed love will not make me forget Selina. The more in¬ dulgence fte g-ants, the greater my paflion will be ; for wi ids cannot fpeak its fervour. To ck/p ycur hand thus, is heaven j .o breathe my hei'rt before you, is an atone¬ ment &r a world of troubles and pains/'
He
He flopped, with his eyes rivetted on hev face. She, believing herfelf devoted to frefh miferies, aud ftill greater than fhe had even yet experienced, wanted power to fpeak. She wrefted her hand from Def¬ mond : flie fmk on her knees, and clafping together her hands, lifted her eyes upward, with fuch a piteous look of a^ony ex¬ preffed in them, as does the wretched ma¬ niac whofe little interval of reaf:n is fink¬ ing away, and who feels returning all the horrors of defpair and madnus. Defmond, encircling her whh his arms, attempted to raife her from i.ie ground, but ftie ftarted from him, and ruflun? into her chamber, wildly cried for help and proteclion; till, exhaufted by her eftbrcs, fhe fa,'ik fainting on a chair. He ftung himfelf at her feet, and in fome moment* foothed, and in others bade her avoid fuch calls for afuftance, unlefs fne would pro¬ voke him to the immediate uih of force.
t 'i
She
She had not ftrength fufficient to renew, at prefent, her endeavours to procure help; and he, taking her nearly lifelefs hand, faid- (( Where, proud girl, can you find blame in giving yourfelf to my arms ? Is one embrace more polluting thzn another ?—- Since you Imivc ht\d fenfe to difdain the fliackles impofed by folly, why not take pleafure in every lb ape in which it offers itfelf?" " //" cried Selina, in a voice where horror and dreadful furprift were blended; * c I take pleafure in eveiy guilty form I canr tc As to guilty returned he, "'tis too harfh a name for the foft enjoyments Selina yields herfelf to. The endearments of love may be purchafed at an eafier price than that of criminality. Have you not weighed, Selina, the pleafure, and the rate of pur- chafe ?—I offend you—I read it in your eyes: let us not then argue on fo ufelefs a point. You
You know what joys love can produce; Oh ! fuffer me to fhare its joys with you I" As he fpoke, he impreffed an hundred rude kiffes on her hands. " Jnfulting ruffian! Unfeeling wretch! leave me, or fhudder at the vengeance 1 will ta k e t__The caftie muft be alarmed if I fcream wich my utmoft ftrength j then tremble for thy bafenefs and thy falfe- hoods." " My falfehoods ?" cried he j "now you think proper to jeft! Why, Se!ina, you have never taken a foot ftep unknown by me. Ofborne's cottage has never been vi¬ fited without my knowledge.—Underftand you me ?" Here he lowered his voice to an hoarfe vhifper. "Certain fecrets are not more familiar to your bofom than to mine.'* " No!" thought fhe ; " great God, protect my infant then."
i 3 "You
"Youfpeak not, Selina," continued Def¬ mond, with a fmile of malicious triumph on his lip; " but your look tells me you un¬ derftand me. Why, you dear little deceiver, from the firft moment of the Prince meet¬ ing you, I faw he loved you. I knew full well his motive in vifiting Lord Ilford's Caftle. I found that he had difcovered the fecret paffage, and then my heart told me that his titles, his fame, and that curfed, foft, affected air of his would win your love.— I watched the fpot you were fuppofed to fleep on, till I beheld—hell and diftraction! —you in his hated arms. Ere my tortured eyes could witnefs your actual guilt, I was perceived ; but had difcovered too much to believe you innocent. By means of fpics I traced you to Ofborne's cotcage, and then I began to fear I fliould entirely lofe y 0U :—I apprehended your favoured lover would either perfuade you, or force you to fly with him. To prevent the repetition of a vifit fo dangerous, I ftationed myfelf in the armory. I knew you would pafs through it.
it, for I had fecured the other way ofentrance. There I put in pradice that precious mum¬ mery of lifting gauntlets, and murmuring dreadful words. My fcheme proved effec¬ tive.—Selina dared not leave the caftle walls again.—-You fee what I have done for your love; but I would willingly do for it fifty times more. I burn, I die to ca'l you mine! and will not live another hour without the dear boaft that you are fo !" In his gefture and look as he fpoke, the violence of impure paftion in each moment increafed. Se ina forgot his accufarions in her fears for her immediate fafety. She looked round her for means of efcape. No means offered themfelves. The utmoft exertions of her voice, fhe was too fenfible, would ftand very little chance of procuring help. She fancied herfelf a loft creature. Her brain burned in delirious agony.—She clafped her hands, and, dropping on her knees, wldly prayed Defmond to pity a poor wretch already loft to happinefs; and L 4. '<*
to refrain from taking that little ray of com¬ fort which was the laft fhe had remaining. On his fenfual heart her diftrefs had no good efTed, Jt rather heightened, in his eyes, the power of her beauty. " Idle and frivolous !" cried he: " how will my love deftroy your eafe ? I thought you had known better. No, this is my only opportunity j if 1 let it flip, may I never know the heaven of your arms!— Long have I thirfted for this minute. As long as lean remember, I remember loving you.^—In childhood, when thefe beauties were yet budding, how often have you flept, fcarlefs, in my arms! Oh, how it glads me to recoiled thofe days!—Oft, when the fun's heat prevented our fporting on the lawn of the park, woukl Selina feek with me the fliade of fome clofe covert j there would we ftretch ourfelves under the flielter of a large oak, on a mofs-bank ; my &rm woukl fteal round Selina's neck, and play with the golden treftes that rambled there.—
there.—Selina heeded not where my hand repofed. She blufhed, but flie did not know why; for fhe was innocence itfelf. How freqment vvere the kiffes I fnatched from her lips, fweeter than the breath of May 1 and ftie chided me not. My bofom was her pillow; fhe flept on it, I would have flept too, but I could not for gazing on her lovely face as a fmile fpread over it in her flumbers. Then it was that the fubtle fire crept to my very foul. I knew not what my feelings meant, when rebuke followed not endear¬ ment. I have long known to call them paftion, and a paftion that now fhall be gra¬ tified." He clafped the terrified Selina in his arms. Pier ftruggles vainly coped with his ftrength. That bofom that gave a mother's nurture, became fubjed to his fenfual kiffes. Her fcreams rent the air; but at length her voice failed her, and fhe was on the point of fink¬ ing a ravifher's victim, when rhe door was l 5 broken
broken open, and Lord liford, followed hy two armed domeftics, entered the room. The Earl had his fword drawn. Def¬ mond relinquifh ed Selina, and drew his. The agitation of each prevented his recog¬ nizing his opponent, and a .fierce combat en fued. The fury of the Earl was not to be withftood. His fword paffed through his adverfary's body; Defmond ftaggered, groaned, and fell, bathed In blood 1 The Earl waved his fword over his head, all bloody as it was, and fhouted in joy and triumph. He fnatched Selina, who had gazed on the contention in the wild vacancy of exceffive horror, to his breaft. "Speak," he cried," lovely angel, fpeak, are you fafe ? Are you free from the vil¬ lain's pollution ?" " Thanks to Heaven and you!" faid ihe, falling on his neck, u 1 am !'* " Joy.
« Joy, joy and triumph then'"exclaimed he. " Oh on what an abyfs did we ftand ? Villain, flave 1—A curfe wither him in death for daring to touch this form !—My foul fliudders at the thought. A fingle death is too little for him; let me hew him piece¬ meal with my fword, and glut my eyes with looking on the pangs he breathes life away ia!" He left Selina, and, with his fword lifted,. approached the body that lay weltering in blood. He was about to plunge his weapon, a fecond time in its-breaft, when from the lips of the dying wretch ftole— " My father, wound mc not more, my father V* "Ha! what!" cried the Earl madly; " lights, ho, lights, as you value Hfe I" The taper was inftantly brought. The Earl took it in his trembling hmd r He flowly lowered it till he diftinguifhed the l 6 features
features of his fon diftorted in agony. He ftocd fome inftants aghaft j his whole frame was convulfively agitated. He half averted his head, as if d.firous of fhunning the miferable objecl; he flood over. His fword dropped from his hand; he faintly articu^ lated—* f Great God, have mercy 1'* and fell back in the arms of his attendants/ On recovering animation, he looked round him as does a man ftarting from a dream of horror, and who cannot, at once, affure himfelf thnt the objects he beholds are thofe of real life. When his fenfes were entirely reftored, the firft fubject of his thoughts was Selina, who fat half dead in terror and uifmay, all difordered as Def¬ mond left her, on a chair, clofe to the bleed¬ ing body. The Earl approached, and again folded her in his arms.—" I have faved her!*' he cried, " tranfport and joy, I have faved Jier!" On
On a fudden he ffortcd from her arms, and leaning over his faftly dying fon, ex¬ claimed— " Villain and ravifher! die and be mifer- "^ able. Accurfed be the hand that ftrove to pluck the beauties of that maid I—Point not to your blood, wretch; it flows de¬ ferved ly r The expiring Defmond groaned, and faid, though his voice was broken, and his words articulated inwardly^—" Do you curfe me in death ?—Oh, do not thefe agonies that rend my poor frame fatiate you? Ifl find not pity from yon, how am I to expect it from my God I—Oh, will you add the weight of your curfe to my dying pains? Remember that you are my father 1" The Earl had fied faftly gazed on his face while he fpoke. On Defmond appealing to his parental feelings, and turning his clofmgeyes toward him, he fell on his knee. When he beheld him writhe in frefli pangs, and
and heard the groans that too furely would be his laft, his bofom heaved in grief and companion ; all the rather foftened his foul; he wept even to fobbing, and throwing himfelf by Defmond's fide, exclaimed—■ u I am your father! You are dear to my heart! Oh my fon! my fon! my fon!" He wrapped his arms round Defmond's neck, and, while he gave way to the moft violent emotions of diftrefs, kiffed his pale cheek and his paler Hps. Very few minutes paffed before he ab¬ ruptly fprang on his feet, and fuzing by the throat one of the domeftics who ftood amazed fpectators of the fcene, cried— " Slave and villain, why loiter you here when the falvation of my foul, and the life of my fon depend on your exercions ?— AVhy have you not procured affiftance ? —Is no friendly hand nigh to heal his wound ?—*
wound r—to ftop that torrent of blood, wliich is more dreadful to me than the fight of hell ?—Run, fly 1 my Earklqm will I ftiare with the man that brings my fon help." The trembling domeftics fied, on the in¬ ftant, from the chamber, though in their alarm they fcarcely knew whom to My to, or what ftep to take. The Earl diftra<ftedly paced the room, beating his breaft and head with his clenched hand. The groans of his wretched fon grew fainter; life evidently was making its laft beats in his bofom. Feeling himfelf to be dying, he feebly cried— " My father, prefs me by the hand, and blefs mc with your pardon!-—-A very few minutes, and I (hall be no more ! What a bhek lift of crimes my frighted foul looks back
back to ! It muft be there is a Heaven. Too true I fear are our PrieuV tales! Oh, from Heaven I am for ever exiled \ I am dying, and tortures are waiting for my fleet¬ ing fpirit." " Taik not of dying, and by my hand !" exclaimed the Earl, in an agony little fhort of frenzy; ** I have fent for help; live but till it comes, and you will do weil." A hollow groan from the miferable Def¬ mond forbade his indulging this hope. Defpair took poffeflion of his foul. He plucked the hair from off his head, and ftrewed it along the floor. He feized the trembling cold hand of Selina, and vented a thoufand curfes on her. " Detefted wretch !*' he cried, " doomed to be the ruin of my hopes, what prevents my piercing this fcrpent's bofom with the fame fword that flew my fon, and with the fame hand that------ that will flay myfek ? Thou curfe of a good man's foul, hence, and
and never meet mine eyes mere,—Take with thee, to thy couch, my fon's dying groan?, my fecret pangs of agony, my horror when I look to future days, and fee them full of fuch pains as are inflicted on the curfed!—Take thefe with thee, thou fpecious mifieadcr ! and let them wither thy boafted, thy hated charms ere they well bloflbm!" Selina hid her face on his hands, and wept convulfively. He flung her from him, and knelt again befide hib fon. He hael not done fb many inftants, when he fprang up, and wildly demanded the caufe of the affift¬ ance he had fent for being fb long before it came. He liftened an inftant at the door. A diftant noife alone was heard. He pace el the room in a difordered ftep. As he walked, Selina, drowned in tears, and recli¬ ning,, half lifelefs, on the arm of her chair, met his eye. He ftarted. Nevv emotions had taken pofieflion of his mind ; for he threw
threw hinTeT it iu r fm* ai.d fuatched her hand to his bofom. ** Live, my Selina, moft beloved of angels,live!'* he cried. "Fool! madman that I am ' j»ard' n what my ra'hnefs uttered. Heil and horror! what was it that I faid?— Did not I talk of killing—of killing you? Sooner fhould t' ij. breaft pour it-, purple ft ream at your feet'—I fh udder at the thought! Say, you pardon me, or never will I rife fr^m where I kneel.—Forgive me, and forget what I gave utterance to, or my brain will quite fail!" €< Alas, my Lord," returned fhe, "'tis I that am to afk forgivenefs—I that am a murderets 1" " A murdcrefs i M cried the Ear!; « blef¬ fings on you, you are perfect in beauty and in v'rtue. Yes, you are innocent and happy!" On the entrance, at this minute, of the alarmed domeftics, accompanied by Father I'" red eric,
Frederic, who had much fkill in pry/c, the Earl rcfe haftily from hlsfuurumn. He advanced to the proftrate Dcfmonl in breathlefi fiknce. Father Frederic found the wound to nted bvt little examination before he pro¬ nounced it mortal. The Earl heard this opinion without driving to utter a fentence. A filence, the moft folemn and affecting, took place throughout the room. The do¬ meftics formed a circle round the body. Father Frederic knelt befide it, and fup¬ ported one of its dying hands. Selina ftood without the ring, liftening eagerly for the confirmation ofher hopes, in rather Fre¬ deric's improved opinion; but equally fear¬ ful to look on the expiring wretch, and to enquire aught concerning him. Defmond, after feveral attempts, com¬ manded breath enough to anfwer fatisfac- toriiy fome queftions propofed by the Holy Father. That good Prieft performed the fervices
fervices made due by the Catholic faith to the dying. Defmond then turned to his father, who ftood a model for the ftatue of horror. " Farewel!'' faid he, gafping for breath j " it was fome higher Power than earthly that ftruck me through your hand. To meet the vengeance of that Power I go.— Draw nearer, my Father: I believe I know your intentions refpecting her through whom 1 meet my death. Beware of her—fhe is
He had fpoken with the utmoft diffi¬ culty : when he got thus far, he bounded from the around in frefli and more \iolent pangs, and fank into convulfive fits. He fpoke reafbnably no more. On re¬ covering from convulfions, he raved of the day of judgment, and the pains of the curfeifc The good Father Frederic, when he foothed and remonftrated, talked to a deaf ear. An
An hour had notclapfed after his receiv¬ ing the wound, befo:e he brenthed his Uft. The attendants bore the body to the chamber Lord Defi.ond had occupied. Ti.ithcr Lord liford followed the corpfe of his fon. He had fallen into a painlefs le¬ thargy. Wnile he remained in that ftate, Father Frederic had him led to his own apartment, and placed in bed ; where, after he had ken the affairs of the caftie pro¬ perly difpofed for the remainder of the dreadful night, the good man fat and watched, tenderly difcourfing with the Earl, who, after a time, raved incoherently, and covered his eyes with his hands, as if to hide from them fome horrible fight.
Lrixit *
—-»«#l9©I<3J5a>}@®»*<
CHAP. VIIL *««»» Truth fevere, by fairy fi&iuu drefs'd, '* In bufltinM meafures move «« Paler Gi ief an J Pain, tf Widi Hortor, tj rant of the throbbing breaft." GRAY. LEFT to herfelf, in a chamber ftained with blood, and the theatre of her dcepeft woes, Selina walked vacantly backward and forward, ftill hearing in imagination the threats of Dclmond and his dying groans. One of the domeftics returned to inform her that Defmcnd's body was carried to the appointed chamber, and the Earl was up* held by the fociety of Father Frederic. The man afked if flie would wifti Marian, or any
A winter's tale. 239 any other of the females to come to her? Selina anfwered in the negative, and the fervant withdrew. Solicitude for her infant*s fafety now rofe in her tireaft. She liftened at her chamber- door ; no found could be heard, except now and then the fhutting of a diitant door, or the fmall echo of fome voice in a remote part of the cafllc. Anxiety for her child conquered every perfonal fear; and once more flie haftily trod along the fecret paf¬ fage. Tremblingly flie trod j for fo active were her apprehenfions, and fo much alarmed her fancy, that, at every ftep fhe made, flie feared being encountered by one of Defmond's emiffarics, from whofe guilty - mind as much might be dreaded as from his bafe employer. She reached the retreat of her child in fafety. When flie clafped the infant to her, and remembered the danger fhe had fo nar¬ rowly efcaped^ and the horrid fcene flie had 6 witndTcd,
witneffed, her feelings overpowered her: fhe (trained him to her bofom, and vented the fuinefs of her heart in a flood of tears. When flie gained power of utterance, "Oh my child!'* ihe cried, " for what miferies was your haplefs mother brought into exifte nee ? for what farther miferies is fhe kept in being ? Wretched that we are, would to Heaven we might, in this inftant, fink together to a grave of peace!—For me, each new day brings frefli forrow; and over you hang, through each hour, ten thoufand, thoufand dangers. Alas! my child, too furely they will crufli thy little tender life; and then I will lay me down to die on thy grave. Ah, my infant, they would pollute the bofom that cherifhes thy being ; they fpeak with difhonour of thy mother. Comfort her, my infant, kifs her, and cry with her; flie is very unhappy 1" Her child, as if it underftood her words, put its little arms round her, and neftled clofcr
clofer to her neck. The adion went to Selna'sheart: flie burft intoteais, but they were tears of tendernefs. Hex infant's endearments comforted her through the night. What remained of it foon wore away. The firft fun-beams dawn¬ ing in the Eaft, were the flgnal for her re¬ turning to her own chamber, as the viflt of Marian might be expeded very little after daybreak. She had not gained her apartment many minutes, when Marian arrived at the door of it, and was inftantly admitted. " Oh my Lady," cried (he 9 running to¬ ward Selina, " how glad I be, to be fure, to fee your Ladyfliip ! Who fhould have thought laft night?—but for matter of that we did think; for never, to be fure, were fuch fymptoms known fince the days of the blefled St. Peter ! His armour was feen, I faw it with my own eyes, moving about vol, m, m the
tlie hall without any body touching it.__ Flames of fire, I do not know how big, were difcovered on the top of the caftle j and a voice like a giant's, was heard calling out his name, in the middle of the ftorm! —But, mercy, my Lady, is it true that five men were murdered in your room laft night, befide my young Lord? Oh, I wifh I'd been here to fee fome'at of it j and yet I cant bear dead bodies neither. Oh cri- mini, if there bent blood! Weil, I de¬ clare I wonder your Ladyfhip did not faint 1" As foon as Selina could ftop the torrent of Marian's eloquence, fhe defired her to go for Mrs. Edgcumbe * but before Marian could leave the rcom for that purpofe, Mrs. Edgcumbe entered it. Marian withdrew, and into the friendly bofom of Mrs. Edgcumbe Selina poured the frefh calamities that had fallen on her lucklefs head. To that worthy woman fhe never
never applied for confolation in vain.— Mrs. Edgcumbe congratulated her on her efcape from the infults of a midnight ra¬ vifher. She juftly treated Lord Defmond as a villain, whofe life was to be lamented rather than his death; though it were to be wifhed fome other than a father's hand had ftruck the blow. She alfo ^felicitated Selina on her perfect releafe from the ma¬ chinations of fo unprincipled a foe—machi¬ nations which eventually would, probably, have endangered the being of her child. 5ut all thefe arguments were infufficient to remove that agony which Selina felt in having caufed the father to flay the fon*- in having laid up for the protector of her infancy an irremediable load of forrow. From Defmond not having mentioned knowledge of her being a mother, Selina hoped her child was yet undifcovered and fecure; and in that hope fhe was confirmed by the opinion of Mrs. Edgcumbe.
m 2 No
No confideration could prevail on the good woman to leave her unhappy Lady to herfelf; and, by her prefence and conver- fation^ ftie preferved Selina from entirely finking beneath the frefli trials ftie was ex¬ pofed to, Not much of ihe morning had worn away, when the Earl fent to enquire after Selina's health; to which enquiry fhe an¬ fwered more favourably than truth autho¬ rized. For the fake of her child, ftie, at , noon, took fome flight nourifhment; re- fix f:cd by which, fhe felt her ftrength and ipirks fornewhat revived. The day was waning, when Father Fre- • cleric, tapping gently at her door, begged to fpeak with her. For that holy man flie liad almoft a filial revcience; and with tran¬ fient joy in her heart, ihe opened to him ihe door. He took tenderly her hand, and faid—
" Virtuous
" Virtuous daughter, I grieve that I have not, earlier in the day, been able to a(k after thy health, and give thee the comforc of our faith. Speak, daughter, arc thou well r She anfwered that me was nearly fo, "I take joy in hearing it!'* faid the Father. " My child, I come from fhe dif-" tempered Earl. He paffed a wretched night. Such were his wanderings, that I trembled tor his reafon.—All day he has been calm, but gloomily thoughtful; and now lie defires to fee you.'* " To fee me?" repeated Selina. " Good God ! the Earl fee me !" *< Well did I know, daughter," faid Father Frederic, with feeling, **how painful to you muft be the interview. I ftrove to diffuade my Lord, but he would not liften to me. Take courage, daughter. Truft me/ the Earl's difpofition towards you is friendly and paternal," m 3 Scllna
Selina fell on a feat, fick to death at tho thought of meeting him from whom fhe expeded the moft bitter reproaches, fuch deep curfes as the childlefs beftow on the trembling culprit to whom they owe the death of their laft hope. The encourage¬ ments of Mrs. Edgcumbe, and the reafon- ings of Father Frederic, proved alike in¬ capable of giving her fortitude, At length lhe arofe s and bathed in tears, and tremblins: in apprehenfion^ was conduded to the Earl's clofet, which private place he had defired to fee her in* When Father Frederic beheld her in the prefence of the Earl, he withdrew; the door was locked, and what pafled between Lord liford and Selina was facred. The Earl took her hand, and led her to the farther part of the room. Ere he could bid her fit down, he fell, overcome by his fenfations, on a chair. Selina threw herfelf at his feet. Her voice was loft in fobs, but fhe
ftie ftrove to implore his pai don for the unwilling injuries fhe had done him. He haftily raifed her up. *' Kneel not to me," he cried, " J forgive you all—from my heart I do.—Unwilling, hy you ?—Yes, they are unwilling; but, mercy of Heaven, how tremendous!" He drew an heavy and tremulous figh, then hung his head on his bofom, and was loft within himfelf. Selina, meantime, ftood weeping before him. When he perceived her fituation, he ftarted up, and cried—" Sit, I pray you fit! My mind is all darknefs and confufion. The bufinefs of Fate is doing. I fent for you to complete my deftiny !'*
m 4 Selina
Selina tremblingly Tat down. The Earl paced the room in a quick ftep. When fhe eaft her eyes toward him, fhe fhuddered to behold his face :—his brow was bent to the frown of frenzy, his eyes rolled diftracledly, and he bit his lip till black blood ftarted from it. Her dread of what fhe was fummoned to undergo, every inftant increafed. She ftole a look round the room. A gloom pervaded it that feemed deeper than that ufuaily fpread by the ap¬ proaching fliades of evening. The dark oaken wainfcot was difcernible only as a black and difmal maft on the oppofite fide of the apartment. The evening breeze that ruffled by the window, feemed to murmur predictions of woe and horror. Her ima¬ gination rofe to wild alarms. Now flie lif¬ tened for the groans of DefmoncPs dying hour, and now looked for his fpedre, pale, and ftained with blood.
The
The Earl at length advanced to her. He paufed, and gazed on her face ; frequently he fighed, then fat him down befide her. " Selina,'* faid he, " look me in the face. Mark my funk eyes, my pale, fallen cheeks j mark the fixed look of forrow that is on my countenance. Thefe are given to me by long fuffering. Once my eye was viva¬ cious and gay ; my cheek flufhed with the crimfon of health j my countenance too—■ alas! alas! fpoke a mind at eafe. This change I owe to you." "Tome! alas, my Lord!" " Nay, hear me out 1 By Heaven you ftir not till you hear me. This change I owe to you.—1 took you when the world aban¬ doned you. Of all infants you were, fure, the lovelieft. Innocence and beauty fat on every feature, fymmetry and ^race on every limb. Your tongue too was winning; your voice—Oh, how foft, penfive, penetrating ! I trained you as my daughter. Well was I pleafed to fee you grow as fuch, and mix in
in yourchildifh fports with—with—my fon. When you were tired of your gambols, often would 1 take you on my knee to reft you, and give to your little lips fuch kiffes as does the father to the child. So far all was well. —Now, Selina, now comes the tale !— Mark me!—You grew in beauty, grace, and virtue. My—my—hell \ cannot 1 fpeak the word ?~~ My wife made you the companion of all our domeftic hours, -^Sweet were your manners —Oh how fweet!—Your fmile was en¬ chanting; even your forrow lovely! I could not look on thefe lips, and forget the kiffes I once printed on them. I could not view thofe pollflied arms, and forget that once they were wrapped round my neck. I never tired with gazing on you ; life was a blank when you were not prefent. Selina, I forgot I had a wife, and learned to love you !" ** Pvly Lord ! love me, my Lord ?" ** Yes, love you with my whole foul !** cried he, falling at her feet. " Thus, thus, adored girl, I offer you my heart, my per¬ ion !—Now comes the minute that is to reward
reward me for all my thoufand pains. Say, fay, Selina, can you love mc ?" se Yes, ever, my Lord/* "Ever!" " But as the daughter loves the parent* otherwife can I not/* "Cold, cold and barren I" cried he; "the affection I want muft be of a warmer kind— muft be fervent as my own. Say, fhall I -call you wife ?" " Oh ! never, my Lord 1" His emotion was fuch that he panted for breath long ere he could fpeak. When he could, he exclaimed—* " Think well of vvhat you fay. By Heaven, I am worked to the verge of madnefs!—-Tell me—fliall I be your hufband?" "Merciful Heaven 1 /* cried Selina, "I fliudder at the thought. As a father, I have ever loved you—as an hufband I never can 1" " Hell and horror 1" articulated he, in a voice hoarfened by agony and defpair i " is it
it come to this?—For this have I fiain my fon ?—For this have I murdered my wife ?" €t My Lord!*' ejaculated Selina. " Yes, thou gikledferpent," faid he, feiz¬ ing her wrift, <e murdered my wife! — Seduced by thy accurfed charms, I hhed villains to place a dagger in her heait!" A low groan founded, as if from beneath his feet. u Ha ! ha! hai*' continued he,laughing convuhivcly, u fhe was foon cold !" "Gracious God!" faltered Selina, "am I then in a murderer's grafp ?—Feel I a murderer's touch ?" sf Yes," cried he, cc and nearer yet fliall he be to your bofom, and often fhall you feel die fondeft of his touches.—Hear me," faid he, rifing, and coolly fitting down be* fide her, drawing his chair as he fpoke, till he was clofe to her, u mortal tongue cannot fpeak tne agonies I have endured. Think you, then, I will let efcape me the rccom- 3 pence ?
pence? I rife in the morning callous to all enjoyment. Retirement is death to me.— Illy to parties of jollity; there, even them, while huge goblets of wine are cu. -dated, the daemon purfues me ; it haunts u>. every where, for 'tis gnawing here at my heart. I retire to my chamber; I try to fleep—God of Heaven! what language can tell my hor¬ rors ? Liften to me, thou who haft made me forfeit hopes of future blifs—thou who witneffed the faint's laft m jments, liften to me, and fliudder. So.n as the bell tolls twelve, my curtains are drawn afide; my wife's ghoft, clad in the horrible palenefs ofthe&iave, her pure blood ftili, it would feem, ftreaming from her fide, appears j nor leaves me till the cock crows notice of the morning ; and lat night, my fon's ghoft was with her. His did not ftand be¬ fide her's, it was rather behind; but its eyes feemed to threaten death to me!—And then 3J
He
He flopped j for a fecond groan, deeper than the former, burft on his aftnghted ear, and feemed to hll the room. Selina hid her eyes with her arm. The Earl gazed, pant¬ ing for breath, around him ; his hair briftled on his head; he muttered fome words in¬ wardly, but articulated only " Merciful l" After a long paufe, he turned to the trembling Selina— * c Saw you any thing ?" he faltered. " Nothing!" returned flie. He was filent for a minute, then he arofe. " We muft leave this room," faid he i € * night comes on, and I cannot be in dark¬ nefs. Lovely creature, for whom, while I< gaze on you, I am ready to commit new fins, hear my refolve. Never fliall you pafs my caftle gates till I have called you mine. Two days I give you to confider on what I have faid. I give you that time to prepare yourfelf for my arms. Eternal mifery is to me
me the price of your beauties ; I have paid it, and your perfon lhall be mine. I burn for days in which I can offer you the homage of tendernefs. Till then, till you are my willing, blufh ing wife, you will not wifli to leave your chamber." In filence he led her to the door of her apartment, where he forced her reluctant hand to his lips, and kiffed it twice j then bade her farewel, and, in gloomy, defpairing meditation, returned to all the horrors of folitary guilt.
ENU OF VOL. Ut.
