Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
A winter's tale
A
WINTER'S TALE. CHAP. I. ■ff. Rich. « Say, that I did all this for love of lier. n Queen. « Nay, then indeed, ihe cannot chuff, hut hate thee, " Having bought love with Aicli a W'.oody fpoil." SHAKESPEARE. VV ILDLY Selina gazed round her. A confufion of horrible images occupied her mind. *■» For you I have murdered my wife V ftill rang in her ears. She fcemed in a frightful dream. Her difordered imagina¬ tion could not perfuade itfelf that it brooded over reality. A cold torpor fpread itfelf over her foul—a torpor like the chill num¬ bers that come before death. Dreadful were ihe phantafms of that ftate of inertion. She thought her hands were filthy in clotted blood. She thought ihe ftood the mark for vol. iv. B Heaven
Heaven to hurl its vengeance at! Before her fancy was the Earl, bound and manacled, inftrlaments of torture vexing his frame, flames of fire confuming his brain. At every paufe of agony, he looked her in the face, and cried— " Thefe miferies I owe to you ! Tortures like mine reward you for it!" Then flitted before her eyes the Count¬ efs in a robe of light. Her wounds ftill bled. She pointed to the ftream that fell from them, and bent her reproachful eye toward her once-loved child. She groaned over the agonized foul of her hufband, and was feen no more. And now Selina's dif- tracted fancy beheld Defmond ftretched on a bier, arrayed for the tomb. On one fide ftood his father with a bloody fword in his hand, and, on the other, the Count¬ efs, weeping and loft in grief. Bewildered in fuch frightful fancies, fhe had nearly fallen the prey of delirium. When
When the ftagnation of thought confe¬ quent on her firft fhock, gave place to clearnefs of underftanding, her fate appear¬ ed no lefs diftrefling to her. She faw her¬ felf the innocent caufe of ruin and blood. Where moft fhe loved, her unfufpecting hand wounded moft deeply. The friend, on whofe bofom flie had received the tenderer! fhelter when fatherlefs and friendlefs, fhe had caufed utter unhappinefs and miferable death to. The hufband of that friend, dreadful to reflect on, flie had led to be a murderer! The fon, her lucklefs charms had, perhaps, feduced from honour, and certainly bereft of life. She looked round in horrible aftonifhment. When fhe con¬ templated how ferene, though forrowful, had been her earlier days, fhe could not credit the conviction of her underftanding; and, rubbing her eyes, afked herfelf whe¬ ther fhe were not wandering in a dreadful vifion.
» %
By
By degrees her thoughts left, for an inter¬ val, the miferies fhe had brought on others, and dwelt on thofe frefli ones that threatened her own devoted head. The Earl's parting words ftill founded to her fancy— ee Till you are mine, you will not wifh to pafs my caflle gates!" " Till I am his 1" cried fhe ; " mighty Heaven ! I that am a mother! I that am ftained and "worthlefs! would he accept my polluted hand ? Oh, rather fliould he fipurn me from him with difguft ! rather hurl me from the protection of his roof, as an impure unworthy of his fhelter! Every way am I wretched ; to no fpot can I look for comfort! Even where I ufed never to glance but I gathered peace, I can dare to turn my eyes no longer : no, of every mifhap am I meriting, for my bofom is fullied and guilty." As the period mentioned by the Earl for that of her anfwer, drew nigh, her mifery increafed.
a winter's tale.' $ increafed. On herfelf fhe locked, in every hour, with frefh deteftation. In the purity of her confeience flie continually reproached herfelf with the untimely death of her be¬ loved Countefs, and that of Defmond. She fancied their blood could never be wafhed from her hands, and continually moaned over their fate as what loaded her with eternal guilt. Her abhorrence of the Earl gained ground with that of herfelf. His touch, flic thought, would be death to her. Even the fook of Lady Hford's murderer, fhe dreaded to encounter. His threat of confining her till fhe confented to marry him, fhe recol¬ lected with terror. How often did fhe with, now that it was too late, flie had fled from the murderer's power, and placed herfelf under the protection of the Prince! Such wiflies did but aggravate her pain; every new thought of the Prince and of his beloved child, ftrengthened, however, the b 3 refolution
refolution with which flie determined to oppofe the defigns cf Lord Ilford. The Earl, meantime, tailed fully of that wretched cup which is the portion of the flave of paflioii. All feftivity at the caftle was now at an end. Mournful filence fuc¬ ceeded the voice of merriment and laughter. No more the minftrel fang, the mimic acted 5 fhows, pageants, plays gave place to melancholy preparations for mourning, and the fad bufinefs of interment. Father Frederic, ever active and good, fuperintended the gloomy employments of the houfehold, and found the confolation he offered the Earl fomewhat more accept¬ able than had been that he tendered on the death of the Countefs, Often, however, the Earl turned a deafened ear to what was faid to him by any perfon who ftrove to be a comforter. Tortured by his reflections, he remained in his chamber. Sometimes he called to mind his fon, bemoaned him¬ felf
felf as childlefs, and curfed his hand that rendered him fo; but oftener the. image of his wife was before his eyes; then, all the murderer's horrors were familiar to him. He beheld ideal fpedtres, and heard fancied groans. He thought the earth opening to hide him from its bofom, and would have fled, had his trembling limbs poffeffed ftrength; but he imagined himfelf chained to the fpot he was on, and fat, pale and aghaft, in a trance of terror and apprehen¬ sion. Selina's rejection of his offered hand, gave him no frefh pain. On poffeffing her he was determined, and the abhorrence fhe avowed regarding him with, only made of a more gloomy hue his defpair. The two days given her to weigh his pro- pofal elapfed, he requefted her to meet him where he firft told her his love. Selina tremblingly heard the fummons, and with difficulty tottered to the room where he waited her coming. The Earl met her at the door, took her hand, and feated her. b 4 « Well,
« Well, Selina!" faid he, fixing hts eyes anxioufly on her face, «« have you deter¬ mined on my fate and your own ? Have yoa thought well on what I faid ? Will you be my wife?" " Why urge me, my Lord?" fhe fai* tered in reply ; " I have already told you I never can be." " Never can be 1" cried he, darting up; " but by Heaven you fhall !** Then he refeated himfelf j all anger fled from his countenance. He tenderly took her hand, and bending towards her, faid—- " Oh Selina'1 why do you compel ati heart that loves you as mine does, to regard you with an ungentle look ? Why will you not let me prefs to my fond breaft this hand, heap kiffes on it the while, and proudly boaft it as the deareft jewel in my poffcf- * fion ?"
Ac
At every word he fpoke, Selina turned paler, and fhe wanted breath to make re¬ ply to what he faid. In filence he gazed on her for fome mo¬ ments. " Dear Selina 1 fweetefl girl!" he then uttered, in a low voice, " be no longer cold and cruel, look with pity on the tor« ments of my bofom I 'tis your fmile alone can give me eafe. Speak gently to me ; 'tis your voice alone can footh my ear. Whatever I have done, in whatever way my madnefs has acted, 'twas you that urged me to it. Scorn me not then becaufe I am guilty; I had been innocent but for you ! StiU had my confeience been bloodlefs and peaceful, had I never beheld your charms. In eompaflion, then, hold not from me the beauties that have led my lucklefs hand to ftain itfelf in virtuous blood. Let your beauties reward the defperation they have created." b 5 « My
" My Lord," faid Selina, " to your fhelter it is I owe my few days of bappi* nefs—perhaps, to your fhelter I owe my life. For every favour you have beftowed on me, accept my heart's beft thanks. Alas 1 poor and an orphan, thofe fimple thanks are all I have to give! My grati¬ tude is your due. The reverence that a child owes its parent, is your due alfo— more you cannot exact. My affections, my perfon are my own, and I can give them only where my heart directs me." * s You fpeak truly," cried the Eari; " but is there no way of reaching that tender, that ineftimable heart ? Oh I if there be a tell it to me in pity 1 What me¬ thod can I purfue to make you but give utterance to thofe words, more fweet to my ear than the mufic of the heavens—' I love you, and am your's.' '« Think you, my Lord,'* returned Se¬ lina, with fliuddering earneftnefs, " you took the probable method when you be¬ came—becane ------" * She
She paufed, for her lips could not frame to what her mind dictated,' "i « I underftand you," muttered Lord Ilford, « when I became------a murderer i Thunder of God!" feizing violently her hand, " reft there, or you drive me to mad¬ nefs! Is your's the lip to reproach me? Are you to brand me for a villain ? Girl, girl! 'tis your's to footh my broken heart; to foften to my ftarting eyes the crimes that haunt my footfteps! 'tis your's to lull my burning head to forgetfulnefs on your bo¬ fom—to whifper words of love in my ear, till I lofe all but the remembrance of pof- fefling you, and being bleffed!" « As a daughter," replied Selina, « I am ready, Heaven knows, to do thefe-v never can I do them as a wife*" " A daughter!" repeated the Eari, ■" fuch is not the affection I .demand from you. Dear, dear girl!" and he took her hand between his own, and looked with foftnefs inexpreflible in her face, " J afk, 8 6 as
as a recompence for all the pains I have differed for you, love, fmiling, tender, fer- vent, I afk you to reft all your cares on my breaft ; to have .lot a wifti, a thought, uncommunicated to me; to intermix with mine your very foul; to centre in my affec¬ tion all that you want of the world's friend- fliips to be unhappy when I am abfent; to receive me with fmiles of tendernefs and joy, and kiffes of welcome at my return- -, to confider your perfon and affections as mine only '. Full fondly would I repay to you thefe obligations, by holding my being but as what was to ftrive to render your happtnefe complete."" " Ah, my Lord!" cried Selina, «'tis not from me that you are to look for thefe. Once you had them all. Where is fhe that rendered them to you ? mangled, pale, in the cold grave; there go, my Lord, and offer your vows of fondnefs; there look for the friend's love, the wife's tender duties. If you meet them not, kneel down beflde the
the tomb, weep over their lofs, and curie the hand that robbed you of them !" " Cruel girl!" exclaimed he, ** is it thus you treat my bleeding heart } Oh turn not on me thofe eyes of reproach 1 I can¬ not bear their fire ! How fhall I foften that bofom ? how bend it to tendernefs and love ? Alas 1 this is cutting and unlooked for. Little thought I to find you cold and cruel. But, Selina, my refolve is made ; mine you dial! be ! mine by the earneft of this kifs." He flung his arm round her, and preffed his lips to her's. She ftruggied to prevent bim. In the exertion, what was fufpended from her neck, fell to the ground. The Earl ftooped, and took it up. What did he behold ? the very locket that he had given his loft wife as a pledge of con¬ ftancy and love! He ftarted in horror. With difficulty his trembling hand retained the locket, while he faltered inwardly,
■" Where—
w Where—where got you this ?'• •* What, know you it?" returned Se¬ lina, pointedly; " fay, when was it you gave it her ? when firft you told your love ? when firft you preffed her hand to your lips, and fondly fwore you would kifs no other hand than her's ? or was it on your wedding-day, when you fmiled on your bride, and talked of days of future hap¬ pinefs ? Oh my Lord ! my Lord 1 let her memory be now your only bride. Strive to atone, by future virtue, for the fad, fad crime you have committed. Be that rocket, once the token of your affection, the com¬ panion of your widowed hours. If my trucft willies are of value to you, believe me you have them." She rofe as flie finifhed fpeaking, and would have retired \ but the Earl flarting up, took her hand, and prevented her moving farther.
" Stay,
-" Stay, forcerefs!" cried he, " I am too old in fin to be touched by trifles. There 1 take back your bauble j fet ftore by it if you will, but never let me fee it more. This hand, thofe beauties, are mine inftead of that, and all that it reminds me of. This hand, thofe beauties, fliall be mine 1 Once again, thus humbly let me afk—Will you confent to be my wife ?" " I cannot; Heaven knows I cannot 1" cried Selina, burfting into tears. " Be it fo," faid the Earl; " remember how tenderly I have begged it of you. Re¬ member that on my knees I woo*d you to my bofom. Recollect that you diidained my offers. Now, then, 1 take another -courfe. You fee before you a man whofe heart was once all mildnefs, all virtue. Peaceful and happy, he blefled each new day as a frefh opportunity to difpenfe feli¬ city. He had a wife—a fweet and good one, and he loved her. Happy was he in her love, nor looked, nor wifhed he to be happier. A maid, a fyren maid! decked 4 ky
by daemons with more fafcinating charms than fall to the lot of ordinary mortals, met, one lucklefs, lucklels day! his eye. Then fled peace from his bofom: wild emotions, burning defires, entered in its Head. No more was he happy. He never could be happy more! He knew that the very completion of his wiflies could not reftore to him contentment. But his eyes were blinded, his fenfes dazzled. Madly he waded through fuch fcenes of blood as damn men's fouls, to gain to his arms the object that feduced him. Now, think you It likely fuch a man would let efcape him the object that milled his footfteps ? Should it be all crime, no recompence ? Idle to fuppofe it. No, Selina, no, you fhall not be another's. I knew-it vain to woo you to difhonourable love. I removed every impediment to making you my wife. My wife you fhall be! You tremble and weep; but Selina, no earthly power fhall alter my refolve. Our nuptials fhall be private. The death, poor wretch! of my fon de¬ mands
mands it. But we will be married at once; if I linger, I may die, and never call you bride. Prepare then; a few days for pre¬ paration will fuffice; a week will be, furely, as much as you can defire; at the end of that period you will become fharer of my Earldom, as you now are miftrefs of my heart." Selina turned on him an eye of terror and anguifh. Her tongue cleaved to her mouth 1 ihe wanted power to fpeak. « Unlefs to tell ma that you are fatisfied withwhatlpropofe," faid the Earl, "make me no reply. I cannot bear to hear aught that fpeaks in contradiction to it. You will, my Sell>ia 1 my love I my bride! let me fee you daily ? Let us pafs our hours together. To me they will then pafs fweet¬ ly ; and if tendernefs, love, adoration can make them pafs fo to Selina, in fuch wife will they-glide on with her."
He
He led her to her apartment; at the door of which he folded her to his bofom, forced a kifs from her lips, and ieft her to wretch¬ ednefs. Though the agony of her mind was ex- quifitej while her infant's fecurity remained unleflened, fhe was above abfolute defpair. Diftrefs fometimes gathers confolation from fmall circumftances; Selina fancied the friendfhip of Mrs. Edgcumbe afforded her grounds for the indulgence of hope. To her chamber, very fhortly after Selina's return to it, that worthy woman came. With furprife and terror fhe had heard of the Earl's declaration of love. It ftruck at the very root of her hopes. The refult of Selina's fecond interview with him, con¬ firmed her in all her fears. She fawj with an aching heart, the thoufand dangers his paflion, and obftinate profecution of his wifhes, would too probably produce. She, however, commanded herfelf diffidently to fpeak
fpeak to her Lady in a voice of courage and comfort. Experience had ftrengthened her natural fortitude, and much differing had taught her never to defpair. She ftrove to revive the drooping fpirits of Selina, and readily advifed her to write intelligence of her fituation to the Prince, requefting him either to devife fome means of refcuing herfelf and child from the power of the Ear), or effecting their fecurity by com¬ manding Lord Ilford to join the continental army. With this opinion accorded that of Se¬ lina, A meffenger was procured by Mrs. Edgcumbe, who, with ali pofflble hafte,* fought the Prince j while Selina, at home, hoped, by making every endeavour to poftpone the execution of the Earl's in¬ tentions, to be relieved by the fteps the Prince would take on receiving notice of her danger.
To
To bring fome comfort to her heart, which had very long been a ftranger to comfort and peace, fhe ftole, in filence, to her obfcure nurfery: but, alas! Selina receiv¬ ed no confolation there, for her infant had drooped, and fallen fick. His little cheeks, that were ufed only to fhew dimples of beauty, now glowed in fever; his eyes were filmed, heavy, and dull, and his hand lan¬ guid and hot. Selina ftood in mute horror when fhe beheld his altered appearance. Her hands were clafped together; her look fixed on her fick infant. After fome moments, fobs fwelled her bofom, tears followed, and, fink¬ ing on her knees, fhe hid her face on the child's bed, totally overcome by her for¬ rows. Rachel attempted to confole her wretch¬ ed Lady; fhe took her hand, and fpoke tenderly what flie thought likely to footh her mifery, but fhe fpoke to a deaf ear. « Oh
*' Oh my infant, my fon, my child!" exclaimed Selina, when the convuifed heaves of her bofom would fuffer her, " muft you too be taken from me ? Dear child of for¬ row, your infant fmiles of innocence were all that I had to cheer my long days of mifery I When 1 was unhappy, the kiffes of your lips only could give me peace. And muft I fee thofe lips in the pain of death ? And muft you, my child, be torn from me ? No! rather fhall one grave enclofe us both ! Together will we die ; death fhall not part us!" " Dear my Lady," faid Rachel, "do not give way to thefe guftoes, as I may call them, of paflion; all bairnes have fome ficknefs, more or lefs; and my little Lord's, being a Lord, does not keep him from what befals others that are not Lords. -There was, I remember—Lord help me, to think of what I have feen in my time ! My daughter Jane——'*
And
And then Rachel quoted inftances till (be exhaufted her breath, Selina, to whom her harangue was ad- drefled, though at length it became direct foliloquy, heard not a word of what fhe faid. Her eyes, dim in tears, were fixed on her boy, and his hand Ihe held to her bofom. He drew his breath with difficulty, and fell into a doze of infenfibility. While Selina watched over him, and wetted his burning hand with tears, Mrs. Edgcumbe entered the chamber. To her, with fuch eagernefs as that with which the drowning wretch catches at an hope of life, Selina applied for advice and afliftance. Mrs. Edgcumbe affected to believe the infant's ficknefs only of fuch a trivial na- J a as childhood is invariably fubject to, while in her own breaft fhe felt fears of the moft lively nature for his diforder being one of thofe, that to overcome needs the poffeffion
poffeffion of every comfort; and few were the comforts of Selina's nurfery. While its mother ftaid, the infant appear¬ ed to grow worfe. In its flumber it ftarted fearfully, and its lips we?e convulfively agitated. Selina ftood befide the bed, half frantic in grief, while Mrs. Edgcumbe prepared fuch medicines as the cafe re¬ quired. With difficulty the arguments of her two attendants prevailed on the wretch¬ ed mother to leave, for a time, the cham¬ ber of her infant, left herabfence from her own ihould give rife to fufpicions, AH the world to her was centered in her child; him gone, fhe felt the earth would be a defert to her, and was altogether indifferent as to what might then befal her. When perfuaded by Mrs, Edgcumbe to liften to the advice of prudence, and not idly hazard her child's fafety and her own, fhe clafped her numbering iniant to her heart,
heart, and (liedding a flood of burning tears on his face, wildly exclaimed— " Farewel, dear little companion of my miferies ! Sweet offspring of a broken heart, for ever farewel! Never fhall I fee you again alive I Too furely will thefe tender little limbs be cold in death before I can return. But they will force me, my child -, they tear me from you! What, what are Earls to me ? He will kill me, perhaps-*— and let him! Heaven knows I long for death! He can do no more than end my wretched life, and then, my child, we will go to heaven together.** u Come, my dear Lady," interpofed Mrs. Edgcumbe, " do not give way to thefe needlefs burfts of forrow. You have differed fo much, that every fmall circum¬ ftance alarms your weakened mind. The infant, 1 hope and truft, is far from ferioufly ill. Remember, dear Lady Selina, your fituation. Even now, perhaps, the Earl returns from an unfuccefsful fearch after you*
you. The open rooms of the caftle exa¬ mined, Heaven knows where he will next look!" " True," faid Selina; " good God, very true! Perhaps they may find my fickened babe ! Oh horror, they may tear him from me 1 Let us hafte to fee all is Ci(c f and then return to fuccour my child." Mrs. Edgcumbe led her back to her chamber, where all was ftill and fecure. Once more alone, Selina, with her hands folded on her bofom, paced, in agitated fteps, the room. The dreary fcenes of murder that furrounded her, the perfonal calamity of her deftiny, and what fhe had to dread from the perfecution of the Earl, all pafled away from before her eyes, and nothing remained to weep for, but the dan¬ ger ofher darling child. Were he well, flie thought fhe could be happy, and die won¬ dered how flie could deem herfelf utterly miferable, while he fmiled in health and peace amid her endearments. Very flowly vol. iv. c palkd
pafled the minutes, till night clofing in, promifed to enfure her from interruption. Then hadened fhe, with a trembling hand and beating heart, to the bedfide of her fick boy.
——*e*©©-/fglS>I#$$©«—•—
CHAP. 11. » The locks between her chamber and his «iJ] t " Each one by him enforcM, recites his ward j " But as they open, they all rate his ill, * ( Which tit ives the creeping thief to fome:regard ; ** The threshold grates the door to have him heard ; <{ Night-wand'ring weafets Ihritk to fee him there, ** They fright him, yet he ftill purfues his fear/* SHAKESPEARE. VV ITHIN a due time after the death of Lord Defmond, a written account of the manner in which he fel^ was tranfmittcd to the King. When
When the meffenger who bore it, returned to the caftle, an hour was fixed for the interment of Defmond's remains. To aflift in this ceremony, the wretched Earl found utterly impoflible. Father Frederic, therefore, acted as Prieft and mourner. When the body of Defmond was placed in the chapel vault, the Earl's dejection vifibly decreafed. The fatal paflion that burnt in his bread, now engroflcd all his thoughts. Every frefli difficulty he had to en¬ counter, but inflamed his defire of Obtaining gratification. On pofleflmg Selina he was de¬ termined, though his death, or her's, were the immediate confequence. Should flie continue unfavourable to his fuit, fuch was the degradation of his foul fince once he fell from honour, that he imagined the defign of forcing her to his arms, fup- pofing, after her perfon had been facri- [^ ficed, flie would readily confent to the c 2 marriage
marriage he ftill fhould be willing to offer her. The poor Selina, meantime, neglectful of thofe charms that fpread fo wide a mifchief, Ipent every hour, fhe could with fafety, in tending on the illnefs of her little child of miicry. The medicines adminiftered by Mrs. Edgcumbe had fo good an effect, that liis flackened fever, and more regular pulfe, gave, even to the tender apprehen* iivenefs of a mother, hopes of his diforder fpeedijy leaving him. The quicknefs of her fears removed, fhe fell into a foft melan- cholv. She had now leilure to reflect on the danger of her fituation, From that hand which had beftowed death on a fond wife, what was not to be expected? Should fhe not meet with the afliftance of the Prince, too likely fhe muft fall the victim of the Earl*s defires. Even fliould the Prince do his utmoft to relieve her, oppofed to violence like Lord llford's, his endeavours might be unfucccisful. She lhuddcred a^ flje
fhe contemplated the precipice ihe Hood on. Still lifted flie a thankful eye to Heaven for her child's reflored health, and owned, while he was left her, ihe mould flrive to be fatisfied with her lot. The heavy bell that tolled notice of Def- mond's burial, founded to Selina'sear molt drearily. As the innocent caufc of his death, fhe wept j then recurred to the loft Countefs, reproached herfelf as the caufe of her end alio, and wept again. The Earl repeatedly fent to reqneft her company in the common fitting-room j but Ihe uniformly returned for anfwer, her health was fach as forbade her leaving her chamber. Two days after the interment of Defmond, his patience, however, was en¬ tirely exhaufted, and, through the hands of Mrs. Edgcumbe he fent a note, in whicli he told Selina, if indifpofition prevented her feeing him in the rooms frequented by the family, his anxiety would not fufTev c 3 him
him to be eftranged from her, and that, after one hour had pafled, he fliould wait upon her in her own apartment. Alarmed by the fignifkation of this in¬ tention, and diuddering at the thought of Lord Ilford entering her chamber, flie in anfwer faid, fhe fliould endeavour to dine at the family table. The Earl received her with rapture that he drove not to conceal* There were no gucds, and the repaft Very ftiortly was re¬ moved y for neither the Eari nor Selina were difpofed to eat. When the domeftics re" tired, Lord Ilford renewed the fubject that occupied his foul. Selina liftcned to him in trembling terror. He repeated what he had faid' when lad they met. He glanced at die dangers he had dared for her fake, and fwore flie fliould, in fpite of all the powers of earth, be his. He named that day week for the celebration of their mar¬ riage,
riage, and afked her if the time he had chofen, met with her approbation ? " He knew,'* fhe replied, " how impof- fible it was for her to accede to his widies. She had declared her utter averfion to be¬ coming his wife—it was an averfion never to be overcome.*' He heard her with gloomy earneftnefs. When flie ended, he took her hand :— " Selina/' faid he, " look round you, You are enclofed by a caftle, to you im¬ pregnable. Beyond that, my power reaches to a vaft extent. You have no hopes in oppofing rny wiflies. Recollect: yourfelf, fweet girl. In all your native grace, be¬ come my bride, and meet my trueft, ten¬ dered love.. Mine you muft be. Con- ftrain me not to ufe every advantage I poffefs, and forget not that I am worked to defpair.**
c 4 When
When he ceafed to fpeak, he would have flung his arms round, her, bad fhe not ftarted up, and waving her hand, forbade him to touch her perfon, with that air of authority that Virtue gives birth to, and Vice fhrinks before. While the Eari remained motionlefs m momentary fear and reverence, flie drew to tht door. The Earl, rifing, requefted her to ftay; but, not waiting to ^anfwer his requeft, fhe fought haftily her own room* There flie fat down, the prey of mefan-* choly. She looked' back to all the fad cir¬ cumftances of her fife. She compared her¬ felf, now that flie was the victim of For¬ tune's word; malice, to her mother, in the days when her reafon fell before her troubles. Divided from him who had her fondeft affections, her mother wept over her firft pledge of love, till her heart could no longer hold together, and then fank to a grave of forrow. Selina. ftill more wretched, dared
dared not, fave in ftolen minute?, fhed tears over the child of her bofom, and pined, with fcarce an hope of future alleviation of her miferies, too certain that he who held her affection, could never fliield her on his breaft, and wipe away the recollec¬ tion of her fufferings. Sometimes acrofs her breaft would fteal a thought of the Prince, the beloved Prince. She fighed, died a tear, and ftrove to think of fomewhat elfe. Several days elapfed, and brought not back the man difpatched to the Prince. The infant had entirely got the better of its illnefs, and again cheered its mother with its gambols and fmiles. But fhort-lived was the cheerfulnefs her child's reftored health gave to Selina. In every hour her anxiety and terror increafed. Very poffible was it that her meffenger had fallen beneath accident on the road; too much fo, likewife, that he had failed in his c $ attempt
attempt to convey intelligence to the Prince's hand through an enemy's country. On him feemed to depend Selina's laft hope. Should he not fucceed, what refource had flie from the violence of Lord Ilford ? Alas, none ! for even flight appeared to be denied her. Oftentimes entered her breaft, while fhe fat mufing, the prey of gloomy mifery, the thought of felf-deftruction; but the fmiling features of her infant came, on the inftant, before her eyes, and reminded her that fhe lived not for herfelf only. Still did flie confole herfelf in fome fliape, in remembering that her child's fecurity remained undifturbed; but even this con¬ folation was taken from her, and a train#*of hideous fears placed in its ftead. It was at dark night, after one of thofe long and dreadful days, in which fhe in vain looked for the arrival of tidings from the Prince, that fhe ftole through the fecret path toward her child's apartment. As flie haftened
i
haftened on, a fmall ftream of light broke on her way at no great diftance. Alarmed, fhe fearched with her eye the black fpace before her, and perceived, afar off, the figure of a man bearing in his hand a faint light. For an inftant, her limbs refufed to move— her faculties were loft in horror. Then die ftrove to fly ; but made not two fteps before her unprotected child was prefent to her, and with him fhe refolved to go and die. With difficulty fhe reached the room, and catching her child to her breaft, fell on a chair. Rachel, terrified at the actions of her Lady s looked wildly round without power to fpeak, and Selina plainly heard the flow and heavy footfteps of the perfon flie had feen. . Maddened by apprehenfion, fhe doubted not that men were in queft of her fecreted infant; already (he thought fhe felt the grafp of s a ruffian, and faw his murderous c 6 blade
Wade pointed to her child's bofom. Dis¬ tractedly fhe clafped him to her heart, and, finking on her knees, looked with fuppli- cating horror up to Heaven. 9 No circumftance, however, juftified the extent of her fears. The footfteps faintened till they were loft, and every thing became ftill as ufual. When in a flight degree re¬ covered from the firft effects of terror, Selina had recollection fufficient to bid Rachel, in a low voice, extmguifh the light. That done, flie lulled her child in her arms, and refigned herfelf to the protection of Heaven. Little time had paffed, when on afudden, clofe to the door, there founded a voice, A^ain returned Selina's terror to an height nearly beyond bearance. Footfteps echoed through the paffage; words were fpoken in a low tone, and no more was heard. Rachel,
Rachel, when (he could command power to fpeak, broke into divers diftrefsful excla¬ mations, lamenting the day that (he was barn, and bewailing the cruelty of her ftars, that fufFered her to become the prey of murderers in her old age. Seisna, who only thought of danger as of what threatened her child> ulenced the noify lamentations of poor Rachel, and Hilened, breathlefs and pale, to aflure herfelf that all was indeed quiet. The footfteps and the voice founded no more, but the fears of Selina's mind fank not with them. She imagined a thoufand dreadful poffibilities. Too likely did it feem to her that her child's retreat was fuf- pe-fled i or, if it were not fo at prefent, how improbable was it perfons fliould have the habit of ufing the fecret pafTage, and not overhear either the words of Rachel, or the voice of the infant ? Dangers thickened around her. With nearly delirious impa¬ tience the looked for news from the Prince. Through his interference alone, (lie hoped to
to obtain a refcue from all the miferies that threatened to overwhelm her. Should he fui to aflift her, her utter deftruction, fhe fearfully thought, was inevitable. While Selina thus paffed her time in pain and diftrefsful fears, Lord Ilford, the wretch¬ ed prey of alternate paflion and remorfe, looked, fighing, to every frefli hour as the bringer of comfort; then curfed its length, and abandoned himfelf to utter mifery, con¬ vinced that comfort u as for ever fled from him. He caufed to be made all fitting preparations for the folemnization of his marriage. The day that he had mentioned to Selina, he confidercd as that agreed on. On the morning preceding it, he requeftcd to fee his intended bride in his clofet. Selina met him according to his wiflies. His brow, that had contracted to a con¬ stant frown of harflinefs and pain, relaxed to tendernefs when he beheld her. Scarcely could
could he refrain from fnatching her to him, and prefling her to his burning breaft. Over his pale cheek was fpread a tranfient flufli ofpleafure, and love animated his eyes. He called Selina " bride," and talked of the morrow as a day that would produce joy and happinefs to each. To her apartment he had caufed to be conveyed fuch fplendid drefles as he ima¬ gined moft acceptable. He now afked if every thing met her wiflies, and bade her complete his felicity by telling him flie looked to the enfuing day without pain. Selina, to whofe aid no fuccour had arrived, was nearly worked to a delirium of agony. For an interval, all her hope and \ all her fortitude fell, and flie entirely de- [ fpaired. Roufed by Mrs. Edgcumbe, ever good and faithful, flie became again fenfible [ of the duty fhe owed her infant, and thought fhe could command ftrength fufiicie.it to oppofe, to the laft beat of life, the inten- 4 tions
tions of the Earl, In the hope of a very few days bringing her the expected arfift- ance of the Prince, fhe determined to for¬ bear expreffing abfolute hatred of Lord Ilford, and make an indulgence of time the only object: of her felicitations. In vain die requefted him to allow her a fpace to calm her mind before flie became his wife. In vain flie knelt at his feet, and weeping, - prayed for it. He feemed to apprehend hidden danger in every minute before Ihe was united to him ; and his paf- fion, violent and unconquerable, would ad¬ mit of no farther delay. When, after all her entreaties, he remained inflexible, her hopeletTnefs gave birth to the courage of defpair. She wildly called Heaven to wit¬ nefs that fhe would never give him her hand; dared him to ufe his utmoft in de¬ fiance of honour and virtue j threatened him with the avenging fpirit of his mur¬ dered wife j then, overcome by the violence ofher emotions, fell at his ket, fenfeleis and
md convuifed. In that ftate fhe was car¬ ried to her chamber, and the Earl himfelf hung over her as fhe lay in her attendant's arms, and watched the progrefs of her refto- ration to life and reafon. Soon as the morning dawned> he rofej for very fliort are the flumbers that vifit the b,d of paflion. The houfehold wore a face half feftive, half funereal, that nipped every thought of joy in the bud. ^Though Lord Ilford intended his nuptials to be celebrated privately, he wifhed his caftle to poflefs the appearance of fatisfaction and rejoicing; but, fuperficial as were the re¬ flections of his menials, they could not fo foon forget a kind and murdered Lady, as to look on their Lord's frefh union with¬ out mournfully calling to mind the lofs they had fuftained. In vain the halls were hung with armorial decorations; in vain the minftrels rehearfed the merrieft of their notes; "a gloomy fadnefs ftill pervaded the caftle,
caftle, and more feemed it like a day of burial than of gladnefs. Selina's women, (for the Earl, fince. his return, had in lifted on her having fuch an edablsfbment as fhould grace a deftined Countefs) waited on her, by command of Lord Ilford, to attire her for the ceremony of the morning; but Selina difmUTed them her chamber, fending at the fame time a mellage to the Earl, requefting to fee him for a few minutes where he fhould think fit. He waited her in the audience chamber. Arrived in his prefence, fhe fell on her knees, and befought him to take pity on her weaknefs, and grant her yet another week to reconcile herfelf to becoming his wife. He heard her with impatience, and while he lifted her from the ground, gazed on her with al! the heat of fenfuality. His wiflies feemed raifed to the higheft pitch, and
and ere he fpoke in anfwer to her, he preff¬ ed her forcibly to his bofom, and kiffed her cheek and forehead. He was deaf to all fhe urged. Not an hour's delay would he admit. Though flie flirank from his touch, he folded her to his breaft, and murmured the word <c bride" among kiffes that he printed on her lips. Defpairing of fuccefs in her entreaty, and terrified by the intemperance of his de¬ meanour, flic at length fled from him, and gained, overcharged with agony, her own apartment. Again the women, appointed to attend on her, preffed her to put on the fuperb drcfs chofen by the Earl. With horror fhe turned it afide, and, dropping on her knees, prayed Heaven to fnatch her fiom the dan- gera that threatened to overwhelm her.
Very
Very fhortly the Earl, attired as a gay bridegroom, and attended by Father Fre¬ deric, and another holy minifter of the Catholic faith, appeared at her chamber door, and fummoned her to the altar. Bewildered in diftrefs, at firft die thought of flying to the chamber of her infant; but on recollecting the danger that ftep would ex- pofe him to, fhe abandoned the defign, with clafpad hands haftened round the room, calling for afliftance from flie knew not whither; then tore oft* beautiful treffes of her hair, and, flinging herfelf proftrate, ex¬ claimed, in a voice hollow and horrible— " God of my mother! when will thy wrath be fatitfied ?" The Earl, knocking violently at the door, cried-— « c Selina! my love ! my bride! every thing waits. Haften, and blefs me at the altar, my chofen wife !" « Bleffed
«« Blefled Virgin !** ejaculated Selina, •* doft thou too forfake me ? Good Angels that guard around my mother's tomb! will you not hear my cries ? Father of all! thee have I offended ? Thou difdaineft my repentant tears. To no place can I look for fuccour. What then forbids? My child ? Oh my child is~loft to me 1 Thus, then, O God !------" Already had fhe lifted a dagger to plunge in her breaft, when Mrs. Edgcumbe caught her hand, and cried wildly— " Help ! help ! my Lady Selina dies!" *" God Almighty, aflift us!" exclaimed the Earl from without, and burfting open the door, he flew into the room, followed by his holy companions* He threw himfelf by her fide, and wrench¬ ing the dagger from her hand, violently cried—
" Am
e< Am I too late ? Speak ! are you hurt ? Oh, are you hurt ?*' * ( No, my Lord ; Heaven be thanked and praifed V* anfwered Mrs. Edgcumbe, panting for breath, and finking on the ground, quite exhauded. Selina remained immoveable in a trance of horror, as if her fenfes failed, while (he contemplated the actjierfelf had been about to commit. The Earl gazed on her with tendernefs and anguifh. « Selina," faid he, mournfully, *' why this diftradion ? Does my Earldom contain aught that I can refufc thee ? Haft thou a wifti known to me ungratified ? No, Se¬ lina, and thou never dialt have. Conquer thy fears, give me thy hand, and happinefs and thee ihall be one/*
" Leave
" Leave me," cried Selina, when his words awakened her from inanitjs " I can¬ not be thy wife. Leave me to my miferies, or fee my dying pangs 1" The Earl gazed intently on her face for a minute without fpeaking. He was going to addrefs her, when Father Frederic, taking hold of his arm, faid—■ <c Good my Lord ! the Lady Selina. feems too much difordered to liften to your difcourfe at prefent. Allow me to remain with her. If her objections to folemnizing the nuptials are fuch as lie within my com- prehenfion, haply I may overcome her re¬ pugnance." After fome hesitation, " Be it fo, Father," returned the Earl; " you are a good and holy Churchman. I leave my caufe in your hands. Selina 1" and he looked on her with mingled apprehenfion and command, " re¬ member, you are wholly in my power!" Followed
Followed by his other holy attendant, Lord Ilford returned to his own chamber, where he, with impatience the moft agoni¬ zing, waited the arrival of Father Frederic. It was long before the good man appeared. When he did, the Earl haftily advanced to him, and cried— * c Holy Father, have you prevailed ? Does Selina confent to give me her hand?" Father Frederic ftruggied for an anfwer. His face was pale, his lips trembled, and his whole manner appeared confufcd* Thefe unufual fymptoms, however, efcaped the notice of the Earl, who, in breathlefs fuf- penfe, liftened to what the reverend man might fay. " My Lord," he faltered, " I have not been altogether fticcefsful. The Lady per- flfts in having this day granted for prepa¬ ration. To-morrow," flie fays, <c it may be flie
flie will be willing to wed you : to-day ihe cannot." " Idle and unreafonable," exclaimed the Earl, " why is not this day as fitting as the next ? I will not accept fuch an anfwer. By force or perfualion, this very hour fhall name her my wife !" " My Lord," faid Father Frederic, feiz- ing the arm of the Earl, who was haflily advancing to the door, " all that you can do will have no avail. Porfuafion's utmoft you have tried; force can do nothing, lave bereave the lady of life. Give her till to¬ morrow; then, haply, all may be well." " Old man," cried the Earl, " to your eyes a day is, in this inflance, little, but to mine 'tis a long and dreary age. The impatience oflove. burns in my veins, and will brook no delay." * ( My dear Lord!" returned the pious man, < e I allow for all you can feel, but how ufelefs would be violence! Its only- produce would be caufing the like in the lady. Within this hour,—-alas the while ! — vol. iv. D im
has flic lifted her hand againft the life given her by God I" The Earl folded his arms on his breaft; he bit his lips, and ftamped his foot on the ground. He mufed gloomily for a few minutes, then faid— sc Well, be it fo. This day is not the day of my marriage." In the eyes of Father Frederic, that fcl¬ dorn fparkled but -in devotion, fhone a ray of the brighteft joy as Lord Ilford fpoke thefe words. It fhone but for an inftant. He then bowed himfelf meekly, a-id re¬ tired. When alone, the tumult of the Earl's thoughts feemed to frenzy his brain. That dreadful haunter of his footfteps, the remembrance of his crimes, failed to have all its influence over him while the gratifi¬ cation of his paffions feemed near at hand ; but
but now that it was removed from his immediate grafp, defpair and remorfe again tortured his foul. His defire of poffeflin» Selina had attained its utmoft height. He had framed his vehement wiflies for gratifi¬ cation. Made fufpicious by guilt, he ima¬ gined Selina encouraged fome hope of efcape by effecting .delay ; and his blackened foul meditated on the met hod ■» in whieh 'twas poffible to compel her to compliance, with¬ out driving her to defperate rcfources. Fie held it .abfolutely certain, that a female once pofleffed, muft feel affection, in fome degree, for her poffeflbr. The violence of his inclination prompted him to immediate confununation ; and once aban¬ doned by the finer fentiments of rectitude, he knew not to falter at any act of vice that would advance the grand object of his withes. For means of cleftroying Selina's peace, he now fought; and as the mind of guilt is'ever fertile, he fought not long D 2 before
before he formed fuch a defign as appeared nearly fure of being fuccefiful. With the fecret way that ran through the main parts of his caftle, Lord I'ford was perfectly acquainted. Frequently had he vied it, and Selina had often run the danger of difcovciy, while vifiting her child, when she imagined herielf perfectly fecure. That Selina's anti-chamber opened to this myfte- rious channel, he knew but too well j and he refolved, at ihe mod lone hour of mid¬ night, to enter, through that medium, the chamber of the defolate orphan, whom an haid fate had rendered dependant on him, and there ftrive to effect that, for attempt¬ ing which he had flain his only fon ! The hours intervening between Ids re¬ folve, and that of his intended crime, were paffed by him in heated impatience. He had not diffidently overcome the remon- flranccs of confeience, to contemplate a projected act of difhonour with unconcern ; but
but now all feelings were buried in the anticipation of expected joy. He viewed the arms of Selina as a recompence for all he had committed, and viewed that recom¬ pence as an event inevitably at hand. When night clofmg in, brought ftill nearer the moment of his wifhes, his throb¬ bing heart could fcarcely be confined to his breaft. He numbered the minutes as they pafled, and thought the hours of immeafur- able length. No fooner had the ftill hour of midnight arrived, than, drinking a cup of wine, he prepared to leave his apartment. Though hot impatience beat in his pulfe, a chill ran through his blood as he ftepped forward to commence his courfe. The taper glimmer¬ ed faintly on the table, and he thought he heard fomewhat like a female fliriek wafted on the wind that hruflied along the caftle walls.
n 3 " Hark!"
** Hark V he cried, while his eyes affumcd an air of wildnefs—the wildnefs of deep guilt, and his hair bridled on his forehead ; " 'th but the night wind/' iaidlic, faintly, and flruggling for breath 5 and the night wind it was that howled anew round the gloomy turrets of the caftle, but with a more melancholy cadence than a fweep of wind is ufed to poffefs. He wrapped his garment round him, and, knitting his brow, proceeded. Twice acrofs his bofom paifed the image of liis murdered wife, and twice his better genius faid within him-— " Avoid new crimes, and difturb not the 'flumbeis of the innocent V But Selina, lovely, fmiling, fleeping, rofe to his view, and fuppreffing every fuggef- tion of confeience, he rufhed on.
With
With an hafty and trembling flep, he pafled many of the^dark clofets of his caftle, and entered on that dreary paffage which led to Selina's chamber. He trod quickly along its footing, till coming to a divifion Of the path, he paufed to afcertain his way. While he looked round him, a general trembling feized his frame, and cold drops fell from his forehead. The death-watch beat in the wall, and difconfolate noifes of nisht founded faintlv afar off. While he lidened to them, the caftle bell toiled twelve. His heart fank within him at every echo of the heavv note. He looked for his fitua- tion, and found himfelf leaning againft the fide of the room in which he had caufed his wife to be murdered. At that indant he thought he heard a ruftling within the room, followed by a deep groan. His limbs refufed to move, and his fenfes ftaggered in their feat. He would have fpoken to pray, but his tongue cleaved to his mouth. d 4 Soon.
Soon as he gained power, he tottered forward. Defire yet was ftrong in his breaft. No obftacle could conquer his black deter¬ mination. Difoidered and confufed, he arrived at what he thought the door of Selina's room. He paufe.d but an inftant before he threw it open, and ftepped in; but found himfelf in a chamber communicating with the picture gp.f'ery. He would have returned, but could not Radily fird the door he had entered at, and recollected the poffibility of regaining the paffage through one in the gallery. « Trembling, though refolute, he (to*c, like the midnight murderer, acrofs the apartment, and entered the long one it led to. As he caft his eyes on the erect portraits cf his anceftorb, there fulpended, he fliuddered, and ftiove to creep within himfelf. He looked fearfully on the vifible gloom of the fpacious place. He applied hh
his finger to the falfe diamond of the pan- nel. At that moment the moon, that had hitherto been hidden behind clouds, re-ap¬ peared, and (hone full on the pictured countenance of Selina's mother, " Great God of Heaven 1" cried the Earl, darting back, " have mercy on me !" The picture appeared to him to have altered its character. No longer feemed the face fmiling, or the poflure eafy. The fea¬ tures appeared livid, the eyes fraught with preternatural fire, and either the arm was, or the Earl fancied it was, extended toward him. His eyes were rivetted to thofe of the painting. His hair dood upright on his head, his joints Ibook in horror, and his trembling knees fcarcely kept him from fall¬ ing to tlie ground.
i> 5 Nature?
Nature was finking within him, when the moon withdrew her faint and melan¬ choly light, and caft the dreadful picture into the fame obfeurity that pervaded the j oom. It was long ere what little of native courage confeioufnefs of guilt had left, rcfumed its feat on the Earl's bofom. When it did, unquenched defire worked it to the height of defperation. He furi¬ oufly flung* afide the pannel, and entered the fpace it left. The picture clofed to, and there the Earl's good angel forfook him. With the hafte of heated wiflie?, he trod along the paflage toward the hap¬ lefs Selina*s chamber. He foon ftopped at the door. Every remembrance then pafled from his bofom. Only was pre¬ fent to him the delight of clafping the beloved girl to his breaft. Without much difficulty he opened the anti-chamber door,
rfoor. Excefs of pkafutc nearly deprived him of power to. proceed.. His pulie beat turaultuoufly. He paufed, to gather breath, then, flowly, and with little noife, opened her chamber door, and entered..
CHAP. HE
.... *« He brings me liberty. « My wfolution's placM.ond I have nothing ** Of woman in me *. now from head to foot « I'm marble conffent.'* If ever one heart poffeiTed more gentle- nefs, more mild refignation and virtue, to¬ gether with more beneficence and philan¬ thropy than that of other men, it was the heart of Father Frederic. \V hen left alone p 6 w»th
with Selina, the worthy man drew his chair befide her as flie fat weeping, and, with an air truly parental, took her hand, and faid— " Why, daughter of my heart, thefe tears? Why this grief? If an old man, whofe paflions have long fince been laid at the feet of his God, may be admitted into the fecret that wrings thy thoughts, repofe thy fufferings on my bofom, and, truft me, I will truly ftrive to heal them," The tendernefs of diis addrefs did but increafe Selina's agitation; for her con¬ feience, far too cruel in its fuggeftions, told her flie was unworthy of it. She fobbed aloud, but could make no anfwer. Father Frederic, ftill retaining her hand, repeated his enquiries:— ". Why, daughter," faid he, " all this fhew of grief? Open your heart to me, and kt the hand of age wipe away your tear j*
tears. Come, my child, liften to the com¬ fort I fpeak. Full well I know all the feelings of youth. Alas!" and he fighed deeply, " once I was^ their victim. The anguifli of thofe days is not, even yet, forgotten. None can fo well heal the fuf- ferer's wounds, as he tvho has experienced the like. Haply, fuch an one am I." Still was Selina filent. She leaned back in her chair, and wept and moaned without controul. " I am here," refumcd Father Frederic, u to reafon with you on the propriety of marrying the Earl. My daughter, can you do better than accept his hand ? ii feems to me you cannot. He is truly devoted to our bleffed Church. Moft rigid is he to the Catholic faith. His life is unftained ; and that he loves you, the violence which pro¬ bably caufes in you this diftrefs, ought fully to prove to you. Say, daughter, where can lie your objections to the union ? My child, your
V
your refufal makes the heart of my Lord bleed !" " Oh Father!" cried Selina, " defift front fuch perfuafions. Never, never can 1 be wedded to the Earl. Afk me not why, but leave me to my mifery." " No, my child,*' exclaimed the holy man, " not while I have fife. God forbid that I diould forfake the unhappy! 'tis my office to comfort you. Daughter," he con¬ tinued, more earneftly, ** it is meet that you fhould not keep from me your thoughts. Am I not appointed by the Church to un- burthen the bofom of the painful? referve will but increafe ycur affliction. Yourfelf faw the difficulty 1 had in peifuading my Lord to leave your chamber. He watts but for my communication, before, I tear, he ufesungentle methods with you. Think me a parent. Think nihie is the agtki cheek of your true father. Prom me you fiiall receive a parent's fondnefs. AU your foibles will I liften to with paternal indul- 6 gence:
gence: yes, e'en as if yon were indeed my child." " Oh Father V cried Selina, falling at the good man's feet, overcome by his ten- dernefs, *« you know not what a wretch it is you are kind to. Spurn me- from you, for I am fit to be an outcaft. I am un¬ worthy the affection of all men. There is not he breathing whofe hand I fliould not difhonour." ** You make me tremble, my child; but proceed. Fleaven knows, wc are all weak 1" •* Father," continued flie, while her eyes aflumed a wild and frantic air, and her heart laboured as if it would break; u Father! you fee before you a creature polluted and impure. Never more can I fhed a virtuous tear. Murder have I caufed among my fellow-creatures, and my off-. faring, unbleffcd by the Church, unac¬ knowledged by God, breathes,to fill up the mealure of my wickednefs !"
She
She paufed, and fixed her frenzied eyes on Father Frederic's face. The holy man ftarted back a pace. He looked on her an inftant in horrible furprife. Then he lifted up his hands, bleffed his God, and faid— " Father, that art above, have pity on her!" <s What!'* exclaimed Selina, wildly^ " then I am utterly loft 1 then you aban¬ don me to God's wrath ! then you think me a wretch doomed to deftrucfcion !** " No," faid he flowly ; " daughter, my heart weeps for you. God forgive you ! come to my bofom, and fhed your repentant tears.** He took her to liis arms. She leaned on his neck, and piteoufly moaned, while he caft his flrcarning eyes up to heaven, and hi3 trembling lip begged the Being he adored, to blefs her. After a paufe, in which FatLer Frederic internally communed with
with the Power he truly ferved, and Selina knelt at his feet, and hid her face in her hands, the good man defired his haplefs penitent to tranquillize her mind, and liften to his difcourfe. He found no difficulty in perfuading her to make him the entire confidant of her troubles. He heard her fad tale with tendernefs and companion* He raifed her from defpondency, and pro¬ mifed her the pitying pardon of the Power fhe had offended. He confoled her when fhe wept, and mixed his tears with her's when fhe looked for mercy to the Being, beyond whofe nvrcy none can tranfgrefs. Pie did more than confole—he advifed. He made her forrows hii own, and readily deter¬ mined to hazard all nis horvs in her caufe. Convinced of the impoffibility ofher marry¬ ing the Earl, he now had to fludy means to refcue her from his power. Selina's oniy wifli was to fly to the pro¬ tection of the Prince. Safe beneath his authority, fhe could fold her infant to her breads
breaft, and, as a lad token of his afTeflion, rcqucft him to provide for her fome foreign folitude, where, unknown to all, me might rear her child, and then lay dowri to die in peace. To return Selina to the fight of the Prince, was by no means what Father Fre¬ deric efteemed proper ; but, humble md reclufe as was his lot, he had not power to provide*for her an afyhim, in which fhe would be fecure from the refearches of Lord Ilford. At length, therefore, he agreed to kek for means to enable her to leave the caflie according to her willies. But long he defpaired of being able to effect it. The private paffage known to Selina, he, however, refolved to make ufe of, His firft point was to gain time from Lord Ilford, In that endeavour lie fuc- ceeded. Next, he obtained two horfes equipped for travelling, and engaged Ofbornc to be the guardian of Selina's flight, while Selina
Selina eafily prevailed on Rachel to follow the fortunes ofher and her child. Soon as evening clofed, Father Frederic repaired to Selina's room, and apprized her of the preparations made on his part. With tears of gratitude fhe heard him, and liften¬ ed to ^very particular of her attempt to efc The horfes led by Ofborne, were to L. * a fmall copfe befide the caftle, at an early hour of night; and, as foon as the family feemed wrapped in fkep, Father Fre¬ deric promifed to enter the hidden paflage, and conduct Selina and her child to the chapel, from which there was a channel leading to the outer part of the cattle, well known to him. Such meafures feemed almoft certain of being crowned with fuccefs. On the pro¬ bability of the Earl's purfuit in the morn¬ ing reaching hfj, were fixed their chief fears. But Selina hoped, by exerting the fpeed of the horfes, to gain, early in the day»
day, fome retreat, from whence, difguifed, flie might reach the fea coaft, and gain a paffage to France. In the hour he now pafled with her did Father Frederic beftow on Selina's infant the benediction of the Church, and to Selina foft and foothing were the leffons of religion and virtue he read. When he left the chamber, Mrs. Edg¬ cumbe entered it. Her affection for her unfortunate Lady was of the warmeft kind. Though flie now rejoiced over the profpect of her efcape from the Earl's perfecution, a thoufand fears poffeffed her bofom, and tears of melancholy and apprehenfion ftole down her cheeks. Thefe, however, flie hid from Sefina, and ftrove to ftrengthen her refolution, and encourage her hopes Toge¬ ther they went to Rachel and the child. Rachel had many more fears than Mrs. Edgcumbe; and though die endeavoured with equal good-will to difguife them, flie was not equally fuccefsful. As
As the hour drew nigh at'which Father Frederic was to be expected, Selina's agita¬ tion grew nearly too powerful for her forti¬ tude. Her maternal feelings prompted her to exert, at this moment, her utmoft ftrength, while maternal tendernefs created in her breaft the moft agonizing apprehen¬ fions. Before the hour of midnight, Father Fre¬ deric foftly tapped on the door of her anti- chamber. Trembling, fhe opened it, and admitted him. In his hand he bore a fmall lamp. Anxiety and folicitude were pic¬ tured in his countenance. (C Daughter," faid he, as he entered the room, (< are you ready?" " Quite fo, Father. Heaven befriend us!" " Amen, daughter! As we do right, Heaven guard us!" He took her hand—* « i Shall
" SI'.ail 1 conduct you now," faid he, < e to the chamber of your wretched little one ?" " I go," replied fhe; * c good angeh, fliield my child 1" Father Frederic took her hand 3 Mrs. Kdpcumbe roilowed, pale with fear. Thx 1 hanibcr do. r was clofed, and the faint beams of Father Frederic's lamp were all that aided ihem in tracing the windings of the gloomy paffage. Ir the filence cf caution they roach rd the obfcure cha;ubc.. Rachel, wrapped in a winter garment, large enough to pre¬ ferve (ron the cold her helplefs burthen, was is: entire re:',uiuelk Twice Sefina kifled her child, who flept in his nurfe's arm?, and fobbed a prayer on his lips. The holy kifs of peace alio, Father Frederic im¬ printed on his ioiehead, and murmured a blefling on his innocence the while. When
When he had fo don \ he motioned to the door, and Rachel followed Selina, with what fc-x arti- les of drefs die thought proper to take. Selina bore her infant in her arms. As they trod quickly, though carefully on, through the narrow paflage echoed a noife lLe the «ra ing on its hinges of a door, hca\y, and little ufed. The Father eroded himfelf, aid Selina c!af| ed ciuicr her infant, and ruflied for- waid, though lier trembling knees had fcarcely ftrengih to fupport her. The noife died away, and filence tucceeded. " Haften, dear Father !" cried Selina, " wc may be fufpected, and purfued. Hafttn, or we are loft !" * ( Tread with caution, my child," re¬ turned he; ^ mark you ho,v uneven the ground is ? Wc are not far from the chapel. Huve a cure on your footfteps." Ncdiing
Neftling to her lier charge, flie fearfully hurried on. The fmall light of the Friar's lamp at length Hi owed her eager eyes an arched door, which Fat ner Frederic pro- claimed the one they fought. " Daughter," ft id he, paufing at it for a moment, " be not alarmed, but this door opens to a burial vault. Take you, how¬ ever, no fear. Of what harm to the true of heart can be the neighbourhood of the dead ? Let not what fights you may be¬ hold, appal you." " Proceed," laid Selina, faintly, " I fear but for my infant." Slowly he opened the mafiive door, and difplaycd, iu truth, a dreary fpectacle. Piled one above another, ftood a melancholy train of coffins. Some wen crumbling through age; others, enriched wilh armo¬ rial honours, had the fad frefhnefs of a more recent date on them.
Selina
Selina fliuddered, and faltered, before fhe ftepped on. While fhe hefitated,fhe thought fhe heard a noife from behind. She-con¬ quered her apprehenfions, and proceeded. The damp fiagnation of the air, together vvith the fuggeftions ofher feelings, were almod too much for her fpirits, while fur- rounded by the rotting corfes of her fore¬ fathers, A faint ficknefs came over her, and, without the afliftance of Father Fre¬ deric, fhe had fallen to the ground. The Friar haftily opened the door at the end of the vault/ and the ftream of air that iffued from the chapel aides, revived his companion, and reftored her ftrength. The gloom of the chapel, faintly revealed' by Father Frederic's lamp, ftruck hor¬ ror to Selina's heart. The wind whittled among the tombs; its hollow murmurs feemed the harbinger of ruin and diftrefs, Savedich dreary founds as dole from with¬ out, through the fretted arches of the hoiv
place, all was quiet. Mrs. Edgcumbe and Rachel were too much oppreffed by the terrors of their fituation, to break the melancholy filence. From the chapel, Father Frederic led his trembling attendants through a narrow paf¬ fage, low, dark, and dreary. " Be of cheer, daughter," faid he, as they walked on, " we fhall fhortly breathe open air." Selina replied by quickening her pace. To her imagination, however, very tedious was the way 8 and oftentimes, when the wind groaned, Ihe fancied (he heard the voices of purfuers. At length they arrived at the laft door they had to pafs. Slowly it opened before the Friar's key, and in an inftant Selina beheld herfelf without the caftle walls.
Father
Father Frederic here left his lamp, and they proceeded for the fpot Ofborne was ordered to occupy, in darknefs. As they pafled under the caftle ramparts, they fear*., fully eyed them; but no lights appeared, though they heard, at intervals, the footfteps of the poftern fentineh As they approached the copfe, by the light the moon fometimes caft, they de- fcried Ofborne, who, on their appearing, advanced with the horfes prepared by Father Frederic* " Now, my child," faid the Friar, «I muft confign you to the care of our Blefled Virgin * no farther can I protect you." Selina bathed the good man's hand in tears of gratitude. Her breaft laboured to fpeak its thanks} but what we feel moft, we are leaft able to exprefs. He kifled her cheek, and filently ipread his blefling on her head. ■e 2 Mrs.
Mrs. Edgcumbe wept without' reftraint. None but melancholy thoughts entered her bofom. Too much reafon had fhe, when flie trembled at the profpect of fo young and beautiful a female wandering, nearly friendlefs, about the wide world. 'She had a melancholy foreboding that die fliould never fee her Lady again, and fhe quite for- - got the dangers from which Selina was efcaping, while fhe contemplated thofe flie was about to encounter. Selina paid her the tribute of a tear as ihe bade her adieu ; and if true friendfhip and unbounded, gra¬ titude merit the tear of regret, well was Mrs, Edgcumbe deferving of it. On one horfe, with her child in her arms, Father Frederic placed Selina, while Ofborne rode before his wife on the other. Amid the bleffings of the Father and Mrs. Edg¬ cumbe, Selina departed, and fled, defolate and forlorn, from the abode ofher anceftors.
The
The night, though not bitterly cold, was wintry and comfortlefs. The-moon often¬ times was obfcured by heavy clouds, and the gufts of wind that fwept along the plain, were hollow and chilling. While Selina preffed her infant to her, flie blefled the faints that had thus far befriended her, and befought them to be the guardians of their perilous courfe. When (he looked back, and"faw the towers of the caftle finking, to her eye, into the black clouds of diftance, joy and momen¬ tary happinefs pofleffed her heart. What then would have been her .feelings, had flie known that at that inftant the midnight raviflier entered her forfaken chamber ? that thofe minutes, had not her flight pre- ferved her, would have been the wkneflfes of her utter ruin ? To Ofborne, who in his youth had been .fomewhat of a traveller, the roads leading to that part of the fea-coaft Selina wifhed EJ tO
to reach s were well known. Along them he guided his Lady*s fteps. Selina, as (he rode over heaths uninhabited and dreary, .often caft a look of terror behind, and fome¬ times fancied flie perceived, in a fhrub waving in the wind, the front of a purfuer. So that flie could efcape from the power of the Earl, fhe cared not whither fhe went, and imagined even the hands of a robber were lefs to be drea*ded :—fo natural is it for us to think prefent calamity^ of all others* the molt bitter* Poor Rachel^ though fometimes fhe had prudence enough to controul her lamenta¬ tions, felt her heart overcharged with ter- tors and apprehenfions. Hangman's ropes,. and all thofe pleafant formalities that attend the execution of a criminal, were continually pafling, in mournful fucceftion, before her eyes. Not unfrequently fhe felt her neck, which flie thought moft unfit for the rough noofe drat would reward her, fliould fhe be difcovered $
difcovered j then looked tremblingly be¬ hind, and cried-— ** Lord be merciful I to be fure I fee them now I" " See what, goofe?" Ofborne would anfwer: " Why, why," while his chattering teeth threatened to fliorten his tongue if he ventured on difcourfe, " why do you trem¬ ble fo ? To be fure you are not afraid ?" Free from all moleftation, they travelled through the night. To as quick a pace as her tender burthen would let her ride, Selina goaded her horfe. To all fatigue fhe was infenfible, and Rachel was too much en¬ gaged with her fears to think on fo trivial a fubject. When morning broke, they were on a wide and extenfive common, which Ofborne declared to be within half a day's journey of the fea-coaft. Selina would have con¬ tinued her way till fhe reached the object: £ 4 of
ofher wiflies; but the horfes refufed to go farther without reft and refrefhment. Con- ftrained therefore to flop, flie fearched for fome cabin fuflkiently folitary to infpire hope of the Earl's purfuit not difcovering it. On defcending a hill, fuch a reclufe and difconfolate habitation appeared. It was built of clay x and thatched with furze-bufiies, and nearly^iidden from the paJTengcr's eye by tall and fpreading trees. Oiborne knocked, and an old woman, its fole inhabitant, appeared. On being told travellers, wayworn^ and willi ng to re¬ ward her for her trouble, wanted a flielter, her door was inUantly opened ; and Selina comforted, with warmth and nurture, her infant, while.Rachel repofed her limbs and her fears, and Ofborne fed himlelf and horfes.
CHAP,
——•««*9JO > I ( 9*«*
CHAP. IV. u ,..., i The winds give benefit, " And convoy Is afllftant——•" VVHEN the Earl, * c withTarquin'sravidi- ing dride," entered the abandoned chamber of Selina, he advanced to the bed, and tremblingly withdrew the curtains. The rage ofhisdifappointmentmay be conceived; filence, however, was his only refource. He at once fuppofed Selina had changed her apartment, and returned, maddened in vexa¬ tion, to his own folitary and gloomy bed. Rather before his ufual hour, he fummon¬ ed his attendants; for fleep was an utter e 5 ftranget
ftranger to his eyes. To his prefence he alfo ordered Father Frederic, whom he com- miflioned to Selina. He made the good man the bearer of a meffage, informing her that her laft requeft being granted, no obftacles he trufted could remain to their immediate union $ fhould any, he was refolved to trample them to the ground, as he would not live through another day without call¬ ing her wife. Unwillingly Father Frederic received this command, and much grieved was he that his tongue fhould bear to Lord Ilford word that Selina was not to be found throughout the caftle, and that there was every reafon to believe fhe had fled from it. When the Earl received this info^nation, he ftarted as a man who firft feels his death- wound. He gazed on the Friar in wildnefs and honor, without power, for an interval, to exprefs the paffions that laboured in his breaft. When he gained power of utter- o ance,
ance, he citrCed his fate, and the hour in which he was born ; then he burft into frightful exclamations even againft the object of his love ; and when he had vented his rage on her name, he heaped execra¬ tions on the diuddering old man, and draw¬ ing a dagger, threatened to fheaihe it in his breaft. The pious Father endeavoured to fboth the emotions of the wretched Earl's mind, but he was deaf to all that favoured of comfort. He beat afide the hand of Father Frederic, and rufhing to the hall of the caftle, madly fummoned all his houfehold to his prefence, a»d, with hag¬ gard looks, gave to them confufed orders as to the fearch he would have imme¬ diately fet on foot. The domeftics, who but half underftood what he fo franticly faid, ftood, with open* mouths and wondering eyes, flaring at each other in mute aftonifhment, The impa* e 6 teencs
iience of their Lord ill brooked this delay y fome he reviled and curfed, and others he furioufly ftruck to the ground. While they fled in terror from his rage, he rufhed to the range of ftables, and mounting a deet horfe, himfelf fcoured the furrounding coun¬ try, followed by as many of the domeftics as could keep pace with his motions. Thoie* left at home immediately mounted their horfes, and left the caftle; but, fortunately for poor Selina, they, very wifely, kept all' in a body,' and before they had rode a mile, forgot, in their converfation on the ftrange demeanour of their Lord, the object of their errand. Wretched and exhaufted, the Earl re¬ turned, though not till after night had dark- , ened all thofe fcenes he deemed proper for examination, living only on the hope of his emiffaries having been more fuccefsful than himfelf
The
The mob of menials he found dill abfent. Shortly the horn founded, and they con- fufediv entered the caftle. The Eailrudied to the poftern. " Fellow!" cried he to their leader, *■* have you found Selina ?" " No, my Lord," returned the man, pulling off his cap, and looking fomewhat confequentially ; " no, my Lord, wc have not; but that does not fo much matter, for you may remember, my Lord, that you for¬ got, my Lord, to tell us what meJfage we were to deliver to her if we did meet her!" " Slave and villain!" exc'aimed the Earl, felling the fimple wretch to his feet; i( and has all this train of idiots been your com¬ panions ? Curies wither you all 1" Choakcd with rage, he wanted power to proceed, while all fled from before him ex¬ cept Father Frederic, wlio meekly drove to afluage the temped of his bofom.
In
In a paroxyfm of defpair the Earl pafled the next hour, and the Friar filently waited on him. At that late feafon the horn was violently founded. When the gates were opened, two men in military drefs rode in, and leaping from their horfes, that feemed jaded to death, demanded to be fliewn to Lord Ilford, He admitted them to him. They mftantly prefented him a packet, on breaking open which, he read the follow* ing lines: " My Lord of liford> " Affairs of moft efpecial moment occa¬ sion my defiring you, on the receipt of this, to lofe not an inftant in gaining the main body of my army. The bearers have orders to conduct you, and what attendants the immediate hour may have in readinefs,, to me. Again I fay,, my Lord, if you efteeni my future countenance worth having, or difpleafure worth dreading, lofe not an m~ flant in joining me, (Signed) , ¥ £DWARD, a>
The contents of this letter roufed the Earl from the lethargy of defpair. At firft he thought of refufing to comply with its import; but when he reflected on the pro¬ bable confequences of his fo doing, he was convinced he muft obey, whatever ruinous events it produced. With a diftracted air he ordered frefh horfes to be faddled, and calling to him Father Frederic, entrufted him with the care of endeavouring to re¬ gain Selina. He inftructed him in the way he widied the fearch to be conducted, and defired him to fend meffengers, at cer¬ tain periods, to the camp, with intelligence of whatever tranfpired. He then mounted and departed, in a ftate very little fhort of delirium, attended by very few perfons 3 for the feat of war. Thus arrived at Ilford the fuccour of the Prince. Not without difficulty the perfon, difpatched by Mrs. Edgcumbe,reach- ed the Englifh camp in France. The ob- ftacleshe encountered, occafloned that delay which
which fubjccled Selina lo fo much danger and ; ain, No fooner did the Prince learn her fituation, than he lent a chofen party to Ilford, under the conduct of that perfon who had before been ferviceablc to the Prince in the profecution of his love at the caftle. Should his fummons to Lord Ilford not be attended to, he commanded this confidant to take Selina from his power by force. Until the Earl's difpofition fhould be known, the Knight remained concealed in the neighbourhood of the caftle. As Lord Ilford complied with the Prince's wiflh, he, and the perfons under his command, re¬ turned immediately to France, though not before he had gained every poffible parti¬ cular relative to Selina. The cot, at which the poor fugitive and her aged attendants {lopped, proved, in every view, favourable to 'heir intcrehr. 1c contained fuch r-Jrefhmc:'-. as fatisficd the wants of the infant, and -omforted herfelf and companions, while its fituation was fuffkiently
fufficiently remote to fanction hopes of it being overlooked by the Earl, fliould his fearch extend fo far. To Selina,. every minute appeared an age of danger; and as foon as Ofborne pronounced the horfes ready for frefh exertions, fhe liberally paid the hoftefs, and departed. When flie found herfelf again unprotected on the plain, her heart beat in dreadful apprehenfion. Her aching eyes, that often weie cad behind, perpetually figured to her ciouds of dud enwrapping a party of horfe¬ men ; and never founded the lead cudomary noife, but flie fancied it the fhouts of pur- fuers. Ofborne was not a whit lefs ap- prehenfive than his Lady, though he fu;u- moned fufficient of man within him to hide from her his fears; and, in truth, he felt not more ibr himfelf than he did for her: and, though ielt'-love is a very dear principle in every bofom, he would perhaps have lain down his life rather than witnefs her falling into die hands of the Earl. The
The fea was far more diftant than Ofborne imagined. With the lefs frequented paths to it, he, however, was acquainted, and before the clofe of day y he conducted Selina to die ccaft bordering on it. With thankful tranfports of heart, Selina beheld the ocean that foon, die trufted, would flow between her and danger, and now con¬ fidercd the hazards of her flight half over¬ come. Slowly fhe wandered along the bar¬ ren fhore, in fearch of fome hut to fhield her through the night. Long, however* flie fought in vain. Night, meantime, came on. Swells of wind ranged over the ocean^ and dafhed its waves againft the fhore. The roar of the waters, and difconfolate cry of the fea-fowl that flieltered in the rocks^ made Sefina fhudder, and clafp her child to the warmth of her bofom. When ftill no roof appeared to protect her infant from the chili blaft of night, her agitation grew exceffive. Often Ofborne fancied he difcovered a hut in the obfeurity of diftance; but, on examining, found it to be only the jutting.
jutting brow of a rock, or the vague decep¬ tion of his eyes. A fmall fight, at length, they defcried twinkling afar off. Toward it they gladly - rode, and after travelling many a weary flep, found themfelves at the door of what appeared a fiflier's cabin. Ofborne knock¬ ed, and was quickly anfwered from within. On learning the nature of the fummons, the door was opened by a young man. A ■woman alfo appeared, neat, though homely* and of a motherly and encouraging afpect* " Worthy friend," faid Selina, " you behold travellers oppreffed with fatigue, and ignorant of their way ; fhelter us, good mother, for the night—in the morning we will depart, and well reward you for your hofpkality." " Come in, in God's name, young gentle¬ woman," replied the cottager; " we can very ill accommodate you, but what we have is moft heartily at your fervice," « A thoufand.
" A thoufand thanks!" cried Selina, while Ofoorne gave the infant to the friendly woman, and aflided his Lidy to alight. Selina, attended by Rachel, entered the fifher's cabin, and the young man (hewed Oiborne a fmall died, the roof of which indeed was far from weather proof, but which afforded, on extremity, a decent ftable for the horfes. The infide of the cabin was quite as de¬ ferable as the feeming difpofition of its owner. Every thing v. as homely to the extreme, but comfortable and clean, and a cheer/ul fire blazed on the hearth. The houfewlfe bullied to produce her little ftores, while Selina and Rachel uncovered the child, and revived him with the warmth of the fire. Ofborne and Rachel ate, but Sehna, in fpite of her endeavours, and the perfuailons of her attendants, could not touch a mor- feL She gave light nourifhment to her child, and fometimes wetted his cheek with tears.
tear and fometimes warmed his lips with - kilico. The cabin afforded but one bed, and that was compofed of ftraw, with the thinned" coverlet fpread over it. To this Selina very fhortly retired, leaving the two com¬ panions of her flight to repofe their wearied limbs on bundles of ru flies fpread befide the hearth where lately the faggot had blazed. , ' ' Oppreffecl as Selina was by agitation, and the pain of many weary miles, it was long before ihe could clofe her eyes to repofe - exhaufted Nature. Cloftly fhe nettled her darling infant to her bofom, and fondly moaned over the fad forrows of his dediny. Thoughts of diftrefs and terror crowded on her fancy, till at length, overcome by fa¬ tigue of mind and body, the fank into fliort flumbers. But ftill her affliction haunted her; for ihe was the prey of dreadful dreams. Sometimes fhe thought herfelf returned to he
the Earl's power, and beheld him ftanding ©ver her, ready to plunge a drawn fword in her heart! Then fhe imagined herfelf at fea i fhe faw the waves roll till they feemed to touch the heavens, and heard peals of thunder break round her. She felt the veflTel part in two; the fea ruftied in, and fhe and her child were waflied from the wreck. While in the fancied agonies of de*ath, fhe awoke, preffed her child clofer to her, and blefled God that fhe did butdreanu When morning broke, fhe arofe, very little refreflied by what fleep her bed had afforded. TiU Rachel came, flie fat down and watched her child, who ftill flept in peace and fcrenity. It was not long before Rachel entered her room, with many tender enquiries after the health of herfelf and child. Breakfaft was quickly prepared by the woman of the houfe, and Selina fliortly fat down to a table covered with very brown bread, por¬ ringers
ringers of milk, and abundance of dried fifh. By fome of the bread and milk, flie felt her fpirits revived, and Ofborne and Rachel found their's to be no lefs fo by eating plentifully of the fifh, to the no fmall gra¬ tification of their hoftefs. By the converfation Selina entered into with the honeft woman, ihe found her to be the wife of a fifherman, at that time along the coaft, engaged in his trade. The young man was her ion, who had ftaid be¬ hind his father on account of ill health. Selina perfuaded herfelf (he could not have fallen into better hands. The fimplicity of the poor people feemed too extreme to allow a fear of their fufpecting her a fugi¬ tive, and, from their fituation and habits, it was moft likely they could put her in the way of obtaining a fpeedy paffage to France. Not without caution and apprehenfions, fhe mentioned to them her wifli of gaining the Continent,
Continent, and offered them a confiderable fum if they could obtain for her an imme¬ diate conveyance. By good fortune the fon knew a veflfel that w?s to fail from a port not far diftant that very morning, and which the favouring wind would probably bring within fight in a few hours. Every thing anfwered to his word : ihe morning had not far advanced, when a fail hove in fight and, in obedience to Selina's wifli, he proved his fiiii boat to board her. When the veffel came even with the point the fiflier's cabin ftood on, Selina's heart ?nd Spirits danced in happinefs. In joy the mod exquifite, fhe kifled her child, and gazed on the bark that was to convey him from a land, containing for him nought but mifery. When affured flie was on the verge of embarking, (he beftowed on the woman and her fon, who had fo hofpitably received and entertained her, the two horfes that had
had borne her and her companions to their hut. This donation made joy fwim in two more hearts, and all was tranfient hilarity as Selina left the fliore of England, probably fhe thought for ever. The fea was fmooth, and the wind light, fo that with eafe and fafety, though their boat was very fmall, they reached the veffel they fought. Selina and her little party were imme¬ diately received on board, and, with many thanks and good wifhes, their conductor returned to his hut and humble happinefs. Selina found the bark die had become a paffenger in, was an armed veffel bound for Calais, and laden with fupplies for the Englifli garrifon there. Though Selina knew little of the ftate of the country flie was about to enter, flie imagined Calais as convenient as any part of the French coaft for the purpofe of joining the Englifli army. vol. iv. s X! 1C
The veffel was fmall, and the accommoda¬ tions it contained but ill fitted to the recep¬ tion of paffengers; but fuch inconveniences were of fmall moment to Selina, while dying from fuch horrors as fhe had left behind. The commander reftgned his own cabin to his unexpected gueft, and there Selina rock¬ ed to repofe, quiet and unmolcded, her beloved child. Now that flie judged herfelf in fome mcafure fecure, Ihe had leifure to redect on the ; ainful circumftances of her fituation. In the thouglit of [/lacing herfelf under the Prince's protection, there was fomewhat that wounded her to the foul. Much rather would die have Red to fome lone fpot, where fhe might have been For ever hidden from his eyes. Had die poffeffed on tht whole earth a fingic friend capable of flicluring her, him die would have avoided; but, aUs! tiie world contained no pfribn but him, to whom ihe .could apply for affiftancc. .By every other fellow-crea¬ ture,
ture, capable of befriending her, fhe was ■ either perfecuted ordifregarded. It remain¬ ed for her and her child either to day and peridi, or owe their prefervation to his hand. When fhe looked to the perils die had yet to undergo, before flic could view her child in fecurity and peace in fome diftant land, moft gloomy and wretched were her thoughts; dill die felt herfelf equal to the tafk of encountering a thoufand frefti difficulties for the lake of her infant, . and deemed his fmiles a furficient compen- fation for whatever fhe mi^ht undergo. The fame light winds that had favoured their paffage in the morning, continued throughout the day to waft them gently toward France. As the day drew to a clofe, Selina afcended to the deck, and far there to breathe awhile the frefli air. The fun, in purple magnificence, feemed veiling his glories in the bofom cf the ocean. A foft and reviving breeze fv\ept along the water. The dill grandeur of the fcene r 'i foot lud
foothed and comforted her broken fpirits, and for a little interval flie only looked on the miferies of her lot with an eye forrow- fully penfive. They were near enough to the fhore to fee the merry peafants dancing away their little hour of recreation in fpright- ly contentment. Sometimes came on the gale the found of their Ample mufic : it came foftened to the ear, and died away in the fweep of the evening wind. Moft grate¬ ful was it to the feelings of Selina; for though very miferable herfelf, flie could now rejoice over the happinefs of others. Often, while (lie liftened to the notes, flie wifhed flic had been born fome pcafant's daughter. Never, die thought, would ambition have entered her breaft. Con¬ tentedly could fhe have rifen to the tafk of the day, and fweetly have lain her doivn to dumber when it was done. Then, if flie had loved, flic could have been happy in he ..i art'h withes, fince ihe hard impositions of r»nk reach not to the low roof of the coaage. When fhe contrafled her fitua-
tion with the obfcure quiet of fuch an one* flie fhed tears of pain. With the fhades of night the wind in¬ creafed, and ftill continued favourable. Notwithftanding the perils that encompaffed her, Selina now obtained a few hours* re¬ pofe, and felt that it refreflied, and gave her ftrength and fpirits. Before funfet the next day, the veffel anchored off Calais, fafe from the many cruifers that hovered about the French coaft. In the firft boat that made for fhore, went Selina and her old attendants. In hope and joy fhe fhortly ftepped on French land. Her firft care was to procure fuch apparel as fuited a pcafant's daughter ; in fuch-wifc equipped, fhe accompanied Ofborne and his wife to the Englifli Governor. When Ofborne made known his defire of gaining the Enghfli army, and requeftcd leave to pafs the gates for that purpofe, the Governor treated him as an infane, and was proceed- F 3 ing
ing to interrogate his companions too clofcly for their purpofe j the old man, however, had been prepared for the interview by his Lady, and interrupted him by informing him he was entrufted with peculiar orders for a nobleman in command, and producing, as a teftimony, a ring which the Prince had given Selina, in cafe fhe fhould ever need his-ailiftance. This voucher was fufrlcient. The Gover¬ nor ordered every care to be taken of the ftrangers, and provided a guide to aid them in effecting their wimes. Though old, her adherents were willing j and where the heart is light, the limbs are adequate to much. Many a cheering fen-' tence fpoke Ofbornc as he fixed to his back his knapfack ; and Rachel, fo far from defponding, had a fmile ready for the infant fhe was to carry, and a word com¬ fort to fpare for its grief-worn motU*.
CHAP,
CHAP. V, « What loads of mangled fiefh and limbt " (A diftKial carnage!) bath'd In reeking gore, " Lay weltering on the ground 1" DRt WATTS. It was a clear, mild, and lovely morning, as the haplefs fugitives paffed through Calais gates. Rachel fhrugged up her flioulders, and fighed twice, emphatically, as flie be¬ held the walls that no longer were to defend her *, and, looking upward, croffed herfelf very devoutly, as if praying fhe might meet a flielter in every night of her pilgrimage, as good as that die had left. Ofborne re¬ buked every fign of forrow fhe manifested, and often caft his eyes, that fpoke moft F 4 eloquently
eloquently honefty and attachment, on the cheek of his Lady, where Grief fat fo mildly pictured, that die feemed an angel of mercy lighing over men's frailties as flie wandered round the earth. In her peafant's garb, Selina looked, if poffible, more lovely than when attired in the habits of rank. The extreme foftnefs of her beauty well became the fimplicity of fuch a drefs; and all that poets talk of village charms, rifing to view, ** Sweet as the r-rimrofe peeps beneath the thorn," was in her perfonificd. A little ftraw hat was tied under her chin wifh a coarfe rofe- coloured ribbon, which the blufh of her cheek put to fhame. The fhort fleeves of her gown difclofed thofe poliflied arms that had feldorn been expofed to the heat of the day 5 and its unftudied make alfo left un¬ covered the greater part of that beautiful neck that hitherto had only been < ( uiifnaik'd to the moon/'
Their
Their way feemed very flowly to leflen before them. Selina's i;npatience impelled her to haften forward, with fpeed that could not be long continued ; but ftill heaths, wide and comfortlefs, ftretched themfelves out before her anxious eye. The guide appointed by the Governor of Calais, ap¬ peared a man fimple and honeft, but igno¬ rant to an excefs, and not overftocked with courage. As yet, Selina had feen few of thofe fliocking effects of war that fome¬ times, though but in a flight way, die had heard of. Of their nature fhe had formed a very imperfect idea; for accudomed as fhe had been to hear of only that part of a victory that blazes brilliantly, and damps the fortunate few heroes, a figh' for the fufferings of thofe who fell, and thofe who mourned over them, had never, for more than an inftant, occupied her bofom. But- now fhe was doomed to become more inti¬ mately acquainted with the painful, as well as glittering part of war ; for the track die had to purfue lay acrofs thofe parts that a £ 5 divifion
divifion of the invading army had lately defolated. The marks of very many horfes* feet fliortly declared the travellers to be in the road through which troops had recently paffed. As Rachel tripped biifkly on, flie fuddenly ftarted back, and fcreamed as loudly as lay in her power; and her voice was far from being of (he weakeft, for Na* ture, indulgent goddefs! generally beftows a found pipe en thofe whom die intends to make ample ufe of one. Selina, in whofe hvtagination Frenchmen and murder were \ippermoft, flood motionlefs and fpeechlefs, gazing, with haggard eyes, on the wild geftures of her attendant. When Rachel could fpeak, fhe replied, in anfwer to the demands ofher hufband— " Oh I leaven I Oh dciu me ! Under the hedge ! Look yonder!" " Look at what ? Speak, woman, for God's fake !" exclaims.d Ofboine. « Oli
" Oh the body ! the dead body 1" cried Rachel. « Oh ho !" faid the guide, « is that all ? Come, take a heart, hero 1 We won't run away from a dead man, I warrant you." Selina caft her eyes to the fpot, and fliud¬ dered to behold extended there, indeed, a lifelefs human body! The guide and Of¬ borne iidvanced to it, and the former, turn¬ ing it round, faid— ** All frefli and fair as yet. I wonder the black gentlemen above have not found him. Here's a rare breakfaft, dinner, and fupper for a whole troop of the army's followers. Let's fee. Oh here he was drilled ; egad, here's a nice little eyelet-hole." And then the facetious guide pradtifed divers drolleries on the pallid body, and feemed indeed vaftly divc"**^d with his own jokes; but his companions could not per- Ctive tic humour of his merriment, Selina f 6 was
was (hocked to a dreadful degree, and cried faintly— " For God's fake quit the dreadful fight! It overpowers me to look on it!" « Why, Lord !" replied the guide, laugh¬ ing very heartily, <c to be fure you arn't frightened ? Adzooks, what will you fay by and bye, when we find your grinning gentry by hundreds ? Why, zounds! they fay my Lord Chandos has not left a foul alive within five miles of his track." . " No!" faid Selina, " God forgive him!" In filence and painful thought they pro¬ ceeded, while their guide whidled a tune, often lifting to his mouth the leathern bot¬ tle he carried, and drinking a health " to him who fhould cut the laft Frenchman's throat.'* As they emerged from a lane, hedged by tall and thick trees, a party of horfemen fud- denly
denly appeared, and commanded them to ftop. Again Rachel fcreamed, and Selina trembled, while Ofborne got clofe to. his Lady, anc drew the old fword he had pur- chafed at Calais for the companion of his dangers. But their alarm was needlefs; the foldiers were Englifh, and greeted them as friendly countrymen. The guide afked fome quef- rions relative to the roads he had to pafs, and received aifurances that all was fafe in tliem. The detachment did not remain with them many minutes. The officer at firft eyed Selina with fome intereft, but differed her to depart without any familiarity. Beneath a fpreading tree they fat at noon, to enjoy a little interval of repofe; and there they produced a part of the refrefhments they had provided, of which Oiborne and the guide ate very heartily; as for Rachel, 5 terrors
terrors of various forts had entirely taken away her appetite, and Selina fickened at the thought of eating. When the fhort meal was over, they renewed their march, and the liberal quantity of French wine that they had drank, fee ned to have heightened cor.fidcrably the valour of Ofborne, and to have given a tranfient beat of courage to the breaft of the guide. The diftance that they had to go, before they reached the fpot judged proper for them to pafs the night at, ar peared to Se¬ lina immealurabie. Her tender feet grew very weary, but hir fpirit:—the ipints that lived for her infant's fake, ftill upheld her drooping frame. Often the guide pretended to remember feme remarkable tree, and declared it to be but a fliort walk from the little village now poiiefled by the Englifh. The village, how¬ ever, appeared not, and Selina's difappointed eye
eye looked forward to a fpace dreary and wide. At length however he exclaimed, with joy— u We are there !" Revived in an inftant, his companions ftepped quickly on. Good God ! what a (cent did they behold! A village, lately fmiling and giy, ftrewed one heap of frightful ruins 1 Cottage intermingled with cottage, 1. y fliapeiels on the ground. The little garden that once had been cultured with fuch nice care, and had afforded an evening retreat to harmlefs age, or laughing youth, fliipped of its trifling treasures, and covered with fragments of the fired hut. The village church, which had witneffed the fond vows of fo many true lovers, and had, for many a year, held facred the re¬ mains of honourable old age, mingled in (corn with the Hones of the field. The narrow
narrow ftreet, where all had very lately been innocently bufy, or as innocently feftive, covered with the remnants of many a young couple's fole treafure, and too often ftained .with guiltlefs blood ! Here and there too lay an unburied corfe, disfigured in agony, and blackened by fire ! " Great God f" exclaimed Selina, as flie ftood with clafped hands furveying the fcene in anguifli and horror j " great God I and does war, glorious xvar / fpread fuch wide, fuch exceffive mifery as this ? And are thefe the curfes that attend the con¬ queror ? Thefe the thorns that grow on the laurels of victory ? For this, my Edward, for fcenes like this have I blefled you for my hero ? Father of mercies, look you here I Oh dwells the victor's boaft in fuch a piti¬ able fcene as this ? Where now is the happy fmiling wife ? Where the lifping babe that hung on her bofom ? The father who caught frefh life from his infant's eyes ? The old too and the helplefs, where are they ?
The white hair of old age, Oh ! is that fcattered difgracefully on the ground ? Come, you who rend the fkies with fhouts when your enemies have fallen, come here, and fee your works ! Look on this fpot for the honours of triumph ; look for them in the groans of expiring infirmity, in the flirieks of the maffacred mother !"------ She was roufed from contemplation by the voice of the guide, who cried in the littlenefs of an unfhaped mind— . '* The devil take them for knocking all thefe fnug little places down ! Now we have half a mile to go before we can fipd a fhelter!" Selina looked on him with all the difdain of ftrperior feelings; for, in thofe moments, flie had not a fingle thought to fpare for herfelf. Soon, however, the fight of her infant recalled her to the woes of her own bofom, and, in truth, fhe there had enough to
>*
to weep over. Convinced that the object to which they had travelled with fuch high expectance, contained not what they fought, they were conftrained to fet out on a frefli purfuit. The guide declared there were fome ftraggling cottages, in which, very probably, Englifh foldiers flieltered, at a few furlongs' diftance. Toward them he now led his trembling companions. Ere he reached the place, night drew near, and not under favourable aufpices. The wind rofe as the fhades of darknefs fpread themfelves over the fcene, and blew cold and hollow. The terrors of Selina, as fhe beheld her child's defolate fituation, cannot be fpoken. It was now that fhe found, though fhe fled from pain and woe, fhe had neverthelefs much of each to encounter. Though affured that the native French were entirely expelled the part fhe was in, fhe could not perfuade herfelf there was not caufe to fear being furprifed by them, Even the gratification of their wiflies die
die fliuddered at, fliould they find the cottages remaining, and containing only their countrymen. Protected but by a man, whole age itfelf needed a guard, what dangers might (he experience in pafling the night with licentious foldiery! As great mifery might befal her as that fhe had efcaped from. Should fhe not find this hazardous flielter, her infant might perifli through cold, and want of comforts. Her ftrength almoft failed, and fhe felt difpofed to fit down and weep ; but the mother rofe in her breaft, and infpired her with frefh courage and perfeverance. In vain they looked for huts, that, but a fliort time pad, had afforded the weary traveller repofe. Thefe too had ihared the fad fate of the village, and were levelled with the ground. Their fcattered remnants prefented to the eyes of the wanderers a picture of ruined hope, dreary beyond de¬ fcription. A general paufe marked the moment
moment of difappointment. The guide broke the filence— 14 Body of mc 1" c^ed he, " but we are knocked out here too! I don't know a houfe within miles of us. ° The air is pinch¬ ing, and enough to kill one. By yonder clouds too, I guefs we are going to have a ftorm. If it ihould overtake us on one of thefe naked heaths! Ob Lord! Lord! what fliall we do ? Oh St. Peter and St. Paul! what will become of us ?" u Become of us ?" retorted Selina, gather¬ ing courage from feeing the want of it in another; " why, friend, every thing that's bad, if we don't exert ourfelves. Come, good fellow, call up your refolution 5 think whereabout you have formerly feen a roof that may fliield us from the night. Look not fo fearfully. Remember that you are a man." " A man !" repeated he ; " yes, I am a man now to be fure, but God knows how long
long I fhall be one ! Oh dear, where fhall we go ? What/W/ we do ?" " VVhy, go forward," faid Selina - 9 " any thing is better than ftanding here to bemoan our mifery. Good Rachel, give me my child, for I fee you are no longer able to fuftain his weight. My father, lead on !" Moft ruefully Ofborne regarded his Lady as die fpoke, while a tear ftole down the furrow of his cheek. He begged Selina to entruft him with the fleeping infant; in truth die was inadequate to the tafk of fup- porting it herfelf, and at length fhe con¬ fented to let him mufflle it up in his cloak. In which order they Jed their pufillanimous guide forward, they knew not whither. There appeared too much probability of the man's trembling predictions of foul weather being verified. The clouds lower¬ ed, and were heavy and lurid, while the increafing wind impelled them furioufly along. Frequently the gale (hatched away part
part of their watery contents, and hurled it to the ground, as the forerunner of a tem¬ peft. Here and there ftood a folitary tree, and its branches fhook difconfolately, as the wind whidled harfhly through its leaves. Selina fliuddered, and folded her cloak clofely round her; but in fpite of its thick- nefs, the cold wind chilled her trembling limbs. In fad filence they trod on in the path that the guide told them led toward the grand object of their journey. Sometimes an half-fupprefled figh, difmal as a groan, efcaped Rachel's bofom; and fometimes Ofborne whifpered fondly to the unconfeious ear of the baby. The rain fell more thickly, and gufts of chill wind fwept along their way, and bent the tall trees that ftrove to fliield them from the blaft. Selina looked wiftfully round. Nothing appeared but the defert heath and ftormy fky. «« Gracious
" Gracious God !" thought fhe, " for what am I referved ? Where muft my child find a pillow for his head through this long and unfriendly night ? Much farther I can¬ not walk, and then I muft lay me down and perifli! Oh ! what a treafure would be to mc one of thofe humble fheds that my cruel countrymen have lain wafte behind me! A thatched roof and a bed of ftraw are all I afk. Towers, that look down on usl let not my precious infant die forlorn and wretched! Oh! preferve my child from perifhing on my breaft !" Tears of dejection and pain wetted her face as fhe trod on over fharp flinty paths that cut her foft feet at every ftep. 41 Alas, my Lady !" faid Ofborne, who kept even with Sdina, and heard her heave a fob of agony, " arc you crying ? For pity's fake, my dear Lady, don't cry j if you do, you'ii break my heart. Be cheery ! If you tire, we'll make a litter of boughs, and carry
carry you on. I will fupport you till my old arms drop from me!" " Thank you, good Ofborne!" returned Selina, " thank you truly! but heed me not; I have ftill ftrength and courage left to toil for my infant." " That's right, my dear fweet Lady !'* &id he 5 " od's mercy, who knows what good fortune may be in ftore for us ? At the next turning we may ftumble over a cottage. I vow I thought juft now I faw a light over among thofe trees, as 1 take them to be yonder. Yes, yes, we may—Oh Lord! what's that?" ■" The fignal trumpet of fome night- party by all that's good !" cried the guide. " Oh the Saints!" exclaimed Rachel, * ,< the French are come !'* *« Great' God of Heaven !" ejaculated Selina, " is it an enemy ?" " An enemy!" repeated the guide, «' no, no, I'm not afraid of that; they know better than to come in this part, I warrant them;
them ; beflde, I know the fignal. There i there's another blaft, and it's Englifh." The fhriil found of the trumpet again broke on the noifes of the ftorm, and fhortly it was anfwered by a fainter note, far away on the heath. The guide propofed halloo¬ ing till his voice reached the party, and begging the commander to fay where a ihelter might be found in fafety, A thoufand fears were alive »n Selina's bofom, and, for a while, flie objected to his making their fituation known to the night foldiers; but when all the defolate circum- ftances of their wandering recurred to her, fhe gave her confent, and both the guide and Ofborne endeavoured to engage the attention of the troop, whether it might be friendly, or otherwife. But in vain they (houted with their ut¬ moft ftrength ; their voices were loft in he various noifes of the dreary night. No vol. iv. c * anfwer
anlwcr wa^ made to I'xir fi 0 nal, and, after a long paule of cxpcftauon, they heard the trumpet of the linglifli foldiers found feebly from afir off. Again were they hopekfs, and without a fhadow of comf'.-rt. The tempeft pahituUy increafed ; tlie wind fwept along in rude and convulfinf antL, and the heavv clouds died large and thick rain. No hovel, of however wretched a kind, appeared, an 1 ilarcdy c»uld a tree be feen to give Llum the protection of its branches. AVith the lail excrtLn of their dtuigth they hurried on, vhile the coaifc wind almoft b'ewlhc.n from their feet. * V/urd of faiiitne's and defpair weie juft lifir.^ to RacIiLl's l ips, whe.i tlie guide cx- clakut'd, cl i L ping hU hands— " There's a houfe-—there's a houfe ! Oh my poor weary limb;-, you'll, be refted at l-dlV* " Where,
" Where, whe"c ?" cri id Sslina, darting forward with new lif \ " Yonder," faid the man, * c there, to tlu riglit !" " ThatV' ejaculated flic; <« alas! it is but a grove of dark trees." " Tre - ?" rcjieated he, " then I be¬ lieve iheir branches are made of flonc and mortar; for, if I have not lofl my fenles, 'tis a lai^e, lon^ building." u God fend )OJ may Iv ti/ht !" ie r pjnd- ed fhe, " for if I h ive jml i] _ • \y fuciu;, I mud fink to the grou:,d, a;ui jK.'i'h." 1 n fpecch I efs c \ ,er 0 e fs I Ii ey 11 a le 1 ed t<; - ward tie object tiiat appv :ej through the gloom, T,.ey pe.if d nu.iy cJJ and la*ge trees, from who.e bru.Vlc'. founded tlie bxlir.^s (i n'.jlil-biids, S'lira looked to the fancit, 1 bv.i ,t:n >; as t 1 a laft hope. Little lefs anxious u e,e ii xh-.'! and O'bomc; and ihe guide, thorgh he only felt for him¬ felf, was ab aiiitiojs as cither of the three, g 2 For
For once Fortune proved favourable to Selina; an edifice, fpacious and friendly, difclofcd itfelf as die advanced". In her faint bofom rofe fuch joy as no words can dcfcribe. Rachel fhouted in tranfport, and Ofbornc rejoiced as much for his Lady as himfelf. The guide, who was as eafily exhilarated as dcprefl'cd, difplayed a thou¬ fand ridiculous antics in manifeftation of his fatisfaction. Moft bitterly were tlic .'anguine expec¬ tations of the whole party damped, when, inftead of an afylum inhabited and com¬ forting, appeared a mafs of defolate and frightful ruins, Selina's foul fliuddered within her—• " St, Paul forfake me," cried the guide, " if it is not the abbey under the hill!" " An abbey!" replied Selina, '• 'tis but a dreary pile of decayed buildings! Alas! here is no flielter for us, and ftill have we only
only the profpect: of wandering till we perifli 1" " Dear Lady," exclaimed Ofborne, " why not examine this melancholy place? Perhaps it may poffefs fome corner where we can hide us from the ftorm." " For the Lord's fake, then, my Lady, v joined Rachel, " let us look into it 1" The guide led the way, and, with flow fteps, often impeded by fcattered parts of the ruinous building, Selina and her at¬ tendants followed him. The abbey was wide 1 )' built, and had once been of great name, and much fplendour. Now it was merely the refidence of " things of night." The windows, once gay in painted glafs, vere now overgrown with long weeds. The walls, which foimerly had rung with the <c pealing anthem," and enclofed many a fcene of religious pomp, now hung frowningly over the ruined aide, in black and terrific decay.
03 *' Lord
4t: Lord blefs us! my Lady,"' fud Oiborne, '* hcic rae io coimoits t'l.r )ou and yui.r jitric cliil.i ! Oil iv cmils mo to loo!; iwuud ii.ls lad jy'ace :" '■■ K'o C'.'n/.orr^ !'' ielurned the guide; 14 thedtvil iv i*i it. i-' 'tis not better than va'kin^iihou' : ;. til.; ".ind antl rain. Here, fallow me through tl'.-j broken paffage ; I think I r*'vn nibjr a kind of bclfiy that has pot h r> r -■*' '"et " i ";. >f in filce.ee 'l/.y rV :v,:d ir.n ti a fmall divifion cf ;■;. 1;; ih- ; r 1 ,u v\-s indeed frill weather-!-roof, ,■ iowvur thunal fuch a flicllci \*.v, o h;ei acc-,[,*-_d it with joy; and, icaiu.jj Knelt on a done, caught her chihi to he arms, and warmed hi.n on her bofom. When once (he determined on fpending the night on ibis defolate fpot, Ofoorne and the guide examined for materials to render it as comfortable as [jofliblc. They fhortly found fome dry boughs and old wood. Bv
By friction they produced fire, an.I kindled a cheering bla^e on the ground. Ofoorne fpread provifion, and after a time, Selina compelled herfelf to eat triflingly of ir. Rachel ma'le fomewhat like a bed of boughs, on which Selina lay her down, and tried to deep, whi'e Oiborne and the guide watched alternately. A confufed cloze wns all that Sclin-, fo pakifaliy lituaud, could link to, i:i fpite of u;e day's fatigue. Even this unrefreih- ing dumber was often broken on by the cries of the birds that fheirercd in the abbey walls. The tierce wind 100 kovUed round her wretched bed, and the rahi beat chillingly on the aged roof. NohvithfLuid- ing the fire was kept up during the night by the per.'on who watched, the cold was extreme* Shivering, die neflled her infant to her breaft, and imparted to him what warmth her heart retained. Happy in cafe and ignorance, he flumbercd fercnely :-rib broke on them the new day. G 4
As morning dawned, the ftorm fank away. Clouds ftill lingered in the fky, but the fun rofe with cheerfulnefs. We never know the extent of pleafure till we feel pain. Never had the peace- fulnefs of early and calm day been fo grate¬ ful to Selina's heart as now. Ofborne and Rachel fpread breakfaft, and the whole party prepared for frefli exertions by partaking of the meal. Refrefhment taken, they left the abbey ruins, and recommenced their painful and hazardous march. The country acrofs which their way lay, was fiat, but the hard and ftony footing moft oppreffive to Selina, Againft fuch an obftacle as fatigue, ilie, however, bore up with firmnefs, and gather¬ ed frefli fpirits at every ftep, from reflecting fhe was fo much nearer to fafety and the Prince.
The
The fame devastation that had prefented itfelf to her firft day's journey, met her eye through this. Huts, and often hamlets, were paffed, ranfacked and abandoned. In this fpot fome vifta appeared half demoliftied and pillaged ; in another, the vineyard of the lowly and induftrious, mangled and ruined. From fuch fcenes die turned a bleeding heart, and fighed to think that rapine fliould be counted glory. A cottage, lefs effectually deftroyed than thofe that were near it, received the tra¬ vellers as evening drew near, and, by com¬ panion, afforded a comfortable fhelter. Here, while the hearth blazed, and fhe cherifhed her child, her fancy wandered to the miferable beings in whofe habitation fhe refted. She thought of the fmiles of peace with which they had fat after their day of toi!, where now fhe did. She faw them either abufed and weeping exiles, or infulted corfes What, die afked herfelf, was their crime? Want of power to oppofe an in** t- ; 5 vader.
vadcr. And what was gained by .their dciiuuclion ? The reputation of viclory. On the break of morning, Selina fum- inoncd her companions to their duty, and very fhortly die led them to ncA r endeavours. TJie guide, who, when no object iofj to alarm him, diverted hy his facetioufnefs, promifed to conduit his empl iver*. on this day, to a fortified town in poOefnon of ihe Englifh, where the exact fituation of ihe army might be learned. The hope of thus gaining the end ofher folicifude, inspired Seiina with frefh courage. Of fuch a dim il¬ lative, (he, in truth, ftood in the utmoft need. Weaned by the long way ihc had trodden, her ftrcngth began to fail, and her fpirirs to droop with it, Rachel, inured to labour, bore the fatigue of walking with little inconvenience 5 but her joy in having a profpect of attaining the object of her march, was fcarcciy h's vivid than l.tr La<!\ '&.
The day grew gradually milder. As it wore toward a clo*e, every veftige of the preceding night's ftorm pafled away, and there was a penfive languor ia the air that feemed to fis>h over the recollection of the tempeft. Selina's mind foftened to the temper of what furrounded her. A melancholy, not altogether unpleafing, dulled, for a time* her Wnfe of the miferies die was enveloped by. By degrees the whole party appeared to become fubject to a feeling of fomewhat fimilar a kind. An entire filence prevailed* Suddcnlv it was broken bv the gui(b, who walked foremofl, calling to his companions %i not to be afiaid if they dunibled on a bod) or two, ror he imagined tlu-re had been a fkiimifli on the heath, as lie detcricd a do..d horic. 1 ' Sehna fliuddered al the thought of wit- rolling ib dreadiu! a iLcne, but fliuddered iu lilciKC. Rachel was uoiiy in her appre- c 6 ' lipjfions*
henfions. Ofborne took the moft feniible ground for fear, when he falteringly aiked the guide " if he did not deem it likely that the enemy might ftill hover where it was ap¬ parent they had made a ftand ?" The man anfwered in the negative, and comforted himfelf and fellow-travellers by obferving they had not more than half an hour's walk to reach the Englifli garrifoned town. Thus encouraged, Selina quickened her pace, but quickened it to behold a ghaftly fight! The firft picture of death was a mangled human form, acrofs which was extended a ftiffened horfe. She averted her eyes, and haftened from the chilling object. It was, however, only the prelude to more woeful fights. Scattered about the heath, flie be¬ held with honor, many bodies, and foon fhe arrived on the fpot that had held the fierceft of
of the battle. There lay human figures, pale t bloody, and ghaftly, in numbers dreadful to humanity. Sometimes die ftumbled over a fragment of armour, and fometimes recoiled from treading on an unburied limb. She felt her pulfe flutter, ai.d her eyes grow dizzy as the wandered amid this fcene of murder. She leaned on Oiborne to fupport her trembling limbs, and covered her eyes with her hands as die walked. Soon the guide dopped to look on an object that called for the paufe of pity. Two forms, not fufficiently disfigured by death to hide the fimiiarity of features that marked them brothers, lay locked in each other's arms ! They fcemed as if they had expired in blefling each other. It was an heart-affecting fight, and fancy gave it touches of colouring to the feeling breaft, that could even the conqueror be made fufceptible of, would draw a tear from him in the moment of triumph.
Yes,
Yes, the trade of daughter, let us hope, could not fo entirely have banilhed mtare fiom 1 is bofom, but that he would mourn over the blow which deftroyed in an inftant the friendfhip that had grown vvith life* and had iebbed tlie aged parent of the only comfoit of his waning} ears—had left him to tread, defolate and in tears, to the grave! Sehna fhed a tc'r of companion on the fad piclure,and, diuddering mi terror, haften¬ ed f.om tho ipot. Many fiuhtrul \irlims were jet to be paffed ere c.ejr giound could be »tL;med. Spina's 3.--..U d k^i.cd w:t..i»i he;, and her tottmi « firj s w th d*idi-.uiry boie her dom the horrid tcc^e. When die regain-d ftrcnc,th. flie lenirr''- cd to the gUitlo the neai ap; iOi-c'i c f even- iiig, anu ti.c httle profpect r!:cie -a«s of r-i'.ifiii° the town they fou-dit, if the/ con- tinued their prefent dow j ace of jjur^cy- u 0 . This lemaik v»as loo true to be nejlcclcd,
ncgleflod, and they quickened their walk accordingly. Nipht, mod horrible-feafon to wanderers fo defolate, now hovered over them. Chill and murmuring winds fwept over the bar¬ ren plain ; and while the dry birds fought in flocks the covcit, the fercech-o.vl cr,cd bodingly from his daik hiding-place. Not even hope could deny tlu ground there was for fears that the French migb.t did be in the neighbourhood of a place it w ;s evident they had recently fought on. Difnuy rack¬ ed Selina's bread as fancy heightened to her the danger. When the loud blaft of a trumpet burd on her ear, iii: wildly gave herfelf and infant up for loft, and looked defpairingly for the appearance of her cap¬ tors. Horfemen were fooa diftinguifhahle, and it feemed they riefcried the little pirty as they bent their way quickly toward it.' Thouah conllious of the imp:flib ; .!ity of (> ctcapc,
efcape, Selina at firft drove tody; but, oppreffed by her imagination, was quite unable. The horfemen, who, as they ap¬ proached, appeared armed, drew nigh. The gu.de was the firft to difcover they were Englifh, and there was not a beatified nane in his recollection that he did not oder thanks to. The military halted, and their commander ordered the ftragglers to give an account of them [elves. The guide ftepping forward, faid, *' they were poor people of England, (an old man and his wite, and his daughter, and his da ghter's fon) on their \*ay to the Prince'b army, to deliver letters of import¬ ance to a Nobleman there; and that they were tH \ fecking the town of —■—, there to gel " night's ihelter. The : hcer made a few other interroga¬ tions, a .. was about to proceed, when the guide begged him to direct tnem to the town,
town, and give them the watch-word. Both thefe he did, and left the wanderers to their courfe. On looking in the direction they had had pointed out to them, the town-lights, juft one by one breaking through the dark milt, were vifible. With joyful hearts they made toward it, but trod many a weary flep before they were beneath its walls. When they reached the gates, they were defcried by a fentinel, who prefented his bow, and demanded their bufmefs. A defcription of themfelve?, and men* tion of the watch-word of the night, pro¬ cured them admittance, though not till they had anxioufly waited fome time, as the guard was compelled to fignify the fum¬ mons to the chief of the watch. A houfe was pointed out, where, for a trifling fum of money, lodging for the night was procured. To their repofe they were there
there left, after the pcnnLlbn of the com- tmndinr; o{»kcr hud ht^u cl;taincd, ;v.d they lud detlaad tljcm'Mvci) r^u'y to ap* pear before him on the eufuin^ morning.
i< ——. The apptehc* lion of ihe yc--! (t CjI'.v 1 ) but u t greater f^eli.'g to Me ^ »\ ." 6tlAUJ.S?l ari:. IHE comfort of a night's red to Selina in warmth and fecurity, is unspeakable. She felt invigorated by it for new exertions, and viewed thofe exertions cheerfully, when die perfuaded herfelf that veiy few more were nrceffary to accomplish her aim. When fhe rofe in the morning, and lojked, for
for the fufl time, on th; to vn which had flidtered her, (he fhuddoivd to beh.ohl tne j'^noial prepantion for dtu^hter that reigns through every ftieet of a fortified place in the feat <t*uar. The officers marlhalling foldiers, the ar.ntd change of guard, the harlh founds of martial mufic, and the clangor of arms in the di fibre nt evolutions fcattc/ed troops went through, c!fi!kd and appalled her, after witneffing the dreadful cflbcts of war's couife, ■■» Ofl>omeand Rachel waited 01 htr flioitly after die liad rifen. Ofoorne die d\l)i tched to learn the diftance of the Piece's army, and Rachel die commiffioned to procure fuch neceffarics as the infant might need in the part of the journey y«t to come. Ofborne foon returned, and with a coun¬ tenance predictive of good fortune. Selina's quick tin! j caught the joy the faw pictured on his fe^tuici, nor was her fatiafaction damped w!i'-n Ofbornc informed her that the army
army was but one day's journey on horfe- back diftant, and that a man in the town had offered him the loan of horfes, pro¬ vided he would pay in fuch a liberal way as might make it worth the owner's while to hazard his cattle in a journey acrofs the enemy's country. " Good lack, my Lady," concluded Ofborne, *« I faid to him, 'Friend,' faid I, * if you think your horfes in fo much dan¬ ger, what do you think of us that are to ride them ?' £ Oh, as to that,' anfwered he, grinning, * it is your own look out.' " Mercy on us, my Lady I I hope neither' the horfes nor we are in real peril." Whatever Selina might think, fhe dis¬ claimed all apprehenfion to her old follower, and Ofborne went gaily away to get ready for his laft day's wandering.
Rachel's
Rachel's preparations were foon made. The town produced every comfort for the child that Selina could require, and fhe now viewed herfelf on the eve of gaining the fhelter of her too fondly-beloved Prince's protecting arm. New fears, but fears of a lefs painful and more delicate kind, now poffeded her. She looked with trembling to the hour in which fhe fliould place hericlf in the power, and implore the affiftance of, the companion of her fall. Though fully fenfible of his ten¬ dernefs and gcnerofity, the dignity of her virtue made her weep at the thought of becoming his charge. With too much juftice fhelikewife feared her own fortitude-j for her love to him was fervent and un¬ abated. He was the object which engaged her thoughts, when the firft impulfes of her bofom bade her place her affections. The tendernefs of his attentions, the fond fym¬ pathy with which he raifed her, drooping under misfortunes, bound her heart to him for
hufuanj, (he u-lt for him. Viopf. ly, therefore, did flic doubt her own flrength vdicn ouee more he aripcarcd m tlic character or co'i forter and guaruian, and wfen ihe be kl him U ndle his cluld 1.1 his arms aid vainly ftiuggle to hide th; fj.e!".iU3 -vf the 1 .iufb^iid, while ho exprefu'd thole oi' the pare.it. I*:*ii r:eniat; aly did flic torture h^hsf by fuchrcf^vicini. \Mdlc the pay ot th.m, Rrxhd bn.-te into the rocm, and, with i v m: ■ .0 m > of •. mut ion, cricd — " Oh I^idj i" V L^dv, there i-^ a mon* ft:-jj5..;Mrh*. -'. f,h".::s at the do-ir, v.idi anoora'l <^ver t..cm, and ] il.t*s I don't kr.o v ho v I.-; j. in thvir lund^ l" « Sok'.'.ii ." j e[ cated Suhi.a, turning pale, " v>h»t '.v, .it they r" *• Ch, i (.'id uoL ftop to hear that,'* ia;d Rachel i ci 1 Uiicvc u^y afiicu for the old peafants
\
peafants and their daughter, though—Oh Lord, hcie they are 1" An officer now appeared, followed by two annul men. He add re fled himfelf to Ra- clul, and faid — " Como, mother, art- you ready to go brfj.'c the Govcr-*-,/;-? Where is your huf¬ band? ;\:y.pretf;. licDt I./*, are ycu ready ?" <: Ve-s" replied S..\n.\ 9 "lead! 1 will foii-.w." tc Oh yes, your W'jrfliip's honour," eja¬ culated Rachel, " ue arc re.;dy, as the iasingis! Lord hive mercy upon me!" tnr-.ino; to her Lady, * ( what will become of us I" Selina anfwered not, and the officer very officioufly infilled on handing her down flairs. Wliile doing which, lie feemed much intcrefted by her perion, and fpoke what he imagined vutricifms concerning her child.
Trifles
Trifles agitated Selina's haraffed mind, and flie now trembled in apprehenfion of fhe knew not what. The officer, finding his attempts at gallantry unattended to, forbore to make further ones, Ofborne joined the party at the door of the houfe, and flowly. and filently the wretched wanderers followed their guide to the place of examination. The fame account that they had hitherto given of themfelves, Selina defired her com¬ panions dill to adhere to. On the difcre- tion of Ofborne flie knew fhe could depend; on Rachel flie could not place the fame reliance :—but Rachel was not a fubject to judify apprehenfion; for though loquacious enough on fome occafions, flie, on this, wanted power to betray herfelf. In every pafling foldier fhe fancied fhe beheld an executioner, and could as cafily have given herleff a new fet of teeth, as emit diftin- guifhable words through her chattering old ones.
The
The poor fugitives were conducted to a large, gloomy, and fortified building. They were led up an afcent of ftone flairs, on each landing of which fentinels paced. Through an arched paffage, lighted only by loop¬ holes, deftined to ferve the double office of a window in time of peace, a place for archers to fhoot from in 'hat of war and fiege, they were led to a large ftone hall, ranged along which were lines of foldiery, between whom perfons paffed to the cham¬ ber where fat the Governor, Here the wanderers were defired to wait. The awful nefs, created by the ftand of fo many military, terrified Selina, till lately ufed only to fights of peace. The rude glances of the men, and the difcourfe of thofe that commanded theni, abaflied and diftreffed her- Ofborne in vain ftrove to difguile what he felt, and fpoke encourage¬ ment to his Ludy with a very awkward grace. Rachel's difcomfiture was not at all leifeiied when fhe faw feveral wretched creatures of vol. iv. 11 * the
the invaded nation, brought ftrongly guarde( from the council-chamber, leaded wif iron?, and loft in tears and diftrefs. Sh ruefully anticipated her own fate when flit beheld their's, and cordially widied die was on the moft barren fpot of England, or re¬ turned to all the horrors ofher hidden nook in Ilford Caftle. Ofborne was not fo much ioft to himfelf; he f~t ali the apprehensions that the fitua¬ tion commanded, but ftill was well pleafed to differ his fate in the fervice of his lofl Loid's daughter. After a long period of fufpcnfe, the officer that kept the door of the council chamber, pronounced the names affumed by Oiborne and his companions. Falteringly they re¬ plied to the fummons; and partly impelled forward by the foldiers that had conducted them thither, they entered the chamber where the Governor fat in office.
The
The room was fpacious, yet dark and gloomy. The roof was fretted, and the windows fmall, arched, and painted. A long table, covered with green cloth, was iu the centre of. the hall, on each fide of which were perfons, as in council. A feat, exalted above the reft, was at the upper end of the table, and on it fat the Governor, behind whom were ranged files of milit;v/y. Beflde Ids chair ftood two Efquires, to execute his immediate wiflies. Selina and her infant were placed at the bottom of the table, and the awe- ftricken Ofborne and Rachel crept behind her. As the Governor was employed iu fpeak- ing to an attendant, they remained fome moments unnoticed. Selina gathered cou¬ rage to caft her eyes round her. Judge of her adomihment and her terror, when die beheld in the perfon of the Governor, Lord Hford's friend, Sir Emeric Aryille 1
11 2
Fc\
Fear entranced her. She had not at once recollection even to avert her face. She prefently, however, turned half round, and fupported her tottering limbs on the fhoulder of Ofborne. The Governor bent forward, and demand¬ ed the bufinefs on which the peafants fought the main r.rmy. The filence that exiftcd, and the evident emotion of the perfons he queftioned, caufed him to examine them attentively. Ofborne had juft begun a Hammering fpeech, when Sir Emeric cried-— « Ceafe ! Bring forward that female !" Two officers obeyed him on the inftant; and, *lffured of the truth of hh fuppofition, he exclaimed— *« Lady Selina! and in this drefs ! and in this country ! What means it all ?".
Selina
Selina had not power to reply. Sir Emeric knit his brow iu deep thought. Then he faid-*— " Convey thefe perfons to my private apartment j I will examine them myfelf." His wiflies were but too readily put in practice. Selina was dragged, more dead than alive, to an inner room of the caftle, and Ofborne and Rachel, terrified and aghaft, forced to follow her. Very fhortly Sir Emeric arrived. Waving his hand, he bade his two attendants take Oftiorne and his wife away. Then he led Selina to a feat, and fat himfelf befide her. For a few moments he fpoke not. Fix¬ ing his eyes on her face, he at length faid— <e Lady Selina,. how am I to account for the ftrange appearance of you and thefe old people in a foreign country—a country torn h 3 by
. by war, and full of enemies ? Where is Lord Ilford ? Where the attendants proper for vour rank, and the drefs and accommoda¬ tions fuited to it ?" " I have none of thefe," replied Selina ; " the Earl has mifufed the power accident gave him over me, and I am now flying from his perfecution!" "Indeed!" cried Sir Emeric; "you aftonifh me i I do not pretend to decide "between you and his Lordfhip. But, Lady, to whom are you flying ? Accept of my protection. I promife you, on my honour, no power inferior to my abilities of defence, (hail wreft you from me. I aflume not enough to cenfure my Lord of Ilford, but the common laws of Knighthood fhall make me true to hofpitality. Whom elfe would you fly to, Lady ?" " To a Nobleman," faltered Selina, "in the army of the Prince." " If I am not too arrogant, his name ?"
"T cannot
« I cannot tell it," faid fhe, (t but he would give me the protection of a friend and father." *« h may be fo $ but, Lady, know you what you have to encounter ? Know you that the enemy fcour the country between this and the camp—that a large army of them lays not many leagues diftant ? Lady" Selina, it would be madnefs to feek the Prince's camp!" " Oh no, no, no! it would not !" ex¬ claimed Selina. " Let me pafs! for Hea¬ ven's fake let me pafs !" • f* Moft freely ; but, dear Lady, would you rufti on certain deftrudtion ? Can you not imagine the miferies I ihould let you pafs to ? Moft furely you would fall into the hands of the enemy, and then your ruin would be utter! Would your inno¬ cence guard your maiden beauties among licentious captors ? Would even the for¬ feiture of them fave your life ? Too likely not. Oh Lady Selina ! rejoice that you H 4 have
have the (belter of walls commanded by me, and quit not a fan&uary fo fecure.*' " I thank you for your offers," cried Selina, anxioufly, « truly thank you for them j but, fpite of the dangers, for Hea¬ ven's love fuffcr me to go ! On my knees 1 beg you ht me pafs!" " Rife, rile, my Lady !" faid he, lifting her from tire ground j " why this emotion ? If you chufe to encounter the diftreffes I point out to you, pray do. The town gates are open to you.'* " A thoufand thanks i" exclaimed Selina, matching his hand in a feeling of jcy al- mofl cleliiious: " Bleffings reward you, Sir Emeric!" " Alone," continued he, <( I cannoc fun^er you to depart j I will order a guard to attend you, and if you fall, they (hall (hare your fate. Fare wei, Lady ! till you leave us, my houfehold, uncourtly as if is, is entirely at your difpofal."
He
He rofe, bowed, and retired. He had not been gone many minutes,. when Ofborne and Rachel entered, and, with tears of joy, faid they had been fent to their Lady by the good Lord Governor,, who had defired them, while they ftaid, to* take any refrefhment they chofe from his kirchens. Rejoiced as Selina was at her apparent efcape, fears yet hung heavy at her heart. A female, who proieffed herfelf fervant to the Governor, attended by two inferior French female domeftics, fliortly came to offer her fervices, and that of her compa¬ nions j but die did not in any fliape with their attendance. An Efquire foon after came to inform her a guard waited to* conduct her to the Englifli camp. With a beating heart ftic s by this perfon, returned her thanks to the Governor for his friend- ihip and attentions, and haftily prepared to leave the town under his command. h 5 She
She was about to mount the horfes pro¬ vided for her, when a meficnger, with eager and hurried looks, made to her, and put in her hand the following fcroll, fo haftily written, that its characters were fcarcely legibible.
" This inftant, my Lady Selina, have fcouts arrived, informing me that the enemy have totaty cut off communicat'on with the camp. To leave the town, is to go deliberately into the power of the French* You have now to determine whether you prefer this town and my protection, or the licentious freedom of the enemy's army. It is nearly indifferent to me; only I cannot, injudicc to my King, facrifice any of his foldiers on account of your (pardon me for faying it) unreafonable wifhes. (Signed) " lmeric arville,"
Selina
Selina could fcarcely read this note throughout. When fhe finifhed it, it fell from her hand, and her face framed to fo piteous a look of diftrefs, that cruelty itfelf muft have fighed for, had it feen her. Starting fuddenly forward, flie demanded to be led to the Governor. She was inftantly obeyed. She found Sir Emeric alone in a private room. Rufhing toward him, fhe panted for breath, and feemed overcharged with thoughts, yet incapable of giving one of them utterance. Sir Emeric rofe, and took her hand. Her head fell on her bofom ; fhe threw herfelf on a chair, and burft into tears. Sir Emeric was filcnt till the violence cf her emotion was peal. He then aiked the caufe of her agitation, and faid he could fcarcely deem it poffible for the information h 6 he
he conveyed, to fubject: her to fuch excef¬ five burfts of diftrefs. Much as her mind laboured with, flie knew not what co fay. If what Sir Emeric advanced were truth, it would be madnefs to dare the danger confequent on leaving the town. To prove his affertions falfe, flie was unable j and the dictates of reafon, which now prevailed over the firft feelings of difappointment and anguifh, fhewed her the prudence of affecting reliance on his honour if' die were conftrained to remain in his power. To his fpeeches, therefore, fhe made little anfwer, but afked if he deemed it probable the next, or following day would alter the pofition of the enemy fufficiently to render it poffible to gain the army of the Prince. He replied, with much feeming uncon- - cern, " that he thought it was, as ihe French forces were inadequate tothe hazard of a general battle, and liable to be com- 6 pclkd
polled to a retreat by the flighted threaten¬ ing motion of the Prince," He lamented being obliged to deny her a guard, but pleaded, as in his note, the certain death he fhould be configning it to, as an ample apology. He again, though with lefs earneftnefs than before, faid the conveniences of his caftle were entirely at her fervice if fhe chofe to ufe them. To do fo, however painful and fraught with dangers it might be, appeared to Selina her only refourcc; and, pile and overcome by grief, (he was led by Sir Emeric to an apartment felected by him for her ufe, and Rachel, affifted by two fervants of the houfehold,. were appointed to wait on her. Hero ihe draggled, with the lad effort of her fortitude, to bear up again ft the cruelty of her deftiny.—When the mind is wrought to the expectation of peace, misfortune falls with double poignancy j and fo it was with iiCTr
her. She fpent her hours in bitter bewail- ings, and turned a cold ear to the voice of comfort. Tears of deep and cruel woe fell from her faded cheek, and her heart heaved as though it would break. When night came, die retired to an uneafy couch. Painful vifions diftracted her fleep ; and her child too did not reft, as he was wont to do, on her bofom. Morning broke on her haraffed and unwell. She foon rod*, and after calming her mind by a morning hymn, fat down at the window of her chamber, and penfivcly contemplated the landfcape that glowed beyond it. As the day advanced, die fliook off, in fome degree, die oppreffion of her dtdarbed •flight. Rachel, whofe circumfcribed ima- gination fcldorn led her to lojk beyond immediate eafe, was vaftly well pleated with her fituation, and ufed every method inker power to divert her Lady. The infant was all fmiles and playfulnefs, and Selina lulkd her grief to red in nurfing him. Before
Before noon Sir Emeric requefted to fee her, and enquired, wilh fome politencfs, how fhe had refted, and whether all things were to her' fatisfaction? She gave him the thanks due to his hofpita'ity, and, with tremulous eagernefs, demanded the ftate of affairs without the walls. Sir Emeric faid the enemy exhibited figns of moving, but had not yet altered their flat ion. To gain the army was therefore yet impoflible ; but that he imagined, and hoped, the next day would fee them terrified to a diftance by the motions of the Prince. With this information Selina was com¬ pelled to reft fatisfied, and endeavoured to difguife her feelings, to prevent offending the man into whofe power fhe was thrown. As flic timidly glanced on the face of Sir Emeric, while he fat for an interval filcnt, die dirank fhiveringly back from obferving him ; for his large and dark features fpoke a penetration, joined to an obdurate malig¬ nity, that the fenfe chilled to look on. The
The more flie reflected on the danger of being in fuch a man's power, devoted as (he imagined to the intereft of Lord Ilford, the greater her apprehenfion grew. Should he^ on the next day, appear defirous of ftill withholding her, fhe determined to infift on leaving the town, be the hazards what they might j and fhould he forcibly detain her, to difpatch Ofborne to the Prince, with notice of her vicinity to him, and detention. While Selina thus wandered in woe and pain* the Earl—wretched caufe of her dif- trefs !—ran no fmall hazard in obeying the order of the Prince. From the part of tho French coaft at which he landed, to the army, was a much more dangerous track than that taken by the dcfencclefs Selina, He, however, reached the camp, and ap¬ peared before th^ Prince in the evening of that very day on which Selina arrived at ___-., The Prince, anxious at once to remove the Earl from his prefence, and account
account for the abrupt nefs with which he demanded his fervice, feigned to have re¬ ceived notice of a meditated attack on the town under Sir Emeric Arville j and, unfuf- picious of the fatal tcndeucy of his order, appointed Lord Ilford to the command of a confiderable force, and directed him to repair, on the indant, to the place in queftion. The Earl took poffeffion of his command, and marched to the place of his destination. It was on the evening of the fecond day of Selina being there, that he arrived at it. Sir Emeric received him with mingled fen¬ fations. As Earl of Ilford, he welcomed him with as much joy as his feelings could rife to; as military commander of ------» he treated him with a coldnefs that the Earl could not but perceive. The bufinefs neceffary to be tranfacted at their official meeting, ended, the Gover¬ nor took the General to a private ioo.ts, where
where he informed him Selina was in his power. The Earl ftarted, gazed fpeech- lefs on him, bade him repeat what he faid, looked round to affure himfelf he was not in a dream, and then clafped Sir Emeric in his arms, and drained hira to him in a tranfport. All that can be felt of joy, where prin¬ ciple has no fliare in the feeling, the Earl ** felt. His mind, before worked by gloom and defpair nearly to franticncfs fc now glowed in ecftacy and expectation. Little thought was neceffary to determine what courfe to purfue, and that little xvas fuch as proved him abandoned even by the laft lin¬ gering rays of viitue. Convinced of the difficulty, or indeed feeming impoffibility of perfuading Selina to accept his hand, he refolved again to attempt what had already once proved abortive. Sir Emeric, who had long learned to facrifice all to felf. benefit, readily agreed to refign ths poor c}evoted girl to his purpofes, Harmlefs,
Harmlefs, and fmiling amid her forrows, Selina lay down to flumber away the dreary night, while bafenefs and fenfuality plotted the pollution of her midnight fleep. The reftleflhefs of anticipation is excef¬ five. A room was too fmall a fpace for Lord Ilford while evening wore away, and night advanced. After drinking fevtral goblets of wine, he left the gloomy fortifi¬ cation in which Sir Emeric dwelt, and walked alone on the parade within the walls. At did, he fometimes was pafled by fmall bands of foldleis on tiieir march to focne diftant pait of the ramparts, where they kept watch for the night, and by one or two fingh w. 1 d 'ers, returning from the profitlels bboui *\ their fubjected trades, or ftayhv* to iudu"'^e mehvicholy by view¬ ing the dr^ariiufi < f night. But at length thefe cheering encounters died away, and no human creature could be feen, fave the fentinels
*
fentinels who fingly paced the ramparts in chilling filence. The night was dark, the air ftill, except d fome few intervals, when a light breeze rofe from the plain, which murmured among ihe piles that fkitted the town, and died in a diftant whifper. Now and then broke from the filence of the night the foft found of a trumpet far away. Once, a dog howled on that part of the heath which the bodies lay on, of the men killed in the late fkirmifti, and was anfwered by the melancholy note of one in the farther part of the town. A night-raven, too, cried and flapped its wings as it perched on the heavy towers of Sir Emeric's habitation. The black volumes of ' building that rofe frowningly along the ram- ''parts, gave a gloomy caft to the face of night moft oppreffive. Such was the fcene the folitary Earl wan¬ dered in, and plotted deeds that fuited only the horrid temper of fuch a feafon. When
Wken the bell tolled eleven, he ftalked like a ghoft along the rampart, and entered the abode of Sir Emeric. He found him alone. Stepping cautioufly in, he afked eagerly if Selina were retired. " She is," whifpered Sir Emeric; " I have fent my attendants to their couches. Here is a lamp j I will lead you to her chamber." He took up his fword, and proceeded. The Eari, muffled in his cloak, followed. They paffed, in the iilence of afiaffins, through rooms, large, Gothic, and vacant, where even the footdeps of guilt echoed, and the breathing i.f villany feemed a terrific foreboding of death and horror. A gallery, hung with taptftry, along which the creep¬ ing wind whhpered, and appalled the ear, led to Selina's room. By the feeble light of the lamp, there appeared to be chairs worked richly, but mouldering through age,
in this gallery. The windows of it were painted. It iooked more like the difmal aiflc of an abbey than the paflage of an inhabited building. Into it opened Selina's chamber. S'.r Emeric paufed at the door. He drew a key from his pocket. He unlocked the door. A faint and glimmering taper ap¬ peared within. " There is a light," whifpered he to the Earl : " I leave } ou to your purpofe, At daybreak I wall be again here.*' Tiie Earl had not breath to reply. Sir Emeric retired. The echo of his footfteps founded from the end of the gallery ; it fank to nothing, and a folcmn ilillnefs reigned. The Earl hefitated a moment at the door. It was not the paufe of irrefolution ; it was one of tho;c delays that a guardian angel, yet hovering over the head, gives birth
birth to—'Twas momentary.—The Earl flowly opened the door, and catered. Like a thief to his prey, he crept along the room. He took the taper from the table, and gently advanced it to the bed. Thither, to the fweet object that lay un¬ confeious on it his eyes were caft. Selina lay on her fide. The fillet that confined her luxuriant hair, had nearly fallen off, and the fine treffes wantoned over her neck. Warmth tinged her cheek. The beauty of her face was exquifite, for ilie fmiled in her flumbers. On her poliflied and ivory arm lay her infant, and one of his innocent hands was extended on her bofom. The Earl darted in wild amaze. For the fird time he fufpected her to be a mother ! Horror, hatred, and revenge for a minute drove love from his breaft. He drew his fword from its fhcath, and lifted it over the breaft
breaft of the babe; but the mother'* fea¬ tures caught his eye, and foftened allhis foul. The fword fell on the bed. Fie ga&cd on his love v-rith rapturous delight. He ftooped and kifled her check. He extended his arms to clafp her to his bofom, when he heard the cui tains flowly with¬ drawn on the oppofite tide of the bed. Fie looked fearfully up, and beheld Handing the figure of his wife ! Her face was ail pale and ghaftly ! flie ■was clad in light rGoe<>. On her left breaft appeared one deep wound, from which the blood ftill feemed to flow. Below her right bread appeared a fecond gafli—the dab of Sir Ea.enc 1 Her long tranfparent lunds held aiide .the bed curtains, tier eyes gleamed divine reproach and forbiddance. The n.i.eiable Earl gazed, with erect hair and tittering knees, on the horrible 'pectre. Fie cafped for life. Breath failed, and he fell in a fit on the floor, When
'When he awoke from it, he dowly rofe, and, by wildly apprehenfive degrees, looked for the fpirit; but it was gone, the cur¬ tains were clofe, and every thing in its accudomed ftate. Selina flept, and a brighter fmile played on her lip. The Earl, as well as his trem¬ bling hand would let him, grafped his fword, and tottering to the door, fixight Sir Emeric's apartment, where he again relap- fed to infenfibility, and was with difficulty reftored to animation.
voLi iv, c CHAP,
>~ rnm ta09 6 $G>]^&\<Q99* eu < 1
CHAP. VII. •", He that Hands upon a flippery place, " Makes nice of oo vile hold to ftay lum up.'" SHAKESPEARE. UNCONSCIOUS of the dreadful danger that had encompaifed her, Selina awoke, refrefhed and hopeful. Fair vifions had bleffed her repofe; a good angel, flie fan¬ cied, had defcended from the fky, fpread round her the radiance of love, and feaied her lips with the kifs of peace. Sweet are the flumbers given by Virtue, whole fovereign hand has power to calm the
ihc bofom, againft whofe repofe are hurled the fharpefl arrows of guilt. Wearied by exertion, Lord Ilford, toward mormng, fell into an horrible fleep, from which he ftarted with the air of a maniac. Deep defpair fucceeded recollection, and, ftretched on his couch, he hailed the new day with groans of bitternefs, Roufed by the entrance of Sir Emeric, he rofe, but fought in vain cheerfulnefs and comfort in the fmiles of day, and the face of harmlefs nature. Day no longer fmiled for him, and the landfcape, gilded by the early fun, has not power to footh the murderer's torture. Wretchedly convinced that peace and •confolation were loft to him, lie gnifhcd his teeth in utter mifcry, and gave himlelf up to the fway of every bad padion for the purchafe of tranfient pleafure. Hh native courage, hardened'by defperation, * a ilcckd
Reeled him to eye with difdain the inter* pofition of Heaven's (elf; and, though ire could not at once refolve to forcibly flrive for what the attempt to gain had produced a fcene too dreadful for mortal feelings to witnefs, he readily determined to ufe the oppreffive methods fo entirely in his power, to compel Selina to his arms. Rage, revenge, and a thoufand baneful pafiions tore his miferable bofom when he perfuaded himfelf the infant he had beheld in Selina's arms, was her own, Thefe minutes, however, were but few; for he could not coolly believe that Selina, Ample and fecludcd as had been the habits of her life, was deep enough in intrigue to be the parent of illegitimate offspring, nor that flie could be married, and a mother. Exquifitely miferable were the beats of his heart when he, for an in¬ terval, fancied otherwife, and believed that the beloved girl had enriched the arm* of a rival? When
When a few hours had prepared him for the interview, he defired Sir Emeric. to bring Selina to him. The abandoned vil¬ lain inftantly obeyed. He found Selina fitting in the room he had provided for her, with her infant on her knee. The child was playing with its mother's hand,, and looking up to her face with the fweetefl fmile of innocence. She was regarding the opening graces of its in¬ fancy with fond delight, and fnatching endearing kifles from its rofy lips. It was a picture that might be thought to move an heart of adamant. But the heart of vice, that has overcome the flings of remorfe, is harder j and fuch an one was that of Sir Emeric, " Lady," faid he, advancing flowly to her, " let me requeft your prefence in a more commodious room of my caftle; I have a rrifon for it, and beg you wiil not deny me." 1 3 Selina
Selina rofe, and refigned the infant to¬ the care of Rachel, for whofe charge fhe wifhed it to pafs in the eyes of Sir Emeric, She profelTed herfelf ready to attend his plcafure, particularly as flic was about to Lave reqne fled fuch an indulgence as h® now offered. In filence he led her along, like fome poor vitflim whom a bad angel tempts to a frightful height, there making the moment of its adonifhment and terror that of its facrirlce. When he gained the door of the Earl's room, he muttered inwardly— l( The pei fon you find there has effec¬ tually undeceived me. Lady, when yoa pradtifed duplicity, you fliould not have expected to find Truth." It was now that Selina's heart mifgave her. She tremblingly turned, and looked imploringly in his face. There was not time for words. The door was open; fhe entered,
entered, beheld the Earl fitting at the far¬ ther part of the room, fcreamed wildly, and fell back infenfible. Sir Emeric caught her, and Lord Hford 3 darting forward, preffed her to his breaft. Afliftance was procured, and flie foon re¬ dored to herfelf. When fhe opened her eyes, thzn clofed them again, and filently prayed that fhe might ceafe to be, the Earl waved his hand, and the females quitted the apartment. He was left with Selina. He took her hand, that had fcarcely fenfe to flirink fiom his touch. He looked ten¬ ded}', tliough with a frowning brow, on her face. " Selina!" faid he, mournfully, "you expect me to reproach you with your flight, to upbraid you for leavmg me ? But if you fled alone, I pardon you. I will feal my 1 j. forgivenefs
forgivenefs on your lips, and repeat my vows of conftancy and love." She anfwered not, through inability; for life itfelf hung fluttering in her bofom. He fuftaincd her inanimate form, and placing. himfelf clofe to her, fupported her in an attitude of fondnefs. " Tell me," cried he, in a voice treni-. bling in anxiety and apprehenfion, " had you any companion in your flight ?" " Yes," faltered Selina, " two attend¬ ants." (( And whofe—whofe infant was that ?" articulated the Earl, gafping for breath to utter the interrogation, " My fervantV* * f Your fervant's ?" repeated he, " and nurfed in your bofom !" He folded his arms, and mufed for a few moments; then faid—
" I feel
** I feel a diflike for that infant, methinks. I will fee it." He fummoned the attendants, and com¬ manded them to bring Selina's follower and her child to his prefence. She, who has felt a parent's fondnefs, a parent*? fears, alone can judge of Selina's fenfations wliile fhe heard the order given. Rachel appeared with the child. The Earl examined the infant's face. He gloom¬ ily meditated over it for fome minutes. He ftamped, and the chofen confidants of Sir Emeric entered. The Earl took the child from Rachel, and. while he eyed it with a fierce frown, the fwcet babe fmiled in hisr face, and played with his hand. " Bear away this infant!" cried he;. " let it be taken from the town. Anon 1 will give farther orders, concerning it,"
1 5
The
The men grafped the child, and moved toward the door. Selina franticly darted forward— " Give me my child !" flie exclaimed r " Oh, give me my infant, and take my life! Defperately fhe threw her arms round it, and ftruggied to tear it from the firm hold of the ruffians. The Earl panted in rage and horror :—~ 46 Give it to her !" he muttered* The men obeyed, and he bade them retire. A few indants he dood gazing on Selina, while fhe preffed her child to her, and trembled in tearlefs agony. « Your's?",
" Your's ?" he at length faid ; " and is that loathfome bantling your's? Wretch, tremble at my vengeance I Diftradion I Madnefs! Mifery i All then is over I" He ftruck his burning head with his clofed hands, and flung himlelf proftrate on the floor. Suddenly he ftarted up* and unfheathed his fword. Selina anticipated his intention, and fall*- ing on her knees— " Mercy for my child ! Oh,, mercy for him if you love me I" fhe cried. He flood a minute irrefolute ; once he- lifted his fword, but his heart forbade him. to ufe it. His brow grew unbent; tears came to his eyes; his lip trembled,, and he* faid in a foftened accent—- " Syren! that wert born to rule my deftiny, thou haft conquered. Thy child 16 is
is fafe. The look of thine eyes dtfarms me! But there are other objects of my ven¬ geance—objects in whofe heart's blood I will glut myfelf! Tell me, who is the father of that—that hateful fight? Tell me, and I will forgive you." * c Afk me not," replied fhe, faintly ;. t( rather fhall you extort from me life, than, the name of my child's parent.l" A paufc of horror fucceeded.. The Earl commanded Rachel to leave the room. " Was it—was it my fon ?" faltered he. " It was not," faid fhe, turning away her face : " no farther will I reply to what you urge." He advanced to her, and grafped her wrift.
« Sit
" Sit you down," faid he, « Oh thou- betrayer of my peace! Once more let my deluded eyes be happy in gazing on you Y* In the woeful intrepidity of utter defpair, Selina obeyed,, and the Earl feated himfelf befide her., " Cruel, cruel girl!" cried he, " thus to treat with fcorn the offer of an heart like mine ! No words can tell how I loved you ! No breaft can feel what mine did ! Oh! never, never can fondnefs equal that with, which I regarded you! I thought to live happy in your fmiles; to purchafe them,. God of heaven* what did I not wade through? and thus the hand that was to cool my burning head, has been awarded to another's worthlefs claim. The bofom, whofe foftnefs was to heal all the wound* of my wretched confeience, has been—let me not think, or madnefs will fcize me,. aiid furioufly I fhall deftroy your life,, and* breathe my laft over your corfe!--—Mifer¬ able
able girl! pitiful as b the compcniiirioij, ftill you have iomethm > left to give e. Though another lias pofletfed what I drove for io d (> ar y» you yet can blels my arms. Look not indignantly; you are m my po'-ier, and your charms, polluted as they are, muft be mine !" " No V* icturned flie, <( thofe polluted charms, my Loid, though you boaft them in your power, and though they are un- fr'iLiided and dcfencelcfs, fliall never fink to be tlie murderer's reward. Shudder over your crimes, my Lord ! Go drive to waih away your guilt, and refiain to torture wheie you never can overcome ! } ' Ue fmiled horribly. " Wretched giil !" he cried, " do you ,emcmber tiie extent of my authority ? While \ou were yet unftaintd, I foi bore to exeit it ; but for the dikkunful and de* dov.cicd, there are dungeons and bolts, there ;<re iolitary confinements, there are fpots where
v?here an offender may be hidden from die face ot day, and be the victim of a la-vlefs paflion, wirn^ut the luUt hope of King refcued by imcrefle 1 It'low creatures. Think of theie, t-c^bic, and ) teld to my defires i" " P;oud in imocence of hcan," ex¬ claimed the, " 1 look down, unmoved, on your forcelefs :! r?ats. Reieale me, cruel and bloody pertecut^r. B;. I l^wcn 1 lwcar, the difdain I feel for y. u ihall never be foftened, without it a to p-ty '" « Hal is it (o^ did Lord Ilford, darting up. He fta.uped, and the dark vifaged minifters of Sa* E ncric entered. «° Tear from her that cluld !" thundered he. They fprang to the infant. Supernatural power feemed lent to Selina s arms. In vain, for a time, the rufh\-ns ft"ovc to wrcft her burthen from her. >VMuvt ii to ber breaft, fhe refifted a4 the.r elfn'Ls utleri g the while the moil piercing cues of diibv^.
At length one of the villains griped her wrift till all power pafled from her hand, and then fhe could retain no longer her ill-fated child. She flung herfelf, drugglmg, on the neck of tlie man who held it, and, unable to fucceed in regaining it, fell on her knees to the Eari, and conjured him,i £t if ever he hoped to fee another happy day, if ever to have mercy bedowed on him in old age,. to give her back her babe, or facrifice her and that together." Not one ray of pity for the infant, nor, on that head, eompaflion for the mother, induced him to accede to the former of her defires; but he feared- her didrefs, fhould he refute, and confign her to abfolute foli- lucle, depriving her of life of reafon; and, under the impulfe of that apprehenfion, he commanded them to redore her her child, and convey her to fuch clofe concealment as Sir Emeric might name for her, The
The ruffians obeyed, and led the poor miferable, killing her babe, and clafping it clofe to her bofom, from the apartment and prefence of the Earl, But Lord Ilford found it impoffible to flay behind, and he followed at fuch a dif¬ tance, as enabled him to obferve what was tranfacted without being fubject to the reproaches of his victim. Beneath that caftle, taken from the French, in which Sir Emeric now redded,. were many deep and difmal dungeons. Himfelf the object of her fex's fcorn, Sir Emeric felt all the revengeful fury of his foul rife when his flaves told him the dif¬ pofal of Selina was refigned to him. The moft gloomy and unfriendly cell he appoint¬ ed her to, and, in perfon, he led the way to her place of confinement. From an arched paffage, on whofe fides hung, big drops of condenfed vapour, opened the
the dungeon he fought. He entered. The flaves forced Sehna in, and then ported themfelves without the door. Sir Emeric placed the lamp he bore, on wjiat was to- ferve for a table, and fmiling horribly on his prifbner, muttered— *' Well, Lady, you prefer this apart¬ ment to the love of Lord Ilford ? Strange fex 1 that muft be forced to perform what it's woo'd to, and which force can fcarcely prevent acting in the way it's denied I Here, Madam, 1 will leave you to your medita¬ tions, I believe I may prefage you will not long have poftefled your new habita-- tion, before you wdl agree to exchange it for love and pleafure. Fare you well! Due refrediment fhall be conveyed to you." If Selina had retained p^wer, flie wanted inclination to reply to the taunts of villany. Sir Emeric wripped his cloak round him,, caft a fowling look on the dungeon, and flowly
flowly withdrew, and pulled after him the. plated maflive door. The haplefs captive for fome rmnutes dood in a ftupor of woe and horror. The innocent wailing of her child roufed her. She contemplated his face with diftrefs the moft exquifite, and after gazing on him awhile, found power to weep on his neck. In a very fmall degree, tears eafed the weight on her brain. Her forrow became of a more lively nature ; flie fat dovvn, and bemoaned her mitery aloud. After indulging in fulnefs of complaint, the fortitude that the feelings of a mother caufed in her breaft, ftimulated her yet to make endeavours to preserve her child, and herfelf for him. She iurveyed the fad and chihing recefs flie wasjmmured in. AU around her weie bare walls of ftone. A miferable mat, fpread on the floor, alone kept from her feet the damp and cold pavement.
pavement. At one end of the dungeon ftood a bed 7 wretched, thin, and old. A fuppoited board, worm-eaten, and covered with duft, that fupplied the want of a table, and a fingle cliair, completed the comforts allotted to her. No ray of light ftole on tlic hideous dungeon. The dim taper, left by Sir Emeric, barely difpellcd the perpe¬ tual darknefs. that dwelt there. Horrible and frenzied were her thoughts. Where, in this dreary and loathfbme prifon,. fhould flie warm her infant's heart, when the chillnefs of night pinched his little limbs ? If ficknefs oppreffed him, where were the medicines to heal and cherifli him ? They were not to be had. Over his dying pangs, thofe who confined him would rejoice—to haften them on, perhaps, wouM ftrive ! From the hands of murderers, what was not to be dreaded ? She viewed herfelf the offspring of mifery, the child of ill- fortune, and believed, at length, the period of all her fufterings was come—believed, fhe
fhe never was to know days of peace and confolation, but here was to die with her babe, unheard, uncomforted, unpitied! She faw no hope of now conveying to the Prince notice of her fituation. 1 She feemed beyond the reach, loft to the help of e 4 very human power ! Her devoted child, the unconfeious participater in the calami¬ ties of her fate, and her fole fupport in them, flie clafped to her, and murmured her moan, amid bitter and heart-wrung tears, over his fmiling face. While flie, in fuch a manner, paced her prifon, the heavy lock turned, the chains *J1, and the door was opened, A man armed, but not in a military drefs, ap¬ peared. He was not one of thofe who had con¬ ducted Selina to confinement. His fea¬ tures were large, ftrong, and ill-favoured. A malicious fmile fat on his lip, that evinced his
his taking pleafure in triumphing over the. fubjected ; and a frown on his brow, that fpoke him to have waited on the miferable till he iiad grown callous to "their fufferings. He brought a bafket, containing fome homely food, and a pitcher full of fpare liquor. He fet them down in filence* Selina eyed him with terror, but as he was leaving the cell, commanded courage to afk-— u If food for herfelf were «all ftie was to have f If no comforts were to be adminiftered to her child'?** The man replied, in a furly and indiffer¬ ent tone— ** That he could give no anfwer him¬ felf; that he had orders to convey to Lord Ilford any meffage fhe might wifh to have conveyed, and, if die chofe, he would make the queftion flie now propofed, the fird."
She
She begged him to do fo, and he fecured £he entrance, and retired, Prefently he returned with the following reply—
u When Selina accedes to Lord Hford's wiflies, fhe will never make a requeft that he will not attend to. For the prefent, he will fend her detefted infant no other nourifhment than what fiiits its mother. If it perifli, (he will have herfelf to reproach; let her fave it, and open her prifon doors by abandoning her obftinacy,"
•* Gracious God 1" cried Selina, "will he not take pity on my child r* Good friend, gentle fervitor! my infant will perifli without food and without warmth ! Have eompaflion on a fond and defolate mother! Bring little comforts for my boy ! Think, kind
kind friend! that without the like,yourfelf would never have been reared to glad a mother's love ! Look on my infant, view his fmiles of peace, and deny me if you can i" The man coldly faid, " he could only a& as he was ordered, and afked if me had any anfwer to make to the Earl's note ?" Clafping her hands, and falling on the feat, " None," fhe faid. The man fliut the door, and difappeared. Awhile, flie fat with her child ftretched -on her lap, and her hands crofted, defpair- ingly, on her bofom. « Spirit of my mother!" fhe at length uttered, in a low and hollow tone, " that once haft appeared to me armed in terrors, dealing reproach—Oh now look thou down in pity !—Blefled angel 1 is not yet my crime atoned
atoned for > Loft to happinefi, fubject to all the mifery of guilt, the flings of re¬ morfe, the pangs of repentance, I wander oppreffed and forlorn. Woes encompafs me; in every minute weep I over this offspring of my tranfgreffion. Surely, a mother's fondnefs is not criminal ? Smile, then, on me; ftretch thy protecting hand over the innocent of my bofom. Let me not fee him die in bitternefs ; fave me from finking the victim of impurity !" Entranced in affliction die lona fat, while her babe flept on her knee. After he awoke, ihe alternately loft herfelf in dejection, and encouraged the cheering, but faint rifcs of fortitude within her, for his fake. Of the lafpe of time die had no other method of judging, than by the imperfedt way in which her forrow nieafured out the hours. Much too foon flie thought it was night, and offered fuch of the coarfe food allowed her, as die imagined fitted for him, vol. iv. r to
to her boy. Then, flie fpread the covering over the draw defigned for her bed, and lay down on it. Sleep flie never thought of wooing to her eyes. Through many fad hours die nurfed her infant's repofe, and imparted to him the tender warmth of her bread. Very often (lie fhed tears over him, and lamented her wretchednefs in agonized , groans. Di finally—appjehenfivcly flie liften¬ ed for footfteps approaching her dungeon ; but while die lay, all was ftill. Once die fancied flie heard a diflant noife like a human moan, and then the clank of chains. The lbund paffed auay, and the dreary filence of the caverns was, to her ear, bro¬ ken on no more. While Selina was thus fubject to unex¬ pected and entire mifcry, the Prince fuf¬ fcr*. d ail the to; ture of fufpcnfe, and pains of ibiicitude. The confidential periods fent by him to England, on the fird notice he received of Selina's diftrefs, no fooner found the Earl obey their Lord's mandate, than they
they fearched for means of conveying to the Prince fuch intelligence of Selina, as they hoped would prove fatisfactory. Small enquiry convinced them Mrs. Edgcumbe was the proper perfon to apply to; they gained accefs to the caftle, and found means of afluring her their purpofe was j uft. She wrote a letter to the Prince, imparting to him every particular of Selina's fufferings, and flight. This letter the Prince's faithful emiflaries forwarded to him with all pomble fpeed, Flis diftrefs and anxiety in learning that Selina was an unprotected wanderer in the country his arms were dcfolating, arc inde- fcribable. He immediately di (patched cho¬ fen vaflals to her afliftance. With difficulty he himfelf remained inactive in camp, In fincy he faw his adored Selina, and his fori. the helplefs prey of an incenfed foe. He faw her fink their captive. He heard her cries, and beheld her die, the fubject of every indignity that inhumanity could k a devife.
devife. His imagination overpowered him, and with the fird feelings of didraction, he witncfled the unfuccefsful return of nearly every friend he had employed. To the event of their fearch who dill remained abfent, he looked with the lad beats of hope—faint rays of confolation, that alone fupported him through the wretched hours of extreme fufpenfe.
CHAP,
»™c«©e©I« , g£>JO®***'«'—
CHAP, VIII. « m w . —- . .1.. —...... Betake thee *' To nothing but defpair. A thoufand knees, 11 Ten thoufond years together, naked, fading *' Upon a barren mountain, and ft'Jl winter. " In ftorm -perpetual, could not move the gods '* To look that way thou wert." SHAKESPEARE. SLEEP came not to Lord Hford's couch. Variety of wretchednefs wore away the flender remnant of colour from his cheek. By turns, anguifh the moft keen that the heart can know, poifeifed him, as he brood¬ ed over the recollection of Selina having bailed another's arms; and rage, revenge, K. 3 and
and indignation, as he pampered his fancy with the thought of encountering his rival, and making him the mangled victim of his hate. The paflion he felt for Belina, was n"t abated by the knowledge of her beauties having been facrificed. With the finer fentiments of affection he was now unac¬ quainted, and fenfuality md delicacy are incompatible. He could not coolly put in practice perfonal force: the threatening fpirit of his wife flitted before his eye as he imagined it, and changed him to a trem* bling, nervelefs coward. Often, in the heavy courfe of the dark night hours, he dole, with the gloomy timi¬ dity of guilt, to the prifon door of his per- fecuted captive. He heard her moans, and he burnt to footh her with fond kiffes. He heard her fpeak in plaintive tendernefs to her child, and every word fhe uttered was a dagger's point to his ear. The wind growled through
through the caverns, and, to his flartled hearing, it was the groan of one of thofe horrid fhapes that " walk at dead of night, and wave the torch of hell around the murderer's bed." His footdeps ftruck an echo, and he turned to defend himfelf againft a minffter of vengeance. Early in the morning he went, attended by the keeper of the cells, to the dreary dungeon,- The door's maflive faftenings we r e loofened, and flowly he entered. The haplefs object of his widies fat, with a pale countenance and difhevelled hair, befide the dim glimmering of her lamp. Her in¬ fant die was rocking on her knee, aud the fwcet, but comfortlefs babe was moaning like the turtledove. Shec.ift, ruefully, her eyes to the door as he e ■lereti ; but when flie beheld him, averted ner face in horror and indignation. He approached her. Involuntarily Ids lip trembled as he fpoke. k 4 " Falfe
€ < Faifeand fantafticgirl 1" he faid, "do yop yet repent ? Do you any longer oppofc my inclination ? Have not the night va¬ pours of this diflnal place overcome your obduracy ? Speak ! are your prifon doors to be opened, or fliut on you ?" " Leave me, bafe and cruel I" fhe cried, in an hollow voice ; " leave me to perifh !" " Be it fo V 1 murmured he ; "I fhall repeat my queftion when longer differing has worn more wholly down your untimely pride." The door, that groaned on its hinges, was clofed, and he retired more wretched than when he came. He fought his cham¬ ber, and while he paced it in the reftleflhefs of defire, curfed his miferable being. The c T imax of his crimes, and the crifis ef his fate, now drew nigh. When three long and tedious hours had elapfed, he font to requeft Sir Emeric's prefeixe. The bloody and abandoned villain obeyed. With
With him only he defcended the fubter¬ raneous prifons, and once more appeared before the pining and defolate Selina. Heard alone by Sir Emeric, Lord Ilford was louder in his threats, and more profufe of reproach than wfien fubject to the ear of a menial. To both Sefina was deaf; and though for her babe fhe looked on him with an imploring eye in fome moments, in others flie beheld him with the fuperior fcorn of virtue, or the dangerous courage of hopcieflhefs. He left the cell. When' he would have flowly paced the arched paffage that led from it, Sir Emeric laid his hand on his arm, and faid— " My Lord of Ilford, I have words for your private ear. Had you not afforded me this opportunity, I fliould have de¬ manded an audience of you. As it is, the k 5 ftoilfc
ftone chamber on the right will fuit my purpofe. Let me lead you to it." " I am at your fervice," replied the Ear!; and in filence he followed the Gover¬ nor. The room the aflaflin led to was vaulted, and its walls were done. Above it was one of prccifely fimilar formation, and in that there was a tenant; but the circum- ftance was not prefent to Sir Emeric, On both fides he knew there were empty dungeons, and he imagined no ear, fave the Earl's, was near to him when he fpoke. He placed his lamp on the table. He made the Earl fit, and then he, after a minute's paufe, began. * s My Lord,** faid he, " you are, I be¬ lieve, confeious that I have rendered you * fome fervice. There lies a blood-boltered corfe at Ilford that would fay fo, if it could.
could. My Lord, I have waded through murder for you !" " True," cried Lord Ilford, " and I have not been infenfible of it. If I had not remembered your attachment, how would you have become Governor of this important place ?" " I confefs your Lordftilp's gratitude; I confefs what you have done for me; but I have fhewn my friendfhip in fome new inftances. I do 4iot, Earl Ilford, make a boafting difplay of my actions, but, let me obferve, Selina would have been loft to you, had not I detained her within my walls." " Juftly fo. I have new obligations. Pror/.ofe a reward to me, and if you find me tardy, upbraid me." " There you hit the purport of my thoughts. My Lord," advancing clofe to him, and fpeaking with low and folernn earnednefs, " let me paint to you your fituation. You are confeious of the illega¬ lity of your proceedings. Should your de- K 6 tention
tention and abufe of this Lady meet the King's knowledge, your life would be the forfeit. Lord Ilford, how flender are your hopes of maintaining fecrecy ! The attend¬ ants of Lady Selina live ; though not at prefent, they may point a dagger to your breaft. By murder, however, they may be fecured ; but, my Lord, I fear the Prince of Wales has, in fome ftrange way, gained notice of our meafures, for I have received letters from him, denting me to be in readi- nefs to fhift my command at two days* notice, fhould he find it neceffary. To convey Selina away, will be impoflible; to flay her, you have not the heart; and the Prince, when he enters the town, will difcover your cruelty, refcue the miferable crcrtures you opprefs, and condemn you to differ as a villain." <c Horror and hell! No more 1" exclaim¬ ed the Earl. ** Why fliew to me this dread¬ ful gulph ? What does your difcourfe lead to?" *
" I will
" I will tell you. My Lord of Ilford, you have learned to look with meet difdain on what the world calls honour. Honour, my Lord, is what every man terms doing that thing which is pleafant to him ; refraining to do that to which he has no temptation. In the blood of the innocent, but obtrufive, you, my Lord, have fmothered that tinfel idol. No,v, then, let mc tell you how to efcape from the eVils that hang over your head, fufpended by a ftraw !" He drew dill clofer, and lowered his voice to an hoatfe whifper. " The French, who arc encamped not very many leagues off, have ode red me an hnmenfc fum, and their continual protec¬ tion, if 1 will furrender to them this town, I have agreed to admit two thoufand of them, at midnight, on the twenty-third. Without your coincidence, I cannot do this. Be my accomplice, and the muni¬ ficent French fhall guard you from the vengeance
vengeance of judice, and fecure to you the perfon of Selina/' " Villain! Traitor! Slave!" cried Lord Ilford, darting from his feat, " wouldft thou betray thy truft ? Wouldft thou re¬ bel againft thy King, and dare to woo me to be the companion of thy guilt ? Apoftate, avoid me !—No, no, no I much of fin is on my head, but I yet am not a traitor, nor diall hell itfelf provoke mc to be fo j thank my God, I am ftill true to my King !" He paced the cell in tranfient felf-fatis¬ faction and joy. Sir Emeric eyed him with difdain, " Ha, ha, ha ! and you comfort yourfelf with that flender confolation ?" faid he. " Take it with you to the fcaffold. Earl, Earl 1 you are in my power. You cannot kill me, you dare not, for your General would revenge my death. Accufe me, then, of murder ! Lord Ilford, who would fall r with
with me ? Lord Ilford, you are yourfelf a murderer ?" * ; Curfesoffate i" ejaculated the wretch¬ ed Earl, " is it come to this ?" He gazed with glazed and haggard eyes on the black wall. " Fie fays too true, I am a murderer, and in his power!" <( Fare you well, Lord !" faid the crafty Sir Emeric; " I go to apprize my Prince of your injudicc; to ac cafe you of murder; to implore his pardon on my own head; to make him hurl thunderbolts on your's 1" He ftalked from the cell, The devoted Earl remained in a dreadful filcnce. Flis foul was a motley fcene of conflict too dreadful to be pictured. He dcpped from the dungeon— " Stay," faid he, faintly ; " flay while I drive to argue with you." « To
<c To argue with me, my Lord, is ueedlefs. Speak, will you fecure to yourfelf impunity and your victim r Shall we admit the friendly French ?" " Wretch !" exclaimed the Earl, defpe¬ rately ftriking his head againft the rugged wall, ** thou haft wound me to a pitch from whence there is no retreat. Do with me as thou wilt. I am the flave of thy incli¬ nation." " Accufe not me, Lord Ilford, of fedu- cing you to extremity. Yourfelf firft feduced me to flain my palm with blood. Rind yourfelf by a folernn oath, no lefs than in your laft hope, to be fecret and true to my intent. Pray on my fword that your Maker may ufe mercy to you on the day of judgment, as you deal with me! If you perjure yourfelf, may hell's deeped torments be your eternal lot!" He touched the fword with his pale trembling lins, and faid inwardly-*-** I ft-vcarr
fwcar I" then dropped on his feat in a paroxyfm of mifery and horror. While Sir Emeric was in the act of flieathing his fword, he flatted, and cried in difmay — " Did I not hear a noife ? Methought it was like a groan above !" " The murmur of daemons of darknefs," moaned the Earl, " witneding our diaboli¬ cal union 1" " Fantafy and nonfenfe I No, no, m Lord, no demons are prefent in our con¬ ferences •, I rather fear it being an hint of human prefence. I will examine the con¬ tiguous cells. We may have been too neg¬ ligent. If a tenant be found in either of the adjacent dungeons, I will fee that his know¬ ledge fhall never betray us. Come, my Lord, let me lead you to your chamber; and as for the female, obftinate and difdain- ful, whom you hold, force her to your arms, and
ai^d receive the reward of your courage in the fecure poffefflon of her beauties." He led his diflra-ftcd companion from the cavern, but refigned him to the horrors of rciiolpcction oniy for a fliort interval, be¬ fore he invited him tu a fplendid bancjuct, where he ftrove to c u f .ivvay the phantoms of his imagination by the riot of inebriety. One of the parties employed by Sir Emeric Li icouring the country round the town held by him, had brought in, the day before the arrival of the Eari, a perfon of ftrange afpect, and attendant on whom there appeared, on examination, to be fuf- picious circumftances,—The falfe are ever alive to danger.—On the laconic anfwers of this unknown, and the dignified pride of his demeanour, Sir Emeric looked with fear. He ordered him to a dungeon until farther emamination might either condemn or exculpate him. Tlie mandate was obeyed, and
and the tlrangcr placed in one of the cavern cells. This man was of a fiugular kind. His dreft wjs not Englifli, and he fpokc the io-mwofhia co-mlry ai ifh^had been very long remote from (cent* where it war in utc. His deportment was grave and majeftic. He looked as if he had known days of magnificence and fplendour, but had been waded by forrow to premature old age. He fcarcely replied to the few fpeeches of his gaoler, and bore his confinement with feeming indifference. It happened that this ft ranger (who termed himfelf Oftrick^ was placed in the dungeon over that in which Sir Emeric bound the Earl to deeds of treachery ; and though the found of words was fiint to his ear, he diftinguiflied fuffi- cicnt to become matter of every particular of the plot. It was now that the dignified ftranger at once blefled and lamented his confinement. He
He tampered with the gaoler. At firft, the man was deaf to all that was faid to him. He was the moft favoured and moft trufted of Sir Emeric's emiffaries; and the dread of his Chiefs punifliment, and fear of lofing future benefits, made hira, awhile, faithful to his truft.—The tie, however, impofed by accomplices in difhonour, is of the moft fragile texture, if affailed by fuperior pro- fpedts of emolument, Oftrick at length prevailed. The gaoler agreed to rcleafe him in the dead of night, and keep his flight fecret for three days, on condition of receiving a picture fiuddedwith diamonds, and a ring of pearls. The picture he pro¬ mifed, in coniequ^nce of Oftrick's defire, to reftore to him on the fourth day, if he found means to convey to his hand one hundred marks. In the deepeft filence of that ni,^ht which fucceeded the day of Sir Emeric opening himfelf to the Earl, the gaoler drev afide the bolts of Oftrick's door, and fhewed him a way
a way of quitting the town without danger of being intercepted by the fentinels. Every thing fucceeded to the liberated captive's wifh. He faw the town walls behind him, and, fcreened by darknefs, made away from them umnolcflcdly. While feftivity reigned at Sir Emeric's board, the Earl rofe, and quitted the revel. Deep glooms enfolded his heart, and fur¬ rowed his care-wrapped brow. In the dregs of every bowl were the throbs of remorfe, the prefentiments of evil to come, and anti¬ cipation of the horrors of punifliment. The tally of wit that extorted peals of laughter, the choral fong that exalted ihu timent, and made enthufiafm glow, were tadelefs and infipid to his fenfe. His per¬ turbed mind urged him to feek fome other rcfting-place. Where, he afked, was a place of repofe to be found ?—" No where," anfwered his confeience, « for the traitor and the murderer,"
To
To his own chamber he bent his guilty and hopekfs footdeps. There he threw himfelf on a couch, and pafled an hour in oroans and felf-execrations. The tapers t*i fhed a dim and blue light. The room, large and dreary, feemed arrayed for fome dreadful purpofe. His confeience and his fears fmote heavily on his heart. I le fcarce¬ ly dared to lift his eyes to furvey the dim- nefs of the room. F|e apprehended the ap¬ pearance of fome hideous fliape in every wave of the dark curtains, and fancied the low howl of wind the cries of approaching avengers. Once more, ere he fliut himfelf up for the jiight, he vifited the cell of Selina. He found her weeping over her babe, who lay fevered and ill on her bofom. Though foftened to tears, her heart was not foftened for him. She eyed him with reproach and difdain. » Wretch!"
" Wretch !" die cried, amidd her grief, " draw near, and contemplate your vic¬ tims. View my child, harmlefs, lovely, innocent ! Behold his lips parched in fever, his eyes clofing in ficknefs ! Thefe he re¬ ceives from }our hand. Inured to blood, you know not to figh over the corfe that never injured you. But the day will come, when the blood of your wife, and of my flaughu-red fon, (hall prefs dread¬ fully on your foul ! Then fliall they rife in retribution, and pray the Father of aU to hurl you among thofe who are doomed to endlels agony and vain remorfe !" " Silence, fbrcerefs ! Silence, fource of my inmod t\oe V* cried he ; ** ceafe your fruit- lefs predictions, and let me yet know to dwell, with kiffes oflove, on thofe threaten¬ ing lips !" " Kitfes f* exclaimed fhe, with abhor¬ rence, " never, unlefs thou wilt plant them on the clay-cold lips of a corfe !"
Shuddering
Shuddering at her words, yet burning to enfold her in his arms, and dry the tears that ftained her cheeks, he withdrew 7 , in¬ dulging a fecret hope that the morning, by prefenting to her the increafed diforder of her fon, might incline her to liflcn to his wi files. In defponding fadnefs he paffed along the range of iubtcrrancan dungeons, where never came ray of daylight, never fhone moment of peace. Often, his ear was appalled by diftrefsful groans, and fometimes he heard the voice of guiltlefs mifery offer up a prayer. It chilled his very heart. His features corroded in envy, for he knew not how to fupplicate the throne of Heaven for forgivenefs! He felt that he was for ever loft! When he left the damp avenue of the cells, and pafled through the arcade of a court-yard, the bird of ill omens (hrieked at his prefence. Every object was, for his eye
eye and ear, gloomy and terrific. He be¬ lieved the dreadful catadrophe of his guilt hanging over him ; and, though he curfed each minute's length, looked on it as a treafure in forming a little fpace between him and an eternity of terrors. He had not fpirits to repeat the farewel of the night to the attendant whom he difmiffed his chamber; and was become ib weak in refolution, that he once thought or* calling him back. The remnant of courage that he retained forbade it, and, with a beating heart, he fummoned up power— to remain alone ! Ia horrible meditation he paced his chamber. Too late he found that guilt's glittering dice is but a vaporous deceiver, that leads the wretch's feet from flep to flep, after felicity which it cannot give him; that, like the taper to the infect, it draws, inevitably, to a frightful fate the deluded. who dares its furface. He looked, with vol. iv. l fighs
fighs and groans, to the pure and ferene happinefs that he had dafhed from his hp, and viewed even himfelf aghaft, when he cpnfidered how much more utter a finner he was, than, on his fird deviation, he had intended to be. Wearied by miferable thought, he ftretch¬ ed himfelf, when the bell tolled twelve, on his couch, and fought to bury himfelf in ■dumber. Sleep came to his eyes; but, gracious Ood ! how dreadful is the fleep of the abandoned ! One arm he hid his eyes with—his eyes that glared widely in his vifions! with his other arm he, ever and anon, fmote his troubled breaft. His hands and his feet were convullively contracted, and he moaned woefully enough to fhock the hardeft heart. Wild and hideous dreams infcftcd him—fuch dreams as it appals to relate, and the murderer cannot Men to I
All,
All, he thought, was night, and he was abandoned by the world. Wild and defert heaths lay before him} behind were the haunts of thofe that held the fword of judice. He wandered, without hope, with¬ out home. The high winds rofe; the thunders of heaven broke over his head, and ghaitly lightning fpread itfelf acrofs his path. The temped was dreadful beyond com¬ pare. His wav e;rew blacker, and the wind's howl feemed to murmur—* Fly, children of peace ! the homicide approacheth !'—-All, but the things of night, hid them from the blaft of his prefence. Suddenly the diouts of purfuers were heard, and the trampling of horfes' feet brought on the fweeping pinions of the wind. He drove to run, but his fteps were enfeebled by fatigue. Tlie executors of vengeance gained on him. Diftinctly his feared ear heard them call on l 2 his
210 A WINTER'S TALE. his name, and threaten him with racks and death. Still nearer they got, and nearer vet 1 Now he firft thought of praying. He looked fearfully up to the fky, but it was heavy, biack, aud threatening. He panted for words. His tongue cleaved to his mouth, and he was dumb in defparr and terror. Mis purfuers efideri, and enveloped him. They feized him by the flowinglocks of hh hair, and brandilhcd naked fwords over his devoted head. They were about to ftrike, when the earth opened with an horrible crafh, and engulphcd him. Then came the final hour of retribution; for he iimk to the place of torments ! Be¬ fore his eyes rolled, in endlefs fucceffion, billows of lire. On the Lop of them floated condemned fouls. Evil fpirits toffed them to and iro in the hideous flood, while winged diunons, of frightful and filthy fli apes,
$
fhapes, fpit torture and taunt in their faces, amid malicious grins! Terror-ftricken, and*utterly appalled, he gazed on the dreadful fcene. " Save me, my God !" he cried ; " Oh have I then merited this ? Oh am I then loft for ever ?" He had not ceafed to fpeak, when a chant of feraphic mufic fiwelled from above. He looked eagerly up, and beheld the happy Majefty of Heaven. Myriads of cherubims furrounded the throne, carolling it in blifs. Smiles and felicity, and pure joy, were there only to be feen. He fl retched out his hands, and ftrove to afcend. Thunder founded, the trumpet blew, and God bent to judge him. He kneit, and would have prayed, when flirieks broke through heaverVs vaults, and before the throne appeared the bloody figure of i 3 his
his wife ! He was immoveable in difmay.' Slowly rofe, too, the form of Selina holding in her arms a dead child, and both accufed him of deliberate murder. He repented too late. The All wife refufed'him. The fpirit of his wife, whofe eyes darted fire, im¬ pelled him forward* Crowds, of daemons waited, with uplifted arms, to receive him. He fell into the flames. ' The concave of hell clofed, with a noife fb loud, that he ftarted from his fleep. In his ears, for a time, rang the yells of his tormenters ; and his erect hair, and dis¬ torted vifage, fpoke the violence of his horrors, Furioufly knocking, he fummoned. attendants to the fide of his couch, whom he commanded to watch by him during the remainder of the night.
CHAP.
1 ■^ 't t g^i^^io^-xw^—*~- CHAP. IX. *"' Weave the cnmAm web of war, ,( Let i*%go> and let via Ry, " Where our friends the conf*li& fhare, *« Where they triumph, where th^y die i" GRAY. tf TTT* W EARIED, and not refrethed, by his diftempercd fleep, the Earl rofe with the morning light. His eyes were hollow, his heart heavy. He betook him to the ram¬ parts. He examined the foldiery. There, too, horror flafhed on him. The foldiers he had entered into a league to feduce, or to betray. In every glance he read that he was a traitor. Fie flirank fhiveringly from a fcene which had infpired his early hopes. He could not bear to view the ftandard, l 4 beneath
beneath wliich had glowed his firft wiflies for glory, and which he was about to rebel againft. From every fight and every fcene, he turned, fickened and dilguftcd. He repaired to his chamber, and brooded over anticipations of mifery to come, or writhed in inward agony, the prey of re¬ morfe for pad crimes. In the pofleflion of Selina, he alone look¬ ed for tranfient joy; but his perfuafions end threats yet appeared alike ineffectual in ibftening the obftinaty of her oppofition to his will. What pen can depicture the oppreffed wife, the miferable mother, prefented in the haplefs Selina? In vain the morning fun-beams gladdened the fcene, the breath of dimmer eve revived, and infilled peace and comfort through the bread; to her gloom} dungeon came no ray of exhilara¬ tion, All was blank, hopelefs and wretch¬ ed 1 The ftrength that had yet fupported her
her in her wanderings, now forfook her. She drooped, pale and wan, and fhe only bore life for the fake of the innocent that drew its beint-r from her. Till now, his fmiles, peaceful and uncon- fcious, had given balm to the wounds of her bread; but his fmiles, in this day of trial, died away. The unwholefome damps of his prifon, and the want of proper nourifhment and comforts, overcame his tender health. Fever parched up hii blood. He fell into frequent convulfion fit?, and no hand was near to help, no voice to en¬ courage the trembling, defpairing mother. When the Earl vifited the cell, to (ue for the indulgence of a ienfual and grofs paf¬ lion, ihe, on her knees, with a parent's tear dreaming down her check, bdbipht him to fuller comforts to be brought to o her child—medicines to fave him from the pangs of deuth !
L 5
Her perfecutor, though he bent on her eyes of fjndnefs and paflion, was deaf to her entreaties. He looked with fcorn on the offspring of her love, and would agree to five its life, only on terms that virtue could not liden to. He fmiled at the groans of his captive, or offered carefib to footh her forrow that were more diigufling than difdain. Difmal as was folitude, it feemed an heaven to her, cor .pared to the moments in which his prefence added to the poifon of her cell. Sitting by the table, on which dood her dim light, watching her infant's fading face, and kifling the tears from his cheek, fhe fat through the tedious hours of the equal day and night. Sometimes flie paced htr cell, and fang her child to fliort and broken flumbers, in a melancholy tune ; and fometimes fhe lay her drooping form on her bed of ftraw, and calmed nature by ftvuttirg her eyes, not fleeping.
Ilcr
Her thoughts often ftole to her days of childhood, and llie wondered that fhe could call then days of forrow. Now and then they dwelt on the Prince, and flie wept over his recollection, not reproached it. Amidft all her grief, his image was ftill fondly treafured in her breaft; and, now that fhe believed fhe fliould never lee him more, the father of her child was dearer to her than ever. He, indeed, was her only friend. No parent's tender flielter had flie ever known. The found of father and for¬ row had ever been- alike to her. No.v that flie felt all the mifery of orphan weaknei?, llie wept anew over her mother, buried in a grave of woe, and her father, too furely loft to the earth. It was when die had been confined four days, the unfeeling keeper of her dungeon had lately brought her a bafket of frefli food, that ihe perceived, barely revealed by the paie beams ot her lamp, fomewhat glittering on the ground. She Hooped, and took it up.. *- <> Her
Her aftonifliment was great to find it a picture; but the pidture fell from her trembling hand when die beheld it the portraiture of her mother I Wildly fhe gazed oq herfelf and babe, and believed that flie was in a dream. Again die examined the object of her furprife, and became convinced the features could be defigned for no other than thofe die imagined, and that die held to her beating heart reality. Kifles and tears of ecftacy die lavhhed on the dear refemblance, and, bending on her knees, offered fervent thanks to the Virgin, for from her hand alone die was perfuaded die had received it. A dream of confolation and fortitude fpread itfelf over her breaft. Sive felt aifurcd of the protection of Heaven, and learned to blame herfelf for ever having defpaired. She gazed, with,delight and love, on her acquisition, till her eyes, tired by weeping, could diftinguith no longer, and then flie warmed it on her heart. She 6 deemed
deemed the gift a proof of Heaven's forgive¬ nefs, and told to it her tale of forrow and repentance. But through every hour even this dear treafure could not uphold her. She grew herfelf very faint and exhaufted, and pro- greflively became lefs able to nurfe and cherifli her child. But for him ihe en¬ couraged the beats of lire in her breaft ; for him flic bore differing, and called up power to treat the menaces and cruelties ot her perfecutor with fuperiority. Not an hour paffed without planting new ftm^s in the miferable bread of Lord Ilford. i*** He fcemed, as the time drew nigh at which he was to enter on a new and dreadful lift of crimes, by becoming Sir Emetic's ac¬ complice in betraying the town, to be approaching the verge of u precipice, from whofe tremendous he'ght In was to be hurled to eternity. A thoufand times he repented of having fworn, and hoped dill to
to fcrvc Heaven by breaking his faith with it: but then arole, in hideous ftiapes, con¬ fequences not to be encountered—Selina ioft to him j his injuftice discovered j him¬ felf proved a murderer ! He could not re¬ tract. On the declivity of vice he had made long fteps > thole ineviiably led to others. On that dread declivity, the feet may ftop, but they can never re-afcend the deep they have trodden. In horrible anti¬ cipation he waited the hour, and felt a prcfentirnent that he ihould not outlive it. To tempt the foldiery to treachery, had Dcen found impoflible. The apt Sir Emeric, thlrefore, readily projected a method of making them difarmed prifoners. Of his correspondence with the enemy being be¬ trayed, there was not the leaft fymptom. With tlie due caution of villany, every arrangement was mad^. The period firft named, the hour of midnight on the twci-.iy-third, was to be that of his admit¬ ting
a ting two thoufand French into the town, and foundering, to them the keys of it. The Earl agreed to all he propofed with ghaftly vacancy, and bent his thoughts more fervently, if poffible, as the important feafon approached on obtaining gratifica¬ tion of his paflion. Ten times a day the heavy door of Selina's dungeon turned on its hinges, to admit him to the periling beauty. He upbraitfed, treated with rage, foothed, and ftrove to endear, by turns, and received the hke contempt in anfwer to each. In fuch a way the twenty-third arrived. Throughout it his attempts were alike unfucce'sful. In every minute, each pal- lion of his mind, and dread of his heart, gre.v ftronger. At one interval horror poifeifed him chiefly. Fie counted the hours in difmay, aud lingered on every inftant
inftant that hailed him 3'et'of unbroken allegiance, that faw him guiltlefs of that deep crime to which his breaft contained no incentive. ' Night arrived. The preparations for the impending fcene were dreadful to him. Oiders were iffued for every man to keep his houfe after nine, till the break of morn. The arms of the foldiers, on various pre¬ tences, were fecured in the arfenal, and a chofen band of traitors ported at the north gates, to admit the enemies of their country. The Earl acceded to all thofe meafuivs, but had not power to be active in any ot them. He remained iu the caftie, wilh a brain approaching to frenzy. As nteht wore awav to the twelfth hour, his defperation became abfolute. His for¬ mer words recurred to him— *' ShaU it be all fin, and no recom¬ pence V* The
The violence of his paflion for Selina no circumftances could damp. The horri¬ ble hour of deftrudion denied to him at hand, and he madly refolved, in defiance of heaven and earth, to defpoil the beauties that had been the innocent caufe of all his crimes. He formed the refolve, and yet he de¬ murred. No earthly argument reftrained him; but the expectance of fome ghaftly object to biaft his fight in the moment of violence, forced him to make paufe. The bell tolled twelve! 'Twas the hour that made his ruin utter. Detpair worked him to more than mortal refolution. He fummoned to him the perfidious keeper of the cells. He {hatched his fword and a taper, and proceeded to Selina's dungeon. The vaulted paffage echoed with his guilty footfteps. A more than ufual gloom wrapped the fubterraneous prifons. He feemed
feemed treading to a living grave, He liftened for the fhouts of the triumphant foe, but heard only the noifc of the wander¬ ing reptile, or the more dreary clank of chains on the prifoner's weary limbs, and the moaning captive's groan of mifery. With haggard eyes, and breaft of frightful fancies, yet burning defires, he purfued his way. Fiends fjemed lighting him to his, victim, and, in his wild thoughts, he had already a foretafte of the punifliment of his evil actions. The keeper, withfullen indifference, drew afide the bars of the prifon door. The chains fell. The lock gratingly turned, and he entered. Selina was then ftretched- on the ground,. bathing it with tears, while the child flept on the bed. She ftarted on his appearance; but her limbs were faint, and fhe fell in driving to rife.
He
He flew to her, and raifed her from the ground. " Alas! thou miferable, ftill moft dear to mine heart!" he cried; "art thou fo worn away, fo weak, fo exhaufted, and yec pofleffed of pow f er to fcorn me ? Any other ■ than fuch love as mine would be conquered'" by your cruelty, and you would become the victim of refentment { but my affection is invincible, I come again to- woo you: to my couch, I come again to offer you my heart, and pray you to let me footh your griefs on my devoted bofom. Speak, be¬ loved being! Say you no longer refift me,, and differ me to bear you in mine arms from this loathfome chamber !" " Retire, monfter!" fhe returned, iri a voice hoai fened by groans, and the baneful night damps; " retire, or wait and glut ^ your eyes over my laft pangs!—Woo me in, the hour of death 1 Talk to me ot love, when paiting agonies convulfe my wretched lips 1 for much longer will it not be before that
that hour comes! Health is periQiing within me. The (parks of life are dying in my bofom, and foon will the lone grave of the murdered hide nie from your perfe¬ cution,** He looked on her a minute with fondnefs and pity ; then hts features contracted. *' Infatuated wretch I" he exclaimed, " why wilt thou perfift in bringing mifery on thine own head ? Haft thou not yet felt fufficient of my power? Art thou not yet aware how rigoroufly I can exert what I poffefs ? What more fufferings doft thou wifh to undergo ? To what w ; lt thou cxpofe thyfclf?" " To death!" cried flie, firmly; « and in the moment of my experiencing that laft of human woes, dcftroyer of my babe, diall I triumph over thee 1 1 can lay mc down to breathe away my being with calm nefs and unconcern. I can look to heavenly guards without trembling. I can invoke fpirits of purity
purity to receive my flitting fhade. I can hope for clKru'^: i 1 ? to receive nie, andean look, with juy, ro woridi of peace and blif t where hun an power fails, and guiit neva comes! Yes though the viftim of your will, though fub]ect to all that cruelty can inflict, fo can 1 die !—Will your end, man ofcrin.LS, be likr miner Oil fhuJd:r to think of tiu day of death ! My fpirit, and my child's, v,iH torture )our expiring fancy. The coldeft water will not quench your ra^ina third. Your rolling eyeballs wiil not dare to look to Heaven. Your heart will fink in defpair, while it burns in fire, our------- " l-*eace, wretched prophetefs!" inter¬ rupted he ; "peace 1 the fin is not yet com¬ mitted that ib todanii} my iaft of Hie." He flowly ;idvanced to her. He griped her wrift. Pie prcp:av\l to told her to nib bread. But the courage ot his frenzy *- failed; he flowly, and With ticmbiing, caft hii alarms; eye& round the cell. No
No fiV.vt of horror met them. o He paufed, and gafped for power to proceed, while lie fummoned up the refolu¬ tion of his abandoned bread. At that moment dole along the vault a murmur of fome reiterated noife from with¬ out. 'Twas the fignal that all was over, and that he was a traitor, irrevocably. Again came fearlefs fury to his breaft. His wild eyes rolled, and he flung his arm round the trembling Sdina. " Wietch '" he cried, hoarfcly, "this inftant you fliall fill mine arms, nor heaven ror earth fhall fave you! Yield then, for -----" An hideous found, like tlie break of thunder, diook even the excavated dun- aeon. He
He \va^ immoveable. All became once more calm. But Selina had fled from his grafp. He ftood a minute in mute and delirious horror. " I want power to force her!" he at length muttered. He pondered an indant ; then, flartinp as ii (truck with fome new and renovating thoughr, he damped his foot. The gaoler, of dark and tcinfic mien, entered. The Earl unfheathed his fword. He ^avc it to the blood-inured attendant. (i Stave," laid he, " fei/e on that fleep* ing child." " Oh, no, no, noi" wildly ejaculated Selina. flying to the bed, " Oh God in Heaven, fa\e m/iiifant!° 3 The
The villain ftruggled with her for the babe. Her refiftancc was frantic, but it was vain. He gained ihe innocent. Her fcreams were unheald by pity. She law the glittering weapon pointed to her child':, throat, and, overcome, fell in a fit on the done flooring. u Touch not the brat," cried Lord Ilford; <c throw it down, and fave tlie mother!" They knelt by the fide of the feeming, corfe, and chated ils hands, and fpiinklcd water on iis neck. Their endeavours to reftore her were not unfucceGful. Breath returned* She re- fumed life in deep fijh% and at length opened her eyes, and became confufedly cor.fcious of the mifcry of her fituation. She railed herfelf, with defpair fpreading through every feature, and faintly, though thrilly, exclaimed— " ^Vhc^■e
** Where is my child ? Is he alive?" " He is," returned the Earl. " Oh ! and unhurt ?" " And. unhurt." ec fJleffings on you 1 Where is he ? Give him to my bofom !" The Ear! motioned his companion to take the infant, but give it not to her. She faw it living, and, ftirieking in joy, would have fpru;ig to ir, but the Earl withheld her. " Urlic," faid he, " fufpend your fword over the babe's bofom !" The villain extended the child in one hand, and pointed to its breaft the fword with the other. Selina, with the maniac's violence, ftrug¬ gied to throw herfelf before the weapon; but the Earl's ftrength retained her, vol. iv. m « Woman,"
" Woman," fiid ~Lord Ilford, " behold thy offspring ready to gafp on the blade of a murderer ! Can you endure to fee his little tender limbs writhe in the agonies of death ? Can you hear his picrcicg cries, as life's blood flows from his throat ? Can you view him ftretch his innocent hands to beg a mother's fhelter, while you fit the chained fpectator of his derided pangs ? His fate depends on you. Meet my withes, and your child is fafe 1" " Oh thou wretch!" cried flie, "Oh thou villain ! to make a mother's love be¬ tray her to pol'ution!—Monftcr i thou never, iure, couldft have a mother's tear fhed over thee, a mother's love cherifli thee ! Thou muft have an heart of done. And couldft thou take joy from my arms, when thou pavedft thy way to them on fuch a dreadful bafis? Oh, have mercy on a mother who would weep, but (he has exhaufted her tears; who, kneeling, prays thee, as thou art a man, and didft bear love to thy parent, to fpare her child 1" Unmoved,
Unmoved, fave by paflion, the Earl yet beheld her. Pity for others was dead in his breaft. It had fallen before guilt and de- fj>air. " Wilt thou be mine ?" he cried; « wilt thou red on my bofom ?" ** Oh, thy bofom is worfe to me than a fcorpion 1" tc Wilt thou prove it otherwife ?" " I cannot." <l Stab then, Urlic !" The aflaflin lifted the fword. It was within an hair's breadth of the innocent's breaft. " Stay," cried the diftracted mother, " fave my infant, and take my wretched perfon 1" " Right," cried the Earl, joy flafhing in his eyes.
M 2
He
He turned to Urlic, and, with breathlefs eagernefs, faid— *' Bear the infant from us! Carry it to its proper nurfe. Its mother diall foon be redored toil." The man difappeared. The Earl fliut the door. He dtnv, hembhng with fond¬ nefs, to SJina. At that indant, a confufion of noifes came from the pafiage. It approached, and voices were diftinguiflied, calling on Lord Hford's name, and crying— 46 To arms! To arms! Help, help, or death I" The door flew open, and breathlefs mef- fengeri', with hair erect in alarm, appeared. " Fly, fly, my Lord Earl!" they cried, 4 * the caftle is attacked. All fides nie afiailed.
affailed. Already the eaftern walls poffefs a breach, and the north tower totters. To arms 1 To arms, my Lord, or all is loft 1" The defpairing Earl gazed, terrified, around him. He was entranced in fears and amaze. The funimoners would have impelled him forward, but he paufed, till a few moments' thought made him, in fome fliape, mailer of hunk If. Hz feiected one of the meffengers. He took from his bofom a purfe. He drew the man toward Selina. " Friend," faid he, in an inward and horrible'accent, "you fee that female? Keep her in this confinement. Friend, take this purfe. In it there is what a poor man would deem a treafure indeed. ' There, it is your's. Take with it this dagger. If I fall, bury it in that devoted's heart. 'Tis all tW fervice I aik. Say, will you perform it r
m 3
The
The man took thepurfe, and bowed. The Earl caft one look on his abandoned prey; a look of love, of hatred, and of reproach, and flew in the track his compa¬ nions pointed out. When he attained the ramparts, he be¬ held, indeed, an hideous fcene. The flam¬ ing of torches, thrown by the beficgers, rendered all the horrors of it dimly vifible. The fhouts of temporary conquerors, and the flirieks of the wounded and the dying, rent the air. The din of arms was dreadful, nnd the thunder of the aifailants was the thunder of juftice ! While he hefitated where to fight, the north tower fell, with fhock ing uproar, and entombed hundreds. An awful paufe fuc¬ ceeded. The befiegcrs poured, in legions, over tlv~ ruin made by the proftrate build¬ ing, With triumphant cries. Thither he mfhed,
rumcd, and headed the defenders, furioufly bent to conquer or perifli. That the captive, terming himfelf Oftrick, prevailed on the guide to loofen his fetters, has already been told. That he was privy to the plot formed by Sir Emeric, and into which the F.arl was drawn by him, has been dated alfo. Oftrick's intention wasto con¬ vey to Prince Edward, the fituation of whofe army he had had explained to him, notice of the projected villany; and hisintcitioa he effected. All but one of the perfons employed by the Prince, in fearches after Selina, returned equally fuccefslefs. He had begun to de¬ ft air, when Oftrick arrived at his camp, and foliated an audience. The ftranger was admitted, and revealed all he knew. The Prince was thunder-ftricken at the tale ; and while he imagined means of moft effec¬ tually counteracting the dangerous villany, m 4 he
he promifed a fplendid reward to the inftm- ment of its detection. To ftrength en the necefllty there was for immediate interpofition, and excite the in¬ dignation of the Prince againft the unjuft objects of his truft, Odrick informed him of Lord Ilford having in opprcflive poffeffion a female; and, with a diuddering heart, declared that Sir Emeric Lad upbiaided him with the blood of the innocent. The Prince, with difficulty, concealed the violence of his emotion. " A female ?" he faltered. *' Know you her name ?" " Selina, my Lord," «* Great God of Fleaven!" the Prince cried, clafping his hands, " 'tis flie !" Oftrick viewed the exceffive intereft he took in the fate of the female, in filence. The Prince rofe, and grafped his hand. « Oftrick,"
A ** Oflrick," faid he, " the' fervice yoa have done the ftate binds you to me. Let me venture to fay to you, that I do- not look on the diftrefs of Selina with un¬ concern. Faithful friend, you can lead me to the dungeon that holds her. Do fo, and command my favour." Oftrick bowed, and fighed. Till the moment in which he could hold his fword to Earl IlfordV breaft, the moft dreadful anxiety tortured the-Prince. For Selina to be in the power ot her unprincipled lover, was the confirmation of his word fears. Already, he doubted not, had flie funk a victim to his villany ; already had their infant glutted his rival's rage ! In his fecret hours he gave loofe to all the diftrefs o( his foul, and was milerable to madnefs. Troops, to exceed the number of the expected French, he immediately felected. Oftrick was his advifer in the preparations, m 5 and
and (hewed a knowledge of arms that fur¬ prifed and recommended him to the Prince. In his deportment and figure, there was, indeed, fomewhat not to be pafled over. The cool nefs of age feemed given him pre¬ maturely by forrow, but dill the flame of noblcncis was great in his bofom. His, counfels were thofe of wifdom and courage, and his words, though few, were fuch as imprefled the hearer with refpect for him. On account of the Prince having moved the fituation of his army, before he was apprized of the danger lurking near him, there was barely time for the party, deftined to punifh treachery, to get to------by the middle of the night fixed on for the town's furrender. Till night, the troops themfelves were kept ignorant of the object of their march. When darknefs fpread itfelf, the Prince addrcfled his followers. He revealed to theni the defign of the bafe Chiefs, praifed their 3 valour
valour in the field, thanked them for their afttction to his perfon, and afked if they were ready to attend him to the overthrow of an infidious enemy, and the punifliment of traitors- Fie had fcarcely ended, when the foldicrs T in one breath, fhouted their willingnefs to accom 1 any him to victory or to death ; and, Jftriking their fvords on their bucklers, threatened dreadful vengeance on his foes. He bowed, and afiured ihem that regard fliould follow fucccfs. With Odrick at his right hand, he led on, and rather before midnight gained tiie fkirts of the town. A lon*]!: ranee of trees afforded a fcrecn for the torccs. There they lay, till faint'/ founded tlic trample ot many horfes. Every heart beat with impatience. The found ap¬ proached. Through darknels were difcernible the legions of the foe. Still the Prince re¬ mained quiet. Tiie enemy halted. A fmall number of them icde fore moil, and foia ded wo' a bu^ie>
a bugle. One from the town wall anfwered it, Then began the operations of the Prince. He difpatched a chofen band to fecure the gate, while his trumpets founded a charge. He gave the word, and crying " St. George and vengeance !'* ruflied on the enemy with fndden and irrefiftible impetuofit}% The French fought, but they fought with the faintnefs of finking men. By the un¬ expected attack, their ranks were broken, and they became an eafy prey to the Englifli fwords. Many fell, the remainder cried for mercy, and furrendered themfelves prifoners. In iilent triumph the conqueror entered the town* He hoped to furprife Sir Emeric's fortified habitation, but the alarm was fpread, and thetraiterous caftle prepared to refill its King's power. He fummoned k to furrender j but Sir Emeric, from the waUs 3 , 6,
walls, defied his ftrength, and fwore to die amidd its ruin*?. The Prince attacked it, at the fame in¬ dant, in three diflbrent places. A fhower of arrows conveyed winged death to the wretches on the ramparts; barbed darts afiailed them in every inftant, and piercing the vain hauberk, dealt agonizing death. Firebrands fome hurled againftthe towers; while others, more courageous, ftrove to climb the walls, and meet their foes in equal combat. Meantime, the large force, lately com¬ manded by Lord Ilford, broke opeh the arfenal, feized their arms, and ranged under the banner of their Prince. The acquifi- tion of thefe completed the triumph, for they brought with them fuch engines of affault as had been employed in gaining thp town from the native French. Soon they brought them to bear, and Ipread defla¬ tion and difmay along the ramparts. Already
Already was a breach made^ aad the chief tower levelled, when the prefence of the devoted Eari animated the befieged to a daft defperate effort. They furioivily, cut down thole who contended for entrance over the ruined tower, and hurled vaft pieces of the fragments on tlie heads of thole below. The archers, from the ioop-hoies, kept a continual difcharge on the affaiianrs, and llingers from the cafcle tops, laid low many a gallant warrior. But they could do no more than fell them- fclves at a dear cod. Volumes of building rolled on their bands in one part, and cruEhed them to inftantuncous death. In another, volcanoes of molten lead poured on their mifrrable numbers from off the roofs of their Ham ing towers, and made them affright, by their hideous yells, their yet un¬ daunted companions. They were no longer able to maintain rcfiilance. The Prince's banner waved on the
the walls; his troops fcoured the ramparts. Thofe who lived ot the befieged, fled, The moment victory was afcerfained, the Prince ordered that no fugitive fhould be flain, but mercy fliewn to all orders of the vanquiQied ! The victorious troops thrice fhoutcd in exultation, and then bufied thcmfclves in extinouiflring the flame?, which, as they were yet only partial, was fhortly effect ed. Now it was tliat the agonised heart of . the Prince beat mod anxioufly. Where was Selina? Was flic living in tlie (cene of daughter and havoc ? Or, if living, was flic not the victim of 1 auion, and the childlcfs mother ? Victory was yet but. incomplete. Without Selina, unfuilicd und a parent, the laurels of triumph were not worth wearing. Throughout the attack Oftrick had re¬ mained by his fide, the undaunted compa¬ nion of his dangers. Oftrick now offered lo conduct him to the cells, where, probably, the
the female pined. In the general confufion, he and Oftrick glided through the fmoking avenues of the caftle unperceived, the Prince deputing the command to the fenior officer. With difficulty, Oftrick traced the path to his former prifon. When there, a groan of mifery led htm to fearch beneath it. With frantic hafte the Prince trod in his footfteps. They knocked on the doors of the cells they paffed. From fome iffued a voice that negatived their enquiries; in ' others, all was filent and dreary. Prefently they difcovered a fmall light through a door-way ; the door was ftandi.ig * ajar. They 4 rufhed toward it. When they drew near, a man came from it, and per¬ ceiving ftrangers, fell at their feet, and mv plored mercy, ** Speak, flave I" cried the Prince, " is there in yonder dungeon a female ?" ( * There
" There is." " Her name ?" " I know it not, She is a captive, to Lord Ilford, who let me here to guard her prifon door, and gave me a large fum, fliould he die on the ramparts, to kill her." " To kill her?" repeated the Prince, daggering backward. " Yes." (< And -----and——have you done'it ?" " I have not." The Prince clafped his hands together, and fell, overcome by his joy, back in the arms of Oftrick. Prefently he recovered. He darted for¬ ward. Selina had heard voices. She thought it the Earl come to take her forfeit perfon. She gazed on the door with greater pangs than thofe of the wretch whofe term of life is out, and who hears the bolts of his prifon drawn
drawn afide, fees his executioners come tc* lead him to the fcaflfold. The door opened. She murmured a prayer that life and fenfe might at once fail. She eyed the figure ; 'twas the Prince come to rtdore her to tranquillity, to deftroy her oppreffors ! Nature could not bear the trial. She darted, fhrieked, and fell on- his bofom. He warmed her to life, On opening her eyes, (he looked vacantly round, fixed her eyes, on his face, trem¬ bled convulfively, murmured—" Yes ! — No ! Oh no !"— Gazed more intentiyon his face, and cried, wildly, " Oh it is, it is my Lord! It is him come to refcue mei" and fainted again on his breaft,. Oftrick, who hung over the fcene with a weeping heart, aflifted the Prince in recall¬ ing her to herfelf. They were long unfuc¬ cefsful ^
eefsful; but when die knew what was round her, who can paint the feelings of her bofom? She wept, laughed, chfped the Prince in her arms, kiffed his hands, and at length fank on his dioulder, unable to fpeak, fcarcely poffeded of power to figh. At length flatting up, die exclaimed— " Our child, my Lord, where is he > Where is our child ? Has he murdered him? Oh Heaven ! is my babe fafe ?" » I trud fo, my wife, my love ! Where left you him r" She gazed about her in ghaftly filence, as if ft riving to recollect circumftances that her mind had wanted ftrength to retain. « Where was it, my love ?" repeated the Prince, anxioufly. " Where?" cried die, " Where ?— Why good God, h had him! the murderer!" « Th*
C( The murderer! Oh Heaven!" ex* claimed the Prince, " Wait here* my Lord," joined Oftrick $ ** let me fearch for the m%m, or difpatch the man who ftands ------" He looked, but the man whom they had met at the entrance of the cell, had been Jong gone. Fie fet out alone. The Prince, meantime, as well ns his fears for his child would let him, fupported his refcued Selina on his bread, and con¬ templated the wreck of her charms with didrefs; then folded to him her wafted form with exquifite delight, for, in anfVer to his tremulous enquiries, fhe gave him new being in telling him that hts endeavours had been made in that inftant that alone could preferve her. While he fpoke his rapture in fond kiffes on her lips, the noble and friendly Oftrick entered, accompanied by Rachel and
and Selina's infant. The tranfported mother caught her child to her breaft. Tne father clafped both to his, and, looking upward, blefled the hand that had fent him to preferve them. S.dina was too fa ; rjt to leave the cell at once. She (at down, and fome reft quieted, in a trifling mealure, her fpiiits, and gave he. a little ftrength. The Prince flood by, and dij p..ited her. Odrick was a mute, thwgii delighted fpectator; but ftill he ap¬ peared .is it the fight of happinefs reminded him of pad fcenes, and made him weep for himlelf, while he fmi eci for others. " Kind and gallant Oftrick 1" faid the Prince, ** this dreary dungeon is not a proper place to talk of rewaids in; but all that private g-atitude and public power can do, fhall be your's. Odrick, there is my hand; make your requeft when you will, and may my deareft wifh be denied me if I do not grant you it !" Oftrick
Odrick dood a mo: tent the davc of -con- tcndingcmotions. His bread laboured with fomething weighty and painful. At lengtli he faid— « Prince 1 no moment will be fo proper for what 1 have to fay as this—the moment of your happinefs and joy," He fell on his knee. *' Prince!" he continued, u be not ftartled ; you fee before you a condemned man _a man who once would have injured your welfare. Deep was my error, and heavy my atonement !" He wiped his eyes, where ftood a tear of fad recollection. » My Loid," he rcfumed, " I once held the title of the man whom wc have, now overthrown. I joined, what I deemed the right party, in a ftate contention. 1 was
was milled ; but miftake was no extenua¬ tion. I was banilhed, 1 have never fince feen my country, for I was fliipwrecked, and-------» " My father! Oh my father 1" cried Selina, falling at his feet. " Ha! what ?" exclaimed the parent of Selina, " and do I then fee my child ? The daughter whom I left at my wife's bofom ? Oh it is my darling 1 Thus I recognize her on mv heart 1" He clafped her to him, and lavidied on her lips paternal kiffes. After a time, he held her forward in his arms, and gazed on her ; then kifled her in ail the fwcet extravagance of a father's fondnefs. Suddenly he diew ba(Jc, and turned aiide his head. lt Your mother," faid he, faintly, "your mother—1 find, is no more ! That, and that I had
I had a child in being, were all I could learn. Oh my daughter I------" Tears chafed each other down his grief- worn cheek. He wept, e\en to fobbing. Selina would have wept with him, but for¬ row had Exhaufted her. The old man dwelt fondly on her face, and, for the firft time, for many long yeass, received the confolation of beholding one being to live for, one being to be loved by. v A filence, in which fenfations, too power¬ ful for csprcflion, dwelt in every bofom, took place. The Prince was the fird to break it, by oidering Rachel, who had dood, unperceived, in a corner of the ceil, to retire to a little didance from the dungeon. She did fo. Kow thoughts now rofe in the bofom of Selina's father. He iurveyed the infant of his daughter. His lip trembled.
■" My
** My child/* faid he, " u parent ? and the Prince—the Prince !——" Selina fiirank from him in terror, and hid her face from his look. " You turn from me ! Oh, you weep! My child ! My child : blaft not an old man*.-! fingle ray of joy ere it well rifes to his heart i Tell me, dear being ! ihcdl I plunge this dagger in my aged bread, or welcome the hufband of my daughter ? vSpeak, my child, the rack is peace to my fufpenfe!" A dead filence followed, The diftreded father fell on the ground, and tore off thofe locks of hair that paft grief} had whitened. He groaned deeply, and once more lamented that he had ever been born, and had fnatched from his lip the cup that promifed felicity.
VOL. IV.
JS
The
The Piincc raifed him; but the indij- nation of an injured parent made the mifer¬ able man draw back his hand, and difdain the advances that before he had courted. lie looked on Selina through tears of bit- tcrnels, in mild reproach. His lojk cut her to the heart. She tell at his feet, and clung round ihem in agony. The Prince bent on his knee befide her. «« Father!" faid he, " that is our child. Your daughter is not my wife. Look not indignantly—flic diould have been ib, had not ftrange and dreadful circumftances for¬ bidden it; circumftances that, when re¬ lated, muft fatisfy even y oui felf. When 1 tempted her to guilt, I was loft to myfelf. Since that hour we have been but friends. Without fate differs me to make her my bride, other we never wiil be. Mine is all ihc guilt 1" « Oh pity me, my father!" cried Selina, &{ pity and forgive mc, or I die !" The
Tlie old man hefitated a few moments. Then, he murmured his forgivenefs in a blefling, and wept on his daughter's neck.
>»#@f<g^f*'*>*9#«»««
CHAP. X, i( P.ifliun demands a ''ecoir.j'-ence fevere, " But love parental drops the lifted Ipear } *' Nor fh;sil refle&ion interpofe a wound, « ( To link theftruggling wretch too neatly drown'tl." RESTORED to the blcffings of day, and nurfed by a father's love, Selina foon regained the health that much differing had nearly overcome. Peace, that had long been a ftranger to iier, began to dawn on n % her
her bofom, and the fmiles that now mantled again on her babe's lip, whifpered tales of future comfort io her. The few traitors taken alive in the defo- kted caftle, were placed in confinement till the King's pleafure might be known con¬ cerning them. Among thefe was Sir Emeric Arville ; but Lord Ilford was among the flain. His body was found, covered with wounds, disfigured by dirt and blood. His countenance was the moft ghaftly that death can be fubject: to. Its caft was appal¬ ling. It feemed as if he had died more afflicted by expected horrors than prefent pain. The eyes were turned up, till the fight was loft in the fockets. .Wretched flave of paflion ! ever may your memory live, a proof that the flighted: in¬ dulgence of vicious inclinations leads, nearly inevitably, to the depth of turpitude ; that,"* after the firft ftep in fin, a thoufand tempt¬ ations to crime, unknown before, arrfe; and that
that fin is mifiiry, fince the flings of con¬ feience and dread of retribution that attend the commiffion of it, far overbalance tlie fleeting pleafure of gratification. By the fide of his daughter's couch, Selina's father paffed fweetly his hours. She reftored to him the picture of his loft wife, for his picture it was that Sdina found in the ceil—that picture which the captive Ofti'ck had bribed his gaoler with, and which tlie ruffian dropped from his bofom whde placing Selina's fcanty meal on her table. Over this picture he wept, and had the fweet confolation of feeling a daughter's hand wipe off his tears as they fell, and hearing her tender voice murmur to him a leflTon of refignation. In thefe minutes of fympathy and mournful pleafure, he de¬ fcribed to her the charms of her loft pa¬ rent; and learned to pity, inftead of reproach her in his heart for the errors fhe had funk h 3 t0 »
to, when die wanted the flielter and ad*- vice of a mother, The late events of Selina's life appeared to her, on retrofpection, like one broken and wild fantafy*. The laft, alone, was an event of comfort, and that was fuch an one as (he had believed could never come to pafs—the return of her father. In one of the hours of his penfive at¬ tendance on her recovery, he related to feer the wonders that had kept him in exiftence, and compelled him to remain fo many years ignorant of what had befallen thofe dear relatives that he had left in mifery. The fhip in which he embarked, an hopelefs exile, perifliecl, as defcribed by the mariner who returned. Himfelf caught, in one of the moments that he apprehended his dying ones, a piece of the wreck, and floated on it out to fea. Two days and nights he was tolfed on the bofom of the ocean,
ocean. On the third day a fail appeared, and he exhaufted his little remaining ftrength in procuring the crew's affiftance. They took him on board. The picture of his wife, and a ring on his finger, were his only poffeffions. All places were alike to him, that were alike near to his adored wife and child, The fhip was bound to a far-diftant port. The Captain offered to make the exiled Earl the companion of his voyage, and land him, on the return of the veffel, in Italy. The Earl had no alternative. But his fate was ordered otherwife. The crew confpired againft their commander, and fet him and his only adherent, the Earl, on (hore on an ifland that feemed unin¬ habited. But the Earl and his companion in mifery had not ftrayed long on the coaft when natives appeared. They were of a friendly afpect, and treated their prifoners kindly. They furniflied them with food, and gave them materials to build an hut. Life is N 4 ever
ever deemed worth preferving. Its only blefling now in the eyes of {he Earl, was that of affording recollection of his wife. To dwell in fancy on her charms, and talk with his fellow-fufferer of his native country, were all his fad enjoyments; and of half of them he was fpeedily bereft by the death of his companion. Seventeen years and upwards he pined in all the mifery of feemingly endlefs feclufion from thofe he loved, and utter uncertainty of their fate. Flis date was dreadful, and being became infupportable to him. As he walked, in one of the morning hours of his defpair, on the fea-beach, he ftarted, in delirious ecftacy, to behold a fail. The veffel replied to his fignals. Its boat releafed him from his comfortlefs fituation, though not till he had given every proof of gratitude to the friendly natives. The veffel bore him to Europe. He landed in France, and proceeded from the port he difembarked at, for the army of the Prin.ce>
Prince, determined to ftrive^to fignalizc himfelf in the conteft, that he might recom- mend himfelf to the mercy of the Crown. Among the military of the port he landed at, he found an elderly man, who was fami¬ liar with the dory of his Houfe, though not fo with his perfon. From this man he learned that his wife was dead, but his daughter living. Exidence ftill was worth keeping, and a pardon worth interceding for, for his child's fake. He was taken by the fcouts of Sir Eme¬ ric, and, by that fufpicious Governor, con¬ fined. His confinement proved the fource of all the happinefs the world could contain for him ; by it he preferver] his child, and recommended himfelf to the gencrofity of his Sovereign, Selina heard this account of her father's fufferings with tears of fympathy; and never - tired with dwelling on what was fo lately known—
known—a parent's face, and liftening to his voice, that talked to her only of comfort and affection. Meffengers foon arrived from England with anfwers to the Prince's difpatches* They brought an order for the execution of Sir Emeric, ,and they brought, what the Prince beheld with the pu-eft delignt—■ a free pardon for Selina's father, on account of the fervices he had rendered the State, and a return of his lands and Earldom* The Prince placed no importance on his mediation, nor on the effect of it, when he prefented thefe to the father of his Selina. No gift, no treafure, could compenfate for the woe of a child's blighted happinefs—- for the woe of a daughter doomed to per* petual feclufion and obfeurity. Shortly, the good Earl of Ilford revifited his paternal eftates. He was a ftranger in fcenes that had been the theatre of all his early pleafures. The rooms where he had known
known felicity with his wife, the lawn fhe had bounded ovsr in the gay dance of youth—to fee thefe, ftruck his heart with fadnefs indefcribable. At length he learned to furvey them with that penfive regret which time and philo- fophy have power to make foothing. On his daughter he bent all his wiflies. Doom¬ ed to know none of the happinefs that the world can give, he made it his tafk to teach her to be happy without it. When flie would defpond, he reminded her that Fleaven looks to the motive, not to the action; that he who feems guilty to the world, may be innocent to Heaven : and here, in his pious tafk, he was affifted by the benevolent Father Frederic. When fhe viewed her child, and fighed over the profpect of miferies that her melan¬ choly foreboded it born to, he explained to her that adverfity is the teacher of good- ne&z
nefs, and cheerfully told her that a ftate of humility may be one of felicity. Oftentimes die would grow very fad, and betray every fymptom of an heart pining In forbidden affection ; then he would drive, by every winning art, to divert her forrows, and tenderly bid her fancy Ihe beheld every friend, file could need, in him, who felt for her every friend's find nefs. Though her forrow was immoveable, it leffened, and at length fank into penfive tranquillity. Her child, mild, promifing and beautiful, was her delight. In him Ihe cherifhed the love of her heart, and paid the tender duties fhe owed his father. He was her only hope * and every comfort that the child can give the parent, he afforded her. While he remained with her, the beloved Prince feemed never abfent. His fon was a continual remembrance of himfelf, that made every circumftance of her con¬ nection with him, that could be grateful to her
her feelings, ever prefent to her: on the wreck of her happinefs, while fhe contem¬ plated paft fcenes of danger, fhe built refig- nation and contentment. Mrs. Edgcumbe, in no mean degree, contributed to the little comforts of Selina's lot; and the good woman would have known happinefs herfelf, had every flep taken to produce it for her by the Earl proved ineffectual,—in beholding her beloved lady in peace and fecurity. Ofborne and Rachel, the faithful follow¬ ers of Selina's dangerous footfteps, knew a fecond youth in feeing their old and adored Lord again prefent in hisdomains. Situated in the moft comfortable part of the caftle, Ofbornc wore away the windy winter's night by telling of what he had ieen y and what he had done, in days gone by; while Rachel found all the blefledncis of peace and quiet by contrafting her prefent ftate to that flie had gone through. Tlie
The Prince, in the midft of thofe bril* liant fucccffes that crowned his arms, and have made his name inmiortal, felt that a glittering lot may be a very wretched one. With Selina lay iiis happinefs—Selina, whom fate forbade his making his own, and de¬ voting his life to. The knowledge of her tranquillity alone calmed his breaft. When he found that die could yet tafte peace, he gained power to overcome his own deprcf- fion. The firft and fond wifhes of his youth were never dead in his bofom ; but, by continual endeavours, he at length made them Ue dormant, Selina's was ever the deareft image of his bofom i but lie learned to think of that image with the fuperior feelings of the tendered: efteem and friendfhip. In ad¬ vanced life he faw her often,, and he faw her without danger. To Selina^ his pre¬ fence infpired pure joy and peace j for, in every pafling hour, her feelings got more Unworldly. The fenfations with which he beheld
beheld her, are not to be defcribed; they would honour him in defcription, but they are above it. Of fuch an aftv&ion, and fuch attendant events a*> they experienced;, none but viitue like her's, a f -d hcroifm like his, could have made fo good an ufe.------- Vice ! if by fhewing thy natural pro- greffivencfs, and thy hideous form, I have made one foot avoid thy path—Love ! if by picturing the danger of yielding to thy did indulgence, where gratification is de¬ nied, I hive taught one bofom to avoid the precipice it hung over—my object is at¬ tained, and I rejoice to have written.
r 1 n 1 6.
LAKr, MIHItVA"*rflK(t.» i r.AD EN H AL] -6 T 1 Jt JET,
