Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Le Forester: a novel
LE FORESTER. A NOVEL CHAPTER I Lord Fobestlr, pressed with in¬ ci easing difficulties by the agents of his unfortunate and ill-used nephew God¬ frey, had for some time begu ι to feel his spirits and coinage sink As his piosperls grew more gloomy, his con¬ science smote him But how could he resolve to make ie titulion of his usurp ed rank and pioperty' Little was he fitted for the privations of adı ersity VOL li E
ì all his enjoyment» wae worldl), and m the splendoui of titleb, in the luxuiy of wealth alone, could he oiei power the compunctions of α guilty mmd ' Too subtle, to be ignonnt that that which he ought to lesigli, was his only piotection fiom scom and infamy, how Wl etched weie his present leelmgs' Sorrowful and almost desponding, he went down to the old famı!) scat at Hcdmdon It stood on a rough knowl, ıbıuptly oveihangmg on one side, a precipitous stteam, which issued fiom tbe dista it v.ood crowned mountains that bounded tie pail., a nule, nig leilcd, but magnificent pile of building, the mixed work ol scleral ecnluncs, with windows, galcwi)s, tonei- and
3 battlements protecting in an hundred vanous shapes delightful to the ptciu tcsque eye, and feeding the fmc) with lomantic ideas The park itself was of α congenial chancier, extensive, bioken, exuberant m ane enl tices, and as if it had been foi ages untouched by the hand of ait or cultivation Wild hcids giazed at a diflaice with fiei e οι feai lul look οι ita tid fiom tlie co ver ng of the spieailmg b ake, οι fro η the shade ofthe old twisted tlioin and scudded bcfoi c ti с wind Here and theie a kccpei s lodge 01 labom er s cottage ve as seen peepmg oul of α dmgle, whose sohtuy inhabitants appeared al moft as unacqi -noted with the haunts of men, as the brute ti bes tint fed aiound them I ofty woods rose uj to
4 the horizon on the opposite bank of the river, through which the ancient avenues that had been tormerly cut and kept with such care, weie now hilf grown up, and sometimes rendeicd im¬ passable with neglect 1 he inside of the house vv as not less magnificent, nor less rudi- and neglect ed than the outside A massive gate of entrance, gloomy com Is, an im¬ mense hall with a roof of i-ived oak, and high windovvsdarkened with paint¬ ed glass, numerous apaitmcnts of eveiy size and sb ipe , a lab) ι inth of passages, long endless galli nes hung thick with grim visaged paintings, and a melan¬ choly chapel, m which supeiftition might indulge itself to madness ' In
5 every room the portrait of some warrior or statesman decorated the walls, and frowned ш vam upon his dcgcnciate successor To such a scene did Loid Foreller retire. But not alone solitude w as too dreary for him He brought with him his companions, both male and female, the associates of his profligacy, lhe fo¬ mentei s of his dissolute orgies Music, dining his abode here, made the roof of the old hall ung with its echoes, and the noisy merriment of wine ba¬ nished the awful silence that generally prevailed here But all could not drown the uneasiness that had now taken рой session of his mind He could not beai to be left a moment alone, in some в 3
б of the rooms thiough which he was often necessitated to pass, no efforts could conceal his tremblings, and the pallidne- of his countenance licdrcad- ed the letui ι of night, and often wakeel fiom his sleep with the most hoinble shrieks at some image which appeared to haunt him These perturbations, the woman with whom he cohabited, and who had obtained а great, and in¬ deed unhappy influence over him, cou d yet by no means appease She was a woman of too much intrigue and saga city not to feel alarmed at this slate of her protcfloi s mind, which she termed a conlemptiDİe weakness, and endea¬ voured by radici y, icmonstiance, and aigument to dissipate
7 She would have diagged him away fiom this gloomy abode, which, as she thought, cherished his maladj, but her attempts were vain He seemed fhed here as by a spell, his e)es wtre con¬ tinually wandering towards pidb'res, on which they no sooner glanced than he staited back from them with horroi, and theie were apaitmcnts to which he was continually seen resorting, which he had scalee entered before he again retreated from them, shaking in every limb as if he had sein a ghofl The library was the room which he appear¬ ed most anxious to make use of, and it was evident that he wished to be alone there But yet if he went by himself, or they who accompanied h m left hım, scarcely five minutes passed, в 4
s ere he retired in the mostdistressful agi¬ tation He did not wish to have ac¬ cess to books, for though he was far from wanting abilities, Ihc dissipated habits of his early life had precluded him from the pleasuics of leading, which it was now too late to cultivate Two very large MSS folio volumes, containing the history of the famil), illuminated with numerous drawings, towards which Mr Cai), one of his visitors, himself an antiquarian, and very fond of such inquines had often observed his eyes turned, stood on an high shelf among the other books Thus marked out as they were, Mi Cary could not refrsm one day from taking them down, in which he was not opposed by Lord Foiefier, who jet
9 was evidenti) affected by the subject, for how could he recall without the moil cruel emotions, his family pedi¬ gree? The book contained a variety of cu¬ ııous anecdotes, an niteicfling account ofthe flufluattng fortunes ofthe house, and many extraordinary events that be¬ fell some of its tranches, with some elucidations of history totally new, par¬ ticularly m the times of Gtueen Eliza¬ beth and James I and numerous illus¬ trations of national habits and manners, and exhibitions of romantic character, more especially in those two most op¬ posite reigns But it was not ıegularly brought down below the death of Charles the Second n s
10 This treasure inftantly engrossed the attention of Mr Caiy, ind he conti¬ nued lc. turn over the piges withont any apparent displeasure on the part of Loi d forester Houis glided awiy in this Otctip-ition, while Lord Foreikr sat by his side, lost in piofound thought At length a summons cillcd them to dmnet Then it wis tint he was îc- qticstcd tc restoie the book to its place with a singula inxicly He rose, ind iscending the libru y steps with the boule in one hind, lie placed the othei on the shelf to suppoit himself The shelf unfbitunatcly yielded to his weight, and coming down with ι noisy vio¬ lence, chew aftei it t small paimel of ihe wam«coL behind, which foimed a door to a secret recess ш the wall. Lord
11 Forester running up to him in the most violent agitation, cried, " Good God, Sir! What have you done? Mypapersl my papers ! Where are my papers í" — " Here are no papers in this recess," answered Mr. Сагу. " No papers !" replied he, stamping with both his feet, and convulsed with anger, " Then am I lobbed, betrayed, undone indeed !" He toic his grey hairs ; he uttered the most dreadful imprecations on those who had betrayed him ; and then throw¬ ing himself on the floor, gave way to the phienzy of the most enraged de¬ spair. Mr. Caiy, who, though he knew something of the vicious old man's cha¬ racter, was overcome with this extraor-
12 dinary accident, could only ring tht bell, without being able to afford him any other assistance —Mrs Bellenden, Ins female favourite, vvho had heard something of the alarm, with some of the moft confidential favourites, flocked into the loom together But all theie attentions »-ould not still his ravings Mrs Bellenden in particular seemed the object of his suspicions, and he threw hep from him with anger she had never before experienced, and of which she could not guess the cause Fiom this moment Lord Foreftei gave himself up to dejection Mrs Bil- ltndcn, who often called herself his countess, and by whom he had a son, whom she w as anxious to impose upon
the world as legitimate, lost, for β tíme, all her influence. She in vain exerted herself to revive his courage. « He had struggled," he said, K long enough ; and he would not for a w— and hei bastard, any longer, subject himself to fry in hell hereafter, as well as live in tortures here I"—He sent for his attor¬ ney from London; and told him he was weary of the contest; that old as ne was, all he now wanted was peace, and that he would disburden his consci¬ ence, and do his nephew justice ; and that if a compromise could be made, and he could obtain £. 2000 a-ycar foi his life, he would give up the rest, and go and spend his few remaining daj-s abroad.
и The attorney, who had been too much an accomplice in all his wicked 'schemes, but who had лечег before heard hjm own Godfie/s right, (for the terms by which he »had hitherto desig¬ nated him wore always " bastard," " pretender," or " impostor,") was struck dumb with this communication. He conceived Lord Forester's intellects to be deranged ; and in this idea he was ■encouraged by Mrs. Bellenden. Aftor having therefore gently lcmonstrated against precipitancy, he left Hcdindon with a promise to take the propei steps ; upon condition, however, that Laid Forester should communicate nothing farther on the subject to any human being except Mrs. Bellenden, till tbe whole plan was completely ripe for execution.
i5 Lord Foiester now began to feel easier ; he arranged the plan of his ск- cursion to the coniinent; he atlempted to renew his acquaintance with foreign languages, and having discharged his bosom fioni an intolerable weight, he seemed to enjoy even some renovation of cheerfulness. The acöoiint which his emissaries had sent him of the cha¬ racter and conduct of Godfrej» since his recovery from the last dangerous acci¬ dent, had made him think it vain to oppose him, and he now began to re¬ flect on lum with less malice, and'even with acquiescence. ι Still as he wandei ed occasionallyover his powerful possessions at Hedindon, and returned to the grandeur of that
зб proud old mansion, and all the flatteries ofthe obsequious retinue whom it sup¬ ported, his resolution agam failed lum, and he agam listened to the raillery or remonstrances of Mrs. Be'lenden In this doubtful state, one day calm and resigned, another haughty, inso¬ lent, daring, and full of defiance, he re¬ ceived a letter from his attorney, which overcame lum with joy. He instantly ordered his carriage and horses, and taking Mrs. Bellenden with him, set out for London with an extravagance of triumph, which, as he did not give the least hmt of its cause, filled all the house with wonder.
17
CHAPTER II.
Le Foresteu meanwhile, tom with regret, and sunk into the deepest me¬ lancholy at having, innocently and in his own defence, destroyed the life of another, knew not whither to fly for consolation, nor how to employ himself to dispel the gathering clouds of his mind The soothing voice and bene¬ volent attentions of Huntingfield were applied in vain. The image of Emily heiself was for a time forgot ; Emily,. vlio now lay suffeiing on the bed of sickness and sorra í in sympathy for him.
18 Huntingficld thought it right there¬ fore to inform his mother, who wrote him so pressing a letter, аб to induce him to return to her house, and put himself under her care. Since his sor¬ rows and difficulties had increased, he had hitherto avoided spending much time with her ; for he loved her with so acute a sensibility, that he could not bear to make her uneasy by his suffer¬ ings. Nor indeed were the house and neighbourhood in which she jived very pleasant to him. In the former he was born ; but it was a place bought by his father, and little suited to his taste. Unpopular before, he feared, too pro¬ bably, that the misfortune which had befallen him would lender hira still
19 les- acceptable He knew he could not always avoid the visitois who continu¬ ally lesorted to his mothers houses and he could not bear to giye pain to hei, by aftronting those whose constant delight it was to endeavoui to moitiry hini. Mis Le Forester's affection was tiuly alairoed on his ainval, at his pal¬ lid and emaciated looks, at the mourn¬ ful tones of his voice, and the languor of his whole ňsme Ilei gentle and tender eloquence attempted to preach consolation to his wounded spiut, and did not entnely fail in its effect The tones of his mind became somewhat fiimer, he no lonşer recoiled from the amusement of books, and meditation was less painful
20 His neighbours came to visit him, as he expected, and his mother, who be¬ lieved that nothing was so bad for him aa solitude, forced him into their so¬ ciety. By nature 'bstracied, diffident of manner, and ill adapted for familiar conversation ; absorbed by grief and misfortune, and depressed by illness ; what 'hope was there that he would please his rural visitors ? " I come, Sir," said Sir James Garstang, " to ask you how you do. I have a respect for уотг mother; and so I had for your good father that is gone ; and I am sorry to hear of your misfortune. You look Very ill to be sure. But come, cheer up : there is no helping accidents ; and I am told you behaved like a man. We must have you among us. We
21 will not let you hang poiing Over those datnn'd books, that mm the health and spirits, and make a man as stupid as a log. Believe me, Sir, I have lived nearly seventy years, and I never knew any good come of them yet ' Curse me, if I ever remember a single fellow fit either for society or business, aftei he took to learning 1 " " Indeed I" answered Le Forester, mcapable of any other reply. " No ι damme if ever I did 1" he went on , " but my dear boy, I say I loved your father, and for his sake then I must intrcat you to get out of tlus damn'd moping, musing, thinking way ' Thought, damme, what is thought
22 for? 'Gan't we eat and drink, and hunt and sleep, as well without it ? Would thought have given mL this ruddy com¬ plexion, this load voice, and these gay spirits at sixty-nine î Would thought have kept my hounds, or raised my rents? Damme, leave thought to fel¬ lows that wear petticoats !" As these last words were pronounced, entered Mr. Simpson. " Ah, Sirjames," he cried, " What vas you saying about dey dere petticoats ? Damme, if I don't love petticoats!" " Ha, ha! there he is," cried Sir James, " -fier the old game ! But you are on a wrong scent this time, Simpson. We were talking of men's petticoats." " Oh ! by G—— were you?" replied he, " you vas
28 talking of dey fellers, vas ye J I hate the parsons, by G-i— ' But how's do, Lc Forester î You look damn'd ill. If you don' r take care, my boy, you'll go co Davy's locker before your time, by G — I" "I do not much caie it I do,'' answered Le Forester, disgusted and overcome. " What I sick of life," cried ht, " die Godfrey, eh' damme, if I am, live too well here ' a httle too nice, I fear ' Too ambitious, eh, God¬ frey ? How does the old Eail do ? No coionet yet, eh í Damme, what's a co¬ ronet > Curse me, if I don't think it would be better for the nation, if all dey Loi ds vas at the bottom of the sea ' I m for equality, damme I" At that instant his servant passing
24 before tlie window with hie hoises, one of his dogs set up a most tremendous yell. He ran to the window; threw it up, and enquired of the man, with a volley of oaths, what was the matter. The man answered very mildly, that the dog had been unavoidably trod up¬ on, by getting under the horses legs. " You villain," he cried, " don't tell mc so; it was your own fault."—" In¬ deed, Sir," said the man, still mildly, " it was not." " Insolent rascal," he answered, " do you dare to contradict me ? Is this the way to behave to your betters ? I'll horsewhip you, you scoun¬ drel ! I'll strip the coat off yonr back, you scum of the earth ' I'll teach you how to tieat your supeiiors; damn my blood, if I don't!"
25 Here it was impossible for Lc Fo¬ rester to be quite silent—" You are for equality, I think, Mr. Simpson !" he said a little sarcastically î " Yes, damme, if I ben't," replied he; " I think my¬ self as good as any Lord in the land— but then for those blasted Servants to. behave insolent, damme if it is not in¬ tolerable; I'll kick 'em to hell, I say Г Le Forester thought it a total waste •of words to make any rejoinder on thist subject to such a man ; while even Sir James Garstang could not refrain from a contemptuous smile. Nor indeed^ was there occasion to reply ; for more visitors entered at that moment. vol. п. с
20 " Howi do you do, Mr. Lc Forestci f " cried Dr. Prescott, reilor of Catsfield, and_ prebendary of Barnacre, in the ca¬ thedral c-f -------- , a tall, fat, pompous igure m blqck, with a most tremen-' dous_bushy wig, accurately curled, and > nicely fitted to his sleek face, '' I am ■ very, glad, to see you returned home safe, Sir; I am indeed I Your poor mo¬ ther has had a woild of trouble and uneasiness about you. Ah, indeed; ah, indeed ! poor lady ! From my soul I pıtiçd her. But you look veiy ill yet I This wicked uncle i you vex yourself too much about him. So he holds lus ill-got power still. No matter; no matter ; much good may it do him, I say I The wicked, cannot prosper in heait. Better, poveity with a clean con-
27 scicpce than all the riches artd honours ot the world at the expence of vir¬ tue! " bo, so, Doctor! cried Mr Simp son, " thţş ıs vçry pretty tolking , but if we may judge by your looks, nobody would like to tcel poierty lets than yourself! " How is this, Su ? said the Doflor, drawing himself up and colouring veiy ied, " I hope I have got, whatlittle it has plcascd^rovidencè lo bçstow on me, honestly ' —' Ho¬ ne tly, Dofloi ' to be sui e I rephed tl с ölhet, ' I would have evtiy man get what he can, and keep it as long as he can, that s my way of thinking, Donor! Dr Piescott set himself back m his chair, and with a mixture of in- cl
'28 dignation at his own insulted dignity, and scorn for Simpson, only answered, " You/are very jocose 1" · These, and an hundred others of a similar nature, not worth repeating, were the, conversations with which Le Forester was greeted on his return tO his mother's house at Winsbury. " He looks shoókingly," said one, as they left him ¡ " it seems impossible for, him to live. But so much the better: itwould be a good thing for his family: I never liked him : he is so very wrongheaded, and so very deficient in common sense." —" Irle is such a dull fellow, 1 ' said an¬ other; '·' Iricvcr met with such a stu¬ pid dog in my life I" "I was at school with him," cried a third; " and he was
29 only fit to make verses, and learn Latin and Gieek , he was good tnlured and harmless, if you would let him alone to be sure, but then lint is not the soi t of fellow that I like ! "IIb ıs so bur sedly reserved, which I thmk arises from pude, ' added a fourth, " And how little we should some of us feel, if 1 e should ever get this title and estate, ' said a fifth " The sooner he die« then the bettei," cned another. Lc Forester, with a mmd overwhelm¬ ed with melancholy, and a frame sink¬ ing with languor, was totally unequal to encounter such society Absorbed as lie was in his own troubles, his saga city could not be blinded b) ther pio- fcssions to the dislike they boieto him„ с 3
30 »nd to the secret satib r >£tion they ftlt in all his misfortunes. The hatred that is cherished by most countiy sqtiires to ¡ any of their own order who have the , character of literature or genius ; the ' envy and jealousy which they indulge of each other's superiority ; and the'claim of honours, which Le Foiester was car¬ rying on, will easily account for these unjust opinions, and malignant wishes. He endeavoured to soothe his uneasy thoughts vvitli books, or divert the time by composition ; and wrote on this oc¬ casion the following imitation öf Gray's Hymn to Advetsily.
31 ODĽ TO MALICE,
О thou, to whom imbitter'd Hate On Envy, jaimdtc'd fierd, gave birth, Thou dost an iron crown create, And bind it round the browa of Worth ί The meed, for which through ceaseless toil, The busy day, the midnight oil, He wins his course, his templet to adorn, Blasted by thee, dire Power, is tum'd to painful scorn. II. Ere Satan long* his confines broke To dash the Mifs. of paradise, Thee from thy cave thy sire аи оке To tjhwart the generous enterprise, With coward Calumny to league, With chill Neglect and Wi.nt intrigue, Sweet Charity fiom earthly scenes expel), And fill the finrrul waste with all the imps of Hell, С 4
32 III Hrnce Gemut pines the fi r) ьюи ΓΙ it seem m youth s first η i ıı to cì ırm, riiejoyol bpuiig t enımell d dyes, Γ1 e shndes which Summer s bliaes w inn» Ilib tints oí yellow Autumn s reign, Succeed to thull the heart ш лащ Een the wild storms j the dirken d ¿чу, the night Howling with winds sublime, no more hit loul delight IV. Delusive scenes, and fickle suns. And storms, whofe mufic le-ids tistrty! Distrustful of then joys, he runs, To hide him fiom the girish dny, To moping езуеч, where dark D'ipair Numbs ill the keenness of his care , And, deep m sullen gloom, the tedious hours Design d for heavenly weeks, doll Apaiby devout β*
33 II CHAPTER III.
Ат this period Le Forester's schemes of ambition, and even, his love, were in iome degree suspended. The ghost of the poor wretch, whom he had sent into the other world " with all his crimes upon his head," even though in the last cxtiemity, and as the only possibility of saving his own life, still haunted his fancy both day and night. All his ¡fer¬ mer troubles diminished toliothing be¬ fore this; and the consolations, and remonstrances of his family and his friends were vain. He lost his self- c 5
34 complacence; and that dignity, by which he had hitherto supported him¬ self against the sneers of the vulgar and light-hearted. He was depressed by neglect; overpowered by contradiction ; and grew jealous of the very looks of his acquaintance. They, who never loved him, had the unspeakable mean¬ ness and cruelty to triumph over him in this state of pitiable self-degradation. He grew daily more emaciated; neg¬ lected his person ; his eyes started wild¬ ly from his head ; and his mother gave herself up to despair. The country spread a thousand talcs of his disorder ; they universally agreed that he was mad ; and too many attri¬ buted it to a consciousness of guilt. Is
35 there no clnuty for lum who endea¬ vours to elevate himself above the mob by his virtues, 01 his intellectual ic- quncments? Aie not only the failings, but the tnisfoi tunes, of poor Itumanitj to be thin, insulted ? Is Calumny thus constantly to ride nt the back of Emi¬ nence? Better weie it then, to bury the talents tnd the aspuing hopes nature has bestowed on us, in a dull sensual pm асу, if this world had been all we have lo look to! Mrs Le Torcster called in the aid of the Taculty But what could phj sic do for the diseases of the mmd ? He refus¬ ed all amusement bocks lost their in¬ terest, except the most gloomy tales, or deepest tragedies, and the«e were kept с б
зб from him witli the greatest caution. He wept continually} he prayed for death ; and when be could escape the vigilance of his family, he roamed abroad for hours in the most stormy nîglıts, to contend " with the pelting of the pitiless tempest." More than two months were passed in this unhappy manner. At length the middle of February brought with it a few of those fine da) s, which give an anticipation Of spring. The sudden contiast to the cheerless appearance of winter makes such days the most de¬ lightful of lhe year. There seems a general reviviscence of nature. Mrs. fje Forester flattered herself that she perceived the clouds of her son's coun-
37 tcnance г little broken his eyes seem¬ ed to have a less vacant stare, he ex¬ pressed α willingness to walk in the glare of day, he paused, he led the way along one of his accustomed paths, he climbed up the sunny banks, and pick¬ ed the eaily floweis that suddenly peep¬ ed foith from the moss, he retuincd fatigued, but after resting a little while, took his hat again, ai d went and leaned 01 er the rails that fence ihc 1 ìwn, and there hung, lost in musing' Every dij now dissipated something of his gloom He took Up books which he had long left unnoticed, and seemed to poie over them with some interest Thomsons' Seasons weie thrown n his way, and his family Mere delighttd
38 to observe him go through the poem " on Spring" vvith unbroken attention. Sanguine hopes were hence entertained of his recovery. Nor was their joy mo¬ derate to see him take out his pencil, and write down notes as he used to do, however shoit. One day his cousin Шп irt AiSlon, whp had almost been brought up in the family, and vvho had watched him with the tenderness of a sister, biought to bis mother, with the teais in her eyes, the following lines which he had dropped out of his pocket.
SONNE! 1 . Уе germi beams of tini reviving Sun» Thro whose kind miluence, о er theíl fpreading meads Wond ring I see the wvid verdure run! Primrose, and violet, whose fragrance leads The euly 1 onoiirs of the coining Spring 1 Swtet buds, whose voice m the yet Itnßcss grove I heir with doubtful trnmtlojs prelude sing! New hopes within my breist begin to moie , And thou too, whose lov d i m ige in my mimi Held the first pince, but in my stormy biam Lite with the rest was wreck d, thy form I fincţ With softness still more mei mg rise a^iin' Bliss here on earth t, en yet may be my lot, And thine arms mv gn fs be all forgot 1 She ga\e it to htr aunt without a comment, but while Mis. Le Forester read it, there was in Harriet's counte¬ nance a mixed expression of delight and
ла disi ess, which could not entnely escape lui obsenation " Indeed, my dear llama " vud she, ash« tears dropped upon the pipei, " this is ier> conso- latoi) ' Tini fixed gloom, which was so very tciufic, is no doubt dispersing. But what is this attachment," conti¬ nui d she with an arch smile, " which I nevei heud of before? Perhaps you can tell '' " I am suie I cannot guess," rephed Harnct, while the deepest blushes omspiead her whole face " Will you gu e ine back the sonnet," added she, " thr lines are so affecting I should like to keep them " You shall have them certain!), ' itphedMis I« foresta , " but remember not to lose them " Ί hi re is no fear of th it, ' -aghed Harnct to herself
41 Harriet met Godfrey, as she Jcft lier aunt, while tlic colour was yet on her cheeks, and the distress in her eyes. Her looks caught his notice ; and he took her hand, and kissed her. She trembled all over ; and as soon as she conld withdraw it ran awa)·, and shut herself up in her own room. There she took out the sonnet, and read it again» and bathed it with her tears. From this time Le Forester seemed to be most satisfied when he was occu¬ pied with his pen. The icjeas which had long been either stagnant, pr„too confused and tumultuous for utterance, sought to vent themselves; and though lie was loo languid for severe exertions, he found a relief in pouiing out on
ι'Αϊ paper, without efľoit, the thoughts that weie voluntarily passing through his mmd. The loose sheets that contained them lay scattered in numbers on his table, and among the leaves of his books. He foigot them as soon as writ¬ ten ; and most of them were destroyed,' by those who knew not their value. , But Harriet, having already found what ^he esteemed a treasure, could not al¬ ways restrain her curiosity from turn¬ ing them over, and taking away what pleased her most. Amongst the rest she feized with peculiar delight the follow¬ ing, which seems to have a reference to »ome conversation or correspondence she was not possessed of.
43 £LFGW That strain wi· ti ie i ind Гансу h И tl e power , 1 o itrew With rotei hit, ■ entangled way$ ι Ehe to the poet s eye at midnight hour [ On his lone couch can winning Beauty raite 1 I £ en now I wak å from blissful momenti fraught , With visions, u hich I hail d ш tumult« tuit } Kus d the Iov d object, breath d the tender thought» And gaz d in rapture, till my sight wai lost But aht how soon the envious dawn of day Scatters the sweet creation into air, And leaves the mourner by the foathmg lay The dreary hours of restless light to wean To weep his pprtion of unmixed grief, For van sh d 1 opes, and real woei to sigh j In filsc compart ons search for vain relief, And meet with pings, wheie cr hw foorstepi fiyi
Aï ìf this ıs life, O miy the quiet grave I olili voi n bosom brinj, » long i pec, for little longer can it fr nljr hrive The stoini, ti at m each g4thering co ifličl growi.. Ah¡ surei he feeb that soon his weiry frnme Will find a calm beneath its parent earth;. Where v-iinly Malice wilt insult his intne* While Fnendihip sanftiflei hii humble wortli. But whose the tea» that will eminim bu »hrmel· Will tht sweet Tnaiden, whose ıngenuouı tye* Have often ihone with pity s beams dn me» Weep, that in early youth her favourite di« ŕ Гог she ıs soft, as ıs the vermi rose When full it· bosom is of morning dewj And 1 er dear snowy breast with kindness glows, bwcet as the flower« thit bummer s puhwiy strew..
45 Г mi now his thoughts on her with rapture dwell, Íj ¡re on her trembling firm, her blushing cheek, I An I her lov d beauties to tliq breezts tell, Ι Ί i ose charms the conscious breezes will not tp ak. To hei be breathes his sighs, to her he talks, And mid tbe quiet of surrounding shades Revels at ease with her in lonely w-ilki, Where ne er the world в intrusive eye invades. \ cs fuch is Г -mcy's pow'r, ihe lifts her wind, And all ι. ound tn £uiy visions phy Nor must we bhmc her, if at ber command I ile sgloom is gilded by τ tun lent ray. I
46
CHAPTER' IV,
The pieceding elegy, however lari- guid, will show how rapidly the clouds of Iæ Forester's mind were dispersing. Eveiy day add'd to his recovery. But I will make him his own biographer, »vhereier I have an oppoitunitj·, by exhibiting such of his letters of this pe¬ riod as I have been able to meet with. LETTER I. jjth Feh. I need njt tell you how ill I have been, smre we parted; so ill in-
47 deed, that I dare not look back upon it. My memory, I believe, has been suspended; and it seems all an hideous blank. Tliese few spring-like days have revived mc. I have felt a compa¬ rative cheerfulness; but grief is stdl' heavy at my heart, and will weigh me down to the grave before'my time. You know not a tenth ,part of my dif¬ ficulties' and raifafottunetl ; 'though in the last fortnight we spent together, when our intimacy grew into a friend¬ ship, which I trust will last for the re¬ mainder of şiir lives, I confided to you many things, which equally surprized and affected you. I endeavour to amuse myself with light reading ; and I occa¬ sionally exercise my pen, but not in any way which requires much exertion
4β «f thought. All business I am yet ut¬ terly mcapable of. The hoary usurper and his machinations, I keep as much as possible from my thoughts. Since I have beert again able to re¬ flect, my sufferings have been much increased by the affliction I have caused to my excellent mother. Her tender- nessi her solicitude and watchings have been incessant. Better were it perhaps that I had never been born ; or that I had gone with my little brother to an early tomb! Then had this unhappy «laim been buried with us for ever; and my mother and sisters been at peace ! But I must háve done with this cruel subject: my brain feels already in a tempest.
19 My Lousiii Ι Ιαη iet Aclon enleia the loom she sees my igtlation, she ill ticats mc not lo fatigue myself with too much wilting I obey , foi she has shewn me the kindest attentions dining my illness This is an amiable, umf- fct ted, little cicature I wish you knew hci, Huntingficld '—The saucy thing attempted to oieilook mc, as I wrote tin» sentence I have kissed her for it, and she is iun away \eiy angiy I TITER II th Feb I rsDiD m j foimei Icttci ab utptly Harriet Acton ha» not yet foi gtien me, foi ^he colours when wc meet, anel ıs become quite ıeseıvcd lor π в
so What а simple girl ' How eould she suppose thai I m^ant to offend her ' f ongialulatc me, th it I can tnfle thus, cien with mj pen But why do I tnfle' 'Wlnt icason 1 ave I but for deep lamentation î My small ^acuities, such as they weie, are eifliei gone, or stagnant Nciei before did I know then value -------- Г t t to 1 now a treas ire s orti , TUT ne 1 as stol na aj tl e s! I ted go d, Is cause of 1 alt the misera we feel While nij pen ian fluentb , while ideas π о vcled too ЫЫ upon me fot my hand to сип mit them to paper, I little îe- giided these facilities, I did not pnze the pcuod dining wlueh they lasted,
5t but thought that it would be always the same. Alas' how foobsli was this confidence ' Something seems to have bound up my intellectual powers as with a spell. All is stupid aud motion¬ less. No images, no sentiments come forth at my bidding. The half-formea ideas fade away, and elude my impo¬ tent grasp. Ai e these the consequences of a mmd, which has been too much stretched; of an heait, which has been too much tned ' Peihaps in the ciovvd of anxieties and perds wlueh have as- baulted me, I exet ted an assumed mag¬ nanimity too fai beyond what my пя tuual strength would bear ; and now tlicieloie sink the dcepci mto mibecil- hly and suffering. D 2
62 But pcilnps these pin ation«, tin·, state ot mental deieliction which I so much déploie, will make mc less un- populai. Loid Somerford has just been here, and after expressing his good wishes towards me with a gtcat deal of earnestness, and giving mc much ad¬ vice, has with a circuitous parade en¬ deavoured to с jm ince me it is beneath my dignity to wnte \ciscs, and, as he , is pleased to call it, have the ambition of being an author Wh it ingredienti he supposes ncccssar) to constitute an author, or the species of digmt) winch sets us above intellectual eminence, you may be sure I did not inquire of lum. Lord Somerford's puncipal puiposc however, was to offer me a scat in pai -
63 İnmeni foi his borough, which ь ju t become vacant I th inked hnn, but how could I accept it, while I consider myself to be disqualified by hai mg a iif'it to a seat in the Upper House î I believe he has a great dislike to my usurping and unnatural uncle, and wishes well to my suit, Do you know hım î You will recollect he was made a peer within these twenty years He is a man of a dull, slow intellect, yet with some fitness for the routine of or- r 1 nary business, to which he has at- t ded through life with unabated per- s ciance He is made up of formah- i, to which he annexes the greatest ι equence but these never stand in t way of his own interest, which is uniformly uppermost m his thoughts n 3
54 With no lustre of family, which is re¬ membered but for two or three gene¬ rations, when it is supposed to have emerged fiom the order of yeomen, he has gradually advanced himself fo the peerage, by the means of this borough, of wluch he made a lucty and cheap fiutehase some years before, by seizing the opportunity of an extravagant young Irian's temporary distress, tiis extra* ordinary Success in life has giver» him an uncommon confidence in his own opinions and abilities; and he thinks 1 himself " Sir Oracle." If worldly ad' vancement were the proof of mental or moral virtues, woe be to most of those Whom I have .always beheld as examples of genius or goodness! As for Lord Somcrford; though he disaims me by
lus civility to m) self, I own I cannot love such chuacieis But there are some subjects on win h We cannot always sufficiently lower our expectations to our experience If by continual ment il exti ttons we exalt our own sentiments, we forget that we do not by these means alter those of other people Ought I therefore to have suf- fcied myself to be mortified, if I have gained no credit, respect, or authority with many of my relations and fnends, foi my literary acqmiemenls (no mat¬ ter how small, foi it would have been the same if I had discovered the genius of Milton 01 Spenser), when if I had distinguished myself by showy equi¬ pages, and by cloathmg my servants in d 4
gaudy livene«, aud entertaining tl« neighbourhood wheie I hied with pompous dinncis, Ihej would hue at tached themselves to me with а clin¬ ging servility, would have ovei powered me with then attentions, and have con¬ sidered their alliance or intimacy with me a gratification of their vanity ? But I confess I have been mortified,—mor¬ tified that the intrinsic qualities of the mind should not have been esteemed as good a ground for pride or reverence, as the adventitious circumstances of wealth and external ostentation.
57
CH VPTĽR V.
LETTER III. In consequence of the increasing cu¬ nosity you Ime lately expressed about our family, I here ^si.d you a copy of the memoir left by my father. THE STORY OF EUSTACE LE FORESTER " Ат the eatliest penod which I can ìecollcct, I found mj self the inhabitant of an obscuie and humbic cotfage m the most îemote part of Devonshire, ncai the coast of the Bristol channel. в 5
38 The cottager and his wife treated me not only with а tenderness, but with а respect, which, as my mine and other circumstances had long informed me I was not their child, made me bchc\e m j self of some consequence My dress was always diffcient fiom tint of other village boys and the schoolmaster of the ňeighbounng hamlet had taught me to read and write at an expence of tune and labour which was affoidcd to none aiound mc Sometimes I was called ' the young Lord, ' and my playfellows often made mc promise that I would íemcmber them when I " should come to be α gieat man ' Tin. indistinct memoiy of the fairy vi¬ sions that then played before mc, of the fond sehemes of bene\olcncc that
SÖ
sometimes swelled my little bosom, ts we returned thiough the twilight of a summer evening from some rustic visit, )ct thrills my whole frame with tlie sweetest and most tender regtet I see again in all the vividness of reality the very tints of the sky, the same fields, the sime hedges, the \ery stiles oier which I clambered with such triumph > О how perfectly is the quiet abode, to which ve were returning, pictured m my mmd ' Π e rude wicket-gate, that introduced us through the diminutive garden, the honeysuckles that ciowd- ed round the door, and the casement of my chambei that those honeysuckles hall coi ered 1
" Once I remember a tenant cani- Dä
6ο m a gaudy livery, (I think it was the same as Lord Foiester now uses,) and fetched me to a gentleman at the bot¬ tom of the lane, who took mc in his arms, and embraced me, and, I believe, called me hi» child, but a caniage with servants in the samcliveiy passed hastily along the turnpike into which the lane opens, and a lady letting down the glass and calling to lum, he took an hasty leave of me, again mounted bis hoise, and ordering the seivant t > conduct me back to the cottage, rode away I w as then too young to reason much upon this, but it made a stiong impicssion on me, and foi many nights I waked suddenly out of my sleep in teais, call¬ ing after " my father 1 "
fil " Al length the late Earl Forester died, but the poor people with w hom I lived heaı d nothing of it in their obscuie reheat, I imagine, till the failure ot the usual lcmittanccs, the effects of \\ hich I now lcmembei ftom the change in then mode of liung, and the absence of many comforts I used lo be indulged with, induced them to apply, and ftom expressions which I now ïecall but did not then understand, to apply m vain. " The good old man and lus wife grew melancholy, and then melancholy infected mc. 1 had no longer my usual cmplojmcnts; the village schoolmaster ceased to attend me; the old man woiked harder, and went moie distant for his woik; and the poor woman
62 herself, contrary to her former practice, went out lo labour m the fields I was left therefore the gieat г part of the day to mvself, and restless and unhappy, I «andcicd by digrees still faithci and fai thu, till sometincs I was absent fiom moinmg till night, having fid onl) on Iht nuts and bemes that tho hedges iftorded I had α stiange in¬ distinct dicad of dcseilion and poveity constantly sitting heavy on my heart, m consequence of thubroki η conversations which I now continually overheat 1 at home I often theiefoie tlnew mjsdf down on some sunny bank, and lay there weepmg for houts " In one of lhe* fits α servant came up to me inüitüaine hveiy as that of
ßs
him who bad formerly fclchcd me io· the bottom of the lane, to the gentle¬ man who had so kindly embraced me and called me his child He spoke softly to me, and asked me, if my name was Forcstei ' I answered, yes ; and with a fiantic joy I could not contain, tin civ шу arms round his neck, and asked for my fathei. " Come With me, my dear," he «aid, " and I will carry you to your fithci." " I accepted the imitation with de¬ light, and walked with him several miles till I began to giow weary, f then inquued how much fai ther we had to go, and how soon I should le¬ tuni, as mj dame, not knowing of my absence, would grow uneasy. He as-
6ı surcd me that it was but a httle way farther; and that he would' then go back, and inforni my dame himself. He pointed to a distant town, which, howcvei, seemed much neaiei than it was; and for some miles farthei, I kept up my spuits, and tiudgcd aftei lum,' as well as I could. At last I could walk no longer ; and he took me on his back and carried me; bul his tone was now alteied; and when I began to ciy, he eluded and swoie at me. " As wc at hist entered the town, he charged me not to make a noise, and mj spuits w ere now so subdued through fear and latigue, that I was silent. lie earned me through some nanow stink¬ ing sheets, to a small public house at
tis the edge of a laige luibour full of ship«, wheie I first had a Mglir of the sea On goi ig .along the djik passage of this dbgusting hovel, and ascending the stairs, which were little beiter than a ladder ; all so different from the ex¬ pectations, that the gaudy livery and splendid equipage?, which I had for¬ merly seen, had laised, I again began to ciy, and to ask impatiently for " the great gentleman." The brutal fellow now held lus hand belore my mouth, and bringing me into a dark room, wheie theie was a small bed, •he threw me on it, and bade me rest quietly Iheie, till I had recoveied fiom my fatigue.
66
" Not daring to move, I wept myself lo sleep, and continuing in that slate till it was dark, I was suddenly awak¬ ened by the loud and hou id oaths of some fellows, who on seeing me open my eyes at the candle which they held over nie, withdrew again, and left mc to myself.—My spirits and strength ut¬ terly exhausted, I again fell into the most profound slumbers. Then it was I suppose that tlje ruffians carried me on board tho vessel, where I found my¬ self on waking the next morning. "Merciful Heaven! What a change of situation was now mine! I wept for tin ее days, ™Л re fu E ed a» food. The captain thought he should lose his prcy.¡
67 and sent the surgeon to soothe and in¬ dulge me, till by degrees he hoped (o reconcile me to my fate At any rate he wľJicd to k<vp nie quiet, till he sailed. But even in this state of lom- parative kindness with what I soon after expi rienced, how diffeient was my lot fiom that which I had lefl 1 Instead of the affectionate attentions, the whole¬ some though homel) faie, the inndcent though unrefined conversations of my dame and her husband, instead of tho sweet air, and lonely peace of their humble cottage, I had to contend with the haidened rebuffs, the blasphemies, the nauseous food, tlie cruelties, and ılıt tiinjtä of a crowded meic^antman, amidst the fumes of con upturn and pestilence.
Οβ 1 \l length « e weighed anchoi, and as the bank» of lhe cliinnel giadually faded liom my new, ill the chords ot ni) hcait seemed one by one tobe toin awa) fiom mc As llic last gbmmci- mg of the la«t object vanished, I threw myself on the deck, and sobbed aloud, till the cruel lashes, which a blood¬ thirsty sailor unmercifully inflicted on my back, recalled me to my senses Trom that moment I was goaded by stripes and blows, to the most menial, the most labonous, and the most dan¬ gerous employments in the ship, of which my age was capable What power, even of imperious necessit), eould en ib e me, tendei and delicate as I was, thus to undergo these duties, I am now α α loss to £,ucss Often did
са I rcsoUe to thiow myselt omboard, and ■-eek ïcposc in α watery gra\e But tint mjstci ous love of hie, whicli Pi ο¬ χ idem с Ins implartcd m us, even w hen accompanied b) the sevnest trials and afflictions, iesti uned mc " M e w cic bou ïdonatiadiiig \o)agc to the coast of Africa, and thcic can be little doubt tint I w as consigned to slaver) in that savage countr\ But the hand ot Heaven ordered it 1 ciwi=c ' It was I th nk the end of С lober, 01 beginning of Î40vembei, η! ι wc set sail and wc continued the ι J) age for neaily α month 11 fm wca lei w hen we cime in s gilt of the i md of Μι deira The sight of land, howevci dis tant, ga\e mc the first thull of plcaoiue
I had experienced since we took leave ofthe English coail. " The day hod been unusually bright and calm, but the sun set w ith an ap¬ peaiance, fiom whence the sailors fore¬ told a storm. A tremendous daikness came on ; and the w ind, which had begun to rise with a few sullen gusts, grew all at once outrageous. The sea ran mount uns high. Wc wei e lifted at one moment hteially almost among the clouds, and the nest, wc seemed to be piecipitated into a bottomless ab) ss. The oldest sailor amongst us had nc\ er scen such a tempest before. Lvery one lost his self-possession. The captain's guilt) conscience struck him, and he sunk into Ihc most timid and eontemp-
71
tibie imbccillity We lost our rudder; and the m un mast fell over the ship's side with α crash, of which the sound yet lings m my cai. " Wc now drove before the blast w ithout conti oul , andeven the stoutest men in the vessel gave themselves up lo despair Foi m) selt, aftei all the honors with which the fiist astonish¬ ment at the stoim overwhelmed me, lhe slate of dcsp-ir in which I had lived foi some vv eeks, soon reconciled mc to my fate, and I bcliev el fi It more calm than the bi ai est of my companions, I ·' The tempest continued lather to increase, if that was possible, than to abate. Eveiy one was prepanng for
n the fatal moment, when ¡he ship must cither sink 01 go to pieces, and dei is¬ ing, as far as the distracted sta*e of hi¬ mmel would allow, some chance of saving his hie — I h id climbed up to the top of a ícmaimng mast, to scenic ni)self fiom the power of the waics, which -weie continually dashing o\ci us, and had lashedm)sclf to the timbci to secure my scat, when all at once w e seemed to be din en on with the rapi¬ dity of lightning, and in a moment thcic was a crash as if the elements had burst The ship, no doubt, was dm en ag unst the rocks of the island, and in stanti) dissoh ing moa thousand fi ig ments, went, with all its contents, to the bottom,—ail except me, whe, as insensible as the iest of what had hap 1
73 pence!, was pu ked up the next morning floating on tlic fi igment of the mast, to which I had lishcd myself " I was earned to а little village si¬ tuate on the sea side m the island of Madena, where one of the inhabitants, in compassion for the misfortunes of a helpless infant, supplied me with food, and attended to the biuises which every pait of my body had suffered. For many days, I have reason to think, that my life was in danger, but Isooti reco¬ vered my senses, and, aftei sometime, my strength I shewed the gratitude which I felt to die family of my pie¬ sei ν er by tears, and that unaffected ex¬ pression of countenance, which was more effective than if I had commanded VOL II F
74 the most eloquent words of then lan¬ guage. " I desired to make myself useful to them, and to cam niy bread. The) carried me to work with them in the cultivation Of a vineyard they had on the declivity of one of the mountains. The scenery and occupations among which I now was placed, were Paiadise compared with what I had lately expe¬ rienced. Rural labours were congenial with my early taste ; and the prospects around mc were delightful. The air was temperate ; the soil was fertile ι and an exuberance of wuud and water enriched the face of nature. The moun¬ tain-tops were crowned with forests of chesnut. Lemons and oranges grew
7Ь spout licousl) on the slopes beneath them The g'apes, growing undei bovvcis, ripened in the shades, and ri¬ vulets, issuing fiom the heights, ferti¬ lized them by an mfinitj of wind¬ ings * " In this way I spent four years, with a mixture of satisfaction and regret I was grateful to Providence for my won¬ derful preservation, I was grateful to those vho had so kindly protected me, 4nd I could not help reflecting with satisfaction on the escape I had from the brutal captain, into whose hands I had fallen He was gone, wretched man, to answer for his sms , and I could
ε 1
76 not contemplate his fate vvitli ¡niy. But yet I could not think on thr beloved cottage in England, from which I had been lom, and its dear inhabitants, without floods of tears ¡ I could not think of those elevated prospects in life, however indistinct, to which I had been formerly accustomed to look for¬ ward, without sighs of deep regret ; I could not think on him, who had fold¬ ed me in his arms, and called me " child," without pangs of acute sor¬ row. And when the reflection came across me, that I was in a remote part of the world, a foreign land, in poverty and dependence, without a relation, or â natural protector, my heart failed me; I sunk into despair, and wished for the kind release of death.
77 ·· I grew notwithstanding in strength and health ; my preserver and his fa¬ mily continued their attachment to me; and in this course-of life I completed my twelfth year. During all this time I had never fallen in the way of any of my countrymen, who must not unfre¬ quently have visited the island. But my days were busily employed ; idle¬ ness was unknown to me ; and I could not bear that they who had been so kind to me, should suspect me of dis¬ content; and that I would seek an op¬ portunity to leave them. They never mentioned my countrymen to me; but, I afterwards heard, had once or twice expiessed their uneasiness, when they were informed of parties of them in the neighbouring town of Funchial. к 3
CHAPTER VI.
THE STORY OF EUSTACE LE FORESTER, CONTINUED. " At length a tempestuous season had given considerable interruption to our rural labours. Wind and rain hää confined us a great deal to the shelter of our houses ; and the time began to hang heavy on our hands. We wan¬ dered along the shore, and contem¬ plated the struggles of the ocean. We beheld ships labouring with the tem¬ pest; while my heart felt an acute sympathy in all their sufferings. Day after day they weatheied the galçs.
But at last a morning was usheicd in with a storm more loud and fearful than common, " We went down to the shore as usuali and viewed with terror the, con¬ flict with the waves. Qnly a single ship was seen endeavouring to lido the billows. Her effprts appeared almost hopeless; but she made at ι lengfh, fot the bay. Two women were beheld dis 7 tinctly upon deck with uplifted hands, as if supplicating assistance. Signals were made fiom land, that it was im¬ possible for vessels of that size to reach the bay safely in the direction they were pursuing. Boats put off, and ven¬ turing along the ship's side, took in as many passengers, and indeed more than ь 4
so they would hold—but'among these, f saw with delight, the females whose distress had given me such pain. I had observed the English colours on the ship, and felt a double interest in its dangers. I watched the overloaded boat, which contained the women, and as it approached nearer, observed with agony the momentary perils with which it laboured. I had learned to swim with perfect skill since my lorfg re¬ sidence so near ' the sea : throwing off my jacket, therefore, I sallied forth among the waves, and made my way to the affrighted sufferers. As I reached them, the boat seemed in the act of sinking ; and some of the passengers, by a sudden loss, were actually plunged ¡into the bottomless abyss. " Saie my
8 1 child," cried the elder lady, as her daughter was struggling to recover her hold, in the general confusion. I caught her in my arms, and by a miraculous effort, for which I cannot now account, 1 diagged her, almost lifeless, to tlie shore. ι ■ " I had scarcely landed her, when I saw the boat overset by the surf, and the passengers likely to be drowned, after so wonderful an escape, within a few yards of us. I delivered my charge into the arms of one of my companions, and'again dashing into the water, I had the happiness to bring the mother, as I had the daughter-, safe to land, My strength and courage were at tlut mo¬ ment providential. To argue on the £5
82 powers which à boy of my yeais then possessed, is vain The hand of Hea¬ ven, no doubt, was stietched out, and I was made the humble instrument of its mercy I " What weie the mother's feelings, when she found hci daughtei safe, tliough yet insensible, on чЬоге ' She thiew her arms ai ound hci in an agony no language can describe, and lifting her streaming eyes to Heaven, poured out her gratitude for hei preservation. Now casting those eyes on me, yet he¬ sitating a moment, as if she almost doubted her senses, but again believ¬ ing it impossible to be mistaken m the person of her own, and her child's de¬ liverer, little and boyish as I appeared,
63 she knelt before me, and seemed to worship me for a minute aa some divi¬ nity ; then looking up in my youthful face, and beholding the tears of joy that flowed down my cheeks, she cast her¬ self on my neck, and embracing me with a fervor which I can never forget, was lost for some moments in the con¬ vulsions of her heart. " As soon as Mrs. Damory (for that was her name) recovered fiom this agony, I spoke to my friends,'m Por- tugueze, to carry her daughter, a girl not more than eleven years old, who seemed to be now recovering, to the house wheie I resided. As they began to move vvith her, " What are they going to do ?" said her mother, trcm-
84 bhng with alarm She spoke this ш French, hoping, that entirely surround¬ ed as she supposed herself by foreign¬ ers, some one would understand that language Guessing what she meant, I replied, " My dear Madam, we will carry you both in safety lo the house of a fnend " hearing me thus speak m English, she utteied a shriek of asto¬ nishment, and casting hei eyes again on me, she cried, " Meiciful Heaven · Have I found m thee a countryman too ì Thou art indeed a protecting an¬ gel !" Hei tongue hcic again failed her, and she sobbed aloud upon my shoulder. " We conducted them to the humble habitation of my kmd host, wheie Miss
85 Damory was put to bed for some hours ; and by the unremitting attentions ot her mother, who never left her, was at length perfectly restored. In two days I had explained my little history to Mrs, Damory, whose gratitude had already grown into the fondneás of. the most tender mothei. As she had pieserved her pockcl-book, containing most of her bills, and orders for money, she expressed her wish to be no longer troublesome to the good people who had so kindly received them. At her desire, thercfoie, I procured her more commodious lodgings in the town of Funchial, to which, after having made a handsome present to my host, she re¬ moved. ' '
86 " But neither she, nbr her daughter, could bear that I should be separated from them; and, bymany intrcaties and promises, they obtained my good mas¬ ter's leave to have me wilh them during their abode at Madeira. Mrs. Damory now informed me, that she was· the wife of a.milifarjr officer, who had been many years in the East Indies. She had been secretly married to htm, and had brought him Ihis only child befoie he left England ; and had on that ac¬ count been very ill used by her family, who had all deserted hor. She had hi¬ therto, lived, upon the produce of her own fortune, in a state of independence : but not having heard of him for a long time, she had collected together the remnant of her property, and with her
«τ daughter had got thus far on her way to India to seek him uut, when the! tre- mcindous i-tonn arosti, from whijeh I had been so happy as lo save their lives. " Mis. Dampry was. not, more than two -uid-thirty, and was still a very handsome woman. She had all that ι İcar understanding, and patient forti¬ tude, which aie mosi fitted to surmount those difficulties she had to contend with. To mo she became at once a paient, a fiicnd, an instructor. My peasant's elicss she instantly changed; and the ıustic habits which I had con¬ tracted among rural companions, and, ι rural occupations, soon yielded to her lenient but constant attentions. 1 4
88 ", Thus passed many months, before she had an opportunity of re-embark¬ ing'for her'original destination. Her kindness to me grew every day stronger; and when at last a ship offered, in which she' could take her passage for Iridia, not able to part vvith me, she obtained, byian handsome gift, the per¬ mission of thd 'peasant, who had for four years supported mc, to accompany her. It is needless to mention with what joy I received this indulgence. My heart I believe would have bioken, to have still continued, after the tender protection ahd refined pleasures I had lately'experienced, among foreigners in the sam'e coarse society and ernploy- ments as I had formerly thought Com¬ paratively tolerable.
89 " The hour of our embarkation at last came. Tö the very last moment I had a tremor and foreboding that I might yet be separated from my be¬ loved friends. When! I, found myself seated in the boat that flauto carjiy us off to the Indiaman, my dear Mrs. Da¬ mory on one side, and my sweet sister, (so I was allowed to call her), my sweet sister Isabel on the otner, cling¬ ing to me, her | band fast locked in mine; for bhe could not subdue the tre¬ pidation she felt at again trusting her¬ self to the waves ¡—when I found the boat moving down the strand, and then heard the crashing sound wi'h which it was launched upon the ,ν ateis, while the spiay new íound us, I felt for the first time an exultation of heaı t, a cer-
90 faulty of happiness, which was entirclv new to me We passed oier the blud waters, by the impul e of a gentle breeze, with so delightful a motion, that the remembrance of it yet thrills my bosom with the most pleasing sen¬ sations " As we ascended the side of the ship, Isabel would not trust herself out of roy arms, and still when we were safe on the deck she clung to me A fresh breeze sprung up and we \л ere no sooner on board than we weighed anchoi I cast my e) e back, and di op ped a tcai, as I saw, foi the last time, a spot whcie I had found such a prow dentili deliverance, and disinteicsted suppoit, but in) attention was soon
91 iccallcd to Isabel« As the ьЫр begati to roll through the swelling waves, the awlul. noise of the movement, tlie crackling of the cordage, and lhe roar of the wind among the sails, increased her alarm; I found her hand grow coldj her Cheeks betrayed a deadly paleness; and she strnk upon my shoulder, ready to faint, Mrs. Daiaory assisted ше in bearing her to the cabin ; where, by. ati tentions and remonstrances, we gradu¬ ally restored her to a proper exertion oí her spuits. n > " The pqxt day Isabel became recon¬ ciled to her new situation; for more than a week 'the weather continued beautifully fine; and we all of us began to enjoy the' voyage.' We were now
92 launched far into the wide Atlantic, and had long seen nothing but the im mense ocean around ue Somedrites indeed, we dimly desenai the top of а mast in the distant horizon^ and flatter ed ourselves we should have associates in our voyage, and hear the latest intel¬ ligence from Europe but then agtøn our heaits sunk as we reflected, it might be an enemy s ship, of which these seas were too full (for we were then at wjr with France) and that wc might be cone a prey lo some cruel prnateer Wc continued howci ei to pass on our \0)age w thout any molestation ' The captain of the vessel, who had furn shed h s cabin « ith a httle library, had gnen Mis Damoi y the use ot it,
93 .tnd she had found a work of fiction, in which, as she read it lo us, wc had foi sortie days felt uncommon inteiest. The hourt, seemed to glide away with an heavenly serenity; and Isabel and I be¬ gan lo think ourselves in 'fairy-land. The nights, however, were now attend¬ ed by a tremendous daikness; anel I sometimes Overheard the captain ex¬ press hia uneasiness at the very extraor- dinaiy and unbroken clouds with which the evenings closed. I did not distinct¬ ly uudçrstand the kind of danger, to which he thought it most subjected us. 'fhis danger we knew, alas I too soon. '' One night I was waked by an un¬ usual bustle. The lights of a vessel were suddenly descried very near us.
Ö4 The dawn of morning discovered to us a large fiench privateci within gun shot of us They hailed us to strike It was vain for a cumbersome and heavy laden merchantman to contend with such a ship Wc of couise struck, and they took possession of us " Pnsoneis аь we had now become, ii e n dno longei the same indulgences ач before instead of the use of the cap¬ tain s cabin, we weie stowed mio small holes, where u e could seaicely breathe, and Mis Damor) and her daughter were esposed to nsults, fiom which I could with the gieatest difficult) pro tcct them I endeavouied to alleviate the inconveniences to which the) weie subjected, by every effort Bnt then
95 health and spirits sunk, for wc h id still to cross the Atlantic, though m α diffcient diiectton, as we found oui eaptois were steering the Vessel to one ofthe French West India islands ' We at length aimed at the island of Martinique, where we were diseña buked from the bay of bt Pierre We w (to lodged in the town whicli stands on the edge of tliat bay, and tieated as w ell as w с could expect 1 lie town was long and handsome, while the bills coveicd with woods and sugai planta liions, that lose m succession immedi alelj behind it, gave its situation ι most pictuiesque appearaiiee The çııdcns neaı the town, and those also belonging to thcUısulıne coment on
the-declivity ol the lull, weie elegant and beautiful Many ol the buildings were handsome, and some of then apart ments supeib ' But we soon giew tned of tins si tuation, yet in this island we were ob bgcd to remam foi nearl j α j ear, before we could get released We enle tamed ouisehcs, as well as wc coule!, m c\ cursions up the countrj, to examine the growth oí the cocoa, and coffee tiecs, and other pioductions of the nhnd, and m observing the course of the streams, that every wheie poured down from the hills, and fructified the soil Nothing can be more beautiful than the numerous bays that natuie ha» formed on eiery part of tlie shoics of tin
S7 island and we used to sit foi hùun sometimes on the promontories, and watch the distant sails, w Inch vve ima¬ gined might lately have visited oui dear native bud, till the eyes of Mrs Damory and Isabel became clouded with tears, and I caught the infection of then mel uiehuly But what had I to complain of? Any place to me vv as a paradise ш then company I had never known the refined tendei ness of α mother before I had nev cr known the deai r lation of а sister The looks, the voice, the conveisation of my bc- iuved protectress the softness, the arch g iet) , the kisses, the affection of my beautiful playfellow, gave me nothing to wish so long as they were happy Bui if their spuits sunk, I partook of vol it e
98 their distress I might have said with some lines I have since met with, Each honr some ne w pianure I found in their sigbt, I was pensive with rapture and wept with delight, 1 would wateh the hue feelings tl at roll d in each 4<*. With their j ys Id rejoice, with their solungs Id sghl If they tenderly look d orpronouncdLntmj name, Their kn dnesb ran trembling all over inj frame' " The day now armed, when we w ere permuted to lake oui passage in a ship, that wa leluruiug to Europe I paiticipatcd in lhe joy of my compa¬ nions, but )d when I "ame to ıeflcet tint in Europe perhaps I might lose the hold I now h id on the affections of Mis Damoi) and her daughter, and ihat perhaps I might then be separated
99 from them, sensations of the most poig¬ nant sorrow and despondence came oc¬ casionally ovei my heait, and betrajcd themselves in my countenance. " We embarked, and again saw the watery world of the Atlantic stretching befoie us with no limits bul the clouds. We drove before the wind with an easy rapidity, and were soon out of sight not only of Martinique but of all the cluster of islands, and all the continent of South America "You have been crying, Eustace, jour eyes are red and swoln," said Mrs Damory to me one day, when indeed my heart had been ready to buist at some painful forebodings, that had taken possessiqn of my thoughts I knew I could not escape her penc- t? ι
100 trating looks, or evade answering her truly. «' Some distressing ideas came across me,"- said I -, " and I could not command myself as I ought !" " And what were those distressing ideas ?" replied she tenderly, " Oh madam !" said I, " must I tell yon ?"—" Yes, Eustace," she answered in a tone of the most seductive kindness, " you must tell me ¡ you must conceal no¬ thing from me !"—" You are going to England, madam : in England I shall ■be an incumbrance, you will first grow indifferent, and then abandon Eu¬ stace!"— " When life abandons me, and my child," she replied in a solemn voice, while the rising tears almost choked her utterance, " then shall we abandon Eustace !" Then was it that
101 I could no longer contain within the bounds of respect the unutterable over¬ flowings of my filial affection ; and I threw myself on her bosom, and clasp¬ ing my arms round her neck, I sobbed aloud. " Could I have foreseen what was soon to happen, my fears would have been on all accounts superfluous. W.e had not been at sea ten days before we observed a ship making rapid way imon us, fjom which we in vain at¬ tempted to escape. Within a feţv hours she was along side of us, and pouring in a broad-side at once with¬ out any notice, killed several of om¬ men and had nearly sunk our vessej. A set of the roost savage wretcjies I s 3
I Oí ever beheld, instantly boarded us ; and not only took possession, but began to plunder our persons of every thing they thought valuable about us. Wc soon discovered them to be pirates from the coast of North America; and we now began to tremble indeed for our fate. I, who had from so early a period been accustomed to hardships, felt little com¬ paratively for myself; but the idea of the sufferings and brutalities, to which the delicate persons of my beloved Mrs. Damory and her daughter would be exposed, chilled me with horror. " They took out the captain and some of the ablest sailors, in room df whom they sent us some of their most ferocious and tiusty comrades^, and us
103 they still left on boaid the prize They now tacked about dncctly northvvaid, but bearing fu ont to sea, never enee caught а glimpse of the continent oi islands of South Amcnca We yet с x- pencnced no other sev ent) than coarse and scanty food, but the anxious un certainty and fearful foreboding whith sat so heavy on the hearts of my two dear companions, visibly and alarm¬ ingly affected their health, and with all the attentions, and all the manly spirit I could exert, the sight of then distress gradually sunk me into a de¬ spondence almost as violent as their own
t 4
10i CHAPTER VII.
THE »TORY ΟΓ EUSTACE LE ГОЯВСТВЯ COKTIllUED. " All the comfort we could gather from the hints of our captors was that we should be landed sqmewhere on the continent of North America. This idea was comparative happinessi The dread .of being detained among these savage and blood-thirsty robbers was top violent to be endured; yet this had seemed too probable. We reconciled ourselves to the thought of temporary poverty and hardships, and trusted ta
103 ¿md воте kindness among a people -who spoke the same language, and were sprung from the aarde ancestors with οαι sel ves. " We now could occasionally disco» ver a famt glimpse of distant land, and tegan to hope that our release from the present most disagreeable situation was not far removed At length we plainly saw a long ridge of mountains stretch¬ ing along the horizon, our captare hoisted English colours, and we began*, though with some caution, to approach nearer the land Гог three days we hovered off an extensive bay, of which with otir glasses we could clearly see the opening Γ 5
10б ·! " ¡An evening, accompanied by a fog of unusual thickness," was succeeded by anight still darker. A brifk wind blew towards the shore, and our ventrous sailors steered the vessel directly up the bay. We observed through the aweful blackness that invested us, the twink¬ ling lights frorq the opposite banks, and here and tliere from a ship at an¬ chor ; while we passed on with an undeviating rapidiij', till the banks seemed to approach us still nearer, and we appeared to be ascending a river far ,up the country. " We discovered from one of the men that we were passing between the banks of the Delawarre, and were told we must prepare ourselves to diserti-
107 bark. It was yet early night. We were put on shore in a.narrow creek, with a few coarse provisions in a bag, and directed to a hovel on the bank, well known to these free-booters, where we were informed we might find shel¬ ter till morning. I saw the courage of my companions fail. They shuddered at the thought of being thus commit¬ ted to the mercy of the elements, in an unknown, and perhaps a savage country, which might be covered with endless woods, and the haunt of none but beasts of prey. But we had no choice; and the series of unexampled misfortunes, to which we had been ex¬ posed, bad m some degree fortified егед their timid bosoms.
pfi
m * That night wc passed in imperfect and mterŕuJAed slumbers in the hovel to which we were directed, while both the mother end daughter clung to me for protection; and the tears of Isabel continually fell upon my neck. As the day began to dawn, we found ourselves among Vast marshes and stagnant lakes which extended for miles ; and whence lihe steams and exhalations, that now began to be penetrated by the first rajrs of light, almost hid frarft us the immea¬ surable extent of wood-crowhed hills, by whbh they were bounded. ** We resolved to leave this dieary and unwholesome spot, and to explore the higher grounds, where we hoped to find some village, or town, that
tog would take compassion βροη cur for'» lorn condition. After a toilsome walk of many miles over a swampy ground, thiough which We were obliged to pick our way with difficulty and dan¬ ger, we reached the higher tracts of land. But we could scarcely find a path amongst these dreary and almost impenetrable regions of wood. One narrow opening we at length disco¬ vered, whii h led us to the precipitous banks of á wild and magnificent riveri that seemed to be hurrying from the distant mountains to llie sea. Here some traces of human habitation 'occa¬ sionally broke in upon us. As we pur¬ sued the course of this slieam the woods had been occasionally cleaiedi and herds of cattle and rude shep-
по herds' hut« peeped amongst the yet half-overgrown pasture. " My companions were almost o\ em¬ powered with fatigue and anxielj, when wc icached a little town or rather ham¬ let on the banks of this mer. Our ap¬ pearance, our diess, oui supplications procured us admission into an humble cottage. Heie we obtained the be>t rcficshmcnt the simple inhabitants could furnish, and Mis Damory and her daughter were pci nutted to rest themselves on an haid bed, to tnem softer thin down had eı er yet appeared, while wrapping mjself up in the lough great coal I had been peimittcd to le- tain, I thiew mjbelf on some striw π the corner of the outer apartment, and sunk all our troubles in a profound sleep.
πι « Almost in despair, and terrified at the idea of again encountering the ocean,,,Mrs. Damory detoimincd that here for some time at least we should take up our abode. Her resources were not yöt entirely exhausted. She had secreted a few trinkets from our late robbers, and among the rest a small diamond of some value, which she hoped ,we should be able to turn into money. Conscious that wc could not long be burdensome without some re¬ muneration to those who had so hos¬ pitably receii ed us, she produced one of these ti lnkcts, and requested them to make the. most of it for her, " They succeeded so well that she now ventured to hue a little cottage,
112 with α garden and small enclosure, tliat lay in ι secluded and picturesque spot, about halfa mile farther up the river. This scheme was soon put into execu¬ tion; and we removed to oţir new abode with infinite delight. It stood on the declivity of a lofty hill, which running into a flat for a few yards be¬ fore the house, projected perpendicu¬ larly over the stream. On each side of this simple dwelling, and some way up the ascent behind it, the soil had long been cleared of its gloomy covering; and some rich patches of pasture af¬ forded support sufficient for a cow. The walls themselves were only of mud, and the roof a mixture of thatch and boughs.
113 " Wc commenced this life of aweful bohtude auspiciously. The lust days of summer had now begun to throw their chceiful and reviving beams on all nature. The trees budded, and the grass sprung with a rapidity to which we had never been used ; and the gloom of the immense forests that overhung us, vanished as they at once became arrayed in greon. The fears that had long tortured the mind of Mrs. Damory subsided into calmness. Isabel, whose childish uitnd was more elastic, became even gay and playful ; white I had scarcely any other wishes, if niy beloved protector could but be content. " I found a daily occupation in the cultivation of the little garilen, for
114 which my long habits at Madeira had given mc both skill and ability, while Isabel often by my side gave me such assistance as I could allow her tendei hands to undertake Mrs Damory herself meanwhile occasionally lent her aid, or sat by us, leading one of those few books which we had been able to piocuie, by the intercourse of our neighbouring hamlet with the distant towns nearer the sea-coast. " Thus passed the summer, and thus I completed my fourteenth year, while Isabel was scarcely eleven months younger. Six years had I been torn from my native country, and iţi my affection for in) piesent companions 1 ngland had almost lost its hold upon
ns my heart. Sometimes indeed, as mjr beloved instructress conversed with us on its events, my memory seemed to acknowledge an indistinct association with soine of the names whicli she íe- pcated ; and I felt a momentary emo¬ tion of curiosity and regret. I believe that she had heard of Earl Forester, and suspected the history of my birth, as I have often since imagined that on these occasions she knew more than she spoke, which she probably sup¬ pressed, lest she should give me useless pain. " Winter now approached, and the long evenings set in with a dullness which made us look forward with some terror to the hardships we had to en-
Ji6 counter. Fuel however was abundant, and even during the day, as the cold weather increased, my companions confined themselves to the side of their blazing hearth, while I peihaps amused myself with my gun, or stepped to the neighbouring hamlet to fetch the sim¬ ple articles of which we stood in need. At other times, and constantly as the darkness came on, we read and con¬ versed alternately, while we were fear¬ ful of exhausting the iew books we could procure. " Two or three little volumes con¬ taining a " short history of llie disco¬ very of the new world," most engaged my attention. While I listened with wonder to the tale, which unfolded the
117 inventive genius and danng intrepidity of Columbus, while I heard with in¬ dignation the ingratitude with which he was tieated, and \ cp ovei his mis¬ fortunes, while I attended with breath¬ less expectation to those indications of land, which were exhibited by buds and floating weeds, at the moment when his mutinous and desponding crew were about to commit this mighty discoverer to the waves, and saw at the critical moment the Bahama islands emerging from the waves, I perused with moie local interest the cotem¬ porary discovery of ni) countr)men the Cabots I bailed the 24th of June 1197, when (Ins adventurous father and son, neaily five years after Columbus's
πβ diicovery * of those morc southed) isles, first saw the island which they called Puma Vista, on the coast of Newfoundland, and thence siding back to the Cape of Honda, discovered and took possession m the name of our Henry the Seventh, of the immense continent of North America -f- How
49 I delighted to bring before my imagi¬ nation the figures of some of the wild natives here when presented to Henry on the thi one at Westminster I How I delighted to compare this land in its piesent state, though jet only half civi¬ lized, with the times when it was the haunt of savage beasts, and men almost ■ii savage '
" Dajs, I cried, of generous entei- pnze and just wonder ' Would that I
120 could then have hied I wlnt fields fui speculation ! what hopes for a warm heart! what usions for a sanguine fancy! my bosom heaved, my eyes flashed fire Isabel put her soft hand upon mine, and looking innocently in my face, asked if I was tued of their society, and could again encounter stoimy unknown seas, and barbarous and blood thirsty nations ' I felt coi - rectcd, and a train of gentler ideas chased away these dreams of iude ambition fiom my mind " Mis Damo y did not al«a)s seem capable of detaching hei thoughts fiom her own misioi times, bj thefe fubjeefs, which were less new to her than to us She had long since found an ορροί-
121 luiiiiy ol sending Ictteis both to India md Luiopi But she had )ct ïeccivcd uo answers Ilei own fnends in Eng lind, vvho had used her so ill, she had, it this distance, and after all her sub¬ sequent siiffeungs, foi gn en all their injuiics, and now rcmembcud only those traits of kindness she had ечре- nenccd at a moie foitunalc pcuod ot liei life She had wiiltcn to hei aunt* mil cousins, for she had neither pa¬ tents, noi bıotheı, noi sislet If they had icceivcd hci Ictteis, how a nel was iheir silence ! The »ilence of her bus band, though to have heard f om bini would have given her moie satisfac tion, yet less exciţi d her wondei, be cause she knew not the certain direction I ) him, and had indulged but little VOL II G
122 hope it would ıeach hım Wc some¬ times saw her eyes suffused with tears, while the stones we wne reading aloud to her could have occupied little uf her attention " Isabel worked aud listened as I icad, and when she look the volume, the melody of hei enchanting v oiet, added new charms lo llic interest of the tale The heroes of mj contiti} still continued to fill ill} imagination Isabel delighted to choost the subjects that pk ised me most SI e joined hei teais VMth mine over the fate of the geneiousSirllumphiyGilbeit* " OfF
1Í3 yoíulei ıs' ind of bt John, I cued, " he hit m 1583 I fiel the exultation of his mind as he bogan lus triumphant return I Eight days the wcithei con¬ tinued good, " fair hughed the mom " of the ninth, but m the evening a sudden storni arose ind sunk his brgest ship How noble, but, ahs ' how fi¬ ni, wis the lesoiution tlut he then unde' When his fuends pcisuidcd lum to leave the snnll sloop m which himself was sailing foi a krgn vessel, Nevci, he cued, " will I deseit the little ciew with whom I have
124 escaped so many dangers ' ' Noble spirit, how soon was thy heroic resolu¬ tion put to the test I On the ninth of September, tbe baik, too imall to resist the swell of those tempestuous seas, was swallowed up at midnight, and naerseen moie I How often, on the distant shores of the Atlantic, baie Isabel and ni)self embalmed thy me- moi) with teais '" " Nor v,as Sir Huinpluy Gilbeit oui only favounte We weie neici tired of dn elling on the lives of the biaie advcntureis of those ilajs, who led oui naval expeditions. Ihe names of Willoughbj, of Hawkins, and Diake, of frobishci and Cavendish, of Cailisle and Clifford the îomantic
123
Ľail of Cunibciliixl*, were alwa\s m our thought 1 !, and the subjects of our
ГЕб convei rations. O gloiimis name of Drake, thou, the first Englishman vv ho
127 surrounded tlic globe, how have I en¬ vied the feelings of thy triumphant
icturn ' How have I jO}cd to im tgme thy detiaetors, for thou too hatbt dc-
3¡& tractors, bursting with envy in their duty holes! How often since hare I read with pleasuie those Unes of Cow- Icy, " on the chair made out of the re¬ lics" of thy ship ' ■ —■.. — " this chair which here you see, For aH its quiet now, indgiavity, Has wander d, ană has inveli d more, Tl -m ever beast, or fish, or bird, or ever tree before In every air, and ever) sea, t has been» T has compa s ά all the earth, and all the heaveni Lu not the pope s îtstlf with this compare·, 1 his is the only universal chair Gie-u Relic! thou too in this port of ease Hist still one wiy of miking voynges, The bre ith of F-uae, hke in auspicious gale, (The grem tnde wind, which ne er does fiil) Shall dnve theexound the world,and thou shall гид As long around it, at the sun. G 5
130 Tlie straits ef Tîıpe too narrow aie for ili^c, launcli ferth into an umlisL"/er'd sn, Ar.d atefr the endless eonrsaof vast eternit)., ' ι Take for thy sail this veise, ajid for tliy pilot me." " О Eustace !" Mrs. Damory used to say, as I expressed my adtuiution of thesp hardy advcnturois, " yet mo¬ derate your praist's, and ι esői ve your highest wonder for those who mix more of the lefmemeiits of a rich and accomplished mind w ith their heioic exploits! Learn tiist to prit«· the in¬ tellectual qualities of mankind I Let the character, though not the unhappy fate, of my favourite llakigh call forth your youthful emulation !"— Yts, ini- mortîl genius, to thy fame h.ave I evei paid my adoration ' Pott, historian, philosopher, politician, sojdier, and
131 sailoi, discovcier of new countues, and civilisei of new vvoildsl What lan¬ guage is adccmale to thy praises î Who ever united such vanous claims to the applause of mankind as thou ? To thy petictnting sagacity mil persevering coin age we owe these colonies ! How often weie thy attempts fiustrated, yet how often didst thou ictuin unsubdued to the imdcrt ikmg ' If thou canst now look down liom those ngions vv licit, no doubt, thou art levvaidcd for the ingratitude of th) cirthl) master, how must th) spun be delighted to sic these munti oils towns, these sp - emus liai bonis, (lus extended popula¬ tion, these fields, once coveietl with endless md lmpenctiable woods, now )cllow vvith corn, which, sent bick об
132 over the mighty oceans thou so boldly traversedst, may hereaftei, perhaps, feed thy half-famished native coimliy ' And thou, too, generous follower of Ra¬ leigh s steps, thou who gavedst thy name to yonder capacious ba}, wise, virtuous, and resolute Dclawai re ' Thou, too, nursedst like a father these infant colonies, and thy name, united with Raleigh s, shall dt st end with glory to a grateful posterity » '
133
134
CHAPTER IX.
THE S VVIC STORY CONTINUED I srEM to giow )Oung igani as I think of those dclightfu' da)s, whin, Isabel on m) aim, we sallied along tbe freuen foolpalh with some eu ι id to the villige, and then reluming, eie llic night fall, to our chceiiul fiieside, wc listened, while Th exclu le I tempest dly nv d tho t, to oui beloved instrucliess îepeating some beautiful poem, 01 relating tlie pathetic passages of her former life
135 Haw yet do I lemember the glow of Isabel's cheeks, ι when assailed by the keen visitings ot lhe .wintry blast'! How do I recall those seasons of en¬ chantment, when vvith playful inno¬ cence she warmed her aching hands in my bosom ! Days, alas ! too quickly fled! " As spring came on, how often did she dance lor joy ! How olten did thé wood-crowned banks of the solitary river echo with her song! As s'hè wandei ed vvith mc to gather the early flowers that opened their bosoms to the first beams ot' the vernal sun, she pouted her wild wood-notes along the banks, and through the copses. Amid these occupations, one day I was seized
136 with unusual admiration at the affect¬ ing manner in which she sung a fa¬ vourite song, and, m the fulness of J»y delight, I clasped her in my arms, and kissed her check with an earnest¬ ness and violence I had never before betrayed She ti mcd hei cheek fiom me, as if in anger, and ciymg, " Foi shame, Eustace I genllj unci isped my arms, then turning back the ro id by which we came, she seemed passing hastily homeward to our cottage A strange confusion of feelings, of plea¬ sure, fear, and regiet, nn at once through all my flame I thought I had done wrong, and had an indistinct terror of the anger not only of Isabel, but of her mother I ran after her, and put her arm within nune, she said
Г37 nothing, but I saw her eyes suffused with tears. I could not speak any more Ihan herself. We walked mourn¬ fully forward, till we got within sight of our cottage. Then, for tbe first time, I became afraid of meeting Mrs.Damory; and I begged her daugh» ter to compose herself. We sat upon the trunk of a tree, which I had lately felled, till Mrs. Damory, growing im¬ patient, came out to meet us; but nearly half an hour had passed in this way, during which Isabel's anger or gloominess did not appear to subside-, while my own tongue seemed to fail me. Isabel spi ung forward as her mo¬ ther came up, and presented her with the flowers she had been gathering, " Your cheeks are on fire, my lovt\"
138 said she My conscience mede ine tremble all over al these words But, "Hie sun has been veiy hot, replied ♦he daughtei, « ind I am so tired, that I must hasten in dpors to iest myself" —Jpsfaptly she bounded away, and I »w no щепе of her till dinner. \ I " I dated Wt east my eyes upon her again that day, and both of us conti¬ nued veiy silent. Another, and ano¬ ther came, and passed away in a simi¬ lar manner. From that eventful hour irfl her ease was gone She shunned me , she would not trust herself away from hei mother, hei looks, the tones of her voice, hei taste, hei оесирл tıons, were all changed I became se¬ riously unhappy at the deep offence I
139 sc med to baie, gnen her. I recol¬ lected the low md unprotected situ- ition in which Mis Dmioryhad found mc I fcircd Isabel's pride was alaim- cd and I rec died to my mmd, wilh some anxiety, those indistinct claims of birth, to which I once É seemed to have pietensions " In propoi tion as this subjet occu¬ pied my mmd, and I strove m vam to satisfy mjself of its causr, the effect be¬ came every day more painful to me Isabels change of behaiioui was of moie const quence lo mc than I could at first hive imagined llie sweet companion of mj walks, my play¬ fellow, nij woik lellow, she with whom I planili!, and iod, aud Ulked, anet
140 danced, and sung, had withdiawn hci society from me at the very moment when it seemed to have the power of double delight The peison of Isabel was now become cnchantingly bcauti ful, her auburn hair, her fair com¬ plexion, her blue eyes, her white hands, and round white arms, filled me with new sensations as I gazed upon her, and ¡she, with whom I had so long played with familial ease, seemed all at once to awe me like a diyimty " Mrs Damory saw the altu ation of my countenance and manneis, but shame, and I know not what other feelings, made me anxious to hide fiom her lhe cause I giew restless, and a
141 tlionsand schemes of ambition, by which I might rendei myself less un¬ worthy of Isabel, entered my biam. Ι ν detached myself more from home, and wandered sometimes down the river, as fai as those creeks which vessels of small burden frequented fiom the great bay below. I scarcely knew what I meant, for surely I could never hate intended lo haie left my piotectress and hei loi ciy daughter m their pre¬ si nt helpless solitude. But sometimes I foimed impossible schemes, and hoped to reconcile insurmountable con- tndictions. I flattered myself, peihaps, that I could convey them to some more hospitable and convenient residence, and then sallying forth into the world, return ciowned with spoils and glory not unworthy the ai ms of Isabel.
" But these fite fjf absence appealed Ъу;ю means pleasing to Mis DaipOilyi »nd on my icturn I found her daughter still moie gloomy, and often in tears'* In ont of these excursions, witli roy gun upon rny shoulder, I met two "Bntisli officers, with whom I ftll into conveisation, and spent the gieatei pari of the da) I ull of this adventure, I talktd mueh of it on my ainval at our cottage Mis Damoi y saw with un¬ easiness the hold that it had taken on my mmd, and the continual chaitgcs of Isabels countenance affected both hti motlict and myself W hen Mis Da¬ mory left the room, htr daughtei did not, as had latteily been h<~r constant custom, rise to follow htr A dead silence ensued, at length I looked up, and seeing the kais stream down Isa
мз bel's face, I síid to her, in a solemn, ticmulous voice, " Miss Damory, what can be the cause of your alteied beha- 1 vioin to me î How have I thus offend¬ ed 5011 '" I saw her bosom heave nolenti), and she stiuggled to speak, but the woids died upon her tongue. I \enuned to appioach hci, and take lict hind " Tell me," I continued, " tell me, I cntreit)Oii, what makes \ou thub une isy " Hei bosom p-ilpi- nfed still more tiemulously, as if it would bmst its confines, she threw heiself upon mj neck, miiimurmg out, " Dc 11 Eustace, are you going to leave us ind ста jou wonder at my unhap- inni« '"— " Dear ЕиЫ -ice '" woids she had so long ceased to pi onounce—they cime like heaven upon my eai. I
144 pressed her to my bosom, and earth and all its pleasures vanished in the delu mm of m j joy ! " From that moment Isabel and I vowed eternal love How exquisitely happy were the fiist dajs which passed after this explanation ' I can only de¬ scube them m the beautiful woids of a modem poetess, which I hai e lately read· « The e are the days, that fly on Riptiue s wing, Enpuiphngevery flower that decks the spring, For when love kindl ngHoj>e,with whisper blan I, Wakes the dear magic of hei potent wand, More vivid colours namt the rising morn. And clearei crjstal gems the silver thorn, On more luxuriant shade the moon beam plajs, And richer gold the evening sun arrays, Star, seem to glitter with enamour d lire, And shadowy lulls m stateli« grace aspiic.
us
More subtle sweetness scents ti e pasung gales, And softer be-iuty decks tl e moonlight vales ι All Nature smiles ' * .......... Our looks, the tones of our voice, soon, if they had not long since, betrayed our mutual passion to Mrs Damor). What could she do ' Or how could she have expected otherwise î It made her ν ery unelsj, but she was too good and too wise to be harsh with cither of us Now, however, it became neces¬ sary to make some vigorous effort to remove from this solitary life , for so¬ litude, she knew, must foster our pas¬ sion, and how, with common pru¬ dence, could she encourage our future union?
\0L II в
ыб " In one of those long day s which the apptoach of summer now afforded us, vve лссошр uued hci to α town at the mouth of the Delawarre, where she found «ut some mei chants, by whose means she bargained for our passage to one of tlie West India islands, in ι ship bound thithei, and whence, the) infoinied us, vve should easily find au opportunity of being forwarded to any part of the vv oild we wished Finding no offer of a moie direct conveyance, eithci to the East Indies or to Europe, Mrs Damoi y engaged foi our dcpai- tuie m a foi might, when the day was appointed foi the vessel to sail. We returned to our cottage with heavy hearts We could not come
147 back to a spot where so many endear¬ ing scenes had passed, knowing we were so soon to quit it for ever, with¬ out feeling severe regrets. But our lot was fixed. Mrs. Damory disposed of her little furniture, her cow, and the stock of her garden, to the best advan¬ tage; she settled her rent with the owner of the cottage, and with heavy hearts we took our leave. " Unequal steps, and riling sighs, disclose The thorny pressure of tyrannic woe«, And whei e th' incumbent rock, with astful face. Bends o'er the fountain, gurgling from its base. And marks the limits of the "dent dell, Sad to the winds our bosom'd griefs « e tel] ; Invoke fond Hope, those tender grief, to sooth, And hid, alii I their "urging tide he smooth. It will not he,—since here, with j earning thoujlit, Лу «ca 1 ., unoluntary impulse brought, H 1
и» Where Leve Mia Memory bear resistless sway. And all tlie weakness of the soul betray 1 O, ye known objects I how ye strike the heart t And valrt regrets with keener force impart! Slow, thro' the fading grove, past pleasures glide, Or sadly linger by the fountain's side · ľ' Isabel had not yet conquered her tci- rors of the sea. She turned pale, and tiembled as we approached the ship ; and not all the exertions and remoli- «trances of her mother, nor all the tender attentions I could shew her, dissi¬ pated her uneasiness. The dye, how¬ ever, was cast; the vessel got under weigh, and in a few days we lost sight for ever of the northern continent. A short and prosperous voyage soon
ug brought us within view of the western islands, and soon alter we were landed at Barbadoes, without a single 6torm or danger, or even an) appearance which could alarm the timid ncivcs of isabet herself *' Mrs Damory had procured such recommendations from the captain of the vessel which brought us hither, that we were received m this island not only with comfort, but with hos¬ pitality We anchored in Carlisle Bay, and landed at Budge town, which we found an elegant and well built capital How diffcient in manners, how dif ferent m prospenty, was this from the French island of Mai timquc, into which we had formeily been earned as pn нЗ
160 soners Wt wuc loid it was the ~!dest of our West Indu settlements, a id tint it was colonised by tlie famous bir Wil¬ liam Comten m 16°J, who was, howeve·-, m about foui years, cruelly dispossessed by some courtiers, who, obtaining ι grant fiom the crown, came and reaped the revvaid çf his costs and labours * Here, not long aftei waids, many faithful and peise- cuted lo}a!ists found a refuge from the rnad lev enge ofthe zealots of rebellion We did not, hovvev er, long enjoy our situation hcic 1 he habits, and senti¬ mento, and rlui atters, of these W est-
151 Indian colonists were disagreeable to Mis Damon, from whom we soon imbibed mi equal dislike to them lhen luxuiy, while it was showy, was co trie, and Ihcy wete α vam, fickle, and sensual people Above all, the sjstem of slaveij, bj which the plan¬ tations were cultivated, shocked and disgusted us, nor could all the plau sible arguments by whu h this sj stem v\ as defended, for a moment mislead a mmd like Mis Damoi) s, as acute as it was benevolent '* I confess I had othei îeasons, in addition lo the c, foi d silking this si tuition Is bels bei Uy attiacted aH cjea, and I coul 1 not elidine the lor v,aid and unhallowed looks of the rich и i
ise young planteis, which I thought pro¬ faned the sacred person of my beloved gn 1 These men, whose perions too often betrayed а strong imxtuie ofthe blood of the ancient native', or rathei of the un¬ happy slaves who had been imported thither from countries equally wild, ippcared not unfrequently to exhibit, in their eounte nnces and manners, a feiocity ^ery alarming to the refined sensibilities of him, who loves with a puic and delicate attachment Isabel «hrunk fiom them as fiom some loath¬ some animal while then dark and swarthy completions looked still more coarse and disgusting in comparison with her fair tiansparent skin Mrs Da- mory, though ehe had neier expicssly encouraged my attachment, tieaicd the
153 advances of these sun-burnt islanders with almost аз much repulsion as her daughter, and often excited their proud and irritable tempers by the coldness or the haughtiness of her manner to them. " We rejoiced, therefore, at finding an opportunity of quitting this new world, tliough it necessitated us to trace back part of our course as far to¬ wards Europe as the Azores. Thither the vessel in which we embarked was bound, and we once more trusted our¬ selves to the broad Atlantic. A brisk breeze sprung up, and \vp were soon out of sight of land, having steered away directly fram the southern conti¬ nent into the wide ocean. Several days 11 5
154 followed of the most seiene and de¬ lightful weather In the free air, which had been purified by constant undula¬ tion, where there were no woods, and mountains, and stagnant lakes, to in¬ terrupt its course, we breathed easier, and shakmg off a load, seemed to escape into lighter legions of existence The unclouded serenity of the heavens, the mighty expanse of waters rippling with a soothing murmur, while the ship glided along With a soft and easy motion, calmed at once all the tremu¬ lous anxiehes of Isabel's mind, and I saw with love and admnation in her eloquent and enchanting looks, the new sensations of dehght that thrilled her bosom. " My motner," said she, " has always taught me to love poetry.
ISS and this scene would almost make me endeavour to be a poetess myself. How often has she encomagcd mc to make an attempt ! She says it induces us to examine our own ideas; to nourish the most refined sentiments; to view tbe charms of nature with double de¬ light s lhat it dissipates many an heavy hour, and has often turned grief into a pleasing melancholy!" After this hint I would not interrupt her silence as we sat upon the deck gazing on the watcis. The next morning Bhe put into my hands the following SONNET. O'er this blue wat'ry world, that spreads around, Far, far beyond the utmost stretch of sight, How sweet the rippling surge's soothing sound I Tîh' extended canopy of heaven how brightl HÖ
13б
Smooth ai we go, while scarce tlic keel divido The glauy »irfacc, o'er my tin tiling breast How blissful the serenity that glides > How, like the blasts, the passions tırık to reft * Stir wll this brilliant icen«, my Elìcaci, last ? Will no winds gather, and no clouds . rise, The wide invested tplendoui to о ercast î Dark m the rear perthance the lempest liest But roar the bellowing storm, and rage the sea, Still that alone I dread«whuh teparates me fiom thee' " I need not say with what delight and tenderness I read these ]ines ; nor, whatever pleasure they would have given her mother, could I regret the passage which rendered it indelicate for me to communicate them to her. " Thus passed our da>s till we saw the ïïjgh coasts And craggy rocks ot
«Г Tercera tower above the sea. This i» the chief ol that cluster of small islands called the Azores, which lie in the midst of the Atlantic ocean. Here we were landed at the town of Angra, and had to seek for some new opportunity for a passage lo the plaee of our des¬ tination. The scenery of this spot was picturesque ¡ the town was situated at the edge of a bay, formed by two moun¬ tains, of which each was crowned with a castle that defended ils entrance, and magnificently overlooked the sea. Here the land was not unfruitful ; and as I again beheld the rocks covered with vineyards, I recalled, with a mixture of pleasure and sorrow, my boyish occu¬ pations at Madeira·
Г58 A month had scarcely elapsed when an English vessel touched here which was bound to the Bay of Bengal Mrs. Damory's countenance became uradi- ated with hope and joy at this news. I had never yet seen her spirits so elated. With great difficulty, however, she pre¬ vailed upon the captain to admit us as passengeis " Wc embarked, and sailing with a fair wind, fiist saw the island of St.He¬ lena towering in sublime solitude, as has been often observed, " like a castle in the midst of the ocean " Having already replenished his stores at Tercera, the captain did not stop at this place, but proceeded round the
159 Cape at once into the Indian sea; from whence, after a tedious but not dangerous voyage, we sailed along the coast of Coromandel, and at length were landed near the mouth of the Ganges.
neat
CHAPTER IX. IN CONTINUATION,-
" Wiien Mrs.Damory found herself and her daughter at last safely landed in the country which she had so long been seeking through so many dieadful and almost hopeless perils, she scarcely could believe her senses ; it seemed to her a happiness almost too great to be real. We took up our residence at Calcutta, and for some days I was se¬ riously alarmed for the sanity of my .beloved protectress. She could not con¬ troul the extravagance of her delight; 1
löi
she burst out into fits of laughter with¬ out any adequate cause ; then she took Isabel in her arms, and as bhe strained her to her bosom, she wept with pleasure. " When the first transports of her delight subsided, 6İıe recollected that she had still many difficulties to over¬ come. She had not yet heard of Mr. Damory ; she did not even know that he was living, still less did she know his situation and circumstances. How then can I describe her feelings when she was informed that he was lately settled in a lucrative department in the province of Bahar, after having been not long since released from a cruel imprisonment under Stijah Dowlah, the-
16i Nabob of Oude, by whom he In 1 been taken in an action m w İneli hed sphyed uncommon gallanti ) ' " The happy inteligence almost overwhelmed her with a dclinum of joy, which biought on α fever As soon as it subsided we hastened together to Col Damoi y s residence, and surpnsed lum with our ainval befoie he had even heard of oui being ra India He could scarcely believe his own eyes when we were ushered into the room, he remained foi some moments clasped in his wife s aims, and vv hen he beheld his daughter, whom he had left an in¬ fant, almost a woman, and with the beauty of an angel, the tianspoits of his fondnees knew no bounds In ths
lös first interval of calmness ' I was intro¬ duced to him as the saviour and pro¬ tector of the lives of his wife and child. and experienced from him all the kind¬ ness and gratitude of the most benevo¬ lent of human beings. " I became a member of his family, and was soon placed in the most con¬ fidential post under him he had to be¬ stow. My attachment to Isabel grew cvei y day moie unconquerable ; noi , in¬ deed, was it discouraged by her generous father. Oh Isabel, how my bosom yet thrills with the delight of this early passion! Thou weit fairer than the fiiet rays of a morning in May, when they throw their dawning splendour ой the chaims of reviving Nature.! W,bat
Тб4 a radiance didst thou spread, to my enamoured imagination, over every sur¬ rounding object I Oh, what can renew those enchanting feelings of early youth ! Those pure and simple pleasuiesl That romantic fairy-land, in which we then seemed to move ! О hateful knowledge, that comes to destroy our bliss ! ' О cursed experience, that deadens all the biilliant colours of hope i " Years passed away, and every one added to the brothers or sisters of Isabel. But of Isabel herself, my fears whis¬ pered to me, that the bloom already began to wither. The heat of the cli¬ mate enervated her frame, and a sallow hue came over the transparent splen¬ dour of her complexion ; a languid со-
IOS lour became' fixed in her cheeks, and she grew lllin arid heette. Alas;! we all of us endeavoured to hide thei dread¬ ful inference from ourselves tod long I A consumption followed with such ra- piditj', that it was too late to try the experiment of sending her to Europe for change of air. Her strength was already exhausted. In three weeks the angel expired in my arms. " I remember it as if it was but yes¬ terday. Her last look, the last faint pressure of her hand, the last gasp, how» my heart still bleeds as they recur to me! But never, never shall they be' erased from my memory, " Of all that happened afterward» for some days I have no trace; I be-
1бб lieve that I was frantic. As soon as I became calmer, I recollect the assiduous and fond attentions of Mis.Damorjr, who sometimes controlled her own tears that she might wipe away mine. But the struggle was for some time in¬ effectual i and it was believed I must soon follow Isabel to that grave in which all my affections were buried. " Fate decreed it otherwise. I íe- covcred, lived some years as secretary to my benefactor, and, when he quitted his post to return to his native land, I was, by his interest, appointed to suc¬ ceed him in the government. 'Here I' continued till the salary and' honest emoluments of my place enabled me to accumulate a fortune which satisfied my moderate ambition of riches. My
1б7 youth was not yet entirely gone, and I now detei mined to return to the coun¬ try of my nativity. I had many reasons foi this resolution; nor was the least of them the curiosity I had long felt to ascertain the mysterious history of my birth.
IOS
CHAPTER Χ. THE «ΑΜΕ STOBY CONTINUE».
" As soon as I arrived in England I made the researches necessary to ascer¬ tain my birth my pi incipal occupation. I traced out and visited the village where I had spent my earliest years ; I found access to the nearest relations of the cottagers, long since dead, by whom I had been brought up ; and I collected a vaiiety of evidence that I was the legitimate son of the late Earl Foi ester.
1б9 " While these researches were.going forward, and the reports of my claim. spread through all tlie upper orders of society, 1 had the good fortune to at- tıaçt tlie notice and attachment of one of the most amiable of women, w hom I married within a year after my arrival iiom India. This fortunate event, the great souice of my comfoits, connected me anew, and by indisputable ties, to manyi noble and illustrious families, which alone, exclusive of the claims Γ trust I have myself established to high descent," have given fo my children' 1 » birth all the splendour ol the ancient peerage of England. " But how have thèse just sources of enjoyment been embittered by the vol, n, t
170 conduct of the hardened usurper of my honoùrk and estates, with whom I had to contend ! I will not here de¬ tail the various and unparalleled acts of that base man, for which my spirits have been worn out, and my purse ex¬ hausted in endeavouring to obtain re¬ dress, because the evidence of those acts, as well as of my rights, is ren¬ dered notorious by the printed accounts of the numerous trials I have had wilh him both in England and Iielantl, wliich already make more than one fo¬ lio volume. This memoir shall rather contain notices of Some of those feel¬ ings and remai кь which impressed themselves upon me during the pro¬ gress of these eventful suits. These are colourings which the dry and fonnál
171 serjprde of law will not admit, but «¡hich give to the history of human nature all its interest, and all its value. " But were I to ïelate, however briefly, all the strange prejudices under which I have sufferedj the ignorance, the envy, the intrigues, the falsehoods, by which my progress bas been im¬ peded, they would run into volumes almost as long as those which are stuffed with the tedious proceedings of the trials I have alluded to. ' " Having brought home a fortune of about forty thousand pounds, I fixed niy residence, soon after my marıiöğe, m one of the maritime duuiítíes whioh sun ound'London. I hiied a mansion
172 . in a neighbourhood where a mixturó of land and sea views afforded the most diversified prospects. I flattered my¬ self that in this retreat, with the mo¬ derate mixture of society it would fur¬ nish, I could live as happy as the vexatious suits in which I was engaged would permit me. No · one, who has not lost я sense of moral feeling, is in¬ sensible to respect. With the ideas of importance which the present occupa¬ tion of my mind had naturally engen¬ dered on the subject of honourable descent, with the jealousy which, as an East-Indian, I felt of being treated as a new and obscure adventurer, I confess I was a little too tenacious of notice. The neighbours all visited me, perhaps out of curiosity, or to kill the
173 time. But I thought they assumed to themselves a consequence, and treated me with an hauteur which I could ill brook. " I had returned to England with a strong impression of the existence of aristocratical prejudices in a nation where they were fostered by the an¬ cient establishment of an hereditary peerage. I had hoped therefore that my very name, and the universal know¬ ledge ofthe claims.in which I was en¬ gaged, would have secured me from» those slights with which the novelty of eastern opulence is generally assailed. In this neighbourhood I found it fár otherwise; indeed I was received les» ι 3
174 wittingly, and witb fewer civilities, tittat other new-comers. ,, .¿.n ¡'i' U % „ litt« I .1 " With a mind, across which* 'the passing events did not glide totally un¬ heeded, an* with a curiosity .¡iıaıincd to inquire, I searchoďinto the histories and characters of those) who! thtie treated toe. I perceived they» had ,wy deci¬ sive notions of the importance of de-j scent and hereditary consequence. But rn these notions they were .extremely ineoneietent', or rathenesttremely 'nar¬ row and ignorant. I attempted, by: eornbimng the histories of those to whom they paid^espect, with the екл pressions tin-j occasionally let fall; toi. ebeit some principlei. hmvevcE eno«,
17& ясоив, by which their opinions were guided. I believe that my attempt was vain ; and I must rather exhibit speci¬ mens intermixed with occasional ob¬ servation, than venture to lay down any general rule. И The neighbourhood was very nu. nlerous, and consisted of persons of various fortunes, and characters in na¬ tural temper and diaposition as various. There! wás of course, ,as,in all country neighbourhoods, a plentiful intermix»· ture «f baronets ι and this seemed tö be the' title which excited most of their reverence. Here were several of this sort, of whom it was impossible to gues.s on what slender and absurd pre¬ tence they assumed superiority^ ¡unless ι 4
170 it was the mheut met of the patent If I may be allowed to speak my opinion, I have long thought this honour ori¬ ginally impolitic, and very injurious in its consequences to the ancient families of the kingdom It originated fiom the pecuniary distresses of the corrupt and disgraceful reign of James I A subscription paper of two hundred sub¬ scribers, under certam qualifications, Of a thousand pounds each, was handed about, in consideration of which they were to be entitled to the patent of a baronet's title It is obvious, that not the uchest or most respectable, but the most vam, were likely to fill such a list. Candour, however, must admit, that there weie many ancient and ho¬ nourable names in this first list. Yet
177 sneh was the poverty of the natraff, that it was many years in filling.' Osborne, a writer of memoirs in this reign, who has been deemed scandal¬ ous, says, " At this time the honour of *' knighthood, which antiquity pre- " served sacred, as the cheapest and " readiest jewel to present virtue with, " was promiscuously laid on any head " belonging to the yeomanry, made " addle through pride and a contempt " of their ancestors pedigree, that had " but a court-friend, or money to pnr- " chase the favour of the meanest able " (to bring him into an outer-room, " when the king, the fountain of ho- " nour, came down, and was uninter- " ruptcd by other business : in which " case it was then usual for him· to ι S
ire « grant a commission for the chamber* " lain, or some other lord, to do, iti " But experience soon, informed th* " empty Scot, that, as, this airy treasure " was inexhaustible, so..it might bo " turned to great profit, seeing the ·' shoals of base and ignorant trouts " that gaped after it ; the cause, accesa " to the king, was made daily more "difficult; by this rendering the tern» " pie of honour a comrorm theatre, " into which the basest were suffered " to eoter for their money. J " Now this shower of .dignities fál- " Kng upon all, without any more sc- " гюиа consideration than favour or " profit, whole houses were ruined. " For ancient gentlemen finding ihem-
179 « selves preceded by baser families, " only for having the impudence or " luck to be dubbed before them ; and " being despisedjor spurred on through " their wives' ambition, or their own, " shame, fell into that trap gilded with " the title of baronet, for which they " were to pay a thousand pounds, as " is expressed in their patenti no " slight caveat for tho vanity of it. " And how short-lived the honour " must needs bei that was built upon " nostronger basis than the mercenary " consideration of such a sum, riche» " for the most part being the lot of " covetous, and dejected spirits ! Be- " sides, augmentation of titles puts " a higher imposition upon all ex· " pences -, since he that before, being 16
İSO '* c'onsidercd as but a gentleman, could " compose his charge within such a " precise rate, now double did not " serve the turn : men in honour, coii- " traiyto the elements of frugal ity, bc- " ing not seldom compelled to pro- " portion their layings out to their " dignities, not their post to tbeir abi- /' Kty. For wives, daughters, sons, " and servants, cannot all, if any do, " regulate their minds to the estate, " but fix their eyes upon the glitter- " ing splendour of this new star of " honour, and do by that steer their " expences, till of a sudden they fall " into so deep an ocean of debt, as " they are never able lo preserve their '· ancient lands, but are forced to sell, " die in a prison, or play at bo-peep
ısı « all the remainder qi their/ days With " their creditors in London *.'' 1 " I believe that no political institu¬ tion was ever more at variance with the tuie principles of aristocracy, or a more fatal insti umení of the depression of ancient and honourable names, than this. It has ever been a cloke to stirili the hesitation, if not the seoin,' with which tbe world is justly inclined to lepel the assumption and airs of new opulence. It would seem as if the * state which invented it weie not con¬ tent with the intrinsic powers which wealth possesses to win its way, and ride over the ancient gentry of the
182 ¡land, but. were resolved to assist it with hereditary precedence and titles, which must ever have a tendency to assist their alliances by the attraction they hold out for the female heart. A con¬ tractor, a stock-broker, я banker, oi pther citizen, no sooner determines to retire with his fulbgorged purse into the country, than he -contrives to ob* tain the decoration of a baronet's patent to increase the dazzle with which he means to blind his humbler neigh¬ bours. At county meetings and quar¬ ter-sessions, Sir Peter Grubskin and Sir Paul Hogsfte$h stand at the head of every commission, and take their seats near the top of every table, while the little petty, snivelling clfk, the attor¬ ney of the adjoining > .wh, bows to
183 them as oírteles, and I ıs ovfcmved by tlieir wisdom, at tbe. time tliat all the sense,elegance andcrudilton of Squire Seymour, or Squirt Devereux, appear insignificant to him becauee he knowe- Ihem tg be labouring. V idi,r тецт- bionccs which scarce iiiuule them, with every exertion, to preserve any part of the splendoui of then illustrious houses-. Koi docs the consequence and triumph of these upstarts qnd here lhe daughteıs aie still more msojent and assuming at countiy assemblies, and among countiy shopkeeper, and at cquuti,y races, their equipages and out riders drive over us at every tprn, vjhilc that terflf) ing badge of hpnour, the bloody hand, exhibitsitself from every pannel
ist " Itistruef tliat every baronet, who infests a country neighbourhood, is net exactly of this description But they, who are not such, are, for the most part, the descendants of such And I am not sure lhat the evil is not greater in tHe latter case, for the scorn that protected the high spirited and well- informed against the vulgar assump¬ tions of the former, is too apt to smir into a gradual and habitual acquies¬ cence, after the lapse of a generation or twoi " With the people, among whom I now reside, I soon found that I was regarded with doubts and envy ' My claims to importance were of an am phibious natine, foi which their n-r-
18S row minds had not provided, in their byslem of superiority For the gratifi cation of their spleen, a thousand ab¬ surd tales were invented of my early life, and of what they called niy pre-i tended rights. Sir James Ellenhurst, who had long been considered tp take the undisputed lead of this society, made me, behind my back, as I was afterwards informed, the subject of his constant jokes What those jokes-were, I never took the pains to inquire; be¬ cause I khew hıra to be incapable df any but such coarse and aukward at¬ tempts at wit, as nothing but the mbst hungry malice, or the meanest servility, could smile at ι ! ι " Sir James Fjltønbutst hacì inherited
186 his title, and be prided himself that his family were indigenous to the soil. He ßntered »uto tht>¡*tyr*o!ogy of-his name to prov в it Saxon; and he found out|Some!pelty farro in tbe neighbour¬ hood of the same denommation,twbich lie dignified with the description of a manor, audi boasted'that frami thence hi» family sprung, and that .there they were seated at tlie conquesti. I know- not exactly why Hb ancestor wai mad« α baronet, but ргоЬцЫу in a time of distraction, when ряЧу ran high, and the timid and imbecile leaders- df the etherjside proposed» by this ..mpolibe bribe, to disarm a venomous repub¬ lican , for such all the race were ι But the consequence proves the truth of my -opinion» ii fdt ftom that moment these
w
people, who «ere beffare considered as veiy obscure,- continued to inercaseiin. wraith and .' importance above then· Ijctlor-aesceuded neighbtwlts, till bjŕ successive fortunato marriages 1 they 1 tó-* quired α large estate, and! would 1 now be equally astonished with theiţ sj-co- phants thatany onb could qbu«»ea tit« lustre of theuibirth,! or attempt-. t о 1ы nut tili .period, when tliey «njergeď from the rank of yeomanry and citi¬ zens, ŞoorjyaltJtty were stiU m utan¬ ners «pd rebits ) of lifo they euuld " bea* ад jfival patibthen thrrjnef and at ho,i»f?urs.wb»oh ivould take plgctrofi theirs they were «jedy (tt burst with» spleen, Itjseemed as if the. blood, Ц> winch they had allied diemselve», rçfusert properly ta mjx with .tøa, anattiai}
ies »t formed only a niongrel breed Su James himself, for whom the weight of lus purse had for many years ob¬ tained a seat in parliament, seemed en¬ tirely out of hjs element when tliere, and never opened his mouth but once on a proposed increase of penalty in ftie. game laws, and on that Occasion he was found as importúnatelas if the late of the nation had depended oh it. «*· Sir Martin St Pihl Miller was a was »marflof a different east OHis fail 1 nnly had ïlèett ftom the very lowest orders qi society 1 , within tae liichioryOf old peoplef Their tnanhers were coarse, tlieiŕ sentiments low, and their dispo- áihónsíytífrniCal and disgusting 1 But wWhoütT meWhandiiŕe ot profession,
189 they had, in a very'few generations, bf a succession of doep cunning, 'finesse, and intrigue, ι by iand-jobbingj by -dar-, ing assumption, perseverance, and a total disregard ot the incumbrance of pimciple, accumulated a Vast 'estate, bought a baronet's title, and claimed all the consequence, and ekerciseď áll flic ımpoıtance, of powerful aristocracy; ueie ıeturned members to represent their county, raised their demands' with a steady and undaunted eye to a peer¬ age, and induced a belief that thejr would sooner or later, by threats or wearisome solicitation, extort it ft oŕn tlie minister. Such was tho« effect of tlieir dauntless ahd unblushing front, that, though these things were alľímíb icrsally known and acknowledged, and- 7
igo ätpugli eveiy one secretly reviled and ţaughed at them, «veiy one openly yielded tp their pretensions. ' " Tliese men, though I was unfor¬ tunately so situated as to be annoyed by -the visits of both, 'vere too jealous, apd too »nhkej to vjsit each other In tiuth, there was in Sır Martin, who was an improvement upon his race, and did not want sharpness Of abilities, tqo much enterprise and vigoui of mmd, as, well «s of age, to be г fit companion fc> the other. Sir Gcoige Hanson, «r moie qiuescent charactoi, whps&esnaHjestate )jad .enabled himsell and his antestdra, aided by a dull pru dţijflei to-íuppart thenisehes on the «ИКС Bpotitfithaut disgracmg tliat ho
nom to which they attached the highest importance, was "Dener 1 fitted to be the associate and tlie шш ot feir James Ľlknhurst. " These, and others of ihe same rank, with little > ariation of eharaetei, with the addition of such as Sir Peter 1 Grub- ski n and Sir Paul Hogsflcsh, were the leading members of the only society which a long itent of country afforded me Theie was, indeed, no smali num- bet of'squires, and doctois of divinity, and rectors, and curates, which filled up the groups of clubs, and race¬ courses, and minting parties, and with whom I migrit have been oêcupieci in an endless succession of engagements. Ot noblemen there were few houses ,to
11)2 be seen, and those there weie, never savy tbeii illustrious owpers unless foi a mouth of ţhe hepţ of summer., when they were too anxious for then ease to suffer the intrusion of counti y neigh bourş The ¡most honouiablc ordei of baronets, therefore, weie suffered to give the law t and tbe faslııojı around them unmolested, unless here and there by a ıcfıactory 'squire, who peihaps from a little eentleman of two oi thiee hundred pounds a year, had usen, by some good luck, into such sudden opu¬ lence, that no period had occurred be¬ tween that when he was too low to at tain, and that when he conceived him¬ self too high to accept, tlu.ş title of new men. « Such was Mr. Martonby. Ihe
103 fortune of his family had, by various late accessions, become extremely large, fiom a very slight paternal inheritance. Of his ancestors nothing particular was known, or thought worthy of inquiry; they had lived as small gentlemen so long, that nobody remembered them in any other situation ; and this is all the world in geneial mean when they speak of a good family. They had nothing to boast, and nothing to be ashamed of, on that subject. Nor did they pride themselves upon it. Wealth they possessed, and wealth was the ground of all their vanity and self- sufficiency, except to here and there an East-Indian or a citizen, who was supposed richer than themselves, and then they talked about the dignity of VOL. II. к
194 the ancient gentrj, and the improper insolence of new got wealth Mr Mai tonby was a man ptcuhaily vain, and anxiously solicitous of peisonal pre¬ eminence, with which, as he possessed something of a great vanety of quali. ties and accomplishments, he always contrived lo console himself, indepen¬ dent of his wcallh, by piquing himself, in comparison with the peisons pre¬ sent, on some of those qualities or ac¬ complishments which they did not possess Before a nobleman, for in stance, who was a fashionable courtier, and exquisitely polished, he would affect the plain country gentlcm m of laige and independent fortune, and manly blunt manneis, who despised the corrupt life of London, and was
10.5 above the acceptance of a peerage. To the plamei 'squiies around bun, bolder and hai dier, he fel t perfectly pleased with himself, as the man of polished man- nets, the scholar, the travelled gentle¬ man who kne>v the world, and was a member of the circles of fashion. He would shiug his shoulders, and sit wiapped within himself, to see their nide manners, and heai their rude com creations To men of close heads and argumentative turns of mind, and to men of business, he enjojed his inn supenontj, as a man of elcgint tiste, the maslei of modem languages, of talente foi pohte literature, and works of imagination To men of ima¬ gination, on the contrary, he affected «orn at their high flights, and would к 2
10б be thought the sober reasöner, the use- foil man of business Thus he alwaje fostered his own pride, while he dis¬ gusted those w th whom he conversed For the neighbouring baronets he had я supreme contempt, and, as to them at least he was superior in personal qualities as well as m estate, to them he was the object of most bitter spleen « Nor was he less so, nor with much less reason, lo the surrounding squires Mr Topp, Mr Ball, Mr Тш ner, Mr Fagg, Mr Day, and others ofthe club that supported the subscnp tion pack of harriers, which Mr Mar tonby considered a gieat nuisance to the nicety of his grounds and planta tıons, bore hım an inveterate hatred 7
197 " Mı. Topp vvas the grandson of Sır William Topp, a knight who had originally been a slopseller m Wap- mg, and aftei waids turning goldsmith (01 according to the modem phrase, banker) and stockjobber, became deeply engaged m tlie iniquities of the South- tea scheme, of which, however, he contrived so far to elude the penalties as to be enabled to purchase a moderate estate in this county, which the grand¬ son now enjoyed. This man was brutal, avaricious, rude, and insolent, with no enjoyments but in field sports, and no knowledge but in matters of dry business. " Mr Ball was of a veiy different na¬ ture. He was of an older family, for КЗ
ige he could produce ι knight among hi« ancestors m lhat glorious reign of plen¬ tiful honours when, ач Osborne ob serves, " a knighthood was promis¬ cuously laid on any head belonging to the jeomaniy, ' and of this he was sufficiently proud Without education, and w ith the narrowest proi incial ha¬ bits, he had no idea of a comparison, or mdeed of the existence of family consequence, beyond his own imme¬ diate neighbourhood, and thought that to have lived the 'squires of two or thiee hundred acres for two centu¬ ries was the very peifeetion of pech- giee On this subject he fell such a satisfaction and confidence, that even the intrusion of the most illustrious nobihty did not disturb it, for nobility
109 never came within his limited cogni¬ zance, and even α noble match, which the fimily hael once by some good 1ш к made, see ned insignificant in his eyes, sunk as it vv as b) the importance of the gieat family of Ball But this blot was nothing, compared with his moial defects Though his ignorance andvulgauty mule lum pay a mean and servile delcicncc to rank and riches, and though he oppiesscd all he met with a fulsome civility to their faces, yet no sooner weie their backs turned, than he treated them with ridi¬ cule or buffoonery, none, neithei most familiar friends, nor nearesti£İatıons, weie spared, and~lus universal malig¬ nity constantly vented itself, as Ma¬ dame Genlis says of a very different κ. ι
soo
character, in the disguise '· of a joke " " Whit shall I чау about Mi .Turner, Mi. Day, Mr. Fagg, and the long et cetera who fill up the groups of а countiy life î What can I say, but that they hunt all the morning to get an appetite, and that they sleep all the afternoon, when that appetite is satis¬ fied , that they are very busy at quar¬ ter-sessions and monthlymeetings, and on Sundays in the rhurchyard after service display then abilities and elo¬ quence in extorting intelligence about poacheis, and issuing threats about in¬ trusions on thn game ' "There wa 1 ·, lionc\ et, a eharaetei
201 with whom I formed an immediate friendship, very opposite to these. Mr. Devereux was a man of very superior qualities Of a family connected with much lustre, but which had often suf· feied gieatly by buffeting with " the waves and weathers of time," he inhe¬ rited all their aspiring disposition, which disdained tht petty limits and narrow notions of provincial vanity But while the struggles with his com¬ plicated and encumbered fortune weak¬ ened and depressed him, and tied him to the ground in a spot too confined for the exercise of hie poweis, the cowardly daws and carrion crows of rural malignity hovered round to insult and vent then garrulous noises upon him Nothing could equal the hatred KÜ
S02 which the surrounding "squncs bore him, nor the circuitous mtngucs, as well as direct mjttues, by which they never ceased to persecute lum With many eccentricities, and some fiailties, he too often laid himself open to their mean and base attacks He used too little disguise in the contempt he felt for them, nor did he sufficiently con troul llie intemperate expicssions of hie indignati та at their repeated attempts to traduce and rum him Given up to mtellectuil pursuits, he overlooked the petty coarseness of country affairs, and perhapsyieldedtoofir to the abstraction of thought and study But his thoughts and studies were not remote fiom life, they were, however, directed to a wider theatre than the comer of a county
203 Moialit), politics, history, and bio gi aph), weie among his favourite oc¬ cupations, and to them he often applied the most intense powers of his mind A poet by nature, he had somewhat oppressed the exubeiance of his fancy by these more close researches, while the extent of his information, which he did not perhaps enough mingle in society to have attained the power of always expressing with facility, asto¬ nished the few with whom he was intimate " The " res angusta domi, ' the per¬ petually recurring chains of his narrow fortune, exasperated his spirit, and wore out his stiength by thvvaiting all his schemes He sometimes bit his fetters кб
204 in the keenness of his disappointment, and too much aggravated, instead of »oftemng, the evil luin of his fate In the circle id which he moved, his ex¬ cellencies were sources of dislike and ridicule, nor would that circle even allow those excellencies, for they knew not how to estimate merit of any kind but by its success There were even relations of his own, who would rathei have had him " the top 'squire of his neighbourhood, for his dinners and equipages, and piaised for his puncti¬ lious adherence to etiquette, the grace of carving, or the elegance of a bow, than remarkable for learning or ge¬ nius " I am,' they would cry, " for none of these airy notions, which I do- not comprehend Of what use is a
sos poet, or a man of learning ? Of what use are the rhymes or the learning even to themselves ì I do not see that Ihey make them richer, I do not find that they make them more agreeable If a person gives a good dinner, I can partake of it, if he drives a handsome tarnage, I may enjoy some portion of 'he credit of it But if he writes a fine poem, and is praised by all the critics of the nation, how can the conse¬ quences be communicated to me ' I come not m the way of critics, nobody, I associate with, cares or talks about poems. If he gains any thing, it is a shadowy possession, which eludes my grasp, I can neither see, nor hea , nor handle, nor measure it! I have no
so6 notion of these idial supenoi ities ! Do not talk to mc ol η idillica which waste themselves in distant speculations gire me those which, if more confined, are more piactical, and of winch the effects are felt nearei home ' —Such at least, if not cxactlj so expressed, were their constant opinions, and such sometimes, in coarser terms, they ventuitd to pronounce " Devereux was my intimate friend, I loved, I pitied I admired him He taught me how to appiecnte the cha¬ racters around me but he warned me not to indulge in all the gall which they had geneiated in lum He seemed to condemn himself for talents thiown
207 awiy or ill duected, and had con¬ stantly on his tongue those two beau¬ tiful lincb, «' The hand tint brush'd a swarm of fools away, Should rouse to grasp a more rcluctint prey* I was always inclined to add the fol¬ lowing as equally applicable to him : " ..-.. .......- in some runl cell, As year to year, and day succeeds to dıy, In rur 1 leisure wastes his life swiy In hi n the flame of early fancy shone, His genuine worth his old compimons own, In childhood and in youth their chief confess d, His waster s pnde, his pattern to the rest Now far aloof retiring from the strife Of busy talents, and of active life,
SOB A· from the loop holei of Mtrort he t«wi Our stage verse pamphlets, pol tics, and ne \s, He baths the world ■ ■ Poor fellow ' Left as he was to pine m solitude, and to brood over the ca¬ lamities of life, his sentiments took а gloomy, and what many would deem misanthropic, hue, but his feelings were so far fiom harsh, that perhaps tenderness was among his defects Re¬ turning kindness, or its appearance, made him too soon, at least for pru¬ dence, forget the most cruel injuries And thus it was that his heart, and not his head, exposed him often to be duped by people so very widely his in¬ feriors m intellect
209 " To Devereux I owed an insight mto the sources of some of those pre¬ judices, by wluch the envy of my most stupid neighbours exerted the svish and tlie power to hurt me. Sequestered a* was his life, his pursuits were intensely direcüed after practical wisdom For it к a gros» errai to suppose that, to acquire an acute knowledge of the characters and conduct of society, we must bt en¬ gaged m a constant intercourse «ith it Objects, which дге perpetually be¬ fore our ejes, lose much of tint viva¬ city of impression which wo feel from a rarer enjoyment of them Constant repetition of company, like constant indulgence of our appetites, deadens the keenness of the efti ct And none are 4o devoid of all observation as the
сю silly and empty beings who lue in an unceasing lound of public amusements. Eveiy occasional communication with the world, howevei short, afforded him materials for thought, which were not easily exhausted; no hint was lost upon him; and he developed the windings of human malignity with a sagacity seldom deceived. Not that he was satisfied with himself, or with his lot, he longed tor a wider sphere of action ; nor was he of opinion that re¬ tirement was always the proper scene for the operations of genius. " He explained to me, in the natuie of my claims, in the habits of my life, even in my intimacy with him, the causes of the unusual enmity wluch
211 my rural neighbours secretly fomenttd against me As th» enmity unfolded itself, and the narrowness and mean passions which actuated them bet mit more apparent, I gradually contracted a reserve towarde them very opposite to my firat and natural manners. This alteration increased their ill intimations towards me, and the disgust became mutual and open. " My residence now became so un¬ easy to me that, with the advice of Deveieux, I removed into another county, where I bought the estate which I still possess. But these man¬ ners of the fiist society with which jt was much convenant after my return to England,*and thé ili effects of the
212 prejudices they had rnstilled, in one of the trials I had with Lord Forester, for some farms within the circuit of their power, have ever dwelt so strongly on my mmd that I could not icfiain from attempting to delineate them in these brief memorials of a life of cars, diffi¬ culty, and disappointment. " Devereux did not long survive my removal. Incessant cares, or intense thinking, unrelieved by that vanety and those amusements which the oc¬ cupations of a more active life supply, wore out, before he had attained his fortieth year, а frame ofthe moot trem¬ bling sensmility I lamented, and stiU lament, my irreparable loss with un¬ ceasing sorrow. Here, Iben, let the
£13 humble effusions of my gnef find a place, that I may deliver down to my posterity some memoiial of my friend¬ ship. AN ADDRESS TO THE DEPARTED 8Г1Ж.ХТ OF WALTER DEVEREUX, ESO^ Departed spirit ! wb lc yon grave contami* Within its chill embrice, thy poor remains, Tho«, if the grovell ng wanderers here below May aught presume of future fate to know, Pure, and by intellectual toils renn d, The choirs of heavenly habitants ha»t join d' Look downwards, and behold with pitying eye The strugglers in this vale of misery ! In strength unequal still behold thy friend With роиег unjust and perjur d wealth contend' О er his tumultuous breast thy influence spread, And bring soft slumbers to hts restless bed) With fortitude msp re him to withstand Terror s loud threats, Oppression s iron hind, And stiU undaunted, where bu causeis true, Еспш the face ef rum, right pursue 1
SH РсгсЬапм thou h«r st me net—th*u may'st Alone, unaided, I 3111 dootn'd to beír The worldly tmll—HöIy shade, adieiţ t Be mine to die·^ t by crave with girhnds new, ΑηΊ oft ılı tin to moisten with my tens, Whil fresh thy once lovd form igiin appeirs, An HI y fin] voice seems, wakend from tlie tomb, To soothe with wisdom s lore my mournful doom l
215 CHAPTER XI.
LETTER TROM GODFRLY LE FORESTER. " I норд you received the pacquct, containing my father's memoir, safe. You will have observed how abruptly it ends. The last touches were given it, while his heait was yet bleeding for the loss of his friend Devereux, which he never entiiely recoveied. It seems as if he was ever afterwards afraid of renewing it, lest the pathetic passages, wilh which it closes, should tear open his wounds afresh.
216
« You will be anxious to hear of mj own health. They tell me that my looks are evidence« of my improve¬ ment. My strength is certainly greater; but I have very melancholy forebodings on my spirits, which I cannot myself either account for or overcome. " I am told that the agents of Lord ÏOrester are busy around me; and I sometimes fancy that my family are afraid lo trust me alone aï any distance 'from the house. What can they fear ? "Lord Forester dares'not murder me. " I steal out, and wander alone in the woods ; and the image of my Emily liovers about ' me. I recai her last loob ; I see her smile Upon me. She
âi7 seems to promise to dry my tears, and to fly with me to some distant cottage, where in her arms I may forget my troubles, and no longer excite the jea¬ lousy or resentment of the cruel usurpei of our estates and honours. While I saunter along, or lean against the Stump of a tree, lost in these delicious dreams, I am suddenly awakened by the tread of light footsteps, and Hau iet Acton appc.u sat my elbow. " Youi mother has missed jou, Godficy, for some houi s ; she is frightened, and has sent me after you. I traced jour steps by the shepherd, and have been running all the way. You see how much I am out of breath. But pray let us hasten back." I answer peevishly at the in¬ terruption. »The tears come into her voi,. II. r.
S18 eyes. I relent. I kiss her hand. Blushes cover her face. She puts her arm gently within mine, and we return with quick steps lo the house. Hereafter I shall be accused of seducing the affections of my cousin. What am I to do ? I am almost inclined to disclose to her my attachment to Emily Mason. But then my mothei—I know what pain itwould give her, should it reach her ears ; and delicacy even to Emily herself restrains rae."
LETTER FROM THE SAME. " Ι βντβελτ you to procure me some intelligence about Emily Mason. Whither did she go from MA Dudley's ? and where is she now è I haveinade·
2ig inquuics, but can hear nothing of her. Is it not strange that we cannot trace her connexions ? *' I am still very gloomy. I endea¬ vour to shake off this gloom by intel¬ lectual exertion; but in vain. To convince you of my efforts I write down a composition of yesterday. » SONNET. Dark o'er the sky has Night her shadows spreadl The lulling murmur of the hollow wind ' Λ drowzy music utters ¡ white the hind Lies in sweet slumber on his lowly slved. Me, whom, to no fatiguing laboure bred. The morning saw, to gentler deeds assign'd, Chase the sweet phantoms of an adire mind,' New shanes stilt beckon from my restle« bed. t. 2
220 Ρ« reliance» while jet a thousand beauteous forms JDaţice. with enchanted radiap« on my eye» My trembling bosom keener pleasure warms) Butthink, O hind, of sorrow's sharper sigli ! Mine the uad pang, as mine the rapt delight ι Thine the calm day, and undisturbed night! The ghost of him who is gone haunts me. Poor wretch, I think of thee every hour í " Cut off e'en in the blossoms oftliy sin, Unhousel'd, unanotnted, unaneal'd ; No reck'ning made, but sent to thy account With all thy imperfections on thy head. ph horrible'" .......... ■
LETT CR FOM THE SAME. " Stbange clouds oppress my mind. A tumultuous· chaos succeeds, and
'aw wildness and terror rule over my ideas. The heavens scowl ; a solemn darkness sits over the earth ; and I yield to the impulses I feel ; I give the reins, to 'iny fancy ; and delight in the gloomy tem¬ pest of my brain. I surrender myself up to tales of horror ; difficulties and dangers elevate my soul ¡ and I ехрЫ rience a melancholy satisfaction from them. But whatever softens ι whatever is connected with a picture of peaceful pleasures, unnerves my frame, and leaves unqualified misery, by rendering me unfit for the situation and circum¬ stances, vvith which I have to contend. " Beset with hourly trials of my for¬ titude and patience; with mexpiessible mortifications and injui ¡еч j ь 3
" Voitti ilarïtoese and with dangers tompass'ii rounil," J dare not submit my mind to tender reflections. '' When night comes on, and the moon only breaks out by momentary fits Scotti the rolling clouds that are hurried along the fky, I sally forth to bear the groans of the forest shaken by the wind. The tempest around me is congenial to the temper of my soul. It soothes, it animales me. I hurry down to the banks of the lake, and wateh by the uncertain bursts of light the upioar of the waters ; I wander on the edge of precipices, feailess of the driving blast, and feel a teirific pleasure in the dangers I encounter.
22Я " In these wanderings I have lately seen strange figures Predominant as my fancy is, it cannot be fancy They way lay me, they cross mc, they dart from behind trees, but they seem feai- iul of approaching too near me They always appear singly, and perhaps the resolute manner, which the state of my feelings at these times may have given me, has hitherto restrained their at¬ tacks. Human foims I am convinced they arc, though they sometimes glide before me like spirits. " My mmd suffers all tho disorder of а fever, and my ideas are in too much confusion to furnish a longer let¬ ter May jom fate be happier than nunc > I am impiessed with dreadful forebodings i i
324 \ " P. S. Though I am unable to say any thing more of myself, I feel soothed and corrected while I transcribe the fol¬ lowing fragment of my fatlier, not in¬ serted in his memoirs, of which how¬ ever I do not know the particular oc¬ casion, and do not choose to ask my mother." STANZAS, . BY EUSTACE LE FOItESTEH. A FRAGMENT. I. While busy falsehood tells her tale, And cruet calumnies prevail, And still my path surround, The gathering winds of fame I heai '' The swelling burden gladly bear Willi loud and louder sound.
Ü25 П. Though shrill about me raves the storm, No anger shall my breast deform j No mean revenge inflame, Though senseless scorn her fìnger rai«, While folly former insults pays, And joins tli' ungenerous g$me III. Let the fierce temptvt ebb or flow, t With firm undaunted step-1 go, Or fit itb deep repose, While by the muse's aid my sight Surveys such visions of delight, As banish all my woei. IV. But ye, hard hearted and iintrup^ Who gave a more engaging hue To Jmuüou's var j ing form, Who imťd the clamorous crowd among, And urg'd tbe driving stream along, Till notte could stay the etarmi L 5
22fJ
V. ' No thanh8 to you, if yet with bold Unyeilding hand my place I hold, Amid th* o'erwhelming tide ! If yet my little children fceep Their native cots, and nightly flec^ "With undiminished pride I l - VI. Not yet the storm bas calnVd ib rage, Nor coald your eloquence assuage, If eloquence were yours, Tbc boiling waves, that round me rise The gloom that overspreads the skies; The blait my ear endures Ì
M?
CHAPTER XII.
Emily Mason, of whom Hunting- field, by Le Forester's desire, had gah» ed every intelligence in his power, had long since left Mr. Dudley's house, under the care of Mrs. Barker ; but whither they were gone, the family at Willington had seemed desirous to keep a profound secret. They had gone fu st to London for medical advice on Emily'á health, which was dreadfully shaken by the report of the alarming accident tliat LŐ
2ÎS had befallen Le Forester Hci affec tion for him grew every day stronger, and the affection which for his sake this accident continued to foment, pieyed upon hei spirits, enervated hei frame, and expelled the roses fiom her cheeks But it did not embitter the sweetness of hei. disposition, SI e sal lihe pat ence on a monumenť Sra ling it gncl She was earned to airy, commodious, and expensne lodgings in the neigh bourhood of Hyde Paik, where a con sulfation of physicians was piocured, andevei) thing that care and wealth could command was brought to her assistance A gentlcm in w hom she had not seen foi many ) ears, and w ho was now introduced to her as her fithei,
22g made her frequent visits. Mrs Bar¬ ker called him Mr Mason, but Emily could not help observing the apparent privacy and concealment which he af¬ fected , never arriving till the dusk of the evening, and always hurrying away before any oue else could be intioduced To an oiphan, of а disposition so af ilctionate as Emil), the delight of find ing a fatlier w ıs almost overwhelming And to find that father full of anxiety bout her was а joy still more ıncon- tiollable lhe v mety of feelings, which at this time divided her bosom, was too much for her strength, and hci constitution seemed to be rapidly smking under them A slow fever was
230 undermining all her youthful vigour, and she appeared the sure victim of an early grave. Mre Barker too well suspected the state of her heart, but she never direct¬ ly mentioned the name of Le Forester. In terras however which could no' be misunderstood, she continually let her pupil know, that Le Foiester was a person unalterably interdicted , and that her father, fond as he was of her, would sooner attend her to her grave, than suffer her to be united to that un¬ fortunate man Many times and by many ways did Emily endeavoui to penetrate the cause of this most violent and mysterious antipatii) But in vam Mrs Barker always possessed the art
28 t of alarming her delicacy, or intimidat¬ ing her curiosity in a manner which pr»ventcd all particular explanations. In all other points she was indulged to her utmost wishes, in this alone there was no relaxation, and hei illness and even danger never seemed for a mo¬ ment to soften the rigid obduracy which had been determined on Her letters were all watched with unwearied strictness The coirespond- encc with the Miss Dudleys was prohi¬ bited The acquaintance admitted to see her were persons no way connected with the Dudley family, or the neigh¬ bourhood of Willington And thus was she shut out from any intelligence of Le forester.
232 But the flame that can find no vent, will burn inwardly with the more vio¬ lence. In the secret reresses of Emily's bosom it raged, till it almost affected the sanity of her fancy His image haunted her, and played befoie her in a thousand colouis, till it neaily attain¬ ed the shape of a diunity, and her. mind became almost idolatrous The physicians advised a change of scene, and the dissipation of vaned so¬ ciety. She was foiccd theiefore mto the public amusements of London, to which she only consented with the se¬ cret hope ot meeting Le Foicstei She was mortified at first that her fatlier never appealed with her in public, but careltss and indiffeient as she was to
233 tvi'iy liung but her attachment, even ihat cìicuinstanco made but a slight impression on her. Wherever she went,· to the play, to the opera, to the park, to assemblies ; she turned her inquiring eyes in vain. No Le Forester appeared. The young men buzzed about her, attracted by her beauty faded as it was. But no one who bore any resemblance to Le Forester, Whoever was introduced of a good name and connexions, received all the encouragement Mrs. Barker could give them. There were many who wanted no encouragement. Emily's attractions were too powerful to require collateral
ÏJ4 aid. Even the coldness of heL man· ntrs, her resene, her absence could not repel admireis. The giace of hei person, her eloquent ej es, her tender and seductive voice, had niesistiblc charms. lew, however,had hearts to be seri¬ ously affected. Fashion, dissipation, habits, soon effaced tlie momentary impression, of which they who felt it were ashamed. Indifference was the ordei of the day, and no one would be so vulgar as to own a romantic attach¬ ment. " Nil admiran," to feel no¬ thing, to care for nothing, to stare with stupid non-chalance, to vote every thing a bore, to have attained an ex¬ tinction of the emotions of humanity,
гЗа were pioofb of ton and hi^li life, \v lucir ill were anxious to exhibit George Dt spensel alone had not )et acqti icd t Jus glonous conquest oier himself This y oung man from the moment of fiwt seeing Dtnil), had conceived the wannest admiration of her He Bought every opportunity to be in her company, and whenever he could in¬ duce her to talk, her conversation in¬ cieased his attachment In him she of en sought a refuge fi om the brutal stare, and unmeaning or insolent com¬ pliments, of other admuers He talked а language she could understand he let drop sentiments congeni ú with her own and he preseneti a respect aid seemed subdue lb) a melanchol),pecu-
S36 liai ly soothing to the stale of hei own feelings Unfoitunatc young man ! 1 knew not the poison he was drmking He suspected not the cause of that ш tei est, with which she listened to the tender or the mournful tones of lib conversation As she wept over the pathetic tales which he sometimes was permitted to icad to hci, be was not aware that those precious 'cars weie consecrate-! to another Mrs Baiker too encouraged his at tachment with all the art and cunning of her character Peihaps she encou¬ raged hopes it might be successful At any rate sh6 thought it might an svvei the purposes she had in view and she cared not about the consequences
а37 lo Despenser He was a man of family and fortune, and might be made the nistiument of detaching Emily from Lc Forester If his happiness was wiccked rnthe tual, she was of a dis¬ position to feel no compunctions on the subject Emily s fits of abseni e, the inequa¬ lities of her behaviour, and the occa- s nnaţ peculiarity of her sentiments, were carefully accounted tor by Mrs Barker, who attributed them to the temporary illness under which she la¬ boured She sometimes indeed let fall expressions which startled Despenser , but the blindness of love still permitted lum to theush his passion Emil), meanwhile, conscious of the state of
138 her own heart, had little doubt but that it must be known to Despenser. One day he brought a poem to read to her, which had ' found its way into the public prints, and which was theie attributed to Le Forester, a person with whose existence he was utterly unac¬ quainted. He informed her he had some pathetic lines for her, with which he was sure she would be delighted. But he had scarcely begun them, be¬ fore he heard her burst into an agony of tears. *' Good heavens!" he cried, " Miss Mason, what is the matter?" She could not speak, but put her hand¬ kerchief before her face, and attempted to leave the room. Mrs. Barker ran up, and attempted to soothe her, but in
339 vam Another burst of tears followed her attempts to icstrain her, and she was permitted, trembling and feeble as she was, to reach the door, and go and compose herself in 1 er own apartment Mrs Baikei s awkward and anxious attempts to account for this behaviour first gave Dcsponser a suspicion of the îeal cause It flashed like lightning upon his mind, and seemed at once to blast all his prospects of happiness T he poison of jealousy ran cold and withering through all his veins, and turned all his feelmgs into gall Sick, self abased,and inexpressibly miserable, he left the house, and went to pine over the misfortune, which seemed to have attacked htm, in solitude
340 But in solitude he found sufferings, which he could not long endure. Many days had not elapsed, before be again sought the company of Emily. He found her beautiful, soft, attentive, and apparently unconscious of having injured him, while hei melancholy was even increased, and the patlietic tones of her voice at once augmented his love and his despair. Of Le Foicster he bad been able to gain no intelli¬ gence. The mysterious manner and apparent disguise of Mrs. Barker in¬ flamed rather than allayed his curio¬ sity. To Emily herself he could not venture to touch upon the subject. In this state, by a strange, yet not un¬ common, infatuation he still encou- laged hope, after all hope appeared to.
241 be lost * He watched her eounte nance and expressions, he endeavouied to extract from the tales which most affected her, the circumstances of liei story, and he began at last to imagine that there had been some insuperable bar to the accomplishment of her first wishes, and that there might yet be an opening for himself Mrs Barkei lost no opportunity to encourage his attentions Ht saw Emily daily, either in public or at tlieir lodgings The similarity of their tastes, his sympathy with hei in those sentiments and passages in books, in which she most delighted, excited her
VOL· II M
242 esteein and friendship Engrossed with her own attachment, she had no vanity or coquetry, and did not suspect what stores of miserj she was fostering in his bosom At length his attentions and expres sions became so very particulai, that even Emily could not misunderstand them From that moment she altered her manners, and her sudden coldness and reserve determined him to come to an immediate explanation He re solved therefore, encouraged by Mrs Barker, to make her formal proposals These proposals he made the very next morning, Mrs Barker contriving to give him a full and uninterrupted
243 opportunity. Emily hist declined to obey the message he sent to her to pel¬ imi him to speak to her on particulai business But when he sent a second message still more urgent, a strange thought came acı oss her, that he had information of Lc Forester to impart. She burned down therefore into the drawing room, where she found him alone For some minutes both sat silent At length Emily herself, who could not bear the suspence, began Ľmily " What can you want with me, Mr Despenser f" Despenser hesitating, and scarce arti¬ culate " I came to offei you ——." m 1
244 Ľmily at once suspecting his errand, and disappointed —— " You have no¬ thing to offer me which I can accept ' Despenser " At least hear me ' ' imily " Welj, what have you to of¬ fer me? Be quick, I cannot stay ' Despenser " My heart and hand ' Ľmily " Those I certainly cannot accept I" Despenser " Why not î I thought Emily " I am not bound to give you my reasons—but what could you think î" Despenser " I thought that I was not dis — dis —disagreeable to -----' Emily " That you was not disagree¬ able to me—j ou thought right You had my fnendship
24а Despenser " Friendship ıs a cold word Emily " It is oil I had to give " Despenser " But perhaps I may be content to begin with fnendship, and trust h°reafter to —— " Emily " Do not deceive yourself my heart is irrevocably------" Despenser " Another's ' ' Emily " Anothei's \ dead silence now ensued, ınteı ι upted only by the convulsive sighs of Despensei Emily felt affected, but icsolving not to discover her feelings, lose to leave the room Despenser, seeing this, again exerted himself Despensei " Yet a moment, Mis« m 3
246 Mason — perhaps hereafter — if this happy man----- ." Emily hastily. " What do you mean ? explain yourself." Despenser. " I only mean, that as we cannot tell what may happen, if he should -----in short if------" Emily turning very fale. " I cannot bear this—you know something—I am sure you do—this instant tell mc ! Despenser. " I only thought—that if—if insuperable ----- ." Emily. " Oh, I am sure you know- speak, cruel man, this moment speak." Despenser alarmed. " Be cplm, Miss Mason I I only thought—Mrs. Barkei thought—I had heard—that—that— that your father had—in short that Loid Forester had ■ ------- ."
£47 Emily heard no more, a mist came before her eyes, a loud sigh burst fiom ber bosom, and she sunk back as if she had been irrecoverably dead Despenser lang the bell violently, Mrs Barker and the maids ran to hei assistance, and finding all attempts to recover her vain, earned her senseless to her own apai tmcnt The mysterious expressions of De¬ spenser, the name of Loid Foiester, the mode in which it had been con¬ nected with that of ber father, with whom she had lately had suspicions that Lord Forester had some inter¬ course, and the sudden suspicion of a fresh plot against Le Forester's life, and that Despensei had been too well-
S48
informed of its success, had darted upon her mind like lightning, and produced upori her the dangerous ef¬ fects I have related. When Emily, at length, recovered ftom this alarming fainting fit, a fever ensued, and her senses still continued in a delirious state. As soon as she was sufficiently well to be removed, the physicians ordered her to Bath, with a particular injunction to keep her mind quiet. On this account Mrs. Barker was necessitated to forego foi the present the scheme of her marriage with'Despenser, whose name was now never mentioned. In this state Emily remained at
s -ig Bath, when Huntingfield gained his last intelligence of her. He had not indeed learned all that I have related ; nor did he communicate quite all he knew, in the answer which he wrote to Le Forester's inquiries, The answer however was long, and contained much information which he trusted would be interesting ' to Le Forester. He waited some days im¬ patiently for an answer. An answer at length came, not in the hand-writ¬ ing of Le Forester—but of Harriet Acton. He opened it witn a tiem- bling heart. What was his astonish¬ ment to see his own letter enclosed un¬ opened ; and a few affecting lines to say that Le Forester had been miising
USO for some days previous to its arrival ; and that no intelligence could be any where gained of him ! Harriet Acton added that his mother and all the fa¬ mily wete in a state of distraction, and intreated Huntingfield to lose not a moment in coming to their assistance
EBD OP THE SECOND VOLUME.
T, Benfley, ťimter. Bult Couit, Fiset Siretr, London.
