Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Le Forester: a novel
LE FORESTER. A NOVEL. CHAPTER I. Hugh le Fobester, Earl Forester, was now between seventy and eighty years of age. He had succeeded his brother Earl Eustace at leaft fifty years ago. A more profligate and un¬ principled character had seldom dis¬ graced the peerage of England. But the propeity, of which he was in pos¬ session, was as large and powerful as the titles were ancient ; and these en¬ voi., ι. ι
2 ablcd hım, though scorned and abhor¬ red by all honoui able and good men, still ta retain a great deal of political power and consequence. Yet they were not held witho.it much uneasiness, ond many dangerous struggles, which arose from the claim of Eustace le Forester, who called him¬ self, and was admitted by tlie most con¬ vincing evidence to be, his nephew, the son of his eldest brother Earl Eustace ; 04 λ dıose honour« and estates he had seized, in tho helpless infancy of this nephew, by the moet· cruel and daring crimes. This unhappy heir, ofwhom hi» mo¬ ther had died in, childbed, neglected in
s a few months after his birth, and after¬ wards concealed and abandoned by tlie influence and intrigues of a base wo¬ man with whom his father cohabited, had lived to his eighth year under the roof of an humble cottager in a remote part of England, with only a slight in¬ timation of his parents, whose name he had however retained. No sooner was his father dead lhan the unnatural uncle, having reported him without issue, and taking the inheritance, dis¬ patched two hired ruffians, who suc¬ cessfully executed their orders to seize the child, and convey him by some vessel on the neighbouring coast to the Indies, where it was intended he should be sold for a slave. A storm, fortu¬ nately, and a shipwreck extricated him в 1
4 fiom tlie brutal hands of llic captain of the trading ussil, to whom he was consigned, and a series of accidents brought lum mto favour of the family of an caste -η goveinor, bj whom he was educated with his o«n children at one of the settlement* and whence he succeeded his beiefictor in his post In this situation Eustace had an op¬ portunity to make with peıfect honour a moderate foitune, suTici-nt to enable hıra prudently to indulge his wish of returning to his native country His cuno|itj regarding his bnth, v, Inch had never totally slept, he had hitherto hail no ром ei to gratifj But he no sooner aimed m England, than а thousand
5 circumstances, concurrid in inflaming hib inclination to inquire into it He found hmi tit ticaled as a new man, an upstut, -m Indnn extortioner, spuing from the diegt, of the pcopL ind no distinction rs made between him, and the **** nnd the **»** ot the d i) , fellows who had worn ι In eiy, 01 can ed a hod, and wlio be ti mg oier wilh them the m-inncis and the senti ments from wl enee they rose, hid wiung from the bleeding natives their overflow in" wctlth at tlie expenee ot filmine and desolation This alone was a sufficient spur to the investigation of his own ougin, but concurring with his veiy name ind £ 3
б many imperfect stories, of which he still ïeiained a confused recollection, legarding his alliance with Eirl Fores¬ ter, it immediately caused that investi¬ gation to become the first business of his life By the exercise^of his memory, and a few collateral inquii es, he soon found his way to the village whence he had been kidnapped, wh ch he no sooner entered than all the early impressions of his childhood revived in his mind, and he liad no need of any direction to the cottage where his earliest years were spent He hastened to the door, and lifted the latch with a beating heart, but its old inhabitants were gone No trace of the grey-locked vil-
7 tager, or his dame, who had fed him, who had cherished him, who hid often wept over him with many a mysterious expression, was to be seen His heart sunk, his feelings overwhelmed him, he dropped upon a chair, and foi some minutes became convulsed When he recovei e J, lie made in quines which led tn some of the good old people s gcandchtldien m a neigH bouring parish These v ulagers were at first both suspicious, and awed by his questions At length they confess¬ ed having heard their grandmother talk of the young squire that was stolen from her cottage, and how many a tear she used to shed in telling it, and what hoirors she sometimes expressed lest в 4
β some' ill-luck had happened to the poor lad ¡ and how in half-suppressed curses she called down vengeance on his blood-thirsty uncle ; and then how •fearful she was, lest some one should repeat her woids, and the great man should come and ruin her and hers. From hence by what a long Irain of circumstances, Eustace gradually un¬ folded the truth ; with what persever¬ ing industry, and what an expenee of .money and of crimes he was thwarted and calumniated at every step, as soon as the knowledge of his arrival in Eng¬ land had reached Ear! Forester's ears ; ^and by What hair-breadth 'scapes he •was preserved from assassination, it - would be too tedious to relate.
d At length he brought matters into tram for a trial at law with his uncle, having in vain appealed to the House of Lords, who would not permit the writ to be questioned of which the earl was in possession But long before this event he had married a most amiable şnd beaut ful girl of a family as good as his own, and by her had two sons, besides several daughters. Meanwhile he was spending his time, his spirits and his meney, in the almost hopeless contest with the un¬ natural usurper who held his titles and his estates, and by those very means wis titdblcd against ail ngni ro conti¬ nue tl eir possession » 5
10 The time of trial at length came, and after a tortnight consumed jn examin¬ ing nearly an hundred contradictory witnesses, in whicli a scene of villany never to be psraUcled was laid open, he obtained a verdict. The shouts of the audience would, it was thought, have burst the walls of the court asun¬ der ; and triumph sat for weeks on the countenances of all who regarded jua- ticc. But the defeated were not dis- Biayed: they had still the possession of the purse. Writs of error, arrests of judgment, new tiialsj and all the tricks of legal, chicanery were still open, and ■were of course still piusued. Eustace was still a commoner of »mall, and now of diminished, fortune.
İl Earl Fetester itili had A áeal (fdť ht was also an Irish peer) irt the upper house of both kingdoms, end still in both' held all the influence bf « mighty feudal domain. Twenty years passed away in this unequal litigation. The health ef Eustace, his temper, and his resources began to flag under difficulties so cruel and unjust, while Lord Forester, un¬ feeling, vicious, and desperate, gretv more hardened with his grey hairs, and flared in triumphant defiance, his co¬ ronet, his privileges, and his wealth. To have these heart-breaking priva¬ tions aggravated by insult ; to undergo the sneers of scorn, and the taunts of в б
13 calumny, to be treated as a pretender, an ţmpostor !■—Could any liberal spirit , bear this ) Above all, could the ho- дющрЫе mind of Eustace h Forester bear it ? And if himself he could ele¬ vate above these indignities, could he bean it for the dear connections with " whioh hè was now surrounded ; for an amiable wife of illustrious descent s and for beloved children of ingenuous dis¬ positions, who were now emerging into the world î A fever, the consequence of the per¬ petual anxiety and irritation, in which he had now 60 long lived, at length seized upon his enfeebled constitution! and he died in the fiftieth year of his age, without appearing to have ap-
13 preached much nearer the points, for which he had been contending so wearisome à length of time. Lord Forestei's triumph on this mournful event was excessive ; and his insults to the unhappy surviving fa¬ mily were inexpressibly^ brutal. He now hoped to crush them all at once, while the broken spirits of the soirow- ful widow were yet unable to extend protection over her helpless children all yct in their minority. But the wicked monster of usurped power and hoiuble crimes knew not, suspected not, the mighty spirit in em,- bryo with whom he had yet to con¬ tend.
í*
CHAPTER II.
Gokfuë* iï-Fökestm, the eldest »on, was now seventeen. His unin¬ terrupted education in England, and the acquaintance which from his very infancy he bad had with the Subject of his descent, added to abilities v< ty far superici, and a mind much more ele¬ vated and adventurous, than that of his father, seemed to promise a more vi¬ gorous and successful pursuit of their rights thart the father had ever carried on, if the length of years, which had already elapsed in the claim, had not too much increased the difficulties.
ıs In a few montila after h s father's decease, Godfrey was ient to the uni¬ versity of Cambridge, where the con¬ fusion arising from the multiplicity of his ideas and the violence of his feel¬ ings at the first opening of life, and a mixture of pnd·" and mortification, springing out of the peculiarity of his doubtful station, so overwhelmed him, that his abilities made but a ve, y »qiu- vocal figure His passions were yet too warm, his imagination too romantic for the pur¬ poses of practical hfe, and he did not bear with sufficient patience and forti¬ tude the supcnon'y, and sometimes silly and despicable airs, of the many young men of acknowledged rank, but
1б new titles and families, by whom he was surrounded. The subtle old carl, who never rest¬ ed, and regarded not expenee to ac¬ complish his numerous schemes, had early intelligence of his disposition, and sent two or' three young men, of suffi¬ cient cunning and self-possession, at his own cost, to the same university, and one to the same college ; to watch, ridicule, depress, irritate, and drive him into excesses, particularly of momen¬ tary resentment, tu which he was too much prone. It is well known how much may bc done in this vvay by the most contemptible human being, who keeps constantly upon the reserve; and how easily such an one may seem to
17 carry the day against the most noble disposition, and the moit splend'd abi!· lilies for a tim' ; and perhaps, if not counteracted, destroy for ever the cha¬ racter, and nip in the very bud the fruils, of the most admiiable geniu«, ' Godfrey found himself at times very ипсаьу at this place. The studies did not suit hira : the society was Still less pleasant to him. He perceived many of those sneers, though he knew not whence they aiose, which seemed to .laugh at his birth. He was too much provoked at the gross inconsistency of opinions (not considering that they had no opinions at alije of thoseiyoung noblemen who shewed ,the most into,- Jerable insolence in,cot)bequt;nceiof their
1β titles, and yet ridiculed all discussions of descent, and all inquiries into tl e history of the past He saw in them all the odious and indefensible quali¬ ties, without any of the virtues, of aris¬ tocracy But this made hnn extend his inquines beyond his own firrily, and with the aid Of the public libraries, he became by degrees lhtunalely ac¬ quainted with th» lescent, character, and memoirs of every name, who had attained the English peciage They, who were spies upon hint, thoroughly knew, but it was .mpofsible to controul, hie private studies, how¬ ever undesirable they were to thetft All the weapons of offence they had ih thus case Were their eld ones of ridi-
19 cule. He never asked a question that could possibly have reference ,to this subject; he never was веей carrying α folio from the library ta his rooms ; he was never observed gazing at a coat of arms over the gateways, in the win¬ dows, or the chapels of the colleges, without hearing the burst of a horse¬ laugh, or at least, on looking up, see¬ ing a half-suppressed smile on every countenance. This gave an early mixture of indig¬ nation and asperity to tiie own man¬ ners, and much increased the number of his enemies. He was represented tu supercilious, ill-tempered, intolerably haughty without the least pretensión« i (though if it had been possible to doubt
ao 'his paternal 1 ddscent, · the Wood which filled his veins from his mother flowed 'not only ^without baje mixhnc from all tho old nobility, but united'that of all the Plantagenets and all the Tudors ',) he was repiesented as of slender abi¬ lities, with little knowlcgc but of the fantastic pedantries Of heraldry;'of no -acquamtance with life ; of no spirit for the fashionable pursuits of the d.iy ; in short as one who might seclude him¬ self without exciting regret, and in- -dulge in his own fancies without call- jpgfqith>envy. .. Such Loid Forester's spies held him \forth ; but such they observed too mpch ,to thmk him. < .FroiWiheir reprásenta- -tion the usurper itreriibled in the midst
21 of his power ; and if he could not be urged Id'something in the unchastized enthusiasm of his early youth, which would blast his reputation for lift, they informed their hoary employer he would have much harder battles to fight than he hjid ever yet encountered. The first hope was derived from a plan to engage him in duels, in whieh his impetuous temper was very likely to be imolved, and where if he him¬ self escaped with life, yet if his anta¬ gonist fell, they were prepared instantly to pursue a prosecution against him for murder. Hithertp this scheme, though it had been several times on the point of succeeding, had been averted by the kind hand of Providence. 4' Iwt it
аз appeared about to happen. Mr. Hodg- kinson, a weak young man of the same college, the only son of a peer made within a few years by the influence of a rotten borough, was by previous in¬ struction» worked upon not only to take place of Le Forester in a rude minner in the common-room af'er din¬ ner, but on its exciting some expres¬ sion of anger, to call him or his father, « bastard and pretender." Le Fores¬ ter instantly rising pulled him by the nose·, at which Simkins and Johnson (who was that day visiting him), the Earl's two creatures, clapped their hands, and cried in their vulgar lan¬ guage " to it, my boys," and the whole room burst into a laugh. Le Forester irritated by tìnsi and grasping him still
29 tighter, led the poor affrighted and un¬ resisting young man tothe door, mål then opening it, gave him a bek, which sent him through it full upon his face. The affair havmg tak-n so unex¬ pected a tun, all the party began to look very grave, but as the unlucky instrument whom they had put upon this business Was notoriously the of¬ fender, and yct had not spirit to go through with the affront, it would have been too gross to have carried the matter farther at present, or di- recdy to have shewn any resentment to Le Foreeter. Nor was it possible to avert the disg ace they drew on the unfortunate Hodgkmson, who was 1
ii obliged to avoid the contempt of the umversity by qrntting it It was some 'ime before a similar attempt was made to affroijt our hero.
25 CHAPTER III.
Le Fokesteii, with the first appear¬ ance of a.recluse of contracted habits and desires, had all the fire and flexi¬ bility which enabled him to feel plea¬ sure and arrive at excellence in the most opposite attainments and occupa¬ tions. If it be applied to mere amuse¬ ments, it may be said of him that he could " Be every thing Ъу fits—but nolhing long." Of intellectual pursuits alone he never grew tired ; the joys of other employments he soon exhausted, .and retired from them with disgust. vol. i. о
S6 But with this disposition he occa¬ sionally felt a zest for the pleasures of the chace, and even of the turf, and sometimes indulged himself in the pur¬ chase of fine horses This was a turn easily gratified at Cambridge It was one of the reigning fashions of the place, which no doubt was much in¬ creased by the neighbourhood to New¬ market It cannot be supposed that such an opening to mischief was lost by Lord Forester's agents Their endeavours were instantly directed both to involve him in ruinous expenee, and to get irito his possession horses which were dan¬ gerous In both points they Were in some degree successful At one time
ν his neck was trusted to a mron blind horse, who fell headlong with him into a ditch, from which it is scarcely pos¬ sible to conceive how he could have escaped with life, and even with un¬ broken limbs At another he was irri tated mto a sweepstakes for a race to be rode by the owneis of the horses, into which a desperate fellow was in¬ troduced to ride a horse that was blmd Thus mounted the fellow was encou- ïaged by a great bribe every where to cross and jostle and ride before him, that, ď the horse fell, which it was thought he could not avoid, Le Forester might (as indeed seemed inevitable) fall over him. All this bme Le Forester could no more assimilate his manneis or habits
28 to the clubs of young hunters, and jockies, and gamblers, than If he had always lived the life of a literary re¬ cluse; so that even where the picjti- dices raised against him could but fee¬ bly operate, he was not less unpopular than before. He nowhere got the cha¬ racter of " a good fellow," a " lad of spirit," one whose acquaintance was worth having. He found no easy en¬ try whciever he went ; and no engage¬ ments flowed in upon him unsought. No attempts had hitherto been suc¬ cessful to seduce him to the gambling- table. It was only in bets upon the tuif that he coujd be drawn to venture Ins money; and in these from a con¬ sciousness of liis ignorance in the
29 science, he was so cautious as to escape without much average loss. His debts, however, began to be trou¬ blesome ; but as he was not of age, they could not yet be dangerous. Still to a man of his nice feelings they were sufficient to add much to the various causes of irritability and uneasiness with which he was surrounded. It has beeh already related that his father had nearly exhausted his re¬ sources in the expensive litigation in which he had been so long engaged. But since his death two or three mem- beis of the family of Le Forester, ac¬ knowledging his descent, had left con¬ sideiable bequests both of land and с 3
30 money to his children, and by thf course of inheritance, Mrs Le föres¬ tet also h id come into possession of no inconsiderable fortune Le Forester's prospects therefore weie far different from that poverty, with which the wicked eirl had flattered himself they would be dcpiessed Nor did he in¬ deed yet suspect the extent of their acquisitions Godfrey's expences then, diough im¬ prudent, were by no means of any fear¬ ful magnitude His mother eluded hıra a little, and warned him of the enemies with whom ne had to contend, but soon eased him of the load by dis¬ charging them at once
3i CHAPTER IV.
He now returned to his books with keener fondness. With Homer, Vir¬ gil, Dante, Spenser, and Shakespeare, he spent his days arid his nights, and of Tasso, in addition to the delight de- nved fiom his general excellence, he felt a private and peculiar interest in the " Godfrey of Bulloign " Nor did he hang with doubtful rapture over 'he translation of old Fairfax ' The sacred armies of the gotllj knight, Who the great s pulchre of Christ dul free I sing mudi wrought his v-dour and foresight, And m that glorious war much suffer d he С A
32 In inm gainst lain did Hell oppose lier might» In vim tlit lurks and Morians urmed be lbs sol hers wild to biawls and mulinici, prest, FUducul lie to p-icc, so Heiv n hım bitst " \c nolılc princes, tint protect nnd sive 1 isc pdgrim ишчез nnd their stup defend Ггот nick n i n noii»ce nnd enors wive, Your griuwi-, p) f s npon tins labour bend To you these tales oí кле and conqücit brave I dedicate, lo you this work I eend , My muse, hereafter, shall perhaps unfold 'i our fighta, your battles, and your combats bold " Гог if the Christian princes ever strive To win fair Greece out of the tyrants hands, And those uBurpmg ftmaehtes deprue Oí woful Thrace, which now captived stands, You must from realms and seas the Tuiki forth As Godfrey clnced them from Juda's hnds, And in this legend all th it glorious deed Ueid, whilst you arm you irm you, whilst you read.
33 « Sit j eirs were run since first in marmi guise The Christian Lords uarred lhe Listem 1 md Nice by osţmlt and Antioch by burpnze, Both fair, both rich, both uon, both conquerd And this defended they in noblest wis>e Gunst Persian kmghts, md many a vihant Tortosi won lest wintp r might them abend, Ihey drew lo holds, md coining spring tttuid " The sullen season now wis come and gone, That fort, d them late ceise from their noble When God Almighty from hi* lofty throne Set in hose pırts of Hlív n tint purest are, As far ibove lhe cle ir stir evei v one, As Ц ıs hence up to llu, highest stir, Look d down indili it οι се this u oriti beheld, bach hnd, ea^h city country, town ind liciti. " ЛИ things heuewd, it hst m Sj па still Upon the Christnn Lords his gncious e>e с 5
34 That wondrous look, wherewith he oft survey'd Man's'secret thoughts, which most concealed lio, Ив cast on puissant GODFfiEY, wlio assay-'d To drive the Turks from Sion's, bulwark· high; And full of zeal and faith, esteemed light All worldly honour, empire, treasure, might *."
35
CHAPTER V.
I am in some doubt, whethei in me¬ moirs of this kind, I shall be forgiven for the contents of the following chap¬ ter. The pnvate source of Le Fores- tor's delight in the theme of " Godfrey of Bulloign" has not yet been explain¬ ed But it has been told how well ac¬ quainted he was with the descents of the English peerage, and how very conversant not only the general struc¬ ture of his enthusiastic mmd, but lhe very particular circumstinces of his own birth and claims, impelled him to с 6
36 be with the history of his own fimilj It w ıs this which gave lum an addi- t oml loie foi the storv of " Duke Godfiey, ' and it is the lustre of such а n mic, which must plead my excuse for filling any of my pages with what me deemed the dull narrations of pe¬ digree Weie I uitlced to iccui to a set of people, of whom the date of the birth, the tmirrage, and the death, forms their whole history, of people who boast of having lived for sik or seven centuries in the same obscure manenal lesidence, and in possession of the same acres, and the same rank, when in truth they net er had the spirit to increase, to diminish, or to emerge from them, I should justly incur the contempt which generally falls on til'·
37 dry and (rifling researches of the ge¬ nealogist. But there is an interest, which every liberal and well-cultivated mind will ftel, in tracing out the descendants of the great heroes of the Crusades; of the first foundcisof piovinces and king¬ doms ; and of the rude but generous magnanimity and enterprize which shines forth in many of their characters. The family of Le Forester was sprung from a branch of a puncely house, very nearly allied to " Godfiey of Bulloign." This was the gieat house of Flanders, to whose ancestoi, Lideric de Bucque, the kings of France granted, as eaily as 6ai, the countries Of Flandeis and Ar-
ss tois, and part of Picarrty, with the title of FoiiESTEa. Baldwin, the seventh ш descent fiom Lidtnc, was, by Charles the Bald m 8б4, created first call of Flanders Baldwin de Lisle the fifth, married Adela, daughter of Robert Sanctus king of France, and was father by her of several children, of whom Matilda was wite of our 'W illiam the Conqueror, who came in person to the court of her father to demand her, and celebrated his nuptials with her there in 1053. In consequence of this alli¬ ance the earl accompanied Duke Wd- liam in the expedition to England, and carried with hun a large body of forces, which he was enabled to collect not orly in his own domains, but from different provinces of France, of which
39 he was now regent during the mino¬ rity of king Philip. It was Robert II., carl of Flanders, his grandson, who was one of the chief men that accompanied Duke Godfrey to the Crusades. " Another Robert," says Gibbon, (having already spoken of Robert of Normandy, our Conqueror's eldest son,) " was count " of Flanders, a royal province, which " in this century gave three queens- " to the courts of France, England, " and Denmark', he was surnamed " the sword and lance of Christians s '* but in the exploits of a, soldier he " sometimes forgot the duties of a " general *."
40 In the same expedition also was his first-cousin Baldwin earl of Henault (a younger son of Baldwin de Mons, the sixth eafl of Flanders *). To explain the various ways in •which this great family were allied to tlie.r leader, Tasso's illustrious hero duke Godfrey, is not necessary here ; and now perhaps would not be possi¬ ble. But one channel of alliance I may be forgiven for taking ihe opportunity even of these pages to point otit, be¬ cause historians in general have omit¬ ted to mention it. They were both descended ftom Matilda, daughter of Herman duke öf Saxony,' who married first Baldwin III. carl of Flanders, and
il afterwards Godfiey caii of Ardenne, whose giandson, Godfrey ďikc of Lor- íain and carl of Ai denne and Bouillon, leti a daughter Ida, who nnrrying Eu¬ stace eail of Öoiilogne-4ir-r. cr in Pi¬ cai dy, was mother of duke Codfrey of Boulogne *. This descent indeed seems too re« mote for the complicated copnexion«
42 which evidently existed between these great families. Eustace, earl of Bou¬ logne, the duke'a grandfather, might probably be an immediate cidet of the house of Flanders : and Baldwin, the second of that name, kmg of Jerusa¬ lem, who is recorded foi his near rela¬ tionship to Godfrey, was an undoubted Fleming, and could scarcely have any other; ongm than a direct one from that powerful stock *.
A3 But whateicr was the alliance be¬ tween the great hero of the Crusades and the house of Fhudirs, Le Forester considered lnm as belonging to it, and tht chief ornament even of that most illustrious and princely race, on whom there was no need to graft the decora. tion of any doubtful honours How and when the English branch berame settled in this country may be easily guessed, when their alliance with the wife of our Conqueror is recollect¬ ed*. The rude fragments of the
44 mounted castle, which they first built to overawe the frontiers of the rebel¬ lious Welsh, still remain to attest their ancient power ; and many a spreading manor which continues to swell the ancient rent-roll of some of our proud¬ est families, were the forfeitures which the fluctuating fortunes of the race paid for their public spirit or their ambition in the baronŕ ware. ' ' It is true their name is not to be traced in the noble record of Domes¬ day-book, but this is owing to the want of sirnames, which were then but rarely fixed even in the most considerable fa-
45 nultes : a circumstance which alone is a pioqf of the orgery of the Roll of Battle-abbey, to which vanity and igno¬ rance make such fiequent appeals for the antiquity of their names. As soon as it became unfashionable to be without a sit name, the ancestors of our hero looked back to their origin, and called themselves Le Foeesteb. Their rural honours from this period ; their feudal contests ; or even the pe¬ rils they escaped and the fame they won in Palestine, or afterwards at Poictiers, or at Agincourt, I shall omit to detail ; nor is it necessary to relate by what merits, or by what gootl luck, they, ages back, again attained an earldom, and thus approached a little nearer to the rank from whence they sprung.
46 Enough then on this subject : for I have shewn lhat if birth can ever be a fair source of pride, Le Forester had the strongest plea for indulging it. I have traced him to the most ancient family in Europe. For what other family, but the house of Flanders, can ascend as far baek through the darkness of the Go¬ thic ages as the year 621 ?
Л7
CHAP! ER VI
Though Le Forester prized illustri¬ ous birth, he was not so foolish as to consider it an excuse for igno-ance, meanness, or wickedness He valued it as an incentive to virtue, and honour¬ able ambition, and thought a vicious man of noble descent to be rendered doubly odious and criminal by the con¬ trast This added deeply to the com¬ plicated causes of hortor he felt for the character of his atrocious uncle The very name which he loved, the venerated stock from whence he spr ing,
48 he felt sometimes a disgust at, when he; reflected what a monster it had pro¬ duced. " Shades of my' ancestors," he would cry, " what spurious wietch " is this, that profanes your holy mc- " mories ! Usurper, robber, murderer ! " when I think of thee, I almost ab- " jure the once proud name, and trcm- " Ыс for the punishment of Heaven " on all our race ! In my pioudcst " moments if the memory of thee, as " the possessor of our family-honours, " but crosses me, I shrink into shame " and disgrace, and would hide my ·' head in the deepest solitudes !" - But how little would the earl have regarded soliloquies like these, could he have known them ! He was much
«O' too hardened in iniquity ; much too engrossed in selfish enjoyment to regard at what price, and with what opinion« of others, he held his titles, his wealth, and his power. Eustace was welcome to his sallies of indignation so long as he did not succeed in disseizing hûîi of his possessions ! Sometimes as the earl's carriage whirled by him in the streets of Lon¬ don, the involuntary curse which he utteied arrested the attention of those who were near him. They took him for a person crazed; but he was not always unnoticed by those in the car¬ riage, whoni he saw more than once to- direct his uncle's eyes towards him ; and at length on some of these occa» vol. ι. η
50 sions the very footmen we c scen to point their canes at him, and to mut¬ ter to each other some eagei obser¬ vations. He now could scarcely walk the streets of a night in safety, being conti¬ nually jostled and insulted by fellows, whom he had every reason to suspect to be livery servants of the earl. His full conviction of the desperate chaiac¬ ter of that most abominable old man, prepared him to expect every out¬ rage, and though he had much im¬ portant business with his lawyers on that great affair, which was the first object of his life as it had been of the latter years ot his father, London was rendered so irksome to him, that he re-
51 quii cd a change of air and scenery tb brace his mind and nerves. He determined therefore to spend a few weeks at one of those watering- places, where the mixed views of land and sea, and the refreshing breezes from the ocean, might relieve his wea¬ ried spirits. He arrived at the place he had fixed on, late in an evening of July—twi¬ light was coming on; and refreshing dews had succeeded one of the hottest summer days. As he emerged from a narrow lane, through which his road had for some way ran, the broad ex¬ panse Of the sea, illumined by the moon, which hung majestically over n 2
52 İt, burst upon him at once. It looked tranquillity, and a calm came over his heart. Here then he hoped to pass his time in peaceful pleasures, and forget the uneasiness with which he lud lately been tormented. One hasty walk on the noble terrace of the haiboui, to feel the expansive airs of the ocean blow over him, and to hear the solemn billows break upon tlie shore, he seiţejd before he ictiied to (est. " Welcome," he cried, " this " cool and untainted breath I welcome " these soothing and melancholy mur- 'f murs ! Here will my spirite recover " their tone; and hope agajn enlivcri " my prospects, The enjoyments of "-.life, winch haye lately seemed scarce
S3 " woith lhe contest, appear already to *' airay themselves in bnghtei colours' " Aheady do I feel vigour returning to " my body, and my mmd ! A night followed of calm and undis¬ turbed slumbers He rose -efreshed and happy He sallied forth, and sat upon the cliffs, and wandered, bursting with delight, for hours along the beach and sands He forgot the world, he torgot his own cares, mere existence was ecstasj , ideas crowded upon him as thick and as involuntary as those of di earns, he could not command them, they bore hnn away with them he knew not whither, and he was lost to him¬ self—Who would not be lost m ε* pleasing a delirium f d 3
54 Now is the time that fancj throws ι fairy and l'lusive light over eieryob jecl like care, Lei orestcr, tint m the flow of geneious passions whieh now oecieome Ilice, tl ou dost not f 11 into the toils of dcecit ' Inou nnjst behold beauty with pleasure, and see t irridi tid wilh а thousand iisioi ary charms, but reality is jet too gross foi thee ' For a moment thou maj st gaze with admiration on the crowd of ele¬ gant girls, set off with all the graces of dress—but they speak, and the charm is gone—the coarse sentiment and flip¬ pant manner at once dissolve the spell ' Gay parties of ladies tripped along the Sıioreş, and njraphs of every hue, the lit ely, the placid, and the pensive,
ss eveıy vvlıeıc lnuııtcd the walks and public plices But Le Foresteı, unno tıeıng aid unnoticed, jet io ed about in silence ind solitude He cast his ejes over the bright expanse of waves, and gized on the white cl ffs of Cila s that glittered in the sun md he de¬ lighted to watch tl e mc cments of tl e various sails tl at crowded this watery interval of ocean ' Who can bc that melancholy joung man' sud an handsome girl to her companion, pass mg hım as he lay stretched on the beach in one of his deepest reveries— ' he looks interesting—but ' in a whisper at the very instant she was so near him, that she almost touched him Le Forester s attention was roused—" He looks unhappy»" d 4
¡в answered the other girl, who was much younger—in a softer voice—"but he is very good looking ' ' Thej were al¬ ready passed, and Le Foiester, who re¬ gretted not h iving more accuiately ob» sen ed then looks, indulged anew train of feelings His \anity was raised, and his romantic ideas of female charms revived in his mmd, and filled his fancy with a thousand chivalrous \ ìsions. He returned into the streets and equares, he traversed the rooms and libraries^ yet he saw not agam the figures he sought but the peculiarity of his looks, his careless air, and the uncommon varieties of his counte¬ nance, sometimes sunk in gloom, some times flashing with anger, and some-
S7 times beammg with pleasure, al'racted much notice lhe young men, such as swaim at public places, fiom the heirs of titles and fortunes to the pert vacationers from meichants' counting houses and attoraics offices, beheld him with mdif fcrence or ridicule Few knew him, he solicited no acquaintance, he af¬ fected no intimacy with rank, he 'corned all the little fashionable tricks of dress or manner to attract attention. In shoit, hi» mind was too predomi nant, too excursive for tint collected and narrow observance of httle customs and proprieties with regard to himself, which gives a man the character of a fine gentleman, and makes him agree¬ able in mixed society d 5
58 Shj sometimes even to the most dis¬ tressing awkwardness, and incapable of "plying to а question, ot answeung а ow, he seemed to have the imbecili¬ ties of an idiot when addressed At another time his nerves would grow firm, and he ve ould exhibit the most undaunted countenance amid the im¬ pertinent looks and sneers of silly co\- combs and giggling girls One while he would j ield timid)) to the slightest contradiction his best-wciglied know¬ ledge and opinions at another he would display and support lus most eccentric notions by the fiie and vehe¬ mence of his manner igainst all op¬ position Tremblingly alive to the charms of female beauty, vhereier he fixed his
S9 gize, all women of sensibility felt the compliment in the aident admiration which lighted up his countenance But his judgment and his unagmition were in perpetual contest, and the ex¬ treme acuteness of his delicacy conti¬ nually extinguished with disgust the flames which were so easily raised The cjes therefore that one day darted with pleasure, the next peihaps were iverted with cold indifference This frequently gave rise to a spite and re¬ venge against Le Forester, which tip¬ ped the shafts of calumny with double poison
D б
бо
CHAPTER Vii
Lb Fobestek was now willing to throw off from his mind the loid of care and business, with which he had been so long oppressed, and indulge in the pleasures of the scenes around him. What were the adventitious benefits of rank, and titles, and superfluous wealth, for which he was to sacrifice the jojs of youth, the delights of the senses, the enchanting piospects of mture, ind the charms of female beiuty î " Begone " then," he cried, " yc ungencious « anxieties oí ambition, and let mc
âl " seize the enjoj ments that offer them- " selves to me '" The snilen look ot uneasy thought now vanished from his countenance; ¿nd his eyes danced with cheerfulness. His manner became at once unembai- ıassed , his com ersation gay and \ ola- ule, and he talked with eise in every circle in which he mixed. But among those, with whom he found Inmselt by these means familiar, there was no one with whom he be- idme moie fiequently engaged than Lady Ciilingford, a woman of fashion and beauty, and of manners which weie, at first at least, particularly at¬ tractive. Her husband, an lush peer
62 of considerable property, wis at lhat time absent in lus η ιίιν e country In a public place of the most incon¬ gruous societj , where persons meet of every description from the highest no¬ bility to the wife ind daughtei of the dusky citizen fiom Thames street and Wapping, Lady Carlingford could not avoid ittractmg the wonder and envy of many of those who sunounded hei Le Forester, who appeared m the cha¬ racter of one of hei admners, became, among the women there, the fashion of the day, while he continued uncon¬ scious of his nnpoi tance, and of its cause Many an oglo therefore and many a sigh wis directed at him in vain fıonı various quarters foi obtru-
бэ sive chairas he felt but little interest ¡ and he still prelened the frank and easy conversation of a woman of rank and knowledge of the world, to the beauty of tUteme youth, where there was no simplicity to make amends for a barren or half-informed mind. There was indeed a little girl of a delicate fonn, and not moie than six¬ teen,, in whose expressive countenance he seemed to read something far above a girlish simplicity. But though, he could not keep his eyes from frequently fixing on her, he had never yet had an opportunity of conversing with her. He scarcely knew her name; much less did he know her history or con¬ nexions; and Lady Carlingford, under
64 whose protection she sometimes seem¬ ed to be placed, carefully abstained from gratifying his curiosity; which however had not been very urgent. He had never even taken the trouble to ascertain whether she was one of the ыгепе persons who had disturbed him fiom his reveiie on the beach the first day after his arrival at the sea-side. But for some days there had appear¬ ed in the looks of Emily Mason (for that was her name) an unusual me¬ lancholy. Two young Irishmen who seemed to have some acquaintance with Lady Carlingford, and occasionally ob¬ truded themselves into her company, caused such an evident agitation over her whole frame, whenever they ap-
65 proichcd the circle, as to draw his no¬ tice He could searcely suppose them to possess the manners or the peisons which were likely to engag 'lie inte¬ rest of miss Mason Sometimes her agitation appeared like fear, and more lhan once he observed her to interpose herself officiously between himself and them, as if she was only restrained by her timid modesty from throwing her¬ self upon him. ior protection The ad¬ muation which he had early ielt for her beauty, began now to extend itfelf fir¬ thei , but either the management of Lady Carlingford, or some accident, al¬ ways prevented his entering into con¬ versation w ith her Y-ct the eloquence of the ej es was not entirely silent
aa Λ cool refreshing ci enmg had suc¬ ceeded a most sultry d ij Le Forester and his usual party v, ere enjoying them selves in lounging up and down the no¬ ble terrace of the haibour, where the reviving bieezes that came acro«s the ocean, the soothing muimur of the waics tint bioke gratlj Ы neath their feet, and the giateful approach of tsvi- light that threw romantic shades on all tlie scenery aiound them, gave an un¬ common zest of pleasuie to their walk, and detained them to a late hour Even Emily Mason tluew off her re serie, though not he r uneasiness, aud in the little she. sa el discovered that sensibility of manner and delicacy of sentiment vt, hich acooided with the ro
67
mantie feelings her beauty was adapted to raise in a mind like Le Forester's. Clouds now suddi'iily rose, and a ra¬ pid darkness came over the sky. But the paity still continued to traverò« the walk ; in whieh they were followed by ttso men wiappqdlup iu sailors' great coali, and with muffled faces, who seemed to escape the notice of ail but Emily. These two men at length placed themselves on a bench, and ap¬ peared in deep conferentíe ; when, as Emily approached them, she gave a loud shriek, and springing forwaid to Lc Forester, she boie lum on with her several paces, by tlie'violence of tho motion, and then sank almost lifeieiss into his ai'ms.. Tlie conlbsiou'which
ÖS this incident occasioned was soon pa¬ cified, while poor Emily underwent a mixture of reproof and laughter, for her needless, and what some of them termed her affected, fears. Mrs. Oleary, however, a companion of LadyCarljng- ford, took veiy officious care imme¬ diately to separate her fiom the arm of Le Fotester. The tide was now rising fast, and the wind' began to get up. A few glancing lights from the ships in the harbour, or out at sea, rendered the darkness more visible. But not all the fears of Emily, nor the fatigue of others of the party, could persuade the rest to retire. Le Forester was walking on tho yery edge of the harbour, occupied with
a conversation in which Mrs. Oleary had taken earnest pains to engage him, when Emily, who was behind him¡ hearing the tread of steps at her heels, and perceiving, the two sailors, sprang forwaid again with a piercing shriek, and had no sooner clasped her arms round hira, tlian these ruffians darting after her, plunged them both over the precipice into the water. A dismal confusion of cries, and la¬ mentations, and curses, ensued. A third ruffian jumped into a boat, and made towards Lc Forester, who being a good swimmer, and having instantly reco¬ vered from his surprise, had already saved the yet insensible Emily, and was now bearing her in his arms. Tiie 7
70 wretťh seemed extremely anxious to rescue the unfortunate gill. As soon therefore as he ¿ould reach her, he took her into the boat. But Le Forester had no sooner delivered up his charge, than in the attempt to save himself also, he by sbme means received a sudden blow on the head, and sunk again senseless into the water.
71
CHAPTER VIII.
Рвом this, period all that passed for some time was dark and blank to Le Forester. The first lucid interval he found himself in bed in a strange room, the curtains half drawn, with his head bound, and the debility of an infant in all his limbs. Scarce could his faulter- ing tongue pronounce, " Where am " I?" when a female attendant, who was sitting in a chair by the bedside, answered—" You are safe, thank God ! " Be quiet, Sir, and you will soon be " well !" This little exertion was too
72 tiiucli for him : a mist came before his eyes, and he sunk back insensible on the pillow. How he had got hither, what acci¬ dent had happened to him, how he had been preserved, and by what means he had been brought into his present apartment, was but very obscurely and imperfectly known to his own servant, who had found him out, and exerted himself to procure the best ' assistance,, and medical advice for him. Various tumours, some of which were too ridiculous even for the belief of a, servant, had got about the place ; and, Lady Carlingford and the two Irish gentlemen had suddenly left it.
?3 But there appeared an officious attempt of a large party to ascribe the affair to an accident arising from Le Forester's carelessness" in walking too near the edge of the harbour. Whencèsoevèr it arose, there were but too many circumstances which made the servant' uneasy in the present situation of his master. His life seemed' many Ways in danger; his Senses had neVer yet returned but for one niomeht, a symptom of amendment which had been eagerly communicated by tho nurse, but which had been of so short a continuance as lather to increase the servant's fears than his hopes. Inqui¬ ries were made which appeared to be¬ tray rather the eagerness of guilt, than VOL. I. E
ü the more gentle anxiety of benevo¬ lence. But among these inquirers was a lady, who never came before twilight, "and never but with the most careful concealment of her face, and in whose tender and deeply-afflicted manner there was a fascination it was impossi¬ ble to resist. This lady, having for come days talked to the servant with a fearful reserve and mystery, and having left in his hands a note which she said contained some very important inform¬ ation to be given to his master as soon as he was in a state to read it, grew at length so impatient as to commit to him the dreadful secret, that if Le Fo¬ rester could not be removed from his
75 present abode, he was in hourly danger of assassination She implored him therefore to use instantly all means of effectuating his removal even in his present alarming health Le Forester was in a state ot calm insensibility The blow upon his head had caused at least a temporary impotence to his mental faculties but his bodily strength had within the last twenty four hours a little recovered The faithful man, therefore, convinced of the kind and honourable intentions of the lady, who had so anxiously advised him, procured his master to be put into a postchaise, and by slow and careful journies conveyed him safely to London в 2
76 In London he had the best medical assistance : but he still continued very weak , his spirits were low", ahd from the imbecility both of his mind and bodj, he seemed to have little know¬ ledge or caie of what had been pass- mg
CHAPTER IX
Had Le Foiestei been restored to any longinteival of sense dui ing this diead¬ ful slate, it would have been impossible for a man of his warm and romantic feelings to have rested without know¬ ing the fate of miss Mason, whom he had so nobly endeavoured to rescue from the waves He would have been delighted to hai e kno« n tint lus noble endeavour succeeded, and that afta having been cuned home insensible to bed, she ıecovered in a few houis, and did not afterwaids suffer any mateııal пушу E 3
78 Emily Mason, on the other hand, safe herself, was of too generous a dis¬ position not to have acknowledged her gratitude to her preserver, and to have shewn him every attention in his illness that female delicacy would ndmit, hid not some imperious necessiti prevented it Whether she had been earned away with Lady Carlingford, or whatever was the canse, it was a matter of observation and surprize among the talkative im¬ pertinents of the place, that she no longer was to be seen m public In consequence of the conversation, which the accident had given rise to, she had for some time become an ob¬ ject of curiosity But her history and connexions were not known here, and
79 nobody could trace her farther than to the introduction of Lady Carlingfoid. An elderly lady attended her as a com¬ panion, and her establishment and ex- pences were moderate and unostenta¬ tious. Her marniera were polished, though timid, and from education she seemed to have had every advantage. But her name was so common and ob¬ scure that from thence her origin could not be guessed at, and both Lady Car- lingford and herself exercised so inflexi¬ ble a reserve regarding her alliances, that nothing but the most ill-founded conjecture or ridiculous fiction had yet ventured to determine who she was. It would be endless to repeat the va¬ rious commentaries, that the accident p. 4
in which ehe was involved with Le Forester gave birth, to ; 01 even thosç in w|ifch perverse malignity implicated her in the guilt of the scheme top justly ;■ ud by tlipin lo have been formed upon his (ife. But whatever were the motives foi this daring attack; whether, as some reported, the jealousy of Lord Carling¬ ford, ov whether it arose from a more ancient and deeper source of crimes, Binily Mason at least was guiltless of them. She heard not, she suspected not, the cruel calumnies which were thus buiy to wound her innocent and yet unspotted reputation. Wherever she was, she surely was feeding her heart with sentiments of grateful ten-
81 derness for Le Forester, if she knew he was living; and if she believed him dead, she undoubtedly was embalming his memory in her tears. Perhaps ehe was wandering, under the care of a lynx-eyed gouvernante, on the fearful cliffs that overhang the ocean, listening to the melancholy beating of the waves beneath. Perhaps she was immured by some barbarous uncle, or relentless guardian, or re¬ moved to some distant and solitary abode ; or from suspicion of her endea¬ vour to defeat the diabolical plans of murder meditated against Le Forester, perhaps she was borne away by a law¬ less tyrant to end her unhappy days in s 5
ai some dreary fastness in the savage re¬ cesses ol Ireland. Oh, Le Forester ! Couldst thou now but be thyself again ; could thy tender and enthusiastic spirit but know the wrongs that Emily Mason, who ran such hazards of her life to save thee, may now be suffering on thy account, what would be thy emotions ! vvhat wouldst thou not venture ! what exertions wouldst thou not make to rescue her ! How trifling in comparison would all thy favourite and habitual schemes of ambition appear ! Riches and honours would fade before thee ! Thy uncle's usurpations, thy law-suits, and thy claims, would sink before softer and more interesting objects of pursuit.
83 But thon Iieedcst not what is past I The images of memory are darkened m thy disordered brain, fancy has no power over thy convulsed intellect, and thy heart is dreary and barren ·
в 6
CHAPTER Χ.
The air of London was soon deemed by die physicians too close and relaxing for Le Forester, and he was moved to a retired lodge on some of the southern downs of the kingdom, where he might enjoy the fiee breezes, and the freshness of a keener atmosphere might brace his shattered frame. As the carriage whirled him through the dusty suburbs of London, from Kensington lo Hammersmith, and from Hammersmith to Bientford, the variety
ее of moving ppbjeots, the earrfages, tho passengers, seemed somewhat to rouse his attention, and a little tO revive him ftom the stupor which had long op¬ pressed him. As he proceeded, the rio- tion and change iot air still continued to have.a rapid effect upon him ;' and he grew visibly better ; till towards the close of his journey he sunk agam with fatigue into a State of helpless debility* in which) he was carried to the bed of his new abode, i'' j The little lodge or oottagei which had been fixed on'for this purpose, and which'had long been fitted up· for'the accommodation of invalids, stood on the edge of an high common br dovi>n, which, oveHoöking a healthy tract' of
8СЗ sheep-walks of the breadth of some miles, commanded a noble view of the sea in the Channel. In this situation a few days of rest again brought back the symptoms of Le Forester's reviviscence. He began to be capable of walking With the aid of his servant's arm ; and to ask a few questions, and make a few feeble and incoherent observations. But he com¬ plained frequently of most excruciat¬ ing pangs in his head ; and sometimes when he commenced a conversation, which the weak glimmerings of his in¬ tellect appeared incapable of support¬ ing, he burst into tears at the conscious failure of his memory. He seemed to have no distinct idea of the accident
87 which had befallen him. He had in¬ deed a Very confused remembrance of miss Mason, and Of some imminent dan¬ ger from which he had preserved her ; but the subject always agitated him; and he sighed and sunk fora short time into a profound melancholy, whenever it occurred. There was yet a wound in his head, which ät first had materially shaken thr; brain. And there câh be little doubt that thfe mutderous ruffian into whose arms he delivered miss Mason when he rescued her from the Waves, had strack him back again with ah oať, as' mon as he saw him raising himself into the boat. Luckily for him a generous sailor from another vessel had by that time caught
88 the alarm, and leaped; Ul toi вдув hım. That lie, was not biought home to his own lodgings» but tp a more humble apartment in an obscure pait of the town, was probably owing to the in¬ triguée of some of the enUBsanCč of the ruffians who had assailed birm ι ι ! ι . But of all this Le Foresteı was un¬ conscious H/s wound now began ra¬ pidly tp heal, апЦ every daj¡ added some firmness, not only to his body¿ but his mmd Ţo the proel ( rppoits, by which his character was attacked, lhe motives of justifiable rcvcuge to which the barbarous attempt npon his life was attributed, he was happily a stranger. Otherwise how much would they have aggravated Ins sufferings, and retarded lusiecoveiy
89 It w ıs llow September A serene light invested the skies In the patches of cultivated land which appeared on tlie· sku ts of the downs the golden co lours of haivcst added to the variety and richness of the scenery The coun- ti j v. as open, but in the crossing vallies or hall way down the slopes, where was scattered a little village or lone farm¬ house protected by the umbrage of trees, the leaves already began to dis¬ play something of the yellow tinge of autumn In the clear still air every so¬ htaiy rural sound was distinctly heard. To Le Forester these charm's of na¬ ture were not unavailing He might have exclaimed with Gray m his sub¬ lime fragment " On Vicissitude,"
SO " See tbe wretch that long has tost, On the thorn/ bed of pa o, At length repair lus vigour tost, And breathe and Wiik again The meanest floweret of the vale, The simplest note Ibit swells the gate, The common sun the air, the skies, To him are opening Faiadhe Every day added to Le Forester's power to bear exercise, and to the length of his walks and rides He yet had refrained from makmg any inqui nes about his accident with a scrupulo¬ sity which his sen ant attributed to a doubt of his own strength Those hours which were not spent in wan denng about the downs, he soothed his mind by filling up with reading, and in this he could be gratified by the
9» books winch his servant procured from [he circulating library of a neighbour¬ ing watei mg-placc A calm came over his spirits and his heart, he forgot his worldly litigations, he injured the thorny paths of vulgar ambition, " The pale descending year, yet pleabing etili, A gentler mood inspires · -------- He comes, he comes 1 in every bréese the power Of philosophic melnncholy comes ! Hu near approach the ludden-startmg tear, The glowing cheek, the mild dejected air, The soften d feature, and the beating heart Pierc d deep with rmny a virtuous ping declare Oer ill the «nil his sacred influence breathes! Inflames imagination, through the breast Infuses every tenderness, and far Beyond dim earth exalts the swelling thought! Ten thousand thousand fleet ideas, such
9¿ Ля n*ver mingled with the \ulgir drc«m, Crowd fast into the m nd s creitive eye As fast tht correspondent fassions rise Asvined and is high Devotion rnis d To rapture and 1 vii e aslon shmriit The love of nature unconhn d a id chief Of human racej the lir^e ambitious wish To make them blest the sigh for suffering worth Lost in obscurity, the noble scorn Of tjrant pride, the fearless great resohej The wonder, which the dying patriot draws, Inspiring glory through remotest time, Th awaken d throb for virtue and forfarne, The sympathies of love, and friendship dear, With all the social offspring of the heart * Ιλ Forester began to thmk tbese tlie happiest hours of his life Thet e was an mnocen e, a quiet, ind afiudom fiom all angry passions, whith gave him cnjo)ment unmixed with thorns
93 He some' i"Ca icsolved to fix m Such a spot for the remainder of his life, and to have nothing more to do with the tuimoils of the world But, if he looked back with contempt on the crimes and the follies of the world, still his heart, melting with tenderness, whispered to lnm, that no retirement could long be his choice, which ex¬ cluded the consolations of friendship and love " Paltry honours and riches,' he cried, " which aie enjoyed and even acquired, by the basest and lowest of mankind ' Can a coronet put out the stains of murder î Can blazoned sup¬ porters, can gorgeous equipages, and tawdry livenes exalt the mean, polish б
94 the vulgar, and illumine the minds of the stupid ì Can an untitled name and slender income shut out respect, and the power of being useiul, from the virtuous and intelligent f Can a com¬ moner of illustrious descent and ac¬ complished intellect derive much ad¬ ditional importance from enjoying a bauble of distinction, in common with many who are the scorn of the haughty, the laughing-stock of the wise, and the abhorrence of the good ? Let my usurping uncle then continue to enjoj these outward trappings t Let him still try, if they can appease the vultuies that must prey upon his heart ! Away with such toys 1 I will never vex my temper, or lose my time in pursuits of them ! Be mme the pleasures of the
a* mind ! Be mine " such dreams, as " youthful poets dream!" From the mood, in which these re¬ flections lefi him, he seemed to be in an unusually placid temper, which made his servant hope that he was per¬ fectly recovered. He ventured there¬ fore to give him a parcel of letters, which had been accumulating from the time of his accident. Among these was one in a fair hand unknown to him, which he opened with some curiosity. It was in these words. " If the dreadful injury which has " befallen you will permit you to read " this, for Heaven's sake attend to it. " I write in difficulty and danger ; but
об " the gratitude I owe to the preserver " of my life is paramount to all other " considerations. Take warning ; I " unfortunately know too WeU, what «Ijiossiblý' may die fot telling, that " yotír lifd is still plotted against—Fly, " remove instantly from your present " lodgings, or the consequenties will " surely be fatal—If you regard not " yourself, at least regard me. " E. M." Unfortunately this letter touched upon too delicate a chord. He glow¬ ed ; he grew agonized ; he burst into tears ; and a mixture of love and in¬ dignation ran contending through every vein. He rang the hell ; and on his servant's approach, complained of a
97 tremor and faintness. A glass of wine and water was brought him ; which he had no sooner taken than he complain¬ ed of a giddiness, and putting his hand to his head as if the old pain had re¬ turned, his whole frame appeared con¬ vulsed ; and he once more sunk into insensibility. But the insensibility did not long continue. ' A few hours recovered him, and he had the fortitude to bear with calmness the relation which he extorted flom his sefvarit, of cveiy particular known by him of the cruel attack that had been made upon his life. A thousand feelings and sentiments, wluch the self-command he had now vol. i. r»
98 attained over ' himself enabled him to moderate, passed in succession through his mind. But anxiety for Emily Ma¬ son, and a growing tenderness and ad¬ miration for her, predominated over all the rest- Conscious as he was, that he had never shewn any attentions to Lady Carlingford, much less indulged any prefeieoce for her, which could with the smallest regard »to truth be so ex¬ aggerated as to rouse the jealousy of her husband, he did not hesitate to attribute the outrage to that source of wickedness and usurpation, from whence he and his father had so long undergone the most unparalleled in¬ justice and sufferings.
99 Resentment, not dictated by mali¬ cious revenge, but originating from manly indignation, thus early put an end to those schemes of quieti which he had planned, and urged him to think of renewing those worldly pursuits, which he had so lately resolved to abandon. " Relentless and blood- " thirsty old man," he thought, " thou " wilt yct force me to hurl thee-from " that seat of worldly grandeur, of " whioh tltou art *o wrongfully pos- " scsscd 1 Thy hoary hairs must not " yet descend in peace to the grave ! " Thou shalt know, how Utile, when " thy power is gone, thy ill qualities " can protect thee from the grin of po- " pular scorn I And infamy, such as " even thou canst feel, must yet be thy « lot!" ï 2
100 The calm which Le Forester had enjoyed in his retirement was, alas I fled. His employments were irregular, his walks and rides were unequal, his pace was desultory and uncertain, and his nights were broken and feverish. Uneasy in himself, he could no longer trust to his own resources for amuse¬ ment. His lonely excursions upon the downs ceased to please him : and he sought relief in the more busy scenery of the adjoining watering-place, or the neighbouring towns.
CHAPTER XI.
A mind ill at ease, if it sometimes flies to solitude, not unfrequently also plunges into company. Le Forester embraced the temporary alleviations^ with which 'f the table and the bottle; " flatter and seduce." He met an old. college-friend in one of his morning excursions, who soon introduced him to a large party of new acquaintances. His name, the character which his fiiend gave him, his peison, and a cer¬ tain wild, hurried, and often eloquent manner, which partly flowed from the f 3
toa agitated and feverish state of his mind, gained lum an immediate interest, par¬ ticularly among the women, which made his company very acceptable. He left his retired abode, and took lodgings at the public place. The scenery of the ocean, the dashing of the waves, ami: the freshness of the free winds that had travelled over so wide« am expanse of waters, seemed to soothe and cool his burning frame, as often as he still found it necessary to breath» from the restless hurry of society. In this society he found a mixture of pleasure and regret. Disease and in¬ juries had rendered his. temper irrita¬ ble ; and if he often pleased, he often
103 also offended. If the natural disposi¬ tion of his mind induced him to view people through th« magnifying glass of fancy, or the distorted colours of pas¬ sion, his understanding, continually exercised, gave him an acuteness and nicety of discrimination, which were seldom laid asleep. To those, who knew not his story, who knew not the place in society which he ought to have held, who knew not the abilities of which genius is always conscious to it¬ self, he too frequently appearedhaughty and overbearing. Nothing seemed to disarm and put him off his guard so much as the sneers of dull men, of mere practical beings, who scarce rise a degree above s A
104 the brute, and have the temerity to de-, spise what they cannot comprehend ; who think all sentiment folly, and all imagination childish. These fellows, whose " blockish understandings it was in vain to attempt to cut with a razor *," he felt that his weapons were unfit to contend with ; and he yielded the victory to their stupidity. Perhaps the most predominant qua¬ lity of his mind was tenderness, which made him peculiarly awake to the charms of female beauty. And al¬ though this passion had never yet be¬ come exclusively appropriated, still tne memory of Emily Mason and the gra-
105 t¡ti*te he felt towards her, had lately obtained a general and indistinct power over him, which, notwithstanding he scarcely acknowledged it to himself, induced him m every new company to look ut for her, and hope to hear of her It might have been observed by those who knew them both, that the guls to whom he paid the most atteib tion, were those who in person oi man¬ ner bore the greatest resemblanre toi Emily Mison l IK With some his intrinsic powers ofl pleising, with some the reputation he, liad o,t a poetical turn, which they hopedj would be exeited m celebrating them-| selves, and with some the idea of thei eaildom» to which he was said to be в 5 v
10ft entitled; ebcceeded in making! him a< favourite. Hb Wis flattered, and the gloom of his mind wa» occasionally re¬ lieved, as hisi days passed away in this mixed, and often interesting, society. But still a preponderating weight lay at his heart; the claims which a just ambition, and a just indignation at the usurper's conduct were continually urging him to pursue ; and which had hitherto been defeated by such iniqui¬ tous manœuvres ; the occasional taunts and affronts which his want of success brought upon him.; and aboveallthe Cruel violence to which his life had. been, and was likely again to- be, ex¬ posed, never permitted hira long to enjoy the gay pleasures appropriate to his age i that careless freedom of heait which renders youllnso delightful. 1
w It was probably about this-time that he wrote an epistle to a friend, which has fallen into my hands, and which I shall here transcribe, as it gives a better picture of his mind than I could other¬ wise furnish. The reader must make due allowances for the unfinished state in which it appears, written as it was with no intention of meeting the pub« he eye.
Epistle to Henry ****** Esq. Γη this still vale, where o'ermy deep repose, Tlie murmuring wind it« drowsy musio blows; Where thro' the day my half-olos-'d eyelids Tie w Forms flit before, them of enchanted hue, Which yet unheeded on my lazy mmd Fata like- a cloud, and leave no tract befarna* j rö
108 At Friendship's call I still my voice must raise, Seize the neglected pen, and tune my lays 1 But where's the fire, that bade my boyish breast, Till Fame's high hill was mounted, never rest? Feebly it burns, though age's vapoury cloud Has not begun its dying fires to shroud,- Nor yct the toH'ring pace, the hoary hair, The whher'd current of my blood declare. Over its mounting heat Disgust has shed Cold drops of poison, and the blaze is fled ; And Disappointment tonch'd it, and it shrunk ; And Gnef's pate clouds o'ershadow'd,and it sunk. By foes so numerous press'd, sh when again Will its gay spirit prompt th' impassion'd strain' Ferchance О never: but the aweful close Of Hfe will bring me to the grave's repose; And still this trembling hejrt.and close these eyes, From w hence too oft the flash of anger flies, Ere Hope once more the cheerful hours illume; Or Fancy once again dispell the gloom I But e'en amid these chilling damps I crave One sprig of laurel for my early grave I
log Still I aepire not quite· unknown- to die»' While friendship's aid shall partial tear* supply ! These idle lays, then, which the vacant hour Can by a feeble half-form'd effort pour, Wilt thou receive, my Henry, nor require, Where Grief incombent sits, the Muse'a fire* But hark î the lolling mnrrnur of the blast, That sooth'd my t fancy's languid dreams, is past' Loud was that shriek, that came across the grove I See how the forest's trembling honore move l liiste, let me serk old ocean's foamy shore, And Usten to ihc big waves gathering roar ! О how 1 ¡lovt, tlie fighting billow's roll 1 Ho« the loud tumult suits my troubled ¡oui Ι ι I seem once niore -my wonted -fire to gain. And without efiurt comes th impassion'd strain, On the talt cliffs tremendous verge J líe, And watch the clashing waves that threat ţheskyj While frum afar I trapç lhe swelling surge Near and more ne t ir the liquid mountain orge, Till forLd agunst th' opposing land, that quakes E'en to its very inmost ame, it bn;pks.
гга And witb dtoand'that scemi to shake the worlcf. Thro 1 air,, earth, sea> the watVy там ii hurľd. Thcee are tl» mighty 8севеа,ту epirît ïoVes ť I hate Ihe peaceful gleni, the murmuring grove*. The stock-dove's plaintive note, the nightingale, That to the happy lover tells her tale, Suit nöt the chaos of n stormy breast, Whom injuries have-wrong'd, and wo-i opprest f Ask you, my Henry, when delights Hke these My wounded soul no longer finds to please» Wb'atsoothesmencxt? To seethro'blackest night The pealing thunder dart it» fiery light j Or in seme roching tower the tempest brav«, And hear the-land storm thro' the forest rave, While tlie wan moon, that dirkness long en» shrouds, Breaking by fits from otit the driving clowds» Displays the tossing waters of the lake Thai lash its shores, and all its bound'ries shake. Then as at length the rising waves o'erkap The yielding banks, and pow down every· eteejv
Mir I hear the roaring tumult, and behold Thro' woods and plains the foaming torrent rolľdj And as each ray the spreading wreck revea/i, A gloomy joy my grief-torn bosom feels * I And dost thou blame me, Henry ? Let not Ease Taunt him, whom Sorrowe and Misfortunes suizel О ) e, who down the stream of pleaiure ride, Wafted with silken sails along the tide; Whom no winds agitate, no dangers try, judge not, ye vain, the child of Moery 1 Him wilder joys for nobler efforts form, In perib moat to shine, and glory in the stormt
U2
CHAPTER ХП.
It will not be expected that I bhould give iny opinion of the preceding epis¬ tle It was written with that facility of composition of which the impatient quihlics of Le Foi ester's mind rendei cd hun alone capable, ind which, though it subjected lnm to many faults, ex¬ empli d hım from others, perhaps not liss disgusting fhe faults I mean are cumbersome ind ıınnatuıal orni¬ mi nts, and 1 deficiency of that eise, perspicuity, and vıgoı, in which the tliought prcdomnntcs oier the Ian-
на guage.i These, however fashionable fhey may have lately been, are surely the gieatest defects into ivhich.thc Шеь; ratuie of an age can fall. ,1)11 > 1 Yct we all remember within these ten or twelve years, so corrupt a taste- io-pofctiryyithat whoever presumed to: laugh ab the false fglitter, and<absurd< and .unmeaning pomposity of 'the· Delia-Crusca school, was despised for his 'want of sensibility and fancy, or censured fbr the envy by whirjh ' his : opinioni were'supposed 'to'be influx enced. This rage for the most tawdry, roost harsh, most empty nonsense that ever disgraced a natibftVKvas at length extinguished by those excellent satires, The Baviad and Mtoviad. These sa-
1141 tire« operated like a charm ; the nation at once recovered their senses, and w en¬ dered at what they had admired. True genius seeks but a vehicle for the utterance of her sentiments and images; she can too seldom wait to adjust tbe minute parts of their dress« she trusts to their intrinsic powers to strike. Ue real female beauty, she shines roest in the simplest apparel. It » poverty) of mind, like a eonscions/dtc fiťaency öf ebífnns m women* that re- quiïeamosb the aid of artificial orsa· menta) Nothings jn«* wonderful than the, flowra of fashion to reconcile us to> Anigs^wltich^whetx it ceases,, w« cou-
11Æ template m all their native ugliness: How often do the habits and manners. of past times, which we see exhibited, in paintings or m books, and which, obtained the admiration of cotempora- rics, excite our laughter or our disgust! Thus the pedantic jargon which in» fected the poetry of James the First's· reign, and the harsh and rugged metra m the verses of Dr Donne and his- folf lowers, which it is impossible, so ta peo·. nounce as to appear like harmony to a> modern ear, were considered at tha* time as the most enviable efforts of ge¬ nius, which rendered the woiks of their predecessora tame and insipid 1 But Donne and his mutatóra have long been» consigned to oblivion -a fate which they deseived, (i for they wrote,' as
иб Johnson says " with narrow views, and " instead of tracing intellectual plea- " sure to ils natural sources in the " mind of man, they paid their court " to 'temporary prejudices * ;" " not " sufficiently inquiring by what means " the ancients have continued to de- " light through all the changes of hu- " man marniera, they contented· them- " selves with a deciduous laurel, of " which the verdure in its spring was " bright and gay, but which time has " beeh continually stealing 'from their " brows-)-." How will many of our modern poe¬ tasters, the little meteors of a day, save themselves from the effect of these
117 truths ί Must they not submit to the fate of Donne ŕ Or rather having none of his excellences to counterbalance their defects, his comprehension, his depth of learning, his originality of al¬ lusion, have they not already become the mark of contempt, and are they not rapidly descending into the gulf of oblivion î Gorgeous and overloaded epithets, confused metaphors, far-fetched and obscuie imagery, .-nd perpetual per¬ sonifications, with an inveision of lan¬ guage as difficult to be understood as an enigma, and which even defies all grammar ! if these could once be mis¬ taken for poetry ; if fashion could sanc¬ tion them for a day, a better taste has
118 »urely Succeeded. But can we avoid Wondering that discord could ever have Ъееп mistaken for melody î That faults should bc considered as beauties, and systematically sought foi ì And that the çromirtciation required by the sense should be at constant variance with that which the metre demands * ?
П9 It гаду ppriiaps be aşfced whether, es fashion is always tending to extremes, we are not now -as much verging to¬ wards too insipid and careless aaim- pliçityj as wc .lately were,too fond of cumbrous and tinsel ornaments. " Then? is indeed," ¡as is well observed, " a great distinction between'sintpli- " city and meanness. The charms of " a fine thought, like those of a beau- ", tiful person, are most touching when " they are least ornamented : but this
120 « nakeáness'Of a homely figure îé dis " gustirig * " To dcgcnéi ate mte the coarse and prosaic plainness of the an Cient ballad, tlie eňtectälnmdní öf ι ¡rude end uncultivated áge, ind in ihany cases to exercise no refine ment in the selection of см cumstance 1 ! or ıh the elegance or harmony of hn guage, is perhips, little ltiss absurd thin the corruption of a gaud} and oiei labouied pompOsity The cfclmer cf forts of the lessinspiredrtWiso, tlie illus trations of moral ixioras, the pricepis of didactic poetry, at least cqune to bc enlivened and dignified by lhe arts of judicious composi mn Taste aloni
m and the study of the ancient modeli, more especially Vngi!, can teach us the limits between an elegant simplicity and а tawdiy splendor ι But m the higher effusions of the Bald, where the visions of his fancy, or the swelling sentiments of his soul, bear 1 m aw ay, he cannot stop foi the nice- tie? of language, the ideas are more tlian sufficient to support themselves, wttnout the aiti of studied diess, which «oultl only oppress them Such is Bui ns s sublime song of " Bannock- buin, which lhe British critics, in α noble stile of mticism, thus chuac- teii7c " Those who considei the aiti- " ficcs of style as the puucipal merit " of poetry, will piobably wonder at VOL T G
122 " the high place whicli we have as " signed to this little song Still less " can we expect the concurrence of " those paradoxical critics, who trins " mute faults into ments, who deem " obscurity a great poetical excellence, " and even an indispensable quality of " the higher ode We have no hope " of, and indeed we have scarce a wish " for, the concurrence of such readers " or judges of poetry But those who " regard the powei of inspiring pas " sion as the noblest excellence of an " ode, who know thit passion has no " leisure for elegance that it is hai diy *' reconcileable with that refinement " of thought or profusion of imagery " which are the principal causes of « obscurity, that impassioned lan- 7
113 " guage ıs Simple, negligent, »brirpť, " vehement, full of repetition» con- " fined to its object, and though often " disorderly, yet more than clear, be " cause peculiarly significant, those " who have formed such a taste, and " adopted such a standard of excel- " lence m lyric poetry, will perhaps " not blame us for saying, that we " think this ode scarcely inferior in " spirit and energy to any English ode " that has appeared since Alexander's " Feast * " While Such a spint of criticism continues, Genius, cherished and emboldened, will burst forth from the shades of obscurity, and the nu¬ merous tribe of disgusting amateurs
о 1
121 and pretenders bc properly mortified, and repressed. Whether Le Forester belonged to the number of these pretenders, the paitiahtyofthe writer of these memoirs renders him incapable of forming an unbiassed judgment Let him not be judged by a single effusion, written perhaps with ι blameable degree of haste, and let the author of these pages be excused for here taking the oppor¬ tunity of a digressive chapter to deliver some cursory obsei valions on modem poetrj', which were pressing on his mmd.
125 CHAPTLR ХШ
Not twenty miles from the public place where Lc Forester was spending his time, at the old manor house of Wdlington, hied Mr Dudle}, a coun- try gentleman of a very mcient branch of a once-illustrious fimily, but of a slender estate, which with cire ind old- fishioned manners had supported ihem foi numerous generations on their pie¬ sent spot Mi Dudley and his wife were de¬ clining into jcais without children to succeed them But his brothei, the rec- G ч
Vì6 lor of a neighbouring parish, had a son and several daughters. This brother was the person, at whose house Hun· tıııgÜLİd (the friend who had intro¬ duced Le Foiester into the company with which he was now associating) had been educated by private tuition. Huntingfield, however, had spent mor* pf his time wiih the squire than the tntor, and had thus become a favourite with the elder brother, in whose sporti of the field he had always taken the lead, and to whose rural humours he was particularly adapted. This young man, proposing to pay a visit of a few days to his old friend at Willington, pressed Le Forester to be of the party. He assured hira that he
117 would be plciscd with the cheerful¬ ness, the philanthrop), and the ori¬ ginal charactei of Mr Dudkj , with the placid civility ol his wife, with a stile of manners now almost cxtincl, and above all, with the romantic beau ties which the situation of the old minsion exhibited " Perhaps too,' he added, " you may find there some " of my old play fdlows, the neices, " who are very pretty girls, and will " be very ready to flirt with ) ou." Le Forester, uneasy, and hoping re¬ lief in every change, was glad to accept the invitation The next day then they rode to Willington together, and were received with tlie hearty welcome of ancient hospitality e 4
Ι2Θ One of the brightest OUober morn mgs had conducted them on then ndc, across the downs, into the more varied stcneiy of the woodlmd country .---------- 1 the day, Oer heaven and earth difluid, grow» warm, end high, Ir ünite splendor! wide investing all 1 How still the breeľe' sa\e what the filmy threads Of dew evaporate brushes from tbe plain How clear the cloudless iky I how deeply ting d Wab a peculiar blue t the ethenal arch How swell d immense ! amid whose azure thron d The radiant sun bow gay I haw calm below The gilded earth I the harvest treasures all Now gather d m * Le Forester s heart and fancy were already inspired with tins scuicr} It
m was yet not more than noon when they entered the mansion of vVilhngton: and there were some hours to elapse before the time of dinner The win¬ dows of the room into which they were introduced commanded something like a bird ь eye view of the immense wood¬ land country, whicli after continuing to slope for miles beneath them, rose agam as gradually to the horizon The ex¬ treme clearness of the light, " Ilie sober calm Thit fleece] unbounded ether, exhibited this enchanting prospect in the most advantageous manner before Le Forester He intrcated to walk out, and Mr Dudley reading his de¬ light in his countenance carried him a 5
130 'with exultation upon the hanging ter¬ races of the old-fashioned garden, whence he could command still more uninterruptedly the prospect he ad¬ mired. " Now," said Huntingfield to Mr. Dudley, " leave him to himself, and " we will go and visit the stables ;—he " can always entertain himself; if we " leave him for hours, we shall still *' find him on our return wrapped up " in his own thoughts on one of those " benches !"—" But will it be civil î" tried Mr. Dudley. "Oh civil, yes, Sir ; *■ it would be uncivil not to leave hiin; " he will enjoy it so much."—" Well *', then, so be it ; every man his hu- " mour, say I, my dear little Hun-
131 " tingfield! I never would disturb a ," man in his,hobby-horse, if it be but " innocent; though Heaven defend " me from such сгагу amusements, " say I, my boy ! But he in a poet, you " say ; perhaps then he will tip us a " verse or two of a good hunting song, " whilst he is here, which will make " us live over again the sports of the " morning in our parlour after din- " ner, and call all our lítele merry tat· " tiers to join in the chorus again !"— " I dare say he will," said Hunting- field, indulging the whim of thecheer 7 fui old man ; " but now let us go, and " see how you are mounted." , They went into the stables, and thence-into the kennel, and filled up G 6
'132 two hours in a manner which, how¬ ever agreeable to them, would not have been quite so pleasant to Le Forester. Le Forester found the garden such as it had been formed by Mr. Dudley's ancestors probably two centuries ago ; in many reipects such as is delineated by Lord Bacon in his Essay on Gar¬ dening ; and more particularly answer¬ ing the description of a garden after¬ wards given by Sir William Temple. Aseries of terraces and bowling-greens, connected by flights of stone-steps, de¬ scended the ste'ep slope, at the bottom of which the ground ceased for some distance to fall with the same rapidity, and some meadows almost flat spread themselves out wilh a rich verdure.
133 On each side of the terraces were plan» tations and wildernesses of wood ¡' and walks and avenues of ancient growth, where the thick-matted turf sent up the most delightful fragrance at every step that pressed it, were cut in various directions. At the lowest extremity of the giounds was a piece of water hke a little lake; and on its banks a grotesque fishing-house, which in the heat of summer appeared to ofièr many attractions. In many situations the formality of sueh grounds would have been dis¬ agreeable. Hcie, in coincidence with the styie of the mansion and the man¬ ners of the family, and with the pecu¬ liarity of the magnificent and varied
134 views which this garden thus com¬ manded beneath it, while from each side· the dull uniformity of the ground, and the narrow limits of the owner's property, required exclusion, here the effect of this obsolete taste was en¬ chanting. Le Forester, aheady in a mood to be the sport of imagination, yielded him¬ self up to all the luxurious indulgence cf uncontrouled musings. He seemed as in a dream. A thousand brilliant visions passed through his mind, un- Bought, unarrested, unexamined, undis¬ turbed. He forgot the weight of care; and the trammels of mortality. He soared above all the low incumbrances of the world, and felt himself all spirit.
'ias He walked along thé taraces? be traversed the umbrageous avenues-, but most he lingered ini the thickest and rccluscst wood-walks. The domestic tranquillity of the place brought images of tenderness before his heart.' The form of Emily Mason, whieh having for some time gained a fresh power over him from a, mixed consideration of gratitude and jpity had been imper¬ ceptibly acquiring a piedominance over his mind, now casyBiWith irresistible force before his fancy.!- He Saw her with those ej'es of girlish but eloquent simplicity casting glances af him more fascinating than the roost energetic words, ι Again he'felt heu grasp, he heard her shriek, as on that dreadful night when they were both plunged
136 from the harbour into the sea : again he imagined her within his trembling arms, as he bore her lifeless to the boat. Nor did the sufferings and mysterious dangers which followed, iccur without mingled sensations of curiosity, fond¬ ness, and horror. From these reveries he was inter- -rupted by the re appearance of Mr. Dudley and Huntingfield, who came to summon him to dinner. He was ushered into the sombre drawing-room of dark oak-wainscot, adorned, with a variety of portraits of different ages and different merit, where he was intro¬ duced to Mrs. Dudley, a plain but not dnelegant woman, of gentle manners ; and to another lady younger, and more
finely dressed, but of coarser appearance, and so exceedingly deaf, that though Lc Forester's name was distinctly pro¬ nounced to her, she mistook it, and called him upon every occasion Mr. Torrington. Le Forester, shy, and his mind not yet thoroughly recovered from the scenes of fairy-land in which he had so lately been expatiating, was sitting silent and awkward, not without some endeavour» to join in iho conversation which the politeness and volubility of Mi.Dudley had begun, when in came a rosy-look¬ ing, smiling girl, who was immediately announced to be miss Dudley the neice, followed by two others, more timid .md reseivcd, the second of whom Le
13Ь Forester, ou looking up, ш to be- no other than Emily Mason herself! They caught each othei's eye at the same instant—Emily turned very pale, and huiried to the window; where she set herself down and pretended to look out to hide her confusion. Le Forester not less agitated, and from the sudden surprize utterly incapable of addiessing he?, would inevitably have betrayed his extraordinary feelings, had he not been relieved by the seasonable intervention of the servant to announce dinner. The movements caused by this summons very luckily gave them both time to recollect themselves. They weie not placed by each other ah the dinner table ; for the officious
tag good nature of Mr Dudley took parti¬ cular care to scat Le Forester next his eldest neice, whom he thought all peK teclion both m person and manners This, Lq Forester in the confused and embarrassed state of hts feelings at thfc IWtlnentl scarcely- regretted. Jie sa* niiBsMivwnsBxtererjpdrtuAatìabj he saw that, fitim whatever ctijlej she whs unwilling openly to ìecognizc bis ac quaintance, and the f ecotfebtiori bf the mysterious circHrflsfstncE*wti)«h Яйей*. ed their dreadful accident, and or the notewHch she afterwards wrote tö huti, m which her personal safety seemed m some way to be involved m his con¬ duct, induced him to pinsè and wart some private oppoitumty for a refer¬ ence to their foi mer meetings
140 The incessant talking of miss Dud¬ ley, and the variety of ways by which she was determined to engage Le Fo¬ rester's attention, provoking as they were, left him in common politeness little leisure to watch the looks of Emily Mason ; and they were looks alone that could be watched, for of conversation »he scarcely uttered a word. The company, in none of whom the« waa great acuteness of observation of knowledge of the world, did not .however. perceive or make any com¬ ments on this mutual and striking em¬ barrassment. Mr. Dudley had been prepared by Huntingfield for some ec¬ centricities in the manners and appear¬ ance of Le Forester ; and miss Mason
141 had whispered to Mrs. Barker tho deaf lady, to whose care she now seemed to be committed, in a distinct tone, which was heard by the whole room, that, overcome with the fatigue of the long morning-walk they had had, she felt a head· ach and giddiness, that rendered her scarcely capable of remaining at the tabic. Miss Dudley was too much taken up with her beau, of whom, notwithstand¬ ing his reserve, his coldness, his ab¬ sence of rnind, she was determined to make a conquest, to think of any body but herself. And the attention of her sister, of more delicate looks, and more- sentimental manners, vvas'ehğa'god %y ; her old acquaintance Huntingfield, who'
iii btnvevct' sestìneìd.not entirely suited to hqr, and. whose rattle and levity did not quite coincide with her ideas of love. It was evident tb Le Forester that he vvaâ not known to Mrs. Barker, who continued to call hiin Mr. Torrington, whicli, thpugh it sometimes made the company smile, they saw no reason for taking the trouble to correct. This he considered a fortunate circumstance ; and he was the more confirmed ju it, because; miss Masqn herself had suffered the mistake to continue. ,,Αβι the ladies,left the room, heflat- teredibJ4rself,,that he perceived some- фте .Iţkea.tendeţiglance.from Ernily. Hţş hacji Wt¡(tew»». and began to bïood
14 J uponthiSjwhcnHuntmgfieldbegantøbe clamourous to Mr. Dudley to know who miss Mason was, whom he pronounced to be a very beautiful little girl. " You " would have me tell you more than I " know myself," said Mr. Dudley : " all *' I know is, that she is an orphan; that " she is connected somehow with some " persons of rank, whose fine titles I '' neither know, nor care for ; that she " is committed to the protection of " Mrs. Barker, wlio is a very distant " ι elation of Mrs Dudley; and thiough " this channel a very earnest request " has been made to us to let her pass " three or four months witli us, 'as they " do not approve of public, places, and " like our retired situation, and what
114 " thej aie pleiscd to cill my chcerful- " ness ind fondness for joung people, " the 1 itter of which at leist j ou know, " Hunlingfield, is tiue enough " LeForcstci sit on thoins, his colour went and came, but the cigeincss of his companions pievented their observing it " Sure, Sir," cried Huntu gfiek!, " this is not all jou know ' '—" Indeed " it is all, replied Mr Dudlej, " un " less I add that she is not only a verj " handsome gnl, which you see, but ι " very good girl, but her heilth is de " hcatc, and, perhaps from the loss of " her pirents or some otlici sufficient " cause, she too frequently appcari " melancholy—indeed -ι little too me
145 " lanclioly for me." Huntingfield was satisfied, and turned to another subject, and Le Forester was relieved from an agitation which he feared would every moment have betra) ed hun
\OL ι.
ΙΛΟ
CHAPTER XIV.
Fatigued with the endless stories of hoiscs and hounds, and all the witty sayings of Joe the huntsman, and the chaiming пшыс of " Blucinin, and Dimnmei, and Piper,"—how they " found the hare in farmer Hobbs's tuınıps in Gozely-bottom," and how " she took a pretty turn round Cover¬ tigli, and then making a burst through Wai ley wood, ind up Fox s dale, she crossed Hixlcy heath right an end to Lvcrhj cots, ind so back agam, till they killed her in the little copse at the edge of Watlmg down," with rail the
¡47 faults and stops, and the conduct of every hound, and " how they over- ïan, and how clevcily Joe drew them biek," and a thousand other such te¬ dious impei tincnccs, fatigued I sqy beyond measuie with the endless re¬ petition of such local and unintoiest- ing miauin?, Le Forester, in the ago- ni7ing conflict of the mightiest passions of thL soul, grew impatient almost be¬ jond endurance foi the summons to tea. The summons came, and he entered the drawing room with misty ejes and a beating heat t Miss Mason was sitting between the miss Dudli js at the tea- table, her head lcslmg on one ann, and the smelling-bottle lifted with the И 2
148 other tO her nose She looked up, and bending gently to Mi Dudley, seemed to take the opportunity of throwing α soft smile upon Le rorestcr, and then again applied liei hand lo her foiehead " What is the matter, Emily > ' satd Mr Dudlc), taking her hand with а sweet benevolence " I have only got " an headaeh, bn, she replied, " fiom " the fatigue of α long walk, and shall ' be bettei to moirow —" So I hope " jou w ill, my little deai, ' he ıeplıetl, " ot else this madeap, Huntingfield, " will btcak his heart, for he is half m " loi c w uh) ou already Fanny Dud ley frowned, and bit her lips " And " heie is Mi I e Γοι estet,' he conti¬ nued, "whom I have not jet had an " opportunity of mtiodunng lo you,
ид " though he looks so grave and sci ıous, " he would like to hive a little talk " with you too, I wan ant him—would " j ou not, Sir ?" Miss Dudley now was inclined to fi own, but iffecting a luigh, cried, " Li' uncle, jou are so " droll'" ButEinil) did noi even look up, and Le Foiestei felt so awkward, that he could make no ansvv er. Minute followed minute, and even hour followed hour, during which Le Foiestei, torn with the most cruel sus¬ pense and uneasiness, could find no opening to speak unobseived to Emily. Suppei came, and was finished, and he pal ted for the night m the same state; a restless and feverish night, tormented when he was awake with impatient and H 3
1«0' painflil thoughts, and haunted through his broken slumbers with wild visions of unattainable happiness, which ren¬ dered the dawn of morning peculiarly grateful to him. He rose early, and went out to while away' in the garden the hours which now appeared so tedious, till breakfast. At length the great clock over the gate- vray of the stable-yard struck nine; the morning was as bright, and the air as clear as it had been the preceding day ; the sound' echoed down the slopes, andl through the avenues, where Le Forester Was endeavouring to calm his expecta¬ tions with the rich prospect beneatb him; it was a music that made his heart beat; and he ascended with tre-
151 mulous steps to the room where the* party were assembleai Emily looked languid, but she ap¬ peared much more composed than yesterday ; and in the simplicity of a morning diess, and with a faint tinge of colour, she seemed still more beautiful. The miss Dudleys had contrived to place her between them, that they might secure the young men to them¬ selves ; and the eldest began imme¬ diately to схегс'ше her usual volubility of tongue to Le Forester.' Among the pleasures on which she expatiated was the delight of puhlic placee, from one of whioh she understood Le Forester to have come ; and then she entered into· a· history of- the dull life she led at her· H 4
152 fathei s parsonage , and thence passed to a tedious account of evciy mcmbci ofher familj , and what a fine spirited lad her brothei was, and how veiy anxious he was to go into the aimy, but that unfortunately hei fitl cr had а most violent prejudice against that pro¬ fession " Don t you thmk my fither " is wrong,' added she, " to thwart " his inclination so î lie is a fine " dashing fellow, is not he now ' And " is not that the best piotession ' To " he sure j ou must think so, foi you " belong to it, do you not ? By the " bye, wlnt is that dieadful scar I see " on j our temple î Hai e you betn « wounded ì ' He coloured, and stam¬ mered, and Emily lifted up her eyes, and cast α look of ineffable sonow and
ш tenderness upon hım, which pierced to the very bottom of his heart It was indeed the mirk of lhat dreadful blow he had received, on that awful and mysterious night, when he had saved her life from the waves almost at the expenee of his own, and which was followed by lhat afflictive vacuity and alienation of mmd, the most severe of all misfortunes that can fall upon an. intellectual being ! A thousand woids could not have spoke as eloquently to Le Foiester as th s affecting look He grew calm and satisfied, but he became still more si¬ lent and absent Miss Dudley at last herself found her powers to engage his attention vain She left him, and И 5
154 frirtiöjj; toHuntmgfield, wlíorn she cítw ťe> ä Cerner of the rcJom> " Υοΰΐ friend " there," said she in a whiáper, " is * very odd ; indeed he is very stupid !" ·—" There you are as much out," cried Ke, " my dear Bell, ав ever you was in " your life ; he is not stupid I promise " you !"—" He is in love then, I vow !" continued she. " In love, Bell, in lore ; " that is a serious matter; I cannot " answer, as to that ! But I suppose " you do not mean with yourself; for " there has not been time yet, Bell !" —" Psha, psha, foolish ! No !" said she, With a mixture of jest and suppressed ¡Olgèr; —" but I will go ahd rally him, u and find out; that I willj it will b6 '* good tun, will it not !" And away Hie rah, and again seated herself by Le Forester. ι
ISJ " Fray, Mr. Lo Forester," she began, « is there much dancing at the place « wliere you have lately been passing " your time î" —" I believe there is !" ho replied. " And do not you love « dancing î" —" Not much."—" But " sometimes î" — " Very 8eldom."-r " When you get an agreeable partner, " I suppose ?" Emily gave a side- glance, and coloured. " I do not love " dancing, I assure you," he answered. " Yes, but when jou have an agree- " able partner, I say:"—" Certainly " that would be an attraction."—Emily coloured again. " Would be now— " would be—you understand the art " of evasion, I see," (laughing) "but " come, come, be candid, was it not " so ? Has it not actually been the и 0
15б " case ? Did you not find it so, when " you danced with that pretty miss "-----, oh ι dear I forget hei name, " —at the place you are just come " from ? ' Emily at this moment over¬ threw a whole dish of tea on her gown, which made the three girls start up, and created a confusion, that put an end to Le Forester's persecution, except that Fanny Dudley, looking earnestly in Emily's face, added, " Why, you " are m loie, I thmk, miss Mason, ìn- " stead of Mr Le Foiester 1 ' Mr Dudley now called on Hunting- field and Le Forester to accompany him in his morning amusements He had not yct begun to hunt regularly foi the season, and therefore proposed a ride
15? to survey some of the scones of his fu-f tuie sports. The rich tract of country, which the back front of the mansion overlooked, was of too deep a soil, and too stiong enclosures foi the choice of the hunter Their couue therefore was directed along ihe range of hills on the veigc of the downs, where a light chalk, large open fields, and low and nai row hedgerows were better adapted to the puısuıts of which Mr Dudley was so enthusiastically fond. Here, though there was a poverty of scenery in the immcdiately-suirounding fields, yet the high ridge of lands, on which they were riding, foimed a terrace whence they not only looked over the same glorious view of the woodlands, as they saw from the house and gaidens of Wíl-
15« lington, but in the opposite direction they frequently commanded a noble expanse of sea-views at the distance of from ten to twenty miles. Mr. Dudley, already instructed in the character of Le Forester, suffered 'him to indulge his own thoughts with¬ out interruption. He could still find sufficient subjects of conversation with Huntingfield in the relation of all that had occurred in his favourite sports since they last met. Lc Forester then gave once more a full range to his mind. His horse, used to his master's ways, followed quietly his companions, and 1 he was carried, he cired not how of where, while his day-dreams were undisturbed. -The lender recollection
159 of Emily, which had some bme been blooding into love, had now received an accession of fuel, and was bursting into a flimc Her beiuty had increas¬ ed, hei reseive, the mysteries in her history, ind those ш which they seem¬ ed to be mutually involved, all added to his passion. ' The fading many colour tl woods, Shade deep ning over shade tlio country round Imbrowi, a crowded umbrage dusk and dun. Of everj hue from wan declining green To sooty dark How much did this softened, so¬ lemn, scenery sooth the pensive mood which now possessed him ' The vcxi- tious turmoils of the notid, the caies of litigition, the villainy of business he
1бО longed to flee fiom for ever—his ear, his heart, and his fancy, were only open to the whispers of love. Emily meanwhile grew sick with the nonsense, the folly, the ignorance of the world, tl с vanity and the secret envy of the miss Dudleys (particulaily the eldest), with whose company she was persecuted the whole morning. Their father's limited income and re¬ tired abode had pre\ cntcd their mixing but with a very nan^vv circle of so¬ ciety. And then uncle's good-natured but injudicious praises, and their constant famihaiity with ill-selected novels, whicli operating on the weak¬ ness of one, and the romantic turn of the other, had filled then heads with
1б1 llic falsest colours of life and manners, bad made them very ill-suited compa¬ nions to the sense and accomplishments of Emily Mason. Emily's-feelings and imagination, strong as they were, were chastifed and attempered by a judg-, ment constantly exercised, and little less powerful. With an excess of candor, gentleness, and good-humour, therefore, she could not always quite repress her disgust at them ; espeaially as they were always discussing the character and per¬ son of Le Forester ; and seemed almost to think him their property, and that he would use them very ill, if he was not very much in love with one of them. " Indeed," she would cry, " you ask " me questions it is impossible for me
1б2 " to answer. How can I know whi- " tiler he is going; which he likes " best ; what he thinks ; and whether " he will be at your next ball ! Now " pray do not plague me any more rt about j'our bcauv."—" Olto, miss " Emily !" replied Bell sharply, ". jou " are mighty demure ! But if jou had' " a beau of your own to talk about, I' " suppose we should hear enough of " hiin, miss Squeamish !" Emily, dis¬ gusted at the ill-temper and vulgarity of this speech, and already wearied out with the perplexing tattle with which these gills liad worried her, burst into tears, and running into her own room, locked the door. " Let her go," said Bell ; " I suppose she is angi y she can- ·' not find a lover herself 1"
«531
CHAPTER XV.
Lì Forestes, lost in his musings, was lingering in his own chamber, when tbe parly were already met in the dravving- roum before dinner. Hantingfield had' no sooner entered, than the ladies be¬ gan to question him about Le Forester. " Pray tell us, Huntingfield," said die 1 miss Dudleys, " a little more about " him. He is so vciy odd, that we are " mad to know his history and charac- " ter." —" AU that I can tell you of his " history," replied he, " is very little. " Of his character perhaps' I can say a
]б4 " little more He ıs as eccentric, to be " sure, as you think him, but he is a " man of the purest honour, and the " most brilliant abilities " A fine suf¬ fusion tinged the checks of Emily, un¬ perceived by the miss-Dudlejs; and she would have thanked him, if she had dared. *· I knew him at college," he went on, " where, though his ac- " quaintance weie confinedj and he « Was not generally popular, they who " were intimate with him, admired " and loved him. Ί hough it would " not be easy to find two men more " dissimilar than us tv>o, we soon con- *' ceived a mutual fuendship, which, " as we ne\er mteıfeıe with each " othei's puısuıts, has never suffeied " a moment's interruption. I exer-
i6s « cise no impertinent curiosity about " his affairs and prospects in life, " concerning which I believe there is " something very embarrassed and ,e painful But I have heard that he " has some great claims and lawsuits, " I piotestl forget, if I evei knew, of " what nature, and tint he has a " chance of a vast fortune, and great " powci and rank, of which hcissome- " how or other kept out We used to " thmk it was α great pity his mind " η as so much entangled with his pi 1- " vate affatis, because he was otherwise " likely to make α gieat figure m pub- " he life But, miss Bell, you do not " give lnm fur play, I assure you, " j ou absolutely worry him, he is but " lately recovered from а dreadful ill-
1бб ** 'ness ; that Æoar which youiremaikcil " ün the morning near his temple arose " 'from a blow which had nearly been " fatal to him ; and which produced a " most alarming fever of the brain."— Here Emily finding the tears come into her eyes, and an agitation over hei whole frame so palpable that she feared all the company would see it, ran out of the loom as if she had forgot some¬ thing, when as she was rapidly ascend¬ ing the stairs, she met Lc Forester on the first landing-place. He seized her soft hand as she passed, and gave it a tender pressure, which he flattered 'himself she genlly returned ; and was • about to speak, when slie cried—" For -" God's sake, "Mr. Le Forester, take ■" Gaie ; it—it—will—will be"—(hesi-
1б7 tating, and in a breathless whisper) " fatal to —" The drawing-room door now opened; and she sprung up the stairs, without uttering another word. It was lucky that she did; for miss Dudley was at the door, already insti¬ gated by that demon jealousy. Lc Forester descended, and had no sooner entered the drawing-room than Huntingfield laughingly ciied out— " Herç is a pretty account of .you, Le " Forester ; miss Dudley says you are " so .dull that she cannot get a word " fEomyou!"—"Fj'enow, Hunlinş- ", field," answered miss Dudley, co¬ louring and looking angry; " you " know I never said so !"—" I am but " too conscious of my dujnesş," said
1б8 Lc Foreslcr, a little piqued. The good-nature of Mr. Dudley was now alarmed: " The silly boy is only joking '' with you," cried he, " I assure jou, " Sir : but he has just been gil ing you « the highest character in the world !" Le Foiester bowed, and he and Hun¬ tingŕield gave each other a smile, which shewed that they both perfectly under¬ stood the matter. The riarty were already in the eat¬ ing-room, when Emily rejoined them. And the determination whieh Le Fo¬ rester had made to obtain a seat next to her, was defeated. But miss Dudley being a little checked by what had 'passcel, and less talkative, gave him an opportunity of -commencing amore ge-
IUI) genial comcrsalíon, whieh he was re¬ sulted 10 attempt, with the hope of drawing Emily to join it. This he found less difficulty in ef¬ fecting, fiom the accession to the com¬ pany of two neighbouring gentle¬ men, ofwhom Mr.Fieeland, a young clergyman of considerable ability and information as well as elegance of man¬ ners, was a great aeldition to the plea¬ sure of the society. r. " Have you been walking this moi n- " ing,miss Mason ?" saidHuntingfield. " A veiy short walk," she answered faintly ; " no farther than the garden· " terrace."—" Oh, I thought," replied he, " my fair friends heic would have von. ι, ι
ПО K dragged yöu across hedges and dit- " ches, hilf over the country, for I ·* know thej are fond of excursions ' —" Miss Mason is too delicate for such " robustcxcitions !" cried miss Dudley with an eager sneer —"lou see, then, « what adv antages j ou derive fiom the " life of rural retirement, which jou " was so keen!) regretting this morn- " mg, miss Dudlej >' said Le toi est« a little sarcasticillj Emily gaie hım a look " I admire your taste, mis» *' Mason, ' he continued, "jou could " no wheie have found such beautiful " views ns from fhc garden terrace '"— " The} are unusually neh and magni " íiccnt,' she ıeplıcd, " and I confess " I do not 1 kc hem the less, becuise " I am not at the toil of a veiy long
171 " walk to commmd them —Kxercise " is often more healthy than pleasant, " and if I cm bc giatified with a 11 " nety of scenei y without it, I must " own that it is more pleiSmt to me' ' She spoke tins in an interesting plain- tnc tone, which, from a countenance of uncommon delicicy ind beiuty, came with enchantment oi er the ear of Ггес- hnd, and ian thi illing through eieij лет of Lc Forester " The sccneiy of nature," cried Frec- hnd, " affords the purest, the most dc- " hghtful of human pleasures To en- " joy it with the fewest mtcniiptions, " to hait the mmd leist fettered by " personal atténuons, ıs undoubtedly " hıghlj desinble Ľxeicise and η¬ ι 2
172 " ligue rečnil one too much to onc- * self, and every minute destroys the " chaim, by bringing us back from the " distant prospects over which our " minds are cxpatiitmg " All this " may be very fine, cried Mi Dudley good humouredly, " but for my part I " nevei see the prospect so charming " as before my hounds, when a good " gallop is putting all my blood into " motion, and eieiy wood and v-illey " rings with the иные of my little <· merry tatlers But eveiy one his hu- " mour, say 1, that is my way, you " know, Freeland ' Freeland gave Mr Dudley a smile of love and reverence He knew and admired his benevolence and naivete,
173 and upon aH occasions bent to his good mturcd whims It was the charm of Emilj s beauty and intelligent voice that scduecd him mto an higher tone of - com cisition than he genei illy indulged at Willington, and something in the countcnanee and manner of Le Forester encouraged him in this indulgence Le Forester felt delight that Emily s îe- serve seemed a little to dissipate, and that with the aid of Frcehnd he should be ible to keep up, without porticu- linty, a conveisition moie idapted to her accomplished mmd, linn he hid hitherto heaid withm the piesent hos¬ pitable minsion The wind was using m sullen gusts without The serene cilm of the niurn- 13
İM mg Ind been followed by a doubtfid and angry twilight Bhek clouds suc¬ ceeded, and Mr Dudley foretold a stoini ГЬс shuttcis w u e closed the lights weie brought, tnd ч blazing wood fire wis mide on the spacious old fashioned hevth The blasts tlut begin to rive round the house endeired the scene within The spirits of Le Forester rese He described with elo¬ quence the scenery of his ride He entered into the histoiy of the country, he told of the deeds " of the days that " were gone by " I saw the spot, ' ■said he, " where the two contending Hoses shed so much of their mutml blood 1 finucd I igi n siw theBeau- foits the Stiffords, the Cliffords and ill then mil houses, glistcung щ armour
175 from head to foot, displayiiig-their min¬ gled banners, bıotheı against biother, and son against father, bursting with unnatural ıagc, and about to begin the onset that is to determine the cruel and ruinous victory. I tiod the giound lightly, and with awe, undu which İme mouldered the bones of so manv victims of this accursed civil discoid' How many a mother did that day leave 3 widow ! How many a child fatherless, by the hand of a relation, a friend, or a neighbour * How many of the sur¬ rounding villages roust have joined the standard nnpiepjieu» »-. , . rustic who saw the sun rise in peace ovei then innocent and solitary labours, did that sun at Ins setting behold ítiçtçhed lifeless with their loids in tho 14
17б field of battle 1 I seem to see the plough left in tht unfinished funow fıonı whence they «ere cilled, how little thought they to rctm n to it no moie' I see the feudal loid musler Iths little corps on the giecn, the shout of heroism elites then «pints, they go foith in the gnety of vigorous }outh, at noon the hamlet is deserted and still, ere night the lord and half his people are brought home mangled and bicalh- lc=!> trunks ' " I shuddered sometimes, as I trod , ... ax oeer stiincd with the blood of those from whose ι ems I diaw my existence ' The Cjc of Emily wis upon hım, Ivır Dudley ь cuiiooity seemed ıaısed, md Freehnd gave ι
m Iookofuncommonsignificance. "Many ¡m ancestor," he went on, " did I lose on that day' You smite, Hunting- field, I petccive the blunJcr you think I hai e fallen into: 5 ou suppose there could not have been many of my an¬ cestoi s In ing at one time to have been present at the sime battle. You folget that by the word, "ancestors," I do not confine myself to the male line ; I do not menn merely Le Toresters: I mean those also, from whom I tiace by female descent, the Beauforts, the Staf¬ fili ds, the ChfFoids, whom I have al- leady mentioned, with an hundred others." Mr. Dudleys countenance again expressed wonder, and doubt, and cuuosity. He thought his own family had been one of the first in the king-
178 dom. Of what family of Le Forester, thought he, can this gentleman he í I know none of any consequence but the family of earl Forester ! Frceland's at¬ tention appeared to increase ; the miss Dudleys yawned; and Emily grew very palp. " But I know not why I should talk of ancestors," continued he; " nor by what unfortunate train of ideas, by what unlucky temptation I should be drawn into it." He put his hand to his head ; lhe tone of his voice altered ; his countenaneç grew gloomy ; a half-suppressed tear stole down his check; he exertçd himself, and in a moment his eyes flashed fire. " What iş descent to me," he cried, " but a trouble; a misfortune; a curse! It brings çai cs that eat np my days; it
m destroys my mini ; it fills my (оц) ,w<tfy angry passions; it surround« wewífh· envy and malice ; it bespte me with re¬ venge; it pursues mc with murder I" Heie hie voice failed him ; his whole frame become convulsed ; and he hid; his tace in his handkerchief. A dead silence had reigned, as the violence of his voice and language rose - f and the company now looked on each other with mingled emotions- of sur¬ prize, pity, and wonder. The good¬ nature of Mr.Dudley was alarmed; Freeland felt highly interested; anet could scarcely suppress his feelings. Bnť Emily, who during the whole speech? seemed to be struggling with increas¬ ing and incontroulable agitation, burst ι б
İSO at last into an agony of tears', ifitowhichi after having recovered lictÉelf, she agam broke with such violence, that finding herself unable to regain any self-com¬ mand, she ıose, and ran out of the room. —Le Forester cast a look after her, as she past behind his chair to the door ; and at the instant of her shutting it became more convulsed than before, and incapable of restraining himself, sobbed aloud The company, unable to sobe these unaccountable appearances, stated for some minutes in silence at each other, till the ladies, by a hint from Mr. Dudley, left the room. After a little time Le Foiester m some degree recovered his composure.
IS) The looks of Huntingŕield hinted to the company to leave him to himself— and other topics of conversation being introduced, in which Fieeland took the lead, with an intelligence and energy interesting to Le Forester him¬ self, he gradually regained his usual appeaiance and manner.
w
CHAPTER -¡Vn.
Ti« ladies had no sooner met ift ith« drawing-room, with the exception of Emily, who yet remained in her awn, apartment, than they began to discuss the strange scene, to which they had been witnesses. Mrs. Dudley expressed her pity for Le Forester with unaffected goodness of heart. From the conver¬ sation of Htmtingfield, coupled with what she had now seen of him, she consideied his intellects to be beyond all doubt deranged; but she piaised his disposition, and ihe delightful vi¬ gor and eloquence of his sentiments,
m aa4 his mapner. Mis. Şarker said ht¬ tle part|y from her ejeafness, and partly fiom an apparently cold and res£rvc4 natuie, she latlier looked than talked; she looked indeed suspicion, and cu¬ riosity, and displeasure, aţid to the httle lhat was said loud enough for her to hear regarding Emily, she made no answer The miss Dudleys in¬ dulged m an hundred ridiculous com¬ ments , but their principal observations, wlfieh they made in a voice too low for Mrs Patkei, weie vents of ill-temper and envy duected at Emily Ľmily had already exerted her reso¬ lution to rejoin the ladies, when the summons to tea brought the whole party once moie together.
tat ' Le Forester entered the room with unusual animation ¡ and for the first time had an opportunity of taking his seat by Emily. He observed her trem¬ ble as he drew his chair near her; and cast a momentary glance at Mrs. Barker. After a pause, in which close observers might have seen acute distress in the countenance of both, he begun in a low tremulous voice ; " I am at length, miss " Mason, so happy as to sit hy you.— " Pardon the agitations, the senli- " ments, the expressions I have so " unfortunately diseoveied this even- " ing ; my mind is too much torn ; " my difficulties, my sorrows, my mis- " fortunes—?" "I intreat you, Mr.Le " Forester," she replied in a soft whis¬ per,—" another time, another place."
165 " You refuse to hear mc, then," he inswered hastily ; " the first and only " opportunity I have ever -----." He sighed; his voice faultered, and he found himself incapable of going on. " Composeyourself," she said tenderly; " you are wrong, indeed you aie — " at this moment thus—but do not " doubt my anxiety, my gratitude— " another time and place—at present " look round the room; observe tlie " eyes of the company ; if you persist, " I must take another chair— here¬ it ..ft»..," oı«. -,: ь 1^а decplj) "hcit- " after, perhaps, I may—maj'—explain " ----- ." " Here-after !" he cried with a profound and mournful sigh, "here- " after ! and when will this hereafter " '— ~i" He paused; and then sunk into a melancholy silence.
186
" llıı» ıs very extiaoidmarj, wins pered the scntımçntal Fanny Dudley to Iluntmgfıeld, "verj extiaordmary m deed ! A,nd so miss Emily knows how to bt sly with all herrimity She un- deistands, it seems, how to talk to men by the ej eg, to Iţe by, til) she gctsbeaub into corneis, and then to make more love iti five mimifefi than we fianfc pountry bred gűrls s»jtb ¿1} wir »ndiSr guised filiations can dp Ш a jcar toger ther I ' « Цо not be spiteful, Fanty, ' said Huntmgfield; " miss Mason if з delightful girl, and if wc wanted any pioofs of Le Foiester s taste, hishavr ing found out her çharras would havt addçd to them ' Fanny coţoured with anger and bitteiness, and with difficulty suppıessed the vuulence of hci heait, but she had а character to support fpr
ib/ sweet sentimental softness; and she recovered herselt During the remainder of the evening Lc Forester spoke little; but could; scarcely keep his eyes from Emily, ex¬ cept when the distress which it occa¬ sioned her was so apparent that lie dared not indulge them· A nighj; of agitations, of slumbers interrupted sometimes by the most delicious, and sometimes by the most horrible or af¬ fecting dreams, was succeeded by a dark and stormy morning. He rçse, and rambled through the walks, and up the avenues to view the devasta¬ tions of the night. The walks were choaked up with leaves, and branche* lay every where toin from the trees. As he wandered about, he repeated ta
18В himself some lines of a young fncnd aheady Jaicl in his grave. ι *< Vow mniirofuity wh ties tho wind o'er tl« grove, Ληϋ th" leaicsfiroin ill j cllow lubmit tothe blast J Ah ! «c on the bwn how 11 eddies they move t Haîf tke Лъяк» ef the foiett »litady »e u«t. 1Г. *' Clouas dark and deprcHÌhg invest all tti* iky, And by fits crtnt the vai« do the dtutiing jnt« drive ţ In vain then to check from my bosom the ugh, In vain from my tongue the comglunt/ ilwll I ttnvtf Iti. *· Neglected, traiue'd, and to malice ■ prey». I bow to the sullen dominion of grief, A«d the' long I could ttann tht dirt tynnt aw»yi Oblivtoa alane сап ηοψ give me i-elief. IV « My diyi, my short dayı, tho' my youth u not fled, Already too surcjy I fee) од. the щае, And ere tct the grey hairs round my temples have fpreaji Fwgot in the gnve wltl my ¡uhet J>»e lain 1"
180 Overwhelmed with melancholy, and sick with fondness for Emily, for whom the flame, that had long been rising, was violently increased by the circum¬ stances of the preceding eiening, Le 1 orestcr in his looks and motion? be¬ ti ayed all those appearances of wild¬ ness and eccentricity which wouldhavc confirmed the suspicions of those wha liad been witnesses to his behaviour. He knew not that Emily was watch¬ ing him from her window, as he now hastily, now with slow and lan¬ guid steps, darted eioss the walks, or moved along the turaccs. " Dear ill- fated wanderer," slie said to heiself, " would that I could pour balm upon thy wounds, that I tould cherish that noble heart, that I could avert with-
здо out и crime those dreadful troubles which I have too prevalent a fear may yet await theel Thy eye, thy man¬ ners, thy sentiments fiht caugHt my virgih hcait; of thee alone I think; and never ndvèi can I love any one but thee ! Yet, crud, cruel fate ! thou Г fear of human Ъeшgs art tb me the most prosciibcd ! I dare not indulge iny love; still less do I daré to tell it ' О where will the inoonlroulable power of my feelings, wliere will the pcrveiseness of my unhappy, doom ter¬ minate? О how shall J again this morning encounter his eloquent and pleadmg «yes ? To Hiecf him is to engage in a -conflict of tlîemost' tumul¬ tuous and distressing feelings. 'Birt, alas 1 I can no longer conceal from my- 1
191 self, that to lie abseht from him, is 3 niiscry still more insupportable!" Little didst thou think, Lc Forester, while mournfully thou wanderedst in those Walks ; little' did Ihy diffidence think how fondly thy love was re¬ turned ! Lc Forester was at the lovvïsl'tèirni- natìtìn' of thtS gardens, hahgînğ over the wall,' lust' in contèfhpbtìon of the indistinct tícencrjHjéluvt/and before 1 hirit; new> scarcely emerging from the irlist of the gloomy moťriing, whett the sound of the bell, that was lhe sum- morìs tó¡ 4he break faststäbte, eOHoed acróssíľhe terraces, and'dowri the slopes. He heard it with x beat İti g heatt, and ascended in tumult to the house.
192 Tiemblmg he opened tjte dooi, and found Emily alone there —In a phienzy of delight he threw himself at hei feet, kissed her hand, and was about to pour out the fen oui of his heait to hci, when the miss Dudlejs, who had seen lum mounting to the house, entered the loom " You are thetc, ate jou, miss Emily ? ' they both cried with a triumpliant taunt Both Emily and Lc Totester felt toq much em¬ bai rasscel to make any answei " A ctmse on your intrusions," sighed Le Eorestei to himself, aş he cast a con¬ fused ада angry look, on them ι l' i li i no jEimh/ betrayed at breäk&st thr dis-, tiesø of mind iota whiehitthi» unlucky incident had thrown, her: Ehe knew ι ; j OJ î a nu m > JU ><.*.
193 tooi well the malignant ufe that would be made of it ; and the perverse inter¬ pretations that would be carried to Mrs. Barker. She trembled at every word tliat the miss Dudleys were about to utter ; and they faw and delighted in the increase of power which it gave them over her. The morning having passed in the usual manner, nothing could exceed Le Forester's disappointment at tlie ab¬ sence of Emily from dinner. Con¬ scious of the incident of the morning, he dared not inquire the cause ; which however appeared too probable, from the uncivil looks Mrs. Barker cast upon him, and from the triumphant gaiety of miss Dudley. He thonght he could VOL. i. к
lg* not conceive i fiend more odious that! the Iattcr¡ but civility to the hospitable owner of the marision restrained htm 4k>m exptcssing Tiis disgust. Miss Dudley, affronted at his cold¬ ness to her, was yet во pleased with his person, and so habituated, by va¬ nity, to a confidence in her own "rJharms, that she was resolved not to 'give up the conquest she had planned. The delicate person, the grave mân- "ners, the plaintive tones of Emily, she '*s(imated with contempt. But as her lifead was full of intrigue and inesse, "under an affectation of Uncommon frankness, "her suspicions of a concealed '"flirtation were highly raised by the Ut¬ ile she had heard and seen. Her fancy,
filed with the most crude and ridi¬ culous fictions of romance, uncon¬ trouled by judgment or experience, bad formed a Stpry, which she had al¬ ready in part communicated to Mr»· Barker. By this she trusted to rid her* self of her rival ; apd she did not despair of being the wife of te Fonts- ter; and, what was still more delight¬ ful, having a coronet blazoned on her Síirriages. Le Foiester, gloomy and jrascible, talked only by fits ; and alarmed the good-nature of Mr. Podley, and the gentle benevolence of his wife, by the melancholy, the vehemence, or the bittemess of his sentiments. He filled Jus,glass ţo the biim, scarce knowing K2
ig6 what he did, and inflamed the moody temper of his mmd by the irritation of wine. Impetuous, eloquent, pathetic at times, his ideis seemed to flash through the chios of his intellect, like lightning through the darkness of night He hinted, in obscure terms, at the misfortunes of his life, he mourned the hardness of his fate, he deprecated the unequil powers of wealth, and he lamented the triumph of wickedness in this world Mrs Barker, hearing imperfectly, yet catching at times the tenor of his conversation, expressed, by shrugs and tones of disapprobat on and anger, her anxiety to divert 'ne career of his effu¬ sions But Le Forester, having work-
197 ed himself into a conflict of passions, and, uiged by the inflammatory powers of the bottle, attended not to the rude¬ ness of her interruptions " But there " is a man, there is a man," he went on, " whose cumes, whose guilty stains " of blood, not all the power, and " wealth, and rank of the earth, can ^ wipe out ! They will blast his name; " they will disgrace his family, they " will, they must, 1 fear; nay, they " should perhaps—but the wish is too " cruel I—be punished on his innocent " posterity, if the posterity of such a " man can be innocent !" His voice grew louder as he spoke this, Mis. Barker distinctly heard him ; she red¬ dened, and anger flashed from her eyes: " Take care, sir," she cried, " be a lit- K 3
ige " tfe more sparing of your uncharitable " imprécations!" ------ « Uncharitable", " madam !" he replied ; " if you knew " to Whom I allude, if you knew how ·* I and my family have suffered, you " would not say I was uncharitable 1" " Humph!" she answered, " excuse *· mej sir I But—" pausing, " —it is " well ; all very well ; lam glad I " kow your sentiments—" concluding in an half whisper, which Le Fores¬ ter did not hear, « it will serve me " some day !" This Strange párt which Mrs. Barker (¿bt iti the cötıvefsatlon, did not escape fte" observation of Hïtntingfield, who could Übt imagine what prejudices she hid tikeni »na who was lamenting
199 the state of feehngs in which he sawLç Forester, without being able to assign a cause for them. He saw so much ill- temper and malignity in the manner and looks of Mis. Bat ker, that he became anxious to put an end to a conversation, which had become in all respects too interesting and personal, and in which the seemed so willing to provoke. He knew too much of Le Forester to hope that he would pass by scorn or bitter¬ ness ; and he knew that when once hi» feelings wete roused, and especially if they were at all imiamed by whoc, they were totally beyond th.e cpntrouţ of prudence or judgment. Besides, he did not consider him entirely recovered fiom the effects of his late illness; and he reflected that whatever agitated him K4
200 ν, ould probably affect the injured part, and fly to his bum. He therefoie gu с a hint, which Mis Dudley undeistood, and the ladies withdrew " Lc Forester," cried Huntingfield in a soothing tone, as soon as they were gone, " what could put you in " such a passion ì You agitate yourself " too much, remember how lately " jou recovered from a fever' You " should beğeniler, the ladies do not " understand these impetuosities '"— *' I beg your pardon," he answered, " I was wrong, I know I was, but " something vexed me ; and then that " cursed, cursed subject alwaj s comes " across me, and makes me mid. " But leave me to myself a little
201 " while, and I shall recover!" They took tlie hint, and turned the conver¬ sation ; while Le Forester sat calmly buried in his thoughts till the sum¬ mons to tea.
гог
CHAPTER XVII.
Emily appeared not at tea, and Mrs Barker lef the room as soon as it was over, and ascending to her apartment found her in tears. " Miss Mason," said she, " though I am sorry to give °' you pam, yet I confess I rejoice that " what I hinted to you in the morning ** has prevented your joining the party " below to-day. I have to answer to " those who have committed you to " my care for the propriety of your " conduct; and I must say, from " something which has reached my ·" ears, that you have—" " Good
«03
" heaven», madfim, wbat Ьяуе I," in¬ terrupted JEmily, colouring, *' what " hare I don« that can call forth the " commencement of so crue) » re- «· proof Î"—" Do not be alarmed, miss " Mason," she replied with stern se¬ verity ; " but that gentleman, whose « name I novv find to be if Foretter" (with a bitter .emphasis), " is not, I " am assumed, a proper person fqr you " to give tbe private .encouragement " to, whidi you seem inclined to be- ·* ştow (ţn íiňn 1" ^ţrdly, conscious- that tbe nnlucky itncidem of ţh£ mçjçrí- ing |¡av,e itoo roucţi the арриг,а,п,ер pf truth io this- accusation, felt ,the teats sorne into ,her ^yes, and 5^t jsitent. "· i need flot obşeţye to уцп," ф,е stent .«!> <' hpvy improper if. js ,for да U> 5.6
004 " give pnvate encouragement to my " mm But as to this Mr Le Forcs- " ter, who is base, profligate, my " mad, which are sufficient rcisons " for shunning him, there aie, in ad- " dition to these, a thousand powerful " motives, such is I cannot explain to " you, which ought to mike you avoid " him as a serpent, which, in short, " would render any partiality from " you towards him criminal, naj, ei cn " fatal ι " Emily s whole frame trem¬ bled, and a shivering coldness ran to her heart " In mercy, madam, she answered, " inform me what can all " this mean > —" Mean, miss Mason, " mean, she cried with a shrill voice, *· take care to give no more encouragc- " ment, I say, to this base Mr Le
2Θ5 " Forester, or you will soon enough " know what it means." With this cruel speech she left her, before Emily had sufficiently recovered the surprize and agony she felt to make her any reply. , The afflicted girl, already melan¬ choly and depressed, was overcome with this new, this harsh, and unex¬ pected attack; and, in the excess of her grief, threw herself upon the bed, where she wept till she fell into a state of insensibility. Mrs. Barker, of з temper and disposition unusually rude and brutal, which had rendered it im¬ possible for Emily to love her, had, from the story told her by miss Dudlcj', connected with the discovery of Le
¡¡Об Forester'« name, and the tenor of his conversation after dinner, become so «nragod, that she lost all the controul over her behaviour, which prudence had hitherto dictated, and vented her anger at the hazard of seriously endan¬ gering Emily's health. When, after an interval of some hours, she returned, she found her alarmingly ill; faint, pale, cold, convulsed, and with all the symptoms of an overwhelming and de¬ lirious sorrow. She became frighten¬ ed for her own sake ; she suspected she had gone too far ; she had to answer for her charge ţ and her own intereft was materially implicated in her wel¬ fare. She ^consulted, apd brought np to
30í her Mrs. Dudley, whoM genüe and tender manners had a much more toothing effect ; and with a few drops of laudanum applied to her temples, Emily passed the night in a refreshing sleep. But the dawn, whioh broke in upon her slumbers, awakened her to л renewal of the honors whieh Mrs. Barker's cruel »speech ihad inflicted. It was not the accusation of her encou¬ ragement of Le Foreller, which affected her so deeply ; for to that she was Aware what miss Dudleys had witnessed, had ,given л colour of probability. It was the firange and myftcrious manner in which he, of all human being«, was (proscribed to her; it was the .language -of reproach end baseness she connected with :his name and character fwhicb
20S gave such unconquerable agonies to her heart ! Too' sensible of lier grow¬ ing attachment to him, which jet she was sure she had locked up within the limits of the pureft reserve and femi¬ nine timidity, she could not endure to have this attachment thus rudely and cruelly torn from her bosom ! Her fears had been already too much alarmed ¡ her fate had seemed already in too un¬ accountable a way connected with Le Forester's ! These threats struck upon a chord already too tender ! They re¬ called all the horrors of that night when the lives of both were in such imminent danger! They recalled the generous exertions of Le Forester to save her from the waves!' They re¬ called his wounds; his sufferings ; and
ion that fughtful fever, winch had shaken 1 s brain, and nearly wrecked one of the noblest undcrstandmgs ! They le¬ called her pity and hei gratitude to the aid of her love, and she became the most miserable of human beings. She determined, ill as she was, that not all the stern interdictions of Mrs. Barker should prevent her from join' ing the party at breakfast, and when the hour came, she descended with tottering steps into the parlour Pale and languid, she looked " the ghost " of what she was and seating her¬ self by Mrs Dudley, as if to ask pro¬ tection from the fiery and relentless eyes of hci governess, and the imf er- luicnt and unfeeling looks of the miss
ÎIO Dudleys, she answered the inquiries after her health in a tremulous and tBstreseed voice. Xe Forester beheld her altered сошь tenance and afflicted manner with in¬ expressible emotion. He cast a glance of tenderness upon her; but dared not trust his tongue. Himself melancholy, pallid, wild, he exhibited appearances equally pitiable; nor were they un¬ noticed by Emily. Each now was aware that their con¬ duct towards the other was watched, and restraint added to the painful sen¬ sations they were suffering. The man¬ ners of Mr. Dudley betrayed an em¬ barrassment and reserve totally opposite
an to his usual behaviour. Huntingfield looked grave, and seemed uneasy. Even miss Dudley had lost her viva¬ city and talkativeness. In short, the conclusion of breakfast, and the dis¬ persion of the party, appeared a relief to every one of them, le Forester was beckoned out of the room by Huntingfield. As he waa passing to the door he cast back л lingering look at Emily, when her eyes having fondly followed him, they met Ыз ¡ and in that exchange was a mu¬ tual transfer of tenderness, which lan¬ guage is too feeble to describe. He followed Huntingfield with a beating heart along the terraces, and down the slopes of the garden, till they had ar-
2ΐα rived at the lowest walk that overhangs the meadows. Then Hunlingfield, exerting all his resolution to make tho painful communication he was com¬ missioned to deliver, began in a faul- tering voice : " My dear Le Foresler, " pardon the disagreeable hint I am " about to give you I Mr. Dudley is " the most generous, the most bene- " volent, the most hospitable man in " the world. I believe he has now " had one of the most disagreeable " tasks imposed upon him that could " have occurred."—" What can aU " this lead to?" cried Le Forester hastily. " To tell you the truth then," Hunlingfield went on ; " to tell you « the truth, Mrs. Barker -----" Le Fo¬ rester's colour went and came, and a
213 tremol vah through evfery \ cin. —« Mrs. " Barker lias represented to Mr. Dud- " ley, that you have paid very unpro- " per attentions to miss Mason ; and " that it is the more suspicious, be- " cause you have done it privately; " that she has very delicate health ; is " very peculiarly circumstanced with " regard to her fortune and con- " nexions ; and that she is committed " to her care under the most severe " restrictions, which cannot be all ex- ™ plained ; and that were she to give " you encouragement, the consequeu- " ces would inevitably be fatal to both! " In short, she insists on taking miss " Mason away to-day, unless you are " about to leave it ! I endeavoured to " laugh at all this, as it appeared to
214 « to me in a laughable Ught. But " nothing will satisfy Mrs. Barker, " the more we remonstrate, the " more tierce and determined she be- « comes." The variety of feelings that passed through Le Forester's rnind during this relation discovered them¬ selves but too plainly in his counte¬ nance. His voice was almost choaked ¡as heanswcred—" Say no more, Hunt- ·· iugfield; however strange and die- " tressing this message may be, how- " ever difficult to endure this unintcl- " ljgible affi-ont from such a worow « as Mrs. Barker, you cannot suppose " I wQuldfbra moment intrude on the ".hospitality of Mr. Dudley. I go : " -this instant I order jtny horse !"— " I go with you, of course," í added Huntingfield. « I insist that I may 7
215 " not drag you away loo," he replied; " I am content.—To be traversed and ·' affronted wherever I go, is my tot, " my irrevocable doom ; and I must " endure it with the patience and man- " liness that becomes me !" Here he threw himself on a bench they were passing, and burst into a flood of tears, which affected Huntingfield almost as much as himself. As soon as they had recovered them¬ selves they ascended to the house, und after taking leave of Mr. Dudley, who shook Le Forester warmly by the hand and parted from him with the tears trickling down his cheeks, thpy mount¬ ed their horses, and directed their course to the >wateririg-place frun
'216 •whence they came. Le Forester, who 'had thus suddenly left Willington in a 'lit of just 'anger'and desperate 1 rekilu- J tion, began, after a few miles, to re¬ gtet that he had not at least made one attempt to see E.-nily before 'his depar¬ ture. He dwelf, however, on her last 'look, ahd it afforded a balm to tlţe afflictions of his mind. Huntingfield did not interrupt him in his meditations as they rode ; during ' which all that had passed at Willing- ton was revived in his fancy. What Mrs. Barker could mean by the pecu¬ liar objections she had taken to him ; what could be the cause of the fatality that always attended any intercourse on 'his'part with miss Mason, he could
217 not form the most faint conjecture. The inviolable secrecy that was pre¬ served regarding her birth and con¬ nexions, had shut from lnm every pro« bable clue by which his guesses might have been directed. He wearied him*· self by revolving the subject in his mind, till he felt so bewildered as to wish to escape from it to other topics. ì The day was veiy different from that on which they had rode to Willington. The weather was unusually gloomy. A high wind, which had roared by fits among the wooded lanes when they first set out, was very tioüblesome across the high downs over which their vol. i, ь
218 road principally layı but as they ap¬ proached the sea it added to the in¬ terest of the scenery. The loud and melancholy roll of the waves was heard at a considerable distance, and they saw the white spray sometimes rise in clouds to the tops of the clifiš. As soon as they had reached their former residence, Lc Forester hastened imme¬ diately down to the beach, and bared his bosom and his feverish temples to the, driving blast. He felt " the fresh- " ening impulse," and imagined the air purified by its " restless undulation" across the world of waters. He seem¬ ed soothed as he listened to the sound of the tumultuous surges that were chasing each other till they broke upon the shore ; and he watched, with an
2ig awful and breathless interest, the ships that were driving, with the rapidity almost of lightning, before the wind, now mounted into the air, now buried between the waves, and, though they appeared irrecoverably lost, rising again the next moment, and riding in safety the topmost billow. Huntingfield, wnose mind was made of other materials, saw, with tear and alarm, the gratification he took in this sublime scenery He considered it as a proof of that malady of brain to which he had long dreaded his ten¬ dency, and he suspected that it in¬ creased the disordered state of his in¬ tellect. He could little have believed l2
220 that it would soothe and compose his agitated feelings ; that it would bring bring him back into humour with ex¬ istence, and turn his sorrows into a pleasing melanchoiy ! When he saw him grow talm ; when he saw the harrassing and fluctuating emotions, that had seemed to pursue each other through his countenance, subside into an equal and quiet thoughtfulness ; when his voice, which had been hur¬ ried and impetuous, and loud with anger, became plaintive and tender, he was not only delighted, but sur¬ prized. They dined together ; and Hunting- field did not again attempt to dissuade
221 his fnend from soothing his spirits by the same means Late and dark as it was, they sallied forth that very even¬ ing once more to take a ramble on the beai li.
422
CHAPTĽR XVIII.
The events at Wdlington on reflcc tion lost nothing of then sting Le Forester began to despair, he seemed to be the mark of disappointment, of malice, of conspiracies which he could not unravel, of revenge of which he could not guess the source His pride, his ambition, also, took the alarm — He saw his inferiors in birth and in ability already in public life, he saw them already in parliament, making speeches which were admired, pio posing laws which were earned, he
aii saw them welcome and courted whete- ever they were introduced, then alli¬ ance sought, their authority cited, their power feared, and their very names a passport. ' He looked around hmi, he examin¬ ed the pretensions of others, he cast his scrutinizing eye on the realities of hfe, he saw how the various depart¬ ments of public employment or rank were filled, and he reflected on the modes by which they had been attain¬ ed. With acute powers of research, with a penetrating insight into the hu¬ man character, whenever he checked his fancy, and exerted the vigorous fa¬ culties of his understanding, he probed deep below the surface, and beheld U
'iu what too much embittered his scorn 01 his discon'ent. He discovered stupid arrogance and unfeeling presumption almost uniformly successful : he found that those whose abilities were most fitted to shme and be useful, were least fitted to attain those situations ¡n ivhich they could have an opportunity to display themselves. He percened the worst and most dangerous, because the most insidious and disguised, ten¬ dency to undermine the principles of aristocratic distinction, and produce some at least of the restless evils of democracy, in those who make the warmest professions of attachment to ancient opinions and establishments. He could not help admiring the happy accommodation with which most of
229 these people drew the limits between theory and action, between old prin¬ ciples ind modem practicability, ex¬ actly in the direction which suited the pm ite ci reumi tances of themselves and their fuends wilh what exquisite skill,. with what a ready art of shifting from speculatile light to things as they are, and from things as they are to specula¬ tive right, they could throw down as visionary and useless lhe bariiers above them, and defend and support with haughty tenacity those below them lie read the lists of legislators and placemen with astonishment, that in¬ creased in propoition to his knowledge of the personal history of the kingdom And that knowledge was very exten- L 5
226 sne and very necurate He obsen cd, with wonder and regi et, the decae °f families and change of property, and he tliought there must have been some¬ thing radically and alarmingly w rong m that system, which, in one century, had been more destructive to lnhen- tance and established names than, per¬ haps, the waste of all the ciul wais of York and Lancaster, and of the re¬ bellion of Charles s reign, even in the four which preceded it, when added together Could it be owing to the funded debt ' or to the increase of commerce î or to that leaven of demo¬ cracy which began in the time of that imbecile and contemptible monaich James, and raged, in the next, with a cruelty which produced his son's deca-
•m pitation ? Probably to aH — Whencè¬ soevèr it aiose he jamented it severely, nor could all die reproaches of indulg¬ ing a narrow prejudice, nor all the sneers of modern illumination, shake his opinions and induce him to believe that his lamentations were ill-placed, He never wished to shut the door to ability m any station He thought genius, rare as it is, might supercede all rule, and oveilcap every barrier, without danger to the strictness of his principles He thought that to such a man as Burke, for instance, every path of ambition, every seat of honour ought to have been open, even if his birth md fortunes had been cist in the lowest state of obscurity But to com. mon qualities, to intellectual powers l6
228 of an ordinary kind, however con¬ siderable, which have been improved by industry and matured by practice, which have rather been formed by the station they have filled thin added an orniment to it, to such he thought, though the road of elevation should be open to them, yet the rise should be gradual, and it should require a suc¬ cession of genei ations of such men to climb from poverty and mcinncs to the higher ranks and titles of a state In the modern arrangements of so¬ ciety, ideas such as these seemed not only disregarded, but treated with u- dicule If a Vere, or a Staffoid, the heir-male of those illustrious families, could rise up agam with the lustre of 3
229 genius added to the splendor of his descent, would it give him any pre¬ tensions, in the opinion of modern statesmen, to honouis or public em¬ ployment over an East Indian, a con¬ tractor, an underling intriguer in of¬ fice, a pert calculator, a jobber m elec¬ tions, or a dealei in boroughs î Would not the lespeet due to his birth be rather a secret objection to him > Would it not rather too much over¬ shadow the new splendor of new people > He observed, that they who ad¬ vanced themselves moot in public life, were puncipilly of that description which at college are called " Tuft- hunters," a sort of men remaikable
230 for attaching themselves to those above them either m rank or fortune, with an uniformity that had at least the ap¬ pearance of meanness and servility. These men might not, perhaps, be de¬ ficient either in abilities, or other qua¬ lities of mind and temper which their new situation requned, but they were not pre eminent in them, they pos¬ sessed no powers above mediocrity, and therefore had no just pretensions to rise much above the place in which they were bora But they were men who never relaxed their selfish exer¬ tions, they let slip no opportunity, and the step they had gained they never lost by imprudence or want of ait. Obsequious when low, insolent when high, they possessed not the magnani-
231 mity to support independence and dig¬ nity in an obscure staUon, or humility ш an elevated fortune. Men of this description have at all times been suc¬ cessful in the world but the fashions of society fluctuate in this as well tıs in other respects There never wis a time, he thought, in which such men weic equally successful Some dis¬ tinctions had hitherto been kept up, some lines had been drawn, over whicli it was scarcely possible to leap All were now erased, or thiown down. It was deemed a weak and narrow pre¬ judice to lament that they weie gone " These indeed," thought he, " are times unfit for me Such characters aie both by nature and reflection pe-
2J2 culiaily disgusting to mc. I hate their pliancy of thinking, their deficiency in all the stronger tiaits of the mind, their want of vigorous sentiment, their conten pt foi the ebullitions of the soul Neglected, disliked, despised, calumniated, I meet with nothing but crosses ind affronts whereier I go If the men, who thus tnumph oier me, possessed indisputable abilities, 01 ex¬ emplary virtue, 1 could endure the mortificatior But, alas' it is impos¬ sible to hide fiom myself, that m these days neither genius, nor moral excel¬ lence, nor birth, are the qualities which open the gates of Fame or Rewaid " If the momei lary chagrin which Le Foicstei had experienced at Willing-
233 ton hid increased the sombrous hue of his sentiments, if his reflections were rendered by discontent a httle too poig- mnt to be just, who can wonder * He had reason to be discontented His suffenngs weie hercditarj During all the }eais of his life he ïcmembered no¬ thing dui ¡ι ot" ggle with power and injustice Excluded fiom his rank, excluded from an immense property, pursued by prejudice, driven from the person to whom he was madly attich- | ed, and his very life in continual dan¬ ger of assassination ! Whose temper would not such oppressions irritate » On whose opinions would they not cast the dirkness of their shade î His mind at this tune, toin by a
аз4 thousand conflicts, could with diffi¬ culty submit to the guidance of his reason. The tumultuous waves of passion and fancy rose occasionally above controul and days, and pei¬ haps even weeks passed, dunng which his unsettled intellects would allow of no steady occupation of hi« tho ights. He applied to books in vain, m vam he endeavoured to busy himself with the execution of some literal y design. Restless and melancholy he wandered about like a troubled spirit ·, while the murmuis of the ocean, and the break¬ ing of the billows on the shore, seemed the only sounds that could soothe lum.
ass
CHAPTER XIX.
Le Foreste!! finding at length the danger of giving way to the uncon¬ trouled regrets and sorrows which had lately raged with such tyranny over him, made a strenuous effort to divert his thoughts from himself, by listening to the seductive charms of poetry, and interesting himself with the creations of his fancy. At this time he began a poetical romance, whicli he had not the perseverance to finish ; brt of which, as it in some degree exhibits
23Ő the tone of his compositions, I shall here insert a specimen ; and, if it ob¬ tains a favourable reception, may, per¬ haps, hereafter lay the remainder be¬ fore the public. I need not inform my readers that it is written in the stanza of Spenser, which has since been so happily adopted in those two enchanting poems, " The Castle of In- " dolence," and " The Minstrel," by Thomson and Beattie.
237
ELLEN ST. AUBIN. A POETICAL ROMANCE
CANTO THE FIRST.
In Richard s days, when many ч war-worn knight, From blood atam d fields of battles lost and won, Wliere Europe β troops, array d in armoui bright, Unfurl d the banner d cross before the sun, Weary return d, their race of glory run, The remnant of their days to spend at last In those calm mansions when, their lives ί egun f Where the/ might muse upon their perils past, And on the gloom of age soft smiles their children cast j
238 II Amid the throng St Aubin t Baron came, A шап, whoie g nerous heirt and valiant hand In Salem ■ fields had gain d immortal fame Two years had gone «лее fint he led his band From Cantia s vallin to the hallow d land, Stain d by the infidel ι unhüy crew , And left hit lovely child · caresses bland, His weeping Aife s helov d embra es flew, Mid war on distant plaint to leek for danger new III Forth with the peer a neighbouring chieftain s heir, Young Edmund, who had long for action pin d. Sallied, the darts of glorious death to dare, And laureli round his boyiih brow to bind A youth he was of truly noble mind, Which m a form as noble was eneas d ; Bold at the lion though as Pity kind, Oft in hit fancy he the foe had chac d, Then ш bu early dreams the goddett Fame embrac d
239
IV Soon ai the long array began to move, Joy m his mien, impatience in bu eye, Long hn triumphant looks to lude he strove Yet when the beauteous Ellen ι form came nigh, Ellen St Aubin ■ only hope, the ugh Koie from his inmost heart ¡ the long farewell The trickling tears could only now supply ι Nor dar d he on futurity to dwell, Nor could the rising thoughts of past enjoyments quell V Sweet dayı, how blissful, did they know their bliss 1 The days of childhood past in pure delight, Th unfeigned smile, the unımpaısıon d kist, The tear ihat every toy can put to flight, The carden day, and the unruffled night 1 Can ever Edmund, by the battle s spoilt, The loss of genuine joys like these requite ì Where is the palm that equals Ellen t, »miei? Ah 1 where is the reward that thus repays hit toils ?
240 VI. Yet e en in Ellen s smilet of late infus U A httlr bitter ting d the cup of joy j For on her form no more at ease he mui d, Nor with her Wy hand could safely toy t When absent) stilt her image would employ His restless fancy — — — — —
VII Nor could the pnest, a proud and gloomy soul, Who in the neighbouring ibbey dwelt at eiee, Who oft m vain had striven to controul The sallies that a lively spirit seize, The wanton rapturei of the boy appease ι Kor could thr youth conceal th indignant rage Of generous anger, when the priest, to teaze The sweet effuBions of a tender age, The dear enchantment: clull'd With taunts and maxims sage.
2 И VIII Glad had the holy father seen him go j And though with outward pomp and formal prayer He sought of Heaven iti bless ngs to bestow, And make the g»llant youth its chosen care. Deep ш lui heart the inward hate he bare ι And while he asit d aloud that he the wreath j Of f iture glorious vittorie» might wear, His kindest wish was, he might close his breath In distant eastern field» by honourable death IX Many a fell danger, many an omet fierce Had the bold chief endur d with dauntless mind » Yet still affection s anxious cares would pierce His inmost heart for those he left behind Nor had th array and din of war coufin d His busy thoughts to Asia ι crowded plains 1 For his dear nuptial partner oft he pin d, Oft in his fancy s eye his daughter reigne, And oft with tears his cheeks her rising image stains. VOL Ι. M
U4.1 Χ " Ο Heaven, he pray d, "protect my futhfi 1 wife, *' Wlule now I fight with thy Barbarian ft es ' ' Prolong 1 er ν rtuouE and instructive life " To soothe my little Ellen s childish woes ι " To nourish every virtuous tho ght tbat grows " In her young bosom and to guard her heart " From the vile hidden thorns that interpose " Too oft in outward flov»ers their cruel dart, * And wounds, no future balm can e er remove, im- XI But Heaven or heard not, or Heaven thought not fit To grant ti e fond requ et ι the mother died j As the last pangs forewarn d her, she must quit Her lovely charge t " My d-arest child sheened» ** I go-comimnded hence, and be thy pnde " To shew thy mother s cares have not been vain ! ** Let tenderest duty all thy actions guide, " And when Heaven β mercy о er the fearful mam " Bears thy lov d fither safe, his droop ngagesustainl
XII. The mournful tidings many a weary day, And many a tedious month were passing slow, Ere yet to end his doubts they found their wiy, And struck a fatal, e en though lingering blow She who, his hopes had whisper d> would bestow The crown on all his toils, in silent rest Was with the dwellers of the grave la d low ¡ And all the dreams of future joys, that blett Hit sangume fancy, fied from his desponding breist XIII. But time, and busy scenes began to calm His bosom s waves Affection fond the form Of his sweet child recall d, to pour a bilm Into bis wounde, and once again to warm His hopes, о erwbelm d in Sorrow s chilly storm And when at length, with wreaths of glory bound, Weary he left the tented field s aEarin, To seek for rest on Europe's distant ground, New hopes in Ellen s smiles his rising f -шсу found M2
244 XIV. Now safely landed on hU native ihore. Many a long mile the peniive Baron pac'd, And now o'er distant well-known hills once more His castle's glİtteıing towers he faintly trac'di Joy at the sight and Fear alternate chaťd Each other through his palpitating breast ι Now gay in youth a daughter he emhrac'd ; And now, as boding glooms his mind oppreit, His child a lifeless corse his longing arms carest. XV. Boldei the turrets rear'd their frowning height, And more distinct the cross-sign'd flag display'd Iti flapping streamers to the approaching eight ; With beating hearts his little train, array'd In older due, each tedious step upbraid | Till now arnv'd within its inmost bound The very courte their happy step» invade ï The horse s hooft upon the drawbridge sound. And the loud trumpet brays the mighty walli around.
245 XVI. Forth lallles from the hall the beauteous maid, And trembling kneeli before her father s feet f Her streaming eyes her tendei; joy betray à, And her tongue faulterM, and reft» d to greet Her long lost parent ι but her hps repeat The huly kiss, ai, m hi« armi embrac d, The weeping Baron s dear carene· meet Fondness unfeign d, and all the rapturei chaste Of pure unmingted love a »re and daughter taite. XVIt. Now rings the hall with festive rights ínspuŕdf Dow ì the long tibies, rang d on every side, The wir worn crew, with new sprung spirit fir d, Their cires and toils and dingers pair dende [ And still as they repeat their travels wmv To list ning trams who greet their glad return. They long again to stem the spreading tide Of mighty oceans, and again they burn In dutxut eastern climes th »sailing foe to turn.. M 3
240
XVIII Jïtgh at tlie top tlie îovely Ellen sits, While her glad father with urcheck d delight Haagi on her tender smiles, and oft by fits Αι the bold youth indulge their raptur d sight, Temper d by distance, at the glances bright Of her illumnd face, her idol form Sinki in their hems, end e en her looks requite The pera» of the battle, and the storm ι Then wonder, love, and awe at once their bosoms warm» XIX Night came j apd toil of body and of mind, And ipirits with a thousand feelings worn, The Baron s aged frame had soon consign d To (lumbers deep and sound, but ere the morn Had climb d the sky, he wak d j and all forlorn In that iov d bed the partner of bis days Wis wont to presi, he found his bosom torn With pangs reyiv d, which keener tortures raise, And Grief's ¿lew covered, fires with double fury bfazq.
347
XX, Ilia daughter's soothing voice, and sweet circss Could ill his agonizing sorrow quell, Though much he strove their tumults to repress, And \cil in smiles the trickling tears which fell Adown his furrow d cheelcs, and spoke so well Wlnt rankling wounds .iffection s brwt cin sting 1 How vam the Attempt to Charm the sole nn knell, That still in Loie ■ immersed ear wi 1 ring, Б en though a dearest child her toft encluntment bring t xxt. Yet still, as glided peaceful days along, A cilm begin to steal upon his heatt. At Ellen s youthful w les, at Ľlkn s song A ray of cheerful li^ht was seen to dirt Across his gloomy looks, and thence impart Balm ţo lus thoughts, ind from his feeble fnme Drive by degrees Kegret s consuming smart, Of thrilling joy to spread the tender filine , And back to earthly scenes lui far-fled hopes reclaim. M 4
218
XXII. loveher each hour the blooming maiden greu g Hei fem with more luxuriant beauty glow dj Her soft cheek.! wore a more enchanting hue, Nor hadat thou» Nature, though thy bounty »how d An outwird shape ю perfect, leu bet юл 'd Jn the full gifts ofher «ceo rphih d mindj There melting Sentiment had found abode | The» Fancy'· rich creation· were dea gn d ţ There mimic Memory kept her brilliant formi enihrin'd XXIII O'er his dear charge the rapt St Aubin hung, With love the Muse herself can ill express ι Each morn, in haste impatiently he sprung With Ellen s unii« hb long ng sight to blesi { Each morn within his fond embrace to press Her, who on earth was now his only care, Whose form ador d e en if w th rude caress The airs of Heaven should visit, he his pnyer With tears would upward urge his idol child to (pare.
240
CHAPTER XX.
Emilt Mason, during this time, was- endeavouring to sooth away the melan¬ choly days in the shades of Willington. She was relieved from the impertinence and restless manners of the miss Dud- lej'S, who had returned lo their father's paisonage, and was left much to her¬ si If; while Mrs, Barker, who had re¬ covered from her illhumoar, continu¬ ed silent and reserved, and never again touched on the subject of Le Fores¬ ter. But what had already happened, M S
450 could not be erased from her mind ; it had added deeply to her uneasiness ; and the mysteries it involved, and the difficulties it threw in her way, in¬ creased her passion. She remembered vvhat had passed at lady Carlingford's : there shehad impei fectly overheard ex¬ pressions between Mrs. O'Leary and the two Irishmen, which seemed to threaten Le Forester's life;—expressions of re¬ venge, of vvhich, though the jealousy of lord Carlingford was made the pretence for them, yet she thought she heard enough, to guess that they were dic¬ tated by some deeper and more inte¬ rested motives. On these were founded the suspicions that impelled her to en¬ deavour to wai n Le Forester, the night on whieh they were both so dreadfully ä
2S1 plunged into the sea It was known to her, that not on herself but on him the cruel violence was intended But she heard too darkly, and was too much intimidated, if she had been able, openly to declare her fears Her early predilection for Le Fores-* ter, connected with the pity which these circumstances raised in her bosom, and the gratitude cilled forth by his heroic exertions in saving her fiom the wav*.s, had grown into α sei íoiisatfichment from the feelings whuh his subsequent ill¬ ness excitf d , and hid now been fanned mto the most enthusiastic love by all that Ind passed at Xvillington She cherished his form in her fancy she re¬ called his voice, his expressions and his m б
S52 sentiments She lamented theoppor tunnies she had lost of talking to him, and of hearing the effusions of tender¬ ness he seemed about to pom out to her. She knew not the cause of his sudden departure without even taking leaie of her, and she feared she had affronted him for ever Sometimes she resolved to write to him, but she was ignorant whither to direct, and she dreaded the detection of Mrs Barkeu The last gleams of autumn were tak¬ ing their departure, the leaves, already faded, were falling m clusters ftom the trees Shook from the grove the wither d folnge flies, Anil eddymg m n¿les with tlie beetje s siflis , Faint shoots tl e sun a cle-ir ) et dy] ig ray О er the moist grass, that mourns us a antle gray
253 Now Melancholy haunts the forat-walfcf f And mata, or with ibapes aerial talJcif She weaves her fancies in the fairy song, And charms awhile each heart-comuming wrong. Yc forms, that in the poet's vision play, And chase woe's ihadows with your orient ray ţ Now let me catch your features as you glance Before my sight in sweet promiscuóos dance l See yonder! while I pierce this ruîtling slude* ' An heavenly figure darts across the glade J It seems to cast a smile of pleasing grief; And bids me hope in pensive thought relieff My steps along the leaf-strown path it leads To muse on him, for whom my bosom bleeds г In these dark shadowy vistas once again To hear his tender voice his woes explain j His pleading looks with iighs responsive soothe, And to 1)14 vows to swear ete/ nal truth. Бе ye ye rural deities, my gnide, Ye who o'ei love and solitude preside In these umbrageous bowers! To you I come! Ye, whoexilt the heart, bhall uile my doom I Within your haunts be mine from morn lill night, To nurse the tlay-dreams that my soul dehgbU
254 But if pervert« 1 Fate, ж foe to love» Shill unrelenting to my wishes prove. Here let me still my sorrows calm to ivst, And soothe the throbhings of my aching breast,. Till, like these gleams departing Autumn throws, I sink serenely to the grave s repose ' To Emily all was new the fiist de¬ lirium of love, if mixed with bitterness, was yet full of the most delicious trans¬ ports Her's were not the ldtas of sickly and aitificial romance, thecan- cittires of an ignoiant and inuxeiascd mind, htatctl by the grossness of ani¬ mal passion It was her pure and un¬ foı t ed fane}, thit magnified with the radiance of youthful genius the genuine charms of natuie, the genuine sensibi¬ lities of the fsoul The early-closing evenings afforded
ber long hours for reading and medita¬ tion. Books of fancy and pathos асч quired, a neviţ aest from the tone of her mind. As the low and sullen murmurs of the wind, interrupted by occassional shiieks, sounded among the projecting irregularities, and high clustered chim- nics of the old mansion, she sat lost, in the charms of some romantic tale» The spirits of the blast seemed in uni¬ son with the visionary beings, whon* the powers of t,he poet had brought be-i fore her. " Her eye," like his, " in a fine phienzy rolling, Doth glance from heaven to earth, from eaţth toi heaven, And as imagination bodies forth The fonns of thjHgs imseen, ----- A local habitation and a name V'
2¿6 The few years of her life had already known something of sorrow and diffi¬ culty, she had suffered many of the mortifications and deichet ions of an or¬ phan she knew none whom she could call relations, yet she had always been brought up with ideas of pnde and pre eminence, to which she knew not that she had any pretensions Removed from governess to governess, and from family to family, she had seen some¬ thing of the varieties of the human chaiacter, and sometimes experienced the cipnces of tempir and dispos tion These circumst nces hnd gncn her a tinge of thoughtfulness and melancholy unusu il to her ige They Ind tiught hci the value of humin enjoyments, and doubled the tenderness of her leart
257 bhc gave herself up theiefore to the delirium of her attachment, she in¬ dulged in the visions ofher fancy, she wandered in the scenes of fairy land, and et eiy object around her was clothed with an imaginary light The many hours she was left to herself in the quiet and solitari life they led, since the other visitors had left Wdlington, afforded her an oppoi tunity to give full scope to these propensities While Mi Dudley sunk into slum¬ ber in his armed chair after the f itigues of the chace, or was occupied in a game of eaidswith his vufe and Mrs Barker, she sat by the fire side in all the luxury of thought Whatever she knew of Le Foreetei s history added to her fond-
258 ness for hım ; though what she had ex¬ perienced seemed to pıedıct insuperable. barriers to their union. Tt was in vain that at times sh- 1 saw the hopelessness of this .itt jehment. In vain she endejtouied to reason with herself. Some plausible ¡itgmneiit still recurred to her to justify lier choice; jome predominant charm, v. uh winch she felt it to be a virtue to be. de¬ lighted. ■ r If merely the person or manner of lc Foreste-r," slit.said to luiself, " Ind engaged my affichons, perli ips I could not justify mysilf in thus indulging them İŞut thtie is in his mind, in his Sentiments, in his misfortunes^ an at-
259 ti iction, which I cannot resist, and which I should thmk the worse c f my¬ self if I could ıesıst I know how ro¬ mantic this would appear to the gene« nlitj of the world, and perhaps mos,t so to those who pride themseh cs upon their good sense To such perhips the mind of Le Forester may not appear the object of such admiration His wild sallies, his mdiffert ncc to the mi¬ nutna of common life, his want uf »hat is called propriety, his dsregaid of woi Idly piudence, the fieedom with which he speaks his sentiments, his scoi n to conciliate those whom he dis* likes, and the uregulanty of his h ıblt» nny pi obibly appeir to them incom¬ patible with a superior understanding. I heai them asking, of what use are the
2бО abilities which gne no skill in the com¬ mon affairs of life, and which do not teach a man to direct hi» own conduct by the dictates of personal interest î which wander away from Th» whicli betöre them lies in cUily lite, into remote speculations and fields of fiction ? which neglict their ow n im¬ mediate concerns to watte their ener¬ gies on ti e past, or the distant î To me how tliffuciit such a mmd appLdu I Is it not the proudest distinction of hu¬ manity that wc aie intellectual beings? Is everj thing to be estimated by its mere use and fitness for success in this world ? Why do wi admire the sub¬ lime scenery of wild, and sometimes barren, mountains, and deep impass¬ able vallies, before the dull and flat
2б1 plain, however rich in soil and the ne¬ cessary produce of rain's labour? If we arc to estimate every thing by its mere daily use, ought not the view of the latter to fill us with the most de¬ light î But as Nature has implanted in us to be thus affected with the sublime and the beautiful beyond tbe merely useful, so has it taught us to pay our adoration to genius, and to prefer the brilliant to the practical qualities of the mind ' The soul, which aspires at an higher state of existence, often spurns the groveling pleasures of the woild. If it is not always cilculated to attain prosperity here, it is calculated to rise above it " From the moment I first saw Le
2Ö2 Forester, he appeared tO me of a cast so much superior to any young man I had hitherto seen, and so nearly an¬ swered the ideas I had formed in my early imagination of the person who was formed to win my affections, that I have struggled in vain with my grow¬ ing attachment. He seemed to me all spirit; his'mind irradiated his w|iole frame. But how long was it before I dared flatter myself that lie had noticed so young and simple a girl as I was ! Sometimes indeed his eye glanced upon rile ; and I thought there Was ineffable sweetness in it ; sometimes he touched my hand, and I felt myself tremble through every limb, but he never spoke to me, or never beyond a few words of form ; and I feared he thought me
2Ö3 too childish to· converse with. What would I have given to have had some of those remarks addressed to me, whioh I knew were unintelligible to most of those to whom they were directed ! By lady Carlingford and those who sur¬ rounded her, he was estimated no nlore than other good-looking young men : to their undiscerning eyes he wore tho same outward shape; they knew not the difference of the mind, that in¬ formed it ! Even when I fiist saw him stretched on tlie beach ι at ***«, there was an expression in his ccintenance which interested me beyond any, one I had ever seen ! " When I read in his melancholy looks that he was unhappy; when I
2б4 heard his name pronounced, a name, that, I know not how, I have always been habituated to connect with an¬ tiquity and splendor of birth ι when I collected, from a thousand hints, some dark idea of his misfortunes, 1 grew every day more interested about him. But when at last I overheard those mys¬ terious and horrible threats, by which it appeared that his very life was in imminent danger, my whole soul -was overwhelmed With sorrow and anxiety; my feelings could no longer be re¬ strained ; and I trust I contributed to save him from immediate destruction, even at the hazard of incurring it my¬ self! " Never, never can I for a moment
2б5 forget the tortures X endured during the fever and delirium that attacked him in consequence of the blow of those cruel assassins upon his temple ! Dear, generous Le Forester, in the midst of all thy danger thou didst not for a mo¬ ment lose thy care and thy effoit to save me I To thee I owe my life ; and love and gi atitude conspire to surrender up my whole heart to thee !"
266
CHAPTER XXI.
Not many weeks had passed in this way, when Mr. and Mrs. Dudley hav¬ ing business in London, proposed that Mrs. Barker and miss Mason should pass the time of their absence at his brother s rectory. However disagree¬ able this plan appeared to Emily ; how¬ ever she dreaded the coarse raillery and uncongenial manners of the miss Dudleys, she could not oppose it. Mr. Dudley's cairiage conveyed them through narrow lanes and deep and miry roads to Selborough, which was
î67 Ae -name of his brother's parish, on aidark and foggy November day. Miss Dudley ireeeived nhem with obsüepe- rous jdy, arid her sister with sentimen¬ tal softness. The house stood amidst the scattered cottages of the village; an arioient,. half timbered, broad-roofed, irregular building, defended by a court m front, '¡Md behind by a formal gar¬ den intersected with platforms and nar¬ ro* gr'ae^'Walks, and fenced by clipped hedges oí yew. The thaster of this abode with dull and cerentomous man¬ ners; and the mistress, with merely the appearance of the (Economical house¬ wife, were little calculated to overcome the chill of spirits, with which Emily entered ik She looked through the uncomfortable casements, and found her N2
2б8 view terminated by the, funereal melo-. sures of the garden, which thejneessint showers that were falling otïthcmlbeiü dered stdl more dark u Muchi as I love solitude and the country," she said to herself, "heaven defend шв fiom Such solitude andrai ál scetìesas diesel'' Miss Dudlej s saw the gloom of her countenancf, and/elf mqititjed They broughtout thcmransiq, their work, and their boqkf, they iulicited her attean tion to th-·« corømon -рЫсе books of po,eti y, filled with songs and charades, they invited her tp thtţir οψη iropin to shew hcţ thçır di esses, ajid to ta^kov,^ what liad ¡passed since tljqy,, met Emilys cjvihty piompted 1кя to «ееш pleased, while this intcuuptian wss sn
ибо, thousand' times more disagreeable to bet than the dreariness of hei own thoughtSr She became impatient for the hour of dinner, vvhich would ïe- lieve her from these disgusting trifles, and the still moie disgusting and non' sensical cdnveisafion with which she was pestered The hour of dinner it length came Mr Dudley's*son, a pert stripling, and anothei young man ¿f the Same age, a pupil of Mr Dudley, added to the pai ty. The early peuod frûm v> hich Mr Dud¬ ley had lived in his piesent recinse ha¬ bits, hiving when verj young nnde not a "very prudent mntch 1 With 1 f-irrners dáügfiteí· of small fortune, ind giveh him httle opportunity of icquiringeithèr к 3
270 the mannen, or the ideas of the wo,ıJü\ Hia own understanding was ngtiirally slow and cold, and tliough hq w Л4 a tolci ible bcholaj, he knew nothing but Latin and Greek TJiis was not a ehineter to soothe jnd conciliate Emily IliS comxisatioii wasi larded with pi ovei bs, aud he seamed to have the most narrow and mcomprehensive views of life "My good brofhei ' — he cried,— " you have led a strange life with him, miss Mason, at Willington, I dare say Poor man I he tiunks of no¬ thing but his hounds and horses—but ray father and mother spoiled him when a boy, they never kept him to his learning ¡ and without learning, you know, miss Mason, how can H man be expected to lead a ratioinl life 1 Had
271 he been suffered to be whipped through the school, as I was, he might have been a member for the county, and I should have been a prebendary and perhaps a bishop! A-lack-a-dayI he was en¬ couraged to get by heart the names of his father's hounds, in preference to his " propria quæ maribus," and what is the consequence i" .·< '"-.-m,™,.! Mr. Dudley," im¬ plied his wife, who was a little of a vixen ; ·< why the consequence is, that heli™« „t 1.1. - . , , . ,. and visits and takes his pleasure, like a squire as he i»; while we, with all our learning, are obliged to lead a dull moping laborious life, and after all can hardly make both ends meet ! For my n 4
2?2 part I have always said I can have but little value for learning, if it can do folks no more good in life than it has done us I" " Oh dear now, mamma I" answered miss Dudley, " how can you say so î is there not a secret pleasure in learn ing? Is it not its own reward! Isit She was going on with her usual vo- lubility.when her mother interrupted „ ·„ , . ■» ■" »¿¡cu slie, " I wish it may reward jou with a good rich husband ; that may make amends to your poor father and me for the ex- pence of your education and dress ; that is what I wish, miss !"
273 " And who knovvs bnt it may, mamme — uho knows but it may,' with a pert confidence—" You know how fond I have always been of reading, and I know who is fond of it too—what say yùu, niamma, should you not like to see your daugh 'er married to a man of rank and genius, w ith a coronet perhaps into the bargain, si ould you not like that, mamma Í" Here s' » threw a sly look upon Emily, wno haa little compre- hensitnof what she meant, but was ilmost petufied with the coars'uess, vanity, indelicacy, and nonsense of the thalogiie ι " Like it! ' continued Mis Dudlej, " jes, child, to be sure, but I ftncy it would bc long enough beforej our learn-
274 ing, even if yon had all the learning of Solomon, could get such a husband 1" " Well, mamma !" she íeplied, with, the most conceited complacency, " wo thall see!" casting at the same time another significant glapeé upon Emily. Emily became anxious to turn the conversation; and for that purpose was steking an ορροί tunity to answer Mr. Pudley'squestionconccrningtheirmode of life at Wdlington ; but the second look which his daughter had diiected to her ed up a confusion of painful ideas, which made her whole frame tremble, and oveipowercd her^ijoiee. She recollected the pretensions miss Dudley had made to Le Forester, when
»s they were together at WiJIington ; and though she had then no reason to sus¬ pect the partiality or pretensions mu¬ tual, as some time bad sinoe elapsed, the tliought thus suddenly presented to her mind was too dreadful to be re¬ ceived, without the most acute suffer¬ ing. Her colour changed ; she became absent, and inattentive to the conver¬ sation addressed to her; made unintcU Iigible' answers ; and exposed herself by an appearance of awkwardness very- opposite to the polite and elegant man¬ ners, by which she was generally dis¬ tinguished. The low and narrow dis-> position pf Mrs. Dudley exulted to рей« eeive the person, whose praises: she had' often so reluctantly heaid, seero to pes» scss less easy and agreeable mamiprs иб
276 than her own daughters The com¬ parison set her envy it rest, and the complacency, which she had hitherto unwillingly exerted towards Emily, be triyed less of constmnt Mrs Barker obseıved the chinge in Emily s countenance without knowing its cause, )ct conscious how ill suited were the manners of the present com¬ pany to her more delicate ind refined sensibilities, she behaved to her m a mannei so soothing ind attentive, and so unaccustomed, as to draw the teirs from her eyes " Surely, my love, she said, " }ou are not well, the dnve this morning through those deep mads has been too much for you You are riot' very capable of fatigue l' " I aro
277 indeed a little fatigued," Emily replied, " Yes, you seem but weakly," added Mrs. Dudley with a suppressed tri¬ umph ;" or else you would not be so easily tired with our roads, which we reckon far from bad!" "But had we Mr. Lc Forester here," cried Fanny Dudley, with a sneer, " I dare say we should have a long argu¬ ment to prove how attractive and pretty it is to be incapable of bearing fatigue !" " How can you say so, Fanny ?" in¬ terrupted her sister, " you are always throwing at Mr. Le Forester ! If any one has a right to find fault with him, I am the person—yet I will say that upon the whole he is a very delight-
278 fiil young man ; and he is a man- of fashion, and of fortune too, and of rank, I hear, into the bargain. But some people are envious, miss Fanny !" If Emily was uneasy before, how much was the pain increased by this last speech ! A cold chilling sensation ran to her heart ¡ and she felt a degree of wretchedness, of which she had be¬ fore no conception. Jealousy and ha¬ tred took possession of her tender bo¬ som; and miss Dudley appeared to her in the light of a fiend. A thousand confused suspicions of Le Forester arose in her mind. His intimacy with Hunt¬ ingfield, who was brought up under Mr. Dudley, came across her like poi¬ son, and she grew sick at heart. He
Î79' might have been emce visiting at ths parsonage ¡ and who could tell the re¬ sult of the arts of stich a girl as miss Dudley í But she felt too confused, and was too much alarmed to inquire; till at length the agonies of her mind became insupportable, and burstingmto tears she was obliged·to leave the room. Hithei to, however, nobody suspected the cause of her illness. Mrs. Barker luckily was too deaf tţ hear miss Dud-. ţey's conveisation; and miss Dudley herself was too confident of her own charms to be much aliye to any sus¬ picions of Emily. Her absence there¬ fore did not draw forth any of those comments, wjiich would have, been most painful to t\er^ Mr. and Mis.
2В0 Dudley merely lamented tile 'delicacy 1 of hei health, while they looked with triumph on. the baler countenances- of their own daughters. This brought forth some pert' Observations from the Son, who defended the looks of Emily against the remarks of his father and mothei, and the sneers of his sisters. In truth the lad already fancied himself in love with her, and grew very rude to his sisters, whom he did not hesi¬ tate to tax with erlvy 1 and ílUttímper. " And so, Bob," ched Fannj, " you are in heiotcs about this little Weeping doll already, are you I Excellent swa'ífi t thou majest have these crying'fits 'eii'l acted evety day m the week, if ttìbtl wílt bul tell her tHejV become ТА 1 " " Ďo not be so ìH-rfvUured, Fanny',"
281 .inswered Robert ; " I am sure she is not half so affected as you arc at any iate, with jour melancholy looks and sentimental sighs; and as to beauty, cveiy one, who has any Uste, must allow that she has moie of that than an hun¬ dred such as you and j-our sister !"— " Do not be so rude, Robert," said his mother, " I am sure your sisters --------' at that moment she caught Mis. Bar- tivc that she stopped lest she should be overheard. " But mind me, Robert," she continued in a lower tone, " I will have no fooling with this miss Mason, to feed the girl's vanity at the expenee of yourself and your sisters, mind that!" Robert coloured, and felt ashamed; but he did not altei his opinion of Emily'* charms.
282 Thus passed the ditucr of the first day. As .soon as they lose, Mrs. Bar¬ ker, and the miss Dudleys went toge¬ thei to Emily's loom. They found her pale, faint, and low. " I have brought these girls to entei tain you," said Mrs. Barter ; " exert youiself, my dear ; you are too apt to indulge in melancholy !" " Come, Emily," cried miss Dudley, " we will soon make you more chear- r..T. л™ ,„ n ı„,, rû „ i\,„„ cn „A a ; nf rc In say to you," at the same time seizing her cold hand. Emily withdrew the hand fiom her,as from a viper.—"Good Heavens!" exclaimed the other, "what is the matter?" " I am veiy sick," an¬ swered Emily, applying the hand to her forehead;" only let me be quiet for a few minutes !"
283 They sat still for a hltlc while, and Ennly seemed to ¡tcovee Iter compo¬ sme. "Now I will leave jou then," sjjd Mrs Baikcr, "Iknow, missDud- Jrjs, jou will attend 'o my pool Emilj '" Emily cast a distressing look after hcr„ as she dppaited, and mis» Pudleys began then harangues. " Dear Emily," said the eldest, "wc were so sorry foi you after dinnei ' yetmybio- tlicraajsj'O" —· ir1 --ŕ- '— ъ ~ - *-- f- tiful ; and that it was becoming to yau, ш short, he is m love with you already, Emily" " Pray do not plague me with this nonsense," she ar>swei ed; " in¬ da d I am too ill " " Oh but," con¬ tinued the other, " do you not want to know how we have employed our tune stuce we left Wiilingtonî" " Why,
284 how have jou employed 5 onr timer' said Emily with i f imt eagerness " I thought you would 1 ke to hear that, ' she replied " we have been talking, and writing and thmkii ь of love to be söre , we hav e been match making, or at least laying plans for it arid whii is moie, we have no doubt of success * (Érhily gasped for breath ) "You lenierŕibéŕ, ' she went on, "the gentleman that \vas ч β « ν ι ь „he » cued Emily, scarce artídäWtdý· « VWitíg, why at Willington lo lie 1 suic, wc have had letters, fuch sweet enchanting Ik ters -----' " Indeed ! letters f* mtei ι upted Eitìily, with the most despond mg moumfulness ' letters' you do now surprize .ie '' " And <<!hy not î continued miss Dudley, *' why shoi Id
289 we not have lct'ersi Do you know whom they were from then !"■ « No, indeed," «aid Emily, with tears ib her eyes, having recollected lltjrself, but not able to recover her confusion. " Shall I tell you then î No, you shall guess ¡ from such a smart beau too." " I can¬ not guess," she answered ; " pray do not keep me m this suspence?" "Sus- pencc' » hy, what is it to you ?" "No¬ thing," she replied, " nothing ;" again lecollecting hei'self; "but to be always guessing, is the most irritating thing in the world." " You know Le Fores¬ ter V'' added the other. "Was he the person ?" She sighed out, as well ¿s her trembling lips enabled her. " He — he—'-, but guess again," continued miss Dudley. " You ine too provok-
гвб ing," answered Emily, bursting tinte tears. " Oh now don't weep, my child," said she, " and yout ouriosity shall be indulged. Le Forester was— was— not the person ; but his friend Hunt¬ ingfield." Emily felt a respite, as from death.—" But what does Hunlingfield write about î" she had now courage to ask. " Why he writes love to Fanny, to be sure ; and what .is more, he fills half his letters with praises of Le Fo¬ rester; which I have no doubt is done to raise him in my opinion; and that he means soon to bring him with him to make formal offers to me; and do you think I shall refuse him, Emily i No : I think of him all day, and write about him all day; and eveiy novel that I read I fancy him 'he hero, and my-, self the heroine!"
487 This speech at once removed the in¬ tolerable load from Emily's bosom. Her eyes danced; her colour came; and a glow of pleasure ran like lightning through every vein to her heart. " If this be all," she thought; if there be nothing more than the silly dreams of this conceited girl's imagination, I am at ease !" In this humour she suffered miss Dudley to rant on for another half-hour without contradicting her; and then having gradually recovered the tones of her countenance and voice, she professed heiself again able to join the party at the tea-table. Many days followed without pro¬ ducing any circumstances woith re- j cording. Robert Dudley could not sop-
288 press the admiration, which Ernily's beauty had called forth in him ; while Emily could scarce refrain from dis¬ covering the disgust she felt at his awkward advances. Miss Dudleys had but two themes to talk upon; dress and love; and the only hours Emily en¬ joyed were those in which she shut herself up in her own apaitmcnt to en¬ joy her own thoughts. Le Forest« sunk every day deeper in her hcait. The traits of his character, which had been communicated in Huntingfield's letters, lhat she obtained a sight of, added to her admiration ; and her ex¬ alted fancy raised him into a being of a superior order. The gloomy days of November, the driving rains that sad¬ dened the prospects around her; the 6
289 tices growing every day more bare, the mitted and half-rotten leaves that obstiuctcd eveiy walk, were congenial to the tempei of mind she loved to in dulge, and she becime impitient lo get biek to Willington, whei с she longed to wander alone along the ter- laces, or under the duk vistas She consoled heiself, however, that some letter would arnve from Hunting- field dunng the tme of her stay at the pai sonage, and that in that letter Le Foiester would again be mentioned, as he had been in all he had lately wntten At cveiy letter that the ser¬ vant brought her heart palpitated, ind her anxious eyes inquired if there were any for Miss Dudlejs But VOL I. О
290
e\ cry post disappointed her, and Miss Dudleys themselves began to grow impatient and alarmed about their coi respondent. The letters never arrived till the lioui of tea A day of uncommon d ukness, mixed with loud and tremen¬ dous storms, was shul in by a close, black, still evening. The party were gathered round the fire. As the boy, who had been sent to the post, entered the village-lane which led from lhe common, they heard the gate clap ; and presently aftei the 6ound of the horse's feet as he came down the loid. Emily's heart beat so she could scarcely sit ; her whole frame became agitated, and her emotion betrayed
291 ıtselt to every one m the room In a few minutes the servant opened the door with the letters One was deli vered to Mr Dudley, another to his wife, a third to Mrs Baıkeı , Emily s impatience became now insufferable, a fourth to young Dudley, and at last a .fifth to his sister Fanny Fanny opened her letter With eager¬ ness, while Emily, pale, trembling, and almost gasping for breath, fixed her eyes upon her as she read Fanny ıead down the first side, while Emily watching hei, thought she saw hei change countenance, and her hand tiemble as she held the paper As soon as she tuined ovei the second side, she had not read many words be¬ fore she exclaimed, " Good God ' He о 2
toi ıs killed'' — " Killed ened Emily in an agonized voice, " who is kill cd î " Le Foiester I she answered, ind the woids were no sooner out of her mouth lhan Emil), givinga piercing shriek, sunk lifeless upon the ground lhe pirty was now all confusion, and ev cry one was e nploj ed in fl) mg to Emily s assistai ce But assistance seemed vain , all the applications weie ineffectual, she continued lifeless, and m that state was removed to hei bed The alarm vv is too greit to illow any comments on the cause of her facing thus affected A medical person was sent foi, and aftei some time she begin to breithe moie freely, but lemimed insensible the whole ev cning
Й9Э As soon as the party again assem¬ bled, and had leisure to examine the letter, it was found that Fanny in her agitation catching the name of Le Fo¬ rester in conjunction with the word " killed," had totally mistaken the fact. Le For« ster had indeed been on the point of being murdered ; but he had luckily killed the person who had attacked him. He had behaved with the most heroic gallantry; and they who had heard of the transaction gave the highest praise to his conduct. But what was human piaise to the feeling heait of Le Forester, under such circumstances I He had shed the blood of a fellow-being, and the hor¬ ror of the deed overwhelmed him with sonow and legret. Huntingfield could
£94 not soothe him, while he often dis¬ solved into tears like a child ; and then for days together neither spoke, nor eat ; but sat with eyes fixed, heedless of all around him, and could get no sleep but with lhe aid of the strongest opiates. Huntingfield, therefore, be¬ came more seriously alarmed for 'the disorder of his brain than ever, and ex¬ pressed very slender hopes of his final recovery.
BND OP THE FIÜST VOLUME.
Printed by T, Bcttfley, Bolt Coun, Ficat Sircct. London»
