
THE UNIVERSITY 



OF ILLINOIS 



LIBRARY 

1829 ,^ 



\^ 



y 




j^ ^.^ 



^, 



V^^^^^r-^^^ 







^9^ ^ - 



'^^^^^^^^ ^'"'^y/^/^^/rf'f// Z/f^ar/,/:}/^/. 





v^f^ 



a 







The person charging this material is re- 
sponsible for its return to the library from 
which it was withdrawn on or before the 
Latest Date stamped below. 

Theft, mutilation, and underlining of books are reasons 
for disciplinary action and may result in dismissal from 
the University. 
To renew call Telephone Center, 333-8400 

UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS LIBRARY AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 



DUGi 



B-io 



ft/rr 1 C8r, 



m 



L161— O-1096 



/ 



SALATHIEL. 



A STORY OF , 

i 

THE PAST, THE PRESENT, AND | 

THE FUTURE. 1 



IN THREE VOLUMES. 
VOL. 1. 



NEW EDITION. 



LONDON: 1 

HENRY COLBURN, NEW BURLINGTON STREET. 

\ 
\ 



PRINTED BY A. J. VALPY, RED LION COuRT, FLEET STREtT. 






TO HIS GRACE 

THE DUKE OF NEWCASTLE, 

KNIGHT OF THE GARTER, 

VICE-PRESIDENT Of THE ROYAL SOCIETY OF 
LITERATURE, &C. ~&C. SiC. 



A"^ 



My Lord Duke, 

t_ I feel highly honoured by being 

allowed to present these volumes, as a tribute 
of personal respect to a nobleman, distinguished 
by his zeal tor literature ; and standing in the 
first rank of the manly, high-principled, and 

^uncompromising friends of his country. 

^Y I have the honour to be 

Your Grace's very obedient 

And humble servant, 

THE AUTHOR. 



316334 



PREFACE, 



There has appeared from time to time in 
Europe, during the last thousand years, a mys- 
terious individual, a sojourner in all lands, yet 
a citizen of none ; professing the profoundest 
secrets of opulence, yet generally living in a 
state of poverty ; astonishing every one by the 
vigour of his recollections, and the evidence of 
his close and living intercourse with the eminent 
characters and events of every age, yet connected 



VI PREFACE. 

with none — without lineage, or possession, or pur- 
suit on earth — a wanderer and unhappy. 

A number of histories have been invented for 
him ; some purely fictitious, others founded on 
ill-understood records. Germany, the land of 
mysticism, where men labour to think all facts 
imaginary, and turn all imaginations into facts, 
has toiled most in this idle perversion of truth. 
Yet those narratives have been in general but a 
few pages, feebly founded on the single, fatal, 
sentence of his punishment for an indignity offered 
to the Great Author of the Christian faith. 

That exile lives ; that most afflicted of the peo- 
ple of affliction yet walks this earth ; bearing the 
sorrows of eighteen centuries on his brow, — 
withering in soul with remorse for the guilt of an 
hour of madness. He has long borne the scoff in 
silence ; he has heard his princely rank degraded 
to that of a menial, and heard without a murmur ; 
he has heard his unhappy offence charged to deli- 
berate malice and cruelty, when it was but the 
misfortune of a zeal blinded ana inflamed by the 



PREFACE. Vll 

prejudices of his nation ; and he has bowed to the 
calumny as a portion of his punishment. But the 
time for this forbearance is no more. He feels 
himself at last wearing away ; and feels, with a 
not uucheered sensation, like that of returning to 
the common fates of mankind, a desire to stand 
clear with his fellow-men. In their presence he 
will never move again. To their justice, or their 
mercy, he will never again appeal. The wound of 
his soul rests, never again to be disclosed; until 
that day when all things shall be summoned and 
be known. 

In his final retreat he has collected these me- 
morials. He has concealed nothing, he has dis- 
sembled nothing ; the picture of his hopes and 
fears, his weaknesses and his sorrows, is stamped 
here with sacred sincerity. 

Other narratives may be more specious or elo- 
quent; but this narrative has the supreme merit 
of truth ; it is the most true — it is the only true. 



SALATHIEL. 



CHAPTER I. 



*• Tarry thou, till i come." The words 
shot through mo — I felt them like an arrow in my 
heart — my brain whirled — my eyes grew dim. The 
troops, the priests, the populace, the world, passed 
away from before my senses like phantoms. 

But my mind had a horrible clearness. As if 
the veil that separates the visible and invisible 
worlds had been rent in sunder, I saw shapes and 
signs for which mortal language has no name. 
The whole expanse of the future spread under my 
mental gaze in dreadful vision. A preternatural 

VOL. I. A 



2 SALATHIEL. 

light, a new power of mind seemed to have been 
poured into my being. I saw at once the full 
guilt of my crime — the fierce folly — the mad in- 
gratitude — the desperate profanation. I lived 
over again in frightful distinctness every act and 
instant of the night of my unspeakable sacrilege. 
I saw, as if written with a sunbeam, the countless 
injuries, that in the rage of bigotry I had accu- 
mulated upon the victim ; the bitter mockeries 
that I had devised ; the cruel tauntings that my 
lips had taught the rabble; the sanguinary pre- 
judice that had forbidden them to discover a trace 
of virtue where all virtue was. The blows of the 
scourge still sounded in my ears. Every drop of 
the innocent blood rose up in judgment before me. 
Accursed be the night in which I fell before the 
tempter ! Blotted out from time and eternity be 
the hour in which I took part with the torturers ! 
Every fibre of my frame quivers, every drop of 
my blood curdles, as I still hear the echo of the 
anathema that on the night of woe sprang first 
from my furious lips, the self-pronounced ruin, the 
words of desolation, *' His blood he upon US, 

AND UPON OUR CHILDREN !" 

I had headed the multitude : where others shrank, 
I urged ; where others pitied, I reviled, and in- 
flamed; I scoffed at the feeble malice of the 



SALATHIEL. 3 

priesthood ; I scoffed at the tardy cruelty of the 
Roman ; I swept away by menace and by scorn 
the human reluctance of the few who dreaded to 
dip their hands in blood. Thinking to do God 
service, and substituting my passions for my God, 
I threw firebrands on the hearts of a rash, jealous, 
and big-oted people. I triumphed ! 

In a deed which ought to have covered earth 
with lamentation, which was to make angels weep, 
which might have shaken the universe into dust, 
I triumphed ! The decree was passed : but my 
frenzy was not so to be satiated. I loathed the 
light while the victim lived. Under the penalty 
of treason to Caesar, I demanded instant execution 
of the sentence. — " Not a dav of life must be 
given," I exc-. aimed ; "not an hour : — death, on 
the instant ; death !" My clamour was echoed by 
the roar of millions. 

But, in the moment of my exultation, I was 
stricken. In the acclamation of the multitude 
came forth the command. He who had refused 
an hour of life to the victim, was in terrible retri- 
bution condemned to know the misery of life in- 
terminable. I heard through all the voices of Je- 
rusalem — I should have heard through all the 
thunders of heaven, the calm, low voice, " Tarry 
thou, till I come l" 



4 SALATHIEL. 

I felt my fate at once. I sprang away through 
the shouting hosts, as if the avenging angel waved 
his sword above my head. Wild songs, furious 
execrations, the rude uproar of myriads stirred to 
the heights of popular passion, filled the air: still 
through all I heard the pursuing sentence, " Tarry 
thou, till I come," and felt it to be the sentence 
of incurable agony ! I was never to know the 
shelter of the grave ! 

Immortality on earth ! — ^The perpetual compul- 
sion of existence in a world made for change ; to 
feel the weariness of thousands of years bowing 
down my wretched head; alienated from all the 
hopes, enjoyments, and pursuits of man, to bear 
the heaviness of that existence, which palls even 
with all the stimulants of the most vivid career 
of man; life passionless, exhausted, melancholy, 
old : I would rather have been blown about on the 
storms of every region of the universe. I was to 
be a wild beast, and a wild beast condemned to 
pace the same eternal cage ! A criminal bound to 
the floor of his dungeon for ever ! 

Immortality on earth ! — I was now in the vigour 
of life ; but must it be always so I Must not pain, 
feebleness, the loss of mind, the sad decay of all 
the resources of the human being, be the natural 
result of time 1 Might I not sink into the per- 



SALATHIEL. 5 

petual sick-bed, hopeless decrepitude, pain without 
cure or relaxation, the extremities of famine, of 
disease, of madness ? — yet this was to be borne for 
ages of ages ! 

Immortality on earth ! — Separation from all that 
cheers and ennobles life. I was to survive my 
country ; to see the soil dear to my heart violated 
by the feet of barbarians yet unborn, her sacred 
monuments, her trophies, her tombs, a scoff and a 
spoil ; without a resting spot to the sole of my 
feet, I was to witness the slave, the man of blood, 
the savage of the desert, the furious infidel, riot- 
ing in my inheritance, digging up the bones of 
my fathers, trampling on the holy ruins of Jeru- 
salem ! 

I was to feel the still keener misery of surviv- 
ing all that I loved ; wife, child, friend, even to 
the last being with whom my heart could imagine 
a human bond, all that bore a drop of my blood 
in their veins, were to perish in my sight, and I 
was to stand on the verge of the perpetual grave, 
without the power to seek its refuge. If new 
affections could ever wind their way into my 
closed-up and frozen bosom, it must be only to 
fill it with new sorrows ; for those I loved must 
still be torn from me. In the world I must re- 
main, and remain alone ! 



6 SALATHIEL. 

Immortality on earth ! — The grave that closes 
on the sinner, closes on his sin. His weight of 
offence is fixed. No new guilt can gather on him 
there. But I was to know no limit to the weight 
that was already crushing me. The guilt of life 
upon life, the surges of an unfathomable ocean of 
crime were to roll in eternal progress over my 
head. If the judgment of the great day was ter- 
rible to him who had passed but through the com- 
mon measure of existence, what must be its ter- 
rors to the wretch who was to appear loaded with 
the accumulated guilt of a thousand lives ! 

Overwhelmed with despair, I rushed through Je- 
rusalem, with scarcely a consciousness of whither 
I was going. It was the time of the Passover, 
when the city was crowded with the multitude 
come to the great festival of the year. I felt an 
instinctive horror of the human countenance, and 
shunned every avenue by which the tribes came 
in. I at last found myself at the Gate of Zion, 
that leads southward into the open country. I 
had then no eyes for that wondrous portal which 
had exhausted the skill of the most famous Ionian 
sculptors, the master-work of Herod the Great. 
But I vainly tried to force my wild way through 
the crowds that lingered on their march to gaze 
upon its matchless beauty; portal, alone worthy 



SALATHIEL. 7 

of the wonders to which it led, like the glory of 
an evening cloud opening to lead the eye upwards 
to the stars. 

On those days the Roman guard were withdrawn 
from the battlements ; and I ascended them to 
seek another escape ; but the concourse gathered 
there to look upon the entrance of the tribes, fixed 
me to the spot. 

Of all the strange and magnificent sights of 
Earth, this entrance was the most fitted to swell 
the national pride of country and religion. The 
dispersion ordained by Heaven for judgment on 
the crimes of our idolatrous kings, had, in that 
wonder-working power by which good is brought 
out of evil, planted our law in the remotest ex- 
tremities of the world. Among its proselytes were 
the mighty of all regions, the military leaders, the 
sages, the kings ; all, at least once in their lives, 
coming to pay homage to the great central city of 
the faith ; and all coming with the pomp and at- 
tendance of their rank. The procession amounted 
to a number which threw aftertimes into the shade. 
Three millions of people have been counted at the 
Passover. 

The diversities of the multitude were still more 
striking. Every race of mankind, in its most 
marked peculiarities, there passed beneath the eye. 



8 SALATHIEL. 

There came the long train of swarthy slaves and 
menials round the chariot of the Indian prince, 
clothed in the silks and jewels of the regions 
beyond the Ganges. Upon them pressed the troop 
of African lion-hunters half naked, but with their 
black limbs wreathed with pearl and fragments of 
unwrought gold. Behind them moved on their 
camels a patriarchal group, the Arab Sheik, 
a venerable figure with his white locks flowing 
from beneath his turban ; leading his sons, like our 
father Abraham, from the wilderness to the Mount 
of Vision. Then rolled on the glittering chariot of 
the Assyrian chieftain, a regal show of purple and 
gems, and convoyed by horsemen covered with 
armour. The Scythian Jews, wrapped in the furs 
of wolf and bear, iron men of the north ; the noble 
Greek, the perfection of the human form, with his 
countenance beaming the genius and beauty of his 
country ; the broad and yellow features of the 
Chinese rabbins ; the fair skins and gigantic forms 
of the German tribes ; strange clusters of men 
unknown to the limits of Europe or Asia, with 
their black locks, complexions of the colour of 
gold, and slight yet sinewy limbs, marked with 
figures of suns and stars struck into the flesh ; 
marched crowd on crowd ; and in strong contrast 
with all, the Italian on the charger or in the 



SALATHIEL. 9 

chariot, urging the living stream to the right and 
left, with the haughtiness of the acknowledged 
master of mankind. The representative world was 
before me. 

But all those distinctive marks of country and 
pursuit, though palpably ineradicable by human 
means, were deeply overpowered and mingled by 
the one grand impression of the place and the 
time. In their presence was the City of Holiness ; 
the Hill of Zion lifted up its palaces ; above it 
ascended, like another city in a higher region of 
the air, that Temple to whose majesty the world 
could show no equal, to which the eyes of the 
believer were turned from the uttermost parts of 
the earth, in whose courts Solomon, the king of 
earthly kings for wisdom, had called down the 
blessing of the Most High, and it had descended 
on the altar in fire ; in whose sanctuary the Lord, 
whom heaven and the heaven of heavens cannot 
contain, was to make his future throne, and give 
glory to his people. 

Oh Jerusalem, Jerusalem ! when I think of 
what I saw thee then, and of what I have since 
seen thee, the spoiled, the desolate, the utterly put 
to shame ; when I have seen the Roman plough 
driven through the soil on which stood the Holy 
of Holies ; the Saracen destroying even its ruins ; 



10 SALATHIEL. 

the last, worst devastator, the barbariaa of the 
Caucasus, the ruffian Turk, sitting in grim scorn 
upon the towers of the city of David; violating 
the tombs of the prophet and the king; turning 
up for plunder the soil, every blade of whose grass, 
every atom of whose dust, was sacred to the broken 
people of Israel ; trampling with savage cruelty, 
and the deeper torture of infidel insult, my coun- 
trymen that lingered among its walls only that 
they might seek a grave in the ashes of the 
mighty ; I have felt my spirit uproused, and mad- 
dened within me. I have made impious wishes. 
I have longed for the lightning to blast the tyrant. 
I still start from my bed when I hear the whirl- 
wind, and send forth fierce prayers that its rage 
may be poured on the tents of the oppressor. I 
unconsciously tear away my white locks, and 
scatter them in bitterness of soul towards the 
east. In the wildness of the moment, 1 have 
imagined every cloud that sailed along the night 
a minister of the descending vengeance. I h-ive 
seen it a throne of terrible shapes flying on the 
wings of the wind, majestic spirits and kings of 
wrath hurrying through the heavens to pour down 
sulphurous hail and fire, as upon the cities of the 
Dead Sea. I have cried out with our prophet, as 
the vision swept along, " Who is he that cometh 



SALATHIEL. 11 

from Edom? with dyed garments from Bozra ? he 
that is glorious in his apparel, travelling in the 
greatness of his strength ! Wherefore art thou red 
in thine apparel, and thy garments, like him that 
treadeth the wine-press ?" and I have thought that 
I heard the answer : " I, that speak in righteous- 
ness, mighty to save ! I w ill tread them in mine an- 
ger, and trample them in my fury, and their blood 
shall be sprinkled upon my garments, and I will 
stain all my raiment; for the day of vengeance is in 
mine heart, and the year of my redeemed is come!" 

Then, when the impulse passed away, and my 
heart withered within me ; my eyes have turned 
into fountains of tears, and I have wept until 
morning came, and the sounds of the world called 
back its recollections, and for the sacred hills and 
valleys that I had imaged in the darkness, I saw 
only the roofs of some melancholy city, in which 
I was a forlorn fugitive ; or a wilderness, with but 
the burning sands and the robber before me ; or 
found myself tossing on the ocean, not more fruit- 
less than my heart, nor more restless than my life, 
nor more unfathomable than my woe. Yet, to the 
last will I hope and love. Oh Jerusalem ! Jeru- 
salem ! even in my mirth, if I forget thee ! 

But those were the thoughts of aftertimes. On 
that memorable and dreadful day, I had no per- 



12 SALATHIEL. 

ception but of some undefinable fate which was to 
banish me from mankind. I at length forced my 
way through the pressure at the gate, turned to 
none of the kinsmen who called to me as I passed 
their chariots and horses, overthrew with desperate 
and sudden strength all who impeded my progress, 
and scarcely felt the ground till I had left the city 
behind, and had climbed up through rocks and 
ruins the mountain that rose drearily before me, 
like a barrier shutting out the living world. 



SALATHIEL. 13 



CHAPTER II. 



Terror had exhausted me; and throwing my- 
self on the ground, under the shade of the stunted 
grove of palm-trees that thinly crowned the sum- 
mit of the hill, I fell into an almost instant slum- 
ber. But it was unrefreshing and disturbed. 
The events of the day again came before me, 
strangely mingled with those of my past life, and 
with others of which I could form no waking re- 
membrance. I saw myself sometimes debased be- 
low man — like the great Assyrian king ; driven 
out to feed upon the herb of the forest, and wan- 
der for years exposed to the scorching sun by day, 
and the dews that sank chilling upon my naked 
frame by night. I then seemed filled with super- 
natural power, and rose on wings till earth was 
diminished beneath me, and I felt myself fear- 



14 SALATHIEL. 

fully alone. Yet there was one predominant sen- 
sation, that all this was for punishment, and that it 
was to be perpetual. At length, in one of my ima- 
ginary flights, I found myself whirled on the wind, 
like a swimmer down a cataract, in helpless terror 
into the bosom of a thunder-cloud. I felt the 
weight of the rolling vapours round me ; I saw 
the blaze ; I was stunned by a roar that shook the 
firmament. 

My eyes suddenly opened, yet my dream ap- 
peared only to be realised by my waking. Thick 
clouds of heavy and heated vapour were rapidly 
rolling up from the precipices below ; and at in- 
tervals a sound that I could not distinguish from 
distant thunder, burst on the wind. But the sun 
was bright, and the horizon was the dazzling blue 
of the eastern heaven. As my senses slowly re- 
turned; for I felt like a man overpowered with 
wine, and a sudden rush of blood across my sight 
made me dread that I was growing blind ; I was 
enabled to discover where I was. The discovery 
itself was terror. I had in my distraction fled to 
the mountain on which no Jew ever looked with- 
out shame and sorrow for the crimes of the greatest 
king into whose nostrils the Almighty ever poured 
the spirit of life, but on which a Jewish priest, as 
I was, could not touch without being guilty of de- 



SALATHIEL. 15 

filement. I sat on the Mount of Corruption, so 
called from its having once witnessed the idolatries 
of our mighty Solomon, when in his old age he 
gave way to the persuasions of his heathen wives, 
— that irreparable crime for which the kingdom 
was rent, and the strength of Israel scattered. I 
saw in the hollows of the hill the spaces, still bear- 
ing the marks of burning, and barren for ever, on 
which the temples of Moloch, Chemosh, and Ash- 
taroth, had lifted their impious magnificence in 
sight of the House of the living God. The very 
palm-trees under which I had snatched that wild 
and bitter sleep, were the remnant of the groves 
in which the foul rites of the goddesses of Phoe- 
nicia and Assyria once filled the air with mid- 
night abomination, and horrid yells of human sa- 
crifice, almost made more fearful by their min- 
gling with the roar of barbarian revel, the wild 
dissonance of timbrel and horn, the Bacchanalian 
chorus of the priesthood and people of impurity. 

The vapours that rose hot and sickly before me, 
were the smokes from the fires kindled in the val- 
ley of Hinnom ; where the refuse of the animals 
slaughtered for the use of the city, and the other 
pollutions and remnants of things abominable to 
the Jew, were daily burned. The sullen and per- 
petual fires, the deadly fumes, and the aspects of 



16 SALATHIEL. 

the degraded and excluded beings, chiefly public 
criminals, who were employed in this hideous task, 
gave the idea of the place of final evil. Our pro- 
phets, in their threats against the national be- 
trayers, against the proud and the self-willed, the 
polluted with idols, and the polluted with that still 
darker and more incurable idolatry, the worship of 
the world, pointed to the valley of Hinnom ! The 
Pharisee, when he denounced the unbelief and 
luxury of the lordly Sadducee, pointed to the val- 
ley of Hinnom! All, — the Pharisee, the Essene, 
the Sadducee, in the haughty spirit that forgot the 
fallen state of Jerusalem, and the crimes that had 
lowered her ; — the hypocrite, the bigot, and the 
sceptic, alike mad with hopeless revenge ; when 
they saw the Roman cohorts triumphing with their 
idolatrous ensigns through the paths once trod by 
the holy, or were driven aside by the torrent of 
cavalry, and the gilded chariot on which sat some 
insolent proconsul fresh from Italy, and looking 
down on the noblest of our people as the beaten 
slaves of the stranger, — pointed to the valley of 
Hinnom ! 

How often, as the days of Jerusalem hurried 
towards their end, and by some fatality, the vio- 
lences of the Roman governors became more fre- 
quent and intolerable; have I seen the groups 



SALATHIEL. 17 

of my countrymen, hunted into some by-way of 
the city by the hoofs of the Roman horse, con- 
suming with that inward wrath which was soon to 
flame out in such horrors, flinging up their wild 
hands, as if to upbraid the tardy heavens, gnash- 
ing their teeth, and with the strong contortions of 
the Oriental countenance, the stormy brow and 
flashing eye, and lip scarcely audible from the 
force of its own convulsion, muttering conspiracy. 
Then, in despair of shaking off* that chain which 
had bound the whole earth, they would appeal to 
the vengeance of the endless future; and shrouding 
their heads in their cloaks, stand, like sorcerers 
summoning up demons, each with his quivering 
hand stretphed out toward the accursed valley, 
and every tongue groaning ' Gehenna !' 

While I lay upon the summit of the mountain, 
in a state which gave me the deepest impression 
that I had ever conceived of the parting of soul 
and body, I was startled by the sound of a trum- 
pet. It was from the temple ; which, as the fires 
below sank with the growing heat of the day, was 
now visible to me. The trumpet was the signal 
of the third hour, when the first daily sacrifice 
was to be offered. It was the week of the class of 
Abiah, of which I was, and this day's service fell 
to me. Though I would have given all that I 
possessed on earth to be allowed to rest upon that 



18 SALATHIEL. 

spot, polluted as it was, and there moulder away 
into the dust and ashes that I had made my bed ; 
I dared not shrink from the most solemn duty of 
the priesthood. 

I rose, but it was not till after many efforts that 
I was able to stand ; my limbs had a stony weight 
and insensibility. I struggled along the summit 
of the ridge, holding by the stems of the palm- 
trees. The second trumpet sounded loudly, and 
was re-echoed by the cliffs. I had now no time for 
delay, and was about to spring downwards towards 
a path which wound round the head of the valley 
and beyond the fires, when my ears were again ar- 
rested by the peal that had disturbed me in my 
sleep ; and my glance, which commanded the 
whole circuit of the hills round Jerusalem, invo- 
luntarily looked for the thundercloud. The sky 
was without a stain ; but the eminences towards 
the west, on whose lovely slopes of vineyard, rose, 
and orange grove my eye had so often reposed 
as on a vast Tyrian carpet tissued with purple and 
gold, were now hung with gloom ; a huge and 
sullen cloud seemed to be gathering over the 
heights, and flashes and gleams of malignant lustre 
burst from its bosom. The cloud deepened, and 
the distant murmur grew louder and more con- 
tinued. 

I hurried to the city gate. To my astonishment, 



SALATHIEL. Ij) 

I found the road, that I had left so choked up 
with the multitude, almost empty. The camels 
stood tethered in long trains under the trees, with 
scarcely an owner. The tents were deserted, ex- 
cept by children, and the few old persons neces- 
sary for their care. The mules and horses grazed 
through the fields without a keeper. I saw tents 
full of the animals and other offerings that the 
tribes brought up to the great feast, almost at 
the mercy of any hand that would take them 
away. Where could the myriads have disappeared, 
that had covered the land a few hours before to 
the very verge of the horizon ? 

The city was still more a subject of astonish- 
ment. A panic might have driven away the con- 
course of strangers, in a time when the violences 
of the Roman sword had given every Jew but 
too frequent cause for the most sensitive alarm. 
But all within the gate was equally deserted. The 
streets were utterly stripped of the regular in- 
habitants. What but a pestilence or a massacre 
could have thus extinguished the look of life in 
one of the most active and populous cities of the 
east ? The Roman centinels were almost the onlv 
beings that I could discover in my passage of the 
long streets from the foot of the upper city to the 
mount of the temple. 



20 SALATHIEL. 

All this was favourable to my extreme anxiety to 
escape every eye of my countrymen ; yet I cannot 
tell with what a throbbing of heart, and variety 
of feverish emotion, I at length reached the thres- 
hold of my dwelling. Though young, I was a hus- 
band and a father. What might not have hap- 
pened since the sunset of the evening before? for 
my evil doings, for which may He, with whom 
mercy lies at the right hand and judgment at the 
left, have mercy on me, had fatally occupied the 
night. I listened at the door, with my heart upon 
my lips. I dared not open it. My suspense was 
at length relieved by my wife's voice; she was 
weeping. I fell on my knees, and thanked Hea- 
ven that she was alive. 

But my infant ! I thought of the sword that 
smote the first-born in the land of bondage, and 
felt that Judah, guilty as Egypt, might well dread 
its punishment. Was it for my first-born that the 
sobs of its angel mother had arisen in her loneli- 
ness? Another pause of bitter suspense — and I 
heard the laugh of my babe as it awoke in her 
arms. 

The first human sensation that I had felt for so 
many hours, was almost overpowering ; and with- 
out regarding the squalidness of my dress, and the 
look of famine and fatigue that must have betray- 



SALATHIEL. 21 

ed where I had been, I should have rushed into 
the chamber. But at that moment the third trum- 
pet sounded. I had now no time for the things of 
this world. I plunged into the bath, cleansed my- 
self from the pollution of the mountain, hastily 
girt on me the sacerdotal tunic and girdle ; and 
with the sacred fillet on my burning brow, and the 
censer in my shaking hand, passed through the 
cloisters, and took my place before the altar. 



22 SALATHIEL. 



CHAPTER III. 

Of all the labours of human wealth and power 
devoted to worship, the temple within whose courts 
I then stood was the most mighty. In my after 
years, the years of my unhappy wanderings, far 
from the graves of my kindred, I have seen all the 
most famous shrines of the great kingdoms of ido- 
latry. Constrained by cruel circumstance, and the 
still sterner cruelty of man, I have stood before 
the altar of the Ephesian Diana, the master-piece 
of Ionian splendour ; I have strayed through the 
woods of Delphi, and been made a reluctant wit- 
ness of the superb mysteries of that chief of the 
oracles of imposture. Dragged in chains, I have 
been forced to join the procession round the 
Minerva of the Acropolis, and almost forgot my 
chains in wonder at that monument of a genius 



SALATHIEL. 23 

which ought to have been consecrated only to the 
true God by whom it was given. The temple of 
the Capitoline Jove, the Sancta Sophia of the 
Rome of Constantine, the still more stupendous 
and costly fabric iu which the third Rome stili 
bows before the fisherman of Galilee ; all have 
been known to my step, that knows all things but 
rest ; but all were dreams and shadows to the 
grandeur, the dazzling beauty, the almost un- 
earthly glory of that temple which once covered 
the ** Mount of Vision " of the city of the Lord. 

At the distance of almost two thousand years, 
I have its image on my mind's eye with living and 
painful fulness. I see the court of the Gentiles 
circling the whole ; a fortress of the whitest mar- 
ble, with its wall rising six hundred feet from the 
valley ; its kingly entrance, worthy of the fame of 
Solomon ; its innumerable and stately dwellings for 
the priests and officers of the temple, and above 
them, glittering like a succession of diadems, those 
alabaster porticoes and colonnades in which the 
chiefs and sages of Jerusalem sat teaching the 
people, or walked, breathing the pure air, and 
gazing on the grandeur of a landscape which swept 
the whole amphitheatre of the mountains. I see, 
rising above this stupendous boundary, the court 
of the Jewish women separated by its porphyry 



24 SALATHIEL. 

pillars and richly-sculptured wall ; above this, the 
separated court of the men ; still higher, the court 
of the priests ; and highest, the crowning splendour 
of all, the central temple, the place of the Sanc- 
tuary, and of the Holy of Holies, covered with 
plates of gold, its roof planted with lofty spear- 
heads of gold, the most precious marbles and metals 
every where flashing back the day, till Mount 
Moriah stood forth to the eye of the stranger ap- 
proaching Jerusalem, what it had been so often 
described by its bards and people, a " mountain of 
snow studded with jewels." 

The grandeur of the worship was worthy of this 
glory of architecture. Four-and-twenty thousand 
Levites ministered by turns, — a thousand at a 
time. Four thousand more performed the lower 
offices. Four thousand singers and minstrels, 
with the harp, the trumpet, and all the richest in- 
struments of a land whose native genius was mu- 
sic, and whose climate and landscape led men in- 
stinctively to delight in the charm of sound, 
chaunted the inspired songs of our warrior king, 
and filled up the pauses of prayer with harmonies 
that transported the spirit beyond the cares and 
passions of a troubled world. 

' I was standing before the altar of burnt-off'er- 
ings, vvith the Levite at my side holding the lamb; 



SALATHIEL. 25 

the cup was in my hand, and I was about to pour 
the wine on the victim, when I was startled by 
the sound of hurried feet. In another moment 
the gate of the court was abruptly thrown back, 
and a figure rushed in ; it was the high priest, but 
not in the robes of ceremony which it was custo- 
mary for him to wear in the seasons of the greater 
festivals. He was covered with the common ves- 
ture of the priesthood, and was evidently anxious 
to use it for total concealment. His face was 
buried in the folds of his cloak, and he walked 
with blind precipitation towards the sanctuary. 
But he had scarcely reached it, when a new feel- 
ing stopped him; and he turned to the altar, where 
I was standing in mute surprise. The cloak fell 
from his visage ; it was pale as death ; the habi- 
tual sternness of feature which rendered him a ter- 
ror to the people, had collapsed into feebleness; 
and while he gazed on the flame, I thought I saw 
the glistening of a tear on a cheek that had never 
exhibited human emotion before. But no time 
was left for question, even if reverence had not 
restrained me. He suddenly grasped the head of 
the lamb, as was customary for those who offered 
up an expiation for their own sin ; his lip, ashy 
white, quivered with broken prayer ; then, snatch- 
ing the knife from the Levite, he plunged it into 
VOL. I. B 



26 SALATHIEL. 

the animal's throat, and with his hands covered 
with blood, and with a groan that echoed despair, 
again rushed distractedly to the porch of the 
Holy House, flung aside in fierce irreverence the 
veil of the sanctuary, and darted in. 

There was a subterranean passage from the in- 
terior of the sanctuary to the High Priest's clois- 
ter ; through which I conceived that he had gone. 
But, on passing near the porch, at the close of the 
sacrifice, I heard a cry of agony from within that 
penetrated my soul. 

I had never loved the head of our priesthood. 
He was a haughty and hard-hearted man; insolent 
in his office, which he had obtained by no unsus- 
picious means; and a ready tool alike of the popu- 
lar caprice, aad of the tyranny of our foreign 
masters. 

But he was a man ; was a man of my own order ; 
and was it for one like me to triumph over even 
the most abject criminal of earth ? I ascended the 
steps of the porch, and with a sinking heart and 
trembling hand, entered the sanctuary. 

But— what I saw there I have no power to tell! 
To this moment, the recollection overwhelms my 
senses. Words were not made to utter it. The 
ear of man was not made to hear it. 

Before me moved things mightier than of mortal 
vision, thronging shapes of terror, mysterious gran- 



SALATHIEL. 27 

deurs, essential power, embodied prophecy ! The 
Veil was rent in twain ! How could man behold, 
and live ! 

When I lifted my face from the ground again, 
I saw but the High Priest. He was kneeling, 
with his hands clasped before his eyes ; his lips 
strained wide, as if hibouring to utter a voice ; 
and his whole frame rigid and cold as a corpse. I 
vainly spoke, and attempted to rouse him ; terror, 
or more than terror had benumbed his powers; and 
unwilling to suffer him to be seen in this extremity, 
I bore him in my arms to the subterranean. 

But a tumult, of which I could scarcely con- 
jecture the cause, checked me. The trampling of 
multitudes, and cries of fury and fear, echoed round 
the Temple; and in the sudden apprehension, the 
lirst and most fearful to the priest of Judah, that 
the Romans were about to commence their often 
threatened plunder, I lai^ down my unhappy 
burthen beside the door of the passage, and re- 
turned to defend, or die with, our perishing glory. 

The sanctuary in which I stood was wholly light- 
ed by the lamps that burned round the walls. But 
when, at length unable to suppress my alarm at 
the growing uproar, I went to the porch, I left 
comparative day behind me; a gloom sicklier than 
that of tempest, and thicker than that of smoke, 



28 SALATHIEL. 

overspread the sky. The sun, which I had seen 
like a fiery buckler hanging over the city, was ut- 
terly gone. Even while I looked, the darkness 
deepened, and the blackness of night, of night 
without a star, fell far and wide upon the horizon. 

It has been my fate, and a fearful part of my 
punishment, always to conceive that the calamities 
of nature and nations were connected with my 
crime. I have tried to reason away this impres- 
sion ; but it has clung to me like an iron chain ; 
like the shirt of the Centaur, nothing could tear 
it away that left the life : I have felt it hanging 
over my brain with the weight of a thunder-cloud. 
As I glanced into the gloom, the thought smote 
me, that it was I who had brought this Egyptian 
plague, this horrid privation of the first element of 
life upon my country, perhaps upon the world, per- 
haps never to be relieved ; for it came condens- 
ing, depth on depth, till it seemed to have ex- 
cluded all possibility of the existence of light ; it 
was like that of our old oppressors, darkness that 
might be felt, the darkness of an universal grave. 

I formed my fierce determination at once, and 
resolved to fly from my priesthood, from my kin- 
dred, from my country; to linger out my days, 
my bitter, baiiishe^, blasted days, in some wilder- 
iiess, where my presence would not be a curse, 



SALATHIEL. 29 

where but the lion and the tiger should be my 
fellow dwellers, where the sands could not be 
made the more barren for my fatal tread, nor the 
fountains more bitter for my desperate and eternal 
tears. 

The singular presence of mind found in some 
men in the midst of universal perturbation, one of 
the most effective qualities of our nature, and at- 
tributed to the highest vigour of heart and under- 
standing, is not always deserving of such proud 
parentage. It is sometimes the child of mere brute 
ignorance of danger, sometimes of habitual fero- 
city, — in my instance it was that of madness ; the 
fierce energy that leads the maniac safe over roofs 
and battlements. A}\ in the temple was confusion. 
The priests lay flung at the feet of the altars; 
or, clinging together in groups of helplessness and 
dismay, waited speechless for the devastation 
that was to visit them in this unnatural night. 
I walked through all, without a fear or a hope 
under heaven. 

Through the solid gloom, and among heaps of 
men and sacred things cast under my feet, iike the 
spoil and corpses of some stormed camp, I made 
my way to my dwelling, direct and unimpeded, 
as if I walked in the light of day. I found my 
wife in deeper terror at my long absence than 



30 SALATHIEL. 

even at the darkness. She sprang forward to my 
voice, and, falling on my neck, shed the tears of 
joy and love. But few words passed between us, 
for but few were necessary to bid her with her 
babe follow me. She would have followed me to 
the ends of the earth. 

Oh Miriam, Miriam ! how often have I thought 
of thee in my long pilgrimage ! how often, like 
that of a spirit descended to minister consolation 
to the wanderer, have I seen, in my midnight 
watching, thy countenance of more than woman's 
beauty ! To me thou hast never died. Thy more 
than man's loftiness of soul, thy generons fidelity 
of love to a wayward and unhappy heart ; thy pa- 
tient treading with me along the path that I had 
sowed with the thorn and thistle for thy feet, but 
which should have been covered with the wealth 
of princes to be worthy of thy loveliness and thy 
virtues ; all rise in memory and condemnation be- 
fore the chief of sinners. Age after age have I 
travelled to thy lonely grave ; age after age have I 
wept and prayed upon the dust that was once per- 
fection. In all the hardness forced upon me by a 
stern world ; in all the hatred of mankind that the 
insolence of the barbarian and the persecutor has 
bound round my bosom like a mail of iron, I have 
preserved one source of feeling sacred ; a solitary 



SALATHIEL. 31 

fount to feed the little vegetation of a withered 
heart, the love of thee : perhaps, to be a sign of 
that regenerate time, when the curse shall be 
withdrawn ; perhaps, to be in mercy the source 
from which that more than desert, thy husband's 
soul, shall be refreshed, and the barrenness flou- 
rish with the flowers of the paradise of God ! 

Throwing off* my robe of priesthood, as I then 
thought, for ever, I went forth, leading my heroic 
wife in one hand, and bearing my child in the 
other, I had left behind me sumptuous things, 
wealth transmitted from a long line of illustrious 
ancestry. I cared not for them. Wealth a thou- 
sand times more precious was within my embrace. 
Yet when I touched the threshold, the last sensa- 
tion of divorce from all that I had been came over 
my mind. My w^ife felt the trembling of my 
frame, and, with that gentle firmness which in the 
hour of trouble often exalts the fortitude of woman 
above the headlong and inflamed courage of the 
warrior, she bade me be of good cheer. I felt her 
lips on my hand at the moment ; the touch gave 
new energy to my whole being ; and I bounded 
forward into the ocean of darkness. 

Without impediment or error, I made my way 
over and among the crowds that strewed the court 
of the Gentiles. I heard many a prayer and 



32 SALATHIEL. 

many a groan ; but T had now no more to do with 
man ; and forced my way steadily to the great 
portal. Thus far, if I had been stricken with utter 
blindness, I could not have been less guided by 
the eye. But, on passing into the streets of the 
lower city, a scattered torch, from time to time, 
struggling through the darkness, like the lamp in 
a sepulchre, gave me glimpses of the scene. 

The broad avenues were encumbered with the 
living, in the semblance of the dead. All was 
prostration, or those attitudes into which men are 
thrown by terror beyond the strength or spirit of 
man to resist. The cloud that, from my melan- 
choly bed above the valley of Hinnom, I had seen 
rolling up the hills, was this multitude. A spec- 
tacle, whose name shall never pass my lips, had 
drawn them all by a cruel, a frantic curiosity out 
of Jerusalem, and left it the solitude that had 
surprised me. Preternatural eclipse and horror fell 
on them, and their thousands madly rushed back 
to perish, if perish they must, within the walls of 
the City of Holiness. Still the multitude came 
pouring in ; their distant trampling had the sound 
of a cataract ; and their outcries of pain, and rage, 
and terror, were like what I have since heard, but 
more feebly, sent up from the field of battle. 

I struggled on, avoiding the living torrent by 



SALATHIEL. 33 

the ear, and slowly threading my way wherever 
I heard the voices least numerous ; but my task 
was one of extreme toil; and but for those more 
than the treasures of the earth to me, whose lives 
depended on my efforts, I should willingly have 
lain down, and suffered the multitude to trample 
me into the grave. 

How long I thus struggled I know not. But a 
yell of peculiar and universal terror that burst 
round me, made me turn my reluctant eyes to- 
wards Jerusalem. The cause of this new alarm 
was seen at once. 

A large sphere of fire fiercely shot through the 
heavens, lighting its track down the murky air, 
and casting a disastrous and pallid illumination on 
the myriads of gazers below. It stopped above 
the city ; and exploded in thunder, flashing over 
the whole horizon, but covering the temple with 
a blaze which gave it the aspect of a huge mass 
of metal glowing in the furnace. Every outline of 
the architecture, every pillar, every pinnacle, was 
seen with a livid and terrible distinctness. 

Again all vanished. I heard the hollow roar of 
■an earthquake ; the ground rose and heaved under 
our feet. I heard the crash of buildings, the fall 
of fragments of the hills, and, louder than both, 
the groan of the multitude. I caught my wife and 



34 SALATHIEL. 

child closer to my bosom. In the next moment I 
felt the ground give way beneath me ; a sulphu- 
rous vapour took away my breath ; and I was 
caught up in a whirlwind of dust and ashes 1 



SALATHIEL. 



CHAPTER IV. 

When I recovered my senses, all was so much 
changed round me, that I could scarcely be per- 
suaded that either the past or the present was not 
a dream. I had no consciousness of any interval 
between them, more than that of having closed 
my eyes at one instant, to open them at the next. 
Yet the curtains of a tent waved round me in 
a breeze fragrant with the breath of roses and the 
balsam-tree. Beyond the gardens and meadows* 
from which those odours sprang, a river shone, 
like a path of lapis lazuli, in the calm effulgence of 
the western sun. Tents were pitched, from which 
I heard the sounds of pastoral instruments ; camels 
were drinking and grazing along the river-side ; 
and turbaned men and maidens were ranging over 



36 SALATHIEL. 

the fields, or sitting on the banks to enjoy the cool 
of the delicious evening. 

While I tried to collect my senses, and discover 
whether this was more than one of those sports of a 
wayward fancy, which tantalise the bed of the sick 
mind, I heard a low hymn ; and listened to the 
sounds with breathless anxiety. The voice I knew 
at once — it was Miriam's. But in the disorder of 
my brain, and the strange circumstances which had 
filled the late days, in that total feebleness too in 
which I could not move a limb or utter a word, 
a persuasion seized me that I was already beyond 
the final boundeiry of mortals. All before me was 
like that paradise from which the crime of our 
great forefather had driven man into banishment. 
I remembered the convulsion of the earth in which 
I had sunk ; and asked myself, could man be wrap- 
ped in the flame, and the whirlwind that tore up 
mountains like the roots of flowers, and yet live ? 
Still it was pain to me to think that the lovely and 
the young should have so soon gone down to the 
grave — that Miriam should have been cut off from 
the long enjoyment of life due to her gentle vir- 
tue — that a creature, delicate of form, and beau- 
tiful as the young vine, should have been torn 
away from the world by the grasp of a death so 
sudden and terrible. 



SALATHIEL. 37 

In this perplexity I closed my eyes to collect 
my thoughts, and probably exhibited some strong 
emotion of countenance ; for I was roused by a 
cry, — "He lives, he lives!" I looked up — Miriam 
stood before me, clasping her lovely hands with the 
wildness of joy unspeakable, and shedding tears, 
that large and lustrous fell down her glowing 
cheeks, like dew upon the pomegranate. She 
threw herself upon my pillow, kissed my forehead 
with lips that breathed new life into me ; then 
pressing my chill hand between hers, knelt down, 
and with a look worthy of that heaven on which it 
was fixed, radiant with beauty, and holiness, and 
joy, as the face of an angel, offered up her thanks- 
giving. 

The explanation of the scene that perplexed me 
was given in a few words, interrupted only by 
tears and sighs of delight. With the burst of the 
earthquake, the supernatural darkness was cleared 
away. I was flung under the shelter of one of 
those caves which abound in the gorges of the 
mountains round Jerusalem. Miriam and her 
infant were flung by my side, yet unhurt. While 
I lay insensible in her arms, she, by singular good 
fortune, found herself surrounded by a troop of 
our kinsmen, returning from the city, where terror 
had suffered but few to remain. They placed her 



38 SALATHIEL. 

and her infant on their camels. Me they would 
have consig-ned to the sepulchre of the priests ; 
but Miriam was not to be shaken in her purpose 
to watch over me until all hope was gone. I was 
thus carried along ; and they were now three days 
on their journey homewards. The landscape before 
me was Samaria. 

My natural destination would have been the 
cities of the priests, which lay to the south, bor- 
dering upon Hebron. In those thirteen opulent 
and noble residences allotted to the higher minis- 
try of the temple, they enjoyed all that could be 
offered by the munificent wisdom of the state ; — 
wealth, that raised them above the pressures of 
life, yet not so great as to extinguish the power of 
intellectual distinction, or the love of the loftier 
virtues. — The means of mental cultivation were 
provided for them with more than royal liberality. 
Copies of the sacred books, multiplied in every 
form, and adorned with the finest skill of the 
pencil and the sculptor in gold and other precious 
materials, attested at once the reverence of the 
nation for its law, and the perfection to which it 
had brought the decorative arts. The works of 
strangers, eminent for genius or knowledge, or 
even for the singularity of their subject, were not 
less to be found in those stately treasure-houses of 



SALATHIEL. 39 

mind. There the priest might relax his spirit from 
the sublimer studies of his country, by the bold 
and brilliant epic of Greece ; the fantastic passion, 
and figured beauty of the Persian poesy ; or the 
alternate severity and sweetness of the Indian 
drama : — that startling union of all lovely images 
of nature, the bloom and fragrance of flowers, the 
hues of the oriental heaven, and the perfumes of 
isles of spice and cinnamon, with the grim and 
subterranean terrors of a gigantic idolatry. There 
he might spread the philosophic wing from the 
glittering creations of Grecian metaphysics, to 
their dark and early oracles in the East ; or, 
stopping in his central flight, plunge into the 
profound of Egyptian mystery, where science lies, 
like the mummy, wrapped in a thousand folds that 
preserve the form, but preserve it with the living 
principle gone. 

Music, of all pleasures the most intellectual, 
that glorious painting to the ear, that rich mas- 
tery of the gloomier emotions of our nature, was 
studied by the priesthood with a skill that in- 
fluenced the habits of the country. How often 
have my fiercest perturbations sunk at the sounds 
that once filled the breezes of Judea ! How often, 
when my brain was burning, and the blood ran 
through my veins like molten brass, have I been 



40 SALATHIEL. 

softened down to painless tears, by the chorus from 
onr hills, the mellow harmonies of harp and horn, 
blending with the voices of the youths and maidens 
of Israel ! How often have I in the night listened, 
while the chaunt, ascending with a native richness 
to which the skill of other nations was dissonance, 
floated upwards like a cloud of incense bearing the 
aspirations of holiness and gratitude to the throne 
of Him whom man hath not seen, nor can see ! 

But those times are sunk deep in the great gulf, 
that absorbs the happiness and genius of man. I 
have since traversed my country in its length and 
breadth ; I have marked with my weary feet every 
valley, and made my restless bed upon every hill 
from Idumea to Lebanon, and from the Assyrian 
sands to the waters of the Mediterranean ; yet the 
harp and voice were dead. I heard sounds on the 
hills ; but they were the cries of the villagers 
flying before some tyrant gatherer of a tyrant's 
tribute. I heard sounds in the midnight ; but 
they were the howl of the wolf, and the yell of 
the hysena, revelling over the naked and dis- 
honoured graves which the Turk had given in his 
scorn to the people of my fathers. 

But the study to which the largest expenditure 
of wealth and labour was devoted, was, as it ought 
to be, that of the sacred books of Israel. It only 



SALATHIEL. 41 

makes me rebellious against the decrees of fate, to 
think cf the incomparable richness and immaculate 
character of the volumes over which I have so 
often hung, and look upon the diminished and 
degraded exterior in which their wisdom now lies 
before man. Where are now the cases covered 
with jewels, the clasps of topaz and diamond ? the 
golden arks in which the volume of the hope of 
Israel lay, too precious not to be humiliated by the 
contact with even the richest treasure of earth ? 
Where are the tissued curtains, that hid, as in 
a sanctuary, that mighty roll too sacred to be 
glanced on by the casual eye? But the spoiler — 
the spoiler ! The Arab, the Parthian, the human 
tiger of the north, that lies crouching for a thou- 
sand years in the sheep-fold of Judah ! Is there 
not a sword ? — Is there not a judgment ? — Terribly 
will it judge the oppressor. 

The home of my kinsmen was in the allotment 
of Naphtali. The original tribe revolted in the 
general schism of the kingdoms of Judah and 
Israel ; and was swept into the Assyrian capti- 
vity. But on the restoration by Cyrus, fragments 
of all the captive tribes returned, and were suf- 
fered to resume their lands. Misfortune wrought 
its moral on them : the chief families pledged their 
allegiance once more to Judah, and were exem- 



42 SALATHIEL. 

plary in paying homage to the spirit and ordi- 
nances of their religion. 

We speeded through the hated soil of Samaria. 
The hand of Heaven is not as the hand of man. 
Its blow is not given but in justice; and it leaves 
a deep and fearful trace behind. — Its wrath, like 
its own tempest, gathers long above the eye ; but 
when it strikes, the scorched and shattered land 
gives stern evidence that there the fiery plough- 
share has been driven. By the Babylonish cap- 
tivity, the whole strength of the chosen people 
suffered a shock from which it never fully rose 
again. The richest portion of Canaan, its central 
tract, cutting off the northern from the southern 
tribes, and lying between its chief river and the 
sea, was alienated to worse than strangers — to 
a mingled race of apostate Jews, Assyrian plunder- 
ers, and refugees from Arabia and Syria. For a 
perpetual brand on the Jewish name, the last in- 
fliction of a hostile and impure worship was raised 
among them ; and on Mount Gerizim stood a tem- 
ple to which Samaria paid its homage, the rival of 
the temple of Jerusalem. 

The rancorous enmity borne by the Samari- 
tans to the subjects of Judah, for ages made all 
intercourse between Jerusalem and the north diffi- 
cult. It was often totally interrupted by war — 



SALATHIEL. 4S 

it was dangerous in peace ; and the ferocious cha- 
racter of the population, and the bitter antipathy 
of the government, made it to the Jew a land of 
robbers. 

But among the evils of the Roman conquest, 
was mingled this good, that it suffered no subor- 
dinate tyranny. Its sword cut away at a blow all 
those minor oppressions which make the misery of 
provincial life. If the mountain robber invaded 
the plain, as was his custom of old, the Roman 
cavalry were instantly on him with the spear, until 
he took refuge in the mountains — if he resisted in 
his native fastnesses, the Legionaries pursued him 
with torch and sword, stifled him if he remained 
in his cave, or stabbed him at its mouth. 

If quarrels arose between two villages, the co- 
horts burned both to the ground ; and the execu- 
tion was done with a promptitude and complete- 
ness that less resembled the ordinary operations 
of war, than the work of superhuman power. 
The Roman knowledge of our disturbances was 
instantaneous. Signals established on the hills 
conveyed intelligence with the speed of light from 
the remotest corners of the land to their principal 
stations. Even in our subsequent conspiracies, 
the first knowledge that they had broken out was 
often conveyed to their partisans in the next dis- 



44 SALATHIEL. 

trict, by the movement of the Roman troops. 
Well had they chosen the eagle for their ensign. 
They rushed with the eagle's rapidity on their vic- 
tim ; and when it was stretched in blood, they left 
the spot of vengeance as if they had left it on the 
wing. Their march had the rapidity of the most 
hurried retreat, and the steadiness of the most 
secure triumph. They left nothing behind, but 
the marks of their irresistible power. 

All the armies of the earth have since passed 
before me. I have seen the equals of the legions 
in courage and discipline ; and their superiors 
in those arms by which human life is at the caprice 
of ambition. But their equals I have never seen 
in the individual fitness of the soldier for war ; in 
his fleetness, muscular vigour, and expertness in 
the use of his weapons ; in his quick adaptation to 
all the multiplied purposes of the ancient campaign 
— from the digging of a trench, or the manage- 
ment of a catapult, to the assault of a citadel ; in 
his iron endurance of the vicissitudes of climate ; in 
the length and regularity of his marches ; or in the 
rapidity, boldness, and dexterity of his manoeuvre in 
the field. Yet, it is but a melancholy tribute to the 
valour of my countrymen, to record the Roman 
acknowledgment, that of all the nations conquered 
by Rome, Judea bore the chain with the haughtiest 



SALATHIEL. 45 

dignity, and most frequently and fiercely contested 
the supremacy of the sword. 

Under that stern supremacy the Samaritan 
had long shrunk, and Canaan enjoyed an exemp- 
tion from the harassing cruelty of petty war. We 
now passed with our long caravan unguarded, and 
moving at will through fields rich with the luxu- 
riance of an Eastern summer, where our fathers 
would have scarcely ventured but with an army. 
I made no resistance to being thus led away to a re- 
gion so remote from my own. To have returned to 
the cities of the priests would have but given me 
hourly agony. • 

Even the gates of Jerusalem were to my feel- 
ings anathema. — The whole fabric of my mind had 
undergone a revolution ; like a man tossed at the 
mercy of the tempest, I sought but a shore — and 
all shores were alike to him who must be an exile 
for ever. 



46 SALATHIEL. 



CHAPTER V. 

The country through which we passed, after 
leaving the boundaries of Samaria — where, with 
all its peace, no Jew could tread, but as in a land 
of strangers — was new to me. My life had been 
till now spent in study, or in serving the altar ; and 
I had heard, with the usual and unwise indifference 
of men devoted to books, the praise of the pictur- 
esque and stately provinces that still remained to 
our People. I was now to see for myself; and be 
compelled, as we advanced, to reproach the idle 
prejudice that had thus long deprived me, and 
might for ever deprive so many of my consecrated 
brethren, of an enjoyment cheering to the human 
heart, and full of lofty and hallowed memory to 
the man of Israel. 

As we passed along, less travelling than wan- 
dering at pleasure, through regions where every 
winding of the marble hill, or ascent of the lovely 
and fruitful valley, showed us some sudden and 



SALATHIEL. 47 

romantic beauty of landscape, my kinsmen took a 
natural pride in pointings out the noble features 
that made Canaan a living history of Providence. 

What were even the trophy-covered hills of 
Greece, or the monumental plains of Italy, to the 
hills and plains where the memorial told of the 
miracles and the presence of the Supreme ? " Look 
to that rock," they would exclaim; ** there de- 
scended the angel of the Presence ! On the sum- 
mit of that cloudy ridge stood Ezekiel, when he 
saw the vision of the latter days. Look to yonder 
cleft in the mountains — there fell the lightning 
from heaven on the Philistine." 

In our travel we reached a valley, a spot of 
singular beauty and seclusion, blushing with flow- 
ers, and sheeted with the olive from its edge 
down to a stream that rushed brightly through 
its bosom. There was no dwelling of man in it; 
but on a gentler slope of the declivity stood a 
gigantic terebinth-tree. More than curiosity was 
attracted by this delicious spot, for the laugh and 
talking of the caravan had instantly subsided at 
the sight. All, by a common impulse, dismounted 
from their horses and camels ; and though it was 
still far from sunset, the tents were pitched, and 
preparations made for prayer. The spot reminded 
me of the valley of Hebron, sacred to the Jewish 



48 SALATHIEL. 

heart as the burial-place of Abraham, Sarah, and 
Isaac ; — may they sleep in the bosom of the Lord 1 
The terebinth-tree, under which the greatest of 
the patriarchs sat and talked with the angels — the 
fountain — the cave of Macpelah, in which his 
mortal remnant returned to the earth, to come 
again in glory, appeared to lie before me. 

From the day of my unspeakable crime, I had 
never joined in prayer with my people. I was still 
a believer in the faith of Israel. I even clung to it 
with the nervous violence of one who, in a ship- 
wreck, feels that his only hope is the plank in his 
grasp ; and that some more powerful hand is tear- 
ing even that plank away. But the sight of hu- 
man beings enjoying the placid consolations of 
prayer, had from the first moment overwhelmed 
me with so keen a sense of my misfortune — the 
pious gentleness of attitude and voice — the calm 
uplifted hand, and low and solemn aspiration, were 
so deep a contrast to the involuntary wildness 
and broken utterings of a heart bound in more than 
adamantine chains; that I shrank from the re- 
buke, and howled in solitude. 

I went forth into the valley, and was soon lost 
in its thick vegetation. The sound of the hymn 
that sank down in mingled sweetness with the 
murmuring of the evening air through the leaves, 



SALATHIEL. 49 

and the bubbling of the brook below, alone told me 
that I was near human beings. I sat upon a frag- 
ment of turf, embroidered as never was kingly foot- 
stool, and with my hands clasped on my eyes, to 
remove from me all the images of life, gave way 
to that visionary and wasteful mood of mind, in 
which ideas come and pass in crowds without shape, 
and leaving no more impression than the drops of 
a sunshower on the trees. I had remained long in 
this half-dreaming confusion, and had almost ima- 
gined myself transported to some intermediate 
realm of being, v/here a part of the infliction was 
that of being startled by keen flashes of light from 
this upper world, when I was roused by the voice 
of Eleazar, the brother of Miriam, at my side. 

His manly and generous countenance expressed 
mingled anxiety and gladness at discovering me. 
" The whole camp," said he, "have been alarmed 
at your absence, and have searched, for these three 
hours, through every part of our day's journey. 
Miriam's distraction at length urged me to leave 
her ; and it was by her instinct that I took my 
way down the only path hitherto unsearched, and 
where, indeed, from fear or reverence of the place, 
few but myself would have willingly come." He 
called to an attendant, and sending him up the side 
VOL. I. c 



50 SALATHIEL. 

of the valley with the tidings, we followed slowly, 
for I was still feeble. As we emerged into an 
opener space, the moon lying on masses of cloud, 
like a sultana pillowed on couches of silver, showed 
me, in her strong illumination of the forest, the 
flashes which had added to the bewildered pain of 
my reverie. While I talked with natural anima- 
tion of the splendour of the heavens, and pointed 
out the lines and figures on the moon's disk, 
which made it probable that it was, like earth, a 
place of habitation ; he suddenly pressed my hand, 
and stopping, with his eyes fixed on my face, 
*' How," said he, " does it happen, my friend, my 

brother, Salathiel ?" 1 started, as if my name, 

the name of my illustrious ancestor, direct in des- 
cent from the father of the faithful, were an accu- 
sation. He proceeded with but a more ardent 
pressure of my quivering hand — *' How is it to be 
accounted for, that you, with such contemplations, 
and the knowledge that gives them the dignity of 
science, can yet be so habitually given over to 
gloom I — Serious crime I will not believe in you ; 
though the best of us are stained. But your cha- 
racter is pure ; I know your nature to be too lofty 
for the degenerate indulgence of the passions ; 
and Miriam's love for you, a love passing that of 



SALATHIEL. 51 

woman, is, in itself, a seal of virtue. Answer 
me — Can the wealth, power, or influence of your 
brother and his house, nay, of his tribe, assist you ?" 
I was silent. He paused ; and we walked on 
awhile, without a sound but that of our tread 
among the leaves : but his mind was full, and it 
would have way. ** Salathiel," said he, "you do 
injustice to yourself, to your wife, and to your 
friends. This gloom that sits eternally on your 
forehead, must wear away all your uses in society : 
it bathes your incomparable wife's pillow in tears ; 
and it disheartens and distresses us all. Answer 
me as one man of honour and integrity would 
another. Have you been disappointed in your 
ambition ? I know your claims. — You have know- 
ledge surpassing that of a multitude of your con- 
temporaries ; — you have talents that ought to be 
honoured: your character is unimpeached and un- 
impeachable. — Such things ought to have already 
lifted you to eminence. Have you found yourself 
thwarted by the common trickery of official life ? 
Has some paltry sycophant crept up before you by 
the oblique path that honour disdains ? Or have 
you felt yourself an excluded and marked man, 
merely for the display of that manlier vigour, 
richer genius, and more generous and sincere 



52 ' SALATHIEL. 

impulse of heart, which to the conscious inferiority 
of the rabble of understanding', is gall and worm- 
wood ? Or have you taken too deeply into your 
resentment, the common criminal negligence that 
besets common minds in power, and makes them 
carelessly fling away upon incapacity, and g'uiltily 
withhold from worth, the rewards which were in- 
trusted to them, as a sacred deposit, for the en- 
couragement of the national ability and virtue ?" 

I strongly disavowed all conceptions of the kind ; 
and assured him that I felt neither peculiar merits 
nor peculiar injuries. " I had seen too much of 
what ambition and worldly success were made of, 
to allow hope to excite, or failure to depress me. 
I am even," added I, " so far from being the slave 
of that most vulgar intemperance of a deranged 
heart, the diseased craving for the miserable in- 
dulgences of w^orldly distinction, that would to 
Heaven I might never again enter the gates of 
Jerusalem." 

He started back in surprise. The confession 
had been altogether unintended ; and I looked up 
to see the burst of Jewish wrath descending upon 
me. — I saw none. My kinsman's fine countenance 
was brightened with a lofty joy. *' Then you have 
renounced. — But no, it is yet too soon.— At your 



SALATHIEL. 53 

age, with your prospects, can you have renounced 
the career offered to you among the rulers of 
Israel V 

" I have renounced." 

" Sincerely, solemnly, upon conviction?" 

" From the bottom of my soul ; now, and for 
ever !" 

We had reached the open space in front of the 
terebinth-tree that stood in majesty, extending its 
stately branches over a space cleared of all other 
trees, a sovereign of the forest. In silence he led 
me under the shade to a small tomb, on which the 
light fell with broken lustre. '* This," said he, 
"is the tomb of the greatest prophet on whose lips 
the wisdom of Heaven ever burned. There sleeps 
Isaiah ! — There is silent the voice that for fifty 
years spoke more than the thoughts of man in the 
ears of a guilty people. — There are cold the hands 
that struck the harp of more than mortal sounds to 
the glory of Him to whom earth and its kingdoms 
are but as the dust of the balance. — There lies the 
heart which neither the desert nor the dungeon, 
nor the teeth of the lion, nor the saw of Manasseb, 
could tame : — the denouncer of our crimes — the 
scourge of our apostacy — the prophet of that 
desolation which was to bow the grandeur of 
Judah to the grave, as the tree of the mountain 



54 SALATHIEL. 

in the whirlwind. Saint and martyr, let my life 
be as thine ; and if it be the will of God, let my 
death be even as thine." 

He threw himself on his knees, and remained in 
prayer for a time. I knelt with him, but no prayer 
would issue from my heart. He at length rose, 
and leading me into the moon-light, said, in a low 
voice — " Is there not, where the holy sleep, a 
holiness in the very ground? I waive all the 
superstitious feelings of the idolater, worshipping 
the dust of the creature, for the king alike of all. 
I pass over the natural human homage for the 
memory of those who have risen above us by the 
great qualities of their being. But if there are 
supernal influences acting upon the mind of man ; 
if the winged spirits that minister before the 
throne still descend to earth on missions of mercy, 
I will believe that their loved place is round the 
grave where sleeps the mortal portion of the holy. 
In all our journeys to the temple, it has been the 
custom of our shattered and humiliated tribe to 
pause beside this tomb, and offer up our homage 
to that Mightiest of the mighty, who made such 
men for the lights of Israel !" 

He earnestly repeated the question — ** Have 
you abandoned your office?" — ** Yes," was the 
answer, " totally; with full purpose never to re- 



SALATHIEL. 55 

sume it. In your mountains I will live with you, 
and with you I will die." Memory smote me as I 
pronounced the word : the refuge of the grave was 
not for me ! 

*' Then," said he, " you have relieved my spirit 
of a load : you are now my more than brother." 
He clasped me in his arms. " Yes, Salathiel, I 
know that your high heart must have scorned 
the prejudices of the Scribe and the Pharisee; 
you must have seen through and loathed the smi- 
ling hypocrisy, the rancorous bigotry, the furious 
thirst of blood, that are hourly sinking us below 
the lowest of the heathen. Hating the tyranny of 
the Roman ; as I live this hour, I would rather 
see the city of David inhabited by none but the 
idolater, or delivered over to the curse of Babylon, 
and made the couch of the lion and the serpent ; 
than see its courts filled with those impious traitors 
to the spirit of the law, those cruel extortioners 
under the mask of self-denial, those malignant 
revellers in human torture under the name of in- 
sulted religion ; whose joy is crime, and every 
hour of whose being but wearies the long-suffer- 
ing of God, and precipitates the ruin of my 
country.' 

He drew from his bosom, and imroUed in the 
moonlight, a small copy of the Scriptures : " My 



56 SALATHIEL. 

brother," said he, ** have you read the holy pro- 
phecies of him by whose grave we stand ?" My 
only answer was a smile; they were the chief 
study of the priesthood. " True," said he ; " no 
doubt, you have read the words of the prophet. 
But Wisdom is known of her children, and of 
them alone. Read here." 

I read the famous Haphtorah. ** Who hath 
believed our report, and to whom is the arm 
of the Lord revealed ? For he shall grow up 
before him as a tender plant, and as a root out 
of the dry ground ; he hath no form nor come- 
liness ; and when we shall see him, there is 
no beauty, that we should desire him. — He is 
despised, and rejected of men ; a man of sor- 
rows ! " 

He stopped me, laying his hand on my arm ; I 
felt his strong nerves tremble like an infant's. 

" Of whom hath the prophet spoken?" uttered 
he in a voice of intense anxiety. " Of whom ? of 
the Deliverer, that is to restore Judah ; him that 
is to come," was my answer. *' Him that is to 
come, still to comeV he exclaimed. ** God of 
Heaven, must the veil be for ever on the face of 
thy Israel ! When shall our darkness be light ; 
and the chain of our spirit be broken !" The glow 
and power of his countenance sank ; he took the 



SALATHIEL. 



57 



roll with a sigh, and replaced it in his robe ; then 
with his hands clasped across his bosom, and his 
head bowed, he led our silent way up the side of 
the valley. 



58 SALATHTEL. 



CHAPTER VI. 



We soon reached the hill country, and our road 
passed through what were once the allotments of 
Issachar, Zebulon, and Asher ; but by the Roman 
division, was now Upper Galilee. My health had 
been rapidly restored by the exercise and the 
balmy air. My more incurable disease was pre- 
vented by the journey from perhaps totally en- 
grossing my mind. Of all the antagonists to 
mental depression, travelling is the most vigorous : 
not the flight from place to place, as if evil were 
to be outrun ; nor the enclosure of the weary of 
life in some narrow vehicle that adds fever and 
pestilence to heaviness of heart ; but the passing 
at our ease through the open air and bright land- 
scape of a new country. 



S A LATH I EL. 59 

To me the novelty and loveliness of the land 
were combined with the memory of the most 
striking events in human record. I had, too, the 
advantage of a companionship, which would have 
enlivened travel through the Wilderness — brave 
and cheerful men, and women on whose minds 
and forms Nature laid her finest stamp of beauty. 

The name of Jew is now but another title for 
humiliation. Who that sees that fallen thing, 
with his countenance bent to the ground, and his 
form withered of its comeliness, tottering through 
the proud streets of Europe in some degrading 
occupation, and clothed in the robes of the beg- 
gared and the despised, could imagine the bold 
figures and gallant bearing of the lion-hunters, 
with whom, in the midst of shouts and songs of 
careless joy, I spurred my barb up the mountain 
paths of Galilee ! 

Yet, fallen as he is, the physiognomy of the 
Jew retains a share of its original beauty, suffi- 
cient to establish the claim of the people to have 
been the handsomest race on earth. Individuals of 
superior comeliness may often be found among the 
multitudes of mankind. But no nation, nor distinct 
part of any nation, can rival an equal number of 
the unhappy exiles of Tsrael, in the original impress 
of that hand which made man onlv a little lower 



60 SALATHIEL. 

than the ang-els. To conceive the Jew as he was, 
we should conceive the stern and watchful con- 
traction of the dark eye expanded ; the fierce and 
ridgy brow lowring no more ; the lip no longer 
gathered in habitual fear or scorn ; the cheek no 
longer sallow with want or pining, and the whole 
man elevated by the returning consciousness that 
he has a rank among nations. All his deformities 
have been the birth of his misfortunes. What 
beauty can we demand from the dungeon ? — what 
dignity of aspect from the hewers of wood and 
drawers of water for mankind ? Where shall we 
seek the magnificent form and illumined coun- 
tenance of the hero and the sage ? — from the heart 
cankered by the chain, from the plundered, the 
enslaved, the persecuted of two thousand years ? 

Of the daughters of my country I have never 
seen the equals in beauty. Our blood was Arab, 
softened down by various changes of state and 
climate, till it was finally brought to perfection in 
the most genial air, and the most generous soil of 
the globe. The vivid features of the Arab coun- 
tenance, no longer attenuated by the desert, as- 
sumed, in the plenty of Egypt, that fulness and 
fine proportion which still belongs to the dwellers 
by the Nile ; but the true change was on our en- 
trance into the promised land. Peace, the pos- 



SALATHIEL. 61 

session of property, days spent among the pleasant 
and healthful occupations of rural life, are in them- 
selves productive of the finer developements of the 
human form ; a form whose natural tendency is to 
beauty. But our nation had an additional and 
unshared source of nobleness of aspect ; it was free. 

The state of man in the most unfettered repub- 
lics of the ancient world was slavery, compared 
with the magnanimous and secure establishment 
of the Jewish commonwealth. During the three 
hundred golden years, from Moses to Samuel,— 
before, for our sins, we were given over to the 
madness of innovation, and the demand of an 
earthly diadem, — the Jew was free, in the loftiest 
sense of freedom ; free to do all good ; restricted 
only from evil ; every man pursuing the unob- 
structed course pointed out by his genius or his 
fortune ; every man protected by lavvs inviolable, 
or whose violation was instantly visited with 
punishment by the Eternal Sovereign alike of 
ruler and people. 

Freedom ! twin-sister of Virtue, thou brightest 
of all the spirits that descended in the train of 
Religion from the throne of God ; thou that leadest 
up man again to the early glories of his being ; 
angel, from the circle of whose presence happiness 
spreads like the sun-light over the darkness of the 



62 SALATHIEL. 

land; at the waving of whose sceptre, knowledge, 
and peace, and fortitude, and wisdom, stoop upon 
the wing ; at the voice of whose trumpet the more 
than grave is broken, and slavery gives up her 
dead ; when shall 1 see thy coming ? When shall 
I hear thy summons upon the mountains of my 
country, and rejoice in the regeneration and glory 
of the sons of Judah ? 

I have traversed nations ; and as I set my foot 
upon their boundary, I have said. Freedom is not 
here ! I saw the naked hill, the morass steaming 
with death, the field covered with weedy fallow, the 
sickly thicket encumbering the land ; — T saw the 
still more infallible signs, the downcast visage, the 
form degraded at once by loathsome indolence and 
desperate poverty ; the peasant cheerless and feeble 
in his field, the wolfish robber, the population of 
the cities crowded into huts and cells with pes- 
tilence for their fellow ; — I saw the contumely of 
man to man, the furious vindictiveness of popular 
rage, and I pronounced at the moment, This 
people is not free ! 

In the republics of heathen antiquity, the helot, 
the client sold for the extortion of the patron, and 
the born bondsman lingering out life in thankless 
toil, at once put to flight all conceptions of free- 
dom. In the midst of altars fuming to liberty, of 



SALATHIEL. 63 

harangues glowing with the most pompous protes- 
tations of scorn for servitude, of crowds inflated 
with the presumption that they disdained a master, 
the eye was insulted with the perpetual chain. 
The temple of Liberty was built upon the dungeon. 
Rome came, and unconsciously avenged the in- 
sulted name of freedom ; the master and the slave 
were bowed together ; and the dungeon was made 
the common dwelling of all. 

In the Italian republics of after ages, I saw the 
vigour that, living in the native soil of empire, has 
always sprung up on the lirst call. The time was 
changed since Italy poured its legions over the 
world. The volcano was now sleeping; yet the 
fire still burned within its womb, and threw out in 
its invisible strength the luxuriant qualities of the 
land of power. The innate Roman passion for 
sovereignty was no longer to find its triumphs in 
the field ; but it rushed up the paths of a loftier 
and more solid glory with a speed and strength 
that left mankind wondering below. The arts, 
adventure, legislation, literature in all its shapes, 
of the subtle, the rich, and the sublime, were the 
peaceful triumphs, whose laurels will entwine the 
Italian brow, when the wreath of the Cfesars is re- 
membered but as a badge of national folly and 
crime. 



64 SALATHIEL. 

But those republics knew freedom only by the 
name. All, within a few years from their birth, 
had abandoned its living principles — ^justice, tem- 
perance, and truth. I saw the soldiery of neigh- 
bour cities marching to mutual devastation, and 
I said, Freedom is not here ! I saw abject pri- 
vation mingled with boundless luxury; in the 
midst of the noblest works of architecture, the 
hovel ; in the pomps of citizens covered with cloth 
of gold, gazing groups of faces haggard with 
beggary and sin ; I saw the sold tribunal, the 
inexorable state-prison, the established spy, the 
protected assassin, the secret torture ; and I said. 
Freedom is not here! The pageant filled the 
streets with more than kingly blazonry, the trum- 
pets flourished, the multitude shouted, the painter 
covered the walls with immortal emblems, in 
honour of freedom ; I pointed to the dungeon, the 
rack, and the dagger ! Bitterer and deeper sign 
than all, I pointed to the exile of exiles, the broken 
man, whom even the broken trample, of all the 
undone the most undone, my outcast brother in the 
blood of Abraham ! 

I am not about to be his defender ; I am not 
regardless of his tremendous crime ; I cannot stand 
up alone against the voice of universal man, which 
has cried out that thus it shall be ; but I say it 



SALATHIEL. 65 

from the depths of my soul, and as I hope for rest 
to my miseries, that I never saw freedom survive 
in that land which loved to smite the Jew ! 

I saw one republic more, the mightiest and the 
last; for the justice of Heaven on the land, the 
most terrible ; for the mercy of Heaven to man- 
kind, the briefest in its devastation. But there all 
was hypocrisy that was not open horror ; the only 
equal rights were those of the equal robber ; the 
sacred figure of Liberty veiled its face ; and the 
offering on its violated shrine was the spoil of 
honour, bravery, and virtue. 

The daughters of our nation, sharing in the rights 
of its sons, bore the lofty impression that virtuous 
freedom always stamps on the human features. 
But they had the softer graces of their sex in a 
degree unequalled in the ancient world. While 
the woman of the East was immured within bolts 
and bars, from time immemorial a prisoner; and 
the woman of the West was a toy, a savage, or a 
slave ; our wives and maidens enjoyed the inter- 
courses of society, which their talents were well 
calculated to cheer and adorn. They were skilled 
on the harp ; their sweet voices were tuned to the 
richest strains of earth ; they were graceful in the 
dance; the writings of odr bards were in their 



bb SALATHIEL. 

hands ; and what nation ever possessed such illus- 
trious founts of thought and virtue ? 

But there was another and a still higher ground 
for that peculiar expression, which makes their 
countenance still lighten before me, as something 
of more than mortal beauty. The earliest con- 
sciousness of every Jewish woman was — that she 
might, in the hand of Providence, be the sacred- 
source of a blessing and a glory that throws all 
imagination into the shade ; that of her might be 
born a Being, to whom earth and all its kings 
should bow ! the more than man ! the more than 
angel ! veiling for a little time his splendours in 
the form of man, to raise Israel to the sceptre of 
the world, to raise that world into a renewed 
paradise, and then to resume his original glory, 
and be Sovereign, Creator, God — all in all ! 

This consciousness, however dimmed, was never 
foigotten ; the misfortunes of Judah never break- 
ing the strong link by which we held to the future. 
The reliance on predictions perpetually renewed, 
and never more vividly renewed than in the midst 
of our misfortunes ; a reliance commemorated in 
all the great ceremonies of our nation, in our wor- 
ship, in our festivals, in every baptism, in every 
marriage, must have filled a large space in the 



SALATHIEL. 67 

susceptible mind of woman. And what but the 
mind forms the countenance ? and what must have 
been the moulding- of that most magnificent and 
elevating- of all hopes, for centuries, on the most 
plastic and expressive features in the world ! 

Sacredly reserved from intermixture with the 
blood of the stranger, the hope was spread through- 
out Israel. The line of David was pure, but its 
connexion had shot widely through the land. It 
was like the Indian tree taking root through a 
thousand trees. Every Jewish woman might hope 
to be the living altar, on which the Light to 
lighten the Gentiles was to descend ! The hum- 
blest might be the blessed among women ! the 
mother of the Messiah ! 

But all is gone ! Ages of wandering, woe, 
poverty, contumely, and mixture of blood, have 
done their work of evil. The loveliness may 
partially remain, but the glory of Judah's daughters 
is no more. 



68 SALATHIEL. 



CHAPTER VIT. 



We continued ascending through the defiles of 
the mountain range of Carmel. The gorges of 
the hills gave us alternate glimpses of Lower 
Galilee, and of the great- sea which lay bounding 
the western horizon with azure. The morning 
breezes from the land, now in the full vegetation 
cf the rapid spring of Palestine, scarcely ceased 
to fill the heavens with fragrance, when the sea- 
wind sprang up, and, with the coolness and purity 
of a gush of fountain waters, renewed the spirit 
of life in the air, and made the whole caravan 
forget its fatigue. Our bold hunters spurred 
down the valleys and up the hills, with the wild- 
ness of superfluous vigour; tossed their lances 
into the air; sang their mountain songs; and 
shouted the cries of the chase and the battle. 



SALATHIEL. 69 

On one eventful day a wolf was started from its 
covert, and every rein was let loose in a moment ; 
nothing could stop the fearlessness of the riders, 
or exhaust the fire of the steeds. The caravan, 
coming on slowly with the women and children, 
and lengthening out among the passes, was for- 
gotten. I scorned to be left behind, and followed 
my daring companions at full speed. The wolf 
led us a long chase ; and on the summit of a rock 
still blazing in the sunlight, like a beacon, while 
the plain was growing dim, he fought his last fight, 
and, transfixed with a hundred lances, died the 
death of a hero. 

But the spot which we had reached supplied 
statelier contemplations : we were on the summit 
of 3Iount Tabor : the eye wandered over the 
whole glory of the Land of Promise. To the south 
extended the mountains of Samaria, their peaked 
summits glowing in the sun with the coloured 
brilliancy of a chain of gems. To the east lay the 
lake of Tiberias, a long line of purple. North- 
ward, like a thousand rainbows, ascended, lit by 
the western flame, the mountains of Gilboa, those 
memorable hills on which the spear of Saul was 
broken, and the first curse of our obstinacy was 
branded upon us in the blood of our first king. 



70 SALAtHIEL. 

Closing the superb circle, ascended step by step 
the Antilibanus, soaring into the very heavens. 

Of all the sights that nature offers to the eye 
and mind of man, mountains have always stirred 
my strongest feelings. I have seen the Ocean 
when it was turned up from the bottom by tempest, 
and noon was like night with the conflict of the 
billows and the storm that tore and scattered them 
in mist and foam across the sky. I have seen the 
Desert rise around me, and calmly, in the midst of 
thousands uttering cries of horror and paralysed 
by fear, have contemplated the sandy pillars 
coming like the advance of some gigantic city of 
conflagration flying across the wilderness, every 
column glowing with intense fire, and every blast 
death ; the sky vaulted with gloom, the earth a 
furnace. But with me, the mountain — in tempest 
or in calm, the throne of the thunder, or with the 
evening sun painting its dells and declivities in 
colours dipt in heaven — has been the source of the 
most absorbing sensations : — there stands magni- 
tude giving the instant impression of a power 
above man — grandeur that defies decay — antiquity 
that tells of ages unnumbered — beauty that the 
touch of time makes only more beautiful — use 
exhaustless for the service of man — strength im- 



SALA.THIEL. 71 

perishable as the globe ; — the monument of eternity, 
— the truest earthly emblem of that everliving-, 
unchangeable, irresistible Majesty, by whom and 
for whom all things were made ! 

I was gazing on the Antilibanus, and peopling 
its distant slopes with figures of other worlds 
ascending and descending, as in the patriarch's 
dream, when I was roused by the trampling steed 
of one of my kinsmen returning with the wolf's 
head, the trophy of his superior prowess, at his 
saddle bow. "So," said he, "you disdained to 
share the last battle of that dog of the Galilees ? 
But we shall show you something better worth the 
chase, when we reach home. The first snow that 
drives the lions down from Lebanon, or the first 
hot wind that sends the panthers flying before it 
from Assyria, will have all our villages up in arms : 
every man that can draw a bow, or throw a lance, 
will be on the mountains ; and then we shall give 
you the honours of a hunter in exchange for your 
philosophy." He uttered this with a jovial laugh, 
and a hand grasping mine with the gripe of a 
giant. " Yet," said he, and a shade passed over 
his brow, " I wish we had something better to do ; 
you must not look down upon Jubal, and the tribe 
of your brother Eleazar, as mere rovers after 
wolves and panthers." 



72 SALATHIEL. 

I willingly declared my respect for the intrepi- 
dity and dexterity which the mountain life ensured. 
I applauded its health, activity, and cheerfulness. 
*'Yet," interrupted Juhal sternly, "what can be 
done while those Romans are everywhere round 
us?" He stopped short, reined up his horse with 
a sudden force, that made the animal spring from 
the ground, flung his lance high in air, caught it 
in the fall, and having thus relieved his indigna- 
tion, returned to discuss with me the chances of 
Roman war. ** Look at those," said he, pointing 
to the horsemen who were now bounding across 
the declivities to rejoin the caravan ; " their horses 
are flame, their bodies are iron, and their souls 
Would be both, if they had a leader." — ** Eleazar is 
brave," I replied. ** Brave as his own lance," was 
the answer; *' no warmer heart, wiser head, or 
firmer arm, moves at this hour within the borders 
of the land. But he despairs." — " He knows," 
said I, *' the Roman power and the Jewish weak- 
ness." 

" Both, both, too well !" was the reply. " But 
he forgets the power that is in the cause of a peo- 
ple fighting for their law and for their rights, in 
the midst of glorious remembrances, nay in the 
hope of a help greater than that of the sword. 
Look at the tract beyond those linden trees." 



SALATHIEL. 73 

He pointed to a broken extent of ground, darkly 
distinguishable from the rest of the plain. " On 
that ground, to this moment wearing the look of a 
grave, was drawn up the host of Sisera; under 
that ground is their grave. By this stone," and 
he struck his lance on a rough pillar defaced by 
time, " stood Deborah the prophetess, prophesying 
against the thousands and tens of thousands of the 
heathen below. On this hill were drawn up the 
army of Barak, as a drop in the ocean, compared 
with the infidel multitudes. They were the ances- 
tors of the men whom you now see trooping before 
you ; the men of Naphtali, with their brothers of 
Zabulon. On this spot they gathered their might 
like the storm of Heaven. From this spot they 
poured down like its whirlwinds and lightnings 
upon the taunting enemy. God was their leader. 
They rushed upon the nine hundred scythed cha- 
riots, upon the mailed cavalry, upon the countless 
infantry. Of all, but one escaped from the plain 
of Jezreel, and that one only to perish in his flight 
by the degradation of a woman's hand !" He 
wheeled round his foaming horse, and appealed to 
me. ** Are the Roman legions more numerous 
than that host of the dead ? Is Israel now less 
valiant, less wronged, or less indignant? Shall no 
prophet arise among us again? Shall it not be 
VOL. I. D 



74 SALATHIEL. 

sung again, as it was then sung to the harps of 
Israel — * Zabulon and Naphtali were a people 
that jeopardied their lives unto the death in the 
high places of the land'^" 

I looked with involuntary wonder at the change 
wrought in him by those proud recollections. The 
rude and jovial hunter was no more ; the Jewish 
warrior stood before me filled with the double 
impulse of generous scorn of the oppression, and 
of high dependence on the fates of his nation. 
His countenance was ennobled, his form seemed 
to dilate, his voice grew sonorous as a trumpet. 
A sudden burst of the declining sun broke upon 
his figure, and threw a sheet of splendour across 
the scarlet turban, the glittering tunic, the spear- 
point lifted in the strenuous hand, the richly-capa- 
risoned front and sanguine nostril of his impatient 
charger. A Gentile would have worshipped him 
as the tutelar genius of war. I saw in him but 
the man that our history and our law were ordained, 
beyond all others, to have made ; — the native 
strength of character raised into heroism by the 
conviction of a guiding and protecting Provi- 
dence. 

The conversation was not forgotten on either 
side ; and it bore fruit, fearful fruit, in time. 

We had reached on our return a commanding 



SALATHIEL. W 

point, from which we looked into the depths al- 
ready filling with twilight, and through whose blue 
vapours the caravan toiled slowly along, like a 
wearied fleet in some billowy sea. Suddenly a 
tumult was perceived below ; cries of confusion 
and terror rose ; and the W^hole caravan was seen 
scattering in all directions through the passes. For 
the first moment we thought that it had been 
attacked by the mountain-robbers. We grasped 
our lances, and galloped down the side of the hill 
to charge them ; when we were stopped at once by 
a woman's scream from the ridge which we had 
just left. It struck through my heart — the voice 
was Miriam's. To my unspeakable horror, I saw 
her dromedary, mad with fear and pouring blood, 
rush along the edge of the precipice. I saw the 
figure clinging to his neck. The light forsook my 
eyes ; and but for the grasp of Jubal, I must have 
fallen to the ground. — His voice aroused me. 
When I looked round again, the shouts had died, 
the troop had disappeared — it seemed all a dream ! 
But, again, the shouts came doubling upon the 
wind ; and far as the eye could pierce through the 
dusk, I saw the white robe of Miriam flying along 
like a vapour. I threw the reins on my horse's 
neck — I roused him with my voice — I rushed with 



76' SALATHTEL. 

the fearlessness of despair through the hills — I 
overtook the troop — I out-stripped them : — still 
the vision flew before me. At length it sank. — 
The dromedary had plunged down the precipice ; 
a depth of hideous darkness. — A torrent roared 
below. I struck in the spur, to follow. — My 
horse wheeled round on the edge : while I strove 
to force him to the leap, my kinsmen came up, 
with Eleazar at their head. — Bold as they were, 
they all recoiled from the frightful depth. Even 
in that wild moment, I had time to feel that this 
was but the beginning of my inflictions, and that 
I was to wreck the ruin of all that belonged to me. 
In consciousness unspeakable, I sprang from my 
startled steed ; and before a hand could check me, 
I plunged in. — A cry of astonishment and horror 
rang in my ears as I fell. — The roar of waters was 
then around me. — I struggled with the torrent ; 
gasped ; and heard no more. 

This desperate effort saved the life of Miriam. 
We were found apparently dead, clasped in each 
other's arms, at some distance down the stream. 
The plunge had broke the band by which she was 
fixed on the saddle. She floated, and we were 
thrown together by the eddy. After long effort, 
we were restored. But the lamentations of my 



SALATHIEL. ^7 J 

matchless wife were restrained beside my couch, 

only to burst forth when she was alone. — We had \ 

lost our infant. 

The chase of the wolves in the mountain had 1 

driven them across the march of the caravan. j 

One of those savages sprang upon the flank of the j 

dromedary. The animal, in the agony of its i 

wounds, burst away : its proverbial fleetness baf- 
fled pursuit ; and it was almost fortunate that it ' 
at length bounded over the precipice ; as, in the ' 
mountain country, its precious burden must have 
perished by the lion or by famine. Miriam held 
her babe with the strong grasp of a mother ; but 
in the torrent that grasp was dissolved. All our 
search was in vain. My wife wept : — but I had in 
her rescued my chief treasure of earth ; and was \ 
consoled by the same deep feeling which pro- \ 
nounced that I might have been punished by the ' 
loss of all. 



78 SALATHIEL. 



CHAPTER VIII. 

Let me hasten through some years. — The sun- 
shine of life was gone ; in all my desire to con- 
form to the habits of my new career, I found my- 
self incapable of contentment. But the times, 
that had long resembled the stagnation of a lake, 
were beginning to be shaken. Rome herself, the 
prey of conspiracy, gradually held her foreign 
sceptre with a feebler hand. Gaul and Germany 
were covered with gathering clouds; and their 
flashes were answered from the Asiatic hills. — 
With the relaxation of the paramount authority, 
the chain of subordinate oppression, as always 
happens, was made tighter. As the master was 
enfeebled, the menials were less in awe ; and 
Judea rapidly felt what must be the evils of a 
military government without the strictness of mili- 
tary discipline. 



SALATHIEL. 79 

I protest against being charged with ambition. 
But I had a painful sense of the guilt of sufferings 
even such powers as I might possess, to waste 
away, without use to some part of mankind. I 
was weary of the utter unproductiveness of the 
animal enjoyments, in which I saw the multitude 
round me content to linger into old age. I longed 
for an opportunity of contributing my mite to the 
solid possessions by which posterity is wiser, hap- 
pier, or purer, than the generation before them : — 
some trivial tribute to that mighty stream of time 
which ought to go on, continually bringing richer 
fertility as it flowed. I was not grieved at the 
change which I saw overshadowing the gorgeous 
empire of Rome. 

My unspeakable crime may have thrown a deeper 
tinge on those contemplations. But by a singular 
fatality, and perhaps for the increase of my punish- 
ment, I was left for long periods in each year to 
the common impressions of life. — The wisdom, 
which even my great misfortune might have forced 
upon me, was withheld ; and the being who, in 
the conviction of his mysterious destiny, must have 
looked upon earth and its pursuits, as man looks 
upon the labours and the life of flies, — as the 
atoms in the sunshine — as measureless emptiness 
and trifling, — was given over to be disturbed by 



80 SALATHIEL. 

the impulses of generations on whose dust he was 
to sit, and see other generations rise round him, 
themselves to sink alike into dust, while he still 
sat an image of endurance and warning imperish- 
able. 

But there was a season in each year when 
those recollections returned with overwhelming 
vividness. If all other knowledge of the approach 
of the passover could have escaped me, there were 
signs, fearful signs, that warned me of that hour 
of my woe. A periodic dread of the sight of man, 
a sudden, gloomy sense of my utter separation from 
the interests of the transitory beings round me, 
wild dreams, days of immoveable abstraction, yet 
filled with the breathing picture of all that I had 
done on the day of my guilt in Jerusalem, rose be- 
fore me with such intense reality, that I lived 
through the scene. The successive progress of my 
crime — the swift and stinging consciousness of 
condemnation — the flash of fearful knowledge, that 
showed me futurity ;— all — all were felt with the 
keenness of a being from whom his fleshly nature 
had been stripped away, and the soul bared to 
every visitation of pain. — I stood like a disembo- 
died spirit in suff'ering. 

Yet I could not be restrained from following my 
tribe on their annual progress to the Holy City. — 



SALATHIEL. 81 

To see from afar the towers of the temple, was 
with me like a craving for life : — ^but I never 
dared to set my foot within its gates. On some 
pretence or other, and sometimes through real 
powerlessness, arising from the conflict of my 
heart, I lingered behind, yet within the distance 
from which the city could be seen. — There among 
the precipices I wandered through the day, lis- 
tening to the various uproar of the mighty multi- 
tude, or wistfully catching some echo of the hymns 
in the temple — sounds that stole from my eye 
many a tear — till darkness fell, the city slumbered, 
and the blast of the Roman trumpets, as they di- 
vided the night, reminded me of the fallen glories 
of my country. 

In one of those wanderings, T had followed the 
courses of the Kedron, which, from a brook under 
the walls of Jerusalem, swells to a river on its de- 
scent to the Dead Sea. — The blood of the sacrifices 
from the conduits of the altars curdled on its sur- 
face, and stained the sands purple. — It looked like 
a wounded vein from the mighty heart above. I 
still strayed on, wrapt in sad forebodings of the 
hour when its stains might be of more than sacri- 
fice ; until I found myself on the edge of the lake. 
Who has ever seen that black expanse without 
a shudder? — There were the ingulphed cities. 



82 SALATHIEL. 

Around it life was extinct — no animal bounded — 
no bird hovered. — The distant rushing of the 
River Jordan, as it forced its current through the 
heavy waters, or the sigh of the wind through the 
reeds, alone broke the silence of this mighty 
grave. Of the melancholy objects of nature, none 
is more depressing than a large expanse of stagnant 
waters. No gloom of forest, no wildness of moun- 
tain, is so overpowering as this dreary, unrelieved 
flatness : — the marshy border — the sickly vegeta- 
tion of the shore — the leaden colour which even 
the sky above it wears, tinged by its sepulchral at- 
mosphere. But the waters before me were not left 
to the dreams of a saddened fancy : — they were a 
sepulchre. — Myriads of human beings lay beneath 
them, entombed in sulphurous beds. — The wrath 
of Heaven had been there. 

The day of destruction seemed to pass again 
before my eyes, as I lay gazing on those sullen 
depths. I saw them once more a plain covered 
with richness; cities glittering in the morning sun; 
multitudes pouring out from their gates to sports 
and festivals ; the land exulting with life and luxu- 
riance Then a cloud gathered above. — I heard 

the voice of the thunder ; — it was answered by the 
earthquake.— Fire burst from the skies ; — it was 
answered by a thousand founts of fire spouting 



SALATHIEL. 88 

from the plain. — The distant hills blazed, and 
threw volcanic showers over the cities. — Round 
them was a tide of burning bitumen. — The earth- 
quake heaved again. — All sank into the gulf. — I 
heard the roar of the distant waters, — They rushed 
into the bed of fire ; the doom was done : the 
cities of the plain were gone down to the black- 
ness of darkness for ever. 

I was idly watching the bursts of suffocating 
vapour that shoot up at intervals from the rising 
masses of bitumen, when I was startled by a wild 
laugh and wilder figure beside me. I sprang on 
my feet, and prepared for defence with my po- 
niard : the figure waved his hand in sign to sheathe 
the unnecessary weapon ; and said, in a tone 
strange and melancholy, ** You are in my pov/er ; 
but I do not come to injure you. I have been 
contemplating your countenance for some time : — 
I have seen your features deeply disturbed — your 
wringing hands — your convulsed form : — are you 
even as I am ?" 

The voice was singularly mild : yet I never 
heard a sound that so keenly pierced my brain. 
The speaker was of the tallest stature of man — 
every sinew and muscle exhibiting gigantic 
strength ; yet, with the symmetry of a Greek statue. 
But his countenance was the true wonder— it was 



84 SALATHIEL. 

of the finest mould of manly beauty : the contour 
was Greek, but the hue was Syrian : — yet the dark 
tinge of country gave way at times to a more 
than corpse-like paleness. I had full leisure for 
the view ; for he stood gazing on me without a 
word ; and I remained fixed on my defence. At 
length he said, " Put up that poniard ! You 
could no more hurt me, than you could resist 
me : — look here !" He wrenched a huge mass of 
rock from the ground, and whirled it far into the 
lake, as if it had been a pebble. I gazed with 
speechless astonishment. " Yes ;" pursued the 
figure, — " they throw me into their prisons — they 
lash me — they stretch me on the rack — they burn 
my flesh." As he spoke, he flung aside his robe, 
and showed his broad breast covered with scars. 
** Short-sighted fools ! little they know him who 
sufi*ers, or him who commands. If it were not my 
will to endure, I could crush my tormentors as I 
crush an insect. They chain me too," said he with 
a laugh of scorn. — He drew out the arm which 
had been hitherto wrapped in his robe. — It was 
loaded with links of iron of prodigious thick- 
ness. He grasped one of them in his hand, twist- 
ed it off" with scarcely an effort, and flung it up a 
sightless distance in the air. "Such are bars and 
bolts to me ! When my time is come to suffer, I 



SALATHIEL. 85 

submit to be tortured ! When my time is past, I 
tear away their fetters, burst their dungeons, and 
walk forth trampling their armed men." 

I sheathed the dagger. '* Does this strength 
amaze you?" said the being: "look to yonder 
dust;" and he pointed to a cloud of sand that 
came flying along the shore. ** I could outstrip 
that whirlwind ; — I could plunge unhurt into the 
depths of that sea ; — I could ascend that moun- 
tain swifter than the eagle ; — I could ride that 
thunder-cloud." 

As he threw himself back, gazing upon the 
sky — with his grand form buoyant with vigour, 
and his arm exalted-r-he looked like one to whom 
height or depth could ofler no obstacle. His 
mantle flew out along the blast like the unfurling 
of a mighty wing. There was something in his look 
and voice that gave irresistible conviction to his 
wild words. — Conscious mastery was in all about 
him. I should not have felt surprise to see him 
spring up into the elements. 

My mind grew inflamed with his presence.— My 
blood burned with sensations, for which language 
has no name ; — a thirst of power — a scorn of 
earth — a proud and fiery longing for the command 
of the hidden mysteries of nature. — I felt, as the 
great ancestor of mankind might have felt, when 



86 SALATHIEL. 

the voice of the tempter told him, '' Ye shall be 
even as gods." 

" Give me your power," I exclaimed ; " the 
world to me is worthless : with man all my ties are 
broken : let me live in the desert, and be even as 
you are : give me your power." — " My power 1" 
he repeated, with a ghastly laugh that rang to the 
skies, and was echoed round the wilderness by what 
seemed voices innumerable, until it died away in a 
distant groan. " Look on this forehead !" — he 
threw back the corner of his mantle. A furrow 
was drawn round his brow, covered with gore, and 
gaping like a fresh wound. ** Here," howled he, 
"sat the diadem. — I was Epiphanes." 

** You, Antiochus ! the tyrant — the persecutor — 
the spoiler — the accursed of Israel !" I bounded 
backwards in sudden horror. 

I saw before me one of those spirits of the evil 
dead, who are allowed from time to time to re- ap- 
pear on earth in the body, whether of the dead or 
the living. For some cause that none could 
unfold, Judea had been, within the last few years, 
haunted by them more than for centuries. Strange 
rites dangerously borrowed from the idolaters were 
resorted to for our relief from this new terror : the 
pulling of the mandrake at the eclipse of the moon 
— incantations— midnight offerings — the root Ba- 



SALATHIEL. 97 

aras, that was said to flash flame, and kill the ani- 
mal that drew it from the ground. Our Sad- 
ducees and sceptics, wise in their own conceit, de- 
clared that possession was bat a human disease, a 
wilder insanity. But, with the rage and misery of 
madness, there were tremendous distinctions that 
raised it beyond all the ravages of the hurt mind, 
or the afflicted frame ; — the look, the language, the 
horror of the possessed, were above man. They 
defied human restraint ; they lived in wildernesses 
where the very insects died ; the fiery sun of the 
East, the inclemency of the fiercest winter, had no 
power to break down their strength. — But they 
had stronger signs ; — they spoke of things to 
which the wisdom of the wisest was folly — they 
told of the remotest future w ith the force of pro- 
phecy — they gave glimpsesof a knowledge brought 
from realms of being inaccessible to living man — 
last and loftiest sign, they did homage to HIS com- 
ing, whom a cloud of darkness, the guilty and im- 
penetrable darkness of the heart, had veiled from 
my unhappy nation. — But their worship was ter- 
ror — they believed and trembled. 

** Power — " said the possessed, and his large 
and unmoving eyes seemed lighting up with fire 
from within — ** Power you shall have, and hate it ; 
wealth you shall have, and hate it ; life you shall 



88 SALATHIEL. 

have, and hate it ; yet you shall know the depths 
of the condition of man. — You shall be the worm 
among a nation of worms — you shall be steeped in 
poverty to the lips — you shall undergo the bitter- 
ness of death, until — ." His brow suddenly writhed ; 
he gnashed his teeth, and convulsively sprang 
from the ground, as if an arrow had shot through 
him. 

The current of his thoughts was changed. 
Things above man were not to be uttered to the 
ear unopened by the grave. '* Come," said he, 
" son of misfortune, emblem of the nation, that 
living shall die, and dying shall live ; that, tram- 
pled by all, shall trample upon all ; that, bleeding 
from a thousand wounds, shall be unhurt; that, 
beggared, shall wield the wealth of nations ; that, 
without a name, shall sway the councils of kings ; 
that, without a city, shall inhabit in all kingdoms ; 
that, scattered like the dust, shall be bound toge- 
ther like the rock ; that perishing by the sword, 
by the chain, by famine, by fire, shall be imperish- 
able, unnumbered, glorious as the stars of heaven." 

Overwhelmed with sensations, rushing in a flood 
through my heart, I had cast myself upon the 
ground : the flashing of the fiery eye before me 
consumed my blood ; and fainting, I lay with my 
face upon the sand. But his words were deeply 



\ 



SALATHIEL. 89 

heard ; with every sound of his searching voice 
they struck into my soul. He grasped me ; and 
I was lifted up like an infant in his grasp. ** Come," 
said he, *' and see what is reserved for you and for 
your people." 

He darted forward with a speed that took away 
my breath — he ran — he bounded — he flew. ** Now, 
behold !" he uttered in an accent as composed as 
if he had not moved a limb. I looked, and found 
myself on one of the hills close to the great south- 
ern gate of Jerusalem. Years had passed since I 
ventured so nigh. But I now gazed on the city 
of pomp and beauty, with an involuntary wonder 
that I could have ever deserted a scene so lovely 
and so loved. 

It was the twilight of a summer evening. Tower 
and wall lay bathed in a sea of purple ; the Tem- 
ple rose from its centre like an island of light ; the 
host of Heaven came riding up the blue fields 
above; the sounds of day died in harmony. — All 
was the sweetness, calmness, and splendour of a 
vision painted in the clouds. 

** There," said the possessed, " I was master, 
conqueror, avenger : — yet I was but the instru- 
ment to punish your furious dissensions — your 
guilty abandonment of the law of your leader— 
your more than Gentile apostacy from the worship 



BO SALATHIEL. 

of him, who is to be worshipped with more than 
the blood of bulls and goats. A power hidden 
from my idolatrous eyes went before me, and broke 
down the courage of your people. I marched 
through your gates on the neck of the godless 
warrior ; I plundered the wealth of your rich men, 
made worldly by their wealth ; I slew your priest- 
hood, already the betrayers of their altar ; I over- 
threw your places of worship, already defiled ; I 
covered the ruins with the blood of swine ; I raised 
idols in the sanctuary ; I bore away the golden 
vessels of the temple, and gave them to the insult 
of the Syrian ; I slew your males, I made captives 
of your women ; I abolished your sacrifices, and 
pronounced in my hour of blasphemy, that within 
the walls of Jerusalem the flame should never 
again be kindled to the Supreme. The deed was 
mine, but the cause was the iniquity of your peo- 
ple." 

The history of devastation roused in me those 
feelings native to the Jew, by which I had been 
taught to look with abhorrence on the devastator. 
** Let me be gone," I exclaimed, struggling from 
his grasp. *' Strange and terrible being, let me hear 
no more this outrage to God and man. I am guilty, 
too guilty, in having listened to you for a moment." 
He laid his hand upon my brow, and I felt my 



SALATHIEL. 91 

strength dissolve at the touch. " Go," said he, 
" but be first a witness of the future. A fiercer 
destroyer than Epiphanes shall come, to punish a 
darker crime than ever stained your forefathers. 
A destruction shall come, to which the past was 
the sport of children. Tower and wall, citadel 
and temple, shall be dust. The sword shall do its 
work — the chain shall do its work — the flame shall 
do its work. Bad spirits shall rejoice; good spirits 
shall weep : Israel shall be clothed in sackcloth 
and ashes for a time impenetrable by a created 
eye.— The world shall exult, trample, scorn, and 
slay. — Blindness, madness, misery, shall be the 
portion of the people. Now, behold 1" 

He stood, with his arm stretched out towards 
the temple. All before me was tranquillity itself ; 
night had suddenly fallen deeper than usual ; the 
stars had been wrapped in clouds that yet gathered 
without a wind ; a faint tinge of light from the 
summit of Mount Moriah, the gleam of the never- 
extinguished altar of the Daily Sacrifice, alone 
marked the central court of the temple. I turned 
from the almost death-like stillness of the scene, 
with a look of involuntary disbelief, to the face of 
my fearful guide : even in the deep darkness every 
feature of it was strangely visible. 



92 SALATHIEL. 

A low murmur from the city caught my ear : it 
rapidly grew loud, various, wild : it was soon in- 
termixed with the clash of arms. Trumpets now 
rang : I recognised the charging shout of the Ro- 
mans ; I heard the tumultuous and mingled roar 
of my countrymen in. return. The darkness was 
converted into light ; torches blazed along the bat- 
tlements and turrets : the Tower of Antonia, the 
Roman citadel, with its massy bulwarks and im- 
mense altitude, rose from a tossing expanse of 
flame below like a colossal funeral-pile ; I could 
see on its summit the agitation and alarm, the 
rapid signals, the hasty snatching up of spear and 
shield, of the garrison, which that night's ven- 
geance was to offer up victims on the pile. The 
roar of battle rose, it deepened into cries of agony, 
it swelled again into furious exultation — 

I thought of my countrymen butchered by some 
new caprice of power ; of my kinsmen, perhaps at 
that instant involved in the massacre ; of the city, 
every stone and beam of which was dear to my 
embittered heart, given up to the vengeance of the 
idolater. The prediction of its ruin was in my 
ears; and I longed to perish with my tribe. I 
panted with every shout that burst from the battle ; 
every new sheet of flame that rolled upwards from 



SALATHIEL. 93 

the burning houses fevered me ; I longed to rush 
with the speed of the whirlwind. But the terrible 
hand was upon my forehead, and I was feeble as a 
broken reed. '* Behold," said the possessed, ** those 
are but the beginnings of evil." I felt a sudden 
return of my strength ; I looked up — he was gone. 



94 SALATHIEL. 



CHAPTER IX. 

I PLUNGED into the valley; and found it filled 
with fugitives incapable from terror of giving me 
any account of the uproar. Women and children, 
hastily thrown on the mules and camels, continued 
to pour through the country. The road wound 
through the intervals of the hills, and though 
sometimes approaching near enough to the walls 
to be illuminated by the blaze of the torches and 
beacons, yet, from its general darkness and intri- 
cacy, left me to make my way by the sounds of the 
conflict. But I was quickly within reach of ample 
evidence of what was doing in that night of havoc. 
The bend of the road, from which the first view of 
the grand portico was seen, had been the rallying 
point to the multitude driven out by the unexpect- 
ed charge of the garrison. The tide of fight had 



SALATHIEL. Sf6 

thence ebbed and flowed, and I found the spot 
covered with the dead and dying. In my haste 
I stumbled, and fell over one of the wounded ; he 
groaned, and prayed me for a cup of water to cool 
the thirst that parched him. I knew the voice of 
Jairus, one of the boldest of our mountaineers, and 
bore him to the hill-side, that he might not be 
trampled by the crowd. He faintly thanked me, 
and said, " If you be a man of Israel, fly to Elea- 
zar. Take this spear: — another moment may be 
too late." I seized the spear, and sprang forward. 

The multitude had repelled the Romans, and 
farced them up the broad central street of the 
city. But a reinforcement from the Tower of 
An tenia joined the troops, and were driving back 
the victors with ruinous disorder. I heard the 
war-cries of the tribes as they called to the rescue 
and the charge. " Onward, Judah !" " Ho, for 
Zabulon!" ** Glory to Naphtali !" I thought of 
the times of Jewish triumph, and saw before me 
the w^arriors of the Maccabees. 

Nerved with new sensations, the strong instincts 
which make the war-horse paw the ground at the 
trumpet, and make men rush headlong upon 
death, heightened by the stinging recollections of 
our days of freedom ; I forced my path through 
the multitude that tossed and whirled like the 



96 



SALATHIEL. 



eddies of the ocean. I found my kinsmen in front, 
battling desperately against the long spears of a 
Roman column, that solid as iron, and favoured 
by the higher ground, was pressing down all 
before it. The resistance was heroic, but un- 
availing ; and when I burst forward, I found at 
my side nothing but faces black with despair, or 
covered with wounds. In front was a wall of 
shields and helmets, glaring in the light of the 
conflagration that was now rapidly spreading on 
all sides. The air was scorching, the smoke 
rolling against us in huge volumes; blindness, 
burning, and loss of blood, were consuming the 
multitude. But what is in the strength of the 
soldier, or the bravery of discipline, to daunt the 
desperate energy and regardless valour of men 
fighting for their country — and, above all men, of 
the Israelite, fighting in sight of the profaned 
Temple? The native frame, exercised by the 
habits of our temperate and agricultural life, 
was one of surpassing muscular strength ; and 
man for man thrown naked into the field, we could 
have torn the Roman garrison into fragments for 
the fowls of the air. But their arms, and the 
help which they received from the nature of the 
ground, were too strong for the assault of men 
fighting with no shield but their cloaks, and no 



SALATHIEL. 97 

arms but a pilgrim's staff, or some weapon caught 
up from a dead enemy. 

Yet to me there came a wild impression, that 
this night was to make or unmake me ; an un- 
defined feeling, that in the shedding of my blood 
in sight of the Temple, there might be some palli- 
ative, some washing away, of my crime. I sprang 
forward between the combatants, and defied the 
boldest of the legionaries ; the battle paused for 
an instant, and my name was shouted in exultation 
by the voices of my tribe. A shower of arrows 
from the battlements was poured upon me. I felt 
myself wounded, but the feeling only roused me to 
bolder daring. Tearing off* my gory mantle, I 
lifted it on the point of my javelin, and with the 
poniard in ray right hand, aloud devoted the 
Romans to ruin in the name of the Temple. 

The enemy, in their native superstition, shrank 
from a being who looked the messenger of angry 
Heaven. The naked figure, the blood streaming 
from my wounds, the wild and mystic sound of my 
words, reminded them of the diviners that had 
often shook their souls in their own land. I burst 
into the circle of spears, waving my standard, and 
calling on my nation to follow. I smote to the 
right and left. The entrance that I had made in 
the iron bulwark was instantly filled by the mul- 
VOL. I. E 



99 SALATHIEL. 

titude. All discipline gave way. The weight of 
the Roman armour was ruinous to men grappled 
hand to hand by the light and sinewy agility of the 
Jew. We rushed on, trampling down cuirass and 
buckler, till we drove the enemy like sheep before 
us to the first gate of the Tower of Antonia. 
Arrows, lances, stones, in showers from the battle- 
ments, could not stop the triumphant valour of 
the people. We rushed on to assault the gate. 
Sabinus, the tribune of the legion, rallied the 
remnant of the fugitives, and under cover of the 
battlements, made a last attempt to change the 
fortunes of the night. Exhausted as I was, 
bruised and bleeding, my feet and hands lacerated 
with the burning ruins, my tongue cleaving to my 
mouth with deadly thirst, I rushed upon him. He 
had been cruelly known to the Jews, a tyrant and 
plunderer, for the many years of his command. 
No trophy of the battle could have been so cheer- 
ing to them as his head. But he had the bravery 
of his country ; and it was now augmented by 
rage. The despair of being able to clear himself 
before imperial jealousy for that night's disasters, 
must have made life worthless to him. He 
bounded on the drawbridge at my cry. Our 
meeting was brief: my poniard broke on his 
cuirass : his falchion descended with a blow that 



SALATHIEL. 9ft 

would Lave cloven a head-piece of steel. I sprang 
aside, and caught it on the shaft of my javelin 
standard, which it cut right in two. I returned 
the blow with the fragment. The iron pierced his 
throat : he flung up his hands, staggered back, 
and dropped dead. The roar of Israel rent the 
heavens. 

Scarcely more alive than the trunk at my feet, 
I fell back among the throng. But whatever may 
be the envy of courts, no injustice is done in the 
field. The successful leader is sure of his reward 
from the gallant spirits that he has conducted to 
victory. I was hailed with shouts of congratula- 
tion — I was lifted on the shoulders of the multi- 
tude; the men of Naphtali proudly claimed me 
for their own ; and when I clasped the hand of my 
brave friend Jubal, whom I found in the foremost 
rank, covered with dust and blood, he exclaimed, 
** Remember Barak ; remember Mount Tabor." 

But I looked round in vain for one whom I had 
parted with but a few days before, and without 
whom I scarcely dared return to Miriam. Her 
noble brother was not to be seen ; had he fallen 1 
Jubal understood my countenance, and mournfully 
pointed to the citadel, which rose above us, 
frowning down on our impotent rage. " Eleazar 
is a prisoner?" I interrogated. " There can be no 



100 ^ SALATHIEL. 

hope for him from the hypocritical clemency of 
those barbarians of Italy," was the answer; " it 
was with him that the insurrection began. He 
had gone up to lay his offering on the altar : — some 
new Roman insolence commanded that our people 
should offer a sacrifice to the image of the emperor, 
to the polluted, bloodthirsty tyrant of Rome and 
mankind. Eleazar shrank from this act of horror. 
The tribune, even that dog of Rome, whose tongue 
you have silenced — so may perish all the enemies 
of the Holy City ! — commanded that our chieftain 
should be scourged at the altar. The cords were 
round his arms ; the spearmen were at his back ; 
they marched him through the streets, calling on 
all the Jews to look upon the punishment that was 
equally reserved for all. Our indignation burst 
forth in groans and prayers. I hastily gathered 
the males of our tribe : — we snatched up what 
arms we could, and were rushing to his rescue 
when we saw him sweeping the guard before him. 
He had broken his bands by a desperate effort. 
We fell upon the pursuers, and put them to the 
sword. Blood was now drawn, and we knew the 
vengeance of the Romans. To break up and 
scatter through the country, would have been only 
to give our throats to the cavalry. Eleazar deter- 
mined to anticipate the attack. Messengers were 



SALATHIEL. 101 

sent round to the leaders of the tribes, and the 
seizure of the Roman fortress was resolved on. 
We gathered at night-fall, and drove in the out- 
posts. But the garrison were prepared. We 
were beaten down by a storm of darts and javelins, 
and must have been undone but for your appear- 
ing. In the first onset, Eleazar, while cheering 
us to the charge, was struck by a stone from an 
engine. I saw him fall among a circle of the 
enemy ; and hastened to his rescue. But when I 
reached the spot, he was gone, and my last sight 
of him was at yonder gate, as he was borne in, 
waving his hand — his last farewell to Naphtali." 

Deep silence followed his broken accents ; he 
hung his head on his hand, and the tears glistened 
through his fingers. The circle of brave men 
round us wrapped their heads in their mantles. 
I could not contain the bitterness of my soul. 
Years had cemented my friendship for the virtuous 
and generous-hearted brother of my beloved. He 
had borne with my waywardness : — he had done 
all that man could do to soften my heart, to en- 
lighten my darkness, to awake me to a wisdom 
surpassing rubies. I lifted up my voice and 
wept. 

The brazen blast of a trumpet from the battle- 
ments suddenly raised all our eyes. Troops moved 



102 SALATHIEL. 

slowly along the walls of the fortress; they as- 
cended the central tower. Their ranks opened, 
and in the midst was seen by the torch-light a 
man of Israel. They had brought him to that 
place of exposure, in the double cruelty of encreas- 
ing his torture and ours by death in the presence 
of the people. An universal groan burst from 
below. He felt it, and meekly pointed with his 
hand to Heaven, where no tortures shall disturb 
the peace of the departed. The startling sound 
of the trumpet stung the ear again ; — it was the 
signal for execution. I saw the archer advance, 
to take aim at him. He drew the shaft. Almost 
unconsciously, I seized a sling from the hands of 
one of our tribe. I whirled it. The archer drop- 
ped dead, with the arrow still on his bow. 

To those who had not seen the cause, the effect 
was almost a miracle. The air pealed with accla- 
mation ; a thousand slings instantly swept the 
escort from the battlements ; the walls were left 
naked ; — ladders were raised, — ropes were slung, 
— axes were brandished ; the activity of our hunt- 
ers and mountaineers availed itself of every crevice 
and projection of the walls ; they climbed on each 
other's shoulders ; they leaped from point to point, 
where the antelope could have scarcely found foot- 
ing"; they ran over narrow and fenced walls and 



SALATHIEL. 103 

curtains, where, in open daylight, and with his 
senses awake to the danger, no man could have 
moved. Torches without number showered upon 
all that was combustible. At length, the central 
magazine took fire. 

We now fought no longer in darkness ; the 
flames rolled sheet on sheet above our heads, throw- 
ing light over the whole horizon. We were soon 
in no want of soldiers ; the tribes poured in at the 
sight of the conflagration ; and no valour could 
resist their enthusiasm. Some cried out, that they 
saw beings mightier than man descending to fight 
the battle of the favoured nation : — some, that the 
day of Joshua had returned, and that a light of 
more than earthly lustre was visible in the burn- 
ing ! But the battle was no longer doubtful. The 
Romans, reduced in number by the struggle in the 
streets, exhausted by the last attack, and aware, 
from the destruction of their magazines, that their 
most successful resistance must be ended by famine, 
called out for terms. I had but one answer — 
'' The life of Eleazar." The drawbridge fell, and 
he appeared ; — the next moment he was in my 
arms ! 

The garrison marched out. I restrained the 
violence of their conquerors, irritated by the me- 
mory of years of insult. Not a hair of a Roman 



104 SALATillEL. 

head was touched. They were led down to the 
valley of Kedron ; were disarmed, and thence sent 
without delay under a safeguard to their country- 
men in Idumea. In one night the Holy City was 
cleared of every foot of the idolater. 



SALATHIEL. 105 



CHAPTER X. 

But while the people were in a state of the 
wildest triumph, the joy of their leaders was tem- 
pered by many formidable reflections. The power 
of the enemy was still unshaken : the surprise of a 
single garrison, though a distinguished evidence 
of what might be done by native valour, was trivial 
on the scale of a war that must be conducted 
against the whole power of the mistress of the 
civilised world. The policy of Rome was known : 
she never gave up a conquest while it could be 
retained by the most lavish and persevering ex- 
penditure of her strength. Her treasury would 
be stripped of every talent, and Italy left without 
a soldier, before she would surrender the most 
fruitless spot, an acre of sand, or a point of rock, 
in Judea. 



106 SA LATHI EL. 

I weot forth, but not among the leaders, nor 
among the people ; I turned away equally from 
the council and the triumph. A deeper feeling 
urged me to wander round those courts where my 
spirit so often turned in my exile. The battle had 
reached even there, and the pollution of blood was 
on the consecrated ground. The Roman soldiers 
had, in their advance, driven the people to take 
refuge in the cloisters of the temple ; and the dead 
lying thickly among the columns, showed how 
fierce even that brief and partial struggle had 
been. With a torch in my hand I trod through 
those heaps of what once was man, to have one 
parting look at the scene where I had passed so 
many happy and innocent hours. I stood before 
the porch of my cloister, almost listening for the 
sound of the familiar voices within. The long in- 
terval of time was compressed into ah instant. 

T awoke from the reverie, with a smile at the 
idleness of human fancy, and struck upon the 
door. — There was no answer; but the bolts, loos- 
ened by time, gave way, and I was again the 
master of my mansion. — It was uriinhabited since 
my flight ; why, I could not conceive. — ^But, as I 
passed from room to room, I found them all as if 
they had been left but the hour before. The em- 
broidery, which Miriam wrought with a skill dis- 



SALATHIEL. 107 

tinguished even among the daughters of the 
temple, was still fixed in its frame before the 
silken couch ; there lay the harp that relieved her 
hours of graceful toil. The tissued sandals were 
waiting for the delicate feet. — The veil, the ver- 
milion mantle that designated her rank, the 
tabret, the armlets and necklaces of precious 
stones, still hung upon the sofas, untouched of the 
spoiler. 

There was but one evidence of time among 
them — but that bore its bitter moral. It was the 
dust, that hung heavy upon the curtains of precioui 
needlework, and dimmed the glitter of the gems, 
and chilled the richness of the Tyrian purple ;— ^ 
decay, thalMeacher without a tongue, the lonely 
emblem of what the bustle of mankind must come 
to at last; the dull memorial of the proud, the 
beautiful, the brave! All was the silence of the 
tomb! With the torch in my hand, throwing its 
red reflection on the walls and rich remembrances 
round me, I sat, like the mummy of an Egyptian 
king in the sepulchre, — in the midst of the things 
that I had loved, yet divorced from them by an 
irresistible law for ever ! 

I impatiently broke forth into the open air. — 
The stars were waning; a gray streak of dawn was 
whitening the summit of the Mount of Olives. As 



108 SALATHIEL. 

I passed by Herod's palace, and lifted my eyes in 
wonder at the unusual sight of a group of Jews 
keeping watch, where, but the day before, the 
Roman governor lorded it, and none but the 
Roman soldier durst stand ; I saw Jubal hurrying 
out, and making signs to me through the crowd 
from the esplanade above. I was instantly recog- 
nised, and all made way for my ascent up those 
gorgeous and almost countless steps of porphyry, 
that formed one of the wonders of Jerusalem. 

*' We have been in alarm about you," said he, 
hastily, ** but, come to the council ; we have 
wasted half the night in perplexing ourselves. 
Some are timid, and call out for submission on 
any terms; some are rash, and would plunge us 
unprepared into the Roman camps. There are 
obviously many who, without regard for the hope 
of freedom, or the holiness of our cause, look upon 
the crisis only as a means of personal aggran- 
disement. And lastly, we are not without our 
traitors, who confound all opinions, and who are 
making work for Roman gold and iron. Your 
voice is entitled to weight. — Speak at once, and 
speak your mind ; your tribe will support it with 
their lives." 

The council was held in the amphitheatre of the 
palace. — The heads of families and principal men 



SALATHIEL. 109 

of the people had crowded into it, until the coun- 
cil, instead of the privacy of a few chieftains, 
assumed the look of a great popular assembly. 
Thirty thousand had forced themselves into the 
seats ; every bosom responding to every accent of 
the orator, a mighty instrument vibrating through 
all its strings to the master's hand. Accustomed 
as I was, by the festivals of our nation, to the 
sight of great bodies of men swayed by a common 
impulse, I stopped in astonishment at the entrance 
of the colossal circle. Three-fourths of it were 
almost totally dark, giving a shadowy intimation 
of human beings but by the light of a few scat- 
tered torches, or the rising dawn that rounded the 
extreme height with a ring of pale and moon-like 
rays. But in the centre of the arena a fire blazed 
bright, and showed the leaders of the deliberation 
seated in the splendid chairs once assigned for the 
Roman governors and legionary tribunes. Eleazar 
filled the temporary throne. 

The chief man of the land of Ephraim was 
haranguing the assembly as I entered. " Go to 
war with Rome !" pronounced he ; " you might as 
well go to war with the ocean, for her power is as 
wide ; you might as well fight the storm, for her 
vengeance is as rapid ; you might as well call up 
the armies of Judea against the pestilence, for her 



110 SALATHIEL. 

sword is as sweeping, as sudden, and as sure. Who 
but madmen would go to war without allies ? and 
where are yours to be looked for? Rome is the 
mistress of all nations. Would you make a war of 
fortresses ? Rome has in her possession all your 
walled towns. Every tower from Dan to Beer- 
sheba has a Roman banner on its battlements. 
Would you meet her in the plain I Where are 
your horsemen? The Roman cavalry would be 
upon you before you could draw your swords ; and 
would trample your boldest into the sand. Would 
you make the campaign in the mountains? Where 
are your magazines ? The Roman generals would 
disdain to waste a drop of blood upon you; they 
would only have to block up the passes, and leave 
famine to do the rest. Harvest is not come ; and 
if it were, you dare not descend to the plains to 
gather it. You are told to rely upon the strength 
of the country — Have the fiery sands of the 
desert, or the marshes of Germany, or the snows 
af Scythia, or the stormy waters of Britain, de- 
fended them ? Does Egypt, within your sight, give 
you no example? A land of inexhaustible fertility, 
crowded with seven millions and a half of men 
passionately devoted to their country, opulent, 
brave, and sustained by the countless millions of 
Africa, with a country defended on both flanks 



SALATHIEL. Ill 

by the wilderness, in the rear inaccessible to the 
Roman, exposing the narrowest and most defen- 
sible front of any nation on earth : yet Egypt, in 
spite of the Lybian valour, and the Greek genius, 
is garrisoned at this hour by a single Roman le- 
gion ! The Roman bird, grasping the thunder in 
its talons, and touching with one wing the sunrise 
and with the other the sunset, throws its shadow 
over the world. Shall we call it to stoop upon us ? 
Must we spread for it the new banquet of the 
blood of Israel?" 

How different is the power of the orator upon 
men sitting in the common, peaceful circum- 
stances of public assemblage, from its tyranny over 
minds anxious about their own fates ! All that I 
had ever seen of public excitement was stone and 
ice, to the burning interest that hung upon every 
word of the speaker. The name of Onias was fa- 
mous in Judea, but I now saw him for the first 
time. His had been a life of ambition, compassed 
often by desperate means, and woe be to the man 
who stood between him and power. By the dag- 
ger, and by subserviency to the Roman procu- 
rators, he had risen to the highest rank below the 
throne. In the distractions of a time which broke 
off* the regular succession of the sons of Aaron, 
Onias had even been high-priest ; but Eleazar; 



112 SALATHIEL. 

headiDg the popular indignation, had expelled hiin 
from the temple, after one month of troubled su- 
premacy. I could read his history in the haughty 
figure, and daring, yet wily, visage, that stood id 
their bold relief before the flame. 

But, to the assemblage, his declamation had in- 
finite power; they listened as to the words of life 
and death ; they had come, not to delight their 
ears with the periods of the orator, but to hear 
what they must do to escape that inexorable fury, 
which might within a few days or hours be let 
loose upon every individual head. All was alter- 
nately the deepest silence, and the most tumultuous 
agitation. At his strong appeals, they writhed 
their athletic forms, they gnashed their teeth, 
they tore their hair ; some crouched to the ground 
with their faces buried in their hands, as if shut- 
ting out the coming horrors ; some started up- 
right, brandishing their rude weapons, and tossing 
their naked limbs in gestures of defiance ; some 
sat bending down, and throwing back their long 
locks, that not a syllable might escape ; others 
knelt, with their quivering hands clasped, and 
their pallid countenances turned up in agony of 
prayer. 

Many had been wounded, and their foreheads 
and limbs hastily bound up were still stained with 



SAi^nnmiii. 



113 




114 SALATHIEL. 

arena, to enforce them by the seizure of Eleazar. 
I glanced at him ; his life hung by a hair, but not 
a feature of his noble countenance was disturbed; 
I sprang upon the pavement at the foot of the 
throne ; every moment was precious ; the multi- 
tude were raging with the fury of wild beasts. 
My voice was at length heard ; the name of Sala- 
thiel had become powerful, and the tumult par- 
tially subsided. My words were few, but they 
came from the heart. I asked them, was it to be 
thought of, that men should deliver up men of 
their own nation, of their purest blood, the last 
scions of the mightiest families of Israel, into the 
hands of the idolater ! — and for what crime ? For 
an act which every true Israelite would glory to 
have done; for rescuing the altar of the living 
God from pollution. I bade them beware of 
dipping their hands in righteous blood for the gra- 
tification of a revenge, that had for twenty years 
poisoned the breast of a hoary traitor to his priest- 
hood and his country. 

'' We were threatened with the irresistible 
power of Rome. Were we to forget that Rome 
was at that moment torn with internal miseries, 
her provinces in revolt, her senate decimated, her 
citizens turned into a mass of jailors and prisoners ; 



SALATHIEL. 115 

and, darkest sign of degradation, that Nero was 
upon her throne V 

" Whom," said I, " have we conquered this 
night? a Roman army. ^Yhere have we con- 
quered them ? in the midst of their walls and 
machines. By whom was the conquest achieved ? 
By the unarmed, undisciplined, unguided men of 
Israel. The shepherd and the tiller of the ground 
with but the staff and sling smote the cuirassed 
Roman, as the son of Jesse smote the Philistine 1" 

The native bravery of the people lived again, 
and they shouted, in the language of the temple, 
*' Glory to the King of Israel! Glory to the God 
of David !" 

Onias saw the tide turning, and started from his 
seat to address the assembly ; but he was over- 
powered with outcries of anger. Furious at the 
loss of his fame and his revenge, he rushed 
through the arena towards the spot where I stood. 
Jubal, ever gallant and watchful, bounded from 
my side, and seized the traitor's hand in the act of 
unsheathing a dagger; he wrested the weapon 
from him, and, at a sign from me, was ready to 
have plunged it in his heart. Eleazar's sonorous 
voice was then first heard. " Let no violence be 
done upon that slave of his passions. No Jewish 



116 SALATHIEL. 

blood must stain our holy cause. Return, Onias, 
to your tribe, and give the rest of your days to 
repentance." Jubal cast the baffled homicide from 
his grasp far into the crowd. 

The universal echo was ** war!" '* Ruin to the 
idolater. War for the temple." — " War," I ex- 
claimed, *' is wisdom, honour, security. Let us 
bow our necks again, and we shall be rewarded 
by the axe. The Romans never forgive, until 
the brave man who resists, is either a slave or a 
corpse ; the work of this night has put us beyond 
pardon ; and our only hope is in arms, the appeal 
to that sovereign justice before which nothing is 
strong but virtue, truth, and patriotism. War is 
inevitable." 

My words, few as they were, rekindled the 
chilled ardour of the national heart. They were 
followed by shouts for instant battle. ** War 
against the world ! liberty to Israel !" Some voices 
began a hymn ; the habits of the people prepared 
them for this powerful mode of expressing their 
sympathies. The whole assembly spontaneously 
stood up, and joined in the hymn. The magni- 
ficent invocation of David, " Let God arise, and 
let his enemies be scattered," ascended in solemn 
harmonies on the wings of the morning. It was 



SALATHIEL. 117 

heard over the awaking city, and answered ; 
the chaunt of glory spread to the encampments 
on the surrounding hills ; and in every pause, 
we heard the responses rolling on the air in rich 
thunder. 



118 SALATHIEL. 



CHAPTER XI. 

The result of our deliberation was, that Israel 
should be summoned to make a last grand effort ; 
that Jerusalem should be left with a strong garri- 
son as the centre of the armies ; and that every 
chieftain should set forth (o stir up the energies 
of his people. 

Eleazar and his kinsmen were instantly upon 
the road to the mountains ; and all was haste, and 
that mixture of anxiety and animation which 
makes all other life tasteless and colourless to the 
warrior. With what new vividness did not the 
coming conflict invest the varied and romantic 
country, through which we had already journeyed 
so often ! The hill, the marble ravine, the superb 
sweep of forest, that we once looked on but with 



SALATHIEL. 119 

the vague indulgence of a picturesque eye, dow 
filled us with the vision of camps and battles. 
Hunters of the lion, we had felt something- of this 
interest in tracing the ground where we were to 
combat the kingly savage. But what were the 
triumphs of the chase, to the mighty chances of 
that struggle in which a kingdom was to be the 
field, and the Roman glory the victim ! 

Man is belligerent by nature, and the thought 
of war summons up sensations and even faculties 
within him, that in the common course of life 
would have been no more discoverable than the 
bottom of the sea; the moral earthquake must 
come to strip the bosom to our gaze. Even Elea- 
zar's calm and grave wisdom felt the spirit of the 
time, and he reasoned on the probabilities of the 
struggle with the lofty ardour of a king preparing 
to win a new throne. Jubal's sanguine temper 
was irrestrainable ; he was the war-horse in the 
sight of the banners ; his bronzed cheek glowed 
with hope and exultation ; he saw in every cloud 
of dust a Roman squadron ; and grasped his lance, 
and wheeled his foaming charger, with the eager 
joy of a soldier longing to assuage his thirst for 
battle. 

The weight on my melancholy mind was beyond 
the power of chance or time to remove; but a 



120 SALATHIEL. 

new strength was in the crisis. The world to me 
was covered with clouds eternal, but it was now 
brightened by a wild and keen lustre ; I saw my 
way by the lightning. An irresistible conviction 
still told me that the last day of Israel was ap- 
proaching, and that no sacrifice of valour or vir- 
tue could avert the ruin. In the midst of the 
loudest exhilaration of the fearless hearts round 
me, the picture of the coming ruin would grow 
upon my eyes. I saw my generous friends perish 
one by one ; my household desolate ; every name 
that I ever loved past away. When I bent my 
eyes round the horizon luxuriating in the golden 
sun-shine of the east, I saw but a huge altar, 
covered with the fatal offerings of its slaughtered 
people. 

And this was seen, not with the misty uncer- 
tainty of a mind prone to dreams of evil ; but 
with a clearness of foresight, a distinct and defined 
reality, that left no room for conjecture. Yet, 
and here was the bitterest part of my meditation, 
what was all this ruin to me ? What were those 
men and women, and households and lands, but as 
the leaves on the wind, to me! I might strive in 
the last extremities of their struggle. I might 
undergo the agonies of death with them a thousand 
times; and I inwardly pledged myself never to 



SALATHIEL. 121 

desert their cause, lovely and generous as it was, 
while through pain or sorrow I could cling to it ; 
but this, however protracted, must have an end. 
I must see the final hour of them all ; and more 
unhappy, more destitute, more undone than all, I 
must be deprived of the consolation of making my 
tomb with the righteous, and laying my weary 
heart in the slumbers of their grave ! 

Yet I experienced, strangely mingled with the 
deepest despondency of the future, more than the 
keenest fervour of the impulse which was now 
burning around me. With me it was not kingly^ 
care, nor the animal ardency of the soldier. It 
was the high, disturbing stimulation of something 
like the infusion of a new principle of existence. 
I felt as if I had become the vehicle of a descended 
spirit. A ceaseless current of thought ran through 
my brain. Old knowledge, that I had utterly for- 
gotten, revived in me with spontaneous freshness. 
Casual impressions and long past years arose, with 
their stamps and marks as clear, as if a hoard of 
medals had been suddenly brought to light, and 
thrown before me. I ran over in my recollection 
persons and names with even painful accuracy. 
The feeble claims and conceptions of those for 
whom I once felt habitual deference, were now 
seen by me in their nakedness. All that was 
VOL. I. F 



122 SALATHIEL. 

habitual was done away ; I saw intuitively the 
vanity and giddiness, the inconsequential reason- 
ing, the heavy and bewildering prejudice, that 
made up what in other days I had called the wis- 
dom of the wise. 

As I threw out in the most unpremeditated 
language the ideas that were glowing and strug- 
gling for escape, I found that the impression of 
some extraordinary excitement in me was uni- 
versal. Accustomed to be heard with the atten- 
tion due to my rank, I now saw the ears and eyes 
of my fellow-travellers turned on me with an 
evident and deferential surprise. When I talked 
of the hopes of the country, of the resources of 
the enemy, of the kingdoms that would be ready 
to make common cause with us against the galling 
tyranny of Nero, of the glory of fighting for our 
altars, and of the imperishable honours of those 
whose blood earned peace for their children ; they 
listened as to something more than man. *' Was 
I the prophet, delegated at last to lead Judea to 
her glory ? " 

At those discourses, bursting from my lip with 
unconscious fire, the old men would vow the rem- 
nant of their days to the field ; the young would 
sweep over the country performing the evolutions 
of the Roman cavalry, then return brandishing 



SALATHIEL. 123 

their weapons, and demanding to be let loose on 
the first cohort that crossed the horizon. 

With me every pulse was war. The interest 
which this new direction of our minds gave to all 
things, grew perpetually more intense. We 
spurred to the barren heath ; it had now no de- 
formity, for upon it we saw the spot from which 
battle might be offered to an army advancing 
through the valley below. The marsh that spread 
its yellow stagnation over the plain, might be 
worth a province for the protection of our camp. 
The thicket, the broken bank of the mountain 
torrent, the bluff promontory, the rock, the sand, 
every repellent feature of the landscape, was in- 
vested with the value of a thing of life and death, 
a portion of the great stake in the game that was 
so soon to be played for restoration or ruin. 

Those are the delights of soldiership, the in- 
describable and brilliant colourings which the 
sense of danger, the desire of fame, and the hope 
of triumph, throw over life and nature. Yet if 
war was ever to be forgiven for its cause, to be 
justified by the high remembrances and desperate 
injuries of a people, or to be encouraged by the 
physical strength of a country, it was the final war 
of Israel. In all my wanderings I have seen no 
kingdom, for defence, equal to Judea. It had in 



124 SALATHIEl.. 

the highest degree the three grand essentials, 
compactness of territory, density of population, and 
strength of frontier. If I were at this hour to be 
sent forth to select from the earth a kingdom, I 
should say, even extinguishing the recollections of 
my being, and the love which I bear to the very 
weeds of my country ; for beauty, for climate, for 
natural wealth, and for invincible security, give me 
Judea. 

The Land of Promise had been chosen by the 
Supreme Wisdom for the inheritance of a people 
destined to be unconquerable while they continued 
pure. It was surrounded on all sides but one by 
mountains and deserts ; and that one was defended 
by the sea, which at the same time opened to it 
the intercourse with the richest countries of the 
west. On the north, rendered hazardous by the 
vast population of Asia Minor, it was protected by 
the double range of the Libanus and Antilibanus, 
a region of forests and defiles, at all seasons nearly 
impassable to the ancient chariots and cavalry ; 
and, during winter, barred up with torrents and 
snows. 

The whole frontier to the east and south was a 
wall of mountain rising from a desert ; a d arable 
barrier over which no enemy exhausted by the 
privations of an Asiatic march, could force their 



SALATHIKL. 125 

Way against a brave army waiting fresh within its 
own confines. But even if the Syrian wastes of 
sand, and the fiery soil of Arabiaj left the invaders 
strength to master the mountain defences, the 
whole interior was full of the finest positions for 
defence that ever caught the soldier's eye. 

All the mountains sent branches through the 
champaign. As we spurred up the sides of Car- 
mel, we saw an horizon covered with hills like 
clouds. Every city was built on an eminence, and 
capable of being instantly converted into a fortress. 
But while an army kept the field, the larger ope- 
rations of strategy would have found matchless 
support in the course of the Jordan, the second 
defence of Judea ; a line passing through the whole 
central country from north to south, with the lake 
of Tiberias and the lake Asphaltites at either ex- 
treme, at once defending and supplying the move- 
ments in front, flank, and rear. 

The territory thus defensible had an additional 
and superior strength in the character and habits 
of its population. In a space of two hundred 
miles long by a hundred broad, its inhabitants 
once amounted to nearly six millions, tillers of the 
ground, bold tribes, invigorated by their life of 
industry, and connected with each other by the 
most intimate and frequent intercourse under the 



126 SALATHIEL. 

divine command. By the law of Moses, — may he 
rest in glory! — every man from twenty to sixty 
was liable to be called on for the general defence ; 
and the customary armament of the tribes was 
appointed at six hundred thousand men ! 

The munitions of war were in abundance. All 
the varieties of troops known in the ancient armies 
were to be found in Judea in the highest discipline, 
from the spearsman to the archer and the slinger, 
from the heavy-armed soldier of the fortress to the 
ranger of the desert and the mountain. Cavalry 
were prohibited ; for the purpose of the Jewish 
armament was defence. The spirit of the Jewish 
code was peace. By the prohibition of cavalry, 
no conquests could be made on the bordering king- 
doms of interminable plains. The command that 
the males of the tribes should go up thrice in the 
year to the great festivals of Jerusalem, was 
equally opposed to encroachments on the neigh- 
bouring states. It was not till Israel abandoned 
the purity of the original Covenant with Heaven, 
that the evils of ambition or tyranny were felt 
within her borders. 

Her whole polity was under a divine sanction ; 
and her whole preservation was distinguished by 
the perpetual agency of miracle, for the obvious 
purpose of compelling the people to know the God 



SALATHIEL. 127 

of their fathers. But the physical strength of such 
a people in such a territory was incalculable. 
Severity of climate will not ultimately repel an 
invader, for that severity scatters and exhausts 
the population. Difficulties of country have been 
perpetually overpassed by a daring invader in the 
attack of a feeble or negligent people. To what 
nation were their snows, their marshes, or their 
sands, a barrier against the great armies of the 
ancient or the modern world ? The Alps and the 
Pyrenees have been passed, as often as they have 
been attempted. But no empire can conquer a 
nation of six millions of men determined to resist ; 
no army that could be thrown c.cross the frontier , 
would find the means of penetrating through a 
compact population, of which every man was a 
soldier, and every man was fighting for his own. 

The Jew was, by his law, a free proprietor of 
the soil. He was no serf, no broken vassal. He 
inherited his portion of the land by an irrevocable 
title. Debt, misfortune, or time, could not ex- 
tinguish his right. Capable of being alienated 
from him for a few years, the land returned at the 
Jubilee. He was then once more a possessor, the 
master of competence, and restored to his rank 
amongst his fellow men. This bond, the most 
benevolent and the strongest that ever bound man 



128 SALATHIEL. 

to a country, was the bond of the Covenant. If 
Israel had held the institutions of her Lawgiver 
inviolate, she would have seen the Assyrian, the 
Egyptian, and the Roman, with all their multi- 
tudes, only food for the vulture. But we were a 
rebellious people; we sullied the purity of the 
Mosaic ordinances ; we abandoned the sublime 
ceremonial of the divine worship for the profligate 
rites of paganism; we rejected the Lord of the 
Theocracy for the pomps of an earthly king. The 
mighty protection that had been to us as eagles' 
wings and as a wall of fire, 'was withdrawn. Our 
first punishment was by our own hand ; the union 
of Israel was a band of flax in the flame. The 
tribes revolted. Then was the time for the hostile 
idolater to do his work. We were overwhelmed 
by enemies in alliance with our own blood. The 
banners of the sons of Jacob were seen waving 
beside the banners of the worshippers of Ashtaroth 
and Apis, An opening was made into the bosom 
of the land for all invasion; the barriers of the 
mountain and the desert were in vain ; the pro- 
verbial bravery of the Jew only rendered his chain 
more severe ; and the policy that, of old, united 
the highest wisdom with the purest truth and the 
most benevolent mercy, was at once the scoff" and 
problem of the pagan world. 



SALATHIEL. 120 

But opulence, salubrity, and variousness of pro- 
duction, belonged to the site of the land of Israel. 
It lay central between the richest regions of the 
world. It was the natural road of the traffic of 
India with the west ; that traffic which raised 
Tyre and Sidon from rocks and shallows on a 
fragment of the shore of Judea into magnificent 
cities ; and which was yet to raise into political 
power and unrivalled wealth, the rocks and shal- 
lows of the remotest shore of the Mediterranean. 

Our mountain ranges tempered the hot winds 
from the wilderness. ^ The sea cooled the summer 
heats with the living breeze, and tempered the chill 
of winter. Our fields teemed with perpetual fruits 
and flowers. 

The extent of the land, though narrow, con- 
trasted with that of the surrounding kingdoms, 
was yet not to be measured by the lineal bound- 
aries ; a country intersected every where with 
chains of hills capable of cultivation to the summit, 
alike multiplies its surface, and varies its climate. 
We had at the foot of the hill the products of the 
torrid zone ; on its side those of the temperate ; 
on its summit the robust vegetation of the north. 
The ascending circles of the orange-grove, the 
vineyard, and the forest, covered it with perpetual 
beauty. 



130 SALATHIEL. 

This scene of matchless productiveness is fair 
and fertile no more. For ages before my eyes 
opened on the land of my fathers, the national 
misfortunes had impaired its original loveliness. 
The schism of the tribes, the ravages of successive 
invaders, and, still more, the continued presence of 
the idolater and the alien in the heart of the land, 
turned large portions of it into desert. The final 
fall almost destroyed the traces of its fruitfulness. 
What can be demanded from the soil lorded over 
by the tyranny of the Moslem, stripped of its popu- 
lation, and given up to the mendicant, the monk, 
and the robber ? 

But more than human evil smote my unhappy 
country. The curse pronounced by our great pro- 
phet three thousand years ago, has been deeply 
fulfilled. — " The stranger that shall come from a 
far land shall say, when he beholdeth the plagues 
of the land, and the sicknesses that the Lord hath 
laid upon it, the land brimstone and salt and burn- 
ing, even all nations shall say — * Wherefore hath 
the Lord done this unto this land ? What meaneth 
the heat of this great anger ? ' Then men shall say 
— * Because they have forsaken the covenant of 
the Lord God of their fathers ! ' " 

The soil has been blasted. Sterility has struck 
into its heart. Whole provinces are covered with 



SALATHIEL. 131 

sands aud ashes. It has the look of an exhausted 
volcano ! 

Yet, what might have been the progress of this 
people ! The glory of Israel is no tine vision of 
the fancy. The same prophetic word which has 
given terrible demonstration of its reality in our 
ruin, declares the hope once held forth to our 
obedience. Judea was to have borne the first rank 
among nations ; it was to have been an object of 
universal wonder and honour ; to have been un- 
conquerable ; to have enjoyed unwearied fertility ; 
to have been protected from the casualties of the 
elements ; to have been free from disease ; the life 
of its people continuing to the furthest limit of 
our nature. A blessing was to be upon the la- 
bours, the possessions, and the persons, of the 
tribes ; all Israel, a holy nation, in the highest 
sense of the word — a sovereign race, to which the 
world should pay a willing and happy homage. 

What must have been the operation of this illus* 
trious instance of the preservative power of Heaven, 
on the darkened empires ; of the scriptural lights 
perpetually beaming from Judea; of the living, 
palpable happiness of obedience to the Supreme ; 
of the perpetual security of the land in the divine 
protection ; of the internal peace, health, plen- 
teousness, and freedom ! Man is weak and pas- 



132 SALATHIEL. 

sionate, but no blindness could have hid from his 
contemplations this proof of the human value of 
virtue. 

We must add to this the direct influence of a 
governing people, placed in its rank for the ex- 
press purpose of a guide to nations. Combining 
the sacred impulses, knowledge, and devotedness, 
of a priesthood, with the actual power and dignity 
of kings ; by its own constitution as safe from all 
encroachment, as prohibited from all aggression ; 
informed by the immediate wisdom, and sustained 
in its generous and hallowed enterprise by the un- 
covered arm of Omnipotence ; Judea might have 
changed the earth into a paradise, and raised uni- 
versal man to the highest happiness, knowledge, 
and dignity of his human nature. 



SALATHIEL. 133 



CHAPTER XII. 

We reached the hills of Naphtali at the close 
of one of the most delicious days of summer. All 
nature was clothed with its robe of genial beauty ; 
the olives on the higher grounds had put forth 
their first green, and with every slight gust that 
swept across them, heaved like sheets of emerald; 
the birds sang in a thousand notes from every 
bush ; the sheep and camels lay in the meadows 
visibly enjoying the cool air ; the shepherds sat 
gathered together on the side of some gentle emi- 
nence, talking, or listening to the songs of the 
maidens that came in long lines to the fountains 
below. The heavens gave prospect of a glorious 
day, in the colours shown only to the Oriental 
eye ; hues so brilliant, that many a traveller stops 



134 SALATHIEL. 

on the verge of the valleys, arrested, in his haste 
homeward, by the glow and pomp above. All was 
the loveliness and joy of pastoral life, in the only 
country where I ever found it realised. 

The mind is to be mediciued by natural loveli- 
ness, and mine was cheered. To return to our 
home is at all times a delight ; but the new con- 
juncture, the high hopes of the future, and the 
consciousness that a career of the most distin- 
guished honours might be opening before my 
steps, made this return more vivid than all the 
past ; and when we reached the foot of the long 
ascent from w^hich my dwelling was visible, I felt 
an impatience beyond restraint, and spurred up 
the hill alone. How fine the ear becomes, when 
it is quickened by the heart ! As the broken 
mountain road, now made more difficult by the 
darkness of the wild pines and cedars that crowned 
the summit, compelled me to slacken my pace ; I 
thought that I could distinguish the household 
voices, the barking of my hounds, and the laugh of 
the retainers and peasantry, that during the sum- 
mer crowded my doors. 

I pictured the dearer group, that had so often 
welcomed me. The early and cruel loss of my son 
had not been repaired. I was not destined to 
be the father of a race ; but, two daughters were 



SALATHIEL. 135 

given to me, and, in the absence of all ambition, 
they were more than a recompense. Salome, the 
elder, was now approaching to womanhood ; she 
had the dark eyes and animated beauty of her 
mother ; the foot of the antelope was not lighter ; 
and her wreathed smile, her intellectual sportive- 
ness, her laugh of innocence, and buoyancy of 
soul, forbade sorrow in her sight. Oh, what I 
afterwards saw that face of living joy ! What 
floods of sorrow bathed those cheeks, that shamed 
the Persian rose ! 

The younger was scarcely more than a child ; 
her mind and her form were yet equally in the 
bud : but she had an eye of the deepest azure, a 
living star ; and even in her playfulness there was 
an elevation, a lofty and fervent spirit, that made 
me often forget her years. She was mistress of 
music almost by nature ; and the cadences and 
rich modulations that poured from her harp, under 
fingers slight and feeble, as if the stalks of flowers 
had been flung across the strings, were like se- 
crets of harmony treasured for her touch alone. 
Our prophets, the true masters of the sublime, 
were her rapturous study. Their truths might be 
veiled, but their genius blazed broad upon her 
sensitive soul. 

I imaged my children hastening through the 



136 SALATHIEL. 

portal, twined hand in hand with their noble 
mother, still in the prime of matron beauty, and 
still grown dearer to my heart, to give me wel- 
come. The light thickened, and the intricacy of 
the forest impeded me. At length, wearied by 
the delay, I sprang from my horse, left him to 
make his way as he could, and urged my path 
through a thicket which crept round the skirts of 
the forest, and which alone obstructed the view of 
the spot that contained all that earth held pre- 
cious to me. As I struggled onward, listening 
with sharpened anxiety for every sound of home, 
I caught a sound like that of a wild beast rustling 
close at my side. The thicket was utterly dark. 
My eyes were useless. I drew my scymitar, and 
plunged it straight before me. The blow was in- 
stantly followed by a shriek. Friend or enemy, 
silence was now impossible, and T demanded who 
was nigh. I was answered but by groans ; my 
next step was on a body. Shocked and startled, 
I yet lifted it in my arms, and bore the dying man 
to an open space where the moonlight glimmered. 
To my unspeakable horror, he was one of my most 
favoured attendants, whom I had left in the prin- 
cipal charge of my household. I had slain him : 
I tore up my mantle to stanch his deadly wound ; 
but he fiercely repelled my hand. In an unde- 



SALATHIEL. 137 

fined dread of some evil to my family I com- 
manded him to speak, if but one word, and tell 
me that all was safe. He buried his face in the 
ground. In the whirlwind of my thoughts I flung 
him from me, that I might go forward, and know 
the good or evil ; but he clung round my feet, and 
exerted his last breath to implore me not to leave 
him to die alone. " You have killed me," said 
he, in broken accents : ** but it was not your 
hand, but the hand of the Avenger. I was cor- 
rupted by gold. You have terrible enemies 
among the leaders of Jerusalem: a desperate 
deed has been done." My suspense amounted to 
agony : I made another eff'ort to cast off the tram- 
mels of the assassin ; but he still implored. ** Evil 
things were whispered against you. I was told 
that you had been convicted of a horrible crime." 
The sound shot through my senses : he must have 
felt the trembling of my frame; for he, for the 
first time, looked upon my face. *' My eyes are 
gone," groaned he, and fell back. I dared not 
meet the glance even of his clouding eyes. " They 
said that you were condemned to an unspeakable 
punishment ; and that the man who swept the 
world of you and yours, did God service. In my 
hour of sin the tempter met me ; and this day 
from sunrise have I lurked on your road, to strike 



138 SALATHIEL. 

my benefactor and my lord. In the dark I lost 
my way in the thicket ; but vengeance found 
me." — " My family, my wife, my children, are 
they safe?" I exclaimed. He quivered, relaxed 
his hold, and uttering, " Forgive," two or three 
times, with nervous agony, expired. 

A single bound from this spot of death placed 
me on a point of rock, from which I had often 
gazed on my little world in the valley. The moon 
was now bright, and the view unobstructed. I 
looked down. — Were my eyes dim? There was no 
habitation beneath me : the grove, the garden, 
were there, sleeping in the moonlight ; but all that 
had the semblance of life was gone! I rushed 
down, and found myself among ruins and ashes 
still hot. I called aloud — in terror and distraction 
I yelled to the night ; but no voice aoswered me. 
My foot struck upon something in the grass ; it 
was a sword, black with recent blood. There had 
been burning, plunder, slaughter here, in this 
treasure-house of my heart ; desolation had been 
busy in the centre of what was to me life, more 
than life. I raved ; I flew through the fields ; I 
rushed back to convince myself that I was not 
labouring under some frightful dream. \Yhat I 
endured that night, I never endured again ; that 
conflict of fear, astonishment, love, and misery. 



SALATHIEL. 139 

could be contained but once even in my bosom : in 
all others it must have been death. In the mo- 
ment of reviving hope, I had been smitten. While 
my spirit was ascending on the wings of justified 
ambition and sacred love of country, I had been 
dashed down to earth, a desolate and desperate 
man. 

What I did thenceforth, or how I passed 
through that night, I know not ; but I was found 
in the morning with my robe fantastically thrown 
over me like a royal mantle, and a fragment of 
half-burnt wood for a sceptre in my hand, per- 
forming the part of a monarch, giving orders for 
the rebuilding of my palace, and marshalling the 
movements of an army of shrubs and weeds. I was 
led away with the lofty reluctance of a captive 
sovereign to the household of Eleazar. 

The wrath and grief of my kinsmen were with- 
out bounds. Every defile of the mountains was 
searched — every straggler seized : messengers were 
despatched across the frontier with offers of ran- 
som to the chiefs of the desert, in case my family 
should have escaped the sword. Threats of severe 
retaliation were used by the Roman governor of 
the province ; all was in vain. The only glimpse 
of intelligence was from a shepherd, who two 
nights before had seen a troop, which he supposed 



14Q SALATHIRL. 

to be Arabs, ride swiftly by the gates of Kuria- 
thim, our nearest city ; but this intelligence only 
added to the misfortune. The habits of those 
robbers were proverbially savage : they attacked 
hy the torch and the sword ; they slaughtered the 
inen without mercy; the females they generally 
sold into a returnless captivity. To leave no trace 
of their route, they slaughtered the captives whom 
they could not carry through their hurried marches. 
To leave no trace of what they had done, they 
burned the place of massacre. — But this ruin was 
from other and more malignant hands. 



SA LATHI EL. 141 



CHAPTER Xlir. 

What I might have suffered in the agony of 
a beFeaved husband and father, was spared me. 
My visitation was of another kind ; dreadful, yet, 
perhaps, not so pre-eminently wretched, nor so 
deeply striking at the roots of life. My brain had 
received an overwhelming blow. Imagination was 
to be my tyrant ; and every occurrence of life, 
every aspect of human being, every variety of 
nature, day and night, sunshine and storm, made 
a portion of its fearful empire. What is insanity, 
but a more vivid and terrible dream ? It has the 
dream-like tumult of events, the rapidity of transit, 
the quick invention, the utter disregard of place 
and time. The difterence lies in the sterner inten- 
sity. The madman is awake ; and the open eye 



142 SALATHIEL. 

administers a horrid reality to the fantastic vision. 
The vigour of the senses gives a living and re- 
sistless strength to the vagueness of the fancy ; it 
compels together the fleeting mists of the mind, 
and embodies and inspirits them into shapes of 
deadly power. 

I was mad, but all my madness was not painful. 
Books, my old delight, still lulled my mind. I re- 
volved some favourite volume ; then fancy waved 
her wand, and built upon its contents a world of 
adventure. Every language appeared to open its 
treasures to me. I roved through all lands — I 
saw all the eminent for rank or genius — I drank of 
the fountains of poetry — I addressed listening 
senates, and heard the air echo their applause. 
Wit, beauty, talent, laid their inestimable tributes 
at my feet. I was exalted to the highest triumphs 
of mind ; and then came my fate ; — in the midst of 
my glory came a cloud, and I was miserable ! 

This bitter sense of defeat was a characteristic 
of my visions. Be the cup ever so sweet, it was 
dashed by a poison- drop at bottom. 

I imaged myself the great King of Babylon. 
From the superb architecture of those palaces, in 
which Nebuchadnezzar forgot that he was but 
man, I issued my mandates to a hundred monarchs. 
I saw the satraps of the East bow their jewelled 



SALATHIEL. 143 

necks before my throne. I rode at the head of 
countless armies, Lord of Asia, and future Con- 
queror of all the realms tkat saw the sun. In the 
swelling- of my haughty soul T exclaimed, like him, 
" Is not this the Great Babylon that I have built?" 
and, like him, in the very uttering of the words, I 
was cast out, humbled to the grass of the field, 

hideous, brutaU and wretched 

I was Belshazzar. — I sat in the halls of 



glory. I heard the harps of minstrels, the voice 
of singing men and singing women. The banquet 
was before me ; I was surrounded by the trophies 
of irresistible conquest. Beauty, flattery, splen- 
dour, the delight of the senses, the keener feast of 
vanity, the rich anticipation of triumph measure- 
less and endless, made me all but a god. — I put 
the profaned cup of the temple to my lips. — 
Thunder pealed : the serene sky, the only canopy 
worthy of my banquet and my throne, was sheeted 
over with lightning. I swallowed the wine — it 
was poison and fire in my veins. The gigantic 

hand came forth, and wrote upon the wall 

The moon, the ancient mistress of the diseased 
mind, strongly exerted her spells on mine. I 
loved her light ; but it was only when it mingled 
softly with the shadows of the forest and the land- 
scape. I welcomed her return from darkness, as 



144 SA LATH I EL. 

the coming of some guardian genius to shed at 
once beauty and healing on its path. Darkness 
was to me a source of terror; daylight over- 
whelmed me: but the gentle splendour of the 
crescent had a dewy and refreshing influence on 
my faculties. I exposed my feverish forehead to 
her beams, as if to bathe it in celestial balm. I 
felt in her gradual increase, an increase of the 
power to soothe and console. This indulgence 
grew into a kind of visionary passion. I saw in 
the crescent, as it sailed up the aether, a galley 
crowded with forms of surpassing loveliness, faces 
that bent down and smiled upon me, and hands 
that showered treasures to be collected by mine 
alone. But excess even of this light always dis- 
turbed me. From the full splendour of the moon, 
there was no escape ; the rays smote upon me 
with merciless infliction : I fled to the woods as a 
hunted deer ; a thousand shafts of light penetrated 
the shade. — I hid myself in the depths of my 
chamber; flames of lambent silver, curling and 
darting in forms innumerable, shot round my 
couch. — Upon the inequalities of the ground, or 
the waves of the fountain and the river, serpents 
of the most inimitable lustre, yet of the most 
deadly poison, coiled and sprang after me with a 
rapidity that mocked human feet. — If I dared to 



SALATHIEL. 145 

glance upwards, I beheld a menacing visage dis- 
tending to an immeasurable magnitude, and ready 
to pour down wrath ; or an orb with its mountains 
and oceans swinging loose through the heaven, and 
rolling down upon my solitary brow. 

But those were my hours of comparative hap- 
piness. I had visions of intense suffering and 
terror ; flights through regions of space, that left 
earth and the sun incalculable millions of miles 
behind ; flights ceaseless, hopeless — still hurrying 
onward with more than winged speed through 
worlds of worlds, and still enduring; the heart 
sickening and withering with a consciousness of 
being swept beyond the bounds of living things, 
and of being doomed to this for ever ! 

Those trials changed into every shape of despe- 
ration. 

I was driven out to sea in a bark that let 

in every wave. I struggled to reach the land — I 
tore my sinews with toil — I saw the hills, the 
trees, the shore, sink in slow, yet sure succession 
— I felt in the hands of an invisible power, bent on 
my undoing. The storm subsided, the sun shone, 
the ocean was without a surge. Still I struggled ; 
with the strength of despair I toiled to regain the 
land — to retard the viewless force that was per- 
petually urging me further from existence. I 
VOL. I. G 



146 SALATHIEL. 

began to suffer thirst and hunger. They grew to 
pain, to torture, to madness. I felt as if molten 
lead were poured down my throat. I put my arm 
to my mouth, and shuddering, quenched my thirst 
in my own veins. It returned instantly with a 
more fiery sting. There was nothing in the ele- 
ments to give me hope — to draw off thought from 
ray own fate — to deaden the venomed sensibilities 
that quivered through every fibre. The wind 
slept- — the sky was cloudless — the sea smooth as 
glass : not a distant sail — not a wandering bird — 
not a springing fish — not even a floating weed, 
broke the terrible monotony. The sun did not 
pass down the horizon. All above me was un- 
varied, motionless sky — all around, unvaried, 
motionless ocean. I alone moved — still urged 
further from the chance of life ; still undergoing 
new accessions of agony that made the past trivial. 
I tasted the water beside me ; it added fire to fire. 
I convulsively darted out my withered hands, as 
if they could have drawn down the rain, or grasped 
the dew. I withered piecemeal, yet with a con- 
tinuing consciousness in every fragment of my 
frame ! — 

1 wandered at midnight through a country 

of mountains. Worn out with fatigue, I lay down 
upon a rock. I found it heave under me. I 



SA LATHI EL. 147 

heard a thunder-peal. A sudden blaze kindled 
the sky. Bewildered and stunned, I started on 
my feet. The mountains were on flame ; a hun- 
dred mouths poured down torrents of liquid fire ; 
they came shooting in sulphurous cataracts down 
the chasms. The forests burned before them like 
a garment — the rocks melted — the rivers flew up 
in sheets of vapour — the valleys were basins of 
glowing ore— the clouds of smoke and ashes 
gathered over my head in a solid vault of gloom, 
wildly enlightened by the flashes of the conflagra- 
tion below — the land was a cavern of fire. In 
terror inconceivable, TTan, T bounded, I plunged 
down declivities, I swam rivers: still, the fiery 
torrents hunted my steps, as if they had been 
commissioned against me alone. I felt them gather- 
ing speed on me ; when T bounded, the spot from 
which I sprang was on flame before I alighted on 
the ground. I climbed a promontory with an 
effort that exhausted my last nerve. The fatal 
lava swept round its foot; and, in another instant, 
must encircle me. I ran along the edge of a pre- 
cipice that made the brain turn ; the fire chased 
me from pinnacle to pinnacle. I clung to the 
weeds and trunks of trees on its side, and, in fear 
of being dashed to pieces, tremblingly let myself 
down the wall of perpendicular rock. Breathless 



148 SALATHIEL. 

and dying at the bottom of the descent, I glanced 
upwards ; the flame of the thicket on the brow 
showed me my pursuer. I saw the rapid swelling 
of the molten tide. In another moment, it 
plunged through the air in a white column. The 
valley was instantly an expanse of conflagration — 
every spot was inundated with the blaze. I flew, 
with scorching feet — with every sinew of my frame 
parched and dried of its substance — with my eyes 
blinded, and my lungs burned up by the suffocating 
fumes that rushed before, around, and above. At 
length my limit was reached. The land afforded 
no further room for flight. I stood on the verge 
of the ocean. Death was inevitable. I had but 
the choice. Before me spread the world of waters, 
sad, dim, fathomless, interminable ; behind me, 
the world of flame. By a last desperate eff*ort, I 
plunged into the ocean. The indefatigable lava 
rolled on, mass on mass, like armies rushing to the 
assault. The billows shrank before the first fiery 
shock, sheets of vapour rolled up; still the eruption 
rolled on, and the returning billows fought against 
it. The conflict shook the land ; the mountain 
shore crumbled down ; the sands melted and 
burned vitreous; the atmosphere discharged 
scalding torrents ; the winds, shaken from their 
balance, raged with the violence of more than 



SALATHIEL. 149 

tempest. Thunder roared in peals that shook the 
earth, the ocean, and the heavens. In the midst 
of all I lived, tossed like a grain of sand in the 
whirlwind. 

Strange and harassing as these trials of my 
mind were, they had yet contained some appeals 
to individual energy, some excitement of personal 
powers, that produced a kind of cheering self- 
applause. I was Prometheus on his rock, chained 
and remediless, yet still resisting and uncon- 
quered. But the true misery was when I was 
passive. 

I strayed through an Egyptian city. 

Buildings numberless, of the most regal design, 
rose round me ; the walls were covered with sculp- 
tures of extraordinary richness — noble statues 
lined the public ways — wealth in the wildest pro- 
fusion was visible wherever the foot trod. End- 
less ranges of porphyry and alabaster columns 
glittered in the noon. Superb ascents of marble 
steps mounted before me, to heights that strained 
the eye. Arch over arch, studded with the lustre 
of precious stones, climbed until they lay like 
rainbows upon the sky. Colossal towers circled 
with successive colonnades of dazzling brightness 
ascended — airy citadels, looking down upon earth, 
and coloured with the infinite dves and lustres of 



150 SALATHIEL. 

the clouds. But all was silence in this scene of 
pomp. There was no tread of human being heard 
within the circuit of a city fit for more than man. 
The utter extinction of all that gives the idea of 
life was startling ; there was not the note of a 
passing bird, not the chernp of a grasshopper. I 
instinctively shrank from the sight of things lovely 
in themselves, yet which froze my mind by their 
image of the tomb. But to escape was impossible; 
there was an impression of powerlessness upon me, 
for whose melancholy I can find no words. My 
feet were chainless, but never fetter clung with 
such a retarding weight, as that invisible bond by 
which T was fixed to the spot. Ages on ages 
seemed to have heavily sunk away, and still I 
stood, bound by the same manacle, standing on the 
same spot, looking on the same objects. To this 
I would have preferred the fiercest extremes of 
suffering. The passion for change is the most in- 
capable of being extinguished or eluded, of all that 
dwell within the heart of man. 

But the change at length came. The sun de- 
cayed. Twilight fell, shade on shade, on tower 
and column ; until total darkness shrouded the 
scene of glory. Yet, as if a new faculty of sight 
were given to me, the thickest darkness did not 
blunt the eye. I still saw all things— the minutest 



SALATHIEL. 151 

figures of the architecture, the finest carving of 
the airy castles, whose height was, even in the 
sunshine, almost too remote for vision. Suddenly, 
there echoed the murmur of many voices, the 
trooping of many feet ; the colossal gates opened, 
and a procession of forms innumerable entered ; 
they were of every period of life, of every pursuit, 
of every rank, of every country. All the various 
emblems of station, all the weapons and imple- 
ments of mankind, all costumes, rich and strange, 
civilised and savage ; all the attributes and ad- 
juncts of the occupations of society moved in that 
mighty train. The monarch, sceptred and crowned, 
passed on his throne ; the soldier reining his 
charger ; the philosopher gazing on his volume ; 
the priest bearing the instruments of sacrifice. It 
was the triumph of a power ruling all mankind ; 
but ruling them when the world has passed away — 
Death ! 

While I gazed in breathless awe, I found my- 
self involved in the procession. Resistance was 
vain : I was conscious that I might as well have 
struggled against the tides of the ocean, or 
thought to stop the revolution of the globe. We 
advanced through the place of darkness by millions 
of millions, yet without crowding the majestic 
avenue, or reaching its close. I rapidly recognised 



152 SALATHIEL. 

a multitude of faces, which I had known from the 
models and memorials of the past ages. But the 
power that marshalled them had no regard to 
time. The pale, fixed Asiatic countenance of 
Ninus moved beside the glowing cheek and flash- 
ing eye of Alexander. The patriarch followed 
the Caesar. The thousand years were as one day, 
the one day as a thousand years. 

The whole stately train suddenly melted upon 
the eye, and I was alone, in tenfold darkness, — 
entombed. I lay in the sepulchre, but with the 
full vividness of life, and with a perfect know- 
ledge that there it was my doom to lie for ever, 
A miraculous foresight gifted me with the fearful 
privilege of looking into the most remote futurity. 
Ages on ages unfolded themselves, with all their 
wonders, to tantalise me. I saw worlds awake 
from chaos, and return to it in flood and flame. 
I saw systems swept away like the sand. The 
universe withered with years, and rolled up like 
the parchment scroll. I saw new regions of 
space, glowing with a new creation ; the angelic 
hierarchies rising through new energies, new 
triumphs, new orders of existence ; develop- 
ments of power and magnificence, of sublime 
mercy and essential glory, too high for the con- 
ception of mortal faculties. Yet I was still to be 



riS!^ 



SALATHIEL. 153 

entombed ! No ray of light, no sound, no trace 
of external being, no sympathy of flesh or spirit, 
of earth or heaven, was to reach me. The four 
narrow walls, the winding-sheet, the worm, were 
my world. 

I seemed to lie thus for periods beyond ail 
counting ; powerless to move a limb ; the sleep- 
less, conscious, vivid victim of misery unspeak- 
able, — the bondsman of the sepulchre ! — 

In those wanderings I experienced not even 
the slightest recollection of the cause which so 
sternly besieged my brain. Wife, children, 
country, were a blank. Imagination, that strangest 
and most imperious of our faculties, whose soar- 
ings from earth to heaven may be among the in- 
dications of power beyond the grave, disdains to 
linger on the realities of our being. It delights in 
the commanding, the bold, the superb. In my 
instance it had the wildness of disease ; but who 
has ever felt its workings, even in the dream of 
health, without wonder at its passion for the richer 
and more highly relieved remembrances ; its sin- 
gular skill in throwing together the brilliant por- 
tions of life and nature, to the total disregard of 
the level ; its subtlety in the seizure of the cir- 
cumstances of pain, its pointings and sharpenings ; 
its fabrication of adventure, at once of the most 



154 SALATHIEL. 

regular consecutiveness, and the wildest origi- 
nality ; and all characterised by the same sponta- 
neous swiftness of change, and illimitable com- 
mand over space and time, a power of instant 
flight from continent to continent, and from world 
to world ; — the transit that would actually fill up 
years and ages, the work of a moment ! — the ac- 
tual moment expanding into years and ages ! 

What are those but the infant attributes of the 
disembodied spirit ! — the imperfect developments 
of a state of being to which time and space are 
nothing ; — when man, shaking off the covering 
of the grave, shall be clothed with the might of 
angels! — the splendid denizen of Infinitude and 
Eternity ! 



SALATHIEL. 155 



CHAPTER XIV. 

At length the past returned to my mind. Dim 
recollections, shadows that alternately advanced 
and eluded me, sketches of forms and events, like 
pictures unfinished by the pencil, lay before me 
colourless and undefined. But day by day the 
outlines grew more complete, the figures assumed 
a body : they lived — they moved — they uttered 
voices ; and while to other eyes I was a solitary 
and hopeless fugitive from human converse, to my 
own I was surrounded with a circle of all that I 
loved : yet, with a continued sense of privation, 
a mysterious feeling of something imperfect in 
the indulgence, that dashed my cup with bit- 
terness. 

With the increase of my strength, I became a 



156 SALATHIEL. 

wanderer to great distances among the mountains. 
No persuasion of my kinsmen could restrain me 
from those excursions. The mildness of a climate 
in which the population sleep in the open air, and 
the abundance of fruits, met the two chief diffi- 
culties of travelling. I felt an irresistible impulse 
to penetrate the mountain ranges, that rose in 
chains of purple and azure before me. With the 
artifice of the diseased mind, I made my few pre- 
parations in secret ; and with but scrip and staff, 
marched forth to tread hill and valley, city and 
desert, to the last limit of the globe. 

Through what diversities of scene, or impedi- 
ments of road I long passed, no memory rests upon 
me. The same instinct which guides the bird, led 
me to the fruit-tree and the stream, taught me 
where to shelter for the night, and gave me saga- 
city for the avoidance of the habitual dangers of a 
route seldom tried but by the wolf and the rob- 
ber. But my frame, gradually invigorated by 
exercise, bore me through ; and I scaled the chain 
of Libanus with an unwearied foot. 

There I reached the skirts of a region where 
the snow scarcely melts even in the burning sum- 
mer of Syria. The falling of the leaf, and the fu- 
rious blasts that burst through the ravines, told 
me that I had spent months in my pilgrimage, and 



SALATHIEL. 157 

that I must brave winter on its throne. Still I 
persevered. I felt a new excitement in the new 
difficulty of the season ; I longed to try my power 
of endurance against the storm, to wrestle with 
the whirlwind, to baffle the torrent. The very 
sight of the snow, as it began to sheet the sides of 
the lower hills, gave me a vague idea of a brighter 
realm of existence ; it united the pinnacles with 
the clouds; the noble promontories and forest- 
covered eminences no longer rose in stern contrast 
with the sky; they were dipt in celestial blue; 
they wore the silvery and sparkling lustre of the 
morning skies ; they blushed in the effulgence of 
the sunset, with as rich a crimson as the cloud 
that crowned them. 

But all was not fantastic vision. From the 
summit of one of those hills, I saw what was then 
worth a pilgrimage through half the world to see, 
the cedar grove of Lebanon. After a day of un- 
usual fatigue and perplexity, I had found my path 
blocked up by a perpendicular pile of rock. To 
all but myself, the difficulty might have been 
impracticable; but my habits had given me the 
spring and muscle of a panther ; I bounded against 
the marble, and after long effort, by the help of 
the weeds, and scattered roots of the wild vines, 
climbed my perilous way to the summit. An end- 



158 SALATHIEL. 

less rang-e of Syria lay beneath ; the sea and the 
wilderness gleamed on my left and right ; and a 
rich succession of dells, crowded with the date, 
the olive, and the grape, in their autumnal dyes, 
spread out before me, as far as the eye could 
reach in a land whose air is pure as crystal. 

A sound of trumpets and wild harmonies arose, 
and I discovered, at an almost viewless depth be- 
low, a concourse of people moving through the 
hollows of the mountains. The tendency of man 
to man is irresistible ; and that unexpected sight, 
where but the wild beast and the eagle were to 
have been my companions, gave me the first sen- 
sation of pleasure that I had long experienced. 
Bounding from rock to rock with a hazardous ra- 
pidity which arrested the crowd in astonishment 
and alarm, I joined them just in time to see the 
shafts and slings laid down, which they had pre- 
pared for ray coming, in the uncertainty whether 
I were a wolf or a mountain robber. 

They formed one of the many caravans that an- 
nually gathered from the shores of the Mediter- 
ranean to worship at Lebanon. The homage to 
sacred groves had been transmitted from the ear- 
liest antiquity, and was universal in the realms of 
paganism. To the Jew, worship on the hill and 
under the tree was prohibited ; but the forest that 



SALATHIEL. 159 

Solomon had chosen, the trees of which the first 
Temple was built, the foliage which shaded the 
first planters of the earth, must to the descendant 
of Abraham be full of reverent interest. The 
ground was scriptural; the fiery string of the 
prophet Ezekiel had been struck to its praise ; the 
noblest raptures of our poets celebrated the glory 
of Lebanon ; the names of the surrounding land- 
scape recalled lofty and lovely memories ; the vale 
of Eden led to the mountain of the Cedars ! 

To my fellow-travellers traditions tinged by the 
fervid colouring of the oriental fancy, heightened 
the native power of the spot. On the summits of 
the trees were said to descend at appointed times 
those ministering spirits whose purpose is to rectify 
the crimes of man. There stooped on the wing the 
bearers of the sword against the heads of evil 
monarchs ; there brooded the angel of the tem- 
pest ; there the invisible ruler of the pestilence 
blew with his breath, and nations sickened ; there 
in night and in the interval of storms was heard 
the trumpet that, before kings dreamed of quarrel, 
announced the collision of guilty empires for their 
mutual ruin. 

The violation of the grove was supposed to be 
visited with the most inexorable calamity; the 
hand that cut down a tree for any ordinary use, 



160 SALATHIEL. 

withered from the body ; all misfortunes fell upon 
the man ; his wealth dissolved away, his cattle 
perished, his children died in their prime : if life 
was suffered to linger in himself, it was only to 
perpetuate the warning of the punishment. But 
there were gentler distinctions mingled with those 
stern attributes. Above the hill v/as the pagan 
entrance to the skies. Once in the year the celestial 
gate rolled back on its golden hinges with sounds 
surpassing mortal music ; the heavens dropped 
balm ; the prayer oflPered on that night reached at 
once the supreme throne ; the tear was treasured 
in the volume of light ; and the w^orshipper who 
died before the envious coming of the morn, as- 
cended to a felicity, earned by others only through 
the tardy trial of the grave. The river which ran 
round the mountain's foot, bore its share of virtue ; 
its water, unpolluted by the decay of autumn, or 
the turbidness of winter, showed the preservative 
power of a superior being: it was entitled the 
Holy Stream ; and sealed vessels of it were sent 
even to India and Italy, presents of health and 
sanctity to kings, and worthy of kings. 

As we entered the last defile, the minstrels and 
singers of the caravan commenced a paean. Altars 
fumed from various points of the chasm above ; 
and the Syrian priests were seen in their robes 



SALATHIEL. 161 

performing the empty rites of idolatry. I turned 
away from this perversion of human reason, and 
pressed forward through the lingering multitude, 
until the forest rose in its majesty before me. 

My step was checked in solemn admiration. I 
saw the earliest produce of the earth — the pa- 
triarchs of the vegetable world. The first gene- 
ration of the reviving globe had sat beneath these 
green and lovely arches ; the final generation was 
to sit beneath them. No roof so noble ever rose 
aboTe the heads of monarchs, though it were 
covered with gold and diamonds. 

The forest had been greatly impaired in its ex- 
tent and beauty by the sacrilegious hand of war. 
The perpetual conflicts of the Syrian and Egyptian 
dynasties laid the axe to it with remorseless viola- 
tion. It once spread over the whole range of the 
mountains ; its diminished strength now, like the 
relics of a mighty army, made its stand among the 
central fortresses of its native region ; and there 
majestically bade defiance to the further assault of 
steel and fire. The forms of the trees seemed 
made for duration ; the trunks were of prodigious 
thickness, smooth and round as pillars of marble ; 
some rising to a great height, and throwing out 
a vast level roof of foliage ; some dividing into 
a cluster of trunks, and with their various heights 



162 SALATHIEL. 

of branch and leaf, making a succession of ver- 
durous caves ; some propagating' themselves by 
circles of young cedars, risen where the fruit had 
dropped upon the ground : the whole bore the 
aspect of a colossal temple of nature — the shafted 
column, the deep arch, the solid buttresses branch- 
ing off into the richest caprices of oriental archi- 
tecture, the solemn roof high above, pale, yet 
painted by the strong sunlight through the leaves 
with transparent and tesselated dyes rich as the 
colours of the Indian mine. 

In the momentary feeling of awe and wonder, I 
could comprehend why paganism loved to worship 
under the shade of forests ; and why the poets of 
paganism filled that shade with the attributes and 
presence of deities. The airy whisperings, the 
loneliness, the rich twilight, were the very food of 
mystery. Even the forms that towered before the 
eye; those ancient trees, the survivors of the 
general law of mortality, gigantic, hoary, covered 
with their weedy robes, bowing their aged heads 
in the blast, and uttering strange sounds and 
groanings in the struggle, gave to the high- 
wrought superstition of the soul the images of 
things unearthly ; the oracle and the God ! Or 
was this impression but the obscure revival of one 
of those lovely truths that shone upon the days of 



SALATHIEL. 163 

Paradise, when man drew knowledge from its 
fount in Nature ; and all but his own passions was 
disclosed to the first-born of creation. 

The caravan encamped in the bottom of the 
valley, and the grove was soon crowded with wor- 
shippers, in whose homage I could take no share. 
Fires were lighted on the large stones, which had 
for ages served the purpose of altars ; and the 
names of the Syrian idols were shouted and sung 
in the fierce exultation of a worship but slightly 
purified from its original barbarism. As the night 
fell, I withdrew to the entrance of the defile, and 
gave a last glance at Lebanon. In the grove filled 
with fires, and echoing with wild music and dances 
of riot, I saw the emblem of my fallen country ; 
the holiness, old as the oldest memory of nations, 
profaned ; yet the existence preserved, and still to 
be preserved : Israel once throned upon its moun- 
tains, now diminished of its beauty ; to be yet more 
diminished ; but to live, w hen all else perished ; to 
be restored, to cover its native bills again with 
glory. I buried my face in my robe, and throwing 
myself dow n by the skirt of one of the tents, gave 
way to meditations sweet and bitter. They passed 
into my sleep, and I was once more in the bosom 
of my family. 

I heard my name pronounced ; I listened ; the 



164 SALATHIEL. 

name of my wife followed. I looked to the sky, 
to the forest, to convince me that this was no 
mockery of the diseased mind. I was fully awake. 
I lifted up the corner of the tent. Savage figures 
were sitting over their cups, inflamed into quar- 
rel; and in the midst of high words and exe- 
crations I heard their story. They were robbers 
from Mount Amanus ; come, equally, to purify 
their hands by offering sacrifice at Lebanon, and 
to recompense themselves for their lost time by 
robbing on the way home. The quarrel had 
arisen from the proposal of one of them to extend 
their expedition into Judea, a proposal which he 
sustained by mentioning the success of his pre- 
vious enterprises. My name was again sent from 
mouth to mouth, and I found that it was inscribed 
on some jewel which formed a part of his plunder. 
The thought struck me that this might afford a 
clue. I burst into the tent, and demanded my 
wife and children. The ruffians started as if they 
were in the presence of a spectre. *' Where," I 
repeated, " are my family I I am Salathiel !" 
'* Safe enough," said the foremost. " Are they 
alive ?" I cried ; *' lead me where they are, and 
you shall have what ransom you desire." The 
ruffian laughed. " Why, as for ransom, all the 
money has been made by them, that is likely to 



SALATHIEL. 165 

be made for some time ; unless the Greek that 
bought them repents of his bargain." The speech 
was received with loud laughter. I grew furious. 
" Villains, you have murdered them. Tell me 
the whole— show me where they lie, or I will 
deliver you up to the chief of the caravan as rob- 
bers and murderers." They were appalled ; with a 
single stride I was at the throat of the leading 
ruffian, and seized the jewel : it was my bridal 
present to Miriam ! My hand trembled, my eyes 
grew dim at the. glance. In the next moment I 
found myself pinioned, a gag forced into my mouth, 
a cloak flung over me ; and was left to listen to 
the discussion, whether I was to be stabbed on 
the spot, left to die of famine, or have my tongue 
cut out, and, thus unfitted for telling secrets, be 
turned to gain, and sold for a slave. 

But my preservation was not distant. The 
quarrel of the banditti increased with their wine ; 
blows were given ; the solitary lamp was thrown 
down in the conflict ; it caught some combustible 
matter ; the tent was in a blaze. By a violent 
exertion I loosened the cords from my arms, and 
in the confusion fled unseen. The fire spread ; 
and my last glance at the valley showed the en- 
campment turned into a sea of fire. 

Alone, in pain, and exhausted with deadly fa- 



166 SALATHIEL. 

tigue, I yet had but one thought, that of seeking 
my family through the world. I wandered on, 
through the vast range of wild country that guards 
Syria on the side of the desert. T was parched 
by the burning noon, I was frozen by the keen 
winds of night, I hungered and thirsted ; yet the 
determination was strong as death, and I per- 
severed. I at length reached the foot of Mount 
Amanus, traversed the chain, saw from it the in- 
terminable plains of Asia Minor, the desert of 
Aleppo, the shores of Tripoli ; and was then left 
only to choose in which I should again commence 
my hopeless pilgrimage. 

There is something in great distress of mind, 
that throws a strange protection round the suf- 
ferer. I passed the Roman guards unquestioned 
— the robber left me without inquiring whether I 
was worth his dagger. — The wolves, driven down 
by famine, and devouring all else that had life, 
neglected the banquet that I might have supplied ! 
— Yet 1 shrank from none of the evils, but marched 
on through garrison, cave, and forest. But one 
evening the sky was loaded with a tempest that 
drove even me to seek for shelter. I found it in 
one of the promontories that so often scare the 
mariner's eye on the iron-bound shore of Cilicia. 

Fatigue soon threw me into a heavy slumber. 



SALATHIEL. 167 

Bat the weight of the tempest towards midnight 
roused me, and from the mouth of the cave I 
gazed on the lightnings, that, red with resistless 
rage, disclosed at every explosion immense tracts 
of sea rolling in foaming ridges before the gale. In 
the intervals of the gusts, 1 heard, to my surprise, 
the murmur of many voices, apparently in prayer, 
close beside me. But all my interest was sud- 
denly fixed on the sea, by the sight of a large 
war-galley running before the wind. She had 
neither sail nor oar. Her masts were gone by the 
board; and but for the crowd of people on her 
deck, whose distracted attitudes I could clearly see 
by the flashes, she looked a floating tomb. 

To summon whatever assistance might be at 
hand, I cried aloud; to warn the galley of the 
hazards of the shore, I gathered the brushwood at 
the mouth of the cavern, and set it on fire. A 
shout from the crew told me that my signal was 
understood ; and I rushed down the bed of a stream 
that fretted its way through the precipice. Be- 
fore I reached the shore, I saw various fires blaz- 
ing above, and many figures hurrying down on a 
purpose like my own. We had not arrived too 
soon. The galley, after desperate eff'orts to 
keep the sea, had run for an inlet of the rocks, 
and was embayed ; surge on surge, each higher 



168 SALATHIEL. 

than the one before, rolled over the ill-fated ves- 
sel, and each swept some portion of her crew into 
the deep. We rushed into the waves, and had suc- 
ceeded in drawing many to shore ; when a broader 
burst, the concentrated force of the tempest, thun- 
dered on the galley; she was broken into splin- 
ters. Stunned and half suffocated with the surge, 
I grasped, in the mere instinct of self-preserva- 
tion, at whatever was nearest ; and through in- 
finite hazard reached the shore with a body in 
my arms. Need I tell the keen succession of 
terror, anxiety, hope, and joy, when I found that 
this being whom I saw lifeless, and at length 
breathing, moving, pronouncing my name, falling 
on my neck, was Miriam ! 

My daughters, too, were rescued. The near- 
ness of the shore saved the crew, who, until they 
saw the beacon on the rocks, had given themselves 
up to despair. The chance of help led them to 
steer close in land, and I was congratulated as the 
general preserver. Miriam's story was brief. Our 
dwelling had been surrounded by a troop of 
robbers. The household were surprised in their 
sleep. Resistance was vain ; the rest was plunder 
and captivity. The robbers, fearful of pursuit, 
took the road to the mountains at full speed. My 
wife and daughters were treated with unusual 



SALATHIEL. 169 

care, lest their beauty should be injured, and thus 
their value in the slave-market of Tripoli impaired. 
As the robber told me, they had been purchased 
by a Greek merchant of Cyprus, and by him con- 
veyed to his island, to be sold to some more opu- 
lent master. There they were redeemed by an act 
of equal generosity and valour, and were returning 
to Judea when the storm overtook them. 



VOL. I. H 



170 SALATHIEL. 



CHAPTER XV. 



When the first tumult of our spirits was past, 
I had leisure to see what changes the interval had 
made in faces so loved. Miriam's betrayed the 
hours of distress and pain that she must have 
passed ; but her noble style of beauty, the ema- 
nation of a noble mind, was as conspicuous as 
ever. I even thought, when her large eye fell on 
me from time to time, that it shone with a loftier 
intelligence, as if misfortune had raised its vision 
above the things of our trivial world. My 
daughters' forms had matured ; but Salome, the 
elder, wore a portion of her mother's look ; her 
laughing glance still beamed, yet she was often 
lost in meditation ; and the rapid changes of her 
cheek, from the deepest crimson to the paleness of 



SALATHIEL. 171 

snow, alarmed me with menaces of early decay. 
Esther too had undergone her revolution. But it 
was of the brightest texture. The seas, the skies, 
the mountains of Greece, filled her glowing spirit 
with images of new life. She had listened with 
bonndless delight to the traditions of that most 
brilliant of all people ; the works of the pencil and 
the chisel had met her eye in a profuseness and 
perfection that she had never contemplated before ; 
her harp echoed to names of romantic valour and 
proud patriotism ; and as I gazed on her in those 
hours, when, in the feeling that she was unob- 
served, she gave way to the rich impulses of her 
soul, I thought alternately of the prophetess and 
of the muse. 

The shipwreck converted the solitary shore into 
a little village ; the sailors collected the fragments 
of the vessel and formed them into huts; the 
caves that ran along the level of the sands, sup- 
plied habitations of themselves ; and by the as- 
sistance of those dwellers on the precipice who had 
so unexpectedly started to light, the first difficul- 
ties of a wild coast were sufficiently combated. 
The bustling activity of the Greek mariners, and 
the adroitness with which they availed themselves 
of all contrivances for passing the heavy hour, 
their sleights of hand, sports, and dances, their 



172 SALATHIEL. 

recitations of popular poems, and their boat songs, 
kept the spot in continual animation. This was 
my first opportunity of contact with the actual 
people, and I acknowledged their right to have 
been distinguished among the most showy dis- 
turbers of mankind. The evil of the character too 
was displayed without much trouble of disguise. 
They habitually gamed, till they had no better 
stake than the fragments of their own clothing ; 
but they would game for a shell, for a stone that 
they picked up on the sands, for any thing. They 
quarrelled with as perfect facility as they gamed : 
the knife was out quick as lightning ; but to do 
them justice, their wrath was as brief. The com- 
batants embraced at a word, danced, kissed, and 
wept; then drank, gamed, quarrelled, and were 
sworn brothers again. But this was Greece in its 
lowest rank. Constantius, the commander of the 
galley, was a specimen of the land which pro- 
duced a Plato and a Pericles. When I first saw 
him led by Miriam, as the generous champion who 
had restored her and her children to happiness, I 
saw virtue and manliness of the highest order in 
his features. He was still in his prime, but a scar 
across his forehead, and the severities of martial 
life, gave early seriousness to his countenance. 
But his conversation had the full spirit of the 



SA LATHI EL. 173 

spring-time of life. It was incomparably rich, 
various, and animated ; altogether free from pro- 
fessional pedantry, it had the interest that belongs 
to professional feelings. Military adventure, 
striking traits of warlike intelligence, the compo- 
sition of the fleets and armies of the various states 
that fought under the wing of the Roman eagle, 
v/ith their old valour invigorated by their new dis- 
cipline, were topics on which his fire was exhaust- 
less. On those I listened to him with the strong 
sympathy of one to whom war must henceforth be 
the grand pursuit ; war for national freedom, war 
purified of its evil by the most illustrious cause 
that ever summoned the sword. 

But Constantius had conversation for us all. 
His intercourse with the ruling lands of the earth 
gave him a copious store of recollections, pic- 
turesque, superb, and strange. Esther combated 
and questioned the traveller. Salome listened to 
the warrior — listened, and loved. He had higher 
topics, of which I was yet to hear. In the inha- 
bitants of the precipice he found a little colony of 
his countrymen, fugitive Christians, driven out by 
persecution to make their home in the wilderness 
of nature. The long range of caverns which per- 
forated the rock, gave them a roof. The fertility 
of the soil, and the occasional visit of a bark sent 



174 SALATHIEL. 

by their concealed friends, supplied the necessaries 
and some of the conveniences of life, and there 
they awaited the close of that ferocious tyranny 
which at length roused the world against Nero ; 
or awaited the close of all suffering in the grave. 

A succession of storms rendered travelling im- 
possible, and detained us among those hermits for 
some days. I found them intelligent, and, in ge- 
neral, men of the higher ranks of knov/ledge and 
condition. Some were of celebrated families, and 
had left behind them opulence and authority. A 
few were peasants. But misfortune, and, still 
more, principle extinguished all that was abrupt 
in the inequality of ranks, without leaving license 
in its stead. Jew as I was, and steadily bound to 
the customs of my country, I yet did honour to 
the patience, the humility, and the devotedness of 
those exiled men. I even once attended their 
worship on the first day of the week ; assured that 
the abomination of idols was not to be found there, 
and that I should hear nothing insulting to the 
name of Israel. 

The ceremonial was simple. Those who had 
witnessed the heaven-commanded magnificence of 
the Temple, might smile at the bareness of the 
walls of rock, figured only with the wild herbage ; 
or those who had borne to see the extravagant and 



SALATHIEL. 175 

complicated rites of paganism, might scorn the 
few and obvious forms of the homage. But there 
was the spirit of strong prayer — the breathing of 
the heart — the unanswerable sincerity. Every 
violence of the mere animal frame was unknown. 
I saw no pagan convulsion — no fierceness of out- 
cry and gesture — not even the vehement solem- 
nity of the Jew. All was calm ; tears stole down, 
but they stole in silence ; knees were bowed, but 
there was no prostration; prayers fervent and 
lofty were poured forth, but it was in accents ut- 
tered less from the lip than from the soul, appeals 
of hallowed confidence to a Being that was sure to 
hear, the voice of children to a Father and a God, 
who, wherever two or three were gathered toge- 
ther, was in the midst of them. 

At length the storms cleared away, and the sky 
wore the native azure of the climate. A mes- 
senger despatched to Cyprus, returned with a 
vessel for the embarkation of the Greeks. Camels 
and mules were procured from the neighbouring 
country for our journey, and the morning was 
fixed, on which we were to separate. Yet with 
so much reason for joy, few resolutions could have 
been received with less favour. Constantius aU 
most shunned society, or shared in it with a si- 
lence and depression that made his philosophy 



176 SALATHIEL. 

more than questionable. Miriam was engaged in 
long conferences with Salome, from which they 
both came sad. Esther was thus my chief com- 
panion, and she talked of the shore, the sea, and 
even of the tempests, with heightened interest. 
The Greeks, sailor and soldier alike, loved too 
well the romantic ease and careless adventure of 
the place, to look with complacency on the little 
vessel in which they were to be borne once more 
into the land of restraint. The fugitive colony 
were not the slowest in their regrets. They had 
been deeply prepared for human vicissitude, and 
had humbled themselves to all things ; yet, such 
h the strong and natural connexion of man with 
man, they lamented the solitude to which they 
must again be left, like the commencement of a 
new exile. 

There are few things more singular than the 
blindness which, in matters of the highest impor- 
tance to ourselves, often hides the truth that is 
plain as noon to all other eyes. The cause which 
deprived Constantius of his eloquence, and Salome 
of her animation, was obvious to every one but 
me. Nor was the mystery yet to be disclosed to 
my tardy knowledge. 

I had strayed through the cliffs, as was my cus- 
tom after the heat of the day, and was taking a 



SALATHIEL. 177 

last look at the sea from one of the thickets on the 
edge of the precipice. The sands far below me 
were covered with preparation for the voyage, 
which, like our journey, was to commence with 
the rising sun. The little vessel lay, a glittering 
toy, at anchor, with her thread-like streamers 
playing in the breeze. The sailors were fishing, 
preparing their evening meal, heaving water and 
provisions down the rocks, or enjoying themselves 
over flagons of Syrian wine round their fires ; all 
was the activity of a sea-port ; but, from the 
height on which I lay, all was but the activity of a 
mole-hill. " And is it of such materials," mused 
I, " that ambition is made? is it to command, to 
be gazed on, to be shouted after by such mites and 
atoms as those, that life is exhausted in watching 
and weariness ; that our true enjoyments are 
sacrificed ; that the present and the future are 
equally cast from us ; that the hand is dipped in 
blood, and the earth desolated? What must 
Alexander's triumph have looked, to one who saw 
it from the towers of Babylon ? a triumph of em- 
mets ! " I smiled at the moral of three hundred 
feet of precipice. 

A step in the thicket put philosophy to flight. 
My wife stood before rfle ; and never saw I even 
her beauty more beautiful. The exertion of the 
ascent had coloured her cheek ; the breeze had 



178 SALATHIEL. 

scattered her raven locks across a forehead of the 
purest white ; her lip wore the smiles so long ab- 
sent ; and there was altogether an air of hope and 
joy in her countenance, that made me instinctively 
ask, of what good news she was the bearer. 
Without a word she sat down beside me, and 
pressed my hand between hers ; she fixed her eyes 
on mine, tried to speak, and failing, fell on my 
neck, and burst into tears. Alarmed at her sobs, 
and the wild beating of her heart, I was about to 
rise for assistance, when she detained me, and 
the smile returned ; she bared her forehead to 
the breeze, and recovering, disburthened her 
soul. 

** How many billows," said she, gazing on the 
sea, " will roll between that little bark and this 
shore to-morrow ! There is always something me- 
lancholy in parting. Yet, if that vessel could 
feel, with what delight would she not wing her 
way to Cyprus, lovely Cyprus ? " 

I was surprised ! " Miriam ! this from you ? 
Can you regret the place of paganism — the land 
of your captivity?" 

*' No," was the answer, with a look of lofty 
truth ; " I abhorred the guilty profanations of 
the pagan ; and who can love the dungeon ? Even 
were Cyprus a paradise, I should have felt un- 
happy in the separation from my country and from 



SALATHIEL. 179 

you. Yet those alone who have seen the matchless 
loveliness of the island — the perpetual animation 
of life in a climate, and in the midst of scenes 
made for happiness— can know the sacrifice that 
must be made by its people in leaving it, and 
leaving it perhaps for ever." 

" The crew of that galley are not to be tried by 
long exile. In two days, at furthest, they will an- 
chor in their own harbours." 

** And how deeply must the sacrifice be en- 
hanced by the abandonment of rank, wealth, pro- 
fessional honours ! — and this is the sacrifice on 
which I have been sent to consult my husband." 

I was totally at a loss to conceive of whom she 
spoke. 

*' Our friend — our deliverer from captivity or 
death — the generous being, who, through infinite 
hazards, restored your wife and children to hap- 
piness and home — " 

" Constantius ! impossible. — At the very age of 
ambition, with his talents, his knowledge of life, 
his prospects of the highest distinction ? — " 

" Constantius will never return to Cyprus in 
that galley — will never draw sword for Rome 
again — will never quit the land given by Heaven 
to our fathers ; if such be the will of Salathiel." 

" Strange. — But his motives ? he is superior to 



180 



SALATHIEL* 



the fickleness that abandons an honourable course 
of life through the pure love of novelty : or is he 
weary of the absurdities of paganism ?" 

" Thoroughly weary — more than weary ; he has 
abjured them for ever and ever." 

'' You rejoice me. But it was to be expected 
from his manly mind. You have brought an il- 
lustrious convert, my beloved ; and if your cap- 
tivity has done this, it was the will of Heaven, 
Constantius shall be led with distinction to the 
temple, and be one of ourselves. Judea may yet 
require such men. Our holy religion may exult in 
such conquests from the darkness of the idolatrous 
world." 

The voice of the hermits at their evening 
prayer now arose, and held us in a silence, which 
neither seemed inclined to break. Many thoughts 
pressed on my mind ; the addition to our circle of 
a man whom I honoured and esteemed ; the acces- 
sion of a practised soldier to our cause ; the near 
approach of the hour of conflict ; the precarious 
fate of those I loved, in the great convulsion 
which was to rend away the Roman yoke, or leave 
Judea a tomb. I accidentally looked up, and saw 
that Miriam had been as abstracted as myself. But 
war and policy were not in the contemplations of 
the beaming countenance ; nor their words on the 



SALATHIEL. 181 

lips that quivered and crimsoned before me. Her 
eyes were fixed on the sky, and she was in evident 
prayer, which I desired not to disturb. She at 
leng-th caught my glance, and blushed like one 
detected ; but quickly recovering — said, in a tone 
never to be forgotten, *' My husband ! my lord 1 
my love ! would that I dared open my whole 
spirit to you ! would that you could read for your- 
self the truths written in my heart !" 

'' Miriam !" 

** This is no reproach. But I know your 
strength of opinion, — your passion for all that con- 
cerns the glory of Israel ; — your right, the right of 
talents and character to the foremost rank among 
the priesthood ; and those things repel me." 

" Speak out at once. We can have no conceal- 
ments, Miriam ; candour, candour in all things." 

** You have heard the prayers of those exiles ; 
you acknowledge their acquirements and under- 
standings ; they have sacrificed much, every thing 
• — friends, country, the world. Can such men 
have been imposed on ? can they have imposed on 
themselves ? Is it possible that their sacrifices 
could have been made for a fiction ?" 
. " The question is diflScult. We are strangely 
the slaves of habit and impulse. Men every day 



182 SALATHIEL. 

abandon the most obvious good for the most 
palpable follies. Enthusiasm is a minor mad- 
ness." 

" But are those exiles enthusiasts ? They are 
grave men, experienced in life ; their language is 
totally pure from extravagance ; they reason veith 
singular clearness ; they live with the most striking 
command over the habits of their original con- 
dition. Greeks, you see no haste of temper, no 
violence of language among them. Once idolaters, 
they shrink from the thought of idols. Now fugitive 
and persecuted, they pray for their persecutors ^ 
sharing the lair of wild beasts, and driven out from 
all that they knew and loved, they utter no com- 
plaint — they even rejoice in their calamity, and 
offer up praises to the mercy that shut the gates of 
earth upon their steps, only to open the gates of 
heaven." 

** I am no persecutor, Miriam. Nay, I honour 
the self-denial, as I doubt not the sincerity of those 
men. But if they have thrown off a portion of 
their early blindness, why not desire the full illu- 
mination I Why linger half way between falsehood 
and truth ? It is not, as you know, our custom to 
solicit proselytes. But such men might be not un- 
worthy of the hope of Israel." 



SALATHIEL. 183 

"It is to the hope of Israel that they have 
come, that they cling, that they look up for a re- 
compense ; a glorious recompense for their suffer- 
ings." 

" Let them then join us at sunrise, and come 
to our holy city." 

" Salathiel, the time is declared, when men 
shall worship not in that mountain alone, but 
through all lands ; when the yoke of our law shall 
be lightened, and the weary shall have rest ; when 
the altar shall pass away, as the illustrious victim 
has passed ; and the wisdom of Heaven shall be 
the possession of all mankind." 

I looked at her in astonishment. " Miriam, 
this from you ! from a daughter of the blood of 
Aaron ! from the wife of a servant of the Temple ! 
Have you become a Christian ?" 

" I have done nothing in presumption. I have 
prayed to the Source of light that he would en- 
lighten my understanding ; I have night and day 
examined the law and the prophets. Bear with 
my weakness, Salathiel, if it be proved weakness. 
But if it be wisdom, knowledge, and truth, I im- 
plore you by our love, by the higher interests of 
your own soul, to follow ray example." 

It was impossible to answer harshly to a re- 
monstrance expressed with the overflowing fond- 



184 SA LATHI EL. 

ness of the heart : I could only remind her of the 
unchangeable promises made to Judaism. 

** But it is of those promises I speak," urged 
she ; "we have seen the day that our father 
Abraham longed to see ; that mighty Being, the 
Lord of eternity, the express image of the glory 
of the Invisible, the hope of the patriarch, the 
promise of the prophet, has come." 

" Yet Israel is divided and enslaved, torn by 
capricious tyranny, and hurrying to the common 
convulsions and common ruin of doomed nations. 
Is this the triumphant kingdom of prophecy ?" 

" Salathiel, I have doubted like you ; but I have 
been at length convinced out of the mouths of the 
prophets themselves. Have they not declared 
that Israel should suffer before it triumphed, and 
suffer too for a period that strikes the mind with 
terror? that the King of Israel should be ex- 
cluded from his kingdom, — nay, take upon him 
the form of a servant, — nay, die, and die by a 
death of pain and shame, the death of a slave and 
criminal V 

" It is so written. But it is beyond our power 
to reconcile." 

" Pray then for the power, and it will be given 
to you. Ask for the spirit of holy intelligence, 
and it will enlighten you. Pride is the crime of 



SALATHIEL. 185 

our nation. Humility, the righteous resolution to 
follow truth, and leave prejudice to its fate, would 
take the film from the eye of our people. Sala- 
thiel, my lord, the being treasured in my heart. 
Read the Scriptures. I have prayed for you. — 
Read " 

"But how can the promise of the kingdom be 
resisted ? it fills the whole volume of prophecy. It 
is the theme first, last, and without end, of all the 
inspired masters of Israel. What splendour and 
reality of history was ever more vivid and real 
than the glorious promises of Isaiah?" 

** But what force and minuteness of picturing 
ever excelled Isaiah's description of the lowliness, 
the obscurity, the rejection, the agonies, and the 
death of the Messiah ? Why shall we suppose 
that the one description is true and the other 
false ? Has not the same inspiration given both ? 
Why shall we conceive that the Messiah and his 
kingdom must appear together? We see the 
time of his first coming defined to a year by our 
great prophet Daniel. But where do we see the 
time of the triumphant kingdom defined ? Why 
may it not follow at a distance of ages? We 
know that we shall stand at the latter day upon the 
earth, and in our flesh shall see God. Why shall 
not the triumph be reserved for that day of glory ? 



186 SA LATHI EL. 

Are our people now fit to be a nation of kings ? Or 
are the best of us, in our present imperfection, 
in the mortal feebleness of our nature, fit to share 
in a triumph in which angels are to minister? fit 
dwellers of a city from which error and evil are to 
be excluded ; in which there is to be no tear, no 
human suffering, no remembered bitterness*; * a 
city whose builder and maker is God ;' within 
whose walls live holiness, power, sublime intelli- 
gence, and imperishable virtue ; on whose throne 
sits in light the Omnipotent ! " 

Sensations to which I dared not give utterance 
oppressed me : my crime, my fate, rose up before 
the mental eye. I had no answer to this ad- 
mirable woman. Her pure and fervid zeal, her 
love, and holiness of heart, touched every chord 
in mine. But the veil was dark upon my mind. 
Let no man blame the stubbornness of the Jew, 
till he has weighed the influence of feelings born 
with a people, strengthened by their history, rein- 
forced by miracle, and authenticated by the words 
of inspiration. That Judaism was purity itself to 
the worship and morals of the pagan world ; that 
it was the continued object of a particular Pro- 
vidence ; that it alone possessed the revelations of 
God ; were facts that defied doubt. And that 
those high distinctions should be made void, and 



SALATHIEL. 187 

the slavish and profligate mind of paganism be 
admitted into our privileges; still more, that it 
should be admitted, to the exclusion of the chosen 
line, seemed to me a conclusion that no reasoning 
could substantiate, a fantastic and airy fiction, to 
which no reasoning could be applied. 

The moon ascended in calm glory ; and her orb, 
slightly tinged by the many-coloured clouds that lay 
upon the horizon, threw a faint silver upon the pre- 
cipice. The sounds below were hushed; the moving 
figures, the vessel, the sea, the cliff's, were totally 
veiled in purple mist. We could not have been 
more alone if we were seated on a cloud ; and the 
beauty, the exalted gesture, and the glowing wis- 
dom of the being before me, were like those that 
we conceive of spirits delegated to lead the dis- 
embodied mind upwards from world to world. 

A sea-bird, winging its way above our heads, 
broke the reverie : I reminded my teacher that it 
grew late, and our absence might produce anx- 
iety. 

** Salathiel," said she, with mingled fervour and 
softness, — " you know I love you; never was 
heart more fondly bound to another than mine is 
to you. I am grateful for your permission to re- 
ceive Constantius into our tribe. But one obliga- 
tion, infinitely dearer, you can confer on me, — 



188 SALATHIEL. 

read this scroll." She drew from her bosom a 
letter, written to his church by one of the Chris- 
tian leaders in Asia. ** I desire not to offend your 
convictions, nor to hasten you into a rash adoption 
of those of others. But in this scroll you will find 
philosophy without its pride, and knowledge with- 
out its guile; you will find more, the disclosure of 
those mysteries which have so long perplexed our 
people: read; and may He who can bring wisdom 
out of the lips of babes, and make the wisdom of 
the wise foolishness, shed his light upon the gene- 
rous heart of my husband !" 

At another time, I might have started in horror 
from this avowal of her faith. But the scene, the 
circumstances, an unaccountable internal impres- 
sion — a voice of the soul, prohibited me. I took 
her trembling hand, and, without a word, led her 
down to our dwelling. 



SALATHIEL. 189 



CHAPTER XVI. 

No tidings sooner make themselves known, than 
those of the heart. We found our daughters wait- 
ing- anxiously at the entrance of the cave, which 
had been fitted up for our temporary shelter. Be- 
fore a word could be exchanged, a glance from 
Miriam told the success of her mission ; and sorrow 
was turned into delight. Esther danced round me, 
and was eloquent in her gratitude. Salome shed 
silent tears ; and when I attempted to wipe them 
away, fell fainting into my arms. We spent a 
part of the night in the open air : the last wine 
and fruits of our store were brought out : the 
Cypriot exiles came down from their rocks : the 
crew of the galley, already on board, danced, sang, 
and drank to the success of the voyage; and it was 



190 SALATHIEL. 

not till the moon, our only lamp, was about to be 
extinguished in the waters, that we thought of 
closing our final night on the Syrian shore. 

We travelled along the coast as far as Berytus ; 
then turning to the eastward, crossed the Libanus, 
and the mountain country that branches into 
Upper Galilee. Our coming had been long an- 
nounced; and we found Eleazar, Jubal, and our 
chief kinsmen, waiting at one of the passes to lead 
us home in triumph The joy of our tribe was 
honest, if it was tumultuous ; and many a shout 
disturbed the solitude as we moved along. 

My impatience increased, when we reached the 
well-known hills that sheltered what was once my 
home. Yet I remembered too keenly the shock 
of seeing its desolation, not to dread the first sight 
of the spot ; and rode away from the group at full 
speed, that my nervousness might have time to 
subside before their arrival. But at the foot of the 
last ascent I drew the rein. Every tree, every 
bush, almost every stone, had been familiar to me 
in my wanderings ; and were now painful memo- 
rials of the long malady of my mind. 

Eleazar, who watched me during the latter part 
of the journey with something of a consciousness 
of my thoughts, put spurs to his horse, and found 
me standing, pale and palpitating. " Come," 



SALATHIEL. 191 

said he, " we must not alarm Miriam by thinking 
too much of the past ; let us try if the top of the 
hill will not give us a better prospect than the 
bottom." 

I shrank from the attempt. ** No !" said I, 
*' the horror that the prospect once gave me must 
not be renewed. Let us change the route, no 
matter how far round ; the sight of that ruin would 
distract me to the last hour of my life." 

He only smiled in reply ; and catching my bri- 
dle, galloped forward. A few seconds placed us 
on the summit of the hill. Could I believe my 
eyes ! All below was as if rapine never had 
been there. The gardens, the cattle, the dwelling, 
lay a fairy picture under the eye. " This is mira- 
cle !" I exclaimed. " No ; or it is but the miracle 
of a little activity, and a great deal of good-will," 
was the answer. 

*' Your kinsmen did this at the time when you 
were slumbering with the wolf and bear in the 
Libanus : Nature did her part in covering your 
fields and gardens ; and those sheep and cattle are 
a trib\ite of gratitude from your brother, for the 
preservation of his life." 

Our troop now ascended the height. The land 
lay beneath them in the richness of summer. They 



192 SALATHIEL. 

were ardent in their expressions of surprise and 
pleasure. He rushed down the defile, and I was 
once more master of a home. 

Public events had rapidly ripened in my absence. 
Popular wrath was stimulated by increased ex- 
action. Law was more palpably perverted into 
insolence and injury. Order was giving way on 
all sides. The Roman garrisons, neglected and 
ill paid, were adopting the desperate habits of the 
populace ; and in the general scorn of religion and 
right, the country was becoming a horde of rob- 
bers. The ultimate causes of this singular dege- 
neracy might be remote, and set in action by a 
vengeance above man ; but the immediate were 
plain to every eye. 

The general principles of Rome, in the govern- 
ment of her conquests, were manly and wise. 
When the soldier had done his work ; and it was 
done vigorously, yet with but little violence beyond 
that which was essential for complete subjuga- 
tion ; the sword slept as an instrument of evil, 
and awoke only as an instrument of justice. 

The Roman supremacy extinguished the innu- 
merable and harassing mischiefs of minor hosti- 
lity. If neighbour kingdoms quarrelled, a legion 
marched across the border, and brought the belli- 



SALATHIEL. 193 

gerents to sudden reason; dismissed the armies 
to their hearths and altars, and sent the ano^ry 
chiefs to reconcile their claims in an Italian dungeon. 
If a disputed succession threatened to embroil the 
general peace, the proconsul ordered the royal 
competitors to embark for Rome, and there settle 
the right before the senate. 

The barbaric invasions, which had periodically 
ravaged the Eastern empires, even in their day 
of power, were repelled with a terrible vigour. 
The legions left the desert covered with the tribe, 
for the foot of the vulture ; and showed to Europe 
the haughty leaders of the Tartar, Gothic, and 
Arab myriads, in fetters, dragging wains, digging 
in mines, or sweeping the highways. 

If peace could be an equivalent for freedom, 
the equivalent was never so amply secured. The 
world within this iron boundary flourished ; the 
activity and talent of man were urged to the 
highest pitch ; the conquered countries were turned 
from wastes and forests into fertility; ports were 
dug upon naked shores ; cities swelled from vil- 
lages; population spread over the soil once pes- 
tilential and breeding only the poisonous weed and 
the serpent. The sea was covered with trade; 
the pirate and the marauder were unheard of, or 
hunted down. Commercial enterprise shot its 
VOL. I. I 



194 SALATHIEL. 

lines and communications over the map of the 
earth ; and regions were then familiar, which even 
the activity of the revived ages of Europe has 
scarcely made known. 

Those were the wonders of great power steadily 
directed to a great purpose. General coercion 
was the simple principle ; and the only talisman of 
a Roman Emperor was the chain, but where it was 
casually commuted for the sword : yet the uni- 
versality of the compression atoned for half its evil. 
The natural impulse of man is to improvement; 
he requires only security from rapine. The Roman 
supremacy raised round him an impregnable wall. 
It was the true government for an era when the 
habits of reason had not penetrated the general 
human mind. Its chief evil was in its restraint 
of those nobler and loftier aspirations of genius 
and the heart, which from time to time raise the 
general scale of mankind. 

Nothing is more observable than the decay of 
original literature, of the liner architecture, and 
of philosophical invention, under the empire. 
Even military genius, the natural product of a 
system that lived but on military fame, disappeared : 
the brilliant diversity of warlike talent, that shone 
on the very verge of the succession of the Caesars, 
sank, like falling stars, to rise no more. No 
captain was again to display the splendid concep- 



SALATHIEL. 195 

tions of Pompey's boundless campaig-ns ; the lavish 
heroism and inexhaustible resource of Antony ; 
or the mixture of undaunted personal enterprise 
and profound tactic, the statesman-like thought, 
irrestrainable ambition, and high-minded forgive- 
ness, that made Caesar -the very emblem of Rome. 
But the Imperial power had the operation of one 
of those great laws of nature, which through par- 
tial evil sustain the earth — a gravitating" principle, 
which, if it checked the ascent of some gifted 
beings beyond the dull level of life, yet kept the 
infinite multitude of men and things from flying 
loose beyond all utility and all control. 

Yet it was only for a time. The empire was 
but the ripening of the republic, a richer, more 
luxuriant, and more transitory object for the eye 
of the world ; and the storm was already gathering 
that was to shake it to the ground. The corrup- 
tions of the palace first opened the Imperial ruin. 
They soon extended through every department of 
the state. If the habitual fears of the tyrant, in 
the midst of a headlong populace who had so 
often aided and exulted in the slaughter of his 
predecessors, could scarcely restrain him in Rome; 
what must be the excesses of his minions, where 
no fear was felt! where complaint was stifled by 
the dagger ! and where the government was 



196 SALATHIEL. 

bought by bribes, to be replaced only by licensed 
and encouraged rapine ! 

The East was the chief victim. The vast 
northern and western provinces of the empire 
pressed too closely on Rome ; were too poor, and 
were too warlike, to be the favourite objects of 
Italian rapacity. There a new tax raised an in- 
surrection ; the proconsular demand of a loan was 
answered by a flight, which stripped the land ; or 
by the march of some unheard-of tribe, pouring 
down from the desert to avenge their countrymen. 
The character too of the people influenced the 
choice of their governors. Brave and experienced 
soldiers, not empty and vicious courtiers, must 
command the armies that were thus liable to be 
hourly in battle, and on whose discipline depended 
the slumbers of every pillow in Italy. Stern as is 
the life of camps, it has its virtues ; and men are 
taught consideration for the feelings, rights, and 
resentments of man, by a teacher that makes its 
voice heard through the tumult of battle and the 
pride of victory. But all was reversed in Asia, 
remote, rich, habituated to despotism, divided in 
language, religion, and blood ; with nothing of that 
fierce, yet generous, clanship, which made the 
Gaul of the Belgian marshes listen to the trumpet 
of the Gaul of Narbonne, and the German of the 



SALATHIEL. 197 

Vistula burn with the wrongs of the German of 
the Rhine. 

Under Nero, Judea was devoured by Roman 
rapine. She had not even the sad consolation of 
owing her evils to the rapine of those nobler beasts 
of prey in human shape that were to be found in 
the other provinces — she was devoured by locusts. 
The polluted palace supplied her governors : a 
slave lifted into office by a fellow-slave ; a pam- 
pered profligate exhausted by the expenses of the 
capital ; a condemned and notorious extortioner, 
with no other spot to hide his head ; were the gifts 
of Nero to my country. Pilate, Felix, Festus, 
Albinus, Florus, each more profligate and cruel as 
our catastrophe approached, tore the very bowels of 
the land. Of the last two, it was said that Albi- 
nus should have been grateful to Florus for proving 
that he was not the basest of mankind, by the evi- 
dence that a baser existed ; that he had a respect 
for virtue, by his condescending to commit those 
robberies in private, which his successor committed 
in public ; and that he had human feeling, by his 
abstaining from blood where he could gain nothing 
by murder : while Florus disdained alike conceal- 
ment and cause, and slaughtered for the public 
pleasure of the sword. 

A number of partial insurrections, easily sup- 



198 SALATHIEL. 

pressed, displayed the wrath of the people, and 
indulged the cruelty of the procurator. They in- 
dulged also his avarice. Defeat was followed by 
confiscation ; and Florus even boasted that he de- 
sired nothing more prosperous than an insurrection 
in every village of Judea. He was about to be 
gratified, before he had prepared himself for this 
luxury. 

A menial in my house was detected with letters 
from an agent of the Roman governor. They re- 
quired details of my habits and resources, which 
satisfied me that I was become an object of ven- 
geance. From the time of my return, I had seen 
with bitterness of soul the insults of my country. 
I had summoned my friends to ascertain what 
might be our means of resistance, and found them 
as willing and devoted as became men : but our re- 
sources for more than the first burst of popular 
wrath, the seizure of some petty Roman garrison, 
or the capture of a convoy, were nothing. The 
jealousies of the chief men of the tribes, the terror 
of Rome, the positions of the Roman troops cut- 
ting off military communication between the north 
and south of Judea, made the attempt hopeless ; 
and it was abandoned for the time. Even those 
letters which marked me for a victim made no 
change in the determination, that if I could not 



SALATHIEL. 199 

escape danger by individual means, no public blood 
should be laid to my charge. 

For a few months all was tranquil : the habits 
of rural life were calculated to keep depressing 
thoughts at a distance. My wife and daughters 
returned to their graceful pursuits, with the added 
pleasure of novelty, after so long a cessation. I 
hunted through the Lil's with Constantius ; or, 
traversing the country which might yet be the 
scene of events, availed myself of the knowledge 
of a master of the whole science of Roman war. 

At home, the works of the great poets of the 
west, with whom our guest had made us familiar, 
varied the hours ; but I found a still more stirring 
and congenial interest in the histories of Greek 
valour, and in the study of the mighty minds that 
made and unmade empires. 

With the touching and picturesque narrative of 
Herodotus in my hand, I pantingly followed the 
adventures of the most brilliant of nations. I 
fought the battle with them against the Persian ; 
I saw them gathered in little startled groups on 
the hills, flying in their little galleys from island to 
island, the land deserted, the sea covered with 
fugitives, the Persian fleets, loaded with Asiatic 
pomp, darkening the waters like a thunder-cloud ; 
and in a moment all changed. The millions of 



200 SALATHIEL. 

Asia scattered, like dust before the wind — Greece 
lifted to the height of martial glory, and commen- 
cing a career of triumph still more illustrious, that 
triumph of the mind, in which, ^;hrough the re- 
motest vicissitudes of earth, she was to have no 
conqueror. 

I pursued the campaigns of that extraordinary 
man, whose valour, vanity, and fortune, make him 
one of the landmarks of human nature. In Alex- 
ander, I delighted in tracing the native form of 
the Greek through the embroidered robes of 
royalty and triumph. In his romantic intrepidity 
and deliberate science ; his alternations of pro- 
found thought and fantastic folly ; the passion for 
praise, and the contempt for its offerers ; the rash 
temper, and the noble magnanimity ; the love for 
the fine arts, and the thirst for that perpetual war 
before which they fly ; the martial and philosophic 
scorn of privation, and the feeble lapses into self- 
indulgence ; in the generous forecast, which 
peopled deserts and founded cities, and in the 
giddy and fatal neglect which left his diadem to 
be fought for, and his family to be the prey of 
rival rebellions ; I saw him the man of the re- 
public, the Athenian of the day of popular splen- 
dour and folly, with only the difference of the 
sceptre. 



SALATHIEL. 201 

To me, those studies were like a new door 
opened into the boundless palace of human nature. 
I felt that sense of novelty, vigour, and fresh life, 
that the frame feels in breathing the morning air 
over the landscape of a new country. It was a 
voyage upon an unknown sea, where every head- 
land, and dell, and tree fringing the waters, ad- 
ministers to the delight of curiosity. In this 
there was nothing of the common pedantry of 
worn-out studies. My knowledge of life had 
hitherto been limited by my original destination. 
A Jew and a priest, there was but one solemn 
avenue, through which I was to see the glimpses 
of the external world. The vista was now opened 
and deepened beyond all limit : visions of con- 
quest, of honour among nations, of praise to the 
last posterity, clustered round my head. There 
were times when in this exultation my doom was 
forgotten. The momentary oblivion may have 
been permitted, merely to blunt the edge of incu- 
rable misfortune. Incessant suffering would have 
made a double miracle essential to my existence. 
I was permitted at intervals to recruit the strength, 
that was to be tried till the end of time. 

I was one day immersed in Polybius, with my 
master in soldiership at my side, guiding me . by 
his living comment through the wonders of the 



202 SALATHIEL. 

Punic campaigns ; when Eleazar entered, with a 
look that implied his coming on a matter of im- 
portance. Constantius rose to withdraw. *' No," 
said my brother, *' the subject of my mission is 
one that should not be concealed from the pre- 
server of our kindred. It may be one of happi- 
ness to us all. Salome is arrived at the age, and 
more than the age, when the daughters of Israel 
marry. She must give way to our general wish, 
and play the matron at last." He turned with a 
smile to Constantius, and asked his assent to the 
opinion : he received no answer. The young 
Greek had plunged more deeply than ever into 
the passage of the Alps. 

" And who is the suitor ?" I enquired. 

'* One worthy of her and you. A generous, 
bold, warm-hearted kinsman, in the spring of life, 
sufficiently opulent, for he will probably be my 
heir, prepared to honour you, and I believe long 
and deeply attached to her." 

*' Jubal ! There is not a man in our tribe to 
whom I would so gladly give her. Let my friend 
Jubal come. Congratulate me, Constantius; you 
shall now at last see festivity in our land, in scorn 
of the Roman. You have seen us in flight and 
captivity ; you shall now be witness of some of the 
happiness that was in Judah before we knew the 



SALATHIEL. 203 

flapping of an Italian banner; and, if fortune 
smile, shall be, when Rome is like Babylon." 

Constantius suddenly rose from his volumes, 
and thrusting them within the folds of his tunic, 
was leaving the apartment. '* No," said I, ** you 
must remain ; Miriam and Salome shall be sent 
for, and in your presence the contract signed." 

For the first time, I perceived the excessive 
pallidness of his countenance ; and asked, whether 
I had not trespassed too much on his patience 
with my studies ? 

His only reply was — " Is there no liberty of 
choice in the marriages of Israel ? Will you 
decide without consulting her whom this contract 
is to render happy or miserable while she lives ?" 
He rushed from the room. 

Miriam came — but alone. Her daughter had 
wandered out into one of our many gardens. She 
received Eleazar with sisterly fondness ; but 
her features wore the air of constraint. She 
heard the mission ; but, *' she had no opinion to 
give in the absence of Salome. — She knew too 
well the happiness of having chosen for herself, 
to wish to force the consent of her child. — Let 
Salome be consulted." 

The flourish of music, and the trampling of 
horses, broke up our reluctant conference. Jubal 



204 SALATHIEL. 

was already come, with a crowd of his friends. 
We hastened to receive him at the porch ; and 
he bounded into the court on his richly capa- 
risoned barb, at the head of a troop in festal 
habiliments. 

The man of Israel loved pomp of dress, and 
handsome steeds. The group before me might 
have made a body-guard for a Persian king. 
Jubal had long looked on my daughter with the 
admiration due to her singular beauty ; it was the 
custom to wed within our tribe : he was the 
favourite and the heir of her uncle ; she had never 
absolutely banished him from her presence; and 
in the buoyancy of natural spirits, the boldness of 
a temperament born for a soldier, and perhaps in 
the allowable consciousness of a showy form, he 
had admitted none of the perplexities of a trem- 
bling lover. Salome was at length announced, 
and the proposed husband was left to plead his 
own cause. 



SA LATHI EL. 205 



CHAPTER XVII. 

We received the friends of our intended son 
with the accustomed hospitality ; but to me the 
tumult of many voices, and even the sight of a 
crowd, however happy, still excited the old dis- 
turbances of a shaken system. 

I left my guests to the care of Eleazar, and gal- 
loped into the fields to gather composure from the 
air of fruits and flowers. A homeward glance 
showed me, to my surprise, the whole troop 
mounted, and in another moment at speed across 
the hills. I hastened back. Miriam met me. My 
kinsman had openly disclaimed my alliance. 

Indignant and disappointed, I prepared to fol- 
low, and demand the cause of this insult. As I 
passed under a vine that shadowed one of the pa- 



206 SALATHIEL. 

vilions, my daughter's voice arrested me. She was 
talking with Constantius, and in tears. Scorning 
mere curiosity, I yet was anxious for sincere ex- 
planation. I felt that if Salome had a wish which 
she feared to divulge to her father, this was my 
only hope of obtaining the knowledge. The voices 
were feeble, and I could for a while catch but a 
broken sentence. 

*' I owed it to him," said she, " not to deceive 
his partiality. He offered all that it could have 
done a Jewish maiden honour to receive ; — his 
heart, hand, and fortune." 

" And you rejected them all ?" said Constantius. 
'* Have you no regrets for the lover — no fears of 
the father ?" 

'* For Jubal I had too high an esteem, to give 
him a promise which I could not keep. I knew 
his generous nature. I told him at once, that 
there was an invincible obstacle !" 

** I should like incomparably to know, what that 
obstacle could be ?" said Constantius. 

The natural playfulness of this sweet and light- 
hearted girl had already superseded the tear ; and 
she replied — " That a philosopher ought to know 
all things without questioning." 

*' But there is much in the world that defies 
philosophy, my fair Salome; and of all its pro; 



SALATHIEL. 207 

blems, the most perplexing is the mind of woman ! 
— of young, lovely, dangerous woman!" 

" 1*^0 w, Constantius, you abandon the philo- 
sopher, and talk the language of the poet." 

'* Yet without the poet's imagination. No ; I 
need picture no beauty from the clouds — no nymph 
from the fountains — no loveliness that haunts the 
trees, and breathes more than mortal melody on 
the ear. Salome ! my muse is before me." 

'* You are a Greek," said she, after a slight in- 
terval ; " and the Greeks are privileged to talk, 
and to deceive." 

** Salome ! I am a Greek no longer. What I 
shall yet be, may depend upon the fairest artist 
that ever fashioned the human mind. But mine 
are not the words of inexperience. I am on this 
day five-and-twenty years old. My life has led 
me into all that is various in the intercourse of 
earth. I have seen woman in her beauty, in her 
talent, in her art, in her accomplishment, from the 
cottage to the throne; but I never felt her real 
power." 

*• Which am I to believe — the possible or the 
impossible? A soldier ! a noble ! a Greek! and of 
all Greeks, one of Cyprus ! not the breaker of a 
thousand hearts, the worshipper at a thousand 



208 SALATHIEL. 

altars, the offerer of your eloquence at every shrine 
where your own lovely countrywomen stood on the 
pedestal ! — I too have seen the world." 

" Heaven forbid that you may ever see it, but 
what it would be made by such as you ; — a place 
of gentleness and harmony — a place of fondness 
and innocence — a paradise !'* 

*' Now, you are further from the philosopher 
than ever ; but I must listen no more : the sun is 
taking its leave of us, and blushing its last through 
the vines for all the fine romance that it has heard 
from Constantius. Farewell, philosophy." 

" Then farewell philosophy," said Constantius » 
and caught her hand, as she was lightly moving 
from the pavilion. He led her towards the case- 
ment. " Then farewell philosophy, my sweet ; 
and welcome truth, virtue, and nature. I loved 
you in your captivity ; I loved you in your 
freedom ; on the sea, on the shore, in the desert, 
in your home, I loved you. In life I will love 
you, in death we shall not be divided. This is not 
the language of mere admiration, the rapture of a 
fancy dazzled by the bright eyes of Salome. It is 
the language of reason, of sacred truth, of honour 
bound by higher than human bonds ; of fondness, 
that even the tomb will render only more ardent 



SALATHIEL. 209 

and sublime. Here, in the sight of Heaven, 1 
pledge an immortal to an immortal." 

Astonishment and grief alone prevented my ex- 
claiming aloud against this attempt to master the 
affections of my child. The marriage of the 
Israelite with the stranger was prohibited by our 
law ; and still more severely prohibited by the 
later customs and ordinances of our teachers. But 
marriagre with a fuE^itive, a deceiver, a son of the 
idolater, whose proselytism had never been avowed, 
and whose skill in the ways of the world might be 
at this hour undermining the peace or the faith of 
my whole family— the idea was tenfold profanation ! 
I checked myself only to have complete evidence. 

** But," said my daughter, in a voice mingled 
with many a sigh, " if this should become known 
to my father, and known it must be — how can 
we hope for his consent I Now, Constantius, 
you will have to learn what it is to deal with our 
nation. We have prejudices, lofty, though blind 

— indissoluble, though fantastic ; my father's 

consent is beyond all hope." 

" He is honourable — he has human feeling — he 
loves you." 

" Fondly, I believe ; and I must not thus return 
his love : no, though my happiness were to be the 



210 SALATHIEL. 

forfeit, I must not pain his heart by the disobe- 
dience of his child," 

*' But, Salome, my sweet Salome ; are obstinacy 
and prejudice to be obeyed, against the under- 
standing and the heart ? I should be the last man 
on earth to counsel disobedience ; I venerate the 
tie of parent and child. But can a father counsel 
his child to a crime ; and would it not be one to 
give your faith to this Jubal, if you could not love 
him r 

** I have decided that already. Never will I 
wed Jubal." 

"Yet, what is it that you would disobey? a 
cruel and fantastic scruple of your teachers, the 
perverters of your law. Must we sacrifice reason 
to prejudice — truth to caprice — the law of nature 
and of Heaven to the forgeries and follies of the 
Scribes ? Mine you are, and mine you shall be, 
my wife by a law more sacred, more powerful, and 
more pure. The time of bondage is past. A new 
law, a new hope, have come to break the chains of 
the Jew, and enlighten the darkness of the Gentile. 
You have heard that law ; your generous heart and 
unclouded understanding have received it ; and 
now, by that common hope, my beloved, we are 
one : though seas and mountains should separate 



SALATHIEL. 211 

US — though the malice of fortune, though the 
tyranny of man, should forhid our union ; still, in 
flight, in the dungeon, in the last hour of a trou- 
bled existence, we are one. Now, Salome, I will 
go ; but go to seek your father." 

My indignation rose to its height. I had heard 
my child taught to rebel ; and yet could check my 
wrath. I had heard myself pronounced the slave 
of prejudice ; and yet kept down my burning 
passion. But the open declaration that our holy 
law was to be abolished— nay, to my child was a 
law no more — let loose the whole storm of ray 
soul. I rushed from my concealment ; Salome 
uttered a scream, and sank senseless upon the 
ground. Constantius raised her up, and bore her 
to a vase, from which he sprinkled water upon her 
forehead. " Leave her," I exclaimed ; •* better 
for her to remain in that insensibility, better be 
dead, than an apostate. Villain, be gone ! it is 
only in scorn that a father's vengeance suffers you 
to live. Fly from this house, from this country, 
before justice compels me to deliver you up to 
punishment. Go, traitor, and let me never see 
you more." I tore the fainting girl from his arms. 
He made no resistance — no reply. Salome re- 
covered with a gush of tears, and feebly pro- 



212 SALATHIEL. 

iiounced his name. ** I am with you still, my 
love," he pronounced in an unaltered tone. She 
looked up, and, as if she had then first seen me, 
sprang forward with a cry of terror : " Go," said 
I, *' go to your chamber, weak girl, and on your 
knees atone for your disobedience — for (do I live 
to say it ?) your abandonment of the faith of your 
fathers. But no, it is impossible ; you cannot have 
been so guilty : this Greek — this foreign bringer- 
in of fables — this smooth intruder on the peace of 
families, cannot have so triumphed over your un- 
derstanding." 

** I have been rash. Sir," said Constantius 
loftily ; *' I may have been unwise too in my 
language ; but I have been no deceiver. Not for 
the wealth of kings — not even for the more pre- 
cious treasure of the heart I love — would Con- 
stantius sully his lips with a falsehood." 

" Begone!" cried I ; " I am insulted by your 
presence ; the sight of the ungrateful sickens me. 
Go, and pervert others — hypocrite ; or rather, 
take my contemptuous forgiveness, and repent, in 
sackcloth and ashes, the basest crime of the basest 
mind. Come, daughter, and leave the baffled 
idolater to think of his crime." I was leading her 
away — she struggled ; and I cast her from me. 



SALATHIEL. 213 

Constantius, with his cheek burning and his eye 
flashing, approached her. My taunts had at 
length roused him. 

** Now, Salome," said he, haughtily glancing on 
me, *• injured as I am, I disclaim all idle deference 
for an authority used only to give pain. You are my 
betrothed ; you shall be my bride. Let us go forth, 
and try our chance together through the world." 

She was silent, and wept only more violently. 
But, with one hand covering her face, she repelled 
him with the other. 

" Then you will be the wife of Jubal ?" said 
he. 

" Never!" she firmly pronounced. " So help 
me Heaven, never!" 

** Retire, girl," 1 exclaimed ; ** and weep tears 
of blood for your rebellion. Go, stranger — in- 
grate— reducer — and never darken my threshold 
more. Aye, now I see the cause of my brave 
kinsman's departure. He was circumvented. A 
wilier tongue was here before him. He disdained 
to reveal the daughter's folly to the insulted 
father. But this shall not avail either of you. He 
shall return." 

Salome cast up an imploring glance, and sank 
upon her knees before me. Constantius ad- 
vanced to her : but I bounded between them — 



214 SALATHJEL. 

my dagger was drawn. " Touch her, and you 
die." 

He smiled scornfully, and turning back the 
blade, raised her. 

*' Give that wretched child up to me this mo- 
ment," I exclaimed in fury; " or may the bitter- 
ness of a father's curse be on her head !" He 
staggered back ; then stooping his lips upon her 
forehead, gave her to me, and strode from the 
pavilion. 

l flew to the house of Eleazar. I found him 
anxious and agitated. Calm as his usual manner 
was, the late transaction had left its traces on his 
manner and his countenance. Jubal was in the 
apartment, which he traversed backwards and 
forwards in high indignation. He made no re- 
turn to my salute, but by stopping short, and gaz- 
ing full on me with a look of mingled anger and 
surprise. 

** Jubal," said I, '* kinsman, we must be 
friends :" I held out my hand, which he took with 
no fervent pressure. " I am here only to explain 
this idle offence." 

** It requires no explanation," interrupted Ju- 
bal, sternly. " I, and I alone, am to blame ; if 
there be any one to blame in the matter. The 
offer may have been precipitate, or unwelcome, or 



SALATHIEL. 215 

unpardonable, from one still dependent, still with- 
out rank in the tribes : it may have been fit that I 
should be haughtily rejected by the family of the 
descendant of Aaron ; but,'* said he, pressing his 
strong hand upon his throat, as if to keep down a 
burst of passion, '* the subject is at an end ; now 
and for ever at an end." He recommenced his 
striding through the chamber. 

'* Let us hear all, my friend," said I : *' I know 
that Salome thinks highly of your spirit, and your 
heart. Was there any palliation offered ? Did 
she disclose any secret reason for a conduct so 
opposite to her natural gentleness, to her natural 
regard for you ; and which she must feel so 
offensive to me ? But, insult from my family, im- 
possible !" 

•' Hear, then. I had not alighted from my 
horse, when I saw displeasure written in the face 
of every female in your household. From the 
very handmaids up to their mistress, they had, 
with the instinct of woman, discovered my object; 
and, with the usual deliberation of the sex, had 
made up their minds without hearing a syllable. 
Your wife received me, it is true, with the grace 
and courteousness that belong to her above wo- 
men ; but she was visibly cold. Esther absolutely 
shrank from me, and scorned to return a word. 



216 SALATHIEL. 

Salome fled. As for the attendants, they frowned 
and muttered upon me in all directions, with the 
most candid wrath possible. In short, I could not 
have fared worse, had I been a Roman, come to 
take possession ; or an Arab, riding up to rifle 
every soul in the house." 

" Ominous enough!" said Eleazar, with his 
grave smile. *' The opinions of the sex are irre- 
sistible. With half my knowledge of them, Ju- 
bal, you would have turned your horse's head 
homewards at once ; and given up your hopes of a 
bride, at least till the next day, or the next hour, 
or whatever may be the usual time for the sex's 
change of mind. Cheer up, kinsman ; we will 
caparison ourselves in another dress. Let time do 
its w^ork — ride over to Salathiel's mansion to-mor- 
row, and find a smile for every frown of to-day." 

" But you saw Salome!" said I. " I am im- 
patient to hear how she could have ventured to 
off'end. Could she dare to refuse my brother's 
request without a reason?" 

'* No; her conduct was altogether without dis- 
guise. She first tried to laugh me out of my pur- 
pose, then argued, then wept; and, finally, told 
me that our alliance was impossible." 

'' Rash girl ! but she has been led into this folly 
by others : yet the chief folly was my own. Aye, 



SALATHIEL. 217 

ray eyes were dim, where a mole would have seen. 
In my feeble negligence, in my contemptuous disre- 
g-ard for the common prudence of mankind, I suf* 
fered an alien, a subtle, showy, plausible villain to 
remain under my roof, till he has, by what arts I 
know not, wiled away the duty and the under- 
standing — nay, I tremble to pronounce the word, 
the religion of my child." I smote my breast iu 
sorrow and humiliation. 

Jubal burst from the apartment, and returned 
with his lance in a hand quivering with wrath. 
^' Now, all is cleared," cried he ; *' the true cause 
was the magic, the cunning superstition, of that 
idolater. I know the arts of paganism to bewitch 
the senses of woman ; the incantations, the per- 
fumes, the midnight fires, and images, and songs. 
But let him come within the throw of this javelin, 
and then try whether all his magic can shield 
him." 

Eleazar grasped his robe, as he was again rush- 
ing out. ** Stop, madman ! Is it with hands 
dipped in blood, that you are to solicit the heart 
of Salome I Give me that horrid weapon ; and 
you, Salathiel, curb your wild spirit, and listen to 
a brother, who can have no interest but in the 
happiness of both and all. If Salome, whom I 
loved an infant on the knee, and love to this mo- 

VOL. I. K 



218 SALATHIEL. 

ment, the most ingenuous and happy-hearted be- 
ing on earth, has been betrayed into a fondness for 
this stranger, how have we the right to force her 
inclinations? But I know the depth of under- 
standing that lies under her playfulness ; can she 
have heen deceived, and least of all by those idle 
arts? Impossible! — If she have sacrificed her 
obedience to the noble form and high accomplish- 
ments of the Greek, we can only lament her ex- 
posure to a captivation made to subdue the heart 
of woman since the world began. 

" Jubal," interrupted I, ** give me that manly 
and honest hand : Eleazar's wisdom is too calm to 
understand a father or a lover. You shall return 
with me : you shall be my son ; Salathiel has no 
other. This foolish girl will be sorry for her fol- 
lies, and rejoice to receive you. The Greek is 
driven from my house. And let me see who there 
will henceforth disobey." The lover's face bright- 
ened with joy. 

*' Well, make your experiment," said Eleazar, 
rising. " So end all councils of war, in more 
confusion than they began. But, if I had a wife 
and daughters " 

*' Of course, you would manage them to perfec- 
tion. So say all who have never had either." 

Eleazar's cheek coloured slightly ; but with his 



SALATHIEL. 219 

recovering smile of benevolence, he followed us to 
the porch, and wished us success in our expe- 
dition. 

We found the household tranquillised again. 
Miriam received me with one of those radiant 
smiles, that are a husband's best welcome home. 
She had succeeded in calming- the minds of her 
daughters, and, a much more difficult task, in sup- 
pressing the wrath of the numerous female domes- 
tics, who had, as usual, constructed out of the 
g-races of the Greek, and the beauty of Salome, 
a little romance of their own. In the whole course 
of my life, I never met a female, from the flat- 
nosed and ebony-coloured monster of the tropics, 
to the snow-white and sublime divinity of a Greek 
isle, without a touch of romance ; repulsiveness 
could not conceal it, age could not extinguish it, 
vicissitude could not change it. I have found it in 
all times and places ; like a spring of fresh water 
starting up even from the flint ; cheering the 
cheerless, softening the insensible, renovating the 
withered ; a secret w hisper in the ear of every 
woman alive, that, to the last, passion might flutter 
its rosy pinions round her brow. 

The strong prejudices of our nation gave way 
before female fondness for love adventure ; rebel- 
lion was but hushed ; and I was warned by many 



220 SALATHIEL. 

a look, of the unwelcome suitor whom I brought 
among them. But, from Salome there was no re- 
monstrance. I should have listened to none. The 
consciousness of my own want of judgment in suf- 
fering a man so calculated to attract the eye of 
innocent youth, to become an inmate in my house ; 
the vexation which I felt at the dismissal of ray 
brother's heir; and, last and keenest pang, the in- 
road made in the faith of a daughter of Israel, 
combined to exasperate me beyond the bounds of 
patience. I loved my child with the strongest 
affection of a heart rocked by all the tides of pas- 
sion: but I could bear to look upon the pale beauty 
of her face, and hear her deep sighs — nay, in the 
wrath of the hour, could have seen her borne to 
the grave — rather than permit the command to be 
disputed, by which she was to wed in our tribe. 

To shorten a period of which I felt the full bit- 
terness, the marriage was hurried on. Never was 
the ceremony anticipated with less joy: we were 
all unhappy. Eleazar remonstrated, but in vain. 
Jubal retracted, bat I compelled him to adhere to 
his proposal. Miriam was closeted perpetually 
with the betrothed ; and of the whole household 
Esther alone walked or talked with me, and it was 
then only to burst out into descriptions of her sis- 
ter's misery, or to pursue me through the endless 



SALATHIEL. 221' 

mazes of argument on the hardship of being forced 
to be happy. 

The marriage preparations proceeded. The 
piece of silver was given, the contracts were 
signed. The presents of both families were made. 
The portion was agreed upon. It was not cus- 
tomary to require the appearance of the bride 
until the celebration itself; and Salome was in- 
visible during those days of activity, in which, 
however, I took the chief interest, for nothing 
could be further from zeal than the conduct of the 
other agents, Jubal alone excepted. He had re- 
covered the easily-recovered confidence of youth, 
and perhaps prided himself on the triumph over 
a rival so formidable. Two or three petitions for 
an interview came to me from my daughter. But 
I knew their purport, and steadily determined not 
to hazard the temptation of her tears. 

The day came, and with it the guests ; our 
dwelling was full of banqueting. The evening 
came, when the ceremony was to be performed, 
and the bride led home to her husband's house in 
the usual triumph. One of our customs was, that 
a procession of the bridegroom's younger friends, 
male and female, should be formed outside the 
house to wait for the coming forth of the married 
pair. The ceremony was borrowed by other 



222 SALATHIEL. 

nations; but, in our bright climate and cloudless 
nights, the profusion of lamps and torches, the 
burning perfumes, glittering dresses, and fantastic 
joy of the dancing and singing crowd, had une- 
qualled liveliness and beauty. I remained at my 
casement, gazing on the brilliant escort, that, as it 
gathered and arranged itself along the gardens, 
looked like a flight of glow-worms. But no mar- 
riage summons came. I grew impatient. My 
only answer was the sight of Jubal rushing from 
the house, and an outcry among the women. 
Salome was not to be found. She had been left 
by herself for a few hours, as was the custom, to 
arrange her thoughts for a ceremony which we 
considered religious in the highest degree. On 
the bridegroom's arrival, she disappeared. 

The blow struck me deep. Had I driven her 
into the arms of the Greek by my severity ? Had 
I driven her out of her senses ? or out of life ? 
Conjecture on conjecture stung me. T reprobated 
my own cruelty, refused consolation, and spent the 
night in alternate self-upbraidings and prayers for 
my unhappy child. 

Search was indefatigably made. The jealousy 
of Jubal, the manly anxiety of Eleazar, the hurt 
feelings of our tribe, insulted by the possibility 
that their chieftain's heir should have been scorn- 



SALATHIEL. 223 

ed, and that the triumph should be to an alien, 
were embarked in the pursuit. But search was 
hopeless : and after days and nights of weariness, 
I returned to my home, there to be met by sor- 
rowing faces, and to feel that every tear was 
forced by my own obstinacy. 1 shrank into so- 
litude. I exclaimed that the vengeance, the more 
than vengeance of the dreadful day of Jerusalem, 
had struck its heaviest blow on me, in the loss 
of my child ! 



224 SALATHIEL. 



CHAPTER XVIII. 

I WAS in one of tbose fits of abstraction, re- 
volving the misery in which my beloved daughter 
might be, even in that moment, if indeed she were 
in existence ; when the door of my chamber opened 
softly, and one of my domestics appeared, making 
a signal of silence. This was he whom I had de- 
tected in correspondence with the Roman agent, 
and forgiven through the entreaties of Miriam. 
The man had since shown remarkable interest in 
the recovery of my daughter, and thus completely 
reinstated himself. lie knelt before me ; and, 
with more humility than I desired, implored my 
pardon for having again held intercourse with the 
Roman. 

" It was my zeal," said he, *' to gain intelli- 



SALATHIEL. 225 

gence ; for I knew that nothing passed in the pro- 
vinces a secret from him. This letter is his an- 
swer, and perhaps I shall be forgiven for the sake 
of what it contains." I read it with trembling 
avidity. It was mysterious ; described two fugi- 
tives who had made their escape to Ctesarea ; and 
intimated that, as they were about to fly into Asia 
Minor, the pursuit must be immediate, and con- 
ducted with the utmost secrecy. 

I was instantly on horseback. Dreading to 
disturb my family by false hopes, I ordered out my 
hounds, ranged the hills in sight of my dwelling, 
and then turning off, struck in the spur, and, at- 
tended only by the domestic, went full speed to 
Caesarea. From the summit of Mount Carmel, I 
looked down upon the city and the broad Medi- 
terranean. But my eyes then felt no delight in 
the grandeur of art 5r nature. The pompous 
structures on which Herod the Great had ex- 
pended a treasure beyond count, and which the 
residence of the governor made the Roman capital 
of Judea, were to me but so many dens and dun- 
geons, in which my child might be hid. The sea 
showed me only the path by which she might have 
been borne away, or the grave in which her wan- 
derings were to close. 

By extraordinary speed, I reached the gates 



226 SALATHIEL. 

just as the trumpet was sounding for their close. 
My attendant went forth to obtain information ; 
and I was left pacing my chamber in feverish 
suspense. I did not suffer it long. The door 
opened, and a group of soldiers ordered me to 
follow them. Resistance was useless. They led 
me to the palace. There I was delivered from 
guard to guard, through a long succession of 
apartments, until we reached the door of a ban- 
queting-room. The festivity within was high ; 
and if I could have then sympathised with singing 
and laughter, I might have had full indulgence 
during the immeasurable hour that I lingered 
out, a broken wretch, exhausted by desperate ef- 
fort, sick at heart, and of course not unanxious for 
the result of an interview with the Roman procu- 
rator ; a man whose name was equivalent to vice, 
extortion, and love of blood, throughout Judea. 

At length the feast was at an end. I was sum- 
moned, and for the first time saw Gessius Florus, 
a little bloated figure, with a countenance that to 
the casual observer was the model of gross good 
nature, a twinkling eye, and a lip on the perpetual 
laugh. His bald forehead wore a wreath of flow- 
ers, and his tunic and the couch on which he lay 
breathed perfume. The table before him was a 
long vista of sculptured cups, and golden vases 



SALATHIEL. 227 

and candelabra. *' I am sorry to have detained 
you so long," said he, " but this was the emperor's 
birth-day, and, as good subjects, we have kept it 
accordingly." 

During this speech, he was engaged in con- 
templating the wine-bubbles as they sparkled 
above the brim of a large amethystine goblet. A 
pale and delicate Italian boy, sumptuously dressed, 
the only one of the guests who remained, per- 
ceiving that I was fatigued, filled a cup, and pre- 
sented it. " Right, Septimius," said the debauchee, 
" make the Jew drink the Emperor's health." The 
youth bowed gracefully before me, and again 
offered the cup, but the time was not for indul- 
gence, and I laid it on the table. " Here's long 
life and glory to Nero Claudius Caesar, our pious, 
merciful, and invincible emperor," cried Florus ; 
and only when he had drunk to the bottom of the 
goblet, found leisure to look upon his prisoner. 
He either felt or affected surprise, and turning to 
his young companion, said, " By Hercules, boy, 
what grand fellows those Jews make ! The helmet 
is nothing to the turban, after all. What magni- 
ficence of beard! no Italian chin has the vigour to 
grow any thing so superb ; then, the neck, like 
the bull of Milo ; and those blazing eyes ! If I had 
but a legion of such spearsmen " 





228 SALATHtEL. 

I grew impatient, and said, *' I stand here, pro* 
curator, in your bonds — I demand why I — I have 
business that requires my instant attention ; and I 
desire to be gone." 

" Now, have I treated you so inliospitably," said 
he, laughing, "that you expect I shall finish by 
shutting my doors upon you at this time of night ?" 
He glanced upon his tablets, and read my name. 
" Aye," said h*^, " and after I have been so long 
wishing for the honour of your company. Jew, 
take your wine, and sit down upon that couch, and 
tell me what brought you to Caesarea." 

I told him briefly the circumstances. He roared 
with laughter, desired me to repeat them, and 
swore that " by all the gods it was the very best 
piece of pleasantry he had heard since he set foot 
in Judea." I stood up in irrepressible indigna- 
tion. " What ! " said he, '* will you go without 
hearing my story in return ! " He filled his gob- 
let again to the brim, buried his purple visage m 
a vase of roses, and having inhaled the fragrance, 
and chosen an easy posture, said, coldly, ** Jew, 
you have told me a most excellent story, and it is 
only fair that I should tell you one in return ; not 
half so amusing, I admit, but to the full as true. 
Jew, you are a traitor !" 

I started back. — '* Jew," said he, " you must 



SALATHIEL. l2*29 

in common civility hear me out. The truth is, 
thai your visit has been so often anticipated and 
so long delayed, that I cannot bear to part with 
vou yet ; — you are an apostate ; you encourage 
those Christian dog-s. Why does the man stare ' 
— vou are in communication with rebels ; and I 
might have had the honour of meeting you in the 
field, if you had not been in my hands in Csesa- 
rea." 

He pronounced those words of death in the 
most tranquil tone ; not a muscle moved : the cup 
which he held brimful in his hand never overflowed. 

*• Jew," said he, '* now be honest, and so far 
set an example to your nation. Where is the 
money that has been gathered for this rebel- 
lion? You are too sagacious a soldier lo think of 
going to war without the main spring of the ma- 
chine." 

I scorned to deny the intended insurrection ; 
but ** money I had collected none." 

" Then," said he, " you are now compelling me 
to what I do not like. Ho ! guard !" A soldier 
presented himself. " Desire that the rack shall 
be got ready." The man retired. " You see, 
Jew, this is all your own doing. Give up the 
money, and I give up the rack. And the sur- 
render of the com is asked, merely in compas- 



230 SALATHIEL. 

sion to yourselves, for without it you cannot rebel, 
and the more you rebel, the more you will be 
beaten." 

" Beware, Gessius Florus," I exclaimed, *' be- 
ware. I am your prisoner, entrapped, as I now 
see, by a villain, or by the greater villain who cor- 
rupted him. You may rack me if you will ; you 
may insult my feelings ; tear my flesh ; take my 
life: but for this there will be retribution. 
Through Upper Galilee, from Tiberias to the top 
of Libanus, this act of blood will ring, and be 
answered by blood. I have kinsmen many ; coun- 
trymen, myriads. A single wrench of my sinews 
may lift a hundred thousand arms against your 
city, and leave of yourself nothing but the remem- 
brance of your crimes." 

He bounded from his couch : the native fiend 
flashed out in his countenance. I waited his attack, 
with my hand on the poniard within my sash. My 
look probably deterred him ; for he flung himself 
back again, and bursting into a loud laugh, ex- 
claimed ; ^' Bravely spoken. Septimius, we must 
send the Jew to Rome to teach our orators. Aye, 
I know Upper Galilee too well, not to know that 
rebellion is more easily raised there than the taxes. 
And it was for that reason, that 1 invited you to 
come to Cassarea. In the midst of your tribe 



SALATHIEL. 231 

capture would have cost half a legion ; here a 
single jailor will do the business. Ho ! guard !" 
he called aloud. I heard the screwing of the 
rack ill the next room, and unsheathed the poniard. 
The blade glittered in his eyes. Septimius came 
between us, and tried to turn the procurator's 
purpose. 

" Let your guard come," cried I, *' and, by the 
sacredness of the Temple, one of us dies. I will 
not live to be tortured, or you shall not live to 
see it." 

If the door had opened, I was prepared to dart 
upon him. 

" Well," said he, after a whispered expostula- 
tion from Septimius, ** you must go and settle 
the matter with the Emperor. The fact is, that 
I am too tender-hearted to govern such a nation 
of dagger-bearers. So, to Nero ! If we cannot 
send the Emperor money, we will at least send him 
men." He laughed vehemently at the conception ; 
ordered the singing and dancing slaves to return ; 
called for wine, and plunged again into his favour- 
ite cup. 

Septimius rose, and led me into another cham- 
ber. I remonstrated against the injustice of my 
seizure. He lamented it, but said that the orders 
from Rome were strict, and that I was denounced 



232 SALATHIEL. 

by some of the chiefs in Jerusalem as the head 
of the late insurrection, and the projector of a 
new one. The procurator, he added, had been 
for some time anxious to get me into his power 
without raising a disturbance among my tribe; the 
treachery of my domestic had been employed to 
effect this; and *' now," concluded he, " my best 
wish for you — a wish prompted by motives of 
which you can form no conjecture, is, that you 
may be sent to Rome. Every day that sees you 
in Caesarea sees you in the utmost peril. At the 
first rumour of insurrection your life will be the 
sacrifice.'' 

*' But my family ! What will be their feelings ! 
Can I not at least acquaint them with my desti- 
nation ?" 

" It is impossible. And now, to let you into a 
state secret, the Emperor had ordered that you 
should be sent to Rome. Florus menaced, only 
to extort money. He now knows you better, and 
would gladly enlist you in the Roman cause. 
This I know to be hopeless. But I dread his 
caprice, and shall rejoice to see the sails hoisted 
that are to carry you to Rome. Farewell : your 
family shall have due intelligence." He was at 
the door of the chamber, but suddenly returned, 
and pressing my hand, said again, '* Farewell, 



SALATHIEL. 233 

and remember that neither all Romans, nor even 
all Greeks, may be alike 1" He then with a ^ace- 
fiil obeisance left the room. 

Fatigue hung with a leaden weight upon my 
eyelids. I tried vain expedients to keep myself 
from slumber in this perilous vicinage. The huge 
silver chandelier, that threw a blaze over the 
fretted roof, began to twinkle before me ; the busts 
and statues gradually mingled, and I was once 
more in the land of visions. Home was before 
my eyes. I was suddenly tossed upon the ocean. 
I stood before Nero, and was addressing him with 
a formal harangue, when the whole tissue was 
broken up, by a sullen voice commanding me to 
rise. A soldier, sword in hand, was by the couch : 
he pointed to the door, where an armed party were 
in attendance, and informed me that I was ordered 
for immediate embarkation. 

It was scarcely past midnight ; the stars were 
still in their glory ; the pharos threw a long line 
of flame on the waters ; the city sounds were 
bushed ; and silent as a procession to the grave, 
we moved down to where the tall vessel lay rock- 
ing with the breeze. At her side a Nubian slave 
put a note into my hand ; it was from the young 
Roman, requesting my acceptance of wine and 
fruits from the palace, and wishing me a prosper- 



234 SALATHIEL. 

ous result to my voyage. The sails were hoisted ; 
the stately mole, that even iu the night looked a 
mount of marble, was cleared ; the libation was 
poured to the Tritons for our speedy passage, 
and the blazing pharos was rapidly seen but as a 
twinkling star. 



SALATHIEL. 235 



CHAPTER XIX. 

Our trireme flew before the wind. By day- 
break, the coast was but a pale line along the 
waters ; but Carmel still towered proudly eminent, 
and with its top alternately clouded and glittering 
in the sun, might have been taken for a gigantic 
beacon, throwing up alternate smoke and flame. 
With what eyes did I continue to look, until the 
mighty hill too sank in the waters ! But thought 
still lingered on the shore. I saw, with a keen- 
ness more than of the eye, the family circle; 
through many an hour of gazing on the waters, I 
was all but standing in the midst of those walls 
which I might never more see ; listening to the 
uncomplaining sighs of Miriam, the impassioned 
remonstrances of my sole remaining child, and 



236 SALATHIEL. 

busied in the still harder task of finding out some 
defence against the self-accusation that laid the 
charge of rashness and cruelty heavy upon my 
soul. 

But the scene round me was the very reverse 
of moody meditation. The captain was a thorough 
Italian trierarch, ostentatious, gay, given to super- 
stition, and occasionally a little of a freethinker. 
His ship was to him child, wife, and world; and 
at every manoeuvre he claimed from us such tri- 
bute as a father might for the virtues of his fa- 
vourite offspring ; perpetual luck was in every 
thing that she did : she knew every headland from 
Cyprus to Ostia: a pilot was a mere supernu- 
merary : she could run the whole course without 
the helm, if she pleased. She beat the Liburniari 
for speed ; the Cypriot, for comfort ; the Sicilian, 
for safety ; and every other vessel on the seas for 
every other quality. " All he asked was, to live 
in her, while he lived at all; and to go down in 
her, when the Fates were at last to cut his thread, 
as they did those of all captains whether on sea or 
land." 

The panegyric of the good ship Ganymede was 
in some degree merited ; she carried us on boldly. 
For a sea in which the winds are constant when 
they come, but in which the calms are as constant 



SALATHIEL. 237 

as the winds, nothing could have been more 
adapted than the ancient galley. The sail or oar 
never failed. If the gale arose, the ship shot along, 
like the eagle that bore the Trojan boy ; light, 
strong, with its white sails full of the breeze, and 
cleaving the surge with the rapidity of an arrow. 
If the wind fell, we floated in a pavilion, screened 
from the sun, refreshed with perfumes burning on 
poop, prow, and masts, surrounded with gilding, 
and the carvings and paintings of the Greek artists, 
drinking delicious wines, listening to song and 
story, and in all this enjoyment, gliding insensibly 
along on a lake of absolute sapphire, encircled and 
varied by the most picturesque and lovely islands 
in. the world. 

The Ganymede had been under especial orders 
from Rome for my transmission ; but the captain 
felt too much respect for the procurator not to 
trespass on the letter of the law, so far as to fill 
up the vacancies of his hold with merchandise, in 
which Florus drove a steady contraband trade. 
Having done so much to gratify the governor's 
distinguishing propensity, he next provided for his 
own; and loaded his gallant vessel mercilessly with 
passengers, as much prohibited as his merchandise. 
While we were still in sight of land, I walked a 
lonely deck ; but when the salutary fear of the 



2S8 SALATHIEL. 

galleys on the station was past, every corner of 
the Ganymede let loose a living cargo. 

For the Jewish chieftain going from Florus on 
a mission to the Emperor, as the captain conceived 
me and my purpose to be, a separate portion of 
the deck w^as kept sacred. But I mingled from 
time to time with the crowd, and thus contrived 
to preserve at once my respect avA my popularity. 
Never was there a more miscellaneous collection. 
We transported into Europe a Chaldee sorcerer, 
an Indian gymnosophist, an Arab teacher of as- 
trology, a magian from Persepolis, and a Platonist 
from Alexandria. Such were our contributions 
to Oriental science. We had, besides, a dealer in 
sleight of hand from Damascus ; an Egyptian with 
tame monkeys and a model of a pyramid ; a Syrian 
serpent-teacher ; an Idumean maker of amulets 
against storm and calm, thirst and hunger, and 
every other disturbance and distress of life ; an 
Armenian discoverer of the stone by which gold 
mines were to be discovered ; a Byzantine inven- 
tor of the true Oriental pearls ; a dealer from the 
Caspian in gums superseding all that Arabia ever 
wept ; an Epicurean philosopher, who professed 
indolence, and, to do him justice, was a striking 
example of his doctrine ; and a Stoic, who, having 
gone his rounds of the Roman garrisons as a 



SALATHIEL. 239 

teacher of dancing, a curer of wines, and a flute- 
player, had now risen into the easier vocation of a 
philosopher. Of course, among those professors, 
the discoverer of gold was the most moneyless ; the 
maker of amulets against misfortune the most miser- 
able ; and the Stoic the most impatient. The Epicu- 
rean alone adhered to the spirit of his profession. 

But the unstable elements round us were a se- 
vere trial for any human philosophy but that of a 
thorough Optimist. Wind and water, the two 
most imperious of things, were our masters ; and 
a calm, a breeze, or even a billow, often tried our 
reasoners too roughly for the honour of tempers 
so saturated with wisdom. On those occasions 
the Platonist defended the antiquity of Egypt 
with double pertinacity ; the Chaldee derided its 
novelty by the addition of a hundred thousand 
years to his chronology of Babylon ; the Indian 
with increased scorn, wrinkling his brown visage, 
told them that both Babylon and Egypt were 
baubles of yesterday, compared with the million 
years of India. The dagger would have silenced 
many a discussion on the chief good, the origin of 
benevolence, and the beauty of virtue, but for the 
voice of the captain, which, like thunder, cleared 
the air. He, I will allow, was the truest philo- 
sopher of us all. The Trierarch was an uncon- 



^40 SALATHIEL. 

scious Optimist ; nothing could touch him with 
shape of misfortune ; for, to him it had no exist- 
ence. If the storm rose, " we should get the 
more rapidly into port;" if the calm came to fix us 
scorching on the face of ocean, " nothing could be 
safer." If our provisions fell short, '* abstemious- 
ness now and then was worth a generation of doc- 
tors." If the sun burned above us with the fire 
of a ball of red-hot iron, ''it was the test of fair 
weather ;" if the sky was a mass of vapour, " we 
escaped being roasted alive." 

His maxims on higher subjects were equally 
consoling. *' If man had to struggle through 
life, struggle was the nursing-mother of great- 
ness. If he were opulent, he had gained the 
end without the trouble. — If he had disease, 
he learned patience and fortitude, essentials for 
sailor, soldier, and philosopher alike. If he en- 
joyed health, who could doubt the blessing ? — 
If h^ lived long, he had time for enjoyment; if 
he died early, he escaped the chances of the tables' 
turning." The Optimist applied his principle to 
me, by gravely informing me that, *' though it 
depended on the Emperor's state of digestion, 
whether I should or should not carry back my 
head from his presence, yet, if I lived, I should 
see the games of the Circus ; and if I did not, I 



SALATHIEL. 241 

should in all probability care but little about the 
matter." 

Nothing in the variety of later Europe gives 
me a parallel to the distinctions of rank and pro- 
fession, style of subsistence, and physiognomy, of 
the ancient world. Human nature was classed in 
every kingdom, province, and city, almost as 
rigidly as the different races of mankind. The 
divisions of the slave, the freedman, the citizen, 
the artist, the priest, the man of literature, the 
man of public life, were marked with a plough- 
share, whose furrows were never filled up but by 
the rarest chance. Life had the curious mixture 
of costume, the palpable diversity of purpose, and 
the vivid intricacy of a drama. 

Our voyage was rapid; but even a lingering 
transit would have been cheered by the animation 
of the innumerable objects of beauty and renown, 
which rise on every side in the passage through a 
Grecian sea. The islands were then untouched 
by the spoiler ; the opulence of Rome had been 
added to Attic taste ; and temples, theatres, and 
palaces, starting from groves, or studding the 
sides of stately hills, and reflected in the mirror of 
bays, smooth and bright as polished steel, held the 
eye a continual captive. On the sea, flights of 
vessels, steering in all directions, glittering with 
VOL. I. L 



242 SALATHIEL. 

the emblems of their nations, the coloured pen- 
nants, the painted prows, the gilded images of 
the protecting idols, covered the horizon with 
life. 

We had reached the southern Cape of Greece, 
and were, with a boldness unusual to ancient navi- 
gation, stretching across in a starless night for 
the coast of Italy, when we caught a sound of 
distant music, that recalled the poetic dreams of 
nymphs and tritons. The sound swelled and sank 
on the wind, as if it came from the depths of the 
ocean, or the bosom of the clouds. As we parted 
from the land, it swelled richer, until it filled the 
midnight with pompous harmony. To sleep was 
profanation, and we all gathered on the deck, 
exhausting nature and art in conjectures of the 
cause. 

The harmony approached and receded at inter- 
vals, grew in volume and richness, then stole 
away in wild murmurs, or died, to revive with 
still more luxuriant sweetness. Night passed 
away in delight and conjecture. Morning alone 
brought the solution. 

Full in the blaze of sunrise steered the imperial 
fleet, returning in triumph from the Olympic 
games, with the Emperor on board. We had 
unconsciously approached it during the darkness. 



SALATHIEL. 243 

The whole scene wore the aspect of a vision 
summoned by the hand of an enchanter. The 
sea was covered with the fleet in order of battle. 
Some of the galleys were of vast size, and all were 
gleaming- with gold and decorations ; silken sails, 
garlands on the masts, trophies hung over the 
sides, and embroidered streamers of every shape 
and hue, met the morning light. We passed the 
wing of the fleet, close enough to see the sacrificial 
fires on the poop of the imperial quinquereme. 
A crowd in purple and military habits were 
standing round a throne, above which proudly 
waved the scarlet flag of command. A figure 
advanced, all foreheads were bowed, acclamations 
rent the air ; the trumpets of the fleet flourished, 
and the lofty and luxuriant harmonies, that had 
charmed us in the night, again swelled upon the 
wind, and followed us long after the whole 
floating splendour had dissolved into the distant 
blue. 

At length, the headlands of the noble Is 7 of 
Tarentum rose above the horizon. While we 
were running with the speed of a lapwing, the 
captain, to our surprise, shortened sail. I soon 
discovered that no philosophy was perfect; that 
even the Optimist thought that daylight might 



244 SALATHIEL. 

be worse than useless, and that a blot had been 
left on creation in the shape of a custom-house 
officer. 

Night fell at last ; the moon, to which our cap- 
tain had taken a sudden aversion, was as cloudy 
as he could desire; and we rushed in between the 
glimmering watch-towers on the Japygian and 
Lacinian promontories. The glow of light along 
the waters soon pointed out where the luxurious 
citizens ofTarentum were enjoying the banquet 
in their barges and villas. Next came the hum 
of the great city, whose popular boast was, like 
that of later times, that it had more holidays than 
days in the year. 

But the trierarch's often-painted delight at 
finding himself free to rove among the indulgences 
of his favourite shore, had lost its poignancy ; 
and with a firmness which set the Stoic in a rage, 
the Epicurean in a state of rebellion, and the 
whole tribe of our sages in a temper of mere 
mortal remonstrance, he resisted alike the remon- 
strance and the allurement, and sullenly cast 
anchor in the centre of the bay. It was not until 
song and feast had died, and all was hushed, that 
he stole with the slightest possible noise to the 
back of the mole, and sending us below, dis- 



S A LATHI EL. 245 

burthened his conscience and the good ship Gany- 
mede. 

I had no time to give to the glories of Taren- 
tum. Nero's approach hurried my departure. 
The centurion who had me in charge trembled at 
the idea of delay ; and we rode through the midst 
of three hundred thousand sleepers in streets of 
marble and ranks of trophies, as silently and 
swiftly as if we had been the ghosts of their an- 
cestors. When the day broke, we found ourselves 
among the Lucanian hills, then no desert, but 
living with population, and bright with the memo- 
rials of Italian opulence and taste. From the inn 
where we halted to change horses, the Tarentine 
gulf spread broad and bold before the eye. 

The city of luxury and of power, once the ruler 
of southern Italy, and mistress of the seas ; that 
sent out armies and fleets worthy to contest the 
supremacy with Pyrrbus and the Carthaginian ; 
was, from this spot, sunk, like all the works of 
man, into littleness. But the gulf, like all the 
works of nature, grew in grandeur. Its circular 
shore edged with thirteen cities, the deep azure of 
its smooth waters, inlaid with the flashes of sun- 
rise, and traversed by fleets, diminished to toys ; 
reminded me of one of the magnificent Roman 
shields, with its centre of sanguine steel, the 



246 SALATHIELv 

silver incrustation of the rim, and the storied 
sculpture. 

We passed at full speed through the Lucanian 
and Samnian provinces, fine sweeps of cultivated 
country, inter&persed with the hunting" grounds of 
the great patricians ; forests that had not felt the 
axe for centuries, and hills sheeted with the wild 
vine and rose. 

But on reaching the border of Latium I wa& 
already in Rome ; I travelled a day's journey 
among streets, and in the midst of a crowded and 
hurrying population. The whole was one huge 
suburb, with occasional glimpses of a central 
mount, crowned with glittering and gilded struc- 
tures. " There I" said the centurion, with some- 
what of religious reverence ; "behold the eternal 
Capitol !" — I entered Rome at night, passing 
through an endless number of narrow and intri- 
cate streets, where hovels, the very abode of want^ 
were mingled with palaces blazing with lights and 
echoing with festivity. The centurion's house was 
at length reached. He showed me to an apart- 
ment, and left me, saying, " that I must prepare 
to be brought before the Emperor immediately on 
his arrival." 

I am now, thought I, in the heart of the heart 
of the world ; in the midst of that place of power 



SALATHIEL. 247 

from which the destiny of nations issues ; in the 
great treasure-house to which men come from 
the ends of the earth for knowledge, for justice, 
for wealth, honour, thrones ! and what am I ? — a 
solitary slave ! 



248 



SALATHIEL. 



CHAFIER XX. 

The genius of the Italian has, from the begin- 
ning, been the same — bustling, sight-loving, fond 
of every thing in the shape of indulgence, yet 
fondest of indulgence where the eye could be gra- 
tified. He was a sensualist, but of all sensualists 
the most susceptible of elegance. His Greek 
blood, his fine climate, and the perpetual displays 
of the noblest works of art, brought by conquest, 
contributed to this temperament ; but the founda- 
tion was in that genius which has made his 
country the second cradle of the arts to Europe. 
I never saw a little peasant-celebration, a dance, 
a sacrifice of a few flowers, that did not contain 
the spirit of poetic beauty. Rome was all shows. 
Its innumerable public events were all thrown into 



SALATHIEL. ^49 

the shape of pageantry. Its worship, elections, 
the departure and return of governors and consuls, 
every operation of public life, was modelled into a 
pomp ; and in the boundless extent of the empire, 
those operations w^ere crowding on each other 
every day. The multitude, that can still be set 
in motion by a wooden saint, was then summoned 
by the stirring and powerful ceremonial of empire, 
the actual sovereignty of the globe. What must 
have been the strong excitement, the perpetual 
concourse, the living and various activity of a city 
from which emanated the stream of power through 
the world, to return to it loaded with all that 
the opulence, skill, and glory of the world could 
give ! 

Triumphs, to whose grandeur and singularity 
the pomps of .later days are but the attempts of 
paupers and children ; sacrifices and rites, on 
which the very existence of the state was to 
depend ; the levy and march of armies, which 
were to carry fate to the remotest corners of the 
earth ; the pageants of the kings of the east and 
west, coming to solicit diadems, or to deprecate 
the irresistible arms of Rome ; vast theatres ; pub- 
lic games, that tasked the whole fertility of Italian 
talent, and the most prodigal lavishness of im- 



250 SALATHIEL. 

perial luxury ; were the movers that amoDg the 
three millions of Rome made life a hurricane. 

I saw it in its full and joyous commotion; I saw 
it in its desperate agony ; I saw it in its frivolous 
revival ; and I shall see it in an hour, wilder, 
weaker, and more terrible than all. 

By an influence of which I was then ignorant, I 
was permitted to be present at some of those dis- 
plays, under the charge of the centurion. No man 
could be better fitted for a state jailor. Civility 
sat on his lips, but caution the most profound sat 
beside her. He professed to have the deepest de- 
pendence on my honour, yet he never let me 
beyond his eye. But I had no desire to escape. 
The crisis must come ; and I was as well inclined 
to meet it then, as to have it hanging over me. 

Intelligence in a few days arrived from Brun- 
dusium of the emperor's landing, and of his inten- 
tion to remain at Antium, on the road to Rome, 
until his triumphal entry should be prepared. My 
fate now hung in the scale. I was ordered to at- 
tend the imperial presence. At the vestibule of 
the Antian palace my careful centurion deposited 
me in the hands of a senator. As I followed him 
through the halls, a young female richly attired, 
and of the most beautiful face and form, crossed 



SALATHIEL. 251 

US, light and graceful as a danciug nympb. The 
senator bowed profoundly. She beckoned to him, 
and they exchanged a few words. I was pro- 
bably the subject ; for her countenance, sparkling 
with the animation of youth and loveliness, grew 
pale at once : she clasped both her hands upon her 
eyes, and rushed into an inner chamber. She knew 
Nero well ; and dearly she was yet to pay for her 
knowledge. The senator, to my inquiring glance, 
answered in a whisper, " The Empress Poppaea." 

A few steps onward, and I stood in the presence 
of the most formidable being on earth. Yet, 
whatever might have been the natural agitation of 
the time, I could scarcely restrain a smile at the 
first sight of Nero. I saw a pale, under-sized, 
light- haired young man sitting before a table with 
a lyre on it, a few copies of verses and drawings, 
and a parrot's cage, to whose inmate he was teach- 
ing Greek with great assiduity. But for the regal 
furniture of the cabinet, I should have supposed 
myself led by mistake into an interview with some 
struggling poet. He shot round one quick glance, 
on the opening of the door, and then proceeded to 
give lessons to his bird. I had leisure to gaze on 
the tyrant and parricide. 

Physiognomy is a true science. The man of 
profound thought, the man of active ability, and, 



252 SALATHIEL. 

above all, the man of genius has his character 
stamped on his countenance by nature ; the man of 
violent passions and the voluptuary have it stamped 
by habit. But the science has its limits : it has 
no stamp for mere cruelty. The features of the 
human monster before me were mild, and almost 
handsome : a heavy eye and a figure tending to 
•fulness, gave the impression of a quiet mind ; and 
but for an occasional restlessness of brow, and a 
brief glance from under it, in which the leaden eye 
darted suspicion, I should have pronounced Nero 
one of the most indolently tranquil of mankind. 

He remanded the parrot to its perch, took up 
his lyre, and throwing a not-unskilful hand over 
the strings, in the intervals of the performance 
languidly addressed a broken sentence to me. 
'' You have come, I understand, from Judea ; — 
they tell me that you have been, or are to be a 
general of the insurrection ; — you must be put to 
death ; — your countrymen give us a great deal of 
trouble, and I always regret to be troubled with 
them. — But, to send you back would be only an 
encouragement to them, and to keep you here 
among strangers would be only a cruelty to you. — 
I am charged with cruelty ; — you see the charge 
is not true. — I am lampooned every day ; 1 know 
the scribblers, but they must lampoon or starve. I 



SALATHIEL. 253 

leave them to do both. — Have you brought any 
news from Judea ? — They have not had a true prince 
there since the first Herod ; and he was quite a 
Greek, a cut-throat and a man of taste. He un- 
derstood the arts. — I sent for you, to see what sort 
of animal a Jewish rebel was. — Your dress is hand- 
some, but too light for our winters. — You cannot 
die before sun-set, as till then I am engaged with 
my music-master. — We all must die when our time 
comes. — Farewell — till sunset may Jupiter protect 
you r 

1 retired to execution ! and, before the door 
closed, heard this accomplished disposer of life 
and death preluding upon his lyre with increased 
energy. I was conducted to a turret until the 
})eriod in which the Emperor's engagements with 
his music-master should leave him at leisure to 
see me die. 

Yet there was kindness even under the roof of 
Nero, and a liberal hand had covered the table in 
my cell. The hours passed heavily along, but 
they passed ; and I was watching the last rays of 
my last sun, when T perceived a cloud rise in the 
direction of Rome. It grew broader, deeper, 
darker as I gazed ; its centre was suddenly tinged 
with red ; the tinge spread ; the whole mass of 
cloud became crimson ; the sun went down, and 



254 SALATHIEL. 

another sun seemed to have risen in his stead. I 
heard the clattering of horses' feet in the court- 
yards below ; trumpets sounded ; there was con- 
fusion in the palace ; the troops hurried under 
arms ; and I saw a squadron of cavalry set off at 
full speed. 

As I was gazing on the spectacle before me, 
which perpetually became more menacing, the door 
of my cell slowly opened, and a masked figure 
stood upon the threshold. I had made up my 
mind ; and demanding if he were the executioner, 
told him " that I was ready." The figure paused, 
listened to the sounds below, and after looking for 
a while on the troops in the court-yard, signified 
by signs that I had a chance of saving my life. 

The love of existence rushed back upon me ; 
and I eagerly inquired what was to be done. He 
drew from under his cloak the dress of a Roman 
slave, which I put on, and noiselessly followed his 
steps through a long succession of small and 
strangely intricate passages. We found no diffi- 
culty from guards or domestics. The whole palace 
was in a state of extraordinary confusion. Every 
human being was packing up something or other : 
rich vases, myrrhine cups, table services, were 
lying in heaps on the floors ; books, costly dresses, 
instruments of music, all the appendages of luxury, 



SALATHIEL. 255 

were flung loose in every direction, from the sud- 
den breaking up of the court. I might have plun- 
dered the value of a province with impunity. Still 
we wound our hurried way. In passing along one 
of the corridors, the voice of complaining struck 
the ear ; my mysterious guide hesitated ; I glanced 
through the slab of crystal that showed the chamber 
within. 

It was the one in which I had seen the Em- 
peror, but his place was now filled by the form of 
youth and beauty that had crossed me on my ar- 
rival. She was weeping bitterly, and reading with 
strong and sorrowful indignation a long list of 
names, probably one of those rolls in which Nero 
registered his intended victims, and which in the 
confusion of departure he had left open. A second 
glance saw her tear the paper into a thousand 
fragments, and scatter them in the fountain that 
gushed upon the floor. 

I left this lovely and unhappy creature, this 
dove in the vulture's talons, with almost a pang. 
A few steps more brought us into the open air, 
but among bowers that covered our path with dark- 
ness. At the extremity of the gardens, my guide 
struck with his dagger upon a door ; it was 
opened ; we found horses outside ; he sprang on 



256 SALATHlEL. 

one ; I sprang on its fellow ; and palace, guards, 
and death were left far behind. 

He galloped so furiously, that I found it impos- 
sible to speak ; and it was not till we had reached 
an eminence a few miles from Rome, where we 
breathed our horses, that I could ask to whom I 
had been indebted for my escape. But 1 could 
not extract a word from him. He made signs of 
silence, and pointed with wild anxiety to the scene 
that spread below. It was of a grandeur and 
terror indescribable. Rome was an ocean of flame. 

Height and depth were covered with red surges, 
that rolled before the blast like an endless tide. 
The billows burst up the sides of the hills, which 
they turned into instant volcanoes, exploding 
volumes of smoke and fire ; then plunged into the 
depths in a hundred glowing cataracts, then 
climbed and consumed again. The distant sound 
of the city in her convulsion went to the soul. 
The air was filled with the steady roar of the ad- 
vancing flame, the crash of falling houses, and the 
hideous outcry of the myriads flying through the 
streets, or surrounded and perishing in the confla- 
gration. 

Hostile to Rome as I was, I could not restrain 
the exclamation : '* There goes the fruit of con- 



SALATHIEL. 2&T 

quest, the glory of ages, the purchase of the blood 
of millions ! Was vanity made for man ?" My 
guide continued looking forward with intense 
earnestness, as if he were perplexed by what 
avenue to enter the burning city. I demanded 
who he was, and whither he would lead me. He 
returned no answer. A long spire of flame that 
shot up from a hitherto untouched quarter en- 
grossed all his senses. He struck in the spur, and 
making a wild gesture to me to follow, darted 
down the hill. 

I pursued ; we found the Appian choked with 
waggons, baggage of every kind, and terrified 
crowds hurrying into the open country. To force 
a way through them was impossible. All was 
clamour, violent struggle, and helpless death. 
Men and women of the highest rank were on foot, 
trampled by the rabble, that had then lost all re- 
spect of conditions. One dense mass of miserable 
life, irresistible from its weight, crushed by the 
narrow streets, and scorched by the flames over 
their heads, rolled through the gates, like an 
endless stream of black lava. 

We turned back, and attempted an entrance 
through the gardens of some of the villas that 
skirted the city wall near the Palatine. All were 
deserted, and after some dangerous leaps over the 



S58 SALATHIEL. 

burning ruins, we found ourselves in the streets. 
The fire had originally broken out upon the Pala- 
tine, and hot smokes that wrapped and half blinded 
us, hung thick as night upon the wrecks of pavi- 
lions and palaces ; but the dexterity and knowledge 
of my inexplicable guide carried us on. It was in 
vain that I insisted upon knowing the purpose of 
this terrible traverse. He pressed his hand on 
his heart in re-assurance of his fidelity, and still 
spurred on. 

We now passed under the shade of an immense 
range of lofty buildings, whose gloomy and solid 
strength seemed to bid defiance to chance and 
time. A sudden yell appalled me. — A ring of fire 
swept round its summit ; burning cordage, sheets 
of canvas, and a shower of all things combustible, 
flew into the air above our heads. An uproar fol- 
lowed, unlike all that I had ever heard, a hideous 
mixture of howls, shrieks, and groans. The flames 
rolled down the narrow street before us, and made 
the passage next to impossible. While we he- 
sitated, a huge fragment of the building heaved, 
as if in an earthquake, and fortunately for us fell 
inwards. The whole scene of terror was then 
open. 

The great amphitheatre of Statilius Taurus had 
caught fire ; the stage with its inflammable furni- 



SALATHIEL. 259 

ture was intensely blazing below. The flames 
were wheeling up, circle above circle, through the 
seventy thousand seats that rose from the ground 
to the roof. I stood in unspeakable awe and 
wonder on the side of this colossal cavern, this 
mighty temple of the city of fire. At length a 
descending blast cleared away the smoke that 
covered the arena. The cause of those horrid cries 
was now visible. The wild beasts kept for the 
games had broke from their dens. Maddened by 
affright and pain, lions, tigers, panthers, wolves, 
whole herds of the monsters of India and Africa, 
were enclosed in an impassable barrier of fire. 
They bounded, they fought, they screamed, they 
tore ; they ran howling round and round the cir- 
cle ; they made desperate leaps upwards through 
the blaze ; they were flung back, and fell only to 
fasten their fangs in each other, and with their 
parching jaws bathed in blood, die raging. 

I looked anxiously to see whether any human 
being was involved in this fearful catastrophe ; 
but, to my great relief, I could see none. The 
keepers and attendants had obviously escaped. 
As I expressed my gladness, I was startled by a 
loud cry from my guide, the first sound that I had 
heard him utter. He pointed to the opposite side 
of the amphitheatre. There indeed sat au object 



260 SALATHIEL. 

of melancholy interest : a man Avho had either 
been unable to escape, or had determined to die. 
Escape was now impossible, — He sat in desperate 
calmness on his funeral pile. He was a gigantic 
Ethiopian slave, entirely naked. He had chosen 
his place as if in mockery on the imperial throne ; 
the fire was above him and around him ; and 
under this tremendous canopy he gazed, without 
the movement of a muscle, on the combat of the 
wild beasts below ; a solitary sovereign with the 
whole tremendous game played for himself, and 
inaccessible to the power of man. 

I was forced away from this absorbing spectacle ; 
and we once more threaded the long and intricate 
streets of Rome. As we approached the end of 
one of those bewildering passages, scarcely wide 
enough for us to ride abreast, I was startled by the 
sudden illumination of the sky immediately above ; 
and, rendered cautious by the experience of our 
hazards, called to my companion to return. He 
pointed behind me, and showed the fire bursting 
out in the houses by v/hich we had just galloped. 
I followed on. A crowd that poured from the 
adjoining streets cut off our retreat. Hundreds 
rapidly mounted on the houses in front, in the 
hope by throwing them down to check the confla- 
gration. The obstacle once removed, we saw the 



SALATHIEL. 261 

source of the light — spectacle of horror! The 
great prison of Rome was on fire. 

Never can I forget the sights and sounds — the 
dismay — the hopeless agony — the fury and frenzy 
that then overwhelmed the heart. The jailors had 
been forced to fly, before they could loose the 
fetters, or open the cells of the prisoners. We 
saw those gaunt and wo-begone wretches crowding 
to their casements, and imploring impossible help ; 
clinging to the heated bars ; toiling with their im- 
potent grasp to tear out the massive stones ; some 
hopelessly wringing their hands ; some calling on 
the terrified spectators by every name of humanity 
to save them ; some venting their despair in exe- 
crations and blasphemies that made the blood run 
cold ; others, after many a wild effort to break 
loose, dashing their heads against the walls, or 
stabbing themselves. The people gave them out- 
cry for outcry ; but the flame forbade approach. 
Before I could extricate myself from the multitude, 
a whirl of fiery ashes shot upwards from the falling 
roof; the walls burst into a thousand fragments; 
and the huge prison, with all its miserable inmates, 
was a heap of red embers. 

Exhausted as I was by this endless fatigue, and 
yet more by the melancholy sights that surrounded 
every step, no fatigue seemed to be felt by the 



262 SALATHIEL. 

singular being that governed my movements. He 
sprang through the burning ruins— he plunged 
into the sulphurous smoke — he never lost the di- 
rection that he had first taken ; and though baffled 
and forced to turn back a hundred times, he again 
rushed on his track with the directness of an 
arrow. For me to make my way back to the 
gates, would be even more difficult than to push 
forward. My ultimate safety might be in follow- 
ing, and I followed. To stand still, and to move, 
were equally perilous. 

The streets, even with the improvements of 
Augustus, were still scarcely wider than the 
breadth of the little Italian carts thai crowded 
them. They were crooked, long, and obstructed 
by every impediment of a city built in haste, after 
the burning by the Gauls, and wiih no other plan 
than the caprice of its hurried tenantry. The 
houses were of immense height, chiefly wood, 
many roofed with thatch, and all covered or 
cemented with pitch. The true surprise is, that 
it had not been burned once a year from the time 
of its building. 

The memory of Nero, that hereditary concen- 
tration of vice, of whose ancestor's yellow beard 
the Roman orator said, " No wonder that his 
beard was brass, when his mouth was iron and his 



SALATHIEL. 263 

heart lead," the parricide and the poisoner, may 
yet be fairly exonerated of an act, which might 
have been the deed of a drunken mendicant in 
any of the fifty thousand hovels of this gigantic 
aggregate of every thing that could turn to flame. 

We passed along through all the horrid varieties 
of misery, guilt, and riot, that could find their 
place in a great public calamity : groups gazing 
in woe on the wreck of their fortunes, rushing off 
to the winds in vapour and fire; groups plunder- 
ing in the midst of the flame ; groups of rioters, 
escaped felons, and murderers, exulting in the 
public ruin, and dancing and drinking with Bac- 
chanalian uproar ; gangs of robbers trampling 
down and stabbing the fugitives to strip them of 
their last means; revenge, avarice, despair, pro- 
fligacy, let loose naked ; undisguised demons, to 
swell the wretchedness of this tremendous inflic- 
tion upon a guilty and blood-covered empire. 

Still we spurred on, but our jaded horses at 
length sank under us ; and leaving them to find 
their way into the fields, we struggled forward on 
foot. The air had hitherto been calm, but now 
gusts began to rise, thunder growled, and the 
signs of tempest thickened on. We gained an 
untouched quarter of the city, and had explored 
our weary passage up to the gates of a large 



^64 SALATHIEL. 

patrician palace, when we were startled by a broad 
sheet of flame rushing through the sky. The 
storm was come in its rage. 

The range of public magazines of wood, cor- 
dage, tar, and oil, in the valley between the Coe- 
lian and Palatine hills, had at length been involved 
in the conflagration. All that we had seen before 
was darkness to the fierce splendour of this burn- 
ing. The tempest tore off" the roofs, and swept 
them like floating islands of fire through the sky. 
The most distant quarters on which they fell were 
instantly w^rapped in flame. One broad mass 
whirling from an immense height, broke upon the 
palace before us. A cry of terror was heard 
within; the gates were flung open, and a crowd of 
domestics and persons of both sexes, attired for a 
banquet, poured out into the streets. The palace 
was wrapt in flame. My guide then for the first 
time lost his self-possession. He staggered towards 
me with the appearance of a man who had received 
a spear-head in his bosom. I caught him before 
he fell ; but his head sank, his knees bent under 
him, and his white lips quivered with unintelli- 
gible sounds. I could distinguish only the words 
— " gone, gone for ever !" 

The flame had already seized upon the principal 
floors of the palace ; and the volumes of smoke 



SALATHIEL. 265 

that poured through every window and entrance, 
rendered the attempt to save those st'll within 
a work of extreme hazard. But ladders were 
rapidly placed, ropes were flung, and the activity 
of the attendants and retainers was boldly exerted, 
till all were presumed to have been saved, and 
the building was left to burn. 

My overwhelmed guide was lying on the ground, 
when a sudden scream was heard, and a figure, in 
the robes and with the rosy crown of the ba'nquet, 
strange contrast to her fearful situation, was seen 
flying from window to window in the upper part 
of the mansion. It was supposed that she had 
fainted in the first terror, and been forgotten. 
The height, the fierceness of the flame which now 
completely mastered resistance, the volumes of 
smoke thaf suff*ocated every man who approached, 
made the chance of saving this unfortunate being 
utterly desperate in the opinion of the multitude. 

My spirit shuddered at the horrors of this deser- 
tion. I looked round at my companion ; he wa& 
kneeling, in helpless agony, with his hands lifted 
up to heaven. Another scream, wilder than ever, 
pierced my senses. I seized an axe from one of 
the domestics, caught a ladder from another, and 
in a paroxysm of hope, fear, and pity, scaled the 
burning wall. A shout from below followed me. 
VOL. I. M 



266 SALATHIEL. 

I entered at the first window that I could reacb. 
All before me was cloud. I rushed on, struggled, 
stumbled over furniture and fragments of all 
kinds, fell, rose again, found myself trampling 
upon precious things, plate and crystal ; and 
still, axe in hand, forced my way. I at length 
reached the banqueting-room. The figure had 
vanished. 

A strange superstition of childhood, a thought 
that I might have been lured by some spirit of 
evil into this place of ruin, suddenly came over 
me. I stopped to gather my faculties. I leaned 
against one of the pillars ; it was hot ; the floor 
shook and crackled under my tread, the walls 
heaved, the flame hissed below, and over head 
roared the whirlwind, and burst the thunder- 
peal. 

My brain was fevered by agitation and fatigue. 
The immense golden lamps still burning ; the 
long tables disordered, yet glittering with the 
costly ornaments of patrician luxury; the scattered 
Tyrian couches ; the scarlet canopy that covered 
the whole range of the tables, and gave the hall 
the aspect of an imperial pavilion, partially torn 
down in the confusion of the flight, all assumed to 
me a horrid and bewildered splendour. The 
^mokes were already rising through the crevices of 



SALATHIEL. 267 

the floor ; the smell of flame was on my robes ; a 
huge volume of yellow vapour slowly wreathed 
and arched round the chair at the head of the ban- 
quet. I could have imaged a fearful lord of the 
feast under that cloudy veil ! Every thing round 
me was marked with preternatural fear, magni- 
ficence, and ruin. 

A low groan broke my reverie. I heard the 
voice of one in despair. I heard the broken words, 
*' Oh, bitter fruit of disobedience ! — Oh, my fa- 
ther ! Oh, my mother ! shall I never see you 
again? — For one crime I am doomed. — Eternal 
mercy, let my crime be washed away ! — let my 
spirit ascend pure ! — Farewell, mother, sister, fa- 
ther, husband !" With the last word I heard a 
fall, as if the spirit had left the body. 

T sprang towards the sound : I met but the 
solid wall. ** Horrible illusion," I cried — " am I 
mad, or the victim of the powers of darkness?" 
I lore away the hangings — a door was before me. 
I burst it through with a blow of the axe, and saw 
stretched on the floor, and insensible — Salome ! 

I caught my child in my arms ; I bathed her 
forehead with my tears ; I besought her to look 
up, to give some sign of life, to hear the full for- 
giveness of my breaking heart. She looked not, 
answered not, breathed not. 



2QS SALATHIEL. 

To make a last effort for her life, I carried her 
into the banquet-room. But the fire had forced 
its way there ; the wind bursting in had carried 
the flame through the long galleries ; and flashes 
and spires of lurid light already darting through 
the doors, gave fearful evidence that the last stone 
of the palace must soon go down. 

I bore my unhappy daughter towards the win- 
dow; but the height was deadly: no gesture could 
be seen through the piles of smoke ; and the help 
of man was in vain. To my increased misery, the 
current of air revived Salome, at the instant when 
I hoped that by insensibility she would escape the 
final pang. She breathed, stood, and, opening her 
eyes, fixed on me the vacant stare of one scarcely 
roused from sleep. Still clasped in my arms, she 
gazed again ; but my wild face covered with dust, 
my half-burnt hair, the axe gleaming in my hand, 
terrified her; she uttered a scream, and darted 
away from me headlong into the centre of the 
burning. 

I rushed after her, calling on her name. A 
column of fire shot up between us; I felt the 
floor sink ; all was then suffocation— I struggled, 
and fell.— — 



SALATHIEL. 269 



CHAPTER XXL 

T AWOKE with a seDsation of pain in every limb. 
A female voice was singing a faint song near me. 
But the past was like a dream. I involuntarily 
looked down for the gulf on which I had trod— 
I looked upward for the burning rafters. I saw 
nothing but an earthen floor, and a low roof hung 
with dried grapes and herbs. I uttered a cry. 
The singer approached me. 

But there was nothing in her aspect to nurture 
a diseased imagination ; she was an old and emaci- 
ated creature, who yet benevolently rejoiced in my 
restoration. She in turn called her husband, a 
venerable Jew, whose first act was to offer thanks- 
giving to the God of Israel for the safety of a 
chief of his nation. 



270 SALATHIEL. 

But to my inquiries for the fate of my child, he 
could give no answer; he had discovered me 
among the ruins of the palace of the j3j]milii, to 
which he with many of his countrymen had been 
attracted with the object of collecting whatever 
remnants of furniture might be left by the flames. 
I had fallen by the edge of a fountain which ex- 
tinguished the fire in its vicinage, and was found 
breathing. During three days I had lain insensi- 
ble. The Jew now went out, and brought back 
with him some of the elders of our people, who, 
after the decree of the Emperor Claudius, re- 
mained in Rome, though in increased privacy. I 
was carried to their house of assemblage, con- 
cealed among groves and vineyards beyond the 
gates ; and attended to with a care which might 
cure all things but the wounds of the mind. On the 
great object of my solicitude, the fate of my Sa- 
lome, I could obtain no relief. I wandered over 
the site of the palace ; it was now a mass of ashes 
and charcoal ; its ruins had been probed by hun- 
dreds ; but search for even a trace of what would 
have been to me dearer than a mountain of gold, 
was in vain. 

The conflagration continued six days ; and every 
day of the number gave birth to some monstrous 
report of its origin. Of the fourteen districts of 



SALATHIEL. 271 

Rome, but four remained. Thousands had lost 
their lives, tens of thousands were utterly undone. 
The whole empire shook under the blow. Then 
came the still deeper horror. 

Fear makes the individual feeble, but it makes 
the multitude ferocious. An universal cry arose 
for reveng-e. Great public misfortunes give the 
opportunity that the passions of men and sects 
love ; and the fiercest sacrifices of selfishness are 
justified under the name of retribution. 

But the full storm burst on the Christians, then 
too new to have fortified themselves in the national 
prejudices, if they would have suff'ered the alliance ; 
too poor to reckon any powerful protectors ; and 
too uncompromising to palliate their scorn of the 
whole public system of morals, philosophy, and re- 
ligion. The emperor, the priesthood, and the 
populace, conspired against them, and they were 
ordered to the slaughter. I too had my stimulants 
to hatred. Where was I ? in exile, in desperate 
hazard ; — I had been torn from home, robbed of 
my child, made miserable by the fear of apostacy 
in my house ; and by whom was this comprehen- 
sive evil done? The name of Christian was gall 
to me. I heard of the popular vengeance, and 
called it justice ; I saw the distant fires in 
which the Christians were consuming, and cal- 
culated how many each night of those horrors 



272 SALATHIEL. 

would abstract from the guilty number. Man be- 
comes cruel by the sight of cruelty; and when 
thousands and hundreds of thousands were shout- 
ing for vengeance, when every face looked fury, 
and every tongue was wild with some new accu- 
sation, when the great, the little, the philosopher, 
the ignorant, raised up one roar of reprobation 
against the Christians, was the solitary man of 
mercy to be looked for in one bleeding from head 
to foot with wrongs irreparable ? 

During one of those dreadful nights I was gaz- 
ing from the house-top on the fire forcing its way 
through the remaining quarters ; the melancholy 
gleams through the country, showing the extent 
of the flight ; and in the midst of the blackened 
and dreary wastes of Rome, the spots of livid 
flame, where the Christians were perishing at the 
pile ; when I was summoned to a consultation 
below. 

One of our people had returned with an im- 
perial edict proclaiming pardon of all offences to 
the discoverer of Christians. I would not have 
purchased my life by the life of a dog. But my 
safety was important to the Jewish cause, and I 
was pressed on every side by arguments on the 
wisdom, nay, the public duty of accepting freedom 
on any terms. And what was to be the price? the 
life of criminals long obnoxious to the laws, and 



SALATHIEL. 273 

now stained beyond mercy. I loathed delay ; I 
loathed Rome ; I was wild to return to the great 
cause of my country, which never could have a 
fairer hope than now. An emissary was sent out ; 
money soon effected the discovery of a Christian 
assemblage : I appeared before the praetor with 
my documents, and brought back in my hand the 
imperial pardon, given with the greater good-will, 
as the assemblage chanced to comprehend the 
chiefs of the heresy. They were seized, ordered 
forthwith to the pile, and I was ordered to be 
present at this completion of my national service. 

The executions were in the gardens of the im- 
perial palace, which had been thrown open by 
Nero, for the double purpose of popularity, and of 
indulging himself with the display of death at the 
slightest personal inconvenience. The crowd was 
prodigious, and to gratify the greatest possible 
number at once, those murders were carried on in 
different parts of the gardens. In the vineyard, 
a certain portion were to be crucified ; in the 
orangery, another portion were to be burnt ; in the 
pleasure-ground, another were to be torn by lions 
and tigers ; gladiators were to be let loose ; and 
when the dusk came on, the whole of the space 
was to be lighted by human torches. Christians 
wrapped in folds of linen covered with pitch and 



274 SALATHIEL. 

bitumen, and thus burning down from the head to 
the ground. 

I was horror-struck ; but escape was impossible ; 
and I must go through the whole hideous round. 
With my flesh quivering, my ears ringing, my eyes 
dim, I was forced to see miserable beings, me/i, 
nay women, nay infants, sewed up in skins of 
beasts, and hunted and torn to pieces by dogs ; old 
men, whose hoary hairs might have demanded 
reverence of savages, scourged, racked, and nailed 
to the trees to die ; lovely young females, crea- 
tures of guileless hearts and innocent beauty, flung 
on flaming scaffolds. And this was the work of 
man, civilised man, in the highest civilisation of 
the arts, the manners, and the learning of the 
pagan world. 

But the grand display was prepared for the 
time, when those Christians, who had been de- 
nounced on my discovery, were to be executed ; 
an exhibition at which the Emperor himself tes- 
tified his intention to be present. The great 
Circus was no more ; but a temporary amphi- 
theatre of the turf had been erected, in which the 
usual games were exhibited during the early part 
of the day. At the hour of my arrival, the low 
bank circling this immense inclosure was filled 
with the first names of Rome, knights, patricians. 



SALATHIEL. 275 

senators, military tribunes, consuls ; the Emperor 
alone was wanting to complete the representative 
majesty of the empire. I was to form a part of 
the ceremony, and the guard who had me in 
charge cleared the way to a conspicuous place, 
where my national dress fixed every eye on me. 

Several Christians had perished before my 
arrival. Their remains lay on the ground, and in 
their midst stood the man who was to be the next 
victim. By what influence I know not, but never 
did I see a human being that made on me so deep 
an impression. I have him before me at this 
instant. 

I see the figure, low, yet with an air of noble- 
ness ; stooped a little with venerable age ; but the 
countenance, full of life, and marked with all the 
traits of intellectual power, the strongly aquiline 
nose, the bold lip, the large and rapid eye ; the 
whole man conveying the idea of an extraordinary 
permanence of early vigour under the weight of 
years. Even the hair was thick and black, with 
scarcely a touch of silver. If the place and time 
were Athens, and the sera of Demosthenes, I 
should have said that Demosthenes stood before me. 
The vivid countenance and manner; the flashing ra- 
pidity with which he seized a new idea, and com- 
pressed it to his purpose;. the impetuous argument 



276 SALATHIEL. 

that, throwing off the formality of logic, smote with 
the strength of a new fact, were Demosthenaic. 
Even a certain infirmity of utterance, and an oc- 
casional slight difficulty of words, added to the 
likeness ; but there was a hallowed glance, and a 
solemn, yet tender reach of thought, interposed 
among those intense appeals, that asserted the 
sacred superiority of the subject and the man. 

He was already speaking when I reached the 
Circus ; and I can give but an outline of his lan- 
guage. 

He pointed to the headless bodies round him. 

<< For what have these my brethren died ? An- 
swer me, priests of Kome ; what temple did they 
force — what altar overthrow — what insults offer to 
the slightest of your- public celebrations ? Judges 
of Rome, what o{fd|)ce did they commit against 
the public peace ? Consuls, where were they found 
in rebellion against the Roman majesty ? People ! 
patricians ! who among your thousands can charge 
one of these holy dead with extortion, impurity, or 
violence ; can charge them with any thing but the 
patience that bore wrong without a murmur, and 
the charity that answered torture only by prayer ?" 

He then touched upon the nature of his faith. 

*' Do I stand here demanding to be believed for 
opinions ? No ; but for facts. I have seen the sick 



SALATHIEL. 277 

made whole, the lame walk, the blind receive their 
sight, by the mere name of Him whom you cruci- 
fied. I have seen men, once ignorant of all lan- 
guages but their own, speaking with the language 
of every nation under heaven — the still greater 
wonder, of the timid defying all fear — the un- 
learned instantly made wise in the mysteries of 
things divine and human — putting to shame the 
learned — awing the proud — enlightening the 
darkened ; alike in the courts of kings, before the 
furious people, and in the dungeon, armed with 
an irrepressible spirit of knowledge, reason, and 
truth, that confounded their adversaries. I have 
seen the still greater wonder, of the renewed heart; 
the impure, suddenly abjuring vice ; the covetous, 
the cruel, the faithless, the godless, gloriously 
changed into the holy, the gentle, the faithful, the 
worshippers of the true God in spirit and in truth 
— the conquest of the passions which defied your 
philosophers, your tribunals, your rewards, and 
your terrors, achieved in the one mighty name. 
Those are facts, things which I have seen with 
these eyes : and who that had seen them could 
doubt that the finger of the eternal God was 
there? I dared not refuse my belief to the divine 
mission of the being by whom, and even in me- 
mory of whom, things baffling the proudest human 



278 SALATHIEL. 

means were wrought before my senses. Thus 
irresistibly compelled by facts to believe that 
Christ was sent by God, I was with equal force 
compelled to believe in the doctrines declared by 
this glorious Messenger of the Father alike of 
quick and dead. And thus I stand before you this 
day, at the close of a long life of labour and hazard, 
a Christian." 

This appeal to the understanding, divested as it 
was of all ornament and oratorical display, was 
listened to by the immense multitude with the 
most unbroken interest. It was delivered with the 
strong simplicity of conviction. He then spoke of 
the Founder of his faith. 

** Men may be mad for opinions ; but who can 
be mad for facts ? The coming of Christ was pro- 
phesied a thousand years before ! 

*' From the beginning of his ministry he lived 
wholly before the eyes of mankind. His life cor- 
responds with the prophecies in a multitude of cir- 
cumstances totally beyond human conjecture, con- 
trivance, or power. The virgin mother, the village 
in which he was born, the lowliness of his cradle, 
the worship paid to him there, the hazard of his 
life — all were predicted. Could the infant have 
shaped the accomplishment of those predictions ? — 
The death that he should die, the hands bv which 



SA LATHI EL. 279 

it was to be inflicted, even the draught that he 
should drink, and the raiment that he should be 
clothed in, and the sepulchre in which he should 
be laid, were predicted. Could the man have 
shaped their accomplishment I — The time of his 
resting in the tomb ; his resurrection ; his ascent 
to heaven ; the sending of the Holy Spirit after he 
was gone ; all were predicted ! all were beyond 
human collusion, human power, even beyond human 
thought, and all were accomplished ! 

'' Those things too were universally known 
to the nation most competent to detect collusion. 
Did Christ come to Rome, where every new reli- 
gion finds adherents, and where all pretensions 
might be advanced without fear ; where a deceiver 
might have quoted prophecies that never existed, 
and vaunted of wonders done where there was no 
eye to detect them I No ! his life was spent in Ju- 
dea, perhaps for the express purpose of adding to 
his mercy and long-suftering, the most unanswer- 
able proofs of his divine mission. He made his 
appeal to the Scriptures, in a country where they 
were in the hands of the people. His miracles 
were wrought before the eyes of a priesthood that 
watched him step by step; his doctrines were 
spoken, not to a careless and mingled multitude, 
holding a thousand varieties of opinions ; but to an 



280 SALATHIEL. 

exclusive race, subtle in their inquiries, eager in 
their zeal, and }3roiid of their peculiar possession 
of divine knowledge. 

*' Yet against his life, his miracles, or his doc- 
trine, what charge could they bring? None. 
There is not a single stigma on the purity of his 
conduct ; the power of his wonder-working control 
over man and nature ; the holiness, wisdom, and 
grandeur, of his views of Providence ; the truth, 
charity, and meekness, of his counsels to man. 
Their single source of hatred was the pride of 
worldly hearts, that expected a king, where they 
were to have found a teacher. Their single charge 
against him was his prophecy, that there should be 
an end to their Temple and their state within the 
life of man. They crucified him; he died in prayer, 
that his murderers might be forgiven ; and his 
prayer was mightily answered. He had scarcely 
risen to his eternal throne, when thousands be- 
lieved, and were forgiven. To him be the glory, 
for ever and ever ! 

" Compare him with your legislators. He 
gives the spirit of all law in a single sentence 
— * Do unto others as you would they should do 
unto you.' Compare him with your priesthood. 
He gives a single significant rite, capable of being 
extended to every land and every age, and in them 



4f 



t 



SALATHIEL. 281 

all speaking to the heart : he gives a single prayer, 
containing the substance of all that man can 
rationally implore of Heaven. Compare him with 
your moralists. He lays the foundation of virtue 
in love to God. Compare him with your sages. 
He leads a life of privation without a murmur : he 
dies a death of shame, desertion, and agony ; and 
his last breath is sublime mercy ! Compare him 
with your conquerors. Without the shedding of 
a drop of blood, he has already conquered hosts 
that would have resisted all the swords of earth, 
hosts of stubborn passions, cherished vices, guilty 
perversions of the powers and faculties of man. 
Look on these glorious dead, whom I shall join 
before the set of yonder sun. Yes, martyrs of 
God ! ye were his conquests ; and ye too are more 
than conquerors, through him that loved us, and 
gave himself for us. But a triumph shall come, 
magnificent and terrible, when all eyes shall be- 
hold him ; and the tribes of the earth, even they 
who pierced him, shall mourn. 

" Then rejoice, ye dead ! for ye shall rise; ye 
shall be clothed with glory ; ye shall be as the 
angels, bright and powerful, immortal, intellectual 
kings ! * For though worms destroy this body, yet 
in my flesh shall I see God.'" — 

The sky was cloudless ; the sun was in the west, 



282 SALATHIEL. 

but shining in his broadest beams ; the whole space 
before me was flooded with his light ; when, as I 
gazed upon the martyr, I saw a gleam issue from 
his upturned face ; it increased to brightness, to 
strong radiance, to an intense lustre, that made the 
sun-light utterly pale. All was astonishment in 
the amphitheatre, but all was awe. 

The old man seemed unconscious of the wonder 
that invested him. He continued with his open 
hands lifted up, and his eyes fixed on Heaven. 
The glory spread over his form ; and he stood 
before us robed in an effulgence which shot from 
him like a living fount of splendour round the 
colossal circle. Yet the blaze, though it looked 
the very essence of light, was strangely trans- 
lucent ; we could see with undazzled eyes every 
feature; and whether it was the working of my 
overwhelmed mind, or a true change, the counte- 
nance appeared to have passed at once from age to 
youth. A lofty joy, a look of supernal grandeur, 
a magnificent, yet etherial beauty, had transformed 
the features of the old man into the likeness of the 
winged sons of Immortality ! 

He spoke ; and the first sound of his voice 
thrilled through every bosom, and made every 
man start from his seat. 

" Men and brethren ! it is the desire of God 



SALATHIEL. 283 

that all should be saved — Jew and Geutile 
alike ; for with him there is no respect of persons. 
He is the Father of all ! Christianity is not a 
philosophic dream, nor the opinion of a sect 
struggling to gain power among contending sects ; 
but a divine command — the summons of the God 
of gods, that you should accept the mercy offered 
to you through the sacrifice of the Eternal Son I 
— the opening of the gates of an eternal world 1 
It is not a summons to the practice of barren 
virtue, but a declaration of real reward, mightier 
than the imagination of man can conceive. It 
raises the spirit of man, forgiven for the sake of 
Christ, into the imperishable possession of an 
actual, tangible, substantial power, to which the 
ambition of earth is a vapour ; investing the re- 
deemed with all that can delight the eye, or 
rejoice the heart, or elevate the understanding. 
Would you be actual kings— would you be glorious 
as the stars of Heaven — would you possess mighty 
faculties of happiness, supremacy, and knowledge I 
Ask for forgiveness of your evil, in the name of 
Christ ; and w hether you live or die, those things 
shall be yours. What is easier than the price ? — 
what more transcendent than the reward ? Who 
shall tell the limit of the risen Spirit I over what 
worlds, or worlds of worlds, he mav be sovereign ! 



284 SALATHIEL. 

what resistless strength — what more than regal 
majesty — what celestial beauty may be in his 
frame ! — what expansion of intellect — what over- 
flowing tides of new sensation — what shapes of 
glory and loveliness — what radiant stores of 
thought, and mysteries of exhaustless knowledge, 
may be treasured for him ! what endless ascent 
through new ranks of being, each as much more 
glorious than the last, as the risen Spirit is above 
man ! — For what can be the limit to the power of 
Qod to make those happy, glorious, and mighty, 
whom he will ! — For what can be the bound to the 
exaltation of the fellow heirs with Christ, for whom 
the Eternal stooped to suffer upon the cross, and 
for whom he rose again to his throne, their leader 
in trial, their leader in triumph ! Omnipotence for 
their protector, their friend, their father ! He 
who gave to us his own Son, will he not with him 
give us all things ! 

" King of kings! if through a long life I have 
laboured in thycause, in perils of waters, in perils 
of robbers, in perils by mine own countrymen, in 
perils by the heathen, in perils in the city, in perils 
in the wilderness, in perils in the sea, in perils 
among false brethren, in weariness and pain- 
fulness, in watchiugs often, in hunger and thirst, 
in cold and nakedness ; thine alone be the praise. 



SALATHIEL. 285 

thine the glory, who hast brought me through them 
all with a strong hand and an outstretched arm. 
And now, Lord ! thou who shalt change my vile 
body into the likeness of thy glorious body, be 
with thy servant in this last hour ! — Saviour and 
God ! receive my spirit ; that were thou art, even 
I may be with thee !" 

He was silent : the splendour gradually passed 
away from his form ; and he knelt upon the sand, 
bowing down his neck to receive the blow. 

But to lift a hand against such a being, seemed 
an act of profanation. The axe-bearer dared not 
approach. The spectators sat hushed in involun- 
tary homage. Not a word, not a gesture, broke 
the silence of veneration. 

At length a flourish of distant horns and trum- 
pets was heard. Cavalry galloped forward, an- 
nouncing the Emperor ; and Nero, habited as a 
triumphant charioteer, drove his gilded car into 
the arena. The Christian had risen; and, with 
his hands clasped on his breast, was awaiting 
death. Nero cast the headsman an execration at 
his tardiness ; the axe swept round ; and when I 
glanced again, the old man lay beside his 
brethren ! 

This man I had sacrificed. My heart smote me : 
I would have fled the place of blood, but I was in 



286 SALATHIEL. 

the midst of guards : more of my victims were to 
be slain ; and I must be the shrinking witness of 
all. 

The Emperor's arrival commenced the grand 
display. He took his place under the curtains of 
the royal pavilion. The dead were removed ; per- 
fumes were scattered through the air ; rose-water 
was sprinkled from silver tubes upon the exhausted 
multitude ; music resounded ; incense burned ; 
and, in the midst of those preparations of luxury, 
the terrors of the lion combat began. 

A portal of the arena opened, and the com- 
batant, with a mantle thrown over his face and 
figure, was led in, surrounded by soldiery. The 
lion roared, and ramped against the bars of its 
den at the sight. The guard put a sword and 
buckler into the hands of the Christian, and he 
was left alone. He drew the mantle from his 
face, and bent a slow and firm look round the am- 
phitheatre. His fine countenance and lofty bear- 
ing raised an universal sound of admiration. He 
might have stood for an Apollo encountering the 
Python. His eye at last turned on mine. Could 
I believe my senses ! Constantius was before 
me! 

All my rancour vanished, An hour past I 
could have struck the betrayer to the heart, I 



SALATHIEL. 287 

could have called on the severest vengeance of 
man and heaven to smite the destroyer of my 
child. But, to see him hopelessly doomed ; the 
man whom I had honoured for his noble qualities, 
whom I had even loved, whose crime was at worst 
but the crime of giving way to the strongest 
temptation that can bewilder the heart of man ; to 
see this noble creature flung to the savage beast, 
dying in tortures, torn piecemeal before my eyes, 
and this misery wrought by me, — I would have 
obtested earth and heaven to save him. But my 
tongue cleaved to the roof of my mouth. My 
limbs refused to stir. I would have thrown my- 
self at the feet of Nero ; but I sat like a man of 
stone, pale, paralysed — the beating of my pulses 
stopt — my eyes alone alive. 

The gate of the den was thrown back, and the 
lion rushed in with a roar, and a bound that bore 
him half across the arena. I saw the sword glit- 
ter in the air: when it waved again, it was 
covered with blood, and a howl told that the blow 
had been driven home. The lion, one of the 
largest from Numidia, and made furious by thirst 
and hunger, an animal of prodigious power, 
couched for an instant as if to make sure of his 
prey, crept a few paces onward, and sprang at the 
victim's throat. He was met by a second wound. 



288 SA LATHI EL. 

but his impulse was irresistible ; and Constantius 
was flung upon the ground. A cry of natural 
horror rang round the amphitheatre. The strug- 
gle was now for instant life or death. They rolled 
over each other ; the lion reared on its hind feet, 
and, with gnashing teeth and distended talons, 
plunged on the man; again they rose together. 
Anxiety was now at its wildest height. The 
sword swung round the champion's head in bloody 
circles. They fell again, covered with gore and 
dust. The hand of Constantius had grasped the 
lion's mane, and the furious bounds of the mon- 
ster could not loose the hold ; but his strength 
was evidently giving way : he still struck terrible 
blows, but each was weaker than the one before ; 
till collecting his whole force for a last efibrt, he 
darted one mighty blow into the lion's throat, and 
sank. The savage yelled, and spouting out blood, 
fled bellowing round the arena. But the hand 
still grasped the mane; and his conqueror was 
dragged whirling through the dust at his heels. 
A universal outcry now arose to save him, if he 
were not already dead. But the lion, though 
bleeding from every vein, was still too terrible ; 
and all shrank from the hazard. At length the 
grasp gave way ; and the body lay motionless upon 
the ground. 



SALATHIEL. 289 

What happened for some moments after, I 
know not. There was a struggle at the portal ; 
a female forced her way through the guards, 
rushed in alone, and flung herself upon the victim. 
The sight of a new prey roused the lion : he tore 
the ground with his talons ; he lashed his stream- 
ing sides with his tail ; he lifted up his mane, and 
bared his fangs. But his approach was no longer 
with a bound ; he dreaded the sword, and came 
snuffing the blood on the sand, and stealing round 
the body in circuits still diminishing. 

The confusion in the vast assemblage was now 
extreme. Voices innumerable called for aid. Wo- 
men screamed and fainted ; men burst out into in- 
dignant clamours at this prolonged cruelty. Even 
the hard hearts of the populace, accustomed as 
they were to the sacrifice of life, were roused to 
honest curses. The guards grasped their arms, 
and waited but for a sign from the emperor. But 
Nero gave no sign. 

I looked upon the woman's face. It was Sa- 
lome ! I sprang upon my feet. I called on her 
name ; I implored her by every feeling of nature 
to fly from that place of death, to come to my 
arms, to think of the agonies of all that loved her. 

She had raised the head of Constantius on her 
kne.e, and was wiping the pale visage with her 
VOL, I. N 



290 SALATHIEL. 

hair. At the sound of my voice she looked up, 
and calmly casting back the locks from her fore- 
head, fixed her gaze upon me. She still knelt ; 
one hand supported the head, with the other she 
pointed to it, as her only answer. I again adjured 
her. There was the silence of death among the 
thousands round me. A sudden fire flashed into 
her eye — her cheek burned. She waved her hand 
with an air of superb sorrow. 

" I am come to die," she uttered, in a lofty tone. 
*' This bleeding body was my husband. I have no 
father. The world contains to me but this clay in 
my arms. — Yet," and she kissed the ashy lips be- 
fore her, ** yet, my Constantius, it was to save 
that father, that your generous heart defied the 
peril of this hour. It was to redeem him from 
the hand of evil, that you abandoned our quiet 
home ! — yes, cruel father, here lies the noble 
being that threw open your dungeon, that led you 
safe through conflagration, that to the last mo- 
ment of his liberty only thought how he might 
preserve and protect you." Tears at length fell 
in floods from her eyes. *' But," said she, in a 
tone of wild power, *' he was betrayed ; and may 
the power whose thunders avenge the cause of his 
people, pour down just retribution upon the head 
that dared " 

I heard my own condemnation about to be 



SALATHIEL. 291 

pronounced by the lips of my child. Wound up 
to the last degree of suffering, T tore my hair, 
leaped on the bars before me, and plunged into 
the arena by her side. The height was stunning ; 
I tottered forward a few paces, and fell. The 
lion gave a roar, and sprang upon me. I lay 
helpless under him. — I felt his fiery breath — I saw 
his lurid eye glaring — I heard the gnashing of his 
white fangs above me 

An exulting shout arose. — I saw him reel as if 
struck : — gore filled his jaws. — Another mighty 
blow was driven to his heart. — He sprang high in 
the air with a howl. — He dropped ; he was dead. 
The amphitheatre thundered with acclamation. 

With Salome clinging to my bosom, Constan- 
tius raised me from the ground. The roar of the 
lion had roused him from his swoon, and two blows 
saved me. The falchion was broken in the heart 
of the monster. The whole multitude stood up, 
supplicating for our lives in the name of filial piety 
and heroism. Nero, devil as he was, dared not 
resist the strength of the popular feeling. 

He waved a signal to the guards ; the portal 
was opened ; and my children sustaining my feeble 
steps, and showered with garlands and ornaments 
from innumerable hands, slowly led me from the 
arena. 



292 SALATHIEL. 



CHAPTER XXII. 



The first rage of the persecution was at an 
end. The popular thirst of blood was satiated. 
The natural admiration that follows fortitude and 
innocence, and the natural hatred that consigns a 
tyrant to the execration of his time and of pos- 
terity, found their way ; and Nero dared murder 
no more. I had voluntarily shared the prison of 
Constantius and my child. Its doors were set 
open. The liberality of my people supplied the 
means of returning to Judea, and we hastened 
down the Tiber in the first vessel that spread her 
sails from this throne of desolation. The chances 
that had brought us together were easily explained. 
Salome, urged to desperation by the near rpproach 



SALATHIEL. 293 

of her marriage, and solicited to save herself from 
the perjury of vowing her love to a man un- 
possessed of her heart, flew with Constantius to 
Caesarea. The only person in their confidence was 
the domestic who betrayed me into the hands of 
the procurator, and who assisted them only that 
he might lure me from home. 

At Caesarea they were married, and remained 
in concealment under the protection of the young 
Septimius. My transmission to Rome struck 
them with terror, and Constantius instantly em- 
barked to save me by his Italian influence. The 
attempt was surrounded with peril ; but Salome 
would not be left behind. Disguised, to avoid 
my possible refusal of life at his hands, he followed 
me step by step. There were many of our people 
among the attendants, and even in the higher 
oflBces of the court. The empress had, in her 
reproaches to Nero, disclosed the new barbarity 
of my sentence. No time was to be lost. Con- 
stantius, at the imminent hazard of life, entered 
the palace. He saw the block already erected in 
the garden before the window where Nero sat 
inventing a melody which was to grace my depar- 
ture. The confusion of the fire allowed the only 
escape. I was the witness of his consternation 
when he made so many fruitless efforts to pene- 



294 SALATHIEL. 

trate to the place where Salome remained in the 
care of his relatives. When I scaled the burning 
mansion, he desperately followed, lost his way 
among the ruins, and was giving up all hope, 
when, wrapt in fire and smoke, Salome fell at his 
feet. He bore her to another mansion of his 
family. It had given shelter to the chief Chris- 
tians. They were seized. His young wife scorned 
to survive Constantius ; and chance and my own 
fortunate desperation alone saved me from seeing 
their martyrdom. 

We returned to Judea. In the first embrace 
of my family, all was forgotten and forgiven. My 
brother rejoiced in Salome's happiness ; and even 
her rejected kinsman, through all his reluctance, 
acknowledged the claims of the man to the daugh- 
ter's hand, who had saved the life of the father. 

What perception of health is ever so exquisite, 
as when we first rise from the bed of sickness i 
What enjoyment of the heart is so full of delight, 
as that which follows extreme suff(ering ? I had 
but just escaped the most formidable personal 
hazards; I had escaped the still deeper suffering 
of seeing ruin fall on beings whom I would have 
died to rescue. Salome's heart, overflowing with 
happiness, gave new brightness to her eyes, and 
new animation to her lovely form. She danced 



SA LATHI EL. 295 

with involuntary joy ; she sang, she laughed ; her 
fancy kindled into a thousand sparkiings. Beau- 
tiful being ! in my visions thou art still before 
me : I clasp thee to my widowed heart, and hear 
thy sweet voice, sweeter than the fountain in the 
desert to the pilgrim, cheering me in the midst of 
my more than pilgrimage ! 

An accession of opulence gave the only increase, 
if increase could be given, to the happiness that 
seemed within my reach. The year of Jubilee 
arrived. Abolished as the chief customs of Judea 
had been by the weakness and guilt of idolatrous 
kings and generations, they were still observed by 
all who honoured the faith of their fathers. The 
law of Jubilee was sacred in our mountains. It 
was the law of a wisdom and benevolence above 
man. 

Its peculiar adaptation to Israel, its provision for 
the virtue and happiness of the individual, and its 
safeguard of the public strength and constitutional 
integrity, were unrivalled amongst the finest ordi- 
nances of the ancient world. 

On the entrance of the Israelites into Canaan, 
the land was divided, by the inspired command, 
among the tribes, according to their numbers. 
To each family a portion was given, as a gift from 
Heaven. The gift was to be inalienable. The estate 



206 SALATHIEL. 

might be sold for a period ; but at the fiftieth year^; 
in the evening of the day of atonement, in the 
month of Tisri, the sound of the trumpets from 
the sanctuary, echoed by thousands from every 
mountain top, proclaimed the Jubilee. Then re- 
turned, without purchase, every family to its ori- 
ginal possessions. All the more abject degradations 
of poverty, the wearing oat of families, the hopeless 
ruin, were obviated by this great law. The most 
undone being in the limits of Judea had still a 
hold in the land. His ruin could not be final, 
perhaps could not extend beyond a few years ; in 
the last extremity he could not be scorned as one 
whose birth-right was extinguished ; the Jubilee 
was to raise him up, and place the outcast on the 
early rank of the sons of Israel. All the higher 
feelings were cherished by this incomparable hope. 
The man, conscious of his future possession, re- 
tained the honourable pride of property under the 
sternest privations. The time was hurrying on, 
when he should stand on an equality with man- 
kind, when his worn spirit should begin the world 
again with fresh vigour, if he were young ; or when 
he should sit under the vine and the fig-tree of his 
father, if his age refused again to struggle for the 
distinctions of the world. 

The agrarian laws of Rome and Sparta, feeble 



SALATHIEL. 297 

efforts to establish this true foundation of personal 
and political vigour, showed at once the natural 
desire and the weakness of human wisdom. The 
Roman plunged the people in furious dissensions, 
and perished almost in its birth. The Spartan was 
secured for a time only by barbarian prohibitions 
of money and commerce — a code which raised an 
iron wall against civilisation, turned the people 
into a perpetual soldiery, and, finally, by the mere 
result of perpetual war, overthrew liberty, do- 
minion, and name. 

The Jubilee was for a peculiar people, restricted 
by a divine interposition from increase beyond the 
original number. But who shall say how far the 
same benevolent interposition might not have been 
extended to all nations, if they had revered the 
original compact of Heaven with man ? how far 
throughout the earth the provisions for each man's 
wants might not have been secured ; the over- 
whelming superabundance of beggared and por- 
tionless life that fills the world with crime, have 
not been restrained ; and tyranny, that growth of 
desperate abjectness of the understanding, and 
gross corruption of the senses, have been repelled 
by manly knowledge and native virtue? But the 
time may come ! 

In the first allotments of the territory, ample 



298 SALATHIEL. 

domains had been appointed for the princes and 
leaders of the tribes. One of those princedoms 
now returned to me, an<J^. I entered upon the in- 
heritance of the leaders of Naphtali, a large ex- 
tent of hill and valley, rich with corn, olive, and 
vine. The antiquity of possession gave a kind of 
hallowed and monumental interest to the soil. I 
was master of its wealth ; but I indulged a loftier 
feeling in the recollection of those who had trod 
the palace and the bower before me. Every apart- 
ment bore the trace of those whom from my boy- 
hood I had reverenced ; every fountain, every tree 
was familiar to me from the strong impressions of 
infancy ; and often, when in some of the fragrant 
evenings of Spring I have flung myself among the 
thick beds of bloom, that spread spontaneously 
over my hills, the spirits of the loved and honoured 
seemed to gather round me. I saw once more the 
matron gravity, the virgin grace ; even the more 
remote generations, those great progenitors who 
with David fought the Philistine ; the solemn 
chieftains, who with Joshua followed the ark of 
the covenant through toil and battle into the pro- 
mised land ; the sainted sages who witnessed the 
giving of the law, and in the midst of the idolatry 
of the people worshipped Him who spake in 
thunder from Sinai ; all moved before me, for all 



SALATHIEL. 1299 

had trod the very ground on which I gazed. Could 
I transfer myself back to their time, on that spot 
I should stand among a living circle of heroic and 
glorious beings, before whose true glory the pomps 
of earth were vain ; the hearers of the prophets, 
prophets themselves ; the servants of the hand of 
miracle, the companions of the friend of God ; 
nay, distinction that surpasses human thought, 
themselves the chosen of heaven. 

The cheering occupations of rural life were to 
be henceforth pursued on a scale more fitting my 
rank. I was the first chieftain of my tribe, the 
man by whose wisdom multitudes were to be 
guided ; and by whose benevolence multitudes 
were to be sustained. I felt that mingled sense 
of rank and responsibility which, with the vain, 
the ignorant, or the vicious, is the strongest temp- 
tation to excess, but, with the honourable and the 
educated, constitutes the most pleasurable and 
elevated state of the human mind. 

Yet, what are the fortunes of man, but a ship 
launched on an element whose essence is restless- 
ness ? The^ very wind, without which we cannot 
move, gathers to a storm, and we are undone ! 
The tyranny of our conquerors had for a few 
months been paralysed by the destruction of Rome, 
But the governor of Judea was not to be long 



300 salathikIa 

withheld, where plunder allured the most furioui^ 
rapacity that perhaps ever hungered in the heart 
of man. I was in the midst of our harvest, sur- 
rounded with the fruitage of the year, arid enjoy- 
ing the sights and sounds of patriarchal life, when 
I received the formidable summons to present my- 
self again before Florus. Imprisonment and tor- 
ture were in the command. He bad heard of my 
opulence, and I knew how little his insolent cu- 
pidity would regard the pardon under which I had 
returned. I determined to retire into the moun- 
tains. But the Roman plunderer had the activity 
of his countrymen. 

On the very night of my receiving the summons, 
I was roused from sleep by the outcries of the 
retainers, who in that season of heat lay in the 
open air round the palace. I started from my 
bed only to see with astonishment the court-yards 
filled with cavalry, galloping in pursuit of the few 
peasants who still fought for their Lord. There 
was no time to be lost ; the torches were already 
in the hands of the soldiery, and I must be taken, 
or burnt alive. Constantius was instantly at my 
side. I ordered the trumpet to be sounded on the 
bills, and we rushed out together, spear in hand. 
The Romans, alarmed by resistance, where they 
had counted upon capture without a blow, fell 



SALATHIEL. 301 

back. The interval was fatal. Their retreat was 
intercepted by the whole body of the peasantry, 
effectually roused. The scythe and reaping-hook 
were deadly weapons to horsemen cooped up 
between walls, and in midnight. No efforts of 
mine could stop the havoc, when once the fury of 
my people was roused. A few escaped, who had 
broken wildly away in the first onset. The rest 
were left to cover the avenues with the first san- 
guinary offerings of the final war of Judea. 

I felt that this escape could be but temporary ; 
for the Roman pride and policy never forgave until 
the slightest stain of defeat was wiped away. All 
was consternation in my family ; and the order for 
departure, whatever tears it cost, found no opposi- 
tion. In a few hours our camels and mules were 
loaded, our horses caparisoned, and we were pre- 
pared to quit the short-lived pomp of the house of 
my fathers. Constantius alone did not appear. 
This noble-minded being had won even upon me, 
until I considered him as the substitute for my 
lost son, and I should have run the last hazard 
rather than leave him to the Roman mercy. With 
the women the interest was expressed by a de- 
clared resolution not to leave the spot until he was 
found. The caravan was broken up, and all desire 
of escape at an end. 



302 SALATHIEL. 

At the close of a day of search through every 
defile of the country, he was seen returning at the 
head of some peasants bearing a body on a litter. 
I flew to meet him. He was in deep affliction, 
and drawing off a mantle which covered the face, 
he showed me Septimius. " In the flight of the 
Romans," said he, " I saw a horseman making 
head against a crowd. His voice caught my ear. 
I rushed forward to save him, and he burst through 
the circle at fall speed. But by the light of the 
torches I could perceive that he was desperately 
wounded. When day broke, I tracked him by his 
blood. His horse, gashed with scythes, at last 
fell under him. I found my unfortunate friend 
lying senseless beside a rill, to which he had crept 
for water." 

Tears fell from his eyes as he told the brief 
story. I too remembered the generous interposi- 
tion of the youth, and when I looked upon the 
paleness of those fine Italian features, that I had 
so lately seen lighted up with living spirit, and in 
the midst of a scene of regal luxury, I felt a pang 
for the uncertainty of human things. But the 
painful part of the moral was spared us. The 
young Roman's wounds were stanched, and in an 
enemy and a Roman I found the means of paying 
a debt of gratitude. His appearance among the 



SALATHIEL. 303 

troops sent to seize me, had been only a result of 
his anxiety to save the father of his friends. He 
had accidentally discovered the nature of the 
order, and hoped to anticipate its execution. But 
he arrived only in time to be involved in the con- 
fusion of the flight. Pursued and wounded by the 
peasantry, he lost his way, and but for the generous 
perseverance of Constantius he must have died. 

The public information which he brought was 
of the most important kind. In the Roman 
councils, the utter subjugation of Judea was 
resolved on. The last spark of national indepen- 
dence was to be extinguished, though in the blood 
of the last native ; a Roman colony established in 
our lands ; the Roman worship introduced ; and 
Jerusalem profaned by a statue of Nero, and sa- 
crifices to him as a god, on the altar of the sanc- 
tuary. To crush the resistance of the people, the 
legions, to the amount of sixty thousand men, 
were under orders from proconsular Asia, Egypt, 
and Europe. The most distinguished captain of 
the empire, Vespasian, was called from Britain to 
the command, and the whole military strength of 
Rome was prepared to follow up the blow. 

I summoned the chief men of the tribe, and in 
a general meeting was invested with the military 
command. My temperament was warlike. The 



304 SALATHIEL. 

seclusion and studies of my early life had but par- 
tially suppressed my natural delight in the vivid- 
ness of martial achievement. But the cause that 
now summoned me was enough to have kindled the 
dullest peasant into the soldier. I had seen the dis- 
cipline of the enemy. I had made myself master 
of their system of war. Fortifications wherever a 
stone could be piled upon a hill ; provisions laid up 
in large quantities wherever they could be secure ; 
small bodies of troops, practised in manoeuvre, and 
perpetually in motion between the fortresses ; a 
general basis of operations, to which all the move- 
ments referred; were the simple principles that 
had made them conquerors of the world. I re- 
solved to give them a speedy proof of their pu- 
pillage. 



SALATHIEL. 305 



CHAPTER XXIII. 

I FELT that insurrection was to be no longer 
avoided. Whatever was the consequence, the 
sword must be unsheathed without delay. With 
Eleazar and Constantius, I cast my eyes over the 
map, and examined on what point the first blow 
should fall. The proverbial safety of a multitude 
of councillors was obviously neglected in the 
smallness of my council ; yet, few as we were, we 
differed upon every point but one, that of the 
certainty of our danger ; the promptitude of Ro- 
man vengeance suffered no contest of opinion. 

Eleazar, with a spirit as manly as ever faced 
hazard, yet gave his voice for delay. 

** You must first have the people with you, and 
for that purpose you must have the leaders of the 
people ." 

*' What !" interrupted I, " must we first mingle 



306 SALATHIEL. 

in the cabals of Jerusalem, and rouse the frigid 
debaters and disputers of the Sanhedrin into action t 
Are we first to conciliate the irreconcilable, to 
soften the furious, to purify the corrupt ? If the 
Romans are to be our tyrants till we can teach 
patriotism to faction, we may as well build the 
dungeon at once ; for to the dungeon we are con- 
signed for the longest life among us. It is the 
irrevocable nature of faction to be base, till it can 
be mischievous ; to lick the dust until it can sting ; 
to creep on its belly until it can twist its folds 
round the victim. To the field, I say; once and 
for all, to the field." 

My mind, at no period patient of contradiction, 
was fevered by the perplexity of the time. I was 
about to leave the chamber, when Constantius 
gravely stopped me. 

" My father," said he, with a voice calmer than 
his countenance, *' you have hurt our noble kins- 
man's feelings. It is not in an hour when even 
our unanimity may fail, that we should suffer dis- 
sensions between those, whose hearts are alike 
embarked in this great cause. Let me mediate 
between you." 

He led Eleazar back from the casement to 
which he had withdrawn to cool his blood, burning 
with the offence of my language. " Eleazar is 



SALATHIEL. Wm 

right. The Romam are irresisdble bj aoj force 
>hort of the whole people. They have the fall 
militanr poaaeanoo of the coontrr ; all your for- 
litiaia, all your posts, all year passes. They are 
as fe—iiiar as you are with every defile, mocmtaiD, 
and marsh; they sarroand yoa with conquered 
pioiriiioes oo the nortli, east, and sootk; your 
western barrier is open to them, while it is skat to 
yoo; the sea is the kigb road of their armies, 
while at their first forbiddisg joa dare mot 
a galley between Libanus and Idoiaea. X< 
can counterbalance this local superiority bat the 
rising of your whole people." 

' But are we to intrigue with the talkers in 
Jemiilwa lor this r interrupted I. ** Wbal leas 
tbtti a deaeeaded thunderbolt coold rouse them to 
a sense that there is trea a Hearen above them P 
* Yet we mast haie them with as," said Con- 
stantius, " for we mast haTe all. Universality is 
the spirit of an insurrectionarT war. If I were com- 
mander of a revolt, I should feel greater confidence 
of success at the bead of a single province, in 
wbicb ererj bamaa being hnm bojbood apwaids 
was against tbe eneaij, tban at tbe bead of aa 
empire partially in arms. The mind even of the 
rudest spearsman is a great poctioa of him. Tbe 
boldest shrinks from the cmnci o aM eas tbat boa- 



308 SALATHIEL. 

tility is on all sides ; that whether marching or at 
rest, watching or sleeping, by night or by day^ 
enmity concealed or visible is round him ; that it 
is in the very air he breathes, in the very food he 
eats, that he can never feel for a moment secure ; 
that every face he sees, is the face of one who 
wishes him dead ; that every knife, even every 
trivial instrument of human use, may be turned 
into a shedder of his blood. Those things per- 
petually confronting his mind, break it down ; he 
grows reckless, miserable, undisciplined, and a 
dastard ." 

''Yet," observed Eleazar, *' the sufferings of the 
troops are seldom allowed to affect the generals- 
And to men who have no object but conquest and 
plunder, the constant robbery of an insurrectionary 
war must render it a favourite command." 

" Let me speak from experience," said Con- 
stantius. " Two years ago I was attached with a 
squadron of galleys to the expedition against the 
tribes of Mount Taurus. While the galleys 
wintered in Cyprus, I followed the troops up the 
hills. No language can describe the discontent 
even of that most unmurmuring of all armies, a 
Roman army. Nothing had been omitted that 
could counteract the severity of the season. Tents, 
provisions, clothing adapted to the hills, even 



SALATHIEL. 309 

luxuries despatched from the islands, gave the 
camps almost the indulgences of cities. The 
physical hardships of the campaign were trivial, 
compared with those of hundreds, in which the 
Romans had beaten regular armies. Yet the dis- 
content was indescribable, from the perpetual and 
unrelaxing alarms of the service. The moun- 
taineers were not numerous ; they were but half 
armed ; disciplined they were not at all. A Roman 
centurion would have out-manoeuvred all their 
captains. But they were brave ; they knew 
nothing but to kill or be killed ; and it made no 
difference to them whether death did his work by 
night or by day. Sleep was scarcely possible. To 
sit down on a march was to be levelled at by a 
score of arrows ; to pursue the archers was to be 
lured into some hollow, where a fragment of the 
rock above, or a felled tree, was ready to crush 
the heavy legionaries. We chased them from hill 
to hill ; we might as well have chased the vultures 
and eagles, that duly followed us, with the perfect 
certainty of not being disappointed of their meal. 
Wherever the enemy showed themselves, they 
were beaten, but our victory was totally fruitless. 
The next turn of the mountain road was a strong- 
hold from which we had to expect a new storm of 
arrows, lances, and fragments of rock. The 



310 SALATHIEL. 

mountaineers always had a retreat. If we drove 
them from the pinnacles of the hills, they were in 
a moment in the valleys, where we must follow 
them at the risk of falling down precipices, aod 
being swallowed up by torrents, in which the 
strongest swimmer in the legions could not live for 
a moment. If we drove them from the valleys, 
we saw them scaling the mountains as if they wore 
wings, and scoffing at our tardy and helpless 
movements, encumbered as we were with baggage 
and armour. We at length forced our way 
through the mountain range ; and when, with the 
loss of half the army, we had reached their citadel, 
we found that the work was to be begun again. 
To remain where we were, was to be starved ; we 
had defeated the barbarians, but they were as un- 
conquered as ever, and our only resource was to 
retrace our steps, which we did at the expense of 
a battle every morning, noon, evening, and night, 
with a ruinous loss of lives, and the total abandon- 
ment of every thing in the shape of baggage. 
The defeat was of course hushed up ; and, accord- 
ing to the old Roman policy, the escape was 
coloured into a victory. I had the honour of 
carrying back the general to Italy, where he was 
decreed an ovation, a laurel crown, and a crowd 
of the usual distinctions; but the triumph belonged 



SALATHIEL. 311 

to the men of the mountains; and till our cam- 
paign is forgotten, no Roman officer will look for 
his laurels in Mount Taurus again." 

'' Such for ever be the fate of wars against the 
natural freedom of the brave," said I : " but the 
Cilicians had the advantage of an almost impe- 
netrable country. Three fourths of Judea are al- 
ready in the enemy's possession." 

" No country in which man can exist, can be 
impenetrable to an invading army," w^as the reply. 
** Natural defences are trifling before the vigour 
and dexterity of man. The true barrier is in the 
hearts of the defenders. We were masters of the 
whole range. We could not find a thousand men 
assembled on any one point. Yet we were not the 
actual possessors of a mile of ground beyond the 
square of our camp. We never saw a day without 
an attack, nor ever lay down at night without the 
certainty of being startled from our sleep by some 
tierce attempt at a surprise. It was this perpetual 
anxiety that broke the spirits of the troops. All 
was in hostility to them. They felt that there was 
not a secure spot within the horizon. Every man 
whom they saw, they knew to be one who either 
had drawn Roman blood, or who longed in his in- 
most soul to draw it. They dared not pass by 
a single rock without a search for a lurking enemy. 



312 SALATHIEL. 

Even a felled tree might conceal some daring sa- 
vage, who was content to die on the "Roman spears, 
after having flung his unerring lance among the 
ranks, or shot an arrow that went through the 
thickest corslet. I have seen the boldest of the le- 
gionaries sink on the ground in absolute exhaustion 
of heart, with this hopeless and wearying warfare. 
I have seen men with muscles as strong as iron, 
weep like children, through mere depression. 
With the harsher spirits, all was execration and 
bitterness, even to the verge of mutiny. With 
the more generous, all was regret at the waste of 
honour, mingled with involuntary admiration of the 
barbarians who thus defied the haughty courage 
and boasted discipline of the conquerors of man- 
kind. But the secret spring of their resistance 
was its universality. Every man was embarked 
in the common cause. There was no room for eva- 
sion, under cover of a party disposed to peace : 
there was no Roman interest among the people, in 
which timidity or selfishness could take refuge. 
The national cause had not a lukewarm friend ; 
the invaders had not a dubious enemy. The line 
was drawn with the sword, and the cause of na- 
tional independence triumphed, as it ought to tri- 
umph." 

" But we are a people split into as many varie- 



SA LATHI EL. 31^ 

ties of opinion, as there are provinces or even vil- 
lages in Judea," observed Eleazar. 

'* Men," said Constantius, " are intrinsically the 
same in every climate under heaven. They will all 
hate hazard, where nothing but hazard is to be 
gained. They will all linger for ages in slavery, 
where the taskmaster has the policy to avoid sud- 
den violence ; but they will all encounter the 
severest trials, where, in the hour of injury, they 
find a leader, prepared to guide them to honour." 

'* And to that extent they shall have trial of 
me," I exclaimed. ' Before another Sabbath, I 
shall make the experiment of my fitness to be the 
leader of my countrymen. At the head of my own 
tribe, I will march to the city, before the enemy 
can be aware of my purpose, seize upon the gar- 
rison, and from Herod's palace, from the very 
chair of the Procurator, will I at once silence the 
voice of faction, clamour as it may ; and lift the 
banner to the tribes of Israel." 

** Nobly conceived," said Constantius, his 
countenance glowing with animation. *' Blow upon 
blow is the true tactic of an insurrectionary war. 
We must strike at once, suddenly and fatally. 
The sword of him who would triumph in a revolt, 
must not merely sound on the enemy's helmet, but 
cut through it," 

VOL. I. o 



314 SALATHIEL. 

" Yet, to Jerusalem," said Eleazar, ** the ob-^ 
jections are palpable. The Roman cohorts fully 
garrison the castles. The city would be out of 
hope of a surprise, would be difficult to capture, 
and beyond all chance to keep. The whole force 
of the legions would be directed upon it; and if the 
revolt failed there, it must be without resource in 
the land." 

** Ever tardy, thwarting, and contradictory," I 
exclaimed. " If the Roman sceptre lay under my 
heel, I should find Eleazar forbidding me to crush 
it. My mind is fixed ; I will hear no more." I 
started from my seat, and paced the room. Elea- 
zar approached me : *' My brother," said he, hold- 
ing out his hand with a forgiving smile, '* we 
must not differ. I honour your heart, Salathiel ; 
I know your talents ; there is not a man in Judea, 
whom I should be prouder to see at the head of 
its councils. I agree with you, that a blow should 
be struck, an instant and a deadly blow^ ; and now 
I offer you myself and every man whom I can 
influence, to follow you to the last extremity. The 
only question is, where the blow is to fall." 

Constantius had been gazing on the chart of 
Judea, which lay between us on the table. ** If 
it be our object," said he, *' to combine injury to 
the Romans with actual advantage to ourselves, to 



SALATHIEL. 315 

make a trial where failure cannot be ruinous, and 
where success may be of measureless value, here 
is the spot." He pointed to Masada. 

The fortress of Masada was built by Herod the 
Great, as his principal magazine of arms. A gal- 
lant and successful soldier, one of his luxuries was 
the variety and costliness of his weapons, and the 
royal armoury of Masada was renowned through- 
out Asia. Pride in the possession of such a tro- 
phy, probably aided by some reverence for the 
memory of the friend of Caesar and Antony, 
whom the legions still almost worshipped as tute- 
lar genii, originally saved it from the usual Ro- 
man spoliation. But no native foot was permitted 
to enter the armoury, and mysterious stories of the 
sights and sounds of those splendid halls, filled the 
e^rs of the people. Masada was held to be the 
talisman of the Roman power over Judea, by more 
than the people; the belief had made its way 
among the legions ; and no capture could be a 
bolder omen of the war. 

I still preferred the more direct blow on Jeru- 
salem ; and declaimed on the vital importance in 
all wars, of seizing on the capital. But I was 
controlled. Eleazar's grave wisdom, and the sci- 
ence of Constantius, deprived me of argument; 
and the attack on Masada was finally planned be- 



316 SALATHIEL. 

fore we left the chamber. Nothing could be more 
primitive than our plan for the siege of the most 
scientific fortification in Judea, crowded with men, 
and furnished with every implement and machine 
of war that Roman experience could supply. Our 
simple preparations were a few ropes for ladders, 
a few hatchets for cutting down gates and pali- 
sadoes, and a few faggots for setting on fire what 
we could. Five hundred of our tribe, who had 
never thrown a lance but in hunting, formed our 
expedition; and, at the head of those, Constantius, 
who claimed the exploit by the right of discovery, 
was to march at dusk, conceal himself in the fo- 
rests during the day, and on the evening of his 
arrival within reach of the fortress, attempt it by 
surprise. Eleazar was, in the mean time, to rouse 
his retainers, and I was to await at their head the 
result of the enterprise, and, if successful, unfurl 
the standard of Naphtali, and advance on Jeru- 
salem. 



END OF VOL. 



LONDON: 

JPniNTED BY A. J. VALPY, RED LION COURT, FLEET STREET. 



V 



