Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Ancient records: or, The abbey of Saint Oswythe: a romance
• Q Hmi li i Wi i i ii 1 1 j— ' m t^ ix n • ■ ■ il iiii Mi'mhw * \t m w iM* t k i* m > m t * . i ^-,wm i* »Ti n i^,-™.ii rrM . r*»-m *w.**mtmr*emmm
ANCIENT RECORDS.
Gi<2&\&09**
CHAP. I.
t feek
** This ut<fu , < i uei>teit place to find ibmj cafe, " KaR* to the Iwdf fame, none to tlie mint! j ** From reftkfa thoughts, that, Ike av'etidly iwarm ** Oi hornets armM, not fivjnci foxind :*Ione, <* Than ruHi upon me thronghi^, and pixfcnt <* Times paft, what oiw I w,<s, and v.hat am now," Milton. ** |, "||"" N ^ JL HE evening v,a> clofing apr.ee, the fun was no kuuu- Kxw linkin ? iuto tlie vaft waters of the o,can, \u b.i./u edu!:ience of glory had for fome ;i iu ddanjw red, and vol. i* fi the
the heavens had already aflumed the fombre glooms of twilight, when, in defcending a lofty hill, that made a part of the road the tiavellers were purfuing, Sir Alfred *St. Oiwythe, railing his head from the fide of the covered car (where, for many hours, it had reclined in un moving torpidity), caught the laft faint gUmpfe of daylight, as it yet lingered in the weftern hemifphere. Lean- ing from the window ofthe carriage, he per¬ ceived, at fome diftance, the immenle and gloomy lorefts of St. Catherine, and the fpires of his future abode rifing in Gothic magnificence from amidft the interior of the tailed trees. Taking within his own the hand ofthe youthful Rofaline, ancl pointing to the object that had for fome time en- groffed his whole attention, he tendeily faid™ €t Do you not difcern yonder foreft,, my ilea.eft child?" 44 Yes, papa, 1 do indeed/' replied the beautiful unconfcious girl * " and it has for a long
long time been the fubjeff. of my thoughts. I fee, alfo, fome diftant drea»y looking tur¬ rets, th^t feem as if they had rifen from the bofom ofthe woods. You have before told me, that our future refidence was in the v forefts of St. Ofwythc's domain ; but fure # my father, that cannot be tlie place yon have determined fliall be our prefent abode and habitation," € * Alas! my poor girl,** replied Sir Alfred, with ftrong and unfubdued agitation, " we have no other left us I" A tear, that was evidently the refult of internal anguifli and corroding reflection, forced its paflage from the heart of the tra¬ veller ; but the faft defcending fhades of night veiled the uiconmon emotion tVt opprefled him, and he funk back upon his feat in his former pofition, paie, and over¬ come by painful remembrances. The night advanced with d\ in red or imaginary terrors, wlu>fe in^ ivilLns !ai«.d a 2 not
4 ANCIENT RECORDS. not of alarming the fearful minds of Elinor ra^i Jannetta. The carriage, now defcending from the heights, began to enter tiie pre¬ cincts of the difmal foreft, whole wide fpreading branches extended in* dangerous obft ructions along the only road the driver was able to dilcovcr, and rendered their pro¬ gress (low, and difficult of accefs. Each ftep they (ct 7 increafed their danger ; the pall Aint glimmer of twilight was now no more; the clofe entwined trees, covered with an impervious coat of leaves, excluded all remains of light; and the fatigued and weary travellers, though anxioufly delirous of arriving at a place of reft and feeurity, were ftill obliged to continue patiently their weary way, and trnft to the inUincYiee fear of their hoi fes (or their preicnt lalcty through the evident deaiaer* u{ their fmution. -»* The path they were in, had never been trodden by mortal loot for many a year, and the pendant oveigrown bran* he3, and pro¬ tuberant
fuffercd to grow unpinned, had now bcconu fo prolific a-, often to prove dm cious, aod even for a tune to prevent the can lag j honi proceeding. Sir Alfred, more impatient from continual delays, now fuddenly flopped the coach, and demanded of Ov\en why he advanced fo tardily ? ** Pieafe your Excellence,** replied the old fervant, i( it is quite unreafonabie to expect the poor tired beads to move any fafter i for, what with the long journey they have come, together vvith the total darknefs of the night, and the rugged urv^vennefb of this Ivily *eud, 'tis a moral uncertainty whe¬ ther we thad be able to proceed a hundred feps fui ther. Defide&, my,Lord, 1 do fear me we ha^ c c' j'vii the wum; pvth, uid —-'* " Huh ! h iik . ,J fiKldvM \ interruptxl Sir Alijc \ t£ h. i; \o\\ n, t i\ e fiM.d* i.A a U;i?—Li.lea V 9 ' B 7 t\t
At tliat moment the clear-toned melan¬ choly notes of a loud, but diftant bell were heard to chime irregularly. The little party, with fenfations undefinable, remained mutely hilening to its deep founds, as from the diftant fpace they came fweeping over the woods, whofe fulicn vibrations, guided v by the wind, feemed rcf^ondethin lengdien- ed echoes through the middle air. When, at length, the refponfes ceafed, and Sir Alfred had in fome degree recovered from a momentary paroxyfm of internal anguifli (which it is likely the found ofa bell, fami¬ liar to his knowledge, had occafioncd), he with folemn emphafis exclaimed, in* a voice of trembling agitation, " k 13, it is the fatal bell !—its unhal- lo.ved note? flrihe horror to my foul!—Oh ! torturing remembrancer of what I once was, ccafc, ceafe thy harrowing cries—diftrad not my brain forever!"
Foitunately
Fortunately the party were all too in¬ tently engaged on their own more imme¬ diate fears and feelings, to have caught any diftmct meaning from Sir Alfred's ilrange exprefllons, vvho checked the remainder of his myflerious fentencej recalled to the re¬ collection of Bis (ituation by t'.e voice of Owen, who at that moment loudly vocife¬ rated to Sir Alfred, to give him directions what path they were next to chufe. " For, perhaps/' he continued, " your Lordfliip's Monour may be acquainted with. thefe diimal parts, and can tell where the found of that bell comes from/* Sir Alfred, heavily fighing, (aid— c * Thou u}ft aright; It is th^ great tur- re: dock oi h(. Oj\\)the, Remount your llation, and let Rowland guide the hoifes; pnrlue the dhtction of the tound, and ftill. continue to the light; we iha'l (liortly ar¬ rive at the end of our journey/* b 4 Owen
Owen did as commanded, though not till he had internally addreiicd a fervent prayer to St. Thomas, for hismierciful protection ; when ladling pretty fmartly his wurn^out cattle, the carriage once more proceeded,— For fome time they continued to advance with tolerable eafe, and here and there an opening in the trees admitted the partial re¬ flections of an autumnal moon, cheering for a (hort interval the fpirits of the droop¬ ing travellers, and aiding for a time their imperfect knowledge of the roacl; but its welcome, though feint rays were not of long duration - 9 the trees fuddenly, as they advanced, became more clofely interwoven, and excluded entuviy the fmalleft glimpfe of light fiom penetrating their thick obfcurity; a fc iv more pace*:, and t!u fui tellers found themf d\ts once moie invuhed in total ilai iviicic)* Elinor and Jannetta chins; ftill ciofer to each other, and their fears only of offending their Lord, prevented them from expieffing the
the terrors anil difguft tliat every moment increaxd. 'The i\^ei Rolal'.ic hud 'or fome time reclined, in peaceful flun.ber, on the b rea ft of her lather, rid ce.au,; tea- llbiy the moitture of her cluxXs, Ine awuke; and, could the have pierced the juuik} thad^s of total darknefs, Ihe wouid have oeiield St. Ofwythe, hanging in weeping a^-uy over her unconfcious fleep, trom whof; p.u!id countenance tell the bitter drops of abioken heart upon the form of his only chdd, a^ with internal forrow, he inward.y ex¬ claimed— " Sweet child of injury, how s balmy are thy (lumbers !—peace and innocence, u i- known to few, pollels thy bofom, n Hied by a ftorm ; unconfcious of the mi ones of life, and the ills that await thte, no c..:s difturo thy repofe, and thy dreuns .ire the iweet imagiua.y emblem^ of aut\;*/ te i \ p- pineis!—Ah God ! aii (kn\ i nee < k ih , poor of^pring of fullering, thy v.r.;ch, I fuher repofe J in pe.ice, -wj the c!a;.s of »!is
* youth commenced in the promifed pleni¬ tude of unabating felicity and joy;—but now-^bitter reverfe !—• no tporc I look for¬ ward to davs of future deliahts^mv pro- mifed profpcdts of fouling blifs are blafted, aad tlie fun of rny bappinefs clouded and fet for ever!—Alas! how low has forrow, in a little fpace, laid wafte the meridian of my days!—Beloved, adored Matilda ! worfliip- pcd idol of my love, now loft to me for ever !— buried . deep, deep in the cold in- fenfate tomb, thy fuffering angelic form no nun\5 fliall charm my fight—no more (hall writhe beneath the blading powers of ty¬ ranny, which not even a hu(band*s (acred rights could guard thee from!—Accurfed fate !~-Barbarous, lavage, remorfeiefs Ru¬ dolph !-—Oh Father, avenging God of Juf- tice, hear, hear my prayer '.—Strike, (Irike- the fell deftroycr with fome fpcedy tremen¬ dous retribution } exterminate himfelf and' his dele tied race for ever, and right thy own, and thy fuffering fuppliant's injuries !—Yet uo, no, ng—alas! 1 do but wander, and W 6
my brain, maddened by fatal recollections,, forgets the voice of inftinct.—No, let me not curie thee, Rudolph ;—Nature Hill lives within me - f for, alas ! thou art indeed my brut her!— But yet can 1 ever forget that it was thy ambition plunged me (or ever im a gulph of woe, defpoiled me of all, and only left me days of future miferv* and nights of endlefs diilraction and regret ?—» Still* ftill I will not curfe thee, nor call upon. thy guilty head the (harp fearching anger of Heaven's wrath; but, in the inmoft re¬ cedes of my grief fwoln foul, clofed from all eyes, lave one, will 1 bury deep the fatal fecret of my wrongs-j—and, when agoni&ing recollections will force their way to my de¬ tracted mind, I will endeavour to remember the blow that feared up for ever my loft felicity and peace, was the work, of a. brother's hand, whom once 1 loved and trott¬ ed ; and the recollection that I did f> ihall, if poffible, reflrain thofe bitter curies with wliich long pent grief, and agony concealed would foiti relieve tlie heart from bleeding b 6 withi
with the pangs of unnatural fiatcrnal in* gratitude." An impenetrable cloud of curelefs forrow too evidently hungovtrSir Alfred,and there was a dread'ut myftery in his deftiny un¬ known, as it Ihould feem, to any one, and which he was unwilling Oi ukl ever bequef- tioned. It was fttange that, at fcarcely a moment's warning, he Ihould leave hb for¬ mer habitation in the dead of night, ddin«fl- ing ad his eftabliflidd houfehohh lave the very fe^Y attendants that now accompanied him on his present journey, without afligning any other n afm for io unexpected a change, but that he vas ho longer entitled to the tenure of his! tedemefne, which vvas ftuated in one of t.ie moil loroantic wikls oi Scot- aiKi* The domedici who**n Sir Alfred hul fe* le£bj.\ thou ( b wondero*; at tlie fuUdctt charge, vet nad coura je to declare their wiilingucfs to obey, and follow the fortunes
of their beloved mafter, whatever might be the ichtlt; although he had co'idefcetuLd to explain to them that he had no other habitation left htm, ia\e the vaft forcfts ol St. Oiwythe, where, amidft the ruins of its once magnificent Alflxy, he was com-. polled in future to leek a laft, and only re¬ maining refidence. The future profpect, thpugh folitary and gloomy in the extreme, did not dilhearten the tried fidelity of his fervants, who, in¬ deed, knew nothing relative to the home they were advmcing to. Sc. Ofwytne was flightly gratified by their ruidinefs to per¬ form their duty, and ihfmitcly pieferred v their attendance to (Irangers. Enjoining them all to ftiiet lecrecy, he cjuitted his latf holpiuble uianfion, to begi 1 a weary journey thiousdi tlie oiounia nous wilds of Scotland, and acrofs more than half the kin 'dom uf England.
it
Jt was on the clofe of the fixth evening* after the commencement of their journey, that the exhaufted travellers gained a diftant view of the dreary Foi eft ot St. Ofwythe, whcic, cnclufed on all fides by high melan¬ choly trees, towered the turretted ruins of its Gothic Abbey, whofe immenfe fixe was loft in aimoft indiftinffuiihable diftance. It had once been famous for its riches and" grandeur, and, as a monaftery, was dedi¬ cated to St. Catherine* but the fubfequent irregularity of its Order, together with the defpotic tyranny of one of its ancient Lords, had ftripped it by flow, but fure degrees of all its former wealth and confequence j in-* fomuch, that the haughty Baron of St, Ofwythe had, under unjuft pretences, de¬ manded heavy contributions, to aflift in car¬ rying on the war between the firft Edward and the nearly fubdued Scots. His only excufe for fuch open violation of ecdefiaftic rights, was grounded on a difcovery, it was pretended he had made (by means of fpies- whom
whom he retained about the monaflety) of one of the Nuns having broken the (acred rules of her proteflion, and ftained the purity of the devoted Minifters of God, by a difie- gard to her vows of vellal celibacy. The haughty Baron feized greedily this circumftance, as the means of fucceeding in his ambitious dcfigns, and determined to humble the pride and infolence of the Supe¬ riors, lince the lands on which the Abbey - (food, belonged originally to ids progenitors, and was traofmkted to himfelf, v ith powers to exact homage and fee from the heads of the monaftery for this only part of their de~ , pendance on laical jurildiction. For this latter purpoie, the Baron, as Lord Patron of the holy Community, entered the Abbey, and demanded from the*Supcriors not only au acknowledgment of their obedience., but a large fubfidy uf money ; and, to cover his injulbcc, pretended it was defigned tor the further profecution of the holy wars. The
The Superiors proudly refufed com* plianee, and; in angry tones, threatened an appeal to the Vadcan of Rome, wirh a dreadful anathema oi the head ofthe daring \iola:or, ii he perfifted in his prelumptious. But the Baron knew the furetyofhis pro¬ ceedings, and, with a fmile of malicious triumph, expoied his knowledge of the apellate crimes of SifLr St* Anna, even re- kiting at full his undeniable acquaintance with the proofs of her iap'e from that facred vow, which for'ever enjomat the Commu¬ nity ofa monaftery to celibacy. Tlie Fathers of the* Order, when fum* moned to the council, heard the account with hot ror, confofion, and difmay, and en¬ treated time to fearch into the truth ofthe Baron's aQli tions.. The crafty Baron knew the advantage he had over them ; and to ma eafe their fears of the d.cadcd exfohjjv, it was reported that. he quitted, in haujity and loib dd.u^ iilence, the
the Abbey, without deigning to anfwer their clamorous and now abject petitions. Tl^e fum demanded \va% however, foon produced, and fent to the caftle of tlie Baron, as an act of indemnity ; and he was defied to pledge himfelf by oath, to bury in eternal oblivion his knowledge of tlie crimes that fuliied tlie monaftic purity of tlie facred fhrine oi St. Ca ihe rine j but the Baron implacably refuted to accede to any ftipulations but what he himfelf dictated j and thofe were fo frequent I v exerted in-large demands upon the iear-ftruck Community, that in a little time, they law the fpeedy decay of their HouiVs gloiy, unable to avert tne ruin that impended ;—not all the threats, entreaties, and ofl!:vri promifes of I10V Motlier Ch.u.ch, to put it 4 * c\nf!mt pr .ye»b and mafiU f >r the rej ole aad hveing ot his ioul, a.t^r it Ihould have win >e.i ia way to Ruva-a'c, from tiie corruptions cf its deca\ing ten-va, nt, cmld prevail cn Irm to re 11 fat idled, witnout tiie entire ovatmo.v ot
of the Order, whofe n-j/Hied riches he had Ixhdd wuh a gr^-^ tyc vf di fi-c, anil ulti- iii.'tt*) bait Lib uho»e tuouglus on gaining tiiw pavilion oh The unl ap'oy Community at length, ha- railed by their dndd of dn expofure, and the total io>s oi all die w «lth of their fhrines and callers (which now indeed began to line the before empty ones of their terri- , bie psr..cutor) fecicily emigrated irom the Abbey, till, b) muhi|,lied and never-ceafing demands, the once pioud Monaitery of St. Catherine became dependant on the ft own and caprice of its tyrannical Baron; vvho kept the Monks in iuch entire and arbitrary iubiueation, that in tie courfe ofa very few year, the Abi'.ey be.aujc nearly quite fo*- lakcn by iis o;.t.e in \ ciious mafi.er3: wl en at icnuuh, the Ikuon leaving dih lofed to the Kin» the h\ pocriiV a- d diiioiute manners of the Cider, and funphino Edward alfo With a large fum of money, as well a* an army of vaflals to f«2dt h'^ bailies in Wales and Scotland,
Scotland, that Monarch unknowingly re¬ warded his treachery with tlie hereditary poffeffion of the Abbey, and all its tenures, revenues, and riches. The Abbot, and the few of the Order that had remained to protect their fequefter¬ ed Houfe from open violence, appealed, but vainly, to the Pope for juftice and redrefs j but Edward the Firft was a hero potent,and dreaded by aimoft every foreign State. Befides, the PapatSovereign, it is imagined, was but too well affured of the fcandal that ftained the Order of St. Catherines and to have openly countenanced fuch facrilcgious profanation would have expofed himfelf to cenfure, and weakened the high iupremacy of his delegated unbounded fwav. The Baron, therefo e, peaceably obtained his fraudulent defign?, and rook (as is re¬ ported upon lecordi undifputed pofleflion<»f hh nc ,v acc]uifiwi. ,, n, which he toon transformed into a piinccly aud fplevdid iiabita'.ion.— Id is
His own callle, every way inferior to the Abbey, and faft falling to utter decay, from thew.it ot ncctflary reparation, was now Lit ro its fate, and entirely abandoned. The Abbey was in it felf an immenfe pile of fuperior Gothic ftrufture, and, by the wealth of its own cofilrs, was foon converted to a magnificent aid kinslv abode. But tradition iccords, that its itm erious and treacherous mafter did not, though fur- rounded by the pofleflion of a mine of wealth, enjoy that expected eafe and inward happiness which the gratification of his law* leis wifhes kd him to hope for, The un* relenting treachery and artifice that had gamed him th s oice princely clemefne, pu* I'ill-cd \tll:\( j for he l- tepoued cvrr after to Jv\\. } i"i iub'w • t » g' o :y }.*ffit.n% and in i .* h- Iy abujacrions nf irind, which o'.e i c.ided in vehement paioxjfmsof mad- licii.
An imperfed and handed tradition flnl cxifted, which relates that the fjed:e of St, Anna, the unhappy iniliument of his dettrudion to the Monaftery, had repeat * cdly appeared to the Baron, to warn him of Lis heinou> uffuices and even accuto him as the caufe of her ruin, aud fubiequent pu- liiihment by dc.ah. Though fhis ftory was never proved, it is not unhkcl) but the Fathers, in tevenge, had piopugatcd its bchel, as a fmall r^ta Iiation for the injury they liad futiained. Certain it ii, that various repoits and con¬ jectures had arifen In the minds of the un¬ lettered ignorant ; foam tending to involve the Baron in thcfunit ol beinn; the unknown kducer* of A ma, for the furjr |ui;^le ot obtaining his avaii 1 his and n^arh* s de¬ ligns. But the ual tnuh ol Inr deftiny was totally involved in filence i *\% loon after the Baron had e\noftd to the Smurio** his knmvkd^e or Inr der.di. .:on, the had md- deniy difappeaad t om the Co nrnue.iiy, nor wa^
was ever heard of after; though it was ge¬ nerally believed Ihe had experienced fome terrible fate, as an atonement for her crime, «„,i *} ~ :«r,.«« «.»-i *^..ui:^ „-..^^r-___ *!*-** anu liic: hii amy auu puuui CApv>iu»c illitt crime had involved the enraged fanatics of the Monaftery in ; whtllt other conjectures went fo far as to affert, that (lie had been cither burned ahve, or enclofed in the horrid dungeons of the Abbev, and left to periih by inches, for want of fuftcnance, within the deep precincts of four high ftone walls, where ihc at length expired in linger¬ ing tortures. Whatever was in reality her dreadful end is ftill unknown; but the Baron lived not long to enjoy the fplendour of his ilbgained siches. He w.r* heard to confefs that peace of mind a as for ever banilhed from his heart; and, though lying on the downy conches of luxury, and iafli ^, al! thcblefl- ings that wealth lnnrenfe could beft nv, yet did he never alter eniov a ca'm undifturbcd conlUv.net*. i iii> death was the departure of guilty
guilty horror, and alarm for the future, and he quitted the world vvith curies an** execra¬ tions on himfelf, leaving no child to inherit St» Ofwythe, which detcended to his next heir; who, being eve? y way unlike his uncle, refuied to -rHide in a place that had been obtained by fraud and injuftice. From this period, St. CulKrine, for near a century and a half, liad acknowledged (cveral Lords but was frldom honoured, for any length of time, by the pretence of its pofleifors, who were in general eager to ihtin a place, who'e traditional hiftory teem¬ ed with dark and myfterious records. Its lands, therefore, during this great lapfe of time, remained nearly uncultivated ; and its tenants and vallals, by (luwdt. ree>*, forfook their hohh asid d^eilincs; fur the idea that the phoft ofthe injured Nun, to¬ gether with the c ruei Baron's, wandced dida- tisfied all over the domains*, bli^luin ' ,x:\d fj.elbbindirg the land?, and rendering tliem v.u 4 luhue
iinprolific and impoffible to till, foon ter¬ riiied fiom their pofleflions the fuperftitions retainers, who failed not to atfribute this ruin and dcfolation, as a lingular mark of Divine vengeance on the inheritors of the Baron, (mi over their domain by the arm of retributive Julliee. The owners of the Abbey were too fope* riot ly gited with Fortune's treafures, to think on thefe fequeftered and | loomy po(* feflions$ and tlie fpectred traditions of St. Catherine kept them from ever approaching its decaying towers. Its lands, therefore, remaining qui died, foon added increafe to the furrounding foreft% and were fuffercd to become ufelcfs and overrun with the luxuriance of uncultivated nature, whofe prolific wildnef* f\ fead itielt in unpruned diforder through the whole doimun i and, in tlie fp'-ce of a century, the foreft, which was once n,r lirge, Ihot forth its fcions over an immenle tract, hi cndlefs \soou> and wild targkd niaz^s, impervious to
to the fun, and in melancholy folemnity «n all around, filling the mind ofthe affrighted traveller, as he ventured to / explore its awful Imunts and gloomy folitudes, with terror and difmay. The Abbey had not been inhabited, for any length of time, fince the firft Baron became its poffeflbrj the laft owner de- ceafed, was a diftant relation (fo believed) of the prefent inheritor, S r Alfred St, Ofwythe j who, nowdiiven by a myfterious deftiny, was feeking its long- deferted ruins, to hide himfelf and family from the dread¬ ful confequences of an overruling fate no human ^ifdoni could avert; but in^ the hojed-for feeurity of this long forgotten, remote retreat. The r«al caufe of Sir Alfred's fudden re¬ moval to this lift unhappy resource were un* known, lib fervant? in Iced Ind vainh cn« deavoured to conjecluio it, and had formed in their own minds many chimerical con- vox., i* e du fions - 3
cluiionsj but they never attained to t\w truth, and their refearches and fuppofitions it i$ too likely were uncertain, and as far as at firft from the leality; even his moft confidential attendant, Owen, could obtain no clue to guide bis fearch into the myftery of his Lord's condtiA. Satisfied, however* with the high-wrought honour of his mat* ter's temper and character, he had on fo fudden an occafion exerted all his influence w ith the reft ot his companions that were eleded to attend Sir Alfred \ and. to his kin J oflkes his mafter was indebted for, the otherwife unwilling obedience that was exa&cd* Yet the luddenncfi of their journey, its long and fatiguing continu¬ ance, together with the gloomy, remote, and even terrific habitation they were fpeedily approaching, began to raife fears and doubts, if not uneafy fufpicions, in the minds ofthe domeftics £ particularly as the carriage, at length emerging from a narrow pafs of the deep wooded receffes, entered upon an open¬ ing which admitted the momentary beams
of the moon, that at this inftant fhone upon ths towers and fpires of a ruined fabric, which they rightly conjectured woali prove the gloomy manfion they were in fearch of. Mute fufpenfe and fearful expectation filled the minds of 0«ven and Rowland as they caught a firft glirapfe of its fearful and dilapidated appearance j w lid ft the femafes, Elinor and Jannetta, Ihruuk back in the carriage, declaring it impoffible to venture into io terrirk and ruinous a place, * Sir Alfred, whofe mind had for fome time been internally engaged on things that totally excluded all prelent events, was ftart led by thefe united exclamations of his people; and, railing himfelf to the open fpace of the canine, caught a full \fe*v of tlie fouthern angle ot th^ Abbey. He had never out once feen it, and that many years iincc, %md even he ftiuddcred as -c 2 a*rtin
again he reviewed its dreary and frowning exterior, and half wiflied that his precipi¬ tancy had not led him to chufe fo deiolate and ruinous a place for his future abode 5 till remembering that the long deferted folitude of its forgotten fituation, was but too con- genial to the temper of his mind, and the * ncccflitatcd (late of his myfterious fortunes, he eluded the unavailing relict that, but the moment befoie, had afiailed his heart, and reto'utely detei mined not only to con¬ quer his own feeling?, but alfo the unfounded, Uriots of his people j for at that moment the carriage fuddenly ftoppi »g, at fome little diftance from an open avenue that led im¬ mediately to the Abbey, Owen demanded- if he was to proceed further, or if his Ho* noi r had not better torn into another path, and Lek the neareft way out of the difmal fort ft. u For furely, my 'Lord,' 1 continued Ov\ci T wiih a ilarful hefitaiing tone of vjiiv, u fucly)our Excellence will never think
think of entering yon frightful old rum, which, I dare fiiy, will fall and crufli u> alive beneath its tumbling battlements; or perhaps we ihall have to encounter a battle with an army of ghofts and hobgoblins, who will difpure our right of admmbn within their tottering territories" i( Peace, 1 coiiimaad jou!" angrily in¬ terrupted Sir Alfred/with a raifed tone of voice, and a certain dignity of manner tlut inftantly awed Owen's loquacious familiarity into filence. " 1 thought, Owen,'* added his Lord, with lefs feverity, ** 1 thought you, at leaft, poilefled more courage than to admit the impreifions of fuch idle fears as even your (emale companions would biufli to exprefs. The feat of my anceftors, though long deferted, and now perhaps des¬ titute of every comfort, has, I will vouch for it, nothing that can juftly alarm or excite cowardice in the minds of my fervat.ti; if, however, yourfclf, or any of your eonipi- nions, fear toeuter with your Lord the build¬ ing he has choleii for his future abode, you c j have
have free permiflion to icmain with the car* riage till daylight, whilft I and my daugh¬ ter will alone feck our ad million withm a manfion that hereafter will become our chief ixiidence. This attack, which was evidently levelled at the courage, and even fidelity of poor Owen, not a httle wounded him in the moft vulnerable part; and he replied, with hu* miiity and contrition, that his Honour knew but little of his okl ieivant's heart, if he doubted either his courage or attachment to the fervice of his dear matter; that he only meant to propofe their leaving the Abbey, cUid feeking fome other more hofpitable flieltcr, till morning Ihould have difpelled thofe additional horrors of the prefent mo¬ ment, in endeavouring to gain admiflion at midnight within a place, io dreary and dif¬ mal as it then appeared, Sir Alfred accepted this lame apology, and replied, in a tone of encouragement, to his
his domeftics in general, that m ht* was totally unacquainted with any track tha: would, for many miles, ailoul them a IcvUu* return from the foreil, but by the rout th.y had already palled (aIiiCu indeed he LcietK* detei mined never again to rctrnxl\ Iu thought it more aduiiule to puilue the** defign, lince the n.O/a was no.v ov.ua t with hea\y cloudb, wni^n p rtersd/d a florm, and precluded them fo/.n tlie f,n dl remains its watery rayb had au" rded j rendering it now ahfolutuv neceda.y for them to find, if poffible, a ivlu *c v\ttnin the Abbey walls, from the fail dv.ce.»dng- tempeft to which they mini b« expand, if they continued to wander in the wood* at fo late an hour. Elinor and Jannetta had felt their little vanity gratified by the con legending com- pliment their Lord had contrived to pw them i and whatever mbht be their ical feelings, they were too much flattered ti exprefs their inwaid terrors. In refpect iul v 4 m^nee,
filence, though fearful expectation, they dc* tcrmined to fubmit to the will ofSir Alfred 5 whilft the men, afhamed of having expofed their fear?, were now anxious, by a ready obedience and alacrity, to do away thofe ill impreflions which their timidity had caufed, by hearty endeavours to gain admifliun- within the fabric, The carriage, with much difficulty, forced nidi" a paflage through the thick underwood zud togged pathway, and at laft arrived be¬ neath ae Abbey's battlement ramparts.— The moon, faintly ftruggling behind a hoft of clouds, fhot foi th at intervals its feeble rays, and afforded the exhaufted travellers an uncertain light to guide tlieir progrefi ia fafety. Sir Alfred, at length defcending from the vehicle, walked, with cautious infpeftion, a confiderabie way beneath the walls, before he arrived at the heavy gates of entrance. They weie, however, fecurely clofed, and re lifted
refilled his attempts to force them, with an obftinacy that furpriled Sc. Ofwythe.— Calling loudly to his terrcr-ftricken people, he commanded them, on their approach, to join their efforts with his j but the gates proved the ftiength of their interior holds, and none of the faftenings yielded to the united attack. Tired with the fruitlefs labour, yet won* dering at the unexpected feeurity with which they were barricadoed, Sir Alfred paufed once more, and in that interv.il the ideailafhed on hjs mind, that the Abbey might.poffibly be inhabited ; though he well knew that he had.given no one permiflion to enter its precincts, and the traditional terrors of the place he thought were a fuf¬ ficient guard againft ali unknown intruder?. Yet Was it not unlikely that, if it were indeed inhabited, it was become the dreadful \uumt of banditti, to whom the lonely fituation and extenfive dimenlionsof the foreft, ren- c $ , dued
dered it a very favourable concealment for the practice of their daring purpofes ? For a moment tliis fearful fuppofition rendered Sir Alfred undecided, and he re* mained irrctolute how to proceed, from the dread of cxpofing his family to more real dangers than the imaginary ones of Owen, till a violent flalh of lightning ended the conteft ; as it glanced for an inftant on the walls of the Abbev, and difplayed its tot¬ tering turrets and Gothic broken cafements, Ilill magnificent in ruins as in its day of towering fplendour, ft ftiewed alfo, at no great dillance, a fmall angle poflern, whofe weak dilapidated ftate feemed to promife greater fuccefs to the wanderers, and they determined to try if here they could net find a more willing* udmiffion. And fliould thetc really be any inhabitants, ether hoftile or otLerwi'fe, Sir AlfjuJ thouid 1 that when he fliould have proved the juftnefs of his claim to (helter in the Abbey, they would, ier a fufueknt gratuity, fuffer hu> paity to 1 emain,
#
remain, during the reft of the r.hjht, be¬ neath ib roof In iafety. The poflern was extremely old and mia¬ ous, ancl feemed only held by the bolt ofthe lock, which loon givv* wiy to the attack of the travellers ; and crofiin^ be:ieath a heavy Gothic arch, they (omul themlelves within the area of the firft court. Sir Alfred, followed by his trembling at¬ tendants, was haftening forward, till recoi¬ led ing the females in the carriage were left unguarded, and mi^ht iutfer increafed alarm horn the violence of the itorm, and tlie ab¬ fence o( their companions, he oulered one of the men to return inilamly, :\nd a wait with them tlie event ot their Lord's bold venture to s^ain (helter vuhm the ruin. Owen, afhamed of the late deierved re¬ buke whicli his iormer ka»s had vira.vn up>u him, (ummoned up nx fort oi de'peiat.* courage, und declared liii inteuio.i of O O 'I'.vLlJiil
attending his matter; and lighting a torch, from the materials he had brought with him from the carriage, he follovved, with pale and trembling apprehenfion, his calm un¬ daunted conductor, wdio now advanced with caution through the fcide area of a fecond court, which, being covered with ci umbling fragments of the ruin?, rendered his advances difficult, and even dangerous. At length, however, he reached a flight of fteps that feemed to lead up to the grand portal of entrance $ but the darknefs of the night, and the feeble glare of the torch as it flaflied on the black and frowning walls, admitted but of an imperfect certainty. Sir Aifted, however, determined to afcend, and Owen, though tottering beneath hts own weight and terror?, dared not again inter- pole his refiftance i his trembling hand held the light to tiie great folding-doors, of churchdike form, and Sir Alfred, after fome forcible efforts, burft them open, and en- teied what appeared an immenfe hall, of indulin-
indiftinguilhable fizef and terminated in diftance in villas of huge pillars, whofe lofty headf, like the roof they fupported., were impervious to the faint rays of the torch, and were enveloped iti an awful and milty gloom, beyond expreffioo impreffive of folemn and aftonifhing fenfations to the ftart led beholder* Nothing was perceptible beyond the final! circle of light emitted from the torch, which compelled Sir Alfred to proceed as chance direded, and that too vvith the greateft caution. Poor Owen, fpite of his aflumed bravery, began to with, as he found himfelf in this damp, cold, awe-infpiring hall, that feemed to conjure up ten thoufand fuperftitions horror* and terrific imaginary appearances, that he had not been ib hardy in his offered attendance j—nor can it be faid that the fimple trepidation of Otfen was without foundation, when it is confidered that, unlettered
unlettered and ignorant as he was, and eagerly I natch ing at every outward appear¬ ance pertaining to the marvellous, the foiem- moft extravagant ideas o( fuperflition, was fufficient to powerfully excite iu his mind the greateft terror, Rcfpecf, however, for his Lord, and his fear of receiving a fecond rebuke eo operating, held him (ilent j but he failed not t > addrefs himfell, inwardly, to every Saint his memory v ndd think on, (or their protection againft the ipells and enthralments oi ail ihe dark inhabitants that he doubted not were legioned, in mviilble tribe?, btneath the roo( oi this terrific tabne. At length Sir Alfred's proarefs was (lop¬ ped by fome ikps tliat led up to a Gothic door, which, vsith no little difficulty, he forced back, and enteting its d-uk precincts, found himielf within what appeared to have bv,en an anti-chamber to an oppofite apart* man, the k ling-door& ot whi'.h he hailened to
to open; and its interior difplayed a large antique room, with the forms of feveral crumbling pieces of furniture, which, from the number of its raifed couches, now co¬ vered with a thick coat of mildew and black- uefs, feemed evidently the remnants of a chamber that had once been (lately and magnificent. Sir Alfred examined it well : the wall-*, though dripping with damps, teemed tole¬ rably entire, and appeared to promite them feeurity againft the dangers of the night. Tired and exhaufted as he w j a% he refoived, for the prefent, to feek no further, but con¬ tent himfelf with this refting-place till re¬ turning daylight fliould enable him to judge how far it wa^ poffible to pu, his defign in force, oi making the Abbey hibitablej and fince i,e had as yet feen notnmg to ex¬ cite a.arm or dread, he halLned to the car¬ riage, a.»d declared to its inmates his refo¬ lution.
The
The females knowing that, now they had already proceeded thus far, to return or re¬ cede from their feaiful ifttcrprize was now become impracticable, obeyed with trem¬ bling and retudtant fteps, and, fupported by their male companions, flovUy advanced ; whilft Sir Alfred, taking Rofaline in his arms, conve) cd her to the Abbey. Rofanne was yet too young to catch the infc&iouj terrors of her attendants j but ftie refrained not from expressing her wonder that her father fhoukl leave their happy home for fuch a dreary, frightful place as that they were advancing to» Sir Alfred kiffed the cheek of the tender child, who Ind embraced his n^ck j but figh ing deeply, he remaine f filent to her innocent interrogatory, and flu v\ho!e party gained iu fafety the interior of the hall. The great gates, upon examination, were found topofleb many ftrong bolts and chains, that
that remained, as they had been kit for many a year, unhooked to their faftenings; thefe were now, after a lofs of time, care¬ fully placed in their holds for the night j and, followed by his pale, trembling attend¬ ants, who all clung clofely to each other. Sir Alfred once more pafled into the interior chamber he had difcovered. Given and Rowland, who had, by the commands of their mafter, cut down feveral branches from the foreft, now let them alight within the wide-fpread ing hearth, whofe brifk and crackling blaze foondifpelied the damps and glooms of the dreary cham¬ ber, and at length compelled even the long ftretched countenances qf the females to relax into fomething like a fmile j which* together with the condefcending kindnefs of Sir Alfred, and the remembered fatigues and danger of their perilous journey through the fort ft, when compared with their prefent flicker, and the comforts of a welcome and plentiful meal, fucceeded at lift in making a very
4% ANCIENT RKC0RDS. a very vifible alteration j although the con-' teft bet-veen prefent gratification, and dread* eel ap|}rehenfion of ihe forlorn place they were confined to, ftill harafted their thoughts, and they would often caft a terrified glance round every pare of their defolate chamber, in momentary expectation of witncfling fome horrific fpectacle, which their wild alarms and conjectures failed not to conjure up in their bcsvildered fenfes. The repaft being ended. Sir Alfred com¬ manded Owen to place before the fire fome of the ftrongeft couches he could find, and cover them with the packages he had the care of; and not difdainiog, in fuch cir¬ cumftances, to repofe himfelf in the fame chamber with his humble dependants, he ordered them all to take a wrapper, and compofe thcmfelves to reft. The fervants, who had dreaded the thoughts of being obliged to pa& the night in the defolate an ti-chamber, w r ere grateful for this con* fidcrate permilhon j and reclining themfelves ou
on their appropriate couches, they foon for¬ got the terrois and dangers they had felt, and became alike infenfible to their forlorn fituation, and to the ftorm which howled without, and now fhook the trembling fabric with each frefli guft of wind that aflailed its ruined to vers. Sir Alfred, having previoufly committed Rofaline to the care oi* the females, funk -on his Vnees in prayer to the throne of Mercy -> and having entreated protection for his family and himfelf, fell, weary and ex* hauftcd, into a calm repofe.
CHAP.
chap. ir.
*< Guy on the bank, and far from men, ** Hail' towrai by aiuient pines from ih« madg ** AJondly ptle exalts its head, iwg ** Uuken by the Uormt of the north." FRAGMENTS FROM OifcJAJJ. UT the eye of Sorrow feldom enjoys a long oblivion in the peaceful haven of deep* Affliction fuffe.s not her vaflals to tafte even a temporary repofe, and the flight fufpenfion flip deigns to allow, is granted to the " ftricken,* 1 but as a momentary recruit to nature, that her fad victims may rife with renewed ftrength of the corporeal frame,
frame, but to endure ftill greater tortures on the mmd. Sr Alfred was the firft of the fl umbering travellers that a\oke ; convinced tliat it was day, from a ray ot light that Ihone through a broken window-thutter, he haftened to arife. His fpirits were rcmihed, and his frame renovated by the welcome repofe, though fhort, whicli he had taken; and the high-wrought temper of his mind, grate* ful even for this flight oblivion of mifery, failed not tu exprcis itfelf in thanks where they were moft due, for the health and Iafety himfelf and family had experienced. But, alas! the ftrange and forlorn ftate ro which an unhappy deftiny had reduced him, now occafioncd a retro! peel ive paufe of fufpenfe upon 1 hoc hua'ly unknown oc¬ currences that had carried himfelf and fa¬ mily to a place fo remote and inhoipitable as was the Abbey of St. Catherine ; to which, cut oft' from every hope ia Hfe, baniflied 4 from
fiom the fociety of humanity, a victim to barbarous* cruelty and injuftice, and-expofed io all the ills that a place fo utterly devoid of every comfoit, and even (belter, as the Abbey, vvere added the unrcvcaled forrows of a fate that none could alleviate; for con¬ fidence in the human fpecies was denied him, and thus unblefled even with the gentle emollient of balmy fympathy, what but increafe of anguilh prefented itfelf to thefe painful contemplations on a continued (erics of thoie corroding atlhdion?, that had already fubdued a once happy heart, and now promifed peace only in the termination of exiftence? Yet ftill the lingering reflection that touched his tenderiiefs, remained entire when thus recalled to memory; for ftili there remained for him duties of a powerful intereft to perform. His child, the fweet (lumbering, innocent Rolaline, fmiled, as ihe lay before him, in her aerial dreams of youthful felicity. Hue was the dear and only
ily pledge of his worlhipped Matilda's , fou, dad now forcibi/ itcJicd the talk whiclt yet hound him to exiftence, that the tender orphan might And a fecure thhld in her only parent, from thofe thorns and dan¬ gerous precipices which it was the province ofpaternd aflecVion, t4 oidaincd by Heaven," to guard its helplefs offspring agaimt.—- Tears now filled his eves as he viewed, with tendernels unutterable, the unconfcious child calmly repofing in the gentle enthral* ment of peaceful deep, ** Ah ! felfifli bring that 1 am/* he men» tally continued, u to wiih the days of my un¬ happy exiftence curtailed, whilft thou, fweet claimant of my fondeft cares, demand, with a force perfualive and retiftlefs, that protec¬ tion which 1 only, both by nature and affec¬ tion, am bound to afford thee !^—Yes, dear Rolaline, thou (halt not voluntarily be de¬ ferted ; for thy fake, he who loaths, will yet e\en fupplicate for a longer exift¬ ence*—And Oh Omnipotent Providence I'* falling
falling fuddenly on his knees, and addicfting himfelf to Heaven, " thou all-feeing, awful Searcher, wdio alone knoweft trulv the hidden fecrets of the heart, Oh ! may thy mercy fandtion, and thy pity fpeed my prayer, that in the unfpeakable plenitude of thy good¬ nefs, the days of the parent, though himfelf is weary of life, may yet be augmented, if nedeflary, for the profperity of the child j~ that fo fhe may efcape fome of thofe fevere and agonising trials which have already cru(li¬ ed in ruin her fallen father!—Or if, like him, Ihe is alfo doomed to be the victim of mifery, Oh ! may thy grace endue her with fuperior fortitude, left flie fink, unre- figned md abject, to the bitter inflictions of a broken fpirit and afubdued heart!" Sir Alfred, paufing for a moment ro re¬ cover external compofure, and wiping a falling drop from his countenance, kiffed the cheek of the ftill fleeping Rofaline, and approached the door of the chamber; for, fince he was well aflured he (hould fleep no more.
more, were he to make the effort, he refoived not to dillurb at prefent his wearied do* mcftics, but xik the prefent interval in the fearch of the Abbey. He therefore proceeded to crofs tht anti-chamber, which aftbided nothing to engage attention, and only difplayed the dampnds of the walls, and the lofty win¬ dows covered within with flimc and black¬ ened dull, and laced thickly without with an aimoft impenetrable coat of ivy. De¬ fcending the fteps of the outward d xir, he entered the giand hall, whofe extenfive dimensions and immenfe long viftas, even bv daylight, were fcarcely rendered visible through the folemn gloom that prevailed in this heavy ftruclure ;—its roof was lofty ia the extreme, and curiouflv wrought with black arched rafters of ponderous oak, whilft, by minute icrutiny, Sir Ah red wa> en¬ abled to trace njany emblematic defcriptions of holy writ; and, on a ftill ciofer examina¬ tion, he diftinguillud feveral of the hiftoric vol. u D parts
parts of the Bible, carved in large figured along the ceiling, which was fupported by a double row of heavy Gothic pillars of the Saxon order. From the amazing extent and vaft area ofthe hall, Sir Alfred doubted not buf this had formerly been the fuperior church of the Abbey, in its conventual ftate, though i carcely any veftiges of its facred profeffion wece left to confirm the furmife, except the ftupendous height of the pillars, and th$ curious work of the Scripture hiftory difplay* ed on the roof* On either fide were feveral large girt cafe* ments j and at the eaft end rofe, in a mag* nificent point, the grand altar window, richly ftained* But though fo much ap¬ parent light was intended to have been ad¬ mitted within the vaft interior of the Church, yet was its defign totally deftroyed; and the dark dinginefs of its mafly pillars, bending with age and decay, together with the dilapi¬ dated
dated black fides of its bare walls, tend¬ ed to conjure up ideas, even in the ftouteft heart, of a fuperftitions nature* The'light that was admitted through the windows was very inferior to their num¬ ber, owing to the duft and ivy that en¬ veloped them, and to the deep colour of their panes, which were alfo ftained with Scriptural allufions j which; together with the wild plants that clung round their heavy frames, excluding the rays of the fun, and borrowing, if poffible, a ftill darker tint from their clofe affinity to the thick fliaded cyprefi that furrounded the church, rendered the whole a fcene of horror and filent folemn defolation. Approaching one of the fouth windows, which feemed lefs encumbered than the reft, Sir Alfred looked through a broken pane, and difcovered an extenfive fquare, termi¬ nated at a diftance by the battlement walls of the Abbey j he perceived alfo, to the left, d 2 . the
the outward enciofure of the cloifters, though they were now become nearly a heao of ruins ; lame, maflcs of which lay ft ' **r 4 fcattered in the fquare, which here and there difplayed the tops of monumental tombs™ the only crumb ! ing records that remained to mark the place where now repofed the filent dull of departed mortality. Sir Alfred, with & deep-drawn (igh, was compelled to reflect on the fcene^ before him, and on tlie vanity of all human grandeur, when he confidered that the mouldering forms, long lince buried beneath thefe periihable memorials, were, perhaps, no more remembered by " weeping pofte- rity," and of whom not even their monu¬ ments would retain a veftige, to t^W rt who once was Ae, that now, in this world, is nothing" Sir Alfred turned afide from the dreary pro'pect, deeply meditating onthe moral his reflections fuggelled, from truths fo plain and
and incontrovertible. But thefe thoughts, however, after a lapfe of time, gave way to his more immediate fituation, and the con¬ fideration ftruck him, that the ruins he had feen, muft certainly belong to the con¬ ventual fide of the Abbey. A part fo me¬ lancholy and forbidding, he well knew could never have been fele&ed for the brilliant re¬ fidence of his great predeceflbrs; and cafiinj his eyes-around, in fearch of fome orh?r outlet to the more entire parts of the fabrics he beheld, on the oppofite fide, the frame of a Gothic porch, to which he now haftily proceeded; but was a little ftarrled, when, on his nearer approach to the interior paf¬ fage, he found the door at its extremity half unclofcd, and admit ting a ftream of Ibht from its aperture;—this circumftance ahirrned him, fince it feemed to confirm thofe fufpicions he had tin: preceding evening entertained ; and it now ftruck him with aimoft convic¬ tion, that the Abbey might indeed be the rendezvous of banditti, to whom he had but i> 3 too
too certainly expofed the lives and libertvof himfelf and family. The firft fuggeftions of his apprehenfion* of ambuflt were to return inftantly to his fa* mily, and hurry them, as faft as poffible, from the threatened danger j a moment*$ recolleftion, however, prevented the fulfil* ment of this defign. Sir Alfred St. Ofwythe, though borne down by the rude ftream of ad verfe fortune, was not a man lightly to fufler the impreA fions of fear to overcome his natural bravery i and his confidence in the human race would $iot (offer him to entertain an - opinion, that even robben^ fliould he encounter any, would oo violence to a Angle and defence- kfs man. Neveriheiefs, though he was thus refoived to proceed in his fearch, yet a little proper caution might not be unneceflary to the real feeurity of his family ; he therefore flackened his pace, and filently advanced along thj p«(fage j—at u e door he liftened, to
to hear if there was any thing beyond like the found of a human being; but as no¬ thing broke upon the folitary filence that reigned around, he ventured to throw back the half-opened door, and entered what ap¬ peared to have once been the lefler chapel of the monaftery, though he now perceived, from the difference of the ftyle in the altera¬ tions it had undergone, that it had doubts lefs been converted to the grand hall be¬ longing to that wing of the building which £be firft Baron had repaired, and beautified in a fuperior ftyle of magnificence, for his own refidence. It was but in a fecond degree inferior to the fiaje of the one he had quitted, and the pillars that ran round it, fuppoited the grand gallery that led to the higher apartments: the walls were lined with oaken pannels, and the windows were larger, and, when free from their prefent cafe of dirt and cob¬ webs, were doubt lefs light and elegant i two broad flights of flairs led to the difterent jo 4 corridors,
corridors, that feemed to condud to the fuperior apartments above. The hall, though not jn abfolute ruin, difplayed feveral marks of the deftru&ive hand of Time and negleft, although it had none of the gloorn and melancholy fo con- fuicuous in thofe other parts of the Abbey which Sir Alfred had already infpefted. He now proceeded to a large folding* gate in the weft fide, which, from its mafly bars and ftrong faftenings, he concluded muft formerly have been the grand entrance; but his fearch more immediately pertaining to the interior, he declined, for the prefent., any further examination of the outfide of the building ; and turning to the left, advanced to a folding-door, deeply fixed within a Gothic portal, which opening liar (lily to his efforts, Ld him, with aftonifliment, into a long f v he of rooms, which, notwithftanding their filent, deferted, ruinous ftate, he was re* i viccd to find mLht again be rendered habit* able.
able, and, in a little time, even convenient and comfortable. Amazed to find them in a condition fo much fuperior to his warmett expectations. Sir Alfred proceeded more minutely in his examination, and forcing back the old flut¬ tered window-Ih utters, as he pafled through each feparate apartment, he difcovered that, though now in a ftate of decay and ruin, thefe chambers (till bore ftrong teftimony of their former grandeur. The whole fuite of rooms were eight ia number, and fiill retained many remnants of furniture, y^hich, though covered with mildew and dull, and crumbling to tatters, evidently witnefled the fplendour ot their former owner ;—the arras, though fallen in many places from the walls, would itdi have (hewed marks of its pnftine beauty, iiad not time and the moths been permitted to deipoil it. Many large mirrois ftill remained entire, PS whilft
whilft others, fituated in the more expofed fides of the walls, had deferted their frames, and lay a fhattered heap upon the ground. Satisfied that thefe chambers would am¬ ply anfwer his prefent wants* and rejoiced to find them in fuch a ftate as to make their repair not only poffible but eafy, Sir Alfred returned to the hall; well convinced that no one had, of late, entered thefe melan¬ choly chambers, and that his fears of ban* dittt were groundlefs. He now refoived to afccnd the grand ftaircafe, where landing on the firft corridor, he found it, though much of its luftre was dimmed and gone, richly carved with gilded mouldings in all the fumptuous magni« licence ofthe thirteenth century. The walls were but flightly injured by time, except by Ihe lofs of fome of the perforated fretwork* or the fall of a broken pillar of the baluf* trades that furrounded the open galleries, and here and there lay icattered on the ground*
ground. The gallery was fupported foy the pillars of the hah, which flicked rhe magnificent tafte of the ftxi\ Baron, and, from the fymnietry and elegance of their fhape, had doubt lefs undergone their pre¬ fent altered appearance from th >fe of the* church, by the inftrudions of Sir Alfred's great anceftor, who, he was now convinced, had added that wing of the building to the an* ient fite, which already he had reviewed* This gallery ftill retained, though much broken, its noble windows, placed at the eaft and weft extremity, from the latter of which •was to*be obtained a fine, though folitary profpeel of the principal avenues leading from the foreft to the ihores ot the fea; the cafement of which Sir Altrcd with difficulty opened, and was agreeably furprifed to behold a broad piece of water gently meandeung through the overhanging arches ofthe trees, that thickly lined the fides of either ba ,k, md rufliing impetuoufiy beneath the very * s> 6 wall*
walls of the Abbey, it was loft in a number of wild, irregular turnings, till retreating towards the left, it was diftinguifhed at a diftance glittering through the openings of the trees, as the fun pierced their gloomy . fhades, and fparkled in refieded brilliance on the bofom of the ftream. Quitting, however, this pleafingly tran¬ quil fcene, Sir Alfred followed the turnings of the gallery, till an arched porch led him into a long fuite of ruinous chambers which, from the plainnefs of their decora* tions, proved them to be the offices of the houfehold* Retracing his way back to the gallery! Sir Alfred continued his couifc till another portal of heavy gilded fretwork engaged his attention; and opening a richly carved Gothic door, he found himfelf in the interior o£ another fuite,' whofe lofty walls, and faded remains* of rich velvet furniture, ftill bore teftimony that thefe were once the grand ftate
ftate apartments ol the Abbey ; though, now iunk in defolation and ruin beneath the rude leveller of elegance and beauty, they fcarce retained an emblem of what had once been their former fplendour and magnificence, Sir Alfred, however, viewed each objeft of fallen grandeur with evident (;\tu»faftion and contentment, and faw wiih pleafurc that thefe apartments might again be re* ftored to comparative comfort and conve- « nience, whilft the fombre fluded turn of his b i penlive mind received with glad welcome the certainty that he need Lett no further for an alylum, which the pofleifions of his anceftors had bequeathed him in the melan¬ choly,^^//*?;/ ruins of St. Ofwythe. Re¬ tirement and total fecluiion from the buly haunts of deceptive fociety, were the only wifh that novv remained to him ; and here was the place to gratify his utmoft dehres, without a fingle alloy; thefe long delated "towers, and awc-infpii ing recedes were but loo congenial to the temper of his foul * they
they would afford an inexhauftible indulgence to his melancholy and forrow; here, un* difturbed by all, he might give free vent to his feelings, unwitneffed by mortal ken. Theie romantic, but gloomy fcenes would prove a peaceful lefuge to his wounded mind ; nay, he even paufed in wonder at his neglect, that he had not, on a former occafion (v\hen, fome years back, a dread*- ful change in his life had taken place) fe!ect» eel this fequeftered fpot, as a fecure retreat from all the ftorms of a perilous and troubled deftiny* Proceeding forward through this vaft extent of chambers, Sir Alfred felt that every former furmife of robbers was at an end, as he had as yet met with not a (ingle circumftance that could in any degree con* firm it. He was now haftening from the laft of the fuite of rooms, thinking it time to return to his family, who, Ihould they have awoke, and difcovered his ab¬ fence, might experience jao inconfiderable - alanx%
alarm, when he perceived, in an obfcurc angle of the apartment, a fmall door, to which he proceeded, determining to fatisfy his every doubt. He drew back, with much labour, the rufty bolts, and difcovered a long diftant galery, which turned off from an angle tower to the lefr, and fee ned to lead to the fouth-vveft part of the build¬ ing. A number of antique doors, lit but by one long gloomy window at the further end, in progreflive iucceflion met his fight *> but thefe he refoived fhouid remain unexplored till fome future opportunity prefented itfelf, and turning to the right, he began to afcead a narrow, broken flight of fpiral ftone fteps, that feemed to lead to an angle turret;—ar¬ riving at the fecond landing, he entered through an arch-way, whofe door had long fince forfook its holds, into a fmall vaulted chamber, lined and paved with (tones (imi* lar to thoie which compofed its outward coat. The turret was circular, and from its more expofed fituation, jutting out con¬ fiderably
fiderably from the tmin building, had re* ceived greater injury than the reft. He approached one of the angular win¬ dow (paces, whieh commanded a fine bold profpect; and, from the extreme height, of the turret, nfing above the tall tops of the neighbouring pines, an uncon- fined view was obtained of ali the fur¬ rounding feenery, rich in varied beauty and romantic wiklnefs ; the vaft fpreading jbofom of the immenfe wooded foreft was a principal object, bounded only by the dif¬ tant mountains of the north, whofe lofty tops reached to the clouds; whilft others of the window fpaces ferved to difplay, unconfined, the extenfive track of ground which the Abbey walls co^ verech To the eaft were ken its ruined cloifters, covered with wdld (hrubhfery, and ivy peeping amidft its arched roofs; whilft many of its hanging turrets had forfakea their ponderous and lofty towers, which, like the
/
the former, lay levelled to the ground, in aimoft indiftinguilhable heaps of ruhhifh j columns, fallen pillars, and 1 roken arches, with here and there a half-remaining wide-extended fpace, that once had contained the fculp- tured frame of the exalted window, bound¬ ing and increafing the romantic beauty of the fcene, by confining the eye, as it gazed through the empty arcades, with a rich luxuriant glow of fliaded ether, backed by the fummits of the hills covered with the foreft pine, as it waved majeftically to the influence of the winds, and aftording a pic¬ ture of beauty and folemoity that no de» fcription can do juftice to. Sir Alfred forgot for a moment, in the richnefs ofthe varied and delightful prjfpeft, the forrows of his fecret ills ; the grandeur md folemnity of the fcene, enlivened with the brilliance of an unclouded atmofphere, was fuited to the contemplations of his mind, whofe only joy was now in the hoped- for
for continuance of making fuch a folitary fituation as this his conftant refidence. Fearing, however, that fiiould he remain much longer in the indulgence of thofe re- flcftions, wliich ail around gave birth and energy to, that his abfence might greatly terrify his family, he haftened to defcend the turret; and, as fd much time had been loft in paffing over that immenfe track ofthe Abbey, which had brought him to his pre¬ fent ftation, he refoived to try if there were no nearer means of reaching that part where he had left the fleeping party. Having defcended, for this purpofe, the third flight of the turret-itairs, he found himfelf, as he turned on the left, in along, but narrower gallery or paffage, fimilar to thofe he had remarked above}—paffing for¬ ward, he opened with much labour feveral old doors, in hopes they would bring him into a paflage leading to the great hail or Church ^ but they only prefented a number of
of weak and dangerous recefles, perhaps for* merly ceiis ofthe monaftery, whole flooring was fo much decayed, and in fome places fallen in, as to render further progrefs impoflible. .Quitting the fruitlefs fearch, he proceeded to the extreme end, where he met with a ftronger door, which occafioncd him no fmall manual exercife to unclofe, when, to his furprife, a violent fcream rung upon his ears; and, as he threw open the arched door, he beheld his terrified party, who, awakened by the noife occafioned by the forcing of the porta!, had arifen, and, re* gardlefV of all falfe delicacy in fuch a mo* ment of horror, the females had rufhed into the arms of the men, to whom they clung, flirieking for protection againft nothing lets than a legion of armed fpe&res, whom their affrighted tancieshad man inftant conjured from their graves, as coming to pumfli the ralh adventurers for their pre¬ fumptuous intrufion.
As the door fell back with a harfli found¬ ing noife, that echoed di fmally along the vacant gallery, the whole party," actuated by the lame impulfe, fell proftrate on their knees, both men and women, clofing their cjes, and uttering half-fuppreffed groans and fervent ejaculations to St, Thomas, and all the Saints, for mercy ; expecting nothing lefs than to be murdered, or carried away in a fufh of fire, they fell flat on their faces, uttering their Ave Marias with fuch celerity that, as they endeavoured to repeat them, they began afrefh at the latter end, and ren¬ dered it a fcene fo truly ridiculous, that even Sir Alfred, though angry at their folly, could not refrain a fmile j and whenever he attempted to exalt his voice, and bid them rife from their ludicrous poftures, they overpowered his fpeech by cries that re* founded through'the room, and bore a ftrong affinity to a hovU. At length, in a paufe of iilence, the little Rofaline, perceiving her father, ruflicd joyfully into his arms, ex¬ claiming repeatedly— ««*»TU
** 'Tis papa! 'lis dear papa come back again !—Oh how glad I am to fee you, papa !*' The fervants now, convinced of their Lord's appearance, ventured to lift up their faces, which difplayed ftill a whimfical con¬ traft of pallid fear and ihame ; but guefling that Sir Alfred had been to examine the ruins, they all fixed on him an anxious en* quiring look, in hopes to read the welcome information that they were all to return to the carriage, and quit the Abbey for ever; but, alas ! no fuch joyful confirmation. could they diftinguifls, and each caft dif¬ appointed glances on the other, as liftening to Sir Alfred, he thus addrefled thern;^— " I have explored the chief apartments of the Abbey, and rejoice to find them every way beyond my expectations ; I there¬ fore need not repeat that here ends our journey. Workmen, and other neceffary perfons fliall be inftantly engaged, for the repair
repair of this ancient and too long neglected manfion ; which, as 1 mean to make it per¬ fectly habitable, I have now only to affure all prefent, that the feat of my family ha$ in it nothing to excite juft terror, or en¬ courage mifconceptions relating to beings that never had exiftence. If, however, there are any prefent, who feel an infur- mountable diflike to remaining here with me, you have only now to declare it, and I will fupply the means of your departure -, — but, fliould your loyalty and fidelity induce you to ftay, I muft command that, from this moment, you fupprefs thefe unfounded alarms, if you wifh to be retained in my fervice, I am ni}felf content to make this my future abode j but I will not fuffer any one to remain with me, who fhali dare pre- fumc to break the order and tranquillity of my houfe, by their ridiculous fears and groundlefs apprehenfions." There was a degree of dignity and refo¬ lution in the manner of his delivery, that Sir
Sir Alfred was glad to perceive had not fail¬ ed of its intended effeft. The fer vants were awed to filence and obedience; and as they really Joved their Lord, whofe whole de¬ portment, without being forbidding or haughty, ftill retained that dignified referve that claimed unhefilating refpect, and never failed of producing that implicit reverence, of which his people had always powerfully felt the inipudc, they now were eager to fupprefs all murmuring regrets, and dif- guifing, as well as they could, their too ap¬ parent terrors, bowed their rcfblutions in ftknce i though none of them dared to fpeak, left the trembling hefitation of their manner (hould deny the confent of their tongues to await his pieafure. Sir Alfred, an able decipherer of the human mind, read in their countenances the fentiments that pafled in their hears, and determined to accept this fdmt acqui- efcence to his will. He did not difdain to reafon them, by gentle encouragement, $ from
from their groundlefs alarms; his conde- fcenfion foothed, and at length quite fub- dued them to fubmiflive obedience,'and the f11 fl meal cf day pafled over with tolerable compofure and fatbfactiom As foon as their fmall repaft was ended, Sir Alfred arojfc, and de fired Owen to take one of the horfes from the flicker they had found in the interior court, and follow him to the gates of the Abbey, for the pur¬ pofe of difcovering the neareft way oit of the foreft to the town of Urhj^dmc, from whence a fupply of food was now become abfolutely neceffary. As Sir Alfred proceeded round the cir¬ cuitous walls of the Abbey, remarking to Owen the vaft extent of this once mag¬ nificent piie, which was fometimes foft in dift&ncc amidft the trees, and then again feen, beyond the (pace of a mile, peeping through the open glades of the foreft, though he was perhaps examining fome fellea
fallen tower near where he flood, he could not help remarking the varied and pic- tuiefque effl-ct the whole produced, thus foitcned and ihaded by tne uncerrain li^hr, which the fombrc gloom of the woods threw , upon ti;e grey mouldering (tones of this venerable fabric, Having turned the fouthcrn ang f e of the battlements, he now arrived at a full vie^v of the north-eadern hte; but tnis was, if poftible, more ruinous than the one he had quitted, und prefented only a long and dreary continuation of thofe pans of the building once dedicated to conventual occupation, and were now crumbling'into dull; except that here and there ftil! remained, upon the high pinnacle of fome tuneted fpires, the time defaced images of Saints, head'efi and aimoft incltftinguithable td foun : the whole preferring a picture of Ihipelef* perifhing grandeur, whofe rugged forms were clotheu in a coat, of ivy, that ferved, in a flight degree, to rob them of fome of vol. i. e their
^RECOKDS* their gloomy horrors, and gave a folemn variety to the whole. Nearly the whole fide ofthe north wing lay an extended mafs upon the ftfOUiid, whilft Otllv a friv rnteriorvtf. tiges jemained to convey an idea of it$ for¬ mer (upcriority. Many parts were fliaded (a entirely flom the view by the trees, and ihe low under¬ wood that prevented the near approach to the walls in this part of the Abbey, that Sir Alfred was compelled to forego its Ius ther examination ; till turning towards the weft, he was amply recorapenfed by a full difplay of the grand front of the building, or rather that part of it which the firft Baron had added to the original fite. Sir Alfred, pointing it out lo Owen, bade him remark that it was free irom that ruin* ous and dreary afpect, fo peculiarly .harac- teriftic of the other parts. Owen rather flowly confeffed, that to be fure, though bad was the beft, it certainly did carry a more
more civil face with it than the horrible, ghaftly ruins they had left; and that if in* deed- workmen could be prevailed on *~ enter fuch a. difmal old place, it might be rendered decent and habitable, fince his Honour was refoived to live in it. " And for my poor part, pieafe you, my Lord," he continued, «* 1 will do all my „ endeavours to add what little comforts and conveniences I can think on, to oblige your Lordlhip and my clear young miftrcfs/* ** That*s my.good 0»ven!*' interrupted Sir Alfred, who perceiving liis fervant in* clined to enter upon a long harangue, thought it neceffary to cut it (hort in its beginning* ** Remount your horfe," headded, fS and pro¬ ceed, without further lofs of time, to the town 1 have already mentioned, I have con- fuited the geography of the forefl, and find that Urbandine lies to the w r eft, and is not more than four or five miles from the Abbey. Yonder avenue^ will conduct you to it; where, if ftill h>ing, you muft fearch out z 2 Normaa
Korman Clare, who was purveyor and fteward to thefe eftates; explain to him my prefent fituation, and refolution to reftore the Abbey to an habitable condition; in¬ form him that 1 require his attendance, and give him full commiflion to engage fuch workmen and others as fliall be needful for the immediate repairs*** Sir Alfred then depofuing a purfe 'in Owen's hands, for the purchafe of fuch fup« plies as were wanted for prefent ufe, gave him a ftriet injunction to return before the fall of evening* Owen immediately obeyed, and lafliing his favourite fteed into a % faft trot, Sir Alfred watched his motions till diftance, and the dark foliage of the trees foon ren¬ dered him invifible; when, turning from the avenue, he'continued his melancholy perambulations round the venerable pile, till the north-weft angfe prefented to his fight theundolating ftream, aimoft hidden beneath the
the thick umbrageous fliades of the over* hanging woods* Sir Alfred fawj, with penfive gla inefs, that the Abbey and its romantic deepened fhades would foon afford him a peaceful, though folitary refidence from ali the tumultuous fcenes of life j and the plans be now formed for its improvement and repairs, would afford ample employment to his mind, and render the egercife of his cultivated tafte a pleating amufement, for a time, from the effects of thofe corroding forrows which dwelt but too patnfuily on the affhclive remembrances of unknown or rather unrereaied occurrences* A ftranger, on his firft beholding the paie f melancholy StrA Ifred,would have been tempt¬ ed to view him with aftonifhment and fuf- picion, and conjeclured that gudt only could have driven a man, yet in the prime and vigour of his days, to the gloomy receffes of fuch a place as St. Ofwythe's Abbey 5 but, if the difenminating obferver looked a' £ 3 fecond
fccond time in his expreffive countenance, he would feel the die of fliame mantle his cheek, for a conclufion fo tmjuft, whilft his heart would upbraid hi.» with inhumanity for the haftineia of his dceiftom 1 lis features indeed difplayed the legible characters of & noble mind iiruggling with the undeserved perfecutions of a forrowing deftiny, noi the timid apprehenfions of unrcvealcd-crimes. Sir Alfred St* Ofwythe was yet not older in life than three or four and thirty years $ kh feture was tall, majeftic, and finely pro* portioned $ his countenance commanding that was fo vifibly caft over the whole of his featurer, he feemed krefiftibly to engage the reverence and refpect not only of his own people, but of al! who addreiTed him | though pallid and clouded with an immoveable grief, his (ace ftill retained the traces of manly beauty, whi'ft his full fine dark eye??, though foifaken by that Prome» thcan brilliance that had once added fpark* ling
ling luftre md vivacjty to their expreffive orbs, wer£ now become perhaps more bte* refting, from the deprivation of thofe daz¬ zling emanations of vivid fire, retained only by the happy few, as yet untried in the bitter fehuols of affliction and long-fuffering. Rofaline, ^he on'y fruit of his marriage* was a beautiful antl interefting child, and, at the period this hiftory commenced, had reached h«*r eighth year. She was ofa fweet and amiable ditpofition, and promifed a rich maturity of excellence. Sir Alfred loved her with even more than parental partiality ? for Ilie was the only living treafure left him of an adored, lamented partner, ami he would gaze upon her for hours, dwell ou each opening grace of mind or perfbn, till the rears* oi unavailing regret, yet delighted affection, ftood trembling in his eyes, and were'killed away by the fweet affectionate Rofaline. Her ftrong refemblance to his loft Matilda was at once his ecilacy and torment; in niiniaturc, he tiacwd alive each h 4 welU
well*remembered feature of the dear com¬ panion he had loft, and watched each move* ment of her form with eager attention, that he might ftrain (till nca-er to his memory: the living image of bb worshipped Matilda,' During (he continuation of his walk, Sr Alfred reflected, that fince St. Ofwytbe*$ dcmain was to be the only inheritance of Jhis child, he had a ftill more powerful ftimula* tive, both as afteward faithful to his truft, and an affeftionate father watchful of the welfare of his daughter, to urge him to the im¬ provement of her future heritage, and he refoived, for her fake, not to be found de* feciive in his wardfhip. We will now leave him to his meditations, and the mental fatisfa&ton refult ing from a refolution to perform his felf ftated duties, and purfue the humbler Owen through the fhades of the dreary foreft.
CHAP.
CHAP. III. ** In winter's tetlious nights, fit by the fire-fide, with gooil old fyiks, am! let them tell tint tak$ ^f woeful times bcutte,** ■A Shakesfiari» V/WEN, as he proceeded down the ave¬ nue, often caft back an anxious glance, to* fee if he was ftill in fight of Sir Allied* who, though every ftep he took removed him further from his view, was yet a kind of protection to his apprehenfive alarms, fo long as he could retain the flighted gliinple of him | but when at length the turning of the avenue clofed him entirely from his
fight, poor Owen's heart beat forcibly to his fears, and the idea that he was now travel¬ ling alone through a wide defert foreft, which might too poffibly be the refort of robbers* or the ghofts of their murdered prey—the latter fuggeftion, even more ter¬ rible than the former, made him fet fpurs to his fteed, in hopes that tbe celerity of his motions, and the noife they occafioncd, would drown the tenfe of his (ears, or at leaft outlpeed their €i horrible imaginings j'* but all his efforts to tafpire within him even a falfe fort of courage, failed, and he continued tinmercifully to goad forward his poor beaft, who, fenfitive tothe "whip and fpurs** of his rider, flew with a fwiftneft that might wii defy a legion of fpeftres, or a hoft of bandit ti # At length the welcome view of a cloud¬ lets funfhine peeped through a diftant opening, and promifed a termination to Owen's terrors and adventures j and foon after both horfe and man, foaming with heai
heat and perfpiration, arrived at the borders of the foreft, and to the fight of a poor* but neat looking cottage, embowered in trees and fhrubbery. Ow r en now thought it not unneceflary to curb the velocity of his horfe ; but a vene* table looking okl man, who had been fit¬ ting beneath a fpreading oak near the cot¬ tage, and had feen the intiuderashe gallopped furioufly out of the foreft, rofe from his feat, with furprife and fear firongly marked iii his face, and was haftening to avoid the fight of a vifiter fo uncommon, and indeed unwelcome, considering the place whence he* came, when Owen, having taken refpira- tion, and feeling his own fears fubfide as he beheld the difmay of the ftranger, now ven¬ tured to call aloud, and entreat his aflift> ance. The old man, whofe appearance denoted him fomething above the rank ot a peafant, ftood irrefolute today, yet fearful of g^ins;, 16 left.
left hts abrupt departure from his unwel¬ come aflailant fhouid provoke him to wrath 1 for m this feaifcl intruder came evidently from the dreaded forefts of St» Ofwythe, to which t\ere annexed horrors and dangers that had lorg filled the minds of the fimple pea* fantry w : th terror * n y dV . ay, he dreaded what mi«ht be his purj\fr, and his fears overcoming his prudence, he was as anxious to gei from Owen, as Oven was from the foreft; the latter, therefore, could obtain no anfwer, till angry and impatient at the old man's obftinate taciturnity, he again loudly vociferated his demands for afliftance, and a proper direction to the town ot Urbandine. The old man now hoping that by anfwer¬ ing this laft requefl, he ihould get rid of his unmannerly enquber, ventured to reply, as he turned round, that it was only *a fhort mile's journey from thence.
** Canft
u Canft thou tell me, honeft friend,"cried Owen, not v willing Jo be fo eafily difmifled, and now cafting a wiftful eye on the neat comforts of the cottage, " I fay, friend,** he again repeated, after a paufe of hefita¬ tion, ** canft thou inform me if there be ftill one Norman Clare living in this neigh« bourhood ?** . The old man, ftarting back, with increafed furprife and alarm depictured in his coun¬ tenance, now lifted his eyes doubtingiy up to the ftili elevated Owen ; and then, after a confiderabie paufe of minute examination* he demanded,, without anfwering the fore¬ going queftion—■*• ** How, I pray thee, earned thou to know of fuch a peiion; and what is thy bufinefs with Norman Clare f* The fimple-heartcd Owen, whofe ideas never %d him beyond the confequences of the prefent moment, novv, witnout the flighted
flighteft hefitation, entered into a full detail of his mrffion, and the extraordinary occa¬ fion of it i adding, that if fuch a perfon as Norman was idivc, his mafter, Sir Alfred, Lord of St. Olwythe's Abbey and lands— (here Owen aflumed a pompous and confe* qucntial manner of delivery)—demanded hts obedience, and forthcoming afliftance and' prefence at the above-named manfion. " Holy St. Catherine, protect me!**' cried the old man, with a fudden burft of aftonifhment," and increafed difmay darken* ing his furrowed countenance as he liftened to this wondrous narration ; ** does any one live in the old ruined monaftery ?—Now Heaven and the Saints guard them! and. Amen, 1 fay y from the power of Satan and his dark agents that abide there, and reftore them again to their proper fenfes!—For fure 3 friend, thy mafter is polllfted, to think of living in fuch a horrible place!—Do I know ancient Norman Clare, fay ft tliou ? , Aye, aye truly do I/' he continued, (uddenly breaking f
breaking off the firing of his exclamations againft the Abbey, as he read in the face of Owen the fears that his flight account had raifed fo expreffively in the features of the latter; ** Heaven be praifed and thank¬ ed, old Norman and I have been good friends' thefe threefcore years and ten, or thereabouts. If thou requireft to be ac¬ quainted with him in honeft feeming, ftranger, thou fhalt not further wafte thy labour, for truly I am Norman Clare; and fince now I find thou art of real ftelh and blood, nor art of a robber's calling, thou fhalt enter with me my lowly dwelling, and welcome fhalt thou be to Ihare its homely fare/' Owen, well pleafed that this fortunate, difcovery had rendered the execution of his commiffion fo profperous, and not a little gratified by the courteous invitation of bis new acquaintance, and the reft and tefrcfhment he fliould obtain, alighted joy* fully
6
fully from his panting fteed, and entered with his hoft the well-arranged cottage* fc Here, good Dame l" exclaimed Nor¬ man to his aged partner, with a hearty kindnefs in his manner, that fpoke the fin¬ cerity df his welcome, * c here have 1 brought thee a ftranger j who, coming from the old Abbey yonder, muft needs lack of fomething to cheer his fpirits: fo bring, I prithee, my beft ftone flaggon of old hock, and what elfe of our ysfterday*s fare thou canft muf* ier, fpeedily." Blanche, with wonder and curiofity, (tared for a few feconds at the ftranger, and anxi¬ oufly longed to giatify firft her own loqua* cious propenfities j but Norman rather im* peratively repeating his commands for the gratification of the ftranger's hunger, ftie was compelled to defift for the prefent from fatiating a long firing of enquiries her tongue longed to give vent to, and the table was therefore
therefore the fooner fpread with aH the little dainties the cottage could produce* Owen, well pleated with the plenteous meal, failed not to recruit himfelf addi¬ tionally for the late terrors he had expe» rienced * 9 nor did the fine old hock, in the beft ftone fiaggon, remain unhonoured,— Nature's wants fupplied, Owen then entered at large upon the whole of his late journey, and its termination at St, Ofwythe. " What,** cried Blanche, in no very con* cordant tone of voice, * c what fay ft thou— live in fuch a place as the haunted old Abbey ?—Mercy on us, friend, is thy maf- ter mad ?—Does he not know that it has been uninhabited for more than a hundred years, excepting a month or t^vo by work¬ men, to keep the weft font in repair? and does he not know, moi cover, chat it is ali over fo full of goblins and fpc&ies, that no¬ body wili ever let foot near it—no, not fo muchascrufl the corner oi the fore ft j becaufe the
the great fouth tower is feen there when nd otlu,r part is; and becauie, in one of the high battlement turrets, every night———** ** Peace, peace, Blanche!" cried Nor* man, haftily, * £ and hok! thy idle prattle I—r If my Lord chufes to refide in the old man* fion, 'tis not for us to raife reports againft it that may offend himi—and as for the ghofts and goblins you talk fo fooiifhly :,bout,** (here Norman forgot his own pre* vioito exclamation to the fame effed), ** that is the leaft evil to be feared $ for, in my mmd, the tottering old building will never afford (belter for any thing human, except indeed the owls and bats that build in the ivy.—Yet, truly, it is rather wonderful Sir Alfred (hould chufe fuch a defolated, fhatter¬ ed place to live in. Ah! well, well he knows beft j 'us no bufinefs of our's to pry into our Lord's affaiis;~—and. Heaven be thanked, tntoc is a clear confidence; for I hive kept, duly and tmly, an honeft account of all the received rents, and all tlie arrears that, for thefe five years paft, have been unclaimed
unclaimed by the owner of the Abbey. The few tenants and vaflals that ftill re¬ main on the cftate, would fain have re¬ futed" payment of their feesj but my Lord fliall find old Norman was trufty, even to a fingle angel.—Aye, aye, to-morrow, pieafe St* Catherine, I will go once more to th^ old Abbey, and render up my juft ac* counts." . «* Go to the Abbey !'* fcreamed Blanche, at the utmoft pitch of her flirill voice, and dropping from her hand the beft ftone flag¬ gon as fhe was going to remove it, " you go to the Abbey !'* flie again repeated, regard* lefs of the damage her inattention had occa¬ fioncd ; " why, Norman, thou art growing a$ mad as his Lordftiip is, and have caught the infection 1 fear me!—Mercy on us all I the evil fpirits have got loofe from their bounds, and will deftroy us ali in our beds, at this rate,—Why, Normin, don't \ou re¬ member, when you went Lift to the Abbey, fome years ago, juft as you had entered the great gates., what a horrible——" " N nfe fe,
*•* Nonfenfe, nonfenfe," interrupted Nor** man, with a wink, meant to fitence the ia« creafed loquacity of Blanche $ ** you fte all thefe idle terrors and fuperftitions are done away. Did pot Sir Alfred and his family ileep there kft night - $ arid is not Mr. Owen here alive to tell us fo f—I prithee, good dame, fill not the mind of our gueft with thy ridiculous fears and fancies, but make- him welcome with our village news, whilft I and Anthony will go in queftof fuch fup- plies as Owen is commiffioned to take back with him/ 9 Norman had no fooner quitted the cot* tage, than Blanche, with diftendefl features and affrighted afpeft, echoed her hu(band*& words, ** Take back with him!" (he repeated % *« the Virgin be our guard i—Surely, Mr, Owen, you will never attempt to think of returning to the haunted oid ruins again \ — Oh! I could tell you fuch tales as would make
* make your hair uatwiftits locks, ani turn g^-ey witli fright, if not be enough to kill you down right"!—Mercy on us, I wonder I am alive to repeat them I" Here Blanche forgetting, in defiance of her hufband*s» injunctions, the filence he had recommended, entered into a marvellous lorn* detail of improbable fights, of bleed mg head^ flying at midnight over the foreft to the Abbey ; and ghofts unnumbered, with bleeding wounds, ifluing from its cells and cloifters, in ail the terrific defcription of the moft horrible appearances, N Poor Owen, a coward at heart, fat trem¬ bling every joint, as he liftened to the ex¬ travagances ot Bl.nche, and ga\e implicit belief to all the wild incoherences flie ut¬ tered ; whilft his new increafed terror^ of the foreft and the Abbey rendered him more than half irrefolute, and he anxioufly wifhed for fome plaufible excufe to delay his return till the morrow ; for though Ov^en was tender-
tender-hearted, yet was he alfo a complete* believer in the exiftence of fupernatural be* ings I and his mind, long labouring under fuperftkious prejudices, rendered the internal ftruggle of fear and duty a terrible trial. Fidelity however conquered, and he re¬ foived to return; though he .could not help giving a fiill attentive ear to the terrible narrations of Blanche, who finiflting her long ftories with the hiftory of the old Baron and Sifter Anna, thus concluded—- u And moreover, the ghoft of Anna is feen every night, that is if any body had courage to go and fee it, walking down the great long aiiles of fhe Church up to the altar, where it kneels till the next hour of the clock ilrikes twelve, when it then goes , out of the great doors, which fly open at her approach, and walks to the great fouth tower, where ihe utters three loud fiirieks; when the old wicked Baron's ghoft is forced to come, as foon as thefe are heard, and Anna diivts him, with a fiie-brand in one
one.hand, and a dead child \n the other, all over the ruins, till they come to the very chamber where the Baron ufed to fleep after he fo treacherouflv 201 potfeiTion ofthe Abbeys difmal yells, and dying thiieks and groans are then heard to echo through ail the apartments and bl-.zing lights thrown about the great north bedchamber, till the great turret clock, that has never for manv a weary long year, been touched by m >rtal hands, tolls heavily two, and fometiuKS three ftrokes upon the bed*" Here the affrighted Owen failed not to re¬ member the founds ofa bell, that he and the wl>ole party had heard echo through the foreft, as they approached, the preceding evening, to the conclulion of their journey. " And nioreowr,'* added Blanche, wan an exalted tone, and an aflumed importance of manner, " the late pofleilbr ofthe Abbey, who was a lady, came, fome lew year;, ago, to our cottage - 9 fhe feemed rather haughty and
and imperious ; and demanding the keys of the Abbey, ihe went vvith only one attend* ant, a ftrange gruff-look mg fort of a nan, in fpite of all I c< uld do to per Iliads her, to the dihr.al old place, promifing to return Norman the keys the next day, after they fhouid have difcovered fome papers they came in fearch of j—but mark the end, good Mr. O^ven, of their obftinacy: the next day came, and fo did the following, but brought with them neither ladv nor at* tendant. At length Norman, thinking fome mifhap had attended them, went with a good ftrong party of the tenants in fearch of my •ady, to offer his duteous attentions % but no lady was to be found; the great gates of the Church ftood wide open, and they fearched through every part of the old Abbey; even fome of the vaults were ex¬ amined, but ali to no purpofe—my Lady was never feen or heard of afterwards. The tenants were fo frightened, that they ran away, and left Norman by himfelf, to faften, as well as he could, the gates and entrances; and
and from that time to this he has kept the keys; the Abbey is grown more frightful, and doubtlefV my Lady was carried off by the ghofts, for her boldnefs k difturbing them in their gloomy habitation." - Fortunately for Owen, Norman, loaded •with purchafes, that inftant entered the cot¬ tage, and put a flop to Blanche's won¬ drous narrations, Notman faw plainly, from the pallid looks of his gueft, the manner in wliich Blanche had entertained him j he angrily • reproved her for her foJly, a R he termed it; and became as anxious to do away the im- preflions they had occafioncd, as Blanche had been lavilh in exciting them. At length, aided by another flaggon, he in part fuc¬ ceeded, which being foon finifhed in Inch willing hands, pre do od the defued effeit of inspiring Owen wirh f miething like ied- lution once more to brave tne terrific dan¬ gers of the Abbey; who, notwitnilanding vol, i, f the
the exclamations and cries of Blanche, to entreat him not to provoke the anger of the 'Saints by difregarding what flie had fold him, and rafhly running into fure deftruc¬ tion, perfifted in his defign, and mount¬ ing his horfe (now well ftored with many comforts, which the forethought of Noi> .man had provided), he took a hearty leave of his hofpitable hoft and hoftefs, and gal- lopped once more down the avenue towards the Abbey, The fun was faft declining 5 and, as its kft beams faintly tipped the horizon, and tremblingly faded from the fky, the woods aftbmed a browner fliade, whofe dark foliage excluded the light, and really con¬ veyed an idea of defolate gloomy wildneis that might well fill a flronger mind than Owen's with fearful fenfations, when added to inch objects was tiie increafe of terror, which the tales of Blanche could not fail to imprefs bis mind vvith.
• Owen!
Owen* as he proceeded, fancied every bufti a ghoft, and expected c^ery moment to fee fome diimal apparition flit athwart his path, with all the appalling circumftances of Blanche's imprudent narrations* The fhades of night were faft defcending before he ar¬ rived within fight of tli3 weftern front of the Abbey, where he joyfully recognized his mafter; who had for fome time been pacing the lawn in front of the build¬ ing, impatiently watching the approach of his fervant. Sir Alfred's whole attention was too much engaged in attending to the anfwers he re* ceived to his queftions, to notice the death¬ like palenefs fpread over the whole coun¬ tenance of Owen; and his fatufa&ion was not a littic augmented to learn that Nor* man ftill lived, and would be at the Abbey on the enfuimT dav. A brilk Ore, with the addition of plenty of light, and the ftorcs Q.ven had brought, f 2 made
made the evening pafs oft'better than might be expected in fo deiolate a (ituation * s and the doon of the chambers being tolerably well fecured, the whole pany, at an *ear!y hour, 'refigned thcmfelves to fleep. Owen, however, remembering the terri¬ ble account of St. Anna's fpe&re pa fling through the great Church doors, ecu Id not fo eafily enjoy the comforts of repofe 5 he remembered alfo that there was only the anti-chamber between him and this tremen- tlous chapel > and his terror, as it approach¬ ed near the time he fuppofed the fpectre ufually took its midnight walk, was ex¬ treme. He laid attentively lifteuing to his fears, nor did the cry of the fcreech-owl, among the outward battlements, or the hum¬ ming of the wall-beetle and cricket, fcrve much to allay the terrors lie laboured mi* der. At length he fancied that he actually heard the gaat Church gues fly b. ck and clofe again, A kind of lethargic ftupor row feized his fenfes, and tiacl Nature claimed
claimed her rights j—in fpite of the imaginary horrors he had created io himfelf, deep over- took his fevered brain, and th <v?ft of the night palled away tranquilly and undif- turbed. The morning's repafl ended, Sir Alfred repaired through the noith gahery to the weftern hall, where, as he v\ith much diffi¬ culty unfaflcned the gates, lie beheld feveral perfons flo^ly winding up the tangied mazes * of a diffeient avenue, Amount he ioremoft he dillinguiihed, according to O.vcn's de* icrtption, the veneiable nld Nonnan, whofe grey iiairi and unembarraflld countenance gave aa honorary dignity to his whole perfbn* The great gates of the outward courts were beyond Sir Alfred\ ftrength to open; he therefore walked round to the f ulh angle, where alio Norman had directed his paity to follow him j and entering the court, the old fteward no fooner beheld hi* mailer, than f 3 bending
bending to the earth his knee, he welcomed, in due form and ancient ceremony, the Lord of the Abbey t^o his inheritance* inr Alfred then entered into fuch details as were Jufficicnt to fatisfy Norman of the legitimacy of his claim to the domain of St. Ofwjthe. Tlie litter had, by-dint of !/cat peifoaiion, prevailed on fome hardy labourers, bribed by the promifc of 1 a good reward, to accompany him to the Abbey, for the purpofe of repairing the interior, Norman alfo brought with him ail hk papers, accounts, and money i the latter bemg the produce of the rents of the eftate» had been faithfully gathered and hoarded up for the Lord of the demefne, whenever he thought proper to claim it - 9 and which he now refpe&fuily delivered to Sir Alfred, who highly commended his long* tried honefty, and made minute enquiries into the real tlate of his remaining vafiab.
Norman's
Norman's mind, though greatly tinAured wirh ail the fupcrftition fo prevailing in the fourteenth century, contained nevertheiefs a fund of worldly knowledge, which, when his ideas were called forth, and directed by a ilrbng judgment to laudaHle ends, gave proof* ofthe goodnels of his heart and un- dcrftanding j and Sir Alfred found that in Norman he mould poffcfs a valuable acqui- fition, and a promoter of the improvements* he now fcrupled not to explain to him. Norman was himfelf agreeably difappoint- ed to find tliat the Abbey would admit of foch beneficial alterations, and that the in* quifitiveacfs of his own mind would receive ample gratification by the refolution of his Lord to make it for die future a place of residence, and of courfe increafe the good old fieward's confequence among the te¬ nants, who of late indeed had thewn evi¬ dent fymptoms of oppofition.
f 4 "For
* is For truly,'* continued Norman, bring¬ ing to a conclufion a long harangue relative to rhe affairs of the eftatc,' H truly, fo pk-afb your Excellence, the lands hava been fo long iorfaken, and are of late years fo overgrown by the devouring inroads ef the foreft, that many of your Lordfhtp's Unants have deferted their cottages*, and ictticd tbemfuives on the domain of my Lord, Baron of Urbandine. 1 *- ** Of Urbandine !—did you fay Baron of Urbandine r** *« Aye, fo pieafe you* Sir/* replied the ftewanh * 6 Hk Lordfhip^s caftle is hard by i it is not three miles diftant from the Abbey. If the foreft vcefe not fo im* penetrable,^ you might behold it& great huge towers from the northern profpect where we ftand j and might arrive at It a much nearer way than by the village, if you knew the beaten track that formerly ufed to run through the mng!ed mazes ofthe woods from the tuins to the caftle itfelf,'*
Sk
Sir Alfred's brow became fuddenly cloud¬ ed at the unexpected foun i of a name, that feemed- to have given ibme Ihock to his feelings; a deep thoughtfulnefs pervaded his features, and his mind became fo ab- 'ftra&cd as to rentier him inienfible to all around j nor did Norman's uninterrupted ' loquacity receive either attention u* check*, who thus continued— ** But my Lord Baron truly is a haughty Noble, aud an imperious, hard-hearted. mafter 5 and many of your tenants, fo pieafe you, Sir Alfred, wni jo) fully return to their ftalty, when they h?ar their Chief is. coming to fettle among them. The Baron is, they fay, gone to the wars with the Duke ofBedfoid, but my Lady Baronefs, with hfr 10,]$, are lh<»rtly expected at the caftle i fo your LorUihip will not lack of fociety wiule tney remain in theie parts. Repot* Ays her Lid}(!up is not quite fo happy a^ Ihe detents to be$ and tlut the Baron, being apt to the patfton^f f 5 ' jcalouty.
^ jealoufy, has commanded his Baronefs io leave the Court during bis abfence, Bufc Heaven preferve her! (lie is too good for him, I fear; and though, fweet iadyi fbe brought him great riches, and the Lordfbip of Urbandine, yet the dear foul is u hum¬ ble and meek to all his wiflies, as if (he had •only been a poor peafant*! child, inftead of his fuperior,—Ah weH*a«day! weli«a-day! h is not always the good that fare the beft in this bad world. His former Baroneft, in* deed, while he was only the poor Lord of Caftlenuco, held his tyrannical paffions in complete controul; but the fubmiflive hu¬ mility of the Lady Ruithvina Urbandine endures all his overbearing tempers with uncomplaining patience/* Sir Alfred, who had been meditating on things ** long fince gone paft/* heard very little of this long fpeech i but the ir cot ion of names, doubtiefi not unfa- Kiihar* made hiai flatty and recalled forcibly hb at ti at ion lo prdent circumftances $ for fuddenly
ftddenly turning to the garrulous Norman, he "demanded if the prefent Baronefs was his Lord(hip*s fecond wife?—Norman re* plied in the affirmative, «< And flie is then the heirefs of .Urban¬ dine 2" he qukkly rejoined, " Doubtlels* • my Lord of Urbandine, her father, is not living ?" ** He died fome few years ago/' aofwered Norman, ** bequeathing to his only child, the Lady Ruithvina, the whole of his pof¬ feflions, in truft for her fon, the prefent young heir of Urbandine, and its rich da** mains.** The countenance of Sir Alfred, before* gloomy and overcaft, fuddenly underwent a change, his melancholy difperfed, and after reiterating his directions to Norman, he proceeded himfelf to overlook tlie work¬ men already employed in the neccflary repairs*
f6
Sir
Sir Alfred's mind now deeply engaged, and infenfibly withdrawn from the contempla¬ tions of thofe corroding evils that fo long had difturbed his peace, was imperceptibly recovering its proper tone; whilft theaftive part he was compelled to take, permitted him no kifure to dwell oser thofe dreadful. md fecret forrows that had ultimately robbed his cheeks of nature's bloom, and his weaty eyes of the balm of reft. Owen and Rowland had no time to fpare for the e&pteffiono^ their doubts and terrors,, whilft even the houfekeeper and Jannetta found fuch ^niple occupation for their abili¬ ties, and began to feel fuch fatkfaclion tn affifting and obferving the amended ftate of the Abbey, that their fears for a time found no room for employment. » In lefs than a fortnight, the interior began to wear a very ddFcent afpecl: the weft front was toon made hatjitablc, and even comfortable 5
Comfortable^ the chief apartments >vcre dripped of their melancholy remnants of tattered furniture, which beinsj ck-aned and mended, fuch as would bear the operation, with the addition of fome auxiliary purchafes, were foon put in tolerable order for prelent ufe; and Elinor and Jannetta, when they took pofleflion of their refpeclive chambers, could not hel| confelfmg thpir furprife and pleafurc at the great alterations that had taken place, One half of the range ofthe weft front 3 in a month's time,was rendered perfectly fate;. and having undergone complete repair, the apartments foon began to lole much of tlieir defolate-, forlorn appearance* Three chambers were fitted up at the north-eaft angle of the pile tor the future residence of tne fteward ; they were very re¬ mote from the more inhabited pans, and it was a workoi long entreaty before Sir A.tied could prevail ou the venerabx oid Norman ;l to
to take pofleflion of them- Blanche, in* deed, had been the chief caufe q( his long, rejiflancc; but at length Norman, whofe whole energy of character lay in his juftly ddcrved merit of re! pect ful reverence and obedience to hb Loid's commands, aflumed alfo the commands of a hutband i and at laft, by threats, perfuaftons, and entreaties, compelled poor Blanche, much againft her wiil, to partake of ihe real and (olid comforts of their gloomy but magnificent change s who, rather than (lay alone in the cottage, which was her only alternative, confented to venture into the Abbey, though not till flie had received a fttict and pofitive injunc¬ tion from Norman; never to relate any of her terrific ftories, on pain of his, Owen*s, and her Lord*$ eternal difpleafure. The domeftics foon became reconciled to what they could not alter $ the improving appearance of the Abbey began impercep¬ tibly to decreafc their terrors j^und though ii certainly ftill retained its original fombre gloom*
gloom, yet the comfort that had fureceded their firft difcouraging entree, at length be«an to ban ith ibme of thofe terrors which the uncommon change that had taken place, infpired in their minds. The doors and avenues leading to the con* vent ual fide ofthe building, vvere ad firongly fecured, and even the great Church gates opening into the weftern hail, were lock- < ed and bolted with warlike-feeurity; a conceflion Sir Alfred willingly made to his people, to quiet their Years, and fecure them, as they hoped, from the ghofts that frequented the north, eaft, and fouth ruins, whofe chambers and recedes, fuch a$ had not yet fallen, were fuffored to remain in tlieir kteft ftate, and were com¬ mitted to that fure and gradual fa;e, whole mouldering hand had long fince feized their aged forms, and needed only one rude blaft to whe'm them into nothing. Tte
tlie whole of the wefiern front, how¬ ever, was nearly re ftored to a (light degree of its f rmer (plendour, and now ierved as an ample and fpacious boundary to tiie wants * of its inhabitants.. Manv of its fuite* of apartments on the higher ftories, as* they were not manted, received only fufficient reparation to preserve them Trom decay, and were left unfurnished, and nearly in their oiighul dclolation. The outward battlement walls that en*- doled the whole of this immenfe pile, vvere ftrengthened, md every apparent breach re* paired; as were all the poftems and gates rendered repplfive to the attack of iaauei> mmt intruders. The weftern front being thus feparated from the other more dilapidated parts of the Abbey, precluded a fight ot their dreary ruinb; and though nothing could f uiiktently improve it s foas to rake from the folitary fo- Jeminty that marked iis blackened walls, yet.
yet to Sir Alfred the fc«fation» It occafioncd bordered on fublimity, and he now began to feel, in tbefe^flwfuhy wild r-ctflls, more internal fati^fietioa than had of late years been his portion. This remote, forgotten retreat w r ould ex¬ clude him for ever from a hated world,, and here, unchecked, or reftrained by the grating voice of intruding curiofity, he might give free indulgence to his fecret forrows. In thefe venerable towers, and gloomy fequef¬ tered bowers, he could flmt out the bufy fcenes of life, and all its ftorms and dangers; thefe delightful, undifturbed folitudes would add peace of mind to their promifed feeurity,. and afford him ample time to form and rear to maturity the mind of his lovely daughter in ennobling principles of virtue and reli¬ gion. i€ In thefe gloomy, unfrequented woods/* continued Sir Alfred, pAuiny to meditate on.
tine-■ruthkis dcftroycr of her father !'* ■ A ' : dccp :;.%fc " iiecivM■■ :: /h1s^--1)0(0111- ■"" : $&" he uttered aloud this myferiods fettfe'DCe r -..ancj-.'a fori'di inflin^-ivc: '.fliudderini- :t¥iM& ■ ■■■■■' -V* ■ hi'ai ■eaft .arou'nd ' : ^fdarful-^gdiifein : ^ : ''gla^ .of '-'■ fafpicious: ';>n^wy>. : ^-ai'-':'if-' ; he:' ; : :-.ev.ei^ ■ dQiibtcdi:.tk0:,reality■■'.-of..ttot: fafety i be■ ■ toitt-. ■ the-moB^Dty'before^'.e^preflcd' the'' : './orcft.' : . wt>u!d'- v al!brd.;;him.'-"^ -.-aflioiiV ■■ibougS.' ' uhc^plaiaed)':; feem^d- ■-■but=■ too :;; -- 40$f t& ' .■:. coti|'rrn- : ■■ the :COhJ€&ure : ■ that* whatever [ w%m . ■■had:1:rid^:bete \----\At ^:Autton;^tegaii:- ; to^ \ihcfrfat- yellow : ■leivesi- the. Abbey'.became every' way ■ tnore' habitable-.;,-and.- the real tafte and ftiperion judgment of Sir Alfred were often:.difplaytd. k in the-ftyle WitU which 'he had enlarged on his impro\ f emeats t and converted' a large boundary of. the Abbey gardens.■ into-fo'me* ' thing Ifk^ its former beauty and' verdure i . though.
though it muft be Confefled i u ^ all bore tlie emblems of that deep fombre fhad^ of pen- five forrow, that masked the turn ol Ls mind, and dictated all his aaions. Many ofthe Abbey windows were totally darkened, andan additional gloom was thrown over the interior apartment by tl e \\\ that encircled tlie jamb;, and by the tall fpreading branches ofthe majeft'.c oak, the mount ;in pine, and others; but even thefe Sir Alried would fuller to be only partially fi ripped of their foliage, not removed entirely 3 nothing therefore could diveft the building of that fearful, awe-infpiring afped, which ftill kept alive the terrors of its humbler inhabitants j and, together with its long hoarded and nu¬ merous dark legends, rendered it ftill dread* cd and avoided by the fimple villager of iu dejndne. The Abbey was filiated in a vale \ and being furrounded on all tides by lofty hil { s, covered widi the venerable woods of the ioreil*
forcft, very iitt'e profped was to be obtained except fon the wirdowa of the lo'fticft towers j but more particularly from the' v/cft*angle turret, which having undergone complete repair, became one of Sir Aihed's favouiite leioits, where mod of his time was dedicated to the mental inftruction and accomp!i(hments ofthe fweet Rofaline* Of late, however, this was nor his only place of retirement:; the labynLths of the river wliich wathed tlie Abbey towers, and lofl iticU in dsftant woods, had often, un* wiuielled by mortal eye, beheld his mid¬ night employments. Here he would walk for hours, and deeply ruminating, forget himfelf, the world, lm child* md every thing but thofe * £ rooted troubles of the brain** which here, unfeen, fent up the de¬ luged eye of curclcfs gpcf to that Fountain of Mercy, whole mild commandments taught him the teiYon of obedience, and patient re- £gnatbn to liis unmerited fullering*.
Thft
The trees grew in t^i^k av.d aimoft impervious clutkrs to the very edge of the river's hanks; the*r branches meet- ins, formed a dole entwined arcade, ex> cepting here and there a fmall opening admitted the azure /ley, or a fpukli.^j fun¬ beam, forcing its way through the h des of the trees, played in quick fucctilivc bright- nets on the rippling fui face, whefe waters bur fling over a rocky ob ft rue tion, gave a pleafing variety to the glooms the* deeply , reigned over this wild deferted icznt. Such fcenes, however, were but too coo* genial with the mind of their only vifiter, who dwek with cnlhufiafticpieafure'on each melancholy objeft, whieh fer ved more for¬ cibly to heighten the unfortunate languor and fadne r s of his foul. The effects of fuch dangerous indulgences as Sir Alfred allowed to his feeli icls in thefe fequcftcred fliades, were never exprcilid when in
in t the fociety of bin family, before whom he ever a] peared with a (atMied and even cheerful countenance 5 and with fuch an ex*" ample before them, his fervants dared not breathe in their Lord's hearing a dread of their gloomy and deferted abode. Blanche, indeed, who loved any fociety but her own, would often, in the long even¬ ing?, quit her remote apartments, and fteal to the fervant&Miall, where liftening to the wind, as in hoarfc murmurs it fhook the weakened turrets, and fancying every guft that caufed the old wainfcot to crack, was the cry of a ghoft, or.a death's warning, flie would draw her chair, with that of her companions, in a clofe circle round the cheerful blaze of the wide hearth, and bavins; ftrenyKhened her memory with a few additions of lier own, would relate at ful the florics of oM tradirion; the Abbey being chiefly the fcene of action, whofe haunted chambers had each a parti¬ cular tale'of di eadful note and legendary apparition,
apparition, till at length the cheeks of the terriiied hfteners became blanched with fear and horror; who creeping ftill ciofer to each other, dared neither fpeak, fttr, nor look on one (ide, left a ghaitly fpectre fhoukl ftart from the gloom of their wide chamber, and punifh them widi fome (hocking iodic* tion of fupernatural po.vcr 5 whilft the gentler winds, as they whiftlcd moanfully among the branches and falling leaves of the trees, Blanche would roundly alfert were the fighings of St. Anna, the murdered Non j whofe fpirit, driven from its ancient refoit by the rude intruders of its favourite haunts, was now wandering round the exterior ofthe Abbey, diflatisfied, and lamenting, in dif* mal bewailing^, its unhappy ftate* SometiT.es, when they hid fat np to an unufual latenef., thus flaifully employed, the heavy founding foottlep of Nor . a'?, who thev recolleiud not wa*> ablent, and now cirne to chide Blanche f *r her long ftay, would tcirny them into a beact tuac it was
was the ghoft of the great wicked Baron } till being manually convinced by a pinch ofthe ear, which th& fteward fometimes gave them, to prove that he was real flefh and blood, the panic/truck party would recover from their flars, and hurry in a body through the ha.ls and winding long galleries, nor fancy themselves in feeurity till fleep rendered them alike inienfible to their terror^ oj the caufe of it* Sir Alfred, during fome of his refearches into the diftant upper ftories of the Abbey, had palled through a long range of rooms that led by a pannebdoor from his cabinet to the foutivweft angle, whofe faft decaying chambers prefented nothing to engage a more minute infpediom At fhe end ofthe gallery, however, he difcovered a fmall an¬ cient door which, on opening, led him into a light clofet or anti-chamber. His curiofity, loufed to fee more, induced htm to continue the fearch, and, after much time, he difco* vercd a well-concealed doi>r s wliich being forced
forced open, he was aftonithed to find him¬ felf in the interior of a large, old, dreary chamber, lined and filled with innumerable quantities of books, which had doubtlefs, from their dates, and the gloomy antiquity of tbe place, been the library v*f the Fathers of Si. Catherine Upon opening fome ofthe volumes, that were not yet totally defaced by age and mildew, Sir Alfred found much fubject for future amufement 5 more than half of them, however, from long difuie, were become totally illegible, whilft many that remained treated only on religious difputation. Some of them, the works of a bigot ted Father of the Church, tended to involve the fnnplo purity of the Ch rift ian doctrine in a maze of doubt and uncertainty, and were evi¬ dently meant as delufive, flowery vehicles to enchain the attributes of divine truth and reafon in an artful labyrinth of blind error and myftieal delufioa, dcligncd for the vol. 1. - c purpoie
'purpofe of enhancing the reverence and adoration of pricftcrait and fuperftitiom Sir Alfred beheld thefe high wrought pages,of falfe philofophy and fophifticated deception with pity and difguft $ convinced of tlieir dangerous and erroneous tendency, he caft afide the volume with that contempt he could not help feeling towards its mif- taken writer, who had perverted his time and talents to fo unwoithy and immoral a purpofe* The excellent laws of divine eftabiybment needed not fuch falfe drofs to inftil into the virtuous heart thofe principles which Reafon and Nature fo powerfully die* tated. Its facred duties were plain and fim* pie j and, to the enlightened believer, eafy was the talk to pay that reverential homage and grateful adoration, which, void of cere¬ mony and earthly parade, wanted not the oftentatious dilpiay of argument to exprefs itfelf acceptably to an all-merciful Provi¬ dence* Amongft
Amongft others, Sir Alfred found fome traditional manufcripts that really feemed valuable j there were alio a few imperfect tranflations of f3me of ths beft works of Roman celebrity, whofe excellent morals and precepts would prove a fund of future* inftruction to Rofaline; nor were there want- ing fome curious volumes of old Englifli poetry and hiftory. The room itfelf was of a very Gothic and dreary appearance ; its narrow pointed win¬ dows were covered witli a thick coat of ivy, which, as Sir Alfred attempted to break away, afforded him a flight view of the foutlveaft ruins, and the great heavy bat¬ tlements of the frowning fouth cower. Sir Alfred refoived to have this chamber cleaned and aired j and after great perfuafion,' his commands were at length obeyed. Tiie mo!i ufelefs ofthe books were cleared awav, whilft, from the reft, he made a nkafiiv a xi valuable (election, which were removed to o 2 tlie
the weft oak parlour, for the general ufe of Rofaline and himfelf. The windows of this antique chamber were ftripped of fome of their luxuriant fur¬ niture, and air being admitted, many of the remaining books were recovered from the total extinction which their characters had long been threatened with* But the library was too near the dreaded ruins, % to be often troubled with the unwilling entrance of the * domeftics, whom nothing but the a^fo* lute prefence and commands of their Lord could induce at any time to approach it* At length even Rofaline caught the gene* ral panic its dreary afpeel occafioncd, and Sir Alfred was ofun for hours (hut up alone in its remote toiilfde; where, alas! h^ gave but too unreftr.uned an indulgence to his forrows, in rei?,. cm? in living characters thole unknown woes he (o carefully concealed from every beholder.
CHAP.
CHAP. IV. ' ** What e*|»iat torment io the griefs of mind?, *« Of pitting angmfti hid in gefttk heaitc, ** That \u^ feeds h&H* with thoughts unkin^U*, * c And nouriOieth her own comummg imaru f «« What medicine c«n my Ieech»*« art * ( Ykld fuch a fi«e, that doth the gitevaneebide, ** And will to none her uaaiadu; i.nparte ?" mFR ALFRED, notwithftanding the ap* proaches of wmter, (liil continued his ac¬ cuftomed evenings' rambles thiouoh the re- cedes of the woods. One evening, as his mental meditations had caft an unufual a j thought*
thoughtfulneft over his mind, and rendered him infenfible to all nearer objecls, he wan¬ dered from the banks of the fticara, and loft himfelf in an unknown dingle of the foreft* Night was approaching, and only a fecond light was admitted through thefe gloomy groves, when the cry ofa female, as if calling lor aihftance, ftruck on his ear. Surprifed at a circumftance fo unufual, Sir Alfred haftened to follow the founds, anxious to render afliftance to whomever might ftand in nm d of it $ and, as he haftily con-* tinned to traverfe the different avenues^ he beheld a flight /opening tn the trees,, that admitted Sill fome fhades of day¬ light, and difplayed, at no great diftance, a lady richly habited, but whofe dreii feem* ed flightly dilordered, fitting* as if in pain, beneath the fhaded bowers of an afli tree*
Sir
Sir Alfred approached refpeftfufly to offer his affiftance f their eyes encountered each other, and were rivetted, as if by enchant* ment, to the mutual glance, Sir Alfred, ftarting back a few paces, as if in doubtful amazement, at length exclaimed to the tio kf$ evidently aftom(b«d lady— 4< Either my eye deceives me, or my rea» fon has failed me, or both $ yet if I may truft the belief of my fenfes, I again behold the Lady Ruithvina Urbandine!" ** Gracious God!'* cried the lady, fink* ing on the arm of Sir Alfred, which he had e&temkd for her fupport, ** art thou then ftill living ?—J& this reality, or do I dream ? Say quickly, my Lord, art thou indeed my ©nee beloved friend ? Art thou——*' ** I am Sir Alfred St. Ofwythe/* vehe¬ mently and haftily interrupted he, picvuu- ing tlie conclufion of the BaioneisS fpeech, which he pronounced with a wild expreflion tn his c\es, and an increaild agitation of manner, that in a moment repelled the o 4 plcafuu-
pleafurable fenfations the Lady Ruithvina^ heart had felt, at an encounter fo wonder^ ful and incomprehenfible, and that now filled ,her eyes with tears of pity and amazement j for the Baronefs had known the once ac- compiifhed snd unrivalled St. Ofwythe, whofe impreflion not even his changed and altered ftate could era'fe from her mind j for vChom, indeed, flie had felt the tendered regards of mfcreft and of fi Send {hip. " Sir Alfred St. Oiwythe P* flie lepeated with a tone of aftonilhment, doubt, and- anxiety ; •* Sir Alfred St, Ofwythe, f aid ft thou, my Lord ?" ** Yes,' Lady," quickly anfwered Sir Alfred, with a terrific e&preffion of coun* tenance and an increafing agony of man¬ ner, ** wherefore aflc you thus my name? or why feek you to know the horrors it en¬ genders ?—-Is it not St. Ofwythe ?*' Whether the Baronefs felt offended, or what in reality was paffing internally within her, is unknown - 9 but flie feemed evidently ftruggling
s draggling to collect herfelf; and taking from Sir Alfred her hand, which he had re¬ tained, flie moved flovtly, but with dignified firmnefs, a few paces from hira, and thus pronounced— ** I know, my Lord, the title of St. Ofwythe is your*s j but you will forgive me the former doubts I exprefted, when you re¬ member that it is but lately it became fo ;—* tiud you i^uft recoiled 1 ^ice had the Ho- r mr of calling" you by another, more tuit- able to your ftattom-—But, I pray you, par¬ don this unwelcome intrufion—1 feel J have been too long an intruder on your privacy* Faffing through thefe demote forefts to the Caftle of L T rbandine, my palfrey fuddcnly took alarm, and feparated me from my at¬ tendants. In attempting to alHit, 1 (lightly hurt my foot, but the pain h Jlaycd. I befeech you, Sir, to axept my think* for your timely aid, which the approach of my fei vants no tors rer renders ir nccetiary that [ ihould trvfpdi further on,*' G 5 lh'l\
Here the quick trampling of numerous horfes through the avenues proclaimed the arrival of the Lady Ruithvina's fetvants* and in feme degree recalled the recollection of Sir Alfred* The wiidnefs of his eyes became foftened to a more impreffive and forrowing character, and the Blood once more circulated over hb before pallid coun* tenance* Fixing on the Lady Ruithvina a look of entreaty, he befought her permiflion to accompany her to the verge of the foreft; and the latter feeling the ftrongeft emotions of pity, as fhe caft an exprefBve timid glance on the face of Sir Alfred, from the know* ledge that he had laboured under a flight fit of infanity, now beckoned her people to keep behind; and addrefling herfelf to Sir Alfred with a mild yet dignified referve, becoming her higbrank in fociety, the thus energetically pronounced— *« My Lord St, Ofwythe, that I have be* held yuu with aftonifhment unrepreffed, I fear, from my ill-timed queftions,you cannot but
but have perceived % neither can I now fuf¬ ficiently fupprefs that womanifh curiofity,. which, while I entrear your forgivenefs of, I alfo implore, by the memory of her we have both fo loved, and who I hope may yet be living, that you will d ?go to gratify. If, indeed, 1 ever did'potfefs the honoured title and cg< , n'ce of a friend, Itt me conjure you to explain the myftery of your re- exiftence; for fince report has fcr more than five years afferted your deceafe, how muft the heart of tender lympathy rejoice to find, though ftrange and wonderful the difcovery, that you are ftill Hving-r-ftill mindful ofthofeyou once efteenied ; -~and ftill more ftrange, that, in a place fo unfre* quented as the.wild mazes of this gloomy foreft, I Ihould again behold my folong re¬ gretted friend, under circumftances that, whilft they agitate my foul with namelels conjeSurec, yet bear the ftamp of myftery and concealment/'
o 6
Sir
Sir Alfred, who had taken the arm of tlie* Baronefs within his own (and which indeed a* number of agitating emotions chat internally beat in the heart ol the Utter P rondeted now neccflary for her fupport}, and leading her confidcrably from the attendants, thus pro* nounced, after a- deep-drawn figh had a*, little relieved the excefs of his feelings— u Lady Ruithvina, in mc you behold 8 tlie miferable victim of treachery and* ingratitude. A, folemn vow, deep fworn, deep witneSed, irrevocably binds me to* fecrecy $■—not even death can diflblve the* accurfed act, ivhich dared 1 to reveal, my- life, and that of my chihTs (more dear to me than all) muft pay rite forfeiture, The* accurfed myftery muft never be ex¬ plained ;-~the chains of injuftice, that have, rivetted my difaflrous deftiny, Cannot in this world be ever unlinked; yet fuch parts of my unhappy tale as relate not to my dread¬ ful eng-ig ments, thoie, and thofe only, 1 will hereafter
hereafter inform you of. But, gznt\j Lidy, feek to know no further than the limits i prcfcribe you; at prefent be content to know that t^d gloomy woods and yonder dismantled t< weis are the refidence .1 now inhabit, hs im lancholy, retired fituation will afford me a fecure fhe!ter from the de* ftroyer of my peace ; i ! , therefore, 3 our long- tric^d friendthipcan ftiihouthve the wreck of what I wa?, you will rely on ihe honour of Alfred ; and tho' gh you may d*fiippiO\e the dreadful fecrecy my hte impolcs, yet will you learn to pity - when yeu arc made acquainted with fuch parts of my wrctihcd life, as tinder the folemn feal of % fecrecy, I will to you, and you only re vied, h\ the meantime/* he added, with a fudden de¬ gree of unufual dignity tn h ; .> vo: j, and x fiuih of ind:.*nam an^er cr.idi:i^ tec a mo- meat his \ ah:d chcvk-, <% be content to learn that, though I fuller ui,jt.il!y ail the oppreflion and mifeiy ot, Inch a L«e, yet is the foul of Alfred iuearable of dilhonour,
however he may feel tlie increafed affliction of being fufpefted." * 4 Oh Heavens ! n exclaimed the Baronefs, with extrciiie perturbation, " A'hat may the import of this dreadful myftery be ?—* Oh my friend } forgive thefe doubts and confufed expreffions of a too anxious heart | but did I not know you for the pof¬ leilbr of unblemiflied nobility of mind, the dirk fentences you have juft jtte.ed would raife conjectures and,. forgive me, excite fufpicions, that but ill agree with the high- wrought temperament of your difpofltfon. Ah me! fome dreadful ideas rulh on my fancy—ycs> 'tis impoffible but it muft be fo^*—my fears are but too true, and this deep-hidden injury has its fource in——Say, my Lord, is not——-" 6 * Oh forbear, forbear! name not the horrid title—wring not my heart-firings with founds 10 jarringly hateful to my foul! —Oh Lady Ruahvina ! whatever your con* jeftures are* let them, I conjure you, be buried for ever, ia filence aad feeurity, on the
the tablets of your fou!; but feek not to draw from me a difclofure of tliat I an for¬ bid to reveal. At prefent I am only the facrificed victim of inhuman ambition ; do not then open afrefli thofe as yet fcarce clofed wounds;—do not draw my fad heart to the comparative recolleftion of the hap* pinefs I have for ever lo(k ? to fcenes-that once exifted of ecftatie reality, left I forget my¬ feif, my child, and thofe horrid vow* tliat bind me, alas! to fubmiffion and filence, and, fulhing on the murderous deftroyer of my peace and honour, at once i niuolate both myfeif and hini to the juft vengeance ofa heart, bleeding at every po;e with in¬ juries, too keen for weak mortality to eaduie with refignation," With dreadful wiidnefs and difordered mien, Sir Altred lud uttered thefe ineohe* rent fentences; yet was there an innate air of conlcious injuied innocence in his whofe afpect and manner, that forcibly and with dignity 1 imprefled belief, The
The Baronefs, unable'to reprefs-thc ters Sir Alfred had excited, was grieved that (lie had, aimoft without inten¬ tion, exprcffcd a d^ubt of the integrity of one for whom flie had ever felt no common warmth of friend (hip ; the felt, perhaps* more keenly the pang (he had added to ths heait of the fuflerer, than lie himfelf did* Her tfefue to learn, however, fome account of Ladv St* Oiwythe, made her fupprefs the increafmg afloniflinivnt fhe laboured under,, and, with a faltering voice, (he in a low tone pronounced*— " May I not enquire for the dear com¬ panion of my happieft hours?—Ah my Lord! do not diiaj'point my hopes, but conduct mc inflantly io the Abbey of St* OfAylhej—let me opxc more clafp the friend oi rny youth io my bolB.iu Since Providence has fo wonderfully preferred your's, donbtlefs the life of my Matilda has. alto been hb care ?~You do not anfwer me! — Can it he—is flie then'—— f> A con*
A convulfive exclamation of, u Oh Gid i Oh God !" was the only confirming nega¬ tive the Baroucls received. Sir Alfred Lid his fate in his fable cloak, and the dif- tte(Ted Ruithvina needed nu fbonger con¬ firmation of the lofs Sir Alfred and herfelf had fuftaincd. A dreadful interval fucceeded before either recovered outward compofure fuffi¬ cient to again encounter the afiketug ex¬ preffions of each other's looks, S*r Alfred firft fpoke a few flight words of encourage¬ ment, and the Lady Urbandine, though deeply affec\ed at the folemn confirmation of her friend's death, yet refpecl:ed too much the facred forrow of Sir Alfred to offer vain and ill-ti ned confolations; Ilie therefore, as foon as (he could truft her voice, thus addreffed him— ** It was rcportc T , my friend, tint both yourfeif and child had b en wrecked with Uie veffel you embarked in, o.i the ihores of
of France. I will not venture to requefl: the knowledge of your providential efcape, but fay, is the fweet girl alfo an inhabitant oi the Abbey ?"' Sir Alfred was glad to be thus gratefully recalled from mournful contemplations to the only bright (ide of his dreary profpeds of ruifjed happinefs, and he replied— *' We never reached tlie deftined port you have been mtfinformed of. The ordy hoj e and folace of St, Ofwythe'$ weary pit* g image ya lives to cheer the melancholy hopelefihefs of a forrowing deftiny $«~my child, my beloved Matilda, now only known by the aflumed name of Rofaline, yet exifts to claim acquaintance with her amiabje (ponfor, if ihe - Lady Ruithvina will ftill deign to admit that claim to Mr pity for my frier,dl:f o:j ham" 4£ Oh St, Oiwythe !" foftly rejoined the Lady Uiba*.dine, in a tone of expreflive teudvii.efs and commiiciation, " Oh my dear
dear injured Lord ! can you for & moment doubt* the conftancy of that friend hip, whofe bond was mutually fcaledand pledged even to God himfelf? At leaft then let me here again renew it » and though I know not the dreadtul occafion of your prelent myfterious fufleiir.g% jet is my reliance, believe me, Sir Alfred, as firm on the ho¬ nour of my brother, (for fo, though Nature's claims forbid the relationship) I have ever confidered yoii, and do from this moment folemnly transfer that larger (hare of my perfect love, from the facred memory of her who is now no more, to her yet living re* prefentative, whofe fecond maternal parent I will never, if permitted, ceafe to prove myfeif. Corroborating circumftances now rufh powerfully on my mind, and convince me that you, my Lord, have too furely fallen beneath the ambitious machinations of a powerful villain ^ my heart bleeds at the recollection oi the injuries I too fearfu l ly fulpect you have endured j but it k enough to know, and to lament that you aie uidia r ;y,
unhappy, without rudely opprcfling, by ufe* left enquirv, the ** ftricken heart. 1 *~To the Lordfliip of Urbandine, the claims of Ruithvina are not of a flight nature, nor am I deftitute of friends, whofe powerful intcrcfts may be of fervice j command then all my poor fervices, and remember, my dear Lord, that the heart of Ruithvina muft remain in anxious fufpenfe till the cloud that fo long has obfcurcd your peace, be re¬ moved. The night is advancing rapidly? and feems to threaten with portentous afped a heavy ftorm* Mere then, fo pieafe you, we will end our interview.—Remember your promifed communication: farewell —Heaven proted you!" Sir Alfred refpedfully raifed the hand of Ruithvina to his lips j their*former habits of find friendfhip feemed to admit the unre¬ ftrained freedom of long-tried fidelity, and the Baronefs was herfelf too much agitated fro think on any fubjed clearly, Sir Alfred Acn, with a faltering accent, pronouncing, " The
** c The Saints and A'igcis have thte i.i their care!*' bowed trembling over her hand, which he refigned, ab they had arrived at the. verge'of the woods, and haftily retreat¬ ed back the way he had come ; whilft the Baronefs, whofe heart was the feat of every female virtue and tender (enriment,* ftood for a few moments contemplating his receding form, till the gloom ol tiie woods fooa (hut him from iur fi^ht - 9 when wiping fiom her eye a tear, given to the memoty cf paft felicity, (lie proceeded * towards the Cailie, deeply whipped in meditative contemplations on the miraculous encounter with a once beloved bein^, whoai flic had lon^ lamented as dead. Whatever were the Baronefs*s internal thoughts on the foregoing icene, ihe gave them no breath, and for a time Ihe was not permitted to dwell on theiraflhetive kaaree ; for as ihe paficd the buundaiy oi the foreft, and began to enter the vale which ran at tiie
the bottom of the ftecjp acclivities that over* hung the iea-ibore, the towers of her ancient inheritance burft magnificently on her fight* feated on a huge ro v ky promontory, whofe Alpine deeps rendered this immenfe pile a fortrefs of impregnable feeurity. The Lady Ruithvina, as the firft outline -of the Caftle, which for many years flie had never feea,, caught her eye, felt all thofe thrilling fenfations of delight which can only be tru'y underftood by thofe af¬ fectionate difpofitions, who, after a Jong abfence from a beloved home, revifit once more i place that had long bee"n endeared to the heart by a thoufand fweet and tender recollections of paft felicity; where each little circumftance riles with renewed Jife, as in a mirror that faithfully reflects the images of things fuch as they were, and fuch as.me¬ mory, conftant to their actions, will often ir prefent them;-—and pafliog over the tedium ofa lapfe of time that had fu cceede J, fancy, thus recalled, bufily prelents them frefli and neat ly
aiearly entire to the mind's eye, with all tlieir attendant pains and pleafurable (enia- tions; even each particular look and feeling that had been exched. is again impreflLd witli the long train of idea r - that follow the revival of fcenes in which we have ourfelves been fuch principal fharers j—forthe human mind, naturally diflatisfied, and too greedy of a vain fearch after that ftate of perfect eafe and blifs which never, i'ot wife pur¬ pofes, was defigned for an eanhiy inherit¬ ance, is but too apt to crca e to itfelf in¬ ward mtiery, by a cq.rparifon of paft hap¬ pinefs with prefent infelicity. Hi nee we often ungratefully receive" a real good ; nor are regard!efs of its worth, tilLfucceeding ill teiches us truly the v;,lue of that treafore we had fo careleflly defpifed and rejected. It was a work of labour to climb the fieep mountain defiles which kxruptothe platform of the great tower gates. \Vhen arrived there, the Baroness page founded a flirid blaft on the hoin $ the g" cat portcuhis * 3 was
* * * was flowly unchained, and the caftellan un* barring the n^ifly faftcning, the Lady Ur¬ bandine paiFed beneath, the deep arch, and bowing to the fulute of the armed foi* diery who were ftationed on the ramparts, paflcd quickly to the grand entry hall, where* after gracioufly receiving the glad welcome of her numetous people, mc proceeded with Editha, the old houfelceeper of the caftle, to tlie great oak-parlour, who now waited in refpeclful file nee for her Lady's orders. The parlour feemed more than ufually dingy and gloomy to the Baronefs, .who fighed inwardly at tbe coJdnefs of her re¬ ception, having no other welcome to the manfion of her great progenitors, than fuch as the loyal attachment of her vaflals die- • tated, and which in the prefent uneafy tern* per of her mind, (lie had no anxious whh to have repeated. The Baroi.eis having re¬ mained ibme time deeply wrapped in private meditations, at. length obferving that the room
Voom felt damp and cold, exclaimed, in a mild, but evidently agitated tone of voice— '* Add more fuel to the fire, good Editha; the night is ftormy, and the forlorn afpect 4 of this chamber needs a cheerful blaze to difpel the furrounding glooms.** The good old houfekeeper obeyed the BaronefVs orders, and tlcn rcfpectfully bowing, with a tone of leverence pro¬ nounced— " Ah my Lady ! I fear you will find this caftle but a Lid and difmal place to refide in ;—the frequent ftorms from the fea will create mcla.jsholy reflections, and opprefs your fpirits with regret for the iplendid cir¬ cles your Lad^fhip has quitted/* " Not fo, my kind, conliderate Editha," gracioufly'returned the Baron-6, with a hahdupprcfleel figh; "the enlivening in- tcrcourio of my children will be an antidote to folitude.'* vol. 1. H « That
* c That is true, fo pieafe your Ladyfliip; but you will find the caftle very dreary, I fear, without other fociety.** , ncic i^ttinia uuicisiugi from il»e melan* choly abftraftion of her Lady*s countenance, that (lie wiflied to be alone, bowed lowly her repeated welcome, and clofed after her the folding-doors of the chamber. * fi Thy remark is juft,** fighed tlie Baronefs as Editha difappcared ; ** but it is the will of my Lord, during his abfence* that I (hould here ftx my refidence ; and though thefe deferted gloomy towers feem already to frown upon me, increafmg the lati¬ tude of defpondence, and even exciting fome as yet unknown forebodings of evil, that chill me to think on ; yet wiil I cheerfully obey the withes of my Lord and hulband, and in fo doing, find a recompence for the facrilice required/*
The
The melancholy fcene and interview Ihe had pafled with a long loft, long regretted friend in the foreft, feemed deeply imprefled on the private thoughts ofthe Haroneis ; and often did (lie ftart in agitated amazement at the fuggeftions of her internal medita* tions. Sometimes her eyes w f ere caft with an unmeaning glance round the dark (ides of her antique apartment, now firongly illu¬ mined by the additional glare of light that flamed from the hofpitable and cheering hearth ; nor could ihe at times help fhud¬ dering, as die remembered the fitua¬ tion of the caftle, perched high on the pin¬ nacle of a lofty rock, and cxpoled to the dreadful tempefts of the elements which now howled around, and hoarfely murmur¬ ed through the long founding galleries, through whofe empty fpaces the wind rufhed in moanful echoes ; whilft the threatening clouds, now darkening ali the fky with tlieir fulphureous combuftion, (hut in night with additional horrors.
ii %
Soon
Soon the thunder began to roll its awful peals along the vaulted concave of ITeavcn*s footflool $ the forked lightnings to dart angrily acrofs the gloomy at- ruofphcre in dread contending ftrife, and, In a moment, wither the unguarded tree, that hangs, folitary and alone,,over the wild flee] s of tin Alpine fliore. Even the caftle (hakes beneath its firm bafiv ^nd owns the power of chaotic diforder, to whofe deftroy- inG; uiurpations Nature herfelf muft for a tme yield up the fceptre of her fofterlng influence, - The fortitude of the Baronefi forfook 'her j (lie melred into tears of regret, not more for her own, than for the faddencd reverfe of the deftiny of friends once loved and vene¬ rated. Ovei whelmed with forrow, excited by reflecting on their fate, ihe refted her head upon her hand j and, in tones of an- p 5 u;fl\ ^avc vent to her feelings in the fol¬ low W\i words:—
** And
u And is this all that remiins to ftie ?*' flie exclaimed, in a voice of in*va v I dejection h u are albthe happy fcenes of once •. promifed felicity vanithed frorii my view, like a palling vifion, winch has left roe, o./ly the fad reality of fono.vs tint my forcb)Jing foul predict are the future ieiibns 1 m^ii teach my heart to learn and to expect ? — Yet'why, ah! why flioul.i 1 lament the dreaded future?-—Unfortunate Ruithvina, ceafe thefe vain regrets, for thy only leflba is obedience jand fubmiftion i—recal not the memory of thofe vain hopes which early dif¬ appointment blighted! Be the fecret for¬ rows of thy heart for ever concealed^—awake not the jealoufy of fufpicion, or the prying eye of curiofity by thefe ufelefs indulgences of grief.—Yet furely the eye of frientlfoip may let fall fome drops of fympathctic pity to the memory of beings once beloved, nor fear the envenomed tongue of Calumny's diftorted reports, when humanity alone be¬ wails the ruin of thofe we onve have edeemed —once rejoiced in the mutual, tin end wri.i \ h 3 intercourie
intercourfe of confidence and love !—-Ma* tilda ! dear partner of my happier days, for thee the heart of Ruithvina mourns—for thy lake flie laments the mifertes of him whom, whilft thy iair form retained within it a hear! to feel, thou juftly confidered as the fource of all thy hippinefs and hopes,—• Alas ! unfortunate St, Oiwythei'* Here an overwhelming tide of forrow choked all further utterance, and put a flop to thefe deep cxpreflions of regret and in¬ coherent meaning which too evidently dif¬ played no common intereft, and proved tbat the Bar6nefs had not flightly known the fiiends, whofe fecret woes (he thus deplored, . A violent guft of wind at that moment detached htr thoughts from their melan¬ choly fouice i the florm witliout became evui more temfic, the lightning glared hor¬ ribly o\cr the tioubled fa; the ainds and thundaa roared in confli&bg ftruggks, and rocked
ANCIENT rocked the bulwarks of the caftle ; t whilft a dreadful erafti of waters, accompanied by a tremendous noife, like the fall of fome huge precipices of rocks into the ocean, ieetned fearfully to proclaim one general, univerfal ruin. The Lady Ruithvina ftarted up aghaft, transfixed with horrible expectation of the danger another fuch (hock might involve the caftle in, when fuddenly a confufed mur¬ mur of voices founded in the anti-chamber ; * the door of the parlour vvas rudely opened, and feveral of the domeftics, with wild af¬ frighted looks, ruflicd into the prefence of their alarmed miftrefs j at length one of them fumnioncd courage haftily to pro¬ nounce™ ** The great eaftern tower, my Lady* that overhangs tlie tea, is in flames !** ** Heaven guaid them !—Oh five, lava my boys i" fhnekid the Baronefs, linkni-; detyaiiin^ly back on her chair, and lu; n « 4 moment
moment wringing in agony her hands | * then fuddcnly tlarting up, fl>e franticly exclaimed—** Fly, fly, fome of you, and fnatch the fons of your Lord from the de¬ vouring gulph that will deilroy them,—Oh 'Heaven^! peihaps they may already be plunged into the mercilefs wares, and I fliall tee my Con Clan tine no more!—-Begone inilaptly,'* fhe more diftraclingly cried to the terrified houfehokl, *' or they are loft for ever T* The attendants ftarted back, aghaft, u Alas! my Lady/* cried Edith*, more courageous, from the real love and fidelity of her heart to the race of her ancient Lords, » €i alas 1 the tower is now in flames, ftruck by the lightning ; and the battlements have already fallen from their lofty walls into the fea." For a moment ihe now diffracted Rutth- vina flood the pale image of horror and dclpairj
defpair j but the feelirgs of a mother agam recalled that courage and conftancy Oie hail never till this moment known the want'of Darting glancvS of anger and wild determi¬ nation on her terrified pe >ple, ihe loudly ejaculated— ** My children, thy mother fliall yet try to favc thee, or we will periih together !" She ruflied through the halls and open courts, as a much nearer way to an ive at the eaft tower than through the long galleries of the interior, which ied by a chain of de¬ ferted buildings to the dreadful object; flie arrived at the gate, that opened into the eaftern court, followed at a diftance by Editha and the terror-ftruck domeftics. But what a fight prcfen:ed itfelf to thz anxious and agoni/.jd heart ofihedelpairing mother, who, ab Or entered, bciield the tower, in which the ions of her Lord re¬ pofed, half defpoiled of its lofcy h,ad, and H 5 the
the flames ifluing furioufly through its upper windows. Defpair and frenzy marked die diftorted vilage of the Baronefs; flie ran, flie flevv over the extended pavement, and burfting with more than hu rt <au ftrength the ftrong faftenings of the gates, flie was feen, enveloped in fmoke, rufhing, through a glare of light, up the fpiral (leps of the tower; and in an inftmt after a Ihriek, which feemed her laft, rung appalling on the ears of the ftupified domeibcj, and they fet^up an univerfal cry of horror, convinced that with the Baronefs had perifhed alfo the inhabitants of the di eadful tower. None of them had courage to vtn* ture to confirm the'r Icar^ till Kditha, ftarting fonva«il, fid I wildly on her knee^, aud !ou '!y Ixi^'i/jit Uum to lutlen, ere it wao loo hue, t> tiie ^Clante of ther be* » lo\cdf.avi). S:il! ih~y larcd nJt ii.r. * 4 Oh th ly Vii^n ! (he exclaimed, wringing lit, liands, £ * will Jione veutu;e I 1 * ;j At
At that moment a whole fide of the tower fel! 2 with a Lrvjn.eiiJ.ous noife, into the fea, and dilcovcrv* 1 the Ba«*«»aeft dill living, and rulhing tljrowg!; .1 cloud of fmoke towards a bed, width the f;ame& that inftant had caught iiold of* ** See, fee! Heaven's wil! be done!--* Will none vent me ?" die repeated, ** Then old Editha\vill!—Oh .God ! how the flames furrdund her !—Spare, guardian angels, fpare the mod lovely of human beings! and Oh ! accept, inftead,. the a;ed Kdillm! Dear Lady, 1 come, if pothole, to relcue thee,or to die with thee!" Regardiefs of their attempts to retain her from the dreadtul purpoie, Editha tot¬ tered to the tower, and was for a moment feen atcending the ftaiis, What an awful paufe oi fufpcnfe fucceed- ed to the horror-(liuck fpectators: the wind and dmnder, roaring in diead tre* h 6 meikious
mendous convulfions, batried along the roof of heaven, and tlie agitated waters ofthe fea, in mountain*rifing forges, laved the rocky bulwarks of the Alpine fteeps j the forked and biasing lightnings cut the murky glooms of night, whilft volumes of fmoke and flame, raging furioufly from the upper parts of the tower, gleamed horribly over the troubled bofom of the angry deep, and rendered pale ev.n the lightnings themfelves. All eyes, in defpairing hope, were now turned towards the^dreadful object of horror and fearful expectation j at length Editha was feen hurrying, with the eldeft fon of her Lord, through the chamber, and in a few feconds a fliout of gladnefs hailed them fafely arrived from the dreadful boundaries of their near deftruction, Their joy, however, was ftill imperfect $, for as the flames began now to rage with greater violence than ever, aimoft every profpect of the Baroncfs*s efcape was ended, when
when fuddenly the fall of a more diftant battlement difplayed her, for a moment, ftruggling with the door of a chamber^ which, as flie forced it open, again precluded lier from their view. After the fpace of five minuted deathlike fufpenfe, an exclamation of— <4 She lives! fhe lives !'* proclaimed the happy tidings 5 and Ladv Ruithvina, rufhing through the outward chamber, with her younj ion chip- ed in her arms, foon after entered the court* where finking, completely exhaufted, on her knees, fhe juft retained life enough to articulate—" My boy, my Conftantine, yet lives !<—■ Powers of Mercy, accept a mother's thanks !*' and feil fenfelefs on the pave¬ ment. The frantic terror of her people was now as wild as their for ner joy for her miracu- lou$ efcape, for all concluded flie was dead ^ till one of her mo .icn, loofening her out¬ ward garments^ gave freer relpiration to her fainting
fainting i mft:e<s \ a- d thoy haliened to coiv vey her to a place ol nil and feeurity, ihft trjiug to take tl;j }oung Conftantine from ha lockul embiace :-—but the mother, even in infenfibility, was conicious of the praious tieafiirc flie had prdlnxd ; nor could thev, in her pre»ent ftate, looic him from her ftrong enfolded grafp; Hiey were therefore both convesed gently io the Baronef/s apart ment. The Lady Ruithvina had received fome dreadful hurts, for Conftantine flept in au inner apartment of the tower beyond Jus brother's ; where the flames had can die the hangings of his bed at tne time the Baronefs forced into it, and a few moments of pro* trackd delay had font him to be an inha* 01 rant ol heaven* In the agonies of fuch a moment, the elder ion of the Baron had been left to pen (a it is too likely, had nut the faithful Editha beeu inlpired with the determination of rcicui.'g.
threatened tlcftru&ion. Editha, however, nearly choked with fmoke, was unable to proceed further than the 8 firft chamber, where the cries of tlie young Loid Gon¬ demar guided her in time to effect liis* iafety and efcape. When, however, the Baronefs was re¬ ftored to life, and tranfoort in beholding the perfect health and fafety of her f\n, as he flcpfin her arms r (he, for the fi, ft time,. remembered that the Lord Gondemar * as abfent ; and wildly ftarting in her bed, ihe loudly exclaimed-** ** Oh Heavens! what have I done ?~~ Guilty wretch that 1 am, 1 have left to perhh* in the devouring flime*, the eldeft born of my Lord and huiband j and ere tins, pei¬ haps, his form is for ever ihroudul in d.\uh —buried beneath the allies of the drcadludy con fumed cower!"
Sh.'ieki.;#
Shrieking wildly, and totally regardlefs of the agonies of pain her frame had fuffercd, from the fevere burns and bruifes flie had received, flie was ruthing again towards the fcene of danger, when Ediths prefenting the youthful Gondemar in fafety, fhe clafp- ed him joyfully to her arms } and then, quite exhaufted, fubmitted to the direc¬ tions of her people, who having mlniftered affuafives to her hurts* flie funk peacefullf to reft i after having offered a prayer of gra¬ titude and heartfelt adoration to that Su* preme Being, who had fo gracioufly preferved herfelf and children from the jaws ofa fate the moft horrible to nature* The morning, however, now rofe fe* renely beautiful j every veftige of the late tempeft was diffoived, and 4he heavens pre¬ fented only one grand difplay of vaft ex¬ tended ether, enriched shlth all the glowing brilliance of a cloudlefs fun, which fhone with fplendour over ths grey turrets and gilded fanes of the caftle, reflefting in * dazzling
dazzling brightnefs the Un thoufand glories of his beams on the hofoni of the now un* ruffled *' abyls piofound." The caftle, which (lootl proudly and loftily exalted over the vaft waters ol the ocean, feemed to re- pofe, in folemn, fi owning majefty, the mo¬ narch of the furrounding fcenes, rearing high its ponderous and gigantic towers above the Alpine pinnacles of near and diftant mountains, awing, as it were, into fubmif- (ion and dependance the humbler dwellings that, ia lengthened perfpedive, were km in the diftant profpect to raife, amidft the valley below, their lowly roofs. The caftle had once been a fief of the Crown of England; and ancient (lory re¬ cords its towers* as being the witnefs of many a dark and fearful act* Often had its proud battlements llieltered alternately the Monarch, and the rebellious iuhject that dared oppofe his (way; many vvere the for¬ mer* ficges it had known, but its flrowr, impregnable bulwarks had as often refilled the
the attack-of ftu and land, and baffled the moft confammatc mantxsuvres of the Gtne** rals that vainly tried, by force or ftratagcm, to elftd its overthrow* In fome ofthe mouldering records found in the caftle, it i& famed, in times of yore, as being tbe guardian of John againft hh difaffeded Barons j and many of itsfuccef- five Lords had, in after times, proudly and triumphantly whhftood the attacks of an invading' foe, An imperfed account, of fome dark tranfadions ftill remain, the guilty evidences of tyranny and ptieft- craft * but as thefe relate only to deeds done in ages paft, and pertain not to the events of the prefent tale, it would be ufe¬ lefs to enter into an uninterefting detail of what but an aim ft decayed and mutilated manuscript can afford. Alas ! "tiie tale to be n w recorded, affords but too many proofs of the t ark dxd , and dangerous fuperfti¬ tions of ih„ fourteenth cemury*
The
The hte Lord of Urbandme was a Noble of fevere diipofitton, but unblcmithed ho* nour» 1'hc death of an only and beloved fon, the heir of his rank and richer, iiad deeply dwelt on the proud mind of the Baton $ and nor even the gentle and iubmiillve be¬ haviour of his only remaining Guild could fometimes (often the growing aufterity of hb manners. After the death of parents, tlluftrious for their noble virtues, as well as the grandeur of their rank, the magnificent poffeflions of her great progenitors were vefted folely in the perfon of the Lady Ruithvina Urbandine, who was tlie only living child ot the late Baron, and in whom alone the Baronial titles, as well as the cle- ntefne, were inveftcd, Thg caftle was of great extent, and built of fuch durable materials and ru^ej texture, as toriiid defiance ahiu U to tunc itfelf; but though its interior was magnificent and fumptUQu% that, was an asr ot proud grandeur in t\v i\ : x ol the lufldm^, that
was evidently meant for purpofes of greater import than an old Engliih Noble's residence. Its high-raifed towers* and heavy overhang* ing battlements conveyed an idea ofa place clefigned for at once a fortrefs and a prifon. The late Baron of Urbandine had indeed endeavoured to alter the ftyle of the building, and to take from it that Gothic, gloomy afpeft which, at firft %ht f excited emotions of fear and alarm in the beholder £ but either the architect was unfkilful, or the defign was ill-judged, for no improvement could add an outward cheerfulnefs to the fo^ lemnity of its dark rugged towers* The building was of irregular fhape, and at every angle rofe a clufter of turretted bat dementi, of ponderous and huge dimen- fions, whofe uncommon height, and broad fpacious v\alls were black with the ruft of time, The north front of the cattle was fituated on the edge of the chff% having only a hanging terrace, that divided and defended
defended it from the main ocean j and giving from its windows a terrific unbound¬ ed profpect, that at firft to the beholder conveyed an aimoft fairy idea that the caftle had fuddenly reared itfelf from the bofom of the vaft deep; for, from this profpect, no particle of land cheered or added variety tO the furrounding feme* The naturally ftrong fituation of the caftle rendered it fecure and impregnable againft the fudden attack of an invader; and now that all England was in arms, and fathers, fons, and brothers had c.diiicd themfelves beneath the banners cf a bloody civil war, this caftle, like many others, was arme 1 for the feeurity of its Lord, ia cafe of danger, ' It was the received opinion that the Baronefs, at her Loid*;* requeft, hdd retired from the Courts to avoid the e .dequcnecs of thofe cruel and dreadful contentions r at had already begun to agitate the minds of
men, and the politics of Miniftcrs. The Vrinccs of tlie York (action had already vuthdiawn their allegiance from the Sove¬ reign Henry of Lancafler; and the nccef* fity of the times had driven to their ftrong ftrtrcfles the *> ounger branches and iiluftrkms Ladies of the Englifli Nobiiity j and fuch was the univerfal belief, as to the caufe that •occafioncd the Lady Ruithvina's fudden ar- rivaJ at her ancient pofleffiom': but to thofe who had long known the character md dif* pofition of the Baron, a doubt was enter* tained as to their reality* The Baronefs was ftill in the very prime of life, and her beauty unrivalled by the faireft dames of the Bfkilh Court 5 but even the unblemflhed honour of her cha¬ ncer and conduct could not fliield her from the bufy tongue of blading Calumny, or ftay tlie utifoundcd fufpicions of her jealous-minded Loid,
By
By fome unaccountable circumfUncc, a Teport had been whi*pered th it the Ba¬ ronefs, in the very early days oi her youth, had felt a mutual partiality for a young uc- compHlhed Noble, to whom ihe had pro¬ mifed herfelf at a future period; end tliat her marriage with Otho, Baron of Caftle¬ nuco, had betn the arbitrary ad of her father, who had conftratned her affections, and forced her to an union with a Chief fhe had never beheld but with averfion. The truth of fuch a rumour was much to be doubted, fince the affection the ever bare her Lord, and the unexampled goodnef? * ith which flie cheerfully yielded to ail his withes, checked in time the unfounded report, which might otherwife have depreciated the honourable mention of the BaronclVs name and virtues ; yet, though the wodd became convinced of the injuftice fhe had fuffercd, and the tale funk to obhvion, the Baron cealed not to remember it had. once found exiltencc; and, to a mind addicted io the baneful paffion of jealoufy, the fmalleft
fmalleft caufes " are confirmations ftrong ai holy writ /' and thouah he ever treated the noble Ruithvina with apparent affection and politenefs, yet fometimes a clouded coun* tenance befpoke a mind within, labouring with undivulged uneafinefs % and feldom of late had he ever felt more (atisfaction than when the Baronefs, with not the flighteft v hefitation, obeyed his defire for her removal fhm the fociety of her admiring friends, and the brilliant gaieties of a Court life, to refide in future dn the filent folemnity, and gloomy famenefs of Caftle Urbandine. Accompanied by her train, and the eldeft fon of the Baron, with his brother, the heir of Usbandine, (lie quitted the Royal Palace, and after a weary journey, arrived at the confines ofthe Foreft of St. Oiwythe, whofe tracklcfs, long untrodden roads had led her outriders aftray, and been the means of fo ftrangely introducing to her prefence a being (lie had long mourned as dead ; but whofe wonderful relloration was accompanied with fuch
fuch. myfterious circumftances, as in part even compelled herfelf to filence and fee i eey. The young Lord Gondemar of Caftle- tiuco, eldeft fon of the Baron, by a former lady, was aijived at the age of adolelcence, and already had the bias of his mind formed to itfelf a future flandard for his conduct. Surrounded by a fuite of fervants (to whofe care Ms father had entirely refigned him, lince the death oi his former Lady), his heart naturally bad, became hardened, and early difplayed traits uf an ambitious, proud fpirit. Left to tlie unchecked difpofal of himfelf, he imbibed dangerous notions of the greatnefs and foperiority of his birth i and being fur- rounded only by a fet of dithoneft fyco- phants who dared not contradict his will, or thwart his jsafhoas, and who found it their intereftto induL ~ 4 his pleafures, he became at once an oI>jec; k$ future dread to thofe who unhappily exuted his regard or his voju li I hatred;
hatred j and, even as a boy, evinced the evils tbat awaited his maturity. The iiluftrious RuUhviria* pitying the ftatein which he was educated, had fome¬ times difplayed, in mild terms, the dangers attendant on the indulgence of unruly paf* Cons*, but Gondemar, fcarcely reftraining the unjuft diflike he had ever conceived for the Baronefs from terms of open expreflion, haughtily reminded her that over him (lie had no authority, nor would he brook a ftepmothet's interference in thole purfuits that his high birth and fortunes demanded* The Baronefs was * foon convinced how fruitlefe and unprofitable were her efforts, where the foil was naturally ftubborn and . unyielding 5 and flie found that his mind had received that unhappy bias, whofe dan* gerous tenets had gained too fure a root to hope for amendment j fhe therefore confined herfelf folely to Conftantine, whofe mind and heart (the reverie ot his brother's) eafily fubmitted
, fubmitted to the wiflies of the Baronefs, \vho found, in the goodnefs of his temper, no difliculty to inftil thofe feeds of manly emu* lat ion that Gondemar had rejected. f Between the ages of the brothers there was a difference of four or five years. As Conftantine grew older, his mind feemed to ' hwtfi imbibed a love for deep reflection and penfive pleafures ; whilft the goodnefs of his heart, the uncommon beauty of his perfon, and the fweetnefs of his mild difpofition, rendered him universally loved and refpect* ed, as much as Gondemar f s overbearing, haughty temper excited dread and diflike. Their oppofite difpofitions gave them but. littleseft for each other*s fooiety; whilft in the heart of Gondemar a fmothcred averfion had long been hid for hts brother, which not the mildnefs and forbearing good- nature of Con¬ ftantine could remove or conquer $—though he had made many attempts to obtain a place in the affections of Gondemar, lie h,ul i 2 been
been as conftantly repelled by the latter, from whom his only returns were freezing looks of fcorn, or words didated with told, iinco"**tp{H!«* l&ntruape. " As they arrived to manhood, each had their feparate fuites of apartments and at¬ tendants afflgned them ; nor, though Con¬ ftantine was the heir of Urbandine in right of his mother, would he ever affume to himfelf that foperioiity which his birth and greater inheritance entitled him to j he fighed indeed for the friendfhip and affec¬ tion of his brother, but he humbled himfelf, that he might not aroufe thofe proud paf- fions, which a rival fuperiority would have provdked in Gondemar. The Baronefs had often tried to effect in Gondemar a fenfe of the injuftice of hts conduft to a brother that loved him with the moft fraternal warmth, which flie attri¬ buted to the coldnefa of his heart to ali relative connections j but Gondemar never deigned
deigned toexplain the reafon of his behaviour, and only listened to the Baronefs in fullen filence, or increafed refentment againft the caufe that had procured him fuch rebukes, which, however mild, his proud foul felt impatient under ; or if fometimes the Baron, hts father, was prefent, and enforced his commands with a threat that Gondemar dared not difobey, for his apologies to his brothef, he would impetuoufiy feize the hand ofthe latter, hnd, while his looks fpoke the fmiles of a diffrmbling heart, that dc* t ceived his father to a belief that al was peace, he would grafp fo hardly the hand he had taken, that the marks of violence too plainly (hewed how deceptive had been the outward figns of Gonderaar*s affection : but Conftantine*s noble mind enabled him to bear io fdznc* the pain of his bruifes, nor did he ever make known the uokind advan¬ tages be had taken ot his offered friend* flap.
* J
The
The caufe of Gondemar's want of affee^ tion, and even averfion to the, youthful Conftantine, cannot fo welt be explained a& in his own words; for, after leaving the prefence of the Baron (whom alone he feared to offend) with welkliflembkd love towards his brother, he would ru(h furioufly to his own apartments, and, in the rage of his dif« tempered paflion, utter fome dark and dread- ful threats againft the unoffending object who had been unknowingly the caufe of many a degradation. ** My curfes wither the hated intruder V* he would exclaim aloud ; ** he poffeffes his father's affections and his mother's riches!— What, (hall a boy, a (tripling, a younger brother lord it over Gondemar ?—• Shall he inherit the e proud towers-**(hall he enjoy the vaft wealth of Urbandine, whilft only the ftenl Barony cf Caftlenuco remains to me?"
Here
had aroufed the envy of a bad hearty and frozen up the affedions of brotherly regard in his brealt—this fortunate brother was un¬ difputed heir to the iiluftrious titles and do¬ mains of Urbandine ; a poffeffion that his ambitious foul had afpired to from infancy* ■ though the neceflity of difguifing his dark and guilty wiflies ought to have deftroyed their exiftence, fince nothing could encou* rage their hopes of future gratifications yet he could not at times command his paflion* fufficiently to dilguife that dan¬ gerous anger and internal hatred that burnt . in hk heart, again ft Ihe only being who ftood between him and this avarice and ambition. •But as his cunning taught him the neceflity of dilguifing his averfion and its caufe, the difcovery of his dangerous and deep-rooted hatred was tecured fiom the knowledge of the Baronefs $ nor did the unlufpedin^ Conftantine ever fuppofc to what dark paf¬ lion he owed the difafledion of a brother, m whom he had fought, by every proof ol love, i 4 for beat*
forbearance, and flratagem, to creafe a mutual efteem and' friendfhip. Guilt made the latter cautious and fecret; or had . the dreadful tendency of his thoughts been developed in the firft dawnhigs of his/youth, the unnatural bias of his mind might have received a check, and been quafhed in its in¬ fancy i but, unfortunately, the paffionl of avarice and ambition, that had fo early * . phnted themfelves in hb breaft, " increafed with his years,** and ftrengthened with his growth j and, in addition to that never-de- creafing mountain of diflike that he felt for Conftantine, was the difregard and open difapprobation with which he was confidered * by the vaflals and retainers of Urbandine., . who looked up to their future Lord, in the perfon of their beloved Lady's fon, with aimoft adnration as well as refp^ft, not only as a mafter they muft obey, but as a friend, whole mild opening virtues promifed them - a powerful interceffor with the Baron, againft thofe heavy grievances that a feudal Chief had po'Acr to inflict, and which indeed ihe Loid
Lord Otho had given feveral oppreffive tnftances of. ,The tenantry in general were in their hearts diflatisfied, though none dared openly to breathe their murmurs againft their pre¬ fent Lord, and the unwarrantable ex¬ ertions of power that had been felt univer* fally among them ; but whatever evils they might endure-from the Baron, were amply amended in the kind interference of the Baronefs and Conftastine, who were ever anxious to repair the injuries that the feverity, and even cruelty ofthe former had often over¬ whelmed theaiwtth; whilft Gondemar they confidered as a ftranger, nor, though the vaflals patiently fubmitted to his father's harfli edids, would they in filence endure the tyrannic power he had often exerted over them, - Hence it was that the vindictive paflion of jealoufy, as well as hatred, was implanted in his heart ; for Le could but ill brook to fee the voluntary homage that vvas ever paid as much to tiie virtues, as to the
high dignity of his brother's bitth^ who^va$ ^ K always the mediator between him and the deftructive wrath he would often have exc* cuted on the lower orders of retainers, but who, in Conftantine, ever found a guardian againft the revenge and malice of Caftlenuco* So degenerate was his mind, that he-ever after harboured the moft unforgiving refent¬ ment againft the unfortunate, being who had offended, or dared to oppofe the privileges of nature againft the tyranny of his will ^ and hence Ius froward nature fcit the , moft unabated anger againft the Baronefs If who*had given the preference to her own child (whofe danger, being greater than Gondemar's, had doubly called for her ex¬ ertions in his behalf), on the night that her Ladylhip had preferved from the flames he? o«Jy fon* Gondemar trcafured this eircutn* ftance in his foul, and m\xr after forgot it* „ Several years had glided imperceptibly away at the callle, with little worthy of record * 9
record ^ and thefe noble youths grew up towards manhood, in ali the various ex- ercifes fuited to the inftrudiom of that age Qf hioodfhed. Each had a ftrong defire for martial encerprize and warlike glory y and Gondemar* who, as being confiderably older than Conftantine, had reached his years of • emancipation from adolefcence, in the wars with France had given proofe of the reftleii hardihood^f his ambitious Ipirit i Conftantine, ftill under the tuition of his preceptors, and the affedionate care of his mother, rofe gradually to the perfedion of every' manly virtue, and the pradice of * thofe honourable purfuits tliat marked his charader—the dehght of his adoring mother, and the favourite of all his numerous tenantry and vallals. The pcrfon of Gondemar was large, muf. cular, and well-proportioned *> his features were dark and expreffively handfome; but hb black eyebrows were ever knit with a 1 6 h owning
frowning harfl^rtefs, and the fpeak ing pene¬ tration of his fparkling eyes confeffed the proud movements of his foul, md feemed to exact inftant homage and fubmiftion to his very looks j whilft the mild, open, fine- formed countenance/ and pleafing conci¬ liatory manners .of Conftantine rendered obedience a talk light and eafy to his adoring attendants* Such were the different characters of thefe young brothers of a noble Houfe j and, a$ they arrived to the age of manhood, each daily unfolded fome new characleriftic of their opposite MpoBtlop$ t Conftantine, though he could not fucceed in allaying the growing*enmity which, with pain, he be* held in his brother, was too generous to difciofe the many proofs of the decep¬ tive cruelty he in fccret bore horn Gou- dcmar, whofe mind was filled with a deep , unconquerable hatred, which no effort could ' remove* Often, indeecl, had the latter, in the prcfence of the Baron, aflumed a dek* five
, five fhew of regard for the noble Coiftantine, and deceived him with the vain hope that his pcrfeverance had at length fubdued the ftem f proud heart of his brother, and that in future he fliould enjoy what he had U> lone fished for—a friend in iiim ;— but he foon difcovered how impoflible was the accompiUhment of, his wifhes, and though he deeply felt their difappointment, he buried them in his own breaft; nor ever exerted that fuperiority which his inheritance gave him, to compel Goadeimr to dcf\(l from thofe injuries he too often fubmitted to s from the extreme forbearance of a nobly forgiving nature,
chap.
*MgmsBm m&&wsm um
v^rji/v* • v # * * <* Her Hiaj>& was human, but a bearenly grac^ 64 A®d b*a» y all divine adorti f d her face,"* *< In each low wind* methinks, a fpirit catta* 11 At4 more thm eclioei talk along tiie walls," Pom* JL HUS had paffed a fpace of fame years, fince the arrival of Sir Alfred at the Abbey, and the Baronefs at the Caftle, with nothing of moment neccflary to be mentioned in either of their hiftories, excepting that, on the night ofthe Baronefs^ arrival, Sir Alfred, after
^ANCIEHT after their interview, had returned to the Abbey with a mind difordered and un- ufually unhappy. The evening's repaft was taken away untafled; and, as foon as he had retired to his own chamber, he paffed on to the gloomy old library, where he fpent the reft ofthe night, m he had too often done the preceding ones. In the morning his pale, haggard countenance declared too un* deniably his want of reft ; and even O^en (who was difmifled with a fmall packet of letters to the Baronefs) could not help think* ing that his dear mafter certainly was either infane, or had been feared by a ghoft. The Baronefe, on the receipt of thefe papers, impatiently opened them, and hoped to find a full difclofure of the myftery thae enveloped her friend j but iher perufel, though they increafed her wonder, explained nothing to umavel the cloud of myftery and conjecture that involved .Sir Alfred in a fituation fo aftonifiling and even doubtful; but whatever was the purport of theie o letters,
* letters, they were committed to the flames as fbem as read, foch being St.' Ofwythe*s earneft requeft contained within them. Dniing the fpace of time before men¬ tioned. Sir Alfred had cleared many parts of the Abbey lands that lay onthe foreft bor¬ ders, and which bad been fo long overrun with the fcions and young underwood that fpread horn the latter. Many neat little habita¬ tions were erected, and gladly tenanted by the ancient vaflals ofthe demefne, who had Jong groaned beneatli the hard yoke of Urbandine, and now with joy returned to their allegiance to St. Ofwythe, from whofe mild government they bad every thing to hope, but nothing to fear j and thus Sir Alfred, * in a (hort time, found the unprofitable kinds of his anceftors, that had fo long laid wafte and deiolate, would now become a htite inhabited territory, proving in the end beneficial to fociety, and affording *m increafe of revenue to himfelf and his pofterity*
Sir
Sir Alfred had invariably flmnned a!l foticty but thofe of his poor humble re¬ tainers £ nor could the efforts of the Lady Urbandine induce him to vifit the caftle, though frequent and prefling had been her attempts for that pnrpofe. They fometimes correfponded, but never after met. An in- creafing melancholy frequently obfcurcd the fine features of St. Ofwythe, which not even the company of his daughter could chafe from^iis heart* The* lovely Rofaline has too long remain¬ ed unnoticed} (he had at this.period ar¬ rived at the age of fixteen, and was indeed the fweet child of Nature's bed perfections ; her lovely face and form promifed an aflem- blage of every female grace, and tier mind and |ieart of every pofleflion that could ren¬ der virtue ftill more irreflftible, and beauty more fafcinating} and though living in the gloomy recedes of St, Ofwythe** woods, fe- eluded entiiely from all tootty fuitable to her birth and'years, yet was tier mind never depieflVd
* deprcffed by fadnefs* pr the heavenly fmile of her aimoft angelic face clouded, but when Ihe faw her father more than ufually melan¬ choly and unhappyj and then indeed the bright glow of innocent contentment, which had beamed over her fweet featurevvani(h* ed, or was fucceeded by a look of ft*cb deep commiferation* accompanied; with a tear of exquifite feeling, which, as it fell from her fpeaking eyei, evinced the u«* Common tcndernefs of her foul*/ Often would fhe kneel before him, with all the innocent fincerity of a heart anxious only for his happinefs, and hanging on hi$ words with filial attention, fhe would raife her fpeaking features jn tcndernefs and iorrow to her father's* and in language alrn&ft irre- fiftible, fearch for tlie hidden caufe of hk deep*conccaled fadnels. Sir Alfred, though he never anfwered thefe pains u! importunities by any other than a filent (hake of his head } and though the* dreadtul uigcncy of his fecret griefs forbade 1 hm
him the endearing confidence of his lovely chihl, yet did he often feel the benefit of her mild and dutiful arguments $ for feldom would (he quit his fight till fhe had recalled the faint emblems of returning peace over his care-worn countenance, and deprived aift&ion of half her envenomed ftiogj then in the fociety of hk child, Sir Alfred found a momentary ceflation of thofe concealed woes, that preyed upon his mind with fuch burthenfome reftiembrances; and grateful for the precious gift ftill left him, he would ftruggle with his feelings for a time, that he might reward his Rofaline with % more But, alas! though he concealed in her prefence the myftery of his outward expreffed grief, his fortitude forfook him in the un¬ interrupted hours of retirement, and mid¬ night witnefled alone the cureleft indulgence of what no effort could fqpprefs* Rofeiine*$
and delicate 'y proportioned* fliehioVed with that light any graccfubefs which her fylph- like figure rendered aimoft enchanting. It was her principal amufement to wander among the woods for hour*} exploring frefli fcenes that every where met her curious eve, Accuftomed from infancy to the gloomy folitudes of their thickets, glades, and re* c,fles, they were too familiar to her to create difguft at a famenefs that flie had never known the reverfe of j nor ever did fhe ex* prefs a wiih to pafs the boundaries of tbe foreft fhe was taught to confider as her only home \ for Sir Alfred, hating thofe worldly fcenes, where he had on$c experienced alike the fweets, and extremes ofthe reverfe of life, feemed entirely to forget that there were other inhabitants beyond the precincts of the foreft ;«—fliut out, therefore* from the benefit of enlightened fociety, and folely dependant on her father for inftruction and information, fhe naturally imbibed a pen- five, romantic habitude 'of mind, that marked
marked for ever her future character. Bit Sir Alfred, though happy to lole it pofliblc the remembrance of all wot Idly connections, negleded not to' inftil thole high and culti¬ vated kffons of education and refinement, which, from his own ftore of mental acquire* ments, he was fo able to beftowon Rofaline ; vvhiift Elinor, the houfekeeper, whofe ta* lents hnd capacity fuitetl her for the under* taking, inftruSed her young miftrcfs in thole more iamediate branches of accomplilh- ments that related to the education of fe¬ male excellence, Under fuch able tutors, Rofaline (though buried in the monaftic glomus ofthe Abbey and it& cheeriefs woods) flouriihed like the dawning bud of the valley lily, vthich nur¬ tures beft in the (hade, nor needs the in- conftant heat of the dazzling funbeam to rear (o maturity us furpaffing beauties. As fhe advanced in years, the mind of Rofaline displayed an uncommon fuftcpu- bility
bility and tcndernefs of feeling. Her emo* tions of grief were exquifite in the ex* treme; and fo devoted were her affections to Sir Alfred, that fhe would often forego thofe hours affighed to recreation and amufement, to follow his footfteps, as he pnr« fued his evening*s walk to the fhaded coverts ofthe river's banks; and fometimes, when perceiving a more than ufual fadnefe iti the countenance of her father, fhe would difco¬ ver herfelf, as if accidentally, to him, and by a thoufand little namefefl graceful actions, win him from himfelf, or charm for a time thatcorrofive forrow flie ever beheld with participating affliction. Sir Alfred, at fuch times as thefe, em* braced her with an increafe of affection, for he found it impoffible to refill her mild per- fuafive endearments; and, to avoid in future her affectionate importunities, he had re¬ courfe to artifice, and fo well fucceeded in deceiving Rofaline, that fhe feldom after difcovered any'of thofe agonizing fenfations that
that ufed to cloud the features of St, Ofwythe with untold forrow. Whilft in her prefence, Sir Alfred ever ap¬ peared with a ferene, refigned countenance ; but when retired for the night, he generally paffed many of its hours in the forlorn chamber in the fouthern ruins, where he *• fpent the time in eafing his labouring thoughts of thofe concealed miseries that affection for his child, and a folemn vow confpiring, made him of neceflity dilguife from her knowledge, fiet foft heart, yielding and pliant to the will of Sir All red, docile, and eager for the inftructions he afforded, foon rendered the office of a tutor needlefs, fo quickly did (he perfed herfcnf in the various improvements he iaftilled ; and fo amply had he ftored tlie rich foil of her capacity, that (he now became a companion and folace in many an otherwife weary hour, and was to him a never* failingfountain of delight j—with filent admi¬ ration
ration he would obferve her maturing beau- ties, and with fiifcinated pleafing forrow, trace in hergefture, movement, and features her mother** moft perfed refeniblance. Rofaline having no fociety but the initiates of the Abbey, nor accuftomed to any other, never even cxpreffed the flighteft wifh to pafs the confines of the foreft f for uncer* tain worldly pleafures* The good old Norman and his mk were indeed often ho* nourcd by a vifit from their blooming young miftrefs; who,, croffmg the weft gallery oft a cold winter's evening, and entering the north extremity of the Abbey, would dif- penfe with the ceremonious forms of rank, % v and, feating herfelf by the briik wood-fire that blazed on the hearth, Iiften attentively tothe talkative Blanche's terrible narratives of fpeclres and fupernatural appearances. Rofaline would at times cither laugh- af, or anxioufly attend to thefe dreadful ftories, till fhe becauie irrefolute, and even ferioufly queftioned
queflioned with her reafon the reality of a f wpernatural exiftcnce. Tne talcs of Blanche^ were generally terrific in the extreme, and a'ways finilhed with the hiftjry of the o!i Ba*on and the. Nun; who, (he affirmed, ftil! haunted the ruins of the Abbey, and nightly performed their dreadful penance at certain hours, for the crimes committed in "the days oi" their life.~ Rofaline was ofa timid and delicate turn of mind j it cannot then be fuppofed that thefe dreadful narrations, f^ often repeated with ail their terrific accompaniments, failed in exciting various reflections on this [ubject f and there were moments when (lie even felt inclined to believe thefe marvellous ac¬ counts, till reafon and fenfi interpofing, would convince her of the improbability of fuch chimeras haung a red foundation of truth for their fupport. Certain it U> how¬ ever, that from ibme latent caufes her mi a J received a bias on this fubject, which at more mature years remained unrefuted. The vol* u k ftory
ftory oi SiW Anna had made a deep impreflion on her memory \ and having often wiflied for u clear and true account of what really was tlic end of that unfortunate Mun, ihe had repeatedly entreated Sir Alfred's leave to fearch among the ruins, in hopes chat fome difcovcrics might be made, that would lead to a development of her death. It Was one evening that (he had, rather cailier than ufuul, left the north chamber, in returning ft\,m her accuftomed vifit to the okl (ieward and Blanche, that flie, in a playful humour, declared to St. Oiwythe her intention of examining the ruins. Sir Alfred, ftarting at the idea, a(ked with a look of incredulity-— " Have you courage, Rofaline, for fuch an undertaking ?" 44 Heavens! my dear father/* replied Rofaline, ** are you ferious in fufpeding me of want of courage ?—Or rather let me aflc/* (lie added, with a fmile, ** do you think it will
wi'l be put to the teft by the appe.tnnce of thefe terrible fpedres; that buiy Fume re* parts have fo long haunted the Abbey ? fi Sir Alfred became much agitated, turned pale, and, with a gravity of manner that Rofaline thought un neceffary to the occa¬ fion, forbade her ever again to renew the fubjed. ** It is a theme, Rof dine, of too folemn a nature for your prefent comprehenfion ; — there is not any thing, however aftonifiling, or feem ing! y impoffible to the im perfed; fight of weak mortality, that comes not within the attributes and power of a wife infcrutable Deity. Miftake me not j—I mean not to infpirc in your mind a ground¬ lefs apprehenHo.i ; but on this fubjed I am filent j—let it, as you regard my peace, be never more renewed." Rofaline liftenc 1 with furprife, and for the firft time felt an awe, flic knew not k 2 why,
vhy, in her father's prefence : hn words were, (lie thought, equivocal, and very un¬ like the ufuai frank, explicit manner in which Ihe had been accuftomed to receive his fen** timenrs and opinions. She reflected, as fhe retired to her own chamber, that they im¬ plied, if not a belief in fupernatural beings, at leaft a doubt of their non-exiftence,— There was, flic obferved, a decree of emo* tion, and an appearance of deep inward ftruggling to fubdue Ibme unexplained feel¬ ing, that feemed to have caufed the vehe¬ mence and agitation of manner in which Sir Alfred had delivered himfelf. Whatever Sir Alfred might have intended Rofaline to conjecture from his indecifivc anfwer, was unknown ; but certain it is that flie aimoft felt herfelf fanct.oned in that growing belief of fupernatural beings, which this and other circumftances encouraged. Sir Alfred had given a tacit confent to her little project r and (he refolvcd to purfue it % for,
ANCIENT* RECORDS. l£7 for, as flie was extremely partial to drawing, fliee^peded to gain many fubjecls for a beau* tiful landfcape among the ruins; and, witb aii the buoyant cuftofity of a young inno¬ cent heart, ftie refolvcd to fearch narrowly every part of the piie, in hopes that the might meet with fomething that would un¬ veil the obfcurity of Anna's fate. But as this enterprife could not fo well be per¬ formed alone, fhe made Jannetta her con¬ fidant ; who being entirely appropriated to tbe fervice of Rofaline # readily promifed obedience, though not without an inward reluctance, and a little argument, in hopes ro deter her dear young Lady (whom in¬ deed fhe loved) from fb dangerous a pur¬ fuit ; for it was the undoubted belief of aft within the AbScy, that the fouth ruins cer¬ tainly were the refort of unquiet fpitks. Rofaline, however, was bent on her fcheme; and feehng an affedionate reverence for every brokji arch ani rujgfd turret of tlie Abbey, the had too long indulged the k 3 with
wiih of exploring thefe dilapidated frag¬ ments of the building Ihe had never yet feen, to be diffuadcd from her purpofe. > Norman, as foon as dinner was over, brought in the keys of all the entrances to the ruins, which Rofaline beheld with im* patient pleafurc j and calling Jannetta for her promifed attendance, the Utter, trem¬ bling, prepared to follow. Her courage in* deed was now put to the proof, for flie faw her Lady was refolutein h^r defign 5 but her auction prevailed, and flie determined to * &tc< mpany her; though fhe haftene 1 up to her own chamber, that fhe aii^ht arm her* felf with an Ava Mark agianft the incan¬ tations of the troubled ground Ihe was about to vifit, RoCuine, as me entered tlie hall from the s?,*ind kdjon, was lurpiifed to rind all*the icivanta aad retainers atiembled there, with iacch diftorted uith fear and wonder ;—fore- niofi of the throng flood Blanche, in whofe countenance
countenance was difplayed a degree of fear md doubt, that feemed to ex pre is her ap- prehenfion for the ioxmd fenfc of her young miflrefs j for after having pc» formed her well- meaning, uopolifhed obeifance, ihe ftepped a few paces from her companions, and placing herfelf in an attitude that feemed to demand attention, ihe thus, with great eagernefs, began * f< Surely, my dear young Lady, fome evil being ha$ infpired you with this unaccount¬ able whim of vifuing the frightful old ruins. Does your Ladylhip forget all the tales and terrible accounts of apparitions that I have fo often warned you againft }** Here Rofaline couW not refrain from a fmile, which the whtmfical gefticulation and diftortion ot countenance tliat Blanche,in her eagcrnefs to excite attention, iiad thrown on ha* aged feature^ caufed*
K 4
" Ali i
** Ah! well, I fee you won't believe me, my Lady ;-~fo pray, Mr, Owen, declare you what it was you laft night beheld, that alarm¬ ed you fo. Perhaps that may daupt my young Madam's defire to go \ tying a.nong old frightful places and haunted ruins/-* Rofaline fmikd, but was not intimidated. ** Good Owen/' (lie faid, ** I pray be fpeedy in your narration, or you will oblige me to poftpone piy intended vifit till to«* morrow.*' ** Why pieafe you, my Lady, I can't tell how it wa; but*fomebow or other, laft night, as the moon was Alining very bright, I'could not help looking at it from my cafe¬ ment window before I went to reft $ fo my thoughts juft then being employed in think* ing about paft timc/% when my Loid ufed ta , live a vety different kind of a hfe to ids prefent, it occurred to me that juft under that bright ftar (you know, my Lady, the northern ftar), well, juft under that fame
ftme ftar, or near to that way, was his Lordfhip's former refidence.—Aye, and many a good dance, my Lady, I have had in bonny old Ma!colm Caftle hall—And pleafe your Ladylhip to forgive my boldnefs, but I was juft mufingon the fad melancholy change of life we lead now, to what we did then;—Well, juft as the old turret clock, ftruck.twelve, 1 happened to turn my eyes into the fouth court of the ruins, as 1 was clofing my cafement (for you muft under* ftand my chamber-window looks full among the old parts}, when, Heaven pardon my fins ! but there, as fure as 1 breathe, I favr a tall figure glide among ehe cloifters, and then fuddenly vaniflh in a vapour of flame and fulphur.— Mercy on me, my knees tremble, and my teeth chatter now, ta remember it!" Rofaline felt a flight alarm crofs her thoughts; but not chufing the attendants to perceive it, (he replied— k $ u Your;
•#
** Your fears, my good Owen* deceived you £—*and the fuperftitions tales of the Abbey, together with the latenefs of the hour, made you fancy what could only be the imaginary deiufions of a terrified mind." *« No, plcafe you, my Lady, I am quite pofitive and certain of what I faw,-*—I had not been even fo much as thinking of the ghofts at the time $ and the moon (hone fo bright, that 1 faw the fpe&re as it paflcd along beneath my window, and I watched it till it disappeared.'* « Why then did not you fpeak to it, fince it was fo near you?" replied Rofaline £ " for perhaps it was only fome benighted travel¬ ler, who had climbed over the battlements, in hopes of obtaining a (helter in the Abbey during the night/* t% Me fpeak to a phoft, my Lidy V* in¬ terrupted the terrified Owen, hailih', *' the holy St* Thomas guard me from th' ir hor¬ rible clutches!— Lord ! my Lady, how can you be fo harcJv as to pretend (pardon your old iervant's freedom) to diibclicve inch things ?
things?—-Ah ! if your Ladylhip had ever been at the flitine of St. Thoma^-d-Becket'stomb, and feen the wonderful miiacLs wrought there, you would not be ibdtilicult to con¬ vince.—Hcaveu*s guard be v\ith you!—I pray that no dreadful judgment may tall upon you for this irreverent obftinacy i" Rofaline could not again refrain another fmile, and" Blanche, feizing this paufe of Owen's fpeech as a iair opporcuuity, thus concluded hh untinifhed fcntcnce, ** Bcfidcs, m\ Lady Rofaline, how fliould it be poJibie that any body could Icale the great high walls, when my Lurd nad every breach mended, and all the gates and gaps doled up?—No, no > it was certaiidy the wicked old Baron that Mr. Ov\tm law; jour L'ldythip knows very well n.s gh* tfc walks in the ruins every ni^ht, the moment the clock ilr ike j twelv;." * s AcCv/rding to ) our account he docs," replied Rofaline; "hut you forget, jilo, f- o that
that he never walks alone. Owen faw, or fancied he faw, one figure, and no more, the reality of which I am ftill inclined to queftion, if not doubt entirely j and, as far as outward examination will -allow, I am re» folved on being convinced. Therefore, good Norman, proceed, if you pieafe, to unfaften the entrance door that leads to the great Abbey Church." H Since your Ladyfliip is not to be dif« % fuaded from feeing the ruins," replied Nor-* man, " which are indeed well worthy view- ing, I will do as you command me.—But, tny Lady, I pray you be not too venture* fome; for though I do not approve of the* notions of fpedres, and fuch like fantafies, yet it is as well to be a little cautious of danger; therefore 1 advife tbat Mr. Ower* attend you in your walk. The grounds ine overgrown with weeds and broken pieces of ruins 5 and as he is tlie you nge ft of your Lady (hip's defenders, he is moft able to pro* eel you, fliould there be need, if your Ladylhip wiil grant him that honour.—Hey,, Owen,,
Owen, what fayft thou V turning to the latter, whole confofion feemed to be en¬ joyed by the old fteward f for poor Owen, little thinking what a fevere punifliment his love of the marvellous would draw upon him, and being naturally a coward, did but ill accord with this malicious turn of the fteward*s, who thought it but a fair rebuke for the fears he had helped to implant in the minds of the houlehold. Owen's countenance fuddenly fell - f he caft his eyes upon Norman with no (light degree oi diilatisfaction, then fixed them, with a look of fear and entreaty, on his Lady, in hopes the latter might not accept the pro* pohilof the mifchievous old fteward. » Rofaline was as mild to the failings of others, as ihe va; ievere to any that the diicovercd ia herfelf; flic knew the parti* cular fault in Owcfi temper, and fhe could not bear to give a moment's pain by exact¬ ing a repugnant obedience to what ihe con- 6 fidcred
i
fidcred the gratification of a whim that might prove painful to another, whatever it did to herfelf j and, to the great joy of Owen, (he declined his unwilling attendance, faying that, as it was yet early in the even¬ ing, (he was devoid of all fear, for perfonal faiety i and being fo near the Abbey, (hould there be any appearance of danger, prbtec* tion might eafily be obtained* At this moment Jannetta made her ap¬ pearance from the gallery ; and having for¬ tunately been abfent during this long par¬ ley, Rofaline commanded the others prefent to be filent on the fubject" of their fears and apprehenfions, nor attempt to inftil fuch unfounded ideas into the mind of her only courageous attendant* They indeed laid nothing, but their looks fpoke more than words, Norman, approaching the old doors, with fome difficulty unbolted them, wliich were no
no* fooner thrown open, and a view of the dark vaulted paflliges diftinguifhed, than the whole of the vaffals rm affrighted from the hal!,*and the echoes of their faft receding fteps founded along the vaulted pavement, and foon became loft in diftance. At firft Rofaline fdt a little palpitation, and fomething like fear fteal over her fenfes, as flie caught a view of the difmal dreary interior 5 but youthful curiofity foon dif¬ pelled thefe fenfations and the fmiled, the happy emblem of innocence and peace. Old Norman felt a little afhamed for him* felf and his fellows* as he eyed his young Lady alkaoce, and beheld the enchanting ferenity of her countenance, in which nut a trace of fear was depictured. Roialino now, confidently his a i>\ declined hi* further attendance, and would have dUin'il^d him; but Norman, feeling both Ius gulantry and fervices called upon, determine 1 to accom¬ pany his Lady to the Chinch and cloifters and
and therefore preceding Rofaline down Hie* paflage, which was feebly lit by a di£ tant window, they arrived at the laft,door that opened into the great Church, Jannetta, trembling and filent with in¬ creafing dread, clung to the fide of her f Lady, as the folding-doors opened on their grating hinges with a loud harfli noife that echoed through the Church, and produced founds that ftartkd for a moment the Httle . party. When their uncouth vibrations ceafed, they defcended the fteps that led down to the marble pavement ofthe Church,, and Rofaline with amazement beheld its ponderous maffy pillars, and high-raifed painted windows illumined by the bright re* fleftion of a fetting fun, which ftiining faintly thiou^h the many coloured panes of the emblazoned cafements, gave a kind of * gloomy variegated brightnefs to the damp,. deca}inp; walls, a'.d to the feem in general. The roof teemed to be ftili perfed \ but man£'
many ofthe Gothic pillars that fuppoited it weie enclofed in a coat of ivy, whLh had fprung up through the interline* ot the pavement, felf-planted and fuppoited ; aud clinging to the ci umbling bodice of the co- "lunms, added a greater degree of weaknefs to their dibpidated forms, and gave to the whole a folemn melancholy awe, im¬ poffible to be defwribed, but fuch as excited in the mind of fenfibility, emotions of re¬ verence and refped* The contemplative mind, in examining this flow time-decaying pile of venerable fandity, might here for hours ruminate on the caufes and efie&s of things. Here in this Gothic building, where all around " a melancholy, dim, religious light" was caft, and all feemed to inipire the mind with , folemn thoughts, how uuny p'.v^idrtg, pain¬ ful, indtfer.bablc ideas wou.d arhi fiom the meditation* that a \ Lice h^c th:^ \\ou.dgi\e birth to! I a
In the fpaces of the ftupcndous arches of the thick cluttering pillars, there ftill ap- pea?ed the remnarits of tombs, that had been reared to the memory of thofe who, for centuries paft, had been configned (b their laft earthly repofitory ; whilft only a few mouldering characters remained to perpetuate the name of that fcrm, whole ihroudul dui\ had long been at peace within the narrow precincts of its fecure home* The fcene to Rofaline wa$ new and won¬ derful; flie felt not any emotions of fear $ but the filent awful glooms of the place, and the melancholy contemplations it infpired, excited in her mind fenfations never before experienced ^—fhe was unable in any lan¬ guage to exprefs her feelings, and fhe continued filently almiring and roflecling on the proiound folemnity that reigned around*
As
As flie flowly paced up the middle aifle, flie viewed as intently as th^ li^ht would permit^jhQ immenfe ftmdurc ami formi- tion of the different pillars, and the huh- wrought fretwork thit furmounted ihj.n. At the extreme end ftood the holy table; but not a vetlige was left of its former mag¬ nificent trappings, and it now remained a Skeleton of greatneE robbed of its rich ap¬ pendages. Sometimes flie endeavoured to decipher an infeription upon the time-worn monu¬ ments as Ihe paled them, but fcLIoni was able to proceed,, from the total difappcarance ofthe charadcrs \ with a figh Of reverence fhe refieded upon the fplendour of this Church, and hpa* different from its prefent melancholy afpeft muft have been its for¬ mer condition, when in potLfiba of the ii iter booth *she funa^d to i^r muni an i u- perfect kka ut v\ii.u mull li i vc been iu ma^n ih cent appearance, wii«,n illumined by the wax taper^ th«t bun*cd pe^ctuahyia l HV
the (brines, and all ihe paraphernalia of facer* dotal decoration adorning its now vacant fpaces; the trains of M^nks and Nuns too that here once met to celebrate iheir Maker's pra f e, grung new life and animation to all around ;*~»but n«w, alas! they no longer remained—they Imd long fince va* niflied from the buiy fcene—their allotted ordeal vas over, and themfelves iw^pt, by tli'* rude hand of Death, fiom life's ** fitful fever,"—" themfelves forgetting, by the world firgot," and even their names buried, Jike their clay, in eternal oblivion. The refledion is fyown to all that fuffer themfelves to meditate deeply on this fubjed, nor did it fail to caft a fudden gloom over the fpirits of Rofaline i a t€^f fell from either eve to the memory of thofe departed, as well as f>r thofe that yet reinamed, a^ much as for the teflon fhe had gat Ik ied, tliat, fx>n*r or later, fuch war, the cei tain fate ot ad, and conicquently of htr lather anu he*felf* The
though tlic Church, recalled the attention of Rofaline; (he followed the dii\cl« >n of the founds aud arrived at the poflern, which Norman liad uniaftened fur her adraulion to the cloiuers. The fudden return to more peifeft light, and the cxaahui ms of thi paiti ig fu*i- henms, hu! a moft w*dcoiu ere^i 01 the Ipnits of Koialinc, and Ihe toon kit ie* vivtd by thr*cnltvei.ii*g change. S ^ tha.J<- *d Normal tor liis attendance, who pio* mifed to vatt at the gate for her rvrurn, an 1 witli J^ncutta, proceeded to explore the frdh fcenes ot woi.der aad athuiration which the ruins piefent^d. Thev extended to a great diftancc; ancl the va*iety of \ie.vs, th it evgry where llartcd a frdh biiufy to cr^n ^ atteaiioo, puzzled the ch ici ot Rolaline, who leaning on ihe arm ot lier attendant* (lowly entered the broken archer of the cloifters, Thefe wtre of great dimcnlio;i>, but aimoft impadablc, fom the heaps of i; laments
fragments that lay extended on the pave* ment. In the centre was the burial fquaro, whi* I ner mc icanrnt oi tvoiannc nnt icu ; and, after much difficultv, flie climbed over the fcatteicd hillocks that were overgrown with gt(\l\ and weeds, and arriving at the dormitory, began a minute examination amr»n« r he tonibs &nd ^ravc-ftone^; but in general they were too much decayed to yield any information, and Rofaline gave over the uielefs fearch, concluding, as was very pof- fib*e, that the unfortunate Anna had never been honoured widi this laft teftimony of remembrance by the Sdlerhood. As they continued to proceed from the Abbey, Rolaline failed nut to enter every Look and auh that truftld hvr way ; fome* times fhe even ventured up the broken fteps of a ruined tower, whofe lofty battlements no longer reared their proud heads, but lay extended in the area j and, tempted by the beauty
beauty of the evening, (lie afcendcd to tlie (itft (lory, and through the heavy arch of the qpen fpace, where formerly the fretted jambs of the windows had been placed, the obtained a fiill better view of the furnnind- ing romantic fcenery * it was through this open fpace (he had a full view of the fouth angle tower, one of whofe entire fides Ind fallen away, and all the upper ftories were exp^fed, Rofaline bade Jannctti obferve it, and a(ked if Ihe had courage to enter it.— Jannetta (hrunk back* '* Indeed, my Lady, I never behold that tower,*' ihe replied, ** but it makes me tremble. It was there, they fay, that poor Anna was confined.; and Blanclic has fo often told me to beware of it, that—I — i hardly dare look at it.— Beitdcs, my Lady* you fee it is even more ruinous than this, nor k it faf'e to be approached.—Surely, Madam,
Mad Am, you don't intend' to make the trid ?'• u If, as yon fay, that was the prifon of Anv%" $ pointing to the fouth tower, ** it h there only 1 may hope to find fome documents tektive to her fat<*% I am there* foit refoived to proceed. But for yon, Jan¬ netta, ftay where you aie 5 I fliall not require a further attendance than your remaining within hearing.'* Ro&Une defcended the broken Heps, snd proceeded towards the to ver, whilft Jan- w*u%, nut daring to advance, ftood trem¬ bling, entreating her young Lady to forego the dangerous enterprife; but Rofaline having as yet found nothing to gratify her fearch, or terrify her from purfuing it, re- folvcd-not to yield to the light fears ol Jm* uctta; flic therefore proceeded, after having #biaincd the keys from the latter, and ar* rived at the full fi^ht of the fouth tower :— im black and frowning afpeft, together with its i
its weak, tottering fituation, at firft aroufed a momentary feeling of terror j but youthful hope encouraged her to venture, and (lie approached the old Gothic door, which* from its rotten appearance, fhe hoped to have puChed open with eafe, but it refitt¬ ed her, and fhe was obliged to have recourfe to the rufty 6ld keys; after a confiderabie loft of time, (he found one that turned in the lock, and the portal giving way, ad¬ mitted her into a narrow paflage, which gave her a fight of an iron grate that was fixed in the arch ofthe oppofite walk To the kft Ihe beheld a flight of ftairs tktt ted to the upper ftories j but thefe were too weak to admit her*fcent in fafety to the top t ftie therefore gave over the defign, and turned agiin tothe iron grating. As (he caught the firft view of the alarming ob¬ jects withm, her mind, unprepared for the fudden ihock, endured a momentary fuf¬ penfion, and ihe led, nearly fainting, againft the wall, the pOAei of calling for aid vol** I* h was
was gone, and, for a few feconds, ilie was unable to fupport herfelf The terrific fpefiacle that had fo power* fully affected Rofaline, as me caught a view of the interior of this forlorn ruin, was ^ deep narrow cell, whofe walls were hung with mouldering trappings of black j the only light that was admitted within, pro¬ ceeded from an iron grate fixed deep in tt^e amazing jdiicknefs ofthe fmall embrafure of the walk Around this gloomy place w f ere fixed in al] diredions the horrific emblems of death; and whichever way the defolate inhabitant of this dreary cell turned, images of horror fhocking to nature met the tor¬ tured view, in the terrific flare an$ eye!e|s fockets ofthe ghaftly flm.ll bones, that hung in gum appalling array. In the middle of tlie cell, upon a raifed pedeftal, ftood tbe mouldering relics of a coffin, which had once beeu covered with a velvet pall, but which no$ hung in tatters down the fides* , At
conjedure might form as being once, per* haps, the fad refting-place of the diftraded penitent; for that this was the fevere prifon of penance and contrition, every fuperfli- tious emblem of Monkifli torture that fur¬ rounded the walls plainly bore teftimony of; a "crucifix and broken hour-glafs ftill re¬ mained, co r ered with duft, upon a fmall altar, beneath an arched recefs, whilft the floor was ftrewed with fkulls and human bones. Poor Rofaline now fincerely regretted her bold attempt $ ten thoufand melancholy dreadsand apprehenfions feized her thoughts, with fears never before experienced $ this place indeed, flie thought, feemed the very fpot for cruelty and murder, and here it was but too poffible the injured fpirit of Anna might certainly refort* She ftiuddcred at the thought j flie aimoft fbrkked as her fancy prefented vifionary forms j—but all around was ftill \ the fun had filed its laft t 2 famt
faint beams, and the folemn grey of even¬ ing began to obfcure the fate of Nature $ but a fecond light was kft of departing day, and that fo imperfect and dim in this gloomy and horrible dungeon, as to feem aimoft en* veioped by the darknefi of night* After the firft momentary fhock had fub* fided, Rofaline arofe, and ftood irrefolute to proceed in her refearches ;■—her alarms were ftrong, but her curiofity was if poffible ftill ftronger $ flie felt Ihe fliould never be abte voluntarily again to enter this tremendous place, and Ihe debated whether her courage would fuppoit her, fhouid fhe purfue fur* Iher the daring adventure* € * I have furely feen the worft,** (lie in« ward ! y ruminated $ 4 * wherefore then ftiould J now fear to enter, fince no fight, more ap* palling than what I no# lee, can cieate greater alarm ?—-Perhaps this was indeed the final end of the unhappy fifter :* f fhe added, fighingi * f alas! poor unfortunate, tin* too furely
fureiy v$m alike your prifon, and the caufe of your lingering death.—Yet wherefore am I thus anxious to folve the myftery of her deftiny ?—Dare I lift the paP from that hor- rilic fpe&acle ?— What if my fpirits fail me, and 1 fmk t overcome with dread* in this charnel-houfe of death, may not my fenfes forfake me ia the trial $ or is it not very likely that terror may bereave me of my reafon ?— Shall I enter ?** Either her fenfes were indeed confufod, or perhaps her mind, wrought to a certain pitch, led her to fancy more than reality i for, as the laft word dropped from her lips, (lie ftarted, and thought the heard it feebly repeated by an unknown voice, which floArly pronounced, «* Enter!'* Rofaline trembled, and not exa&Iy aware of her intentions, unfaftened the grate, and threw back the rattling mafly chains that were hooked on the (taples without the cell; the grate opened with eafe, and fwung on h 3 * its
Rofaline, with an imagination diftetnf&red; 1 ' and mifled by the hopes of difcoveiing fomething flic came in fearch of, that would repay her fears, defcended the indented de¬ clivity, and with trembling fleps daggered two or three paces from the grating; but again becoming irrefolute, and terrified from her pnrpofe, (lie (topped, ** Dare I," flic faintly ejaculated, "dare 1 raife the myfterious lid of that horrific coffin ?** € * Dare to do foT* replied a voice, that founded hollow along the dreaded vault; and Rofaline, whofe terror now had fuf- pended the faculty of feeling, though not of Jife, actually moved towards the coffin, as if performing fome dreadful rite, that flie found ihe had not power to refill. Impelled With a notion of that fuperior agency which (he dared not difobey, and not exactly fen¬ fible of what (lie did, (he fearfully caft afide the lid, which, as Ihe touched, fell crumbling to
ter the ground 5 and turning afide her head, her hand (over which, as well as herfelf, flie had loft all power) fell mechanically within the coffin; and in lier fright ihe grafped fomething moift and clammy, which the brought awav :—fliriekim3: whd- ly, ihe ruflied irom the (cene of terror, and precipitating herfelf through the tower-g ite, fell f unting into the arm^ of Jannetta j wh<?, pa'e and t^nified, called loudly for aid, as (he fupported her now infenfiDie Lady* Norman, who had long been impatient at the (lay oi his njiftreis-, and alarmed for her faiety, was haftening down the ruins, when the cries oc Ja.metu aifaikd hi> ear, and iiad arrived u die iccne of terror as Rofaline be^aa to o r cn her eyes. ** Holy Virgin prote^ thee, Lady !*' he exclaimed, as he atfuUd t> r^L^Atr her; H what has thus iu,\fkd thee ?-~Haft tiiou feen my thing, or do t..cte pale aflngiued looks proceed iiom fome fail whLh, un* h 4 mindful
thy tender form among the hillocks of the ruins ?'* ** Oh no, good Norman, not fo," feebly and wildly ejaculated Rofaline; " the tower —the dreadful tower V* ** The tower, %ft thou, my Lady?— Mercy on me I—Have you been fo hardy as to venture into that difmal place ?—Dear heart! dear heart I Til warrant now thou haft feen fomethfog*—Where are the keys ?** ** I know not, unlefs they remain ftill in ihe gates of the tower," replied Rofaline,. ** Heaven forbid it, I fay V* angrily in¬ terrupted Norman i ** now were it not that the ruins would be left open all night, I would as lieve cut off one of my fingers f$ go near the forlorn dungeon," The old gentleman, however, haftily ad¬ vanced to the tower, but with evident fear and trepidation in his manner, and not a little angry at the caufe that compelled him on an errand fo unwelcome, Rofaline,
Rofaline, a$ flie giadually recovered, kit a perfed recolle&ion of the late horrid fcene $ and recalling the awful voice flie had heard, which flie doubted not proceeded from fupernatural agency, fhe no fooner beheld Norman advance to the place of her late terrors, than, with the fwiftnefe of the wind, fhe darted from the melancholy ruins* totally regardlefs of the pettifli exclamation of Morman, who loudly called on her to wait his arrival; but fhe {topped not till a heap of rubbifh lay'widely fpread in her path* and obftruded her further progrefs. It was now nearly dark, and the fcene around was peculiarly grave and folemn 5-—if they purfued their way over tbe rubbifb t they muft of necefEty recrofs the cloifters-** a circumftance little deflrable to either Rofaline or her companion. Whilft thus deliberating which path to chufe, the voice of Norman aflailed them, and was joyfully hailed by Jannetta; he feemed rather angry at being left behind, but hk natural good h 5 humour
humour, a!nd the habitual reverence aid re- tct he had ever accuftomed himfelf to feel hh Lord, foon vanquished the difplea- Aire he was at firft rather inclined to; whilft the hi|h honour of being his young Lady*s defender and conductor foothed in an in* ftant his ruffled tamper, and gratified his vanity. By leading them a more circuitous My, *hey arrived with tolerable eafe at the * great gates of the Church, The mind of Rofaline was too much em¬ ployed in deep reflections on the late won¬ derful and even terrific Tcene, to attend to prefent circumftances; but Jannetta, whofe fuperftitious terrors had increafed by the extraordinary appearance and infenfibilfty Chat followed her Lady's return from the dreary tower, felt ten thoufand fears, though ftie knew not why ; and dreading the fight bf ftie knew not what, the clofed her eyes md clung clofe to the arm of Norman, to whofe guidance fhe trufted for her fafety through the Church, which fhe inwardly 4 vowed
wwedt no Inducement fliould again tempt Jfef to enter. At length the dreary aifles were pafled, aiid JUorman faftening the great Gothic doors ofthe Church, they arrived once more ifrthe vaulted paflage. ' The lamps that illumined the hall recall* ed the fcattered ideas of Rofaline fufficiently to enable her to erjoin Jannetta and Norman, on pain of her lafting difpleafure, to be fecret on the fudden illnefs flie had fuffered, whSeh, ihe tried to aifure them, proceeded ooi]rfrom a failure of courage, and the for- kfctinefs of entering fingly the dreary tower j but her pale look% trembling limbs, and agitated voice contradicted the account fhe wifhed to be believed* Norman, however, bowed in filence his obedience to her com* mands; but Jannetta no fooner entered the half, md found herlelf once more in fafety, than ihe related all that had pafled, with many exaggerated additions, fufficient to i* & confirm
belief that their young Lady liad feen the* ghoft. Rofaline entered the grand faloon \ but Sir Alfred was not there, and ftie felt thank* ful for the relief* She endeavoured to com*, pofe her fpirits againft his appearance, but ftill the dreadful fight fhe had feen, and the voice fhe was convinced fhe had really heard, bafljed every effort of mental compofure $ and though furprifed at fo unufual a circum¬ ftance, ihe was not forty when Owen brought in word that Sir Alfred had retired for die night, anddefired fhe might not wait tapper* Rofaline felt, in her prefent ftate of mind,, that flic was but ill able to bear the piercing %m&z% looks of enquiry that Sir Alfred would have expreffed ; and ihe rejoiced that flie fhouid now be fpared on the dreadful fubjed* Feeling no inclination for the meal* flie retired immediately to her own apart¬ ments*
As
drew from the folds of her robe the relics (be had unknowingly giafped from the coffin, On examination, it feemed to be fome folded papers j but, excepting the envelope, in fo damp and decaying a condition, asto threaten to drop to pieces with the touch. The outfide paper, indeed* did not feem of fo old and dark a colour as the reft; but Rofaline felt too much agitated at prefent to compofe her fpirits iufliciently for their minute in- veftigationu The late fcene now converted ber doubts to aimoft certainties j the relation of what Owen fo pofitively affirmed he had (een, together with the occurrences which ftie had been an eye witnefs of, confirmed her ca¬ dence in the exiftence of fome unknown fpiritual power 5—(lie recalled the doubtful and even fevere manner with which her lather had anfwered her queftions on this theme, on the preceding night.
" Would
** Would he defcendto deception in a point of fo awful and, to me, incomprehenfible ft nature V It mow ftruck her that Sir Alfred, from the equivocal "manner ofhH reply, had cer* Uwriy feen f6ruething to* alter hb former opinions on this fubject j and, for the firft time, (he could not help thinking hi$ con* duct tnerphcaMe. She had been informed of every particular relative to her father's arrival at the foreft; fhe well knew, alfo, that his habitual forrow and melancholy turn of mind originated in the lamented death of her mother; nor could (lie* doubt it, for the never-ceafing exprefftons of d%* nified reverence he bore to the memory and virtues of the Lady St. O wythe, confiim** ed her mind in thi or inty that it was the Caufe of Sir Alfred'* continued" and determined ieclufion from the world. In
In him Rofaline had ever found not only an affectionate parent, but a companion and friend, to whom fhe might, without fear, ynburthen her innocent mind ; but the late prohibition ftie had fo foreib!y received, never £gain to renew a certain fubjed, entirely left her io the freedom of unreftrained conjee- ture j fhe dared not break the command he had enjoined, and for the firft time fhe ex¬ perienced the painful fenfation of difcon« tent j for (lie felt as if ftanding alone, with¬ out the aid of that powerful fupport on which (he leaned, wad to whom flie might confide the trouble of a young mind, de¬ prived for the firft time of its great and only frotedor. Her mind, ever the feat of peace, con- tentj and harmony, now became agitated and unhappy; a number of unpleafing emotions corroded her heart, ancl for fome ftme ftie preed tht chamber with a haft v. difordered ftep. Tta perturbed ftate of her fpirits being at length exhaufted, Cm became more
the papers, fhe took them up once more^ and drawing her chair clofe to the tahfe, and retriuiming her lamp, flie tremblingly caft her eyes over the envelope. The characters were perfectly legible, mid eafy to decipher $ with. amazement fhe read the firft line* which was thus expreffed ;—
** TO TUB MBIK, OR HIlEESS OF THIS! BOMjIIHS, " If euriofity, or fome over-ruling chance fliould hereafter lead any of the Houfe of St Ofwythe to this lonely tower, let them not difregard the advice contained in this paper. Strange % as it may feem fl the lafeeft inheritor of this Abbey is the being to whom thefe lines are addrefled, ** There is a myftery pertaining to thefe towers, which the flow moving hand of Time
Time can alone unfold. The family of St* Ofwythe poffeffes a deadly foe, and im¬ pending forrow awaits its lateft reprefenta- ttves. Should the laft heirs ever enter this melancholy ruin, this record will remind them (o (bun the poffeffors of Edmondville Gaftje.***«The hand that traces thefe charac¬ ters is folemnly withheld from explanations % but asthou regardeft thy future happinefs* fe regard thou this fecret Earning !— Remember, (bouldft thou prefumeto reveal to any creature exifting its contents, thou wilt incur a fate as terrible as unexpected, and render ufelefs this effort to fave thee from irrevocable mifery, if not death itfelf! *« Beneath the deep foundations of the ruins, the recorded myftery of the Houfe of St* Ofwythe lies fecurely buried from all mortal difcovery; and only chance, or a merciful Providence, can reftore it to its rightful owners*—Be cautious! remember my injun&ion—*obey ils mandates, fo mayft thou
thou yet efcape thofe terribie evilf that threaten, without a remedy, the heirs ofthefe once proud turrets/*
With amazement Rofaline perufed th» incomprehenfible pafier j flie had glanCed her eyes over the others, but found them to be the hiftory of St, Anna. It was evident that this fcroll, from the difference of the vellum and the writing, had no relation what* ever to the manufcript of the Nun* There was no date'prefixed, nor the flighteft clue apparent to guide her conjectures as to the means by which it had been placed in fo extraordinary a fituation. Rofaline agam perufed it, and trembled as fhe finifhed thi* paflage—*• To fave you fiom iirtvocable mifery, if not death itfelf r <* What may this mean ?'* flie fearfully ejaculated i " what dita^ful import is con¬ tained
, tained in thefe terrible expreffions ?—Can it be poffible they fliould appertain to my dear father i"> She agtin loolrd at the firft line, and her emotions* if poffible, became ftronger as foe read, *« To the heijj. or heirefs of thefe domains." Rolaline was her At her's heir, his only heir 1 was it probable thefe awe-infpiring words could be addreffed to herfelf ?—Con¬ jecture thickened, her thought* became wild and difordered, and at length a fud len gufh of tears relieving the confufion ot her ideas, her firft defign was to fly to Sir Alfred's eha nber, and unveil the myftery to him, from whom alone flie could hope for confolation in her prefent a 0 itation; but cafting accidentally her eyes once mom on the paper, fhe iaw another paragraph that fee had not at fiift ob.crvcd. Eigerly flic perufed the characters j they were to this effect %- " Tiifle
mmmmmmmmm x i * f Trifle not with the folemn injunction contained in this warning, but be filent on its contents, as you value the future bap¬ pinefs or tntfery of your days to come.**
Thefe words arretted her intention; they appeared as if indeed addrefled perfonally to herfelf, and (he (huddered as if convinced they really were fo. Her fpirits failed her; the late terrors of her mind, and the con^ fufed, and even dreadful import of the ma- msfcript occafioneda faintnefs that compelled her to fufpmd all further attempts to eluci» date this myfterious paper. The latenefs of the hour, for it was now paft midnight, together with the ftill agi* tating remembrance of the tranfactbns of the fouth ruin, impreffed her mind with a fuperrtidous dread unfelt before $ and hurrying
hurling off her drefs, (he endeavoured to lole the recollection of the foregoing fcene in the arms of fleep:— but her dreams were alarming and terrific j at one moment (he found herfelf following the corpfe of fome dear connection, for whofe lofs (he was in extreme grief. But foon (he loft fight of this melancholy object, and found herfelf compelled by a fuperior power to enter fome forlorn and gloomy chambers, which ap¬ peared to belong to tbe fouth wing of the monaftery. As fhe here waited, a tall ma- jeftic female, whofe hauglity ftep and ftem countenance feemed to awe her mto fear and apprehenfion, flood before her, and with a dagger in one hand, and a goblet of liquor in the other, hade her, in a voice hollow and dreadful, chufe her fate ;—as (he prefented, wirh threatening afpect, the poifoned cup, (he railed h<*r dagger, and bade her drink it, for that was the laft hour of her exift* tcnce.
A burft
A burft of agony awoke her £r$m thefe difordered vifions, and Rofaline found hutv pillow wet with tears s but flie rejoiced that Ihe awoke ere the horrid conclufion of her difordered fancy had been accomplilhed.**- Sleep foon again lightly weighed on her eye* lids, and for a fhort time flic enjoyed on* difturbed repofe j but ere the lark imd raifed his extolling notes to the heavens, ftte^g&iu atvoke, and finding the reftleflaefs of hm thoughts would not permit her to fleep f Ite arofe from lier couch, and approaching tbe cafement, felt her fpirits revive as ihe in¬ haled the frelhnefs ofthe morning air. She remained for fome time at the winr dow, watching, as was her cuftom, the rifing ofthe fun from its eaftern bed, as it thre^r its magnificent beams on the dewy tops of tbe fpangled foliage of the trees, yet ivet with the mpifture ofthe night. At a diftance Rofaline caught a view of the wftern towers of Urbandine, furrounded on all
mil fides by the venerable majeftic woods of the foreft, and clofmg all nearer profpe&$ from the view, except the Alpine mountains which ro r e upon the horizon, and was to the north bounded by the utmoft fkm. The fcene was fo calm, fo tranquil, and yet fo romantically folitary, that it infenfibly drew the grateful foul ol Rofaline to thofe inward heartfelt orifons to the Supreme Being, which will rife fpontaneous from the uncorrupt purity of innocence. Her devotions ended, Rofaline caft her eyes into the lawn, but did not there per¬ ceive ber little favourite fawn, who every morning was accuftomed to wait beneath her window for the food which it received from the hands of its gentle miftrefs; from this circumftance Che was convinced it was yet very early, and die refoived to re¬ main fome time longer ere (he defcended, Cafting her eyes on the table, (he beheld again ihe fubject of her kft uight^ agita¬ tion,
flie found her mind better able to deliberate on the myftery of their contents. How the papers came in fuch a place, and by whom depofited, was a conjecture that no mental effort could be certain of; at one moment fhe felt inclined to think they re¬ lated to a former Lord of the Abbey* ** If it really pertains to my father,** flie faid, ** he is implicated in this intricate warning more deeply than myfeif j and fh mid there be indeed an unknown danger, which this paper may teach him how to avoid, it is my duty to make him acquainted with the contents, and the difcovery 1 have made/* But ftill thofe emphatic words, which fo pereirptorily forbade, whoever was the finder, their revealing the contents of the minuter pt* caufed her ro waver, and again flie became irrefolute; though her duty and affecti ?nate tendcrnefe to her fuher power¬ fully prompted her to unburthen this wet hty
ftc^t :-r-fl^^ confidered how infinitely more fuperior wtm his prior claims, than the in* junctions of a ftrange unknown warning, whole fufpicions contents might contain fome dark meaning which, in the end, would prove dangerous to the peace of Sir Alfred if fofered to remain unrepealed. This laft confideration, with many others of equal weight, at once determined herj and, be the evil of whatever nature if might to her¬ felf, (he refoived to incur it by making Sir Alfred ber confidant of the whole chcum* fiance* ' Convinced tL*c fhe (hould ad right on this myfterious fubject, her mind began to regain its ferenity, although the terrors ofthe night, and her uncommon vifions failed not in making a deep imprcf* Con on her thoughts* With the papers in her hand, Rolaline defcended to the ialoonj but her father was not tliere, and iho had impatiently waited his appearance near an hour, wfua Owen entead io inform his Lady that vol* j, m Sii
Sir Alfred, being rather indifpofed, defired her prcfence in his own apartments* Alarmed for the health of her beloved parent, Rofaline haftencd to obey i but was ihocked at beholding the alteration, that had taken pLce, fince the preceding day, in his features md countenance, which weie now pale, haggard* and ieemingly much agitated. An unfolded letter lay upon the pi'low of the couch, which Rofaline con¬ jectured as being t + e caufe of the fudden illnefs that with grief (he faw too legibly depictured in the whole appearance of Sir Alfred; flie perceived alfo that his mind was deeply a&e&ed, and r%ardie£> of her own peace, but only anxious for that of her dear father's, (he ^concealed the paf>er (lie had intended for his perufal, thinking at iome future period to produce tt* A fealed packet lay upon the table, which Sir Alfred delivered to Owen, and ditmified him with it to the Baronefs of Urbandme * then
he faid~ ig My child, I feel that I have too long immured you in the cheeriefs glooms of thefe folitary ruins; it is neceilary that you mould become acquainted wirh thofe fcenes of life, that a friendly intercourfe with its virtuous characters cm alone render valuable. The kind friend of my happier days has long im* portuned me for tlfe fociety o( my Rofaline, Say, any love, would it not gratify you to mi* in thofe fweet fcenes of youth¬ ful expe&ation and joy, which hope ever prefents in glowing colours to the young mind ?—-Would you not be happy, my Rofaline, to quit, for a time, thefe me¬ lancholy recedes, for the brilliant circles that now court your acceptance in a vifit to the Baronefs of Urbandine ?** • Rofaline lifiened with inward pleafurd to this propofal, and Nature prompted htr to wiih the offered change, that now prefented m z hkU $
itfelf, were for a time reality $ but the tm** der foul of Rofaline iofe fuperior to the defire of feififh gratificatfons, when obtained %t the expence of filial affeftion and duty ; and though her heart leaped with youthful joy at the profped of beholding fcenes of * pictured delight, yet as ftie caft her eyes oh the pale, wan idfage of Sir Alfred, fhe ro- folved to decline What would elfe have been gladly accepted* J Sir Alfred, for a moment, feemed cheered by her ^afecAionate felf-denial i but though he would have grieved to lofe fight of his Rofuine even for a day, yet he generoufly contended for her acceptance of ;\ benefit fb pleafing, and every way deftmblei but Rofaline, armed with an invulnerable fltteld of duteous love^ replied-*- ** When* I fee my dear father happy, and recovered from his indifpofitbn, I may, under bis fanftion, take advantage of my Lady Urbandine's goodnefs} but if allowed my
itey choice, believe me, my Lord, I can tafte no peaee whilft abfent fmm you ; therefore 1 conjure you, grant me permiflion to defer, till fome more convenient opportunity, the honour intended me." Eofafine, a$ (he fkifiied her requeft, dreiv her (eat near to the ewuch ; and Sir Alfred, feeing (he was relolved not to leave him, no longer attempted to oppofe her defire. As he viewed her, the tears trickled down his fece, which ivere kiffed away by hU beau¬ teous daughter, who, taking Sir Alfred's hand, (aid h with all the angelic perfuafive looks and manner ofa miniftering cherub—* u My dear father, forgive the queftions of your chdd, if (he has too long obferved with pain the woes of a parent whom ihe loves t-~Ah 1 too furely fome unknowa griefs prefs heavily on your mind, and rob nte ojf many a delighted hour I fliould elie participate in the fociety of my only . parenu~May V foe trccauloufly ^kkd 9 s m 3 iC not
" not know the fource ?~Who kiftow^, but perhaps the confidence of your own Rofaline would alleviate their infli&bnsur-Sorrow, when confided in tbe bofom of affeAion ahd &my f lofes its ftiarp envenomed poignancy* Do you doubt my prudence.? 1 will not fuppofe you fufpect my love,—Ah I then unfold to your child this overwhelming, this myfterious caufe of affliction.—My father, you may truft your cbi!d—indeed, indeed you may P* * Sir Alfred appeared evidently moved * lie grew more pale, and caft a look of agony on the aftooifhed Rofaline, who remained filent, intently obferving with anxious glances the more than ufual emotions fo ftrongiy depictured in his features* Some deep in* ward feelings ftruggled in the breaft of Sir Alfred, who laying his hand on life heart, as if to reftrain the labouring fecret, faid— <* Oh God !~rOh tny child S foie -pledge of an adored wife, how trying is the aoguifh of
of thb bitter moment l-^Nature, combat* ing af ainft Fate, would fain caft off her unnatural yoke* but folemn vows forbid the impoflSWe trefpafs, and confidence on the caufe of my forrow i$ denied me for ever.—* I mpft not, great God of Juftice! dare not reveal th« horrid fecret! ,, ~A kind of folema horror, accompanied with looks of wildneis, diyrkwd the fine eKpreflive features of Sir Alfred, as he thus continued.—" An oath* the moft binding, forces me to a hateful filence.—Were th© myftery of my fate dif¬ covered, the confequences would be dread¬ ful Yet when, indignant at my injuries, I think on the wrongs 1 have fuftained—when J behold thy cye*i, my child, caft in anxious enquiry on him who is forbid to (peak, fearching for what muft never be difclofed, my ioul revolts at the bale fubmifliou I an compelled to )ield, and, diilrad<.d by hor¬ rible remembrancer, I am tempted to rulh on a deftiny inevitable, but that my child remains behind unfhdtered, and expofed to M 4 the
the keen malice of an unknown fatanr.*** Where, ah ! where would thy fpotlei pa¬ rity find a heart fafely to repofe in *w~Or t# whom could I truft the guardknfcfp of k being, whofe father has fc^eii banifh^d fmm fociety, and deftroyed by fhe machinations of a monfter?—No, no, it will ndt be!*-* Providence, in eompaffion to weak morta¬ lity, endowed the mind with fortitiide and forbearance to aid the wavering teafon of mm. —Mifery unabating is the lot of thy father, Rofaline, but not perjury or dif* honour i —thefe he has at leaft a power io prevent, ahd they muft be kept inviolable. Seek not, therefore, as you regard my peace of conference as well as mind, to draw from * mea forbidden confidence!—Alas I poor innoeent, H Would preferve thee from a fimikr fate j for already i forefee there are woes in ftore that wili but * too feverely afflift thy fufceptibie nature. Shouldft thou, my Rofaline, become acquainted wiih unknown erib, they can anfwer no purpofe but tofo* volve
AHCIEKT RECOE0S# ^49 volve thee in a labyrinth of forrow, which no clue but death could unravel.—-Thou art a blooming flower, my child, too weak for this rude habitation, and fain would I transplant thee to a more congenial clime ;-— but here only thou art fafe—in thefe remote folitudes none will feek for him who once waft""-*"*- What am I about ?'* Sir Alfred fuddenly (lopped fhort j Ro¬ faline liftened with the utmoft attention, and for a moment hoped to have gathered fome¬ thing from this unfiniflied fentence* that might lead her amazed ideas to a train of probabilities; but Sir Alfred, deeply figh- fog, only added— *< My Rofaline, I feel that I am incohe¬ rent, and indeed myfterious \ but never cjuof* tion me again* Ot tlm, however, be aflured, ^that whiie in tlide gloomy woods we find a ho&ie, we have no near cvih to dread ; yet ihould thy uncouiaum footfteps pais the M 5 boundaries
^5®' ANCriNT RECOED$. boundaries of this foreft, remember the agitations thou haft fo often witneffed in tue, and when you refleft on their fource, think of them as a kind of warning that r*iuft in* iUn&ivdy guide thy.conducl:; fo fhalt thou efcape thofe dangers that I may not have power longer to fhield thee from.—Retire, my love, and compofe thy fpirits *j—endea* vour to be happy while happinefs remains within thy grafp; but be cautious in feek*. ing to gratify a curiofity which, if purfued, will deftroy tbe bafis of thy future peace. I would wifh, my Rofaline,'to fupprefi alfo thofe luxuriant emotions of thy impaffioned heart, which, if indulged to excefs, wiM fubdue the ftrength of thy mind, ahd com* pei even reafon to yield to its dangerous en¬ ticements, configning all thy days and nights to come, to endlefs forrow and difcontent. Thefe evils, dm ! mal<e hut too great a part of the woes of thy father 9 yet I truft they will not fall tojhy lot, my child, fince 1 have well obferved the temper, of thy mind,
mind, and rejoice to find it poflefled of that fortitude which will, I hope, preferve thee from the enervating tyranny of thofe un¬ governable feelings,-**-! feel myfeif eihaufted, and wifh for repofe;—retire, my love* and in tbe evening we will again xcnm our ufual occupations*
m $ CHAP,
Bjea i ttMetsaaBi&u^^
CHAP. VI. * f Tbe morning ro& whh ks beams. <* A boar rafli'd from the wood j «* My fpear pierc'd his &Ie» and hefelh** JlJEEPLY mufing on her fathcf s words^ Rofaline retired for the reft of the time to the foreft, where fhe pondered on each fen¬ tence he had uttered j but flie found the more Ihe attempted to give the femblance of truth to the vague conjectures of fancy, the farther fhe involved herfelf io an inex* tricabie lab) rinth of doubt and uncertainty; foe therefore gave over the ufelefs refearch ; but
OSSIAW* ,
but one or two expreffions that fell from Sir Alfred's Sips, feemed to throw a faint light on the extraordinary occurrence of the for¬ mer evening* Was it pofliblc, flie thought, thi-t ber father was acquainted with the myfterimn papers or, if fo, for what in- fcrutabk purpofe had he taken fo alarming a method of cautioning her againft unknown danger?—What power could be fo potent as 4o hinder him from explaining openly what Ihe had found fo myfterioufly ? Some part of Sir Alfred's fpeech feemed connected with the paper, and ilie now * * tried to conjoin the fenfe of each in fuch a meaning, as to place beyond doubt her con* jedures of the truth* She, remembered he had hid, great ftrefs on the word, *< warn¬ ing*" wjd flie now, on this review, felt aimoft convinced of the certainty of h^v furmifes; but it yielded no pleafurc to her mind, as it tended only to iolorm her more dearly that there was indeed fome heavy concealed
cone aled ill preying in fecret on her father^ h.art. . ' In penfive ruminations flie pafled along, unheeding the hours, till fhe found her¬ felf in a gloomy unfrequented avenue fhe had never before remembered to have feen. The fun was-declintng, and no ghmpfe of the Abbey could (he diftinguilh to guide her back to its towers. Her father was perhaps awaiting her return, and might even be alarmed at fo unufually long an abfence,—* She looked around to difcover fome brake or footpath; but none appearing, fhe refolvcd to regain, if poffible, the intricate maue fte had paffed. Turning to retrace her path, fhe was alarmed by the founds of ftrange voices, aud faw at no great diftance.two tall figures, cloathed with long folding cloaks, pa&down the avenue, who, by the earneftncfi of their conversation, feemed 'not to have noticed her* Dreading
Dreading fome unknown danger, (lie haftily fprung through an adjoining glade, and concealing herfelf behind an embower* ing thicket, remained in breathlefs fufpenfe till they fliould have departed, A$ they approached near her hiding-place, thur cos verfe was too loud to remain un¬ heard j and Rofaline, whom fear and cu* iiofity made attentive, caught fome of their extraordinary words, as they flowly paffed along. ^ But furely, my Lord/* exclaimed a harfli voice, ** wealth and honours are amply in your power, in an union with the heircfs of Edmondville/* ** Heavens I do my fenfes not deceive me } u tremblingly ejaculated Rofaline. A full-toned voice, replying in anfwer to his companion, faid—
** The
** The haughty Helen fcorns my ad¬ vances ;—and thou knoweft my fad is de*^ voted to the too charming unknowa foreftreft," 44 It k evident, my Lord, from her fitua* tion,** replied the other, u (he would think herfelf honoured, and gladly accept the terms of the Baron of Caitlenucoi nor need flic prevent the long defigned union between you and the Lady Helen/* ** Mention her no more,** replied the former voice in;a tone of anger 5 u (ha his caft her eyes on the baftard of Urbandine, and all my efforts to procure a fmile, (lie treats with filent fcora and contempt* * But vengeance*-^—** Here a guft of wind car* ried away the fucceeding words, and Rofa¬ line was unable to diftingtiKh the eonalu- fion i but in another inftant die heard*-** ** The eaftern towers will fuit our purpofe well ;<—the idle reports of fpeftres render our operations fecuie from diicovery and intrufion/*
" Is
<* h then your Lordftiip refoived ?~~Can no other alternative than blood give you pof¬ feffion of your wifhes,** ** None !—*has he not provoked my ven~ gcance, and foiled me in every with of my leatt ?-***Has be not blafted my golden har* vefts, andcrufhed my infant love ere it had time to blofibm.^***Bf the Eternal, my foul lothes the ferpenfs fight not more than his 1 —Thinkeft thou weak and futile ties of blood fhall reftr&ht my juft revenge ?—Haft thou yet to learn how immoveable are my decrees, when once determined on?—But: of this enough at prefent. He fhall enjoy his fancied triumph. Let us learn the* feem* ing femblance of a fair outfide, and lull him to hk ruin by our diftembled fhew of friend- Aiip arid good*wilh~*~ As yet my project is ^ut green in ripenefs.—Prepare thou as I command thee, and at our next meeting I* will %eak further on this bufinefs.** Tbe voices now funk into diftance, and the terrified Rofalme ventured from her conceal-
concealment* She had, through the inter- ftiees of the boughs of the trees, obtained a flight view of their perfons 2 the one neareft, feemed tall and tnajeftie of ftature and de¬ portment j and the fide glance ftie had been enabled to obtain of his features, difplayed a noble, fine, dark countenance, though his cloak and the feathers of his hat fo much dif* guifed it, that (he had onlya partial view* The lovely Rofaline, educated in fecfo* fion and retirement, ftiuddcred as her ears were involuntarily pierced with founds fo new to her; unacquainted with the de* pravity and hatred that the human fpe- cies too often practife on each other (for Sir Alfred had educated her in the fim- pleft dictates of nature and innocence), Ihe felt an aftonifhment as new as fuipriling how to account f *r language of fuch re* vengeful and alarming expreflion. But ter* rifled for her own fa'.eiy, the hurried down the avenue at tlie rtioment that the quick bounding of an animal's feet was heard in the
the hollow woods, and in an inftant Ilie beheld her favourite little fawn, which, rulli* ing, affrighted and panting, down the path, fprung into the arms of Rofaline, and, by the piteous glances that ihot from its eyes, feemed to entreat protection from the furious purfuit of a boar, which Rofaline faw dart* ing in favage eagernefs upon his helplefs prey. Her own fafety now Became endan* geredi for the ravenous beaft, uointimidated, made a fudden leap upon hs double fpoil, and had nearly reached the fpot flie ftood upon, when fhrieking, and ftill with the poor animal in her arms, fhe fprung through another thicket, at the inftant that a young ftranger, who had donbtlefs been purfuing the chace, with his hunting~fpear inter* cepted her certain fate, and refeued her from impending deftruction. He lav the danger of Rofaline, and with a f*iit motion winge.l his barbed a*row to its deftined aui; it entered tlie fide of the enraged and hungry inonfter, and laid iiim proftiate on the earth, Rofaline,
Rofaline, in the pure joy of her feelings* fell on her knees before the ftranger, in wliofe fine, open, manly form aiid coun¬ tenance Ilie was pleafed to recogni&e neither s of the two beings lie. k&d fc kit ly feen* The gallant ftranger, as he haftened to raife the objeel rf his care, viewed her with evident marks -of admiration, whilft the beauteous Rofaline, unconfcious of the in* fluence of her native perfections, returned* in a ftrain of jiriiefs language, hei thanks fbf hk timely aid* ** Heavens and earth I" cried the ftranger, charmed as'much with the melting harmony of her voice and manner, as by the oncotic mon lovelinefs of her face and perlbn t ** whence could fuch matchkfs beauties fpring, and where fo long remain con*, * cealed ?" Rofahn*, confufed and drfeoneerted by the ardent gaze and language of the
the Uranger, aveited her eyes, and with-a snodeft dignity, faid— « The Abbey of St. Ofwythe js the re¬ fidence of my father, Allow me, courteous ftranger, to conduct you to his prefence; he wil 1 , f am fure, joyfully acknowledge the fervice your timely ami hasfo generoufly per¬ formed ior his daughter/* There was a certain dignified eafe in the delivery of Rofaline** fpeech, that convinced the ftranger (he was of no mean birth. He bowed refpc&futly, and with a vifible plea¬ furc in his countenance, accepted the invita* tion. The name ot St Oiwythe feemed sot unfamiliar to him, and he ttms replied— ** I have then the happinefs to behold, for tiie firft time, fhe Lady Rofaline St. Ofwythe. May this unlooked-tor rencoun¬ ter prove the means ot renewing tliat tocial i&tercourte 1 have fo often heard my mother 5 deplore
deplore the lofs of. Our parents, charming Lady, once lived in the reciprocal bonds of frientlhip. Suiely Sir Alfred, though he dcpri\e$ the world of his fociety, wiH not longer refufe his lovely daughter to the en* treaties of the Baronefs of Urbandine/* Rofaline had heard many accounts of the illuftri us family at the Callle, but* knew wv till lately that Sir Alfred had ever been connected by an acquaintance with any of its pofteffors* From the noble appearance and dignified deportment of the ftranger, as well a^ the latter part of his fpeech, ihe was aflured this was certainly one of the Baron's fons, of whom, by report, (he had heard much. From what caute fhe knew not, but fhe evidently felt her cheeks crkifon, and her torgue unable to perform its fnncYions. The ftranger perceived the ardent gage of his cyiS was painful to the lovely girli and though they were fixed in wonder an# ad¬ miration on Jier countenance, yet delicacy forbade the indulgence of his too falcinated f#t,
light, and witli refpectful conlideration he reftrained himfelf, though with great did* culty, from a too apparent pleafurc* Rofaline felt relieved* and foon recovered her native cafe; fhe kindly patted her little favourite, which (be ftill retained in her arms, whofe eyes, tilled with tears of grati¬ tude, fccmcd to thank its deliverers for its late e'cape i whilft the ftranger, loft in am dement, a t pea*ed to'be cueply ru- minat ng on the late occurrence, ani though he lpo*e not, tus actions, hfs eyes, a.^d tuanne* all expreiled the fudden fafci* nation ot his fenfes. Rofaline too had experienced a variety of emotions on tnisoccafion; flie fcarcely re¬ flected on the danger Ihe had efcaped, but her thoughts were bait on him who had been her preferver. She had once flightly caft her eyes on his face, and there beheld an aflembla^e of m n y beauties that forcibly intereikd her remafk* a,*d aaention, and they
they led to this innocent and inwatd apof* tro|Ae;—* f * € That countenance and form ^rere furely never defigned to difpky the paffions of envy or revenge 1-^-1 think, for the fake of virtue only, 1 fliould feel difappointed were this young ftranger the eldeft fan of theParan/* Rofaline had heard a defcription of the different characters and difpofitions of the brothers of Urbandine Caftle; but feeling very little intereft on the merits of either, had I aid but (light attention to the account, although flie now remembered f&ffietetit to think on th^ contraft that exiiled between - them. . Thus mentally referred, they reached the Abbey eie their imvard reflections were finifhed, where ftood Sir Alfred, who, with furprife and fcrutiny, beheld the ccmpanionr oi Ru(ahoe $ the latter, gracefully preicnt- ing her deliverer to her father, recited in animated
he bad refeued her. Sir Alfred liftened with alarm to tlie narrow efcape fhe had fo for- Innately effected, and with delighted joy prefled hi$ Ro&line to hb heart f then turn* ing to the ftranger, and warmly taking hm hand* hefaid**- / , ** Brave young Sir, accept a parent's thanks. The jpleafure of this moment ren¬ ders cold alffanguagej but the heart fpeaks fm itfelf, nor will thefe tears of gratitudo be reftrained.~*dVIy Rofaline muft alfo learn to exprefs her acknowledgments j for in laving her*#, you have preferred tlie life of her father.** ** My Lord,** replied the youth, <f you over-rate my trifling fervice* To fuccour undefended innocence, is the beft and greateft privilege of manhood | and happy* fliall I efteem my felf, if the events of this evening fiiould have afforded me the real felicity of rendering the fmalleft aid to the daughter of Sir Alfred St. Ofwythe. I fhall be greatly vol, i, m repaid.
repaid, if allowed herieafter to claim the honour of his friendfhip, and fometimes the pleafure of his fociety/' He bowed low, and fiuiffikrg this fentence, was retiring, when Sir Alfred, as much by his looks as his words # exprefflng his thanks, (aid— ** If I be not deceived, it is to my Lord Conftantine that I am indebted for the fighal fervice he has fo generoufly exerted in my child's defence. Moft honoured muft I ever efteem myfeif in the favour of his vifits j and but too happy, if my ;poof fecfety hm can afford the fmalleft gratification to the mati I Chaff ever hdld myfeif bound td by the ftrongeft ties of paternal gratitude/* Lord Conftantine, bowing with dignt* fied cafe, yet modeft diffidence, replied— ** Thus permitted to renew my fortunate acquaintance, I (hall J fear, my Lord, be* come too often an intruder/* He
He faid no more, but cafting a fpeaking glance on the attentive Rofaline, gracefully took his leave, and bent his way through the thiekeft mam ofthe woods, Rofeline watched his receding form, till the deep foliage of the trees clofed him from her fight* Uncoafdoufly a (igh efcaped her bofom, which wa* followed by another* She knew not why, but the fancied foe felt a vacuum in her heart never experienced before* Shut from all fociety but the in¬ mates of the Abbey, the fine pcrfon and no- ble countenance of Conftantine had left a foft impreflion on her memory, that made her for a moment regret the fecluded life flie had never till this hour thought on but with indifference* Retired to the privacy of her own cham¬ ber, Rofaline felt herfelf lefs reftrained, and (he eagerly began to review the many un¬ common occurrences of the preceding day* h 2 The
The gloomy tower," and the fcene there witneffed ; the unfathomable niyftery of her Cither's life, which flie dared not enquire into, and laftly, the events of thh even* ing—all crowded on her tumultuous thoughts, and each demanded a Te^arate notice, Who could be the ftrangers that, Willi fuch threatening afpects and dreadful expreffions had mentioned fecrets evidently defined for no third hearing. The heirefs of Edmondville was mentioned* Rofaline ftarted at the recollection of the name, and haftily approaching the table, drew forth the papers, and again eagerly perufed them. The names were alike be- , yond the power of mifconception or error in their found and pronunciation ; yet why Ihc ihould feel drr.'icl towards the poffeffors of Edmondviile Caftle, was a myftery no effort of conjecture could poflibly elucidate. At length, however, her ideas became more general; and though th^ words of the ftrangers failed not to make a deep - impreflion
impreflion on her mind, yet, by degree*, the agitation they occafioncd, liegm to gut; way to the recdled idea of the more pfeafing ior.xi and (bfc infmuatiug manueis of the noble Conftantine, whole wel!-remembea*d image purfued the memory of the fweet unconfcious giil in a thoufand hntafiss of happineis, too engaging and (afcinaiing to admit of the r^pofe of nature. But that ihe might divert' her thoughts from this latter fource, finceflie {<jud:\ it wa c , yet im- poffible to deep, Rofaline determined code- vote the prefent time, late as it was, to a perufal of the (lory of ths Nun. The pipers (he had found in the coflin, relative to the fifter, were many of them oblcured by mildew ; many of the lines were totally cxtincf, and only here a-*d there a fe*', of the fir ft parcel (he berai to examine, €ou\d be at a4 dift.n^.ilhed, AH kind of regularity in the dory feemed totally loft, an ! uhat was kii^ appeared to be no moie than the ft antic meohetench s ai a m <n ac j tiioo £ yi a 3 ta
, but too evidently confirming the previous accounts that had been reported of the un- fortunate Anna, Some ofthe papers ivere written in a dif¬ ferent hand, and apparently ferved to con¬ ned the moving and affecting exclamations ofthe forlorn f offerer; mmy of them indeed* were entirely loft and deftroyed. At length, in another packet, Rofaline- difcovered a more perfect copy of the pre** ceding ones, which, from the ftyle of its writing, and the latenefs of the date to the other papers, evidently proved them to be ths labour of fome of the Monks of St. Cathe¬ rine, who had, from the cfonfeffions of the fair penitent, and from the papers they had difcovered in the cell of her confinement, been enabled to trace the truth of her me- lan< holy ftory and fubfequent fufferings, in vhich thi Baron of St* Ofwythe was bm too principally concerned* 1 hefe
Thefe records being eafier to decipher than thofe which the Nun had left, Rofaline laid the latter afide $ and retrimmiog her lamp, and feating herfelf nearer to the table, flie took up the Monk*s copy, and begun, not without infinite difficulty, to read the melancholy ftory of the Nun of *, St. Catherine*
CHAP.
■ ^m ^ ^s^mmmmmmmmmm,
CHAP. VIL ** A mh of tb* times of old! 4 '*« The 4*«d§ of days of other years l
<* Why dH I i^c»i pafs tway m fecret, like tbe Sower oa th« rockj th&t Hft» its f air bead ****&e*i $ sad futws iti wittered leaves on the bbft ?*»I vtnWi in my yomh**^«y aam« ihall Ve heard no more V* OcltAH* THE STOR¥ OF ST. AKHA. i IT was in the reign of Edward the Firft, that, in an old dilapidated manfion, depend¬ ing on the Barony of St. Ofwythe, lived the poor,
poor, but proud Sir Ermanfrcd ; defcended of an iiluftrious Houfe, whofe noble proge¬ nitors had, with the Conqueror, fettled in England, upon the prodigal eftabliflioient of their Royal Mafter, u In the two fucceeding centuries, how** ever, great changes had taken place, and many events* not here related, had reduced the once powerful and fplendid anceftors of Sir Ermanfrcd to little more than a military dependance, The proud" nature of the Knight flirunk from the confequences. *of the total tuin ofthe grandeur of his Houfe % and, indignant at the dilgracefal arid humi* hating change of his circumftances, he haftily quitted the gay triumphs *of the Britifli Court, becaufe his fallen fortunes and wafted patrimony no longer enabled him to vie in the fplendour ol liis appearance and expenditure with the left cf the Nobles of the kingdom* In the gloomy lhades of his forfaken manfion, he buried himfelf ftvm all the joys of facial intercourfe 5 nor w^ts hit m 5 melancholy
melancholy habitation ever after difturbed by the founds of feftive cheerfulneft, or the v fmile of conteiiltnent. Morofe in temper^ from his difappointments in hriv^* wid too proud to ftoop to fuch honourable re« fourcet as might have in time procured for him tha re-eftabliflhment of his decayed Houfe, he difdained all pecuniary acquire*. merits, and determined to build his hopes of future grentntfs on an alliance of hl$ only child with tbe fplendid and noble Lord of Ofmmd* ** But the lovely Anna, brought up ia total feclufipn, and unacquainted with the manners of the world, happily free ft&m tlie ambitious md haughty paffions of her ftem fire, had unconfcioufty rendered obedience to his commands impoffible, and (hrunk in horror from the dreaded propofalof an union with Lord Qfir.ond ^ fcr, alas! fhe had not a heart to beftow, nor a hand to give away, Anna, the beautiful and enchanting Anna, nrhpfe years force riumbered feventeen, had known
a fecret love j and, in the fimple innocence of an unfufpeding, tinfophifticatedr min<f», ha^ given her heart* .her foul* Jber all. to a—- firmer*, H Pr^m earlfcft infancy * fhe had beea * abandoned by her father; who, till the de** ftruAion of his fortunes compelled him ta * remerabfer that he had a child, had ceafed even to think fuch a being was in exiftence t he now, however, refoived to make her futt* fervient to Ids purpofes; and by her pro» jelled alliance with Lord Ofmond, reftora the ancient grandeur of his Houfe*. ** Afma had never known a mother^ ten* dernefa, or experienced a fathers fheltering protection 5 the artlefs dictates of her too fufceptibie heart were her only guides and monitors; and during the lon^ abfence of her fire, her foul firft felt the pleafing emotions of love for the unknown but graceful ftranger, whom flie had firft beheld in the u 6 fliade^
wood, that adjoined equally her father 1 * do* main, and the vaft forefts of St, Catherine's IVfoaaftegr, where 4 fbe # lmd often been ac- , cuftomed to roam at large in fearc^of health and exercife, and where flie had firft met the fafcbatiog Vortimer; who but too foon betrayed the unconfcious maid into a confefiiaii that his fervent love was not dif- pleafing, and that to him, and him only, Ihe had refigned her heart, beyond even a wifli for its recal. u Left totattfto the guidance of her #wn difcretion, and with no other guardian near her than an ^elderly and uninformed* female for her companion, the mind of Ann^ was itiCftf&ihk of reftraining the foft thrilling ecftaties ofa fii ft it.fant paflion;—theftrangcr urged hi& fuit xmth all the nicking, ali the t prevailing elc^qucnce of aa enraptured lover, and all the outward bkuiddhments ^f real fetlmg zud fiixetuy* Unactjuaihred with the world's deceits, poor Anna liftened to * 3 his
his fervent vowsr with downcaft UuHiing timidity and picafed acceptance.—How could fhe doubt their reality and truth, from the lips of a being, whom her ideas had formed as the moft perfect of all created. men ?—-With an entire, an article confidence (lie owned a mutual love, and with joy an¬ ticipated the moment of happinef, when (he was to become the bride of him, for whom alone life was valuable* , " Each fccret meeting more firmly linked her chains; her very fou! was devoted to the ftranger* whom, a* yet, (he knew not by any other title than the fimple name of Vortimen—In a moment fatally deftrudive to her repofe, yhen love had blinded reafon, and the artlefs character of Anna but too iuccefsfully aided the purpofes oftl^ fh\*n^\ r, he obtained not only complete [joildTico of her affe&ion?, but of htr pcrfon alio. ** At midtfight, in the mined thnpd of Sir Eimanfrcd'j. ^^Odiy cd ike, the fl.a.i^cr Ltd
had prevailed on the innocent Anna to meer him, and ratify his wiflies. A Monk of a diftalit Convent waited in the chapel, and tha inaufpicious nuptials were performed^, and Anna became a bride, without knowing hy what tirk (he mull io future call her* felf. ** Scarcely had three months of happinefs and love paffed over her head, when a ftbrm, dreadful jmd unexpected, threatened for ever to annihilate the bright profpeft of felicity* The- fudden arrival of a hafty tpc^ fenger from the Knighe alarmed the trem¬ bling Anna-; and fcarcehad (heperufed th& purport of his arrival, than with a faint (hriek, and a ftiflecl cry of agony, (he fell to the grouad, as (he feebly exclaimed— * c Loft, undone, and wretched Anna i deftruction and death await thee i*' " Recovered by rhe tender affidnities of the ftranger, (he wildly bade him,* if dill he loved
Jdved her, to proteft and bear her from her ftem father's relentlefs rage, and her lover's detefted arms. The ftranger read the fatal paper that contained the harfh mandate* of his Anna's father P hm brow became con* trafted, and his countenance overcaft with apparent gloom and forrow, as he perufed the-unwelcome information of the Knight's arrival, on the morrow, at hk Caftle, to celebrate the nuptials of his daughter with the Lord of Ofmond, who accompanied him, <f For fome time a gloomy filence per* yaded his lips, and Anna vainly caft ,her * tearful, imploring eyes for fuccour and pro- teftien on the ftranger, At length ftarting from a d®cp reverie, he caught her In hh arms, as flie was linking to the-ground, overcome by tenor and furprife, and kiffinj her cold and quivering lips, bade her take comfort, and abide with patience th: arrival of her fire 5 adding, as he reluclantly tore himielf fro a: her Leblv hold, for Anna was nu.v
. now nearly hifenfible, that in three week$ he would return, and openly claim her as his wife; when the myftery that had jfo long enveloped in fecrecy his name and title* fliould be unravelled, and his adored Anna, be reftored to fplendour. and afliucnc^,-^ Again embracing her, he hurried precipi* tately from the place, and Anna—the ruined, ha'plefa Anna, nevtrlaw him more S s * Here many lines became defaced, and Rofaline, who felt herfelf uncommonly in* terefled in Jthe fete of the once lovely Anna, co^not confent to quit its perufal, though the latenef? of the time had already been proclaimed by the turret clock ofthe Abbey, whofe melancholy heavy bell had ftruck the hour oi one. With much difficulty the had been alk to decipher thus far of the " tale of other times ;*' and as (he continued to proceed, (he
flie found herfelf ftill more perplexed in endeavouring to unravel the disfigured and crumbling (heets f where in many places the ink had rotted through the vellum, and all traces of writing were totally loft in mildew and obfcurity. At length, how¬ ever, (he was able to continue as fol¬ lows :*-*»
** Fefocions rage filled the foul of the gloomy Knight, and darkened his feature*, as proftiate at his feet lay, overwhelmed in grief and tears, the imploring Anna # 4 * Spare me!** (he cried, "Oh (ire! fpare your v* retched child—flie cannot marry the Lord of Ofmdnd !" ** Fury flifhed in the eyes of the (tern S*r Ermanfrcd, on hearing thefe v-ords of \m daughter^ at le.^th theburft of rage found vent| he feized the arm of the tumbling Anna, and placi g her hand forctb'y in th it of
t of Lord Ofmond's, commanded her to pre* pare herfejf, in three da>s, to .become his bride, or meet the curfes of an angry father, and be driven from his fight for ever* " In vain the unhappy Anna turned her fwimoiing eyes on tlie haughty countenance* of her deftined Lord for pity and forbear** ance i* malicious, brutal triumph filled hd$, mind, and hie heart was relentlefs and vin- diftive* The uncommon lovelinefs of the beauteous maid had fired his foul with fen^ fual love; and he would, a$ fhe knelt before, t him for pity, have joyfully,made her that inftant Ids bride, had not the word of the Knight been paffed for the confummation of his nuptials with his daughter in three days, " Driven to defpair, and now vainly call* ing on the myfterious ftranger to fliield bet from the direful fate that awaited her, or the ftill more dreadful vengeance of her unre* knting father, the hapkfs Anna wildly flear t®4
to the gloomy wood of cyprefs, in the for¬ lorn hope that there, once more, fhe might behold the lord ot all her love and. fond Jl wifhes. In three weeks he had promifed-to reclaim her ^ but, alas! ,they had already expired, and no ftranger had appeared.^— The fourth week of his abfence came—it pafled away, but became not;—and now but three days remained between her aid her hateful nuptials. Wildly die wandered through the gloomy wood, and vainly call her eyes in hopelef$ anguifli all around her ; no ftranger. met her fight—he came not to refcue his forlorn bride from the rude grafp of impending mifery and deftrucTton. ** Night now came on $ the hours paffed away unheeded, yet ftill (lie quitted not the folemn fhades of the dreary grove. The bell of midnight founded ; fhe ftarted at the melancholy toll, and fear and awe pof- feffed her fickentng fancy. She hurried through the wood, and reached in filence her
her chamber, but fleep yifited not the wretched maid. " Again, as the hour of fuffering drew ftill nigbcr, (lie threw h'c-rfelf in (application before the gloomy Knight, and befought him to fpare her but one week longer, ere he linked lier to mifery and woe j hoping by this delay to procure time for the ftranger, aud give him yet another chance, cfe it was too late, to fave her, and claim his affianced bride. But inexorably bent on the union of his child with the Lord of Gfmond, the Knight in anger caft her from his knees, and threatened to overwhelm her with his moft tremendous curfes, if (lie perfifted to fefufe the fplendid fortune that awaited her, u Meet Lord Ofmond," cried her ruth* lefs father, as he, with fury darting from his eyes, feized the wretched maid, ** mztt Lord Ofmond at the altar, *ere the fixth hour ofthe early morrow has chimed upon the
the bell, or Ihun for ever the prefence of thy offended patent I" f# Poor Anna fhrunk from the angry -glances of the enraged Knight; despair and anguilh feized her foul. Tye ft range r^ievcr came * % he had forgotten his fbfemn vows, neglected his promife, and abandoned her to her fate.—Whither could ihcUy ? Ho* was fhe to avoid the choice of miferies that equally purfued her ?■—Either Ihe mutl per¬ jure'her foul with falfe o.iths, or meet the dreadful alternative of a parent's, dire male¬ diction.—>Oh ! v^iither, loft and wretched Anna, canft thuu % 1 ** Upon the pillow of her tear*b:dcwcd •couch flit vainlv laid her head, to feek a mo- mentary oblivion of her fo- rows in repofe* S>mething by upon the pillow ; fhe ftarted up,'and took her lamp to examine it— it was a papercuriotsfly ; o!ckd j—-wi* h fearful, trem¬ bling ex]3cclutbn fhe haftily opened the envelope j and read:—- 4 The
* The ftranger guards his lovei-rand, though unfeen, and yet forbidden to reclaim his lovely bride, now watches over herfafcty, and awaits the precious mdment when he (hall haften on the wings of love to reftore his Anna to happinefs and liberty. If then (he would preferve herfelf for her unknown friend, let her inftantly fly to the fanctuary of St Catherine's Monaftery, where (he may remain in feeurity, till demanded by her adoring * VORTIMBi/
gl The unhappy maid perufed thefe fetal lines with unfufpecting belief and joyful ecftaey *—Heaven itfelf feemed careful of her peace ; and in the pofffoility of efcaping the vengeance of her father, and her union with Lord Ofmond* (lie regarded not the difficulties that attended her emancipation from tyranny to liberty, and now only thought
AHCIENT A'£C0fTD«. ^i? thought on the prdfpect of being reftored to 4ht unknown/'
Here again feveral pag^s of the manu* *fcript were totally obliterated; only a line -here md there, and a'half-finifhed fentence ^remained intelligible, by which it appeared that BL Anna, in compliance with the ftranger's myfterious tvarning, hade fctped at ^midnight from her father's manfion, and taken refuge in the cloifters of St* Cube* rine,-—The remaining papers thus went on, i ii iwyrwi i i u The haughty Lady Abbeft received the forlorn wanderer with co!d civility antl fufpktoui fcrutiny. The unfortunate Anna -had, in the fimple innocence of her heart, confided to the Superior her mournful tale, nor* left one circumftance untold that might excite her pity, fave her marriage with the ftranger, for whom fhe now began to feel unufual fears, and dreadful forebodings of evil
glided heavily avay at the Abbey in fe*> eluded retirement* and yet he camd mt***
Here another paufe ia the affitfttng mp* rative prevented the'difc©vety of the fuc* ceeding paffages; nor could, all Rofaline% anxious effoi ts enable her to'Continue with ^ny fort of regularity or precifion the re* tmaintng lines, The next paper ftie was at ^liable to make out f ran tln»:~»- # ........... Mwa w w i w i' » i <€ The Knight, with dreadful luge, dif- •cohered Ids daughters flt^it;. but he vainly fought again to reftore her to his power i**- he never faw her more, nor knew the fad tonelufioii of the unhappy Anna*s deftiny; who, deceived and terrified by tbe threats, expoftulations, and commands of the Lady Abbefs, and the Fathers Confeffors of the Monaftcry, was at length betrayed into her own deftru&ioti; (m the mertikft Abbefs threatened
threatened to return her to her Lord, and to her father, if fhe longer,refufed to take the vow of a monaftic life, ** Defpair and horror now feized the fof- fering victim of bigotry and paternal tyran¬ ny. Another and another mdnth elapfed, and hof>3 no longer would fupport her—the cruel ftranger never came. At the gates of her prifon, flic was toid, waited her father and her rejected lover, with a powerful band to force her from the Abbey into the arms of a hated hufband j and only the alterna- live of inftantly taking the veil, eouli (live her from the mifery that purfued lier, la a wild agony of terror, that had totally be* reft her of her reafon, ihe faintly bade them fave her from her fathers vengeance, and hit hated lover's purfuits. ** That inftant thefacrcd, irrevocable vow ivas adminiflered, and all its binding forms complied with by the loft St* Anna j who, in ber terror of her father, had for a moment vol. u o * foi got
ftranger—forgot that fhe muft, in a little time, become perhaps a wretched mother, aud now was $ ftill more wretched Nun,"
Here again the papers were ufelfft, and their lines completely in obfcurity» but turning over the fides of fome that yet re¬ mained whole, (lie continued to read the following fentences:~-
«* Tbe Lord of Ofwythe Caftle was the patron of St Catherine's Abbey, whofe great riches had long been the objeel; of his rapacious wiflies* The truly fumptuous ftyle, and princely magnificence of the holy Fathers had given caufe of umbrage to the haughty Baron, and raifed the cenfure and (peculation ofthe furrounding country; nor were the pretended humility and fanftified folemnity of their outward manners, at ali calculated to blind the eye of reafon ^nd difcern*
difcemment to the real hypocrify of their * characters. ** Long continued profperky, and indis¬ putable power had given to the holy Fathers of St* Catherine $ proud fuperiorky over every recurrence in Jife \ and to the repeat¬ ed and angry demands of the Baron St* Of¬ wythe, that they (hould raife for him, as their patron, a fubfidy often thoufand marks, and alfo acknowledge and pay the homage of vaffalage for the lands of the Abbey, which belonged to the domain of the Caftle, and was, by an anceftor of the Baron*s, given to the Fathers of St, Catherine, as a fuperftitions expiation of fome heinous crimes he was reported to have committed* The Abbot, however, difdained compliance, and heavily fulminated the thunders of the Church againft the Baron, if again he dared to prefer fo unlawful a claim upon the (acred Order, which being governed by no power but ecdefiaftic, would not fuffer the indig* o % nity
uity of being fwayed by the snf^lent pre* „ fumption of laical jurifdidion* ** The Baron, difregarding fhe threatened * •vengeance ofthe Church* with haughty ftep, and mien undaunted, forced himfelf within the very gates ofthe Abbey, and fuddenly appearing before the aftonifhed community, with frowning anger, yet ferocious triumph lie accufed tlie members of the Monaftery with facrilege and profanation ; affirming, with a tremendous oath, that fince he'well knew that one or more of the Sifters had fuliied her vow of fan&ity, he would expofe the whole community to the world's deri* fion, nor ceafe his vengeance till the ruin of tbe Abbey was accomplished j conclud* ing w)th faying, as he indignantly retreated from the portal— ** Look to it—look io it well;—*for, by the tremendous powers above, I fwear if, within three hours, you fend me not thrice ten thoufand marks, your houfe, and all your
dergo the terrible expofure and punifliment of your infolence and guilt/ * 4 The terror-ftruck community awhifo ftood ighaft, not knowing how to act^ and, trembling with fearful horror for the confequences of the vindictive Baron*s pro* ceedings, haftily difpatched a Monk with ten thoufand marks, to buy the ftkncc pf the implacable Baron, till the Fathers could fearch into the truth of his dreaded ca¬ lumny. «. with difficulty he was prevailed upoa to ftifpead his proceedings againft the Abbey till the fucceed tag morrow, whilft the holf Sifterhood endured the moft perfe** curing examination from the Lady Abbefs. Nofigns of guilt, however, were found j and the Fathers, rejoicing in their expected feeurity, were debating on an ample defiance to the Baron* when news was brought that Sdler St. Anna had (alien ienieieis on the o j ilep*
culty been removed to her cell Thither the Abbefs inftantly haftened; and m tbe infenfible Nun lay ftill reclined on her mat- trefs, her outer garment unlaced fo ad¬ mit of refpiration, the disfigurement oi her perfon firft forcibly ftruek the holy Mother with fufpicion. She ftarted, frown* ed, then looked again; conviction flaflied upon her eyes, and, regardlefs of pity for the ftili lifelefs ftate ofthe haplefe Anna, (I10 commanded all to quit the cell* and fend inftantly the Father Abbot to hen u Tbe Father haftily obeyed, and enter¬ ed. The Lady Abbefs, in filence, mack him a fignal to (tmt the door, and pointing to the ftill inanimate Nun, flie murmured in a hollow voice, as frowns of fury darted from her now terrific countenance— < Behold the guilty wretch that, with impious facrilege, hath defiled our holy fane* tuary, and brought dcftru&iou on the glory of
of Olir Houfe's fame 1— Say, holy*Fathe*v how muft we difpofe of the accurfed apof- 4ate V f< Before the Abbot could reply, the un¬ fortunate Anna awoke from the counterfeit of death's repofe, and wildly calling her eyes around tbe cell, beheld the form$*of her in¬ veterate deftroyers j their fierce and angry looks of dreadful enquiry were bent upon the terrified Nun, whofe foul fickened with vnufual apprehenfion and difmay % whilft the Abbot, fixing on the trembling Anna am increafing look of penetrating ftcrnnefs, in a hollow r deep-toned voice that funk to her ap* palled heart, thus exclaimed— * What punifhment too terrible can await that guilty wretch, who with facrilege defiles our holy Order ?~Say, loft one of God, art thou not guilty V ** Sinking on her knee*, of every hope in life bereft, the unhappy Anna drooped o 4 her
* her head to avoid the terrible fcrutiny of truths pronounced, and looks uoanfwerable* No chance of efcape was left her j (he dared not prevaricate, and only with a groan of agony Che feebly exclaimed— * I am indeed!—Have mercy, holy Father, as you fhall hereafter expe& to re* ceive mercy from our Heavenly Judge, om my involuntary crinie !* ** She then turned to the frowning Abbefi her faefeecfaing eyes, and piteoufly added* as,the clung around her knees-^ * Spare, Oh gracious Mother, fpare ii repentant daughter f * ** In the countenances of her terrific judges poor Anna read the horrid mandate of her fate ;- for againft the Iacred Order of the Sifterhood die had finned beyond atone* ment by any ether punifliment than death-** death the moft honible and excruciating I— Vainly
of the Abbefs; - fhe had * andried w h * * crilcge the punty of Go.i's anointed houk its Mimfter^ and iacred devours wer*. Dili d with 4 ftain, that only the blouU ofa vieti n could wafti away ; nor was the ph i of her marriage to a Knight, who cwdtvt'v never meant £j claim her, admit e i a^mc Ik* juft expiation of her pejim I vo^$ io t rl e Abbey,and the dl%r<teejhe had hrotyht 01 its fanctifted inmates* Her horrd ftmcs demanded intlant t unifhment ; .oid the dreadful vengeance of the intuited men.cers of the Church could only be ajp*.aed hy the invi<edi k ate extirpation of the heinous apoftate* * c To dif|x>fe of the unfortunate Nun fV ever* beyond tlie podibti ty of iur he, g produced, as a h\io<j evidence v/f the tLio i*s ttiifam md the Abbev *& ilunu, \m% ,0/ become an event a^iolutt y nwce*taiy 10 the Iafety and wUmix ol tne 0*dcr; tm cianus of mercy, or the inching pkadu.g* oi pay O £ WCie
reft of the more immediate triumph ofthe Abbey over its avowed and implacable ene¬ my : and the Father Abbot, with the Lady Mother, having exhaufted on the loft fek one the dreadful thunders of the Church's vengeance, forcibly tore themfelves from her diftracted gr&fp* and prepared to inflict the terrific puniihments that awaited their de* fpairing victim; who, fhrieking vainly for aid, and calling piteoufly on the faithfefe ftranger for refcue and protection from her horrid fate, was borne by the tormentors from her cell to the dungeon of the fouth tower/* 0
Here Rofaline, who had for fome time been weeping over the dreadful fate of Anna, jjiuddcred as the kft fentence forcibly ftruck her imagination, and flopped the fource of her tears. Terrific ideas now fill* cd her foul, and fhe internally exclaimed**- « That
*
,* f That horrid dungeon then was, ab 4 the witnefs of poor Anna*** fuflirings u..d death j-^too fureiy I have behe d Jlie tcene of mifery and torment,-—And whofe—whose nmy be the voice tliat awfuJy (truck my ear, and jarred upon my ioul*—*' Here (lie could proceed no further; the fentence died unfiniihed on htr iips the idea was toj appalling lor utterance. ' Her lamp but feebly thr^w alkance its dim re¬ flections; fear infenfibly Ante. o\er her a r i» tated fpirits; ihe remembered how near 0ie was to the dreadful fouthem tower, yet ftdl flie could not confent to wive till the next day the conclufion of the melancholy tale» and again Ihe refumed the papei j.
*« At the hour of midnight they dragged the mifcrablc victim fron her cell* and deep, in the horrific dungeons of the prifon, plunged the diftr^dted Nun !»— Groans, lighs, and lhriek$ alternately rung o 6 echoing
echoing round the fugged walls $ the tor* taring horrors of famine awaited the unfor* tunate Nun * no pity alleviated her mifery* * * md in the center of the place ftood tbeeoH^ dsftined for her; whilft round the wa!t$ and floor, in all direftsons, were ftrewed the ghattly enfigns of woe and torment, A faint glimmering lamp, fufpencfed from the m^ffy bars of the roof (as if, with a refinement of cruelty unequalled, to blaft the fight of the vicTiov and ftrut out every contemplation but her immediate fate), ferved to (hew ter the horrors that overwhelmed her,* and ihe terrific engines of her tortures*—The im* plements of eonfefEon were placed on the lid of the €oifi% for the Fathers denied her even the kft confoktion of abfolution j but 4hefe (he only in moments of Chort intelleft would ule, when diftraded fentenccs, and wild, unfiniftcd exclamations and appeals were alt that it produced, fufficiently de* pi&ive of the toror^ of her fate. f Two'
n
** Two days of lingering fufferings had * faffed? and the thi* dwas nearly dofeiJL Shut from life, and light, and every means of exiftence, the pangs of hunger feized tho frantic fuflerer, and the perils of premiture childbirth writhed her anguilhed frame.—* Shrieks of defpair rang through the building, and echoed to the vault of heaven,-—Hark t again that foul-appalling cry !—Inhuman fiendi, is mercy dead within you ?—• is there no touch of pity in your obdurate fouls ?«— And thou foo, rcmorieiefs betrayer of truft* ing innocence, hear ye not yon foul-appalling (hriek of her thy fatal love has deftroyed ?— Hark! again (he calli on thy unpitying namej and now, in the bitternds of her foul's fufferings, flie curfes thee, and im* precatcs' Heaven*s Juft vengeance an thy perjured heart!-~Heaven hears the a^lut appeal*—it will avenge thee* fuffering m dd t Now fink to death appeafcd,—Again (lie Ihrieks—fure it h her laft!—The holy Sifterhood, appalled} fly mildly from the & dreadful
dreadful tower, but vainly fuppliette Ihe mercy of their Superiors for its dying inniife —Nature is exhaufted, and hark again the groans grow fainter !«-^Short,breathed mur-* murs "proclaim the welcome dtflbfotioa of life 5—the foul, though confined with the fuffering frame within the mafly bars of her prifon, at % length has burft itt bonds—it mounts from death, and in a moment is freed for ever,*—A (hort prayer, addrefled to the throne of Mercy, re* leafcs the exhaufted fuflerer, and wafts her foul from the perfections of the wicked t«— the cruel ftrife has ceafed—poor Anna h at reft—her voice is heard no more,—In the coffin of penitence Ihe had laid ber fuf* fering form i—perhaps it will never be re* moved from thence.—Her guilty judges tremble at the place, nor dare their unhal¬ lowed footfteps approach the facred duft***
Rofaline again (hudderedi for now (he doubted not that, in bringing away thefe appalling
gppaUtng documents of mifery, (he bad touched the long4brgotten form, whofe (hrinking duft had once inherited exigence and^nim4tion*-^and,aks! but too much of forrow and affliction for a fault fo involun¬ tary .—But little of* the melancholy tale re* mained to be perufed 5 anxious, however* to learn fomething of the ftranger, (lie con* tinued to read fome pages that evidently re¬ lated only to the contentions of the Baron St. Ofwythe and the Fathers of the Abbey* but over whom he at length triumphed, to the entire (cclufion ofthe holy Order j a cir¬ cumftance related in the preceding pages of thefe Ancient Records.~Rofaline, however, found little in this part of the papers to ia* tereft her attention, till towards their con* clufion the following paflage ftruck her, and (he thu3 proceeded ;—
H The vengeance of Heaven hung heavily over the conference of the wicked Baron, nor was he fuffercd ever after to partake of happinefs.
happinefs^ It was on the third e vetting after his removal from the Caftle of 8f* Ofwythe to the Abbey he had plundered, that, re* tiring earlier than ufuai to his uuweieome couch, he tried in the arms of deep to loft* the remembrance of his crimes, and the ter* jiblc vengeance they inflicted on hb guilty conference* H The fallen bell had tolled the hour of midnight ere he could compofc his mind t® repofe* On this night, however, ttnufoal feftkflhefs pervaded his frame, nor could he for fome time clofe in forgetfulnefe bis eye¬ lids 1 at length a kind of unwilling ftupor hilled for a moment his tortured fpirits, and he flept. Not long did the balmy deity await him t troubled groans of anguifli * founded through the apartment, and piercing (hrieks rung bitterly in his cars j—liming in horror, he wildly railed himfeif, half-bent* on his couch, and drew afide its draperies* The chamber was in total darkneft, astd every taper feemed fuddenly to have been uctin* gciibed
flepfc without a blaae of light in his chana- ber). ** At that moment the heavy bell of the Abbey clock ftruck one;—*a freezing awe ftok om the fenfes of the trembling Baron ; be in irain attempted to call his attendants* for fpeech was denied him, and a fufptmfe of trembling Jjorror had chilled his foul;—his blood mn cold to lu native fource, his hair ft$o$ ttnStf md hii countenance was dif* tortetl j fyr t as his eye$ turned wildly, he beheld, ftinclbg clofe to the fide of his bed* the pate figure of aftmale form, thinly cioath* ed in the habiliments ofa Nun, and bearing in one hand a taper, Whilft the other arm fupported the ghaitly form of a d^ad infant reclining on her breaft. The countenance of th$ figui$ ua» pale, wan, and honible to beholds for Irom iis n otionlefs eyes na fpark of life proceeded, but they were fixed in un&oving terrific e^preffioii on the appalled B^irctu
Baron, At length a hollow founding voice pronounced through the jcbfed lipi of the fpectre—*- * Oil falfe, falfe Vortimer! accurfed ai|d rejeflcd of thy Maker! knoweft thou not the fhadowy form that ftands before thee t —knoweft thou not thy wretched bride ?—• feeft thou not the murdered infant thou haft deftroyed ?—From the deep bo(om of im* menfity, the yawning horrors of the grave,, the fpirit of St Anna comes to eail for vengeance and retribution % for know* tin curfes of her lateft moments, when writh* ing beneath the agonies, the torments of death, and devouring hunger, that fhe then called upon thy head, were heard, and never fhalt thou, guilty wretch ! enjoy one quiet moment more.~My mangled form, as now thou fecft mc! and dreams for ever of affright and terror, fhall haunt thy thoughts whh horror; nor Ihall the grave even refcue thee from the tortures 1 a&ait to inflict.—Fare* wcl—farevvel till next we meet f In the cyprefs
cyprefrgrove, where firft thy perjured foul won on my happy, unfufpecting nature, and drew my youthful heart from parental duty and obedlience, there (halt thou again be¬ hold me 1* ** Suddenly the eyes of the fpectre became animated—Oh! then what flafhes of ap¬ palling anger daited from their hollow orbits on the horrar-ftruek Vartimer j three dread* foi (farieks rung pealing through the cham¬ ber, now filled with a blaze of fulphureous light j— th$ fpectre fuddenly became invifi- ble, and the Baron fell fenfelefs on the couch,** *
Here Rofaline threw down the papers in fearful expectation of ihe knew not what 5 precip tateiy cafting off her drefs, (lie hur-* ried into bed, as the Abbey clock ftruck three, and covering herfelf completely with the clothes, a: it fearful of really beholding the imaginary form of lie Ihado^y being, il%t
that ftie now doubted not haunted the Abbey ruins, tried to^lofe in deep the dread* fill picture her fancy had created £ nor was it long before a fweet (lumber overtook her agitated fpirits, which not even the horrors ol the tale the had been weeping over could prevent the foft vifions of delight from vifit- ing her dreams, ia the pleafing form of Conftantine* ** * Thefe fweet deiufions of vifionary ilum* bm had held their influence over the fenfet of Rofaline for fome facurs after the fun had Hied - his powerful beanos on the earth V pleafed with her dreams, fhe (prung from her couch with the lightnefs of unburthened youthful % expectation. Her foiningtreifeswere foon confined beneath a firing of pearls, and hung in undulating ringlets down her lovely face and neck^ whilft her fparkling azure eyes received additional brilliancy (rum the foft tint of Nature's ver* tmlion, thai mantled through the ^clear bnghtneli of her ikm, and communicated new
mew luftre to their enchanting orbits, Her alburn hair, parting on her fine open fore¬ head, gave ber a fweet and aimoft celeftial afp^ct j her every feature was indeed a rich perfection of irreftftible lovelinefs, that in¬ voluntarily claimed fuperior homage and adoration, Unconfcious of her beauty, fhe moved with that engaging timidity, yet dignified grace, that, without feeking, feemed to com¬ mand univerfal refpect. Her delighted pa* rent beheld her, as (be this morning entered the fitting-room, with emotions of mixed pain and pleafurc j—he fighed inwardly as he reflected that this all-fafcinating creature might (hortly be deprived of her only pro* lector j and with fuch rare endowments both of mind and perfon, how could he hope flie would efcape the fecret fnares of the dif- fembling hypocrite, from whom her own opennefs of heart would never enable her to defend herfelf t The
The fiither's fffeclion mm mdm4, amply gratified in the poffeffion of a child of fufch incomparable beauty and perfeftlp!^; but thia fond* gratification had its painful &t|ay, v and he felt thatlud (he been led attractive, her future bappinefs would be mote fecure. It was now for the firft time that thefe re* (ledions convinced him of the ill confe* quences that might enfue from fo long fe- eluding his Rofaline from the world $ and, painful as was the conviction, againft tha light of prudence and long*accuftomed habit, he yielded to its force, and refoived no longer to refufe the earned and prefling entreaties of the Lady Urbandine for her removal to the Caftle, The morning's repaft had (carcely ended, when, from the grand avenue, Rofaline be* held the ftranger approach ; die pointed him out to her father, whilft an additional glow fpread over ber lovely features.
Lord
Lord Conftantine entered j the happy «a*e "mM blended timidity of his deport¬ ment and manners, foon reconciled Rofaline to herfelf5 and the morning falutations being ended, they converfcd with that per¬ fed unembarraffed freedom that marks io amplv the character of politenefs and good breeding*, Sir Alfred, whofe mind was highly finifhed, and ins manners cultivated and extremely ftfcinating, feemed for once to have kid afide the fombre (hade of his cha¬ racter, for he now converfed with that dig¬ nified eafe and general knowledge he had acquired i—nor did the diffident Rofaline re* main totally filent j by* imperceptible de* grees her companions drew from her that fund of intellectual ftore flie fo amply pol- felled i and if at firft fight her uncommon lovelinefsof form and features had captivated the attention of Conftantine, the beauties and accomplilhments of her mind added ftrength to the attraction, and fettered his fenfes
fenfes in refpect and admiration* Sir Alfred in the mind of his gueft found every emblem ofa noble nature, and a fuperior excellence of heart nnd underftandingj they parted mutually pleafed, and mutually regretting £ach other. Days and even weeks pafled in calm, im* ruffled ferenity at the Abbey, though not without a conftant daily vifit from Conftao* tine* who, indeed, had felt the advances of a firft love,* aud now drank deeply of its fweet intoxication* The Abbey jbecame ai¬ moft a fecond home; and Sir Alfred, pleafed with the fociety of a being fo every way de- . ferving, became kfs referved: and though he never obferved the evident brilliancy that fparkled in the eyes of Conftantine at the approach of his daughter, he became fo much accuftomed to his daily vifits, that he even experienced a difappointment if he came not as uftrd, though no inducement could prevail on himfelf to pafs the foreft boundary ; and Conftantine needed but little perfuafion
perfuafion to renew the fight of beings that now made the greateft part df his prefent happinefs. With Sir Alfred and Rofaline he conftantly partook of their ufual occu¬ pations and amufements; at times they would enter the deepeft receffes ofthe wood, and whilft his companions reclined bene ith their embowering lhades, he would produce a volume from the Caftle library, and read to them aloud. At other times he attended Rofaline, who was her father's almoner, to the cottages he had eftabliflhcd on the d « main, where frefli beauties arofc to increaft the admiration with which he beheld her benevolently adminifteriug to the infirmities of decayed and fuffering nature* Their evening's ramble often led them round the ruins of the Monaftery, which prefented to the exquiike tafte of Conftan¬ tine many a fublimc idea, which he failed notto enlarge upon, as it often called forth the natural talents of his enchanting com¬ panion, to the foft melting tones of whofe voi.. i« i> \okc
voice he would iiften with attention, as (he recited the various report!* that, from time^ immemorial, had been founded on the ruins of the tiotbic pile; and thefe very ruins, once fo (bunned, oftenr ^ecame their fa* vourite refort; where, unfufpicious of her, danger, Rofaline loll all poilibility of re^» gaining a heart that fhe fomnd was irrevoca¬ bly in the pofleflion o( Conftantine, His arrival made it dance with tumultuous joy, but his departure again funk it to its uluai fedate evolutions i or perhaps a gentle figh would exprefs to herfelf alone tbe regret of his abfence, and convince her of the date of her mind; though ftili (he knew not to what to attribute the change, yet (he could* not help feeling wonder that the was, if jpoflible, more happy than (lie ever remembered to have been. Rofaline was not only the moft pure of Heaven's earthly creatures, but (he was Vinue's reprefentativc, nor could that celef- tial Power hcrfelt breath more chafte» un* fuJied
fuliied innocence. She did not even falfely confider there could be an improprfetv in admitting fo often the phafing fociety ofthe fafcinating ftranger j the kne.v not wrong, nor ever entertained an idea that the forms of cuftom forbade the *ree intercourfe of two amiable beings, She confidered Con¬ ftantine with the affectionate freedom of a brother, and fuffercd his vifits to be repeated wich she fame confidence fhe would have difplayed towards fo near a relative. Nx>t yet acquainted with the feeming referved manners of life, her whole deportment was the unfophifticated refult of happy, uncor- ruptcd, native iimplicity ; in the fociety of Conftantine, Ihe found fuch a never-failing fource of informal ion and delight, thit flie never attempted to reflect what might bo tfej future confequences of iuch an uolimitted indulgence* He was indeed a being fo en¬ gaging, fo different Aom any thing the Ind formed an idea of, tliat affection, gratitude, and love had lit the torch of the moft pure F m UkiS\
# and innocent paflion in her breaft, and all confpired to her eonqueft. Conftantine wa$ the fon of Honour, and his ndnd endowed wifh every fentiment that ' could render him refpectable in the eyes of a being fo innocent. He had feen with fen¬ fations of indelible regard the enclunting perfections of Rofahne i but the fuperior attractions and pofTcllions of her mind fpoke in every feature, and flione in every look and action $ and, fo powerful iiad been the charm, that it ftufe to his heart acknow¬ ledged and refiftlefs ;•—fighing, he confefled he loved—loved to adoration & creature^ whofe pure manners and unperverted natural endowments exceeded even his moft exalted ideas of female perfection. Satisfied with the dear object of his choice, he refigned his foul to the ecftaey ofa lafting paffion, with¬ out a fingle effort to fubdue, or a fingle reflection on the confequences of an indul» gence fo unreftrained. The delighted plea* lyre of her fociety was the bourne of his, wiflies,
wiflies, nor did one felfifli defire crofs his honourable affection^ &s }V 3 t he fcarcely knew a term for the fweet enthralment of his fenfes, nor did lie ever attempt to eji - gage the attention of the object of his paf¬ fion by a felicitous rcquhal and acknow- ledclient iu his fuour. They met at the hours expected, and, unalloyed by a thought of ihe futuie, their halcyon moments pallid in ferene participa¬ tion of the enjoyments of amutuil tafl&for all that they beheld; nor was tlie grand feenery of Nature, and all her appendages, more admired by'Rofaline than her com* panion. A reciprocal confidence foon ren¬ dered their intimacy more endearing $ and together they ftroMed down the romantic glades and thickets of the foreft, or fketch- ed the rude fcene of the furrounding pro» fpeds,as they prefented themfelves. Their moft favourite refort was an old ruined tower among the cloifters, which being fhel* tered from the inclemency of the weather, P 3 they
# they had here a fecure profped. Rofaline, throwing afide an unfinished view, took up her hue, and paffing her fingers over the chords, drew forth the-notes of harmony* Conftantine eagerly took the difearded pencil, and in a fhort time finifhed a jketch of fome of the moft prominent towers and battlements of Urbandine Caftle, hts prefent fituation affording him a full, though dif* tant view of its fouthern turrets. Having finillied his performance, he prefented it, vvith a (peaking glance of tender meaning, to Rofaline t and entreated her acceptance of it, which (he did not refufe, though not with¬ out a blufh i for flie faw it wai the fame view which ftie had every morning, of late, contemplated from her own chamber cafe* ment, that looked full upon the towers ©f the Caftle.
CHAP.
ttjtiftutwwjajL4MJ.jaau'.J» '
CHAP. VIII. " The Jar of brother* « Ii like a final! iom thrown Into a fiver, «* TbebrncK fetrcc heait!) but view the beaten cut rent, *' A»d fOA fhall fte a thoufand »ugr^ rings rife m ** Htffwe, dUl fwellling^na ftil!growing) fo jjrs circling <* JPiftnift*—4itbruas breeding danger*, ind dangers death, «< TiU nothing bouiul them v hm ihe Jhorc-~the»r gravest*' BtAVMOliT AMD Fi,ITCtt£IU JjllS mind abforbed in pleafing medita¬ tions, Conftantine was retracing his way to the Caftle, and had already reached tlie outskirts of the foreft, when a loud (brick ftartled him, and withdrew his attenti n irom hb own reflecbons* It was. again repeated r 4 vath
with a tone of anguifli, and a cry for help that demanded inftant aid. Drawing his fword, he hafleiied to the place whence the founds iftued, and "foon beheld two men maflcedv and violently forcing forwards a . female. Not flow in obeying the calls of humanity, Conftantine ruflicd between, and feizing the female, loudly commanded them 'to defift* Theforemoft of-the* ruffians turning haf* iily round, ht go *hk hold of the female, who, (inkingat the feel of Conftantine, with evident terror and alarm, exclaimed-^" *« If you have pity, preferve me frorii dtftmabrt V ** Rife Y* replied Conftantine, ** you have nothing to fear % —whoever is you&fer* fecutor,he will not dare to moled youfurther 9 under my protection \ which, be aflured, you (hail not want." , ** Do not believe it,'* replied a voice, that Conftantine inftantly recognized; ** either
« either defift and refign the foojifti dame* or defend her with thy life !'* Conftantine, taking the female calmly by the band* faid to her— <* Has he who now demands thee, aright to thy obedience r J * " Ob no, my Lord V* replied the female, trembling, **>!-know him not*—Returning home to my brot!ier*s cottage, I pafled through thefe woods, as being a nearer way, to arrive at our humble dwelling ere it was dark j but the ruffians feized me, and but for yqur gracious aid, 1 ftiould have beea forced 1 know not whither, or for what.'* Conftantine liftened to this account in filence, and placing her arm withm his own, faid— ** You are, I think, the tenant of my Lord, Fair JeOiea, difmifs your apprehen* fions j I will provide for your tifety." p 5 He
He was leading the lovely cottager to¬ wards the Caftle, when one of the ruffians, placing his fword againft the bofom of Jeffica, furioufly (ei&ed her other arm f and loudly exclaiming (lie was his wife, vowed die thould not proceed with any but him* (elf. u My Lord Gondemar, 1 * replied Con* ftantine, with ftern emphafis, <s ho^v illfuits this mean, diflionourable action with the dignified nobility of the iiluftrious Houfe from whence you fprang ;~for (hamc! caft afide this degrading counterfeit, which but a moment's reflection will make you btufti to have aflumed, Tlmt y#ur defies on this innocent girl &r$ not of the mod gene¬ rous nature, I am too well convinced $ and, though thaukkfs be the office, 1 will yet prcCerve the honour of my brother, at the hazard of his future enmity/* u Wretch defpifed V furioufly ejaculated the difappointed Gondemar, *• be eternal enmity the bar that feparates us forever !«— Refign
Refign my prize, or meet a brother's ven¬ geance/* ** No,** calmly replied Conftantine $ «' tho1%h I have long borne, in fecret and in filence, the wayward and unprovoked in* juries of an unjuft brother, whom I have (ought, with never*ceafing ardour, to be my friend rather than my oppreflbr—and dear n would be to my heart that latter claim and title, yet will I not folly my own refpect, by yielding, a helplefs creature to him who (eeks only a viciom gratification j though my reward fliould be the future amity I have fo long vainly ftrived to obtain from a brother, whom I would lain regard with veneration and efteem/* ** Slave! hypocrite!** more angrily in¬ terrupted Gondemar, ** dareft thou preiumc to reftraio an elder brother's puifuits?-— From henceforward tremble, for here I bid thee fear me !—Here do 1 loieumiy call all tie* of blood away from my lemnubraiice! Boy, thou (halt sue this infoL-nce to thy forrow!—Was it the office ofa fnuid to f 6 R-iule
refufe the only trifle I deigned to entreat of thee ?—- But from this hour beware of me*— foun me—thy danger elfe is mortal !•—Thou and thy implements have foiled ri|e in my heart's belt wifhes, Revenge, onceroufed, knows no reftraint;~fear to provoke it, therefore, and deliver up the girl, or meet the point of sm injured brother's weapon/* "'Never/* replied Conftantine firmly, u be aflured J will not do either* Paflion and difappointment, for which I can make allowance, now tranfport you, Gondemar, beyond your recollection ; when it fobfides, you. will thank me that I refufed what would, when accompliflied, have produced an hour of remembrance^that hereafter would clog your foot with remorfeand Ihame." ** Be the fliame done my owni but greater in its confequences ic cannot prove, than the infamy that difhonour* thefpurbus offspring of the meek .pretending Baronefs of Urbandine, who Las dared to graft her bale-born fcion on the illuilrious Houfe of Caftlenuco,**
Caftlenuco/' replied the empaflioncd and enraged Gondemar. " Gondemar/* ejaculated Conftantine* in a tone of indignant anger, whilft his eyes flatbed "with fire, "Gondemar/* he/epeat- ed, with a voice ftifled with wounded feel¬ ings and infulted honour, * f my own wrongs 1 can and will bear with patience, becaufe 1 remember from whom they have their mif¬ guided fource 5—but dare not/* he added, with increafing ftcrnnefs, as he caft a fled- faft* glance that feemed to awe the ca¬ lumniator, ** dare not, as you prize exift¬ ence, to fully *he purity of my honourable mother, kft 1 lofe the power of foi bearance,^ and forget the ties of nature that ihould elfe reftraia my juftice. Your paflion hurries you to this monftrous fuggeftion, which neither your heart nor your mind aflents to- f for this confideration, 1 will baniih the re¬ fentment ot the iiiluk you ha\e fo ufljiy uttered ; but beware how you agiin trifle with the facred cuauctcr of the evafou of your fire/* Gondemar
Gondemar would have interrupted this unexpected feverity of fpeech, fo unufual in his brother, but Conftantine's determined tone and manner awed him for* a moment, although bb haughty, imperious fou! could ill brook ihe language ofcommandjparticularly from one^in whom he bad-never before wit* nefled fuch proofs of juft indignation (for every fpark of brotherly affection had long been fwalfowed in tlie deftroyiog paflion of ambition and avarice) % and the noble re¬ fiftance he now fo unexpectedly met with in a being, whofe greateft error was a pliant and too forgiving nature, together with the lofs of the object of his purfuit, inflamed His fierce paffions, which had never known reftraint, and age choked up every en¬ trance of juftice or of prudence* He had unfortunately arrived at rhe knowledge of the unfounded n ports that had been for* merly circulated to the Baronefi of Urban* dine's prejudice; violence, oppreflion, and cruelty, the attributes of his vehement dif* pofition, could ia this moment of difap¬ pointed
« pointed gratification no longer be difguiied, or the outrageous enmity he had ftourhhed from childhood againft an unoffending bro* ther, be longer concealed or fupprefled. En¬ raged paflion clenched his hands, bis teeth gnafhed with anger, and ftriking a furious blow on the face of Conftantine, ire fnatch- ed his prize from the hand of her preferver as he daggered back, and gave the-terrified maid to the arms of his attendants he then with diftorred features,, exclaimed— u Prefumptuous boy! let this in future teach thee the dilTerence between tbe heir of Ciftlenuco and the bafe-born baftard of Urbandine/* The mild, forbearing Conftantine could endure no more i the laft words of the in* temperate Gondemar (lung him, if poffible, more than the blow he had received j his manly (pirit routed* indignant to the infulted feelings of hb noble heart j a blow, dt eadful as it was, he might have forgiven, becaufe proceeding
proceeding from a, brother difguifed with head ftrong paftion, but the horrid afperfjoa call on hb birth, could not ba palliated, ** Cowardice alone,*' he cried, with a funk tone of voice* that fpoke the anguifli of a wounded mind, " would calmly fubmk to theiadelibledifhonouryouhavedaredtoover- wbelm mewith j but the fpotiefs fame of * an injured woman (hall not be trifled with, or call in vain for vengeance on its impious calumniator; though the ilanderous tongue that dares revile the facred character of my infulted mother, be the offspring of the Lord of Caftlenuco/' Conftantine threw himfelf in an attitude of defiance, and Gondemar was rulhing to the attack, when a voice from among the trees called loudly on them to forbear i and in the fame inftant Father Benedine, the Caitle Confeflbr, fpringing from a dark avenue, rufhed between them*
« Good
" Gdbd Heavens 1" he cried, * f what dreadful provocation impels you to this vio* knee, ?—why, my fons, draw you on each other thefe direful weapons?—why are thefe hateful, angry geftures of paflion levelled with fuch wild diftortions ?—Are you not brothers—have you forgot the facred ties that fubfift between you ?" r Gondemar in an inftant dropped his fword —not from repentance, but from fliame, and fear of difcovery. The enmity he had in fecret praciifcd upon the yielding for- gtvcnefs.ot Conftantine, had been gene¬ roufly concealed by the latter* Paflion, and artifice, thrown off its guard, had hur¬ ried him beyond the confiderationa of what might be the confequences of fo unfounded and injurious an infult as the pretended at¬ tack upon the legitimacy of his brother's birth § and relying on the long experienced generofity of tl at brother's temper, he vvas unprepared for the juft refentment his oppro¬ brious affirmations had drawn upon him j but
but now that he feared the unexpected ap¬ pearance of the Father had difcovered his guilt, he repented the unguarded outrage that had efcaped his lips (which proceeded as much from hatred as diiappointttiettt), and trembled, for toe firft time, left the long-concealed deception of his charader ihould be difcovered j for, fhouid the Father have acquainted himfelf with their difeonrfe, not even the forbearance of Conftantine could in that cafe fecrete it* Abafhed more from inward rage than real forrow for the caufe, he was indebted to the darknefi of the night for the conceal- mmt of thofe deep and ireful pafftoas that diftorted his dark and frowsisg counte¬ nance. Father Benedine remained imanfwered t and he again addreffed them. ** Whence proceeds this dreadful dif* pute ?'* he continued $ ** fome aemon (urely influences
influences you to theie unnatural actions.— Oh my children f (heath, I conjure you, thofe deftructive weapons, and in-the mild embraces of mutual forgivenefs, let me once more behold you the brothers of affec¬ tion, not of eternal enmity j—think on the enormity of your intended guilt, nor (hock the attributes of God and mime by thefe unfeemly purmits. I know not the caufes of refentment that (land between you, al* though 1 perceive- inflamed paflion mifleads yotjr faculties, and abforbs your judgments i but the difpaflloned influence of Reafon, when again permitted to exercife her functions, will difplay to your perverted minds the heinous precipice, to whofe devouring gulph a few moments would have plunged you, in an everlafting vertex of mifery and repent¬ ance i 1 * Conftantine (heathed his (word, with an entire conviction of the juftice ofthe Father's remark, and approaching Gondemar, taid—•
** My
** My I^ord, from the compunction which I tm(k a moment's refl^fltion on the words you have uttered, has infpired you with, I - am convinced they proceeded only from the wild dictates of lingovemcd paflion, and for which you wilt hereafter receive a diffident punifhment in the fhame of their rcmem- brance*—1 amfatisfiedj nor will I do.myfelf the juftice which I might, in making knowr> the caufe for which I was provoked to draw rny fword. I will, if poflible, believe you meant no real injury, and the unintended wrong was but the effects qf a defire to try the ftrength of my affection i though, be allured, nothing Ihould ever again reftraia me, ihould you fo far forget yourfeif, and the honour and reverence due to the men- tion of that name, you, in a moment of in* confederation, have traduced* The only eon* ccffion I (hall exact, is the undifputed liberty to difpofe of Jeffica in a place, that (hall to me be thought mod: proper for her future faiety."
$&iher
Father Benedine liftened with aftonifh- 'ir.ent to this nobly forbearing fpeech of Conftantine; the diforderiy character of Gondemar was too well known for him to have any doubt of what had been the origin of this nearly fatal difference between the brothers: in an inftant he comprehended the caufe of difpute, and * plainly few who was the offender* The Father was a man of a benign and I pious demeanour, and the fanftity of his I age and profeffion fecured him at once both attention and obedience. In the caufe of oppreffed "virtue he was ever acYive % and that he might enforce the proteflion he was re¬ foived to enfure to Jeffica, he thus *cx> claimed— " My Lord of Caftlenuco muft forgive me if, as the duty of my ftation compels, I (hould exert my authority in behalf of the oppreffed. Unwillingly, Iny Lord, have 1 been a witnets of the events of this evening; but
• but my refpeft for your brother,., and my regard for your eternal welfare, co-operating, will not fuffer nie to remain filent on thefe difgraceful tranfadions, on any other confi¬ deration than your confent to the determi¬ nation of my Lord, your brother $ and be aflured that I will not quit this innocent young creature till i have conveyed her in jfafety to her friends, from whofe protecting arms'you would have robbed her, for pur* poles, I fear, bale and ungenerous,—I for* bear foch reproofs as the criminality of your defigns has juftly dtawn upon you s but fliall with your leave, my Lord, i? to Con¬ ftantine, ** attend you whitherfoever your judgment fhall think proper to conduft the objeft of your care," ** In that/* replied Conflantine, " out¬ ward (lull direft us/* Jiffica, gratefully thanking her noble pro* te&or, accepted, with modeft grace, hii ciliied efcort to her br^he/s cottage, and with latlur Iknedinctheypioceededunmo- kfkd
Jefted t'ojher humble refidence, When ar¬ rived thfre, Couftuntiue beheld a youag H)anof ^n open countenance, whofe mm- mn and {appearance feemed fuperior to the generality of a feudal Baron's retainer. They, entered the neat and cleanly cot, whilft the thanks of Jeffica overwhelmed lier deliverer "with their joyful expreflions* The ftrong glare ofa brilk wood fire difco¬ vered her features to bear the fkmip of beauty, notwithftanding her perfon was dif¬ guiied in the habiliments ofa lowly and hum¬ ble apparel. The fmall parlour to which they were conducted was neatnefs itfelf, and Conftantine and his companion were alio- niflied );o find, from the fuperior manner in which their expreffions of gratitude were de¬ livered; no traces of the harfh, but well* meaning civility of forefters. Little penfuafion was neceffary to induce them to paitake of the cottage dainties that Jeffica placed upon the homely board j for the
33$ AHCIENT RECORDS, the curiofity of Conftantine being raifed, he enquired into their concerns with that friendly encouragement, which fpokeawifli to ferve beings who appeared worthy of Ms countenance and favour* The young man, whofe name was Julian, having placed a chair near the fire for each of his guefts, and ar the fame time courte*- oufly pointing in filence to the offered civi¬ lity, took his ftand againft the back of an¬ other feat, upon which no' encouragement coufd induce him to place himfelf, and thus began :— u My Lord, grateful as I am for the protection you fo gracioufly have afforded my fifter, I know not in what language to ex* prefs the gratitude your vaffal feels for'fuch a condeicenfion ; but it is my Lord*s plea* fure to command me, and I obey.—In the north.of England, near the fea, my family once lived in opulence and profperity, though now only the wreck of what they were L» left. 4 My
My father was by Inheritance the owner of an eftate* which enabled him to fuppou the character of an independent gentleman; my mother was the daughter of a man refpected for his virtues, and adored by his people. He held no mean ftation in the Church j but dying early, left my grandmother and her daughter but a flight portion of that wealth they had till this period been accuf- tomed to* Our grandmother, lineally de- fcended from one of the nobleft Houfes of England, could but ill brook the retrench¬ ment flie was obliged to fubmit to in her altered circumftances; but, fup[>orted by a proper pride, (be refigned the manfion of eife and hofpitality, to feek, in retirement, that peace which the lofs of a beloved huf~ band had invaded. " Educated under the eye of a woman of fuch poiithed manners, and endowed with every neccflary female requifite* our mother became a woman pofleffed of all that was amiable, both of mind and per¬ form. vol, i. (^ " I Ier
*' Her habitation was too near our father** for her long to remain unnoticed t they faw, loved, and in fecret were united ; none but our grandmother vvas privy to the union ; who, though flie felt the pride of high birth fevcrely humbled ia fo inferior an alliance for her child, yet loved her too well to op¬ pofe her choice: and for fome years they lived in harmony and happinefs, But the generous freedom of our father's temper led him beyond the bounds of prudence j he not only exceeded his fortune, but fubmit* ted k to the truft of fcif-mterefted agents, who were bent on the ruin of him that too unfufpeftingly confided in their fidelity, At the expiration of ten years bis affairs w^r^ difcovered to be in a ftate paft redemp¬ tion or amendment $ the reflection that his own imprudent conduct had reduced a once adored wife ami childien to a ftate of de* pendance, preyed fo deeply on his mind, that at the end of a few months he died, and, by his deceafe, plunged his ruined family into ftil! greater miferies, * f Our
^ Onr annual fupport was now nearly nothing j but the admirable fortitude a* our excellent mother ftruggled firmly again tt the aflliclive change; flie coliecled the final! remnant of her jointure, and removing from our beloved refidence, took pofTcflion of a neat habitation more fuited to our cir- cumftances. # ** To our adored mother we owe thofe fmall remains of cultivation which, in our prefent humbleftate,fliouldnow be forgotten entirely* Not to burthen your Lordlhip by thofe details of forrow and affliction thi^t overwhelmed u% for I fear I have too long engrailed your time, I will only relate thofe more material concerns that placed us as you fee us* " Our lafl, W(t, and only parent was taken from u% ^nd wc had m this world no other flay,—Forgive, tny Lord, thcfeemo* tions which will haw; vent for the memory of her whom no tribute of our's can do juf- tice to—no prajh*, however great, can equal her defect* o_? The
The fear trickled down the cheek of the youth, nor was he able to fupprefs it* Con* ftantine felt a ftrong emotion of compaffion^ he pafted his hand over his forehead and eyes, as he faid*-* ** I honour this reverential piety, which you manifcft to the memory of an exemplary parent * $ and believe me, Julian, I fincerely feci for the Jofs yourfelf and fifter mull have fuftained* But be not too defponding; from this hour I will take charge of your future fortunes $ nor fhall the forfaken Jeffica want honourable protcdion.*-Fimlh your nar« rative," ** It is very, fhort and too uninterefting, I fear, my Lord, to merit fuch an indulgence/* replied Julian, who thus continued—** My mother, deferted by the only being who fhoukl have (heitared her from the ftorms and evils of life, oppreflld by tbe rude world, in fuited by the unfeeling arro¬ gance of upftart pride, was fuffercd to fink, unpitied, to the tomb, in the very prime of life,
ltk f the broken-hearted victim of mercilefs avarice and injuftice ;—yet, though nowfor* gotten by the profperous great, who fhoukl have refeued her from unmeritted afflliction. her unequalled fufferings and patient refig* nation (hall raife her a lading monument of glory, fuch as earthly veneration cannot rear, when the only living beings fenfible of her worth, are thcmfelves prevented by death from paying the tribute due to her honoured memory.** Julian paufed, wiped off the falling tear, and bowing rather confufedly, thus pro¬ ceeded ;— ** With the death of our mother ceafed alio our only means of cxiftence j and, added to the deep affliction oi her lofs, was the total deprivation of the little property that had accrued to her from her jointure, which now went to an elder branch of my father's family; and the fad alternative of poverty or dependance vvas all the choice kft us* A <U rich
rich relation, however, from motives of falfe benevolence, offered to our ffiendlcfs youth the protection of her refidence i but bitterly did we fed the ungenerous inflic¬ tions of that kindnefs, which had only worldly, oftentatious charity for its fource 5 mean jealoufy and parfimomous prudence crammed our willies in the fetters of galling dependance, and abject fubmiffion to the imperious w ill of her who pretended to do us aas of friendfhip* The deceived world thought us fortunate in the proteflion af* forded us t and fxtolled the virtues and be* nevolcnce of our guardian ; but could that world have known what were the bitter taunts ofa dependant exiftence—how agonizing to the fufceptibie mind, that is compelled to endure life beneath the tyrannic inflictions of haughty infujnificance, or puric-proud, ca¬ pricious greatne.'s, k no longer would con* demn the ftruggle w* ich reafooand urinous refiftance to a vicious oppreflion compelled u> io make for an emancipation from a thral* dom fo unjuft and ungenerous, " The
u The only relative of my mother was rich, and inclined to fcrve and proted us ~ 7 but the artful dcfigns of our guardian, and her villanous agents, deprived us even of this laft hope, by riding falie accu ht ions ia out prejudice, that fo ilie might compd in to reft our only hopes on herfelf for fupport; whilft the return that was expected for the unexampled goodnefs of her efforts in our favour, were to be rep:;id in the facnfice of my filter's future pea:e and honour. For myfeif, I would joyfully have entered tlic army a volunteer, but my poor Jeffica would then be deprived of her only protector againft'the villany that was intended her. In the faint hope of fi.iding Iome means of cxriftence for us both, 1 quieted that part of the kingdom which had once been mv happy home, and re fo! ving to enur t.-eca; ifd, unl leek fome honourable employment that would fuppoit u» both, 1 was pafltrcthiw/ji this remote foreft, when thehtuation of thn» cottage ftruck me. U was then hrnly and extremely ruinous; but the noble Lord ot q 4 Sr.
St* Ofwythe was its owner $—to him I related our tale, and to his generous bounty owe my prefent felicity. He fupplied me with money and every neccflary $ and to his ex¬ alted goodnefs I am indebted for the reco¬ very of a fifter that vvas deftined to mifery ot deflruction. Providence guided me to the houfe of our mercilefs guardian at the very inftant that (he was to have been facrificed to the alternative of an union with a wretch more than treble her years, or the irrevoca* ble vows of a monaftic feclufiom With tranfport Jeffica accepted my protection, and together we returned to our romantic little cot i nor has (lie ever regretted the change, fince Providence enabled her toefcape the double mifchief that her longer ftay would have inevitably occaQoned. f * We have already lived here for more than two years, and been (o fortunate as to procure, with induftry and care, the means of fuch comforts as now fuit the humility of our condition » nor, till this evening, has any circumftance ever difturbed our repofe. We
We aflume the habiliments mod fif table to our fituation ; and, by never afpiring be* yond what we fee in, efcape fufpicion and detraction.—Next to my fifter, I muft be permitted to hold ever in deareft memo y and endlefs gratitude the generous Lord of Urbandine, who has deigned to Iiften to fhe calls of the oppreffed, and gracioufly to re* lieve one, who, but for his aid, had fallen into Ihe hands of a villain." Conftantine, at the conclufion of this fhort account, rofe to depart, much pleafed with the open ingenuoufnefs of Julian, from whofe tale (though, he doubted not, much had been curtailed, in refpect to his auditors) he faw enough to dilcovcr the emblems of a noble mind ftruggling with adverftty. He again repeated his former promifes, and with the Father took his leave*
q S CHAP-
»K'mi ' .r:^Vijj.^j;!j '> iL ' }ji^^' *'^a
CHAP. IX.
" Theylw*d.—— ** 'Twtsts, frkn IDiip lieightenM by the iruttial with* ** Th* enchsnting hope and fympathctic glow, ** BeamM from the mutual eye, devoting alt, ** To lm? \ each wa* to each a dearer Mi\ •* Supremely happ# in t\C awjtkenM power ** Of giving J0y t * *mmmmt m mm TUOMSOK* JlN their return to the Caftle, Conftantine confuked with the good Friar in what man** ner they might beft fcrve two young perfons whofe feeming worth and misfortunes claim* cd their pity and refpecl: j and it was fettled, ere they parted, that Conftantine ihould 4 * provide
provide for Julian, and Father Benedine un¬ dertook to intereft the Baronefs in favour of Jeffica—a talk he found not difficult ; for the foul of Lady Ruithvina, open to the foft claims of pity, readily yielded her-protection, and Jeffica foon had reafon to rejoice in an event that had produced fuch a deflrable change in her hfe. She vvas foon removed to the Caftle, and became the chief com¬ panion of tht Baronefs, whofe modeil de¬ meanour had obtained her the confidence and eftecm of her noble protectrefs, Julian was not only eftabliflsed as the companion and Squire of his gallant friend, but, that all idea of fervitude nyght be done away, Conflantinc conferred on him the honourable title of Knighthood; a pri¬ vilege he, as feudal Bai'ou and heir oi Urban¬ dine, had undifputed power to confirm : determined to manifcft that beneficence his heart prompted him ever to practife, in fuch a manner as fliould render ful ian al muft in- dependent of his benefactor, he hud obtained ^6 i lie
the Baronefs*s confent, and Julian received the high honour with a modeft gratitude that ftiewed the favour§ of his Lord not ill be* flowed. His mind and abilities, having no*v a rich field for their action, foon gave proofs of the folidity and excellence of his under- Handing $ and, in a (hort time, he became the confidant of his young Lord, whom, from the congeniality of his mind and fentiments,. Conftantine looked on as a friend and bro* ther. Lord Conftantine was at this period near the age of nineteen. Within the Caftle lately refided the rich heirefs of the Earl of Othin j her father, recently deceafcd, had been by inheritance a Baron of the realm $, but, having rendered great fervice to the Houfe of York, in one of thofe dreadful contentions between the rival Princes, he had been dignified with the fuperior tide and poffefilons of an Earldom, the reward of his apoftacy frnm his allegiance to the rightful Sovereign, tlsnry the Sixth* He
He lived, however, but a very (hort time to enjoy this fplendid acquisition.— Rudolph was of a gloomy habit of mind ; and fome early occurrences that it was re¬ ported he had been largely engaged in, not much to the honour of his memory, if true* had left fo deep an impreflion on him, as frequently to plunge him in melancholy* The Baron of Caftlenuco and Urbandine * was the bofom friend of Rudolph of Othin; to him the latter bequeathed the guardian* (hip of his daughter and her great fortunes j which, by his will, were veiled foldy in Paulina, on condition (he efpoufed one of the Baron's fons* In this the prudence of Rudolph was exemplified; for he had re¬ flected that, ihould Henry the Sixth, as was very probable, recover his throne frum the Houfe «of York, the revenge ofthe Lancas¬ trians would take from his daughter the new-created title which had been tlie mft of Richard Plantagenet; in that cafe ihe might alfo be ftripped of lier other inheritance, if not
not allied to a family of fuch power and in¬ tereft as that of Uibmdbe. To this fchemc the Baron of Caftlenuco readily gave his famftion ;—he was indeed anxious for its conclufion, and had long before the prefent moment, prepared the mind of Gondemar for the fplendid fortune that awaited hrm, in an union with an heirefs of fuch unbounded wealth as Paulina of Othim Otho, Baron of Caftlennco, was a man of aprofound? iofcrutabledifpofition; the civil wars, that began at this time to burft forth with defolating fury, was to him a matter of triumph, from which he expected to reap, if not a golden harvcft, at leaft a wreath of lading laurels* In filence he obferved the date of things, and faw that though his al¬ legiance was pledged by no commdn ties to Henry, yet would that allegiance (hortly claim a maftermorc potent, f Jence it was that he felt no doubt but the poffeflions of Paulina would he Mc irom all diipute, fo foon as England had owned York for her Sovereign;
Sovereign; and to fecure the heirefs in his own family* he had retained her? as the will of her father fpecified, in the Caftle of Ur¬ bandine, that the marriage between her and the heir of Caftlenuco might be fpcedily confummated* Paulina was introduced to the Baronefs by no other title than that of Countefs of Othin |~ the latter had for fomany years lived in entire fecluiion, that ftie did not even know the Baron poflefled fuch a friend as the Earl of Othin ^ but the fweet compli¬ ance of her exalted mind enabled her to re¬ ceive the young ftranger with that courteous hofpitality and deference fhe ever paid to the wil! and pleafurc of her Lord. The former title of Paulina's fire, though fplendid, was equalled in her preicnt;—«for rcafons of po* licy, unexplained to all but himfelf s Otho never made known to the Baronefs theie circumftances; and Paulina, whom pride of birth had rendered imperious, was ever anxious
anxious to lofe every trace of her former felf in her new-acquired fuperior dignities. The Lady Paulina was extremely young; but from the majeftie height and fine pro¬ portion oi her perf *n, carried that womanly appearance that might deceive the molt mi¬ nute fcrutiny, and make the obferver con¬ clude her at leaft four yean older than (lie really was. There was a degree of hauttur firongly expreflive in her countenance, whilft the firmncfe of her movements feemed to bear the emblems of a mind conlcious of its own fuperiorky, and inwardly fenfible of the dignity of hei rank and birth j her face and features were beautiful and command* ing, whilft her piercing black eyes had at times an expreflion in them fo peculiarly flriking and impreflive, that the diffident mind would tremble at their glances, and even the bold jicld to the reftramt Ihe had power to taloice. Her manners were a counterpart with her appearance—fome- h mes arrogant, unbending, and command¬ ing i
ing | but when flie had any particular wh int flie wifhed gratified, flie knew how to af- fume the fofteft penuafive looks, and the moft infinuating method of addrefs j«—ar fuch moments as thefe her eyes became diverted of iheir fire and animation, and her language left imperious and auftere, and for a time flie appeared divefted of that un¬ yielding re fcrve which made her feared by thofe in fubmifliou to her will, and render¬ ed her urmmiahk in the eyes of her equals. Gondemar had never feen the rich heirefs till the death of her father introduced her to the Caftle, He well knew his father's de- figns, und looked forward with fatisfaftioa to tbe plenteous harveft that opened on his view* The pofleflion of fuch a fplendid title as Paulina could confer, feemed to gratify even hk ambition, and which, by the death of the Earl of Othin, he was in a fair way of attaining, But he was here again, as on a former occafion, doomed to difappoint¬ ment, at leaft difficulty, from the execfiive pride
pride of the young Countefs, who, fenfible of the dignity of her birth and fortune,, feemed to expect more fubmiflion and ho¬ mage than fuited the difpofitioa of his mind to ftoop to, even as a lover, ' Yet he re* fleeted the prize, once obtained, was worth, ( , he focrifice, and to diSen.hle an honourable regard, was to him a talk no way afJli&ive, Thus determined, he aflumed the charac¬ ter ofa lover the mod paflionate and ten* der, but received only looks of coldnefs, difapprobation, and refufal m return; whilft on the infenfible Conftantine were lavished thofe fpeaking glances which Gcndemar vainly hoped to excite* Conftantine, knowing that the Lady Paulina of Othin %as the deftined bride of his brother, and wholly devoted to his own paflion for Rofaline, had i*evcr in th& leaft entered into the character and actions of the young Countefs j—unconicious ofthe wound he had mads in ner heart, and little dream* ing oi the iiorai that hung over his hopes and
# and wiflies, he ftili continued his vifits to the Abbey, and, in the charming luxury of paCfing his happieft hours in the fociety of the lovely Rolaline, he foon found the in* fant p&ffkm ihe bad excited was- approaching to a pure flame of tender regard. Unfufpicious of a eonqueft fo little de* foed, he had fubdued the proud heart of Paulina j and a j afilon, iudden as uncon¬ querable, took polledion of her fenfes. Hb gallant form and manly features iafcinated her eyes, and the excellent and rare per¬ fections of his mind rivetted the chain in fetters of adamant i the intoxicating charm infufed its fubtle poifons into her heart* and (he yielded refifttefi to the power o£ almighty Love* Paulina, the proud, imperious Paulina, was in turn fubdued, and for the firft time taught what it wm to feel that her happi- aefs depended not fingly on herfelf; Ihe attempted not to check the growing ftrength of
of her paflion, nor did (lie fiar a refufal whenever ihe fliould reveal, at the Baron's cotpmand, the choice (he had made; neither did her vanity ever fuflfer her to foppofe that, on the part of Conftantine, (lie fliould meet with any oppofition to her wifhes,—* That Conftantine never addrefled her in the femblance and language of love, flie attri¬ buted to his fuppofition of the union that had been planned between herfelf and his brother, to whom (he neither behaved witli encouragement, nor abfolutely rejected his fuit j but rather fubmitted to his importu¬ nities from vanity, than a ferious intention to Iiften to them with attention or refpect. But to the great penetration of Gondemar this conduct, md its caufe, could not long remain undifcovered: he faw his hopes of greatne& (ink for ever beneath the more fortunate power of a rival brother, and again he curfed his fate—again impre* cated maledictions, dreadful and dangerous, on the unfufpecting Conftantine i who, regardlefs
regardlefs of the politics of the Caftle, and now entirely devoted to a paflion tliat engaged hk every fenfe and faculty in the delicious thraldom of love, never obferved, nor ever regarded the frequent figh, or the foft encourag'ng glances that proceeded from the impaflioned Paulina whenever the object of her regard was prefent ; but though Con¬ ftantine was rendered infenfible by a prior attachment, the fcarchings of a jealous rival foon difcovered thefe filent, but expreffive tokens, fatal to bis own hopes, Rag% envy, and jealoufy added frefli caufe of refentment to the dark (bul of Gondemar, and increafed that hatred which had burned with fierceneis from the hour that he had read the fecret thoughts of Paulina. His dark«featured countenance became clouded and gloomy, expreifing too legibly the fecrets of a heart that was diftorted by contending pafiions, rendering life itlelf an aimoft infupportable burthen, but that the vacuum of his difap¬ pointment was fupplied by a dark and deadly
•deadly paffion, prefenting to his thoughts the poflibility ofa revenge that, in the end, fliould amply compenfate for thofe fuppofed injuries proceeding from ail unoffending brother, Conftantine one evening entering the Abbey, and finding Rofaline equipped for tlieir ufual evening*s ramble, they purfued their walk down the weftern avenue; and Sir Alfred being too much indifpofed to ac* company them, Rofaline (in whom was implanted an innate fenfe of delicacy by the hand of Nature, which had been highly improved by her father) went not unat¬ tended, but was followed at a diftance by her favourite jannetta* Whether it was the rich glow of the fet¬ ting fun that flione full on his charming companion, and gave additional brilliance to the azure af her expreffive eyes $ or whether Rofaline was this evening more lovely or more animated than ufual, is difficult to determine :
determine; but Conftantine viewed her, as her Ikht graceful form moved with native elegance—with filent rapture his eyes became fo bent upon her fweet countenance, that Rofaline, ihe knew not why, felt her face crimfon with an unufual glow, cfpccially as Conftantine, foftly taking her hand, and ftill with the fafcinatcd gaze of refpedful love fixed on her innocent countenance, thus alked, vvith the moft iniiiniating emphafis of tone and manner— 4i Has the Lady Rofaline never felt the foft emotions of love; or is her heart totally infenfible to its painfully pleafing fenfa¬ tions ?'* Conftantine fighed deeply as he waited, with eager attention, for a reply * $ when Rof dine, not knowing what (he did or faid, unconlcioufly railed lier fpeaking eyes to the face of Conftantine, and their encountering looks fcarce needed any other tranfiation of their hearts: but in a moment the lovely gir»'i>
girl's funk in increafed confufionj whilft Conftantine, half-doubting, half<ertain of his happinefs, remained filent, unable to break the confofion of both, his he^rfc one moment rifing tn hope and ecftaey, and finking again in tumultuous dread and ap* prehenfion;-—at length, however, he again repeated, asheprcfled the hand of Rofaline to his lips, which (he attempted not to withdraw— u Am I then, from this filence, to con¬ clude that my gentle companion is free from ihe paflion of love ; or does fhe delight iu witncfling the fufferings of a lover un* requited ?'* u I love my father!** haftily replied Ro* faline, in a foft, low, hefitating tone of voice. ** Ah!** quickly interrupted Conftantine, u but a heart fo tender as your's, charming Rofaline, cannot remain unfufceptible of other affections than parental love $—ther«* is a refined, an honourable pa/Soo, which Heaven
tteaven has ordained to be the happinefs and reward of earthly goodnefs—foch a paf¬ fion as I at this moment/' and he threw an expreffive meaning into his eyes too plain to "be mifunderftood, ** endure in all its purity $ but the objeft of my adoration is inienfible to my unalterable devotion, and I tremble kft the temerity of this confeffion fliould be difapproved and rejeded.—Say, aibitrefs of my face—Oh quickly eafe my torturing ap¬ prehenfions I—fay that the prefumptuous Conftantine is not defpifed; and that you do not for ever forbid his hopes of one day calling you his own, his worshipped Rofa~ line*—Forgive the fuddennefs of this abrupt difclofure of a paffion, lafting as life, and pure as your own thoughts when they afcend to the throne of Heaven.—Oh then, charm¬ ing maid 1 deign to anfwer my entreaty, and make me at once the moft bieffed, or moft unhappy of men !—Say that 1 am not the objeft of your averfion j or, if that be too much in me to afk, Oh ! drive me not to de¬ fpair by faying that you hate me !** voju* r. k Conftantine
Conftantine had funk on his knees during this fpeech, whilft he ftill retained the hand of Rofaline, which indeed (he hadypt recol¬ lection to withdraw. He fixed his eyes upon her blufhing countenance to read his fen tence, which, though averted in confo¬ fion, had no traces of difapprobation or di£ couragement to his fuit. Rofaline, though difconcerted by this un* expected confeflion, and the abfence of Jan¬ netta (for Conftantine had imperceptibly withdrawn her from her attendant), found (lie had no alternative but an abfolute ne- ceflity to make a fuitable anfwer, fuch as the feelings of her heart fliould dictate. She was now entirely left to the guidance of her own prudence in the moft important concern of her life ^ and being deprived of every means of efcape, added to the deep mantling biufhes that caft a foft confeflion, more eloquent than language, and cxpoicd the real ilaic ot her heart upon her glowing cheeks, (lie At length fommoncd reiolution to reply— " My
s * Mv Lord Confhntinc cm never be m objeft q( hatred or LuIifK.rvnc v * t:> the heart of Rofaline, when flie reco'Ietls the gene¬ rous fervices he performed in her refcue from inevitable deflruftion,-—lie mult now be fatbfied with the ad'irance that he can never be difregarded by the giateful Rofaline and her father/* Conflantinc liilened with e/t^er attention to this fpeech, which he felt fomewhat at a lufs how to tranHate; it was no acknow* ledo mei ^— no dxlarauon ot a mot ual rerrard. and only dictated fiom the emotions uf a heart grateful for fuch trifling aid as he had been fortunate enough to aflbid her* He would have felt huit, lay almoil certain that hii* pafrton was at prdent hopciefs, did not thcincieafin^confuiion ol her manner, for Rofaline trembled, and fla e 1 indeed fhe had expielled too much* ftriue conviction tul^s, heart ofthe concealed meaning uHierv/oid% fuch a*» his withe« would I*i\e anticipated ; and catching both her hand^ with ali the k 2 ardoui
ardour of an accepted lover, he preffed them to his lips as he ftill remained kneeling before her; from which pofition no entreaties of Rofaline could induce him to rife, till an unwelcome voice from among the trees, repeating his name, at no great diftance, in an inftant diffoived cIk ecftatie charm, and rifing haftily, he caft up his eye , and, in evident vexation, beheld the Lady Paulina and Gondemar, who ftood, with looks of anger and wonder, a witnefs of the fcene that had pafted. *« Good evening to my Lord Conftan¬ tine/* taid the Countefs, with a farcaftk tone of voice, and a piercing *glance of haughty expreflion direded towards the con» fufed and trembling Rofaline, as it paffed in an„ry fcrutiny over her lovely features,— <* The romantic glooms of the foreft,** fhe continued, H are ceitainiy very inviting; and your Lordfliip can never be at a lofe for amufement whilft tlie)! contain fuch bewitch* ing attra&ions* The m> Itery qf your Lord* fbip's
fiiip*s repeated abfence from the Caftle is certainly well accounted for, though not much to the honour of your companion/* Pride, fpleen, and difappmnfment had diclated this fpeech, which the law* of de¬ licacy and pohccneft had not power to re- ftrain £ and Rofaline, the moil innocent and guilelefs of I leaven's earthly creatures, now felt as if overwhehned ^ith (h »me, and that in the late tran.aftion flie had, in likening to the confefiion of Conftantine, committed fome heinous trefpafs, for which the mali¬ cious fpeech of Paulina was but a juft puoifhmeau Jannetta at this moment appearing, die threw herfelf into her arms, and turned to¬ wards the Abbey; but was unable to proceed* from a fudden faintnefs that feized her fpirits, and rendered her motbnlefs, though not infcnfible.
R $ Lady
Lady Paulina's paflion mattered her rea«» fon, A flght, fo blafting to the hopes tho had given unreftrained indulgence to, fa unequ*vocally confirming the impoflibi- lity of tlieir gratification, chilled her heart with defpair, and routed all the bitter ef* feds of a jealous mind to rage and rcfcnt* ment. With a fmile of cxquitice contempt, and a haughty wave with her hand, ihe added— u But I beg forgivenefs for my intrufion, which I fee lias unfortunately interrupted the harmony of your reciprocal meeting, and imprefled the (emblance of repentant (hame on the cheeks of that mifguided loft one," pointing to the now (hocked and in¬ fulted Rofaline. ** Favour me, my Lord Gondemar/* (lie (aid, turning to the latter with a look of foftnefe, difappointment, and malice, u with your fupport, and let us re¬ tire from a fcene where our fociety was (p little dclired, and our mtmfion fo il!-timed.**
Sbc
She was depaiting, when Conflantinc, with a degree of anger ancl refentment but feldom or ever feen in his countenance, ex* claimed-— % * f Stop one moment, Lady Paulina, and allow me to convince you that your fuf t .i- cions, to this Lady's prejudice, are as cruel as unfounded -, nor is the a being whole hu¬ mility of birth would function the freedom of your Ladylhip's right to fcrutinize imperioufly her actions, who, in nobility of defcent, is Httle inferior to yourielf j and you will, I truft, repeal the unmeritted infult you would have call: on her pure and fpotiefs fame, when you (hall be informed that the father of Lady Rofaline is Sir Alfred Lord of St, Ofwythe, the well-known friend of the Baronefs of Urbandine.—As my father's ward, and the betrothed of my Lord and brother, you are entitled to my refpect j but when the Coiintels of Othiti ftoops to forget herfelf, and injurioufly io» jfuics an innocent Lady, the fliould be e 4 reminded
reminded that fhe has forfeited allfe^r claims to that politenefs and refpect (lie would otherwile be entitled to command/* Conftantine, (hocked at the anguifli which this rude intrufion had occafiooed in the timid and delicate mind of Rofaline, and provoked at the interruption, had an* fwered with that degree of refentment which he could not overcome, againft the malicious eipreffion of Paulina's doubly pointed words 1 and, with a look of the utmoft tendernefs, that was to the Countefs more galling than a barbed arrow, he took the arm of Rofaline within his own, and" gently led her forward* Paulina, as Rofaline difappeared, ftarted as if fome fudden recollection had eroded lier thoughts, which in a moment feemed to agitate her with an unknown fource of in* ward meditations j again (he caft a ftili more imgry glance on the innocent caufe of her difappomtment^ and uttering fomething like inward*,
inward, though indiftinft threatening!, bent ber way tov\ ards t he Caftie. Gondemar feemed not without his inter* nal meditations on the foregoing fcene; and though he had been only a mute obierver*. his eyes were too deeply engaged on the ad¬ mirable perfections of Rofaline, to render him any other than an inactive fpedUtor. Me had feen, for the firft time, the fur¬ paffing lovelinefs of Rofaline, nor faw it without emotions of wonder and admira¬ tion j and though lie rejoiced that this un¬ known beauty had crulbed the wifhes of Paulina, he envied the more fortdnate Conftantine, who Imd firft difcovered this hidden treafure, and cngrolfed it fo entirely * for, judging Conftantine by himfelf,, his vicious nature fuffercd him not to give ere-* deoce to the report he had made of the md fituation oi Rofaline, all of which be concluded to be a forgery fabricated to im* pofe on die credulity of Paulina, and his* ikaiily, in a moment the dark project of r 5 revenge
revenge for a former defeat was formed la his mind, and a field of ample retaliation darted in an inftant to his prolific brain* He aimed at no Ids than depriving his bro-* ther of allAhat he held moft dear, ani from this four re-he expefted to ruin him for ever in his father's love md good opinion^ to defeat* the growing love of Paulina, who would then gladly accept ef himfelf, and, in the end, reward him with the pofleflion of a creature, whdfe beauties had already excited a flame as impoffible to overcome^ as it was dangerous to its objed. RolMsne, the innocent, unconfcious Ro* faline, now fek herfelf a new-created being | Ihe rather flew than haftened through the foreft, and, for the firft time, the voice cf Conftantine failed in its power to charm her attention. The fcene was changed 5 ihe wha never had received the flighteft breath of reproach (for flie was unconfcious ever t$ have unfitted it), was now unable to fubdue the agitations of her wounded feeiings, and the
the tender afliduities of Conftantine to re* affure her to feli-con^dence and. efteem, were in vain ; fhe filently liftened to his ar¬ guments, but felt too deeply fhocked at the late fcene to be able to make any anfwer* Arrived at the Abbey gates, (he bade him* in falteiing accents, adieu; and entering tlie ball, flopped not til the lound herlelf in her own chamber, where, tiirowing her¬ felf on a couch, fhe gave vent to a violent flood of tears; not fuch as ^cm the offspring of mortified pride, but wounded delicacy, and a quick perception of unmeiitted infult* Dejected and unhappy, fhe began a re~ - view of the late tranfactions, and fevcrely took herfelf to tafk for her want of fortitude in not repelling the confefTum of Conttuv* tine, or at leaft referring hnn to her father for his confent, ere tne piokiFions of his regard hud Ken ic\.cn\d by iut> iclf. She now relolved that no cva*t a itt. future, fhouid make her forget the reipcel r o eiiiCi.
due to her own character, or eirpole her again to the effects of a concealed regard, %hich might, if they had not done fo al¬ ready, raife conjectures dishonourable to the purity of her heart, and the exalted notions of her veneration for propriety and delicacy of conduct. fi Till this moment,'* fighed (he, as (he prepared to refign herfelf to repole, ** till this moment I never conceived that harm could be attached to an intimacy, which, however innocent in itfelf, is wrong when indulged at the expence of worldly opinions* —Oh Conftantine! noble, beloved—»yes, my beloved friend! in whom 1 have eipe- ritneed a brother** ch&fte affection, we muft meet no mofe«*-*ne more renew thofe pleafing employments that together we have partaken.—*Ah 1 this hour is indeed import¬ ant, for it has (hewn me my dangerous pre¬ cipice—foewn me that you are dearer to the heart of your Rolaline than are all the ptedbres of ejuftence $ m4 deeply regretted will
will be the neceffity which tyrant cuftom impofes, in the deprivation of your loved. fociety." Conftantine had no fooner entered the Caftle than he received a fummons to attend his father iu the library. Gucflingthe caufe of this unufual command, Conftantine pre¬ pared to obey; but, on examination of the Baron's countenance, he was a littie fur¬ prifed to perceive none of thofe traces of anger he came in expectation of meet¬ ing. ** Conftantine," faid the Baron, rifing from hb feat fomewhat majeftically, u I have fent for you for the purpofe of informing myfeif truly of feme idle reports that fame has been bufy in raifing to your di fid vantage. It is faid, my Lord/* continued the Baron, emphatically, ** that }ou have of lace be- flowed not only your time, but your regard on the charms of a ruilic forclter > now, as $ thefe
thefe are tales I cannot well credit the truth of, I defiic to hear a pofitive affirmation or denial from yourielf alone, on whofe honour I rely, thit fo 1 mav judge how heft to re* ftne thecaiuunies of your enemies, and to re rto re the luftre of your good name*** ** Mv Lord,'* replied Conftantine firmly, determined to pretend ignorance of the Baron's informer, fince the defcription that he had received of Rof dine in no degree an- fwcred the picture of the original, ** vvho* ever may be tlie perfons ilut have taken fuch means to deprive me of your good opinion, for the amufcment of themfelves, and the diftuibance ofa noble family, l*can with iafety aflurc you the calumny is m** founded ; and let me alfo conjure you, my Lord, to rely, a^ you fay you do, on the honour of your Ion, who \mI! never form any connection but fuch as yourfclf (hail approve by your wifdom, and (auction by your approbation/* *
Coaftantuift
Conftantine uttered the f e words with a degree of anxiety and agiia^on that aimoft depitvcd him of liis pro lence j and he was nearly on the poin: of deli.erirg a warm eulogium on the meiits and |;ntife of hb ndfi repre len ted Rofaline, when tl;e timely re* collcclion of the Enron's temper an J chi> rafter (lo whom the rare endowments wf perfonal at traclion would be no recommend¬ ation in the icale cf liis mtt.refted viewO, withheld his generous intention, Ihe ua* ufoal warmth with which Conftantine had delivered himfelf, did not efcape the Earun's keen penetration, and he looked furpiifed as he thus ipoke— ** There is no nca-ifity, my Lord, fcr thife aflurancesi doubtlefs the blood rf Urbandine and Caftlenuco wiil never dc- feend to l dtf^racefui connection, nor did I conceive to degrading an idea; I nicjut only to caution ycur heart, left it becomes too fofematcd to a prefent object, to per.uk the
tlie leceptton of another* who may, or Iam& much miftaken* lay claim to your good will and acceptance.—-Truly, my Lord,** added the Baron, with a fmile, " you are in a fair road of being the chief favourite of Fortune and Happinefs* But no more of this ; the Batoncfs and Lady Paulina wait our prefence.'* So faying, he took the arm of the won** dering Conftantine, and led him to the ban* quct hall* Conftantine pondered on the Baron*$ words; but *is he did not at prefent defire to be further queftioned on the fubject of their late interview, he declined feeking art explanation of what appeared to him to contain a double meaning* left the Baron fhoukl in turn endeavour to penetrate deeper into the reai ftate of his heart than he wifli¬ ed 5 though he found, by the ftrong em¬ phafis laid on the words <c ftfeintfed to a prefent
prefent object/' that his father ftill gave cre¬ dence to the report which Gondemar, he doubted not, was the inventor of. Nor was this conjecture unfounded s fat trotting tint Paulina, from the diicovery flic had fo unexpectedly made, would refl-^n alt* *~ hopes of Conflantinc; and wiihing, if pof¬ fible, to dtftroy tliat harmony that fobfiiled between the Baron and the latter, fo dm<* gerous to his dark intents, lie had related to his father, under the dhguife of pretended friendfhip to his biothcr, the in%ht he hai obtained into the wiflies of Fauhna, and to whom they pointed, and his own hopelefs paflfon for that Lady. Having thus art¬ fully gained the attention of the Baton, lie proceeded to lament the degeneracy of Con* ftantine, whom, if Paulina's choice Ihould fall upon* he feared was rendered indifferent to his good fortune, by his indulged paflion, for a handfome, artful cottager.
The
The Baron, whofe deligns were inforuU* ble, gave fome degree ot credit to this ac¬ count ; and dreading the confequences of fo i'ldeiible a ftiin to ins ambitious views, re¬ foived to crulh at once this dangerous con¬ ned ion to ihe aggrandisement and J plendour of his Houfe. He had long fufpecteel to what object the choice of Paulina tended j and though d'dappointtd in the rejection he forefaw ihe would make ol his eldeft fon, he liad no right to fetter her inclinations, pro¬ vided her choice fell upon one of the bro¬ thers; but this unknown attachment of Conftantine alarmed his pride, and threaten¬ ed an overthrow to his glittering profpsfis ofgreatnefs. The Baron was, in manner and demeanour, a man of the moft fubtle, infinuating ad- drefs $ nor could the unfufpecting perceive the flighted caufe to raife a doubt prejudicial to liis fincerity, or injurious to his honour $ and whatever were the real ienfarions of his * heart*
heart, while addrefling Conftantine, no tidto appeared to difcover the-r tendency ; for they were completely difguifed beneath that command of feature hefo eminently puficfl^ ed. Time al joc muft unravel hi- real cha¬ racter, and icmove thst Jon^-c^nct.iled ruifk that had rendered him mvinble io ihz- ilarch of his raaicii connection:^
CHAP.
Jg B WSS i ^^
CHAP. X, " "Til H«*Vcn d'.<m« an tell 1 s * XIow fft<ally the Acr.i tlruggka hfrc | •* Wnh what unpHuou* fatct it hmU tnf H Bk&Okt »nd tnr* iw»y my quiet iu iu way,** Southern JlHE warlike ftate of England, foon after this period, again renewed her bloody bat** tics; again the intrepid Margaret, Queen of Henry the Sixth, had conquered the bold afpiring York, and driven him from his (hort-lived feat of greatnefs, to reinftate her cunfort on the throne of hk fathers*
Th«
The Baron of Udiaidine and Caftlenuco **was, to all appearance, trye to his f *om al¬ legiance to hn» Sovcrei m s but the keen, dif* Citmioatmg eye of Royal Anjou, looked beyond the fine ipun web of artifice, that fhe knew governed the ambitious views of Otho. She faw the conceiled oifcontent -with which lu* Jub uittcd to her icfoluie go¬ vernment i and Ilie knew, by fatal expe¬ dience* how litrlc wa*. to be tiutkd to the intercfted politics of an ambitmui> Mi.,ifter, who had \vn^ d'uued at poflctling ia him* felf the c ief mvetb^af ion uf that rcvai power wliich the piou*, but weak-minded Henry was cart led to rcu.n. The general difalTv-Oion of the Barons of the realm called for the ftrongeft vigilance 1 and Margaret more particular!v fixed her eye upon the fufpecleu condud of Ocho, whofe crafty policy (hj vv 1 too well aware of *, nor could the u'moft management o( Otho avuid the threatened blow, for Mar¬ garet had placed her Ipies over the actions of
mi the Huron, and, by their means, bad ob¬ tained iime'y intimaiioti of UU Iccret com* niK*icc with lie enemy v to wnom if wa-» fop* po:cd !k- had convened advices prejudicial to t!;e interePs of the ptefent Govern* menu Ihnry the Sixth, liivi\ of England, but l : jiie regardful ol ihc ^'nomy ilate of his t^ittiin^; power, tfev*>tcd himfelf to the praline* of a private znd retired life, ilia mmd, ahforbed eaurt y ia the j.io.'S cxer* t' c or u'ligi. us du;k^, reudacJ iiim of t3J Wf.ik and plutbie a Umper for the burthen cl loyalty, aud witliout a %h he quieted tl.. bufy irajpm^soi m\,d pump and^n.u- iic.i., to the ;;ui uihc of hi* more ipu.Kd siad euterpiiiisjgcotitviU, who bcu*^ i^iulved on the uif.iitflil of a Mimfter, who,e pumcr aad utility Ihe had kng dict'lcd, fealed with her own hand tlie mandate of hi& ix* puhion from his office tu the Sia r \ and tlie Baron \\as at length cot^ tiled to refign thoie
thofe hir t h t%nuk$ he hid forfeited Ji clai.n to poflus. This Broke of fupeiior powcr^ th^u^h fu.ldv*n, hid Io ,g been :$ peaed \ ..rid \\**, i, h the disgrace of his dihinif A ha i iie^ply wounded Ids pi.de, it alia roufe i ids r> i* .,t- ment, aoJ He no lon^r hv-Htated to a id his forvcj* to th* namei i*«'^irutsvjin t'-^t had already entAi ied ii! h b;n 4 ul* tne t lur.e'!. ofthe York faction, by whom h*, n is i >v* fa !y active 1 as a Noble, wlu Je ['ie a p )f- ictiions Mid koovvn t des t- wo^. 1:, Id th 1.4th ti their tnkrprtlc, a.al ahnot cntuic mc* t *j to their caute. It wa fi na thh peri/d that tie flr^^; to*ei> ol iMnn ir** b' ^m, tp \r i. f * CiriMna d « f the hir^ >, t 1 .d t \ c 1 \\ v d.tf re.*? a j-tct. It »*a torn*, k * d a* d to t«,e k.u of vvas, th 1 t it,*\ mi^ .t Ik oi- daiv,ei*d «u*ie if k t ** e t %, ** ? j, | n«\ e ni* r** its Lr f- e c ^ .its *n»ti ]o,c; ».i:j ,n u s cchoe I to tue iouLu'4 ui iiurLa! ^aitare; r. *.a
again the armed fentinel paced the rampafts> the wateh-pofts were ftationed hi the higheft turrets, and the Caftle again aflumed the formidable appearance of refiftance j its nu¬ merous retainers, and thofe of Catllenuco> filled its wards, and accoutred in armour, prepared under their Chiefs, the Baron and <3ondemar, to rulh to the field of bloody contention. Conftantine alone remained inactive i the Baron had endeavoured to enlift him in the caufe of Yo* k: for many of the retainers of Urbandine, who were devoted to their young Lord, exprefted many tokens of diffatisf&c- tion in being delivered t> the command of Gondemar, and not of their future maften But Conftantine, much as he wiflied to fig- nalize himfeft in the field, nobly replied to his father's requefts, that though he would ever pay a fon*s obedience to his com¬ mands, yet, in the prefent cafe, his ho* nour forbade his engaging in oppofition to Henry, to whom his allegiance had been guaranteed
guaranteed by the Baronefs $ adding, that he /hould, on no confideration, fwerve from that loyalty and refpect by which only he was entitled to hold the inheritance of his grand* fire's pofleflions; that, as be was content to remain neuter, and would not oppofe his arms againft his father and brother, fo al r o he was refoived never to lift them againft the indifputable rights of that Sovereign whom alonehe meant to acknowledge; though, from neceflity, he was compelled to remain in¬ active in his caufe. The Baron, though much incenfed at this refufal, concealed his anger, recollecting that the lands, pofleflions, and their produce, had been unhefitatingly lent by his generous foil for the ufe of hb prefent enterprife; not only fo, but he knew fuli well the fteadinefs of the mind of Conftantine, to hope to repeal his determinations, where he was convinced that he acted from the ftricteft principles of juftice. With an army of aimoft: fifteen hundred retainersand vaflals, the Baron and Gondemar vol. i. . quitted
quitted the Caftle for the field of battfc; and joining the forces of Richard of York,, lib arrival was welcomed with triumphal (hunts by that politic Prince, The Caftle was kft under the command of the chief warden, with a fufficient guard to fupport it againft a (fege $ the fears of which, however, were banilhed by the firft battle, in which the York parry had been compelled to remove their camp to a more diftant quarter. It was fome few evenings following that in which Rofaline had received (b deep an hu* miliation in the foreft, that, as flie fat at the great weftern cafemeat of the falaon, watching the twilight that gradually ftbfe over the face of nature, (he oblerved ahorfe- man galloping furioufly towards the Abbey, Somewhat alarmed at a fight fo unufual, ihe pointed to her father the object that had In¬ terrupted a long tf£m of difagrceablc reflec¬ tions that had alternately agitated her mind. Sir
*§\s* Alfred advanced to the window, as the ftranger entered through the arch of the great gates; he caft his eyes upon the horfeman as he alighted, and flatting, wildly exclaimed— ** Great God! what means this unex- fie&ed vifit ?~—Am I at length free * 9 or is there yet an increafe of mifery in ftore for the wretched Alfred i n Rofaline, with amazement, viewed the contending emotions that fhook the frame of St. Ofwythe \ fhe arofe alarmed from her feat, and tenderly taking his hand, faid— ** My father, why are you thus diftreff- ■id —why thus agitated ?■— Oh! why his Fate denied me the blefling of parental confi¬ dence?—why is this dreaded—this hidden mifery fliut within your own bolbm folely, and your Rofaline, your only child, ex¬ cluded ft m participating in an evil fhe anight Jighten, at leaft footh with fympathy, s 2 if
if not entirely eradicate?—-Oh my father 1 if you knew the truth of this heart, and the anguifli it feels at beholding you thus, you would no lunger feek to conceal a grief that robs me of your dear fociety, and imbitters every moment of my exiftence with anxiety and dread forthe life and welfare of that be¬ loved parent, on whofe happinefs my own depends*** Sir Alfred fixed his eyes alternately upon the door, with impatient expectation of the entrance of the ftranger, and then angrily on Rofaline* At length he faid, with a iternnefs that cut her to the very foul™ <« Rofaline, have I not often cautioned you never to enquire into the fecret caufe of my actions, or hope to have the myftery explained that time only can unfold ? Reft faii fied, unhappy child, your father has but too deep a motive for that oppreffive forrow which J perceive >ou have fo keenly obferved. 1 would ihciter you from its effects—I would, if
if pofltble, fecure you from thofe woes that lam the vidtim of; but, as you value my blefling or difpleafure, never, I folemnly enjoin you, repeat a queftion that I am for ever filent upon/*—The door at that mo* ment opened, and a tall figure, habited in black, and his perfon concealed by a long cioak of the fame, entered the chamber.— ** Retire,'* continued Sir Alfrrl, with an emotion which feemed increafed by the pre¬ fence ofthe ftranger; " I have fome private concerns that demand your abfence.**—The tear ftood in the eye of Rofaline, who felt her heart quite fubdued by this unufual feverity, and even harflincfs of language. Jt was obferved by Sir Alfred, who, in a moment, felt that he had fpoken unkindly ; and now fofteuing his features, took her hand, with a look of tenderiiefs that in a mo* ment cheered the drooping Roi dine, and filently leading her to the do.ir, he kiffed her cheek as he clofed it upon her; and Rolaline, with infinite amazement, heard the door bolted ftrongiy within, Alarmed, s 3 and
and not knowing what to think or conjecture, ihe flood liftening in the entry to the founds of their voices, which, however, in a mo* ment funk fo low as not to be heard, and in an inftant ail was total filence. In any other fituation Rofaline would have fevcrely upbraided herfelf for fuch an act: of meanne s: but in a moment when all her fears for her father were fo myfte- rioufly excited, (he could not help thinking that this was the pcrfon who had fo long been tlie caufe of his unhappinefs, and that his arrival, and the dreadful agitation of Sir, Alfred, proceeded from motives hoftile, if not dangerous, to her father's life* Impreff¬ ed with this apprehenfion, foe placed her eye to the chink of a broken pannel in the door, and at that n:oment heard Sir Alfred exclaim, " Foiknv ms !" and in an inftant at ter Ihe iaw him opeti a fmall fpace in the wamlcot, through which he entered a dark arid empty void, and was followed by the ftranger with a lighted taper, who no fooner had
had pafled the entry, than the pannel Aid again into its foi mer pofition* Aftonifliment now fucceeded alarm, and her fears of danger to Sir Alfred gave place to other concerns of equal importance. It was evident he was well acquainted with the ftranger, and had no apprehenfions of his own faiety* or he certainly never would have take&him to a place formed for fuch feeurity and .concealment. Pondering on the ftrange- nefs of thefe circumftances, ihe entered her chamber; and feating herfelf in the receis of the turret-window, continued for a length of time to ruminate on tlie many occur¬ rences tint had lately followed each other ia £ucfe quick fucceftiom Her mind wats reftlefs and unfettieJ, and ihe continued watching the moon, as it role in unclouded majefty over the dark woods of the foreft. A kind of penfive (blemnity ftole gradually over her, as fhe viewed the filent ferenity of the trees, unagitated by s 4 the
the flighted breath of $ir; their fable foliage contrafted with the whitenefsof the time-worn ruins of the Abbey, prefenting a gloomy kind of diverfity to the folemn ftilinefs which prevailed. More than two hours had elapfed, during which time fhe ftill continued to remain at the cafement, anxioufly impatient for her father's fummons j till the flow change of nature gradually produced the reverfe ofthe late beauties flie had been contemplating, and the moon becoming invifible, fl>e mark¬ ed the fulphureous lightnings as they blazed acrofs the fky, and feemed to proclaim an approaching ftorm* A kind of fear, fpite of her efforts, ftole over her fenfes, like the image of a dreadful prefentiment of evil.-*-* She had liftened to the hootings of the fcreech-owi from among the ivy ofa ruined tower, till its cries had aimoft infpired her with prdaging terrors of ilie knew not what nature *, and her impatience once more to behold her father, prompted her to rife from her
her chair, with a defign tf once more trying to enter the fidoon, when a hafty ftep in the corridor quickened her expectation, and in the next inftant the door was thrown vio¬ lently open, and Jannetta, breathlefs and wild, flew into the chamber. The fears of Rolaline had but one objed, and (he eagerly demanded, with affrighted looks-— " Where is my Either? where is Sir Alfred ?<—§peak, Jannetta, for Heaven's fake, fpeak the occafion of this uncommon alarm l'* *« Oh my Lady ! pardon my boldnefs, but I am aimoft befide myself with joy." " But from what caufe ?" more impa¬ tiently demanded Rofaline* " Why pieafe you, my Lady, there*s a fine to do in the Abbey, and ali occafioncd by the arrival of this ftranger. My Lord has fent me to your Ladylhip,. to defire you will at 1 end him inftantly. Owen is gone to the Caftle, and my matter has given s 5 orders
orders to quit the Abbey once more. The blefled St, Thomas be praifed I" 4t Qyit the Abbey I*' repeated the Lady Rofaline,with an incredulous tone, "Ifear, Jannetta, your fenfes* are as unfettled, as your language and meaning are incoherent and miftakem** " Miftaken 1" echoed Jannetta, who had by this time recovered refpiration $ ** nay then, my Lady, if you will not believe'me, my Lord will convince you. He has been giving commands for this half hour, that all fliould be ready for departure by midnight. The Abbey is all in confufion; and the great old clock, in the weft-turret, has already chimed the hour of ten." " Gracious Heaven V* exclaimed Rofa¬ line, **to what do thefe myfterious cir¬ cumftances relate ?** Jannetta was endeavouring to explain them agreeable to her own thoughts j but Rofaline, entering the gallery, was quickly ©ut of hearing, and had already reached the 3 ' door
door of tlie faloon;—her heart beat with unufual emotion, and her hands trembled as flie hefitatingly threw it open, and entering gently, perceived her father alone* He was pacing, with quick and hurried fteps^ the length of the apartment; his countenance difplayed a combination of con¬ tending emotions; fear, hope, and doubt were ftrongiy depi&ured, and feemed ftrug? gling with furrow to gain fupremacy. With the noife of the opening door,. Sir Alfred was routed from the meditations into, which he had been plunged, and raifing hi& eyes from the ground, they encountered thofe of Rofaline. With a look ful! of tendernefs, angnifii, and expreifive meaning, he fto^jed^ fighed heavily, and, as (he approached, threw his arms around her, and embraced her with an excefs of parental affection. A ftrong emotion of anguifli laboured for ut¬ terance, and tears, impoffible to reft rain, fell upon the neck of Rolaline^ as he prcflld & 6 he;:
her ftili nearer to his heart. At length* in* wardly ftruggling to regain compofure, he faid, with a tone of voice rendered aimoft inarticulate from excefs of emotion-— «« Rofaline, I leave the Abbey this night.'* ** This night, my Lord !" repeated Ro-* faline $ then, aCter a paufe of momentary re¬ gret, given to the memory of paft felicity, and to the thoughts of Conftantine, fhe firmly added, u Well then this night be it 51 am ready, my father, this inftant to attend you." « Oh Heavens! never, my child, muft we pafs this foreft together!" ejaculated Sir Alfred, with extreme agony; * c it is forbid¬ den, and ycu muft remain here $ for your own fafety alone depends on our prefent feparation. Grieve not, my Rofaline," for flie had fallen upon a chair, immoveable and fpeechlefs, with aftonilhment and griefs *« the evils that part us arc but temporary, and,
and, fliould I live to return, all thefe myf¬ terious woes will ceafe to be.** ** Remain here!" feebly ejaculated Ro¬ laline, tears of anguifli filling her eyes $ " remain here !" (he again wildly repeated, in a tone of unafFe&ed forrow and aftonithed doubt j then throwing herfelf into her fa¬ ther's arms,and calling her eyes in anguilli- ed tendernefc on his face, (lie added, ** What power* what law prevail to compel a parent to defert his child—his only child, or force Nature to forego her rights ?—Oh 1 no, no, you cannot, (hall not refufe me to accom¬ pany you !—My father loves me too well to deny this only requeft qf his child." * c Rofaline," interrupted Sir Alfred, with mild, but determined fteadinefs of manner, ** Rofaline, you know how much 'dearer to me are your feeurity and happinefs than either my own, or even my exiftencc; it is to in- fure them I now quit, for a time, thefe (bet¬ tering folitudes, fo congenial to my mind. Liften, and do not interrupt me.—You have too
too often remarked rile fecret mifery thafe has fo long diftarbed my repofe, and I have before forbade your enquiry into thofe irre¬ vocable engagemen s that bind me tofllence on the fource of my forrows. jHeaven, in the arrival of this ftranger, feems to point the way to returning peace ; and, fliould the* indifpenfible caufe that calls me from the Abbey, prove fortunate to my with, I may yet again be reftored to thofe ferene enjoyments that I had for ever defpaired of recovering in this life > and though Fate compels us to fe- parate, yet reflect that it is the only means left that can produce a hope of future pro» fperity.—I leave you to the protection of ftrangers, it is true ; but remember that Ruithvina of LTrbandine is your father's deareft, only living friend, and beneath her foftering roof will my Rolaline find feeurity till her father returns/* Rofaline liftened in filence, but in tears ^ for fhe found the rcfolutc, though affec¬ tionate?
iionate manner, in which Sir Alfred deli¬ vered his defign, too impreflive to admit of appeal; but fince (lie knew that flie muft not hope to conquer his determinations, aii places to her in his abfence were indifferent, and (he had no longer even a wifli to enter the Caftle* >to which indeed (he now felt a re¬ pugnance ; and wiping away the tears from her eyes, fhe at length falteringly faid—• €i Since I am deprived of the dear pri¬ vilege of attending my father whitherfoever he goes, and fince, without, his loved fociety,. all places are alike to me, why may 1 not be indulged in the only remaining wiih left me> by ftill continuing to inhabit the Abbey till his return?" ** That muft not be, my child !" replied Sir Alfred, with emotion;—««that I fliall deeply feel the lofs of your fociety, Heaven knows is a deprivation I am but ill able to combat with j but I fubmit to the decrees of deftiny, nor will I murmur at its un- fea reliable
fearchablc inflictions. But for you, mf Rofaline, thefe gloomy towers and tottering ruins were never intended as a (belter^ nor would they afford you even a fafe retreat during the prefent dangerous ft.ite of Eng¬ land ; for, expofed and unprotected, you might become themiferablc prey ofthe law- lefs freebooter, or, what is even more dread¬ fully to be feared, perhaps fall a viftim to thofe numerous foraging parties that daily pafs through the foretl to either camp; then reflect what would be the fufferings of your father when, at his return, he flioul i find his - only treafure torn from his arms by the favage violence of mercilefs war, or midnight ban¬ ditti !*' Rofaline funk on her feat, fhuddering at the horrid picture; and, convinced of the juftnefs of Sir Alfred's arguments, fhe did not attempt to refift them* Her heart was too fuli for utterance, and ihe remained filent, and overcome with extreme forrow* The Abbey
Abbey clock at that moment tolled the dread¬ ed hour of parting, and a deathly fickneis aimoft rendered her infenfiblc, when Rofaline beheld the entrance of G*ven, who came to inform his Lord that ali was ready for de¬ parture. Sir Alfred filently waved his hand, and Owen inftantly clofed the door, Rofaline, at their harfh founds, ftarted from her feat in the wild tranfport ef defpair* which tnfpiring her with a falie courage, ihe approached St. Ofwythe, and fell fuddenly on her knees before him, ** My father !" (he inarticulately exclaim¬ ed, trying to ftifle the fob that rent lier heart* and ftruggled for utterance, ** my dear, my only parent, Oil! do not leave me for ever! —You are my all—the only being on earth I ever loved—1 have no other friend exiftmg if you defert me !—A dreadful prefentiment fills
fills my mind that I fee you for the Jafttim%, and never, no never fliall my eyes again behold" you living, iii do not attend you on this expedition.—Oh Heavens! what direful caufe oppofes a requefl. fo natural ?—1 crave only tiie performance ofthe duty of' a child to her father, and even that relentlefs Fate denies me PV-And then paufing, as if con¬ vinced of the hopelefs eftbrt (lie had made, (lie ftruggled inwardly with herfelf, and riling, at length added, with a (igh—** Ah I I fee fuil well it is in vain to hope for fo dear a bleffing, and I will nomoreafflid you, my father, with mf entreaties, Forgive nay pre- fumption >—I wiil be what you would have^ me, and endeavour to teach my heart the only kQbn difficult from you to liearn—fub- miffion to this dreadful ncceOity." * 6 Do not wrong me, my love," replied Su Ofwythe, preffing his Rofaline to hia heart, ♦' by fuppofing that I am lefs grieved than yourfclf at the bitternefs of our fepara- tioa.—It i& the firft you have ever known* and
and iis fuddenncfh increafcb thu lurrow you feel;—but moderate thefe tranfports of grief, and learn, if pofi^ble, to fubduc fuch aftlic- tive feelings entirely, Confider our prelent parting but as a temporary evil, and a happy prefage of that (uture gQod whieh may* in the end, reftore us to-—- T * Sir Alfred here fuddenly checked himfelf, and left the (entence unfinished; then added—'* The Baronefs is prepared to receive you with that tender care that will, in a fhort time, com¬ pensate for my abfence. A month, or fix. weeks are the utmoft limits of my ftay j and, at the end of that period, I fhali again en¬ fold you, my child, in my arms; when all thefe forrows will be remembered but as a pafliog cloud, and our future fun will be a fun of undiminished brightnefs. But, Oh my daughter! let me conjure you, as you regard your own happinefs and my peace, to endeavour to fubdue thefe dangerous emotions of forrow; they will enfeeble, and ultimately deftroy that fortitude of mind which
which is fo indi r penfible to, your comt- fort. The refent trial, to a heart fo young and tender as vour's. is deeolv afflic* ting; but exert the ftrength of that judg* ment and fenih you have been fo greatly en¬ dowed with, and it will ftiew to your reafon that immoderate grief is as ruinous to your own peace of mind, as it is offenfive in the eye of Providence, whofe allotted decrees are meant as fweet afflictions to purify, and try the ftrength of our fortitude and obe* dienee to his almighty pleafure.—If you re¬ gard my peace, you will not hefitate to en¬ deavour to regain your own;—the fight of your unavailing diftrefs will deeply imbitter every moment of my abfence, and increafe thofe forrows which not even time can heal, although 1 bend fubmiflive to their yoke.— Say then, my chilil," he added, with a look of tendernefs and perfuafion, <s will you not ftrive, for my fake, to regain that com* pofure (o neceffary to the happinefs of your father ?" Rofalia*
Rotatine raifed her eyes trom the ground to the pale, grief-worn countenaoce of Sir Alfred ; (he made an effort to fpeak, but an inward fob choked its utterance—her iips moved, but yielded nofou:»d—the attempt was vain 5 fhe fupprefTed indeed the flowing tears, and feeling the power of articulation •denied her, me raited her father's hand to her lips, and fervently fainted it; St. Ofwythe had exerted himfelf to admi- isifter that confolation to Rofaline he could mot give to himfelf. His own feelings were doubly painful, becaufe obliged to fupprefs aind .conceal them ; but at this moment the torture of his mind aimoft defied his forti¬ tude to reftrain them, and, left he mould betray himfelf, he refolvcd inflantly to end this fuul-rending fcene» 44 The time is precious," he haftily ex¬ claimed, " and one hour loft may deilroy ali hope for ever; not only depriving my Rolaline
Rofaline v f her bitthright, but even this laft retreat—*thefe ruined towers may be rudely torn from her inheritance,—For myfeif I care not 5 but juftice to my child demands tt' drefs of thofe injuries I have, and (lie may ftill continue to fuftain.-—Should I, Rota* line, be n ftored to thofe poffeflions that powerful villany has deprived me of, yota (hall then know at foil the unhappy ftory of my woes; but if unforefeen events render my hopes abortive, and I return not at the ftated period, this key, which 1 will fend by Owen, unlocks the cabinet that (lands in my private clofet, where you will find the documents of your birthright, and fuch other papers as wiil infarc your welfare.-— Adiou> my child ! Pi evidence, whole pecu¬ liar caie is cvei over the innocent and the defence! if,, will not leave you unprotected j to his ah 2'.. igh ty guidance I tomaih you, and to the friendly flicker of Urbandine I re¬ commend your fpeedy removal/* Sir
*Sir Alfred, as he concluded his laft fen- tence, again embraced his d mghter, whofe audible (bbs burft fuii? , and wrung hb heart with anguith. At length he ejacu¬ lated, with (mothered emotion—** Ange's guard thee V f —and ruflicd into the hal, hoping, by a fudden departure, that Roia'h e -would fpare herfelf and him any further trul of fo afflicting a parting; bur, ere he hud reached the outward gates, ihe had wildly ruftacd iroai the faltjun, and faking a um upon his bread, faintly exc;aimed~ <* One laft, laft embrace—oniy one bkflf- ang more, and 1 am refigned T* Sir Alfred was now completely fuMueJ 5 he raifed his eyes wiih deiixurin^ ani>u.'h towards Heaven, impreftrd a fervent kits upon the pale quivering lips of K c - fuftein \ daughter, and guitly p.acin ; her in the aims of her attendant, \aulted on 1 is tad ile, arid, tivith the Jp^ed c* lightning, darted cjkui the
the avenoe, and was in an inftant beyond the fight c»r Rearing of the Onhappy Rofa* line; who, uttering only a faint figh, fell fenfelefs into the arms of Jannetta, and -was borne to her own apartments.
SND OJ" VOL. &
