Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Ethelwina: or, The house of Fitz-Auburne: a romance of former times
ETHELWINA.
nt—Mu
CHAF. I AN the reign of the illudrious Edward the Third, the Eari of Fitz-Aubume and his family redded at his magnificent caftie, near one of the principal lakes of Weftmoreland. Godfred was noble, generous, bold, and warlike, aod the bofom friend and favourite of his auguft mader;—in war he was invin¬ cible, in pqace mild and amiable; the very youthful part of his life had been devoted to his Sovereign; their ages were iimilar; whilft the royal Edward in Godfred found a real friend, and an honeft heart—a gem of vol. i. s which
wbkh wo am knew the value better than himfelf, and w ic*> he prixed ro^jd to its ^orth. The Earl was tall, finely propo-'tiockedft wkh a n^We, commanding, aacl onen countcnaoce ; hi* features v\ere of linking raanh beauty ; his tul* dark eies ftiewed a mind enlighteneti by cu'tiva^ioa and benevokmce. Edward (to re ^ard the Earl for his valour in the fieid, in v hich he had gallantly preferred hk mailer's hfe, at tbe imminent 1 azardof Lis own, »hrn» fur¬ rounded by bolls ot fees, he m id ha.*e fank a vidim, had aol hb watchful tnend fljwa to his aid, and fet his monarch free—*tv%a$ an ad that coukl not fail to have due weight upon the noble Edward "s mind—it bound him more clofdy in the bonds of friendfliip), from that period condefcended to lay afide his high dignity, that, unconftrained, he might enjoy the confidence of Godired, from whom he foon drew forth the caufe of his feeming dejedion. The Earl had paf- fionately loved the beauteous .Lady Urfuline, the
ibe biL aad oaly turt i vi^g herr of the Baron %£ Caftk-^re. U^dte mheri^Ld tfae title aad v^ dk&m of her^n% fromte*&thsr, by mhak m®L ibe became, at his deceafe, a ward of the Crown; aou l^ing the heirefi of te^e landed p-operty, &®d an accwxmlixing &m& c£ wealth firom her k>og mirscjrky, Ibe was much fought, and ber alliance cooked, by tbe Nobler of Britain, But the timid and derkare noad of the young Baronets (kmnk fron the gaze and fulfome compliaient? of the intereded lover.^ Her eyes no fooner beheld the manly form and galknt qualities of Godfred* than her heart lod its freedom ; and the Earl feeling the dionged paflion for the fair Urfuline, they refigned themfelves to the pleafure of mutually loving each other in filence; and though they fpoke not, their eyes told a hundred tales: and the bluftiing Urfuline was at laft induced to yield to the prefllng entreaties of her happy lover, and acknowledge the fen- timent he had infpired in her heart, juft as b 2 his
'hts inif called him to tbe fenrke of Ui King. He refigned the fond hope of caffiag her his o#n till that was performed; Jpi wkh im.1% regret quit ted his £ur midrefs to at- ten£! ik Sovereign, who had fet out upcm an expediriofi againft Scotland, to pumfli the cliriiig Mortimer, to wh&k utMhery was owing the hombk iiLcrilegkxa murder thaf h^d been con.fflaitted om fe iqared father, the depofed and unfortunate Edwwd the Second. It was after returning foceefs&l from thefe enterprizes that Edward farprifoi tbe fecret of Godfred's love, and he refolved to pve proof of his fri*adfhip for his heroic pre- ferver. They arrived at the Court; and while the Royal Edward was entertaining his betrothed Queen with the events of his late fuccefs, Godfred haftened to the apart¬ ment of his beloved Baronefs, land in her tender fufceptible heart poured'forth-his foul's fentiments. in the uncoaftrain- ed language of love. With'- downed - 4 '^ . , * .Jf*~ 4 .' ' ''J
eyes, Uffifee entreated her bver to rife fmm lib knnWe pofture (Ibr he had funk atberfett onhkkBees), when the Sovereign entered their apartaieoC unperceived by either* *& ^* 1 ^ C€ arrefted t^ir attention, aod in a&ddkm they belaid each other. The fiaiiiaB cofM^esaoce olthe young Mo- msm^ beaw^wkhr^afii^isheai^roached tfaem, and takkgthe ha^ df Urfuline, and facing k k Go*ed% he find— «* Receive, fm Urfufiae, my gallant pre* forar as yosr fofcme hufband. And you, Godfted, accef^ the rkl^ft treafure I have to beftow, in thb, your future bride, as a re- turn ibr the paft fcrvices your friendrfarm has performed for us.—The day tnat unites me to Philippa fhall be a double nuptial morn, and my mead thai! partake in the happinefe of his Sovereign." t Godfred, enraptured, bent the knee of gratitude to his King, and kiffed the hand of his confonting lovely midrefs ; and, on the day appointed, the marriage ceremony took place. The time flew in a condant b 3 round
round of mixed pleafures—the feaft, the tournament, and every martial fpott and warlike exercre that were the dd^it of thofe darkfjme da\ s. The kingdom at this time being in a date of perfect tranquility, gave to the Earl the long defired opportunity of vifiting his favourite feat; and, taking a grateful leave of his Royal Mafter, he k£ out for the Lakes of Weftmoieland with hk$ Countefs, and a fplendid train of attend* ants. It was a beautiful evening, when, arriving near his domain, he pointed out to his lovely bride the manfion of hh anceftors: ks white turrets and lofty towers rifing from the bo* ibm of a venerable fored, whilft the re- Iplendent orb of day, finking in the Weft, Ihed its golden rays in calm ferenity Epos eacli weli-remembered object of his youth. The Earl had been abfent from his caftie for fome years; for as himfelf, as well as bfr Countefs, were, till they came of age, wards of the Crown, they had both been} removed from their parental manfions, the' better
better to be nearer thole snote immediately ^jocerned in their guardian!iip j but now, on thK his return to his magnificent caftk, his heait tilled wth Might* reiacfriberi^ that there he had fpeat th« happy hours of youfh. The cadle was of imTienfe &%c* and buEj in riie h^vy grand ft\le of architectyre of thole days ; the w^L, of ftroog aod ^la^ cemcaf* and vaft thicknet, fliewexl them c^| able of refuting the attacks of an invader^ to which it had been much eapokd. tt was a noble ipendd pile of buikkng; a%l though it had ftood many ceaturks* ^- (lip retained every mark ot ftrength, a^ k^caj^- ftuit repairs fee u red it from decaf: it was built upon a high rocky hiB^ajad^irroujKl- cd on all ides by a wide moat, ^ch, on^the foot hern fide* was increafed in brea^tfr by^ river, which ran througli ^e ,va^t M$£ foot of the hill, and had #% prjincjpajj^iurjie from t|ie large lakes tha^ ab^urfcya t^Nojj^i of England; The gr^rid^jp^rancie^into^t^ caftie was defended by a ftrong, high tower, 5 b 4 its
its fides were angular, and the corner angles fupported hanging turrets from its ponderous battlements. It was built upon a rock of more confidcrablc licight than that on which the cadle ftood, whilft the whole was enclofcd by a low wall, that ran round the verge of the rock, and was terminated by a huge portcullis with fquare towers, and a draw¬ bridge crofting the moat. The caftie ftood in a large irregular foreft of mountain pine and venerable oak ; but its elevated .hcighth rofe above the talleft trees of the foreft, which in no degree pre¬ vented the profpc&s from its windows from being open, perfpeftivc, and beautiful. Such was the exterior of the refidence of the Earl of Fitz-Auburne, who, rich in his large and extenfivc domains, richer ftiU in an excellent heart, and laying afide the haughty grandeur of the manners of thofe days, re¬ turned to his beloved country feat amidft the acclamations of his delighted tenants and vaflals; who, having learned from the warder of the caftie that their Lord and Lady
Lady 'were once more coming to rcfidc among them, had been watching their ap¬ proach. Scarce could the lieavy coach, of thofe days, pafs through the cmwd of anxious gazers, who all pre fled forward to tcdify their joy and allegiance ; whilft the Earl, overcome with the excefs of his own happinefs, leaned back in the coach to avoid praifes he io well merited Irom his p/atcful people. The gentle heart of the CountcU flicxl a tear of delight; and in perfect happinefs and peace with all around her, frnilcd with the fweet nefs o( true benevolence on the pleated countenances of her future vaflals The coach ftopped at the drawbridge, the gate* opened wide to receive their noble ewnen* and a train of attendants waited to welcome their Lord : among the foremoft was the ex* cellent old fteward and warder ol the cailk, who, with eager haftc, jvaid his duty and obedience to the Earl, who, leading the Countefs from her coach, welcomed her to Auburne. Having prefented her to hu B 5 admiring
admiring ped^e, hie c&adaded ber ti Ae hall of eatralice to the Banquet* which hi! beeti prefsared in the true ftyfc of anck^t En^ifli ho(pi^lity. The cadle gates wer* khrdwn open Oft this feftive occafion, tad every heart round the domain of Auburne made a% happy al its owner ; the lofty hall refounded with' the §m& of the minftrels, whilft the fmrper ofthe caftie fung mi played the heroic ballads of ancient times; the ftory of the former gallant owners of the noble p3e was recited, and kft of all, an ode in honour ot the beauteous Countefs. * The rejoicing being ended, their days gifted in Orie uninterrupted fcene of calm tfnruffied pfeafure: feveral children bleffed their nuptialk, but airdted in their infancf, except their firft-born, v who was named TEthelwlna, and at prefent ^he fole helrefs^cS ^both her*piren&¥ ^ by the will of her rria- fernal'grandfather, (he was already invefted with thlt^nfer" ritfe of her mother, whieft tl>e eideft child; wlietler' niale' or fSHUB&, "was to ltiheritr independent of any 'after r ^ ' i *• iffue
hfe^ that might be the confequence of Urfuriii*& i»ania^e. The Royal ^pard wa5oa a imit.at th« caftk«luringE£Www*t chnftcning. aad bad gracioufly ftood fponfof^ im tlie hi^mt &mmef%^ eoofirtping her right m ike title ami eftatcs. the ^Itet of which flie was to enjov at her mother's deceafe; for ft^k warn the extraordinary teftament of her grandfather. - 1 Etlidwina had arrived at nearly her fixth year, when her father wits at laft bleffed with a fon. The infant Arthur was welcomed (becaufe fo long defired) with unufual drains of joy ; and the caftie refounded with the mirth occafioned by the joyful event. — Ethelwma, with wild delight, kiffed a thou¬ fand times the little ftranger, and, in the joy of her young heart, threw herfelf into the arms of her enraptured father, and expreffed the pleafure of innocent delight in having at laft a brother. Soon .after this event, the tranquillity of the caftie was difturbed by a fpeedy (um- mons of the Earl from the King, as bufinefs s6 of
of import required his immediate prefence at Court. The Earl, who had Jong re¬ figned the fplendours of a Court to live in the bofom of his family and^t his favourite retirement, felt no way defiro«s ? on his own account, again to renew thofe fcenes of grandeur which the elevated dignity of his high birth demanded. Contented and happy in the love of his Urfuline, and the affedion and fidelity of his people, it was with re- ludance he prepared again to revifit thofe fcenes ; where, however, the prefence of all the Barons was at this time required, and the advice and affiftance of Godfred never more defired by his auguft matter than at this crifis. * With the dawn of the fuccceding day Godfred arofe ;—the *afflided Urfuline, in tears, embraced her Lord, who tore himfelf from her beloved arms, and mounting his fleeted: horfe, attended by his numerous train, purfued his way to the capital.
/
, CHAP.
mmm^
CHAP. II.
A HE Countefs, after watching his courfe, with the out-ftretched eye of tender affection, from the higheft tower of the caftie, till the diftant mountains clofed him from her view, turned, her fteps towards'her own apartment, there to indulge the gentle melancholy which tl^e firft abfence df her hufband, fince their union, had ever created. But the fcene was changed—the object of her conftant at¬ tentive love was gone, and her fpacious apartments feemed, for the firft time, dreary and cheerlefs. Ethelwina entered the cham¬ ber of her mother, who, taking the hand of her blooming daughter, kifled her cheek; and they left the apartment, endeavouring,
by change of fcene, to turn the current of her thoughts from that defpondency which overwhelmed^ 1^fufceptible heart. The growing beauties of Ethelwina now engrofled the Coun tefs's attention : with delight (he traced, in her infant features, the drong refemblance^of her father foftened by her own milder graces. Ethelwina was now arrived at nearly her tenth year; her per¬ fon, tali aridf exquifitely formed; promifed lo expand to maturity with all *he charms of female lovelinefi? ' In the cadle refided two orphan children, who had, for the laft four years of their lives, experienced the protection of its?noble qwners. Their father, the once* proud Baron de Mountferville, had felt the extremes of the reverfe of forfune. Milled m the for¬ mer part of his life by the artifices of thd wily Mortimer, and the intriguing Ifabella (Queen of Edward the Second), and think¬ ing himfelf injured by his difiniflal from the *higb pod he had held in the government of the $tate under that unhappy Monarch, he had .retired*
fetired, Ml of ^fpleen; &f hi^ large domains, there^td indulge that f|0cled*fie^er>ge?^aiaft his Royal Mader, which' ultimately through! his rain on htm. His haughty, un^mrabbi manners, evert ^>trtPaq^^ls, foon rendeled him univerfally dilliked; whilft the feudal ftate in which he lived, vying tn grandeur with the higheft Nobles of the land; and even equalling ? t?hfc King himfelf, rendered the approach to his prefence difficult of ac* eels, and fed "that pride* of greatnefs which made him feared try the low^ and. humble* and defpiied by* thofe who were on a level witfr himfelf. He had loft his wife in brmg- ingit4ht0) the world an only daughter;—the baron had paffionately loved her* and while die livedy fhe had kept many of iiis haughty paffions uiider by her rhiider influence; but When She 1 ceafed* to exift, his rough nature broke fotth Vitli uncondrained violence, his temper foured by her death, andtheuttei difappointment of his high-raifed ambitious hbj)es^6f~greatnefs. No longer withheld*by tte'qgentle voice of affection, he became morofe,
morofe, gloomy, and melancholy, retiring to his caftie, there to plot fcenes of revenge for his fuppofed infults, and fhutting himfeif from all intercourfe with .his friends* In the firft tranfports of Jiis a^ger* he eafily liftened to the defigns of < the infidious Mortimer. Forgetful of his children; the innocent pledges of a beloved vrife, neglectful of their future ihterefts in life, and regardlefs of his allegiance to his Sovereign, he joinecTthe un¬ natural Queen and her colleague, and be¬ came the fecret enemy of his unfortunate Monarch, who was foon after depofed. But again was his afpiring hopes crulhed, and he found himfelf an inftrument only in the hands of fadion. Too late he perceived the error he had been.betrayed injtoj and, tbougjh his heart dill retained its caufe of anger againft his lawful Monarch, yet he ihrunk abhorrent from becorning a partici¬ pator in the horribly excruciating murder executed on the martyred King; and once more he retired to the folitary fplendour of bis own domains, refigning all future hopes of
traded his ambitious defires, and brought fuccceding ruin on him* Edward the Third, from the early fate of his father, foon became a King, and, at the age of fifteen, took the government of the f State into his own hands, ^hereby di(aj> pointing the ambitious defigns of tlie Queen mother. The firft ufe that Edward made of Ms power, was to difcover and punifh the perpetrators of his father's facri* legious murder. As yet the Baron had efcaped the vengeance of the juilly incenM Edward, the former having totally declined any fhare in that outrageous de^d* For a few years he eluded the ftrong fufpicions that bad been long entertained againft him % but Edward, indefatigable in his fearch, and ibijfftjag to exterminate every heart that had proved difloyal to bis father, at kft difav vered the too apparent figns of the Bar^i^ diinqwepey, whkhi was proved by fome papers that bad pafted between the lattet md the traitor Mortimer. , The content* i&** * >{ , were
.■ ■■were-.of: ■ vAijga-^ /■'■ Sovereign, a nd 'lie ^ wasyftntenced^b"^ • ^v;;headed/;-; s;-TherEari..3o^ ;: ■ ■ th^ifirft-who;;;i;ecei : ved thi^-me^anc'h^'infeW : ^ligence, ■:.: !/ :His: ';bentevoIerit-^heartr«;was ; vf;w witfegrtef fo : : .-. ■ but^plafe^yaar^i'%.at; ; 'ri ''' ' : isifti'and:t^^;hai forg^t^ .".. /in;^ th^t^j^utH^they ■ '^^^^ix^^^f^^y. ; ■;■■■cdm.^ani^^^butyav hio^s4iSd4)red a^^ ' ■ &irlngi^e^atterclperfofc^^ ; the> fhaugh^ i^rbid.dibg^"manners;.!ofSfhe : ':. Barori haa^4bngi &meiAe^sM : :^hemf&t$&.:_ .' ! tatsr^fitaiiie^Mend^i^J^;-^.4l^- %h v^^f;.'^?::^; ; ■.; ;^-^€lSal|4d^foor^ 1feg^ti^^%i : J.^ '.-. ^nc^il^inft ^th#l ■''." ■ tetil^ : ;#4he^hran^of^his^jtoi^fe'i'v^^.; : ' Kfe of isls iol^ death revoked ; but future banifhmerit was ,:■'.; : >pv/: ; . ..-,'. ■v/...;. v ;prpnouncedv : -
prohc»Tii)iceo4nanA all the Barpn's.eftatesjand. poffeffionscpnfifcaled to the Grown., Again the generous Qodfred kneeled and entreated that the fon of the Baron, a child, and innocent of his father's guilt, might not fhare the pufiifhmeot, but be permitted to inherit his birthright. 4 Edward, though jud, magnaniij>pus, : and merciful, yet was. proud and inflexible in his refentments^ againft his fathers, enemies v apd r thc>ug^lie . ftill retained his friendfliip fpr ^he^EarJ*; could not |iear liini with ^%tjenc^ 4 on s th^ prefent fubjee^. He.had gr^n;ted tfee, life of a^^feei/ld his, entreaties, mU^fi agaj.nft* *u>< q^^incljnations; and h^ now thought t|ie %$4 pr^Cpme;d pn hisfayour* u ' • ,\ »^ zfiWririg frorn^ hi«<feat jathor ^n a^ger, her qopaa^nded the^Eafl neve; : to mention t%j fbyect j but M fee* „ him^lftf■ t^ i^er oft Wiito^ti e^e&uted nU{K)a:H9^ $&W8 ^ Mogntfftfvife, TChe^flkft ;th«o|«^6nc6 of ithc^M»i»iraiiiandidvfpatche4 mmeflre.agfir* witb ^ififtrume^fe,^ exile M Mmmtferti ville Caftie j foftenifig;,Mtmwtibaapoffitete* x ii tho
"i the melancholy circumdance, and offering a renewal of his Services and friendthip to the Baron, which had for fome years pad en¬ tirely fubfided. He then returned to his caftie, and, in the bofom of his family enjoyed that heart* felt fatisfadion which ever attends the ac¬ tions of benevolence and virtue, however unfuccefsful. But what was the furprife of the Earl, when the next day brought a meffenger, who informed him that the Baron had that morn-* ' ing been found dead in a remote apartment of the caftie, where he had fecured th6 door within, and died by the point of his own poniard I The aftonifliment and grief of the Earl could only be exceeded by his pity for the orphan ftate ofthe Baron's helplefs children^ whofe forlorn and wrelched dediny excited his utmbft compaflion $ and he haftened to the Caftie oPMountferVille,'but^fe#ieaguesI diftantfrom his own, ^to offer to their <un4* protected ftate thofe offices of humanity they &muGhift©o&4ft iteed f j&&* • * . } * # jl ne
^The Caftie of Mountferville was a vene- wble Gothic pile, and ftood in a delightful vale ; but fo embofomed in trees that, from their clofenefs to the caftie, they (hut the rays of the fun, and gave it a melancholy gloomy afped. It was large, (pacious, and magnificent, but, from want of proper at¬ tention, it was fpeedily falling to decay, par¬ ticularly thofe parts unoccupied; for though the Baron lived in the utmoft ftate of feudal fplendour, yet, as he never of late had re¬ ceived company, many fuites of apartments were fhut up, and only fuch parts of the caftie were kept in its original grandeur which the Baron inhabited. Godfred alighted at the gate; but his loud fignai remained unanfwered:—again his attendants ^repeated the blaft upon the founding horn, and, after a fhort period, the gates ilowly opened, and a female gave them admittance. To the EarPs demand of why he had been fo long detained without the walls of the cadle, and the negled of the warders, (he t anfwered, that the mo- } ment
ment the death of the Baron had been dif¬ covered, the vaffals and fervants ran af¬ frighted from the cadle, leaving her alone in care of the melancholy abode, who, feeling the fidelity of a deady honed fer¬ vant, had refolved not to defert her deceafed mader, whofe nurfe in his infancy flie had been, Godfred commended her zeal and attach¬ ment ; and, as he paffed through the filent courts to the grand door of entrance, he could not help reflecting on the s fudden change a few hours had wrought. The dupendous lofty halls no longer refounded with the light foot of ready cheerful obe¬ dience, or the fong of the mindrel; ali was deferred, gloomy, and cheerlefs, whild echo fent back from the vaults beneath the foot- deps of the Earl, as they founded on the ear, as in filence he paced the halls, follow¬ ing his guide to tlie chamber of the felf- devoted vidim. He afcended the grand daircafe, and crofting the winding gallery, paffed along - * feveral
feveral fuites of magnificent apartments. Th£ windows had for years been clofed ; the furniture, from long difufe, was fad decaying, the chambers, though antiquely grand, were gloomy and me j ancholy in the extreme ; and prepared the Earl for the afflictive cataf- trophe ;—at the tnd of thefe fmtes of cham¬ bers was a long narrow gallesy, terminated by a flight of ftairs ; having defcended^ the latter, v a heavy Gothic door opened to the' melancholy fight a full view of rhe fcene of death. The room compofed the upper dory of a fmall round tower, but which was become fo old and ruin'ous as to make it dangerous to enter; if had but one fmall high grated window, which ferved to admit a kind of gloomy half light, and prevented the Earl from immediately feeing the object of his attention, who lay upon a once magni¬ ficent couch, but which, like the chamber, was tottering to decay. The blood had flowed eopioufly from the wound^ and had con¬ gealed on the floor; by its horror-driking fide lay the fatal poniard, the indrument of * ^ * . death;
death; and near it the mandate, for the Btaroji's banifhment^ whild the (ilent object of ceafing exidence, together with the for- lornnefs of the placed refembled the den of gloomy defpair. > Godfred approached his once beloved friend, now pale, motionlefs, and diff$ the, Wood ftijl ejbbed from the ghadly WOuiid, whilft his face; bore marks of extreme^ agony, though pride feemed the mdd predominant feeling that was ftrongly pictured on his haggard countenance. Godfred took one of the cold clammy hands of the deceafed, and dropped a manly .tear of forrow over it—it was a tribute to the departed foul, a token of refpect for the once gallant friend now ftretched in death, who, whatever were his errors, they were no longer remembered by the generous Godfred, who inwardly prayed that the ra(h act might find that mercy hereafter, which ftern ho- ' nour, and a too keen ienfe of humbled pride, had forced him to commit. ; - Godfted
ETHELWINA.' Godfred then beckoned to his people, who had by his order followed him, and gave diredions for the immediate removal of the oorpfe from its prefent dreary reding-place to a more magnificent apartment, determined to fhew every honour to the deceafed, that was now left time to perform. Godfred was then leaving the chamber, when cading his eyes around the room, he faw on the table a folded paper, which, on opening, was dired- ed to himfelf, and contained thefe words:— " I will not live diflionoured, Godfred ; I die—dern Fate decrees, and I mud exe¬ cute its mandate.-—I die, but not the death of infamy !—But, ah 1 my generous friend, unworthy as I am to call you fuch, if you dill hold me dear, extend your pity towards two helplefs little beings. Godfred, they are my children 1 let them in you experience what, from me, they have never known—the tendernefs of a father. Their infant graces will allure your love, and their young hearts vol. i. c • gratefully
gratefully repay the bounty you will fliower on them. I know your heart, my friend, and with confidence I rely upon the furety of your honour.—You will extend the arm of mercy to them, and in your protedion they will find a fure afylum.—To Heaven, and noble Godfred, I commit them !—I have kiffed my deeping babes as they lay, unconfcious of a father's laft embrace, in the arms of peaceful dumber—have taken a laft look at their innocent fmiling faces—and now the ftruggle is paft, and 1 no longer hefitate to die—the weaknefs of nature is over, and this gloomy place fuits the me¬ lancholy horrors of my foul \ —'Tis mid¬ night—the poniard lies before me—it calls me to the office of fuicide!—I (tart from the deed, and want the power to finifh my bloody purpofe !—the images of my children rufli upon my fight—their imploring looks, tearful eyes, and out-firetched hands entreat me to day my hand.—I dand aghad!—but they are deeping—it is but the virions of phantafy, of a mind difordered, perhaps didraded!
didracted I—What! fliall I live to be the fcorn of little minds ? fliall my ears be bladed with the founds cf * there lives—lives the once proud, illudrious, but now fallen Baron of Mountferville—-crulhed to the earth ?'— Madnefs is in that thought—my arm is dou¬ bly drengthened with vigour,my foul upbraids me for my foolifli cowardice—I will no longer delay—'tis but one plunge, and I am------! Godfred, preferve my children—folqmnly I commit them to your charge 1 Defpife me not, nor for ever hate my memory 1—refcue my name from the opprobrious epithets of fliame and diflionour—be the guardian of my fame, and preferve it, by this great act, untarnifhed and unfullied to future ages !— Once more remember—protect them, ah \ protect them 1—So may Heaven profper you! —Godfred, my friend, farewel for ever I"
With pity and compafiion the Earl pe¬ rufed the lad fentenccs of the unfortunate miftaken writer, in which he plainly faw the c z druggies
druggies between affection for his children, and a defire of life overcome by wounded pride, and a too high fenfe of injured ho¬ nour; whilft thehaughtyfpirit ofthe Baron was ftrongly perceptible through every line, which the awful end he had prepared for himfelf had not in the lead fubdued. . Godfred breathed a prayer for th? repofe and peace of the departed fpirit, &nd then left the melancholy tower, determined to adhere to every requeft contained in the paper, and for that purpofe defired the children to be brought to him ; but Heder, the name of his conductrefs, informed him that they had been removed by their at¬ tendants to the neighbouring monaftery.— Godfred was not forry for this, and he re¬ folved that they fliould continue there till the remains of their father were entombed 5 -a ceremony which took place that night with as much privacy as poiliblc, and as well as the fudden circumftances would allow. The Earl arid a few of his mod attached attend¬ ants followed him to the vault of the family, by
by torch-light, where having performed the lad folemn offices to the memory of the de- ceafed, Godfred, the next morning, ac¬ companied by his young charges, purfued his way to the Cadle of Auburne. The children of the Baron had never ex¬ perienced the affection of a father—almod his name was unknown, as was his perfon, to Augudine; his fider was as yet in infancy, and of courfe hardly underdood the word father. His death and his misfortunes were concealed from them, and they, with the lively unconfcioufnefs of youth and infancy, rather rejoiced that they were no longer to refide in their former gloomy habitation. On their arrival at Auburne Cadle, they were received with maternal compafiion by rhe amiable Countefs, who knew no greater plcalure than ih obeying the wiihes of her Lord, and the impulfes of her own benevo¬ lent heart. The difinherited young Baron Augudine was at that time between feven and eight years of age, whild his little filler, Emma, c 3 had
had not yet reached her fecond year. They were acknowledged, and in every degree con- fidered, at the caftie, as the children of its noble owners ; and the fervants and depend¬ ants were defired to treat them as fuch: their former attendants were retained for their ufe^ and the faithful Hefter added to the nurfery of the infants Emma and the heir of Auburne, the ages of the latter being within a day or two of each other^
CHAP.
CHAP, III. SUCH was the hidory ofthe orphans who ran towards the Countefs as, with Ethelwina, the former was feeking to divert her melan¬ choly for her Lord's departure, and was proceeding to the gardens and lawns of Auburne Cadle. The endearing attention of all her children (as ihe always called Augudine and Emma, confidering them as fuch) ferved, in a great meafure, to diffipate many of the long evenings of dreary Winter during the abfence ofthe Earl.—Sometimes they would draw round the cheering brilk fire that blazed in the wide extended fire¬ place of the large oak parlour; and the c 4 Countefs,
Countefs, difpenfing with the forms of high rank, would difmifs the train of attendants that waited in the anti-chambers, and whilft the young Arthur and Emma amufed them¬ felves with many a merry gambol round the room, the Countefs would read to the more attentive Ethelwina and Augudme, or lay¬ ing the book afide, Ethelwina would amufe her mother with the fweet founds which (lie ably drew from her favourite lute, or fome¬ times the more exalted drains of the harp, of which indruments flie was midrefs. For the Countefs, ever defirous of feeing her children the emblems of natural perfection, had them all, as their ages permitted, in- dructed in every accoraplifliment that thofe unenlightened days would admit of; whild her own well-informed mind, elegant man¬ ners, and highly poliihed underdanding enabled her to give to Ethelwina a grace which few females can obtain from tlie mod refined education, if their natural friends are deficient in points fo neceflary. The
The opening beauties of the manly Auguftine, and the delicate'y femiaine Ethelwina, expanded daily, and with thenv their increafing affection for each other ;— the fame pleafures, the fame ftudies, the fame purfuits, attached them more ftrongly to each other : if Augudine was fad, fo was Ethelwina; if Ethelwina was mefry, none more fo than Augudine. Together they would droll through the fored, and wan¬ der to the arm of the river which ran from the didant lake, joining the moat of the cadle, and then, meandering into the thickeft groves of the wood, would afford a cool delightful (hade to the infant lovers, who, beneath the impervious fliades that overhung the banks of the river, would fet for hours delighting each other with the fong or the harp; or, fearching the woods, would collect many a beautiful wild- fiower, which, tranfplanted from its bed of weeds, would repay their care by a double glow of beauty when removed to tin warm rich foil of Auburne gardens. Ia the mom* c 5 ^ ing
ing they rofe with the lark, and Augudine tapping at the chamber-door of Ethelwina, who was always ready, they would droll to lhe highed battlements of the cadle, there to watch the glorious fplendour of the rifing fun, or looking towards the Wed, would drain their eyes beyond the high-road, hoping to be the fird to catch a glimpfe of the Earl's arrival. As the winter wore away, the two young friends again had recourfe to the battlements ^ and one h\nQ clear evening, in the beginning of May, as Ethelwina had been pacing the battlements alone, and watching the fun as it funk behind the mountains, and won¬ dering why her companion came not, (he cad her eyes towards the wedern road, a cudom (he never failed to perform, when, at a di dance, fhe dcfcried fomething moving along. For fome time, in eager hope, (he watched, till, on a nearer approach, (lie ob- ferved feveral horfemen, and the well-known plumage of her father's hat was foon recog* nized;—with hade Ethelwina darted from the tower,
tower, and entering her mother's apartment,. proclaimed the joyful tidings. The Countefs flew; and as (he reached the drawbridge, her Godfred enfolded her in his arms. Alive only to the joyful pleafure of feeing her hufband, Ihe perceived not a dranger who accompanied him, till gently reminded by her beloved Lord, in whofe features Urfuline thought (he perceived a fiVuggle between pain and pleafure. But, withdrawing herfelf from her Lord's tender embrace, (he turned to the ft ranger, whofe dark penetrating eyes and gigantic figure fomewhat difconcerted her, till the Earl im¬ mediately introduced him as his nephew* the Lord de St. Iver ; the Countefs return¬ ed his obfequious attentions, but ftill (he felt uneafy, though (he knew not why.— Well did Urfuline remember that her huf¬ band had fuch a relation, though this was the fird time (lie had ever feen him; and his dark frowning brow, rolling eye, and un¬ common height, gave him a very unprepof- feffing appearance; yet the extreme courtefy c 6 and
and politenefs of his manners ought to have baniftied the unfavourable imprefiion which her mind had received at the fird fight of him. She tried in vain, during the banquet, to recover the natural ferenity of her difpo- fition ; but the cloud increafed in her mind as (he fat obferving the dern, and (he fancied even ferocious, countenance of her gued, as it was turned with a look of envy on her Lord, and fometimes a glance of meaning expreffion on the young Ethelwina, who, though no more than at prefent a fine girl, was tall, and, from the fuperiority of her underftanding, appeared to the obferver more womanly than from her age (he really was, excepting that her face retained the youthful fimplicity of early age. Urfuline fat (ilent, watching, with alarm¬ ed attention, the meaning looks of her vifiter, who at laft turning his eyes from the former objects of his ardent gaze, he encoun¬ tered the fearching ones of the Countefs; the fudden turn, and the expreffion con¬ tained in the countenance of Leopold, made her
her dart; (lie involuntarily grafped the hand of Godfred, who, not perceiving her emo¬ tion, returned the preflure by a warm falute. Leopold, with a fmile, handed the goblet to the Countefs, and entreated her to falute him with the cup of welcome. Urfuline obeyed, and rifing with her accuftomed dig¬ nified eafe, welcomed him to Auburne Cadle 3 but, from an unaccountable caufe, her hands trembled (o that (lie could only convey the cup to her lips, which (he fat down without tailing the contents; and at the fame time waving her hand to the minftrels of the gallery, the fong of cour¬ teous reception was played and fung in ho¬ nour of the unexpected vihter. The banquet ended, each party retired for the night to their refpective apartments. Urfuline, the moment they were alone, ex¬ plained to her Lord the unconquerable averfion (he had conceived towards Iver. The Earl endeavoured to combat her diflike; . and Urfuline declared herfelf much more at 4 eafe,
ea(e, when told that he was to depart on the morrow. But, alas I the gentle heart of the* Countefs received a fevere fhock, when, to her repeated demand of her Godfred s want of fpirit s, he anfwered, that war had been declared between England and France, and that his King, who was to go in perfon, at the head of his army, had claimed the at¬ tendance of his friend, who had now re- J turned to prepare for the fpeedy expedition i and though his heart beat with the noble glow of warlike emulation, yet the foft and tender ties of hufband and father abated a little of that ardour which ever armed his bread in the fervice of his Monarch and his friend. It was the thoughts omy of leaving the tender affli&ed Urfuline, and the dear objeds of his love, which had thrown a gloom over his countenance, and ' which he in vain tried to hide under the maik of conviviality. The time allowed him was but (hort, and three days only remained for him to pafs in the bofom of his family, whom, from the chances
chances of war, he might never fee again; or, if it were otherwife, might be many years ere he again revifited England. The night of this didrefllng news was paffed in mifery by the once happy, but now wretch¬ ed, Urfuline: the Earl, with tender love, endeavoured to footh and infpire her with confidence, but the too fufceptible heart of the Countefs was deaf to confolation ;—de¬ voted to her Lord, and adoring him as a fuperior being, the idea of parting filled her foul with terror, and her prophetic mind received but one belief, and that was the melancholy certainty that they fliould never meet again ! Yet, as (he knew the honour of her hufband was dearly prized by him, (he.attempted not to perfuade him from the enterprize i and regarding his fame above her own happinefs, (he refolved nobly to fub¬ mit to an evil unavoidable. In the mornings Ethelwina and Augulline purfued their accudomed exercifes. The latter having,, on their return to the cadle, left his Ethelwina, fhe was proceeding to her
her own apartment, when, going through the gallery that led to it, (he faw, to her, the terrific figure of Leopold, who, with arms enfolded, and eyes dedfadly fixed in deep thought upon the ground, was flowly pacing along the gallery, feemingly wrapped in me¬ ditation. His tall perfon and fcowling thick eye-brows had, the night before, filled her young heart with fear and dread; never having been beyond the bounds of her father's do¬ mains, and but rarely feen faces (he had not been condantly accudomed to, the un- pleaftng and commanding feature$ of the Lord St. Iver filled her mind with diflike as (oon as (lie had beheld him. She had now afcended the dairs, and was debating whether fhe fliould not avoid him, when he caught a fight of her in her irrefblute pof- ture. He advanced to meet her, and Ethelwina found it was too late to return; therefore depped lightly on, and with becoming eafe met his compliments, and was parting on, when he caught her by the hand, and rudely killed
kifled it. Ethelwina, young as (he was, felt infulted, not fo much at the kifs, but at the abrupt and forcible manner in which it was given; the native dignity of her mind le vol ted at a freedom (he had never before experienced from any one, and deeming the liberty he had taken an offence to her high notions of delicacy and propriety, (he fnatch- ed her hand from his grafp, and, with a look of indignation, hurried, without fpeaking, to her own chamber, difregarding his entreaties for her return and pardon. The ardent gaze of his eyes, which had been rivetted upon her, had frightened her. Had the falute been lefs fervent, Ethelwina might have paffed it over as a common form of politenefs; but there was a fomething in the looks and manner of Leopold that was repugnant to her feelings, and (he found it difficult to lofe the remembrance of the morning's occurrence. It was almpft the firft circumdance that had ever given Ethelwina a moment's uneafinefs, and (he could not directly confent to (hare her confidence with her
her beloved companion; but, leaving her chamber, (he refolved to feek her father, and explain to him her childilh anger* For this purpofe flie proceeded to the Earl's ftudy; but on opening the door, was furprifed to hear her father converting in an unufual elevated manner, and the found of his laft words ftruck upon her ear, which flie plainly heard were thefe— " Iver, no more prefume to addrefs me on this fubject, nor dare to raife your am¬ bitious hopes to the Baronefs of Caftle-Acre •—you have now for ever received the laft proof of my favour, if you ever infult me again with fo vain a proportion.*' Ethelwina, as (he caught a view of her lather, perceived a glow of anger on his countenance, and his eyes feemed to fparkic with more than common intereft, fuch as before (he had never beheld in him, whilft Leopold (for it was to him he fpoke) flood pale, confufed, and feemingly hum* bled; but as Godfred turned his eyes toward* the door, to fee who had difturbed him, (he
faw the features of Leopold change, and a look of fuppreffed rage and mingled refent¬ ment (hot from his eye towards the Earl. Ethelwina, fearful that (he had offended by her abrupt intrufion, and aftoniflied at what fhe had heard and feen, ftood unde¬ termined whether to go or ftay; but the Earl gently waving his hand, Ethelwina ut* tered an incoherent excufe, and retired,ck>fing the door. Feeling too great an intereft in what (he had heard, (he endeavoured to apply her father's laft words to fome particular mean¬ ing i (lie refolved them in her mind in dif¬ ferent ways, but ftill (he was-at a lofs to un- derftand their purport, She had once, and but once, been informed that, by the will of her maternal grandfather, fhe was to inherit his title; but could it be poflible that (he was the Baronefs of Caftle-Acre her father's fpeech alluded to f Yet fhe knew of no other;, her mother had loft that title in the fuperiof one of Countefs of Auburne. «* What r
cc What!" faid (lie inwardly, "doesthat frightful man, more than thrice as old as me, ^does he want to be my hufband ?" The idea made her fmile, and (lie no longer refufed her confidence to her proted- ing knight, as (he had long fince dubbed her favourite Auguftine; (lie recited to him the whole occurrences, and laughingly de¬ fcribed the woeful looks of the diEppointed Leopold. But inftead qf the lively mirth this piece of raillery had been expeded to create, Auguftine liftened to her with filent gravity, fighed deeply, and after a paufe, refped- fully taking the hand of Ethelwina, he faid in a dejeded voice— «' Ah! you will one day forget me!—I fhall be no more thought of—you will ceafe to love me!—Some rich Lord will poffefs my once beloved Ethelwina, and the poor Auguftine will be no more remembered— this Leopold, this Lord de St. Iver, per- haps-—"
%rf» lin 1 *
" Cruel Auguftine !" cried the innocent Ethelwina, interrupting him, * 6 go, leave xne—you ought to know me better—thefe are words I have not deferved,"* and (lie burft info tears. Auguftine was in a moment on his knees ; his pardon was as inftantiy granted, and the fweet frnile of reconciliation burft through the (bower that had at firft overcaft the lovely face of Ethelwina; and this was the firft time they had ever fo openly cxprefled their love for each other. Iver, after being clofeted for two hours with the Earl, at laft departed j the Countefs with joy beheld his abfence, whiift the coun¬ tenance of <5odfred, ever the index of his mind, feemed clouded and relerved. Speedy preparations were made for his departure, and Auguftine no fooner learned the Earl's intentions, than gracefully bending his knee, he entreated permiflion to attend him as his page? but Godfred, well knowing the ftill remaining reientments of the King againft every branch of thofe who had rebelled againft
againft his father, refufed his requeft, af- figning his extreme youth as a reafon ; but defiring him to purfue with vigour his mar¬ tial exercifes, and from henceforward, du¬ ring the Earl's ablence, to become the de¬ fender and protector of his mother (as the Countefs was ever defirous of being con- fidered) and his fiders. " My brave boy," faid the Earl, endea¬ vouring by his own courage to infpire Urfu¬ line with a part of the fame, " I leave you the guardian knight of thefe fair darnfels, and thb my cadle j—look that you guard them well, and let me find all fafe at my return." Though Auguftine had given this early proof of his heroic fpirit, yet .the thoughts of remaining near his beloved EtheJwifta, and to be appointed her protector, foftened his difappointment. A fmall armour was chofen fuitable to his (ize, with the helmet and lance, from the armoury of the caftie 5 and Auguftine nas invefted with the honour
*, ETHELWINA.' 47 of being its defender, as well as of its fair inhabitants. The evening before the Earl's departure, he fent for Rupert, the old deward of the cadle, whofe long-tried fervices warranted the unlimited confidence repofed in him by his Lord. The fubjed of their conference was fong and unknown; but the latter part con¬ fided in the eager recommendation of his fa¬ mily to the watchful care and unceafing vi¬ gilance of Rupert, whom, with unufual warmth, he defired to be careful ofthe fafety of his Lady, his children, and in particular the young Baronefs. ** And fliould the chance of war," added the Earl, ci prevent my ever returning, and my beloved wife be overcome and fink un¬ der my lofs, then give this paper, which I commit to your charge, to the hands of Ethelwina. Continue (aithful to your trufl, and the blefling of Heaven, and the praifes of your Lord be your reward T Rupert on his knee received the paper, and was about to make the aflbrance necef-
fary ; but, overcome by the folemn manner of the Earl, and the affecting fubject, was unable to fpeak ;—a tear filled his aged eye, and that was a fure engaging anfwer to the Earl, who raifed him from the ground, faying, as he left the place— " Remember, Rupert, my former injunc¬ tions." The morning of departure arrived, and Godfred rofe early from his fleeplefs couch ; the extreme mifery of the Countefs had in¬ creafed his"own forrow, and he had to com¬ bat her grief, as well as, on his account, his own regret. The noble Uifuiine faw the unhappinefs of her Lord, and (lie refolved to ftru'ggle againft the violence of her feelings, though with an agonized heart fhe beheld all the bufy preparations for the Earl's departure. At the drawbridge flood the neighing deeds; and the Earl, feeling the neceflity of tearing himfelf from his beloved family, at hft proceeded to the r'amparts. Urfuline was unable to buckle on her Lord's armour, an
an office which, till now, die had ever per¬ formed ;—^vainly (lie tried to hide her ago¬ nizing, feelings, "but her prophetic foul feem¬ ed to behold him for the lad time; (lie embraced her Godfred, and cading her dreaming eyes to heaven, offered a fervent prayer at the throne of mercy for his fafe return. Ethelwina, keenly alive to the ft''ong feel¬ ings of nature, and tenderly loving her noble father, with free uncondrained grief gave way to her foul's powerful emotions ; and as (he fadened a blue fatin fcarf t richly embroi¬ dered by her own hands, with the name of Urfuline in the middle, fhe fobbed aloud, and funk, fainting from her father's embrace, at his feet. The fcene became too tender ;<—the Earl again embraced his defpairing Countefs and his whole family, and mounting his horfe, fet forth upon his melancholy journey. The fortitude of Urfuline bad not de- ferted her till this trying moment: (he Bxed an i earned, agonizing look towards the vol. i. p receding
receding form of Godfred, and when the winding road (hut him entirely from her view, it was then that the fupprefied mifery of her heart burfl its prefcribed bounds, and uttering a deep-drawn figh, (he faintly ar¬ ticulated—" He is gone for ever !"—and funk, convulfed, into the arms of her at¬ tendants, who conveyed her immediately to lier own apartment.
CHAP.
<Md
, CHAP. IV. uOME days palfed in unavailing efforts to recover from the deep imprefiion Godfred's abfence had occafioned to the minds of the Countefs and her children, who all endea¬ voured to give that confolation to each other which they themfelves flood fo much in need of. A melTenger with packets at laft arrived ; and though very little comfort could be " drawn from the Baron's letters, yet the ten¬ der and affectionate ftyle of his epiftles was foothing and alleviating to the wounded mind of Urfuline; and (he began to return to thofe former occupations, amufements,
and inflruction to her children, that fome- \;hat engaged her attention, and turned her thoughts from that deep melancholy which at firft threatened to take a lafting hold on her mindr Days, months, years paffed, but no hopes were encouraged for the Earl's re¬ turn. In the meantime Auguftine and Ethelwina were faft arriving at thofe ageswhiqh made the innocent pleafures of youth no longerproper : a fudden change in boLh their manners had partly been the confequence of their growing years, when a circumftance put a final ftop to the innocent familiarity that had fo long fubfifted between them. The Countefs was one day walking in the wide gallery of the caftie with more than ufual penfivenefs, at¬ tended by Auguftine, when the latter fixing his eyes upon the portraits of a warrior and a lady, who had no names or titles prefixed to them, as the reft of the pictures had, begged to know of the Countefs, who then approached him, whofe refemblances they were.
were.—The Countefs, whofe mind had been engaged in deep meditation, flarted at the queftion, and, after a moment's paufe, fixing her eyes tenderly on Augulline, fhe faid, with a figh— " They are the reprefentatives of your parents," " Good Heavens! is it pofTible ?—So oft as I have viewed thefe pictures, that I fliould not till now recognize in that warlike martial form, a father; and in that beautiful, ineek countenance of female perfection, a mo¬ ther P'—. " Such,'* interrupted the Countefs, " were your parents. Liften to me, while I entruft you with the fecret of their lives/' Augulline knew*that they were dead, but he knew no more ;—their lofs had been fo amply fupplied, that the "want ef natural friends had never been felt; yet now, on his approach towards manhood, the Countefs thought it neceflary to make him acquainted with his real circumftances. With the ten¬ dered care and folicitude flie broke to him . d 3 'his
his fathers untimely end, and his own por- tionlefs fituation. With grief unutterable he lidened to his parent'sjunhappy fate, and, falling at the feet of the Countefs, poured forth his gratitude for her more than mater¬ nal care of him. The Countefs, much af¬ fected at the lively emotions of his grateful heart, and reverential filial forrow, raifed him from his humble podure, and bedow- ing a mother's embrace and benediction on him, rethed. From this time, Augudine was no more the lively happy youth he had once been ; the knowledge of his unhappy fituation dung his foul with grief and (fiame. From infancy he had admired his beautiful companion, Ethelwina, who was about two years younger than himfelf; his paffion increafed with his age, and he now loved her with all the ardour of a tender, young attachment. Her in¬ creafing lovelinefs, though ftill very young— her winning foftnefs, and affectionate fufcep¬ tible nature, yet fprigjitly engaging manners, together with the fuavity of her difpofition, had
had entranced and fafcinated his heart, and he now felt that he had laid up a dore of future miferjr. With agony he looked on his father's picture— " Ah! was it poflible that noble com¬ manding exterior could hide a foul of trea- fon ?—Oh, my father !" in a paffion of grief he cried, as he lifted his eyes to the coun¬ tenance of the portrait, " Oh, my father I why was I born to be the wretched inheriter pf di (honour !—Beloved, adored Ethelwina, thou art lod to me for ever 1—What! will the generous Godfred receive the offspring of a traitor for his fon ! or, if his gallant nature, pitying my fufferings, ihould with to alleviate them, will not the * implacable Edward oppofe his power ?—Can I, a poor difinherited outcafl, who exids only on the bounty of Godfred-—can 1 afpire to his daughter, to the rich, the noble Baronefs of Cadle-Acre ?—No—no !—Let me then fly from the dangerous allurement.—Oh, Hea¬ ven ! infpire my foul with fortitude; and, fince I am doomed to differ, it fhall be with n 4 honour*
. honour, and in filence.—Ethelwina, dear Ethelwina, I refign thee to fome more for¬ tunate being!—But, Oh ' to forget the loved partner of my youthful happinefs is impoflible I—where'er I go, thy heavenly image will follow 1—I will cheriih thy bleft remembrance in my foul—tis the only gra* tification I can ever know ;—I will check the prefumptuous wifhes of my heart, and only in fecret wiil I give utterance to my paflion." Such were the noble druggies of Augudine, who from that day no longer became the con- dant attendant on Ethelwina; but, devoting his time to deep melancholy, would plunge into the thickeft ofthe foreft, there to in¬ dulge his hopelefs love and defpair. Ethel¬ wina, as flie increafed in years, loft much of her former vivacity, and the delicacy of her mind taught her the neceflity of no longer allowing thofe innocent freedoms which, as brother and fifter, they had thoughtleflly paffed their time in. Yet, as (he loved Augudine rather with the affection of youth¬ ful
ful fimplicity for her condant companion and brother, though as yet without the more exquifite refined feeling of matured years, fhe felt hurt at the fudden alteration in his manners;—his cheerfulnefs and colour (lie perceived were gone ; he feemed always dejeded; no longer he tapped at her cham¬ ber-door, to enjoy their morning or evening rambles; if he approached her, it was with marked refped, and the word Lady was always prefixed to the name of Ethelwina. Ethelwina was grieved and adoniflied at this behaviour, not knowing what was pafling in the bofom of Augudine : (lie was on the point of requeding an explanation of this regretted change of condud; but, young as Ethelwina was, there was a degree of pro¬ priety very rarely found at fuch an age, when thelivelinefs of youth gets the better of pru¬ dence. Befides Ethelwina poffefled a great (hare of pride ; and although her pure heart felt a wound, if not a forrow, at Augudine's extraordinary defertion and negled, yet (lie thought it a meannefs to fue for an explana- i> 5 ' tion
tion that feemed to be fo anxioufly avoided by him; and whilft her heart filled with grief for the lofs of paft happinefs, her mind affumed an early habit of thinking, and the fprigljtdinefs of her former difpofition was foon to be entirely fubdued by the adverfe fate that purfued her family. The Earl, for the firft year and a half of his abfence, had conftantly written every occurrence to his Countefs; and his laft let¬ ter proclaimed his fpeedy return to England with dilpatches to the auguft Philippa, who, during her Royal Conforms abfence, had been appointed P^egent of the kingdom.— A war at this time threatened the kingdoms of England and Scotland, and the return of the Earl was expedited by thefe events, he being appointed the leader of the army under the Queen. The victorious Edward having gained immortal glory in France, was foon to leave that nation, when the truce that was intended, would take place between the victor and the vanquilhed.
With
With revived joy the now happy Urfuline received this welcome news. The time of her Lord's arrival being fixed, the Countefs ftationed herfelf on the lofty tower of de¬ fence, and with longing eager looks (he pierced through the void of fpace, hoping to catch a glance of his didant form long before his arrival. The day paffed, the evening followed, the cadle clock dmek the hour of midnight, but he came not ;—in vain her attendants en¬ treated her not to expofe herfelf to the night air; fhe would not quit the battle¬ ments tili her heart fickened with difappoint¬ ment, and fainting, die was conveyed to her chamber. Another, another, and another night paffed in defpairing watchings, but he ap¬ proached not;—at lad days increafed to weeks, when one evening her meffenger, whom (lie had fent to the capital, returned with the unfatisfadory news that a (hip had put in at one of the principal ports, in which the Earl was fuppofed to have taken his d 6 paif ige
paflTage for England; but this event had happened three months before the prefent time, and no one had ever feen him or his fquire, who was the only attendant that had accompanied him on his expedition* Aftonifhed and confounded at fuch an account, Urfuline turned pale, and trem¬ blingly demanded if the (hip the Earl was fuppofed to have entered, was the fame in which he had embarked from England I —- The courier anfwered, No; that it was a fmall hired veffel, the better to traniport the Earl if it really was him who embarked, with greater fpeed to Britain; but that the pilot and tailors had fuddenly difappeared, fo thaj: whoever were the paffengers, they had all landed in the night, leading the veffel in the harbour without a foul on board, where, at cai ly morn, it had been difcovered by fome fifhermen.—The meffenger alfo brought a packet from the Queen, which, with agitated hade, the Countefs perufed; but it contained only a confirmation of what (lie had already heard ;—the (hip was believed to have con¬ tained t
tained the Earl; and -the Queen further added, that (he had received difpatcbes from the Sovereign to announce the Earl's arrival to her Majefty with advices of par¬ ticular State import. Such were the dreadful uncertain accounts that Urfuline received; and only a hope was left, that it might indeed be poffible that the veffel was a merchantman, or fome pri¬ vate property. There had lately been no intelligence from France, except that hodilities had again commenced between the contending powers, and the Earl might have been, from that^caufe, dill detained in the latter nation. Yet fufpenfe was dreadful; and the afdided mind of the Countefs was racked by a thou¬ fand alarming forebodings. Days rolled away, but no tidings arrived. Urfuline be¬ came hopelefs, and gave way to defpondency and incurable forrow : (he would fit for hours with her young fon Arthur on her knee, who was now about feven years old, with her eyes drowned in tears, which the aftedionate 4 child
child would endeavour to kifs away. His ftrong and uncommon refemblance to his father, at fo early an age, had doubly en¬ deared him to his mother, and the child was feldom truded from her fight, except to the care of the good Rupert, who was his con- dant attendant. One day when he had been talking about his father, and, by his innocent prattle, writhed the heart of his afflicted mother, (>e got upon her knee, and clafping his,arms around her neck, he afked her when he would return. <' Never, my child, never!—he is for ever lod to us S" " Oh ! do not fay fo," cried the child, €< y ou grieve me forely, Mamma;—furely nobody can have the heart to kill my good Papa!" " Kill!" cried Urfuline, a cold driver running through her veins, " Oh God ! what means this foreboding terror?—why am I fo agitated at the prattle of a child ?"
And
And then recovering from the trembling fhock of her whole,frame, which the words *« kill" and " father" had occafioned, die afked Arthur why he imagined his fether would be killed ? « Why becaufe, Mamma, as I lay in my couch by your bed-fide, lad night, you called out in your fleep fo loud that you awoke me ; and you faid, * Murderer, for¬ bear—kill not my hufband !" and then you laid your head down again, and cried your¬ felf to fleep. My dear Mamma. I was fadly grieved and frightened to fee you, and then to hear you weep fo!—I tried to wake you, but 1 could not. <c My darling boy 1" cried Urfuline, fold¬ ing him in her arms, and (bedding tears over him; whild the revival of her dreams (ia which die had fuffered great torments) im¬ prefled her mind with a fuperflitious warning of approaching ill. Having, with more than ufual tendernefs, embraced the boy, die gave him to the care of Rupert, who then entered the Counters*** 3 apartments,
apartments, to take the youthful heir to his accudomed walk in the fored. His little playmate, Emma, had for fome days been indifpofed, and of late he had been obliged to take his exercife without his dear little companion. The time for his return from his walk was far expired, and neither him nor his attendant made their appearance. Night came on j and the Countefs, who became anxioufly alarmed for his abfence, difpatched her people different ways throughout the foreft in queft of him. Some ofthe fervants returned, but no/tidings or any Arthur could be found. Diftracted with this intelligence, Urfuline flarted from her chair, and flying wildly along the galleries, was gaining the hall, de¬ termined to go herfelf in fearch of her fon ; when, as (he reached it, the bleeding mangled form of Rupert met her (hocked fight. He was brought in by the people who had gone in fearch of him, but fo wounded as not to be able to ftir. He was recovering from a long
long infenfibility, when the Countefs, with haggard didracted looks, demanded where her child was. *« Where is my boy, my Arthur ?—God of Heaven ! mud I lofe all ?—Speak, as thou hoped for mercy.*' «« Alas ! my Lady ------" " Ah 1 fay at once—fpeak the dreadful certainty—my agony cannot be greater than this foul-harrowing fufpenfe occafions—fay, is he dead ?** " Alas I I fear it is fo,** anfwered the feeble Rupert. '* I fought while I had ftrength, but numbers overpowered me :— the ruffians aimed a blow at the child as a ftroke fent me infenfible to the ground ; and I feju them fnatch him from my arms as 1 fell poWlefs to tlie earth/' A groan of tortured agony was the only reply of the miferable Urfuline, who funk convulfed into the arms ofthe no lefs afflicted Ethelwina; who, having fortitude enough to overcome her own outward grief, became the uncomplaining comforter of her unhappy mother.
mother. ' In the fird moments of this dif- trefling event, (he forgot her referve, and fnatching the hand of Augudine, entreated, with alL the perfuafive eloquence of forrow, that he would, if he loved her, go indantly in fearch of the haplefs Arthur. " If I love thee !" anfwered Augudine, fixing a look of unutterable affedion and tendernefs on her—" if I love thee !—Ah, Ethelwina ! little do you know the anguifli that rends this heart," and he laid his hand on his bread—" it lives, it beats to adore-r- to------ " But dopping fuddenly, as if druck by fome recoliedion, he left the fentence unfinifhed, fighed deeply, and bowing pro¬ foundly on her hand, which he had detained* difappeared. ' ^ Ethelwina's grief for her brothers lcw'Jfor a moment gave way to the drong furprife which the extraordinary words and manners of Augudine had occafioned ; (he anxioufly wifhed v to difcover/their meaning. She flood a moment buried in contemplation, when the dreadful ftate of her mother claimed
claimed her utmod care and attention, whom fhe tried in vain to recover from the deep- rooted incurable melancholy and defpair that had already taken fad poffeflion of her too fufceptible and didraded feelings. The Countefs endeavoured to be refigned ; for every hope of her hufband's or child's return vaniflied. Augudine had fearched every thicket of the fored, and around its boundaries; but, alas ! without fuccefs;— and it became too evident that the child had been murdered ; for, though his body could not be found, feveral little ornaments of his apparel, together with his fafh, crimfoned with blood, were picked up about the fored, and this latter circumdance feemed to con¬ firm that he no longer exided :—and as Ethelwina, with dreaming eyes, lidened to the melancholy narrative of Augudine, fhe vainly endeavoured to account for fuch an unheard-of ad of cruelty. To murder help* lefs infant innocence was a crime of fo hor¬ rible a nature, as could only be accounted for but by fuppofing fome wretch, intereded in
in the death of an heir of vad poflfeflions, had perpetrated the horrible deed. Ethelwina, with a penetration beyond her years, immediately conceived the idea that Leopold Lord de-St. Iver was the perfon chiefly concerned in this dark myderious affair;; and (he freely explained to Augudine the tendency of her fufpicions. Augudine, upon mature confideration, did not Cccm to admit the belief: he thought it impoflible that fo near a relation as Leopold could in nature be the indigator of fo dread¬ ful an act. The Countefs continued for fome months in a date of melancholy (ilent infanity, not knowing even her afflicted daughter, who, with weeping eyes, fat watching by her bed- fide ; or, if ever (hedid fpeak, it was only fome incoherent fentence relative to her Lord and fon ;—till at laft Ethelwina furprifed her into attention by mentioning her father, and ex- prcfling how poflible it was that the Earl anight ftill exift, asjb© King was not yet returned
returned from France, and no confirmation of her father's real fate had ever arrived* The Countefs, raifed from her defpairing lethargy by this revived hope, flarted from her couch, anci uttered a fervent ejaculation that fuch might be the cafe. » " But, ah!" added flie, **where is my Arthur ?—are there no tidings of him ?— For twelve long months has he been gone— will he never, never more return ?—Alas I there is no hope for me P* Ethelwina, anxious to relieve the loaded anguith of her mother, if ponlble, ventured to mention her fufpicions, and to fay that Arthur muft either have been murdered in the foreft, or was in the power of Lord d# St. Iver. No fooner had Ethelwina fpoken the un¬ founded fufpicions of her fecret thoughts* than Urfuline, matching the hand of her daughter, entreated her inftantiy to difpatch a melTenger to the throne of Philippa for the grant of a warrant to fearch the domains And all the pofieulons belonging to Leopold, « Oh r
«* Oh!" cried (lie, " well do I know his heart is capable of ads of dark defigning vii- lany. Difpatch, my Ethelwina, difpatch— Oh ! fly to eafe thy mother's breaking heart J Oh 1 if poflible, be the means of reftoring my beloved child.—-But for my .Lord, 0 —and a deep heart-rending figh attended thefe words, ** him, I fear, thefe eyes will never more behold, but in thofe abodes of blifs where 1 hope foon to join him.** # With grief unutterable, Ethelwina beheld the daily alteration of her mother, who, unlefs fome fpeedy relief could be adminiftered to her diftraded mind, feemed flowly declining to the fleep of death. A meflengcr was immediately dilpatcbed to the Court, and the fuit of the unhappy Countefs was complied with by the iliuftrious Philippa, and proper officers appointed to go oo the expedition.
CHAP.
CHAP. V.
1VER at that time had, during the King's abfence, formed a confpiracy with fome other Lords, daring and refolute like himfelf, for the purpofe of recovering fome forfeited lands which had once been in the poffejfiion of his father, but which, for fome treafon- able occurrences, owing to adifpute between the Monarch and the former Lord of Iver, had been alienated from him and Jiis heirs for ever, and confiscated to the ufe of the King, The plot was timely difcovered; and Leopold, dreading the refentment of Edward for thefe and other enormities, and from fome fecret myderious reafons, withdrew himfelf from the Court of England, retiring to
to hb caftie on the mountains in Wales, and there entertaining fome lawlefs and def- pcrate followers. He was fuppofed to fpend his time in riotous purfuits and difloyal cabals; the well-known profligacy, and even daring projcds of his ambitious foul fully authorized the feverity tliat was pradifed againft him; and an order was iffued not only for the fearch of Arthur, but of (ome traitors fufpeded to be concealed in bis principal caftie, which was formerly a royal palace, as well as a fortrefe of impregnable ftrength; and, from its lofty fituation, being built on the brow of an inacceflible high mountain, made it a place of confiderable import, and very difficult of accefs—a place tliat could with fafety hold out againft a lengthened feige, as no one but thofe who knew the fecret of its entrance could pin ad* miffion within, it being fo artfully concealed, that it was impofliWe to find the lower aper* tuie that led to the only afcent ofthe moun¬ tain on which the fabric ftood, all its fides being nearly perpendicular to its fummit. Sttch
Such was the fecure habitation of St. Iver, whofe defcription fhall here follow. Leopold, Lord of St. Iver, was the only child of the ^Earl Fitx-Auburne's fifter. Alicia Fitz-Auburne had been the eldeft child of her parents, and there was more than ten years' difference between her age and her brother's, who was the youngeft child, and t the only furviving male of the Houfe of Auburne. Alicia had married the .Lord of St. Iver very early in life, and expired in giving birth to her fon, before (be was twenty. Her hufband lived but a few years after her, and died of a fudden fall from his horfe i and fo indantaneous had been his death, that he had not even made a will, or appointed guardians for bis fon; who, at the deceafe of his father, was ten years of age, and left the uncondrained mader of his fortunes, and the entire difpotcr of his per* fon* His'paffions were ftrong m& ungovernable. Unchecked by the voice of friendfliip, or proper corredion, he knew no will hut hh vol,, !• i own jr
own; and having only flatterers and fyco- phants about him, it was not to he %vonoer- ed at it he became haughty, vtoknt, and ovetiscaring; hts hea?t, naturally a bad one, became woife by* unreftrained indulgence ; his will wa% a bw to all around him; arid, by the ti.ise he arrived at manhood, he had caft afide all the influence of virtue, de- fpidng the mild exhortations of his uncle, who being but a very few y^ars older % than liituiei, he felt very little inclination to bear lib rebukes, though deli vered in the i.oft gentle «u<m r; and lie totally decined all inlercourfe with the Earl of Auburne. His large poflcifions engaged him the Irieadflnp of a let of men Uio only defigned to fleece him of that wealth which lie himfelf teemed fo little to know tbe value wf. A few years fer%cd to difiipatc the tortune* uf liis houfe ; and when they were gi*«3C» oe found bimfe*f reduced to cj»*:p3Mtvc noihtngiit^* AU that he oiuld dtf^o^e of was lofo, and ao- thrg remained tint tbe entailed cftates, and the^nueutGotuicCaillcot Iver, m Wuics, .1 *Frf-
a poffeflion which he had not power to part with. He had made feveral attempts to reindate ' himfelf in his former fplendour, by marriage with fome rich heirefs; but his well-known abandoned courfe of life had fufficiently pre¬ vented fuch an event from taking place. Money was now become neceflary to fupport his extravagant propenfities, and he had at laft recourfe to bis uncle, who immediately fupplied him with a large fum. .The eafe with which this had been obtained, induced him to make another demand ; and in perfon he came with the Earl to receive what had been fo liberally promifed hiin. It was then that, for the fird time, he beheld the youthful beauties of Ethelwina. A rich harveft laid before him, and he in¬ ftantiy conceived the idea of marrying his coufin j but her extreme youth muft prevent for fome years the completion of his wiihes and defigns. Ethelwina, he well knew, would be immenfely rich at her mother's deceafe; and as the latter was of a weak and % % delicate
delicate conditution, he concluded (as he hoped) that (he would not livelong : Ethel¬ wina would then inherit all her mother's fortunes totally independent of her father. She was very young, of courfe Irery inexpe¬ rienced, and, he fancied, foon caught.— The kifs he had forcibly imprefled on her hand, on the morning of his departure from Auburne Cadle, he had meant (hould have conveyed his admiration of her; but he was difappointed in the manner it had been re¬ ceived, whild the anger that (hot from her eye, and the dignified manner in which (he had led him, dung his vanity, and convinced him that (lie was not fo ignorant or fo unin¬ formed of the manners of the world as he had hoped, from her fecluded life, to have found her; yet,, never having known con¬ troul, and refolving to poflefs himfelf of the rich gem his avarice coveted, he had the temerity to propofe himfelf to the Earl for an alliance with his daughter, as foon as the latter fliould be marriageable.
The
The Earl was no dranger to the dangerous charader of his nephew; and though he had ceafed all kind of admonitions, as ufelefs, he never refufed to anfwer the latter's repeated demands on his fortune. ' But when Leopold had openly the infolence to offer himfelf for his future fon, a circumdance in which ail his deared feelings and affedions were power¬ fully intereded, the mildnefs of the Earl's temper for awhile left hirn, and glowing with anger and indignation, he too incautioufly upbraided his nephew with his vices and peremptorily forbade him ever to think ofthe Baronefs Ethelwina. St. I ver's haughty foul could ill bear rebuke, however merited : he gave a loofe to his un- ^ redrained rage, and, in the prefence pf the Earl, vowed to be amply avenged for the infult, Difregarding threats, which he fup¬ pofed to be the momentary effeds of difap¬ pointed ambition, the Earl left the room, commanding Leopold never again to enter Auburne Cadie.
e 3 From
From that moment the dark paflions of Leopold's foul became his principal gratifi¬ cation. He left the cadle full of fmotbered rage,- and plotting thofe fcenes of villany which afterwards involved the de'votediithel- wina in mifery. * Leopold was paflionate, revengeful, and unforgiving; if he hated, his hate was deadly, and it never ceafed till the ruin of the ob- jedwasatcomplifhed.. His manners were haughty, commanding, unconcihating; his perfon was more than tall—it was gigantic, aod ferved to increafe that impervious fupe¬ riority which he affumed, particularly to his inferiors; his^ limbs were large, drong, and finewy; his eyes were almoft/terrible from - their piercing expreffion, and full orbs; whilft one glance from him feemed to fay, ** I read the very foul of the objed I contemplate ;** his forehead was hi^, and furmounted by a pair of extended eyebrows, black and nearly meeting, 'which* when he frowned, the fcowl of his eyes, as they rolled in their orbits, were really objeds of affright; his
hair was dark and curly, and added to the fiercenefs of his looks. The lines, and lower parts of his face, were- an index of his mind, in whofe ftriking traits defigning cun¬ ning, Cruelty, and artifice were plainly legi¬ ble. Such was the unpromifing exterior of Leopold, fated ,to bear a diftbguifhed part in this hiftory. But to return to* Cadle Auburne, where the* meffenger arrived with the officers ne- ceffiry for the fearch, Rupert, who had recovered of his wounds, requeded to be pf the party, he having formerly been at the caftie during the lifetime of the late Lady of St. Iver, and knew many of its intricate and moft fecret labyrinths. The following morn they fet forth on their fruitlefs em- baffy, and at the end of the w«ek returned with the melancholy affurance that their fearch had been ufelefs ; every part had,bee» ftridiy examined, even the vaults, but to no, purpofe. Leopold was at the time re- fiding at Iver j and, by the free and cafy .gaanhejr in which they had gained admit*
tance, it feemed that the Countefs and Ethelwina had injured him in their fufpi¬ cions, or that the child had been murdered in the foreft; and the finding his fafti, and not his perfon, made it probable that the ruffians had concealed his body in a hafty grave. But whatever was the dark my (lery of his haplefs fate, all hopes were now for ever at an end of feeing him more ; and the Countefs rcfigned herfelf to her former me¬ lancholy, increafed by the at laft certain and fatal confirmation that the Karl had fallen long fince in the field of battle. A courier arrived from the Sovereign, who was now returned to England, to fpecify that hoftilities had broke out on the very day that the Eari was to have embarked for England; that it * was fuppofed he re¬ turned from the vefle 1 to the army, on the morning of battle, though too late to take his former dignified flation in the army; and therefore entered as a volunteer, and was (lain in the midd of the engagement. A further confirmation of this unhappy event was
was produced by the Earl's fword ana* a bril¬ liant diamond ring, which was brought to the Engiifti camp by a dranger, who faid that, in fearching the field of daughter for the remains of a friend, he had found the fword and the ring, and fuppofing them (by the arms engraved on the fword, and the initials of a name in the ring) to belong to fome Englilh Noble, he had brought it to the camp of tile latter; but the bodies of the (lain had been removed and buried, and though diligent fearch had been made among the graves of the Enghlh dead, the corpfe of the Earl had not been found. The King had fent an exchange of prifoners to the enemy ; and all but the Earl, who were alive, were returned of the Englifh. A large ranfom had been offered the French to re- ftore the Earl, if they had taken him pri¬ foner 5 but Edward received undoubted proofs that fuch an event had not taken place; and nothing remained to be con¬ cluded, but that the French, having buried e 5 their
their dead in the night, might, in their hade, have performed that office for the gal¬ lant Godfred. The Countefs, with the calm fettled de¬ fpair of hopelefs forrow, received the unwel¬ come news, of the truth of which not a doubt could be entertained ;—the ring had been a pledge of affedion, placed on the finger of the Earl on the fad morning of his depar¬ ture. Urfuline again received it; and putting it filently on her own finger, fervently kifled it, and with eyes cad in agony towards hea- , ven, left the hall in mute refignation, feek¬ ing that confolation from on high which was for ever (hut from her on earth, and meekly bending to the Power that had afflided " her. An univerfal change took place in the cadle from this lamentable period. It no longer refounded with the mirth of happi¬ nefs—tl at hofpitable roof was now changed to melancholy cheerlefs folitude. No more its lofty halls echoed with the dance/of hila¬ rity,
rity, or the fongs of the mindrels at the clofe of day; the lives of its inhabitants were devoted to forrow ; the faithful vaffals^ loving their Lord's memory, no longer par¬ took in the fedive joys that formerly glad¬ dened the hearts of thofe who felt the con¬ dant benevolence of their lod mader; whilft the Countefs, patiently fubmitting to the dediny that awaited her, with placid refig¬ nation viewed the gentle, though flow, de¬ cay of a life that had ao charms for her de¬ voted broken heart- Ethelwina, with a fortitude truly noble, druggled againd her own grief, and endea¬ voured to inilil a portion of that fortitude into the bofom of the Countefs; whilft Augudine, unhappy and miferable, would wander whole hours from the cadle, and, in fome thicket of the fored, throwing himfelf on the ground., give way to the increafing ardour of his love, and bitterly lament the unfortunate circumdances of his birth, or form hafty refolutious to quit the e 6 cadle*
cadle, and with his fword endeavour to re- ftore his feat tered fortunes to their former ludre, or perhaps terminate at once his hopelefs paflion and-his poVerty in the fields of battle. Many projects arofe in his mind, but on none had he been abk to determine: to offer himfelf as a volunteer in the fervice of Edward, would be only to expofe himfelf io the refentments of the Monarch, who might dill bear enmity to his fathers me¬ mory in his averfion to his offspring. With pious manly grief he had received the fad news of the Earl's death ; and though nearly three years had paffed fince that event, he dill remembered and lamented his more than father's early fate with grateful forrow; who, if he had lived, would have found fome honourable means of providing for him. The Countefs, abforbed in her own unfubdued grief, and devoted to melan¬ choly and defpair, feemed to have forgot the neceflity of his remaining longer in inglorious eafe and inactivity; and could he prefs
prefs on her fufferings by mentioning his own concerns, or filently leave the caftie without affigning a reafon for it ? It was evident that Ethelwina, in the fimple innocence of a firft attachment, loved him. Though all their once happy hours of unconftrained childifli pleafure had entirely ceafed, yet could he meanly take advantage of her un¬ fufpecting affections, and, forgetful of her rank (now as fhe was the undoubted heire(s of Auburne) and fplendid fortunes, could he dare afpire to the poffeflion of fo fuperior a being ?— cc No," cried he ; *« perifh the thought —Ethelwina (hail never for a moment fup¬ pofe me capable of fuch degenerate bafenefs. I am poor, the object of charity, with an empty title; but no. fortune to fupport the fplendid nothing!—Ah! better had it been if I had received my life from the lowly cot¬ tager; for, then my humble wifhes would have kept pace with my means, and the dangerous beauties of the great Ethelwina 4 would
would not have allured my too prefumptuous heart !" In fuch meditations as thefe paffed the clays of the unhappy Augudine, till an event took place that, in fome degree, once more raifed his hopes from felf-devoted defpair. -
CHAP.
ETHELWINA.
CHAP. VI. JL HE infincerity ofthe French nation once more ftiewed' itfelf by breaking the folemn ' contrad it had entered into with the vido- rious Edward; who, enraged at their de¬ ceitful condud, was again preparing a fecond war with France, determined to punifti her treachery and infidious fadions. But before he (et out on this expedition, he refolved to examine into the edate and laws of his own country; for which purpofe be condefcehded to vifit mod parts of his dominions, redrefling the wrongs ofthe in¬ jured, and reforming the abufes that had, ' by imperceptible means, dole into the feats of judice. While on the purfuit of this 1 laudable
laudable defign, Edward arrived within a few leagues of Auburne Cadle; and he re¬ folved to pay a vifit to its unhappy midrefs. A meffenger was fent to fpecify the Royal Edward's intentions; and, on the evening of the following day, he reached the Cadle of Auburne. With adonifhment and concern he be¬ held the change which a few years of grief had made in the beautiful, but now faded, ' form of Urfuline; whofe calm, mild, de¬ jected countenance plainly indicated a heart, if not broken, at lead fad approaching to that lad dage of human mifery^ and a frame finking to an early grave. The illudrious Edward, though a victo¬ rious conqueror, was poffeffed of compaf-' fion ; its gentle influence filled his bread as he contemplated the beautiful ruin, whom, about feventeen years ago, he had beheld a blooming, happy bride. With condefcend-. ing affability he renewed his friendfliip to the Countefs, and offered his pity and confo¬ lation ; defiring her to fpeak freely, and if it , was
was in his power to be of any fervice to her, fhe might command him. The Countefs, by the unexpeded pre¬ fence of the Sovereign, was a little roufed from the lethargy of her incurable forrow; and, feelingly alive for the miferies of others, determined to take this fair opportunity of pleading for two objeds, who, though one of them might feemingly have been negled- ed by her, yet were they often the fubjeds of her thoughts, when (he could a moment detach them from her deceafed Lord and in¬ fant fon. She haddong felt convinced, that in this world her ftay would be very fliort, and the idea of leaving Ethelwina unpro¬ tected, had often been a fource of added grief; befides the forlorn ftate of Auguftine engroffed her generous confideration;—for the young Emma (lie was able, and meant to provide; but for the two former, an op¬ portunity like the prefent was not to be negleded, and, in anfwer "to the Monarch, fhe (aid—
< c The
" The generous good nefs of my Sovereign encourages me, and I will fear'efs make my boon to his royal ear.—My Liege, I have now, alas 1 but one child—lhe may foon be left without her only parent; and her un¬ protected date cxpo.es her to the lawlefs power ot defigning villany. Yet, if flie were bleffed with her Sovereign's flickering arm, fhe would then enjoy a fure fafeguard, and might efcape from the dangers of her fitua¬ tion ; her large polleflions expoting her -to the cunning and intereded mercenary lover. Condefcend then, Oh Royal Edward ! to approve a mother's Amplications, and make her at lead at eafe. by the affurance of thy all-powerful protection ?" u Doubt it not," interrupted the Mo¬ narch ; " on the word of a Sovereign I pro¬ mife, not only to be a guardian, but a friend; and, as far as my State affairs will allow me, a father. As a proof of my fmcerity, let the baronefs Ethel .vina be inVeded with the title and hereafter domains of her father j this paper contains her undoubted right.— Nay,
Nay, Countefs^ offend me not by thanks—it is but an act of juftice, which this vifit oc¬ cafioned/' " My gracious Liege, how fhall your grateful fubject repay the love and duty which her heart feels, though her tongue is unable to fpeak its meaning ?—-But'fince you forbid me to exprefs my thanks, allow me to addrefs you on another fubject—a iuit of much importance have I to folicit* yet want the power to afk it; for it is of a nature fo prefuming, that I fear to incur your anger, if not your juft rdentmQnt 9 for my rafh temerity." " SpeakV* cried Edward, again interrupt-* ing the Countefs;, "■ I cannot refufe what-, ever you require ;—you have claims, Lady Urfuline, on my.juflice, which, whatever they are, I fvvear to you, if your fuit comes within the compafs of my ability, (hall be anfwered to the full of your requed." Thus encouraged, the Countefs fell on her knees before the King, from which hum¬ ble podure fhe refufed to rife at his prefllng ♦entreaties,
entreaties, and in that lowly attitude con* defcended to remain, till fhe had fully ex¬ plained the defolate ftate of the orphan Augudine, whofe caufe fhe pleaded with prevailing eloquence, in all the moving terms of language and perfuafive pity, which her compaffionating heart fo highly felt, and was fo well able to depidure in her expref¬ five countenance. She then added— fl The fafety of my own child fecured, I have now no other hope than to behold the objed of my beloved .Lord's care preferved from thofe ills which his lofs muft foon oc¬ cafion to the unfriended youth*—•Ah then, heroic Edward 1 great hi juftice as in war, deign to liften to my entreaties. Long has the youth panted to fignalize himfelf under his'vi&oriou&raafteri—pumlh not the father's degeneracy upon his haplefs and unoffending offspring $ but, with the mercy of a for¬ giving angel, condefcend to receive under your care a noble youth, whofe good and grateful heart will, I doubt not, by his Wthftd fervkes, repay ia part the vaft debt be
ETHELWINA. $J he will owe to your generous clemency, and wipe away the dainsof his anceftor/* Such were the gentle and good offices of the Countefs, who, foaring above the weak* uefs of declining nature, had exerted herfelf with an ardour beyond her fmall remains of ftrength; and now, feint and overcome by the afflicting emotions occafioned hy the revival of bitter recollections, in which the recital of Auguftiae's ftory, f and her Lord's were fo principally concerned, flie ftill re¬ mained in ber proftrate fituation, without the power to rife, and with great difficulty preventing herfelf from fainting* The King, on the mention of Auguftine, became thoughtful. His countenance, over¬ caft by a fudden gjoom, gave the Countefs but little hopes of fuccefs | he ftood fome moments wrapped in meditation, till ob¬ ferving the Countefs's humiliating fituation, her grief-worn countenance, and imploring looks, he turned to, and raifed her from the ground % and, in a foftened voice, faid— 5* Urfuline,
w Urfuline, thou haft conquered—thy boon is granted j—let it be a teftimony of the friendfliip of Edward to thee, when he condcfccnds to forget his refentments at thy felicitations." Urfuline again dropped on her kncc f and kifled the hand of her Sovereign, who raifmg her inftantiy, they repaired to th*s hall of ftate, where the banquet had been prepared, and a canopy failed for the Monarch,^— Ethelwina was prefented to Edward by the Countefs, whofe laft maturing beauties ftruck the admiring King, and he paid Ethelwina many dignified compliments on her fine per¬ fon and elegant mind, the latter of which he had an opportunity, in the courfe of the evening, to obferve was highly poliflicd and well cultivated. Before the banquet began, Urfuline gave a filent fignai to Rupert, who always at¬ tended tbe chair of the Countefs on thefe ftate occafiom. He well underftood tbe motion, and left tbe hall to fulfil its mean¬ ing, psfeatly leturniogi udering in the aftoniflied
aftonifhed Auguftine; who, dejected and melancholy, had retired to his own chamber from the moment of Edward's arrival at the caftie. The Countefs* a* foon as (he faw him enter, rofe from her feat; and meeting the awe-ftruck Auguftine, took his trem¬ bling hand as flie conducted him to Edward, explaining to him the reverfe of his prefent dclliiiy Auguftine had no time to exprefs his frelm^s I eiore he arrived at the throne, where he gracefuhy, and with reverential re- fpect, bent the kt&Q of veneration before tbe Royal Edward, who had been viewing the noble mien and gallant form of the youth. The pleating exterior of Auguf¬ tine feemed to have wtou^ht much in his favour ; and tie Cou..tc s rejoiced a* flie watched the countenance of Edward, to ob- fcrve not a fin b lc trait ot Utiapp robot ion. No fooner hAU he proftratcd himleif before hb buverei^n, than Ed^rd, with a (mile, defired liim to rile, faying—
" Be
« Be the offences of thy fethcr forgotten, and, in die fidelity of his fon, be all his errors buried in oblivion^Rifc, Auguftine, and receive this fwod, tbe pledge of my protoc* tion;—4ct it, by thy courage, pfocure fi» thee the future favours of a raaftcr not flow to reward merit and bravery. Thou (halt Accompany nieia my prcfeal expedition i Eod, in the glorious field of war, cftablilh that valour which, if my judgment deceive me not, (bines through thy features, and fives in thy heart;—and, that thou may ft be equal with the Nobles who attend me on the enterprise, receive the order of Knight¬ hood, which I here bcftowV* So laying, he conferred that high diftin- guifocd h^iour upon Auguftine, who, though furpriicd, overcome, and aftontftied at fndi «iieif«aed happinels f received tbe ^voursof his Monarch with a noble and be* coming cafe; and as he accepted die fwordfrotn Edward, te firac upon tt tbe fervent <Mh of allegiance, and killing tbe out-ftretched kind
hand of ths Kmg $ with grateful warmth, bid— " When 1 defeat my poft, or become ncg- leclfu! of my Sovereign's goodnefi, may Heaven, to punifh my bate ingratitude, ftrikc mc to the earsb, or fend fame heavier ill, more terrible than death, sis a fit reward for crimes h execrable f" «« Rifc, Augulline,** faid Edward; " I trufl thee. In three days 1 leave the eailfe j prepare then with fpeed to accompany me." The banquet then began, and the Countefs, with noble firmfiets, fubdued her outward feelings, that no appearance of grief in her might difturb the entertainment of her illuftrious \W\tcr ;—at cafe, now that fhe knew her Ethelwina and Augulline had ob¬ tained fo powerful a friend, fhe retired with a heart more calm and reiigned than (he had for fome time known. The arrival of Edward had bellowed uni- verfat joy, and enlivened the iblitaiy glootn of the ozee joyous rmnlion of Auburne, But how different were the fenfottons of vol. i. L w AuguClme f
Auguftine! He was now in all things the reverfe of what he had lately been—joy, gratitude, aftonifhincnt, and love, by turns filled his mind, and made him alive to every fufceptible emotion of the feeling heart.— His name rtkmd from diflionour, filled his bofom with hope ; a d, forgetful ot the poffibiiity that he might never return (which, from the chaiicv* of war, *as very probable), ht thought only oi Ethelwina, and the cer¬ tainty of one day calling her his own. No longer he ftrived to combat with his former feeling*; his fine countenance * as no mere the pale image of defpair, but lightened up with the transports of his mind and his fmiiing happy profpeclsi he \enturvd to fix his eyes, a$ he fit at the banquet, on his adored Eriiclwm*, with a rapturous txpaf- fion th.it couid uot be ...illaken. Eihel iiu tthuvd in his joy; but felt con- fuicd as lite lometimes kw his ardent gaze fixed with a modeft tenderntfs upon her, that could not excite anger, but which flie fancied thrir illoftrious gueft feemed to notice, as he
he frequently turned his eyes on them both. 1 The banquet ended,; and, as Ethelwina was following her mother, Augudine foftly took her hand, and, kifling it with refpedful ardour, entreated permifli6n to tencv^ their former amufements, which of late years had been dropped on both fides, without either the one or the other feeming defirous to ex* plain why they had broke through fo plea- fant an engagement.—-Ethelwina, fomewhat furprifed at this ftrange requed, ut firft he- fitated. « Beloved Ethelwina," added he, ** re¬ fufe me not a favour that will foon be ended —remember that in two days I fhall depart. You will not fure deprive mc of a gratifica¬ tion we have fo often voluntarily partaken together ?—I have much to fay, many things to explain of great importance;—fay that you will, to-morrow morning, allow me to condud you to our once favourite battle¬ ments?" w % Ethelwina
Ethelwina reludantly gave her confent, and then hadened after the Countefs, who dood waiting for her'in the gallery. In the morning, Ethelwina rofe with the fun, and prepared to attend her engagement, when a female fervant entered her apart¬ ment ; the Countefs had been ill in the night, - and but then recovered from a faint¬ ing fit. Ethelwina in an indant forgot that die was to meet Augudine, and fpent all the morning in her mother's chamber, who, overcome by her exertions the preceding day, had relapfed into an illnefs that fhe was much fubjed to. Augudine, difappointed, returned to the hall of date, where, in the feeble looks of the Countefs, he foon difco¬ vered the caufe of Ethelwina's fuppofed for¬ getful nefs. Edward made that day an excurfion round the country, and Augudine was of courfe obliged to accompany him ; they did not re¬ turn till niglit, and no opportunity prefented itfelf to the impatient lover toobtain an inter¬ view with his Ethelwina. The King had, for fome
fome particular purpofe of State import, fliortened the time of his x at fird intended day, and the next morning was fixed for his leaving Auburne Cadle. Augudine, with befeeching looks, entreated Ethelwina to meet him at fun-rife on the enfuing day; and, as her mother now appeared better, fhe promifed to attend the appointment.
*3
CHAP.
/ CHAP. VII.
JiiTHELWlNA paffed a fleeplefs night, reflecting with regret on the departure of Auguftine, and rofe early to fulfil her en- g'tgernent. She afcended the battlements, and found .Auguftine already there; they exchanged the morning falutation, and he thanked her for her obliging condefcenfion in. keeping her promife. Both feemed op~ preffed, and unable to fpeak ; while Auguf¬ tine tried to gain refolution to open the caufe that had brought them together. At lad, fixing his exprefiive blue eyes upon the downcad face of Ethelwina, and gently taking her hand, he laid— "The
" The hour of feparation, Ethelwina, is arrived ;—this day I leave the beloved man¬ fion of Auburne, and its dearer inhabitants, for the chances of war, which, for many yea's, m::y deprive me of the blefling ot" be¬ holding ail on earth that i- valuable to me ! Yes, dear .idorcd companion of my happy youth, though your locks fliould upbraid me for my preiumption, yet, in this laft interview, when a few hours only will fliut me from the poffibiiity of offend ing more, 1 muft own niy love for the a Jored miftrels of my heart !—Oh Etbeh\ ; ni! great has been the conflict in my bread to check my afpiring pailion, and to wuhnold 1I1U Lift confeflion ; but now, when 1 behold you for the laft time, I cannot refrain the emotions of my foul, which glows with love unconquerable. Long have I llrugglcd againft the tranfports of my heart—vainly have I tried to fubduc its ardent fenfations;—for, alas! was it for the poor, diflionoured Auguftine, without a name, a fortune, and unknown—his future life ftained by a mi (taken, but beloved f 4 parent's
parent's misjudging adions—was it for him to afpire to Ethelwina ?—Ethelwina, the rich, powerful, and honoured, and who mud foon have crowds of admirers kneeling at her feet !—Was it for me, the lowly, out- cad Auguftine, to dare to raife a hope to fuch fuperior excellence ?—Alas, no !—And I no fooner learned the misfortunes of my birth than I refolved to refign every hope ; and, though I fullered from an incurable paflion, I was determined to fuffer filently. It was fit that I fliould be the vidim of my prefuming withes; yet how often have I flood on the precipice of diflionour! The mifery of this rebellious heart has tempted me often to rufh pad the barrier which Fate had placed between us and boldly own my love and wretched nefs, till refledion, and the friendly folitude of yon wood, redored me again to honour; and I perfided to re¬ main fecretly unhappy, though I had often wifhed to remove from the dangerous, foul- fafcinating objed of my mifery.—Ah, Ethelwina! judge what it mud have cod me,
me, when, with Teeming compofure, I fuf- fered all the innocent pleafures of our youth¬ ful days to have an end ! In place of the happy amufements which, delighted, I had lb ^often partaken with thee, I fubftituted only that diftant refpecl: which more pro¬ perly became the humble dependant Auguf- tine, towards the Baronefs of Caftle-Acre, and the daughter of my benefactor. Still mould that diftant refped: have continued to mark my conduct, and I would ftiU have continued in private to indulge in all the agony of a hopelefs love, had not the Royal Edward's unmerited generofity reftorcd me again to hope, and brighter profpects. Again I revive % for Fortune, imiling on my efforts, may give me back my forfeited lands and honours ; and, fliould that blelTmg be mine—fliould I live to return equal in fortune with the idol of my foul—and, Oh ! fliould flie deign to hear my vows, and accept their fervency and truth, what.happinefs will be mine!—how (hall 1 be overpaid for every former, every
other ill!—Say then, Ethelwina, condefcend to anfwer me—May I hope, that when I am far away, you will fometimes remember the bleft hours (to me how bleft !) of our youthful days—will not one figh efcape your heart for my abfence, one prayer be offered for my return ?—Am I to defpair; or does that gen¬ tle heart, which once repofed every fecret on my faithful bofom, now difregard our early affection, when, uncondrained, you vowed to knew no other love but me ?— Speak, dear angel, eafe my tortured doubts!" Ethelwina remained utterly difconcertcd, with her eyes fixevi on the ground, and her face, the naturally exprefiive beauties of vvhich were raifed by a deep crimfon glow which fpread its influence over her whole features; at lad, with a noble fincerity, though with the mod bewiu ing fimplicity fhe faid, in a fweet low tone of voice— " I fha'l figh for the abfence of my be¬ loved companion and brother—I (hall pray for his return with all the fervency of a never
never ceafing affection, and weep at the thought of the dangers he may encounter ; nor will Sir Augultine, or even the Baron of Mountfe: vii.e, reindated in his family pofFefli >ns, be more dear to me, than is the orphan fon of my late father's adoption." In a wild tra^fport of joy he fell on his knee, from which podure Ethelwina, as he held Doth her hanJs, found it impoflible to raife him, till, cifting her eyes over the bat¬ tlements, (lie beheld on the outlide of the cadle walls fome Grangers, who flcmed earned viewing the fabric; and EtheLrina feared, from their expofed fituttion, that the horfemen mud have feen them. Auguftine, regarding the p*eace and delicacy of Ethel¬ wina, infhntlv rofe from his kn.ej, and they continued to pace along the battlements. One of the horfemui ftruck them, by his height, to be the L jrd of St. Iver; but it was impoflible to judge with certainty, as they almod immediately put fpurs to their horfes, and were quickly out of light. Ethehvina and Augudine (pent fome time in conjec- f 6 turing,
turing, if it were Leopold, what his purpofe could be in pafling the cadle at that early hour, and at fo great a didance from his own; but nearer concerns foon engaged their attention, and Augudine faid— " May I, indeed, one day hope to call you mine ?—Bleffed thought! a tide of tranfport ru(hes on my heart, and foretels that you wiil be all my own. Till then, Ethelwina, how many weary hours mud pafs away ! In that fpace of dreary vacancy will none other fupplant me in the heart of Ethelwina ?—may 1 hope that, at my return, I (hall find you the lame conftant, lovely maid I left r—Ah ! will you indeed preferve * whole'and entire, the treafure of thy heart, that precious gift for which I would joyfully expofe my life to every danger I—Oh ! fay, promife, that you will live for me alone 1" " Augudine," faid Ethehvina, interrupt¬ ing him, and fpeaking in an earned manner, 44 you wrong me if you fuppofe me capable of fuch bafenefs. I have relied on your honour, and frankly owned the weaknefs of my heart; after fuch aconfen!on > todoubt its truth is to degrade the
the objed of your love. You furely little know the heart of Ethehvina, if you enter¬ tain the fmalleft thought to the prejudice of her affedion.^—Go then, Auguftine, to the field of glory—'tis honour calls, and you muft obey !—But, Oh ! expofe not your life needfeffly to danger—be fatisfied that you, and you only, fliall eyer poffefs my heart!— Be careful of your life; and, in the battle's fury, remember the future happinefs of your Ethelwina depends on your fafety." Ethelwina had uttered this with a melting foftnefs, accompanied with tears, whilft her words, labouring for expreflion, gave to her that irrefiftible fweetnefs that entranced the heart of her adoring Auguftine; and he caught her in his arms with all the ardour of a pure exalted attachment. Ethelwina, foftened and overcome by the recoliedion that tliis was the faft morning they might ever meet, fuffered him to enfold her in his rcfpedtfui tender embrace; -and, for fome moments, tbe forrow of parting rendered them unable to fpeak, till Ethelwina, feeling 4 the
the impropriety of their fituation, gently difengaged. hcrfflf from his arms, faying— " I am' very youn^; niy dear mother is unacquainted with thii meeting, and I fear I have done wrong in fo freely giving way to the emotioi.s of"my heart;—but it is pad, and I cannot, do not, wifh to recal it.— But no.v, Auguftine, leave me ; let us no further prolong an interview that will but increafe our grief at parting, and muft and ought now to be ended. Therefore begone, I entre.it you ;—the fervants are ftirring, we may be obJ*rved, and I muft attend my mother.—Farewel then at once!" and (lie was haftening from him, Augulline ftill lingered, wanting courage to tear himfelf away -, and, Peking every little * pretence to detain her, he laid— " Beloved Ethelwina, before 1 depart, give me fome little pledge, fome relic of your 'affection j it willcheer the hours of ablence, and be a treafure, a fund of inexhauftible delight to my increafing love,"
Ethelwina
Ethelwina had a fmall miniature of her own, which had been done for her father ; this flie gave to Auguftine in filence. He kifled it with rapture, called a thoufand bleffmgs on the dear original, and placing it in his bofom, faid— ** Thou, clearer! femblance, (halt be my guardian (hield againft every ill." Again Ethelwina urged his departure j and Auguftine, feeing the deeds of the King already prepared ih the court, could no longer delay. He fnatched his adored Ethelwina to his arms; and, fixing on her a look of inexprefiible forrow and tendernefs, defcendecl from the battlements. Ethelwina no longer ftruggled againd the feelings of her heart, but gave way to a tpr- rent of tears; and the idea that he might never return, filled her foul with agony ;— but knowing her prefence would be required, die haftened to her chamber, and af Fuming as much compofure as (he was able, lhe entered the hall of date, where the King and her mother were aflcmbled. She approached his
-112 his Majedy, who, faluting her cheek, defired her to remember that (he was his ward, and that, in all cafes of emergency, (he was fure of his affidance and protedion ; and commanded her to apply to him, (hould at any time any unexpeded ill befal her.— Thefe words were uttered in a low tone of voice, and Lady Urfuline had no part in the converfation. Ethelwina but too well knew the meaning of Edward's fpeech, and was unable to an¬ fwer, except by a filent look of gratitude. The Monarch then embraced the Countefs, and, bedowing his benedidion on Ethelwina, mounted his deed. Augudine had already, in all the language of a fenfitive and fufceptible mind, gratefully thanked, and took leave of his beloved mo- ther, whom, with forrow, he plainly faw he had no hope of again beholding. The Countefs was greatly affeded at this parting, and would have retired, but that (he could not leave her augud vifiter while he remain¬ ed in the cadle. Augudine, with'a manly tear
tear of regret, again knelt before the Countefs, who bellowed her blefling on him ; then approaching Ethelwina, he fold¬ ed her in his arms, and foftly whifpering Jn her ear, ** Remember," he fprung on his horfe, and, following his Royal Mader, was foon beyond the cadle walls. With fecret grief Ethelwina beheld their departure, and retired early to her own chamber, there to indulge the 'melan¬ choly which Augudine's abfence created. The Countefs again returned to her dejected ftate of mind, which had been a little amufed by the late budle, and in a fmall degree withdrawn from that preying defpair which corroded and devoured her heart j but which now received another increafe by the abfence of Augudine, whom (he looked on as a fon, and felt for him all the tendernefs of ma¬ ternal affection. It was now five years fince the dreadful event that deprived her of her own fon j a heart-rending misfortune, which, joined to the fatal account of her Lord's death, had fo 4
. fo affeded her health as well as her mind, that though (he never complained, yet had fhe long (trugglcd againft the deftroyer of life, f: r the fake of her daughter; whofe r extreme fenfibility could ill bear the fhock jof lofing fo beloVed a parent. Another vear - paffed, and all remain- d at the caftie as before, except that the Countefs declined more vifi- bly; and Ethelwina chu\fhed the remem¬ brance of her Auguftine with increafing aft fedion, devoting every lei fure moment to regret his ablence, and wifh in vain for his return* One evening, the peace pf the caftie was difturbed by the arrival of a meffenger from Lord de St. Iver, with a packet for the Countefs, who, with an inward dread, Broke the feal, and read the contents; which were a demand x>f* Ethel wina in marriage, couched in no very fuppliant language, and infolently finifliing his letter by figning him¬ felf Leopold, Earl of Fitz-Auburne ; fay¬ ing that, as he was the only male relative to the late Earl, he fliould (hortly arrive to claim
claim his bride elect, and take poffeflion of his hew inheritance. The feeble Countefs was roufed from her abforbed melancholy by this daring and open undifguifed proof of his bafe unjudifiable defigns; and, with the indignation of in¬ fulted greatnefs, fhe wrote an anfwer of de¬ termined refufal to both his claims, and with fpirited injured dignity, commanded him never to prefume to hope IJthelwina would be his, nor dare again haughtily to lay claim to poffeflions that never would, or ever could be his, while Ethelwina lived; referring him to the Court of the Sovereign on this latter fubject, and enclofing him a copy of the deed left by Edward, which confirmed to Ethelwina, the prefent Countefs of Auburne, the inheritance of her late father, and finifh- ing her packet with faying, that weak as (lie was, and finking daily to the grave, (he would defend her daughter's rights againft the .inroads of a daring affumer. Thefe letters were no fooner difpatched, than Urfuline fent for the faithful fteward of her haufe*
houfe, to whom (he freely unbofomed her prefent diftrefs. «« Alas! .Rupert," faid tjie Countefs, " to what dangers may not my child be ex¬ pofed !—fay, how fliall we p refer ve her from the defigns of Leopold, who will, I fear, prove a future foe to her haplefs date, which not even the protection of Edward himfelf can defend her from. But from thy firm fidelity, good Rupert, I expect that affid- ance which, I fear, we fliall have too much need of/ Confult on the proper meafures to be adopted ;—go round to all my vaffals and tenants; tell them their midrefs's fafety is endangered—prepare them to defend the cadle. Go, good Rupert; on thee I rely for the (afety of my child, your future miftrefs." ...'.. Rupert bowed in obedience to the Coun- tefs's orders, and thanked her for the honour of the truft repofed in him, faying, (he might be affured of the fealty and ready obe¬ dience of her people, whenever called for, with alacrity
alacrity and zealous devotion to the concerns of his beloved miftrefs. Rupert inftantiy fet about the proper and necefTaiy preparations: the caftie gates were fecured and ftrongly barricaded, the fquare tower was put in a ftate of defence, every little breach of the walls repaired, and the ancient watch once more paraded the ram¬ parts—a cuftom in thofe days always put in practice when in war, or the fafety of a cadle was endangered. Ethelwina, with aftonifliment, beheld all ( thefe fudden alterations; and when, on the following morning, flie purfued her accuf¬ tomed walk in the foreft, flie was furprifed to find the great gates fo unufually fecured ; and as fhe paffed over the drawbridge, on looking behind her, (he found herfelf followed at a refpectful didance by Rupert and two of the defenders of the cattle, a number of whom were always retained, in cafe any fud¬ den attack might be made onir. Ethelwina was not acquainted with the infolent preten¬ tions of Leopold f and the Countefs had given
given ftrid orders that (he might not be in¬ formed of that event. When, therefore, (he had beckoned to Rupert to approach, and explain to her the meaning of the prefent proceeding*, he aufwered by informing her, that the long threatened war was exped¬ ed foon to commence between England and Scotland ; and, as the latter people had al¬ ready made dangerous inroads on the Engliflv borders, and the Cadle of Auburne being'near the fea, and no very great dif- tance from the fcene of hodilities, it was thought proper to guard againd any unpre¬ pared attacks. This account fatisfied Ethelwina, and (lie proceeded on her walk, though (lie would have preferred being left afone to the uncondrained enjoyment of her folitary refledions. Some time clapfed in this date of fufpenfe, when a meflenger arrived at the caftie from Lord of St. Iver; and, by the contents of the packet, the Countefs was aftoniflied to find m anfwer fo little expeded; it con¬ tained his total refignation of the hand of Ethelwina,
Ethelwrnn, and all claim to her rights, and finifhed in a manner that left no doubt of his altered intentions;—in one part of the letter he feemed to tegret the lots of Ethelwina j but added, that be ihould pur- * fue his way to France, and join the victorious Edwa d. Rupen was again cdted in to cotmfcl, and it was agreed that the:r^ireient (Ute of defencefhou»i reuiain a month or two longer, the better to be tccured froai any unpre¬ pared treachery that the v*elI«k*noivn bafe¬ nefs ot Leopold authormzd the idea of.— That time expired vutnout alarm, and ail apprehenfions were at an end. The caftie and its inhab.tants returned to their former peaceful date, the mcrcathig weaknefs of the Countefs only intcrruptuig the caan which for the iad \ear had enfu*d. Ethelwina hzd now encercd her eighteenth year. She was arrived td all that matu¬ rity of lovelkefs which her morn of life had promifed $ (he was rather above the middle ftature, of a commanding and finely formed i perlbn,
perfon, in which dignity, eafe, and majefty were the moft leading traits; her features refembled her father's, foftened, as we have before faid, by the milder graces of her mother; her face, though not perfectly beautiful, was a combination of irrefidible lovelinefs that won upon the beholder at firft fight, and increafed its fafcination upon a longer knowledge and view of its intcreding beauties j there was a bewitching fmile in her dimpled checks and exquifitely beautiful mouth that attracted the admiration of the gazer, whilft her fine, full, exprefiive eye could not fail to engage the atten¬ tion of all who were a moment in her pre¬ fence ; her complexion was clear and beau¬ tiful; her face rather inclined to the oval; her ruby lips fo^ of fmiling expreffion, were adorned by clofe rows of fmall ivory teeth; her eyes of a bright hazel colour; and the opennefs of her inimitably fine formed fore¬ head was adorned by a profufion of light auburn hair, which curling in natural ringlets, and confined only by a firing of pearls and a diamond
diamond clafp, ^.ve to her tbe appearance of that fimplicity, yet commanding dignity, which the confcientioufnefs of high birth cannot at all times poffefs. Her features, though not ftrictly beauti¬ ful, were prepoftefling, engaging, and ftrik- ingly depictive of what was paffiog in her mind % and while fhe fafcinated every be¬ holder, (he poffeffed tbe power of repelling try a look, which, when ferioufly offended* conveyed a world of meaning, and at once filenced the offender. Her heart was not lefs beautiful than her perfon, but was po¬ tently gifted with all the tender fufceptibi- lities and virtuous refinements of female excellence:—- to the tale of woe fhe lidened with melting compafiion, nor ever reded fetisfied till fhe had amply, by her tender commiferation and foothing attentions, ren¬ dered the fufferer more than half relieved of his afflictions. Her mind was endowed with ftrong natural powers, and in matters that required IrmneJs and decifioni fhe ftiewed , voi. i. o m
an unequalled ftrength of mental ability $ not lightly yielding to an evil, but bearing with fortitude, and a greatnefs of mind un¬ conquerable, thofe misfortunes which (he couid not otherwife combat. With a foul of high-wrought fenfibility, fhe had keenly felt the heavy misfortunes that had befallen her family; and, though fome years had elapfed, the remembrance of the fad occur¬ rences of former times dill prefled with weight upon her memory; having no friend on whom (he could rely, or with freedom open every feeling of her heart, (he was obliged to have recourfe to her own well* (fared mind for that comfort, which the Countefs couid not give, but powerfully ftood in need of, whofe declining health, and even faft de¬ caying ftate, could no longer be concealed from the piercing eyes of Ethelwina. Often had Che left her mother's chamber in tears, and retiring to her own, gave way to the grief and melancholy of her forlorn fitua¬ tion. When deprived of the Countefs, (he fliould
Ihould behold herfelf without one tender friend, one endearing, confoling relative, who would be to her a fecond mother ?—• Alas! her only friend was far, far away, and might never return—never might fhe again behold her beloved Auguftine j—he had been abfent nearly two years, but no hopes of his return had ever been entertained.
c z CHAP.
' P7Ff^!Tn^ m FwV!l!f*^^ S !SS^^
CHAP. VIIL Ali !** fighed Ethelwina, as fhe one evening look her accuftomed walk, unat¬ tended by the prefence of any one, to the forcil, ** Ah! i fhall never fee him more— a fad prdentiment fill* my bofom that he mil (hare the &tc of my haplefs father, and in fome unhallowed ground will his remains im laid, and for ever at peace!—whilft my mother, devoted todeath,and feeking her only happinefs in the grave, will loon leave this world, and me a fticndiefs orphan.—Oh !** cried (he, * f where am I to look for confo¬ lation!" and (he wept bitterly. « Alas!' 1 ih$ added, *« if my prophetic foul fpeaks truly, may the fame bani that iays my angel j mother
mother in the tiknt tomb, releafe me alio from a world that fcems to promife nought but mifery !* f An unufual depreflion this night came over the heart of Ethelwina; the terrible truth that (he could no longer doubt the Countefs** fpecdy diflblution to be near, had ftrongly afHicted her mind, and made her lofe fight of that fortitude which had hitherto fupported hen but, accuftomed to keep all her forrows in her own breail when (he did give way to them, the melancholy view be* fore her had given more than common ex- predion to her grief, and now that flie was unperceived by any one, lhe gave frte vent to the anguifli that lhe could not fubduc. Her thoughts, bent only on one fad ob* ject, rendered her inattentive to the paiBng hour, and lhe wandered to a greater dif- tance from the caftie than ufuaL Az (h» approached a large aftVtree, flie perceived fome letters, as lhe leaned penfively agiinft it, cut on its rind i and upon examination, 03 lhe
flic law her own name, which excited her to the perufal of the following
lines ; 0,ai favourite w&dt, wbofc ftknt hmly fliades, Whole datkfomc b»v tn ami brajidiing atmt conceal *I he -deng ttuQtt, an4 tlw foftft gbdtJ, WJbwt' hojnltJ* Sovc iti jaSon darei rereal} lliy fiknAfy gfoom* I fetfc, and 'neath yon lite 1**J lilie my p-kf$ fmn prying mott^ils* eye 5 Tiure, unoonftnilii'd, dear n»td, lil think on thee, At*d give to hajtcldt Jove the ba«t*fubdaiag figh I Yfciiug u«e 9 titpird, >ntl «n thy ^reading r»od Pen £ditlffrj«if*f ism»«e thy hark dull bmri Av& %}*€«, tar aidant fccnet, I l«i*e thee far behind, TdJ d my faejsekfi iove, ^i»d ensikft M defpair S
By the expanfion of the letters, they muft have been imprefled fong fince, and the name of Auguftine at the bottom left no doubt
doubt who was the author. Ethelwina read them again, and treafured each fentence in her memory, whild a penfive pleafing calm difib&d itfel; over her^ mind, by this un¬ equivocal proof of Augudine's early conftant love. It began, to grow dark* and with flow fteps flie turned towards the caftie. She had not proceeded far, before fhe fancied flie law a figure glide along one of the avenues of the foreft; a little alarmed, fhe quickened her pace, but as (he arrived at the turning of a thicket, the form of Leopold dood before her aftonifhed fight. Had a fudden unexpected flafh of light¬ ning darted on her, fhe could not have felt a more momentary (hock. It was now for the firft time that (lie felt the imprudence of wandering, unattended, fo far from the cadle, and at fo late an hour. The fun had retired from the wedern atmofphere for hours, and nothing but a glimmering twilight re¬ mained of day. Some heavy clouds had long been gathering in the heavens, and o 4 foretold
foretold an approaching dorm. It was no$ yet fodark but Ethelwina could plainly dif- tinguifh the features'of Leopold, and though file had not feen him for fome years, it was impoflible to midake his gigantic per¬ fon ;—he appeared nearly the (ame as when (he fird beheld him, except that his face had lod its crimfon hue, and was now pale, fal¬ low, and (hrunk, which gave an additional gloom to his rough dark countenance. Ethelwina, with the prefence of mind which fhe fo amply poffeffed, returned with outward eafe his falutation, and was proceeding onward, when (he found herfelf detained, and her hand roughly feized by Leopold, who, in an impreffive commanding tone, bade her flop. Inwardly terrified, and now dreading, from the delivery of thefe words, (he knew not what, (he dood ftill, but with happy forethought faid— < c My Lord of St* Iver, I pray you let us proceed—the evening clofes, and darknefs is faft approaching, while the diftant thunder feems to threaten an impending ftorm.—• My
My mother will be alarmed at my long ab¬ fence—1 befeech you, therefore, to accom¬ pany me to the caftie ;—(he will, with joy, repay her acknowledgments to you for con- duding me in fafety to her arms," and (he haftened forward, But Leopold again feized her arm, while lie faid— " Lady, you ftir not—this is the extent- of your prefent footdeps. Yonder flicker¬ ing tree 'will fecure us from the dorm, and here mud you be contented to remain till you have heard the firm purpofes of my foul,- and confented to the propofals of a heart refolved.—Know then, Ethelwina, that I love you J—Nay,-, dart not; you cannot be ignorant ofthe time when firft I beheld you : even then 1 fought you for my % bride, and told your haughty father fo;—but with anger he prefumed to rejed my fuit. I fwore to avenge the infuhv The time, long. fought for,, is at length arrived, and I will keep my oath. But one way is left to fave yourfelf—remember, Lady, your future hap- o£ pinefs-
pinefs or mifery depend on your anfwer.— Refolve to be mine, and the former only awaits you ; but if, regardlefs of your prefent danger, you refufe me, there are fufferings which, but to think of, would freeze your foul with terror.—Twice has the great foul of Leopold dooped to fue;—he no longer condefcends to fuch bafe humility, but now demands what his power could indant give him, but that he rather chufes to owe his wiihes to Ethelwina's free confent, than take advantage of her powerlefs fituation.—Speak therefore, but beware how you anfwer ; and remember, St. Iver will not endure controul." Ethelwina lidened with freezing terror to this daring demand ;—her foul funk within her as hopelefs of aid ; (he cad her eyes around her, whild her dreadful dangerous fituation made all profped of affidance impoflible; and fhe was on the .point of yielding to pre¬ fent terrors, and a fate that feemed unavoid¬ able, till remembering that the purpofes of Leopold might be only to frighten her into a promife, and her heart dwelling on this 1 hope,
hope, fhe affumed a look of indignant anger, and her countenance for once betraying no marks of her inward fears; flie laid— " My Lord, you forget thefe proud im¬ perious words are ill fuited to the daughter of the Earl Fitz-Auburne; nor b fhe, by empty threats, to be furprifed into a compliance that muft prove derogatory to her honour ;— though furrounded by dangers, and befet by treachery, 1 will not defert my felf,—You have already received a final anfwer from thofe who fpoke the wifhes of my own heart; and let the candour with which I here in¬ form you, that my affections are another's, produce that generofity which fliould ever attend thebreaft of manhood. Ceafe then your fuit, nor longer increafe my terrors, which, on my'mother's account, rife to agony.—Ah ! fliould the difcover my ab¬ fence, fhe w f ill die of grief. I befeech you, permit me to pafs unmolcfted------" " Never !" interrupted Leopold, in a tone of* rage. <c You have dared to own that another poffeiles your heart—I know c 6 the
thewretch-tistheprefumingdependantjAu- guftine. But let him tremble; my power (hall reach and crufh him. And for yourfelf, you fhall endure the full force of my refentment; foon fliall you learn how dangerous it is to have excited my hatred, proud beauty; you ihall foon feel the effects of my power, and deeply fliall you repent having refu fed my love.—For the laft time have you beheld the towers of Auburne j prepare to meet the fate that awaits you.*' Overcome with terror, Ethelwina feebly uttered— €< You vvill not murder me ?" Leopold flarted j and could Ethelwina; have pierced through the darknefs of night,, fhe would have beheld with aftonifliment the effect her laft words produced.. It was fome moments before he (poke,, and when he did, it was in fo altered and wild atone, that as the repeated flafhes of vivid lightning darted on tli^m, Ethelwina, as in expecting dread of fomething of horrible import, call her eyes upon him, and beheld a countenance
countenance whofe natural roughnefs re? ceived added terrors by a ghadly deathlike palenefs, and a wild ferocity of look fpread over his dark and frowning vifase. " Murder !" repeated Leopold, " I mur¬ der only fuch as are the objeds of my hate:* " Merciful powers, preferve me!" invo¬ luntarily ejaculated Ethehvina. Leopold at theie words recovered from his inward refledions, anS again feized both her hands. ** We are lofing time,. 1 ' he laid ;. " there is one way only to extricate yourieif from prefent evil—fwear to me a folemn promife,- that, when I claim the performance of, you, will become my bride ; and you are free to return to Auburne. Beware; and no lonoer trifle with my firm refolves. Hope not to efcape me;—we are beyond the. reach of fearch.. Your Royal Guardian cannot now avail you aught. Your favoured• Augudine is in a far diftant land, and will not now pro- tedyoui Anight like "this gives fecurity to 4
to my power—provoke it not, Lady, nor draw my future vengeance on thee ;—give me, therefore, but the fblcmn promife, and 1 {wear to you, that while your mother lives, I will not claim the performance of it.— Deny me, and you never behold her more !** The horrors of Ethelwina's firuation were indeed dreadful. In the power of a wretch, whofe countenance bore tbe fpeaking marks of defigning villany, and who fcrupled not to confefs his daring intentions -, beyond the reach of all human afliftance, and a fo- lemn oath demanded as the only means to preferve her from the terrors that furrounded her; expofed, almoil unflieitered from the * dangers of the raging dorm ; whilft the loud founding thunders met in pealing clafhes along the vault of heaven, the blazes of lightning, and accompanying torrents of rain, rendered it an awful fcene of elemental war, and might well appal a mind, however ftrong ;—but ftill as the occafion for more than common firmnefs increafed, fo did Ethelwina's fortitude and ,courage increafe alio,
alfo, and (he refolved not lightly to yield to a mifery that would be for ever, and from which there was no retreating. She refled¬ ed that Leopold dared not put his threats in* execution, as her being a ward ofthe Crown would be a fure fafeguard againd open violence. With all the haughty indignation lhe. was midrefs of, (he commanded him to leave her, nor longer prefume to detain her from her home ; (lie added— " 1 am, myfelf, the midrefs of my ac¬ tions, and will not fuffer another infolently to affume a power to difpofe of that which I alone poffefs the right to bedow, as bed fuits my own determination; nor will I lightly yield to the horrors that encompafs me, or fuffer myfelf to be terrified into a promife which none has a privilege to exad from the Countefs of Auburne." Eihelwina had uttered this with a firm dignity that adoniflied St. Iver. Though ia the cadie die had peremptorily forbid any of the domeftics ever to addrefs her as the Countefs of Auburne, and refufed to be ac¬ knowledged
knowledged as fuch ;. yet now,- for the firft time, fhe had ufed that title, and it had pro¬ duced a momentary effed that for a time awed Leopold into filence ;*—but he foon re¬ covered from his aftonifliment, and with a terrible oath he drew his fword, and vowed' that if fhe_ did not inftantiy give the de¬ manded promife, he would that moment drag her from the wood, and in the Cadle- of St. Iver fhould'fhe at leifure repent her temerity, in experiencing every differing. that mifery could invent,, or (lie form the lead conception of; he added— ** No longer vainly drive to brave my- power;—let me but give the fignai, an& numbers wait to obey my commands.— Chufe your dediny, while yet I condefcend- to allow you the liberty of choice." A drong flafh of lightning at that mo* ment enabled Ethelwina to perceive fome- men at no great didance, and (he found,, indeed, that lhe had no alternative but to- yield her promife r and yet to refign herfelf voluntarily to fure- irremediable forrow, to» be~
Mt a creature fo wretched as the wife of St» | ver j—the thought ftruck horror to her very foul \ —and then for ever to refign the partner of her affecVions, the loved youth who had received her plighted heart—to make htm miferable—to deftroy, perhaps for ever, his all of future happinefs !— «« Ah 1" fighed (he, " have I not folemnly and willingly engaged myfelf to be only his ? yet what will that avail me now ?— Yet for thy fake, Augudine, I will fuffer," • And (he was about to declare (he would not take the oath required,, when the dying form of her mother darted on her fancy :— to be denied her lad embrace^—to be, per¬ haps, the caufe of her premature death ! ** Ah! can I be fo felfiflx as to defert my angel mother, who, diftraded at' my lofs,. will want but this additional mifery to plunge her to her eternal reft!—No i!" cried the noble Ethelwina, " whatever my after mi¬ feries may be, I will fuffer in innocence-— I will take the fatal oath. Allow me now to return to my alarmed parent, who is„ perhaps*
perhaps, acquainted with my abfence from the cadle. Promife me that you will fuffer me to remain as I am, till that diftrading hour which will deprive me of a mother's protedion ; and I will give the affurance you require. Ethelwina, with flow defpairing accent, uttered thefe words; and Leopold again drawing his fword, faid— " Swear then on this weapon, to fulfil the oath of promife required." " yNever!" cried a voice that Ethelwina feemed to have fome knowledge of; " draw, ruffian, and defend thy felf!" The form of a man in armour darted from the trees. Leopold blew a loud blad on his pendant horn ; at the fame moment Ethel¬ wina fled ; as (lie heard the fignai of purluit and the clafh of fwords, (he darted down an impervious avenue ofthe fored. A vivid flame of lightning ferved for a moment to enlighten the pitchy darknefs,. which driking through the thick boughs of the trees,, (hewed to Ethelwina many figures purfuiug
ETHELWINA. 139 purfuing her with overtaking fwiftnefs.— She quickened her pace, and flying down another avenue, concealed herfelf behind a clofe embowering thicket; for, fainting and exhauded, flie was unable to out fpeed her followers. The darknefs of the night favour¬ ed her, and (lie heard their footdeps fwiftly pafs the place that concealed her. No time was to be lod; they might foon, by the next flafh of lightning, difcover their midake ; fhe, therefore, with the velocity ofthe timid frightened hare, fprung from her thicket, and darting along another path, by her un¬ wearied fpeed foon recovered the beaten track; but all was filent, even the thunder had ceafed, and not the fmalled remains of either her defender or purfuers were to be heard of or feen. Much as flie wifhed to know whom her preferver was, no time could be lod; and (he hurried forward, and in fafety gained the outfkirts of the wood, where (he faw lights hadening towards her, which con¬ vinced her that (lie was in fecurity, and that her own people were in fearch of her. Rupert
Rupert in good time ftretched out hfe arm to receive his fainting Ladjr; for, ex¬ hauded with tenor and fatigue, and drench¬ ed with wet and ra ! n, her limbs refufed to carry her further, and (he muft have funk to the earth but for the timely aid of her people, who, alarmed at her long abfence, had been fome time iti queft of her. When fhe recovered from her fwoon, (he eager¬ ly demanded if her mother was informed of her ab r ence. Rupert anfwered in the nega¬ tive ; but the Countefs had defired to fee her, and was much worfe than (he had ever been. Ethelwina gave a hurried account of the dangers (he had been expofed to, and defired that the friendly dranger Who had refcued * her, might be fearched for. She then, re¬ gardlefs of the (hooting pains, and agonizing, trembling of her whole frame, haftened to her mother's chamber, eompofing, as much as poffible* her affrighted looks.—But ah 1 what an increafe of mifery awaited her 1 (he found her dying mother faft approaching to the
tlie hour of diflblution !^—that hour fo long defired by the Countefs, fo infinitely dreaded by Ethelwina. The Lady Urfuline was in a faint durn* ber. She placed herfelf,on her knees by the fide of the expiring Coqntefs, and laying her burning fevered foreheacj on the bed, fobbed forth bit|er tears of heart-rending agony. The Countefs awoke foon after, and feeing both Ethelwina and Emma by her bed-fide, {h§ feebly ftretched forth her arms, and took a hand of each, as they weeping kAeit befide her j and, in a low tone of voice, bade them attend to her lad injunctions— " My Ethelwina," faid (he, <« I could have wiihed, for thy fake, the droke of fate had been a little longer averted ; but 1 fub-* mtf : to the will of Heaven; and, but ff: you, my children, rather rejoice at this early period of my mifery, which takes me from , *h.Qfe follows 1 have druggted hard to en¬ dure ; ^nd let the happinefs of my opening profpects be your future confolation after I • The
The Countefs.'.-paufed from increafing weaknefs. .Ethelwina fobbed in audible tears. The Countefs, fuinmoning the laft remains of Nature's drength, faid—^ t( Ethelwina, you grieve and didurb me by this immoderate forrow;—my child, ceafe from ah ufelefs lamentation, which is offenfive to the Almighty, and deftrudive to yourfelf. Give me, my child, a promife that you will overcome this extreme fufceptibility, which, if indulged, will dedroy your future happi¬ nefs, and embitter the few remaining trip- ments of my life;—fay; will yoti ftill perfid in this overwhelming grief, and refufe me the adurarice t require to conquer it ?" Ethelwina tried to (peak, but her vemo- tions overcame her, and her lips nipved without the power of utterance; (lie took the cold hand of her mother, arid bathing it with tears, kiffed it in filence. k " I fee," continued the Gountefe <* yoti deny me the dying confolation of knowing my child would obey the laft requeft of her expiring parent. You negled the only re¬ maining^
mainirig proof of affection, which is all that is now left you to perform % and I die in the knowledge of my child's unhappi¬ nefs/' " Oh, my mother ! my bleffed mother ! your words are daggers to my heart V fighed forth Ethelwina; "I will do anything you defire—I will promife to iubdue my feelings —any thing but the mifery of forgetting you!" " My child, I am fatisfied;—a promife given at this folemn hour will, I know, have due weight on your mind, and your reafon will aflift your heart and underdanding. To forget my memory, 1 know, is not in your nature; and I will not require what may afford you, in a proper manner, a pleaflng contemplation. But now compofe your ipirits, Ethelwina, and give me a proof of your love and obedience. I have much to fay, and (hall claim your utmod attention j draw nearer, my children ;—either my eye- light feils> or the room is dark $ I fcarcely fee you. Come hither, Emma-^Ethelwina, receive,
receive from my bands this child of forrow; love her as a fifter, and be a mother to her orphan ftate ;" putting the weeping Emma into her daughter's arms, who opened them to receive her, and with fuppreffed fobs cm- braced the lovely girl, and kifled her. " And do you, my Emma," continued the Countefs, «■ be a kind companion and comforter to your fifter; fo fliall you prove a mutual happinefs to each other. And now, Ethelwina, attend to my laft injunctions." The Countefs then, in a folemn but al¬ moft exhaufted tone, charged Ethelwina never to fuffer the Lord of St. Iver to be¬ come her hufband, (hould he again renew his add redes. " I have reafons," added flie, " which muft remain in my own bread—but of fuch a nature arc they, that I folemnly conjure you never to break them, but to abide by this my laft requeft." The reafons of the Countefs were, an un¬ conquerable diflike (he had taken to her hufhand's nephew; and though, (he never acknowledged
acknowledged it, her fecret thoughts tended to confider him as tbe author of her mis¬ fortunes. " When it fliall pleafe Heaven to releafe me," added flie with increafed difficulty of fpeech," haften to the Court of Philippa; there only will you remain in fafety. Prepared for this laft hour of exidence, I had no other concern to difturb my repofe than the know¬ ledge that my children would be fecure from danger; and the illudrious con fort of your abfent guardian has gracioufly offered her protection till the Monarch's return. In the ivory cabinet you will find a fmall key of curious workmanfliip ; it belongs to the repo¬ fitory of the riches of our houfe, which now ail centre in you, Ethelwina, and is concealed in one ofthe fecret avenues of the vaults of the caftie ; Rupert alone is acquainted with the place, and in his fidelity, my child may rely for the fcrvices of a fteady friend and honcft de¬ pendant.—My ftrength is exhaufted—I hat much to fav, but utterance is denied ine. Remember, Ethelwina, the promife you vol. 1. - h have
I46 ETHELWINA. have given,—Let your truft be in Heaven, and offend not the Majefty of Divine Pro¬ vidence by fruitlefs murmurs againft his fixed decrees; but rather learn with forti¬ tude to bear an evil that is unavoidable, and------" A fudden fpafm prevented her faying more—her fpeech left her;-—(he juft reco¬ vered, and in an inarticulate found bleffed her children f and uttering, in disjointed fentence , the name of " Godfred, I come 1" in a few moments fighed out her foul to heaven. Ethelwina flood the ftiffened image of filent curelefs grief, not daring to draw her breath, left (he (hould not catch the laft founds of the now happy Urfuline ; but all was filent—her foul had fled to its Maker. Ethel v. ina liftened—but, alas! in vain—(lie fpoke not, moved not, but foon became the cold image of death. Ethelwina, in a defpairing hope^ caft her eyes to Heaven,
« She
« She is not, cannot be dead I" fhrieked (he, as (he fprung from the attendants, who would have withdrawn her, from the fad fpe&acle 5 and hurrying to the bed, (he ut¬ tered, "Mother! bleffed mother! Oh fpeak to me—look at your difiracl:ed Ethelwina I —In vain, haplefs child, do you call—(he hears you not." ' Ethelwina laid her burning lips to the cheek of the corpfe—it was cold and clam¬ my ; a piercing fhriek iffued from the ago¬ nized tortured heart of the poor mourner, and fhe fell, convulfed and didraded, upon the body of Urfuline.
e 51 CHAP.
' |*H*P , * ,l "* ll * l,l,,,l, * l * ll **** | MiiBBW* l BWB ll B
\_-JriiVl. * A,. ETHELWINA was conveyed to her chamber. The terrible (hock (he had re¬ ceived, added to the horrors ofthe evening, threw , her into a burning delirious fever, from which (he was many weeks before fhe recovered to fcnfe or life. During this period, the remains ofthe Countefs were removed to the vault of the chapel of the caftie ; it was then that the hitherto almoft unnoticed Emma difplayed the tendernefs of her young heart. She had not yet reached her fifteenth year, but (lie employed her time in attending the bed- fide of the now Countefs Ethelwina, with all the gentle kindnefs of pure affection, J£II3 _ - '- The
The fird object that Ethelwina beheld, on her waking from her lingering delirium, in which the drength of her conditution alone preferved her from the grave, was the atten¬ tive Emma, feated by her bedfide, and her hand enclofed in her own* " My gentle Emma!" faid Ethelwina, feebly j " is it indeed my fider, or am I ftill in this dream of horror ?—Is (he ! Oh is (he nd more \ —Ah ! that darting tear tells me I am awake, and alive only to mifery !—Come, lead me to my mother's chamber—let me enjoy one look* and I am reflgned." " Ethelwina, deared Ethelwina ! will you kill your poor Emma by indulging this foul- fubduing grief?—Do you forget you are my mother—fider—all?—I have none other but you—I (hall die if you defert me I— Indeed I need your love.—You remember nothing but this ufclets grief, which, in the end, will deftroy ybu. Aas! you cannot now fee the object of your Sad thoughts. You have yourieif been confined for weeks—*' H 3 « And
« And—and I (hall never more behold my angel mother," cried Ethelwina, " never more take a laft look, or imprint one laft kift on her facred form.—Cruel Emma! —could you not ftay a litilc longer ?" ** My filler, my Ethelwina," laid Emma, gently putting the hand of Ethelwina to her lips, and wetting it with her tears; *' my Ethelwina, kill me not with reproaches I do not merit; but rather rejoice that your heart has efcaped an added, lengthened mi¬ fery.—Have you, my fifter, forgotten our beloved mother's injundions ?—will you not keep your folemn promife ?" Ethehvina ftarted ; abforbed in bitter grief for her mother, fhe had indeed forgot it; but now, when fo powerfully reminded of her promife, the pleafure of, in fome degree, obeying her mother's laft requeft, made her ftruggle hard againft her feelings; and though (he felt (he could not conquer her grief, (he re¬ folved never to indulge or give it utterance} and from that day, as (he recovered iri health, fo did her mind regain its compofure. Her heart
heart dwelt, with pleafing fond regret, on her mother's memory; and when alone, then only did (he give way to the melancholy luxury of unfeen forrow. In the affectionate Emma, the Countefs found a pure, fiocere heart, devoted to love and tendernefs, and capable of receiving imprefnons of a lafting tendernefs. Months rolled away, but Ethelwina could not perfuade herfelf to quit the beloved towers of Auburne. Sometimes fhe.would lead to tlie fubject of her mother, and the two charming girls would weep in on^ an¬ other's arms, till remembering ber lad word?, they mutually fuppretfed their feelings.—- Together would Ethelwina and Emma droll through the cadle gardens, which now be¬ came the extent of their walks, as they never dared venture to the foreft. Ethelwina had one apartment in particular to which (he was more attached ; it was a fmall room budt on the higheft ftory of one of the loftied towers, and preferred by her on account of the noble prolpccts it h 4 afforded,
afforded, which having windows at every pcim, difj)!a3*ed a mod delightful romantic view of the furrounding country; and, from its height, commanded a didant per* fpedive ,if the da, and the lakes of the ad- jt*«ning county of Cumberland, whilft the lofty waving woods of the foreft, and the fcencry near it more rich and cultivated, in¬ creafed the diverfity of the many beautiful profped*. Here would Ethelwina aod Emma fpend their hour:-, fometimes in re¬ lating their mutual caufes of uneafinefs, or fir.h nnd wirti for Augudine's return. It was here thai Ethelwina, one day, propofed to prefent the portionlcfs Emma with a dower fuitable to her rank, and fuch as might make Emma feel more independent; though there were no figns of difcontent, or regret on the want of fortune by the inno¬ cent Emma, who, the moment Ethelwina had explained her generous intentions, burft into tears. *« Ah ! M cried Emma, « am I fo unhappy as to have difpleafcd my only friend, my fifter,
fifter, that thus (he wounds me with the offer of what I do not need, and know not even the ufe of ? Ah, Ethelwina ! do ycu then wi(h me to leave the hofpitable roof of Auburne ?—Am I fo wretched as to fee the alienated objeded of your love ?— Do you, indeed, no longer retain that affedion for me which has been my only hope— my only happiuefi ?" Ethelwina kiffed the cheek of the aflided girl, and begged her totee affured of her un¬ alterable love and regard for her; declaring that her meaning was to make her inde¬ pendent, and to fulfil the wiihes of her mo¬ ther, who had always declared it her inten¬ tion amply to provide for her. 46 She has more than provided for me," faid Emma, 4( for (lie bequeathed me to the care of my Ethelwina ; and to live and die with my biloved fider, is the extent of my wiflies. And fince the never-forgotten, ever- lamented day thut deprived me of my deer Arthur, I have had no other hope in life but to fpend my days at Auburne, unknown and h 5 unnoticed
unnoticed by all but its midrefs and inha¬ bitants. This unexpected revival of the memory of her lod infant brother grieved, a,iid ado- nifliad her ; and Ethelwina.afkedf^ " Do you dill rememb4^hirrj,;Emma? Js it poffible that feven yea^rslilve^not-'effaced him from your mind|^I/^dtfuprJofed you were too young when^^lt'^am'en^d event took place, dill toretl^fkny recollection of him." . * ( i/ l( . ■ # " Ah, .EiMy^m \Hhihk yb,u I (hall evefr forget him^a^jfcfo^the gentle Emma. " Thovghc^^W^Tpa^^'' added (he, cc we were : of tWW^irie agesf-born on the fame day; vye afterwards' became- playfel¬ lows, and*ve"fcne's|jno happinefs afunder; we loved each othefWth all- the innocent delight of infant affetfi^n. I love his me¬ mory ; and, though he iFloft to me forever, none other can ever fupplant him. What caufe, therefore, have I for riches ? give me but thy love, Ethelwina, and I am happy,"
With
With aftonifliment the Countefs liftened to this fhort effufion of artlefs fimplicity, de¬ livered with all the fervour of truth and fin- cerity. That Emma fhould ftill retain the remembrance of her early playfellow, and with increafing years cherifh an infantine af- feclion into a ferious paffion (if it may be fo ^.called) for an object that was loft to her at fo -very early a period, and whom, in this world, not a hope remained that fhe would ever fee- again ; that fhe fliould have ha¬ bituated herfelf to think on him, though fo young herfelf when he was \oft$ that flie was fcarce old enough to make it poflible that, after the firft violence of childifli grief, (he would ever after regret, or even recollect fuch a perfon had ever been in exiftence; ftiewed a proof of attachment, an affection fo ftrong, that Ethelwina viewed her with increafing admiration, as a being of fo fu¬ perior an order, and of fo elevated a mind, that rofe above her years, and feemed to promife fuch a (lore of excellence as might in time, under the gentle hand of friend- h 6 (hip,
ihip, be ripened from an opening bud of fweets, to a matured flower of natural per¬ fection. She caught her in her arms as (he finifhed her latter cogitations, and from this day the young but lovely Emma became the confidante of Ethel wina ; and (he freely dis¬ covered to her the adventure of the foreft ; at which Emma turned pale, and inflantly reminded the Countefs of her mother's in¬ junction, that they might remove to Court. " Oh Ethelwina I let us immediately fet out for the capital. You are not fafe here,- indeed you are not. How often have I wondered, why of late the caflle has been fb nnufually guarded ! and at the reafon you prohibited yourieif from your favourite walk! —But now all is explained ^ and, if you love me, you will haftcn to that fecurity which our angel mother provided for us." " Alas 1° faid Ethelwina, " I have often thought on this fubject; but my mind, de¬ voted to folitude and to this venerable feat, makes me ill-fuitedto eater the gay fplen- dours of a Court life. Fain would I re- a main
main here; the beloved fpot where I fird drew my breath, has a claim on my remem¬ brance and gratitude. I fickcn at the thoughts of quitting it; yet as all that is indeed left me to perform to a venerated mother's memory, is implicit obedience to her lad defires, I will forego my own wifhes, and prepare for my departure. With what reluctance I fliall leave the fcenes of all my youthful happinefs, is a truth that Heaven can witnefs! Ethelwina had, almod as foon as her re¬ covery, paid a fecret midnight vifit to the chapel, when every eye in the cadle but her own was clofed in fleep; and, at the tomb of her mother, given vent to all thofe ex¬ cruciating pangs which the lofs of a parent fo beloved had occafioned. This dangerous indulgence had been a nightly occupation; and, dretched on the grave of her mother, flie would give unreftrained fcope to that full tide of forrow for her lofs, which, with feeming compofure flie Aided in the day. She had condantlv attended, for fome nights pad,
paft, this melancholy pious duty; when on<s night as fhe was leaning over the tomb, in a paufe of a violent guft of wind, (he fancied fhe heard the clafh of a diftant clofing door. The found feemed to proceed from under her. She flarted from her kneeling podure, affrighted. She knew many of the vaults of the cadle branched out in different direc¬ tions, and fome ran under the floor of the chapel; it was impoflible that Rupert alone, who kept the keys, (hould at fo late an hour venture to vifit places fo dreary. She felt confident that die had heard the found of the door as it (hut; " Yet," faid (he, Inwardly, " might it not be occafioned by the wind's forcing its way through the dif¬ ferent avenues of the vaults ?"—In various ways (he tried to account for it; but flie felt fomething lika terror creeping over her, and her pious devotions being didurbed by the incident, fhe rofe from her knees, and kill¬ ing the marble urn that contained the heart of Urfuline, left the monument.
As
As (he paffed through the Gothic gloomy aides of the chapel, a form ruflied pad her, but was in a moment vaniflied. Her terrors now increafed, and (he haftened out of the chapel; but before (lie had arrived at its ancient porch, (he perceived, or her fancy deceived her, the finking (hade of a man defcending through the earth. The mind of Ethelwina was compofed of firm mate¬ rials ; (he had but little of the fuperflitious faith of thofe days, and (he refolved to fee the end of this alarming appearance. With an undaunted dep, though with a palpitating heart, (lie walked to that fide of the walls of the chapel that had witneffed this adonifliing phenomenon. She held her taper to the ground, to the walls, but not an opening, or even a crevice, were to be feen near the fpot where (he felt convinced (he had per¬ ceived the form or (hade of fomething de¬ fcending. Ethelwina became aflonithed and terri¬ fied, and tried in vain to account for what fhe felt fhe had not been deceived in the fight
fight of. Was it indeed a (pedlre ?—it could not be of human fubftance, for (he had not been able to difcover any outlet that could have delivered a man fo inftantaneoufly from her fight. Yet (he had no other way of reconciling it to her mind than to fuppofe her fenfes and fight muft have been deceived, and that the feeble light (he carried (not fufficient to illumine a third part of the chapel, together with the fadnefs of her own mind, and the gloomy folemnity of the place and hour), conjured ideal forms to her imagination, that even in vifion had no reality. She haftened from the chape), and re¬ joiced once more in finding herfelf fafe from terrors, which, whether real or imaginary, made fuch an inipreffion on her, as to prevent the continuation of her mournful vifits.
CHAP.
tJHI ..... i.„ . N. I.JJ1M
CHAP. X. A HE day of departure from the caftie was fixed, and the one before that was appoint¬ ed for the Countefs to receive the oath of fealty from her tenants and vaffals, who had long anxioufly waited to pay this mark of duty to their future midrefs. The day arrived, and Ethelwina was ar¬ rayed in a long folding robe of black fatin (for (lie refufed the (plendid regalia of drefs, which it had been the cudom to wear upon thefe occaiions) enlivened by a rich vandyke pf pearls, whild the flowing drapery of her mantle was clafped round her waid, and fet off her fine fliape by a treble row of the fame ornaments; her fleek white arms and fine
fine formed neck received additional beauty from the dark richnefs of her fliining habit; a fmall coronet of pearls was fixed in her hair, the gloffy ringlets of which was drawn through the points; her bracelets were clafp¬ ed with the pictures of her father and infant brother, whild a miniature of her mother hung pendant from her neck. The beauty of her perfect form was finely difplayed by the fimple grandeur of her apparel; and never did the driking features of Ethelwina look more lovely, notwith(landing the pale- nefs of her countenance, which received a more exprefiive foftnefs from her apparent melancholy.—A raifed throne was fixed in the grand hall of ftate ; the drapery was of fine black cloth, edged with a broad filver fringe, with taffels of the fame, as Ethel¬ wina did not chufe to lay afide her mourn¬ ing, and felt a diflike to ufe the rich para¬ phernalia of former times. Her mother had been dead nearly a year, and the time of mourning was expired; but Ethelwina chofe to continue her's till fhe left the cadle. Such
Such was the majedy of Ethelwina's per¬ fon, that her every movement was a grace, and difplayed more perfedly the fuperior greatnefs of her commanding beauties ;—fhe had not yet reached her nineteenth j T ear, as, with an agitated heart, (he followed the deward and ienefchal of the cadle, who came to condud her to the hall of date to receive the full honours of her illudrious houfe, whofe great fortunes and fplendid titles were folely veded in herfelf. She was led by Emma and Rupert, who each took a hand to fupport her, to the throne, through a double row of admiring people, who lined each fide of the hall to fee and pay their refpeds to their beloved young midrefs. When (lie was feated, ihe cad her eyes on all around her; but they indantly filled with tears, as quick recoliedion darted to her mind, remembering on two former occafions to have witneffed this accudomed ceremony, when her mother had filled that chair, and enjoyed thofe honorary dignities which (he herfelf would fain have never known:
164 ETHELWINA." * known : her heart felt a bitter fenfation, and t flie wifhed, if poflible, td have deferred a ceremony flie had no inclination to receive, or fpirits to" endure. A thoufand little circum¬ ftances rufhed forcibly on her thoughts, and reminded her of her adored mother, whom fhe could not at this moment refemble by difplaying her fortitude on the prefent occa¬ fion. Overcome by painful recollections, die was about to rife, and in filence retire from a fcene that excited emotions which (lie felt unable to dilguife, when Emma, who had been watching the varied changes of Ethelwina's countenance, foftly whifpered in her ear— " Remember." The word feemed to contain the power of a talifman, and to Ethelwina had a double meaning ; whild the tone of Emma's voice,' as (he uttered the word * £ Remember," founded fo like that of her fcrother, that Ethelwina darted, and almod fancied it was Augudine whifpering again in her ear, as he did when he left the cadle— Remember i— 1 and
and (he became outwardly calm, and re¬ folved to go through a form that was fo ne¬ ceflary to her own future welfare. She arofe from her feat with her accudomed eafe, and in forcible language gracioufly thanked her people for their continued fidelity, defiring them to date with freedom all their griev¬ ances, and to rely on a full redrefs. The Countefs then (eating herfelf, Rupert and the fenefchal admimdered the oath of fealty fingly to all the tenants and vaffals, who, one by one, kneeling at the foot of the throne, vowed to prove themfelves the de¬ fenders of their Lady, (hould, at any future period, their aid be neceflary. The ceremony ended, Ethelwina paffed through the double row of her people, fpeak¬ ing to and encouraging the timid, and en¬ dearing herfelf to their hearts; at the fame time drawing her thoughts from melancholy occupations. She then proceeded to the banquet-room, followed by all the tenants and vaffals in re¬ fpedful filence. Every heart round the domain
domain of Auburne was that day made happy, and with fober gladnefs they partook of the plentiful fead. The long oaken tables were loaded with the choiced profufion of ancient Engiifti hofpitality ; the mindrels and harpers ofthe cadle played the warlike dories of former times, and the ear was delighted, as well as the tade;—and, as each jolly peafant finiflied his hearty meal, upon removing his plate, he difcovered a fmall paper, on which was wrote a full acquittal of his year's rent, which he had honeftly laboured to procure, and brought with him on this feftive day to pay into the fteward's hands. With furprife he turned to his neighbour to fliew his good fortune, and extol his young midrefs ; who, on removing his plate, found the fame. This joyful circumdance was foon difcovered to be general, and above a hundred hearts made happy by this unlooked- for bounty. Ethelwina, who had formed this benevo¬ lent plan, and tranfmitted it to Rupert for the
ETHELWINA. l6/' the fulfilment of it, daid at the head of the table to witnefs the delight which fo pleafing a furprife mud excite, till the loud echoes of their grateful hearts became painful to her; when, on rifing from her chair, their loud clamours ceafing in an indant, flie dretched forth her arms as fhe dood, and, with un¬ common' tendernefs of voice and manner, pronounced— " God blefs you all!" and diredly re- t tired from the hall. They watched her receding form (as fhe afcended the grand daircafe, till the clofing door of the gallery (hut her from their view) with reverential awe ; but the moment (he was out of fight, they all with one affenting voice returned her lad fentence fourfold on herfelf, and drank to the health of their be¬ loved Lady, whom they all fwore to proted to the lad drop of their blood. The merriment and rpvelry, the fong, the . dance, and every other emblem of happy conviviality then went on, and at ten they all retired ; and, though not inebriated, yet lively,
lively, and filled with the good cheer of the caftie. Ten was not an early hour in thole days, and they departed fully fatisfied with the length of their amufement, and blefling the generofity of their beloved Lady. The caftie gates clofed for the night ; and ih another hour all the inhabitants were buried in fleep—all but Ethelwina, who could not confent to leave the caftie without paying a laft farewel vifit to her mother's tomb. Taking off fome of her ornaments, and throwing a loofe wrapping cloak over her, (he defcendecl the dairs, and eroding the now vacant halls, proceeded- to the chapel, af the door of which (lie dopped, hefitating whether to enter; and now, for the firft time, remembering the alarm fhe had fuffered on her laft vifit, a kind of (ink¬ ing dread at her heart made her at firft a coward, and (lie was on the point of turning back: but (he thought it a weaknefs to in r dulge fuch idle fears, that might have been unfounded, and again (lie prepared to pufli open the door;—fpite of her refolution, an inward
inward dread dole over her, and only the defire to behold the tomb once more, pre¬ vented her from turning back. At laft (he entered, and with fcrutinizing eyes cad a look of examination around her; and as fhe-chapel clock tolled the hour of midnight, flie reached the facred repofitory of her mother's allies; her forrowing mind receiving an increafe of grief from the necef- fity of leaving the caftie, and a ceffation of thofe pious but dreadful indulgences. So accudomed had (he made herfelf to thefe vifits, that, in the delirium of her forrow, die would fancy her mother ftill living, and (though die anfwered not), heard the com¬ plaints which, with unufual forrow, (lie this night poured from her heart. In this fad manner the hour paffed, and again the difmal bell tolled one* The i ncreaf- mg dorm without warned her to depart; and, killing the cold marble, (lie arofe half up on » her knees, and dretched forth her arms in the act of pronouncing a blefling, when- horrible, unexpected (enfadon—fhe felt vol. 1. 1 them
them both powerfully grafped by cold clam¬ my hands '.—Stifled with horror, (he ilowly turned her eyes, as with terror they threaten* cd to (hoot from their lockets, to the forms of two grim objects who detained her; and the next moment the baleful Leopold de St. Iver flood before her. Her very foul died within her ;—the time, the place, the horrible furprifc froze her very life's blood, and (he fell, convulfed, to the earth,unable to give utterance to the draggling fliriek that tortured nature fent forth. But who fliall defcribe her added mifery, when, on opening her eyes, (lie found her- felf in the altar of the chapel, fupported by Leopold, and Father Hubert, the Prieftof Auburne Caftie, fin idling the laft prayer and blefling of the marriage ceremony I Unable to (peak, too weak to ftir, and ftiifened with terror and furprife, (he faw the facred book clofe, and herfelf the wife of Leopold, who, cafting bis arms round her, (aid—* " Now yoti are irrevocably mine." As
As if a ferpent had dung her, Ethelwina darted from his arms, and only then was able tc comprehend tjie extent of her mifery. " Ah, God of mercy 1" cried (he, " where am I ?—am I, indeed, the loathed, hateful being they tell me £—Impoflible— 'tis all a forgery !—Leopold, beware; for here, on my knees, I difavow this unlawful ad;—you have taken advantage of my in¬ fenfible ftate. But remember, here in the houfe of God, I declare myfelf free # this is but a mockery, and no law can, nor any power on earth ever fhall, compel me to acknow¬ ledge a marriage, at which my own voice has never affcnted." *' Lady," cried the frowning Leopold, " you deceive yourfelf; oehold it is by your own Prieft the ceremony has been per¬ formed ; he is devoted to my fcrvices ; you have here no witnefs who can bear teftimony againd me; refled in time, and rather fub¬ mit to a fate indiffoluble, and which to druggie againd, will but draw a hufband's anger on you. But to fatisfy your ferupu- 1 2 lous
lous delicacy, I am here willing to fuffer the ceremony again to be performed, provided you confent i^nftantly to own me for your hufband, ar/cl proclaim" it among your people." / " Rather let me fink into the wide-ex¬ tended earth, whofe yawning bowels will open to enclofe me, or bid me caft myfelf into the burning flames a facred martyr, than live the wretch you dare fuppofe me; and with tranfport I would do it."—And (lie approached the altar, and throwing herfelf on her knees, and ftretching her hands and eyes to heaven, (he continued—" God of juftice! hear and regider my folemn vow, which is firmly and irrevocably to abide, let whatever ill oveitake me, to this foul-bind¬ ing oath, which here, at thy facred altar, I make before thee :—At thy throne, t)h Omnipotent Power! I /wear never to ac¬ knowledge Or receive this man as my huf¬ band—never to enter with hirn into the facred order of thy high ordination—never to fuffer the holy marriage ceremony to pafs my
lips, or to profane thy facred houfe by weak¬ ly owning myfelf a wife, to fave my felf from prefent horrors. In the face of Heaven I declare myfelf abfolved from any binding rite which, during my infenfibility, may have been performed. Again I [wear, fuch fa- crilegiou.s forms as may have been forced on me, never (hall be acknowledged ; and when 1 fuffer this man to call me wife, to preferve myfelf from greater ill, may the lightnings of thy anger ftrike dead the perjured wretch \ before thee !—Attefting angels, witnefs and record my folemn indiffoluble vow, which, from my foul, I fwear to keep—fo help me, Heaven 1" As (he finifljed her irrevocable oath, (he took the facred volume, and fervently preffed her lips upon it. No weak or womanifli fears had,prevented Ethelwina from going through ber great engagement with the, firm dignity which tl\e uncommonnefs of the oc¬ cafion demanded ; and (he fpoke in a firm, untrembling, audible voice, which plainly die wed, that her very heart went jointly with i J her
Ker vow, which having .finiflied, (lie took the ring, the fplendid brilliant that had been forced on her finger, and threw it with violence to the ground, and placing her foot on it, cruflied it to atoms. The rage and affonifliment of Leopold were extreme and violent, as, unable from furprife to interrupt her, he had liflened to a vow fo blading to all his ambitious and future profpeds. It is almod needlefs to lay, it was not the perfon of Ethelwina alone that engaged his pretended affedions, but her fortunes, which, from being fole inhe-- riter of both her parents, were immenfe; and though the beauty of Ethelwina fafci¬ nated his vitious tade, yet her large do¬ mains aud fplendid titles were the principal inducement for his cruel proceedings. It was the hope of amending his own ruined circumdances by this fuperior marriage, that for years had engroffed his attention; and, with impatient eagernefs, he waited for the hour when he might be able to gratify his moft avaricious defires. The rejedfons he had
ftad met with filled his defigning foul with many prqjeds, and an extorted oath vvas the only one that feemed to promile fuccefs; —and he hadened to Auburne, concealing himfelf in the fored, and watching for his prey till he had it in his power, and then he fancied himfelf fure of his purpofes; but, baffled in this by an unknown hand, he began to defpair. The cadle was too well guarded to enter by furprife, which, had it been otherwife, would have produced no¬ thing in his favour, as Ethelwina, being a ward of the crown, would have made fuch open violence dangerous and punifhable. He dill laid concealed in the fored, hoping, after a time, that Ethelwina might again walk there ; but thereagain he was dif¬ appointed. Accident, in one of his evening rambles, introduced him to the Pried who performed religious worfliip in the cadle. Unhappily for Ethelwina, fhe had lately loll the good Father who formerly filled that offiee at Auburne, and the prefent was a ftranger, and a villain, who, for the bribe, 14. of
of gold, fold the peace of his benefactrefs, who had, though a dranger, generoufly taken him to 4ier own hofpitable roof, when, a month or two before the prefent time, he had abufed her ear with a falfe tale that ex¬ cited her compaflion ; and readily was he permitted to remain in an office from which he had been exploded for his irregularities and bafe conduct in the holy Convent where he was formerly a brother of the Order, but difmifftd by the Society, from the known vvickednefs of his life and manners. Ethel¬ wina, too open to the voice of diftrefs, and unfufpecting of the villain (he foftered, be¬ came the victim of her own pure benevo¬ lence. A few moments' converfation with the Friar ferved to difcover, to the penetrating Leopold, that he was a heart after his own, and as capable as himfelf of any act of treachery. It was agreed that Leopold fhould fearch the vaults of the caftie for the repofitory of its riches; and when found, the Prieft was to receive a full reward for his
his delinquency to his too credulous mif¬ trefs. It was for this purpofe he entered the va^jl-s of the cadle by a fecret avenue. Hither the gloomy defigning St. Iver repair¬ ed ; but in vain fearched for what, as yet, he had never been able to find. Whild wandering from vault to vault in maddened difappointment, he defcried a flight of narrow fteps, and at their head a fmall flat door h\xcd in the ceiling;—thefe he afcended, the door gave way to his touch, and he found himfelf in the chapel of Auburne. A diftant glimmer of light dartled him, and he flowly approached the object of his diabolical defigns, who had paid lier ac¬ cudomed vifit to the tomb- It was then that the black project of this night was formed ; and, but that he was unprepared, Ethelwina would have fooner experienced her prefent horror. His peo¬ ple were foon inftructed in the enterprife, and for feveral nights they concealed them¬ felves in the chapel; but, as flie came not, it was fuppofed that Ethelwina had fern fome- * 5 thing
thing to alarm her, and, fpite of his caution, Leopold concluded fhe had per¬ ceived him at the time he made the difco very of her midnight occupations. But when he learned from the Friar that but an¬ other opportunity remained of her being fafely in his power, he refolved to brave every dan* ger, and enter her chamber in the night, and by ftifling her cries, carry her to a place more fuitable to his defigns : for this purpofe he proceeded to the chapel with all his people, and, beyond his hopes, beheld the object: of his bafenefs completely in his power.— Regardlefs of the fan&ity of the place, the folemnity of the hour, or the pious but miftaken offices of the afflided victim, which ought to have fecured her from the violence Of his cruelty, he dragged hex fenfelefs to the altar, without one fpark of remorfe or compaOion. He bade the treacherous Monk perform the ceremony, rather rejoicing that, by her infenfibility, it prevented all kind of refiftance; and he thought the knowledge of her then fituation would make her mojre readily
and that, for her own fake, (lie would allow the illegal manner of the aft to pafs as it was, and comply with all his defires. What, therefore, was the fury and rage of his envenomed heart, when, by the firm and folemn oath (he had taken, he was for ever aud entirely excluded from all poffibi¬ iity of enjoying the accomplifhment of his foaring hopes ! Had Ethelwina been any other than a ward of the Crown, he might with eafe have forced her to compliance, and feized on the riches which, as her hufband, he would then have a right to claim ; but now fuch an event would never take place. The marriage he knew v\as illegal, ai Ethelwina was quite infenfiblc during, fhe whole ceremony ; and htr. guardians would refiife him every claim to either herfelf and fortune without her own free confent. Ethelwina, by the undaunted vow (he had taken, had rendered that abortive ; and thus the fchemes and projects of years were, by the magnanimity of the Countefs, crulhed 16 to
to nothing. , But goading revenge, the lead¬ ing paflion of his dark heart, prompted him to yet greater cruelty; and he refolved to try if the power of all the mifery he could inflid would not in the end obtain his pur¬ pofe. Seizing her hand, as fhe had juft rofe from her knees, he faid— " You have now pronounced your owii doom, and cannot exped I fliould fliew either mercy or forbearance to one who de¬ nies every thing to me. Prepare to en¬ counter thofe fufferings which, in the Caflle of Iver, awaits you." Ethelwina Ihuddered, but refolved to re¬ main filent; as fhe thought that, in croft¬ ing the halls of the caftie, a faint call would eafily awaken her people, if they were not already didurbed. She was led to the cavity of the vaults; the trap-door dood open, and one moment fufficed to convince her of her midake, and the horrible dangers of her fituation, She darted back, and fhrieked aloud for help. j *« Your
" Your cry is vain," faid the wretch ; " for at a didance your people repofe in the arms of a Death's fleep. Behold your fate— return to the altar, and recal your rafh vow ; and, before it is too late, you may yet fave yourfelf." u Lead me to my fate 1" cried Ethelwina, in all the agony of defpair. *' You refufe then," added he, " to re¬ cal your oath; but will become the voluntary inflicter of all your future mifery ?" u I have fworn,"" continued tlie in a fink¬ ing, low, but firm tone of voice; " I am refigned to my dediny—I fubmit to fuffer what I cannot avoid—I truft in the mercy of a protecting Providence !" Thefe words were uttered but feebly, and fhe was fainting, when Leopold faid— " Then be my utmofl vengeance thy fu¬ ture puniflnncnt and portion !*' and turning fiercely to Ruthmer, his chief attendant, and the people that followed him| he added, " Bear her through the vaults to the tortures that await her!" Ethelwina
Ethelwina funk into the arms of her ter¬ rifying guards, and only retained jud life enough to hear the found of a voice that founded like Augudine's, who at that mo¬ ment fprung with drawn fword from the aperture ofthe vaults, faying, as he entered— « He that paffes mud firft hew his way through my body 1—Die, traitor !" added the dranger,.as he aimed a ftroke at Leopold; but in a moment he was furrounded by numbers. Bravely he fought; he was but one againft a hod of foes. Vanquilhed, and covered with wounds, he fell to the earth, breathlefs and dead. Ethelwina's eyes, though glazed in death, and almod clofed, ftill purfued her defender till he fell; and then, with a deep foul-rending figh, (lie became alike infen¬ fible to all that paffed around her. Motionlefs, and in the filence of Death's image, die vvas conveyed down the vaults; her deli ite limbs held in the ftrong grafp of two ferocious looking ruffians, and thus borne along the dreary caverns ofthe earth, CHAP*
CHAP. XI. JilrfTHELWINA, on recovering her fenfes, found herfelf in the fored; and after being carried in filence from all poffible view of the cadle, fhe was placed in a fmall clofe vehi¬ cle, whilft the people of Leopold mounted their deeds, and rode by her fide : and, unmolefted by the company of any one but her own heart-rending reflections, they hur¬ ried her through the fored. Having foon gained its extremity, they purfued their way over a wide-extended heath, till towards morning they again entered the fliades of a venerable wood. Sad and bitter were the retrofpects ofthe forlorn Ethelwina; (lie had retained her fenfes
fenfes to be a witnefs of the fall of Auguft tine (for (lie felt affured it was him), and this excruciating mifery was added to her other fufferings. She dared not hope that he had efcaped with life; furrounded as he was by numbers, whofe fwords were all point¬ ed at his bread, it was impombie to hope he lived ; —and flie paffed the dreary hours of her melancholy journey in bitter felf-accufing regrets, as being the caufe of his death ; and refleding, and endeavouring to difcover the reafons o'f his fo extraordinary appearance in fuch a place at fuch an hour, and his being fo unexpededly from the army. It was too evident that his arrival at Auburne was un¬ known to her people as well as herfelf; but by what means did he gain admiffion to tlie vaults and to the chapel ? It was plain he was unacquainted with the dreadful proceed¬ ings of Leopold till he witneffed them; for fhe imagined if he had had any knowledge of what dangers fhe was expofed to, he would have come better prepared for her re¬ leafe, which coukl only be accompliflied by a fu-
a fuperiority of numbers. It now druck her that the deliverer fhe had found in the fored adventure, nearly a year ago, and Augudine, were one and the fame perfon ; but if fb, why had he fo long concealed himfelf? What occurrences could have happened that ihould have prevented him from coming to the cadle, and acknowledging himfelf as her pre- ferver. She reverted to the night when (he was expofed to the dangers that in the fored encompaffed her. " If," faid (he, as fhe druggled to fubdue her tears, <* if Augudine was my refeuer, why fhould he negled to pay his vifit where love and affedion ought to have quickened his deps ? or for what purpofe had he left the field of diftant war, when its ending was not expeded, or likely to happen, and, in private, lurk about the fecret haunts of the foreft ?. A myftery feemed to hang over the condud of Auguftine, which die tried in vain to unravel; and at one moment fhe almoft
almod doubted the poffibiiity of what her eyes and ears had feen and heard. Ethelwina had not feen his face, for he was in a moment furrounded, and almod clofed from her fight; yet, if it really was him, from what incomprehenfible purpofe had he, in thedead hour of midnight, entered, through a concealed way, the chapel of the caftie ? How could fhe reconcile thefe feemingly dark, myderious, and fufpicious circum- dances, to the open conduct of the gene¬ rous minded, noble Augudine ? but if it v/as not the loved companion of her infancy, it was a friend, who fuffered for, and meant to ferve her; and flie felt companion, whe¬ ther it was or was not Augudine. " Yet, alas!" faid (he, "it was furely him; though 1 was nearly infenfible, my ears could not deceive me; the tones of his manly, well-remembered voice dwell on my mind, ,f and (he (lied another torrent of tears at the conviction ;—whild the only con¬ foling hope that was left her, was in the thought that the hade of the ruffians to quit the
the chapel might have prevented them from repeating their drokes on a fallen, refidlefs foe; or that, fuppofing him dead, they might have left the body, which could no longer impede their prqjeds, without add¬ ing to the wounds they had already inflid¬ ed. ' Nothing remained to hope, but that he might have fallen from lofs of blood and drength, and, by timely affidance, might be recovered from the grafp of death. But Ethelwina refleded that many hours mud pafs before the dreadful fituation of Auguf¬ tine would be difcovered. Her agony and impatience increafed ; but it was ufelefs, and die felt how powerfully fhe was prevented from adminidering aid to the dying, or perhaps dead, gallant youth, and fhe had no other alleviation to the tortures of her mind, than a fincere trud on the mercy of Providence. Such were the fad and defpairing. medi¬ tations of her mind as flie journied though the venerable fored, whofe filent glooms and fombre fliadcd darknefs added to the for- rowful
rowful reflections of the weeping mourner. Towards noon they cleared themfelves of the woods, and then travelled over a rugged, rocky track of mountainous country, which began upon an afcent, and continued for many a lengthened fpace. No traveller met the ouldretchcd longing eye, or helped for a moment to enliven the dreary profpects. As Ethelwina cad her dimmed fight through the carriage window, fhe beheld a view ofthe towns and cities in Wales; but they laid fome of them iu the vales and low lands, and not'a houfe or a hut was to be perceived ih the barren track of dupendous mountains which the travellers journied over, nor ever did the carriage appear within miles of a town or village;—and it feemed that the dangerous impaffable ways they purfued were chofen, the better to prevent the wretched captive from exciting the compafiion of thofe towns, through which it would have been fafer to have travelled, than over the prefent road they were going.
They
They ftill continued their way over deeps and rugged high mountains, raifed in du* pendous fublimity above the furface of the lower earth, whofe tremendous height fome¬ times appalled Ethelwina with fear and dread expectancy of being in a moment dallied to inftant death. The dangers of her jour¬ ney increafed ; a wonderful chain of high mountains was now afcended, their almoft perpendicular fides and narrow tops rifing in pointed fharpnefs to the (kies; over whofe fummitsdid the affrighted Ethelwina pafs, with horrible feniations that cannot be defcribed, and which deprived her of all power of thinking on any other fubject than the impending dangers of her fituation ; as lhe was in momentary dread of being preci¬ pitated over the narrow lides ofthe caufeway, which in breadth admitted only a carriage to pafs, -and was undefended by any wall or day on either (ide, to fecure the trembling paifenger from falling to his lure grave. Ethelwina's terrors became (b great, that flie would even have fued on her knees for permiflion
permiflion to have defcended the carriage, and walked, as the people of Leopold had al¬ ready done ; but (he feared to call, led the found of her voice might alarm and frighten the mules, and with clofed eyes (lie waited to receive that fate which (he confidered as inevitable;—but on feeling the carriage gra¬ dually defcending, (he opened her eyes, and faw with joy they had paffed the tremendous caufeway. As fhe cad her fight forward, fhe perceived a large white fpeck, illumined by the rays of the fun ; but it was at fuch an immenfe didance, that it received no form, and only appeared a huge mafs of fliapelefs matter. - The winding ofthe road being defcended, they entered a lower region of mountains, though ftill at a great didance from the fur¬ face of the earth. Ethelwina again beheld herfelf in comparative fafety; the views, though not fo tremendous, were equally varied, and dazzled the eye when it dared looked down from its towering cloudy height to the vales below* A fhort
A fliort time afterwards, Ethelwina had approached fo much nearer to the mafs be¬ fore mentioned, that (lie was now able plain¬ ly to fee it in its real fliape, which was fome huge towers; and as nearer and nearer (he drew toward them, flie found they belonged to an immenfe cadle, feated in proud defy¬ ing majedy on the brow of a lofty dupendous height, which appearing to touch the clouds, feemed more like a vaft vifion on the air than a human habitation ; it w;as furrounded by many high towers, whofe huge bulwarks and flanked buttreffes almoft feemed to equal in drength the rock on which it dood. Ethelwina had long been convinced (he was travelling over the mountains in Wales, and with a finking heart flie concluded that the dupendous heap of buildings before her was •Iver Cadle, on which fhe fixed an agonized look of defpair; then cad her eyes, imploring, up ro Heaven, in filent hopelefs fupplication. The mountain, on which the cadle dood, rofe perpendicular from a vale, and (bared fuperior to the furrounding heights, though uncon-
unconnected whatever with any; it ftood, as it were, proudly unfupported and unchained, if ihe expreffion may be allowed, by any oftts companions, in a wide-extended amphi¬ theatre of lofty mountains; at a narrow nook of which it had its fource, and towered in grand fublimity from the earth to a level with the other rugged deeps; or rather let ;us fuppofe, that when the fliapelefs mafs of chaos, at the great bidding of Nature's God, took the beautiful forms of creation, this huge immenfity of rock was cleft afun¬ der from its kindred mountains ; but a fmall fpace was left in the divifion, which received the foaming torrents that daflied from their lofty precipices, and formed a river in the deep impaffable gulph which ran round three fides of the bafe of the mountain. As Ethelwina defcended from the heights, (he had a more fpacious, uncondrained view ofthe cadle : the fides of the mountain, on which it dood were perpendicular to the top ; £he caftie feemed ina^perfect ftate of jqiau\; all, except the jponderous large . - northern
northern tower, which, daridingunconned- ed and unfupported by any building near it, feemed tottering and crumbling to decay. It was of a fize fuperior to the other towers—• its Jofty head, rearing to the fkies, feemed to out-top the tailed point of the highed pre¬ cipice ; but its gigantic battlements were terribly bent, and leaning in threatening anger, as if it would fpeedily tumble from ifs airy high dation to the fathomlefs abyfs which it dood over. ' As the carriage wound down the fides of the precipices, it croffed the amphitheatre, and dopped at the front fide of the moun¬ tain of Iver. Ethelwina perceived, as the horn ceafed founding, a part of the rock give way, and fhe was conduded into the mountain throuo-h a fmall aperture, which clofing on the indant, (hut her from every hope of help or pity. An iron door was then opened, and a flight of deps prefented themfelves, up which fhe was led ; another iron door was unfaffened, and admitted them to another dill more nu- • vo *" i* k merable
merable fliglit of deep dairs, which were cut out of the folid rock. Ethelwina was forcibly led up thefe, and as (lie reached an¬ other gate, which, as fhe entered,- clofed upon her, fhe beheld herfelf a prifoner. Another dill narrower, and more deep quantity of deps prefented themfelves, and it was a work of time to afcend to the top ; fhe at laft, weary, depreffed, exhaufted, and defpairing, gained the fummit, where, on a wide extenfive area before the caftie ram- parts, ftood Leopold ; his dark and gloomy foul pleafed by the triumphant gratification of his remorfelefs and fecure revenge. With all the mockery of pretended love, he welcomed her to her own caftie. . " This, this is the extent of your future liberty," faid he ; " here will the conquer¬ ing Edward feek for his ward, but vain will be his fearch. The moft powerful cannot enter here but with my permiffion, nor fhall any one /eleafe you from the irrevocable doom which here you will fuffer.
3
Ethelwina
Ethelwina fixed her eyes in piercing feve- rity upon him, as (lie faid— '* Lead me to my dungeon; I am pre¬ pared for every ill.—A foul of virtue trem¬ bles not at the inflidions of tyrannic cruelty. Even this moment, the bittereft of my life, is peace to me, compared to the feelings of a guilty confcience.—I am in the hands of Heaven, and to its all-wife diredion fub- miflively I bow*—The power of judice, when dealt by the never-erring hand of unfeen Majedy, can in one moment crufh to the earth this proud a.die, and fink the foundations ofthe rock itfelf into atoms ; fo can that fame jud hand .releafe me, and render powerlefs your vain opprefling tor¬ tures." Leopold felt the full force of virtue, as (lie, with outflretched arms and upraifed eyes, and in all the firm reliance on the Deity which her words contained, uttered her laft fentence. With adonifhment he beheld the fortitude of her mind, * which not even the near approach to mifery could weaken. k 2 Gloomv,
Gloomy, diffatisfied, and at war with his paflions, he now in filence took the refidlefs hand of Ethelwina, and conducted her to the extended gates as widely they had flown open to enclofe the haplefs captive, and gave them admiffion into the courts of the cadle, and from thence to the grand hall of entrance. The courage of Ethelwina dill fudained her, refolved as fhe was not to (hew the lead figns of fear. The hall, like the exterior, was of im- menfe fize, but dark, gloomy, and dreary, lighted only by one large Gothic window fixed at the further end, the glafs of which was fo flained, that it excluded much of the light of heaven from entering through the girted panes of the cafement. She was conducted into a large oak par¬ lour, the wainfcoted walls black with age, and the furniture, though magnificent, fail¬ ing to decay, and worm-eaten. Ethelwina,
n Ethelwina, in filence, fat down on the fird chair (lie met; for fick, as well from bodily infirmity as from mental anguifli, (he had not drength to fupport herfelf.—Leopold paced the chamber deep in thought, fome¬ times cading glances of anger at th? haplefs Countefs; and at lad approaching her, as fhe reded her weary frame upon the chair, he faid— «« You already begin to feel the terrible effed of your obdinate adherence to an ufe¬ lefs vow. In pity to your fex, I condefcend to forget what is paffed; if you will recal you|^ oath, and acknowledge our marriage, I will willingly condud you from this place.— Take till to-morrow to confider on my pro¬ pofal ;—but be wife, and no longer expofe yourfelf to fruitlefs differing, which will avail you nothing.—Refled, it is now for the laft time in your power to free yourfelf, or to re¬ main here for ever.' He rang the bell without giving her time to anfwer; the condudrefs of the cadle k 3 imme-
immediately entered, and was ordered to lead her Lady to her chamber. Ethelwina checked the riflng (corn and indignation of her heart; and fummoning the laft remains of her ftrength to her aid, lhe rofe from her feat and energetically faid— " My Lord, your propofal demands from me not a moment's confideration ; it would be an infult to my reafon and to my heart, could I hefitate one moment what anfwer to return ypu.—My Lord of St. Iver, I here fledlare you have no power whatever over my mind or my actions—both are at ray own free command, unconquerable 5 for the lafttio:e, I again folemnly declare, I will not recal my oath, or even wifh it reeaHed.^—I; am your prifoner, I am in your power % but my will is at my own difpofal, and (hall ever remain fo,—I am prepared for all the refined torments you can inflict, and will fubmit to a dediny, that no means but thofe of dif- honour can avert. You now knowmy de- cifion on this fubjed—it is fixed irrevocably to
to endure all that malice and revengeful cruelty can perform on my unprotected head; but never to recede froman oath that I have not power to withdraw, and which has my own free confent and decided approbation, let whatever ill overtake me.'* ' She then left the room * and, as the door clofed, fhe heard Leopold ftamp his foot in fury, and utter fome dreadful threats arid horrible execrations.
* >
m
^Jff^ K4 CHAP*
CHAP. XII. JtiiTHELWINA was conducted through the gloomy hall up to the great ftaircafe f having afcended the latter, (he proceeded ^through the winding galleries of Gothic heavy fretwork down feveral arched paflages, till the conductrefs unlocked a heavy door, which admitted them to a large, dreary, for¬ lorn chamber, melancholy and folitary in the extreme. " This is your apartment, my Lady," faid the conductrefs, in a harfh voice; " it has not been flept in, nor opened, for thefe eight or nine years 5 but, if your Ladylhip chufes a fire, it (hail be lighted/'
" No," anfwered Ethelwina, " not to¬ night ;—I am ill and weary, and wifh to re¬ tire indantly to bed." Ethelwina had looked in the face of the condudrefs; but nothing like pity or com¬ pafiion was portrayed on the harfli counte¬ nance and unexpreflive lines of a face, that (hewed a faithful reprefentative of a wicked heart, capable to help and partake in every ad of villany. Ethelwina, at the fird glance, drew her eyes in difgud from an objed, whofe bold and infolent demeanour fridit- o ened her, and (lie waved her hand for her to leave the chamber. " If your Ladyfliip (hould be alarmed by any noifcs in the night," laid the woman, with undaunted affurance, * c you have only to walk through the padliges, crofs the long galleries/and on the right-hand fide of the great daircafe is my Lord's chamber;—he will proted you from all alarms; and indeed it is fit that a hufband fliould do fo.—-There is my hufband, Ruthmer------"
** Leave the room!" faid Ethelwina, with that dignity of command in her manner, that forced almoft inftant obedience; and - Agatha departed, uttering fome infolent murmurs. Ethelwina heard the door lock after her, and felt that indeed (he was a prifoner, and in the power of wretches from whom fhe muft not hope for the fmalleft particle of pity. She gave a bitter figh to the memory of her paft fecurity under her own hofpitable roof; but here, alas! (he had every danger, every infult to dread/ Weary and exhaufted, (he approached the further end of the room, where dood a high raifed canopied bed of more than common magnificence; though it had feen its bed days, and was much damaged and ruined by damps and difufe, yet dill it retained fufficient emblems of its pad fplendour, to (hew what it oncehad been. It was of dark green dama(k fatin, richly inlaid with gold, and the hangy ings deeply fringed by a tarniflied gold lace; embel-
embelliflied with a high-wrought cornice of gilded fret work, but that, like the hangings, had loft its once proud glittering ornaments, which hung broken and difcoloured in tat¬ ters, the melancholy remainder of decayed greatnefs.j the room had but one fmall win¬ dow, which, from the immenfe flze of the chamber, gave it a mod dreary and unfocial afpect. As foon as the woman had left the apart¬ ment, Ethelwina began an examination of her forlorn prifon ; the walls were of dark wainfcot, carved in the ancient tafte, with darting prominent figures, that told the' dories of many a bloody fcene. As tlie fad captive walked round her room, (he difcovered a fmall door, which on open¬ ing, led to a lktle chamber built in a round tower j the window was high, and, as (h§ dood, affordecl no prolpect; the walls were lined with a dark tapedry, but almoft de¬ cayed; nothing further ftruck her view, and flie again clofed the door.
Returning to her own room, flic exanvned the principal door, and was pleafed to find it had ftrong fadenings on the infide ; but they had ruded for want of ufe, and it was a difficult tafk to draw them into their holds : this (lie at lad accompliflied ; and now once more (he went to her gloomy couch, where fhe threw her exhauded frame upon the bed, and, wearied and tired, funk to reft. But her dreams were thole of horror, and flie ftarted from her fleep; her eyes wildly purfuing fome fancied objed, which her dreams had prefented to her difordered mind. Sometimes (lie awoke, expeding to behold herfelf furrounded by ruffians; at another time fhe fancied fighs and groans founded on the ftillnefs of the night, till at lad wearied Nature threwlier into a calm lepofe, from vvhich flie arofe revived and in¬ vigorated ; and though her chamber retained by day the drearinefs of gloomy horrcr it had appeared in the night before, yet (he felt more at eafe when, with returning morn, fhe
(lie was able to fhake off the fatigues and terrors of the night. Agatha foon after entered her chamber, and afked her if fhe had fLpt quiet, and had not been didurbed in the i/ight. Ethelwina (imply aniwered, a No ;'* tor (he felt an in- furmountable diflike to enter into conver- fation with the woman, who, on the fird fight, had fhocked and difguded her. " Well," added Agatha, li that is ex¬ traordinary. The lad perlbn who flept in that bed, died in it ; M and flie laid an em¬ phatic dreis upon the words died in it. " it has never been flept in fince," continued (lie, " except by my hufband Ruthmer, who one night, (ome years ago, midook his way, and entered this'chamber indead of his own; but he dia not remain here an hour. Ah, by St. David ! I fliall never forget the fright¬ ened wretch as he ran into my chamber, begging Heaven's mercy to fave him from the tremendous apparition that haunted the room. Never (ince that hour has it been opened 5 and I am furprifed, Lady,
Lady, that you look fo calm ; for certainly, had you witneffed what has here been feen, you would not be fo compofed as you now appear. But, as I tell Ruthmer, it was only his fancy that conjured up the form of the Chevalier that in this very apartment was confined and ------ But, Lord, how I for¬ get ! there is my Lord waiting all this time for your Ladylhip to take breakfaft; fo, if you pleafe, I will condud you to the oak parlour; for you cannot go alone, and might, if you did, midake your way, and perhaps go to my hufband's chamber inftead of your own/* " Peace !" cried Ethelwina, " and leave the room. Say to your Lord, I (hall not quit this apartment. 1 ' The woman declared (he dared not take fuch a meffage ; but Ethelwina firmly and angrily perfifted, and Agatha left the cham¬ ber, returning in an hour after with refrefiV ments, and a fmall trunk containing her clothes; a circumftance that Ethelwina wondered at, as, upon opening it, fhe found
found they were really fuch; and, by the manner in which they were thrown into the ched, it was obvious that the plans of Leopold had been projeded with furety and determined fuccefs; whild the clothes, being confidered by him as an objed of defign, were melancholy proofs that no hopes could be entertained of her ever quitting her dreadful fituation - and, by this circum¬ dance, Ethelwina judged that Leopold meant it as a further confirmation of his defigns, and to convince her how lit tie die had to exped from his generofity or his pity. Without even a hope, (he threw herfelf into a chair by the window, and fpent the day, without moving from the cafement, in bitter recolledions, and in fortifying her mind to refid the dangers and evils which encompaffed her. The pafling hours flew, and evening and darknefs fucceeded to a gloomy day of fevere mifery. Agatha had attended with her dinner; but, as the night came on, (lie felt a more than common
common heavinefs pervade her—a kind of lulling dupor that abforbed her fenfes, and for which (he could no otherways account, than fuppofing; that her frame and brain were exhauded by fuch intenfe mifery as fhe had lately endured, As fhe fat at the window, (lie felt this dupor dill increafing; and the faculty of thought was fo much gone, that flie ceafed to wonder at the drangenefs of her feelings. The darknefs increafed, and a fudden flafh of lightning dartled her ;—but foon after flie had a more dangerous caufe for alarm, for fhe was didurbed by a violent knocking at ihe door, which for a time roufed her from her infenfibility; and, terrified led fhe fliould be expofed to fiefh fufferings, fhe hadily rofe from her chair, with an intention of fadening the door; but it opened, and the hateful Leopold appeared, his eyes fparkling fiercely, and his vifage reddened and bloated by an inordinate intempe¬ rance.
In .
In his whole countenance Ethelwina read the danger of her fituation, and now bit¬ terly felt that there were miferies prepared for her of which flie had had no concep¬ tion. Her very foul trembled within her as he daggered into the room ; but, affuming as much haughty dignity as (lie was miftrefs of, flie demanded what meant this intru¬ fion. The majedic commanding beauties of her whole appearance awed him a moment from Iris defign, and he fell on his knees before her, feizing forcibly both her hands. He declared himfelf her adorer, befought her pity, and loudly proteded no pow r er on earth (hould day his intentions unlefs (lie gave him her free content to meet him on the morrow at the chapel of the cadle, there at the altar, voluntarily to pledge thofe vows which now only could fave her from threat¬ ened violence. The triumphant, meaning ferocity of his eyes terrified her. He had grafped her hands fo hard, that the pain it inflided on her crufhed
crulhed fingers made her utter an involun¬ tary fhriek, and in the next moment her fenfes became confuted—(he gafped for breath, and fell infenfible on the floor. Haplefs, lod, wretched Ethelwma !—Ah ! how little Were you confcious of the fuffer¬ ings that awaited you 1 The cruel, remorfe¬ lefs Leopold, baffled in every one of his ambitious prqjeds, had but this dreadful defign left to obtain his villanous purpofes; and only by reducing thee, haplefs maid ! from thy high eminence of virtue, to that abjed date, when you would no longer re¬ fufe to become bis wife, was the lad and only plan that promifed a fure chance of fuccefs. To make his diabolical and horrible work fure, an opiate had been in¬ fufed into the cup of the innocent fufferer, which was the caufe of the heavy dupor flie had endured, and which now ended in the powerlefs infenfibility of her unhap¬ py, lod date. . Leopold, inflamed with wine, and a falfe vitious love, together with his brutal defigns, had
had entered the chamber of his intended devoted victim, determined to force her to compliance by leaving her no other alterna¬ tive, after the intended outrage, but gladly to become his. The fortitude and courage of Ethelwina were equal to any trial while in her fenfes ; but now, in her deplorable ftate of inanity, terrible indeed was the moment that beheld her infenfible in the arms of her worft enemy. She was confined in a place impregnable tp mortal ftrength, with not one friend to aid her. Every creature in the cadle was devoted to the fervice of Leopold ; had fhe been awake to the mifery of her lamentable fituation, her fhrieks would have been un¬ regarded. Well did Leopold know his own fecurity % and with a look of horrid triumph, a grin fo ferocious that it refern- bled the daemon of darknefs, he fnatched her from the floor, N when a tremendous clap of thunder rolled, pealing on the ear, and feemed to fhake the rock itfelf to its foun¬ dation,
dation, accompanied by a flafh of light¬ ning, which in fome degree terrified him from his purpofe. But his terrors were momentary only; for, (hatching the poor infenfible in his arms, he hadened to the couch, and there muft have accomplifhed his brutal purpofe, when his ears were appalled by the founds of a long-drawn, hollow groan, and in the fol¬ lowing fpace, in terrible accents, a voice cried— ' " Forbear /" The guilty wretch quitted his hold of the entranced Ethelwina, and, reeling forward, caught at a chair for fupport. The horrors of remorfe were but mo¬ mentary ; he darted from his terrors, deter¬ mined to punifh. the daring wretch who had caufed this didurbance, and, drawing his fword, he took the lamp to fearch from whence the voice proceeded; but every thing remained ftill, and no figns of any one being near, or in the chamber, and becom¬ ing more determined to finifh his bafe inten¬ tions,
tions, he croffed the room, after having fadened the bolts on the infide, to prevent all intrufions. The thunder now began again to roll from an immenfe didance; but with an unintimidateddep,he approached the couch, and, with a blafphemous oath, he fwore no power in heaven, earth, or of man fliould fave her. As he reached, the couch, the thunder, which had before only rolled at a didance, now broke over the towers of the caftie in one vad tremendous crafli, fo loud that it awoke the haplefs maid from her trance; and, darting up in horror indefcribable, (lie flew from the intended grafp of the monfter. At that moment the wall of one end of the room parted, and difcovered an efful¬ gence of radiant light, from which proceeded a tall figure clothed in armour, bearing a bleeding fword in its right-hand, and a flaming brand in its left. The guilty con¬ fcience ftruck, Leopold ftarted from the flow approach ofthe frowning fpedre of his mur¬ dered
dered uncle, and, catching the hand of Ethel¬ wina, he dragged her forward. The phantom waved its left^arm, in token for the affrighteried, appalled wretch to quit his hold on Ethelwina; and then, with ter¬ rific frowns, and a voice hollow and deeply fblemn, it pronounced— ■".' Monfter, forbear!—Will not Godfred's murder fuffice ?—Mud ppwerlefs, unpro¬ tected innocence be facrificed ?-^Beware 1 —Repent ! j —the hour of terrible retribution is at hand.-—The guardian of virtue dill prevails, and thou and all thy power (hall be as nothing [-—Begone !" The fpectre then waved its hand, and pointed to the door. ... The bolts, untouch¬ ed, flew back, and the horror-druck guilty Leopold crept out of the chamber. The ghod continued waving its hand, and flowly and with filent, folemn dep followed; as it reached the portal, it cad on the agonized Ethelwina a look of forrow, pointed to Heavenyand dilappeared. Half frantic, not knowing what flie did, and impelled by an irreftftible
irreliftible impulfe, flie, with quick and hur¬ ried fteps, flew to the door in the moment the fpectre vanifhed. The blaze of light was gone, and nothing was perceptible but the receding fteps of Leopold, which found¬ ed along the galleries. Her eyes clofed ; (he crawled into the room ; (he was infenfihle to every thing but the noife of her chamber-door, which, the moment (he entered, ruflied to with violence, and every bolt darted into its fadening.— Nature and fenfation were exhauded, and fhe fell to the floor in a deep dumber ; but gentle fleep vifited not the differing Ethel¬ wina, and her (lumbers were broken by dreams of horror; darting convulfions ago¬ nized lier frame; at one time (he faw her father pale, bloody, and dying, with a coun¬ tenance of forrow and anger, crying to her for vengeance on his murderer. Another time, her unquiet, didurbed fancy prefented a vifion of the late fcene of terrors; and, (hrieking to be releafed from Leopold, (he awoke. It
It was morning when (he darted fi'om thefe didracting redlefs dreams. Her mouth was parched with third; her head was dreadfully afflicted with (hooting throb¬ bing pains, and her whole frame trem¬ bled with a burning fever. Unable to endure fuch exceffive third, die made an effort to ,erawl to the cup that con¬ tained fome water, of which (he drank plentifully. Some faint recollections of the horrors ofthe preceding evening croffed her brain, and indinctively (lie tried the bolts of the door; but memory furnifhed her vuth no didinct circumdance of the pad, and her intenfe head-ach made her hurry to her couch, where, laying her innocent head upon the pillow, ihe fonk intjO a calm repofe, which laded many hours, and from which (lie arofe free from fever and pain, and her mind compofed. It was (ome time before (he was able, from the confufion of crowding thoughts, to remember the oc¬ currences of the preceding night. With awe and gratitude (lie threw herfelf upon her
ETHELWINA. 217 her knees in prayer and thanks to that gra¬ cious Providence, who alone refcued her from inevitable dedrudion. Her thoughts became folemn when fhe fancied (he had feen the fupernatural appearance of the laft night, and by wh^fe wonderful interference (he had been faved. She tried to have a more clear knovvhd^e of what flie felt fure fhe had witneffed; but her fenfes had, during the whole trying fcene, been fo con¬ fufed, that (he couid not recoiled, with cer¬ tainty, whether all was not a frightful vifion of a difordered brain. Yet that fomething of a ftrange and uncommon nr.ttire had hap¬ pened, was beyond a doubt; und her mind alarmed, though not fuperdirioufly, but weakened by mental agony and intenfity of thought, flie flatted from her feat, deter¬ mined to examine the walls of the room more thoroughly. The day was dark and, rainy ; the im- , menfe fize of hef apartment, and n the blaek- nefs of its walls prevented ^her from feeing clearly to-the further end; Shetra- vol. 1. l verfed
verfed the room with caution, frequently flopping to found the wainfcot, to difcover if there were any falfe door or fecret com¬ munication ; but all feemed perfect. She ftopped a moment to recollect herfelf; and, confidering the horrors of her dreams, be¬ gan to think that the whole muft have been an uncommon vifion of the mind, didurb¬ ed and unhappy in its deep, as well as in the * day by the mifery of her tortured heart. She proceeded in her refearch, till draw¬ ing near the door, flie perceived all the bolts were faft in their holds ;—^flie well re¬ membered her hade to faften them the pre¬ ceding evening, and that fhe had been pre¬ vented by the fudden entrance of Leopold, now recurred to her; arJ# the extreme pain which (lie had endured in her wrifts from the hard grafp of St. Iver, had, as (lie fuppofed, caufed her to faint. She now looked at her arms, and found them bruifed and difco¬ loured ; conviction came beyond a doubt, and ihe threw herfelf in a chair, in agony at the thoughts of what (he had to endure, and what
what (he might be expofed to. She would have opened the cafement of the window to receive a little frefli air, in hopes it would revive her finking fpirits; but the rain, as it fell in torrents, beat againd the cafement, whild the wind, as it rufhed in hollow mur¬ murs through her chambers and the paflages beyond them, made her turn fearfully around, in momentary expedation of fome new alarm.
l % CHAP,
CHAP. XIII. X HE tears ran down the pallid cheeks of Ethelwina as (lie contemplated her melan¬ choly apartment, and ftill more hapleftf fate— as, without a heart to pity or befriend her, torn from the protection of her own ihe.ter- ing manfion, and in the pov er of a man whom no law, human or divine, could day from executing his dieadful purpofes-of re¬ venge. Falling on her knees, fhe befought that Power, who is the guardian of innocence, ftill to watch over, and continue her in its pro¬ tection, to (hield her from her enemy, and to endue her with fortitude divine to refift all
all the oppreflions that might be inflided on her. " Into thy care, Oh Power Supreme 1 I commit myfelf;—if I efcape the dangers that encompafs me, teach me, Oh teach thy erring creature how to perform the great taik of gratitude for thy unbounded mercies ! But if it be thy Almighty will that I mud fuffer, indrud nie to bear my lot with pa¬ tience, and to die with refignation !" Somewhat calmed, fhe arofe with greater hope, and confidence in the Divine Power to w'horn (he had fupplicated ; and the rain abating, (lie opened the cafement, and found herfelf much revived by the air. It appeared to be about noon, and, for the firft time, Ethelwina felt herfelf faint for want of food : for (he had fcarce ate or drank any thing, but the fatal potion, fince the morning before. x She was foon after difturbed by a gentle tap at the door. Ethelwina rofe, and de- manded who was there ? A female voice defired to be admitted.—Ethelwina unbolted l 3 the
the door, and opened it ajar, that fhe might be affured fhe was not deceived.—Agatha alone was at the entrance, who faid, as (he walked acrofs the room— " Dear my Lady, I am fure you mud be almod darved; but truly the cadle has been in fuch a budle, that I quite forgot your Ladyfliip.—Oh by St. David I there has been a fine piece of work ; and fure enough our Lord faw the ghod of the Che¬ valier tfiat was murdered——that is, he died here,'*" faid the woman, catching up her for¬ mer Words; for the word murder had ex¬ cited the penetrating glances of Ethelwina, and recalled the recollections of Agatha.— «« Yes," faid fhe, " he died in this very chamber." " In this chamber," cried Ethelwina; •* was he muidered here ?" , " Who faid he was murdered ?" anfwer¬ ed the woman, in a confufed yet angry tone of voice, whild her face was alternately red and pale in a moment. " I did ,not fay he was murdered j—but if people will be obflinate"
objlinate? and ihe looked hard at Ethelwina, laying great ftrefs upon her lad word ; " why if they will not hear reafon, and con¬ fent to a few trifles, only meant for their good, it is fit that they fliould fuffer for their objlinacy. —However, as fure as can be, my Lord faw the fpectre.—St. David preferve me I I wonder I have courage to enter here. —Dear me, what's that ?—The Virgin pro¬ tect me! I thought 1 heard a noife 1—Well, I wifh fome folks would do as they ought," and again fhe looked at the affrighted Countefs, " and then we fhould have no oc¬ cafion to live among ghods and difmal ap¬ paritions, and in this horrid and frightful old cadle." " Peace!" faid Ethelwina, who had been partaking fparingly of the refrelliments, to hide the terror which the knowledge of fome one's being murdered in that very room had occafioned. She was about to drink fome of the wine in her cup, when accidentally looking at it, fhe difcovered, from the clearnefs of the l 4 liquor,
liquor, fome thick fedirnents at the bottom. Struck with difmay, (lie turned pale, and was about to defire Agatha to bring her fome water indead of the wine, when the fear that ihe fliould difcover h^r emotions made her defift, and (lie bade the woman leave her; but her voice was fo faint and altered, that Agatha eyed her with more than common curiofity, if not with looks of fufpicion. Ethelwina read a meaning in her counte¬ nance that confirmed her own fufpicions; but, as foe feared the woman might have difcovered the caufe of her too great emo¬ tions, (he put the cup to her lips, went tb the window, and, leaning careleflly on the window-frame, threw out the contents of the goblet untaded, while Agatha was ga¬ thering the remains of the repaft together; and feeing the cup in Ethelwina's hand, and fufpeding (he had not drank the liquor, (he faid, with eagernefs in her manner— « Won't your Ladyfliip be pleafed to drink the wine ?"
Ethelwina
iLthelwina put the empty cup again to her lips, as if (he was finilhing its contents, and, inwardly (huddering, gave it "to her attend¬ ant, who inftantiy left the room. Fainting with difmay and affright, Ethel¬ wina funk on the window-feat j—the certainty that flie was doomed again to more fevere trials, and the knowledge that perhaps a fleeping potion, if not a poifon, was infufed in the wine, raifed her mind to a pitch of agony. She was now fatally convinced that fomething had been mixed in her drink the preceding day, which had caufed theflupor of her mind. Wild with terror and appre- henfion left (lie (hould be again expofed to (ome other dreadful danger, fhe darted up in frantic defperation, determined to make one effort to^ efcape from the accumulated mifery that awaited her. She darted acrofs the room; the door was unbolted from without, and it opened to her touch; flie flew along the galleries, and ftopped not till (he came to fome fteps, where, refting a moment, (he recovered pre- t* 5 ience
fence of mind fufficient to feel the impof- fibility of efcaping, and in defpair fhe re¬ folved to turn back;—*but, in herhafly flight, fhe had not noticed the way fhe came, and now found herfelf in a part of the cadle that appeared totally uninhabited : (he had pafled an immenfe quantity of the build¬ ing, and it feemed, by the diredion fhe had taken, that (he was in the northern towers of the cadle. To proceed on her ufelefs fearch of liberty promifed nothing, and to return was now, from the intricacies of the paffage, difficult; the chance of meeting any one, and the dread that (he might' be miffing from her own apartment, excited ^various emotions. Whild (he was deliberating, (he heard a didant footdep proceeding down the paffage die had jud left. The fear of being difco¬ vered and ill-treated overcame every other feeling, and (he darted down the deps ;•—at the bottom was a long narrow arched paf¬ fage; the damp coldnefs of the place druck upon her heart, but other terrors urged her on,
5n, and (he quickened her pace. The paf¬ fage became more dark and gloomy, and at lad (he found her progrefs dopped by a door. Curiofity prompted her to open it; a fpark of hope aided and impelled her arms, and, with all her drength colleded, (he forced back the bolts ; but how great was her dif¬ appointment to find only a wide extent of ground, at the further end of which, fur¬ rounded by thick walls, dood an immenfe tower, which overlooked the highed turret of the cadle. Ethelwina remembered to have feen this tower in her journey, as its gloomy Gothic battlements and great height frowned de¬ fiance on the valley below ;—its fides were black with age, and the fmall deep recedes in the walls, in which the windows were placed, together with the thick iron-bars acrofs them, proclaimed it the abode of mifery and horror, and druck a cold (hiver- ing to the heart of Ethelwina. As fearfully fhe looked upon it, her imagination pidured to her fight the poor wretch languilhing in l 6 mifery
mifery and bondage, or butchered by the midnight murderer. Difpelling thoughts too horrid to en¬ dure, (he determined, though hopelefs of fuccefs, to make one laft attempt to drop from the caftie walls to the outlide of the rock, and truft to chance for a poffibiiity of efcaping. She haftened up the fteps of the wide ramparts that ran round the extenfive court of the tower, vvhich was divided from every other part of the caftie. As (lie afcended to the top, lhe caft her eyes around, and beheld a wide extent of country far be¬ neath her. She too haftily approached the low para - per : in one moment inevitable deftruction awaited her j fhe became giddy and infen- iible to all around her; her eyes cloied,^ and (he was falling over the wall to an eternal grave, when fortunately her foot flipped, and threw her forcibly on the ramparts. The vertigo that had feized her was occa- ftoned by the tremendous profpect that pre r iented it felf to her affrighted fight, which were
were the deep and perpendicular fides of the mountain, rifing in immeafurable height to a level with the foundation of the ramparts; and without any (helving or jetting out of . the rock beyond the walls, and upon the •< very edge of the precipice were the bulwarks built. Terrific was the profped from the place where Ethelwina Jiad, unknowing of her danger, approached. No mortal foot- deps, on this fide the mountain; had ever dared to venture up the heights; even the poor wild-goat, that ranged the contiguous crags, refufed to tempt its fate by climb* ing a deep where it muft receive indant death. The brain of Ethelwina became indantly frenzied at the fight of the danger flie was in; and, from the acutenefs of terror, (he would have fallen over without the power of flopping herfelf in time, and been plunged down the deep into the gulph below (that received the waters of the foaming catarads, as they came thundering from the precipices of the oppose mountains), had not her foot
foot fortunately flipped backward, and caft the balance of her weight* fo as to throw her on the terrace of the rampart. Ethelwina foon recovered from her infen¬ fibility ; but awoke in horror, expeding to find herfelf in the valley below. Her fur¬ prife was infinite, and a momentary joy feized her when (he found herfelf in fafety ; and rifing from the ground, (he clung fad to the oppofite parapet, from whence (he ftill had a view of the abyfs below ; and (huddering ar the inevitable deflrudion ihe had fo providentially efcaped from, (he hur¬ ried down the deps. Arriving at the lad, fhe feated herfelf to recover from her terror and affright; and now the thoughts of what had brought her to the fpot, and the ago¬ nizing difappointment (he was doomed to meet with, filled her eyes with tears, and fhe felt fadly and certainly convinced (he was a prifoner, perhaps for life. She refleded on the marriage ceremony that had been performed, and fhe thought, had (he not taken the oath never to acknow¬ ledge
ledge Leopold as her hufband, it would have been lefs dangerous to her future peace and honour to have fubmitted to a fate that feemed inevitable, than to live in a place where greater ills than that might with fecu¬ rity be perpetrated. The form of marriage had been gone through, and that by her own Pried; the world might unkindly judge her, and her honour and reputation at lad become the facrifice. But dill the hope that Augudine, the beloved companion of her infancy, might live, rofe pleafing to her remembrance, like an angel of light, to vifit and confole her didracted ideas, and excite her to continue in her noble reBh\- ance. " Yes," (he cried, " I will yet endure patiently ail the horrors that avvait me— and thou, all-feeing Power, to thee I fup- plicate for aid!—Oh! fave an innocent helplefs creature from pollution !—- Let me, Oh Merciful Providence! live in honour, nor fuffer thy omnipotence to be infulted in 6 its
its deared attributes by the appalling touch of guilt and lud. Ethelwina rofe from the bended podure in which (lie had cad herfelf, and now began flowly to crofs the court, when flie fancied fhe heard fomething like the found of a human voice; but its tones werefo faint, that fhe could not didinguifh from whence they came. She dopped to liden, and in a moment after heard a perfon finging in^ me¬ lancholy, though fweet notes. She lidened attentively ; the language was very pathetic, and excited the tendered emo¬ tions in the care-worn heart of Ethelwina; Surprife gave way to pity and attention ; the voice, though weak, was melodioufly ex¬ prefiive ;—there was a fomething in the tones that druck her as being like her own, and by the words it appeared that they were the offspring of a fufferer and captive. Ethel¬ wina had lidened during the fong with in¬ creafed admiration; and when it was finifh¬ ed, had continued herfelf in an attitude of
of attentive expedation, hoping every mo¬ ment to hear it repeated; but a total filence enfued, and (he now concluded it would not be renewed ;—the voice had feem¬ ed to proceed from a didance, or rather from a dation above her. She examined the walls 6f the tower ; but the windows were fixed high above her reach. Ethelwina felt anxioas to be con¬ vinced from whence the founds had pro¬ ceeded ; but could mal^e no difcovery to gratify her curiofity. She walked round the vad buttreffes and badions that flanked the fides of the tower, but no opening prefented itfelf till (he came to a thick heavy Gothic arch; behind it was a cumberous door, the approach to which was by a defcent of feveral deps ; the top of the arch was level with the ground of the court, and the door was fo artfully con¬ cealed as to require minute fcrutiny before it could be difcovered. Ethelwina defcended the deps, which, like the court, were overgrown with long grafs
grafs and weeds,.the evident emblems that the tower had long been difufed and unin¬ habited. She tried the door ; but found it fad, nor could her utmod efforts even (hake it. She gave up all further attempts ; but wifhbg to be convinced from whence the words (he had heard, proceeded, (he called repeatedly; but received no anfwer, except¬ ing that which was occafioned by the echo of her own voice. This circumdance alarmed her, for the refponfes might be heard, and expofe her to affronts, if not infult; therefore refigning all further endeavours as ufelefs, (he was eroding the court, thinking (he had been deceived, and that the voice mud have proceeded from the mountains," when, as fhe was approaching the entrance into the caftie, fhe was frightened by the found of a footftep coming haftily along the paffage. Terror feized her foul; (lie gave herfelf up for loft, and forgetting the danger (he had fo lately efcaped from, fhe hurried up the ft;eps of the ramparts as the only place of con-
concealment, and hiding herfelf completely behind the parapet that faced the court, waited in momentary expedation of being .dragged from the only place of refuge that could conceal her from immediate fight.
END OF VOL. I.
