Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Rosalviva: or, The demon dwarf!: a romance
■ ROSALVIVA. • CHAP. J. . Boft on (he wave the oars at diitancó sounrj, : , The night bicezc eighjng'thro 1 the leafyifpray, With genti.! whisper murmuri aH around, i Brchtlics o'er the placid кеч and dies aw*y. - Sotbbbv. ι »'.!-. TíiREE. years had elapsed , since the union of Golfieri and thé amiable Fran¬ cesca, a lovely boy had become Ithe pledge .of> their, affections, possessing' all its; father's.features, combined with; all the .softer",beauties of its maternal pa-; rent. > '"- : ".-- · \ \i\ - i,A , It; may be in some degree; imagined under /what state of mind had existed, VOL. III. В
the Comptessa Rosalviva'; by gradual decay, she had witnessed the"'once heated and ardent love of Paoli degene¬ rate into f coldness, neglect, and indif¬ ference. The hatred she cherished to¬ wards the unsuspecting Francesca knew of no moderation ; with ■ Paoli she had lost every hope, and she felt sensible that the time was indeed at händ, when she would be scarcely retained in his remembrance, at least not in his esteem. In vain she had recalled to 'his mind his vowš of 'early days^ in vain she essayed to î bring'back the fondness they had reciprocally and long indulged'in, and in'vain were her efforts to redeem'his heart] or claim even the slightest por¬ tion of it from the doting partner of his happiness; Francesca seemed his idol, and of late hé had lost but trifling inter-
vals in which he had not offered his adoration. . A.scubformed like Rosal¬ viva's could probably endure every pos- sible; infliction from the being to whom all its sympathies had yielded, but that of contempt and. neglect; these recol- lections may be «traced in her earliest career, in her correspondence and inter-i course < with Leontini ; and when the greatness of that soul was doomed to submission, in the loss of Paoli's love, its miseries, its indignánce, and its pangs can be readily imagined. Itis not to be supposed that a woman, with' the facul¬ ties and resolutions of the Comptessa, would tamely bear with calamity ; she was not moulded in that tenderness to watch the ------------- ťí canker worm of care Creeping thro' her heart !"———
and ,not strive to exterminate it from thencè ; nò, the sense. of Paoli's ind if- ference, and the reward which her en- thusiasm, her, sacrifices for him only, bad met with, rather served to fire her brain, with the madness of desperation and revenge, and under its powerful im¬ pulse she willingly submitted to it with the utmost subservience. Imagination pictured a thousand schemes for the result of her vengeance upon the per¬ jured Paoli and his bride. , Her heart shuddered at the recurrence of, its early fondness, ,and she smothered its recol¬ lection in emotions of vindictive resent¬ ment and ferocity. The incidents ofthe previous evening, glanced .across her mind with pleasing retrospect, ,and the singular and peculiar menace of the un- known dwarf stranger towards the hus-
band of her rival, seemed to bring with it a joy and a satisfaction, that she trusted might be turned to some share of profit and account. She contemplated on the mysterious and appalling figure of the Dwarf, but there was a manner and a dignity about him that failed not equally to engage her attention. He had deigned fo gaze upon her with more than common interest, and the longer she reflected upon the circumstance of the evening; the more anxious her heart seemed to feel for the re-appearance of its object. ' Her wish of discovery, and her desire for the chance of that moment which would effect their meeting was now her most ardent pm suit; she fre¬ quented such places as might give her the opportunity of his presence. It was
at no distant period wherein her efforts were rendered successful. The soft glow of a Sicilian sky, in the middle of its most exhilarating season, had one evening invited the Comptessa to enjoy the mildness öf the refreshing breezes of the almost sleeping Mediter- ranean for a greater length than was her customary habit. The rippling current had bòrnè hér little barque, which was conducted by one attendant, to a consi¬ derable distance along the lake (whicb branched from the port of Palermo through a winding track of some length,) before she observed, the interval which had caused it. Her reflections were at length disturbed by the mellow tone of a lute ; the sound struck upon her ear with amazement and rapture;ahe boat
was stationary ; the echo of the waters near to the cavity, from whence seemed to proceed the harmony, conveyed a gratification upon the mind of the lis¬ tener οΐ sweetest sensibility. Tbe šere- nity of the evening 'aided the beauty and refinement of tbe scene, and the Comp¬ ót * ' l'i. _ tessa indulged, for several moments, in a kind of " extatic" silence. After the melodist had repeated the strain of a soft canzonet with much taste and feel- ing, the voice, in notes of beautiful tone and richness,, swelled into a delightful air, of, which the Comptessa distinctly caught the following stanzas. SICILIAN AIR. î . > í < ! Ì Ab ! how soft those rays declining,, Scarcely resting on the луате j l ' Tho* Jate so brightly they were shining, * Seek they now, a cloudy grave ?
§o droop' d love, 'mîd worlds of sorrowy In this bosom torn by pain ; The sun will shine and smile to-morrovr, But love to me, ne'er beams 'gain. Like the leaf by night winds shaken, Like the flow'r by tempest blighted ; Like the sigh which sighs can waken. Is the heart, where hope has slighted ! Farewell hope and love for ever ! Joy and smiles, farewell, farewell I Like, t he earthquake's shock we sever, Love and hope, farewell, farewell 1 The pleasure of the moment was too great to be parted with in silence, and quitting the boat whicii was fastened to the rirojecting shore, she essayed to seek the retreat ofthe minstrel. The emi-i nence which rose before her pourtrayed a wild but pleasing sketch of nature, and as tbe crimson tints of the setting sun rested upon its summits, it gave appearance to some kind of building,
whose basis lay'buried in the, deep' and woody inclosure beneath;" Rosalviva pursued the track tbat tended to'give the most ready access to the half deso¬ lated retreat. The thick' intervening branches of the chesnut and pine waved over the path in clusters that almost defied penetration, and it was with con¬ siderable difficulty that she proceeded further. Attaining the extent'of her path through an opposite and sloping direction, the Gothic remains of an edi¬ fice which, to the opinion of Rosalviva/ had originally been öf a religious ordert precluded further communication, and she paused/in an intermission of breath¬ less anxiety, ,'for the renewal of the minstrel's harmony. ' ; There was an agreeable variety, in the suspension of those moments, ' which в 5 '' '' '
served to lull the mind and ideas into a melancholy yeţ pleasing calmness.» u Ro¬ salviva gazed upon the. surrounding sce¬ nery with feelings of mingled pleasure and sublimity. The softened streaksof the declining sun were attaining'their more dusky hue ·/ its beams still hung upon, the distant prospect,' deepening, as they seemed to lose themselves, in the wide expanse of the ^Mediterranean, oyer whose green surface the white -sail Ofthe gondolier was seen floating, till İt progressively became lost from observa¬ tion./ The eyeof the Comptessa .alter¬ nately surveyed each intervening object, arid almost forgot the .seclusion, of the moment.; .The,silence of the spot con¬ veyed-to, Rosalviva a thrill of singular sensation, as to the result, of, her.. re¬ searches. )
Pursuing the direction of a partly dila¬ pidated colonade, she, was led to the entrance of a kind óf cemetry, through which a streak of light from the horizon broke through -an opposite cavity r and by its' aid Rosalviva more distinctly re¬ viewed the extent of the ruin.. She passedits mouldering fabric, and entering a narrow portal,'was again -within sight of the waters which rolled beneath, her. A small grot or cavern projected itself from the* acclivity, and from thence she believed had issued the notes of the minstrel ; she paused,—the shadow of a human being met her eye,—it retired ; her footsteps seemed to linger where she then remained, and while her rumina¬ tions were busied in conjecture, the'dis¬ turbance of the trees near to her broke the reverie, and turning her eye> in as-
tonishment, the Dwarf Valfroni stood beside herj ^· . , « < ; t A confusion,· marked with terror/co¬ loured the cheek of the»Comptessa, ! -and her gazé rested npon the Dwarf,--under a power, as it were of inability j to be removed.- * í . - ·,<»*< Valfroni noticed her I agitation/ and approaching, .with an .air» of;calmness and respect, urged, hér 'to forbear appre¬ hension, and mildly questioned the,pur- port of her presence. ; * t , ¡. , . Rosalviva stammered out a few awk-, ward arid ill-timed t ireplies, .and pleaded in excuse that the beauty* of the scenery/ and the t delicious harmony she had lis¬ tened to/ had invited her beyond . tbe usual trackj^and in an.attempt to regain, the shore, where her attendant remained/ she had only penetrated still furţherinto
the obscurity of the abode. " You will; I trust, pardon the ignorance and f curio* sity of a woman," added the Comptessa, 't if ¿she has disturbed the ; goodly "poá- sessor of its habitation." * ·-» я^иь* 1 " This markof distinction and honour in visiting the retreat ofthe Dwarf Val¬ froni, is too valuable not to be acknow¬ ledged,' ť and * rather demands from · me, Signora,', »an: act of courtesy,«'-'than t the thought of apology or atonement."- Ь-. ч -^ The Comptessa smiled, ami ·with a feeling' of somewhat better confidence, she'^sought to meet>hisgaze.; ¿The 1 fea¬ tures ofthe* Dwarf were socoucealed by his bushy hair, and scattered ringlets/ , that she was unable to ¿trace Ihéiríeha- racter. She^fancied. there was k> pleasing expression in the shade of that coiínte¿
nance, and that a look of joy returned her smile. ' ' ■ " May it please you, Signora, 1 will conduct you to a path more cheerful," and leading the way, he traced back its direction towards the front'part ofthe building, 1 which Rosalviva had first discovered. " These lonely wilds, Sig¬ nora, can offer but a poor gratification to so illustrious a visitor," remarked the Dwarf. » t " They can boast a melody that might be pronounced divine, and for such a charm, they who have souls susceptible to its refinement could dwell here for ever." " Since then, Signora, you are pleased to feel a pleasure in its wildness, may it be hoped that the hallowed spot of St.
Rosalta will, as ofţ as leisure and incli¬ nation permit, bë rendered still- more sacred witb thy presence.^ .-. Ф: - iiffi could ^certify, thätv propiise ¿with rapture,'' cried the Comptessa, and t, her bosom seemed to imbibe a pleasant^ and peculiar^feeling,towards thé affability arid manner of the Dwarf ;—" indeed, my visits shalf prove it." "¡Thanks,.thanks, I am bound for the remembrance." , The. evening was growing dark, and the Dwarf requested the hand .of the Comptessa, as he offered his, assistance to escort her. " The evening's gloom, Signora, methinks is contribuable to danger ; fear you any in a spot so remote, lady?" , , . . ·.. " Not any," was the reply. · " True ; virtue and innocence are
proof against fear; still, lady, your beauty may occasionally hazard it." " Yon are skilled in flattery, 1 per¬ ceive," observed Rosalviva, not dis¬ pleased with his remarks, and willing to encourage them. Valfroni essayed to engage her band, the effort was unavailing, and the Comptessa increased her step. The sin¬ gularity 4 of the attempt surprised her; policy, and a certain sense of prudence, withheld a favour which she still bad more the inclination to grant than t the power to deny ; but the ignorance of the quality of the person by whom she was addressed, his rank and family, and, again, his strange retirement, severally endeavoured to dissuade her to the con¬ trary. For several moments each main¬ tained a total silence.
" This apparent suUenness, Signora, elsewhere would be irksome ; were it observed, it would be presumed that we were almost strangers to each other, and such a mistake I should be sorry to create." . · * The Comptessa could not restrain a smile,'as 1 she* expressed her surprise at bis meaning.· She'interrogated him.as to its' n definition, adding,'that the claim of fellowship was not of any lengthened duration.,, '· -:!;.■ U ' Hold, Signora," interrupted Valfroni;. " this is only your imagination:" : ; The Comptessa paused 1 and looked attentively in his countenance. ' ι " Yes,'* resumed he, " no incident, however trivial, has' lost place ih 'my memory diiring ages back,—^they are too
securely in my keeping to be easily lost." . . The inexplicable expressions of the Dwarf served to weigh unpleasantly on the mind of Rosalviva. Her courage was naturally strong, and in the present instance it abated but little of its energy ; still there was an appearance »of singula¬ rity in the remark, that caused her some share of uneasiness. She rested on the basis of a rugged and broken pillar, and a rapid succession of thoughts came across her remembrance; bui no clue offered that could dictate by what means he pronounced with such emphasis the language which he had ч indulged in ;—* however, she treated the ( annunciations of yalfroni with a levity that showed her indifference, and said,— " Since, then,
Signore, you have been so studious an observer of my actions and conduct, the name of my family is equally as familiar to yon, doubtless. 1 ' r " Equally,'' cried the Dwarf, without a moment's hesitation, " oh, yes ; Ro¬ salviva, heiress of Romagno, is not less frequent to my recollection than is the title myself was endowed with." ' " Name that title,—nameit," anxiously repeated the Comptessa, her sense awak¬ ening a series of suspicions. • " Time will reveal it—must disclose it,'* replied Valfroni, and, as he gazed on her features, his heart seemed to triumph.. ч Rosalviva almost felt sensible of an inferiority in the presence of the Dwarf, and>which she in vain endeavoured to account for. Surviving the discompo«
sure of the moment, she extended her hand, which the D Warf, with some warmth of feeling, pressed to his lips. She urged him to speak of theevents of which he hinted. * Valfroni requested her silence, and motioning to withdraw,' pointed to the path whicii led to the shore. She forcibly detained his hand, and her large beaming eye rested ear¬ nestly upon him. " Signore, wherefore this sudden haste ?" * The Dwarf was silent. : ' "*You hesitate; in mercy, name a reason, Signore." ' ' '> * " I have many. v ŕ í¡ " But one, Dwárf, and I am satisfied." > " Oh, ho, desist in this painful inquiry ; circumstances prohibit further disclo¬ sure;" we must f part.—Your presence here/is injurious to yourself." ' 'Ί
" It would be more so, Dwarf, were I to leave this place thus unrequited. It can ¡never be quitted, till I know more. Your; manner, habit, and singularity, at once Cjonfonnd, and charm me ; there is a kind of inspiration in thy,soulf which fires mine. You see 1 am candid in my expressions of feelings, and till I ob¬ tain^—" *' What, Signora ?" interrupted Val- froni, " be not too impetuous—obtain what?" *' That confidence you would fain withhold." , * , The, Dwarf continued his .silence, the figure of^a man was observable »in the distance ; it struck through an opposite avenue. Rosal vi va followed its resem¬ blance as far as her sight f would permit ; she had not felt a sufficient dread to have
."■/'.:■:'■ implored iits assistance, though ^ the pulse beat quickly ; responsive ^tOrthe agitation of Hèrbeart;^ kind öf gloóm Mpašseď over her; vnind and spirits^ and she y Was less free in her remarks ; she felt à wish to départ, ýet her inclination still yèarnédtö wards the society öf the i Valfroni sighed, almost imperceptibly, but the sound did not escape the hearing of Rosalviva, and dispersing the oppres¬ sion of her bosom, she interrogated in a töne of sympathy its cause.^vr " ? . " The Dwarf evaded thé inquiry. " Arid you will not dare to confide in the truth «of one, who might relieve itsV anxiety■!'' replied thé Comjptessa¿; ^ '"'. '.-X ; ;'' Iri whose interest, Signora, coald l· be thus distinguished ■?"■' :: ?; >ч ' Rosalviva goffers her own ; use
them, Signore, as yo^ may think, most advantageous; perhaps you may find some profit attending;therein." ' ' . . . ** Thanks, Signora, I doubt if I have capability of doing justice tp so valuable an offer; in return, let me beg the poor acceptance of mine." ν * · · ' '.' Tbe Comptessa paused during a long ,and heavy* struggle within her bosom ; she 1 thought of Golfieri's cruelty/ his neglect, the happiness of Francesca, and at her hands how much she had suffered in all tbe miseries her soul had known, and, as they alternately fastened upon her soul, responded with the throb of vengeance: dared she repeat these thoughts, .these dark wishes, to the Dwarf? Could or would he assist her in them? Might he not betray them, and might not:her designs be scorned and
defeated ? Yét she thought him sincere ; she looked back atthe meeting with him arid Golfieri ; she : remembered his me¬ nacé there, and she could but be assured that the purpose of some ' desperate at- .tempt had urged it.;■ ¿Might not he have equally suffered from, thè .falsé promises, or fremother causes,; at the instance of the Duca, and might he not be desirous of avenging them; else wherefore \yis h to disturb the hilarity of such a time by his mysterious and appalling presence ; his ¡words at parting^ too, with Paoli, hung upon her lips, arid she repeated, with enthusiasm, their^purport— r- íť - many hours ;'teill not elapse when we must meet agâiil·;" she mentally exclaimed, "and these ï were; ; thé ¿words of the !unkno wri Dwarf" ; She was too seriai blé öf the quality òf their tone to conceive the
intruder in the light of a dependant ; it Mvas the language and authority of one who had much to communicate, and that in redress, doubtless,"of his inju¬ ries. The idea soothed her, and she felt determined to poiut out to Valfroni all her sufferings; she turned her eyes upon him, he was in the attitude of reflection ; there was a solemnity and a majesty in his deportment and manner that encouraged her wishes, 1 and she assured herself that the soul· of the Dwarf was not less susceptible, nor less valuable than her own ; her gloominess vanished, and, in an artless' and unre¬ served voice, she questioned his thoughts, concluding * with "Who, Valfroni, has the felicity of their engagement?" · ! " One who has had tbem long,' Sigv nora Rosalviva." VOL. in. с
"Ha! then I might presume you deign-to acknowledge that you cani ove, Signor Dwarf?" '' I have loved almost to madness/ Signora." ťť Thou art not singular in that fatality, others have equally suffered, without doubt, Dwarf." "Truly so; there are many beings in the ' vast rangé of empire whose, souls have loved ; years/ perchance, may have recorded their passion; they may have known joy and sorrow for one selected object, arid the happiness or misery of such an object Was their's ; but ah ! mine was more ; the love I cherished was hot depicted in smiles, ■ or my grief in sighs, in tears ; I loved àrderitly, and one who could ; promise much,/and -who could teach nie to believe that she felt much ;
she deceived me, lady, and the wound «he had inflicted was permitted to ran¬ kle ; but words are vain to describe that passion, the heart only wears its remem¬ brance, and that can never disclose it," The Dwarf paused, and his eyes met those of Rosalviva. il Oh, Valfroni," interjected the Comp¬ tessa, " thou hast a soul formed for ado¬ ration." " Hush, Signora, such was the lan¬ guage of her I loved, cease to persecute ray memory with its recognition,—'tis dreadful!" " Unhappy Dwarf, thou hast my pity, my esteem." " Ha, this is well; now, lady, I could gaze upon you till ray heated eye¬ balls seared their sockets with watchful-
ness; I could chase away thy cares,! could give consoleinent to thy bosom, nay, might sacrifice my feeble existence were át to benefit that of your's ; I will deserve thy pity and esteem, believe me." The eyes of the Dwarf seemed to convey more than usual brilliance as he smiled upon her, and while Rosalviva witnessed their expression, her soul che¬ rished a kind of delight and animation, from which, she derived unspeakable pleasure. ; " Since then our wishes and ideas as¬ similate so closely, Signore Dwarf, their "correspondence must not be at distant periods ; you will give me to hope that tlie Castelli di Roinagno shall be consi¬ dered at,all times open to your visits and familiar to your uses; suppose, for
its first change, you favour me with its acknowledgment in the evening of to¬ morrow." " With grateful pleasure," answered Valfroni, and he respectfully kissed her hand. He carefully conducted her from the acclivity to the shore, and, unmooring the boat, waved his band in repeated adieus, as the moonlight, breaking from 4 the heavens, lighted the Comptessa from the rocky eminence.
CHAP. II. Wealth now is mine, and all tbat wealth can give. Bat oh» it gives not happiness. I've still That fever io my brain which tarns and burns A» though the spirit were fiesh. Soine. " Speak; what li't ye dot" , Shakbpeahe. An instinctive pride impelled Golfieri from communication witb the pallazzi respecting the assignation of the Dwarf, and until the elucidation of the circum¬ stances attached should be made known, whatever might be the consequence, "he felt determined to hold the most impli¬ cit silence. Francesca had perceived bis repeated moments of abstraction, and, in earnest supplication, questioned
its nature. He excused himself on thè plea of ,ignorance towards- its cause, assuring her. that the ensuing nighťs repose, which it was his intention of .seeking at an early hour, would doubt¬ less alleviate its pressure. The' natural change and gloom of Golfieri's mind was the frequent obser¬ vation of the palazzi's inmates. The Duchessa would repeatedly endeavour to exact from him its origin, but his silence and petulance forbade any strict¬ ness of inquiry, and when he essayed to banish it in the smiles of his offspring, the trifling reproach she fain would have advanced at his want of confidence, became instantly hushed in receiving the more pleasing feeling of his paternal fondness. Golfieri, retired considerably, before
ι his accustomed time. It was one of those cold and dreary nights which shut out intercourse beyond the small circle of familiar associates. He looked from the window of the pallazzi in intent awe; the faint and intervening gleam of moon- , light pictured tö his sight the shadow of the Dwarf ás it glided beneath the por¬ tico of the adjoining chapel, true to the time appointed. Golfieri withdrew him¬ self from the casement, fearful that hispre- sence might be noticed. The D warf closed the door of the chapel, and the next instant the scene appeared wrapt iri ob¬ scurity. A presentiment, of some evil would have intruded itself upon the mind of Golfieri^, but that he considered his opponent was unarmed and unat¬ tended, and even within the walls öf, ... i bis own pallazzi. · He reminded himself*
too, that the assignation was the choice of the Dwarf, and if it were for crime, or for any sinister purpose, certainly some other spot would have been se* lected, rather than the oue which he had chosen, and where the domestics of the Duca, had he thought proper, migbt have been placed in security, and unper- ceived by any eye save his own. > He re¬ proved his apprehensions and weakness, and dispersing every fantastic suggestion which his brain had coined/ he looked to the meeting onjy as a matter of com¬ munication, when probably matter of national or more private import, might have induced the Dwarf tp impart them to his ear only. He quitted his apartment, and by the light of a small lamp, partly concealed, (which he carried,) entered the chape). с ő
The'feeble glare ofthe light burning within at'the sacristy ofthe chapel, threw its idim and shadowy reflection <along the aisles through which .Golfieri hurried with agitated step.' The small portal by which he had entered, from a private communication formed through a t se¬ cluded avenue ofthe pallazzi, was closed with a cautious quietude, and holding forth/the lamp,., he surveyed the ,cold and 1 dismal edifice with feelings of a strenge and dubious nature. The foot¬ step of * the Dwarf * precluded ■■ further sensations, which the blank appearance ofthe scene, .and its singular formation. washibout to give rise to; and the Duca^ awaited him with as much, energy and confidence as the incident could permit. Looking earnestly to the Dwarf, and in' a voice reridered audibly impressive, r he
. , А . ,R0SÀLvivAï :■'■■■: cried, ^ Níow; "D wart nor« time nor placé yields encouragement · in such a night as this to t unnecessary parley ; speak to the tull purport of thy wishes;?' / t i'^Your: precision," replied Valíroni, "is Worthy !of comrxiendation; it shall not be 'trifled ; with ;^ thé hoarse-night winds rush heavily and bleakly through these t aisles ; <yonder ; dormitory is Jesisi open ' to' itsV cliilly blasts-^fbllow me, 'j ^The' Dwarf ¿pointed ä ίο the folding doors^at' thé extremity öf the aisle, and nmtionèdíGolfierilto proceed. He obeyed théVentreåty^ in siSerit submission. '?The imperati ve and familiarcommand :of the Dwarf awed ^hirn into^ ani unconscious subservience/ and with' àlmostaíèn^er-^ stitious <3ŕead, yet* retaining^ ah iťidig^ nation àt the thought of harm; he eiitéréd
the 'moré gloomy part of the ι <^ building^- Я J' should hail^thee, Dwarly as a friend, or why this ceremonious observance; say thy name." ; 7- í h -^ Valfroni ;'did I ¡riot at Our ; first in¬ terview announce it ?" ¿ - v'-f- i<ir - - ·.· ^True; and thy country ?" ; í vff, Yöurs, my Lord-^Sicilý; - forbear further iriquiry'; my: family/ mý friends, cease to ?exist;iand for^rny origin; it will not avail in the present moment." ^ "These replies; Dwarf]; are enigma¬ tical ;-4your purposes ?" ; V; -; í /'Aye, 7 uo Wi we speak? on points of .interest ; answer ¡me, then, Duca, has life and dignity sufficient charm to birid thee to its influence, Or därest thou meet the gaunt despoiler of all earthly care with resignation and fortitude?" '; VTo what end do these inquiries re-
sult ? and wherefore árt thon, unknown Dwarf, their interrogator?" > \ " In í pursuance to an allegiance I have lohg sworn to effect'the accom¬ plish inent of. Trace back'tbe few latter periods of thy life, and tell me/Duca,-^- nay, this curled lip and 'disdainful smile colours not'thy feelings, I know theïn too well,—therefore,' speak if thou Vanst, whether the recollection of such times is unspotted by infamy —- its verdict exempt from retribution ?" T " Presumptuous and insolent enthu¬ siast! Is it'for reproof like this thou hast dared to break in lipou mý privacy; and vauntingly fo claim my attention? Maniac ! (for so I must deem thee,) fly from this spot, or the excess of my rage will dare me to deeds which even the sacredness of this roof will'not prohibit;
go/ or¿ be thé' arbitrator öf your own immediate doom;" Y ţ The òoiitémpt arid vindictive passions of Golfieri had been harrowed up tó tlie extreme öf desperation ; it amounted almost to madness, ánd/i under its coh^ trol, hé seized? thé Dwarf amidst a burst of excruciating feeling/ arid but for the equal strength and resistance of Val¬ froni, it would have terminated dé- cidedly fatál; ■» ■/- r " Now, thou recreant Dwarf, since thou hast created my vengeance/ take the punishment it merits ; thy life is iri my* hands. Either confess thy dark and subtle motivés/ Or corisider thyself its just ^victim—this riiomerit shall be thyiast;" : ; M ..'v: ,:/■■■..■ '-.■■■ím^- --■-·:■--=■ The eyes öf the Duca threw a malign nant glance upon the struggling Val-
froni; He disengaged himself from the hands of Paoli, and replied, . .' , " · " Thy. threats are. as weak as' thy vaunted power, Duca: 'Dost thou be¬ lieve Inventure here unguarded, though unarmed? No!—Carry thy, vengeance into execution,—but remember, for every particle of blood thy madness might shed, the daggers,of a countless barid of partisans t . will invoke ¡its penalty. Tliinkst thou, too, that I should thrust myself on the point of this poniard," (for the. Duca, had unsheathed a small sword, which he usually carried,) *f had I not known ¿hat there was an ample strength in reserve, to close up my-wound. Misguided » Paoli, —look to thine, own life, nor resign it with such seeming exultation." , The Duca smiled, but it was under the
influence of feelings which he almost shrunk from acknowledging. He could not but own their tendency, and as the changed and wild expression of his eye viewed the singular form of Valfroni, a gloomy presage of guilt and dismay passed over his soul, and which seemed to him to be charged with convulsions of mingled horror. There was, in des¬ pite of his utmost resolutions, a tremor crowding within ' him, which as he at¬ tempted to address Valfroni, the faltering accent too clearly betrayed. He felt his heart throb inpainful suspense; and he implored of Valfroni to terminate so unpleasant a meeting. " Tell me," he cried, *' what is it you desire, aud I will endeavour to see it' realised; dost thou seek power ? has ambition a flame within your heart, that you would fain cherish ?"
*' It has, it has,'* interrupted the Dwarf, " and 1 seek it, Paoli, at your hands." " Thy abstruse and singular mode of conduct were not the best testimonials of thy right to its favors," spake Paoli. * " Do not mistake my meaning, though, Duca," calmly rejoined Valfroni, li 'tis not power, command, or a desire of pre¬ cedence, either in rank or riches, beyond those of my fellow creation ; it is the desire of rewarding those by whom Val¬ froni has suffered injury. Can the Duca Paoli subscribe to this ?" " He would have you to point out those aggressors, and probably some advice or assistance might be offered by him." Valfroni paused for some few mo¬ ments. A severe and derisive smile was
upon his lip, a threatening expression seemed fixed upon his brow, and the power of some dark and immoveable purpose appeared to hold a dominion over his ' thoughts. " Answer me then; Duca; what advice canst thou offer; in behalf of the man wbo could first betray the confidence of a friend, and who could, in cold blood, complete his treachery by the assassin's knife? who could—4' ," Hush, hush!" interrupted Paoli, for the words of the Dwarf seemed tö appal him ; the portrait held up to him was too close in resemblance with his own, to view it without embarrassment; yet still persevering in a kind of tenbpo- rary assurance, he replied, " such a man," Dwarf, ought to suffer by the laws of his country,"
" And 'their decree would pronounce his death, Duca ; judge I correctly ? J ' " It would; and for whom does this language appeal?" questioned Paoli; and lie assumed a more composed and dignified demeanour. The interrogatory agitated the bosom of the Dwarf; there was a confusion of strange and perverse ideas flashed throughout his imagination, and amidst their engrossment, the name of Paoli Golfieri involuntarily passed from his lips. " Paoli Golfieri !" echoed the voice of the Duca, and* the intrepidity and firm¬ ness of the speaker seemed thé more forcibly to alarm him, as he looked upon his unmoved and strange countenance. " In what instance caust thou couple the name of Paoli with such an act?"
** Had he ever the title of a friend amorig his acquaintance?" resumed the Dwarf; " can he remember whether oliere ever was the mán to whom he pro¬ fessed the most ardent friendship, the most sincere esteem ? Does he remem- ber whether he 'ever forfeited his senti¬ ments of honour and regard, and does he not remember to have made such a friend his victim !" " There was one who deserved all this," shouted Paoli, in an expression of madness, which harrowed up his senses at the Dwarf's recital. " And he met with his fate," be added, still wreathing with a violence öf rage, that told the unsubdued and reeking torment of his soul. There was a trifling space of time which marked their mutual silence.
Valfroni perceived the tumult that existed in the brain of Paoli, and enjoyed it with a satisfactory triumph. r. " I knew him," cried the Dwarf, " I knew this victim ; I heard his last gasp escape him, and I saw the hand that paused it; therefore prevarication, Duca, is 'needless. Shall I tell you that yonr victim was my kindred,—Leontini di Vivaldi ;—one to whom I owe every gratitude, and for whom I would contend with every danger. I appear here, Signore Duca, in the character of his avenger,— nor can I relinquish it while existence -----" " His avenger ?" repeated Paoli. " Yes, Signore Duca, the law of his country demands it, and the right of his kindred will enforce it ; and even though the ducal coronet binds thy brow, it is not the more exempt from the punish-
ment due to such a crime. ï come, Signore Duca, to the presence of the tribunal, wbicb governs Sicily's rights, to pronounce my claim ; nor all their ho¬ nors, nor all thy riches, can buy them from the fulfilment of their duty. In the face of Heaven I make my charge, to the hearts of my country my appeal." • " And its decision," murmured Paoli, within himself, " is but too certain, can be but fatal." He reflected for nome mo¬ ments and he felt witb it ce All the horrors of a guilty mind." " And is the incident which ended Leontini's existence never to be blotted from memory? Will not the hand of sovereignty, extended to his hapless kindred, be ia some degree an alleviation for his loss; perchance it might be,
Dwarf, that thou hast enemies ;—some who raay have scorned your hopes, blighted your endeavours ; speak of them, and - to such beings shalt' thou deal out destruction ; name the word, and I have hearts bold enough to rid them from your recollection." . " Doubtless," replied the Dwarf, and his countenance and gaze had resigned' part of its apparent venom and ma¬ lignity. 44 Hast thou," resumed Paoli, ·" from ties of . consanguinity, friends thou wouldst fain reward? Knowest thou the man, who in tbe black hour of ad¬ versity, (if such a moment you ever felt,) administered to thy wants and gave thee even a hovel's protection ? Speak of him, and his repayment shall be riches and dignity ; nay, speak of what you will,
so much does my poor heart, andssoul relent for the untimely death of the Sig¬ nore Leontini, that I would : commemo¬ rate it only with acts of mercy. .. №o\v, Dwarf, thou hast my power;and,incli¬ nations at thy command; use.them as . . '■......'/ .■ " ¡:- ■ ., ; -7 -.J'.".! ':ţif-- .-··■'■■ befits thy mošt special, and thy most desired wishes." ; ; ;'. ϋϊ ,¡ That tilis confession wouldJiayebeen the resource of Paoli, may be .expected, seeing how deeply bis guilt was,unfet¬ tered, and bow incapable bissţrength of resolution was of drawing Vajfrøni^eb ther from bis calmness ior decision of purpose. Threat or taunt was.pf,feeble avail ; it was an instance of policy to change its tone; could he by signification of his remorse,;and a.well formed narra¬ tive of penitence, purchase over thè. còni- rnisëration and respect of the Dwarf,
whatever'might be thè price of such an instance, his determination was to hazard it. He knew that the person of the Dwarf once within his grasp, and his secrecy and silence within his keeping, the dread of danger vanished, and he bore still an unimpeached and spotless soul. He perceived that his harangue carried some encouragement; Valfroni mused upon its feeling, and an occa¬ sional smile played upon his lips as the rapid succession of ideas passed through his brain. It was a satisfactory moment felt by Valfroni ; ' the terms upon which Puoli seemed willing to secure the silence and friendship of the Dwarf, were flattering and auspicious ones'; the result of his contemplation taught him to engage VOL. III. D
with ìthem, and he intimated :■: that 'so much was he desirous to ^render the penitence of Paoli more lasting, and to -witness his .acts of ¡goodness, rather than be .their pröhibitör, that to his liberality of iri ind t ánd to bis exemplary ^principles he yielded his ; appeal/andaddéd,^-* ť So •lopg, ^Signóre i- Duca, ias I retain your confidence and your generosity/ the Dwarf Valfroni is silent» as the agrave." "Thanks, thanks ! > My pallazzi/ my wealth,* my kingdom, ;-are all· ι in your care; make of them as thine-observa- vtions and thy friendship' warrants/ ** I ishall 1 not ť be unmindful,; Duca, of ithe extent and greatness of 'iriy trust." · -Çaoli seized the hand öf the Dwarf; aiid pressing it with exulting warmthý lie said,—"This pledge : is sacred;'' ^ '
,■■■;'·, ^líjrppi ìpo^pd, : «and ^exchanged ; a pleading ¡smile. ^ I - f f Come ¡then, ; J) warf Valfroni, the night ,Jias 'already , ; far advanced ; ¡no pţher ¡roof must forni: thy-shelter; but -the oné which covers Pa^ernıp's :L)u ça ; to¬ morrow, iWheutW 6 rpeeţ,jţp the Duchessa ypu ¡will,permit me (the introduction of the ЩгсЬеве Valfrpni." Valfroni .acquiesced. The Duca -re¬ freshed the Jamp ^be bad brprightiWith him, .and ¿requesting ,ya]frphi to pro¬ ceed, lie led tţie ţ way ¡towards^ ¡the state apartments^^of ţhe r pa||azzi.; TheD^varf w r as, cpnducţed ¿to .one ¡ aJpQpát .unparel- feled for jçiçhneşş ¡ and embellisliment, and ţhe Dnc^, bidding an ^adieri, he,was leftto /uturer^flectipri. Thus far was secured the ; silence and the subşeryience pf the Dwarf Valfroni,
and happy in its attainment,' the Duca Paoli once again resumed the air of composure. Valfroni, locked in ihe solitude of the chamber, gave vent to the various ideas that floated across his mind ; the circumstances of Leontini di Vivaldi were their principal import. It is remembered that in gratitude for tbe restoration of a life doomed by Paoli to destruction, the Signore Leon¬ tini had undertaken Ыз journey to Reg¬ gio, where the mission entrusted to him by the Neapolitan Visconti was with willing pleasure entered upon. The subsequent morning witnessed his departure ; the Neapolitan received him ■v to his embrace, and hoping his safe return, they parted,—it was an eternal separation ! The brightness ¿f a soft Sicilian sky
animated the prospect of Leontini, and as his sight seemed to measure the im¬ mense space that pictured itself before him,, his heart felt a genial throb, in viewing tfie sublimity of the Creator. A chain of mountainous passes, beneath whose narrow and winding declivities the path was just distinguished, mingled with the dusters of numerous, pine and, cork trees, that scattered them¬ selves upon the rising borders of the scene, encouraged a pleasing and ro- mantie train of, contemplation, and Leontini freely indulged them, while the slow but certain step of his mule tracked the course of the steep and rugged road, from the shelving and rocky summit of the last yvM and va¬ riegated eminence that linked itself with Palermo's;, boundary. The small but
Beautiful' town of Monte Real extended itself f ô the right of the port ; arid along its* gehöy sloping ascent; Leontini pui 4 - sued r hiá route. Its aspect Was' of the most enchanting atid picturesque' kind ; from 1 the rude passes hé had just' left, thé scéne was mellowed into' a'delignfc ful· landscape: Thé light' appearance' ofthe villas dispersed thŕofrghoíiť,~Uŕé liriez of olive and other trees thröngítíg uriW its beiğhis,— thè half-tenanted ^e- rriäiiis of the abbeys jäst rearing its turret through the intervening vístá,~tH'é s'éi'pëntiriè ròad,' rbfreshecí With cooling gfeánrrô that spread themselves frorri thé tíVerftòWitig éasrjádes arid surrounding jffid'èaûj Which áré nUmerötısly disco¬ vered' tìpoti iti êriVirònfe ; the extensive s^feéťOf Meditèrráilèari ťéaehirig ť& thé ifelés rif Lipari, studdédWitbthé báŕciités
of the Sicilian traders*, and pther fre¬ quenters of the coast,, afforded at once a most delicious and .brilliant prospect. Leontini occupied some few minutes in reflection ; then, turning from the scene, he t emerged into the almost entangled path, and made for, the nearest town. The romaptic and, even [terrific appear¬ ance of the mountains .which he passed, their perilous heights rendering ap¬ proach impracticable ; its acclivities im¬ pregnated with nigged piles of rock, and other masses of immense structure, scattered as it were by the bold hand of Nature, above numerous tracks and descents, wbicb, excluding from the craggy and canopied steep the light of day, seemed« to pourtray u Dells of gloomy horror." The mist of evening was enshroud-
ing^the brow ofthe lofty heights; Leon* tini had travelled several leagues, and ( , í-, # u -■ t ŕ*. is¬ felt the effects of its fatigue. Gazing from a projecting ascent through the distance which lay before him, a small Ь и *, п wretched building appeared the' only habitation within sight, and to its inha- bitants he directed his course. It was a rude although cleanly hovel, shelved in . . | - í -I'M ' l the hollow of one of the mountains. , -'j'" '' ϊ - ?"« ^ГГ 1 " 1 '* 1 ^.. THe wild thyme and heath briars grew upon its path, and the vast range of cedar and pine trees served to partially shade it from observation. From its eminence, the main road was seen winding through an uncultivated waste, till thé black aiid impenetrable appear- ' * '" J ( >, ч r,v jÍťO -'"'"V ance of the forest's terminated thè track, through which, at intervals, á faint speck of thé Mediterranean was jusf dîslin- smishëd.
The door was opened by a hardy and cheerful-looking mountaineer, who, surveying the appearance of Leontini with seme apparent good humour and caution, lie made a formal obedience. He inquired the distance from the next town, and, finding that it was several leagues, he purposed sheltering at the hovel for the night, " The mountaineer repeated a hearty welcome, and throw- ing some fresh fuel upon the hearth, the red flame reflected brightly on the walls of the hovel. Its interior afforded but little, either for observation or enter¬ tainment. A flask of choice Greek wine was offered to the Signore Leontini, and, partaking of some dried fruits, with a large oaten cake, which was presented, he felt somewhat refreshed. The close of the following day brought DO
hilu tò CapO Cefalu,< and,,engaging* with a amali galliot trading to' Messina fov án exchange of some rich merchandise, he was speedily within sight of the atí¿·' . cient and opulent port. Making й tem¿ porary abode at Porto Real, he $ougtø ëome gratification in its rich ahd varied prospects. From a rocky accent' ad* joining Fort St. Katharine, á scerie of ihe niost peculiar grandéul* presented itself.*
The heat of a Sicilian sun had de¬ creased, and only its beams lingered on the calm surface of the Faro, (or straits,) leading from the entrance of the port, amply defended'by majestic ridges of mountains, upon which art had com¬ pleted what was originally the rude and sublime outlines of nature. The town of Reggio, stretching its towers to the '" blue horizon," met the eye of Leon¬ tini, and musing for a moment upou the purport of the mission which caused his presence there, a sigh escaped him for the unfortunate bride of the Neapolitan Carraccio.
f; JÇHAP; HL- I burn, I throb, my pultes beat, I feci thy rankling arrowi now} They tremble iu ray bleeding brow. And pierce Reflection iln hie lilniy eeat. " ' Tn heighti of pain my heart ie tost, ŕ And all the .meaner torrowt lost. >» t" ' . Deruouy. /, ŕr ζ ^ :. , Ί'.'· /Λ. . '- i- r * The D.vfarf^was punctual to, his' pro-. mised meeting. The Comptessa enjoyed - a „peculiar kind of delight in his ¡visit/ and it was expressed in a reception 'of the ınoşt cheering welcome. V I Would rather,^Comptessa,* meet with the fare' o.fa¡ guest ¿less /valued/ than be the par-? ticipator, s of entertainments like these;> they.dOî but form .obstacles, probably/to 4 our meeting,land tempt us,¿ by artificial·
means, to resolutions which alone ought to be the work of calm arid reflectiöriJ But permit me to speak of wbat may be; of greater import. Since my presence. here, the Duca: ЗраоН^ bás made me inheritor of his sole confidence; through the entire range of Palermo's dominion/ the Dvvarf/hithérto spurned and avoided/ has free scope, power, command. He will shew it. The wealth, kingdom, pallazzi,' allin Paoli's claim/ áre шП /té Dwarf's carefr-mark cyoui that, Signorä-^and itâ isaesire&toiwéihem às his observations andfiiendsh^iwarrántši^^hf'í :i,/ -iH^Ohi -no, ^impossible, impossible;?^ shouted^thèLComptessa/, with ä peculiar: force aridv insanity of ; expressioni rthat fmledťnotííto , pourtrayíhöw gladlýŕishé· receiyédsuchlaninstanceöf ^information^ вЬелсЬврегЯ' the händs of thepwarf^í
" ( To what, Valfroni, does an event like¡ that originate ? Oh, do not falter, tell me all, and J will reveal to thee every feeling and eyery wish my heart pos¬ sesses—ah! it would be happiness h> deed, dared I to think that Valfroni's wrongs, and he must remember such intimation was given to Rosalviva, had received atonement from the hands of the Duca Paoli." < " Tbey have, Signora, in some degree; but wealth and kingdoms cannot hush sufferings that I have known ; they may, for a temporary periódy but the storm is still gathering, though bidden, and must, at a future interval, burst forth." " This is comfort to my soul," re¬ marked the Comptessa; «'other clouds, equally blackened, « and fraught with impending danger, shall hover in con-
junction With those^ thy imagination forms, and in one destructive crush shall the proud Duca Paoli perisru 'Tis sweet, Valfroni, to have a partner in <an &ct of great and vindictive revenge ;—thou wilt be mine?" ' " > ŕ " Nay, Signora·,' ere I could possibly subscribe myself to tbis, I would know the extent of that cause by wbich it is derived/' " Scorned, irisulted/and blighted love," unhesitatingly pronounced the Comp·* tessa, arid* héťeyes fully revealed the rage and indignation of her soul ; " can there be causes, D warf Valfroni, more calculated »for severe punishment than these?" >ï. ! . * '*í. None, none," answered the Dwarf, arid a more than usual fire of counte-
nance beamed from him at the moment of exclamation. " I have one day yet to come, when I must make out a simi- lar penalty." " Forget it not, Valfroni, but inflict it to its full extent; curses upon the' viprous being who forgets the vow of love." " The curse of every torture fall upon such an one as you have pictured, Comp¬ tessa !. May the blood of every nerve within them scorch, and wither them up, as fire breathed from the maddened hydra !, May agonies most acute fasten upon; their heart, and in the hour of death may, their hopes and their prayers be as loathsome and as abhorred as their pangs! May the great Creator, boun¬ teously as his mercy is extended, to-
¡ r î fallen sinners, curse them ! Let their grave be in the depths of hell—their souls for ever in its fires !" " Yes, yes," impassionately rejoined the Comptessa, and she viewed, with eyes of gladness, the ardour of Valfroni's thirst of vengeance, " thou hast fondly loved, and thou hast suffered?" " I have, Signora." " And yet tby mistress was fair, lovely, t, and spoke with such seeming truth, that you could have staked, probably, every ri '' .''' '- power on earth in compact with her faith and affection," resumed the Comp- tessa, and, in tracing out the description of Valfroni's lover, she gave the resem- blance too of Paoli's. " I could have done all that human strength and human art could accom¬ plish, to have perfected the happiness
of thÍ8- t creature. What a thrill of strange and peculiar, passioni ita recollection; brings on my soul; that time when , I used to gaze on her, through hours of gloom and sadness., We met,* Signora, often, but not always happily; there was a kind of adversity that, crowded upon our hopes, and chased our affecr tion ; her tears would heighten the me¬ lancholy of the. scene; but, when Val¬ froni spoke of love and happiness— when, in the,soft embrace of innocence aud sincerity, his bosom pillowed her form/ and his heart throbbed-with intel¬ ligence that recited schemes of future felicity—Oh, then, her Jook, her voice, and her smile, was indeed, a Heaven, She would<press her lips upon my, brow, that, ached with terror and oppression* and her kisses would alleviate its pain ;
she wouldvtenderly clasp me, aridi- in thé full glow of hér affection, she' exultingly; then vWöuld exclaim,* ť w é shall yet be liuppy !' With this*:who could have but loved : aš Γ did ¿"-¿-Madness; as it were, I cherished ity : and rather; than have for¬ feited iti wpuld bayeencounteredtorture, destruction and'death." ' . " ; The Comptessa was ;silent> an apathy şeemedtoreigft; oyer/her senses,¡and though she gaized full upon the ; flushed countenance of the D warí];; its sense was;^void¿ \-.^['^;ί Ί ι •■■■-iti -Υι' ·.·.-. '·:-Υ:ν'^:>-·-^' ťť And think, Signora, « when,)-, at the moment my bliss was ' mpşf perfect— when there ivas a cup offered; to my lips beaming with: sugIi . richness and. such sweets—she—she alone dashed r it from me :-т -ууЩ i her. :pwn willipg ; band shià snatched, frpm 3 me/the last hppe^ and the
last throb of joy that ever* warmed ' my bosom/ You may imagine,' in v soibe degree/ thatstàte'of misery'which thé distressed mariner suffers when his little bark/containing áll that 'is ' valued 4by him on-earth/'is 'overwhelmed ' in öne immense gulph; and, wrecked and deso¬ late, he views the scene that hás brought with it his horrors and^his ruini I stood — the motionless statue ~of r grief and despair; there,was no arm offered 1 to lead me from my wretchedness — to sooth' íny suffering; she had fled from me, and with her, human happiness." "And this deceit was practised to obtain another more deserving ?" replied the Comptessa, somewhat interested ' in the narrative. ' ' * Li '* Not more deserving, Signora ;—he could but love her. Morethan I would
.ROSALVIVA.v have done for, her, ¡to,she w щу sense of felicity, and , to secure that of her's,; could not have, been the attainments of ; man ; but there was some charm that diffused itself in her bosom, inspiredjbyJher new lover, that existed not but in. ţhe şun, of whose, beams it was constantly reposing ; and for this charm.she bartered her pro¬ mises ; all,those; ties which serve to bind human nature in one formation of com¬ fort and joy, were burst asunder ; she took his heart to the unison of her: own, and,mine was flung from her unheeded aud unpitied." r ,.-.', л ; : ť", But she relented ?" cried Rosalviva. ч :" Never, Signorat she rioted, ior r ;an age, in the excesses of her love, ; and the guilty passion of her paramöur."^.*;-.;;.},^. v? .:^jŞheJiveş■ţeţ,ioJţ?5 b :.;. i f, : : ra: ; î ' Î> ;·-;" ;-.- : >. ? ч i " Time,, Signora, . has, brought юп> a
satiety inUbe mind of her lover, and he has turned from'the object of his once magnified idolatry ; in the arms of one more endearing he loses thè wanton smiles of his late mistress ; itis ever tbe case attendant upon affections · engen¬ dered like these. You, Signora, seem to know some little feeling, witb regard to the correctness of my observation— lias the Signore Daca Paoli deserted charms beauteous as thine? impossible !" " 'He has ;—but he shall yet learn the vengeance due to insulted affection. Thou hast deigned, Dwarf, to tell me of thy sufferings ; they are but parallel with mine—-nay, do, not start—I once'had a lover, kind and faithful as yourself ;'he seemed to bestow upon me every care and every hope, but the high blood within my bosom rushed impetiiously,
and my heart was swept aWay in ' its torrent. Oh, to ithe ear and senses* öf -woman, what-penetratesso quickly as the sweet balm of adulation. Faoltayas then-my admirer, Ъе lavished it upon me with 'unceasing hand, and, 1 blinded by its infatuation, I*became - lost to- shame, ,trutb, and honour. 1 quitted the pre¬ sence of one who would -ha-ze made me blest,; and fled with,him who now has rendered ma wretched." f "/¿And ihe lover survived his ruin ?" " Thanks to Heaven he' fell ; my« dis- jgrace, my end, he can never know; he died, Signore Dwarf. I wiibnotiassume .vanity -sufficient to mark - the event, as jderiyed from the result of blighted joy ;—- bnfc -he ceased to breathe more than during a<trifling elapse after»my union with .Paoli." , ,
/'.Better thus," observed' Valfroni, '/* than to cross thy path- with'the bitter ■taurttof violated vows and .perjured prin¬ ciples." * * ." Rather should < this hand shed the blood that warms its heart, than 'Rosal¬ viva suffer the momentary horror and torment bis presence would create—oh, it would sink me into the earth !" ?' And thou, too, art really wretched ?" ejaculated Valfroni, fixing a look of ear¬ nest inquiry on the commanding outline of Rosalviva's countenance. ' " 'Tis a wretchedness, Dwarf, I scarcely know how to delineate ; 'tis not the abject sorrow, the bitter grief, that dries up the current of every young and branching hope; it is indignation, scorn, and resentment combined; and its unities burst upon my soul with the
fever of agony and revenge. For Fran¬ cesca has he relinquished the Comptessa of Romagno—tell me, » Dwarf, ifan adder, whose sting has penetrated the most sensible part of thy nature, crosses thy (Step and lingers there,—what should follow?" * ", Its destruction," replied Valfroni. " It should, it should," > eagerly, echoed the voice of Rosalviva, glad- dened.tfn the coincidence of Valfroni's ideas with her own. " But'a woman's courage is not ever at command ; much as the reptile may have wounded, she might recoil at the moment its venom is seen.", , if» There are instruments invented by the art of 'mankind, to deal destruction out in every possible shape, and there are hands to wield them» Signora ;—the VOL. III. E
viper, whose dreadful touch 4 you have félt, should lose its 4 stmg ; and^ in losing that, you j enioy the satisfactioii J re¬ quired."' " With your aid, Dwarf Valfroni, methinks- the spirit and resolution bunv ing within my bosom could blaze forth in all its' strength ;¡ thy temperance would enable>me to deeds, I' had not confidence otherwise tò »think upon.—You, too, feel· an equal'pang, and' for its-afflictioU no one could yield 1 a better 4 reward. Sball· I clahmthy· services?" The- Dwarf'mused. » " ' You see J I* am · prompts Valfroni ; but I need not point out to one so capa¿ ble· of judging'by experience4he enthu¬ siasm 'which is^carried with 1 it'; my'first í glance directed'to Valfroni told me ! thar/ there wfts^a sympathy* and'a suffering-
,Α ROSALVIVA. 75
hi his bosom акт with that or Rosal- viva^s. Slie has not drawn an'incörrécT portrait/ Váiironi is ' sérísible' that the -sili ■■biiojivíí'i /л·.·« r» di'i^aSvijìii· ■. : ί}*'?- ! ιϋ - Duca Paoli has wronged hım; he has also Rosalviva.■ ■ Wliat further' remains, but, ia" unison, to sèeK^ atonement, and ', V li İ İİ ¡i 'ff JÍ.ílJ-LlítiUO. Uè .¿U.íi ; ü'.t 'ľ-.'i :ŕ' s.isfi,<' : *»jJ by one act reinstate the composure and peace of mind he so indignantly lace- ťi Yes, this ímigátne enecïed^ signora, jusfináblý and ¿afëly," rèjôÎnërï" ţtie' ^O^İİ.İjİî-::';» \·.,ϋχΟί--'.ίί,ΐ- ; . '».Ui.*.*-. ím:':«, ^ i: ..¿iţii' Dwarf, m a tone of the most calm and décrsive liina.' '' Anămust be* etfectecl," repeated trie" JJ'Jiií''íí' iii '·..); ¡jj.i íj.> \.'L?LHiï . Jïi "íiJJiJrf fl'UVť/ v.«. Comptessa, and her hand pressed more iervëntiy tnat: oí valfroni ľ ^ - " Dosi inou'kn^wý- ignorar pr.-rïiher ddstthou TemVmbeŕ^tŕát the unÎapjöy' penod which terminated thy parent s, tne
Conte j Reo Cardonťs life, was singled out by the assassin's art." " It was," replied the Comptessa, and a gloom momentarily overwhelmed the brightness of her features. " Thou also wert sworn to avenge it, tbe oath was bound in compact with thy soul's destruction, dared you to fail.** " It was ; but how know you this ?" " It was too publicly known and re- corded, to have escaped me, or aught beside ¡were their sensibility awakened to its interests. How hast thou per¬ formed thy covenant?" interrogated the Dwarf, after a space of time, in which í i 'İH there had been a f complete silence. 1 ». 'i " Nay, do not descend to offer a frown, Signora," for he perceived that there was an alteration of visage and a cast of ^ϊ ί .ΗΊ - li./ » ι . / n
expression that augured her displeasure with the familiarity of the Dwarfs in¬ quiry, " unless I do but hear the most minute description, how can I possibly administer aid ?" " True," murmured the Comptessa, and a sigh of agony seemed to escape her. " You falter, Signora Rosalviva, is the assassin i n to you ?" " Would he were ; my broken pro¬ mises and my neglected duty to my parent's destruction should meet atone- ment, in my immediate consignment of the recreant to the scaffold. 'Tis true, that the affairs of the heart have been more the care of Rosalviva than those which ought to have marked the duteous zeal due to her father's remains; but God will forgive'it!—ft has slept, but it now
y V Λ Tf 7 V . ί J /i', shall be my first thought, ,my first ac- complishment." .til 1^4 ΙΙΪΊΐΠ 'ΐ» I, ! " And thou wilt .forget, then, thy in- juries from Paoli;" remarked the Dwarf, as he beheld the kind of fiery ardour which ¡vented itself in the wish of persecuting the assassin of Cardoni; " one must actuate the other, and both may be decreed, finally and irre- гДз r ·"/ >-f»/t mí) ... 'ift' ur» ' " vocably." *' Thou canst give me comfort, ,Val- froni," placidly cried the Comptessa. íť Willingly, and ţo prpyp J(brţher my sense of such, promise not to shrink, „».i J/, .fi. )'tn- j| y*i >'í'it.u. rdi ;*. ¡( ((ι *f< * aiid I will ,poiqt put thy .father's mur- r*>j-f ţ ч r* ^ι * ». -,*-,/-i ^ «У ' -c /,| ;,ţ f i.ir,c¡. derer!" .** My .father's murderer!" shouted Rosalviva, and a temporary wildness }j«-i'> or n¡%, t . titl t ^V^î^ï.<Ç^ ' 4 "',Γ >f "ín^íjO iopk possession of her faculties. 41 Aye, Comptessa ; I wiH not deceive
you ; 'the hand which ¡guided the wea¬ pon ito the heart of the Conte, in the piazzi of St. Marc, on tbe -eve of St. .Rosalia, was one thou bast often pressed." The eyes of the Comptessa grew dim ; there was .a,singular and mystic manner about the energy vof the Dwarf that alarmed her, and she began al most to doubt ,his natural agency. She looked with an involuntary dread upon his cheerless countenance, and a sensitive ;shrill of terror,seized her. " .Speak," ;she pronounced deliriously, " in candour, do not keep from me hb name; my Jips can blast it ; speak, Valfroni." ' ",And thou canst positively, were it the nearest friend on earth, resign thy
bond, in obedience to thy father's last command, and thy oath of allegiance/' " Assuredly ; no tie on earth could make me relinquish the promise sworn to at the dying pillow of iny parent." ' "*" Signora, thou hast treble vengeance and treble claim ; the assassin was ------" Tlie Dwarf paused, and looking cau¬ tiously to the portal in the distance, from 'which'his fancy formed approaching footsteps, be drew'more closely to the Comptessa, whose agitation and impati¬ ence were manifested in the convulsed sob, and the breathless vibration of her bosom. " Quick, quick, Dwarf! his name?" "Paoli Golfieri!" A violent and horrid shriek witnessed the Dwarfs harangue, and she sunk for
some'moments, in a statie of stupor, into t' ! i the arms of Valfroni. "Oh, God! oh, God!" she replied, on recovering her ! self-command, " this is dreadful indeed !" The state of her feelings may be ima¬ gined to-be those of the most afflicting and the most harrowing kind; she looked back at'the wide career of sin she had rim through, hand in'hand with Paoli, with her father's assassin; the man she was bound by oath the strongest to hurl to punishment and death. Her senses seemed to reel within her ; she 'shuddered to sketch the retrospect, she trembled to think of the future. For a short time her finé ( form and features were enshrouded in the most dejected- and most abject appearance, nor could "all the consolements of Valfroni dispel e 5
sure of calamity that .ljowedjt; ý $ х М}$г qeş^^ud^n utţeţ* ^bstractipn alternately remarks of the Dwarf Valfrçmi, she scarcely r yv;as h^rd ţo , acjfup^le^ge çeply. A goblpt of şparkjing, lacbryniae ş t tpod ,b t esjde, ,ţ|ie couch ,of R^şaivjiyş, a t i|d ^yipg p its delusive apd shiiat aţjn,g xejipff her qiprJ and ţ i(Jeas pţiţainecl ъ ftfiŞb polpitriitg. , . ,ι ■ y#Ppi ^d tl ^ta^ed ti ţq ^er şp rni- pqtely the incidents cjspnejqterJ yvjth ; ţ}|e fijţal catastrophe, rel^ţi^e ţp Carp!f)rii, щ}а ţhe frequent, pceurreııçes that ^xqse jn Iter teppjlectjoii siftp^ Щ, &Ф& VpMm ţo.ţhe ftpndppt ща m^nqe?: of ßaotj, şervet tp reridpr.^u.bt at.pnce ifriitţess. Slie røpalled ţhe jSİnjEula^ ar- doqr wjth νν^ιφ h^^^.fpjvtlifîciîşi-
racter of the assassin, when the Padre Vivaldi had presented her with its out¬ line, and urged her pursuit of it ; and the more attentively she had recurrence to tbe past, so much was she the more convinced of its unfortunate reality. The night was already far advanced, the dim reflection of the lights in the apartment threw an unusual tint of darkness around it. The figure of the Dwarf,* as he sat beside the Comptessa, scarcely moved, and there was a stillness solemn as it was unpleasant. " If the Dwarf Valfroni," ejaculated the Comptessa, " wears a heart like mine, what will it not accomplish." " He has a heart, Signora, bold and revengeful<·—can you but prove firm ?" " I will prove a giant's strength, a giant's soul," triumphantly replied Ro-
salviva, her eyes expressing' tlie excess of passion 'that : rested in her heart, and, at the same ' time, she drank deeply of the intoxicating beverage before her. ; " Well then, Comptessa, it is for your¬ self to determine, whether the disgrace and destruction' of the Duca-Paoli be immediate or riot—dost thou still· love him?" ....«'· j . ' - i » - 't Oh, : shame and horror,! I do, I do !" ì '^Wouldst thou have him survive it? —wouldst thou yet enjoy more, of ------" " I would but see my rival, Fran¬ cesca, -tortured—say i death—and -· then learn· how far the feelings ■ of his soul will reveal themselves towards her loss —this done,- the proud Paoli can form no excuse for ;the denial of-ray fondest .boast/ Palermo's ì Duchessa— ^but this I doubt—his heart seems woven with her's,
and she has acquired atı ascendancy over it that holds 'free' and entire domi¬ nion."- f<; ·'. · «·» ; İ" w. .. . " And forgotten thee ?" implied the Dwarf.^ -· - - - ť·· " Gh ! yes,'^ cold and frigid is the resemblance of that passion which once he -inherited, and which oft he - would pourtray." * ,. > " And if Paoli/ sensible Of thy value, and unmindful of the decease of Fran¬ cesca,' welcomes to his heart thy hopes and 'thy happiness, what follows ?" The Comptessa was unable to reply; she felt the agony of such a moment; she felt her fancy rise to scenes;of splen¬ dour .and' bliss, in'-the acceptance of Paoli's -hand and 5 'dukedom—but again her mind was appalled on its reflection thatsuchan union" was-With the assassin
of her parent. She uttered these sug¬ gestions to the Dwarf, but his persua¬ sive and unerring tone diminished their poignancy. "* » " You may still preserve thy oath, Signora, and still enjoy thy highest hap¬ piness 1" f ( r « " Ha li' violently éried the Comp¬ tessa, and her enthusiasm seemed lighted up with more than usual brilliance ; she seized the hand of Valfroni and*pressed it,to her heart»— * ς and the terms that could secure ; to «me this invaluable en¬ joyment?" ' ¡^Francesca np more, you claim at once the fiat af your wishes" 'A CrantecJ," одэЦеД the Comptessa, and her, mind >wa#*rivetted to the гевдаф ofVaJfronj, » , , "WJia&jş the sequel presumed he;
,'^tós, refusa) giygş riimjţo,J;he scajŞpld — his acquiescepiçe, -fte şumm^ <ä pf ţ yppr gxpectatipriß-rrtnisiiloiiej.thpre дп!у re- rnairı.şipr ypUiţp jdémandjthe w ea № »nd ppssession&p^hiŞidu^e^pm to your own ppnsjg^rientrTjthi^knthen^wiat w\ţl be yonr ppwpr, .yputţ.^rifei.andyonr, gr^)- 4euiTTW ar,:l iJli n ? | Î ţil?T!· P a l? rmo holds.one being w}ıp çan, prove Jlţis, atrocious,guilt in the ^ss^ssjnatipn^f ¡geo^Ça^ppir^- ^iflİAİÇd 1, yoAi^JhaJI.ppint p\it,to ţhe tribunal ,pf h,is ,.£oqn.ţry ţhaţ ^Iţaţge, wfeicb^wuLcomp^litbis beipg tQ dişelp/ie ajl liis ideart Jş. Jn po^şpşşjpp qf^will liß qpt^rtfttt frp.m).ţhejidea^ith hprfpr? Ţjiij mu^biSPcorøpJiisiied, )Уои и р»1у çan РЛрподпсй1>У^егчЬр1^е?.^^^ $ RpAalvİYa^py^llSiAfe dppnţed asşa^- Mrio^tjiyp^rpriír.]'
" But didst thou not say, I could 'enjoy both these attainments?" · " " Yes, Signora, but not for ever—at least if thy father's loss and his value be considered worth recollection. I said thou mightst still preserve thy oath ; but why wouldst thou seek the mutual exis¬ tence of these attainments? Tell me what possible feeling you can have towards the man who wantonly deserted thee—who, while he was presuming to cherish a flame for one, he was destroy¬ ing the peace of another·—has this man the soul left of former days ?—no, it has gone. Makes he you the partner of his splendour on voluntary terms? Does he not purchase it by your silence? and can such an' one retain 'a 1 power of thought or commiseration in the bosom
of Rosalviva? Surely not. The wealth of Palermo absolutely in her sole pos¬ session—can she then not find cause to proclaim to the world the assassin öf her parent? <Can she ¡ not tear off the mask he has long concealed himself with? Her country will applaud the deed, and she may reign, as it were, amidst the warmest of honour, and exultations, at the act of magnanimity." " And Paoli perishes," she pronounced at the termination óf * Valfroni's detail. " As traitors should 'perish," cried the Dwarf. " Do you forget your wrongs ? or do you shrink from the task ? Indeed I thought the Comptessa Rosalviva had a more lofty soul, or I should not have deigned to presunie upon its guidance." " No, no, this is'irrelevant," impres¬ sively spake the 'Comptessa, " I can do
,all thatjbecopies -rne-r-I .can fulfil my ,pa|th-H-í>ut cbpw» /riiighty Va,l froni, can f ţhe existence ,pf jFJrancesca ,be ,parted iwith.? i№ght M not ¡the deed ,at f once de¬ stroy }Ош\ projects? ,Mightit npt lead to detection? Who can be ¡her execu- íioner,?"^ "This iß with facility .accomplished; my iutnodnqtipn to ^er ,exceHenza will fayourfmciwith sufficient opportunity for iCvery ^purpose, arid ßo ^bly ,(раггДоп me, Signora, if J pVier-rateniy.owü poor^abi- Uty)"T--the ^Comptessa ,srmUed, but she snatched ?bjş ¡hand tp Jber Jips, and jts ţpresspre testified 4he s,eAS,e ^and rapture 5 ybe felt for xhjs zeal \апгД superior kAöw- Je^gei "< I ¡repeat, so ably coulo! it be effect,, -tbşi (ПО jsign ,,or ? eyidence »of destruction can be adduced ; suspicion şhajjl nöt have v the sniaJJLest .cypviqe for
¡ifs Proses ; ,ηρ 49irliyiç]ual·bejr^gsţıppld Jçpow, { or ^ap, ppşsiblyjdiscoyer^ ţpe syjmpţouţş (pr^qauşe ţ of h^r lţi death, } зо ^ecjçetly^ııld 1ф$ та^регщще ţfce ^eşţr, ťs f ppl,şatio ( n,of ^(ıis : idol,' ^ranc^spa, that she shall sin^intptheicy,.embrace,of jdţssol^ţiqn^jgnor^ţţt^ven herself iţhat its approach is so near, and at once so decisive." * c Oh, impst.ppw^erfui ,and ^stonjşlıing y,al ä (roni, .wJiat ha^e J ¡pot .gained in jll^yimi.the^?" , - " Fm e > .Sfew№ Ά ^Д ' teW * e c^nc^şion^.' I?ı;^ncesca-s iridisppsiţipn Vfi ¥»?9 1$Щь Mb S0 M^ rtam ip-íŕ result, that it must ţ tya .supposed the Ш\Щ1 íf>i^claiiim^t ; ap^jirrfprference of p'Ţhiş iş^|vyer,^hisjş,subji ı mi ; ty m,pşt
wonderful 1 ,,J cried Rosalviva, ' and her bursts of rapture were vented in conti¬ nual plaudits and testimonials of' the sense of Valfroni's value. " And to what agency does Valfroni oweall this grand and masterly acquirement ?" " Poison," audibly answered the Dwarf. The Comptessa momentarily startled —the calm and expressive manner of 'the Dwarf, and the singularity of his observations and disclosures charmed and fired her soul with more than grate¬ ful ardour. ' " Poison !" she repeated, and her tone almost seemed to fear the safety of its effect/ * " Yes, Signora, and of so pure'and 'subtle á nature, that nöt the slightest trace or distortion of feature can mark the victim's fate; its efforts are slow,
imperceptible, but will never fail; lan¬ guor and, weakness will be its ; atten¬ dants ; yet no reason can be construed more than the mere relaxation and apa¬ thy of mind,, which at the best of times, and in the strongest s of constitutions, will have free egress. This compound, Comp. tessa, will be given in her ţieyerage, she was pleased ,to accept from my hand, (by the way) this day at her husband's banquet — a draught of ^choice wine which I selected and recommended !— it can be repeated ¡to-mon/ow, ι and with i t »can be infused the compound I speak of. Some hours will elapse ere it pro¬ ceeds to work upon,the mind and spirits of the ¡partaker, but its effect and its success will arrive." " And thy hand, Valfroni, will adrni-
nieter 'tbîs î^ АЬжШеа^Ье'ЙЙЙСАШ,* álniöst öVerp'ówèred 'aftrie^s'éns'ations^of TbeDWárrpàtisèd.' ' ' '' ľ '^Öh/db'·' riot 1 keeperne 'in ' М$еЫ\ yΌÜ 7 háVë i rШseW , ItìУbό r pëйЧÖ J ári'ëήvia^^^^ height;^ άό'η^/βνβΛ^^ΐΐΙί^οοΓ^ίίεή^ áftdhésitatfbW, blast f ttíeití7"' ' >: ' ' '"T have, doubtless' si^hifiècT^ Òòriípi téášäf th'é^ р!а'п ] which 'i^ould 0 produce' yöıi < hajfípirieàs ŕ' MÍ-óŕ ' ¡ Whaf righť or" authority:^ has 0 'räy^ifiteŕféíWce ? Tlie' D'tichéásWF^česca^^^ ; ! indeed/ tó^s^kim^rtiáliy^ I sWiiU 1 c■ótíéerve'hèr il tó'Ö ì ániihbléV'atìd î wfi^arrV , F- to 0 rjé } thé^ cTé^trcVýeŕ 14 öf h'èr v dà^s 1 ?^' Why J should' my^soıil^e'^cu^ed^tn'' her murder?" M IÍS '' " " r A' > sljriék · öf discoräkiiť atíä ! pám'ful
momeriť esicaped Rosal vivai - äťiď- slie' looked' with,pitiable 1 inferiority' ät 5 thé 1 unexpected 'and gallihg remark. "'Oh! 1 Valfroni, hoW Шё" you 1 tor¬ tured rbé? b THis ; statè l öf my Wretched-' ness surfasses' in every* degree thW which Г have 1 "ever yéť knotvri 1 ;' itMs^ cruel -"it f is'unkind, indeed'." 1 ; Téars'followëd the expression'of Ro-- salvivain räpťd^successión; and her sobs' were' violent; The Dwarf gazed^orľher With 1 the'-niost 1 cordial tranquillityV and¬ in his 'bŕéÄ 1 there*' aprieared 1 tò éxísť'a 11 world ' of 1 riéW" and ' indescribable senšä-' tiohsl· He· 1 extended' his* hand ťo L the Corripťéssä ;-* sbe received it, 1 Hilt her ' grief really manifested the absorbed Wd 1 harrowed state 'of her iiìWàrd* suffering. TH'èy Were'the' fiŕšťtéars' nearly she hátď thVotìjgh' any means' acknowledged—
rì they Mvexe bitter ones. The Dwarf had fixed his,eyes : intentively-upon her; he ventured to kiss her lips; he repeated this familiarity, and the warm blood again was renovating her exhausted na¬ ture. She ¡turned her swollen eyes, still wet with their tears, towards him, and, scarcely beyond a whisper, cried, " Is there no price that can be offered, Val¬ froni, for this signal act of service ?" The .Iţwarf was silent ; but her pres¬ sure of his hand to her, bosom, which heaved t with, excessive emotion ; her i'" 1 flushed countenance, and her convulsive respiration, separately told that feelings of a warm description were animating her .heart. ι í» To which do you allude?" asked Valfroni, "tlie compound can be pro¬ cured at no great price ; but if you mean
the service of Valfroni/ he must reply, that rio sumi on : earth can purchase' it." . ". ;Oh, ; miserable an d .. 'd egrádéd .wo¬ man that Ί am, to uriburdén my heart, and"to'unite it with' one I thought de¬ serving in a mutual'cause; and thus to be renounced.— Valfroni, I did think thou - hadst < more ; sympathy and more fondness." 5 ' '" .. r. ' '■' .'; ' · " Thoii ' wert' not deceived ;—listen,' wheri I state/ that'no f priče; ^-however great, can·purchase this act;that leads to your; eternal welfare; I do not deny but that it isľothéŕ.wise-to'be;obtainedľ' ' !' " Tell meì--*tellmé thé; meaner and I will hope to deserve it^'i "* í ; ¡- ; " I' have much:of your confidence, Comptessa, truly ; ľmighť, forche ar¬ rangement of this i design, íhopé móré," 'insinuated thè' Dwarf, and.he surveyed vol, m. f
thé' tremulous' beating of her* bosom, Which had become somewhat calmed, yet· still ^fluttering beneath its anxieties. -" Thou shalt have the utmost of thy hopes, Valfroni,' ¡in 'completirigiso great 'a task us that you have com¬ menced." ^ A pause again ensued, and for somé trifling elapse, a mingled sense of em¬ barrassment was felt by each other. The DWarf drew her snore closely to his arms, arid, looking'tnildly apon her partially smiling featuvefe, be implied; ""TheyO-ring 'heart which first ventures upon tbe world»'« Signora, sets out girted and bound witb' honour arid virtue; tempt r.but to possess it, aud it re¬ nounces riches,-threats, and all that might be 'imagined ito realise it; it passes, fiirthér through" thè throng of
admiration, and in tm unsuspecting mo* ment, escapes from its chain, and, to the voice and supplication of the nrchirl-boy, denominated Ьвщ yields that which kingdoms, treasures, ondi ages, covila noi have won." The Comptessa smiled with peculiar pleasure at his figurative sketch, and she suffered him to press her lips, which she returned with a seeming fondness. i( Shall I illustrate still more, Sig¬ nora? Even thus may be applied the services of Valfroni. No price could engage them; but, in the smiles and pleasures of Rosalviva's arms, they are irrevocably sealed. " " Dwarf Valfroni, thou hast art and power to win the sternest heart. Oh !
who could resist the fascination of thy voice ?—-Live in Rosalviva's smiles,— her arms are opened to thy.bliss." " ; Enough, H enough, ' divine : 'Comp¬ tessa !—We both are happy."
CHAP. IV.
-At tbis hour,
Tbis solemn bour, wben silence rutes the world, And wearied Nature makes a general pause, Wrapt in night's sable robe; these cloisters drear, And charnels pate, shooting across my path, Witb Dİlent glance, I seek the shadowy vale Of Death, r , Pouibus.
On the lofty summit, of a steep rock, commanding an entire view of the villa Monte Real, stood the Castle Sãn Viedo ; remarkable only for its beauty of situation and the tranquillity of its solitude. It had been the occasional retirement of the Duca Reggio, and during his existence every care was taken to render the loneliness of the spot and the wildness of its appearance more
desirable and more attractively pictu¬ resque. Paoli had renewed at intervals an attention to the improvements, and as the mild season of the year ap¬ proached, or itš móre serene period, there was usually every requisite adopted, to invite thè 'visitor to an au¬ tumnal sojournment at its rocky seclu¬ sion. A banquet, given in honour'of an annual' festival, was signified at the ducal pallazzi, the subsequent day, of Valfroni's meeting with Rosalviva ; and in the height of enthusiasm, he had with his most earnest punctuality infused a sufficient portion of the compound into a glass of wine called for by Francesca, and which the wary Dwarf took especial care to procure for her. , The ensuing morning brought with it the fésűje Valfroni knew would
be experienced; a slight drowsiness, arid a mental stupor visited hen but as the cause was supposed to arise from the fatigue of tta previous evening, scarcely any notice was taken of her languid depressioni . The day advanced, but instead of the accustomed hilarity of Francesca,, there was the stupor, with all its general ef¬ fects, and which the certain properties and government of the potion could npt, as the Dwarf implied» fail to operate. , ..... A slight intermission of fever was; at times observable, aud seeking; only the aid of some cooling beverage, she con¬ fined herself to the quietude of ber cham¬ ber. Thé evening found ber much in the same situation, and Paoli considered that change of air, and the uiore invigo-
rating Ьгеегез of San Viedo,* might, be beneficial -towards her recovery. The distance . from. Palermo < being only a league, he gave the necessary orders for her conveyance ; and while, the last de¬ parting rays of a bright sun rested on the suburbs of Monte-Real, they reached the Castelli. , At intervals the spirits of Francesca enlivened; and indulging a few moments nV air ordinary glow·of animation, she receded again, into a kind of dejection, and seemingly negligent of conversation, or the/ efforts made to amuse her, she would recline absorbed in the arms of Paoli. The time that would witness its final effect upon Francesca was come r and on her retiring for the night, she apparently entered on her-eternal· slum¬ bers.· Early in tbe morning, the Dwarf
Valfroni visited ч ' thé Castelli San Viedo; his presence diverted in some measure the 4 time of Paoli until noon, ere he thought of disturbing Francesca, * Language is ' somewhat deficient to do justice to the feelings and astonish¬ ment of the Duca, on beholding the form of Francesca wrapt in death. He sum¬ moned assistance; but every art was unavailing to restore her. Paoli gazed upon her with emotions of tenderness and sorrow* he .pressed her lips, but they were cold, the damp chill of death had fastened upon them. He was led from the corse; amidst the struggle of some few finer feelings, and secluding himself within his apartment, looked back at the visionary existence of the past, j > í ^ ' j. í «m Anguish filled the bosoms of all who, f 5
were familiar witb Ihe perfections· and;the kindness of 'Francesca, : Violent , cold, supposed to.· have been received in, ber too suddenly retiring from the intense heat of the banquet, she having been observed tø hasten to the terrace, where the powerful effect of the night, air, must doubtlessly have seized on her delicate frame. * Those>wbo knew her less, imagined it an event ordained by the immediate .dispensation s of heaven, and while > they heaved , a momentary sigh for her юйэ, exclaiiiijed, " the will of Providence must be abided by,," \ j..The. Dwarf consoled the gloom of Paoli's mind, and at the . period, of her intermeut, he undertook the attention due to the ceremony.^ .By tiie^osißsels of Valfroni, the " pomp of state," μηά the uıımeûnm^ grandeur, attendant upon
the bier of departed ranki were avoided, and he was persuaded to suffer the Ыь rial to be performed with tbe utmost privacy and solemnity; " Who can. bear,"'added he, "the multitude, witb gaping mouth and gazing eye, in assemblage/ to .Usher forth their useless * exclamations, and the mourner's ear tobe wrung with lamen¬ tation? Even/ Signore Dupa, the pre¬ sence of relatives are buf oppressive ; we are sensible that the decrees of God are just, and cannot be reproved. Qreat as we feel the loss of thosp most dear to us, still, at his righteous and manifest decrees, it is not in the power of man to avert them, or should he repine. Life, at best, Signore Ducapis but a perilous' and stormy ocean; they who basten thé fleetest along its current to repose in thè
, haven Of a better world, ought to excite sensations., of happiness, : rather , than those of griefs in the bosoms of us who are doomed to be parted from; them." " These are just remarks," answered Paoli, bis mind, rather more j cheered, than in the early state of the occur¬ rence; and looking upon Valfroni with an earnest eye, he added,—" But we cannot help the common weakness of our nature, i He who ,had known a Francesca, 1 and had felt the short, but too happy period of an union i like that 1 thought to* experience, cannot refrain indulging in a sympathy and < regret at its untimely closure.". The arrangements'for the interment of Francesca were deputed to> Valfroni,'and the' serene hòur.of midnight, witnessed the removal ι of the corse·, to the^ ce- 5
metry of the ducal chapel in íhe Abbey of Monte Real. , The night was ; dark ; — the black clouds that chased each other through the arch of heaven,, gave but trifling in¬ tervals from the display of the bright features of the soft and " moonlit world." The winds were so gentle, and the face of Nature so solemn, that the hour and the occupation seemed enveloped,as it were in a complete and almost mystic tranquillity. The interior of the Abbey was hung with sable habiliments, and escutcheons of state, rendered visible-by .the-many tapers burning around^ the catafalque and the % altar. The mourners, and the few. attendants that "witnessed <the^ cere¬ mony, knelt with piousi resignation dur¬ ing its performance, and. as. the' deep
tone of the. organ swelled With, its re*· quiem, their love and veneration for the object showed a reality in tears, that spoke more than an abundance of 1апт guage. ,Ί The.,termination of. the same week.brought Paoli again to tbe ducal pallazzi and the condolence of. Palermo. , Rosalviva had witnessed in secret the progress of her wishes, and through each degree of Valfroni's assiduity. she re¬ warded . him with the riches of sensual and enthusiastic love. . , .ƒ' And thou hast done the last duty to Palermo's Ducnessa.!" cried Rosalviva^ t{ie evening after the funeral ; " Yalfroni, when can I enough repay these disinter«· ested but zealous services?" <ť Rosalviva," spake, the Dwarf,» (their intercourse had made the pronunciation of her name.now at all times familiar,)
f -there iş $è% greater enjoyment for thy vindictive, passion, j Francesca is not buried." , :tl , /j ,·,„.. , : , «MVot buried?" and.the-looksof the pomptessa evinced a wild and singular feeling. .·. ; ....... '.' My wish to afford gratification to you still· more exulting, led me to delude the pious devotees .of .the. church, and instead of consigning; •■.tø' i the? |ieaceíul seclusion) of thé; tombí; the corse^of Francesca/ 1 chose to have it. immersed within the grating of a ruined viaultjof the castelli^ aodjjuits: steady solder up the>,^ojffiji9^^bieb ¿were :> şnfficienuy Weighty to »VOM Wpícipn¿^ ; . ri : v>wj '/ And the body t of Francesea ¡fj' гарн turously: jşo^ujrecithieJCo ad- ' ь . ". Is where I named ş when i the nigbťs
ROSALVIVA." deepest- gloom, comes on, if Rosalviva has courage, she shall view it, amid all its baleful and deadly solitude." * ; ŕ ;ţ* She will;-ahd the sight of its livid resemblance shall afford bliss to her : soul, in mockery of the fair form, and the be¬ witching features; that' captivated her doting h u sband, and caused thé wretch : ed neşs of Rosalviva. v ^ ; I ' ; ; íí· And to what purpose can it be fur¬ ther consigned ?"; asked the Comptessa, at the, close of a short but triumphant interval· ; -Ь - ;; V: :;.:[y· ■ ί >'"' , ;_- ..■ :: .- ]; :; ; .·'■:■■,-*■' Only tothat of our. pastime ! It will yield. comfort to 1 Rosalviva> to be enabled, as her \fancy desires, to muse upon the wasted and decomposing form of the once i lovely -and engagingi Fran- cescai~-will it nöt? ? * '->'
" Beyond measure, Dwarf Valfroni ; this act, magnifies thy worth, and r binds me to thy interests for ever." " 1 doubt not my reward,".replied Valfroni, and his lips wandered with repeated warmth over.her charms. The intense obscurity of the atmos¬ phere served their purposes, and as the Pallazzi di Romagno was hushed in re¬ pose, the Dwarf, accompanied by Ro¬ salviva, for whom he had provided mules, journeyed towards Monte Real. Their path lay through the most remote and unfrequented part. of the forest, vérging from Palermo ; the rapid flashes of blue lightning from the sultry heat of the night, flitting through, the branches of the dark cypress, the poplar, and the lofty pine, .with the intermitting roar of distant thunder, which at times vibrated,
in dismal echoes o'er the craggy preci¬ pices, then rushing through the winding avenues of the traveller's route, and ter¬ minating in dreary response down the immense steep, whose measureless abyss seemed to lead to other worlds, produced an electric effect It was not heeded by the Comptessa, but occasionally halting for a moments she would gaze upon the wild ,ahd fearful scene· around them. The rhapsody that floated across her mind, at Francesca's death, and the op¬ portunity of viewing her pallid corse, in commemoration pf her visionary ex¬ istence,, dispersed at once the dread of danger, and afforded her mind and spi¬ rits, an unusual thrill of delight and ani¬ mation.' The spiral toweţ of San Viedo* was> before them, and they alighted at a narrow entranced the southern angle
of its steep 'ascent. The solitude of the spot precluded observation, and tbey made fast the animals to an adjoining column» " This, then,, leads to the grave of my victim r'' said Rosalviva, " oh, its dark and impenetrable mazes convey a sensa¬ tion of more sublimity than all the gilded porticos Palermo can command. Welcome, silejit and mysterious soli¬ tudes I I bail ye witb rapturous emo¬ tions ; thy roofed and 'unexplored re¬ cesses shelter the bones of Francesca I Quick, Valfroni ! to the tömbless comer of earth that contains the Duchessa," The Dwarf bad provided himself witb a lamp, and turning its reflector» they proceeded along tbé partly dilapidated building. ; - r < 'A total silence witnessed their, pro*
gress ; their separate. thoughts seemed wholly to ingross their minds, during the pause of some minutes, till at length they reached the vault where was depo¬ sited the * Signora Francesca. It was narrow but lofty, and its impregnable walls doubled its security. The Dwarf closed the grating, and they surveyed its interior. • Upon a bench of red granite was rest¬ ing the body of Francesca, ' enshrouded in a thick and richly furred robe of sable cloth. Her head-tire' was öf snowy whiteness, 4 fashioned like that of the nuns of Saint Viedo, but over it was partially drawn a cowl of velvet, lined with ermine. Oii her breast rested a crucifix, richly studded with brilliants, wbich was affixed to the girdle that confined her robe, by a massive chain
of pure gold. Jn her hand was a ro¬ sary, elaborately carved, 'and by her side was placed an illuminated missal, nor were the usual appendages of death forgotten. The crossed bones and the fleshless skull were laid ' on a small table, before a calvary, which had once been the ornament of Francesca's pri¬ vate oratory, before whicii stood a small taper, that shed a dim and solemn light through the dull and darksome cell. A chilling sensation of terror rushed across the bosom of Rosalviva at the gloomy abode, and she caught thé arm of the Dwarf with an apparent dread of some horrid catastrophe. " Does v the heart of Rosalviva sink?" questioned the Dwarf, while the reflec¬ tion of the lamp threw a shade о /er hi *
dark features, that rendered their ex, pression unintelligible. ,.-;-■..■■'■ ,;.:,·...,.,;'?:-,.;. The СощЙ^ 1 ^ -made ; au effort to rèsuüieiher.;prjor ;.courage and firmness, and, in a tone barsh yet faltering, she exclaimed, "Shew me the^^corse." - The D warf disengaged part jof ¡the pawl that cppcealed the couritenance of Fráncesca,> and, ; with the ; light of the 1цтр*у Ihe^Compţessa gazed ; upon its placid ;i and i^ill; ¡fSmiling expression. There was.uot'.thé . slightest .change in its^ appearance» sinc^ .W^nJthe i *' festive hpur"jmarked her. presence, -save that the. rosy hup Alf, the lips bail faded,^jand bad left a palHd^oJ^nr^^ ;еа|1ой pf ^RipsaH'iya waş.aliemaţeiy suc¬ ceeded л bý thaŕt ; pf giüite ^ she vjeweil ¿hel^dynf the ¡Duchéssa,
«' And; is jit here, iValfrohi^xthat ¡thou ' wouldst keep the corser?'- ^ : ŕ í . ¿ ... ;í' Неге, ¿that tby sight çan Ibej.¡at fre¬ quent (periods, gratified^ iwhen;the silent arid dealh-like stilbess ; ofthenight can guide lus ţo the dungeon ţ ;she' needs not to be more; secure*?'; . ; 'r ; :> ■ í « / ■■■" But theCastellLSan Viedo I" replied the Comptessai seemingly,·dubious of its secrecy:; '* ' Would '. not -the hollow ; ;and horrible vaults beneath St, Rosalia be:a safer marision ?" ^ , ; ]\... v. -1 =;.:■. :.. TheJDwarjtmused. ;: Л v . ľ: :.■'*. Tkat is, a. spot, sacred pnly to our own 'jSpoţsţeps ; jt.í;mayrperchance^ that in our visits here» the eye of busy curio. sit^ might pursue; us—^alawn would be given^-tbe cell,;gemote as is ; its) sitna* tipo, cannot btì unknown ta the inmates of Şan ^iedp ; and ten Ш
what 1 would í be the result ,of sûchf' a „search !-—discovery of the bodyJ'^3r -, v » •>\ ľ Shea shall·, bej:bome;.rthenŕíto. the deepest vault of -Stf Rosalia;" pronounced the Dwarf#uassuredlof the*more infinite practicability Of ,-the suggestion*, ^tbebeye of Heaven;alone can be* witness there to -,pur r meetings Ι? Η η \*,% ,ι·.ι '«îr t*'f ** Hush, Valfroni, that^iexpressioii makes my heart shudder and hang within my bosoms s^íelléd' J 4n íhorrid amotion ; speak not of ^observation íofjdeqd^like these^ţimuch less - that^of > Heavens !" She trembled, andan inward throVfas- teriipgîUpon her-soul, t út acknowledged its subservience and!weight:of iguitø Ι ^Τΐιβ,ρ warf laughed'; it wasjq abitter and derisive tone, ^and< ithe « sepuïchrai silence of the. cell· gave to it ,an'almost unearthly j ¿vibration. ".'T cannot-¿resist
ROSALVIVA. this levity/Rosalviva,^ hépriedi "when I béaŕ.yoúispeak'thuš morally ъаа piously ' -4-mmd weiare^not doing penance to' St. Christina's shrine, nor are we — '-~?>' ' l "But'hold, hold,^ interrupted the Comptessaji " this is' not a tiriaé foť the' indulgence ofiidle moments ; the :corse," and she pointed to Francesca,' " must' be removed." . / ·:- ï . M .The * increasing approach of light, ere we. cari attain Palermo; will'notgive· us opportunity for the present ; it must remain .until· the: evening' of to-morrow/ and with proper arrangement she shall be conveyer! to theíretrèáí' of Valfroni." " And -yet the % incumbrance,· and the mountainous'path;· will preclude; 3 and ť fearIdefy¡our attempts;"" ì ·: ..;". ., ľ > ťí Weíwill npťthus hazard them, Ro¬ salviva ; from the terrace balustrade of vol. ni. g
di Romagnp :you саш descend, a small boat í shall bear ,űs to¡ the skirts ofnthis: building-^there,¡in waitings you .will look for my. retura„with Francesca. VdUbeJpb·; scürity 1 of ¿the place, and. thé>:äarkness^ will not afford : the: least : chance з fóri. dé-. tection ; 'even?were it observed that the barque 5 was in waiting, suspicion could not be attached—our ι persons ' àrevìm- knojffn; .and the immense coverings Which enshrouds. \ Francesca .cannot, bëtray-ât;; this done, the black foam.df theAwaters carries ţ its r burderit to. the!landingjshore ofï Monte'Pelegrino/i*. ч. у/лщ ! 'Ьушш^- .* '6delightful !" rapturously .yshouted Ros^lviva, and her* manner poúrtràyed bet {returning sensations ot) triucúphlT The Dwarf extended his hándtíiwhich šheclasped ;with v-ari avidity, ľänd^kissed wi th repeated ' ardor.i · r
'ft Thy directions! andothy* judgment areiboundless, Valfroni ; who could op- e pose^ them ? or ?who could' defy »their purposes ? oh! s thou art truly devoted tO/the-scarce deserving-Rosalviva!"' ' At Dismiss»»these, panegyrics," briefly replied 'Valfroni, " you* fully repay their deserts^ Jbelieve me."* îRosalviva again leaned over the corse, andı gazed,-with exulting pleasure,» upon its senseless appearance. Even amid the pressure of these extacies, she could but admire: í theit divine features, and the beaming looks of sweetness and purity, that once gave animation and lustre to the*form'of Francesca, in . - L*· it The ìhour of the following midnight brought? ι sthé -Dwarf, agreeably to his intention, \to, the cell where was placed the body of Francesca. Rosalviva had
with difficulty been dissuaded ťrprrá ac- CÓmpaüymg' hiitíf during 'Itheixoccupatiön; of the event. Thev night/was^ tremen- ^ döus/|ahd>ftlié ; faee¿sof fnatùre^ söí Щ>п- vulséd^ thäPif íŕeqfuiredýälmosti^ super- % - hunian^strëngth^and^cöura^é^n^^ appalled -át^Whoi^tí^^b^Htís^pàee" of horizon'was thronged^ witliidark? and' rushirìgiclÓuds ^ ^hé^Wiŕid swept,* 5 iîı^hOl- low-aiidv stunning^ echoes]^thťôiigh^thé: forest,? "ärid^ j thévt räin" 4ell>*in torrents; united^ with* ftie> ! inténsè i? and ? vividíilašh öf ^iíiciessäut ¿liğhtnihgy; followed ¿y^oròb - şİBı% peals öf thunder, thäti*tne^confi- dënlcëf^of Rosalviva ŕ wäs !t äéfeaté^^and- she^ shrunk from the ; dreadful ríoiít'énííoñ ^rlvragëiöf tHe ^^tàry^fràughAelèntì v .^ifë' url^^älfroni^o^ däáýt tènri M^ missioW-bäť^^ biasäed* Trom 41 Kis ι ^ur^ses^ j ai^ i x3İöseIy
ROSALVIVA. shielding his' person from the storm/ he was speedily » within s the s walls > -of, the Castelli San Viedo. . ϊ ι , .¿The stream« of light * that guided him along the subterranean passage, leading to the dungeon, was with» difficulty pre- served^ii, The ^building-appeared shaken to. its i foundations, and the deep moan of ¿the winds/ passing through the»ave- nuesííbconyeyed an universal sense (( of horror^ ? The : Dwarf, pursued « the o track undismayed, naud, ι closing ¡the gratingof the ceil after him, Jie ; again gazed upon ,the Duchessa. He,grasped?the sylph¬ like form of 4 Francesca within his .arms, and, trayersjng, with his utmost speed, through the isolated and broken urcbes of the, Castelli vaults, he rested it upon the fragment x>f a pedestal, and, beckon¬ ing ţo a figure who was musing in the
distante; of an adjoining .colonade,' f- they together; conveyed. it 1 io· thé^böáti 1 The tempest had abated/ [ ari d tlié stars>rë- appëared ' Witli' ; á! mOŕérthari ^usual· bril¬ liance; ^ Tlie í surface of tlíé^ Waters .was stillen agitatin^riiotion; 'arid thé current hurried' the little vessel 'with-; an uncom¬ mon rapidity/ ' !töwards"thé^ projecting shore of Monté Pelegririö,^ ÍJ '^ -à$\-> Щ The'^ stillness' öf ¿ ^ié 5 hour/ ^ arid ¿ the night's^ranqűillityfséeniéd^ore scene ;iir cájpáciťuäé with^thé^ incident, and the Dwárf led. the way, still sup¬ porting the body of Francesca. .A companion, called Julian, habited as a page,; and who ; had been discovered at thè retreat : öf; St. ; .Rosalia,. in earnest ¡attention upon the Dwarf since his con¬ fidence with the Duca Paoli, preceded him ; and while in one: hand hè retained
a small-lamp, he,assisted, in conveying the habiliments of Francesca. .Reach¬ ing a secure vault, whose entrance ,was through a rocky division in its walls, he v took the light from the attendant, and cautioning« Jiim to remain silent, his figure was momentarily lost in the thick gloom that' spread itself before the eye. The Dwarf was not absent but few minutes, s when, he r returned;·, and î they .traversed the ,passages, leading to the ; habitable part of Valfroni's abode. .....
,CHAP. V.. t4 . A tli . 'j m í/"»·* 1 ! i* Ml·*' ι' ι*"» - ч \*ií ( ij Amid tbc vatt horlïon's itrctcŕ», ,, ϊ Τι ί " ,Ü 5" 8«о/Ьееуо or woadct^artţ >4 , ^ ' u ^ ti 'ü'er (be «pense. So criutrarlcs on Etna's top «.ansptrc, ^ a Ulcre honry froel«*, οώ by thorn b'rVkW out Ij^^ f Su ' i , ^QWLer. The blue streak^of liiorriniéí íígh^èd ΓΙ ^ Leontínť to thè port' or landing of 'Reg¬ gio. Thé long track of thé Médiŕérra- nean rolled smoothly beneath the'vessel, and as tlie soft ray of dawn l bróke upon the^sürrace ofthe waters, its appearance seemed to unite in the blue horizon, fhat of* the и '" ocean world/' There'was a delightful silence;—it 1 gave riie io a sub-
limity of thought, arid a sweetness:· öf melancholy/ that were /mutually inte¬ resting. '■·::':. ''' ' : - -■ ' ' : ' '· ΐ, · : "' r-v.*. v -' ; .'-;r· ' At the extremity of the town was situate the Strada di j Zèltö/ the habi- tation of thè Senor del Capuciö. · The humble and .retired appearance of the spot denoted itšŕ^ denial ^to yvealth or splendour í 'but there was a respectful quietness, .and Ja' 'degree ¡öf ^neatness aboutit, that spoke the industry and ;care,of itsinjia^itatits/^jh; '>níď;. '-mţ An aged , J^eapolitan, on wbose brow w as scattered/the wintry hairs .pftiirie/ wel- cpmied jthe 'appearanceof ¡Leontinit^but, ţp r hiş enquiry of the {^gnpra^rirŕaécfo, hé s heayed: a struggling sigh, anld*in>inel- lojy tonçs i y replied, /Г Wearied/; Signore, with care and the. ^weight of .mental ΐ srif foring/ ; şheţ; 1еД ; :ţhis n dwéfling^but^fow g δ
days, since. - < Palermo wias . the - extent of her fjourney,T?her husband4-butnio matter;·he has deserted her, and^the poor creature's ? heart hangs,. uporih its Jast thread.-^-Never dojI^expect^.Si'g- nore, to.see Jber more?' there^was an expression in ι her countenance/ and a peculiarity in her manner/ ^whenoshe grasped the hand off Capucio,^ that told him it would ,be their lasteartbly* meet¬ ing.!', , , , U 1 . b¡ г : f í' The; sympathy ¿of Leontiniv was /sen¬ si bl yr .awakened to, thé remarks] ofthe Signore. iCapucio, and i which rbutUoo fatally accorded with »the outline, of » the .portraitsketched by¿Cárraccio. ŕ. и* -"- . Leontini .signified tbe purport .of- his .¡visit,, tyet wasiat conjecture upon,what v'coţiditionto render final· its. completion- The arguments of the relative of Vis-
conti were, that she'had ¡quitted Reggio for ever I ; * However, ¿ he дао! ved ;to en¬ trust the packet to tbe care of Capucio; and/îupomhisretıırn ¡to Palermo, if the Signora had 1 not departed, l she * would be in ^possession Of his'arrangement. >He begged 1 the'attention of Capucio to hismiissioiv; and if »any other direc¬ tions r.were'formed*contrary to-that he nowi hád ¡fulfilled, he^ purposed by writ¬ ten communication to forward them.. An involuntary sigh of sensibility stole from Leontini; as he mused 3 upon the ill-fated happiness and'destiny ofthe bride of -Carraccio. His anxietytto re¬ turn to Palermo by the most- secluded route, and to inform the Neapolitan of the nature, of his; tour, induced?him to quit Reggio immediately, arid without
difficulty or ŕ delay, Jie retraced »his track again to Messina. - п «, ; ч ι,, ^nu »- t *- í- Not a tstar-JeuMfø aid throughout the vast yault oţ ti heayen r ^to; illumiuer its " widewo^ld^aş, iaint.and^bewildeçed almost^ the ; fSigiipi;e, Leontini, j fçqnij.qne of ŕ the heights of^rVIessina^ stood- ab¬ sorbed . in a reverie ţ of r> meditation, f Ţhe whole scene appeared iwrapjt in obscu¬ rity^ save the interv^nirig flasbe^ipf quick lightning that traced t its terpentine track álong y the>skies,í,! The moody?silence of Leontini Fwaş ,disturbed, as |his rt eye, ţdi- verted from t its * '* nothingpess," *gazed upouttjbejawfutand grand appearance! of Etna, f » Far ^above ^ the most!- towering eminences) just ^descending, fin* appear¬ ance^ from; the veiled heavens, ¿ the red voluntes of smpky flame displayed, their
ilíiimihating ' aifd ^líiajesfíè '-power. 1 Thè tranquillity of the spot 'where Tjéoritini stóbd^th'e'í'vasť^^páce 4 'aŕo'iiň'd' which thè r streaming light frò'rh^Etnà seemed'to rendéi* ^ìsiblé^and thé trëmeiirjoüs tëliain ofmďufítairis'jusť'diš^äúisbe^ oc'casiôhaľ appébŕaŕJce ŕ of ''thè yèllow tóddn, uríitèd r a prokpéct' áť once magni¬ ficent/ 'ho'ŕribľeVaňď gloötöy. J : 4 " h>1 ' 'The rnihd^f Léontini^Wäs disposed^tb realise a gratification 'hitherto untHöfrgbt of; and,* * engaging a 1 guide, 1 Wìtli^mùleS, he pursued'his Way, 'makiiig Etrià^ his most 'direct and principal routed ,t,E * í The road л extending froin*Messiria J is romantici lofty, and furnished the travel¬ ler with' views his eye сап*8сагсе1уШ|)е to survey-; >so'varied^so wild^sd'pictu- resqué^andíso extensive/' are itä objéctsv It were impossible, likewise, to conceive
the 1 luxuriance^and* /the »aspect» of ¡the immense ridge of mountains, leaving just path sufficient for^theufpptsteps'of the mule» lalong distances pf many leagues. Here,< too,'rarei-'seen «¡mingled^with ithe wildness of nature, bruits,; shrubs;? and flowers, v the most delightfuland in (abun¬ dance. » The cipnamon,' pine^and jessa- -mine, ' which ^also^ enclose ^ them, ^and whichiare^ profusely, scattered,^ inter- spersed with branches of the^Indian fig, and'other*singular'but* beautiful'pro¬ ductions, diffuse a fragrance lat the same time, that when tfefreshfed^by thenight dews and the gentle breezes, emit a> deli¬ cious odour. l ' * ; * ^^ι3ί ι s * Passing Giardini to the left on ,the sea coftst/there, is-little change, eitheHn the scene or4ts journey ; tbe same .bold¿ro¬ mantic imagery presents itself." Onar-
riving at) the smalltøwmof Taorminia, a change of conveyanceis» offered, and in additionto the guides, there are sbirri or guards/who are hired for their protec¬ tion alongíthe island, and ^according to the weight of the; employer's purse/ so are their services and vigilance extended. Yet? strange as n it may appear, these men, whose character and crime .have been, during * a- iongi career, marked-with the mösfcídire and ^hardened colouring, and who havevvith diniculty escaped the wheel· or the ,scaffoldj arenili their ?new capacity treated with » the * utmost 1 cordi¬ ality, protected and even revered.· Their courage is generally strong, and the most perfect confidence and fidelity iş. reposed in their care and attention. They^have also: the power to chastise any acts of dishonor, knavery, orimpositions:; and
fréc¿uently punish with : instant death, such as .endeavour Ï? to inj ure or rdeceive their employers.. They,usually precede the travelling .equipage,' well-mounted upon ; their smules, their carbines ready ■■..*;'"-.í';''>"i'vc. íffíj' oìì^::^nqùU№ioMnziorrUi. for action ; also pistols, which - they .caiTy out of jiuniber, as well as side¬ arms ;, although Jn .some ¿instances, in ■^■:-:·θ/'--ί:ΐ\Λ.'-'^ r*Mi;:tiV!om íij.r;c>n^a ríöí/.;r passinsf »through the „most desolate arid 'T;ivA *^r.'?■··■:' ■ =°;ii ..okííŕíf.uqmr Ъа^о'Н? ŕ? unfrequented places, reserves Jof Sicilian banditti have. .bejen iknown tö loiter/ and 'ΊΎ?υ Πί;ί4 ;*!:гД'; г ' ^ilS ηϊί'-> ί'?ί ¡ШЩПЮЯ^гО^· theseguides, for. a share.of thé plunder, ■;:·ΐ wü°r i-iC -Λΰιΐ'γβϊ'ΐ -iHít^ ,iíí.. ; }dj.íí>v.í>aaií- turn chief actors in the scene of slaugh- 'íO^'píľbíi -τι; oí х-Ци'К^:'г\ J-ùut <Н!<~*'.:\п&г. Jer. v ; Indeed the; robberies and· attacks of this kind, and at this part of Sicily, Г&'ШКЫИЩ ihKİİ ν-:;ι:·Α·>ν-Λ u\omı&l iï:V are enprraoűs. , ν ■> .; -oxe?. r 'ŕl.! ψ4)-^?\)χ}:·ν· : :-ľ- .Jíi;>ix-:? H. ul ^. i There is a small tract of land/ which ,-aio:r т.·:-' ?''-·; Vu-; Λί'ν·.ν..^Μ'·.:Λ -ι;:):'. 11 '.ţo î-îü Leontini ľ was - hear; approaching,, that ;bears. a mpst appalling character. Frpm ithis. spot, (Уа j Pemoni,) numerous^ bri-
gands nightly wander, and the utrfiost perseverance of the Sicilian government have found a failure in a&erripting to extirpate tliem. Nature has formed a .in, r "Mii^a * ι и ,. i, 't. τ > t ä barrier su ŕneient to preclude the strongest force or the most spirited attack, as the immense caverns and subterranean pas- sages beneath mountains, where access is deemed impossible, and which form such peculiar shelter, that no one beside those acquainted with the tract can'ever I JÍJ' ¿ | +4ÌJ »- 1 „ 4 ŕ ! "„ J. > discover them. Still it may not be amiss to point out, that, according to an adage of " nonòr among thieves," the banditti of ti/ " * 1^3* Val Demoni reverence this particular to its full extent. At times, when the pro- nts of their profession are less at com¬ mand, "mey raise frequent loans from" tbe adjacent districts and inhabitants, who mostly from fear, arid partly; aware öf
théfstrict sense; ţpf;Ao«i>riţand, hbiieéty ţthaţ;is , manifested; * in 'thp. kiriä öf traus- ; action iriàké; np scruple pf ^hiršjseŕying them ; ; únď şp/precişe and^cörtepi tO; tbe - time and promise of ^epa^irigVtlrerii^are thei banditti : of> Val- Demoni/ ¿tb^tytfiéir ■éxplpjtsi'are^ésperatp/aud t tbeirj;pers^ : veranee; in ŕ the pbtam'ment off booty, in - order tp-folfiltneirjpaymen ■; willipgly/bear^he stain, of murder/ rather Uhan4hat.p^;-dishpnpr. '^>Щ}Ъ}н : Ц1 ■■■■ih Ui \ ■;:» vGuiseppe ? Fazzelo^ was/itheüéaderwof ¿a ¿^SűLiall· ¡ brigand, ŕ occupying;! theii chief range iof the ValrDempn^impuntains. r The ¡ traitg, of this nian'tí character Were nppculiarlyHjgreaţ ; to the. ^mpşt, intrepid ; ; an,d v faring courages v^^b^apiptiiited .ΐ, eyen tö ferocity,; was adelet anápyincibJe .firmness/ ; a,. şiçength pf ; ; m?nd> ,-. and χ, an ? intrepidity 1 1 scarcely equallédi;^ à ŕ man
whose public deeds in,the Neapolitan territory ¿had shed ¿more humani blood, and ,had ibeenUheipropagationrof more .vile enormities, .than almost % any male¬ factor, registered» in, the, lists i of those who had terminated their existences the gibbet, òr toiled at,the galleys; yet wasi there a mildness and serenity of counteriance fjand f manners, a sense of honors andneven, virtue,! land a conduct and principles altogether allied, s that lamidsbtheirugged andunwholésome co¬ vering í that formed bis r exteriör, »there 'Was !a iffaeartn within, J destined ; for a better sphere* < ' -мм ^ ^ и j f î * Some í few* leagues from the? retreat ι of theihorde commanded by Guiseppewas -a monk's cell f it»\7nsa little spot raised by Lthe ι band of > Nature ;>■ its enclosures gave himifóöd,jand its springband rivu-
; lets: abeverage. . çiTlie bqunty¿of ţheJew , bettermpşt % inhabitante^ .abr; ■ ocçaşîprıal donation,. and^çJjbeiÉal^ -ger, \yhp wandered. by T ;hiş t sanctuary, and ¡to whom.the ¡monk Wp^ld trace^vput the ; :huudred;taljşş, ; connected ^ith.vpne ,riil pr t .móuntain, ; ;he;'wpiuld .beridjngraţi- \ tude! for the; few. pisţples^-besţpw^d^poii ,his;narratipri. ; , íľ ;^ b^vb:;m'.>íne : ífí ?rfí' i^ r Time, tand little need.pf ? íÍĽirthejr -vants beyond «the lap-whichj Jtøyidénce bad opened s tõ>bim„ had, amassed i; »ammali ■sum, rf and which»he held?, in,;".gpódly sţprp ;" be^ueaţhţp^lât in facts of^çha^. riţy, and relieving .the popr^retch^w^P iStrayed» ¿friendless s and, ;hómeless^to ri his rustici- ^níl;¿-hply;jshed. ;^ДЪе ; f humbb ;stoipk, had at times:given aid. to^ţhe^mo- m^^ry^şce.ş;siţies ..oţ Guiseçpé ^ažzelo, -aud ijfc had ^again béén, reñiittéd,;with re- ;
verenťiaf 'esteem and gratitude, lt was from'instances 1 of this kind, that 'a bro¬ ther of Fazzelo, and one 4 of the band, en¬ deavoured to serve his own'purposes. He hastened,- during tHe calrhof one unsuc¬ cessful 'riighť, j tolfíe'celí of the Monk, and inthe^ámb'öf^Gúiseppe^he urged the 1 immediate loan VAľ "á few 1 ducats'. „ The Monk received him with all due' esteem and veneration, and, in a tone of truth and síiàVity; he replied; " Ab ! Signor Otto" Guise'ripe^'thou ''know'sť well'my zea'ľin compliance witli 'the claims'Of thy good brother, 'Fazzelo ; but, in¿ the present 1 ''instance, my wishes 1 are 1 thwarted," inasmuch as 'I have blest an- unfóťtlmate but pious* "family of the" 1 nearer mountain, beyond the valley berel " witlinný'ttťmosť value. 'Thelaİe' storm- had swept awáy the stock and herd, he
was 1 possessed'of, ahd rather thai!'the tears of his wife' aríd ; ih'é i hunger f4 öf his children simuld appeal invaili, I'offered, with cheer,-to ) reinstate < his r little stock. Oh! the s gratefiil humiliation 1 and-"eWlm. siasm paid me by strisi relíeVed lí Íéiŕcle, and the warm, appeal toheaven'iri'thanks for His-bounty, ad ministerfed íj tlirough His'oérvant,Avoùld liaveTepairl me, 'hád iíi'ibeerií twenty 'times''the amount, and never again ; to 4 be "returned;" ^he-old mònk^murmbred'à^rayer and looked to heaven'. -% ίΊ ° " :ί f '' -'* * ^α iiv.it ^ι\ . ^ *S Pshar !—this : preachihg^MÖnkÍ4á ri¬ baldry ; so,' .you - were^fool ^'nough'^to suffer /the -whiriing; crew ; to rt get! f ^thy moìiey^P-^-Tùsh'l my mind misgives^me ,* I dbn'trheVd it;'i thetoilof sbniányŕyékŕs would - nat í have" l been parted r with' iri^ l à moment.T^Comé, Monk, the money." f
! u Indeed^aňd í : arh pennylèss i-iyou místáke^me;, τ д Return i .hencei in 1 a few daýsj^and the > amoiïntH shall. be - àtïthy ' brother's-lservice^foť in ísuchí a:.period, hasbthe, jb ( prrp;^er- ( ót biy^ s|rnple estore- undertakenfiţş repayment.',- Ь v ; ) )S < ,ч Theţ robber ,pauşed; and surveying the^ snow-çlad и features rpf UhebMonk,? he crie,^ ·.-$, BţiţiXxkuaw not, how-to,return,; thus empty íhandéd ^this/idle' tale, rriay appease? merbut ^ it-.will· npt í serve* -Gui^ sepp,^;^ypii»knpwi-,Monk^tbe^rascibility^^ of hiš' temper д< St. Matteo only knowsj what tnightxbe ţitlie^ resjiilt. ;*u Comey\look tp tbyjse^t bpa.râ.";. - ; : .γύ ά'-'- ^f */v VrTlieMonfc shook his (head; anfd again repeated î i his» inability ofî4' 4 compHance v , adfJingMííIndeey, às« thé Hòly €reaţpr;is· witness, rao f ám f li ¡deşti tute, , beyond f fţjie staff and. scrip of his.' goodness.", -'v.h'h· »
;j{'jr \^ell,"'íreplipd;ithe Brigands ? ť .v I would^adyjselyoririréyereViceíot seclude thyself closely till the money be^ofth- conjing^jLéntureii úoty.abröád, nörsèven seeFazzelo,]shoHİd'he appeaŕíhérb^tojbe satisfied ofthe' dentals; ?îlı rnustí^P^ âSe him,'^or ívtbe ,'conseq bences aťe? /gťeat. Keépsecfuded','! say ;>J vyill retumbóme few-days henccìo -'n-hil я соя O -wriíoii. - The'robber departeds and! the Monk repeated;an ^Ave:Maria; 'jiTheïévil star of the] ppor Monkíisé'emed tø & r ö vèr* over him, f pr, im; crossing a narrow brak^tö administer'a supply of herbsíandsíbab sams to the disorder 'of a dying muleteer, \yhps r eboycţl skirtédžthe mountain^ 'and who had entreated the comfort'andias- şţsţapcejigf -the priest, thehbandiť Gui- sejjp^ crossed hisí päthí: nwhhi trembling and palsied distress hé saw his approach,
t and İD'iagony 'oh despair,* he suulc upon his knees 7 , 1 and implored the^meťcý>bf> the -robber.^ ƒ »íí»>.*- ' *' Ί\ν, -\г°иАз itø£* , L - U 4 'i. And whyithis solemn appeal*„?î5^[Hes- tionediGoiseppe, surprised atıİbîfMbıık's _agita^ion^and dismaýioi> ош г и îi.»'. ŕ '»- r^Alas¿" heTepUed; î<e ï bavè^not^the money lyets» spare me! do^butsend thy brother Otto in thé evening of tomorrow, and it sKalbbê thinfe/'q-^ «* "' ' v i>^« fi* zThisïsort .of language,' priest," ob¬ served /theJeáder'Guiseppe, aîîd his'de¬ meanour waswthat of hauteur and asto¬ nishment, " is to * me anîénigmà^fcpeàk fullyitsmeaning.". ' nu^tt^bfjirUt· f ť Indeed," repeated í the Monk, still* in tremor, 'M have not the moneyí n,ü 4 "'^" "* What îmoney, 1 priest?" ^quéstiöbéd the,robber;^anď he looked' atHhe'Monk sternly.'- - f ' . \ ! 1 i *· »î-* " ч for VOL. III. H
, 'Íí That i j íwhicbü м thy-j ïbrother j ^Otto, Signore· íG;uisebpe, acameuryesterday , ţ to demand, forthy.use." il :u jDiv>-*wr »л» .'^My^ıîseJjıriîy-broiheavOttoil" severally exclaimedí ¡the deadejv· lequallynsiwprised and iri ignorance ¡of its meaning,-»r f tííinis- taken ipvìesU ílcbayétfUobneeded^thy money, nor bavení í ícommissiooedá Otto to-seekitt; thou.art mistalen Л' » wit io ^ ι. ¡Thef<Monk assured fSuiseppéiof his br<pther!s > у jsit, andj? further added, t the reason ι whyj he í iwa,s prevented r (fulfilling the;demand^wi·*' ' ,v<+.nA hue ì юЧ ** ioli Well,"* answered tGruiseppeii^thori shalt,see, * holy ^priest, ;w honhadv the ne¬ cessity /of borrowing the. mcfney^rbSo, theiiT—follow/jUie, sand the matter „shall soon be,decided."; ■» ** - >Л) /^»nij* j t iXhey^proceeded /ini silence,,fpr t ,some miles/; till » the »en trapee, of * the^catvern
biroughtthem to a 5 salute ι with <a. robber- on guardatine pass, j·· Guiseppe desired the presence of his · brother,' ^vho/not aware 'öf thé discovery, instantly obeyed føie'SiimmOns; ibis eyelet ăhbse 'of the Monkr'an'dï-iani instaritaneous'-.glow· of shamehnd confusion reddened his brown and' swarthyicouiîteriance. ' 'He awaited not the charge, rbat commenced á' series of defeucé'árid apology, that' had üed himito-thé endeavour of imposing^upon the Mönk^íliberality^and confidence: 4 " Fool and knave," retorted the leader Giuseppe/ */ these excuses will nváil not ; an act öf duplicity tike^his,' Otto, ^can¬ not be {palliated ; to the purpose,-^didst thou askthe Monk for thissrim in the name of Guiseppe Fazzelő?"· J> > J = " ' "- bdidl·'^ after 'a' momentary hesita¬ tion, answered the sullen 'Otto/ and he
darted a■ scowling, look at his brother's seeming superiority. . : 1 / г : ff Then thus t hé rewards ,ţhee," ex¬ claimed ¿the leader, L and/ raising his ι çar- . .!ui*(K--'\i' .ť·.': :->;:MîCî.;-:'.'-":- : .r -^yl , „Ьщй ■ ^Uíf bine; he; shot' him through 'therheart. ■ .v··.·:?.:..·' ■ /■¿;ict : ,Z í ч'л ; ';л.й'^1!'0 Лл-а-^^п Л-9'/;-.*'№1.г; The; robber fell lifeless,* without a, single : '-'; : ;";■■,..?",-> ;.ív/^· ;*/;г?.?.'>л.'"; íjiíí boíb¿'.ysS« groan ; and, in the, ,utmpşţ composure, ■ :\\:-7"..·.! Γν.ν'ί; ■.;.;.'Æ í.;:.;4Í.}ľ' : :.í;ŕS ÍO í '> Λ í ι λ; íl ·"> î.v v ç ι Giuseppe , turned · to the.· jVTonk, whose ■ 'f' У ííV/i/.: -,Ы1Ч^\гЛ ->;>í;0 Í.Í.1Í.Í др ίΐίίίίΠ :>*ί Λ tremor, and alarm werfe raised tö the highest pitch, ..·?'. Senor Monk; yOu ¿are satisfied that r I needed not your money, nor.) wll ;^öü /IJ Mè'ïMpnk: '.raised;his (eyé^toìlleaven, andi ¡utteriiig^' Jeşu^Mâriar'şhoök;>his ^hej^^^niäb^ +iün«j ľlľlieontinľs '{confidence îin^hisv guards ¿félť: Βοη^νφ ţo^ej harrà^Ve;,o
í' j V > ' t ^ f j approach towards Val Demoni ; and he looked for a meeting witli its* inhabitants under ^apprehensions pf no ч very favor· able kind. The equipage of Leontini, however^ passed onwards in safety, and he reached the ancient town of Catania in defiance of banditti and their terrors. 'Ль'; .-'И ^ı -'/* * / , » The ruins of the once populous town oi Si Oj. h >·"* í Ч _c . * .„ ... bij Catania presented an appalling picture of its early grandeur and greatness.* ~
;.' From : thè^scèïié^which^^ í&bňtínSiwkis;;^discoVéreä ' ; a ?i sublimfe wreck ,(if iť may .ше ΪΚ eis Wmed}of1 nä^. t u re— ^hriiîm'erabïë ^tóa'sséŕ^of^átór^c* ^èrèd Шё gròúM^^fo 'mifes^^'a^t^Yrèi^efea- 3 ä 'paTséagé^liíéarlý impracticable/ -ýet Ше я Шс1с föusfëfë ir of corle ánd chesnaţ trees/ äbsoliíťélý rising trom ţhe lava> gives it^a veraamV and ï uxuriäní f Col öurin'g γ Îèàvin^^HësbWéîrJs, nen vineyards meet' the Ji eye, - Utid liuraéroiís !: habitatìóOs> Half H rJéšolaťé<Í anď choked: in^ citrous ^riiitía^'arjpeaŕin
i ^ş ,the jdim, and ¿misty, vapour of night increased, a prpspect.pf astonishing de^ scriptiou, displayed ^itself. From .фе summit,of.,the Monte yv ţ as ^een..pouring forth» , jri, ¿orrenta surpass the, UquirJ-flarneş of,deep,crimson,fire; showers of епо^июив stones, mixed with lava,, r nsţied^, likewise, in devastating horror, .along the sides, of the mountain --\w ? ţule others were thrown^ ,by the vio¬ lence of .the crater, to an .immense dis- tance—and »the noises which the perpe- tual eruptions occasion.is sucb. that the sense of hearing at length becomes void, and the mind and ideas stunned ! As- cenrling further towards the* height of the mountain, the ground iş absorbed in ^thie^and pure covering'of snow; to ,the incrpdulous this may appeal* aş bor¬ dering upon the fabulous; it might be
.' »t 152 ROSALVIVA. ¿imagined, in suDpor t t r of 1( ţhe opposition -to the e^isteuce jV and appearapce^such, •that, from the intense heat of^the T lava, any f possible cqngealmenţ^of sno^w would •not bedikel^; ^buţit is ( positively e^far the fact, that indeed the?revenues and income of. the bishopric., of .^Catania, " ť ari s e 4 princi R ally ; fronbth^ gaj^qfţsnow on Monte Etna ^pn^smaftip^tjoft^pf -which, lying on the north of the moun¬ tain, is said to bring him upwards, of a thousand pounds t ps t apnqm¿: a,singq^r but certain proof ..of its „value, дп d ·, esti- mation.* , , li , ' ι 'J u i f Ü5'
. f ~ V Massa, a writer of eminence, states, " that ih' some 'eruptions ¿if Etna," the lava has-poured idbwir with such á sud- den'imjietuosity, thai,* in the'course of a few' hours/ churches,' palaces, 5 áiiä ^vil¬ lages, ' ha-VV'béën entirely nielted down, and the 4 whole run off,' without leaving the*léas't markof »their former existence.' Itis'iii Iñslánc'es J of this kind, therefore, the qv ih r h'ábitaní:s' calculate on "snow fa- mitiè? ,ijU ' Лу pìL ' s ,l ' - '' l ' J Jv ' Anotber ''writer* of 2 great 'credit; ' in speaking of^its' (Brupiionä,^ gives Wé föl- lc%ing f àiíécâòté, and which is submitteà verbatim. " A vineyard, belonging tob. convent pf v Jesuits, lay directly ón it's way. 'This vineyard was formed 'òli' ah aricienť lâva, probably a thin one, 1 , with a number of caverns'and crevices'under it.' The liquid lava "entering' ihto 'these h 5
caverns,, soon filled them up, and by degrees bore up (the vineyard ; and the Jesuits^who, »every moment expected to see « fy buried, beheld with - amazement the .whole field begin to move ofT.vUt was-,carried on<the surface of the lavt? to a considerable distance·; und; though the greatest, part was destroyed, ,<yet ,some of it remains to tbjstday.*h'"" ' * t .The, gaides; oí-Leontkiivífeariügi 4 that the dangerous passes, on the part f of the ¿npuntainto which they had approactied, .would tconvey, a .ţerror^tbey motioned До return,^ The ideas and astonishment of the Sigrior vvere> however, incom¬ plete, and, a* he proposed^ quitting th^ region of Etna early the subséquent cţay, he felt determined to continue, in the sourceof farther,gratification. л ЗДе jrn- penetrable dusk of .night obliged the
. tťavellers'td haltfersòme trifling period, arid'for ^féw^hourâ^ they met with'no vei^y uncomfortable shelter .· ' "Tt was'a large» cavern', 5 'La Spelonca del Capriole. The" f sun-rise tVom 4bis ! aséeùt v was thé 'richest'view Leontini 5 had ever 1 beheld«· hé'dòùbted if iťever could be equalled. The immeasurable distance" · of ruins, divided by ^foreste, interspersed with rivulets, 4 shrouded'partially witb delight¬ ful foliage, and ç the extremé height he appearédto stand above^the «habitable 'Wôrld," v gavé'it & wobderfol ^abd.super¬ natural J uppcAtaaceA^lV wbuld rtL require the pencil of a bold hand to eketch out the 'prospect f of such an expanse ^per- haps'at iio point of tbe world is there combined thè awful, and yfef magnifi¬ cent formation of that" ecene, rwhich is spread to the eye from the summit of
the; mountain vcalledţ.?ll torre deb Fife foso; '¡/There лсаппоШЬе greater j justice done, in the tracing of í this;outline/ thaţi to:)COričlude./Our/ípresent:l chapter j With the drawing: ďrom thé f pencil} ¿of a Llaté frávélléri^ío-is fi^ßnq : «Я'?1 Ь.*» HiKbä)'.tí ■M* тшЬе íimmènse lelévatiőn üfrömı the surface ofthe * earth,vdrawn j asit ι were to 'a v single;point^»withoutiariyi neighbouring mouiitaiii; for the senses arid! imagination ■tö^rést >tipön/í vånd ^recoverí^fröm ¿their 'astonishments ш their wayťdown toıthe ^world.^^hissp^nntioríspirinaclé^n^ íoh-šthe brinkaof a ¡bottomless gulpb/^as -t)ld^s -theworld, often discharğipgMvers of tiré/ åndi thrö wing fout ^burning »ròcjcs, ^witlí' -ì ar-rioisé that ; shakes > thé и whole islands '*чАШач to дШ8^^1ЬеушпЬоип^ îéxtëritÎof ;tbe : prospects comprehendiog the greatest diversity and the most >beau-
.ROSALVIVA.' tiful * sčeueryj iri riaťuré ; - with ' the rising sun, advancing in ' the east, to illuminate the* wondrous scene. >и * ι.- . a >· ,·'» l( 'The. j whole »atmosphere by^ degrees kindledmp, and shewed dimly and faint¬ ly the boundless prospect around/- ',Βρφ sea and land Jooked d ark and confused, as if Only emerging from their original chaos ;'/and tight * and. darkness seemed stilfundivided>; ttillţth&>morning,by de¬ grees advancing,^ completed the .separa¬ tion.·? The; stars are extinguished^ and the shades·disappear. îThe forests,;which ¡minnow seemed * black and ;bottomless gulphs, from whence.no ray ; was ^re¬ flected to she w their «form or colours, »appear j a new creation rising to, tbe sight; .< catching, life and ¡.beauty from every í increasing beam», The scene, still enlarges, and the horizon seems to widen
and 'expahÜ itself^on all «idest' ЧШ the sun; Tike the'great "Créätôrj åp^éhrsin the east, 5 and e witb *hiér plastirj^aydom- plétés 4hé' mights ''séenë. ,J HlI ,( èÎppears enchantment* : and it is witb^difficblty we can believe we are still on earth. The senses, unaccustomed to the sub¬ limity of such a scene, are bewildered and confounded ; and it is not till after some time, that they are capable of separating and judging of the objects that compose it. The body of the sun is seen rising from the ocean, immense 'tracks both of sea and land intervening; the islands of Lipari, Pattari, Alicudi, Strombolo, aud Volcano, with their smoking summits, appear under your feet; and you look down on the-whole of Sicily as ou a map ; and can trace • every river through all its windings, from
its spurce^ţo its mouth.»i The view is absolnţely lipnndless^pn, every side; nor is there anyone object/ .wiţhjn the circle of vision/;to interrupt ¿-itit., sq, f that T the sighMsfeveryj where Jpst inathétimmen-
l, '*""CH'AP. Vï.^ " ŕ ï if r , All that wild despair, ., And jealousy and madness can inspire/" t Raged in her bosom with consuming fire, , And roused her to á desperata Veefi. 1 * "'' ,J ƒ Г·* * She would pierøn f £ U.ÍÍ'Ü.jJ Hit senseless heart, and wring hla very son!· Л' -u' '' wţ r«q иАвШа\а#и7. ' *Ч' »'î 1 1| , ' 1 ^Д' «»Λί/ ,flOïir ' During an interval of several days, V» ;»j.4^l liM.' ili« *.10ιί'·ί\ ^JOíIojlí« the gloom of Palermo, was, deeply mani- 'ìwtftì X'iWjtf :, .1, MW'iiî nr \' >'Л\чл^ fest in the sudden decease of the ami- able and respected Francesca. The Wri', , " 'i ι «Г» Л ι . t i t » í -' ь * -.Jit ducal pallazzi had been closed to the interruption or interference of public и{ и |1 Λ ' UO. β 1, ( *ίι * '¡i- t î'\>fH» matters, and within its seclusion Paoli appeared to indulge in a sorrow that '' *'' ! ' ' ч ŕ ' ŕ f VJ J'. was far from being feigned or alloyed. Visits of inquiry and condolence were
at length daily followed «ρ, earnest and enthusiastic as their respective interests ν were most apparenti Joy lighted up in the young hearts t of many devotees to the Duca Paoli's magnificence, a new flame of admiration ; tt nor were less zealous in their desires'to bend' before^ sovereignty the paternal part of Palermo's nobility Already, in the perspective of their ima¬ gination, was sketched the outline of alliances, honors, and anticipated pre- ferences, m behalf of a second union . и ,<ri vi > ŕ ì< ţ ;í*Uíw 'fy «î* 'j > with the young Duca. The Cassaro, upon the first public festival subsequent to tbe " cessation of sorrow," s presented an unusual. bril¬ liancy; one glance froni the Duca Paoli gaveto youthful ardour a hope of fur¬ ther " glory;" and even in the^withered form of age ånd debility, it removed
from its painted ¿and artificial beauty, a wrinkle, and <&few yearns, at least. ь e Rosalviva bebeld all· these appear¬ ances! with * exultation ; she, knew· the« aira,, but she, felt satisfied'in their fal¬ lacy^ sensible .that only tortai power and charms, would Paoli be subjugated. As.calmly^as^ her ϊ bosom ţwould permit, she had to the present f period, 1 suffered to remain dormant the mingled feelings of affection ; and »sensibility^ at ){ Paoli's seeming chilliness towardsjier.* t ni) At lengthiShe conceivedrfurtheridelay was) unnecessary, as regarded her inter¬ ests,» and her unity with Paoli ;¿ and con¬ sidering every ^ object that had, hitherto stood between her, aud her hupest to be banished, she essayed, with her utmost power of «skill and ; blandishment, again to engage the still melancholy Duca.
sought paths ; 'she r met ■ him ^but ì oh í * N how great tbe changé of a ^ew Veeks;^ «Sor¬ row was visible in» every line of»his fea- tùresfarid h'is r mânner cold,-^repulsive^ ŕ 'She ran4ö'émbracéhini^shé caught Ыя handiï l andi her' 4 kisses* were lavished there with?' enthusiasm;— ¿ «••Paoli,^ she cried,**'<* this 1 has beenban age of torturé, since' we last' met. 1 * Ше will riot part 1 so* easily r bow !-Mbíes£. thee l^blesš' théél ,,ŕi Her passinne 1 had'seemingly'attained their-heated '"ardour/and shéfell on the bosďm of lier lover with rapturous feel¬ ing.' 'Bnt· thé ť warmth, the*genial glow of his'tíearfe^hád fled,and tocher for Verİt arid affected endearments he returned f a lookj— á rep(y,so distant, so unforgiving, that '- its E very : tone ŕ pierced 'her-* to 1 ?the
soul ;> it^seeriïéd*tÖ k lèavè wiţbiit ampang that she dreaded to examine. л;лЬ;^!.;; Fraüceécáííhád 'engaged ^stìcbTofhis heartäayiwä&^prth^Öfretainnieht^äh herloés[áffli6ted>him' r sèvérêÍyP^ were íthè^ endeavours- öf >Rösál viivá*: hji- pliéd^to ^iverl/his-rnindlirÖnYiner me¬ mory ; all; théUöftriësV'tKe nio'dfest 1 aıiü a!möstcelestiaMabít;W stant í coverings vW'äs "fbefore^his* Ще? ïiv eveŕy^ 'glanbe' · áröüfad ; him^; ЩШ poirier objects"afforded "but^ä^brry íätóiement' for the· vàcuity^hër ■■;■ ábserice m érèsííeW The;éhàrms^atid 1íóÍd^bWMl(!feSfiÍitóť éöuriterianöèlöf^ösalviva^w^^ öf hörrör ^^im^his^igtí^ their ,«; dignity arid' expr^ssiönpwItH-V sensibility \ that'töld "süfficiéHriy?it^^ás- ; täste^änäf-its-no^loi^eŕ^railifi^
the possession. of t wha^was^ once <his idolatry, r^^u*? \''h^vi;ii iti* *o It. was not imagination only that whis¬ pered ţ tOj.th^ ì Comptessa « the failure ^of Paoji'sjaffectjpp, and?that âhmno Jongen retained^ pauver she couJd % neyer sup^ pose tOfhave-^decreased— iţ was - unhap¬ pily reality^ Site recurred to his whole corresponp^enc(e ît ţ and 1 1 conducts« dt. was 1 then ,with u dii^culty- she could be per* waded fthat .such a man r had s ceased to ML M S4 ** reşarrj^ıer ; Jt ^might^be rmere^ly, the ief- fe^ţ^f^languor^aiidânattenţiQn; but she' felţ tpQ sanguine of. her claims, .upon his heart, f to ^yhoìjy^-give^up jthevideajthat she^ would ^still,.live the ť successpru of Francesca's % dignity and ranker Her, restless -spirit < in, t the .controul· of a great action,, caused her too »much torture and compunction to remain long under suf-
foring, and f she determined to< corne at once to the conclusion of her hopes. « , fr. JVow,, Paoli, Providences has or- dainedî the «.arrival of that* hour which givga me -to tby arms—rthat 1 1 proclaims me. thy wife.'iVj.H ^ *ч. .·ιί* ι ; ν .· The Duca Was absorbed in ai silence, i" Speak, and .tell tbeijoycd. Rosalviva that her happiness and herjraptures are mutual^-«Oh.: what » a„lin 1 gering period basit appeared-"! < »),iia to ^t Y ıHııab,<aİQ anıonotonousıand chilling tone^finternupted the Dncar; and^ashe passed his «hand across his^forehead, he stçemejd, tp¡ feel· an »inward .agony and borrón /* «Name iiot,!![lie v nddedi< " the past, -τ- speak , not of happiness with m¡e»n-I knopit not; the¡world is dark¬ ness and »delusion to uie,^—thou >needM not strive lombare it,"
The Du'caslowly traversed 'the 'apart¬ ment, «till fixed inthes intensé and silent reverie; of í hiá mirid, while the s Comp- tessa, awakened tø^a' feeling of surprise antics alarms» surveyed hiél altered figure during moments x)f singular emotion Assuming thôí levity î usually attached to her, ι she^ éried,- >heť voioe attairiing a sar¬ castic, ' though * nbt an unpleasant ; tone, 'SArid işitheberirt of Paoli left uponthe tomb of Francesca ?—- Is this t(re enthu- siashi?—is.this'the kindi of conduct due to Rosalviva? Neverí can } i*thitik-%hat the senseless i heart,* and thè 1 iterile 1 ^öul ' of her youowere^pleased tö 'bonotíť^with the raıik. 'of *Dachessa, can> outweigh' the sacrifices \ mine' have made /Чо sbeW its eetiihatiohïof the value drie4o ! thé Duca Pïtoli I —* Certainly not V beside, 'what
are the coptents^of thine epistles,« which were, combined with the, announcement of such'an incident? — ' Remember,' saidst thou,/ to *you,alone,am I bound by » every tie that! can/ constitutebhappi- ness,— r by every pledge, ► human or di¬ vine! Tbese f bpnc|s can ¿never be bro¬ ken.', And is this but fiction ?-T-Am < I tp believe tiiat ypu have become ^insen- sible ,toţ n tIje "affections ι deserving of the woman. w;ho has done.ithat iwhich I have?'', к „', f r t ^ î * ni ei o/ 1 njTlie t tear .seemed rushing· from *its qp^cealmpnt, ¡ and Rosalviva » wept, г but they were^not i honest tears,-—they were nof those, pure цапф-, genuine" offeringsof sincerity,,that originated with the sym¬ pathy oppure and-refined;affection.)i She w t as prepared for,a t scene. like> tbis, and
they were,-.'in 1 som y e Ineasüïey 'resources 5tOKwhich { she lóokéd^Wifh^^safe'Mêpen- denceir?^ í>ť x "--' í'»^!*»^'' dí"'^tin, bí^Pabli beheld herfğrie'f* with'éaìmiieés; -indeed? íthiére^appeared 'to exišŕ : vVitKin His bosom/ a· 'series'ò f fpám fül arid exces¬ sive feelingsv^such as-denied Wnion'with any/othér.^'bí' }^^ } ' '«' -'-.- ? iltKvas'^bVioti^ťo Rosalviva/ thať re¬ spect to'the-iriembry* 'of-Fraticé^ca^öo- "casióúed áll Uhe 'gloom and sadness Öf , Paoli's mind : he had acknowledgéd'it, even^to^hery abd," r by thaťconfešsiori, her sotil t Jwas stung witli the mbst^póignánt 1 * r .„tí* auguishuJ- Pride,-· mortification^ ** resëiit- mentjíaiid the^mosťbanefal : of ; líumari passions; íbŕowded eagerly j vvitliirť 'h T er bosom*land her eyes turnéd witli* hatred ä and .indignaïion^ upon 1 thè beings who vol. in. ι
could have so willingly forgotten the charm due to her merits. ·' These are moments, Rosalviva," cried Paoli/ somewhat sternly, '* which, for the sake of our united feelings, should be spared. I am indisposed, and must retire;.you will excuse my inability of remaining louger in thy presence." The-agitatioa ofthe Comptessa seemed unrestrained, and in its excess/ she threw herself at the feet of the Duca. ." Unfeeling Paoli ! to wound theheart devoted to thee as Rosalviva's is ; it is not meet that I should deserve coldness and severity at thy hands; look at me, humbled, and prostrate to your mercy— to your affection ; thou canst not spurn me. χ π · 'if Her tone of voice was4hat of supplì-
cation; ánd-she detained the hand óf tlie Dùca, whose ¿pätbywasi still· apparent, "Obi let line calltöímind all those hours of fbrnier bliss г · ·. let hie ; retrace^ Paoli , tilosé moments, 'When- thé heart knew no joy but in the exchangev of each other's passion.: Think what pleasure they both have derived ; think what « though ast taught me to'believé^to hope ; and! ánf swer, 1 thyselfj if treatment like the pre¬ sent should: bé its inheritance. Paoli, thou art only mine, nor can I evén exist, unless f iin -thyi-acknowledgiiient; : We ■wílllňoťpaitl^í^' '^b^^-;V>-^ ■■ " AVretcheri ί Woman ! ? oh> God ! oh, Gaá^m.^^k'ü^}ü^^ The'ebullitionofPaoli's'griefánd^ ing was a painful' spectacle, and thé;inore he'gázed^upoh the features i oif Ŕbsalviväi there· was· a coldness and av disgust
clinging-round iupori his heart, that poi¬ soned his invagination incthe recollection of the past; iThé; short period öf singular but real felicity he had ;knö\y ri with Fran¬ cesca, had.so changed him; the purity of 7/ег: smiles and affection had Wrought such penitence within hiš 'bosom/ and w had charmed him with so endearingV-a passion towards her, that to contrast the ex travágaiicé and excess, of Rosalviva's hitherto voluptuous and ; sensual; pas¬ sions, only roused bim,. ön viewing the retrospective; to sh ud d er arid recoil/ and while he looked upon the object by which : it,originated, a convulsive pang of horror and, remorse shot across' his anguished ^brain, 'When ; he ; recurred, top, to ; the, unhappy r destruction ipf the victims pf his then ini peding joys ; >whën he thought pf the motives; that ridded
Leontini of the world, the fate of Vivaldi, the progressive list of enormities that had followed these, thé death of the refugees, the assassination of Carniccio, his soul.expired, nearly within him, and he felt himself too much abandoned, to kneel to the throne :of mercy, to deign to look to heaven for pardon.". " Leave,me, leave me,V he uttered, in the ardour of his thoughts, " nor sun, nor light.of heaven, should shine upon beings estranged from our God, as we have been. Oh, how great is the enormity of our sin ! Go, go, Rosalviva, in the bosom of St. Rosalia's confidence and sanctity, do thou seek the peace and comfort which only can ; prepare thy mind and soul for the dreadful coming of futurity. Mine, revolts even from the hope, from the thought of this after, world, this fu-
ture existence. ' 'Oh, the struggles that re&t here,—here, in my bosom, are ago¬ nizing, indeed! The world is madness to me. Begone ! begone ! I am nearly upon its brink ; stand aside; the preci¬ pice once gained, I pass into death and oblivion with safety ; away, nor check my progress!" The sanity of Paoli's mind seemed deserting him ; the infuriated Лоок, the terrific ^awe that revealed itself in his glaring eye, thè convulsion of his limbs, and the burning heat of his brain, sever¬ ally told the internal suffering and weight of torture. J '' Rosalviva was paralyzed nearly with rage and astonishment; its excitement, however, riianifested sentiments n withirr her/Uhat 'vented ^themselves f in ľ bitter inerisce ^aud * irony ať-tlie weakness * arid
. imbecility of Paoli; - «* Insulting fool arid madman !'- she retoited,f* this bigotry of enthusiasm will nöt serve thy apos¬ tate purposes/Thou hast sworn to Rp T salviva too firmly ; thou hast proffered thy love, protection arid fidelity internis top binding, too securely -registered in deeds of blood, to escapé from her thus; What ! and has Palermo another Fran¬ cesca to pamper to thy sickly appetite ? Disgracéďand perjured insensate/ who has taught thee thus to whine and simper out these pious tenets? What has this devout lesson cost thee? Ha ! ha!" here thé wild aiid hoarse laugh of the Çomp- tessaveelıöed iri 'avë^^ thou ţhinkst by its. recital tø triöck; thé state bf n Rpšálviva's ; wretchédùéss^ to colour ¡thirijé^Wuap^ . siprrow arid ? atpriementr^Poörtrnisgm^
wretch í thou wilt live yet to know ages, worlds of torture and ignominy. Aye, thou ! Paoli, Duca of Palermo ! pious and doting mourner of Francesca ! The apostate, the murderer Golfieri ! hear me,,hear me! Thou hast brought down upon, thy bead, thine own sentence, thine own horrible end. Yes,4hou art upon the brink,of thy destruction, truly. I will lead thee tp it; aye, and'safely. Bid me not stand aside, for it is / alone that can usher thee into that [oblivion, and pass upon- 1 thee the murderer's curse Γ ι Paoli stood horrified ; the colour and the appearance of health were blighted upon '- his cheek ; bis appearance was more spectral than human, and .he at lenşth reeled insensibly upon tbe floor. ' I * * The feelings which had been most pre-
.rosalviva;'.';. dominant in the ;bpşora of .ţţosalviyarhad crushed those of m were incapable; of being repressed. She hadbot^wished,^to have ^Ъееп thus indig¬ nant ; : she had hoped tp soften his min d : into compassion 'and. returning fondness, without; extraordinary ärt ; ; but, failing iii this,and distressed at 4he: replies· of Paoli, : her. violence knew nó bounds, and in jts turbulence, she openly ; disclosed hér 'desperate intentions. : . ■."' ,: - 4 .,>. K \ ■V-'y.'iVi'v tr' ;>a ii 'Ί..01 -.'■■Л'и··'.· / ;r 'V'-.V'. r'·"·' ■■^\ , < ţ ' ţ The heart which has felt the; most en-? ■ ,4^li\ ! b,3K;l ' ОЛи.· :·'^'λ í ¡ i^- ; ·:-. -»л,,' -ijv.-: thüsiastic love, is às likely to know the most extreme of hatred ; to ţhisiţhe in^ëiiious Rócheraucäult adds,~,^^t|is impossible to lové a second time, the person we'have entirely ceased to love;" ■ .- : 'r.:^ ' ■·ν'/ίϊ:Υ , .'Λ"-'ί· .. ■·.·.'·..·'. íV.' '■'''.' '· ; .-,. ·:' ; ·?*^- -''■■ '■ ţ 7 '-î ! - and šuch had seemed the power and/ ■ ''■У Oil· ŕJí;;'i..'-..'i ί.;ν·":.:'.'. ! ί_- :"-Ui : '■■ ■}1*·'·:.^Λ^/'χ/.·.^·.-- feeling of Paoli to the Comptessa Rosal- ..':..ΐ^>.°·.Ίί»ΐ '■^Γί?!/ν:·.--ν^.^ν : ·ν:·: :: ΐ ί ν' ί ' : ·Λ!^ Viva¿ /Çoldhéssv aiid contempt;; to^hjer^
Were the worst of piinishrnents;* she could have endured his reproach^ his anger and his resentment; she could have borne all the infliction his haughty spirit conld haVe created, but the thought that there had lived within his breast a sentiment of feeling * towards anotber woman,'in precedence to that' foHier ; the thought that he could pass her in scorn and contumely;—that he could forget her in willingness, and in sacrifice to the respect for a'Francesca, produced feelings of the'direst' rage, and worked her brain to a delirium" almost beyond madness.' » Again she'wept most· violently,'but it alleviated not the'wild and hysteric throbbings of her brain/ She glanced at* the still· prostrate'figure of Paoli ; rather than being gloried with» its seeming weakness aud inferiority, she
conceived iť to > be merely a wariness to giveď pretext to his silence; and in the indignation arising from the idea, she vented forth her utmost anger. '* Look up, wretched Paoli," she added, * ( awake to all the horrors and the miseries of thy ducal inheritance,— the scaffold !—the scaffold'can only're¬ pay the (insult and scorn heaped upon the neglected and deceived' Rosalviva," a loud shout of maddening, laughter followed the expression, and her features attained a satanic triumph. . * · ' Paoli- was indeed awakened. The taunt of Rosalviva pierced his soul, he turned .towards her, but uo longer did there exist in his bosom a feeling like that which earlier' 5 d ays had kindled. Contrasted, * at limited intervals,, were the ideas and' resolutions' of 'Paoli;
during one' moment ι his frenzy rolled back iii equaltorrent with that of the Comptessa,—-at another-his? mind and spirits appeared chained to some deadly and unconquerable 1 spell, and utiderthe power of its anguish, he waslost to sense or animation. > f ' ■ In one of those moods, opposed to bei violence, he retorted,—^"Thoughtless and ungovernable creature, of what avail is ititp thee that I suffer? ¿ Will not the same blow that terminates my Career— end also that of thine?"" - r K ( ' *m«« Never !" pronouncedshe, " where is the'eye tbat has ever seen>—the hand that ^ can j í noint the' heiress^ di Ro- magno-pt— - ''· - í j í ,' » w ι' .' ι " ' Mine! —i minei!". , interrupted * :the Duca» , ί endeavouring ίο«* restrains the pause of "bernvindictive harangue/, ι · *,
'fThiiie, madman!—will the accusation of a murderer be ¡accredited ?—Never ; thou diest/abhorred and cursed." i'Jn guilt,'-tliou art the superior; to thv charge is dated all the unhappy and fatal deeds of Paoli »Golfieri : when he reposes quietly in the grave, thy bosom will be --------- " ». m f i » <( The soul of thine can never repose quietly f cried Rosalviva, preventing the continuation of the Duca's remark, 1 — 11 seek not to appropriate ťae atrocities of thy dark career to my contriving—I deny it. Listen for one,moment: we will imagine the recollection of <the past, and the several events that r have regis-; tered themselves, in the minds pf jour comniuuionj to be made void ; Jet there be not one ; in,stance for ¡ us,. ţa pause upon, or/that ,need ^be f expatiatpd-rall
shall be destroyed; but reflect, illus¬ trious ana worthy Duca, 'on the period of time prior to our interview. Call to mirid that event', which, on the eve of San Rosalia, "eulisted thee in the lists of assassination; and fixed upon thee the murderer's mark 1 ; it can never be erased—an oath was taken before the pious ministers of heaven to avenge the fallen Cardoni." The Duca shuddered, as tbe recollec¬ tion of that affray struck upon his mind,' and his clasped hands pressed against his forehead with disordered emotion. The Comptessa had paused to witness the effect of her language ripori the feel- iugs of Paoli; she resumed, *'Thatoatli was mine; if will now be accomplished. Spirit·bf' my rWent ! look down upon tliy repen tarit offspring,
she will fulfil thy latest decree; yes, recreant ! thou hast saved me from per¬ dition, ånd brought it justly upon thy¬ self. For thee, so blindly were my pas¬ sions and my endeavours guided, I could have ' welcomed the fate due to souls laden with the blackest of crimes, whose existence, fraught with love like mine, taught me to despise every feeling, to defy every danger that threatened its felicity. Mark, how oft 1 despised and banished every curse that memory heaped upon me, and for tliee! For thee/ I could have gone down to the фгк and horrid tomb,—the apostate's tomb ; my path should have been buried with me. So long as happiness and Paoli's love had blest me in this world; Rosalviva Vwo'uld* have smiled at the dread of punishment in that hereafter :
she would have done. this, and blest thee ; think, then, bow she must have loved,—and such a love thou hast sa¬ vagely—wantonly annihilated. A word more, and we part ------" "Maniac!" reiterated the Duca, the agony of his mind having worked him up to a degree of rage and defiance of horror, " Quit the pallazzi with safety ; or there are dungeons beneath it that will never resign thee," " And thou därest —thou cömmandest me to fly? Poor reptile ! My voice alone destroys thee. Palermo's tribunal, ere the night of to-morrow, shall pass sen¬ tence on its culprit—on its Duca ! Death is its sequel ; nor can the power of mor¬ tal' interdict the decree." The piercing glance ofthe Comptessa, was directed to the ashy features of
the Duca She perceived the prominent convulsions that passed within him, and, in a tone of stern and powerful confi¬ dence, she said, " Thou art satisfied of this, my power, and my resolution to bring about thy deeds of infamy, and to seal their punishment !" The Duca uttered not a syllable. "Didst thou not hear? Thy reply." " The light of heaven will surely shine upon thy corse before I leave thee, if thouaetirest not from tbe pallazzi; my feelings are desperate. I have nought to lose; earth is a hell sufficient, and life,is its torture. Francesca^ dead,—· away ! thou canst not doom me to more existing purgatory. Look, thou serpent, I have a dagger!" . " And I dare thee to its use! I came riot unprepared; and thus I inflict, at
least, some portion «of my revenge; the scaffold shall complete it." She drew from her bosom a poniard, and in the uncontrouled frenzy of the moment, she directed it to the breast of Paoli. The stroke, which was aimed thus desperately, was averted, and to her singular astonishment, by the momentary resistance and interference ofthe Dwarf. A silence prevailed some few í mo¬ ments ; the sensations of the Comp¬ tessa and those of Paoli may be equally imagined. Valfrorii still detained her uplifted arm, and in an attitude,of mu¬ tual defence, he stood between them. "Signora," he cried,." this is madness indeed !" "Foiled! há, ha, ha!" A { - hoarse arid boisterous shout of
laughter followed the act, and she swooned in the arms of Valfroni. . " Retire, Duca," in an under and im¬ pressive, tone spoke the Dwarf, t( seek thy chamber ; for the restoration of the Comptessa I will be answerable." "Thoii wilt give me thy presence speedily, Valfroni," cried Paoli," I would devote some few hours to thee in private." s " it shall beso." ^ The Duca withdrew. The revival of Rosalviva was marked vvith a strange arid sullen perturbation ; her eyes were fixed on the Dwarf, rind their'expression sufficiently pourtrayed the 'displeasure she felt at his sudden and abrupt conduct. " And is this the amity of Valfroni? Has thé Signore Duca at length 'purchased his kindness
and care? Lives Valfroni the dependant of such a being ?" severally and hastily interrogated the Comptessa. " Falla- cious, indeed, is the promise of man !" . " Signora," rather sternly replied Valfroni, " such an insinuation I have not merited ; be not too harsh in thy suppositions; the removal of Francesca, is some proof, that my will and inclina¬ tion to thy service, is far from being deemed trivial ; thou art unkind and unjust." " True, I have confided in thee, Dwarf Valfroni ; forgive my apprehen¬ sions." " I do ; I have not been an idle spec¬ tator of this scene, believe me. I wit¬ nessed it narrowly, and knew that an act as was attempted would inevitably terminate it, if not by yourself, Rosal-
viva, it would have been the Duca's, and I was not willing thou shouldst have fallen such a victim, either to thy own passion or that of his. Am 1 deserving reproach ?" " Ijfo, no, thou art praiseworthy in¬ deed ; how can I deign to consider Val¬ froni capable of acting injudiciously' 1 But say," and she looked earnestly round the apartmentj " the Duca?" <{ He withdrew; and claimed my at¬ tention to him in private, as he quitted the room." " Better so," observed the Comp¬ lessa, " but we lose time, and we are in Paoli's power. I need not repeat to you the tenor of our interview, since you ac¬ knowledge to havebeen its participator ; say then, the conduct to be pursued; point out the immediate destruction of
the Duca, and the abandoned Rosalviva with rapture subscribes herself obedient to its performance." " To-morrow, Signora, this decision shall be made final !" <ť And why šuch delay ?" v " It were policy, Rosalviva, to effect as much caution as possible, and first I will learn the nature of the Duca's communication ; we then shall more fully determine. And tbat can be within this hour," continued the Dwarf, observ¬ ing thé impatience of the Comptessa 1 . " And we will meet again at the Cas¬ telli diRomagno." " In one hour, Signora, depend upon my punctuality," replied the Dwarf/and conducting her through'the most-se¬ cluded avenues of the pallazzi, she hur¬ ried back to her residence. ^ ° ' > l
CHAP. VIL I owe thee thanks, and in good hour ' ' Will I repay thec, for that tlioa tlıonçlıt'jt me, to«, A servlcciblc vllJaiu. Z\PObVA. t( Dwarf Valfroni," exclaimed the Duca, after a conversation of much length, during which his mind and ideas were thronged with furor and despair, " add to the ill-fated list of * paoli's deeds this new one, and thou art the arbiter of his fate,—his destiny; do with me as thou wilt. Oh, the weight of sin and blood presses so heavily upon ray heart, it were annihilation by piecemeal,
f \
an inhuman death to,, suffer, .under« its ^ч. ; t ^ * ► «-.ril r torture; I cannot endure it, my,brain The Duca covered bis features ; the ', . i ) l.U'i ί. ΪίΙ*/1' S'^ ,'.'«^ 11 1ίΓ " feverous throbbing of hisc.bosorn, and the pitiable state he appeared in, excited ¡ <\ u (l· -, i; «и ri - *'ίί;υίΗ >'Ji! »it. a feeling near to commiseration,;,„and .1° , . , , ¡!,i u 'I' "I * '. ' \' '»' the Dwarf Valfroni gazed on bim t sen- } к » 1 , sible to such. , , t ъ „,„. .. , ,.;_ . , k , , j Λ inul» .^'.ÍÍJ > - " This penitence, Duca Paoli,,, re- moves/in some degree, the weight, of tliat siri which thou endurest," calmly observed Valfroni, and the tone of his voice conveyed a kind of tendernesş,in ι.' ¿s ί > I'M*'·,;* j· 4 '. 4i ".bf consideration of the anguish of Paoli. " She did threaten thy life, 'tis 'true;— ,: v <, .ut« , í". : · ' г ' Γ)ϊ , до 1,J< . still ït decrees not, that thou should'st^—." ' J u "Do not■ moralize, Dwarf Valfrooi, ,JI '. *»tn- - ιί L ! . ( <> ,·· »·»*·" (i ,ч ' ''' "rii'ií·»' interrupted the Duca, " to ears like mine, its sound ıs hornble. Speak t of
blood,' of death,. and I'll listen— Pli obey. ; " - " " I cannot plunge deeper iu the 1 gulf of í infamy,*' in- frantic gesture cried Paoli, at the close 1 of some 4 few mo¬ ments* silence. " Hell has chained my soul so' fast to its limits, I cannot,—can¬ notescape. Rosalviva,.thou hast been its curse, thou hast prefixed its doom, and ithou must also suffer; yes, Dwarf Valfroni, she shall die;-^-my own hand shall'ask 1 her blood, myself alone shall be ! her 1 'destroyer/ 1 repent me, thou shalt not be stained with this crime,— but ? thou musl not betray me!" The voice of the Duca at this moment fal- tered, its tone > was so imploring, his manliness so humbled, and his appeal sb pathetic,'that it was painful· to see 'the wreck of such once illustrious and vol. in. к
commanding (í dignity. , tìe s M again w re- peated,—" Thou wilt^ not betray me?V ( yalfronj^as still si leut. ι f к , ьмь ' » tť v I inquire but ( this, ţJ ,Dwarjf;rrrtthe depd ßnished) 1, am, tlnpejr-t^y, power alone, сщ governane; şpea^f.ţo ¡ßxe agitation and.alarm^of a,sou(^ke,rrnne, silence, or delay, piily tţie ( niorp {j tampers with its scorching flfrinev"^ ilr¡v ,)î \Uj>4 , * f.jţjwilLbe silept r tben,'f, Jrepjietd the Одаг/, ."l^il^aiditheeţ^jl, am» pot un¬ used to p tbe ¿ sight pf t human bjppd^nd ^ear nç4 to f , w s itiipss thine effort-ríThou jU't resolved ?" t , ν , , * л' , чьЛнЬ rjj £ \%pn Rosalviva's death, Yalfrpiii?|" M í .^/'¡^ye^ţirica" ,, u „Л '>^,|4»ия« ¿ir " Firmly ! Heaven norn — г я .л ohv* 4m"# u §W tís eiiougUi" ,!.!"! *m»n " Thpre,^re vaults, Duca, î?pı?eatb the .fajjiric^of St.;JRosí|Ua,. unkuown^to the
möst l ècrntiriiz!ng sbar'élví long^abit'årid perseVeraíhcè ' during^mý' -abode'there; effected, perha^ í m 4 !tie first Ibsťahce, by the îri'öst 1 singulár áccidèiiti 'served to hïàtëè' nre b alòbe j master of its 'deathly arVd öíibterrábeari recesses. ' Thither, in thé :r solïtude v öf ; tbis* fì night, } the Comp- tessii^^halP'bé^inVieè'd: ' Ì ïieédriotbid Paoli to mark' in'é^eqùé!." ' ' Λΐ ; " ^ľ" Wý'cŕndeávárir bé accomplished to the köritrivancé'öf 5 Rö'salviva's presence 'there^àW thé'dééign is cöm(ilete !" ! -*"' ιοι^Το that,» Duca, I bind myself. : On the repose of the pallazzi, meet íné at the basis "OFM onte Pelegridö, ari ^v'enué, canopied by the dark cypress arid 'the wild fir, branches to the'water's margin. There I will awaiťye;hi the meàh time I' haltén 1 to 1 secííre the Compiesse · ' f,íiííí: My í deity V-?iký -deity f "-" shbïited
Paoli, r and Wi he embraced with ardour the,.Dwarf Valfroni,--" Thou, art^JPa- lermo?p]pe$t, treasure l'\ f , t ,. - f я , ^ ť / í ThovijWÍÍt 1 be, f m i indfuV > cpplJy ob¬ served Valfronij.andhe. quitted ithe apart ment. ι ж _ tlî < ljfŕ<i í -j^rr jtíMt^tr. '. , Fatigue,, anel 4he ¿harrowing ^şţaţ^ of Rosalviva's mind^hacl, overpowe^ect her, aud she sunk. exliaq^ on reaching her, Camber. ¡ ŞJh^e ^aio! . for a time insepsible to her gri^.an^jreşejıt- ments, save ^ţhat , ţhe^ ¡ ţ;ecurrencp, ( pţ,d\e past, and^ţhe swelling ^emo/iopŞj encher soul, still occupied/place in, lier inind, undpr^ţhe most nervous an f d,fever^d state of her slumber, > t , ;.i ft i., ^^.^ . u T^jfeipt, streak of day r vy^s t depart- »»gi/AariÆAbe^eveningXvp^tia^ai^h^ knowledged ţţbaţ ;i sl\e had. sjepfe some hours. The sultry heat of the season
had 'assisted ta r Tülİ : ? héF 1 racuífíés ï arid seiisen; bènëàlh its -lariğuid* аНигётеШ ánd sirice that she had endured ¿of late the foss^of so^mbch^^ tííéí^fe^^őurá" "sleep/ v '(alloy ed ías^theý doubtless were,) still benefited her--by it's refreshing' aid; She* ároséi aridnámidst tlííé" ïigrïè^ Jrist 'discërriiblé/^stööd^ tlie Dwarf ' Väliirörii^ in ^miîsİng ^quietude!· " ŕ *?«Ψ wo$å аоЕ^ШатЩЩ^Ва^. viva.^Ï'è^cTië'di^kfri^ - :u 'and bavé^beën-thy^guar^^ cohtih^íeď^nťérvaí^ttíý "dreaóïs were Ьй1еф*-8аМ :ii ^TÍiey ť wei# 'fiïfflp 5 näý^^ cHıefly^^f ■yoursél^ : VallToniÍ^- : :i ; ' ; ^^^ ' 1й АоШ%оп1гЛШ plèà^àntlyi^marked/' ^bùtl-canexcÛSè iťj'^Sigo'óifä^it" îs^höped hhåb ^^hWve;
soméíòlaímvtethy-private^hridípyeri^t síéepihgTriioriièhts^ &ψί№/ϊ#?. . : Ьзйшз*. ' l : ľf't Tlioiiiiäáťt ïbWfó^uoa/rdidïnÖt admire! thë'ïenöï/of íhese-intrrisive^plíäíi- ■' 'toras.'"'.?'. rffi-rf'.ìh 1 ' 1 '^ r, \ "î."^d] о.Гй511Г<;ш { ; :" Aíiťl· 'what ; cötlld i^ridéŕ c tbénr tlíus . nn'pléasmt ; r^l'?r J H";î. 0 Lí .^^, ^ЫЬ.^Щт^Ь. '^'Idfëa^ öf ^dreadiul·; bights , tWW åjijpéaréllst iri ià ! cloud {pf streamings firé/ 'mid hürry- iiîgfm^ irpriï/m^^ ψ thé most aş tonisliih^ m-anníér/^ö the ^height of aiVimmeç^ë cliff; jbéheatrthê^îright- ■ iiii ^pí^ipicé^was ■{ ppénj ţp^rny^jgbtAkii ^by^^here^tbe ;bpdi^ bèiìigs r sééinéd ^repösipgí ^)Thére^Wère ^héľ^íitpo^in apparenttø 1 .ypjuijfjth'é; -corse' ;ÖfFıan;cesçri/ aritf iti íwas β /përfoct^as - béàutifol/t así thöiıg
had ; sleptíonlyJ*^^IiSaw,í,too, u jRaoli ( ţ ί , 1 he seemed to endure thejjtortur.es^pf^the damned^! 3 Му, heart shoptejdîaş, Ijgazed, and'nl·, was, »wont t to * turn t . me,f+to, ; offer thanks to thee—a cloud burst over,, uş, and thoHchangedstrTTT^-.Y^^PJi now terrible didst thou appear to human eye." . tvljhe, ]|Ц warf t ] façjetipusly ;j smilejJ, χ and, r laking) ( t^ş bant! ?^1?Р 8а ^*У^.,р г ^ е ^>ГГ 'i-haj Şiignorav thou f art pleased tomport ,wjthf ťjl^jfeelings,, of ;,ţhe pqor.DwaffTT 'this;is ^ojt wprthy : ,of, tkee." ,\ { ^ <г *,,;,. t f í π /Νο,ί ϊ Ι{ i twou^d . not for . -WO!}! d ; ş. do that,í Yalfroni, but I 'can never, forget t the . spectacle of such, a momenţ--thy, rţ ţi;e- mendousistatureTTrthy demoniac visage^ and rthyţfiendish r smiles¡ . ŕ were, .appaljíing ; . bshud^ered, apd ; exclaimed Λ · ^lfrom' !' . ¡í НегеЗДои replied, and a burst Slaugh¬ ter escaped thee that petrified my soul,
and raug 1 again in horrid 'écho around ' us, ''not Valfroni, -bui' thy'destroyer;" апгЫЬ' this instant, ' L ftílt 'thy'gråap át my throat; thou wert about to hurl'me down4be dreadful* steep ; Г' shrieked, and iri that alarm'my slumbers left mé—" oh ! ' it was truly ; horrible." v Tne 3 ţompi tessa evinced all the internal Horrors of IT l e Ύ J- ! her^mind; and,'as the'Dwarf essayed to F press his lips with hers, she recoifed from itin strange and fearful' disniãy/ "Thon woïildst indulge in thé"belief of'tliis visiou r iť seems, Rosalviva, or why'this coldness?""" * 'Rosalviva'had, indeed, 'conceived 'a more than 'common interest, and álnore 1 'c' r ( ('i f 'ff than'usual alarm, áf the'i*ecollectíòn df - » heŕ'drednb 'and'she felťsoiné degree of reluc'ftáiice, iti suffering"herself further in the power' of the strange and singular
person .of ..Valfropi,; ßbe ,ţhpughţ n upon the,.^babi;lity^ s of^ n bis -'deceiving ^ her. Might he not delude her intoi thp· dínagi-; nary success of her schemes, <and might he not betray her to, the,. Duca? „Might , he not baye become his .creatnre, .and; might she not be ; his victim,? These suppositions severally to,ok*ppssession of ч her mind, ,,aud > the } more strongly, she, M recurred to the incidents.connected with /, Valfroni,—his sudden conciliation, 4oo, V) »-(¡Лаги* -»ini ', ί ι ' v ' '-/·· ·- - >■ ·' with r the Duca, and, subsequently,- ìbis attaining; so much;of his confidence and' то ,íC^b'fĽ"'>*)ji .•'j· 1 '- 4 '-'' - f ~ i --ή *' -· -- power,—the lessshefeltdisppsed;tpŕtr.ustí herself within the guidance of theJXwarfr She feared however,; to .disclos^^he^^^ suspicions, but endeavoured; byi artifice. | to riisçover; more, particulars, ,ţhaţ ţ might, ,, , present an outline of hiš origin; and ,сЬа-ц, , , ~ г. -.Κ 5....... ..«.
racter. v Her' f features vbr%bteri;ed, 4 i and she caught his'Jharidi. with .a'xkindiofpres· sure that testified her'returning'.warmth' -and ardouiv, í" li will .cease? tøatbfnk of what might^c^qse * displeasure,u/or/ even a .moment, -withi the Dwarf* Valfrohb I have to apologize;'forgetting,riike>Jse, that T prevented the' communication of your result .with'ţhe'PacafU'ioH Ь^^, * ".True,-Rosalviva,'* In fewiiwords^ our victcry, is 4 decisive;-the, í night's' coining' gloom brings tithe;, Duca ¿toi thea, chapel vaults beneath St. Rosalia ; theretlchave promised to commune with him'!" J I „ъ*\ üut ^wherefore' in so', singular' and renîote.aniauditoryaSithe^chapebiyaults of.St. Rosalia?" J-hv h, c *,*iíut tf ^^„'^fbebetter to gratify røy vengeance. sXhe> ( body ,of Francesca j shall Ь be the
1 first object shewn? to j him, and the vault whicfo containsîit yT sHäll· also 1 ' be his v eter- }naİJgraviBi"îiı*riîJ!Jî uıî s .» »iiîJ»-^-t ,ır.ı*î j *'·-■ '.. > tr iTbenf we « dispatch' him there?" ea¬ gerly questioned Jbe Comptessai b l ?1,ιί ^ ■· l < fíWithoutbyoű Iwdnld^p'refe^tbat'his exeellènza^houìàìmger:^ 0 \κ fı)i '" гЦ ' - A^Oh^yeSjí'oh' yés," ^earnestly* inter¬ rupted Rosalvivaţ^ t<! .this'wilI be greater revenge;^and,* in. daily tortures, lié will „awake beside*the''corse* of his bride; ' ih witness^of her fast-andìputrifying^isso- lutfob;?bib rhX^uU.^n - i ^ ^ui*··· The Dwarf was silent. > > ^ % s Ί , u<í' Wili.( this ^mode of vengeance not gladden tţhe heart, itoo,'of Valfroni ? 'oh, it must, it will!" » - " » ,'ť - 1 < ' ""^Inithe distance you can accompany us, arid be the spectator of all· that ¿t en- sues," replied Valfroni, unmoved at the
vetiemênifándS rbapsödicbdispla^or" her . tee!ingSiiiöHé'>iii· 'i'Vnd'ñín^' -ψ tiiiïhfiTiïtmi .γ^ν íuíStí: RosaliaV vaults^! õl> 9Ш : ' ; &>ш? mispdiţp r^yeab:tótó ■røti^i^iuMj- 'h¿oíf'¿ílf 'oi' ; χώΐ(Ι ^[oòi -'x;íh '^jAud he was- ňmused^irirthe T probabi¬ lity of Jhis.promise?'^ л,? -^v f h IhìA: ŕ> ** He wasi í and aWáits^VauBòU^y t r?for s ^ Ifet^orøent v^hichirøa^beiiteiiinjBd ■ his final ipn^with ilifo?" mr&\ * -'¿¡¡vi' - -'erna *■*'. Even^^Pi jRpsalviya^i àhd í^bArno^ nient, past, rthe;re№npéösè^ ^li^ňiiis^^|%;;o Ш : хр1юШ .¡¿¿i* „or í*? C^erli^n- 11п^ С: гел^г^е ; ,^ the ¿ ßojiipt(Bssav;-as > iCsin;:i ranfícipãtmn^f ... lp^ciiclj^i^í;|- - : -:
îiîfi ¥^u/}Wpu1diôVer-Tatèi»y tliöökö'ánxf my gratitude, Valfroni,**' facetiously im¿ plied theCofaiptèBôa ;^ííbtitPÍWiH no?t for¬ get» these ieŕviceôi ^and^eVen wheti-world s distant Worlds '«Hvide ifls/ ï^wilt^ith joy look back to the houť tfiáť^gaVe^mé théîfrièqdslHp'bf-thè^Dwarf Valfŕoni." " And dost thotf anticípate á-sèpara- tión^zRösai^iva^w^ bíw.-äti'- í'ti " From<lwh ľ dím J ?^ •teítgeríý ^afekëtf 1 lhe COmptessapándí&ei" agitation -ariä^ sur¬ prise was some What i^e^crìted tr at4Kè strangeiinteprogatbŕyoíílValfrdňií^ >ч ϊτΛί.*Ί?Γθώ the Dwarfs feplied^hè, ?í áiid the energy of his tone seemed to' coňfey amhmusuai* asperity anä strength^''no, \ 'RosalVívá'// thou^caiisť néťeť leuvS 1 ihe-ß ŕ " Singular Being," replied ^th ? é Oömp- teseav>áaďshe< felt^dispósed to iaiînïge in thetìracinófiobserviationsl \vhich came
from, and which v sèerriéd to amuse'the DwartN " Nay,' 3 she added; 'f tell· me by what soleten and |mysterious í compact I am chained to thy-will? WhTnot'even my sacred meditations, my repose,-my solitude, be exempt from'thy Y iníèrfer- enc é?" <,i W 'i Λ /t »ίί>/ι ' " Does, then/the thought of /Valfroni's society seem to afflict the { 06mpiessa ?" M u Oh, no ; but hoW'is^iťto 1 be'ima¬ gined,* that, shut from theworld, as will be'lièr dètermiriatiöivthe 1 DwarfValfroni cán^séè^k or 'hobeTor society witH îj heţ·? This àctî -which invites J Paoli to tlietepi- rit^bf his wife, gives thee thy. revenge/as well asinine. 1 ' We have- notíghfrmore, Valfrooi, r tocönimrinicate J ; andthe link which' "now 'binds* us, must then) be brókeri?' '*'** 1>-ч»'.. . ,'ъ-.м* u It will only bein death só,"' gloomily
answered the f D warf, and his voice appeared to sink into'tìiat sepulchral tone, Avhich the.darkness, of night, and the loneliness of the mind r appears,to create.4 ¡ n <. s u i } ^ ^ > ц . - *UDo weuever part?" Ut t , f . " Never, Rosalviva—never! Immure thyself, within the darkest recess of the earth ; frequent that isolated spot, .where the.pure light of heaven never yet beamed, nor the voice of mortal ever cheered ;— select that path in existence *the, ţnosţ appalling—the,most,dreaded; thy sha¬ dow keeps to thee still— so will ,mine; aye, never to forsake thee! ~ Death)only can,part us 4 ; and, even theo, , my. spul» nnappeased, would welcome dissolution, to join^vith thee jn thejother%regions." . Rosalviva shuddered. The half fabu¬ lous, "naiul· the half solemn meaning of
■■ -ü'j'L ■■ ■ vr--jk.. r ;.^-.co.4 thé Dwarf, caused her ño trifling sensa^ . tions of terror,; there, was a presentiment. seemingly-clinging ^ to. her ebuî, , ţhaţ jiro-, . ■ ·■ ':·' ...-'·' ■' "'л я j Ой *? í .ŕ (Vf 1.0 í.í.L?.:Í'!i{>f:'. , ': n duced disagreeable reflections*, and she felt the icy,chill of its alarm ; her. heart swelled within her, i,and the. attempt ,..· sn.l·—· fíöK'*A .i?r>JíU. ек 1. - - : ,зто?.гшс{ eJí. ííoq,j at utterance, was, for some ; minutes^ re- sistléss : she leaned upon a couch, and: . .íí/rjts.í'ífH >(W "n-'ís.Míď oi: fïoofxiiiî ' /ňŕ.^j her - respiration was r ; heavy and ; còn- ■■ ;tVïiiJïrt--:i'fïTf-iïO''fiOiJi;i{|ra c jïriOO-b9iioqo λί?;!: vulsed.; ' ;.v;vp ■■^^■г:;:».-^^;.'":-·" ^•.■■v r - : W« : 4 i The Dwarf viewed ; the contention ¡.of ■. ( :0ШГ?.::Ь>»1» Oí ííi7ílV3í'-¿ l Í : ÖÏOO-tó ¿О ^ШЗЧ1ж her faculties unmoved, save, that there; ■ -■■■ ■угп-)то'тс>^^.рт"(ь : по iii »Ьг/ша8д 'ť-J. was ;a kind of derisive contortion of -fear ture, mixed with:a calmness, and,a still apparent sood nature, that was difficult tó be accurately defined; r , ;, , , . ; л 'í This is misery of strange apprehen- .■■■'■''':'■ . . '■'"'·,'{ uv- sión ;" .murmured Kosal viva; as: the faint glow of animation, wanned her feelings. „ "Misery ľ* repeated the Dwar^ '' thou
• ,ь ROSALVIVA. 20У art wont Ю bestow harsh terms rea
upon sensations wrought up'by the sole guidance of yourself;' ч л >- "Alas ! I am íguorant of this myste- . .teid-wi?- : штйш 3jì:to- Iíído.?::^ э*1з..-П: nous harangue, nor do 1 wish to pause 1а?ш]^:' rreít Ьш^ с :^.1 '.и^йхм.^Ь^Шт. upon its purport. The Duca Paoli— the Ducá !'V impressively urged hheCpmp- tessa, anxious to banish the thought , -İK.O '.■'■lij-'Æ Ví'jíiu.íí |rj.í-;v7. s5Cíí, f ;'.ííÇí^'í" -'^ that opened contemplation on the future. " The Duca will be¿ ih ; waiting at the ' '*■ '■ 'líc'.ÍÍ' ÍA » , ;- - '"r'V , -j''^ f..-.·.:·'. v r ;'>- '''■ r-V/ff-.^^l"· skirting óf Monte Pelégrinò ^ή aùetimëï; be assured. : ln order to avoid observa- 'f·'-)* 'ï{>, 'V |: '"''ï £"ч'; J 'j'«'Vï .' : »·ί ί ^-'·'"-".>> ί. ir··' t'Ví^-jí ŕ'; ;;·,"; tion ; we will repair thithér prior to his arrival·; iiV Óné öf tliè^ïiÖst of St Rosalia, tliou ähal t bé^aAviínèss-' of the deed that consigns hini ^to 1 éter- nity." ■ ;'. л - . ■"■ä-^·· : *'. ; .:·· r ·: .■■-■■--;■ -r»^ -ν Dwárf '^iaÎİrroub^ tiiHt^tií ■■■ tbe^'vaàlf ŕ wnï en
contains L the * corse - of с Francesca,' í the Duca is;tOibe immured.'' ν»η /*ь^ ni *, * *< Decidedly thus : i arlanıp, »which ->1 havé.'proyidédì» wilbJn giving»a ? constant flame,; light him to bis diuinaMiorrors; its glare, though'feeble^íis.jsufficientíto sheWíthe decomposing remjains of Fran¬ cesca,^ f How long ia time hisitsoul c can Jbanquet upoiii^biS; .prospect, -is^not for ourselves'to determine ţ *,i t; Дел «enough to know, 5 that a fate wretche4^asrthis S iU)au- kinti need t noJt f ipvent ^moje ^gpnişjng, to avenge) the ,inj u rie.sJreceİYed from, his most» døadly .foe ; thou would st- notjwish beyond/ Rosabiva?ľ,í < , ы \ г . с я :с - ih , ι -и 1VNp,thing beypnd ; aţid, før. thqtsa,fe.ty ofthe vault?" asked she. s> ,? x ,ì'd ^.J*f)Ţhere»iejino human beings,Replied Ltbe.D warf,) Λ* ( possesses .the etfghtesţiclue ti^íh buir· tifu t.ii¡.bái,A^ *4 it^t 't vt f
to' its ä situation! or ^could^even approach it; beside, ere the bars tøf that dungeoti could Hbe 'iremo ved,~^· secure »las Φ can make them,—the'body' of 'Paoli 'will be longîretbı'nedJtb its native* d ust, < and { th f é earth cai^telľno tales." ^^ ^ ^- í - i я'И .Thed night îgroWs late," 1 observed Rosalviva^^ we^had better depart." " '"i« i Willingly ^»tfrjedf »the I>warf,« .aud 1 , thrpüghahe'mèist silérítíparts'of Palermo, leading* í towards 1 Monte Pelegrino/they cautiously proceeded. * The occasional glèanv 1 of moonlight * · afforded>rthem * å clirection ŕ álotig their path/aìid^at the close of an hour, they attained the 'dark árid^desòlated' building, once'sácred to St. Rosalia. ŕ » " f τ* * T ^»V ij ^The passages Were not new>toitfie*eye bf>Rosalviva,'and she looked *äVoutíd them with a familiarity aud satisfaction.
Ťhe'moŕV deeply ^he^en^érgérl ^within thè súbteŕraneätí áveiíuéš, notwithstand¬ ing the mildew mid dampìVéss that hiihg abonťtheir' Walls/ arid thVtbicIc bíílíin| glooinľ'Cthát^theligbí, which 'tİıey "car¬ ried, scarcely seemed^to^enetraie 1 ,) 1 '^ greater'was the prédominance от that vindictive passionrthaťkepťalivďalflier feelings' and faculties,' with jièrfêcVsub- misšidn^aríd 'gladness.' s Paoli would'be speedily withiii her' ¿rasrJY it Was 'n' tri- umpb,' indeed, to reflect upön; lf that the mah 'Who hud * doomed 'her l ¡эагеп<; ] to á premättíre grave, and who had broken hér hearty would termiriáte á life hor¬ rible 0 ^s^Wouïdbè Kis. Hér' acquies¬ cence of leaving him to his owďwréťched and 4ihgèritëg r death ^appeared' tö ?c be rr/ôvédí^^Sbe^ considered thar'ïurihèr tórniéiiìt'uiightyetbè'givéhhinf. h 4î ' ''
ťť . What," she /whispered to the Dwarf, «if r we.were tp^leave ţhe n ßuc^to his ovfrif contemplation f one, nişţ\ţ, Valfroni, pf such liquors, joiusi; ^^ţiis,; fettered beside tţie nı^ıjderipgfco^şe.pfj his í3 w,ife, would, be worlds of death and,pain ; and tlie^n . to awfdcep, j him , from^tíiese, , to nuisis them,upomthev„scaffold,, would,be an excess of jay.ţo me. that not all thou couldsf askfsho.uld purchase it from, me. • *.. J '' M * / j' "' ' * vid '' lib.,. Say,<D £ warf, shall .it be dope?", 3}{ \ 4 ^ (íl ,, ť í It ŕ miglit^ coldly ^epli^d^Valfroni, at the. same. ť time i replenishing ţji^/eeble light .of the lamp,; * e We, are^npar.^the 4 σ ¡fbi.3 „Λ ' ' Π», ν , f V ^t lii siti Zli Kt f vault of Francesca," added, he, ¿* thou, nutşţ f reumáin. în this recess,^Coiiiptessa, luţtil 4 my return with : the J)uca. . t Qri,thy s.i ( ţence,.depepd / ^ î the> : securiţy^p^^aoJ[ţ^ movent,! beseecţi tţi^e, fromthişisjpçıt.j Were it known .that,thou, art, t heEe Af .be<
assured í «th é Ducawould> suspeötfitrea- èbery ; teven aïslght 'öf theejíúntillWe at- tain'the' interior of ithe dupgeoiijt would inevitably destroyJ oriiíí purposşs'Kthere- forê, Onorio pretences opi knxiety,<leave thisíèavity.^ Thedighfciplaoéd iriíyorŕder broken arch will tho^íbe ^observed 1 ,* and from witbinâts duskyi ebclosure^oqiwill easily perceive btíriáprjroäcb; -enveloped closely in* your cloak/ yo ť ú can ifolldw,'— anticipate theb'emainder. H ^it masť be full midnight; воГН^РаоКЛ^УШ' ?i ''Distracted aiid torn ,by feelirig^of al¬ ternate ? horror, » ' cri mei^anri répéníànce, the^erilöus Duca awaited'for thé meet¬ ing with Valfroni. I His mind ( a f rfd senses hïïd î become l so distracted* by continual t¿ríment/ that be dreaded ¿ to "pauöêr 'he Wutø gladly 'eriibŕace whateVerídéšliny might befal him, in prefererìcé ! to a tbe
ignoïriinipuss оле* ¿hab« had been * ihreat- eoedwto¿him i-by HRösal vivar; /До .perish tbusjvheowould t ( never yield« ţn with ìbis о wn> weapon? iwouldi he ? have destroyed his ^excruciating) pxistence^ rather} than suffers the bfatehdué/ito bis" enormity^ of criine>)vV<>Iťás mykast sVemaining hope," he apostrophiáedírinithe' 'midst of his^ ru¬ minations, í 'litis the-last decree thatseals the^doom röf Paoli; ŕ * Ministers^ of idark- ness. and vengeance,, оЬ»Л darenot^look toinyGodM/darjttr4—# ; J-i,Mït)ir- ίΐ-,ι K'ícHush^husb, -Signore Dnca/A-ícfied thpţ DíWarf/ whojhad appeared^ uring ДЬе ^ppealjvp/ P,aqli,if« thy. God capjrbestpw njeiîçy,i>yıbeJies there, is penitence."^} ч um isFmiTrhfiy apguish 3 which rages irere jn¿£iy bvspmj^tliejffre.íupon my Ьгшп, г .>,ОД { ! ^Jfmni^iM^pastjuMerancei^jvhenisJ^ I^np^y.peace^'rtî
• j ..Th'e Duca raised,.his eyes to ^heaven, they ' ; were. uplifted > se veral·* moments/ 1 a teàr.4 stood j tremulously Avithin tfiem/it веетеД, toigive ■ relief to his ^burdened heart/ and in, a voice ialmosfc inaudihle he sobbed,—'* Cardoni, thou art there.,v ( my crime werevexpatiated;in tbe,miseries 1 now endure! Leontini, my murdered friend«, oh J if thpu , couldst witness the -compunctious throbs that tear mysoul, thpruwonldst bid ' me i die л and end them-, " « л' í ,í*tľ "t" " Whatídid Lnot forfeit in losingthee! To \yhat extent of crime did I notplunge inj iwhen J. became ţliy betrayer J fears of blood rrishf. from·, me, .but 'they « wilt not .suffice;,-oh,>It>ain agonized indeed 're- .morse/remorse, tho uh ast fixed thysting [herei ¿jtisdreadful/'; : ;v l t,' ъ -i.ì f</ The : Dwarf felt pity, and he supported
tlìe^rìéàrly ^ exhausted^ frame 'Of 'Paoli, düriïig } at period 'of severe stnïggle^ and anguiåh .· > #ť 'Coriiè, * come; be alive,' í Ro¬ salviva is fixed to the spot devoted to'thy purpose. Thy v weapon gives release to all tby terrors." ** More blood i'"groaned the Duca, and Uhe'pale and livid marks of death seemed' almost to triumph over his countenance. " My soul shrinks from the sound, 'my arm* will fall nerveless, ere I can strike the blow that marks me deeper with the stain of murder." " Nay, but think, unhappy Dùcâi upon the- alternative. What oughtest "thou not encounter in avoiding a' scaffold ; think of such a fate, reflect on such*a death Γ - < ^ л ' < The Dwarf grasped the'arm öf the Duca, .who, unable to subdue4he kind vol. m. L
ofj stupor, that came over İrim, yielded to the impulse of yalfroni's power, and in hurried, step they enţerpd the chapel of St. Rosalia. ,
CHAP. VIII.
_~^---------- When l все These frantic transports of despair, T jop To liave preserved theo. live. Хо see thy nnguiib, 1 Wilt more complete my vengeance. ¡ hoa shalt Uve, SíNííETx'í AtrtusaaãThyutes. I stacd Immoveable, like seiuclci» marble, Hoi ror lias frozen my suspended tongue. Yooho. The, retiringi footsteps of the Dwarf were .listened, to iby the Comptessa,, as * he quitted ι the range of vaults, with an' elatedi throb' of ardour, and in the silent meditations of her mind she traversed' the dreary space of» the cell, during se¬ veral impatient! and troublesome mo¬ ments, Tbe.silence of the sepulchre,: and, all its gloom, exceeded not the loneliness of the recess> wherein she^
awaited the return.of the,Dwarf,. She had not courage to, meet, the reproach of the past, she feared to judge pf the future, and the beţter^to avoid the anguish of thought, she endeavoured to,discover the grating that opened to Francesca's vault. At such a tima, in such a spot, and with all the horrors that may be supposed to have fastened on a heart like Rosalviva's, guilt and fear would have at once deci¬ dedly prohibited the attempt, but such a dread was not prevalent, in, her bosom ; her courage failed. at the idea of retro¬ spection) but.her,personal temerity,, in wishing to obtain access to^a .sight ,of the Duchessa, . was .not in the slightest degree perceptible, and she; snatched the lamp-with. a determined£;boldness } ionce again, and alone, to gaze upon the livid corse .of her victim. * ^
, tút k narro^arijlmkj/ branched Йоп4 the vaulťíle'áding^towärdsHhe'gí'ating^whích closed 'ita, 'extremity, 'and ^having ^care- fully observed tHeinahner" hf which the Dwarf 'liad' 'previously M gàinéd u admit¬ tance, slie * adopted the'same 'process. The Walls' of the cell, and the few pillars that supported'its lofty roóf, were co¬ vered*'with 'a* áable cloth, which the gleam'of a lamp that was affixed to 'dne of the columns just distinguished'; at <the* end of thewaúlť was laid, upon a small erected throne, a coffin, over which 'thedeep páll was spread and the other insignia of the ** charnel house," equally discoverable, met the sight of Rosàlviva. A 1 canopy,, bearing the f arms/and-the partly dishevelled banners of some illus¬ trious family, waved above 4Ъ& bier,' and
various tliræaments of ancestry were scat- itered rabout the - cemetery. Rosalviva startled, and pausing during a moment's consideration, she found thaťshe { had en¬ tered a different vault to that whioh con- .tained ithe corse of Francesca. ' ' She was ïproceeditsg to retire, when the appear¬ ance of a black curtain, Íri ''an adjoining circular *recess, caught'her attention, and aeshe viewed its dismal· folds, a sudden ^emotion ifrornbehind'the drapery riveted fher to the »spof; and she felt the blood (chilling -throughout her veins, in super¬ natural foorror/ The folds of the curtain > were "again • .distinctly seen Ito move, in a &ind of cau- ' 'tious disturbance ; in 1 ^vain^ sbe v essayed to recede, her stepsiseenieďcíoggéd^Wítli Jsome'dreadful «nd heavy «burden,<^nd
she remained in a state of insensibility, and yet as if awaiting the appearance of some dreadful mysterious disclosure. The alarm of Rosalviva ceased in pro¬ portion'as she felt convinced that it was ideal,'and slowly recovering her usual spirits, she tottered to one of the co¬ lumns for temporary support. cl Madness and horror seem to oppress me/' she faintly articulated, and a cold shuddering at repeated intervals came over her»> ,'* Oh I these dark and chil¬ ling vaults, my every step seems to echo* as though with guilty tread ! these Walls even have curses for me, and in the awful pauses and moaning of the hollow wirid, * there risesn. voice that appals me I Hark, näy 'tis hell to >bè thus absorbed I Why should sense and feeling be so strongly fettered ? idle phantasies í shrink, shrink
г not, ту soul ; think on wbat I am I think opt what 1 have suffered,, and thy scorned superiority shall nobly triumph. t P^oli Golfieri, thou diest !" A wild and .coarse ,shout of lausrhtçr followed the exclamations of thş„C,omp- tessa, and horrid ,were its echoes a,10ng the distant passages. . , f , * л » ? , The «whisper of.the £ Dwarf Valfroni in an adjoining archway, rouged^the at¬ tention of Rosalviva, and, slip rushed through the avenue to meetjiim.^ !Ţhe crating closed violently after,,her, as ť a sudden grasp of her hand moved it.frow its stationary position., The electric dis¬ solution ,of worlds could not bave beep imagined in more awful shock, as, did the tremendous peal reverberate^thrc;ugh- 't i ! * " ' out the entire space of St. Rosalia. H ( er agitation w^s heightened in the extreme,
and she'sunk almost breathless against a'projecting crag, in the recess where I ' , t . ι ι ι i 1 1 1 % Valfroni had commanded her to remain. The visage of the Dwarf caught her eye ţ^arid the Üarslı meaning iţ conveyed, the terrible and appalling glance directed to' her/and the loud and angry tone with whicii he pronounced, " Rosalviva, thöti b hast' trifléd with my' interdiction," harrowed up' her entire senses. " Dis¬ dainful woman, what might not have been its' consequences ? this curiosity of thine is wrong: didst thou know its < ι dangers, thy life would have been for¬ feited; ' rather than thou wouldst have èndeavoiired to have learned them; speak, what hast thou seen ? "*í* Answer," again stormed the Dwarf, after' 'abpause, wherein the silence
of Rosalviva was maintained, v/ith ' a kmd of obdurate ¿and indignant feeling, rather than .otherwise ; "' The' ¡grating of yonder cemetery has been unhinged, and thou didst venture to explore its deathly and horrible ^interior l·*Speak, rash .and ungovernable woman; ' what hast thou seen r" í = * * * ,"íThe resting place of the dead;'* re¬ plied the Comptessa, and hpr mirid and tremor had' given way to a, cbdrage, and an .unconscious- degree of defence, that caused her to assume a l more than expected intrepidity of'¡reply ; , ·" bast thou such forbidden'mysteries,? that I— Yet all this is évasion. —Is the' Duca within reach.?" > \ i v ' ' ;''·? .)i; . ,¿í "/The Duca isbntifewpaces distant/' ^îţ'.dt is: resolved,"· urged ţhe /Comp-
tessa, -" that we, during some few lonely hours, iCpnfine^him in· thé vault with Francesca." /'ItisPb M ' л '' "Hasten then,, Veltroni, this'much; for already the dampness of these sub¬ terranean habitations has given me a chill, and I feel anxious again to see the light of heaven-^-to feel the air 1 of humid nature."^ t í * v *ţ But then tHou wilt not leave me?" questioned the Dwarf, and he glanced a look at ber, which seemed intended to penetrate the interior of her soul ; ·** what are the terms of the compact? î have forgotten:", \. ,.''»- -"· " Indeed this is/ in the present mo¬ ment, wholly irrelevant i" ¡replied Rosal; viva, " my mind is too." much engrossed in ithe accomplish ment Of our design, to
consider,.o/ matterşi «loireïtriyiali íHavéJ npt offered f thee,,- D warf,«/ al Jífth.at friches may command?'^ пД ул jw{ ^он ш>* , ?i ^Aiid alfofwhich liutţerly disdain;" spakéítbe Dwarf ıh .к.л\{ ч^ягюРлЬ * , 4 ííutOhíucrueliandvtortrienting Valfroni; , thou ı.hast ; a ^dagger лг: sheath \ itibere!" andmat thejsamevinstant she* bared iher «bòsbirij» gràspingi >toowjtbe bilt *of Jiis * poniard,* which the Dwarf imperiously 'aiid ι with'facility extricated ľ frorri^ her hand : : hh Yés f she. cried/ *S'sheàtbát v here ; and let' rny fears' terminate. Thou i knowest not/ that suspense and delay ¡to thêífeelingsybff womankind,*; are >at once cruelty and death. Be kind, then;band » if :*hyipo wer is not equal to thy inclina- tionrAf Paoli ; hás bribed thee<?<to re- • bounce 4hersaerifice of ľa ìlirfe^* so/justíy -doomed totJsuffer4^if thy nature/ pitia-
blë'abd relenting/'withholds itself froin theídeed,í íiuímercyr^in ε mtírcý,' téli me, and seek not by an. invention 'of^pur- pos^íto {impede or 'brush ' my ^wishes. I discharge, thee cheerfully from*, thy pled^e^will/still revere thee, and J think, too, b tbat thöu ehdeavouredst to serve me'; ■but ¿vengeance must not' beparted -with ; for''to 'the scaffold--will T j with gladness ;summon f íí this .recreant ? and perfidious 'PaoliiMThisrmuch, at least, thou canst assisterne in, и D warf Valfròni;, come, theii,; since! have brought .-forward ifor thee, tliis < confession, '■ reverence it, * by speaking: thyntacil·-compliance,·', and', we wilbpart." , '. . ^ .-.■■<;:■, ■.'.. i^** I would notideign to interrupt the . volubility : of thy eloquence, Signora/' . sterni у .remarked, the í Dwarf,; " now «thou hast -spöken* ,J ? iwill hasten, toj,remove
this suspense thou talleest« öf : further delay shail be.also unnecesBavy-*-listtíň, thou;artdeceived." ^ .« v ,f ** ^ " Deceived !" echoed the voice ofthe Comptessa, and a variety'of strange and perplexed ideas instan f tly~rushed aerose» her mind. mi. u » л ο» ι *«'Yes y ; the time is at band, when the award of a rapid 'career of ci ime likeithine must be «measured out,'and the fate it merits will have its course i follow* me, and this scene of fiction shall be dis¬ solved—your own eyes shall behold^-" * ì ** Ha, then my fears are real ¡"shrieked the -Comptessa, as with frantic ( gestriťe she interrupted the strain of Valfroni's command,v*« Js am betrayed'; arid ťhou art, indeed,^ the monster~thé' démon, whose shape, in my dreärhs, I have Wit¬ nessed ; but thou shalt be foiled;—Dare
to pollute me'with 1 ttìine ubJtø'ed touch, and this dagger/ whicb I have 1 secreted for its due purpose, shall terminate 'a -deed of treachery üké that of thet base and abortive Valfroni I Whs.1 are thy pur¬ poses j*-—Speak, let me knoW^tnemworst and most darkénedcolouring/that Tmay be the moreenâbled to resist theriť." < */ FollöWimetotheiCemetery yonder," cried the. Dwarf, '*! and thou needstnot farther inquiry ." S ,, . ^ "Is it thus you would·. aliare, then, your victim?·—Has the Duca,'Paoli obeyed thy^ wishes; and does>he loiter tolaugh-at the subdued Rosalviva 5 ?^ Oh, yes, 1 see it all; I see aH thy damning accursed duplicity, thy sin, and thy hor¬ rid treachery ;výet, ^strive to· effect-thy desìgns,.(if { thou 'därest!" ? Here^she snatched from beneath r bér 7 cloak, tbe
poniard- concealed H there, 1 / and;*-' frown¬ ing 1 in^the* mcTst^sévere^coníeiiipé ir ahd rage^ripon 4he> Dwarfs sHe'criedi "NöV,r Dwarf Val froni j I will· pass'; opposé my'egress' from these* assassin >baunts J , the consequences shall beTatal ; and,, for this, thy joint plot/ ! the light of the forthcoming day shall avenge it; and then, .Paoli Golfièri," looking 'ear¬ nestly round tbe archway, in suspicion, that among the dim shadows-beforé her, she should recognise the figure öf ihe ¡Dtica,- *; Murderer 2 Heretic ! 'Cow¬ ard ! Take/my curseö, —my bitterest curse ; it shall ring , upon thine 'ear while the, grasp of death' is upon' thee ; it shall hiss around thee till thy latest breath/, and then invoke ¿he' wrath 1 of God tothy everlasting torments, : Now, Dwarf, 1 yvillpass. ,, (>
r ^;yhou 4 shalţ,nptrpaşs," » reiterated ithe Iţ\varf, . and < with. his ; handhèîfptpUïly detainedjher ; ■'>, thy suspicions^.and thy charges ; aţe .equally .wrong ;■. it .»¿thine own actand.deed,th atj) ath,brought}thee to this state.·, Valfroni.is np-monsterrr- is no,; deinen." ,,·,; ;..,..», «ií; .¡о.ч^ .. ■) /: ■ { ' ť The wprld.^as nominated- tbee.such,- and thyblacţ: and.da.r.k actions proclaim thee one,;" shrieked; the Comptessa/her ey ( es darting.the -nipst fieny and, ăvengp- fa] glances.„. ', j ¡ ^ ... ,,,„ Y / -, ,ϊ. .,. ч ) - * γ : . (ί Λ Τ1ιοιι liest.; ^Valfroni can. defy-ţbat woriçlto prove one,act ( that unites him 4g«%"*i -; .:.. .. >. к Λ í - V-» - «*-Ч» . .".Де 5 not thy .appellation, universal throughout Palermo ?ľ ,-,,,. ,\»:i r . v 'SWbşit appellation?" . ,.., }i -j ,η .. f . /^ The Demon Dwarf ! Arid what but
crime'andi atrocity can give itisuchnau- ťhority?"ii r ,л χ \ » t<4 f < . .-· \f " The credulity of fools might have it so; \ but the appellation 'Was my'own, in every î place, in every cause, society, and all·engagements during my'habitatioh here, I pronounced it thus—the Demon Dwarf ! Theresas mystery in its sound, and I erideavotired to profit byit.*< The huge and "hideous frame of body ¿only, could ! sanctiori the title ; the mind, the mind, Rosalviva, was of a different'or¬ der." u 'İ Mi 1 ^ ' ^The voice of Valfroni, driririg 'the. con¬ clusion of Lia repliesj lowered itself, and there wás a kind of Calmness/ a retentive recollection of something that seemed more r than in a common. degree y tò en¬ gross his manner and his 'meditations.
Ше íGomptessa ^was ^inclined to feel· a terror . creeping /throughout s her- , The changed and altered torie of ithe 'Dwarf had ¡filled her imagination with ¿fresh mystery; «and, under its power, sheifelt Jess í capable of'resistance, than' had 'it arisen to 4hat imperative and authorita¬ tive ¡repulse, which she tconceived must have followed. > . s "And iwhat-canst >thou mean?" urged Rosalviva, in fearful and comfortless 'feeling, " this singularity 'and 'horror breaks upon my mind with strange im¬ pulse*; how couldst thou hopevto profit by thy uBsumed mystery? ' And how hast thouiprofited? Didst thou ! originally,in the bour- of'misfortune, 'with thy wealth and tthy 'hopes, become a wrecked and abandoned man ? ,? . ♦ - e^ , * ' ' ** I' told thee tømt there had been a
time* whe л ^1·- ventured' tó /nourish^"the fairest ^flowery? that'ever * Nature^' pro¬ duced;^ Itold thee, šthaťit livéd^iirmy bosom, and ígrew there rooted with-it; 1 told thee, ^that fronvits fragrance'and its dewy blossoms^ lîenjoyêd 'all· my*pleas- ing comforts ; to constantly gaze upon ¡its richness and Justre, I said, was'my daily pride, and my care to 'add freshness to its bloom ;.> ohi ! *1 г cherishedithis? flower into so divine, \ and 'into «soj enchanting a treasure, * it was my deity, h t ÂrídLtold thee,,too, that, in such a moment^there àppeared^a>sting,îa(barb from, beneath this flower; and, in an unthinking mo- menttfit struck'into,my heartland pe¬ rished there ; the flower withered in its cold, and desolate bed¿ and bloomed; no more. j. There was oncera;voice» ~ too, the onlyjønejntthe.wcirjd that couldibave
recalled·»my ^dreaming '¿sdul » frònwdts' blighted , and tortured. sleep tv' for. you' mustkiiow^jOoraptessa,* that? until the sounds of that .'voice > a wakeried ^ linages ' had bound ifc^beneath its* slumbers ς tout thou,hast heard my history,*and it were tedious - repetition to'speak of it here; follow tine,.to the cemetery',· thou shalt know4hp'Utmost.^ 'ь t * « > î "» ut. s , f« Andi Whatîhave i there to behold ?"' ζ - ( ^PadIi ; , Golfieri, fettered^ to Ithe em^ brace of Francesca." *>j ^"î r " *U> - J * •"íOh, Göd! No,'no; thóu döst but niock^me," Лп agonising" * îfrenzyï^cried Rosalvivat, ¡»^ , m, ·. í . н j% «bi* •«."'AwayP'-and be satisfied; away 1 -^- aWay.'^^ uî«K- v ·» '' 'ff? ч 5 /n ;*" k -> ; ThejGomptessa ? iristantly yielded Чо thè impulse, j and ^rushing througlrthé avenue*gained the iron grating. 'Valfroni-
removed: it/ and she. emerged intői the; vault. ν ι '.,; и '-- · hw-* ì ·' -ί *^ϊ· /" ^4 ; t. The;. D wari closed, .the ? gratingľ upon; her^, she awaitedhis^ approach,«but. the silenpe,,! and; the.;darkness, (for¡vhe3:had; taken Otec. lamp : .from, jRosalvi va¿ $ con-* vinceď hex, that he. badUdeparted,,and the. fatal, trutlţîseemed ¡ totdisclose itself,, that she was.now» alasUwhollyiinvhis'. power ! í ,Her». situation ¿ rendered^.her dreadfully violeriţ., The, v smalt ylamp beside the bier, gave ;the,i most feeble 1 light, imaginable ^ she, revived jitsi'dim- ness,,and fğuidingjts, reflection round the. vault, cried, amid the fervour of ,her in¬ tense sufferings,/^ Paoli ДоШеп ; ! ц 1 call thee to answer this treachery. Spirit,of Francesca! I charge thee, 5 too/;witb/jts origin ! I. charge, thee with the,» destiny th^tbefals me J" ^ ui ^, K , rt . v<
T.he-coricealed recess' atihe; extremity of the vault again caught her attention/ and she 3 »rushed towards; it. > Throwing asjdpi in the violence of her agitation, the, d ark drapery, to> herKorrid surprises the figure'of Francesca 'stood before her ! Palei and. in tbe habiliments of death, the fprm^of the Duchessa, as she appeared 'in the dream of Rosalviva/ gazedïistedfastly* upon her. l The glare of a brilliant lamp, suspended above the- statue appearance v of Fraucesca, "cor¬ rectly pourtrayed the uiialtered^ coun¬ tenance. ¿She could not look upon^it; an icy and poignant thrill of horror coiled* upon*her>'heart, and, with a r convulsed shriek, she sunkiupon ¿the earths The drapery closed itself immediately. * )n/ i The' Dwarf Valfroni, 'through a %'ιί> ther cavity entered the vault; in^a^voice'
of terrible power he recalled iier to ani¬ mation,, and, snatching)· her *fromí' bei* sunken and exhausted position/ he>cried, ** Look*up, Hosalviva!'thy titaieiàiiear. Ţhe~ fiends' of despair and «darkness' ayvaityou !" .* - > .\ - **» * íť Valfroni ! r ' my ^preserver ? . -my ' be¬ trayer?" faintly 1 * exclaimed «'the' Comp- tçsşa,ithe;wild glance 'from* her' eye be- speakinglthe kind of dread and iiorror 1 her souleutertained. . , ¡ i> · / > ! ^ j ' , " Thy. preserver <w2ce,-r-thy avériger now /τ Look at me, 'arid peruse these dark and stern lineaments of an injured, a t despprate l being!" 1( , „ . . л. , *; r Oh,,,God ! J ï v speí theín/ I see-the fierce lightnings of thine, eyes/ and they sepm to scorch me ; but wby should they blast mei, Thou, 'Dwarf· Valfroni, and tbis-—.this living spectre. Oh ! mystery- !
mystery, j s wha,t,ia it^.what ^rt thţw ?\urt human! i; or,fiend t ? speakjcai^djcrush my, miseries !"^ .ţ ,;j -ìvi-t.v * ^ffWonder noťif/J hadbecome î( fiend, indeedj'.wretched'audjhandened'-womaiv; my, heart; is still .human. .< The <wound, thou ! caused pi ïstamped f me;with desola¬ tion, n í did not die r -andncurse thee., t l lived for>this 'hour, K to triumph over thy falsehood, to repay .„thee,,in ¡ the ţ terms dueto thy evil; and dreadful-career. ;,> To sting ^thee; with ]the¡ adder's, rmost .loath¬ some .venom, j Onc.ejthou .wert sunshine to | me,; and my. every happiness was^ in thy. beam ;, it-was „snatched from. me,aud thy г dark ; and inhuman, soul¿ ; meditaţed • my ι destruction: t ïjt, .failed,—I/became free,; andvlived' to^Teud^tlţy; heart'by; a meeting like this. Look) a£ <шсД* ' ч ч(щ 5 j t "^ tVjaLprcnţ ! P lialfţoţţi,V fea^fuljy ( \ and, VOL. III. M
■ : ■ . AAA
aiid h№%} »Щ^^щфЛОу íWitb- ^r^M^mWï^^, recedi. Jf Paoli anďthp duchessa stood enfold^jjiineaob p^er's^^mb^c^v ЩаЛп t thè^same; mo¬ ment .ţ|iq i; meinb^^ o^ ?i the iţji Jesujt tri- .bun^l enJe^ţbş^t^Î» ato^aw^oţmded ţhe ^ppalled.and.asto^hjß^ BosalviVá,, ( \ TÇhç^p^çsp^pf thé discarded and,in- jure^^lieontini appeared, from beneath ,the artificial character of ft the I)warf Valfroni,^ and assuming tbe dignity of manner his, feelings t tbest t encouraged, he regarded jth^ t Comptessa, with a stern and reproachful glance. ť . t , ft (A terrible and awfol scream escaped her,.at s the wonderful events , before Jher: »'l»\i ^ İJİli if V \* T 1 , she j uttered .several daring and incohe¬ rent imprecations,, buţţ tlie, interference of the judicial authorities silence^them. ι,Ιη. the dreadful ι and .convulsed .state of
hér./sufferings/iíshe ,snatched· from her icloák the poniard^aud fearlessly plunged ¿t» through' tò< hearts «' Heťe -has 1 'been -my епешу/'( 'she' r exclaimed,^** thus'Tïé- -ward-i-Oh lÌ'Gòd \> mercy) rrtercy !" " 1 * i The» blooii«flowed imríetíiöusly ; it'was aí blow decidedly fatah' 'She swooned -upon 'the^earth-Mhe last ^'struggle was upon her—she'expired l i ^t'Kfi nĽi. . ι
