Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
St. Leon: a tale of the sixteenth century
TRAVELS OF ST. LEON.
CHAP. I. JrİAVlNG rejoined che remainder of my family, wt fee out togethti for che plains of Icaly. Mj firft incerview wich Marguerite aftci my ıetuın from Dref- den, had been melancholy. But our lıcuatıon was now fuch as Co give addi- cional anguiih Co her fenous thoughts. She had then regarded me as ambigu¬ ous, myftenous and impenetrable, qua¬ lities from which Che franknefs of her nacuie fponcaneoufly revolted , file faw Vol. III. В in
in me the deftroyerof her fon, the idol of her heart ; fhe believed me an al- chemifl", a character svhich flic viewed as bafe, degrading and infenfible ; fhc had heard that rumour had been bufy with my fame. But now fhe faw in me a man of blafted reputation, ar¬ raigned and imprifoned for ìobbery and murder. She did not credit thefe imputations. But did the ingenuous and noble-minded Marguerite dc I lam- ville ever think to find herfili allied to a being thus loaded with the world's abhorrence, that flie fliould bc com¬ pelled to honour with the faci id namı ot hufband a fugitivi, a prifou-break- er and an outlaw ' It 1 h«id fuffired thefe things in the defence of my child¬ ren, my religion or my country, the cafe would have been widely different. If, while encountering the contempt of men, I had earned within me the glorious feeling, that what they re¬ garded
garded as my difgiace, was indeed my immortal honour, Marguence de Damville, bejond all women, is as pre¬ pared to defpife cheir fenfelefs blame, and proudly to demand her filare in fuch a difhonour. I know there are men who will liften with fretful impacience to α detail of fuch forrows as hers, and who will cry ouc, If we muft bc difticfftd, give is more fubftantial and gemime fources ot dıftıefs I thev will regaid tin dc- jrttion of Maipuciicc as an idle vvilful- nels of guci, better entitled to aver¬ fion, than to f) mpathy , and w ill tell nk that nothing but tlic moil deplora- bit blindnils tould have pievtnted her fiom dilttrning che happ nefs of hei condition , chac (he had the woi Id be¬ fore her, a rich, a brave and an cncei- pnfing hufband, wich a lovely family of children, chac they could move from councry co country, and tiom В 2 climate
climate Co climace, carrying wich chem the means of luxury, indulgence, ho¬ mage md ufefulnefs. To fuch moral- lfeis I write noc. For chofe vvho are incapable of fympachifing wich che delicace fenfacions of Marguence, I am as little qualified to enter into cheir feelings, as they into mme In che fequcl of che ftory hoivever, ic is noc impoffible they may meec with thtir gratification. I am battening to events corporeal and palpable. I and my family did wander from country to country, and from climace to tlimaCe. Wich what rcfulcmg fuccefs will fpeed¬ dy be feen. Our deftination at che prefine mo¬ rnene led us, chrough che cerricory of the Grifons and over a iimb of the Rhctian Alps, to Como, Milan, Pia- сепга, Parma and Pifa, in che neigh¬ bourhood of whicli lateer cic y ive re¬ folved Co cake up our immediate refi dence.
dence In this piflage vse met with few advencures chic mene Co be re¬ corded in my hiftory One howevir fiems inticlid ro ι pi ice, boeh as 1С tends to difplay the fingular worth of ι dumb and unpretending brute, and as ic is in fonie fort connected with the fortunes I encountered in the Pifan territory, h occuned in our journey ovci the Alps One evening, in the wildcft ind mod dcfolate pirt of the mountain, after having lodged my family in an mn, I wandeied forth to take a furvey of the neighboui mg ftenery. It was moonlighc, our travel oi the day had been flioit, and had left on me no im¬ prcflion of fatpue, while ihc roman¬ de appeannce of eveiy thing around Cempted me Co extend my excurfion further than I had originally purpoftd. Stories of robbei ies and murders in che vicinity had been icpiiccd Co us, and В 3 Mar-
Mugliente had employed the pi cc au¬ tion of difi mg lltetor fieli wis the nunc ss luth tht c q ice ot lus tormer maliers had billowed on tn> futhtul negro, to tollow my Heps, antl lit Id mc in fight Ivo anticipamos of din¬ ger how tvu cl ι Ilın bed my lontiin- platiois I rclig it t ni) felf, as all u y lile 1 had Dun atcuflon cd to do, to the tnipreffions of the moment, and fought to fliut out memory and che world from all my thoughts. The leene was lnexprefiibly beautiful, the filence was unintenupted and awful. The fpiendour of the moon gave a fober and filvery tint Co every ehing by which ics light was caughc, fofc white clouds were fcitteied in the deep azure of che fky, the tindes weie of a blackncfi. and piofundicy chac could noc be furpaffed. Every clung was calculated to fooche and fubdue the mmd, to infpire a grand and exp
tranquillity The enrhufiafm it fpoke, occupied every channJ et my heart. I flood fidi. It ftcmcd as if motion would have jarred and broken the fpellthat fuzed me, I yielded with eager tianfport to the fintimcnt tnat fhrowded and enveloped me in its am¬ ple embrace. 1 had remained morionkfi, foi above half an hour, vvhen a fudden and eager found buitl upon my ear. lt feemed to be the fhrick of fome human ciea¬ ture in diftrefs. It was repeated fe¬ veral times. My fiill impulfe was to fly to the fpot fiom which the found appeared to protced. Meanwhile Hettor tame up to me, and endea¬ voured to detain mc oy violence. His firft principle was obedience to every juft and lawful command, and the er¬ rand upon whuh h„ was commiffioned, was to prefeive me fiom the approach of danger. He repieftrted to me the В 4 ftories
ftories of bandicci vs e had recently heird. He Cold me that sve fliould coo piobably lall in wich a numerous party of thefe delpcradocs, againft whom all our ellorts ciclici for our- lclvcs, or foi thofe I was dtfirous to futcoui, would be nugatory. What would btcotne of my children, whae would become of his mifirefs, af my riflinifs were fucceeded by a fatal evene ? While he was thun fpeaking, and exerting himfeif to decain me, ehe cries ceafed. I believed they were thofe of a perfon aflaţii nated. I conceived that I ihould be the vilefl of poltroons, if 1 fuflered any confideration co pre¬ vene me from endeavouring co afford to this unfortunace the relief in my power. 1 had noc advanced far, before I per¬ ceived coming Cosvarets us, in cht fame direction from which che found had reached my eai, a dog, entirely black, and
and of uncommon ftVurc and ftrengch. He was alont. Having caught fighe of us, ht nicrealed his pace, and had no foonei reached che fpot on which we flood, etian he fuzed che flap of my coar, and pulled ic wich confiderable vio¬ lence. I was fomevvhae alarmed "«c his fi/c and aftion, che lateer of which I •tpprehtndtd Co have a hodile defign , and, having (haken him ofl, I put my- feli in а polirne of defence with а сапе that I carrud in my hand. Undettr- ïed howtvei by my gettine, heicruin- cd to che actack, only pulling with fomething lefs exeition of ftrength thm he h id done bifore. More accu¬ rate attention coivinted me tint hc had no intention to mjun me, and I withheld the aftion of Heftor, vvho had raifed his hand to tlrikc in defence of his mailer. I fuffered him to guide me; and, after a confideiable circuit which che nacure of rhe road obliged В 5 us
us to take, he led me to a fpot, where I found a man lying on the ground ind weltering in his blood, but with no other perfon near, to whom to impute the violence he had fuftained His blood flowed copioufly trom cwo or ehree diffnene sveunds, one of chem in particular neai his left breafl, and my firft cue wis to flop che effu¬ fion For chis purpofe we flnpped him of his cloches, and Con his linen inco bandnges VV hen we lound Ium, hi was inftnfible bue che anguifli of bi J mg his wounds revived him ι little, though only enough to extort from him iighs md groans 1 his iccompliihed, I dif nifftd Heftor to the inn to pro¬ cure fomething m the nacure ot a litter, by w hich he mighc more eafily be con¬ veyed within reach of effectual aflitt¬ ance I was now left for fix hours wich no ocher companions chan the wounded gentleman
gentleman and his dog, upon che very fpot upon which hc had juft before fuftained fo ferocious a treatment, probably fiom che hands of bandım. They might every mornene be expected to return. This was no agreeable no¬ tion co a perfon circumftanced as I was. I was compelled to feel that a man poffefltd of boundlefs md illimic able wealth, and of the power of ıt- pelling old age and difeafe, did nol m thefe adsanciges poffefs every thing. Notwithltanding the diftppointments and mortifications I hid fuftained, I «vis yet attached to life and though the btqutfts of the Munger had hither¬ to produced Co mc nothing but evil, I ftill looked, svich almoft puerile eager- ntts and btac ng of heart, foi che time vvhen 1 mighc fpread ouc che whole exeent of my treafuns wichouc parfi- mony or che dread of reverfe. During the interval which I employed in thefe В 6 reflections,
refteftions, the wounded man was for the moil part in a ftate of lnfenfibility, and conftantly fpeechlcfs I expeftcd Ins death every moment, and I per¬ ceived, as I choughc wich ctrcmcy, that there was no hope of his reco¬ very. While we hidclrefltd his wounds, the dog had watched our motions sı ith the moft refllefs acccncion, and, now that it was over, hc came and licked my hands, and laid hin felf down at my fect. The lead motion however, fo much as a ruftling among the leaves, 11 trtled him hc rofe, looked round, and feemtd to tnqutri into the c tufe of the difturbance, but he ab. ftained from balking and eveiy kind of noife, whether it were that he was confcious ot the advantage of quiec to a perfon in his mailer's condition, or that he had the ftnfe to know, in the ficuacion m which we were placed, chac whacever produced alarm, might eventually
eventually expofe us Co undifcovered danger. lc was broad day-light, befoie Hec- Cor rcappearid, and feveral other per¬ fons 111 his company. Hector was not of a temper Co have receded from any rhing he undertook, and che auchority of Marguence had in this mftance fecondi d his remon- fhances with the furly and inattive peafancs of che place. I had ac chis Cime only one ocher male fervane, bue, when Heftor returned, he brought with him α crazy kind of litter, and a recruit of four mountaineers. The wounded min filli lived, and was con¬ veyed alive CO the place at which I had taken up my lodging. Hc fuivived three d iys, and, duung the whole of chac period, the dog could neither be moved by force, noi prevailed on by mtreacies, Co quit che apartment of his matter. Before his death my unforc«- nace
nate gueft recovered the power of fpeech. He told me that his name was Andrea Filofanto, and, which ftruck me as fomevvhat extraordinary, that he was of Pifii, the very place at which I purpofed to take up my abode. He had a brother reflètent in that city, and had himfeif been about to marry a very beautify and accom- pliflied young lady, an heirefs, of the houfe of Girracciuoli m Ρ fa. Pre- vioufly to his marriage, he ìefolsed to make a vifit to his mother, who had efpoufed to her fécond huíbind a French nobleman of Languedoc. He had travelled accompanied only by one fervant, contiary to the peifuahoiis both of his biother and the family of his intended bride ¡ but th it fervant, though he had been a very fhort time in his employment, was active, inge¬ nious and obliging, and had eftablifhed himfeif ftrongty in the favour of his malter.
matter. Signor Filofanto had taken with him a fum of money, the pro¬ duce of one year's intome of the dower of his mother, and it was but too probable that the nchnefs of the charge he bore, had been fatal to the life of the bearer His fervant had difappeared from hn fide noe a quar¬ ter of an houi before his being at¬ tacked by the banditti , and variou» concili rmg circumftances feemed Co fix on thb fervane the iccufation of being an accomplice with the mur¬ derers Hiving heard from the un- forcunate fufferer che cale of treachery ot his human attendant, Ι ι elated to hnn rhe extiaordinary example of fide¬ lity and attichment fliown by his dog. The maller svas ftruck with the ftory 1 told, and called che dog to him upon his bed The poor animal fnft leaped up upon che fooc of che btd, and chen warily and wich great caution crawled Co
to his matter's face, filofanto em¬ braced the dog, who by his manner fhowed himfeif fully fcnhbit of the puipoit of the action. Tint very evening, having requcfted me to con¬ vey his remains to the tomb of his anceftois at Pifa, the niiftcr cspned. The dog in dumb and conftant guff watched bythe coipfe, and followed the velinle m which it was conveyed to Pifa. Afttr the funeral, he m tde the choice, fiom which he could not bc diverted, of living with mc, and not with the biothir md illations of his mailer, to whom hc was almoft wholly a ftranger, but who svould glad¬ ly have received him. One of the ad¬ vantages! derived fiom this adventure, was the fnendflup and protection of the niofanti anu Cirracciuoli, two of the moil powerful families in Pifa. I have not yet fimflicd the hiftory of my dog. A few months after our eflablifli-
ctlablifiiiiiciit 111 the Pifan tcrricory, the s alit of the deceaftd had the auda¬ city to appear m chac cicy He be¬ lieved himftlf to be entirely unknown theie, his mailer hiving taken him into his fei vici during his rilidcnce as a ftudent 111 the ι niverfity of Bologni, and having ordeied him previoufly to his projefted toui into 1 rn cc, to (tiy behind and fettle his debts and other affans at thit p ace He fti nd how¬ ever an adverfary in Pifa who in all his anticipations had never occurred Co his choughts The dog faw him at a diftance in che fireer, ran towards htm with incredible fwiftnefs, and fell upon him with favage violence ind feiocity The man was 110c exen caCcd from his gripe, nil he had been feveiely and dingeroufly ssoinded Thus affulcd, ill the tenors of fupir ftition and an accufing confeience feucd on this devoted villain he owned
osvned wlio he was, and confcffcd that he had made one among the aflaflins and plunderers of his matter, vifible probibly to the dog, though unfein b/ the unfortunate I ilofanto. He deci ircd, that hc knew not svhat mo¬ tive had brought him to Pifa, that he tttmed to himfeif under the guidance ofan impulfe which hc had not power to refift, and that he rejoiced that pro¬ vidence had thus conduded hun to the expiation of his gull t. He vv as brought to his trial, and fuffered death for his crime. Charon, fuch v/as the name by svhich my dog was diftinguifhed, fhowed himfeif in all his actions worthy of the character for attachment and fagacity which he had in thefe tnftances ac¬ quired. He was therefore the favour¬ ite of my whole family and par'it ularly of Hector. But his own partiality was with the niceft difcrinunation re- firved
ftrved loi mc. The ruling раПюп ol his piecidmg niitttr had beert the fpoi ts of the fiild, and his leading fin- gul u itv in uncommon fimiliancy and fritndihip towards his bruce atcend- iiics. By this conduct hc Ind svon tht illtftions, and perhaps awakened the undei (tanding and vi «ues ot the f uthful Chai on. I own my weak¬ nefs. I could noc refift the affiduities and regard of chis generous bruce ; and, chough I had never before con¬ ceived any excraordmary partiality for creatures of his fpecies, his fagacity and noblenefs of nature took a ftrong hold of my affection. I admired his form and agtiity as he bounded and gamboled before me upon che plain. In che midft of his gayeft frolics he was all actencion, and the leaft fign 1 made him would inftantly divirt his cKcicmns to а differene purfuit He was accuftomed Co faluce me wich honeft.
honeft, undefigning homage every morning as I came from my cham¬ ber, and I fliould have miffed his prefencc with heavincfi, of hcaic u(.on lhis plain and homely occafion Hc was che aftociacc of my fohcary walks, my companion when penfive medica- cions induced mc Co wichdraw fiom all human fociety. I became accuf¬ tomed ac fuch periods Co obferve him by my fide, and fliould have felt that all was not right if he were not there. 1 was interefted in his health, his well-being and his enjoymencs ¡ and, if any calamiey befel him, was prepared co feel ic more feverely than a wife man is fometimes willing to eonfefs.—Ic would fearcely be necef¬ fary Co add co this fimple hifloiy of my faithful Chiron, che circumtlance of his having faved Che life of a beau¬ tilul littlt boy of Cen years old, vvho had unlutkity flipped into Che Arno, and
and whom he feized by his garments and drew to the fliore, had it not fome connection with what I fliail fpeeddy have occafion to relate.
CHAP.
CHAP. II L О return Со ehe ehread of my nar- racive, which in flacing thefe particu¬ lars I have in fomt points anticipated. —1 fat down, as I have already find, in the environs of ehe cicy of Pifa Marguence, as well as myfelf, had a pontiful atlachmenc со che íecirtment of rural life, and 1 judged 1С equally eligible for che health and intillicttial improvement of my daughteis 1 tc- coidingly purchaftd a fmall domun, delightfully fieuaccd, buc ot fimple appearance, on che banks ot che Arno Here I propofed Co remain during che indifpofition of my wife, which lilat eered myfelf reciremene, cranquitlicy, actencion and kindnefs svould m no long
long time be able to cure. To this objeft I refolved to devote my exer¬ tions Well did fhe merit thts return from me, who had reftored me in the guilty ruin of my forcunes, and raifed me from the abyfs of infanity. Odious and ducftable in the uemoft degree fliouid I hive appeared in my own eyes, if I could hive neglefted any means I vs ıs able co devıfı, co heal a mifchief of which my own precipita¬ tion, felfiflinefs and folly were the only caufes Lveiy little, continual, name¬ lefs cire 1 exerted, was as a drop of hiding b dm to the burning fever and remorft of my confeience Nothing indetd eould eradicitc my difler per, 1 fete the ever living worm of perpe¬ trated gu lt gmwing it my heart Buc my folicicudes for Mirgucnce, ae leali diung the moments they wtre in ac¬ ción, micigactd my anguifli ind chis tranfitory relief, however lnfignificant 1С
lt may appear in the eyes of others, I chenlhed beyond the w ealth of king¬ doms. Marguerite and myfelf appeared at this time to have changed characters. She was languid, ltt^ifpofed in body and mind, her thoughts gloomy, her hopes blafted, her wifhes bankrupt. Still however fhe maintained her fu¬ periority to what I had been in a limitar condition. She endeavoured to make the beft of what yet remain¬ ed to her, though flie declined che vain accempe of forgecting whae flie had loft. She hung over her daugh¬ ters with inexpreflible endearment. She confoled ehem , ihe reafoned with them, (lie endeavoured to fteel then minds for whatever ill mighc bc yet in flore. She cultivated cheir underftandmgs, fhe breathed inco them mingled fentimenc of refigna- eion and energy. There was in her converfation
converfacion wich chem a (Inking tone of celeftial and divine Her eloquence was copious, her manner rich, unaf¬ fected and flowing, her fpeech fimpl«·, fiee from exaggeration and turbulence, but mild, affectionate and svinning. It fank deep meo ehe hearts of her hearers, and feemed to give a new turn to tlieir cempers ind difpofition. It rendered che ciianfter of Julia at once more diftinttive, ml yet more chaf- cifed, ic infpired an unwonted mild- nefs and fenf bilicy co chac of Louifa , and rendered the cadette of the family unufually gnve, thoughtful and fedite. But upon me vscre devolved the more aft ve occuparions of our eflablifhment. Marguerite had for¬ mei ly been, I was now, che fteward. Lvciy kind of fupenntendence, from which the diftmftion of fex did not unavoidably exclude mc, was refign¬ ed to me by the lovely victim of Vol III С my
my mdifcretions. Mugliente had been my nurfe, 1 was now ambitious to be hers I made myfelf the fchoo'. mafter of my children, Marguerite confined her communications to gene¬ ral topics andthe culture of the nearc. I imciated them in mulíc, drawing, geography, feveral different languages of Europe, and in every accomptifli- mcnt that I believed would bc really ornariental or improving to t lem I might, it is true, have hired different mailers to mltručt them m each of thefe branches, and it is not impoffi. Ые chat they might then have been better taught, though I was myfelf no incompetent preceptor But I had an honeft arcifice for my guide in the plan I adopted I was defirous of removing out of the fight of my wife every thing that might remind her of the fatal legacy, the effects of which the was induced fo bitterly eo deplore.
deplore In fome particulars I may affirm of myfelf chac I was now a better and a kinder hufband, than I had been in the days of our gayeti profpertty, or the fcene of our infant loves I ftudied w ıth affiduity the temper of Margue¬ rite , 1 wacched her looks, I endea¬ voured to ancicipatc her every wifh. 1 meditaced wich care the plan of life which her Ample and feeling heart, if folely confultcd, would have led her originally Co have chofen, andl copied out in the whole arrangement of our houftiotd the idea painted in my mind Гаг from us were now the oftentation and pomp ofthe family chiteiu on the banks of the Garonne We lived now, not to asvaken admiration and ens у in che bofom of gtiefts and fpectators vve lived for ouifelvcs Every rhing was elegane every rhing was tafteful , but not an article found its place in oui refidencc, that did not reft its С 2 claim
claim to be there upon a plea of ufe- fulnefs. Though, by the nature of my fituation, I was fupertor to all reftramt from a confideration ot expence, yet our competent board and orderly ha¬ bitation approached nearer in their appearance to the honeft planinci, of a ruftic, than to the fumptuoufnefs of hereditary nobility. A table fet out with ftrikmg propriety and neatneft,, was preferred to the nchnefs of plate and the fptendour of porcelain and Iuftres. I was anxious that Margue¬ rite fhould forget the change of our fituation and the extent of my re¬ foulées. The objects of my prefent purfuit were obfeunty and content. That Maiguente might forget my ac- quifmon, I was ftudious to appear to have forgotten it myfelf. If a ftranger had entered our habitation and furvey- ed our economy, he would havejudged that our revenues amounted to a decent competence,
competence, and chat we diíburfed them wich a judicious difcretion. Noehmg was co be feen chac would have becrayed die pofleflor ot the pow¬ der of projection. We had no guefts. We cultivated no acquaintance We were formed Co fuffice to each other within our lítele circle, and, but for the importunate recurrence of difquieting reflections, sve ihould have done fo. To look at the exterior of our houfhold, it might have been thought that we had ainved at thae fweec forgecfulnefs of anxious care, chac delicious leifure and un¬ broken recrear, which have m all ages been ehe cheme of panegyric to poets and philofophers. But it was not fo. Our reciprocal relations were changed ; and the hope of the houfe of St. Leon was no longer in ehe midft of us, Co cheer, to enlighten and Co wai m our bofoms. С 3 A life
A life of leifure is often in active and a bufy life. The grand, I mighc almoft fiy, che fingle objeft of prcfene attention to me, w ıs lhe reiteration of the health and trinquillity of Margue¬ rite. For thae I watched wich unwea¬ ried affiduity Subordinare co chis oc. cupation svere che differene arts and accomphlhments in which I mftrufted my daughters, ι et neither the former nor the lateer of thefe engıgements filled up all che time of a mmd fo reft- lefs and ıapıd as mme was Intervals occurred, in which my attentions to Marguerite would have been, not fooehing, buC Croublefome, and in which I could no longer imparc a lef- fon to my daughters, without relaxing and weakening the fpnng of progref- fion in their m.nds. Thefe intervals I fometimes dedicatid to chemiftry and che operacions of naeural magic. The more effectually to hide thefe purfuits
purfuits from the eye of Marguerite, I occupied, unknow n to her, a fort of grotto, buned almoft from human ob- iervation in a hollow on the banks of the river, and which was connected, by a winding path and a concealed fubterrancan paflage, with the gaiden of my own habitation. The fecrets of the ftranger had given me a particular iclifli for this kind ofpurfuit. There are habits of the mind and modes of occupying the attennon, m which vvhen once we have engaged, there feems a fort ot phylical lmpoflibility of ever withdrawing ourfelves. This was my cafe in the piefent uiftance. My habit was of no long ftanding. But no reading of my ftory, no mere power of language and words, can en¬ able a byftander to imagine how deep it was funk into my heart, how inex¬ tricably it was twitted with all the fibres of my botom. That he may 111 С 4 fome
fome degree enter into my ficuacion, I inereae Che readei co confi ltr whae are the moft imperious pattions of the hu¬ man mind, lhcy hue luilely been defcribed to bi svt ilth, power and pleafurabli fenfition How allunng to eveiy one of us are tht vifionary conceptions of the mmd refpefting thefe moll potent excitements' But mine were no vifions. 1 had grafped them m my hand, and known their reality. I had felt that the wealth of the whole world was at my difpofal, and that I held my life by a tenure in¬ dependent and imperial Thefe are noc of che clafs of conceptions that fede and perifh from the mmd. We cannoc wake from them as from a dream, and forget that ever fuch Chingi were. They had changed che whole conftitucton of my natuie Ic would have required a miracle, greacer chan all (he confecrated legends of our 4 church
church record, co have reftored me to what I formerly was. If then I could have refolved never henceforth to ufe the gifts 1 had received, I yet firmly believe thae I never could have refrained from the compofition and decompofition of firnplcs, and from experiments on the nature of fubftan- ces, chemical and melatile. I was however far from having formed any fuch refolucion as rhac I have named. My prefene forbearance to bring forth the fecret Crcafure of my powers svas purely an accommodanon to the un¬ happy condition of my wife, artd I felt 1С as a meutonous exertion thus to pollpone che ufe of the faculties I pof¬ feffed. In the mean time the amufe¬ ment I fought that I regarded as pro¬ perly and entirely my own, confided in thefe experiments. While I was bufied with my crucible, I was able more vividly to prefene to myfelf my С 5 fcemmg
leeming fuperiority to the reft of my lpecies. I ufed the employments of my grotto as a fort of ftarting-poft from which to fet forth in a feries of intoxicating reveries ; not to mention that to improve in the facility of my fecret operations might become a va¬ luable fubfidiary to the purfuits of my future life. I took occafionally as my companion at thefe periods the negro of the prifon of Confiance. I found him fufficient- ly adapted for my purpofe, his inno¬ cence and implicit obedience to whomever he f'crved, rendering me fecure that hc svould anticipate no¬ thing, that he would conjecture no¬ thing, that he would reft in what he faw, that I might almoft exhibit my whole procefs under his eye, without» once awakening the bufy fiend of curiofily in a mind to which feience had never unvieled her charms. He was
was formed to be a pure, paffive ma¬ chine in the hands of his employer, only with this Angular difference from the lifelefs machine of the engineer or mechanical inventor, chat hc was fuf¬ cepcible of actachment and aftcftion, as welt as of a certain fpccics of con- tentmene and a eertun fpecies of good¬ nefs and virtue. A feacure of my individual charac¬ ter which has already fiequently pre¬ fenced itfelf Co the attention of the reader, is che love of admiration and fponcaneous deference. 1 am at this moment aihamed of my vices and my tollies , bue ıc mnd be recollefted, in the firft place chit they are human, and in the ficond that I am wncing, noc their vindication, but their hiftory. In the midlt of my expenments and chemical lutubrations, I could not help fometimes oftentaeioufly exhibit¬ ing eo Heftor the wonders of my arc, С 6 and
and thofe extraordinary effefls which have in all ages drawn upon the more eminent operators of natural magic the reproach of being necromancers and conjurers. This 1 did, partly perhaps that my atcendant might learn to look up Co me with a kind of namelefs re¬ fpeft and awe, but parcly alfo that I might divert myfelf wich the fimpli- ciey of his nacure, and Che gaping and motiontefs aftonifhment with which he viewed my performances If 1 had not done this, or digreffed into idle and oftentalious cxpei miert , he would otherwtfe hive fem enough, in the operacions in whim hi- attiflance, if noc abloluctl/ nccpfltrs, was excremc- ly convenient, Co have induced a per¬ fon, fo void of the mcaneft European información, Co regard me as aftifled by and in league with inv fible powers The prejudice agamft me, with which this poor fellow had been im- preffed
preffed at the commencement of our intercourfe, did not long hold out m his ingenuous mmd, againft the more favourable fentiments, which my pre¬ fent fituation and mode of living were calculated to infpire. The fpecimenshe had hitherto feen of European fociety were of the molt unfavourable kind. His firft mailer was a wretch of brutal difpofition, ferocious and infolent, dif. darning to reafon himfeif, aid impa¬ tient of remonftrance ir others. This man hid exercifed the temper of his humble and honeft attendant svith every variety of favage caprice, and, having tired the rcftleftnefs of his own gloomy tyianny, without being able ro eshauft the modeft and unexampled pittuice of his fervant, had finifhcd by thiosving him Into jail upon a wan¬ ton and groundlef» charge of diftio- neily. This, which was intended as a further exercife of tyranny, deferved to
to be hailed by the poor fufferer as a period of jubilee and deliverance. His innocence, as I hase already re¬ lated, svas fpeeddy recognifed by his neiv tafk-rmfter, svho accordingly ex¬ erted hinsfilf to obtain juftice for the friendlefs victim, and, from a reputed thief, propofed to elevate him Co che nnk of a tuinkey. Heftor had neither kindred nor patron ro affili him, the outcaft ot a jail, he muft again have entered the world wich a blafted cha¬ racter , thus circumftanccd, and in¬ fluenced befide by gracicudc ro the un¬ looked for liberality of his deliveier, lit willingly accepced che fitu mon pro¬ pofed ro him. Wich his nesv matter, svilo, noe lefs unprincipled, was lefs tyrannical Chan his predeceffor, che humblenefs ot his hopes caughc him to be concenced Yet in che bofom of che jailor all his fidelity and regard could not enable him co deceit one poficive
pofitivc virtue, and, within the walls of the prifon, t'icrc had exi (led no¬ thing that could by any pottibllityche- nfh and refrelh the human heart. The fcene prefenced to Hector's ob- fervation in our little retreat on the banks ot the Arno, was of a very dif¬ ferent niture. To his frank and affec¬ tionate fpint it appeared a perfeâ pa- radife. He bad yet fearcely been ac¬ quainted with my but the reíuíe oí mankind, from the infection of whofe vices his uinpprehenfive and invin¬ cible fimpliuty had been his only fafe- gu ird, and he was now fuddenly in¬ troduced to the prtftnee and inter¬ com ft of the moft perfect of her fex. Ht loved her as a bencfartor, and he Morflupped her as a God There is no receipt for begetting aftection in others, fo infallible as a warm and fuf. ccptible heart. Hettor accordingly foon became in a remarkable degree the
the favourite of my daughters. His temptr was naturally chearful and gay, and, warmed by their encouragement, it became a thoufand times more fo. When he had completed che occupa¬ tions of the day, the tightnefs of his fpint would prompe hım to fing and dance for ever. He exhibited the whole circle of his fporcive games for their amufement. The infantine in¬ nocence of his underftanding remark¬ ably adapted him to be the butt of their little waggeries and mıfchıefs. Whatever cricks were played upon him, were however tempered by che forbearance and regard his worth de¬ manded , while ehe obftrepcrous chear- fulnefs wich which he would fécond their jmrth when moil ignorant of ies occafion, gave uncommon zeit to the amufemene, and furnifhed ecernal pro¬ vocation to che prolonging and varying its features. Let
Let not the f iflidious reader com¬ plini of the inconfiftcncy of this part of my pirtun, or cenfure the levity of my daughters I am not writing a tragedy, but a hiftory. Sad gnef and melancholy cannot, and ought not, for eser to reign m the human face or the human heart. No daughters es er loved a mother more entirety, more fervently» than Margueiite was loved by her children. They vvere unwearied in their attention to her, often was thetr pdlow watered with tears, occafioned by the fad preftnttment of the lofs thcy vvere dettincd to fulkun But the human mind, particularly 111 the feifon of youth, has an unconquerable prin¬ ciple of clafticity in its frame. The bow cannot bc kept for ever on the ftretth , and, vvhen the whole foul ap¬ pears to be bent down by calamity to the grave, it will often furprifingly recover its vigour and renew its ftrength.
ftrength The ingenuous nature of thefe poor girls led chem indeed occa¬ fionally Co reproach chemfelves with thefe moments of chtarfulncfs as with a crime. Buc ıc was no crimt None but che uncharicabiy rigorous and nio- rofc will charge ic upon chem as a crime, lt interfered with no duty, ic diminifned no aftcftion, it had no tendency to harden their hearts. It was a cax chey paid to the imperfect. nefs of our nature, it was a tribuce of gracieude to chac God, who, while he deals ouc eo us ehe moft terrible cala- mides, fails noe co mix with ehe copi¬ ous diaughc fome folicary drops of be¬ neficence. Julia alone, whofe temper was confticucionally fenous and fofr, enCered little inco cheft fporcs, of which her youngell filter was the ecer¬ nal leader and unrired partaker. ıec even upon che grave councenance of Julia chey would fometimes provoke an
arı unwilling imite, which upon her councenance fac wich uncommon luttie. the hilarity and lovclincfs svhich Heftor found m the midft of my fa¬ mily, mftigiced and increafed the at- tachmene he began Co feel foi myfelf. He could not believe chat the father of fuch daughters, and the chofen huf¬ band of fuch a conforc, could be defti- tute of a citte co be loved. He rea¬ foned in his own way upon che accempt I had made to corrupt his fidelity, an attack which hc never thoroughly di- gefted. I have reafon to believe chat his attendance upon my chemical pio- ceffes, and che wonders I occafionally fhowed to excite his aftonifhment, did noc eend co elevace me in his good opinion. But he could not avoid wic- nefling in me many ofthe virtues of a good hufband and a good father, and Chcfe, fo new Co his obfervation, ftrong- iy
ly lmpreffed him in my favour The regularity of my habits and che mıld- nefsof mycarnige weie lifo calcu'ited to win his ıffı ftion and efteem Never hid the poor fellow s iffcftions been fo forcibly called out as chey were in his new fituation and hc would chear- fully have ftretched out his neck eo the affaffin s knife, co have warded off impending evil from the meaneft of us Profpenty and eafe have often been found che parenes of wifhes und incli¬ naeions unfelc before Adverfity is the feafon of fober thoughc, calls home the erratic mind, and teaches us to be cheaply facisfied But the man who has many gratifications is apt to wan¬ der in imagination from daily and fa¬ miliar joys, and confidencly to reach after things yet untried Such was the fituation of Hector Heftor Was ra love Our fweet and fimple manfion was
was dittane fearcely more chan two hundred yards from a charaftei iftic Icalian village. The matd of a little albergo in this place had caught his in¬ experienced heart. He had been m- viced by fome peafancs to a moon.light feftivity on the lawn of ehe albei go t and, though 1 fhould have been better pleafed thae my fervancs fliould decline this fort of amufement, I could not have the heart co deny him. Ic was, fo far as I knew, the firft and the laft Cime thae Heftor had ever referred to it. Buc I was deceived, Heftor had proved Che gayeft and moit amufing of the whole circle. His chearful- nefs was incxhauftible, and his mirth in the utmoft degree harmlefs and good-humoured. He had played a thoufand antics, and danced with an agility chac knew no end. In a word, the accomplifhments of Heftor, in fpice of che jetty hue that ftained his face,
face, had won the heart, or roufed ehe coquecry, of the plump and rofy bar¬ maid. The overtures the made and the lures flie threw out, vvere too glar¬ ing to efcape ehe noctce even of the modeft Hector. He felt himfeif flat¬ tered, fuch is human nature, at fud¬ denly becoming an objeft of admira¬ tion and preference, to a woman whom his imagination, ftirrulated by her vi¬ fible parciálny, aCCireu in a hundred charms. He osv ntd himfeif hers, in all fair and honeft fealcy, eo the vvoitd's end. Love taught Heftor a leffon, which hc had never learned before. In nature he was frank, and, as far as fidelity to his mailer permitted it, wore his heart as naked as his face Love taught him dilfimulation. A vulgar footman or clown is as forward as che moft empry beau, in boafling of the tri¬ umphs he has gamed over the female heart,
heart, and tn facrificmg che reputación of Chofi, who have los ed hım ас che flırıne of his vanıcy. Noc fuch was Heftor. He fliut up his new fend¬ rions and reveries as α ficred depofit in his bofom Nature worked wiehin him, and he would have been aihamed to fpeak, and diftrcffcd co hear, of cmocions, now felt, till now never ex¬ perienced. His areléis and ingenuous eemper in chis one particular aflumed che guife of cunning. Never did he cell his love in che ear of any mdiffer- enc audieor, afliduoufly did he avoid pronouncing even the name of her to whom he was attached. In any other cafe he would have announced Co me his inclinaeions, and previoufly de¬ manded my leave of ablencc for his excurfions. But love feemed co hım ımperıoufly to command privacy, and he employed every imaginable precau¬ tion to prevent me and all human be¬ ings
ings from knowing whither he went, or that he was abfent at all. In one of his vifits Co his fair don¬ zella, he happened lncaucioufly Co drop fome very remoce hint of the feenes tn which he had juft been engaged with me in my fecret grotto. The curiofity of the gul vvas ftrongly rouf¬ ed , fhe queftioned him further. He ftarted, and was terrified to recollect what he had faid. I had ftriitly en- Joined him fecrecy cowards everv member of my family my precaution had extended no furchcr, for, as I have find, I fearcely knew that he had the moil cafual intercourfe with any perfon beyond my own roof But Hector naturally dreaded chac what I was fo eirneft to conceal from every one in my houľe, lie would be highly to blame to communicate co a ftranger. He therefore perempconly refufed, and with many figns of dif¬ trefs,
trefs, co fay another svord on ehe fub¬ jeft. The donzella, piqued ac his refinance, had recourfe Co female ares. She was cruel, flic uccered words of fharp dif¬ pleafurc and difdain, fhe knesv chac a perfon who refufed her fuch a trifle could noc have an aeom of ìegard for her, ihe commanded him never eo fee her more. Unfuccefsful in Chefe ex¬ pedients, file had recourfe to expedi- encs of a different fort. She wept, flie called him bafe, falfe-hearted and unkind , (lie fiw he was determined Co bc the death of hei, flic was feized with ftrong fies of fobbing and hyfte- rical affection In che midft of all chis he vvas as unmoved as a rock of marble He interpreted eveiy thing chac paffed in ies moft literal form , he felt more fevcrely her unkindnefs, and lympathifed more truly in her diftrefs, than perhaps any human creacure Vol. Ill D would
would have done. But no further could the gain upon him. The confi¬ dence of his mailer was in queition, and he would fooner have died upon the rack, than run the flighted rifk of betraying it. From thefe arts fhe defcended to arts more congenial to the habits of h«r life. She fummoned all her fkdl ro peiplcx him with cunning and infidious qucf¬ tions. From her qucftions he ought to have fled ¡ but of this НеЛог was incapable. He was diflrcfled by her feverity, he grieved for the unin¬ tentional pain he had caufed her. Ail thefe circumftances melted his heait ; and 'he could -not refotve upon any thing that was not confiderete and re- fpectíul ťowards her. As the framing Of"artful queftions was the ftrong hold of the donzella, and flie might have challenged in this article'the mofthoary practitioner of the quibbling bar, fo it
lt was cxat'tly the wcakcft fide upon which poor Hector could bc attacked. His fimphcity yielded h τ up a de- fencelefs piey to the affai! int , lutt of all human undertakings ssas he capable of detecting the various faces of α doubtful queition, and of gui umg himfeif againft the traps of an infidious foe. It was not till the fourth in¬ teiview from Hectors original hint, that the dnzc/h had recourfe to this fpecies ot attack, and flic did not withiliaiv hu forces, till flit had ex¬ torted tiom htm all ht knew When I letttor found that all hi» gutrds vvere baffled and put to flight, he had then recourfe to the only e\- pcdicnt tint ıemaıned, conjuring hei by every thing facred and cveiy thing tiemendous not to bitiay а truft (lie nad fo ungencrouflyobtained fiom him. She leadily promifed every thing he defiicd. Soothed by her compliance, D 2 he
he determined not to mention to me the lapfe of which he had been guilty. It would in his opinion have been little lefs than trcafon, to fufpefl his Dul¬ cinea of indifcretion or frailty. In the breaft of this ritraete of nature was not his loyalty as lecurc as it could be even ш his own ? Why thtn fhould he betray the fecret of his love, which had never yet been confided even to the fenfelefs air ' Why fliould he fub¬ ject himfeif to the inconceivable an- guifla and confufion, of owning, where my interefts, or where my willies vvere concerned, that he had been found tripping and ímpeifeď Why fliould he inflict a pain, or caufe in me a fear, which he knew, and hc only could know, was groundlefs ? Thus it hap¬ pened that I had one «more confident of what I purpofed fhould be fecret, than 1 was myfelf in the fmalteft degree advcrtifed of. The
The confequences of this indifcre¬ tion of my fervant, were noe flow in rendering themfclves vifible The dmzilla was by no means fo fcrupu¬ lous or delicace in her fenciments, as my humble, bue faithful, accendane As (lie had given her company eo Hec- cor, ihe had had an opportunity of obfervmg in him fuch integrity aid goodnefs of heart, as coutd not fail to extort the efteem of any human being She really honoured htm, fhe was un¬ willing to give him any caufe of unea. finefs But fhe had another lover, perhaps ihe had moie The laws of ctuftitv (tie regarded as prejudices, and believed they were never foimed for perfons in her ficuacion in fociecy. She was of opinion that the more lov¬ ers the had, piovided ilie fatisfied them all, the more completely did fhe im¬ prove the talems wich which heaven had endow cd her. Tew women have D 3 any
íny fenets fir the man chey admit to their embrace' In an houi of amorous ihlliantt Ihc eommuniiarcd to \gottino the oftltr, all tb it flie knew of the conjurations ind íj tils of monfieur Boifmorand, futh was the mme I hid ifiumeJ upon my синапсе into Italy Ilei communication was ]ЯоЬаЫу attended vvıtlı cautions, ımı- caced from chofe svith which Heftor had fo induftiioufiy loaded the tmxella in the preceding example Perhaps the tiltflri fiim Agoflmo had another mif¬ trefs, with whom he thought it would be unjuft to praftift greater referves than che donzella had done wich hım. Be chac as ic will, ehe lumours which were vshifpcred to my prejudice, fpcedilv got an and, it may be, were ìepeated ssith the greater avidity, on account of che myftery rhae attended them, and the injunctions of fecrecy with which chey w ci e accompanied CIHP
CHAP III 1 ΓΑ LY may be confidered as Che very focus and parene of fuperftitious cre- dtiluy. the macenals which Heftor had turmfliid, alterali the intciroga- rions of the donzelt i, wei с flight com¬ piled wich che fiiperftrufture which vvas prefently ercfted on chem. My giotco was find to be che appropriated h unt where ι thoufand devils held rheir mfeinal fibbath the terrified imagination of the ruftics, liltcning with а temper hoiribly dillnfted be¬ tween curiofity and ilarm, creaeed to itfilf fictitious hoistings and ilinek», md fasv pale and ftilphureous flames dancing upon the furface of che dream Pooi Heitor vvas eaily lhe vittim of D 4 cheir
their cruel and unearned ignorance , they believed that the peculiariiy of his complexion rendered him a fingu¬ larly agreeable lnterceffor becween me ind my infernal familiars The colour of Charon was fimilar to thae of my confidential attendane , and he, like Heftor, fell undtr the calumnious mifconftruftions of the affrighted vil¬ lagers Confpicuoufly noble, affection¬ ate and ufeful as he was, the jaundiced eye of fuperfticion metamorphofed him into a devil The ftorms of thunder and lightning to which the climate in which I refided is particularly fubjeft, acquired new terror from che ill fame which nosv purfued che name of mon. fieur Boifmorand At thofe times the fhapelefs form of moniters vomiting fmoke and flames were vifible to che neighbourhood, fomecimcs fcudding along the blue tops of ehe dillane hills, and at others, with audicioufnefs in¬ credible,
credible, bruflnng even at the elbow of che almoft lifelefs clowns and dairy¬ maids, and then fuddenly diflblving into air, their place no longer marked but by the noifome and deadly ftench they left behind. All the mtsfoituncs of die diftrift vverc imputed to me, che mortality of cactle, the convul- fions and death of children, and the pale and lingering decay of perfons re¬ cently advanced to an ige of puberty. lnnotcnc and blimclefs was my con¬ dutt co all iround us, often was I for¬ st ird and eiger for the relief of the oi and afflitted, never was 1 the author of the flighteft inconvenience oi prejudice to any. Yee nothing meiely human couid be hated in the degree in which I was hated , few were daring and intrepid enough to repeat the very name I boie, and, when it was midvertently pronounced, it pro¬ duced through the whole extent of che D j afton-
aftonifhed circle, an involuntary and fupernatural fhuddcr. Agoftino, the firfl lover who had made an imprcflion on the heart of Hector's donzella, was, as I aftci wards found, a fellow of a gloomy and fero¬ cious difpofition, a true Italian fpaiac- счю, determined that none fhould per¬ petrate an affront againft him with impunity, but mould expiate, in fome refined and cruel vengeance, the leviry by which they had been Co unfortunate as to give birth to lus hatred. He by no means reliflied or approved the liberal and good-humouied fentiments of the dorøelh , often had they inflict¬ ed on turo the darkeit torments of jca- loufy, nor had he fluted, at leaft in one preceding mftance, to make his rival the victim of his refentment. The donzella however svent on in her career, fhc was light of heart, gay in temper, and carclcfs of confcquences. She
She had always hitherto fucceeded, by playful blandifhments, or more ftnous demonftrations of contrición, in mol¬ lifying che eemper of her bruce ; and every pirdon file received, operaced wich her as a new permiffion Co offend. She did noc fufficiently confidei chat the was chus concinually railing Co a higher pitch ehe fitnzyot his malice. Htetor in the mean cime ssas utterly unconftious and l/moraiit of the peril¬ ous licitinoli in Svhich he ftood ¡ svhile, to the ipprihcntion of Agoftino, the paving hmi ι nc г о foi a rival, whom his prute legauttd is belonging to an interior fpecies of beings, and his de¬ vour ignorance likened to the leader ot che ınlıı nal fquidrons, was Che till an 1 moit intoleiable infide. His malice was ingenious and fubtle. He dildaincd che vulgar revenge of ftabbing his antagonilt m the dark, and fuppofing that his enmity could D 6 be
be gorged by a blow. When the ve¬ nom of his nature was thoroughly put in motion, nothing could reflore ie to quietnefs and eranquillicy but fome mighry ftroke, co excite ehe wonder of every byftandir, and that fliould leave behind it a track of defolaeion, never to be filled up again and erafed. He heard therefore with unfitted appetite and eager joy the tale of neciomancy and infernal machináciou repeated to htm from Heftor by the donzella. The lmpretiion wluth the nirratise produced upon him svas а mixed fin¬ timene of tranfporc at che apprchen- tion of fuch an inftrument of ven¬ geance, and of palpicacmg hatred, hi. pcrflition teaching him to believe and to view with abhorience, thae which he defired Co render cenfold more an objeft of faith and averfion to his neighbours. He ftruck an aufpicious and auguft alliance between his revenge and
and his religion, his religion exciting hım to extermínale that, the deftruc- tion of which would produce lnexpref- fible gratificación co his revenge The darknefs of his fpirit led him to pro¬ ceed with double caution and vigi¬ lance in his correfpondence with the donzelli He difcovered nothing co her of the dark projeft which was en¬ gendering in his mmd , and only be¬ trayed fo much of his fuperfticious feelings and fears, as, by giving new tmotion, might ftimuhce her Co gratify his cunoficy and hei own by a dceec- non of further particulars He was aflidttous in che underhand and limiter propagation of che Cale, co which he did noc fail Co give his own colouring and affix his own feelings He was defirous chac che cram fhould be laid in filence, and chac che explofion he defigned fliould be free from all pre- fignification of the event Thus dn individual,
individual, of whole ammofity I had no apprehenfion, and che incanni fs of whofe appearance would probably have made mc neglect all precaution igainfl him, gave method and direflion Co an evil, of which however, upon a review, I am not inclined co doubt I fliould have been the viftim, if the enmity and induftry of this individual had been wholly withdiawn The mifeliuf w ıs long in preparation, befoie I received in any way the (light- eft intimation of the predic unent in which I flood The hilt circumllanie at all calculated to cxtite alat m in vat mind, was the lingular mannei in which I found myfelf regarded, if I entered any of che nughboun ig vil¬ lages, or met the rufttcs and their damts, as I ftiayed along the loids or che fields. They fied my approach, defeittd the ftreets, and caiefully (hut themfelves up in their houfts, till I had patted. Where it was impoffible CO
co avoid me, they bowed themfelves to the earch in ehe moft fubmiflïvc guife before me, while the mod lively terror was painced in cheir counce- nances, dreading left chey fliould ex- Cice the rcfentmenc of a tremendous and lnexoiable foe Thefe tokens how¬ ever wen far from infpinng me with a conception of the truth They per¬ plexed, they aftonifhed, they diftreffed me Sore is I was wich my reeene afflictions, my mmd was bue coo fully prepaicd for ancicipatit ns of evil I had fuflered from fufpicions, I had fuf¬ feicd fiom calumnious imputations, I hid fuflered from the malignant effects of popular nimoui Had I yield¬ ed my confidence to any pcrfo 1 but fuch а one as Hectoi, it is probable my fufpicions would have curned on chac fide Buc my reliance on him, was noc lefs chan thae which Alexander the Great yielded to Philip the phyfi¬ cnn
cian I knew his rectitude, his fim- plicity, his fidelity, and the finglenefs of his heare, and I could not harbour the fhadow of a doubt refpefting him. My reliance was of thae encire and per¬ fect fort, which did not exprefs icfelf by a recolleftion of che phyfical poffi- biluy and an acquietai founded m de¬ liberation, but by a Coul vacancy of doubt, or of rerrofpeft that way direct¬ ed, juft fuch as the ftace of my mind would hase appeared, if the thing had been nitu rally impoffible I wis not however ignorint ind raw enough to be deceived by the exterior of horn ige I have deftnbed , I fuffici¬ ently knew that what I beheld was the offspring of hatred. To feel one's felf hated, is in all inftances a painful ind humiliating flat« of che human nund. To me ic was efpecially fo. I was not formed to recaliaee chis fpecies of in¬ jury , I could not hace in my curn. I was
w is formed to iove. 1 could not look upon my fpecies with dark and gloomy contcmplacions, 1 vvas prompt to ad¬ mue chur vircuts, and perhaps even too prompe to cxccnuacc cheir errors. Ic may, I believe, be laid down as α rule, chac chey vvho cannoc hace, can leaft endure Co be made objects of hacrcd. Feetered however, as I now was, by che cendereft confidera- tion foi che healch and CianquiiliCy of Marguence, I choughc ic beft co cem- ponfe and fubmic in filence. My principal anxiecy was Co hide chefe fympcoms from che nonce of my fa¬ mily. This I could not compleeely effect, fome of them vvere too glaring and obtrufive, encirely co efcape the obfervation of my daughters in cheir walks Bue che filial foibearance chey felt towards then mother, led them implicitly and withoue any concerted plan
plan to concur vv ith me in my exercions tor her quice. The animoficy of Agoftino was reft¬ lcfs and inexcinguifliable. His plans did noc Cemunate in excicing againft mea fecrec and covend abhoircncc, chey aimed ac noching lefs chan my uccer deftruftion. The tiexe exertion of the confpiraCy which was engender¬ ing againft me, was of a tragital nacure. Ic happened one night after all my family was rem ed co reft, and Iwas myfelf funk incoa flumber, Chac I was fuddenly al irmeli at che ι epDrt of a mufquec which fecmed Co be fired al¬ moft under che window of my cham¬ ber. This wasa very fingular cucum- flance, and calculated to convey an im¬ preffion of danger. 1 leaped from my bed, and ran to the window. The night was extremely dark, and every ihmg feemed perfectly quice Prefently I difcerned a glimmei ing light like that of
of a lanthoin, which however appeared co be gradually rccinng eo a greacer dittanci. I was not thus facisfied, but clettrminiil Co h ilten down ftairs, and mveftigice the caufe of che difturbance. Mirguintc, who had heard che firing of cht mufquct as welt as. myfetf, nosv cillcd mc to hei, and uitreaced me noc to cxpote myftlf to unncceffary danger. In compliance with her rc- nionftnnces I promifed, chough un¬ willingly, noe co go out inco the court or upon the lisvn, but co colitene my¬ felf wich examining the (hte of every part of Che houfe. When I came eo the (lair cafe and ehe hall, I found chat the alarm had communicated co almoft every peifon in ehe family, svho pie- fently atlcmblcd round mc. We pi- Croled che houfe, but found every ehing in che fituation in which it had been left, and no w here any appearance of violence. 1 opened feveral of the windows,
windows, but all was darkncfs and filence. Having thus far fatisfied my¬ felf, I liftcned with a degiee of amufc- ment to the conjectures and fage rc- maiks of feveral of the fervants, a rank of fociety who may ufually be found to derive a degree of enjoyment from in¬ cidents of this fort, which for the mo¬ ment ftrikmgly tend to level all arti¬ ficial diftinctions, and confer on every one the liberty of uttering his reflec¬ tions without apprehenfion or con- flraint. I did not however feel myfelf entirely eafy, the circumftance which had juft occurred combined with the forebodings which had lately lmprcfled me, and filled mc with undefinable terror ¡md alarm. Hector would wil¬ lingly have gone over the grounds contiguous to tlie houfe, to fee if he could difcover any thing that related to or could explain the incident, but 1 had promiled Margúeme that I svould
would fearch no further, and the tem¬ per of my mind would not fuflfcr me to expofe another to a danger, which I abftained from encountering in my own peifon. It was more than an hour before the conclave in which we were affcmbled broke up, and every one retired, fatigued with attention, and prepared to fall into the foundeft fleep. My dreams were uneafy and difturbed , my nund was in a tumult of imaginary calamities ¡ and I paffed the greater part of the night in a ftatc of lingular anxiety. In the morning I was fearcely funk into a rcfieftiing flumber, befoie I was fuddenly roufed from tleep by a repe¬ tition of flirieks of aftoniflimenc and diftrefs. I put on myclothes as quick¬ ly as I could, and haftened towards the fpot from which the founds appeared to proceed. The firft object I beheld vv as the little boy of ten years old, whom
whom Charon had a fhort time before dragged out of the nvei, ftretched along upon the lifelefs body of this faithful and generous animal. The mufquct, the report of which had alarmed js the night before, had no doubt been aimed againft Charon, and the greater pait of its contents apjiear- ed to bc lodged in his body. As no further found had fuccccdtd tbe Rung, he had probably been killed on thi fpot. Hcwas ata fmall dittante from the houfe near α jn ivate foot-path, where he had been found in the moin¬ ing by the lad whofe life he had u- cently prefers cd. The poor boy had notat fiifl underftood what hid hip¬ pened to his benefactor, but only thought him afieep, and, prompted by aftection for the generous creatuie, hacl quietly fat down by hrm till he fliould awake. He had not fat long however, before he difcerncd аЬшс hım the marks
marks of blood. He put his hand to the wound, the animal itirred not. Hc pafled to his heid, hc faw his eyes fury and Hairing, and Ins lips diftort- ed. He tndeavouied to awake him, as one would awake a human being to whom fome mifchief had happened of which hc was not awaie. All his cftoits vvere funtlefs. He found his body motionltfs, and his joints ftiff in death. Ί he npprchenfion of what had occurred then fuddenly lliflied on hi« mind. Ile burft out into flirieks of ationlflimcnc and anguifli. Heftor svas the fuft peifon who caught the found, and haftened to the fpot, 1 im¬ mediately followed. The poor negro, who 111 the innocence of his heart wns uninitiated in Che proud diftmftion« by which cmlifed man is taught to place fo vaft a barrier between the hu¬ ilaan natuie and the brute, was ftruck fpeechlcfs w ıth Borrow and amazement. He
He r cognifed the dead being before hım for his fellow-creaeure. He re¬ collefted in him his friend, his com¬ panion, his ıntımice acquaintance, be¬ tween whom and himfeif chere had for fome cime paffed an unineerrupCed reciprocación of acts of kindnefs and affi (lance. A morofe and faflıdıous reader will perhaps aik me why I lay fo great a ftrefs upon fo peccy and infignificanc an incident as the death of a dog. It might have been little to other per¬ fons , it was not little to us. Let che reader recollect his ingenuity in pio- cunng aid for his dying mailer, his gratitude co che perfon by whom chac aid was aftorded, and his unconquer¬ able ancipaehy to his matter's murderer. Thefc are noC common Craies. 1 here are many men, whofe premature fate has been the mod unrelentingly aveng¬ ed, that in moral and ufeful qualities / could
could not bave flood the companion with my generous Charon. It furely was no common caufe for regret, that a creature who had diftinguifhed him¬ feif by a conduct fo peculiarly admira¬ ble, fhould have encountered fo pre¬ mature and unmerited a fate. His con¬ duct the reader may in fome degree comprehend and appreciate, but 1 fhould in vain atcempt to delineate thofe admirable qualities in this faith¬ ful domeftic, which do not fall within the province of narrative, and which to have juftly appieciated you muft have been peifonally and familiarly acquainted with him, Befide, ours was a family of love. As vve weie af¬ fectionately attached to each other, fo vve never admitted a fervant under our roof, who did not prove himfeif by his conduft uccerly unwoi chy, to whom we did not ettend a filare of chat fnendflup and affection, whtch feemed Vol. Ш. E to
to be the right of every one that dwelt in our family. Feeling does not ftay to calculate with weights and a balance the importance and magnitude of every objeft thae excites it tt flows lmpe- tuoufly from the heart, withoue con- fulting the cooler refponfes of the un. derftaqdmg. There was another circumftance which rendered the cacaftrophe of chis generous animal of great moment to us. It was a clear proof that there was fomewhere a ftrong ammofity ac work againft his mailer. Ic was impoffible he could himfeif have provoked his fate. Ntver was a creaCure more gen¬ tle and moffenfive. Though his bulk was great, and his ftrengch uncommon, the energies he poflefled were always employed in acts of juftice and bene¬ ficence, never in acts of aggreffion. But, if a hatred were at work fo bufy and fierce as to prompt an action like this,
this, how were we to eftimate it > What was its fource, and whicher did it tend ? Thefe were very inte¬ refting and fenous confidcratıonş. We however dwelt for fome time longer in the centre of general antipa¬ thy and abhorrence, withoue being able in the fnialleft degree to explain to ourfelves svhat we faw As we knew jiot in what we had offended, we were unable to atone for our faith, or even to guard ourfelves againft the repeti¬ tion of it, nor were we by any means piepared to comprehend the extent of our danger, Happil, Marguerite, sv hofe hcilch svas no ι in a rapid de¬ cline, was leaft expoied to che obferv- acion of elus new mifchief Chough flie fele enough of ic Co confirm her in the fencunene, chat flie had nothing fortunace and happy eo look forward to in che fmall remainder of her exiftence. There was indeed one idea perpetually Г г prefent
prefent to her, which rendered the imprcflion of ordinary occurrences extremely feeble upon her mind —— Charles, Charles wandering atone in the world, unknowing and unknown, ■withoue a friend, a relative, a counfel- lor or a proeector, without money and without a name' This melancholy image followed her wherever fhe went, haunted her nightly in her dreams, at¬ tended her in all her occupations, filled all her intervals of leifure, and, though ihe laid it down as a law to herfelf never to repeat his beloved name in my prefencc, fhc could think of no¬ thing elfc.
CHAP.
CHAP. IV. İT was no long cime after the deach of Charon that Heftor came home one evening in a ftace of ehe moft violent anxiety and trepidation. He burft upon me in my ftudy, where I was fit¬ ting alone, buried in one of thofe deep reveries which, efpecially fince ehe le¬ gacy of the flranger, had been among the moll frequent habits of my mind. His perturbation was fuch as to render ic impoffible for him Co impofe on him¬ feif the fmalteft degree of caution and lcftraint The noife he made in en. tenng the apartment ftarcled me. I looked up, and perceived his features fwciled, his face bruifed, and his gar¬ ments disfigured with blood. E 3 For
For heaven's fake, Heftor, exclaim¬ ed I, what is ehe matter ? He anfwered not. He advanced towards the upper end of the room, he took down a piftol, one of thofe which I always kept loaded in my apartment, he came towards me, he fell upon his knees, he rendered the piftol to my acceptance. Heftor ! cried I : what am I to un- derftand? vvhat is the meaning of this? Kill me, dear mailer! For Chrift's fake I intreae you to kill met I took the piftol from his hand ; it pointed towards the floor. And will you not kill ine ? in a mournful accent exclaimed he. What have you done, that deferves that I fliould kill you ? Kill me ! only kill me ! pray kill me ! He fpread out his hands towards me wich a gefture of ¡ncreacy. Heftor,
Heftor, what means this agitation ? what has happened ? You terrify me beyond expieffion, Muft I fpeak ? replied hc. Mull I be the accufer of roy guilty felf? He burft into an agony of tears. Would I were dead ! Would I had been torn into a thoufand pieces, be¬ fore this had happened I Indeed, fir, I am innocenc I I chought no harm I Indeed it is not my fault ! What have you done ? Whence come thefe bruifes and this wound.' Ic is all my fault I It is all my do¬ ing,—nobody elfe ! Why will you not kill me ? Heftor, I cannot bear this uncer¬ tainty. Recollect yourfetf! Be paci¬ fied ! and tell your ftory ! Will you forgive me ? Forgive you what ? What have you done to deferve my anger ? E 4 No,
No, no, I do not wifh to be forgiven ! I only wifh you to abhor, to deteft, to curfe and to kill me ! This is beyond all patience. ï never loved any body but you, and my miftrefs, and my dear young ladies. 1 never did any body ctfe the leaft atom of mifchtef: and now my folly Will be the ruin of you all î Pardon me/ fir 1 I will torment you no longer. 1 will get the better of myfelf, and tell you all that has hap¬ pened. He then informed me, though with many breaks and paffionate interrup¬ tions, of what he had juft difcovered, my evil repute as a necromancer, the many ftrange and terrible ftories that were circulated of me, the antipathy univerfally entertained againft me, the active ferocioufnefs with which this antipathy was accompanied, and the confcquences that he feared would re¬ fult.
fult. He afcribed the whole to hi» own imprudence, and to the particu¬ lars which the fuperior cunning of the donzella, in fpite of his invincible refufal to acquaint her with a fingle circumftance, had wrung from him. Hector had collected feveral of thefe circumftances accidentally from a neighbouring ruftic, and had been vehement in my defence. While they were eager in debate, others had joined them, but Heftor had found them all opponents, not one a fupporter. Irri. caced with the conteft and the oppro¬ brious language heaped upon himfeif and his mailer, Heftor had been pro¬ voked to lirike the moil infolent of the difputancs. Immediacely feveral had fallen upon him ac once, and it was owing to the uncommon ftrength and dexterity he poflefled, that he had efcaped alive out of their hands. Be¬ fide innumerable blows with fift, foot E 5 and
and ftick, he had received two or three Aabs in different parts of the body, from the knives with which the Italian is too much accuftomed to affali his adverfsry. It was eafy to fee that the gallant and generous defence of Heftor had confiderably augmented the danger of my fituacion. They difmifled him with a thoufand execrations againft both him and myfelf, and vows chat they would fignalife their vengeance by fetcing fire to my houfe. Having re¬ lated his ftory, Heftor concluded with agam earneftly conjuring me to kill him, that fo he might expiate the im¬ prudence and folly by which he had made himfeif the author of my cala¬ mity. The eieceflivenefs of the poor fellow's diftrefs exctced me eo employ every ef¬ fort eo pacify his mmd. Heftor, find I, you have been very imprudenc, but I forefeeno fuch confequences as your terrified
terrified imagination has led you to forebode. The idle threats of clowns in the midft of their brawls are entitled to little regard. I am not fo weak and infirm of foul, as to be moved from my tranquillity by their fenfelefs prate. I entertain no doubt of your fidelity and affeftion. I am not angry with you. The fault you have been guilty of arofe from no defect of vigilance or ' attachment. You did svhat you could, and where you failed, it was only in that to which your powers were not commenfurate. You have done well and wifely nosv, in acquainting me with particulars and the whole extent of the danger : doubc noC but I will employ fuch precaucions and be fo awake to my fituation, as to foreftal the poifibi- lity of mifchief. Thus I endeavoured toaffuage ho¬ neft Heftpr's perturbation, but with no adequate effect. He hung his. head E 6 in
in ibrøjvv, »nd refilled to be comforted. •Shame and terrorilTailed him together, »nd he knew not how to fupport their united preffure. He ihtreared me not to lull myfelf in fancied fecurity, and fall blindfold on my ruin. He in- treated me not to forgive him. My clemency «nd forbearance ferved only to make him regard witli greater hor¬ ror the crime of which he had been guilty. If however I refufed to puniih him, and by penance or death to light¬ en the remorfe that hung upon his heart, 'he would at leaft devote himlelf inOppofition to the evil hehad created, and die rather than it fhould touch a hair of our heads. This idea he feemed to view with fome complacency ; but the pleafure ir gave was a glimmering and momentary light; he could not remain in any place for an inftant ; he •wrung his hands with anguiih, and ex¬ hibited every feature oí the deepefl defpair.
defpair. I examined his bruifes nnd wounds, the latter of which, though attended with a copious effufion of blood, did not appear to be dangerous. I warned him to be guilty of no fur¬ ther indifcretion, to betray nothing of what had happened to any one of my family, and to engage in no further controverfies and broils in my vindi¬ cación. Though I endeavoured to make light of what I heard, in companion to the dillrefs of my fervant, yet, when I came to reoonfider the fubjeft in fo¬ licude, it by no means appeared to me in a light and trivial point of view. One part of Hector's ftory had related to the deach of Charon, who, I now found, had owed his fate to the fuper¬ fticion of my uncultivated neighbours. I had always entertained a formidable idea of the character of an Italian po¬ pulace, whom I regarded as more fuf- 3 picious,
picious, fangumary and violent than any other race of men in the world. I deplored my fate that expofed me to their rage. I deplored my folly that had admitted any confident into my individual purfuits, though my con¬ fidence had been fo limited, and us receiver fo truft-worthy, thae I could not have imagined any evil would have refulced. I determined that I would not expofe myfelf to the nfque of fuch finifter confequences, as in my opi¬ nion might in my prefent fituation eafily overcake me 1 grieved for che tender health and ehe doubtful ftate of mind of my beloved Marguerite, which alone oppofed chemfelves eo the adop¬ tion of an immediace change of fcene. In che ftace of her healch I had been gnevoufly difappoinced. I had looked for amendmenc, I found decay. The decay however was gradual, almoft ìm- percepeible, from cime to time I had even
even flattered myfelf that the progrefs was in an oppofite direction, but the deiufion was foon baniihed. Another difficulty arofe in addition to the reft j Marguerite appeared pregnant j a cir¬ cumtlance that now firft prefented it- felf, after a ceffation of ten years. The morning after the accident and difclofure of Hector, I went to Pifa, determined to confult with the mar¬ chers Filofanto, elder brother of the unfortunate Andrea, who was pro¬ bably more accurately acquainted with the Italian character than myfelf, and underftood the ihades of that character as they were modified in the particular territory in which I redded. The marchefc was a man univerfally ad¬ mired for fubtlety of reafoning, vi- goroufnçfs of comprehenfion, and re¬ finement of tatle. Jn the ítruaure of his mind he was fearcely an Italian. He had refuted feveral years in Eng¬ land,
htod. and was the intimate friend of Honry Howard earl of Surrey, who fome time after fell a victim to the jcsldu* tyranny of hts native fovereign, king Henry the Eighth. The marchefe was frank, generous and difinterefled, and poSèlTed more fully the affections of every one within the circle of his friendfllip than any other man I ever knew. He was of a fanguine temper, ilways contemplating the world on its brighteft fide, and, from the gcnerofity of his own beart, incapable of credit¬ ing a diftant danger, or of difcerning rhe ftorm in the embryo cloud where it was filently engendering. In the-conference we held, I was in- ftuenoed too implicitly by my confeiouf- aefs of hi» integrity and the gigantic power* ofhis mind, and did net furfi- ciently advert to ttíofe peculiarities in his temper whicti I have now defcribed. The external facts with which the nar¬ rative
rative of Heflor had furnifhed me I fully detailed to him ¡ as to my par¬ ticular purfuits, I contented myftlf with Hating that I indulged freely in the ftudy of chemiftry, and wa« of thofe perfons, ordinarily accounted vifionaries, who amufed themfelves with the expectation of finding the philofopher's ftône. Having heard tmt ftory to ah end, thernaròhefe ridiculed my appreheniions. He faw nothing in the facts that alarmed me, but * cowardly fuptrftition whofe utmöft flight reached no higher than the (hoot¬ ing a dog, and a fquabble between * boifterous rüftic, and a ftrvant to* acutely fenfitive for rhe réputation of his mailer. He aflured me that the days of fuch fuperftition as I contem¬ plated were long fince paft, and that his countrymen lefs deferved the im¬ putation than any others, as, living at the very centre and fource of catholic impofition,
impofittoh, they fawideeper into the myftery, and were not expofed to the advantage which diftance poflefles for augmenting our reverence. ,.He expa¬ tiated with great-eloquence on the vice of a fufpicious temper. A fpirit of alarmand continual apprehenfion, like the jeaioufy of lovers, he faid, made the meat it fed on. It brooded over plots chat had no exiftence but in the wanderings of a difturbed imagination. Jt was continually interrupting the quiet of its owner, and the tranquillity of fociety j and, for the fake of avoid¬ ing imaginary evils, often plunged into fuch-as were.j-eai. He advifed me to go .home and be contented. He re¬ commended to me to clear up the clouds of my mind, and cuicivace a light heart, a chearful temper, and a generous confidence in the honeft fym- pathics of mankind. Infine, he bade rnt continue my purfuits, avoid eclat, and
and truft in 'his fagacity that no ill confequences would »enfue. - The remonftrances of the marchefe Filofanto led me to fufpect that I had been idly credulous. I had too eafily participated the, feelings »nd nppre- henfions of a pooiy uninftructed negro, and had fuffered the fecret griefs that brooded in my« heart, to difcolour my» perceptions, and aggravate the features of circumftances, in themfelves trifling or indifferent. I began to.be half sfhamed of the gloominefs of my con¬ ceptions. I could not, alas ! follow the advice of the marchefe as to the cheerfulnefs of my heart -, but 1 could exert myfelf to prevent my prefent melancholy from disfiguring to me every thing I faw. The influence ex- ereifed over my conceptions by perfons of eminent intetted has always been great. Not that the judgment I form¬ ed of the powers of my own mind was peculiarly
peculiariyhumblc; but I reafoned thus. Perhaps the perfon Ί confute is as well informed in the fubject under con¬ fideration as I am, in that cafe hii decifion is as fully entitled to attention as my own; and thus, without coward¬ ly fclf.contempt on my part, the gene. ral baltnce of the argument was mate. rially altered, f crbaps, without being on the whole my fuperior, he may be meat competent to this particular queition. In eicher'cafe my idea of ics merits «became percepeibly modified. I never liftcned to the fentiments of a mim «of talents when they differed from my own, unlefit where he w»s evident¬ ly vifionar y and irracional, without be. ing ftuken as to the credit due to my own view of the fubject. Such then was the eifect produced on me by the marchefe's expoftulation. I fliook off my apprehenfions, and laughed gt my fears. 1 was aflumed of
of the want of gallantry that had pof¬ feffed me, when I meditaced flight from fo trivial a menace. I concluded that dangers, particularly fuch as anfe from the irrational paffions of a capricious multicude, were increafed when fymp¬ tom s of apprehenfion difcovered them¬ felves, and abated, when received with neglcft, or repelled with a magnani¬ mous ferenity.
CHAP.
CHAP. V. Meanwhile the unrelenting Agofttno was fixed in his purpofe and ïnceflant in his machinations. He be¬ lieved that the deftruftive mine was now fufficiently prepared, and thae hi might proceed in all furety to the ultimate explofion. Hc appichendcd that he had advanced too far to retract, that the death of Charon and the af- faule upon Heftor were calculaccd fuf¬ ficiently to announce vv hac was to fol¬ low, and that it would be înjudiciou» and idle to grant me much refpite for reflection. The parlions of his affociates were wrought up co a ficnzv of horror, and needed only a bold and artful
artful director to urge them to any point of fury and deftruition. Implicitly as I had confided in the decifion of the marchefe, I had fpeedi. ly reafon to know that it was the dic¬ tate of too fanguine and prcfumptuous a fpirit. On my return from his pa¬ lace and feveral fubfequcnt occafions I found the manners of the populace altered refpecting me. They no longer viewed me ν ith a fort of re¬ verential awe, or fled my approach. They infulted me svith their eyes, they muttered curfes upon me in a voies fufficiently audible to be underftood, thcy broke forth in gcftuics of abhor¬ rence and derifion. They regarded me with looks of fciocious hatred ¡ and, when I had paffed them, their mur¬ murs gradually fwciled into ihouts of triumphant contumely. Thefe fymp«. toms however were progreflivc ; each day became more odious and intolera¬ ble
ble thtn the laft. They who have never been placed in a fituation like mme, will never be able to do juftice to roy grievance. They will perhaps fay, that the calamity I now endured was a trifling one, and that a weak mmd only can be elevated by the ac¬ clamations and huzzas of the multitude, or depreffed by their hifles and fcorn. I did not, and I could not feel it fo. There is no pleafure more congenial to the human heart than the approba¬ tion and affection of our fellows 1 call heaven to witnefs that I could mount the fcaffold, furrounded with an innumerable multitude to applaud my fortitude, and feel es it were on their own neck the blow that ended me, and count it a fefttval. But I cannot bear to be furrounded with to¬ kens of abhorrence and fcorn. I can¬ not bear to look round me through an extended circle, and fee the impa¬ tience
tience of defpite in every face Man was not born co live alone He ıs linked co his brethren by a choufand titb and, when thofe eics are broken, he ccafes from alt genuine exiltence Their complacence ıs а food more ın- vigoricmg chan ambrofh their aver¬ fion is a torment worfc than thae of chedimncd While I vvntc, 1 feem igun to heai refoundmg in my cars the hootings antl chmours of thefe in- far nttd pcaf mts When heard in¬ deed chey wcnc со my heare and fat thci e tolder chan the afpic ¡, venom , they ıofe to my chroac wich a ftnfation biccercr chan wormwood They un¬ ftrung all my mufcles and nerves I could not ftay I could not fly I vv iflied myfelf buried deep η che centre of cht earth I file fomcth ng vvorfe, more itvolting morcoppohte to all che piejudices and propenfities of the foul than annihilation I hive known in Vol HI I variou»
various fituatioiis and conditions of human life, what it was Co bc diltrel- fed, to be dejected, to bc mifirable, but never 111 any other licuación have 1 fele a mifiry fo concenciaeed, fo gnaw¬ ing and mfufterable. I began however, tike che enens I am figuring co myfcif, to dcfpife the pufillammiCy of my fubmiflion, and to believe chat, if I would oniy make a ftand and turn round upon my enemy, I fiiould fubdue him. This refolution I could with difficuley have eaken 111 the moment of aecack, it was formed in an interval of rctrofpect and reflec¬ tion. Having formed it, che concempc I fliould have fclc foi myfelf would have been coo cxquifice, if I had failed to put it in execution. I was not long at a lofs for an opporeunicy In one of my walks I found myfelf purfue^ by a numerous populace wich a pecu liar degree of inveceracy. I yieldc fc
for fome time, till I came to a place chac appeared convintene for ehe pur- j.ofc of haranguing them It was a bench, placed upon a nfing ground md flickered behind by a thicket, which had been ercfted for the pur¬ pofe of commanding a neighbouring profpett I ftoppcd I ftepped upon the bench , 1 waved my hand towards the multicude They perceived my pui pofe with fome degiee of con¬ fufion and fuipufe, they drcsv nearer. Uo not liften to him' Do not hear t woid hc has eo fay' cried fome of thtm Oh, hear turn ' heai him ' exclaimed otheis I obtained an au¬ dience What is the caufe, fud I, of all this batı cet and ptittcution ' Bicaufe you are a wizard, a necro- inancci, α dialir m the black arc, be- ciuft you aLC in league with hell, and 1 2 hav e
have fold yourfilt to the devil ' an¬ fwered twency voices ac once. Hear me, replied I, and 1 will con¬ vince you of my innocence but hear me in iilence, and do not ineerrupc me. For myfcif, I have no bellet in che exiftence of fuch an arc This remark produced a general groan. Why fliould I have fold myfcif to ehe foe of mankind ' What could he give me, that fhould compenfate me for configning myftlf over to him for ever hereafter ? The powei of exhi- bicing ftrange and extraordinary tricks ? Wime a pitiful recompence ' But, if I had bought this posver ac fo dear a price, ihould I hide it ' Should I not take every opportunity of excic- ïng your reverence and aftoniflimenc ' Who has feen me perform any wonder¬ ful ftac ' 1 live quiecly among you, and give no caule of offence to any. I live
Iliverccircd in che midft of my family I form no party or connections. I do noc intrude into any of your affurs, political or private. I do not even enter inco conferentes wich any of jou, un¬ ltfs induced by the apparine occafion of doing fomt good and benevolent aftion Quit then tins ungenerous pcrfecu» tion ! Do not turn che fury of your refencmene upon a harmlefs ftranger t You are Italians, ehe moll polifhed and ingenious people on che face of the earch the moft glorious monuments of arc, in budding, in flacuary and in paincing, are Co be found in Che midft of you ancient Italy governed the world by her arms, modern Icaly go¬ verns che world chrough che medium of thae pure and fubtime religion of which providence has gracioufly made her the repofirory. Do not flam the glory of this charafter ' Show your- h 3 felvés
fel ves worehy of che honour wich which your name is heard in every corner of the habitable vvorld ι While I wis jet fpiakmg, а huge clot of mud icirhcd me, and iliuck me on the face and the uppir part of my breaft. I calmly endeavoured eo free myfelf from its effects with my hand¬ kerchief, and, looking round me, de¬ manded in the facred fpint of confci¬ ous innocence, Hosv have I deferved this crearmene ' Thus far 1 had been heard with a doubtful fentiment of murmur and approbation, and I began to feci chac 1 was racher gaining giound upon my audience. But chis nesv infide feemed to turn che eide of popular ìmpreffion in an inftanc Villain, ıenegado, accurfed of God ' I heard from every fide, did not you bewitch my cow ? did not you enchant my child i' hase noc you killed my daughtei '
diughter ? Down wich hım' excer- mınatc hım ' do not fufteı hım Co lise' I continued my efiorcs со be heard. It «s is a cncic.il moment, a tall expe- i imene upon the powtr of firmnefs and ι vnotence to contiol the madnefs of infuriated fupiiftiiion. lc was in vain. Iwas deafened wich ehe noife that aflailed me. It was no longer fliouts and chmouis ot difappiobation. It was the ι oaring of tigers, and the ilinek of cannibals. Sticks, ftones, and cvciy kind of miffile weapon that otlercd itftlf, fell in ihowcrs aiound me It feemed a fort of miracle that I tfcaped inftant deftruthon. I eluded cheir pui fuir, afeei fonie Cime I vincili cd to rclurn co my own houfe. I hid in the mtei val cernfied myfelf wich che idea chac, having miffed my perfon, they might have hurned chichei, and execuced fome Cernble F 4 vengeance
vengeance on my helplcfs family. . I found them however in falcty the mob had for this time conttnted lt- felf to difperfe without further mif chief. « As foon as it was dark, I haftened to Pifa, and related what had juft occur¬ red to my friend the marchefe. He was ferpnfed, but he ftill adhered to his opinion He had never fuppofed, he told me, that a noify and clamorous mob was a proper fubject upon svhich to make experiment of the energy of truth, and he laughed at my attempt to reafon them out of their fuperfti- tion. But they meant nothing by all that had paffed. It was the mere foam and fury of a moment, poured out with vehemence, and then dithpated in air. A ceitam fct of politicians hid for their particular ends reprefented a mob as a tei rific and formidable engine, alas ' thcy were rathei to be
be pitied, than condemned There was no malice in their hearts. They were in reality a mere matenal machine, led on without reflection, and, when they had committed a momentary ra¬ vage, aftonifhed themfclves the moft at the injury they had perpetrated They were as tight and variable as a feather, driven with evei y bieath, and nothing could argue greater obliquity of intelletft than to fuppofe, beeaufe they were in a certain temper and fen- timcnt to-day, that they would be found in a fimilar remper and fenti- ment ro-morrow. The mat chefe how¬ ever wiihed, he faid, to relieve me from the apprehenfion of this lmagi- uarv dangei, and therefoie oftcred me the whole finte ot his fci vants for the defence of my houfe He added that, among his friends and ret nners in the city of Pifa, he did not doubt in an hour's time to bc able to raifc a troop F S of
of four hundred men, and, whatever power of that fort he poffeffed, he af- fured me was wholly at my ferviee. I was not convinced by the marchefe's arguments, but I declined his offer. 1 could not bear ro think that blood ihould be fpilted, and the lives of thefe poor ignorant wietches facrificcd, for the prefervation ot a thing fo woithlefs in my eyes as the local propeity I pof¬ leflcd I theiefore told the marchefc, that I might perhaps watt yet a day or two longer before I foimed my refolu¬ tion, but that, the inftant I faw one frefh fymptom of the hoftility of the villagers, 1 was determined to take my family with me, anil remove far beyond the reach both of thui tei rors and their hatred. I ftaid two hours with the marchefe, and then fet out to my own houfe. The way I took svas by a private road, open only to the neighbouring gentry, but
but of which my feivant carried the key. It led along the higher ground, •and commanded a view of the common highway. Confideiably before I reach¬ ed my osvn h donation, I was [truck with tht ajipcaiance of pei fons paffing, 111 confidei ablt numbei s, and in a tumultuous mannei, along thepublic road. Some of them ss en* armed with clubs, and others with torches. Their ninth however led, not towards my houfe, but in an oppofite duection. I mended niy pate, terrified with a fort of vague apprehenfion of vvhat might hive happened, though I did not dif- guife to myfelf that wlnt I faw, was. not pieeiftl) that which I might have c>.piäcd to ice, if they had been re¬ turned fiom duiiolifliing my property, and bui nmg my houle. When 1 arrived, I found indeed that no mikhief had been actually commit¬ ted, but that I vv.b indebted for the pre- Ir 6 fcrvation
fcrvation of my houfe, and perhaps for the lives of my wife and children, to the fagacity and prefence of mind of Bernardin, Che fervant of my early years. My reiidence had been the object agamft which the march of the popu¬ lace had been directed. Bernardin, per¬ ceiving their intentions, had wich greie difliculey prevailed upon Heftor to keep out of fight. Nothing could bc more adverfe to the feelmgs and incli¬ nation of my faithful negro, but, Ber¬ nardin having convinced him chac his appearance would only exafperate che rage of che afliilancs, and thae ptrhaps every ehing of importance to his maf- ter's ferviee and happinefs depended at prefent upon his concealment, Hector yielded to his reprefentacions. 1 his ac- compliflied, Bernardin next aflembled the gardener and one 01 two laboui crs in my employment who happened eo beat hand, and, having furnifhed them with
with fire-arms, ftationed them at dif¬ ferent windows in the front of the houfe. Wich chefe preparacions, when che mob ainved, he rcfolucely told them that he would fire on the firft ptrfon chat accempccd to break in. Thcy were ftaggered : furious as they appeared ehe momene before, this thieat held them in awe. They paraded two or three rimes round rhe houfe, clattering their arms, and pouring out vehement execiations, and then wiehdrcw, folemnly promifing that they would recurn che following night, and level thç houfe wich the ground. I no longer yielded che fmalleft de¬ gree of credic Co che unfufpicious and confiding philofophy of the marchefe Tdofanco. I fene oft my wife and children before day-break for Lucca, deCermincd to take fhippmg at the firft convenient port, and pais over into Spain.
Spam. I vvas titele folicicous, for rea¬ fons wich which che readei ıs already acquainced, abouc my propercy, and moveables, I had nomocive Co induce me co fecccr and clog my retreat at this hour of peni and terror, wich a fingle article of rancy and price. My fur- nieure indeed was not fplendid, buc ıc svas handfome and valuable, and the indifférence wich which 1 rifigncd che whole co che mercy of chance, was a maccer of fonie furpnfe to the perfons around me. My fervants offeied to defend my pofieflions at the peril of their lives, but I peieinptonly foibad it. I would not even confent co then taking away ceitun articles by way of appropriating them co cheir perfonal ufe. 1 believed chac if I admitted a fingle aft of that fort, I fiiould find it no eafy maccer Co fee limits Co cheir avidity, and, as I was determined to cake none of my prefent fervants with me,
me, the negro and Bernardin excepted, I feared chac che apparene pofleffion of a fingle article chac had bten mine mighc hereifcer m.irk its propriccor a victim to che r snftltfs rage of blindfold fuperfti¬ tion. I could eafily make up to thefe honefl and faithful dependents the injury they might fuftain from che ftenung fe¬ vei ity of this oidei I determined to fluii up my houfe sv ith all ics prefene concents, asjoihua, che captain of che Jews, diew a Ime of feparation round che profane pofllflions of Achan, and to leave the villageis, if fo ir feemed good to chem, co make of ehe whole a burne oliering, to propitiate thewiath ofchcii avenging divinicy. The directions I lffued being imhcfi- rating and pcrcmptoiy, met svith a ıeady fubmiflion from all my other ctomcflics Hectoi only, the mild and complying Heftor, ot whom obedience had hichereo appeared eo confticuce che very
very foul, met my commands with a refolute refufal. The prefent diftrefled appearance of my fortunes feemed to have worked the poor fellow's mmd to a paroxyfm of infanity. He confidered himfeif as the fole_author of my ca- lamiey. He reviled himfeif in che bit¬ tereit terms of compunction and ab¬ horrence. The language which the agony of his foul forced from his lips, svas fuch as could not fail to imprefs upon my other fervants, a conviction of the juftice of the imputations that were now brought agamft us. This however was of little imporcance. I muft aC all events have been concenced to leave behind me in my prefent neighbourhood a name loaded wich the execranons of religious fanacicifm. Hector imprecated upon himfett a thoufand curfes, if, fo long as he con¬ tinued to live, che populace fhould lay hands upon a ftraw of my property. He
He would not move fo much as an inch from the defence of my houfe. He would either, by prefervmg it, expiate in fome degree che mifchief in which hc had involved mc, or fall and bc crufhed to deach m che midft of ies rums. Argumenes and cxpoftulacions were ufelefs here, his mind was work¬ ed up Co coo high a cone, to be fuf¬ ceptible of the patience neceffary for hearing or underftanding any reafomng that was addreffed to him. Auchonc/ icfelf was of no avail, for ehe firft and the laft cime he threw off the character ot a fei vane, and appeared obftinaCe, felf-willed and ungovernable. Ic was only by dircft violence chac he could be forced from the fpoc. I gave him in charge, wich ehe moft ftrift orders noe co fuffer hım co efcape from cheir cultody, to two of his fellows. llus bufinefs being difpatched, I vvene, ac the invitación of cht marchefe, co
to a fmall cotcage he pofltfled ac no greac diftance from my osvn houfc. Ics fituacion was fo private and retired, that few perfons knesv or could per¬ ceive that there was any building on the fpot. Here cherefore I could re¬ main in clic moft perfeit fafcty. 1 ielt myfelf unaccountably impelled co ftay and witnefs the cacaftrophe of che Cra- gedy. I fliould not have been fatisfied to concinuc m uncertainty as to what it would prove. After all thae had paffed, like che marchefe, I fliould have been ape co accu fe myfelf of cowardice and a mind fourcd and degenerere, if the mob had not puc cheir threrts in execution. 1 he marchefe himfeif w as svell pleafed wich my dccermination in this refpeft. He sv as not yee convinced that 1 had noc painced to myttll a dan¬ ger which had no adequate tountci pai с in che world of lcalittes. Ihad
1 had not long to wait. The night had no fooner lpread an even-coloured and almoft impervious veil over the vvorld, than the marchefc, as if moved by a iceret impulfe to witnefs vvhat he yet rcfufed to believe, came to mc at the cottage. Hc had ftaiccly arnved, vvhen vve heard the confufed murmurs and turbulence of the joopulace, for we· were near enough to diftingttifti almoft eveiy thing. As they did not mtet with the difence of the pieced¬ ing esening, the work they had under¬ taken was prefently difpatched. Wc t.isv the flames -feend. We recognifed the fliouts of infernal joy with which they svitneffcd the catafirophc. When the manhefe bthtld what, till feen, hc would ncscr admit to be polhble, he burft out into a fort of tranfport of nufanthiopy. Hcesilumed, that no innocence and no ment could defend a man fiom the unrelenting antipathy of his
his fellows. He faw that there was a principle in the human mmd deftmed to be eternally at war with improve¬ ment and feience. No fooner did a man devote himfeif to the purfuit of dtfeovencs svmcti, if afccrtiincd, would prove thehigheft benefit to his fpecies, than his whole fpecie» became armed againft him. The midnight oil was held to be the fignal of infernal ma¬ chinations. The palenefs of ftudy and the furrows of thought were adjudged to bc the tokens of diabolical alliance. He faw m the tranfaftions of that mght a pledge of the eternal tnumph of ig¬ norance over vvifdom. Above all he regretted that hiscoumrymen, his dear Italians, fliould for ever blot their ho¬ nour and their character bv fuch fav ige outrages. Though myfelf the princi¬ pal fufferer, I was obliged to perform the pait of the comforter and confoler, and endeavour to calm the tranfpoit ot agony
agony chac feized upon che fufcepcible Filofanto. He was aflomfhed, fhock- cd and befide himfttf, I viewed the whole wich che gloomy firmnefs of a dcfperace refolution. The worll event of this deCeftcd evening remains yee uniecorded. Even now I Cremblc, while 1 accempe co commit the ftory to my harmlefs paper. So far as related to che mere deftruftion of my propercy, I looked on wich a philofoptucal lndiflerence. I dıfdaın¬ ed, and I had no reafon, Co regree ehe lofs of chat which 1 had it in my powei Co repair in a moment. I thoughc I had eaken care chac no human life fliould be rifqucd upon chis critical occafion. Buc I was miftaken. I learned che next morning with anguifh inexpreflible, that Heftor, the negro of the prifon ot Confiance, was no more. He had eluded the vigilance of his keepers. No fooner was he at 3 liberty,
liberty, than he haftcned, unknown to every one, to dte, as he had declared he would, in the defence of my houfe. The mob had burft into the houfe, they feized him alive. They dragged him out in the midft of them, they ïn- fultcd over him as the fpecial favour- ire of the infernal king. Thcy inflict¬ ed on him every fpecies of motkeryand of torture, thcy killed hini joint by joint, and limb by limb----- 1 he pen drops from my lifclefs hand What right had I to make this nnn the viflim of my idle and unh illow ed purfuits' What has the ait and mul¬ tiplication of gold in it, that fliould compenfatc the deftniction of fo inge¬ nuous, fo fimple-heartcd, fo noble a creature' If I had myfelf fallen into the hands of the populace, it hid been well I was a criminal, woithy of eveiy ictilbution they could infitti upon me ' Some men perhaps will aik why I la¬ mentiti
mented fo bitteily oser fo uncultivaccd and uninformed an individual as chis negi o. 1 know ıc ıs unjuft and unrea¬ fonable ----- buc chere was fomething fo truly tiagical in che fate to which this creatuie in his gcnerofity and re- moifc devoted himftlf, thae I believe for che mornene I tele a iharper pang mic, chan in che ft ι ange and excraor¬ dmary lois of my only fon, or perhaps in the picmacure death of my beloved Margiuruc.
CHAP.
CHAP. VI OEbORE the dawn of the fucceed. mg morning I turned mv face co« ards Lucca I beheld che laft cloud of mingling fmoke and flame afcend from the afhes of my villa. The blaze funk, its macenals were nearly confumed, and ic yielded an uncertain and fitful light only, when I withdrew from be¬ ing any longer the melancholy and heart-wounded fpeftator of che ium 1 took an everlafling leave of the mar¬ chefe I had been introduced to him under a friendly afpeft, as the man vvho had had courage co perform the laft offices of humanity to his unforcunace brocher, and he had conceived a warm affection for mc The pamiul nacuie of
of the cataftrophe he had witneftld melted his heart, and he carneftly pref¬ fed me to draw upon him for any fup- plies I wanted, or rather to receive from him a fum equivalent to the da¬ mage the fuperftition of his country¬ men had inflicted on me. This I po- fitively rcfufed, but I found it împof- fible to filence his importunity, till I fubmitted to the duplicity of promif- îng that, if I found myfelf leduced to any neceffity, I would not fail to ap¬ ply to him It was in the very mo¬ ment ot oui feparation that intelligence was brought mc of the fate of НеЯог. 1 hc reader may imagine with how hea- vs a heait 1 fet out on myjourney Lucca is ibout feventcen miles from the city of Pifa from the pt ice where 1 had fpent the greater pait of this mc¬ moiable night it was twenty The marchefe made me promife to take a ferpcntinc and cncuitous route, the W III. G moie
more completely to elude the poffibi- hty of future danger. An adventure occurred to me in this paflage, wich the relation of svhich I svill not lncer- rupt my narrative, which prevented me from arriving at Lucca tilt ehe noon of the following day. Suffice it to fay, that it was of fuch a nacure, that, impatienr as I was under my pre¬ fene excraordinaay circumftances to rejoin my family, I fliouid have held myfelf defiitute of every acorn of hu¬ manity, if I had not fubmitted Co this fliore delay. Short as it was, I found, vvhen I reached Lucca, thae my evil genius had been bufy co accumulace for me new misfortunes Marguerite and her daughCers were wholly unkiown in this place, and, che intelligence of the Pifan not having reached Lucca in the courfe of the day, it was related to my wife, as coa hearer unconcerned, with
with all its horrid circumftances and the calamitous face of our generous Heftor, by che hoftefs of the mn. The rapidity of evenes, during ehe laft part of our refidencc m Che Pifan territory, was fuch as to have obliged me to fay little of the effect chey produced upon Marguerite. But the reader can fearcely bc fo inadvertent and unre¬ flecting, as not eafily to imagine to himfeif thae (lie felt them in the high- eft degree painful and overwhelming. this lati blow was too much. Mar¬ guerite had been fome months preg¬ nant She was immediately feized wich che pains of laboui, and delivered et a dead child. The firfl intelligente communicated Co me upon my aiuval was chac my ss ife was dying. Lucca howevei diet noe witnefs ehe penod of her exiftence. Aftei having toncinued for feveial dass upon che eiy extremity, as it were, between life G 1 and
and death, fhe grew perceptibly beteer, and in a week more, chough in a very feeble ftace, ic "became apparene chit her cafe was not i ıapıd one. Wc agreed eo proceed upon our Spanifh voyage. Ie appeared noe improbable that the fea-air mighc be found benefi¬ cial, and the experiment was warmly recommended by her phyfienns. Thiy Were not however aware of che whole exeent of her difordcr. During the Voyage her crıfıs rerurncd wich fuch malignane fympcoms, as ftarcely to permit us che hope fhe would reach the land alive. We debarked it Boicclom on the fourteenth of April 1 546. We had no fooner rakın up our abode in chis cuy than, fully aware of the ftate of her dıfcafc, flie aflembled her daughters, and poured forch to them svithout leftratnt tint flood of af¬ fection, thai ardent fpirit of love, by which flie was difiingiuftied and elevat¬ ed
cd above cvci y creaCure chat lived Her mmd vvas clear, hci inrelleftual pow¬ eis were compiere and encire The en- thuhafm witn which flie now expieff- cd hcrftlt, was noc of chac mconfider- atc nacui с which fliould tend tomake them feel with gieater acurenefs the lofs thcy were about со fuftain Ic was bnght, unclouded and ferene Ic was the eloquence as of a difembodied fpi¬ rit, fii^d from che perdu balion and alloy of human pallions She remind¬ ed chem chat chey vverc fitters, and ex¬ horted each to fulfil che dudes of a filter and a mothei to che ocher cwo. It wife and good, they would be happy in each other, and their little iffocn- cion v ould bc afchool, piepanngchem for the more geni inc and venerable duties foi which nature had deftmed them Hei views of all human chings were altered by hır prefine ficuacion on che brink of che grave Our το¬ υ 3 ferves
firves and mifunderftandmgs had wrung her heart, but flic forgave me Things which had lately appeared of the higheft magnitude and moment, faded in the dittance, and mmgled with the vulgar crowd of human con¬ cerns which was now retiring from her view fhe muft again return, flie faid, to life, before fhe could again feel che paflions and che incerefts of chis peccy fcene For the fake of her daughters fhe had lately defired to live. She was now reconciled and content to die She had formed che chain and link of conneition between me and my girls perhaps it was beccer chat vve ihould burft our fetteis and be free —On the fourth day after our arnval at Barcelona Marguerite expired There is nothing m ehe vaft variecy of objects which this wretched vvorld prefenes to our view, fo dreadful and diftreffing
diftreffing as the fight of one we have ¡oved, but who is now no more. I faw, thefe eyes beheld, che lifelefs corfe of Marguence. Greac God of heaven ! w hac ıs man ' and of vvhat are w e made ? Within chac peccy frame refided for yeais all chac vve worflitp, for thci с refided alt thae we know and can con¬ ceive of excellence. That heart is now ftill. Within the whole extent of that fíame there exifts no thoughc, no feeling, no virtue. It remains no longer, bue со mock my fenfe and fcoft ac my forrow, Co rend my bofom with a woe, complicated, matchlefs and m- expreflible. the cheek is pale antl livid, the eyes are funk and circled with btacknefs. Corruption and rum have already feized theirpreyand turn¬ ed ic inco horror. Diaw, for heaven's fake, draw the pall over chofe iifclcfs feaCures 1 Bury, bury chem deep in the bowels of ehe earch ! Let not G 4 my
my ïmagiiiiiion follow Ihem into che thambirs of che giave, and dwell amidft pcftiltnriil damps and all the fenes of decay I Let me recolleft alt chic Miiinicrite vvas as flie lived, her numerous iicomplifhments, her un¬ paralleled virtues,—aye, in all che magnitude and wealth of cheu detail,— for that is a divmi and celeftnl mad¬ nefs but lee me noc recollect her as I faw her on ehe bier, left I become rav¬ ing and blafpheme ! I have no povver to talk of the ficua¬ tion in which I was nowplaced, and the reader muft cheiefore explain ic for himfeif—if he can. I ntver loved buc once, I never loved bue Marguerite. All other affection is ftdnefs and ice compared wich chis. This ıs the great crıfıs of my hiftory, the gap between life and death, the gulph thae cue me off foi ever from every thmg that deferves the name of human. Such was the legacy of the
the ftranger ! my fon an exile, myfelf publicly arraigned as a murderer, the unmerited and tragical deathof Hector, ehe premature and fclf-denving lofs of che beccer half of my foul ' Who would have believed chit this enven¬ omed gift would, in lefs chan two years, have thus dreadfully changed the face of my affairs, and deftroyed every thing chac rompofed che happi¬ nefs of my life ' After tome dtlay in chis wrecched and ill-omened town of Barcelona (luch 1С has evei Imre appealed to my choughts), vve pioceedfci Co Madrid. fhe reader will give me credic, when I cell him chac, however eager I had lately ftlt to exhibit my magnificence and my wealch, I had no lueh eager- nefs now. I fpcak no more of che chaiaftcr of Marguence, I actempt not to compofc her panegyric. The ftory of her life is the beft record of G 5 her
her virtues. Her dcfefts, if defefts fhe had, drew cheir pedigree from rec¬ titude of fentimenc and percepción, from che moft geneious fenfibilicy, from a heart pervaded and leavened with tendernefs. A fimple itone in che wcftern aille of the great church at Barcelona records her perfonal and her family name, wich chis fingle addition, THE PRESERVER OF HER lAMILV IN POVERTY AND RUIN, THF VICTIM Ol HER DISCONSOLATE AND REPENTANT HUSBAND'S UNHALLOWED WEALTH. But, difmiffing for eser, and hence¬ forth configning co unviolated filence her excellencies, could I avoid feeln.g that I could never again form a fimilar, or indeed any real union, fo long as I exifled ? Being now indeed more than forty years of age, having fpent near twenty of that forty in a moll enviable wedlock, and being bleffed wich a 1 fufficiencly
fufficiently numerous offspring, it may be thought perhaps I might bc con¬ tented. But, without diicuffing the propriety of fuch а maxim as ic relaces to the fpecies in general, 1С muft be recollefted in my cafe that my youth was со be recommenced by a perpetual feries of renewals. I never gave credit to thae axiom of a fickly fenfibihty, lhat it is 1 facrilege, in him who has been engaged 111 one cordial and happy union, tvtr со turn his thoughts to ai ocher Much more rcifonable than this is the Indi in doctrine, thae che fui vis or oughc to leap into the flames, and perifh upon che funeral pyre of th Jeteifed While we live, it is one of our moft imperious duties to ieek our happmels He thae dédicaces lus days to an entliefe forrow, is che worft and moft degiaded of filicides. It is an importane queftion in the eco¬ nomy of human life, up eo vvhat age G 6 we
we ihould allow ourfelves to contraft engagements to a wife and a probable offspring, but, feparately from thi» confideration, I fhould hold that in many cafes he whe» entered into a fécond marriage, by that action yield¬ ed a pure and honourable homage to the manes of the fii ft But from ge¬ nuine mainage I was henceforth foi ever debarred. An immortal can form no true and real attachment to the in¬ fect of an hour Mourning, a deprefling and fpeech- iefs regret, was yet the inmate of our houfe. Grief does not commonly lay ι lining and invincible hold of us in the morning of onr days, and, though the temper of Julia was perhaps it her age the moil tender and fufceptible I ev ei knew, even fhe, who was now in her feventeenth yeir, reaped che benefic of thae elafticicy which in early life is che portion of humanity. Nothing material occurred
occurred to us in r he firft three months of our refidencc in Madrid. It was impoffible for any one Co be furround¬ ed with a more lovely and blooming family than I was. Tret from happinefs I was ımmeafur- ably diftant. Excluhvely of my re¬ cent and in every fenfe irreparible lofs, my mind was full of dark and gloomy forebodings. I feared not for myfeif, but I had an unconqueiable alarm and apprehenfion for my children. My youngell was but cen years of age j the eldefl was noc fevenceen. Sweec, tender bloffoms, that che cruetcy and hardnefs of minkind mighr fo eafily blight, and chac requirid a concur¬ rence of (avourable circumftances eo ripen inco all chey were capable of be¬ coming ' Whin I recollefted what had happened in che courie of che lait two years, I could not flatter myfelf that our misfortunes were at an
an end, or chat I had not, to fpeak moderately, many fierce mals yee to encouneer. I feemed, like che far- famed tree of India, to be deftincd Co fhelcer only eo deftroy, and co prove a deadly poifon Co whacever foughc íes refuge under my procefting branches. In chis melancholy frame of mind the tail words of my adored Marguerite pafled and repaffed een choufand times through my recollection. " She had formed the chain and link of connec¬ tion between me and my girls, per¬ haps ic was becter that we fliould burft our fetters and be fiee " Whatever fhe had lud was facred to the prefent temper of my imagination her laft beheft 1 woutd have died to execute. The idea contained in the fentence I have juft repeated was ambiguous and obfeure, rather hinccd than expreffed. But was it worthy of the lefs ateeneion, beeaufe ics author, with
with her ufual gentlenefs and fweetnefs, had modeftly fuggefted цп advice, ìn- ftead, which fhe was well entitled to have done, of prcfcnbing a will ' I deteimined to part with my children, that I might no longer be to them a fource of corroding mifery and afflic¬ tion. I believed that the cloud that now opprefled me was tranfitory. I feemed purfued for ehe prefene by a malignant genius, but a man, endowed as I was wich unbounded wealch and immortal vigour, cannot eafily be re¬ duced to defpair. Whin the tide of my profpency fhould unfold its rich and imple current, I might eafily com- mumcite ot its bounty to my daugh¬ ters If 1 parted with them now, I did not lofe them as I had perhaps loft cheir brocher, foi ever. I could turn to a particular point, and fay, There lies my foul I I could call n^ eye upon a projection of the globe, and put
put my fìnger upon their reiidence. Wherever I vmndered, whethir 1 were plunged in a dungeon 01 mounted a throne, my heart, like the mariner's needle, would tremble towards that point as its cynofure. I had ftill fome¬ thing to love, fomething to pant for. fomething to dream about, and be happy. Having ruminated infatiably upon the laft exprcflions of Marguerite, having formed my commentary, and fixed my predilection, I recollected a perfon, then a young «oman upon my paternal citate, foi whom my wife had conceived a remaikable fnendflup. She was the daughter of a peifint, her birth hadbeen low, ind nei edu¬ cation confined ' Bat fhe had iade, fhe had difcretion, fhc had integrity, I think I may add, flie had genius. As Marguerite had difcovered her merits, and diftinguifhed her from her
her equals, flıe had been of great ufe to this extraordinary ruftic in unfold¬ ing her mind, and guiding her pro¬ penfities. This was not fo much .1 matter of deliberate and meditated purpofe in li dame du fugueur, it rofe out of the circumftances of their fitua¬ tion. They vvere almoft of an age; and Marguerite frequently invited her to be the affocate of her ftudics and amufements. Mariana, that was her name, did not perhaps refemble my wife confiderably in her features, but hei dature was the fame, her com¬ plexion and the colour of her hair. The fimilaiiry in carriage and gefture, Mariana having never had an oppor¬ tunity of contemplating the accom- plifhments fhe admired ш any one but madame de St. Leon, was ftill more finking. There were points in¬ deed in which no human creature could compare with Marguerite, the expreflive·
expreífive and flexible tone of her voice, and thofe cadences, which fprung from, and communicated to every ¡fufceptible heai er, the divineft feniibility. One of the unhappy con¬ fluences of our exile from the Bor¬ delois, was the misfortunes of Mariana. Her father had fatten to decay. To relieve his diftrefs flie had contracted a marriage, not of fentiment and pre¬ dilection, but with a man who had promifed her that her falher ihould never come to want. This marriage had been unhappy. The hufband was a prodigal and a profligate. A period of feven years however delivered her from her Egyptian bondage. She had but lately become a widow ; and the prudence and integrity of her con¬ duct had rendered this alliance, which to many women would have proved a rock of deftruttion, an additional fource of honour and refpect. Ma- liana,
riana, at the death of her hufband, had no children ¡ ihe had buried her father ¡ flıe vvas confequcntly entirely alone. * It was this woman I fixed [upon as the proteftor of my daughCers. I was beccer pleafed with the meannefs of her extraction, than I fhould have been with one of the high-born defcendants of ehe houfes of St. Leon or Damvîîle, had it been my fortune to have had in the female line any near relations on eieher fide. My daughters were no longer children ¡ they were fingularly prudent, confidente and unimpeach¬ able in their conduct and propenfities. They wanted a proteftor in the eye of the woi Id ¡ it was defirablc for them that they ihould have an advifer¡ but I ihould have been grieved and morti¬ fied Co give Chem a dictator. I wrote ,co Maruna Chabot, com¬ municating my project, and requeuing her
her to give us the meeting at St. Lizicr on the frontiers of France. She was delighted wich the office I tendered to her accepcance, and lcadtryconfented to every thing I required. I conducted my daughters to the place of rendez¬ vous without imparting to them the defign by which I was actuated ¡ I believed that they would of their own nwcion conceive a partiality for the friend of their mother. I was not de¬ ceived in my prognofttc , the meeting was an interefting one. The eyes of Mariana overflowed at meeting after fo long an interval the hufband and progeny of the deareft and moll rever¬ ed friend fhe had ever known, che mourning we wore reminded hci how lately her incomparable pacronefs had been committed co the grave. My girls were ftruck with the refemblance of Mariana to cheir mocher. Accidenc had prevented us from cultivating al¬ moft
moft any intimate conncftions out of our own family from the period of our exile, my girls had therefore never met with a perfon who approached in any degree fo near their mother in accomplifhments, in flcill, in turn of thinking and opinion Mariana came up to my warmed hopes as a piotcftor and companion for my children , her uihappy marriage by concencracing her choughes and ixpeftacions in her¬ felf, had perhaps ïendered her more exemplary 111 carnage, and more ele- vaced in fencimenr, chan the would ever have been without 1С Ac Sc Lizier I pafled myfcif for monfieur Valmire, che guardian of the orphan heirtffes of Se Leon Ic for¬ tunately happmed thae my paternal eftace was at chis cime upon fate. I detet mined to become tht purchafer, and to fectle my girls 111 the fcene of cheir nacivity I piocured an agent, and
and difpatched hım with an ample commiflton for that purpofe. Having adjufted this point, 1 refolved to make a tour with my daughters, through Languedoc, Dauphiné, and the pro¬ vinces ufually known by the deno¬ mination of the fouth of France. I wiihed to familianfe thtm to the fo¬ ciety of madame Chabot, and Co aflifl them in difcerning her menes under a varieCy of poincs of view. I afked them whether they vv ould not be de¬ lighted to obtain her, as a companion, who might aflifl and conduft ehem in fuch points as only α woman of undeu ftanding and experience is competent to. Thcy every one of them liftcned to the idea with pleafure. At length I received the informa¬ tion that the purchafe of St. Leon was completed, and I proceeded to che cri tical difclofure that my daughters were on the point of being ft pai ated from their
their falher. They liftcned to the communication with aftonifhment and terror. They had entered fucceflively into the feelmgs of their deccafed mo¬ ther, and I am well perfuaded felt a lefs ardent atcachmcnc Co my perfon than they had done ae the coecage of che latte of Confiance. But, culpable and criminal as I had been, I was not deftituce of every virtue, and they could noc extinguifh in themfelves the refpeft thcy had fo long enter¬ tained for mc. Habic has a refift¬ lefs empire over the human mind, and, vvhen we reflect with how much reluctance we confent Co che removal of a cree or a hedge Co che fighe of which we have been accuftomed, it will not be wondered at that my daughters could not calmly think of fo complete a feparation from their father. Ihe ìmpreflion of their mo¬ ther's deach was yee green, and cq lofe mc
me was to become orphans a fécond time. But I had fully meditated my plan, and was peremptory. That I might withhold from them no ad¬ vantage it was tn my power to confer, I gave them Bernardin for their fuper- ìntending bailiff and fteward of their property. Our parting was not lefs painful and melancholy, than its occa¬ fion was extraordinary and its mode uncommon. It took place at the town of Montauban. I fav/ my dear children fct forward on their journey, and I knew not that I fhould ever behold them more. 1 svas determined nevei agam tr fee them to their injury , and I could not take to myfelf the connotation, On fuch a day, in fuch a month, or even after fuch a lapfc of years, 1 will agam bave tbe joy to embrace them. In a little while they were out of fight, and I was alone. The reader will perhaps agree
agree with me, that no man had more exquifitely enjoyed the dcarcft ties of fociety than I had, and that perhaps few men were ever better formed ro enjoy them. This complete and dreadful reparation, this ftroke that feemed to cut mc off abrupdy from every thing moft valuable that the earth contains, was not the refult of any ofthe ordinary necefiities of human life. Still lefs was it the diciate of alienation or indifference No, it was the pure eften of love, of a love fo ftrong, complete and uncontrolable, as inflexibly to refufe every thng that could be injurious to its objefls. I own I could not thus have parted with Mar¬ guerite. Her utei was mingled with the vital fpnngs of my exiftence, and fearcely any pow er lefs refiftlefs than deith, eould have made me confent to pafs an entire day without her fociety. But then it is to be confidercd, that Vol. III. H my
my daughters were in the morning of life, their hopes were untanuflied, their profpefts not obfcured by a fingle cloud, and that the crime would pro¬ babiy have been greater, obltinaecly eo have made them che partners of my misfortunes and difgrace. There are perfons who will regard this paflage in my hiftory as culpable, and the cefti- raony of a cold and unfufceptib)e heart. I contemplate it, even at this diflancc of tune, as the nobleft and mod virtu- 04s effqrc of my life, and a thoufand circurnftances have occurred fince, to induce me eo congracqlate myfelf that I had the courage to acchteve my pur¬ pofe.
CHAP.
CHAP VII. NINETEEN years had now elapfed from che day that had witncffed my union with Marguerite de Damvtlle. In all that cime I had never b "en alone. Alone in α certam fenfe 1111 ed I hid ftood at Pans in the period chat had led to my exile, and at Soleure in thae which immediacely fucceeded ic In each cafe I was folitary, and my foli¬ cude svas unhappy Buc my unlnppi- nefs was then m a certain fenfe fpon. taneous, my folitude was а luxury in which I fele myfelf impelled to indulge. He that has experienced both, sviti readily acknowledge the extreme dif¬ ference, between the mifery we em- H 1 brace.
brace, and the mifiry fiom which vve flinnk with abhorrence and loathing. I retinquilhed in the former tnftances my deareft connections, my proper poft and fituation ; but I fele chat I could return to che one and refume che ocher at pleafure. I repeat tt chere¬ fore. Then I had noe been alone, and now I svas alone. The fame motive, which in this mftance made me cut myfelf off from my daughters that I might not be the caufe of their mtfery, forbad me to be the parent of a futuie offspring upon whom I might entail fimilar misfortune. Tell me then, Was I not alone' I recollefted thewords of ehe ftranger, w rung from him by che excefs of his mifery at the fummer- houfe of the lake, Alone—alone'— friendlefs—friendlefs ' I began to pe¬ netrate the enigma of his hiftory. I fixed my daughters wich an ample revenue in chechaceau of St. Leon, I re- purchaftd for them all my paternal pro- ___ perty.
perty. I waited fome time at Montau¬ ban to hear of the event of my project, and their final fettlement. I learned with pleafure that they found their fituation peaceful, eafy and reputable, I enjoined them that they fhould fpeak and think of me as dead. 1 led them to fuppofe, when I left Montauban, that I Ihould fet out upon an extenfive tour, that I fhould traverfethe Indus and the Ganges, and penetrate into the furrbelt extremities of the Eaft. How uncon« mon, how pitiable a fate 1 I became prematurely dead to my country and my rate, beeaufe I was deftincd never to die' The firii fenfation 1 denv¬ ed from their profilent), as I have already faid, was pleafure my fécond vvas that which the devil might have felt, when he cnttrcd paiadift for the reduction of our firft parents. I con¬ templated w ıth fome degree of malig¬ nant envy, а happinefs of svhich it was little probable I fliould ever partake. H 3 Let
Let me not be cenfurcd for this let any man put himfett in my fituation, and fay, whether the pleafure hc feels at contemplating the feparated happi¬ nefs of thofe hc loves bc not a mmgled fenfatton ' With heavy heart I fought again the road of Madrid. Though my fpints underwent an extreme depreffion, I determined not to defert myfelf or the advantages I had purchafed at fo ineftimable a price. I exerted myfelf to fhake oft my ie- íťargy, and roufe the faculties of my foul I rcfufed to give way to omens of evil portent, and refolved to fee what might yet be made of my endow¬ ments. There is no misfortune that has not m it fonie flight mixture of good My being now alone and de¬ tached f rom eveiy relative tie, left me at liberty to purfue my projects with a bolder enterpnfe. The miftake ot which I accufed myfelf in the former mftance, was the entering too precipi. tately
tately into the exercife of the gifts öf the ftranger, before I had properly meafured my ftrength, and inveftigated the ufe and application of my tools. I had fuffered fufficiencly fiom che paft uncertainly and irrefolutenefs of my march. I determined, as far as human precaution could fecure ies ends, eo encounter no more misfortunes, to fubject myfelf eo no further mifcar- riages, but ro take care thae hence¬ forth ehe eide of my puıfuıts fhould hiove fmoothly onsvard. 1 dedicated the fix months immediately fucceeding my fcparacion from my daughters, cb the |oint contemplation of morals and natural philofophy. I svas ıefolved Co afcercaln che fimplcft mode of manu¬ facturing wealth, the svifefi methods for lulling the fufpicions and control- ing the paffions of mankind, and the true feience of che ufe of riches. Alas t 1 had in ehe fequcl frequent occafions to eonfefs, thae, though I had fortuit- H 4 oufly
oufly entered into pofféíliun of the leading fecrtts of natural magic, I was a mere tyro in the feience of man, at leaft in the degree in which the cxei- cife of thefe fecrecs required the pof- feffion of it. Nothing material occurred to inter¬ rupt the occupations of the winter. My apath), ------ incelleftual activity, palfy of the heart,------ went evenly forward. I made no acquaintance, I was a mei e fpeftator of the bufy feenes thae paffed around mc. I was refolved noc to entangle myfelf with raflily formed conneftions, and ic will commonly be found that he, whofe contemplations are principally employed upon fome fecret and guarded hoard of reflection, has little propenfity to communicate upon idle and indifferent maceers. A flight incident indeed difturbed me for a few days during this interval, buc ic paffed away, and for che prefent I choughc of ic no more. During che fctlival
fefttval of Chriftmas it happened that I felt an inclination to be the fpeciatoi of a celebrated bull fight, that was exhi¬ bited before the emperor and his court. Гог the moft part I was ftudious of privacy, I therefore felt the lefs fcru¬ ple in indulging this unufual caprice. At the commencement of the fpeflacle 1 was attentive only to the exhibition. I was delighted with the form and beauty of the anım lis, vith thi fiee¬ dom and grmdeui of thur motion, with the terrible eneıgy of their affault and repulft. It was not long however, tutore my eyt was tianhently caught by an individui!, who fit in a gallciy at no great diftincc, and ν '10 fıemed to view me attentively His ligure befpoke tome degree of refinement, but his eye was fiery, m Iicioiis and favage. Prefently however I turned again tosvards the arei, and thought of him no more. Some time after H s by
by mere accident 1 looked towards the fame gallery, and obferved this man ftill in an attitude Co examine me. It feemed as if he had not removed his eyes fiom me during the whole inter¬ val This was repeated chrce or fout times. Withoue knowing why, I be¬ came anxious and uneafy I had a confufed feeling that I had feen the man before, buc whether in brance, Switzerland or Itily I could noc cell I experienced that fort of difagrceible ImfaCion fiom looking ac his face, which anfis in che nund from an affo- ciatmn of the objeft prefent, with fome mifchief or fuffering that was contem- poiary with its being perceived in a preceding mftance I am nosv per- luadcd that this man was one of che mulcicude co whom I had addrefied myfelf from the bench on the hill a flioi t time before my flight from Pifa, and that he was among the moft eager Co
to interrupt artd moleft me But he was apparently a Spaniard by birth, and I coutd noc ас chis eime develop che myftery chac hung about his fea¬ Cures Finding that I could ncichcr nd myfelf of his curious and watchful obfervacion nor of che diflurbancc it gave mc, I svnhdresv fiom Che galleiy where I had hicherto been titting, 'and íemoved to anocher galleiy on ehe op¬ pofue fide of ehe irca About half an hour after, looking acudtntally round, I fa v thi very m in it my tlbovv I then icroltcd him with the inquiry, Do you know me, hi ' to which he immtdiattly retuined with a pure Caftilian accent, No, fetor 1 He chen began co be mort refei v ed in his atten¬ cion Co mt, wichout however entirely withdrawing ie As foon is che enCcrtunment was over, I svenc iway, and fasv no more of my Spaniard I begin to cax my- H 6 felf
/elf with pufillanimity in fuffering fo lnfignificant an incident to difturb me. A few days after however I fuddenly lighted upon him in the ftrcet. He v,as talking to three or four of Ins countrymen, and in the progrefs ot his difcouife fiequently pointed to me. 1 could now perceive fomething par¬ ticularly hoftile and ferocious in his countenance. Ihc firft impulfe I felt, vyas that I would no longei fu ffer the unquictnefs and anxiety the fight of him produced in me, but would go up to Inni, and forec him to an explana¬ tion. I believed however that, 111 the temper he indicated, this could not be clone without involving myfelf 111 a quarrel, and 1 thought it wifcr to endeavour to conquer in filence an un¬ reasonable fenfation. I therefore paff- ed on, he immediately bioke from his companj, and attempted to follow ,nc. This I determined not to endure. I laid
I laid my hand on my fword wich a perempcory look, and waved to him to defift. His countenance then af- fumed an air of diabolical malignity, he fliook his head funoufiy, and turned down another ftrcet. A ftrange fort of animoficy chis, bceween cwo perfons ucter drangers to each othei, and which had as yee noc deigned Co exprefs icfelf by a word · Buc fuch is che world ! We hace we know noc why. We are ready eo cue each oeher's chroaes, beeaufe wc do not like the turn of a feature or che adjudmenc of a fword- knoc. Prejudice, paity, difleience of countnes, difference of religions, and a choufand w ild chimeras of fanaticifm or fuperftition, are concinually arming us againft a man, of whofe virtues and qualicies vve aie ignorant, and into svhofe benevolenc or evil intentions we difdain to enquire. I faw
I ftW this Spaniard but oiicè more. It svas as I was ofi the pOint öf enter¬ ing the houfe, a part of which I oc¬ cupied. I was particularly mortified at this circumftance. It was plain the mäh entertained, for whatever reafon, a determined animoflty againft me ¡ and I was grieved to furnifh him with that advantage for injuring me, which ŕonfiíted in being acq 'ainted with the place of my reiidence. 1 would have turned aWay and gone down the ftrèet ι but I had too fully marked my defign of entering the houfe, be¬ fore I reconnoitred my enemy. The difpleafurc I felt was fo unaccount¬ ably great, that it was with difficul¬ ty my courage got the better of it, and I determined not to change the place of my abode. In a fhort time however, as I have already faid, I thought of this incident no more. That it fhould have difturbed and un¬ hinged
hinged rne, in the degree that it had done, evťn for a moment, was a thitig I could hot account for Had the с dammes in which the legacy of the ftranger involved mej converted me in fo fhort a time, from a knight and a fotdier, into a character ofthat morbid timidity as to tremble at every fhadow ' Oi, is there in fome human counte- na vees a fafcination, a fort of iviyftenous fympathy and preftntiment that makes us cower and quail whenever we meet tin ir eyebeams ' Several weeks now paffed away, and I had neatly forgotten all the circum- ftances of this feemingly foohfh ftory, when, in a little excurfion I chanced to make from Mad|id to a phce about twelve miles diftant, I was overtaken upon the road by a cavalier of refpect- ible appearance, who prefently took occafion to enter into converfation with me He explained to me feveral of
of the objects thae prefented them- lelves on either fide, told the names of the different nobility and grandees who occupied the villas we faw, and fomeftmes entered into the particulars of their hiftory. I ас firft gave little encouragement to this communrcative traveller, but chere was fomeching fo police in his manner and mcelligent in his difcourfe, chat I could not prevail upon myfelf to crcac him wich rudenefs or difrcfpeft. After having calked for fome time upon mdifterenc copies, he led co che generai ftate of liceracure in Lurope. Few febjefts could appear lefs dangerous than this, as there were few upon which I fete myfelf becter qualified to converfe. By degrees I threw off fome of my original referve, and I found my compamon well in¬ formed and ingenious, lively in his manner, and pertinent in his remarks. By
By this time the unknown, having diftoveicd that I had only come from Madrid for a day's relaxation, invited hunfelf to dine with me at my tnn. 1 departed from my eftablifhed fyftem of conduct on this occafion, and ad¬ mitted hts overture. After dinner he gave me fome account of him.elf and his family, and feemed to expeu from me a limitar explicitnefs. I was lefs pleafed with him in this particular, than I had been with his frank and undefigning converfation on the road. Strictly fpeaking however, the expect¬ ation implied was only a breach of politenefs, I had no reafon to fuppofe that he forefaw it to be particularly oftenfive to me. Obfervmg my back- wardnefs, he immediately changed the fubject Prefently he remarked, that by my phyfiognomy and accent he per. ceived I was a Frenchman, and afked me if I had known Cornelius Agrippa, wha
svho died about twelve years before at Grenoble. I anfwered in the nega¬ tive. The unknown then entered into a warm eulogium of the talents of Agrippa, inveighed againft the illiberal treatment he bad experienced in con- ftcjuenee of his fuppofed proficiency in magic, and fpoke with great afpe- rity of the pfiefts and inquifitors who hitd btren hie perfecutors. I became attentive, watchful, and fufpicious. Ие went on to expatiate upon the praifea bf the art magic, which no¬ thing, he faid, but the jeaioufy of churchmen had brought into difre- jiufê ι affirmed that it hud been treated with refpeft and counted illuftnous by the ancients in the inftance of Pytha¬ goras, Apollonius Tyaneus, and others ; »nd expreffed a great defire to become a ftudent of the art himfeif. This kind of difcourfe made me repent that I had
hud been drawn in fo far as to fit down with this unknown, and admit him as my companion of the day. During the whole time hc was the principal fpeaker. Sometimes he paufed, with α fceming defire to hear my fentiments. But I had now formed my refolution, and gave htm no encouragement. Prefently after I called for my horfe. I fhould have obferved that his fervant who followed him engaged converfa¬ tion with mine, at the fame time that the dialogue began between ¿heir maf- ters. Seeing me about to depart, the unknown motioned as if to accompany me. Upon this I became ferroui. Sr /иг caballero, faid I, I have now had the pleafure of your company to dinner I am going home, and have the honour to bid you farewel. It is neither my difpofition, nor the habit ofthe grave and dignified nation amohg whom
whom I at prefent rifide, to form per¬ manent acquaintances upon cafual ren¬ counters: you wilt noe therefore think I violacé the hofpicaliey for which I am indebted to them, if I intimate to you my defire to return alone. All this I faid with the grave and formal tone becoming a Spaniard, and the unknown had nothing to reply. It was evident, however, that my drynefs chagrined him, and he. even muttered words of refencmcnc between his teeth. I could obferve now a degree of hofti¬ lity and fury in his countenance, which remarkably contrafted with the pliancy and obltgingnefs of his preceding de¬ meanour. I took no notice, however, of chefe circumftances, and rode away. I have fince had fufficient reafons to convince me that thefe Cwo perfons, whofe ftory, bue for chat explanation, may appear .0 the reader exceedingly lrivotous, were ehe one an informer, and
and the other a fpy of the holy inquifi¬ tion. The man who had feen me at Fifa, had his imagination terrified, and his fuperftition fet in arms by all that he had heard of me in that place ; and thought he could not perform a more meritorious work, than by giving in¬ telligence to the fathers, what fore of perfon had eaken refuge in Che me- cropolis of this moll Cachoiic king¬ dom. Ic was wich chis view he had wacched mc, and at length, by an ac¬ cidenc he deemed peculiarly forrunace, lodged me in my proper habication. Having given in his denunciación, my eravelling companion was next fattened on me by the contrivance and zeal of the fathers inquifitors. He was a familiar of ehe holy office, and it is well known thae perfons of the fairéit profpefts and molt polite educa¬ tion in Spain, are led by their reli¬ gious impretlions, to place a pride in ■ ',ь per-
performing menial and even, perfidious offices in the ferviee of the inquifition. The kind of dtfltonour I put upon him in parting, though of a nature he could not openly refenc, I fear confpired sı ith hts zeal for God's and the church's honour, to induce hms to relate a ftory concerning me, more modelled by the bitternefs of hisiperfonal feelings, than diftingtufhed by a regard to truth. Suth waa the fnare, woven and draw¬ ing clofe round me on all fides for my dcftrtiftion I was made uneafy by the rencounter of the traveller, but by no means awire of the whole extent ofthe rmfchief that impended over me. When I name to ref nice peint by point the ducourfe hc had held, I could not conceive that the turn it had taken otv ginated in accidenti I perceived, with no little grief of heart and concern, that l vlas known, ι It was however пеосЯГ«;у thabl fliautd reflect maturely ι upon
upon the conduct to be purfued by me. I ought not gratuitoiifly to expofe my¬ felf to danger. But then, on the other hand, it is a point of general wifdom, and was particularly incumbent m my extraordinary circumftances, not to fuffer vigilance to degenerate into reft¬ lcfs anxiety. It would be eafy for me, if I vvere not ftriftly on my guard, con¬ tinually to find food for fufpicion, and to fui round myfelf with imaginary plots and dangers. This was a vice that I was willing enough to pity 111 others, buc there was no charafter that I more cordially difdnned for mytclf. there was none more pointedly in op- potition to that gallant, generous, con¬ fiding- fpint, which had diftinguifhed thofe military heroes of my nacivc foil who had been the exclufive objeft of my earheft admiration, and whom, in my prefent dejected and deferted fitua¬ tion, I füll defired to refemble. When I came
I. came to reflect, I eafily perceived that this vice svas particularly allied to a life of folicude; and that hc who is cut off from the genuine and happy connections of hufband, father, and friend, is of all men moft liable, in their abfence, to conjure up for himfeif the unnsttural intercourfcs and recipro¬ cations of hoftility. It was thus that I artificially reconciled myfelf to my fituation, and obftinatcly clofed my eyes upon thofe equivoca! demonftra- tions of danger which from time ro time were prefented to my view.
CHAP.
CHAP. VIH. OUCH svas che ftace of my mind, svhen ic happened one gloomy evening in ehe lateer end of March, chac my valet announced co me chrce gencle- men who were come to vifîc mc. It was ftrange I had no vificors, I in¬ dulged no rclaxacion but that of the ftrcet, and of public places. Do you know who thcy arc, faid I? I acci- dencally looked up, and faw palenefs and Ceiror written in his councenance. He had noc however time co reply, before chey burft meo che room. Thcy vvere alguazils ot the inquificion. They cold mc chen errand was co con¬ dutt me co che holy office. Voi. HI. I I fift,-
I fubmitted and accompanied them. It was already dark. They put me into a litter with the curtains drawn, and then arranged themfelves in filence, one on each fide, while one brought up the rear. I was taken by furprife , nothing could be furthei from my ex¬ pectation than fuch an event. As we paffed along, I ruminated with myfelf on the line of conduct it was incum¬ bent on me to purfue. To make an immediate experiment of the fidelity of my guides was a doubeful ateempc. If, for want of time and the oppor¬ tunity of a tranquil hearing, I mifcar- ned with them, the trial would be converted into evidence agamft me. If I fucceeded, I had then to efcape out of Spain, in the centre of which 1 now was, from the hoftility of a tri¬ bunal, which was faid to furpafs all the tribunals on the face of the earth in activity and vigilance, I knew of no¬ thing
thing that the fathers of the inquifition could have againft me. I had lived in the moft entire fetlufion, and I could defy any one to report a fingle aftton of mine fince I had entered Spain, to my prejudice. I had been wholly oc¬ cupied with melancholy reflections on the pall, and folitary invencione and devices which I purpofed Co bring for¬ ward for Che fucure. I determined not to live for ever the ilive of feir. 1 believed that the beft method for de¬ feating a dinger in miny cafes, was un- daunccdly Co encounter ic, and I did noc imagine chac I could have a more favouiable opportunity for chac pur¬ pofe than the prefene. I hau heaid much indeed of che tenors of che in¬ quifition. Bue a generous and liberal fpint lends no very attentive car to honors, the tule and vulgar turnout of which only has reached him. I dif- dainedeobe blown dovv n wich a breath. 1 2 I be-
1 believed that the inquifition itfilf would not venture to pioceed crimi¬ nally againft a man, againft whom no¬ thing crimina! had been alleged In every event 1 believed it would never be too late to have recourfe to my pe¬ culiar prerogatives Upon entering the prifon of the m quifition I wis firfl co lituttcd to a fo¬ litary cell. It is not my intention to treat of thofe particuhrs of the holy office, which are aheady to be found in innumerable publications Ihave no pleafure in reviving the imigcs of this fojourn of horrors I know it is unicafonable to dtfpiu. a man for ihe mifenes and vvrttchedrefa he has en duud, but 1 know that/uch is the humm heart, and I will nor expofe myftif to be ftofled at and trimplcd upon for my misfortunes. I found myftlf undei the neteffity, while in the inquifition, of fubmitttng to that moll ι piofiigatc
profligate of all impotitions, an oath of fecrecyas to what 1 had leen, and vvhat I had fufitrcd , and, whatever may be the drift mordity of fuch лп obligation, I will not ambitiouflythrufl my ftlf forward 111 violation of it I svill ıctrırt the ftoiy I have to rchte to Che peculiarities that characlcrifed ni) с ift, and enter as little as pofiible into tht geneial poliev of this frontier intrenchment ofthe Chriihan futh When I was brought up to be inter¬ rogated, I vvasalTnled with innumera¬ ble queftions, the obvious puiport of which was, as much as poifible, to ex¬ tort from mc evidence of every kind that might be injurious to my caufe. The object of the inquifition is to de¬ fend our holy mother, the church, from whatever might defile hei nnfti- ty and vvhitenefi, Lvciy thing that rails into queition the tiuth of her doctrine», that pollutes and turns fiom I 3 their
their ongin d puipofc any rf hti or¬ dinances, or chac implies commerce and league wich che invifible enemy of faints, ıc ıs ics peculiar province со in· veftıgace. The fachers a.e cheiefore particularly cautious chac tht y may not, by confining their queftions too much to a fingle objeft, pieclude chemfelves from che chance of difcovermg danger under all che forms 1С may aflu me. It is prefumed that he who is a corrupt member of the church of Chnft in one point, is unfound and nnfaithful in ochers. The inquificor vvho examined me, firft demanded. Whether I were in¬ formed for whae caufe I was brought before that tribunal ? Whether I did not find myfelf able to conjefture the nature of my offence ' Whether I did not know the fort of cnmcs for which men were detained m chat prifon ? He then defiled me Co recolleft myfelf, »nd
and confider, wheiher I were noe con¬ fcious of offence againft the holy Ca¬ tholic church' Whether I had never afferted or maintained any doftnnes contrary to whae mocher church aflercs and maintains' Whether 1 had never, to my knowledge defiled any of the oidinances of God, or applied things facred to unholy and profane purpofes ? Whecher I had never invocaced the devil 1 Whecher I had never held anv commerce, or entered into any league svith the enemy of fames' Whecher I had never performed, or fought to perform, preternaCural and miraculous acts by unholy means' Whecher I had never vexed or foughc eo vex thofe ag unit whom I had enmity, by fecret and forbidden arcs? Whecher I had never refided π counenes che ínhabi- Cancs of which vvere herecics, and whe¬ cher I had never liftcned co their dif- couifes and arguments ? Whether, 14 when.
when I inhabited fuch commits, I had never aftifled at the celebration of di¬ vine ordinances, performed by here¬ tics, or in a form which holy church difapproves or condemns ' bin ing that he could gain nothing upon me by thtfe general interroga¬ tories, the inquifitor next defctnded 10 particulars. Hc enquired concerning the incidents of my Pifan ftorv, which, having firft aflured myfelf from the train of his qucftions that fome repre- fentation of that unfortunate affair had reached his ear, I willingly re¬ lated, to the fame extent that I had previoufly done to the marchefe filo¬ fanto. He then proceeded to a great number of queftions, the fource of which is to be traced to the commonly received notions refpečting forcerers and necro¬ mancers. They were fo artfully con. trived, and fo large in their fcope, that
ıt was not eafy to guefs whether they related to any particular accufatmn al¬ leged agamft me, or vvere foimed en¬ tirely on general principles. Yet fome of them vvere fo minute, fo connected, and arranged fo perfecib in feries, that I tould not but believe th«.) were an icho of the calum u"s invented agamft mc at Pifa, of whuh, however, as I hul neser collected anv rtgular and detailed account, I could not accurate¬ ly trace the influence on the prefent occaiion. The inquifitor demanded of mc, Whether I had neser fien 01 held con¬ verfation with any fupcrnatuial bung, 01 the fpint of a man departed' Whe¬ ther I had never praflifed diabolical ?its to raift the dtad' Whether I had never had a fanulnr m the form of fomt uifefl, domeftic animal, or icp- tilt' He was p u ticularly fubrle and copious in his qucftions icfpcfting 1 i the
the hiftory of my unfortunate dog, en¬ deavouring to furprife me in fome flip or contradiction in vvhat I affirmed on the fubjcfl. Hc afked, Whether I had never aflumed a form different from my real one, cither a different age and appeinnce, or a different fpccics of animal ' Whether I had never, by the agency of my demon, ínfliäed ficknefs, convulfion-lits, or deith' Whether I had never caufed the mortihry of cat¬ tle' Whether I had not the power of being in two plates at once ? Whether 1 had never been ften ruting through the an' Whether 1 had never been wounded 111 my abfence, by a blow aimed at myaftral fpint or appuition' Whether I had never pofleflcd books of conjuration or the art magic' Whether it had never happened to me that an indifferent perfon, indifcreetly perufing a fpell or incantation in my poiTeflion, had been maimed or killed by
by the fpints he had undefignedly evoked? A further objeft particularly purfued in my interrogatory, was the deteftion of my property; and che queftions conftruftetl foi this purpofe were un¬ commonly artful and multiplied. The inquifitor cold mt thit the holy office was, by the natuie of its mfticution, the guardian and atlını uftutor of every peifon thae Itll undtr its animadver- fion. Shut up, he faut, as I muft be, during che pendency of my caufe, and fcpiiated from che reft of mankind, I svas wholly incapable of fupirintend- mg my svoidly afiairs, whicli, unlefs thcy svere pioperly looked into, might in the inceri tl be materially injured. 1 oughc therefore implicitly and with¬ out lelcrveco ltfer myfcif in chispóme co che care of che fachers. If my in¬ nocence were eftabliflud, as he hoped, and earneftly prayed to the mocher of I 6 God,
God, and the fames of Jefus, mighc ul- timaeely happen, I ihould find the holy office a faithful and qualified ftewatd. If, on the conciary, I fliould be proved a heretic and an alien to the Moll High, I ougte chen co icjoice in che benefi¬ cent interference of the fathers, who, by dedicating my wealch co confecrated purpofes, would míngate in the eye of thejuft judge of heaven and earth, che duiation or ficrccncfs of niy punifli- ments in a future woild. Ihc inqui¬ fitor had apparently hiard sarious re¬ ports ot my t ich j, and ssas mexpief- «iibly chagnntd th ic ht fliould be found fo untkilful a membei of his profitlion, as not to be able to extoi t from mea full confeflion on that head. After having employed every artifice of me¬ nace and tenor, after having endea¬ voured Co fooche and cajole me by blandiihmencs and peifuafion, and finding all his expedients frmrlefs, he pouied
poured upon mc the full ftorm of his indignation. He faid, ie was apparent thae I svas dealing difingenuoufly and fraudulently with the delegated guar¬ dians of religion, it was imponible chac che cxpendicurc 1 was well known more 01 lefs co have incurred, could be fupporced without confiderable funds, and my evident duplicity and concealment in chis pome mull be re¬ garded as a full confirmación of every tnmc myaccufeis hadaileged againft me. In the courfe of my examinations, die inquifitor svho queftioned mc, gave himfi.lt ehe croublc of eneenng meo a full vindicationofche cnbunat of svhich he was a member. He find, that every thing that was valuable to mankind, noc only in a fucure ftace, buc alfo in the prefene, depended upon prefervmg m full vigour and ftrength che facred inttitutions ofthe Chriftian faith, and thae
that thofe who were cndosved with powers fufficient for that purpofe, would be in the higheft degree inex- cufable tn the fight of God, if they did not vigilantly and inflexibly main¬ tain the exertion of thofe powers It was an egregious miftake of felf-willcd and opiniouaced men, со fuppofe chat the mamcenance of ou. holy religion was fufficiently provided for by the clearnefs of its es idence. Ic was no lefs dangerous to pretend chac che fta- bilicy and duración of the chuich of Chnft might be confided to che prési¬ dence of God. Providence acts by human means, and it was prcfump¬ tuous for thofe who neglected the means, to cruft chic che/ ihould never- thelefs fee che end adcquacely fecured. Why had providence thoi ghc proper Co generare an alliance between church and ftate, and co place the powers and authority of human fociecy m che hands
hands of the adherents of Che Chriftian faith ' Magiftraces and governmencs were thus made the vicars of heaven, and great would bc their condemnacion if they neglefted the truft repofed in them The greae adverfary of man¬ kind was inceffancly walchful for che diftruftion of fouls, and, while he fpread abroad his dclufions, it was folly to imagine that evidence alone was powerful enough to counteraft them. What judges were che great mafs of mankind of che integrity and validity of evidence? The jeftofthe fcorner was ever at hand to turn mto ridicule the moit facred myftenes The oppo- fers of our holy faith were mdefaciga- blc 111 cheir induftry, and as anxious in their exertions Co depnve their fel¬ low men of every comfort and hope, as if infidelity, which was the curfe of the human fpecies, were the grcaceft blefling that could be conferred on them.
them The devil was a hard tafk- mafter, and granted no vacation, night or day,to thofe vvho entiiled themfelves in the fupport of his caufe. It might anfwcr will enough the purpoft of the vam-glouous theorilt, to fuppoft that man was a rational animal, but they vvho had regarded human fotiety with an obfervmg eye, knew that it was othcrwile Deiufion would ever be too hard foi evidence, and the grofttft falfiioods prove vitftouous over ttie mod facred tiuths, if wlut wis illibe¬ rally and malicioufly fiv led perfccution were not brought in ud of the ciulc of religion, the paffions of mankind were on the fide of falfhood, man, un- retlrained by law, was α wild, fero¬ cious, and molt pernicious btatl, and, were it not for the wholefomc curb ot authority, would fpecdily thiow oft alt ties and limitations, human and divine. Nothmg could more clearly prove that the
the hcietical follosseis of Luther and Calvin, svho had lately fprung up for che plague of mankind, whacever they might pretend, w 11 e in reality che dcecrmined enemies of all revelation, than their continual demand, that the nule flioutd bc tned by diftultion, and lhat es cry man flioutd bc deftnded m the cxeicifc of his private juttgmene. They could noc but knosv,—every man noc cocally robbed of all power of dif- cernment muft knosv,—that, if chis demand vvere rnce granted, it would prove a blow at the 100c of every fen- Cimenc of religion. The inquifition therefore was the molt falutary mflitu- tmn that had ever been dcvifed, and the future welfare of mankind wholly depended upon the maintenance of its powers and its maxims. By a modé¬ late and judicious exhibition of terror, ic fuperfeded che neceftiey of innume¬ rable punitliments. The inquificion was
was not capricious and uncertain in its policy, it afted under the direftion of immutable laws, it held a tender, but a firm rein upon the extravagance» and madnefs of mankind Nothing was more notorious than that a regular and fy ftematical proceeding was both more effectuai and more generous than one that was fickle He defied the whole hiftory of the world to produce an example of fo merciful a tribunal. The great end of its policy was the re¬ claiming of finners and the multipli¬ cation of penitents, who, after a gen¬ tle and falutary difcipline, were again by Шу church received into her bo¬ fom, and even when they delivered the finally impenitent to the flames, ic was to ehe flames of'a purifying fire, which by deftroying ehe flefh redeemed or diminifned the punilhments of a future world. He knew that an outcry had been artfully raifed againft the proceedings
proceedings of the holy oflice. But ic was eafy to fee that ics enemies, under the pretence of compaflion tor its vic- tirns, concealed an inveterare animoficy againft property, religion and cıvıl fo¬ ciety. The anabapcifts had thrown off the maik, and difcovered their true defigns, and the reft were only more plaufible and fpecious, in proportion as they were more timid. The prefent was the moft importane crıfis that ever oc¬ curred in the hiftory of the world. There was a fpirit at work, that aimed at diflblving all the bonds of cıvıl fociety, and convercing mankind meo beafts and fivages. Who had not heard ofthe levellers, millenanans, and fifth-monaichy-men, who, under the fpecious guife of difintereftednefs and an univerfal love of mankind, had no¬ thing in view but the moil facrılegıous and unprincipled depredations ? It was true th»t the preachers of thefe doctrine«
doctrines were utterly contemptible both for numbers and talent, but it would be found a fhort-fi^hted policy, to overlook thefe defperate aflailants on account of the poornefs and mean- nefs of their qualifications. For his own pirt he did not hefitate to fay, that human fociety would owe its pre¬ fervation, if it were preferved, to the merciful yet vigorous pioceedings of the court of inquifition. The mif- rcprefcntations that were lnvidioufly made of the prefent firm and vigilant fyftem of policy, would be heard for a day, and then univerfally abandoned. Poftenty, he was well aflured, would do full juftice to the fagacity and foundnefs of tlie conduct of this ca¬ lumniated and much injured lnfti- tution. The reader will forgive me if the panegyric thus elaborately pronounced by the inquifitor who examined me, upon
upon the court of which he was a mem¬ ber, had not all ehe weighc with my mmd at che mornene I heard ir, which he will probably afcribe Co ic «n ehe calmnefs of che clofec. Ie is fo diffi¬ cult to be impartial in our own caufe' The candid mind will no doubt makea large allowance for the unhappy fitua¬ tion m which I nosv ftood, and the bitter and galling thoughts thae preyed upon my memory. Bur, if I am chargeable with cemporary injuflicc m the judgmene I then pafled on the arguments of che inquifitor, I flatter myfelf that I have been able, after che mtei val thae has elapfed, Co give a true and adequate ftacemenc of them. Befide thefe reafonings on ehe nc- cefficy of a wholfome íeítraint on the privileges of fpeaking and wncing, the father in another of my examinations condefcended Co delineate to me the myftenes of the worid of fpints. He reeundtd
reminded me thae in the firft grand re¬ bellion upon record, that of the fallen angels, of which he confidered the pre¬ fent defection under Luther and Calvin as in fome meafure a counterpart, a third of the holt of heaven had been thruft out of the celeftial manfions. Thefe accurfed fptrtts had fince been permit¬ ted to purfue their machinations on the face of our earth. "'The devil, like a roaring lion, goeth aboue, feek- ing whom he may devour." The ora¬ cles of the heaehens, the temptations of Job and of our faviour, and the de¬ moniacs of facred writ, were examples of the extenfive povver which heaven had thought fit eo allow htm. Men of a fceptical and feeble underftanding had been tempted to doubt whether this was confident with the wifdom and good¬ nefs of God. But, though it was in vain for us to pretend eo fachom the depth of the divine myftenes, there were
svere certain reafons that were fuffici¬ ently obvious to every ingenuous mind. There svere perfons in all ages of the world, who, like the Sadducces in the time of our bleffed faviour, were in¬ clined to affirm " that there was no re- fur reftion, neither angel, nor fpint," and God permiteed the lying won¬ ders of infernal agents, che more com- plecely to confound the unbelief of his enemies. He who witneffed che wonderful operacions of wicchcrafc, ot fasv the ghoft of a man departed, could not doubt of the intei ference of invifi¬ ble agents in che concerns of our nether world, and, if chere were devils and appaneions, it would be to the laft degree unreafonable Co deny the ex¬ iftence of God, or che miracles of Chnft. Thefe were Co be received as the grounds of che divine permiffion of forcerers, necromancers and wiCch- es. But the rules of the divine con¬ duft
duft were not to confttcuce ehe rules of ours. He mighc perime ehe agency of invifible malice, beeaufe he faw chmgs upon an unluniccd fcale, his judg- mencs were infallible, and he could fay to Beelzebub himfeif, «« Thus far flialt thou go, and no further." Thofe to whofe care was intruded the welfare of mankind here or hereafter, were bound as far as pofiible eo oppofe themfelves to the empire of Satan. His powei was given him only for a time, and, if not ftnftly rcftrained of God and the powers ordamtd of God, ic viould overrun every thmg, and replunge all this beautiful fcene of creation m its original chaos. Ί here was an -cfidlefs and eternal war between God and the devil, and the governors of the church were heaven's field officers and pio¬ neers for carrying it on. Of all che crimes, he added, co which che depra¬ vity of human nature had given birch, the
the moil aftonifhing and the ...oft hor¬ rible was chut of diabolical commerce. That human creatures fhould be fo far ínfacuaced, as to enter into league with the declared enemy of fouls, and for the pofleffion of a fhort-hved and pre¬ carious power to fign away their fpints to eternal damnación, was fo extiaor¬ dinary as co havebeen wholly unw or- ehy of credit, were ic not fuppoited by evidence as ftrong and lrrefiftible as that of the muaclcs of Jefus Chnft himfeif. The perfons svho thus volun¬ tarily made themfelves accurfed before God, deferved to be regarded with alienation and horror by che whole hu¬ man race. Every man Chac faw chem, was bound by his baptifmal engage- mencs to deftroy ehem , and whoever adminiftered to rhem the fmalteft por¬ tion of food, drink or comfort, there¬ by rendered himfeif a party to their guile. The inquificion efpecially had Vol. III. К declared
declared agamft chis race of men eternal war, and conhdered their crime as more complicated, audacious and peflilen- tial, than any other branch of herefy. Having, for his own part, no doubt that 1 was one of thefe noxious and enormous reprobates, he exhorted me to make a voluntary confeffion of my evil deeds, and, by fubmicting leadily to the tortures and purufhmenes of this world, endeavour to free myfelf, if it were yet poffible, from thofe of the world to come Thefe difcourfes of che inquifitor were vanoufly mterfperfed chrough ehe three examinations, co which I was fubjefted a lhorc tune after I became an inhabitant of che holy houfe. On my part I endeavoured to che beft of my power Co ìepel che impucacions caft upon me, to eftablifli my innocence, and Co confound che feverity of my oppreflbrs. I told the inquifitor, vvhaeevei
whacever nughe be the force of his argumenes refpefting herefy and deal¬ ings with the devil, they were noihmg to me. I was no Lutheran, no ana- baptift, no necromancei, no under¬ miner of Che faich of ochers, or ally of the prince of the infernal regions. I proudly and earneftly demanded to be confronted with my accufers. I afked my examiner m lus turn, Whae fore of juftice chac was, which precended to proceed capitally agamft its pnfoncrs upon fecret andunavowed accufations * He endeavoured to flop me. He cold me that I was nor brought there to anaign the methods and practices of their court, chac ic did not become a prifonci put upon his defence Co infuit his judges, chac chis concumacy could not be regarded but as an aggiavacion of my guile, and chat I was bound ftriftly and fimply Co anfwer the in¬ terrogatories that were propofed to К 2 me.
me. The rebuke ofthe inquifitor was unavailing. My fpint was wrought to too high a pitch to be chus rcftrained ι | was too firmly refolved to give the Utmoft force of mind and truth to the topics of my juft defence. It is the practice of the inquifition for the pri¬ foner to fit during his examination. I ftarted upon my feet The mode of your proceeding, cried I, is the mockery of a erial From your fatal bar no man can go forth ac- quicced How is a (lory to be refuted, when hardly and wich difficulty you fuffer your prifoner to collect the flighteft fragments of it ? If I would detect a calumny, is u noe requifice that 1 fliould be acquainted with its hiflory, and know ics authors and pro¬ pagators ' 1 hen I may perhaps be able to confound their forgenes, to fhow the groundleflhefs of their allega¬ tions, to expofe the bafenefs of their purpofes
purpofes and the profligacy of their characters I am informed of nothing, yet I am bid, firft to be my own ac¬ cufer, and then to anfwer the accufa- tions of others It is only by follow¬ ing a falfhood chrough all us doub¬ lings, that it can beefleftually deftroy- ed You bid me unrav el a web, and will not fuffer me to touch it with one of my fingers The defence of the pureft innocence is often difficult, fometimes impoffible, aga nil che arc- fulnefs of a malicious tale, or che for¬ tuitous concurrence of unfavourable appearances But you ftrip innocence of thofe confecraced weapons by which Only ic can be difended Give eo an accufacion the particulars with svhich whac really happens muft always be ae- Cendcd, give 10 it che circumftances of place and of time lay afide the ambi¬ guity and generilicics in which you fhelter yourfelvcs, and then, perhaps К 3 then
then only, it can be victonoufly re¬ pelled. You aik me a choufand va¬ rious and artfully confi, utted quef¬ tions. What fort of a man do you imagine me to be ' I am not a fool, that 1 fhould be inveigled, I am not a boy, thae I fliould be menaced into confeffions· Ceaft your bafe ant« un¬ principled arcs ! I will fuinifii no macenals againft myfelf. If you know any thing againft me, avow it ' Pro¬ pofe it, and I will anfvvei. Think noc to patch up a miferable accufition out of the words which madvei tence or weannefs may caufe me to uttei. Shame on your inftitutioii 1 May in¬ famy overcake che fyftem of youi pro¬ ceedings' That religion which is fup¬ portcd by fuch means, is viler Chan atheifm. That civilifation which has its bafis in defpocifm, is more worth- lefs and hateful than the flate of ravages running wild in theu wooda. Do
Do you not perceive that the lan¬ guage I am nosv holding to you is the exclufive privilege of confcious inno¬ cence? The indignation I exprefs is no artificial rage, ftudioufly concnved to oveibcar accufacion. You hase it, as ic flows fponcaneoufly Co my congue, warm from Che prompcings of an ho¬ neft heart. If I coultl hivt confulced a fuend, ic is probable he svould have dif- fuadcd mc fiom my prefent demeanour as impolicic. If I were governed by the dictates ofan ordinary prudence, I ihould have difplaycd lefs ardour, lefs refencmcnc. But I am willing eo cry svhichei fliame cannot ycc bc lighced up even in the cheek ofan inquifitor. Ί he fathei who examined me, hav¬ ing 111 vain endeavouied to check che cui rene ot my invective, changed his manner, and aflumed a tone diametri¬ cally the rescife of mine. He profef- fed that he felt muth compaflion and К 4 intereft
intereft for my misfortune, and fhould deem himfeif happy if he could be the inftrument of my deliverance. The language I had uttered was highly in¬ decorous, and fuch as feemed in itfelf to call for a rigorous penance. But he fhould not think himfeif worthy the name of a man, if he did not make fuitable allowance for the biteer and extravagant fentiments that would oc¬ cafionally find their way into ehe mind of one in my unforcunace ficuation. So circumftanced, men svould often miftake their friends for their enemies I regarded the inquificion as my enemy, it was in'reahty my firm and difinte¬ refled friend, zeaioufly watchful for my body, my foul, and my eftate. Other courts had other maxims of proceeding, beeaufe their motives of aftion were different, and it was bur juft that they fliould fiťrniíh their pn¬ foncrs with a defence agamft their frail¬ ty.
ty. But the breaft of an inquifitor was acceflible to no fentiment but that of love, a burning love of God, love ofthe church, love of the prifoner, who might be wrongfully accufed, love of the penitent, whom he reconciled to our common mother, the church, love even of the incorrigible heretic whofe body he burned for the good of his foul The inquifitor did not difcover to the prifoner the evidence adduced againft him, that was between God and the inquifitor s confeience. But the fuppreffion which was thus prac- tifcd rendered him doubly fcrupulous and fceptical as to the evidence he re¬ ceived , he fiftcd it with a feverity that the joufoner would in vain endeavour to imitate, and the rules of evidence in that court were fo guarded, puncti¬ lious, and minute, as to rendei any mif¬ take in its proceedings altogether im¬ ponible. For a man to be once a К 5 prifonci
prifoner of the court of inquifition, by a falutary prejudice which prevailed through the Catholic world, rendered htm for ever infamous. This was ano¬ ther caufe of the extreme wannefs and caución wich which chac coure was ac- cuftomed to proceed. They firft lif- Cened to tho accufer, vvho was obliged to give 111 his information on oath. Thty then mfticuced a fecrec enquiry againft che party accufed, and, till they had collected abundant ground for their proceeding, they did not ven¬ ture to touch a hau of his head, flicy elaborately clafled all che diffeient de¬ grees of evidence into half proof, full proof, proof lefs than half, and proof lefs than full. When chefe things were duly confidercd, it would appear cercam chac no courr chac had ac any time exiftcd on eaich, had ever bctn fo eender in ir» proceedings, fo pure in Us incitements, and fo every way fupct ior
fupertor to the attacks of calumny and malice, as the couit of inquifition. With lefpectto myfilf in particular, he fud, they had not apprehended me, and put mc upon my defence, without previoufly affembling a large body of mificllaneous and circumftantial evi¬ dence The evidence they had drawn irom myfelf was negative only, but it was ftrong the obfeunty that hung about my perfon, slio I was, and vshei cc 1 cime and the obftunty that hung about my loitunt, a gieat vifible expenditure in Spun 01 in Italy, and no vifible means Thtft were not the fignitures mil tokens of inno¬ cence thiy tei Jed tliongly to con¬ timi the ittufition ι η 1er which I la¬ boured Yet fo tender was the inqui¬ fition in its proceedings, inel fo chiry ot its reputation, that upon thefe iciu- mulated pioofs md preemptions, thiy wen not prep u id t > pronounce igainlt K b me
me. They would hear me again and again. They would give me time tö recoUeu myfelf, and for this purpofe they would order for me a coarfe and fcanty fare, and a folitary cell. I might depend upon it, my contumacy fliould be overcome. The funda¬ mental principle of their proceedings was borrowed from that humane and companionate maxim of the old Ro¬ man law, De vila homtms nulla cmidatio tfl longa, and I fhould accordingly find them free from all precipitation and impatience, and ready to indulge me with a reftdence, however long, in their pnfons, till my cafe had been lifted to the bottom.
CHAP.
CHAP. IX. 1 HE indulgence thus oftentatioufly proclaimed by the father-inquifitor, was not exactly to my tafte. Find¬ ing that all the energy of mind I could apply to my defence was vain, I determined to have recourfe to a dif. ferent mode of proceeding. I received three admonitions, as they call them, the fubftance of which I have already recited, in the courfe of the firft ten days of my confinement, and I then for fome time heard of the inquifitor no more. I underftood that it was frequently the practice, after three ad¬ monitions, not to bung up the prtfon- er for further hearing during a whole year
year, and it appeared fufficiently pro¬ bable from the laft words addrefied to me by my judge, that this policy was intended to be employed in my cafe. AVithout further delay therefoi с I re¬ folved to recur to the expedient in the ufe of which my power was unbound¬ ed, and by a brilliant öfter at once to fubdue the fcruples, and ftcuie the fidchty, of the perfon or pei fons upon whom my fafc cultody might be found to depind. AU thit was neceffuy, vvas to convince the party to whom I fhould propofe the atlifhng me, ofthe íeality of my powers, and thin to put caite blanche into his hinds, or rather to afcertain at once tht extent of his hopes and demands, and by a fpi- rited and peremptory conduci to yield them ati In the period which, im¬ mediately picsious to my prefent ìm- prifonment, I had devoted to the me¬ ditation of my future plans and the review
review of my pad, I had feverely ac¬ culiti myfelf of half mcafuics, and had deteimined to abjure all hcfitation and irrefoluctncfs for che time 10 come. Ic is not indeed to be wondered at, chac, poffifling a power fo utterly re¬ moce irom common ideas and con- cepcions, and vvluth, fpeaking from experience, I do not hefitate to affirm, no mere eflort of imaginación ıs ade¬ quate to rcpicfcnt, 1 flioutd have afted below the prerogatives and demands of my fituation. This miftake I would make no moie. I would overwhelm oppotmon by the fpiendour of my proceedings, antl confound fciupltsby the dignity and printtly magnificence of my appearance Unfhackled is I vvas with conneftiois, and nfquing no one's happinefs but my own, I pro¬ pofed to compel the human fpecies to view me fiom an awful diftance, and to oblige eveiy one chat approached mc to
to feel his inferiority. It would be ro the laft degree difgraceful and con¬ temptible in me, being raifed fo far above my peers in my privileges, if I were to fall below the ordinary ftand- ard Of a gallane man in the decifion and firmnefs of my fyftem of conduft. Decifion and firmnefs were the prin¬ ciples to be exercifed by me now, dignity ahd magnificence mull awaie cheir cum hereifcer. It Was noe long before I embraced an opporeunicy of fpeaking Co the man who waited on me with my daily al- loemenc of provifions, and I defigned as fnorfly as poffible Co proceed eo chac fpecies of argumenc, in which I prin¬ cipally confided Co engage him in my caufe. Buc he did noc fuffer me to utter a fentence, before with a very expreflive gefture he incerrupced me. I had remarked already the filence which feemed for ever to pervade this difmal
difmal abode, but I had not afcrtbed importance enough to this circum¬ ftance, to fuppofe chat it could mate¬ rially interfere with the project I had formed I now perceived the coun¬ tenance of my atcendant to be over- fpread with terror and alarm. He put his hand upon my mouth, and by his atcicude feemed earneftly Co infili upon my conforming to che rules of the pri¬ fon. I was not however to be thus diverted from my purpofe. I feized his hands, and began again to purfue the difcourfe I had meditaced. This proceeding on my part induced him to brtak the filence he had hichereo pre¬ ferved. He cold mc hac if I did not inftantly fee him ae liberty, he would alarm Che pnfon. 1 loofed his hands. 1 then by every gefture I could devife endeavoured Co prevail on him co ap¬ proach me, eo fuffei me to confei with him in ehe lowed vvhifper, andaflured him
hım that he fliould have no reafon to repent his compliance. I mighc as well have addrefitd myitlf co che walls that mcloltd mc. He would not flay an inftanc, he would yield in noching. He burft from me abrupţi), and, clof. ing the door of my cell, lefc me in fo¬ licude and darknefs. In che evening of che day of chis accempt che keeper of che prifon en¬ tered my apartment. When he ap¬ peared, I began ro flaCCer myfelf that m this man I fhould find a better fub¬ jeft for my purpofe, than in the pool turnkey vvho had given me fo unfavoui¬ able a prognoftic ot my fuccefs. I loft no time in faying to him that I had fomething important to commum- cate, bue he pcicmptonly command¬ ed me to be fitene, and liften co whae he was about Co fay Co mc. He cold mc that 1 had already been com¬ plained againft for fpeech, and I was now
nosv repeating my offence. He ad- vifeil me to ponder well the confe- quences of svhat I was doing. The orders of the inquifition were rigorous and inflexible. The celts weie not fo fubft mtially feparated but that a voice ungut bc heird fiom one to the othei, yet it had hippened more than once, that a hufbind and wife, a fither and child, had for years been lodged next to tach other, without the fmalteft fuf- picion on either part of the proximity of thur fituation. He was aftonifhed at the peitanicity of my behaviour. Ί here was no government on the faccof the earth, he would venture to fay, that had fubjefls more obedient, more duti¬ ful and exemplary than the holy inqui¬ fition. Not a murmui was evei heird ¡ not ι difcontent evei exprcflcd. All was hunibltncfs, thankfulntls and gia¬ titude He recommended to me to conform my felf to my fituation, and let him
htm hear no further complaints of me. He had ho fooner finifhcd his harangue, that he left me as abruptly as his ferv¬ ant had done It is not pofiible to im¬ part any adequaCe image of the inflexi¬ bility of his features, or the item com- pofure of his demeanour. I rtow faw my fituacion in a different point of view. Bribery was of no ufe, where all intercourfe was denied. Great God ! into what pofıtıon was I got f In the midft of a greac and po¬ pulous city, ae this time perhaps the metropolis of the world, I heard occa¬ fionally from beyond the limits of roy prifon the hum of bufy throngs, or tlie ihouts of a tumultuous populace. Yet I Was myfelf in the deepefl folitude. Like the wretched mariners I hive fomewhere read of, fliipwrecked upon a defert (hore, I might remain encaged, till 1 loft all recollection of European language, artd all acquaintance with the
the found of my own voict. A jailor from time to time entered roy apart¬ ment, but tome he was iiirply a mov¬ ing and breathing ftacue, his features never moulded into the exprenion of a meaning, nor his mouth opened for the utteiance of a found. From the firft I had been ftruck with the ex¬ treme and death-like filence that cha- raflerifèd the place of my confinement, but my mind was occupied with other thoughts, and I had not adverted to the caufe of the phenomenon I had then felt little inclination to the con- verfe of a jailor, my natural difpo¬ fition was fomevvhat fingular for a 1 renchman, and inclined to taciturni¬ ty , I had refolved to make a fair and ample trial ofthe power of а juft de¬ fence, where my innocence was fo complete and I was entirely difengaged from thofe unfavourable appearances which had conftjtuted my misfortune at
at Confiance ; and I even rejoiced, that a filence, which I regarded as cafual and individual, delivered me from all fear of impertinence in my attendant. With how different a temper do we contemplate an incident which, we perfuade ourfelves, continues to ope¬ rate only beeaufe we want inclina¬ tion to remove ic, and an incidenc which is violently impofed, and to which, with the utmoft exertion of our ftrength, we cannoc fucceed to impart the flighteft fliock ' The external object is che fame, ics pifture m the inrelleftual fenfonum how unlike ' What a profound and inconceivable refinement in che art of tyranny is this filence ' The jailor might well tell me, thae beneach his roofs chere was neither complainc nor murmur, chat the very foul of its lnhabicancs was fubdued, and that they fuflered the raoft unheard of oppreffions wichout attornili-
aftonifhment or indignation. This is the peculiar prerogative of defpotifm : ic produces many fympcoms of ehe fame general appearance, as thofe which are derived from liberty and juftice. There are no remonftrances ; there is no impatience or violence; Chere is a calm, a fatal and accurfed tranquillity that pervades the whole. The fpectator encers, and for a cime mifinterprecs every objeft he fees ; he perceives human bodies ftanding or moving around him ; and it is with the utmoft furpnfe, if he has lci- fuie and opportunicy Co obferve a tícele fui cher, chac he finds ac lati che things he fees Co be the mere fluides of men, cold, inert, glaring bodies, which che heaven-born foul has long fince defcrced. Wonderful, I hefi- cate not co affirm, is che genuine and direct power of fuch a ficuacion as that in which I was now placed, upon
«pon the humain imagination. What wu it then to me, to whom fpeech was, not merely one of thofe things, mifnamed indulgences, mjfnamed lux¬ uries, upon which the defirablenefs and the health of human exiftence de¬ pend i but who had loolwd to it as the only and the aflured means of my ref- cue from this fcene of horrors 1 I in¬ treat the reader to pardon me, when I eonfefs, that the operaeion of the dif- covery I made was fo overwhelming and apparently defperate, thae ie was fome weeks, I mighc fay monchs, be¬ fore my mind recovered ics wonted bias and activity. It was cowards che clofe of che pe¬ riod I have named, thae a new incidenc, concurring with that familiarity which ferves in fome meafure co difarm every mifchief of ics fling, reftored and re¬ awakened my mind. I had vegecaced now for fome time, if the metaphor 3 can
can with propnety be applied to exift¬ ence m a noxious and empoifoned air, by which all vegetation would have been undermined, and which the vital principle in man is fcirccly competent eo furmounc and in ill chis period had encouncered noching from vnrhouC noi received any intimation, chic could in the flighteft degiee interrupt the progieffivc deftruftion and wafte ofthe foul One day, ac the cuftomary houi of my bnng attended by my warder, I wis fuipnled toleehnn bnng with him 1 vifitor to my cell The unknown svas 1 mm with grey hairs and a filver beard though onte tall, he now Hooped confiderably, and fupported himfeif sv ith a flaft his drefs was fim¬ ple and near, and his whole appearance piepoileffing. A fweec ferenicy was diffufed over his countenance, ¡et there vvere occafionally a fire, and a contemplative grafp of thought ex- ^.ol III L preffed
preffed in his eyes, which fufficiently proved to me that his ferenity was not the refult of vacancy. All this I dif- cerned by the famt and uncertain tight of a fmall lamp which the warder had brought with him, and placed upon my table. The introduction was per¬ formed in filence, and the warder left us alone. The unknown beckoned me to be feated, for the firft emotion of furprife at the entrance of α ftranger had caufed me to ftart on my feet , and, opening a folding ftool he had received from my attendant, hc placed himfeif befide me He then addreffed me in a low voice, and told nve that, the humanity of the fathers of the inquifition had given him permifiion to vifit mc, and that, if I would bt fo obliging, m confoimi¬ ty to the regulations of the prifon, as to lower my voice to the fundird of his, we were at libeity to confer toge¬ ther.
ther He hoped the conference would bc fome relief to my folicude, if not lead to my complete liberation He then unfolded to me his ftory He told me that he, like myfelf, had been committed to the pnfons of the inqui- fieion upon an accufation of forcer) Having advanced chus far, he flopped Hc Calked mifccllaneoufly and digief- fivelj of svi/arcls md thur familiais, of potrcfiions and demon , of charms, fpclls, talifmaiis and me incitions, even of the el s/j vital and tl с philosopher s itone Sometimes m the progrefs of chis diftotirte I could p"i«.eise him ob¬ fervmg mc wich the utmott nanow nefs as if he would dive into my foul, and again, part cularly when he caughc a glance of ufpicion in my eye, with infinite adJrcfs changing his atcitude and cone, ind affuming a fuiprifing air of ingenuoufiiefs and gaiefy In a word he was α confunimace aftoi Ic I 2 was
was evident, whether his defigns were hoftile or friendly, that his purpofe was to make himfeif mailer of my fe¬ cret. I atked him whether the ac¬ cufation of forcery which had been preferred againft him were well found¬ ed or a calumny. He evaded that queftion, and was only influenced by it to talk more copioufly and fluently on ocher copies, with ehe apparene de¬ fign of making me forget the enquiry I had made. Hc avoided anticipation, left he ihould mifcalculate and cake wrong ground in my affair, and, though fuperficially he feemed com¬ municative, I found that he fearcely told me refpefting himfeif any one thing definite and clear He ce¬ lebiated the clemency of the fathers of the inquificion. He faid, Chey feemed eo regard chemfelves as the adoptive parenes of Chofe thcy held in their cultody, and were anxious fingly for
for che rcftoiacion of fouls. In then excel ior f hey were autiere, and had unforcunacely coneraftcd a forbidding manner , bue he had foon found, upon a clofer infpeftion of their character, thae che only way Co deal fuccefsfully with them was to tepofc in them a per¬ fect confidence. This panegyric was not reforted co citi hc had exhaufled the various topics by which he had hoped himfeif Co extort my fecret from me. I afked him, whether the effetti ofhis repofing confidence had been an abjuration of forcery, and reconcilia¬ tion to ehe church ' But this queftion experienced che fate of every other that I addreffed to him. He only told me generally, that he had every reafon to be fatisfied wich, and Co fpcak well of Che creaemene he had experienced in ehe houfe of che inquifition. He pofTefT- ed, or rather, as I believed, affected, a character of thoughtlefs ganuliry and L· 3 loqua-
loquacity, well adapted co cover the ftrange deviations and abrupt tranfi- cions ttn marked his difcourfe. Ie was certainly fingularly conrrafted wich chac clofe and pcnecrating air which from Cime to cime I remarked in him. The rcadtr may deem ic furpnfing and unaccountable , buc certain ic is I took uncommon dthght in this man's company. 1 preffed him earneftly to repeat his vifits, and would fearcely fuffer him to depare, cill he had pro¬ mifed to come to mt again the next day or the day after. Yet I looked on him as my mortal enemy, and had no doubc chac he was one ofthe infamous wretches, employed by the policy of the inquifition, and well known be¬ neath thofe hated roofs by the ap¬ pellation of mofeas. Various reafons may be affigned for my conduft in this particular. Let it fii ft be remembered that
thae I was alone, and for monchi had not heard che found of my own voice. No incident marked my daj s , no ob¬ ject arretted my ateeneion. A dull, heavy, peftdencial, foul-depreffing mo¬ notony formed the hiftory of my life. If in this fituation 1 had been vifited by a moufe or a rat, I fliould lndetati- gably have fought to get vi ithin leach of it, I fliould have put it to my bofom, and felt with exultation the beat ofan allunai pulfe, the и armth of animal life preffing refponfively on my heart. With w hat cagei appetite I fliould have mixed in feenes of calamity and cruel¬ ty, intolerable со any ocher eye, glad formyfelt chac even upon fuch terms I could efcape the froft bound innrer of the foul ' How 1 fliould have rejoiced, like kmg Richard of Fngland, ro fee four grim and diach-dealing aflaflins enter my cell, like turn to ftruggle and wrctllc and contend with my murdei- 1. 4 ers.
ers, though, as in his cafe, wounds and а fatal end fliould bt the refult I 1 hus feeling thtn, it is little wonderful that I ihould hase hailed ssith picafuie the vifit of the mofea. But this was not all. While I con¬ ferred with, or rathei hftened to my vifitoi, that pride and ftlt compkicin- ly, which I fufpeň to be the main, or at leaft the indifpenfible ingredient of all our pleafures, revived in my heart. 1 believed that he was fet upon me by thefe infatiable blood-fuckers of the inquifition, that he might enfnare me with his qucftions, and treachcroufly inveigle me to the faggot and the flake. I ftlt a laft, lambent intimation of pride within me, vvhen my 1 ■ art whif- pered mc, This man filali not attain his ends. 1 fecrctl ; defied his arts, and amufed mjfelf with baffling his moft cunning devices. Ihad now fome one with whom to mcafurc myfelf. The
The companion, I own, for a defend¬ ant of the councs of St. Leon, was a humble one, but it is not permitted a prifoner in the jails of the inquifition to be faftidious in his pleafures. This man I played with at my cafe, and laughed ae his ftracagems. I therefore felt chat I was his fuperior, and, which was a fenfacion I had not lately been accuftomed Co, chac I was fomebody. Thefe feeling«, recommended co me his vifits. Buc svhat svas much more material, 1 looked further, and propofed an ul¬ timate end to this occunence Let it be recollefted what was my unhappi- nefs, vv hen I found myftlf, if I maybe allowed the expreffion, fuddenly de¬ prived of fpeech, and chen ic will eafi¬ ly be underftood how fincerely I re¬ joiced to hive this faculty reitored to me. Speech, as I hive already faid, I had regarded as ehe only and aflured L 5 means
means of my deliverance from this fcene of horrors. I therefore doubted not chat from this miferable tool of my oppreflors 1 svould obtain my enlarge¬ ment. I ftood firmly on my guard. I permiteed him Co run ouc the whole b ngth of his own projeta withoue in¬ terrupción. By this delay 1 fhould beteer underftand his charafter, and finally feize ic wich a moie decifive grafp. Thus purpofing, I allowed three or four vifits to pafs befoit I opened to the mofea my osvn propofal. 1 defigned unexpeftedly ro turn the tables uppn him, to furpnze and finirti wich hım ас once. I knew noc chac all this precaution was neceflary, bue I played for coo deep a ftakc, noc to be anxious to omit nothing, which here¬ after in rerrofpeft I might reproach myfelf thae 1 had omieced. The Cime was ac length come, at which I judged it convenient to exe- cuce
cuce whae 1 had planned in my mind. I began wich an attempi co moitify and humble iny guetl 111 Ins osvn eyes, that he might lofe the pude to make the knallett rehftinct to my propofil. Do jou thmk, my good hr, cried I, that I have not puttttly underftood jour intentions 11 this sslule? You hive pietended to bt my lrund, and Co come Co me foi my good I know chic tvtry ftcret I repofed in your fide¬ lity, every word that I might unguard¬ edly hase diopped, every look and gefluit that could have been interpret¬ ed 10 my difidvantagc, would have been inftantly reportid co che fathers of the inquifition. VVhy, what a poor and miferable iool mull you hive ima¬ gined me to be' How came you into my cell' Had you a tecrit key by which you found your svay hither un¬ known í Could you ever hase come into my apartment, if you had not L 6 been
been employed ' You fawn upon me, and are the tame and paffive agenc of my mercilefi. deftroyers! Shame on fuch bafe and perfidious proceedings ' Is this religion, that you ihould Hatter and cajole and lie to a man, purely thae you may hive che gratificación ас ¡aft of burning hım alive? Ifvouoi your mailers can make out any rhing to my difadsancage, let chem make ic out in the way ot fair and open trial, by the production of dııcft evidence, and calling on mc for my defence. lheyftsle chemfilscs the champions of Chnftendom and ornaments ot our holy faith, they pretend Co an extraor¬ dinary degree of ianftity, and would have all men bow down in mute reve¬ rence and aftonifhment at their godli- nefs, and yet they have recourfe to means fo bafe, that the moil profli¬ gate and abandoned tyrane upon record would have dıfdaıned Co employ chem. But,
But, bafe as are the judges and afleflbrs of the coure in whofe prifon I Hand, even chey fcorn the meannefs of the perfidious taik in which you have en¬ gaged. The vehemence I put meo ehe fup- prefled and under-Cone wich svhich I delivered chefe reproaches, fecmed co produce no emoción in my gueft. He dropped his flatt upon his fhoulder; he meekly folded his arms upon his bofom, and anfwered chac he had long fince learned Co bear eveiy contumely for ehe cauftof God and the redecnici. they were hcavtn-dirtftcd chaftife- mencs, which his manifold iins and miquicies had amply deferved. Hypocnce 1 replied I, would you make me believe chat a confcientious motive can prompt fuch conduft as youis, can mould your features inco a treacherous expreffion of kindnefs, and fill
fill your mouth with lies and decep. tions innumerable' No proceedings, rejoined he, with an unaltered air, are bafe, thae God and his chuich prcfcribe. I Cake up the crofs with checritilners, and glory in my fliame. The more ignominious in che eyes of an unregenerate world is my conduft, the more entire and lmphcic does ic piove my obedience to be. My heare fwciled wictnn me as he talked. I could lend no attencion to futh defpicablc cant, and wis ithimed to fee che moft profligue conduit af¬ fuming to ltfeh the pretmtions to in extrioulmary degiee of fančtity and dilinttreftednefs. Come, come, faid I, diffembler, I know thae noching could buya man co fo Ioathfome an office but money. You are fome galley-flave, fome wretch who
who by your complicated crimes have forfeited your life to che community, and aie now permicced to earn a mifer¬ able exiftence by lying in waic for the unfortunate, and engaging in arts at which humanity fliudders. I rake you upon your own ccrms, you are the man I want Affiti me to ef¬ cape, go with mc to fome fifer and lefs cruel country, I will resvard you to the extent of youi wifh.es. Give me your hand, an eftace of fix thoutind pillóles per annum withoue further condición waics your acceptance I invoke all tht powers, facred to tiuth and pumfliers of deceic, to witnefs chat I have ability to make good the idiote of what I promife. While 1 fpoke, 1 could perceive an extraordinary revolución caking place in my gueft. The mceknefs and cian- quilhty of his councenance fubfided , his eye became animated and alive. I hailed
I hailed che aufpicious omen, I urged my propofal with all che impecuoficy I could exerc and ail ehe argumenes I could devife At lengch I paufed. I looked again at the countenance of the mofta, I was lefs pleafed Chan be¬ fore. Τ he expreffion did not feem to be that of affent and congratulation, it was rather of horror and alarm Se Jago, and all the faints and angels of heaven, proteft me' exclaimed he. What do I hear? A full confelfion of guilt ι And arc chou Chen the confe¬ derate of the prince of the powers of darknefs ' If vve were noe here, in the holy houfe of inquifition, I fhould die at this mornene wich fear chat che roof would fall and crufh us together. I fhould expect hell co fwallovv me alive, for being found in thy unhal¬ lowed foriety. He erembled with every expreflion of the fincereft terror and averfion. «Thy
" Thy money pendi with thee," thou fécond Elymas, like him " full of alt fubtltcy and mifchicf, child of the devil, enemy of all nghteoufnefs'" Blafted be thy offers ' Have I for this devoted myfelf to the ferviee of God, afliduoufly fought out the bafeft and vlleft offices of that ferviee, and loaded myfelf with ignominy here, that I might obtain a crown of glory hereafter? and am I now to be affaulted with the worll of Satan's temptations ' Even fo, Lord, if fuch be thy will ! Oh, poor, mifeiabte, deluded victim ofthe arch-deceiver of mankind, what has the devil done for thee? He has per¬ fuaded thee that thou art neh, and thou wanted every joy and every necef- fary of life He has promifed to be thy friend, and he brings thee to the faggot and flames in this world, as an earneft of thy eternal damnation here¬ after My
My vifitor had no fooner thus pour¬ ed out the tumult and agnation of his foul, than he lefc me abrupdy, and I faw him no more Such was che evene of my accempe to bribe the officers of the inquifition. In my firft espenment I could noe even obtain a heanng, in vvhal follow¬ ed, my propofals vverc rejected with all che tranfports of religious abhor¬ rence. What I offered indeed, how¬ ever dazzling in the ftatement, had not in fact the nature of a temptation. He to whom I addreffed it gave no credit to my affereions, he chought that I was the mere drivelling dupe of him he called the arch-decei /er of man¬ kind, or that my money, when pof¬ feffed, would foon change its figure, and from feenung pieces of folid com be converted into pieces of horn 01 of fhells. Even if he had not ap¬ prehended fuch a metamorphofis, he would
would ycc have regırded eveiy dou¬ bloon he received as che pnce of his concinnai adveriıcy here, and damnation hereafter. I gained nothing favour¬ able formy ficuacion by che enat I had made, buc I added а new chapter to my knowledge of human nature. I found, chat Co be a knave, it was nor ncceflary Co be an infidel 1 correfted che Coo haft) conclutton which 1 had adopted with the reft of my contemporaries, that he whofe conduft was infamous muft inevitably be defiitute of religious lmpreflions and conceit, and I be¬ came fatisfied chat a man, while he practifcd every vice that can difgrace human natuie, might imagine he was doing God ferviee. Enough of che interior of che prifon of Che inquificion. I remained a Cenant of this wretched manfion twelve years. Though ehe w ruch who had been placed upon me as a fpy, was, from my
mj propofal to hım, faCısfied of my guiir, his fuperiors were not fo. They found noehmg in whae hr reporced defimeive as Co che nacure of my un¬ lawful practices, and chey could excort from me no further confeffion. They therefore adhered to their favourite maxim, to avoid the precıpıeate mif- takes of ocher tribunals, and to allow their prifoner full time to develop his guilt, or, as they pretended, to eftabiilh his innocence. Perhaps too the tem¬ per of the prince who now filled the Spanifh throne, contributed Co my fafety. They could not content them¬ felves with a lefs punifhment for fo obftinate and incorrigible a heretic, than thae ofthe flames, but, during the reign of the emperor Charles, this fpecies of punifhment for herefy was rarely inflicted, and only one or two contumacious, at intervals, were deli¬ vered ovei to the executioner at a time. fhe
The ìnftitution whofe victim I had be¬ come, looked for a richer and more abundanr harveft from the well-known piety and zeal of his fucceflbr. I pafs ovei the reft of the years of my tedious imprifonmenr. They had in them a lad and death-like uni¬ formity. Whac furprifing or agreeable advencures can be expected from a man clofed up wichm che four walls of a dungeon? Yee ic is not aleogeeher che unitormicy of chis period chat decer- mmes me not to dwell upon and ex¬ pand it. Twelve years cannot pafs 111 che life of man without many memo¬ rable incidents and occurrences. He that fhould be buried alive m the deep¬ efl cavern of the earch, if he were noc an ldioe, or incapable of ehe taik of nar¬ ration, and could fubfift twelve yeais in that ficuacion, could Cell of Chings that occurred to him, chat mighc fill the bufy man of the world with thoughes
thoughts and fpeculatıon almoft to burtting. I mighc unfold the fecrets of my prifon houfe, but that I vilt not. 1 refufe the ccnfequenccs of that ftory boeh to my readers and myfelf. I have no inclination to dnve the moll delicate or fufcepcible of my readers mad with horrors. I could convince fuch, if fuch there are, who fuppofe my faculties w ere altogether benumbed or dead, that it was noe fo I did in¬ deed paf» days, perhaps weeks, in a condición of chac fore Buc ас other times my mind was îoufed, and be¬ came bufv, reftlcfs, impatient and in¬ ventive There was no mode of efcape that I did not ruminate upon or at¬ tempt , not to mention that, though my body was reftrained, my mmd oc¬ cafionally foared to the furthett regions of the empyrean, or plunged into ehe deepefl of the receffes m which nacure conceals her operations All fj items of
of philofophifing became familiar to me. I revolved every different fable that has been conftrufled refperting the invihble powers that fuperintend the events of the boundlefs univerie, and I fcarlefsly traced out and deve¬ loped the boldeft conjectures and af¬ fermons of demonifm or atheifm. As the humour of the moment led me, I denved nuftryoi confutation from each of thefc fyftems in their turn----- But memory, bittet memory, unperccived by its loid, is feizing my pen, and running assay with my narrative. Lnough, enough of ttie interior of the prifon of the inquifition I
CHAP.
CHAP. Χ JTHILIP the Second, king of Spain, fucceeded to the throne of that monar¬ chy about the clofe of the year 1555 , but his affairs in England and the Ne¬ therlands long withheld him from vifit- mg his beloved country, and he aid not reach its fhores, after a feven ) ear's abfence, till the tvventy-nmth of Au- guft, 1559 It may be thought that a public event of this fort could be little ïnterefting to me, a forgotten prifoner, immured in the dungeons of the inquifition. The fact was other- wife The king was defirous of diftin- guithing his arrival on his native foil by fome fplendid exhibition or memo¬ rable event, that fhould at once exprefs his
his pıecy co God, and conduce co che felicity of his people and hc could think of nothing that fo fignally united chefe characters as an Auto de Fe. The Ludieran herefy, which in che courfe of forty years had fpread ics poifon fo widely in the different counenes of Lui ope, had not failed to fcatcer a few of ics noxious feeds even in this, the pui eft and molt Cicholic of all ics di- vifions But Philip had early pro¬ ci umtd his hoftility againft this inno¬ vation, and, pioftrating himfett before che image of his faviour, had carneftly tiifoughc the divine majcfty, "chache mighc nevtr fuflcr himfeif to bc, 01 to be calltd, the lord of thoft in any cornei of tht globe, vvho fhould deny Htm the Lord · Pievioufly to his arrival in Spam, dutftions had been given, and arrangements made, re- lptet ng the pious and folemn exhibi¬ tion hc demanded. Formerly thofe Vol. III. M who
who by the fathers of the inquifition had been delivered ovei to the fcculu arm, had been executed m the differ¬ ent pi ices wheie their cnmcs had bten committed, 01 their tnals been htld but now it was propofed that all thofe throughout the kingdom, vvho wert iound piopcily qualified to fitisf) by thur dciths the fublinie rafie ot the rojal funt, fliould bt divided into two troops, met luir, the one to Seville, long the ι ıpıl 1) of an illuitnous mo narchs, nul the othci to Vili idolul, wluth hid tl ĺ honoui to be tht bnch- pliccot the jmknr foverepn Ihc troop dettine i D fted the liames at Seville was loipiltdot fitly pei Ions, many ot ihem dil'inguifltcd foi thui umk, tl ur talents 01 th it vntuis Ihc tioop tobt Itoı tid to A illad« hd, of which I vs s ι nun hi, n ou imi only to thirtv bm, to tra ıpcııf uc tl is dclicicntv, Ρ ι uihmililf h 1 ipnilitcl 1
his gracious ìnccntion to be prefent, cogechei with the heir appâtent and his whole court, at chat exhibición, fhe Spanifh nation, rc^icing in the ap¬ proach of a monarch vvho was born among them, whofe manneis and tem¬ per happily accord d with theirs, and whom they believed abouc Co fix his perpetual refidencc in cheir land, ix- pctted him with alt the longings of che moil udent attachment Wc, the unhipp/ s Hums of pious md lnquift- lonilt rami), dfo txpetted him Our hints lile, n >t pine with ι lefs billing i 111 к ıcfs choipli our ansiecy aroft no 1 c t otioi ot ι dilieitnt natine \allai)lıd 1ь tuft int fıunı the nıe- tiopohs tphty-loui miles Vv t had a ici ly linn 1 >n t week, piepared for this joume , and pioufly directed to hold oui let a 11 i^idmils to takt oui put in «he fclcmn national fundi We waited ho evn to reciıve ι pıc- M" VIO,s
vious notice of the day on which the monarch would enter the place of his birth, fince fo greac was his royal zeal for che caufe of leligion and cıvıl fo¬ ciety, chac he would not conlent Co be abfent from any pare of che fpeftaele, and accordingly 1С was noe allowed us to encer che fcene of our final deftina¬ tion, till the king of Spain and the Indies fliould be al nady on the fpoc, and prepared to receive us. The Aulo ie Fe performed at Seville had Che pre¬ cedence of our» lt took place on the twenty-fourch of Siptembtr , and we svere indulged with an accurace account of it, and weit prefent at a public reading ol the record of the aft, in the chapel ot oui prifon, previoufly co our removal from cht metropolis. I will noc enter into a minute detail ofthe fcene ot this reading, chough the recolleftion will never bt effaced from my memory. Of che perfons preftnt who
who were deflined co fuffer capiCal puiiifhmenc, eighc vvere women. Four of them were taken from a fingle fa¬ mily, being a grandmother, a mochci, and Cwo daughcers of che noble houfe of Alçıla. Γ|ιι } had ill been bcatici- ful of peifon, and of а gricetul figure , the youngell of ehe daughcers was in Che ninecttneh year of her age. Their crime, cogechci wich chac ot che ira- joricy of cheir fcllovv-fufferer:., was ob¬ ftinate and impenitent Lutheramfm. The feats of che women vverc feparaCcd from the reft, and fronted with a clofe laccice. The men wcic cwency-esso m number, and cheir appeaiance was truly impreflive. Then perfons were neg¬ lefted, and their figures emaciaced , their eyes were funk and ghaftly, and ehcu completions of a fallow and death-like while. Moll of them were crippled by then long confinement and the fevencies they had endured, and M 3 were
were fuppoitcd co then feats, upon an elevated icaftolding wich benches unf¬ ed one above anothei, bj two appari¬ tors, one oa each fide of the condemn¬ ed heretic. God of mercy and bene¬ volence ' is it poffible that this fcene ihould beiegirtted as chy triumph, and the cxecucion deftmed to follow, as a faenfice, acceptable in thy fight ' If chefe papers of mme are ever produced to light, may it not happen that chey filati fu ft be icid by a diftant poftcricy, who will rcfufc co believe that cher facheis weie ever mad enough to fub¬ ject .ich other to fo hoinble α tieat- menr, meiely beeaufe they weie unable to adop« each other's opinions' Qh, no' human aff urs, like the w aves of the ocean, aie mcielv in a fiate of ebb and floss " there is nothmg nesv un¬ dei lhe fun " two centuries peihaps aftei Philip the Second fhall bc gather¬ ed co his antcflors [hc died in 15983. men
men finii leain ovci „un to pcrfccittc eich other foi confín ice fike other aiiabapcitts or levcllcis finit furnifh, pretexts tor new pcvftcutions othci lnquifitois finii irift m the mod en¬ lightened tiafts of t urotoe , and pro- feftois fiom their ch 11 tlieltrring then intoleiance unter tht «neit names of Aiiltotlc ind Ciccio, fhall ínftručt then ftholns, thit 1 hetciodos doc¬ tnne is the vsorft of cnmis, and chit the philanthropy and pui iry of bene in which it ıs mailini ıcd, only rendei its deftnders the moie worthy to be ex¬ tirpated Wlnt were the ideas and 1 flections of my lillows, feated on the benches abose, belosv, and on either fide of me, 1 am unable to aitimi , my own could not fail Co be pungent and dif- Li^limg I undtsltood continually mou and moie of the myftenous and unurtucd hiftoty, of the ftranger vvho M 4 died
died in che fummer-houfe of che lake of Confiance I found that I was only acting over again whae he had experi¬ enced before me. His legacies had ferved to involve me m che bictereft and mod unheard of mifenes, bue vvere wholly defticuce of ability Co refcue from the evils chemfelves creaeed. Unbounded wealth I found to have no power to bribe the daftard (laves of religious bigotry , and the elixir of immortalily, though ie could cure dif¬ eafe and puc to flight che approaches of age, was impocenc Co repel the fervour of devouring flames. I mighc have been happy -----1 was happy when the ftranger found me. I might have lived to а virtuous and venerable old age, and have died in che arms of my poftency. The ftranger had given me Wealch, and I was now poorer chan the peafant who wanders amidft polar fnovis. The ftranger had given me immortality,
immortality, and in a few days I was to expire in excruciating tortures. He found me tranquil, contented, in the midft of Ample, yet ineftimable plca- fures, he breathed into me thereftlef» fentiment of ambition , and it was that fentiment which at length had placed me on high in the chapel of the prifon of the Catholic inquifition. Our progrefs tttValladolid was flow and folemn, and occupied a fpace of no lefs than foui days. On the even¬ ing of the foui th day w e approached that city. The king . i his court came out to meet us. He faluted the inquifitor general with all the demon- ftrations of the dcepeft fubmiflion and humility, and then, having yielded him the place of honour, turned round his horfe, and accompanied us to Valladohd. The cavalcade that at¬ tended the king, broke into two files, and nccived us in the midft of them. M 5 The
The whole cicy leemed Co empcy icfelf on chis memorable occafion, and the multieudes chat crowded along the road, and were fcattered in the neigh¬ bouring fields, wire innumerable. The day was nosv clofed , and the pro- ceflion svene forward amidft the tight of a choufand toiches. We, che con¬ demned of the inquifition, had been conducted from ch# metropolis upon Cumbnls , bue, as vve arrived ac the giCesofValladolid, vvewcie command¬ ed for the greater humiliation, co alight and proceed on fooc to the place ot our confinement, as many as could not walk without aififtance bung fuppoitcd by the ictendants We win nuthcr chained nor bound, the practice of the inquifition being Co deliver Che condemned upon fuch occafions meo the hands of two fureeies e ich, who placed their charge in the middle be¬ tween them, and men of the moil re- fpeftabic
fpcftablc characters were accuftomed fiom religious motives to fue for chis melancholy office. Dejcilid and defpairing I entered the ftreets of the cus, по objeft piefent to che ese» of ms mind but chac of my appioaching ixeiunon. the crowd w аь vift, the confuiion incxpieffible. As wc paifid by the end of a narrow lmt, Che hot fe of one of che guards sho melt cxittij in a line svich mc plumjcd and reared 111 a s loknc man¬ iin, and ic length chrtsv his rider upon. tht pavement Othcis of Che hoife- gu irds attempted to carch the bridle of the eniagid imnul They rufhed .pamit tleh other Severit of the iiossil were thiown down, nd tiamp- led under the hoifea (ια. flit flineks oi tutti, anJ tht lo td enes amt ex- chiiiaiiois ot tht bv flinders, mmgled m confutici ud tlilcordaiic choius. No found, 10 objtet could bc difhn- M 6 gtiifhtd·
guifhed. From the excefs of the tu¬ mult a fudden thought darted into my mind, where all, an inftant before, had been relaxation and defpair. Two or three of the horfes pufhed forward in a particular direction A moment after they rented with equal violence, and left a wide, but tranfitory gap My project was no fooner conceived, than executed. VVcak as I had juft now felt myfelf, a fupernatural tide of ltrength fecmed to come over me. I fpiungaway with all imaginable im- pctuofity, and rufhed down the lane I have juft mentioned Lvery one amidft the coniulion was attentive to his per- fonal fifety, and feveral minutes ctapf- cd before I was miffed.
CHAP.
CHAP XI. İN the lane every thing was filent, and the darknefs was extreme. Man, woman and child were gone out to view the proceflion. For fome time 1 could fearcely diftinguifti a fingle objeft ; the doors and windows were all clofed. I now chanced to come Co an open door, wiehin I faw no one bue an old man, vvho was bufy over fome meeallic work ac a chafing-difh of fire. I had no room for choice ; I expected every mornene co hear the myrmidons of the inquificion at my heels. I ruthed in ; I impetuoufly clofed che door, and bolced ie ; I chen feized che old man by che collar of his ihirt
fiiirt with a determined grafp, and fwore vehemently that I would anni¬ hilate him tha, inftant, if he did not confent to aftoid me aflittance. Though for fame time I had perhaps been feebler than he, the terror that now drove pie on, ïendered me com¬ paratively а giant. Hc intreated me to ptrmit him to bieathe, and pro¬ mifed to do whatever I fliould ('"fire. 1 looked round the apartment, and faw a rapici hanging againft the wall, of which I ïnitantly [iroceeded to make myfelf mitter. While I was domg this, my involuntaiy holt, vvho was extiemely ternfied at my procedure, mmblj ittempted to flip by me and rulli into the ftiect. With difficulty I caught hold ot his irm, and, pulling him back, put the point of my rapitr to lus bičati, iolenmly afluring hım that no tonfideiation on tarth fliould live him fiom my tury, if hi attempted to
to efcape a fécond time. He immedi¬ ately dropped on his knees, and with the moll piteous accents mtieaced me to fpare his lite. I told him that I was no lobber, that I did not intend him the (lighten; harm, and rhat, if he would implicitly yield to my direction, he might aflure himfttf he never fliould have reafon to repent his compliance. By this declaration the te-rors of the old man wtre fomewhat appcafed. I took the opportunity of this calm to go to the ftreet-door, which I inftantly locked, and put the key in my bofom. Nothing but the moil fortunate con¬ currence of ciicumftances could have thus far forwarded my efcape. The rearing of the horlt of the life-guards¬ man was purely accidental. The con- courfi and prefs ofthe eiowd from all iides could aloni have tendered this cir- cumfiante of any magnitude. The gap svhich svas made by the pufliing forward and
and refiling of ehe horfes, continued baiely long enough for me Co fpnng through, and clofed again in an inftant. It is aftonifhing that the thought of efcape fhould have thus fuddenly darted into my mind, which bue a moment before was in a ftate of dejection equal¬ ly incompatible wich aftivicy and with hope. That in the lane down which I rufhed, I fliould have met no human creature, and chac che firft open door 1 faw ihould lead co the reiidence of a decrepid old man, who appeared co be its fingle inhabitane, were occurrences equally excraordmary, yee feem eo have been boeh indifpenfible eo my fafecy. One poinc more concurred wich chis forcunate train, and aflifted to ftill the palpitations of my beating heart I perceived by certain indicanone in che councenance of my hoft thae he was by parentage a Jew. I prefently concluded that hc was what in Spain they de¬ nominate
nominate a new Chriftian, for that ottici wife he would not have been al¬ lowed to refide at large in a Spanifli city. Iluc, upon chac fuppoficion, I did noe believe that Chnftianity was vciy deeply mingled up in him with the vital principle the convercs of che inquificion are not confpicuous for their fincenty. Now chen for ehe firft time I thoughc, 111 che courfc ofcwelve years, I had opporeunicy co communi- cace wich a man whofe foul was not enflaved to the blood-thirfty fuperfti¬ tion of this devoted country. All I had feen during the period of my con¬ finement weie hyenas, tigers and cro- codiler—they were not men. I had no fooner fooched my hoft meo a temper to titlen to my ftory, than I told him with all imaginable franknefs whence I came, and to what I had been deflined. The mention of forcery, however, and preternaCural practices, 1 fttppreffed,
fupprtfftd, for I fufpefted that perlons of all religions entertained an equal honor agunft thefe. I fullered him to imagine chit the allega ion againft mc had been the cnme of heiefy all fefts ofthe Chi liliali fuperftition might be fuppoftd equally obnoxious, 01 ac- cepCablc to a Jcsv. 1 tmphatically ap¬ pealed co che perfecutions which hid been fo long directed againft thi reli¬ gion of his anceftois, and obferved hosv difgraceful ic would be 111 him co aititi che operation of a pnnciple, the effects of svhich his fatheis had fo deeply de¬ plored, and fo perfectly abhoned. I affured hmi thae 1 would bring him in¬ to no dinger, and thae all 1 afked was the pioteftion of a few hours I would leave him in the courfc of che follow¬ ing day, and ht fliould heai of mi no more. I lemindtd him chac the d tu¬ gir hi had to fear was 111 betiaying, nol 111 piocecting mc. The inquifition looked
looked upon every new Chriftian with an eye of the fevered jeaioufy ; and che mci e taft, if known, chac I had eaken ıefııgc in his houfe, would infallibly fubjift him co che purgación of a tem¬ poi aiy imprifonmenc in cheir dungeons. lc would be in vam foi hım co affirm chat he had no choice 111 whae had oc¬ curred, he was withoue α witnefs to connina his 1 elation, and the affections of a man boin of Jewifli pnents never obtained credit in the court ofthe in¬ quificion. I added, with folemn affe- serations, that, che moment 1 fee foot beyond clic ceırıtoıy of Spain, I would iernii to him che fum of fix hundied piftoles as an acknowledgmeni foi his kindnefs. During che whole of my difcourfe, I watt'ned his countenance with the utmoft 11 inutentls. It gradually re- lascd from thetciroi which had at firft appeared 111 it, to cxprefhons of com¬ panion
paflion and complacence. I faw no¬ thing thae oughe to alarm mc. When it was his curn Co fpeak, hc carneftly aflured me thae hc took a warm mcereft in my ftoiy, and would cheerfully per¬ form every ching I required. He was happy that my favourable ftars had led me to his habicaeion, and would rc]oice to che laceft hour of his exiftence, if they rendered him inftrumental in pre¬ femng che life of a human being from fo deplorable a cacaftrophe. While I calked to him, I eafily perceived that the arguments I ufed, which pioduced the moft fenfible effect upon his fea¬ tures, were thofe of the dangers anfing to him from betiaying me, and the re¬ ward of fix hundred piftoles which I promifed him in the event of my fuccefs. His motives however were blended together in his mmd, and he had no fooner formed a determination, grounded perhaps upon the meaneft confider-
considerations, than he became elo¬ quent in a panegyric of his own bene¬ volence, by which he was not, I be¬ lieve, more anxious to impofe upon me, than to put the change upon him¬ feif. I confidercd all that he find, his geftures, and the very tones of his voice, with eager anxiety, the terror of the inquifition penetrated to the mar- low in my bones, and the fate award¬ ed agunft me by that court became mexprcflibly more horrible to my thoughts, now tliat I faw the probabi¬ lity of cfcaping it. Every thing that I obiirved in the Jcsv was apparently fan, plauliblc and encouraging, but nothing had power to quell the agita¬ tions of my apprehenfive foul. We svere ftill engaged in difcufhng the topics I have mentioned, when I was fuddenly abi mcd by the nolle of fome one ftirring in the inner apart¬ ment. I had looked into this room, and
and had perceived nothing but the bed upon which the old mm nightly к pofed himfeif I fprung up, howevei, at the found, ind, perceiving that the dooi h id a bolt on the outlide, I eagei¬ ly fattened it 1 then turned to Mor- decai, fuch pievioufly to his convcr- fion had been the name of my hoft Wretch, fud I, did not you affine nn that there was no one but yourftlf in the houfc'-------Oh, cned Moidctai, it is my child 1 it is my child ' flic went inro the inner apartment ind has fillen afieep on the bed------Besvue' 1 m- fvvcred, the flighted falfliooit moie in ill inftantty bt cxpntcd in your bloo I ------ leali Abı ıhım to vvıtıııfs, ıc|oınıd the once mort ttinheJ Jew, it is ni) child' only my child'-------Itli nt, cried I with ftvtuty of accent, how ol I is this chikl'-------Only five ytars, hiu Moidccai mj diu Leah died when her babe svis no moie thin a veai old, uicl,
and, though w e had fesei dchildrci ,thia fingle ont has fuivised hci------Speak co your tluld, lit mc hcaı hci voice' -------He fpole to hci, and the an- luucJ, lathei, 1 want to come out, — I w ь flushed ıc vvas che voice of a lude girl. I tumed to the Jew take cue, faid I, how you deceise mc now is thtrt no Cher ptrfon in tint loom' lie imprcncecl a cuife on himf If it tneie were I opened the dooi with ca uion, and tht ImL pit cime foiw utt As loon as I lus liti, 1 'l /cd tın with 1 ıapıd molion, and letiiLtl ba к to ι thin. Mm, lud I, soi I ive tufi d with me too 1 ilhh , vou hue nor cüiılıılıud whae I am ilcipctl liom, mil vv h tt I have ro ten , tiom tl ι» moment this tl ikt finti be the plelp tit ni) iift.es i will not pait s uh hn an mituit is loip 43 ţ remun 111 soui houft, ind w h this ri ; 1 1 in niy hind 1 will pietti hei to 3 the
the heart, the moment I am led to imagine that I am no longer in fafety. The Jew trembled at my refolution, the emotions of α father worked in his featuies, and gliftencd in his eve. Ac leaft let me kifs her! faid he. Be ic fo ! replied I · one embrace, and chen, till the dawn of the coming day, flie remains with me. I releafed my hold, the child rufhed to her father, and hc caught her in his arms. My dear Leah, cried Mordecai, nosv a fainted fpint in the bofom of our father Abiahani' I call God со wicnefs beewecn us, that, if all my caution and vigilance can preventie, noe a hair of chis child fhall be injured ' Scranger, you licde know by how ftrong a mocive you have now engaged me Co your caufe We poor Jews, hunced on che face of the earth, the abhorrence and execration of man¬ kind, have noching bur family affec- tions to fupport us under our multi¬ plied
pited difgraccs , and family affections are entwined with our exiftence, the fondeft and belt loved part of oui felvés The God of Abraham biefs you, my child ' Now, fir, fpeik ' what is it you require of me ' I told che Jcsv chat I muft hive α fuit of cloches confoi miblc co che ap¬ pearance of a bpaniih cavalier, and certain medical ingieduncs that I nam¬ ed to him, togethei vv ith his chafing- difti of coils to prepare them, and, that done, I svould then impofe on him no further trouble. Having re¬ ceived his uiftruftions, he immediately fet out to piocure vvhat I demand¬ ed. Hc took with him the key of the houfe, and, as foon as he was gone, I retired with the child into the inner apartmenc, and fattened the door. At firft I applied myfelf to tian- quillif&the child, who had beer fome¬ what alarmed at vvhat flie had heard Vol. Ш N and
end feen : this was no very difficult Wflc. She prefently left me, to amufe herfelf with fome playthings that lay fcattertd in a corner of the apartment. My heart was now comparatively at eafe,· I faw the powerful hold I had Cn the fidelity of the Jew, and firm¬ ly perfuaded myfelf that I had no treachery ro fear on his part. Thus rircumftanced, the exertion and acti¬ vity with which I had lately been im¬ bued left me ¡ and I infeufibly funk into a fort of flumber. The night was nùsv far advanced, and I was ftill reclined infenfible upon Mordecai's bed, when fuddenly a jar¬ gon of various founds feemed from all fides to affali me. My mind was con- fufedj I heard fomething, but feemed wholly unconfeious what 1 was and where. I wanted to efcape from the difturbance, but it continued, anä eveh increafed. At length 1 was forced
forced to command my attention, and the firft thing 1 perceived was a beat¬ ing at «,hc door of the «.hambeť. The little girl was come to the bed-fide, and endeavouring to fhake me. Sir, fir, fhe cried in an eager accent, my father wants to come in, and I cannot flip the bolt of the door. By flow de¬ grees I began to comprehend my fitua¬ tion, and to recollect what hid hap¬ pened immediately before. I felt greatly alarmed , I feared by the dif¬ turbance that Moidecai had not re¬ turned alone. I effayed to fpeak, m/ organs refufed their ofiice. I endea¬ vouied to move, my limbs felt palfied, and abfolutely lifelefs. I experienced a finking and ficknefs of heart that feemed to be the immediate precurfor of death. By Iiftemng occafionally to the difcourfe which the father and the daughter began to hold with each other, I became fatisfied that Mordecai was N 2 without
withoue a companion. I endeavoured to make the little girl underftand that 1 was incapable of nfing from the bed, and, having at length fucceeded, flic communicated ehe information to her father Wich confiderable croublc he loofened ehe door ac its hinges, and entered ehe room. 1 found myfelf in the excremeft degree feeble and lan¬ guid, Che Jew however affidLOufly ad- mimftcred to me of cordials he had in his pofleffion, «id by degiees I file myfelf confiderably refloied Nosv for the hill time I svas ас leilure со ateend со the fine ot my ftrength and my he ilth My confine¬ ment m the inquifition, and the treat¬ ment Ihad experienced, had before ren¬ dered me feeble antl almoft helplcfs, buc chefe appeared со be circumfiinces fearcely worthy of attention m che ficuation in which I was Chen placed. The impulfe I fele in the nudit ot the confufion
confufion in the grand ftrcee of Valla¬ dohd, produced in me an energy and power of exertion, which nothing but the aftual experience of the faft could have perfuaded me wis poffible. This energy, once begun, appeared Co have che faculcy of prolonging icfelf, and I did not relapfe into imbecility, till the occafion feemed co be exhaufted which called for my exertion. 1 ex¬ amined myfelf by a mirror with which Mordecai furniihecl me , I found my hair as white as fnqsv, and my face ploughed with a choufand furrows. I was now fifty four, an age which, wich moderate exercife and a vigorous con- flitution, ofttn appears like the prime of human exiftence , but whoever had look-ei upon me in my prefent condi¬ ción, would noc hive heiitated toafiirm that I had reached the eightieth year uf my age. I ex mimed with difpaffion- att remaik the ftate of my intellect, I N 3 was
was perfuaded chat it had fubfided meo childifhnefs. My mind had been as much cribbed and immured as my body. 1 was the mere fhadow of a man, of no mort power and worth than thae which a magic lanthorn produces upon a wall Thefe are chy svorks, ftipeifticion ! this the genuine and pro¬ per operation of what is called Chrif- tunicv · Let che leadei judge ot what 1 had pafled through and known vncli- ín chofe curfed walls, by the effects ¡ ï have already refufed, I continue to refufe, to tell what I fuffered, and how thofe effects were produced. Enough of compaflion ¡ enough of complaint, I will confine my felf, as far as 1 am able, to fimple hiftory. Being recovered, as faras the cordials. and atcention of Mordecat were capa¬ ble of recovering me, I defired for the remainder ot the nighC to be alone, ex- tepe that 1 was ftill refolved to rtcain the
ehe little Jcwefs as the pledge of my, fafety. I was gieatly obliged to mjf hoft for che punctuality he had already difplayed, hc had found confiderable difliculey in procuring che arricies of which I ftood in need, owing partly to che laCcnefs of che hour, and parcly co che piefence of the king, and the general hurry and confufion which had been produced by the folemn entry of the inquifition. His efforts Coo Cq recover me from Che languor and le- Chargy into which I had funk, had a charafter of generofity , and perhaps 1 oughc now Co have crufted him with¬ oue a hoftage. Buc my heare was too carneftly bent upon accompliflnng its prefene object, co aftord harbour Co ehe punctilios of delicacy. The fame ear- ncflneb caufed me to infill upon Mor¬ decai's repairing the injury which the hinges of the door had fuftained, and I W.IS careful to fatisfy myfelf that N 4 every
every thing was reftored to a ftate of perfect fecunty. I was now once again alone. The little girl, who hatl been unufually dif¬ turbed, and roufed at an unfeafon- abtc hour, funk into a profound fleep. I heard ehe noife which Mordecai made in undreflmg himfeif, and com¬ puting his limbs upon a niactr.ifs, svhich he had dragged for the preľcnc occaiion into the front-room, and fpread btfoie the hearth. I foon found by the hardnefs of his breaching chat he alfo was afleep. I unfolded the papers he had broughe me ¡ chey con¬ fided of various medical ingredients I had directed him to pıoeuıe; there were alfo two or three vials containing fyrups and efftnccs. I had neai me a pair of fcales with which to weigh my ingredients, a veflel of water; the chafing-difh of my hoft in which the fire was nearly extinguifhed , and a fmall
a fmall caper, with fome charcoal eo relight ehe fire, in cafe of neceffity. While I was occupied in furveymg thefe articles and arranging my mace¬ nals, a fore of torpor came fuddenly over me, fo as to allow me no time for rcfiftance. I funk upon the bed. I remained thus for aboue half an hour, feemingly withoue che power of col¬ lecting my choughes. Ле length I ftarttd, felt alarmed, and applied my uemoft force of mmd Co roufe my ex¬ ertions. While I diose, or attempied to dnve, my aninfal fpints from limb to limb, and from part Co part, as if to enquire inco the general condition of my fiamc, 1 became tonvınced thae I ssas dying. Lcc noe the readei be fur- pi ifcd at this twelve years impnfon- nienc in а narrow and unwholcfome cell, may wtll accounc for fo ludden a cacaftrophe. Scrange and paiadoxicat as it may feem, 1 believe it will be N j found
found in the expenment, that the calm and fecunty which fucceed to great internal injuries, are more dangerous than rhe pangs and hardfhips that went before. I was now thoroughly alarm¬ ed 1 applied myfett with all vigilance and expedition to the compounding niy materials The fire was gone out, the taper was glimmering in the fockct, to fwallovv the julep vvhen I had prepared ir, feemed to be the laft effort of which my organs and mufcles were capable. It was the elixir of inimoi c ility, exactly made up according to the prefcnption of the ftranger Whether fiom the potency of the medicine, or the effetti of imagination, I felt revived the moment 1 had fwal- iowed it. I placed myfelf deliberately in Mordecai's bed, and drew over me the bed clothes. I fell afieep almoft inftantty. I believe my firft deep was perfectly found and infenfible, but in no
no long time I was vifited with the pleafanrcft dreams imaginable. No¬ thing was diftinct, nothing was at¬ tended with the confcioufncfs of my former idencity , but every thing was gay, chearful, invigoracmg and deli¬ cious I wandered amidft verdant lawns, and flower-enamelled gardens. I was faluced with the fingmg of a thoufand birds, and the murmuring of a choufand founcams Kids, fawns and lambs frifked and gamboled before me Ac a dittanci, rhrough an open¬ ing 111 the trees, I difcerned nymph* and their fvsuns dancing a vanety of antic ineaiures. I advanced towards them, they approached towards me. bites, oboes, recorders, and lnftru- mencsofa hundred names, commenced a chearful and melodious concert My¬ felf and the dancers now were mee f rhey placed me in che midit of them. Ihey began a choral fong, the motion N6 of
of their limbs conformed to their num¬ bers. I was the theme of the general chaunt; they afenbed to me the beau¬ ty of Apollo, the ftrength of Hercules, the invention of Mercury, and the youth of Bacchus. My deep was not long, m a few hours 1 awaked. With difficulty I recognifed the objects about me, and lecollected where I had been. It feemed to me that my heart had never beat fo vigorouily, nor my fpints flow¬ ed fo gay. I was alt tlafticity and life, I could fearcely hold myfelf quiet, I ftlt impelled to bound and leap like a kid upon the mountains. I pirtuved that my little Jesvefs was ftitl afieep, (lie had been unufually fatigued the night before. I know not whether Mcrdecai's hour of r«iing were cerne , if it svere, he was careful not to difturb his gueft. I put on the garments hc had prepared, I gazed 1 upon
upon ehe mirror he had left in my apartment. I can recolleft no fenfa¬ tion in che courfc of my life, fo unex¬ pected and furpnfing as whae I felt at that moment. The evening before, I had feen my hair w hice, and my face ploughed with furrows , I looked four- fcore. What I beheld now was totally different, yet altogccher familiar, it was myfelf, myfcif as I had appeared on ehe day of my marriage with Mar¬ guence de Damville; che eyes, ehe mouch, the hair, che complexion, every circumftance, poinc by point, che fame. I leaped a gulph of thirty- two years. I waktd from a dieam, tioublefome and diftiefsful beyond all dcfuiption, but it vanifhed, like che fliades of nighc upon che burft of a glorious morning in July, and lefc not .1 trace behind. I knesv not how Co take away my eyes from che mirror befoie me. I foon
I foon began to confider thae, if it were aftonifhing to me that, through all the regions of my countenance, I could difcover no crace of whar 1 had been the night before, ir would be ftill more aftonifliing Co my hoft. This fort of fenfacion I had noe che fmalleft ambition co produce one of Che ad- vancages of che metamorphofis I had fuftained, confifted in its tendency, in the eyes of all chat faw me, to cut off every fpecies of conneftion between my prefent and my former felf. It fortu- nacely happened that the room in which I Перс, being conftrufted upon che model of many ochers in Spain, hid a ftair ac che furcher end, wtth a crap-door in the acting, for the purpofe of ena¬ bling the inhabitant to afcend on the f oof in the cool of the day. The roofs were flac, and fo conftrufted, Chac there ssas little difficulty in pafling along them from houfe to houfe, from one end
end of the ftreet to the other. I avail¬ ed myfelf of the opportunity, and took leave of the reiidence of my kind hoft in^a way perfectly unceremonious, de¬ termined, however, fpeeddy to trar.f- mic eo him the reward I had pro¬ mifed. It may eafily bc believed, that Mordecat was not lefs rejoiced at ihe abfence of a gueft whom the vigilance ofthe inquifition rendered an uncom¬ monly dangerous one, than I was eo quit his habitation. I clofed the trap after mc, and clambered from roof to 1 oof to a confiderable diftance. At lengch' I encountered the occafion of .111 open window, and fortunately de¬ fcended, unfeen by any human being, into ehe fireer. Having svith difii¬ culty fucceeded on this occafion of public folemnicy, 111 engaging an aparc- rhenr in oneof che hotelo bf Valladohd, I fent inco it, as foon as I was able, a cheli, concaining every ncceflary of apparti,
appaiel, and particularly a fuit of cloches. I chen changed my drefs, and threw the clothes which Mordecat had provided into the chert I had pur- cnafed. As long as they continued fafe- ly locked up, and che key in my poflef¬ fion, no faculcy poflefled by any human creacure could deeeft roy idencicy, and expofe me afrefh to my former jailors. Ihe only peril under which 1 had before laboured, was from Mordecai, who, if he had feen me m the gai- menes he had procured, mighr have recognifed them, and, though a peril from chis fource came birely within the limits of poffibility, ic was eafily avoided, and I therefore chofe to avoid ic. I paffed che whole of chis day in a fpecies of enjoyment, which, as ic has no parallel in che ordinary tranfaftions of mdnkind, fo arc there no terms in the received languages of the world chat
that arc adequate co che defcnpcion of it. Ie has often been ä fubjeft of me¬ lancholy and complainc among mor¬ cais, chac, while che whole vcgeeable fyftem contains in it a principle of perpecual renewal, man alone,— che orramene and lord of che univerfe, man,—knows no return to youth. When the fun declines in ehe weft, ehe flowers droop, and fold up chen frail and delicace leaves, bue foon the eye¬ lids of the morn are again opened, and again they rejoice in his invigorating beams. Upon the approach of winter, the beech, the afli, and the monarch- oak, fca'Cir their svichered foliage over che plains, buc fpnng reappears, and nakednefs is no longer cheir reproach, and they clothe themfelves anew in their leafy honours. Wich svhac a me¬ lancholy fenfacion does che old man fuivey his decaying limbs' To me, hc cuts, chere is no ftcond morning, and
and no returning fpnng. My head, preffed down wich years, ihall never again erect icfelf in confcious man¬ hood. Thefe hoary locks ihall no more be adorned with the auburn of gloffy youth My weacher-beacen Crunk fhall at no time cloche icfelf with a fmoocher rind. A recruieed marrow fhall never fill thefe bones, nor a more vigorous fap circulare through my unftrung limbs. Τ recollect what 1 was in the prime of manhood, wich vain regrets, the memory anfvvers no other end than to torment and upbraid me The ufelefs wifh of the old man, the objeft of his hopelefs figh, was mine Common and every-day bleflings have lítele value in the eye of their poifeffor The young man fquanders the endow- menes of youeh, and knows noe co prize them. If rhe young man had once been old, if che old man could »gam he young, then, and then only, they
they would juftly eftimitc their svealeh» The fprmgy limb, the bounding frame, the vigour thae fets fatigue ac defiance, and revels in pleafures uncxhaufted, would then by the near and confcious tompanfon, of ftcblcnefs and lafiirude, the drooping limb, the aching head, and the frame decayed in all ics fenfes, bc well underftood Such was nıy fituation. Ycfterdıy I was fornicare , Co-day I was Cw eney. Ycfterday I was a prifoner, crippled m every articula¬ ción, today I was a citizen ofthe world, capable of all its delights. To¬ morrow I was deftmed to have been dngged Co the flake with ignominy, and to fuffer intoleiable anguifh amidft che fliouts and huzzas ot an unfeeling po. pulace, Co morrow I was at hbert) co employ as I pleafed, to choofe che cheatre upon which ie fhould be fpent, and the gracificacions chac fhould be tiowded into ie WhaC was moft materia^
material, my mind was grown young wtth my body. Weary of eternal ftruggle, 1 had lately refigned the con- teft, and funk under the ill fortune that relcntlcfsly purfued mc. Now I felt withm me a fuperfluity of vigour ¡ I panted for fomething to contend with, and fomething to conquer. My fenfes unfolded themfelves to all the curiofity of remark, my thoughts fecmed capa¬ ble of induftry unwearied, and invefti- gation the moil conftant and invinci¬ ble. Ambition revived in my bofom, I longed for new engagements and new relations, I defired to perform fomething, that I might myfelf regard With complacence, and that I might fee the world ftaitat and applaud. I determined, for reafons that I fhall prefently have occafion to unfold, that my firft vifit fliould be to my daughter» at my paternal citate of St. Leon I propoted to fpend two or three days in preparation
preparation for this journey. By mete accident, by a moil cenfurable heed- leflhefs, I became in fome degree a fpectacor of the Auto de Fe', in which I was deftincd to have been a victim. Unawares I had become entangled in the crowd, and could with difiiculty efcape, or even prevent my being car¬ ried nearer to the centre of the fcene. 1 faw the galleries and accommodations that had been netted for the fpečla- tors , I faw the windows and roots of the houfes ciowded with beholders. Ihc flirieks ot the fufferers I could not hear, they were drowned m the internal exultations of the muiutude. But what was woiftof all, I difcerned fome ot the condemned, fixed as they vvere upon fmall boards, near the top of (lakes about four yards high, and therefoie greatly above the heads ofthe aliembly, while the flames, abund¬ antly fed with faggots and dry fuel, climbed
climbed aloft, and feemed eager to embrace their victims. As I have al¬ ready faid, there were thirty of thefe deach-devotcd frames ; and, if my eye did noc count them all, my fancy well fupplied what fenfe was unable to dif¬ cover. The imprcflion I felt at that moment was horrible beyond all con. ception. I exerted my new-found ftrength, and pufhed out of che prefs with irrefiftible vigour. If at that in¬ ftant I could have felt exultación, even in Che confeioufnefs of my own fafety, 1 fhould regard myfelf as che moll ex¬ ecrable of monfters.
END OF THE THIRC VOLUME.
ťnntedby R. NoBtE, Sbircine.
