Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Alibeg the tempter: a tale wild and wonderful
ALIBEG THE TEMPTER
CHAP. I Wherefore bast thou left ihy grave? Montoojiehy. APPALLED did Lorenzo gaze on his dripping form, and endeavour in one whirling moment to recollect all De Rolfe had told him respecting the fate of Ruganoff and his comrades, since their last parting on the island of Flores —but in vain. A chaos of events only would arise to his remembrance—he could fix nothing, clearly. There was something of burning—of bondage—of vol, ii. B shipwreck
shipwreck! Had not De Rolfe assured him often that Ruganoff was dead—en¬ gulfed by the swallowing waves ? had he not asserted Geronime alone to have been saved from some fatal catastrophe —that her comrades were food for the otter, and the sea-dog ? was it so ? or had he only dreamed it so? he could not tell, but his brain swam giddily, and, urged by the impulse of terror, he would have sought De Rolfe instantly, but wanted the power to do so. Just at that moment, the violent motion of the vessel causing him to reel backward, he perceived close behind him the features of De Rolfe, .who seemed for some time to have been earnestly regarding them; but whose scrutinizing glance, Lorenzo could not help thinking, appeared di¬ rected rather toward himself, than to the wave-worn object who still remained standing piteously before them. Lorenzo, with a faint cry of recogni¬ tion,
tion, now retreated toward De Rolfe, and seizing his arm with a convulsive gripe, pointed to the drenched figure, and feebly articulated—" Behold!" *' It is Ruganoff," said De Rolfe, with more than stoical calmness, " but he does not know me, nor shall—you have promised not to reveal my secret to any on board this vessel." " But didst thou not tell me that Ruganoff no longer existed ?" demanded Lorenzo, with even added emotion, as he reflected on that fatal promise— " that the sea weed was his shroud— the cold worm his companion ?" " I saw him struggling under the green salt wave," returned De Rolfe, with an air of indifference—" I saw not his escape. But—come nearer—nearer still------" Lorenzo, confused and speechless, here approached him as desired. " Are there no circumstances," De B 2 Rolfe
Rolfe continued, " in that same appal¬ ling tale thou last night toldst me, to warrant Lorenzo in the supposition that this is not in reality Ruganoff, but only some foul fiend assuming here (I grant thou knowst not how) his living like¬ ness for abhorrent purposes ?" Lorenzo again stood aghast at this insinuation of De Rolfe, which, indeed, his own conscience had already suggest¬ ed to his bewildered mind. Meantime, the crew still loitered around them in astonishment, not knowing, without their commander's order, how to dispose of this utterly-unexpected claimant on their humanity; when Ruganoff, who had not yet spoken, advanced, and, with his usual roughness, said—" Why stand ye all amazed ? afford ye no warmer welcome to a brother seaman whom dis¬ tress hath made your guest on a night like this? is such the best cheer I am likely to receive ? am I among speech¬ less puppets?—or moving statues ?" "It
" It is—it is!" exclaimed Lorenzo aloud (to whom the sound of Ruganoff's voice appeared to have brought con¬ viction) clinging still, as for protection, to De Rolfe. " It is—thou art right," responded Ruganoff, bluntly. " I am Ruganoff— to whom, but a short time since, thyself, as thou knowest—instigated, perhaps, by certain remembrances—afforded a much kinder reception." " Some demon art thou," cried Lo¬ renzo, shunning him, " and not Ru¬ ganoff! some thing of evil, hither sent to ensnare me, if possible, to even deep¬ er perdition. But I know thee—back, fiend! to thy native darkness—thou art baffled, for I know thee!" " Approach me—gaze—assure thy¬ self!" said Ruganoff, advancing, indig¬ nant at this burst of invective from the lips of Lorenzo, of which, nevertheless, he scarcely comprehended the meaning. B 3 « My
" My bark is destroyed—my command gone—but, I am he ------" " Away—away—thou art false, and execrable as the power that sent thee!" exclaimed Lorenzo, shrinking from him still. " Loathed as the agent of a fell superior—abhorred as the realm whose inhabitant thou art — away, I say — away!" The amazement of the rugged Ru¬ ganoff, on finding himself taken for something even worse than he really was, and by one too with whom he had possessed the advantage of a previous acquaintance, was ludicrous in the ex¬ treme. He knew not whether to laugh, or to appear incensed, at those expres¬ sions which he yet found it impossible wholly to understand. De Rolfe knew their meaning better. He stood fiercely regarding both Lorenzo and the drip¬ ping figure that caused his consterna¬ tion, with an aspect in which were truly depicted
depicted triumphant pride, and demo¬ niac exultation. But Ruganoff marked it not, nor indeed took any particular notice of his person ; and even Lorenzo failed to observe it, but still clung wildly to him, as the only being in whom he had ever reposed unlimited confidence, and who alone knew the meaning of his expressions, and his fears. After a brief pause, Ruganoff again attempted to make himself heard. He told his tale in much the same manner as De Rolfe had narrated it, with the exception that to the last overset of their boat, near the Portuguese coast, he added his own escape, which Lorenzo now remembered (or thought he* re¬ membered) De Rolfe never having po¬ sitively averred to be impossible. Find¬ ing himself, however, to be still in dan¬ ger, he had contrived to recover the boat, and quitting the coast of Portu¬ gal, had determined to wait alone on b 4 the
the high seas, with what provision he could stow on board, for the passing of some merchant vessel which might con¬ vey him to place of safety. But this more than commonly boisterous night had nearly caused him to repent his re¬ solution—driven his frail beat with vio¬ lence against the brig of which he had now the fortune to be on board—his signals being disregarded by her crew, because they were unheard, and himself barely rescued a second time from a watery grave. This narrative Ruganoff bluffly de¬ livered, and without reserve, in pre¬ sence of De Rolfe and Lorenzo, mak¬ ing only some few necessary deviations from fact, just sufficient to conceal his ancient piratical propensities, which he knew not how the former might have relished—but not once during the re¬ cital mentioned the name of Gero- mme. And
And now the gloom of night had completely closed around the betossed, and creaking vessel, which still bravely rode the tempestuous billows, and her crew seemed conscious would continue to do so undamaged, even although their fury should increase. On every side of her the ocean appeared like a vast sheet of living foam rising tumultuously into various images, and incessantly breaking over her whitened deck, or washing her shrouds with its spray; while the black, overhanging sky, form¬ ed a chaotic contrast to the **" snow- crowned" waves among which she bound¬ ed so dauntlessly. The wind now howl¬ ed through her rigging more furiously than ever, causing her very masts to rock and quiver, and then anon subsid¬ ed into a low wailing sound, more dis¬ mal, if possible, than the loud rushing of its boisterous violence. The whole formed a scene of noisy confusion, and b 5 terror,
terror, such as even the stormy Atlantic seldom exhibited: thus much, although they shrunk not from braving its fury, confessed the stoutest hearts among the crew of De Rolfe. There is a tradition, well enough known to many who frequent that pe¬ rilous ocean, of a shadowy unsubstantial vessel, which, in case of tremendous weather, is reported to be constantly abroad upon its surface; for the purpose, it is believed, of abstracting from such wrecks as may then happen the souls of the drowned sailors, and conveying them to a place of security to wait for judg¬ ment. This tradition is not confined to the Atlantic only, but extends also to other seas, where, it is affirmed, the same vessel (or one extremely like it, at least) has been frequently seen to glide on a stormy night, which, it was afterwards found, had proved fatal to some of the convoy observing it. Among the many spectral
spectral barks with which the supersti¬ tion of sailors has, as it were, peopled the seas alluded to, it is chiefly remark¬ able of the present, that its appearance is commonly just before, or immediately succeeds, a shipwreck: to the living, however, the sight of it is no gratifica¬ tion, except as a mere matter of curiosity, for it neither assists, nor has any thing to do with them—its business is solely with the dead. While yet the voice of Ruganoff was ringing in the ear of Lorenzo, and ere the latter could collect any reply to his " plain unvarnished tale," the hoarse wind was augmented by a hoarser cry from the forecastle, proceeding at once from many rugged throats opened in conjunction. The exclamation was," The dead man's bark!" and every eye was instantly turned towards the rolling main, to catch a glimpse of the terrific spectacle. b 6 CHAP.
CHAP. II. The dead man's bark glides swiftly on, Tho shivering drown'd to save : Near yon sad wreck her goat is won— Where ghosts shriek r/er the wave! Whistles Ihe wind, and I jud, yet nought To aid her speed avails: Swoln by no human blast, I thought. Her light, and filmy sails. Portuguese Ballad. Lorenzo perceived a whitish burst of light, moving direct to windward, which, on gazing intently, he discerned with astonishment presented the likeness of a blue burning hulk, bearing transparent sails, and skimming the troubled waves with superhuman velocity. Wherever it passed, the turbulent billows submit¬ ted to a preternatural calm, and became instantly smooth, as for the purpose of facilitating
facilitating its passage. The roaring blast appeared hushed and tame on ap¬ proaching this terrible object, over which, it was evident, it possessed no power—as if the very winds shrunk ap¬ palled from encountering any thing less material than themselves. It is not ex¬ traordinary that a sight from which even the elements appeared to recoil with terror, should possess a proportion¬ ate influence over the minds of men; and to this feeling of involuntary awe now yielded the stoutest hearts among De Rolfe's sturdy, and hitherto-invin¬ cible crew. Each strained his sight— each felt his breast sink and swell with a fluttering motion till now unknown to him, or endured but rarely—each strove to hold his breath, and effectu¬ ally held his silence, while this horrible phantom glided awfully, magnificently by. Nor was Lorenzo less moved than the rest: he, too, felt his thick breath heave
heave, and his heart palpitate, as the pale gorgeous vision fleetly disappeared. Even the rugged Ruganoff was ex¬ cited to wonder, and emotion not to be suppressed—De Rolfe alone remained immoveable. Calm and inscrutable as usual, the commander stood beside them, surveying still their consternation with a curled lip, and haughty demeanour, but little regarding the object by which it was occasioned. On them, however, his glance shot lightning, and his fierce eye revealed his inmost soul: had Lo¬ renzo spared an instant to regard just then his hideously-impressive features, he must have discovered in them, at that fearful moment, bomething more than was mortal. But his whole soul was engrossed by the spectacle which had suddenly attracted his eyes, and he averted them not to observe the malig¬ nant sneer that at once irradiated and disfigured the aspect of his too fatally- believed
believed, and trusted, confidant and friend. Just as the ominous messenger dis¬ appeared from view, De Rolfe burst from his apparent trance of exultation, and exclaimed—" Ay, go! cleave thy swift course over the billowy waste, like a hungry prey-bird to the far-scented offal—there will be food for thee ere the morning shines! Thou ! who skim- mest the watery gulf, on one hand, as far as the ice-bound shore of the nor¬ thern Muscovite, and, on the other, dost traverse even that which laves the sea¬ ward extremities of the great Celestial Empire 6 —on—sail on! our Atlantic to-night requireth thy fleet presence, and thou knowest, fell raven, thou wilt not
not depart ungorged. Speed, bark, speed swiftly —fata)!y! for well thou knowest, ere thy dreadful course be won, will thy work be waiting for thee —the wreck gone down—the last wild bubbling over, and the spirits of the shrieking drowned alone point out to thee the spot of thy destination. A precious freight —a lovely aerial bur¬ then—beauty cut off in its early bloom ^-gentleness cropt in the morning of its sweetness, shall on this night be thine. Speed, thou unerring harbinger, speed—speed!" During the latter portion of De Rolfe's animated speech, Ruganoff had turned him regardless aside, and kneel¬ ing toward where the framework of the vessel had formed something like a cross, now appeared to be repeating his prayers, with frequent inclinations of the head, after the Russian custom. Lo¬ renzo observed him again and again sa¬ lute
lute the holy symbol, rude as it was, which in his need chance seemed to have erected for hs worship: but De Rolfe turned away, and however joy¬ fully he had hailed the appearance of the spectre bark, it was evident he liked not the present exhibition. A sudden shi¬ vering seemed to seize him, which he could not control, and he removed to a distance of several additional paces: while Lorenzo, approaching nearer to the Muscovite, heard him return warm thanks for his recent preservation, and fervently implore that, in spite of this portentous encounter, their vessel might ride the gale in safety to its termination. Such was the supplication, in his hour of peril, of the humbled Ruganoff; who knew too well the fatal certaintjr of wreck and devastation being at hand, when he saw abroad that never vainly- commissioned vessel, not to shudder at its appearance. It had now passed, but the
the terrified rover still remained pros¬ trate, while De Rolfe yet kept aloof from surveying his sacred posture, with averted looks, and a scowling counte¬ nance. The agonized Lorenzo acted diffe¬ rently. He hung over the kneeling Ruganoff unobserved, and, as he watch- .ed his reverential attitude, murmuringly exclaimed—" Can he kneel ?—and I may not bend! do holy aspirations pass his rugged lips?—and mine may not utter them ! dares he to ask eternal salvation? —and Lorenzo must not supplicate! Yet, if unpolluted by crime—Alas! I am polluted. If I preserved my con¬ science free from reproach—my hands from blood—(such were the easy condi¬ tions, as they seemed to me)—have I preserved them? No. While I kept unstained my innocence, though assail¬ ed by temptation—hope! when I yield¬ ed to guilt—despair. Have I not yield¬ ed?—
ed ?—be not so busy, memory—Ah ! I have yielded. Juggled out of my self- command by circumstances, I know that I am criminal—I fear too far for mercy. It is not barely the perpetration of offence, but mine own act, and oath, and bond, and will, as the price of un¬ curbed enjoyment, and unlimited free¬ dom, that if I did commit—Away! I have committed—let me not think the rest. But—can he pray? down then, stubborn Lorenzo, to thy prophet's very pantofles—it is never too late to strive! but what shall I solicit ? rags again, de¬ sert fare, and poverty ? the wasted ca¬ mel, faint with the wearying march— the parching thirst created in the throat by flying particles of the fiery sand, and the scanty drop wrung from his slaugh¬ tered form alone to appease its suffocat¬ ing agony? hunger, and toil, and strife, and solitude—the dreary solitude of the scorching wilderness, made still more lonely
lonely to me by the massacre of all whose existence once rendered it tolerable? No! Aben Voorg—Zeid—Mohara, too, is gone—she whom- I loved as I have not loved another! I heard her dying exclamation poured—Muley, where wast thou ?—let me not thither, kind Maho¬ met, let me not—there could I only find added desolation—there could I only meet madness and remorse. What then have I to ask? since not without a total restitution of advantages evil won could I again be admitted within the pale of his sanctuary, and to restore what I am would make me what I was, but dare not again become—there is nought left to require. Beside, is it not too late ? for know I not that of all my va¬ garies past, and faded joys, their guilt will alone remain ? joys! I have never tasted them—mirth has been strange to my lips, as pleasure to my bosom : or, \f her bright cup sparkled near my grasp, it
it was only to be dashed—But, softly'^! see, he arises—he kisses the blessed symbol his fancy has helped to frame— can this man be evil? yet trust him not, Lorenzo, albeit thou dost not slay —he may still, perhaps, dissemble." Ruganoff now arose, but appeared to be still absorbed in mute, and somewhat barbarous adoration, of the half imagin¬ ary crucifix. Lorenzo crossed sullenly to De Rolfe, and simply observed, with a significant glance at Ruganoff—" Thou hast not seen ?" " I know" replied the personage ad¬ dressed, coolly, but with bitterness, still continuing his averted gaze. " He must be what he seemeth," said Lorenzo, again regarding Ruganoff ear¬ nestly. " And that is—what ?" inquired De Rolfe. Lorenzo made no answer, but seemed to think more favourably of Ruganoff. Meantime,
Meantime, the latter, having finished his almost heathenish ceremonies, ad¬ vanced with a bold and confident air towards them, seeming not a little in¬ vigorated in mind, at least, by his lengthened spiritual exercise. Observ¬ ing, however, that Lorenzo still regard¬ ed him with a steady, suspicious look, he exclaimed with genuine warmth.* and in no gentle tone—" There is much in¬ gratitude, younker, in this rough shak¬ ing oft' of an old acquaintance—but I dread thee little now. I am armed— I am invulnerable. A power greater than thine—and thine seemeth much in this vessel—=hath enabled me now to scoff at thy attempts to do me shame, or harm. I am sheathed in brass—thy words will pass idly now, and wound me not. Do what thou wilt — de¬ nounce me if thou choosest: I feel that within me which dares defy thy gro¬ velling nature to its worst. Thy voice has
has authority here—mine possessed it elsewhere—I spoke not the word, and thou livest: thyself mayest choose to give it utterance—and I am instantly nothing. But I yet am assured there is something in Ruganoff—destitute as he seems—of an eternal nature, which thou canst not destroy. In this I am mightier than thou—for I feel the ex¬ alted spirit which animates my words, and dwelleth in my bosom, superior far to thine." " How ! that again !" now exclaimed Lorenzo (on whom a new light seemed to have flashed suddenly, as if kindled by his words) and he gasped anxiously as he spoke—" tell me, and truly——-" " I have told thee nothing but truth," answered Ruganoff, surlily—" now and before. If thou wouldest hear more, demean thyself better first: my limbs require rest—my body lacks food—both thy least beck could furnish, but neither have
have been proffered ire. Salt water— although he loves it—is no beverage for the brawny, sea-worn veteran: yet none other hath moistened my throat for a longer period than thou wottest of—ay, or carest to inquire. Dost thou think me ail spirit—jackanapes ?" Lorenzo drew a pistol—one of a su¬ perb pair conferred on him that morn¬ ing by De Rolfe—he had just loaded them—and now levelled it full at the broad breast of the unshrinking Ruga¬ noff, exclaiming—" Spirit, or devil—or, it may be, both—this brings thee a lengthened rest. Thou art already shri¬ ven—if -shrift may aught avail thee, which I more than question. This be the proof!" Thus spoke Lorenzo, as he cocked the pistol—and, as he ceased, he fired. A sudden flash in the darkness, and a report scarce loud enough for the announcement of so great a crime, were all
all that preceded the fall of Ruganoff who sunk where he stood, like a tree that had been felled, uttering neither word nor groan. The crew were amazed, but silent: they appeared to deem it the act of their commander, or commit¬ ted with his sanction, and none rushed to abet, or even support' the fallen. Lorenzo himself seemed astonished at what he had done. For a while he stood motionless, with the discharged weapon in his hand still pointed towards his victim ; then he grew ashamed and sorry, and, it was evident, had he de¬ layed the fatal stroke a few brief mo¬ ments longer, the impulse of humanity would have stopped his hand. But it was now too late. Ruganoff lay mo¬ tionless at his feet—the recording angel had, perhaps, already added his blood to the catalogue of the offender's crimes in heaven, and it would not be easily wiped away. So thought the already vol. ii. c penitent
ALIBEG penitent Lorenzo, as with a heart full of grief, and swimming eyes, which the darkness, however, effectually conceal¬ ed, he bent sadly over the body of the fallen pirate— ■' A3 if to search how fjr the wound he gave Had sent its victim onward to his grave." Presently he observed the limbs to move quiveringly—life was not yet ex¬ tinct in the body of Ruganoff: a hoarse¬ ly-muttered sound was the next symp¬ tom of animation it betrayed—Lorenzo knew not if it was a curse or no, but he felt that he deserved it should have been for his rashness—for his ingratitude. Another "low murmur succeeded, but Lorenzo was still unable to distinguish any thing: the wretched being now half arose, but spent by the speedy effects of the wound, and excessive pre¬ vious exhaustion, he instantly sunk again apparently lifeless, and rolled heavily towards his murderer. The latter
latter started with horror, as he felt the writhing arms clinging convulsively around his trembling knees, but com¬ passion was mingled with his dread, and it was not until now that he sum¬ moned for him that assistance Ruganoff before really stood in need of, and whicli should have been earlier bestow¬ ed. He remembered that the now ex¬ piring man had asked for drink, and immediately commanded one of the crew to bring some water: it was brought, but Ruganoff only shook his head faintly, and, collecting all his strength for a last effort, appeared about to communicate something to Lorenzo. On perceiving this, two of the pirates, for his better ease while speaking, sup¬ ported him in a partially elevated pos¬ ture; and Ruganoff then commenced that speech whicli was his last, in broken sentences, somewhat to the following effect.—" I know not why you have c 2 slain
slain me—some strange mistake—I have always been rather your friend than enemy. Even now, in my parting mo¬ ments, you are my greatest consolation —you from whose hand I have received my doom! I rejoice to think that to one human being, at least, I have ex¬ tended that mercy myself so soon must supplicate; though requited for my clemency—as you have requited me. I thought not always thus—but my spirit is changed. I am Ruganoff now no longer—my vessel burnt—my comrades drowned — brave Monctar! — gallant Smyth !—faithful Spalatro!—where are ye all ?—am I last of my band ? I am childish to ask the question—I knew I was the last. But listen to me. I have heard news of Estherholme—he is dead —gone to his narrow, dark abode, and I.—scarce my breath holds to tell thee out the tale—who shot that pang through my bosom? Ha! who did-it? it
it was thou, and I cannot but think of it, because—but I forgive thee—Oh ! again—again!" Lorenzo's attention during this reci¬ tal, especially since the name of Esther- holme was mentioned, scarcely permit¬ ted him to breathe. He saw that utter¬ ance was fraught with anguish to the speaker, but had not power to check him in the narration of what he was so anxious to hear. In a few minutes, Ruganoff conti¬ nued—" Speech is painful to me—but let me finish. Flow not so fast, my gushing life-tide! cease—he expired in Portugal a short time since, whither he had sped in pursuit of Seraphina—thy Seraphina — who has abandoned her home to search for thee. She knows thy abode to have been Flores—Flores —and is, perhaps, at this moment there?. Estherholme found her not, but died de¬ spairing—as he should have died. Return c 3 not
not thou to Sicily—at least—not yet— happiness awaits thee first in the Azores. Part we in peace — I never did thee harm : others I have wronged, but they sleep soundly now, undisturbed by the remembrance, as I shall do to-morrow —and thou hast lived to avenge on me tlieir injuries, I can add no more— Estherholme thus removed, no obstacle now exists to thy felicity. Farewell— seek Seraphina—RuganofPs task is ac¬ complished ! last of my crew, I yet leave behind me one who—though he slew me—cannot curse my memory." Tlie dying rover again sunk heavily on his side, as he concluded—he seem¬ ed, indeed, to have uttered his parting accents. In vain Lorenzo now essayed to staunch the tide that still trickled fatally from his bleeding bosom, ren¬ dering him fainter and fainter at every succeeding gush—it flowed in spite of his unavailing efforts, by which he only bedabbled
bedabbled himself with gore—Ruganoff appeared about to expire. But where was De Rolfe during this affecting scene? did he appear to feel no interest in the events of the passing moment? far — far otherwise. Alone, with arms majestically folded on his breast, De Rolfe now proudly stood, observing, with a triumphantly- lighted countenance, the tragical cata¬ strophe of this strange encounter. . He interfered not either to prevent, or to accelerate, such a fearful issue as had ari¬ sen from their unexpected interview; but, it was now evident, from the proud fire of exultation in his eyes, that he was far from displeased with its bloody termination. Yet whence could arise his gratification at the circumstance ? why should De Rolfe thus fiendishly rejoice at the slaughter of the unoffend¬ ing Ruganoff? This Lorenzo was wholly unable to divine, as, rising from c 4 his
his recumbent posture over the prostrate slain, he first caught a glimpse of his triumphant aspect. Then hurling the fatal weapon as far as his trepidation permitted him into the boiling waves, and exclaiming—" Thou shalt do no more murder!" he turned gloomily to demand an explanation of this conduct. " Curse on my wretched destiny!" he added, as the second pistol followed the former into the bellowing surge—" I told thee, De Rolfe, I was born to be criminal. Why dost thou seem thus unfeelingly to rejoice at what my un¬ happy hand hath perpetrated ?—An¬ swer me?" M Thou hast slain him —he was thy only friend!" now cried De Rolfe, in a loud exulting tone, while the radiance of joy still more distinctly lit his wildly- expressive features. « Distraction urged me to the deed," exclaimed Lorenzo, looking astonished —«I
__« I could forbear no longer. He provoked me to frenzy—I gave the fatal fire—but am now sorrowful for his wretched doom; since once to his clemency, as thou knowest well, I owed my own worthless life, I sus¬ pected, too—but I will not think so longer, it is impossible—my fears were false: his was the demeanour of a faith¬ ful Christian—I ought to have weighed it better. I am not blameless—dost tliou not behold me contrite?—but how can Lorenzo ever want a friend, when De Rolfe is near who has hitherto gui¬ ded him?" " Duped ideot!" now burst from the lips of the altered De Rolfe— « yet hold—thy precipitate words are true. I was thy friend—am thy associate— and shall be so for ever! thine still to haunt thee, like an accusing conscience, and keep with thee—and never be cast from thee!" He paused, and Lorenzo c 5 now
now stood perfectly thunderstruck; and shrouding his visage from such thicken¬ ing horrors, clasped his bewildered fore¬ head with convulsive violence, and be- grimmed his face with the colour of his hands. While thus for a moment bu¬ ried in reflection, or rather while in that state of stupor which admits not of any reflection, a strange peal of laughter rang loudly in his ears, which, on looking up, he observed proceeded from the changed comniandej' of the vessel—the now- scoffing De Rolfe, who, perceiving him again attentive, tauntingly resumed— " But he to whom, by thine own base confession, thou owest thy vagrant ex¬ istence—he who would fain have guided thee to happiness, hast thou requited with evil, and rashly rendered power¬ less to serve thee more," A horrible suggestion here again flashed across the almost-frenzied ima¬ gination of Lorenzo, of which the ghast-
Jy idea made his brain spin giddily, and his whole frame to tremble. He thought upon the strange circumstances accompanying the recent mysterious reappearance of De Rolfe—his present disguised situation, and suddenly chan¬ ged demeanour. Why did he shun the recognition of Ruganoff? From these his mind wandered to the trans¬ actions of that awful night passed on the island of Flores by the beaten and famished fugitives—the apparent death of Geronime, and subsequent convey¬ ance of her body to the vessel with la¬ mentations " not loud but deep"—her miraculous restoration during the night, according to her own account, by un¬ taught pirates—and again he shuddered visibly. These were no common events __were they such as could in nature exist at any period— " And overcome us, like a summer's cloud. Without our special wonder?" c 6 Lorenzo
Lorenzo deemed otherwise, and then turning suddenly to his companion, de¬ manded with faltering earnestness— " If he whose still warm body spouts gore for my offence be the only friend of Lorenzo—oh! what art thou, who didst counsel his destruction ?" "Behold ine and judge!" De Rolfe responded sullenly. " My form is flesh like yours—my feelings more tempe¬ rate. I am greater in wisdom than thou, as tliou ownest—I am steadier of purpose, as thou shalt acknowledge. Further than this I may not answer thee—no ! for my task is yet unfinished here. Further than this I will not an¬ swer thee—no ! for the lofty spirit I still bear is not in more bound to subser¬ viency. And further, I know, thou canst not penetrate—else thou hadst never raised thy hand to slaughter the only being whose wish was to advantage thee. It is in vain thou strivest td staunch
staunch the wound—he will expire within an hour at latest. The ball has carried corruption into his vitals, and loosed the streams of life—who sped the fatal summoner? Thou! over whom is again flung the horrible incarnadine predicted in thy destiny, because thou wilt deem terrestrial good felicity, and dream thou canst cull earth's flowers, without rending thy spirit on its thorns. Thou! stained with ingratitude—a heart¬ breaking libertine—many times perjured —thrice a murderer! well mayest thou stand aghast—deemest thou still to enjoy tranquillity ? share it then with the pale-blooded forms of thy butchered companions, for these thou wilt never lose. In the closet thou shalt recal their remembrance—in the wind thou shalt hear their voices—in the forest thou shalt feel their forms: the cold fresh sweeping of the summer leaves shall seem to thee as the clinging of the dead —even
—even as the clammy embracing of the grave. Arion .— Rosalba — Ruganoff! and which of these had done thee in¬ jury ? Rosalba would thy quivering lip proclaim to have wronged thee ? it may be so—but say not the laws of Heaven, and of humanity, the murderer for the slain ?—thou shalt sustain wrong, if thine integrity thou wouldst hold spotless, and yet not smite to destroy. Now wander to the wide earth's ex- tremest verge—from the frost-bound pole to which the quivering needle flies, even unto its stranger southern anti¬ podes—from the point which the sun shall next-irradiate with his rising glory, to that which is illumined by his setting gorgeousness—thou shalt never find for- getfulness of the visions that will pur¬ sue thee, but only augment many fold their hideousness. Seek the proud climes where civilized humanity hath fixed its most boasted abode: thou wilt find
find their civilization but a boast, and their vaunted superiority an empty bubble. View their extensive marts.,, where lurketh hollow deceit beneath each winning countenance—mark their gay minstrelsy, whose enlivening aid is too often invoked to veil some crafty purpose—see how the loaded ocean groans and heaves beneath their floating edifices! then gaze on tho merchant's lean, and anxious aspect—is this the man to whose gain and quietude the very main vouchsafes its assistance? then watch the wan faded looks of hag¬ gard beauty—are these the effects of yon seductive strains ? observe the dull squalidness of the daily market drudge —are those sunken features the reward of his industry ? Then turn thee, and roam over regions scarcely yet inhabited by man—the mountain barely accessible to his footsteps—the savage tract where he hardly has dared to venture—the lone
lone wilderness where never, or rarely, hath heretofore been erected his rude dwelling. Here study his frugal, and repulsive fare—his perilous adventures in the search of it—his desperate strug¬ gles with the ferocious habitants of that unenviable territory—his imminent es¬ capes—escape not always the brawny Indian's portion—and his laborious life. Are these the sole earthly rewards of abstemiousness—of courage, and of be¬ nevolence? all were his virtues—prac¬ tised, not pretended to—and only this their recompence? if such alone prove the terrestrial meed of the guiltless, un¬ tutored savage, what, worse than homi¬ cide! hopest thou can be thine? But fulfil thy chosen doom. In a little space thou wilt turn thy prow for ever frcm these detested shores. Look not amazed —thou yet thinkest again to visit the Azores ?—vain-sighted mortal! it will never be. No face thou hast hitherto gazed
(razed on shalt thou ever see more— none of those who have hitherto con¬ sorted thee shall again be thy compa¬ nions. All familiar objects thou must now forego—forsake—forswear! forget thou canst not—else how gladly wouldst thou consign them to oblivion I But" henceforth thy lot will be separate from these. I have arranged that from this, thy desolate hour, my bark shall be for a space at thy command; in which thou but beholdest my solicitude to advan¬ tage thee. Direct it where thou wilt— (away, I know, from Europe)—and, for its callous crew, whose hearts are as hard as their conditions desperate — whose deeds I already have disclosed to thee, that thou might'st not choose unwit¬ tingly—continue to command, or aban¬ don them, as thy choice then may dic¬ tate. See! the vessel is near whose re¬ turn sets me at liberty: she is a saga¬ cious falcon, that never misses her gorge. From
From the wreck she brings tidings— Seraphina, whom thy love hath but lured to destruction, from this spot—on this night, thou beholdest again ! Lo!" he triumphantly added—" she comes ! she conies!" Lorenzo cast his eyes in the direction pointed out by De Rolfe, and again dis¬ tinctly saw the shadowy vessel, now ap¬ parently returning with her freight of fresh-delivered phantoms over the roar¬ ing surge. Among the shivering group of spectres that crowded her sulphu- reously-illumined deck—a ghastly crew but dimly visible—was one whose droop¬ ing wretchedness principally attracted his attention. Could his fate be so trebly accursed? the deep blue eyes of Sera¬ phina glared wistfully upon him ! a con¬ viction that she was on that night lost to him for ever rushed at once upon his mind—the seamen's tale was indeed true—and he stood for some time as if petrified
petrified into stone. Swiftly, and yet majestically, passed the appalling page¬ ant—no currents were obstructive, nor winds needful to her course—and at length the dead man's bark finally disap¬ peared among the dense black masses of cloud that on every side bounded the horizon. But how looked Lorenzo on this se¬ cond disappearance of the (to him) so awfully-freighted vessel? conscious that he gazed but on the disembodied spirit of her whom he had vainly loved while living—whose kindred dust was now doomed to the dreary ocean, he remain¬ ed for some time motionless with terror and amazement. But when he saw the grizly vessel vanish, bearing with it the only hope that at present could sweeten his abhorred existence, his awe seemed to diminish, and frenzy appeared to take ■possession of his bosom. He raged— he stamped—he tore his hair with vio¬ lence—
lence—he felt himself perfectly duped by one of those " juggling fiends" that speak only to deceive— " That patter with us in a double sense. And keep the word- of promise to our car, But break it to our hope." He stretched out his arms toward the receding phantom—he exerted his voice, but in vain; it had sped from his sight with the rapidity of the passing wind, and refused to appear again to his solici¬ tations. Meanwhile, the storm which had been (or appeared to have been) partially hushed, during the passage on their windward side of the spectral ves¬ sel, now burst forth again with renewed fury, and its bowlings seemed increased by their temporary suspension. Ruga¬ noff, who, amid the dreadful uproar, bed still lain gasping on the unsteady deck until the passing of death's fearful mes¬ senger, seeming then to be conscious that
that his hour was come, had yielded his last breath without a groan, as the bark swept fleetly by his gory reclining place. It was a moment of the most consum¬ mate horror to all on board the vessel, but more particularly so to Lorenzo, who, beside the anguish he felt for the fate of Seraphina, whose gentle blue eyes seemed even in death to reproach him for having so recklessly abandoned her, knew himself also the immediate cause of the parting of one other unhappy spirit which had that night flitted from its earthly tenement. The death of Ruganoff had been dealt by his own hand, however mistaken the apprehen¬ sions which induced him to the deed, and he now too bitterly felt they were mistaken—a conviction not likely to di¬ minish the regret he endured for his rashness. He had given two victims to the bony tyrant on that fatal night—he had furnished with two aerial passengers that
that appalling harbinger of wreck and destruction! his feelings were too pow¬ erful for expression—almost too horrible for endurance. He stood by the side of the constantly-heaving vessel, forgetful of all but his own agony, his dishevelled hair streaming on the hollow and piti¬ less wind, in seeming defiance of the elements to do him any further harm. " Can it be possible ?—so near my clasp too!" he exclaimed, in a tone scarcely to be distinguished from the hoarse voice of the tempest—" but, Seraphina! we shall meet again—meet in a happier sphere. Who shall prevent us?—who ordain it otherwise ?" " Thy master and mine!" now shout¬ ed suddenly an exulting voice. Ruganoff had already expired. Lo¬ renzo turned abruptly to where, a few minutes before, had stood the female pirate, but his eye met only vacancy-*- De Rolfe was seen no more. Several
ir * i'fi % * Several expectant springs had passed away, and as many succeeding winters had elapsed, ere the aged and benevo¬ lent Alvarez, bowed down by years, dis¬ appointment, and infirmities, yielded gradually to the decay of nature, and sunk at last into his quiet grave. It was long ere he relinquished the feelings of grief in which he had indulged on the first departure of Lorenzo from Flores; but, as time wore away, the conduct of his now seemingly fickle and ungrateful guest, appeared to his mind in a totally different point of view from that in which he had hitherto been accustomed to regard it. He now weighed more maturely the abrupt, and mysterious departure—he might almost have said flight—of the young foreigner from his hospitable dwelling, and won¬ dered how he could so long have re¬ mained
mained blind to the base ingratitude of his thankless visitor. He found leisure, too, now to deliberate on the strange circumstances which attended his first introduction into his own secluded fa¬ mily ; and, as the affection he once felt for his already adopted son-in-law be¬ came weaned,' or weakened by absence, Alvarez most sincerely regretted having extended his benevolence so far. In the course of these deliberations, Yambo had been admitted to a due share of his master's confidence, aud, it is hardly needful to observe, felt his scruples re¬ specting the discovery of what he knew relax considerably with the lapse of time. Accordingly, one morning the domestic, with many supplications for forgive¬ ness, and declarations that he had done all for the best, divulged without reserve the transactions of that fearful night, as far as he had witnessed them. As may be supposed, this communication served little
little to amend, or contravene, the grow¬ ing ill opinion Alvarez had already be¬ gan to entertain of his some time highly- favoured guest; against whom, after some few months of additional conside¬ ration, during which Lorenzo came not to vindicate himself, he could scarcely refrain from bursting into the bitterest invectives. These transports, however, were generally restrained, except when himself and Yambo chanced to be un¬ observed, in commiseradon for the un¬ happy Isabel; but his changed feelings speedily manifested themselves in his constantly evinced dislike to the very mention of his name; and the result was, that Isabel was sternly forbidden to con¬ verse, or even think of him more. Meanwhile, the dejection of the droop- ins; Isabel continued still undiminished by the lapse of years, or the change of circumstance. The seasons succeeded each other in pleasing variety—skies vol. ii. d were
were calm or stormy—sunny, or over¬ shadowed like her own future prospects, but the heart and the thoughts of Isabel were still the same. In vain did her sister, Maria, still essay with lively converse, and remonstrances, to win her from her settled melancholy—in vain try to abate, or dissipate, her determined sadness— " The serpent of the field, by nrt And spells, ia mm from harming; v But that which coils around the hcnrt, Oh ! who hath power of charming ?" Such was the situation of affairs on the island of Flores, when the' good old Alvarez," after a life principally passed in the devising of accumulated acts of benevolence, yielded back his spirit into the hands of its Creator, and added another pang to the afflicted bosom of the surviving Isabel. Before his death, however, he had insisted on seeing united in the holy trammels of matrimony, Jannette,
Jannette, and his own faithful Yambo; and they were joined together accord¬ ingly in his presence, not a little to their mutual delight and gratification. Notwithstanding their uniqn, Yambo and Jannette still continued to reside at Flores, it having been stipulated by Al¬ varez on his deathbed that both should remain as heretofore in the service of his unprotected children; and such being also the wish of Maria and Isabel, who now inhabited alone the mansion of their deceased parent. It was not long before the industrious Du Moulin found means to remove from his wretched hovel on the coast of Cor- vo, to a more commodious and comfort¬ able abode on the strand of Flores, in the immediate vicinity of the new-mar¬ ried couple. Here he continued to cast his nets daily for the capture of the finny tribe, and soon found, much to the benefit of his circumstances, that the d 2 proximity
proximity of his new habitation to that of the lamented Alvarez was not among the least of its recommendations. He was now an almost constant guest in the kitchen of Isabel, which he regularly supplied with the finest produce of his piscatory skill, and where Seraphina not unfrequently formed the theme of con¬ versation. The thoughts of Isabel, too, were not seldom devoted to the probable destiny of the lovely blue-eyed stranger, of whose inducement for abandoning alone her paternal roof (powerful as it must have been) she was yet in ignorance. She suspected love to have had its share in her venturous determination—but all was vacant conjecture—all was likely to remain so: for a dreadful night having succeeded the morning on which she embarked, it was rumoured the vessel was lost, and that all on board had pe¬ rished. Possessed of these advantages, added to the constant intercourse he was now
now enabled to enjoy with his adored Jannette, the already aged Du Moulin contrived to pass the latter portion of his days much easier than the former. Isabel he considered as the primal cause and origin of his better fortune, and would have grieved sincerely for her ap¬ parent unhappiness, if grief for any thing could have found room in his heart: as it was, his best endeavours were exerted incessantly for her gratification, and he never omitted subjoining to his daily orisons a blessing on the head of his pre¬ sent benefactress. One clear spring evening, shortly after the demise of Alvarez, the now doubly wretched Isabel chanced to stroll alone to visit the tomb of her deceased parent, erected on an adjacent hallowed emi¬ nence, to which she frequently of late directed her solitary steps. How dif¬ ferent was now her tread—how utterly contrasted to the light and airy de- d 3 meanour
meanour which formerly, in happier days, distinguished the volatile and ro¬ mantic Isabel! its grace was indeed pre¬ served, but its fairy-like elasticity—its lightness and speed, were gone. Who that had observed her in those happier, youthful hours, winding perhaps that very steep for pastime, or for exercise, would have deemed that a single blast might one day render her the feeble, and wasted form, she now appeared ? that— in the language of the bard, too fatally accurate— " A cloud Blight gather o'er her biauty, and a j;Iooin In hcrditrk eye, prophetic of the duoni Heaven gives its favourites—early death ?*' Yet such was plainly the case with the once lively — once engaging Isabel. Slowly, and with arms folded over her disconsolate bosom, did she now mourn¬ fully proceed to the gloomy spot of her destination, while the welcome breath of
of evening fanned her feverish temples, and its shadows already began to over¬ spread her flowery and silent course. Having finished her accustomed de¬ votions over the carefully-tended grave, she was suddenly startled by perceiving the white sails of a vessel which seemed moored in the little bay just beneath where she stood, and was evidently now preparing again to encounter the watery element. Giving way to the thousand feelings awakened by this interesting- object in her bosom, she stood for a time regarding it with curiosity, not wholly unmingled with anxiety and surprise. It was not the simple fishing- bark of Du Moulin, nor could even the gathering gloom cause her to mistake it for such—she knew too well the solita¬ ry sail that distinguished it. While yet she gazed upon it, her wonder was a second time more fearfully excited by the sound of approaching hoarse, and d 4 unrecognised
unrecognised voices, and Isabel instinc¬ tively recoiled behind her father's mar¬ ble monument, which she rightly judg¬ ed sufficiently high to afford her con¬ cealment, for the purpose of evading their observation as they passed. In a few minutes she observed, apparently about to go on board the vessel, as the path they were pursuing led directly to the beach, seven or eight sturdy ruffians, each laden with a huge bucket, which it seemed to task even his herculean strength to wield, or manage. These, she now rightly judged, were part of the crew belonging to the vessel which had excited her attention, and who had merely been on shore for the purpose, it appeared, of obtaining a fresh supply of water. But tlieir rugged forms—their frightful countenances! never before had Isabel seen their resemblance—never before had she even dreamed of such. As the figures drew nearer, she could plainly
plainly distinguish on the bare shoulder of the foremost the mark of a brand of infamy (could she deem it otherwise ?) stamped there doubtless in requital for some horrid crime. Isabel shuddered, and would now have fled precipitately, but terror effectually deprived her of motion, and fixed her an involuntary statue to the spot she had chosen. And now, as these colossal barbarians still approached the tomb, close to which they were obliged to pass in their down¬ ward path to the strand, Isabel could not avoid listening to their conversa¬ tion, every syllable of which distinctly fell upon her ear. Shiveringly she heard it, although she knew not its im¬ port, or only partially divined it; and, while she held her breath, her wan slight figure, save for occasional tremb¬ lings, might have been well mistaken for a portion of the monument destined so soon to cover it from all future vicissi¬ tudes, d 5 " None
" None dread a blustering sea-gale less than myself," said he of the branded shoulder—" but I like not this ocean since the night brave captain De Rolfe vanished, like the smoke of his own pistol, just as the dead man's bark flitted by within even a cable's length of us. That accursed vessel must have captur¬ ed him, body as well as spirit, and waft¬ ed him—who knows whither ?" " Nay, facts speak for themselves," re¬ plied another gruff, untutored voice— " that captain De Rolfe was unfairly filched from us is certain. But, in ano¬ ther quarter, our next captain served us a little better trick. On the coast of Chili, where we chanced to land for fuel, he gave us the slip, and we heard of him no more." " Let him scud to the devil, without helm, oar, or canvass !" returned the for¬ mer speaker, contemptuously. " We boarded not a single prize during the whole
whole term of his command. He want¬ ed to free the captives, too, won by gal¬ lant De Rolfe, and preserved for the slave-market: but finding himself baf¬ fled in his wishes, by the general voice, he abandoned us, I guess, for compani¬ ons better suited to his poltroonish pro¬ pensities." The voices now became indistinct, as the speakers receded toward the sloping strand, and Isabel heard no more. Scarcely had she ventured from her hi¬ ding-place, ere she discerned the dark visage of Yambo peering cautiously af¬ ter the retreating seamen, who as hasti¬ ly recognised his mistress. He had been on some trivial errand to the resi¬ dence of Du Moulin, which he had just quitted: on his return his path was crossed by those terrific strangers, to whose appearance, however, Yambo was better familiarized than Isabel, having seen such before, and he rejoiced at dis- d 6 cover-
covering her just in time to scare, in some degree, her not entirely groundless apprehensions. Although the excited curiosity of Yambo would have prompt¬ ed him still further pryingly to pursue the pirates (for such he judged, and the reader is aware, were those who had caught his attention) he instantly re¬ linquished his previous intention of do¬ ing so, and expressed to his mistress, in an under tone, his gratification at thus having seasonably encountered her. " Let us hasten, good Yambo!" she exclaimed, hurrying the negro forward as she spoke—" I have been alarmed— let us hasten !" and grasping his arm, for the double purpose of supporting her feebleness and assisting her speed, they soon reached in safety their isolated dwelling, and thought of the circum¬ stance no more. Often during the course of that suc¬ ceeding summer did Isabel, leaning on the
the arm of her sister Maria, drag her exhausted, and still-weakening frame, as far as the delightful flowery summit of that endeared and sacred eminence. Here, often, over the last abode of her lamented parent, would she afresh pour out her sorrows to the commiserating ear of fond sisterly affection, at that lone pensive hour when—as if every thing in nature commiserated the darkness of her pitiable destiny— " Tacli hWci (he dews have lightly wer, And in the sky the stars arc met, And on the m«' is deeper blue, And on the leal a biowner hue;" and then, casting her sunken eyes to¬ ward the vast expanse of water, veiled in the dim, and shadowy twilight, she again wept bitterly. Oh.' why did those smiling billows first waft to her deluded clasp the bright being who af¬ terwards abandoned her? why lend their treacherous aid to bear him again from her
her embracing arms, whose image she yet strove vainly to erase from her dis¬ tracted memory?—But, as the winter drew near, her debility increased, and the utter hopelessness of her situation manifested itself more heavily : she was unable to leave her apartment—then to quit her couch—and before the approach of another spring, Isabel was sleeping with Alvarez, under the covering turf, and cold grey stone. Such was the doom of the lovely, but broken-hearted Isabel—such was her first love, and its fatal termination! Isabel was not born to support sorrow— '* Through yean, or moons, the Inner weight to bear Which colder hearts endure till (lity are laid By age in earth; iier days, mul plenums were Brief, but delightful—such as had not suid Lo;)g with her destiny ; hut she sleeps, well By the si'a shore, whereon •ihe toved lo dwell. Maria, now the only survivor of this hapless family, received with the part¬ ing
ing bequest of Isabel—though she smi¬ led at its futility—an injunction not to abandon the fatal island of Flores until Lorenzo should return, except tidings reached her of his abode elsewhere; so fondly, even in death, did the unhappy victim cling to the delusive hope that he would at some time revisit the scene of tlieir unfortunate loves. In this solitary situation, the chief plea¬ sure of her existence was still to ascend tlie little mount where reposed the blighted ashes of her kindred—the part¬ ner and protector of her happier child¬ hood, and water their grave with her tears. Sometimes, on these occasions, while straining her dimmed sight over the glassy main, imagination would cre¬ ate a speck in appearance like the boat which had first conveyed Lorenzo to that flowery, but fatal shore: starting from her involuntary trance, Maria strove to view more clearly the ap¬ proaching
proaching object—but it was only fancy —such never appeared again. For Lorenzo—as far as those were concerned who in Flores had been either his friends, or enemies—what became of him was ever afterwards involved in mystery. To them he had ceased to exist any longer—had disappeared like the transient furrow left by some passing keel on the clear surface of the billowy ocean: the dull wave presently closes over it—perchance the white foam bub¬ bles for an instant, and all is erased— obliterated. What trace the bark leaves of its watery cours.. left the mysterious wanderer of the track he had chosen. He spoke no word at parting—he bade no vain adieus, nor entertained any idle hopes of his return—he had fled on his fearful wanderings, and was heard of by the inhabitants of the peaceful Azores no more.
CHAP.
CHAP. III. A change came o'er tlie spirit of my dream. Bvnov. It was sunrise on the mighty Cordil¬ leras, or chains of the Andes, that vast mountainous ridge which divides South America, even from the Isthmus of Da- rien to the Straits of Magellan, an im¬ mense extent of more than four thou¬ sand miles. The effulgent orb of hea¬ ven was just beginning to shine glori¬ ously upon the aspiring summits of this lofty and extensive range, already tin¬ ged with the gorgeousness imparted by his approaching chariot, though not yet fully immerged in the warm radiance of his cheering beams. The last thin rem¬ nants of vapour were vanishing fast be¬ fore
fore his potent influence, as the youthful Ozembo now bounded with an agile step, and joy-illumined countenance, over the peaked brow of one of those superior wonders of nature. The lofty ground his feet now trod was the sum- mit of only one of the lower Andes, yet had he witnessed, on the preceding eve, the thunder growl, and the lightning stream beneath him, himself unharmed —unaffected by the elementary uproar. Sheltered only by a projecting crag, on its bare inclement edge had he passed a night of storm and tumult to the wide realm he viewed stretched below his own rude- couch, himself little incom¬ moded, save by the piercing cold inci¬ dental to his present elevated situation. Thus reclined, and regaidlessof the com¬ fortless exposure of his wild mountain bed, for his heart was warmed by tlie hope of coming transport, had Ozembo abided the dawn of light to direct him in
in his difficult downward course: and well did that anxiously-awaited day¬ break requite him for its seeming tardi¬ ness, by the glorious scene it unfolded to his gaze. The armed hunter—for such Ozembo seemed—although traversing the rude wilds of Patagonia, was of slenderer form, and much fairer complexion, than the gigantic inhabitants of that singular region—the huge Patagonians, are gene¬ rally found to exhibit. Yet looked he like a " savage man of Inde," for his whole dress, and accoutrements, were completely Indian, even to the tomahawk whicli he carried in his hand: but such rather resembled the more fanciful equip¬ ment, and appendages, of the most north¬ ern tribes, or those of Chili, than the far wilder and coarser habiliments of southern Patagonia. His attire was ? sort of tunic, adorned with innumerable beads and stitches, and fastened round the
the middle with a cloth girdle. His hair appeared carefully decorated with a profusion of shining baubles, over which waved a variegated plume of the most beautiful feathers, exhibiting every tint and shade imaginable. To these may be added silver bracelets on the arms and wrists, together with a massy breastplate of the same pure metal: a collar of wam¬ pum, and the accustomed cloth boots, called mocazins, ornamented with quills from the porcupine, completed his equip¬ ment. His arms were-the bow and qui¬ ver, which slung carelessly behind him, peeped over his shoulder—the scalping- knife stuck in his girdle, and the toma¬ hawk in his hand. He was alone—but at a great distance, toward the foot of the mountain, were discernible some rude huts, evidently those of his brethren, or tribe; for it was easy to perceive that toward them his eyes, swimming with tenderness, were frequently cast, and toward
toward them he also directed his fleet course. But now, so more than commonly at¬ tractive was the extensive prospect which lay stretched on every side of him, that Ozembo paused involuntarily to survey for a moment its gradual deve- lopement, and extraordinary magnifi¬ cence. The clouds that a short time since had enveloped the mountain were now entirely dissipated, save a few light and airy vapours not perceptible, or very imperfectly so, and which intercepted not the view of objects either beyond or beneath them. On the north lay ex¬ tended the expansive, and pathless plains, which conducted the Indian's practised eye toward Chili, and the region from which Ozembo, indeed, had lately wan¬ dered : while, on the south, were dis¬ tinguishable even the Magellanic islands, now called Tierra del Fuego, or the Land of I? ire. Ozembo looked toward the rising sun— « Wh ch
" Which gladden'di on their mountain tops, the hearts Of the Chaldean shepherds, till they pour'd Themselves in orhons 1" and might well have imbibed in that exalted solitude a glowing conviction, that (although his own feelings were far from devotional)— " Not vainly did the early Persian mate His altar the high places, and the peak Of earth o'crgazing mountains, and thus take A fit and unwall'd temple, there to seek The spirit in whose honour shrines arc weak Uprear'd of humuu hands." He then turned toward the opposite side of the mountain, and—what beholds he there ? why doth Ozembo start, and look astonished ? Can there be aught save vacancy in that huge hollow vale to fix his astounded sight ? Yes ! there was something more. A form arrayed and armed after the Indian fasliion, in limb and feature exactly like himself, there greets his amazed vision, and awakens no slight emotion of wonder in his
his breast. He advances—recedes, and the figure does precisely the same: in short, it presents the very image of him¬ self in person and attitude, such as Ozembo could alone hope to discover in the clearest streamlet; with the splen¬ did addition of a magnificent arch of the most beautiful radiance he had ever be¬ held, which encircled the head of this singular and imposing phantom \ The startled Ozembo gazed with wonder at the curious phenomenon, presenting to his plcised eye all the agreeable hues exhibited
exhibited by the many-coloured bow seen sometimes in the heavens, and ex¬ claimed with transport—" Oh ! I have seen the sun break beautifully through clouds of mist and skies of loveliness, in climes and situations of almost pqual grandeur, but never saw it rise so gorge¬ ously—so enchantingly as now ! Then be calmed, my burning brow—my fe¬ vered brain—my continual restlessness— away—away! Avaunt this incessant dread of something terrible—this awe which has hitherto consumed my peace, and still secretly tends to poison the felicity which to others I seem to par¬ take of and enjoy. Come, dove-like tranquillity ! let me woo thee to my breast—let me teach thee to abide in my bosom. How beautiful and sooth¬ ing is this mountain scene! it exhila¬ rates—it revives me, and strengthens my hope of future unalloyed happiness. Yes! amid the charms of nature—cap- tivations
tivations such as these—lavished in transcendant magnificence around ^him, Ozembo cannot fail to be happy. When once are consummated my nup¬ tials with the blooming Ora, of which this very day must behold the celebra¬ tion, there will be nought to interrupt my tranquillity—nothing to disturb the felicity of Ozembo! I at length see be¬ fore me a path of unmingled bliss, in which surely—surely, it will be mine to tread!" As Ozembo finished speaking, and while yet he gazed on his reflected fi¬ gure, or the beautiful semblance of a rainbow which adorned it with a seem¬ ing crown of glory, he fancied its hues became suddenly darkened, or obscured, as if by the intervention between it and himself of some larger, though scarcely more substantial object. In another moment he thought he observed—or was he still deceived by a wreath of the vol. ii. e morning
morning mist not wholly exhaled?— the obscuring substance assume a palp¬ able form, not unfamiliar to his shud¬ dering gaze, " hanghty, and high, and beautiful," though it neither bore— " The wing of seraph, nor the tuco of man." i A ^ Well knew the now-shrinking Ozem¬ bo in whose presence he stood. Pale even through the partial shade of his Indian-smeared complexion—tottering beneath the weight of his own weapons, did he cower before one against whom he knew such were powerless. Yet he strove not to fly—having met, he was aware, he must endure the dreadful in- terview.
CHAP.
CHAP. IV. By a power to thee unknown, 1 bou catist never be iifone , '1 hou art wrapt as with a shroud, 'llion nrt gathei'd in a cloud ; And tor ever »lialt thou dwell In the spi it of this spell. 1\\ ron. *' Most evil messenger!" exclaimed the trembling Ozembo, after a lengthen¬ ed pause—" thou harbinger of all ill, what seekcst thou? say, wherefore art thou come?"' " To congratulate Ozembo," said a voice, " on his attainment of that ines¬ timable jewel he hath heretofore sought in vain. Thou hast this morning con¬ fessed thyself happy. I have often been at hand to thwart thy felicity—I now appear to congratulate thee on its existence." e 2 " I need
" I need not thy congratulations," said Ozembo, hastily; " but I hear—I have heard them—again let us sepa¬ rate." " Poor mortal! separated we have never been," replied the voice, in the same dull tone—" nor shall be: nei¬ ther deem thou to enjoy full happiness in an earthly draught; for, even be¬ fore thou dost drain the dregs, shall thy cup have a smack of bitter. But, I repeat, I appear not now to baffle thy design." " And thou wilt not cross my pre¬ sent purpose ?" demanded Ozembo, im¬ ploringly. " I will not," said the voice, grow¬ ing fainter as the shadowy form seem¬ ed to recede before the burning sun¬ beam, which now shsine clearly on the space it occupied. " Ah! shall Ora then be mine?" again asked the anxious Ozembo. " And
" And Ora shall be thine," returned the voice, now scarcely audible. " Then, fiend! will Ozembo be happy in spite of thee," he muttered, as the phantom entirely disappeared—" if only the lovely Ora be permitted by thy malice lo reward my love. What then could possibly happen to render 1113?" state aught save felicitous—what could arise to embitter then my destiny ? Should I struggle with dangers—Ora partakes them with me. Should I grieve under affliction—Ora will be my com¬ forter. Even misfortunes themselves will fall like blessings, with the voice of Ora to solace—to console me. Revered by the tribe to which I have attached myself, and blessed with the society of my beloved Ora, shall the future con¬ dition of Ozembo be undisturbable hap¬ piness : nor do I deem, thou loathed re¬ membrancer! that even thy own fell presence could suffice to destroy his bliss." e 3 Ozembo
Ozembo had now descended to near midway of the mountain, when on casting his eyes again toward the still far-off habitations of his tribe, he dis¬ tinguished on the sea shore a solitary object, apparently making signals to a vessel which he now also discovered directing its course towards the Straits of Magellan. The figure was habited (as he could just discern) in an Euro¬ pean dress, a garb instantly recognised by Ozembo, though not of precisely the same form as any he ever remembered to have*seen before; while the distract¬ ed eagerness with which he endeavoured to make his signals seen, plainly demon¬ strated that he too rightly deemed their success or failure to be fraught with to Mm the important alternatives of life, or destruction. At the same instant, Ozembo saw issuing from the temporary abodes
abodes of his travelling Indian associates —the scattered dwellings of his own beloved tribe, but with whose casual fierceness he was well acquainted, a host of ready warriors, all eager to rush on their defenceless foe. He saw, and pitied the unfortunate victim, who, he doubt¬ ed not, had been abandoned or lost during some excursion in search of water, or fuel; and urging his speed to its utmost, he rushed forward, adopting sagaciously a shorter course, for the purpose of preventing if possible the in¬ human sacrifice. Fleet as the rushing wind was the course of Ozembo down each succeed¬ ing dangerous promontory, his eye still fixed on the object of his solicitude, of whose vain attempts to attract attention the vessel seemed to take no notice, but still kept steadily her onward course. And oh! through what romantic tracts, and amid what fearful glens, did his e 4 precipitous
precipitous path conduct him! Here probably over a smooth sloping region- some flowery glade where the munifi¬ cence of nature had been more inviting¬ ly manifested— " Had scooped the volt, jnd clothed the mounram's side With nmiy a verdant wood ," and anon through some dell of a gloomier aspect, where lurks in his never molest¬ ed lair the ravenous beast of prey— " Or tin. green serpent from his dar\ abode, Which c%en imagination fcirs to tread, Al noon forth issuing githers up his train In orbs immense, thin, darting out -uiew, SeeLs the refreshing louut, by whicli diffused, lit throws bis folds, and while with thrtai'mng tongue Aud deathful jaws erecr, the monster curls His flaming crest, all other thirst appall'd, Or shivering flies, or checVd, at distance stands " Then again would succeed an almost level and expansive plain, such as the mighty condor, " hugest of his kind," would have chosen to rest upon from his sweeping course. Over the whole of these
these did Ozembo hasten with the speed of the chased guanaco, or wild lama, often droppingfrom a considerable height to gain the level beneath, avoiding gulfs, and surmounting difficulties, which only the dexterity taught him by the wan¬ dering life he led could have enabled him to encounter and overcome. At length, with a vigorous bound, though exhausted and breathless, he gained the shelving beach, but perceived, at the same instant, a party of his tribe still nearer than himself to the devoted European. Their bows were already half bent—their eagle eyes fixed eagerly on their victim—Ozembo perceived that not a moment was to be lost. Then raising his practised voice, he shouted aloud, in the hope that its sound might reach, and deter them at least from the infliction of a present summary doom, exclaiming fiercely—" Who is he that would anger Ozembo? Who dares e 5 do
do him wrong? His arm is powerful in the strife, as his voice strong in suppli¬ cation. Let the stranger live! Spare him—he shall belong to Ozembo! Hold back your javelins—hold!"
CHAP.
CHAP. V. He dies, and makes no sign~0h! God forgive him! SllAKESPEAn*. Meanwhile, the affrighted mariner, perceiving the hopelessness of his situa¬ tion, and that the vessel continued her outward course regardless of his un¬ marked, or unheeded signals, at once gave way to frenzy and despair. He seemed to be entirely unarmed; he looked around upon the gathering hills, where his approaching foes appeared to thicken every moment—clasped his hands in the bitterest agony of despera¬ tion—stretched them again toward the vanishing sail with which he felt had departed his only hope, and, as if choos- e6 ing
ing to meet death from the watery main in preference to their poisoned ja¬ velins, rushed frantically into the briny waves. But his purpose, conceived in a moment of the most agonizing horror, was by his pursuers as instantaneously defeated; for the Indians, fearful of al¬ together losing their prey, on observing this last desperate act whose meaning could not be mistaken, no longer with¬ held the terrible discharge. The follow¬ ing moment a swarm of weapons assailed the unhappy victim, and so unerring were the hands which launched them, that few, or, perhaps, none mistook their aim. Without a struggle he sunk, co¬ vered with wounds, leaving the troubled surface of a crimson hue, and casting one ghastly look toward his murderers, but— " If ought his lips essay'd to groan, The rushing billows chok'd the tone." Grieved and astounded at the sudden cata-
catastrophe, Ozembo reached the edge of the water, where many of his tribe had already arrived, and endeavoured througii the clear element to discern some trace of the body, but in vain. Eager for spoil, some of his more ven¬ turous, or, perhaps, more greedy asso¬ ciates, even entered the ocean, diving deep to discover the missing prize, but in vain also: they returned to the sur¬ face with tidings that the crimson newly issued from his wounds was alone visi¬ ble—the corpse (though they panted to strip it of its European ornaments) was not to be found. Presently the last purple shade disappeared, and nothing remained to mark the spot where had perished the unoffending sacrifice of their barbarity. Disappointed they turned away, save a solitary aged In¬ dian, named Oromanes, whose cupidity induced him to remain after all had de¬ parted: but Ozembo, after pausing awhile
awhile to breathe more freely, slowly measured his steps more dejected than heretofore toward the reed-built* habi¬ tations of his tribe, where he knew one awaited his arrival who was likely to be little pleased with his delay. Jj. * ¥ V "* The beautiful Ora was the daughter of Orontes, a chief of acknowledged bravery and merit, an elder of the coun¬ cil, and a warrior whose valour had done much for the tribe of which his daughter was the pride and flower. She was in the prime of youth—dark, comely, and engaging. Many a gallant warrior, renowned for his achievements, and ho¬ noured for his wisdom, had in vain soli¬ cited the hand of the captivating Ora. At last came one whose enviable destiny it
it was to prove less indifferent to her. From a far land he came—she under¬ stood not which, nor where; but he had seen many, and often amused Orontes and herself with a description of the wonders they contained. He had proved himself brave in combat—was magna¬ nimous as the eagle, although gentle as the dove, and (compared with many of the war-worn chiefs around her) very, very fair; and further than this she cared not to inquire. At her own earnest so¬ licitation, Orontes had adopted Ozembo into their tribe, who otherwise might have devoured him as an enemy; and the venerable chief found no reason hi¬ therto to repent having saved his life. Thus protected by the powerful Orontes, and favoured almost constantly with the tender society of the graceful Ora, the newly-adopted Indian soon afterwards —in imitation of the dusky wooer of Shakespeare— ■' Took
" Took once a pliant hoar, and found good means To draw from her a prayer of earnest heart," that he would never dream of abandon¬ ing her tribe, but remain with them for ever.—" On this hint," Ozembo spoke, and, it is needless to add, was not re¬ jected, but continued from that hour the cherished favourite of Ora, and the glory of the whole tribe to which he be¬ longed. At length the eagerly-awaited morn¬ ing arrived that was to consummate their felicity. Within the shadow of his rustic porch sat the majestic Oron¬ tes, the calumet of peace in his hand, and in his heart joy and benevolence. " The red wild feathers on his brow were blent," and the skin of the conquered wolf hung suspended from his brawny shoulders. By his side reclined the beauteous Ora, her attractions if possible increased by the becoming adornments such a joyous occasion,
occasion, as a matter of course, induced her to use. Behind her shone several dark damsels of her tribe: but there appeared none so magnificently array¬ ed—none so transportingly beautiful as Ora. Orontes gazed with pride upon the unprecedented assemblage of charms he beheld united in his only offspring. Sons he had once possessed, but they perished for the good of their tribe: Ora alone survived to comfort him, and with her he was now about to part. No wonder the tears swam over his aged eyes, as he reflected on what her mo¬ ther had been, at the same joyful pe¬ riod : an European might have wept over such recollections as bitterly as Orontes. His sons, too—cut off in the perilous contest during their ripening youth, whom his arm could not save! but would not the youthful stranger be to his declining years as a son, and a com¬ forter? would not Ozembo emulate their
their deeds, and fill up the void in his bosom? Such were the self-interroga¬ tories of Orontes, to which, in spite of his tears, his heart replied in the affir¬ mative. But still the bridegroom came not: though the great orb of light and majesty had mounted high in the hea¬ vens, and already began to scorch the earth with his potent beams, Ozembo had not yet appeared.
CHAP.
CHAP. VI. And summer was the tide, and sweet the hour. When sire and daughter saw, with fleet descent, An Indian lrom his bark approach their bow'r, Of husLin'd limb, and swarthy lineament. CaMI'SELL. Orontes wondered at the strange de¬ lay of his tardy son-in-law, if such a term may be applied to a race whose laws, of every description, exist prin¬ cipally in their own bosoms. He knew him fleet of foot as the mountain roe, and, whenever need for exertion or speed existed, even fond of enduring hardship and fatigue. It was true, he had ascended the perilous mountain alone, and Orontes knew their little village to be surrounded and watched, even
even at that moment, by formidable enemies; and he began to fear that Ozembo had encountered some fierce straggling Patagonians, wliose huge strength had proved more than a match for his wonted courage and skill. While digesting these thoughts, which he forbore to communicate to his softer companion, Ora suddenly started—she perceived the many-coloured plume of Ozembo peering gallantly above the surrounding foliage! Another moment convinced her—he was approaching her dwelling. With a dejected mien, of which he could not divest himself, and a pensive aspect he strove vainly to cast aside, Ozembo now strode slowly into view: not in demeanour like the happy bridegroom of that joyous morn¬ ing, but the events he had just wit¬ nessed weighed heavily on his mind, and he found it impossible to appear otherwise. " My
" My son, thou hast news of the ene¬ my?" demanded Orontes, calmly, as Ozembo entered the dwelling—" for thine is the far-searching eye of the eagle, that looketh not abroad in vain." " Be at rest," said Ozembo, in the same cool strain—" we are safe for the present. I have climbed the rude steep, even to its loftiest point, and can discern nothing that should alarm our fears. I have even passed beyond the mountain, but nothing is there to awaken suspicion. Our foes cannot surprise us, at least un¬ til the sun is set." " It is well," returned Orontos, still preserving his calmness, which no dan¬ ger appeared able to ruffle or dispel— " the Great Being has ordained there shall shine for thy nuptials a day of peace. My son! be grateful." So saying, the aged Orontes arose de¬ liberately, and withdrew to order prepa¬ rations for the ceremony, now speedily to
to complete his children's happiness. Ora then with tenderness approached Ozembo, and inquired affectionately the cause of his evident gloom, gently re- preaching him for its existence on that auspicious morn, and adding—" When first thoo earnest to our happy land, thou wert wont to be thus melancholy; and I marvelled not at the cause of thy grief, because I knew that thou mightest have many. But many delights have cheered thee since that hour, and thou hast said to thy heaviness—* Abandon me.' Yet even as thou didst look then, in the time of thy desolation, so again lookesf thou now. Alas! will the as¬ pect of Ozembo never know permanent tranquillity? will his bosom never be the seat of lasting cheerfulness? what gift more precious than Ora must the god we worship assign to his possession, ere his heart will acknowledge its perfect happiness ?" "Ora
" Ora—my beloved!" returned Ozem¬ bo, clasping her to his bosom as he spoke, " no greater boon could even the all-potent Being thou hast named bestow —no gift more precious than thou art to Ozembo, I know that full many a time my sadness hath wearied thee, but the end is, I trust, approaching. When Ora is Ozembo's—then Ozembo must be happy." " Now you speak like yourself," cried Ora, delighted: " what a shadow was then cast from the brow of my Ozembo! what a hollowness from his features! Oh ! for tho sake of thy Ora's happiness, which, thou knowest, depends upon thine own—be always thus!" " I would," said Ozembo, faltering, " but—this morning I have seen ------" " Now again thy cheek changes!" said Ora, reproachfully—" what hast thon seen this morning to unnerve thee thus?" " Oily
" Only the corpse of an European," stammered Ozembo, as if anxious to evade the subject. " Yet thou wert not wont to be thus affected by the bare sight of death," re¬ joined Ora. « No—but—it is the associations that arise—that will not be suppressed"—and here Ozembo briefly narrated to her, as the sole cause of his inquietude, the bru¬ tal massacre of the unarmed mariner witnessed by him that morning on the blood-polluted strand. It was now noon, and the union of the lovers was consummated—Ora and Ozem¬ bo were united. According to the sim¬ ple custom of their nation, the deer's foot had been accepted by the bride, who in return presented the bridegroom with a ripe ear of corn*, as emblems of the
the future duties expected from either party. The form being completed, Orontes beckoned to silence, and ap¬ proaching Ozembo, said — " My son! thou art this day elected an .elder of our council—an honour for which thy youth may seem to unfit thee, but of which thy deeds have rendered thee truly worthy. Among craftier nations, call¬ ing themselves civilized, it may be that birth, or riches, can alone confer supe¬ riority; but among us it is otherwise. With us valour and wisdom only can obtain dignity, or command respect. Both—both, my son, it rejoiccth the heart of Orontes to say, hath thy con¬ duct already exhibited; and thou hast early received—which no less rejoiceth me—the partial recompence of thy yet ripening virtues." The aged Indian ceased: he had spoken much of advancement—much of congratulation, in a few words. Ozembo vol. ii. f wished
wished to answer him; but his heart was full, and he strove vainly to utter a syllable. He acknowledged the present moment to be one of supreme felicity— how long was such to endure ? ***** The same evening, just as the sun had sunk behind the vast ridge of the Andes, and while yet their loftiest sum¬ mits seemed to burn in his departing radiance, an unusual bustle was heard to prevail in the scattered Indian vil¬ lage, of which the weaker portion of its scared inhabitants too readily guessed the meaning. Ozembo was reclining with his beautiful bride within the wild portal of his father's habitation, and Orontes was sitting opposite, when the dreadful cry of " Areouski* '." assailed their ears, and each started suddenly to his feet, grasping his arms as he arose.— " I knew
" I knew the alarm would speedily arrive!" observed the sagacious Orontes: then hastily directing Ozembo to follow him to a meeting of the elders, with whom the latter was now enrolled, held under an adjacent venerable tree, after the Indian custom, he immediately dis¬ appeared.
F 3
CHAP*
CHAP. VII. JJct there alamletb one among you, whom ye know not. St. John, i. 26. 1 know thee, stranger! who thou art. Milton. The parting of Ora and Ozembo was brief, but affecting. It was some mi¬ nutes before the latter spoke a word, so intensely did he appear engaged with his own dark thoughts: but tlie cries of Ora "would have touched a heart of stone. Only with the meridian exalta¬ tion of that very sun had their felicity commenced, and so soon to be separated! he would hurry with Ii is accustomed valour into the fiercest of the combat, and perhaps return no more! cruel des¬ tiny—unfeeling Patagonians! With these,
these, and such other vehement excla¬ mations, did Ora make the hollow roof of their dwelling resound, ere the al¬ most equally affected Ozembo was able to extricate himself from her entwining arms. " She rose—sbe sprung—she clung Co his emhruce. Till liis heart heuv'd beneath her hidden face," with a warmth of passion, and energy of distress, such melting climes can alone teach or bestow. But brief space had Ozembo to reply, or even to listen to such useless ebullitions of sorrow. He had that morning been inco porated with the chief defenders of their tribe— those whose wisdom, and whose bra- -very, were its principal dependance in the hour of peril and adversity: he felt his pride and reputation to be not a little concerned, therefore, in the event; and accordingly tore himself away from her convulsive clasp, and, flourishing f 3 his
his tomahawk, hastily followed Orontes to the appointed rendezvous. Here, beneath the wan light of the sickening moon, to aid which the de¬ parting sun still lent to the western at¬ mosphere a feeble radiance, he found the chiefs assembled, and debating on the deeds of blood and slaughter likely to arise out of their present exigence. It seemed that a tribe of the Tehuel¬ hets (the most fierce and courageous among the Patagonians) had discovered, and were about to attack their position, which it now behoved them to defend to the last extremity. Such, judging by the present bent of their discourse, appeared to be the decision at which the majority of voices, generally ascer¬ tained on such occasions, was most likely to arrive. To these proceedings, however, Ozembo seemed inclined to pay little attention; his whole soul be¬ ing engrossed by a far different object, which
which had saluted his eyes on his first entrance into the assembly, and from which he found it difficult to avert them. This object was no other than the very European mariner whose apparent massacre he had beheld that morning, standing unharmed amid the gathering chiefs, as if the suffocating brine had never ingulphed him—as if the swarm¬ ing arrows had never entered his lace- rated bosom! By his side stood the aged Indian, Oromanes, who, it will be remembered, lingered last of his tribe on the brink of the swallowing waves; and who appeared to have even¬ tually preserved, and, by his present demeanour, according to the Indian custom to have adopted him. Ozembo gazed on this unnatural sight, and his thoughts grew more distractingly con¬ fused with every passing moment; for had he not witnessed the despairing F 4 agony
agony of that remembered countenance ? had he not seen the poisoned arrows, and deadly-aimed javelins of his un¬ erring brethren, hack one another in his mangled form ? if he yet lived, he was invulnerable. Live! how could he live whom the overwhelming waves had devoured, and buried in a liquid grave? While thus employed in fruit¬ less and appalling cogitations, the ob¬ ject of them calmly approached him, and appearing to recognise his figure, addressed him as follows.—" Stranger— to whom I might have owed my exis¬ tence, and whom still (next to this re- verend*man who has adopted me) I re¬ verence—accept my proffered friend¬ ship. I faintly heard thy benevolent voice raised loudly in my behalf, ere the weapons of thy tribe—but no mat¬ ter : the peril, and the pangs, thou seest iiave passed away. Henceforth, I desire to be thy warmest friend. Stranger—I crave thy name?" "Ozembo!"
"Ozfembo!" was the faint reply bf him who knew not what to think of this strange salutation. . " Mine is Falkland," rejoined the Eu¬ ropean : ** may its sound not long seem unfamiliar to thy ear, or upon thy lips. Thou art married this day—may thy union be h-ippy! thou art also brave— may thy valour be successful! from the bold Oromanes have I gathered thus much of thy condition. For the rest— I am European, but am skilled in the use of arms. Thy tribe is in real dan¬ ger—to-night we shall fight together side by side—and, it may be, I may ren¬ der thee back the service thou wouldst have done me." The tumult in that wild assembly now rose higher—the Tehuelhets were upon them! short time had each rude chief to prepare his weapons, and betake him to the post of danger appointed him to 'defend, in their briefly-organized plan f 5 of
of repulse. Louder yet arose the veil¬ ings of the vanquished, and the shrieks of the females, mingled with the shouts of the every-where victorious Tehuel¬ hets, ere the termination of that dismal night; while the pale moon seemed to shrink from the contemplation of the murderous scene, and the wild herd of the forest started and fled from the heart¬ rending uproar, * ,t- *- *- #- In a beautiful district, situated far from the abodes of civilized man, among the inaccessible mountains of Chili, there arose a "few quiet Indian dwellings, which seemed truly the residence of peace and security. To this remote tranquil region had Ozembo escaped with his beloved Ora, after the carnage of that fatal night. Hither, too, had fled with them the venerable Orontes, after vainly assaying all that valour could,
could, to preserve their former settle¬ ment from falling a prey to the cruel Patagonians. Here also yet lived the gallant stranger Falkland, new christen¬ ed since that hour of blood by the In¬ dian name Ogloo—but the aged Oro¬ manes, his pretended preserver, survived not that dreadful massacre. Thrice, du¬ ring the desperate contest, had the mys¬ terious Falkland, with almost more than human valour, saved the life of Ozem¬ bo ; and well won the character for su¬ perior bravery he still preserved among the present chiefs of the tribe, with whom such was an essential virtue, and principal recommendation to their reve¬ rence. Here, then, at present dwelt the wandering Ozembo, surrounded with every charm exhausted nature could produce for his gratification, in a de¬ lightful vale, teeming with delicious and odorous productions. To its other ad¬ vantages was added that of safety, for F 6 the
the Tehuelhets had not yet discovered the secluded retreat. And, amid this delectable profusion, was Ozembo hap¬ py? view his bosom laid open, and judge.
CHAP.
CHAP. VIII. Oh heware, my lord, of jealousy. SriAKESPnAHE. Notwithstanding the gratitude he acknowledged due to Falkland, now called Ogloo, for a life thrice preserved by his intrepidity, Ozembo had never ceased to regard the European intruder with feelings of suspicion, at least, if not of aversion. In these feelings, it is pro¬ bable, that, at first, envy may have pos¬ sessed a considerable share— " As where's the palnce wherekito foul things Sometimes intrude not V but they had recently assumed a novel, and deadlier complexion. Ora—his be¬ loved Ora—Ozembo thought, appeared too partial to the honeyed accents some¬ times
times dropt in her attentive ear by the straight and comely foreigner. These were principally tales descriptive of the wonders of other climes, to which, Ozembo was aware, Ora loved to listen: but then—were not such the means by which himself had formerly won her ap¬ proving smiles? they were. Yet Ogloo was so invariably gracious, and assiduous in cultivating his friendship, that Ozembo could not openly evince his suspicions: but, in spite of repeated efforts to wrest himself from the dominion of the dread¬ ed tyrant, jealousy, he felt the growing uneasiness daily fastening upon his soul. One delightful afternoon, as Ora and Ozembo were reclining beneath the shade of richly-laden fruit-trees, which, with¬ out even the trouble of previous culti¬ vation—such was nature's extreme mu¬ nificence in this most lovely, and fertile region— " Dropp'3 in their laps, scarce pluck'd, their mellow store," they
they observed Ogloo slowly pacing, with folded arms, the meadow in front of their simple habitations.—" Yonder is Ogloo," said Ora, innocently, fixing her dark eyes with apparent pleasure upon the grace¬ ful figure of the fair-haired Indian. Ozembo rivetted his penetrating glance upon the same object with a different expression, but he answered not. " Shall we call him hither?" asked Ora, with thoughtless simplicity. " For what purpose ?" now demanded Ozembo. " Thou shalt learn when he comes," replied Ora, smiling playfully; and, clapping her hands, she exclaimed— " Ogloo! Ogloo!" " Peace, Ora, peace—ere thou plantest a javelin here that cannot be extracted !" said Ozembo, striking his breast with emotion that scorned to be any longer controlled. " Peace—ere thou kindlest a flame in my bosom the whole ocean can
can never quench! the mild voice of Ogloo thou hast made no longer pleas¬ ing to me, if it was ever so—would its deceptive tones had never saluted the ear of Ozembo ! I mean, that his pre¬ sence is not always requisite to Ozembo's happiness—can Ora's no longer be com¬ plete without it ? not for a single hour —and even that hour passed with her Ozembo ?" Ora appeared somewhat astonished: she had often seen him gloomy, but never thus suddenly agitated before.— " But Ogloo narrates blithe legends," she exclaimed, " of the land he calls Scotland, -where he says he was born. Such were wont to amuse you." " Such amuse me no more!" said Ozembo, sighing deeply—" at least, when delivered by the lips of Ogloo. I cannot divest myself of a dread—Ah ! Ora—how would it shock thee to divine my thoughts!" " I have
" I have dreamed I knew them all," said Ora, more earnestly than she had yet spoken. " Did I, then, only dream ?" " All—all—save that thou knowest" he replied, with a visible shudder: " save that—that only, which thou must never know. Yet thus much still may I reveal unto thee—our circumstances render it necessary. Avoid thou yon¬ der Ogloo. In his smile there is poison —in his presence danger. When he talks m thy hearing—beware! a ser¬ pent speaks to thee. I doubt the rea¬ lity of what he seems—I suspect him to be what he seems not. Demand not thou the origin of my fears, but believe them not groundless, nor despise my precepts. Ora— my Ora—let thy fide¬ lity baffle the snare which—I shudder to think—is surely now spread for the peace of Ozembo." " Nay, Ozembo is jealous!" said Ora with surprise, and apparently somewhat hurt at the supposition. " Mistake
" Mistake me not," said Ozembo, in¬ terrupting her—" it is not jealousy alone that tortures me. Yet the time has been %vhen Ozembo's tale of love— no ear save her own to listen to his ac¬ cents—was more precious to Ora than aught the too skilful Ogloo can unfold to her imagination, or address to her heart." Ora looked still more amazed, but, without any other answer, clasped her arms affectionately round the neck of Ozembo. " He observes us even now," conti¬ nued the latter softly. " Let not Ora feel surprised that Ogloo should know himself the subject of our discourse, though the sound of our accents fall not upon his ear. There are more mysteries on the wide earth, dearest Ora, than subtler conceptions than thine can ima¬ gine or solve. See ! his steps bend this way—I will retire, and remain not thou long
long after me. Yet greet him kindly, for he thrice saved my life—but i can¬ not bea<- his presence I" There was indeed some semblance of veracity in the last improbable remark of Ozembo; for the eyes of Ogloo were juot then turned towards them, with such a peculiar, and malignant expres¬ sion, that it was evident he knew, or supposed himself, at that moment the object of their unkind animadversion. As soon as Ozembo had quitted her, Ora began to revolve in her own mind the probable fallacy, or reality, of her fond husband's t?nderly-hinted suspi¬ cions. His jealousy she knew, or be¬ lieved, to be utterly groundless; but Ozembo had darkly alluded to some¬ thing beyond, the hidden meaning of which strange suggestion, ho also told her, she must ever> as now, strive vainly to unravel. From these thoughts she was aroused by the approach' of Ogloo, in
in whom she acknowledged there was much of mystery, and whom she now regarded, for the first time, with trepi¬ dation and timidity.
CHAP.
CHAP. IX. Strange is thy form, but more thy words arc strange, Ftarful il seems to hold this parley with thee— Tell me thy race and country ? M.iturin. Ogloo now appeared completely habit¬ ed in the wild dress of tlie country, his European habiliments having long been cast aside. W ith these his vigorous frame, and dauntless deportment, extremely well accorded: but his grey, though piercing eyes, fair complexion, and light sandy locks, formed a singular contrast to his perfectly Indian attire. Notwith¬ standing this, there appeared something more beautiful, and certainly more in¬ teresting, in his solitary fairness, than even in the shadowy aspects, or the raven-coloured, and sometimes knotted hair
hair of his present companions. And now, as he approached Ora, of whose present sentiments, nevertheless,beseem¬ ed perfectly aware, he smiled submissive¬ ly, and flinging himself gracefully at her feet, proffered to her some of the choicest fruit which he professed to have gather¬ ed for her acceptance. A few minutes before, Ora would not have avoided par¬ taking of what his gallantry offered: but now she recollected the words of Ozembo—" In his smile there is poison !" and shrunk from even touching the con¬ taminating gift. On perceiving her resolute rejection of his 'services, Ogloo again smiled faintly, as if perfectly conscious of the cause, but forbore to repeat the proffer; then, turning the subject, he, with seem¬ ing carelessness, demanded — " Saw I not Ozembo part from you this instant? in his absence you must be melancholy. Shall I resume for your amusement, the splendid description where——" "No—
" No—no, Ogloo, I am weary—I am sorrowful," said Ora, interrupting him; then with truly Indian frankness and simplicity, as if scorning to disguise iier sentiments, which yet she dared only half divulge, she added—" I wonder, Ogloo, since the climes you speak of must be superior in magnificence, as well as in comfort, to our poor Indian territory, that these considerations in¬ duce you not to seek them, in preference to remaining with us any longer here ?" Offloo still smiled, but with more of bitterness than heretofore. " Does Ora wish me to begone ?" said he. " I said not that," she replied, with timidity; " that is, I meant it not—not exactly wished------" " Nor exactly wished otherwise," said Ogloo, ironically. " But, Ora, 1 may not abandon thy tribe; comfort—mag¬ nificence—nothing may urge me to do so. Should even the great orb of thy fathers'
fathers' worship, now about to decline, change its course and wheel backward to the place of rising, Ogloo may not abandon thy tribe." " May not!" repeated Ora, with evi¬ dent surprise, " and wherefore?" " Nay, beautiful Ora!" he retorted, playfully, yet still with some mixture of bitter irony—" since those soft lips deign to speak ambiguously, permit to Ogloo the same poor privilege. It is some¬ thing to know that I may not—even thus much thou knewest not yesterday: perhaps, ere many morrows shall have elapsed, thou mayest know more. But let us change the theme. Charming Ora! beneath this delightful shade, while the god of thy ancestors gradual¬ ly resigns his sovereignty over the pur¬ ple heaven, that the white-faced moon may enjoy for awhile her dominion, and borrowed glory, suffer me to re¬ peat------" " For-
" Forbear, Ogloo—I know not that I ought to listen to thee," here hastily in¬ terrupted Ora: i: or, if thou repeatest aught to-day—if thou wilt persist in thy desire to narrate something, let it be the manner in which thou wert left by thy inhuman comrades upon our hostile coast, on the morn that Ozembo essayed (as he then deemed, in vain) to preserve thy threatened life." " As thou hast commanded, most re¬ verenced Ora," said the sycophantic Ogloo, preparing instantly to commence his narrative. He then told, that being engaged in what is termed by the curi¬ ous inhabitants of other climes, a voyage of discovery—a kind of cruise, he said, still often undertaken, though common¬ ly ending in no discovery at all—the crew, feeling more keenly than they chose to endure, the weight and number of their deprivations, had dared to dif¬ fer with the resolute commander of vol. II. g that
that adventurous expedition. Staunch to his purpose of proceeding further on his hitherto-unprofitable excursion, the determined European peremptorily re¬ fused to return; and (which forbidden consummation of differences Ogloo af¬ firmed to be as common among Euro¬ peans, as the most savage Indians) was re¬ warded with death for his valiant resolu¬ tion. Himself, he averred, of all the crew, alone had ventured to take part with his wronged commander; and, instigated by the same bold spirit of inquiry, had given almost equal offence by his conduct. They accordingly resolved on maroon¬ ing him, which sentence was no sooner pronounced than put into execution.— " Aghast at my now inevitable doom," continued Ogloo, " on viewing the ves¬ sel recede, and observing the adjacent hills covered with those of your tribe, I long endeavoured, by hopeless signals of distress, to awaken their remorse; and
and eventually threw myself—though not yet entirely despairing—into the briny surge. At that moment I plain¬ ly distinguished Ozembo's voice, exert¬ ed, I had reason to believe, in my be¬ half, but chose rather to trust to my own skill and sagacity for safety, than confide in his efforts to preserve me from their weapons. Accordingly, just as I felt their arrows whizzing round me, I availed myself of a feat I had for¬ merly practised, diving beyond their vi¬ sion deep—far—secretly. No treache¬ rous rippling of the glossy surface—no stray bubble, betrayed the course I had chosen: I was wounded—but the ef¬ fusion of gore was insufficient to re¬ veal the direction in which I moved. They lingered on the beach some time; when all at length retiring, except Oromanes, I again ventured forth, and crawling exhausted to his feet, im¬ plored his clemency, for which I sup- G gt plicated
plicated not long in vain—it was ex¬ tended to me." ^ a * *■ * Meanwhile, Ozembo had wandered deep into the shadowy grove, buried in his own torturing ruminations. The sun had declined in the west, and the moon had mounted high in the firma¬ ment, ere he was joined by Ora, Ogloo not having till then finished his detain¬ ing narrative, although she frequently wished it sooner terminated. The feel¬ ings of Ozembo during this protracted interval had been various, but all of them alike new and tormenting. It was not that he at present suspected her actual criminality; but he thought he perceived a secret leaning towards Ogloo, and a growing inclination for his society, he could have wished absent. Was she not ai that moment probably attending, to his alluring words? Had he not often
often witnessed the soft tender moon¬ beams playing over their engaging in¬ tercourse?— and the sensitive Ozembo had not yet to learn that— " There is a dangerous silence in that hour, A stillness, whicli leaves room for the full soul To open nil itself, ;v ithout the power Of calling wholly back its self-control : The silvet light, which, hallowing tree and tower, Sheds beauty, and deep soilness o'er the whole, Dic.itlie* ii!m> tu the heart, ami o'er il thious A loving languor, which is not repose." Among other thoughts which at this moment, so favourable to meditation, entered the mind of Ozembo, it might be that vengeance on the destroyer of his peace was not the least frequently indulged in: but respecting that de¬ stroyer, Ogloo, he found himself yet unable to plan any thing decisively. From this mood he was at length aroused by the well-known melodious voice of his beloved Ora, whose silver G 3 tones
tones pronounced his name aloud, and who was evidently now seeking him in his solitude.
CHAP.
CHAP. X. Oh, my heart! Would he had broU'n thee, that made thee know This lady was not loyal ! Piiilaster. In a few minutes the sound of her ac¬ cents was distinguished nearer, and soon the answering echo of Ozembo's directed her with certainty to the place of his retreat. With open arms, then, Ora rushed upon his bosom, and exclaimed -—" The voice of the woodland bird is sweet to the ear of the enraptured wan¬ derer, but Ozembo's is sweeter to mine. Why hast thou strayed alone thus far from our habitation ? why so long hast thou rendered strange the beloved voice that is such melody to me ? it is even hours since Ora's ear hath banqueted on its mellifluous tone." g 4 " But
" But Ogloo hath regaled her ear with a strain as tender, and more wel¬ come," said Ozembo, with more stern¬ ness than he usually assumed. " Answer me—hath lie not?" Ora found it impossible to avoid look¬ ing somewhat confused, as she faltering¬ ly replied—" Ogloo hath been narrating to me the manner of his escape from the javelins of our tribe, after thy voice had been vainly raised for his preservation." " Would it had never been exalted in his cause!" now exclaimed Ozembo, with renewed agitation. " Would the too merciful main had ingulphed him for ever in -its watery recesses—deep— dark—unfathomable! Oh! would he had never again arisen to blight ray peace, and destroy my happiness!" Ozembo here raised himself to his full stature—set firmly his ivory teeth —and lifting his clenched hands toward heaven, appeared to imprecate its hea¬ viest
viest vengeance on the being he had formerly essayed to preserve. Ora be¬ held his energetic gestures with still in¬ creased astonishment and emotion, as twining herself around his averted form, she tenderly exclaimed—" Thou hast spoken thus before, but wherefore I yet know not, or am only partially in¬ formed, But why should Ozembo fear to impart to Ora the whole of his sus¬ picions or his knowledge? Why now doth such a fearful cloud overcome thy altered aspect ? Do not look so terribly upon me—what horrid subject hath en¬ gaged thy thoughts in this solitude to which thou hast wandered, or who have been thy companions?" u I have been thinking," said Ozem¬ bo, endeavouring to subdue his agita¬ tion, " that we will abandon this abode of peace, which, in spite of its- appa¬ rent tranquillity, now grows dangerous to me. We will leave it—we will be-
" What danger dost thou dread?" demanded Ora, in amazement, "and whither wouldst thou wander ?" " I spoke of us both," said Ozembo, bitterly, " and thou answerest but of one. Well—remain, then, thou—alone I will begone." "Nay, now thou art jesting!" replied Ora, reproachfully. " But whither would Ozembo flee to find greater feli¬ city than doth court him here ?" " Whither indeed !" repeated the lost Ozembo—" but I care not whither. Perhaps tc the perilous Patagonian re¬ gion, whence we have just escaped— open foes are less dreaded by Ozembo than the more deadly venom of the dis¬ guised enemy. Perhaps to the Land of IT'jre *—any where to avoid these dread¬ ful apprehensions—I care not whither, so I were away from hence." "To
" To Patagonia!" exclaimed Ora, fearfully: " wilt thou return to strug¬ gle with our fiercest enemies? Shall Ozembo go to the Land of Fire—shall he cross tlie deep water to avoid his dearest friends? Ozembo, whom I have loved, and whom I still must love —whom Orontes loves—whom Ogloo « Name him not!" here interrupted Ozembo, furiously—" name not the detested Ogloo! he is the bitter drop that poisons all my present happiness- he is tlie venomed adder that hath crept into my paradise, and transformed its choicest rivulet of bliss into a source of real, insufferable agony! I was happy —thrice blessed in the full enjoyment of thy love—thy sole undivided affec¬ tion, and esteem. Ogloo—accursed Ogloo------" " Hears thee, and wonders at the epithets bestowed on him," said a voice g 6 bursting
bursting from the thicket, which both immediately recognised t> be that of Ogloo himself; and, in anojier instant, the light-haired chief stood fully re¬ vealed before them. Ozembo, now conscious that lit. had gone too far to recede, determined ?t once to defy him, and exclaimed—" Ha! is it thou? Stand, reptile! thou hast wronged me—but the hour of our rec¬ koning is at hand!" " This is not that hour," replied Og¬ loo, coolly passing him, " albeit—as thou sayest—it is at hand!" aud, with¬ out even slackening his pace, he dis¬ appeared in the direction of his habita¬ tion. The suddenly-checked Ozembo would have shouted after him to return, and essay the vengeance-nerved arm of an injured husband, but the cool demean¬ our of Ogloo had really chilled his rage for the present, and he resolved to bury his
his animosity until some future oppor¬ tunity. For some time he appeared as if looking earnestly on the spot where he had vanished, but was in reality struggling to subdue his rising feelings: then, taking Ora tenderly by the hand, he led her slowly toward their own low- roofed dwelling. As Ozembo and Ora approached their sequestered abode— " At such an hour, on such ;i night, So calm, so mild, so heavenly bright. Who would have seen, anil not confest It Idok'tl us all within were blest?" yet but a very &hort period was to elapse, ere tl.e wild prey-bird of the wilderness would flap his wings with transport over that seemingly strifeless and secluded scene. «■ r % 9 * It was not yet midnight, when Ozem¬ bo suddenly started from his couch (which, indeed, had been sleepless), rou¬ sed
sed by the unusual tumult that pre¬ vailed, mixed once again with the well- known war-cry of his tribe. Anxious to learn the cause, he instantly repaired to the place of assembly appointed on such emergencies, as usual, in the open air. Here he soon ascertained that the chiefs had reason to believe their retreat discovered by the Tehuelhets, who, ac¬ cording to the repoki of a spy just re¬ turned, were about to attack them on that very night. The consternation this intelligence occasioned throughout the assembly was extreme; for the number of the Tehuelhets was reported consider¬ ably to exceed their own, and of their valour they had already received more than sufficient proof. Accordingly— as may well be supposed under their present exigence— " In that wild council words wiu'd narra and strange," while deliberating on the best course to be
be pursued in order to avert the ap¬ proaching peril. At length it was de¬ cided that (the females being first de¬ spatched to the heights for safety) twelve of their picked, and stoutest warriors, should proceed to reconnoitre the ene¬ my, and if possible discover his inten¬ tions ; while Ozembo, and Ogloo, were among the number selected for this ha¬ zardous expedition.
CHAP.
CHAP. XI. H ive not I chosen j outwelw, and one ol yon is ii dewl? St. Jchm, v>. 70 No sooner had Ozembo received his final instructions at the council, than he hastened to take a tender (perhaps last) leave of Ora, before he proceeded on his perilous enterprise. His eleven bold associates were aheady prepared —but could he leave Ora on so danger¬ ous an undertaking without the melan¬ choly satisfaction of a parting word?— he could not, for his heart refused to do so. He found her at the open entrance of their flowery dwelling, anxiously awaiting his re-appearance to dissipate her apprehensions, or confirm her fears. Unfortunately
Unfortunately the intelligence brought by Ozembo could only do the latter, and Ora becpme suddenly plunged into the most excessive grief. This grief Ozembo exerted himself to tranquillize with what arguments the occasion al¬ lowed him to use: but the exigence was sudden and imperative, and the moment fast approached when he could stay no longer.—" But Orontes stays with Ora," he exclaimed—for the In¬ dians, with their usual sagacity, had de¬ creed that the aged warriors should re¬ main to protect the women, while the young and vigorous were more pro¬ fitably, and desperately engaged. " It avails not who may abide," said Ora, dejectedly: " Ozembo will be ab¬ sent." " And doth Ora perceive yonder stream ?" inquired Ozembo. " The river that runs through the valley," she remarked, carelessly—" I see
see the soft moonbeam playing on its limpid surface." " It is now confined, and narrow," observed Ozembo; " but our tribe have the means of diverting its course, and deluging the surrounding vale with its waters. Such means, Ora, should the Tehuelhets gain possession of our habitations, will assuredly be resorted to. Thou must, therefore, prepare to ascend the heights to a place of safety, by following cautiously its precipitous course—Orontes will direct, and ac¬ company thee. My beloved Ora! I have no more to say: see where Orontes comes—I resign thee to his care." The aged chief, Orontes, approached the dwelling as Ozembo concluded. "Away!" he exclaimed—" thy comrades wait for thee. Thou seest my dejected child—she is also thy wife, and would wail heavily for thy loss—but equally so,
so, I trust, for thy dishonour. Then remember, my son, to be brave—yet forget not to temper thy valour with that prudence so requisite to thy safety, and the prosperity of thy cause." " May our course be productive of success and victory!" cried Ozembo, grasping his tomahawk eagerly as he spoke, and preparing to take his depar¬ ture. Just then a long dusky file, consist¬ ing of eleven armed warriors, were seen gliding like so many gigantic phantoms between the shadowy trees, and taking their course toward the adjacent heights—they were the com¬ panions of Ozembo. With a single glance he recognised them, yet paused irresolutely— " And ere the wolf-skin on his back lie flung, Or laced his mocazins in act to go," fixed another lengthened gaze upon his Ora—bestowed on her lovely form one other
other soft embrace, then rushing toward his valorous associates, fell last into the file, and presently disappeared. By this time, the tumult was con¬ siderably increased, the whole of the inhabitants preparing to leave their dwellings, and resort to the moun¬ tains, until the result of the coming contest sliould be known. Orontes, among the rest, selecting only his arms for preservation, abandoned silently his peaceful habitation; and with Ora es¬ sayed, by traversing the brink of the river, to arrive at its rocky source, which once attained, presented to the females their only chance of security. Mean while, the party which contained Ozembo and Ogloo, proceeded in single file at a swift rate; and if speed or cou¬ rage could have baffled the design of their assailants, there were those among them by no means deficient in either qualification. But, it is also true, that, amid
amid that light-footed cavalcade, there were some whose minds, and bonoms, were any thing but fit for the task they had undertaken. With this latter num¬ ber might truly be ckssed Ozembo, whose heaving breast and throbbing brain (in spite of his assumed demeanour before the penetrating Orontes) still swelled and beat with the remembrance of his jealous pangs, and the anticipa¬ tion of his projected vengeance. Of that vengeance, though the cool forbear¬ ance of Ogloo had determined him to delay for the present its execution, or to wreak it more secretly on his victim, he had never relinquished the idea ; and the present occurrence—some demon failed not to whisper him—was peculi¬ arly favourable to its speedy consumma¬ tion. Ozembo had known—had en¬ dured already the horrors of remorse for many an ill-advised hasty deed of blood, and had as often vowed never again to imbrue
imbrue his hands in human gore, for any earthly consideration whatever; but the tormenting suspicions he now suf¬ fered were so new to him—so utterly undreamed of, and so utterly insupport¬ able, that he found it impossible to re¬ sist the impulse which prompted him at once to rid himself of a rival, and re¬ store to his bosom its vanished happi¬ ness. " Why (thought Ozembo, as he fol¬ lowed the warlike file in gloomy silence) should I falter, or hesitate to slay this man ? am I not now abroad in quest of enemies, whom, if I encounter, I shall not shrink to sacrifice—and is not Ogloo an enemy more bitter to Ozembo than these? What seek my associates in this wearying enterprise but the de¬ struction of their foes—and shall Ozem¬ bo's alone be permitted to survive? What seek the fierce antagonists of our tribe, save to rob of our possessions, and embitter
embitter our existence—and hath not Ogloo already embittered mine? It shall be so—he escapes not the coming strife: should the blows of our oppo¬ nents chance to be misdirected, this arm shall not shrink to stretch him bleeding in the dust. Whate/er the chance of war may determine, or whatever the consequent risk I may encounter— Ogloo must return no more." The party having now traversed a considerable distance, at length reached the spot whence they expected to have obtained a complete view of tlieir ene¬ mies, but all appeared vacant and de¬ serted ; the Tehuelhets had evidently changed their position, and, it was more than probable, had proceeded forward to the attack, by a different route from that which themselves had chosen. The moon now sinking low in the firma¬ ment, although the hour of daybreak was yet distant, seemed also to favour this
this conjecture; as it was extremely probable that the wily Tehuelhets should take advantage of the brief interval of darkness, to fall upon, and destroy their habitations. Disappointed in their pro¬ ject, therefore, and but too apprehensive of the fatal consequences of an attack made now upon their tribe, thus weak¬ ened by the absence of many of their bravest warriors, they determined to seek the spot whence, as already intimated, they could easily divert the waters of the river to the destruction, or, at least, to the discomfiture, of their triumphant and inveterate enemies. The dreaded interval of. darkness stole over them as they proceeded, and not a little enhan¬ ced the difficulties that every where sprang up in their trackless course. At length, just as the dawn appeared break¬ ing in. the east, they succeeded in gain¬ ing a small level tract, not far from the spot of their destination; and here, wea¬ ried
ried and faint with the fatigue they had undergone, they were fain to rest them¬ selves awhile in order to breathe more freely, ere proceeding to the termination of their arduous journey. With the first glimmering of slow- peeping light, were their keen eyes strained anxiously over the narrow va.e beneath them, in order to reconnoitre if possible the suspected movement of their enemies, as well as to ascertain the pre¬ sent position of their friends. At first their efforts were totally in vain : but as the daylight grew gradually stronger, they were just enabled to discern some¬ thing that resembled the motion of a sable host, evidently approaching the site of their devoted habitations. Jn a short space they viewed this dusky liv¬ ing mass surround their peaceful dwell¬ ings, like an enormous flight of blood¬ thirsty vampires*, and Ozembo even vol. ii. h fancied
fancied he could faintly distinguish the noise of the onset. To this fearful colli¬ sion the bustle of mingling strife seem¬ ed soon to succeed; and to the bustle of strife succeeded visibly the rushing of many fugitives from the scene of con¬ test. This signal was enough for Ogloo, on whom the principal command of the small detachment present appeared to have devolved—" Those of our tribe are overpowered!" he exclaimed: tiien turn¬ ing to the young Indian next him, and pointing upward toward the still-over¬ hanging cliffs, he added—" Onward, Orillo! one last effort to drown the ac¬ cursed Tehuelhets—mount and perform your duty!" As he finished, the young warrior ad¬ dressed
dressed bounded with renewed agility up the threatening precipice, followed by the greater number of his compa¬ nions. With a slight yell he speedily disappeared from view, as well as his equally-brave and agile followers—Og¬ loo, and Ozembo, stood together alone. " All is lost—but I thank Heaven that Ora is by this time safe!" ejaculated Ozembo, unconsciously, still gazing to¬ ward tlie half-revealed commotion which polluted the shadowy vale at his feet. " And whom thankest thou for thy own safety ?" demanded Ogloo, in an ironical tone. " Abhorred intruder! I thank thee for nothing," exclaimed Ozembo, start¬ ing at the sound of his voice. " Thou art right—thou hast little cause," Ogloo muttered, as he turned away, apparently to ascend the rugged promontory after his companions. Now was the moment for Ozembo to evince h 2 his
his resolution—and he suffered it not to occur in vain. Seizing his opportunity, while Ogloo's back was toward him, he raised his tomahawk, and, as it descend¬ ed on the red-pi umed crest of his ima¬ gined enemy, exclaimed—" Die, dis¬ sembler, for thy perfidy !" The stroke was well aimed, and fell with a violence sufficient to have extinguished an hun¬ dred lives, yet Ogloo sunk not under it __his plume, indeed, with some portion of his hair, lay stripped off at his feet, but the European chief stood otherwise unharmed. With an aspect in which rage seem¬ ed mingled with astonishment—with a visage full of the most demoniac intelli¬ gence, did Ogloo turn fiercely toward his dastardly assailant; and while his tomahawk trembled in his hand, as if eager to cleave in pieces tlie assassin, and his scowling front betrayed the vengeful emotions of his bosom, ad¬ dressed
dressed him in a tone of bitter derision and contempt. " I have not power to smite thee," he exclaimed, " but—ha! ha ! ha !—thou art smitten—thou shalt feel—feel, even to thy false heart's core, the terrible vengeance of Falkland! of Falkland, whose wretched life thou wouldst fain have preserved—of Ogloo, whose happier existence thou wouldst fain have destroyed! See where the savage Tehuelhet riots yonder in thy delightful home—look to thy wrath- spoiled dwelling, the loved production of thine own industry, and tell me then if I am not avenged? Hark to the roar of yonder bursting cataract—how doth it strike thine ear? Ha ! it is al¬ ready augmented by the shriek of ago¬ ny—the music of distress ! Whose was that bubbling scream?—dost thou re¬ cognise its tone?—Faithless Ozembo, if thou rememberest not—since the voice that maketh that wild ringing H 3 melody
melody was, oh ! how familiar to thee. Thy beloved wife—thy Ora—she for whom thou wouldest even become a murderer—where is she now ?—ha! ha! —Go witness where—hear her wild supplicating cries for life—view her hard struggles for a little longer exis¬ tence, and then tell me if Falkland— if Ogloo is not avenged ?" While he spoke, a heavy and unusual sound fell on the unaccustomed ear of Ozembo, and made his heart quake within him, even more effectually than the strange and terrifying demeanour of Ogloo. Presently a loud shriek for help smote his startled senses, and long ere Ogloo informed him of the circum¬ stance, he recognised the voice which uttered it to be that of his own adored, unfortunate bride. In another moment, the whole truth was developed. It was the rumbling of the loosened waters he heard, in their precipitous descent to the
the plain below—the inundation had commenced, and Ora was about to be¬ come its first victim! with a ghastly look of horror he fled from the presence of the fiendish Ogloo, and rushed to¬ ward the spot whence the cry of agony appeared still to proceed. The grey dawn had advanced, during his protracted intercourse with Ogloo, and it was now sufficiently light for Ozembo to discern his pathless course, as well as the rugged objects that rose frowningly around him. Above all, the white foamy track of the downward- bending torrent he could plainly distin¬ guish, and thither he now directed his fleet, though often bewildered steps. Presently he arrived half breathless at its brink; the call for assistance had ceased some time—even the low wail of lamentation had died away, and all was silent—all seemed solitary. Suddenly, while yet looking " sad and earnest on h 4 the
the water," Ozembo beheld the mangled form of his Ora whirled hastily by, and carried impetuously downward by the descending stream. Its course was so swift—its passage so momentary, that he had no time to ponder on the means of rescuing, or drawing that mutilated corpse to shore; it passed him, and was gone—his straining eyes strove vainly to follow it. Distracted, he tore the wild raiment from his form, exclaiming as he did so—" Ora—Ora—it is Ozembo calls—stay for me, my beloved ! thy bridemoom follows thee. Where thou restest, there also shall be my abiding place—whither thou goest, thither will Ozembo go likewise!" The chasm through which the water now swept was steep and craggy, as newly torn by the diverted torrent—the bank was high and slippery, beneath which rushed furiously the loosened flood, as if eager to attain the more tran¬ quil
quil valley that still lay between it and the great South Pacific Ocean, into which eventually its waters were poured. From this wild dangerous boundary was Ozembo now suspended in middle air by a solitary yielding twig, over the foaming current, the slender branch to which his hands yet clung convulsively alone seeming to hold him back from destruction— " Dack by a single luii, which would not break." A massy floating tree now hove in sight, apparently dragged from its unwieldy roots, by the resistless fury of the cataract. Ozembo dropped upon it, as it was borne beneath him amid the boiling foam, and was instantly hurried with it onward by the impetuously descending stream, toward the site of his former Indian habitation.
CHAP.
CHAP. XII. A change came o'er the spirit of my dream. Bthow. As Ozembo, thus partially supported amid the bubbling waves, swept past the secluded situation of bis now vanish¬ ed home—the happiest he had ever yet possessed or enjoyed, bis emotions, stilled for awhile by the giddy whirling of his frail dependance, again became utterly uncontrollable. A single canoe floated where his habitation once stood, near the former channel of the stream which now threatened presently to devour him, as it had already destroyed one whose preservation to him was far dearer than his own. Struggling almost un¬ consciously* yet still struggling (urged by
by that universal instinct planted deep in the bosoms of all human kind) a- gainst his dreadful destiny, he contrived to transfer into it his cold and shivering form. Then, frantic with agony, wav¬ ing his helpless hands, he shouted sa¬ vage-like in his desolation, while the grey twilight burst into morning gra¬ dually around him, as the wild current bore him swiftly onward to the mighty South Pacific Ocean. ***** The now-enfeebled remnant of that scattered tribe soon afterwards collected hastily together, and fled far enough from the doubly - enkindled wrath of their ancient inveterate enemies. It was now that the sorrowful Orontes disclosed to his fellow-chiefs the lament¬ able manner of Ora's untimely doom. He told that, owing to the delicacy of form, and drooping spirits of his lovely h 6 charge,
charge, he was utterly unable to gain in time the appointed rendezvous of safety. Afraid to invoke assistance by cries which he was apprehensive would only draw toward them an unequal, and perhaps overwhelming, number of the enemy, he patiently endeavoured to toil upward with his beauteous burthen in silence. While thus engaged, the black rocky mound above them which formed the river's barrier was torn away by the party under the direction of Og¬ loo, and sire and daughter were toge¬ ther engulphed in the descending flood. The arm of Orontes was powerful in battle, and' dreaded for its expertness in single strife; but he now found him¬ self assailed - by a potent, and resistless enemy, against whom even the skill and vigour of Orontes strove vainly to prevail. He, however, succeeded in saving himself with difficulty, by cling¬ ing with one hand to the surrounding trees;
trees; while, with the other, he endea¬ voured to keep hold of his terrified child—but in vain.—The rushing tor¬ rent soon tore her from his grasp, and carried his tender Ora headlong down the exalted precipice. A lengthened scream, more horrible to him than the war,cry of the Tehuelhets, rang wildly in his ears! He smote his bosom fear¬ fully—he tore the scanty locks from his aged forehead—but he could not save his child! From that sad, fatal hour, neither Ozembo, nor Ogloo, mingled any lon¬ ger with the remaining stragglers of that wandering tribe; nor was it ever known, even to their dearest friends, what particular stroke, or destiny, had fallen to the lot of either. It was ge¬ nerally believed that both had perished by the Tehuelhets; but as Orontes soon after laid his aged bones in the earth, there were few left to remember —none
—none to regret their absence, and they were speedily as entirely forgotten as if such had never been. a- ^ * * i- if- % * * In the once-magnificent city of Mos¬ cow, the former extensive capital of the whole vast Russian empire, dwelt the wealthy Alexander Smolensko, a noble¬ man, who, in the sumptuousness of his abode, and the splendour of his equi¬ pages, was surpassed by none of the gorgeous residents of the great northern metropolis.' Count Smolensko, in ad¬ dition to a wife of exquisite beauty, possessed likewise an amiable daughter, of whose perfections, and unparalleled accomplishments, report was lavish in its praise. The disposition of lady Smolensko was proud, and much incli¬ ned to tyrannize—morose, haughty, and unbending;
unbending; but not so that of her more gentle and submissive offspring. The former resembled the bleak wintry skies of her own rugged clime: the lat¬ ter that sunny vault of sweet soft azure, that glows only beneath a milder lati¬ tude. In short, the docile and agree¬ able Agatha Smolensko, in all, except uncommon personal beauty, of which each could really boast a more than usual share, was the very contrast (as universally acknowledged) of her stern, lofty, and imperious mother. Among the most distinguished and favoured admirers of the beauteous Agatha, deserves to be first mentioned, a young engaging foreigner, lately ar¬ rived in Moscow, named Lovinski. By Smolensko himself, and more particu¬ larly by his ambitious countess, the suit of this fascinating stranger, vvithont title, although not, it. appeared, without fortune, was most decidedly discou¬ raged
raged and despised; but, as far as re¬ garded only Agatha, it was easy to per¬ ceive that the handsome, captivating Lovinski, was not indifferent to her heart. It w T as the winter season ; the snow was fast descending, and the bitter gale swept keenly the yet crowded streets of Moscow, when a gorgeous equipage, drawn by six noble horses, sumptuously caparisoned, drove furiously to the lofty palace of the renowned count Smolen¬ sko. It was only one of several which had that night passed the massy gates that admitted to tlie court-yard, and deposited their noble owners beneath the marble portico which adorned the spacious entrance: but, among the whole, none were more magnificent, or more costly, than that which now drew up to the thronged portal. It stopped, and Lovinski alit from it; and drawing his huge fur mantle closely around
around him, passed through a bend¬ ing crowd of liveried menials, majes¬ tically into the lighted hall of the pa¬ lace.
CHAP.
CHAP. XIII. Cold ' cold 1 Tis a chilly clime That the toil of the jouth has reached, And he is awenry now, And faint for the hick of food. Dost thou wish for thy deserts, 0 ! son of Hodeira' SoiiTiirv. There was a splendid entertainment given on that evening, at the noble and hospitable palace of Smolensko. The numerous" and extensive apartments were each lit and decorated in a style of superior brilliancy, and gorgeous mag¬ nificence. Rich and becoming orna¬ ments were every where disposed for effect, with tasteful profusion; and few who paraded in the warm tempera¬ ture of those mirrored chambers, gave a thought
thought to the piercing blast that howl¬ ed without, or thj children of misery whose " looped and windowed ragged- ness" but ill defended them from its re¬ lentless fury. In whatever direction the eye might chance to wander, abound¬ ed the most costly, and delicious refresh¬ ments; and menials, richly liveried, at¬ tended at every door, and met the glance at every turn. Near to the outer por¬ tal, in the court-yard, for the conveni¬ ence and comfort of the vassals and at¬ tendants in waiting on their numerous guests, blazed a large cheering fire, as was customary in that half-polished country, where festivities, and recrea¬ tions of a ruder kind, were also taking place; and many jocund hearts, regard¬ less of the bleak surrounding atmo¬ sphere, strained their coarse voices above the noise of the crackling flames, in praise of the liberal count Smolensko. The dancing had now commenced, and
and Agatha Smolensko, attired with the most exquisite taste and delicacy, " foot¬ ed it featly" with her assiduous, and ac¬ complished partner, the almost equally graceful Lovinski. From this mutually attached, and winning pair, the applaud¬ ing circle now found it impossible to withhold their admiration, which often burst forth in audible murmurs of ap¬ proval and delight, not much to the gratification of the noble donors of the fete, the count and countess Smolensko. Lovinski seemed about the middle age, or nearly approaching to it; and his dark swarthy complexion, with the sable locks he wore in becoming profu¬ sion, as well as the easy languor of his whole air, bespoke him a native of some burning land which lay far toward the lascivious east. In spite of his Russian habit, and present assumption of north¬ ern politeness and frigidity, the effects of the scorching sunbeam were visibly imprinted
imprinted deep on his tawny fore¬ head : but this did not detract from the general interest of his. appearance, nor diminish the admiration with which the finished and voluptuous move¬ ments of the well-taught stranger were regarded — perhaps rather tended to increase these feelings. Agatha Smo¬ lensko, his more than commonly attrac¬ tive partner, was arrayed with modest simplicity, but yet gold and silver were not entirely wanting to adorn her na¬ turally resplendent charms. Her figure was rather tall, and precisely suited to couple agreeably with his own: but her complexion of the purest ivory, and her soft ringlets of almost flaxen whiteness, formed a striking yet lovely contrast, to the raven hair, and mellower aspect, of the more staid Lovinski. And now, as they bounded airily to¬ gether through the light mazes of the graceful dance, the countess Smolensko eyed
eyed them secretly with a malignant expression of rising distrust, and an in¬ ward determination to prevent their in¬ tercourse for the future; while even the more temperate Smolensko himself, disapproving as he did of the match for his daughter, appeared to lament having suffered their intimacy so long to con¬ tinue unrestrained. Ere yet the dance in which Agatha and Lovinski were engaged was finished, and while still the eyes of the whole admiring assemblage were attentively bent upon their graceful motions, enter¬ ed the lofty and valiant baron Wolve¬ roff, a retire'd soldier laden with wounds and glory, the especial favourite of his sovereign, and the sole remaining de¬ scendant of one of the noblest families throughout the Russian empire. He was aged, but his honourable scars, gained in the cause of his country, and the renown he had derived from them, together
together with the distinctions conferred upon him by his prince, in the opinion of many persons, entirely overbalanced and concealed that defect. To the father of Agatha also had the baron Wolveroff, as well as the gay stranger Lovinski, made proposals for the hand of his beautiful daughter; and to neither of the aspirants had count Smolensko yet returned any decisive answer. He was unwilling to sacrifice his only child, whom, moreover, he dearly loved, by rendering her subject to the caprices of age and peevishness; but, on the other hand, was not wholly prepared to reject so beneficial a match—an union that promised so much for the advancement of himself and family, as the far-sighted Smolensko, with all the keenness of a practised courtier, fancied he could safe¬ ly calculate upon, by judiciously closing with the present offer of Wolveroff. As may be supposed, the old veteran was
was not greatly pleased on his entrance to find the soft object of his wishes, at that moment, so much the subject of another's attention; and that other one whom he had too great cause to fear was his rival. He strove, however, to face out the matter bravely, and to act with nonchalance, as he had done in many a more desperate, and dangerous situation; and, taking his seat with all the freedom of an old acquaintance next to rhe person of his noble host, appeared to enter with him into deep conversa¬ tion. After a little while, lady Smo¬ lensko was summoned to partake their conference, and whispers of wonder went abroad among the guests at their noble host's apparent abstraction, and depar¬ ture from his usual sprightliness on such occasions as the present; but Agatha (nor even her adored Lovinski) yet dreamed not of the bolt which was ready on that night to burst upon her head. During
During the greater portion of that last joyous night did - the revelry con¬ tinue, while, according to the poet's apt description of a similar scene— " The long carousal shakes the illumined hall, Well speeds alike the banquet and the hall; And the gay dance cf hounding beauty's train Links grace and harmony in happiest chain: Bleat are Ihe early hearts and gentle hands That mingle there in well-according bands!" But as it began to wax late, although many remained, tlie most distinguished guests gradually disappeared, and among them the baron Wolveroff, who, after an extremely low and reverential salu¬ tation to Agatha, ordered his equipage early, and took his leave. Soon after his departure, although still, as Shakespeare has expressed it, the ° sport was at the best," Agatha Smo¬ lensko was peremptorily ordered to her mother's dressing-room, there to await her communication of some important vol. ii. i matter.
matter. The timid, and submissive Agatha, immediately obeyed this impe¬ rious mandate, and retired from the company. Lovinski danced no more, but long awaited her return to the ball¬ room, with a degree of anxiety for which he was unable to account; but, perceiv¬ ing that the company now grew ex¬ tremely thin, and finding that she did not again appear, he at length took his departure, and drove home.
CHAP.
CHAP. XIV. And that aaroc marriage is the very theme I came to talk of. Tell rae, daughter Juliet, How stands ^our disposition to be married ? SlIAKESrEARE, So passively was the mild Agatha ac¬ customed to submit to the will of her haughty mother on every occasion, that she had hardly yet even dared to sur¬ mise what could be. the cause, or mean¬ ing, of this strange injunction. Yet though she neither dared, nor possessed the inclination, to question its propriety, she could not wholly avoid feeling it an unkind separation from one of whose society she was already too fond for her perfect tranquillity; but whose society she also felt was now the only charm i 2 that
that could sweeten or enliven her exist¬ ence. Thus far did the unsuspecting Agatha venture for once to arraign se¬ cretly her mother's conduct—but no further; she had yet no dread of after- consequences—no fear of any thing be¬ yond the present evening—no idea—no dream that the present separation was meant to be eternal. After waiting a considerable time in solitude, her mo¬ ther at length made her appearance; and dismissing the attendants with a haughty gesture, fastened the door as if to pre¬ vent intrusion, and seating herself with dignity beside her daughter, appeared about to address to her something of no mean importance. Agatha now turned pale, and almost trembled, though not aware of any fault she had committed. The countess ob¬ served her trepidation, and slightly touching her cheek with her lips, ob¬ served—" I come not hither to blame you,
you, Agatha, for aught that has happen¬ ed this eve, however strongly I might disapprove— but be not afraid—the blame is mine alone." Then, casting her eyes on a mirror, she demanded— " My child—how looked I to-night?" " Well, madam," was the laconic re¬ ply of Agatha, and all she was able to utter. It was, indeed, true: the countess Smolensko—always so majestic—always beautiful, never looked nobler than on the present occasion. Her stately figure was now closely enveloped in a large embroidered mantle, which she had thrown around her on quitting the ball¬ room to commune with Agatha: yet even through the dark glittering folds of this warm covering, the symmetry of her form shone apparent to the be¬ holder. Her locks were long, fair, and unconfined—her complexion the most speckiess alabaster. What wanted the 13 countess
countess Smolensko to render her per¬ fectly amiable? A gentle, and femi¬ nine disposition, to correspond with the exterior beauty of her person. " I mean not to blame you, child," she now repeated, in a tone which im¬ plied the "blame she affected to wave— " but these fooleries with a mere un¬ titled wanderer, beseem not the condi¬ tion of Agatha Smolensko. Looked I well, saidst thou, Agatha, when the brave baron Wolveroff was seated by my side ? My beloved Agatha! thou also lookedst well. So well, my child, that thy mother hath been blamed for thus, like'a jealous niggard, hoarding a treasure even one of the noblest in Russia hath long panted to possess." "What means my mother?" asked Agatha, tremulously, while the palp¬ able heaving of her bosom betrayed her emotion. " That thy hand hath been to-night a second
a second time solicited," replied the countess, firmly, " by one with whom an alliance would be equally advantage¬ ous and honourable. What answers Agatha to a proposal sanctioned by pru¬ dence, and approved of by her parents ?" " My hand is at their disposal," said Agatha, evidently not displeased, but blushing even 10 crimson: then chang¬ ing suddenly her whole manner, she added with quickness—" but to whom ?" " The courteous and gallant baron Wolveroff," replied the countess, pomp¬ ously, " in esteem for our noble house, and veneration for the ancient attributes of our family—as well as, it may be, some share of admiration for thyself— hath condescended to offer thee rank and happiness." " The baron Wolveroff!" repeated Agatha in astonishment, while the glow on her cheeks faded at once into a dead¬ ly paleness. i 4 "Ay!"
"Ay!" said the countess, somewhat nettled at the change she could not avoid ■perceiving—" what answers Agatha to the noble baron—the favourite of his prince, and of his country?" Agatha paused a moment, and then, summoning all her resolution, replied with more dignity than, on any occa¬ sion of her life, she had ever before as¬ sumed—" My answer is to the brave baron Wolveroff—thanks for the esteem in which he holds our house—regard for the veneration with which he professes to regard my ancestors, who I knew were noble, ere he informed me of it, and worthy of bearing relationship to his own. With respect to the rank and happiness he offers me—tell him that the first is worthless to me, because I prize it not; and, for the second—it is not in his power to bestow." The countess Smolensko now looked, in
in her turn, indeed astonished ; she had never seen Agatha betray such emotion —never heard her evince so much spirit. Forcing herself, however, by a violent effort, to at least the outward appear¬ ance of calmness for a transient period, she demanded—" And should Agatha Smolensko deign at all to enter into the happy wedded state, who is likely to become the object of her choice?" " Oh! now you are again my mo¬ ther!" exclaimed Agatha melting, and falling at the feet of her dissembling parent. «* Oh, my kind mother! should you ever wed your Agatha—if you would have her live to thank, and bless you—let it not be to any other than Lovinski!" " Away from my sight, perfidious! begone, disobedient!" now vociferated the angry countess, giving full scope at once to her chagrin and resentment. This was precisely what lady Smolen- 15 sko
sko had long feared, and suspected— and her rage knew no bounds. Her beautiful face was swollen with choler, and its effects seemed to oppress her almost to suffocation: like a tigress, she rushed upon her shrinking offspring— had -she smitten her, the blows would but have fallen on an inanimate form, for Agatha had fainted at her feet. ***** During several succeeding days, Lo¬ vinski called vainly at the palace of Smolensko—none of its noble inmates v/ere to be seen. At length, deter¬ mined to obtain some more direct and positive information respecting the cause of this mysterious absence, in which he felt his own happiness to be materially concerned, he became one morning more minute in his inquiries: on which the porter, Nicholas, appear¬ ing suddenly to recollect himself gave him
him a letter purporting to be from his young mistress, Agatha Gmolensko, with many well-feigned expressions of contrition for having forgotten it so long.__" Creeping, treacherous slave!'' cried the exasperated Lovinski, fancy¬ ing that he could already penetrate the shallow artiiice; and, as he spoke, he struck the shrinking menial a blow with the hilt of his sword which felled him to the ground. The weapon was heavy, and Nicholas appeared to have felt its full weight; the blood spouted instantly from his temples, and even sprinkled in its progress the green habit of his mur¬ derer__for the wretched domestic had indeed received his death-blow. Lo¬ vinski saw—but disdainfully turned on his heel, and agajn entering his carriage, drove rapidly homeward with the billet of Agatha. He had not sufficient patience to await his arrival, as may be easily sup- 1 6 posed,
posed, ere he panted to peruse the epis¬ tle thus bloodily obtained. From its contents, however, he drew little conso¬ lation : they were simply these:— " Lovinski is informed that circumstances of a pressing nature have called the family of count Smolensko, for the present, into the country. He is further desired to understand that, under any circumstances, his presence at the palace of Smolensko will in future be dispensed with. " Agatha Smolensko."
The hand-writing was evidently Aga¬ tha's, and with her affixed signature Lovinski was too well acquainted to be easily deceived; yet he suffered, not these circumstances, convincing as such might appear, to warp his judgment, or
or to influence his consequent resolu¬ tions. He knew that Agatha (although she adored him) was completely under the control of her parents, and more particularly of her tyrannical mother: to even the worst of whose terrible ordi¬ nances, should such be issued to the pre¬ judice of their hoped-for union, he felt conscious she would hardly dare to ob¬ ject. There was much, too, of suspi¬ cion in the (no doubt instructed) menial's having so long detained this important communication; for had they not pro¬ bably by this time attained a consider¬ able distance on their route, which their secret departure might render it impos¬ sible to trace ? Why was the termina¬ tion of that route concealed from Lo¬ vinski ? These circumstances failed not to operate in his mind considerably to the exculpation of Agatha, who, he just¬ ly deemed, had been but an unwilling instrument in the hands of her impera¬ tive
tive mother,—" I will seek her every where," exclaimed Lovinski, " nor rest till I obtain from her own lips my an¬ swer, and my destiny!"—and he took his resolution accordingly.
CHAP.
CHAP. XV. The course of true love never did run smooth : But cither )t was different in blood; Or else niis»raffed, in respect of years j Or else it stood upon the choice ot friends; Or, if there were n sympathy in choice, War, death, or sickness, did lay siege to it. SlIAKESPEARI!. A few weeks only had elapsed, and the count and countess Smolensko were again residing at their palace in Moscow—but Agatha no longer resided there with them as formerly. The domestics were all kept in profound ignorance respect¬ ing the place of her present residence; the whole extent of their knowledge being that she quitted the palace in com¬ pany with her parents, who had return¬ ed alone. Baron Wolveroff continued as
as usual to visit at the palace of Smo¬ lensko, but of course saw not Agatha, although, it seemed more than probable, he was no stranger to the place of her retreat. With the exception of the ba¬ ron's frequent visits, the count and conntess appeared to keep less company than heretofore : a general gloom seem¬ ed to pervade every thing at the palace of Smolensko, of which none knew, and few were even able to divine the origin. At this time, Lovinski had quitted the populous city of IMoscow, none being aware of the precise period, or purpose of his departure. # * * *■ *• In a far distant, and sequestered man¬ sion, near the dreary confines of de¬ sert Siberia, surrounded by almost ever¬ lasting snow, now pined the wretched Agatha Smolensko, cut off by cruel parents from all her fond anticipations of
of future happiness. No cheering object was here to enliven her dull moments— no companion, save an aged female, named Magdalen, who acted in the ca¬ pacity of a superior attendant, and had strict charge of her health and security. Among the objects which here employ¬ ed her always melancholy thoughts, the most frequent was her abandoned— loved Lovinski; and if hope ever enter¬ ed her bosom in this dismal solitude, it was when she remembered Ids oft-re¬ peated vows, and felt convinced, by their fervency, that he was not likely to for¬ get her. Yet of what avail was likely to be his remembrance of the " happy, heartfelt hours," she had passed in his society ? Of the long-deserted mansion in which she was now immured, Lovinski knew not even the existence, and had he known its situation, or the gloomy ex¬ istence to which she was now doomed by her unfeeling mother (for the count had
had little share in the transaction), his interference was likely to achieve but" little towards her release, or restoration to the favour of her offended family. " Ah me!" she sometimes cried, des- pondingly, " why was I born to endure these fierce extremes of piercing cold, and unutterable fire: without—the chil¬ ling blast of this rigorous, never verdant clime; and within—the glowing warmth of an affection as hopeless as it is ardent and tormenting. Alas! if by the irre¬ sistible decrees of destiny I was fore¬ doomed to bear this cruel deprivation— for still the loss of Lovinski's society must the .imprisoned Agatha account the heaviest of her woes—why was not my strength proportioned to the endur¬ ance of so great a calamity ? But, as I feel already too fatally assured—not all the cold terrors of this icy region, to which my almost equally frigid parent hath condemned me, can prevent the flame
flame in my heart from consuming my existence." Sometimes the officious Magdalen en¬ deavoured to console her, and not un¬ frequently strove to set before her the advantages she would derive from an implicit following of her parents' coun¬ sel; but Agatha—the faithful Agatha, on such occasions, never allowed her even to proceed. Thus passed their heavy, and unsocial hours: there were several other domestics left to guard the mansion, but with these Agatha mingled not even to command—her only amuse¬ ment consisted of her books, and the conversation of Magdalen. ***** It was on a clear, starlight night, illumined too by the beautiful Aurora Borealis, almost to the brilliancy of de¬ parted day, but excessively cold, that Lovinski approached what he rightly conceived
conceived would prove the termination of his hitherto fruitless search. A large, and apparently-neglected mansion, arose dark and frowning over the bleak white waste, towards which his steps had been directed by the neighbouring peasantry, as belonging to the rich count Smolen¬ sko; and towards which he now fleetly proceeded, over hardened snows which yielded not to the pressure of his nim¬ ble footprint, so frozen and slippery was the glistering surface. Lovinski was alone, and habited in the coarse garb of a common peasant, which he had deemed best calculated to effect his concealment, and forward his design; he had endured no slight degree of hard¬ ship, but he knew that the costly prize, if once obtained, would more than re¬ quite him for the temporary inconveni¬ ence he had been doomed to suffer, during the prosecution of his enter¬ prise. CHAP.
CHAP. XVI. I see, a man's life is a tedious one; I have tired myself; and lor two nights together Have made the ground my bed. • • # • Two beggars told mc I could not miss my wrty : will poor folks lie, Th.it have afflictions on tliem ? Shakespeare. Twice did Lovinski (though faint and exhausted with his previous travel) make the wearying circuit of this deso¬ late-looking residence, ere he perceived that he was watched by a figure, who seemed to have been cautiously placed there as a guard, or centinel. This man now approached the disguised wander¬ er, dauntlessly, and levelling his firelock full at his supposed defenceless breast, de-
demanded, in an authoritative tone— « Who goes there? Speak! or this si¬ lences you for ever." «»A friend!" answered Lovinski, at the same time cautiously drawing a pis¬ tol from his bosom, which movement he took care his interrogator should ob¬ serve. " That is false," replied the ruffian in office, fiercely—" stand! for I know thee. Thou art the foreigner, Lovin¬ ski." Lovinski started on hearing his name pronounced thue readily, but presently recovering himself, advanced, saying— " Whoever thou art that knowest my name so well, it suits not my purpose to deny the fidelity of thy recollection. Ha!" he continued, now observing his challenger to be the very menial whom he had felled to the ground at the pa¬ lace of Smolensko, a circumstance which surprised him more, as a report of his death
death had previously reached him, ere he quitted Moscow—" thou art Nicho¬ las !—yet how is it that thou, poor Ni¬ cholas ! art living, and art here ?" " Not by the omission of any effort of thine to destroy me, as thou know¬ est," replied Nicholas, half maliciously; but, at the same time, grounding his piece, and calmly awaiting the approach of Lovinski. ** Nay, Nicholas," said thfr latter, at¬ tempting at least to smile, " now thou speakest too harshly. What I did in my rage I am sorry for, and am hearti¬ ly well pleased again to encounter thee here. As a further proof that Lovin¬ ski hath little desire to be thine ene¬ my, here is my purse, to cure the rash blow I dealt thee, which I wish I could recal, as easily as I can compensate thee for its infliction." Nicholas took the purse, but received it with a grin that still seemed half ma¬ lignant,
lignant, or derisive; and then, with real or pretended surliness, demanded—" And what favour is the despised Nicholas ex¬ pected to perform for this ?" " By the friendly height of yonder shadowing walls," said Lovinski, draw¬ ing him gently toward the building, " we shall be screened alike from unwel¬ come observation, and the bitter intru¬ sion of this freezing blast. There shalt thou learn—thrice gentle,Nicholas, whose forgiving disposition hath already won my admiration—what service thou shalt presently perform for me. This night —this very night, shall Nicholas pro¬ cure such-a favour for Lovinski, that the sum thou hast already received from him, twenty times doubled, shall fall short of thy recompence." * * * * * As Agatha was sitting dejectedly in one of the extensive naked apartments, in
in company with her sole confidential attendant, Magdalen, she suddenly drew her chair nearer to the fire, and exclaim¬ ed__" Oh! what a dreary, comfortless clin e is this! Alas! for the houseless, shivering wretches, exposed this night to its fury—should there be any such— my very heart is chilled by thinking on their misery!" " It is, indeed, a rare cold night," said Magdalen, assenting to the first obser¬ vation of her feeling captive: with re¬ spect to the second, she then added— " My Nicholas, poor youth ! must en¬ dure its pitiless breath the bleak night through, it being his turn to watch with¬ out the walls—I warrant his handsome limbs will ache before the morning!" and, with an affected sigh, the elderly damsel concluded. By this speech it will appear—and let not the conclusion seem over strange, since such things sometimes occur—that vol. ii. K the
the somewhat-antiquated maiden had cast what is vulgarly called a sheep's eye upon the youthful Nicholas, who, sooth to say, in spite of their disparity in point of years, had not formerly discouraged her pretensions. "But, alack!" she now continued, " the youth is changed. Since that un¬ fortunate blow he received from thy headstrong champion, the vagabond Lo¬ vinski, which it was feared would have cost him his life—nay, which it was even reported had done so—hath Nicholas been utterly altered. He is now grown moody, and thoughtful; and though the Good count hath sent him here, as I be- lieve, chiefly to render my situation comfortable—that I may, as it were, hanker less after that delightful Mos¬ cow, he scarcely ever deigns me a single word. Indeed, so totally different is Nicholas from that which he was wont to be, that I sometimes think it is not Nicholas
Nicholas whom the good count hath sent us, but------" " But what?" said Agatha, perceiving her pause. "You have heard of wandering, dis¬ embodied spirits," resumed Magdalen, with solemnity, " who, ere the corpse is cold ------" " Psha !" exclaimed Agatha, rising— " it is late. Magdalen, I shall retire." " With all my heart, lady," said Mag¬ dalen, rising likewise. Then to herself, in a lower key, she subjoined—" But ere Magdalen also retires, she will ope the portal to Nicholas, who shall lie to¬ night by the kitchen hearth, I vow, as an act of common charity ; for this keen biting air is even unkinder than him- self." With this determination she de¬ scended to the portal, and Agatha pre¬ pared to retire to rest. # # it * a
k 21 " Nicnolas!"
" Nicholas!" now exclaimed the shrill voice of Magdalen at the opened portal —" he hears me not—Ah! time has been when he would have sooner distin¬ guished the voice of Magdalen. Softly! he is yonder—mercy on me! there are two of them—or could my eyes deceive me ?—Nicholas!" Nicholas now approached, with appa¬ rent unconcern, and inquired gruffly why he was summoned. The compas¬ sionate Magdalen was not long in ac¬ quainting him with her humane inten¬ tions, but added—" Who was thy com¬ panion ? I mean the tall peasant stand¬ ing beside thee yonder—surely I saw two figures ?" " It was only my shadow flung by the light ihou seest in the sky," replied Nicholas, carelessly, alluding to the Au¬ rora Borealis, which appeared indeed playing beautifully over the enlightened firmament. Then requesting her coolly to
to leave the portal to his charge, he re¬ turned to his post, as he said, to fetch his firelock; and Magdalen withdrew not very well pleased with his courtesy, to attend her young mistress to her chamber, leaving the door a little open^ as Nicholas had desired her. $. * * * fr Agatha Smolensko was now in her sleeping apartment, to which, a short time after the preceding conversation, she was officiously ushered by Magda¬ len, who had since likewise retired to repose. Desolate as was commonly the face of Nature in this forbidding, frost- bound region, Agatha still loved, ere retiring to her oftentimes sleepless couch, to look abroad upon her varying coun¬ tenance. Approaching, therefore, for this purpose, the small recess in which the window of her apartment was situ¬ ated, she thought she perceived the cur¬ ie 3 tain
tain which shadowed it tc tremble. Amazed, yet scarcely knowing what to dread, she was about to alarm Magda¬ len, when a voice, whose silver tones were instantly remembered, desired her to remain tranquil, and assured her that she had nothing to apprehend. At the same instant, the figure of Lovinski, habited like the humblest peasant, stood revealed before her! The welcome in¬ truder now rushed forth to embrace her, with all the fervency of a long-parted lover, but Agatha was near fainting with emotion—he caught her sinking form, ere it fell to the earth, and strained her to his heart.
CHAP.
CHAP. XVII. Yls, love, indeed, is light from liCtivel), A spark of that immortal fire With jiigcls "harcii, by Alia givi.11, To iift from earth our low rlesire. Devotion wafts the mind above, But heaven itself descends in love. B^nov. The transports of the enamoured Lo¬ vinski while pressing even the inani¬ mate form of bis loved Agatha to his bosom, after so long and anxious a se¬ paration, it is utterly impossible to de¬ scribe. He felt his worn languid spirits nerved anew by the soft touch of her yielding hand-—his breast throbbed tu¬ multuously beneath the thrilling pres¬ sure of its beauteous burthen; and even in that half melancholy moment of feli- k 4 city,
city, hardly won, and likely to be suc¬ ceeded by fresh peril, the sentiments of Lovinski were precisely those of the poet who exclaim?— *' Oh, Love 1 young Lo«e! boarul in thy rosy band, Let sage, or cynic, prattle as he will, These hours, and only these, redeem life's years of ill." He now listened attentively, but all seemed perfectly tranquil within the mansion: by his timely interposition, he had prevented Agatha from giving an alarm, and consequently their sudden encounter had not disturbed any of its hardly yet slumbering inmates. He looked again upon his Agatha—she re¬ mained still insensible. " My Agatha!" he softly exclaimed, " revive—look up —it is thy own Lovinski—to whom, I know, thou hast been in heart ever faithful! I come not to reproach thee, but to devise means for thy deliverance —for thy happiness. Awake, my an¬ gelic
gelic love—my spotless Agatha! look up—look up with thy blue heavenly eyes, and charm me into paradise!" Agatha now began slowly to revive; and first, as she raised her swimming head, and became gradually conscious of her situation, a flood of tears gushed forth to her relief—tears, which even the cruel conduct of her parents had not before extorted from her eyes. Lovin¬ ski clasped her yet closer to his bosom, as from this circumstance he justly im¬ bibed a stronger conviction than even he had hitherto entertained that his re¬ gard was still precious to her. She then anxiously surveyed his altered per¬ son—his vile peasant's garb—his sunken aspect, and fatigued appearance. Lo¬ vinski—the brave, high-spirited Lovin¬ ski—of whom it might truly have been said, as Agatha well remembered while the spirit of past scenes flashed across her recollection— K 5 "Light
" Light was his fuotstep in the dance. And firm his stirrup in the iists; And,oh! he had that merry glance That seldom lady's heart rLsibts," was changed into a homely, coarse-clad serf—-a vassal of.the land where vassalage is. esteemed, the, lowest degradation. His form was evidently worn with tra¬ vel even to lassitude, and his very eyes seemed wearied with over watching; yet still in his glance, when turned to¬ wards Agatha, shone the lustre of for¬ mer happier hours—a lustre dear to her remembrance. Of happier hours, have I inadvertently written ? forget, reader, the erring expression—surrounded as they were, by peril and difficulty, never had Agatha experienced a happier hour than the present, and the fears it drew from her sensibility were drops of joy. Ashortitime suffices lovers for an ex¬ planation, especially where neither have been to blame. Agatha was compelled to
to write the letter, it appeared, by her stern mother's so much dreaded man¬ date, which Nicholas had orders to de¬ tain until Lovinski's patience was ex¬ hausted, lest he should too speedily pur¬ sue, and discover the spot selected for her future seclusion till she consented to espouse Wolveroff. Lovinski then nar¬ rated how he had traced their route, and obtained entrance, by means of that very Nicholas whom he supposed himself to have slain; and, in the end, unfolded his already projected plan for her escape. On tiie morrow, he said, a sledge should be waiting that would swiftly convey her from her present persecutors; if she would deign to accept his proffered ser¬ vices, and protection, until her austere parents were taught differently to value and esteem the happiness of their harsh¬ ly-treated child. Ere the now blushing and irresolute Agatha could possibly frame any reply to this sudden proposi- k 6 tion,
tion, their conference was interrupted by an unusual noise without, evidently occasioned by the hasty approach of travellers toward the mansion, over the hardened snow. Scaicely knowing what to think, or apprehend, Agatha rushed to the win¬ dow of her lofty apartment, and thence with ease, by the resplendent light of the northern sky, discerned a rapidly approaching sledge, in Avhich appeared seated the count and countess Smolen¬ sko, in company with the equally feared, and more detested, baron Wolveroff! In another moment, all was tumult and confusion within the dwelling. Magdalen had descried the same unex¬ pected object—even Nicholas appeared to have been alarmed by its approach, for his hoarse tones were distinctly audi¬ ble rousing the other domestics to their duty, and ordering preparations for the reception of the noble guests. Scarcely
had Agatha time to breathe, ere the shrill voice of Magdalen was heard at her chamber door, desiring her to resume her habiliments immediately, and for¬ mally announcing each of the distin¬ guished party by name. " Here is ar¬ rived the noble count Smolensko," said she, " and the benevolent countess Smo¬ lensko is with him: up, lady Agatha! for the countess will want to see you im¬ mediately. Here is also arrived the worthy and valiant baron Wolveroff: then arise, lady Agatha! and attire thy¬ self with care, for it is not late, and per¬ haps the noble baron may also wish— but open the door, I say—open the door!" Amazed—confused—distracted stood the nerveless, motionless Agatha, and the almost equally distressed Lovinski —distressed not on his own account, but alarmed for the reputation of his stainless partner in this stolen interview. Aghast
Aghast they looked upon each other, lost in astonishment, terror, and per¬ plexity. Lovinski's first resolution was to fall fighting by her side-rbut against whom was he to fight? against her dearest kindred! reason and humanity alike forbade so desperate a course. But ,a moment was left to decide. Agatha, now drooping from excessive emotion, discovered that her hand rested on a ponderous chest* that had long stood neglected in a corner of the apartment, and an idea instantly struck her—wo¬ man's wit is always most conspicuous in a moment of pressing need. She raised the'lid—it was empty : she look¬ ed imploringly toward Lovinski—he comprehended her meaning, and drew nearer to the fatal chest.—" My Aga¬ tha," said he—" for myself I fear not; and
and to prove to thee that 1 fear not even dishonour for thy vantage, I will even die degraded—if chance so wills it— sooner than be the means of disclosing our hidden intercourse. I. will enter, until.the coming hustle shall pass, and opportunity again present itself for con¬ certing some course that may lead to our mutual liberty. Fear not thou any discovery of my confined hiding-place— Lovinski would rather perish than suf¬ fer his untimely indiscretion to betray our secret." By this time, Magdalen, weary of uselessly exhausting her voice, had re¬ tired from the unopened portal to wel¬ come her sincerely reverenced m H ster and mistress : but now instead of her shrill tones, was plainly heard the de¬ liberate, majestic tread of the countess, slowly amending the stairs to Agatha's apartment. The hoarser accents of Ni¬ cholas seemed also for the present to have
have ceased : even the awakened bustle of the domestics below appeared to be gradually subsiding—nothing was dis¬ tinguishable but the heavy advancing step of the countess, which had almost reached the portal. Lovinski heard, and leaped in with agility, lying full length presently at the botom of the chest; and Agatha, with the speed of lightning, let fall the sounding lid.
CHAP.
CHAP. XVIII. Tu the trunk again, and shut the spring of it. Swift, swift, you dragons of the night! that dawning May bare the raven's eye. I lodge in fear; Though this a heavenly angel, hell ia here. Shakespeaiie. Immediately the chest was closed, Agatha flew to unlock her chamber door for the admission of the countess, her mother, although not until the latter had violently endeavoured to ob¬ tain entrance. The bolt smoothly re¬ coiled beneath the light trembling fin¬ gers of Agatha, and the door stood open : on entering the apartment, lady Smolensko exclaimed—" My child—I heard a noise." « I------1 was alarmed," stammered Agatha—" and so------" The
The countess now cast upon her a keen scrutinizing glance: she saw in¬ deed that Agatha had been alarmed, and not slightly. She next threw her eyes round the apartment—they ap¬ peared to penetrate into the very walls. Nothing, however, was visible to ex¬ cite her further suspicion, and she cold¬ ly added—" You have not been un¬ dressed. " Magdalen assured me you were buried in sleep." So- saying, and with another evil glance around the chill and naked walls, the countess Smolensko drew a chair, and seated herself before the crackling fire which blazed in the chamber, desir¬ ing Agatha to do the same. Agatha trembled more, and cast her eyes grate¬ fully up toward that sparkling heaven, though clouded by the cieling of her apartment: if any trace of Lovinski had been incautiously left visible—if even his peasant's cap had been left upon the floor,
floor, how horrible would have been her situation! Having obeyed the injunction of her mother, by seating herself opposite to the cheering flame, she next awaited with anxiety her commencement of the dreaded interview; little doubting the subject, or point, toward which the coming conversation was to be directed. After a little while, as if even the haughty countess wanted resolution to begin the subject in a more formal way, she demanded of the shrinking Agatha—" Know you who waits be¬ low?"- *' The count, my father, and------" said Agatha, but her lips refused to ut¬ ter the detested name with which her reply should have concluded. " And the noble baron Wolveroff," said the countess, sternly, completing the unfinished sentence. " Has Aga¬ tha weighed the merit of his preten¬ sions—
sions—the acknowledged worth of the gallant suitor for the happiness of her hand ? Has she considered the exalted lineage, and distinguished character, of the brave veteran who is now an aspi¬ rant to the honour of an alliance with our ancient house ? If she hath, let her answer me accordingly; and according to the tenor of her answer, shall my heart be shut or open to her solicita¬ tions for freedom, and restoration to so¬ ciety." " Alas! my mother!" returned the imploring Agatha, obliged to speak, yet loathing even the sound of her own voice, when conversing on so disagree¬ able a theme—" name not the detested subject, nor let such alone be the con¬ ditions of my liberty. That dreadful alliance! I have, indeed, well pondered on it; but the very name of Wolveroff is ----- 0 h! more than hateful to me; and I dare not consent to an union I feel I could
could never endure, nor even long sur¬ vive." " Foolish, misguided girl!" said the countess, yet rather persuasively than in anger—" remember the innumerable advantages that may accrue to thy fa¬ mily—think on the certain respect and aggrandizement that will every where attend thyself. The domains of the valorous baron Wolveroff are extensive, and his abode magnificent; few are no¬ bler in lineage—none more highly dis¬ tinguished for personal prowess, or ad¬ dress in the field. His equipages are more splendid than even our sumptuous capital doth often witness roll through its crowded streets. His vassals are nu¬ merous—his possessions dispersed even from that proud city to where the white birch blossoms alone, for a brief interval, toward the cold boundaries of Siberia— that Siberia to which thy own obstinacy hath now exiled thee. Why, our golden- steepled
steepled Moscow, with all its spire- crowned edifices, will look up to thee as fashion's airy sovereign, and adopt thy fancies, as the usage of the time. Allure¬ ments such as these are not to be slight¬ ly thrown aside, and despised, by a mad, oii-fish caprice—must not—shall not! You must wed baron Wolveroff—-nay more, you must even prepare this night to tell him so. At this moment he is partaking some refreshment with thy father; and, after his wine, expects to receive the submissive homage of his future wife—and at thy peril let him be disappointed." Agatha shuddered, as she heard this final determination of her unfeeling parent; that night—that very night to be required to enter his abhorred pre¬ sence __to yield herself a sacrifice with¬ out, at least, one other day for reflection —for remonstrance—for escape! it was more than she expected to be told even by
by her wily, and resolute mother. The reality was, that her determined parent, having heard of Lovinski's secret depar¬ ture from IMoscow, and dreading its concealed purpose, had resolved imme¬ diately on forcing her refractory child to marry the scorned, rejected Wolve¬ roff; who, on his part, panting eagerly to possess the obdurate Agatha, cared little by what means he obtained the beauteous prize. Thus circumstanced, however, after a brief pause of mingled emotion and terror, Agatha still found spirit to reply—" To-night see baron Wolveroff! to-night become the sub¬ missive, duteous victim! the former you may compel me to perform—the latter you never shall. You are my mother— my too resolute mother; pardon, then, to your most unhappy child the pos¬ session of some portion of that spirit which governs your own breast, and breaks forth in all your actions. You are
are my revered mother—and I, in all save this, am your most loving—most obedient child ; yet you may bid me be happy, or command me to be wretched —you may imprison me as now, or restore me again to liberty—but you never shall enforce my compliance with your present desire, to the inevitable destruction of mine own tranquillity. I will not marry the proud, detested Wolveroff." " Are you mine own?—is this the child I have nurtured?" said the irri¬ tated countess, her swollen visage glow¬ ing again with rage, and her fair bosom heaving; almost to suffocation. " Now truly am I thine—thine in spirit as in form," responded Agatha, with surprising resolution. " Hereto¬ fore have I been contented to resemble thee only in form; but I now feel a heart within my indignant bosom, big with the spirit of my noble kindred, and that
that xvill not be sacrificed. I now more resemble my honoured mother's off¬ spring than when, with milky softness, I submitted to be trampled on; yet am ready to become the same again, pro¬ vided only she will wave this hateful- tins distracting theme." " And this is all for thy minion !" said the countess, equally enraged and asto¬ nished—-" thy darling—thy cherished vagabond — thy Lovinski'. It is for him that I am braved thus haughtily— an unknown churl—an undistinguished wanderer, who in mine absence dares to assail mine house, and strike — even strike mine unoffending menials! Oh ! it becomes thee well to taunt me thus in behalf of a mere cowardly assassin, and say thou drew'st such heartless inso¬ lence from thy fond mother's bosom! Agatha! Agatha! is it to thee I owe this torturing palpitation—this sudden faintness that steals over me ? Oh! that vol. ii. l I again
I again could front the wretch, Lovin- s ld_Oh! that this moment he would arise before me, that I—even I, a wo¬ man—might tell the dastard vagabond how nobler to employ his weapon!" The rage of the countess now seemed totally to overpower her utterance, and she leaned half fainting over the chest which contained Lovinski (almost the only object that offered its support in the ill-furnished apartment), and covered her beautiful features with her hand. Agatha looked tremblingly toward the fatal trunk, full of apprehensions far from groundless—full of fear and horror: but Lovinski, its close-pent inmate, was still motionless—still silent as the grave to whose dark dominion he seemed for •a transient space to be condemned. Did he slumber when that degrading denun¬ ciation from female lips was uttered ?— or had the strength of his attachment prevailed over every feeling of pride in his
his bosom, and constrained him to be silent? While yet Agatha revolved this subject in her mind, another foot¬ step was heard on the stairs ascending to the chamber; and presently divested of his travelling attire, and arrayed in a warm dressing-gown composed of costly materials, and edged with ermine, count Smolensko entered the apartment.
l 2 CHAP.
CHAP. XIX. If you be mine, I'll give you to my friend s If you be not, hang, beg, starve, die i' the streets ; For, by my snul, I'll ne'er acknowledge thee, Nor what is mine shall ever do thee good. Trust (n't, bethink you, I'll not be forsworn. SlMKrSPEAltE, Surprise at -the lengthened absence of the countess, combined with the non¬ appearance of Agatha as expected, seem¬ ed to have drawn count Smolensko to his daughter's chamber. On his en¬ trance, he looked not a little surprised at the scene which there met his view: his beautiful countess half dissolved to tears, the result of extreme vexation, and Agatha—the sympathetic Agatha. —apparently regarding her distressed situation with indifference, or, at least, appearing
appearing little anxious to console her. A few words from the angry countess sufficed to explain to him the reason of this strange sight. The heart of the count Smolensko was not unfeeling, and his temper was milder than that of the countess; but, like his boasted ances¬ tors, he was not proof against the temp¬ tations of ambition, nor indeed either wished or strove to withstand them. In him, therefore, although under any other circumstances Agatha would most probably have found a compassionating friend, she now only beheld an intrigu¬ ing courtier, and powerful abettor of her mother's cruelty. In any affair of a kind less important to his prospects of advancement, the heart of Smolensko might have been easily touched, and melted—but in this it was invulner¬ able. The countess seemed very well aware of this unfortunate trait in her husband's disposition, and his presence l 3 served
served only to increase the bitterness of her invectives against ignoble attach¬ ments, and disobedient children. To these fiery ebullitions of his con¬ sort's wrath, however, the count soon put a period, by himself more calmly introdu¬ cing the already worn-out theme of the noble Wolveroff's past exploits, and pre¬ sent possessions; and having dwelt some time upon them, told Agatha that he should expect her definitive answer on the approaching morrow, and regard her still as his most precious hope, or cast her from his affections accordingly. He concluded by informing them — much to the gratification of Agatha— that the baron had for that night retired to rest; but added, addressing her so¬ lemnly—"Thy absence, my beloved child, has occasioned a feeling of disap¬ pointment, which to-morrow must not see renewed." After this somewhat severe lecture— severe
severe from the lips of a parent who never till then had spoken to his child save in perfect kindness—the count and countess withdrew to their own apart¬ ment. Each kissed, ere they quitted the chamber, the victim whom they designed so speedily to sacrifice; and Agatha returned with fervency the fond salute of her father, for though she knew his foible, she was also sensible of his kindness. The countess desired her to retire to rest, and proffered to send Magdalen to her assistance—but this, of course, Agatha declined. No sooner did the wretched, persecu¬ ted Agatha, find herself again alone, than she flew to the chest which con¬ tained her adored Lovinski, towards whom her heart now overflowed with gratitude for the patience with which he had endured, without discovering himself, this protracted, galling inter¬ view. She raised the lid softly—Lo- l 4 vinski
vinski still lay motionless at the bottom of the chest,—" Fatigue and drowsiness have overpowered him," said Agatha, " and he slumbers: but he must be awa¬ kened." She tried her soft voice, but its silver tones fell powerless on the deadened ear of Lovinski—she took his nerveless hand, but it dropped heavily in seeming lifelessness from her relin¬ quished clasp. Amazed, her hand wandered in alarm over his heart—his temples: no breath—no pulse seemed to indicate that Lovinski any longer possessed existence. " Alas! he is dead!" she exclaimed with horror in her accents—" he is dead! Lovinski is suffocated—he is dead, and I have slain him! It was for me he entered that fatal trunk—for me that he endu¬ red—mother of Christ! Can it be pos¬ sible?" Mute, motionless, and aghast now stood the changed and shuddering Aga¬ tha
tha for some moments, in silence re¬ garding the awful object thus suddenly presented to her gaze, as if petrified by the appalling sight into a form of stone. Again she strove to dissipate the illu¬ sion—if it was an illusion—which had thus reduced her panic-struck form to helplessness, by striving to recal to ani¬ mation the senseless Lovinski; but her fruitless endeavours served only to con¬ firm her in the horrible conviction that he was indeed no more, and she again relapsed into a state of the most con¬ summate agony. Sometimes she press¬ ed her wan sunken cheek to his, or clasped his cold hand to her tumultu¬ ous bosom: then again would she.cover his" pallid brow with kisses, wring wildly her delicate hands, and fling herself in frantic delirium by his side. Anon starting to her feet, and endea¬ vouring to comprehend at a single glance the full horror of her situation, she
she again exclaimed—" Oh God! is there no ray of light to dissipate the darkness that like a shroud seems to environ me?—is there no beam of hope to cheer, or penetrate the despair of Agatha? It is already midnight: the shadowy mantle that now covers the face of nature soon will pass away> but the gloom which envelopes me morning will not dissipate. Oh! what a scene will the rising sun behold! Lovinski's doom, and the despair of Agatha— my father's bitterness—my mother's wrath—Oh! it must never be. Shall I sit idle here, and suffer his glaring beams to disclose a catastrophe so un¬ looked-for, and so dreadful? Will not Agatha be pronounced criminal ? Will not the world esteem her a semi-mur¬ deress—even, perhaps, with justice? Yet shall I alarm the house?—awake Smolensko?—Wolveroff? Oh! no- no—that thought is too horrible. What if
if I arouse only Magdalen, and—— Ha! a sudden idea dawns on my be¬ wildered mind—he may best be trusted who hath already participated in the crime. I will seek the slave who for gold admitted Lovinski: his fears will bind him to my interest, and, for the proffer of more, he will undertake whatever must now be done. I know not what—but Nicholas shall instruct me. Nicholas! with a vile, wretched slave—a very menial, to plot and ad¬ vise for safety in mine own chamber! Let me not think—it must—it must be submitted to. Bend, Agatha! thy proud spirit to thy destiny, and away to seek the low traitor Nicholas: pro¬ mise him largely—any thing — any thing—rather than this beloved, lamen- ted corse, should be discovered here." Once again she embraced the cold senseless form of Lovinski, and closing the chest with more fortitude than she had
had hitherto exhibited, quitted the apartment silently, intending to search for and, by some secret signal, summon Nicholas to partake of her distress, and assist her in removing the cause. She had not far to seek the humble menial whose presence she required, and whom surely, she thought, some kind angel must have made acquainted with her intention; for just without the portal now appeared the sturdy Nicholas, whom she instantly, and in silence, beckoned into her chamber. Having carefully refastened the door, she next drew him toward the chest, and raising the lid, displayed the wan features of her unfortunate lover, leav¬ ing him to draw his own conclusions respecting the chain of events which had led to this fatal catastrophe. Ni¬ cholas met the sight, if not altogether unstartled, yet evidently undismayed. Agatha then drew forth a purse con¬ taining
taining fifty roubles, and promised to present him with it, provided he would instantly remove the body beyond the walls of the mansion, and bury it in the snow; or, on the other hand, if he could devise any expedient for her lover's res¬ toration, undertook to reward him with her eternal gratitude. Nicholas now looked sullen, and nei¬ ther took the proffered recompence, nor appeared inclined to use any means for the recovery of Lovinski, whom pre¬ sently he roughly pronounced dead, and wondered how she could expect his ex¬ ertions to restore him. " Then the body must be borne hence," sobbed Agatha, agonized at the thought, but impressed with the impe¬ rative necessity of its instant removal from her chamber. " But I cannot quit the walls," mut¬ tered Nicholas, " without incurring too great a risk of the count's displeasure." " The
u The reward shall be doubled," said Agatha, imploringly, alarmed at his re¬ fusal which she did not anticipate— " nay even more than trebled, if thou deemest it insufficient. Five hundred roubles shall be thine, to-night—only remove ihe corse." " But I value not wealth," said Ni¬ cholas, with a malignant grin; " and, if I were avaricious, the countess would part with more for the discovery." u Wretch! have I then disclosed to thee my secret in vain?" demanded Agatha, distractedly. " Have I vainly admitted thee, slave, to my confidence ? Wilt thou not aid me in avoiding a di¬ lemma of which thy own treacherous imprudence was partially the cause ?" " Mistake not, fair creature, my backwardness to serve thee," now an¬ swered Nicholas, with another signifi¬ cant, and ghastly smile. " Nicholas shall surely obey thy mandate, and also experience
experience thy gratitude; but the price of his services shall be neither fifty, nor five hundred roubles. Lovinski hath bestowed upon Nicholas wealth—the daughter of Smolensko must yield him a softer recompence. His reward for disposing of this lover dead, must be thy gracious acceptance of a living lover, whom thou also beholdest in thy presence. The price, dearer than gold, that for my present obedience I lay claim to, is thy beauty—is thyself! This nirrht thou shalt be mine—and for no other meed will Nicholas stir one foot at thy bidding, nor even quit this cham¬ ber." Agatha now stood rivetted with amazement, as by a sudden thunder¬ stroke—she could as easily have leaped up to the moon, as quitted the spot where astonishment had transfixed her. A slave—a cringing vassal—a creature among the very meanest of her father's household,
household, to aspire to her notice—to the possession of her person ! She could scarcely believe she had heard his pre¬ sumption aright, yet lacked courage and strength to demand it of him again. At first her indignant eyes seemed fixed stedfastly, and penetratingly, upon his insolent features; but soon their search¬ ing glance was exchanged for a vacant look of deep meditation, and they ap¬ peared to wander— " In far forgelfnlncss—away—away;" but the nature and bent of those gloomy ruminations must appear hereafter.
END OF VOL. II.
Printed by J. Darling, Leadenball-Street, London.
