Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Three perils of man: or war, women and witchcraft: a border romance
THE THREE PERILS OF MAN. J............. ' SSS3 V/JtlAi · X. And be said unto Satan, whence comes t thou ? And he answered, and said, thou knowest it is troe, That I corae from wandering on the earlh, Aad from going to and fro on it, Like a masterless dog, with my bow-wow-wow. Zach. Boy d* Bibb. ?? the very time they were disputing about the right of Tarn to proceed with his tale, their ears were astounded by a loud hollo ! at the gate. Every man's heart leaped for joy, and every one was instant¬ ly on his feet ; but Charlie was first on the platform, and answered thé hollo ! with full stentorian voice. The same voice called again, « A Bellandine." *' Where bye ?" answered Charlie. " By the moon," said the voice. vol. πι. A
** And the seven stars !" rejoined Yard¬ bire, clapping his hands, and shouting for joy, " The Warden for ever ! My chief for ever ! He is the man that cares for his oivn ! Ah ! he is the noble master." Charlie well knew the voice that hailed him. It was that of his friend and com¬ panion in arms, Dan Chisholm, whom the W.arden had indeed despatched all the way from Northumberland to Aikwood, to see what was become of his embassy, Λν??ι six- and-twenty chosen troopers. Charlie Scott's asm was a bulwark of strength, and his breast a, tower of fidelity, the value of which Sir Ringan knew how to estimate, whue his acts of kindness and regard made a deep impression on Charlie's honest un¬ sophisticated heart ; and before he would •say a word about the situation of either himself or his associates, he caused Dan to inform him ofthe Warden's fortune and success in "their absence. Being satisfied ccmcerning these* he called out, ? What ither uncos* Dan? What mair news arencóme out ?"
??? ye ken that the world's amaist turned up-side-down sin ye left us ? The trees hae turned their wrang ends upmost— the waters hae drowned the towns, and the hüls hae been rent asunder and riddled up hke heaps o' chaflf. 'Tis thought that there has been a siege o' hell, and that the cita¬ del has been won, for the deils are a' bro¬ ken loose and rinning jabbering through the land. They hae been seen, and they hae been heard ; and ??? man kens' what's to be the issue, or what's to fa* out neist." " Blaw lown, Dan ; ye dinna ken wha may hear ye," said Charlie. -" We Hae had hand in these matters oursels: But for the sake of a' that's dear to you and tous bring gavelocks and ern meLs, pinching-bars, and howies, and break open every gate, bar, and door in this castle ; for here «are we a' im¬ prisoned on the top of it, and famishing to dead wi' hunger and starvation." " That I will do wi' a* expedition," an¬ swered Dan. ** It is a shame for the mas¬ ter of the castle to imprison his kinsmen's friends, who came to him in peace and a£
good fellowship. What strength of op¬ position holds he ?" " Nane, good Chisholm, but these gates. The great Master is himself a prisoner, and suffering \vith us." " That dings a' !" said Dan ; " I canna understand it ! But its a' ane for that ; ye maunna stay there. I shall gar his gates flee a' into as mony flinders as there are hairs on his grey beard." " If you demolish one bar of these gates, young man,'* cried the Master fierce¬ ly, " you do it at your peril." *\So I do, and so Ι Λν?Ι," aimvered Dan : x * Either bring down my friends and com¬ panions to me this instant, or—I have or¬ ders,—and here goes." *' Man of mystery and of misery, what dost thou mean ?" said the friar. " Lo I have $??^ thy life ; and if thou refusest to Jet us escape from the face of death, I will ?? ? ?? throw thee from the top of thy ίοΛ\τΓ, and thy blood shaU be sprinkled on the ??'?11." The lilaster ga\'e him a fierce look, but made no reply. As he strode the battle-
ment, however, he muttered to himself with great violence, " Does the Christian dog dare to beard me thus ? To Λν?^ am I fallen ? I am fallen low, but not to this. And not to know what I am ! nor what power remains with me ? Would that I were in the midst of my arcana and of the spirits once more! Young warrior, use your liberty. Break up and demolish. Set us all free, and see vvho is the pro¬ fiter." Dan scarcely needed such permission. He and twenty others had each a stone of at least half his own weight heaved on his shoulder, which* at a given signal, they all dashed on the gate at once. The bars bent, but nothing gave ?\ ? ?? ; and it was not before the twentieth broadside, in the same irresistible style, that the cross bars became like ? ???? and the lock slipped. As for the large bolt, one of the men had climbed over the counterguard on the shoulders of the rest and drawn it. When tliey came to the gate of the castle, en¬ trance seemed hopeless. It was stedfast and immoveable, the door being double.
Dan bellowed for the porter, and asked those on the top ΛΛ^ί ?? ? ?? become ofhim ; but none made answer to his rash ques¬ tion. After waiting ? ?\'?1? for it, Λν??ι his face placed horizontally, he muttered to himself, " Aha ! mum tliere ! He has gane ??? gude gate, I'll ?\ ? ???^ him. It's a queer place this, an' as queer folk about it." " What's queer about it, lad," said a strange ????? through the key hole, ivhence it would not speak again. They had nothing for it but to begin with such ??\ ? ??\-??? mattocks as they had, namely, a score of huge stones ; but, to their excessive joy, the doors g^rve both way at the first assault. This ???? o?ving to a most fortunate blunder of the friar, who, during the time he was in possession ofthe keys, had gone forth to provide for liis mule, ?? ? ??? he did in an ample man¬ ner, but, on returning, had either been unable or unwilling to turn the tremen¬ dous locks again into their sockets ; and open new the gates vrith a jarring sound. Ofjcourse, it was not long till our yeomen
were thundering at the iron door on the small stair. It ???? a double door of strong iron bars, and the lock was inclosed be. tween them, so that all attempts to open it appeared fruitless, one man only being able to get to it at once, (that is, one on each side,) and these had no footing. After tugging at it in vain for a space, Dan ?????? that, to open it, it ????? be neces¬ sary either to begin at the top of the kwer and demolish dowmvard, or at the bottom and demolish ???????. This ap¬ peared a job so tedious to starving people, that it ???? agreed to feed them with meat and drink through the bars. Every man readily proffered the contents of his waUet ; but the getting of these through the bars required ingenuity. They poured the meal through in tubes made of leather, and ΛναίβΓ and strong drink in the same way; but the flesh could only be got through in long small pieces ; and Tarn Craik having taken his station at the back of the door, in order to hand up the pro¬ visions to his companions, none of the butcher-meat (as it is now caUed) found
its ???? farther. By the time they had got a supply of meal, ?????, and dis¬ tilled liquor, some of Dan's party, by the direction of the Master, ???? to bring mattocks for raising the stair, and forcing a passage through below the door ; others had gone to the brook for more ?vater ; so tliat none remained in the ??????? stair save Dan Chisholm and another person. By this time there Λν -as one λλΊιο had been silently ?vatch?g the progress of affairs at Ai^vood castle, ?????? he had long been accustomed to reckon on every thing as his ΟΛνη ; but ηοΛν there ????? some things passed uuder his potent eye, the true motives for ????? he could not comprehend, and these actions ????? still gnrvving more and more equh r ocal ; so he resolved on trusting his ?????? vassals no more to their ???? guardianship, but to take an active management in guiding the events that so deeply concerned his honour and ???\ ? ??. Who this august personage was the reader Λν?Ι scarcely guess. He may perhaps discover it in the detail. It ???? ?vearing ^vard evening, the sun
being either set or hid behind dark clouds ; for, short as these tales may appear as here related by Isaac the curate, they had taken a day in telling by the ??^?? themselves. The individuals Λν?ιο had been shut up ????? all light of heart and rejoicing. De¬ lany had fainted in ecstacy, or partly, per¬ haps, by exhaustion, bift was soon ????? ? ??- ed by a eup of cold ?\^??. They had got plenty of stores laid in for a night and more; so that they ????? freed from the dread of perishing by s taxation, or saving their lives by a resource of all others the most repulsive to humanity. Such ?? -as the state of affairs, ?? ? ??? the most appalling noise ?\ ? ?? heard somewhere about the cas¬ tle,—a noise which neither could be de¬ scribed nor the .cause of it discwered. The people below ran out to the court or to the tops of the outer walls, and those above to the battlements—but they saw nothing save the troopers' horses ????\ ? ??- ing off in all directions, every one of them snorting abud, and cocking their heads and their tails. Tarn Craik and Dan Chis¬ holm ????? still standing with their noses A 3
dose to the iron door, and conversing through il Another trooper stood elose at Dans back; ami, when the rushing sound «rose, the cme said to the other, ** Wbat the devil is that ?" m Take erne wha ye speak about here, friend, ??* wi' reverence be it spoken," said Tam* Then turning round, he called out, m Yardbire, what hurly-burly is that ?" •'I cannot tell," answered Charlie; "only I thmk the devil be entered into the horses/ 1 Tam, who did not hear distinctly from the top, answered Dan thus : " He says its only the devil entered into the horses." Dan was just about to reply, when the tuooper tapped him on the shoulder, and said in a whisper, '« Hush, squire ! Good Lord ! look what is behind us." He look¬ ed about, and saw a terrific being standing on the landing-place, beckoning him to come down. From an irresistible impulse, he lost no time in obeying; and, pushing the trooper down before him, he descend¬ ed the steps. When he came to the bot¬ tom he got a full view of the figure, that stood upright between two pilasters, with
its face straight to the aperture that lighted the place. One may judge of our yeo* men's feelings ????? they gazed on a being which they ahvays described as follows : It appeared about double the human size, both in might and proportion, its ????1? body being ofthe colour of bronze, as well as the crown upon its head. The skin appeared shrivelled, as if seared with fire, but over that there was a polish that glittered and shone. Its eyes had no pupil nor circle of Λν?ι^; they appeared like burning lamps deep in their sockets ; and ????? it gazed, they rolled round with a circular motion. There was a hairy man¬ tle hung down and covered its feet that they could not be seen ; but Dan saw its right hand, as it pointed to them to retire, every finger of which terminated in a long crooked talon that seemed of the colour of molten gold. It once opened its mouth, not as if to speak but to breathe, and as it stooped forward at the time, both of them saw it within. It had neither teeth, tongue, nor throat, its whole inside being hoUow, and of the colour of burning glass.
It pointed with its right hand across its bosom* for them to be gone, and, as they passed by with hurried strides, it drew a stroke with its paw which threatened to send them heels over head down the stair ; but it withheld the blow in a moment, as if moved to some higher revenge ; and all the way down the great winding stair, it followed and showered on them such a torrent of burning sulphur that they were almost overwhelmed, all the while vomit¬ ing it jfrom its burning bosom, with a noise that resembled the hissing of a thousand great serpents. Besides this, on every lamling-place there were a pairof monsters placed as guards, immense snakes, bears, tigers, and lions, all with eyes like burn- ing.candles. For all these, our two yeo¬ men t still kept their feet, which was a wonder, and escaped fairly into the court ofthe castle. When they arrived there, every one of their icompanions had taken leg-bail, and weremnning as if for death or Hfe; and after.what our. two champions had seen,
there was no occasion to bid them run af¬ ter the others. Those above heard only the rushing noise, which still increased as long as there was one of those below within the gate, but they saw nothing further,—and wondered not a little when they saw first the horses run away, and then the men af¬ ter them. When Charlie saw that they were gone, and his brother-in-arms Dan leaving the outer-gate the last, he called after him to go by fhe mill, and see that Corbie got plenty of water. What our prisoners had witnessed was, like every thing else*about that castle, quite incomprehensible. Even the great Master himself was manifestly at a loss ; when he first heard the sound, and saw the beginning of the confusion, his eyes beam¬ ed with exultation. He gave three stamps with his foot, and called ^loud, as to some invisible being, in an unknown tongue ; but on receiving no answer his counte¬ nance fell, and he looked on in gloomy mood. The flyers vanished after their horses on the hill to the eastward of the castlâ Once
a few of them rallied and faced about ; but on the next one coming up they betook them again to their heels; and thus was our hapless embassy left in the same state as be¬ fore, save that they were rather in higher spirits, their situation being now known, «and instant death averted. After they had refreshed themselves, most of them fell in¬ to a slumber; but at length, as the even¬ ing advanced, the poet claimed his privi¬ lege of telling a story. Some of them pro¬ posed that the conversation should be ge¬ neral instead, seeing the great stake for which they contended was now, in all like¬ lihood, superseded. The poet,. however, was of a different opinion, on the ground that the highest stake, in his estimation, still reimrined. " What though my life may not be forfeited,** said he, " to feed the hungry and carnivorous maw of this outrageous baconist ; although my warm end oozing blood may not be sucked up like the rtagnant m¿b by bittern vlo, or by the tawney «snipe ; yea, though niy joints should not be skatcbed and collared by the steel, or sinews gnawed up by offi-
cious grinder : What's that to me ? a gem of higher worth, of richer acceptation, still remains. Beauty unsullied! pure simpli¬ city ! with high endowments, in affliction nursed, and cramped by bondage ! Oh my very heart yearns to call such a pearl of lustre mine ! A kindred soul ! A bosom friend! A oh—oh—oach." Charlie hasted to clap his hand on the poet's mouth, as he burst out a-crying, " Hout, hout, Colly !" said he, " I am quite o' your opinion ; but truly this is carrying the joke ower far. I wish ye maunna hae been hauddin rather freely to your head o' thae strong liquors ; for the singing crew are a' drowthy deils, ilk ane ?' them. Whisht, whisht, and ye sal tell your tale, or sing your sang, whieh you like ; and then you are free to take a collop, or gie a collop, Λν?' the best ofthem." " I flatter myself that's rather a good thing? Eh?"* said the poet. " What thing ?" said the other. " The song that we overheard just now. Do you know who made that song? Eh ?" * Not I."
u But you have heard our maidens chaunt it,—have you not? God bless them ! Sweet, dear, sweet, sweet creatures ! Why, Sir, that song happens to be mine ; and I think I may say, without vanity, it is as good a thing of the kind as you ever heard? Eh?" α Faith, I beheve it is," said Charlie— not kno?ving ???И Λν?^ to say, for he had heard no song ??1?1^?? ; and then turn¬ ing to the rest, while the poet was enlar¬ ging on the exceUency of his song, hesaid, in an under voice, " Gude faith, the poet's either gaen clean daft, or else he*s drunk. What shaU I say to him ?" The poet tapped him on the shoulder, seeing he was not paying attention. . ** It is not for this, I say, that I judge the piece worthy of attention ; nor yet what it shows of ability, liability, docility, or any ofthe terms that end in ility ; nor for its «allegory, category, or any of the terms that end in ory. Neither is it for its ver- «sificatiori, imagination, nor any ofthe thou- «sand abominable terms that, end in ation. No, sir, the properties of ¿Ά my songs, I
am thankful to Saint Martin, end in icity «and uity. You know the song, Yardbire ?" " ? yes. Quite weel." ** What do you think of the eleventh verse? Let me see. No, it is the thir¬ teenth verse." " Good Friday ί are there so many ?" " Hem—m—nu The tenth is, the Ox-eye, I am sure of that. The eleventh is the Mill-stone. The twelfth, the Cloudberry and the Shepherd Boy. The thirteenth, is the Gander and Water- Wagtail. It is the fourteenth. What do you think of the fourteenth ? Ay, it is the Go wans and thel^werock thatyou wiU like best. You remember that, I am sure ?*' « ? yes; to be sure I do."—(Aside,) "Good Lord, the poet's horn mad I Heard ever any body the hke o' this ?" " How is this it runs ? Ay, ?? 7 ??? the bluart bears a pearl, And the daisy turns a pea, And the bonny lue ken gowan Has fauld it up his ee, Then the laverock frae the blue lift, Doops down and thinks ??? shame To woo his bonny lassie, When the kye come hame«.
** The song is good, and the music of Ûm «song ??? is delectable," said the friar ; ** imt the voice of the singer is like a sweet psaltery that hath lost a string, and hath its belly rent by the staff of the beater. Lo, I would even delight to hear the song from beginning to end." * Sing it, poet, and let it stand for the tale," cried two of them at œce. " That I wfll not," answered he ; ** I will tell my tale in my own style, and my own manner, as the rest have done : nevertheless, if my throat were not so dry, I would sing the song." " It is plain what be wants," said Charlie. " 'Tis the gate wi' tf the minatrsls, — wet the whistle, or want ?? spring." Charlie handed him another cup of strong drink, desiring him to take it off and sing. He did the first freely, and attempted the «second with equal alacrity ; but his voice «and memory both failed him by the way^ to the great amusement of the whole par¬ ty,—even the captive boy screamed with «laughter, and the great Master was twice constrained to smile. But we must des^ cribe this scene as Isaac himself gives it.
The poet was sitting on a bench, with Charlie on the one hand, «and Delany on the other ; and, fixing his eyes on the ceil* ing, and clasping his hands, which he heav¬ ed up at every turn ofthe tune, he went on thus : THE SWEETEST THING THE BEST THING. Ä SONG· VERSE FIBST. Come tell ?? a' you shepherds That love the tarry woo', And tell me a' you jolly hoys That whistle at the glow, What is the greatest bliss That the tongue of man can nai^u, 'Tis " To woo a bonny lassie AVhen the kye come bame.* f When the kye come hame, When the kye come hame, 'Tween the gloaming and the mirk, When the kye come hame. That's the burden, or the qnoir, as father Cormack calls it ;—the o'erword, like. VERSE SECOND. 'Tis not beneath the burgonet, Nor yet beneath tbe crown, %
*?? not oa couch of velvet, Nor yet in bed of down \ Tb beneath the spreading birch In the dell without the name, Wi* a bonny bonny lassie, When the kye come hame. When the kye come h;une, &c. VEBSE thirb. There the blackbird higs his nest For the mate he lo'es to see, And on the topmost ? ugh, Oh a happy bird' is he ! There he pours his melting ditty, And love 'tis a* the theme *, And he'll woo his bonny lassie When the kve come hame. When the kye come hame, &c. VEBSE FOURTH. When the little wee bit heart Rises high in the breast, And the little wee bit starn Rises red in the east, Ö there's a joy sae dear, That the heart can hardly frame r Wi' a bonny bonny lassie, When the kye come hame. When the kye come hame, &e. VEBSE FIFTH. Then the eye shines sae bright, The hale soul to beguile,
There's love in every whisper, And joy in every smile. ? wha wad chuse a crown Wi' its perils and its fame, And miss a bonny lassie When the kye come hame. When the kye come hame, orc. Here the poet warred a long time with re¬ collection, always repeating, ** I made the thing, and it is impossible I can forget it— I can't comprehend------" At length he sung the following verse, which he said wm lhe fifteenth. VERSE THE FIFTEENTH. See yonder pawky shepherd, That lingers on the hill, His ewes are in the fauld And his lambs are lying still j Yet he downa gang to bed, For his heart is in a flame, To meet his bonnié lassie, When the kye come hame. When the kye come hame, &c. VERSE SIXTEENTH AND LAST. Away wi' fame and fortune, What comfort can they gie ? And a' the arts that prey On man's life and libertye 5 %
Gie me the highest joy That the heart of man can frame, My bonny, Wy ksae, When the kye come hame. When the kye come hame, When the kye come hame ; 'Tween the gloaming «and the mirk. When the kye come hame. u I made the thing," added the poet ; ** but God knows how I have forgot it. Since I came to the top of this cursed tower, the wind has blown it out of my head" With these words he fell into a profound deep, which they suffered him to enjoy, before he began his competition. In the meantime, Isaac relates an extraordinary story of a certain consultation that took place in the castle in that very interim, but does not say on what authority he had it, none of the parties yet named having apparently heard it. The castle of Aikwood, says he, being left as before, an ample and perilous void, some old and frequent inmates took un¬ disputed possession. The leader and con- voker of this gang was no other.than the
Master Fiend who ordered our yeomen out of the eastle, and chased them forth, with so little ceremony. In the great Mastets study was his gigantic and commanding frame placed at the end of the board, while the three pages, Prig, Prim, and Pricker, were waiting his beck. u Come nigh me, my friends," said he; " and read me what is to ¿ be done with this king of mighty conjurors now ?" " What thou wiUest, our Lord and Mas¬ ter," ???? the reply : "Give the command ΛνΗΙι the power, and thy pleasure sh.aH be done." " ΗοΛν canst thou* answer for thy neg¬ ligence in suffering this cowled and cant* ing vagabond to gain admittance here vrith his saws and parables, his crosiers «and his ΛνΓ?ίη^β ?" "We meant to devour him, but our po?ver extended not to it Thou hast seen the bones of one whom we suspected," " You are indolent and wayward slaves. Either separate our greatest vassal on earth from this captious professor, or you shaU
be punished with many stripes. Our «sway is dishonoured if such a man as he is suffered to take shelter under a crosier, and there hold our power at bay,-~our «control at defiance."— u Return to him that power which since his dejection has been withdrawn, and you are sure of him still. Riches and honours he despises : feasting and wine-bibing he abhors : but for power to do what no other man can perform, he would sell twenty souls, were they in his power of disposal." ** He is a great man, and well suited for our free independent government. By his principle of insubordination to established authorities, I yet hope to bring all man¬ kind to my own mind and my own coun¬ try. Read me my riddle, you three slaves. What is tbe most hateful thing in nature ?~ ** A saint." " More ready than right, and more right than ingenious. Show cause." *' Because he is the greatest coward, and all that he does springs from the detesta¬ ble passion of terror."
4Ç Right. Which being is the most noble ?" "The opposer of aU established authori¬ ties ordained by the tyrant of the uni¬ verse." 49 Right ! Right ! These are the men for me, and of these this Master was a great ensample. Therefore, Separate ! Separate ! Separate ! My elemental power is solemn¬ ly engaged ; but on the morning of the third day, it shaU be given to you to work again at your Master's wiU. TiU that time it wffl be as weU to prevent afl ingress and egress here; and at that time I will come again. Speed you weU, nim¬ ble noddies; shape well and shard weU, and the day is your own. While I tran^ form my shape, sing me the song *hat I love. Whenever I hear it, my further¬ ance is the better. The imps compUed, and the redoubted fiend laughed till the wallsof the castle shook, while those on the top took it for the great bittern of the Hartwood, caUed there the Bogbumper. vol. in. ?
HYMN TO THE DEVIL. Speed thee, speed thee í Liberty lead thee ! Many this night shalt hearken and heed thee. Far abroad, Demigod ! What shall appal thee l Javel, or Devil, or how shall we call thee ? Thine the night voices of joy and of weeping, The whisper awake, and the vision when sleeping : The bloated kings of the earth shall brood On princedoms and provinces bought with blood, Shall slubber, and snore, and to-morrow's breath Shall order the muster and march of death: The trumpets shall sound, and the gonfalons flee, And thousands of souls step home to thee. Speed thee, speed thee, &c. The warrior shall dream of battle begun, Of field-day and foray, and foeman undone j Of provinces sacked, and warrior store, Of hurry and havoc, and hampers of ore 5 Of captive maidens for joys abundant, And ransom vast when these grow redundant. Hurray ! for the foray. Fiends ride forth a souling, For the dogs of havock are yelping and yowling. Speed thee, speed thee, &c. Make the bedesman's dream With trefire to teem 5 '1
To -dav and to-monow He has but one aim, And 'tis still the same, and 'tis still the same. But well thou knowest the sot's demerit, His richness of flesh, and his poorness of spirit j And well thy images tbou canst frame, On canvas of pride, with pencil of flame : A broad demesne is a view of glory, For praying a soul from purgatory : And, ? let the dame be fervent and fair, Amorous, and righteous, and husband beware ! For there's a confession so often repeated, The eyes are enlightened, the life-blood is beated. Hish í —Hush Î— soft foot ■and silence, The sons of the abbot are lords of the Highlands. Thou canst make lubbard and lighthead agree, Wallow a while, and come borne to thee. Speed thee, speed tbee, &c. Where goest thou next, by hamlet or shore, When kings, when warriors, and priests are e'er· f These for thee have the most to do, And these are the men must be looked unto. On courtier deign not to look down, Who swells at a s mile, and mints at a frown. With noble maid stay not to parle, But give her one glance of the golden arle. Then, oh, there's a creature thou needs must see* Upright, and saintly, and stern is she î 'Tis the old maid, with visage demure, With cat on her lap, and dogs on tbe floor. - ? ?
Master, she'll prove a match for thee, With her psalter, and crosier, and Ave Mari. Move her with things above and below, Tickle her and teaze her from lip to toe $ Should all prove vain, and nothing can move ; If dead to ambition, and cold to love, One passion still success will crown, Λ glorious energy all thine own í 'Tis envy j a die that never can fail With children, matron, or maiden stale. Shew them in dreams from night to day A happy mother, and oftspring gay 5 Show them the maiden in youthful prime, Followed and wooed, improving her time ; And their hearts will sicken with envy and spleen, A leperøus jaundice of yellow and green : And though frightened for hell to a boundless degree, They'll singe their dry perriwigs yet with thee. jSpeed time, speed thee, &c, Where goest thou next ? Where wilt thou hie thee l Still there is rubbish enough to try thee. Whisper the matron of lordly fame, There's a greater than she in splendor and name j And her bosom shall swell with the grievous load, And torrents of slander shall volley abroad, Imbued with venom and bitter despair : ? sweet are the sounds to the Prince ofthe Air ! Reach the proud yeoman a bang with a spear, And the tippling burgess a yerk on the ear \
Pat fees in the eye of the poisoning leech, And give the dull peasant a kick on the hreech : A.S for the flush maiden, the rosy elf, You may pass her by, she will dream of herself. But that all may be gain, and nothing loss, Keep eye on the men with the cowl and the cross ' f Then shall the world go swimming before thee, In a full tide of liberty, licence, and glory í Speed thee, speed thee, &c. Hail, patriot spirit ! thy labours be blest ï For of all great reformers thyself wert the first f Thou wert the first, with discernment strong, To perceive that all rights divine were wrong ; And long hast thou spent thy sovereign breath, In heaven above and in earth beneath, And roared it from thy burning throne, The glory of independence alone ; Proclaiming to all, with fervor and irony, That kingly dominion's all humbug and tyranny \ And whoso listeth may be free, For freedom, full freedom's the word with thee ! That life has its pleasures—the rest is a sham, And all that comes after a Aim and a flam ! Speed thee í Speed thee ! Liberty lead thee ! Many this night shall hearken and heed thee- Hie abroad, Demigod î Who shall defame the» ? King of the Elements ! how shall we ???? thee ì
As the imps concluded their song, our prisoners on the top of the castle perceived a large rough watch-dog jogging out at the gate of the castle, and following in the direction of the fugitives. When the brute saw that he was perceived he turned round, set up his snout toward the battlements, and uttered a loud bow-wow-wow, which, when the great Master heard, he started to his feet, and, with wild staring looks, and his hair standing on end, took shelter behind the friar." *' Behold thou, and see with thine eyes, that it is only a watch-dog come from the camp of our captain," said the friar. " Lo, thy very nature is changed since first I saw thee." " Then, would to the gods that I had never seen thee, or that I had seen thee sooner," said the Master ; and strode away to discourage any farther reply. The dog followed the fugitives, and bent his course toward the mill. That being the next inhabited house to the eastward, Dan Chisholm and his yeo¬ men landed all there; and infull assembly
he related,to their terror and astonishment, how he had seen the devil himself and se¬ veral of his monstrous agents, who had chased him from the castle, spuing fire and brimstone on him like a cataract. The rest said, that though they had not seen the devil, they had seen and heard enough to put any rational being out of his senses, and as much as to teach them never to go there again. Dan swore that they were not to be taught any such thing ; for, said he, " Our captain's friends, and our own brethren in arms, are most unwarrantably, and I must also say unaccountably, confined there,—and we will either free them or perish in the at¬ tempt. I can find plenty of holy men that, with book and candle, can withstand the devil, and shall make him flee from his stronghold like fire from the flint. If I had the gospel friar on the one side of him, and Father Brand, or Capuchin Cair- nabie, on the other, I shall gar liim skip.'', While Dan was in the middle of tliis speech, in comes the great rough watch¬ dog ; who, after fawning on somq of the
warriors as on old acquaintances, took his station in a dark corner of the miller's thronged hall,, and began a licking his feet, but at the same time taking good heed to all that passed. It was finally agreed that Dan and a companion should ride straight to Melrose, and represent their case to the holy abbot there,, who was devoted to the interests of their captain, and who, it was not doubted, would devise means of ex¬ pelling the old demon from his guardship, and letting free their friends, who were all baptised men and good Christians. As they formed these sapient devices, many hard things were said of the devil; and our warriors seemed rather inclined to make a laughing-stock of him, till the miller's maid interrupted them with the following question : " Wha o' you trooper chaps does this maskis dog belang to ?" " To ???? ?' us," was answered by seve¬ ral at the same time. " I wish ye wad tent him, then," said she, " for, this wee while bygane, his een
hae been glentin like twa blue burnin candles. I wish he be ??? a mad ane." " Sneck doors, and out swords," cried the miller : " We'll hae him proven." The doors were shut, and the yeomen surrounded the dog with their drawn weapons. The poor beast lay as harmless- like as a lamb, with his head upon his foie feet so as to hide them, turning up his eyes from below his shaggy brows in a beseeching manner, and wagging his taiL till it played thump, thump, on the floor. But this did not hinder the miller from reconnoitring, though*it gave him rather a favourable opinion of his shaggy guest. " Poor ??И???," said the miller, " wha's dog may ye be ?" The dog forgot him¬ self; he lifted up his head in a kind ac- kno?vledging manner to the miller, %vho, looking narrowly at him, cried out : " A marvel ! a marvel ! saw ever ony mortal man the like o' this ? Here's a tyke wi' cloven cloots like a gait, fairney cloots and a* thegither. The Holy Virgin be wi' us ! I believe we hae gotten the------" Here the miller was interrupted, with-
out getting the sentence concluded. The dog sprung to his feet, appearing twice as big as when he entered. " Bow-wow- wow !" roared he in the miller's face with the voice of an enraged lion ; " Bow-wow- wow !" And as he bayed from side to side on the warrior circle, they all retreated backward till the ? ν all stopped them. Well might they,—for they perceived, by his open mouth, the same appearance that Dan had before ?????????, namely, a sto¬ mach and chest of burning flanfe. <c Bow¬ wow-wow !" reiterated he : " Youph, youph, youph." All fled back aghast ; but the attack Λνα8 of short duration. The miller had a huge fire of seeds, above a burning log of Λνοοά, ?\ ? ??!1 he had heaped on for the comfort of his guests. When the dog reached that, he broke into it, ap¬ pearing to bury himself in the coil of fiery dust. It flashed upwards in millions of burning atoms, and in the midst of them up flew the dog out at the top of the lum, with a tremendous " ΒθΛν -v-zow-wow !" All was silence for a few seconds, vidiile our yeomen stood in a circle, with their
weapons drawn, and their backs at the ???И, gaping ΛνιΟι affright, and staring on one another. " By Saint Thomas, we are haunt¬ ed!" cried Dan, breaking silence; " That is the same chap I forgathered wi' afore in the staircase of the castle, I ken him by his lowin lungs, though he has changed his shape." He was interrupted by a loud laugh on the top ofthe house, and ? ? ? ??? tliat said, in a jeering tone, " Ha, ha, ha ! Andrew Chisholm is that you ? I have found out a' your plans,—and ride you to Melrose, or ride you to Dryburgh, I'll be there afore you to lend you a lift. Ay, and I'll keep Aitavood castle in spite o' you and a' your mastets men." Dan could not contain his indignation on hearing this brag. He ran forward to the brace, put his neck under it, and turn¬ ing his nose up the lum (or rustic chini¬ no; ) ans?vered, " Deil ?* that ye're fit to do, auld tyke. Ye're but a liar at best and the father o' liars. Gang and toast hea¬ then lacon in year ain het hame. What seek ye here amang Ieel men ?" 4C Weel answered, and like yoursel, Dan!"
said one of the yeomen, and slapped hmr on the shoulder, which rousing his spirit still farther, he added, " Confound you Robin's Geordie o' Feindhope-haugh, what for didna ye strike when the foul thief set up his gousty gab at your nose wi' his im¬ pudent bow-wow-wow; I see ??? right ony ?' God's creatures hae to be hurlbar- rowed out o' their standing wi' him." As he finished the remark, there was something came to the door, and gave two or three rude impatient scratches, exactly in the same manner that a strong dog does that wants to be in. This instantly chang¬ ed the cheer of our sturdy group, that with one involuntary movement closed round the hearth, as the point the most distant from the door. " That's him again," said the miller's lass. " The Lord forbid," said the miller : " I wonder what multure he wants frae me. Though I live on the lands of a Master of Arts, I had ??? inkling that I was thirl to hell. Brave lads, can ???? of you rhame a mass, a credo, or a paternoster ? He is but
a coward at best ; I hae kend a monk, wi' his crosier and his cowl, chace him like a rabbit." " I fear well prove but lame hands at that," said Dan, " and think we had bet¬ ter sally out on him sword in hand, and see what he can either say or do for him¬ self. But, Chryste, I needna say that, con¬ sidering that I ken sae weel what his lin~ ing's made of." " I hae a cross and chain in the house," said the miller, " that was consecrated at the shrine of St Bothan ; whoever wiU be our leader shall bear that before him, and we'll bang the auld thief away frae our big- The scratching was renewed with re¬ doubled fury. Our yeomen crowded closer around the fire, till aU at once their ears were saluted by a furious " bow-wow-wow* down the lum, which, in spite of their ut¬ most resolution, scattered them like a co¬ vey of heath-fowl over which the hawk is hovering, when every one endeavours to shift for itself, and hide in its own heather bush.
Their faces were by this time flushed with shame as well as fear, that they should be thus cuffed about by " the auld thief," as they styled him. Resolved, therefore, to make one great and strenuous effort, the miller brought out his consecrated cross, some tied sticks, and others horn spoons across, till all ΛνβΓβ armed with the same irresistible symbol, and then they mar¬ shalled up before the fire, uncovered their heads, artd with the ensigns reared before them, waited for a moment the word of command to march out to the grand at¬ tack. The arch fiend, not choosing to Wait the issue, raised such a horse laugh on the top of the lum that their ears were deafened with the noise ; and clapping his paws that sounded like tho strokes of bat¬ tering ram's horns, he laughed till the up¬ per and nether millstones chattered against each other, and away he bounded through the clouds of the night, apparently in an agorty of laughter. * Aha ! there he goes !" said Dan : *, There's ??? guidance to be had o' him, and as little mense in meddling wi' him.'*
" Ay, let him e'en gang," said the mil¬ ler ; " he's the warst mouse o' the mill. Ane had better tine the blind bitch's litter than hae the mill singed wi' brim¬ stone. I lurd rather deal wi' the thank¬ less maltster, that neither gi'es coup, Ueive- fu', nor lippie, than wi' him. I have no part of the breviary but a glorious pre¬ amble ; kneel till I repeat it." The troopers kneeled round the miller, who, lifting up his hands, said, with great v fervour, " ? semper timidum scelus ! Ob¬ stúpili, steteruntque coma? et vox faucibus hæsit. ? Deus ; niiSquam tuta fides ! Amen." " Amen !" repeated all the group, and arose greatly strengthened and encou¬ raged by the miller's preamble. They spent that night around the mil* ler's hearth, and had a cog of good brose to their supper. The next morning Dan and two associates rode off for Melrose, to lay their case before the friendly abbot, and to beg assistance ; which, notwith¬ standing the devil's brag, they were not afraid of obtaining. But the important
events that followed must be related in course, whüe we return to those friends in their elevated confinement, to whom that night the poet related the following tale.
CHAPTER IL LordDuf. Didyounot wake tbem, Coroaro? Cor. Alas ! my lord, I could not. Their slumber was so deep, it seemed to me A sleep eternal. Not a sleep ot death, But of extatic silence. Such a beam Of joy and happiness I ne'er beheld Shed from the human face. T/Lt Priores$, tt Tragedy. Fain would I tell my friends and fellow- sufferers of my translation hence. Of all the joys and ecstacies of 'that celestial clime, ycleped the land of faery ; were it not that one is here whose sex forbids it, and whose gentle nature from such a tale wouldshrink, as doth the flower before the nipping gale. You all have heard of that celestial form, the white lady ? And of that v^an and beatific presence there lives in my re¬ membrance some faint image of saintly beauty. But list to me, my friends, and do not smile, far less break forth with loud uncourteous neigh, hke war horse in the:
charge,—vile waste of breath ! convulsive, unrestrained. But hear the truth : It was not she who bote me from this hnd, —not she, the white htdy t as all divined. No, it was a form of flesh, and that flesh too of most rare quality. Fair, witching, plump, rosy «and amorous ; and of unmarred propor¬ tions. Sooth, she who lured me from my rustic home no other was than wandering, minstreless, queen to the mightiest harper ever born. Sole empress ofa tuneful way¬ ward choir, thoughtless and giddy. But their music stole my very soul away. What could I do but follow it, to listen and to sing. In that bright train I sought the Scottish court, the nobles* hall, and every motely scene of loud festivity through¬ out the land. There have I heard and seen such scenes of love, of dalliance, and of mirth, of deep intrigue and violent cruelty, as eye of minstrel hath not wit¬ nessed.. Yes, I have seen things not to be expressed, at least not here. Therefore 111 change the rule this night pursued, of say¬ ing what myself have seen and done. The fairy land in which I sojourned was fair
Caledon ; and there I had my living mins¬ trel joys in high abundance« But I grieve to say, a fatal brawl placed all of us with¬ in the line to which the sword of ven* geance extends its dreadful sway. Our group dispersed. The soul of melody was then no more ! The sounds of harmony divine were hushed ; all scattered on the winds of other lands, and other climes* to ■charm with waiUng numbers. Southward I came, amid the border clans to trust my life, men lawless as myself. They once had saved me when a helpless orphan. \V'hotn could I better trust ? And I have found their generosity alone"out-done by their oivn courage. For my adventures, let this sketch suffice. And though not of the fairyland, I will relate a tale, as pure, as wonderful and full of mystery, as ifin other worlds I'd learned it. I had it from a sim¬ ple peasant's mouth, an old grey hind upon the Sidley hills, who vouched its truth. With faltering tongue, and palpi¬ tating heart, for love, for life, and all the soul holds dear, I say my tale. ? be my soul rapt to the estimate at which l· hold
the prize, and the divine and hoty narra¬ tive. Once on a time* in that sweet northern land called OthoUne, the heathen Hongar landed, and o'er-ran city and dale. The rampart and the flood in vain withstood his mighfc Even ta the base of the un- oanquered Grampians did he wend with fire and sword; and aU who wouM not kneel, and sacrifice to his strange northern gods, he tortured to the death. Some few renounced the cross, for sordid life, and dread of unheard torments. Men were roasted ; matrons impaled ; and pure vir¬ ginity was given up to the rude soldiery to be abused, or humbled as they termed it Then were they decked with flowers «and ornaments, led forth in paira unto the horrid shrine, and sacrificed to Odin. At that time there lived three beauteous sisters of the line of mighty kings. They were so passting fair, that aU who saw them wondered, and all who wondered loved* Hongar and Hubba, these two heathen brothers, and princes of the Danes, heard of their fame,, their beauty,, and their ex^
cellencies ornature, and sent to seize them in their fathets tower, that in the heights of Stormonth stood secure. The castle was surprised, the virgins seized, and car¬ ried to the camp. There to their dreadful trial were they brought, and bid to curse the sacred name they feared and worship¬ ped ; to renounce the holy cross, and wor¬ ship Odin, or give up their bodies to shame, to ignominy, and to death on Odin's hi¬ deous altar. Marley and Morna both kneel¬ ed and intreated, begged a little time to ponder on the dread alternative. But the young sprightly Lena, jfeirest she of Al¬ byn's virgins, browed*the invader's threat with dauntless eye : That eye whose liquid smile in love's sweet converse had been formed to beam. " Thou savage heathen !" cried she, "dost thou think to intimidate the royal maids of Caledon to thy most barbarous faith ? Tyrant, thou art deceived. I dare thine iie. Thou may'st torment me ; for lm in thine hands, and thy heart ne'er knew pity. Thou may'st tear this tender fragUe form with pincing irons. But my soul's purity
i thou never shall subdue by threat, by en¬ gine, or by flame, Thee and thy god I scorn-^I curse you both. I lean upon the jrock that wip not y iel$. ; and put my trust if* one whose mighty arm can crush thee and thy idol to an atom. I know he'll save me. He will save us all, if we but teu^tMm without sinful dread. Here, un- derneath his bleeding cross, I kneel, and cast myself and my poor sisters here, upon .Ms mercy. Here I make a vow to stand for bim* and for his sacred truth, and for no other. Now, thou ruthless savage, here ï defy thee· Do thy worst to us, må thou shalt see if Jesus or if Odin, shall prevail, and who can best preserve their WW bippe* S . The heathen brothers smiled ; and Hon- gar said, "How wildly sweet the little Christian looks! I make my choice to humble and prepare her for the base slaves of Odin's warlike halls* Go warriors, lock them np in donjon aeep, nntil the hour of mlUîugM* wh-ep the rites of Odin shall begin. Then will we ssnd and bring them
to the test; and all shall see whose Godis most in might, and who must yield. In prison dark the virgins were immur¬ ed, with sevenfold gates and sevenfold bars shut hu Soon as they were alone, the sisters twain, Marley and Morna, in fond tears embraced their youngest sister, laud¬ ed her high soul, and vowed with her to stand, with her to die, unsullied in the faith they had been taught. Then did they kneel ??? tbe cold dun¬ geon floor, and one by one offered their fervent prayers at mercy's footstool. But chiefly were their vows made to the Holy Virgin ; for they hoped that she would save their pure virginity from sin's pollu¬ tie α. Never did prayers ascend up to hea¬ ven with greater fervency. And as the hour of midnight on them drew, they kneeled; and, side by side, with lifted hands, and eyes turned toward heaven, sang aloud this holy simple hymn to their Redeemer.
H¥MN TO THE KEDEEMER. ??^ of the Virgin, hear us ! hear ue ! Son of the iiving God, ?? nefar us ! Thou who urt ??? in form and feature, Yet God of glory, and God of nature. Thou who led'st the star of the East, Yet helpless lay at a Virgin's hreast ; Slept in the manger, rød cried on the knee, Yet rulest o'er Time and Eternity. Pity thy creatures here kneeling in dust 5 Pity the beings in Thee that trust! Thou who fed'st the hungry with bread, And Taised'st from the grave the mouldering ά%*ά; Who walked'st on the waves «f the rolling maio, Who cried'st to thy Father, and cried'st in vain 5 Yet wept for the woes and the sins of man, And prayed'st for them when thy life*bIood ran j With thy !«ft$t breath who cried'st fobgive! When bleeding and dying, that man might Hv« ! Over death and the grave hast the victory won, And now art enthron'd by the stars and the sun. For thy name's glory, hear us, má come, And show tby power over idols dumb» ? leave tb£ abodes of glory and bliss, The realms of heavenly happiness 5 Come swifter than the gale of even On thy lightning's wing, the chariot of heaven; By the gates of light and the glowing sphere, ? come on thy errand of mercy here !
But Lord of glory we know not thee, We know not what we say j We cannot from thy presence be, 'Not from thine eye away : For though on the right hand of God, Thou art here in this dark and drear abode : Beyond the moon and the starry way Thou holdest thy Almighty sway, Where spirits in floods of light are swimming, And angels round thy throne are hymning 5 Yet present with all who call on thee In this world of wo and adversity. Then, O, thou Son of the Virgin, hear us í God of love and of life be near us İ Our hour of trial is at hand, And without thy aid how shall we stand ? Our stains wash out, our sins forgive j And before thee may our'spirits live. For thee and thy truth t>e our bosoms steeled : ? be our help, our stay, our shield : Show thy dread power for mercy's sake, For thy name, and thy glory, and all is at stake j Bow down thy heavens, and rend them asunder, And come in the cloud, in the flame, or the thunder. The trumpets now were sounding, while the host arose from wine and wassail, to prepare the baleful sacrifice of Christian souls, The virgins heard, and trembled «afc they kneeled; and beauteous Lena raised vol. ?. ?
her slender hands, and prayed, with many tears, that the Almighty would stretch out his right hand and close their eyes in ever¬ lasting sleep, to save them from self- slaughter, or the fate they dreaded more. While yet the words were but in utter¬ ance, and ere the vow was vowed, they heard the gates unbarred one after one, and saw the lights glance through the lu¬ rid gloom. Each youthful heart turned, as it were, to stone ; for well they weened the Danish soldiers came to bring them forth to shame and death. They kept their humble posture, with hands and eyes up¬ raised, for they expected no pity or com¬ passion save from heaven. The inmost door upon its hinges turned, like thunder out of tune ; and, lo ! there entered,—no heathen soldier,—but a ra¬ diant form covered with light as with a flowing robe. In his right hand he bore a golden rod, and in his left a lamp that shone as bright as the noon-day sun. A thousand thousand gems, from off his raiment, cast their dazzling lustre. Dia¬ monds and rubies formed alternate stars,
while all between was rayed and spangled o'er with ever-varying brightness. Hound his head he wore a wreath of emeralds ; these vrere set with never-fading green. They deemed he was the great high priest of Odin come to lead them to the sacrifice. But yet his look, so mild and so benign, raised half a hope within their breasts of pity and regard. They were about to plead ; but ere a sound breathed from their lips, the stranger beckoned them to silence. Then, in mild and courteous strain, in their own tongue, he thus accosted them : " To one already have your vows been framed ; and would you bow to another ? You have pleaded to heaven's high King ; and would you plead to man ? Rise up, and follow me." The virgins rose ; they had not power to stay,~and followed him, alas ! they knew not whither. They had no voice to question or complain. Door after door they passed ; gate after gate ; and still their guide touching them with his golden rod, they closed in jangling fury. Onward still they moved, and met
the heathen bands, led by their chiefs, Hongar and Hubba. They Λνβ?? drunk with wine ; and loudly did they halloo when they saw their prey escaped, and ?va]king on the street all beauteous and serene : Closing around the fugitives, and jabbering uncouth terms and words obscene, the chiefs opened their arms to seize the help¬ less three. Just then their guide turned round unmoved, and waving his bright rod, the heathens staggered, uttered mum¬ bling sounds, and, trying vainly to support themselves, reeling they sunk enfeebled to the earth, ?????? all as still and motionless they lay as piles of lifeless corpses. ???? ? the virgins wondered at what they saw ! and fearless ηοΛν they followed their bright leader. Next they met the priests of Odin, in their wild attire, marching in grand procession to the scene of mighty sacrifice. Aloft they bore their hideous giant idol ; by his sides his loathsome consort and his monster son, Freya and Thor, ????? all their followers sung this choral hymn in loud and warlike strains:
HYMN TO ODIN. I. He comes ! he comes í Great Odin comes ! Who can rise or stand before him ? The god of the bloody field, The sword, aiid the ruddy shield 5 The god of the Danes, let all adore him. 11. Wake the glad measure to The goddess of pleasure too, Who fills every hero with joy and with love î And hail to dread Thor, Great son of great sire, The quafifer of gore, And the dweller in fire : The '?(?\ of the sun, and the lightnings above. III. P 1* ? paro í prepare ! The feast prepare, Since mighty Thor our guest shall be : Three times three, And three times three, This day shall bleed for repast to thee î iv. Strike the lischt, Make the flame burn bright, Since Freya is here who gives delight 1 Three times three, And nine times nine, A This dav shall bleed on altar of thine.
v. Shout and sing, Till the mountains ring ! The father of men, and of gods the king ! See him advance With sword and lance ; Billows of life-blood, heroes, bring í vi. God of Alhallah's dome ! God of the warrior's home ! Who can withstand thee in earth or heaven ? Bring to his altar then, Of Christian dames and men, Nine times nine, and seven times seven. VII. Bend to your place of birth, Children of sordid earth ; The god of battles your homage disdains. Who dare oppose him ? Christian or Moslem ? Who is like Odin, the god of the Danes ? The maids and their angelic guide went on following the cross ; and as they ????^ they sung in s?veet and humble aspirations the song of the Lamb. They met the gor·* geous files. Fair met with fair. The hi¬ deous idols sat an hundred cubits high ; whereas the cross a maiden's hand upbore,
But when they met, the proud and mighty peal, swelling from Odin's worshippers, was hushed as with a sob. The hills rang with the sound ; and the o'erburdened air bore the last knell up to the skies. It quaver¬ ed through the spheres, and died in dis¬ tance, to be heard no more, ???1? nought but the sweet notes the virgins sung rose on the paths of night The motely mass of heathens stood amazed, and as they stood they listened and they quaked. The words were these at which they paused, and which the virgins sung : ****** Silence the blasphemers thee that defy, Strike down the mighty, Son of the Most High 5 Bise in thy power, that the heathen may see, What dust are their gods and their glory to thee ; Raise thy right hand, and in pieces them shiver, That to the true God may the praise be for ever. At every line *he bearers and their gods trembled the more, and as the last notes closed, the mighty Odin toppled from his throne, and crashed amid his powerless wor¬ shippers.. His wooden spouse and son fell with the sire of Gods and men, ??1 in a
thousand pieces their gilded frames were dashed. Confusion reigned. The host fled in dismay ; but Odin's priests sunk do?vn in ΙοΛν prostration, groaning and howling for the fall of Odin,—the shield and glory of the Danish host. From out this wild confusion the bright guide conducted the three virgins, to a cave close by the river's brink, and charged them hide until the wrath of the enraged foe should be abated. Here, said he, you are in perfect safety. No one living kno\vs of this retreat. Here sleep and take your rest. May angels watch around your flinty couch. Farewell, I must begone on the employ assigned me by your father and by mine. He left the lamp and ?? -ent his way. Forthwith they kneeled in prayer, thank¬ ing their Saviour for their great deliver¬ ance, then laid them down to rest. They kissed the cross, and folded closely in each other's arms, cheek leaning unto cheek, with holy hymns they sung themselves asleep. Great was the rage among the Danish chiefs, and wide the search for these pre-
sumptuous and bold aggressors. The host was all discouraged and amazed, and nought but terror reigned. Earldoms were offered for the audacious maids, dead or alive. But nor alive nor dead could they be found, either by friend or foe. ? dreadful were the execrations uttered by the Danes. They called them demons, witches, and the worst of all incendiaries. Well they might. The terror of their arms was bro¬ ken. Great was the rejoicing mid the hills and glens of Albyn, butthe eastern vallies groaned beneath the fury of the savage Dane, and Christian blood was shed on every cross. The virgins waked at morn, and still the lamp sent forth its feeble glimmer through the cave. The day-beam through the ere* vice of the rock streamed in and mixed with it. The virgins strove to rise, to speak —to sing a morning hymn. But all their limbs were cold, and their tongues clove fast to their thirsty palates. Lena, first of all the three, upraised her pallid form, and on the lamp turning her drowsy eye, there did it settle, closed, and oped again» bat ? 3
still with faded and uncertain light, as if the mind were lacking. Long she sat, half raised in this uneasy torpid state,—this Struggle 'twixt oblivion and life. Oft she «assayed her sisters to awake, by naming them ; but still as oft the names died in a whisper. By degrees her mind dawned in¬ to recollection, as the moon breaks o'er the sullen twilight. Then the wonders, that she had seen o'ernight, aroused her soul to all its wonted energy. She kneeled, and thanked her Maker for the great deliver¬ ance to them vouchsafed. And when her sisters woke, they woke to join her in a heavenly song, " What ails our sister ? Here we are in safety. Why does our dear beloved not rest in peace ? The night is not far spent: the dawn of morn is yet far distant. ? dear Lena sleep. Sleep on, and take your rest. The morning sun is yet beneath the deep. Our limbs are cold ; our eyes are heavy; yet we cannot rise, for we are weary, and not half awake." " Wake, my beloved sisters. It is time. The noon is at its height. See how the
sun peeps through the granite cliffs, and on the stream sheds ray of trembling sil¬ ver. Let us rise and talk of aU the won¬ ders we have seen." Long they conversed in tears of grati¬ tude, still peeping from their cavern, lest the Dane again should find and drag them to the altar. Sore were they pressed by hunger. From the stream they drank a- bundantly with thankful hearts. But food for many a day and many a night they scarce had tasted, and they longed for it with more than ordinary longing. Night approached ; and there they sat, not know¬ ing what to do, a prey to gnawing hunger. At the last, young Lena said, " I cannot ween that heaven hath wrought a miracle for our relief, and for no higher purpose than that we should be left to die of hunger in this dark and hideous den. Again I'll put my life into its hand, and go into the city after twilight in search of bread ; and if I die I die : Heaven's wiU be done." Her sisters looked at her, and blessed her in the holy Virgin's name. They could ,not bid her go % where danger waited, so great, so imminent ; and
yet they felt they could not press her stay. With cautiouseye, and with enfeebled step, trembling she sought the city gate. But when, afar, she saw by torch-light porters striding to and fro, with glittering lances of enormous length, and ponderous battle axes, her heart failed, and she drew back. But then she thought again of those she left behind, and all the throes of perishing with hunger, and resolved to risk all hazards. The huge gate stood open, and strangers went and came. " I'll join," thougiit she, " this straggling crew, and enter among them ; they speak my native tongue. Ah ! they must be a band of trai¬ torous base renegades, that have renounc¬ ed the cross and joined the Dane; else wherefore free to go and come and trade ? I'm all unsafe with such. The strangers eyed her with most curious and piercing looks, and whispered as they went. They seemed afraid, and shunned her by the way, as they who shun a being infected by the pestilence, or spirit from the dead. No one addressed a word to her, but hurried to the gate.
She came alone, for feeble was her step, and her breast palpitating as with throb of burning fever, hopeless of admission. The porters stared with wide extended gaze, and eyes protruding ; but no word they spoke, nor crossed their lances. Straight she entered in. " What can this mean ?" thought she ; " There is a change since y ester-even that it passes thought to comprehend. These keepers are not Danes ; I heard them speak in Albyn's ancient tongue ; and yet methinks they wear the Danish garb. How's this? that I am free to come and go, as in my childhood, when the land was fee*?" She passed the sacred fane, and there be¬ held crowds entering in ; but fast she sped away, weening they ivent to Odin's ci **sed rites. She went to those that sold, and asked for bread. The woman stared at her with silent gaze. She asked again, and straight the huckster fled in floundering haste. Poor Lena stood amazed. " Hovr's this ?" said she, " where'er Ι βΙιοΛν my face the people shun me. Here I shall remain, for
I am faint ΛνΗΙι hunger, till I taste some of these cakes, which I can well repay." She stood not long until she was accosted by holy bedesman, who, with cautious step, and looks of terror, entered, fast repeating his Ave Maria. " In the Virgin's name," cried he, "and under sanction ofthis cross, I charge thee teU Λν?ιο or from ??????? thou art." The virgin kneeled, and kissed the holy symbol, but waived direct reply. " I lack some bread to give to those that famish, and I'll pay for that Λν1ικ;1ι I receive," was her reply. " Then'tis the bread of life that thou dost lack ; man's natural food I fear thou ean'st not use, for thou art not a being of this world, but savour'st of the grave. Thy robes are mouldy, and fall from off thy frame ? Thy lips are parched and colour¬ less. These eyes have not the light of hu¬ man life. Thou ominous visitant, declare from whence thou art, and on what mis¬ sion thou com'st to this devoted wasted land ?" Lena looked up. The holy father's face
to her appeared familiar. But how great the change since last she saw it. " Fa¬ ther Brand, dost thou not know me ?" was her home reply. With blenching cheek and Λν?ί?ι unstable eye the father gazed, and, faultering, stam¬ mered forth, " No. Jesu Maria, be thy ser¬ vant's shield ! Yes. Now I know thee. Art thou not the spirit of the hapless El- lamere, who was put down within our convent for a wilful breach of its most sa¬ cred ^Λν ? Avaunt ! Begone ! Nor come thou here t accuse those that grieved for thee, while they executed just vengeance on thy life. Injuriou« ghost ! Thy curses have fallen heavy on our heads, and brought the ?? ? ??? of heaven upon our land in tenfold measure. In the Saviour's name, Λν?ιοββ delegate I am, I charge thee hence unto thy resting-place,—to that award that heaven's strict justice hath or¬ dained for thee; and come not, with that pale and withering look, more curses and more judgments to pronounce." " Reach me thine hand," said she, and held her's forth, meaning to work convie-
tion on his mind that she ???8 flesh and blood. Her arm was wan as death itself, emaciated and withered, and furred with lines, livid and colourless, as by corrodent ? -apours of the gra? r e. The monk with¬ drew his hand Λν? thin his frock, shook his grey locks, and, \»ith δΙοΛν palsied step, moved backward till the threshold stone he gained ; then turned and fled amain. The household dame fled also from her inner door, from which she peered an d lis¬ tened, and the wondering virgin again was left alone. She waited there in wild and dumb incertitude a space ; then took some , bread, some fruits, and baken meat, laid some money down as an equivalent, and ???^ ??? ? ?? to seek her dark retreat. But as she passed the fane, with wary step she ventured to the porch, and, mar¬ velling, heard the whole assembly, joined in rapt devotion, praising the name of Je¬ sus. Close she stood, and, darkling as it was, joined in the choir so mueh belov¬ ed. But all the wonders she so late had seen yielded to this. In one short night, one strange eventful night, such things
?? ? ??? done as human intellect, witli aU its cunning, eould not calculate. She passed the gate. The gaping sen¬ tinels stood, as they did before, immove¬ able, ???'? cp^liig sidelong glances unto his mate, to note Λν?ιο first should fly or eall the word. She beckoned them as with intent to speak ; but in one moment porters, spears, and axes scattered and \ r anishcd in the darksome *>Jiude. Reaching the cave, siie found the lamp gone out that their mysterious delh~erer had left them over night. First she re¬ galed her sisters' hearts \vith the miracu¬ lous tidings that all the pec^ie Λνοι -shipped Jesus' name without dismay or molesta¬ tion, Λν?ιο, but the night before, not for their lhes durst ??? ? ? acknowledged him : That aU seemed free to go and come, and pray to Λν?ιοιη they listed. The tale seem¬ ed a romance,—a dream of ΛνιΜ delirium. The Danes could not be banished in a night, and all the land cleared of the vile idolatry of Odin. They disbelieved the whole, as ?? ? ?11 they might, but held their peace, dreading their sister's mind mazed
in derangement. Still, as she went on, sayir ^hat all whom she had met or seen suppu ed her one arisen from the dead, or ghost of some departed criminal, strangled, for breach of a monastic vow, thei. did they grasp each other's hands, and weep for their dear sister's sad mishap. They deemed her mad as raving whirlwind, or the music of mountain cataract. Yet she had brought them food of various sorts, which in the dark she gave them; and they fed, or strove to feed,—but small in¬ deed the portion they devoured. * fi How's this," cried Morna, " that my little cake grows ne'er the less ? Can it be so that we are truly spirits,—ghosts of the three maids that overthrew the Danish god last night ? I hunger and I thirst, 'tis true. Tell me, Can spirits drink the element of water ? Certes they may. But then, how did we die, or when ? for I can¬ not remember me of passing death's hi¬ deous and dreary bourn, though some¬ thing of a weary painful dream hangs round my heart." This vague disjointed speech, the way-
ward visions of distemperáture, struck the two others motionless, and set them on cogitations wandering and wild as meteors o'er a dreary wilderness. The thought of being in a new existence, with all its un¬ known trials, powers, and limits, their struggling minds essayed in vain to grasp. Reason returned, but as a step-mother returns to frenzied orphan's dying bed. They felt each other's pulses. There was life,—corporeal life ; but still there was a change, which no one chose to mention,— yet a change quite unaccountable for one night's sleep to have effected. From their cavern's porch they viewed the stars of heaven. They were the same as they were wont. They saw the golden wain, the polar plough tilling his ample field with slow unwearied furrow, and the sis¬ ters,—the seven lovely sisters of the sky, arching their gorgeous path. Far to the east they spied a star beloved, wbich in their childhood they oft had watched, and named the " tiger's eye," changing its vivid colours as of yore. And then they wept to think of former days of innocence
and joy. And thus in tears, clasped in each other's arms, they laid them down their mazed and oppressed spirits to com¬ pose. While thus they lay, romantic Morna said : ** My sisters, it is evident to all that some great change has happed to us last night. We are not what we were. Vv hat can it be but change from one existence to another? A mortal creature cannot touch or feel a disembodied spirit; but we know not how spirits feel each otlier. Sure as life and death hold opposition in this world, from the one into the other we have passed. I feel it in my being, So do you, though unacknowledged. Let us rise and walk as spirits do by night, and wc shall see the change in us, not over a whole land in one short night. Come, let us roam abroad.. I feel a restlessness,—a strong desire to flit from place to place,— perchance to fly between the mountain and the cloud, and view the abodes of those we love. This wild romance waked in the vir¬ gins' hearts an energy between despair
and madness. All extremes erratic and unnatural, on the minds of females, act like the infection of virulent disease. Up they arose, and, stepping from their ca¬ vern, took their way along the river's brink. Midnight ???? past. The tiger's eye had climbed the marble path that branches through the heaven, and goggled forth, now red, now blue, now purple and now green, down from his splendid ceiling far on high. 'Twas like a changeful spirit. In the east the hues of morning rose in towering streaks, as if the Almighty had caused light to grow like cedars from the summits of the hills. It ivas a scene for spirits! There were three abroad that morn before the twilight rose,—three crea¬ tures spiritual, yet made of flesh ! First they espied an aged fisherman, who passed without regard. Then did they deem they were invisible, and wilder still their fan¬ cies worked. The suburbs now they gained ofthe resplendent ancient Otholine, the emporium of the east, and hand in hand, with hurried, but enfeebled step, they trode its lanes and alleys. Those who saw tbem
said their motions were erratic, like the gait of beings overcome with wine, or crea¬ tures learning to walk for the first time on e«arth. The early matron, and the twilight groom, fled with hysteric cries at their ap¬ proach. The gates were left ? -jar, the streets a waste : porter and sentinel joined in the flight, and nought but terror and confusion reigned. The virgin sisters wist not what to do, or what to dread. Within the convent's porch, they halted, turned, and gazed on one another, and wondered what they were, that nature thus shuddered at their ap¬ proach, and held aloof. Three creatures spiritual yet made of flesh, belonging not to heaven nor earth ! but shunned by the inhabitants of both. Just then, while standing in despondency, they heard the grey cock crow ; the eldritch clarion note chilled every heart, and twanged on every nerve. " That is our warning caU," wild Morna said : " My sisters now we must hence and begone : that is the roll-call of the murdering spirits. We shall be missed at
matins. To your homes ! your damp and mouldering homes, ye ghastly shades ! The daylight wffl dissolve you ! Does that voice not say so ?" " Hush thee, gentle Morna ! drive us not to distraction. Here we'U wait until the convent matin ; then we'll ask the holy prioress what things we are. What say you, gentle sisters ? can we live out¬ casts on earth in such incertitude ? Our father's towers are distant. We can glide, like passing shades with slow and feeble motion,but nothing more spirits ;— caii sail the air in skiff of mist.or on the breeze's Λνίη^ Such powers^we have not ; and to journey there we lack ability. Here then we stay until we are resolved what strange events have happened to us, to our native land, and church, of late so grievously op¬ pressed." " Yes, here we'll stay. Come, rouse the porteress ! For see the sun tips the far hills with gold, and we shall melt before his tepid ray, all gentle as it is at early morn ! My frame is like a müdew. The hoar frost of death hath fallen on it. Oh, ior the
guide—the angelic youth that left us yes¬ ter-eve. Ho ! daughters of the Cross ! If any here hath 'scaped the murderous Dane, come forth and welcome the conquerors of Odin. Ho ! within ! Wake ere the sun upbraids you. He is up, on service to his Maker, yet you sleep. I say, wake." " Who calls ? What are you there ?" " We know not what we are. For that we come, to see if any here can us resolve. But two short nights ago, we were three maids of royal lineage. Thou stem por¬ teress, come forth and look on us. Canst thou not tell what we are made of? Why stand'st thou aloof?" " Speak calmly, sister Morna. See she trembles and dares not answer. Gentle dame, we pray admission to your lady prioress, for sake of him who died upon the cross, whose name we worship." Straight she vanished upon her fearful mission, glad to 'scape from such a collo¬ quy. Soon then arrived the aged prioress, who them approached with dauntless countenance, and, unappalled, asked of their errand. " Venerable dame, dost thou
not know, or hast thòu never heard ofthe three maids of Stormont, who of late, led by a heavenly messenger, o'erthrew the god of Denmark, and upheld the cross tri¬ umphant o'er the breasts of prostrate hea¬ thens?" « Ay, I have heard of them ; and often joined in prayer and thanksgiving for the deliverance vbTOught by these royal vir¬ gins. That was a conquest that roused the spirit of the Christian to deeds of more than mortal energy, and humbled the proud confidence the Dane placed in his idols. Ay, that was a CQnquest shall cloud the brow of the idolater while the world stands ! But Λν??αί was it you spoke of yester eve ? Either you are deranged, or shallow poor impostors: for that time hath long gone past, and the three wondrous maids were in the sight, and from the mid¬ dle of that mighty host translated into hea¬ ven. Unless you came from thence on sa¬ cred mission, and bringest evidence of identity by further miracle, better you had keep silence and depart." *' We are those maids, the maids of VOL. III. D
Stormont, nieces to the king ; and we re¬ quire of you lodging and fair protection, till we prove our lineage. There is some¬ thing passing strange hath happed to us. But what the circumstance, or how ac¬ cordant with the works of God, is far be¬ yond the fathom and the height of our capacity. We are the maids of Stormont. To that truth we wül make oath upon the holy cross." The prioress crossed herself, commended herto heaven, and, with deep awe and dire astonishment, admitted them. She gazed upon thepi : their fair cheeks were pale, and their benignant eyes looked through a haze that was not earthly ; it was like the blue mists of the dawning. All their robes were of the fashion of a former day ; and they were damp and mouldy, falling piecemeal from off their bodies with their rottenness. " I dread to question you, mysterious things. That you are earthly forms, I see and feel. Whence are you ? In what dreary unknown clime have you been so¬ journing? Or are you risen from out your
graves ? If you have truth in you, and power to tell it, pray resolve me this ; for I am lost in wonder." " What we are we know not. For that purpose we came hither, that you might tell us. All wë know is this : Last night but one we ????? the maids of Stormont, doomed to a dreadful fate. An heavenly one came to our rescue ; led us through the gates of iron and of brass. Still as we ?? ? ??^ we conquered. Ranks of proud ido¬ laters fell prostrate in the dust; and the great god, the mighty Odin, was o'er- thrown, and dashed into a thousand pieces. Straight our blessed guide conducted us into a lonely cave close by the rivets brink, and bade us sleep and take our rest until the day should dawn and shadows fly away. We slept, and yester-morn, when we ??????, the lamp our guide had left still feebly burned. Impelled by hun¬ ger, from our cave we ventured. AU peo¬ ple fly from us ; the Danes are gone ; the name of Christ is mentioned. Nought we see and nought we hear is comprehen¬ sible." Dg
u A miracle ! a mighty miracle! Within that secret cavern you have slept for days and years, in quiet sweet repose, the lamp of heaven still burning over you, until the day hath dawned,—such day of grace as Scotland hath not seen. The heathen Dane, with all his hideous gods, was van¬ quished, but days bf darkness and conten¬ tion rose, until this time, when all the glorious rays of mercy and of grace have shed their influence on this benighted per¬ secuted land ; and you are waked to enjoy iL Let us go straight to the altar, and beneath the cross join in elated thanks¬ giving." The chancel door opened before the al¬ tar. When the three virgins entered in, and saw the figure on the cross, they cried aloud with one combined voice, " 'Tis he, 'Tis he ! What ? Have these heathens da¬ red to lay their impious hands on him ? 'Tis he ! 'Tis he ! Our heavenly guide that saved us from the death. And have they slain him ? Has the cursed Dane------" " Hold, hold, for mercy's sake ; you do not know the things you utter. What you
look upon, hangs there to represent the death of him who died that man might live." " And is it so ? Then be our lives sa¬ cred unto the service of him who laid his life down for our race, and sent his angel to deliver us, in his own likeness too ; for this is he who came to us in great extre¬ mity, when we called on the name of our Redeemer in agony of soul." " Remain with me till our great festival. This miracle must be made known to all that trust in Jesus' name. Meanwhile I will cherish and comfort the beloved of heaven." The day arrived of the great festival, the anniversary ofthe overthrow of mighty Odin,—that sublime event that broke the bands of iron and of steel, and threw the gates of superstition open to Albyn's Chris¬ tian triumph. On that day the king's whole household, nobles of the realm, high dames and commons, abbots, monks, and mendicants, a motely and a countless multitude, assembled early at the monastery of ancient Otholine, to render thanks for
their deliverance. Masses were said ; and holy hymns of praise ascended to the skies. With one accord, then all the grateful multitude agreed to canonize the three heroic virgins, who, with the aid of angels, had wrought out the Christian's triumph, the beloved of heaven, translated to the blest beatitude, where souls of saints and blessed martyrs dwell, and whose joint prayers might with the holy Virgin much avail. A joyful clamour for the ordinance then spread around, so eager were the crowd to kneel and pay their humble adorations to the three maids, translated to the heavens With bodies like their own. Applauses rang; and from behind the altar was given forth a song divine, in which a thousand voices joined, till all were hushed at this ec¬ static strain· Hail to the happy three î Vessels of sanctity î , ITow honoured to stand Aw the Virgin's right hand* (Mater Dei ! Remember me !)
Bemember us ali, and send us for good, Bone of our bone, and blood pf our blood.— Song of harp, and voice be dumb !— The heaven is oped. They come, they come ï A bustle rose. The abbot on his knees sunk down and leaned upon the altar- cloth, and only a few voices whispered round, " They come, they come !" The congregation turned their eyes into the chancel, and beheld three virgins, aU in robes of purest white, stand over against the altar. The loud choir was hushed, and every brow was forward bent in low obeis¬ ance : All believing these three beauteous fkwers from paradise had come arrayed in robes of heaven, with angel forms that bloomed like winter roses newly oped, in high approval of the festival, and sacred honours to be paid to them. The virgins beckoned,, raised their flow¬ ing veils, and their right hands to heaven, " Stay, they cried, stay the solemnity, ere you profane the name and altar ofthe God of heaven. Here stand the three unworthy maids of Stormont whom you would de fy. Come nigh to us our father and our king».
and ye chastfe ministers of him we serve : Come nigh, and feel that we are mortal like yourselves, and stop the rite. Pay adora¬ tion to that Holy One who pitied us in mi¬ sery extreme, and you in grievous bonds. There be your vows and worship paid, in which we three shall join. He hath in¬ deed done wondrous things for us, works of amazement, which you all shall hear, iind whoso heareth shall rejoice in heart." Then came they all unto their fathets knee, kneeled and embraced him, while the good old earl shed tears of joy, and rendered thanks to heaven ; their sove¬ reign next, their former lovers, friends, and all they knew in that mixed multi¬ tude, they did embrace, that no remaining doubt might spring and spread of their identity. It was a joyful meeting, such a one as hath not been in any land for hap¬ piness and holy ecstacy. They lived be¬ yond the years of women,—but their lives were spent in acts of holiness, apart from grandeur's train. In curing of the sick, clothing the naked, ministering to all in want and wretchedness, and speaking peace
unto poor wandering and benighted souls. Their evening of life was like the close of summer day, pure, placid, and serene,—the twilight long, but when at last it closed, it was with such a heavenly glow, it gave pure prospect of a joyous day to come. Thus ends my legend ; and, with all sub¬ mission, I bow to your awards, and ivait my doom.
oS
CHAP. III. Garolde. Priek on good Markham. That galled jade of yonr· Moves with a hedgehog's pace. Is this a time To amble like a belle at tournament, When life and death hang on our enterprize ? Mark. We've had long stages, Garolde ; We must take up. What miscreants have wehere? The Prioress. " Lo, have not I taken great delight in thf words of thy mouth ?" said the friar, " for it is a legend of purity and hohness which thou hast told, and the words of truth are contained in it. Peradventure it may be an ancient allegory of our nation, in which manner of instruction the fathers of Christianity amongst us took great de- Ught. But, whether it be truth, or Λν?ιβ- ther it be fiction, the tendency is good ; and behold, is it not so ; do not I even thank thee for thy tale ?" " It is the most diffuse, extravagant, and silly legend that ever was invented by votary of a silly and inconsistent creed," said the Master.
- I side wi' you, Master Michael Scott," said Tarn Craik; "I think the tale is nought but a string of bombastica! non¬ sense." " Excepting ane about fat flesh, I think I never heard the match o't," said the laird of the Peatstacknowe ; " It brings me a- mind o' our host's dinner, that was a' show but ??? substance." " If I foresee aught aright," said the Master, " of many a worse dinner shall I see thee partake, and enjoy the sight." " Was not that a beautiful and sublime tale, father ?" said Delany : " I could sit and listen to sucH divine legends for ever." The poet's eyes shone with tears when he heard the maid he loved say these words to the friar apart, who answered and said unto her, " Lo, there are many more su¬ blime and more wonderful in thy little book ; nevertheless the tale is good for in¬ struction to those that are faithless and doubting." " Alak ! I fear I shall not live to learn and enjoy these. Do not you think, fe¬ ther, that we shall all perish in this miser-
able place," added Delany,—" this hor¬ rible place of witchcraft and divination ?" Charlie Scott stepped forward when he overheard some of these ??????. " Eh ? Λν?^ was the lassie saying ?" said he. " Eh ? Ill tell ye ??1? it is, hinney : I believe ye see things as they are. There's naething but witchcraft gaun on here; and it is that, and that alone, that a' our perils and mischances rise frae. Begging your pardon, father, I canna help thinking what I think, and seeing what I see. But, gude faith ! v?e maun blaw lown till we win aff the tap o' this bigging, if that ever be." " My hand hath prevailed against his hand," said the friar, " and my master over Jus master ; and had it not been for this miserable accident we should have had nothing to fear from his divinations, su¬ blime and mighty as they are. What hath become of the mighty men of valour from the camp of our captain ?" " ? there's ??? mortal can tell," said Charlie : " It was not for naething that Dan and his lads ran off and left us with¬ out ever looking ower their shoulders. A'
witchcraft ! a' witchcraft ! Ane may stand against muckle, but ??? man can stand against that. I wish we were where sword and shield could aince mair stand us in stead. But this I'm sure o'—Now that our situation is kend to our kinsman, it winna be lang before some aid appear. ? if it wad but come afore we are driven to that last and vrarst ofa' shifts to keep in life." " We canna live another day,*' said Tarn : " I therefore propose that the maid and the boy try ilk ane their hand at a tale too, and stand their chances with the rest of us. Their lives are of less value, and their bodies very tender and delicate." Every one protested against Tarn's mo¬ tion with abhorrence ; and it was agreed that they would now appeal to the Master who had told the ???? tale. Not that the unfortunate victim was to be immediately sacrificed, nor even till the very last ex¬ tremity ; but with that impatience natural to man, they longed to be put out of pain ; every one having hopes that his own me¬ rits protected himself from dangert Every
one also beheved that judgment would be given against Tam, except he himself ; and that, at all events, such an award would put an end to his disagreeable and endless exultations of voracious delight. They then went before the renowned wizard, «and desired him to give judgment who of them had related the worst and most in¬ efficient tale, laying all prejudice with re¬ gard to creeds and testimonies aside. He asked them if they referred the mat¬ ter entirely to him, or if they wished to have each one a vote of their own ? Tarn said it was an understanding at first that each should have a vote, and, as he had made up his mind on the subject, he wished to give his. Charlie said it was a hard matter to vote away the life of a friend ; and, for his part, he would rather appeal to the great Master «altogether. But if any doubts should remain with any one of their host's impartiality, he thought it fairer that they should cast lots, and hazard all nUke. The poet, who had heard the Master's disapprobation given pointedly of his tale, sided with Yardbire, and voted
that it should be decided by lot. Gibbie, though quite convinced in his ΟΛνη mind that he had told the best story, yet having heard the morality of it doubted, and dread¬ ing on that score to have some voices against him, called also for a vote ; for he said the referring the matter to the Mas¬ ter brought him in mind of the story of the fox sitting in judgment, and deciding against the lamb. The friar also said, " Verily, I should give my voice for the judgment of the Master to stand decisive : But, lo! is it not apparent that his thoughts are not hke the thoughts of other men ? Neither is his mind governed by the mo¬ tives of the rest ofthe children of men. I do therefore lift up my voice for the judg¬ ment that goeth by lot. I ????И, notwith¬ standing of all this, gladly hear what the Master would say." " I will be so far just that I shall give you your choice," said Master Michael Scott : " Nevertheless I can tell you, if there be any justice in the decision by lot, on whom the lot will fall." A pause of breathless anxiety occurred, and every
eye was fixed on the grim and stern vis· age of the great necromancer, over whose features there appeared to pass a gleam of wild delight. " It wiU fall," added he, " on that man of fables and similitudes, who himself bears the similitude of a man, just as the lion's hide stuffed does the resem blance of a real one. How do you call that beautiful and amiable being with the nose that would split a drop of rain without being wet ?" '* Most illustrious knight, and master of the arts of mystery," said the friar,—" as this man is, so is his name ; for he is called Jordan, after the great river that is in the east, which overfloweth its banks at cer¬ tain seasons, and falls into the stagnant lake called the Dead Sea, whose waters are diseased. So doth the matter of this our friend overflow, pass away, and is lost. But what sayest thou of the default of his story ? Dost thou remember that it is not for the best story that we cast lots, but the worst ?" " Ay, that's weel said, good friar," said
Charlie ; " for, trifling as the laird's story was, I never heard ought sae queer, or that interested ane mair. If there be ony jus^ tice in lots, the laird's safe." " Your's was the best tale, gallant yeo¬ man," said the Master, " and you may rest assured that you are safe. The dumb judge Λν?Ι not err, and there is one overlooks the judgment by lot, of whom few are aware. I say your's was the best tale. ** Thank ye kindly, Master Michael Scott," said Charlie ; " I'm feared ilk ane ????? be ?' your opinion." The friar then took from the side-poc¬ kets of his frock a few scraps of parch¬ ment, amounting to fifteen. Twelve of these he marked with a red cross, and three with a black one, to prevent all infernal interference ; then rolling them closely up, he counted them all into his cowl be¬ fore his companions, and, shaking them together, he caused every one to do the same. Then putting the cowl into the vir¬ gin's hand, they desired her to hold it un¬ til they drew forth their scraps one by one. She did so, while her bright eyes
were drowned in tears, and each of the •candidates put in his hand, selecting his lot. " Let them be opened, one by one, be¬ fore all these witnesses," cried the Master ; ** that no suspicions of foul play whatever may remain." The friar drøv forth his without one muscle of his unyielding features being altered, and turning deliberately about, he opened it before them all. It ivas red. The friar bowed his head, and made the sign of the cross, CharUe thrust in his hand,—pulled out a ticket,—and tore it open, aU in one moment, and with the same impatience that he fought in a battle. His was likewise red. " Gude faith I'm aince ovrer the water," «sæd Charlie. Tarn put in his hand with a decision that would have done honour to a better man, the form of his mouth only being a little altered. " Now, who will take me a bet of a three-year old cout," cried Gibbie, " that the next shall turn out a black one ?" and
he grinned a ghastly smile, in anticipation of the wished event. Tarn kept his hand within the cowl for a good while, as if groping which to select. At length he drew one forth ; and before he got it open¬ ed, Gibbie's long nose and his own had met above it, so eager was each of them to see what it contained. It was opened. Each of them raised up his face, and look¬ ed at the face of his opponent ; but with ?vhat different expressions of countenance! The cross on the lot was red ! Grief, dread, and disappointment were aU apparent in the features of poor Jordan, while the ex¬ ulting looks of his provoking neighbour ????? hardly to be endured. " What think you o' that now, laird ?" cried he. " What does that bring you in mind o' ? Eh ? I say, wha's jugular vein swells highest now; or wha's shoulder- blade stands maist need o' clawing ?" This ?vas rather more than Gibbie was disposed at that juncture to bear; and when Tarn, as he concluded, put forth his forefinger to ascertain the thickness of fat on the laird's ribs, the latter struck him
Λν?Λ such force on the wrist, that he ren¬ dered his arm powerless for a space. He put his hand to his sword, but could not grasp it ; ΛνΜΙβ Gibbie, seeing the motion, had his out in a twinkling ; and if the staunch friar had not turned it aside, he would have had it through the heart of the deil's Tarn in a second, ????? might have prevented the further drawing of lots for that present time, and thereby put an end to a very critical and disagreeable business. Gibbie was far from being a hot or passionate man ; but whether his rage was a manoeuvre to put by the decision, or if he really ???? offended at being handled like a wedder for slaughter, the curate pretends not to guess. He however raged and fumed ex¬ ceedingly, and tried again and again to wound Tarn, while the rest ????? remon¬ strating with him ; nor would he be paci¬ fied, until Tarn's disabled arm by degrees regaining somewhat of its pristine nerve, he retreated back towards the battlement for sword-room, and dared the laird to the combat. Gibbie struggled hard ; but
finding that they were about to let him go, his wrath subsided a little ; he put up his sword, and said the whole business re¬ minded him of a story of the laird of Tweelsdon and his two brothers, vvhich he assured them was a prime story, and beg¬ ged permission to tell it. This was pro¬ tested against with one voice until the bu¬ siness of the lots ?vas decided, and then all were willing to hear it. " Oh, the lots ? that is quite true," said Gibbie : " I de¬ clare that business had gone out of my head. Let us see what casts up next," There was a relaxation in every muscle of Gibbie's face as he put his hand into the anvl. But Gibbie's was a sort of a cross face. It did not grow long and salknv as most other men's faces do Λν?ιοη they are agitated. The ja?vs did not fall down, they closed up ; so that his face grew a great deal shorter and broader. The eye-brows and the cheek-bones met, and the nose and chin approached to a close vicinity. He drew forth the momentous scrap, and, with fumbling and paralytic hand, opened it be¬ fore them. The cross ???? black. ?? dared
not lift his eyes to any face there save to Delany's, and when he saw it covered with tears his looks again reverted that way. This lot it is true was not decisive, yet it placed Gibbie on ticklish ground ; it hav¬ ing been agreed, that whoever should draw the two first black crosses, subjected him¬ self to immolation, if the necessity of the case required it. The great Master and Tarn were visibly well pleased with the wicked chance that had fallen to the laird The motives of the former for this delight were quite a mystery to those who beheld it ; as for Tarn, he seemed determined to keep no more terms with poor Gibbie. The poet also drew a red one ; and then it was decreed, that the next round Gibbie should have his choice of the time, if he judged it any advantage either to be first or last. He seemed quite passive, and said it was all one to him, he should draw at any time they chose, and desired his friend Yardbire, as he termed him, to choose for him. Charlie said he deemed the first chance the best, as he had then four chan¬ ces to be right, for one of being wrong;
and it Would be singular indeed if bis hand fixed on a black cross again for a time or frvo, when more of them might be on an equal footing. Gibbie accordingly turned round, and drew out one more of the ominous scraps, opening it under the eyes of aU the circle Λνιίίι rather a hopeful look. " If the deil be ??? in the ????'1, I shaU hae a red ane this time," said he, as he unrolled it ; but as soon as the head of the cross appeared the ticket fell from his hand ; and, as the friar expressed it, there ?vas no more strength remaining in him. " Verilv, rr^ son, thy fate is decided," said the latter worthy ; " and that in a wonderful and arbitrary manner. As the Master said, so hath it come to pass, although to judge of any thing having been done unfairly is im¬ possible," w It is absolute nonsense to talk of aught being done fairly in this place," said Char¬ lie Scott : " There's naething but witch¬ craft gaun. I tell ye a' things here are done by witchery an' the black arts ; and after what I heard the king of a' warlocks say,
that the lot wad fa' in this way, I winna believe that honest Gibbie has gotten fair play for his life." " If you would try it an hundred times over," said the Master, " you would see it turn out in the same way. Did not I say to you that there was a power presided over the decision by lot, which you neither know nor comprehend. Maii of meta¬ phors and old wives' fables, where art thou now ?" " Keep a gude heart, Peatstack¬ nowe," said Charlie ; " perhaps things may not come to the worst. I have great de¬ pendence on Dan Chisholm and the war¬ den's good men. I wonder they have not appeared wi' proper mattocks, or ladders, by this time o' the morning." u If they should," said the Master, " and if we were all set at liberty this minute, he shall remain my bondsman, in place of these two and him of whom your arts have bereaved me. Remember to what you agreed formerly, of which I now re¬ mind you," " I think that is but fair," said the poet.
" I do not know, gentlemen, what you call fair or foul," said Gibbie : " I think there is little that is favourable going for somebody. Of the two evils, I judge the last the worst. I appeal to my captain the Warden." Gibbie's looks were so rueful and pitiable when he said this, that no one had the heart to remonstrate farther with him on the justice or injustice of his doom. The Master and Tarn enjoyed his plight exceedingly ; the poet rejoiced in it, as it tended to free Delany from a vile servi¬ tude ; and the friar also was glad ofthe re¬ lease of the darling of his younger years, the grand-daughter òf Galli the scribe. Charlie and Delany were the only two that appeared ito suffer on account of the laird's dismal prospects, and their feelings were nearly as acute as his own. Stories and all sorts of amusements were now discontinu· ed. A damp was thrown over these by the dismal gloom on the laird's counte¬ nance, and the congenial feelings of others on his account. The night had passed over without any more visitants from the infer- VOL. III. E
nal riions; the day had arisen in the midst of heaviness and gloom; and every eye was turned towards the mill, in the expec¬ tation of seeing the approach of Dan and. his companions.
OE
CHAPTER IV. Ask me not whence I am ; tliy vesture speaks mine office. Female Parliamentfrs, ? MS* Com. After the frightsome encounter at the mill, with " the masterless dog and his bow-wow-wow," Dan and his companions spent a sleepless night, not without sever¬ al alarms and breathless listenings on the occurrence of any noise without. Few were the nightly journies on the banks of the Ettrick in those days 5 and few the mid¬ night noises that occurred, save from the wild beasts of the forest. There were no wooer lads straying at that still and silent hour, to call up their sweethearts for an hour's kind conversation. Save when the English marauders were abroad, all was quietness by hamlet apd steading. The land was the abode of the genii of the woods* the rocks, and the rivers ; and of this the inhabitants were well aware, and £2
kept within locked doors, whose lintels were made ofthe mountain ash, and night¬ ly sprinkled with holy water. Cradle and bed were also fenced with cross, book, and bead; for the inmates knew that in no other way could they be safe, or rest in peace. They knew that their green and solitary glens were the nightly haunts of the fai¬ ries, and that they held their sports and amorous revels in the retiring dells by the light of the moon. The mermaid sung her sweet and alluring strains by the shores of the mountain lake, and the kelpie sat moping and dripping by his frightsome pool, or the boiling caldron at the foot of the cataract. The fleeting wraiths hover¬ ed round the dwellings of those .who were soon to die, and the stalking ghost peram¬ bulated the walks of him that was lately living, or took up his nightly stand over the bon-es of the unhouseholded or mur¬ dered dead. In such a country, and among such sojourners, who durst walk by night ? But these were the natural residenters in the wilds of ihe woodland, the aborigi¬ nal inhabitants of the country ; and how»
ever inimical their ways might be to the ways of men, the latter laid their account with them. There were defences to be had against them from holy church, which was a great comfort. But ever since Mas¬ ter Michael Scott came from the colleges abroad to reside at the castle of Aikwood, the nature of demonology in the forest glades was altogether changed, and a full torrent of necromancy, or, as Charlie Scott better expressed it, of witchcrajt 9 deluged the country all over,—an art õfthe most malignant and appalling kind, agamst which no fence yet discovered could pre¬ vail. How different, indeed, became the situation of the lonely hind. Formerly he only heard at a distance on moonlight eves the bridle bells of the fairy troopers, which haply caused him to haste homeward. But when the door was barred and fenced, he sat safe in the middle of his family cir¬ cle as they closed round the hearth, and talked of the pranks of the gude neyboris^ When the speats descended, and floods roared and foamed from bank to brae, then would they perceive the malevoleqt kelpie
rolling and tumbling down the torrent like a drowning cow, or mountain stag, to al¬ lure the hungry peasant into certain des¬ truction. But, aware of the danger, he on¬ ly kept the farther aloof, quaking at the tremendous experiment made by the spirit of the waters. It was in vain that the mermaid sung the sweetest strain sthat ever breathed over the evening lake, or sunk and rose again, spreading her hands for assistance, like a drowning maiden, at the bottom of the abrupt cliff washed by the waves,—he would not be allured to her embraces. Èut what could he do now ? His daugh¬ ters were turned into roes and hares, to be hunted down for sport to the Master* The old wives of the hamlet were saddled «and bridled by night, and urged with whip and spur over whole realms. The cows were deprived of their milk,—the hinds cast their young, and no domestic cat in the whole district eould be kept alive for one year. That infernal system of witchcraft then began, which the stake må the gibbet could scarcely eradicate in
a whole century. It had at this time be¬ gun to spread all around Aikwood; but of these things our Border troopers were not altogether aware. They dreaded the spirits of the old school, the devü in particular; but öf the new prevailing system of me¬ tamorphoses they had no comprehension. Dan and three chosen companions, mounting their horses by the break of day, rode straight for the abbey of Mel¬ rose, to lodge their complaint against the great enemy of mankind, and request as¬ sistance from the holy fathers in rescuing their friends out of his .hands. They retch¬ ed Darnick-burn before the rising of the sun ; and just as they passed by a small deep-wooded dell, they espied four horse¬ men approaching them, who, from their robes and riding appurtenances, appeared to belong to the abbey, and to rank high among its dignitaries. They were all mounted on black steeds, clothed in dark ê flowing robes that were fringed with cost¬ ly fringes, and they had caps on their heads that were horned like the new moon. The foremost, in particular, had a formidable
and majestic mitre on his head, that seem¬ ed all glancing with gems, every one of Λν?ι???ι was either black, or a certain daz¬ zling red ofthe colour of flame, Dan doffed his helmet to this dignified and commanding personage, but he deign¬ ed not either to return our yeoman's low bow, that brought his face in contact with the mane of his steed, or once to cross his hand on his brow in token of accepting the submission proffered. He, however, reined up his black steed, and sat upright on his saddle, as if in the act of listening what this bold and blunt trooper had to say. " Begging pardon of your grand and subUme reverence," said Dan, " 1 presume, from your lofty and priest-like demeanour, habiliments, and goodly steed, and also from that fava-horned helmet on your head, that you are the very chap I want. I beg your pardon I canna keep up my style to suit your dignity. But are ??? ye Father Lawrence, the great primate, that acts as a kind o' king or captain ower
d the holy men of Scotland, and has haud¬ ding in that abbey down by there ?" " Certes I am Father Lawrence* Dost thou doubt it ?" " No, no ; what for should I doubt it when your worship has said it ? An we dinna find truth aneath the mitre and the gown, where are we to look for it ?" The sublime abbot shook his head as if in scorn and derision of the apothegm, and sat still upright on his steed, with his face turned away. Dan looked round to his companions with a meaning look, as much as to say, " What does the body mean?" But seeing that he, sat still in the act of listening, he proceeded. " Worthy Sir Priest, ye ken our captain, Sir Ringan Redhough, warden of the Bor¬ der. He has helpit weel to feather your nest, ye ken." " He has. There is no one can dispute it," said the abbot, nodding assent. *' Then ye'll no be averse, surely, to the lending o' him and his a helping hand iu your ain way." The priest nodded assent. E 3
" Weel, ye see, Sir Priest there is a kins¬ man of our nmter s lives up by here at Aikwood, a rank warlock, and master o' the arts of witchcraft and divination. He is in compact wi' the deil, and can do things far ayont the power o* mortal man. What do ye think, Sir Priest? he can ac¬ tually turn a man into a dog, and an auld wife into a hare ; a mouse into a man, and a cat into a good glyde-aver. And mair than that, Sir, he can raise storms and tempests in the air ; can gar the rivers rin upward, and the trees grow down. He can shake the solid yird ; and, look ye, Sir, he can cleave a great mountain into three, and Hft the divisions up like as mony gowpens o* sand." The stern abbot gave a glance up to the three new hills of Eildon, that towered majestically over their heads ; but it seem¬ ed rather a look of exultation than one either of wonder or regret " Weel, Sir, disna our captain send a few chosen friends, a wheen queer devils to be sure, on a message of good friend¬ ship to this auld warlock Master Michael
Scott merely with a request to read him some trivial weird. And what do-es the auld knave, but pricks them a' up on the top o' his castle, wi' a lockit iron-door aneath them, and there has keepit them in confinement till they are famishing o£ hunger, and I fear by this time they are feeding on ane another; And the warst o't ava, Sir, is this, I wad break his bolts and his bars to atoms for him, but Mas ??? he the deil standing sentry on the stair, spuing fire and brimstone on a' that come near him in sic torrents that it is like the fa' ?' the Grey-mare's-taîk Now, maist reverend and worthy Sir, my errand and request to you is, that, for my masters. sake, and for his men's sake, that are a' good Christians, for ought that I ken to the contrary, you will lend us a lift wi' book and bead,. Ave Marias, and other powerful things, to drive away this auld sneckdrawing thief, the devil, and beep him away till I get my friends released ; and I promise you, in my master's name, high bounty and reward," " Ha ! is it so ?» said the abbot, in a
hollow, tremulous voice. " Are my friend and fellow-soldier's men detained in that guise ? Come, my brethren, let us ride,— let us fly to their release, and we shall see whose power can stand against our own. For Aikwood, ho !" " For Aikwood, ho ! f ' shouted Dan and his companions, as they took the rear of the four sable dignitaries; and striking the spurs into their steeds aU at the same time, they went off at their horses' utmost speed, but in a short time the four yeo¬ men were distanced. The black steeds and their riders went at such a pace as warrior had never before witnessed. Up by the side of Hindly-burn they sped, with the most rapid velocity,—over mire, over ditch, over ford, without stay or stumble, Dan and his companions posted on behind, sparing neither whip nor spur, for they were affronted that these gowns¬ men should display more energy in their master's cause, and the cause of his friends, than they should do themselves. But their horses floundered, and blew, and snorted, and puffed, and whisked their taik with a
whistling sound, and stiU lagged farther and farther behind. " Come, come, callants," cried Dan to his companions, " let us rein up. These bedesmen's horses are ower weel fed for our bog-trotting nags. They fly like the wind. Od, we may as weel try to ride wi' the deviL" « Whisht, whisht," said Will Martin ; " I dinna like to mak ower familiar wl that name now-a-days. We never ken whas hearing us in this country." They were nigh to the heights when these words passed, a$d the four black horsemen pereeiving*~them to take it lei¬ surely, they paused and wheeled about, and the majestic primate taking off his cornu¬ ted chaperon, waved it aloft, and called aloud, " For shame, sluggish hinds ! Why won't you speed, before the hour of preven¬ tion is lost ? For Aifovood, ho, I say 1" As he said these words, his black courser plunged and reared at a fearful rate ; and, as our troopers thought, at on e bolt sprung six or seven yards from the ground. The marks of that black horse's hoofs remain
impressed in the sward to this day, and the spot is still called The Abbots lee. At least it had been so called when Isaac the curate wrote this history. To keep clear of the wood that was full of thickets, they turned a little to the left, and pursued their course ; and the ground becoming somewhat firmer, our yeomen pursued hard after them. But on coming over the steep brow of a little hill, the lat¬ ter perceived a mountain lake of consider¬ able extent that interrupted their path, and, to their utter astonishment, the four black horsemen going straight across it, at about the same rate that the eagle traverses the firmament, <fc The loch is frozen and bears over," said Dan : " Let us folhnv them across." " The loch is frozen indeed," said Will Martin, " but, ony man may see, that ice winna bear a cat." 64 Haud your tongue, you gouk/' said Dan : " Do ye think the thing that bore them winna bear us ?" And as he spurred foremost down the steep, he took the lake at the broad side ; but the ice offering no
manner of resistance, horse and man were in one moment out of sight. The sable horsemen on the other side shouted with laughter, and called aloud to the troopers, " to venture on. and haste forw.ard, for the ice was sufficiently strong." The bold trooper and his horse were extricated with some difficulty, and the monks testifying the utmost impatience he remounted, dripping as he was, and not being able to find the passage across the lake on the ice, he and his companions gal- lopped around the head of it. As he rode, the morning being frosty» he chanced to utter these words : " *Heigh-ho, but I be a cauld cheti J" Which words, says Isaac, gave the name to that lake and the hill about it to all future ages ; and from those perilous days of witchcraft and divination, and the shocking incidents that befel to men, adds he, have a great many of the names of places all over our country had their origin. The dark horsemen always paused until the troopers were near them, as if to en¬ courage them on, but they never suffered
tbem to join company. When they came over a ridge above old Lindean they were hard upon them, but lost sight ofthem for a short space on the height ; and, coming on full speed, they arrived on the brink of a deep wooded dell, and to their utter as¬ tonishment saw the four gownsmen on the other side, riding deliberately along r and beckoning them forward. w I am sair mista'en," said Will Martin, ·* gin thae chaps hae ??? gaen ower the cleugh at ae bound. An it warna for their habits I wad take them for something nou- ther good nor cannie," " Haud your tongue, or else speak feasi¬ ble things;' said Dan ; " Can the worthy Father Lawrence, and his chief priors and functionaries ever be suspected as warlocks, or men connected wi' the devil and his arts, lf sic were to be the case, we hae ??? mair trust to put in aught on this earth, The dell maun be but a step across. Here is a good passable road ; come, let us follow them. Dan led the way, and they dived into the dell by a narrow track, rather like a
path for a wild goat than men arid horses ; however, by leaping, sliding, and pushing one another's horses behind, they got to the bottom of the precipice, and perceiving a path on the other side, they expected to reach the western brink immediately. But in this they were mistaken ; abrupt rocks,, and impenetrable thickets barred their pro¬ gress on every side, and they found it im¬ possible to extricate themselves witbout leaving their horses. They tried every quar¬ ter with the same success, and at the last attempted to ascend by the way they earner but that too they foundlmpracticable, and all the while they heard the voices of their fellow travellers chiding their stay from above, and shaming them for their stupi¬ dity in taking the wrong path. At one time they heard them calling on them to come this way, here was an excellent out- gate ; and when the toiled yeomen stuck fairly still in that direction, they instantly heard other voices urging them to ascend by some other quarter. At other times they thought they heard restrained bursts of giggling laughter. After a great deai
øf exertion to no manner of purpose, they grew they neither knew what to do nor what they were doing, and at last were ' obliged to abandon their horses, and climb the ascent by hanging by the bushes and roots of trees. When they emerged from the deep hoUow, they perceived eight black horsemen awaiting them instead of four ; but as the country around Melrose and Dryburgh swarmed with members of the holy brotherhood of every distinction and rank, the troopers took no notice of it, thinking these were some ofthe head func¬ tionaries come to wait on their abbot. The latter chided our yeomen in sharp and resentful language for their utter stupidity in taking the wrong path, and regretted exceedingly the long delay their mistake had occasioned, his time he said being li¬ mited, as was also the time that his power prevailed in a more particular way over the powers of darkness. *' For us to go alone," added he, " would signify nothing. The manual labour of breaking through the iron gates we canuot perform ; therefore,
unless you can keep up with us, we may return home by the way we came." " I am truly grieved," said Dan, " at our misfortune. We have certainly been more forward than wise, and I fear have marred the fairest chance we will ever have for the deliverance of our friends. But I have a few fellow warriors at the ??? who will accompany you for a word of ???? mouth. I beg that you will not think of returning, for the case brooks no delay· We have lost our horses, and can hardly reach the castle on foot before it be even¬ ing. I wot not what we· shall do." * Brethren, I am afraid I must request of you to lend these brave troopers your horses," said the abbot to the four last comers. "My esteem for the doughtycham- pion of my domains is such, that I would gladly do him a favour." " ? thank you, thank you, kind sir ; we are mair behad- den to you than tongue can tell," said Dan* The four new come brethren dismounted at their abbot's request ; and, without tak¬ ing a moment to hesitate, the four yeomen mountçà their horses. The abbot daw.*
rence charged them to urge the steeds to their utmost speed. Away went the ab¬ bot and his three sable attendants, and away went the four troopers after them ; but from the first moment that they start¬ ed the latter lost sight of the ground, un¬ less it was, as they thought, about a mile below their feet. The road seemed to be «all one marble pavement, or sheet of solid alabaster; there v/as neither height nor hollow in it that they could distinguish ; but the fire flew from the heels of the horses, and sparkled across the firmament like thousands of flying stars. The ve¬ locity at which they went was such, ihat the borderers could not draw their breath save by small broken gulps; but as they imagined they rode at such an immense distance from the ground, they kept firm by their seats for bare Ufe, leaning forward with their eyes and their mouths wide open. Having never in all their lives rode on such a path, they were soon convinced that they could not be rid¬ ing toward Aikwood, around which the roads were very different. They often at-
tempted to speak to one another, but could not utter any thing farther than one short sound, for the swiftness with which they clove the atmosphere cut their voices short. At length Dan, perceiving his comrade, Will Martin, scouring close by his side, forced out the following sentence piece¬ meal : " Where—the—devil—are we— gaun— ηοΛν ?" " Straight—to—hell.—What—need— ye— speer?" " The—lord—for—for—for—bid—Wffl Martin," was the reply, which has since grown to a proverb. On they flew, over hill, over dale, over rock and river, over town, tower, and stee¬ ple, as our yeomen deemed; but they might deem what they pleased, for they saw nothing except now and then the tails of the churchmen's gowns flapping in the air before them. However, they came to their goal sooner than they expected, and that in a way as singular as that by which they reached it. The mffler at Aikwood-miU had a Whole
hill of kiln-seeds, or shealings of oats, thrown out in a heap adjoining to the mill. Ere ever our yeomen knew what they were doing from the time they mounted, they were all lying in this immense heap of kiln-seeds, perfectly dizzy and dum- foundered, and setting up their heads from among them with the same sort of staring stupid attempt at consideration as the heads of so many frogs which may be seen newly popped up out of a marsh. The bedesmen were ? -head ofthem to the end ofthe course, and drew up by wheeling their horses round the kiln as ifit had been a winning-post ; but the yeomen's horses, in making the wheel, threw their riders, one by one, with a jerk over head and ears among the loose heap of seeds, and galloping off around the corner of the hill, they never saw another hair of their tails. Tbemiliercame running out from his mill with his broad dusty bonnet; the smoky half-routed kiln-man out from his logie ; the mili-maidens came skipping from the meal-trough, as white as lilies ; the rest of the warden's mm, and the four sable dig«
nitaries of the church came also, and all of them stood in a ring round our dismount¬ ed troops, some asking one question, some another, but all in loud fits of laughter. Their wits could not be rallied in an in* stant ; and all that they could do or say was to blow the seeds out of their mouths, with which they were literally filled, and utter some indefinite sentences, such as, " Rather briskish yauds these same ! " " May the like o' mine never be crossed by man again !" " Hech! but they are the gear for the lang road !" '* What's become o' them ? I wad hke tø taice a right look o* them for aince." ir Do ye want to look if they have mark o' mouth, Will ? You may look at some o' these that came fore¬ most then. Youis are aff wi' their tails on their rigging ; there are some cheated if ever ybu see mair o' them." Will Mar¬ tin looked at the abbot's horse ; but when he saw the glance of his eye, he would not have taken him by the jaws to have looked his mouth for all Christendom. The four sable horsemen led the way, and all the yeomen followed on foot, bearing
with them such mattocks as they had been able to procure about Selkirk that morning, and away they marched in a body to Aik¬ wood castle. That was ? ?? th sight to our forlorn and starving prisoners ; even Gibbie had some hopes of a release : but when¬ ever Master Michael Scott got a near view ofthe four sable equestrians, he sunk into profound and gloomy silence, and every now and then his whole frame was observ¬ ed to give a certain convulsed shake, or shudder, which cannot be described. The rest of the sufferers supposed it to proceed from his rooted aversion to holy and devout men ; but they were so intent on regaining their own liberty that they paid little at¬ tention to the manner in which he was «affected. Father Lawrence bade the men proceed to work, and he would retire into an inner chamber and exercise himself so bs to keep from them all sorts of interrup¬ tion from spirits of whatever denomination, and he pledged himself for their protec¬ tion. They thanked him, and hasted to execute their design ; nor were they long in accomplishing it. By the help of huge
scaling hammers they broke down a part of the narrow stair-case, and actually set their friends at liberty. But the abbot enjoined them in nowise to depart, or to do any thing contrary to the desire ofthe mighty Master, while they remained in his premises, else he could not answer for the consequences. This our yeomen readily assented to, and undertook to prevail with their friends to acquiesce in the same measure. As soon as the iron-door was forced, the abbot Lawrence sent one of his officers to desire Master Michael Scott to come and speak to him privately in the secret cham¬ ber. The wizard looked at the messenger as a sovereign does to a minister of whom he is afraid, or a master to a slave, who, he knows, would assassinate him if he could ; nevertheless he rose and followed him to his superior. What passed between these two dignified characters it is needless here to relate, as the substance of the matter will appear in the sequel. But the Master returned into the great hall, where the warden's men were by that time afi as-
sembled, ?? altered man indeed. His countenance glanced with a sublime but infernal exultation. His eye shone with ten times the vigour of youthful anima¬ tion. It was Hke a dying flame relumin- e«J» that flashes with more than pristine brightness ; and the tones of his voice were like those of a conqueror on the field of battle. With this % r oice, and Λν??ι this mien, he ordered the friar and his ward Delany instantly to quit the castle ; and if an hour hence they were found on his ctomaiiis ? he would cause them to be hew- eâ into so many pieces as there were hairs on their heads, " Lo thy threats are unto me as the east wind," said the friar : " Yea as the wind that qometh from the desert, and puffeth up the vapours on the stagnant pools of water. If my companions in adversity gø, then will I also go along with them. But if they remain, by the life of Pharaoh, S3 likewise will thy servant; and what bast tbou more to say, thou man of Belial?" fhe Mastet ???? his grey locks and his ??? silvery bgajrd in derision ; and Char-
?? Scotts whose confidence in his friend the friar was now unbounded, stepped ti|> to back -what he had said, and to protest against parting company. Dan, however, interfered hastily, and told them he was bound by a promise to the holy father, who had wrought their liberty, to do no¬ thing adverse to the will of the Master, while they remained in his castle and on his domains; and therefore he begged they would comply without more words, and without delay. The friar then consented, much against Charlie's inclination; atid taking Delany by the band, he said: ** Lio I will even depart·/ but I will remain at the ford of Howden-burn until my friends arrive, for then am I from off the territoty of this blasphemer and worker of all man*. ner of iniquity. See that you tarry not at the wine, neither let your eyes behold strange women, that it may be well with you." So the two went away, and did as they had said. The friar found his mule in good keeping, and he remaifted with the maid in a cottage at the fords of HøW~ F8
den-burn, to await the issue of this singu¬ lar and unfortunate embassy. 44 Now sh-all I have my will, and do that which seems meet to me," said the Master, as he strode the hall with unrestrained energy. *· Did the dolt imagine he could, with his tricks of legerdemain, outdo me in the powers and mysteries of my art ? No, that man is unborn ! Let him go with his crosiers and his breviaries ; I am Mi¬ chael Scott once again !" u It is needless to say ought here,*' said Charlie Scott aside to his companions: Ct Fock should ken weel what they say, and where they are saying it. But the truth is, that the friar was the greatest man o' the twa ; and that auld birkie was right ? cowed in his presence. It is sair against my will that we hae been obliged, by your promise, Dan, to part wi' the gospel friar ; for, d'ye ken, I feel amaist as the buckler were ta'en aff my arm, to want him as lang as I am here. What do you think the carl did, Dan ? Come here, you and Will, and 1*? tell you. When we came here, ye see, the master had a steward, a perfect hound
0' hell, wha thought to guide us waur than dogs ; and he crossed the friar unco sahv till at length he lost a' patience wi' him, and, lord sauf us! sent him up through the clouds in a flash o' fire ; and there has ne¬ ver been mair o' him seen, but some wee bits o' fragments. I can tell you the loss o' sic a man as the friar, out o' sic a place as this, is a loss no easily made up." " Have a little patience, brave Yard¬ bire," said Dan : " We have the great and the grave abbot Lawrence in his place, He is our firm friend and our captain's friend, and every thing .will now be settled in the most amicable manner."—" That holy father and his assistants «are the only hope I hae," returned Charlie : '* An it warna for their presence, I wadna stay an¬ other half hour in sic a place as this. Ye little ken what scenes we ha'e witnessed during the days and nights that we ha'e been here. However, as I had the charge· of the embassage, I will gang and speak to the auld billy. He seems to be in a higb key. Master Michael Scott ; ye ken that yoursel and our auld friar, by ???? trials*
? ? skiU in your terrible arts o' witchcraft,, brought about an accident that has kept ? ower lang here, to the great trouble and inconveniency of our captain, your own brave kinsman. Now, since we are a' at liberty again, we beseech 'you to give us our answer ; and if you canna read the weird that he desires of you, why tell us sae at .aince, and let us gang about our bu¬ siness." ^Galfent yeoman, your request shall he granted without loss of time," said the Master. '* But it is the venerable fathets request that I should regale my kinsman's people before dismissing them, to make spme small return for the privations they have suffered. Be satisfied then to remain for a few hours, tffl you taste of my cheer; and in the meanwhile I will look into the hook of fate,and not only tell you ?? ? 1?И; your captain, Sir Ringan, ought to do, but I wiU show you demonstratively what he must do, if he would succeed in raising his name and his house above that of every Scottish Won." " Thank ye, noble sir," said Char¬ lie: " There shall never be another word
ábóüt it. If we gain our errand sab satis¬ factorily at last, I'U counta' that we ha'é bidden weel wared." ** Noble and worthy Sir, you never yet have said who told the most efficient tale* and unto whom the maiden should be¬ long," said the pòet. " 'Twas he, your captain there, who said the tale I most approved, and to him í award my right in the toy, the trifle you call maiden," returned the Master. ** And it is well remembered, squire ; amongst you, you deprived me of my steward, a man that could have accomplished a great deal,—I therefore claim this worthy in his stead, as agreed ; and glad may he be that he escapes so well." " I fear I will be a bad cook, and an awkward valet," said Gibbie. " I was ne¬ ver very handy at ought that way. Tarn wad answer a great deal better, an it were. your will." " We will have you taught practically, and to profit," said the Master : " The three brethren, attendants on father Law¬ rence, shaU take you to task this instant.
Thev will act as your assistants and mas¬ ters to-day, and to their, hands I recom¬ mend you. Be expert, and spare no cost" So saying, he gave three tramps with his heel, as he was wont to do in time past, and instantly the three sable monks stood before him. " Take that comely youth," said he, " and bestow on him afew cogent lessons in the, mysteries of the culin.ary art You may teach him a few varieties" As he said this, there was a malignant smik rather darkened than lighted up his stern features, and on title instant the three monks had Gibbie from the ground ; and one holding by each «arm and another by both his feet, they rushed out of the hall with him, in the same way that one drives a wheelbarrow. When the men of the embassy heard the three tramps, and the words about the varieties, they looked at one another with rather uneasy sensations. But the presence of father Lawrence, and the other three holy brethren, encouraged them still to acquiesce in the Master's re* quest, A short time after this, as they were
some loud giggling laughter, intermixed with squeaking cries of despair; which last they could weU distinguish as pro¬ ceeding from the lungs of poor Gibbie Jordan ; and immediately after that there came among them a huge red capon, flut¬ tering and screaming in a most desperato and deplorable manner, and all the three monks pursuing hira with shouts of de¬ light. The feathers were half plucked off him,, and his breath quite spent, so that they easily laid hold of him, and carried him away by the neck to have him spit¬ ted living, as they sžddl Our yeomen saw nothing but an overgrown bird, but they heard well that the voice was the voice of Jordan. "Thesemonks are trifling «and amusing themselves," said Tain ; " we shall get no dinner before night." The words were hardly weU said when the castle bell rung* and in they aU rush¬ ed to the great hall where stood a pienti· ful dinner smoking along the board, and the abbot and the Master both seated at the upper end, side by side· Our yea» F 3
??^ thought it extraordinary to see tihe great warlock and the reverend fa* ther in suoh^close compact, but they held their peace. The abbot rose and pronoun¬ ce a blessing on the food, but it was in «an unknown tongue, and little did they wot of its purport. There was great va¬ riety on the table of every kind of food, yet there was not one of our yeomen knew of what the greater part of the dishes con¬ sisted. But the huge capon stood at the head ofthe table, and though he hadbeen killed and cooked in afew minutes, the bird looked exceedingly well. The ab¬ bot, and the Master devoured him with so. much zest, that no one liked to call for a piece ofhim, save Tarn Craik, who eat a wing of him ; but there was no broad bone in» his shoulder, yet Tarn declared him the first meat he had ever tasted, save once, in his life. Charlie was placed ¿ïext the Master,. anA Dan next the abbot Law- r^nce* The three monks, attendants on » the latter* served the table, but nothing ofethc new steward made his appearance. Ihe? wine and other strong liquors were
served round in great abundance, and the quality was so excellent, that, notwith¬ standing of the friar's charge, every one drank liberally, and soon got into high glee. Whenever the supreme and haugh^· ty abbot swallowed a cup of wine, Dan, who sat next him, heard always a hissing sound within his breast, as if one had been pouring water on red hot iron. This startled the trooper terribly for two or three times at first, but his surprise les¬ sened and wore off by degrees as the li¬ quor continued to exalt his spirits. The feast went on, and the.wine flowed; but, as on a former occasfîöii, the men ate With¬ out being satisfied. The wines and liquor were all however real, and had their due effect, so that the spirit of hilarity rose tö a great height. It was observed that father Lawrence conversed with no one but the Master, and ;he dialogue they held was all in an unkrown tongue, in which tongue also, the sometimes conferred with the servi¬ to! s. The Master left the table three se¬ veral times, for he hud a charm going on
in another part of the castle, and at the third time returned with the black book of fate, the book ofthe dynasties of men, below his arm, and laid it closed on the table before him, α Now, my brave and warlike guests," said he, " Before I open this awful book, it is meet that every one of you be blind¬ folded. I ask this for your own sakes- If any one of you were to look but on one character of this book, his brain would be seared to a cinder, his eyes would fly out of their sockets, and perhaps his whole frame might be changed into something unspeakable and monstrous." " Gude faith, sir Master, I'll haud my een as close as they were sewed up wi' an elshin and a lingel," said Charlie. So said they all, but they were not trusted ; the monks were ordered to go round the table and tie every one's eyes öiosely up ; and when this was done, they were desir¬ ed to lay ail their heads down upon their hands on the board, and to sit without moving, whatever they might hear. He then proceeded to open the massy iron
clasps, and as soon as they were unloosed, three spirits burst from the book with loud shrieks, and escaped through the barbican. The yells were so piercing that some of our yeomen started from their seats, but dared not lift their heads. " Ah ! They are gone," said the Master ; " This weird wiU cost me dear !" " Fear nothing, but proceed," said father Lawrence. He opened the book, and three peals of thunder ensued that shook the castle to its foundations, every one of them louder than the last ; and though our yeomen sat tremblinginutterdarkness,theyheardvoices around them as if the hall had been crowded fuU of people; among others, they deemed that they could distinguish the voices of the warden and his lady. They, however, sat still as if chained to their places, await¬ ing the issue ; and, after much noise and apparent interruptions, the great Master read out as follows : " He for whom this weird is read, Be he son of battle bred, Be he baron born to peril, Be he lord, or be he earL
Let him trust his gallant kin, And the sword below the skin. When the red buck quits the cover, When the midnight watch is over, Then, whatever may hetidé, Trust the horn, and trust the hide, He that drives shall feel the gin, But he that's driven shall get in. All tor whom this weird is read, For the living, for the dead, From the chief with corslet shorn, To the babe that is unborn, Let them to the sceptre lean, Till the place where they have been See their sway expand untroubled, Doubled, doubled, nine times doubled 5 First to rise and rule the rings, Mixed with blood of mighty kings. This is read for princes, peers, Ahd'children of a thousand years j Now begins their puissant story 5 Strike the blow and gain the glory. Rise not against feudal union, No advance but in communion, Though through battle, broil, and-ânurther.-— Shut the book, and read no further." The book was closed, and loud shouts of applause, as from a great multitude, were heard at a distance ; as that died away, a peal of thunder burst forthiover their
heads, which rolled away with an undulat- ing sound, till lost in the regions of the western heavens. Our yeomen's eyes were then unbound, and when they looked up the book of fate was removed, and the Master was fallen back on his seat, with his countenance mightily distorted ; but the abbot and his attendants would not suffer any to touch him till he recovered of himself. He again rose into high and unwonted spirits ; but his elevation was rather like the delirium of a man driven to desperation, than that flow of delightful hilarity, the offspring of a temperate and well xegulated mind. The borderers persevered in their libations, and the mirth and noise increased till near th& fall of the evening, when Charlie again proposed to go ; but the Master protested against it for a short space, adding, that he had to give them a practical lesson how tlieir captain ought to proceed, if he would be the greatest man in Scotland. This was quite sufficient to prevail on Yardbire, and none of the rest appeared much dis¬ posed to move.
About this time some of our yeomen y sitting with their faces toward the case¬ ment, beheld a novel scene, which they 1 called up the rest to witness. This was the Master's new steward, the late laird of the Peatstacknowe, making his escape from the castle with all possible speed. He was stripped half naked, and bareheaded ; had thrown himself over the outer wall, lest he should be seen going by the gate, and was running up the ?????? of Aik¬ wood burn, among the trees, to elude dis¬ covery. Presently afterwards they be¬ held two of the monks stretching after him ivith a swiftness not to be outrun. Poor Gibbie was soon overhied and brought back, not in the most gentle manner ; and, instead of carrying him round by the gate, which, having heen broken up, stood wide open, they took him by the heels, and threw him over the wall» at the place he had leaped before. Gibbie gave a loud squeak in the air, as he came over the wall Λνίίίι a wheeling motion ; and faUing on the other side, every one believed that there would not be a whole bone left in his ba
dy. Instead of that he sprung to his feet, and ran across the court, saying to himself, " I'U tell you what—It minds me o' hel this place,—if ever there was ane upon earth." He got not time to finish the sen¬ tence till he was again seized, and hauled into the castle. *' Master Michael Scott, I protest in my master's name against this usage of a leal vassal and tiend laird," said Charlie. " The comely youth is mine by your own agreement," said the Master ; " He shall be weU seen to. Perhaps I shall only keep him for a season, until better supplied. Be content ; the matter is now beyond dis¬ putation. In the meantime I wffl pro« ceed to give you a specimen of my pro¬ found art, of which you have now seen ma-. ny instances ; and also of my esteem for your captain, to whom you wülbe so good as repeat this." He then went away to his arcana, and brought a bason of liquor, resembling ?????, which he sprinkled on aU his guests in small proportions, and taking his seat be* side the supercüious abbot, the two satap«
parently waiting for some grand metamor¬ phosis. The spell, powerful as it was, had not the effect that was surmised. These rude warriors ofa former age had principles of virtue and honour in their natures that withstood the charms of necromancy ,-those charms before which noble dames, cruel laymen, and selfish clergy sunk down con¬ founded and overpowered. The counten¬ ances of a few of the troopers were some¬ what changed by the spell, assuming there¬ by a sort of resemblance to beasts, but this their associates only laughed at, deeming it occasioned by the drunkenness of the in¬ dividuals affected. The two great person¬ ages at the head df the table viewed the matter in a different light, and that with evident symptomsof disappointment. They comprehended the reason, for they knew there was but one against which the pow¬ ers of darkness could not prevail ; and, af¬ ter holding a «conversation about it in their own mysterious language, they set about the accomplishment of their desires, ior, though a matter of no great* avail, the Master could not brook to be baulked in
any of his works of divination. The pur¬ port of this conversation was, what the Master had once proposed before, that the men must be made accessory to their own transformation ; and in this project he forthwith engaged with all manner of ear¬ nestness.
CHAPTER V. He can tum a man into a boy ; A boy into an ass ; He cau chatìge your gold into white raoncye ; Your white mone) e iuto brass ; He can turn our goodman to a beast With hoof, but, an' with horn, And chap the good wife in her cheer, This little John Barleycorn. Old Song. The plan of our great necromancer was no other than that of pushing round the wine, and other strong intoxicating liquors, to the utmost extremity; and it is well known that these stimulating beverages have charms that no warrior, or other per¬ son accustomed to violent exertions, can withstand, after indulging in them to a certain extent. The mirth and argument, or rather the bragg of weir, grew first ob¬ streperous, afterwards boisterous and un¬ ruly, and several of the men got up and strode the hall with drawn swords, with¬ out being able to tell with whom they
were offended or going to fight Neither the Master nor the abbot discouraged this turmoil, but pushed round the liquor, tffl some of the most intimate friends and as¬ sociates of the party, in the extravagance of intoxication, actually wounded one an¬ other, and afterwards blubbered, like chU- dren, for vexation. While they were all in this state of unnatural elevation, father Lawrence got up, and addressed himself to the party, for the first time. He repre¬ sented to them, by striking metaphors, the uncertainty and toil of the warrior's Ufe ; and requested aU such pf them as loved ease, freedom, and independence, to be¬ come inmates of his habitation ; and dur¬ ing the time of their noviciates, he pro¬ mised them every good thing. Several of them pretended to snap at the proffer, some on one condition, some on another; but when he presented a scroll of parch¬ ment, written in red characters, for their marks or signatures, no one would sign and seal, save Tarn Craik 3 who put his mark to it three times with uncommon avidity, on the positive condition that he
was to have as much fat flesh as he could eat for the first three years, at ail times that he chose, by day or by night. When matters were at this pass, and our brave yeomen could with difficulty rise to their feet, they heard a chorus of sweet and melodious music approaching, which still drew nearer and nearer. This was a treat they little expected in such an habitation; but how much greater was their surprise, when the hall-door was thrown open, and there were ushered in thirty of the most lovely maidens that the eyes of men had ever beheld. They seem¬ ed, too, to be all of noble lineage, for they were dressed like eastern princesses, rust¬ ling in their silks, and covered over with dazzling gems. The Master welcomed them with stately courtesy, apologizing for the state of his castle, and the necessi¬ ty they would be under of sitting down and sharing the feast with warriors, who, however, he «assured them were all gaUant gentlemen, of his own kin, and some of them of his own name. The splendid dames answered, that nothing on earth
OF ???*
would give them so much delight as to share the feast with gentlemen and war¬ riors, the natural protectors of their help¬ less sex, to whom it should be their prin¬ cipal aim to pay all manner of deference. As soon as the door was opened, our brave yeomen, Λν???ι the profound respect that men of their boisterous occupation always pay to female beauty and rare ac¬ complishments, started all to their feet, and made their obeisance. But jthe worst concern for them was, that they could not stand en their feet. Some of them prop¬ ped themselves on the hilts of their sheath¬ ed 8?? ? ????, leaning the points backward against the wall. Others kept a sly hold of tbe buff-belt of the comrade next to him ; and a few, of whom the poet was one, and Tarn another, lost their balance* and fell back over the benches, showing the noble dames the soles of their sandals* AU was silence and restraint, and a view of no group could be more amusing; for though our heroes were hardly able to be¬ have themselves with the utmost proprie¬ ty* yet they were all eudeavouring to do
it ; some keeping their mouths close shut, that no misbecoming word might possibly escape from their lips ; some turning up their white faces, manifesting evident symptoms of sickness, and some unable to refrain their joy at this grand addition to their party. The first breaking up of the conversa- tion was likewise extremely curious ; but itwas begun in so many corners about the same time, it is impossible to detaU it aU. Will Martin, with a lisping unbowsome tongue, addressed the one next him to the foUowing effect. " Hne evening this, noble dame." α Do you account this so very fine an evening, gaUant knight ?" " Hem, hem ; glorious roads too ; most noble lady,—paced all with—marble, you know. Hem ! Came you by the marble path, feir lady ? Hem ! hem !" " Not by the marble path, most courte¬ ous knight, but on one of alabaster, bor¬ dered with emeralds, rubies, and diamonds you know. Hem ! hem !" « May all the powers—Hem~powers of
beauty, you know—Ay—hem ! «and love. Hem ! What was I about to say ?" ** Could not guess, knight." " That smile is so sweet Will such an—hem !—such an angelic creature,— really con—descend to converse familiarly with a plain, homely warrior." " Your notice does me far too much ho¬ nour, worthy knight." And so saying she put the tip of her palm gently on the warrior's rough hand. Intoxicated as WiU was with wine, be was petrified vrith asto¬ nishment and delight, and could not find terms to express his gratitude and adora¬ tion. Many others were likewise by the same time testifying, by their bright and exulting looks, the joy and delight they were experiencing in the conversation of those most beautiful and refined of «aU earthly objects. Tarn Craik beheld, or thought he beheld, his iovely KeU «among them, blooming in tenfold loveliness. He was so drunk that he could not articuhte one syllable ; but he fixed his long coulter- nose and grey eyes steadily in tiie direc- VOL. ul ?
tion of ??? faes, and put his hand below the table and scratched. Still the cup and the cateö circulated without my respite. The Master and tlie abbot both<ialled them round and rounds and though the lovely and high-born dames tasted sparingly, nevertheless the drcumstance of their having touched the cup with their lips was sufficient to induce the enamoured warriors to drink to them in healths deep and dangerous. Reason had long been tottering on her throne with the best of them, but these amorous draughts of homage overthrew her com¬ pletely, and laid her grovelling in the dust The heroes fell from their seats first by ones, but ere the last in threes and four& Still the courteous and sympathetic beau¬ ties tried to administer comfort and assist¬ ance to their natural protectors, by holding up their heads, and chafing their temples; but, in spite of all they could do, total ob¬ livion of passing events ensued to the whole of onr incautious troopers. The next morning presented a scene in Uie great hali of Aikwood, which, if it can-
nöt be described, neither can it ever, be conceived. There lay our troop of gallant yeomen, as good as ever heaved buckler, scattered over the floor; some in corners, some below benches, every one of their eyes sealed in profound slumber though the day was ???И advanced, and every onç having an inamorata in his arms, or ding¬ ing close to him of her own accord. At a given signal, the great bell of the castle was rung with a knell that might have wakened the dead. The sleepers raised their drowsy and aching heads all at the same time ; and, as was «natural, every one turned his eyes first toward the partner of his slumbers. Their sensations may be in some measure conceived, when, instead of the youthful, blooming, angeUc beings, whom they had seen over-night, there lay a group of the most horrible hags that ever opened eyes on the light of day. In¬ stead of the light, flowing, and curled hair, there hung portions of grey dishevel¬ led Jocks. Instead of the virgin bloom qf the cheek» and the brilUant enamel of the eye, aU was rheum, haggardness, afld de- g2
formity. Some had two or three long pit* ted teeth, of the colour of amber ; some had none. Their lovely mouths were a- domed with curled and silvery mustachios ; and their fair necks ????? shriveUed and seriated Uke the bark of a pine-tree. In* «stead of the rustUng silks and dazzling jewels, they tvere aU clothed in noisome rags ; and, to crown the horror of our be¬ numbed and degraded Bacchanalians,every one of the witches had her eyes fixed on her partner, gleaming with hellish delight at the state to which they had reduced themselves, and the horrors of tlieir feel¬ ings. The poet, and two or three others, fell into convulsions ; and all of them turn¬ ed away groaning, and hid their faces from these objects of abhorrence. The Master came with his enchanted Uquor once more, and sprinkled it over the prostrate and humbled group, who were now in that state of mental agony that rendered them indifferent to aught that eould occur ; and, as he sprinkled them, he said to himself, * I now have the power
over you, though you had been seven times anointed in holy church." " Aye, seven times seven," said a tre¬ mendous voice ; and the ?????? were fol¬ lowed by a laugh that shook the vault of the hall, which laugh ?? ? ?& echoed by three or four accordant voices, and afterwards by aU the witches in the apartment. The astounded warriors again raised their heads, and beheld their friend, the abbot, stalk¬ ing along and along the haU in the midst of them in majesty sublime. He ΛνοΓβ the same sable and fhnving robes, and the same mitre, that he did on the preceding day ; but he wa& now striding openly in his own character, ΛνΜι his legs shagged and hairy, shaped like those of a goat, and his feet cloven into two distinct and horny hoofs. The three attendants were there also, but they were no more three monks,. but the identical, Prig, Prim, and Pricker, the infernal pages of Master Michael Scott. In short, our yeomen discovered, to their utter despair, that they had been riding, eating, and drinking, hand to fist, with the, devil in propria persona^
Before giving any ofthem time to reco¬ ver their senses, he strode up to Dan Chis¬ holm, and stooping over him with exulta¬ tion, he said, ** Did not I tell you, Chris¬ tian droich, when I bayed you at the mill, that I would be before hand with you at Melrose, and have not I kept my word ?" As he said these words, Dan once more saw down his throat, and beheld the burning flame within. Half-dead with fright, he threw himself back on the floor, and held up one foot and one hand, as his last inef¬ ficient defence, on which his infernal Ma¬ jesty vomited such a torrent of sparkling flame outuponhim and his forlorn partners, that they lost all hope of ever again mov¬ ing from the place where they were. " Take heart, my brave fellows," said the Master. " This great primate, you see, is no other than the prince of the power of the air, the great controller of the mighty elements, who has honoured us with his company. You are now in his power, and lie at his mercy ; but he is more of a gen¬ tleman than he is generally represented to be, and will scorn to take advantage of a
few poor insignificant creatures, who call themselves Christians, of whose company he is sure before he wants it. He knows you will fume, and bully, and fight for a few short years, sending, one another home to his ample mansions in myriads before your time. Both he and I would scorn to take farther advantage of beings so blind ignorant, and inconsistent, than suits our own amusement. We only love to mock you, show you your own littleness, and how easy a prey you would be, were there a being in the universe that watched for ever- over your destruction; Cheer up, gallant soldiers í and now for the long- ?vaited developement of mighty moment. I will show you the manner, and very mode, by which your captain must only hope to succeed in his great enterprise." He then touched every one ofthem with the divining-rod that was in his hand, pro¬ nouncing at the same time some mystic words, which ???? of them comprehend¬ ed. While he was thus occupied, the Λνί?ο?ιββ rushed from the hall, and as soon, as he had touched the hindmost, ha him-
self also made his escape, and looked from a crevice of «an inner waU. The enchant¬ ment began immediately to take effects the warriors rolled about on the floor in strong convulsions, bellowing and floun¬ cing, trying always to run on all-four, and then tumbling over again. At length their noses and chins began to grow for¬ ward in hideous disproportion, till their heads began to assume something of the forms of the heads of beasts, and liker to those of calves than any things else. The laughter that pealed from loop-hole, cre¬ vice, and barbican, was, at this eventual period, excessrve. The devil, the three wicked spirits, the great enchanter, and his ■conventicle of witches, seemed all to be in convulsions at witnessing ΙιοΛν the meta* morphosed champions shook their long heads, looked at one another, and tried to speak. How their language changed from long-dwvn words, half pronounced, to downright confused bellowings ; and how their forms, in the space of a fiw minutes, gradually assumed those of as many migb·* ty and ferocious bulb.
- I have now given you your own pro¬ per shapes, and showed you in frames suit· ed to your natures," cried the Master,, from a crevice. " Pass forth, and be gone ; and carry my respects to your captain." Then there was a combined bellow of rage arose in the hall that would ???^? rent any castle to the top but that of Aikwood; and benches, boards, and couches, flew about in flinders on the horns of the furi¬ ous monsters. Fortiwith fhey rushed out into the great court, and from that to the side of the hill^ bellowing, and tearing up the ground with hoof and horn, till the country was alarmed for many miles round; and, believing that all hell was broke loose from the castle of Aikwood that day, they betook them to their heels, and fled away out of sight and out of hearing. The outrageous drove looked back as they ascended the brae to the eastward of the castle, and sa?v the devil and the great warlock, standing on the topmost tower,, laughing at them ; the former appearing of a size and dimensions equal to those of 3 G
another castle. The grand mitre that he wore on his head, shaped like a crescent to conceal his horns, now moved like a cornuted black cloud amid the firmament ; Kus eyes glimmered like two of the reddest of the stars of heaven ; and the sceptre that he waved in his right hand was like a tremendous pine all in flame, or rather like a burning aerial meteor. Our trans¬ formed warriors gallopped away in terror as fast as cloven hoofs could carry them, wth one mighty bison, that had once been Charlie Scott, far ? -head of all the rest ; for, notwithstanding of all that Char¬ lie had seen and heard in favours of the devil, he felt as much affrighted for him as ever, degraded as he was in form. No won¬ der was it that our tumultuous group was terrified and galloped off; for at the same time that they saw Satan stretching out his sceptre in his right hand, he held out Tarn Craik by the nape of the neck in his left, whüe the poor fellow was seen spraw¬ ling and spuming the air óver an unfa- thomed void. When the arch-fiend made his retreat from among the warriors that
*. morning, in the midst of the confusion he carried Tam off with him, according to compact—fed him for some time on ani¬ mal food of the richest quality, which, ne¬ ver once satisfying him, the devil grew Λν68^ of such a voracious cur, and twist¬ ed his neck about. The dro\'e was no sooner out of sight,, than the Master said to one of his pages, " Pricker, assume thou the habit that thou hadst yester-eve ; mount, and ride after these ΛνιΜ cattle, and deliver them over to the charge of their dolt of a con¬ fessor. He will try to rescue them from their present degraded and brutal forms, but he will not be able. Spirit, thou sawest a part of the charms performed. Gh r e him the proper directions how to find it out before leaving him. It boots nothing of¬ fending my kinsman, the Warden," Pricker mounted his horse, and rode straight for the fords of Howden-burn, ????? he knew the friar was awaiting his companions, and meant to have driven them all up before him to the cottage door, where the friar and his fair ward sojourn-
ed, and there delivered them over to the care of these two, as a present of fine beeves from the great Master to Sir Ringan Red- hough. But before the infernal page over¬ took them they ????? all at the door of the cottage, bellowing and kneeling, and try¬ ing in vain to make their hard case known to the friar. Pricker came up, and saluted the friar, who, observing his clerical habit, returned the compliment in a hurried and careless manner—for he was confounded by the arrival of so many mad bulls. *' Reverend brother mine," said the page, " I deliver over into thy charge this herd of beautiful cattle, the best breed that ever roamed the forests of Caledon. They are a present from Master Michael Scott to his cousin the Warden of the middle marches. See that you deliver them safe and sound." " Lo, thou seest witb thine eyes, and thou also hearest with the hearing of the ear," said the friar, " that the creatures are outrageous, and not to be governed by the hand of a single man. And thinkest thou
a brother of the holy order of Benedict would take a goad in his hand, and ride forth after these bulls of Bashan? Lo,would they not even run headlong upon my mule, and thrust their horns into his side? Thy servant also, and this maiden, would they tread under their feet? Go tol Thou speakest as one lacking understanding." " I give them in charge to thee, as de¬ sired by one ??? whom it is dangerous to contend," said the page ; " and alongst with them this request, that your captain will make away with them as quickly as possible for food to his army." At these words, ofjthe apparent sacris¬ tan there was such a roaring and bellow¬ ing commenced among the herd, that, for the first time, the friar began to suspect some horrid enchantment, but wist not what to dread. The drove turned round their heads to the speaker,—shook them in disapproval of what he had said, and join* ed in such a ferocious roar against him, that it was not like ought the friar Imd ever witnessed among the brute creation before. The metamorphosed troopers, how*
evér¿.kne\v too well now who Pricker was to attack him, but, turning again round, they came in a row, and kneeled around the friar, looking at him with the most supplicating expressions of countenance that ever cattle put on." " Lo, methinks I have looked upon these wild beasts of the forest in some of the days that are past," said the friar, " and that their countenances are not entirely unknown to nie ; though when, or in what place, in that thing my memory uphold- eth me not. I pray thee, brother, to de¬ clare unto thy servant where thou earnest by these beasts of mine acquaintance. If thou art a follower of the worthy Father Lawrence, thou must speak the truth. —Tell me, art thou a Christian ?" The bulls gave not the infernal page time to reply. They turned about, shook their heads, and tossed the earth at him with their horns, raising at the same time such an outcry of rage against him that the friar himself was afraid, and retreated within the door of the cottage ; and he thought that, amid their confused bellow-
ings, he could distinguish as it were these words pronounced, " He a Christian! Away with him ! Away with him !" u Lo, what am I to understand by aU this ?" said the friar, " Come near unto me, thou man of mystery, that comest like one of the chU- dren of Esau, with thy cattle and thy herds, and tell unto thy seromt what are these ?" Pricker would not, however, come nigh the friar, but still kept his distance ; for against the friar's spiritual armour he durst not engage ; but he called out to him, in mockery, " I then declare unto thee, ? thou great magician, who camest to cope wifh the prince of aU magicians, Master Michael Scott, that these are thy master's yeomen whom thou leftest with him yes¬ terday. Now, what sayest thou? Hast thou ever Λνι^βββα power like this ?" The friar Ufted up his eyes to heaven, and tears fell down on his dark beard. " ? wretched man that I am !" cried he, ? w jjy ¿?? j leave my children in the Uon's den? yea, even in the den of the great
lion. Wo is me, that this breach hath been made among the followers of my Master ! But there is One that can yet eontroul all the powers of darkness, and to Him alone must I apply without delay." The friar went instantly to his devo¬ tions, and performed many rites of a na¬ ture too sacred to be here minutely de¬ scribed; yet, after all his exorcisms, the men could not regain their natural shapes^ but lay and rolled about on the valley in awful convulsions. The hellish page, who had kept far aloof during the time of the friar's sacred appeal, now came galloping near to enjoy the convulsions of the herd, and the grief and astonishment of the friar ; and after mocking for some time, in obedience to the great wizard's com¬ mand, he called to the friar, and said, ** I see he that brought about this wonderful metamorphosis,—for which you shall one day be grateful,—can only effect the coun¬ ter-charm. Look into the manes on their foreheads, and look narrowly ;" and hav¬ ing said these words, he darted off towards Aikwood with the speed of lightning.
4 The friar did as this flying horseman had directed, and searching the long curled mane befrveen the horns of the first mon¬ ster that came to his hand, he there found stitched a small scroll of parchment, neat¬ ly rolled up, and written in blood. * Then he caused them to bring him fire, in which he burnt it, and presently there stood up at his hand one of Sir Riegan Bedhough's warriors, in aU his arms and accoutrements as he first arrived at the castle of Aikwood, ** By the life of Pharaoh !" cried the friar, "surely this excelleth all that I beheld heretofore!" The spell was now quickly dissolved ; but no pen* can do any justice to the feel¬ ings of our amazed troopers^ as they again strode the green in their own fotms and vigour* embracing the friar, and thanking him as their deliverer. They returned back over the ridge, not without some dreadful apprehensions, to the mill of Aik-» wood for their horses, but went no more in view of the portentous castle. They found their horses at good feed ; and whenever Charlie saw Corby's skin, that gliftened
like the plumes of the raven, he eried, ** Aha, Corby lad, ye haena wantit either meatordrink, ye rascal! Od ye hae fared bet¬ ter than your master, ye cock-luggit gloom¬ ing thief; stall up, ye dog, till I caparison you, and then let us bound for the border.'' But tbe most curious and least suspect¬ ed of alî the circumstances attending the horses was, that Dan Chisholm's horse and those of his three companions, that they left stabled in the deep dell above Lindean, were all found standing at the mUl among the rest. The miller could give no farther account about them v than that a lad brought them all tied to one another's tails, and said they belonged to four of the baron of Mountcomyn's men that were gone to Aikwood, " By the Lord Soûles," cried Dan, "then it is true that Master Michael Scott said ofthe devil being more of a gentleman than he had been generally represented. For all the pranks he has played us, I'll think the better of him for this the longest day I have tolrve. What say you to this, friend Yardbire ? ? ' " I shaU be twenty miles off Aikwood at
leastaforel speakanother sentence about ei¬ ther him or some others that I ken o.' Mer¬ cy on us ! poor Tarn Craik ! What an end he has made wt his fat bacon ! Hech, but it be a despisable thing to rin open mouth to the—I'll no mention whae~-for their greed o' meat. Some may hae gotten ??? mair than what they deserved ; but as for sachiess Gibbie Jordan, he has been right hardly dealt wi'. My heart's unco wae for the poor laird, and I think something should be done to recover him." " Something shall be done for him," said the friar, and that of such momentous consequence, that, if his own iniquities keep him not in bondage, all the powers of the evil one shall be unequal to the task." After all these horrid perils of weird wo* men and witchcraft thus miraculously over¬ come, ourtrooprode straight onto thecamp of the Warden, and found him in the vi¬ cinity of Wooller, having come into those parts to counteract the rising about Ber¬ wick in behalf of the English garrison* And the time being at hand on whieh he
must either do or not do, either join with heart and hand in the cause of the Douglas, or leave him to stand or fall by himself, and abide, by the consequences— his impatience for the return of bis men from Aikwood castle had been commen¬ surate A with the importance that he attach¬ ed to their mission. But when they in¬ formed him of all the wonders they had witnessed, and the transmutations they had seen and undergone-—how th^ ????- lock and his spirits had raised the tempests, deluged the plains, levelled the forests, and cleft asunder the everlasting mountains, the baron was like one in a trance. It was long before they could make themselves accredited, or impress him with any other idea than that it was a story made up to astonish him. With the feats performed by the friar, he Tvas particularly pleased, and from that time forth paid him more honour than he had ever been seen pay to man. But the precise meaning of the destiny, read for him out of the book of fate, puzzled and interested him most of ?. It WS ctørk and full of intricacies ;
atid it was not till after long consultation with wise men, as well as women, that any thing like a guess could be formed of its tendency. By making words and actions to coalesce, a mode of procedure was at the last pitched on as the only one reconcile*. able with the predictions. This mode will eventually appear without giving the detail at present, and the reader will then be bet* ter able to judge whether or not the Red* hough and his sages understood the Mas* tets signs and injunctions properly.
CHAPTER VI. Here away, there away, wandering Willie, Here away, there away, haud away hame. Oíd Song. We have now performed the waggon¬ er's difficult and tedious task with great patience, and scarcely less discretion, hav¬ ing brought all the various groups of our dramatis personae, up to the same period of time. It now behoves us (that is, Isaac the curate and me,) to return again to the lead¬ ing event, namely, the siege of Roxburgh. The state of mind to which the two commanders were now reduced was truly pitiable. Within the castle of Roxburgh, all was sullen gloom and discontent. In one thing, and that only, were they unani¬ mous, which was in a frantic inveteracy against the Scots ; and though Musgrave, with the feelingsof a man, wouldgladly have saved those dearest to him in life, yet he found that to have proposed such a thing
as yielding to the garrison, would have been but adding fuel to flame in order to extinguish it. Their small supply soon be¬ gan again to wear short ; and, moreover, the privations to which they were subjected, had brought on ati infectious distemper among them, of which spme died every day ; but every item added to their suffer¬ ings, fell into the scale against the Scots, and all the cruelties exercised by the lat¬ ter, in order to break the spirits of their opponents, only militated agamst them¬ selves. Opposition to the last man was a sentiment nursed in every· English bosom within the garrison, with a brooding en¬ thusiasm of delight. There can be no doubt that they felt intensely for their gallant captain, considering the dismal si¬ tuation in which he stood with respect to their enemies, and the strong hold they had been enabled to keep over his heart It was probably the burning intensity of these feelings that was the great source of their unhappiness, and gave rise to the fierce spirit of dissension that daily mani¬ fested itself. Although they detested Ihe
deed thfe Scots had committed in execut¬ ing Sir. ÏSichard* yet they felt his death a sott of relief, as by it one-half of the cord wiiich their hated adversaries held round the breast of their commander was broken* an¿ there iš little doubt that they wish« ed themselves free of Lady Jane Howard» by fair and gentle means if possible, but at all events to be rid of that remaining tie, which almost maddened them to think of Tbere was one circumstance which of late was to all of them wholly unaccount¬ able. As the day of the Conception of the blessed Virgin approached, the mind of Lord Musgrave, instead of becoming alto¬ gether deranged as they had foreboded» became more and more steady and collect* «ed. He watched over every part of the economy within that huge fortress, and gave his orders with punctuality and de¬ cision, although with a degree of sternness that had not previously been observed. The dreaded day of the Conception at length arrived ; and, before noon, crowds of the citizens, and people from the surround¬ ing country, began to assemble around the
beyond the line of circumvallation, while the regular troops were drawn up in co¬ lumns both to the east and west ofthe for¬ tress, and particularly round the gibbet on the Bush-Law, At eleven o'clock the Scottish trumpets sounded; the English soldiers crowded to the battlements around the western tower of the citadel, and Lord Musgrave came up among the rest, array¬ ed in a splendid suit of light armour, and gallantly attended. These battlements and the ηβΛν gibbet were, as before stated, right opposite to one another, and separated only by the breadth of the moat and a very small slope on the western ascent ; so that every object could be distinctly seen from the one place to the other, and, by raising the voice somewhat, a conversation could be carried on across. At the very time that Lord Musgrave thus appeared on the wall, the Lady Jane Howard and Sir Richard Mus¬ grave were introduced on the boards of the gibbet. Yes,—read it over again. I say Sir Richard Musgrave, for it was* tru* VOL. IIL η
ly he. The Douglas, seeing* that he could not prevail, and that the gaUant youth was -given up by his brother and the English to his fate, could not brook the idea of los¬ ing by his death the one-half of the in¬ fluence he held over Musgrave. But that he might try it by stretching it to the very last, he clothed another culprit in Sir Richard's habiliments, tied a white cloth over his face, let him stand a proclaimed space on the boards with the cord about his neck, and, at the last moment of the given time, there being no parley sounded for the delivering up of the keys ofthe fortress, the board sunk, and the man died ; but Sir Richard vras safe in hold. He was again produced that day, being the eighth of December, along witb Lady Jane. He was dressed in the suit of ar¬ mour in which he fought on the day he was taken prisoner, and Lady Jane in pure «now-white robes, betokening her spotless virginity. Sir Richard's eye beamed with manly courage, but the fresh hues of the rose on the cheeks of Lady Jane had bleneh- «4 and given place to the most deadly
paleness. Both hosts were deeply affect¬ ed with the sight, and on tbis occasion both felt alike. There was not a heart amongst them that did not overflow with pity at the unhappy fate ofthe two youth¬ ful prisoners, whose dismal doom could now no longer be averted, unless by a sa¬ crifice on the part of the English, with which even the most sanguine of the be¬ leaguering army doubted their compUance. The Douglas then causeda herald to make proclamation in a stentorian voice; first stating the cause vriiyhe hadputoff the exe¬ cution of Sir Richard Musgrave until that day, namely, his anxious desire to save the Ufe ofthe noble youth, on the ground that the purposed holding out ofthe garrison tffl the twenty-fourth ???? a chimera ; and, se¬ condly, declaring that, unless the keys of the castle were previously delivered up to him, precisely at the hour of noon, theno¬ ble and gallant Sir Richard, the fkrwer of English chivalry, should be put down ; and the beautiful and accomplished Lady J.ane Howard, the betrothed,bride and devoted lover of Lord Musgrave» subjected to a h %
fate the most humiliating, and the most t deplorable,that ever noble maiden suffered, and that in full view of both armies. A loud murmur of detestation sounded from « the walls of the castle, but the columns of the Scottish army stood and looked on in mute and tender sorrow. Lord Mus¬ grave placed himself right opposite the prisoners, turned his face straight toward them, and gazed with an unmoved and undaunted air. Sir Richard addressed him in the same sentiments he had for¬ merly expressed, the purport of ????? was, it will be remembered, the madness and folly of holding out the castle, ???? ????? the bright and unequalled prize for which he contended was lost. For his ??? ? ? life, he said, be accounted it as nothing in the scale; but the fate that awaited the lady of his love, Λν?ιο had shewn such devotion to his person and interests, was not to be en¬ dured or permitted by any knight of ho¬ nour. Lady Jane cried out to him to save her from a doom before which her whole soul shrunk ; adding, that she had done much, and suffered much, for him, and
would he not make one effort, one sacrifice, to save her ? " Lord Douglas," cried Musgrave, *' Will not a formal consignment of all my lands, titles, and privileges in the do¬ minions of England, ransom the lives of these two ?" ** Not if thev were ten times doubled," returned the Douglas : " Nor shall any earthly thing ransom them, save the full and free possession of the castle of Rox¬ burgh. 1 have myself suffered a loss at your hands, of which you are not aware ; and I long and thirst to revenge it on you and your house." " Then my resolution is fixed !" cried Musgrave : " Though all England should deprecate the deed, and though I know my brethren in arms disapprove of it, I must and will redeem the lives of these two. Yes, I will save them, and that without abating one iota from the honour of the house of Musgrave. Not make one effort, Lady Jane ? Not one sacrifice to save your honour and life ? Effort, indeed, I will make none. But, without an effort,
I will make a sacrifice of as high estima¬ tion for you as ever knight offered up for the lady of his love. Perhaps it may not be in my power to save you ; but in the sight of these rival armies,—in yours my only brother and betrothed bride,—and in the sight of heaven,— loffer the last ransom that can be offered by man." As he said these words,he flung himself headlong from the battlement ofthe western tower, struck on the mural parapet around the kxwer platform, then on the rampart, from which he flew with a rolling bound, and flashed with prodigious force into the ample moat. There, by the weight of his armour,he sunk forthwith to rise no more. The troops ofthe rival nations stood aghast, with uplifted hands,gazing on the scene; but no more was tobe seen ofthe gallant Musgrave! Agurg- ling boil of bloody water arose above him as he sank to the bottom,—and that ???$ the last movement caused in this ΛνοΓΜ bygone whose life had been spent in deeds of high chivalry and restless commotion. Excepting one shriek uttered by Lady Jane, the Douglas was the first to break
the awful silence, which he did by these words : " There fell a hero indeed ! Noble and resolute Musgrave ! I cannot but en¬ vy you such a chivalrous fate as this!" Many such expressions of enthusiastic ad¬ miration burst from both armies, not in shouts of applause, for these were suppres¬ sed by sorrow, but in a low and melting pathos that bespoke the soul's regret as well as approval. When these first expressions of feeling were over, the dark and manly counten¬ ance of Douglas sunk into more than usual gloom and dejection. AU the advantages given him, and which he had deemed in¬ surmountable by his opponents, were by this desperate actof Musgrave's extinguish ed. He had now no more power over the English garrison than what he could make good with his sword and his bow. To have executed his threats on Sir Richard, må the lovely and romantic Lady Janev would only have been an act of poor and despicable revenge, which would have dis¬ gusted his own followers, and could in no degree haye furthered his cause ι so he or-
dered them back to confinement, with di¬ rections that they should be attended ac¬ cording to their rank. What was next to be done ? That was the great question. Douglas never once conceived the idea of giving up the enter¬ prise ; for though the princess for whom he had undertaken it was now no more, his broad domains were all engaged. The very existence of the house of Douglas de¬ pended on his success ; and, besides, the king had more daughters, though none like his beloved and accomplished Marga¬ ret. Therefore Douglas had no hesitation regarding the necessity of taking the cas¬ tle. He was determined to have it. But what to do next, in order to accom¬ plish this determination, was the question. Circumstances were grievously changed ivith him. The garrison had got a sup¬ ply across the Teviot-bridge during the time ofthe flood and the tempest, but the Scots could not ascertain to Λν?^ amount. Sir Thomas Musgrave had been joined by some troops from the shores of Northum* berland, and had issued forth with these
and the greater part ofthe garrison of Ber¬ wick, to the amount of 5000 men, in order to make a diversion in favour of the gar¬ rison of Roxburgh. This movement by the governor of Berwick disconcerted the Douglas most of all. A party of these marauders had shewed themselves on the height about Hume castle, with trumpets sounding and colours waving-in the air. From thence they marched on, keeping the backs of the hills, until they came into the ΙοΛνβι* parts of Leaderdale, which they harried, burning in their way the fanvn and castle of Ercildon. ^ They next made a movement towards Melrose, meaning to establish themselves in the rear of Doug¬ las, and either to cut off his supplies, or force him to abandon the siege, in order to preserve his own country behind him. But when they came to the river Tweed they were opposed by the brave abbot Lawrence, not the feigned and infernal abbot that our yeomen left at Aikwood, but the real worthy and apostolic Law¬ rence himself. He had raised all the ab¬ bey vassals and retainers, and shewec^ fairly Η 3
disposed to dispute the passage ofthe Eng* lish over the river. In the meantime he posted message after message to Douglas, to come, or send to his assistance, before the abbey of the holy Virgin, with all its sacred stores, should fall into the hands of their ruthless enemies. Douglas was hardly put to it. If he drew off from a close blockade, the Eng¬ Ush were sure to take advantage of his ab¬ sence, make a sally, and procure plenty of more provisions ; and, in that case, his only probable hope of success was cut off. On the other hand, if he suffered himself to be inclosed between two armies, his situa¬ tion would become every day more pre¬ carious, and perhaps in the issue quite un¬ tenable. He was, therefore, in a manner forced to the resolution of making an ef¬ fort to join father Lawrence, and of giv¬ ing the captain of Berwick battle before he attained possession of the rich monas- try of Melrose* The time was now arrived when the support of Sir Ringan Redhough and his borderers was become absolutely necessary.
and decisive manner than that in which they had hitherto conducted themselves, he could not now proceed one foot, and his great cause was ruined* He therefore dis¬ patched a pressing message to the chief, conjuring him as his friend and fellow-sol¬ dier, either to come and supply his place in the blockade of Roxburgh, or march with all expedition to Melrose, and give battle to the governor of Berwick. The dogged and unyielding Warden returned for an¬ swer, that it had always been his chief and undivided aim to act in concert with his noble and gallant friend^ and lord superior, the Earl of Douglas and Mar. But that he had a peculiar charge from his Sove¬ reign, ofthe English marches, which it wm his bounden duty to attend to, prior to aU other considerations. Whatever he could do conformable with this first duty, should not be wanting. FinaUy, he .sent him word, as he had done formerly, " that if he coudna take the castle, and confessed that he coudna toke it, he might send word to him» md he wad take it fi»: hhn. w
4t What does the crabbed carle always mean by that answer ?" said the Douglas, when it was reported to him : " Perhaps he has some means of communication with those within the fortress, some secret friend in disguise among our enemies. Perhaps he knows of some weak or accessible point among these extensive bulwarks, or per¬ haps he reckons on some plausible means of surmounting them ; for the devils head is not more fruitful in expedients than his. This is a matter of such importance to me at present, that I must try to probe it to the bottom. Were I sure that he could accomplish his boasted feat, I had better engage him to it with one-third of mý do¬ minions ; and at all events, I must procure the active assistance of his energetic force at present, whatever may be the equivalent required. Let my white stead Beaver be caparisoned, and my attendants in readi¬ ness ; 1 must have an interview with this man of the mountains before I sleep." The Warden had drawn his force down to Wooller, with the intention of co-operat¬ ing more effectively with the Douglas. He
-İÜ had heard of the advantages that lord held over his adversaries, but nothing ofthe late catastrophe by which they were all remov¬ ed. Deeming therefore that the chances were mainly on the side of the Douglas, he judged it his safest course to act in com¬ plete concert with him. Above all, the words out of the black book of fate had been conveyed to him as read by the great¬ est magician in the world. From all that could be made out of that mystic rhyme, after long consultation, it appeared that it behoved the Warden «and his friends to go hand in hand with Douglas. " Rise not against feudal uhion^-No advance but in communion," were words hardly to be mis¬ interpreted. The words of the prophecy, and the ludicrous metamorphosis were all taken into account, compared, computed, and over again computed,—and the sequel was a decisive resolution to support the Douglas and join issues with him. But, in the meantime, still to make the most q/abad bargain. This resolution had been taken, and so far acted upon, that trusty agents had been
. despatched all over the country in disguise, to execute a portion of the great concerted plan, when the Douglas, at a late hour in the evening» arrived in the Warden's camp. He then had proofs experimentally ofthe Warden's caution and vigilance. He came upon his outposts at a great distance from the main body of his army. These with¬ stood his passage, but seeing his retinue so small, for he was attended only by two knights, a squire, and a guide, they con¬ ducted him from one post to another, tiU at length they brought him completely guarded to the Warden's head-quarters ; wbich was nothing more than a lowly cot¬ tage at Wooller haughrhead. Tbe doughty chief and his kinsmen were sitili sitting in earnest conversation round a rustic table, with a tremendous torch in the middle of it This ?vas nothing less tlian a huge broken jar full of refined ox's taUow, and a flow peat stuck to the head ? tbe middle* wbich being kindled emitted ? ???? like a fish Ugtit. The gaUant kins¬ men were iu deep consultation anent their gmà pïw of wariike operatirøs, ?? the
more they conversed aboutit tbe more efi* gible did it still appear to them, and the more deeply did they get interested in it; so that when the knight in waiting an* nounced a stranger who requested an in·* terview with Sir Ringan, every one seem?» ed disposed to refuse him admission. « Tell him I am engaged," said the Warden. u O yes. By all means. Tell him we are engaged," said Dickie o' Dryhope. m Ifit is another message from the Doug¬ las, I have had enough of him," said the Warden. u Ay, faith, we have had enough ofhim/* smd Dickie. u It is perhaps from Master Michael Scott'" said Yardbire : '* Or maybe himsel, wha kens. Lord sauff us !'* *' D'ye think sae ?" said the Warden, starting to his feet : ff That would indeed alter the case Ï" * Ay, thajfc would alter the case indeed ? «úd Dickie, starting to his. * Who is he? or wbat is he like?" en¬ quired tbe Warden. " Ay, thnt is the principal thing to be
attended to," said Dickie ; " What is he like?" " He is delivered as a knight óf most noble bearing and courtly deportment," answered the knight in waiting. " I sup¬ pose we must admit him, and hear what he has to say," said the Warden, again tak- bg his seat. " O yes. By all means. Let us hear what he has to say," said Dickie, sitting down likewise. As the courtly and athletic form of the Lord Douglas came up the hovel, the Border gentlemen stood all up to receive him, save Sir Ringan, who throwing him¬ self back on his seat, leaned his chin on his hand, and in that indifferent posture await¬ ed till the quaUty of his guest was made manifest. But no sooner did the voice of Douglas reach his ear, than he rose up to salute and receive him with as much ease as if he had been his daily visitor. ** You are hard of admission, noble Sir Ringan," said he, " thus to let your friends wait at the door of your pavilion, after riding so far in the dark to see you."
" I am chafed with visitors from both countries every hour of the day, Lord Douglas ; many of them coming with com¬ plaints whieh it is out of my power to rec¬ tify. I have therefore a sly inquisition es¬ tablished around me, that might haply give your Lordship some interruption. But it was your own blame. Had you an¬ nounced the name of Douglas, that would have opened a lane for you from my far¬ thest outpost to this chair, which I request you to occupy, while I take my place here at your right hand. You are welcome noble Earl of Douglas'and Mar, to our rude habitation. There is no man more so, beneath our sovereign lord the King. I give you and your attendants all kind wel¬ come and greeting." ** You are become as much an accom¬ plished courtier among these wild wastes as you were before an accomplished war¬ rior, Sir Ringan," said Douglas. " I always make points of speaking as I am spoken to, drinking as I am drunk to» and going to a battle when sent for," said the Warden. " H'm h'm h'm," neighed
Dickie o' Dry hope, screwing up his mouth on one side like a shrew : " It is all true our Captain tells you, Lord Douglas. That's his rule. Mh ? mh ? Mh ? H'm h'm h'm." The Douglas cast at Dickie a curious searching glance from his dark eye that was half hid by a shaggy eyebrow; and then turning to Sir Ringan, replied, " I am heartily glad of it, noble Baron of Mountcomyn, it having been for that very purpose I sought this interview with you. Sir Ringan Redhough» you must to battle with me to-morrow," " With all my heart, my lord,*' was the reply. " Come, that is as it should be. We'll no more of it. We can have no more of it," said Douglas : " Let us have a flaggon öf your best wine to drink success to our arms." The wine was soon produced, with plen¬ ty of other good cheer, with which the Warden's camp was then abundantly sto¬ red ; and the two chiefs conversed together with as much freedom, and as little appa¬ rent jealousy with regard to rank or fame,
as if they had been two brothers. The Douglas delineated his affairs as in that posture in which success could not fail him; at the same time he admitted the ticklish situation in which he stood, owing to the diversion made by the captain of Berwick, and that ΛνΙΛιου? an instant effort he would be inclosed between two fires. Sir Rin¬ gan answered, that he had heard of the in¬ cursion, and therefore he had drawn his troops down from the dales of Northumber¬ land to support his friend and firm ally in any case of necessity ; and he concluded by boldly proffering either to supply the Doug-, las's place in the blockade, or march to the west, and hold Sir Thomas Musgrave in check. Douglas ?vas delighted to find the crabbed, cross-grained Warden, as he was wont to call him, in such a complaisant bumour; and testified that delight by many well-turned compliments and enco¬ miums on his vigilance and gallant sup*. port. He got introduced to all the gentle¬ men of the party, with Λν?ιοπι he exchan·* ged civilities, desiring them all to regard him as their friend, and one readyn to do
them a kindness Λν1^ηβν6Γ it lay in his power. " And ????, Sir Ringan, sinee you hold the taking of the eastle of Roxburgh so light," said he, " I think it is meel that my men and I should march and give battle to Musgrave. Probably you may have taken possession of that troublesome garrison before we return." " If I do, my Lord of Douglas, I take it for myself," replied Sir Ringan ; " and claim all the privileges, rights, and immu¬ nities that ?\ ? ??? to devolve on you as the reducer of it. ΝοΛν, if I should take the castle of Roxburgh before your return, I suspect you ΛνοιιΜ find it as hard ???? to expel me, and these Border ΛναπτίοΓβ of mine, as the half-stan r ed English that you have there already, i have all these brave fellows to hold in beef and malt, my Lord of Douglas ; and for their sakes I have laid down a golden rule to walk by, whieh is, To do nothing for nothing. If I take the eastle of Roxburgh, I take it for myself and them." Douglas, Λνίιο forøv nothing of the pro¬ phecy and injunctions from the book of
the destinies of men, became more con¬ vinced than ever, that the Warden knew of some flaw or some tangible point in the garrison ; and if there existed a knowledge of such a thing, he resolved to avail him¬ self of it by any means. He knew Sir Ringan too well to suppose he would con¬ fide his secret to him, without a certainty of reaping due advantage ; and that, there¬ fore, it behoved to give him a prevailing interest in it. With this view, he answer¬ ed him, jocularly : " Though you were to reeeive all that was promised to me, in the event of my success, you would probably find yourself only a loser by the guerdon.'' 6i Why, are you not to be made the king's son-in-law." replied Sir Ringan? " and thereby the first subject, or rather the first man of the realm ; for, by the in¬ dolence and retired habits of our sovereign, you would have the whole kingdom at your beck. Call you this nothing, my Lord ? Or would it be fair and reasonable, —supposing the thing possible, which I do not pretend to say it is,—that if my warriors and I should put you in posses-
session of all this ροΛνβΓ, riches, and ho¬ nours, would it be fair, I say, that we should be again turned out to these Bor* der wastes, to live by our shifts, without reaping any thing of the benefit ?" " Should you take the castle for me, in my absence, noble Sir Ringan, your re¬ ward shaU be of your own naming." " Would it not be better, Lord Douglas, that the reward were settled before-hand ; and, then, I lose or gain at my ΟΛνη risk and peril. If I deliver you no produce, I ask no pay." " And what is the reward Sir Bingan would ask for such a piece of incalculable service ?" " My choice of seven baronies on the West Border, to divide amongst these gentlemen commoners, to whose support I owe ?? ? ??? thing.'' " You are a master Λνο^?ι serving, brave Sir Bingan. But such a grant ΛνουΜ break my power on the Border for ever.'* " It is that your poww on the Border may not be broken for ever, Lord Dou¬ glas, that I make the proffer. I am safer
without the venture. But you are a day's march nearer to the English army,—draw off your men silently before tht break of day, and march against it. I shall supply your place at the blockade, to the west of the castle, without loss of time, and an¬ swer to you at your return for all ingress or egress that takes place in that division. If Sir Thomas proves hard for you, you have only to keep your men together, and fall back ^vard the entrenchments. You shall find you have some good back-friends there." Doublas had determined on no account to let this proffer of the Warden's inge¬ nious head and powerful arm in the tak¬ ing of the fortress pass without trial ; so, ΛνίΛο^ more ado, hë called for the friar's tablets, and made out a grant to Sir Rin¬ gan, in free present, of the barony and lands of Gilterscleuch, and his choice of seven of the best baronies belonging to the house of Douglas in the districts adjoin¬ ing to the West Border, in the event of his putting James, Lord of Douglas and Mar, in full possession of the eastle of
Roxburgh. This grant signed and sealed, tlie Douglas departed, after pledging the Warden and his friends in a hearty stir¬ rup cup, both chiefs being alike weU pleased ΛνίΛ the agreement they had en¬ tered into. The Douglas posted back to Roxburgh, and reached it just in time to put the ?? ? ??1??? division of his army in motion at break of day ; while Sir Ringan made his musters by the light of the moon, and marched off to the siege of Roxburgh.
CHAPTER VII. Aboon his skins he sat and x*ockit, And fiercely up his bonnet cockit ; Then at ha' doors he ciousely knockit Withouten dread, Till wives and bairns around liim flockit, But now he's dead. Then he wad claw, and he wad hustle, Till all the skins played rap and rustle ; ????? up his thighs, wi' devilish bustle, Ran mony a ked ; Now they hae lost their eume and gustle, Sin*Robin's dead. De'il on the yaud, that I should ban ! That brak the neck of sic ane man ; Now wha vvill wucked dames traupan Λν?' sİecan speed ? Or drive the bides to them wha tan, Sin' Robin's dead ? Rob Paterson"$ Elegy. On the same day that Douglas marched his men up the Tweed towards Melrose, and the Warden his troopers across the Bor¬ der to the siege of Roxburgh, a band of tov elve men and thirty horses came up out of Eskdale ^vards Craik-Cross, the most motely group that Imd ever Jieen VOL. III. ι
«een traversing that wild country. The men were dressed as English peasants of the lowest order, with broad unshapely hats, made of a rude felt of wool and hair mixed ; wide coarse jockey-coats that came below their knees ; and, instead of loops, or buttons, these were bound round the middle with a broad buff-belt ; the rest of their dress was all conformable, save that each of them had a noble broad-sword girded by his side. Some of their horses were loaden, some of them half-loaden, and a few had scarcely any thing on their backs at all. But no man will guess what that loading consisted of. Not to keep the reader in suspense, it was of nolt-hides ; that is, of cow-hides, oxen-hides, bull- hides, and all sorts of hides that ever came from the backs of cattle. There were raw hides and dried hides, black hides and white hides, hides with horns, and hides without horns ; and of these consisted their loading, and nothing else. The men alighted at Craik-Cross to bait their horses, and the following conversa¬ tion ensued, which will let the reader into
the secret who these skin-dealers were, thus strangely accoutred. <* Will Laidlaw o' Craik, ye're a gay¬ an auld-farrant chield. Come near me, and sit down, and tell me gin ye can hae ony guess what our master the Warden can be wanting wi' a' thir confoundit ill-smeUed hides ?" " I hae puzzled my brain to ??? pur¬ pose about it, Dan Chisholm ; but am con¬ vinced it is some way connected wi' the siege of that unlucky castle ; and the maist part o' us trows that they are for making raip-ladders, or rather whing-ladders, for climbing ower the waV, an gin that be the case, Dan, there will mony ane ?' us throw away our lives to little purpose." " Now to hear you talk about fock throwing away their lives ! You that wad risk your life for naething but a broken crown every day o' the year. Why, Will Laidlaw, I hae foughten often in the same field wi' you afore this time, and I ne¬ ver saw you set your life at a cow's horn, let be the hide o' ane (for whilk we wad gie a good deal the day.) I hae seen ye 12
ride from your ain party, when that wing wasna hotly enough engaged, and blatter into the very thickest and hettest part o" the field, just girning and laying on like some lang-nosed deil come out o' the pit. But let me teU ye, Will o' Craik, it is a sair fault o' your's, and it is a clagg o' the hale clan,—the deil be your landlord, (as he has already been mine, quietly,) gin the hale tott o' ye be ??? ill for saying ae thing an' thinking another. If ane hear a Laidlaw complaining o' pinching and po¬ verty, ye may amaist be sure that he has the best stockit mailings, and the best fill¬ ed beef-barrels in the country. If ye hear him complaining, that the English are her- rying the Scots up, stoop and mop, ye may rely on it the Scots hae been getting the upper hand and enriching themsels ; and and if ye hear a Laid^v pretending to be averse to a foray or a battle, ye may de¬ pend on it that his very knuckles are itch¬ ing, and his teeth watering, to be at it.— Na, ye needna waul Λν?' your muckle een, Will, for ye canna deny the thing ; and it is a d— n'd provoking gate ye hae."
" Hout, dear Dan ! we just hae it by kind to try what fock thinks on the subject a wee ; to sound them like, afore we tell our hale minds. But a' comes aye freely out ere the hinder-end. But the truth is, about this that ive were cracking, ye ken. I dinna mind a bodle Λν?^? the Warden be gaun to do Λν?' the skins, provided he keep his promise, and gie me a living English cow for the hides of every three dead anes that I brino; him." " There it goes now ! There you go a- gain ! Weel I ken ye carena ae doit about the kye. Ye hae plenty o* baith kye and ewes already, and, onthe contrary, ye wad gie them d to ken what our chief is gaun to be about wi* thir hides. But it is need¬ less to fight w'y e ! Ye canna help that cross gate o' expressing yoursel. Gin ever ye be drowned we may seek you up the wa ¡ ter. There'a ae thing, Will,—ye may see the Warden means some general good to us a' by this project, whatever it is, for he has sent ae man o' every name to gather up the skins o' his native district. Ae O- liver, ae Armstrong, ae Laidlaw, ae Chis-
holm, and twa o* the Redhoughs ; for ye ken he is always maist behadden to his ain name. But what can be the meaning o' this ugly disguise, I canna form a single conjecture ; and he is sae strick about it too, that if ane ?' us let oursels be found out, we lose a' chance of reward or advan¬ tage. Sae, Will, ye're unco weel kend a- bout Craik and Howpasley, and a' the links o' Borthwick, and so am I about Castle- Wearie and Chisholm, and thereabouts. Gang ye into my father's house a* night, and I'll gang to Craik ; gather ye up the hides o' Teviot, and I shall take Bortlnvick in my road. My father will maybe be a wee sweer to take ye in, but ye maun make your way on him the best gate ye can ; he has the best stockit pantry on Teviot head, but a bit of a Laidlaw's fault, complaining aye maist when he has least reason. He has a capital stock o' hides, but seeing that English disguise he may deny them ; there¬ fore try him first, and if he winna produce them, gang up the burn about halfa mile, and in a lown crook, weel hidden frae a* the world, ye'll Kind a bit housie wi* a dozen o* good hides in it If he winna gi'e y ou
them at a fair price, ye maun e'en take them for naething, as it is a' for his ain ad¬ vantage." " Na, na, Dan. Weel I wat I'll do ??? sic thing! I wadna dispute wi' the auld man, nor anger him for a' the hides in the hale barony." " There again í Aye the auld manî Now, the Lord forgi'e ye; for ye ne¬ ver met wi' him a' your life but ye baith angered him and disputed wi' him. But ??? mair about it. Take ye San¬ dy Pot o' the Burnfit, the queer hairum skairum devil, Tarn Oliver, Bauldy Elliot, and Bauldy Armstrong wi' you; and I'll take Jamie Telfer o' the Dodhead, Jock o' the Delorrin, Jock Anderson ?' ??? place,. and Geordie Bryden o' every place, wi' rae^ -—and good luck to the skin trade !" It was one of those sort of winter days that often occur in January, when the wea¬ ther is what the shepherds call " in the deadthraw," that is, in a struggle between frost and thaw. There was a dark cloud of rime resting on the tops of the hills, which shrouded them in a veil impervious^ to vi¬ sion bevond the space of a faw yards,, and
within that cloud the whole height appear¬ ed to be covered with millions of razors, every pile of bent and heath being loaded Λνιίίι ice on the one side, so that each had the exact resemblance to a razor blade, all of which appeared to be cast in the same mould, and of the same beautiful metal. The feet of the horses as they travelled through this made a jingling noise, as if they had been wading among crystal· As they came lower down on the hills the air became softer, and the ground was free of those ice-candles; but an uncommon gloom hung over holm and dale. Old Peter Chisholm ?vas walking on the green to the westward of his house, look¬ ing at his ewes· coming bleating down from among the dark foldings of the rime, and saying to himself, " Ι ΛνοηάβΓ what can be ΛνοΓά o' thae dirty herd callants the day, that they are letting the sheep came a' stringing in lang raws, and rairing and bleating, into the how o' the ?vater that gate. The country's in a loose state e'now, for the strength is a' out o't ; a raid o* thir¬ ty stout English thieves wad herry the
the day, my stock wad be a' gane." Peter was proud of his ewes for all that* and, giving them a whistle, he threw the plaid over his shoulder, set his broad bon¬ net up before, and turned about to go home to look after the shepherd lads. As he turned his face to the north, he natur¬ ally cast his eye up toward the Limycleuch hills, where it instantly embraced tbe ap¬ palling sight of Will Laidlaw o' Craik, and his disguised compeers, with their fifteen horses, coming stretching down, the ridge, right opposite to Pate Chisholm's hirsel of bonny wheel-horned è Wes. The old man's eyes were dazzled in his head, and a para¬ lytic affection seized; his whole frame. *' Lord pity us ! Now see whats coming yonder," said Peter : " I tauld them aye what wad happen ! but no ane wad heed me ! O. dool to the day ! A man may soon hae muckle,. and soon hae naething in this wearifu' country. O Dan, Simon, and Jock, the strength o' my house ! wherefore are ye a' gane and left your gear to gang;
m it came ! Dear bought ! far sought ! and little for the haudding." By the time Peter got thus far with his soliloquy he was quite out of breath ; for he was not only walking fast, but he was absolutely running towards home, with a sore stoop, and knees bent much forward. Stillas he hobbled he continued to apostro¬ phise in short sentences, as he could ga¬ ther a little breath now and then to utter a small portion of the concatenation of re¬ pulsive ideas that presented themselves one after another—" Naetfiing but trash left— Heh-heh—Rob-in~Laid-law !—I haeseen— Heh-heh thè — dav, but-r-Heh — thats — gane,—Lasses, too !— Hoh— oh !— O ay !— Half—breed«—bring—up—>Oh—Dan— Dan, &c. &c. Daughter! Bessy Chisholm— Heh ! Are ye therein ? May Chisholm— where's your titty ? Poor tafferel ruined tawpies 1 What are ye gaun gaiiidering about that gate for, as ye didna ken whilk end o' ye were uppermost ?" " That's ea¬ sily kend father. What has come ower ye ? Hae ye seen a warlock that ye are gaping and glowring at sic a dismal rate ?"
f * War than ony w*arloek, ye twa glaikit idle hizzies. Oft* wi'jerkin and wily coat, and on wi' doublet, breeks, and buskins instantly. Belt on bow, buckler, and brands and stand for life, Umb, gear, and maidhood, or a's gane in ae kink. O dool be to the day ! dool be to the day ! What are ye standing glinting, and looking at . anq anither there for ? Cast your een up to the Carlin-rigg, and see what's coming. A' harried ! ravaged ! and murdered ! Come, come : Don your billies' claes ; let us make some show ; it will maybe save something. Warn the herd callants ; let the stoutest of * * * them arm, and the .weakest rin and drive sheep and cattle an' a' out o' sight amang the clouds. O dool to the day ! Na, na ; for a' the houses that are in the country here they come straight ! Nae winning by this place." The lasses seeing their father in such a querulous mood, and the motely troop fast approaching^acquiesced in his mandate, mìa without delay mounted themselves each in a suit of their younger brother's clothes,. whüe old Peter stood over them to see tlmt
they put all to rights, always giving such directions as these : 4 * Come, come, come ! strap, clasp, belt and buckle ; and gude- sake fauld up your cuffs. Your arms hing at your shoulder blades as they were off joint. Hout fie ! hout fie ! Wha ever saw young chields hae sic luchts o* yellow hair hingin fleeing in the wind ? Come, come, strap and string down ; swaddle it round wi' sax dizzen o' wheelbands, and fasten a steel-belted fur cap ower aboon a'. Yare, yare ! Lord sauff us ! Here they come ! Whats to be our fate ? Keep close for a wee while." " Hilloa î Wha hauds the house !" was vollied from the door by the deep-toned voice of Will Laidlaw. " There's ??? body in but me, and I downa come to the door. Ye had better ride on," cried old Peter, in a weak tremu¬ lous voice. " Wilt thou answer to thy name, or hast thou a name to answer to?" said Will, feigning to speak the broad Northum¬ berland dialect, which sorted very ill with his tongue: " An thou be'st Ieel
man and true, coome and bid thee guests wailcome. It is God speed, or spulzie wi' thee in three handclaps." *' Spulzie, quo the man !" exclaimed Pe¬ ter : 4C The muckle fiend spulzie the un¬ mannerly gab that spake it !"—and with that he came stooping over his staff, and cough¬ ing to the door, speaking in a quavering treble key. " A bonny like purpose! What wad ye spulzie frae a poor auld man that hasna as muckle atween him and the grave as will pay for howking it, and buy ahag- abag winding sheet? Spulzie, quo he! That is a good joke !—he—he—he, (cough) hoh — hoh —hob. Piti sae ill wi'that host! Eh ? wha hae we a' here ? Strangers, I think ! * c Goodman, we were directed to your house for a night's entertainment or two, if you are the old rich yeoman ycleped Patrick Chisholm of Castle-Weary." * Na, na ! I'm ??? rich yeoman ! I'm naething but a poor herried, forsaken, re¬ duced auld man ! I hae ??? up-putting for ought better than a flea. Ye had better ride on down to Commonside. there's
plenty there baith for man and horse. Come away, I'U set you doivn the length o' the ford, and let ye see the right gate." ** Come neighbours, let us go away as he says, We'll never make our quar¬ ters good on this auld carle," said San¬ dy Pot, in a whisper to his companions : Ä And troth do ye ken I wad rather lie at the back of the dike, before I imposed myself on ony body. Od my hearts wae for the poor auld niggard." ** Come away, lads, come away/' cried Peter. " The days are unco short e'now ; ye haena time to put off." ** Stop shortthere, my good fellow," cried Laidlaw, " We have some other fish to fry with you before we go. I am informed you have a large stock in hand of the goods in which we deal. Youhave had lucky lifts this year. Plenty of good hides with you ?" " Rank misprision, and base rascaUy jests on a poor auld man. Not a single hide about the hale town, foreby the ane on my back," cried old Peter. ** My orders are, worthy old yeoman, to give fair prices to such as produce their
I am, obliged to search for them ; and if I find anyl take them at my ????? price." " ? dear, honest gentlemen, I downa joke wi' ye : hoh, hoh," coughed Peter, " Gin ye be for a place to stay in a' night, come away as lang as it is dayüght." "Why, with your leave my good feUow, we must lodge with you to-night. Hearth- room and ha'-room, steed-room and sta'- room, is the friendly stranger's right here. Small things will serve : a stone of English beef or so, and two or three pecks of oats." " Beef, quoth the man ? Ye may as weel look for a Λν?ιίίβ corby.as beef in my pan¬ try, or aits in my barn. WiU ye no come away." " Not till I makesa search for your nolt hides, hojnest yeoman. To that am I bound." The four skin-dealers next the door alighted and Λναη? in, leaving their horses with the other two, who went and put them up in a good large stable with plen¬ ty of stalls. Peter ran back to the house in perfect agony, speaking to himsejf all
the way. " They are very misleared chaps thae. They maun surely either be Low Dutch, or else sutors o' Selkirk, that they are sae mad about skins. I little wat how I am to get rid o' them." The favo lasses appeared armed cap- a-pee like two young men ; and though Bess was Will Laidhuv's own sweet¬ heart, he did not necognize her through the disguise, neither did she once sus¬ pect him. The two made a little swag¬ gering about the pelt-dealers as they called them entering the pantry, but not choosing to measure arms Λνιίίι them, the weak suf¬ fered the strong to pass ; and Will having his cue, soon discovered the huge barrels of beef below the ground, ΛνίΛι empty ones above them. Old Peter shed tears of vexation when he saw this huge and high¬ ly-valued store was all discovered, but had not a word to say for himself, save now and then "A' fairly come by, and hardly won ; and there is ??? right nor law that says honest men should be eaten up wi' sor¬ ners. May ane speir where ye come frae, or bv wha's right ve do this !"
" Why man dost thou no hear and dost thou no see that we're coome joost from Nworthoomberland !" ** Aha!" thought Peter to himself» " English thieves after a ! I had some hopes that I could distinguish Scots tongues in their heads. But a's gane, a's gane !" '* Now auld yeoman, if thou hast a word of trooth in thee, tell us where the hides are, and we will pay thee for them," " No ae hide about the town* No ane, either little or muckle." *' Why soore am 1 them coos doodnae coome to thee withòot *heydes, did they ? That I can answer for, they had a' heydes and bonns baith when they came from hwome." " Waur than ever ! Waur than ever !" exclaimed Pate Chisholm to himself as he sought another apartment : w The very men that the kye were reaved frae come to take revenge ! Callant, come here and speak wi' me. Haste to a neighbour's house, and raise the fray. We shall never be a' quietly put down wi' halfa dozen." "Dearest father," said May, «? dinna
thmk the men mean ony ill, if ye wad be but civil." *< Civil or no civil, wench, it is as good to have half a dozen armed men lying con¬ cealed near us," said Peter : " An we dinna need them, the better. Rin your ways, and gar raise a' the auld men and the young lads in the two neist towns, for there is ??? ither left. Pith's good in a' play." The maid did as she was ordered, and Peter, seeing that no better would be, tried to compel himself to a sort of civility, which, however, sat on him with a very bad grace. But, hides ! hides !—nothing but hides was the burden of their en* quiries ; while Peter durst not for his. life produce the hides, deeming that every man would know the hides of his own kine, and wreak tenfold vengeance on him¬ self and household. He knew not, he said, what his son Dan, who took care of all these matters, had made ofthem,—sold them he supposed to the curriers and su- tors of Selkirk,—*and more than this Pate would not acknowledge. There was no other thing for it, nor perhaps did Laid-
law want any thing else, than for him and his companions to walk up the burn and make a seizure of the ivhole of Peter's ex¬ cellent hides, with which they returned loaden to his dwelling. . His confusion and distress of mind were most appalling when Laidlaw spread them all out before him, and asked in a very particular manner to be informed where he had got them. ? ! Peter knew nothing about them. They were not his at all. He did not know to whom they belonged. But he would not stand to speak, turning his back always on the men, and hasting away, coughing and speaking to himself. He could have seen these presumptuous skin-men roast¬ ed on a brander, for they had now put him out of all patience, and all hope ! " Pray thee now, mine good friend, in¬ form me this," said Laidlaw ; *' Did'st thou nwot get this seame fleckered one, and this brwoad one liere, on the third ofthe last mwonth ; and here's wother three, did'st thou nwo get them on the twentieth of the seame mwonth ? Now tell me this I say? Why where is thou gwoing groom.
biing inte theesel ? Turn about thee feace to the heydes, and answer to the pwoint." * c Aff hands is fair play," said old Pate : " I winna be forced wi* ony unmannerly English lown that ever I saw atween the een ;" and with that he heaved his staff and struck Laidlaw across the shoulders, and over the steel bonnet repeatedly, who was like to burst with repressed laughter, but still persisted in his queries. ** What ails the owld catwiddied carle," said he, '* that he winno answer ,a ceevil question? I's jwost wanting to tauk to thee aboot boosiness, and thou flees out in a reage and breaks me head. Come tourn again, and tell me when and where thou gotst this one, see, this wheyte one here ! What's 't moombling at ? Wolt thou teU me the price of them, then ?" u I want to hae naething to do wi' you, and as little to say to you ; therefore, gang about your business, and dinna pbgue a poor auld unfeiiOch man. The gate is afore ye, and your company's.wanted else¬ where." Will would take none of diose hints ;
he followed his uncourteous host about ??? about, till at last he fairly holded him be¬ yond the fire; and then he took his seat over against him and conversed on, while his companions dropped in one by one and joined in it. For a while they got it all to themselves, but at length Pate, not be¬ ing able to make better of it, suffered him¬ self to be drawn in by degrees tojóin them, still preserving the same strain of disinge- niousness. They asked who the two hand¬ some striplings were that attended him, and spread the board with provisions ? He answered that they were two sons of his own. " Sons of thine ?" said Laidlaw, " Whoy, what are their neames ?" '* Simon and John," answered he ; *' or råtner Sim and Jock, for that's how we ca' them." " Whoy, mon, that is the queerest thing I ever heard," said Laidlaw ; " Then thou hast two swons of the neame of Jock, and other two of the neame of Sim, for I saw two ofthat neame, strapping youths, in the Warden's camp." Peter wist not well what answer to make ; and, therefore, only added, " Ay,
Ay ! Were you in the Warden's camp ? Then tell me, is their ony word frae my son Dan?" ** Ay man, I can tell thee sic news of Dan as thou never heard'st ; he has sitten ât his supper hand and neive wi' the deil." At these words one of the young men be¬ hind them (May Chisholm to wit,) utter¬ ed a suppressed scream, and from that mo¬ ment Will Laidlaw smelled a rat, and soon discovered his own beloved Bess Chisholm standing gazing at him as he related the wonderful story of her brother's adven¬ tures with the devil, the warlock, and the three evil spirits ; of his race with those infernais along the marble pavement of the air ; his transformation into a horned beast ; and of his eating and drinking with the prince of darkness. But the two strip¬ lings were most of all shocked at hear¬ ing of the devils burning stomach, and how the winejterf as it went down. After listening and wondering while «aU these things were in relation, Bess said to the skin-dealer next to her, who chanced to be Sandy Pot, " Pray, Sir, when you
were in the camp of Sir Ringan Redhough, did you note a brave trooper, a friend df ours, named Laidlaw ?" " Oh, yes, that I did," said Sandy : " I know him well." This was a glorious joke for Pot, and his comrades were afraid he would persevere in it till he put their se¬ cret out altogether. " How is he reported in the army ?" said she : " Is it still alleged that he is the bravest and most successful battler in the baron's array ?" " Bottler, I suppose you mean," said Sandy, " for as to his battling, God mend that. He is not rioted for ought that I ever heard of, except for keeping a flun* key, or a wall-i*-the-chamber, as the Frenchmen ca' it ; and it is reported thro' all the army, that that wally o' his is an English girl. I can tell you that your neighbour, Will Laidlaw, is notorious for nothing else beside this," « It is false as thyself, and thy perjured ungenerous nation,'" said the disguised maiden. w I know my friend to be ho¬ nour's self, and of á house whose eourage
and integrity were never called in ques¬ tion. The man that dares to slander him had better do it somewhere else than in my presence, and under my father's roof. But I degraded him myself, by putting his name into the mouth of such a mean forager as thou art ! The man whose ac¬ tions are base, always accuses the brave and generous of deeds such as his own." " Bless me, what ails the chiel ?" said Sandy, laughing good humouredly :— " What's the great ill o' keeping a wally? I aince keepit ane mysel, there's ??? doubt o% till my uncle, Gideon Scott, set up his birse, and gart me part ivi' the creature." The rest laughed at Sandy being put out of countenance by the indignant strip¬ ling ; but Bessy Chisholm turned on her heel, and walked out at the door, mutter¬ ing expressions about vulgarity, raw hides, and maggots ; and Will Laidlaw, not able to contain himself, rose and walked out after her, in a visible state of mental agi¬ tation. As he approached the stable door quietly, into whieh she had turned, he heard her saying to herself. " Laidlaw keep
an English mistress in disguise ! No, the fellow is a poltroon, and a liar, and I wffl not believe it." Will entering at that mo¬ ment, seized her hand between both his, and kissed it, saying, in a passionate style, " My own dear and high-spirited Bess Chisholm still !" Never was there seen such a statue of amazement ! The tones of the ?'01??, now uttered in its natural key, were familiar to her. But the figure that uttered them ! To be addressed in that style by a great burly thief of an English skin-buyer, outwent all comprehension. She was in a man's dress, be it' remembered,—and there she stood, Λν?Λ her face half raised, her ruddy lips wide apart, and her set eyes of lucent blue showing a mixture of as¬ tonishment and disdain. ·' What? what? Sir," was aU that she could say, until the ragamuffin figure reminded her of the weaponshaw at Mountcomyn, and some love-tokens and vows, of which none knew save one. But, Λν?Λ a woman's natural caprice, she now was angry at him in turn having discovered her true sentiments, må vol. ?. ?
refused to acknowledge him as her lover m that hateful disguise, unless the meaning of it was explained to her. He told her, that the meaning of it was unknown to himself ; that he took it at his captain's command ; but that his fortune depended on the secret being kept. " There you are safe, at all events," said she*, ** and it is well you have disclos* ed yourself in time, for my father has rais* ed the country, and it is not improbable that, before to-morrow, you should have Wn all dead men.'* ** I think we have been in greater jeo¬ pardies," said he î ** But in the mean time keep up your disguise, that my comrades may not discover your sex ;—and we two must have some private discourse during Übe night, foi* 1 have much to say to you." * Not I, master, I winna court ae wórd røi' a man in the dress of a vulgar English boor ; for it is sae hatefu' to me, I can like nought that's within it. Ah me ! I wot ill how it is ; but I think I hardly detest it sae «sair already." * My bonny, haughty, pawkie, sweet
Elizabeth !" cried Laidlaw.—-But Isaac the curate says, that, being himself a married man, he could not go on with all the over¬ charged outrageous stuff that passed be¬ tween these two fond lovers; so he passes it over, as well as the conversation at their evening meal, whLn Bess took care to make a plentiful and savoury one ; and in the mean time, she was in such high spi¬ rits herself, that the troopers, who did not know her, took the young man for the most swaggering puppy they had ever seen. She challenged Sandy Pot to fight her with single rapier, kntrwing well that Laidlaw would find some means of pre¬ venting it ; but it was evident that old Peter thought her entirely out of her sen¬ ses, for he tried to get her away from about the house to the residence of one of the neighbouring gentlemen yeomen for the night, but the experiment was vain. When he saw such a goodly supper, or dinner, (for they were both in one,) set down to these uncouth, and, to him, un¬ welcome guests, he could not contain his chagrin, and at first refused to turn out tö ir 9.
the board, or partake with the rest. But when he saw that the good fare would all go, he grew as restless as if he ,h«ad been fitting on pins, till Bess, who knew his way, took him by the arm, and pretended to force him jocularly out to the table. But Peter was not ill to force; for in place of receding, he made all the haste into the head of the board that he could, though at the same time always repeating, " I tell ye, callant, it is downright wastery," He, however, püed as good a knife and as good a horn-spoon as any of them all. While they were yet busily engaged at their meal, the tramp of horses was heard approaching the door in a cautious and uncertain manner, and by a circuitous ?vay. The two disguised maids, (whom, by-the- by, we should distinguish by the names of Sim and Jock, as they sustained these that night,) were standing eating at the hall- dresser, behind the backs of the troopers ; and when the trampling was first heard, Jock grew as pale as death, but Sim, who Jknew what guests were within, which the other did not know, shewed a courage
so undaunted, that it appeared wonderful to all present, save one, but to Jock in par¬ ticular : " O ho ! The' nearer night the mae beggars," cried Sim. " Who have we next?" " That beats ought I ever heard in my life !" exclaimed Pate : ·* I think the fock be gane distractedly mad ! What brings them a' here ? Is there no another ha' house and pantry in the hale country but mine ? It is hard to be eaten out o' house and hald wi' sorners and stravaegers this gate^ May Liberton's luck befa' the hale o' them. Callant Jock, set by that meat out o' sight." " Stop fora wee bit, an ye like, goodman," said Bauldy Armstrong : * r It is best aye to do ae thing afore another." By this time the dialogue had commen¬ ced in the court ; Simmy went briskly to the door by himself, and demanded of the strangers who they were, and what they wanted ? They answered, with hesitation, that they supposed they had lost their way, and requested to know who held the house* and how it was called? w The house is held by my father, a Ieel Scottish yeoman?' said
the youth ; " and already full of strangers to tiie door, as weU as every stall of his stable with their horses. Pass on your way, and pence be with you." " Did not I teU you we had hst our way," said the first speaker, riding up to the door. " Pray, v who are the strangers within ? We have lost a party of our friends." *' The men are from the south, master : free-traders, they may be called. Men of horns» hides, and hair, Sir. You, I suppose, are of the same profession ?" " Precisely of the same," said the stranger, alighting from his horse, and entering the house. He was followed by other two, for there were but four in all, and the fourth was a a boy whom they left holding their horses. When they came in upon Peter and his jolly hide-merchants, they were visibly disappointed, and viewed the grotesque^ looking group with marked curiosity. These were not the men they expect¬ ed to have found, tlmt was evident ; but perceiving their EngUsh habits, they ventured to address them. They were an¬ swered in blunt c?uttipg terms; for our
vented their being known again. Having learned the name of the house and ? its owner, they began forthwith to inquire if «any thing of a young nobleman had ??? seen át that place, with such and sueh at¬ tendants; for they had traced them to that very house, they said, and if the ^pos¬ sessors could give no account ofthem they would be held as responsible. Old Peter said, there were so many people came to that house, that it was impossible he could tell a tale of one of them distinct from an* other; but the intrepid $im, knowing his back friends, told him the whole story in a few words, and then asked them in turn what they h.ad to say concerning it* " Whoy, I has joost to say this, young chap, that I am to boond thee and aU the faymilie, and carry you aU to answer be* fore a meeting of the wardens." " Ay, and it is prwoper reyght and prwoper reason too, that they should, friend," said Laidlaw, pretending to take his part, to see whzit he would mf* WM knew the three ?? ta hs tims mtâvmm
English thieves, of the set of the Halls and Reids, and that they could not, in fact, be sent in search of the Lady Jane Howard; but he could not divine their motive for coming there, or making the inquiry ; therefore he took the Northum¬ berland tongue as well as he could, and encouraged them in conversation till a late hour. Yet he could le.arn nothing; only he Was sure they were come about no good end. As for old Peter, when he saw two parties of Englishmen come up¬ on him, and heard that they laid their heads together, he gave himself and all that he had up for lost ; and hoping to conciliate their favour in some measure, he actually intreated these last comers to sit down and share of the remnants of their supper, which they did in a right li¬ beral manner, while Peter went out and in to learn the news. He found by this time nine men, well armed, assembled in the barn, that had gathered from the neighbouring houses, whose inhabitants were all bound to rise and assist one an¬ other on any emergency. These were
flower of the Border districts being all in the Warden's campi Will likewise inform¬ ed his sweetheart privately of his suspi¬ cions; and perceiving that the strangers were extremely well mounted, and heavi¬ ly armed, he desired her, if possible, to find means of concealing their horses. This the supposed Sim soon effected. The boy still held them at forage by the side of the old castle-wall ; and he being brought in, and set down to supper, some of those in the barn were warned to take the horses quietly to th§ concealed house up in the hollow bum-They were soon se¬ cured there; and the thieves perceiving that no one left the house, never had the smallest suspicion of any trick, the boy being fast asleep behind the board. At length all of them grew drowsy, andbs- gan to compose themselves to rest as they best could, save two fond lovers, that were whispering their vows and their secrets to each other in the little chamber mention¬ ed in a former part of this history. About midnight, when all was --quiet*;
hm ! from a iieighbptóng mountain, which in a short time was returned from two dif¬ ferent places Jn the valley. " Now, I will lay my neck in wad," whis¬ pered Will to his sweetheart, " that there is ^ thief-raid to-night ; and that these three have either come here to watch you, or to cut your throats in case of resistance ; or per¬ haps they may have indeed lost their party in the mist. * But this I ken, neither a Keid nor a HaJl ever came thus far into Scot¬ land for good, lf the fray rise, take you the command, and fear nothing. My friends and I will defend you, an4 clear your way." ** But what shall we do, dear Laidlaw* with these three moss-troopers and the toy?" " We must either slay or bind them the first thing we do, or perhaps leave them to waddle to the hills in their ar¬ mour on foot the best way they can." The maiden's heart trembled at the thoughts of what lay before her ; as for old Pate, lie ???£ going out må in like a
restless spirit; and if he had not losi his di^ht^ aid knew not where 5he was, he proposed to ???^? fastened doors and i,vindows, and burnt all the nine English¬ men xvhere they lay, for he had no faith in any of them* andw^enedithrøiRlIieonie for the purpose of ruining:hHn· As he was going about preparing matters for this laudable purpose, ope of the shepherd kds came with the fray, and related a dis¬ mal tale. He said, that he and his compa¬ nions had driven out all the sheep and cattle to the heights among the mist, as tbey had been commanded;.that in the course of the evening they heard ??? calls and whistles around them ; and, jmt as the moonro.se, a band of English thieves came round them, and drøve them aR off towards Bilhope-head. Peter's «assembled friends advised him to take the skin-men's fifreen horses, and what remained at home of his own,,and ride off and try tø recover th^prey, witbout alarming his dangerous guests; but,Peter,was bart on fastening the doors, and burning them skin ???? bone, for, he said, they wouid ne vet get so
easily quit of them. The two anxious: lovers hearing a bustle without, opened the casement, and overheard a part of these peiplexed words and reasonings. Then hastening out to join counsel, they raised the fray openly* The heroic Sim flew to horse, and desired all that were friends to the Scots to follow, while Laidlaw address¬ ed his compeers, spying, " Up, lads, and let us ride ; our host must not be berried while we are under his roof" " No, no!" exclaimed the thieves, all in a breath ; " he must not be berried and we under his roof;" and no one appeared in half such hurry as they were to mount and be gone. " Stop short, my good fellows, till I speak with you for a minute," said Laid¬ law: " Make me sure which side you will take before you go, else one foot you stir not from that fire-side. I b^v you for Anthony Reid of Whickhope, and those for two of your cousins of Tersit- head, and shrewdly suspect you to be at the head of the foray," Anthony drew his sword : so did Laid-
, law. But the English troopers were bold and desperate fellows; and before Laid- law's friends could gather round him to his assistance, the three having covered themselves with their bucklers, forced their way out, back to back, and ran San¬ dy Pot through the left shoulder* who pressed on them too rashly. When they missed their horses, and saw that they were clean gone, they foamed like as many furies, and, setting their backs to the wall, swore they would fight it out. The com¬ bat might have Jbeen attended with much bloodshed, had not all. .the people rushed from the barn, and*-overpowered them. They were then taken into the house and bound, while Pot and May Chisholm, alias Jock, were left as guards on them* v^ith orders to kill the first that should offer to loose either himself or any of his compa¬ nions. This whole scene was quite beyond Peter Chisholm's capacity. He could in nowise conceive how the one party of Englishmen assisted with such energy in detecting and binding the others. Still he was any thing but satisfied ; the matter
having outgone his comprehension, as well as that of all his associates, save one. They now mounted without delay, and rode with all manner of speed toward the Pass of the Hermitage, by which path they supposed the droves must necessari¬ ly proceed ; and just as they went down the Redcleuch, leading their horses, they saw the cattle passing at the foot of it. The party amounted scarcely to their own number ; but the sheep-drivers were not come in view; sotheymounted their horses, and instantly mixed with the men behind the drove, without offering to stop the cattle. At the same time they placed a guard of two farther behind, to prevent all intelligence from passing between the two parties. When this was effected, Simmy challenged the cattle as his father's, and desired the drivers to give them up ; but to this the captain ofthe gang, whose name was Gabriel Reid, the younger brother of Anthony, and captain in his absence, only mocked, imitating the sharp treble notes of the petulant younker, and telling him that he would not give them up for three
score such men as he was, else he was bet¬ ter than he looked. As he said this, how¬ ever, he kept a curious eye on the rough exterior of the tall athletic English pea¬ sants by whom the youth was surrounded, which Laidlaw perceiving, accosted him in his feigned tone. " Whoy, friend, we are countrymen of thee own, and know thee full weel. Thou's Gabriel Reid of Trochend. But thee billy Anty is taken prisoner this seame mworn- ing, and if thou disna gie up the kie, his head will be chappit off, as weel as these of thee twa coosins the Ha's. Sae thou hast ney choice left but to yield up thee ill gotten gain." " And what dog art thou, that takest part against thee own countrymen ?" said Reid. " Oo, I's a dealer in the leather line, as weel as all my friends there. We have our free passages and warranty for the good of both countries ; but we are honest men, and by chance were lodged in the house of the owner of these coos, «and must see joos*
tice doone to him. I boond thee brwother with mee own hands." " Then the devil bind thee, thou traitor knave ! and for thee røvard, this to thy harnpan!" said Gabriel, dra?ving out his sword« and attacking Laid^v without more ado. Will, who was never backward at a brulzie, received the encounter Λν ith¬ out flinching, and, calling for fair play and elbow-room, both proceeded to decide the day by single combat, while the rest drew aloof and looked on, encouraging them only ???? cheers and applausive words. Laidkvw was mounted on Anthony Reid's gallant steed, which Gabriel remarked, and that added to his rancour against the skin-man at least ten degrees. The ground was exceedingly bad, so that they could not wheel for ?? ? ?????-8???? Λν?Λουί a par¬ ley ; but neither would ask it. They fought close together, first λ\?1ι their ??????- blades, and afterwards, as their horses came in contact, they dashed each, other with their hilts. Both were slightly wounded, but Laidlaw rather had the Λνοπί of it. ** Beshrew thine heart, if thou hast been a
skin-merchant all thy life," said Gabriel, as he turned his horse in the path for another encounter. They had now changed sides, and this encounter was longer and more inveterate than the first. Laidlaw not be¬ ing quite master of his mighty and furious steed, was twice in imminent danger, lo¬ sing his broad slouched hat in the struggle, the crown of which was cross-barred with steel. Poor Sim had changed colours ten times since the combat began ; and, on seeing this last struggle, he lost all command of himself, and rushed with his sv/ord drawn to Laid^v's rescue. Himself, did I say ? alas, no one knew the true sex, save her 1?? ? ??, and no one interfered till she was met by an English trooper half-way, who unhorsed and wounded her with as much ease, of course, as she had be-^n a chUd. Will's eye caught the first glailce of her, as she was falling, and galloping up to the rescue, bare-headed as he was, he clove the trooper's burgonet, and slew him at the first stroke. Reid followed him up ; but Laidlaw's spirit, now fuUy proportioned to
the high mettle of his steed, was a match for ??? thing. He rode against his anta¬ gonist with all his fury, and having the advantage of the brae, overthrew horse and man, and galloped over them. Then throw¬ ing himself from his horse, and seizing the forlorn warrior by the throat, called out with a voice of fury,—■" Rescue or no res¬ cue ?" *' No rescue ! Redsdale to thefrav!" was the resolute and fatal reply. Will could not stand to reason any more at that time, so, without more ado, he ran him through the body, and flew to the rescue of his beloved and heroic Elizabeth, for there the combat began to thicken. She ???? on her feet ere he arrived, and well guard¬ ed, and, mounting her palfrey, she bade her lover head the fray, and pay no regard to her, for she was nothing the worse. He, however, saw the blood upon her bassonet, and was roused to perfect fury. The battle now became general; but i^vas no regular engagement, being scattered here and there through all the drove—some fought before the cattle, some behind them, and some in the middle, It was reported, that at one
time there were fifteen single combats all going on at the same instant. Therefore, to have been an engagement on a small scale, it proved a very bloody one, many being slain and wounded on both sides. But the tremendous skin-merchants bore down all before them wherever they went These were inured to battle, while the thieving moss-troopers, as well as the hinds on the Scottish side, were only used to de¬ sultory warfare. The bare-headed leather* merchant, in particular, was a dismal sight to the forayers, for having soon rid ??? self of his first antagonists, he continued galloping about the field wherever he saw two engaged, and cut down aU of the ad verse party as he went, or rode them down* giving, with every stroke, a hard grin and a grunt. The men thought the devil waa come among them, or else that he had fairly taken possession of a skin-merchant ; and, giving up the contest, a few of them tried to escape by flight, which they did by quitting their horses, and gaining some inaccessible ground. The drivers of the sheep likewise made their escape, for they
found the droves deserted in the Hope. The weakest of the men having been left behind with them, they had come in view of the field of combat, and, marking how it terminated, had sped them away out of danger. Chisholm's party brought home five pri¬ soners with them, twelve English horses well caparisoned, and all the prey, save one ox that Will Laidlaw had ridden over and slain in the plenitude of his wrath. The Scots had no fewer than nine killed and grievously wounded out of their small party, of Λν?ιοηι one of the latter was the brave and lovely Bess Chisholm, who was so faint, that AVill was obliged to carry her all the way home on his horse before him, clasped to his bosom, he not failing to kiss her pallid cheek many a time by the way, while all the rest wondered at Laidlaw's great concern about the youth. When Peter saw his ehild borne into the house pale and wounded, he lost all recol¬ lection ofthe secret ofher sex, and cried out * c ? my poor Bess ! my dear daughter t What had I ado making a man of thee !
Thy blood is on thy old fathets head. " Alas, for my beloved daughter !" ** Daughter !" exclaimed they all again and again, " Daughter !" re-echoed WiU Laidlaw, as if he had not known well before. " Daughter ?" cried the skin-men : * Have we then been led to the field by a maid ? Shame on our heads that suffered the over¬ throw ! against the rules of chivalry as her attempt was ! Alas, for the gallant and high spirited young dame !" They put her to bed, and dressed her wounds, and from all appearances had high hopes that she was more afraid and fatigued than hurt. She soon fell into a quiet slum¬ ber, in which they left her, and retired to take some refreshment, and talk over their morning's adventure. It turned out as suggested, that their three prisoners were the three chief men of the gang, who had completely lost themselves and all traces of their companions among the mist; and hav¬ ing heard a report of the seizure formerly made at that place, they cunningly tried to pass themselves off as messengers sent in search ofthe lost traveUers. If they had
been with their own party, that would have proved an overmatch for the Chisholms. The Reids and Halls had been berried of their whole live stock by the Warden's people, and learning that the greater p.art of it was driven up into these mountains, they naturally wanted to make some re¬ prisals and recover their own again. Had it not been for their misfortune in separat¬ ing, and the exertions of the gallant hide- men, they would have effected their pur¬ pose with the utmost ease. It proved a luckless raid for them, for they lost all their horses, the greater part of their men, and the chief, squire Anthony, and six of his friends, were sent prisoners to the castle of Mountcomyn. The country people at Chisholm's board were loud in praise of the skin-men, and of their trusty and gallant behaviour ; in par¬ ticular, they averred that Laidlaw had kill¬ ed the half of the thieves with his own hand, for that he rode about the field like a resistless angel, destroying all before him. When Peter heard that he fought so va¬ liantly for the recovery of his stock, and
regained his darling daughter's life, his heart warmed toward him, and he bid ?? ask any thing of him he chose that was in his power to give, and he should not be said nay. Will at once asked the maid whose life he had saved for his wife. Peter hesitated, and said it was hard to bestow the flWer of all the Chisholms on an En¬ glish skin-merchant, a man who seemed to have neither house nor name, or was ashamed to own them. However, as he had proved himself a warrior and a hero, Peter consented, provided the maid grew better, and was herself satisfied with the match. Will said he asked her on no other terms, and vrent ben to see her before he departed. She was still sound asleep, or pretended to be so ; therefore, unwilling to disturb her, he breathed a blessing over her, and impressed two or three warm af¬ fectionate kisses on her lips. As he came a?vay he felt a slight pressure of her arms around his neck. When Sandy Pot learned that the iove¬ ly youth with whom he had watched the prisoners all the night and morning ofthe
battle was a maid, and the younger sister of his gallant friend Dan, Sandy's wound grew so ill that he could not be removed, so he remained where he was, and the other four went off with their uncouth loading. They found Dan Chisholm at Hawick waiting for them in the utmost impatience, having collected no fewer than twenty horse-loads of hides, every one of them in size like a hay-stack; and away the motely train m-árched and joined the War¬ den on the night after his arrival before the walls of Koxburgh.
ι
«t
CHAPTER VIII. So they shot out and they'shot in, Till the morn that it was day, When mony ?* the Englishmen About the draw, brigg lay ; ??'??? they hae yoket carts aad wains, To ca* their dead away, • Ånd shet auld dikes aboon lhe luve, In gutters where they lay. SalL of Old Metilin. The expedition of the Dpuglas against Musgrave is, Uke the innumerable Border battles of that reign, only shortly mention¬ ed by historians; and although it was a notable encounter, «and is deteUed by Isaac at great length, it lies out of our way here. Let it suffice that they skirmished cautiously for two days with various suc¬ cess, and at last came to an engagement on a field right opposite to the junction ofthe Tweed and Gala. After a h«ard fought bat¬ tle, Douglas* left wing w.as discomfitted ; and just as he was arranging his force so as to cover the retreat, an unaccountable'con-
fusion was noted among the English ranks, which seemed -o be engaged anew, and with one another, there being no other army nigh. Douglas, redalling his routed squa¬ drons, faced about, but advanced with cau¬ tion, tiU he ^v Musgrave's army broken and flying in aU directions. This gallant feat was accompUshed by a Sir John Gor¬ don, who was on his way with seven hun¬ dred fresh men to the assistance of Doug¬ las ; and as he came on the English ranks behind at that important crisis, he broke them at the first onset, and took Sir Tho¬ mas Musgrave prisoner with his own hand. Thus far the affairs of Douglas wore the aspect of prosperity—but a settled gloom hung over his mind ; an oppression of spirits was apparent in every sentence that he uttered and every plan he suggest¬ ed, and these were far from being traits of his ?v?nted disposition. But the monk Benjamin had been with him again and again I —had been harrassing his soul with commissions and messages from the man¬ sions of the dead \ and one night he heard the volee of his lost and dearly regretted
priucess, speaking to him in his tent, as it were out of the canvas. Still the most so* lemn injunctions of secrecy were imposed on him, insomuch that he deemed hlnàself not at liberty to open bis mind to any one. Besides all this, the disconsolate Mary Kirk¬ michael had been constantly lingering nigh to him, and always presenting her¬ self in the utmost agony of mind, to make enquiries about her royal mistress. That lady's appearance became so terrible to him that he was unable to bear it, and gave strict charges that she should not be suf¬ fered to come within the limits of hfe camp. But for all that, avaüing herself of her rank and her sex's privilege, she forced her way to him several times, and at every visit filled his soul with the most racking torments ; so that, harrassed with war as he was, he found this his first inter¬ course with women, attended with ten times more distracting and grievous perils than the former. While, on the other hand, the heroes that visited the castle of Aikwood, even those who escaped, not including the retched victims who remained behind, Li
discovered, to their dear bought experience, that there were perils in nature infinitely superior to both. It is now absolutely necessary to shor¬ ten the curate's narrative, to prevent this work running to an inordinate length ; and though two of his tales have been left out already, the great events that follow must also be related in a style abbreviated, though not mangled by indistinctness. After the intrepid Lord Musgrave had sacrificed his own Ufe in order to save those of his *only brother and the lady of his love, Clavering was unanimously chosen captain in his room, and every soldier took a new oath to him to die in defence of the for¬ tress. The commission -of which he ac¬ cepted was a dismaLone ; but he entered into all the feelings of the famishing in¬ mates in their hatred ofthe Scotland im¬ placable enmity against them,—therefore, he was the very man for their purpose. Every attempt of the besiegers to scale the waUs of the castle, or to gain an en¬ trance by fraud or force, had hitherto prov¬ ed utterly abortive;, the determined sons
of England laughed at them, regarding them in no other light than as freaks of mere insanity, or the gambols of chil¬ dren. The fortress was impregnable with such heroes within, had they been supplied with suflicient stores of food and of ar- rows, both (rf which had long been exhaust¬ ed ; and though a small and welcome sup¬ ply ofthe former had been obtained during the tempest and the flood which followed, for ????? they were obliged to the devil and Master Michael Scott, yet, Uke all the benefits derived from that quarter, it ????*- ed rather more hurtful than advantageous, for they devoured it with such avidity that the distemper, ΛνΗΙι which they had formerly been visited, broke out among them with greater violence than ever. Yet disregarding all these privations, which a looker-on would suppose might naturally tend to break the human heart and daunt the resolution of the· boldest,—with famine and pestilence both staring them in the face y — they bound themselves by a new and fear, ful oath never to· yield the fortress to the Scots while a man of them remained Wive%
Every new calamity acted but as a new spur to their resolution ; and their food be¬ ing again on the very eve of exhaustion, their whole concern was how to procure a new supply. Not that they valued their own lives or their own sufferings,—these had for a good while been only a secondary consideration,—but from the excruciating dread that they should die out, and the Scots attain possession of the fortress be¬ fore Christmas. The warders soon noted the alteration that had taken place in the beleaguering army. They perceived the ground that had formerly been occupied by the Angus men, and the Mar Highlanders, now taken Up by the tall, athletic, and careless look¬ ing borderers, against whom they found their antipathy was not so mortal: and they had some surmisings of what really was the case, that a strong diversion had been made in their favours, that had drawn off their inveterate and hateful enemy Dou¬ glas from the siege. Every hour convinced them farther of the truth of this sugges¬ tion ; for they perceived a laxness in the
manner of conducting the blockade which they had not witnessed for many days, and all their conversation turned on the man¬ ner in which they ought to avail· them* selves of it. The carelessness of the be¬ siegers themselves, or something subor¬ dinate thereto, soon furnished an oppor¬ tunity to them of putting their policy once more to the test, and that by an adven¬ ture the most ardently desired. On the second day after the departure of ^Douglas the warder on the topmost tower per¬ ceived, on a rising ground two miles to the southward, about thirty head of cattle, that came gradually in" view as a wing of a large, drove might be supposed to ,do ; and after they had fed for some time there, two men came before them and chas¬ ed them back out of sight of the castle, as if a great oversight had been committed by letting them come in view of it. No¬ tice of this important discovery was in-* stantly given to the captain, and the news spreading among the garrison, many a long and longing look was cast from the bat tlements and loopholes of the high wes*
tern tower that day. They were not cast in vain. Just toward the fall of evening they perceived a part of the drove appear again only a very short space from the cas¬ tle, and they likewise perceived by their colours that they were a drove of English beasts which had been brought from their native pastures by the strong hand of ra¬ pine, for the supply of this new come bor¬ der army. They perceived likewise that they approached the army by a coneealed way, that the two glances they got of them were merely casual, and that they were very slightly guarded, A council of war was immediately cal¬ led, in which it was agreed, without one dissentient voice, that the garrison should makea sham sally at the eastern draw¬ bridge» as if with intent to gain the city, in order that they might draw the atten¬ tion ofthe besiegers to that point ; and in the meantime the captain, with the choic¬ est of the men were to march out by Te- viot-bridge, of which the garrison had ne¬ cessarily the sole possession* and endea¬ vour to seize the prey. Thence they were
to proceed westward, and try to elude the enemy's posts, or give them bat· tie, if the former were found to be impinc- ticable ; but at all events,, either to die or succeed in attaining that valuable suppiyî or a part of it. The success ofthe con* test now turned on that single point as ón a pivot ; the balance was against them, but, that turned m their favours by an exer¬ tion of warrior prowess, they could then reckon on a complete triumph over their unappeasable foe^ Besides, every thing^ seemed to concur in support of their gallant expedition. The nights were dark evenJbeyond their usual darkness at that gloomy season, and the moon did not arise till two inthe morning. Both these circumstances were in their fa¬ vour,—the one in attaining possession of the prey unperceived, and the other in enabling tbem to fight their way home; for they knew that though they themselves mightpass the strong^Scottish posts favour¬ ed by the deep darkness, still it was im¬ possible to bring the drove through them, and along the bridge, without a hard skir- l3
mish. The captain, therefore, gave com* mand to the division left behind, that the møre noise they heard of an engagement about tiie bridge of Teviot, and the gate toward the west, the more they should press their battle eastward, to divert the strength of the army to that quarter. Be¬ cause onthat side the Scots could make no impression, and the English could lose nothing there save a few lives, which they accounted of small avail ; but if the expedi¬ tion to the west failed, their cause was finaUy ruined. That was a busy evening within the waUs of Roxburgh, while all was quietness and indifference without. Within there was arming and disarming, for the suits of armour that once fitted these emaciated warriors would not now hang on their frames. There was grinding of swords, pointing of spears and ox-goads, and even the slaughter-houses of the fort were clear¬ ed, with a provident concern seldom over¬ looked by Englishmen ; and at eleven o'clock at night, by the convent matin beU, Clavering, ivith five hundred chosen
garrison, creeping aïong the Teviot-bridgt on their hands and knees. From tibat they proceeded westward in the most pro¬ found silence, and so close by the Scottish posts, that they heard them breathing and conversing together. One party crept up all the way within the Water-brae, and the other^ledbyClaveringhimself, p.ast through between two Scottish posts, drawing them* selves along the ground* dose, on their breasts» and once or twice were obliged to squat close down, and lie silent for a con* siderable space, while thp following dia¬ logue p.assed between tihe sentinels. " Od, Sandie Scott, think ye it can be true that the English are eating «ane ano¬ ther ?" «. " There*s ??? doubt o't. I hear that they're snapping up five o* the fattest o* their number every day. They wffl eat themsels out hit by bit that gate." " Aih wow, man ! I wad rather die o' hunger than pick the banes of ane acquaint tance. Bursten devils, that they are !" " Aha, Sandie, billie, ye dinna ??? tül
ye be tried. A man will do ought or he die o' hunger. An do you ken, Sandie Scott, I think our captain has done wrang in bringing sae mony fat bullocks a' sae near the castle at ae time. Thae hungered louns will hae a haud ?' some ?' them, and maybe cut a wheen o' our throats into the bargain, some o' thir dark nights.'* * 6 Now, ye see neighbour, I ken sae weel that our master never does the sma'est thing without some design, that I think he wants to wile out the English, and then kill them ; and that he has brought a' thir braw stots o'er the border, just on the same principle that a fisher throws a bait into the water." < t Na, na, Sandie, that canna be the case; for he has g^en strict orders that no ane o ? them be suffered to come within sight o' the castle. He just thinks the beasts can¬ na be sae safe ony where else as beside him¬ sel' and his lads. But hunger has sharp een, and I wadna wonder if this drove should lead to some hard tulzie.** " Whisht ! Godsake«, haud your tongue I Whats that I hear ?"
hunger hae cle.ar een, fear has unco lang lugs. What was it that Sandie heard ?*' " I heard a kind o' rubbing and thrist- ing, as a fox or a foumart had been draw¬ ing himsel through a hole aneath the ground. Hilloa ! What guard ?" *' Howpasley and Gemelscleugh." " Watch weel. There's something stir¬ ring." " Not a mouse." " So say the sleeping foresters ; but I can tell you, men o' Gemelscleuch and Howpasley, an there be nought stirring aboon the ground, the- moudies «are very busy aneath it the night. Clap close, and keep an ee on the withergloom. I had a heavy dream at nightfa', and Fm resolved no to close an ee. Come, neighbour, tell a tale, or say a rhame to keep us wauk- ing." ** Have ye heard the new ballant made by the rhiming dominie o' Selchrit, the queerest thing ever was heard ? It begins this gate :
The ??? he mt ? Domock tower, Aad out at a slip-hole keekit he, «ånd he saw tbree«taws come yont the lift, And they winged their flight to the Eildon tree. ? whow, t) whow, quo the muckle deil, But yon*s a sight that glads my ee, For 1*11 lay the steel-brander o f hell There's a storm ? -brewing in the west countrye" ********** " Whisht, for heaven's sake! I heard the tod again, Hilloa! Gemelscleuch to the glahe ! Have lug and hawk e'e, or there'll be news afore the morn that's unheard teU o' yet" " And that there will ! Saint David be with us ! and the blessed Saint Mary, the mother of God, be with us ! Hist havering, say Benedicite." At that instant a sharp breeze arose which drovmed the noise, and Clavering and his men passed fairly by on their perilous ex¬ pedition. Beyond the next hollow they found the cattle all lying puffing and doz¬ ing on a round hiU. An immense drove ofthem there seemed to be, for the hill ap¬ peared to be Uterally covered, but the night
nothing distinctly. Clavering gave Ws commands in a whisper to his chief men» to surround the whole drove, and drive them furiously, that by these means they might throw the enemy's lines into con¬ fusion. " We have the advantage of the ground," said he ; " the bridge is clear, and the gates open. Let us play the men for once, and our difficulties are all over. Pro* tddence has favoured us beyond what could have been calculated on. Our force is su¬ perior to that of our enemies on this side the river. On whatever side our column * * is attacked, let us keep ^a running fight, so as to push on and preserve the prey, and the day is our own: And now, Saint Antho¬ ny for the right !" The men then formed themselves into a crescent behind the cattle six-line deep, and with club, goad, and spear pushed them on. There were a few dour lazy driving runts behind that bore aU the thumps* but. the bulk were high-spirited,and galloped off on the path toward Roxburgh with the ut¬ most fury, insomuch that the deligtøed
drivers never got a sight of them. They broke through the Scottish lines with¬ out either stop or stay. The alarm was instantly given, but a night muster is always attended with some delay. So the English thought,—so they said ; and to their great joy they found their sugges¬ tions realized ; for not till the last cow was past the strong line of posts on the height were they attacked by the Scots. But then, indeed, the Gemelscleuch and Howpasley men set upon them ???? unparallelled fu¿ ry, and being ev^ry five minutes joined by more of their companions, they pressed hard upon the English, who, being oblig¬ ed to keep up a retreating battle, fell thick on the brae beyond the bridge; The ????'? and judicious Longspeare himself led the attack, and behaved like a lion ; for though* wounded in three different places ofthe body, he fought in the front of the main battle all that night. The Scots, to the utter amazement of their enemies, never once offered to stop the cattle, but merely attacking the English crescent behind, drove them and cattle and
all towards the bridge. This Clavering and his chief men attributed wholly to the sur¬ prise by which the Scots were taken ; and when tbe former saw the dark column of cattle take the bridge, he thanked the God of heaven, the blessed Virgin, and all the saints whose names were known to him, for such a wonderful success and merciful de¬ liverance. The English host then raised such a shout of triumph that the echoes called from the castled ?θΛνεΓ8 to the forest, and from the forest to the distant roeks. The Scots soon joined in it with equal en¬ thusiasm; and the two armies then engaged at the eastern gate, also joined their voices to the general chorus. The gray friars of Roxburgh, and the Benedictine monks of Kelso, raised their heads from their flinty piUows, committed themselves to heaven, and deplored the madness and folly of the men of the ?????. The city dames wept and prayed, and the men ran to head-quar¬ ters to learn the cause of the uproar. The sounds were actually heard in the camp of Douglas, at the distance of sixteen miles ; and when this was reported to hira *next
morning, he said, u There was the Red- hough on the ramparts erf Roxburgh !" But man's thoughts are vanity ! He can¬ not judge of events so as to calculate on what is to happen from one moment to an¬ other : incidents of the slightest moment so often having the effect of overturning the greatest and most momentous enter- prizes. Never was there one so nearly overturned as this, althoughit was not once thought of till afterwards*—and it was on this wise : There was a strong guard of English placed at the south end of the bridge, to guide the foremost of the drove on to it, or help to cut a way for the cattle through such troops as might interpose. The cattle, as was said, came galloping furi¬ ously without intervention, and, as if led by an unseen providence, took the bridge with all their vigour, the battle being then waging behind them, and the shouts begin ning to rend the sky. This guard had no¬ thing to do, of course, but to open into two lines, and give them head. But at the end ofthe bridge there was a deep puddle, and among the men there chanced to be a Ht*
tie boy, who was running about and thrash ing the cattle as they went through this puddle, which made them spring up the arch with redoubled velocity, which the urchin thought good sport. But in the midst of this frolic he bolted away at once with such velocity that he had almost over¬ thrown one of the men in the file, and as he ran he cried out, " Lord, saw ever ony mortal the like o' that?" " What was it, rash idiot?" said the man. " Grace and mercy, man, did you not see how yon great black stott stood straight up on his hind legs and waded the pool ?" said the boy. " Take that to clear your eyes,lmpertinent brat," said the man, and gave him a blow with his fist that made him run away howling and crying, always repeating as he went, " I'll tell your captain,—now î 'at will I that—now !" The combat behind the cattle thickened apace. The English were sore borne down on the hiLl, but when they came to the little plain at the bridge-end they stood firm, and gaveas hard blows as they got. They bad fairly g-amed their aim, and their spirits so
feng depressed, mounted to an unusual height. The last lingering hoof of the ????? countless drove was now onthe arch,and they could calculate on holding out the fortress against their hated foes not only till Christ- mas,but till that time twelvemonth. Their shouts of joy were redoubled. So also were those of the Scots. "The peopfe are mad!" said they«, " thus to shout for their own loss and their own defeat. It is a small trmt ofthe cursed perversity ofthe whole nation !" The English narrowed their front and narrowed their front still as their files found room on the arch of the bridge, which ???? long and narrow, and very steep at the south end, that rose directly from the plain. But the road up to the castle by the Uvo tremendous iron gates was likewise exceed¬ ingly steep, and went by a winding ascent, eo that the latter end of the drove, those duU driving ones that bore all the strokes, got very slowly up,, and with great dijflfk eulty. There was a guard of considerable strength Ieftin this gateway by Clavering, lest any attempt should, be made by the
enemy to enta: in his absence. But these men had strict charges to clear the way for the cattle, and help to drive the foremost ones up the steep. The fore part of the drove however came up the steep with such main fury, that the men were glad to dear a way for them, by flying out of the path, up to the citadel. There was not a man left in the gate?vay, save two at each of the iron portcullises, and these stood in deep niches of the wall, out of all danger. Each of these men held the end of a chain that was frvisted round an immense bolt m the wall,—and these bolts* Isaac says, are to be seen sticking to this day. On un¬ twisting this chain the portcuUises feU åo\x n, and when they were to raise up it was done with levers. Well, as the two outer¬ most men stood in their niches, holding by the ends of their chains, they observed, that two of the oxen that first came in, nay the very first two that came in, turned round their ugly heads, leaned their sides to the wall, and kept in their places, the one on the one side and the other on the other, tffl the whole throve,
passed them. The men eould not move from their posts to drive them on ΛνιΛ the rest, but they wondered at the beasts ; and the one cried to the other» " What can ail them two chaps ?" " ? them are two tired ones," said the other; " Dom them for two ugly monsters! they look as them hod been dead and toosen again." At length, by dint of sore driving and beating, the last hoof of the Warden's choice drove passed inward through the castle gate of Roxburgh, for the mainte¬ nance of his irascible enemies. Could any thing be so unfortunate? or how was he to set up his face, and answer to the Doug^ las ηοΛν ? But the Redhough was determin¬ ed that he would set up his face and answer , to the Douglas and his country too, as well as to his kinsmen and followers, whom he valued highest of all. Just as the last lazy cow crossed the gate, and Λν?ιβη the triumphant shouts of the English were at the loudest, the two great lubberly oxen that stood shaking their ugly heads, and leaning against the wall, ripped up their own bellies; and out of two stuffed hides
two most ingenious cases, started up two no less men than Sir Ringan Redhough and his doughty friend Charlie Scott of Yardbire. Off went the heads of the two porters in one moment, and down came the portcullis with a thundering rattle, and a clank that made the foundations of the gate shake. " Now, southron lads, haud ye there !" cried the Redhough : " Time about is fair play. Keep ye the outside rf the door threshold as lang as ye hae gart us keep it." They next Went up and seized the other two porters, whom they "saved alive, to teach them how to bolt, ???, open, and shut the gates ; but the men had taken the oaths with the rest, and remained obstinate. 'No threatening could make them move either finger or tongue except in mockery, which provoked the Redhough so that he des¬ patched them likewise. On reaching the great square the Warden found his men in peaceable possession. Six score brave cho¬ sen men had entered among the cattle, each in a stuffed ox or cow hide, and had now Uke their captain cast their sloughs, and
stood armed at «all points to execute his commands. They found nothing to do, save a prodigious difficulty in working their way from the western to the eastern gate. There were so many turnings and windings ; so many doors and wickets ; so many ascents and descents,^—that an army might have gained possession of the one end and yet have been kept out of the other for years. But the surprise here was so complete, that the Borderers had in fact nothing to do but to keep the possession» thus obtained in so easy and at the same time so gallant a style. The shouts that arose from the western battle had so much encouraged those at the eastern gate, that they had sallied out, and attacking the besiegers sword in hand, had driven them back with¬ in their strong line of defence, This re¬ treat vms a part of the plan of the Scots, to draw off the remaining force from the gate» and while they were in the hottest of the skirmish, down came Redhough and his lads from the interior of the castle be¬ hind them, cut down the few guards about the entrance and the draw-bridge wth
ease, and having raised that, and shut the double gates on that quarter likewise, he placed the Armstrongs there as a guard, and returned into the interior, stffl uncer¬ tain what enemies he had to combat within. This mighty fortress was, from the one drawbridge to the other, a fuU quarter ofa mile in length, walled and moated round* and contained seven distinct squares or cas¬ tles, every one of which was a fortress of itself. But the strongest of all was. the di¬ vision on the western part, which was de¬ nominated the citadel, and had gates and bars of its own, and ίοΛνβι^ that rose far above the rest. Into this strong place the sole remnant of the English soldiers had retreated, which consisted merely of the guard that kept the western porch and made way for the cattle, a few stragglers beside, and some official people that kept always within. Through every other part of the castle the Scots found free passage ; and by the time the moon had been risen for an hour, the shouts of " A Douglas ! a Douglas ! a Redhough ! a Redhough !" were heard from every part of the wâDs, VOL. ?. M
excepting the western tower. Tliere in¬ deed a faint and subdued shout announced at intervals the sname of the King of Eng¬ land, for it was now no more a Musgrave ! and as for Clavering they wist not ?? ? ????? he was dead or alive, taken or at liberty. When the first ranks of the Englishmen tliat came up behind the cattle saw the gates shut against them, they took it for some accident, or some mistake that the porters had fallen into, on listening to the shouts îOf the adverse parties ; but after calling and .remonstrating to no purpose, they began to suspect that there was trea¬ son at the bottom of its and the whisper of treason spread among that part of the 'forces which was now forced against the gate. They could do nothing ; for they neither had room to fight nor fly, and they ^Λν not whom to suspect, or what had befallen them. As for those at the farther end of the bridge, they were so hotly en¬ gaged with their opponents, that they had little time to consider of any thing ; but finding themselves fixed to the spot, and no movement making toward the gate,
they conceived that something there was wrong, which retarded the regular entrance of the troops for so long a time. They now fought only three to three abreast on the steep arch ofthe bridge, down which the English drove the Scots six or seven times, the latter always returning to the charge with that vigour which a certainty of suc¬ cess inspires. Clavering fought them in the rear, and in the hottest of the battle still encouraging his men to deeds of des¬ perate valour, little weening how matters went within. But when the names ofthe Scottish chiefs were resounded from the walls, every heart among the EngUsh was chiUed, and every arm unnerved in one in¬ stant. They had no conception how the thing could have happened ; it appeared so far beyond all human power to have effected it, that it was several hours before it gain¬ ed general credit among them. They had kept the fortress so long, with so Uttle dread of its being wrested from them, and withal suffered so much in it, that they could nöt believe the evidence of their senses, that by a course of events, entirety
of their own planning, they should be all without the walls, and the Scots within· It was like a work of enchantment Like some of the late inconceivable works ofthe spirits of divination. The Scots could make no impression on them upon that long narrow bridge; but they could not long stand cooped up there ; and v/hen they saw that all hope was lost of regaining entrance, they threw them¬ selves over a high parapet, and took pos¬ session of the steep bank between the bot¬ tom of the southern wall and the river Teviot. The river being dammed below, it stood like a frith round the bottom of this bank, which was so steep that they could not stand on it, but were obliged to clamber alongst it on their hands and feet. Escape being impracticable, the Scots suf¬ fered them to take possession of that bank undisputed, and to keep it, supposing they must surrender next day ; but a great num¬ ber were slain before the latter end ofthe train was disentangled ofthe bridge. The Scots had now free access to the gate, into which Gemelscleuch and How-
braced them, and thanked them for their wise counsel, as well as their great bravery; and they again set about traversing and surveying the fortress, concerning which Charlie Scott said, " It wad tak a man a year and a day to find out a' the turnings and windings about it." The battle at the eastern draw-bridge had continued from midnight without in¬ termission ; and after the break of day our chiefs witnessed a scene from the waUs that was without a parallel. That division of the Scots army was composed of Douglas' men, being the same troops that were there before, and they were commanded by Sir James Douglas of Dalkeith. That knight got private intelligence of the Warden's intention to storm the castle, by what means he knew not, but resolved to hold himself in readiness ; and, as he was desir¬ ed, when the sortie was made, he> retreated at first, drawing them off from the gate. When the cry arose that the castle was tak¬ en, his men became frantic with joy, and resolute on taking ample vengeance on their
enemies, they burst upon them without re¬ gularity, making great havock, and at the same time throwing away many of their own lives. Sir James with great difficulty re¬ strained them, called a parley, and offered the expelled garrison quarter ; but they re¬ turned for answer, that they weened he had called the parley to ask quarter of them, and they had determined to refuse it They concluded by telling him to see to him¬ self, and insult them no more by such mes¬ sages, for as yet he knew not with whom he was warring. The battie was then re¬ newed by the light of the moon with grea¬ ter fury than ever ; they fought like baited bears, with recklessness of life and the si¬ lence of death. Deadly hate was in every thrust, and the last words of every fab ling warrior were, " Have at them yet." When the day light arose, the English fought within a semicircular wall of mang¬ led carcasses ; for, grievous to relate, they were not corpses ; yet were they piled in a heap higher than a man's height, which was moving with agonized life from top to bot¬ tom, and from the one end to the other ;
for the men having all faUen by 'sword wounds, few of them were quite dead. The English were now reduced to a small number, yet, in the strife, their ardour seemed to prevail over that of their op¬ ponents. The Border chiefs, inured as they were to war, stood amazed, and even shocked, at the scene presented to their view. Yardbire was the first to deprecate it in these words : ** Gude faith, Sirs, it strikes me, that this is rather carrying war to an extremity." " Rescue ! rescuei" shouted the Warden : " Give quarter to these n\en for my sake. I will pay their ransom-myself." When the Douglas' vassals heard this^ they lowered the points of their ???????, and drew baek from the slaughter, com¬ manding the English to ground their ????- pons. The latter consulted together for a few minutes, and void of alt dread, save that of being obliged to submit to the Scots, they broke with one consent over the pile of hu¬ man bodies, and, carrying destruction be¬ fore them, opened a way into the middle of the Scottish columns ; nor ceased^ they
fighting until every man of them was cut down, The rest of the English army were in a fold. Escape was impossible. Ten men could have prevented it on all sides, yet for a whole day and night did they hold their tenure of that perpendicular bank, although before the evening many were losing tlieir holds, and rolling into the river from exhaustion. Then the sud¬ den immersion arousing them somewhat from their torpor, scores of them might be seen at a time crawling to the side of the water, and endeavouring to clamber once more up the bank ; but at last they sunk back into the deep, and their last breath arose to the surface in small chains of fetid air bubbles. No one knew what became of the young and intrepid Clavering,—at what time, or in what place he fell ; and without a head as these men were, it was not tiU the second morning, when the breath of revenge had cooled, and after much expostulation on the part ofthe con¬ querors, that the wretched remnant yield¬ ed themselves prisoners of war, and were dl suffered to depart on their parole, with
these commendations were received with the gall of bitterness; and none ofthem could tell, when they went home, how or by what means they were expelled* The Warden and his men now set them¬ selves with all their endeavour to take the citadel ; and, feebly as it was defended, it cost them no little trouble. It is probable that it might have held out a few days longer, but when Douglas and his army were seen approaching on their return from the battle, the impatience of the Border- erscould be no longer restrained; andYard- bire, with a remnant of hiš Olivers, Potts, and Laidlaws, scaled the wall in the faces of the enemy, who had scarcely power left to cleave a head without a helmet, and throwing themselves into the square, be¬ came masters of the gate in a few minutes; so that before Douglas reached the top of the hill of Barns, his colours were placed on the topmost tower of the citadel. It may easily be conceived with what joy, wonder, and admiration he gazed on this phenomenon. Joy that his broad lands. M 3
and possessions were thus insured to him, of which for some time past he scarcely re- t-ained a hope ; and admiration ΙίΟΛν that indefatigable chief had accomplished, in a few days, that which he had exerted him¬ self in vain to accomplish for the space of as many months. The idea of being so far outdone in policy was without doubt some¬ what bitter to the palate of a Douglas, for never till this day can they brook a com¬ petitor in the field ; but, considering how matters stood, it would have been the Tvorst of policy to have let sueh a feeling appear. Douglas therefore testified the highest sa¬ tisfaction, extolling the Warden's head to conceive and hand to accomplish, in terim such as he had never been heard to utter. " Glorious Redhough ! unparrallelled Red¬ hough !" exclaimed he again and again : " Thou and thy lads aye the men to trust." The chief received him at the castle gate, welcoming him in jocular terms of high chivalry to the castle of Roxburgh, which he took care always to denominate " my cas¬ tle." This was soon noted by the Douglas ; and as soon as they entered the governor's
house in the citadel, Douglas made oven to him, by regular deeds and instruments, the seven first baronies he chose to name. This document, together with the royal charters confirming it, is extant, and in the possession of one ?? the Warden's lineal descendants at this day. On receiving this grant, signed, sealed, and witnessed, Sir Ringan, delivered over the keys ofthe castle to the Earl of Douglas and Març and the two exchanged seats at the table. Douglas also conferred the honours of knighthood on Charlie Scott, Simon Long- speare, and John, of Howpasley ; while Sir Ringan bestowed one of his new baronies «o on each of these brave gentlemen in sup¬ port of their new dignities, burdened only with a few additional servitudes. On his right hand hero, the hereditary claimant ofthe post of honour, he conferred the ba¬ rony of Raeburn and Craik, that he might thenceforward be the natural head of his hard-headed Olivers and skrae-shankit Laid¬ laws. To Longspeare he gave Temadale ; and to Howpasley, Phingland and Lang- shaw. When Charlie first rose from Jiis
of Raeburn and Yardbire, he appeared quite cast down, and could not answer a word. It was supposed that his grateful heart was overcome with the thought that the reivard bestowed, on him by his gene¬ rous chief had been far above his merits. The news ofthe capturé were transmit¬ ted to court with all expedition ; on which King Robert returned word, that he would, with his queen, visit the Douglas in the castle of Roxburgh, and there, in the pre¬ sence of the royal family, and the nobles of the court, confer on him his daughter's hand in marriage, along with such other royal grants and privileges as his high gal¬ lantry and chivalrous spirit deserved. He added, that he had just been apprized by his consort, that his daughter, the princess Margaret, had been for some time livingin close concealment in the vicinity of Rox¬ burgh, watching the progress ofher lover with a devotion pecuUar to her ardent and «affectionate nature. If the Douglas was aware of this, which the King had some reasons for supposing, he requested that
sence of her royal parents. There w«as a thrust indeed ! An éclaircissement was ap¬ proaching too much for man to bear.— But that heart-rending catastrophe must be left to the next chapter. In the mean¬ time, for perspicuity's sake, we must relate how this grand device of the War¬ den's originated, by which the castle was won, and himself and foUowers honoured and enriched. It was wholly owing to the weird read by the great enchanter Master Michael Scott. So that though the.reader must have felt (as the editoria in a very pecu¬ liar manner,) that Isaac kept his guests too long in that horrible place the castle of Aikwood, it wiU now appear that not one iota of that long interlude of his could have been omitted ; for till the weird was read, and the transformation consummated, the embassy could not depart,—and unless these had been effected, the castle could not have been taken. The editor, for bre* vity's sake left out both the youth's and maiden's characteristic tales, which shall
appear by and by, but more he durst not cancel. When the passage out of the book of fate was repeated to Sir Bingan, he never for a moment doubted either its truth or fulfilment, provided he and his friends could discover its true meaning. But the words were wrapt in mystery ; and, when conjoinedwith the enchantment practised on his men, were for a long time so com¬ pletely unintelligible, that all save Sir Ringan himself, and bis echo Dickie of Dryhope,. gave up the hope of reconciling the given destiny with reason or common sense. As for the friar, he entered his pro¬ test against paying any regard to it from the beginning, on the principle that all the Master's powers · and foreknowledge were deputed to him by subordinate and male¬ volent spirits, and that good could not arise out of evil. The Warden's philoso¬ phy, on the other hand, taught him to es¬ timate facts and knowledge as he found them ??? ? ????? among mankind, without enquiring too nicely into the spirit of their origin ; for the more deeply that was wrapt
over his imagination. Charlie Scott felt much disposed to coincide with his master in these principles, but in all deep matters he was diffident in offering his advice or sentiments. He, however, hit upon the right cue in this instance, and that by the most natural combination of ideas that ?? ? ?? presented themselves to mortal man.. The right understanding of the prophecy was about to be given up in despair. The in¬ tervals of silence during thediscussion ΛνβΓβ becoming longer and longer each time. It was in order to break one of these, rather than to impose his advice on his chief, that Charlie ventured to deliver himself as fol¬ lows : tí Gude faith, my masters, I see no¬ thing for it, but that we get Master Mi¬ chael Scott to turn us into fat owsen again, or bulls, or stötts, or what ye like. Then the English will drive us a' gladly into the castle for marts to theiç beef barrels. But ????? ??'? are fairly in, we ?vad need the gospel friar to change us to men again, or, gude faith, we wad be in a bad predica¬ ment. But 1 hae some faith to put in auld
and gin that could be done as he seemed to hint, by the blood of Bruce ! but we wad dowss their doublets for them." " Might we not rather disguise ourselves as cattle, cousin ?" said Howpasley. cff I have seen our jugglers and mounte¬ bank players," said Longspeare, " disguise themselves as a lion, a tiger, a bear, a wolf, and even as a great serpent, and dragon, so that I myself took them for these animals." ' t Why then may not we disguise our¬ selves as oxen, so that we may pass for them in a dark night ?" said the Warden. " Ay, in a dark night," said Dickie ; " what is to hinder us ? If we but walk on all four we will pass with hungry men for oxen in a dark night." Thus was the hint given, which was im¬ proved on as above related, tül it effected the desired and important event, the tak¬ ing of Roxburgh castle, and that in the most masterly and prudent style ever con¬ ceived by man. They had a small drove of cattle colleeted,as well as hides; but the dis¬ guised ones took care to keep in tbefront or
the middle of these, in short on the side far¬ thest from an Englishman. The one who walked through the dub in an upright pos¬ ture, had not perceived the shabby boy so near him. Abundance of all the good things that the kingdom could produce were now poured into the castle with all expedition; and every preparation made for the recep¬ tion of the King and Queen of Scotland. The carnage had been so great at the two gates that night the fortress was taken, that the citizens of Roxburgh, as well as the three establishments of monks and friars in the vicinity, besought of Douglas that the slain might not be buried nigh to the city, for fear of infection ; and if this was granted, they proflèred to be at the sole charge of removing and burying them with all holy observances. This was readi¬ ly granted, and they were removed to a little plain behind the present vülage, where thousands of their bones have lately been dug up. The burying continued for thre$ days.
CHAPTER IX. ? I hae seen the gude ? uld day, The day o' pride and chieftain glory, When i*yal Stuarts bore the sway, And ne'ec heard tell o* Whig nor Tory. ι Though lyart be my locks and gray, And eild has crook'd me down,—what malter? Ml dance and sing ae ither day, That day onr King comet» o'er the water. Jacobite Song. From the time ofthe taking ofthe castle until the arrival of KingBobert, was an in¬ terval of high festivity. The Border chiefs andyeomen went home to their respective places of abode with abundant spoil, hav¬ ing been loaded with rich presents from the Douglas, as well as their share of Sir Ringan's numberless booties, ????? le al¬ ways divided among them ΛνΗΙι great li¬ berality ; and it was computed that,,in the course of that predatory warfare, he drove thirty thousand domestic animals out of the English territory. The Scottish Bor-
der districts were never so well stocked before. For a century previous to that, they had lain waste, having been entirely depopulated, and left no better than a hunt¬ ing forest. That reign enriched them, and its happy effects have never since been obliterated. Among other things that happened in this joyful interval, old Peter Chisholm received a message one day, informing him* that the stranger to whom he had be¬ trothed his daughter would appear next day to claim the fulfilment of his pro¬ mise. " They'll eat up every thing that's with¬ in the house," said Peter : " If he will have her, it wad suit better for us to meet them at Hawick. The half o' the expences there ???? lye to him at ony rate ; and if he made weel through Λν?' his hides, may¬ hap he wad pay the halewort. He's a brave chield enough, it wad appear ; but I ??1* he had fawn aff the tap o' his humphed ill-smelled hides, and broken the bane o' his neck ; for it will be a wae sight to me to see the flower of a' the Chisholms g&ng
away wi' an English cadger. Oh, wae be to the day !" " What is a man but his word, father ?" said Dan. * t I think the gallant way in which the stranger behaved entitles him well, not only to the flower o' the Chis- holms, but to the best in the house be¬ side," " Ay, ay, that's aye the gate ! fling a- way ! ffing away ! till ye'll soon fling a- way every plack your auld father has ga¬ thered for ye. But, hark ye, callant Dan : Gin ye will stand by me, I'll gainsay the fellow yet, and refuse to gie him my Bess." " Hear what Bess says hersel," said Dan, " and then lll gie my answer.' 1 Bess was sent for, who declared not on¬ ly her willingness, but her resolution to abide by her father's agreement ; but, add¬ ed, that if a better came before him, and made her an offer, she would not wait a minute on her leather-merchant. " Heard ever ony body the like o' that ?' said Peter : * What trow ye is the chance for that? How lang hae ye hung on the
tree wi 5 a red cheek an' a ripe lip, and ne¬ ver man to streek out the hand to pu' ye? There was aince a neighbour I had some hopes o' ; an' he has a good heart too, for a' his jibes, an ane durst but tell him !" Peter said these last words to himself, as he was turning about to leave the apart¬ ment,—for he was at that time forming in his mind one of those superlative schemes which strike dotage as plans of the migh¬ tiest and most acute device, but which youth and energy laugh at. This was no other than to be early astir next morning, and, before any of his family was aware, gallop over to Craik, a~ matter of seven miles, and beg of Will Laidlaw to come and run off with his daughter before she fell into the hands of an English skin- man. This grand scheme he actually put in practice, but met Laidlaw and his jovial party by the way, who wondered not a little when they saw old Pate coming gal¬ lopping up the Fanesh ridge, having his great pike staff heaved over his shoulder, with which he was every now and then saluting the far loin of his mare, and that
with an energy that made all his accoutre¬ ments w-allop. He.never perceived the bridal party till close on them, and till he was asked by half a score voices at once, " What's the great haste, Castleweary ! Where are ye gawn at sic a rate sae early in the morning ? Are your ha's burnt ? Are your cattle driven? Have the Ha's and the Reids been o'er the fells aince mair?" And many other such questions were put, before Peter got a word spoken or a thought thought. He only bit his lip, and looked very angry, at being caught in such a plight. But seeing Will Laid¬ law at the head of his kinsmen, he took him aside, and imparted his grand secret. Will's sides were like to burst with laugh¬ ter. He, however, contained himself, while Peter went on " But ye had better turn a' that clan again, wha hae nought ado at a' wi' us but put things to waste. The less din about the thing the better." " But how are we to answer the skin- merchant when he comes then, Castle¬ weary ? That tremendous buyer of hides will hew us all to pieces."
** Ay, ye maun just take a' the blame on yoursels, you and Bess. He'll no mak muckle at the Laidlaw's hands, or he'll do what never ony did afore him." M I certainly have the greatest respect for your daughter ; but times are hard and dangerous, and I have ??? great opinion o' marriage," * f Come, now, I like to hear that ; for ye ken fock maun ay read a Laidlaw back¬ ward ; and if the times are hard, I shaU be satisfied with a very small dowry. Per¬ haps the matter o' ten tup hogs aff the ???-1??? ? , sax owsen aff Hosecot, and—— " Hold theæ, my old friend ; and I will run all risks, and take away your daughter Elizabeth ; let the skin-man look to him¬ self." " WeeL. God bless ye wi' her. Ye'll get the flower of a' the Chisholms, and the best bairn o' the bike," Bess was ? ?^????? and a blithe bride that day, and though the wounds she re¬ ceived in the engagement with the ma¬ rauders were not quite whole, she danced the best at the wedding, and was tiie first
that lighted on Craik-green. Dan enter¬ tained his fellow*soldiers nobly; but old Peter was terribly in the fidgets, not only at the huge waste of meat and drink that he now saw going on, but for fear of the «arrival of the outrageous and ill-used hide- merchant, and never till his dying day could he be brought to identify his son-in- law with the stranger to whom he first promised his daughter. But for many a day, when the dogs barked, he hasted out in great agitation, lest the dealer in skins and his associates should come upon him unawares. Sandie Pott l^ r ing found a very kind, attentive, and, withal, a very indulgent nurse, in the younger daughter, May Chisholm, there chanced two wed¬ dings at Castleweary on the same day. Among other matters of that eventful period, Isaac the curate mentions also a petition of the friar to Sir Ringan, that he would use his interest to get the youthful bard, who had come an adventurer into his «army, replaced in his rights of the lordship of Ravensworth ; and likewise that he would grant him the captive maid, Dela-
ny, for his bride. These important con¬ nections had never before come to the Warden's ears ; and when he heard the extraordinary adventures, and early mis¬ fortunes of the twain, he manifested the greatest concern for their welfare. But the maid, by the laws of those days, was the right and property of Sir Charles Scott, who seemed unwffling to part with, her, and she not less so to be divided from him, now that his late honours became him so well. This was a distressing con¬ sideration to the poet, and he ΛνοηΜ in ??¬ ????? leave her, to lay claim tp his paternal estate, till he saw how*~matters would turn in his favour. But the friar still en¬ couraged him, assuring him, u that he should be restored to the house and to the inheritance of his fathers ; and that the fair¬ est among the daughters of women, even the sole remaining stem of the house of Galli the scribe, should be unto him as a spouse and a comforter." But among all the festivities at Rox¬ burgh, and all the mighty preparations for the reception of royalty, and the spending VOL. III. N
of the Christmas holidays in such compa¬ ny, the countenance of Douglas was ma¬ nifestly overcast He affected mirth and gaiety, but a hideous and terrific gloom frequently settled on his dark manly coun¬ tenance. The princess's shameful and un¬ timely death hung heavy on his mind, and the secret of it still heavier. His con¬ science upbraided him, not with any blame in the matter, for he was alike ignorant of the rank and sex of his fantastical page : But her devotion to his cause and person ; the manner in which she had exerted her¬ self by putting her rival into his hands ; the love-tokens slily given to him by her own dear self; her admonitory letters; and all her whimsical and teazing inuendos, came over his mind, and combined in ren¬ dering her memory ten times dearer to him than ever he conceived that of human being could have been. And then, how was all this requited ? By bad humour, disrespect, and a total disregard of her dan¬ ger and sufferings. The most enthusiastic, affectionate, and accomplished lady of the age in which she lived, was suffered to be
put down as a common criminal, without one effort being made to save her ; and that delicate and beautiful form thrust down into a common charnel-house among the vulgar dead. Knowing all these things as he did, how could he again behold her royal parents ? and knowing all these things as he did, why had he not re¬ lated the lamentable facts as they had hap¬ pened, and conducted himself according¬ ly ? There was fixed the acme of his di¬ lemma. The detail of that lady's love and fate rose before his mind's eye, like a dark unseemly arch, of which thi.s was the key¬ stone ; and there was a power stood above it that held his soul in eontroul, and be¬ yond that he could not pass. Was it in¬ deed true, that the spirit of his royal and beloved mistress walked the earth, and from day to day laid her stern behests oip- on him ? And could it be that such a spi¬ rit attended upon him in his most secret retirements ; and, though unseen, watch¬ ed over all his motions, words, and actions ? Or how else could the very thoughts and purposes of his heart, together with tjie N«
most secret transactions, be repeated to him by this holy monk ? Nay, though he had never actually seen this apparition, he had heard his mistress's voice one night speaking to him as from behind the hang¬ ings, and charging him, as he respected his own and her souls welfare, to keep her fate concealed from all flesh. Whenever the Douglas got leisure to think at all, amid the hurry of his military duties, these cogitations preyed on his mind; and one night when they had thrown him into a deep reverie, the monk Benja¬ min was announced. " I cannot see him to-night : Tell him to come and speak with me to-morrow," said Douglas. " He craves only a few moments au¬ dience, Lord of Douglas ; and he says, that, unless .he is admitted, a visitor of an¬ other nature will wait on you forthwith." '* What is the meaning of this ?" said Douglas: " Must my privacy be broken in upon, and my mind placed on the rack, at the pleasure of every fanatical «devotee ? Tell him that I will not Jbe dis-
turbed to-night. But—I think not what I am saying. Admit him. Well, reverend and holy father—madman rather ! What is your important business with me ?" " That saintly vision has again been with me." ** Out upon thee, maniac and liar! There has been no such thing with thee ; and thou hast trumped up a story in order to keep the power of the Douglas under thy ghostly and interested eontroul." " If I am a visionary, Lord, it is for thy¬ self to judge. I speak nothing as of my¬ self, but the words of on&tfiathassentme. If thou därest say they are the visions ofa • maniac, in future I keep them to myself, and do you abide by the consequences." " Thinkest thou that I will not, or that I dare not abide by any consequences ? Hence ! Begone !" * Rash precipitate man ! thou shalt repent this ! What interest can I possi¬ bly have in whispering these truths in thine ear ? Did I ever ask or hint at a fa¬ vour from thee? Orwas aughtever, save thy own welfare, the purport of my messages ?
Adieu, mylord! There must another com- riiissioner wait on you presently, and one who win elude the most vigilant of your sentinels." " Stay, Benjamin : Thou art, indeed, blameless. If thou hast ought to warn me of, say it and have done, for I am not in a mood to be trifled with." u I have been bid to caution you to look to yourself, for that there is treason with¬ in the walls of this castle. Will you an¬ swer me one or two queries truly and se¬ riously, that I may know whether the be¬ ing that commissioned me be a true spirit or a false one ?" " I wffl." " Have you got a private offer to a pro¬ digious amount for the ransom of Lady Jane Howard ?" « Monk, thou h-ast had this from heU.— I have." " Which thou hast rejected, with the secret intent of asking her in marriage yourself, should circumstances concur to fevour the device ?"
" It is false \ —^false as the source whence thou hadst it." u Ah ! Then have I done ! my inform¬ ant is a false one." " Or, if I had, it was some passing thought, which no man can gainsay, and for which none are accountable." " Neither is it true that you visited her in disguise last night ?" The Douglas gazed upon the monk in silence, with an eye in which ther«e was an unnatural gleam of madness. He drew his breath three times, as if he would have spoken, but made no answer. The monk continued : " If these are truths, then list to the following behest,—if they are false thou needest not regard it : There is a conspiracy among thy people for the rescue of Lady Jane. They have been bribed by unheard-of rewards. Thy guards are of course to be cut down, otherwise the rescue cannot be effected ; and if thy own head is added to the convoy, the guerdons are all to be doubled." Tlie Douglas started to his feet, and held up both his hands : " By the blessed
Virgin it is true !" exclaimed he—" True every word of it ! There have been peti¬ tions made to me for the use of cer¬ tain keys already. Ay, and I have granted some of them too. I see through a part of the conspiracy. But I'll sift the trai¬ tors ! I'll make carrion of them." " If I am rightly informed, it may yet be prevented without being made mani¬ fest, which would be greatly preferable. Beware of Kinlossie. And list, for my time is expired : If you value your own name, see not the face of Lady Jane again, till you present her to your sovereign." The monk retired with precipitation, and left the Douglas overwhelmed with tumultuary and adverse passions. " StiU the Lady Jane Howard !" said he to himself: " Nothing but the Lady Jane Ho?vard ! Is it possible this can be an agent of hers? But the inference con¬ tradicts the whole scope and tendency of his missions. I must investigate this mat¬ ter without delay." He raised his small bugle to his mouth, for in those days that answered aU the purposes of a house bell,
and many more. Eveiy officer in castle or camp knew, by the blast blown, when his personal attendance was required. Dou¬ glas lifted his to his mouth,—but before he sounded it, the knight in waiting an¬ nounced " a lady." No bolder heart than that of Douglas beat in a Scottish bosom. Nevertheless it quaked ; for he thought of the threatening ofthe monk, that another commissioner should visit him, whom his guards should not be able to repel. His agitation was now wrought up - to the highest pitch, for he attempted to pro¬ nounce some words, of which the knight knew not the import,—probably it w«as a command to expel her, or to caU in some guards ; but before the order could be understood or complied with, the lady herself entered. ** There she is, my lord !" said the knight in a whisper ; * «and none of us know whence or how- she came hi¬ ther." The lady came slowly by, «and the knight retired with all speed. She bore indeed the figure and form of the late princess, but the roses of youth and beau- ??
ty were gone, and in their room a clayey paleness pervaded the features, which were even whiter than the cambric by which the face Was surrounded. The fi¬ gure held up its right hand as it advan¬ ced, and fixed its eyes on the earl; but no man to this day ever knew any thing far¬ ther of that conference. The knight in waiting, shortly after he had retired, heard a noise within as of a man choking and endeavouring to cry out; and, bringing two more attendants with him, they all three rushed into the apartment, and found the Douglas fallen back on the embroider¬ ed couch in a state of mental abstraction, or rather of total insensibility, and the la¬ dy was gone. They immediately applied themselves to the restoration of their lord, which they effected in a short time· Animation soon returned, but reason wa¬ vered in a state of instability for several hours. During that period he had for a number of times inquired who admit¬ ted that stranger, or who saw her de¬ part ? The men assuring him each time, ihat no one saw her tiU she was observed
" . standing in the anti-chamber ; and that none was either admitted into the citadel or seen depart, save the starveling monk who attended him frequently as his confessor. " There has been another lady,"they added, begging admission to your presence for a whole day and night, ΛνΜοΙι has ahvays been refused her, in consequence of your peremptory order. She has at the last re¬ sorted to the means always at a woman's command, tears and threatenings ; and she vows, that if she is not admitted to an audience, you shall dearly repent it." "What, another still ?" said the Dou¬ glas : " No^ I'll see no, more women to¬ day, nor to-morrow, nor next day. Do you know, Eveldon, what I think of Λγο- men ?" t( No, Lord Douglas, but vreli what I think of them myself, ΛνΙιίΛ is, that they are nature's masterpieces." " The pests of society, Eveldon. I deem them subordinate creatures, created solely for man's disquietude. The warrior is na- turaUy surrounded by dangers ; but, till
he engages with women, he rises superior to them all ; it is then that his troubles «and perils begin. No, I'U see no more women to-night" " Might I advise, my lord, it would be, that you should give her admission. It appears so strange to see a lovely and most courtly dame standing weeping at your gate. The very commonest of the people sympathise with her, and blame your ne¬ glect. Beshrew me, if any knight in the realm would refuse such a suit ; no, not the King himself." " Do you think, Sir John of Eveldon, that I can submit to be ruled by women and their agents? I, who never held them as ought save as beings formed for man's pleasures or his interests. My hands are free of their blood, Sir John¿ —my heart, if ever it was in bonds, is now emancipat¬ ed ; and yet, by their means, has my life of late been held in thraldom." ςς Say that I may admit this dame, my lord." " WeU, be it so, and let us be quit of
her. In the mean time, let the guards be tripled, and stand to your arms. I have had strange intelligence to-night ; if true, there will be a dangerous commotion in less than an hour hence.** * The forces of the two kingdoms can¬ not disturb you here to-night, Lord Dou¬ glas." * Sec to it,—there is treason within our walls. Who are on guard ?" " The Gordons, and Lindsay of Kinlos- sie's men." ** The Gordons I can trust,—let the others be changed without delay, Sir John, and see them consorted to the camp.— Call up the Douglasses of the Dales, and let them look to themselves. Admit that petitioner in whom you are so much in¬ terested, and call me on the slightest ap¬ pearance of insubordination." Sir John did as he was commanded, and forthwith introduced Mary Kirkmichael of Balmedie. The impatience and morti¬ fication that the Douglas manifested under this trial is not to be described, for he had
promised to give her information of her royal mistress as soon as he had it in his power, and yet he neither had the heart nor the resolution, after the charges he had received of secrecy, to tell her of her mistress' ??????! fate. At Mary's first en¬ trance into his presence, she rushed for¬ ward and kneeled at his feet, crying, in the most passionate manner, " O, my dear lord, tell me what has become of my mistress. This suspense is dreadful. The castle is now in your hands, and all the prisoners, if such there were; but there are shocking insinuations ΛνΜβρβΓβά abroad. Her father and mother are on their way to visit you here ; and what shall I say to them for the loss of my dear mistress ? O, Lord Dou¬ glas, if you know of her, as know of her you must, tell me where I can see her. Dead or alive, let me but see her. Or tell me when I shall see her." " Lady, that is more than I can tell you ; but if it will give you any heart's ease, as certainly as I speak to you I ???? her in this apartment to-night"
" Blessed are the news to me, my lord ! But why, then, won't you ad¬ mit me to her ? Send me instantly to her presence, Lord Douglas, for I know she cannot be in any state of concealment in which my company cannot be welcome. I implore of you to send me forthwith to her presence." " Send you to her presence ? That would be a cruel act ! Dame, you and your sex have moved my spirit from its erect and heavenward position. It is Uke a tree bowed by the wind, and the branch of memory is stripped of its fruit. Did I say I saw the Princess» Margaret in this apartment?—You must not credit it. There's an incoherence in the principle, or nature has hasty productions not accounted for. You must not beheve it, lady ; for tiU the porter opens the great gate to you, your royal mistress you shall not see a- gain." " Are not all the gates opened or shut at your eontroul, my lord ? You speak to me in paradoxes. I comprehend it aU
well enough, however. I wül go in or out at any gate ; only, in one word, conduct me to my mistress." ** Hell has no plague like this î No, there are no other fiends that can torment a man in this manner," He blew his bugle. —" Eveldon, conduct this dame to her mistress. She in the great state prison, you know, the receptacle of royalty and thraldom, and let me not hear another word. I'll throw him over the battlements that next mentions the name of a woman to me." The lady curtsied, and thanked the Douglas; and Sir John, mistaking his lord's frantic sarcasm for a serious com¬ mand, hurried Mary Kirkmichael up stairs to the topmost apartment of the great tower, and ushered her in, without farther «ceremony, to Lady Jane Howard and her attendant. Lady Jane rose and came run¬ ning toward them ; but, seeing who ap¬ proached, she started, and retreated to her place. As the two ascended the narrow staircase, there was a great commotion in
the square below, therefore, Sir John turn* ed the key and hastened down again. The noise increased, and he heard there was a stern engagement, in which the name of Lady Jane was given as a rallying word * on the one side. At the bottom of the stair the conspirators met him, having broken through „the ranks in that direc¬ tion ; for the Gordons flew to guard the apartments of the Douglas, not knowing what the object of the insurrection was. Sir John had just time to shut a double- barred door in front of them; and, re- treating up one storey, he shouted from the balcony to , apprize the Douglas, else the Lady Jane Howard was gone. One fi-om the ranks ran to apprize the captain, but losing himself among the intricacies of the entrance, he shouted out, " Lord Douglas 1 Lord Douglas !" with the utmost vocifera¬ tion. The Douglas ???? sitting in a deep reverie ; his drawn sword was lying on the table beside him. He heaved it above his shoulder, and running to the door of the apartment, opened it, and asked thefellow^
who was still bawling in the dark, what it was ? " 'Tis the Lady Jane Howard !" answered he, in the same shouting voice. K Damnation on the tongue that says it !*» exclaimed the Douglas in ire : Ä Am I ne¬ ver more to hear aught repeated but the names of women ? Do you know the pe¬ nalty of that word, recreant ? I have sworn to throw you fram the battlements, but that shall not prevent me from cleaving you to the earth in the first place. Wo¬ men! women! Nothing but one ??????? after another ! I'U cut down every man that dares name one to me in that manner !" As he said these Λνο^$, he rushed ^vard the soldier with his heavy ?????? heaved, but the man, flying with all expedition, es¬ caped into the court. The Douglas fol¬ lowed him, and was sooil in the midst of a confused engagement ; and hearing the con¬ spirators shouting the same name, " Lady Jane Howard !" he took it as in derision, and flew on their ranks Λνιίίι such furv, that every man at ΛνΙιοπι be struck fell to the ground. The Gordons followed him up,
crying " A Douglas !" but the conspirators were the stronger party, and would ulti¬ mately have prevailed, had not the Doug¬ lasses of the Dales arrived to change guard as formerly ordered ; and then, Kinlossie having faUen in an attempt to slay the Douglas, his party surrendered. There was a strong troop of English horsemen waiting on the other side of the Teviot with a raft, to whom she was to have been let down from the wall. But the information lodged by the monk not only frustrated the whole of this desperate expedition of the Howards, but šavedthe life of Doug¬ las. For the conspirators receiving the un¬ expected orders to depart to the camp, were driven to make the attempt prematurely, before their measures formerly concocted were ripe for execution. Of all the circumstances that had hither¬ to occurred, the reflection upon this be¬ wildered the mind of Douglas the most. The manner in which these secret combi¬ nations had been revealed to him filled his heart both with gratitude and amazement ; and as all endeavours at reconciling them
with nature or reason only increased the mystery, he resolved to shake the load from his spirits and think no more of them. That he might effect this with greater promptitude, he kept his noble kinsmen constantly abou t him by night as well as by day. The Redhough also returned from his visit to Mountcomyn, as did all the knights and gentlemen commoners of his party from their respective homes, mount¬ ed in their most splendid accoutrements, to greet their Sovereign, render him an ac¬ count of their services, and proffer him due homage. But, among all these Border chiefs, there was none whose appearance attracted so much admiration as that of Sir Charles Scott of Raeburn and Yardbire. Before that time, the only attention he had ever paid to his hàbiUments, was that of procuring the best suits of armour that could possibly be obtained. As the leader of the Warden's vanguard column, and his right-hand filesin line, he knew it behoved him to be well armed, and in that article he was never deficient. But now that he had to appear before his Sovereign in
fuU pride of array, as the knight of Rae¬ burn and the Warden's right-hand man, he deemed it requisite to have an equip¬ ment becoming his rank ; so he rummaged the old oaken wardrobe and armour-chest at Yardbire, and from the knightly spoUs of ages got himself fitted out, by a skilful hand, in a style that amazed all his former compeers. Both himself and his horse Corbie were literally covered with burnish¬ ed gold ; while the playful restiveness of the one, and the manly and almost colos« sal figure of the other, rendered the appear* ance of our warrior a sight truly worthy of admiration. The activity and elasticity of aU his motions, combined with his invinci¬ ble muscular strength, and urbanity of countenance and manners, rendered Char* lie at all times an interesting object ; but till once he appeared in his plumes and light armour studded with gold, no one could have believed that he was so com-e- ly and graceful a personage. At the same time the very consciousness of his ap¬ pearance, and the rank that he was obU- ged to support, raised his personal carriage
and address many degrees, as by a charm ; so that wherever the Warden and his træn presented themselves, strangers always ap¬ peared disposed to move their bonnets to Sir Charles, whom they took for a king, or an earl at the very least. The arrival of these heroes added a great deal to the hilarity, tilting, and other mili¬ tary amusements at Roxburgh; until at last the 24th of December arrived, and with it the word that the King and Queen were on their way to Roxburgh, and ap¬ proaching by the wild path of Soutra-edge. There was no bustle at the castle or city of Roxburgh, save by the city dames and maidens, for whom the approaching festi¬ val appeared a glorious epocha ; for since thø days of Edward Longshanks, who kept his court there for some weeks, there had not been a crowned head within the pre¬ cincts of that illustrious city. Consequent¬ ly, with these fair denizens, and with the merchants who attended that mart once a year from many of the towns on the Con¬ tinent, it was a time of hurry and prepara¬ tion ; but with the warriors it was far other-
wise. They were ready before ; every one being alike anxious to fulfil the part en¬ trusted to him,—so that they had nothing ado but to mount and ride in the order assigned to them. First of all rode Sir Ringan Redhough, supported by all the gentlemen of the mid¬ dle and west marches—the Scotts, the El¬ liots, the Armstrongs, and the Olivers, were the most powerful of these: And next in order came the Laidlaws* the Brydens, the Glendenyngs, and the Potts. After them rode the copper-nosed Kers, the towzy Turnbulls, and the red-wudd Rid¬ derfords ; for in those days every sept had some additional appellative or by-name. These were also mixed with a number of smaller septs, such as the Robsons, the Dicksöns, the hurkle-backed Hendersons, and the rough-riding Riddels ; and they were all headed by the doughty Sir An¬ drew Ker of Aultonburn. Next in order rode Old Willie Wiliecoat, named also Willie wi' the ivhite doublet, the ancestor of the Earls of Home,—a brave and dauntless character, who for the space of forty years
had been a sight of terror to the English, with his white jacket. With him rode the gentlemen of his own name, the hard-rackle Homes, the dorty Dunbars, the strait-laced Somervilles, and the Baillies. Then came the proud Pringles, a powerful sept, mixed with a countless number of dependent fa¬ milies, headed by Pringle of Galashiels ; and after them the Gordons, led by Sir John of that ilk. All these held lands of the Douglas, on conditions of certain services ; they were nevertheless all independent chiefs, these services performed ; but at this time they attended personally, with their kinsmen, to pay their dutiful respects to their Sove¬ reign. Last of all came the Douglasses, in five separate bodies, every one headed by a lord or knight ofthe name ; and these made up one-third of the whole cavalcade, the Earl himself being with the last party of all, and most gallantly attended. The two parties met at Earlston, but the royal party was nothing in point of bearing and splendour to that ofthe Doug¬ lasses. The King and Queen travelled each
in a litter borne by two gaUant steeds. These carriages were very splendid in their decorations, andconstructed in the same way as a sedan chair, and it was truly wonder¬ ful with what velocity they were borne along. They were contrived for the King's use, who had a halt, and could not travel on horseback ; and they suited the state of the roads in Scotland at that period ex¬ ceedingly. Two heralds rode- before his Majesty, who introduced the various chiefs to him. as he passed, and those others of whose names he enquired, among whom Sir Charles Scott was the first. The Queen and her Maries also saluted him along with the Warden. The Λν?ιο?β procession then drew up in files until their Majesties pass¬ ed, after which they fell all into their pla¬ ces, the order of precedency being then re¬ versed, and the Douglasses next to the Sovereign. There was no time for delay, considering the season, the darkness ofthe night, and the shortness of the day ; so they posted on vvith all manner of expedi¬ tion, and yet it was dark before they reach¬ ed the abbey of Kelso. But aU the way, VOL. III. ?
by -the cloisters, -the bridge, and jup £he B4gbs»treetof the city of Roxburgh, itiiere wsre^iers'of itorches iraised above .oneian- other <tliat »made it lighter than the noon¬ day. Never was there sucha scene of splen¬ dour witnessed.in that ancient and noble 4ity.; tto wbich the darkness of the canopy aboviejandrthe^lareoftorch-lightbeloWyad- d ed inconceivable grandeur. It seemed/is if allitlie light and beauty of the universe Jaad beeu confined within that narrow spaee, for witliout.all was blackness impervious toithe eye, îhutAVjithin there was nothingbutbrll- lJAney, ^tivity, «and joy. Seven score mu- aical instruments, and as many trilling hut discordant voices, yelled forth, from the one end »of the street to the other, that old song beginning, " The King came to our. town ; Ca' Cuddic, ca' Cuddie ! The King came to our tomi, Low on the Border." The trumpets sounded before, and the bijgles behind; and the Border youths and maidens were filled with enthusiastic delight ,at the novelty of the spectacle.
They followed with shouts ito the castle gate, and then returned »to føik of >what they hadbeen, and what they -should see on the morrow. The royal party was conducted'to tihe citadel, where every thing-was in readiness fora grand entertainment ; -and »there $he Douglas delivered into the King's hands the keys,of the castle df Koxburgh. BBs Majesty received them most graciously r and thanked him for all the cost, pains, and trouble that ihe had taken dor the good «of the realm ; and added, that he .jcameipre- pared in heart and mind to fulfil his «en¬ gagements to him in return* There was now a manifest embarrassment on thetpart öfthe Douglas; his countenance changed, and he looked as he would have asked for the 'Princess, or, at least, as if some <ene were wanting that ought to have been there ; but after an agitated pause, he could only stammer out, that " he was mueh beholden tojhis Majesty, who might at al tidies command his utmost services ^with- out ^bounty or *reward: w OÄ
if I trust that is not as much as to say that you now decline the stipulated re¬ ward for this high service," said the King. * Sire, I see none either for your Majes* ty to give, or your servant to receive," said the Douglas ; and at the same time he cast a hasty and perturbed glance at the cour¬ tiers and warriors ranged around the hall. The king nodded by way of assent to his huit ; and at the same time said to him, aside, " I understand you, Lord Douglas. You will explain this gallantry of yours, in keeping your sovereign's daughter in concealment from her natural guardians, in private to-morrow. But, pray, can we not see our darling to-night ?" ** Alas, my liege lord and sovereign," said Douglas, passionately, " sure you jest with your servant, thus to tax him with that of which he is innocent," The King smiled, and waving his hand jocularly, by way of intimating that he thought his affected secrecy prudence at that time, left him, and forthwith went halting up among the Borderers, to con· irerse with them about the aflairs of the
English marches. The stately and com¬ manding figure of Charlie Scott, who was like Saul among the people, again attract* ed the King's eyes, and he went familiarly up to him, and said at once, " Well, gal¬ lant knight, how have accounts balanced between you and your southern neigh¬ bours since last Lammas-tide ?" '* Gude faith, my liege lord and king, I can hardly tell you," said Sir Charles, with¬ out hesitation : " There hae been some hard yerks gaun ; but the last quarter stands rather aboon an average wi' us. It is a kittle bauk that hings ? er the Border, my liege ; it is often ??? sooner down to the yird than it is up to the starns again." " Well said, knight ! I like your fair wit and free humour," said the King. " So, upon the whole, you judge that the ba¬ lance preponderates on our side just now ?" " I should think sae, Sire, when sic a clod as this castle of Roxburgh is thrown into the bucket. It is ??? witherweight this for the end of a weigh-bauk. A* the kye o* the Seven Dales winna carry the swee to the south side again."
The Queen., hearing her lord conversing so freely and jocularly with this goodly personage, came also up with two of her ladies of honour, in order to put in a word ; " for (says Isaac, with great simplicity) wpmen always like to be striking kemps with- a handsome and proper man ; and the bigger of bone, and the stronger of muscle, the more is he the object oft their admira¬ tion." When Sir GharleSf had finished the last remark, therefore,, the Queen smiled? com¬ placently in his face, and said¿ " Yoitmust c^tainiy acknowledge, gallant knight,,that you have been much indebted to-heaven for your singular success· in this instance?" Sir Charles nodded his head, " Its a' that ye^ ken about it, my lady queen. But saft be the; sough that says it. I trow we were mair indebted to some other piacéin the first instance." The Queen held» up her hands : " Üh ! what does the knight mean ? Say, my lord, What ? What plaee ?" Then turning to Sir Ringan* who was terribly in the fid¬ gets about what had dropped from his
kinsman, she added* " I trust our right traist ??????? and lo? r ing cousin did not practise any of the diabolical arts, so pre¬ valent of late, to accomplish his hard task ?" And then, with a Λνοπιαη'β natural volu¬ bility, when once her tongue is set a-go¬ ing, she added* turning to Charlie, with*. out ????^ the Warden's reply, " What place does Sir Charles mean ? 1 hope you would not insinuate that you had any dealings with the spirits of darkness?" " Not with hell directly, madam," ani. swered Charlie, (for Isaac can never help calling him occasionally by his old title,) " but I canna say thafcwe didna get atstrong hint frae ane or twa of its- principal agents. No offence, my lady queen. I ken* by report, that your Majesty takes supreme delight in reUgious devotions ; and, to tell the truth, I have always had a strong hankering that gate mysel', and hope* I will hae till the day of my death* But tliere is ae thing in the whilk T am 4 greatly altered. Pray, may I* take the liberty to ask what is your Majesty's opinion about the deil·?'
"Uh! gracious St Mary be with us? What a question, knight! Why, what can I think but that he is the great enemy of God and man, and the author of uni¬ versal evil ?" " There I think differently," said Char¬ lie, bowing very low : " Always begging my lady queen's gracious pardon, that's the only tenet o' my belief that is altered;— at least an it be ??? fairly altered, it is con¬ siderably jumbled, and nought like sae steadfast as it wás. Always begging your pardon though, madam." " I am quite confounded,"said theQueen. ** Pray, warrior, what do you mean ?" ** Plainly this, my lady queen ; that I think the old gentleman has been sair abused; and that there are somena meikle better than him wha have been a great deal better ca'd. It may sound a little odd in your ears, but I hae now seen him. I hae sat wi' him ; I hae eaten, I hae drunken wi' him ; and gin it hadna been for the interference of women, we ?vad hae partit civilly. But whenever they get a finger in a pye, there ??? be some ane burnt
in the opening o't. Always begging ???: Majesty's pardon, though." " The Queen crossed herself, and count¬ ed her beads ; but at the same time be¬ stowed a smile and look of admiration on this extraordinary hero who had accom¬ plished such singular adventures. These encouraging Sir Charles to finish his sen¬ tence, he added : " They hae frightit me wi' him lang ; and sair has my neb been hauden at the grindstane wi' the fear o'. him. I durst hardly say or think that ane of a' the members of my body was my ain wi' perfect terror. But* thae days are a' o'er. An' the bedesmen be gaun to fright me ony langer wi' a deil, they maun get a new ane ; for the auld ane winna stand his ground to any extent wi' me on that score. He has doubtless some bad quali« ties ; some wicked vagaries about him ; but, upon the whole, I hae met wi* waur fellows." This introduction, in spite of SirRing- an's endeavours to waive the subject, led to the whole narrative of the transactions at Aikwood, of which the Queen and her
JIffîtìdenìsr , ót 'hcíiiour ????? never wearied, dthough at the same time many an Ave Maria and Paternoster the subject cost them. When obliged, from the lateness of the hour, to desist listening to the agi- tating' theme, the Queen was never at rest until it was renewed next day ; nor even tìien: till she had gone and visited the great hiU of Eildbn thus miraculously cleft a- «Simtjerand divided into three; and ?? ? ?? «after quaking at the scene, she grew still more importunate in her inquiries, so that Önere* Was no satisfying her curiosity on thfe subject of the enchantments of Master Michael Scott aU the time she remained in Bfcxburg-h. When* she retíred to her chamber that flwšt night she inquired for a confessor, and tiie*knight in waiting introduced the monk Benjamin 1 ; intimating, thatf since the cap«. tuDefíof tlie' castle he had been confessor^ general to all within its walls. The Queen-s dfcWliionfc thaft night were prolonged until ?????? hour next morning; nevertheless «stearosfe» from, her sleep» greatly refreshed^ mi · ii* high* spirits^ «and at? the^breakfasfr
table ???? more than usually gay. Not so with Douglas> over ?????? countenance, in spite of all exertions to the contrary, hung a heavy gloom* as well as a' manifest ab¬ straction of thought. The lung, who ???? a person of strong discernment, observed this, and, from some indefinite dread of the cause, involUntariiy partook of the sen¬ sation.
] ? j
CHAPTER X·
I want none of your gold, Douglas, I want none of ???* fee, But swear by the faith of thy right hand That you'll love only me : And VW leave my country and my kin And wend along with thee. May Marley. When the mass, and a plentiful morn¬ ing meal, were over next day, every one began to prepare for such exercises as the season admitted, AU lingered about for some time, but seeing that no orders were Ukely to be given out for any procession or general rendezvous during the day, which every one had expected, some be¬ took them to the chace, others to eques¬ trian exercises with sword and spear, while the Homes and the Gordons joined in an excursion into English ground, keeping along the southern bank of the Tweed. The King observing thera aU about to disperse, reminded the Douglas that it was
a high festal day; on which the htter made a low obeisance, and remarked, that he was only now a guest in the castle of Koxburgh, and that his honoured liege sovereign was host ; that his foresters and sumptuary ofiicers had got timeous no¬ tice, and nothing would be lacking that his Majesty could desire for the entertain¬ ment of his nobles and friends. The King then caused it to be intimated, that he would be happy to meet all his lords and nobles in the banquet-hall at even-tide, where every knight, gentleman, and yeo¬ man, were expected to attend in their se¬ veral places, and all should be heartily welcome. " And now, Lord Douglas," said he, leading tbe way into an anti- chamber, " let us two retire by ourselves, and consult what is to be done next" Lord Douglas followed, but ill prepar¬ ed to answer the inquiries about to be put to him. He had received injunctions of secrecy from one who had in no instance misled him, and to whom he had been of late indebted for the preservation of his life. But how was he now to conduct him-
self, «or-How answer his sovereign in any otìierway than according to4lie truth as iC Had* ???? ? stated unto Him ? Hîs prediì- cament was a Hard" one ; for lieras·, ih' the first place, ashamed òf tlie part he had acted, of never having discovered his royal mistess ??1? attached to* hi-? side, notw tvitfistandihg of all the evidences in con<- fihtratîon of the* fact; which· he had never once^seen till' too late: And then to have suffered even his mistress 1 page to* fall a victänrto' such a shameful 1 death, without ertfier making an effort to save him, or so much' as missing him from his hand, or mentioning his loss,-— ????? circumstances not* quite consistent Λνιίίι the high spirit of gallantry, as well as chivaliy, he had dis¿ playedatfírst bytííe-perilbusundertaking'. Glhdiy ?????' he have kept his-knowledge oftfi:e4ransaction'a secret; but then-there was the* monk Benjamini ????; by some supermitaraí agency, had 1 been given to undbrstaud tìiewholfe 1 scope and 1 tenor of* it;* and tfiere* was**-dame-JSTaiy Kirkmii. cHaeikniew tHe 4 whole; except tìlcdegrad^- iîïg^caftestt'ophe; aiRÏHa* unibldediiifall'to
hhn when it Λναδ too late. He run over all these things in his mind, and was as little, as at any previous period, prepared ivhat part to act, when the King turned round, and, in the most anxious and ear¬ nest manner, said, " Lord-Douglas, where is our daughter ?" <r My liege lord and sovereign; ought not I rather to have asked that question of you ?" said the Douglas:' " And I would have done it at our first meeting, only that I would not trifle Λν??ι your feelings on such a serious matter, perceiving that you laboured under a grievous misconception regarding my conduct. You have not, it seems, brought the princess Margaret along ivith you, as Λν3» expected by all my friends and followers ?" w Not by yourself, I am certain. I say, Lord Douglas, whereis my daughter?' I demand a categorical answer." "' Sire; in what Λν3^ am I accountable for yourdaughter?" ? Lord Douglas, I frate^ all evasion: V request an answer as express as my question; I know my darling* ??? ih
admiration of your chivalrous enterprise, resolved, in the true spirit of this roman¬ tic age, to take some active part in the pe¬ rils undertaken solely on her account : I know her ingenuity, which was always boundless, was instrumental in performing some signal services to you ; and that fi¬ nally she attached herself to your side in a disguise which she deemed would ensure her a kind and honourable protection. Thus far I know ; and, though the Λν?ιο?β was undertaken and transacted Λν?Λοιιί my knowledge, when I was absent in the Highlands, I am certain as to the truth of every circumstance ; and I am farther cer¬ tified that you ^οΛν all this." " Hear me, my liege sovereign. Ad¬ mitting that your daughter, or any other king's, lord's, or commoner's daughter, should put herself into a page's raiment, and" — " Silence, lord !" cried the King, furious¬ ly, interrupting him: " Am I to be mock¬ ed thus, and answered only with circum¬ locution, notwithstanding my express com¬ mand to the contrary ? Answer me in one
word. My Lord of Dpuglas, where is my daughter ?" '* Where God will, sire," was the short and emphatic reply. The king eyed Dou¬ glas with a keen and stern regard, and the eagle eye of the latter met that of his so¬ vereign without any abashment. But yet this look of the Douglas, unyielding as it was, manifested no daring or offensive pride ; it was one rather of stern sorrow and regret ; nevertheless he would not with¬ draw it, but, standing erect, he looked King Robert in the face, until the eyes of the latter were gradually raised from his toward heaven. " Almighty Father !" cried he, clasping his hands together,— " Where, then, is it thy will that my be¬ loved child should be ? ? Douglas ! Dou¬ glas ! In the impatience and warmth of temper peculiar to my race, I was offended at your pertinacity; but I dread it was out of respect to a father's feelings. I for¬ give it, now that I see you are affected, only, in pity to this yearning bosom, re* late to me all that you know. Douglas !
can you not inform me what has befallen to my daughter ?" " No; my liege, I cannot. 1 know no¬ thing* or at least little save from report ; But the little that I have heard, and the littlfe that Γ have seen* shall· never be re- fforted by my tongue." ** Then hope is-extinct !" cried the King. ^TSe scene that? can* draw tears- from the «tern* eye ofthe Douglas.) even by an after teflfe-ction, is one unmeet fora' parent's eat*. Therwill of the Almighty be done! ICe Bath* given and he hath takenaway :: bles¬ sed-be His name ! BhC why have the'inen of my household, and the friends iiiwhom f frøsted; combined' against my peace ?" Thé* King said tliis in a querulous mood. Äí Why did you not tell me sooner?" cried Re, torning-* to> Douglas, his tone altering gt-iadfcrølly from one of penitence and deep Humiliation' to one of high displeasure : **Why bring- me on this fools errand, when Fought to have been sitting in sack- dbtfr.and ashes, and humbling myself for the siro of my house? These must have been grievous indeed, that have drawn
down such punishments on me. But the indifference of those in whom we trusted is the worst of all! O, my child í My dar¬ ling child, Margaret! Never was there a parent so blest in a daughter as I was in thee ! The playfulness of the lamb or the kid,—the affection« of the turtle-dove, were thine. Thy breast was all enthusiasm and benevolence,, and every emotion of títty soul as pure* as the ray of heaven. I: lovad thee with« more than parental affection, and, if ? am bereaved of thee, I will go mourning to my grave: Is«there ?? one in this place that can inform me of ttîy daughter's fate?'Her lady confidanti, ???- derstand, is still lingering hem. Send' for her instantly. Send for her confessor ako, that I may confront you altogether; and ascertain the hideous and unwelcome truth. If I cannot have it here, I shall have it elsewhere, or wo be to all that have either been instrumental in her fate or lax in warding it off! Do you think, Lord of Dou¬ glas, that I can be put off with a hum and a haw, and a shake of tlie head, and, ' its ' God's, will?» Db you think I should,
vrfien I am inquiring about my own daugh¬ ter, whom I held dearest of all earthly be¬ ings? No, I'll scrutinize it to a pin's point. Ill wring every syllable of the truth out ofthe most secret heart and the most ly¬ ing tongue. Ill move heaven and hell, but I'll know every circumstance that has befallen to my daughter. Send, I say, for her foster-sister and faithful attendant, dame Mary Kirkmichael. Send also for her confessor, and for all to whom she has but pnce spoken since she arrived here. Why are they not sent for before this time ?" ** My liege lord, restrain your imp.a- tience. They are sent for ; but they will tell you nothing that can mitigate your sorrpw. If it be all true that has been told to me, and that you yourself have told to me, of the disguise the Princess assum¬ ed, then is it also true that you will never again see your daughter in this state of •existence." " Ah ! is it even so ! Then is the flower of the realm fallen ! then is the solace of my old age departed ! But she is happy in
the realms of blessedness. While love» joy, and truth are the delight of heaven, there wiU my Margaret find a place ! O, that she had staid by her father's hand ! Why was my jewel entrusted to the care and honour of those who care but for them* selves, and who have suffered the loveliest flower of the world to be cropped in its early blossom ? nay, left it to be sullied and trodden down in forgetfulness. Lord Douglas, did you see my daughter perish?* '* Now, my liege lord, can 1 act the man no longer, Forgive me ; and may the holy Virgin, the mother of God, forgive me ; for I indeed saw with these eyes that in¬ estimable treasure cut off, without one effort on my part to save her, and without a tear wetting my cheeks." « Then, may all the powers of darkness blast thy soul, thou unfeeling traitor! Thus ! thus will I avenge me on the cul¬ prit who could give up his sovereign's daughter, and his own betrothed bride, to a violent death, and that without a tear ! ? thou incarnate fiend! shalt thou not bewail this ????/?? the longest times of
eternity ? Därest thou »not draw .against an inured father and feing ?" *' Put up thy sword, sire. The Douglas drja«w« not but on »his equals, and thou ari npne of them. Thy person fe sacred <and thy Jføuue debilitated. He .holds thee in¬ violate,; but beholds thee^also as nothing!" ** Thou shalt »know, proud lord, that the ??, of Scotland fears no single arm, and that he can stand on one liirib to avenge theJblood-of his royal house." " My »gracious lord, this is the mere ra¬ ving.of a wounded «pirit, and I grieve that I should *h&ve for one moment regarded it otherwise than with veneration. I hadtde- s£r,ved to,die an hundred deaths, if I had known who the dear sufferer was ; hut, alas ! I knew not au^sht of ¿he sex or rank of any pag€t, who was taken prisoner in the great night engagement. But I ean tell you no onore, Sire ; nor is it needful ; you now know all. I am guiltless as the babe un¬ born of my royal misteess's (blood ; but I willneve;· foçgive -myself sfor my negligence and wwt s of|psrception ; npr do I anticipate ??????? h^ßpinßss in this wpdd. I;brøe
C*F ???." been laid under some .myatepousireMrainjts, and have suffered deeply already. ??? now,any gracious lord, Lsubmit-myselfrto your ¿wards," " Ala«, Lord Douglas, y ou mre Iittie ?- ?vare of ithe treasure you ji&veilpst. ?*(?? løssis even greater than mine. It behoves us, therefore, to lament ¿md bewaU our misfontu nes together, rather thanánflulge in hitter upbraidings." Here they were interrupted iby ithe m* trance of the Queen, who »brought iwitìh her the Lady Jane Howard» idressed iin a style of eastern magnificence, to .intr-ftdiige her ito :the King. The Kmg, amid *aU abø grief that ovenvhehned his spirit, was stenek witii her great beauty, find .paid that /respect and homage to her whicb high birth and misfortune always com¬ mand from the truly great; and the Queen, Λνιίίι the newfangledness of her sex, ap¬ peared wholly attached to this captive stranger, and had brought her down at that time to intercede Λν?Λ the King and Lord Douglas foi\her Ubenty, loading 1?? ΛνιΛ commendations imd kind attentions.
To check the Queen's volatility of spirits, the King informed her shortly ofthe irre¬ parable loss both of them had suffered, but the effect was manifestly not at all proportionate to the cause. She appeared indeed much moved, and had well nigh fallen into hysterics ; but if her grief was not «assumed, it bore strong symptoms of being so. She first railed at, and then tried to comfort the Douglas ; but finally turned again to Lady Jane, (who wept bitterly, out of true sympathy, for the Princess's cruel and untimely fate,) and ca¬ ressed her, trying to console her in the most extravagant terms. The King, on the other hand, sobbed from his inmost soul, and be¬ wailed his loss in terms so patheticandmov- ing, that the firm soul of Douglas was over- come,andhe entered into all his Sovereign's feelings with the keenest sensations. Itwas a scene of sorrow and despair, which was ra¬ ther increased than mitigated by the arrival of two more who had lately been sent for. These were the monk Benjamin and the lady Mary Kirkmichael, whom the King began anew to examine, dwelling on every
circumstance that occurred during the course of his darling child's extravagant ad¬ venture with a painful anxiety. But every now and then he became heated with anger, blaming some one for the ???^ of discern¬ ment or respect. When he came to ex¬ amine the monk, who shewed great energy and acuteness of speech, he lost his temper altogether at some part of the colloquy ; but the monk was not to be daunted ; he repelled every invective with serenity of voice and manner, and at sundry times ra¬ ther put the monarch to shame. " Hadst thou ever an opportunity of confessing and shriving my child, previous to the time she fell into the hands ofher enemies, reverend brother." ** No Sire, she never made confession to me, nor asked absolution at my hand." " And wherefore didst thou not proffer it, thou shriveled starveling ? Were there no grants to bestow ? no rich benefices to confer for the well-being of a royal virgin's Soul, that caused thee to withold these poor alms of grace ? Who was it that bestowed on thy unconscionable order all th$t they .VOL- TTT u
possess in this realm ? And yet thou wilt suffer one of their posterity to come into thy cell, to ask thy assistance, without be¬ stowing a.mass or benediction for the sake of heaven." "Sire, it is only to the ignorant and the simple that we proffer our ghostly rites. Those who are enlightened in the truths and mysteries of religion it behoves to judge for «themselves, and to themselves we leave the state of their consciences, in all ordinary cases." The monk was robed in a very wide flowing grey frock, and cowled over the eyes, while his thin and effemin¬ ate-looking beard trembledadownhis breast with the fervency of his ,address. As he said these last ΛνοΓάβ, he^stretched his right hand forth toward the King, and raising the left up behind him, his robe was by that means extended and spread forth in a man¬ ner that increased the tiny monk to triple the size he was before. " And for you, King of Scotland," added he, raising his keen voice that quavered with energy, " I say .such.a demeanour is unseemly. Is it becoming the head and guardian of the
Christian church in this realm,—him that should be a pattern to aU in the lower walks of life,—thus to threat and fume beneath the chastening of his Maker? You ask me who bestowed these ample bounds on my order ? I ask you in return who it was that bestowed them on thý progenitors and thee, and for Λν?^ purpose ? Who gave thee a kingdom, a people, and a fa- mUy of thy own ? Was it not he before whose altar thou hast this day kneeled, and vowed to be for him and not for ano¬ ther ? And what he has bestowed has he not a right to require of thee again, in his ΟΛνη time, and in his own way ?" The King bowed with submission to the truth of this bold expostulation, and the impa* tuous and undaunted monk went on : " It is rather thy duty, most revered monarch, to bow with deep humiliation to the righ¬ teous awards ofthe Almighty, for just and righteous they are, however unequal they may appear to the purblind eyes of mortal men. If he has taken a beloved chUd from thee, rest assured that he has only snatched her jfrom evil to come, and tr-anslated her f2
to a better and a happier home. Why then wilt thou not acknowledge the justice of this dispensation, and rather speak com¬ fort to the weaker vessels than give way to ill-timed and unkingly wrath. " As for thee, noble lord, to the eyes of men thine may appear a hard lot indeed. For the love of one thou adventuredst thy life and the very existence of thy house and name. The stake was prodi¬ gious, and when thou hadst won it with great labour and perseverance, the prize was snatched from thy grasp. Thy case will to all ages appear a peculiarly hard one ; still there is this consolation in it— " ** There is no grain of consolation in it," said Douglas interrupting him : " There can be none ! The blow on my head, and my hopes of happiness, is irretrievable." ** Yes lord, there is," said the monk ; "for has it not been decreed in heaven a- bove, that this union was never to be con¬ summated ? Man may propose arid scheme and lay out plans for futurity, but it is good for him that the fulfilment is vested in other hands than his. This then is conso-
lation, to know that it was predestinated in the counsels of one who cannot err, that that royal maid never was to be thine ; and therefore all manner of repining is not on¬ ly unmanly and unmeet, but sinful. It behoves now thy sovereign, in reward of thy faithful services, to bestow on thee another spouse with the same dowry he meant to bestow on his daughter. And it behoves you to accept of this as the gift of heaven, proffered to thee in place of the one it snatched from thy grasp. As its agent, therefore, and the promoter of peace, love, and happiness among inen, I propose that King Robert bestow upon thee this noble and high born dame for thy consort. Both of you have been bereaved of those to whom you were betrothed, and it can¬ not fail to strike every one that this seems a fortune appointed for ??? two by Pro¬ vidence ; nor can I form in my mind the slightest objection that can be urged to it on either side. Ät is desirable on every ac¬ count, and may be the means of promoting peace between the two sister kingdoms, wasted by warfare and blood, which every
true Christian must deplore. I propose it as a natural consequence, and a thing ap¬ parently foreordained by my master ; and give my voice for it. King and Queen of Scotland what say you ?" " I hold the matter that this holy and enlightened brother has uttered tobe con¬ sistent with truth, reason, and religion," said the King,— " and the union has my hearty and free approval. I farther pro¬ mise to behave to this lady as a father to a daughter, and to bestow upon our trusty and leal cousin, the Lord Douglas, such ho¬ nours, power, and distinction as are most due for the great services rendered to this realm. The match has my hearty con¬ currence." " And mine," said the Queen : " I not only acquiesce in the reverend brother's proposal, but I lay my commands on my noble kinsman the Lord Douglas to accept ofthis high boon of heaven." *' Pause my sovereign lady," said the Douglas, " before you proceed too far. In pity to the feelings that rend this bosom, let me hear no more of the subject at pre-
sent. In pity to that lovely and angelic lady's feelings, that must be acute as my own, I implore that you will not insist far¬ ther in this proposal. Do not wound a delicate female breast, pressed down by misfortunes." " This is something like affectation, Lord Douglas," rejoined the Queen : " If I an¬ swer for the lady Jane's consent, what have you then to say against this holy brother's proposal ?" " Ay, if your Queen stand security for the lady's consent, and if I stand security Jòr it likewise/* said the monk—*' what have you to say against the union then ? Look at her again, lord. Is not she a love¬ ly and angelic being ? Confess the truth now· For I know it to be the truth, that never since you could distinguish beauty from deformity, have your eyes beheld λ? lovely and so angelic a lady ? Pressed down by misfortunes, too ! Does that not add a triple charm to all her excellencies ? You know what has been done for her ? what has been suffered for her? what a noble and gallant life was laid down for her»?
Was such a sacrifice ever made for a lady or princess of your own country ? No, ne¬ ver, heroic lord ! Therefore bless your stars that have paved out a way for your union Vf ith such a lovely, angelic, and matchless la* dy; and take her ! take her to your longing and aching bosom." " Moderate your fervour, holy brother," said the Douglas, α wbich appears to me rather to be running to unwarrantable ex¬ tremes. Granting that the lady Jane How¬ ard is perhaps unequalled in beauty and elegant accomplishments ------" " Is she not so ? Is she not so ?" cried the monk witha fervour that raised bis voice to a scream of passion : " Did I not say that she was? And now am I not war¬ ranted by your own sentimentSj^/rétf/y ex¬ pressed enough. Sure, lord, you cannot deny that I said, that I told you, the lady was peerless in beauty and accom* plishments ? I knew it, and told you before that she was the queen oj beauty. Why then do you hesitate, and make all this foolish opposition to an union whieh we all know you are eager to consummate?
Yes ; you are : And we all know it. You are!" u Holy brother, what unaccountable phrenzy has seized upon you," said the Douglas ; " and why all this extravagant waste of declamation ? Let me not hear another sentence, nor another word on the subject : only suffer me to finish what I had begun. I say then, granting that the lady Jane were peerless in beauty and ac¬ complishments, still there is an impression engraven on my heart that can never bé removed, or give place to another ; and there will I cherish it as sacred, till the day of my death. And, that no reckless importunity may ever be wasted on-me again, here I kneel before the holy rood, which I kiss, and swear before God and his holy angels, that since I have been be¬ reaved of the sovereign mistress of my heart andallmy affections,—ofher in whom aU my hopes of happiness in this world ????? placed, and who to me was all in all of womankind—that never shall another of the sex be folded in the arms of Dou· glas, or call him husband! So help me P3
thou Blessed One, and all thy holy saints and martyrs, in the performance of this vow !" During the time of this last speech and solemn oath, the sobs of the monk Benja¬ min became so audible that all eyes were turned to him, for they thought that his delicate frame would burst with its emo¬ tions. And, besides, he was all the while fumbling about his throat, so that they dreaded he had purposed some mortal in. jury to himself. But in place of that, he had been unloosing some clasps or knots about his tuniek ; for with amotion quick¬ er than thought, he flung at once his cowl, frock, and beard away,—and there stood arrayed as a royal bride the Princess Mar¬ garet of Scotland ! " Journeyer of earth, where art thou now?" Yes ; there stood, in one riioment, dis¬ closed to thé eyes of all present, the princess Margaret Stuart herself, embellished in all the ornaments of virgin royalty,and bloom¬ ing in a glow of new born beauties." " Thank heaven I have been deceived 1" cried she, with great emphasis ; and when
she had said this, she stooà up motionless by the side of lady Jane Howard, and cast her eyes on the ground. No pen can do justice to the scene. It must be left whol¬ ly to conception, after the fact is told that no one present had the slightest concep¬ tion of the disguise save the Queen, who had been initiated into the princess's pro¬ ject of trying the real state of the Doug¬ las's affections on the preceding night. It was like a scene of enchantment, such as might have been produced at the castle-of Aikwood. But a moment ago all was^sor-* row and despair ; now all was one burst of joyful surprise. And, to make it still more interesting, there stood the two rival beau¬ ties of Scotland and England, side by side, as if each were vying with the other for the palm to be bestowed on her. native * country. But to this day the connoisseurs in female beauty have never decided whe¬ ther the dark falcon eyes and lofty forehead of the one, or the soft blushing roses anc} blue liquid eyes of the other, were the most irresistible. The King was the first to burst from the
silence of surprise. He flew to his daugh¬ ter's arms v/ith more vigour than a cripple could well be supposed to exert, kissed and embraced her, took her on his knee and wept on her neck ; then, striking his crutch on the floor, he scolded her most heartily for the poignant and unnecessary pain she had occasioned to him. " And the worst of it is," added he, " that you have caused me show too much interest in an imp that has been the constant plague of my life Λν?Λ her Λν?ιίιηβ and vagaries ; an interest, and an intensity of feeling, that I shall be ashamed of the longest day I have to live." *' Indeed but you shall not, my dear lord and father, for 1 will now teaze another than you, and teaze him only to deeds of valour and ?????? ; to lead your troops to certain conquest, till you are fully avenged of the oppressors of your people." Alary Kirkmichael hung by her seymar and wept The Douglas kneeled at her feet, and in an ecstacy took her hand and pressed it to his lips. " I do not know whether or not 1 shall have reason to bless
lieaven all my life for this singular resto* ration," said he ; " but for the present I do it with all my heart. Tell me, thou lovely cameleon, what am I to think of this ? Wert thou indeed, as was related to me, the page Colin Roy Macalpin ? He with the carroty locks and the flippant tongue ?'' " You need not doubt it, lord Douglas. I was. And I think during our first inti¬ macy that I teazed you sufficiently." " Then that delicate neck of yours, for all its taper form and lily hue is a charmed one, and rope proof ; for, sure as I look on you ηοΛν, I saw you swing, from a beam's end on the battlement ofthis same tower." " Oh ! no, no, my lord ! It was nót I. Never trust this head again ifit should suf¬ fer its neck to be noosed. You suffered it though ; that you must confess. And I dare say, though a little sorry, felt a dead weight removed from about your neck. You suffered me to be taken prisoner out of your tent, and mured up among rude and desperate men in a dungeon. It cost me all my ???? then to obtain my release. But Ieffected it. Swung froma beam's end
quoth he ! Och ! what a vulgar idea î No my lord, the page whom you saw swung was a tailor's apprentice^ whom I hired to earry a packet up to your lordship, with ray green suit of clothes, and a promise of a high place of preferment, and I kept my word to the brat ! An intolerable ape it was. Many better lives have been lost in this contention ; few of less value—I never deemed he was so soon to be strung, and my heart smote me for the part I had acted. But the scheme of turning monk and confessor suited me best of all : I then got my shades of mystery riveted on you ; and, heavens ! what secrets I have found out." At this part of the narrative, Isaac the curate bestows a whole chapter and a half on the description ofthe wedding, and all the processions, games, and feasting that ensued ; but as none of these things bore the slightest resemblance to ought that has ever been witnessed in the present age, like a judicious editor I have passed them over. Suffice it that the Border never witnessed such splendor of array, such tournaments,
such feasting, and such high wassail. For why ? because it never witnessed the mar¬ riage of a king's daughter before. The streets of the city, and the square ofthe fortress, that had so lately been dyed with blood, now " ran red with Rhenish wine." And be it farther known, that Sir Charles Scott and his horse Corbie bore off every prize in the tilting matches, till at last no knight would enter the lists with him; but the fair dames were all in raptures with the gallantry of his bearing, and the suavity of his manners. As for the Queen, she became so much ????????? of the hero, that she was scarcely to be kept in due bounds, and if she had not been advanced in years he might have deemed she was in love with him. In the lists she drew up her snow-white palfrey by Corbie's side, and in the revel hall the royal dame her¬ self was sure to be at the knight's side, ex¬ cept when at table, on pretence of hearing something more about his perils at Aik· Λνοοα, and in particular about the scene ΛνΗΙι the beautiful and splendid witches ; at ΛνΜοΙι, as Sir Charles related it with
»bashed countenance, the Queen and her Maries laughed till the salt tears ran from their eyes. As for the description of their appearance the succeeding morning, and the feelings of the warrior, both then and afterward when transformed to a huge bull, these never failed to throw the game¬ some group into convulsions of mirth. In short, the knight of Raeburn was of all the gallants quite thefavourite at that splen¬ did festival in the hall, as well as the hero in the lists, in which he six times received the prize of honour from the hands ofthe royal bride and those of lady Jane How¬ ard, who, at the Queen's earnest request was made principal bride's-maid, and pre¬ siding lady at the sports. But if Charles was the hero of those en¬ gaged in the games, his friend the gospel friar was as completely so among the gay onlookers, and created them more sport often than all in the lists. Ever since the various affrays in which his mule had been engaged, and come off with such decided success, the mongrel had learned to value himself solely as a beast of warfare, and no
man who rode near him was sure of keep¬ ing his seat a minute, especially if he rode a high mettled and capricious charger. By the side of a horse of modesty that bore himself with candour and humility of coun¬ tenance, the mule was a beast of sociality and decorum ; but whenever he saw a steed begin to cut any unnecessary capers, he deemed himself insulted or put to the chal¬ lenge, and on the instant began to lay back his long ears and switch with his tail, while his grey sunk eyes emitted a hellish gleam. It was no matter at what distance such a horse made his appearance, if the mule disliked his deportment, he would have flown across a whole field to attack and humble him. He had borne his mas¬ ter headlong into so many unpremeditated and umvarrantable scuffles since his return from Aikwood, that he had ^bestowed on him the name of Goliah of Gath ; and be* sides giving him that v-eteran title, he of¬ ten averred that he believed one of the ne¬ cromancer's imps of darkness had taken possession of his beast. The friar had, however, learned to dis,-
tinguish all his motions, and knew from these the exact points and stages of his ir¬ ritation ; and when his offence began to reach its acme, he had no other resource than that of wheeling his head forcibly around, and turning his tail toward the object of his displeasure. Without this precaution, the friar would have been car¬ ried into the lists every day merely to gra¬ tify the spleen of Goliah, who could not endure the curvetting and jangling that was going on there. And even this in¬ verse precaution did not at all times prove effectual, as in the following pleasant in¬ stance. It chanced one day that the knight of Kraeland entered the lists alone, no op¬ ponent appearing against him, owing to some mistake made in the arrangement by the officers. He was a goodly youth, but uplifted above the earth with vanity, and of his vapouring and airs there were no end. Imagining that he attracted the eyes of all the beholders, and elated because no one had the courage to appear against him, for so he affected to regard the circumstance,
he paraded the circle round and round, brandished his lance, and made his horse to curvette, rear, and wheel, accomplishing many grand evolutions. The lookers on were all beginning to get sick ofhim, and to view his vaporous manœuvres with dis¬ dain, but amongst them all there was none so much moved with spleen as Goliah of Gath. From the first moment that the knight entered the lists that uncireumcis- ed Philistine began to manifest a mortal dislike towards him ; the more so it was believed that he ivas mounted on a milk- Λνίπίβ steed, a colour peculiarly disagree able to the mule's optics. The judges of the games Λνίβί not what to do, and appeal¬ ed to the King, ΛνΙιο gave it as his opinion that this unchallenged appearance should be accounted as a victory, and that the knight should take his course in the next round ; and the heralds got directions to make proclamation accordingly. But long before this period the friar had been compelled to turn away the face of Goliah from this scene of vanity, and, as chance would have had it, he was in the
innermost circle, so that retreat outward through the innumerable files was utterly impracticable, and there sat the gruff un¬ courtly form of the gospel friar, with the tail of his beast ΛνΙιβΓβ the head should have been, to the great amusement of the spec« tators. For all this the malevolent eye of Goliah, as well accustomed to look back¬ ward as forward, perceived all the outra¬ geous rearings and snortings of that proud and gaudy animal, and became moved with so much indignation that he would no longer be restrained, either by bit or spur, soothing or threatening. Just as the he¬ rald had taken his place to make procla¬ mation, the mule fell a running backward ; and the more fiercely that the friar spur¬ red, and the more bitterly he threatened, the beast of Belial retrogaded the faster, till at last, after two or three intemperate plunges, he got his head straight to the white charger, and then in one moment he was upon him, and had him by the brisket with his teeth. The horse reared furious¬ ly, but the mule pressed still closer to him, fixing his' long teeth in the horse's shoul-
der, till on a sudden, in an attempt to clear both Goliah and his rider, or, at least, to leap over the mule's neck, the white steed was overturned, and thrown right on his back, above his overweening rider. All this was transacted in a space of time shor¬ ter than the time taken up in reading the relation ; and the moment that Goliah of Gath had achieved this overthrow, he ??????? about with a mettledness and in- \ r eteracy beyond all description, and at¬ tacked the eouple with his heels, prostrate as they were, yerk for yerk, indiscrimi¬ nately. The friar sunk the rowels of his spurs to the head in his sides, and uttered some strong declamatory sentences against him in the style of the nations of the East; but Goliah plied his iron-heels still the faster, although he groaned, as he kicked, in the bitterness of his spirit. The scene was perfectly irresistible, grievous as the consequences threatened to be on the one side. The lists were all in convulsions erf laughter, and involuntary shouts of ap¬ plause shook the storeys ofthe firmament. The King laughed till he sunk down in his
litter, and his attendants had some fears that he would expire in a convulsive fit. The knight of Kraeland was carried out of the lists, maimed, and in a state of in¬ sensibility; and the friar, maugre aU he could advance in opposition to the award, was proclaimed the victor in that course, and obliged to appear in the next encoun¬ ter in opposition to the knight who had been the conqueror in the preceding com¬ bat. Had Goliah of Gath restrained his wrath when this conquest was achieved, it would have been aU very well, save for Kraeland and his white charger; but the mongrel's wrath once aroused was not çasily abated. Therefore, when the friends of the fallen knight and his squire forced the Philistine to forego his attack and bat¬ tery, his gleaming eyes glanced all around for another proper object whereon to wreak his horrid revenge. Now it so happened, that the Queen and her Maries were all mounted on white palfreys ; and as these stood in the inner circles, arching their proud necks, and champing the bits, he
was moved with choler against them, and resolved within himself to give them a sur¬ prise, and shew them the prowess ofa ve¬ teran warrior ; for, over and above their saucy demeanor, the glaring whiteness of colour that pervaded them and their riders his heart could not endure : And, besides all these, the shouts and laughter of the multitude were thought to have added greatly to his ire. The friar, who knew him well, said so ; " for" added he,:" the shouts of joy and laughter are unto him as a portion of gall and of worm-wood." Certes, when he was driven from the pros¬ trate champion, by dint of club and lance, he straightway laid back his long ears, and with a swiftness hardly imaginable, scour¬ ed the plain to the attack of the dames and their strutting genets. The friar soon per¬ ceived the dangerous dilemma into which he was about to be precipitated ; and, all unable to restrain this champion of the Phi¬ listines, he cried out with a loud voice, " ? wretched man that I am ! lo, I shall work destruction among the daughters of women ! AVill no man come to the assistance
??? Wo is me! will the mighty men stand and look on till the daughters of their people are cutoff from the face ofthe earth?" Long ere this sentence had proceeded out of the friar's mouth, the work of deray and confusion was begun. The column of white palfreys were routed in one moment, and their gentle and affrighted riders kick¬ ed off in pairs, like so many diving swans. Never was there a warrior like Goliah of Gath ! for he tore with his teeth, and struck mth both hind feet and fore feet, all at the «same instant. The Queen of Scotland would in ail probability have been laid low with the rest, had it not been for the prowess ofher favourite hero, who sprung from Corbie's back, and seized the audacious mule by the bridle. " Smite hira, my son !" cried the friar, with a loud voice : " Draw thou forth thy sword, and smite him to the earth, for it is better for him to die than to live." The mule thought to prove contuma¬ cious at the first; but feeling CharHe'spow¬ erful grasp, he calmed himself, turned the
tme ear back, the other fcrw.ard, and switch¬ ed his tail, listening with much gratifica¬ tion to the hysterical cries of the discom¬ fited damsels. Not so his master, who was grieved in spirit, and very wroth with his old servant and companipn ; insomuch that when he alighted from his back, and seized his curb, he exclaimed, u ? thou Umb of the wicked one ! Thou emblem of the evil principle working in the children of disobedience ! * What shall I do unto thee ? Lo, ηοΛν, if I had a sword in mine hand, would I not strike thy head from off thy body, and cause thee tobe buried with the burial of an ass ?" The mule let his ears fall down very wide asunder, like the horns of a Lancashire ox, putting on a face of great humility, as he looked out from beneath his heavy eyebnrws, with many a sly demure glance at the friar's face. The good man led him around the lists in search of an opening to get out, for he durst not again mount him for fear of be¬ ing instrumental in some farther outrage among Üie ranks ofthe great and the noble. As he passed by the Kmg, his Majesty can·** ed him to be called up into his presence,
iand asked him what sum it would please tóm to #sk as the priqe of his mule ? * Verily, my lord, ? King," answered the friar, with great readiness, " that beast hath been unto thy servant os a friend and nn inheritance. He hatâ borne ?? over the mountains of Palestine, and hath drank from the fords of Jordan, ?? weU as from Abana and Pharpar, the rivers of Damas¬ cus. Yea, bestriding that woful beast, hath thy servant fought the battles of the cross ; and the hooves that have in thy sight been lifted np «against the fair and the lov-e- ly, the meek and the innocent, have been* dyed red in the blood of infidels. Money is of no avail to thy servant ;and he cannot part with his old and trusty companion, even though the spirit of those that are cursed from the heavens be in him." H Then wilt thou come thyself unto me at the Scottish court ?" said the King tohim, somewhat in his own style,—" and I will cherish both thee and thy doughty companion, and thou shalt minister unto me in holy things, and shalt be unto me as ä father, and I and my children will be to
l^puntcomyn, saith ??# pft|iee arttl ^f|y ^e^; ^isdom, valour, sn4 p^denç^ " Vprily, most noble JÈÇtffg, I hø? ^ many things to accpnsplish 1? ^hpr laît|s thsn this, which, by t|*e strpt^fljL of the ¿ord, paust be fulfflj-ed; ^heit tbgse arp finished, then shaU thy servei cqnte uii^o thee, and visit thee for gopd." " And,thou shalt be a ^ejcpmp gp?^ said the King t " Wear th -ομ this ?? f$t my sake, which I give thee as ? $?^$ friendship, and of protection through ?? kingdom. Remain in the Jists» fcwr /Ö$ti hast yet battle to do against two kni^jj of the lance aitd the sword." " Lo, Ι ψ??? even strijqe ^ith %e $??§ and the spear, if my ford the ïCing çom- mandeth it. But I lack armour, arçd ?? not a man of war, save when the Uves of the innocent or the cause of the cross is at stake. And, moreover, the beast that thou seest is as a beast of the bottom¬ less pit ; he hath antipathies and sym¬ pathies of his ???? ; and instead of bearing
me fidi force against my opponent, he may cany me to make vrar against women and children. Nevertheless, I wffl do «all that it behoovèth me to do. Who are my ad¬ versaries ?"—He was told they were the knights of Gemelscleuch and Raeburn. — tt Then God do so to me, and more also, if I Uft up my hand against any of these my brethren, the men of my right hand, and the preservers of my life. Neither will one ofthem put his spear in rest against me ; so that the battle would perish. Thy servant is not afraid to fight, but as a gla¬ diator he is unwffling to exhibit ; therefore my lord, ? King, suffer him to depart in peace." These reasons were cogent, so the King admitted them ; and the worthy and heroic jfriar was sufferedto lead off Goliah of Gath, mnid thundering shouts of applause.
CHAP. XL This general doctrine ofthe text explained, I proceed, in what remains of this discourse, to point out to yon three important and material considerations concerning the nature and character of -«vornan. These shall be, ls%, What she was; 2<%, What she is ; and, 5dly, What she will be hereafter. And are not these, my bre¬ thren matters of high importance ? Dickson's Sermons. All things of this world wear to an end, saith Isaac; so also did this high Christmas festival within the halls and towers of Roxburgh. The lady Jane had borne a principal share in all the sports, both in and out of doors. In the hall she was led up to every dance, and in the lists she presided as the queen ofthe games, dis¬ tributing the prizes with her own fair hands to the Scottish heroes, and, of course, crown¬ ing her old friend Charlie with the bays at least once a day. Sir Charles was amost unassuming character, and seldom adven¬ tured on addressing his superiors first. But when once they addressed discourse to
him, he never failed answering them with perfect ease and unconcern ; and often, as is well known ere this time, with more vo¬ lubility than he himself approved of. Once, and only once during aU these days of his triumph and high honours, did the lady Jane remember him of having brought her into captivity, and of the high bribe he had refused for her liberty, " An' if it be your will, honoured lady, I vrish ye wadna say ony mair about that matter," said Sir Charles ; " for mony queer fidgetty kind o* feeUngs I hae hád about it sinsyne. And if I had kend then what I ken now,—if I had kehd wha I had in my arms, and what I had in my arms, I had ??? borne the honours that I wear the day, My heart had some sair misgiving aince about you, when there were hard news gaun of your great jeopar¬ dy ; biit now that you are in sic high fa¬ vour, I am* e'en glad that I brought you, for troth ye hae a face and a form that does áne good to look at." The lady Jane only sighed at this ad¬ dress, and looked down, thinking, without doubt, of the long and dismal widowhood
which it would behoove her to keep for the dismal end of her betrothed knight, and then a virgin widowhood too, which was the worst of all. There was an obscure glimpse ofthe same sort of ideas glanced on Charlie's mind as he viewed her downcast blushing countenance ; and afraid of giving birth to any painful sensations in such a lovely lady's mind, he desisted from fur¬ ther conversation. The Queen was still so much interested in that lady as to endeavour by all means to procure her liberty without any ransom, somewhat contrary to her son-in-law's opinion. The Queen reasoned, that she was not a lawful prisoner of war; the Douglas that she was, there being no bond of peace subsisting between the nations, and she entering Scotland with forged cre¬ dentials, at least signed and sealed in fa¬ vour of another and non-existing person, Shc applied to the King, who gave his consent, but, at the same time, professed having nothing to do in the matter. At length she teazed Lord Douglas so much that he resolved to indulge her Majesty
before the court took leave of him, but to leave it until the very last day. He, how» ever, reckoned before his host; for now that the abbot of Melrose had conjoined him with royalty, he found that he had at the very least two to please instead of one. Here, we must, Λνί??ι that regard to ve¬ racity Λν?ιίο?ι so well becomes every narra¬ tor of a true tale, divulge a disagreeable secret ; that is, we must delineate truly a trait in the character of our heroine, the lady Douglas, (lately the princess Marga¬ ret of Scotland,) ?1 ? ??? we would rather have concealed, had it been possible to ??? ? ? done so. But she could not conceal it any longer herself,—and ivhy should Isaac and I vex ourselves about it ; for one day when Mary Kirkmichael ???^?? on her in her chamber, she found her dnjwned in tears* and with great perplexity, and no less cu¬ riosity, set herself to discover the cause. * What ? My dearest and most noble lady in tears ?" exclaimed she. " Now, a plague on these teazing, battling, boister¬ ous, deluding creatures called men, that will not let poor innocent maids alone to live
at heart's ease, but hold them thus in con¬ stant ferment, married or unmarried ! Well did I ween from experience, that the mai¬ den's troubles ΛνβΓβ the most insufferable to be borne ! The neglects—the disappointed hopes—the fears—and, above all, the jea¬ lousies ! Oh these jealousies ! What infernal tormentors they are 1 But now Httle wot I what to say, or what to think ; for beshrew me if Τ remember the time when I saw my rovai mistress in tears before. Let me re- collect. No, not since dame Mary Mal¬ colm's palfrey leaped the ravine before the lords of Huntly and Athol, ^and yours re. fused. Then, indeed, you*wept ; and when I laughed you struck me. Yes, you know you struck me, and that had nearly made matters worse." " Pray, madam," said lady Douglas, " could you conveniently command your¬ self so far as to bring a surgeon here on the instant ?" " A surgeon ! Sanct Marie's grace I what is your ailment, my dearest lady ?" " It is not for myself, it is for you I want him. You are very ill ofa quinsey,
dame, and bleeding below the tongue is Uecessary. Go bring my father's leech ,to nie, without delay, and come ivith him." " You have not forgot your sweet mai¬ den frolics for all that is come and állthat h donìe. Well, I «am glad you are still in ihat Whimsical humour. I was afraid you w-ere grievously Vexed or disappointed at something in your new state." " Step forth, I say, and bring me in a surgeon, for I insist on having you bleed- ed under the tongue. You are very ill in¬ deed, and the disease is infectious." €i By my inaidhood, and by your own, sweet lady, (the Douglas's I mean,) there shall no leech that ever drew lancet open a vein in my blessed and valuable mem¬ ber. No, not were it to humour a queen, or a lady Jane Howard" " Now, may all the plagues that prey oil the heart of woman seize and torment thee if thou hast not guessed the cause of my uneasiness. There's a latent devil within thee that whispers to thy imagin¬ ation the thoughts that are passing in my heart. O Kirkmichael, I am ill ! I have
suffeì-ed many distresses in my time ! ma¬ ny, many distresses !" 'f Yes, indeed you have,, my royal mis¬ tress ! many, many distresses !" ** Bring the surgeon, I say.. Cannot you, for the life of you, composé yourself for a little space, when you see ftie in such distress ? Your royal mistress, Mary ? I am rio royal mistress tiow ! No* I a'nt ! Nothing but a plain jog-trot wife of alord> or earl, or how do you call that beautifiil title ? While the lady Jane Howard !~ Oh Kirkmichael, I cannot tell yom. the half of what I feel !" " I know it all. Jealousy ! my dear la¬ dy-, jealousy ! Think yon I know not what it is to suffer that ? Do you remem¬ ber young Spinola, that came to our court from the places abroad ? He loved me the best after aU ; I had certain de¬ monstrative proofs of it. But do you know what I suffered ? Racks^ tortures, strangulations ! Fiends tearing out my èyës, pouring KeUebore into my ears, and boring through my heart ivith red hot irons! Not know what jealousy is? Was
not I telUng your royal self the last mi¬ nute"— * t Mary ! stop, and be advised. You are very ffl." ** I humbly ask forgiveness. I was coming to it. Dear lady, I have noted your trouble these nine days past, and that it was still gaining ground. But I can partly account for it, so that, with a little prudence and patience, it may be removed. Ever since the day on which you was a bride, or the one foUowing perhaps, there has been more court and more flattery paid to the southern beauty than to .the nor¬ thern one. It is the course of nature, ma¬ dam t you. are now a married wife, and your charms must be admired at a distanœ with respect and awe. The maid must still be courted and flattered. Quite natu¬ ral, madam, I assure ??? Think you any knight durst caper and bow, and prate to the lady Douglas, as they do to the Eng· lish puppet ?" " Mary, I will give you all my wedding apparel for these two last words. Is not she a mere puppet, with-
ont soul or magnanimity ? . But — Mary ! —How gladly would I change places with her, Mary ! She has conquered after aii Yes : She has conquered Margaret Stuart, there is no denying of it to one's own bearti « Gramercy, dearest lady, are you not raving ? Has not the noble lord of your adoption proved victorious, and gained yon with all honour and approbation ?" " But then the lord of her adoption died for her, Mary. Think of that. The gal¬ lant, faithful, and magnanimous Musgrave died for the mistress of his affections. But who died for the poor degraded lady Mar¬ garet of Scotland ? I am conquered with my own weapons. There is no denying of it ! I would rather that one lover had laid down his life for me than have had fifty husbands." " Palpably wrong ! I'll prove it. Fifty husbands ! How delightful^—Beg pardon, madam." " I tried the Douglas hardly for it. But he was too selfish, and would not die for me. Base, cruel knight ! No, he would not die for me ; even though I got him. to be-
íiW% Ihat I was jktt to death, arid niy ghost hàtìntiìig Him, fei he would not kill him¬ self. What ä Value those monstrous men set fr-pòri thefr ìiVés ! MuSgrávé died. La¬ dy Jane has conquered, and I ard married! t Wiéì I ????? dead, Kirkmichael !" to *Tis á pity büi that you ?vère, madam ! ff ?? are tb Uve on these terms with the world, they had better be out of it. For ýbú tóow if the man that one loves best tWU nöt condescend ahvays to die when the gratification bf his ïiiistress' vanity requires È, Miy there is atl end óf all endurance. I ritöthaged otherwise with yourig Spinola." u Méiítion thé name of your Spinola ág-áhi tb nie for the head that stands on your ???? 9 sìrice ybu deprecate the mote gentle* prescription of bleeding below the tongue ; mid now find me some anodyne Without delay for the distemper that is preying on my ??? ??? .óf ybtìr jeers ?? your jibes, Kirkmichael, for I am not in humour tè beat ffièiri. *nib Worst thing of aU is fa ?> cbhie. This pippet,— this paintéá M,~thïs Mtíg of wax * after triumphing ötèr aite ih my oWn country ?? among
toy own people,—after being died for, while I was only lived for,—after behig courted, and flattered, and smiled oil» while I was only bowed to and gazed on, —after being carressed by my father, atid bedaubed With praises by my newfangled and volatile mother,—after all« this, I say, there is she going to be set at liberty.· and without all question wedded to one of thfe royal dukes, one of the princes of the blood ! How shall the blood of the Bruce and the spirit of the Stuart brook this ? Before I heard of that lady's name, 1 knew not what jealousy was. Ever since that time has she held me in misery. I thought I had once achieved the greatest conquest that ever was accomplished by heroine. And I did seize a noble prize ! How has it turned out ?—in every instance to her honour, and my disparagement And there^ through the uïmatural fondness öf my doating mother, will she return home, and be courted for her princely fortune, not for her beauty I am sure ! But then, they wul hear that the bravest and most ehivalitous knight in England died Jar ñer ¿
S76 THE THEEE FEEIIS and as certainly as I speak to you, will she achieve a higher marriage than Margaret, •and how shall she ever showher faceagain?" " A higher marriage than you, dearest lady? Then must she be married to some of the kings on the continent, for in all the dominion of England there is not a subject of such power as your lord, the Earl of Douglas and Mar, nor one whose military honours flourish so proudly." " My lord and husband is all that I could wish in man, only^ ------" " Only that he is not dead. That's all." * c You had better ! Only I say that he is not a prince ofthe bloodroyal, Mary. Think of that. There are many such in England. And there to a certainty will my great and only rival be wedded to one of these. The Duke of York or Glocester, mayhap ; or to Prince Henry, the heir of the house of Mortimer, and then she'll be a queen ! Yes, Kirkmichael ! then she will be queen of England/ — And I—what will I be? No more than plain Lady Doughs ! The wife of the Black Douglas ! — Och ! what shall I do, Mary? I'll go and wipe my
shoes on her as long as I have it in my power." ** Tarry for a small space ; there is time enough for that afterward, my dearest la¬ dy. Be staid for a little while, till I tell you a secret. A very important and pro¬ found one it is, and it behoves you to know it. There is a certain distemper that young newly married ladies are subjected to, which is entitled phrenzy, or some such de¬ lightful name. Some call it derangement of intellect, but that is too long a name, I hate long names, or \ T ery long things of any sort. So you must ?????, madam, that this delightful trouble, dor it is delightfiil in its ?vay, produces a great deal of ani¬ mation. It is quite proper you should know this grand matrimonial secret, madam. This delicious, spirit-stirring trouble then soon goes off, and Λν?ιβη it goes all the gid¬ dy vapours of youth fly witli it. The mir¬ ror of the eye is changed, its convex being thence turned inward, reflecting all nature on the soul in a different light from that in which it had ever appeared before ; and, at the same time the ????1? structure and
fmme df the character is metamorphosed, and the being that is thus transmuted ?* conies a more rational and respectable crea¬ ture than it was previously, and at the hme time a mòre happy one, although it must be acknowledged its happiness is framed on a different model. This is my «secret* and it is quite proper that every young lady who is married should be ini¬ tiated into it. As for the old ones, they are too wise to be initiated into ??? thing, or for any thing to be initiated into them." ** Now, you imagine you have said a very wise thing; and it is not without shrewdness. But I can add a principal part which you have wholly left out, and it iS this : When the patient is labouring under this disease, it is absolutely neces¬ sary that she be indulged, and humoured in every one of her caprices, else her con- válesence is highly equivocal. Don't you acknowledge this ?" " I grant it. And the first case that cbmes under my care I promise to abide by this prescription." " That iš spoken like yourself,—like the
trusty friend and confidante. What then is to be done? for something must be done, and that suddenly." * That is easily decided. She must be kept in confinemerit. Kept here a prisoner at large, until she turn an old maid and lose a few of her fore-teeth. That wiU bé delightful ! Eh ! Then make her beheve all the time that it is a duty incumbent on her to remain in that widowed state for the sake of Musgrave— Hoh ! beg pardon, madam !" α I charge you never to let that triumph of hers sound in my ears again. It creates the same feeling within me as ifyou in¬ formed me that an adder was laced in my stays. Kirkmichael, you never took any thing in hand that you did not accomplish for me. This lady must be retained for the present, tiU we can determine on some other course. I gave my lord a lesson about it already, but his reply was not on¬ ly unsatisfactory but mortifying in the ex¬ treme. It has almost put me beside my¬ self, and my pride will not suffer me to apply to him again. " My dearest love»"
said he, " I pray that you Λν?Ι not shew a a sense of any inferiority by a jealousy of that unfortunate lady." Inferiority î I ne¬ ver had such a sentiment as a feeling of in- feriority ! What absurd notions tlieme men imbibe. Is it possible, Mary, that I ean have a sense of inferiority ?" €i Xo, no ! quite impossible 1 Think no more of such antiquated and absurd a- pothegms as these. Ι Λν?Ι manage it for you, I take in hand to keep her as long as I live, if that will satisfy you. But are you sure that your brother Λν?Ι not fall in love witli her, and marry her, and then she \vill be queen of Scotland ?" <tf Ooh !—Oooh ! Give me a drink, Ma¬ ry. I am going into fits ! Ooh !—Yes : as sure as you stand there, he Λν?Ι The prince is his mother all over, newfangled and volatile in the extreme, and amorous to an intolerable degree. Disgustingly amorous, she is the very sort of food for his passion. Then her princely fortune, and the peace of the two realms ! Oh f give me another drink» Mary ; and bathe my hands—and røy bnrw—That is kindly done. Queen
of Scotland ! Then I must pay court to her* -—perhaps be preferred as lady of the bed¬ chamber. No, no. To the Scottish court she must not go Γ " Be calm, my sweet lady ! I have it. You shall assume your brother's character once more—pay court to her—seduce her, and have her disgraced." " What did you say, Kirkmichael ? re¬ peat that again. What did you say about disgracing ? I am so very ill." t * O no ! That scheme will not do. It will end ill î it Λν?Ι end ili ! You are lady Douglas noiv, not the majden princess. Why, Ι Λν?Ι get her married to one of your footmen for you. That ?\ ? ? do." " Prithee speak of things possible, and within some bounds of probability. If she were but married to a knight but une step ??1??? ? my lord in dignity, Ι ΛνοηΜ be sa¬ tisfied. Nay, ?? ? ??? that step only ideal it would give my heart content." " Is that then so much to make such a pother about ? Ι Λν?Ι accomplish it in ^vo days. So difficult to get a maid ofher com¬ plexion to marry ? Difficulty in fattening
—a pig ! baiting a hook for a bagrel !—a stickleback !—a perch ! I'll do it in two days—in one day—in half a day, else ne¬ ver caU me Mary Kirkmichael of Balmedie again. Difficulty in marrying a maid with Hght blue eyes—golden locks and rosy cheeks—with a languishing smile always on her countenance? and that maid an English one too ? Peugh ! Goodbye, my lady, Lady Black Douglas. I'm off. (Opening the door again.) It is a shame and a disgrace for any gentleman not to ?? for his mistress ! I say it is ! Young Spinola would have died for me cheerful¬ ly if I would have suffered him,—that he would ! Goodbye, madam." Mary was as busy all the remaining part ofthat day as ever wps a bee in a meadow. She had private business with the Queen, and had art or interest enough to get two private audiences. She had business with the lady Jane Howard ; a word to say to the King, and two or three to the lord Dou¬ glas—But it is a great loss that these im¬ portant disclosures cannot be imparted jbere,—for every word that she told to each
of them was a profound secret ! Not a wor4 of it ever to be repeated till death ! What a loss for posterity ! It had one quality^ there was not a word of truth in all this important disclosure ; but an ingenious lie by a woman is much more interesting than one of her tlue stories. There was, how¬ ever, one of Mary Kirkmichaels seprjets came to light, though none of those aboye- mentioned ; and from the complexion of that, a good guess may be made at the matter of all the rest. Sir Charles Scott, alias Muckle Charle of Yardbire, was standing .at the heajä of his hard-headed Olivers, his grimy Potts, and his skrae-shankit Laidlaws, in all «a- mounting now to 140 brave and well ap¬ pointed soldiers. He had them all dressed out in their best light uniform, consisting of deer-skin jackets with the hair outside ; buckskin breeches, tanned white as snow ? with the hair inside ; blue bonnets as bro.ad as the rim of a lady's spinning wheel, «and clouted singlc-soaled shoes. He was train¬ ing them to some evolutions for a grand parade before the King, and was himself
dressed in his splendid battle array, with his plumes and tassels of gold. His bon¬ net was ofthe form of a turban, and his tall nodding plumes consisted of three fox tails, two of them dyed black, and the middle one crimson. A goodlier sight than Sir Charles at the head of his borderers, no eye of man (or woman either) ever beheld. As he stood thus giving the ΛνοΜ of com¬ mand, and brandishing the Eskdale souple by ?vay of example, in the great square in the middle, of the fortress, a little maid came suddenly to his side and touched him. Charles ???? extending his voice at the time, and the interruption made him start inordinately, and cut a loud syllable short in the middle. The maid made a low courtesy, while Charles stooped forward and looked at her as a man does Λν?ιο has dropt a curious gem or pin on the ground, and cannot find it. " Eh ? God bless us, what is't hiimy ? Ye ???? amaist gart me start." " My mistres requests a fow minutes private convei oution with you, sir knight." " V* r hisht dame ! speak laigh," said Sir
Charles, half whispering, and looking raised- like at his warriors: " Wha's your mistress, my little bonny dow? Eh? Oh you're nodding and smirking, are you ? Harkee, It's no the auld Queen, is it ? Eh ?" ** You wi?l see who it is presently,gallant knight. It is a matter of the greatest im¬ port to you, as well as your captain." " Ha ! Gude faith, then it maunna be neglected. I'll be w'ye even now, lads ; saunter about, but dinna quit this great four-nooked fauld till I come back ????. Come along, then, my wee bonny hen chic¬ ken. Baux up an' gie me a grip o' your finger-ends. Side for side's ? neighbour like." So away went Sir Charles, leading his tiny conductor by the hand, and was by her introduced into one ofthe hundred apartments in the citado!. " Our captain is gaun affat the nail now," said Will Laidlaw ; " Thae new honours o' his are gaun to be his ruin. He's get¬ ting far ower muckle in favour wi' the grit fo'k." " I wonder to hear ye speak that gate," said Gideon Pott of Bilhope : *' I think it VOL· ΙΠ. R
be true that the country says, that ye maun aye read a Laicl^v backward. What can contribute sae muckle to advance a íren- tleman and his friends as to be in fervour with the great ?" <fi I am a wee inclined to be of Laidlaw's opinion," said Peter Oliver of the Lang- burnsheils, (for these three were the heads¬ men of the three names marshalled under bir Charles,)— i( Sudden rise, sudden fa' ; that was a saying o' my grandfather's, and he was very seldom in the wrong. I wad¬ na ??????? a bit to seeour new knight get his head choppit oif; for I think, if he haud on as he is like to do, he'll soon be ower grit wl the Queen. Fo'k should bow to the bush they get bield frae, but take care o' lying o?ver near the laiggens o't. That was a saying o' my grandfather's aince when they wantit him to visit at the castle of Mountcomyn." " There is he to the gate ηοΛν," said Laidkiw, 4t and left his men, his bread¬ winners, in the very mids o' their lessons ; and as sure as we 88Λν it, some o' thae imps ìviìl hae his simple honest head into Hoy's
net wl some o' thae braw women. Wha wins at their hands will lose at naething. I never bodit ony good for my part o' the gowden cuishes and the gorget, and the three walloping tod tails. Mere eel-baits for catching herons !" " Ay weel I wat that's little short of a billyblinder, lad !" said Peter Oliver ; * € I trow I may say to you as my grandfather said to the ghost, 6 Ay, ay, Billy Baneless, * an a' tales be true, yours is ??? lie,' quo' he ; and he was a right auldfarrant man." But as this talk was going on among the borderers, Sir Charles, as before said, was introduced into a private chamber, where sat no less a dame than the officious and important lady of all close secrets, Mistress Mary Kirkmichael of Balmedie, who rose and made three low courtesies, and then with an affected faultering tongue and downcast look, addressed Sir Charles as follows: "Most noble and gallant knight, —hem—Pardon a modest and diffident maiden, sir knight !—pink of all chivalry and hero of the Border : I say be so gene¬ rous as to forgive the zeal of a blushing R 2
virgin for thus presuming to interrupt your warrior avocations.—(Sir Charles bowed.)—But, ? knight^—hem—there is a plot laying, or laid against your freedom. Pray may I take the liberty to ask, Are you free of any love engagement ?" " Perfectly so, madam, at—hem !------" " At my service. Come that is so far well. You could not then possibly have any ob¬ jections to a young lady of twenty-one or thereby, nobly descended, heir to seven ploughgates of land, and five half-davochs, and most violently in love with you." " I ,maun see her first, and hear her speak," said the knight, " and ken what blood and what name ; and whether she be Scots or English." " Suppose tl^at you have seen her and heard her speak," said the dame ; " and «suppose she was of Fife blood ; and that her name was lady Mary Kirkmichael : What would you then say against her?" ** Nothing at all, madam," said Sir Charles, bowing extremely low. "Do you then consent to accept of such a one fôr your lady ?*
" How can I possibly tell ? Let me see her." " ? Sir Charles í gallant and generous knight ! do not force a young blushing vir¬ gin to disclose what she would gladly con¬ ceal. You do see her, Sir Charles ! You do see her and hear her speak too. Nay, you see her kneeling at your feet, brave and generous knight Ì You see her tears and you hear her weep, —and what hero can withstand that ? Oh Sir Charles !— " Hout, hout, hout i" cried Sir Charles interrupting her, and raising her gently with both hands, " Hout, hout, hout ! for heaven's sake behave yoursel, and dinna flee away wi' the joke athegither, sweet lady. Ye may be very weel, and ye are very weel for ought that I see, but troth ye ken a man maun do ae thing afore ano¬ ther, and a woman too. Ye deserve muc¬ kle better than the likes o' me, but I din¬ na incline marriage ; and mair than that, I hae ??? time to spare." " Ah, Sir Charles, you should not be so cruel. You should think better ofthe fair
sex, Sir Charles ! Look at this face. What objections have you to it, Sir Charles ?" " The face is weel enough, but it Λν?Ι maybe change. The last blooming face that took me in turned out a very differ¬ ent article the next day. Ah, lady ! Ye Uttle ken what I hae suffered by women and witchcraft, or ye wadna bid me think weel o' them." 44 Well, knight, since I cannot melt your heart, I must tell you that there is a plot against your liberty, and you Λν?Ι be a married man before to morrow's night. It is a grand plot, and 1 am convinced it is made solely to entrap you to marry an English heiress that is a captive here, who is fallen so deeply in love with you that, if she does not attain you for her lover and husband, her heart will break. She has made her case known to the Queen, and I have come by it : therefore, sir knight, as you value my life, keep this a projound se¬ cret. I thought it a pity not to keej) you out of English connections; therefore I sent for you privily to offer you my own
hand, and then you could get off on the score of engagement." " Thank you kindly, madam." " Well, Sir. On pretence of an appen¬ dage to the marriage of the king's favour¬ ite daughter with the greatest nobleman of the land, before the festival conclude, it is agreed on that there aré to be a number of weddings beside, which are all to be richly endowed. The ladies are to choose among the heroes of the games ; and this lady Jane Howard is going to make choice of you, and the law is to be framed in such a manner that there will be.no evading it with honour. You have been a.mortal enemy to the English ; so have they to you. Had not you better then avoid the connection by a previous marriage, or an engagement say ? " 1 think I'll rather take chanco, with your leave, madam : Always begging your pardon, ye see. But, depend on it, I'll keep your secret, and am. indebted to you for your kind intentions. I'll take chance. They winna surely· force a wife on ane whether he will or no ?"
<c Perhaps not. One Λν?ιο does not in¬ cline marriage, and has not time to spare to be married, may be excused. Tell me, se¬ riously ; surely you Λν?Ι never think of accepting of her ?" " It is time to decide about that ?? ? ??? aince I get the offer. I can hardly tnrvv Λν -hat ye say is true; but if the King and theWardeinvill hae it sac, ye ken Λν?ηιί can a body do t" * " Ah, tliere it is ! Cruel Sir Charles ! But you ????? you really have not a mi¬ nute's time to spare for marriage, and the Λν3ηί of inclination is still ??'????. I have told you, sir knight, and the plot Λν?Ι be accompUshed to-momw. I Avould you ΛνοιιΜ break her heart, and absolutely re¬ fuse her, for I hate the rosy minx. But three earldoms and nine hundred thou¬ sand marks go far ! Ah me ! Goodbye, no¬ ble knight. Be secret for my sake." Sir Charles returned to his men in the great square, laughing in his sleeve all the way. He spoke some to himself ?????18?, but it ??'?? only one short sentence, ?\ ? ??? Avas tliis : " Three earldoms and nine bun-
dred thousand marks ! Gudefaith, Corbie will be astonished." It was reported afterwards, that this grand story of Mary's to Sir Charles was ?1 ? ?? nothing at all in comparison with Λν?^ she told to lady Jane, of flames and darts, heroism, royal favour, and distinc¬ tion ; and, finally, of endless captivity in the event of utter rejection. However that was^vhen the troops assembled around the fortress in the evening, and the leaders in the hall, proclamations ?? ? ??? made in every quarter, setting forth, that all the champions ΛνΙιο had gained prizes since the commencement of the •hristmas games ?\ ? ??? to meet together, and contend at the same exerciser befove the King, for other prizes of higher value ; and, farther, that every successful candidate should have an opportunity of acquiring his mistress' hand in marriage, vvith rich dowries, honours, manors, and privileges, to be conferred by the King and Queen ; ΛνΙιο, at the same time gave forth their peremptory com¬ mands, that these gallants should meet with no denial, and this on pain of forfeit- uà
ing the royal favour and protectk % not only towards the dame so refusing, but likewise to her parents, guardians, «and other relations. Never ??& there a proclamation issued that made sueh a deray among the fair mx as this. All the beauty of the Low¬ lands of Scotland was «assembled at this royal festival. The city of Roxburgh and the tow a of Kelso were full of visitors; choke full of them î There ????? ladies in every house, beside the inmates ; and, ge¬ ueially speaking, three at am average for everv male, ??????? in the citv or suburbs. Yet, for all these lovely women of high rank and accomplishments, none eke fled from the consequences of the man¬ date but one alone, who dreaded a rival being preferred,—a proof 1??\' little averse the ladies of that age ????? to the bonds of matrimony. Sueh a night as that was in the city ! There were running to and fro, rapping at doors, and calling of names during the whole night. It was a terrible night for the dressmakers; for there was such a run upon them, and they had so
mueh ado, that they got nothing done at all, except the receiving of orders which there was no time to execute. Next mornibg, at eight of the day, by the abbey bell, the multitude were assem¬ bled, when the names of the former heroes were all called ????, but only sixteen ap* peared, although Uventy-two stood on the list. The candidates ????? then all taken into an apartment by themselves, and treat¬ ed with viands and ????$, Λνί??ι ?\ ? ????\ ? ?? else they required. There also they were instructed in the 1???? of the game. Every one was obliged to contend at every one of the exercises; and the conqueror in eaclnvas to retire into the apartment of the ladies^ where they were all placed in a circle, lay his prize at his mistress's feet, and retire again to the sports Λνίί?ιοιι? uttering a ΛνοΓά. The exercises were held on the large plain south ofthe Teviot, so that they ΛνοΓβ beheld by the whole multitude without any inconveniency. The flowers of the land also beheld from their, apartment in the ,castle, although no one saw them in return, save the fortunate contenders in
the field. The fet trki wm ? foot mm for a chain of grôd, giren by the kdy Doo* glas, ??? all the sixteen being obliged to run. the sport aiforded by the ??? was ex¬ cellent ; før the eager desire to be foremost acted not more powerfully to urge the candidates to exertion than the dread of being tbe last, so that tîie two hindmost were straining every nerve, and gapping as voraciously for breath m the two foremost Sir Charles Scott took the lead, lea\ing the rest quite behind, so far that even' one thought he would gain with ail manner of ease, and they began to hail him as con¬ queror. But owing to his great weight he lost breath, and in spite of ? 11 he could do the poet made by him and won the prize, which he took with a proud and a joyful heart, and laid at the feet of Delany. ** Bauchung shurf !" exclaimed Sir Charles, laughing when he saw the poet passing his elbow, Sk Useless bauehling shurf! an I had kend I wad hae letten ye lie, and been singit to an izle in the low o' Ravens- worth,"
** Slight, I thmk ye ?? k^,* acted one; - Ithinksæ f too, w ^MC^es. M I fiket aye tetter to rin ahint an Englishman than afore him a ? my life " The next game given out was a tmì in leaping, for a pair of bracelets, cksped with gold, and $et with jewels, given bf tbe Queen. Thete also the poet won, and kii at Deknya feet Sir Charles wem three ; one for tilting on horseback, one for wrest¬ ling, and one for pitching the iron bar, and he laid all the three prbes at the feet of ladv Jane Howard. Two lords won each of them two prizes, and other two knights won each of them one ; and aU, unknown to one another, laid them at the feet of lady Jane Howard. When the sports ofthe day were finish¬ ed, the seven conquerors, aU crowned ΛνιΛ laurel, and gorgeously arrayed, were con¬ ducted to the gallery ?????? the ladies still remained ; and after walking round the room to the sound of triumphal music, they were desired to kneel one by one in the order in which they had entered before,
mad each to invoke his mistress's pity in hk own terms. It fell to the poets lot to kneel first who strett4ied forth his hands toward a certain point in tbe room, and ex¬ pressed himself as follows : ** ? lovely dar¬ ling of my soul ! in whom my every hope is centered ; at whose fëet I kid my ho¬ nours down. This laurel wreath I also consecrate to thee. B\^ all the love that I have borne for thee, the pains that I have suffered, I conjure you to raise me up, and say thou wilt be mine :— ebe here I'll kneel tiU doomsday !" A pause ensued ; the King and his nobles looked on in breathless curiosity, for they knew not where he had bestoved his fa- \'ours. The dames also gazed in envious silence, and in hopes that the supplicant would be refused. He soon himself began to dread ??*1^ they hoped ;. his eoimtenance changed ; the wild lustre of his eye faded ; and he began to look around to see where he could get a sword on which to fall and kill himself. He cast one other pitiful look to Delany, but she deigned no move¬ ment to his relief>—stiU keeping her seat,
though visibly in great agitation, uut, at length, when hope w.as extinct in his ?????, there appeared one to his relief This was no other than his old rival the gospel friar, ?% ho had been admitted in an official capacity, in order to join hands and bless unions if any such chanced to be agreed on. He was standing ruminat¬ ing behind backs ; but .seeing the first offer about to be rejected, and aware of the force of example, whether good or bad* and how little chance he had of employment that day if the first effort misgave, he step¬ ped briskly up to Delany, and, taking her hand, said, " Lo, my daughter, have not I travelled for thee in pain, and yearned over thee as a mother yearneth ???? the son of her youth ? Why wilt thou break my heart, and the heart ofhim that burneth for thy love?" Delany then rose, and Λνιίίι trembling step came toward her lover, led by the grotesque form of tlie good friar. The tears gushed from the poet's eyes as she lifted the laurel crown from the floor, and replacing it on his head, said, as she raised him up, " Thou hast adventured
må overcome* Hence be thou the lord of my heart and aJBfectkms,*' The friar g^e them no more time to pala\ r er, but joined their hands, pronounced them a married pair, «and blessed their union rø the name of the Trinity. Then Sir Charles Scott kneeled, antl, casting his eyes gravely toward the floor, ?said only these words ; ** Will the lady whom I serve take pity on her humble sbv-p, or bliall he retire from this presence ashamed and disgraced.** Woman, kind and affectionate woman, is ever more ready to confer an obligation on our sex than accept of one. Lady Jane airóse without any hesitation, put the crown on the knights heat!, and, with a most win¬ ning grace, raised him up, and said, u Gal¬ lant knight, thou wert born to conquer my countrymen and me ; I yield my hand and with it my heart." The friar lost no time in joining their hands ; he judged it best «and safest to take women at their first words ; and short time ?? ? ?$ it till the two were pronounced husband and wife, w and whom God hath joined let no man dare to put asunder. Amen !" said the friar, and
bestowed on than an earnest blessing*— Isaac the curate expatiates largely on the greatness and goodness of thb couple; how they extended their possessions, and were beloved on the Border. Their son, he says, was the tanrøæ Sir Robert of Eskdale, the warden of the marches, from whom the families of Thirlstaae, Harden, and many other opulent houses are de¬ scended. No unió* could be more happy ; and besides, it rendered the Lady Douglas the happiest of women, and Mary Kirk* miehael the proudest* But to return to the scene in the gallery with the knights and their mistresses. The King and his nobles Λν?ιο aceomp&nied the gallants into the apartment of the la¬ dies, ????? -ing nothing of the choices each had made, expected great amusement from compliances and non-compliances ; and at all events, after so fair a beginning, a num T ber of tveddings to be the result. Every one of the successful knights expected the same thing ; for it is a curious fact, ΛνΙιίΑ shows the duplicity of our character in a striking light,that,?vhenthechampionswere
all in the apartment together in the morn¬ ing, soine mentioned one lady as the ffovv- er øf the land and of all present, some mentioned another, and so on. But no one ever mentioned the names either of Delmy or Jane Howard. Sir Charles in¬ deed mentioned no name, but when each had named a pretended favourite ivith mighty encomiums, he only added, " l'U¬ no say muekle ; but there's- ane that I rank aboon a' thae." The master of the ceremonies looked round to call the next champion to kneel ;* but, behold, he was not there ! He called the next again. He ivas gone also ! ?? ? ??? one ofthe knights had vanished, each think¬ ing himself slighted by the preference gi¬ ven to Sir Charles Scott, but none know¬ ing that for his sake they were all slighted alike. The noblemen were all in the ut¬ most consternation ; the King became high¬ ly offended, and said " What is the mean¬ ing of this ? Have these knights dared to desert their colours on the very eve of ac¬ tion ? This is not only an affront put up¬ on us, but upon our fair and noble visitors*
of ?? -hose honour and feelings we are more jealous than of our own." But the friar, ΛνΙιο was a man of peace, and disliked all sort of offence, when he saw the King was displeased, took speech to himself, and his speech set all the gallery into a burst of laughter. He ?vas standing in the midst of the floor, with his book in hand, ready and eager to officiate still far¬ ther as a knitter and binder ; but when he sa?v the knights all fled, and the King of¬ fended, he uplifted both of his hands and one of his feet, standing still on the other, and cried with a loud voice*, (i Behold my occupation is ended ! Woe is me for the children of my people ! For the spirit of man is departed away, and he hath no strength remaining. Oh Λν??α? shall I do for the honour of my brethren! For, lo, the virgins are come to the altar, and there is none to accept of the offering. The men of might are dismissed, yea they are con¬ founded and fled ?????, and the daughters of the land are left to ????^?? the months and years of their virginity. Woe is me, for my hand findeth nothing more to do I"
The ladies laughed immoderately at the cases ofthe forlorn and discomfited knights; for they had ????????? the proceedings, and saw that all their devotions were paid to one object ; and as no lady of Scotland had been chosen, one could not envy ano¬ ther,—so they tittered and laughed off the affront as ???? as they could. The friar got passports into England, and after much labour and pain got the poet estabUshed in his father's possessions, and acknowledged as the lord of Ravens- ?????. He also regained for him his la¬ dy's possessions on the continent, ????? the NeviUes retained for the space of two hundred years. That amiable couple cul¬ tivated the arts of peace, music, and song, as long as they lived. After these things, the friar was preferred to great emolu¬ ments in hb old age, and he spent them aU in acts of charity and benevolence. From Roxburgh the royal party pro¬ ceeded to Melrose, where they remained two days, which they spent partly in de¬ votion and thanksgivings, and partly in viewing the magnificent scenes in the
neighbourhood, particularly the great hiU of Eildon, so lately reft asunder and di¬ vided into three by the power of the ele¬ mental spirits. To this awful theme the mind ofthe Queen still reverted ; and, on her last visit to these mountains, she passed through the recent chasms, gazing and trembling at the effects produced by that tremendous convulsion of nature; and, at length, she had spoken and dreamed so much about it, that she proposed to go and visit tlie castle of Aikwood, and if possible to get a sight of the great enchant¬ er himself, before she left the Border coun¬ ties, ??????, she said, she~might never be again. Every one tried to dissuade her from the attempt, and the King got into a high passion, but still she could not not be driven from her purpose. " As we return to the abbey," said she, " we will go by the ford of Dornick-burn at the foot of the deep dell that you told me of, where the devil first made his appearance on horse¬ back to the four warriors. I should not ΛνοηάβΓ that we shall see him there again under some disguise."
" I would not ??-????? that we should;* said Sir Charies : ** I have been told that he is sometimes seen there in the shape of a clerk ; sometimes a^ a mariner ; and some¬ times in the form of the King of Scotland. Always begging your pardon, royal ma¬ dam." u There is no offence, Sir Charles, as long as you do not tell me that he appears in the shape of a Queen. I hope he has never yet been ?????-? to assume tlie shape ofa woman." ** He has ????? to appear for him in that form, which I ken something about to my cost ; and which your royal majesty kens mair about than I could ???? ?\ ? 18???. W Imt does your majesty account the greatest peril that man is subject to in this world ?" *' Oh war, ????, certainly ! Nineteen out of twenty of his perils concentrate in that, or are derived from it." " Ye may be thankfu' ye ken ??? mair about it than that, my lady queen ! Aince ye gang near the castle of Aikwood ye'll get a little mair experience perhaps. Now
ye are determined on ganging there the morn, and I am determined on accompany¬ ing you, since you will go. But troth I would be right wae to see my queen turn¬ ed into a co%v, and a little deii set to drive her ; or into a grey mare, and a witch or ??????? set to gallop on her ; or a doe, or a hare, or a she-fox, and a tichel ?' tikes set after her to tear her a' to tareleathers. Al- ΛΛ -ays begging your pardon, my liege lady." As they were chatting on in tbis fami¬ liar and jocular style, they came to the identical little deep dell, at the meeting of two rivulets, or moorland .burns, where the devil and his three attendant imps had appeared to our warriors on their way to Melrose; and, as Dan Chisholm was ofthe party, the Queen caused him to be called up to describe the whole scene,—with the personal appearance of the arch fiend,—the words he spoke, and also the extraordinary course that he had with him along the mar¬ ble pavement of the air. AU these matters ?ve?e detailed to her by the trooper \vith per¬ fect seriousness and simplicity, which made such an impression on the Queen's roman-
tic and superstitious mind, that her coun¬ tenance altered in ?\ ? ??? ? feature, and she was every now and then gazing around as if expecting Sataits personal appearance before them once more. The party vvere sitting on horseback conversing together, when the sharp eye of Sir Charles, ?\ ? ?!1 accustomed to the discernment of all living or moving objects, whether by night or by day, perceived a miserable looking wight approaching them by the very path on which the infernal cavalcade had forinerly proceeded. The Queen ?? ? ?? talking to Dan, still pushing her inquiries, when Sir Charles touched her gently on the shoulder, and said, " Hush, your majesty. See who is this approaching us by the very road that the deils took ? It is a question who Λνο have here, Ane is ??? sure of ony shape that appears in sic a plaee and sic a time as this." Then there was such crossing and telling of beads, and calling on the names of saints, took place with the Queen imd her ladies, every one of them asking the same ques¬ tion in terrified Λν??ρει^, fiÉ Is it he, think
you ? Is it he ? Oh, is it he ?" Then there ivas a general request made that they should take instant flight, and ride home to the abbey full speed; but an opposition arose to this proposal from a quarter not expected. This was from no other than Sir Charles' English lady, whose education had taught her to despise the superstitions so prevalent in Scotland ; and seeing them all about to fly from a poor wo-begone, half-famished wretch, she opposed it with indignation, adding, that she would abide his coming by herself if none else would. Sir Charles was still far from being ciear about these matters, hard experience hav¬ ing taught him caution ; however, he com¬ mended his lady's spirit, and drew up by her side : They rest marshalling behind them, they awaited in a body the coming of this doubtful guest ; and every eye being fixed on his motions, so every tongue was busied in giving vent to the spontaneous movements of the mind. " It is a palmer," said one. " It is a warlock," said another. " It is the devil," said a third ; w I ken him by his lang nose !" « Aha, my royal and VOL. IIL s
noble dames !" cried Sir Charles exulting¬ ly : " If it be ??? the deil, it's his man ; sae we may expect some important message, either frae his infernal majesty or the great enchanter, for this is no other than his seneschal. My royal liege, this man that you see approaching is no other than Gil¬ bert Jordan, the late laird of the Peatstack- ^ΟΛνβ, who was drawn by lot to supply the room of the ?\ ? ^?? whom our gospel friar sent up through the clouds in a con¬ voy of fire and brimstone. Whether this be Gibbie or his ghaist, it is hard to say ; but I ken ?^ ? ??1 bv the coulter nose it is either the one or the other. Your majesty ?\ ? ? scrimply bclhrve it, but the last time I saw that carl the deil ?\ ? ?? hauding him by the cuff o' the neck oiver the topmost tower of the castle of Aitavood, and the poor laird was ΒρΓαΛνΗηβ- like a paddock in a gled's claws, when fifty fathom frae the ground. There is nought in nature I ex¬ pected less to see than that creature again in the land ofthe living; yet it is actually he himself in flesh and blood, and that is all, for he is Λνοπι to skin and bone, and
his nose is even longer than it was ! Hech, laird, is this you ? And are you indeed returned to the Christian world ai nee mair ?" " Aye troth, Yardbire, it is a' that's to the fore of me. But Λν?ιο have you got all here? Good-e'en to you, gentles. This brings me in mind of a story, man, that I hae heard about the hunting of Stanebires' eat—" bi Whisht, Gibbie, and gie us ???? ?' your auld stories about cats even now. This is the Queen of Scots and her attendants t Rather tell us, in one ΛνοηΙ, ΙίΟΛν you have made your escape from yon infernal gang- in the castle of Aikwood ?" <ζ Aha, Yardbire, that is a tale that Λνίη- na tell in ae ???1?1. nor tova neither ; it wad take a winter night in telling, and it is the αΛΛ?βοίΓ^δί ane that ever passed frae the lips o' man ; but I am ower sair forespeilt at this time to begin to it." " Oh, no !" cried the Queen : " Honest man, do not begin it at present. It shall serve for our evening's amusement, and you shall tell it before yourKing and his no- s %
bles, after you ???^? had such refreshment as you stand in need of." She then caused one ofher squires to alight, and mounting the ?vearied and exhausted laird on his horse, they rode off to Melrose, Λν1?6?*β, after a plentiful meal, the laird was brought into the apartment ?????? the King, the Queen, the abbot, with the nobles and ladies of the court, ????? all assembled ; and then, at the royal request, he related to them the fol¬ lowing narrative.
CHAPTER XII. Commissions and black bills be had, And a' the land went hey-gae mad, The like wae never seei\, joe : To dance and caper in the air f Aud there's an end of hiin, joe. Old Jacobite Sottg. Weel, ye see, my masters and mistres¬ ses, this is what I ?????? expected to see. Tliere is something sae grand in being in the presence ofa King and Queen and their courtiers, that it brings me in mind ofthe devil and his agents that I have been in tne habit of entertaining for a month by¬ gane. But there is some \vee difference in masters for a' that; for, in my late service, if I had been brought in to entertain them, in an instant they would have had me transformed into some paltry animal, and t lien amused themselves by tormenting that animal to death, by dissecting it while living. But the queerest thing of
aU was this,—there was aye a spark of life that they could not destroy, which, for all their cruelties, remained active and intel¬ ligent as before ; and the moment they put that spark of life out of one animal, they popped it into another, aiid there was I obliged to undergo the same dismember¬ ment and pain once more, and so on for ever. The inflicting of torment was their chief delight, and of that delight there was no satiety,—it seemed still to increase by gratification. ?? the very firs t d ay that í entered on my probation they had a feast, as£my comrades know, and as I aLo have good reason to know, for on that day I suffered death nine times ; and yet I was Gibbie Jordan again before night. They first turned ?? into a cock, and after the three pages had chased ?? round the castle, and thrown stones at me till I was hanging out my tongue, and eould not cackle another lilt, they seized me, took me into the scullery, and drew my neck. Ere ever I was aware, they had me transformed into a huge lubberly calf, while one of the hellish pages was dragging
me by the neck ivith a prickly rope made of kurcheon hides, and the two others Avere belabouring my rumple with cudgels I suspected their intentions, and being still terrified for death, and inclining rather to suffer any thing, I d^v back, shook my head, and bellowed at them, ???1? they still redoubled their blows on my carcase, and cursed me. In spite of all I eould do, they dragged me gaspinginto the slaughter¬ house, kept the knife an excruciating long time at my throat, and then, after piercing the jugular vein, they laughed immoderate¬ ly to see me running about, bleeding to death, Tvith my glazed stupid eyes ; and ivhen, through faintness, I began to floun¬ der and grovel on tbe floor, they laughed amain, threshed me to make me plunge a little more, and Λν?ιοη 1 eould do nothing farther than give a faint baa ! they thought that the best sport of all, and mimicked me. 1 had scarcely ceased baaing as a calf, when I found myself a beautiful capper- cailzie, winging the ΛνίηίβΓ cloud, and three devils of falcons after me. t ΝοΛν/ thinks 1 to myself, € If I do not give you the
glaiks ηοΛν, my hellish masters, may I ne¬ ver ?vap a vring again. By all the ροΛνει^ of swiftness, but I shall try for once if the fea¬ thers shall not ca^y the flesh away.' Sanct Martha, as I did scour the rimy firmamen* ! I took the wind in my tail, but Ι ΛνεΜ with such amazing ? ? ?!???? that I left it behind me, and as I clove it, it seemed to return in my face. I reached the shoulder of a lofty mountain, and then I laid back my wings, and bolted through the air like a flash of lightning. * ? ho ! Messrs Hawks, where are you now ?* thought I to myself. Good Lord ! ere ever Ι Λναβ aware, there was ane ?' them gave me a nab on the crown, that dovered me, and gart me tumble heels-o'er- head down frae the shelves of the clouds ; and lighting with a dunt onthe ground, I had ??? shift but to stap my head in a heather bush, and let them pelt at me till I ¿rot some breath again. Then I madefor a cottage, thinking the inmates could not but pity my condition, and drive the hawks away from me. I took cover among their cabbage, in the sight of both man and \vife ; but instead of pitying me, the one came
with an old spear, and the other with the tongs, to finish my existence,—and always when the falcons came down on me with their talons, the two cried out, " Weel done, little hawkie ! Yetlicr him up ! puik him weel !" I was forced to take wing again, till at length, through fatigue and want of feathers I dropt close to the castle whence I had set out, and the three falcons, closing with me, first picked out my eyes and then my brains,, I was stabbed as a salmon, hunted as a roe-buck, felled as a bull, and had my head chopped off for a drake. The dinner was made up of me. I supplied every dish, and then was forced to cook them all afterward. It was no won¬ der that I could not partake of the frag¬ ments of the meal. From the moment that the Christian warriors were all dismissed with disgrace from the castle, the devil became contuma¬ cious with the Master, and assayed to car¬ ry matters with a very high hand. But he had to do with ? «e that would not suc¬ cumb, no not in the smallest point, but who opposed him with a degree of viru- s 3
lence of which even the master fiend seem¬ ed scarcely capable. It was a scene of con¬ stant contention and rage, and the little subordinate demons did not always know whicli to obey. It vras, if it please your Majesties, a scene acted in terrible magni¬ ficence, of which I have seen several poor and abortive emblems among mortal men. And henceforth I shall aways believe and feel, when I sec a family or society con¬ stantly involved in disputes, wranglings, and angry emotions, that they are children ofthe wicked one, and moved by the spirit of discord, that bane of the human race. " The worthy gentleman hath said well," said the abbot. " It is a moral truth that can never be too deeply impressed, that peace and love only lead to happiness. They are emanations from above, and the con¬ trary passions from beneath. All the fierce and fiery passions of the soul are the off¬ spring of hell fire. But a truce with preach¬ ing. Honest friend go on with your strange relation, and acquaint us in what manner his infernal majesty and the king of mor¬ tal magicians spent their time."
In constant discord and jarring. The devil challenged the Master with impo- tency in entertaining a poor crazy monk, and submitting to be protected and even ???^^ by him ; at wiiich the Master took high offence, and retorted in the bitter« est terms ; Λν?ι?ο the other always hint¬ ed that he ΛνοιιΜ make him repent his intercourse λλ τ Μι that preposterous and pre- sumptive fool. So he termed our ΟΛνη wortliy friar and head chaplain. In one thing only they agreed, and that was in abusing the ???????. Never were tliere poor del udcd creatures guided in such ? ?\?? as they. The devil says to the Master one day in my hearing, " Brother Michael," says he, " I have an act of jus¬ tice to perform to all our true and trusty female lieges in thi ^ quarter. I ga? r e them my princely word of honour, that on their yielding themselves up souls and bodies to me and to my service, they should all be married, and all to young and goodly hus¬ bands too. That having been the princi¬ pal, and almost the only boon, the good consistent creatures required of me for the
sacrifice they made, they must not be dis¬ appointed." The Master acquiesced, but at the same time remarked, ???? what I judged unreasonable chagrin, that when he was keeping his word so punctually, it be¬ tokened nothing good for those to whom he kept it. Well, we had a vritch's wedding every night for nine nights running ; but such extreme of wickedness is past all human comprehension, beyond the possibility of description. The marriage ceremony it¬ self, always performed by a demon in the habit of a friar, was a piece of the most horrid blasphemy ever conceived; and every night one of the Λν^?ιββ ???? mar¬ ried to the devil in disguise. Sometimes the bridegroom made his appearance as a gay cavalier, sometimes as a country squire, a foreign merchant, a minstrel, and a moss¬ trooper. The old wretch of a bride was all painted by some devilish cantrip, and be¬ decked with false jewels, and though she seemed alwavs aware of the deceit in a cer- •«V tain degree, from former experiences, yet it was wonderful with what avidity each
of the old creatures clung to her enamour¬ ed and goodly husband ! How they mum¬ ped and minced in their talking, and ogled with their old grey ropy eyes ! And then how they danced ! Gracious me, how they flung, and danced among the deils and the ?\ ? ?????? ! and capered and snapped their fingers, giving their partners often a jerk on the nose or the temple as they passed and repassed in the reel, as quick as green clocks on a pool. Then the bedding ofthe brides, these surpassed all description ; and as they had me fairly in thraU, I was «suffered to witness every thing. The first Λν^?ι bride was led out at the back door of the castle vrith much state end cere¬ mony, into a place that had been a bow¬ ling green, and in which there ?vas nothing else save a ???? -'ling green : Yet, to my amazement, there stood a bower of the most superb magnificence ; and there, in a chamber hung ΛνΗΙι gorgeous tapestry that glittered all Λνιίίι gold and rubies, the lov¬ ing couple retired to their repose, and to all the delights and joys of so happy an union. Then wishing them the greatest
conjugal felicity, all the gallants returned to the castle. But I, being curious to see v^hat would be the end of this grand pa¬ vilion in the bowling-green, which I ????\ ? must be merely a delusion, avision, a shadow of something that had no stability of existence, went up to the top of the cas¬ tle, and from a loop-hole sat and watched what was to be tho end of this phenome¬ non. I waited a good long while, and be¬ gan to think all was real, and that the splendid witch had met Λνι?ι a happy for¬ tune,—for I knew them too well to be all witches from former happy experience. But at length the lusty bridegroom, as I supposed, began to wear} 7 of his mate, for I saw the form of the bower beginning to change, and fall flat on the top, and itb hue also became of a lurid fiery colour. I cannot teU your Majesties vriiat sort of sen¬ sations I felt when 1 sa?v the wedded cou- pie sinking gradually down through a bed of red burning fire, and the poor old bel¬ dame writhing to death in the arms of a huge and terrible monster, that squeezed her in its embraces, and hugged her, and
caressed her till the spark of wretched life was wholly extinguished, I saw distinct¬ ly by the light of the flame that surround¬ ed them, and marked every twist of the features, and every quiver ofthe convulsed limbs ; yet these were not more impressive tlian the joy of the exulting fiend, who continued to caress and kiss his agonized mate to the last, and called her his love, and his darling, and his heart's delight. At length the distortions of the human coun¬ tenance reached their acme—the shrivelled bosom forgot to throb, and, with the expi¬ ry of the mortal spark, the lurid flame that burnt around them also went out, and all was darkness, There was no bower, no chamber, no bridal bed, but a cold winter soil; and I thought that, througli the gloom, I perceived the couple still lying on it. As I could get no rest all that night for thinking of the terrible scene I had wit¬ nessed, as soon as the sun rose next morn¬ ing I went out to the bowUng-green, but found nothing there save the strangled body of the wretched woman,—a dismal and humbling sight,—squeezed almost to a jelly, and every bone broken as ifit had
been smashed on an anvil. Being eu rious to examine her robes in ?? ? ??? she appeared with such splendour the evening before, and her je?vels, part of which I had seen her lay carefully aside,* 1 took every thing up as it lay. Her robes ?? ? ??? a small heap ofthe most wretched rags imaginable : her pearl necklace was a string of dead bee¬ tles, and her diamond rings pieces of thread, on which were fastened small knots of clay, and every thing else proportionally mean. While I víüs standing considering this vile degradation that had taken place, I heard a voice at a little distance that called to me and said, " Gibbie Jordan ! Gibbie Jordan ! ?? ? ?? standest thou in amazement at a true emblem of all worldly grandeur ! It is all equally unreal and unsubstantial as that on ?? ? 1??? thou lookest, and to that it must all come at last." * Hout, friend,' thought I, ' it canna surely be a' sae perfectly unreal as this, else ΛνΙ^ does it signify ?' But a' that I couki look and glime about, I could never disco¬ ver the speaker that said this; and when ? thought seriously of the matter, I found
that it comes a' to the same thing in the end. " Honest friend, thou hast again illus¬ trated a momentous moral truth," said the abbot,— w and I thank thee for it. Thou hast the art, in thy simplicity, of extract¬ ing more good out of real evil than any ex¬ pounder of divine truths throughout the land. Thou art both a moral and a natural philosopher, and I intend conferring on thee some benefice under the church, that thy talents may no longer remain locked up in a helmet. Prithee, go on with thy extra¬ ordinary narrative ; but these witch wed¬ dings are too horrible for mortal ears." Then you may consider, my Lord Ab¬ bot, what they v/ere for mortal eyes, espe¬ cially such a run of them, which were eve¬ ry night varied in their horrors, and termi¬ nated in something perfectly distinct from all those preceding. On the second night the bridegroom was a foreign merchant, a man of bustle and punctuality, who said he could not remain late Λνί??ι his kind convivial friends, and ?vas under the ne¬ cessity of carrying his bride off at an early
hour, having business of importance to transact on the morrow. It was a specu¬ lation, he said, on which he calculated mak¬ ing a good profit, and a man who was com¬ ing in to have a wife, and in all probabili¬ ty a smaU family to maintain, required to look after and attend to these matters. The witch caressed him in ecstacy when he made this speech, and proffered togo with him as soon as he chose. She saluted her cronies, and bade them farewell ; and al¬ though there is no love among those sort of people, yet there was still so much of human nature remaining, that there seem¬ ed to subsist a degree of regret that they should never meet again. JMy own heart was even sore for tbe wretched beldame ; for I had witnessed a scene the preceding night which had been withheld from her view, and those of the other brides that were to be ; and I knew that a fate some¬ what similar awaited them all. They mounted this one behind the spruce mer- chant on a tall gallant charger whose eyes gleamed like lightning, and away they set over the leas of Cavterhaugh, at a light
gallop ; but at every bound the swiftness of the steed increased, till it was quickly be¬ yond the speed of the eagle. The witch held like grim death, and would fain have expostulated with the bridegroom on the madness of risking tlieir necks for a little per cen tage, —but her velocity was such that she could make no farther speech of it, than just a squeak now and then like a shot hare. The reckless merchant flew on, still increasing his rapidity, until he came to the very highest rock of the Harehead linn. The witch knew of the dreadful chasm that was before them, and weening that Lcr husband did nôt know she uttered a piercing shriek ; but the void was only thirty yards across and a hundred deep, so the fearless merchant, meaning to take it at one leap, made his charger bound from the top of the precipice. The infernal courser cleared the linn, but the witch's head failing, she toppled off about the middle space. There were two fishermen spearing salmon in the bottom of the gulf, who saw the phenomenon pass over their heads, and the wife lose her hold and
fall off; they heard her likewise saying, as she came adown the air, " Aih, what a fa' I will get !" And as she said, so it fell out ; for she alighted on the rocks a short space from the place where they stood, and was literally dashed in pieces ; but the steed ran away with the merchant over hill and dale like a thunderbolt, and neither the one nor the other ever looked over his shoulder to see what had befallen the bride. This continuation of horrors still de¬ priving me of rest, I went into the linn the next morning to look after the corpse ; but the three pages, Prig, Prim, and Pricker, were engaged with it, cutting it trimly up, and hanging it on the trees of the linn to be frozen, so that they might tliereby be enabled to preserve it for some grand ex¬ periment. In the same manner did they serve the remains of all the brides ; none of them ever being buried,—but there was one taken away bodily. I shall now, in conformity with your reverence's hint, de¬ sist from the description of any more of these weddings, and proceed to the ad¬ venture by wiiich Τ attained my liberty.
I had often attempted this, both by night and by day, but these imps seemed to pos¬ sess a sort of prescience, for in all my at¬ tempts I was seized and maltreated so grossly that I gave up all hopes of escape, otherwise than by some upbreaking of the ?vallock , s establishment, and of all such in¬ cidents I had resolved to avail myself, and you all see that at last I have succeeded,— which happened on this wise. Still as Christmas tide drew on, the wranglings between my two chief masters, the devil and the warlock, grøv more and more fierce ; and as I heard they were obli¬ ged to sever before that time, I both hoped and dreaded some terrible convulsion. The fiend, for several successive days, was always hinting to the Master that it now behoved the latter to deliver him up the black book and the divining rod ; and he tried to c^ jole him out of them by fair speeches and boundless promises : but with these re¬ quests the Master testified no disposition to comply, and the promises he utterly dis¬ regarded, bidding him bestow his promises on those ΛνΙιο did not ????? him. At
length the fiend fairly told him, that he must and would ??? ? ? the possession of these invaluable treasures, ?? ? ??? ought never to have been put into the hands of mortal man, and that now he ΛνοιιΜ have them if he should tear his heart from his bosom to attain the boon. I ?? ? ????? that matters ????? come to that pass now that the Master ΛνοιιΜ be obli¬ ged to yield, and that all this show of re¬ sistance was only the ebullition of a proud and indignant spirit struggling against the yoke under which it knew it was obliged to bow^ like a horse that champs the bit, to the $???? of ????? it ?????? too ?\ ? ?11 it must submit. In all this, however, I had reckoned before mine host, and kuew not the resources of the great magician. Be¬ neath the influence of the cross I found him a child, a novice, a nonentity, unre¬ solved and inconsistent in his actions. But amongst the beings with Λν?ιοηη he associ¬ ated I found him a superior intelligence, a spirit formed to eontroul the mightiest energies, and not brooking submission to any power unless by compulsion. To my
utter astonishment he not only gave the arch-fiend absolute refusal, but haughty defiance ; and then it was apparent, that, except from necessity, all forbearance Λν3δ at an end. " Preposterous madman ! dost thou ????? ΛνΙιοηη thou beardest?" said the fiend, gnashing his teeth with rage and thirst of vengeance : " Kno?vest thou with whom thou art contending, thou maniac ?—and that I can ????^ thy soul out of thy body, consigning the one to the dunghill, and the other to elemental slavery, at my Λν?Ι and pleasure ?" " I defy thee," said the Master : " Do thy ΛνοΓδί. He that imparts a moiety of his ?????? to another, must abide by the consequences. Do I not ????? with whom I am contending? Yes! I know thee! And thou art so well aware that I do, that at this moment thou tremblest beneath my rod. I ????? thee for a liar, a deceiver, a backbiter, and a spirit of insatiable male¬ volence. Who can iay one of these charges to my name ? Were I immortal as thou art, ΙιοΛν I ????? hurl thee from thy usurp-
arch-demon boasted of his legions, and of their irresistible ???? ? ?? ; and threatened to bring them all to the contest, and annihi¬ late the Master and his adherents, root and branch. " I ??? ? ? already said that I fear neither them nor thee," said the Master. " What though thou hast the $?? ? ???^?? over the element of fire, and all the fierce and in¬ durated spirits that sojourn and ply in the sultry regions of flame, as also of the gro¬ velling spirits of the mould ? И?? ? ? not I at my command those of the air and the water? I can muster against thee the storm, the whirhvind, and the raging tem¬ pest, the ovenvhelming wave, and the de¬ scending torrent. These shall extinguish thy meteor hosts, and sweep thy mold- warps from the face of the earth. I am in the midst of my elements here. Thou art out of thine, and that thou shalt feel when thou bringest it to trial." Thus parted these two once-bound as¬ sociates, but ???? jealous and inexorable foes,—a good lesson to aU those Λν?ιο form combinations inimical to the laws or au-
thority of the land in which they reside. Like those master-spirits, such are like¬ wise conspirators against rightful sove¬ reignty, although on a smaller scale ; and like those whom they imitate, and by whom they are moved, their counsels will always be turned either to foolishness or against themselves. " The sphere that this man hath filled in society," said the abbot, " is far below that in which he ouffht to have moved, if his narrative is true, which I can hardly believe, he turns it to most excellent uses; and ii" it is an apologue, it is one well conceived for the purposes of instruction. Verily, this gentleman hath never moved in his proper sphere." " I think it is not very unlikely that your reverence says," said Sir Ringan, u for he made no great figure in it. The' I had always a partiality for him, I had no great faith in his valour. He would ra¬ ther have cut down a warrior behind his back than before his face any time. He has made mare quake this night wi' lm tale than ever he did wi' his weapon, I τ 2
entreat ye to get on, laird, and let us hear how they made up matters." Made up matters, does my chief say ? That ???? a term no more mentioned be¬ tween them. They separated but to raise their different forces, and meet again ΛνίΛ more fury and effect. The Master spoke lo his three pages, and a^ked if they ?? ? ??? resolved to stand firm to his interest? Tliey answered, that they would, till the term of their bondage expired. " Then am I doubly armed !" said the Master, exultingly; " and Ι Λν?Ι slunv your tyrant that I can quell his utmost rage. Speed thee, my trusty and nimble spirits ; speed to the western and northern spheres, and ron.se Mie slumbering angels of the winds and the ???1???. Tell them to muster their array, and bear hither- ward,—to rear the broad billov/s of the Atlantic up against the breast of heaven, and I ? make a bellows of every cloud to «father the %vinds up behind them. Then bring down the irresistible spirits of the frozen north in ambush,—and ΛνΙιο shall
stand against their fury ! How soon will you execute your commissions ?" " Master, I'll ring the surface of the ocean, from the Une to the first field of pickled ice, before the hour-glass is half run." " Master, 111 look south on the polar star,—call every whale, sea-monster,and ice-shagged spirit by his name, and return to you before the cock-bittern can boomb his vesper." u And I'll to the moon, And the stars aboon, And rack my invention? For the coming contention : And the wind and the weet, And the 410W and the sleet, I'H gather and gather, And drive them on hither." With that tlie three imps departed on their several missions, but not before they liad seized me, and bound me to a ring on a turret of the castle. The Master re¬ tired into his apartment for some time, but soon came up to the level space on the top of the castle, our old birth, and strode a~
bout in thu must violent agitation, but ap¬ pearing rather to be moved by anger and impatience than by dread. At length, he came up to me, and said, " How now, droich ? What thinkest thou of all this ?" 1 said nothing, for I durst not answer a word. " Dost thou think," continued he, " that there exists another being, either mortal or immortal, like me, thy master ?" I still durst not answer a word ; for if I had said no, it would have been blasphe¬ my ; and if I had said yes, it would have provoked him to do ?? a mischie 1 '; so I looked at my bonds, and held my peace. " Thou därest not say there is," conti¬ nued he; " but I know what thou think¬ est. Sit thou there in peace till this great trial of power be over ; and if thou därest for thy life invoke ariother name than mi*· ·, thou shalt never stir from tiiat spot dead or alive. But if thou takest heed to this injunction, and cease from all peti¬ tions to, or mention of, a name which thou mayest judge superior to mine, then shalt thou be set at liberty to join thy friends."
I determined to attend to this,—but he waited not for my answer, but strode a- way, looking now and then on the book of destiny, and at the western heaven al¬ ternately. At length he exclaimed," Yon¬ der they come ! Yonder they rise in grand battalia ! Noble and potent spirits ! How speedily have you executed your commis¬ sion. Yonder comes the muster of my ar¬ ray, and who shall stand against them !" I looked towards the west when I heard him talking in such ecstacies, but could see nothing save a phalanx of towering clouds, rolling up in wreaths from the dun hori¬ zon. I had seen the same scene a hundred unes, and could hardly help smiling at his enthusiasm, especially when he went over a long muster-roll of the names of spirits and monsters whom he saw approaching in the cloud. * It is a sign that warlocks have clear een, 5 thinks I, quietly, 6 for I see nothing but a range of rolling and rest¬ less clouds.' However, he was so overjoy¬ ed with the sight of this visionary array, that, having no other to communicate with, he came rapidly up to me, and said,
" Tell me, droich, didst thou ever witness any thing so truly grand as the approach of this host of mine ?" " You must first lend me the use of your eyes that I may see them," said I ; ** for, on my word, I see nothing ??? ? ? fovo or three files of castled clouds, which I have seen an hundred times." With that he lent me a ΜοΛν with his rod, and said, though not apparently in wrath, " Thou hast no brighter eyes, and no brighter conceptions, than a hedgehog, but art a mere clod ofthe ? ? ?11??, ? ????? ; if I knew of aught lower to liken thee to, I would do it ! Dost thou see nothing like fleets and armies approaching yonder ? Dost thou not see an hundred and seven of the ships of the ocean above, coming full sail, with colours flying, and canvas spread ? Seest thou not also, to the south of these, two files of behemoths, with ten thousand warrior-spirits beside ?" I looked again, and though I was sen¬ sible it must be a delusion brought on by by the stroke of his ???? ? ???? rod, yet í «did see the appearance of a glorious fleet
of ships coming bounding along the sur¬ face of the firmament of air, while every mainsail v^as bosomed out like the side of a Highland mountain. I sa?v, besides, vdiole columns of ΛνίΜί I supposed to be crocodiles, sharks, kelpies, and ??^??- horscs, with a thousand monsters never dreamed of by human being. The Master marked my astonishment, and exulted still the more ; and then he desired me to turn round, and look toward the north. At first 1 eould see nothing ; but on being touch¬ ai again vvitli the divining-rod, I shall ne- ver forget such a sight as opened gradual¬ ly to my view. The whole northern he¬ misphere, from the eastern to the v^est- L*m horizon, ???? covered Avith marshal¬ led hosts ofthe shades of gigantic ????- riors. They ?? ? ??? all mailed in vdiite ar¬ mour, as if it had been sprinkled ΛνΜι hoar-frost ; and their beards, ????? had the appearance of icicles, hung άοΛνη, swinging in the wind, like so many in- \ erted forests, stripped of their foUage and bark, and enerusted with ice. They ΛνβΓο all mounted on the ghosts of crackens,
whales, and walruses : and for bows and quivers each had a blown bladder on his back as large as the hill of Ben-Nevis. My heart quaked at the νίβΛν of these tremen¬ dous polar spirits, and I said, " Great and magnificent Master, are yon terrible chaps all coming hither ?" " Certes they are," said he : " Why dost thou ask after having heard my mandate sent forth ?" ** Because," said I, " If yon bearded spirits be a' coming here, Ι Λνίδ?ι I ?^ ? ??? somewhere else, for the like of yon was never beheld by man. If your opponents dare face you, they have a spirit beyond what I can conceive." " They will be here, and that instant¬ ly," said he, "And lo ! yonder they come ! I will go άοΛνη and meet them on the open field. Bat, in the meantime, Ι Λν?Ι loose you Λνί?ι my own hands,, for who knows Λν?^ may be the issue of this day ; remain where thou art, for here thou shalt be safe, but no ?????? else." I looked ; and as far as my eyes eould discern, I saw as it were a thousand thou-
sand sparks of fire rising from the east, that came in a straight line knvard me, and Λ -rith great velocity. As they came nearer I perceived that they ?vere all fiery serpents, vvith faces like men, and small flaming spears issuing from their mouths, which they held between their teeth, or drew in as they listed. These ?? ? ??? led on to the combat by the arch-fiend him- self, ???? eame at their head in the form of a huge fiery dragon with his iron cnnvn on his head, and vrings springing from his shoulders behind, that reached as high as the hill of Blackandto. ' Aih ! God guide us î ' thinks I to mysel, ς Michael has an awsome ???-?????? to contend vvith the day !' He was nothing daunted, how¬ ever, but Λντηί boldly down the valley, where he was met by hosts of crawling monsters, sueh as snakes, lizards, and a thousand others. These I took to be the spirits ofthe element of earth,-—but they vvere lubbards in a field of battle, for, at a brandish of the Master's magical rod, they ran off wagging their tails in such a ven-
geance of a hurry that they overturned one another. The van of Michael's western array had by this time gained the middle sky, and hung boiling and wheeling like a troubled ocean straight above his head and above mine. Its colour was as dark as pitch, but there ?\ ? ?? noiv and then a shade of a dead Λν?ι?β colour rolled out, and as suddenly again swallowed up in the darkness. I never saw ought so aivfully «sublime, It had now descended so low, tliat it hid the polar giants entirely from my vien r , and the Master kept ?? -aving his rod awards it, and clapping his left hand ahvays on the black book, till at length, with the motion of a whirlpool, tiie cloud came and settled all round him. The fiend and his firebrands perceiving this, darted with the utmost fury into the mid¬ dle of it, and the most tremendous crash of thunder ensued that ever shook heaven and earth. My eyes were dazzled so that I could not see ought distinctly, but I per¬ ceived these flaming meteors glancing and quh'ering round the verges of the dark-
ness, and ever and anon darting again into it. Seven of these peals of thunder suc¬ ceeded one another, and then I saw the spirits of flame would overcome, for the darkness began to scatter, and I saw the Master hard bested, defending himself' with his rod against a multitude. He then cried witb a loud voice, and waved his rod toward the north, and that mo¬ ment the giant warriors of the polar re¬ gions loosed all their quivers at once, and with «sueh effect, that they tossed the op¬ posing legions before them like chaff The hailstones, the snow, and the sleet, poured upon them thicker and faster, and the wind roared louder than their thun¬ ders had done before. There was no more power in their foes to stand before them ; thev ????? scattered, driven ?????% and ex- tinguished. When the Master saw this. he shouted aloud for joy, calling out * Vic¬ tory !' and leaping from the ground in ecstacy. But ??-??? he was in the very paroxysm of exultation, the great dragon came round Λνιίίι a circular motion behind the castle, and approaching behind the VOL· TTT TJ
ivizard's back before he ?? ? ?? ??1 ? ???, seiz¬ ed him by the hair with one ???\% and by the iron belt ?\ ? ?? the other, and bore him off into the air straight ???\ ? ??! The Master struggled and Λίτ?ί?ιοά very lmrd, but never opened his lips. At length, after great exertion, he struck the monster a bloiv Λνί?ι his rod that made him quit his hold, and fly aivay yelling after his dis¬ comfited legions. The Master fell to the ground from a great height, and lay still, and when I saw no one to eome near him, I left the corner where I had hid myself, and ran to his as¬ sistance ; but he ivas quite dead. His teeth had severed his tongue in two, and ???? clenched close together ; his eyes ivere open, and every bone of his body ivas bro¬ ken. Ha\ing ?vitiiessed the unspeakable 4 value of the golden rod, 1 put out ?? hand and took hold of it, ivanting to bring it aivay Λνιίίι me. but Τ might as well luu e tried to have heaved the eastle from its foundations. Besides, ivhen 1 tugged at it, the dead man turned his eyes toward me ivith a fierceness that chilled me to the
heart, so I fled «and came hithenvard \vith all my might. He is lying in a little hidden valley, at the side ofthe burn, inimediately above the eastle, with the book of fate locked in his bosom, his rod in his hand, and his eyes open. I have ηοΛν described to your Majesties this scene exactly as I ,ΝαΛν it; but I must also tell you, thaUvhen I came to the mill, both the miller and his man, neither of whom knew me, said it had been an awful storm of thunder and lightning. I asked if they perceived no¬ thing about it but a common storm of thunder and lightning ? And they said, no¬ thing, save that it ?? ? ?? exceedingly vio¬ lent, and rather uncommon at such a sea¬ son of the year. I have, therefore, some suspicions that there might be magical delusion operating on my sight ; but of this I am certain, that the great enchanter was carried up into the middle space be¬ tween lieaven and earth, fell down, and was killed." " I think there can be no doubt," said the King, "that Λν?ια? you have told us is ihe plain and unvarnished truth, though, mä
perhaps, the rod of divination might open your eyes to see the storm in a different light from that seen by the eyes of com¬ mon men. Of this there can be no doubt» that the greatest man, and the most pro¬ found scholar of the age, has perished in this conflict of the elements. He has not only kept the world in awe, but in dread¬ ful agitation for the space of thirty years ; let us, therefore, all go to-morrow and see him honourably interred. I ask no rites of sepulture to be performed over his re¬ mains, which, if living, he would have de¬ precated, only let us all go and see his body reverendly deposited in the tomb, lest it be left to consume in the open fields." They went, and found him lying as stat¬ ed, only that his oyes were shut, some of his attendant elves having closed them over night. His book was in his bosom, and his rod in his hand, from either of which no force of man could sever them, although when they lifted the body and these together, there was no difference in weight from the body of another man. The King then caused these dangerous
relics to be deposited along with the body in an iron chest, ?^??? they buried in a vaulted aisle of the abbey of Melrose; and the eastle of Aikwood has never more been inhabited by mortal man.
ihe END,
