Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Gondez, the monk: a romance of the thirteenth century
GONDEZ, THE MONK.
CHAP. I.
Light was tlie form аз airy nothingness ; "While floating in the breeze, its liley robes, lake filmy cloud before the silv'ry moon, Seem'd ready to dissolve------ —.
-In vain I strove,
It vanished from my grasp j and with it fted A joy unfelt before within my breast, A bliss fit food for souls immortal. W. H. Î.
di VER Y thing around was gloom and silence ; and the chain of events which had followed each other in such rapid suc¬ cession, were sufficient to rivet to the spot the wandering Huberto; who, petrified with the extraordinary address of the monk, and the abrupt rencontre, remained vol. и. в
a considerable time undetermined as to the line of conduct which was most expedient for him to pursue, after the pointed communication made to him, whicii so obviously affected the safety of King Robert Bruce, and which, occurring so immediately after the late dreadful ap¬ pearances he had witnessed in the chapel, seemed to identify at once the dreadful suspicions he had entertained. As Huberto thus continued yielding to the numerous suggestions which these ideas created in his brain, a pealing crasli suddenly reverberated through the build¬ ing, apparently arising from the slam of a distant brass portal; and as the dis¬ cordant sound faded on his attentive ear, he distinctly heard the distant sound of approaching footsteps, which, from the direction of the echo, seemed to proceed from the opposite aisle of the chapel.— And in this conjecture he was perfectly correct; for on bending his regard in
that direction, he soon perceived the iorms of the Abbot Gondcz, and the Monk John of Dunbar, who, bearing a large brass lamp in one hand, and a bunch of keys in the other, marched slowly on by the superiors side, by whom he was ad¬ dressed in deep conversation, butin so lov/ a tone of voice, as to render it utterly impossible for Huberto to gain the smallest information as to the tenor of their deli¬ beration. Having passed up the aisle, the Abbot and his companion proceeded across the nave of the church, but made a pause at the summit of the flight of steps con¬ ducting into the cloisters, where they con¬ tinued conversing for some minutes in a whisper, when they descended from the church, the light gradually fading avvay, and, on a sudden, a portal was closed to, which veiled in gloom every surrounding object, and an appalling stillness wliieh suc- B г
ceeded, augmented, even more, the solem¬ nity ofthe scene. Huberto felt internal satisfaction at having escaped the notice of the superior and his creature ; as he imagined that they might, in case of discovery, have regarded him in the light of an impertinent in¬ truder, and a spy upon the actions of the inmates of the mansion ; and more par¬ ticularly so, as he had the same evening been discovered by John of Dunbar, in a part of the convent set apart for the com¬ munity only. But with this supposition Huberto could not connect any Hne of conduct which had rectitude for its basis, as virtuous actions never fear the eye of publicity, nor shun even the inquiry of the stranger. While occupied in this contemplation, Huberto soon found himself at the sum¬ mit of the steps conducting to the dois-
ters, which the Abbot had so lately de· scended; but how great was his asto¬ nishment, on perceiving that the portal was shut, and to find, on attempting to open it, that it was secured on the oppo¬ site side. Avinzo now became convinced that the gates were shut upon him till the mid¬ night hour, when the fraternity, accord¬ ing to custom, would again enter the church, in order to perform the vesper chant; he also recollected, that dur¬ ing the term of his continuance at the shrine in the chapel, all the fathers were, according to the severe rules of the com¬ munity, compelled to pray in secret, each within his respective cell, nor dared be vi¬ sible, under fear of the most exemplary punishment, in case of default ; and this in some, measure accounted for the haste with wY--.h the Monk, who had so mys- tic-*]:y 4«)u reseti Ii: îl, had made his retreat into iľ;e íĽiavj:' of the monastery. This * 3
circumstance also convinced Huberto that his having been noticed by the Abbot and his friend, would have drawn upon his tiead the severest censure, as it was at that hour the superior accustomed himself to repair to his private oratory, and offer up his meditations before the relics of Saint Columba, which were therein deposited. At such a time, to have entered the church without the p.irticular permission of the Abbot having been previously obtained, would have been deemed the most profane intrusion, and received perhaps the most exemplary punishment. Under this conviction, Avinzo thought it most advisable not to endeavour to make himself heard by any inmate of the convent,but to remain patiently till the pe¬ riod should arrive, which muse free him from his disagreeable confinement. The eighth hour had long chimed forth from the turret of the chapel, and night
ín solemn stillness spread her wide pinions throughthe realms of air; it was that species of murky gloom which received, at intervals, a partial gleam from the pale lus¬ tre of the silvery moon, who sometimes shot her chaste radiance through the breaks of the dark clouds, which slowly moved through the atmosphere. The awfulness of the spot, with various latent thoughts combining, might Iiave entranced the faculties of many, more stricken in years than the forlorn Hu¬ berto ; but his sure stay was in that all- fostering power that can, with invisible hand, not only protect the bodily but the mental being, by rescuing the one from the hellifh machinations of the remorseless murderer, and the other from those ap¬ palling terrors,which, trampling down the barrier of reason, unnerve at once the faculties of man. Upheld, therefore, by this implicit confidence in the Creator of all, Avinzo defied the attacks of every в 4
care, save only that which was so inti¬ mately connected with his soul—the pre¬ servation of the King of Scotland. Occupied in contemplating the concur¬ rence of the late mysterious events, Hu¬ berto quitted the portal, and reascending the flight of steps, proceeded to pace along the chill avenues ofthe edifice; on either side of which, in the numerous chapels de¬ dicated to their respective saints, burned, unceasingly,before the shrine,a silver lamp, similar to that in the chapel, before the altar of which Avinzo had so lately pros¬ trated himself. These steady flames emit¬ ted an imperfect light, scarcely dissipating the obscurity of the middle aisle, which received the dark shadows reflected from the stately pillars of the edifice. Having passed and repassed these cha¬ pels several times, Avinzo's wandering steps led him at length to the fretted brass work in front of the choir, the folding
portals of which were always kept locked, §ave when the fathers performed their ac¬ customed ceremonies in the church. Here Huberto paused to contemplate the interior of the choir, when his atten¬ tion was at first arrested by the lustre of the numerous enshrined relics, which received the full glare of the steady light suspended before the cruciiix; but on a sudden with¬ drawing his eyes from these dazzling ob¬ jects, he beheld, before the altar, the prostrate form of a female, in white flowing garments, who was apparently in the act of oJvring up her fervent prayers to heavii. hu uc^ with this extraordinary spectacle, ILihcrto remained with eyes stcdfasilv ri vetted on the fiuure before him, scarcely knowing whether to credit the rejíií у of the appearance, or attribute the wholo to tiie machinations of his brain, whieh had already been so powerfully worked upon. B-.it every idea of illusion speedily vanished, for Avinzo distinctly *5
perceived that the figure raised its hinds to the altar, and frequently bowed its head in the action of the most sincere adoration. Huberto continued, for a considerable time, his examination of the form before him, which at length arose, and turning from the shrine descended witli a diçmified air the flight of steps that led from the altar, and advanced towards the folding cat e wav of the choir, under which Hu- bcrto had placed himself. At this junc¬ ture, for the first time, the irresistible im¬ pulse of curiosity pervaded his breast, when .stealing softly from the station he had oc¬ cupied, the youth determinedon watching the movementb of this unexpected appear¬ ance. As the female approached the brass рог - tab, slie drew from beneath her robe a key, with which she immediately opened the gate, and descending the second flight ^f steps-» proceeded directly down the cen-
tre of the nave, folding her slim and appa¬ rently graceful figure in the loose gar¬ ments that flowed negligently around her· From the wide and uninterrupted space that was on either side, it became abso¬ lutely impossible for Huberto to observe her unperceived with any degree of preci¬ sion ; rather, therefore, than intrude him¬ self, he chose to contemplate her actions from the side aisle, down which he stole with slow and cautious step, keeping on in the same pace as the moving object that actuated his conduct. On the arrival of the female at the great west entrance of the building, she imme¬ diately returned, and so continued retrac¬ ing her steps up to the railing ofthe choir, and back again to the west door, for seve¬ ral successive times ; once indeed, Huber¬ to's footsteps seemed to arrest her atten¬ tion, for stopping short on a sudden, she bent an inquiring look upon the aisle where the youth then was, who having ob.
served the action, made a pause also, when after the lapse of a few seconds, the fe¬ male continued her course as before, but on her return ascended the steps, and entering the choir, proceeded to close the portal, when being unable to resist the strong impulse he felt of addressing her, he instantly sprang forward and fiew towards the steps. The sound of his approach im¬ mediately arrested the female's attention, and as Huberto issued forth from the shade of the aisle, a faint scream echoed from her lips, tbe key instantly shot into the bolts of the brazen lock, when the form, with the utmost precipitation, fled along the choir to the side of the grand altar, and was almost instantaneously lost to the inquiring eyes of the youth, who gazing through the strong and impassable brass-grating of the portal, still supplicated her return in accents the most tender and persuasive. Avinzo for a considerable time continu¬ ed to cherish the fond hope of her return,
but his attendance was fruitless, the ob¬ ject did not appear to gratify his anxious expectation ; for curiosity could no longer be deemed the real motive, as the youth, from the moment the female fled his ear¬ nest supplications, had experienced that kind of feeling which pervades the soul at the moment when all we revere and ad¬ mire is feparated from us. Huberto's thoughts were such as language would but in vain endeavour to define ; they had their source in that vortex of ideas, which actuate the mind of fire, and are conse¬ quently by far too refined to admit the most studied description, even though aided by anguage at once glowing and chaste. Still rivetting his gaze to the spot which had first presented the female form to his wandering eyes, Avinzo seated him¬ self upon the steps leading to the choir, and reclining his harassed form against the brass work, yielded his soul to the irresistible impulse of pensive melancholy.
Thus glided imperceptibly the hours, without Huberto's Iiaving once recurred to his perilous situation, to the contempla¬ tion of which he was at icn^h awaken- ed, on hearing the bars of the portal through which the Abbot had passed sud¬ denly withdrawn, and in a few seconds beholding, in the distance, the person of the Monk, John of Dunbar, who bearing in his hand the sante lighted lamp, ad¬ vanced with hasty stride along the aisle. Roubcd at the father's approach, Avinzo hastily descended the steps, and had just time sufficient to conceal himself, ere the father mounted the steps of the choir, the gate of which having unlocked, the Monk proceeded to that side of the altar where the female form had a short time before disappeared, when in the same instan¬ taneous manner the father also became invisible to the observant eyes of Avinzo.
Huberto, conscious that the passage
fram the chapel was now perfectly frce^ determined on remaining till the Monk's return, which he, however, looked for in vain. Astonished at his prolonged absence. a thought suddenly pervaded the mind of the youth, wliieh chilled his soul, and as the irates of tlie choir had been left open by the Monk, he determined on ex¬ ploring, if possible, tliis fresh mystery, which seemed connected with the en¬ chanting form he had witnessed. Fall of this idea, he left the place cî Lis '-ecre i «on, and on the winr;s of sneed flew to trn г г lie of the altar where both the fonns had disappeared ; but in spite of every endea¬ vour, no aperture was perceptible, and it was while occupied in this research, that the approaching retinae of the Monks ascended the steps from the cloisters, bending their course to the choir, in or¬ der to celebrate the wonted midnight chant.
Thus was Avinzo once more compelled to a retreat, which he very happily effected unobserved ; when, how great was his surprise, on beholding amidst the pre¬ cession the forbidding stature of the Monk, John of Dunbar, who followed as usual the steps of his superior Gondez ; by this it became obvious to the youth that some secret avenues must lead from the church into the interior of the monastery, as that father had not repassed the church previous to the advance of the procession from the cloisters. The Monks having placed themselves in nearly the same order as on the celebra¬ tion of the matin service, shortly after began the vespers, when Avinzo con¬ ceiving that his further continuance in the church might hazard a discovery, and being mentally worn out with the eve bis of the night, he bent his course from the chapel, and yielding to the co^b.^wms which so many strange occurrer>¿ gave
rise to, retired to his chamber ; then closing to the arras, he threw himself upon the rug, trusting that sleep would calm for a time the strong perturbation of his soul.
CHAP. IL
''{»тс ¡s nwtliíuij so aiîoviatiiijï to tbe souî, whicb has у'ь i'ioii íťrí'iC to the íšibclimtions oť love, as the beina; sihle ío buburíhíT. those cmotioüb which it generates in lhe Jî та rl ίο th<: homoni of friendship and sympathy. There is a charm in this species of coti fidence, Vshirh nol only softens th.e scute au&uish of ths ffutTervr, but itt.jjcrccpttbly rivets more nn.iiy that bend of affection, by which tlie strong impulse of the payions has riveitul us to our fellow creatures.
JL HE mind, however agitated, will yield at length to the soothing influence of re- novating sleep ; yet although Huberto felt the potent effects of the soothing god, his repose was constantly invaded by conflict¬ ing thoughts, that rendered his hours of sleep less invigorating than they would have otherwise been, for the care-sooth¬ ing divinity of night never lights upon
the pillow of thought and sorrow, but courts the soul of ever smiling serenity and content. At early dawn Avinzo descended into the garden, where he found King Robert Bruce and his staunch adherents awaiting with anxiety his presence, who immedi¬ ately requested to know the cause of his protracted absence the preceding evening, and his non-attendance at the supper hour, which circumstance, they added, was much noticed by the lay fathers who attended them at the board. Huberto hesitated for a few moments, not knowing what answer should be made to thofe inquiries; but conceiving at length that the whole occurrences of the preced¬ ing evening did not amount to any thing like a satisfactory proof, being also fully convinced that he could personally watch over the fate of the unfortunate* monarch, who was himself sufficiently guarded at
the present juncture, and well knowing that the fiery temper of Douglas would prompt him to make an open avowal of hisfeelings before the Abbot Gondez,which must inevitably prove fatal to their cause, were their suggestions respecting him well founded ; urged by such contemplations, which rapidly succeeded each other in the mind of Avinzo, he fully determined on concealing every circumstance for the pre¬ sent, and therefore merely stated that he had been occupied in private prayer and meditation ; and to the further interroga¬ tories of the lay fathers who attended them in the refectory during breakfast, he in¬ formed them that he had unconsciously strolled through the gardens of the mo¬ nastery, forgetful of every other considera¬ tion but the present poseure of affairs be¬ tween the Scotch and the victorious Ed¬ ward, King of England, and finding on his return that the supper was concluded, he had in consequence retired to rest, having no wish to partake of the nights repast*
ïn the course of the day, Huberto, and his bosom friend, the young Lord Walter, had several private conferences in the gar¬ den; by which Avinzo learned that the mind of the King, far from being eased by the proferred friendship of the Abbot, was, on the contrary, more suspicious than ever. The Lord Walter also allud¬ ed to certain mysterious hints which the monarch had thrown out during the ab¬ sence of Avinzo the preceding evening, relative to several portentous visions which had, during the night, unceasingly haunt¬ ed his imagination. The young Lord then concluded with stating, that it was the King's positive determination not to continue long inactive, but either by stra¬ tagem or force quit the monastery and island of Oronza, wherein they were to all appearance little better than captives. After having thus explained the several deliberations which had transpired dur¬ ing Avinzo's absence, the Lord Walter
continued with his friend for a consider* able time, dur ing which an extreme thought¬ fulness was apparent in his whole demean¬ our: sighs would frequently escape his lips; and his soul seemed anxious, yet fearful, of unburthening some secret to the observant Huberto ; who, unable to endure the visible uneasiness under which his friend laboured, took the hand of the Lord Walter, and pressing it with energy to his heart, proceeded to make the inquiry in language the most tender and persuasive; to which interrogatory the youthful Lord, after a violent struggle, thus replied :— " Ah! my dear Avin2.0, you little dream of the continued misery that rankles in the bosom of your friend. You know not how goading is the sting that cor¬ rodes this heart. 'Tis true, the exigencies of the times, the safety of my liege so¬ vereign, and the rooted attachmcntT bear towards niy country, have for a season
к/ stifled the feelings of my breast ; yet in despite of all endeavours the wound will bleed afresh, while I in vain attempt to tear the barbed arrow from my heart. Shall I, Huberto ;—must I confess the truth? Yes: you are worthy of receiv¬ ing the sacred deposit ; the secret of my soul shall be committed to your keepings you will, I am sure, refrain from any ill- natured animadversions on my weakness. Yes, I am fully convinced, that you would not suffer a momenťs diminution of that fervent friendship to take root in your breast, when you have learned that Wal¬ ter, your friend, is the wretched slave of unconquerable love. " Good heavens! my friend—what, thou the slave of love !" reiterated Avinzo with astonishment. " Yes,—love," resumed Lord Walter with energy. " Oh! my true friend, I have hitherto concealed it from thee, but
the pent up flame now bursts forth with redoubled fury. To thee have I unbur¬ thened the secret, for thou, I am sure, art calculated to pity and commiserate misfor¬ tune, although unable to heal the smart." " I will do every thing which the most unremitting friendship can dictate," re¬ sumed Huberto with warmth, " for now indeed have you displayed the most con¬ vincing proof of the sincerity of your es¬ teem, and the implicit reliance you have on my integrity and honour." - " Already hast thou been tried, my friend," said the Lord Walter, " and the creature exists not who dares boast pre¬ eminence over thee in virtue, and every exalted qualification of the soul. Now lis¬ ten, my friend, to what I shall unfold: * c Five tedious years are now elapsed, since, in the company of Laird Douglas, I ufed to seek the invigorating pastime ofthe
chace, on the borders of Northumberland* No broils then molested the peace of the two countries ; and the y r oung English no¬ bles of the north would oftentimes mingle with us during the sports of the field.— One day it so happened, that our hunt was protracted till night overtook us, when I was compelled to seek for shelter within the stately walls of Alnwick castle ; yet neither the tempest that raged on every side, the probability of continuing ex¬ posed, during the night, to the conflict of the elements, nor the most pressing in¬ treaties, could win Laird Douglas to pass within the portals of the castle of the Nor¬ thumbrian earl. No, he exclaimed, never will I seek sanctuary in a mansion that owns a Percy for its lord : and in this de¬ termination our mutual friend retired.— Would I had followed him ! but it seemed as if an irresistible impulse urged me on ; I suffered Laird Douglas to depart, and en¬ tered alone the castle of Alnwick. There, —yes, even there it was that these eyes vox .11. с
first met the form of the immaculate Isa¬ bella, the only sister of Edgar, Earl of Pem¬ broke, who, together with Edwin, the son of the Earl of Hereford, was at that time sojourning with the Northumbrian earl. To tell thee, my friend, the extatic senti¬ ments which took possession of my pal¬ pitating heart, were a task beyond the power of language to achieve. I from that juncture became the constant inmate of the castle ; I was assiduous, on all occa¬ sions, to rivet the attention of the beloved Isabella ; in short, I dared at length avow to her that predilection with vvhich my soul was inspired. О ! my Huberto, think not I overrate my bliss, when I tell thee that her conduct, though characterized by maiden coyness, seemed nevertheless to sanction my wishes ; yes, a soft confession beamed from her downcast eyes, which never will be obliterated from the fond remembrance of that delightful moment. Now mark the sad transition, and then picture to thyself, my friend, the agonies
which must have tortured my breast, on learning that her brother, the Earl of Pem¬ broke, was altogether inimical to a Scot¬ tish alliance, and repulsed my suit with such marked disdain, that had it not been for his consanguinity to the adored Isa¬ bella, he should have felt the weight of my resentment and defiance ; added to this, he affirmed, that his sister should ra· ther become the bride of one of England's baseborn churls, or spend her days within a monastery's dreary walls, than wed the first in rank of Scotia's sons. Then, my Huberto, was the trial $ I tore myself away, nerved with the momentary pride that swelled through every vein, and vowed internally to think of Isabella no more ; nay, for a period, I cursed the land that fostered her. But O! how unavail¬ ing was this flow of rage, these boisterous exclamations ; resentment soon subsiding, love returned triumphant ; and I have ever since, except when in the field of battle, с 2
been all for tenderness' and beauteous Isa- bel. 1 ' Avinzo, with that warmth of genuine feeling, which is characteristic of the soul of sympathy, offered ¿uch consolation as was requisite to the unhappy feelings of the gallant Lord Walter, who found in the soothing conduct of his friend a ray of comfort, which chased away the pervading gloom of corrosive melancholy. Huberto next proceeded to extol the apparent vir¬ tues of Edwin, the Earl of Hereford's son, mentioned by Lord Walter as the bosom friend of the Earl of Pembroke ; Edwin being the English nobleman, whose ge¬ nerous interference freed him from the English camp, after his fortunate escape from London. To these panegyrics the Lord Walter listened with infinite .satisfaction ; confes¬ sing that Edwin was the most generous of
men, having himself frequently endea¬ voured, but in vain, to soften the ri¬ gorous determination of the Earl of Pem¬ broke. Lord Walter also informed Avin¬ zo, that he had even ventured to confess his attachment for Isabel to the Laird Douglas. That nobleman being equally obstinate with the English earl, in every thing which bore a reference to that coun¬ try ; and in this rooted animosity the Laird Douglas was strengthened, by the galling injuries he had 'sustained ; his two brothers having been very recently deca¬ pitated by order of King Edward, and his wife and daughter being then kept close prisoners within the Tower of London. These circumstances, Huberto confessed, were in themselves sufficiently powerful to harrow up the feelings ofthe most sense¬ less of mankind, and consequently much more calculated to enrage the noble and spirited soul of a Scottish Douglas. He also allowed, that to have confided to him ' the secret, would have been rash in the с j
extreme, as in every other respect Lord Walter possessed the same inherent vir¬ tues that characterized the Laird Doug¬ las, and which still riveted their ornerons souls in the bond of closest amity. On quitting Lord Walter, Huberto dwelt for a considerable time on the hap¬ less fate of his noble friend, and generously endeavoured to invent some р!ш, which might at least soften the acuteness of his sufferings; after which his contemplations gradually recurred to the strange events of the preceding evening, which gave rise to other thoughts, and led Avinzo to adopt a plan which he determined on putting into execution that very night. Full of anxious expectancy, the hours seemed to drag on heavily, till at length the blazing chariot of jocund day bent its fiery course towards the netherworld,when Avinzo, retiring to the most unfrequent¬ ed spot, seated himself on the decayed
trunk of an oak, over which a spreading beech waved its luxuriant foliage in the evening breeze. Huberto, enraptured, bent his gaze on the surroundingscenery,for the train of his ideas was now in unison with the appear- ance of evening, which was perfectly se¬ rene, excepting at intervals only, when the ambient wind rustled through the ver¬ dure that over-canopied his head. On looking to the right, the distance displayed a gradual ascent, interspersed with clumps of elm and beach, while every break presented to the view the golden beams of sinking day, that irradiated the heavens, save where the venerable spires of Oron za* s monastery proudly shot their fretted forms into the realms of air, still contributing to diversify the scene, and render the landscape more enchanting. In¬ clining the eye still, in the circle ot the horizon appeared a sheet of water, on с 4
whose margin waved the melancholy wil¬ low. Within a few paces of Hubcrto's resting place, some lofty trees precluded the distant prospect, beneath which lay scattered numerous bundles of faggots left there by the servants of the monastery, who were all retired to their separate cells, to pass some hours in-meditation. Inclin¬ ing the eye still more to the left, beyond the boundary of the convent's wall, the eye of contemplation was feasted with bold rocks, that seemed to frown upon the dis¬ tant expanse of sea, which lost itself in the darkened horizon. It was the seventh hour, the twibVht now stole on apace, and Avinzo's attend¬ ance at the supper-board became requisite. Quitting therefore the peaceful shade, he slowly bent his course to the monastery, fully determined on hazarding the step, which not only curiosity, but even a more irresistible impulse seemed to urge him to adopt.
.33
CHAP. III.
There are so few individuals gifted with a susceptibility of feeling, that the world in general contemns, as ridi¬ culous and romantic, that strong impulse which wilt frequently prompt one being to rivet his affection, at fiîst sight, on any particular object. Though not ge¬ neral, this is certainly sometimes the casei and it is only to be accounted for, as originating in that degree ot sympathy in the objects, which coming in contact, produces, like the vibration of sounds, the most divine harmony. _____ The system of all nature tends to prove, That harmony attunes the soul to love. w. H. I.
JL HE supper hour was passed in the same manner as on the two preceding nights.— Avinzo was the first to rise from the board; when cordially bidding adieu to his sovereign and companions, he instantly quitted the refectory, and retired to the chamber allotted for his repose. After re- 4
maining there for a short space oi time, during which a thousand anxious doubb and fears flashed upon his brain, he cau¬ tiously stole forth, antl continuing along the corridor, proceeded by circuitous and unfrequented passages, which he Iiad care¬ fully explored during the day, and then descending a winding flight of steps, he found himself in the cloisters; where hav¬ ing listened for a time, and finding that no sound interrupted the solemn stillness which reigned on every side, he ventured, with quick and lightsome step, along the pavement, and soon found himself at the portal ofthe chapel, which he entered, and then sought tlie remotest sanctuary, in order that he might lie concealed, and es¬ cape observation. Avinzo having remained in this asylum for a considerable length of time, precisely at the same juncture as on the preceding evening, beheld the forms of the Abbot Gondez ai,d John of Dunbar suddenly
issue from beside the grand altar, who, traversing the aisle, descended into the cloisters, when the gates were instantly closed to by the Monk, and Huberto was again left the solitary inmate of this me¬ lancholy pile. No sooner was Avinzo assured that he was free from observation, than quitting his retreat, he advanced to the railing of the choir, where, secure from interruption, he determined on observing whether the same figure should again visit the chapel, in which case he was resolutely bent on ad¬ dressing the mysterious form. Here Hu¬ berto remained the slave of the most anxious curiosity, blended with an indo-« scribable emotion which pervaded his breast, and caused the most extatic flut¬ tering of the heart. In this situation the tardy minutes were lengthened into, hours, and his impatience made him at length conjecture that Lis solicitude would remain сб
ungratified, when a distant sound was heard. Avinzo's eyes, almost starting from their spheres, were instantly bent in that direction, and at the moment were gra¬ tified with the sisrht of the same extraor- о dinary personage, who advancing to the altar, with more timidity than on the pre¬ ceding night, gazed cautiously around, and then kneeling, began internally to offer up the nightly prayer ; while Huber* to, scarcely permitting the breath to escape the portal of his lips, stood intently gazing on the form before him, which remain¬ ed prostrate for a length of time, and then arising, advanced slowly to the brass por¬ tals oï the choir, through which the stran- *ger looked for some time, and more par¬ ticularly towards that precise spot from whence Avinzo had issued the preceding night ; when, being apparently satisfied sfhatno intruder was near, the figurt, as before, unlocked the gate, and descended •into the nave, down which it proceeded
with faultering steps, making frequent pauses, and bending in every direction a look of the most scrutinizing inquiry. Avinzo thought, in the first instance, of following it to and fro, but thij idea gave way to the more certain expedient of arrest¬ ing its course, and he in consequence quit¬ ted the situation he had taken, and pas¬ sing before the lofty brass work in front of the choir, entered the portal which the stranger had left unclosed. There Huber¬ to took his station, when the figure hav¬ ing traversed the nave several times suc¬ cessively, ascended the flight of steps, and entering the choir, was preparing to lock the portal, when Avinzo, suddenly advanc¬ ing, sunk on his knee beside the stranger, thus exclaiming:— " Pardon, I conjure you, fair unknown, the intrusion of an unfortunate stran e;er.' 3 At the moment he adçb essed tlie figure,
which, as he*had conjectured, proved to be a female, a faint scream issued from her lips, she tottered back some paces, and Avinzo just sprang forward in time to save her trembling frame from sinking on the marble pavement. « But, oh ! what a moment was this for the astonished Huberto! Conceive the youth supporting upon one knee the most exquisite female form, while her pa- lid cheek rested negligently on his breast, and the flowing drapery which had before encircled her brow, forming a kind of hood, had fallen back upon her shoulders, displaying a symmetry of features more an¬ gelical than mortal. Her cheek, pure as the spotless marble, just began to resume the roseat tinge, of which terror had for a few seconds wholly deprived it ; while her trembling lids unclosing, presented to the sight two gems more chastely brilliant than the lustre of the evening star. Upon her alabaster forehead waved a profusion
of golden ringlets ; her nose was of the Grecian outline, beneath which a mouth appeared whose lips resembled two streaks of coral moistened with the May-morn dew ; her teeth were even rows of lilies washed with the gentlest showers of spring, through which the perfume of a violet's bed wafted on zephyrs its odoriferous per¬ fume ; her neck resembled the ivory's newly polished surface, while her heaving bosom, which from the action of falling was perfectly uncovered, displayed the most perfect gradual swells that ever met the anxious lover's gaze, when first upon the bridal night he clasped his mistress in his nervous arms and sealed her for his own. Upon this snowy breast fell a pro¬ fusion of wavy tresses, which modesty in¬ tended they should veil from observation. Such was the creature on whom Hu¬ berto bent his most ardent gaze ; such the being that seemed to rivet him with admiration; bung fortunauly aided in
the desire of perusing this enchanting symmetry of shape, by the full glareof light proceeding from the silver lamp which hung suspended before the golden cru¬ cifix. Avinzo having in some measure col¬ lected his scattered senses, placed his hand upon that lily bosom, and finding respi¬ ration return, he assisted the trembling unknown female to arise, still however continuing to support her for some mi¬ nutes. The stranger having at length recovered from the consternation which Huberto's sudden appearance had excit¬ ed, instantly withdrew herself from his encircling arms, and retired some paces with an air of dignity accompanied by a steady and commanding aspect, which heightened even more the dear enchant¬ ment her form had produced on the soul of the youth, who slowly sinking on his knee, again addressed her :
'·· Most perfect, most lovely of nature's creatures ! deem not, I conjure you, my presence in this sainted spot a profane in¬ trusion ; I come not to insult, nor with the touch of libertinism to sully the purest form that ever met my eyes ; no, angelic creature, I possess a soul framed to pro¬ tect, not injure so delicate a being as thyself. 1 steal not on you in the dead of night to act a villain's part ; indeed, fair maid, I have no mind for sin, no power to act but in the sacred cause of God, of virtue, and of innocence." Avinzo paused, when the female stran¬ ger thus replied, in accents that thrilled through every vein, in tones of mellow harmony, which sunk deep into the heart gf the prostrate youth, " Who is it that addresses me ? and how, at this most sacred hour, when all within the monastery are at peace, do I behold in this sainted asylum a mortal form, when lingering death would be thy punishment
for 5;uch presumption, did any eye but mine behold thee ?" ** You see, most exquisite of women," returned 1 Avinzo, u a wretched and for- Iprn wanderer, a creature that has no country, parents, or kindred to bless him ; a being who hath from infancy been drift¬ ed on the rude sea of life, bereft of need¬ ful pilot, though not in want of friends. No, sweet lady, let me not impiously ar¬ raign tiie fostering hand of heaven, for I have yet such as would give their life for my preservation. My country Ы I^alia's fertile land, my name Huberto Avinzo, and my appearance in this spot was alone иъ stigated by the unconquerable desire of once more gazing on your form. Hither with my friends, who, together with King Ro¬ bert Bruce, w T ere defeated at the battle of Methven,I fled,and in this monastery, with my brave companions, I sought the wish¬ ed-for asylum. Last night, unconscious of the hour, and ruminating on my adven-
t urous tate, 1 remained within this chapel until tlic great portal was made secure; and thus did 1 continue as a prisoner, tiil fate gave first to my astonished gaze the form, I now behold with more than won¬ der. 'Twas then 1 sought to address you, but you fled my supplications, and i, urged by wishes too strong to be endured, have this night once more hazarded the worst; for well myself and dear companions know, from orders strictly issued, that in a secret dungeon I should be enclosed, where, de· barred of sustenance, my life would w r aste, were 1 but found at this forbidden hour infringing on the rules of the fraternity of Saint Columba." <ς Rash youth !" resumed the lovely stranger, " may the all-fostering hand of heaven protect thee, for thou art unac¬ quainted with all the horrors of this place. —Go, secure thyself from observation ; fly at midnight vespers, from this haunt
of terror and of blood ; and if it may be so, quit for ever, with thy brave compa¬ nions, Oronza's guilty soil." The stranger made a retiring motion, when Huberto seizing her hand, answered thus, in accents the most impressive :— " Thy caution, gentle maid, indicates that thou art but too well informed of some mysteries appertaining to this gloomy abode ; inform me, therefore, I conjure thee, of what nature is the secret to which thou dost allude. Oh ! should it relate to thee, and something whispers me that thou art a persecuted innocent, I will with joy relinquish life, so I may but ,serve thee." " Thou requîrest of me what neither can or must be tolds/* replied the female in a solemn tone of voice, accompanied with a graceful wave of the hand ; " my lips are closed for ever,"
Avinzo was on the point of interrupt¬ ing her discourse, but she continued : " Nay more, I charge thee keep this strange event for ever a secret within thy own bosom; to this I solemnly conjure thee." " What I" resumed Avinzo, u must I feel the conviction, that such unparalleled excellence pines out the day, perhaps in lingering solitude ? Perhaps— Oí heaven, that I should harbour such a thought,—is here condemned by some foul fiend, in monkish garb, to pass a life of unavailing anguish, since none that bear the female stamp should live within these walls, such being the austerity of Saint Columba's votaries. What ! know all this, and yet with coward baseness, not attempt thy rescue ? Impossible, it must not be. O! divinest of women," continuad Huberto, in а softened tone, " suffer me to become the champion of unguarded innocence; permit me, angelic creature, to lay that
heart before thee, which from this moment owns itself thy slave beyond recall."— Avinzo paused awhile, when the listening stranger assumed a more reserved air, which the youth observing, continued thus :— " Do not bend upon me the eye of stern reproach ; I cannot exist should thy displeasure await me ; mine is the unfet¬ tered language of a glowing soul, which from this moment dates its bliss or mi¬ sery, according to thy decree ; do not then at once bereave mc of all hope, but. speak. Oh! tell me; in mercy ease my sickening heart, hath any predilection yet found sanctuary in thy breast, or may thy bosom's freedom dart a genial ray ? may I, from this instant, strive to merit inte¬ rest there? ' During the conclusive sentence, the countenance of the lovely stranger lost the repulsive air it had assumed, while the
agonized Avinzo gently pressing her un¬ resisting hand, and bending on her features a look indicatory of the most ardent af¬ fection, waited in dread suspense her re¬ ply to his impressive address, which was at length inarticulately answered in the following terms : ci If on my words depend another's hap¬ piness, I will not, by my silence, doom a creature to endure the torture of suspense. Learn then that I have no inmate in this breast but misery, and free from that I should indeed be ^^Ζ' " Soon then shall it be effected," ex¬ claimed the enchanted Huberto; " but say, may I then cheri.^h the sweet dawn of hope, may I from henceforth call my¬ self thy slave, and tread the puths of vir¬ tue, honour, and renown, but to ensure esteem from thee?" The fascinating object was silent to this
interrogatory ; but Avinzo more ardently pressing a reply, she answered thus: " On one condition I accord with thy request, impassioned youth, and on thy acquiescence alone depends my fiat." " Name it," resumed the anxious Hu¬ berto. " Swear to keep this interview a secret from all, nor hazard in my behalf a rash attempt, which would not only prove abortive, but doom thyself, thy friends, and me to certain death." Avinzo continuing silent, she thus re¬ sumed her address : " Thou cans't hesitate then between my certain death, or the continuance of that existence, which, however miserable, I would fain preserve to work the mighty cause of retribution?"
" No," replied Huberto ; " with warmth I feel; I own, the justness of thy decree, and bow contented and obedient. I swear to act henceforth according to thy dictates. Yet one dear request ï have in store:— say, must thy name continue hidden from me during ail my perils ; may I not blazen it on my shield, and under its sweet in¬ spiration rush to lionour ? Resolve mc this, and let mc fiy to act thy will." " Be satisfied/* resumed the attentive stranger, " let fate work all the rest." There was an impressive solemnity in the stranger's manner, which awed the soul of the prostrate youth, who raising her hand first to his heart, then pressed it to his lips, with a mingled emotion of reve¬ rence and rapture, while the beauteous maid continued incapable of preventing the action. She at length advanced with measured step towards the shrine, whither Huberto also was imperceptibly attracted ; vol. и. о
who, advancing to the step ofthe altar, fell prostrate before the holy table, and ele¬ vating his right hand, fervently exclaimed thus :— " As I prove just to that which I have sworn, so may the Redeemer of the world aid me in the hour of peril ; and as the heart I have purely offered up now throbs for her that has enslaved it, so may it cease to pal¬ pitate, if ever I forget her." The peculiar emphasis which accompa¬ nied these words, and the pious, yet ani¬ mated look of him that gave them utter¬ ance, could not fail to act upon the soul of sensibility. The stranger then confessed their power, and the cause in which they were offered up was accompanied by the internal prayer of her rapt soul ; which, together with the love-sick emotion that prevaded her bosom, produced an instan¬ taneous eflect ; for a sickening languor -:<Де over her senses, and she sunk upon
her lover's arm, while her quivering lips pronounced emphatically, « О my Avinzo !" The sound was extacy. Huberto stole a rapturous kiss, which seemed to collect the wandering senses of the maid; who immediately arose, and hurrying the en· tranced youth down the choir, bade him, with a faltering sigh, farewell; then, wav* ing her beauteous hand, she closed to the portal, and instantly vanished at the former place of her departure· Avinzo remained motionless for a time, still picturing to his glowing imagination the perfect form which had so completely taken possession of his inmost soul* " 'Tis a reality," he at length exclaimed, with enthusiasm ; " 'tis no illusion of the brain, but a corporeal being of this sublu¬ nary globe. Gracious heaven ! what an¬ gelic lineaments are there combined ! what. d 2
graceful majesty, and what cherub sweet» ness played upon that divine countenance! Those lips too, unclosed but to give utter¬ ance to the most harmonious sounds ; yes, they moved to pronounce the name of Avin%o\ while an expressive languor, indi¬ cating all my soul now pants for, pervaded her every action. I am not then indiffe¬ rent to the mistress of my heart; I am not doomed to perpetual anguish ; for death would have been bliss, without the love of that soul-subduing creature." Huberto continued thus to offer up the effusions of his rapturous mind, till the hour of vespers arrived, and the appear¬ ance of the fathers, as on the preceding night, roused him from this train of love- engendered phantasies ; when worldly pru¬ dence, and the injunctions of his goddess, recurring full to his recollection, he had recourse to the most cautious line of con¬ duct, and escaped in safety to the cloisters, from whence he gained his chamber un-
observed; there stretching himself upon his pallet, yielded to the sleep of love, that soon overpowered his faculties, and wafted him for a time to the regions of enchant- ing bliss, and soul-subduing harmony, where worldly anguish was forgotten in the arms of peace.
CHAP. IV. ass» ." ' ..J ' tu ".д ат —— Yes I can give liberty,— The bolt and chain are no impediments. The yells of Cerberus my power would qucil> And pliant move the iron gates of Hell.
------------1 scent the air of liberty, And uncoiiătraiti'd may wander from the cell Which late confm'd «ne. Ö 1 bleesed freedom. . J; . , Where is the being so bereft of mind À* not to own at once thy sovereign power ; A wretch that's dead to such a sentiment Degrades himself, and U rt· longer Man. W. H, I. .■Ihil l i ll ľ. Г" ι » HUBERTO continued awhile entranced in dreams of bliss, but as the cup of plea¬ sure soon overflows, so was his joy of transient date; for on a sudden all the lovely vision vanished, and horrors came
THE MONK. 55 to chill his bosom's warmth, and from his soul affright the god of gentle sleep. From dreams confused and terrible, Avinzo was at length aroused, when at his side he beheld a figure in monastic gar¬ ments, whose countenance was wholly shrouded (save the eyes) by the flowing drapery, which was raised by the stranger's hand for the purpose of concealment, and the cowl which overhung his forehead· Astonished at this unseasonable intrusion, Huberto sprang from the pallet, when his first idea was, that in the person before him, which was tall of stature, he beheld the form of John of Dunbar. After eyeing him, however, for a few seconds, he was enabled to find that he had been mistaken in this suggestion ; and, having summoned his resolution, he boldly demanded who the stranger was, and the intent of his appearance there at that extraordinary hour ? To which the figure replied, " Murder and Treason." D4
These emphatic words struck deep into the soul of Avinzo, who instantly called to his recollection the circumstance of the Monk who had addressed him in the chanci with the same words, and from thi* circumstance it immediately recurred to Avinzo that the father 'then before him must be the very identical person» u What is thy will ľ' inquired the youth. j . « A The stranger,.instantly advancing one pace towards the entrance ofthe chamber, invited Huberto, by his motions, to follow him, who, seizing his trusty sword, bowed his head in token of assent, when the Monk raising the Ьщр from the table on which he liad placed it, led the way into the passage, while Avinzo, grasping his unsheathed glave, and holding it at arm's length, followed the stranger with cau¬ tious step. Having first descended into the cloisters by the very same winding and unfrequented staircase, which Avinzo had
discovered the preceding morning, they came at length to a small arched and grated door-way. Before this entrance Huberto had frequently halted during the day, through which, however, he could perceive nothing but the commencement ofa flight of stone steps, which lost themselves in darkness. Here the Monk paused, a&d giving the lamp to Huberto, emphatically used the word "Mark," then touching with his fore¬ finger seven bars successively from the top, he grasped the seventh firmly, which yield¬ ing to his pressure flew back, and with it drew forth the bolts, which appeared connected with a massy lock placed on a different part ofthe iron grating, and enter¬ ing deep into the stone work. The Monk instantly pushed open the portal, which grated dissonantly upon its rusty hinges, producing a harsh reverberation through the caverns beneath. Devoid of fear, Avinzo followed the 3 5
steps of his mysterious conductor, who draw in to the grating, the bolts shot back again into the massive wall with a loud crashjthat resounded along the vaulted descent. The Monk, still carefully conceal¬ ing his visage, retook the lamp, and began to descend the winding stone steps, which terminated in a spacious vault, devoid of all light save only that which the flitting flame of the lamp emitted, but partially illuminating the wide expanse of dark¬ ness. This vault led into a second, which having, traversed, a deadly scent infected the damp unwholesome air, and on arriv¬ ing at the third vault, it : proved to be a burial place, where the uncovered forms of the deceased Monks, arrayed in their monastic habits, lay side by side, leaving an avenue for the living who might descend to perform the last sad office for their de¬ parted brothers. This forbidding sight infused a momentary chill into the breast of Huberto, which soon, however, gave way to the strong desire he entertained of
fathoming the unaccountable conduct of his silent conductor. They stifl continued to advance along these ranks of death, these mouldering remains of religious votaries ; when they arrived at length at the entrance of a smaller cavern, which, from the stone eñigies of mitred Monks that graced the pavement, appeared to be the receptacle for all the deceased Abbots of the mona¬ stery of Saint Columba. Huberto's guide instantly proceeded to a wide altar of stone, which was appa¬ rently connected with the wall of the cell, and whereon was placed a large plain cru¬ cifix of ebony ; but to Avinzo's astonish¬ ment, one side of the altar, instead of being substantial stone work, proved but an art* ful screen representing the wall ; for the Monk on applying his hand drew back the screen, and followed by Huberto, descended into a narrow passage, where he loosened a d6
bolt, when a door being thrown open the astonished youth found himself without the precincts of the convent's walls, and on the skirt ofthe wood through which the King and his companions had forced a passage on their first landing at Oronza's island. As the Monk remained mute, without proceeding, Avinzo at length addressed him. ** What is the source jaf thy mysterious conduct ?" * e Murder and Treason," was again the reply. ** And how can this prevent a comple¬ tion of the threatened peril ?" demanded the youth. " Liberty and flight are thus attainable," replied the Monk, " only beware that cau¬ tion guides thee and thy friends."
<c May heaven reward thee, reverend man !" interrupted the grateful Huber¬ to. " Hold," resumed the father. « To¬ morrow night pursue the course I have thus pointed out, and under the umbra¬ geous shadow of yonder wood, continue by its left margin, and soon the ocean will attract thine eye, whose beach is covered with the huts of fishermen; from thence procure the means of a de¬ parture from this isle, take boat, and on the succeeding night, when all the bro¬ thers chant the midnight prayers, ap¬ point a meeting with thy friends, and with them fly, I charge thee, or wait the worst that can befal thy well-beloved companions and thyself." xt I shall obey," replied the attentive Avinzo, with an inclination of the head ; after which the Monk re-entering the pas¬ sage, and bolting the narrow door, passed
under the altar into the gloomy mansions of the dead. The conductor, whose countenance still remained obscured, then turning to Hu¬ berto, and pointing to the secret screen, thus addressed him :— u The garb, young man, doth not always denote the wearer's mind. I know the .secrets of this mansion, of which I am irrevocably sworn an inmate. Would I bad never trodden this monastic ground ! Even this spot hath been the scene of base deceit, for, from beneath yon altar, when each Abbot dies, is said to issue forth the form of Saint Columba, clad ia heavenly radiance: 'tis true a form doth issue thence, but it is a brother schooled in the deceit, who, for the pur¬ poses of gain, and to inspire in vulgar minds an awe for this most rigid monas¬ tery, enacts the saint-like part ; for on an Abboťs death alone are worldly
minds permitted to bend the knee be¬ fore this altar, which, it is said, contains the relics of our patron saint. Beware of all within this mansion, for every charac¬ ter is schooled in horror and deceit. Be¬ ware of Gondez, and of his chosen friend, Dunbar ; yes, even for the little term that makes this place your dwelling, take heed¬ ful note of your companions, for to create suspicion seals your fates beyond my power, or that of mortal." , Proceeding in the same course, they gained the portal opening into the cloisters, when adopting the same secret method of unclosing the grating, the Monk extin¬ guished the flaming lamp, and uttering an emphatic " farewell," instantly disap¬ peared, having wholly eluded the prying glance of Avinzo, who had in vain endea¬ voured to trace the physiognomy of his ge¬ nerous conductor. Absorbed in meditation, Huberto re-
gained his cell, when the first impulse dic¬ tated a prayer to that merciful Being, who had thus placed it in his power to rescue the valiant Bruce and his adherents from dire captivity, if not from death. This generous sentiment, however, experienced some alloy, when he recalled to mind the lovely stranger in the chapel, whom he should now be forced to quit, and that perhaps for ever ; consideration, however, shortly told him, that the secret means he had acquired of escaping the monastery's confines, might, at a future period, enable him to pass within its walls, by securing the secret door beneath the altar on the side of the forest ; for as no recourse was had to it but on the Abbot's death, the portal consequently would be unbolted on the inner side, and thereby remain acces¬ sible at pleasure. Full of expectancy and hope, Avinzo once more courted sleep, which never left his couch until returning day warned him
to risc, and with his^companions partake of the proffered breakfast, which they ate as before in silence and mistrust. By the desire of the melanch. ly King Robert Bruce, his adherents followed his steps into the garden of the monastery, where,after bewailing his cruel fate, he in¬ formed them, that it was his determination to ask an audience of the Abbot Gondez, and then request safe conduct from the island, as the dreadful uncertainty as to his fate, and the anxious expectancy of his adherents, must soon give way to fell despair, when his cause would be crushed for ever. ** If this inexplicable Monk refuses us a pass as simple Knights," continued the King, " then will I make known my real rank, and by large promises ensure his friendly aid." A silence of some moments prevailed,
each being unwilling to hazard an opnion, after the mysterious conduct they had witnessed from the Abbot. Huberto at length requested that his monarch would lend him an attentive ear, when he pro¬ ceeded to acquaint his astonished auditors, that he had acquired the knowledge of a secret pass from the convent, and conclud¬ ed by informing them, that he should that very evening repair alone abroad, in or¬ der to procure the means of escape, and that on the succeeding night every thing should be in readiness for their embarka¬ tion. The monarch, clasping Avinzo to his heart, while a tear glistened on his manly cheek, exclaimed :— " Thou art formed, young man, to be my guardian angel on this side of the grave ; may heaven but grant me power to prove my gratitude !" Themonarch then turning to his adherents, who were each warmed with the same feeling as their chief, continued thus :—" I do not tax
ye nobles, with any lack of friendship for Avinzo, but I would only conjure ye to cherish him with unabating zeal, as that will prove more firmly the attachment which ye bear me." Huberto, overcome with the warmth of gratitude which was heaped upon him by every noble present, strove, but in vain, to give the language of his bosom vent, and dropping on his knee, concealed Ids face within the garments of the King— " And all the mother came into his eyes," " And gave him up to tears." These soul-subduing passions having in sòme measure subsided, Avinzo, whose advice had become an oracle, requested of his friends that they would appear more cheerful than hitherto, and seem in every respect to relish their situation in the convent. King Robert then, in order that the weighty argument of gold might not be wanting to procure the desired
means of conveyance from the island, gave into Huberto's hand an hundred marks, to be expended as he should deem most expedient; after which the Sove¬ reign having conversed in private with his brother, the Lord Walter, the Earl of Murray, and Laird Douglas, approached towards Avinzo, and thus bespoke him:— *' We know, dear youth, thy wayward history, and that thou art not one of Scotia's sons ; yet, with the glad concur¬ rence of my nobles here, I shall bestow upon thee the title of my chosen Knight and Lord of these my islands." The youth then faffing on his knees, the monarch placed his sword upon Avinzo, saying, €C Rise, now a Knight, and be thy name henceforth Sir Huberto Avinzo, Lord of Scotland's Isles." This ceremony being ended, the King
took the bracelet of gold which graced his own right arm, and hasping it on that of the youth, he continued :— " Wear that, my Lord, as token of our love, and on thy shield in happier times, let there be blazoned this same golden token, and for thy motto bear the words, LA FOI, BT L'ESPERANCE." The youth having received the warm congratulations of his friends, they sepa¬ rated, in order that no suspicion might attach itself to their lonsc continuance to* gether ; when the Lord Walter renewed with Avinzo, in private, tlie subject of his unhappy love, from which he felt some alleviation, by the generous conversation of Huberto, who, though anxious to un- burthen the secret of liis own soul, was compelled to maintain a rigid silence, and let the passion prey upon his bosom with-
out the consolatory interference which the balm of friendship ever yields to the love¬ sick heart· Thus passed on the day, during which no particular event occurred, each fugitive being particularly guarded in his conduct according to the instructions of Avinzo. At the supper board they were appa¬ rently more at ease, but their conversation was of a nature not to create the least mistrust ; and having bade each other a good repose, they proceeded to their seve¬ ral apartments for the night. Avinzo mindful of the task he had to fulfil, awaited anxiously the tolling of the bell that should call the fathers to the cha¬ pel, and which at length resounded on the moaning blast of night, summoning him to act his wished for purpose. Huberto arose, and quitting his cell,
stole unobserved into the cloisters, upon which the moon darted its pale radiance in full splendour. At the bottom of the steps he halted, and, bending round a look of minute inquiry, observed not a human form : with light step, he theii advanced to the grated entrance into the vaults, and placing his lamp upon the pavement, he seized the seventh bar, and with ease drew back the massy bolts, when the portal unclosed, and he found himself on the summit of the winding staircase. Unassailed by fear, he traversed the same gloomy mansions of the moul¬ dering dead, and having gained the altar, opened the secret way, and soon found himself at liberty. As he stole through the overhanging wood, he passed beneath the windows of the chapel, and distinctly heard the mid¬ night chant of the fraternity, which soon faded on his ear ; his quick pace shortly
brought him to the miserable habitations alluded to by the Monk on the preceding night, Avinzo, approaching the entrance of one of these huts, knocked several times for admittance, and at length succeed* ed in arousing the inhabitants, consist¬ ing of a poor fisherman, his wife, and three small children. Having made known his errand, and framed such excuses as tended to lull all suspicion in the mind of tlie fisherman, who received the more gra* tify ing earnest of gold to back the request, it was agreed that the succeeding night, by the hour specified, a boat should be waiting in readiness, and as the reward was great, the poor fellow gave a suflicient token of his own secrecy, by requesting his employer not to engage any other boatman than himself, as he was fully com* petent to conduct them in safety whither they required. Every thing being thue
arranged, Huberto bade the family fare¬ well, and retracing his steps, gained in safety the cell appropriated for his repose ; there, falling on his knees before the crucifix which adorned the altar in his chamber, he returned to heaven the effu¬ sions of a grateful soul, and then enjoyed upon his pallet, the soothing forgetfulness of gentle sleep, whose balm was rendered the more grateful to his senses, by bring¬ ing to his wandering fancy, the form of her he loved to extacy.
vol. iu «
CHAP. V.
There iá nothing; gives such elasticity to the human mind as the sudden change from confinement to liberty ; it not only reuves in the soul its former energy, but re¬ animates the vigour which had been its characteristic ereit was fattened by the cruel bondage of despotism. SS— 1S.SSSSSSSSSSSSS ..... || Quoth he like sage philosopher Who scorn'd to make a mighty stir ^ Kot Sol hiimclf is half so free As is the mind of thee or me; For why ? The simple truth aright is, My night's his day, his day my night is.
jPHE morning's repast being ended, the monarch'and his friends, anxious to learn the success of Hubcrto's endeavour, in¬ stantly bent their course into the garden of the convent, where Avinzo soon joined them, and by his welcome tidings dispelled the anxiety which had, during the night, chaced from their pallets the sweet physi« cian of the troubled mind.
in the course of the day Avinzo fre¬ quently repaired into the chapel, where he had beheld the mysterious creature who now reigned empress of his soul. With what rapture he retraced her form and graceful motion, with what extacy did he recur to those fond words," O! my Avin¬ zo,'* which had unconsciously escaped her subdued heart. Sometimes the thought of never more beholding her recurred to his fancy. Again he would think, nay his mind assured him, that she was subject to the villain Gondez and his creature, the contemplation of whose purposes made him shudder. At such moments quite frantic, the youth would groan with anguish, till the assurance of his maker's justice came to reanimate his sinking spirits, and nerve him with the enthusiasm of divine religion. Such were not, however, the only cogi¬ tations that pervaded Huberto's mind : ever anxious to express the warmth of his gratitude for that being who had so sig- E 2
nally interested himself in the cause of hib king and friends, he regarded with atten¬ tion the person of every father who pre¬ sented himself at the dinner board ; but he strove Ín vain to single out the object, the similarity of their dress rendered it im¬ practicable. Sometimes, indeed, the youth recalled to his memory the form of father Anthony, which had so much interested him when attending mass in the chapel, and on the appearance of that dejected looking Monk he measured his person with an eye of the most anxious scrutiny ; but it did not appear like that of his un- Known conductor ; and when his eyes met those of the father, there was not visible the least indication of his having been ac¬ cessary to the discovery which had been made to Huberto. Absorbed in wonder, and in thought, Avinzo partook of the meal, after which he retired with his friends, between whom it was agreed, that they should all assemble in the cell of Avinzo, at the appointed
hour of twelve that night, from whence the youth was to» conduct them by the secret way, and lead them from captivity to freedom, and perhaps to victory. From this juncture, the souls of the monarch and his friends upbraided the slow progress of hoary time, who seemed to have forgotten his wonted speed, with each anxious fugitive, save th^ fond youth Avinzo, who remembered that, as the night closed in, he must abandon to the care of guilt, the object of his every hope, the lovely wanderer of the chapel of Saint Columba. All was at peace within the monastery, and at length the wished-for moment ar¬ rived, when the noble chiefs, with wary step, gained the appointed cell. Once more the brazen bell, with solemn tone, spoke to the votaries of Columba, the hour of mid¬ night chant. Avinzo seized the lamp, and, followed by the monarch and his friends, E 3
stole from the chamber, and arrived in safety at the secret staircase, which they de¬ scended, when Huberto giving the lamp into the hand of the Lord Walter, pre- ceeded alone to the bottom step, wherr, under the darkened shade of the avenue, he gazed anxiously around, and placing his ear to the earth, listened with attention. No figure, however, appeared, no footstep resounded to impede their course, and Hu¬ berto beckoning his followers, they soon descended into the cloisters. The orb of night but faintly dissipated the surrounding gloom, as the dark clouds floated in sullen majesty through the realms of air. Avinzo seized the bar, the bolts unclosed, and the hinges grated on the ear, echoing dissonantly through the vaults be¬ neath. The anxious sovereign, and his friends, passed quickly over the threshold, when, just as Huberto was proceeding to follow them, a figure darted forward from behind a pillar that support e 1 the cloisters. The hearts of the wretched fugitives sunk
within their bosoms, but suddenly the stranger form seizing Avinzo's hand,press¬ ed it with warmth, saying—" It is a friend» may the great God protect ye."— Huberto recognized the tone ofthe intruder's voice; it was indeed the friend who had planned their rescue, and who disappeared, ere the youth could heap a blessing on his head. Avinzo shutting to the portal, the bolts shot back into the wall, when taking the lamp from Lord Walter, he proceeded through the various vaulted chambers, followed by his silent friends till they ar¬ rived at the altar, when Avinzo, drawing back the screen, gave his expectant fol¬ lowers to hope and liberty. Following Avinzo's direction, they had just entered the wood, when the sound of approaching footsteps met their ear, and having concealed themselves, they shortly after beheld a band of armed men pass to¬ wards the great portal of the monastery* г 4
" We are betrayed," exclaimed King Robert Bruce in agony; " the trappings of those men bespeak them in the pay of English Edward ; let us be prompt, or all is lost." Huberto darting forward, his friends followed his steps with the utmost preci¬ pitancy, and on ariving at the hut they found the fisherman in waiting, who in¬ stantly led them to his little bark, wherein they placed themselves, and were soon happily wafted on the bosom of the deep. From the questionings of King Robert Bruce, he was given to understand by the fisherman, that some time previous to their embarkation a large vessel with troops on board had anchored at Oronza, in a small bay, about a mile from the huts of the fishermen, and that this circumstanee had excited much wonder in the breasts of the man and his wife, as the island was of little consequence, and so far removed from the scene of warfare, that the in-
habitants scarcely knew the horrid de¬ vastation which was hourly committed by the English army on the Scottisli soil. The wind and waves were propitious, and the little sail spread its white bosom to the air, urging forward the vessel with infinite rapidity; so that when the morning .dawned upon the horizon, all that was visible of Oronza's island, were the pro¬ jecting rocks that mingled their light blue tints with the warm blushes of smil¬ ing Aurora. The king and his friends still continued to gaze upon the spot, fear¬ ful lest their escape should be proclaimed, and an immediate pursuit take place; no sail however appeared to break upon the watery plain, and the brave monarch with his chosen few, found themselves safely landed on the island of Jura. Having amply rewarded the fisherman, the king further enjoined him to secrecy, and the honest boatman swore by Saint An- 4'
drew, that he would cast his nets, and then return to the island as usual, with the pro¬ duce of the deep, nor ever make men¬ tion of the events of that morning. King Robert, having assured the boat¬ man that the time might come when he should receive a more ample reward, de¬ manded his name, which was Walter Lo¬ gan ; after which, procuring horses, the fugitives, at full speed, crossed the narrow isle, and soon entered a second vessels in which they launched into the sound of Jura, steering their course to the main land of Scotland. No interruption occurred ; the elements, as if in triumph, vied with each other, to waft the king in safety to the wished-for land ; ---------------------And it should seem as if The roaring .surge were prcud to bear bim up ; Afar the waves came towVmg towards his ship, And dipt his pendant ш the watry clouds; Aţ length, qniíe hoarse, they bow'd their stubborn baefes, Ctook'd, their pointed tops, then soon dissolving*
Bath'd and fondled the tough and well ribb'd bark, 3n plains of milky and thick-span^Ied foam. The blanket sails swell'd as though ihey wou'd crack, And shiver the twisted cords that held them ; Both winds and waves in amity were leagu'd, And strove who most cou'd aid his homeward course. Upon King Robert's debarkation with his nobles, he instantly proclaimed himself; while his brot lier Sir Edward, Randolph Earl of Murray,and the Lord Walter, were dispatched in different directions to appoint a rallying place for the adherents of the monarch. A universal joy now ran through the country, and as the king advanced, the hardy supporters of his rights poured in from every quarter, adoring their sove¬ reign more as a divinity, than a mere sub· binary potentate. From the period of the defeat at Meth¬ ven, a thousand reports had been propa¬ gated, some stating that the king had fallen in the field, others affirmed that he e6
must be in the hands of the merciless Ed¬ ward; and the English monarch gaining a knowledge of the disappearance of the Scottish chief, industriously turned that circumstance to his own advantage, by strengthening, as much as possible, these rumours, by which means he felt a con¬ viction, that the spirit of the Scottish clans would be damped, and that he might t hereby acquile the whole territory of Scot¬ land with the greatest ease ; and indeed, so dreadful was the shock of King Robert's loss, that his followers had, in despair, partly determined on relinquishing any further struggle. But, if this circumstance had conduced to depress the Caledonian spirit, the reap¬ pearance of its chieftain tended to inspire. it with redoubled animation; and the cry from one confine ofthe island to the other, was, " Revenge and victory, or honour¬ able death." On every side the clank of arms was heard,and martial music resound-.
ed through the regions of air. Cities poured forth their hundreds of citizens, and villages their sturdy youths ; wives joy¬ fully embraced their husbands, inspiring them with a thirst of fame, and mothers, with enthusiasm, yielded up their offspring for the public weal. Defiance was thundered forth from every tongue, and vengeance on the bloody foe was hurled with heartfelt acri¬ mony. Wheresoever King Robert Bruce ap¬ peared, shouts of thousands greeted his approach, and Avinzo, whose services the monarch blazoned forth, shared with his beloved sovereign the popular clamour ; in short, it appeared as if a new furor had taken possession of the Scottish people ; the country seemed electrified,and the presence of its beloved monarch appeared in itself suflicient to ensure the palm of victory, whensoever the signal should be given for the bloody onset.
CHAP< VI.
■ ■ ■■ He got a hurt O' th' inside, ofa deadlier sort, By Cupid made, who took his stand, Drew bome his bow, and, aiming right, Let By an arrow at the knight· Love is the world's preservai ire, That keeps all souls of things alive ; Controls the mighty pow'r of fate, And gives mankind a longer date ; The life of nature, that restores As fast as time and death devours. Who but lovers can converse, Uke angels, by the eye discourse ? Address and compliment by vision— Make love and court by intuition? And burn in îmVrous flatnes, as fierce As those celestial ministers ì BVTLEÄ. y 'π ľ hiin' "ίτ-τ 'u г XT has been already sťated, that the ba¬ tted of Laird Douglas towards the Eng. Ksh was of the roost inveterate nature,
which partly originated in his two brothers' deaths; they having suffered on the block by order of the merciless King Edward, by whom they had been taken prisoners. In addition to which circumstance, the Lady Birtha, his wife, and the beautiful Maude, his daughter, were then lingering in cruel captivity within the Tower of London, as no ransom which had been offered, could prevail on the implacable Edward to restore them to their friends and home. This obduracy of the English sovereign originated in the martial con¬ duct of the Laird Douglas, who had tes¬ tified his matchless prowess against the sons of Albion, in many a deadly fray. In one of those contests, which two years before had declared itself in favour of the English, the Scottish Laird, in order to rescue his king, had been compelled to leave his castle, little supposing that the victorious Britons would steer their course in that direction; but the English leader,
conscious that Douglas had been the sole cause of rescuing King Robert Bruce from becoming his prisoner, determined, with the rancour of hatred, to level his castle with the dust; for whicii purpose he pro¬ ceeded thither with a mighty host ; but the magnanimous Lady Birtha determined on holding out a siege, which she did for thirteen days, with unexampled persever¬ ance, when stratagem accomplished what force was utterly incapable of accom¬ plishing. In consequence of which, the politic Edward entered the castle, and seiz¬ ed on the persons of Lady Birtha, and her daughter Maude ; but ere he could put his threat in practice, as to the demolition of the fortress, a superior army of the Scotch, headed by Laird Douglas, came to rescue his wife and daughter, but in vain ; for the English chief, hearing of his rapid approach, drew off his troops, and with his female captives proceeded im¬ mediately to join the main body of his army. . . - ■
The first step taken by the English mo¬ narch was, to commit the Lady Birtha, and her lovely daughter, to the care of Edwin, son of the Earl of Hereford, who, with a strong guard, was deputed to con¬ duct the unfortunate captives m safety to London, and there commit them close prisoners to the Tower of that city. The soul of young Edwin, though glow¬ ing with the love of fame, and struggling in his country's cause, was not so steeled against the Scottish name, as to remain a calm observer of the beautiful Maude*— His first sentiment was pity for the tender objects committed to his keeping ; and, as one generous sensation begets another, that emanation of the heart gradually gave birth to a more extatic feeling; so that ere he knew the rapturous bliss, his youthful bosom was subdued by love. In the course of Edwin's progress to the English capital, from the borders of
Scotland, he was all assiduity to the un¬ fortunate Birtha, and her lovely offspring. By his conversation he endeavoured to sooth their dejection, and proferred every thing within the scope of his ability to ameliorate their bitter fate. The mother, by degrees, was led to behold the youth more as a protector, than as the watchful guard placed over her freedom ; and her gentle daughter, having never felt a pre¬ dilection for another, could not witness Edwin's gentle manners and frank de¬ meanour, without experiencing, in some degree, a similar sentiment to that which usurped the emporium over his bosom. A thousand times the youth hesitated, as to the line of conduct he should pursue. Love and generosity prompted him to set his captives at liberty, and aid them to re¬ gain their native land. Honour, on the other hand, pointed out his duty to his monarch, who had sacredly vested in him the charge he was called upon to fulfil. The struggle was dreadful; but what will
not love effect? Every other sentiment yielded to that of his heart; and ere they had half accomplished their journey to London, Edwin made known to Lady Birtha, his intention of freeing herself and daughter, at the risk of his own safety; for the vengeance of the king would, in all probability, have sentenced the headstrong youth to the block, as a traitor to the state. The magnanimous Lady Douglas, how¬ ever, justly appreciating the disinterested conduct of Edwin, disdained to purchase her freedom at the price of his honour, if not his life; and having warmly expressed her gratitude, she made known her unal¬ terable resolution of never accomplishing her liberty by such means. This ge¬ nerous offer, however, did not only rivet the esteem of Lady Birtha, but indelibly stampt the signet of love on the heart of her beauteous daughter, who, previous to their arrival in London, had sufficiently testified to Edwin a return of that passion, which occupied his entire thought ;. and it
may naturally be supposed, that the gene¬ rous confession did not tend to diminish the ardour of his passion, but, on the con¬ trary, reanimated his heart, and led him to hope, that a happy termination of their loves might, in the end, be accomplished. Alas! the mental reveries of lovers are generally but speculative, and in the pre¬ sent instance they were particularly so; for had the youth but suffered his reason to expand, he would have become con¬ vinced, that an insurmountable barrier op~ posed itself to the full completion of his happiness : the hatred of the Douglas's to the British race was proverbial. In addi¬ tion to which, it will be remembered, that the existing Laird had the most cogent reasons for his animosity. But the warm fancies of entranced love never regard such impediments; they soar above all worldly considerations, till fatal experience steals upon them ; and when it becomes too late, places before them a just picture of their
¿oily and the miseries attendant on such passions as are suffered to have unbridled licence over the cooler operations of the mind. Young Edwin having escorted his cap¬ tives in safety, committed them, with a bleeding heart, to the custody of the keeper of the Tower of London; not without laying a peculiar stress as to the manner in which he was desirous they should be treated. An assurance was of course given, that his requests should be asquiesced with ; but it is too well known how little the feelings of such beings are worked upon in the cause of humanity. The generous youth having received his sovereign's orders to return immedi¬ ately to his post on the Scottish borders, was almost instantaneously compelled to retrace his steps ; and having bade a mourn¬ ful farewell to all he panted for on earth, he obeyed his monarch's will, and from
that period remained the slave of love and misery. It was before this very youth that Huberto had been conducted, after his escape from London, and his subsequent seizure in the English camp; and it was on account of Edwin's passion for the daughter of Douglas, that he had betrayed such visible emotion on Avinzo's men¬ tioning the name of that nobleman, dur¬ ing his examination before Edwin, who happened to be that night the officer on duty in that quarter of the English encampment where Huberto had been seized. From the period of the commitment of Lady Douglas and her daughter to the Tower of London, nearly two tedious years had ehpsed; during which epoch, the commander of that fortress, neglectful of the promise he had made to Edwin previous to his departure, and urged by hatred to the Scotch, had conducted himself towards those ladies with marked rigidity, ren-
dering their captivity the most insupport¬ able. The gentle Maude, fearful of the consequences that might accrue to her be¬ loved parent, from such unmerited cru¬ elty, was constantly assiduous in adminis¬ tering every comfort which the unfeigned affection ofa daughter could dictate; while the beauteous maid was occupied by night upon her pallet, in recalling to her fond fancy the form of Edwin; and though compelled, from his station and birth, to be the enemy of her own country,' she could not refrain from offering up uaceas- ing prayers for his personal safety. Thus were the captives situated, being never permitted to see a human form, except an under gaoler, who was, iudeed, more lenient than his employer, the harsh commands of whom he would frequently ameliorate at his own personal risk; but, as if fate seemed determined on embittering stili more their condition, that very gaoler was displaced,and another,more rigideven
than the commander of the Tower, was allotted in his stead. After the lapse of a few days, the first step taken by this wretch was to separate Lady Douglas from her beloved daughter, notwithstanding the anguish which was mutually displayed on this cruel event; but, in the adoption of this mode of con¬ duct, the Lady Birtha little thought how dreadful was the plan then in agitation by this abandoned ruffian, whose impious re¬ gard had been fixed for sonie time on the person of the beautiful Maude, the ruin of whom he determined to effect, for the gra¬ tification of his own licentious desires. In order to succeed in this infernal dc- sign s the villain at first assumed the garb of commiseration, attributing the separa¬ tion of Maude from her parent, to the brutality of the commandant, and wholly disavowing all concern whatsoever in the change which had taken place. These
protestations however did but ill accord with his anterior conduct and the charac¬ ter of the villain, which was conspicuous in every lineament of his lowering visage. A short period was passed in these fal¬ lacious endeavours to soften the steady abhorrence with which the beauteous Maude beheld the wretch who attended her, when the gaoler finding every effort alike unsuccessful, and hurried on by the impetuosity of his brutal lust, at length determined on forcibly violating the de¬ fenceless creature placed under his despo¬ tic care. In order the better to effect his purpose, the villain, Fitzmaurice, determined on en¬ tering the dungeon of his lovely captive, when the influence of sleep should have ensteeped her senses in oblivion ; and for that purpose, the midnight hour seemed to be the best calculated fcr the comple¬ tion of his villainy. VOL. II. f
Durino: the evening of that eventful о о day, which was to embitter the future life of Maude, she liad been, as usual, assiduous in calling forth the divine mercy in behalf of her captive mother, whose person she was not permitted to behold, and with regard to whose fate she was kept in the most profound state of ignorance. The hour of midnight had arrived, when the unprotected Maude, wearied with the mental contemplations which pervaded her fancy, had yielded to the powerful in¬ fluence of sleep; at this juncture, Fitz¬ maurice, gently withdrawing the bolts of her dungeon door, and bearing in his grasp a lamp, whose pale gloom illuminated the dungeon walls, approached the recumbent form of the lovely creature whom he had sealed for destruction. The beautiful countenance, and the graces ofthe person of Maude, which met the ruffian's eye, so far worked upon his
unbridled passions, as to render him wholly unmindful of that caution, which would have otherwise marked his con¬ duct. Fitzmaurice * hastily placed the lamp upon the projecting stone, which served as a seat for the unfortunate inha¬ bitant of this cell ; and leaving the entrance of the dungeon unclosed, he threw him¬ self beside the lovely captive, upon whose bosom his detested hand already roved, anxious to withdraw the covering which veiled her hidden charms from observa¬ tion. The pressure of so rude a touch, speedily banished from the eyes of Maude the potent spell of sleep; who, springing from the pallet, seized with both her hands the wrist of her hated gaoler, and utter¬ ing a convulsive shriek, bent her full gaze upon his features, with a mingled look of desperation, horror, and contempt. Fitzmaurice, conscious of superior strength, and guided only by the lust that "swayed his soul, with his left arm grasped F 2
the waist of the shrieking victim, and forcing her upon the pallet, stopped, with his right hand, the shrieks which had be¬ fore escaped her lips. In vain she strug¬ gled; in vain, by turns she called on hea¬ ven, or supplicated the mercy of the wretch who had her in his power. She sunk, at length overcome, and the pale E- very of death overspread her lovely coun¬ tenance. The remorseless wretch 3 glorying in his strength, and callous to every sense of feeling, prepared to act his hellish plan ; when, on a sudden, sounds were heard along the vaulted-passage leading to the cell; and ere the vile monster could arise to ward off the dread vengeance that awaited him, he felt the keen cold steel pierce through his recreant breast, and groaning, yielded life in gushing torrents of his blood, that flowed upon the pave¬ ment. A stranger form had wrought this deed, whose person was obscured from sight in
cumberous mail; while o'er his visage the obscuring helmet was close locked, and on his crest a crimson plumage waved. Be¬ side him stood a second object, who, though armed, seemed formed to pay obedience to the stranger who had dealt the blow of death; and who, upon the instant, sheath¬ ing the crimsoned weapon, caught within lus arms the senselessMaude, with whom he hastened from the cell, bearing her through secret caverns with the utmost precipitan¬ cy ; while his companion, who led the way, seemed conversant with all the intricacies t of this dreary fortress. m At length, ascending by a winding flight of steps, they passed a narrow portal, which opened on a spacious court-yard. This having traversed, the centinél re¬ ceived the secret watch-word, when the gates were opened; and the drawbridge being quickly lqwered,the.strangers found themselves without, the prçctpcts pi the Tower; the lovely Maude, being still ua-
conscious of all the change that had been wrought in her behalf. With the same expedition, these mys- terious friends of virtue hastened from the gloomy wails of the fortress, bearing still the helpless Maude from the fell spot that iiad enclosed her. Having gained the mar¬ gin of the Thames, a boat was there in readiness, wherein two mariners were sta¬ tioned, together with a second female ; who, on perceiving the person of the lovely sufferer, uttered a convulsive groan ; and as the form of Maude was placed within the bark, clasped it within her outstretched arms, and sunk upon her breast, over¬ come with an excess of agonizing feelings. The concealed stranger, who had res¬ cued Maude by the murder of Fitzmau¬ rice, her remorseless gaoler, still standing on the margin of the river, with his com¬ panion, exclaimed, in an impressive tone, " Begone, brave fellows, and act your
purpose as I have dictated." The un¬ known then turned from the margin ofthe stream ; when, as the boat moved on the silvery Thames, the female, who embraced the reviving Maude, cried in impassioned terms,— u Who and what art thou, most divine of men? speak, that I may bless thee for a daughter's and a mother's sake." Such was indeed the truth; for when the lovely maid unclosed her eyes, it was to meet the form of her beloved mother, tlie Lady Birtha. In vain these supplications were made, the bark svviftiv ulidcd on, and the preserver of the captives was lost to their view. After the lapse of a few minutes, the boat gained a vessel of some .strength, into which Birtha and her re¬ covering child ascended. The sails were set ; and the wind proving fair, before the tenth hour of the ensuing morning they found themselves launched upon the bosom of the foaming waves.
f 4
CHAP. VII.
Tovc's peweťtí too great to bc witlìstood By feeble human flesh and blood. Twas he that brought upon hh knee?,, That hearing kill cow Hercules } Transform'd his boasted lion's skin T' a petticoat» and made him spin; Seiz'd en his club and made it dwindle T' a feeble distaff, and a spindle, 'Twas he that made empero» galîants To their own sisters and their anuís $ Set popes and cardinals a-gog, To play widi pages at leap-frog. Twas he that made Saint Francis do More than the devil could tempt him to, In cold and frosty weather, grow Enamour'd of a wife of snow. вить»*.
WHILE the young Lord Walter, high steward of Scotland, was confiding his love-sick tale to the bosom of his trusty
friend Huberto Avinzo, the object of his passion was no less a prey to the bitter pangs of that transcendant emanation of the heart. From the period when Edgar Earl of Pembroke, the brother of Isabel, had decidedly pronounced his aversion to the alliance of his sister with the Lord Walter, and that nobleman*s consequent departure from Alnwick castle, the breast of Isabel had been torn with every emotion that constitutes the purity and fervency of love. She was possessed of all that de¬ licacy which should accompany the female character, in addition to which her mind was gentle and framed for every thrill of sensibility; but if any endeavour were put into practice in order to fetter those incli¬ nations which reason sanctioned and vır-* tue approved, the soul of Isabel would then assume all that determined magnanimity which stamps the breast of heroism. Edgar Earl of Pembroke, whose hatred to the Scottish name could only be coun· *5
terhalau ced by tli с inveteracy of a Douglas to the British race, was a nobleman pos¬ sessing the most rigid sense of honour ; his thirst was after fame, and in the field his valour had. long been prominent in many a dreadful contest. Brought up in a camp, and tinctured with the disposition of his sister in every thing relating to an opposition with his will, he could not brook the most trifling disobedience to his orders : and when his mandate had dismissed Lord Walter from the continuance of his suit to Isabel, he conceived that every emanation of the soul was to be banished with the same ease as he had pronounced that rigid sentence. For a period the pride of Edgar would not suffer him to place to the account of love for Lord Walter that dejection which so evidently preyed upon his sister's spi¬ rits, and which was so apparent to his friend Edwin, the Earl of Hereford's son*
who at length feeling acutely for the suf¬ ferings of the maid, ventured to intercede with Edgar in his sister's behalf; for at that period the dreadful contest between the sons of Albion and of Scotia had not bro¬ ken out to place the possibility of an al¬ liance at such a distance. The Earl of Pembroke, firing at the sug¬ gestion of his friend, denied the possibi¬ lity of such weakness existing in the bo¬ som of Isabel, and took an early opportu¬ nity of questioning her upon the subject with all the sternness of paternal autho¬ rity. The lovely maid, unaccustomed to such harshness, and alike incapable of base de¬ ceit, not only avowed her predilection in favour ofthe Scottish Lord, but supported her attachment on the ground of reason and affection, defying her brother to ad¬ duce any plea which should taint the name and honour of the brave Lord Walter. f 6
To such determined language, the en- raged Earl of Pembroke only answered, that the object of her choice was of Scot¬ tish blood, which was in itself a suffi¬ cient answer to her interrogatory 5 and at the same time a just cause, on her part, for banishing υιε^ομϋι from her mind for ever· u Besides.;" resumed the earl, " it is my «////, nor am I accustomed to have that will questioned; and shall you then, my sister, dare deny my power ? Learn from this moment, that obedience best befits you." "I shall no longer obey," replied the in¬ dignant Isabel, u than the obedience re- quired of meis consonant with reason and the genuine feelings of my breast. I own you are my guardian ; nor have I ever by any act of mine called forth the language of reproof: in the present instance I do not allow myself in error, nor can I conse·
qucntly agree that your commands are those of the guardian 1 have hitherto esteemed you ; for if you, my brother, are determined in spirit, even so am I formed to spurn control." Edgar in fury seized his sister's arm ; rage impeded the utterance of words ; fire was in his rolling eye, and the quick blood crimsoned over his manly cheek. At length he, in loud accents, exclaim¬ ed :—" I will subdue this stubborn mind, and teach a sister what is due to me." Throwing the arm of Isabel from him with disdain, and casting on her a look of contumely, he hastened from the chamber, leaving her more roused to a sense of her own dignity, than inspired with fear at the threats of her exasperated brother. During the remainder of the day the Earl of Pembroke ntver made his appear-
ance, and the beauteous Isabel retired to rest as usual. Already had she knelt to offer up her nightly prayer,when the sound of approaching footsteps caught her ear, and in a few seconds she heard the voice of the earl, who demanded admittance into her apartment. Isabel, with calm and determined mind, arose from her prostrate position, and withdrawing the arras, her brother immediately entered the chamber. Approaching a few paces towards his sister, he demanded, " Has my sister yet learned obedience to her brother's command ?" " Isabel of Pembroke," resumed the maid with steady demeanour, " has never learn¬ ed to waver in that cause which her mind tells her is founded in honour." "Is this thy resolve? ,f demanded the carl.
" Fixed—peremptorily fixed," was Isa¬ bel's reply. " Then instantly prepare to leave these walls," resumed the determined Edgar. iC Whither would you lead me, brother r '* continued the maid. u Prepare," replied the earl in a threat¬ ening tone. Having eyed him with an air of pity and contempt, the injured Isabel replied with calmness, " I am ready, Sir j lead on, I will attend you." Iiaving uttered these words, her brother led the way, and she in silence followed his steps to the portals of the mansion, where horses were stationed in readiness, toge¬ ther with two attendants^ who, having
assisted Isabel to mount, they instantly sprang upon their horses, when the earl exclaimed,—at the same time waving his hand,— " Begone, Sirs, and to your duty." On the instant the horsemen made obeisance to the beauteous Isabel, and informed her, that she was placed under their direction, and must accompany them. She turned to cast an inexpressible look upon the earl, but at that instant he had retired in silence, and she beheld his form returning with measured pace through the portals she had so lately quitted. Isabel having desired her conductors to proceed, they set spurs to their horses, and were shortly removed to some distance from the dwelling which had so lately con¬ tained her. The mansion wherein the Earl of Pem>
broke and his sister had resided, was with¬ out the walls of the city of Hereford; and had been purchased by Edgar, that he might be in the vicinage of the castle of the Earl of Hereford, to whose son Edwin he was bound by every tie of unalterable friendship. The journey, though fatiguing, was per¬ formed with very few halts, and yet with¬ out a murmur having escaped the lips of babel. Having travelled the whole of that night and the succeeding day, they arrived the following midnight at the gates of a fortress, which Isabel recognized immedi¬ ately to be the castle of Pembroke The horn was blown, and the bhriii blast echoed far upon the midnight breeze, when the warden having demanded the necessary information, lowered the drawbridge, and the travellers entered into the base court of the castle. The maid, in silence, was conducted to
her chamber by a female attendant, from whom she was given to understand, that orders had been received from the earl her brother the preceding day, that every thing might be arranged in tîıe castle previous to her arrival ; and that this mandate was also accompanied with an order, that IsabeL was on no account to be suffered without the limits of the castle walls, by which means she became a prisoner in that for* tress wherein her mother had given her life. Stili warmed by the same genuine feel* ings which had taken possession of her breast, the lovely Isabel apportioned out her days in recalling to her fond fancy the form of the Lord Walter, and cherishing hopes of the most brilliant import, while sometimes the call of religion prompted her to offer up the effusions of a glowing breast, in praise of that Creator in whose almighty hands the fate of worlds is vested*
Month succeeded month, and still no change was wrought in her melancholy situation : a gloom would sometimes in¬ tervene to chill the bosom of the captive ; but the energies of her mind were too po¬ tent to suffer long the canker of dejection ; she spurned at it as ignoble, always look¬ ing forward to that period when truth should find its level, and virtue meet its just reward : for it had ever appeared in¬ compatible with reason in the mind of Isabel, that from the Fountain of all excel¬ lence should flow a stream of bitterness for those whose thirst was virtue and immu¬ table truth. At length the fatal period ai rived, when the disputants for the crown of Scotland preferred their claims to the politic King Edward ; who, finding Baliol wiUing to come into his views, decided every thing in his favour, to the expulsion ofthe loyal claimant King Robert Bruce,
From that moment the indignant Scots refused to allow the sovereignty of Balio!* in consequence of which that king de¬ manded succours of English Edward, who with a mighty army advanced under the plea of reinstating the deposed Baliol, whom he had nominated, but in reality for no other cause but to render himself the monarch of the Scottish realm. Under King Bruce the Lord Walter be¬ came conspicuous as his adherent, and received from that monarch the title of High Steward of the Realm ; which ho· * nour, when conferred, was pf course known to the Earl of Pembroke, who, more enraged than ever at the idea of his sisters predilection fcr so determined an enemy of England, thought of the most desperate plans in order to terminate at once every hope of an affiance with the Scottish Lord in the. bosom of Isabel. л Fraught with such ideas, the Earl of
Pembroke, previous to his joining the army of Edward with his vassals, repaired to the castle of Pembroke, without any notice having been forwarded to his sister of this intended visit. It was evening when the unwonted sum· mons was heard at the castle gate, shortly after which Edgar presented himself to his •astonished sister. A gloom sat on his countenance, and his accents on addres¬ sing Isabel to the following effect, were correspondent with the cogitations of his warring soul :— " ï^îperience must, ere this, have taught thee,lady,the difference that exists between us ; and confirmed in thy mind the deter¬ mined spirit that sways thy brother's soul. Once more I come to make thee own the justice of my will, and give thee back to freedom ; or, in the event of thine adhe¬ rence to the former purpose of thy breast,
to bar against thee the gate of hope for ever." <c Had my brother the Earl of Pembroke deigned but to study his sister's character," replied the composed Isabel, " he would then have followed a far different plan to that which has been put in execution, in order to soften her to his purpose. If by imprisonment I am to learn experience, it certainly has taught me that I am worthy the blood of Pembroke, since no accumu¬ lated force can teach my mind servility ; nor should the torture urge me to belie a truth which virtue sanctions. Brother, the day will come, when revolving years have calmed the frenzy of thy blood, that thou wilt reverence thy sister Isabel for this decisive conduct. Yes," continued the determined maid, seeing the earl on the point of speaking, " for well I know thy soul, my brother ; and although thou didst but now demand whether the differ¬ ence between us was apparent to my mind,
I tell thee, Edgar, that difference exists in passion only ; our honours are the same, but my determinations are more the off¬ springs of cool consideration, than unbri¬ dled furv. Do with me as thou wilt ; I have decided, and will abide the judgment which my reason dictates." It was with infinite difficulty that the earl refrained from venting his rage dur¬ ing this retort of his sister, which had received additional force from the co( 1 premeditated manner that had accompa¬ nied every sentence : stamping the ground with rage, in a vehement tone, he thus replied :— u Accursed infatuation, and more ac¬ cursed brother, thus to behold in his kin¬ dred the disgrace of Pembroke's ancestry í —Such then is thy decree, misguided sister, by which I am compelled to act, what I would fain withhold from putting into practice ; but the time is short, war
calls me forth, and death may be my fate, when, (detested thought !) a Pembroke's stock may be allied with Scottish Walter. No, never ! never ! Prepare, Madam, for this night you quit the castle of Pembroke, and quit it too for ever." These words were scarcely uttered, when Edgar rushed from the apartment of Isa¬ bel, in a delirium of rage, leaving his op¬ pressed sister to conjecture the meaning of his conclusive words, and prepare for an immediate departure from the castle, which had witnessed her earliest infancy; and which, notwithstanding her late imprison¬ ment, was endeared to her by the fond remembrance of the parent who had given her existence.
chap. vm.
———It is invaici To argue 'gainst a woman's grain ; Or, like the stars, incline ťhefti te, What they Ve averse themselves to de : For when dispu&s are wearied out, "*Tis interest still resobres the doubt : But tho* no reason can confute ye* I'll try to force you lo four duty ţ JFor so it is, howe'er yeu mince it^j As ere we part, I shall evìnce it i And curry (ifyou stand out) whether You will or no, your stubborn leather. BUTLER.
ХНЕ ninth hour of night had just elaps- ed* and solemn darkness reigned upon the face of nature, when a summons from the Earl of Pembroke called the Lady Isabel from her chamber ; who following the messenger, descended to the great hall of the castle, and on entering observed her VOL. Ii· &
brother, who, unmindful of her approach^ paced to and fro the chamber wath folded arms, and eyes bent to the earth, abssorbed in gloomy meditation, from which it was some seconds ere he became aroused, and conscious of the presence of Isabel. With a look of the most stern command, and at the same juncture making a motion with the hand, he ordered the Lady Isa¬ bel to accompany him, who obeyed his mandate in silence, following her brother to the grand portal of the castle, the draw¬ bridge of which being lowered, they cross¬ ed it, and had proceeded only a few paces from the moat whçn the same persons who had formerly conducted her to the capti¬ vity she had endured, since her quitting the vicinity of Hereford, were awaiting there with horses ready to escort her whi¬ ther her brother should command. Lady Isabel, having placed herself upon the palfrey, without exchanging a word
with her brother, bade the attendants lead on, for that she was ready to follow them. The Earl of Pembroke, then giving a pac¬ ket into one of his domestics' hands,order- ed them to proceed forward on the instant, and on their arrival at the destined spot, to deliver those papers in safety. Setting spurs to their horses, the one attendant led the way, while the other kept in the rear of the beautiful Isabel, who casting a saddened glance on the usual residence of her ancestors, heaved a parting sigh, and was soon carried far from its venerable walls and cloud aspiring turrets. They proceeded forward during most of that night, and after a few hours repose the ensuing morning, under the lowly roof of an industrious cottager, they set forward again, and by midnight gained a narrow valley, in the midst of which appeared a gothic structure, whose walls received the faint lustre ofthe moon's pale rays, which darted on it, and с 2
at once proclaimed it to be an asylum for the votaries of religion. On gaining the portal of the convent, one of Isabel's conductors alighting, rang the bell, and in a few seconds appeared a lay sister in monastic garments, who in¬ stantly making ap obeisance to the unfor¬ tunate maid, requested her to alight, evinc¬ ing by her manner, and speedy attendance at the gates at that unseasonable hour, that her arrival at the convent had been ex¬ pected. Lady Isabel instantly alighted, and fol¬ lowing the sister was led into an apart¬ ment, where after a few moments atten¬ dance she was visited by an elderly nun, whose habiliments at once evinced that she was Abbess of the convent ; and who bore in her hand the very packet which one of the attendants of Isabel had received from the hands of the Earl of Pembroke. The person of the superior was com-
manding, and though age had marked her countenance, she nevertheless displayed щ her eyes all that fire and penetration which are usually attendant on persons less ad¬ vanced in years. Her manner was gene¬ rally reserved, but in the present instance, being fully acquainted with the. dignity of her guest, and the mode of conduct requisite to be adopted, she assumed a more easy deportment, while her conver* sation was in every respect calculated to work on a being less acute and determined than the beautiful Isabel, in regard to any object which her mind and reason sanc¬ tioned. The Lady Abbess, after fixing her re¬ gard on the lovely maid for some mo¬ ments, thus addressed her ;—* " The will of the Earl of Pembroke is not, I suppose, unknown to the Lady Isa¬ bel his sister ľ" G 3
ť< That cannot be deemed an obligation, reverend madam," replied the Lady Isabel, " which is not founded on the ba¬ sis of justice." " I am not authorized," continued the superior, " to enter into an examination of those circumstances, which may have transpired between the Lady Isabel and her noble brother, the Earl of Pembroke ; but in alluding to the will of the Earl, I only refer to the instructions contained in this packet, by which I am compelled to assume that authority which my station in this sanctified dwelling calls upon me to adopt, by immediately forwarding you in that religious course, which will hereafter en¬ title your ladyshjp to fill a similar station with myself, in a monastery of greater revenue than that of which I am now supe¬ rior ; as the power of your brother, and the contents of his letters, fully assure me, that his interest will place you in one of
the most elevated stations tq which the followers of God can aspire," Lady Isabel, during thb address, was alternately a prey to those sensations which arise f r' m wondtr, pride, and in¬ dignation, and Λ the conclusion of the su¬ perior's harangue, she continued for a time incapable of making any reply ; how¬ ever, when slie had sufficiently recovered from her astonishment., she thus made an¬ swer : — t " Although, reverend madam, you are not interested in the transactions of the house of Pembroke, you will, 1 trust, al¬ low, that I have some right to interfere in my own concerns ; and as to the orders of the earl, my brot lier, with respect to my future conduct through life, you will al¬ low me to state, that they can only have due weight with me when they are sanctioned by myself. G4
calculated to embrace a monastic seclusion y though the most shining prospects opened to my view ; I, therefore, in opposition to my brother's instructions, do perempto¬ rily refuse to accede to the propositions made, nor shall any power compel me to teceive that veil, which would indeed ob¬ scure every hope of happiness on this side *>f futurity.'* During the conclusion of this reply, a malignant sneer escaped the superior, indi¬ catory of more than language could con¬ vey, which, though observed by the Lady Isabel, her spirit was too magnanimous to droop, or demand any explanation of the future mode of conduct to be pursued re¬ specting her. The superior, rising from her seat, then requested Lady Isabel to follow her, who obeyed in silence, and was conducted to
the apartments allotted for her, when the Abbesb,on retiring, with a look of tri¬ umph, exclaimed ;— " The Lady Isabel of Pembroke will re¬ member, that from this hour her noviciate commences/* The superior then withdrew from the chamber, leaving the forlorn Isabel to the contemplation of her cruel fate ; who, in¬ stead of yielding: to that violence of srrief, which would have preyed on the spirits of the generality of females placed in such a situation, very boldly determined, on the contrary, to oppose stratagem to such un¬ lawful measures, and, if possible, accomplish her escape from the monastery. For some weeks, during which the Lady Isabel suffered a species of confine¬ ment to her apartments, at the same time, being served with every tiling she could require, her absolute aversion to a mo- G 5
nastic life was constantly apparent; when being visited by a very fascinating nun, who was expressly tutored by the Abbess to extol, on every occasion, the pure vota¬ ries of religion, the Lady babel, to all ap* pearance, became more reconciled ; and in consequence of this supposed change in her ideas, she was very frequently visited by the superior, who made use of every art and all the argumentative powers she possessed, to strengthen her in this seem¬ ing reconciliation to her fate. In this manner passed on several weeks, during which period a greater portion of liberty was allowed her, of which, how¬ ever, the- Lady Isabel, in order to render her plans the more secure, did not for some time take the least advantage. This circumstance lulled the Abbess and these placed near her person, into a greater de¬ gree of assurance as to the triumph they bad obtained, and the honour and wealth which would thereby accrue to the con-
vent; and so convinced was the superior on this head, that communications were made to the earl her brother, then with the English monarch on the borders of Scotland, which so much gratified him, that a packet was forwarded by Edgar, to the Lady Isabel, couched in the most affec¬ tionate terms, and containing an order that whatsoever she 4 required, would be for¬ warded to her by the bailiff of his estates, upon her own application. Having thus procured the unlimited command of gold to forward her plans, the Lady babel began to regard w,itb an eye of scrutiny the several inmates of the convent, in order tp select that indir vidual who was most likely to answer her purpose, and enable her to carry her de¬ termination into eflect. n It was at this epoch, that the Abbess, glorying in her supposed triumph, propos¬ ed to Lady Isabel, the curtailment of the о б
period usually required for the completion of the noviciate, when, to her inexpressible satisfaction, she found her proposal not only accepted with cheerfulness, but even caught at with apparent avidity. In vain* however, did the lovely Isabel examine the sisterhood, and by her conversations gleam some insight as to their sentiments ; she found those who might have serveď her, incapable from their stations of putting her scheme in to' execut ion; and of those few who had uncontrolled freedom, they were too old and bigotted, as also too de¬ cidedly under the influence of the Lady Abbess; to forward any plaň for the eman¬ cipation of a persecuted being from the fetters of misery, 1 which were preparing to enchain it to unceasing wretchedness- One evening, as the Lady Isabel Γη a pensive mood strolled through the garden of the monastery,a poor labourer, who was« then occupied in culling flowers to adorn the altar, during the mass of the ensuing
day, which was to be very magnificent, suddenly attracted her attention; and on observing the features of the man, a faint recollection entered her mind, that she had before seen his countenance, but on the old man's raising his eyes she became fully convinced as to this circumstance, by the labourer's falling on his knees, and exclaiming, " Mercy Jesu ! the Lady Isabel of Pembroke-" Fearful of interruption, she threw a mark of gold upon the sod., and bidding the old man attend her by seven that evening, in the bower of the convent garden, she darted from him, and in retracing the way to her apartments, with some difficulty recalled to mind that, in the person of the labourer, she had be¬ held Ralph the forester, who had some years before fallen into disgrace with the old earl her father, then living, on account of a buck which he had killed, and stolen from tbe forest, for which he had been taken up, and suffered trial before the earl in the hall of Pembroke castle, on
which occasion, death was awarded him, and would have been his due, but for the intercession of the then youthful Isabel, who had, on that occasion, procured a re¬ mission of his punishment, from that of the forfeiture of life, to an eternal ba¬ nishment from the estates of the Earl of Pembroke. The hours dragged heavily on, during which the mind of Lady Isabel was not a little occupied in contemplating the un¬ searchable will of Frovidence, which so imperceptibly works in rewarding acts of beneficence at the period least expected, for the maid placed a firm reliance on the endeavours of this man, although her pur« pose was not yet developed to him. The hue of evening at length drew in, and sombre twilight spread its grey cur¬ tain before the last tinge of beamy day, when the Lady Isabel, punctual to the ap¬ pointed hour, stole through the garden,
and at the place agreed upon with the la¬ bourer, she found him there awaiting her presence. Old Ralph w^as on the point of uttering his gratitude for the former beneficence of his young mistress, but Lady Isabel spee· dily demanded his attention ; and then, in as few w r ords as possible, explained her si¬ tuation, and the conduct which had been pursued with regard to her by her brother Edgar ; after which she proceeded to in¬ quire, in as guarded a manner as possible, the capability of Ralph's assisting her; but ere she would at once disclose her plan of escape, she found by the answers of the old servant that there was little doubt but his endeavours would compass her libera¬ tion. Being fully satisfied on this ground, and also perceiving that Ralph acutely felt the sense of that obligation under which he laboured, with regard to his youthful mistress, she then unfolded her intention, and conjured the old man to
aid her designs; with which request, he not only acquiesced on the instant, but sealed his promise of assistance with the most fervent protestations, calling on hea¬ ven to witness that his life was preserv¬ ed by the Lady Isabel, and that he was in duty bound to risk that existence for her preservation. llie overjoyed maid then ctemanded of Ralph his idea as tö the plans they should adopt, stating that gold to any amount was then in her possession to forward theunder- taking. After some consideration upon this subject, it was agreed that Ralph should procure two huntsmen*s dresses, the one for his mistress, and the other for himself; and in order that no second meeting between them should take place, a spot was agreed upon in the thickest part of the bower, where the disguise of the Lady Isabel should be deposited by Ralph,who, on the succeeding night by tvvelve o'clock, was to be in waiting behind the bower, so that on
^ Isabel's having equipped herself therein, she was then to summon her attendant, who would previously havearrangedevery thing for her escape, and procure horses for their conveyance from the place of her hated seclusion. Having given as much gold as was requisite to answer every pur* pose, and again witnessing the feťvent manner of old Ralph, she retired unper¬ ceived from the bower, and swiftly gliding to her chamber, threw herself upon a seat with a palpitating heart, and, under the fervent hope of sliortly breathing the long wished-for air pf liberty, she soon after re¬ signed herself to sweet repose.
СИАР. IX.
"-----·------'W ipe thou thine eyes; have comfort. The direful spectacle of the wreck, which touch'd Tlie very virtue of compassimi in thee, ï have with such provision in mine art bo safelv order'd, that there is no soul; JS'o, not so much perdition as an hair, Relide to any creature in the vessel Which thou heard'st cry, which thou saw4t sink. ------._.-------- Be collected ; No more amazement: tell your piteous heart There's no harm done. .SHAKSPEARE. жуг ' "■ r ι "rnnt i JL IIE morning broke forth with unusual splendor, when the sound of the convent bell aroused the Lady Isabel from her re- freshinff slumbers. All the inmates of the о monastery were soon in motion, and the lay-sisters were busily employed in adorn¬ ing the altars of the several chapels with wreaths of flowers, as also in arranging
the various relics in order, to produce the most magnificent appearance posbible. By a message from the superior, the Lady Isabel was summoned to her chamber, whose heart began to sicken at the com¬ mand, lest Ralph should have betrayed her, and at once sealed her fate : so much did her fears at first overcome her usual intrepidity, that her steps could scarcely support her trembling frame ; at length, however, she called her wonted magnani¬ mity into action, and daring the worst, proceeded along the corridor, and soon arrived at the chamber of the Abbess, who with a smile of affability arose to greet her, dissipating at once the suppositions which had so lately appalled her fancy. This condescension in the superior, ori¬ ginated in a wish she had, that the Lady Isabel of Pembroke would, that day, ap¬ pear foremost in the procession, which was to take place from the grand entrance of the chapel, up the nave, to the altar*
With this request Isabel cheerfully complied, in order to gratify the vanity of the supe¬ rior, and the better to lull all suspicion as to her meditated escape- Having partaken of some refreshment with the Abbess, who peremptorily insisted upon it, (that being the greatest mark of condescension she could show an inmate of the convent who had not yet taken the vows,)the Lady Isabel departed, in order to decorate her person in the most sumptuous manner, as a noviciate of the monastery· At the appointed hour the bell sum¬ moned the sisterhood to the refectory, from whence they issued in pairs, the order of the procession being аз follows ; First advanced a singing hoy, in scarlet robes and tonsure, bearing a lofty crucifix of gold ; after whom the lay-sisters, with beads in their hands, marched with slow and solemn pace; six youths, in white vestments, followed these ? wafting in air tlie
glittering censors, which emitted the most fragrant odour :—another boy, in white robes, and bearing a cushion of crimson velvet, whereon rested the missal of the Lady Abbess, came next ; after whom, with measured pace, marched the superior, arrayed in all the state of her order, ahd assuming the most dignified and com¬ manding deportment. The sisterhood of the convent, accord¬ ing to their seniority, then appeared, after whom was born a smaller crucifix pf silver. Following these, alone, and habited in the most sumptuous manner, (not being yet entitled to the monastic garb,) appear* ed the lovely Isabel of Pembroke; next after her came the remaining novices, in pairs, who were also succeeded by several board¬ ers, then resident in the convent. In this order the procession passed through the cloisters to the great portal of the chapel,
singing the most plaintive hymns; and on arriving at the choir, each female took her respective seat, when the ceremony com¬ menced ; the chapel being crowded with a mixture of personages, consisting of such as were devout, or onlv came to witness the procession, and behold the Lady Isabel, the knowledge of whose resi¬ dence in that convent the Ladv Abbess liad taken every method oí spreading abroad. During the service, the eyes of Isabel wtre frequently cast upon the attentive multitude, amongst whom she soon dis¬ covered the person of Ralph, who, though seemingly occupied in fervent prayer, was , using every endeavour to catch the eye of his young mistress, by which, when he had effected his purpose, she sufficiently ascertained in his gestures that all went on according to her desire. At the conclusion of the mass they pro¬ ceeded in the same order to the interior
of the convent, and when the hour of evening vespers was proclaimed, a similar degree of state was resorted to. At the conclusion of the chant, the Abbess, on her return to her chamber, could not refrain from testifying her complete satis¬ faction with every transaction of the day, but more particularly the pointed man¬ ner with which the noble Lady Isabel of Pembroke had coincided with her ardent wishes. After a very sumptuous enter¬ tainment, the novices were, that evening, permitted to join the nuns,*and a general harmony prevailed within the walls of the convent. Every one vied to acquire a preference in the good opinion of the Lady Isabel, in consequence of which, it was with tlie utmost difficulty that she found an oppor¬ tunity of resorting to the spot where the hunter's dress was to be deposited, which she found, indeed, secreted according to the promise of Ralph, though not without
nearly hazarding a discovery, as one of the older nuns, most in the confidence of the Abbess, happened to enter the bower at the precise juncture when Isabel had withdrawn her hand, and suffered the branches to close which concealed the wished-for disguise. f At length the evening drew in apace, the nuns retired to their cells, and the novices by degrees entered their several apartments. The Lady Isabel, to elude suspicion, had very early erőtered her 'chamber, where, seated at the casement, which overlooked the garden, she alternately watched the dispersing of the sisterhood, and the retir¬ ing radiance of the sun, already veiled be¬ neath the horizon. As the moments elapsed, the beauteous captive became a prey to all those anxious doubts and fears, which must ever be the attendants of a sensitive mind at such a trying juncture.
At length tolled the eleventh hour upon the breeze of night : Lady Isabel arose, and, listening at the door of her apart¬ ment, found that all was silent ; she then stole forth and gained in security the por¬ tal of the garden, which led into it from the adjoining cloisters; having slipped back the bolts, she quickly descended the steps, and darting into an alley screened by leaves from the overlooking windows of the mo¬ nastery, soon found herself within the ap¬ pointed bower. 4. Happily for Isabel, the gratifications of the day had so worked upon the inmates of the convent, that they had yielded, with more than usual pleasure,to the fascinations of sleep, whose potent spell lay heavy on their eyelids. At first a rosy hue crimsoned the cheek of Isabel, at the idea of unrobing herself in such a situation; but delicacy soon yielded to the momentary exigency, and she with VOL. II. H
trembling hands proceeded to invest her¬ self with the male habit, consisting of a slouch bonnet of green cloth,adorned with a black feather, w ? hich, hanging over the brim, tended much to obscure the linea¬ ments of the wearer from observation ; an under vest and loose apron, covering to the knees, concealed her virgin charms ; in addition to which, a long and ample mantle hung suspended from her shoul¬ ders, with w r hich the beauteous Isabel could with ease envelope her person. A pair of sandals graced her feet, which, together with a hunting dirk and silver horn, con¬ stituted the whole of her disguise. Being thus arrayed, and having depo¬ sited her female dress in the same ob¬ scure spot which had concealed her male attire, she uttered in a low tone the name of Ralph, yet no voice replied, nor did the wished-for footstep catch her ex¬ pectant ear; again the call was pronounced, but all in vain, a stillness of the grave en-
sued ; at length the tread of a foot was heard, and the Lady Isabel looked from the bower ; but what was her horror on be¬ holding the form of the Abbess, who bear¬ ing a lamp, was proceeding slowly towards the .spot which Ralph should have осей* pied : a momentary chill of death struck to the heart of the maid, when fortunately the recollection of her infinite danger flash¬ ed upon her brain, and she rushed with the velocitv of líçhtnin?; into the thick- est part of the alcove, unmindful of the brambles and impeding branches which lacerated her tender form. Almost fainting with fear, she at length halted, and through the leaves saw the form of the Lady Ab¬ bess in the bower, whose eyes were bent in that direction whence Isabel had escaped, doubtless on account of the rustling of the leaves which had occurred to alarm her, during the flight of the enhorror- ed maid. At length, however, the superior quitted
i » SSM
the alcove, and continued her course alonar another alley with the same steady march. The Lady Isabel, regaining fresh energy, was returning to the interior of the bower, when she happily heard a voice exclaim ;— " My Lady—my Lady Isabel !" and at that instant Ralph appeared, almost in as much trepidation as his youthful mistress ; who, on regaining the bower,scared) knew whether to regard the old man in the light of a friend or a treacherous foe. " I am ruined, lost, undone for ever," cxdaimed the frantic maid. cc Be peaceful, for heaven's sake be calm, my dearest mistress," replied old Ralph; " we are secure, indeed we are ; but what have been my fears on your account ! in vain did I endeavour, on gaining the dread¬ ful information, to apprize you of the fact. Yes, Lady Isabel, every year, on this eventful night, the Lady Abbess, un-
der penalty oí' being degraded from her si¬ tuation, is compelled by charter, to in¬ spect, between the hours of eleven and midnight, all the limits ofthe convent, and on the succeeding morn, to take an oath to that effect, on the administering of the sacrament. From a lay sister did I acquire this intelligence, and heaven be my judge, if I have not since been more a dead, than living man.'* Ralph then proceeded to inform his mis¬ tress, that he had adopted a similar step to that which she had taken, after trying in vain to intercept her on gaining the garden. The fears of Isabel being thus dissipated, her conductor led the way, who having that evening affixed a knotted rope to the trunk of a tree on the opposite side of the wall, had, of course, cast the other end into the garden, which nearly reached to the ground; having another rope of the same length, a similar step was now taken within the garden, in order to the descend, H 3
ing on the outward side of the wall : this being effected, Isabel, divesting herself of every fcar s nimbly climbed the knotted rope, and as speedily descended without the wall, being instantly followed by Ralph, who had within a few paces station¬ ed the horses, having affixed their bridles to an adjoining tree«, Being quickly mounted, they speeded forward with the utmost precipitancy; tke old fellow having first carefully cut away the rope by which they had descend¬ ed; and also, when on the top of the wall* thrown down into the brambles of the garden, that by which they had gained its summit : this was done in order to elude a discovery of the particular spot from whence they had escaped, as old Ralph thought that circumstance might probably lead to a discovery of the route which they had taken. The Lady Isabel, having notified the di* rection which she was desirous of pursuing.
and Ralph being perfectly conversant with . every foot of ground in the Welsh ter¬ ritories, immediately took that road which he knew would the soonest conduct them to the Bristol channel. Wearied, not so much with bodily fa¬ tigue as with mental apprehension, the fu* gitives proceeded on their route with the utmost velocity; and merely taking an hour's repose at dawn of day beneath the friendly shade of obscuring t rees, they again set forward, and in this state of constant anxiety, did they travel to the extent of their journey, without having witnessed any peculiar impediment or discerning any thing like pursuit, The existing war with Scotland, ren· dered an escape by sea into that country very precarious, as the vessels of Edward were unceasingly occupied in coasting along the channel. The danger, however, was not so great in this direction, as on H4
pursuing the wonted track from London to Berwick, where the vigilance of the English mariners, rendered a landing abso¬ lutely impracticable. As it \v;is the desire of the Lady Isabel of Pembroke to escape, if possible, into Scotland, and throw herself under the pro¬ tection of the Lord Walter, through whose means she intended placing herself as a boarder in a convent, till some fortunate turn should take place, which might work a reconciliation of the contending parties ; Ralph was of course dispatched in order to procure, if possible, a vessel that might convey them to the wished-for shore; but his endeavours were for a considerable time of no avail, as the mariners were con¬ scious of the danger attending the voyage thither. At length, however, the persua¬ sive argument of gold produced the de¬ sired effect ; and five seamen undertook to transport them thither in a small fishing bark, for an enormous sum agreed upon \
though, from the size of the bark and the danger of the Bristol channel, it was un¬ certain whether they could ever reach the place proposed. Without further delay, provisions being placed on board, the sails were unfurled, and the Lady Isabel with Ralph and the five sailors having embarked, they weigh¬ ed anchor, and in this little vessel set for¬ ward on their desperate enterprise. Scarcely had the bark made a mile from land, when a vast concourse of people ap¬ peared upon the shore ; among whom were visible several horsemen, while the breeze blowing from shore, wafted to their ears the load shouts of the persons assembled. The heart of Isabd sunk within her, and Ralph, though fully assured that among tue concourse on land he beheld their pursuers, used notwithstanding every co· и 5
deavour to reanimate her drooping spirits, and'convince her to the contrary. The sea¬ men, who beheld the .perturbation of the supposed youth, demanded the cause, when Isabel, unable to speak, left the answer to old Ralph, who instantly told them, that in the person whom they then conveyed., they beheld the only remaining branch of a renowned family, who had long been persecuted by a cruel uncle, from whom the youth had escaped by stratagem ;. and that if he effected his purpose he had it in his power to load them with wealth, and to make the remainder of their lives glide* happily away ; the old man then concluded, by conjuring them, that they would carry the utmost .press of sail, in or¬ der to ensure their safety. This tale of Ralph's was well received by the seamen, who had previously felt a predilection forJsabel,the pretended youth, and the conclusive promise did not a little tend to strengthen their endeavours.
The sailors exclaimed aloud, that they would sink the bark rather than yield, should any other vessel put to sea ; and having set all the sail they had on board, the wind very fortunately proving fair, the land had faded to the sight, ere a ves* sel procured for the pursuit by the persons on shore, (who were really creatures paid by the Abbess of the convent, ţo reclaim Isabel,) could put to sea. The mariners soon descried this vessel making towards them, but by their unre¬ mitting skill they speedily got a head,when the pursuing bark gradually lessened to the view, and from a mere speck upon the watery expanse, it soon vanished into airy nothingness. In this manner the little vessel continu¬ ed its track upon the ocean, until the tenth hour of night, when the douds completely darkened the atmosphere, and the wind нб
blowing more briskly, the waves assumed the most tremendous aspect, dashing the bark with precipitancy into yawning gulphs, or raising it mountains high, again to bury it among the foaming billows. The mariners, conscious of their dan¬ ger, had recourse to every possible effort, to save the bark, and Ralph receiving their instructions, joined his efforts with the rest, while the task of the beauteous Isabel was to fill the buckets and heave the wa¬ ter overboard, in order to keep the vessel as empty as possible. These united endeavours of the seamen were but in vain ; the wind had shivered the mast, the sails were rent in pieces, and the cordage snapt in all directions, leaving the little bark a hulk upon the angry deep ; in addition to this, the mariners were spent with unremitting toil, and with the Lady Isabel, resigned themselves to their im¬ pending fate*
In this situation they were driven upon the surge, expecting every instant a wa¬ tery grave, when by the fourth hour of morning, which dawned in anger upon the eastern horizon, they espied a vessel of some strength, that had weathered the dangers of the night. Desperation gave them new courage, and every plan was put into execution, in order that they might gain assistance; for some time their endeavours were unsuccessful, but in the end, the ship appeared making way to¬ wards them, and shortly came so near, that a boat was put off at the hazard of the lives of those who were in it, to res¬ cue the existence of the sufferers ; for the sea ran high, and although the wand was in some measure abated, the tempest yet lowered upon the expanse of heaven. With much difficulty the Lady Isabel, Ralph, and the five mariners, entered the boat, which had scarcely made five fathoms towards the vessel from which it had
been dispatched, when the empty bark foundered, and was soon a scattered wreck upon the foaming waters. The exhausted and unfortunate suf¬ ferers having thus happily gained the ship, which had so providentially saved them ; old Ralph, fearful of the conse¬ quences which might ensue, were the sex of his mistress made known, although fainting with fatigue, called new vigour to his assistance in the cause of his be¬ loved Lady, and having seen her con¬ veyed below, he placed himself beside the pallet whereon her fainting form was laid, breathing a fervent prayer for her recovery.
chap. x.
•—Be merry : vou have cause
(So have we all) of joy j for our escape Is much bevond our loss : our hint of woe Is common ; ev'ry day, some sailor's wife, The masters of some merchant, and the merchant, Have just our tlieme of woe : but for the miracle, I mean our preservation, few in millions Can speak like us.
JL HELadyDouglas, and the lovely Maude her daughter, who had been so providen¬ tially rescued from their imprisonment in the Tower of London, by the unknown warrior, soon after gaining the main sea mutually exchanged their accounts of the method of their several escapes· In that of the .Lady Birtha, nothing very material
was related; but what was that fond mo¬ ther's anguish, on becoming acquainted with the sufferings of her child since their separation! and when the horrid attempt in the cell of Maude, from which she had been so mysteriously rescued, was made known to her, a torrent of tears fell from her eyes, while the warm prayer of mater¬ nal gratitude issued from her Hps in praise (if the generous stranger who had been the preserver or her daughter's honour. « From th.at moment, my dearest mo¬ ther," r.ľi.medthe beauteous Maude, " I became insensible of every transaction till I found myself enfolded in your loving arms." Occupied with such conversa¬ tions, it was bome time ere they called to iheir recollections the situation in which they were then placed. It was true, some extraordinary interference had procured their liberation from the Tower, and they were then launched on the bosom of the ocean; but whither were they
steering their course,and what perils might not yet environ them ? Terrified at these suggestions, the Lady Douglas demanded to speak with the commander of the ves¬ sel, who, on making his appearance, testi¬ fied every mark of the most profound re¬ spect» *4n what course do you steer?" de¬ manded the Lady Birtha, u Lady, we are bound for Scotland," answered the captain. " Scotland!" reiterated the Lady Doug¬ las; oh! may these eyes but once more gaze upon that much loved soil, and I shall die in peace." * " Our orders are," resumed the captain, í¿ to land your fadyship, and this fair mai¬ den, in security, upon the coast you so much wi h to view,"
" Who is your employer?" interrogated Lady Douglas. " The self-same knight, who, on tV borders of the Thames, gave you to my care/* c * Who and what is her" continued the Lady Birtha with anxiety. " We are alike unacquainted with his name and features," was the reply; "but ori the score of munificence we have am* pie cause to hold him in our best remem¬ brance; and we feel bound to a man to pro¬ tect your persons from all harm ; besides, lady, in my keeping was left this purse of golden marks," continued the captain, pro¬ ducing it, "which it was my order to deli¬ ver to your ladyship in due season : I therefore now present it to its proper owner." " Strange and mysterious!" exclaimed the lovely Maude, who remained pensive ¿uring this conversation*
" Our voyage, lady," resumed the cap¬ tain, " would have been of short duration, had we dared to pursue the usual track to Berwick; but as assured danger would have awaiteel us in following that course, we are pursuing a difTerent way; which, though more tedious, will, I fully trust, be attended with the wished-for success." In the first instance, the Lady Birtha conceived that this might be only pretend¬ ed ignorance in the commander, and that he was not commissioned to waft them to Scotland, but was tutored in this story, to lull all suspicions in her mind, as well as that of her child. After further question¬ ings, however, the frank demeanour of the commander of the vessel, and his assevera¬ tions as to the veracity of his narrative, fully quieted all tbe apprehensions of the Lady Douglas; and she looked forward, with the most fervent hope, to that mo¬ ment which would give herself and child
to their native country, and to their be¬ loved husband and father. During two days and nights, the vessel ploughed the ocean without any material occurrence having taken place. By the dawn of the third day, however, a ship of war appeared in sight, steering towards them. The captain having cautiously ob¬ served the vessel, pronounced it to be one of Edward's coasting galleys, and that they must set all the sails with expedition, in order to escape her. These orders were obeyed with the utmost alacrity, and they were chased during that day, and part of the night; but, towards the eleventh hour, the stormy atmosphere proclaimed a rough morning, which was indeed ush¬ ered in with the most tremendous hurri¬ cane, the sea running with a horrid swell; and, when it dawned, no appearance what« soever was visible of the galley, which had so lone been in chase of them. The tempest still was unabated, and the Lady
Douglas, and her fair daughter, had re* signed themselves to their fate; but the captain, at intervals, descended into their cabin, protesting that the ship would stand a far rougher gale than that which they then experienced, and that they might even regard the storm as the source of their own salvation ; for had the vessel of Ed* ward kept in sight, it must, in the cnâ 9 have gained upon them, and would, in all probability,have carried them into an Eng¬ lish port, when the persons of the Lady Birtha and her fair daughter Maudo, would have undoubtedly experienced a cruel imprisonment, if not death ; so ri¬ gorous were the orders of Edward, re¬ specting the inhabitants of that unfortu¬ nate and persecuted soil; and the com¬ mander concluded by assuring Lady Doug¬ las, that his life, and that of the crew, would certainly have been forfeited, for having aided in transporting them from the English territories»
As the morn advanced, the wind in some measure subsided, but the sea ran mountains high. At this juncture, one of the mariners hailed the commander, and informed him that a signal of distress appeared in view. The commander hav¬ ing ordered out the boat, six ofthe bravest seamen dared the surge; and, on arriving at the shattered bark, rescued its inmates from impending death ; after which, they with some difficulty regained their vessel, and got the fainting mariners on board, who proved no other than the disguised Lady Isabel of Pembroke, and the trusty Ralph, together with the five mariners, who had strove in vain to weather out the pitiless storm, which had reduced them t· the brink of a watery grave.. Old Ralph havingpartaken ofthe friendly viands and beverage which were speedily administered, was soon capable of holding some conversation with the commander of the ship, of whom he learned with
joy, that Scotland was the object of their voyage. In addition to which he was given to understand, that two ladies, whose safety was committed to his charge, and whom he was bound to land upon the Caledonian shore, were then in the ad¬ joining cabin of the vessel. On hearing these welcome tidings, old Ralph conceived that a degree of confi¬ dence was requisite on his part ; in conse¬ quence *of which, he made the commander acquainted with the real sex of his com¬ panion, but without entrusting him with the name of Isabel, he simply stated, that she was a person of consequence, and highly meriting the assiduities of any of her own sex, who might feel for her ex¬ hausted and almost lifeless condition. On gaining this information, the com¬ mander repaired to the cabin of the Lady Douglas and her daughter, stating the in¬ formation he had acquired; when, by their
desire, the pallid and motionless person of the beautiful Isabel was conveyed into their cabin by the trusty Ralph, when every effort was, for a long period, vainly put in practice to restore her lost animation. A faint pulsation at length became appa¬ rent ; and the languid palpitation of the heart gave hopes of returning life. Dur¬ ing this period, Ralph was indefatigable, calling aloud on his dear mistress ; while the tears of Lady Douglas, and her anxious daughter, fell copiously upon the faded cheek of Isabel of Pembroke; whose eyes at length unclosing, met the tender regard« of her assiduous observers. The anger of the elements had now sub¬ sided ; and, towards evening, the captain descended into the cabin, stating, that by the ensuing dawn, he trusted he should announce to them the appearance of the Scottish land. The torpor which had overpowered
every faculty of the Lady Isabel was gra¬ dually retrieved by the assiduities which were practised for her recovery; and, at the close of the evening, she was enabled to hear from Ralph the means of their preservation, and the conduct he had adopted, with respect to informing her gentle friends of her real sex. The Lady Isabel of Pembroke, with that warmth of gratitude which is the charac¬ teristic of a noble mind, professed the ob¬ ligations under which she laboured to her attentive friends; who, having soon made tlieir names known, and related, in part, their cruel sufferings, Isabel of Pembroke, with the same frankness, confessed herself, and the circumstances attending her dis¬ guise; which were no sooner revealed to the Lady Birtha, than she proferred herself the future protectress ofthe lovely inaid; stating, that to the utmost of her power, she would prove her safeguard through existence. vol. π» ·ι
Ere the hour of repose, the gentle Maude and Isabel had sworn inviolable friendship towards each other ; and as the daughter of Laird Douglas w r as fully convinced that the Lady Isabel must be well acquaint¬ ed with her brother's bosom friend, Ed¬ win, the Earl of Hereford's son, for whom she felt such an ardency of passion, she, in consequence, made a thousand enquiries respecting him, dwelling with rapture on every noble trait which was conspicuous in his character from the conversation of the Lady Isabel. This conference became at length more impassioned; and the whole ended in a full confession of their mutual affections; after which they placed their weary forms upon the same pallet, and speedily sunk into the arms of gentle sleep. In this state they continued, till the first tinge of light beamed upon the expanse of the deep ; when both, anxious to renew their conversation, awoke from the balmy spell which had entranced them, and dwelt
with extacy upon the thème of the pre¬ ceding evening. The lovely Maude, however, with a gen¬ tle sigh, expatiated on the joy which must swell the heart of Isabel, since she, in all probability, was on the point of beholding the object of her adoration, the noble Lord Walter; while herself, on the con¬ trary, had to expect every opposition to such a wished-for blessing, with respect to the youthful Edwin, then armed against her countrymen, and struggling in the cause of the English monarch. While they were occupied on these topics, one of the mariners then on deck, with a noncha¬ lance peculiar to that description of nien y who are equally unaffected by the dangers past, and regardless of the coming storm, sung to the breeze the ensuing stanz which forcibly took possession of t b „τ .- tention. *' Why gleam rrmnrţ yon я' 1 ', inc tr -тгг -> <:.- * - And who is ton rmil-iVn wich skin lih· i .*
i 2.
î prithee, gootl stranger, explain ?" ** Yon altar looks brilliant, tlie timers burn clear, Because vonder maid, who so fair doti) appear, lire midnigjit the veil will have ta'en. ** The lover is true, but relentless her sirp ; Against poor Alphonsti his hatred is dire ; So Isabel's lost ťo the youth : For here, witli the sisters her beads she must tell, And love-lorn expire in St. Agaíhťs cell,— Then pity the fate of such truth." And now march the sisters, in ro..es£>f black hue, Around them su cet ehaplet»; of roses they strtw, Anil pale looks the -victim and wiid ; Vet durk is the vbage, and clouded the brow Of hun uho, prepur'd, is to witness the vow, Consign i ii£ to death his sweet child. And now chant liie sisters, the rites thev bcyjn j When blue burn the tapers, and sudden a din Like thunder is heard to resound j iV.cm Agatha's imaire, the soul to appal, Of biood, three large drops, on the altar did fall ; The nuns prostrate sink to the ground. *< Proud father, repent! make Alphonso thy son ; " On Palestine's plain thy fair child he hath won ;" f n accents-was heard from above. Wide ope burst the portals, in bright armour stood, Î4 0W rich in possessions, as noble the blood, Alphonse, the true knight of love. The\outh, with fair JsaLel, sunk-on his knee ţ ** í yield, и cried the father» " 'tb heaven's decree ¡τ-
Arise, ihen, my child and my son !" Aljihonso Λναη Unib rendtied hapov through life ; Asul i .sabel siìuued the ahara wiíl·, Instead oí a heart-broiien inin. This song, which was sung by the watch¬ ful seaman merely to pass away the tardy- gaited time, was considered by Isabel as л- supernatural production, and not less pro¬ phetic of her future fate, than it was de¬ scriptive of the past. Upon its conclusion, another of the mariners reiterated the fol¬ lowing song:— ALBERT AND EMMA; OR, THE HAG'S PROGNOSTIC* Blooming was each lovelvieature» .Emma's breast was pure and kind j Young Lord Albert saw this creature; She enslaved his youthful mind. Kich and handsome was the lover ;-*— Vows, hy such a youth confesad* Made the damsel soon discover All love's tumult in her breast. líe so pressing,—she believing ;— Soon he play'd a traitor's part j All his purpose was deceiving ;— Albert broke fair Emma's heart* I $
!kedle?s of the maid's undoing» Careless ofthe death he gave, Albert, picture's course pursuing, Kode one eve by Kumiu's grave. Sudden, there a female cross'd him, Grim her vbage, foul her breath ; hi the¡>e words she did accost him, " Soon tisy steed shall cause thy death. " Hag!" the youth exelaim'd, then lul ting, " 1'alse thy words are, by the rood ; M And from off his соигьег vaulting, Plunged his sword in guiltless blood, With a yell the stranger vanUh'd, Groaning sunk the fihhfui ^tet-d ; — Soon from Albeni mind ν><·.>. ba'iiJťd, Bolli the onien and the deed. At the board the fact repeated, Where no guest the talebeì.evY. ; Albert, mad \vt f h wine, inírj.iírd, Tbat they v.- о и Id Ье ni.ùeeci\eJ. Forth he ran,—his friends ìoud Cid.'ii.·,;,— *' Here"? the spot,'' Lord Albert cried ; O'er his courser's bones rude falling ;— lluiTd on Kumia'b j;rave—he died. As the last note vibrated on their ears, the voice of the commander of the vessel was heard, who announced with joy the appearance of land ; when Maude, and the
Lady Isabel, anxious to taste the refresh- ingbreeze ofthe morn,enfolded themselves in their ample robes, and ascended to the deck, where their longing eyes were spee¬ dily gratified with the sight of land. Hav¬ ing continued for some time on the deck, they then descended, and finding the Lady Birtha just awakened from her repose, communicated to her the joyful informa¬ tion ; who, arising with uplifted eyes and clasped hands, offered a spontaneous prayer to the invisible author of creation, and hastily covering her form with her habi¬ liments,rushed to the deck,and gazed with tearful eyes upon the scene before her. The vessel soon got close in shore; and ere any length of time had transpired, the Lady Douglas, with her daughter, and the beauteous Isabel and Ralph, having bade adieu to the commander and mariners of the vessel, (who received from the Lady Pembroke ample compensation for their conduct, in having rescued herself, and the i 4
little crew of her bark,) descended into the boat, wherein the five conductors of Isabel were placed to transport them in safety to shore, which was speedily effected ; when they also shared the ample munificence of the disguised maid; after which they part¬ ed, heaping blessings on her head, and then put off again tojóin the vessel, leav¬ ing only the Lady Douglas, her daughter Maude, the lovely Isabel, and old Ralph, her trusty friend and preserver, on the strand of the Scottish coast. Having immediately proceeded to a small village, occupied by industrious fish¬ ermen, old Ralph made every requisite inquiry, and soori learned where horses might be procured, which he accordingly went to obtain, leaving the three female fugitives under the hospitable roof of the fisherman, who had given him this most requisite intelligence. During the absence ofthe old man, Lady
Douglas was given to understand, that King Robert Bruce had been for a consi¬ derable time lost to his anxious country¬ men, but that he and his trusty friends had again appeared, as by a miracle, and were now collecting all their scattered forces, in order to check the rapid strides of the conquering Edward: on further en¬ quiry she also learnt the names of his noble companions in adversity, and the most lavished praises were heaped on a foreign youth, who, it was said, had most essen¬ tially benefited the monarch ; which al¬ luded to the brave Huberto Avinzo ; so rapid had been the tongue of rumour in spreading the welcome news of their re¬ turn throughout the most remote parts of the Scottish coast; for such was the situ¬ ation which the commander of the vessel, that transported them, had chosen, the better to secure the safety of the fugitives, and land them free from all apprehension of dancer.
1 5
Old Ralph ere long returned with his horses, and a guide, when the overjoyed sufferers, bidding their host farewell, were speedily mounted, and took the route in the direction of the Scottish borders, in the neighbourhood of which, they were informed, the army of King Robert Bruce was then assembling. During four successive days they ad¬ vanced without any interruption, save the short period which they allowed them¬ selves for repose, and for taking the requi¬ site nutriment to support the animal func¬ tions. In all directions they heard the name of King'Robert extolled, and the cause of Scotia's freedom seemed to animate every age and rank of society. Lady Douglas in vain endeavoured to conceal her real nobi- lity,under a fictitious name; she was several times recognised by vassals of her Laird, and thus compelled to yield up the endea-
vour of maintaining secrecy. As she passed the villages their joyous inhabitants poured forth to welcome her return, and almost worshipped the lady of King Robert's staunch adherent. The news of their arrival was spread through the country, with the rapidity of lightning, but the affairs of state, v/hich alone occupied the mind or Douglas, pre¬ vented him from acquiring these welcome tidings. At length, at a distance, the line of the Scotch encampment appeared extending over the plains, when the emotions of the travellers were variously worked upon. With all the feeling of a wife who regards her Lord,—with a fervency of alfection bordering on enthusiasm, the noble .Lady Douglas pictured to herself the rapture that awaited them, after so long and cruel a separation. The tender Maude, warmed with the purest sentiments that ever graced the soul of a daughter, forgot at this juncture the object of her youthful love, ι 6
and all the cruel impediments which ex¬ isted to frustrate the completion of her fond hopes ; while the panting Isabel of Pembroke, who had undergone so many hardships, in order to behold the generous enslaver of her affections, now trembled at the contemplation' of that meeting, which was so speedily to take effect. With these mental cogitations, was mingled the idea of her brother's fury, and eternal hatred; and,actuated with such sentiments, they gained at length the entrance of the camp, while Ralph, feeling for the agitation of his y r oung mistress, endeavoured as much as possible to appease the perturba¬ tions of her soul. The sun w r as setting with rcsplendarit lustre in the western sky, as the Lady Douglas and her fellow fugitives, with an escort, were conducted through the camp to the head-quarters, the king and his council being then occupied on matters of high import. On their arrival at the
tent, admittance was instantly given to the wanderers, and in a few moments the Lady Birtha found herself encircled in the arms of her beloved Laird ; while Isabel, on meeting the adored form of the Lord Walter, uttered a faint scream and sunk upon the bosom of the feeling Maude; who, with her left hand, had embraced the neck of her much loved father. King Robert Bruce, with his brother, Sir Edward, and the gallant Lord Hu¬ berto Avinzo, instantly sprang from the council table, and mingled with this inter¬ esting groupe. After the firstnmpulse of feeling had in some measure subsided, a general statement of the circumstances which had occurred took place ; when, what was the extacy of the Lord Walter, on beholding in the disguised form before him, and claiming the protectorship of the Lady Douglas, the person of his much loved Isabel of Pembroke.
Huberto, having long experienced the confidence of the Lord High Steward of Scotland, gloried in this happy termination of his friend's anxiety ; and* conscious of the acute feelings which must agitate the soul of Lady Isabel, he used every effort to recall the fleeting senses of the lovely suf¬ ferer ; while the trembling Lord Walter, reclining on his knee, clasped the hand of his beloved, with all the ardour of genuine aflection. This scene was of short duration. Laird Douglas had a thousand communications to make to his beloved Birtha, who, toge¬ ther with Maude and the recovering Isabel, were speedily conveyed to the tents of Laird Douglas ; while Ralph, glorying in the happy termination of his endeavours, followed his young mistress, internally ap¬ proving the steps he had taken, which, in some measure, compensated for that life he owed to the suffering creature whom he had rescued. Lord
Lord Walter, supported on Avinzo's arm, accompanied the idol of his youthful fancy ; and having seen her safely enter the tent of the Laird Douglas, returned to that of Huberto, w r here the whole night was spent in that species of conversation, of which true friends can alone partake, when occupied on the subject of their most ardent love.
CHAP. Χ.
" ■ »■ Öur stern alarms are changed to morn' meetings^ Our dreadful marchrs to delightful measures. Grim visaed war has smooth'd his Avriuklcd front j And now, instead of mounting barbed steeds, To frijnt the souls of fearful adversaries, VVe caper nimbly, in a lady's chamber, To the lascivious pleasing of a lute. Shakspeare,
JT ROM the period of King Robert Bruce's escape from the monastery of Saint Co¬ lumba, to the arrival of the Lady Doug¬ las in the camp, the monarch had been unceasingly occupied in arranging the weighty transactions of the state, and in Organizing the first levies of men, whicii were poured in from every direction, to as¬ sist in repelling the victorious invaders. Se-
verâl smart skirmishes, under the direc¬ tion of Laird Douglas, Sir Edward Bruce, and Huberto Avinzo, had taken place, in all of which the Scottish troops had gained a decided superiority ; whereby the career of Edward had been checked, and the two armies remained undecided, whether to come to a general battle, or still con¬ tinue to harass each other's out-posts. It was determined by King Robert, that whensoever the general battle fliould take place, he .would either firmly establish himself in his dominions, or, by the loss of the day, relinquish with his life all fur¬ ther claim to the ennvn. As this had been agreed upon at the council board, it consequently became expedient not to act with too much precipitancy, but to collect all the forces possible, and so to organize them,as to be able to meet,with confidence, the well-disciplined troops of the victorious Edward.
In this state of suspense were the con¬ tending armies, on the arrival of the Lady Douglas, her daughter, and Isabel of Pem¬ broke ; who, after a short continuance in the camp, were obliged to leave this seat of war, and repair into the interior of the country, lest in case of a discomfiture of the Scottish forces, they should become the captives of the English. During the continuance of Isabel with the noble warriors, the Lord Walter had unceasingly breathed in her ear his unal¬ terable love ; and knowing how to appre¬ ciate the spirit of his adored enslaver, who had braved so many dangers to free her¬ self from an obdurate brother, and the re¬ ligious shackles, which must have embit¬ tered his future life ; he, in consequence, allied veneration with love, and put every means in execution, to convince her how acutely he felt impressed with the sense of her magnanimity, although delicacy pre¬ vented him from placing to the account
of affection for himself, those bold measures which she had had recourse to. Isabel, who was superior to mean du¬ plicity, avowed by her manner alone the gratification which her soul experienced^ from these impassioned conversations of Lord Walter ; and even the inveterate Douglas, on becoming fully acquainted with the mental attributes of babel, could not, in his heart, upbraid his friend for tiiis violent attachment, although to a daughter of Albion's soil» On the departure of Lady Douglas from the camp, the Lord Walter, in the pre¬ sence of Maude, avowed his passion for her friend ; intreating that, during their absence, she would unceasingly become his advocate with Isabel \ after which, a heart re/iding farewell took place, when, followed by Ralph, and an escort of sol¬ diery, the Lady Birtha, Maude, and Isabel, bade adieu to the bustle of the camp, and
repaired to a fortress, in the centre of Scotland, which had been previously ar¬ ranged for their reception. From' that period, a constant state of skirmishing was carried on between the rival forces, which continued for several months ; when Edward, exasperated at not being enabled to bring King Robert to a decisive battle, swore vengeance on the enemy, and determined on forcing their camp, if possible ; in which attempt, should he succeed, he vowed to lay waste all before him, and reduce Scotland to the most abject state of dependance. While the necessary arrangements were putting into execution for this hazardous enterprize, the presence of King Edward was suddenly demanded in France, where an ob* r π ate war had broken out, with a view to expel the English from their conquered territories. Although the mo¬ narch thirsted to wreak his vengeance on
the rebellious Scotchmen, as he termed them, yet this peremptory call from abroad was not to be dispensed with ; leaving, therefore, a part of his army on the Scottish borders, he suddenly withdrew the main body of his forces, and was in a short time embarked for the Gallic shore« This fortunate event afforded King Ro¬ bert Bruce suiHcient time to collect an immense army, which he proceeded to discipline wiih the indefatigable zeal of an experienced warrior ; during which pe¬ riod, the irresistible Edward bore down every thing before him, routing the French in many a horrid conflict. Having, after the lapse of some months, sufficiently humbled the pride of the insurgents, and brought them to a compliance with his despotic will, he once more embarked for Britain; where finding, on his arrival, that his inveterate enemies, the Scotch, had made frequent inroads into Northum¬ berland, and that King Robert, profiting
by his absence, had organized a most for¬ midable army, he sw r ore, in the bitter¬ ness of his heart, that he would extermi¬ nate the hated foe. Ordering the forces, which had landed wŤtli him from France, tojóin those who had remained on tîıe borders of Scotland, he instantly repair¬ ed to London, and, by an edict, offered free pillage to all such as would join the English standard, in order to the total an¬ nihilation of the Scottish race. Such san¬ guinary measures produced the desired effect ; thousands flocked around the ban¬ ners of the English king, urged by the thirst of plunder ; while others, inimical to the Scotch, thirsted to wreak their ven¬ geance, and spill the blood of Caledonia's sons. At the head of this tremendous force, Edward bent his march towards the Scot¬ tish borders, having previously made the most bitter and sanguinary vow that ever originated in a mind fraught with the
horrid thirst of exterminating venge¬ ance. Throughout this numerous host, the assurance of victory echoed from every tongue; but speedily the invisible arm of heaven seemed to display itself, as if to punish the bloodthirsty and revengeful leader of this army; for suddenly the hand of sickness struck him, when on the verge of that soil which, by his commands, was shortly to have been drenched with its children's blood. The rapid progress of the king's dis¬ ease, infused a panic into every soul. His dreadful plans were frustrated ; and, at length, the hand of death striking the monarch, put a sudden termination to this exterminating expedition. Scotland rejoicing at the tyrant's death, speedily avenged themselves on their for¬ mer persecutors, by regaining those places
which had been wrested from them by the hand of conquest; and King Robert Bruce, well aware of the unsteady and fickle mind of the succeeding monarch, King Edward the Second, took advantage of this favourable juncture, to place himself firmly in his dominions ; wliile the youth¬ ful Edw r ard, guided by his favourites, Spencer and Pierce Gaveston, yielded him¬ self to those effeminate pleasures, which, in the end, proved the sources of his mis¬ fortunes and untimely death. Notwithstanding that peace seemed, in some measure, to expand her pinions over the realm of Scotland, there was neverthe¬ less much to be done; imd although it had been the intention of King Robert to .summon the Abbot of Saint Columba to Edinburgh, in order to answer the inter¬ rogatories v/hich should be put to him, respecting his doubtful conduct during that monarch's exile in the island of Oronza; yet the press of state business
was 60 great, that the king, anxious only for his subjects' happiness, took little note of himself, leaving such proceedings to a future period. Lord Huberto Avinzo, however, feeling more weighty incitements to prompt him on this head, and having no longer the imperious call of his monarch's safety to detain him from carrying his long medi¬ tated plans into effect, determined on revi¬ siting the island of Oronza, and fathom¬ ing, if possible, the mysteries appertaining to the monastery of Saint Columba, which contained the most perfect of created be¬ ings. Huberto having made his desire of absence known to the king, the monarch, however unwilling to grant him a request which would, for a period, deprive him of the presence and counsels of the youth, could not, on account of his services, deny his intreaty, and Avinzo, in conse¬ quence, received his sovereign's consent ; who, on giving it, anxiously entreated his vol. 11. к
return as expeditiously as possible. Pre¬ vious, however, to his quitting Edin¬ burgh, Huberto received anew, and in the presence of the Scottish nobles, the title with which he had been invested during the misfortunes of the monarch ; in addi¬ tion to which, a revenue, suitable to the services he had rendered his king and country, was settled upon himself and hi» posterity for ever. In vain did the Lord Walter seek to fathom the cause of his friend's intended absence from the court ; the secrecy which Huberto had sworn to maintain, during his interview with the unknown female, in the chapel of Columba's monastery, sealed his lips ; and however painful it was to the generous soul of the youth, his honour prompted silence, nor could he for a moment waver in this resolve. Lord Walter, finding all endeavours to wrest the secret from his friend were alike
unsuccessful, could only pray for his speedy return. Avinzo having bade adieu to the lovely Isabel of Pembroke, one of the principal ornaments of ¡die Scottisli court, as well as to Lady Douglas, and lier daughter Maude, quitted the presence of his friends, and instantly proceeded to make arrangements for his speedy depar¬ ture for the island of Oronza.
CHAP. XII.
.'■■>.. » .iShe «rvcr *oM her lm f , Butiét coîiccîihncntj like a worm ithebud, Prey on her damask cheek. She pm\l in thought, And, with a green and wiîmv melaneholy, .^at, hke Patience on a monument, ¡smiling at grief, SRAKLSTLARI .
SHORTLY after the coronation of King Edward the Second, when a cessation of hostilities between the two countries had taken place, a messenger was forwarded by the Lady Isabel of Pembroke to her brother Edgar, making him acquainted vrith the then place of her resort, and the protection she had experienced ; she also intreated in the strongest terms, the forgiveness of the carl, and by every ar-
gument, which reason combined with love could dictate, urged an extenuation of that line of conduct which urgent necessity alone had compelled her to pursue. Such applications, however, were but ill calculated to appease the stern determi¬ nation of Edgar, who almost perem pto- rilv refused to regard her in future even in the light of a sister, as she had not only acted in contradiction to his xksire, buc daringly sought the protection of those who were his utter detestation. lie also, in the name of her departed rather, order¬ ed her never to complete an alliance with the Lord High Steward of Scotland, or any son of Caledonia's soil ; as, on her acquiescence with that mandate alone, de¬ pended whether or not he should be led to throw a veil of oblivion over the un¬ warrantable steps which she had taken. In vain did the youthful Edwin, his friend, argue in extenuation of Isabel. K 3
Edgar was deaf to all entreaties ; nor, in¬ deed, had this generous son of the'Earl of Hereford, even communicated to the Earl of Pembroke his ardency of passion for the beautiful Maude, being well assured, that his detestation of such an alliance, would perhaps annul that sincere friend¬ ship which had for a lengthened period enchained them to cachother, in bonds of the strictest amitv. Finding that all the endeavours of Lady Isabel were equally fruitless, overtures were then made by the Lord Walter; but in this instance, their reception by the English e*rl, was attended with even less success; for after perusing the packet, he, in a frenzy of rage, recommitted the letters to the hands of the messenger, without even deigning to dictate a reply. During these proceedings, the young Earl of Hereford, ever mindful of his for¬ mer protestations, and learning from the
brother of Isabel, under whose protection his sister was then placed, secretly dis¬ patched through her medium the most impassioned protestations of his inviolable love for the drooping Maude ; at the same time supplicating that she would use every endeavour to keep alive that kind predi¬ lection, which, on their parting after he had escorted her to the Tower, Maude had so undisguiscdly testified towards him. Thus the Lady Isabel had not only her own personal sorrows to endure, but was compelled to witness the grief of Maude, and the dreadful hatred of Laird Douglas to any English alliance; which seemed at once to annihilate the fond wishes of her brother's friend, the цепе- rous Edwin ; for if the antipathy oí the Earl of Pembroke was rooted, that of Douglas was equally determined; and thus no transient ray of hope seemed to illu¬ mine the dark cloud of misfortune, that
lowered over these youthful votaries of the most fervent aflection. * s t i tr . Isabel, whose soul was framed for that warmth of friendship which untoward circumstances could not diminish, had cau¬ tiously questioned the Lady Birtha as to her opinions respecting Edwin, when she happily found that the mother of her friend was by. no means inimical to the Earl of Hereford's son; .but on her further request¬ ing to know whether she would venture to sound the Laird Douglas on the subject, her decided negative was given to such a step; for she afllrmcd that it might plant the seeds of unhappiness in her breast for ever ; and she was but too well acquainted with the sentiments ot her husband in that particular, to venture his eternal displea¬ sure. Isabel carefully concealed these unwel¬ come tidings from the dejected Maude, whose melancholy gradually increased,
notwithstanding the efforts of her spirited friend to prevent it. Lady Birtha, with anguish, beheld this change in her beloved child; but if her sorrow on that head was great, how much must her pain have been increased on being conscious of the source of her daughters dejection, without being able to yield even a ray of comfort to her afflicted heart ! Laird Douglas, though absorbed in thď weighty matters of the state, could not, however, fail to remark the extraordinary change which was so apparent in his Maude ; his questionings, however, were unattended with successj as the lovely sufferer dared not, by a con¬ fession of her passion, draw down upon her head the bitter malediction of a pa¬ rent whom she reverenced with the true piety of a daughter. Laird Douglas, un¬ able to draw the secret from his child, took an opportunity of addressing him¬ self to Isabel, who having received the
opinion of Lady Birtha on this topic, was not,of course, so presumptuous as to hazard a disclosure of the fatal truth. To the Lady Douglas he also made application, but she evaded any answer, by merely stating that she would use every per¬ suasive argument, which maternal fond¬ ness could dictate, to urge her child into an avowal of the secret that preyed upon her soul, which, when acquired» she assured her Lord should be instantly communicated to him. With respect to the Lady Isabel of Pem¬ broke, Lord Walter had frequently press¬ ed a private union in opposition to the orders of her brother Edgar, but with this request she would by no means com¬ ply; for though her high spirit had prompted her to fly the misery that would have awaited her future existence, had she become a votary of monastic seclusion, and been for ever debarred a union with the Object of her love ; yet she would by rio
means listen to a step in such decided opposition to her brother's wishes, who, though imperious, she knew to possess a soul glowing with the spirit of honour ; she therefore trusted, that circumstances might in the end effect that friendly union of parties, which by a hasty pro¬ cedure would be annihilated for ever. Edwin was of course indefatigable in his communications to Isabel, which were always fraught with love for Maude, and details of the conversations which took place between himself and the Earl of Pembroke respecting her ; during which Editar sometimes hurled the most acri- monious threats upon her, and at other periods, yielded in some measure to those refined feelings which nature ever implants in the bosom of rmid virtue. о Such was the situation of affairs, when Avinzo bade adieu to his noble friends, having previously acquired a knowledge
of every circumstance respecting the pas¬ sion of the youthful Maude, which he the more shuddered at, as he was fully ac¬ quainted with the irrevocable decision of the Laird Douglas, were such an alliance proposed. The mind of Avinzo being alternately occupied with pity for the beauteous sufferer, and hope as to the laappy termination of his endeavours re¬ specting the lovely inmate of Columba's monastery, experienced that inexpressible thrill, which has its origin in the soul of fervent love and gentlest sympathy.
CHAP. XIII.
Angels and ministers of grace defend us! Art thou a spirit of health or goblin damned ; Bringest with thee airs from heaven, or blasts from hell ? And I have heard from perfectest report, there's more in them than's mortal. When I questioned thera further they made themselves «ir. SHAKESPEAR F
SCARCELY had the shrill cock pro¬ claimed the appearance of returning morn, when Huberto, mounted on his neighing steed, and followed by two trusty servants, quitted the city of Edinburgh, and took the road in the di¬ rection of the Western Isles. On every side the rugged majesty of nature dis¬ played itself to the eyes of Huberto, vol ir. h
who watched, as lie proceedetl, the earl> tinges of Aurora's beam, and soon be« held the glorious rays of Phœbus paint the summits of the projecting roťks with golden splendour. Sometimes a turret peeping o'er a crag¬ gy steep broke upon the view, while beneath, through tremendous chasms in the frowning rock, rolled an impetuous torrent spangled with foam and roaring horribly to the winds; at other times the fret-work of some religious pile appear¬ ed through the dark foliage of the spiral pine; the declivities in every direction were covered with brown heath and fern, and the humble village in the dis¬ tance, oft would grace the view, while silver streams appeared to break the uni¬ formity of the land. During three successive days Huberto proceeded, witnessing all the variegated beauties of the country, and without
iiaving experienced any particular occur¬ rence; his resting place by night was some poor cottager's abode, and his food by day, being always provided by his two attendants, was taken under the co¬ vert of some friendly tree. As Avinzo approached the termination of his journey, the country became more barren and less populous ; mile succeeded mik 1 , and scarcely any habitation ap¬ peared, when towards the middle of the day he gained some fishing boats situated on the margin of the sound. Being determined on embarking im¬ mediately for Огопга, he applied to some of the inhabitants of those wretched huts, who informed him that he could not with safety put to sea 'till the ensu* ing morning, as the rocks were danger¬ ous ; in addition to vvhich it was remark¬ ed, that the wind was high and the cur* rent rather rapid. L 2
Such representations, however, had not their due weight with ttø, energetic and fearless Huberto, who having tempted the fishermen with gold in profusion, they immediately prepared one of their little vessels, in which Avinzo and his two at¬ tendants having embarked, they speedily found themselves wafted on the angry surge. The prediction of the mariners was soon verified, for the wind gradually be¬ came more boisterous and blew full in their teeth, while the current ran high, tossing the little bark upon its foam-tip¬ ped waves. Thus situated, the sailors with great difficulty escaped the various shoals, and at length were compelled to inform Huberto, that if he persisted in his intention of proceeding to Oronza that night, their safe arrival there would be a miracle ; adding, that if he thought fit, they might in safety steer to the
island of Jura, whither the wind and cur¬ rent impelled them. Avinzo, being fully conscious that the fishermen must be acquainted with every existing peril, and the waves and hurri¬ cane becoming more tremendous, he at length yielded to their sol ¡tations; and as the angry glow of evening ap· peared, the distant island of Jura met' the regard of Huberto, from which arose three craggy mountains of a conic form, and most stupendous height, which the mariners informed Huberto were called the paps of Jura. The scene from the little vessel was indeed impressive ; дш expanse of foaming ocean met the eye* in every other direction; a black canopy of clouds came rolling onward from the east, portending most tempestuous wea¬ ther; the gleam of sinking day, that still arrayed the western horizon, was tinged with angry red, while to intercept the view, appeared the frowning summits of L 3
Jura's island. The winds roaring hide¬ ously, flapped the sails-ofthe unsteady bark, which yielded to each impetuous gust of the hurricane. With infinite difficulty the fishermen at length made the shore, where, being landed in safet} 7 , they secured their vessel in a little bay, guarded from the effects of the tempest by the rocks which arose on every side to a considerable height, s Huberto having enquired of the mari¬ ners whether any habitation Mas near, discovered infinite trepidation ori the countenances of the fishermen, and, on demanding the cause, they informed him that danger alone should have urged them to put into Jura, as it was subject to the visitations of an evil spirit, called the Tail White Мащ whose habitation was a cavern in the bowels of the loftiest mountain on the island. In vain did Avinzo endeavour to argue against the
possibility of such an appearance, the sailors affirmed that their representation was correct, and that the last who had suffered by his fury was the celebrated hunter Guy, who was the Laird ofthe castie of Finlagan, the remains of which were still to be seen on another island, at no considerable distance, called Ila. In addition to this tale, several other cir¬ cumstances were imperfectly narrated, which from their coincidence made a strong impression on tlie mind of Avin¬ zo, who having in vain endeavoured to persuade either the mariners or his at¬ tendants to accompany him up into the island, determined on exploring singly this nrysterious spot. Having there¬ fore seen the party safely placed w ithin a cavern of the rock that overlooked the bay, he sallied forth, regardless of the fervent intreaties of his palsied com 4 · panions. Huberto having gained the main land L 4
x)f the island, found щ ^xganded flat waste, covered with ^¿yb^awhich ex¬ tended to the base of the first conic mountain of Jura, presenting to the view a prospect drear and chilling to the soul. Unmindful of the threatening tempest which scowled upon the ocean in the rear, and heedless of the approach of night, Avinzo with hasty strides pro¬ ceeded onward, screened from the chill¬ ing blast of evening by the ample plaid that enfolded him. Ou his arrival at the first eminence, he wound round its dreary base, when shortly the loftiest mountain appeared in sight; while beyond it, to the right, the third pap of Jura closed the scene in that direction. As the lof¬ tiest hill had been that alluded to by the mariners, Huberto advanced towards it with .alacrity, but ere he gained its base, the setting orb of day was sunk to rest, and night, in sable majesty, assumed her dominion over the face of nature. Unappalled by «fear, and heedless of
the pelting rain and distant thunder that echoed gruffly through the realms of air, Hjilterto began at length to as¬ cend the side of this rugged and tre¬ mendous steep, being frequently illu¬ mined on his way by the pale glow òf the lightening that shot its forked and sulphureous gleams around* In this situation the dauntless youth, though frequently opposed in his passage by projecting masses of the earth, conti¬ nued to ascend, when suddenly the en¬ trance of a cavern displayed itself, and as the storm was at that period at its height, Huberto, to screen himself, en¬ tered the gloomy avenue before him. Having advanced some paces beneath the vaulted earth, bethought some sound echoed through the cavern, and in con¬ sequence made a sudden pause, but all remained silent, save the howling of the, blast that moaned through the entrance of the cavity. u 5
CONDEZ, Being somewhat weary with the efforts he had made, Huberto afetòitóh stretch¬ ed his frame upon the eafth^%d enfold¬ ing himself in his robe, the stupor of sleep soon overpowered his senses,.during which, confused and mystic forms seemed to dancé before his wandering fancy; when suddenly it seemed as if his name resounded through the cavern ; Avinzo started from his slumber; but reason told him that his dreams alone had pro¬ duced the effect which had aroused him, and he had just yielded to this supposi¬ tion, when a shrill voice again was heard, exclaiming, " Beware Avinzo !" Fully assured that this second warning was not barely the effect of imagination, Huberto sprang from the earth, and instantly un¬ sheathed his sword, when, casting his eyes on the interior of the cavern, a pale gleam suddenly arrested his attention, towards which Avinzo instantly advanced, divested of all fear ; but what were his feelmgs, as he approached the light, on
perceiving the former mystic prognosti- cator, wl^.had appeared to him when in the chapei^o^ the monastery of Saint Columba· The youth started on eyeing the forbidding person of the hag, and for some seconds, continued undetermin¬ ed whether or not lie should address her in the present instance, but while thus agitated, the loathsome object before him, in a shrill tone of voice, spake as follows ;— " Again thou seest me, Avinzo, I could, but must not, all the mystic tale unfold."' While the petrified Huberto stood gazing on the hag, a confused yell suddenly resounded through the vault¬ ings of the cavern, when instantane¬ ously, six figures, equally loathsome with that which at first met his regard, quick¬ ly surrounded him, and at that mo¬ ment, from the bowels of the earth, rose up a blazing cauldron, whose puliid light, being reflected on the objects encircling L 6
his form, gave tbem to his sight arrayed in ghastly horrors; wlritóiW^ó himself receiving the full glám^*ťhe flitting flame, became the object of their scruti¬ nizing regards, which were bent upon his person from every quarter. One of the hags advancing from the circle, approach¬ ed the cauldron, and addressing the ob¬ ject who had first hailed Huberto, spake as follows :— T straddled o*er my crutcli, and thus did gliác, It was the misty hour of curfew tide ; In church-yard porch I took my stay, The scent of death did guide me there ; * Tr»e whistling Sexton trudg'd his way, His shoulder spade and axe did bear ; í mark the pit fall deep, Then to its brink I creep, There, i'the socket of а skull. An eyeless worm from thence I pull ; In twain the bone I split, then draw it out ; Thus, in I cast it.—Stir tlie fire about. This hag having retired, a second came forward, and uttered thus :—
I, to a dismal cavern bent my way, Where never yet batí piercet! the beam of day ;
; Jhe walls sent forth a deadly damf, , The/^l^Ajfmtriţl stench did bear. Tlie етодШШЕЕтф was all a swamp. - *T^BSsssses** > jS·' And stagne« #as th' unwholesome air, Big draps cöurs'd down the wall, I heard a lizard crawl, Welcome, quoth I, and with my nail, I broke the mid joint of its tail ; Then sucked its fat, our purpose to inspire, And kindle still th< cauldron's blazing fire. This unaccountable stanza being concluded, another wierd sister stalked forward, and, first eying Huberto, and then the principal hag, muttered as fol¬ lows :— Pacing the heath, at midnight, when 'twas dark, I heard the shepherd's mongrel loudly barki The wclping cur was on the prowl ; I breatlľd a charm, it shrunk away, And straight sent forth a hideous howl, And then the watry moon did ba) ; Three teeth I soon unset, With fowl's blood they were wet; Thus, in the flame my offering I throw, Our purpose works, tlie fire doth fiercer grow.
The hag, ^mutterino-, then retired ; when the fourth, with a malignant air, and her withered hand 'sketched oer the ilarne, pronounced these word,s :·— I Leard the mongrel as 1 f gan my watch, And lisťned near the shr pherd r s lowly thatch ; Within the door anon í rt'ocp, A rug upon ilie hearth was laid; Joan and the lout were sound a^îeep, J curs'd her for a filthy jado : For spider's u ebb I ba.v, ï caught one by the claw ; And then, «iti» dreams οΐ spectres dire, Thegood/* brain I did inspire; 1 loudly I yeiľd, then hard í gppM her toe, And thus my oifrmg in the flame I throvu The fifth hag, hobbling forward, drew from her pouch a freckled reptile, and, eying Avinzo with a side leer, spoke to tiiis effect:— I to a mould'ring cistle did repair, The night being sometimes foul, and sometimes fair ;
Anti as Γ lieard the hooting owl, And ii$j;}$i$$ to the гк a* id rake's cry, The гау^шив jwolf began his prowl, And then I heard a toad hard by : I mutter'd Ueeatc*» creed, Then screech'd aloud— a deed ! The reptile by its claw I took, And toro it vvith a tenter hook ; And, lo ! its pois'nous bag, well sto/d, I bring; Such was my chance, and such my о fieri ng. Another sister, more terrific than the others, instantly advanced, and with an eye portending more than mortal language can impart, spoke as fol¬ lows *— I.r^t night beneatii the yew-tree*» iliade ΐ stood, And lisťned to the radenti croak for foo Ì. Thrice 'sail'd by the »creaminc bat, He flapp'd mo i tťs unsteady flight ; My crutch í raib'd, und laid him Hat, My fang'd tooth then his claw did bite : Thrice on the moon I stnr'd, And thrice my right-foot bare'd ; Such was tny last nighťs incantation, And now I oiler tlic oblation.
ι ζ? «cx A^teæs mv:asg t&ss «cp?««siM íbír-^elvíÄ. ibsÄ "bag пф© jkad i-sr*í^ i¿Ti,c^ai, t\dtÚ№?nsgr ä* f fee sî^iî^ ;·:-;-€€ ísíhmK mea preciemaif ¿tXL2*á A^ :z,m iza zh? cíklWí
JtİKrL 'В. штат* -»^Ыа 1 i«*aii.. Sffiţt\ tø« « «s ш% Hfiáä , İiiîÎfV ib"«·'*;· 4 ' 'i îMîsuv iau, nütjsie f τχιι*.
:-t *■
i tıs ťorr^a сяечг, 1зет j^&aeqg; v^^cŕs, ?B*lí, ia сЬсьпаАч Ш tbe Asliku isas S^BÎiİ îâ« 'ί^ώ^ίίΐ Ike 4» f** Íluíf v« .rafe·: jîïï £iïl Tťru4e^.
A-si «ar »таит íçwu 32:·*.'« ; ľS csu лр juisissžs'ev ^¿5 > г«*.^ ¥ V'-ı: ьГ«г ^¿»^¿γλϊ 4^ uçlu- Αϊ ti*e ieCTinaiuTO <sf iba?« racc^» prtbesisibk' ìiic^a imxiar¿% tbe &,i^eACí^iűs:s itsütiMtxi direka îbe cavenife as¿ ¡s а^ instant rise ^ix sisters vAaìsbed. i x * roaìning bait dbe ka^ жЬош НшЬело ¿r>t bŕheid. ana tbr siiEe Ыае ìiame, ííüí Ğkc^d Kw&ad îbe g^sB of ¿be са\г э Aviases whù hm r¿MM ss^te ¿ж- cf acèxesáes the fbnn ΐ^/αι^ hinv %1^га. tjıe lug, iJitfcia^ Wr beţ&i лш! fu&rls* ber rir, şt r mı feer lip, ^¿Йдохи tim га be >¿ktií ; mibŕr vbich, »lr%ncisr¿ ;α cle
youth, she traced a line, around him upon the earth, from which Huberto was on the point of proceeding, when the form ejaculated aloud, " Stir not, on thy life, I charge thee !" Ko sooner had these words escaped the lips ofthe hag than the mobt piercing veils re-echoed through the vaultings of sv О О the cavern, and, in a few seconds, a mangled spectre, mounted on a skeleton horse, rushed onward to the spot, from the entrance of the cavern. Avinzo shuddered at the horrid object; vhen the ghastly phantom checking his courser, from whose nostrils issued lam¬ bent flames, cast on the person of the youth a look of mingled pity and depair; then .shrieked aloud, u he comes ! he comes !" At tbat instant the witch, in shiil'I accents, thus bespoke Huberto: —
·' ilast thou anv emblem of religion r M V sZJ " I have," replied Avinzo, vvith firm¬ ness, drawing from his bosom a crucifix of gold, ancl instantly raising it towards heaven. u Tlie hag shrunk at the sight \ but the terrific rider ofthe steed, on behold¬ ing the sacred emblem, sprang from the courser, and, stretching his lean and bloodless arm over the line that circum¬ scribed the youth, he exclaimed, in the most piteous accent : " Havemercy! let my lips but press it, and my spirit is forgiven." Huberto presented the crucifix, whicb, the spectre having kissed, its hideous appearance instantly vanished iuto air; and, with a cherub smile upon its brow, it presented to Avinzo a manly and becoming fornis vvhich seemed to
ascend on high, even through the vault¬ ed cell; while, at the same juncture, the flaming steed, bounding forward, proceeded with the rapidity of lightning into the deep abyss of this cavernous abode of horror. Avinzo had scarcely turned his eyes to gaze upon the hag, when her outstretched finger pointed towards the entrance of the aperture; but as he bent his regard in that direction, what were the feelings of the youth, on beholding a gigantic figure, white as the mountain snow, whose lanky beard, hung low upon his breast, whiie in the sockets of his eyes, two pallid flames emitted a deadly glare, freezing with horror the soul of the ob¬ server. This terrific form halted before Avin¬ zo; malice was in his look, and his white brows knit with rage.
" Avaunt," exclaimed the hag, " thou can'st nGt tôuçh the holy, nor därest thou tresspass on this mystic line." Huberto once more reared the cross, when, with monstrous strides, the object of his terror vanished in the distant gloom ; and on bending his look towards the spot, where had so lately stood the hag, her form also disappeared, and the youth remained alone on this terrific spot. However, after a few minutes, he summoned his wonted resolution, and boldly advanced to the entrance of the cavern,' without any impediment; but on arriving at the verge of this gloomy abode, a voice, in silvery tones, bespoke him as follows.— " Finlagaiťs Laird is rescued, and ascends to realms of bliss; proceed, Avinzo; be bold, and act the will of Heaven,"
Huberto gazed in every direction, but no form was visible; and as he bcirau to descend the side of the mountain, tlic first grey tinge of dawn beamed through the eastern sky. The tempest had quite subsided, and all the elements appeared in sweetest unison. Гог a considerable length of time, durino; the absence of the noble I luber- to, his two attendants, in whose breasts every fear was awakened for the safety of their lord, on account of the horrible tales recited bv the fishermen, continued on board the bark, fearful of landing on the shores of Jura; but at length, sum¬ moning sufficient resolution, they deter¬ mined on braving every peril, in order to find their absent master, if (as they dreaded) he should have escaped the malice of the Tall White Man of the mountain. The affrighted fishermen in vain endea-
voured to deter them from their purpose ; duty surmounted personal danger, and the two attendants of Huberto, with the prayers of the boatmen for their safe re¬ turn, bent their steps in the direction of the mountains of Jura. As they continued to advance, each endeavoured to re-animate the drooping spirits of his companion, and the return¬ ing dawn spreading its misty light, gave additional energy to their spirits, so powerful is the effect produced by the beam of day upon the terrified soul. However great the operations of the human mind,there are but few individuals who can altogether dispel the chilling impulse of fear during the solemn hon ι¬ οί' night; every insignificant circum¬ stance awakens apprehension, and wlu и once the soul has yielded to the power¬ ful spell, superstition with rapid strides unnerves the vigour of the man, and he
