Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Italian mysteries: or, More secrets than one: a romance
ν
ITALIAN MYSTEKIES.
CHAPTER L W hut m ca tb thaf ghastly look ? ILiM thou the futile ,«>eeii ? Why í>tí*ri(l»t îhou >>|cechîe*.i ; \S hat me.ujs that th-ep-fctcU'd gs% an ì A iiv doc* í -espair sta e rhiou^h thy hn/gard ????' * å ? Ž ARK î the clock strikes two ? eja¬ culated the half-weeping Valeria, " ami still my dear father does not return. What can detain him ? Blessed Virgin, shield him from injury !" 4 * I shouid think so excellent a man as he is," rejoined Paulina, " can have no danger to apprehend ; for the good quali¬ ties of his heart are his safeguard against enemies." vol. i. ? " True, 4
" True," answered Valeria; " and I have heard some of my fathers most inti¬ mate friends affirm that, even in his* youth, he was ncvjr addicted either to gallantry or play, those too common pro¬ vocatives in this city to the stiletto of the less-favoured lover or unfortunate game¬ ster; and in proportion as î feel myself unable to propose any cause for his ab¬ sence, my alarm is heigh tened/' " Is it not probable/* said Paulina, '* that the increasing illness of the patient whom he went out to visit this evening, and of whose life he told us he despaired, may have detained him ?" " No, no, no," replied Valeria; " you know he is never absent beyond the time at which he teaches us to expect him, without conveying to us a note or message explanatory of the cause." A silence of a few moments ensued; the tear again started into the eye of Valeria—*' Something has 1 efallen him, I am certain," she said; and, pressing the hand
hand of her companion in hers, she added —" You know not, my dear Pmiiim» what it İs to feel anxiety respecting a father's fate." " Oh, Valeria," replied Paulina, ** is ? not my father as well as yours? Is he not the only being from whom I have ever known a parent's tenderness-—a pa¬ rent's love? And is İt not the most ele¬ vated joy of my heart to extend towards him the obedience of a daughter, the gra« titude of a friendless orphan ? Oh î should we be deprived of him——-'* The throb of sensibility choked her utterance, and she fell upon the neck of her friend. " What would become of us indeed," ejaculated Valeria, " without a friend, without a protector!" arid their tears were mingled together. " Without a friend or a protector you never can be, Heaven bless your angehe souls !" exclaimed the voice of one» of whose entrance into the apartment during the last few momenti* they were uncoib ? C À scious,
scions, " whilst Terenee O'Donnovan can raise voiee or arm in your sarti cc. Pardon the freedom of one \vhose first wish is your happiness ; but I know tlie feelings of both your hearts at the present mo¬ ment. I can in patience wait no longer myself for my dear master's return, and I am come to consult xvid you what is to be done for the best ; for. * 'Tsb now tl.*- wry t' itching time ?' níi'bi, W h 'Hi chuícliAurds viwn, ; nti he.I ibth breathe- uut CVjijta*»b»Ti to thia wo;hi ; ? and therefore he must not be left un¬ sought after any longer 'm this town of laurel-juice and stilettoes." % ' Kind, faithful creature !" ejaculated Valeria. *' But where can he be sought with any prospect of success ?" " That will best be seem lady, when every possible quarter has been tried for him; and that myself is going to set about this moment," answered Terenee. Valeria and her cousin warmly applaud¬ ed his intention—" But do not, pray do not
not go out alone, at tliis unsafe hour in the morning," added the former. Si I have called up Riccardo, the gar¬ dener, to 1)0 my companion, lady," an¬ swered Terence ; ** his is the stoutest heart inthehou.se, next to my own, I belave; and the reason of mv stopping into your presence uncalled, was to make you ac¬ quainted wid my absence, and to beg you'd lock the door after me: * Fast bind, fast find-—a proverb never stale in thrifty mind,' lady." " í fea ven crown your efforts with suc¬ cess!" said Paulina. " I'll call iirst at the house of the signor in the fiver, that he went out to visit labt night," said Terence. 4 ' And if he is not there," Valeria inter- rupted him by saying, " do uot relax in your endeavours—-use every expedient to fliscover him; beiieve me, your exertions sball meet tht ir merited reward." " Reward, lady !'* echoed Terence, feel¬ ingly, but half-indignantly—" What is it ? 3 keeps
keeps me out of dear little Ireland, living in this Italian country, but that the load of gratitude would burst my heart, if I had not occasional opportunities of reliev¬ ing it, by sarvi ne the best of masters and of men. He saved my life; I carry my reward about xvid me in my existence, and live to be prouder every day of the hand I received tlie benefit from." " Indeed, good Terence," replied Vale¬ ria, " I should have known you too well to— -Excuse me—are all the servants in bed, except yourself and Riccardo ?" " Sure and they are, my lady," answered Terence. " Was yourself wishing any at¬ tendance during my absence?" " No, not attendance, 5 * rejoined Valeria; *' but, at this dreary hour, combine*! with dreary thoughts, a companion. Call up my father's medical assistant, old Jerony¬ mo, before you go; he shall sit with us till vour return." " I'll do tiiat thing immediately," re¬ plied Terence ; and leaving the apartment, and
and beginning to ascend the stairs leading to the chamber of Jeronymo, he proceed¬ ed, repeating— " Id« remember rt» npothccary, And hereabouts he d^elL," &c. Descending again in a few moments, and announcing tla! Jeronymo would speedily attend their summons, Terence and Ric¬ cardo departed, followed by the prayers of Valeria and Pai dina for their success; and we shall avail ourselves of the interval occupied by Jeronymo in rising from his bed, to make our readers better acquaint¬ ed with the persons just introduced to their knowledge. Signor Urbino di Cavetti, the parent cf Valeria, was a man of independent for¬ tune, and a physician of the first eminence in the city of Venice. From his father signor Urbino had inherited his posses¬ sions and his profession, Early iu Hfe the signor Imd entered into the marriage state with a lady nobly connected» but, «?? ? in ? * all
countries, not uncommon with those who boast the longest line of ancestry; slenderly portioned ; she however contri¬ buted to the happiness of his existence during the period nature had assigned to her for her sublunary pilgrimage, which was only protracted till she had given birth to a son and a daughter, whose in¬ nocent smiles were the only alleviation ot their widowed father's grief. About a year after the death of his wife, signor Urbino introduced into his family Paulina, at that period a new-born infiur. stating that she was the child of a near relation, who had disobliged her parents by an unbecoming marriage, and who had entrusted her offspring to his care; and the children of Urbino were taught to name her their cousin. Nothing worthy relating, materially connected with the family Di Cavetti. occurred till about eighteen months to- fore the opening of our tale, except that the three children grew in fascinating qualities
qualities and accomplishments, both of mind and person, and that their hearts were stored with the most liberal instruc¬ tions, which the superintendence of their education by a father, who was himself a mild assemblage equally of the Christian virtues and of tho.se sciences which alike embellish and enrich life, coukl bestow. At this period the felicity of Urbino re¬ ceived a wound, from which it was doomed never perfectly to recover. His son, the pride of his existence, the successor to his reputation and his name, the only male relative he possessed, fell ir* a duel; the hand whieh gave the deadly blow was never known, and the son of Urbino died unrevenged.. Bending to the will of a first Power, Urbino endeavoured rather to impel his mind to bless the hand of Providence for what it had spared to him, than to repine at the loss which it had inflicted ; but stifled grief sinks deepest into the heart, and the forced smile and ? 5 furrowed
furrowed cheek too evidently betrayed the destroying traces of anxiety. The once gay and hilarious family of Di Cavetti, the animation of society and the zest of every polite resort, now r be¬ came the melancholy tenants of a solitary home, where serious conversation, or the slow notes of the harp, were the only relief of the mild but gloomy scene. We have already learned from the words of his daughter, that the habits of Urbino had ever been virtuous and regular; sinee the unhappy death of his son, seven, or, at the latest, eight o'clock in the evening, had been the undeviating hour of his re¬ turn from his professional cares to his fa¬ mily; and hence anw 1 the anxiety with which we liave seen those interested in his welfare affected at the mystery of his absence on the present morning. Of signor Urbino di Cavetti and his relatives we have said enough tor our present occasion; relative to the introduc» tion
tion of Terence O'Donnovan into his fa¬ mily we have a few words to impart. About six years had now elapsed since simior Urbino had been one dav sent for to attend a foreigner in a dangerous state of illness: he found his patient to be an English gentleman, of manners remark¬ able for their manliness and conciliating grace; to every individual the humanity as well as skill of our physician was open —to a stranger he conceived them to be doubly due, and his conduct appeared to the invalid a challenge to intimacy. His patient informed him that he had for se¬ veral years of his life been a star in the theatrical hemisphere in Great Britain ; but that, having amassed a comfortable independence, he was indulging himself by r appropriating the fruits of his past la¬ bours to the visiting of foreign countries. In the course of a few days, symptom? of an alarming nature taking place in his patient, signor Urbino, perceiving the na- uiral fortitude of his mind, ventured to ? 6 impart
împart to him the perilous state .n w hielt he believed him to stand. The English¬ man received his information wilh thanks for his candour; and having caused a will. which he immediately sent off to his own, . country, to be drawn up, he informed the good physician that there was now only one point relative to which he felt any anxiety, which was the safe return of his servant to his native land. He proceeded to say that his domestic, whose nan.j wa< Terence O'Donnovan, and whom Γ rhino h*d perceived to be an athletic young fel¬ low, of about thirty, or three-and-thirtv years of age, had first fallen under his notice as a performer in a strolling com¬ pany in the west of England ; that, ha\ ing hern a poor scholar in his native eoe η try, Ireland, he had received a tolera bl·, Ubiral education; and that the drama î.ssimiïat- ing more to his taste than any other studv. he had learned by rote innumerable pas¬ sages from Shakespeare, with which only recommendation ior becoming an actor he had
had enlisted in the train of Thespis. The gentleman concluded by saying, that, hav¬ ing found him to be of a most worthv and faithful disposition, he had dissuaded him . from the pursuit of the btage, and taken him into his own service; iu which capa¬ city he had fully answered his expecta¬ tions; but that he had found it impos¬ sible, though he had redeemed him from acting, to break him of the t stant use of dramatic quotations. I 'rhino smiled at the account Tereil'e's master gave of him, and promised that his wishes in his behalf should be faith¬ fully executed, In the course of a few days the Knglish gentlenian died. Terenee was extravagant in his grief for the lo<s ofhis tost ert τ, and the good Urbino prosai himself his uílee- tionate consoler; as one point of u hi« h consolation he adduced the trite but im¬ pressive observation of Nature's undent¬ ing law with regard to all her children. *' Oh,
" Oh, Ì know it, your honour—I know it, ' said Terence— t ?И ??? ??? mn?' die, l'.í«.siutí throu n ???.?? to eternity.' Pardon my tears ! they will flow—and no sin either. I hope ; my poor mother used tt) sny they ware the cream of feeling, and all lamentations widout them only skim- milk, 111 dry them as soon as í can. I know what your honour would say— " Dbpotr it hkr ·Λ ίτ.ηη. I bhall da ??; But 1 mast also feci it as ? man."' The day appointed for tlie funeral be ing arrived, the coffin which contained tlie body of the deceased was placed in a gondola, for the purpose of conveying it to the spot appointed for its interment ; Urbino, and some friends whom he had selected as mourners, accompanied by a priest, entered after; and Terence was al¬ lowed to attend them, and be a witness of the last earthly rites paid to the remains of
of his valued master. The gondoliers threw out their oars, and having gamed the centre of the stream, the priest, at the head of the coffin, began a solemn chant for the repose of the dead. Till this mo¬ ment the sighs and lamentations of Te¬ rence had been confined to the undertones of his voice, but, encouraged to freer ac¬ cents by the elevated notes of the priest. he threw himself upon the lid of the coffin« and in unrestrained exclamations poured forth the true Irish hotvl. The priest conceiving his lament a moc¬ kery, commanded him to be silent; but Terence, as unacquainted with the lan¬ guage of those ahout him as they were with his, heeded not wbat was addressed to him, but, as his fetlings wanned, re¬ doubled his cries and his groans. The priest became enraged, and declare d he woubl proceed no further u ith a here¬ tic; and two of his attendants, iu compli¬ ance with the will of their superior, pulled Terence oft' the coffin and endeavoi red to stop
stop his mouth. Signor Urbino and his friends, who were perfectly conversant with the Knglish language, endeavoured to adjust the misunderstanding, and to explain that Terence was fulfilling a na¬ tural duty, as he believed it to be, to the remains of his master ; but whilst this ex¬ planation was going on, a false step, made by Terenee in his struggle with the priest's attendants, plunged him into the w T ater. In a few seconds Urbino perceived th.at Terence was ignorant of the art of swim- ming; he immediately offered a sum to any one of the gondoliers who ould vena¬ ture in to his rescue; but, awed by the gravity of the priest, they declared they would not risk their own lives for the sake afa heretic. " What can be done to save the poor fellow ?" said one of the physician's friends. ** í believe there is not a swimmer amongst US. " Except myself," replied Urbino, and accompanying his words by throwing off his
?> hat anei c'oak, he dashed into the ♦itrunn, caught Terence by his hair, and placed him safely in a boat, the rowers of whieh having been witnesses of the oc* currenee, had plied to their assistance.-— Urbino having called to his friends, re¬ questing them to attend to the interment of the deceased, as his present state pre¬ cluded him from taking any share in the eerernon ν, he directed the boatmen to take them to a spot near his dwelling, from wliich he immediately proceeded home¬ wards, accompanied by Terence. To say that Terenee was grateful lor the preservation of his life, bestowed on him by signor Urbino, would be saying nothing—no words cm give an adequate idea of his feelings iind gratitude, or his attempts to evince it: he wept, he knelt, he begged, he entreated to be allowed to serve tlie physician without wages as long as he lived; and the worthy Urbino, de¬ lighted with the warmth ofhis sensibility, gave
g-ave him his hand as a pledge of his wel¬ come beneath his roof. Terence acted religiously \ψ to all he had professed; he was the friend as weil ns servant of the family ; he would will¬ ingly have beí4i its slave, but that Urbino and his children were too great respecters of tlie order of beings of which thev them* selves formed a part, to allow tise momen¬ tary degradation of a link in the chain of humanity; and whilst he faithfully served his fosterers, the sallies of his humour not im flequen tly contributed to their amuse¬ ment. Intimately acquainted with the language of the dnine bard of Avon, and not less enamoured of his works than capable of estimating their excellence, Terence frequently recalled some of their most favourite passages to their memory, and equally excited their risibility by the national twang ancl consequential air oí' proud theatrical strut with whieh they were delivered. A sentence
A sentence or two respecting Jeronymo* and our introductions are, for the present, at an end. Jeronvmo di Z ubica, a n us π now in the vale of life, had for half a century past held considerable repute as an apothecary in the city of Venice. He had tor many years been the sole preparer of the medicines administered by the fa¬ ther of signor Urbino, and at his decease had fallen into the employment of his son. Jeronymo was a character of by no means an uncommon nature ; he had deeply studied books, but he was utterly ignorant of mankind, too wise to be ser¬ viceable to himself, and too learned to possess the true use of his faculties; and though devoid of every passion (most of all, the miser's lust), except a desir*» of gaining knowledge, sleepless nights, and even weeks, innumerable, had been toiled through by him m the fruitless study of alchymy. In stature he was remarkably tall, and in figure the exact prototype of the "lean and
ancl slipper'd pantaloon ;" but the curve with whieh old a^e had stooped his shoul- dors, and the projection with whieh it had b'4tt forward his knees and comracted itis elbows, had greatly diminished his lu ight, and converted his shape from a straight perpendicular into a complete form of acute angles His never-varying habit was of a dark-grey stuff, so compactly fitted to his limbs as glaringly to display the scantiness of the ile^h with wiiich they were covered. His aquiline nose, which the loss of his teeth had nearly brought in contact with his chin, formed the constant saddle of his ebon-mounted spectacles ; and a nightcap of green net¬ work surmounted the lank grey hairs that hung sparingly about hih temples. Xor were his manners less extraordinary than his person; roots were his diet and water his beverage; but the greatest pe¬ culiarity by which his character was marked, was, that he was scarcely ever heard to speak. Yet was not his temper harsh,
harsh, nor his manners repellent ; on the contrary, the former was mild in the ex¬ treme, and the latter conciliating. But his taciturnity was so admirably supplied by his expressive features and the gestures of his ?????, that those who had for a short time been in his acquaintance always felt themselves in conversation with him whilst in his presence. But those wbo bad taken little pains to investigate his character, turned his peculiarities into jest, and for many a lustre he had been known by no other name throughout tbe city than that of J7 Speziale muto-— The dumb Apo¬ thecary. The old man had been tbe father o/ two sons, who, more attentive to the plea¬ sures of life than the welfare of their pa¬ rent, had involved him in debts and en¬ tanglements, in the midst of which they had fled and left him, till accumulating misfortunes, added to his ignorance of the concerns of life, had nearly reduced him to a state of beggary. At this crisis the humane
humane Urbino, respecting him as an old servant both of his own and his father's, offered him an apartment in his mansion, restricting him in future to prepare only fhe drugs for which he had himself occa¬ sion. Jeronymo was betrayed into a vS]>ecch of thanks, and took possession of his new abode. When Jeronymo entered the apartment where Valeria and her cousin sat awaiting hiin, he greeted them with a courteous smile, intended to display his readiness to serve them. " Oh ! my father ! my dear father !" cried Valeria. Jeronvmo raised his countenance with a iook of mingled surprise and inquiry. " He has been out ever since five o'clock last evening/* said Paulina, ** and is not yet returned." Jeronymo clasped his hands in agony together, and mournfully shook his head, " What can be become of him ?" ex¬ claimed Valeria. Jeronymo
Jeronymo repeated his shake of the head, but with more solemnity. " The agony of our minds is insupport¬ able," rejoined Valeria. ** And I am sure you participate in our sorrow," added Paulina. Jeronymo sunk upon a chair—" Imsso! lassoT escaped in scarcely-articulate ac¬ cents from his lips; his head sunk upon his breast, and he wrung his hands, A few moments of mournful silence ensued ; it was broken by a sudden start on the part of Valeria; she heard the lock of the outer door of the mansion creak in its wards, and, aware that no individual of the family but Urbino himself pos¬ sessed a key wliich coukl open it, she darted forward into the vestibule with the precipitancy of joy, and caught her pa¬ rent in her arms.—" Oh î my dear father!' she exclaimed, as she held hiin in her strict embrace—** The Virgin be blessed for your return ! you know not how your absence
absence has alarmed us. But are you safe? are you well ?" " Thank Heaven í I am both/' replied Urbino, in a tremulous tone of voice, in which his daughter and Paulina were un- accustomed to hear him speak. Gazing upon his pale and ruflied coun¬ tenance with tenderness and anxiety— " But where have you been, dear father? what lias so long detained you ?" rejoined Valeria. " Question me not, urge me not," em¬ phatically replied Urbino, rt for it is im¬ possible that I should reply satisfactorily to your inquiries ; but prepare your¬ selves, my children, to quit Venice im¬ mediately." " To quit Venice !" echoed his daugher and Paulina. **To quit Venice!" solemnly pronoun¬ ced Urbino; " after the expiration of an¬ other hour wc shall probably never be¬ hold its walls again." " And
w * And whither is our course to be bent? ' asked Valeria. " You must be satisfied to remain in ig¬ norance of the spot of our destination till we arrive at it," .said Urbino. " Onee more," he added, in a hastier tone of voice, *' J adjure you to go and prepare your¬ selves for your departure from henee; your packages must be small; and in your choice of wdiat you carry hence with you, select rather the useful than the valuable or ornamental ; for the latter you will in future have no occasion. Lose no time, 1 again enjoin you ; and whilst you are tluib employed, the iaithful Terence, who is alone to accompany us, will assist me in the few preparations which I iiave to make," tfc Terence," replied Valeria, " is«----- ," '· In my study, awaiting my coming; her father interrupted her by saying ; k * I met him at the gate—-now then be speedy;" and in mute astonishment Valeria and her vol. i. ? friend
friend began to ascend the stairs which led to their chamber. At their departure Di Cavetti was pro¬ ceeding to his study, when he felt his hand suddenly grasped ; and on turning round his head, perceived, on his knees by his side, the old Jeronvmo, with the tears stream¬ ing down his cheeks, and the palsy of agi¬ tation shaking his limbs. Never was his silence so eloquent as at the present mo¬ ment ; the most florid rhetoric could not have uttered—" What will become of me when you are gone ?" with so irresistible an appeal to the feelings. The physician eyed him for a few se¬ conds with sympathy, but uncertainty ; at length, after a momentary pause of thought —■" Thou shalt not leave me," he ex¬ claimed ; " collect together a few useful medicines, and meet me here in ñve mi¬ nutes ;'* and with these words he hastened to his study. Jeronymo did not try to speak, but endeavoured to smg for joy, and
and ended his attempt with bursting into a fresh flood of tears. " Have you sent Riccardo to bed, as ï directed you?" inquired Urbino of Te¬ rence, as he entered the study. " I have done that thing, according to your honour's bidding," answered Te¬ rence. " We are going to travel, Terence," re¬ joined Urbino ; " provide yourself with a change of linen ; we are going to set out immediately." " Wid all my heart, your honour," re¬ plied Terence ; " so long as Terence is by the side of yourself, he does not care the snuff of a potato for the name of the ground his foot stands on. ' Master, go on, and í will follow thee To the last t¡;asp, witii truth and Irvyalty ;*' and with these words he hastened to ful¬ fil his master's directions. On the return of Terence to the vesti¬ bule with his slender equipment, he w-as ? 2 met
met at the door of Urbino's study by Va¬ leria and Paulina with theirs, whieh, toge¬ ther with a package that had been made by Urbino, were collected in a cloak bag, and placed under the guardianship oí O'Donnovan. They perceived that Ur¬ bino had girt his rapier to his side, and wore a brace of pistols in his girdle ; with a pair of similar weapons he furnished Te¬ rence ; and taking up a small casket, which he refused to commit to the charge of any one but himself he cast a liastv look oí farewell, during whieh the .stifled emo¬ tions of a labouring heart were sensibly depicted on his countenance, upon those walls which had been the scenes of all his studies, his labours, and his hours of re¬ compensing reflection antl composure from the toils of life, and darted out into the vestibule. Against the outer door stood old Jero¬ nymo, with a small medicine-chest clasp¬ ed binder his arm, and guarding, as it ap¬ peared by the situation which he held, against
against the possibility of being left be¬ hind. Urbino opened the door, and waved his hand to his companions to pass on. Te¬ rence was the first to obey ; Jeronymo fol¬ lowed him with all the speed he was able to make. The females, half weeping, half eoníuunded, moved on, scarcely conscious of action ; and last came ibrth Urbino, compelled to close upon himself, perhaps lor ever, that portal which had so long opened to him as its respected master.
CHAP-
CHAPTER 11. Sure never dav oí »int-f na-, known bkt Ürs. ------ , ——_,„— ? re we not, Like wltMclus iti ;t »tonu, «hein t vr r v 'iminent Tbegrttílv <ití Y j> 5>i.;ip)HL toilfUKír' N. ììow» The season was that of the infancy of spring, and the first tints of dawn were just beginning to streak the sky. Objects were scarcely discernible, and the paths along which they passed were obscured by the surrounding buildings. Urbino placed an arm of his daughter and Paulina under each of his; the poor Jeronymo, little accustomed to venture abroad, even by day, stumbled at almost every step, and held for support and secu¬ rity bv the pocket of Terence, whose arms were both engaged with the baggage that had been committed to hib charge. Moving
Moving along cautiously, and insilence, somewhat more than a quarter of an hour brought them to one ot the houses of re- sort for the gondoliers, whose avocation it was to ply in the gulf. A few minutes coîiversatîon between Urbino and one of these men gained them the accommodation of a vessel; and in ten minutes more thev wer* 4 gliding swiftly down the stream. The mystery of their situation hekl every tongue silent; antl the current of the tide favouring the exertions of the gondoliers, their progress was so rapid, that when the sun rose to view from behind the mountains, his golden beams glittered on the distant spires of Venice. Valeria continued to gaze upon them without anv defined emotion, but that of their appearing to stand to her in the re¬ lation of old friends, whom she liad beeu warned that she was never again to behold; and as the citv of her birth at last faded *■ in the obscurity of the grey distance, a heavy sigh escaped her lips. At the same ? 4 moment
moment she encountered the eye of her father ; it beamed wit!) a mingled com¬ mand and entreaty to repel the weakness in whieh she appeared to be indulging; and too much accustomed to derive plea¬ sure from unvarying obedience to the best of parents, she gathered something like a momentary comfort, from believing it in her power to grant his evidently-sorrow¬ ing soul the slightest shadow of alleviation for its woes. She -lecordinglv compelled lurs*. If to appear ??!}»??^?? and even re¬ signed. The profession of Uri-ino had confined him closely to the lhnib of the city in which he had resided ; and as he had disapproved of any protector bur himself for his daugh¬ ter mhI his protean' lT pon excursions ot* pleasure, Valeria and Paulina had never been more than three leagues from Venice. Under any other situation of mind, the beauties of the favoured country by whieh they were surrounded woidd ha\e arrest¬ ed their attention, and excited their admi¬ ration ;
ration; but under the influence of their presen feelings, it passed unobserved, or at least left no impression behind. About an hour before noon the gondo¬ liers drew in their oars, and laid tiieir ves¬ sel to the banks of the shore. Urbino gave the signal for stepping upon the land, and a walk of a few minutes brought our travellers toa rural albedo, situated in the centre of a little garden, perfumed by the musk-rose, the heliotrope, the jonquil, and every flower which cast its odour into tlu opening lap of spring. Refreshments were procured, which con¬ sisted principally of the delicacies of the dairy. With the exception of Terence, every one appeared faint and harassed. but still negligent of supplying the neces¬ sities of lite. After nearly an hour had been expended—" If you think you ?? all able to proceed half a league, or per¬ haps somewhat more, on foot, the sooner we set olì the better," said Urbino, A ready assent having been given t*» ( -i he*
his proposal, for all present were too well acquainted that he alone knew in what manner their proceedings were best regu¬ lated, as he alone was master of the spring by which their actions had been put into motion, Urbino engaged a lad frorr the albergo to point out to him a path which lay across the hills; and an easy hour's walking brought them to a posthouse, where Urbino ordered beds for the night. When they had retired to a separate apartment, Urbino said—" As we had none of us any repose last night, and have a long journey fbr young travellers," he added, attempting to smile as he spoke, " to perform to-morrow, I recommend that we should all retire as soon as possible to rest; we shall be the better able to rise with the dawn, at which time it is my wish that we should set out" This arrangement having been made, Urbino continued thus-— 4 * You will per¬ haps expect— desire, I am persuaded you aU do, that I should render you some ex¬ planation
planation of the mystery by which my present conduct is regulated. That I shall ever give you a solution of the past you must not hope—it cannot be ; my plans for the future I shall detail to you at the close of to-morrow's journey." He was listened to in silence and in wonder; and shortly after pressing a hand of each of his companions in his, with a kind " good-night" accompanying the ac¬ tion, he retired to his private apartment, into which he was heard to direct imple¬ ments for writing to be brought to him. Jeronymo and Terence enjoyed toler¬ able repose, tor change of place had not de¬ prived them of the comfort they most va¬ lued, which was the presence of their friend and master, Valeria and her cou¬ sin wept and wondered alternately ; and when they resolved on silence, and endea¬ voured to induce the approach of sleep, regretted visions of the past, and antici¬ pated disappointments in the future, drove repose from their pillow« ? 6 The
The rising dawn had scarcely eclipsed the morning star, ere the bustle which pre¬ vailed throughout the posthouse inform¬ ed Valeria and her friend that preparations were making for their departure ; and shortly after hearing Terence inquiring for his masters apartment, and the long- drawn step of Jeronymo passing their chamber-door in his way to the staircase. they rose, and descended likewise. The foot of the staircase was immedi¬ ately opposite to the door of the house, and at the instant they arrived within view of it, the combined influence of a lanthorn, suspended in the passage, and the emanating beams of day without, serv¬ ed indistinctly to show them a horseman, who stopped before the open door. He was muffled in a long black cloak; the deep verge of his hat was drawn down over his face, and the steed on which he was mounted panted loudly with fatigue.— v< I would speak with signor Urbino di Civetti/' he said, in a rough voice, ad¬ dressing
dressing himself to two or three persons who were crossing the passage. It chanced that one of these was Urbino himself; he started at the sound of his name, and involuntarily raised his head towards the speaker. The horseman recognized him, and add¬ ed— " Signor Urbino, I have a letter for you." Urbino advanced a few steps towards the door; the horseman extended his hand towards him with the letter. Ur¬ bino received it in his, and the horseman set if at full speed. Urbino darted towards the lanthorn, and tearing open the paper, hastily perused its contents. Valeria, who had closely watched her father during the transactions of the last few moments, saw a smile of serenity steal over his features. An instant served fbr the perusal of the paper ; and placing it carefully in his pocket» he advanced, with a faint
a faint smile, to Lieet her, and led her to the breakfast apartment. Their meal being concluded, Valeria, her father, Paulina, and Je»Onymo ¥ took their seats in a post-carriage ; and Terence, mounted on a sturdy mule, jogged by their side. The day appeared long and tedious; the country through which they travelled was for the most part rugged and uncul¬ tivated ; the forest had not yet acquired its verdure, nor the mountain-plants their bloom. Stopping occasionally, more for the convenience of the drivers and their cattle, than for their own refreshment, and moving painfully slow when they did pro¬ ceed, at about seven in the evening they reached a posthouse, situated at the foot of the chain of hills which the day had been employed in crossing. Valeria and Paulina were not only greatly fatig'ied, but unwell. The want of repose which they had for the two last nights
nights experienced-—the anxiety of mind which they had endured—the confine¬ ment of travelling, to which they were unaccustomed, had ail conspired to subdue ÌK>th their strength and spirits. The bi¬ len tly-watchful Jeronymo pei ceived their feelings ; and no sooner had they entered an apartment than, unlocking his medi¬ cine-chest, he advanced towards them with a phial of hartshorn drops, " No, no/' said Valeria, " they will be of no service to me—I need repose," k * Throw physic to the dogs," cried Te¬ rence, waving his hand to Jeronymo to withdraw his medicine ; then turning to Valeria, he added—" Lady, your medi¬ cine must be sleep— * Sleep, that kmb up the luvelietl sheave «i'enre, The death or each dny*$ life, sore labour's bath, Balm uf bun raiiids " Urbino, who bad been detained in dis¬ charging the drivers, at this moment en¬ tered, and overhearing O'Donnovan'e last words,
words, he said— ic Indeed, my dear chil¬ dren, Terence is very much in the right ; you do both of you greatly require the re¬ freshment of sleep : let me thereiore pre¬ vail on vou to retire to rest, and defer re- ceiving from my lips that explanation of my future plans which I promised to give you this evening, till to-morrow morning, when you will be better able to attend to my words, and to digest my intentions. Jeronymo gave an immediate noti oí as¬ sent, and drew his nightcap from his pocket. Exhausted nature had scarce! \ ieft the females the power of dissenting from Urbino's proposition, and they were accordingly conducted to a chamber. On the following morning, after their repast was concluded, Urbino, calling Te* rence into the apartment where he was as¬ sembled with his family, thus addressed him.—" Terence, as from your proved fide¬ lity to me and mine, it is my choice to make you the chief agent of some import¬ ant concerns which I am about to transact, it
it is highly necessary that you should be present at the relation I am now going to make" A gentle bow of humility, with a look of strict attention to his master's words, were Terence s reply. " Before I speak of my future inten¬ tions," continued Urbino, "I think it right once more to state to you, that with the cause of my sudden departure, probably for ever, from Venice, you never must expect to be made acquainted ; it is a point upon which your curiosity never can be satis¬ fied ; and I most earnestly request that you, who love or respect me, will never attempt to urge me to a disclosure which í cannot make." This injunction was received with an¬ other gentle inclination of the head on the part of Terence, and a similar acknow¬ ledgment from Jeronymo. The counte¬ nance of Valeria fell, and Paulina heaved a smothered sigh. ít You are well acquainted, my child," continued
continued Urbino, addressing himself to \ aleria, tí and the circumstance is w r ell known to all of you, with the exception of Terence, that a few months before the great Disposer of event e called your excel¬ lent mother to her reward in heaven, that she had unexpectedly bequeathed to her, by a distant relative, an estate and man¬ sion." " I think I have heard you name it— the Castello della Torvida," said Valeria. es The same," returned Urbino. " As it did not at that time suit my plans to quit Venice, I immediately exposed the estate for sale, and was surprised to find that no purchasers offered themselves ; but, upon further inquiry than I had yet made concerning my new property, I found that the land was unfertile, and in a state of meagre cultivation, and that the Castello was very ancient, and consider¬ ably out of repair ; that it had been fbr some years uninhabited, and that its gloomy and unalluring situation was unlikely
unlikely to procure it a tenant. How¬ ever, after some time, the lands were hired of me by a farmer in the neighbour¬ hood, who was tempted to the engage¬ ment on account of their lying contiguous to his own, and he has ever since continu¬ ed to rent them ; but the Castello still re¬ mains uninhabited. And," continued ? or¬ bino, after a few moments pause, ** as it is necessary that I should, for some time at least, live in absolute seclusion from the world, it is my intention to retire to the residence of which I have been speaking." Again he paused, then added-—" I hope it does not afflict my children that their father's fate compels him to devote them to an exclusion from society ?" " Whatever constitutes your happiness," replied Valeria, " the duty which I owe you as a parent commands me to behold in the same point of view in which you perceive it ; any life is preferable to that of being torn from you," " And
" And for myself," said Paulina, tt I can only aver, that rH being whom your kindness has reared and fostered, can kiiow no will but that of her protector." Urbino embraced them both, and then turned aside to wipe the dew of sensibility írom his overflowing eyes. He proceeded to say, that he was unacquainted at what exact distance they now were from the Castello della Torvida, but that he would immediately question their host where the village of Malina lay, one league to the north of winch he was acquainted that the Castello was situated ; and with these words he left the room to prosecute his inquiries. ** How different a life shall we pass at the Castello to what we were accustom* ed to lead in Venice!" remarked Pau¬ lina. ik We have tasted few of the pleasures of society," replied Valeria, " sin ?? the death of my poor brother; ourselves and our
home hive of late been our chief enjoy¬ ments* and those comforts we shall still possess." " True," answered Paulina; " but fbr all that, I am afraid it will be very melan¬ choly to live in such a solitude as your father describes our future residence to be." At the word solitude a smile of pleasure stole over Jeronymo's face, and he clapped his hand upon the medieine-chest, with an air which implied that he foresaw how ser¬ viceable, in such a solitude, its contents might prove. In a short time Urbino returneil to the apartment ; he said that the host had told liim, that it was necessary they should pro¬ ceed to another posthouse, seven leagues and a half off, at a short distance from wiiich lay the village of Malina, ant; at which they would not fž/il to gain every infor¬ mation they required. Accordingly in¬ stant orders were given to prepare for their departure ; and with all tlie expedi¬ tion
tion which they could persuade their en¬ tertainers to use in befitting their horses and servants for the journey, they set out. Their cattle were on this day worse than on the former, and the hills they had to as¬ cend more steep; thus, notwithstanding Urbino contrived to suffer as little delay as possible upon the road, it was dim twi¬ light when they reached the posthouse. On attempting to alight, they were sa¬ luted by an exclamation from the landlady, that every bed in her house was occupied. She however mollified her unpleasant tidings by saying, that if the signors chose to take a refreshment by the kitchen-fire, they should have the best her house could afford, and might sleep in the carriage, as the drivers could not return till the morn¬ ing. The evening was cold, and the promise of a good fire readily tempted them into the kitchen, where Urbino, by the promise of extraordinary payment, endeavoured to prevail upon his hostess to relinquish her own
own bed for the night to his daughter and Paulina ; and her reply was, that it should have been at their service, but that she had already granted it to another party. "For myself and my male companions,' said Urbino, " it matters not where we take our nap ; but my poor girls are far from well, and much fatigued into the bar¬ gain. Could no expedient be contrived for accommodating them ?" The hostess looked at Valeria and Pau¬ lina, and saw Urbino's assertion respecting them to he true. She appeared affected by their interesting appearance and turn¬ ing again to Urbino, she said-—" I know but one chance. Our only neighbour is a rich old farmer, whose house is but a stone's throw off. He has sometimes granted us the use of a bed upon such an occasion as this* and I can but ask him the favour." " And little fear of your being denied," said a voice, which was that of the host, at that moment entering the kitchen ; " Sancho
" Sancho di Borges is a good old fellow, and í never knew him refuse to do a good turn." Sancho dì Borges was the name of Ur¬ bino h tenant for the estate of j Mia Tor- vida. " Sancho di Borges î" echoed Di Ca¬ vetti. " If you will have the goodness to let me sev him, ï have no doubt of pro¬ curing my suit." " Do you know him then, signor?'' asked the host. " Not personally,' 4 replied Urbino; 4 ' buí 1 believe a few words spoken together will prove us old acquaintances " Well, signor," said the host, u I am at your service to show you the nay tu ?? house;" and Urbino having, in a whisper, communicated to his daughter who Sancho di Borges was, he signaled to his host to proceed, and follow T ed his steps. On arriving at the house, whieh Urbi¬ no perceived to bear the marks both ol opulence and comfort, he requested a few moments
moments private conversation with its owner; and being shown into an apart* ments was almost immediately followed into it by a highly-respectable-looking man, who had counted at least sixty-five summers, and who, in a tone of blunt but honest civility, requested to know his bu¬ siness with him ? *' You are, I beheve, my friend, ac¬ quainted with the name of Di Cavetti?" said Urbino. " If you mean signor Urbino di Cavetti, who resides in Venice, and who, I under¬ stand, is a physician, I have been his tenant for these nineteen years past," answered Sancho. tí The same," replied Urbino ; " he is at this moment travelling through this coun¬ try on business of importance, and having this evening arrived at the posthouse at the foot of your garden, he has found it impossible to procure a bed for his daugh¬ ter and niece who accompany him, and if you could indulge them with a bed be- vol ι, n neath
neath your roof, I need not say how great a favour you would confer on him." " Most willingly, signor," answered San¬ cho, (í and with another for himself. He has been a good landlord to me; never press¬ ed me for my rent, nor ever raised it upon me, though I must confess the land has turned out much better than I expected it would. We have been known to each other by letter for a long wdiile past, and I shall be glad of an opportunity of be¬ coming better acquainted with him by word of niouth." tt ?ί Cavetti thanks you heartily, and begs leave to shake your hand," replied ï , r bin ?. The farmer grasped the extended hand, and, as he pressed it in his, he said-—" I thought you were he, signor, the moment you mentioned the name ; I am glad to see you—I am indeed. Go and fetch your daughter and niece hither, and all shall be ready to make them comfortable in five minutes." Urbino
Urbino returned to the posthouse, and having made tlie best arrangements in his power for Jeronymo and Terence, conduct¬ ed his daughter and Paulina to the farm¬ house. They were met at the door, with a hearty welcome, by Sancho, and con¬ ducted by him into an apartment, where he introduced them to his wife, a vener¬ able-looking woman, who was sitting in the chimney corner, and for whose not rising to receive them he apologized, by saying that she had for many years been blind. A flask of excellent wine was produced. in a bumper of which Urbino and the farmer pledged each other as old friends ; and shortly after, an inviting supper was placed upon the table. During their meal they were waited on by a servant- girl of, at most, twelve years of «ige, and a female who appeared, at least, forty, with all the flippancy of seventeen, and who, by the familiar and sometimes even im- |>ertinent manner in which she addressed n â and
and by turns contradicted Sancho and his wife, seemed to rank in the family above a common domestic. Perceiving the w r eary state of our female travellers, when the cloth was withdrawn, the good farmer lagged that they would discard all cere¬ mony, and retire to bed whenever it suited their inclination to do so. They thanked him for his kindness, and begged leave to avail themselves of his offer without delay. " Surely, surely," answered Sancho; " to do as you please, signoras, under my roof, is the best way to please me. Here, Francisca," he cried, addressing himself to the elder female, " take a light, and show the signoras to their chamber, and see that every tiling is to their mind." '" I believe 1 know very well what to do without your bidding," replied Fran¬ cisca, tartly ; " there's not a girl in Italy has waited on more real ladies than I have tìone, and t practice makes perfect,' as the proverb says." With an affected courtesy to
to Valeria and her cousin, slie then inti¬ mated that she was ready to show them the way. On entering the chamber, which was neat, and the bed inviting—" Now, sig¬ noras," asked Francisca, ** is there any thing I can do to assist you ? I have un¬ dressed some of the first ladies in Italy, I assure you." " We will not give you any farther trouble/' said Valeria. " Trouble, signora !" echoed Francisca ; " it cannot be trouble to wait on ladies of elegant appearance like yourselves; no 9 no, I could be up day and night to serve people of fashion and gentility, and think it no trouble ; but such homebred creatures as my uncle aiid aunt below stairs put me out of all temper. All I can say or do, they wont try to polish ; but * you cant make a silk purse of a sow's ear/ as the proverb says," and with this elegant apos¬ trophe and a sliding courtesy, she left the chamber. d 3 " Thank
" Thank Heaven," said Valeria, ** my dear father's mind seems relieved by the kind reception he has met with from the farmer. Pray the saints, that those evils, which are perhaps magnified to us by be¬ ing wrapt up in mystery, may gradually evaporate, and restore to our protector his wonted equanimity of mind!" " Let us entreat the blessed Virgin that it may be so," answered Paulina. Valeria drew her missal from her pocket, and having passed some time in prayer, they entered their bed, and sunk to sleep.
CHAP-
CHAPTER III.
---------------------- — Kor tomei hing still t h ore ìk -? ín HcíucdV daik volume, u liie!» I reud through ???'?, W Al. POI f . After every other member of the house¬ hold had retired to rest, Sancho di Borges and Urbino continued for a considerable time in conversation together. The un¬ affected openness of heart, so conspicuous in the good farmer, challenged for him the esteem and confidence of the discerning physician, and he felt happy in the a<- quaiutancc of so valuable a man, in the solitude to which he was about to retire. Accordingly, Urbino, without reserve, un¬ folded to him that he had resolved to pass the remainder of his days in retirement, and that he intended to make the Castello della Torvida his abode. i> 4 "I am
'* I am truly happy, and proud too, sig¬ nor," replied Di Borges, " to rind that I shall possess a neighbour like yourself iu the evening of my days, and I shall not regret bartering part of my farm for your society." ** I don't understand you I 1 ' said Urbino —" what do vou mean ?" " That, as you are bent upon a country life," was the reply, " you will, of course, take your land into your own hands." " Indeed not," replied Urbino; " I am utterly unacquainted with the art of agri¬ culture, and it is too late in life for me to become a scholar to anv science." »f " I am glad to hear you say so," replied Borges. " I am attached to the land, on account of the thrift which it has made under my culture ; but you must increase your rent ; it is worth nearly twice as much as it was when I first took it." " Which improvement is owing to your skill, and therefore, in my opinion, you have the best right to the benefit produced," rejoined
rejoined Urbino; " however, time enough to talk of that. But tell me, how far is the Castello from hence, arid what kind ot a dwelling do you think it will make f<>r me and my family ?" " The distance from hence is about a league and a half," answered the farmer. " The road to it lies through the village named Malina, does it not?" inquired Ur¬ bino. " The nearer road is to leave the village to the left," said Sancho ; " but there is no positively direct road to it ; the high road, alting which you have hitherto travelled from Venice, turns off to Mantua at the bottom of the hill, a stone's throw beyond my orchard ; it is a by-road to the Cas¬ tello, over fields, and partly through a small wood. As to the state of the house itself, ï can say but little about it ; for it is a long wdiile indeed since ï have even passed through the gate which leads into the sycamore walk, through which lies the main approach to the building. I was, I d 5 believe»
believe, in every room of it once* about two years before you came into possession, with a stranger who inspected the pre¬ mises, but declined the purchase. It ? a gloomy and an old-fashioned place, but î think capable of being made comfortable to its inhabitants." " I should like to see it as soon as pos¬ sible," replied Urbino, " that 1 may fix my determination.^ " I will walk with you to it to-morruw morning after breakfast," said the farmer. ** I suppose you have a set of keys to the premises yourself?'' Urbino's reply was in the affirmative. " And ï have another," said Sancho; li so we can't be at a loss to gain admit¬ tance. But, mark me," added the farmer, " as 1 am sure» repairs must be required in a place which has been so long uninhabit¬ ed, not an hítiT si ι ; ? you or your familv reside there, till I pronounce it fit to re¬ ceive» you ; you have a home at your com¬ mand; jou have nothing to do but to ex¬ cuse
cuse the inconveniences of a farmhouse, and to use it as your own." Urbino rectived this kind invitation with a silent smile of gratitude, aware that elaborate thanks must have been imae- ceptable to a mind formed in the mould of Sancho's. When they at length retired to rest, no two individuals ever parted with a stronger impression in favour of each other; and Urbino's heart overflowed to Heaven in irratit ude for + he valuable friend to which ît had introduced him, at the most trying crisis of his life. On descending from his chamber on the following morning, Urbino found that Jeronymo and Terence had been invited from the ???!??*»? by Di Borges, and added to his establishment. Urbino re- motistraied by sa\ ing—*· That he entreat¬ ed accommodation might be procured for them elsewhere, as the addition of ñve persons was too great a burthen upon Sancho's family." To which argument ? 6 Sancho
Sancho replied, that if there were any thing amiss in the case, he felt the quar¬ rel his, that any member of Urbino's tra¬ velling-companions, from a sense of false d< lieaey, had been excluded from his roof on the preceding evening, ** Politeness is a virtue," said Di Borges ; " it has saved many a man's threat from being cut, many a woman's reputation from being defamed, and many an indivi¬ dual's purse from being pilfered ; but false ceremony produces only the evil conse¬ quence of proving a bar to the conference and acceptance of benefits, Kxcu.se my philosophizing,' he added, with a smile to* Urbino; " 1 have had no instructor in these matters but experience, a kein, but a true monitor. You'll know me better by-and-by, signor, and put up with mc and my logic." Their meal being concluded, Sancho and his new friend prepared for their walk. In passing though the little garden whicli lay in front of the house, they were met by
by Francisca— ·" Now remember, my girl," said Sancho, stopping to address her, " let us have the dinner in the best order you can, and not ready sooner than three o'clock ; for the signor and I have a long walk to take before our return—not sooner than three—do you hear ?" " Do you think I am deaf?" returned Francisca : 4 * you've said it twice already ; * twice done is ill done,' says the proverb, and I am sure twice said is quite as bad, but some people never know when they have said enough." " Ah, ah Γ' cried Sancho, shaking ?? head, " that girls tongue is unaccountable and ungovernable. For my part, í ea "e not how much she frets and scolds ; but I am sorry for my poor old wife, whose dark state obliges her to receive every little ser¬ vice at her hands, and not appear to heed her temper. She is my niece, signor; her mothei, my elder sister, ran away with a soldier when she was quite young, and followed him on his campaigns. Wben thtf
the Spanish wars were ended, they return* ed to Italy, and kept a lemonade shop in Mantua, placing out their only child, this Francisca, as waiting-maid in some family of distinction. Her parents are now both dead; and when my wife lost her eyesight, thinking that a relative to attend upon her would be preferable to a stranger, I sent and invited her hither. She has now been with us three vears; and although I believe her heart at bottom is ¿rood, si<r- nor, it is a long way to it through the fence work of airs and nonsense in which she keeps it enclosed."' " Had you never any children of your own?" asked I "rhino. " Only one, signor, only one/* replied Sancho, with a faltering voice, " as pretty a little girl as ever——but we'll not speak upon that subject just now, signor; if we dwelt upon it, I should be very bad company for the rest of the day." He blew his nose, wiped his eyes, and imme¬ diately talked of the roads and the weather. A tolerable
A tolerable path, corresponding with the description given of it by Di Borges, brought them to a spot from whence the grey summits of the Castello della Torvi¬ da were seen towering above a dusky knot of waving trees, whose branches the early spring had yet but meagerly clothed. As they proceeded, Urbino perceived tiiat gloom was the characteristic of the univer¬ sal scene ; craggy rocks, upon whose rugged bosoms grew only partial clumps of scanty vegetation, closed in the view on every side, and the distance beyond the Castello pre¬ sented an amphitheatre of dte>p and mazy forests, broken at intervals by the conic tops of mountains mingling with the clouds. As they drew nearer, Urbino observed that the wall, which had once encircled the square of ground in the centre of wdiicli stood the Castello., was in many pares levelled with the ground, and the gates leading into the sycamore walk, of which Sancho had spoken, fallen from their hinges. - The
ct The hand of Time appears to have been very busy here," he remarked. " It is always most bold where it is un¬ checked by observers," rejoined Di Borges; '* but recollect," he added, " that this walk has been exposed to the weather, and that the inside of the Castello has been protect¬ ed by the substantiality of the building." As they contili ued to advance, they en¬ countered an aged and ragged female, who was gathering fuel.—** Ah İ dear signor," she cried, addressing Sancho, '* im saído, un soldo, per t amor di Dio! —-My poor boy has scarcely been an hour without a fit for this month past." ** Here, here, Bianca," said Di Borges, throwing her two or three pieces of coin ; then turning to Urbino, he added—" She is indeed an unfortunate creature,and the mo¬ ther of a most unfortunate son, who is both a victim to the fits of which she has been speaking, and an idiot into the bargain." Urbino added his mite to Sancho's, and they moved on, attended by her prayers and blessings. As
As they were on the point of passing through the gateway into the sycamore walk, they heard a shrill shriek behind them ; and on turning round their heads, saw old Bianca hobbling towards them as fast as she was able, and beckoning to them to stop, " Now, what is the matter?" asked San¬ cho, when she approached within hearing. '* Oh, worthy signers/' returned Bhnea, " you have bestowed your charity on me, and would I suffer you to run into danger in return î To be sure you are not going to be so rash as to venture within that gate ?" " Rash î why so?" inquired Di Borges, tí Oh, signor Sancho," returned the old woman, you th* t live in these parts can¬ not but have heard the report there was about n\e months ago, that real, natural smoke was seen coming out of one of the chimneys of the CasteiU , though not a human inhabitant has it had these seven- ami-twenty years," tí Nonsense,
" Nonsense, nonsense!" ejaculated the farmer; " old women's tiles, fit only to im¬ pose on the ignorant and superstitious Γ " But it is proved now not to be an old woman's tale, signor," replied Bianca ; " it is confirmed ; my poor boy Calvino saw a %ht in one of the windows of the Castello only about three weeks ago ; and because the poor creature is not quite right in his brain, some mav call him a fibber for sav- ing so; but I aver he knows a light when he sees it ; and see it, he swears, lie did, poor boy ; the boy's not blind, signor." Urbino and the farmer both smiled, but pretended to thank Bianca for her caution, and proceeded on their way, apparently to the no small discomfiture of the old wo¬ man, whom they for some time heard ex¬ claiming—" Ay, ay, you can't say but I warned you ; you'll find poor Calvino not such a fool as some folks think; but self- willed people must take their own way. Blessed saints preserve you î Holy Virgin look down upon you !" As
As they continued to advance, Urbino found the Castello to be a building of ex- tensive dimensions, surrounded by a heavy colonnade, and with a flight of steps lead¬ ing to the principal entrance. Having as¬ cended them, they produced their keys, and with little difliculty gained admittance within the walls. The wards of the lock, and the hinges of the door, had become rusted with disuse; but a trifling exertion of skill and strength easily overcame these impediments. Having examined all the apartments oïj the ground-floor, they ascended a staircase at the extremity of the vestibule, which, at the elevation of twelve steps, branched off by a second ascension to the right and to the left, conducting to the opposite ex¬ tremities of a gallery, which ran round the upper story of the building, and upon which opened the doors of various cham¬ bers. Almost every door stood oper», and thus they found their keys ????? use than they had expected to find them. From
From the chambers situated in the angles of the building, short passages led to con¬ fined apartments, which appeared to have been intended for the use of domestics; and a door, which terminated one of these short passages, was the only one which they found fastened. They applied to their keys, and quickly discovered one which without difficulty moved in the wards of the lock; but the lock being turned, ^he door still refused to open. Sancho placed his shoulder against it, and endeavoured to overcome the difficulty, but in vain. " No matter," said Urbino ; " we have seen sufficient of the other apartments to conceive the nature of this." ít Most probably," returned Sandio, " some of the stones from the balustrades (for you must have observed without, that it has fallen íl several places) have forced their way through the roof* and blocked it up." (i Most probably indeed," rejoined Ur¬ bino ;
bino : " however, that will all be seen and remedied when the workmen arrive." They now descended, and having locked the portal, and taken a short survey of the desolate garden by which the Castello was encircled, they began to retrace their steps towards the farmer's house, " Well, signor," said Di Borges, #t what do you think of the Castello for a resi¬ dence? I am half afraid to hear your opinion,, for, to speak tiie truth, I should not like to have been only tantalized with the expectation of having my landlord for a neighbour." " My resolution is by no means shaken," replied Di Cavetti ; " the situation is cer¬ tainly very gloomy, and the mansion verv much out of repair ; but the latter defect is easily rectified, and hearts blessed with cheerfulness and content will, I trust, prove a powerful antidote to the influence of the former. My chief objection is the size of the Castello ; for, according to my idea of comfort, the inconveniences which a large
a large family suffer from a small dwell¬ ing, are infinitely preferable to the naked¬ ness which chills the eye, and almost the heart, where two or three scattered indi¬ viduals occupy a large extent of building." "But if that is your only objection," rejoined Sancho, " 1 should thmk a part of the Castello might be selected for the residence of your family, and the doors of communication with the rest of the man¬ sion entirely blocked up ; by which means you may make a small house out of a large one." tí í will consider of it," answered Urbi¬ no. * 4 My pillow is a friend which upon almost every concern of any importance I am in the habit of consulting ; and after I have done so to-night, I will return to the Castello to-morrow, and digest my plans on the spot." *' To-morrow," replied Sancho, " I can¬ not be your companion, for I am compelled to go to Mantua on business which I must not neglect." "If
" If I were at any time a momentary restraint upon your actions," rejoined Ur¬ bino, *' I should no longer derive pleasure from your society. Now I am acquainted with the way thither, I need no compa¬ nion at all ; but I shall take my servant Terence with me, because I doubt not that he has a better knowledge of many conveniences necessary to be observed in preparing for the accommodation of a fa¬ mily, than I myself have." " Good, good," replied Sancho. '· I shall be at home to-morrow evening, time enough to hear how your second inspection of the old Castello pleases you." On cnterinff the house, thev found Va- leria engaged in reading from a religious book to Sancho's wife. Upon their arri¬ val she closet" the volume, and the blind Averilla, recognb.ing Sancho's step (for the loss of one faculty invariably renders the perception of those which remain more acute), said—·" Ah, my dear husband, í ha\e not experienced so great a pleasure for
for this many a day as I have done this morning; I seldom hear a passage from those good books now, which it was onee my greatest satisfaction to dw f ell upon; and this amiable young signora has been reading to me from one of them like an angel." The observation passed unnoticed, ex¬ cept by a silent smile of thanks from Ur¬ bino to his daughter, for having endea¬ voured to reader herself engaging to those whose friendship he coveted. When dinner was over, Urbino, ad¬ dressing himself to Averilla, said*—" As my daughter has been so happy as ti) gain your approbation, it is but fair that her cotisin should have a chance of insinuating herself into your good graces too ; she is an excellent singer, and one of her songs may amuse yon." Paulina cheerfully accepted the general invitation given her, and sung the follow¬ ing
ZALLAD.
ITALIAN MYSTERIES. ?3 BALLAD. Within a convent's dreary shade, JI β hapless Julia liv'd &erei*e, Like the fait lily in tlic glade, That dies neglected mid unster*. No father's smile her childhood blest; Denied a mother's kiss to prov«, Her breast each sorrow had confest, Encept the pange of hopeless îüve. But though the gifts of fortune ne'er Deign'd on tliib abject maid to ????, Amidst the gloom she grew more fair» As gems gleam brighter in the mkü* But caree more wayward t'oom'd to bear, A lot more hapless still to prove, A lover whispered in hcr ear The luring tale of artful love. Tbe lover press'd—bis suit lie won ; Julia agreed with him to wed ; And at the solema hour of one» To Jerome's holy sinine they sped. But when he found her friendless, poor, lie fled ; no pra* '-■> ins heart could move, And to the pangs she'd knowa before. SVete added those uf perjur'd love.
Paulina possessed a voice of exquisite voe. ι. ? sweetness,
sweetness, and Sancho and his wife were enraptured witli her melody. " It is like a new world to me tobe thus entertained with your superior accom¬ plishments," said Averilla, " and every one of you make so strong an impression on my senses, that I begin to know you aH al read ? ? — -signor Urbino, his daughter, and her cousin ; but there is yet one signor, whom I am acquaint«, is here, and yet 1 think 1 have not once heard his voice." All present smiled, except poor Jerony¬ mo himself, who half blushed. " Come, signor," said lìi Borges, ad¬ dressing him, " you shall take my seat, next to my wife, and let us see whether you can manage to get acquainted to¬ gether." Jeronymo obediently moved towards tlie seat resigned to him ; and Sancho having put his wife's hand into the apothe¬ cary's, a cordial shake ensued. u You have a cold hand, signor," said Averilla, " which they say is the sign of a warm
ITALIAN MYSTERIES. 75 warm heart ; and I have no doubt we shall grow better acquainted." Jeronymo gave the hand he held in his a second shake, as an affirmative to Ave¬ ri İla's prediction, and silently took the chair by her side. The evening passed off pleasantly, and even cheerfully, signor Urbino, if not for¬ getting, at least partially subduing the painful recollection of a past occurrence» with which his mind was, in spite of his exertions to control his feelings, perpetu¬ ally haunted.
e 2 CHAP.
CHAPTER IV.
0 î Hay .md night, but this i» wondroös stranie t When the morning arrived, Valeria and her cousin were desirous of accompanying Urbino to the Castello, eager to behold their future residence ; but as the walk to Delia Torvida was a long one for novices in the practice, Urbino persuaded them to defer gratifying their curiosity till they were perfectly recovered from their late fatigue ; and accordingly Terence and his master set out together. Terence was a man whom those of his own rank denominated an universal ge¬ nius, that is to say, he had seen so many changes, and lived in so many various si¬ tuations of life, that he knew a little of every thing, and was at all times happy in
¡n turning his knowledge to the advan¬ tage of others. Thus, before they had proceeded half their way, Terence had pro¬ jected a thousand plans for promoting the comfort of his master and his family, and seemed to regard it as a matter of little importance, that he had never seen the spot where his schemes were to be brought to maturity. When they had reached the fallen gates and crumbling wall, Terence paused in his pace, and clapping his hand emphatically to his heart, pronounced— '* The cloud-rapt tower·*, theçorgeon« pahtre«, The s demn tf^npl^ the t;r^at ¡il'*be n>» It, Yea, .di wli'ch it mb-nb, vhull dbwhe, And, hke tli!*» iusuhst mtial pa^.nit finir ιί. Leave not a witu iu hind %i I made the same observation, your honour, at the downfall of my uncle's mud cabin at Bally poreen ; and the priest of the parish, ould father O'Murgathride, was so delighted tv id my illustration, thai he wrote it down in the blank hfe of his ? 3 sarmon
sarmon case ; he was only acquainted reid one of the two books the w T orld contains, that it is worth a scholar and a Christian's while to look into." " And what is the other work you so highly estimate, Terence?" asked Urbino; ** I know Shakespeare to be one." " The Holy Bible is the other," answer¬ ed Terence, touching his hat as he spoke, in reverence to the subject ; " no man has any business to bodder his brains xvid fic¬ tion, till he's master of the truth." Urbino could not refrain shaking him by the hand, and applauding his merito¬ rious sentiment. " I wonder there are no stories of ap¬ paritions abroad about this Castello, your honour," said Terence; ** I never knew an oidd place of the kind yet, in any country, but what was reported to have its ghosts." Urbino recollected Bianca's words, and desirous of ascertaining Terence's opinion on the subject of " the shadowy world," before he repeated them to him, he said— " Amongst
** Amongst your numerous good qualities, I shall be very much surprised if I find vour mind infected with the weakness of a belief in spirits." " What í Terence O'Donnovan afraid of an apparition, your honour i Many 's the good thirteen stone of solid flesh this pair of hands has sent to kiss the ground at Donnybrook ; and it would be strange to tell, and stranger to see, if a bit of a shadow could make that same Terence O'Donnovan wink an eye." Urbino now related the cautions given to himself and Di Borges by old Bianca, and also the cause from which she averred that they had sprung. " Unreal mockery, hence!" exclaimed Terence ; and being now admitted into the Castello, he bustled ahout from apart¬ ment to apartment, pointing out his ideas of the future regulations to be observed, listening to those proposed by Urbino; sometimes confirming, sometimes amend¬ ing them, and finally bringing the whole E é within
within an easy compass of alteration, which not only surprised, but highly gra¬ tified his master. Urbino dropped a few words to this ef¬ fect, and in reply Terence said—" My dear master, pardon me, but I am truly happy just now, and that is the rason why I prosper so well in my inventions. An Irishman is never at his ease when the brambles are pricking his shins—you don't understand me ; why then the rason why í am so over and above satisfied, is he- cause I am pretty sure that here 1 shali be your only mansarvant, if ever you have any oders at all at all; and devil's the casion Terence sees for them. But that\ as you please about the women-creature%s ; but if 1 am your only man-sarvant, you never was so waited on before." Urbino said a few words in the afflrma- tive to his hope.—" But í must confess," added our physician, M that every new trait of your character astonishes memore and more. All the servants that have ever
ever fallen under my observation, would wish to have as many sharers of their la bour as their employer would allow them/' ik Och, your honour/' an&wcred Terence, '* the handb turn of such spal·" ans is not worth the filings of a harpa i» i ve me lave to tell you, your honon? >înee ont present circumstances have br ight these matters upon the carpet, what for I dis¬ charged the only master I evrr did that thing by in my life/' " Discharge ??? master !" echoed Ur¬ bino. tí I left him of my own accord, widout his bidding; that's what I call discharging my master, your honour,** answered Te¬ rence. " You see, your honom; I lived wid a great marquis, who kept sevi n of ns to cío one man's work; so one mo* ,ng, when he was short of cash, he ord d me to take his curricle-horses, and gi 'hem sold at the riding-school in Dublin so says 1 —* My lord, if you want to raise a little money, 111 make bold to tell you a short« E 5 et
er way of it,* says I; ' send away all your meri-sarvants but me, and 1*11 engage to do the work of them every one.'— f What,' cried he, t would you have me lessen my consequence by reducing my establishment? you are an impertinent rascal !' ' t Now, your honour, though the family of O'Donnovan, at least the O'Donnovans 1 came of, is a poor family, they were al¬ ways proud enough not to take an un¬ handsome word from richer folks, so I ci¬ villy turned my back upon him, and bid him keep the wages he owed me for a lit¬ tle bit of a lift out of the scrape his con¬ sequence had brought him into. So, your honour, if you will but let me do all the work, I shall have the ciisiest place in the world. There will be nobody tt) cry out, ' this is not my place,' and ' that is not my place/ and * I was not hired fbr this,' and * I was not hired for that ;' I'll be hired for it all, and there's an end of the whole hipothic at once." " Your
4ί Your offers are so kind, and at the same time so honest," Urbino was begin* ing to say—— Terence interrupted him.—" Excuse me, my dear master ; pray don't be angry wid de freedom of one that don't know what to say to you, to say it properly. Once more excuse me ; but if there is any drawback upon your circumstances, as well as your pace of mind, from this late kind of mystär ions —I don't know what to call it—my wages are paid for seven years to come, thats all." With thanks adequate to the grateful feelings of O'Donnovan, Urbino replied to his generous denunciation of himself in the cause of his benefactor, but assured him, for his satisfaction, that whatever weight recent circumstances had imposed on his mind, the obscure event which had led him to quit Venice had left his for¬ tune unimpaired. As they were ascending the stairs to e 6 the
the upper range of apartments—" It ap* pears, by what you have just been telling me," said Urbino, " that you have served other masters besides the gentleman ivt whose death you became a part of my fa¬ mily. I thought that, till you had enter¬ ed his service, you had only been an actor." *' Indeed, your honour," replied Terenee, " there are \ery few situations in life but what I have filled at one time or another, snd that's the very thing that will make me doubly useful to you just now; but let the progress of time spake for me, and prove tchider Terence O'Donnovan does not know a thing or two." Saying that he should leave to Valeria and Paulina the choice of their own apart¬ ments, Urbino selected two rooms, open¬ ing into each another, for his own bed¬ chamber and study. " And now," said Terence, " if your ho¬ nour wovM ñx upon a lodging for me, the fiist part of our business would be done/* " Oh,
€( Oh, please yourself/' replied Urbino ; u take any room you choose ; there is no scarcity of apartments here." fi I should like a bit of a place as near you as possible," answered Terence ; u br¬ ease it would be handv to be xvid İn call, ν you should want attendance in the night." The apartments which Urbino had se¬ lected for his own use were situate in tme of the angles of the Castello ; and in reply to Terence's last proposition, he s¡;id —" There is a small room at the back of my apartments, but í cannot say what state it may be in, for we found the door blocked up yesterday.' Following the direction of his masters extended linger, Terence moved towanU the door of which Urbino had spoken; but quickly returning, Di Cavetti per¬ ceived an unusual degree of emotion de¬ picted on his countenance; and, before he had time to inquire the cause-—** Pray, your honour," said Terence, ** did you see any thing particular about that same door yesterday,
yesterday, except that it could not be opened ?" " Xo, nothing," answered Di Cavetti ; tí why do \ t ou ask ?" " Walk this way a moment, your ho¬ nour ; pray walk tliis way," replied Te¬ rence ; and Urbino, not a little surprised at the agitation in which he perceived him, fol low* ed his steps. As they advanced—" book at that, your honour !" ejacukted Terence, point¬ ing to the fastened door; ** what can the meaning of that be ?" Urbino raised his eyes, and beheld. marked upon the door, the following sen¬ tence ;— ** AVOID THESE WALLS 1 " For some moments they fixed their eyes on each other in astonishment and silence ; it was broken by Urbino. — " What can I think of this extraordinary warning?" he exclaimed. " To my thinking," answered Terence. u there are some inhabitants here before us
us that don't want to be turned out of their lodgings ; but if there are fitly iron bolts at the back of tbe door, by the Powers ! Ill see wheder there is any living creature within to keep them company !" and with these words he was proceeding to use force for executing his purpose. ** Stay one moment," said Urbino ; <* let me find the key, and let us first ascertain» when the lock is turned, whether the door still resists our efforts»" The key was found, and placed in the lock, which turned easily to the hand, and the door was opened without difficulty. The inside presented to their view a small apartment, utterly devoid of every ap¬ pearance of having sheltered inhabitants ; but, what was still more extraordinary, without any means hewing visible by which the door had, on the preceding day, been so strongly secured. ** I think I never met with any thing so unaccountable in my life," remarked Urbino. ** It
" It bates cockfighting, your honour, replied Terence, He paused, and after a few moments thought— 4i I beg your par¬ don, your honour," he said, " but do you think this warning is in any way connect¬ ed with the cause of your sudden depar¬ ture from Venice?" " I am very certain it bears no reference whatever to that circumstance^ answered Urbino. " It is written with chalk," said Terence, passing one of his hands over the letters. *' Whatever the cause of these words being placed here," rejoined Urbino, " what most surprises me is how the writer can have gained access into the building." " Divil of a person can be hid about the house !'* replied 'ference ; ** there is not a nook in the premises that I have not had mv nose into." * t It is strange indeed," said Urbino. He paused a moment, then added—** Uet us return home, and agree to mention this occurrence
occurrence to no one but our landlord ; in his advice and opinion I place great faith." It was resolved that they should do so ; and after once more investigating every corner of the Castello, in order to be con¬ vinced that no person was hid within its walls, they locked the portal, and proceed¬ ed on their way home. They moved on, sometimes in reflective silence, sometimes in repeating those re¬ marks which they had already made in the Castello, on the unaccountable admonition they had received, and the still more un¬ accountable means by which the writer had gained admittance to the spot where they had found it ; nor did they omit to reflect, though without deriving any satis¬ faction from their surmises, on the extra¬ ordinary circumstance of the fastened door. Di Borges did not return home till late in the evening; and when he did so, the conversation was general, till the females and old Jeronymo had retired to their chambers, when Urbino related to Sancho the
the extraordinary occurrence which had that morning befallen him at the Castello di Torvida. Tlie worthy farmer expressed the great¬ est astonishment at what he heard ; he was as free from a belief in supernatural agency as any man of an unprejudiced and clearly-discerning mind could be; and thus impressed, convinced that mortal means had produced the effect witnessed by Ur¬ bino and his servant Terence, he declared himself utterly at a loss even to guess at the performer of so mysterious an action. —" There is not an individual in this neighbourhood," he said, itf above the rank of peasantry, consisting chiefly of labour¬ ers in the field and vine-dressers; there are none hereabouts wdio could have any motive for desiring your absence, if even your intention of residing at the Castello were known ; and the report cannot have circulated, for I have not yet spoken of your design to any one but my wife, lib deed I am convinced, from the general re¬ gret
gret which I have often heard the poor round about express at the Castello re¬ maining so long uninhabited, that they would universally rejoice at looking for¬ ward to its being occupied by a man from whose affluent circumstances they would consider that they had a claim upon his charity in their hours of affliction." " You recollect what old Bianca told us about the smoke and the light at the Cas¬ tého?" said Urbino. u And you must recollect," answered Di Borges, " that 1 told her they were old women's tales." u True,* rejoined Di Cavetti; ** and had it been possible for old Bianca to have been the person who had discovered the writing upon the door, and to have in* formed us of it, we shouhl have treated her information upon that point with the same con tempt/' ** Why, undoubtedly," returned the farmer, " corroborating points form the strength of evidence ; but I am very un¬ willing
willing to believe any thing for whieh í cannot reasonably account," " And y°t you are compelled to give credit to my having this day beheld the handwriting on the door, which I am sure İs as dark an occurrence as ever bade defi¬ ance to the skill of man to unravel," said Urbino. Di Borges turned himself in his chair with a gesture which confessed an affirma¬ tive to Urbino's assertion. A pause in the conversation ensued ; Urbino broke it.— " What course, think you, were it best to pursue, ; ?i the hope of penetrating this mystery '' " Pardon me for replying to your ques¬ tion with another," rejoined Sancho ; " has the circumstance whieh to-day occurred at the Castello della Torvida deterred you from the idea of making İt your future residence ?" " By no means," answered Di Cavetti ; ** my curiosity is doubtless strongly ex¬ cited, but my feelings are not disturbed ; and
and for two reasons ; the first, that î am conscious of not deserving an enemy ; the next, that, if I do possess one, he displays himself convinced of his own inferiority» by venturing to attack me only in the dark," ** Well said î well said !" ejaculated Sancho. " Now then," he continued, ** 111 tell you my plan for proceeding* This is Friday evening; on Monday I will ride to Mantua, and engage the same carpenter and mason who last year built an additional story to my house, to make such repairs as are required at the Castello, Whilst at work for me, they lodged at the posthouse here hard by ; but I will tell them, that as it is a very considerable dis¬ tance between the Castello and either the posthouse or the village of Malina, that they shall be accommodated by me with beds in the Castello. The necessary re¬ paire will take up at least a month or six weeks ; and if the time passes tranquilly with them, I think you may rest satisfied that
that it will do the same with you and your family." *' The expedient is a very good one, and at all events worth making experiment of," replied Urbino. " And in the meantime," continued Sancho, tt before the arrival of the work¬ men from Mantua, if you should be com¬ pelled by the entreaties of your daughter and her cousin to take them to visit the Castello (as we know not what may hap¬ pen), contrive to loiter on the road, and send either myseifor your servant forward with the keys, to investigate the state of things, that nothing may occur to terrify or to disgust them at the first sight of the place," These arrangements being satisfactorily made—" Tlie first opportunity which oc¬ curs," said Di Borges, " I will have a lit¬ tle conversation with Bianca and her son Calvino. I never heard any other person speak of the Castello as she did the morn¬ ing we met her, and that appears extraor- ilmary, when all hereabouts are, like lier- self,
self, unenlightened, and consequently su¬ perstitious. Her son is doubtless afflicted with the fits of which I told you ; in them there is no hypocrisy ; but I have at times had my doubts whether he is quite so de¬ ficient in natural sense as he endeavours to display himself, and his mother professes him to be. I have heard that Captain is a very good travelling name in England ; the like is Signor Hidalgo here in the south ; and idiotism is a very good apolo¬ gy for begging all the world over. I have my suspicions, and I am determined to search deeper into this youth's heart than I have done yet." The subject before them affording an infinite field for surmise and conjecture, their conversation was protracted till the midniglit hour admonished them to defer their consultations to another day,
« í
CHAP-
CHAPTER V.
On the light fantastic foe, At pleasure's call we fty t Hark ! thej laugh, they dunce, they »ing, In merry» merry revelry ; Hark ! the tabor ili ν el v beat, Hark ! the ilute in numbers swecî, Fiil the night With delight, At the masquerade. P. 1\?\??. During the next day no occurrence of moment took place. On the following one, which was Sunday, it was agreed that Urbino and his family should accompany Sancho di Borges to the chapel of San Ijorenzo, to whieh the inhabitants of the village of Malina and its neighbourhood regularly resorted every Sunday and holi¬ day. «r On this morning accordingly, for the first
first time sinee their departure from Ve¬ nice, Valeria and Paulina unpacked their slender wardrobe* ? order to provide them¬ selves with a change of habiliments. ?? Valeria was opening the package in which the few articles of apparel which she had collected together were contained, a small bunch of artificial daisies, ta&tefidiy bound with a green ribband, fell from it upan the ground. Paulina darted forward, and hastily snatching it vp, exclaimed—" Ah î not- withst«anding the confusion of our depar¬ ture, this relic ha,, not been forgotten, I see, Valeria." " You know I promised never to part from it," answered the Iialf-blushing Va¬ leria; " and our memories are remarkably good when the heart assists in keeping the register," replied Paulina, * t I can now never expect to see hipi again from whose hand J received it»* re* joined Valeria, witha sigh· u There is no saying,* retymedPaulbu; vol. L f * true
4Í true love works miracles ; and if he is as constant as 3^011 have--—" Their conversation was here interrupted by the assiduous Francisca, who came to offer her assistance at their toilet, and not renewed again that day. But as the bunch of daisies and their donor are of no little importance in these pages, we must pause a while in the progress of our narrative to introduce them in due form. Two years had now elapsed since the carnival at Venice had been more nume¬ rously attended than it had been for seve¬ ral years before ; strangers from all parts of Italy, and likewise from ever}' adjoining country, had flocked toit, and the scene of liilarity was scarcely ever remembered to have reached the acme to which it at this period arose. The signor Urbino dì Cavetti was a fa¬ ther who, hav ing bestowed on his children an education calculated to defend them against the idle temptations and weak fol¬ hes rf life, after having fortified their minds
minds with the double shield of admoni¬ tion and example, did not refuse their mingling in the pleasures of the worid, and reaping their share of the scanty har¬ vest of sublunary joy; but still he Imd li¬ mits to whieh he circumscribed the bounds of indulgence; and although, during this season of universal festivity, females of the first ratik, shaded by their masks, were seen joining in the conversaziones held in the streets, he confined the range of his children's participation in the " golden dream of the hour" to the theatres, l .d private entertainments given by their friends and acquaintance. ïn the first week of the joyous month, Valeria and her cousin were invited to be present at a splendid masked ball given by the marchesa della Pådriva. Valeria was at this time in her nine¬ teenth, and Paulina in her eighteenth year. Their order of beauty was in direct opposition to each other, but the coldest heart must have confessed ihat they were i' 2 two
two of the most lovely examples of na¬ ture's excellence. The characteristic of Valeria's charms was delicately majestic, that of Paulina's playfully fascinating. In stature, Valeria was rather above the middle height of women, but her limbs were so exquisitely turned, and so admirably proportioned to each other, as to add a peculiar grace to her well-modelled form. Her hair, of the darkest sable, hung in playful ringlets around a countenance of ineffable sweet* ness, which her eyes, of tbe deepest jet, would alone have rendered eloquent, with¬ out the auxiliary rhetoric contained in the ¿mile which adorned her ruby lips. Her manners were easy without levity, her conversation was gay without frivolity, and her deportment graceful without af¬ fectation. Although far from being tall, Paulina displayed a form of elegance and attractive symmetry. In complexion she was tr'dy *' the fairest of the fair/* and her light au¬ burn
burn tresses, which fell in luxuriant wan¬ tonness on her neck and shoulders, were not more in accordance with the dazzling delicacy of her skin, than the mild beams which emanated from her blue celestial eye were expressive of the sweetness of her souk Her cheeks appeared twin roses of the maiden-blush, and her lips a bed of coral, within which reposed a double row of pearls. On the evening of the masquerade the characters assumed by the two friends were thoee of Flora and Hebe. In a light robe of the palest green, strung with gar¬ lands, her head bound with the violet and primrose, and with an osier basket in her hand, containing the mingled sweets ot every season, Paulina, scattering odotus ps she moved along, appeared the very god- iVss of the sylvan groves ; whilst Vale- ria, gracefully attired in a flowing rone of the whitest silk, which a zone of amethyst confined around her waist, and with flut¬ tering wings of azure quivering on her f 3 shoulders,
shoulders, darted through the admiring crowd, more like an actual member of the celestial world than the mere representa¬ tive of its airy inhabitants. When the dancing commenced, a young shepherd sought the hand of Valeria, and continued her constant attendant through¬ out the whole of the evening. His con¬ versation was of the most agreeable kind ; he appeared to Valeria a young ??? doubly gifted with a strong natural un¬ derstanding, and an extensive range of ac¬ quired information. His figure was equal¬ ly graceful and commanding; his language and deportment were those of the finished gentleman ; and from the accidental slid¬ ing of his mask she discovered enough of liis features to be convinced that they were not unworthy of the rest ofhis per¬ son. 1 rom the first hour of their introduc¬ tion to each other, the attentions of the young shepherd to Valeria were of a mark¬ ed nature, lie was by no means the first from
irom whom she had received homage of a similar nature, but be was the first from whose lips the compliments of love had carried with them any charm to her heart. The carnival was now drawing towards a close ; scarcely an evening had elapsed on which Valeria and her cousin had not join¬ ed in the pleasures of the festival; and constant as the planet to its orb had the young shepherd devoted his attentions to his fascinating Hebe. Still, although every sentiment he had uttered might have been construed into a mark of the tenderest passion, he had not directly spoken of love. His every breath, his every gesture, had implied admiration, but still he had not declared his passioin Anxious to learn who that being was who had stolen into those recesses of her heart which had not yet been penetrated, Valeria endeavoured to learn from various friends the name ofher attendant swain; but her attempts were in vain; one alone informed her that she had heard a mask F 4 address
address him by the name of Julio, and that as his acquaintance appeared to be principally students from St. Peter's at Home, of which there were a considerable number present at the carnival, he was probably one himself. Three evenings were now only remain¬ ing to the close of the festival, when the young shepherd and his Hebe, having mingled as usual in the soul-exhilarating (lance, retired to a saloon where various happy pairs were either tasting refresh¬ ments, or reposing after their fatigues q\\ the velvet sofas by which it was surround¬ ed. They approached a sideboard, and whiie Julio by turns offered to her accep¬ tance every delicacy which the table af¬ forded, she in return placed before him a glass of aucharde. " Whatever your hand presents must be acceptable, divine Hebe/' he replied ; " bat it would be infinitely more compas¬ sionate in you to grant me a draught from your celestial vase, in order to restore to me
me the blessing of health, of which you have deprived me/* " You charge me with an accusation of which I feel myself entirely innocent," answered Valeria. " When the heart sorrows, can the bo¬ dy be in health?" ejaculated Julio, " If I have caused you that sorrow, would we had never met !" said Valeria. <s Would to Heaven we never had, un¬ less you promise me that we shall meet again !" exclaimed Julio. *' If you desire it, I will do nothing to prevent our meeting again," said Valeria. " Oh ! thou angelic arbi tress of my fate," he pronounced, pressing her hand as he spoke for the first time tenderly in his, 14 I revive beneath the promise; health ix restored to mc in those words." He led her to a sofa, and having placed himself beside her, he gently drew a knot of ribband from her shoulder, and said-— " Pardon, oh pardon a man whose happi¬ ness betrays him perhaps into unwarrant- i' 5 able
able freedom, but suffer this to be the pledge of your promise ;" and without waiting for Valeria's reply, he placed it in his breast ; " and this," he added, taking a bunch of daisies from the head of his crook, and placing it in the zone of the unresisting, half-trembling Valeria, " be this the surety of my eternal truth." Again he pressed her hand in his, and from the fingers which lie held entwined within his own received a gentle affirma- tive to his suit, whieh her tongue could not have uttered. " ín wiiat terms can I express the over¬ flowings of my grateful soul ?" exclaimed Julio; " and y r et so supremely blessed al¬ ready, I seek to kill myself witli joy. At the expiration of this week, thou most adored of human beings ! I am doomed to a short ex¬ ile from thv fascination and conversation; does not then the happy event of the few last moments authorize me to request that thy image may accompany me, in the eye of
of recollectiomduring that unwillingperiod of separation, and cheer me with the charm of memory?" And as he spoke, having raised his own mask from his face, an ur¬ gent but silent entreaty procured him a transient glance of the features of Valeria, It was evident that the momentary ac« tion of unmasking did not give dissatisfac¬ tion of tlieir choice to either party. In a paroxysm of rapture, almost amounting to phrenssy, Julio cast himself at the feet of his mistress, and as he bent forward to pour into her ear his transports and his thanks, a miniature picture, richly set in diamonds, and which was suspended round his neck by a slender chain of gold, started from his vest. The portrait repre¬ sented a female, neariy in the prime of life, and of dazzling beauty. An im¬ médiate start on the part of Valeria con¬ veyed to the sensitive mind of Julio a si¬ lent, but eloquent inquiry, to which he instantly replied—" That is the image of f 6 one
one whom 1 once adored, and still most tenderly love and pity; her story------ *' At this moment loud shrieks, accom¬ panied by the cries of " fire," whicli issued from the ball-room, cast the whole scene into a chaos of alarm and confusion. In a few seconds the flames were seen playing upon ' e walls, and spreading de¬ vastation on aii around, whilst the dancers were effecting their escape, with all the precipitancy which the peril of their situ¬ ation impelled them to use. In the uni¬ versal struggle for gaining the door, Vale¬ ria was separated from Julio; but shortly encountering a friend of her father's, to whom her attire was known, he led her in safety through the crowd, and lodged her in security in her fathers iouse; and from him she learnt that the accident had arisen from one of the window-curtains in theapart men t having been undrawn forair, and thrown carelessly hack upon a chan¬ delier, from which one of the lights casu¬ ally
ally falling, had communicated fire to the drapery. No sooner was Valeria herself in safety, than her anxiety was awakf oed for her father and Paulina ; in a few m ñutes, ïk>w- ever, they appeared to relie γ her alarm, but Paulina was borne in the arms of a domestic, her ancle having been strained by a false step which she hud made in quitting the house. Every deviation of her pain which medicine iv-ukl bestow having been afforded her by the tender Urbino, she was placed in her bed, and a gentle opiate, which the physician had ad¬ ministered to her, quickly taking effect, her chamber was quitted by all but Vale¬ ria, who casting herself into a chair by her side, indulged in reflection. Who could the interesting stranger be to whom she too sensibly felt her heart a captive? Why had he not declared to her his name, his rank, his place of abode? Why had he been explicit in no one circumstance, but the declaration of h is
his passion? What too could she think of the portrait suspended round his neck, which he had confessed to be the image of one " whom he had once adored, and still most tenderly loved and pitied ?" How strange a declaration to make at the very moment when he was professing to lay his heart at her feet ! It was an enig¬ ma beyond her powers of solution, and feeling that she really loved, she only prayed that the progress of time might unravel the mystery to her satisfaction. Paulina's accident preventing her from joining in the festivities of tlie two days which now alone remained of the carnival, Valeria could not be prevailed upon to quit her cousin, and thus she despaired of seeing Julio, or of even hearing of him, till that period of separation, whatever it might be, which he had told her must ne¬ cessarily take place between them, had ex¬ pired. Between the cousins there were no se¬ crets, and in the bosom of Paulina, Vale¬ ria
ria reposed her tale of love. Paulina, who had witnessed the growing intimacy of the lovers, applauded her choice, and agreed with her in supposing him a stu¬ dent from St. Peter's at Home ; and when Valeria would, half-despond ingly, dwell upon the only-apparent drawback on lier happiness, whieh was the circum¬ stance of the miniature, Paulina would laughingly reply—" May not the ease of your Julio be similar to that of the hero ofthat admirable drama of Terence's favourite English bard, of which the scene is placed in our own country, Romeo?— may not your Julio, like him, have loved one who t had forsworn to love?" " It may be so," replied Valeria ; but her words were followed with a sigh, which seemed to say, that she should pre¬ fer to reign in a heart where there never had been a competitor. The time crept on, days growing into weeks, and weeks into months, but still she heard not of Julio, nor could she dis» cover
cover that he had been seen in Venice or its neighbourhood since the day which had terminated the carnival. One evening, about the time that Pau¬ lina was become sufficiently recovered from her accident to venture abroad, a party was formed for the opera, in whicli herself and Valeria were included ; and it was agreed that they were to assemble at the house of a friend, and proceed from thence to the place of amusement. As they were adjusting their veils to set out, the ever-buoyant spirits of Pau¬ lina, tingling with joy at being once more able to quit the confinement to which the weakness of her ancle had lately subjected her, was singing, acting, and even attempting to dance, in congratula¬ tion to herself, as it appeared, upon her restoration to liberty. u Upon my word," said Valeria, smil¬ ing, ** I will not undertake to be your donna attempata into public, if you are not a little more sedate." " Indeed,
" Indeed, now I recollect myself," re¬ plied Paulina, " I really think ï ought to be yours; there must be something %'ery matronly in my appearance, I am sure, for the only marked attention which I re¬ ceived during the whole of the carnival was from a venerable old signor, three times my own age, 1 am certain. Did you never observe him dangling after me ?" she continued ; " he was in the dress of a pilgrim, with dark hair, and very tail?" Urbino, who was reading in the apart¬ ment, closed his book, and listened at¬ tentively to the conversation. tí Come," said Valeria, '* pin on your bouquet, and let us be gone ; we shall be too late." ki Ah î now you are envious of me be¬ cause 1 have had an admirer, and 1 dare say you have not," replied Paulina; ** I assure you I am quite proud of my con¬ quest ; the old signor must have been over head and ears in love, for he asked me
me such questions as he could never have dreamt of, if he had not entertained thoughts of making me his wife. He wanted to know my name, and how old I was, and whether Urbino were my la¬ ther, and I know not wdiat, I expected to have received formal proposals from him the moment the carnival was over ; but I suppose the dread of a young fami¬ ly has put him out of tune with matri¬ mony, and he has repented of his over¬ tures ; and, clear of this scrape, has madi 1 a vow to himself to be a good boy, and do so no more." And Paulina's equip¬ ment being completed, they proceeded to tlieir engagement, Urbino sat wrapt in reflection on the words which he had heard Paulina utter. The tall pilgrim with the dark hair, of whom she had spoken, had twice accosted him during the carnival, and had ad¬ vanced to him some questions of an ex¬ traordinary nature, which he had felt himself rather at a loss how to reply to, and
find yet unwilling to refuse answering. On the first evening of their meeting, he had introduced himself to Urbino by a compliment to the graceful figure and elegant dancing of Valeria, whom, he said, he had been informed was his daughter ; for Urbino, taking only a graver share in the amusements of the hour, had simply thrown a domino across his shoulders, and carried his mask in his hand, At their second encounter, the com¬ mencement of a conversation was rendered easy by their having spoken together be¬ fore.—** You have two daughters, I think, signor," remarked the stranger. " Xo,*' replied Urbino; " only one/* *' The other is then, I suppose, a distant relation ?" was tiie rejoinder. " My niece, signor/ answered Urbino. " Indeed, your niece !" echoed the pil¬ grim; " though I have never liad the pleasure of your personal acquaintance till within the few last days, 1 have known your family long, and ï believed thut VoU
you had never had but one sister, who had taken the veil at an early age, and died in the convent to which she had re-* tired." " J certainly had such a sister as you describe," said Urbino. " But you have also had another sister, of whom I had never heard," rejoined the pilgrim. " All whom I ever possessed are now in the grave," answered Urbino ; " I am the sole remnant of my father's stæk." And as he spoke, he mingled with the crowd, desirous of evading the farther in¬ quiries of the stranger. Urbino and the pilgrim met no more. Actuated by causes which cannot at this moment be explained, Urbino dwelt for a considerable period with unpleasant feelings on the minute inquiries of the stranger after the origin of Paulina; but as time moved on unmarked by any event connected with the conversation which had passed between them, he be¬ gan
gan to believe that his fears had perhaps led him to imagine more than his ques¬ tioner had intended to convey ; but the relation just given by Paulina strength¬ ened his apprehensions, and revived a subject for reflection in his mind. He could read no longer ; he took up his hat and cane, and proceeded to the solitude of his garden. The hours moved upon leaden wings to the doubting Valeria ; four months had elapsed since the conclusion of the carni¬ val, and still Julio neither came nor wrote. She concealed her anxiety, but she could not relieve her heart from a weight of despondency almost approach¬ ing to wretchedness. At this juncture she was awakened from her slumber of h »ve, from contemplating the image of a supposed misfortune, to behold the sub¬ stance of grief in its most soul-harrowing form : tlie body of her brother, deprived of life by the sword of an antagonist, was bome
borne hy the hands of strangers to the house ofhis agonized father. Every feeling mind will form for itself a just estimate of the sufferings of Urbino and his family at this moment of trial, and let us draw a veil over the rashness and immorality of the self-immolating victim, who, for " a rush, a straw," flies nnsummoned into the presence of his of¬ fended Maker, and leaves his memory a curse to those from whom affection draws a tear that sterner virtue frowns upon. From the period of this awful event, unchequered was the scene of life to Ur¬ bino and his little circle. For a while their hours were passed in endeavouring to communicate to each other that peace to which their own breasts were stran¬ gers; but gradually, for the balm of every woe lies In the womb of time, their feel¬ ings began to resume their usual tone, and even cheerfulness had again claimed a place in their society, when the sudden and
ITALIAN MYSTERIES. 119 and mysterious event occurred which drove Urbino to quit Venice. Once more then we return to the hos¬ pitable roof of Sancho di Borges, and pre¬ pare ourselves to accompany the worthy farmer, his household, and friends, to the chapel of San Lorenzo»
£HAP-
CHAPTER VI.
Beneath a mountain's brow, the roost remote And inaccessible by bhepherds írod, In a deep cave, dug hy no mortal hand, A hermit liv*d ; a melancholy man, W fio was the wonder of our wand'ring swain». Austere and lonely, cruel to himself, Did they report him ; the cold earth hi*, bed, Water liis drink, his» food the shepherds' alms. Home. The devout and regular behaviour of the peasantry assembled in the chapel of San Lorenzo, communicated considerable plea¬ sure to the feelings of Urbino, as he re¬ flected on the tranquillity, and even re- speet, of which so satisfactory an appear¬ ance in his inferior neighbours seemed to promise him the enjoyment On their return home, Valeria passed a considerable portion of the afternoon in reading
reading to the grateful Averilla ; and Ur¬ bino and the farmer digested the variou» transactions which the visit of the latter on the subsequent morning to Mantua was to comprise. The morning being arrived, Di Borges did not wait the family hour of breakfast, but departed on his mission, ere his guests were arisen. The day being remarkably fine, Valeria and Paulina again urged their request to visit the Castello, and Ur¬ bino readily consented to their petition, contriving to delay their setting out till lie had sent Terence forward with the keys, upon the plan which had been agreed on between Di Borges and himself. Every unexplained circumstance leaves the mind open to expect an increase of mystery; it was therefore not without gome degree of anxiety that Urbino ap¬ proached the entrance to the Castello ; his feelings, however, were infinitely relieved by being met about the middle of the sy¬ camore walk by Terence, whose munte* vol, i. g nance
nance implied that he had beheld nothing amiss within the walls. The observations made by Valeria and her cousin on their future residence were sueh as Urbino had expected to hear from their lips, cf that h w r as certainly a very melancholy situation, but that they doubt¬ ed not that the influence of custom would soon reconcile them to a solitude to which they had hitherto been strangers;" and having, at the request of Di Cavetti, se¬ lected their own apartments, and strolled for some time in the garder, which pre¬ sented only a bed of weeds and unpruned trees, and formed a plan upon which they wished it to be laid out at its recultiva- tion, they bent their steps towards the farmhouse. In the course of a few days the work¬ men had begun their operations, and at the expiration of a month the Castello and its garden wore a new and almost-in¬ viting appearance. During this period the good farmer had purchased for Urbino fit
at Mantua the furniture necessary to his new establishment, which he caused to be packed ready for transporting to the £>pot of its destination, the moment a command to that effect was conveyed to the persons from whom he had bought it ; and had also visited Venice, and arranged those af¬ fairs which Di Cavetti's abrupt departure from that city had caused him to leave in confusion. Terence meanwhile never entered the Castello to inspect the proceedings of the workmen, without casting an anxious glance at the door npon which he had, at his first visit to its walls, discovered the mysterious warning which had long since been defaced by the command of his mas¬ ter ; but no circumstance, eitiier of a si¬ milar, or of a mysterious or alarming na¬ ture, presented itself to his observation, or to that of any one who visited the place. Amongst his other qualifications, Terence proclaimed himself useful in the tillage of the earth, and accordingly became head¬ er % gardener
gardener and director in chief of the new* ly-planned garden. One day, after it had been restored to tolerable order, and its borders were even beginning to bloom with the flowerets of the spring, Terence, while proudly di^ playing the increasing beauties of the place to Urbino and his family, suddenly stopped, and pointing to a spot of newly- raked earth, exclaimed—" These will be as fine a bed of fruit as ever was seen, or my name's not Terence O'Donnovan/' (i What will the product be ?" inquired Paulina—" strawberries, or ------ n Terence interrupted her—" Bless your heart, no, my lady/* he said ; " a far bet¬ ter thing than that— potatoes" i( Your servant, sir," answered Paulina, laughingly ; " I see you have not forgot¬ ten your own private taste." " Your pardon, my lady," replied Te¬ rence ; " there's a participator, as I may say, in the business, and I planted a little more of the fruit than I should have done, when
when I recollected that my old friend there," pointing to Jeronymo as he spoke, " lived upon such kind of vegetables/* The party laughed, and Jeronymo, with a smile of satisfaction lighting his coun¬ tenance, laid one hand upon his stomach, and with the other clapped Terence upon the shoulder for his consideration. " I think, as the summer advances, Va¬ leria," said Paulina, ** we must turn gar¬ deners, or at least florists, ourselves; it will assist us in passing away our time." " And perhaps afford us as much real pleasure," returned Valeria, ** as the the¬ atre or the ball-room." " No doubt of it at all at ail, my dear lady," observed Terence— ' s Are uot ????? woods More free from peril than the envious court? And tins our life, exempt from public haunt, Finds tongues in tree«, books iu the nmumg brook«, Sermons in ¡>toaes, and good in every thing.'* " But to make things complete," con¬ tinued Terence, " we must have a cow. I G 3 am
am not a bad hand at a churn myself, atid then we can have butter of our owrn." * e And buttermilk too, eh, Terence?" said Paulina, pointedly. Terence smiled, and added—-'*' By Si- Patrick, it will be almost as good as liv¬ ing in Ireland ! only the devil a drop of usquebaugh shall we come at." *' What is that usquebaugh to which I have heard your nation is so strongly at¬ tached ?" asked Paulina. " Why, my lady," answered Terence, " it is argument to the head, courage to the heart, and strength to the fist of an Irishman. It is what champagne is to an Italian, burgundy to a Spaniard, claret to a Frenchman, whisky to a Scotchman, ale to an Englishman, brandy to a Swede, or gin to a Dutch boor." *' Oli, I understand/' rejoined Paulina ; " a liquor in favour with your country¬ men ?" " Yes, my lady," answered Terence, " it is a liquor ; but many of my country¬ men
men contrive to make both meat and drink of it. Ii is too often wid them as was the case w id our friend Shakespeare's friend, sir John. * Sack, two gallons, ñve shillings and eightpence ; bread a half¬ penny. Oh, monstrous î but one half¬ pennyworth of bread to this intolerable deal of sack!" And taking up his spade» he returned to his employment. In the course of another fortnight the repairs at the Castello were in so great a degree of forwardness» that the furniture was sent for from Mantua, and a day ap¬ pointed tor Di Cavetti and his iamily taking possession of their new abode. About this time a rural festival took place at the farm of Sancho di Borges, It had for several years past been Lis undevi¬ ating custom to give a treat to his neigh¬ bours and dependants on the anniversary of his wedding-day : the senior members of the party were regaled with an excel¬ lent repast ; the young were provided with music for a dance on the lawn in g 4 front
front of the house, and the poor received alms at the gate, in proportion to their ne¬ cessities and their deserving qualities. The hilarity of the day was in its zenith, when old Bianca and her son Calvino ap¬ peared to claim their share of Sancho's bounty, and Di Borges, as he stepped forward to bestow on them his offering, speaking aside to Urbino, said—-" Walk this way a few steps with me, and I will take this opportunity of proposing a ques¬ tion or two to this boy, as I told you some time ago it was my intention to do, but he has never since fallen in my way." Urbino gave an assenting nod, and moved on by the farmer's side. When Di Borges had put his gratuity into the hand of the old woman-—" Well," he said, ** has your son seen any more wonders of late? any more lights in un¬ inhabited houses ?" " Oh no, signor, the Virgin be praised !" replied Bianca ; " he has not been terrified by any evil appearance lately ; he has trouble
trouble enough of his own, Heaven help him î to vex him, without seeing un¬ natural sights.'* " And so you really pretend to affirm/* rejoined Sancho, addressing the lad, " that you once saw a light in the Castello della Torvida?" " Si, signor — si, si" replied Calvino. " And was this in the daytime or i:\ the night?" asked Di Borges. " After it was dark in the evening, cer¬ tainly," answered Calvino ; " people don't want candles in the daytime; to be sure you must know that." ** But as there have been for years past no inhabitants in the Castello, there could be no people there to require a light," said Di Borges. M But candles can't move about," re¬ turned Calvino, u without people to carry them; silly as I am, I know that;" and he ended his observation with a vacant laugh. Go ** What
4Í What do you mean by their moving about?" asked Sancho. tí Why," answered the boy, " did I n:>t see the light in the Castello go past as many windows as------" and holding up the fingers of one hand, and touching them successively with the thumb of the other, " as all them," he added. " And you saw a smoke proceed from the chimney too, did not you?" inquired Sancho. " Xo, no, no," ejaculated Calvino, again laughing vacantly. " How foolish you must be to think that the smoke of a can¬ dle coukl reach to the top of a chimney !" " No, it was somebody else that saw the smoke, not Calvino," *aid Bianca; " I ibriret now who il was." ir I dare say you do," answered Sancho, '•and I shall think better of you in future, if you forbear to circulate stories in regard to matters İn whieh you have no right to interfere;" am; with this reproof he turned away
away from the mother and her son, mo¬ tioning to Urbino to do the same. " It is as I said at first," exclaimed Di Borges, " an old woman's tale ; the smoke, you see, has already vanished, and I doubt not," he added, smiling at his own joke, " but the light will be found to end in smoke too/' ít But," said Urbino, " the handwriting on the door still remains a stubborn fact." Sancho was at this moment addressed by one of his guests, and a period thus put to their conversation. To a mind pleased with nature in her plain and simple garb, the group this day collected on the lawn before Sancho's house presented a most interesting pic¬ ture; every countenance was dressed in smiles of innocent pleasure. The airy movements of the young through the mazes of the dance discovered the light¬ ness of their hearts, and the serene satisfac¬ tion which beamed in the eyes of the elder members of the feast, bespoke the honest g 6 pride
pride with which they beheld their off¬ spring reflecting credit on the parents from whom they sprung. The gay Paulina entered cordially into the amusements of the day, and candidly acknowledged to Urbino that she had dis¬ covered there was happiness to, be found at a distance from crowded ball-rooms and circles of fashion. Valeria endeavoured to compel herself to reap enjoyment from the reflection of all being happy around her; but retir¬ ing from the gayest part of the throng, her time was principally passed in leading atout the blind Averilla, who had become so much attached toher new friend, as almost to feel disgust when now compelled to re¬ ceive the ruder services of* her niece. Francisca, on her part, cared not who administered to the wants of her aunt, so she was spared the trouble of attendance, ¡md the truly amiable and grateful dispo¬ sition whieh Valeria discovered in the re¬ signed and patient sufferer, " shut out from
from the light of day," perceived it a duty to which she was called to grant her that alleviation of her misfortune which it was evident that her society so eminently af¬ forded her. Towards the decline of the afternoon, Averilla, requesting Valeria to lead her into the house, said—" I expect a poor woman liere presently, as a sharer of my husband's alms, who is a widow with se¬ veral children, and to whom I always add my mite in addition to his bounty. 1 have prepared a bundle of linen and other necessaries, which I know will be service¬ able to her, and I have told one of the servants to inform me when she arrives at the gate. This is about the time of her coming, and as I wish to give her my pre¬ sent myself, I shall feel infinitely obliged to you, dear signora, if you will lend me your arm thither " " It is my greatest pleasure," replied Valeria, "to receive your commands;" and they sat down in an apartment, await¬ ing
ing the servant's notice of the poor wc* man's appearance at the gate. Whilst Averilla and Valeria were thus engaged, a personage of a no less inte¬ resting than extraordinary appearance was exciting the attention of the party on the lawn. A venerable hermit, bowed down by years, and supporting his trem¬ bling form on a rude staff, upon which both his hands were rested, with his cowl drawn down upon his face, entered the gate, and with a lowly inclination of his body, and his hands upraised by tun.j in supplication, presented himself before the guests of Sancho di Borges. Attracted by the singularity of his ap¬ pearance, all present who were not at that time mingling in the dance, crowded round him, and beheld suspended from his neck a label of paper, on which were inscribed these words—" ιίτυ a dumb recluse." The hand of Di Borges was immedi¬ ately extended towards him with the offer¬ ing of his charity—" Poor wretch !" he at the
tîie same time remarked, " he must be unacquainted with this country, fbr 1 ne¬ ver met him in any of my rides, which are not very circumscribed; and it is very hard, in his melancholy situation, to be re¬ duced to beg of strangers." " I have seen him once before," said an old peasant. " Near to the spot where 1 cut wood, is a cell dug in the side of the mountain, which, neighbours, you must all recollect, was once inhabited by a soli¬ tary man, named father Anselmo." " Oh, yes ; we remember father Ansel- mo," was replied by several voices. " Weil," returned the peasant, ** by the side of the little brook which runs within a stone's throw of the hut in which fattier Anselmo dwelt, I saw this very man bit¬ ting about a fortnight, or three weeks it may be, ago." ** It is but likely," rejoined another, " that he may now occupy the same dwell¬ ing." ** Whatever
? Whatever he is," said Urbino, w hø strongly merits our compassion and cha¬ rity." He accompanied his words by put¬ ting some pieces into the old man's hand, and his example was followed by several of Sancho's guests. Jeronymo, who had been a silent spec¬ tator of what had passed, now approached the hermit ; and having shaken him by the hand, in token of intended friendship, proceeded, by various signs which he made to him, to endeavour to persuade him to suffer his tongue to undergo an anatomi¬ cal inspection, in the hope of the defect by wL Ji it w f as tied being discovered. The hermit gently disengaged himself from his grasp ; and shaking his head as a negative to his proposal^ he turned to view the other side of the label, which he wore npon his breast, and discovered these words —** THE POWER OF MAN CANNOT GRANT ME RELIEF." tt I dare say," remarked a female pre¬ sent.
ITALIAN MYSTERIES. 137 sent, " that he has been made a prisoner of w r ar by the Algerine pirates, who have cut out his tongue." Jeronymo's countenance implied his in¬ stant adoption of the idea, and he again advanced his fingers towards the lips of the hermit, as desirous of inspecting his oracu¬ lar organs. The recluse again waved his hand to him to forbear; and having pointed his finger upwards, and followed the action by an humiliating inclination of his body, he implied timt the privation under which he was suffering was the ordinance of Hea¬ ven, to which he submitted with resigna¬ tion ; and having bestowed his tacit thanks on his benefactors, he began to recede slowly from the spot where his necessities had been relieved. As he approached the gate, he was met by Valeria and Averilla, who were return¬ ing from a short interview with the poor widow, who, it has already been mention- ed,
ed, was the favourite object of Averillas beneficence. The side of the label which was now turned outwards on the hermit's breast, contained the sentence of—" ιίτυ a dumb recluse ;" and Valeria observing it, com¬ municated what she beheld to Averilla ; and their sympathy in his misfortune pro¬ duced him instantly a small gift from each, which the moment Valeria had expended to him, hastily extracting from his sleeve a small substance, he pressed it into her hand, and continued his progress towards the gate. Surprised by his action, Valeria imme¬ diately tore open the envelope, which was of paper, and, to her unutterable astonish¬ ment, beheld the very knot of ribband which Julio had taken from her shoulder on the last evening that she had beheld him at the masquerade; and within the envelope were traced, with a pencil, the WOlds, " CONSTANCY AND SECRECY" Utterly
J''
ITALIAN MYSTERIES. Ì5§ Utterly at a loss what to conclude from so extraordinary an occurrence, and so mysterious an admonition, Valeria hastily concealed the paper and its contents in her bosom, thankful that Averilla had been her only companion during the transaction of the last few moments, and that it had thus passed unobserved by every individual. With her mind upon the rack, she durst not allow herself for the piesent to indulge in either surmises on the future, or reflec¬ tions on the past, lest the absorption of thought into which she might fall, might betray that she had received some cause to diminish that gaiety which she had throughout the day professed herself to feel ; she accordingly conducted Averilla to the green, where they found the assembly amused by the exertions of Terenee, who was entertaining them with an Irish lilt, to v\hich he was obliged to be his own mu¬ sician, as all his instructions had not been able to succeed in producing lum any notes
notes to his satisfaction from the instru¬ ments of the band upon the green. When he had concluded, and the novel¬ ty ofhis performance was obtaining liim the plaudits of all present, not even ex¬ cepting Jeronymo, whose slapping of palm against palm did not infringe on his prac¬ tice of taciturnity, "So then," exclaim¬ ed Francisca, " in Ireland, I perceive, it is the fashion for tlie men to dance by themselves, and leave the ladies to look on—well, 'live and learn/ as the proverb says. ;î ** Upon my soul and you are quite in the wrong, my jewel," returned Terence. " Ireland is the place of all the world for politeness to the ladies ; there is not a set of fellows under the sun that show more respect to the petticoat than the sons of St. Patrick !" " If those at home are so pre-eminent, they send -very bad specimens abroad, I think," answered Francisca. " You
u You are wrong there again/' replied O'Donnovan ; " there is not a better spe¬ cimen in the world, though I say it my- belf, than Terence ; for now I have had my bachelor's lilt, as I may call it, by my lone ??% I'll dance my legs off but I'll pair for a jig with every girl on the lawn between seventeen and twenty-seven; so sit you down there by the side of them oder two ould ladies, and see if I don't keep my word." " Oh the vulgar fellow ! oh the out* landish brute ! but ' what is bred in the bone," muttered Francisca between her teeth, and pretending to trip along to a tune of her own humming, she entered the house with affected gaiety, but with an inward vow of eternal hatred to the sons of St. Patrick, who, according to Terence» appeared to fix twenty-seven as the jinû tum of the dancing age. At length the setting sun gave the sig* nal for putting a period to the dance ; and tlie guests having departed, no apology was
was required after the fatigues of the day for retiring early to rest. Paulina, exhaust¬ ed with her exertions, was no sooner in bed, than she became locked in the ai ms of bleep ; and Valeria was^thus, according to her wish, left to silence and reflection. " Coukl it have been Julio," she in¬ quired of herself, " who had put into her hand the paper and its contents, or an emis¬ sary deputed by him to that end? And whichever was tlie case, what could so long have detained him from her sight, and by what means could he have gained a knowledge of her present residence, which she believed to be knmwi only to í he peasantry in the neighbourhood?" It was an enigma whieh grew in intricacy at every fresh attempt whieh she made to solve it. She drew the mysterious packet from her bosom ; and having minutely examin¬ ed the ribband whieh it contained, felt con¬ vinced that it was the same which Julio had begged of her as a pledge of her truth. She
ITALIAN MYSTERIES. 143 She next examined the envelope ; the only words inscribed within it were, ·* con¬ stano ν ? nd SKCRECY." The former must apply equally to himself as toher; he couid not desire her to be true without being himself the same ; but the latter seemed to refer only to herself, and to re- quire silence on her part respecting their correspondence. Tenderly losing, as we have already perceived Valeria to have done, and at this moment soothed into a degree of happi¬ ness by the acknowledged constancy of him on whom her heart was bestowed, the mystery in which his actions had hi¬ therto been wrapped appeared a faint con¬ sideration, when opposed to the knowledge that his affections had never wandered ; and, bending at the shrine of sensitive love, she resolved that her secrecy should be inviolable to every human being.
????-
CHAPTER VII.
We wish remoT'd what standeth in our îigbt, And nature blame for limiting our sigbt, Where you stand wisely «inking, that the view Of the fair prospect mny be ever new. Walter, When the time appointed for Di Cavetti and his family to take possession of their new abode arrived, it was with the sin¬ cerest regret that Averilla parted from Valeria, and not without exacting from her a promise that she would frequently visit her. DÌ Borges likewise was not much better pleased to be separated from the only friend and companion whom for years past he had met with who possessed congeniality of feelings to his own ; but as the distance at which Urbino and him¬ self were going to reside from each other was but trifling, they agreed that very few days
days should pass on which they did not meet. The hours of Urbino were spent in ex¬ ercise, in reading, and in social intercourse with his familv : those of Paulina were occupied with her music, to which she was greatly attached, and in gardening, for which amusement novelty had given her a zest : whilst Valeria, who constrained herself to wear a smile upon her lips in the presence of her father, experienced no re¬ lief for her agitated mind but that of re¬ tiring to the solitude of her chamber, and indulging in reflection. in most minds cheerfulness increases with the growth of summer; the smiles of nature animate the heart of sensibility, and create in it a sentiment of gratitude towards the liberal Power which clothes the forest, embroiders the flowery garden, and swells with nutriment the blushing fruit and golden harvest ; and blessed with minds which nature and education had combined to render sensitive, Urbino and vol. L h his
his children reaped a hitherto-untasted luxury, from their unrestrained wanderings through the mazes of uncultivated nature, which the surrounding scenery afforded them. One day, when Paulina was displaying to them hei flower-garden, and expatiat¬ ing on the beauties of some of her favour¬ ite plants, Terence, approaching his mas¬ ter, said—" The poor soul returns your honour his humble thanks." Urbino smil¬ ed, and Terence added—" that is, to be sure he did not spake a word, but he made a great many grateful signs, your honour, and all that, when I gave him the bit of money and the bread." Terence moved to another part of the garden, and Urbino said—" Terence was speaking of the poor dumb recluse, whom you saw at our friend Sancho's festival. I have discovered that he lives in the hut at the side of the brook, in which the peasant mentioned that a father Anselmo had once resided ; and as I think there cannot be a greater
a greater object of charity than himself, I include him in thenumber of those whom I occasionally relieve," Valeria felt her colour change, and stooped down to examine Paulina's flow¬ ers, with an earnestness that was highly gratifying to their cultivator. About a week after this conversation re¬ lative to the dumb π eluse, an event took place which threatened to interrupt the peace of the inhabitants at the Castello della Torvida. But before we proceed to state what this occurrence was, it is neces- sary to rectify an omission which we liave made, in not acquainting our reader, tliat Sancho s niece, Francisca, was become one of Di Cavetti'« family. Urbino, considering it necessary that his daughter and Paulina should have at least one female attendant, had mentioned his idea to Di Borges, and the farmer, with a request from whom it was not very easy for him to refuse compliance, had urged him to make experiment of his niece, say- H 2 ing
ing that his wife infinitely preferred the services of the little girl whom he saw in their house to those of her relative ; and that he doubted not, although Francisca was both disobedient and impertinent to them, with whom she placed herself upon an equality, on account of their connexion in blood, that she would prove service¬ able and willing to others, whom she considered her superiors. The bargain was accordingly concluded, and Francisca declared herself both proud and happy to be once more in the service of signo¬ ras, who, as she said, possessed elegant manners, combined with a knowledge of both life and fashion. To return to the event of which we were beginning to speak, when we were in¬ terrupted by stopping to relate the trans¬ plantation of Francisca into the family of Di Cavetti :—The day had been passed by Urbino, his daughter and niece, at the farmhouse; and on their return to the Castello in the evening, as they entered the sycamore
sycamore walk, they beheld Francisca sit¬ ting on the steps leading to the portal, and no sooner did she perceive them than she came running forward to meet them, in a hurried manner that excited their sur¬ prise, which feeling was not a little in¬ creased by the emotion, which, on her nearer approach, they observed depicted on her countenance. Half out of breath, and scarcely waiting till she was sufficient¬ ly near to be heard by tbose whom she was addressing—" Oh, my dear signoras, I beg your pardon, and yours too, signor Urbino r ' she exclaimed ; '* but í must quit you directly ; not that í have any objection tomy place—oh no, indeed! such polite ladies must win the esteem of every discerning person like me, who have seen the world; but I would not enter the Cas¬ tello again for millions—1 could not—dare not do it !" ** What is your reason ?" asked Valeria. " Oh signora," ejaculated Francisca, π fi 4 * the
" the Castello is haunted, awfully and dia- bolically haunted." *" Haunted Î" echoed Paulina. The countenance of Urtino became se¬ rious; that of Valeria impatient. ik Haunted, signora í haunted !" repeat¬ ed Francisca, half-weeping at the recollec¬ tion, as it appeared, of some alarm which die had received ; " oh Blessed Mother ' accept my thanks that 1 am saft; out of its walls!" She crossed herself, and added— " Yes, signor, I say again, haunted! it is as positively true as I am a living soul and a virgin. These eves have seen the ? -host. seen and beheld it as it sat writing a letter at the table in the closet next the signora Valerias bedchamber," " A ghost writing a letter!" cried Pau¬ lina, laughing aloud; " í newer heard of a ghost that possessed a quality of that na¬ ture before." " Ay, it is something new, and won¬ derful too/ 1 replied Francisca ; " but vou would
would not have laughed if you had been in my place, signora." tí Compose yourself," said Urbino, '* and come with me into the house, and explain with less incoherence what it is you mean." " Into the house ! into that house!" re¬ joined Francisca ; " I would not set foot into it again to be made a duchessa! oh no, signor, * a burnt child dreads the fire/ as the proverb says, and I shall never, never have that horrid spectre from before my eyes as long as I live." " What was it like?" inquired Paulina. 01 A young cavalier, signora! a young cavalier !" answered Francisca. " There is nothing so very horrid in that, 1 think," remarked Paulina. " No, signora, not if it had been a real» live man; but an apparition, signora! only think of an apparition !" '* But how did you know it was an ap¬ parition ?" asked Paulina. " Because it vanished, signora," answer- H 4» ed
ed Francisca, " and you know nothing but ghosts can vanish. Praised be the saints that I have not lost my senses with the fright ! Terence and signor Jeronymo know all about it." At this juncture Terence approached them. " What is the fright which Francisca has had," said Urbino, addressing O'Don¬ novan, " and of whieh she appears herself unable to give any distinct account?" " Fright î ' repeated 'Ference, affecting to laugh as he spoke, though the expres¬ sion of his eyes conveyed to his master that he did not absolutely consider it a laughing matter ; " I believe, your ho¬ nour, it is all blarney." " That may be your Irish name for a thing of the kind," ejaculated Francisca, " but every one must call things by the names they understand, and in plain Ita¬ lian I do say, swear, and maintain, that it was a ghost I saw." Urbino requesting that one only would speak
speak at a time, Terence took upon him¬ self the office of elucidator, and proceeded to say, that in the afternoon, whilst em¬ ployed in hoeing his favourite bed of po¬ tatoes, he had been startled by the shrieks of Francisca, who running up to him in the most violent trepidation, informed him that having accidentally gone into signora Valeria's bedchamber, from which the door of communication with a closet, in which her library and various articles of amusement were placed, standing open, she had beheld the ghost of a cavalier, as she had expressed herself, sitting writing at the table whieh stood in the centre of the apartment, and that she had immedi¬ ately tied in terror from the spot, and had communicated what she had witnessed to iurn. Terence added, that Jeronvmo and himself had directly repaired to the spot where she had received her alarm, but had found nothing to corroborate her account; that they hail minutely searched Valeria's ? 3 bedchamber
bedchamber and the closet adjoining, and from thence proceeded to investigate every room in the Castello, but without discover ¡ng the slightest mark of any person hav¬ ing been within the walls ; and moreover, that in the closet adjoining to Valeria's bedchamber, the implements for writing were not upon the table, but on one of the shelves which supported her books. " I recollect that I placed them there myself this morning," said Valeria. it I care not," ejaculated Francisca; " I am positive that when I saw the ghost he had paper before hini, the inkstand by his side, and a pen in his hand." " It has been a waking dream of yours, 1 am after fancying," returned Terenee. " A dream!' 1 exclaimed Francisca, " oh Heavens ! oh the saints ! would you call my eyesight and my word of honour in question ? A dream ! oh blessed saint Ur¬ sula ! Well, dear signoras, fare you well ! 1 know it is very ungrateful in me to leave you at such short notice, but you know my
my reason ; I am safe out of the ghost's clutches this time, but there is no saying what might happen if I was to fall in his way again ; and indeed, if I might advise, you had all better go back to my uncle's ; after such a sight as I have seen within those walls, it is almost tempting Provi¬ dence to ìive within them : well, if you do continue here, Heaven send you have no cause to repent your rashness í 111 not say good-bye, for I hope 1 shall often have the pleasure of seeing you at the farm. And, dear signora Valeria, if you do sleep, as usual, in your own chamber, next to that haunted closet, pray burn a light in your room, that you may be upon your guard what comes near you ; and if you should see that dreadful spectre, be sure and speak to it, if you can ; for a priest, who you know must understand those kind of things, told me, if a person had the cou¬ rage to speak \ ><i ghost, it couk do them no harm aftc.w*» ds." Valeria received the admonition with a h 6 smile,
smile, and Francisca added—" Ah, signo¬ ra, t a little experience is worth a deal of wit/ as the proverb says; but if I don't make haste, it will be dark before I get home, and I am sure, as it is, I shall think that 1 see the awful spectre* every step 1 set" And with these words slie hurried oat of the gate. Urbino and his famdy entered the Cas¬ tello in silence, and Valeria, anxious, from various almost-inexplicable causes to visit the spot where the late mystery was said to have passed, and to investigate whether any traces of the enigma were left for hcr discovery, began to ascend the stairs whieh led to her apartments. Paulina came running after her,— ík I ????? was afraid of » ghost in mv life." s!u* said, " and I am determined to be tîie first to veni ure into the haunted closet, as the silly Francisca called it." And darting for¬ ward into Valeria's bedchamber, she pro¬ ceeded towards the door of communication with the closet, when suddenly stopping, her
her countenance underwent a visible change, and as Valeria approached her, in -? faint voice she said-—" Listen, I am sure í hear somebody breathe within the closet ; don't you ?"' " ï do, 1 do " replied Valeria, and step¬ ping forward, with an eagerness for which Paulina was at a loss to account, she dis¬ covered old Jcronymo sleeping in a chair. Tin 1 laugh excited by his appearance awoke Jeronvmo, and in the longest sen- tence wliich he had uttered for many a year the old man informed them, that having sat down where they found him, to watch whether any circumstance would occur to corroborate Francisea's tale of the ghost, wearying of solitude» he had fallen asleep on his post. Terence and his master being meanwhile left together, it will bo readily imagined that theii conversation was on a subject to which their ideas had lung recurred, name- Iv, tlie writing which they had formerly seen on the door, and their surmises whe¬ ther
ther the alarm received by Francisca bore any relation to that miraculous occurrence, to whieh they had themselves been wit¬ ness, and upon the authenticity of which they were alone tempted to give any de¬ gree of credit to the assertions of Francis¬ ca; and although they resolved to hide their feelings from their companions, their minds were not a little agitated by the succession of events for which they were utterly unable to account. " Whoever they may be that play us these» pranks, or whatever may be their reason for so doing, I wish with all my heart they had confined tlieir tricks to my apartment, where they first began them, and not shifted their ground to that of ray dear young lady," said Terence. "■ As I know that a surprise is frequent¬ ly as fatal to a delicate mind as any real cause for alarm could be," said Urbino, " 1 will change apartments with my daughter to-night ; the impression which must be made on her sense« by Francisea's prattle
prattle may cause her sleepless liours if she remains in her own chamber, though pride may withhold her from making the confession." " And if she lies in your chamber, your honour," replied Terence, " she'll be close by mine, and I shall be at hand, if she re¬ quires protection or consolation." The females now entered the apart¬ ment, and Urbino informed his daugiiter of his resolution. Valeria remonstrated against his pur¬ pose, by declaring herself entirely free from apprehension; but Urbino remained fixed to his point ; and Valeria was com¬ pelled, however reluctantly, to abide by his decision. Whilst at supper, Urbino, addressing Terence, who v/as attending in the apart» ment, saiil-—" Take down the two pair of pistols suspended over the chimney piece in my study, and load them ; one pair 1 will keep in my chamber, and the other you shall take with you into yours. We will
will at least use the precaution of prepar¬ ing ourselves against a surprise in the night." " You are a gentleman of good conceit/ replied Terence ; " it shall be done." " Oh, surely there can be no occasion for such a precaution," said Valeria. " I hope not," replied Urbino, " but too great security can never be observed in any case of ambiguity." Valeria turned sick and faint ; it was possible, she believed, that Julit) might be the supposed spectre, and should he. by any means, have secretly gained access into the Castello, in the hope of procuring an interview with her, be discovered bv her father or Terence, and fall a victim to their false suspicions—she could scarcely support herself on her chair. Explain or discover her anxiety she durst not ; in a few seconds she assumed courage to say —" I would not, for the wealth of worlds, that my dear father should stain his hand with the blood of a fellow-being; my peace
peace o r mind would at that moment va¬ nish for ever." '* Surely not, my child," replied Ur¬ bino, " if the action were committed in self-defence : in such a case mercy would be unjustifiable in me, as I should commit myself a sacrifice to my enemy, and ex¬ pose you to the loss of a father and a pro¬ tector." " Great Heaven, avert the dreadful contingency !" ejaculated Valeria. In a short time Terenee returned to the apartment, and informed his master that the pistols were all loaded, and lying upon the table in his study. Eager to conceal the agitation under which she was labouring, Valeria arose, and saying, that as her father was to ??- eupy her chamber, sbe would require a few minutes to remove some articles of which slie stood in need from her own apartment into his, she rose to retire. Paulina followed her example, and half-smiling at the idea of her uncle being alarmed
alarmed at the folly of Francisca, as she called it, and declaring herself utterly de¬ void of apprehension, she bade her cousin good-night, and proceeded to her own chamber. Valeria closely examined her closet, in order, if possible, to discover if any traces of the supposed spectre were left on the spot ; but her researches were fruitless ; and retiring to the apartment that night allotted lier, she shortly after heard her father and Terence ascend to their respec¬ tive chambers, and universal silence then prevailed through the Castello. The night passed undisturbed. In the morning Urbino was scarcely risen when Di Borges appea reti at the Castello, anx¬ ious to inquire into the truth of the re¬ port which Francisca had borne to the farm ; for although the fear of losing his respected neighbour had caused him to treat with the greatest apparent indiffe¬ rence every tale which had been circu¬ lated to the prejudice of the Castello, he had
had often, in the privacy of his own mind, reflected with a sensation approach¬ ing to wonder, on the circumstances of the smoke, the light, and, above all, the writing on the door. J)i Borges passed the day at the Castello, but the conversation of Urbino and him¬ self whieh was principally confined to one Nubjeet, served to throw no light on the matter discussed. Di Borges ap¬ proved of the precaution which Urbino had laken to prevent a surprise írom a concealed enemy, if such a one he had, and promised to pass as much of his time with him as his avocations would permit. A considerable period elapsed, during which the tranquillity of the Castello re¬ mained undisturbed ; Di Borges proving constant m his visits to Di Cavetti, and Urbino and his family in returning them at the farmhouse. One day, when they had agreed to dine with Sancho, whilst the farmer and Urbino were engaged in a ramble over the lands of the former, and Valeria
Valeria occupied in reading to Averilla, Francisca, contriving to draw apart Pau¬ lina, said—" Oh, dear signora, I have such a piece of news to tell you ! you have got an amante, one of the sweetest young signors I ever set my eyes on in my life." " And pray who is the signor that does me so much honour?" asked Paulina, laughing. " That is more than I can tell you, sig¬ nora," answered Francisca ; " but to my thinking, he's not a cavalier of these parts, for I never saw him before in my life. You must know that the evening before last, when you had been here to pass the afternoon, you had not been gone ten mi¬ nutes before this very signor, whom 1 had observed for a considerable part of the day at the posthouse, introduced himself to¬ me, as I was standing by the little gate at the foot of the lawn, and paying me a handsome compliment, by saying that he saw by my manner I was a girl of dis¬ cern men t
comment and knowledge of the world, that might be trusted with a secret, he asked me to tell him who the beautiful young lady was that he had just seen leave the farmhouse. ' There were two of them, signor/ said I. * That I know/ returned he, * but I mean her with the light hair, the dimpled cheeks, and the smile oí' an angel. You must have ob¬ served me/ he continued, * gazing upon her from the road, when she was gather¬ ing flowers in the garden by its side; and i içazed so ardently/ he added, * for the charm conveyed to my heart was so irre¬ sistible, that 1 almost fear I may have of¬ fended her/—»* Oh no, 1 hope not, signor/ said I ; " a cat may look at a king," as the proverb says ; not that I mean to compare you, signor, to a creature of that kind, only for the ' ??? of the similarity in con¬ versation." Francisca paused, and Paulina increas¬ ing her laugh, said—" And is that all the
the wonderful secret you have to tell me?" " Ah, signora/' replice! Francisca, " but the best of it is yet to come.—-* What is the name of the divine creature?' said he. — .'Paulina, signor; the signora Paulina/— 4 Where does she reside ?'—- ? With her uncle, the signor di Cavetti, at the Cas¬ tello della Torvida.' — 4 One more ques¬ tion, and my heart will be at ease ; I hope she is single ?'—* I believe 1 may answer forthat/ said I. Oh! how his eyes glis¬ tened with joy when f told him that í Ile put two pieces of gold into my fiand, and said— 4 Have the great kindness to convey to my adored Paulina, íbr 1 will call her mine, that it is my resolution instantly to lay my suit for her hand be¬ fore her uncle, and that my life or death depends upon the favour with which my proposals are received." " This is love at first sight, indeed !" re¬ plied Paulina. tÉ Love
" Love must have a beginning,' as the proverb says," returned Francisca, They continued to discourse for some time on the same subject, but their far¬ ther conversation onlv sen ed to inform Paulina, that, whoever her sudden ad¬ mirer was, he was tall and handsome; a gentleman in dress and conversation, well mounted, well attended, and that he wished to resign his liberty at the shrine of her charms. The heart of Paulina had hitherto escaped un wounded by the darts of the blind god, and she had latterly often re¬ flected that it was not unlikely that her uncle's plan of seclusion fron ι the world miirht condemn her to become a leader of apes. She therefore considered, that if the unknown cavalier were really the man in person and address \\ hich Fran¬ cisca had described him to be, and that his professions with regard to herself were fulfilled, she might stand as great a chance of happiness in her connexion with a man who
who had been captivated by a glance of her person from the road-side, as with one enthralled by a similar glance from a box in the theatre. Marriage, she was aware, is at best but a lottery-ticket, to which a blind chance of felicity is attached; for those persons between whom the union of wedlock is onci; decided to take place, so carefully conceal from each other their de¬ fects or unpleasant qualities, till the gor¬ dian knot is tied between them, that the act of their inseparability can alone, with any degree of certainty, prove to them whether they have drawn a blank or a prize from the wheel of life. Whilst Urbino and his family were ab¬ sent from the Castello, Terence, leaving Jeronymo employed in gathering simples from the surrounding woods, proceeded to the village of Malina. He had requested the wife of the miller, of whom he was in the practice of purchasing flour for his master s household, to procure him a ser¬ vant in the place of Francisca, and his pur¬ pose
pose in going thither was to ascertain whether she had succeeded in her at¬ tempts. The woman's reply was, that she had made his proposal to a young female, whom she could safely recommend as a useful and honest servant, but that the girl was partly under an engagement to the major-domo of the marchese di Val- detti; "but," added the miller's wife, " I recommended her to serve your master tu preference to the marchese; every body knows the signor Urbino di Cavetti to be a kind and a good man, and not many know any thing of the marchese at aH, and still fewer any tiling of him that is to his credit/' " Who is this same marchese that you are speaking about ?" replied Terence ; * 4 ï never heard of him before, I am after thinking." " I dare say not/' answered the miller's wife" for it is about twenty years since vol ι. ι he
he has been seen in these parts. His pa¬ lazzo stands about a league from hence to the south; but for the period of time 1 was mentioning to you, it has been inha¬ bited only by servants and Ids sulky olu major-domo, who, they say, pilfers the marchese as greedily ?? the marchese preys upon others, ït is not long sinee he had hke to have been amenable to the laws of his country, as report says, fbr peculating the state: but he got clear of that, as men with interest and money generally contrive to make their way out of every scrape; and the latter end of last week, without an houts warning ofhis coming, he appeared at the palazzo, and I fancy not so great» or at least so rich a man as he leit it. The world says he has had a vast loss at the gaming-table, and that the reduction of his property has driven him into retire* ment." Whilst they continued chatting toge, ther, the miller entered, accompanied by a young
ITALIAN MYSTERIES, 171 a young man in livery, and producing a flask of wine, invited Terence to take a cup with them. After drinking to Terence, the miller, turning to the stranger, said—*' Well, Paulo, better luck to you, my lad ; it may be your good fortune, one of these days, to fall iu with a master such as my friend here," pointing to Terence as he »•poke, *' serves." ** Indeed !" replied the young man, ít pray, who may the good signor be ?" *' Nobody that you know ; a stranger here," replied the miller ; " his name is signor Urbino dì Cavetti; but for mv part, I call him the butcher, baker* brew¬ er, clothier, and comforter of the whole* neighbourhood; for ï truly believe he studies nothing but the doing of good." " I serve a very dilferent kind of man mdeed," answered the str inger. í4 Paulo is an old friend of mine," re¬ joined the miller, addressing Terence, tí whom I have not seen for some time, í a and
and I am sorry that the chance of service has led him into such bad company as I find he is returned with into our country, - which is tlie place of his nativity." Paulo said that he had been but a short time in the service of the marchese, and therefore knew but little of his private history ; but he had heard his fellow-ser¬ vants mention several circumstances con¬ nected with his former life, similar to what the miller's wife had been recount¬ ing to Terence: he said that the domestics in his employment were treated in the most tyrannical and humiliating manner; that their pay was small and uncertain ; their fare hard ; and that they expected a curtailment of even the few privileges which they did enjoy, as it w.as confident¬ ly reported that the marchese had retired to the country in order to repair his bro¬ ken fortunes by economy. " The oppressor's wrong, tlie proud man's contumely," muttered Terence be¬ tween his teeth. Without
Without comprehending or attending to what he said, the miller rejoined—" Yes truly, I never knew so worthy a mail as your master, and though I say it to your face, I have observed that you possess qualities yourself that leave you little be¬ hind him in the scale of goodness" " He saved my life," replied Terence, *' and it is a duty I owe his humanity to prove to him that he did not preserve a being unworthy of existence." " Has the marchese any family, Paulo?" asked the miller. ** Only a nephew," answered Paulo, " signor Vinccntio, who is as amiable and as much beloved as his unele is disliked. Signor Vincent io is every one's friend whom he has it in his power to serve," And the flask being concluded, the miller returned to his labour, and Terenee and Paulo retraced their steps towards their respective homes. In the evening Terence informed his master of the arrival of a nobleman, named î 3 the
the marchese di Valdetti, in the neigh¬ bourhood, and Urbino declared himself utterly unacquainted with either the man or the title.
????-
CHAPTER VIH. An thoíi any thing? Art thou some god, sotae angel, or some devil, That ???'? my blood coid »nd ray hair to stand ? Sptîrtk to me—What srt thou ? Juliut ????, Notwithstanding the light manner in which Paulina had treated the informa¬ tion conveyed to her by Francisca whilst in her presence, she considered it with some degree of seriousness when left to her own reflections. She felt a wish to know whether the unknown were really as handsome and engaging as he had been reported to her, what his name was, where he resided, and whether he really intended to lay the proposals of which he had spoken before her uncle. Not less occupied were the thoughts of Valeria, and her despondency of mind in¬ creased with every hour which rolled on, ι 4 and
and still brought her no explanation from Julio of his ambiguous conduct ; her days were passed in affected serenity, and her nights in sleepless anxiety, whilst her health was suffering under a nervous lan¬ guor, produced by the constant restraint which she was compelled to impose on her feelings, Upon this evening, on retiring to her bedchamber, unusually reluctant to enter that bed wdiere repose so seldom visited her, she threw herself into a chair; and having passed no inconsiderable portion of time in a state of inactivity consonant to the apathy of her mind, during which period she heard the other members of the house, as usual, retire to their cham¬ bers, she took from the table before her a volume, which contained a collection of tales of mingled fancy and superstition. As she cast her eyes over the leaves, they glanced upon a romantic fable, whieh she recollected that her father had pointed out to her as an eligible subject for a little poem,
poem, and had requested her to turn it into verse—an art which she had from her youth cultivated with a fondness equal to the ardour with which Paulina had de¬ voted herself to the science of music ; and, conscious that occupancy is the most effectual shield against the tortures of an anxious mind, she resolved to attempt complying with her father's request, and sketched the following lines :— TUE WARRIOR AND THE WITCH. λ ROMA NC ?. O'er Havia'*» w i Ul and rti^ed phuns Λ «arrior, tlobh'd with victory, rode; IJ!> ??????? champ'd the trothy mm, i'roud of his t>an«ruisiary ioad. Danni; and fearful was ins míen; Bred in the ???(«?% fierce alarms, Carnage his ruthless nurse had beeu, And rt-ar'd hit» in her sinewy arm». Caio from youth had dauntless led IIis legions to th'embattled field, Where» 'midst the dying and the dead, Sword clash'd with s>word, and shield met sh>etd. ι 5 W fi.bt
Whilst arrows, thick as driving sleet, From thousands snatch'd the qtiivVing breath, &>me spirit, 'midst the battle's heat, Ultmted íor him the dart of death. Round Vida's towers, in gay parade, The blood-stain'd banners wav'd on high, Whilst the vain pageantry display'd The dear-bought meed of victory. But soon his heart, with impious pride, Scoff'd at the powers óf earth and sty. Beth heaven and hell he wouid deride, And each indignantly defy. But fate, to damp his daring mind, Drugg'd deep for him a cup of woe, .And, with the art of hate xefin'd, Blasted the lau reis on his brow. For, ?? he cross'd a barren heath, A dingy figure met his eye, .Ami sulphVous was her tainted breath, Whilst mutterini; spells of sorcery. -And, when slie saw his horse draw m¿hj She lifted up her straggling hair, Full on him fix'd her rheumy eye, Then mumuur'd on the murky air— ** Stay, Caio, stay, and hear me r«ead Tlu. pagt; that holds ttiy destin ν ; Why ?>??? unprofitable speed? İlah í halt ! such haste there need» nnt ?«.*
'* ???«· t»* î"
Begone !" he cried, ** unholy hag Ì Nor dare to cross me on my way ; líence thy foul, loathsome body drag, Meet carrion for the birds of prey Ï" Cursing, on him she loudly raild, Invoking Heaven, and earth, and sea; Then cried, us through the air she sail'd, " Proud ? night, thou shalt remember nw, Unmov'd, the dauntless warrior lieard The curse she mutter'd on her tongue; liis snorting courser straight he spurr'd, And loud his rattling armour rung. O'er plains and wastes the warrior speeds», Till plains and wastes are seen no more, And Vida'» mountains rear their heads, Like friends upon his native shore. For, äs the soldier homeward hies, And blood and carnage leaves behind, Visions of peace benignly rise, To tranquillize his rugged mind- Now mists drove furious o'er the plain, And night the gathering gloom rene«* 'd. Whilst shivering sleet and driving rain The weary traveller pursu'd. Loud from the vale tlu deep-ton'd bell Fell fearful on his listniug ear; The warrior heard the solemn knell, Aad sudden stopp'd, appalfd with feat. 16
Borne on the blast, responses rìse, - Then, boft and softer, faintly die. i( The monts n requiem chant/' he ????, *' lur one who*b gain'd eternity." But, as near Vida's rower» he drew, A biit-itmg object met his eye ; For, ?? the b ieu ? winds wildly blevr, Wav41 the black Hug of Death on hi«rh. Tfie warrior sjiurr'd his« foaming steed, Eager his hastier stepe to urge; A hollow voice cried—" Omvard speed ! Ihey chaut Mabeila's funeral ^iige." The knight turn'd pale— u Mabel!a*5 cold—- in Ueath'.s cold nrms Mabella 1.?? : It was for her the death-bell toil'd— Vain aje your tears, and vain your .4irh>.*' Now here, now there, he turn'd his ey<°, Eager the phantom to pursue ; Nought hut the bat ilcw swiftly hy ; Yll duo bhuddt'r'd ?? it lie w. Torn witli predicted fatal woes, Ilia bpur snll goi'd his ii,;im ;'- „nh" Tili \ ida's toveis majestic rose, And frown'd upon the glob^y tide. The fiii, er vta\f*, ?? ¡u dismay, Titinhliitg π ceiv'd the nta&sy pde·; The pdf, moie .leuuteoub from decay, Trcu.bied ut Tuut'b aule touch tbe whiie.
As near his castíe ??.:** ire«', With glittering lights the caserueuts gleamM ; An awful splendour r*iur,d they threw, Aiid with ? ????? stillness heam'd. ** What maj? this mean?" he frantic cried; * u Ye saints, in charity declare.*' A voice iubciutahle replied— " Mabella's freed írom mortal care/' Again lie turn'd with wild a Aright, And quick his glittering falchion dmr, To hcare this bphit of the night, That mutter'd murder as it flew. But nouirht his ruthless ratte avnild — He clea\*d sdone tlie yielding air; The voice mysteriously pre^aild, And tiUVJ his heart with wild despair, At length he gain'd the ivy'd tower, And the shrill hum blew sharp and loud, Tiie vas&aU, conscious vi' its power, Around their pallid master crowd. " 1^ ¡ny prediction trise ?" he crk'd; *' Inataut« ye dastard crew ! d«*c!are. Those gliminVtUg h«hb Írom iar 1 *t>ud : li otti me no more 'tv* ut hope and leur.** Mute as the grave the vassal:* stood, Nor dar'd the dreadful truth repeal; Their bilence froze hi* curdling blood, Ana riv'd his brain Hke baits of bteel.
Swift as he pac'H the dismal hails, Loud plaints of woe assail'd his ????; Funereal trappings from the walls, Mingled with casques and glittering ?????? ; And sable figures cross'd his view, Augment ing more the geu'ral gloom; And sudden gusts unsemnly blew The crested helmeti» towering plume. 4< Spirit of vengeance 1" Caio cried, ** The trulli now bursts upon my brain ; Tiie imprecation I despis'd Strikes me with agonizing pain. " Why did I mock tlmt fiend of hell, And for myself this woe prepare? Ambiguous was th' accursed spell She mutter*d on the murky air," His footbteps echo'd through the dome, Tül he MabeUa's chamber spied s Where, m the vestments of the tomb, Repos'd his once-bewitching bride. Slie, the mild solace of his hours, Breathless in pallid beauty by; Met- cold hands clasping wreaths of ??« erf, Chili'd their il ail beauties to ûccay. Yet stdl a look divinely mild, Soft o'er her tranquil feature* phjy'd ; ?? if in bleep she sweetly siwild, Or witb cloi»'d eyes devoutly pray'd*
And oft the requiem through tlie air Stole swelling on the ear of Heaven, Whilst angels leant the strain to hear, And seem'd to whisper sine fovt'.tn. The sabîe pîutïies, with sombre pride, Droop'd graceful o'er the silent bier, Whilst friends, by mutual woe allied, Profusely shed th' unbidden tear. Neatt morn, with solemn steps and siow, Assembled round the mournful throng, In all the pageantry of woe The dark procession mov'd along. Bui who can Caio's anguish tell, When the cold earth was lightly turu 'd, And on the coffin's lid it fell, And dust to dust again return'd î The sacred dust to earth resign'd, Homeward the blow procession mov'd î And ? ? the warrior iouk'd behind, On the cold grave of her he iov'd : When suddenly a whirlwind loud Houses the spirit of ihe storm, And dim along the shadowy cloud Glides tiie ioath'd witch's hideom form. And as she sails tlie heavy air, Atid drives the whirlwind o'er the tea, These words her vengeful soleen declare«-* * 4 Pronti knight, tliou hait remembers røe»" --«*»-- When
When Valeria laid down her pen, she felt plcú.ed that she had obeyed her fa¬ ther's wish, and also that the night w r as so far spent; for, on consulting her watch, she found that it was some minutes past three o'clock ; but, on reviewing her little production, she, with a sigh, confessed that it was greatly inferior to many others which she had composed in a happier tone of mind. Having folded up the paper on which it was contained, she opened a little drawer at the bottom of her inkstand, for the pur¬ pose of depositing her performance in it till she had an opportunity of showing it to her father, when, what was her asto¬ nishment at discovering a note directed to herself, and securely wafercd î She tore it hastily open, and found these words— " Let not my adored Valeria he surprised at the un expected sight of her Julio, at whatever hour, or on whatever spot, she may chance to behold him" Again and again she read the mysterious warning, and,
andj with eyes fixed in anxiety, was al¬ most endeavouring to search into the paper on which the words of admonition were inscribed, when suddenly the report of a pistol from the chamber in which her 'father lay struck her senses ; at the sound she sunk breathless into a chair. Almost instantly the first report was followed by a second, and immediately the few inha¬ bitants which the Castello contained were heard in motion. Assuming a strength which nature ap¬ peared to deny her, she thrust the paper into her bosom, and darting out into the gallery upon which her chamber-door opened, proceeded as quickly as she was able to that of her father. The smoke emitted from the tubes of the pistols, with which the apartment was filled, for a wdiile prevented her from dis¬ covering objects ; as it died away, she he- held her ñtther in his nightgown, witli a lamp in his hand, eagerly examining the walls of the closet which communicated with
with the bedchamber, and Terence and Paulina proposing to him inquiries, to which they could for a while produce no reply. After a time, Urbino proceeded to state that, ever since he had lain in Valeria's chamber, in order to be prepared against any sudden alarm, he had always made it his practice to throw himself upon his bed in his nightgown, after having placed his lamp and pistols on a table by his side : that he had hitherto slept uninterrupted, but on this morning he had been awa¬ kened by a rustling noise, and on raising his head had perceived the figure of a man standing in the doorway of the closet, He had twice called to him, demanding who he was, and wdiat his business ? and upon receiving no answer, had discharged at him both his pistols, enveloped in the smoke of which the figure had disap¬ peared; and, wdiat was quite as extraor¬ dinarv, he was not able to discover in the pannels of the wainscot which formed the waì li
walls of the closet, any spot where the bullets had entered. All around him stood wrapt in silent astonishment; to account for so miracu¬ lous a circumstance, without admitting the interference of supernatural agency, appeared impossible, even to a mind of the strongest sense. *' Can such things hi*, And overcome u% í ike a summer' j* '■lona, \\ uh<iut our special wonder ?" at length exclaimed Terence. Jertmymo fell on his knees, and raising his hands towards heaven, pronounced a silent in¬ vocation for their preservation. The coun¬ tenance of Urbino displayed a mind dis¬ tracted with doubts, but unwilling to con¬ fess the sense of apprehension with whieh it was evidently affected. The features of Valeria bespoke terror mingled with re¬ signation ; whilst Paulina appeared almost incredulous of the facts, to a detail of which she had listened. Again and again did Terenee and Di Cavetti
Cavetti examine the walls of the closet; but fruitless was their investigation-—no possible means could be discovered by -whicli any human being could have en¬ tered the place; and it was also fully ascertained that the bullets had not pene¬ trated the wainscot. Tremblingly Valeria inquired of her father a description of the figure which he had beheld; and Urbino replied, that it bad appeared to him a man of the mid¬ dling height, wrapped in a dark cloak, which was all he had seen, as the light had not been favourably placed for his gaining a view of his countenance. Λ considerable time having been passed in vain researches for an elucidation of the impending mystery, and in surmises and reflections on the only subject which could at the present moment be supposed to engross tlieir thoughts, the morning was already advancing, and Urbino proposed that they should take an early breakfast, and walk to the farm, as he had particular reasons
reasons for wishing to see Di Borges that day, and was apprehensive that, if they did not visit him early, he might be gone to Mantua before their arrival. Valeria and Paulina accordingly quitted Urbino, in order to prepare themselves for attending him on his walk; and Urbino, on being left alone with Terence, said— " I recollect that, when we first observed the writing oil the fastened door, you in¬ quired of me whether the circumstance might not bear any relation to the cause of my abrupt departure from Venice?" " 1 remember very well I asked that thing, your honour," replied Terence. " And I remember that I answered you that I felt certain it did not," re¬ joined Urbino. 14 The very words your honour spoke," said Terenee. " But reflection with in ν own mind/' replied Di Cavetti, " has latterly tended considerably to change my opinion ; and í intend immediately to take certain steps, which
which I hope may, in some degree, re¬ lieve my mind at this disagreeable crisis." ** Disagreeable it is, sure enough, your honour," answered Terence ; " but I need not tell you that the man who has done nothing amiss has nothing to be afraid of. To be sure, as fader O'Wolloghan at Ballyporeen used to say, the best iiave tlieir trials ; but, if they do fall into the darkness of trouble, a good conscience makes them shine the brighter when they once get out of their misfortunes. It is only keeping up a good heart, your ho¬ nour, and the long day makes all right wid the righteous ; as ould Willy said— > 1 Come what, come may, lime aud tîie bour ru:iN tbrougb tbe rougbest d.ìy.' But I'll be after getting the breakfast ready, your honour;" and with these words he departed, though he could will¬ ingly have prolonged the conversation in which Di Cavetti and himself had been engaged, as he considered it an unpardon* able error when the negligence of the ser« vant
vant delayed the execution of a master's purpose. The face of nature is one of the most effectual cheerers of a desponding mind ; the beauty and regularity of her laws, dis- eernible in every feature, calm the senses, and communicate peace to the heart. The morning was of uncommon loveliness; the golden orb of day was majestically ascend* ing towards its zenith, through a firma¬ ment of glowing azure, unspotted by a «ingle cloud ; the mild gale which fanned the air was scented with the perfume of the wild flowerets which bloomed around, and the ear was recreated with the grate¬ ful melody of the choristers of the grove. The scene was too lovely not to excite admiration ; and, soothed by the contem¬ plation of its beauties Urbino and his party arrived in tolerable cheerfulness at the farmhouse. The principal part of the day was passed by Di Cavetti and the farmer in the pri¬ vate apartment of the latter, Valeria, m was
was her regular custom at every visit which she made to the farmhouse, de¬ voted her attentions to Averilla ; and the act of administering to the comfort of the placid sufferer, in the present state of her feelings, appeared to communicate unhoped-for placidity to her own mind ; whilst Paulina, who having no concealed thoughts or surmises relative to the sup¬ posed apparition coupled with its recol¬ lection, and who was accordingly, of all the inhabitants of the Castello, the least affected by the occurrence of the morning, having exhausted her sources of amuse¬ ment witiiin the house, strolled into a little wood whieh led from the orchard to a range of corn-fields at its extremitv. The sun was now at its meridian, the air oppressively warm, and Paulina seated herself, for a few minutes* repose, upon a verdant bank whieh skirted the grove. Whilst she was thus reposing, she beheld passing along the road, which lay at only a very short distance from her resting- place,
place, two persons on horseback ; they were both males, and the one who w r as nearest to her appeared, by his dress and manner, to be the superior of his compa¬ nion ; though the distinction of rank be¬ tween them did not appear so positive as that of master and domestic, as they rode by each other's side, and were conversing familiarly together. Paulina viewed them cursorily as they passed, and would haw thought of them no more, had she not perceived the more distinguished of the two to turn his head again and again to observe her; and when the intervening hedge shut her from his sight, she saw him raise himself in his stirrups and con¬ tinue to look back upon her, till a turn of the road placed a screen to his observation. Still Paulina would have considered the conduct of the stranger as the effect of an idle curiosity rather impertinently grati¬ fied, had she not believed that she hud aeen his person before, although she could not form the slightest recollection where vol. L E she
she had beheld him, if even her conjec¬ ture that she had done so were correct. In age he appeared about fifty-five, in stature tall mid thin, and his dress was not in any point remarkable. Her walk being concluded, as she Was returning slowly towards the house, Fran¬ cisca rati out to meet her.—" Oh, signora ï where have you been ?" she exclaimed— 4C You have lost such an opportunity î I have been to every place I could think of to look for you." " What was the occasion of your search?** asked Paulina. " Why you must know, signora/' re¬ turned Francisca, " that I went about an hour ago on an errand for my uncle to the posthouse, and as I came back again» who should ride by me but the charming cavalier I told you of, that a.sked me all the questions about you the other day, and sent that polite message to you tlmt I had the two pieces of gold for delivering. The moment I saw him, I dropt him my Very
very best curtsey (for I am never defi¬ cient in politeness to people of real ele¬ gance and gentility, of wiiich I am sure he is one) ; so he drew in his horse's rein and ï stepped up to his side, and fie leant down his head and asked me if I could inform him whether bhe on whom his ex¬ istence rested were well?—* Indeed she is, signor/ returned I—" as healthy as hysop," as the proverb says. It is lucky you rode this way to-day: she is on a visit hard by, and if you will loiter ahout here a little while, I have no doubt but I can procure you an interview.** ** How incautious !" exclaimed Paulina, " Do you think I should have been mad enough to have acceded, if even the re¬ quest had been made to me?" ** Well, I beg your pardon," rejoined Francisca; " I only did for the best. î know that many young ladies of high fa¬ shion prefer stolen interviews." " I hope I shali never be so fashionable ? m ?$
as to lose sight of common prudence," re¬ plied Paulina. ít That seemed to be exactly the cava¬ lier's opinion, signora," returned Francisca ; " for he answered me—* I must decline your offer; I do not wish to see her clan¬ destinely whom I desire to espouse ho¬ nourably. Have the goodness to inform my adored Paulina that I am now on my way to Mantua, and that I have business there which will detain me for three or four days ; at the expiration of that time I shall pay my respects to her and her uncle at the Castello ;* and so saying, off he rode, putting one piece of gold into my hand at parting ; and somehow I think he was only half as engaging this time as the last." Paulina easily perceived that Francisea's opinion was ruled by the value of the bribe which she had received ; for herself, she felt happy that the conduct and pro¬ fessions of the stranger appeared to lie such
such as bespoke his character to be esti¬ mable. In a few seconds their conversation was interrupted by Francisca being called into the house ; and a period was very shortly after put to the reflections οι Paulina by a summons to the dinner-table.
? 3 CHAP-
v~'a1x\JL AJL*Jtv IA· Some s ; x or seven, «bo did bide their foces Kven bom daîkuet.3. 8???»>??? rj. Tn e cloth being removed, Urbino and the farmer, who had spoken but little during the meal, again retired to the pri¬ vate apartment of the latter. Their con¬ versation during the morning had con¬ sisted of a recapitulation of such unex¬ plained circumstances as had taken place at the Castello; and Di Cavetti at length said—" Conscious as I am that I never deserved an enemy, and firmly believing, as I do, that, six hours before my abrupt departure from Venice, there was not a being in existence who ever nourished displeasure against me, I can only, upon mature reflection, suppose that my re¬ fusing to perpetrate an action whieh 1 considered
considered to be criminal, snd to the per¬ formance of which I preferred to quit my native city, and the friends and acquaint¬ ance of my youth, as you are already aware that I have done, has drawn upon me the unceasing enmity of one whom my denial has offended, and who unge¬ nerously tortures me in revenge for his disappointed views." " I can be no judge of the truth of your surmises/' replied Di Borges, " with¬ out I were acquainted with the circum¬ stances out of which thev arise; and as you have hitherto so carefully concealed from me the secret, I suppose you are withheld by a vow from disclosing it ?" '* 1 am not indeed/' rejoined Urbino; " I have only been solemnly warned that its promulgation may involve me in trou¬ ble, from which a strict secrecy may pre¬ serve me. This admonition, more for the sake of their peace of mind with whom I am connected than for my own safety, has hitherto closed my lips ; but as 1 begin to ? 4 be
be doubtful whether the terms proposed by my adversary are adhered to on his part, and as I can also no longer deny myself the gratification of a wish which I have long felt to admit a tried friend like yourself to my con fidence, I am re¬ solved this day to reveal to you the cause which brought me into your neighbour¬ hood." " I need not, I believe, assure you tliat your confidence shall not be abused," said Sancho. " And í need hardly add," rejoined Di Cavetti, " that I wish that confidence to l>e confined to your own breast ; fbr I be¬ lieve it is truly said, that a secret loses its existence if reposed in more than two hearts : the vanity of showing that we are entrusted with matters unknown to others, the pleasure of displaying ourselves pos¬ sessed of superior information to our neigh¬ bours, and a thousand little causes which proceed in most hearts more from care¬ lessness than evil intention, have too often propagated
propagated facts which have led to the ruin of those whom they concerned." * s I am neither a boy nor a woman," returned Di Borges; ** that hand," he added, shaking Di Cavetti's as he spoke, " is the pledge of my heart; and indeed, signor, I am truly glad that you are come to the resolution of imparting your secret to me—not for the idle gratification of my own curiosity, which, I confess, has been considerably excited by many hints which you have occasionally dropped re¬ lative to the cause of your having quitte«! Yenice so abruptly, but because, though J am not so great an admirer of proverbs as my niece Francisca, í believe there is considerable truth in that which affirms, that two heads are better than one ; and though mine is certainly not the best in the present instance, it may be able to discern some bypath to lead you out of your dilemma, which, whilst wandering on the high road, has escaped your obser¬ vation." ? 5 " Without
" Without farther preface then," said I "rhino, " I will begin my relation." Sancho placed hrnself in an attitude of attention, and Urbino spoke thus :—" It was one evening about the hour of ñve that ï quitted my house in Venice, for the purpose of visiting a patient who lay in a dangerous stat:?. As the invalid was an intimate acquaintance, I remained some time with his familv, conversing with and consoling them by turns. On my return homewards, passing by the opera-house, and perceiving that Iæ Clemenza di Tito was the performance of the evening, to some of the airs contained in which piece I have always been extremely attached, and looking at my watch, and finding it ti» be within a few minutes of the hour of commencement, I went into the house nnd took mv seat. " Some time before the conclusion of the performance 1 quitted the theatre, and on stepping into the street I was accosted by a man wrapped in a dark cloak, who addressed
addressed me by saying— t Signor di Ca¬ vetti, there is a person at the end of the next street who wishes to see you imme¬ diately.' As he was acquainted with my name, I concluded that he knew my pro¬ fession, and that the person to whom I was called was ill, and required ray ad¬ vice ; I accordingly followed him, and on approaching the water's edge by which the street was terminated, I felt myself suddenly seized by several hands, and iny head muffled in a cloak, which stifled my power of utterance, or at least prevented my cries from being heard. I was hurried into a gondola, which was immediately put into rapid motion ; and when it had gained the middle of the stream, the cloth was removed from rny head, and a band¬ age placed over my eyes, which I was prevented from removing, by one of my hands being held in those of two persons who sat on each side of me. " On recovering the power of making myself heard—* Who are ye, and why am ? 6 1 thus
1 thus abused ?' was my first demand.— * Fear nothing, signor/ pronounced the voice of one who appeared to be standing opposite to me, and whom I conjectured to be the same person who had addressed me in the street—·' no evil is intended you ; on the contrary, you are invited to accept a rieh reward for the temporary inconvenience under which you are suffer¬ ing.'— * But to what purpose am I de¬ tained your prisoner?' I replied.— i We are forbidden to explain,* answered the same voice; 4 the motive will be in a very short tíme unfolded to you : but, I repeat, be assured that it is the reverse of evil to which vou are conduct! n <2\'—« * Everv unlawful restraint whieh ? in- fiieted on one who is not criminal u »ust be evil/ í rejoined.—' A very short time, î repeat again, will unravel what I am withheld from explaining/ answered tlie same voice; and every question whieh 1 afterwards advanced was only received with silence by my companions. " After
" After a time, the oars w r ere pulled in, and the motion of the vessel ceased. I was then led on shore, and having ascend¬ ed a flight of steps, I heard a door closed belúnd me; from which sound and the echoes of the footsteps by which I was surrounded, I concluded that I had en¬ tered the vestibule of some palazzo si¬ tuated on the banks of the gulf. I con¬ sidered it in vain to expostulate, and therefore awaited in silence the develop¬ ment of this extraordinary occurrence. " Mv conductors continued to lead me fonvard through various turnings and windings, sometimes moving along a level ground, sometimes ascending and some¬ times descending, but more frequently the former, till, entering an apartment which appeared to me to be situate at the extremity of a long gallery, my hands were released, and the bandage removed from before my eyes. %t I perceived myself to be in a hand* some room, and my companions to be four
foor or five men, wrapped in dark cloaks and closely masked, öf these, all imme¬ diately retired but one, who, pointing to a sofa, requested me to repose myself after my fatigue, adding, that I would 1? detained only a few minutes till the person who sought my services appeared before me *, and with these words he de¬ parted likewise. " You may easily conceive, my friend, how extraordinary was ray situation at this moment; long past the age of gal¬ lantry, and believing it impossible that my medical skill should be sought under the ambiguous veil whieh had attended my entrance into the mansion where I now was, I ielt utterly at a loss to divine the sequel of my adventure. ** At the expiration of about five mi- mites, a door, opposite to that by which ï had entered, was opened, and another man, also wrapped in a dark clonk, and as closely masked as those whom I had al¬ ready seen, appeared before me. He ad¬ vanced
vaneed towards the spot where I was standing, and bowing to me with an ele¬ gance of manner which bespoke superior mnk, he said—* I know not, signor Urbi¬ no, İn what words to attempt apologising to you for that most unwarrantable liberty which I must have appeared to have taken with your person, by conducting you hi¬ ther in the mysterious manner in which you have been treated/-—I replied, that I felt it impossible to deny that a liberty whieh required some explanation had been used towards me.—* For that liber¬ ty/ replied the stranger, * I do most sin¬ cerely entreat your pardon, and will imme¬ diately proceed to the explanation which you so justly require/ lie then requested me to be .seated, and begged me to taste some wine and fruit, which were placed on a table near the sofa, upon which, fol¬ lowing the example of my ex t inordinary entertainer, I had taken my seat ** After a short ????? he said—* The very high opinion, signor dì Cavetti, wliich
which ï entertain of your skill as a phy¬ sician, and your honour as a man, has prompted me to use the freedom with you of which I have this night been guilty. I have at this moment, signor, a female within these walls in a dying state, and to whom the relief of medicine must l>e administered with the secrecy of the grave/—' Signor/ I returned, * I am too well acquainted with what the duty of a medical man is, to have ¿equired such precautions as you have taken to ensure my secrecy upon any point connected with my profession/—' Have I not already told you my opinion of your honour l said the stranger, pressing my hand in his as he spoke. * Unknown as I am to you, signor, and beheld by you only beneath a veil, it is but just that I should disclose to you some part of myself which may be seen without disguise—the liberality of my heart is all which I can at this mo¬ ment display to you. These two purses/ he said, placing them upon the table be¬ fore
fore me as he spoke, * contain each a thou¬ sand pieces of gold ; I hope you will deign to accept them, as a slight mark of my regret at the inconvenience which vou have this evening suffered on my account: and should you be fortunate in granting positive relief to the female of whom I have spoken, five thousand others shall be your immediate reward.'—* Signor,* I re¬ plied, * you offer terms more liberal than I can feel myself justified in accepting. í hold it right that every professional man should be rewarded for his skill and atten¬ tion, but I deem it equally wrong that, presuming upen lus success, he should be¬ come an encroacher on the liberality of a heart which overflows to him with grati¬ tude for the beneficial effects of İm know¬ ledge.'— 4 Signor Urbino,' he returned, * you speak with a most commendable moderation, commensurate with the other great and good qualities of your head and heart, but if a grateful soul which can afford richly wishes to reward liberally, your
your hesitation to accept such an offer is but a voluntary undervaluing of your own talents;' and as he spoke he pressed to¬ wards me the purses containing the two thousand pieces of gold. But there ap¬ peared a something so altogether incom¬ prehensible and extraordinary in the trans¬ action in which I had blindly and invo¬ luntarily become a party, that 1 declined all remuneration till I had seen my pa¬ tient, and proved whether my skill were effective in pioducing the desired relief. * t Finding me resolute, he rose, and re¬ quested me co follow him. He opened the door from which he had first ap¬ peared to me, and we entered a chamber dimly lighted by two wax tapers, which burned on a table at the foot of a richly- ornamented bed. " He drew aside the curtains, and 1 could perceive a human form reposing in the bed, whose features were concealed by a thin veil spread over the countenance. -*- 4 This is your patient/ be said; * we may
may speak aloud, for I have already ad¬ ministered to her a sleeping draught, which precludes all apprehension of her waking / and as he spoke he drew from beneath the clothes with which the bed was covered a female arm of exquisite de¬ licacy, which was uncovered nearly to tlie shoulder. " I was advancing to take her hand, when the stranger withdrew it from røe, and said-— c Permit me a few words, I have in this case been myself the phy¬ sician, and decreed for my patient a pre¬ scription, which I only require of you to administer ; a single touch of your lancet upon any one of these/ he added, pointing as he spoke to the veins ofher arm, * is all I require of you/—' But I must first make myself acquainted/ I answered, * whether the malady under which she İs labouring requires the loss of blood/—-' Did I not tell you/ he Faid, pressing my hand signb ficantly as he spoke, t that I wished her to obtain positive relief? and what relief/ he
he whispered, after a moments pause, * can be so positive as that of the grave, especially when we pass to the change through the oblivion of sleep ?' " His views were no longer hidden to me ; I faw the horrid motive for whieh I had been trepanned into his society—the cruel object for whieh he had offered to prostitute his gold ; my eyes swam, my tongue faltered, my limbs trembled— Murder î commit murder !' I pronounced in scarcely-articulate accents, and sunk half-fainting upon a chair, near to which I had been standing.
CHAP-
CHAPTER X,
Expectation stoud in horror. Milxùh. * 4 After a few minutes," continued Ur¬ bino, " I recovered sufTicientlv from tlie horror and astonishment with which the stranger's disclosure of his criminal pur¬ pose had affected me, to be able to pro* nounce—* Signor, your words and inten¬ tions bear a strange contradiction to each other; the breath is scarcely cold with which you were pleased to extol the ho¬ nour which, you saul, you were acquaint¬ ed was the inhabitant of my heart, and you now endeavour to tempt me to the performance of an act from which a hired bravo Wv.niId recoil. Your praise was there¬ fore either mockery» or from a false habit of judging; from having accustomed your¬ self
self to consider the servility with which those whom you. select as the instruments of your inclinations obey your desires to be honour, you have dared to abuse my feelings, by ranking me in a class of beings alike unworthy of existence and the name of humanity.'— f I entreat you/ replied the stranger, ' to be calm and hear me.'—* To he calm,* I eel. »ed, * and listen ίο your re¬ quest that I should become a murderer ! ï know not what you are, signor, nor do 1 care who you are-— í feel myself at least the superior man. 1 am within your man¬ sion, surrounded by your minions ; I scorn yourself and your offer. Disappointment of your views may j>erhaps render the ex- tinction of one life as grateful to your feel¬ ings as that of another ; if so, the eye of Providence watches over me, as it appears that it has hitherto done over the unhappy victim of your displeasure contained in that bed, by having led you to make choice of me as the agent of your sinful purpose.'—* Hear,me! I entreat you, hear me,
me, signor di Cavetti l exclaimed the * stranger. * Can you possibly imagine that ï would commit an injury against you, when I have already so powerfully dis¬ played to you my inclination to serve you?'—' That was when you hoped to gain my consent to the execution of your nefarious desires/ I answered. * But let me solemn ly assure you that I would think lightly of perishing myself, to be- comini: the instrument of a fellow-being's annihilation.'—* You are warm bevond discretion, signor Urbino/ rejoined the stranger, a degree of mingled irritation and displeasure becoming, for the first time, apparent in his accents ; * you know not the necessity, the justice, which may exist for the act at which I have hinted/ —* If she is criminal, expose her to the retribution of the law/ I answered.—* Im¬ possible! impossible!' he exclaimed; 'such an exposure would carry in its train a series of misery and disgrace attaching equally to the innocent and the guilty. Had
Had not inviolable silence been required in the disposal of her fate, where had been the necessity of conducting you hither with the secrecy which has marked this night's transaction ? whence the unbound¬ ed offer of reward by which your services were sought to be repaid? The case is unparalleled, unequalled ; it must not— cannot be divulged.' ** He paused, apparently in the greatest agony of mind, and I availed myself of his silence to say—·* Signor, there is only one condition upon which I can listen to yon for a moment longer—that of my perceiving any probability of my persua¬ sions and counsel being able to convert you from your guilty purpose; but if you declare that your heart is steeled against all interposition between yourself r.nd your crime* I demand immediate enlargement from my present captivity.' w Alter a moment's hesitation, he re¬ quested me to retire with him to the apartment which we had just quitted, I complied ;
complied ; and having entered it, he locked the door of the chamber which contained the unhappy female. He took out the key. I expected him now to speak, but he began to traverse the apartment with hasty strides, as it appeared, wrapped in reflective bilence. " In a tone of greater decision than î had yet spoken, I repeated my demand of enlargement; and as I spoke I advanced towards the door by which 1 had been admitted. My companion crossed upon mc, and endeavoured to take mv hand in his; I indignantly withdrew it, and hasti- lv placing himself between me and the door tovvards which I was advancing, in accents of the wildest agitation he offered to double the ñve thousand pieces of gold which he had before offered me.-— t You add insult to crime/ I exclaimed, * and, whatever your rank in life may be, dis¬ play yourself equally unworthy the name of gentleman as that of man, when you would thus rudely and unwarrantably vol. i. L force
force an innocent person into becoming a sharer of your atrocities.'—* You know not/ he ejaculated, £ the misery of my mind;' and accompanying his words by casting himself upon his knees before me, that meanness which is ever a concomi¬ tant principle in the heart of a villain, now displayed itself in the incoherent ravings and entreaties which he uttered, in the hope of ultimately gaining me over to his suit.—I firmly replied, that I was resolved not to speak again till my en¬ largement was granted me, " Finding me unshaken by his words, and resolute in my owrn determination, wildly exclaiming a request that I would consider of his proposals fbr one hour, and at the expiration of that time my freedom sltould be no longer denied me, he darted out of the apartment, and locked upon me the door. " Conscious that I could gain egress from the house only by his commands to that effect, I endeavoured to compose my mind
mind for meeting any event which might arise out of the night's mysterious occur¬ rence. " The minutes crept on, and an unin¬ terrupted silence prevailed. I examined the apartment I was in, in order to ascer¬ tain whether I had any recollection of having seen it before, as my profession had led me to most of the principal houses in Venice; but I felt convinced that ï be¬ held it for the first time. The room was handsomely, but plainly, furnished, and there were in it neither paintings, busts, nor any ornaments by which it could at a future period have been identified. " At the expiration of a precise hour, as my watch informcil me, the stranger returned. Few words .served to convince hin that my opinion had undergone no change; and with the certain overthrow of his hopes, at least as far as my adjunc¬ tion in his plan was intended to have for¬ warded them, he poured forth tiie torrent of his displeasure in the bitterest threats L 2 and
and upbraidings. The exact words of which he made use I cannot, 1 believe, just now repeat, but the sum of what he uttered was to this effect :—That I was ignorant of his high rank and consequence, more especially of his influence in the state of Venice, arising from a public au¬ thority with which he was vested: that wdiat 1 had seen of him must have con¬ vinced me that he was capable of any action which promoted his advantage or favoured his inclinations : that having been admitted to his confidence, as I had been that night, and having refused to pursue the measures which would for ever have bound him my friend, he did not attempt to conceal the hatred which my refusal had excited for me in his heart : that the feelings to which my obstinacy, as he termed it, had given rise, had once nearly determined him to prevent the possibility of my repeating the facts of which I had been witness ; but that, on one condition, he had resolved that we should
should part as we had met. * In the course of a few minutes,' he proceeded to say, * those who conveyed you hither shall reconduct you to the spot from whence you were brought ; and, if you value the safety of yourself and your family, ere the sun be three hours high, quit Venice for ever; retire to any resi¬ dence you please, at the distance of not less than ñftv leagues from this citv, and your days shall pass uninterrupted by myself or my agents; but if you persist in still remaining in Venice, where acci¬ dent or design, slender as is the possibility, may lead you to a knowledge of the rank or name of him before whom you are standing, I swear by every power capable of showering good on man, or hurling down upon him condemnation, that your hardiness will draw the poniard of re¬ venge either against your own breast, or that of one whom you perhaps more value than yourself. Signor Urbino, a native as you are of this country, you must be well i, 3 acquainted
acquainted with the tempers and usages of its iniiabitants ; I need not explain to you how quick their sense of vengeance. nor how readily the assassin flies to ex¬ ecute the purpose whieh is rewarded by the gold of his employer/ ** With an oath of the most dreadful nature, and in a tone of voice the most horrid and emphatic, he repeated his de¬ termination ; and believing, doubtless from my silence, that he had impressed upon my mind his denunciation and his resolu¬ tion not to waver from his point, he intro¬ duced his agents into the apartment. My hands were again seized, the bandage was placed before my eyes, und I was led back to the gondola in the same manner in which I had been conducted from it. At the head of the last flight of steps leading from the mansion to the water's edge, a momentary interruption to the rapid pace at which they had before been moving was made by my guides, and the voice of tlie stranger, close by my side, solemnly pronounced—
pronounced—* Remember niy terms— your fate is in your own hands ; remem¬ ber my oath.' The voice ceased, and 1 was hurried on board." For the first time since the commence¬ ment of his narrative, Di Borges now in¬ terrupted Di Cavetti—" The sequel of your tale is evident," he said ; '* and truly happy am I, my friend/' he added, " that you were sufiiciently temi »erate in your proceedings to pursue the advice which was given you, although it came from the lips of one whom circumstances had made your enemy, i have lived nearly tin* whole of my life in the country, where atrocities of every description are rarer than in crowded cities ; but I am no stranger to the spirit of vengeance whieh some of my countrymen possess, or the ready means which are to be found for its gratification, where the purse is able to lend assistance to the inclinations of the heart : and though tfie compulsion under which you have buffered is doubtless in I. 4 the
the highest degree an infringement on the rules of justice, still, having been involved in the strange circumstances, into a know¬ ledge of which you were blindly led, I think that, upon the whole, you may con¬ gratulate yourself that no consequence of a more serious nature was the result of the mysterious occurrence." " You are well acquainted," replied Urbino, " that without the assistance of my profession, my fortune is sufficient to procure me not only the comforts, but the luxuries of life; and thus circumstanced, 1 considered that it would be madness in me wantonly to expose the safety of my child and mvself to the threats of an exas- perated and disappointed villain." " What appears tome the most extraor¬ dinary circumstance in the whole affair," returned Di Borges, " is, that a man of diabolical principles, such as your unknown tempter evidently must have been, should have sought you as an assistant in his plan —that he should have hesitated to have executed
executed the deed of death with his own hand, or at least by thatof one ofhis agents. Why admit a stranger thus obscurely to his confidence, in a point where there ap¬ pears no material cause for his requiring an additional participator in his actions ?" " I have often dwelt on tlie same consi¬ deration," returned Urbino, " but without having been able to produce any elucida¬ tion or satisfaction from my own reflec¬ tions." %i You can have no idea who the stran¬ ger was, I imagine," said Sancho. '* I cannot form the most remote con¬ jecture," answered Di Cavetti, " and con¬ sequently his motivefor desiring the death of the female whom I beheld must be equally a seeret to me." " You have fulfilled his terms," said i)s Borges ; " your residence is situate at the distance of two leagues more than the number to which you were restricted from the city of Venice." He paused a few moments, then added-—* 4 No, signor, I L 5 cannot
cannot suppose that the events which have recently occurred at the Castello della Tor¬ vida have any relation with either the persons or facts contained in the recital which you have just given me." " Vour opinion upon this point will gain strength, then, from a circumstance with which I have still to acquaint you," resumed Di Cavetti. 4< On the first morn¬ ing after that on which I quitted Venice, at the moment 1 was descending from my chamber in the posthouse where we had lodged, I heard myself a.sked ior by name, by a voice on tlie outside of the door which opened upon the road, and on stepping forward to answer the inquiry, received from a horseman, who wa¡s muffled in a cloak, and the verge of his hat drawn down upon his face, a letter, which the instant lie had put into my hand, he rode off at full speed. You may guess my impa¬ tience to read the contents. The words were these—* Proceed as y.ou have done, and you have nothing to fear. 1 am not the
the enemy of those who forbear to injure me' The intelligence was certainly satis¬ factory to my mind ; but it proved that my proceedings had been watched, and prompted me to use every precaution in my future conduct, as spies, of whom ï was unconscious, might at any hour be observers of my actions and my words/' " The character which your unknown villain gives of his principles, if so they may be called, is not an uncommon one» as the biographers of many dazzling heroes have shewn ns," returned Di Borges; " but what is his real nature, is of little importance to you, so that you escape suf¬ fering from the evil propensities of his heart." Again he paused, then resumed —" Yes, truly, as you say, the letter which you mention adds great force to my argib raent. that he is not the interrupter of the tranquillity l the Castello." " But to what cause then can be attri¬ buted the extraordinary events which í have witnessed within its walls ?" exclaim- ε β ed
ed Urbino; " for to mortal means I think it scarcely possible to impute them/' " And you will ñná it very difficult, I assure you, to gain me a convert to a be¬ lief in supernatural agency/' replied San¬ cho di Borges ; rt nothing but experience can convince the mind how strongly cer¬ tain events in life, which the book of time can alone develop, have strength to im¬ press us with an opinion of the interven¬ tion of powers more than mortal/' ·* But/' asked Urbino, " how are we to proceed in regard to the Castello ? for it is not my wish to take my children back to it for the present, though I am resolved to leave no experiment untried myself for developing the mystery in which it is in¬ volved." bi I had already resolved in my own mind/' rejoined Di Borges, ÍC that your daugiiter and Paulina should not return thither, till it can be done with more sa- tisfaction to all parties. My proposition is, that a constant watch be kept in the Castello
Castello by day and by night, and if those on duty vigilantly perform their task, the progress of time must either produce us some elucidation, or success in driving our troublesome assailant from his haunt; and in order to guard against all neglect, either you or myself, or both of us, will constantly pass the night there, as shall Terence and two of my stoutest servants; and when the ghost, whoever he is, finds that we are well armed into the bargain, depend upon it that we shali have little to fear from his attacks. What do you think of my plan ?" ** It is not only a rational one," replied Di Cavetti, " but the only one which ï think can be adopted in the present case." Tlieir conversation was now changed for action, and they proceeded to make preparations for both passing that night at the Castello. When Valeria and Paulina were in¬ formed of their arrangements, the latter, as usual, declared herself quite a heroine in
in the cause, and averred that she had not the slightest fear of returning to her old apartments ; whilst Valeria pressed a re¬ quest to the same effect with so much earnestness, as in some degree to excite the surprise of her father, till, with a stifled tear, she declared that she could not bear the idea of his being İn danger whilst she was at a distance from him. The worthy farmer applauded her filial affection, but at the same time pointed out to her the propriety of her remain¬ ing at his house ; and her father ear¬ nestly expressing his own wishes to the same effect, her entreaties were at length overruled. Accordingly, about the hour of sunset, Urbino, accompanied by his friend Sancho and two of his men-servants, proceeded to the Castello, on arriving at which they found that the hours had passed undisturbed by Terence and Je¬ ronymo. During the day, Valeria had believed that she had perceived in a lad, who wm one
ITALIAN MYSTERIES. S31 one of the servants of Sancho's farm, an anxiety to attract her attention, and, as it appeared, to address her; and in the pre¬ sent disturbed state of her mind, catching eagerly at every spark of hope which seemed to promise any elucidation of those undefinable circumstances by which she was surrounded, her father and the farmer were no sooner departed, than she con¬ trived to throw herself in the way of the youth who had excited her suspicion. Looking eagerly around to assure him¬ self that they were unobserved, he dart¬ ed hastily towards her, and pulling a pa¬ per from his breast as he spoke, said— 4i There is a letter, signora, which a young signor gave me a couple of ducats to deli¬ ver to you, and he charged me, with the strictest injunctions, not to make any in¬ dividual acquainted with the circumstance, and I have obeyed his commands/* b( Wliere did you see him ? w impatiently asked Valeria. " On the road, signora, at the distance of
of about a quarter of a league from this house/' replied the lad, and immediately vanished at the sound of an approaching footstep. The superscription was, "To the signora Valeria di Cavetti," and the handwriting- was the same as that of the note which she had discovered in the drawer of her inkstand. Retiring to the privacy of her chamber, she found her epistle to contain the fol¬ lowing words :— " MY ADORED VALERIA, " Too long have I been to you an enigma ; but the time is come for me to unveil the mystery in which I have been clouded, and to unfold to you my¬ self as I really am ; but this explanation can proceed only from my lips ; it can nei¬ ther be communicated by the pen, nor en¬ trusted to the confidential ear of an inter¬ vening friend ; I therefore entreat my be¬ loved
loved Valeria to grant me an interview, the last which we shall perhaps ever be fated to enjoy on earth ; yet without which the heart of Valeria must continue to sick¬ en in doubt—the soul of Julio to linger on a rack of torture. Guide then your conduct by the following instructions:— On the first opportunity which occurs to you of wandering abroad unattended, visit the hut of the dumb recluse by the side of the brook ; lie will bring you to Julio : meanwhile guard, with the utmost secre¬ cy, the avowal which this paper contains ; its promulgation were perdition to one, if not to both of us : above all, arm your heart for a disclosure, which it may re¬ quire extraordinary fortitude in you to bear, of whieh it will \? agony to me to impart to you the knowledge. Once more, observe my warning long since con¬ veyed to you— constancy and secrecy— farewell ! with every fervent wish that love and adoration can devise, I implore you to sem:
sei r ¿e the first happy moment for appear¬ ing before your devoted ** Julio." What conclusion was it possible that she could draw from what she had read ? Every line contained an intricacy inscrut¬ able. From what cause could he por¬ tend that the interview which he solicited might probably be their last?^—Whai could be the confession which he had di¬ rected her to fortify hor mind to hear? She recollected the miniature portrait-—a portrait which he had acknowledged re¬ presented one whom he had once adored, nay tenderly loved and pitied. " Her story" were the words which he had been uttering, when their conversation was in¬ terrupted by the confusion which had taken place in the ball-room. Might it not be possible that the story of this female was the important communication which he
he was now desirous of making to her, to receive which he warned her to prepare her strength of mind; and, still more dreadful possibility, might not that por¬ trait represent his wife-~-her beloved Ju¬ lio prove a married man ? The bare sup¬ position was agonizing beyond endurance, and (for we always endeavour to persuade ourselves that our real opinions aecord with our wishes) she struggled to believe that the portrait which Julio had worn bad rather been, as Paulina had surmised, the image of one who had repulsed his ad¬ vances towards her heart, than the coun¬ terfeit resemblance of one who had inter¬ changed her vows with his. The subject which occupied her thoughts drove ofl* the attacks of sleep ; her night was restless, and her anxiety to visit the cell of the recluse became so uncontrollable, that she resolved at all hazards to repair to the hut by the side of the brook* though infinitely perplexed what apolog) to ad¬ duce for absenting herself for so ii,ng a period
period of time from the society of her friends. The night passed away undisturbed at the Castello della Torvida; and the ar¬ rangements making at the breakfast-table by her companions, conveyed an expecta¬ tion to the heart of Valeria, that an oppor¬ tunity would be given her for visiting the cell of the dumb recluse. Urbino, it was agreed, was to ride with Di Borges to in¬ spect a vineyard which he rented at some distance from his farm, and Paulina, at¬ tended by Francisca, who was not afraid to approach the Castello by day, so she were not compelled to enter within its walls, had resolved to visit her flower-gar¬ den. Our readers may perhaps imagine that she had a concealed reason for selecting Francisca as her companion ; we shall not however be so uncharitable to her feelings as positively to satisfy them on this head, but merely to state, that the two parties hav¬ ing set out on their respective expeditions, Valeria
Valeria easilv formed an excuse for leav- ing Averilla, and began to trace her steps towards the spot whieh she longed, yet dreaded to approach. The hut of the dumb recluse was situ¬ ate at a short distance from the high road communicating with the posthouse and the village of .Malina ; at its foot ran a gliding brook, which supplied the inha¬ bitant of the solitarv abode with water, and upon a declivity at its back rose a clus¬ tering grove, which afforded shelter equally from the wintry gale, and the scorching rays of a summer sun. Arrived within a short distance of the rustic dwelling, Valeria east her eyes around, and perceiving no observers, she continued courageously to advance. The wicket door of the hut was closed; with a palpitating heart she tapped upon İt with her knuckles; in a few seconds it was opened, and the dumb recluse appearing within, waved to her to enter. She com¬ plied with the signal ; the door was again instantly
instantly closed, and the recluse throwing back the cowl whieh had hitherto con¬ cealed his countenance, presented to her the person of Julio ! Although half prepared for the elucida¬ tion which she had received, a smothered ejaculation of surprise burst from her iips. Julio caught her hand in his—" In what words, in what language," he ex¬ claimed, " shall 1 attempt to apologize for a conduct which cannot but appear to you to be ruled by the incoherency of madness ? Can you, will you, forgive me ?" The countenance of Valeria plainly be¬ spoke that astonishment at that moment superseded every other feeling in her heart. " Let me endeavour to compose myself," he continued, " and to observe towards tbe mistress of my soul that respect and hu¬ mility whieh are due from me to her." He rose, and leading Valeria to a seat, placed himself by her side.—" 1 need not inquire/' he resumed, " whether you re¬ ceived
ceived my letter; your presence is my an¬ swer. Oh, Valeria ! have you not blamed, condemned, almost resolved to renounce aU future intercourse with a being who ap¬ peared to neglect tlie treasure he had won f as I have done ?" " It is not my nature to condemn un¬ heard," replied Valeria ; '· but I must con¬ fess that your conduct has strongly excited my surprise; the silence which you ob¬ served towards me, after our last meeting, whilst I remained in Venice, and the ex¬ traordinary notices which 1 have received from your own hand, of your being near rue, during my residence in this neigh¬ bourhood -----~" She paused ; the expres¬ sion of her features distinctly revealing the anxiety of mind with which these circum¬ stances had aflected her. " Oh, Valeria, beioved mistress of my soul l' exclaimed Julio, " I am a wretch* fated to involve in misery the transcend¬ ent being whom ï best love. Pardon me," he added, after a momentary pause; " thb is
is an hour at whieh our inmost thoughts must be revealed to each other without disguise." " V\ ould they had been so sooner." an¬ swered Valeria, *' since the necessity of their becoming so now. skeins to labour in a cloud wliich you appear apprehensive of bursting." " \ aleria," emphatically pronounced Julio, " the last time we met, an hour you cannot have forgotten, at the moment 1 declared to you my dexotion, my idolatry to the fascination of your image and your mind, 1 pledged a vow to Heaven, that no one but yourself e\ er should possess my heart; 1 have maintained, and ever will preserve my oath !" lie gazed upon her for some moments in silence, with an ex¬ pression of eountenanee which conveyed to Valeria a sense of tlu tenderest affection, embittered by some goading reflection. She did not reply j and he spoke thus— * É Arbitrées of my fate, too lovely and too excellent Valeria, I am now about to pro¬ pose
pose to you a question, your resolution of which will either gild with the happy beams of contentment and serenity my future days, or plunge me, abandoned, lost, and hopeless, into a gulf of misery and despair." " Oh, be explicit, I beseech you," an swered Valeria ; i( your looks and words alarm me. If there is any service, as you seem to hint there is, that I can render you, I think you need not apprehend I should deny it to you/' " I think, when I behold you here," re¬ turned Julio, " that my doubts are re¬ plied to you as I could wish they should be; but the ardency of love proves itself in the disbelief of its own happiness, and upon this axiom I can alone excuse my¬ self to you for those fears which almost preponderate against the happiness I still believe myself possessed of. Speak then, beloved Valeria! let your hps seal your Julio's doom ! dare I hop· that you still vol. l m think
think of me, as, at our last interview, you blessed me by confessing that you did ">" A few words on the part of Valeria, confirmed to him his expectation that he was still sensibly alive in her affections. He received the avowal with a joy, which* although extravagant in expressing his felicity, still appeared to be tinctured with regret, After a few minutes of* silent admira¬ tion on the part of Julio, and* as V aleria beHeved and almost feared, with a tear, against which his soul appeared u> strug¬ gle, starting into his eye, he said^— 4t My letter informed you that I had a disclosure to make to you, for which I begged you to fortify }our mind; but from the mo¬ ment 1 had conveyed to you the inibrma- tjon tha such a necessity existed, 1 have felt myself unequal to the task. Take, therefore, these* papers," he added, placing a small manuscript volume in the hand ot Valeria as he spoke ; « they contain a nar¬ rative
rative ol tlie events of my life down to a certain period." He paused, * 4 Whew you have perused what is here contained, my lips shall reveal to you the sequel. These papers were originally written with the intention of their evidence vindica¬ ting ?? memory, after my death, from—~~ but no matter; it is better to be vindicated in heaven than extolled on earth. On earth, it is tot» frequently an accident that makes or mars the ???? and fortune of a man; in heaven, the even balance <if his actions sways his judge." There was a solemnity in his air and voice, as he pronounced these word*, whicfi astonished Valeria. He jiereeived what was passing in her mind, an«! ????— ^ What now appear: a mystery tn my word*«, will be explained to \ou at our next meeting, and ! entreat von t«» let that be as quickly as posible, as it «ill end all our cares, al! «»ur inquietudes, aml. I trust, consummate our hws in hm\«-nh pu reness/"
Before Valeria had time to remark upon the extraordinary tenour of the last sentence which he hati uttered, he a<*ain thought her to ?<?» every expedition in pending the manuscript, and to return to h»s hut the moment >he had done so. T^c interest which «die took in im fate» the pitch of an\iet\ b* which his enigma¬ tical coinluct hud u »und her feelings all rendered her willing to pursue the clue which he hacì givt >i her for unravelling the imstery, ami ^he promised t(» etnnply w ith hi*· »?? [uest. ? considerable tune elapsed ??? they parted , incoherent exprehSHUb of affection burst tuna the breast of Julio, and falter¬ ing aeeeut> of suq»risc fÆ from the hps of Wdcria. Every ¡\u »k« every 4*nteiKv, breathed b\e m\d adoration« but the) ap¬ peared tempered in Julie« hy ? chill of ior» bearanec. whicli» by the now er of ,sy mpa- thv.irresibtiblv communieatixi itH*lf to the » *■ breast of λ" aleria. That
That Valeria should return soon, was the promise upon whieh they parted ; and Julio, at hib separation from her, appeared to regard her rather as a beatified spirit, than as the enchanting mortal whom he had idolized at the carnival of Venice. " He professes himself the same as when we last met," reflected Valeria; ** hut his manner is evidently changed ; he professes to fear the loss of my affections, and yet he speaks as if he could not long hope to pos- ^ess them. Is he already a husband, com¬ pelled to return to that circle of claims upon his heart, from whieh truancy of ills position has for a while exiled them ' J or has á second love annihilated the vows by which he bound himself to me ?" Finally she resolved to form no opinion. till she had perused the manuscript \v hich he had placed in her hands. Witli a distracted mind she retraced her step** tí »wards the farmhouse, and was so fortunate ïb to reach it !>efore the return oí
of either her father and Sancho, or Paulina and her humble attendant.
END OF VOL. I.
Printed by J. Darling» Leadenhall-Street, London. ??????— ι ..... I^^r^-~ ■ ?i^^ .i l i, ?■■?^^,:^?^l?ari??r?í—rs s
