Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Mystery: a novel: in two volumes
MYSTERY.
LETTER L Sir Charles Melford to Major Seymour, DEAR GEORGE, О Dover. NCE more arrived in England, I imme¬ diately fulfil my promife of announcing to you my return to the land which gave me birth ; and, believe me, I return to prefer Britain to any foil on which I have yet trod¬ den : but, in truth, my friend, mine is only the preference of renewed habit ; for I am not one of thofe felfiih or unenlightened pa¬ triots, call them which you pleafe, who fup¬ pofe that God has been fo unjuft, as to place benefits in any one country, which he has not balanced by iome equal good in every other. vol. ii. î Our
a
Our journey has throughout been pro¬ fperous, and the Marchefa has difplayed л cultivation of mind which has rendered htr a mofl pleafant companion; in addition to this, her attentions to me, and her endea¬ vours to promote whatever flie believed to be my wifli, have been fo flattering, yet re¬ gulated by that extreme modefty which flie always outwardly wore while I knew "tier in Venice, that I have accepted with plea¬ fure her delicate offerings of gratitude, con¬ vinced that to be paid fo unremittingly as flie beftows them, they mufl proceed from a heart whofe increafing happinefs will not fuf¬ fer it for a moment to forget its benefactor. I have learned nothing more ofthe ftrange fate in which flie is involved, nor indeed have I often touched upon the fubject, as ï perceive it gives her much pain to dwell upon it. The longeft difcourfe vvhich 1 have had with her upon this topic was about a fortnight ago ; fhe then began it herfelf by faying, " Did I not once tell you that I had one friend in the pallazzo di Marvaldi?"— fţ You did," I replied. ťŕ I will inform you who
3 who that friend is," flis returned; ci it is the worthy old Bernardo, the major domo of the Marchefe: he lived with my father, and ftill knows how to value the child of his loft mafter."—" Does he know where you are now?" I aiked. f * This was what I was going to tell you," flie replied ; " I have informed him that I am on my jour¬ ney to England, and have promifed, as foon as I arrive there, to inftruft him where to addrefs me ; thus if any event which------" She paufed a moment; then continued, " I only wiflied to account to you for my re¬ ceiving and anfwering letters 5 are you fa¬ tisfied with this explanation?"—" I can have no right," I returned, u to be diffatif- ficd with any pai t of your conduft; 1 ani not your governor, though I am your pro¬ teftor."—" Pardon me," faid fhe, " I think you wrong ; it ftrikes me to be of more con¬ fequence than you feem to imagine, that a man ofyour worth Ihould be convinced that the woman he protects is free from diifolute principles."—" You addreffed me," 1 re¬ turned, " as if you feaied that í fufpected « i the
the integrity of your heart/'—" No," an¬ fwered flie; " I only fpeak from thc deter¬ mination I feel that you never fliall have caufe to doubt it." She immediately, on having faid this, changed the fubject, and we have not fince converfed upon it. Every word fhe utters, every action of her life, convinces me more ftrongly that fhe has been greatly unfortunate, but never unprin¬ cipled. I have informed the Marchefa of the fitua¬ tion in which I intend to place her : flie tells me, that fhe receives my offer of the plan I have formed for her future life as an additional weight upon the debt of grati¬ tude which flie already owes me, and fliall ìiever be able to difcharge; but entreats that I would rather put her into fome me¬ thod of exercifing her talents for mufic, embroidery, and painting, which fliall make her dependence reft on her own endeavours. To filence her fcruples for the prefent, I have told her, that flic muft, at leaft, inha¬ bit my cottage, till fome other plan of life for her can be properly digefted. When
5 When I firft knew her, flie was fuperfici- ally acquainted with the Englifli language, and much of my time during our journey has been paffed in giving her a better know¬ ledge of it. 1 think there can be no impropriety in my introducing her to Margaretta ; how¬ ever this is a point on which í may not be fo competent to decide as an indifferent perfon ; I dial!, therefore, come to no deter¬ mination upon this fubjeft till I have your advice. Adieu: formal congratulations upon your marriage would not appear like the wiíhes of a friend ; that you may enjoy all the hap¬ pinefs yon can defire, will give true plea¬ fure to, yours fincereiy, Charles Melford. You may now direct for me at Melford- houfe.
в 3 LETTER
(>
LETTER iL Gì orge Siy meur, F/i/, to Sir í ut. r U а МЛ г rd. MY DEAR ÍR IEND, TKîrron. HE moment î know where to addrefs you I take up my pen, but now I have dip¬ ped it into ink, 1 cím hardly determine what more to fay to you, thnn to congiatulatê you upon your return to your native coun¬ try. You wifh me, I dare fay, to comment upon your conduft with regard to the Mar¬ chefa, and to offer you all the conjeftures which may have occurred to me relative to the myftery in which flie is wrapt. When an event has once taken place, it is folly to bring arguments to prove that it had better have been left undone; I fliall, therefore, confine m)felf to obfervations upon the fact as it now ftands. Your humanity, you fay, has induced you to take upon you the pro¬ tection of an unfortunate woman, una to bring her with you to England : beware that paflion is not cheating you under the garb of huma¬ nity.
7 nitv. You have placed her in a fituation of independence, contrary to her wiflies of reft- ing for her fupport upon her own endeavours: be careful, whatever you may of your own accord choofe to beftow on her, that you are not too ready in granting requefts urged by her ; for women poffeffed of art, and placed in the fituation in which you have fixed the Marchefa, have been known to transfer the çiependence from themfelves to thofe wlio were once their benefaftors. I do not fay that the Marchefa is one of thofe ; but remember that you are not convinced any more than myfelf that ihe is not. You have fecn that flie was capable of affuming two different conducís ; and however well difpofed her own heart might at that time be, and how¬ ever flie might be conftrained to aft as fhe then did, deceit is a very unfafe leffon for the female mind to be praftifed in, upon whatever terms it may have been learnt and exercifed. No woman but a wife fliould know the extent of her power over any individual man. It is allowable for every woman to have fome little harmlefs » 4 vanity,
s vanity, and I know no means fo likely to con- .vcrt that vanity into a crime, as her having once learnt that flie poffefles dominion over one ofthe lords of the creation. The vanity of woman is fed by the weaknefs of man ; it is in his ability to reftrain her vanity within the bounds of good humour to others, and harmlefs approbation of herfelf, or to fuffer it to extend into criminality. Y r ou afk me whether you fliall introduce Margaretta to the acquaintance of the Mar¬ chefa? I have heard it as the opinion ofa man to whofe fentiments I pay much de¬ ference, that the mind Is improved by hold¬ ing converfation with a repentant finner; I allow this to be a truth ; but I feel it to be a much ftronger truth, that the mind of .innocence is moft fafe in the converfation ofa heart which has never needed repent¬ ance: Î, therefore, advife you not to let Margaretia know the Marchefa, at leaft for iome months to come, till you have afcer¬ tained how flie will regulate her conduct in her new abode. Her new abode muft be that of feclufion; folitude is the touchftone of
9 of moft hearts ; where there is leaft to di¬ vert the thoughts, the paflions are oftea moft truant: make the experiment; do not put it into the power of accident to ac¬ quaint the purenefs of Margaretta's heart that criminality exifts. I have written all I have to fay upon this fubject, and if ever you valued my advice, let me entreat you to attend to my prefent admonitions. I intended to have vifited you immedi¬ ately on your return to England, but the ill health of Mrs. Hughford makes me unwil¬ ling to leave Emma alone with her, left any thing fatal ihould occur in my abfence; I have, therefore, a requeft to make to you in the names of Emma and myfelf; it is, that as foon as your inclination and leifure will permit you, you wiJl come and pafs fome time with us at Kirton. I have fold my majority, and am now, according to the appellation by which I anı known in the village, no longer Major, but 'Squire Seymour. inftead of a letter let the next in telit· B 5 gence
10 gence I receive from you be from your own lips, χ arewel -, and believe me truly yours, George Seymour.
LETTER III. Sir Charles Melford to George Seymour, Efq. О Melford-houfe. H, George, how exquifitely has Marga¬ retta ripened info the perfeftions of perfon and mind fince I lafl faw her ! Let it not be find that thc human mind, with the ma¬ terials for infimo ion put into its own hands, ks tapable of expanding its faculties, or that the perfon may not in an obfcure hamlet acquire graces fuperior to thofe of ftudied att. Could you fee the eafy unaffected ele¬ gance with which Margaretta moves, feel thc force of her eyes and fmiles untutored in the fiftitious modes of gaining approba¬ tion, you vvould then be convine«. d how much
îl much more attraclive are the graces of in nocence than thofe of any ftudied f} ftern. Till you fee her, this is alf you can know of her perfon, and you may conceive the defcription of it flattered by one feeling fo warmly in her caufe as myfelf; but of the accompiifhments ofher mind I can give you evidence on paper. On my firft vifit to her at Edward Wallace's farm, after the ufual fentences of fatisfaciion at again meeting had pafled between us, I began to queftion her about her improvements, in my abfence, with all the warmth that a mafter in love ufually catechifes his pupil ; her anfwers to my enquiries evinced that flie had not only been attentive to the courfe of readin-o- I had advifed, but had drawn comments from it to the benefit of her underftanding L'ninftmfted but by natural genius, flie in¬ formed me that flie had ufed the pencil, and begged me to view with an eve of candour fketches from nature which criticifm muft have approved. I afked her whether the fifter art of the pencil had never been courted by herí— a faint bluih fuffufed lier B 6 check.
iá cheek, and íhe replied, " that fhe had fometimes attempted to write fome little pieces of poetry." I requefted to fee them : and with a modefty far more interefting than the affected timidity of thofe who take much entreaty to fhow their performances to the eye of a friend, and vainly believe that they are enhancing the merit of their works by being backward in ihowing them, ihe immediately produced to me fome fheets of paper on which flie had tranfcrib¬ ed the effufions of her uncultivated genius ; from among them I have felefted the fol¬ lowing to fend to you. SONNET.—To a Ssowdïw. Hail» thou chafte fnowdrop ! firft of fimpie flou 'r» J That Nature fentfe to deck her vernal bovrYs; May by thy fide no fpiteful weed o'er-grow That modeft beauty thy full growth will fliow! Forthy fair emblem in the human heart, Mild innocencf» too often feels a dart Shot from a bofom envious of its worth, That fours ks fweets and ffobs « in its b-htli: Too often thus is Virtue cruih'd by man, tI-ecdU -Гй the ЫЦь which Virtue give-,, to fcan-
13 Oh, may'ft thou flourifh in thine humbler fphere, Not knowing caufe thy neighbour's hate to ftart Thus fliall 1 wifli thy paffive life my own, To bud unenvy'd, though I flowV unknown. The following lines were fuggefted to Margaretta by the recollection of what flie fuffered on hearing the paffing bell toll for her father's death. SONNET.—To Death. Oh, the fad found of yonder paffing bell I Hovv woe-clogg'd thro' the air its knocks refound ï Why, thou grim tyrant of our earthly fate, Why hsft thou taught that iron mafs to wound- To wound the heait thou has already chill*d, By grafping with thine icy hand the trunk On which I once in fummtr verdure branch'tt? Novv that its fallen, I am withering funkl Oh, (hew thy mercy when I own thy pow'r, Command to filence by thy freezing breath The tongue of yonder bell, whofe ev'ry toll Strikes on my wounded heart another death Ì Again its founds ! oh, make thy vot'ty bleft; Rai fc thy fluŕn hand, and beckon røe to left'. AN ADDRESS TO EVENING. Oh, how ferene this evening's calm f S<re grey-eyM twilight draws hcr duiky veil, Aad
n And throws a darknefs vifible around! In what foft harmony ail objecb now, Blended by the generai íhade, unite! How far more lovely does this modeft drefs Of Nature ftrike the calm mind of fober Contemplation, than when (lie wears the Gaudy garb of noon-day !—blazing fin 'ry ! See how the waves, receding, mix themfelves In falling clouds î then watch them how they die Away together from the fight, as the Loft fun itili lower finks, unfeen, info The bofom of the deep. Turn towards land, And rix thine eye upon you ancient tow'r; Soon ihak thou fee it fwailow'd up by the Devouring darknefs: that object vanifh'd, Stilt the -uV.des of night roll on, and gather Round thine hend, leaving the ciuikiuefs of Sol's retirement, fovereign in his bbfence. Thus fade? mortality! a truth ft *■ heid! To remember it, thefe are the moment. Then retiring from the bufy world, and Leaving all its childifli cares behind us, We (ho'uJd retí eft upon a ftate to con.e ; Think till our reafon tells us that onr thoughts Are juft ; nor give belief to reafon, till A praifing cohfeie^.ce warrants our return With fafety to the world ï
15
SONNET.—To FiuBNDSHir. Oh, tell me, Friendfliip, paffion moif benign, Whence, teil me, didft thou take thy happy birth ? I cannot guefs thy pow'rs зге born on earth, Soothing the mind wiih energy divine: I guefs that to the budding, infant world, Thou wert the happy tie that bound mankind, Whene'er their hearts in mutual fervice joi n'd; By envy now from common minds thou'rt huri'd. Where'er I tread do thou refume thv fwav ; Teach them with whom I live tie futid joys That wait on thofe a kindi ed tafk employs— The taik to fmooth each other*s pi'e/im-w ay î Thus fliall I own thy fovereignty fupreme; Livt- bltfïM thro' Ufe, and make thy praife my theme! Thefe, George—thefe are the lines that touch my heart ; with fuch a foul for friend¬ fliip, how exquifitely capable muft her heart be of love ! Love is the efľcnce of friendfliip; flie has already ihown me that flie poffeffes the paflion, the core from which that exquifite fweet is to be extract¬ ed, and it fliall be my future bufinefs to draw it out into perfeft ion. Edward Wallace and his mother are en¬ joying
Ì6 joying peace and plenty in their newly-ac¬ quired farm ; and tlie Marchefa is gaining a compofure almoft approaching to happinefs in her new abode. Thefe effefts more than repay me for having been the means of producing them. I fliall follow your advice, and not intro¬ duce the Marchefa at prefent to Marga¬ retta : Mrs. Wallace and fhe are acquainted that I have brought a firanger to the cot¬ tage, and appear fatisfied that fhe is a fimi¬ lar objeft of my benevolence to Margaretta. Do not expeft to fee me yet at Kirton ; I cannot at prefent leave my home ; my long abfence requires that I fliould now be aftive in many concerns where the obferva¬ tion of a principal is required. My fteward is a very worthy man; but the moft honeft ihould not have too much latitude of power given to them ; by allowing it to them, we are not only hazarding the injury of our own property, but alfo of their integrity; for we are, perhaps, inducing them into evil which they never would have imagined if we had not left tempra ion to it in theirway. Remember
17 Remember me ■ refpeâ fully to your wife, and believe me your fincere friend, Charles Melfokd.
LETTER ΙΛ^. George Seymour, Ejİj. to Sir Charles Mclford* MKirton. ANY thanks, my dear Charles, for the fpecîmens vvhich you fent to us of your Margaretta's natural powers; 1 fay to 'w*, for 1 am a fufficiently unŕaíliionable huiband to divide all my pleafures with my wife, and Emma follows my example, by taking an intereft in all mine, and admittmg me to a íhare in all hers. The verfes to which I allude proved a moft acceptable prefent to my Emma ; for ilie has herfelf a tafte for fcribbling, though an uncultivated one, and has 'expreíľed much fatisfačtion that one whom flie hopes in a fliort time to dall her friend hasa fimilar inclination to herfelf. As a proof
18 a proof that ñie wiíhes to court the friend¬ fhip of Margaretta, flic defires her to ac¬ cept, in return fur her comportions, a cou¬ ple of little pieces which ilie has juii writ¬ ten. She does not fend thorn becaufe lhe has the vanity to imagine them to be per¬ fect; ihe knows them to be far otherwife; but fends them to convince the future wife of my friend, that íhe wiíhes to meet her npon thofe terms of amicable intercourfe which do not admit the concealing from one friend whatever in its performance has given pleafure to the other. Emma's ac¬ quaintance hereabouts know her to be what the world choofes to call a poetefs ; that is, a woman who fometimes writes her thoughts in verfe. Some are candid enough to allow that flie has a little merit ; other laugh at her, becaufe flie cultivates a talent which they have not. Some again, the flaves of envy, vouchfafe only a fneer when her little works are mentioned ; and others moft richly difplay their own ignorance in attempting to criticife her writings. Emma herfelf» vvith too much good fenfe to refrain from an
mì amufe-ncnt that reives no one individual but the envious paîn, İs ftill tco diffident not to believe tliat her writings are of the loweft rank, and fo good-natured as to be unot- fended with flander, and even think her a true, fpeaker. Her huiband weie he to give his opinion of the thoughts which iffue from a heart m.ited by the moft tender ties to his еди, would pe»haps gi> e it too partially: this is all he ever ventures to fay upon the fubjeft, " if my Emma fails in hcr innocent attempts, fhe ftill does more to merit praife than thofe who attempt nothing;" and he adds, " that he thinks thofe who have ne¬ ver made the attempt, would do wifely for themfelves to refrain from cenfuring a talk of whofe difficulty they cannot have tho ability of judging; and that thofe vvho ha\e performed the like taik with fuccefs, would do equally right to encourage others who are mounting the hill of difficulty, which they have already climbed, left, while they pretend to defpife, they prove themfeh /еь in reality apprehenfive of a growing rival.'' Thefe are remarks which, though true, I caa
со can only venture to make to the ear of a proved friend, as their general circulation would at leaft beget me a coolnefs, if not a quarrel, with rnoft of thofe who call them¬ felves both mine and my wife's very good friends. I háve given you a long preface, the fub¬ jeft itfelf fliall now immediately follovy. ARTS PETITION TO NATURE. Art having once a gift to make, Submiffive bow'd at Nature's fhrinc; ** Let envy now each breail forfakf, " Thy pow'r," flie faid, " 1 own divine. " Then hear my pray'r, and gr^nt thy aid, " Blefs with thv fmiie mv arduous t ík ; '* Touch with thy wand tlie gift I've made, " This fairy boon is all I aík. ■" Of rofes, je-a'mines, lilies meek, ·* Of evVy Aveet thy bovvVs can ЬоаЛ *· (Defign'd tO rai& on Friendihip*s cheek, " The bhıÛı whofe filence pleafes moft)« " A gift Tve made ; thy fìoies un clofe, " Shed iVagrance o*erthe myrtle g»ecn # . " Spangle with dew the blufliing rofe, ** Breathe beauty on the pink ferene ; "The
0] ** The tint of early morn beftow "On the carnation's gioWmg face, " The humble cornflowers clam is, too, 14 That hues celeftial fliould it grace. " My pray'r iá made i fmile from thy throne, * l And drive me not to fad defpair ; " Force not my heaving breaft to own " That forrow fits triumphant there." Benignant Nature fmiľd ferene, Complaifant fmiľd at Art's beheft, And gave her filler's -flow'rs a mien That more than anfwer'd her requeft. Delighted Art with rapture Mew, And plac'd them fafe on Friendfíup's fliriuei Friendihip entrane'd can only view, And hug the gift fo all divine : Lofl are her word?, in pleafure loft, Her thoughts too quick to give them breath; She looks her thanks for kindnefs paft, To be forgotten but in death! The following lines were written one ftormy evening, when the loud whiftling of the wind round the antique manfion ^f Mrs. Hughford had led Emma to refleft upon the dreadful and precarious fate of thofe at fea, THB
<Л9,
THK SAILOR. Sunk beneath the foaming lurge Lies poor-Edwin's fenfelefs coi:e j Sea-giťíís fk im min g fing his dirge, Fricndion flıore lament his loil! Hnrľd from off the fliip's high fide By the fcour-nng tempeft^ rod, Doom*d on angry waves to ride, Can on the mercy of his God : Behold his form ! his flowing hatr Is dripping witli a biiny ilood; His e)es are fix\J in wan defpair, Death does his aching heart forbode: Deny'd his wife's laň kifs to feel, Refus'd his lifping babes to bkfs; Nodtath-bel! his fa-i fate will rt-li, No flir<Jiid his ft-a-beat corpfe will di efs! He finks ! he dies ! the laft hard pang, That iink'd his foul fo long to eaitli, h paft ! his flitting ghoft has fung, ** The boon of virtue now ha* birth." Oh> heave a figh to Edwin's name ! Oh» give a tear to errors pall ! Merit muß own tbe firft, and Fame Λφΐ Vn\\du:!'ùloi out the laft· Tlìtn
'23 Then ileep in peace; thy children Ч fate Reits in thc hands of him whofe love Feels for the orphan's helplt-fs ibte— Feels, and protects them from above.* I expeft that the fame letter which tells me yôu háve fhewed thefe lines to Marga¬ retta, as the produftions of one who hopes foon to call her friend, will alfo bring me information that you have difclofed your heart to her, and let her into the fecret of what <he happy charafter is in which Mrs. Sevmour and myfelf are tobe introduced to her. Truly, Charles, 1 think you have been very dilatory in bringing to a conclufion this affair which you pro tefs to ftrongly to intereft your heart : once more, í fay, do not trifle with fuch perfeft felicity as awaits you ; when any point is once determined to be.defirable, all delays in its completion are dangerous, efpecially one where the heart is concerned : refleft and be wife and happy. Adieu! Yours truly, George Seymour.
LETTER
24f
LETTER V. Sir Charles Melford to George Seymour, Efq. OMelford-houfc> H, George ! I am thrown into a dilem¬ ma in which I know not how to act, or on what to decide !—I have loft Margaretta.— Hear me with patience, feel for me, pity me, although you exclaim, " The blame lies with himfelf!" It is now fix weeks fince I have written to you ; two months have I been returned to England, and ever fince the receipt of yoUir laft letter I have let no opportunity flip of endeavouring to prepare Margaretta for the full confeftion of my heart. I have watched her countenance when I have given the tinge of love to fentences which were before confined to the warmth of friendftiip ; my words have produced no emotions tbat betrayed flie underftood their concealed meaning ; ftie received them only as expreffions of benevolence delivered in new
25
new terms. H?r heart is totally unfufpi¬ cious that it has touched mine with any paflion but that of humanity. Oh, why did I not fooner teach her that it vibrated on the chords of love ! I have made a difcoverv which·------but I will proceed regularly. Edward Wallace w T as the friend of my boyifli days ; he has now been the com¬ panion of my walks about my lands. My evenings I pafs fometimes at Edward Wal¬ lace's farm, for the fake of enjoying the fo¬ ciety of Margaretta ; fometimes in vifits of friendfliip to the Marcliefa, whofe conduft ftill continues to be highly exemplary ; and accidentally, after a day of any country fport, Edward fpends the evening with me at Melford-houfe. This was vefterdav the cafe ; I ïeturned to a lale dinner, of which I invited Edward to partake. When the cloth was removed 1 , the wine put upon the table, and we were left to ourfelves, I felt—I know not wiry, particularly then ; perhaps it was that I had been more than ufu¬ ally fatigued by the exercife of the day . however, no matter why—but I felt inclined vol. п. c m
* Йо"
to drink a few bumpers very rapidly one after another. In almoft every one of them I toafted Margaretta, and called upon the young farmer to join me ; he drank a much lefs quantity than myfelf, but repeated my toaft every time I gave it with all the energy I pronounced it myfelf. I had Jong intended to take fome opportunity of giving Edward Wallace a hint of my intention with regard to Margaretta, and to aik him whether he imagined that flie had ever fufpefted that I entertained for her any warmer paffion than that of frİendflıip. The wine quickened my feelings; niy fpirits refted folely upon my love for Margaretta, and I determin¬ ed to make this the moment I had been fome time looking for : " Edward/' í faid, ** you live under the fame roof with Mar¬ garetta ; you have an opportunity of ob¬ ferving her in every aftion of her daily life ; thofe are the moments that beft befpeak the temper of the mind, and 1 truft you ever find in her moft trivial aftion fomething to praife." — ** Do not," he anfwered, +ť think me too partial or blindly prejudiced in
27 in her favour, if I declare that I fez in her all perfeftnefs."—" I fhall not think you ; improperly biafled," replied I, fmiling, u for entertaining an opinion which is my own." —" You do M argaretta great honour," faid Edward. tc To confer juftice," I returned, f< is not to confer honour, though it is highly honourable to the individual on whom it is conferred to deferve it : juftice is thc right of all. Unhappily fuch is the envious tem¬ per of the world, that, as far as words can convey it, their duo is much oftener given to the undefcrvinş than the meritorious.**— cc You, Sir Charles," he replied, " have be¬ ftowed on Margaretta the juflice of huma¬ nity ; you have performed towards her that great claim of benevolence which is exacted from man to his fellow. Margaretta is wor- thy the friendfoip you have ihewn to her ; n\ç feels with gratitude the debt ihe owes to you, and prays with fervour for the means of repaying it." He fpoke thefe words with an emotion which I conceived to pro¬ ceed only from that intereft in her favour which, judging by my own heart, I thought с 2 ло
m no one wlio knew Margaretta could fail to feci for her, and I anfvvered, " i am al¬ ready repaid by feeing thofe exquifite ta¬ lents which flie poffeffes cultivated by her into ornaments of fociety, and which, if I bad ncglecied to point out to hcr that ilie did poffefs them, might have died away un¬ known. I have, by one aftion, fnatched an individual from mifery, perhaps from obli¬ vion ; and conferred a portion of happinefs npon the world, even if it is felt by no one but myfelf*"— tc Indeed," he faid, <c it is not a partial happinefs ; all who know the fource from whence it fprings, muft feel its charming influence."—" You fpeak enthufi¬ aftically of my protegee," I cried. ct True, Sir Charles," replied Wallace ; " I am an en- thufiafi: in the praife of Margaretta Hayton.*' —" You have not known her long," I re¬ turned, " and yet, in the time you have been acquainted vvith her, you find that flie has poffeffed the fecret of infpiring you both with friendfhip and efteem for her."— * ť Indeed flie has," he anfwered With em¬ phafis» ci How heavenly a prize," I re¬ joined,
29 joined, " muft be the love of a woman, whofe friendihip and efteem carry with' them fuch influence over the hearts of thofe on whom they are beftowed ί ' Edward Wallace breathed a half- rai fed.figh. 1 emp¬ tied a clafs, which í had for fomc moments been holding to my lips, then faid, " lie muft indeed be the happieft fellow İn exift¬ ence who calls Margaretta wife." As í fpoke thefe words 1 fixed my eyes upon Edward ; 'his eyes for a moment met mine, and a crimfon bluih ftole over his face. He attempted to fpeak, hefitated, then turned away his eyes, and ihe glow on his cheeks became v in deeper, liis confuiion railed within me ;ll ;igony which made me trem¬ ble. I felt that í had fomething to fear re¬ lative to Maıgaretta; 1 could not decide what, my ideas were perplexed, and my tongue was unable to move. In a few mo¬ ments Edward Wallace again turned his eyes towards me, his confuiion was much abi/led, and there remained only fufficient bllod in his face to give an animation to hibeye. " Sir Charles/ 1 he faid, " I per- ( с 3 ceive
30 ceive that you are acquainted with the feelings of my heart; it was not my inten¬ tion to keep thern a fecret to you any longer , than till an opportunity prefented itfelf to me of difclofing them to you." I did not vet entirely underftand his meaning" ; if I had, I could not have anfwered him. lie continued : " It is the proudeft wifli of my heart to become that enviable being who ihall call Margaretta his own ; you have been friend and father both to Margaretta nnd to myfelf, we both owe you a debt of gratitude, which our hearts and affeftions alone can cancel, and yet we petition one more bleffing from him who has------" Whilft he was fpeaking thefe words a faint ficknefs feized my whole frame, and my head became dizzy and painful. I attempt¬ ed to reach the decanter, my ftrength was infufHcient, my head f dì upon a wine glafs near the eóge of the table, the glafs broke under the blow it received, and cut my tem¬ ple j the blood guihed violently from the wound; Edward ftarted from his chair, raifed me from the table, and, while he fupported me
me in his arms, called to the fervants for . afliftance. The blood trickled down my ' face, my fenfation of mental agony increaf¬ ed; a hot air feemed to be choking my throat, and a mift obfcuring niy eyes ; an icy coldnefs then came over my whole frame, and I fainted........
When fenfation returned I found my fell upon the outfide of my own bed, the village apo* thecary, who had juft dreffed my wound, ftanding on one fide of the bed, and Ed¬ ward Wallace leaning upon the other, and applying vinegar to my noftrils. F 'flec¬ tion did not immediately return with life ; I had no remembrance of the paft till I faw Edward; then the torments of memory burft upon me ; from a íhi vering coldnefs my blood became a raging fever, and the agonies of my heart diftilled themfelves in large drops of perfpiration from every pore of my aching body. I raifed myfelf upon the bed, and laid my hand upon my forehead: when my eyes glanced towards Edward, he faid, с 4 "I hope
u I hope you are better." I fliook my head, but could not immediately fpeak : a few moments after I anfwered, " Edward, you call yourfelf my friend ; you are my friend ; I acknowledge you my friend." I extended my hand towards hini ; he took it in his; I prefled his fingers in mine, then added, " I conjure you by our friendihip to leave me, I fhall perhaps be better when you arc gone." Having faid this, I with¬ drew my hand, and placed it before my eyes. Whether Edward thought my fenfes affected by the blow 1 had received I know not ; but when í again looked round I found that he was fitting on a chair by the bed-fide, where he was almoft hid from my obfervation by the curtain. I could not look upon hirn with compofure—1 coukl not command my feelings. " Pray, leave me, Edward," I faid, " it is cruel of you not to со when I defire vou." He rofe D rf and left the room, fav hip, " 1 would do any tiling to obligo you," All that 1 audibly an¬ fweied to this declaration was a figh ; men¬ tally
33 tally I exclaimed, " How little do you know what I defire 1" I funk down upon the bed. The apothecary recommended that I fljould undrefs myfelf and go into bed. My faintnefs was by him, and by thofe who had attended me, thought to be in confe¬ quence of my lofs of blood. I did not con¬ tradict their opinion, hut fuftered myfelf to be put to bed, and cnvleavoured to lie as compofed as my perturbed ftate of mind would permit me. Tiie apothecary adminiftered a cordial ; it warmed mv heart and refreflıed me ; m v ·* -'j ftrength began in fome fmall degree to re¬ turn , but, alas! ίο what puri'ofe did it re- turn î to give a keener câgt^ to the fmart that rankled in my breaft. In a ihort time the apothecary left me: he told ше, that аь the wound iiad bled copi- oufly, nothing was ι о be apprehended from it. He advifed me, if poflible, to fleep: I ielt myfelf that it was 1,ироФМе у and only anfwered by an inclination of my head, b endeavou-ed tocompof; my mind, i endea- \oured ro reafon with niyfeif, but ¡n vain;
34 my mind was tortured, agonized, and the more I reflected the more miferable appear¬ ed my fitation. Oh, good God, Seymour, conceive what I muft have felt at hearing another man de¬ clare that he had gained the heart of Mar¬ garetta !—won the affections of that Marga¬ retta whom I had protected, whom I had cheriflied, whom I had adopted, whom I had educated, and to whom I had looked forward as the fmiling angel from whom all my earthly blifs was henceforward to be de¬ rived; and then—oh, maddening thought!— to reflect that I had loft her becaufe I had neglected to téli her how dear fhe was to my heart, how deeply engraven on my foul ! Thus ran my thoughts—I know not how long—till a gentle lap at my chamber door called my fervant, who 4 was fitting by my bedfide, to open it. I heard the voice of Mrs. Wallace enquiring " if I was afleep r'* on being told that I was not, flie requefted -permiflion to fee me ; I motioned to John to admit her, and when flie was come in he left the chamber· Mrs»
íl »
Mrs. Wallace approached the bed ; I pointed to a chair, and flie placed herfelf upon it. " How do you do now, fir?'* ihe faid; her voice fliowed me that flie had been alarmed. " Not well," I anfwered ; ct not well, indeed."—" Is your temple very pain¬ ful ? " ihe next afked. I had forgot the wounds in my head, and did not recolleci what flie meant till I put up my hand to my forehead and felt the bandage that encircled it. <f Is it very painful?"flie repeated ; " I am afraid it is."—" Not at all," I anfwer¬ ed. She looked at me as if ilie doubted the truth of what I had faid, or rather as if üıe doubted the torn peí ency of my ability for informing her. A paufe enfu¬ ed. " How wore you taken, Sir Charles?' 1 flie broke filence by faying; "did vou turn faint, or were you doling r"—" Oh, no," exclaimed í 3 ť< wide awake, I af¬ fure you."—" You were faint, then ; fome¬ thing had difagreed wirh you/' flie re¬ turned. " You arc right," I replied, tc you are right."—« if you had been fick," ihe again began, " it had been fortunate, it с 6 would
30' would have kept your head from turning dizzy."—" 1 was fick, fick at heart/' i cried with violence. " I did not underftand fo," faid Mrs Wallace. I turned my face to¬ wards the pillow, and again filence enfued. u Have you taken any thing fince you were put to bed ?" Mrs. Wallace prefently de¬ manded. fi Yes, 1 have."— if Do you wifli for any thing now?"— fC No."— iC Tell me when you do/' fhe anfwered; " I am come to watch by you to-night."-— <c You, Mrs. Wallace!"— tc You muft allow me to be your nurfe ; I cannot think of leaving you till 1 fee you better." I began to remon¬ ftrate upon an attendance which 1 knew to be unneceffary, and yet could not fummon fortitude to explain why it was fo. "In¬ deed, Sir Charles," flie anfvvered, tc I muft force myfelf as a nurfe upon you ; I ihall never be foi given if í go home and leave you : if you will not accept of my fervices for your own fake, let me ftay for the peace of Margaretta ; flie will be more miferable than 1 can defcribe if I am not with you." — u Is Margaretta indeed miferable on my account ?
37 account? Does flie indeed feel thus ten¬ derly for me ?" 1 exclaimed. c£ Surely, Sir Charles," replied Mrs. Wallace, " you can¬ not doubt it; have you not been every thing to her, while flie has only tbe grati¬ tude of her heart to return you ?"—" Mar¬ garetta is an angel," I faid, in a voice fcarcely audible. Mrs. Wallace, however, heard what I did fay ; for lhe anfwered, " I hope her prayers will reftore you, for you have them fincereiy." Oh, Seymour, what an agony was I un¬ dergoing to hear that Margaretta revered me, wept for me, prayed for me, and yet loved another ! I was no longer mafter of my feelings, the quicknefs of fenfe out. ftepped reafon, and I cried, " Can this be true, and can it alfo be true that flic does not now"------* love me ?' I vvould have added, but ftill contending fenfations feem¬ ed to advife that I fliould keep the fecret locked in my" own breaft. Mrs. Wallace imagined that flic had underftood how I in¬ tended to finifli my fentenee ; for fhe faid, ťí You mean, fir, that flie does not how come
38
come to vifit you ; indeed flie was very ear¬ neft in her entreaties to fee you to-night ; but I perfuaded her not to come till the morning."—** Dear, generous girl !" I ex¬ claimed ; cc fend one of my fervants direftly to let her know that I am much, much bet¬ ter/*—" My fon, fir," fhe anfwered, " is waiting here to carry Margaretta tidings of your health."—" Oh, God !" inadvertently efcaped my lips, and again my hand was placed on my aching head. Mrs. Wallace rofe and ftood by the bedfide : " You are not better, Sir Charles," fhe faid. " I am ill at eafe," I replied, " Pray., Sir Charles," flie faíd, in emotion, " has my fon Edward offended you ?" I fighed, but did not anfwer. " I entreat you, Sir Charles, to tell me if he has." Mrs. Wallace wenton : *' He told me that he feared, by yoar fend¬ ing him away from you, that he had un¬ willingly difobliged you; if he has done fo, pray admit him to your chamber, if it be but for a minute, that he may iearn in what he has afted contrary to your wifh, and atone for his fault : he is very unhappy at the
39 the idea of having offended you." The tears were ftarting into her eyes as flie fpoke thefe words ; they challenged mine ; I en¬ deavoured to fpeak, but my utterance was choked. Mrs. Wallace continued, te Ed¬ ward would have died fooner than have of¬ fended his benefactor!" Her anxiety at the charge of ingratitude, which, I believe, flie feared I might be feeling againft her fon, could no longer be reftrained, and fhe burft out into fobs of grief. I could not bear to fee the effect of my own pain falling in torture upon the heart o{ another. I raifed up myfelf haftiiy in the bed, caught the hand of Mrs. Wallace, nipped it in mine, and faid, " Mrs. Wallace, will you believe what I fliall fay ?"—" Certainly, certainly I fliall," fhe anfwered through her tears. " Upon my honour, then," I replied, " your fon has not offended me in word or action ; I fpoke harflily to him, I could not help it ; but I was not angry with him, I was im¬ paffioned againft my own feelings ; but I called him friend even in the fervour of my feelings j I conjured him by our friendihip to leave my chamber. Pray, go to him now—
40 now—go immediately, good Mrs. Wallace, and tell him, that in the fame name of friend I entreat him to pardon the feverity with, which I fpoke to him." Mrs. Wallace would not fuffer me to proceed ; her tears now flowed fafter than they had done be¬ fore, though from different fenfations, and in indiftinft fentences faid, 4t No, Sir Charles, no, no, this humiliation muft not be ; you muft not afk the pardon of my poor boy; he would be more hurt by your fubmiffion than when he thought you were difpleafed with him* No, no, î cannot, will not so to him, much as I know he defires to hear that he has not ofiended you."— u I muft fend another meffenger to him then," faid l t ** for I cannot live under the idea of having given pain to one whom I efteem." Mrs. Wallace wiped thc tears from her eyes, then rejoined, i; Might Edward—would you allow Edward the fatisfaciion of coming for a moment into your chamber, and juft ihak¬ ing you by thc hand, in order to convince him that you are not difpleafed wiíh him?'* Again a figli, and only a deep figh, efcaped me in anfwer to her requeft. í did not know
41 know how to fupport the prefence of the Iman who had won the loye of Margaretta, fand I felt as much hurt to refufe feeing Ed¬ ward, when it was the petition of his weep- rfing mother that I fliould fee him. " May I [call him in ?" alked Mrs. Wallace. I nt- tered a faint " Yes." She left the room. I again felt fick and faint ; but í refolved to mufter ftrength to fupport the fliort inter¬ view. I put my hand on the outfide of the bed ; I was uncertain whether I could com¬ mand fufficient fortitude in order to draw it out in order to put it into the hand of the man who had won the heart of Margaretta, when he ftood before me. Edward entered, took the hand 1 had prepared for him, prefled it in his, and faid, " Am I forgiven, Sir Charles?"—" Indeed,'* I anfwered, "you have never offended me, you were miftaken : I beg your pardon for having given you a momentary feeling the reverfe of happinefs; but I cannot talk now, yon muft leave me." — <ť Let me fit by your bedfide to-night," he replied. " On no account," I returned, " Are you better?" he next afked. « The wound
43 wound in my head is much better," I an¬ fwered. " I am fincereiy glad of it," he cried; u and fince you will not permit me to be your companion, í will go home with thc happy tidings of your amendment to Margaretta : good-night, and may you be ftill better in the morning." He left thc room. I thought Mrs. WaPace had gone out with him, and, imagining myfelf alone, 1 gave vent to my fcejings, and exclaimed, *' My heart will break before that period arrives !" As I concluded thefe words I raifed my eyes towards the foot of the bed, and faw Mrs. Wallace ftanding before it, and liftening in aftoniftiment to what I had faid. She came round to the fide of the bed : " For Heaven's fake, fir," fhe cried, €t what aiflifts you ? fome heavy forrow is la¬ bouring in your heart. Excufe my being fo free as to tell you fo ; but, from the firft mo¬ ment ofmy feeing you, I thought your eyes looked more like thöfe of a perfon whofe peace was difturbed than his health." I fuffered a few moments to pafs in filence, then faid, " Mrs. Wallace, if I confide to you
4:ï vou that my cafe is fuch as you imagine it to be, have you fufficient difcretion to bind it down a fecret to your own breaft?"— " Certainly, fir, if you command me," flie anfwered. " Enough," 1 replied, " your word is pledged to me : what the anxiety is that is preying upon my mind I am not now going to impart to you; in time you will know it. Be affured that it is nothing which interferes with your own happinefs. You now perceive that I want no nurfe during the night; leave me, therefore, but do not leave the houfe to-night, as your re¬ turn now might furprife your fon and Mar- caretta. I dare fav mv mind will be eafier by the morning; for I then fliall have deter¬ mined upon fome points on which 1 am now undecided. Good-night, good Mrs. Wal¬ lace ; order a bed to be provided for your¬ felf, and fend m ν fervant to me." Having faid this, I endeavoured to lay myfelf down with compofure İn my bed. " Ifyou choofe I fliould leave you—" returned Mrs. Wallace, and made a confiderable paufe after flie had fpoken the words ; which, as 1 did not in¬ terrupt,
terrupn flie added, « Good-night, Sir Chai les, and pray God make you better and hap¬ pier." She then went out of the chamber with the flow flep of doubt and anxiety. When John came to my chamber, the apothecary came with him, and after my wound had been dreffed. I fent'my fervant down to give orders that 1 should not be in¬ terrupted anv more that nisrht. On his re- turn I had my door locked, rofe and dreffed myfelf: I felt faint, but more haraffed in mind than in body. My writing deik was then placed before me, and I ordered John to go to bed in the clofet. I have now been writing nearly four hours, and have, as far as the making our forrows known to a friend can relieve the heart, d i fenc umbered mine of fome fmall portion ofthe weight of grief with which it is load¬ ed. I ihall now return to bed, not to fleep, but to reflect, upon a conduct which I am half refolved, and yet more than half afraid to adopt. Oh, Seymour! pity me; í am in¬ deed miferable, although the fault lies with myfelf* Sweet are your flumbers ; nothing interrupts
4J Interrupts your approaching fleep, but the heavings of a heart that beats only for you, as you recline your head on the bofom of an affectionate wife : my pillow is fluffed with thorns !—Once more I entreat you to pity the unfortunate, Charles Melford*
LETTER VI. Sir Charles Melford* in continuation. SEYMOUR, I Melford-houfe. F ever a wretch breathed upon this earth. it is myfelf. It is now eleven o'clock in the morning, and I have not yet come to any refolution ; I have a noble defign in my head, 'but my heart ftill clings cowardly to the intereft of the frame it inhabits, and forms delays to its execution. Oh, what a night have I pafled! how trivial are the fufferings of bodily pain, when compared with
46 with the tortures of the mind. Methinks the very rendings of the rack might be tamely borne by one who had felt the con¬ fila now raging in my heart ; and then, as if the caufe itfelf of my fufferings were not enough for one mortal to bear, I have the additional, the bitter fting of felf reproach, for not having fo regulated my conduci as to have prevented the mifery which has now befallen me. With what acutenefs do thc juftice of your admonitions, the truth ofyour advice, the friendftiip of your counfels, now ftrike upon my heart ! Oh, Seymour ! I cannot forbear aiking myfelf whether retribution may not fometimes overtake us on earth ? whether my prefent difappointment may not be my punifliment for having wandered into the by-paths of pleafure with the Mar¬ chefa Laura, when the high-road to blifs jay open to me, through the heart of Mar- garetta ? the heart of Margaretta, which was then untouched by any paflion but that of gratitude and friendftiip for me ! Oh, hovv exquifiteJy might thofe paflions then have
47 have been converted into the tendereft fen¬ fations, with which the human breaft can glow ! ------Now------Oh, I cannot think—· I cannot write—......... .....Two more hours are pafled, ftill my refolution faulters. I have volun¬ tarily promifed myfelf a father to Marga¬ retta, a friend to Edward Wallace. Is it the part of a father—is it the part of a friend, to difunite two worthy hearts joined by the fweeteft ties ?—even—even though his own fliould break in making theirs infe- parable ?—This is a felfifh thought ; but it is fo keen a one, that it will not be pafled over in filence. I am fated to be unhappy ; for even if I could now make Margaretta mine, where would be the blifs that a man could enjoy in cruthing the firft love of an amiable pair, to gratify his own fefiifli de¬ fires ? Oh, no, this I can never do; I can rather bear to be unhappy myfelf, than to make Margaretta fo. Mifery is then my doom; but my obligation ro confer juftice is ftill tiie fame; and I will not add a crime towards another to the fault I have already committed
48 committed towards my own heart : my mind is already too much burdened. I have defired Mrs. Wallace to wait for a note which I am going to write to Mar- garetta. I am faint, and ill. Great God ! grant me ftrength to execute my defign, I will not then quarrel with feeblenefs of in- telleft, or body ; perhaps it may prove a friend to waken the acutenefs of thought. —Now is the time—my hand trembles, my head aches, every thing fwims before my eyes. Why did I not attend to your admo¬ nitions ? but it is paft; and I will—be juft î .....It is done— í have written to Margaretta; I could fcarcely breathe be¬ fore ; I have wept fmce, and my mind is fomewhat relieved by it. Mrs. Wallace has taken the letter; little does flie fufpeft what it contains. I wifli Margaretta had re¬ ceived it. I fliould be cafier if I thought flie had read it. Thought is very pain¬ ful; I will endeavour to divert it by tranf¬ cribing to you my letter to Margaretta ; it ran thus ; " Margaretta,
49 tc Margaretta, the moft arduous taik ofmy life is that I this moment experience in ^writing to you; and yet how fliould I ere yefterday have ridiculed the idea of my feeling pain in addrefling you ! You have hitherto called me benefaalor; you have poured forth from your generous bofom effufions of gratitude, which have made every fervice I could render you too little for the merits of your heart. You have caiied me alfo father ; I have had from you all the reverence, the duty of a daughter, and I have endeavoured to repay to you all the obligations depending from a father to a child : never, never I entreat you ceafe to feel for me as for a father ; it is the moil folemn petition I fliall ever urge to you. I have always found you fo tenderly obedient, even to the very anticipation of my wifhes, that I do not hefitate to decide—that my prefent requeft is already comphed with by you ; пау,Л even believe I have done you in¬ juftice in the making of it, for I ought to have recollected that it was a law engraven on your excellent heart.—Now kt me explain vol, ii. * d w T hy
50 why I made it, and how I defire you ihould underftand my petition. ï wifli you to feel for me only as you would feel for a father; I wifh you to forget that there is any pre- ponderancy of obligation on your part to me; and from this moment I entreat you to confider whatever fervices may pafs between us, as the mutual obligations between father and child. This is the prayer of him to whom Margaretta has fo often faid, c Oh, that I could tell you all the gratitude my heart feels for you ! oh, that I could repay you, if but in part, the obligations I have received at your hands !* The moment is now come at which I will accept a requital from you ; what that requital is, I have already pointed out to you ; do not turn in¬ grate, and refufe to make it to me.— " Margaretta has bound herfelf to the re¬ queft: of Sir Charles Melford, flie is hence¬ forward his daughter, and confiders herfelf entitled to receive from him the fervices of a father.— ** This I venture to affirm to my own heart, confident of the defire which your's pofleflTes
51 poffeffes to acquiefce in any requeft of mine. " Now hear me: you have promiíèd to obey me ; mark then what is the firft com¬ mand of your father, and attend to my in¬ ftručtions faithfully: go to Edward Wallace, tell him thefe words ; ' Edward, you have confided to my father our mutual affection · he thinks you worthy of my hand and heart, and confents to give his bleffing to our union/ Then give him the notes which I have inciofed in this letter, their value ie five thoufand pounds ; tell him it is your dower; requeft him, from me, that your marriage may take place to-morrow morn¬ ing. Pardon me, my dear daughter, tbat I cannot witnefs the folemnity, nor can I fee- either of you till it is performed ; when the indiffoluble knot is tied, then come to me* you fhall have my bleiBng, and the beft congratulations my health wjlî permit me to beftow. God blefs you ! return me no anfwer, afk me no queftions, only come to ше the moment you are the wife of Edward n г Wallace ¿
ко
Wallace ; I cannot embrace you with the fervor of a father till you are his wife. Heaven blefs you now, then, and ever ! fuch is the prayer of your father, Charles Melford." Have I done right ? I feel tolerably fatif- fied with my own conduft, and it has always been a rule with me, that a man's own con¬ fcience ihould be the touchftone on vvhich to try the nature of his aftions. This hafty marriage will fpare pain both to them and myfelf. Edward will not know he ever had a rival, till he is convinced that he has nothing to fear from him. A double incli¬ nation will impel Margaretta to obey my in- ñrüftions, and when ihe is once another's, perhaps the fever in my brain will cool. Margaretta another^! Oh, almighty powers, on how uncertain a wheel do all the acci¬ dents of this life revolve ! Eight-and^forty hours ago I would have flaked my life a- gainfl: the íhadow of a pofiibiiity that Mar¬ garetta would have become any man's wife but my own........... My
53 . . My letter has been gone nearly four' hours. I receive no anfwer. Marga¬ retta obeys me. Good-night to happinefs, the duiky veil of forrow is drawn over my future profpečts. Yet, I wonder they were not furprifed at the haftinefs with which I aiked their marriage to be folemnifed. I wonder alfo that they İhduld not think it ftrange that I fliould refufe to fee them till they w r ere become infeparable. Perhaps Margaretta fees a myftery in my letter, and is by that prevented from returning me an anfwer. I expect at leaft her thanks. I know I told^ier not to return me an anfwer, and tbercfol^ I ought not to expect one; but my minti is in a ftate not very confif¬ tent even with itfelf. ....... .......Mrs. W r allace aiks to fee me ; ï told my fervant to tell her that I was fallen afleep. " She will wait then," ? fhe fays, " till I wake, for ftie mufl fee me t to-night." I cannot refufe feeing her, as I find ihe is alone. In a few min tues I fhaU admit her into my chamber, D 3 I HAVJ2
54 Twelve o'clock at night. I have not been able to write for fome hours. The die of my fate is decidedly caft ; Margaretta becomes the wife of Ed¬ ward Wallace : but I will proceed as com¬ pofedly as I am able. When Mrs. Wallace came into my room, I was lying upon a fofa before the table at which I had been writing ; fhe approached me with her hands raifed, and attempted to throw herfelf on her knees before me ; I prevented her, and placed her on the fofa by my fide : it was a long time before ilie could command her utterance, and when fhe did fpeak, her words were fo confufed as to be almoft un¬ intelligible ; I gathered from her, however, that fhe was come commiftioned to exprefs to me the thanks of her fon and Marga¬ retta. I could not command my feelings fufficiently to keep upon my feat ; I rofe and walked up and down the room while íhe was fpeaking, at intervals exclaiming, " Enough, enough, for Heaven's fake no more thanks/' At length fhe ceafed her ftrain
55 ftrain of gratitude; but I ftill continued traverfing the room. She did not fpeak a- gain until I refumed my feat > flie then faid, " Sir Charles, you ïaft night confeffed to me , that you had fome fecret caufe of mifery , | you faid too, that in time 1 ftiould know ' vvhat it was."—" I did, but I now fincereiy hope that you never will," I exclaimed, interrupting her. She looked at me fteâd- faftly ; but did not anfwer me. ςζ Indeed/* I continued, ** it is diifipating faft> and I truft will foon be quite worn avvay."—" Your looks and words difagree/* faid Mrs. Wal¬ lace ; " your features are more care worn to-day, even than they were laft night."— " Oh, no," I anfvvered. cf Indeed they are," flie returned $ u and I think I know the caufe."— u Surely you cannot," I cried, thrown a little off my guard by her declara¬ tion. " Nay," flie replied, " it was Mar¬ garetta's firft fufpicion; but I think her right in it, and fo does Edward*"—'* What does Margaretta fay?" aíked I trembling. "She fays, Sir Charles," Mrs* Wallace went on, " that fhe fears you have been croffed *>4 in
56 in love, and that on this account— K This was a happy miftake, and I imme¬ diately interrupted her by faying, " Marga¬ retta is right, 1 have been croffed in love ; and this is the reafon why I could not bear your fon's prefence, at the moment he told me that he was a favoured lover; this is the reafon that I cannot witnefs Edward's mar¬ riage with Margaretta; this is alfo the reafon why I wifh it to be fo hafty, becaufe I hope I fhall feel nothing when they are once united."—" You are too good a man to have #net with fuch a difappointment," returned Mrs. Wallace; " indeed it was the opinion of us all that this was the cafe; your Jetter to Margaretta, though filled with the kind¬ nefs of an angel, fliows your mind to be ill at eafe ; and, moreover, fhe thought there muft be fome very preffing reafon for your wiihing Edward and ftie to be married at fo ftiort notice, as to-morrow morning ; but ihe bade me inform you that all fcruples yanifli, where the peace of your mind is concerned ; and flie alfo defired me to fay, that flie hopes you have not felt yourfelf flighted
57 flighted by her, in her not having told you herfelf that Edward had gained her heart ; but that ihe had only given her confent to be his in a few days, and intended to have informed you of it the very firft opportu¬ nity." Again I rofe and traverfed the room. ft This is a fubject upon which we muft talk no more ; I hope after to-morrow you will be better," faid Mrs. Wallace. " If my feelings undergo any change, it muil be for the better," I returned. " Will you allow me to keep you company, or do you wiih to be alone ?" afked Mrs. Wallace, " I prefer being alone," was my anfwer. She rofe to depart; and after a few more immaterial fentences had. paffed between us, flie faid, " I hope, Sir Charles, a good night's reft will afford your aching heart re¬ lief; if not, it will be better I truft to¬ morrow at this time, for every thing will be done in the morning according to your di¬ rections ; hafty as the affair is, we muft îofe no time in giving eafe to your mind." I endeavoured to fay fomething which ihould found like gratitude for the intereft they d 5 took
ss took in my feelings; and Mrs. Wallace left me. To-morrow my Margaretta becomes the wife of another, and by my σωη confent ! Oh, how craftily do the accidents of life con¬ trive to ficken man of his mortal ftate, and fill him with defires for a future exiftence ! —Oh, Seymour, perhaps after death—but my brain will madden if I give a loofe to thought.--Oh, that I could fleep till to-mor¬ row noon were paft ! I will ileep ; I hear my apothecary upon the ftairs, and he fliall give me a dofe to lull me for the night. The apothecary is gone ; he has counted out the drops of opium which I am to fwalîow ; I fliall call in my fervant, lock my door, drink my cordial, and to bed. Fare¬ wel, dear happy friend, farewel—I almoft wiih to iay for ever ! Charles Melford,
59
LETTER VII. Sir Charles Melford, in continuation. DEAR SEYMOtTR, NMelfbrd-houfe, nine o'clock ia the mora&f. oTwiTHSTANDiNG my draught I have been awake thefe two hours ·* another hour, and the feal of fate will be ftamped upon my doom *, —another hour, and Marga¬ retta will have pronounced vows of fidelity to Edward Wallace. My whole frame î& this morning languid almoft to imbecility;,. ï have little pain either in my head or heart* The Marchefa fends to enquire after my health, and whether fhe may be allowed to fee me to-day j I return in anfwer, *' that I am not worfe, but beg not to receive a vifit from her at prefent." If I had never feen Marchefa Laura, or rather, if I had confeifed my heart to Margaretta before my departure from England—-but man is the creature of his own abfurdity, and kis fete is not in his hands. *> 6 1 tailed
60 I tafted fcarcely any nourifhment the whole of yefterday ; my fervant entreats me to take fome breakfaft; nature requires that I fliould make the attempt. Ten o'clock. Oh, Seymour, I fcarcely know how to hold my pen, or what I am writing now I have taken it up. Margaretta has broken her arm ! how fad, yet how ftrange an oc¬ currence ! I ihall inftantly drefs myfelf, and go to her ; I cannot keep myfelf away from Margaretta when ihe is in affliftion. Adieu í yours truly, Charles Melford. LETTER VIII. Sin Charles Melford, in continuation. VV HEN I arrived at Briar-bank farm, the bone had been already fet, and Margaretta put to bed ; the fracture was a fimple one in
61 in the left arm : flie fell from the top of a flight of ftairs which flie was going to de¬ fcend, at the bottom of which Edward was waiting to receive her, and conduft her to church. Strange, unaccountable acci¬ dent! It had been the particular order of the furgeon that ibe fliould be kept quiet ; accordingly,greatas was my defire once more to behold Margaretta not the wife of an¬ other man, I conftrained myfelf to leave the houfe without feeinsr her. Edward Wal- о lace did not offer to walk home with me, nor did he even glance at what was to have been the tranfaftion of the day ; I fuppofe he omitted fpeaking upon it from delicacy to my feelings. How will this accident lengthen out the pangs which it is my r lot to endure ! I fliall now be under the neceflity of frequently feeing Margaretta before ihe is the wife of Edward Wallace, or of aftin«: by her, what muft appear both an unkind and an affefted part, that of not vifiting her at all : vifit her I muft ; pray Heaven my feelings may be fubfervient to my reafon vvhen I do fee her in
62 In my way home, I met the Marchefa Laura walking in the park which fur¬ rounds Melford-houfe ; flie expreffed fur¬ prife at feeing me out, after the meffage I had juft fent to her. I explained the reafon of my being abroad ; and as the Marchefa, who had joined me in my walk, continued to lament the unfortunate accident which had called me from home, I could not help faying at how peculiar a moment the unfor¬ tunate event had taken place. " Was Mar¬ garetta," fhe afked, " going to be married to Edward Wallace }"—" Yes," I replied,. * ť how does that furprife you?"—"The fame Margaretta," fhe next enquired, u whom I have fo often heard you mention as your protegee ?" — iC The fame." — ** Good Heavens," flie cried, " I had always under¬ ftood, that when her education was com¬ pleted, you intended to make her your own wife."—" I never told you fo, Marchefa."— ** No, Sir Charles, but I could not help fancying that you had often, in my prefence> betrayed fuch an intention to be in your heart." I endeavoured to fmib away the opinion
63 opinion of the Marchefa; íhe fmiîed alfo» but did not feem convinced by the mode of contradifting her which I had taken.. We walked forward a few moments in fiience ; the Marchefa then faid, " I have often aiked you to bring me acquainted with your pro¬ tegee, and have underftood the reafon why you did not acquiefce in my requeft ; but I have now been two months in England confined to the folitude ofa cottage, except when your vifits have broken it; is my petition for her acquaintance ftill to be denied ?" I paufed a few moments, then anfwered, " When Margaretta is fufrlciently recovered to fee a ftranger, I will introduce you to her." She received my promife with pleafure. As we approached nearer to the houfe, ihe faid, " I have a good mind to invite myfelf to pafs the day with you ; your fpirits feem to be low, and unfit for foli¬ tude." I readily accepted the offer of her fociety ; two hours before I could not have borne the converfation of any one created being. I cannot explain the caufe of my feelings 5 but now, notwithftanding the anxiety
64 anxiety I was experiencing on account of Margaretta's painful fituation, I felt in better fpints, and more inclined to be a- mufed than I did when flie was well, and going to------oh, hold, in that fentenee I fear the caufe is explained. The Marchefa left me early in the even¬ ing. Our converfation during the day was upon indifferent topics; but ftili flie found opportunities of expreffing her furprife that the Margaretta of whom I had fpoken to her in terms of fo high encomium and rap¬ ture, would, but for the accident that had befallen her, have that day become the w T ife of Edward Wallace. Whenever flie re¬ turned to the fubject, I endeavoured to d r '.ve it away by the immediate introduction of fome other topic ι but I fear I fucceeded ill in difguifing my features to her difcern- ing eyes. I ventured to-day to enquire of her, whether ihe had yet received any letters from Italy, and fhe informed me that flie had not. Margaretta is well beyond the moft flat¬ ter in sr
65 terin"- hopes of the furgeon who attends her; flie is extremely compofed, and has very little fever; fhe is an angel of meek- nefs, and her temper will be her beft phyfi¬ cian. Farewel; you fliall hear from me a- gain very foon ; yours fincereiy, Charles Melford.
LETTER IX. Sir Charles Melford to Geoy^ge Seymour, Efq* DEAR GEORGE, IMclrbrd-houfe. Τ is now ten days fince I wrote to you laft, and I have not once heard from you fince I gave you an account of my firft dif¬ covery of my ever-to-be-felt difappoint¬ ment ; what can be the reafon of your filence ? Perhaps you do not know whether to confole, to blame, or to applaud me: our friendftiip admits of free fpeaking, and you never hefitated to addrefs me openly before ; why then are you now filent ?
66 filent? Say fomething to me, for to hear from you at all will be a relief to my fpints. Every favourable fymptom continues in the fracture of Margaretta's arm; I have feen her feveral times. Oh, what painful, yet exquifite moments are thofe paffed in her fociety ! The firft time of my feeing her, flie burft into tears as I approached the bed, and extended her right hand towards me; I put out mine to her, ihe kiffed it, then faid, " Forgive me, I am very weak, and could not forbear—" She faw my emo¬ tion, checked her words, then added, " but I will do fo no more, I affure you." She has faithfully kept her word ; Ed¬ ward Wallace too, when he is prefent at the times I am fitting with Margaretta, fcrupuloufly avoids ihewing her any of the attentions of a lover ; no doubt out of re¬ fpect to my feelings. Could I interrupt the happinefs of fuch a pair ? I could not be a man to do it ! I told Margaretta to-day that I wifh to introduce to her the Marchefa Laura ; " flie is another of my daughters," faid Í, ** and you
67 you muft become acquainted."—■" I have often wondered, " replied Margaretta, " when I have confidered the fituation in which, from your own words, we both ftand to you, that you fliould not before hare made us known to each other."—" The Marchefa," I anfwered, almoft uncertain what to fay, " has experienced much un¬ happinefs in life ; both her health and fpirits have been extremely bad ; fhe has not till very lately been at all calculated to mix in fociety ; but fhe now wiflies to be¬ come acquainted with you."—" Pray bring her with you to-morrow morning," returned Margaretta. I have promifed to comply with her requeft, and till that time is paft I fhall lay down my pen......»
* · * · I have been with the Marchefa to vifit Margaretta; I felt it an awkward introduc¬ tion for me to'make; but I contrived;4o hide my feelings. How many fituations in life are there, in which it would never be difco¬ vered that a man had any occafion to feci embarraffed,
68 embarraffed, unlefs his own confeflion be¬ trayed him ! iC We muft be friends," faid the Marchefa, after the common-place fen¬ tences of fucli an interview had pafled be¬ tween them ; " will you admit me to your friendftiip ?"— " Whoever is the friend of Sir Charles Melford, is my friend," replied Margaretta. Their hands were then joined as pledges of their promifed intimacy. Margaretta's vifitors are at prefent not al¬ lowed to remain long w T Íth her, thus our flay was fcarcely. half an hour ; when we rofe to depart, Margaretta faid, "You fee, Mar¬ chefa, my inability to return your vifit, you muft therefore make your's frequent to me."— " It is an invitation I accept with pleafure," returned the Marchefa. We had fcarcely left the houfe before the Marchefa faid, " How exquifite a girl is Margaretta; how interefting does the lan¬ guor of illnefs make her beautiful counte¬ nance; how fenfibly does every word flie utters touch the heart !" I fighed, and the Marchefa continued, " How great, how noble a mind muft you poffefs ; with what abfolute
tø abfolute fway muft you be able to regulate your paflions, that you could ever perfuade yourfelf to give up a prize like this, for the happinefs of another man !"—" It is for hcr own happinefs, I hope and truft," I re¬ turned, " that flie marries Edward Wal¬ lace."—" And this/' replied the Marchefa, tc is the ftrongeft proof of your affection for her; you give up your own happinefs to enfure her's ; what love, what gratitude, muft flie not feel for you !"—" She is not deficient," I anfwered, tc in any one virtue of the human heart ; but I beg of you, Marchefa, do not mention this fubject to me again, it is one I cannot bear to dwell upon."— u You are a man," flie exclaimed, <c without your equal; may Heaven find fome other laeans to make you happy!" I did not reply, and we reached her cottage in filence ; at the door we parted, and I im¬ mediately returned home to conclude my letter. If you are ftill alive, and have a heart open -to the entreaties of a friend, write to me
70 me as foon as you receive this from him who is yours moft fincereiy and ever, Charles Melford.
LETTER X. George Seymour, Efq. to Sir Charles Melford. P, Kirton. ARDO№ me, my dear Charles, that I have feemed to neglect you at a time when I know my correfpondence would have given you pleafure ; but I have had con¬ cerns at home, which have till this moment demanded all my attention: Mrs. Hughford is no more ; I followed her yefterday to the grave; and the affliction of my Emma, who has loft in her the only parent whom ihe ever knew, has required all my attendance, and all my care. Now the Jaft fad office which can be rendered her in this world has been performed for her much-beloved mother,
71 mother, the compofure of my Emma be¬ gins to return, at leaft the violence of her grief is in a great meafure abated, and I am enabled to fnatch a few minutes to ex¬ plain to my friend the neceffity of my having thus long negìecìed to write to him. 1п л how peculiar a fituation have you been placed, and with what noblen efs of mind have you acted 1 But, oh, Charles, this cruel accident which has befallen Mar¬ garetta ! I fcarcely lament her misfortune more than I do the effecl which it has pro¬ duced ; I mean the neceffary protraction of her marriage with Edward Wallace· I know the goodnefs of your heart, and I know how well it intends ; but I know alfo the mutability of your heart; I have feen that it can at times command its paflions with the moft praife-worthy firmnefs ; and I have alfo feen that the moft trifling titra¬ tion of its fenfes can, at any unguarded moment, change the whole courfe of its feelings. Now, therefore, that you have once determined not to interrupt the happi¬ nefs of Margaretta and Edward Wallace, carefully
72 carefully guard your heart and tongue^ that no unexpefted moment may warm the one, or give an unintended loofe to the other ; I mean, w r atch carefully that Margaretta does not learn for whom that love was entertain¬ ed, in which you were, according to the opinion of her and Mrs. Wallace, croffed. Were flie once to gain this knowledge, mark what would be ^he event ¡-Margaretta would refufe to marry Edward, from the idea of her being bound by gratitude to make you happy, in preference to any other man ; honour would forbid you to make her your wife, after you had once given her to Edward Wallace ; and thus a difcovery of your heart would only make wretches of two individuals;,and your own feelings be¬ come ftill more painful than they now are, from the knowledge of your having, in an unguarded moment, ftabbed their happinefs. Take my advice, you acknowledge that it has fometimes been good, and come to Kirton till Margaretta is perfeftly re¬ covered, and united to Edward Wallace. You will find here at leaft a diverfity of fcene
73 fcene to amufe your eye, and tt is not im¬ poflible but that you might fee fome objeft: capable of interefting your heart , but of that poffibility, I fuppofe, I muft not fpeak at prefent, while another paflion is yet glowing in your breaft. And if you fear while you are with us to correfpond either with Edward Wallace, or Marga¬ retta—which, indeed, I think it would be more prudent for you not to do—requeft the Marche ία, fince fhe is now become ac¬ quainted with Margaretta, to give you in¬ telligence of her health in your abfence. Mrs. Seymour has long wiflied to vifit Wales ; come and ftay with us till fhe finds it convenient to undertake the journey, and 1 think when that is performed, you may return with fafety into Rutlandlhirc, and if you want an efcort, we will promife to conduft you. Short as my letter is, ϊ muft bid you fare¬ well, for I cannot leave Emma any longer. Keep a ftrift guard on your conduft ; re¬ member that a difcovery noze* could but add to your mifery ; let this refieftion be a VOL. II. E tıV
74 tie upon your words and aftions. Adieu, and believe me, with the fincereft regard, Your friend, George Seymour.
LETTER XL Sir Charles Melford to George Seymour, Efq, NMeîford-houfe. O, Seymour! I cannot leave Rutland¬ fliire at prefent ; ƒ hate loved, nay í do love too tenderly, to be happy at a di¬ ftance from Margaretta in her prefent ftate. The frači ure in her arm improves daily ; but yet, I cannot leave her 5 but do not fear me, I will not by look, word, or figh, give the flighteft hint that may lead to a difcovery of the real ftate of my heart. I am melancholy it is true ; but of this they all think they know the reafon, and it is paifed over unnoticed. The Marchefa is as conftant as myfelf in her
75
her vifits to Margaretta; they both exprefs fatisfačtion in the fociety of each other. It is now twenty days fince Margaretta's un* fortunate accident; fhe is entirely free from fever, and the ftay. of her vifitors is now at her own option. Sometimes flie afks me to fit and read to her; her requefts are commands. Thomfon is the author who beft pleafes her : I read to her this morning how Cela¬ don loft his Amelia ; the picture touched my heart, I could read no more; I com¬ plained of a hoarfenefs in my throat, and fliut the book. Sometimes fhe dictates her thoughts, and I put them for her upon paper. Thc Jincs which were fent to her by Mrs. Seymour (and for which I fear I have omitted to re¬ turn her many, many thanks) arc con¬ ftantly on the table by her, ihe takes plea¬ fure in imitating them. Mrs. Seymour may yet know Margaretta, though not as my Margaretta; but I will not again begin to indulge this very painful ftrain, for my head and heart have been to¬ lerably at refl for the laft few davs. к г \ hope
76 I hope this letter will find your Emma more compofød; if I durft, at fuch a time, urge a petition to her, I would fay, that Margaretta told me this morning, that no¬ thing could give her fo much pleafure as to be favoured with a copy of fome more of Mrs. Seymour's elegant little productions. Adieu : pardon this hint in a father who fpeaks on the part of his daughter, and be¬ lieve me fincereiy yours, Chariæs Melford.
LETTER
77
LETTER ХИ. George Seymour, Efq. to Sir Charles Melford. С К írton. HARLES, Charles— your refolution is ftill unfteady, or you would come to Kirton. Why remain in Rutlandfliire to feed a hope¬ lefs paffion by daily intercourfe with the [ object who provokes it? I have a good 1 mind to come and take you away by force ; for you are only lingering where you are, to lay up a ftore of mifery for your future life. Oh, that you could but at this moment meet fome other woman who might engage your attention, or intereft your friendftiip !—I will not fay warm your heart, but that might be the confequence, and the prefatory ftep to touching your heart, from any object whom you could once perfuade yourfelf to think ami¬ able:—it is the only event which, in my opi¬ nion can give an effectual turn to your feelings. While you fuffer yourfelf to be conftantly the companion of Margaretta* you are con- E 3 ftantly
78 ftantly feeing lier accompliihments and her virtues in new examples; and, obferving them through the eye of prejudice, you al¬ ways conclude them increafed, the object who poffeffes rhem fiill more defirable than ihe was before, and yourown misfortune mag¬ nifying with every hour. Believe me, this is noi: the method you muft purfue to regain your happinefs : you have acted towards Margaretta and Edward Wallace with the noblencfs ofa man ; be equally firm in con¬ tributing towards your own peace. I fliall fay no more on this fubject ; I have given you hints for reflection, and 1 hope you will ufe and improve them to the promo¬ tion to your own future happinefs. To fhow you that I am willing to pay at¬ tention to all your requefts, though you flight mine, I have fent you another copy of verfes written by my wire ; but I only let you have them on this condition, that you will go and bid farewel to Margaretta for the prefent, and make them your parting gift. Adieu : Mrs. Seymour joins me in moft fincere wifties; for the reftoratiön of Mar« garetta's
79 garetta's health, and your happinefs. Do not write, but come. George Seyjmou*.. Vertes biß Mrs. Seymour, invlofod hi the above letter, on Ttßüng a Spot in t.\c Country vherc the days of Child¬ hood xwre paj/cd* OH, feenes, where once in youth's gay hour The days flew fwifrly o'er my head ; Where fu-ceb were cull'd from Nature's bou-V ; Where willies were by virtue led ! Oh, feerie:» belov'd ! your fight or.ee more With magic's rupture charms my eyes ; I feel the joys» I've felt before, Paft hours of blifü like vifions rife ! I pace the garden round and round, Reft on the mofly turf-built bank, Search the arch*r! grotto's depth profound, Obferve the willow's foliage lank; The hermit's folitude I feek, Where Meditation loves to dwell, Where mikl-ey'd Peace, with Influence meek, Her charm benign breutheb o'er his cell. Ah, Mem'ry ! now I own thy pow*r; Till noro thy charms to me were loft j Never didft thou until thù hour Caufe me to make thy name my boaft. e 4 AII
ΑΠ earthly joys—hW few, how rare ! Aias ! when childhood's dream is paft Oii г hours are deeply tiiig'd with cnre, Each day more bitter than the taft t Then are we forc'd by Cuftom's fway To bfcnd at Fafliion's toilfome flirine ; To fay the ball-room's glaring ray Beams nought but »xtacy divine! Yet, ah! in this tumulruous (cene, Where al ] feems happinefs and truth, Vice, rob'd in Virtue's garb ferene, Smiles, treach'rous fmiles, on eafy youth I The graceful veil, the nodding plume, The head bedeck'd with finds of pearl, The fandallacM, the fweet perfume, Each charm Love's ftandard can unfurl ; The half-hid grace, by Art contriv'd To make the charm of beauty more ;— Thefe lures are all of peace depri v *d j The name they have—'tis all their ftore. For, ah ! too frequent heaves that heart The world would judge the feat of blifs, With fighs from Love's unhallow'd dart, With woes from Falsehood's fatal kifs ! Falfe, treach'rous index of the mind Are fmiles drawn forth by Faihion's crowd; Thev wear the face of Peace refin'd, While their hearts burft with Sorrow's load !
How
81 How mildly foothes this calm feren«, That hangs on all the fcene around î Sylphs flying o'er the eňameľd green Flap the mild air with fiow'rets crown*d. Here could I range with rapture wild, TiU night's dark ihades were o'er me fpread» By Mem'ry's witchcraft quite beguil'd, By Mem'ry's hand benignly led ; Through all thofe feenes where once in youth The joyful hours too fwiftly flew, Where Life's fweet walk was blefs'd with Truth— The profpeft ever bright and new.* * The author is indebted for thefe lines to the fame fe¬ male friend vvho favoured him with * Art's Petition to Nature/ and * The Sailor,*
β£
LETTER ХШ. Sir Charles Melford to George Seymour, Efq. M "\ Melford-houfe. -*^0 not, my dear George, pray, do not afk me ţo leave this fpot; I feel it impoflible. I helieve, that fooner than tear myfelf from Margaretta, at this moment, I could marry myfelf to the firft woman who fliould come in my way, in order to prevent the poflibi- ihy of the ftrange wheel of fortune taking fuch a turn as ever to make Mai garetta mine. I fuffer lefs than I did when I re¬ fleft upon the difappointment of my heart's darling wifli ; but I am more agitated, more impatient under my misfortune every hour ; I am fit to quarrel with myfelf, and every thing, and every body about me ; nay, there are times when I cannot forbear doing it. The Marchefa has feen me at thefe times when my feelings have hurried me into peeviflinefs and paflion: with what exqui¬ fite tendernefs has fhe at thofe moments en¬ deavoured
83 deavoured to admin ifter balm to the wound which flie knows tas poifoned my peace ! Indeed, Seymour, her attentions are the moft fuccefsful opiates that can be poured upon my lacerated lieart ; her concern forme is fo tender, fo aptly expreffed, and in terms fo confoling to the victim of difappointed love, that there are moments when her atten¬ tions do draw my thoughts off from my mif- fortune, and lead my memory back to feenes of which I have promifed her never even to hint at a repetition. My .head was yefter¬ day more than ufuallv painful and agitated; I went into the air in the hope finding re¬ lief; I ftrolled towards the Marchefa's cot¬ tage ; flie was at home, and I went in. As I fat by her I leaned my head upon my arm, which refted on the table : I believe a tear was ftealing down my cheeks. She rofe, took a fmelling-bottle from her pocket, moiftened her fingers, with a fcen t that it contained, and rubbed my temples. My imagination was extremely bewildered; I hardly knew whether I was awake or dreaming; my memory recurred to the firft E 6 time
84 time of my beholding the portrait of the Marchefa, my firft admiration of herfelf, and fo on to our firft private interview. Here thought refted. My mind was fo forcibly imprefled with the recolleftion of where 1 bad once feen her, that I entirely forgot ihe was now ftanding by me : I believe I muft have been more than half afleep; at all events my brain was hurried. I ftill con¬ tinued to think myfelf with the Marchefa, in the caflino at Venice ; I faw her inviting me to fit down by her; and I had juft placed myfelf by her fide, when methought Marga¬ retta ruftied in, and ftood before us. This appearance roufed me from my trance, I ftarted up, faw the Marchefa by my fide, and fixed upon her a look meant to enquire, * how ilie came there ?' " Good God! Sir Charles," ihe cried, " what ails you? you are fuddenly become ill : pray fpeak to me." I know not how I was aftuated at that moment ; but I took her hand, khTed it, and put it to my forehead. « Your head burns," ihe faid. " So does my
85 my heart," I replied. She put her other hand υροη that. At what moment fhe had done fo before darted into my memory ; ϊ could bear my feelings no longer, and I pufhed back my chair to releafe myfelf from her hands. " Let me hold your head," flie faid, following me· " No, no," I cried ; " I cannot do you fuch an injuftice."—" You have been thinking fo deeply," fhe faid, " that your fenfes are confufed, and------ ,f —" indeed they are !" I interrupted her by exclaiming. " Pray, compofe yourfelf," fhe faid, coming after me to the window : " en¬ deavour to fleep a little while." I turned round half refolved to take her advice : fhe took my hand to lead me to the fofa. I certainly trembled, and required affiftance to lead me to it ; I funk upon it, with my face towards the wall. She returned to the table, and fat down by it. I lay fome while in a trance of thought : after fome time I believe I ilept ; for when I turned myfelf round to¬ wards the window, it was too duik for me to difcern objefts ; I could juft perceive the Marchefa ftill on her feat. She came and ftood
86 fiood by the fide of the fofa : " Are you better?" (he afked. I could not repb- ; for I knew not how to define my fenfations. She put her hand upon my forehead : ťl Your head does not burn fo violenti" n<*w," fiie faid. In taking away her hand from my head, her fingers glided gently o\er r \ face; my hand followed her's, and drew it back to my head; her wrift lay acrofs my lips; I felt the vibration of her pulfe through her foft and elaftic fkin. My heart beat as if it would have forced its way out of my breaft. I durft not truft myfelf any longer in my prefent fituation ; I fprang from thc fofa, and faying, " I am better now, and able to walk home," took up my hat. Thc Mar¬ chefa entreated me not to go alone, but to let my fervant be fent for. I would not al¬ low it, and left the cottage alone. Did it not require more than common fortitude to tear myfelf away, at that mo¬ ment, from a woman with whom——but you know all I could fay on the fubject. With a flow pace I entered my park wrapt in meditation. I reviewed all the feenes
S7 feenes of my paft life ; ï found that when¬ ever my plans had failed, the blame was my own. I was fatisficd with my conduct towards Margaretta, and, for the firft time, I felt fomething like a glow of pleafure about my heart, refulting from the knowledge of having made her happy at the facrifice of my own felicity. Thefe points having paffed my thoughts, I began to enquire of myfelf whether I could not form fome plan which might reflect a gleam of happinefs on my future path through life. The emotion raifed in my heart by the peculiar fituation into which I had that afternoon been thrown with the Marchefa had not yet fubfided; the re¬ collection of paft pleafures ftill left a glow about my heart, but thofe pleafures were never to be repeated ; I had pledged my honour never to require a repetition of them, and on that condition only an unfor¬ tunate woman had accepted my protection, I bade the intrufive idea vanifh. Stiil my heart infifted upon telling me, that next to Margaretta, the Marchefa poffeffed the power of rendering herfelf interefting to my
88 my feelings. Cí Margaretta can never be mine," ftill I argued to myfelf, and " the Marchefa is. already a wife." I paufed a moment ; then, almoft infenfible of what I did, 1 exclaimed aloud, " Oh, that it were poffible for me to make the Marchefa Laura my wife !" As I fpake thefe words I hap¬ pened to caft my eyes upon the ground, and I perceived that I had wandered out of my path, and was now ftanding within a yard ofthe margin ofa piece of water wdiieh runs through the park. I immediately turned round, and perceived Edward Wal* lace clofe behind røe. " I beg your pardon/' he faid, " for be¬ ing fo near you, but·-----" "But what?" I exclaimed haftiiy : I feared fomething more had befallen Margaretta. " I was coming through the park," he anfwered, and feeing you walking alone, at this time in the evening, with your arms folded, as if you were difturbed, and towards the lake—" Again he paufed ; he had faid enough to explain to me his fears. " I thank you," I faid, " for your attention to me ; I was loft in
ад in thought, but my fenfes are clear; you need not apprehend any thing from the late¬ nefs of my walk. I fliall go home direftly : good-night." He returned my wifh, and í walked forward. Whether he watched me into the houfe, 1 know not ; but I am in¬ clined to think he did. He undoubtedly heard mc exclaim, i£ Oh that it were poflible for me to make the Marchefa Laura my wife !" It will now be decided by himfelf, his mother, and Marga¬ retta, that my melancholy is occafioned by fome obftacle to my efpoufing the Marchefa. No matter; it may perhaps prove a fortu¬ nate mifconception, which may affift me in keeping fafe the true fecret of my heart. Farewel, and believe me your fincere friend, Charles Melford.
LETTER
90
LETTER XIV. Sir Charles Melford to George Seymour* Efq. WMeJford-houfe. ELL, Seymour, it has turned out as I predifted — Margaretta believes that I am in love with the Marchefa, and that theie is fome irremoveable impediment to my efpoufing hcr : neither Margaretta, nor in¬ deed any one but yourfelf, has ever heard what little I do know of the Marchefa's ftory, I wonder what they conjefture her fituation fo be ; certainly not an improper one, or they would not draw this conclufion ofmy difappointment. Their miftaken opi¬ nion is fortunate for the charafter of the Marchefa, and, on her account, I am glad they have conceived it. A few days after my meeting Edward Wallace in the park, I was fitting with Margaretta, no one clfe was prefent ; fhe faid, " How much am I indebted to you for bringing me acquaint¬ ed with the Marchefa Laura ; ihe is of ail women
91 women fuch a companion as I moft value : her opinion of the propriety of employing all the hours of life is fimilar to my own, and her amufements are alfo like mine ; her good fenfe and acquaintance with the world render her converfation equally in- ftructive and fafcinating: but what makes her more than all dear to me is, the warmth with which flie acknowledges her obliga¬ tions to your friendihip." I did not anfwer ; and flie added, " Have you known the Mar¬ chefa long?"—" I faw her for the firft time in Venice," I replied. Margaretta appeared to want to know fomething more, yet to be undecided what to afk : prefently flie faid, " The Marchefe appears fome years older than you, Sir Charles."—" Only about five or fix years," I anfwered. " She tells me," Margaretta continued, " that fhe has drunk deeply of the cup of calamity. She is very handfome now, and, 1 think, if her life had been free from misfortune, fhe would have been rnoft beautiful ; but the hand of for¬ row fometimes carves as deep an impreflion on the features as the froft of age does."— " She
fíft
" She has experienced fevere trials," I re¬ turned. " And the tinge of melancholy which they have caft over her countenance renders her fo infinitely interefting/'return¬ ed Margaretta, " that, I think, when flic contemplates her own perfon, fhe muft al¬ moft ceafe to regret tliat they have befallen her."— u You fliould be a man to make that compliment," I faid. " May not a woman be equally fenfible of the perfections of one of her own fex?" afked Margaretta. I wiflied to turn off the fubjeft, and anfwered, " I believe moft women are very fenfible of any perfection which they may happen to fee in any one of their own fex ; for I have always obferved the majority of them en¬ deavouring to decry its value, which I have as regularly noted to be a fure fign of their inwardly feeling its worth."—" You are fevere upon our fex," faid Margaretta, cr Not more fo," I replied, " than moft of the fex are upon one another. I never yet faw a woman, except flie was gifted with more fenfe than women of fafliion ufuallv * have taken the pains to acquire, who did not
93 not think fhe would undervalue herfeif in allowing another woman to be beautiful." —« I fliould make an ill fubjeft for the rules of fafliion," returned Margaretta, " for I fliould never be able to ñx my thoughts enough upon myfelf to be always ill-natured to thofe around me ; and this you feem to pronounce the fyftem which a woman ot fafliion follows." I was not in a humour of fufficient gaiety to fupport this ftrain of raillery, thus I fmiled, and continued filent. After fome time, Margaretta faid, " The Marchefa, I fuppofe, is now fuffering for having dedicated her early years at the ihrine of faftiion and diifipatiom I cannot be too thankful for having paffed mine in feenes which have given meno opportunity to lay a fubjeft of future remorfe upon my confcience."—" Such lives of retirement are more defirable," I anfwered, " than the world imagines." — " I wonder they are ■not more frequent," returned Margaretta ; 4i furely forne muft ficken of hourly deceit and uninterrupted levity."—" Many do," re¬ plied I, " but they have not the requifites to fweeten
94 fweeten a life removed from thofe pleafures which leave no time for thought: the want of an ufeful education, and the ftrength or cuftom, render İt impoflible to them to re¬ tire from feenes which many of them ac¬ tually loathe."—" but the Marchefa has thefe requintes," returned Margaretta. " She is a rare inftance," I anfwered. " Thofe who have embittered the days of fuch a woman," rejoined Margaretta, " muft have much to atone for." I was filent : I had a great mind to leave the room ; I feared being queftioned upon what I couîd not anfwer, and thus increafing the myftery which was already hanging over the Marchefa and myfelf. I wiihed myfelf away, and yet did not move from my feat. " Does ihe fly to England to avoid the tyranny of a father or a huiband ?" aíked Margaretta, after a paufe. " My dear Margaretta," I returned, " I cannot at pre¬ fent reveal, even to yon, the ftory ofthe Mar¬ chefa." She took my hint to drop the fub¬ ject, and immediately began to talk of a book which lay upon the table. 1 pre¬ fently rofe to depart, and the Marchefa's name
95 name was not again mentioned that morn* ing. What couîd thefe queftions indicate, but that Margaretta took intereft in my happi¬ nefs, and felt defirous of knowing the fecret caufe which my words had led her to fuf¬ peft was exifting to prevent my union with the Marchefa. I feel very unhappy : oh that Margaretta - were but once become the wife of Edward Wallace ! I think, if flie were but united to him, I fliould be infinitely eafier, than while there remains a poffibility------1 will not allow that there does remain a poffi¬ bility. My prefence is neceffary for two or three days on one of my eftates in a neighbouring county. As foon as I return to Melford- houfe I will write to you again ; it is my greateft pleafure ; all others I enjoy are ne¬ gative ones. If I am with Margaretta, Г агд only filentiy lamenting that an union in which I looked for happinefs to refult from equa¬ lity of fentimenj: is fruftrated : if I am with the Marchefa, recollection is ever bufy to curtail
9в curtail the pleafures of the prefent moments. Adieu : to you I fliall ever be the fame Charles Melford.
LETTER XV. Sir Charles Melford to George Seymour, Efq. S Melford-houfe. EYMOUR ! I am born to live in a ftate of unceafing perplexity ; a moft unexpected, though natural, event has taken place, and I am again thrown into the greateft uncer¬ tainty of mind. When I returned home yefterday evening from the excurfion which I had been upon with my fteward, I found Edward Wallace at Melford-houfe waiting my return. After I had enquired for Margaretta, and received a favourable anfwer to my queftion, Edward Wallace faid (for I ftill continued ftanding hi the air), " Sir Charles, will you favour ще with a few moments' converfation - 3 " I immediately
97 immediately aflented, and we went together into the library. He fliut the door, then faid, t( Pardon my queftion ; but did I not, on that evening when I faw you in the „park, hear you exclaim, ς Oh that it w ? ere poffible for me to make the Machefa Laura my wife ?'"— " J certainly did fpeak thefe words," I replied. " I am glad I was not miftaken in what I thought I heard you pro¬ nounce/' he returned -, " for I hope that fentenee explains -the emotions which Γ have lately feen you exprefs." Thefe were ftrange words, incomprehenfible to me, aud I faid, "What if this were the cafe?' — " Much, I hope, to the improvement of your happinefs," he anfvvered ; "I have not urged the queftion from idle curiofity, but from a defire of being the firft to bring.you tid¬ ings of pleafure."— cç For Heaven's fake," cried I, " keep me no longer in fufpence; explain what you mean, I entreat you."— " The hufband of the Machefa Laura is no more," he returned. " Good God !" Γ ex¬ claimed -, " by what means do you know this?"—" The Marchefa," he anfwered, vol. ii. f " received 4
ss * f received a letter to that import tlm morning, whilft vifiting Margaretta : on ■opening the letter, ihe betrayed violent •emotions; Margaretta enquired the caufe, and fire replied, that it contained informa¬ tion of the death of the Marchefe di Mar- vaîdi. She alfo faid, f that flie could not forbear being at firft moved by the fudden- nefs ofthe intelligence; but that fhe had no caufe to regret his death, except only the or¬ phan ftate ofher daughter, to whom he had fulfilled the duties of a father, for that to herfelf he had been a tyrant, and not a pro¬ tector/" I was fo thunderftruck by this information, that every faculty was loft in furprife. Edward Wallace, I believe, con¬ tinued to fpeak, but I was fenfible only to my own thoughts, till a fervant opened the door ofthe library, and announced the Mar¬ chefa herfelf. Wallace* directly wifhed me a good night, and left the room as flie en¬ tered it. The Marchefa advanced toward me with a flow ftep, and put into my hand a letter; ihe then drew a handkerchief from her pocket,
.99 pocket, held it before her eyes, and turned her face towards a window. The letter was in Italian, and ran thus; " MY DEAR LADY, « Much am I grieved that my firft letter to you in England fliould bring tidings to lay an additional weight of mifery upon a heart already too inhumanly laden. The Marchefe di Márvaldi exifts no longer; and your beloved and innocent daughter, Paulina, is now a defencelefs orphan, with¬ out a protector in this country, except myfelf, who am, indeed, a very infufHcient one. This it is that I know will give you pain ; the death of the Marchefe cannot be a fource of anxiety to you. A fevere diforder which he caught carried him to the grave a few hours after it broke out: * May Hea¬ ven forgive him ľ I often exclaimed, 'and reward you, mý worthy lady i' Come, I en¬ treat you, come to Italy without delay, and footh the forrows of your amiable and much to be pitied child. Your anxieties, I truft, are now almoft at an end—-" f a Here
100 Here the remainder of the letter had been rent off. " From whom does this come ?"" I afked, on having perufed it. " From my only friend," the Marchefa anfwered ; " from the good Bernardo."—" Say not fo," I returned; ' ( there is, at Jeaft, one other perfon who takes intereft in your fate."—" Pardon me," ihe faid ; " if I had been fpeaking of you, I ftiould have faid the fame; my heart is over¬ burdened, and grateful in forrow ; it gives a fuperlative epithet to thofe few who are its well-wifliers."—·" Will you go to Italy?" I rejoined, " or will you commiffion Bernardo to conduct your daughter to England ?"— " I muft go," flie replied ; " there are affairs to tranfact, at which my prefence is indif¬ penfable."—" Cannot you act by transfer¬ ring your power into the hands of the law ?" I afked, after a paufe. " Impoffible !—ut¬ terly impoffible!" ftie anfwered, with a fo¬ lemn emphafis. I did not fpeak, and fhe added, " It is alfo ofthe moft material con¬ fequence that I do not delay my journey/' I arofe and walked about the room. In a few minutes flie faid, " I muft now return home;
101 home; I have uot yet acknowledged the receipt of Bernardo's letter, and, for the eafe of my dear Paulina's heart, I muft not delay it a fingle poft."—" When fliall you fay that you intend being in \ r enice ?" I aiked. " Very foon," flie replied ; " but I ihall not fix anv exact time; I am undecid- ed how to travel ; it is a long journey for a woman to perform alone." She hefitated, and for fome moments feemed loft in thought ; her eyes then brightened, and ine added, " But this is a light tafk compared with thofe I have performed." She rofe, and was moving towards the door. I took her hand, led her back to a chair, and placed myfelf next her: " Stay, Marchefa," faid I; " grant me the favour of a few moments' more converfation before you go" She bowed affent to my requeft. " Will you," I continued, " now the Marchefe, your huf¬ band, is no more—will you confide to me through what ftrange means your fate in life has been fo extraordinary a one?"— " Do you ftill doubt," faid fhe, " whether or not I have merited the fufferings that F 3 have
Hh? have fallen upon me ? It is a cruel queftion from you."—" You m i (conceive my mean¬ ing," I replied; i£ in aflcmg vou whether you durft confide to me the means through which you had fuftered. I do not include a poffibility of your having been guilty."— " Forgive me/' ihe returned, " pray forgive me; but the wretched heart of an unjuft fufferer is eafily wounded." She wiped the tears from her eyes ; then added, " Have I not repeatedly declared to you, that I may not reveal the fecret of my fate? Why did you then again, and at this moment too, re¬ quire of me its explanation r"—" Believe ще," faid I, " that I repeated it without an intention to injure your feelings ; ï thought that in confequence of the Marchefe's death ------" She interrupted me. " I cannot reveal the myftery in vvhich I am wrapt," flie exclaimed, "until——-" She hefitated, " Until when ?" I aiked. " I have already told you," flie faid, " that v/ith the fafety ot my future peace, I cannot explain it; when I arrive in Italy, perhaps I ihall be no longer bound to preferve it. I now,
103 I now, for the fecond time, plainly per¬ ceived, that me was bound by the church to maintain a fecret, from which, on her return to Italy, ftie hoped to be abfolved. " Suffer me to kave you now," flie faid; " I anı anxious to write mv letter ; in the morning I fhaİÎ return to take your advice upon my journey. 1 * As fhe rofe I took hcr hand as a mark of tendernefs at parting; flie preflcJ her fingers with warmth upon mine as 1 held her's in it. I know not how I was impelled at that mo¬ ment, but I infenfibly felt my lips upon her's. She withdrew her face haftiiy from mine, and faid with firmnefs, "Forbear,Sir Charles, forbear; I am now my own miftrefs, and the day of my bodily humiliation is paft." She fpoke thefe words with a fervour that betrayed the generous fatisfačtion of re¬ gained honour, to me an evidence of the guilt of the deceafed Marchefe. I rejoiced m her honeft pleafure, while 1 fighed in¬ wardly for the hypocrify of her "huiband. I thought filence the beft apolgy for what I had done, and let go her hand without f 4. fpeaking.
104 л' t ipeaidng. She bade me good-night, in a tone· that implied her momentary difplea¬ fure.to be vaniihed, and I warmly returned her wifli. \ţ'hen the Marchefa had left me, I tra¬ verfcd the room with a new fubject for re¬ flection. * it was now poflible for me to тЩс the Marchefa Laura my wife ľ — ť Margaretta could never in honour become n ¡iiii 1 !' Was it not then reafonable that I fhouki feek fome other woman with'whom I rñight enjoy a fecondary portion of happi¬ nefs to that which I had expected to obtain inanunionwithMargarettar Doubtlefs it was reafonable that I fliould do fo. There was no ftrong bond of fentiment to unite me to the Marchefa, the concealment which flic vvas conftrained to ufe towards me had pre¬ vented that ; but there was the powerful incitement of paffion; the recollection that the charms of the Marchefa had afforded me more delight than thofe of any other woman I had ever tafted, and that thofe charms were never again illicitly to pour rapture through my fenfes. Then I con¬ fiderei!
105 fidered that flie already efteemed, nay al¬ moft revered me as the preferver of her life, and the protector of her fubfequent days, and that flie could not but adore the man who fliould make her his honourable wife, if it was only from contraftjng his conduct with that of him to whom flie had been united. This confideration fo far refolved me, that nothing prevented me from immediate¬ ly going to the Marchefa and making her an offer of my hand, but that I felt fome kind of repugnance, that there fliould be a part of my wife's conduct which had never been explained to me. Again I reflected that it was folly to re¬ fufe taking a woman to be my wife, whom I in every refpect efteemed, becaufe it had been her hard fate to have been married to a firft hufband who had driven her to a conduct fhockingto her feelings, and bound her to fecret his motives, by laying upon her expofure of them what flie believed to be an injury to the peace of her future life· f 5 She
106 She was obliged,«fiie faid, to depart for Italy immediately.·—If flie ivas ever to be my wife, it was doubtlefs my bufinefs to go with her to Venice her huiband, and not, by delaying to avow my intention of efpouf¬ ing her, perhaps reduce her to thc neceffity of taking another companion on her journey» perhaps lofe her for ever.·—No, no, 1 had already loft too much by delay, and I de¬ termined not to rifk the little chance of future happinefs which w r as now in my power, by repeating my folly. Still there was one poffibility which feemed to make againft me ; might not the Marchefa, from having fo fevereiy fuffered in her firft ftate of matrimony, refufe rifk¬ ing her happinefs in a fecond ? This appeared to me a point againft which I fliould at leaft be prepared with fome good arguments ; I determined to form fome to this effecl before ΐ went to her, and threw myfelf into the chair where ftie had been fitting. Аь 1 fat, my foot kicked againft a piece of paper which lay upon the floor ; my eye was drawn towards it ; and as it lay on
107 on the ground I faw that it was written upon, and that the writing was not mine. I took İt up : the words were Italian ; and í immediately concluded that it was that part of the Marchefa's letter which I had ob¬ ferved to have been rent off: I looked for the fignature of Bernardo, in order that I might be certain whether it was a part of that let¬ ter or not. Part of the paper now in my hand had been rent off both from the bot¬ tom and the top, thus the fignature I had looked for was not to be difcovered. Un¬ certain now what it might be, and not fup¬ pofing it of confequence to any one, L caft my eyes carelefsly over it, and was on the point of throwing it down again upon the floor, when my own name caught my eye í this excited my curiofity,- and I then de¬ termined to read it : the words it contained, were as follows :—· " Oh ! my dear lady— (this could be no other than Bernardo addrefling the Mar¬ chefa),— how miferable an exiftence has. your's been, I may fay, even from the cradle 1 f 6 now,
108 now, I hope, you will begin to know what peace of mind is. Oh that you could be fo fortunate as to meet with fome man of worth, who might, in the charafter of your fecond huiband, recompence to you your paft calamities !—I know to whom the honourable affeftions of your heart point, but I much fear this darling wifli of your's can never be accompliihed ; though Sir Charles Melford—(mark this, George)—be¬ haves to you with all the honour, friendihip, and kindnefs ofa man who had not known you in the fituation in which you were once reduced to meet him, yet he will never think of marrying a woman whom he has once pofleffed, few men now-a-days are fo honourable ; and I am fure I need not cau¬ tion you, not to commit fo encroaching a trefpafs upon his hofpitality, as to hint, even in the rnoft diftant manner, that you wifli to become his wife.—No, no, my dear lady, you may be tolerably happy now if you pleafe, therefore be content to enjoy the friendfliip of Sir Charles Melford, and if any man whom you could love ihould------" Here
109 Here the paper had again been torn ; but I had read enough, 1 had found that the Marchefa loved me : I had expefted only gratitude from her, and I had learnt that the tendereft paflion of her heart was given to me ; this 1 determined was the greateft confolation I could ever have for the lofs of Margaretta. I felt in fomething like fpirits, though I was in reality fad. The evening was far advanced, and I therefore refolved to make the explanation of my heart to the Marchefa the firft bufinefs of the morning.—Farewel : I do not aik you to pity me, or to rejoice with me ; when you hear my name, give it the figh of friend¬ ihip. Yours ever, Charles Melford,
LETTER
по
, LETTER XVL Eduard ¡Fallace to George Seymour, Efq, SIR, IBnar-bank Farm. Write at the requeft of Sir Charles Mel¬ ford, to defire, that till you hear from him again, you would diieft any letters with which you may favour him to be left for him at the houfe of Monfieur L'Eftrange, in Paris; he is this morning fet out for that city, on his road to Venice. This is all he wiihed me to coirmunicatc to you j he fays you will perfeft]/ underftand the reafon of his leaving England, and that he will write to you as foon as he reaches Calais. 1 am, fir, Your very humble fervant, Edward Wallace«
LETTER
Ill:
\
LETTER XVIL Sir Charles Melford to George Seymour, E fa SEYMOUR, I Calais ¡. Am married t The Marchefa Laura is my zaife. On the morning fubfequent to thafevening on which I laft wrote^ to you I w--ent, as I told you I had refolved, to the Marchefa ; I knew her fentiments with re¬ gard to me, thus a mutual explanation ot our wiflies was foon made, and flic received the offer of my hand with a rapture which flie could ill conceal. Do not expeñ me to fay much upon what is juft paft, for though I am infinitely glad that the event has taken place, it gives me no fatisfaciion to dwell upon it. An explanation of our mutual fentiments being once made, I re¬ quefted Laura to be ready to leave Rutland- ih ire the next morning ; we had agreed that our union fhould be cemented by an Engliih prieft at Calais, and aU I then wiflied
112 wiflied was to leave England immediately, as I felt myfelf unequal to remaining any longer where Margaretta was, when I had once pledged myfelf to become the huiband of another woman. I returned home to give orders for our journey ; and it was my intention then to go and inform Margaretta of the deftiny that awaited me, and to bid her farewel ; but when the moment of going to Briar-bank Farm arrived, I found myfelf unequal to the taik : I accordingly in the evening fent for Edward Wallace, I informed him of my abrupt departure from England, and its caufe ; 1 received his con¬ gratulations upon the event, and when he left me, I gave him a note to carry to Mar¬ garetta, of which you have here a copy. " Farewel fora while, my dear Marga¬ retta; may every happ nefs attend you while I am abfent.—You al· .ady know the caufe which hurries back th. Marchefa Laura to Venice, and Edward Wallace will explain to you the reafon that carries me with her, ifyou have not (which I fufpect) long fince furmifed
ÌÌ3 form ife d ît. Pardon me, my dear daughter, that I have not come in perfon to take my leave of you, a multiplicity of affairs to which I am obliged to attend, have rendered that impoflible ; at niy return you vviil be the wife of Edward Wallace, and I hope reftored from your late accident ίο perfectly as to have almoft forgotten that it ever befel you.—Once more farewel, my dear Mar- retta ; that peace and felicity may blefs your days, is the fincere with of your friend and father, Charles Melford." This was all I wrote ; I durft not venture to fay any more upon her marriage or my own. On the appointed morning we left Mel- ford-houfe; little more than two days brought us to Dover, and the morning of the third landed us at Calais, and vve were yefterday united by the laws of the church. It's done, it's paft, the ftruggle is over: if I have only met the deferts of my own folly in lofing Margaretta, furely 1 deferve fome
П4 fome gentle fmiles from fortune, for having been fo careful not to interupt her happi* nefs. When the Marchefa's affairs in Venice are fettied, I ihall return with hcr anil her daughter to England, unlefs Paulina's af¬ fection is fiili firm to thc worthy Marquis de Belletsrre ; if it is, flie fliall now meet no obftacle to her union with him ; fo her mother has promifed me; for Paulina raifed an intereft in my heart when I faw her, which has caufed me to think ofher happi¬ nefs fince I am become her father-in law. When I fliall have an opportunity of writing to you again I know not. Adieu ; and believe me ever your Charles Melford.
LETTER
1Î5
LETTER XVIII. Sir Charles Melford to George Seymour, Efq. DEAR SEYMOUR, D --------- E entered Italy laft night, and I juft now receive a letter from you which has been fent after me from Paris. You fpeak exactly as I expected you would upon the late occurrences of my life; that is, you forbear all comments upon what is paft, and give me your wiflies for the felicity of the future, with a fincerity of expreffion which has always rendered your friendihip too fure to be miftaken. From my heart I thank you for that intereft which you have ever taken in my fate ; may the time foon arrive when I fliall make you my perfonal acknowledgments ! You doubtlefs want to know the fitua¬ tion of my mind. I ftill feel perfectly fatisfied with my conduct, fo far as it has rendered it impoffible for me now to inter¬ rupt
W
116 rupt the happinefs of Margaretta with Edward Wallace, and has given me poflef¬ fion of the charming perfon of Laura ; but ftill my thoughts will fometimes return with force to the difappointment of my early views, and whifper to my heart the fuperio¬ rity of an union contracted from fentiment, over that formed from paffion : upon the whole, my mind is cs much at eafe as I couid expečl it would be at this time. But Laura appears to me changed fince our marriage; her fpirits were never very high, but they are now extremely low; when I remark that they are fo, flie endeavours to turn afide my obfervation, but does not deny the truth. The other morning I hap¬ pened to be lying awake upon my pillow, my back was turned towards her, and í believe fhe thought me afleep ; flie raifed herfelf. in the bed, leant over my ihoulder, kiffed my cheek with violence, burft into tears, and turned from me : I immediately raifed my head towards her, and enquired, " what affefted her r" She ftarted and anfvvered, " Nothing—nothing aflefts me;" fprang
J 17
fprang direcìly from the bed, and dreffed herfelf. Yefterday evening I found her kneeling before a chair, and praying with a crucifix held to her breail : I continued in thc room, and while flie prayed, I imagined that I frequently heard her ufe the word tf murder :" w r hen flie rofe froni her devo¬ tion and perceived me, flie ihrieked, then faid, " Why did you come in to fright me ?" tr To fright you !" returned I ; " why ihould my prefence at any time alarm you?"—" I conjure you, in the name ofthe holy Jefus, to tell me whether I prayed aloud," fhe exclaimed. " Not abfoiutely," I faid· " Did I mention any name ?" flie aiked eagerly. " No, you did not," I replied. " What did you hear me fay ?" flie rejoined vvith a countenance that betrayed the Jive- heft agony of mind. " I thought," faid I, **' that you once or twice fpoke of murder.'* Her lips turned pale, lier teeth began to chatter, flie trembled and funk into a chair. A few moments paifed in filent furprife on my part, I then faid, £i I infill upon your explaining to me thc emotion that now agitates
ns agitates you." She threw herfelf upon hcr knees before me, caught my hands in her's, and grafped them fome time before flie was able to fpeak; fhe at lafl faintly uttered, €C Kill me, but do not drive me mad, by demanding this explanation of me." — <f Murder of whom ?" I cried, hardly fenfible of what flie had faid. " Not of you, by the God of heaven!" fhe faid: there was fome¬ thing in her manner impreffive of truth ; and before I could anfwer her, flie added, íť You ihould not have liftened to my prayers ; re¬ member the vow that lies on my con¬ fcience."—" I am now your hufband," faid I. iC Your are," fhe anfwered in a folemn tone, " and the time is at hand, that you will know all I know :** flie releafed my hands from her*s, and rofe with recollecied ftrength. I threw myfelf into a chair ; I was uneafy without the power of having my anxiety relieved ; I felt almoft angry with myfelf for having made myfelf the huiband ofa woman who durft not fuffer me to enter into her confidence. ' Murder/ continued to ring in my brain. The Marchefa walked iome
119 fome time about the room, flie then came up to me with an air of gaiety, and faid, "Come, come, you muft not be fad becaufe I am under the neceffity of having a fecret a-part from you for a little while longer; a few days more will bring us to Venice, and then all will be explained."—" Let us to bed," faid I, « I wifh if I can to fleep."—" Go you to bed by all means," flie returned, " I fliall go back to our apartment, for I have fome hours' writing which I muft perform." 1 knew it was ufelefs to aik any queftions, and fuffered her to go. I threw myfelf upon the bed in thought, but 1 had not lain there many minutes when your letter was brought to me ; I read it, found myfelf unable to fleep, and rofe to anfwer it. How much do I feem to have to fay to you, and yet I know not what to write ; I fliall haften to Venice with all poflible ex¬ pedition ; 1 hope to congratulate myfelf on all my trials and perplexities being paft: when í arrive there, for then Laura fays the myftery in which flie is involved will be ex¬ plained away to me. Laura
120 Laura did not return to the chamber till eight o'clock this morning ; flie brought with her a packet of papers, which flie locked into her trunk, and her air was that of a perfon relieved from fome concern of importance which had been lying upon her mind. We are to fet off in half an hour, and travel dav and night till we reach Venice ; oh that we were already there î Adieu, adieu. Yours,
Charles Melford,
121
LETTER XIX. Sir Charles Met ford to George Seymour, E fq, DEAR GEORGE, W Τ ■ ·, feven in the Morning. E have travelled fince I wrote you laft with no delays but thofe of neceffity; all our repofe has been taken in the car¬ riage : the Marchefa feems even more anxious than myfelf to arrive at the place of our deftination, and a few hours will now r bring us to it, for we are now only a few leagues diftant from Venice; We lire at this moment flopping at the delire of Laura, who tells me the has juft recollecied fomething wh'ch it is of the utmoft im¬ portance to her immediately to write down. The agitation both of hcr mind and body bas for thefe two lait da\s been extreme ; 1 cannot forbear thinking that fome matter of importance, fomc evil deed i fear (I argue from the dreadful word I overheard vol, u. g in
122 in her prayers) is about to be laid open ta the world. She has again, and of her own accord, affured me that I am not concerned in the fecret which is at prefent locked up in heť breaft : flie confeffes it to be a dreadful one, and her whole frame is eonvulfed when flie afferts it. Is ftie going to give informa¬ tion to the ftate againft a murderer ? furely the late Marchefe —but no ; what would it ay ail to allege a crime againft one who has ceafed to breathe ?—It cannot be poflible that flie herfelf—-horrid idea !—Oh ! no, no, (lie has repeatedly avowed to me that flie has been infinitely unfortunate, but never willingly criminal. She comes into the apartment. " Now let us to Venice," ftie exclaims in a tone that marks feelings animated almoft to phrenzy ; her eyes throw out an expreffion that excites both companion and horror. She has not mentioned her daughter in many days ; fome one point, and that only, occupies her thoughts. She will tafte no refreihrnent this morning, but conjures me to
V13
to let us be gone.—I obey her.—Farewel for a while, and continue to believe me truly yours, Charles Melford.
LETTER XX. Sir Charles Melford to George Seymour, Efq. A. Veni,, Τ length, Seymour, we are arrived oa the fpot of elucidation. From the firft moment that Venice appeared within our view, the Marchefa threw a handkerchief over her face and funk back into a corner of the gondola : 1 addreffed her feveral times, and flie did not reply : at fait the faid, ic Pray do not fpeak to me ; order the gon¬ dola to the hôtel of the Virgin, and let me have a room to myfelf as foon as I get there."—Her directions w r ere followed, and ilie is now gone to a private apartment : I have by her dc-firc difpatched a note to G * fummon
12 t
fummon Bernardo to her ....... ......Bernardo has entered the hôtel, and is gone to the apartment of Laura : he is doubtlefs, from his attachment to her, and her confidence in him, acquaint¬ ed with all that, paffes in her heart. How ftrange it feems to me to be excluded thus myfterioufly from the fecrets of my wife. Laura comes· She entered the room with a countenance paleas death, yet with every nerve apparently ftrungby the energy of fome private feeling : fhe came up to me with a packet in her hand, which I believe was the fame I faw her lock in her trunk at D ------, when flie had paifed thc night in writing.—" Take thefe papers, Sir Charles," flie faid, " put them into your pocket, and take particular care of them, tbey are of confequence ; for a private reafon I have written your name on their outfide." I obeyed her requeft ; flie then continued, " I have fcen Bernardo ; Paulina is well, and a gondola will arrive in a few minutes to convey us to the Pallazo di Marvaidi :" ihe paufed, then added, " in
u in one fliort hour, you will learn the fecret ofmy heart."— ťí Compofe yourfelf/ 1 I returned ; Ci nurfe your ftrength till you may require its ufe." She fmiled, but it was a fmile agony. rc Are you already ab¬ solved from your vow r'* I aiked. " Almoft I am," flic anfwered. " Let me then parti¬ cipate your feelings," I cried, " by learning .the caufe of them," I rofe and took her hand. ťť Cannot you wait this one ihort hour more ľ' flie afked : flie fpoke this irta tone of voice that could not fail to move any one to whom it had been addreffed to thc grant of her petition 5 ' methought * I never faw her look fo intereftingly beautiful as at that moment; one hand юг nıirçe 'ab .ready held one h'dnd of her's, and I was throwing my other arm round her waift in order to embrace her, when with a mild, yet forrowful dignity, ihe drew herfelf away from my grafp, and faid in a low yet folemn voice, cf Not now, not now.'* She moved towards the door, then added, Ci When the gondola arrives we will depart, till then I am о 3 going ...... ; í
1126 going to my chamber;" having faid this ihe left me. The gondola is come to convey us once more to the houfe of the deceafed Albert di Marvaldi. How different will be my pre¬ fent approach to it, to what my laft was ! Oh ! how well I remember there bidding farewel to Laura, and endeavouring to procure from her a fmile. I mentioned it to her this morning, but could not induce her to fpeak upon that or any other fubject. Laura opens my door and beckons me to follow her to the gondola ; I lay down my pen to attend her. How ftrange a moment ofmy life is this ! How ftill more wonderful may be " the next fhort hour 1" Yours, Charles Melford.
LETTEK
127
LETTER XXL Sir Charles Melford to George Seymour, Efq, O VÜbge of С- — i. H, my revered, my only friend î how complicated a wretch is the man who now addreffes you !—I have now gained the pin¬ nacle of human mifery ! 1 have not written of four days i a little while ago, I fuppofed I never ihould have held my pen again.-*- Oh great God of Heaven, what a fcene have I witneffed 1—I almoft wifti to lofe the power of thought, that I may lofe the re¬ colleftion of a tranfaftion which alone oc¬ cupies my brain; a tranfaftion, horrid to the feelings of man, infamous in its nature» and condemned by every law of virtue and religion. Almighty Powers, what have I done, that fuch an aggravated calamity» fuch a mountain of all the vices which are to be hated by man, fliould have fallen upon me ! Oh God ! oh God ! my brain burns, my reafon is almoft thrown off her feat.—- g 4 And
HS And when I refleft on your admonitions againft the woman whom I made my wire —my wife!—Oh, Jcfus, have mercy ! blot out this recolleftion from a brain which cannot fuffer more than it alreadv feels. 1 wiil endeavour to colleft flrength and re¬ folution to tell you what has been this hor¬ rid aft, from the fight of which my blood has never been warmed. Pardon me, Hea¬ ven, thou knoweft what I have undergone, how peculiarly I have fuffered, how agonizing a climax has fealed my future mifery in this life! Qh pardon me, if J pray that the chili of horror which ftill hangs over my trembling nerves, may be tbe meffenger of fpeedy death ! I think í concluded my laft letter by faying, that Laura called me to accompany her to the gondola which was to carry us to the houfe of the Marchefe di Marvaldi : I entered" it with her ; we had fcarcely got into if, be¬ fore I perceived that large drops of perfpi- ration were rolling down her face, that he; hands w r ere fixed upon- her body,- and that íhe was preffing them down, as if tb repel fonivi
{рте inward) pain. " You are ,unwe31 Д faid I -y " you have permiţteji ypprjfeieilmg^ to gain afcendancy over your fjreirgtlv 4İ1JL they hold you in abfoİMte torture./' 4 Şjı^i did not anfwer to thefe,words, bţţt-iaidf· " Pray order the gondoliers to, row fafter, much rafter, as faft as they can?' I com¬ plied vvith her requeft. We were now ap¬ proaching near to the place of our deftifia- tion ; I looked at her as I informed her that. we had not much' farther to proceed, and* I faw that her eyes were almoft iîşrţing from» their fockets, her face eonvulfed, and a-· thin foam forcing its way through' her l.rps. "You are fuffering vnlcntb," I faid.* " Nothing," flie replied, (i for one vvho is*» ftanding upon the brink of Bylh" í had« only time to remark that thefe words were, fpoken in a tone of ferocity, very different*, to any accents I had ever heard her pro¬ nounce before, when the* gondola flopped; at the Pallazo ďi Marvaldi : lhe radier fleyv . than ftepped out of it, and ran into the houfe: 1 followed her into the hall, where* ftood Bernardo and another forvet.·*,. , « ·; g 5 . . . .
İSO • # ........ Oh, God, my friend! I know not how to proceed; the pangs of my helrt defeat the powers of my ftand. . . . . I muft a while lay down my pen. . . . ,....... You muft pardon me if I am incoherent, wild in my account; the defcription I have undertaken to give is more than my mind is competent to go through with compofure. I have endeavoured to lull the feelings of my heart, that I may, as well as I am able, proceed. Bernardo and another fervant ftood in the hall : as I entered it, Laura ftopped, and al¬ moft fell againft the wall ; Bernardo caught her arm and fupported her ; fhe uttered a groan drawn from the very bottom of'tieart, ftood a fewmomentsin filent reflection with her ■eyes fixed on Bernardo, fhe then threw her arms round his neck,and kiffed his cheek with a paifionate emotion : I faw a tear ftart into his eye. Bernardo then pointed to me : fhe caft her eyes upon me, advanced a fingle ftep towards me, uttered a ftifled ihriek, then
131 then ftopped: " I,cannot—-I cannot ľ* ihe exclaimed, and again turned towards Ber¬ nardo : u Come," flie faid, *" I am prepar¬ ed ------" Thefe were not all the words fhe fpoke, but I did not hear the remainder of the fentenee. Bernardo immediately went forward; ihe followed him with her hands clafped and raifed, and I walked after her in filent amazement and expectation. You cannot guefs my furprife and horror, for I fear I fliall ill defcribe it, though I felt ! it fo acutely. Bernardo threw open the door of that apartment over the chimney of which I had firft feen the portrait of the Marchefa, and no fooner was the door open¬ ed than he exclaimed, " Sir Charles and Lady Antonia Melford." It firft ftruck me as extraordinary that a mother fhould be thus formally announced to a daughter, and next I was aftoniihed by Bernardo calling her Antonia; but I had no time to reflect, for ftie ftopped at the door of the apartment, took my hand, and led me into it. " My hufband," fhe faid in a voice of authority. I looked forward; but, oh God of Omnipo- G 6 tence I
-tence î what tongue can defcribe my feel¬ ings, when I perceived feated at the fartheft end of the room, The Marchefe di Marvaldi, hh daughter Paulina, and, fiìll more conf uf¬ ing to my fenfes, a female the very counter* .part of her who held my haml ! ! ! ' It appeared to me as if the Marchefa Laura was holding one of my hands, and ftill that the Marchefa Laura was feated by a table at the other end of the room. * Mv ideas were fo bewildered, that all the power of thought was loft to me ; I could only perceive that equa aftonifhment to mine was pourtrayed on the features of all prefent. A dead filence reigned for fome moments, I turned my eyes upon her who held my hand, ihe faw thc expreffion of enquiry which was written upon niy features, and anfwered it : tť Sir Charles," fhe faid, in a voice of firmnefs, if I am not Laura; behold her there." She releafed my hand from her's, and pointed with that which had held it to the female, her own exaft refemblance, feated by the table. After a paufe of a few
1 33 few moments, fhe added with a ferocious fmile, " I am her fifter Antonia whom fhe fcorns.** Extreme confternation was ftill marked oh the countenances of the Marchefe and hk family, but they neither attempted to rife or fpeak : excefs of wonder feemed to have locked up their faculties. For myfelf I ftill ftood by the door in к ftate of feeling 1 which it is impoflible to de¬ fcribe. She who had juft entered' the apartment with me, advanced a few fteps towards thfe Marchefe, fhe then flopped, and fixed upoh him her wild and piercing eyes: " Albert,*' flie faid, " do you obferve who ftands before }ou? If you dare look upon· Antonia, turn your eyes this way."— f ( What brings you hither ?" afked the Marchcfe, in a calm but commanding voice» íť To fulfil my vow," fhe returned, Svith indignant refolu¬ tion : " Do you not remember the morning on which you took the hand of my fifter in marriage ? Do you not recollect that I told you, before you* led her Xo the altar; that ' > : : VOUr
134 your fmiles of love fliould be turned into frowns of torture ? Have you forgotten that when you had taken the marriage vow to Hea¬ ven, I knelt before the fame altar where you had been kneeling, and pledged a vow to— Hell ! You knew not then the import of my .oath ; now, Albert, hear if, and tremble." The aftoniftiment of the Marchefe appeared to increafe, and he rofe from his feat. She continued to fpeak thus: " My vow included a triple obligation : by the firft I (wore, that fome immediate aftion of my iife fliould bring difgrace upon your family; this is performed through the birth of my unfor¬ tunate child: by the fecond I fwore, that if the darkeft of human arts could accom¬ plifh my wifh, I would become the wife of a man equal to yourfelf; it is done, Sir Charles Melford is my hufband : and by the third I fwore, that when this prayer of my foul was fulfilled, your happinefs ihould not outlive my triumph." As flie fpoke the laft words, fhe made a fudden ftep forwards fnatched from her breaft a ftiletto, which had been concealed in the folds of her robe, and plunged
135 plunged it into the heart of the Marchefe. 4t Now I am happy," fhe cried; " the per¬ jured, the accurfed Albert dies the victim of my revenge by my own hand." This was the woman whom I had made -nv wife!—this fiend! Oh, great God of Mercy ! A mift feemed to cloud my fenfes; глу whole frame diflblved into imbecility, I ftaggered to a chair, funk upon it, and my eyes clofed with the moft painful heavinefs. The fnrieks of Paulina, exclaiming that her father was murdered, foon recalled my wandering fenfes. 1 ftarted wildly up, and caft my eyes fucceffively on every object around me. The Marchefe lay on the floor bleeding, and uttering groans of violent agony. The Marchefa Laura (for Laura iudeed it Teas fitting by the table) h~d fainted in her chair. Paulina ftood by the fide of her mother, piercing the air with her fhrieks, apparently defirous to rufh out of the apart¬ ment for afliftance, but not daring to pafs the murderefs, who ftood between her and the door, fmiling on the object of her ne¬ farious act with the favage grin of horrid fatisfačtion,
136 fatîsfaftîon, and with the inftrument of her crime, from which flow drops of blood were falling, ftill clenched in her uplifted hand!!! Bernardo now ran into the room ; the atti¬ tude and features of thofe in it immediately explained to him. the fcene befon him . the old man uttered a mingled cry of horror and indignation; then turning to Antonia, he exclaimed, " Revengeful, infatuated wretch! was it to repay me with the mur¬ der of my mafter, that l· entered into" plans for promoting your happinefs? Complete your work, and kill me too !" She let the ftiletto fall from her hand, and threw*" her¬ felf upon a fofa without the flighteft emo¬ tion of feature. " Oh, my poor mafter 1" cried Bernardo, throwing himfelf upon his knees by the. fide of the proftrate body, and raifing its head upon his arm. I knelt- down on the other fide of the dying man ; 1 took his hand in mine,, I wanted to convince him thac 1 had no willing concern in the bafe deed of his death, and to entreat his pardon for what 1 had done, if I had by any means been
137 been blindly acceffary to it. He nipped my hand as I held his, but it was only the oonvulfive grafp of faft approaching diflblu¬ tion. I fpoke to him feveral times; fo did Bernardo ; he appeared infenfible to our words, and uttered only deep groans, while convulfive ftarts fnatched his blackening body. The Marchefa Laura ftill continued infen¬ fible on her chair. The Marchefe gave a loud intermitted figh, which I thought to be his Jaft. Paulina heard it, left her mother, and camé round to the feet of her father. The agony of death was extending his jaws, and ftiffening his eye-balls in their fockets. Again Paulina ihrieked, " Oh, my father will die !" flie exclaimed ; " call in affift¬ ance, fave my dear father's life !" She now darted paft Antonia, and ruflied into the gallery, ftill exclaiming, " Oh, fave my dy¬ ing father— fave him?*-fave my father!" Her well-known and tenderly-beloved voice recalled the alrnoft-extin<niilhed fenfe о Qf the Marchcfe : ".My child, my Paulina!" he utccrcd,in accents almoft too low to be dif¬ tinguifhed
138 tinguîflıed ; " may Heaven take thy inno¬ cence"— ť to its mercy,' he would have faid, but the laft pang that was to difunite the foul and body was upon him, a writhe of ι agony bent his every limb, then ftretched them out to bend no more ! The found of perfons approaching the apaitment was now heard. The Marche fi vvas beginning to revive, and calling in mur¬ muring accents upon her hufband. Bernar* doclafped his hands over his deceafed mafter, uttered a deep figh, which the motion of his lips made me conceive to be accompanied by an inward prayer ; then rofe, went to the Marchefa Laura, took her in his arms, and bore her away from the apartment, through a door oppofite to that towards which the voices and footfteps were advancing. The tygrefs Antonia ftill maintained a countenance not calm, but fatisfied, and feemed tortured onlyjby fome inward bodily pain. I had fcarcely time to notice this, before a number of fervants, in the midft of whom was the frantic Paulina, ruftied into the room : and laft, though not with the
139 the leaft interefted countenance, came the Marquis de Belleterre. He approached the body of the Mar¬ chefe, faw life was extinct, and I perceived that horror ran through his veins. He darted through the fervants, and went up to Paulina, who had come but a few foot¬ fteps into the apartment : " Your mother is gone from this room," he faid; "let me entreat you to leave it too : pray oblige me by going away immediately; for yourown fake follow my requeft." She leant on the arm of a female fer¬ vant, and retired. As the Marquis de Belleterre returned to the centre of the room, Bernardo re-en¬ tered by the door through which he had carried away the Marchefa Laura. " For Heaven's fake explain to me what I fee l'* exclaimed the Marquis ; " who has done this deed ?—- Sir Charles Melford here tool" I bowed in acknowledgment of his excla¬ mation, fpeak I could not. " Sir Charles Melford is innocent," returned Bernardo; for the young Marquis's eyes were fixed on me
Т40 mc in wild fufpicion. " Who thxľn is the atrocious murderer?" afked the Marquis with vehemence. "' / am"- replied Antonia witli cool firmnefs. The Marquis cali a look of doubt, firft at Bernaido, then at me: "It is fo, indeed/' returned Bernardo. The Marquis was preparing to addref. hcr ; Üıe role from the fofa, the drops cf blood which had trickled down upon her white garment from the blade of the ftiletto were now vifible, and as he faw them he involuntarily ftarted back. " You are go¬ ing to tell me," fhe faid, " of the racks and tortures of this world. I fcorn the power of man to injure me, and fly felf willed to retribution in a fecond ftate, to atone for my paft deeds to a fuperior Judge. I fear not punifliment, for I have braved к ; and however keen the agony of expia¬ tion acrofs that gulph which 1 am now abo« t ' to pafs, I have glutted my felf on this fide of it with the fweeis of revenge.. 1 mock tiu feverity of earthly laws, ] I .am paft their reach, death is already in my Veins': Ihave .fwallowed the juice of laurel; butit is tQo tanb
141 [tardy a diflblution, I pant to clofe my ¡eyes upon this hated world : the moft inge¬ nious tortures of the damned muft be de¬ light, compared to the vile loathing with which my fight beholds this earth of difap¬ pointment and injuftice. Here there is no equity ; hereafter, whatever my fate, it will be juft. I have finned ; but even a finner has the fatisfaciion of juftice ; and this fliall give my foul the wings to fly to it." In faying this flie attempted to ftoop, and pick up the {filetto ; a fudden p-ng, occafioned by the poifon flie had fwallowed, feized her, and fne fell with her face upon the ground. She raifed herfelf upon one hand, and turned her head towards me: " Forgive me," ilie faid; t( I afk no pardon but your's." I felt it impoflible to refufe her requeft in the fituation ihe was in, and I was dropping upon my knee to fpeak the w 7 ords flie had begged of me to pronounce, vvhen, in aloud iliriek, flie emitted her laft breath. My fenfes ftiffened, and 1 became infenib ble to the fcene around me. . . . , t
The
ш The next occurrence of which I have any recolleftion is that of Barnardo's leading me from a gondola into a houfe in one of the ftreets in Venice. As foon as we had en¬ tered it, he faid, " 1 have brought you hi¬ ther, fir, becaufe I thought a private houf¿ would, at this time, better fuit your inclina¬ tion than an inn ; a relation of mine live- here, who is honeft, though poor, and will carefully attend to your warnts: I have fent alfo to fummon your fervant to you." He led me into a chamber, and I threw myfelf upon the bed without fpeaking, " Do not afflici yourfelf, fir," he faid, " you can have loft nothing by lofing fuch a woman as An¬ tonia." —" Monfter!" I exclaimed: " de¬ ceitful, bafe monfter of ingratitude !"— " When you did Jove her------" Bernardo was going on ; I interrupted him by calling out, *' Love her ! I have liked her, but I ne¬ ver loved her."—" She deceived even me, who thought I knew her fo well," returned Bernardo. He then apologized that he muli leave me to attend to his unfortunate miftrefs » again told me, that the houfe of his rela¬ tion
143 tion was entirely at my command, and left me. When the power of reflexion returned to me, how evident appeared all the arts vvhich this fiend of revenge had ufed to make me one ofthe inftruments for accom¬ pli fh ing her difgraceful vow. That two wo¬ men ihould fo nearly refemble each other in perfon, that to one who was unacquainted that there was a fecond both Ihould feem the firft, efpecially when the face of the fe¬ cond was feen by him only for a few mo¬ ments, in the indiftinci light of the moon, did not aftonifh me ; for I háve known fimi¬ lar inftances of the great refemblance of features : and, after that private interview with her in the caffino at Venice, 1 faw Antonia no more, as you will yourfelf per¬ ceive from the nature of the impofition flie pracìifed on me, till flie followed me in the difguife of a youth to the Httle inn upon the road ; and this difguife was purpofely worn by her, in order that if any trivial differ- ience of figure or perfon between her and the Marchefa Laura ihould have ftruck me, it
Ì44 ît might be attributed to the alteration of drefs. * Infamous woman ! and oh, execrable dupe that Ì have been to her deeply-planned deceits! And for a momentary enjoyment with this vile wretch, this monfter of hy¬ pocrify, this murderefs, I have forfeited a life of happinefs with Margaretta ! My brain burns almoft to madnefs; is it a fin to with that I were mad ? ifit be, it is a fm to wifli for happinefs, for if I were mad, I muft be happy, for I know 1 ihould then think myfelf the huiband of Margaretta- But you know not yet how Antonia was aftuated in her villanous and but too fuc¬ cefsful conduci towards me, and therefore her acls as yet appear to you a myftery. The packet which flie put into my hands on the morning of our arriving in Venice con¬ tains the fecret hiftory of hcr arts ; I here tranfcribe it for your perufal.
ТУ
т^?
The confeffions of Antonia, When you read thefe lines the wretch who wrote them will be fuffering thofe tor¬ tures which religion has denounced againft the crimes flie had committed ; flie is con¬ fcious that flie muft expiate in everlafling fire the actions of her prefent life, yet fo acute are the pangs of her infulted heart, that flie accepts future torture as thc well- known confequence of the extacy of re¬ venge in this/ If the confeffions ofa heart rent by thefe intolerable agonies do not tempt you to pity a fufferer paft the hope of mercy, at leaft let them induce you to for¬ give her having finned againft yourfelf. 'My father was a decayed noble, who died before I had fcen the light ; one month after his deatli my mother gave birth to my filter Laura and myfelf, who am named Antonia. Our entrance into thc- world proved death to her who bore us, and we were orphans on the fijft day of our exiftence. From thc moment of our birtk vol. u« h the
Uo the fimilarity of our perfons was fo great, that the woman who nurfed us was obliged to tie a ribband round my neck, who was the cider born, as a mark by which to di¬ ftinguiih me from my fifter. Our only rela¬ tions were a maiden fifter of my mother's, and a filler of my father's who was a widow; the former was with my mother at the time of her death, and fhe immediately fum¬ moned the latter to the houfe of their de¬ ceafed relative, that they might together confult how to difpofe of their orphan neices. The property which my father had Jeft was very ilender, for his pride had been very great, and he had lived far beyond the ability of his purfe, infomuch, that I have fince heard it declared, it was fortunate for his children that he died when he did 7 for had he lived half a year longer, both him¬ felf and us woukl have been reduced to beggary. My father's fifter had nve children ofher own, thus, as might be expected, flie made objections to increafing her family by taking u> into it ; my mother's fifier therefore confented to take our little pro¬ perty
147 perty into her own hands, artd to bring ut up in her own houfe, as well as the junftion of her poffeflions and ours would permit her to do. This aunt refided in Venice, and accord¬ ingly when we were old enough to travel flie took us thither with her. As we grew up the ftrong refemblance which we had borne to each other from the firft moment of our birth continued to ftrengthen with our years, and thofe only who were very intimately acquainted with us could diftinguiih us from each other. But, fimilar as we were in our perfons, our difpofi¬ tions did not in the leaft affimilate. Laura's temper was extremely mild, and her tones perfuafive ; mine was warm, and my lips loved to utter commands. Our minds were alike cultivated ; but Laura was di.*~ f41ent of the knowledge and accompliih¬ ments which ihe poffeffed, 1 was eager in feeking opportunities of difplaying mine. Laura was unmoved by the voice of flat¬ tery ; in me, it could footh every pain a id u 2 awaken
148 awaken' tranfportïng pleafure : Laura re* ceived coolly the attentions ofthe other fex ; I threw myfelf into the way of attracting them, for they were my higheft enjoyment. For the firft fixteen years of my life nothing occurred to me but fuch accidents as have happened to almoft every girl with a tolerably handfome perfon, and are there¬ fore not worth relating ; on the very day on which I completed my feventeenth year— fatal day to my peace !—I faw, for the firft time faw, the Marchefe di Marvaldi, in the church of Saint John. Albert di Marvaldi was juft returned from his travels, he was three years older than myfelf, and his face, befides wearing íhe expreffion of an intelligent mind, glowed with manly beauty, fo that a firft fight lighted up for him the flame of paflion in my heart. During vefpers my eyeswere conftantly pafling over every part of his coun¬ tenance and perfon ; whether they # told him the fecret of my heart I know not, but he appeared to receive my glances with
ι m oleafiire, and no fooner vvas the fervice of the church ended, than he came round to that part where my aunt and myfelf were fating, and entered into converfation vvith us : when wc left the church he continued to walk vvith us, and when vve entered the houfe he left us, for my aunt's prudence, as flie called the coldnefs of her own age, did not fufler her to afk him to s:o in with о US. The Marchefe di Marvaldi vvas, like mv¬ felf, an orphan ; he was poíľeíľed of a very handfome property, and was juft come to Venice to inhabit the manfion of his an¬ ceftors. i had already been honoured with many admirers, and 1 had fancied for a time that 1 had loved feveral of them by turns, but the fenfations vvith which Albert di Mar¬ valdi had infpired me foon explained to me that my former ideas of love had been falfe. it is not my intention to dwell upon any event ofmy life longer than it is abfoiutely neceffary for me to do, in order to ihow h 3 you
Í50 ycu the conneftion of thofe accidents and difappointments which have driven my in» lilted heart to feek revenge, even though bought by its ultimate torture. Upon this principle, fuffice it to fay, that ff the Marchefe di Marvaldi did not at firft underftand the feelings of my heart, he foon learnt to define them through the in¬ terpretation of my eyes, (or before the end 'of a fortnight he put a note into my hand, as we were leaving the church, faying, that he flattered himfelf he had won my good opinion, and ihould call upon my aunt on the following morning, to aík the honour of my hand in marriage. I was almoft tranfported, raving with joy ; not only that I really felt the height of paf¬ fion for the Marchefe, but pride alfo aflifted in raifing my tranfports. I was the daughter of a decayed noble, I inherited all his fpirit of family hauteur, but my circum¬ ftances were fuch, that I had never hoped for,much lefs afpired to, a connection anfwer¬ able to my birth ; and now, in the very man whofe perfon 1 moft admired, were com¬ bined
151 bined both family, power, and fortune! The manfion of the Marchefe was one of the moft noble in Venice, his eftablifliment one of the richeft, his gondolas and car¬ riages the moft expenfive and beautiful, and himfelf the very man whom I fliould have feledted from the reft of the world' even though not poffefled ofa fingle one of thefe luxuries. Oh, had I then known vvhat would have been the event of this momentary happinefs ! Oh, had I then died !—but I am content to have Jived, and to have lived a.wretch, for I fliould not eife have tafted the fweets of revenge. Agreeably to his appointment, the Mar- chefe came on the following morning, and was moft gracioufly received by my aunt, now flie knew his intentions to be honour¬ able, as flie expreffed herfelf. Few words ferve to determine a matter of love to which the minds of both parties are inclined ; thus it was vvith Albert and myfelf, and I pafled three hours in his focietv that mornin«· 'm «* о the enviable of ftate of I. h future wife. The greater part of his time was now « 4 fpent
iâ f 2 fpent at the houfe ofmy aunt , whenever 1 went to .church, or to the opera, he was my conftant attendant, and I felt m ν love in- creafe for him to an excefs which Ì coukl not hide from him; and he appeared the moft happy of men. ' It had been agreed that our ma-rriage fliould be folemnifed at the diftance of three months from the Marchefe 's firft offer of his band to me \ two months of that time were now paflèd, and my fifter, who was on a vifit to her paternal aunt in the country, was recalled to Venice, to be prefent at the nuptials.—And from the moment of her re* turn begins the date of my mifery. Falfe, perjured, bafe, unfeeling, inhuman Albert di Marvaldi 1 no fooner did he be¬ hold my fifter Laura, than that heart, which had fo long and with fo many vow's of eternal fidelity been given to me, began tõ withdraw' itfelf from niy bofom, and to creep into the breaft of my happy fifler. Yes, after all his facred proteftations, all his appeals to Heaven to witnefs his faith, and alî the raptures he had expreffed—fo often
τ дго often expreffed, at the anticipated confun> mation of our marriage, he ceafed to love me; but I, even in my revenge, cannot ceafe to love him ; it is the excefs of my love for him, that fpurs me on to become his affarìi n ! My firft apprehenfion of his bafenefs was one morning when the day appointed for our marriage was faft approaching, he came to my apartment, and for fome trifling rea fon defired the nuptials to be deferred fome time longer. I thought this a ftrange requeft, from a young man fo paifionately in love as I had ever thought him to be ; 1 however judged that there muft be fome neceflity for the protraction of our marriage with which I was not acquainted, and 1 felt tolerably fatisfied, till going in the evening of that very day into the garden adjoining to the houfe of my aunt, 1 faw in an arbour at the farther end of a walk, along which I was moving, the deceitful Marchcfe di Marvaldi feated by my perfidious fifter Laura, and holding in his hand one of her's. They faw me not at firft, I flopped, and и 5 felt
154 felt as if I were finking into the earth ; in a few moments Laura.raifed her eyes and beheld me ; ihe fpoke to Albert, and they both rofe with the confufion of interrupted love on their faces. I advanced towards them, and, in a voice animated by the in¬ dignation ofmy feelings, I upbraided Albert with his perfidy, and Laura with her in¬ juftice in ftealing away the acknowledged huiband of her fifter. Laura burft into tears, and feemed anxious to fay fomething which her tears prevented her from uttering. The Marchefe befought Laura to gô into the houfe, and requefted .me to return with him into the arbour; Laura obeyed his requeft, and I was not yet fufficiently convinced that my fufpicions were juft, to refufe him a hearing. Oh great God ! what a veil of happinefs did he then draw from before my clouded eyes î —he confeffed to me that he had feen my fifter Laura, while on a viftl to her paternal aunt, that he had made acquaint¬ ance vvith her,.and that they had already begu u
lãâ begun to interchange looks of tendernefs, when he had been called on fome matter of importance to Venice, whither he had un¬ derftood fhe was foon to follow him, and where he meant to make her an offer of his hand i that on feeing me in the church of Saint John, my great refemblance to my fifter had deceived him, and that he had fuppofed me to be the fame girl whom he had feen and admired in the village of F ------, and that he did not difcover his error till my After returned to Venice, and he faw us together. " Hence," faid he, " has arifen an unfortunate miftake, for which I know not how to atone to you, and which my averfion to communicate ta you has for fome days paft rendered me very unhappy ¿ I am bound in honour to· efpoufe your fifter, as my firft advances were made to her, but," continued he, " you fliall not fuffer from my error, I will endea¬ vour to procure you a connection not infe¬ rior to the one you have expected^ by- giving you a fortune which fhall command fuch a one far you " h 6 The
us The fudden turn given to my feelings bv¬ the difappointment of my paflion, and the overthrow of my future profpefts, fired my blood to madnefs ; I threw myfelf upon the grounds raved, ihrieked, curfed Albert and myfelf, called upon Heaven to ftrike him dead before me ; and laftly I wept -that no immediate revenge prefented itfelf to my ready hand. As my extacy of rage diflblved itfelf a iittie in tears, my reafon became clearer, and I faw my fifter and aunt coming to¬ wards us from the houfe ; my flirieks, I fup¬ pofe, had caiied them out. •Still I was upon the ground ; my fifter came and endeavoured to raife me; flie ap¬ peared alarmed at my fituation, and faid, *' Albert fhall be your huiband. "—" Impof¬ fible," faid he, " I am your's by the juflice of firft affeftions."—" If it muft be fo," re¬ turned Laura*· " promife again to be a friend to my fifter." At thefe words I ftarted up, they recalled to me the promife with wdiieh the Marchefe had ended his explanation. i: Infulting wretches !" I ex- - claimed,
157 claimed, u think you that your vile gold, and your more detefted friendftiip, will be accepted by me!—me whom you have com¬ bined to diftraft, to torture, to deceive—no ľ before I acknowledge your friendftiip» every breathing thing upon the earth fliall be my foe ; and before I accept your gold— your kindnefs, as you call it—I will beg, ftarve, rot ! One word more and I trouble you no longer; only bear in your mind this admonition :—that by my foul I fwear, your fmiles of pleafure fliall be turned inta frowns of agony !" Having faid this, I ran into the houfe, gained my chamber, flint myfelf within it, and refolved to leave it no more till Laura was the Marchefa di Alar¬ va İdi ; my paflions were ftrong, bur they cafdy yielded to each other, and anger novv gave way to the anticipated pleafure of re¬ venge, though Γ had not yet digefted any plan for obtaining it. I continued refolute in not leaving my chamber nor admitting any one into it, ex¬ cept a female fervant to whom 1 was partial. My fifter Laura and the Marchefe came repeatedly
158 repeatedly to my door and implored ad¬ mittance, or at leaft that I would liften to them while they addreffed me, and anfwer them from within ; but I did not fuffer even a monofyliable to pafs my lips: they both wrote to me, imploring me to fay how they could make me happy ; my fifter alfo ad¬ dreffed me a private letter, in which ihe told me, that ftie would ftill refufe to marry the Marchefe di Maryaldi, if her remaining fingle would be any fatisfačtion to my mind. Heaven and Hell fhould not now have per¬ fuaded me to marry the Marchefe myfelf, after the flight I had received from him, had he even fallen on his knees to implore my hand ; however, it was not probable that he would ever wifti to make me his wife, even if my fifter refufed to unite herfelf with him, and accordingly I determined to look forward only to that paffion which is ftronger than love. After I had confined myfelf a month to my chamber, and had received repeated letters from them both, declaring that they would never marry without my content, I wrote
159 ■wrote a note, which I direfted to thera jointly, and in which were only thefe words ; " I tvijh you to marry." A few minutes after I had fent this note I received one from them, wherein they requefted that I would complete their hap¬ pinefs by once again entering into their fociety, to this I returned in anfwer r " When you are united, I will mix agam with the world." Prefently after came a third fupplication, to defire that I would be prefent at their nuptials ; and to this I replied : íť Yau jhall fee me, on the day of your marriage." From the two laft enquiries I perfeftly underftood that they thought me recon¬ ciled to feeing my lifler the Marchefa di Marvaldi, and imagined that í only kept myfelf a prifoner in my chamber till the in- diflbiuble knot fliould be tied between them, and 1 made my anfwers purpofely equivocal to retain them in their error, as on their union
160 union depended all my felf-promifed re- venere. On the evening previous to the day upon which they were to be united, the female fervant whom I alone admitted into my apartment came to inform me what was to be the event ofthe morrow, and to requeft in the joint names of Albert and Laura that they might fee me that evening; I told the woman who brought me this mef¬ fage to fay, " that they fliould fee me on the morrow, and not till then." When the morning arrived, I habited myfelf only in the fame clothes which I had worn during the preceding week, and with¬ out a fiugle ornament about my drefs to compliment the wedding of this perfidious lover and 'ahuman fifter: I fat down, in a ftate of mind which I know not better how to exprefs than by calling it a compofed madnefs, to await the fummons for accom¬ panying them to church- At length it was brought to the outfide of my door by my aunt ; I enquired to what church they were going ? flie told me to that of Saint John ; I re-
Ι6Ί 1 requefted that they would proceed, and promifed immediately to follow them- My aunt went down with my meffage, and fhortly after returned to U\y, that they wiflied me to go with them ; I anfvvered, that I promifed to follow* but would not go with them. They knew me to be refolute, and ac¬ cordingly they fet out without me. Immediately on their being gone, I threw a thick veil over my head, went down into the ftreet, and proceeded by a different way to that which I knew they had taken to the cloifters of the church of Saint John ; I itole along them till I gained a little door which opens into the church on one fide of the altar, I flid through it, and took my ftation behind a bulky pillar, at the moment they entered the church on the other fide ; here I ftood entirely free from obfervation, and here, in the very church where the bafe Albert had firft met and returned my glances of Jove, I faw him united to my unfeeling lifter. When the ceremony was concluded, the Marchefe
16*2 Marchefe kifled the lips of his wife: I thank Heaven that he did fo ; the power of giving pleafure which thofe lips pofleffed I knew to be mine in equity, and 1 burnt to tafte the delight they were capable of giving» to fee another revel in the joys 1 ľaryguiflied for, was more than I could bear, İt roufed my fpirit to the pitch up to which í wiíhed it to be fcrewed, and throwing up my veil, I dafhed towards the altar. On feeing me, they both ftepped forward, and extended their hands to take mine. iS Forbear, in¬ human wretches !" i cried ; " pollute not my hand by the perjured touch of \ours ; I come not hither to meet your hated forms on terms of amity ; touch me not, I charge ye; you have juft pledged a vow at this altar, í come to pledge one alfo." I threw myfelf upon my knees before the altar, kiffed the crucifix which was placed upon it, then laid : " I fwear by fome immediate aftion of my life ίο bring difgrace upon the family of the Marchefe di Marvaldi ; 1 fwear, if the moft deceitful arts can accomplifh niy wifli, to marry a man equal in rank to Albert
103 Albert di Márvaldi ; and I fwear, when this darling with of my foul fliall be effcfted, that his happinefs ihall not outlive my triumph ■—all ihis 1 fwear to perform,though at the hazard of my everlafling foul." I lav¬ ing faid this, I rofe from the altar, darted at them a mingled look of indignation, con¬ tempt, and fury, and left the church. Wlie¬ ther all the words ofmvvow, or indeed any part of it, was audible to them» I am not able to determine, for the agony pafling in my heart rendered it difficult to me to arti¬ culate. On arriving in the cloiflers, I pull¬ ed down my veil, returned by the fliorteft way to the houfe of my aunt, and agaiu locked mvfelf into mv chamber. You will, perhaps, be furprifed that I did not in the church take the revenge of his life upon the Marchefe, as you have now feen me fufficiently defperate to do it ; but rny triumph would not then have been complete; I fhould not have tortured him with the difgrace of a family which had hitherto not been ftaiucd with a fpot of in- îanıy, or Ihould I have ihown that I could through
164 through my own means connect myfelf with a man his equal in rank and fortune, with¬ out being indebted for the connection to tbe pittance which he infultingiy had offered to me; at that moment my re¬ venge would not have been full, and there¬ fore, to me, no revenge. The nuptials were celebrated at the manfion of the Marchefe ; and mv aunt came to me after I had been returned home about two hours, to enquire why I had not gone to fhe houfe of joy, as I had promifed Albert and my fifter that they fhould fee me on the day of their marriage ? From this meflage I began to conclude that they had not heard my vow at the altar ; I did not think it neceflary to repeat it, and only anfwered, tc I have kept my promife, thev have feen me on the dav of their mar- riage ; tell them this, and alfo tell them to urge me no more to enter their prefence, for we meet but once again !" My aunt feemed to underftand thefe words differently to what they were meant to convey; flie thought them, í believe, to allude
\65 aľlude to a future ftate. She did not at¬ tempt to argue with me, for flie knew the firmnefs of my temper; flie knew alfo the aggravations I had received for forming my prefent refolution, and left me to return to the houfe of the Marchefe. I doubt not that the day I paffed was happier than that either of Albert or Laura. I was contemplating the future atonement of my wrongs ; I was enjoying the fatisfačtion of a wretch who, on the wings of vengeance, was towering above her difappointments ¿ it is the moft decided* feeling which fenfe can tafte. In the courfe of the fame week I had refolved to leave the houfe of my aunt : I knew that Laura would be frequently vifit¬ ing it, and í determined not to fubject myfelf to the hated fight of her prefence. On the very morning on which 1 had pre¬ determined to depart from it, the fe¬ male fervant whp attended me came into my chamber, and told me that flie had found my aunt Hfelefs in her bed. I heard the event unmoved; my heart was not in a ftate
ì'66 a ftate to be touched with the common oc¬ currences of life. I ftill, however, felt fuf ficent intereft in her fate to wiih to afcertain whether ber death had been a natural one, and I fent for a phyfician.to inform me on this point. He fatisfied me by declaring a fit to have been the caufe of her death, and I now experienced fome flight pleafure at her being no more ; for flie had been to me affectionate and indulgent, and I did rejoice that flie was fpared the pain of wit- nefling the future events of my life. I next fummoned a lawyer, and, in his prefence, opened her will: flie had equally fliared be- tween'Laura and myfelf what little proper¬ ty fhe died poffeffed of. I immediately made the divifion, even to the fplitting of a ftraw, that- it might never be faid the poor Antonia had defrauded of a pin's point the rich Laura, who had 'offered her a pittance to buy her a huiband. You will not be furprifed that I was fcrupuloufly honeft at the. very moment I was feeking an opportunity of performing a moft atrocious crime. You muft have fcQO
167 (cen enough of this world to have obferved that every one who inhabits it is made up of contradictions, that every individual be¬ ing looks forward to fome purpofe which, though he knows it to be of a criminal na¬ ture, he has not the refolution to forego, and that he equally binds himfelf down to the performance of other virtues with ftrick- nefs. A fliort time after the death of my aunt, I be^an to enter into a courfe of gaietv and diflipation, which I had fixed upon as the firft fteps towards accompliíhing my deep laid fcheme of revenge. I went conftantly to the theatres alone, and before I had been in them many minutes, I was certain of being at¬ tended by a fwarm of thofe young men wdio hold themfelves ready to pay their atten¬ tions to any woman willing to receive them. By my being {etn alone, or at leaft without any female companion, in a theatre, when my fifter and her hufband were perhaps on the contrary fide of the fame houfe, or at leaft in fome other place of public amufe- meut,
168 ment, the report of my difappointment, and my fubfequent enmity to my fifter and Ah bert, began to be fpread very largely about. Some of graver years, in both fexes, took part againft me for perfifting to maintain a conftant enmity againft a man whofe con¬ duci had originated from error, not defign. Thc younger women were, as they always are, in a conspiracy againft one who has any charms of perfon which may vie with their own ; but the young men flattered, carefTed, and encouraged me in my deter- -mined animofity againft the Marchefe and his wife, Thefe marks of- their approba¬ tion were exaftly what I âefired. I gave them frequent invitations to vilit me 5 free accefs to the houfe of a fingle woman is ne¬ ver difregarded by a man who dexotes h h life to faihionable pleafure, and in a few months my houfe became the conftant af fern blage of the gay young men of the time. The appearance of doing wrong h a-- injurious to a female charafter, in thc eyes and
169 and opinion of the world, as the actual com¬ mifiion, and my reputation already began to be tarniflied by the tongue of calumny. At this time I received a letter from my fifter, wherein ihe entreated me to* receive her proteftion, and admoniflied me, if I continued firm againft reuniting myfelf with her upon the terms of friendftiip, to be care¬ ful of my own fame, which had fuffered greatly in the eftimation of the world at large. Γ returned no anfwer to this peti¬ tion :—the ftigma of the world 1 vvas labour¬ ing to gain» Thus pafled a few months, till my (len¬ der finances were entirely exhaufted by the diffipation in which I had lived, and the entertainments I had fo profufely given. The time of my firft willing degradation was now faft approaching; it was a de¬ gradation which I had refolved, nay vowed, to undergo ; and yet, as the moment which made it neceffary continued to advance more preflingly upon mc, I could not for¬ bear recoiling at the terrific idea. My late levity of conduci had given me ' vot, II. t шапу
İ70 many admirers, who had not fcrupled to make me pecuniary offers for my careffes. 1 loved none of them, and, therefore, was undecided on whom to. fix the honour of my difgrace. The' Marchefe di Marvaldi had, during his travels, fpent much of his time at the court of France ; he had there feen many Engliftimen, and, from the noble conduft of one of them, w r ith whom he had been engaged in an affair of honour, he had im¬ bibed the higheft opinion for Engliftimen in general, and given a preffing invitation to thofe whom he had known in that king¬ dom to vifit him whenever their purfuits might lead them to Venice. The Marchefe had been married about feven months to Laura, when I was inform¬ ed that an Englifh nobleman, who had been fome time in France with his fifter, in the hope of benefiting her health, not having received the expefted fuccefs from thß cli¬ mate, was come with her into the ftill fe- rener atmofphere of Italy, and had taken up his refidence in the Pallazo di Marvaidt. I farther
171 I farther underftood that the Marchefe and he had paifed fome time together in France ; and at that moment I thought no more of what I had heard. About a fortnight after this I one day faw an Englifliman walking İn the place of Saint Mark with Laura 1 and her huiband ; I juft caft my eyes upon him, and he appeared to me of about forty years of age, ofa hand¬ fome countenance and good figure. In the evening ofthe fame day, one ofmy conftant attendants at the opera faid to me, <c I have promifed to introduce a ftranger to your ta¬ ble this evening; have I your leave?"— '< Who is it ?" I afked. ťf The Engliih no¬ bleman," he replied, <c who is now with his fifter upon a vifit to the Marchefe di Mar¬ valdi. He has feen you feveral times, and is defirous of being acquainted with you; but he comes unknown to your brother and Laura ; for as he and his fifter are both re¬ ceiving civilities from the Marchefe and his wife, he thinks it would appear unhand- fome conduft to them, were he openly to ι 2 vifit
172 vifit you, with whom they are upon terms of enmity." I returned home after the play, and in a ihort time the young Italian followed me, bringing with him the Englifliman whom I had feen in the morning walking in the fiţuare of Saint Mark, and whom he introduced to me as Sir Robert Seymour.
Pardon me, my dear George, that the exact truth which the nature of our friend¬ ihip demands reciprocally from us, in recit¬ ing the occurrences that befal our lives, will not permit me to hide this foible of your parent, which, as a father, he judged rightly in veiling from you; for your fa¬ ther undoubtedly was the Sir Robert Sey¬ mour here alluded to by Antonia. You cannot require to be reminded of his hav¬ ing gone abroad at the period herein men¬ tioned with his fifter, Mrs. Woodville, for the benefit of her health· I fliall wave all farther comments on this difcovery for the prefent, and proceed in copying the narra¬ tive
173 tive which has divulged it -, thus it pre* ceeds t
I fhall be very brief in difclofing to you tranfaftions which it gives me no fatisfač¬ tion to dwell upon, and which it can afford you no pleafure to read. I gathered from the converfation and manners of Sir Robert Seymour that he was a man of gallantry. He foon found an opportunity of feeing me alone, and revealed to me the reafon of his having defired my acquaintance : his bribes to infamy were liberal -, they enabled me to live in that ftyle of affluence which I wiflied to fhow my fifter and her huiband I could fupport without their affiftance ; and, in a fhort time, a ftill more extraordinary^ but not lefs ardent, wifh of mine was accom¬ pliihed—for I felt myfelf about to become a mother. When I was advanced four months in my pregnancy, I declared my fituation to Sir Robert; for he was on the poi.it of leaving Venice for Nice, in compliance wih 1 3 the
174 the prefcription of the phyfician, who had recommended a change of air to his fifter. My fituation 1 found to be what he neither wiftied nor expecled : however he behaved with the generofity of a man of honour, and promifed to provide for my child, by taking ittoEngJand with him,when he ftiould return thither. He advifed me immediately to leave Venice, and endeavour to hide my condi¬ tion from the world : this it was not my wiih to do ; I therefore returned evafive an¬ fwers, the fum of which meant, that I chofe to remain in the place where I was. He appeared uneafy at 'finding this to be my determination, and, after fome hefitation, he befought me never to let it be known who was the father of my child, as it would give him the utmoft pain to have the Mar- í hefe Albert acquainted that he had been guilty of fo great a breach of hofpitality, as he conceived to be a connection with the lifter of a man from whom he had been re¬ ceiving fo great civilities as he had experi¬ enced from the Marchcfe di Marvaldi, even though
175
though an enmity fubfifted between us, and I had thrown myfelf into his way. My fole objecl was, that the Marchefe fliould feel the humiliation of knowing the fifler ofhis wife to be the mother of an ille¬ gitimate child : thus it was of no confe- quence to me to divulge who was the fa¬ ther, and I readily agreed to conceal that circumftance. A few days after this converfation, Sir Robert Seymour left Venice, it having been predetermined between us that when my child was born I fhould write to inform him of it, and that he would then, if poffi¬ ble, come himfelf to fetch it away, at all events, would fend a trufty dependent to convey it to England. It was not long before the fame òf my condition began to be fpread abroad, and I then receiveel a fecond letter from my fifter, wherein flie lamented my fall from virtue, and implored me to fly to fome place where 1 was not known. I treated this letter like the former one, with the contempt of not acknowledging the receipt. ι 4 About
Ι7β About a week before the time at which I awaited the birth of my infant, Sir Robert, whofe fifter had paid the debt ornature, re¬ turned to Venice, under pretence of bidding farewel to the Marchefe di Marvaldi, in fact, to hear fome tidings of me. The evening be¬ fore my confinement he vifited me; during bis ftay vvith me, he faid, " Antonia, I love you, and nothing but the fear of lofing both the affection and refpect of two fons, whom I have in England, prevents me from making you my wife: that, however, can¬ not be, from the reafon I have already flated ; but every thing elfe which it is in my power to do, to render you happy, you may command. Do you prefer to be yourfelf the protectrefs of the child, which is yet unborn? or do you wifh me to convey it \mder my own care to England ?" My vow made it uncertain how long I might be an inhabitant of this world; I accordingly an¬ fwered, " I wifli it to be under your care.' 5 He then told me that he fliould leave Ve¬ nice immediately on the child's entrance into life, and that he had provided a wo¬ man
177 man to nurfe it on its journey. He next prefented me with a fum of money, which he told me was to buy comfort during my confinement for myfelf; and much, much was it beyond what I had expefted from him : he then bade me good-night. This was the lafl time I ever faw him. I believe he loved me, but obliged himfelf not to fee me again, from a conviftion ofthe injuftice his vifits to me were doing to his fons. On the fucceeding morning I gave biith to a girl, who was named Amilia ; notice of her birth was direftly carried to Sir Robert, and flie was that afternoon conveyed from me for ever. This, Sir Charles, explains what appear¬ ed to you a myftery, when I told you that I had not embraced my child fince the day of her birth : you thought me then the mo¬ ther of Paulina. In a very fliort time the birth of my child was blazed all over Venice ; it was even confidently afferted who was the fa¬ ther, and I was credibly informed that the Marchefe Albert himfelf knew wh> 1 5 was
17% was the parent ; but the child was faid to be dead. I faw, with joy, the firft part of my vow accompliihed ; the ftigma of infamy which I wiflied to ñx upon the Marchefe by my conduft the tongue of the world was as ready as I could defire it to be in placing upon him, and his name was now fcarcely ever mentioned without it being added with a fneer, ' His wife is fifter to that Antonia who has difgraced herfelf and her family by bearing a child.' Now did I begin to triumph; now did the Marchefe's fmiles of pleafure, as I had foretold they ftiould, be¬ gin to be turned into frowns of agony. You are -.»ware, like myfelf, that the difgrace ot being a mother, unmarried, in reafon falls only upon her who bears it ; but the world at large delights to find falfe pleas for in¬ fulting its neighbours, and always takes care to give the innocent family a fhare of the ftigma. Upon this acquaintance with the ill nature of the world I ačled, and I found the affuiance I had placed upon it not ill founded. At firft it fell ftrongly in¬ deed
V79 deed upon the Marchefe, and it is not worn away even to this day. What has thus long continued Paulina without the offer of the hand of a fingle Italian noble—what but that her aunt Antonia bore a baftard ? Here, George, I mufl: again interrupt the narrative of Antonia, to make fome obfer¬ vations which have perhaps alr-tady ap¬ peared to you. Do you now not perceive what meaning iurked beneath the Count di Rebinľs tongue, when he faid, ' Paulina is a fine girl, and her father is pofleflcd of a handfome fortune, but yet flie is not the woman whom every man would choofe to make his wife ľ Is it not alfo obwous what was the fecret he was аЫлК to difclofe to me in our walk on St, Maik's- place, when the Marchefe di Ma Iva rd i in¬ terrupted our converfation г Does nol like- wife the reafon plainly appear why thq Marchefe, with fo great confuiion, and yet fo great earneflnefs, made me an offer of his daughter in marriage? On, what a dif¬ grace has this Antonia been to her fex! whai: ï ( > a fco urge
180 a fcourge to the peace of thofe with whom ihe has been fated to live ! Methinks to her the pictured mother of Hamlet was an angel, and that to exprefs her enormities, Shakfpeare wouid have converted his com¬ paratively weak apoftrophe of * Frailty, thy name is woman,' into * Devil, thy name is woman ľ Her account of herfelf continues thus í
For fome time no occurrence worth my relating happened ; I continued to recover gradually from my lying-in, and Laura gave birth to her daughter Paulina. When I be¬ came reftored to my health, I went very little from home, and received vifits from but few of my former intimates : I pre¬ tended to appear repentant for what I had done. It was neceffary that my conduct fhould now change, or I could never have the fainteft chance of forming an union to abfolve me from the fecond part of my vow; all my hopes refted now on my be¬ ing able to inveigle fome ftranger or fo¬ reigner into my fnares. At
181 At the expiration of two months the nurfe who had accompanied Sir Robert to England with my child returned. I learnt from her that it was well, and that its fa¬ ther appeared to have fome affection for it. I had underftood from him, at our laft part¬ ing, though he had not abfoiutely expreffed it, that he did not intend me ever again to fee my child, and that I was not to expect, in future, to receive either letters or prefents from him ; and I had received the intelli¬ gence with that indifference with which fe¬ condary concerns are always liftened to, when one principal object occupies the mind. Towards the fecond year after my be¬ coming a mother, I learnt from a young Italian, who had always been in the habit of frequenting my houfe, and who was now juft returned from paffing fome months in England, that Sir Robert Seymour had died during his ftay in the kingdom. I aíked after my child; he told me that he had made fome private] enquiries about it, and that he had been affured it was dead alfo* I received
ш I received thefe tidings without either pain¬ ful or pleafurable emotions. Not long after this time, I was one day fitting alone in my chamber, when ray fer¬ vant informed me, that an old man of a de¬ cent appearance wiihed to fpeak to me. I admitted the petitioner to fee me, and, to my furprife, recognifed in the perfon ofhim who entered my apartment an dd fervant of my deceafed father, named Bernardo. His fervices to my father had been moft faithful ; he lived with my mother at the time of my birth : I had feen him frequently finCe her death ; for he had lived in the fer¬ vice of a nobleman in the fame village, to which I had often göne to vifit my pa iernai aunt. He had always expreffed much af* fedì ion for the daughters of his deceafed mafter : I knew his words to exprefs the real feelings of hib heart, and I received him with great cordiality. It was along time before he could fpeak. I was fu v priied by his embaraffment. At length he gained the power of utterance, and told me he had quitted his Jaft tervice, that
183 that he had come to Venice to feek a new one, and that chance had direcìed him to the Marchefe di Mar valdi, that he had there obtained the place of major-domo ;* " but I am not happy," added he, " for 1 have heard fo fad a tale about you, my dear lady*—" Here he burft into tears. I made him fit down by me, expreffed my fatisfaciion at feeing him again, and then, in my turn, told him a tale of what I had undergone from the difappointment of my love for the Marchefe calculated to foften his heart in my favour. WTien I had concluded it, he fat fome time in filence; he appeared half convinced of my wrongs, and yet not fatisfied with me. **' Do not you pity me ?" I faid. ( * The child," returned he— u the child!" I un¬ derftood his meaning, and inftead of at¬ tempting to exculpate myfelf, I chofe the more politic method of defcribing my for¬ row, my repentance, and my prefent feclu¬ fion from gaiety. At length 1 brought him over to pity me; and when he went away, I made
I made him promife to come frequently and fit with me. I already felt a plan by which it might be in his power to affift me in performing my fecond vow dancing in my brain j but I re¬ folved that it would be prudent to let many months pafs before I ventured even to hint it to him. My fifter and myfelf had been always much, admired by the Engliih who had travel¬ led through Italy ; Sir Robert Seymour's at¬ tachment to me was a fign of their appro¬ bation -, and I learnt from my confidants that every Englifhman who vifited at the Pal¬ lazo di Marvaldi expreffed much more than common praife of Laura's perfon and figure. I had a faint glimmering of fome advan¬ tage which might refult to me from our re¬ femblance, but I could not yet form any diftinft idea of how it was to be effected. One point, however, 1 felt it neceffary care¬ fully to attend to, that I fliould keep myfelf fecluded from the world, as nothing could promote
185 promote the fuccefs of fuch a deceit, if I ever fhould find it convenient to praftife it, fo much as keeping myfelf from obfervation, and by the fame reafon from being fpoken of. Bernardo continued to vifit me once every month, and fometimes oftener; but two years had tedioufly rolled away before I believed the old man to be fufficiently con¬ vinced of my pretended refolution to walk no more in the paths of vice, to be induced to affift me in any plan for promoting the happinefs of my future days. I then ven· tured to begin the fubjeft ; I talked to him of the married felicity of my fifter, how unjuftly ftie had acquired it, and how in- jurioufly I had been treated. His anfwer only was, tbat the Marchefe had fallen into an error, into which the great refem¬ blance between Laura and myfelf had in¬ duced him ; that it had not been a willing infult offered by him to me ; and that he had been defirous of making me any recom¬ pence in his power. "It
ne 44 It is the with of my heart," faid t, " to marry ; I defire to become the wife of fome man who has fufficient generofity to e fpoufe & woman who cannot enrich him, and who would place me in a fituation that would not difgrace the family from which I am ¿çfctndeá" Bernardo fmiled, and, it was evident, at the vanity of my wifli. I con¬ tinued : " With an Italian this can never be the cafe ; but coukl I be fo happy as to pleafe fome man who did not know the cir¬ cumftances of my paft life "- » ....... "■—·" Would you conceal them from any one who might afk your hand ?" Bernardo interrupted me by faying. " It is a juftice I owe to my¬ felf," I replied: " I have already faid that I can never marry an Italian, thus to what¬ ever other country my hufbapd may convey me, my ill fame, I truft, will not travel after азе to interrupt our happinefs."—" It would travel with you in your heart," faid Ber¬ nardo, " 1 think I muft have fuffered enougli to quell its envious fpirit," I re¬ turned. Here ended our firft converfation on
187 on this fubject ; it had been fhort, and 1 augured but little advantage from rt, nor did I venture in fome time to renew it. At a diftant period I again introduced it : " How many men" faid I, " as I am told, are there of all countries, but particularly Engliftimen, who envy the Marchefe di Marvaldi his wife ľ'-*- c < The Marchefa is certainly very much admired," returned Bernardo. <c Am I ftill very much like her?" I afked* " As much as ever," re¬ plied Bernardo ;" ifyou are at all different, it is that you are rather thinner."—" If Laura were Angle then you think ihe would not be long without a hufband ? " I rejoined. " Indeed I do not," was his anfwer. " I think," faid Í, " that the admiration which is beftowed on her, might be turned to my advantage."—" How fo ?" he afked. " I am of opinion," replied I, forcing a fmile, under which I intended to couch my mean¬ ing in the guife of a joke, till 1 obferved how.it was taken by him—"I am of opinion, that ifl were bv accident to fall in the way of
Î88 of one ofthe admirers of my fifter, who Ь fighing in vain for her, that the very fur¬ prife of being able to obtain an exaft re¬ femblance of the woman he had been adoring, as an unattainable creature, would convert him into my hufband*"—" If you met himon terms of honour and truth," faid Bernardo, " I fee no harm in the trial." This was much farther than I had expefted to get with him, and I immediately ex¬ claimed, " Give me the opportunity."—" I will think upon it," returned Bernardo ; and here again ended our converfation* A few days after, Bernardo fent me a note İn which were thefe words :— "My dear lady,I have thought again and again upon the difcourfe which paffed be¬ tween us not long fince. I feel pity for the fituation to which you have imprudently reduced yourfelf; I have related all that has paffed between us to the Marchefe my mafter and your fifter Laura, and with the utmoft tendernefs they offer to forget all that is paffed, and to receive you into their houfe
m houfe as their fifter. I am yours faith· fully. *r "Bernardo.** I threw the letter upon the floor, and crufhed it under my feet ; I felt all my hopes deftroyed by this old fooľs babbling. When my rage began a little to fubfide, I took my pen and wrote thus to Bernardo :— w If Albert and Laura can forget all that is paft, Antonia cannot, nor will fhe on any emergency become beholden to them." Three months paffed away and Bernardo came no more to vifit me. Three other months were added to the firft, and I faw him not. I knew he was ftill alive, and therefore had no hefitation in determining that he had caught offence at the indignant ftyle of my note ; I fcorned to fue him, fo endeavoured to forget that I had ever hoped any thing through him. But a worfe evil was haftening upon me : í had hitherto lived upon the liberal prefent of Sir Robert Seymour ¿
ÏÖO Seymour ; it was now almoft wafted, and 1 faw no refource before me. After many debates with myfelf, I re- folved to go to Rome, where I was not known, and praftife every art that might gain me my defired end ; but I was aware that without an accomplice little could be done. I knew a young man in Venice, who had once been a fervant to a nobleman that had vifited my houfe during the life¬ time of my aunt. The converfation to which I had often been witnefs during the firft few months after her death, from the riotous fociety whom I had encouraged to frequent my table, had taught me that this man, whofe name was Marce*, had been difcharged from his mafter's fervice for a theft of which he was well known to be guilty, but which could not be proved againft him; had fmce that time entered into the fervice of a cyprian for no very credi¬ table purpofes ; and had been fufpeded ol handling with expertnefs a ftileKo. Pity me, 'ď you have a heart, for I was now falling, the victim of revenge^ into the
•ıs» the moft abject, tñe moft contemptible of vices. I fent to requeft fo fee this man : he came to me ; I offered him- a handfome pay to enter into my fervice, and he imme¬ diately agreed to meet me at Rome in the courfe ofa fortnight, where he was to раб for the Count di Barmia and my brother. He promifed me his fecrecy, and I believe in that he kept his word. I fhall not trouble you to follow, me through twelve long and painful years, which were paffed in Rome and other places in Italy with this man, in the un¬ fuccefsful attempt of performing the fecond part of my vow, and thus bringing on the conclufion of my miferable life. Let it be enough for me to fay, uhat having once made this man my confidant, my perfon was a facrifice I could not withhold from him ; and that as our enterprife failed of aecom pi í fii ment, his loathed embraces were not the only ones to which X w^s forced tp yield for fubfiftence. But ftili, notwithftand¬ ing the accumulated wretchedftefs of min-d and
m and body to which Twas expofed, revenge burnt with unabated defire in my breaft» and J would fooner have met a death of hunger, pain, and ficknefs, than to have taken the fmalleft relief from the detefted Albert and his wife.—And yet how excef¬ fively did I love him ! for there was not one carefs which I conftrained myfelf to fuffer from thofe I loathed, which I would not have thought worthy the barter of Paradife from Albert di Marvaldi ! Almoft forlorn in hope from the want of fuccefs which had attended my numerous trials to obtain fuch a- huiband as I defired,. I determined once more to return to Venice, and as my laft refource to make fomc at¬ tempt wherein I fliould be aflifted by mj refemblance to Laura. I informed Marco of my plan ; we accordingly went in dif¬ guife to an obfcure lodging, and he was then to make it his immediate bufinefs to difcover what was pafling in the houfe of the Marchefe di Marvaldi. Fortune this once fmiled on his attempts ; a fervant had jull been difcharged from the Pallazo di Mar vaid i j
193 valdi, and Marco, by his addrefs, contrived to get himfelf engaged in the place. Marco had refided only twoda^s in the fervice of the Marchefe, when he came to inform me, that there was now in Venice a young Englifliman, named Sir Charles Mel¬ ford, who was frequently vifiting the Mar¬ chcfe, and appeared much ftruck with thc perfon of thc Marchefa. iiope now began to revive. On thc following day Marco again came to me ; " The young Englifliman is deeply in love," faid he : " Bernardo, little fufpecting before whom he was fpeaking, has juft been faying, that bebas obferved Sir Charles Melford ftanding this morning before the portrait of tho Marchefa, and contemplat¬ ing it in an ecilacv of delight ; he exclaimed, Bernardo fays, as he viewed it, * What an enchanting woman У " 1 enquired of Marco where thb Sir Charles was iïenenillv to be feen in an evening ; he told me on the fquarc of St. Mark. About nine in the evening 1 repaired to the place he had mentioned, and was there vol. π . к met
194 met by my confidünt, who pointed you out to me, and then left me. You were walk- ingťwith the Marquis de Belleterre. I had previoufly mafked myfelf; and when we met in the walk, I faultered in my pace, and faid m a low voice, " Signor Inglefe ;" you caft your eyes for a moment upon me, but went on; the Marquis came running tow ards me, but 1 avoided him, and went home, left he fhould again attempt to join me, and, what I moii: dreaded, a deteftion of who I really was fliould enfue. In the afternoon of the next day, Marco again came to my lodgings ; he told me that the Marchefe, the Marchefa, and their daughter Paulina, were gone by appoint¬ ment to pafs the day at the Count di P — 's, at fome diftance from Venice, and that you were engaged to dine with the Marquis de Belleterre : " Engliihmen," continued he, " drink freely in company ; Sir Charles will this evening be at leaft warm, if not ele¬ vated by wine, and thofe are the moments wiien men Iiften the mofl willingly to the uhifpcis of Jove : fpeak to him again, if poflible ;
I.*5 poflible; infift upon his attending to you. And that you may not during your conver¬ fation be fubjeft to public obfervation, ihave ftolen for you the key ofthe Marcbefa's caf¬ fino, into which you may invite Sir Charles without fear, as thc Marvaldi family are all from home, and your going into the caflino will not only infure your converfation not being overheard, but will give you an indif- putable appearance of being tlie Marchefa Laura herfelf." The occurrences of that evening ! need not repeat to you, nor need I explain ίο you why I bound you by fo folen: η a vow never to be the fir:î to fpeak upon our meetinjľ of that niçht. I begged your purfe not onlv from urgent neceflity, but alfo to raife your pity in my behalf, as my appearing to you to be re¬ duced to aik it, would cither lead you, I thought, to entertain a mean or a cruel opinion of the Marchefe, whom you fuppof¬ ed to he m} huiband. 1 lav ing once admitted you to the freedom wliich at our firft interview had pafled к a between
196 between us, and learning from the obfer- vant Marco, that your eyes betrayed the moft vivid warmth of affection everv time they gazed upon the Marchefa, 1 deter¬ mined to fee you no more in Venice, but to raife your paflion for me, by difappointing you of thofe pleafures which you had once enjoyed ; I faw this to be my only chance for fecuring you as my huiband. When you were about to leave Venice I learnt from Marco, who had now become intimate with your fervant, which way you were to travel. The letter which you muft recollect to have received from me when you were on the point of leaving Venice, I had previoufly prepared, and Marco, by his adroitnefs, prevailed on old Bernardo to take it to you m aiked, telling hirn it was a letter of importance which he had been en¬ trufted with for you by the Marquis de Belleterre, and which he had a particular reafon for not delivering himfelf. The honeft Bernardo, ever willing to ferve his comrades, readily confented to carry the letter, and return its anfwer to Marco. My obj ей
197 objeft in making Bernardo the carrier of. this letter was, that I hoped, although mafked, his figure woulďbetray him to \our fervant; that he would naturally communi¬ cate to you his difcovery ; and that you would be induced ftill more tlian eve*- to pity me, when you learnt fo worthy an old man as Bernardo to be the patron of my misfortunes. My letter to you anfwered the double purpofe for wliich i fent it ;—to keep alive tlic paffion with which my fifter had infpired yóu, and to fupply me with a fum of money fór my prefent exigencies. The day after that on -which you left Venice I quitted it, and without leaving behind me a fingle fufpicion of my having vifited it. Marco I thought it moft pru¬ dent to leave in thc fervice of the Marchefe, not knowing how* urgently I might yet re¬ quire his afliftance in that houfe. You cannot but remember my coming into your chamber at Q^-----, the drefs I wore on that evening, and what paifed between us. Marco had informed me that i was become much thinner than my fifter, к 3 and
1У8 aud I Selt alarmed at expofing my perfon to you for the firft time, Jeaft the acculate ob¬ fervation of one fo paflionately enamoured as yourfelf, ilio U Id difcover the deceit ï was praéìifing. I accordingly procured the habit of a youth, I thought that any flight change of perfon you might difcern would then be attributed by you to the change of drefs, and with a trembling heart I entered the apartment where the firft fair trial of the ftrength of the refemblance between myfelf and my fifter was to be made; for at our firft interview, you muft well remember, that you faw my face only for a moment as I raifed my maik, and then too by the uncertain light ofthe moon. High did my heart beat with rapture, at the excellence with which my deceit paif¬ ed upon you ; and vá hen I had interefted )our heart in my pretended calamities, and wound your paffion to the cxpeéìation ofa renewal of pieafurc, I h-ft you, the more fecurely to bind you mine in the ind. My intercourie with the world had taught me the heart of man, and I had learnt that when
i rø when the value of any pleafure is once known, the fureft method of continuing it in eftimation, is to let it be tafted no more. After having warmed your paffions, the next ftep that feemed to promife me any advantage from knowing vou, was to excite your compaffion ; for this purpofe I con¬ trived to throw myfelt before you in the wretched ftate from which you refcued me at Rome. 1 perceived that 1 now had you in my power, and you now well knovv how artfully I ufed it, in contriving to get myfelf tranfported by you to England. I now conceived my end to be accom¬ pliihed, for i had now affumed that grace of outward modefty for which you fiift ad¬ mired my filler. 1 plainly faw that your paflion for me had fuffced no abatement, though you endeavoured to fmother is from delicacy to my fuppofed mifery ; and I anticipated with g'ory thc moment when 1 íhould tell you that the Marchcfe was dead, and mvfelf a widow : I feared nothintr CJ from my refufmg to tell you the myftery in к a. wh i cli
200 which I was wrapt ; I was well convinced that a man in Jove fuffers no impediments to ftand in his way, vshen thc object of his paffion is attainable. But my hopes met a damp, when you mentioned to me Margaretta, nnd I gathered from your words, though tliey never ac¬ tually declared fuch a meaning, that ihc was the woman whom you intended to make your wife. I was fome time at a lofs how to act. At length I refolved, whenever you fliould declare your intention of efpoufing her, to go to her, throw my¬ felf upon my knees before her, and tell her a ftory of the delufions which my honour and happinefs had fuffered from your pro¬ mifes; which I trufted would make her, if her heait was really as amiable as you had fo often defcribed it, refufe to marry you herfelf, when the confidered you in juftice the hufband of another woman. Thus determined, what aftoniftiment feized me on that morning on which 1 met you walking in Melford park, and you informed mc> that if Margaretta had not broke''
201 broken her arm, flie would, at that very hour, have become the wife of E J ward Wallace ! " Of Edward Wallace :" re¬ peated my aftoniflied heart. I knew not what to think, what to believe, or vvhat to hope. I determined to found your feelings ; and ï difcovered by only gently probing them, that you had facrificed your own happinefs to that of Margaretta. After this you came frequently to my cottage, and I plainly perceived that your paflion for me had loft no hold in your breaft. Now it was that 1 forged the letter which i brought to you on the evening of vour re¬ turn from) our eftates in---------, the letter wliich told vou that the Marchete di Mar¬ valdi, my fuppofed huiband. vvaj dead; and when 1 left you, I purpi felv dropped a paper which appeared tu have Ικ c n tom from that letter, and which was L planned as to caufe you to believe it written by Ber¬ nardo, adviling me not to confefs to you the hvQ that í bere for vou. My ftratagem anfvvered the purpofe for which 1 had deviled it; your iirft plan of к. 5 happinefs
20J happinefs being difappointed, you feized the next that offered itfelf to you, in thc honourable poffeflion of my perfon ; and I became your wife—the wife of a man equal in rank to Albert di Marvaldi. I fell upon my knees, and offered my thankfgivings to the demons of revenge !...... .........This manufcript 1 have long been preparing for you. Ί liis night I have thus far concluded it— tiiis dreadful night, in which vou have lu ard mo D ■* rf utter " murder" in my prayers, and queftion¬ ed me uptm ir. Th'b л mht i have, ror íhe firft time in a lang ubile, attempted to pray. You ha\o not been forgotten in my onions. I have for theie few ď<\\$ paft been ftiangely linned, íuid no wonder that it ihould be lb ; but my vow ihall be kept. 1 prayed ; I л 'inured to add blafphenn to my crime, h\ aiking paidon tor thc murder yet uncom- oììt'od.— Mv rowt^n is airain awake, and I rf о L ow that pardon ib not to be hoped U г. TLjugh İ dai с not pray again, it cannot add
200 add to my criminality to wifli that God may blefs you, that he may reward you tor the mifapplied tendernefs which you have beftowed on the molt infamous, moii wronged, and moil miferable of his created beings. I fliall once more add a few lines to what I have already written........ . . . . . For the laft time I hold a pen in my hand ; we are now only a few leagues from Venice ; and tlien—1 fall into the pit of everlafling torture. I ha\e dif¬ patched a courier to Venice with a noie h> Bernardo, containing thefe words ;— " My worthy, my faithful old friend Bernardo, congratulate me, be happv with me ;—1 am the wife of Sir Charles Melford : İn a few hours I fliall arrive in Venice. I ihall im me J iately announce to you my ar¬ rival, and then come to the Pallazo di Mar¬ valdi, and feal a bond of eternal fiicndfliip with Albert and my fifter. 1 have k^n all my errors, and am reclaimed. When 1 Ihall к 6 have
204 have feen the Marchefe and Marcliefa, all my defires in this life will be complete. Grant me one petition, and Heaven blefs you for ever ; —do not tell either to my bro¬ ther or my fifter my good fortune or my ar¬ rival in Italy ; I wifli to furprife them hy my prefence. I entreat you to comply with my requeft, it is the moft folemn one you will ever receive from tc Antonia Mľlford.*' £t In a few hours you may expect a fummons to vifit me at the hôtel of the Virgin. ,7 By the fame courier I have fent a packet, containing all the money I poífeífed, as my laft reward to Marco. I have now only two more anions to per¬ form in this world :—to drink the draught of eternal fleep,—then—to ftrike the blow of revenge ! Farewel, Sir Charles ; I do not aik you to pray for me, or to forgive me ; if It is pof¬ lible, foiget me Ì Vain
20J Vain world, farewel ; I do not caft one figh upon you at parting. Now then my heart is ftrong to execute my purpofe—but oh my head is—folly ! I will not think !—I will not dread the here¬ after !—It is but one effort, and apprehen¬ fion will then be loft in confirmed torture ! I go !—Farewel for ever I
Now, George, I do not afk you whether you have ever known fo infamous a fiend as Antonia ; I only queftion you whether you have ever known fo pitiable a wretch as Charles Melford ? But I will fpare comments, for you muft know as well as m)felf what my thoughts muft be, and endeavour to continue my narrative. Towards evening my power of refleftion began to return ; and wmcn Bernardo came to vifit me, which he did with great kind¬ nefs, I learnt that the unhappy Laura was ftill fenfelefs, that her faintings had con¬ tinued
206 tinued without intermiflion, and that flie was incapable of being foothed or rea¬ foned with. Paulina, he faid, was in a ftate of grief little lefs fevere than her mother, and that the Marquis de Belletcrre was aft ing towards both the affeftionate office of foother and confoler. 1 befought Bernardo, when their feelings would per¬ mit them to attend to any fubjeft but that of their forrows, to fay whatever he could devife to them to exculpate me from fliar- ing in their opinion any part of Antonia's bafenefs. I explained to him the truth of all that had paffed, and I befought him to relate it in my name. He faid the Marquis de Belletcrre in¬ tended to vifit me on the following morn¬ ing; I told him that I fliould at an early hour leave Venice, that I could not bear to be fcen by any one in i^, after vvliat had that day happened, much lefs by any one interefted in the tranfaftions of it. tf It will not then," he rejoined, " increafe your inclination to fee thc Marquis, if I tell you that he has about a month gained the
207 the confent of my poor murdered mafter to marry the dear lady Paulina." " May God make them happy ! ' I ex¬ claimed. " Amen," replied Bernardo. " The poor JVIarchefe faw that his daughter would never be happy without him, and thus agreed to their union." ci Be fure," faid I, " У ои do not forget to repeat what I have related to you to thofe concerned in the event which the ftrange occurrences of my unhappy life have aflifted to produce." (i indeed 1 will not," replied he, " for I am furc you are innocent." " And," 1 went on, " promife very foon to write to me in England a ftrift account о ofthe health and happinefs of thufe 1 leave bell ind me here." " lf thc young Marquis docs not take the office u non himfelf, í will certainlv have the honour or executing your commands," he anfwered ; "but," continued he, b< I wiíh you would плу in Venice only till you have feen him once." u Impoffible !"
203
Cí Impoflible !" I exclaimed ; " I cannot bear to hear the repetition of thofe horrid events/* " I am fure you will not for fome time be able to think of any thing dfe," he re* turned. " And therefore,'* replied Ι, <ς I wifli it were no ím to pray for fufpenfion of fa¬ culty." " Try to fleep," faid Bernardo. " That," I returned, " is but to tantalize myfelf with the fliadow of death, and to wake with the powers of thought refrefticd and invigorated." Bernardo fighed. I wiflied to be alone, therefore faid, " I will however take your advice and go to bed ; remember my requeft. Farewel, and many thanks for your concern about me. (i I fliall remember to write to you, and foon," he anfwered ; u Heaven reftore you, fir, to peace and happinefs." The tears ftarted into his eyes, and he left the room. I paffed thc night certainly in bed> but 1 did
<2Ö9 not enjoy a moment's oblivion of this world'·? anxieties. The hours were fpent in reading the manufcript of Antonia, and in indulg¬ ing thoughts baneful to the quiet of my heart. With the dawn I rofe, called my fervant, and ordered him directly to pre¬ pare for our departure from Venice.—And when I had loft fight of it, 1 breathed freer than I had done for the laft twenty-four hours. I have been five days in this village, and have been endeavouring once more to calm my haraffed fpirits : the reciting to you thofe horrid events which had ruffled them, and tranfcribing the manufcript of Antonia, have affifted to keep my mind in a ftate of perturbation ; now that taik is performed, í hope it may begin to fee with lefs detri¬ ment to its tranquillity the vifions of enormi¬ ty which are continually floating before it. I had forgot to tell you, that prior to my leaving Venice I entrufted Bernardo with a fum of money fuflicient to defray the ex¬ pences ofa decent funeral for the remains or* tho wretched Antonia : whatever her conduct*
210 conduci, ihe was fiill my wife, and I conceived it a duty incumbent upon mc to give her burial. I ihall to-morrow again fet out on my journey towards England, and will write to you again when I reach Lyons. Fare¬ wel, dear friend ; pray for the unfortunate Charges Melford. Do not wTite to me at prefent, for I know not where to bid you diredi for me with any probability of receiving your letter.
J .KTTER
'Jl 1
LETTER XXII. Sir Charles Melford to George Seymour, ľfij. DEAR GEORGE, MLvon, Y heart is much eafier than when I wrote to you laft ; it has required few rea- fonings with my own mind to convince myfelf that thc lofs of fuch a woman as Antonia is a gain ; but then I have loft alfo- ------Oh, let not thought turn that way I By this time Marga¬ retta is, I hope, the wife of Edward Wallace. I have marked out my future plan of life ; I will return to Melford-houfe, and my days fliall be thofe of a rich hermit : if you do not underftand this phrafe of mine, hear its explanation ;—I forfwear all the gaieties,dif- fipations, föllies, and care-hatching plea¬ fures, of life ; IHve, for the time to come, but for others ; a frugal plenty ihall deck my own board, and a hand of munificence fhall be ever heid open by me to tlie children of want : thus I propofe to atone for my pail İn confi-
CÎ2
înconfideratenefs,and by the fame conduci to infure myfelf prefent and future fatisfaciion. ï am already the father of Margaretta ; flic fhall continue my darling, my beft beloved daughter : but every child of mifery do I alfo call to mc, that I may foothe its cares by my parental folicitude. Do not fmile, George, and think that my plan is fhe fug¬ geftion of difappointment, which has hung round my heart the cold greybeard that re¬ folves to enjoy only felfifli pleafures. I feel, diat although during my paft life I have not acied criminally, I might have acicd more ftriftly right ; and I feel the fel f-applaudi n g defire of retrieving paft errors, in the exercife of prefent virtues. But enough of this, till I fee you -, when you do fee me, do not expeft to find me the gay, flighty, laughing Charles Melford you have been accuftomed to behold mc: prepare yourfelf to fee a man already begun to fink into the old widower, a title under which he is determined to end his days. The greateft pleafure this life could afford me, would be to meet you at Mel¬ ford-houfe. on my return to íí: ifit is polfi-
C 213 < ble for you to be there to receive me, let me entreat that you will ; I think I fhould experience a great relief of my feelings, which are ftili very painful, in a verbal communication with my friend. Pray let me have youf anfwer to this petition, direfted to be left for me at Dover, as, if you agree to go to Melford-houfe, the anticipation of feeing you there will give me pleafure on the remainder of my journey; and, I think, ifyou write to me immediately on your receipt of this, your letter will ar¬ rive at Dover much about the time 1 fliall get there, I could fay a great deal upon the peculiar hardnefs of my fituation, and the unparalleled cruelty of my deftiny in iife; but what avail complaints?—only to weaken the heart and mind of him who ut¬ ters them !—Oh, had I attended to your ad¬ monitions!—Oh, God! could the laft vear of my life be recalled !—How admirably could we all aft our parts on the theatre of life, did we know the cataftrophe of the drama in which we are engaged! Oh that my laft aft was performed, and tbe curtain had fallen
214 fallen upon the ultimate fcene of my event- i ful life ! Adieu, adieu. Charles Melford.
LETTER XXIII. George Seymour, Ffq. to Si r Charles Melford» MY DEAR FRIEND, IKitton, V/ILL meet you at Mejford-houfe ; your's is a fituarion that requires the footh¬ ing converfation of a friend, and you fliall have the beft confolation that my prefence is able to afford you. Do not expeft from me. that either upon this paper or when we meet I will enter upon a.retrofpcft of the events of your life ; adventures of an un¬ pleafant nature it is better never to repeat, except as leflbns of admonition ; and thefe the words of your laft letter convince me you no longer require. Do not cither, my dear Charles, too fevereiy accufe yourfelf; becaufe
ÙÌ5 becaufe all the difappointments you have experienced, and the irregularities you have committed, have originated in yourfelf: it is one of the mortifications to which human nature is fubject, to have the power of look¬ ing back, and obferving how its actions might have been performed more to its own happinefs. Remember alfo, that this is a ftate in which perfectnefs is not to be ; to expect, therefore, to find a man endowed with a mind of that ftrength which ihall al¬ together reftrain him from the commifiion of error, is to expect to find what will never be experienced in a mortal ftate. Let thefe re¬ flections upon the nature of which you are formed, teach you to bear with greater futif- faction fuch events as have arifen from the frailty of that very nature. The human heart has an obfolutc power in reitraining itfelf irom the commillion of vice ; but I believe it was never yet found with an abfolute power of guarding itfelf againft the commiffion of accidental foibles; becaufe, could it do that, it would be perfect, and if perfect, no longer mortal. I muft fay a few words upon one point c ontained
àie contained in the confeffions of Antonia*. I refer to her mention of my, father, Sir Ro- bert Seymour. The time of his being abroad, and the caufe of his going to the continent, which was that of his fi.fler's ill health, certainly agree with Antonia's ac¬ count ; but flill I know not how to credit his having brought to England an illegiti¬ mate chilo ; no provifion is made for any fuch child in his will, and I believe him to have been too generous and too humane to have caft any being who could call him fa¬ ther upon the world. I never e\en heard a hint of fuch an event having taken place, and the world is, in general, very ready to bring home fuch tales to thofe who ought to be the laft to know them. 1 have alfo» finie the receipt of your Jetter, written to my brother, Sir Oliver, enquiring whether fuch an event had been ever knov>n to him 5 and he declares himfelf equally ignorant of it, and even believes the report to be entirely without foundation. 1 will fav more on the fubjeň when we meet; for you may rely upon feeing me at Melford-houfe. My Emma is better both in health and fpirit s, and
«17 and infifts upon my paying this vifit of friendfhip to you. How ardently I anticipate our meeting ! Hovv long is it fince we hav-e feen each other ! and how many things, when we are once again together, fhall we find to fay, which either have not occurred to us at the moment of our correfpondejuce, or elfe have been fuperfeded by events more immedi¬ ately prefent to us, or again which may not have been thought of fufficient intereft to communicate to paper, but about which it may afford us fatisfaciion to converfe ! Farewel for a while : yours ever, George Seymmour.
vol, n. ĺ LETTER
218
LETTER XXIV. George Seymour, Efq. to Mrs. Seymour, МУ DEAR EMMA, IMelford-hov-fe, Rutlandíhire. AM arrived fafe at the end of my jour¬ ney; but Sir Charles is not yet here, nor is expefted till to-morrow noon. I have not feen Seymour-hall, where I firft received the light, fince my return from America ; it is but twelve miles diftant from this place, fo I fliall employ the prefent day in going to take a peep at it : I fliall not the lefs enjoy the fight of its well and long-known features, becaufe its only inhabitants at this time are the old gardener and his wife. 1 fliall conclude my letter when I return from my ride, and fliall now only juft add, that i have, 1 believe, had a diftant view of Sir Charles's protegee, Margaretta Hayton: a woman of an extremely fine figure, and dreffed in a ftyle fomething above the piain¬ nefs of ruíücity, pafled through the park at a fliort
£1Э a fliort diftance f»*om the houfe, juft after 1 had entered it ; I faw only her back, as flie was leaving the park. I have enquired, and find that the marriage between her and Ed¬ ward Wallace has not yet taken place : I wifli, for the fake my friend, that it had. Adieu till the evening. Ten o'clock in the Kvcning. During mv ride my thoup-hts continued to dwell upon Margaretta's marriage: I felt much painthat it was not already folemniz- ed ; I knew that to find her fingle at his return, would heap an additional (rial upon tlie many conflicts which Sir Charles had alreadv undergone, and 1 determined, im- rf о mediately on my return to Melford-houfe, to со and introduce mvfelf at Briar-bank O rf farm, and i\Ïq my cndeavouis for having the ccrcmom take place in the morning before Sir Charles fliould arrive. With this refolution I vaulted from my horfe at the door of λ lei ford-houfe; but no fooner had 1 difmounted, than the old houfekeeper came running out to me. I advanced a few fteps to meet her, and flie ĺ 2 {aid,
Ö520 faid, " Mrs. Wallace, fir, whofe fon keeps thc manor-farm, has been here fome time wait¬ ing your return, and flie defires me to fay, that flie fliould confider herfelf extremely obliged ifyou would honour her with a few moments'converfation.'* 1 immediately de¬ fired to be fliovvn to her ; the houfekeeper requefted me to go into the dining-room, and added, that Mrs. Wallace would come to me direftly. I had fcarcely taken a couple of turns about the room before the door opened to admit a very refpeftably dreffed and vene¬ rable looking woman of about fixty ; as flie entered flie curtfeyed to me, and I íaid, " I prefume I have the pleafure of feeing Mrs. Wallace?"—" Yes, fir," flie returned, " my name is Wallace." í drew a chair towards her, but flie remained ftanding, and con¬ tinued fpeaking. " t have underftood, fir, that} ou are Mr. Seymour, the very intimate and refpeded friend of Sir Charles Mel- ford."—" 1 -Hin," was my reply. " It is on bis account fir, that I have taken the liberty of afking a ihort converfation with you." I begged
begged* her to fit down, and took a chaif near hcr. Mrs. Wallace then continued : " Knowing the terms of friendihip which fubfift between you, tir, and Sir Charles, I judge that you are well acquainted with all that he has done for mc, for my fon, and for the dear girl Margaretta."— u Perfeftly fo," I replied. tf Excellent man!" exclaimed Mrs. Wallace, and the tears began to fteal down her cheeks. In a few féconds flie went on: w You have certainly heard that Margaretta received from Sir Charles, be¬ fore the accident which befel her arm—dear child 1—his confent to marry my fon Edward, and a dower of ñvc thoufand pounds.''— ct He informed me of thefe circumftances," I anfwered. " Not long after this aft of his great benevolence," returned Mrs. Wallace, "we all rejoiced at the completion of his own happinefs; for news came to the Italian lady, whom he had fome time maintained and protefted at the Lawn-cottage, that her hufband was dead, and Sir Charles left England along with her, telling my fon that they fliould be married in France, and then L 3 proceed
2'2í¿
proceed to Venice, in order to bring back with them to England thc lady's only daughter/ 1 —" All this is true," faid I; Cf and I have been made acquainted with it from Sir Charles himfelf."—" Ofthat 1 had no doubt," returned Mrs. Wallace; " but it was of confequence that I ihould be fure you knew all thefe particulars before I began to explain to you the ftrange cir¬ cumftance that brings me now before you. Pray, fir," fhe continued, after a fliort paufe, " are you not come hither to meet •Sir Charles, who is every hour expected to return from abroad ?"—*" I am/'—" And," returned Mrs. Wallace, " does not his lady come with him ?" I hefitated a moment what to reply, and Mrs. Wallace exclaim¬ ed, " Is it then indeed true, that the lady whom we here knew by the title of the Marchefa is no more ?"—" She is certainly dead," I returned. " Let me entreat you, Mr. Seymour," rejoined Mrs. Wallace, " as you value the peace of an unhappy girl, and your friend Sir Charles, to tell me what you know of this myfterious affair !" I ftili knew
ooi knew not what to anfwer; I was uncertain how much of his extraordinary fate Sir Charles would be willing to have expofed, even to Mrs. Wallace. I, therefore, was beginning to fay, " I muft requeft you to tell me——" when flie relieved my embarraff¬ ment, by drawing from her pocket a letter» which flie put into my hand, faying, te Read that paper, Mr. Seymour ; I can no longer delay to fliow it to you ; and then tell me whether we have not all reafon to be un¬ happy." She burft into tears, and turned from me. The letter which Mrs. Wallace had given me bore the. m ark of a foreign poft, and was direfted to Margaretta. I unfolded it, and read the following words : " Yotj receive this letter from one whom you have lately known by the name of the Marchefa Laura: Antonia flie is, and nmo the wife of Sir Charles Melford; but to r morrow flie dies ; mark then her laft words : Sir Charles Melford married Antonia be¬ caufe he would not interrupt the happinefs L 4 of
224 of Margaretta and Edward Wallace, al¬ though he had intended to make Marga· retta his own wife ! And, oh, execute faith¬ fully her dying command. Do not, Marga¬ retta, marry Edward Wallace, but become the wife of Sir Charles Melford, y oli r beiie- faftor, your father, your lover, and repair to him the wrongs done to him by " Antonia." What was my confternation on reading thefe words ! I read them again and again, yet could hardly credit my fenfes, nor did I know how to account for their having been written, except I could bring myfelf to be¬ lieve that a wretch like Antonia cduld hel remorfe for her conduft towards Sir Charles, in making him the innocent inftrument of her guilty vow, and> in a moment of inco¬ herent gratitude and repentance, had writ¬ ten this letter, with the hope of bringing him an ultimate reward. " What is Margaretta's opinion of this let¬ ter ?" I faid, addrefling Mrs. Wallace. " She is unable to form one," returned the good woman ;
2°5 woman ; α fometimes flie believes vvhat it avers, and fometimes difcredits it : flie is, however, refolved to learn the truth, at leaft not to marry at all till flie does difcover ît j and fliould it be that Sir Charles has made any facrifice on her acexmnt-----~" She paufed a moment, then added, " Should it be fo, fir, even I, who am Edward's mother, muff, think her right, in making her bene- facìo^s happinefs her flril confideration/' I did not fpeak. " Ah, fir," continued Mrs. Wallace, ** you fay nothing, and 1 fear your filence only proves the truth of this letter. Oh, bow worthy, how excellent a man İs Sir Charles í W;e thought ourfeJves very wife in finding out that he had been croffed in love, at the time he refufed to be prefent at Margaretta's wedding ; Uttle indeed did we think that her he loved was fo near us, and we, as 1 may iay—we, to all of whom he had been more than benevolence itfelf, tbat we were fhe perfons to mar his happinefs: <oh, why did we not know this long ago !"— (< There was the fault !" de¬ claimed. M It is tlien all true, as J.feaivd Jt ь S was, 4
Ш6 was," faid Mrs. Wallace, catching her de¬ termination from my words. I was obliged to confefs what flie had already read on my countenance ; indeed I faw no ufe in con¬ cealing the truth, fince it was evident, from what Mrs. Wallace had faid, that Marga¬ retta would force the confeflion from Sir Charles immediately on his return. " Poor Edward!" fighed out Mrs. Wallace; ie but, praifed be Heaven! he has a noble heart, and much as it may be wrung by the lofs of Margaretta, I am fure he would rather be unhappy himfelf, than make Sir Charles fo, or tempt Margaretta to do an ungrateful aftion to her benefactor, out of her love for him." I was meanwhile vyalking up and down the room in thought. " Poor Sir Charles!" cried Mrs. Wallace, " it is plain enough now why he could not bear to fee my Edward hy his bed fide, when he had cut his temple with the glafs. I thought at the time that his heart was more hurt than his head : and then, that he mould marry that Italian woman 1 Pray, fir,
227 fir, tell me what was her death, that fhe knew beforehand that fhe fliould die on the morrow, as fhe favs in her letter?" In as few words as the heads of Antonia's ftory could be conveyed, I told it to Mrs. Wallace. When I had concluded it, flie faid, (< It Would be injuftice for Margaretta to be my Edward's; he has done nothing to deferve her; what has not Sir Charles fuf¬ fered !" A few minutes' filence again enfued : dur¬ ing the paufe I had wound up my thoughts to the refolution of acting, and faid, " Mrs. Wallace, do you think Alargaretta will have any objeftion to feeing me ?"—" Imponible, fir, that fhe can," returned Mrs Wallace. " Will you have the goodnefs to conduct me to Briar-bank farm, and introduce me to her?" Mrs. Wallace immediately confent¬ ed, and we fet out. When we arrived at the farm-houfe, which is very neat, and placed at the ex¬ tremity of an inviting garden, we were met at the entrance by a handfome young man of about two or three and twenty, L 6 whom
whom Mrs. Wallace acquainted me was her fon. Hls drefs befpoke tbat he was a farmer ; but there was an eafe and proper confidence in his manner, that fhewed him to be acquainted with fociety. He con¬ ducted us into a parlour, where, in the midft of all that can give the idea of com¬ fort, fat Margaretta: and here I muft de¬ part from my narrative, to defcribe my new acquaintance Margaretta. It was indeed the fame female figure 1 had fo much admired in the morning. She now rofe from her feat with •that complaifant fmile painted on her cheeks ν hich is called up to welcome a ftranger, in whofe favour we are prepofleffed, be¬ caufe he is introduced to us by thofe whom we efteem. This was juft the idea wliich Margaretta's firft reception of myfelf gave me, and 1 think í never beheld a perfon and figure of more intereft blended 4 * toge¬ ther. Her ftature is rather more than thc middle fize, but it is ftriking, becaufe alî its parts are well proportioned, and that îthere is no feature which can mock another for its Ywiit of afli flanee in tonning the beauty
52.9 beauty of the whole, or envy it for its fu¬ perior grace : her ikin is fufficiently white to be delicate, and yet not fo ffckly aiabaftic as to deny the rofy blufli of tlie blood to peep through its tranfparency : her hair, in being nearly black, is of the exact colour which difplays to advantage the neck on which it falls: her face is juft enougli npon the round to have that exquifite fmile of good-nature conftantly playing upon rr, which, on an oval countenance, is Icarcely ever raifed, without a ínecr or a wrinkle: her eves neither dart flames oi love nor daç- gers of cenfure, but they fparkle with ani¬ mation and good fenfe: hcr nofe is not Gre¬ cian ; it i -j beautifully failed to the propor¬ tion of her face ; and her lips mufl к ex- quifitc, for they arr only emplovetf-in fpeak¬ ing the words of good-nature and truth. Some men would have feared »to irive their wives fuch an exalted defcription of any woman. I think it ite higheft compli¬ ment 1 can pay to my Kmma ; becaufe, in fliowing that í do not heirate to fpeak my fentiments freely of an abfent woman, I de* clare
230 clare that I think you without that failing which every married woman of the prefent age cannot boaft herfelf free from—jealoufy· I know that I have no caufe to fear it from you, and that you have too much good fenfe to harbour fuch a thorn to your peace, even if you were defeftive in perfonal charms, which is the ufual caufe that gives rife to the feeling in other women. At our entrance Mrs. Wallace faid, " Margaretta, my love, this is Mr. Seymour, the intimate friend of Sir Charles, the gen¬ tleman from whofe lady you have had the pleafure of receiving fo many verfes, who now does you the honour of calling upon you." After fome converfation had pafled upon indifferent fubjefts, I began that of wliich my mind was full. I firft apologized to Margaretta for fpeaking to her upon fo delicate a fubjeft, as that of her marriage, while I was as yet almoft a total ftranger to to her, except by name ; 1 urged, in my ex¬ cufe, my intimacy with Sir Chai les, and the intereft I took in his happinefs, which, í told
231 told her, alone prompted me to requeft her attention to the iubject upon which I was going to fpeak and advife. She replied, that, as the friend of Sir Charles Melford, flie was happy in liftening to whatever 1 might wiih to fay, and fliould confider herfelf grateful to me for the fuggeftion of any plan by which flie might promote his felicity. (i It has," 1 faid, " been the earneft and particular wifli of Sir Charles Melford, repeatedly expreffed to me in the letters which I have lately re¬ ceived from him, that he fliould, at his re¬ turn, find you the wife of Edward Wallace» 1 know that when he arrives it will give him much pain to fee you tingle ; to-morrow noon he reaches Mclford-houfc ; it is ftill poflible to fpare him what, from his own words, he will certainly feel, at being in¬ formed that the marriage is yet unperform¬ ed. Permit me then, in the name of his happinefs, to beg of you to confent that your union with Edward Wallace may take place to-morrow morning." Margaretta became very much agitated, but
232 but did not anfwer. Edward Wallace alfo remained filent. After a ihort paufe 1 faid, " I hope you will confent." " That letter, that letter!" exclaimed Mrs. Wallace. " Sir Charles," I replied, "does not know it ever to have been written." " But I do !" exclaimed Margaretta, through her tears; "and it points out to mc, that I may, in the very performance of Sir Charles Melford's wifh, which is dic¬ tated by his defire of my ha ρ pinefs, prove m\ felf thc moft ungrateful, the rnoft unfeel¬ ing of dependants." " God forbid !" cried Mrs Wallace with upraifed hands. " Forbid vvhat, my dear mother?" aiked Edward Wallace hefitatino-Iv. O rf " That Margaretta ihould be your wife," returned Mrs. Wallace. " No, child, that tfHift never be; all that the letter fays is true—every word of it true ; and í truft ψοη will both have refolution to do your duty." The maft affecìing fcene I ever beheld enfued i
£:>:}
enfued ; there vvas not an eye prefent with¬ out a tear, and the different emotions of virtuous forrow vvhich beamed through them was irrrcfiftibîy touching to my heart. After a few minutes I again fpoke: " It has/' 1 faid, " long been the firm refolve of Sir Charles Melford never to interrupt that happinefs which he already conceived to be cemented between Edward Wallace and yourfelf; and I am well convinced, that no importunity, no private inclination, will ever tempt him to accept your hand, while he kiiows that to receive it vvould be to divide two affeftionate hearts." " If this be his refolution," returned Mar¬ garetta, " it is my determination, that he fhall never have the pain of feeing another man more favoured by me than himfelf: I can, and will, at leaft, live fingle." Much more converfation pafled on the fame topic, but it brought the fubjeft no farther; Margaretta is determined to be¬ come the wife of Sir Charles, or never to marry, and I can perceive that her refolu¬ tion is too firmly taken to be ihaken from its
234 its purpofe by any argument that cannot re¬ move the caufe on which it is founded. How will this perplexity end ? Either Sir Charles or Edward Wallace muft be po¬ fitively unhappy in the lofs of Margaretta; and L fear, from the fincere friendftiip and regard which fubfifts between them, that he who poffefles her can, at beft, be negatively happy, in thinking that his felicity arifes from the difappointment of his fiiend. Poor Margaretta, how fincereiy do 1 feel for her! I am fure fhe has the fympathy ofyour heart, and I wifh you were here, that flie might enjoy fuch confolation as your words would give her. How wretched muft be her feel¬ ings, divided between her affections for a man whom flie has for many months paft been regarding as her deftined huiband, and her reverence for him who fnatched her fiom all the mifery to which ihe was on the point of being expofed, as a defencelefs or¬ phan ! With how ftrange circumftances does this world teem ! How thankful ought thofe to be, whofe journey through life is not marked with
235
with any blacker calamity than thofe every¬ day accidents which are infeparable from our exiftence ! I pray Heaven that this may find you well and happy. Farewel ; and believe me your affectionate huiband, George Seymour, P. S. You fliall hear from me again very foon,
LETTER
25Ö
LETTER XXV. George Seymour, Efq. to Mrs. Seymour. I Melford -houfe. DID not intend to have written again, my dear Emma, till after the arrival of my friend, but I have had a little adventure this morning, and take up my pen to relate it to you whilft at breakfaft. About two hours ago I ftrolled into the park, and my wanderings led me towards the gate which opens upon the high road. A drove of iheep was pafling, and I ftood fome time obferving them ; I was going to turn away from the gate, when a man with a wooden leg came towards it, and pulled off his hat, as a preface to what he was 2foin£ to fa v ; his coat was a tattered re.çi- mental, and the reft of his apparel was but in a fhabby condition. " Pray can your honour tell mc where fuch a place as Briar- bank farm is to be found r" he afked. tc The farm-houfc ftands on the other fide of
237
of the road," I anfwered ; " you may fee it a few yards farther on."—" Thank your honour;"—and he was hobbling away· " You are a foldier, are you not ť" faid I. " I have been, your honour, for the laft five or fix years of my life, but it is all over w r kh me now,'* returned he, looking down upon his wooden ftump. " 1 fuppofe you have been in America ? * I rejoined. " And warm work I have feen there, your honour ; I ftand the weaker for it by one peg, as your honour obferves ; I was told often enough before I enlifted, what would come of being a foldier, fo what I have loft, is nobody's fault but my own : but I did not mind what folks faid to me then.—I did not like driving a plough, and I thought tha there was nothing in the world like a red coat, and a műiket !"—" Have you changed your opinion ?" I aiked. " The blow ora cannon ball, your honour/* he returned " makes the fondeft of fighting feel fick of the bufmefs ; and let a poor foldier be ever fo well done by, the beft care that can be taken of him when he'« wounded in a foreign
238 foreign country, and battles going forward every day, is not good enough to make him wifh for another bout of fuch field-fare ; however, I don't mean to complain, your honour ; I am only juft fpeaking of what í think, and no one can fay of me, that I did not do my duty to the beft of my power when I was in the field." I fmiled, and he went on : "I dare fay if father had been alive to have feen me now—but he is dead, God reft his foul I—he would have faid this here bit of tree to ftump about upon was a punifliment for my bad ways when I was a boy, and for not minding my work, and run¬ ning away from him to Oakham, and en¬ li fting* and the like of that."-—" Then .vou were born in this county ?"—" Oh, Lord love you, ay, not above a dozen, miles from where we now ftand."—" Hov/ long have jou been returned from America ?"—" Only about a couple of months, your honour, í could not travel before, becaufe I was not well enough to be fitted with this prop, i have been travelling about here in thi.·) neighbourhood for feveral days to find a fifier
239 fifter of mine, and now I find fhe's got to live under the bounty of fome great man or other at the farm I am aiking my way to , perhaps your honour is the gentleman.*'— " No, indeed, I am not," I replied ; " but vvhat is your fifter's name ?"—" Margaretta Hayton, your honour," he anfwered ; " and I am Tom Hayton, as fad a dog as ever breathed, when I was in thefe parts before, your honour, but I am mended now ; and I hope fifter will be glad to fee me, when flie finds I have had a blow to call my fenfes to reafon ;" and again he caft a fignificant look upon his wooden leg, ** Your fifter is well," faid I, " and at the houfe where you expcft to find her."—" Thank Heaven," he replied ; " I had heard as much, your honour, but I am glad to hear it again ; flie was always a good girh and ufed to take my part vvith father. Thank your honour for ihowing me the way. Good-morning to your honour :" and away he hobbled. When Sir Charles firft wrote to me an account of his having taken Margaretta under
240 under his protecìion, vvhilíi I was in Ame¬ rica, I recolleci his mentioning that flie had a brother then in the army, who had been a rutic profligate; that after he had caufed his father much diflrefs, and reduced him to great pecuniary embarraíľments, he had left him, and enlifted with a recruiting party at Oakham fair. It was then five years fince they had heard of him at all, and they, fup pofed him dead. It was Sir Charles Melford's refolution, if ever he ihould re¬ turn reclaimed, to provide for him. And it gives me pleafure, from the intereft I feel in whatever relates to his fifter's comfort, that írom the fhort converfation I have had with him this morning, his amendment feems ■already to have taken place. He appears aboutfix or feven years older than Margaretta, and does not at aH retemblé her in perfon ; his eyes are light, and his hair inclining to a flaxen. As different you will fay in perfon as in mind and condition* How ftrange a brother for Margaretta to receive ! But her heart is too amiable to fuffer her to dif* regard
241 regard one allied to her by the neareft ties of blood, becaufe his mind is lefs cultivated» and his perfon more hardened. I hear the wheels of a carriage upon the gravel road leading to the houfe ; a poft- chaife appears in fight ; it muft be my long abfent friend : farewel now, my deareft Emma, I will write again to-morrow. Yours, affectionately, George Seymour.
vol. II.
M
LETTER
£42
LETTER XXVI. George Seymour, Efg. to Mrs. Seymour. IMclford-houfe. NEED not defcribe to my deareft Emma how great the ecftacy that bleffed the few firft hours of meeting between two friends who had been fo long feparated as Sir Charles and myfelf. He is, upon the whole, in rather better fpirits than I ex¬ pected to find him j but his perfon is ma¬ terially altered. He, whofe countenance once poffeffed all that fire with which eyes sparkling from the intelligence of the mind, cheeks painted by the glow of health, and lips dimpled with the fmiles of eafe and good-nature, can light up to advantage a regular fet of features, now looks but to obferve, and not to attract obfervation; and fmiles fo feldom and fo faintly, that it is almoft a doubt when he does fmile whe¬ ther pain or pleafure agitates his pale cheeks. This
Ü43 This is the fatal confequence of defiring too much happinefs !—this is the exem¬ plary effecl of being too confident in our own ftrength, and weakly believing, that whatever end we may have in view can at any time be accompliihed ; falfe idea ! There is only one method of fe¬ curing virtuous happinefs, and only one moment of feizing upon it. This life is too fliort to admit of procraftination in virtue, and virtue alone can be true happinefs· You will fmile at my moralizing, but in* deed the fcene in which I am Jiving is enough to convert a merrier fpirit than mine into a crying philofopher. I had confidered how wrong it would be, that Sir Charles ihould abruptly be told of Antonia's letter to Margaretta, I therefore gradually difclofed to him its contents, and what had fince paffed between Margaretta and myfelf at Briar-bank farm. *' Monfter of iniquity !" he exclaimed 5 «' was it not enough for her to break the peace of my mind, but flie muft alfo ftab m 2 the
su *he happinefs of the innocent Marga¬ retta !" I befought him to compofe his fpirits, and to reflect that Antonia had written the let¬ ter with the defign of repairing to him that happinefs which fhe confidered herfelf to have injured. " Did fhe not know," he cried, " that Margaretta's happinefs was dearer to me than my own 1"—he paufed a moment, then added, " Seymour, my friçnd, will you perform one act of kindnefs for the unhappy man before you?"—" You know my wifh to ferve you," I faid ; " fpeak what you defire/'—*' Go," he returned, " to Briar-bank farm, prevent Margaretta from coming to fee me ; tell her that I cannot, will not, admit her to my prefence till fhe is the wife of Edward Wallace ; tell her that I fliall then glory to hold her to the bofom ofher father:—tell her alfo to recol¬ lect, that having already made myfelf her father, I cannot be her hufband; and re¬ mind her that fhe has long ago promifed to obey me as her fathex/' When
S45 When he had fpoken thefe words, he covered his face with his hands. I heard a figh of agony ftruggling on his lips, and I faw the tears wetting his fingers. This converfation took place not many hours after his arrival. When I faw that he had fufficiently recovered his compofure to Iiften to me, I faid, " Sir Charles, let me entreat you to defer this matter, at leaft till to-morrow."—" Why defer it ?" he exclaim* ed ; " indeed it is better done, for my de¬ termination fhall not alter/*—« I do not fuppofe it will," I anfwered; " but were I to go to the farm on the errand you defire, I am fure in this one inftance Margaretta would not obey your reqaeft ; fhe has de¬ clared, that you filali never fee another man more favoured by her than yourfelf. Per¬ haps reflection may devife fome better method of obtaining her confent to your wiih."-—" No, no," cried he, «« I cannot bear to fee her, till (lie is married; you muft go ; fay I command her to become the «rife of Edward Wallace/' I was convinced this meffage would not li produce
246 produce its defired iffue, and therefore re¬ peated, *' Pray defer fending me, if it be only till to-morrow."—" Will you promife me then," he faid, <c by our friendfhip, to go to-morrow, ifl defire it?"—"I will," was my anfwer. He then requefted me to write a note to Margaretta in bib name, to fay that he was fatigued by his journey, otherwife not well, and unable to receive vifitors, and therefore begged for the pre¬ fent not to fee any one from the farm. When I had written it, a fervant was immediately difpatched with it. What will be the end of this ftrange com¬ plication of accidents 1 I wifli fomething were decided upon, as I think it would be for the happinefs of ail who are concerned in it. It is now midnight ; Sir Charles is gone to his chamber ; I have juft parted from him, and he ftiil continues refolved that 1 fliall go to the farm in the morning. 1 have racked my brain in vain to devife fome plan which might foften the per¬ plexities of tbis dilemma. It is fo unparal¬ leled an inftance amongft the ftrange acci¬ dents
24? dents with which life abounds, that I have no precedent to draw an argument from. Good- n ight. Etevp"- in thc morning. Sir Chaıîes Melford's determination ftiil continues ; he declares that his feelings arc this morning more miferable than ever, and fa\ s that nothing can relieve the agony he is fuffering but my going to Margaretta, and prevailing upon her to become imme¬ diately the wife of Edward Wallace. I go, becaufe my friend afks it, but I am well aware that my interceffion will not in this particular ferve him. Farewel ; to-morrow you fliall know the refult of my vifit. Yours, with the fincereft affection, George Seymour.
m 4 LETTER
£48
LETTER XXVII. George Seymour. Efq. to Mrs. Seymour. MY DEAREST EMMA, IMelfaid-houfe. HAVE a difcovery to relate to you, for which I hardly know bow to compofe my fpirits. My dear friend Sir Charles will I hope at laft be happy. Margaretta too will be happy with Edward Wallace, and without interfering with the felicity of her benefactor, I am fure I have raifed your aftonifhment to a pitch that requires imme¬ diate gratification, but you muft pardon me if I infift upon giving you my account re¬ gularly. You know that I yeflerday concluded my letter by telling you that I was that very .hour going to Briar-bank farm, to carry to Margaretta Sir Charles Melford's com¬ mands for her immediately to become the wife of Edward Wallace. In my way thithe/ I met Edward Wallace ; I told him whither
whither I was going, though I did not fay* upon what bufinefs, and he turned back with me. On our arrival át the~ farm, we found Margaŕeita, her brother Tnorrias, and Mrs. Wallace, feated round a table. Margaretta had an open letter in her hand* her faculties feemed abforbed in thought,. and the countenance of both Mrs. Wallace and Thomas Hayton expreffed the greateft furprife. When we entered, Thomas alone rofe to receive us ; Edward and myfelf were equally ftru ж \4th fhe appearance óf the females, and he à ; reftty afked an explana¬ tion of the aftöni liment which was pour· trayed on their fajes. "Oh, my djar boy!'*' cried Mrs. Wal¬ lace—" Oh, Mr. Seymour, the ftrangeft dif¬ covery has juft been made that ever came to light !-—Margaretta is not the child of thofe who paffed for her parents ! w Our aftonifhment Was now excited, and we could only afk farther explanation oti the fubjeft. Mrs. Wallace proceeded by faying, that after the death of old Hayton, Margaretta и 5 had
250
had found in a drawer in the houfe a let¬ ter thus direfted: " If Margaretta ever fees Thomas Hayton again, this paper is imme¬ diately to be read by her in his prefence -, if fhe hears ofhis death, fhe is direftly to open it herfelf/' " The letter now in Mar¬ garetta's hand/* flie continued, " was the very one to which flie was alluding, and that its contents were moft extraordinary indeed/' , Edward Wallace defired Margaretta to read it aloud ; flie did not anfwer him, bat put the letter into his hand. " May Mr. Seymour hear its contents ?" Edward whifpered to her. " He is the friend of my benefactor," flie returned, " and I have no fecret from faim/' " Read it out," faid Mrs. Wallace, " for we have hardly heard it ourfelves, Marga¬ retta* had not quite finifhed it when you came in/* Edward complied with her requeft, and read thefe words :
ť4 МУ
251
€C MY DEAR MARGARETTA, I am but a poor hand at writing, but I cannot forbear penning thefe few lines to tell you that you are not my child, as I think it may be of ufe to you fome time or other to know it. I lay-in of a daughter who would, as nearly as I can guefs, have been exactly your own age had fhe lived, but flie died in the courfe of the month, and I was perfuaded by the gentleman who faid he was your father, to take you and bring you up as my own. My hufband knows nothing of your not being his child, for I feared to tell him, left he ftiould grudge to maintain you ; and we have never any thing to expect from your father, for he died very foon indeed after he had placed you under my care, and fo did not live to perform the many promifes he had made to me for bringing you up. When I am on my death-bed, which 1 think from my fad health is not far off, I fliall entruft this fecret to my hufband, and tell him what is in this paper; but 1 ihall make him promife not to tell you what is in this letter m 6 durin«
*5U during his life-time, left you fliould not love him fo well as you have done. I have direfted that you fliould open it in the pre¬ fence of my fon Thomas that you may have fomebody to fupport you under the farprife of this difcovery; and» whatever Tom's other faults may have been, he ha» been always dearly fond of you ; and oh how happy Ihould I die if I thought you would ever condefcend to become his wife I but that I muft not expeft from one who is the daughter of fuch a father, as you came of. But now I have not told you who your father is. í cannot tell whether you would like to hear it,, fo I have written your father's name, and the one by which you were chriftened, in the little piece of paper tbat you will find fealed up in this letter j by wbich I have left it to your own choice, to learn who was your father, or not. God blefs you, my dear child, and pray do not think ill of me for having kept this fecret thus long from you, for I have been afraid to tell both my hufband and you ; if f have done wrong, I have meant for the beft, fo
$53 fo pray give me your pardon. I am, my dear child, your very well wifher. " Mary Hayton.'* c< Have you opened the paper," afked Edward Wallace, Ci which is faid to have been inciofed in this letter, and to contain the names of yourfelf and your father ?" " No, I have not," faid Margaretta, point¬ ing to it, as it lay on the table. " But you certainly intend it," rejoined Edward Wallace. <c I cannot open it myielfi* fhe anfwered y then after a paufe added, " Do you open it." Edward hefitated ; it feemed to be a taik for which he felt himfelf unfit. " I wifh it were unclofed," faid Marga¬ retta ; " I feel miferable till I know its contents." Still Edward did not offer to take it from the table, " Shall I break the feal?" Γ faid. " Pray do, Mr. Seymour," flie anfwered; I tore open the paper ; and what words thini
254 think you, Emma, met my eyes? Prepare yourfelf for wonder ; they were :—" Sir Robert Seymour %vas your father. — Æmilia, is your chriftian name. v —1 could not utter the contents ; the paper fell from my hands; I threw myfelf upon the neck of Margaretta, and, with thc tendernefs I really felt for her, hailed her fifter! She neither met nor reprefled my embrace ; flie fixed her eyes on mine for fome moments in mute enquiry, at length, <c Sifter !" flie repeated, " your fifter r"—" Sifter," I re¬ turned with emphafis ; tf you are the daugh¬ ter of Sir Robert Seymour, my father !"— tf If this be true," faid Margaretta, t£ why have I not been publicly acknowledged as his child ?"—" Becaufe," I replied, '< you were not born in wedlock."—" And will you," flie returned—" you, whofe birth was legitimate, call an unfortunate being like myfelf fifter?"—" PerifV' I cried, < f thofe bafe frivolities, encouraged only by the proud and ignorant, which would have any diftance acknowledged between the children of the fame parent !" I again prefled
255 prefled her to my heart, and íhe burft into tears. When fufficiently recovered to gain her utterance, <c Who was my mother ?—Is ihe ftill alive ?" Margaretta afked. « No,' 1 I replied, " flie is not alive." Margaretta fighed ; then faid, " Since you can fo im¬ mediately anfwer to the death ofmy mother, to what am 1 to attribute your not having till this moment known me to be what I am novv proved ?"—" It is fo ihort a time,** I returned, " fince I firft heard it hinted, that my father had been the parent of any child befides my brother and myfelf, that, to confefs the truth, I did not give the ftory credit."— ťC What then has now gained your faith to it?" aiked Margaretta eagerly. " The name by which you were baptifed," I replied. Margaretta fnatched up the paper from the table, and read, u Æmilia ; —Was this the name of my mother ?" ihe afked. « No," I returned. " Tell me who my mother was," ihe rejoined. " Pre¬ pare yourfelf with fortitude," I faid, " to hear a furprife which cannot be a pleafant oae»*'
256" øne/' — « Proceed, I entreat you," flie faid. u Your mother," Ireplied, " was— Antonia/' —" The wife of Sir Charles Melford ?" cried Margaretta. " The fame," I anfwered. " Oh," exclaimed Margaretta, again burft¬ ing into tears, " why do 1 know myfelf the child of a murderefs !"—" Even in this dif¬ covery," I returned, " Heaven brings a reward to your virtue ; religion now'forbids your union with Sir Charles, and there is no longer any impediment exifting to your hap¬ pinefs with Edward Wallace/* " Oh,my dear boy I—oh, my dear children !'* exclaimed Mrs. Wallace, " how good is. God to you !—may you be happy for ever and ever !" Edward Wallace approached towards Margaretta ; " Take her hand," faid I, " at that of a brother's, who is proud to put it into your's." I then turned from them for a few moments, that their joy might flow without reftraint. When the firft emotion arifing from this- difcovery had fubfided, I explained to Mar¬ garetta fuch particulars of her birth as the confeffions-
%57 confeffions of Antonia had made me ac¬ quainted with, and alfo convinced her in a point which flie at firft feemed to doubt- that Antonia had not known her to be her daughter when ftie faw her in England. I farther pointed out to Margaretta, that my father's death had been extremely fud¬ den, and that from this caufe undoubtedly had arifen his having left her unprovided for; but that his fons, at leaft I could anfwer with certainty for myfelf, and I be¬ lieved I could take upon myfelf to fay as much for my brother, would not on that account fhut her out from enjoying a part of that property of which her father had died poffefled. For myfelf, I was aU fatisfaciion at an occurrence which refcued Sir Charles from the dilemma in which he was living. Mar¬¬ garetta was all joy and furprife, Ed¬ ward Wallace and his mother all ecftacy ; and Thomas Hayton thus expreffed his fen¬ timents : rifing and ftiaking the hand of hi* ci-devant fifter, he faid, tc Well, Mifs Mar- garetta, or Æmilia, whichever your name be
- Ü5ß be now, I wifh you joy with all my heart, that you have found yourfelf out to be the child ofa better father than I come of, that is to fay, in the way of riches, for niy dad was as honeft as the beft in the land ; as to what mother fays in her letter about your being my wife, I affure you I fliould have liked fuch winter quarters ven/ well, but you are better difpofed of, and fo I wifli you as happy as a long life and plenty of child¬ ren can make you." I now returned to Melford-houfe to make the important difcovery of the morning to Sir Charles. I had borrowed of Æmilia (for fo i fliall in future call my fifter) Mrs. Hayton's letter, and thc paper contained in it. I thought thefe would fpeak more to the purpofe than all the eloquence I could fummon up to my afliftance ; and accord¬ ingly, after a few introduftory fentences, I put the papers into his hands. What paflion moved him rnoft ftrongly on reading them I cannot tell, for he turned to the window as he perufed them, and thus avoided my obfervation. Having
'259 Having read them, he paced the room for fome moments in violent agitation, then throwing himfelf into a chair, he exclaimed, " Wretch, that I ami I might have been tiie brother of my friend !" He extended iiis hand towards me ; I took it in mine, and befought him to Iiften to the many ad¬ vantages arifing from the difcovery juft made ; amongft thefe í laid the greateft ftrefs upon the impoflibility of his now ever being the huiband of Æmilia; and then pointed out to him, that he would now have nothintr to resrret in feeing her the wife of о о о Edward Wallace.—Here he burft into a firing of exclamations againft himfelf, for not having immediately on the death ofhis father engaged her affeftions- Again I re- monftrated, and befought him to forget what had been blameabie in his paft life, by endeavouring to create fome happinefs for his future days. In a fliort time he began to Iiften to me with compofure, and before the evening I had foftened down his feel¬ ings into a ftate of comparative happinefs. " I will
2бО ** I will endeavour," he faid, " to forget the paft: I will, in future, remember only that Margaretta (for I muft ftili call her by that name) is my daughter, and your fifter, and that we are to unite our efforts to make her happy." He then, of his own accord, propofed a walk to the farm, and I of courfe agreed to it. We found all its inhabitants at home; and three hours were paffed there by us, in a manner which gives me reafon to hope that, now this difcovery with regard to ÆmiHa has ftruck the decifive blow cr his fate, his compofure of mind will gradu¬ ally return, and ultimately bring back with it his former fpirits. You have often heard me remark, that the volatilenéfs öf my friend's mind was his only fault ; and I now truft that his difpofi¬ tion of feeling impreflions ftrongly, but not laftingjy, will prove to him a powerful af¬ filiant in regaining perfeft happinefs. I muft now write to my brother Sir Oli¬ ver, and inform him of* his newly-found fifter.
2ÓT fifter. Adieu : God blefs vou, and believe me ever Your affeftionate hufband, Geqage Seymour.
LETTER XXVIII. George Seymour, Efq, to Mrs, Seymour. MY DEAR EMMA, SMeliord-houfc. IR Charles has not relaxed from the pitch of compofure to which he had fcrew- ed his feelings, when I wrote to you laft, and I begin to hope that he now never will. Monday next is fixed for the celebration of ÆmihVs nuptials, and I have prevailed upon Sir Charles to promife, that himfelf and the newly married pair fliall, at the very door of the church, begin their journey towards Kirton, and pafs a month with us. I know it will give you equal pleafure with myfelf to entertain my new fifter, and old friend. I only
202
ï only write this fliort letter to give you a hint to make preparations for the reception of the party which is coming to enliven our quiet feenes of domeftic retirement; and, as I think it my duty here to devote my time to the amufing of Sir Charles Melford's mind, you muft pardon my only adding, what, though often repeated, I ftill feel it impof¬ fible to omit faying, that I am your affec- a tionate hufband, George Seymour.
LETTER
йбЗ
LETTER XXIX. Bernardo to Sir Charles Melford, SIR, I Venice. N compliance with your requeft of hear¬ ing from me, I have the honour to inform you of fuch particulars as I know it will be acceptable to you to learn. A few days af¬ ter your departure from Venice, permiflion was, w T ith difficulty, obtained from the ftate for the burial of the unfortunate Antonia; and then only upon my after tion of her rafh aftion having been the refult of lunacy. The un¬ happy Marchefa Laura, unable to enjoy the fociety of the world, now deprived of her * much-loved huiband, has retired for life into a convent, towards which flie had always been a large benefaftrefs, and where ftie trufts to the balm of religion to footh her mind in this ftate, and prepare it for happi¬ nefs in the next. The amiable lady Pau¬ lina has, with refolution, bid farewel to her mother $
Й64 mother ; flie is become the wife of the Mar¬ quis de Belleterre, and is gone with him into France, as it is her defire never to re¬ turn to the fpot where her worthy father died. The Marquis de Belleterre knows that I am to write to you, and he direfts me to fay, that nothing but the peculiar affairs to which he has lately been obliged to attend fliould have prevented him from writing to you himfelf, but that you fliall hear from him as foon as he reaches Paris with his bride. He intends to make that city his future re¬ fidence. For myfelf, fir, I fliall retire upon the favings of my fervice into the country, and in fome obfcure cottage end my days in tranquillity. That this letter may find you improved in happinefs, and well in Jiealth, is the fincere pray or, Sir, Your moft obedient humble fervant, Bernardo.
LETTER
265
LETTER XXX. George Seymour* Efq. to Mrs. Seymour. A Nottingham. Τ length, my dear Emma, my friend's laft trial is paft : Æmilia is the wife of Ed¬ ward Wallace. We have been upon our journey ever fince this morning, and are now flopped to dine at the diftance of about twenty-five miles from Melford houfe. The ceremony took place between eight and nine this morning : it was private, by the defire of Sir Charles, and we were ac¬ cordingly attended to church only by Mrs. Wallace and Thomas Hayton. Æmilia w r ept. I love to fee the tear that fupplicates for hap¬ pinefs drop from the eye of her who Hands before the altar of God on this folemn occa¬ fion. Sir Charles was violently agitated ; but he had promifed me that he WOuld not let his feelings fubdue his reafon, and he faithfully vol. и. к kept
5266* kept his word. To-day he has indeed been the father of my fifter, and, I doubt not, will ever continue to love hcr as a'parent. Immediately on the ceremony being end¬ ed, we got into Sir Charles Melford's car¬ riage, which is to convey us to Kirton; and, with many wiflies for the happinefs and profperity of thofe it contained, Mrs. Wal¬ lace returned to the farm, and Thomas Hay¬ ton to his new dwelling ; for Sir Charles has benevolently given to him, for life, the ufe ofthe cottage which was inhabited by An¬ tonia dui ing hcr refidence in England, and bas kindly fettled upon him an annuity of fifty pounds. Now my Emma will clafp to her bofom, as the fifter of her hufband, her whom fhe had wiflied tc know when only the prote¬ gee of her huiband's friend. Oh, how I anticipate }our meeting! Ænilia is indeed a moft fafcinating woman, and Edward has feen enough of life to conduft himfelf in its refined walks without oilending, and, what is ftill a more rare quality, witliout af¬ fectation.
Q67 fcftation. If you knew Æmilia it would be enough to fay in his recommendation, that he is herhufband; for flie muft have fome¬ thing more to approve in the man who has hcr efteem, than the outward part. I hope the paft will now be entirely ef¬ faced from the memory of thofe who have been involved in the misfortunes which it has produced ; if it is ever remembered, may it be held up to our children as incul¬ cating this ferious leffon, that when the at¬ tainment of virtuous happinefs is once in our power, it is our duty to receive it with thankfulnefs as the gift of Heaven ; that we fin in deferring it for the fake of any prefent, but more immaterial pleafure ; and that it is the ordination of Providence that the lofs of any great good which has once been within our reach, fliall be the confequence of our vainly thinking, that becaufe it has once been offered to us, it fliall remain fe¬ curely ours, whenever we choofe to receive it. Adieu : in a couple of clays I fliall once n г more
2G8 more embrace you ; till then, and ever, God blefs you ; fo prays your affeftionate huf¬ band, G BORG IS SlvYMf-TJft.
THE END.
Ύ, Г<Л'· fyr y hambrnr i-fp Ш t Г lut β f eet.
