Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
The unknown: or, The Northern gallery: a romance
???
IT tf ? Ji O JT J\\
?И??. I. tt Full many a melancholy night 1 Ie watch'd the slow return of light ; And sought the pow'rs of s'eep, To spread a momentary calm O'er his sad couch, and in tt e balm Oí bland oblivion's dew?, his burning eye» to steep." T. WlRTOV.
'* When wc in our viciousness grow hmd, Oh raiieiy ??? '- the wise gods seal our eyes, ■■■■-'■ —— " ■-'■ drop our clear judgments, make us Adore oc errors, laugh at's» whHe we strut To Our confusion." StIAKISr sittt. itiiLEONÖRÄ passed a restlessitHght. When Gillian, on the following morning, enter* vol, ?. * ed
ed her chamber, she perceived that her lady's spirits appeared more discomposed than \vhcn she had left heron the preceding evening. She made the observation with sorrow ; for the kind complacency of Eleonora 's disposition had gained her the tvarmest affection from her attendant ; and Λν?ιεη Eleonora confessed that Gillian's re¬ mark was a just one, the faithful girl ex¬ claimed,—" Now do, pray*, my dear Lady, make yourself as comfortable as you can in your present miserable situation—do, pray do. When things get to the tvorsf, the proverb says they mend ; so do try and give your thoughts to the retrospect of the future, and don't be alwavs antici- pating ibe past." Ill at ease as was the heart of Eleonora, sbe could scarcely forbear a smile at the eloquence of her simple companion, tvho continued thus:—" Then, my Lady, con¬ sider what the worthy Bishop, your good father, used so often to preach to us, * That when we arc unhappy, ??? should con¬ sider
sider how many arc unhappy besides our¬ selves, and perhaps a great deal more mi¬ serable than wc are;' as much as to say with the proverb, at least so I understand it, ( That we ought to let company in dis¬ tress make our trouble the less.' I am sure, for mý part," added Gillian, half weeping as she spoke, " as I told Egbert, the gardener, when I bade him good-bye at Worcester Castic, ' I think there is no¬ thing but trouble on this side of thesrravc ;' and the proverb says truly enough, * That one half of the world docs not know what the other half suffers." " Truly indeed," sighed forth the des¬ ponding heart of Eleonora, to whose re¬ collection the observation of Gillian brought the remembrance of the torturing secret, which she had doomed herself to nourish in silence within her own breast. " Now, for instance, my Lady," con¬ tinued Gillian, tt all may, and I hope will yet be well with you, and those that be¬ ii 2 long
long to you ; Heaven send it, I pray J .Now that is never.likely to be the case with the poor unhappy sufferer under this roof." <( Whom do you mean?" enquired Eleo¬ nora. w t{ Why, to be sure, my Lady," replied Gillian, ,f you must know who presides in that turret yonder." "Wbat, what do you say?" enquired Eleonora, eagerly, who was sometimes her¬ self at a loss to comprehend Gillian's mean¬ ings, and at the present moment desired to understand her perfectly, on account of the reference she had made to the tur¬ ret "\Vhy f the poor woe-begone prisoner that is 'shut up in the turret, I say, my Ladv," answered Gillian. -"In that turret?" demanded Eleonora, pointing with her finger towards the one which, since her arrival at Castle-Gower, had been the object of her evening obser¬ vations. "Yes,
?И? . " Yes, my Lady, in that turret," an¬ swered Gillian ; " did not you know lhat was the place? Yes, there he lives." " But who is /???" asked Eleonora, with some degree of impatience. '* Why can it be possible," exclaimed Gillian, " that all the time wc have been here, you have never yet heard his story ? Joel, the butler, told me all about it the other evening, when we were walking by the river side together, and I bad been telling him how much í missed Egberts company ; for he being the gardener, you know, my Lady, and he and I being very friendly together, he used to invite me, at Worcester Castle,. to walk about the gar¬ dens with him, and------" " Answer my questions about the in¬ habitant ofthe turret," said Eleonora, in¬ terrupting her harangue, " what is his name ?" Kt Valentine, ray Lady," replied Gillian ; ff Sir Valentine, indeed, I should say, for he is Sir Sigismund's son." ?? " Sir
" Sir Sigismund's son !" echoed Eleo¬ nora ; " the son of Sir Sigismund Blunt, do you mean ?" " O ves, my Ladv," answered Gillian ; " hi> eldest son, born, bred, and degene¬ rated before Sir Hildebrand, as Joel told rr.e ; and would have been heir in birth¬ right to all his father's prepossessions, this rasile and olì, ' first come, first served/ as the proverb says, i r it had not been for this sad misfortune," 'MVhat misfortune?" enquired Eleo¬ nora, xvith increased curiosity. " That's the reason of his being so close·* Iv confined to his chamber in the turret," replied Gillian, " for fear of his doing any mischief if he had his liberty ; it is a hard Λνοι -d to speak, my Lady, but he is------ mad." Eleonora listened in silence. This in¬ formation appeared to account for her having seen the xvrctched inhabitant ofthe turret enlarged by night from his prison, f o taste the air, xvhen no. one xvas likely to
to cross his way, a spy upon his actions ; or to oflend his sight by his beholding others free, whilst he was himself subject to a necessary restraint. This knowledge appeared a sufficient explanation of tbe incoherent terms which she had heard him utter, and of the rasli action which she had seen him rushing to perpetrate. In this explanation was also revealed tp her the cause of Sir Sigismund's despondency, and ofthe calm grief which had settled itself on the mild features of Lady Blunt; sin¬ cerely did she pity their unfortunate case; truly did she lament the fate of their un¬ happy son. But as her thoughts turned to Sir Hildebrand, ,thc information which she had just gained increased the dislike which she already bore him ; she regarded it as evident, that the anticipation of those ho¬ nours, wealth, and power, which would devolve on him, in consequence of the unfortunate state of his brother's mind, had swelled a naturally proud and insen¬ sible disposition into an unfeeling haughti- B 4 ness
ncss of deportment ; and that so far from pitying the lamentable object upon whose misery his prospects were founded, hc was careless of displaying that he rejoiced in the rjheck which the hand of fate had given to the natural progress of events, in the family of which he was a member. " Ah, my Lady !" continued Gillian, after a pause, tc it is a thousand pities, is it not ? I am sure it makes me quite mc- lat'icolly when I think of him ; and I can't help thinking of him, and pitying him very much too, for they tell me hc is as hand¬ some as the days arc long; and thotigh the proverb says, * Beauty is but skin- deep/ yoa know, my Lady, ??? can see no more of any body than his skin, and 1 must say, I like better to look at one that is handsome, than at one that is ugly; and I hope there is no sin in saying so." " Not ifyou tvould be equally compas¬ sionate to both in the hour of their dis¬ tress," returned Eleonora. " The sense of preference is given to us, that wc may be
be enabled by comparison to draw plea¬ sure from tbe contemplation of particular objects, which the majority have not the power of inspiring us with ; and there is no harm in the enjoyment of this distinc¬ tion, if confined to the privacy of our own breast, and we shew ourselves as ready to relieve the wants and exigencies of those who are so unfortunate as to possess any points or qualities which we do not ap¬ prove, as of those who are in our sight and opinion perfect; without this com¬ mand over ourselves, a power which is given us for the purpose of imparting an innocent satisfaction to our minds, be¬ comes an unpardonable fault." Gillian was always well pleased to re- ceive instruction, though her mind was not always equal to the practice of those precepts which were given to her. ' { It is sometimes Very hard to feel exactly as one ought to feci, my Lady, to be quite good and worthy/' she said, with a sigh. '* The more meritorious our virtue," re- ¿ " ? 5 turned
turned Eleonora, " when by strictly ad¬ hering to that which is right and com- mcndable, we conquer any enticing sen¬ sation which would seduce us to an op¬ posite conduct/' After a pause, which Eleonora purpose¬ ly made, in order that the admonition which she had given to Gillian might have time to sink into her mind, before it was occupied by any other impressions, she said,— iC Have· you understood how long Sir Sigismund's unfortunate son has been afîîicfed with this calamity/ and to what cause İt is attributed ?" ' f Joel told me, my Lady/' replied Gil- Han, " that his inanity came on after a fe¬ ver ; they never could account for it any other way ; I think he said, that it was when Sir Valentine was about sixteen, how almost five years ago." " And to whom is the care of this piti¬ able being entrusted?" asked Eleonora. 44 To a person who has for a long while been a confidential servant of. Sir Sigis¬ mund's/'
mund's/' replied Gillian ; "he was in his service before either Sir Hildebrand or Sir Valentine was born ; by my troth, I be¬ lieve even before hc married his present lady ; and the strangest looking man he is that you ever set your eyes upon; so taU, so pale, so thin, ? Lord ! hc is just for alj the world like a walking skeleton." ? summons for Eleonora to breakfast with Lady Blunt, broke off her conversa¬ tion with Gillian ; and when the repast was ended, she entered the garden, and could not forbear placing herself on a seat, from which she could command a view of the window in the turret, which gave light to the apartment communicating-with the chamber which she had learned that the unfortunate Valentine inhabited. While she sat with her eyes fixed on the walls which enclosed him, to whose history and connexions her wandering thoughts were roving. Sir* Sigismund approached her; on seeing him she withdrew her rc- B G · gards
gards hastily from the turret—he stopped opposite to her, and fixed his upon if—as he did so, he heaved a deep sigh— Eleonora answered it by one drawn from fhe deep¬ est recesses of her heart. He turned his eyes towards her ; they beamed with an expression which appeared to applaud the sympathy which she had in that sigh mani¬ fested that her feelings bore fo his own. She perceived him preparing to speak, and did not doubt that his words would be of the unfortunate Valentine; but in a voice of melancholy he asked, whether she would accompany him to the coUage which she had visited with him two days before ? Eleonora immediately accepted his in¬ vitation. ** Perhaps in our walk/' she conjectured, €€ he will mention his unhap¬ py son." But her expectations were de¬ ceived ; he spoke not of Valentine, nor scarcely at all. When they had reached the wboa-cutter's cottage, for such was the 'poor man tg whom. Sir Sigismund paid
his charitable visits, thcy learnt from his wife that he was gone to his regular em¬ ployment in a copse hard by. ' f Why did he venture from home so soon?" said Sir Sigismund; " he knew that I would not have suffered him or his familv to want, whilst he was unable to work for their support." With many thanks and blessings the wife replied.— if That her husband could not bear the idea of appearing to encroach up¬ on Sir Sigismund's goodness, by delaying to return to his employment, a moment after he was able to raise his hatchet." ff I shall go and speak to him," returned Sir Sigismund ; " and if I find him as weak and as ill as I fear hc is, I shall imtantly send him home." Sir Sigismund again drew the arm of Eleonora through his, and they proceeded across a field to a stile, which led into the liltle wood, where the object of Sir Sigis* mund's benevolence was labouring. The briars which grew amongst the un¬ derwood,
derwoodj and had e v en encroached upon the paths of the copse, rendered ita very uninviting spot to enter; and Sir Sigis¬ mund requesting Eleonora to wait for him a few minutes, expresseel his intention of going alone in quest ofthe woodman. For a short time Eleonora stood reclin¬ ing upon the stile, that never-sleeping faculty, thought, still clinging to her as a companion— " How afflicting," she con¬ sidered, " must be the reflections of Sir Sigismund and Lady Blunt, upon the fate of their elder born, that they do not as¬ sume resolution to speak of him, even to her whom they both treat with the kind¬ ness õ f parents!" She wished to mention her knowledge of their misfortune to them —to tell them how warmly she participat¬ ed in their affliction. But she felt that the sensations ofa delicacy, perhaps over¬ strained, would-withhold her from putting this inclination into eflect: and alas ! how often is it that sensations which every one has felt, and which no one can describe, restrain
restrain the dearest friends from communi¬ cation, on points relative to which it is at the moment of their silence, equally the wish of both to exchange their sentiments ! As Sir Sigismund was rather longer in returning to her than Eleonora had ex¬ pected, she seated herself upon a bank near the stile, whose mossy verdure for¬ med an enviable resting-place, around which the wild flowrets of spring cast a delicious odour. She had not long taken her seat, ere she heard voices behind her ; and on turning round her head, perceived Sir Hildebrand, with his huntsmen and dogs, returning slowly home from the chace, along a road which ran by the tide of the field she was in. She had scarcely beheld Sir Hildebrand, before it was evident to her that she was observed by him. Leaving his companions at a turn in the road, which led the latter into a deep glen, that entirely obscured them from the sight of Eleonora, he ad¬ vanced towards her. Throwing
Throwing himself upon the velvet turr by her side, he exclaimed,— " AVell met, fair lady ; the society of your sex is never more welcome to us, than when we are fatigued with exercise ; the smiles of a handsome woman increase to luxury the pleasures of repose." The familiarity of this address did not less surprise than alarm Eleonora. From the first day that her acquaintance with him had commencetl, unpleasant ideas, al¬ most amounting to fear, had always at¬ tended his recollection to her mind ; and those sensations were now heightened equally by the words he had spoken, and 'by the tone and manner with which he had delivered them. Utterly at a loss how to reply, or what it became her to say, she endeavoured to assume a look of cool indifférence, Avhich she hoped might check the progress of his rhapsody, if hc were inclined to continue it ; but ere she could sufficiently command herself to smooth her features with an air of
of placidity, than which nothing conld bc more foreign to the trembling emotion of her heart, he laid his hand upon one of her's, and was beginning to press it be¬ tween his fingers. Eleonora immediately sprang up from her scat—at the same instant his counte¬ nance met her eye— the smile of a liber¬ tine was pourtrayed upon it—she turned hastily from him, but the celerity of his sleps outstripped the fleetness of her's; and in a few moments he had again caught hold of her hand. She now gained the power of utterance —" Sir Hildebrand/' she exclaimed, " for Heaven's sake forbear! what mean you by this insult ? how have I provoked such con¬ duct from you ?" " Have yoti forgotten your debt, coy lady?" he replied. " Recollect that I told you, you owed me a boon, when I spared the offending page to give you pleasure; and wil. you now be so ungrate¬ ful as to refuse me a moment of satisfac¬ tion
and ! doubt not but my amiable parent» will escape without any marks of this in¬ sult. You have lost the merit of com¬ pliance, lady, and I have still obtained m v boon—Sir Hildcbraud nrer vet víeld- ?? to the weakness of woman." Wiih thh virtuous and honourable de¬ clarai ion he turned from her, and pursued the path which hatl been taken by the huntsmen. Eleonora stood chained to the spot where he had left her, terror and indignation equally overpowering her feeling« ; with¬ out her being sensible of his approach, Sir Sigismund came up to her—" Have you been alarmed ?" he said ; " 1 imagined I heard you shriek." At the sound of his voice Eleonora start¬ ed, as if she had been awakened from a trance. Sir Sigismund repeated his question, and added,—*' I thought I saw Sir Hildebrand descending into the glen." " Yes/' replied Eleonora, with a falter¬ ing
ing voice, te í hara been alarmed, very much alarmed— î hope I shall never be thus alarmed again." " !>id not Sir Hildebrand come to your relief?" enquired Sir Sigismund; ** he must have heard your shriek» a* well as mv^lf." *· Do not question me/* replied FJeo¬ nora, struggling to regain her composure ; ·· 1 am in fhat forlorn state in which it be¬ comes me to increase, if possible, the number of iny friends, not hazard the loss of one of the few I possess. Of the excel¬ lence of vour heart, no event can diminish my opinion—Sir Hildebrand is your son — let the subject pass." %t Exquisite, angelic Eleonora !" exclaim¬ ed Sir Sigismund, ir how worthy do you prove yourself of the regard I feel for you! ? had ! a child resembling you, with such a mind, such a face ï —for stiU your features call to my remembrance ideas loved, and cherished once, but now for ever lost! Oh the expression of that eye ! it is the sarac whkh in my nightly visions ofnmcs Ibe-
I behold ; and waking------" Suddenly he broke ofllhis sentence—" Pardon me, Eleo¬ nora," he said ; " but you do pardon me—you have already pardoned me, when at the first moment of our introduction to each other, I displayed to you the weak¬ ness ofmy soul." Λ deep sigh succeeded these words, and he added—" lam a most unhappy father !" He fixed his eyes as he spoke stedfastly on those of Eleonora —again she believed him to be referring to Valentine ; and the expression of her features sympathized with the sorrowful turn of his. Sir Sigismund again broke silence— Cf I have but one, one only son, and he exists a thorn of anguish to his parent's breast." " Do not despond," returned Eleonora; " place faith in Heaven ; it may yet be the will of an all-kind Providence to re¬ store to vou another son, to strew the path of vour declining vears with comfort—the lamp of reason may hereafter be permitted to burn the brighter for having been------' ? violent
A violent emotion was visible in the features of Sir Sigismund, whilst Eleonora was speaking these words; and hastily in¬ terrupting her, ere she had concluded her sentence, he said,— " And is this sad tale known to you ?" (t Believe me," returned Eleonora, " that it cannot be known to any one who more sincerely pities the object whom it con¬ cerns." " Pity me likewise then,'· exclaimed Sir Sigismund, <f and, for the love of mercy, ???? it to me no more !" Almost repentant of having opened the subject to Sir Sigismund at all, Eleonora obeyed his request ; and they proceeded in silence till they had entered the gardens of Castle Gower. Pressing fhe hand of Eleonora affectionately in his, Sir Sigis¬ mund then said,—" Come, cheer thee, cheer thee, sweet daughter of my protec¬ tion ! fear not a farther interruption of thy peace from Sir Hildebrand. I confess that although his father, I have but little sway o\er
over his actions—what little I do possess, I will strenuously exert in your cause—but I repeat, fear him not. Few indeed are the virtues which have place in his heart ; with sorrow I make this acknowledgment; rely therefore that his preferences are mo¬ mentary, and that with constancy of feel¬ ing he is unacquainted." Eleonora listened to him in silence—his words displayed the insufficiency of his power to ensure her tranquillity, if Sir Hildebrand were determined to interrupt it ; and with a heart ill at case she retired to her chamber.
CHAP.
CHAP. II.
u It came o'er my soul as doth the thunder, Whilst distant yet, with an unexpected burst, It threats the trembling ear,"
Masom.
" Now air is hush'd, save where the weak-cy'd bat, With shrill short shriek, flits by on leathern wing j Or where the beetle winds His small but sullen horn. As oft he rides 'midst the twilight of the path, Against the pilgrim borne in heedless hum." Coti ins, Several days elapsed, to the inexpressible satisfaction of Eleonora, during which she met Sir Hildebrand as usual at table, but received from him no farther marks of vol. u. ? the
the disgusting and licentious conduct with which he had insulted her, on the morning of her walk with Sir Sigismund to the wood-cutter's cottage. Sir Hildebrand ap¬ peared, as hc had ever shewn himself since she had known him, petulant in his man¬ ners, passionate in his temper, indifferent towards his mother, overbearing and inso¬ lent to his father. When his eyes were turned towards her, she believed that she could discover in them the expression of an inward triumph ; and she feared that he even turned them upon her oftener than he had been accustomed to do; but she hoped likewise that this idea was but the effect ofher sensitive apprehensions. She novv saw Sir Sigismund less frequent¬ ly than she had done a week be'ore. That habitual melancholy, which was the con¬ sumer of his health and spints, had again risen to a height which often confined him for a day or two together to his chamber ; and at those periods she was deprived also of the society of Lady Thomasine, who was
was Unremitting in her attentions to her husband. The greatest relief, and only relaxation which the mind of Eleonora experienced in these hours ofher solitude, was to wan¬ der through the gardens of the castle, and in one of these lonely rambles, she encoun¬ tered the page Edwin. < f Well, Edwin," she said, " I am be· come acquainted who the unfortunate person is to whom your song was the other day directed, as you sat upon the steps of the turret-—you are a kind boy, and I ad¬ mire the tenderness of your heart." " it must be a hard heart, and an un¬ grateful one too," replied Edwin, " if it did not p t ι ;, poor Sir Valentine, and lead me to do whare \C»* I am able to sooth his «nhapny life ? how kind a master he was to *\e ' how different to------" ir Sir Hil¬ debrand," it appeared as if he were in¬ clined io say ; but he checked himself, and became silent. ? 2 « Your
te Your master!" returned Eleonora; " was Sir Valentine ever your master ?" f< ? yes !" replied the page, with a sigh of regret; tf when my poor mother lay ill and dying, he first took me into his service, and was as kind to me as if I had been his own brother;—1 was then scarcely nine years old. Oh how happy and easy was then my life ! Oh how I lament, both for his sake and my own, the sad, sad malady which now oppresses him !" " And you then went into the service of Sir Hildebrand ?" said Eleonora. <c Ah, dear Lady, what could Ido ?" ex¬ claimed Edwin ; " Sir Hildebrand's page had just quitted him—he offered me the place, and I accepted it ; for I am a poor friendless orphan ; and you do not know vhat it is, Lady, to have neither father nor mother to apply to for advice or pro¬ tection." " Oh yes, yes, I do know the unhap¬ piness of such a lot !" returned Eleonora. tr But
fi But it is a «Treat satisfaction, when we are deprived of them," reioined the page, ft to reflect, that we have done nothing to shame their memory ; and this is a conduct I will ahvays persevere in—I dare say, Lady, that you doso likewise." " My parents are not dead, Edwin," re¬ plied Eleonora, "though I am debarred the happiness of intercourse with them." if Ah, Lady, you are yet happy then, compared to me ! " answered lid win ; ' f you cannot conceive the miserable sensation of weeping over the earth that contains a beloved father or mother, who can no longer look at you, smile upon you, or hear the sound of your voice:" the tears stole down his cheeks as he uttered these words. Eleonora endeavoured to comfort him, and to give a turn to his ideas. if And how do you know 1 ," she asked, " that your sing¬ ing is a relief, or a satisfaction to the mind of Sir Valentine?" " I am certain of it," replied Edwin ; ? 3 " he
" he was always fond of hearing me sing to him whilst he possessed his reason ; and when he lost it, and I was no longer permitted to sec him, as ï judged that the tones of my voice might still aflbrd him pleasure, I used to creep to the door of his chamber, and sit by it, and sing his favourite airs; and frequently he would % call out to me,— c Thank you, thank you, grateful Edwin ,*' and oh, how happy it used to make me !—But ï have not been to his door for a long while now," added Edwin, after a pause. (i Why so ?" asked Eleonora. (e I did not know that there was any harm in it," replied Edwin ; " but when. Sir Hildebrand and Fabian discovered me sitting there one day, they drove me pas¬ sionately away, and ordered me never to come near the place again." fC Who is Fabian r" said Eleonora. (( Don't you know Fabian, Lady?" an¬ swered Edwin ; e< he is the only person that attends upon Sir Valentine—he was formerly
formerly Sir Sigismund's own servant, bit he now dispenses with his attendance him¬ self, in order that all his time may be given to pooi· Sir Valentine.—Surely you must have seen Fabian, though you might not know who he was," continued Edwin ; {i and ifyou have seen him, I am sure you cannot have passed him without having noticed him ; for he is so unusually tall, pale, and thin, that no one can forbear re¬ marking him. 4 " Yrs, I have seen such.a person," re¬ plied Eleonora, " if he were Fabian ;" and she added, (for thought recurred to that moment when she had belic\cd herscif to behold a form similar to his, at the en¬ trance of Agatha's hermitage.. )— Si on whom devolves the attendance upon Sir Valen¬ tine, when Fabian is at an) time absent from Castle Gower?" {< He never is absent," answered Edwin-; " I don't recollect his having been away from hence a single day, since Sir Valen¬ tine's insanity began." ? 4 tí How
t( How strange is this information !" thonght Eleonora; iC can it bc possible that my senses at that moment deceived me—that the agitation of Agatha's mind imparted itself so strongly to mine, that I imagined myself like her, to behold the being whom she was describing ! if this indeed were the case, which I cannot be¬ lieve it to have been, how much more strange that I should, since my arrival here, have actually seen a form exactly cor¬ responding with that imprinted upon my mind!" Edwin roused her from her trance of thought, by saying,— <( So, as I am not allowed to go to his door, I sing lo him from the steps ofthe turret." " And do you think lhat he can hear you from thence ?" asked Eleonora. " ? yes !" returned Edwin ; <f that win¬ dow which you see, near to the door at the head of the steps, gives light to a lit¬ tle closet, into which there is a communi¬ cation from his chamber." " Does
" Does he ever come into that closet ?" enquired Eleonora. " Never but at night, when Fabian ac¬ cidentally leads him out into the garden for air," answered Edwin. Λ pause ensued— Eleonora broke it— tf And Sir Valentine ahvays was fond of music, was he?" fC Yes, very fond of it indeed—that is, of singing," replied the page. " 1 cannot play on any instrument; I wish I coukl—it might be an additional pleasure to him." The signal for dinner was at this mo¬ ment sounded ; Edwin ran to attend on his master, and Eleonora retired to pre¬ pare herscif lor appearing at table. On this day Sir Sigismund again joined his family at their mid-day repast in the castle hall; when they were about to rise from table, a servant came to inform him, that there was a stranger without desiring to see him. Sir Sigismund advanced some questions ? ? concerning
concerning hini, and the servant replied,— '' That hbdrco was that ofa monk." 14 He is doubtless," said Lady Blunt, "some holy man. vvho comes recommended fo supply the place of our deceased Eathcr Cyril." ' Sir Sigismund accorded with f icr in opi¬ nion, and went out to commune with the stranger. in the evening I.?dy Blunt entered Eleo¬ noras closet, and said,— t( I am come, my love, to pass an hour or two with you; Sir Sigismund is engaged with an old friend, whom hc has not beheld ???? they were youths together." Eleonora enquired,—" Who that friend might ber" íl The stranger," replied Lady Blunt. * r vvho was announced fo him as we vvere rising from table. His is a miraculous story, almost a romance. 1 have mvfelf heard the material events of it, and have novv left him detailing the particulars to 2 my
my husband. И? has not seen Kngland for more than twenty years ; and the pro» sjiects of happiness which he had Hal tered himself would greet his return to hh na¬ tive country, are blighted by lhe death of a sister, of whose decease he wy* ignorant till he reached tlm castle." *· ? sister !" said Eleonora. $i Ves," repHed Lady Blunt» " she who was the Lady Elizabeth Talboyse, Sir Si¬ gismundo first wife. The stranger İs no cMher than her brother. He uas in early life cdiUHied for ihe holy oflice of priest¬ hood . and in the very Iirst year that hh t ister became thewife of Sir Sigismund, he It ft England a* confessor to a family of t otisiderable rank, who, on account of an intermarriage which had been formed by one of its brant hes with that of a Spanish nobleman, fixed their residence at Tole¬ do. Shortly after his departure, a report tfî his death reached England, and was universally credited by his friends. Uh appearance now proves the fallacy of the *: ß rumour ;
rumour ; and the account which he gives of the disasters that have thus long sepa¬ rated him from his connexions, are of the most interesting nature." " Lady Talbovse was herself a relation of Sir Sigismunds, before her marriage with him, was she not?" enquired Eleonora. " That is considered rather a doubtful point," answered Lady Thomasine. fi Her maiden name was likewise Blunt ; and therefore a relationship has by some been .supposed to exist ; but ï have understood that it is almost impossible lo trace ir.— Poor Father Saint Ethelbert expresses him¬ self f ? feel her death more severei) f han anv infliction which fate has vet levelled at his peace ; and great indeed have been his sufferings since the period of his quit¬ ting England. He relates. — That afler having resided two years in Spain, dis¬ liking the manners and customs of that people, he resolved to return to his na¬ tive land, and for that purpose engaged his passage on board an English ship. He embarked
embarked at Sf. Andero, and for nearly two days his voyage was. prosperous; but on the third a violent tempest arose* which drove the vessel back upon Ihe Spanish coast. The exertions of the mariners were insufficient to save her—^he was wrecked, and all her crew, except hiimelf and one of the sailors, perished with her;—which fact accounts for the report of his death ; as at lhe lime lhat rumour reached Eng¬ land, he was sa d to have been lost on board a vessel in whith he ??? ? påhenger* and whiih had foundered in a diead fu! storm. Hiniself .nui the viilor ofuhom I lutve nlready spoken, chin;; to ? part of the wreck, which ? fi k ¡idly wave dashed within their grr^p» ami upou it thev were borne out to sea, "Ihus thev e visteti for several hour» in that dreadful state of sus¬ pense, to which a certami) of death is al¬ most preferable: at length α vessel ap* peared in sight, of which the crew per- t eiv ed them struggling with the waves, and having made towards them, took them on
onboard. Eut ??? ! vvhat thcy had re¬ garded as their greatest happinc s, was quickly converted into the most afllicting grief. The &hip proved to be a Itarbary corsair—they were carried fo Algiers, and sold to slavery. The sailor endured the miseries of his unfortunate lot only a few years—death released him from his earthly bondage. Saint Ethelbert, supported by the grace of Heaven, and reserved by its benign interposition for an eventual re¬ storation to happiness in this liíV, strug¬ gled through the hardships of his laborious servitude till the death of the Uey, during whose supremacy he had been made a cap¬ tive. On the accession of his successor to the throne, liberty was granted to all Mich blavw as had been in bondage above fifteen years; of this number was Saint Ethel¬ bert. With difficulty he reached England; for the incanì» of his journey vvere obliged to bc collet ted by him from the hands of the feeling and charitable. On lauding, he immediately proceeded to Blackamor, i u Esbcx,
Essex, which, at hb departure from Eng¬ land, had been the residence ol bîr Sigis¬ mund, and contínued so during the life¬ time of his lirstt wife- on reaching that spot, hc founel that his weary journev was not yet at an end—his steps being from thence directed to Castle (¿ower. Here he will at least fmd a harbour of repose from all the storms of ??; but the satis¬ faction with which he enters it is consider¬ ably diminished, bv the ¡tuctliscnce which ♦neets hîm of his bister ? death." Lady Blunt and Eleonora sat comment¬ ing on the \ arici ic* uf fortune, which hatl been experienced b\ the ill-starred bro¬ ther of ladv Eh/abeth Talhov&o, till the hour of retiring to re>!, when Lady Blunt went to her chamber, and Gillian entered Eleonoras, to ?&?? her mistress in un- drev>ing. The heat's of Saint Kthelbcrt's history had already reached the inferior members of the household at Castle Ciowcr; ami (iulian was not a l»ttle dbappointed that Lady
Lady Blunt had been beforehand with her in communicating them to her lady, as she was now deprived ?? the pleasure of ¡elating them herscif. From her attend¬ ant, however, Eleonora learnt that a mes¬ senger had been dispatched to Framling¬ ham Castle, to acquaint Lord Henry Fit/.- roy with the existence and arrival of his maternal uncle. On the following morning, Eleonora breakfasted alone in her closet. At the hour of dinner she entered the rasile hall ; Sir Sigismund led her towards the vener¬ able Saint Ethelbert, who was» seated nevt to Lady Blunt, at the head of the table. Bv the words with which Sir Sigismund in¬ troduced her to him, she was aware that her name and history had already been im¬ parted to him ; and she was not less plea¬ sed than surprised at his rising to receive her. Saint Ethelbert laid his hand upon her, and gave her his blessing.—" You are sur¬ prised at my action, daughter," he said, reading
reading on her countenance what was pass¬ ing in her mind. tl because you probably imagine that there are none ofmy religion that will bestow a blessing on those whose tenets d i İler from their own—for myself, and I hope such İs the case with others, I would, if ??????, convert you, because I believe the faith which I profevs to lead by the readiest way to Heaven ; but what¬ ever their persuasions, I bless all whom God has created." In a few faltering words, Eleonora ex¬ pressed her sense of his excellent disposi¬ tion, and took her seat at the table. As occasional opportunities offered themselves to her of observing the faiher, she per¬ ceived that he was rather below the middle stature, and proportionally thin. His face was almost constantly shaded b\* his cowl, which he wore, he said, for the be¬ nefit of his sight, which had been material¬ ly weakened and injured, by his haung been exposed in slavery to the heat and light ofthe sun. His beard was long and white ;
white; and the partial locks which de¬ scended from his temples vvere of the same snowy hue, whitened, uot by age, but by grief, and by toil bevond his strength. He spoke but little—when his * ice was heard, it was in tones of the mildest me¬ lancholy. When Saint Ethelbert had been a couple of days an inmate of Castle tiower, his time was principally passed in the chamber which had been aligned to hh use, and in the chapel, where it appeared an iniinite consolation to kneel in prayer at the altar of his own religion. A short time after the arrival of Saint Ethelbert, Lady Elunt remarking Leonora s lute which hung iii her close«, where they were one evening sitting, requested her to indulge her with touching ¡ts chords. Eleonora complied ; and as she plaved, she beheld the tears stealing down the checks of Lady Thomasine —she could not forbear supposing that they were pro¬ duced by some connexion of idea - » between the
the mime ami her unhappy son Valcn- iine; and it was with dilVicttlty that Uie louhl restrain hcr»elf from expr^^rig to his mother the sympathy which vh^ felt tn his fate; but apprehensive that what she intended as a kindness migh: produce an opposite eflect upon her wounded feeling:*» she imposed sileiiec oa her tongue. She liad not pbyed long ere Lady Blunt wa> called away to attend bir Sigismund in his own apartment. Eleonora conti¬ nued sittin- with her lute in her hand— her reflect ions at that moment all turned towards the unfortunate Valentine. She recollected that Edwin, the page, had la- meu ted that he was not able to play on any instrument, as he judged that lhe me¬ lody of its tonex added to hh wme, might prove a giVMCi relief to the pang-> of Sir Valentines miud. Attuned to ??:;<??:??? of the greatest phy was the vnd of Eleo¬ nora; and believing «bat she might, at that moment, have it in her power to per¬ form an action of the most humane hind,
she resolved fo take her instrument, and ??? het^ath the \indow ofthe turret. S ! e acitirdingly entered the garden, and pht'il here! f on the step on which she had once seen tîie page seared, for fhe same friendly office in which she was now going to be engaged. She struck the chords of her lute to a plaintive air. of which sîie hoped the «-oft melody might produce the desirable elìcer, of lulling for awhile the harassed spirits of the poor lunatic, to whom it was addresed ; and in order to render her notes more interesting to him, she accompanied thcin with her voice. She had twice repeated her song with¬ out interruption, when she was startled by the voice of Sir Hildebrand— " Well, Lady," hc exclaimed, " what can have brought you, and your lute, to this spot ?" " One of the most grateful sensations- of which the human mind h capable," re¬ turned Eleonora, ft pity." " Your sex is truly an enigma," hc re¬ plied;
plied ; " there is not one «if you who does not, bv everv action of vour lives, 'w* * assist to prove İt so. Vou, far instami, pity bim whom you have nc- er «een» and slight those whom you daily behold." ** I am not conscious of there existing any one who can accuse me of indiffer¬ ence, and at the same time deserves to meet a more favourable conduct from mc," snid Eleonora. '· But it tnay be possible for you to err in your judgment; may it not, Lady?" replied Sir Hihbl »ml. Eleonora r«;se, a., I moved towards the entran e i. ilo the «astle Arresting her steps lie ???!» — i4 N\»\» give me vour hear¬ ing, Ladv ; I am neither a triller nor a íla'ierer- what I have to say will soon bc spoken—it is myself to whom I think you foo indiflerent." " And I consider myself too lenient/* replied Eleonora. ' % İn holding any com¬ munication with one from whom I have received
received so gross an insult, as you a few davs ago offered me." " Aye, there it is again !" cried Sir Hil¬ debrand ; " women aivvays consider actions in a different light to what they ought to be regarded, and thus never give the per¬ former of them his due merit. Well, since I have Jearnt what you deem an insult, î will not oflend you by a repetition ofit— I will not truly, Lady ; for I wish to gain your favour and your love." Eleonora fixed her eyes upon him iu silence—they expressed the greatest asto¬ nishment and contempt. " Yes, by my holy dame." he con¬ tinued, " I must have your love ! at least it wvre better for us both to let me have it, for you must become my vife. Nay, start not, timid Lady— Γ do not mean this eve, nor at to-morrow's dawn, nor per¬ haps for an hundred or more dawns to come —-I'll tell you—the kiss vvhich I snatched the other morning from your velvet lips, has
has inflamed a passion for you in my heart, which nothing but the exclusive possession of yourself can subdue; therefore you are destined for my bride." (s Sir Hildebrand," exclaimed Eleonora· endeavouring in ι ain fo disengage herself from him, " I cannot regard your words as any other than the rhapsody of a madman* oras an attempt, on your pari, to mock or deride me; wmVhc\cr they are. 1 beg that you wsll restrain \onr>e!f from the free '*Μη ?* |??? ???*??**??£ nio," "Thib \+* all i.dk." cried Sìr HÜÏe- ????? ; '* ??;?>? ? Kue nof lhe ?*: .th tonmie of a courtier» I a« j'idîied r.iher a madman or a fool, when I expres m;. senti'uenls; however, I believe myself to be neither; and here in solemn trnh 1 repeat» that my 'o*"** for you h uiuoiictuer- able, and that mj joy and pnde iull he each other's. rhaK when I have nude vou mv wife." Eleonora would have spoken, but he prevented her,by continuing thus— « You thinks
think, perhaps, fair Lady, that the hand of Sir Hildebrand is such an offer as every day may bring you, and scarcely worth even a refusal ; and so í grant you it is, as Sir Ilililebrand is now, his inheritance depending on a father and an elder bro¬ ther's life— this is as it appears; but a change unexpected, and vast, may quick¬ ly bc wrought—Sir Hildebrand may rise— speak not of this—cherish the hint I have given you within your own breast ; and be content vvith the reflection that you will be a sharer in the coming good." " Your words, Sir Hildebrand," an¬ swered Eleonora, ί( are now as enigmati¬ cal as they a few moments ago appeared the effect of phrenzy; my answer, how¬ ever, will be more explicit—no considera¬ tion of any secondary advantage to that of uniting myseif vvith a man whom í could regard and esteem, will ever tempt me to become the wife of one whom I can¬ not in any respect approve." Endeavouring to conceal the agitation vvhich
which really filled her mind, she again at¬ tempted to jjroceed towards the house. Sir Hildebrand did not now interrupt her progress, he merely said,— ff You have not diminished my hope-, lady ; I know that your sex esteem coyness a virtue, and often constrain,yourselves, from regard for that idea, to give a refusal, where your hearts are panting to confessa compliance. Now I am become a lover, I will endea¬ vour to do credit to my profession, by adapting mvself to these liftle whimsicali¬ ties of the female mind—in a few davs, when I address you again on this subject, I doubt not that om* opinions will agree infinitely better." fi Never, Sir Hildebrand, never !" re¬ plied Eleonora. <f I tell you I do not expect fhey should do so just yet," returned Sir Hildebrand, laughing ; (i and so good night, my love¬ ly bride :" and with these words he en¬ tered the castle. Wishing to avoid every appearance of vol. ?. d following
following the steps of Sir Hildebrand, as he had gone into the castle, Eleonora changed her intention of entering it, and turned into a walk which led to the banks of the river. It was some time ere she could in any degree recover from the sur¬ prise with which the declaration of his passion had aifected her; and the reflec¬ tion of such an avowal having taken place, rested with an inexpressible heaviness up¬ on her mind. If his affection, at least such afiection as she believed him to be capable of, were placed on her, lo what difficulties, to what miseries, might it not expose her !—she had already witnessed sufficient proofs'of the positiveness of his temper, to be conscious that he could not be easily jnduced to give up a point on which his inclinations were fixed—she had also seen , how little authority his parents possessed over bim, and was therefore convinced that she could have nothing to hope fronts their interposition. The hints too, which he had thrown out, of his expectations of being
being shortly placed in a situation supenor to that in which he now stood, filled her with horror. Could it be possible that these expectations were founded on any plan which he had formed, injunous cither to the peace or existence of Sir Sigismund, or of his unhappy brother! She shudder¬ ed at the idea; and breathed a prayer to Heaven for protection from his hated love. She continued wandering in the air, in¬ sensible that the veil of evening was al¬ ready drawn over the earth, for the splen¬ dour of the rising moon rendered the hour almost a rival of the day, till she was aroused from her trance of thought by voices, which issued from behind a knot of shrubs, near the path along which she was moving. Startled by the sound, without the in¬ tention of prying into any person's se¬ crets, she stopped and listened— te Twice has he questioned you thus?" asked a voice, which she immediately knew to be that of Sir Sigismund Blunt. ?? " Ay*,"
" ???," replied another. His tonc^ Avere entirely foreign to her car, and the single monosyllable which he had uttered, was spoken in a tone between sullenness and ill-temper. Sir Sigismund spoke again — the first part of his sentence was not audible fo Eleonora—the words which she heard were •— <r You know she never did—not any child, none, none !" " I told him so," replied the other voice. Sir Sigismund spoke again, bnt in tones so low, that Eleonora could nordist inguish a word that was said. When hc became silent, hh companion merely exclaimed, in a voice of discontent—" Pshaw !" Again thcy conversed fora considerable time, and accidental words only were heard by Eleonora—she wished fp quit the spot where she stood, lest they should issue out upon her, and suspect her of being a designed listener to their discourse; but the fear of being overheard by them if she ten t u red
ventured to move, restrained her from de¬ parting. At length Sir Sigismund's un¬ known companion said— Cf Come, come, do not give way thus—let us return to the castíc —it is late." t( ? bear vvith me, bear vvith me !" re¬ plied Sir Sigismund; " for to thee alone fan I pour out the tortures of my soul." ' f Come, come/' returned the other. "Oh, Fabian!" sighed out Sir Sigis¬ mund ; and she then heard their receding steps. " Fabian !" echoed the heart of Eleo¬ nora ; c< is it in hiò breast that Sir Sigis¬ mund reposes the secrets of hi·, soul ? is it in him alone that hc places confidence — from him alone that he seeks consolation, vvhen blest with the society and affeciion of so en »aci n yr a woman as Ladv Thoma- sine ?" From various po'nts vvhich she had wit¬ nessed in Sir Sigismund's conduct, she was convinced lhat there was some mystery which enveloped his character— still bhe be¬ ii Ü lieve
lieved him amiable, but unhappy ; and he therefore shared her warmest pity. When the steps of Sir Sigismund and his companion were no longer audible, she turned hastily into a path which led to the castle, by an opposite direction to the one which they had taken ; and having reached her chamber, she resolved to quii it no more that night.
CHAP
CHAP. III. " By this, the northern waggoner had set His sevenfold teme behind the stedfast star, That was in Ocean waves yet never wet, But firme is fixt, and sen de t h light from far To all that İn the wide deep wandering are : And cheerful Chanticlere, with his note shrill, Had warned once, that Phcebus' fiery carre In haste was climbing up the eastern hill j Full envious that Night so long· his room did fill." Spencer. " Mark where yon ruin frowns upon the steep, The giant spectre of dt parted power ! Within those shadowy walls, and silent chambers, Have stalk'd the crimes of days long past."
The first intelligence which Eleonora re¬ ceived, on rising in the morning, was, n 4 that
thai ihc messenger who bad been sent to Framlingham (Jab t le, with íhe tidings of Saint Etheibert's unexpected return, was come back. By him Sir Sigismund had re¬ ceived a most pressing entreaty from Lord Henry Fitzroy, for himself, and his family, immediately to make their promised visit to Framlingham Castle; urging, thai as they liad agreed shortly to visit him, hc wished them to habién the period of their setting out, in compliance vvith his impatience to behold Saint Ethelbert, vvho would of course accompany them into Suffolk ; and alledging that he was detained by matters of importance, from bearing in person those congratulations on his prrsrrvniion to his unric, wliich he wished to render him. Enclosed in the epistle which contained this invitation, it wns observed that Sir SigUmund had received from Lord Henry a second lei 1er, of whieh fhe contents ap¬ peared grciliv to interest his feelings; and havim' n^ain and auain perused it, hc de¬ clared his intention of complying with Lord
Lord ritzrov's request; and the third day from the present was accordingly fixed up¬ ou, for the commencement of their jour¬ nev towards Fram lino ham Castic. ìluiìì'; permitfed ίο the perusal of Lady Limit that letter oí Lord Henry's which spoke solc -ίν of Saint Ethelbert, and the pleasure which he anticipated from their visit, Sir Sigismund put it into the hand of Eleonora, uho, however free her heart might be from \anitv, síül read with satis- fit tion the handsome and flattering terms in which he had included her in his in¬ vitation. The only reluctance which she experienced at the idea of qui í ting her prebent abode, was lest any communica¬ tion relative to the fate ofher beloved fa¬ ther should be forwarded to it by Cyprian, and that, by her absence, she might ex¬ perience so considerable a delay in its re¬ ceipt, as to render it of little value at the time it might reach her. But this objec¬ tion Sir Sigismund over-ruled, by promis¬ ing to leave it in strict charge to one of d 5 his
his domestics, immediately to dispatch af¬ ter them a courier, with any packet which might arrive for her. He lamented that she was unacquainted where to address Cyprian, as in such case he might have been directed whither to send her his let¬ ters of information : as she had not this knowledge, the plan vvhich he had pro¬ posed was the only one which could be adopted. When the morning destined for their setting out arrived, the twilight had yet scarcely peeped from the eastern skv, ere all was hustle and preparation in Castle Gower. The steps of the domestics pas¬ sing backwards and forwards in the gal¬ leries, awakened Eleonora ; and it was an interruption which she did not lament, for dreams of an unpleasant nature had haunt¬ ed her pillow during the whole of the night, and she felt it a relief to raise her¬ self upon her couch, and fo reflect that the evils with which they had terrified her senses, had been but imaginary ones. But from
from these fancied evils her thoughts roved to the contemplation of real mi¬ series : amidst these, the undecided fate of her suffering father sfood foremost to her ? iew—next appeared the horrid declara¬ tion, vvhich the savage and impetuous Sir Hildebrand had made to her of his affec¬ tion— ft Wliere, where," she exclaimed, {i is now that being, who once promised me his eternal love and protection ! ? that he were novv here, to rescue-me from the terrifying purpose of Sir Hildebrand ! Can it be that he is ignorant of my residence, or of my fate ; or that he is withheld from consoling me, if not by his presence, at least by that signal of his truth, which he taught me to expect from him ?" In these reflections she emploved her mind, till Gillian appeared to assist her in rising. A very short time served to equip her ; and descending into the castle hall, she was surprised by fhe splendid preparations for their journey, which she beheld from its windows in the court-) ard. n (i The
The only vehicle which she had ever seen, was the one which had borne her la¬ mented father to his eaptivify ; and it had been one without a pretension to any quality htit that of use. A sumptuous car¬ riage, richly painted, and wifh seats of velvet, now met her eye ; nnd the mag¬ nificence of the trappings, which appeared in themselves almost a sufficient burden for the horses which vvere destined to draw it, was equally novel to-her observation. Numerous horses were also preparing for tbe domestics of both sexcc ; and she like¬ wise saw several men in a distinct liverv, who were to act as thejr guards upon the road, preparing their animals at some dis¬ tance from these, near the stables. .Sir Si ¿ismur- d and Lady Blunt now ap¬ pearing, the signal for departure was given. The sumptuous vehicle was ac¬ cordingly drawn forth, and Lady Thoma¬ sine and Eleonora having ascended into it, were followed hv Saint Ethelbert nnd Sir Sigismund. Every moment until the horses *¿ were
were prnt into mofion, did Eleonora dread to behold Sir -Hildebrand appear as their companion; but her expectations were agreeably deceived ; and in fhe course of their journey she received still more satis¬ factory information, by learn in;-;· that if was not his intention to follow them to Framlingham Castle, till the expiration of another week. Their progress was slow; and fhe va¬ riety of scenes through which fhev ρ :s- sed, would have afforded infinite delight to a mind more at case than was that of Eleonora, Even now she behekl them with considerable admiration, and derived something like a soothing composure from the still beauties of the varying landscape. On the second night of their journey, tliey rested at a nunnery, of which a cer¬ tain portion was set apart for the recep¬ tion of travellers. When Eleonora retired fo her bed; she found that the chamber as· figned to her use had no contiguous one for
for that of Gillian ; and she accordingly directed her toleave the lamp burning up¬ on the hearth. Fatigued with travelling, Eleonora soon sunk into the lap of sleep. In the middle of the nightshe was suddenlv awakened by ihe creaking of her chamber door: she recol¬ lected that it had not been locked, for &he had entered her bed before Gillian had quitted her, and thus it had been left un¬ secured. She instantly started up, and drew aside the curtain—she perceived the door mov¬ ing slowly back on ¡ts hinges, and the next moment, to her great surprise, she beheld the hermit Agatha. Uncertain whether to believe it really the human being whose likeness appeared before her, or to suppose it a phantom which had assumed her shape and countenance, Eleonora was on the point of uttering nn exclamation of alarm ; but, at the instant that she was preparing to do so, Agatha stepped
stepped hastily to the side of her bed, and said—** llubh ! speak not—for Heaven*« sake bc silent !" " Arc you really Agatha ? only tell me whether you are indeed Agatha herself r " with difliculty breathed forth Eleonora. Tiie hormi I placetl her hand upon that of Eleonora, to convince her of her sub¬ stantiality, and said—■** Yes, my dear child. I am indeed Agatha, and your sincere friend.** ;i What cau bring you to this place, and ai thin hoar of the night ?" enquired Eleo¬ nora. " My regard for you," replied Agatha. i4 I lo\e you tenderly, and I would not for ihe world forfeit your esteem. 1 fear¬ ed that you might consider me to have ne¬ glected you, in not having performed mv promise of coming to enquire after the Lady Magdalene whilst she lived, or f*> console you for her loss after her decease. Ifl omitted to perform towards you those offices of friendship, it was not that you were
64 ΤΙΤΕ UNKNOWN. were during that interval forgotten by me ; no, Eleonora, my hours were then em¬ ploved upon your interests." " Upon mine !" repealed the astonished Eleonóra. " As I say/* returned Agni ha, te I doubt not that I surprise yon—you know that my ways have always appeared more or less en¬ igmatical—perhaps that appearance may in¬ crease—there is, however, rest v*-ured, no mvsferv in the friendship which I bear you. You are at present deprived of the protec¬ tion of an amiable faiher—during his se¬ paration from you, I will, as far as lies in ??? ability, supply to you his loss. ]>y this explanation, Ì have made my peace with you, which I feared rny apparent ne¬ glect might have broken—this clone, fare¬ well, and Heaven bless you, Eleonora !" and having said this, she was departing. " ? stay, I entreat you stay," cried Eleonora. * f I cannot," replied Agatha ; c< we might be surprised together, and that must not be;
be ; nor, as you value my friendship, re¬ late to any one this nocturnal visit—my purpose in making it was to tell you¿ ihat amidst whatever trials or afflictions may assail you, you will have a firm, and! trust nn efficacious friend, in Agatha—I have done so, and now farewell." As she spoke th^se words, she darted out of the chamber; and Eleonora heard her turn the lock of the door, in order to pre¬ vent her from following herv Astonishment was for a considerable time the only feeling of which the mind of Eleonora was capable—"'Whence could the hermit Agatha bave come ? bv what means have gained a knowledge of her lodging tliat night at the minnerv ? how have procured admittance to her chamber? and in what manner have been engaged in her interests, at the time she had in vain expected to ??? her at Worcester Castle ? M These were all irysteries, alike incompre¬ hensible. To her surprise, at length suc¬ ceeded a feeling ofa gentler nature, which partook
partook more of happinens than mott sensa¬ tions to which she had lately been accus¬ tomed. It arose from the impressive as¬ surance wht'-h Agatha had given her of her friendship, and the ability of which she had appeared to know herself possessed, of rendering that friendship of essential service to her, mystic as it seemed, that the recluse should be gifted with such a power. And Eleonora would probably have been tempted to believe Agatha's ap¬ pearing to her that night, and the words in which she had addressed her, as the effect of one of those temporary derangements of faculty, under which many causes had given her reason to believe that she laboured, had not this idea been confuted by the de« claration which she had ju^t made, that— " she was sensible of her ways having ever appeared to be more or less enigmati¬ cal, and that perhaps that appearance might increase ; but that there was no mystery in the friendship which she bore her." The
Xhe daughter of Latimer slept no more that night. At an early hour in the morn¬ ing she arose and dressed herself, and glad¬ ly would have quitted her chamber» and have endeavoured to dissipate thought by wandering in the air; but her inability to unlock the door of her apartment ren¬ dered her wish impracticable. At length Gillian came to liberate her from her captivity. On entering the cham¬ ber she merely exclaimed— " Well, I am sure I could almost have sworn that I did not lock the door upon you last night, after I had put you to bed, my Lady ; but I find I did though, for all that. I am so ßustned with aU this travelling, and pedes¬ trian exercise, as Joel calls riding on horse¬ back, that I really believe I am a little touched sometimes, for my part." And as Eleonora made no reply, the subject was not continued. Eleonora now descended into the lower apartments of th * nunnery. The nuns she saw not ; but ofthe boarders who attended upon
upon the travellers, she entertained the greatest wish to enquire whether any one, corresponding with the description of Aga¬ tha, had that nigbt lodged there ? but bhe was withheld from making the enquiry, by the positive manner in which the recluse had enjoined her not to let their meeting be known. Having partaken of the breakfast pre¬ pared for them, the travellers again set forward. The air was ci/sily, t\csky cloudy, and the weather by no means so plea¬ sant, as it had been on t.'.e two former days of their journey. Sir Sigismund did not join the party in the carriage, but mounted his horse, which had been hither¬ to led for him by one of his servants. When they had travelled for nearly three hours, the principal part of their road hav¬ ing lain over wild heaths, which stretched themselves almost as fjra» fhe eye could rove, thev descried what appeared a state¬ ly edifice, shrouded amongst a knot of trees, that prevented any of its features from
from bcin*r dKtincllv i ren. As they ap¬ proached nearer t'^ i^, Eleonora discovered if to be the ?? |? ? ive remains of what had once been a building of a monastic struc~ turc. She enquired if its hifo«'v vvere known ? and was informed bv L:\lv l^ur.t thvt it had been n monastery, whicli írd fidlen un¬ dor the displeasure ofkin«? c îe:>hen ; that it had hren by him deprived of it> pri- xileges; ar«d ::s tbe land upon which it immediatelv slotul h.ui not sínre that time been nppropi kited ? any posse^or» the edifice had 1??? sufioicd to fall into na¬ tural decay. The appearance of tlte ruin was of the most picturesque kind. The ivy had crept unmolested up its venerable walh, till having reached their summit, its luxuriant branches fell back in the most graceful shapes upon the parent stem, appearing to protect it with their silken leaves. The broken pillars of the refectorv, peeping from amongst fhe trees, formed a vista of the
the mobt romantic kind, leading into the interior of the pile ; and not least attrac¬ tive were the dilapidated window-frames, covered as it were with a net-work of the thickly-spreading bryony. As they were passing along the side of the gentle acclivity, on which this build¬ ing reared iis ruinous head, rain began to fall ; and Eleonora, who felt the most ar¬ dent desire to wander for a short time amidst those fragments of mouldering gran¬ deur, which had so forcibly struck her observation with their beauty, was encou¬ raged by the accident of the weather to enquire, whether, as their carriage was ???? to the air, it would not be advise¬ able to seek shelter amongst the walls of ihe old monastery, till the shower should have subsided ? The rain increased rapidly, to a violence which Eleonora had not herself expected, und Lody Blunt, and Saint Ethelbert, im¬ mediately coalesced with her in opinion, and alighted from the vehicle. They found the
the entrance into *.·.< ruins < onsiderably obstructed, by several fragments of the massive walls which had fallen amidst the underwood, and almost choked up the passage to such parts as were in a more en· tire condition. From most of the chambers the roofs were entirely gone, and the walls in many places perforated by the weather, and dis¬ coloured by the damps. In one of them, however» a tolerable shelter was found ; nnd here, in some niches which presented themselves at one of its extremities, Lady Blunt and the holy father sought repose, after the fatigue they had experienced in passing over the loose stones which were scattered along the approach to it, Eleonora wandered about at a distance from her companions ; and raising her eye« to a grand archway, which almost appear* ed to totter under the weight of the air, and to frown destruction on those beneath, she insensibly exclaimed aloud-^" How ¿ubiime and awfui !" iS Awful,
ÍC Aw fi l, ì.:Jeod. my Lady/' replied a voice, v hloh, on turbin« round, sîie fourni to luve been tiiat of Joel, who with Gil¬ lian had taken shelter in a cavity at its foot—Eleonora smiled, and Jvjel added·«— " But perhaps you were never here before, Ladv ?" ? Never," answered Eleonora. " Then vou don't know what a dreadful place this has the repute of being?" re¬ turned Joel. t( Indeed I do not," Eleonora said. " Kor ever heard ofthe villain that lived herc once?" continued Joel ; iC not in the time that it was inhabited by the monks, Lady, but since then, within my recollec¬ tion.*' " No indeed," returned Eleonora ; " pray who was hc ?" " lie called himself a warrener," an¬ swered Joel ; " but hc has been pretty clearly proved since to have been a mur¬ derer. They say, that in the second cham¬ ber of that tower yonder/' pointing to¬ wards
wards one as he spoke, " the blood of the poor sufferer whom he murdered may be seen to this day—I never went to look for it, Heaven knows !" " Murdered here !" exclaimed Gillian ; "O pray do let us get away from this place ; for I make no doubt but the un¬ fortunate person's npptrhiiision walks a- mongst these frightful ruins." " Oh no, no ! no occasion for alarm now/* replied Joel, detaining her; "ghosts never walk till twelve o'clock at night/* " Whom isit supposed that this inhuman beitig murdered ?" asked Eleonora. "That is not known, Ladv, nor even guessed at/' said Joel ; *· bul, shame on his cowardly and cruel heart, it was a female —one whom he would have known that it was his first duty to protect, if hc had had half an ounce of man's blood in his veins. The story is told thus» Lady :— H is said, that one evening two travellers passing this way, just as the dusk of evening was coming on, were overtaken by a storm* vol. ?. ? which
which induced them to seek for shelter in these ruins. They had heard that the place was inhabited by Black Brian ------" <f Oh, mercy!" cried Gillian, " what's that ! ain't it something wicked and fright¬ ful?" « Why it was the warrener's name," re¬ plied Joel ; " Black Brian was the name he went by about the country.—The tra¬ vellers had both accidentally seen him at a village not many miles oif, and so they judged he would recognize them, and will¬ ingly let them dry themselves by his fire ; but no signs of a fire could they discover, nor could they any where find Black Brian, At length, as they were stumbling about, (for it was growing darker every minute) over the bits of wall and pillars, that lie scattered about here, they espied a light in the tower yonder, and at the same time heard a sound, something like a sigh, or a stifled shriek—was not that terrible ?" ** Oh yes, very terrible/' cried Gillian ; " pray don't tell us any more about it." ** Yes,
<r Yes, yes, I beg you will proceed,** said Eleonora, whose curiosity and interest were alike awakened by the relation. Proud of detaining Eleonora his listen¬ er, Joel continued thus :—" The travellers directly groped their way up to the se¬ cond chamber of the tower ; the first thing they beheld was a lanthorn standing on the ground, and its light just served to shew them a female struggling with Black Brian, and another fellow, who appeared to be hie accomplice in his villany. The travellers, on seeing this, called on them to desist, and spare the wretched female, when instantly Black Brian drew a pistol from his girdle, and fired it at them. Its contents, fortunately, did neither of them any injury ; bttt whilst their sight was ob¬ scured by the cloud of smoke produced by the discharge of the pistol, Black Brian, his accomplice, and the female, all disap¬ peared from the place, and carried with them the lanthorn." p. 2 <* Did
*' Did the travellers pursue them ?" ask¬ ed Eleonora. " They attempted it," answered Joel, *' but darkness, Lady, prevented their search." " Then I fear the poor female perished/* said Eleonora. " It is supposed so, Lady," returned Jbel. " The travellers immediately pro¬ ceeded to the nearest village, and brought other persons with them to assist in ex¬ amining the place, but no one could be found in it Several spots of blood were discovered on the floor of the second chamber of the tower ; but nothing fur¬ ther is known. — Black Brian has never since been heard of.*' " How long is it since this circumstance occurred ?" enquired Eleonora. " Somewhere between twenty and twen¬ ty-five years ago, Lady," replied Joel. * t, It waá when I was quite a youth/' he ad¬ ded, addressing these words particularly to Gillian. " I should
(t I should like to see this chamber," said Eleonora ; " which way can I get to it ?" " I have heard," answered Joel, " that the broken arch which you see to the left yonder, Lady, leads into a narrow pas¬ sage, at the extremity of which there is a flight of stairs up to the chamber; but you had better not venture." " ? no, pray do not venture, my dear Lady," cried Gillian. (f If you meet no harm, you may at least be frightened, Lady," said Joel. " ? no, no ! no fear of it," replied Eleonora ; *' you know you said youiself just now, that ghosts never walk till twelve o'clock at night." Without hesitation Eleonora proceeded to the passage, which she entered, and im¬ mediately discovered the stairs. These it required some caution to ascend, as they were considerably damaged by the hand of time, and also very dark, light being admitted upon them only through narrow loop-holes in the walls, which were now e 3. almost
nimost closed up by the clustering ivy. With some difficulty she gained a small apartment, in vvhich she looked round for an ascent into the second chamber, as she supposed, from the title by which Joel had distinguished it, that if must be above the one she was novv in. She could how¬ ever discover no outlet from this apart¬ ment, but the door by vvhich she had en¬ tered it, and one immediately opposite to this, from which a few steps led down into a short passage, at the end of which she perceived another door half closed. This she now concluded must be the second chamber, and proceeded dauntlessly to¬ wards it. On pushing open the door, she discovered an apartment, of which the ruinous roof still bore evidence of former sjdendour. Upon pillars of stone, which had been placed at the corners either for ornament or support, curious workman¬ ship was still visible, and the like was dis¬ cernible on many parts of the walls. From ihese Eleonora cast her eyes upon the floor,
floor, in search of the stains made by the blood of the unhappy sufferer, of whom Joet had spoken. The floor was almost generally discoloured by the green damps vvhich the dripping dews had settled upon it. Near the hearth, amidst some fragments of stone which appeared to have fallen down the chimney, she observed upon the boards a purple streak, which she supposed might be the stain of blood of vvhich bhe had beoti told. At the moment that she fixed her eyes upon it, she heard a low and hollow voice exclaim—- ff Beware / Bcxare V Excessive terror seized her ; and regard¬ less that the words conveved rather a warn- ing than a threat, and expecting to see them followed by the appearance of some dreadful murderer, she fled from the spot with all the precipitancy of which her trembling frame was capable. On reaching the starrs leading down in¬ to the narrow passage, fheir ruinous sfafe obliged her to slacken her pace ; for an instant she listened— rdl was perfectly still e 4 und
and she began to descend. When she had arrived near the bottom, a distant hum, as of persons in conversation, struck her ear. She at first imagined it to be the voices of some ofher own companions; but having gone down a couple more steps, the sounds became more distinct, and appeared to pro¬ ceed from some spot immediately behind her; she concluded that there must besóme one following her, and instinctively turn¬ ed round her head ; but no one was to be ????, and still the voices were audible. A second time she cast around her eyes, and thc\ fell on a narrow chink in the wall, whuh had been formed by the giving way of one < f f the stairs. Through this chasm it was now evident fhat the sound proceeded ; and on her de^ scenting one more step, the chink was brought directly opposite to her eye. She int lined her head towards it, and to her utter astonishment, beheld through it a ru- ber of men, to the amount she sup¬ posed of fifty, in coarse and rough dresses ; some
some seared upon the ground, others ly¬ ing extended upon it, and still more lean¬ ing against the walls : what she could dis¬ tinguish of the scenery, looked like ? rough hewn cave or cell, into which the light appeared to be admitted from the top. Her alarm was now excited, not alone for herself, but for her companions. She could have no doubt in pronouncing the assembly which she beheld a troop of ban¬ ditti, who, if they discovered any wanderers. near their haunt, would not hesitate to sa¬ crifice them to their fears and their ava¬ rice. To hasten and inform them of their dan¬ ger was now her only idea ; and she was withdrawing her eye from the chasm, whens it fell upon an object which gave an eir- tire turn to her feelings. It rested on the countenance ofa man whom she observed seated at a table in the midst of the assem¬ bly, and who at that instant raising, his. head from a roll of parchment which he¬ fi 5s hekt
held in his hand, discovered to her the features of her mysterious acquaintance of the wood. Scarcely had she recognized him, ere the sounds of—" Lady Eleonora ! Lady Eleonora! where are you, Lady Eleo¬ noras" burst upon her ear from various parts of the ruins ; and she immediately ran to meet those who were in pursuit of her. The first person whom she encoun¬ tered was Joel—"Oh Lady," he said, " you are entreated to return directly to the car¬ riage^—Sir Sigismund is not weli, and begs you will not delay." Eleonora hastened towards the path which led to it—rain was still falling, but its violence had abated. Before she had reached the vehicle, she overtook Lady Blunt and Saint Ethelbert— fi What, my dear Madam," sbe said, addressing the for¬ mer, " is the matter with Sir Sigismund ?" " Nothmg, ray love, but what, I trust, will mon pass off again," replied Lady Blunt, *ƒ Whatever is gloomy in its ap¬ pearance,
pearance, regularly depresses his weak: spirits. The sight of these ruins has thus. affected him ; and he has sent to beg that we will instantly quit them, and endeavour to find shelter in some place more pleasant to his feelings." " I believe it will not be necessary for us to seek one," said Saint Ethelbert; " the sun is beginning to triumph over the rain." When they had reached the carriage* they found Sir Sigismund seated 'm it» with his face rested on fhe palm of hie. hand, as it were to secure him from be¬ holding the mouldering pile which hk companions had just quitted. Silence for some time prevailed ; Sir Si¬ gismund broke it— " Thank Heaven," he said, ír that we have left that melancholy spot !" " You should endeavour, my son," re¬ plied Saint Ethelbert, (< to conquer thi; nervous indisposition which occasionally.· ?? aitai Lì,
attacks you. Men of evil lives may feci their spirits harrassed by the sight of gloomy objects, the remorse of their con¬ science aksling fo darken every scene which they contemplate. A man of your benevolent turn of mind cannot be ac¬ quainted with such a foe to his peace." Sir Sigismund heaved ι deep sigh. f4 What is there more to create a depres¬ sion of spirits in a ruin, than in a perfect edifice?" remarked the holy father; " the materials which compose them both have once been fhe same — habitation is the only difierence between them ; and í should suppose that the miud of melancholy would rather fear to enter a spot which is in¬ habited, than one which is deserted ; the residers in the former may chance to prove his enemies, the latter possesses none to assail him, 1 hope," hc added, after a ????, '* fhat you do not admit the foolish and weak ideas which the vulgar encourage, of su pernat ural beings resoilin;; to those 1} spots
-spots which earthly inhabitants have quit¬ ted r" Sir Sigismund did not reply, but ap¬ peared uneasy and agitated. " For my own part, I regard those pre¬ judices so little," Saint Ethelbert went on saying, " that I one night, when T was be¬ nighted on the road in Spain, slept in a ruin, of the nature of the one we have just passed, where the ghost ofa lady who had been murdered within its walls, was reported to wander. Vau what cause had I for alarm on that account ?■—she could bear mc no malice— í was not her mur¬ derer— ?? might indeed have felt some cause to tremble in my situation." " The servants have been telling me," said Eleonora, i( that there is a story of the murder of a lady connected with these ruins, and that------ -" " For the love of Heaven," exclaimed Sir Sigismund, interrupting her, <( for¬ bear to relate these horrid tales, or you will
will drive me from melancholy into mad¬ ness !" " Yes, pray desist/' said Lady Blunt ; " I am sure you would not, either of you, willingly cause Sir Sigismund an uncom¬ fortable sensation ; and narratives of this kind always fill his mind with a despond¬ ency, which for hours, and not unfre¬ quently for days, after he has heard them, consumes his spirits and his peace—it is a malady which deserves our pity and our care." Sir Sigismund took a hand of his wife in his, and pressed it affectionately, as if to thank her for the anxiety which she dis¬ played for his happiness. Throughout the remainder of the day an almost uninterrupted silence prevailed. Gloom was the characteristic expression of Eleonora's companions ; and in her own breast this single idea had place— " Can it be possible that the man to. whom my heart is given, can be a rob¬ ber—
ber —a member of a gang of banditti î — yet what else can I suppose hira, from the situation in which ? have this day beheld him ? A robber !—Oh dreadful thought !— Heaven! Heaven forbid it!" she silently prayed.
CHAP.
CHAP. I\\ «' I'ow revVend is the face of this tail pile, Whose ancient pillars rear iheir nutLL·· Ik^Jí, To bear aloft its areh'd atu! \mnú i«>us mof, By its own weight made Medt'ast aad immoveable l' CüXCDEVE.
** Ay, my mother, With all my heart, I thauk thec for my father!" ΚίΝί! JOUK. Towauds the close of the day, as our tra¬ vellers were ascending a sleep hill, the majestic features of Framlingham Castle burst upon their sight. First arose to their view its embattled towers, and beneath these were seen the shadowy groves which filled
filled its beautiful and extensive park, and which, at the distance from whence ihey were viewed, appeared to bc planted im¬ mediately around its walls, of which they suffered but a partial glimpse to be caught. Hut before we proceed in our tale» it may be necessary to say a few words of an edifice, which was at that period accounted the most magniJicent structure in the king¬ dom, and which at this day affords one of the most splendid monuments of antiquity which England can boast. Tradition asserts Framlingham Castle to have bern originally built by one of the Saxon kings, during the time of the hep¬ tarchy. From this period ib possessors were various, and oflen changing, till the conquest of England by William, iHikc of Normandy ; and this prime resolved to renin it as a royal possession, not k&s be¬ cause it was a spot of material assistance to him in restraining the oppressed English in that part of the kingdom, within the bounds of their obedience, than lhe more effectually
eftectuaUy to defend it against the Danes» who claimed it as theirs, and who made frequent invasions upon the coast near which it stood. In this particular he was followed by his son William Rufus. But his third son, Henry the First, after he had been some time seated on the throne, hav¬ iug brought the English into greater sub¬ jection, and no longer apprehending the Danes, granted the castle and manor to Sir Roger Bigod. After this assignment, the castle of Fram¬ lingham was for nearly four centuries sometimes in the possession of the prince» sometimes in that of the subject, accord¬ ing as accident, interest, or favour, direct¬ ed. Previously to the reign of Henry the Seventh, the Dukes of N'orfolk had lor several generations held it in possession, till by him deprived ofit and of their title. But his successor, Henry the Eighth, re¬ stored to them their honours, by creating the Earl of Surry Duke of Norfolk, and returning to him the castle of Främling- ham.
ham, where he, at an advanced age, died, and was succeeded by his son Thomas ; which nobleman was not onlv a most steal- ous Homan Catholic, and a man possessed of an immense revenue, but also of great strength in his alliances. The prejudices of Ilenry the Eighth were extremely strong ; and none basked more luxuriantly în the sunshine of his favour than the family of the Howards. Already as High-steward of England» he had presided at the trial of the injured Anna Bolcyn, in the great hall of the Tower ; and in the same quality he had sat as principal at the arraignment of the Lord Dacres for high treason. Upon the sur¬ render of Charles Brandon, Duke of Suf¬ folk» by the partiality of the king he had been appointed Earl-Marshal of England ; and almost immediately after, Viceroy of Ireland had been added to his dignities. To Henry Howard, Earl of Sum, the Dukc*s eldest son, had also been extended many flattering marks of the king's par¬ tial! rv.
tiality. The Duchess-Dowager of Norfolk had been invited to become ihegodmoiher of the Princess El·zabeth ; and the pros¬ perity ofthe Howards was the envy of the realm. Only one legitimate son. Edward, had been the fruit of Henry's various marriages. The mother of this prince was Jane Sey¬ mour, whose own existence was forfeited by giving life to her child ; and to whom alone, of all his queens, Henry paid the tribute of lamentation for her death, on account of her having borne him a son. It was the secret wish of the king**» heart to li\e till hh son Edward should have gain¬ ed the age of manhood, and become compe¬ tent fo assert his own right of succession to his fathers throne. In order, if possible, to present all disputes to his crown, he had already, pursuant to an act of parliament, passedin the couise of his reign, bequeath¬ ed it to his son Edward, and his heirs, and in tase of their default, to the Princesses ?ry and Elizabeth, his daughters: but stiU
still dreading that if his death should take place whikt his son were yet a minor, he inight, like the u n f minate Edward the Filth, be deprived of his throne; and in these his apprehemions the greatness of the Howards appearing to him a power most capable of contending wiih the prince, as wcl* «si aci ount of their wealth as their strong ?!????? v*ith all the heads of the Popîvfi party; and above all, the plea they might urge of their being de¬ scendants of KJwartl lhe First ; in a fit of .sickness with which he tv\i4 seized, sup¬ posing his end to be fast approaching, and considering that he had but perhaps a very short time remaining to him in which to perform a material service to his son, he commanded the Duke of Norfolk, and his son the Earl of Surry, to be instantly ap¬ prehended, and thrown into the Tower. Upon their arraignment he accused them both of high treason. Against the Duke his charges were of the most futile and in¬ valid nature. Stilt he remained condemn¬ ed
ed to perpetual imprisonment ; nor could the letters of concession, and intreaty to be heard in person, of which he addressed several to his sovereign, procure him his restoration to liberty. Against the Earl of Surry he alledged his having quartered in his scutcheon the arms of Edward the Confessor, king of the realm of England. The bearing was justified by the opinion of the heralds, but still the Earl was not released. His destruction having been predetermined, scandalous and false witnesses appeared against him, on other charges of treason, and he was con¬ demned to lose his head ; which sentence was put into effect on the day of his con¬ demnation. And it is probable, that had not the king himself been called upon to pay the debt of nature, in little more than a week after the Earl's execution, that the Duke would hav e shared his untimely fate. He was left in prison, not to mourn any action which concerned his own conduct; for he had been
been faithful, in word and deed, to a mo¬ narch who had not known how to value his services ; but to lament the hard fate of a noble and excellent son, whose prin¬ ciples of honour had been the same as his own to his king, and whose merits had met even a more severe requital. In consequence of the Duke's attainder, for a special bill was passed to that effect in the parliament then sitting, the castle and manor of Framlingham became for¬ feited to the king, who regulated its future disposal, by a codicil in his own hand¬ writing to his testament. In the first in¬ stance, he devised it in the regular line of inheritance to his son Edward, and in the event of his decease without male heirs, to his illegitimate son, Henry Fitzroy. The royal Edward died at the youthful age of sixteen ; and Lord Henry Fitzroy became the possessor of Framlingham Cas¬ tle and its domains. We have already said that the mother of Lord
Lord Fitzroy was Lady Elizabeth Talboyse; but it here becomes us to add a few parti¬ culars relative to them both, as they are in¬ timately connected with the events con¬ tained in the future pages of this history. The disposition of Henry the Eighth was gay and licentious. Every woman of beauty had attractions for his heart, in his pur¬ suit of which he seldom suifered the voice of reason to regulate his conduct. In a visit to the continent, the king had learnt the trick of masquerading, and was become so enamoured of the diversion, that, on his return to England, it was his most favourite amusement to enter assem¬ blies, held at the houses of anv of the no- bility, clad in a fantastic garb, to disguise his person, and with his face masked, at¬ tended by a few of his select courtiers, habited in a similar manner—a fashion of dress which gave him the advantage of hearing such females as pleased his eye, and with whom he entered into conversa¬ tion,
tion, express themselves with Jess restraint than thev would have done had they known his quali t)-. At an entertainment of this nature, to which the greater part of the guests had been invited to come dressed in masking habits, out of compliment to the taste of the king, Henrv became at the same mo- mcnt acquainted and enamoured with a lovely shepherdess, whom he learnt to be a ladv named Elizabeth Talbovse, the wi- dow of Sir Gilbert Talbovse, a Kentish knight. Lady Talboyse, although a widow, was only in her twenty-third year, and was universally allowed to be one of the finest women of the age. She was tall, and her symmetry was of the most excellent and graceful kind. Her eyes were of the dark¬ est black ; and sparkling with the lustre of a diamond, gave animation to a counte¬ nance composed of the most harmóniou« features. Her mind was equaUy accom- '-ol. ?. r pl bh ed
pushed by education, as was her person by the ornamenting hand of nature ; and she was, beyond dispute, on every account, one of the most fascinating females in the kingdom. The passion with which she had inspired lhe king was quickly revealed to her, and she received the first knowledge of it with that scorn and repugnance which every woman who is raised above a certain de¬ gree in society, feels for the idea of an il¬ licit affection, even if the professor of such a passion be seated on a throne. To these just principles Lady Elizabeth for a long time continued firm, but at length the attentions, the presents, and the flatteries of the king, intoxicated her senses, and she fell into the snare of great¬ ness which her paramour had prepared for her undoing. She was tempted to take possession of an elegant'mansion at Blacka¬ mor in Essex, prepared with the utmost splendor for her reception ; and here she was
was beguiled of that most valuable treasure which the female heart can nourish—the consciousness of its own innocence. Her fall being once accomplished, her thoughts rested solely on her seducer, and she apprehended nothing so much as the loss of his afiection-—a period which the known inconstant temper of Henry caused her to dread. In the course of a few months after her acquaintance with her royal lover had commenced, Lady Talboyse gave signs of becoming a mother, and at the due period produced a son. His father acknowledged him in the most affectionate manner, and having directed him to be christened Hen¬ ry, commanded that he should bear the name of Fitzroy, as an evidence that hc did not wish to conceal his origin. With delight Lady Talboyse witnessed the undisguised affection which Henry tes tified for his son ; but alas ! a second ob servation crept with it into her heart, whkh was, that the king appeared to have made f 2 a trans-
a transfer, and not an increase of his love —her son was caressed, and she was ne¬ glected and almost forgotten. It was now her turn to have recourse to those arts to retain his affection, which he had ori¬ ginally practised to win her love; but they were wholiy inefficacious. The charm which she had once possessed for his senses, bad either been eclipsed by rival beauties, or had faded under the influence of posses¬ sion; and Lady Talboyse found herself no longer regarded by her royal paramour. Although the king did not now approach Lady Elizabeth as a lover, he was still con¬ stant in his visits fo Blackamor, whither his daily growing love for his son, Fitzroy, brought him ; and his presence now ne vet- failed to communicate the most poignant grief to the mother of the more favoured child, as it ever afforded her a fresh in¬ stance that her power was at an end. Equally averse to the idea of removing his child from the protection of its mo¬ ther, as disliking to be invariably greeted by
by her on his visits to İt, with those tigh< and frowns of mingled regret and upbraid¬ ing of vvhtch he knew himself to be but too deserving, it was his desire, if possible, lo devise some plati which might restore her again to composure of mind, aiul a more patient enduring of his change of feeling towards her. After having maturely weighed the mat¬ ter within himself, hc believed no step ι » promise so great ellicacy in producing thi* revolution, as that of inducing Lady Tal¬ boyse to «İve her hand in marriage to some man of rank and honour, as whose bride she wonld appear in a new character to the world, in which he was certain, from his influence a:?d authority, of procuring her a reception in every respect such as the nutbt approve. The man whom the king had selected for her second husband, and with whom he had already held frequent conversations on the subject, was Sir Sigismund Blunt, This young knight was of the same age of f 3 ladv
Lady Elizabeth herself, and he was aiso her very distant relative ; an elder brother and herself hnd been the onl) children of their father, Sir John Blunt, who had been many years numbered with the tîcad. His son, Ethelbert, had retired from the ac¬ tive dutiesof life to the service of Heaven, in the monastery of Saint John of Glaston- hurv : bv his holv office he was conse- quentiy prevented from bearing the title ; and Sigismund Blunt being the only male relative, whose origin could be traced from the parent stock, had, whilst a youth, been invested with it. The personal ??? perty of Sir John Blunt had, of course. been bequeathed to his daughter ; and the inheritance attached f ? the title was so slen¬ der, that Sir Sigismund, on becoming heir to it, gained little more than the honour of knighthood. His own circumstances were equally narre ; and his chief de¬ pendence was on the fruits of an office whit h he held about the court, to which a handsome and prepossessing exterior had originally
originally introduced him, and where his pleasing and elegant manners rendered Ijim ά favourite. To a voting man oil uated as was Sir Si- siunund, and whobe heart had vet formed r.o attachment, the private forume of Lady Talboyse, which wr.s of itself ample, ihe elegant mansion in which she resided, and which had been settled upon her by the king, and the addition of a purse of <»</.d which he promised to bestow on her, were tempting considerations ; they won his absent to the king's proposal ; and nothing but the adjunction of Lady Talboyse her¬ bclf in their plan was wanting to its ac¬ complishment. Having proceeded thus far in the ar¬ rangement of ahhirs, the king, using the utmost delicacy i u the disclosure of his ideas, laid them open to the consideration of Lady Elizabeth. She 14tcned with sur¬ prise tt* the project wht* h he had lormed for hn* future !Le. Alternate!) !. r feel¬ ings were wounded aud g'-atmed by his t I plan
plan—alternately his words raised and de¬ pressed her spirits. Her mind was thrown into a tumult of sensation—to be any thing but his, was to suíier a fall in worldly greatness—to become an honourable wife, after her late descent from virtue, was an undoubted rise in the scale of fame and re¬ putation—" Oh, my Henry," she exclaim¬ ed, " how incredible is the sound* which communicates to my ear your wish for me to bestow my affections on another ! Oh my Henry ! my king ! my------" A flood of tears choaked her utterance, and drown¬ ed the more tender epithet which would have followed : at length she gained her composure sufficiently to say— " Do with me as vou will—vou are the director of ír.v fate—my union will not be unattended at least by one happy reflection, that I have obeyed him whom I best love, in for¬ ming it." The marriage accordingly took place— the king's promises were performed ; and Sir
Sir Sigismund was made the joint protec¬ tor, with his mother, of the young Lord! Henry. But this was a protection which he was doomed only for a short time to enjoy. The health and spirits of Lady Elizarbeth; grew daily worse ; and at the expiration; of about a year after her marriage witb. Sir Sigismund, she paid the debt of na¬ ture ; her death happening on a journey upon which her husband had taken her, with the hope of restoring her to con¬ valescence; and in the course of which they had visited Glastonbury, in order to bid farewell to her brother, Saint Ethel¬ bert, who had just been prevailed upon to> pass over into Spain, as confessor to a fa¬ mily of distinction, who were about ter embark for that kingdom, and which he had for several years been in the habit, of attending in thai quality. The motives of interest from which Sir. Sigismund had given his hand to Lady Elizabeth Talbovse, had been succeeded in> f ò his.
his heart by a passion of a tenderer na¬ ture : with his improved knowledge ofher, he had become warmly attached to her, and exhibited himself a most afflicted mourner for her death. In compliment equally to her memory and to her royal favourer, at whose persuasions he had be¬ eome her husband, the honours with which her remains were attended to the grave were of a princely nature ; and from the heart flowed fhe tears of the train of mour¬ ners who followed her fo her la>st earthly abode. The infant Fitzroy was still foo youn;f fo lament, or idmcst to be conscious of the loss of his parent. lic suhe :1 m> cur¬ tailment of the indulgences to which he had been accustomed ever since his birth ; and under the guardianship c f Sir Sigis¬ mund he was s'il! happy. Before Sir Sigismund had been a wi¬ dower for the time he had been a husbar.'l in his first marriage, he again entered into the state of wedlock. The lady on whom 3 1rs
his choice fell, was that Lady Blunt to whom our readers are already introduced, as the protectress of Eleonora. Herself and a younger sister were the only child¬ ren of their father, Sir Allen Gower, a man of family pride, who, mortified that no son had been born to him, to bear his name and inherit his domains, directed by his vvill, that if his elder daughter, Tho¬ masine, bore a son in wedlock, Cast ία Gower shoi immediately upon such an event, become her's for the period of her life, ?did af her death descend to her son, vvho should fake his grandfathers name of *" Gower. Provided she bore ro son, and his second daughter, Alice, weie ?? foi- tunate, the same rules were to be observed, which wouid in the similar case have ap¬ plied to her elder sister: and if neither of ihem became the mother of a male child, Castle Gowcr was to descend to a very dis¬ tant relative. Mr Allen tiower died whilst his daugh tí -? were Loth tingle, and under a¿;e. 'ilw * 'J f i rtt
first who became a wife was Alice—she gave her hand to Sir Edmund Knyvett, a knight of Norfolk ; and one only daughter was the fruit of their marriage—from the pangs of whose birth its mother never re¬ covered; and a few months after its en¬ trance into existence, she sunk into the lap. nf eternal sleep. Numerous were the suitors who now < rowded round her surviving sister. Wealth .¡lone will always command a string of dc- voices at its shrine ; but whrn it is coupled v. ith both merit and personal charms, as was the case with the Lady Thomasine f «ower. the number of course increases. After many struggles between doubt and hope having been experienced by the competitors for her hand, her choice fell on Sir Sigismund Blunt; and before the revolution of twice twelve months afterthe period of his leading her to the altar as his hride, a son blcbsed their union. Accord- in L to the will of the late Sir Allen, thev were now authorised to take possession of Castle
Castle Gower ; and Sir Sigismund disposed of the mansion and estate of Blackamor, which had become his in the right of his first wife. Lord Ilenry Fitzroy still continued a member of Sir Sigismund Blunt's family. Not less satisfied than pleased with the great attenîion which his son had received from Sir Sigismund, King Henry had made it his request to the second Lady Blunt, to continue him a member of their house during the years of his boyhood—a request to which Lady Blunt had most readily as¬ sented, and fulfilled towards him in every respect a mothers part. At the age of six the young Henry was by his father publicly knighted, and creat¬ ed Earl of Nottingham. To this dignity quickly succeeded that of Duke of Rich¬ mond ; and a sumptuous establishment of his own was then given to him, by the in¬ dulgent monarch from whom he had re¬ ceived his existence. In his tenth year, accordingly, he ceased to be a fixed inhabi¬ tant
tant at Castle Gower; but it was with de¬ light fhat hc frequently revisited the scenes of his boyish sporfs, and with gratitude thnt hc ever entered the presence of the fobierers of his childhood ; but whilst hc regarded them with a feeling honourable to his heart, the most joy-inspiring thought of which his kouI was capable, wasto re¬ flect that he wns the con, although but the illegitimate c/ >n, ofa king. At fifteen th«: understanding of Fitzroy wnb superior f ? that of most youths of his age, as was likewise the progress which he had made in Eteraturr and science. His mind way posseted cf many good antl ex¬ cellent qualities ; and it cannot excite sur¬ prise, that having from hin very infancy been fed with the adulation of all who ap¬ proached him, his wishes anticipated by the indulgence of his rovai father, and homage prúd to all his steps by every courtier, in imitation of fhe king's ex¬ ample, hh mind simuld have been tainted vriîh pride, «nd that he should have for¬ med
mcd a more extravagant opinion of his own rights and merits, than any other man of equal mental abilities, differently edu¬ cated, would have done. The death of his father was severely felt by him. He dreaded that the loss of his countenance might expose htm to a pri* vation of homage and respect, from many who hmi been swayed by no other motive in paying ihem to him than that of curry¬ ing favour with the king. Thh appre¬ hension, so wounding to his feeling, he considered no step so well calculated to dissipate ?? that of attaching himself vvurn- !y to the interests of hh nominal brother, the new monarch, whom he knew to have been enjoined by their father to shew hirn every courtesy on account of their con* sanguinity ; and it is probable, that had the young king been left to the exercise of his own inclinations, it would have had sway with him, and that in him Lord Hen¬ ry would luve fonná a strenuous favourer. But
But Lord Seymour, the king's uncle, who had been created* protector, and who was anxious to profit by the situation in which he was placed, for inclining his nephew to favour the reformation, dreading lest, if an intimacy grew between him and Lord Fitzroy, hc might instil into his mind any prejudices in favour ofthe Romish church, of which Lord Henry was a zealous mem¬ ber, and thm by any means counter¬ act the plans hc was agitatine, or weak¬ en their progress, used effective means for keeping him at a distance from the k¡l'.£. The young Edward, however, resolved fo shew his natural brother thn he was not in himself unmindful of the charge which he had received from their father, wrote immediately to Lord Fitzroy, in¬ foi ming him that he did not intend to make Framlingham Castle a residence of his own, and requested that he would ac¬ cept it from him whilst living, as a proof. of
of his not forgetting that they were the sons of the same parent. Fitzroy was greatly affected by this mark of brotherly regard on the part of the king; and considering a ready acceptance of his offer as fhe most positive means of displaying his true ideas of the favour con¬ ferred on him, he returned an answer to that effect to the king, saying, that he should ever retain a grateful sense of the worthy imitator ofa valued father's ac¬ tions, to whom he owed it. A few weeks previous to the death of Henry the Eighth had been passed by his daughter, the Princess Mary, at Framling¬ ham Castle. The place had pleased her ;- and anxious to possess it as a residence, she heard with indignation that her brother, Edward, had bestowed it on Henry Fite- roy. In vain did she attempt to prevail on him to retract the gift which he had made; and finding her persuasions inef¬ fectual, sbe wrote a haughty letter, the overflowing of her proud and tyrannical heart*
heart, to Lord Henry, demanding of him to yield her up the castle for a certain number of years. Lord Fitzroy was not more indignant at the haughty style in which she had addressed him, than surprised at the audacity of her request. From her brother Edward, and the Princess Elizabeth, he had ever ex¬ perienced the greatest courtesy of man¬ ners: the conduct of Mary towards him had ever been the reverse of friendly and polite. To so great a degree had she even carried her dislike, that when it had once been necessary for him to salute her with his cap in passing, she had turned from him with such open marks of disgust, that an ancient lady of the court, vvho was standing by her side, had reminded her ofthe impropriety ofher conduct, by say¬ ing— " Your Highness forgets that the Lord Fitzroy is your father's son." To which she replied— if I remember that he is my father's bastard," This illiberal observation had already reached
reached the ears of Lord Fitzroy, who judging the present an apt moment for acquainting her that he had a knowledge of it, wrote thus in reply ι —
" Henhy Fitzroy greets Mary, Princess of England. He acquaints her, that he would sooner part with life than a residence rendered doubly dear to him, as the joint donation of an estimable fa¬ ther and a beloved brother. Were he in¬ clined to resign it, he should conceive it an insult to her dignitv, to offer her the acceptance of any gift from her father's bastard."
The haughty and impetuous soul of Mary was stung to the quick by this re¬ ply ; but she had no redress at her com* mand, and was accordingly compelled to burv
bury her resentment in silence. Lord Fitzroy took immediate possession of Fram¬ lingham Castle ; and hence arose the im¬ placable enmity which Lady Blunt has in¬ formed Eleonora subsisted between the queen and that nobleman. It may perhaps be wondered that a tem¬ per ofthe acknowledged violence of Queen Mary's did not rouse her, on her accession to the throne, to revenge an indignity which had created her so much pain. But from this step she was withheld by the reli¬ gious principles of Lord Fitzroy. His tenets were, like her's, ofthe Romish church. Her endeavours were all turned towards the re-establishment of that religion, in the country over which she was become so¬ vereign ; and she preferred to smother in her breast the anger which she felt against him as an individual, rather than to place it in the power of the reformists to say, that she had acted otherwise than with kindness to any member of her own sect. Having
Hav-ng now deduced the historv of Framlingham Castle, and its possessors, down to the present period of our historv, we may again pursue our narrative without interruption.
CHAP.
????. V. f ' This cutie hath a pkasaat «rat ; the air Nimbly and swteily recommends itself Voto ouf gentte semes,** M*c«T3i. ** Vm -.ttmcthmp «<U iheie lie* ín Itciv'tnd.»Tk Volume, vvhtch t ??<1 threu^h mitt«.** As Eleonora and her companions proceed¬ ed, the trees, which had hitherto screened from their "observation the base of the cas¬ tle, appeared to recede on either side, and îo open a vista, at the extremity of which thev befiehl the magnificent abode of Lord Henry Fitzroy. The solid mass which composed the stu¬ pendous
a feature ofthe sublimest kind. Its towers and battlements appeared lo raise their massive heads into the clouds, whifet ? high banks and ramparts spread along the phin in hold masses which seemed to bid defiance to the power of every enemy. On en t eri η«? the park, the road once more wotmd into a valley, which shut the castle for a while from their view. Here their attention was called to the sleek and spotted deer, whieh were reposing in groups beneath clusters of the oak, the beech, the elm, and the sycamore, that were tastefully blended in knots upon its verdant and doping sides, whilst the cow¬ slip, the harebell, and the violet, growing around in wanton luxuriance» refreshed by the morning shower, perfumed the air with their sweets. Again an easy ascent bore them within sight ofthe eastle, and it was now beheld hy them in another point of view. Gran¬ deur and sublimity were still its character¬ istics ;
istics ; but the landscape by whieh it wa*» surrounded was enriched by a partial sight ofthe river Meer, which was seen rolling its silver tide through the thick shade of a majestic forest at its back. The sun had alreadv sunk bencaih the hills that enclosed the prospect on every side. Its last glim¬ mering rays were siili playing on the towers of the caule ; but the light had died away from its walls, and left them enveloped in the purple tint of evening, which, as Eleo¬ nora continued to gaze, soon crept up the battlements, and stole from their summits the lost effulgence of the fading sunbeams. A solemn darkness now* pervaded the whole edifice ; and as the twilight deepened, the castle gained an appearance of awfulnes? from the growing obscurity. At length they reached the foot of the drawbridge : it was already lowered for their reception; and they passed between a double rank of guards, who were drawn out to salute their entrance, through a tower of immense strength, in which was suspended
suspended the heavy portcullis ; and from whose embattled summit waved several an¬ tique banners, the evidences of former vic¬ tories. As they entered the court-yard, the re¬ fulgence of the numerous torches, borne by the domestics who came out to meet them, dazzled the eyes of Eleonora, by their contrast to the gloomy shades which she had for some time past been contem¬ plating, and deprived her for awhile of the faculty of sight. When she recover¬ ed the power of vision, the first object which she distinguished was Lord Henry Fitzroy, standing to receive them at the entrance into the great hall of the castle. Led by Sir Sigismund Blunt, sSaint Ethel¬ bert was the first who descended from the carriage. She observed Lord Henry to bend on one knee before him, and hav¬ ing received his blessing, to rise and press him to his heart : he then advanced, and in the most courteous manner oflered his vol. n. g hand
hand to Lady Blunt and herself in alight¬ ing. When they had entered the hall of the castle, Lord Fitzroy said— ({ I see here two strangers, whom I am equally delight¬ ed to behold within my castle ; but as their sex is not the same, I am certain that my uncle will not judge the less favour¬ ably of me for shewing my first attentions here;".and with these words he took the hand of Eleonora, and led her to an apart¬ ment, where every preparation for a re¬ past of more than usual elegance presented itself to her sight. Eveiy feature of the apartment corres¬ ponded in magnificence with the richly- decorated table which was spread in its 'centre; and the delicacies of the meal bore evidence of the princely refinement of the taste of their entertainer. Towards Sfr Sigismund and Lady Blunt, the.conduct of Lord Henry was that of cordiality and esteem ; to Saint Ethelbert he
he observed a demeanor both of reverence and afiection ; and with the respectful at¬ tentions which he unceasingly paid to Eleonora, was united a gentle complacency of voice and feature, which appeared to denote his sympathy in the sorrows of her heart. Fatigued with her journey, Eleonora expressed a wish to retire early, and Gil¬ lian was called to attend upon her. As she ascended the grand staircase, in her way to her chamber,she could not forbear stopping to observe the splendid warlike trophies which adorned the pillars on either side, and al most started as she cau ght s>udd en views of various suits of armour, so arranged that they appeared to enclose a human being, in the act of raising an offensive weapon for the purpose of her destruction. These brought to her recollection the armed figure which she had once, for an instant. beheld in the mirror in one ofthe cham¬ bers of the Northern Gallery at Worcester Castle; and .turning suddenly from the ? 2 pleasures
pleasures of observation to those of recol¬ lection, she would have sunk into a trance of thought, had she not been roused by Gillian, who said— if Do pray make haste up stairs, my Lady ; for I think ifyou do, you may get a peep at poor Sir Valen¬ tine." "Sir Valentine! why, where is he?" asked Eleonora, surprised out of the ques^ tion, by the strangeness of Gillian's in¬ formation. ' f Why he was on the drawbridge, my Lady, when you sent for me to come and light you up to bed ; and I dare say by this time he is got into the court-yard ; and if so, as I told you before, you may have a peep at him, for your chamber window looks into it." " What conld bring the poor sufferer hither ?" asked Eleonora. ' { Oh," replied Gillian, iC he came in a carriage—such a one as you came in—it was that which brought him hither." They now entered the chamber, and Gillian
Gillian placing her light upon a table, ran to the window, and called upon Eleonora to follow her, saying that the carriage was then driving into the court-yard Eleonora advanced—she perceived that a couple of torches only had now been brought out; and their light was just suf¬ ficient for her to discern a vehicle of a similar nature to that in which she had travelled, except that it was not so large or commodious, and that it was covered by a top, from which depended curtains, in order either to secure those within from observation, or to protect them from the weather. She observed that it had been attended by two servants on horseback, who were alighting from their horses at the moment she beheld them. Several minutes elapsed ere any one left the vehicle. A figure then descended from it, which it was impossible not to recognise for Fabian ; and next to him appeared a second, whom Eleonora had g 3 scarcely
scarcely time to observe, ere Gillian, ex¬ claimed—" There, I'd lay my life that is poor Sir Valentine." In a few seconds the light of one of the torches shone upon his countenance, and Eleonora beheld that it was indeed, as Gillian had informed her, one of the hanoV sòmest she had ever contemplated. The interest of the features which composed it was extremely great ; and the expression of the eye was languid and sensitive in the extreme. Her observation was scarcely made, ere Fabian took the arm of his charge, and led him away from her view. The gleam of the torches w T hich preceded them con¬ tinued for some minutés visible to her ; and she perceived that they did not enter the great hall of the castle, but went in by another entrance at some distance from it. te It can be no pleasure to poor Sir Val¬ entine to come here," said Gillian : " how fond
fond must his parents be of him to bring him all this way, just on purpose to have him near them !" f( There can be no doubt of their affec¬ tion," replied Eleonora. " In a calamity like his, none but the most unfeeling mind could be otherwise than tenderly attached to him, and eager in every respect to al¬ leviate his hard fate." " Well, I wonder they did not let him travel with the rest of us altogether," cried Gillian; " I think it looks mighty odd tq have him come behind." " You are not capable of their feel¬ ings," returned Eleonora ; " you know not how great a misery it may be to them, to contemplate the misfortune of their child ; which most probably accounts for the distauce at which he has travelled from them." ie Well, I dare say, my Lady, it may be so," answered Gillian ; " every one knows best where their own shoe pinches/ as the proverb says." g 4 Eleonora
Eleonora now turned from the window to view her chamber. It was a spacious and elegant apartment, richly furnished. The bed, which stood in a recess, was of crimson velvet, and decorated with a mag¬ nificence which infinitely surpassed any thing of the kind that she had before seen. A suit of tapestry hangings, representing the seasons of the year, covered the walls ; a mirror of an immense size was placed opposite to the bed ; and every piece of furniture which the apartment contained was equally rich and elegant. " Is it not grand, my Lady ?" asked Gillian, who had watched the eyes of her mistress as they roved round the cham¬ ber. " Yes, ît is," replied Eleonora ; " but splendor is not an opiate for care," added she, smiling : f< that velvet bed will not cause me to sleep one moment longer than I should do on a pallet of straw, whilst my poor father and mother are perhaps deprived of almost every comfort," « This
"This is the state bed-chamber, my Lady, I assure you," rejoined Gillian. *"■ Then why is it given to me ? said Eleonora. " Ah, mv Ladv/* answered Gillian, with a simper, " thereby hangs a tale* ?? the saying is; at least so the servants here tell me/* " What tale.? what do you mean ?" asfc- cd Eleonora. *' Why they do say, my Lady/* replied Gillian, " that ever since his Lordship saw you at Cattle Gower, he has talked such a deal about vour beautv ; and that he in< been ?? eager to make preparat ions for your coming as ifyou bad bcui a pr tans*. or ihe ????'? oxea İadtf itérât/" Ekonora perfectly under .tood what ??? the nature ofthe in" intentiun \\Wn U Gillian'** 'tints were inten/td fe- convey ; btt equal¬ ly believing and hoping that it had no other foundation than the idle tattling of the servanti, she did not reply ; ñnd dh- ? δ couraged
couraged by her silence, Gillian forbore *o continue the subject. When Eleonora liad entered the bed, her reflections on the mvsterious occur- rences of which she had that day been a witness, drove off for a considerable time the approaches of sleep ; at length its wel¬ come influence lulled her into a temporary oblivion of her cares. When she awoke in the morning, the first image which recurred to her thoughts was the strange situation in vvhich she had, on the preceding day. seen her mvsterious acquaintance of the wood. With this idea a thousand tormenting hopes and fears rushed into her breast ; and in the per¬ spective of futurity, she beheld a train of gloomy evils, vvhich she might not be able to overcome or to ί?ν from. To relieve her mind from the pangs of refiection, she rose, and compelled herself fo notice ex¬ ternal objects. She entered a spacious apartment adjoining to lier bed-chamber, which
which was likewise appropriated to her use, and the casements of which com¬ manded a ν iew of the country. With ad¬ miration and wonder she contemplated the ramparts of the castle spreading along the plain beneath, and the massive features of its projecting walls, which met her sight on either side. In the curtain which con¬ nected the toners, the ravages of war were herc and there perceptible ; and she shud¬ dered as she reflected on the awful situa¬ tion of those who might, in the hour of dangt r, have been stationed on the very spot ι* here she was then standing. From these objects she turned her eyes to the surrounding countrv. where everv sprt whit h she contemplated was dressed in the smHirii* bloom of the rising sum- mer ; and various were the images of pas¬ toral beauty whLh chequered the scene. The freshness of the morning gave anima¬ tion to her spirits ; and grateful for the re¬ lief which she experienced, she raised her thoughts in prayer to Heaven. ? Ö Whea
When she descended from her chamber into the breakfast-apartment, she found it still unoccupied, every other member of the family being engaged in their devo¬ tions in the chapel of the castle. In a short time they joined her, and the morn¬ ing repast was begun. Whilst seated at table, Saint Ethelbert, addressing Lord Fitzroy, said— " I trace in you, my son, a strong resemblance to my sister—your eyes, in particular, are al¬ most her own—but to your royal father you bear no likeness." " Could you behold my heart, you would see him there," replied Lord Fitz¬ roy. (( I saw you only once before my de¬ parture from England," rejoined Saint Ethelbert, " and you were then only three months old—an age when, except to their mothers, all infants appear alike;—you were about two years old at the time of my sister's death, were you not ?" <( About
tc About two years and three months, I have understood," replied Lord Henry. " You are right, you are right," cried the holy man ; " the last time of my be¬ holding my sister, she told me that you were then two years of age ; and Sir Sigis¬ mund has informed me, that it was at the expiration of about three months after my last beholding her, that she paid the debt of nature." " It was," replied Sir Sigismund, whilst he wiped a silent tear from his eye. " Do you retain so sensible a recollec¬ tion of my sister yet ?" asked Saint Ethel¬ bert, casting his eyes alternately upon Sir Sigismund and Lady Blunt as he spoke. " I assure you, holy father, 4 replied Lady Blunt, " that it creates no jealousy in me, to behold this affection on the part of Sir Sigismund for one in death, whom he loved during the period of her existence ; on the contrary, it communicates to my feelings a pleasing anticipation of the tri¬ bute of esteem which he will pay to my m e mory j
memory, should fate will him to be my survivor." *' Thou art an excellent, truly excel¬ lent, and discerning woman," replied Sir Sigismund, in a tone of mingled gratitude, admiration, and .???????. Again addressing himself to Lord Fitz¬ roy, Saint Ethelbert said— " Jt would give me extieme pleasure to behold the por¬ trait which King Ilenry commanded to bc painted of my bister, if I knew where I couhl sec it." " Yonr wiih shall quickly be gratified," replied Lord ilenry. " The portrait of which you speak it in this castle —at his death my rovai father bequeathed it to me." Saint Ethelbert appeared ίο receive much satisfaction from this intelligence, and re¬ quested that when breakfast was ended it i m ight be shewn to him ; accordingly when they had risen from fable, Lord Ilenry Fitzroy invited his uncle to accompany him to the gallery where it hung. 4 ·« Will
" Will you permit Eleonora and myseif to go with you?" asked Lady Blunt; "I am sure fhat it h a picture which she will be gratified in beholding." *' And I can with truth declare/' replied Lord Henry, " that therje^js no existing being to whom it vvill produce me so much delight to exhibit the resemblance of my beloved mother as to my fair guest." Eleonora returned a gentle inclination of her head to this courteous declaration ; and Lady Blunt said— i( Come, Sir Sigis¬ mund, will not you likewise accompany us?" " No, no/' replied Sir Sigismund, fal¬ teringly, *' not a! this moment—do not ask mc—I had rather not—not just nov/," Receding a few paces into the apartment towards the spot where he was sitting, Lady Blunt said— tt Come, rome, you must go with us—why do you say no ?—whatever sighs you may heave to the memory of Lady Elizabeth, whilst contemplating the delineation of what »he once was, I will either
either not listen io 3 or will echo them to you, just as you shall direct me." Whilst she spoke, she laid her hand up¬ on his shoulder ; he snatched it to his lips, and imprinted on it a fervent kiss ; and ap¬ parently struggling with emotions ofthe most violent nature, he rose from his seat, and darted out of the apartment. Lady Blunt followed him to the door with her eyes, which beamed with an ex¬ pression of the tenderest sympathy in his feelings ; then breathing a gentle sigh, she said—" Come, Lord Henry, pray lead us to the portrait—Sir Sigismund will perhaps join us in the gallery." She took the arm of Eleonora, who felt it tremble violently as she passed it through her's, r.nd who, whilst she regarded both Lady Blunt and her husband as objects worthy of her warmest admiration, could not forbear believing that there was some mystery connected with their conduct. On entering the gallery, Eleonora found it to be a handsome building of grey stone, raised
raised around the grand hall ofthe castle; paintings of various kinds were thickly ar¬ ranged upon its wal lb, and in the centre she beheld a flowing curtain of green silk. A servant of Lord Fitzroy's, who at¬ tended them, raised the curtain at the com¬ mand of his master, and behind it appear¬ ed two full-length portraits ; the first of the Lady Elizabeth Talboyse, and the se¬ cond of her royal paramour. The frames by which they were encircled were con¬ nected by garlands of flowers, intertwined with ribbands of gold, held in the beaks of doves, which appeared flying with them into a glory of spiral rays, partially con¬ cealed beneath the folds of a group of snow-white clouds, which united them to the ceiling. The King was drawn in the sumptuous apparel of royalty, with his eyes fixed up¬ on her who had been, at the pei iod at which the likeness was taken, the mistress of his afiections. The Lady Elizabeth herself was habited in a loosely-flowing white drapery,
drapery, which might be regarded either ae a suit of vestments dictated by fancy, or as a drees of ease and négligence. Saint Ethelbert appeared greatly affect¬ ed by the sight of his sister's portrait; Lord Henry bestowed an encomium ofthe highest praise on his parents; and Eleo¬ nora contemplated with real admiration» ? countenance so lovely and interesting as was that of the Lady Talboyse. As thöy were wandering towards a distant pm of tbe galtøry, in which Lady Blunt was terecting^ the itfention of Eleonora to a }?????, which represented the field of the vale of Ardres, which was the scene of tho c^lebmted meeting between the two kings, Henry the Eighth of England, and Francis the First of France, they heard a shrill bugle sounded ; and Lord Fitzroy, moving towards a window which commanded a view of the drawbridge, said— t( Whom s I wonder, does that sound announce ?— ï expect no visitors to-day." Saint Ethelbert appearing to look for an explanation
explanation of his words, he added—" The bugle which you this instant heard sound¬ ed, demands admittance into the castle." Eleonora followed Lord Fitzroy to the window ; and at the moment she reached it, beheld the drawbridge lowered, and immediately crossed by Sir Hildebrand, attended by his page, his esquires, and se¬ veral of his domestics. " Sir Hildebrand !" exclaimed Lord Fitz¬ roy. " I thought you had informed me," he added, addressing Lady Blunt, " that we were not to expect him in some days.'* " You know that his proceedings are always uncertain," replied Lady Thoma¬ sine. Lord Fitzroy apologized for quitting them to receive his guest ; and Eleonora felt her spirits immediately depressed by the knowledge of his arrival. The manners of Sir Hildebrand at Fram¬ lingham Castle, differed little from those which were habitual to him at Castle Gower. The day passed heavily, notwith¬ standing
standing the unwearied exertions of Lord Fit/,roy to promote happiness and satisfac¬ tion. In «he e\*cnitig Lady Blunt com¬ plained of indisposition, and retired at a very early hour to her chamber- She had not long quitted the apaninen f, ere a ser¬ vant entered it, and whispered Lord Fitz¬ roy, who, apologizing for the necessity hc was under of being absent for a short lime, left fhe room. In the course of a few minutes Eleonora beheld him with Sir Sigismund entering the park, and they ap¬ peared in earnest and close conversation ; Sir Sigismund once or twice directing the attention of his companion to a letter which he held in his hand, and which she supposed might he the one which he had received from him a few days previously to their departure from Castle Gower, fold¬ ed for his private perusal in that which had contained their invitation to visit him. Sir Hildebrand had probably not yet left the dining-hall, where it was his constant custom to remain some time after every one
one else had deserted it, being seldom able to find a companion so inveterately at¬ tached to the pleasures of the goblet as himself; at least he had not yet been seen in the apartment to which the rest of the family had retired ; and Saint Ethelbert was thus left as Eleonora 's only compa¬ nion. After he had wandered about the room for some minutes, he said*—' 1 Did you ever behold any one whom you thought to resemble the portrait which you saw to-day ofmy deceased sister V " No indeed," replied Eleonora, " I do not recollect lhat í ever did. Does it strike you, father, as bearing a likeness to any one besides herself?" " Yes it does," he answered. *' You probably mean, that notwith¬ standing all the hardships which you have endured, in your unfortunate exile from your native country," returned Eleonora, " it still bears a sisterly resemblance to yourself; if so, your features arc so con¬ stantly shaded by your cowl, that I am not sufficiently
sufficiently acquainted with them to be able to determine this point." ít No, no, no," he answered ; (f I am well convinced there is no longer any re¬ semblance between these care-worn fca- tures, and the blooming countenance of Lady Elizabeth's portrait :" he raised his cowl, and standing opposite to Eleo¬ nora, added— ít Behold how unlike they are." " Yes, fhey arc very unlike, 5 * she an¬ swered ; " I can hardly suppose that at any period of your lives you resembled each other." " Very strongly once, indeed," he re¬ plied; " but the changes produced by age and sorrow r.re incredible to those who have not watched their progress/* After a pause he continued—" As I this morn¬ ing turned my eyes from the portrait up¬ on you, I almost fancied that you resem¬ bled it." " The resemblance which you supposed yourself to trace must have been ideal," re¬ turned
turned Eleonora, (C her eyes and hair are so infinitely darker than mine," " If it were ideal, it pleased me," re¬ turned the father, in a tender tone of voice : <c when we have lost an only be¬ loved relative, daughter, there is an in¬ describable sensation of pleasure produced to us, by beholding an amiable individual, who recalls such a departed one to our me¬ mory ; and whether! be right or wrong in my opinion, it will lead me to regard you with esteem and preference." " To be honoured with such a distinc¬ tion from you must ever be gratifying to -my feelings, holy father," returned Eleo¬ nora, (< from whatever impulse on your -part it may proceed." " You are not displeased with me* then, 'for having ventured to confess to you the comparison which t had drawn," said Saint Ethelbert. 4< Displeased î holy father," · exclaimed 'Eleonora, " can the approbation ofa wor¬ thy man be otherwise than gratifying." "May
(i Mzy his prayers prove propitious to thee, daughter," he returned. " ï am go¬ ing to my devotions, and shall tell my beads for thy heart's repose, ere I conclude my address to Heaven." Having said this, he bade her an affec¬ tionate good-night, and left the apart¬ ment. When the father had quitted her, dread¬ ing to encounter Sir Hildebrand alone, Eleonora immediately ascended to her own chamber. Here she sat ruminating on the apparently venerable character of the old monk, and felt some degree of sa¬ tisfaction in the knowledge of any circum¬ stance having occurred to attach to her the esteem of so worthy a man. To the re¬ semblance of which he had spoken, she scarcely gave a thought, concluding it merely the idea of one whose faculties age and grief had rendered imperfect. She had placed herself near the window, and she had not long been stationed by it ere she heard the voice of the nightingale ; it
it Was the first time that its sweet tones had that year met her ear, and slie threw open the casement, that she might the more dis¬ tinctly hear its melody As she stood listening to the enchanting sounds, she observed that the shade of evening was stealing quickly over the earth, that distinct features were fading under its influence, and that outlines were merely visible. The window from which she was lookin ir out was situated on the west side of the castle, immediately be¬ tween two of its towers; and wandering backwards and forwards beneath the shadow of the wall which ran between them, she presently descried the figure of a man. She continued to view him as he passed and repassed beneath her window, and in a few moments she determined him to bc Sir Hildebrand, who had thrown a cloak over his shoulders to defend him from the evening air. At the first moment of her recognising him, she feared that she might herself oc- voi., ii. ? casion
casion his attraction to that spot, but im¬ mediately recollecting that he had not once raised his eyes towards her window since she had beheld him, she decided that he must have some other purpose in view, in loitering upon that particular part of the terrace. A quarter of an hour elapsed, during which Sir Hildebrand still continued his walk ; but she observed that his pace be¬ came hurried, theeffect, as it appeared, of an impatient mind, and that he frequently stepped out of his path, to look beyond the projecting turrets at either end, as if expecting the coming of some one, whom he was disappointed in not seeing. At length Eleonora perceived a light upon a distant part of the terrace, which, on ¡ts nearer approach, she discovered to be a lanthorn carried in the hand of Fabian ; for it was impossible to behold, and not instantlv to recognise his lank form and tall figure. Owing to her elevated situa¬ tion, he was descried by her some time be¬ fore
forc hc was seen by Sir Hildebrand ; he did not behold him until he was turning the angle of one of the towers ; the mo¬ ment his eye fell upon him, he darted to¬ wards him, and saluted him by name. IC Good night. Sir Hildebrand/' return¬ ed Fabian, still-moving on, " Xo, not so," replied Sir Hildebrand, " lll bid you that anon ; I must go wiih you." ' c You know my determination/' re¬ turned Fabian. tf But you know not the resolution to which I am at this moment wrought/* re¬ joined Sir Hildebrand ; tr 1 am prepared to--------" Fabian still continued moving on; and Sir Hildebrand, breaking off his sentence, caught him by the arm with both his hands, in order to detain him— (i Will vou not hear me?" he exclaimed. " No," answered Fabian, decidedly, disengaging himself from his hold as he spoke. u 2 " Stav,
" Stay, Γ entreat thee stay," returned Sir Hildebrand ; " will not this tempt thee' —this purse—wilt thou refuse this purse ?"* To this question Fabian made no reply, and Sir Hildebrand forced the purse into a pocket of his vest. " Now then," cried Sir Hildebrand, " thou art my friend, my better angel—be¬ hold this phial, its contents are infallible." Fabian snatched the phial from Sir Hil¬ debrand's hand, and dashed it against the castle wall : it fell in shivers to the ground. " If these means are disapproved by thee," cried Sir Hildebrand, <r this dagger isas good." " Where is it ?" asked Fabian. " Here by the side of my breast, safe in its sheath," answered Sir Hildebrand. " Let me behold it," said Fabian. Sir Hildebrand drew it forth ; at the in¬ stant that he did so, Fabianstopped oppo¬ site to a door at the bottom ofthe second tower ; he slung his lanthorn upon his left? arm, and having applied a key to the lock, he
he pushed the door back 4ipon its hinges, and mounted the single step which led to its threshold—" Now then," he said, <r are you certain that your weapon is sharp ?" " As enmity can wish it," returned Sir Llildebrand, patting it into Fabian's ex¬ tended hand, and adding— t( See, and ex¬ amine it." " I perceive," replied Fabian, " that it is capable of searching the life-blood at a thrust ; therefore be gone, or to thy heart I pierce it." " How, monster !—'.mine ! " eaudairaed Sir iHild ebrand. " Begone ; once m®*e I warn thee to be g-cme," cried Fabian, using force to shut the door, against whicb Sir Hildebrand was imposing all his sti»ed»gth with the de¬ sign of entering it. " Ungrateful, deceitful Fabian !" re¬ turned Sir Hildebrand, his passion almost choaking him, " hast thou not accepted my purse, and is this «the return Avhich-------" " Why did you thrust it into my poc¬ ii 3 ket ?"
ket ?" replied Fabian ; « I did not ask for it." " Well, well," cried Sir Hildebrand, al¬ tering his tone of voice, ct I will not up¬ braid you ; it was I who forced it upon you—but let me enter, good Fabian—I entreat you—I pray you !" " Pray on," exclaimed Fabian, succeed¬ ing at the same moment in shutting the door, with a violence which drove Sir Hildebrand to a considerable distance from it. Recovering himself in a few moments, Sir Hildebrand exclaimed—" Curses light upon thee !—villain ! rascal ! though not to-night, the time shall come, and quickly too, to thy confusion Î" He directed his menace to the tower which Fabian had entered, and left the terrace with a hasty and agitated step. The senses of Eleonora were wrapt in astonishment and horror, at the scene of which she had been a witness. There could rest no doubt upon the intention of Sir Hildebrand
Hildebrand to have committed minder, if Fabian had permitted his entrance into the tower ; and fhe inhabitant of the tower, she concluded, from Fabian possessing the key of access to it, could bc no other than the unfortunate Valentine, whom it now appeared evident to her, that his unnatu¬ ral brother was sufficiently cruel to wish to deprive of life, lest his return to reason should cut him off from an inheritance of which his present malady promised him the possession. This attempt appeared to explain the words which he had ad¬ dressed to her at Castle Gower.— <( You think, perhaps," he had said, " that the hand of Sir Hildebrand is such an offer as every day may bring you, and scarcely worth a refusal ; and so it is, I giant you as Sir Hildebrand is novv, his inheritance depending on a father's and an elder bro¬ ther's life—this is as it appears —but a change unexpected and vast may quickly be wrought—Sir Hildebrand may rise."— te Dreadful, horrible idea !" she exclaimed, ? 4 « the
' t the wretch who has resolved to wade through a brother's blood into his pos¬ sessions, has already made an offer of his fratricidal hand to me ! Shield, shield me, Heaven, from his persecutions ! ? protect from his injustice the innocent being «whose destruction he plans !" Ijer thoughts next turned to Fabian ; ßhe considered that his having refused Sir ¿lildebrand admittance intonile tow<er, did not appear the effect of humanity ; for had his own disposition been worthy, it appeared unlikely that he would, upon any terms, have accepted a purse fropi one who was tempting him to an adjunc¬ tion in a deed of so heinous a nature as Sir Hildebrand was planning; and not¬ withstanding she had seen the purpose pf Sir Hildebrand defeated by Fabian, she could not induce herself to think other¬ wise ot him than as a villanous charac¬ ter, withheld at that particular moment by some private reason from suffering the villany of another to lake place. Still
Still she reflected that her opinion was an injustice to Sir Sigismund's heart and dis¬ cretion, as he had chosen Fabian for the guardian and attendant of his unfortunate son ; but the horror vvhich the hermit Aga¬ tha had expressed at his appearance, coun¬ terbalanced this idea, and involved her thoughts again in a chaos of doubt.
h 5
-. CHAP.
ae
CHAP. VL " Full many a lady 1 ???? ey'd with best regard ; and many a time Tbe harmony of their tongues hath into bondage Brought my too diligent ear; for several virtues Have I lik'd several women ; never any With so fall soul, but some defect in her Did quarrel with the noblest grace she ow'd, And put it to the foil : but you, ? you, So perfect, and so peerless, are created Of every creature's best." The TiMrEST-
l * \ suppose him virtuous, know htm noble, Of great estate, of fresh and stainless youth, In voices well divulg'd, free, learn'd and valiant, And in dimensions, and the shape of nature, A gracious f enon : but yet I cannot love him." Twelfth Nigiit. When Eleonora awoke in the morning, the first objects which occurred to her ima¬ gination
gination were, the poor unfortunate Valen- fine and his parents. AVith' what pangs, she considered, would their hearts be rent, were they to become acquainted with the attempt made by one of their sons to de¬ prive his brother of existence ! and should opportunity ever favour his diabolical pur¬ pose, she feared that their reason might fade, perhaps their existence droop, un¬ der the knowledge of such an act. She wished they could be apprized of Sir Hil¬ debrand's unnatural intention ; and still she could not summon resolution to be¬ come herself their informer. She hoped that Fabian would impart Valentine's dan¬ ger to his father, and consult with him on the steps proper to be taken for his pro- tecfion ; síül she ieared that Fabian might but be half the friend of Valentine, and might forbear to make this communication to Sir Sigismund: and the point on which she rested her apprehension was the pre¬ vious knowledge that it appeared; from the conversation which had on the preced¬ il 6 ing
ing evening been overheard between them, that Fabian had possessed himself of Sir Hildebrand's intention ; thus if hc had hitherto concealed his acquaintance with it, there appeared a fear of the same mo¬ tive which had induced him to conceal it, impelling him to retain it still a secret within his own breast. From a closet which communicated with the apartment contiguous to her bed¬ chamber, an easy flight of steps led to a door which opened upon the terrace, and of which Lord Fitzroy had informed her that she could at any time avail herself for taking the air, when it was her pleasure to do so. The sunbeams shot an enlivening ray between the curtains of her bed, and rising and dressing herself, she resolved to go down to the terrace, and taste the re¬ freshing breeze of morning, till the family should assemble at breakfast. On reaching the terrace, the first object upon which she turned her eyes was the tower, some part of which she supposed Val- 4 entine
entine to occupy ; but its windows were all so narrow, and raised ?? mauy feet above the level of the ground, that she was not able to distinguish any object through ihem. She next directed her sight towards the park. iie ne;, t h a cluster of uir.br igeo us and ma¬ jestic oaks, she beheld a group of figures, whith gave a peculiar animation to the scene ; it consisted of several domestics of the castle, some of whom were attending upon horses already caparisoned for the chace, others employed in giving spirit to the hawks which were destined to flv tliat day, and some reclining on the ground at the foot of the trees. From these preparations she concluded that Lord Fitzroy was going out ; and as she proceeded along the terrace, in her circuit of the castle, she perceived him atid Sir Hildebrand crossing a private bridge, which led from a postern gate on the eastern side of tbe edifice into the park. She observed that Lord Fitzroy saw her, and
an J fearing that she might prove a restraint upon his departure, she turned from him, and continued her walk in an opposite di¬ rection. In the conrse of a few minutes she beheld Sir Hildebrand, attended only by his servants, galloping towards a gate in the park wall, which opened upon the country, and almost directly afler she heard footsteps following her upon the terrace. Before scarcely a moment vvas given her for reflection upon whom the person might bc, Lord Fitzroy was by her side. After the usual salutations of the morn¬ ing, Eleonora said—" From the prepara¬ tions which I just now beheld in the park, I guessed lhat you had been going to fiy your hawks this morning, my Lord." u It was my intention half an hour ago, fair lady," he replied, " but 1 am nature's debtor for a power of distinction between pleasures ; and have sufficient taste to pre¬ fer a moment spent in the society of a rational and lovely being like yourself, to a day
a day passed in the most successful pursuit after game." Eleonora did not reply. After a short pause, Lord Fitzroy pro¬ ceeded thus :—" The present is the first opportunity vvhtch has oflered itself to me for expressing to you the pride, the de¬ light, with which the honour that you have conferred on me, in becoming my guest, animates my heart—I said truly, of ex¬ pressing them to you—for you must have beheld them beaming in my eye—it could not be so faithless to my heart, as to re¬ port İt otherwise than filled with your idea —we unmarried men, Lady, know not how to be sufficiently grateful for the hon¬ our of tenanting fair beings like your¬ self." " The courteous aftability with which Lord Fitzroy fills the character of host, I should think would never leave him with¬ out willing and grateful guests," replied Eleonora. u But how coolly do we look back to the
the recollection of those who had only claims upon our approbation, when we contemplate a superior being who excites our adoration !" exclaimed Lord Fitzroy : " this novelty of sensation, you, exquisite and angelic Eleonora, have communicated to my feelings—your presence dresses, in the smile of gaiety, even these dreary walk —your form, gilding over the verdant lawn, converts the scene into Elysium— your idea, penetrating my heart, lifts me beyond the glory and the bliss of mortals." " You are an accomplished courtier, my Lord," replied Eleonora, with a faint smjlc ; *' I, a simple maid, unaccustomed to the voice of flattery ; and you address me in a language which I know not how to answer or to listen to—were not my heart at this moment the prey that it is to affliction, I might perhaps grow vain upon your praise -—where grief presides,, it is an unlimited usurper of the mind." " ? make it my most delightful task to tighten yout griefs, by sharing them with you,"
yon/' returned Lord Henry ; " «lake your feelings mine—constitute -it my right to ¿ivjde with you each pang—.give me the authority cf a friend, a lover— ofahus- baniL" Infinite surprise seized upon Blø&uora ; fo^r although tiie attentions of ¿.ord Hen^y to Jier had been marked and ¿Uflceasing, a ^ecJaçivtîon of this nature »from hb Jips was most unexpected ; ber vojtce ftìkered as she attempted to reply, and jthe colour ^ed from ¡her cheefes. JUjrd í%roy ob¬ served her agitation, and was Again pre¬ paring to speafkj when the ????» report of pistol caused thero both io *urø hastily round. They perceived Fabian ie^ning over the i.ampart wal], with the tube which èc had discharged in his hand. (< How now !" exclaimed Lord Fitzroy; " what's the matter?" ' ( nothing, my Lord," replied Fabian, " only it isa long while since I fired this pistol,
pistol, and I wished to ascertain whether it were in proper order for use." " For what purpose then are you going to use it ?" said Lord Fitzroy. *' Not for any purpose that I know of, my Lord," answered Fabian, and tucking the pistol into his girdïe, he moved away. " He intends it," whispered the heart of Eleonora, fC to defend Valentine from the diabolical intentions of Sir Hilde¬ brand;" and she could with difficulty re¬ strain herself from breathing aloud a prayer for the success of his endeavours. The recollection of Valentine and his misfortunes superseded in the mind of Eleonora Lord Henry's declaration of his passion ; and she felt irresolute whether or not to communicate to him the fears which she entertained for the poor suffer¬ er's fate. Lord Fitzroy observed her to be lost in thought ; and judging that the subject most interesting to his own feelings was occu¬ pying
pying her mind, he fixed hh regards upon her in the most eloquent silence—they re¬ called her to a recollection of the subject upon which he had been addressing her; and she was preparing to reply a negative to his hopes, when Saint Ethelbert and Lady Blunt appeared upon the terrace. Although they were at some distance from her, fheir presence checked her ut¬ terance, and she quickened her steps to meet them.— " Eleonora," said Lord Fitz¬ roy, tenderly, " Eleonora, will you not deign to reply fo my petition, ere you quit me ?" " My Lord," replied Eleonora* " I en¬ treat you not to entertain any hopes of the nature of which you have been speaking —they cannot be realized." During the interchange of these sen¬ tences, the father and Lady Blunt had ap¬ proached so near to them, that if Lord Fitzroy had spoken again, they must have overheard his words; he accordingly re¬ mained
gained reluctantly kilent; anda few minutes ^fter they aU entered the castle together. When .breakfast was ended, Eleonora re- 4?1 to her own apartment. The profes- ¿iofi ,af bis Ipve, which Lord Henry Fitz- <rpy had that morning made to her, pro¬ duced a very different sensation in her jnjwd to what Sir Hildebrand Blunt's decla¬ ration to the .same ????! iiad done. From ?? AÄectJou of Lord Henry, *he had none of that pensecution and freedom of con¬ duct to dread, with whicb the wild passion 4>J Six HUdetouid threatened her. The love of Lord Henry, she consider*^ wjould <?1? lead jbim -to §ix©yc his ^fíjeclion by Äpts Ä>f Jundness and friendship ; whilst she fomstea to reflect po the measures which the savage Sir Hildebrand might pursue, in order to revenge himself on her for her meglfcctof his suit. As ahe wandered near the windows of Jier apartment, a briUiant light caught her eye, and QS looking out she perceived that
that it was produced by the beams of the* sun, which were reflected oil the pikes of* a body of men in the park, who appeared to be engaged in some military exercise ; and Who, by moving their weapons rapidly about, produced those scintillations; orfe" of which had attracted her attention. Sfhe observed that'they were about'ail' hundred in number, and that they were? habited in the same dress which distinguiáh- ed Lord Fitzroy's guards, who had received rhem at' th'e drawbridge, on the evening" of fheir arrival at the castle. The simili¬ tude of fheir habits, which were of alight grey cloth, edged with black fiir, gave theiri a picturesque appearance ; and the perfcctness with which they performed their evolutions, detained Eleonora, to whom a sight of'this kind was new, for a considerable time their observer. Sfie was merely acquainted, that every nobleman of high rank had a protection for his property, under his command, in thè persons of his vassals; but she had never
never before been the inmate of any re¬ sidence of sufficient importance to have beheld a scene of this nature. As she continued to gaze, voices on the ramparts drew her attention from the sol¬ diery, and she beheld Lord Fitzroy in close conversaiion with Sir Sigismund Blunt; they were standing upon one of the pro¬ jecting points of the fortifications, and ap¬ peared to be occupied in examining their strength and situation. By their side stood a man, who, by his dress, seemed to be one of the leaders of Lord Fitzroy's vassals ; at intervals Sir Sigismund and Lord Henry both addressed him ; and he appeared lo be employed in noting down their remarks, for Eleonora observed him to write upon a scroll, which he carried in his hand. After a time they disappeared from her sight, seeming to descend to the lower range of fortifications, which spread along the plain below. The pikemen had now also concluded their exercise, and return¬ ing towards the drawbridge, were no longer
longer visible to her. The next moving objects which she beheld vvere Sir Hilde¬ brand and his attendants re-entering the park. He had not proceeded far into it, ere he vaulted from his horse, and pur¬ sued his way on foot : as he advanced near the ramparts, she observed him to turn out of his path, as if with the intention of approaching some one whom he had sud¬ denly beheld ; and in a few moments she saw him joined by Lord Henry Fitzroy, whom Sir Sigismund had now quitted ; and although not heard by Eleonora, their conversation must not pass unreported. , " Well," cried Sir Hildebrand, " vve have had a noble day's cport—^you resign¬ ed the pleasures of the chace to enjoy a woman's prattle—did it recompense you for the sacrifice ?" * f Whoever is so fortunate as to enjoy the conversation of Eleonora/' replied Lord Fitzroy, "if he be not entirely de¬ void of sensibility, must consider every other pleasure which he relinquishes to obtain
.
obtain that happiness a gain, instead of a sacrifice." " Ay, they are all ptétty pastîhles 1 in their way," returned Stt- tìildebrand ; " and Eleonora îs undoubtedly more beautiful than most of her sex." ** Her beautièîs are not confined alone tb her person," replied Lord Henry ; " her mìrtd li equally the seat of beauty as her ccnfntenance; but perhaps^" he added, with asmile, " that is a perfection which you do not valíte ?" "'By the mass!" exclaimed Sir Hilde¬ brand; ' r a handsome face, and a fair form, are" enough for me— Ί require nothing inore than mortality in a woman." fi But sorely," returned Lord Henry, r/ it is no objection to a wpman wheri she approaches so near to an angel as'Elèonorà does." " AUgel !" c¥ied Sir Hildebrand, with a laUgh, " I fancy tho« could'st worship her." "Which
<? Which means that you could not, I suppose," said Lord Henry. " But I can love her," exclaimed Sir Hildebrand ; " therefore have a care that you remain at a due distance from ymir saint in your worship, or you may find love the hotter passion." Lord Fitzroy raised his eyes without speaking to Sir Hildebrand, who, laugh» ingly, continued— i( Well, it contents me mightily, that 1 shall have an angel for my bride/' " Your bride !" echoed Lord Fitzroy. <( Aye, will she not be so when we are wed ?" cried Sir Hildebrand. Struck to the heart by this information, Lord Fitzroy endeavoured, but almost in vain, to continue the conversation—" I was not acquainted," he stammered out, « that-------» I did not know that------" " No, no, likelv not/' cried Sir Hilde¬ brand, interrupting him ; " all men do nor know all things; and this is one of which you were ignorant;—and all women do vol. π. ι not
not tattle of their love, which it joys me to find that Eleonora has not done, as it proves her passion—true love is ever se¬ cret." Lord Fitzroy was now unable to com¬ mand his utterance ; and Sir Hildebrand introduced another subject. But in the mind of Lord Fitzroy no idea but that of Eleonora had place. Strange, incompre¬ hensible did it appear to him, that a fe¬ male of her gentle and enchanting mind, should have fixed her afiections on a rude and boisterous being like Sir Hildebrand, from whom she could expect neither the refined delicacy of a lover, nor the chas¬ tened friendship ofa husband: he knew not whether to believe that Sir Hildebrand had been altogether deceiving him, or that he flattered himself with the belici" of what he wished. The torments of doubt raised an agonizing conflict in his mind, v hich he was unable to endure ; and he resolved to pursue the means of ascertaining the U4.th. At
At the approach of evening, when Eleo¬ nora had retired to her own apartment, a gentle rap upon the door called her to open it, and she perceived, on the out¬ side, one of Lord Fitzroy's pages^—" My Lord," he said, " requests that you will honour him with a few minutes conversa¬ tion, either in this apartment or in the li¬ brary." Heluctant as Eleonora felt to the idea of meeting him alone, after what had passed between them in the morning, as she doubted not that it was with the intention of renewing the subject that he now pe¬ titioned fosee her, still considering it im¬ possible to return an absolute refusal to his request, she said—" Tell your Lord that I will meet him in the library." Lord Fitzroy received her at the door ofthe apartment, and having led her to a seat, he said—" Will you, angelic Eleo¬ nora, pardon this intru- ion upon moments which might perhaps be more happily ëm- i 2 ployed ?
ployed ? Yes, you wilt pardon it ; the na¬ tive excellence of your heart will lead you' tø derive satisfaction from the power which you possess of calming the anxieiies of ;v fellow-being." He paused, and as Eleo¬ nora did not reply, he continued thus: — <r (i Dö I deceive myself, when I en ferta i n the idea that yon vvere not ofiended by the address which the fervor of mv feel¬ ings this morning prompted me to make to you ?'* " Odended! it is impossible that I should liave been, my Lord,' 3 replied Eleonora ; " I must ever consider myself honoured by the profession which you have made to me." <e Honoured, fair lady," he returned, u is a term most cold and unsatisfactory, when applied to the ardor with vvhich my heart burns towards you. But since you avow that I have not offended you, convert the negative happiness, which you in this declaration bestow on me, in¬ to
to absolute joy, by adding to it a hopt for the accomplishment of rhe most exalt·· ed wish ofmy soul," " Were I to encourage such a hope, my Lord," replied Eleonora, " l simuld cease f ? esteem myself, for being guilty of an act of deceit towards you, to wham my most grateful and honourable tvonduet iá alone thie —as my frientl, ¿hero is no ojie to whom., it can grant me cither stVperiof joy or pride, to be allowed to name by that valued title, than Lord Uenry Fitz¬ roy." " Your candour delights me¿" answered Lord Henry, lc as it assures me öf your esteem—equally it afflicts me, in the evi* dence which it bears to my fears-, that your heart is not at your own disposal, ? had it pleased Heaven to have made me the chosen, blissful being, who had ad¬ dressed himself to your unga i ned affec¬ tions!" As he uttered these words he rose, and wandered about the library, overcome by the violence of his feelings. ι 3 After
After a few moments of silence— (< Ö en¬ viable Sir Hildebrand!" burst from his lips. tc Sir Hildebrand, my Lord !" echoed Eleonora. " Yes, adored Lady/' he exclaimed ; " is he not an object of envy to me, when he possesses your love ?" Ere Eleonora could reply, the door of the apartment was opened, and one of Lord Fitzroy's squires appearing, said— * c Some strangers, my Lord, at the foot of the drawbridge, demand to see you." "Who are they ?" asked Lord Fitzroy. " I have already said, my Lord, that they are strangers," was the only reply. " W r hat their number?" the subsequent demand. te Not more than six or seven," return¬ ed the squire. " Admit them into the castle, and say that I attend them presently," said Lord Henry. The squire retired with his message. Lord
Lord Fitzroy immediately turned to Eleonora, and said— " You appeared sur¬ prised when 1 mentioned Sir Hildebrand." " Cpuld I be otherwise, my ford," re¬ plied Eleonora, (f when you united his name with my aifections ?" " Pardon me, I entreat you," he return¬ ed ; lt mine was not a willing o Hence—I have been misled in what I said—Sir Hilde¬ brand himself is my authority." " Sir Hildebrand has then been guilty of a most unpardonable error," answered Eleonora. (i ? my Lord," she added, " question yourself whether Sir Hildebrand can be the man who------" and suddenly repenting that she had begun to draw this distinction to one who was himself a suitor ι for her preference, she became silent. " ? most excellent Eleonora !" ex¬ claimed Lord Fitzroy, " my heart revolt¬ ed at the declaration which he made, and it was a true prophet. But, alas ! this conviction is of little avail to my happi- i 4 ness
ness —there still exists one who rivals me in your esteem." Again the door ofthe library was open¬ ed, and another messenger entering, said, —" The strangers are impatient for your coming, my Lord." " Have they been introduced info the castle, as I commanded ?" enquired Lord Fitzroy. " They have entered fhe court-yard, my Lord," was the reply ; " but they refuso to proceed farther till they have seen you— three of them wear tbeir helmets barred ; and these are most impatient for your coming." " I will be with them instantly," said Lord Fitzroy, and tne messenger retired. Once more Lord Fifzpoy addressed Eleo¬ nora—" I cannot quit yoti, beloved Eleo¬ nora, without knowing my doom—if not Sir Hildebrand's, there still exists in your heart the image of some preferred being, which excludes the probability of mine being
being admitted there—is it nof thus ? Oh yes ! too surely your eloquent silence ex¬ plains the wretched truth ------" A third time the door was opened, and the messenger approaching Lord Fitzroy, said— -" One of the strangers, my Lord, sends you this ring." " Great God !" exclaimed Lord Fitzroy, as he fixed his eyes upon it, ** can it be possible that he·------" He checked him¬ self, and waving his*harid to tb^e messenger to leave the apartmenr, turned towards Eleonora, and said—" Whatever my fate, lovely maid, may thine be happiness— Fitzroy will eVer bë'thy frîérid." He then quitted the library, and Eleo¬ nora retired to her chamber.
ι 5
CHAP.
CHAP. VII. ** For here have been Some sis or seven, who did bide their faces Even fiom darkness." StlAKKSrEAKE.;/
" What freat ones do, the less will prattle of," The Twelfth Night.' -. At the supper-tablè Eleonora was joined by Lady Blunt only.-—" I should not have partaken of this meal, my love," she said, ,t but that I knew you would else be con¬ strained to pass the hour alone, as Father Saint Ethelbert has retired, according to his usual custom in an evening, to his own apartment,
apartment, and Lord Fitzroy and Sir Si¬ gismund are engaged with some guests, who are just arrived—strangers they are called in the castle; andso indeed they appear, but they are not strangers to us—- one of them, in particular, far the reverse." Fearful of appearing too curious, if she advanced any question relative to these mysterious personages, Eleonora forbore to comment on Lady Blunt's words. ïn a few moments Lady Thomasine spoke again— * tf It was my intention, Eleo¬ nora, to have passed this morning alone with vou in vour apartment, and have given you information of some events which it mav vield vou comfort to be made acquainted with ; but I was not en¬ tirelv recovered from the indisposition which last night oppressed me, and I did not (cei my strength equal to the exertion of a long conversation ; I am notatall more adequate to the undertaking to-night; but to-morrow I will breakfast with you in your closet, and give you the commun ί¬ ι 6„ catioa
cation to which I have been referring. The arrival of these strangers adds material¬ ly to the sum of what I was already pre¬ pared to impart to you." <f You have awakened my surprise," re¬ pUed Eleonora, (< and I shall indeed be very impatient to see you in the morn¬ in «· " "'o' u Do not let my hints deprive you of any part of your slumbers," returned Lady Blunt; " rely on me, that what I have to communicate wears at least the appear¬ ance of good, if it does not produce tho reality." u O Madam," exclaimed Eleonora;. **only deign to inform me now, whether this appearance of good refers to,my deart father?" "At present not at all," answered *1???? Blunt ; " what events th'e progress of a chain of circumstances may produce, I can* not determine." When the cloth had been some -mimites 1 removed, Lady Thomasine requested Eleo* 4 nora
nora to suffer her to retire to rest, that she might be the better enabled by repose to fulfil the promise for vvhich she had pre¬ pared her, on the following morning. Eleonora accordingly attended her to the door ofher apartment, and then repaired to her own. Gillian in a short time followed her; and at the first glance which Eleonora caught of her countenance, she saw that it was full of important information. (< Well, my Lady," she cried, (? I suppose ??? have heard what comical people are come to the castle to-night ?" To prevent a repetition of the question, Eleonora replied' i π the affirmative. " They are all shut up'in the room with Lord:Fitzroy andi Sir Sigismund/* Gillian nesumed%* " nota soul is allowed to goin, and nobody can think* what they are aU after*—pray- don't tell, but Joel· tried to get a peetx through the key-hole ; and life' says he bellemesi it^ wa* stopped up, in^or- debito preveni any body from looking in, for
for it was quite imperious to his sight- but pray don't tell, my Lady, because Joel would forfeit his masters malevolence for ever, if it were known that he had done so." " Indeed I tliink he would merit a se¬ vere reprimand for his curiosity," replied. Eleonora. " Why, dear me, my Lady, who can help being curious ?" cried Gillian ; ( ' one might as well be able to help wanting to eat or drink, or any. thing else agreeable ; as the proverb says—' 'tis bred in the bone, and ------" Eleonora interrupted her—"Everyone," she said, " can help attempting to gratify his curiosity by unfair means; and it is his duty to practise such a forbearance." Unable to restrain her inclination for telling all she knew, Giljian continued thus— " Would you believe it, my Lady, that Dorothy, who en ught a peep at them as they crossed the drawbridge, says, that three
three of them had bits of iron, for all the world like the ribs of a gridiron, cross and cross, and cross again, before their faces?** Eleonora explained to her that those were called the bars of the helmet. " Well, who they can be, without they are Spanish ambassadors," rejoined Gil¬ lian, tr none of the servants can think." ,f Spanish ambassadors !" cried Eleonora, with something more than a smile. " Why I assure you, my Lady/* rejoin¬ ed Gillian, '* it has* been whispered about some time in fhe castle as a very great se¬ cret indeed, that his Lordship intends to take Spain." Gillian's observations now became too ridiculous in the opinion of Eleonora, to be any longer listened to, and she accord¬ ingly dismissed her for the night. Gillian read her thoughts tn her countenance, and as she departed, said—" Well, indeed tas¬ sure you, whatever you may think, my Lady, it is true, for all the fortifications, aU
all about the castíe* J are going to be re¬ paired on purpose." Notwithstanding the numerous ideas whieh were crowding upon the mind of Eleonora, she could not forbear watrhing some time (Vom her window, whether any one passed* along the ferrare to the tower of which Valentine was an inhabitant ; but not a* footstep broke the silence of the night. At the hour on the following morning, at which bady Bltitlt had directed 1 Eleo¬ nora to expect her, she eritfered her apaH- merit'. As soort' as thcy were left alone, the former began to open the subject up¬ on which she had already awakened· Eleo¬ nora 1 »· curiosity—" I* have a long tale 1 to relate to yot*¿ niy love*;" she said, "and l· trust thatrit* will «not alone repay yoiir at- tèmìoftiby commuriieating to your heart a·*prosper ot ftttiire joy, but that it will alike impart^ to you* mind a material sa* ttøactiorij by displaying to you How im» plicit
pift i t ¡ι confidence is placed in you, by the friends amongst whom you are here living, when they permit me to acquaint you with transactions which are at present to all but themselves involved in the dark¬ est secrecy, in these friends, I refer to Sir Sigismund %id Lord Fitzroy; for thcy are fhe persons who, with the desire of 'Alts bring yottr sorrows* permit this re¬ cital to be laid before you.** " t masi cease to feel at all/' repUed Eleo&ofa, " when I cease to feel gratitude for such generous protectors." • r There h a softer passion, which wonld prove an infinitely more delightful recom¬ pence t© one of them» my love/* return· «d Lady Blunt, tenderly : " you must sure¬ ly have read Lord Fitzroy*» soui in hi* eyea, if the confession has not already been made to you frorø hie lipe —I think your looks imply that it already has.** Eleonora answered faintly in the affirma¬ tive. (t Perhaps,
u Perhaps, my love/' rejoined Lady Thomasine, (( you consider that ■ the de¬ claration of his passion was attended by too little preparation—that its nature was too hasty for it to bear to vour heart the impression which it was desired to convey —it is my wish to explain to you, that the motive of its being so was of the most noble and disinterested kind. Lord Fitz¬ roy believes that it will shortly be in his power to serve the cause of your father; impressed with this idea, he considered that if he were indeed enabled to do so, and were then to ask your hand, that his, request wouid appear a tax upon the ser¬ vice which he had rendered you, and that you mi^ht be impelled by gratitude to make him that grant, to which love would not have urged you. In order, therefore, to obviate even the appearance of com¬ pulsion, he resolved to offer you his hand,. before you were made acquainted with the depending contingencies, that if your election
election fell on him, it might be for him¬ self alone/' " Kind, noble, generous man !" ex¬ claimed Eleonora; ff but, ? tell me, my dear Madam, what are the contingencies which relate to my unfortunate father?" " Grant me yet one instant ere I pro¬ ceed to my relation," answered Lady Blunt : ζ< truly is Lord Fitzroy deserving of the epithets which you bestow on him ; and it joys me sincerely to hear you pro¬ nounce them thus fervently, as I augur from thence your disposition towards his happiness and your own." Eleonora's head fell upon her bosom- she was unable to reply. " How !" exclaimed Lady Blunt; " can it be possible that you are sensible of his excellent qualities, and still hesitate to ally yourself with him who possesses them? — confìde to me the secrets of your heart —I represent your mother now ; and will not judge or advise you less tenderly than she would do." " I must
*' I must not, cannot confide them fo any one," replied Eleonora. " My child," returned Lady Bhmf, « if you have formed a choice, has not your father's approbation sanctioned it ?" e< No^no," falteringly pronounced Eleo¬ nora. " I doubt nof the goodness of your heart," replied Lady Blunt ; " ï doubt not that it is> virtue, and thorø alone who pos¬ sess it, that have power to charm your mitad ; but, my love, yoti are young, very young, to have decided for yourself, with¬ out the advice of parents or of friend». ? beware that no rash step leads you« into a conduct which may embitter? the future years of your life." The tears forced themselves into the eyes of Eleonora ; with difficulty she pro¬ nounced—" I will do nothing rashly, in¬ deed I will not—sensible as I am of Lord Fitzroy's excellence, I cannot obliterate from i»y memory one also amiable, and cherished in my heart, long ere he was known
known to me—pray spare me upon this subject—I am just now very unequal to it.' 1 Lady Blunt was moved by Eleonora'? tears into compliance with her request; and, after a short pause, she entered up¬ on her promised narrative. She opened her relation, by stating to EleonÉtø those facts vvith which our readers are al¬ ready acquainted, concerning the histories of Lord Fitzroy and Sir Sigismund, pre¬ viously to the time at which Eleonora's knowledge of them had commenced î hence she proceeded to recount the events by which Lord Fitzroy had become pos¬ sessed of Framlingham Castle ; and paint¬ ed, in the most vivid colours, the hatred borne him by Queen Mary, and the in- strlts which he had received from her. Having thus far deduced her account, Lady Blunt continued speaking in these words—" You cannot be surprised that one who feel» himself th« son of a king, and
and who knows himself to have been not only the pride of his father's heart, but the idol of his affections, should receive the severest irritation at being regarded not only in an inferior, but even in a dis¬ graceful light, by a child of the same pa¬ rent ; and one who being placed upon her father's throne, so peculiarly enjoys the power of healing, instead of provoking the smart which rankles in some degree in the heart of every man, however great his rank, who is conscious of illegitimate birth. " The generous spirit of Lord Fitzroy had long since resolved him to pass over in silence and contempt, every affront of a private nature which the illiberality of her mind might tempt the Queen to offer him; but having now strengthened her¬ self upon her throne, and being no longer timid, as she ^was upon her first accession to it, of alienating ftom her those who profess the religion of which she espouses the cause, she has lately added to these, insults
insults of a public kind, which he consi¬ ders it impossible for him so easily to for¬ give. " At the celebration ofher late nuptials with the King of Spain, Lord Henry Fitz¬ roy was the only man of distinction in the realm, (with the exception of Sir Sigis¬ mund, who, as the husband of Lord Hen¬ ry's mother, his guardian, and his firm ad¬ herent, shares equally with himself the contumely of the Queen), who was not invited to join in the festivities which graced the day ; and to the privy council, which was shortlv after convened, Lord Henry was for thefirst time omitted to be called. " These indignities severely aifected the mind of Lord Henry ; he apprehended that they might be followed by an attempt to deprive him of his dukedom, or even to despoil him of his possessions; and he immediately applied himself to the train¬ ing of his vassals to arms, and to the re¬ pairing of the fortifications of his castle ; biir
but till within a few weeks past, he en¬ tertained no offensive ideas in making these preparations. He caused them to be effected solely for the purpose of the better enabling him to protect his rights from innovation, and to defend his owa person, in case a hostile hand should be raised against either of them. " By Sir Thomas Stafford, and by va¬ rious relatives of the late Duke of Suf¬ folk, and of Lord Henry Grey, whom Mary had caused to be beheaded, all of whom were, alike with Lord Henry Fitz¬ roy, suffering under her enmity, he was pressed to stir an insurrection, in which they offered themselves to him as his ad¬ herents, adjudging the command to him ; but he merely replied-—' In gratitude to the memory of my father, I will defend myself from dishonour, and those pos¬ sessions, which it has been his good will to invest me with, from invasion, to the last drop of my blood ; but I will not seek a quarrel wifh one of his children/ " I»
" In this state, my love, were affairs at the period at which you first became ac¬ quainted with Lord Fitzroy ; it is unneces¬ sary for me to repeat to you the sympa¬ thy with which your sorrows filled his heart, the admiration with which your per¬ son inspired his breast. On his quitting Castle Gower, and returning to Ins own residence, your ntea was the companion of every moment ; and he began seriously to balance in his own mind, whether an ex¬ ertion of his power, united with those ad¬ herents who had already offered themselves to him, might not be made the means of restoring your father to liberty, and you to happiness." <c Could the restoration of my father, whose religious principles are so oppo¬ site to his own, be indeed the wish of Lord Fitzroy ?" exclaimed Eleonora. " You deceive yourself, my dear child," replied Lady Bluut, " if you believe the love of persecuting the members of op¬ posite sects to their own, to be the gene¬ vois ?. if ril
ral characteristic of those who profess the religfon of the Church of Home. There are bigofs 'to all persuasions ; there are, amidst the professors of every faith, men of cruel and unfeeling minds, who serve their oHvn interests under the cloak of re¬ ligion, and draw an evil name upon the raitée which they espouse. Sorrie of these have lately reared their heads amidst fhe pillars of onr church; and their furious 'principles, instead of promoting conver¬ sion to the opinions of their faith, which milder measures might have effected, have cast upon it obloquy and hatred. But from these individuals you must not judge the sect of which they are members—the truly Christian Roman Catholic laments the 'horrors acted by a Gardiner and a 'Mary, as truly and as piously as a profes¬ sor of the Protestant church can do. By a crime even ina good cause, will no man ascend to Heaven, The true Chnstian de¬ sires the salvation of all his fellow-being?, and believes his Creator equally attentive to
to the prayers of an upright heart, from whatever sect they proceed." Lady Blunt marked herself with the sign ofthe cross, as a silent attestation, that, in the exercise of the principles which she was then professing, she entertained the consolatory hope of being eternally .pre*- served through fhe means ofhim, wbfr for the sake of man had suffered upon it; 'and, after a few moments pause, she proceeded thus:— rt Whilst Lord Fi: /roy was thus ir¬ resolute in his ideas, he received a com¬ munication of a most impartant nature, from one, by whom he was almost as much surprised at being addressed, as by the information which his epistle contain¬ ed. This person was one whose name and history both, I doubt not that} ou have heard—Sir Percival Godolphin." Eleonora replied, by giving Lady BJunt an account of the fruitless search which had been.made for him in Worcester Cas¬ tle by the royal guards, to whichshe add¬ ed—" That after their departure she had ? 4 been
been much surprised when informed who had been the : object of their pursuit, as she had heard it frequently asserted, that Godolphin had paid the forfeit of his mis¬ deeds on a scaffold." ·*' No, my love," returned Lady Blunt, " Sir Percival Godolphin contrived to effect his escape from the Tower; and a confiden¬ tial servant of his own, who was, I believe unjustly, suspected of having been privy to his flight, suffered the punishment which he had been doomed to undergo. A most diligent search has since been mak¬ ing after him in all parts of the kingdom, but he hes eluded his pursuers." " Where is hc now ?" asked Eleonora, " In this very castle," replietl Lady Blunt ; " he is one of the supposed stran¬ gers who arrived here last night. Godol¬ phin is by marriage my nephew ; I cannot therefore but rejoice in his safety, on ac¬ count of her with whom he is united . but oh ! rejoice weakly expresses the delight, the rapture, with which, on your account, on
on that of Lord Fitzroy, on that of us all, I beheld the existence of one, whom he brings with him— ? bless him, ileaven ! prosper his restoration to the royal scep¬ tre!" " To the royal sceptre !*' echoed Eleo¬ nora; '* of whom, my dearest Madam, can you be speaking ?" " Prepare your heart to meet a tide of joy that is about to rush into it," returned Lady Blunt. " ? Eleonora, the royal Ed¬ ward lives !" " The king !" exclaimed Eleonora ; " is it possible that you can mean the king ?" " ? silence, silence, my dearest child," cried Lady Thomasine ; " no ear must hear a breath of this—no heart catch a suspi¬ cion of it-—yes, yes, it is the king ! that king, whose noble heart never shrunk from hailing his father's son by the title of bro¬ ther—blessings, blessings on his name !" " ? may the interposing hand of Pro¬ vidence stretch itself out to aid the cause of those who struggle to replace him on ?? the
the throne of England !" exclaimed Eleo¬ nora. " In vvhat accents of delight, of praise, of love, have I heard my revered father name this youthful monarch ! ? could he bc apprised of his existence—of the possibility of his being restored to his rights, beneath the gentle rule of his sovereignty !—But I interrupt you—you are* going 1 to relate to me' the particulars of títift apparent miracle." To this relation Lady Blunt immediate^ ly proceeded ; but ere we listen to it, it ? necessary, for the more clearly compre¬ hending its intricacies, that we should know something of Godolphin, and his adventurous exploits.
CHAP.
y Mil* mi » ι —— —fc*
CIIAP. VIIL 0 1? natore thae'» no blemUh but the mind t None c»b.bc o&ll'd dcfoim'd bat th« unkind; Viitufi is bf^jqty } but thctbequtrous evil 4r*en4?ty r tc«ake f o?eifJlotuisb.'d by the devil."
*' Whpt hqrrors h»ng around! Schold hint stretch'd, where reigns «tergal night, The flint his pillow, apd, cold damps his cov'ring ; Unknown, unfriended, compass'd round with wretchedness ; ■ ' ------in servile weeds, But yat of mien majestic." ??????. In the third y^ar after the accession of Edward the. Sixth to· the English throne; Sir Pereival Goldophirr inherited from his ? 4 father
father a considerable personal property, and an estate of value in the county of Kent. The young knight had at this period just completed his twenty-third year; and charmed with tiie novel sensation of an enlargement from all parental restraint, his most earnest desire was to make a dis¬ play of his independence in the circles of fashion and rant. He accordingly repair¬ ed to the metropolis; and through, the in¬ terest of thé Duke of Northumberland, who had experienced a warm partizan in his late father, he procured an in trod uc- tton at court. Never was man happier; and it falls to the lot of few to be equally courted and admired as was Sir Percival Godolphin. Both the form and face of Sir Percival were more strikingly handsome than they are usually beheld in man. His figure was tall, graceful, and commanding. His thick and curling hair was of the same sparkling black which gave animation to his eye ; a vivid colour glowed upon his cheeks ; an aqui¬ line
line nose rendered the proportions of his countenance perfect ; and a mouth of pe¬ culiarly smiling sweetness stamped it beautiful ; whilst the united expression of the whole was interesting even to fascina¬ tion. His natural abilities vvere good. The best education vvhich the progress then made in literature and the arts was capable of affording, had been bestowed on him; and a desire vvhich he felt of possessing every acquirement that might tend to ren¬ der him conspicuous in life, had induced him fo pay the greatest attention to his in¬ structors. But-his heart was by no means of the same perfect nature vvith his person and his abilities. Vanity and craft were its predominant passions, and impetuosity the temper of his soul. The ruling inclination of Sii; Percivals heart was a love of the sex ; and in the heart of a man vvho unites a vain temper to a handsome person, it is not unusually a ruling inclination ; and perhaps it vvould ? 5 be
be móre corectly named* if instead of be¬ ing termed an universal admiration of wo¬ men* it were called a love of being uni¬ versally admired by them. Both in the metropolis, which he had already more than once visited with his father, and in the county where he rc- skied^ the smiles- of every pretty woman had been bestowed on him ; and his gal¬ lant manners and attractive form universal¬ ly talked of, acknowledged, and admired. His years, therefore, of approximation to manhood, it may be easily imagined, hadnot passed without his being engaged in a variety of amours ; but no lasting impression had yet been made upon his heart : this conquest had been reserved for one whose person was as rich in the graces of feminine beauty, as was that of Sir Per¬ civai in those which form the ornament of the stronger sex. The name of this lovely girl was Ger¬ aldine Knyvett ; she was the daughter of that Sir-Edmund Knyvett, whom we have 4 * already
already said had espoused the younger støter Of Lady Blunt. Her fathets only child, Geraldine wae the ido] of his soul— hé lived but in hct sight, and almost worshipped her perfec¬ tions—his eyes danced Wrfh jøy ás he eon*-' tempiated- her by day, arid hiá dreams by mght were composed of bliss ; for Gerak dine was· the vision whkh presented itself in them. Thu¿ sensitively alive to her happiness, tfie supreme wish of Sir Edhfrnnd'fr Sotti wító to be h d íd hey wedded m sönté iflàn ?? worth, in v^hottf ¿he mig^i! íind'án ärffee- tfónaté htrsba»nd and protrCftot United. T^ this end he had encouraged Sir Phißp' Wrïlonghby, » tómght wlícm 1 etme» hy coliti g no us M nis ow it, to address* fifet. · Sir Philip was undonfefedff scleral years older tha'ri Geraldine; but of a sober* andM gi-av^e (ferrteafibr, and univertírlly tépoitéd' to bè an^ ele 6 nVh t* mart. Theie good r qtra- ' liríes Sir Êdwártí f balanced in^his owrí nfífTcf 1 agaírist tUé pTepòrtdPéYartcy ôf yerfrt, afid ? G jud<;in^
judging that he was calculated to make his daughter happy, he besought Geraldine to become his wife. Geraldine was scarce¬ ly eighteen years of age ; she had passed a life of retirement, unseen by any men of her own rank who vvere possessed of su¬ perior attractions to those of Sir Philip;, she had not therefore enjoyed the advan¬ tage of comparison ; and when her father spoke to her of uniting herself vvith Wil¬ loughby, and laid a peculiar emphasis on the excellent protector which she w T ouId find in him, in the event of his death, she accepted him upon this recommenda¬ tion, not regarding him as a lover, but as a< second father. This arrangement being made, *o the in¬ conceivable joy* of Sir Edward, it was agreed that, previously to her marriage, Geraldine should be taken on a visit to the metropolis, in order that when she was become a wife, sfee might have no induce¬ ment to quit her own county. The plan was put into effect ; and at a ball given by one
ene of the nobility, Geraldine Knyvett was beheld by Sir Percival Godolphin, The first moment that their eyes en¬ countered each other, they sparkled with a mutual fire, which quickly communicated itself to their hearts. Geraldine for the first rime felt the ascendency which youth and a handsome person possess over graver years, even when connected with the most amiable qualities, in exciting an interest in the heart for him who possesses them ; and Sir Percival, hitherto accustomed to be sought and courted himself, for the first time beheld a woman of such transcendent charms, as instantly converted him into their humblest votary. The cold senses of an anchorite could scarcely have turned away unimpassioned from the sight of Geraldine's beauty. Her figure was small and delicate, but exqui¬ sitely proportioned and graceful ; her skin rivalled in its glossy whiteness the polish¬ ed ivory ; her eyes were blue, and ex¬ pressive of the most enchanting sweetness; the
the rosy blush of maiden tint bloomed upon her cheeks, and her auburn ringlets flow¬ ed" in luxuriance upon her shoulders, and enviously shaded the paradise of her bo¬ som. An introduction was easily gained, and Sîtf Percitat obtained her hand for the däfice. " Thcy are the handsomest couple ever beheld," was the open remark of every one present ; and in the private re¬ cesses of their own hearts grew the blossom of a passion, wiiich every successive hour tended to mature. Ere the evening was concluded, Sir Per¬ cival already breathed the soft whisperings of affection into the ear of Geraldine'. Her's was 8 an age at'which a tale of love from the Yfpi of a handsome young man may im^ press any image it pleases on the freártôf the fentale fo Whom it is addressed. He* disposition was as gentle as the breathr of May ; her soul wars exquisitely tender, and her heart peculiarly sensitive. She wasr flattered by the preference of a mari so
stf universally coorted. She drew, in het own mind, a comparison between the hap-' piness which she pictured to herself that she had to expect in an union wifh Sir Philip Willoughby, and with Sir Percival' Godolphin. She wondered how she ever could'have admitted the former at ail in the character of a lover ; and, in the course öf a few short days, she confessed with blushes to Sir Percival, that the passion which he was hourly repeating to her that she had awrakenetl in his heart, was reci¬ procally existing in her own. With rapture he received her confes¬ sion, and with all the impatience of an atdertt lover, flew to Sir Edmund to ask hh consent to their union. Sir Edmund're¬ plied— f( That Geraldine had already pro¬ mised her hand to Sir Philip Willoughby." ? Bul she repents of having done so," returned Sir Percivai, " and blesses- me by the transfer ofher affection." Sir Edmund was irtCredufôTtsr; and Sir Percival having left hfin, with 1 evident marks
marks of dissatisfaction, he sent to sum¬ mon his daughter to his presence. When Geraldine appeared, her father's surprise was not less than his vexation, when he heard her confirm what Godol¬ phin had advanced. He represented to her, that it was not possible, without an insult of the most egiegious kind, for her to revoke the promise which she had made to Willoughby ; that Sir Percival was a man whom of all others he should wish her to avoid as a husband. " How little is it,, my child," he said, " that vou can know of him from your private observation ? and how largely does report speak to his discredit? Does not the mean passion of vanity dwell in his heart vvith an unbrid¬ led sway r and does not the indulgence of this passion pronounce him equally selfish in his temper, as weak in his under¬ standing ? Does it not iead you to foresee that his affection for you will quickly di¬ minish, and his ideas all revert again to himself? The natural tone of his disposi¬ tion
tion also is violent and unsteady ; and were you in any case to complain of his neglect, his indifference might likely be succeeded by cruelty. Oh the idea is dreadful to a mind of reflection ! no, no, my Geraldine, were there not another man in existence, Sir Percival must not be your husband í What are the perfections of the person compared with those of the mind ? they are as the pale flame of a sepulchral lamp, contrasted with the glorious bril¬ liancy ofthe sum." It is almost as ineffectual a command as the infatuated Canute addressed to the roaring waves of the sea, which parents issue, when they direct the virgin heart of a daughter to relinquish the flrst impres¬ sion of love under which it has beaten. In vain was it that Sir Edmund interdicted the future visits of Sir Percival —that pas¬ sion which intercourse had produced, ab¬ sence strengthened. In vain was it that he set before her the state of wretchedness to which such an act of desperation on her part
part would reduce htm—his opposition to her wishes rendered her the more eager to unite herself with the man. who.she be^ lieved: knew no happiness, but their grati-* ficat ion. Sir FhilipL Willoughby, on his part, cib deavouned, by rhô e.vercise of every ten* deunBsæand attention: towards Geraldine, to* overcome whati he considered 1 as a tem* posrary delusion whicb had' seised upon her senses; but it produced-the opposite effect to that desired from· it: she had be¬ fore regarded hinv with indifference, she now beheld him with a feeling little short of hatreds Bve scai*cely haPf the tíme had elapsed, which it had been the original intention of Sir Edta'und/ Knyvett to have passed in* bondan, resolved to deprive hfe daughter of ??? opportunity of meeting Sir Per¬ cival kt public, he returned with her into the country. The lovers found it impos¬ sible to gain an interview previously to her departure ; but they had akeady estab¬ lished
lished a daily correspondence, for which Sir Percival had contrived to op^n a chan¬ nel, by bribing one of Sir Edmund's ser¬ vants to act in concert with a faithful do¬ mestic of his own. Not less his love than his vanity, had de¬ cidedly determined Sir Perci vab that no obstacle should eventually stand in the way of Geraldine's becoming his wife. He loved her more passionately than any wo¬ man whom he had e ver beheld, because he judged· her, on- account of the superiority of her charms fo those of all other women with whom he was acquainted, more wor¬ thy of his affection. He was aware that there was not perhaps any other woman in the kingdom whose hand would have been refused him ; he therefore resolved to shew his power, by obtaining her who was en¬ deavoured to be withheld from him. Before the expiration of one month af¬ ter the return of Sir Edmund to his cas¬ tle, he was seized with an illness, whrch it Was apprehended would strikt at the roor of
of his existence. Sensible of his own dan¬ ger, he rcsohed to exert every argument and persuasion which a parent could use, for endeavouring to tempt his daughter info an alliance with Sir Philip Willough¬ by previously to his decease. Two suc¬ cessive days were passed by him in this attempt, Geraldine answering him only with her tears. On the third, after he had spent a con¬ siderable time in conversation with · Sir Philip, he sent to request that his daugh¬ ter would come to them in his chamber ; the servant whom he had charged with this message brought information, that the Lady Geraldine was no where to be found* A suspicion of her having fied with Go¬ dolphin was instantly entertained by her father and Sir Philip, and every enquiry set on foot towards ascertaining the truth. Nothing could be learnt, except that some honsemen had been seen loitering near the castle, for several hours before the discovery of Geraldine's absence ; and as these
these were now no longer to he seen, it appeared natural to suppose that they had been Sir Percivals emissaries, himself pro¬ bably one of them, and that thcy had car¬ ried her off. Horses were immediately saddled for a pursuit ; one of the fleetest was mounted by Sir Philip Willoughby himself; and the road taken along which it was supposed ? most probable that Godolphin had borne his prize. They had not proceeded many miles ere they heard particulars which confirmed Sir Philips apprehensions ; thcy were told that some horsemen, about ten in num¬ ber, of which the description correspond¬ ed with those who had been seen lurking about Sir Edmund Knyvctt's castle, had lately passed that road ; and that a lady had been placed before one of them in the front of his saddle. Notwithstanding the approach of uight, they still pursued their way, and acciden¬ tally met individuals by whom the party had
had been seen. The duskinessof the night in some measure retarded their speed, but Sir Philip still resolved not to stop ; and having refreshed their horses with pro¬ vender and water, they continued their pursuit. About an hour after the dawn of day, they arrived at the entrance of an exten¬ sive forest, where a variety of .paths per¬ plexed rhem in their choice ; whilst they were debating on which to fix, one of Sir Philip's attendants exclaimed—" That he saw smoke rising above the trees at the distance of little more than a stone's throw from them ;" and enquired of his master— <c Whether he did 'not judge it most adviseable that they should ride up to the dwelling from whence ;it proceed¬ ed, and ^endeavour to gain some informa¬ tion concerning the road ?" This was readily agreed to on the part of Sir Philip ; and as they proceeded they discovered some horses browsing amongst the trees, which were recognised by &ir Edmund's
Edmund's domestics to be those Hvhidh had been seen cm the preceding afternoon, in the neighbourhood of his castle; in the dwelling towards which they Were ap¬ proaching, it appeared, from hence, pro¬ bable, that the fugitives were'at that mo¬ ment reposing. On reaching fhehabita- tion, which proved to be a cottage embo¬ somed in the forest, one of Sir Philip's attendants, by the command of his mas¬ ter, knocked at the 'door, and demanded admittance ; for a considerable time they received rio reply ; at length from a nar¬ row casement, in the upper part oPthe cottage, Sir Percival Godolphin himself looked out — " What is that ye would have ?" he haughtily cried. Sir Philip spoke— " We 'require," he said, *' to be 1 in formed, whether'the daugh¬ ter of Sir Edmund Knyvett be concealed in'this cottage? and if she* be, wedemand to have her delivered up to us, that we may restore her to her father." ·* It is my pride to inform you," repHed Sir
Sir Percival, " that she is under my pro¬ tection, from which no existing force shall compel her." " I have promised her father not to re¬ turn without her," replied Sir Philip; " we will therefore try the issue of your vaunt." t( Beware !" cried Godolphin. " By Heaven I am not in a temper to be trifled with." (i Nor I," answered Sir Philip ; then turning to his attendants he added, " force yourselves an entrance into the cottage." " Hold," cried Sir Percival, (f for your own sakes, hold ; I swear that the first who raises the latch shall die." " I fear not your threat," returned Sir Philip, who had already vaulted from his horse, and advancing towards the door as he spoke, thrust his hand resolutely against it. But the action was his last—the impe¬ tuous Sir Percival was true to his assertion •—he drew a pistol from hisgirdle, and shot his rival through the heart. Instant confusion ensued ; the domes¬ tics
tics of Sir Philip, exasperated by the death of their master, rushed wildlv into the cot- tage, vowing vengeance against whomso* cver they should find in it ; but the su¬ periority of numbers on the side of Godol¬ phin, rendered their resolution of little avail; and the victorious party mounting their horses, with all celerity again pur¬ sued their way. Geraldine, who had been sleeping in a separate apartment of the cottage, had been awakened by the report of the pis¬ tol, and had instantly sprung from her couch ; but she had only a suspicion that death had been the event of its discharge, as Sir Percivai merely informed her, that they had been overtaken by a party sent in pursuit of them by her father, whom he and his men had routed and put to flight. They continued to pursue their way with all possible speed ; and without meet¬ ing any farther interruption to their pro¬ gress, reached Sir Percivals abode. Their vol. ii. l imi on
union was immediately solemnized, and Geraldine was then happy ; for it was no longer in the power of fate to disunite her from the man she loved. But, alas ! her happiness was of short duration ; on the second day after her marriage, she beheld the person ot' her husband seized, by virtue of a warrant issued against him, for the murder of Sir Philip Willoughby. Astonishment was the first sensation of her soul, but it quickly dissolved into the tenderer feeling ofgrief; and deaf to her tears, her entreaties, her shrieks, a guard bore him from her to prison, where he was constrained fo remain till he should have taken his trial. To weep was all that Geraldine could now do ; and at the expiration of about fourteen more days, a fresh cause was given her for her tears—she received in¬ telligence that her father had paid the debt of nature. The domestic who brought her the information, told her that Sir Ed¬ mund had not held up his head for one single
single moment since he had received the tidings of her flight, and of Sir Philip's death; that he had not only refused all nourishment, but also the assistance of medicine for the relief of the disorder un¬ der which he had laboured ; and that he might be said to have died of grief. Geraldine now found it almost impos¬ sible to weep ; her agony of heart was too great to admit the relief of tears.—" Oh, Heavens," she exclaimed, i( is it thus to wed for love !—my husband imprisoned on the accusation of murder, ere yet three days had passed over our union !—the death of my father accelerated by the event I Ah, why are sweets of an enraptured pas¬ sion so quickly turned into the bitter gall of misery and remorse !" To the event of her husband's trial were dedicated all the thoughts whieh she could snatch from the tomb of her father. The Duke of Northumberland stood forth Sir Percivals steady and vigorous friend. Every interest was used for him which ?> 2 could
could bc engaged in his cause; and through the persevering and successili! e/ïbrts of his friends,, his life was preserved to him, by his being found guilty only of manr slaughter. A fyie was levied upon him, which he joyfully paid ; and his person vyas imme¬ diately set at liberty. Enraptured he flew to the embrace of his Geraldine ; and as the impression of past events became weakened in her mind, by the lenient hand of time, she enjoyed wjth hini a period of the greatest happir ness ; but permanent felicity is not the lot of mortals, and she began to observe encroaphments uppn her bliss. Sir Per¬ civals union with her had not damped the vanity which, as a single man, had swelled his heart ; he cQuld not still forbear turn¬ ing an eyeof grajtitude upon those females whose smjles bespoke, the admiration which their hearts ej>ter,tained of him. Geraldine- began now to reflect ?? the prophecy of hçr deceased father, and ob¬ serving
serving how correct had hitherto proved his augurations, and recollecting that he had likewise foretold, that if she were to complain of her husband's neglect, she might expose herself to suffer from the impetuosity of his temper, she constrain¬ ed herself sufficiently not to murmur ; but the gloohi of laihèrítatiori often clouded her brow ; and often in the privacy of her heart did she repeat-— <f Is it this to wed for love ?" Thus were the private affairs of Sir Per¬ civai and his Geraldine situated, when a public event of an important nature took phu e, in the death of King Edward the Sixth. At this momentous crbis the Duke of Northumberland seated himself at the helm of state, and declared his daugh¬ ter-in-law, the Lady Jane Grey, Queen. Thé firm adherence, and effectual service which Sir Pertival had experienced from. the Duke, upon his arraignment for the murder df Sir Philip Willoughby, render¬ ed it not less his inclination than his duty, L 3 to
to support every measure proposed by him, and to add strength by every means in his power to his proceedings. The skilful mind and daring spirit of Godolphin, constituted him a most valuable ally to the cause which he espoused ; but it was decreed by the voice of fate to fall unsuccessful to the ground; and together vvith his patron the Duke, and varians others of his adherents. Sir Percivai was arrestei at Cambridge, and thrown into the lower of London, by the command of A-iarv, whose accession to the throne had eclipsed the short-lived dignities of the unambitious Jane. No sooner had the Queen obtained a firm possession of the sceptre, than the Duke of Northumberland and his adherents were arraigned in Westminster-hall, before the Duke of Norfolk, whom it had been one of the first acts of Mary's sovereignty to emancipate from his imprisonment, and to restore to his office of High-steward of England. After
After along and skilful trial, sentence was passed on the offenders, and the day was appointed upon which they were adjudg¬ ed to lose their heads on the Tower Hill. Now Geraldine saw herscif about to be deprived of her husband, her affection for him returned to its original height; and hours of wretchedness, both to him and to herself, were those which she passed in his prison in the Tower. On the afternoon preceding the day on which his sentence was to be executed, she left him with a promise of beholding him again once more on the following morning. At her departure Sir Percivai detained with him a young man, who although no¬ minally a servant of his houtihold, had al¬ ways enjoyed from him benefits superior to those bestowed on a common domestic, and had even held a share in his confidence and friendship. This young man, whose name was Wal¬ ter Blanford, had been brought up by Sir Percivals father, from an infant,, as his ? 4 page ;
page; common report spoke ofhim as his natural son ; and the very strong resem¬ blance which his person bore to Sir Per¬ ei vals, a'Med to the marks of kindness which hc as ever ready to extend towards him, corroborated the opinion. When left alone with Walter, Sir Per¬ civai said—" It is my desire to pass this night, if possible, free from those terrors which must in every mind predominate, when the morrow is destined to cut short its existence : this wish cannot be realised except in sleep; and this my senses in¬ form me will not be produced by natural means—go then, my friend, and bring me an opiate of strength, vvhich may lull for a while the sorrows of my aching breast." Walter immediately prepared to execute his request. As he reached the door of Sir Percivals apartment, he detained him by saying— " That having tasted no re¬ freshment during the whole of that day, he felt extremely weak, and wished him to
to bring back with him also a' flask of wine." In le<& than an hour Walter returned with the articles Which Sir Percival had required ; he placed them upon a r.ible, and would have açairt depnr'èd, but Sir Percival besought him not to leave him—■ "'He could not," he said. " endure the idea of passing the riirht aione." He poured- out a goblet of wine, and desired Walter to dtink, tdl ling him he would pledge hím. " The grace of Heaven be upon' thy soilí. hesr of masterii nini 'of friends/' said Walter, as*he lifted it fo his lips. Godolphin wattdered about the' apart¬ ment m a perturbed state of mind, natural to the situation in which he stood. After a time Walter urged him'to takVtheOpiaté' which'hd'had brought him—" If Vou de¬ fer too long to swallow it," hc said, " it will oppress 5 our poùérs of bense, at that period when your honour is eohceÎnëd in displaying your fortitude of mind." L õ tf 1 will
tc I will pursue your advice," answered Godolphin ;" throw my skin cloak over my couch, that I may take my last sleep in this world with some degree of com¬ fort ; when you have done that, we will bid each other farewell in one more gob¬ let." Walter immediately proceeded to pre¬ pare his master's couch, and whilst he did so, Godolphin filled two cups of wine, into one of which he hastily poured the opiate which had been lying in a phial upon the table. When Walter returned from the other end of the apartment at which the couch stood, Sir Percivai presented him the cup into which the draught of oblivion had been infused—" Farewell, Walter," he said, " this is our last cup on earth ; I shall leave no drop of this, nor wilt thou surely either of thine." Godolphin extended his hand as he spoke towards Walter, who pressed it in his — " Oh, Sir Percivai," he said, "my friends
friend, my----------■" These words were ar¬ ticulate ; the succeeding ones could not bc heard ; they lifted the cups to their lips, and emptied the draught of friend¬ ship to a drop. As Waller set down his goblet upon the table, he perceived the empty phial, and remarked its state. iC The contents are swallowed," said Sir Percivai. " Heaven send they produce sound sleep !" replied Walter. " Heaven send it, í pray !" returned Sir Percival, and threw himself upon his couch. Walter continued sitting in a chair near the hearth, with his eyes fixed, mournfully on the dvinif embers of the wood iire. With the impatiente of terror for the success of his plan, and vvith the watchful¬ ness of a Ixnx for the due moment of putting it into execution, lay Sir Perci¬ vai, In little more than-an hour the loud breathings of Walter informed him that the opiate had taken ? (feet, and that he !. ii was
was soundly asleep. Sir Percival rose from his couch, and taking the lamp in his hand, approached Blanford, and ascertain¬ ed positively by its light that his sleep was unfeigned. Having thrown off his own cloak, with the utmost caution he slipped off from the shoulders of Walter the one which he wore, and took his cap from his head. Still the sleep of Walter continued unbroken, though restless and disturbed. For a few moments Sir Percival appre¬ hended to see him awake, but fo his .great joy he again sunk into a heavy lethargy. Having placed Walter's cap upon his own head, and wrapped himself in his cloak, he gave the signal which was ap¬ pointed to call the jailer to open the door of the apartment ; and preferring to trust to the likeness which he bore to Walter, and which he knew from experience to be sufficient to deceive an inaccurate obser¬ ver, and doubted not would now be strengthened by his wearing his apparel, rather than to attempt to conceal his coun- 4 tenance,
tenance, whieh action he considered might create suspicion in minds into vvhich it otherwise might not enter, he issueel bold¬ ly forth. "Iiow fares Sir Percival?" asked the jailer, as he followed him along the pas¬ sage. "Thank lieaven he sleeps just now," replied Godolphin ; '* I pray you do not disturb him till my return." The jailer promised obedience: andin a few moments time, Sir Percival passed the outer gate of the prison. Ilis heart beat a tumult of joy ; and he darted for¬ ward with the fleerness ofa hind. The first person vvho demanded admit¬ tance to Sir Percival vvas his confessor ; he arrived at the Tower about the hour of six in the morning, and was immediately shewn to his apaitment. On entering it he beheld Walter in the act of waking from the effects of the opiate, with many a struggle to shake off the lethargy vvhich oppressed him. An explanation took place between
between them, and Sir Percivals crafty conduct was apparent fo them both. How¬ ever friendly they might be to his cause, it was impossible for them to conceal the event ; the rumour of his escape was quick¬ ly spread through the Tower, and carried from thence to the Queen, who com¬ manded a pursuit after him instantly to bc set on foot. Geraldine was by no means one of the last whom the intelligence reached, and joyful to her was the sound ; falling on her knees, she breathed to Heaven a prayer of mingled gratitude for his present en¬ largement, and entreaty for his future preservation. In dwelling on the rapture which his escape communicated to her mind, she had no leisure to reflect on her own destitute lot, without a home to shel¬ ter her, wilhout the means of providing herself with the necessaries of life; for the entire possessions of her husband had, since his condemnation, been attainted and forfeited to the crown. in
In her forlorn situation an asylum was oflered to her bv her aunt, the generous and compassionate. Lady Blunt. This she thankfully accepted, and made Castle Gowcr for three months her habitation, during which siie expected dailv to receive some intelligence from her husband; but her hopes were disappointed ; and consi¬ dering herscif either neglected by him, or that he had ceased to exist, she retired, in the utmost despondency of mind, as a boarder, into the convent of Saint Bridget, in the vicinity of Ipswich, in Suffolk. Walter Blanford's attestations of his in¬ nocence, relative to Sir Percivals escape from the Tower, were unheeded by those in power. The unfortunate man was con¬ demned to suffer the punishment of death, which had been adjudged to his false friend ; and his sentence was executed upon the spot, and at the hour, which had been appointed for the termination of Godol¬ phin's existence. Weeks rolled on after weeks, and these grew
grew i n't ? mon ihs, without a breath hav¬ ing been heard of Sir Percivai Godolphin, by any of those vvho, froin their connexion wifh Lady Blunt; felt some interest in the fate of fhe husband of her niece Geral¬ dine; when, on that very evening on vvhich Lord Henry Fif/roy received intelligence of the existence of Saint Ethelbert, a let¬ ter, doublv scaled, was brought by a strån- per, roughly dressed, to the foot of the drawbridge' of Framlingham Castle, vvho delivered it to the sentinel stationed there, and directed him to be diligent in con¬ veying it v immediately to the hand of his Lord. The letter ran thus :—
" Os-r. vvho is well known to Lord Henry Fitzroy, addresses to him these lines. He omits to unite with them his name, not because he feels any reluctante ίο discover if to Lord Fitzroy, for it vvould give him satisfaction to do so, but léét his epistle
epistle should fall into the hands of an enemy. On the knowledge of the dislike which Lord Fitzroy bears to the Queen, and of the love which animated his heart for her predecessor Edward, he doubts not that he will joyfully become a firm ad¬ herent to a cause of the most interesting nature to those who cherish the same sen¬ timents as his own. What that cause ia, must not be committed to the casualty of a letter ; it must be verbally detailed, and detailed where the privacy of the com¬ munication cannot be interrupted« U Lord Fitzroy will come alone, at the hour of seven, either to-morrow, or on the fol¬ lowing morning, to that spot on Fecknam Heath, where the four cross roads; now in disuse, meet, he shall there find one pre¬ pared to explain to him the mystery con¬ tained in this letter.—Treachery has been used towards the unfortunate monarch Ed¬ ward ; let this be a sufficient spur to him not to neglect the invitation herein given him." Not
Not less ihe surprise than the curiosity of Lord Fitzroy was excited by what he had read ; and after much deliberation with his own mind, he resolved to attend the appointment. He accordingly rose on the following morning af an early hour; and in order to guard against the possi¬ bility of any danger awaiting him, he arm¬ ed himself with his cutlass and pistols, mounted one of his fleetest coursers, and attended by a single domestic, likewise on horseback, and also armed, he proceeded towards Fecknam Heath, which lay at the distance of about five miles from the gate of Framlingham park. Having entered upon the heath, he rode on till he believed himself to be arrived at the distance of scarcely a couple of furlongs from the spot of his appointment ; here he commanded his attendant to stop, di¬ recting him not to quit the place, nor to follow him, unless he should hear him sound
sound a horn, which he had slung round his neck for that express purpose, before his departure írom the castle. Having reached the point where the four roads united, and which were so lit¬ tle trodden lhat they appeared almost choaked up with weeds, and would hard¬ lv have been discernible at all to one who was a stranger to the country, Lord Fitzroy looked around him for the ex¬ pected person ; but nothing met his sight except the distant hills which closed in the prospect on every side : his attendant, di¬ minished by distance, was scarcely visible; and the only object which broke the same¬ ness of the unvarying heath, was the trunk of an oak, of which the branches appeared to have been blasted by the lightning. He had not wandered here many mi¬ nutes, ere he was surprised by behold¬ ing the figure of a man, in the act of is¬ suing from the hollow trunk which he had just been contemplating. He was dressed in a surcoat of brown cloth, and wore on his
his head a barred helmet of iron. He ad¬ vanced towards Lord Fitzroy, who could not doubt him to be the person whose pre¬ sence he had been instructed to expect. When they met the stranger spoke-^- " Will Lord Fitzroy," he sakl, " refuse his hand to him who was once Sir Percival Godolphin?" tx Godolphin !" echoed Lord Fitzroy. " Even he," was the reply ; " and I am certain," he continued, " that yoiir soul is of too generous and too ???? a nature f 0 suffer you to despise any marl, because hé is sufficiently unfortunate to be a wan¬ derer on the face of the earth, and to be compelled to screen himself from the ob¬ servation of his fellow-beings." Godolphin still stood with his hand ex¬ tended ; Lord Fitzroy received it into his ; Godolphin pressed it fervently, and then coritiriued speaking thus—" I do not mur¬ mur, I rather rejoice, iri the fate which has reduced me to my present humble state ; I perceive in it the finger of an all- wise
wise Providence ; 1 > ? ' i.rwr been cast a wanderer upon the eat.i, i í ¡an act:o.» of the blaclýeat die whicn can Main fhe oearts of human beings had not been brought to light—yes, Lovd F it/Toy, I pertene my¬ self the instrument of Heaven." Eord Fitzroy desired him to explain. 'f It would only be to waste these pre¬ cipua, momente of privacy," replied Go¬ dolphin* Ci were I to commence to you a detail 06 all the struggles which I have ex¬ perienced to prolong existence, of all the perils which \ have encountered, since· the hour of mv escape from the Tower ; I shall therefore proceed to speak only of what relates to our sovereign Edward." " Edwaro" !" repeated Lord Henry. " Ay/' replied Godolphin, " did I not inform you in my letter, that treachery had been used towards bim ?** " You cannot mean that be was unfair¬ ly deprived of life?" returned Lord Fitz¬ roy. «* You
u You shall hear, you shall hear," re¬ joined Sir Percival. " It is now about two months ago since I was one evening overtaken on a heath, equally destitute of shelter as that on which we are now standing, by a violent storm of hail and rain. I had on the preceding day been driven, by apprehensions which 1 could not subdue, of a discovery awaiting me, from an asylum which I had for a short period enjoyed ; my last night had been passed at the foot of a tree, and I had no place to which I could fly for refuge. The darkness of night was falling to the earth, and the storm appeared to gather strength, as the light of day fled from the sky. Hun¬ ger, cold, and fatigue, alike oppressing me, I became almost careless at what price I obtained relief for my wants, and espy¬ ing the glimmering of a distant light up¬ on the verge of the heath, I ran towards iL". Lord Fitzrov availed himself of a mo- mentary
mentary pause made by Godolphin, to en¬ quire in vvhat part of the kingdom this oc¬ currence had taken taken place ? " In the most northern part of Warwick¬ shire," Sir Percivai replied ; and proceed¬ ed in his recital thus—" In a few minutes the light vanished, but I still continued to pursue the direction in which I had beheld it, for it was my only hope. After some time I reached what appeared to me, in the dusky twilight by which I then'viewed them, the broken and ruinous walls of an edifice which had fallen into decay. I feared that I had mistaken my way, as it ap¬ peared improbable that there should have been a light in a ruin of this nature ; but I was so entirely overpowered by fatigue, and anxious to shelter myself from the rain and wind, that I resolved to endea¬ vour to find some nook, where I might lay myself down to repose. I presently discovered what appeared to me to have been an arched gateway ; I passed through it, and found myself in a lofty hall or apart¬ ment,
ment, whicb I could only discern to be spacious ; it was however provided with a roof, and retiring into one of its corners, I threw myself down upon the ground. " I had not been long reclined there, ere I wa$ startled by a deep groan, which was immediately succeeded by the clank¬ ing of chains. I conjectured the sounds to proceed from some spot immediately under that upon which I was lying ; and I had little time for reflection ere approach¬ ing fbotsjteps assailed my senses. I turned my eyes in the direction in vvhich I heard them, and beheld a faint gleam of light issuing through a narrow doorway, at the distance of only a few paces from me. " Uncertain what to expect, Γ kept my eye fixed on the spot; the light grew stronger, and the sound of the footsteps increased; in the course ofa few minutes I perceived a male figure bearing a lan¬ thorn ; he entered the dilapidated hall which I had made my resting-place, and of which the nature was now made visible to me,
me, by the light contained in the stran¬ ger's lanthorn. <( The moment I beheld him, I expect¬ ed to see his eyes turned upon me, but they were bent sullenly to the ground; he moved towards an opposite extremity of the hall to that in which 1 lay, and from a niche in the wall, in which there appeared to be a shelf, he took a basket and a flask, and returned towards the door-way through which he had just passed into the hall : as he moved on, I saw him tr.kesome bread out ofthe basket, examine it. and replace it. The sight of food, to one m the wretched state of want 1 was then in. was a sight too tempting to buller mc to view it unmoved, or silent; and raising myself upon one of my hands, I said—' Stranger, whoever thou art, f c a r not hi m w h ? add resses t h ?? ; ? fainting and a wretched traveller implores of thee a morsel of bread.' iC The man not only did not reply, but he did not even raise his eyes, nor in the least slacken his pace. vol. u m Ci I con-
" I concluded it impossible for him not to have heard me ; yet as he was passing the door-way, I repeated my petition in a louder tone. " I received no answer, but still heard his footsteps falling deliberately as before. A sudden impulse seized me ; I resolved to follow him ; and starting hastily up, I entered the door-way through which he had passed : the light of his lanthorn, at the extremity of a short passage, directed me what course to pursue, and I next ob¬ served the light flickering on the wall, at the bottom of several broken and uneven steps ; I moved down them as quickly as their ruinous state would allow me to do ; and as I descended I heard the wards of a lock creak. " In a few moments I again had the stranger in view ; he was in the act of re¬ moving an iron bar from across a door, upon which it had been fastened by the padlock, in which I had heard him turn the key. Again I called to him—no reply was
was still given to my invocation—I ac¬ cordingly moved up to his side—he now beheld me—terror and fury flashed in his brutal eye—he let fall Üie bar, and snatch¬ ing a pistol from his girdle, directed it at my head. The pistol which I had about me was not loaded; I had not time to draw my sword in my defence ; I used the only moment which was mine to dash his pistol from his hand ; as it fell to the ground it went ofi^ and the report echoed through the hollow ruins. " This was succeeded by a faint voice on the other side of the door, which ex¬ claimed— c Merciful Heaven ! who is it that approaches?—protect mc, God !' ' What miserable wretch,' I cried, ad¬ dressing the villain who stood before me, ^ t is it that pours forth anguish from these damp and loathsome vaults ?' tf Hc did not reply, but drawing a short cutlass, which hung by his side,'from its. scabbard, he placed himself opposite to * me, and raised his arm to strike ; I un- M 2 sheathed
sheathed my sword, and met his attack. After a struggle of some time I pierced him in fhe shoulder; he uttered no groan but continued the contest ; his wound bled copiously^ and, weakened by the loss of blood, he became every moment less able to defend himself. A second time it was my good fortune to wound him, and in the wrist of his sword-arm ; his weapon now fell from his hand, and he staggered against the wall, apparently overpowered by faint¬ ness ; I made myself master of his cutlass, and immediately opened the door from which I had seen him employed in taking oif the bar, " On entering I perceived a small apart¬ ment of rough stone, vvhere on a wretched couch rested the pale and emaciated figure of a youth, on whose countenance fell the sickly light of a lamp which stood near him upon a stool ; 1 advanced, gazing on him—he rose, and spoke—but, oh mer¬ ciful powers ! what words can describe the astonishment which fdled my mind, when I recognised
recognised in him our beloved sovereign Edward, so long believed the inhabitant of the tomb!'* " Great God," exclaimed Lord Fitzroy, {t can this be possible ? my brother in ex¬ istence !—the royal Henry's son lingering out life within a noisome dungeon's dank «bode î ? say, lives he now, and is be well ? tell me this first—then say on whom «he punishment of this atrocious deed must fall." " Yes, yes, he lives, and shall be king," Æried Godolphin, exultingly. " Give me your patience, and I will pursue my nar¬ rative—When the young monarch beheld in me a friend, excess of joy overpowered his weakened frame, and he fainted in my arms ; at length, when he recovered, I gained from him this information—fhat the man whom I had wounded, and who now lay on the outside of his prison, ren¬ dered unable to move by the faint sickness which had seized him, in consequence of the quantity of blood that had flowed from m 3 his
his wounds, was his jailer ; that he was the only hitman being whom he had seen since the hour of his supposed death ; and that -being both deaf and dumb, (which ex¬ planation accounted for my having so re¬ peatedly addressed him in vain), he had not been able to gain from him any in¬ formation concerning what was intended to be his future fate." tc But by whom, and from whence was he conveyed to the spot of his imprison¬ ment ?" asked Lord Fitzroy. " Of this he is able to give but a very brief and unsatisfactory account," replied Sir Percival " He says, that being ill at his palace, yet not so ill in his own feel¬ ings as those about him represented to him that he was, he was told that it was not in the power of regular physicians to bring him relief, and was requested to admit to his presence a gentlewoman of respecta¬ bility, who was skilled in herbous medi¬ cine, and possessed an excellent receipt for a complaint of the lungs, which disor¬ der
der was reported to have attacked him. He frequently took a cordial whkh she ad¬ ministered to him ; and at the end of about a week considered himself much amended by her attendance. He went to sleep, as was his usual custom, one day in the afternoon, and on waking, instead of finding himself upon his couch, he was in a carriage which was moving along at a very rapid pace. His surprise was ex¬ tremely great; and on enquiring where he was, and attempting to remove from before his eyes a handkerchief which was tied over them, he was withheld from so doing by some one who was seated with him in the carriage," " Hearts of stone !" exclaimed Lord Fitzroy ; " would none step forward to their king's relief?" " He had not the power of interesting any one in his cause," answered Godol¬ phin ; " for during the period of his jour¬ ney, he was not permitted to leave the car¬ riage or to behold the light. At length he m 4 was
was enclosed in the dungeon where I so providentially discovered him; and from that hour, till the moment of my entrance into it, he had not seen a single individual, except his deaf and dumb jailer." rf ? Godolphin, it was indeed the work of Providence, as thou hast thyself re¬ marked, that thy life was preserved to thee !" said Lord Fitzroy. " But did I understand you rightly, that two months had now elapsed since you had made this discovery ? What motive can have induced you thus long to keep me in ignorance of a circumstance, which you must be certain could not do otherwise than most warmly interest my feelings ?" " I trust my reason will prove satisfac¬ tory to you," answered Sir Percival. " I considered that to ensure if possible the continuance of the royal Edwards exist¬ ence, that he might hereafter appear, to strike terror and dismay to the hearts of those practisers of infamy, by whom his destruction had been endeavoured to be wrought,
wrought, was my most essential business ; and doubtful for a considerable time did it appear to me, whether the web of his feeble life were not almost spun to its last extremity. To the languid state of health under which he had been labouring, at the period when he was depri\ed of every comfort to whicb his exalted situation had been accustomed, the noxious air of a dungeon, and the hardship of the coarsest provisions, had been added- Under these calamities his malady had gained ground, and I perceived that he required every de¬ licate attention which it was in my power to bestow on him. ** I easily discovered fhat the residence of his speechless jailer was in a nook of the ruins, not far removed from the un¬ fortunate Edward's dungeon ; and humani¬ ty having prompted me to tie a bandage over his wounds, I dragged him to his sleeping-place, laid him upon his rug, and having set a jug of water by his side, I m ? brought
brought aw r ay every weapon vvhich I could find, and secured the door in order to prevent his escape. " For the mxt month I was alike the nurse and the companion of my sovereign; frequently I repaired to the neighbouring villages, exposing, for his sake, my per¬ son to a discovery, to vvhich no considera¬ tion of my own would have tempted .me ; at these times I bartered a few articles of trifling value, which formed a part of the king's dress, for provisions of a superior kind to those with which he had lately been fed. Heaven smiled on my endea¬ vours, and our king is now approaching rapidly towards a state of health." * f But where is he ? when may I behold him ?" exclaimed Lord Fitzroy. " Only say that the gates of Framling¬ ham Castle shall open to receive him, and in the course of a few days I will conduct him to the protection of their walls," re¬ plied Sir Percival « Shall
<*
rf Shall they not?" returned Lord Fitz¬ roy ; (( could my heart open to receive him, it would joy to do so." ít Expect me then," replied Godolphin, " ns quickly as a journey which must be performed vvith the greatest caution, and some degree of secrecy, can bring me tp vour walls." et But under vvhat protection have you left the king, during vour absence ?" en- quired Lord Fitzroy. " In that of fri onds vvho knovv no in¬ terest but his," answered Sir Percival, í( Start not, my Lord, that î have made a discovery of his existence to any one pre¬ viously ro yourself, nor think that I am heedless in my pians for achieving our high-raised expectations. In vvhat I have done, I have acted partly from necessity, more from a deliberale consultation with my own mind. Godolphin needs not ad¬ monish Lord Fitzroy to raise his forco, and strain his every nerve to replace his injured brolher on his throne ; but he must w 6 whisper
whisper in his ear, that friendless nnd de¬ serted as Godolphin was at the happy mo¬ nient when he discovered his monarch's existence, he can now himself bring to the field an hundred men, stout to the cause which his own heart espouses." « Can Godolphin do this ?" asked Lord Fitzroy. (ί It may weH surprise thoe," returned Sir Percival ; " the power which I possess almost surprises myself; it is a mystery, I confess, and must, for want of time to give thee an explanation of circumstances, foreign, yet friendly to the subject we have been discussing, remain so to thee fill we meet again. Thou canst not doubt that Godolphin, like thee, adores the mo¬ narch under whom he prospered, and ex¬ ecrates, like thee, the avengeful Mary." It was accordingly agreed between them, that Lord Fitzroy should immediately pur- Mie with vigour every preparation in his power, conducive to the attempt of rein¬ vesting the unjustly dethroned Edward í with
with the sovereignty ofthe kingdom ; and that Godolphin should lose no time in conducting the un fortunate monarch to Framlingham Castle. Upon this they part¬ ed, bivathing a mutual prayer for the evontu;.1 prosperít ν of the royal Edward. Lord Fitzroy had not ridden more than half a furlong away from Sir Percivai, ere he heard a shrill whistle, and supposing that the sound might bc intended to recai him, he turned round his horse ; but he was convinced that his idea was a mistaken one, by beholding Godolphin walking slowly along with his back towards him ; hc again rode on, and presently turning round his heada second time, he saw two horsemen, one of whom led a third steed, advancing towards Sir Percival ; in a few moments they reached him, and after he had mounted it, they all three set oíl at full speed together. The events of the morning appeared to Lord Henry Fitzroy like the highly-wrought and undigested features of a dream. His senses
senses vvere almost incredulous of the ad¬ duced fact of the existence of his royal father's legitimate son ; and that the out¬ lawed rebel Godolphin, vvho had confessed himself two months before fo have been driven to the utmost extremities of want, should novv have an hundred men at his command, staunch friends to the depend¬ ing cause, appeared equally enigmatical. As soon as l\e had reached his castle, he wrote a brief account of his meeting with Godolphin to his friend Sir Sigismund Blunt, but cautioned him, in the most im¬ pressive terms, not ta impart the occur¬ rence to any individual—a caution vvhich Sir Sigismund implicitly followed. It has already been remarked, that Sir Sigismund received a second letter from Lord Fitzroy, which excited his particular attention, enclosed in that which contain¬ ed his invitation to the knight and his fa¬ mily to visit Framlingham Castle fand it is now explained what was the important mafter of which it treated. Those
Tho^e preparations which Lord Fitzroy had already commenced, in order to be provided against an emergency of self-de¬ fence, hc now caused to be pursued with greater spirit and celerity ; and every vas¬ sal wbo was of an age to bear arms he di¬ rected to be trained to their use. When Sir Sigismund arrived at Fram¬ lingham Castle, its possessor held with him frequent communications on the plans which the exigencies of the future mi^ht call upon them to put into eflect ; and from the counsels of his friend, Lord Fitz¬ roy derived important service, not alone in this particular, but likewise relative to the best modes of strengthening his castle, in order to render it, as far as art could make it, a refuge of security for the per¬ secuted Edward. Lord Fitzroy and Sir Sigismund were alike unable to determine whether the treachery, under which the King had suf¬ fered, was chargeable upon the present Queen and her counsellor Gardiner, who had
had wished to remove him from the helm of state, on account ofthe favour which he had shown to the reformists; or to the Duke of Northumberland's party, whose aim it had been to bring themselves into greater power, by raising the Lady Jane Grev to the throne. Who were the au¬ thors ofthe outrage vvhich had been com¬ mitted against him, they however regard¬ ed as a secondary consideration to the re¬ dress of his wrongs; and to this reílection they accordingly most strenuously applied themselves. In the breast of Lord Fitzrov, it was rivalled only by his passion for Eleonora, whose affection it was the most earnest de¬ sire of his soul to obtain for himself alone, ere she became acquainted that there ex¬ isted a possibility of the wheel of fortune makine such a revolution, as m i çht render hiin instrumental to the salvation of her father. We have seen vvhat steps this hope led him to pursue, as likewise the despair with vvhich
which Eleonora's declaration of her being unable to return the flame with which his breast glowed for her, rilled his heart. The strangers whose arrival interrupted his last conversation with her in the library, were no others than the royal Edward, escorted by Godolphin, and a few of his adherents.—The ring which was brought to Lord Fitzroy, and upon the receipt of which he quitted Eleonora, was one which he had given to the king, as a testimony of his affection, in the days of his boy¬ hood; and the sight of which left him no longer in doubt who it was that demanded his presence.
CHAP,
CHAP. IX,
*' Where nre the times thy ardent nature painted, When Fortune smil'd upon thy lusty youth, And all ??? sunshine ? Where the look'd-for years, Gaily bedeck'd with Fancy's imagery, When the high blood ran frolic through thy veins, And boyhood made thee sanguine ?" G. Colman, junior.
" Neither man nor angel can discern Hypocrisy ! the only evil that walks Invisible, except to God alone, By his permissive will, through heav'n and earth : And oft though Wisdom wake, Suspicion sleeps At Wisdom's gate, and to Simplicity Resigns her charge, white Goodness thinks no ill Where no ill seems." Mhtoií. Having thus far deduced her recital, Lady Blunt concluded it, by adding— <c That she had
had conveyed intelligence of Sir Percivals welfare to the sorrowing Geraldine, and that she had dispatched with it a couple of domestics of her own, to conduct her to Framlingham Castle, where she expected her to arrive on the following evening." When left to her own reflections, a tu¬ mult of sensations agitated the bosom of Eleonora, and rendered it almost impos¬ sible for her to decide what passion was predominant in her mind. As the friend of the royal Edward, she could not consi¬ der Sir Percival Godolphin in any other light than as her friend also; and from the search which had been made for him at Worcester Castle, she had received a convincing proof that the man to whom her heart was devoted must be one of his enemies. Into what difficulties might not this untoward circumstance plunge her— into what straits might not this opposition of interests lead her, who was from secret motives the well-wisher of each ! She ex¬ cused herself from appearing at the din¬ ner-table,
ner-table, and sat ruminating on the pro¬ bability of her fafe. The noble Fitzroy claimed all her respect, all her admira¬ tion ; the Unknown had excited only her pity and her love : but the tenderness of the first of these feelings, and the interest ofthe latter, render them most persuasive and absolute passions, when they assail the heart of youth and inexperience.— " Ifl had never beheld him who now engages my affections," sighed forth Eleonora, " I should have felt no hesitation in fixing them on Lord Fitzroy ; perhaps it had been more to my eventual advantage, if ? had never seen him whose image dwells in my heart." She paused—her sigh became converted into a smile— te I cannot forget that I have seen him, nor can the impres¬ sion which he has made on my heart be effaced from it by any occurrence but a proof of his demerit." In the afternoon a gentle rap upon the door of her apartment called her to open it, and she beheld on the outside the page Edwin,
Edwin, cap in hand—" I beg vour pardon, Lady," he said, {( for taking th i liberty of coming to your chamber door, but I have something to tell you, which I think will give vou pleasure." " What is that, Edwin ?" enquired Eleo¬ nora. " Why, my Lady," replied the page, iC I know you pity poor Sir Valentine, or you would not have sat on the steps of the turret at Castle Gower, and plaved on your lute to give him delight ; and I have heard vou say, you should like verv much to see him ; and there is an opportunity just now, ifyou choose it," '* How so ? explain yourself/' said Eleo¬ nora. <s I saw him, and talked to him, not ten minutes ago myself," answered Edwin ; *' and I asked him if he should not like to see the lady who had played on the lute under his window, and he said— ' O yes, it would give me great happiness, for I am certain her soul is as gentle as her melo¬ dious
dious voice ; but surely she will not con¬ descend to visita wretch like me l —these were his very words, Lady." te But by what means did you gain access to him ?" asked Eleonora ; " you used to find that impossible at Castle Gower." " True, my Lady," replied Edwin ; " but I'll tell you—Lord Fitzroy is extremely fond of poor Sir Valentine, and pities him very much indeed ; and he has set apart for his use in this castle a couple of apart¬ ments, of which the second opens into a little flower garden, at the back of that tower yonder ; and a portion of this gar¬ den, next to his apartment, is divided off by trellis-work into a walk for him, that he may enjoy the benefit of the air by day. About half an hour ago I learnt that Fabian had been called to attend Sir Sigis¬ mund and Lord Fitzroy, in the apartment where they are almost constantly shut up with the strangers who arrived last night ; and thinking that it might be possible for me to get a glimpse at my loved master, whilst
whilst he was thus engaged, I ran to a door which I knew opened into the little gar¬ den, and was so fortunate as to fmd it un¬ locked. Sir Valentine knew me, and was delighted to see me ; for hr has very lu¬ cid intervals indeed sometimes; and I pro¬ mised him that ifl could prevail on you to come and speak to him, I would, that he might see whose music it was that had so greatly delighted him.—Well, Lady," he added, as FJeonora did not immediately reply, if will you not go ?" " I should like it," she answered, " ifl thought we should not be discovered." " I am not afraid, ifyou are not, Lady," said Edwin. " What fears I have are solely on your account," returned Eleonora : "I am cer¬ tain that neither Sir Sigismund nor Lady Blunt would be offended with me for pay¬ ing a visit of charity to their unhappy son ; and what sentiments it might create in the mind either of Sir Hildebrand or Fabian, would be indiflerent to me, whilst I kuew the
the motive by which I was impelled to be a good one : but their resentment might fall heavy on you, as the instrument of my action." " ? never think of me," replied the page, <f I had rather fall under their an¬ ger, than omit to do Sir Valentine a kind¬ ness—come, Lady, pray come." Eleonora complied, and followed Ed¬ win down a flight of stairs into a narrow vaulted passage, little frequented by the inhabitants of the castle, which led to the garden behind the tower ; it was a small circular spot of ground, about thirty feet in diameter, and a third of this was allotted bv trellis-work to the use of Sir Valentine. As FJeonora proceeded, she discovered him reclined on a couch within the apart¬ ment ; he saw her, and came forward. His form was tall and graceful ; his countenance remarkably fine and expres¬ sive ; his eye had more of the collection of reason in it than Eleonora had expect¬ ed to behold ; and the pallid colour of his cheeks
cheeks bespoke the length of his confine¬ ment. " Is it possible," he said, ". that one sa transcendently lovely can deign to visit am unhappy being like myself?" " The unhappy claim attention from all who are capable of alleviating their lot/* replied Eleonora. f * But how few," he exclaimed, " are ¡ike yourself, exquisite maid, sufficiently amiable to practise this charity ? Oh few; few indeed is their number !" He struck the palm of his hand with violence upori his forehead, and then held it placed be¬ fore his eyes. Wishing to address him, yet almost un¬ decided upon what subject it were best for her to speak, Eleonora said— " I am glad my music pleased you." He let fall his hand, and fixed his eyes upon her with an expression of delight. " I have not got my lute with me now," she continued, believing that he was ex¬ pecting to hear her strike the chords. vol. u. n " What
" What need of it, Lady ?" he cried ; " can there be more enchanting melody than the music of your silver tongue ? ? no, no, no, the spheres themselves can¬ not exceed it !" He spoke these words with an emphasis which startled Eleonora ; and as he had advanced close to the trellis-work whilst speaking, she crept towards the page. " What fear you, Lady ?" he exclaim· ed ; " think you that I would harm beauty and innocence like your's ? sooner would I endure the fires of Etna in my brain, or suffer distraction's self to riot there—for I am not mad, Lady, no, no, no, not road." To be ignorant of their own malady, Eleonora had heard to be the regular ha¬ bit of the insane ; and believing that her presence disturbed him, she motioned to Edwin a wish fo depart ; and then turning once more towards Valentine, she said— " Farewell—when opportunity offers, you shall
shall hear me strike the chords of my lute again." " Stay, stay, stay," he cried ; " ? do not quit me, angelic being, till you have promised me that I shall see you here again !—I have something of the utmost importance to communicate to you—pro¬ mise me that you will come again." " If I can—if possible—farewell," re¬ plied Eleonora, and hurried from a scene so overpowering to the heart of feeling. <t Yes," exclaimed Eleonora, when she had regained her apartment, " there are beings in existence still more unhappy than myself—no individual can be entire¬ ly forlorn who is blest with the exercise of reason—Shield me, ye powers of mer¬ cy, from the fevered brain, whicii turns the sense-deserted suflerer into a mocker of his own calamity !" Lady Blunt passed the evening with Eleo¬ nora in her apartment ; she informed her that consultations of the most important nature were carrying on in the castle, un- N 2 dor
der the superintendance of Lord Fitz¬ roy.—" In a crisis of moment like the present," she added, tc that slow measures, and plans maturely deliberated, ere they were attempted to be put in execution, could alone be adopted ; and that at pre¬ sent no decisive operations had been de¬ tei mined upon." When Lady Blunt quitted her, Gillian entered her apartment; as bhe set down her lamp upon the table, she said -?— tf I was wrong in some part of what I told you last night, my Lady." " About the arrival of the Spanish am¬ bassadors, do you mean ?" asked Eleonora, with a smile. * c ? no," ieplied Gillian, " the servants all think that the strangers are Spanish ambassadors : I mean about his Lordship going to take Spain. It is more likely, Joel says, that the King of Spain will come and try to take this castle—that was the mistake I made ; for as he is mar¬ ried to our Queen, and she, to her shame be
be it spoken, hates Lord Fitzroy, why there is no knowing ( but he may put his finger in the pié/ as the proverb says, and trf to beat his Lorden ip out of his right." Eleonora did not speak, and Gillian con¬ tinued thus :— ,f There are double senti* neis set all about the walls to-night, my Lady, and the drawbridge is ordered not to be lowered after sunset for any body.— Joel says, they are afraid of spies getting into the castle, for the Queen has all hef eves about her : and another of the ser- vants said, whilst we were at supper, that he should not wonder if he had seen more than one spy in the morning, for there had been two or three odd-looking fellows* lurking about, in the road that runs past the park gate." Eleonora was too much occupied with het own reflections to listen to Gillian^ prattle, and dismissed her almost imme¬ diately. The hour was later than she had believ¬ ed it, for Gillian had scarcely left her, ere ν ? the
the castle clock beat eleven. It was about this hour that she had seen Fabian and Sir Hildebrand on the terrace together two nights before, and she could not persuade herself to enter her bed till she had look¬ ed out. from her window, and ascertained that Sir Hildebrand was not again lurking on the same spot. She placed her lamp upon the hearth, and proceeded towards the casement ; the moon was not yet risen ; a few partial stars only gemmed the face of night, and a sable gloom pervaded every object. The stillness of the night was for a considerable time uninterrupted; at length she heard footsteps—they were of more than one person—and she presently discovered some of the soldiery crossing an angle of the terrace to relieve the guard ; in a short time these returned, and all was then again solemnly silent. Fabian, she sup* posed, was already in the turret with his prisoner, and no one would pass along the terrace that night ; she hoped that the pistol
pistol which she had seen Fabian prepar¬ ing, might have proved a sufficient safe¬ guard for Valentine against the villany of Sir Hildebrand, and that he might now, for a while, be ceasing to feel the pangs of madness in sleep. As she dwelt on his idea, a new fear entered her mind ; she recollected the means by which Edwin and herself had gained access that afternoon to the unhappy sufferer ;—might not that door be likewise known to Sir Hildebrand ? and might he not have resolved to profit by it, for putting into effect his diabolical purpose, without the necessity of bribing Fabian to his aid ? might not this be the very reason of his not appearing on the terrace that night, to watch the hour of Fabian's returning to the tower ? With this imagination united themselves various interesting, but distressing, ideas relative to herself, her parents, and other objects of her affection ; and her thoughts were entirely lost to the world, till the castle clock again sounding, told the mid- N 4 night
night hour. Having cast one glance on the surrounding scene, of which' the thick darkness that had an hour before clouded the universal face, began now to be re¬ lieved by the rising of the orb of night, which was creeping slowly into the firma¬ ment, in circular and silver splendor, from behind the distant hills, she took her lamp from the hearth, and replacing it upon the table, began to prepare herself for re¬ tiring to rest. Scarcely had she reached the- recess in which her bed stood, ere her senses were assailed by a sound which struck to her very heart. On the terrace beneath her window, she heard the palms of hands thrice struck together—it was the signal of her mysterious acquaintance of the wood. The most violent agitation seized her— her trembling knees became unable to sup¬ port her tottering frame, and she sunk upon a chair-— " Probably," she reflected, " I shall not hear the signal repeated ; that it
it is only intended to convey to me infor¬ mation that he is near me." After an interval of some minutes, once, twice, and thrice, the palms were again struck against each other. Eleonora wished, yet feared to approach the window. If she suffered the Unknown to behold her, it would bc impossible for her to refuse to listen to his words, if he b>,otild display himself anxious to address her; and if she vvere discovered in con^ Acrsation ?? midnight vvith a strangeF, by :ii>y inhabitant of the castle, and the cir- <ums>tanee reported,. of how gross an im- privpriefy of conduct naisjht not her best ffiendb jud#e her guilty, from 1 the ? viderVce of a clandestine meeting ©f this nature ? an apparent impropriety vvhich the pro- mh»c that she had mádé to the Unknown would »ot permit her io ex piarli* away. " Bv what means," she wondered, " could he have gained admittance into fhe eastle, at a period, too, when the entrance of every stranger was so sedulously guarded n Ô against ?
against ? It appeared impossible that he should be known to Lord Fitzroy, or be one of his guests, for if he were, he need not have pursued this concealed method of procuring an interview with her." A sudden idea entered her brain—she had beheld him at Worcester Castle, join¬ ing in a pursuit after the rebel Godolphin —Gillian had just told her of persons hav¬ ing been seen lurking near the wall of the park, who were suspected of being spies—" Might it not be possible, that the Unknown was one of these, and that the hope of tracing out Sir Percival, and obtaining the reward offered for his ap¬ prehension, might be the motive that had brought him to Framlingham Castle, where he had feared to shew himself by day, and had crept by night from some nook of concealment which he might have found ? But then, how could he have learnt that she was an inhabitant of the castle, and discovered which was her apartment ?" A third time the signal was repeated. When
When the mind is harassed, it admits^ opinions as" certain, which in cooler reason it would perceive to be doubtful. That the Unknown was a spy upon the actions of Sir Percival G odol pi n, was novv the fixed idea of Eleonora. The security öf Sir Percival appeared to her to involve that of the royal Edward, and of her be¬ loved father; nothing therefore at the present moment seemed to her so dread¬ ful as his detection, or apprehension ; and believing that her influence with the mys¬ terious being now under her window might avert this awe-inspiring event, she resolved to see him. The casements of her apartment were so far elevated from the ground, that if she addressed him from thence, every word which either of them uttered could not fail to be heard by any person in the adjacent apartments ; she accordingly descended the flight of stairs leading from her closet to the terrace ; at the bottom of these was a window which gave them light, and having n ? placed
placed her lamp upon the stairs, she open¬ ed a compar^ men f of fhis casement. She immediately observed, advancing towards her, a male figure, of which the duskiness of «the night permitted her at first to observe only the outline; on his nearer approach she recognised in him the interesting Unknown—" Blessed moment," lie exclaimed, t( which once more permits me to behold her whom my soul adores !" " Are your sentiments then unchanged since we met last ?" said Eleonora. " Rather doubt the constancy of the heavenly orbs to their fixed courses," he cried, (f than the fidelity of the passion which this heart professes." " You are doubtless now then come," returned Eleonora, " for the purpose of complying with the only demand, which one whom you declare yourself so sincere¬ ly to esteem ever made of you, to throw off the mystery which has hitherto enve¬ loped you, and to declare to me who and what you are." • - . "Cruel
" Cruel situation in vvhich I am placed," he returned, i( that the severity of my fate should a second time compel me to return a refusal to the petition of one in'whose bosem it vvould be the first pride of my heart to repose my every secret, were I not withheld from so doing by a power which awes, whilst it restrains me. But, my beloved Eleonora, beiieve this also, that when I last denied you the request vvhich you novv again urge, I was uncer¬ tain how long the necessity of my being enveloped in a veil of mystery vvould con¬ tinue; I can now aver to you that it will quickly, very quickly, end." tc But vvhy fear to confide this secret to me ?" asked Eleonora. " Have you broken the promise which you made tb me ?" he returned. ff I am certain that you cannot suppose me thus faithless to my word," replied Eleonora. s< Can y ott then desire me to commit an infidelity 4
infidelity of this nature, and break through a promise which bound me ere I knew you ?" he demanded. " Well," replied Eleonora, fC I will pro¬ ceed to address you on a second subject, from your reply to which I shall fully learn whether you are deserving of my future friendship and esteem :—was I mis¬ taken in supposing that 1 beheld you one of those who entered Worcester Castle, in search oí Sir Percival Goclolpin ?" " No, you were not," replied the Un¬ known ; " and that happy hour afforded me a momentary gaze at your charms." " Now then," rejoined Eleonora, " Xo the test of your affection for me—is it suf¬ ficiently strong to induce you solemnly to promise me that, for my sake, you will not from this moment pursue one step inimical to Sir Percivals security, or breathe one word unfriendly to his peace ?" A short silence ensued, the Unknown apparently wrapt in astonishment at her words ;
words ; at length he said— " Are you then interested in the fate of Sir Percivai Go¬ dolphin?" Eleonora returned a serious affirmative to his question, " Behold then," he cried, " my readi¬ ness to accede to your wishes—by all my hopes of Heaven, I swear, that Sir Perci¬ vai Godolphin shall not have a warmer friend on earth than the man now before you." " You deserve for this the recompence of my esteem," replied Eleonora, ff and you shall have it." The Unknown replied by a rhapsody of the most fervent passion and adoration, which he concluded by saying— ff That I have beheld you for an instant, is a bliss with which I must for the present content myself—our happiness might be forever in¬ terrupted, were I discovered herewith you." tf For your own sake, and equally for mine, it is becoming that we should part," replied Eleonora; (f and O, when next we
we meet, let me not have to upbraid you vvith having broken your promise to me, relative to Godolphin." ct When next we meet," he answered, "it h my expectation to appear before you as intficlf —till then, and ever, angels guard and hover over you ! ?> " Farewell," replied Eleonora, " remem¬ ber------" And he immediately vanished from her sieht. ? -■ Eleonora novv refired hastily to bed; but sleep refused fo visit her; a jovful idea however mingled itself vvith her reflections, in the knowledge that' she had converted her mvsterious lover into fhe friend of Godolphin, when, from the evidence of circumstances, she could not doubt him to have been one of his severest enemies previously to her conversation with him that night. In the morning she beheld Lord Fitzroy, for the first time since the evening of her interview with him in the library, when he
he had quitted her to attend the strartgers ; the conduct which he observed towards her was of the most interesting and gene¬ rous kind ; his attentions vvere rather en¬ creased than diminished ; aad, without re¬ verting to the subject of his passion, he appeared to endeavour, by every action, to prove to her how deserving he was of a change in her sentiments concerning him. When alone with Lady Blunt, Eleonora expressed the delight which it would afford her to be permitted to throw herself at the feet of the royal Edward ; but Lady Tho¬ masine replied, that this was an indulgence which, consistent with the rules of secrecy necessary to be observed concerning him, could not be granted her ; she added— " That he was even now in a state of ex¬ treme ill health ; that his faculties appear¬ ed to be considerably impaired by his im¬ prisonment, and the sufferings which he had undergone; and that his person was so materially altered, as to be barely recog¬ nisable,
nisable, even to those who were so well acquainted with it as Sir Sigismund and Lord Fitzroy." <ς Have you seen him, Madam ?" asked Eleonora. " in the character of his nurse, my love," replied Lady Blunt ; " for he is so feeble and unwell, as to be obliged almost constantly to keep his bed ; but he did not address me by name, nor indeed ap¬ pear to recollect me.—Wonld to Heaven," she continued, " that some light may hereafter be thrown upon the perpetrators of this horrid deed, that they may meet the punishment they deserve." if Can no traces of this cruel act be dis¬ covered ?" said Eleonora. {( There is no clue by which to seek them," returned Lady Blunt ; " you have already heard that the oniy person dis¬ covered with our king, in the ruin of which his dungeon formed a part, was one whose privation of the sense of hearing and of speech, render k it impossible to gain from
from him any information ; Sir Percivai has brought him hither with him, and he is now held here in custody, in the hope that some event may ultimately render him instrumental to the discovery of those whom we all so much wish to know." The day passed on heavily with Eleo¬ nora ; Lady Blunt's hours were chiefly spent in the chamber ofthe royal Edward ; and Lord Fitzroy and his guests were con¬ stantly employed either in the formation of plans for their future proceedings, or in superintending the works which were carrying on about the fortifications and ramparts of the castle ; Saint Ethelbert was the only exception, and in the af¬ ternoon he passed several hours in the so¬ ciety of Eleonora. The gentle benevolence of the father's soul, which displayed itself in the charit¬ able sympathy with which he dwelt on the misfortunes of the young king, although, during the short period of his reign, he had been the favorer of religious princi¬ ples
ples opposite ίο those which he cherished, raised the highest reverence for him in the heart of Eleonora, and caused her to re¬ gard him as something more than mortal. As they conversed together, he revert¬ ed to the delight with whieh it aiways in¬ spired him to contemplate the picture of his lost sister, and requested Eleonora to accompany him to the gallery ; she readi* ly complied, and they found the curtain which usually screened the two portraits raised. Stationing himself before them, Saint Ethelbert said—" Next to the adora¬ tion ofmy God, this is now my first plea¬ sure in existence." As they continued viewing them, the rapture of Saint Ethelbert appeared to in¬ crease— " Noble, generous being!" he exclaimed, " Oh why didst thou ever cast from thine heart one so tenderly attached to thee ? Oh thou knowest not how truly Elizabeth loved, adored th#e !—lived but for thee alone !" As he pronounced these words Eleonora turned towards him, and beheld
beheld his eyes fixed, not on the portrait of his sister, but on that ofher royal para¬ mour, Henry. When he withdrew his re¬ gards from it, perceiving that Eleonora was observing him, he said— ι-" Did my ad¬ dress surprise you ?— ? at that moment placed myself in the situation of my sister ; her feelings animated my heart ; and I ex¬ pressed myself as her adoration ofthe be¬ ing whom that portrait represents would have led her to-do, had she at this moment been alive to contemplate it." '< ζ She is doubtless much happier in the peaceful sleep which she enjoys," replied Eleonora, " Thou art wise, daughter/' replied the monk ; ci there is no happiness like that of the grave, when those who descend info it, die without any just fears for their re¬ surrection." Saint Ethelbert sunk into a reflective silence ; and after a short time, without again addressing Eleonora, he moved slowly away from her; and as she saw that his steps
steps were bent towards the chapel, she did not follow him, judging that he was retiring to his private devotions. The twilight of evening was now begin¬ ing to descend, and unable any longer to derive pleasure from viewing the pictures which the gallery contained, she was pro¬ ceeding towards a staircase at one of its extremities, by which she intended to quit it, when she heard a slow step at some dis¬ tance from her. Through the fretwork of a gothic screen, which filled up the in¬ terstice between two of the pillars, the light was just sufficient for her to behold Sir Sigismund Blunt ; he was moving cau¬ tiously along, and appeared to be turning his head on every side, in order to ascer¬ tain that there were no observers of his ac¬ tions. The spot where Eleonora stood was enveloped in the shade of evening, and she was consequently not perceived by him ; he approached the picture of Lady Talboyse, and threw himself upon his knees before it. The shade, reflected by
by a pillar at his back, novv fell likewise on him, and Eleonora could but indistinct¬ ly behold him ; she heard him sigh deep¬ ly, and she heard also a sound which she conjectured to proceed from a bodily chastisement, which he was inflicting on himself witha knotted cord. " Is it possible/' thought Eleonora, tt that a man, who after a separation of twenty years, professes still such love for the de¬ ceased object of his affections, as demands for him even the admiration of his present wife, can believe it necessary to torture himself, as a religious proof of the estima¬ tion in which he holds her memory ?" At this instant she saw Sir Sigismund suddenly start up, as if some sound had met his ear; believing that her breathings might have reached him, and dreading to be regarded by hinvas a spy upon an ac¬ tion which she had witnessed his anxiety to retain secret, she fied with all the pre¬ cipitancy which she could command from the gallery. She
She threw herself upon a chair in one of her apartments, and almost expected to hear footsteps pursuing her ; but silence prevailed, and she sat reflecting on the ex¬ traordinary conduct of Sir Sigismund, of which she had just been witness. The veil of night was already drawn over the face of the earth, when Lady Blunt entered Eleonora 's apartment, and informed her that Lady Geraldine Godol¬ phin, escorted by the servants whom she had sent to eonâuvt her, was just arrived.' -— " She is," added Lady Blunt, " extreme¬ ly fatigued with her journey, and alike eager to behold the husband from whom she has for so great a length of time heen separated ; ï must therefore defer intro¬ ducing you to her till to-morrow," Eleonora requested that she might not be any restraint upon Lady Thomasine, in giving a personal welcome to Lady Godol¬ phin ; and Lady Blunt shortly after retir¬ ed, not without lamenting that circum¬ stances obliged her, to leave Eleonora so frequently
frequently to the solitude of her own apartment. As the night advanced Eleonora felt her¬ self oppressed by fatigue, the natural con¬ sequence of her having passed the preced¬ ing one without sleep ; and threw herself upon her bed, in the hope of repairing her w r asted strength and spirits by repose.
VOJ.. IK
V*
CHAP.
????. χ. " To be thus puff'd about Like a dry leaf, an idle straw, a feather, The ???? of every whiffling blast that blows, Beshrew my heart, but it is wond'rous strange." Row«. *· Alas î why gnaw you so your nether lip ? Some bloody passion shakes your very frame j These are portents ; but yet I hope, I hope, Thcy do not point on mc." γ SilAKtSTlAm, In order to prevent even the possibility of Sir Percivai Godolphin being recog¬ nised by any one who might be tempted to betray him, by the reward offered from Ae crown for his apprehension, he did not
not for an instant quit a couple of apart¬ ments vvhich were assigned to his use, and which were contiguous to those inhabited by the royal Edward. Lady Godolphin being known by the prin¬ cipal members of Lord Fitzroy's household to have arrived at the castle, it was a measure of equal policy that she should be public¬ ly seen within its walls, as that her hus¬ band should be secreted from all observa¬ tion, lest if she were not, her retirement might be guessed tobear some connexion to the strangers who so sedulously forbore to mix with the other inhabitants of the cas¬ tle, and create any suspicion which might eventually lead to the discovery of Sh: Percivai ; accordinglv', on the following day, Eleonora, for thefirst time, beheld the fair Geraldine at the mid-day repast in the castle-hall. She could not doubt that Geraldine hadí been as beautiful as the tongue of fame had reported her; but the unkind hand of sorrow had committed great ravages on ? 2 her
her charms ; her blue eyes were sunk, and almost void of animation ; the rose had entirely fled from her cheek, and smiles no longer played upon her ruby lips. She received Eleonora in the most ten¬ der and affectionate manner ; she spoke seldom, but addressed her more frequent¬ ly than any other person at the table ; and when they separated in the afternoon she extended her hand towards Eleonora, and pressed that of her's, which she received into it, with a fervor which appeared to bespeak a wish for their more intimate ac¬ quaintance. When Eleonora was again left to her own reflections, she could not forbear imagining that she must have seen Lady Godolphin before, or some one who strong¬ ly resembled her ; there was a familiarity to her eye in the features of Lady Geral¬ dine, for which she could not account, nor dismiss unexplained from her mind. Geraldine was habited in a plain suit of black vestments, which she had worn ever since
since the period of her husband's condem¬ nation ; not a single ornament adorned either her person or her hair; and the simplicity and colour of her dress increas¬ ed the melancholy wanness of her coun¬ tenance. Eleonora contrasted in idea her present appearance with those moments of exultation when she had shone a bril¬ liant star, the heiress of Sir Edmund Kny¬ vett, at the court of Edward ; she beheld in imagination her silken hair adorned with the pearl and the diamond, grouped in fantastic clusters—the golden chain which had enviously reposed on her snow- white neck—the lace of curious workman¬ ship, which in many a plaited fold had con¬ cealed her heaving bosom from the eye of eager curiosity ; and here she broke sud¬ denly off in the picture which she was drawing—the imagery of her fancy brought a real object to her recollection— Geral¬ dine thus adorned, was the exact resem¬ blance of the portrait which had beeu found in the pocket of the murdered stran- o 3 ger
ger in the Northern Gallery at Worcester Castle. This Eleonora perceived was the recollection vvhich had haunted her, from the moment of her introduction to Lady Godolphin. ft was a most extraordinary circum¬ stance, she considered, that the portrait of Geraldine should have been found in the vest ofa man, relative to whose name or history not the slightest information could bc gained; and she resolved, vvhen her acquaintance with Lady Godolphin was sufficiently mellowed, to admit of so fami¬ liar a communication, to impart to her this strange event. Several days passed unmarked by any occurrence, except that symptoms of a more alarming nature than had yet shewn themselves, appeared in the king, and that his strength evidently wasted with every hour ; these appearances filled with sorrow and dismay the hearts of ail in¬ terested in his restoration, and gloom per¬ vaded every countenance. At length one of
ofthose rapid changes, natural to the de¬ ceitful hopes which every consumptive case at intervals affords, restored him to a happier state, and again every preparatory exertion towards the projected event, was recommenced with the utmost vigour. In the course of two more days it was agreed, that Sir Sigismund Blunt should depart into the middle counties, for the purpose of there raising up aid to the support of the cause in which he was em¬ barked ; and that a trusty messenger should bc sent to Sir Thomas Staiford, at Scar¬ borough Castle, for the same purpose ; and likewise an embassy to that effect be dispatched to Lord Ilenry ? rev. In the afternoon previous to the day appointed for the departure of Sir Sigis¬ mund, Eleonora encountered the page Ed¬ win; it was the first time of her seeing him since the day on which they had to¬ gether visited Valentine ; and she had con- Stan iiy been wishing to meet him, that she might question him relative to the - ? 4 door
door through which they had gained ac¬ cess to the garden, communicating with the apartments which Valentine occupied; if it were alwavs unlocked, as thev had found it, there could, she dreaded, be no doubt that it would eventually be disco¬ vered to be so by Sir Hildebrand, and lead him, by an easy method, to the ac¬ complishment of his diabolical purpose ; she hoped to hear that it was not so ; and detaining Edwin, began her enquiries. The page could not give her any infor¬ mation on this subject. He said— te That he had only once attempted to see Sir Valentine since the day on which they had visited him together; that he had chosen a time for so doing, at which he had known Fabian to be elsewhere engaged ; that Valentine's whole conversation had been ofher; and that he had entreated him to beg of the kind Lady Eleonora, not to forget her promise of once more playing to him on her lute.—When will you go. Lady ?" asked Edwin. " I don't
tf I don't know—I cannot determine," replied Eleonora. t( Surelv you vvill not break your pro¬ mise to poor Sir Valentine ?" relurned the page. " It was but half a promise," returned Eleonora; (< but still it would be inhuman not to perform it, if it can alleviate the sufferings of so unfortunate a being; and yet, Edwin, I am very foolish, but he alarmed me when I went before ; he fixed his eyes so stedfastly upon me—— " She hesitated, i( Consider, Lady/' said Edwin, " how seldom he beholds an interesting object like yourself; no wonder he gazes with delight, wheu such a one does present it¬ self to his bight." <e I shall not esteem } on as I have done, if you turn flatterer," replied Eleonora; " you mock a case of sadness like his, when you unite the flippancy of compliment with any of his actions." 4t See, Lady, see," cried Edwin, " there o b are
are Sir Hildebrand and Fabian at this very minute together in the park ; opportunity favours us ; do pray get your lute, and let us go and visit Sir Valentine." After some hesitation Eleonora assented ; and having fetched her instrument from her closet, the page and she proceeded by the same way which had before led them to the door ofthe little garden. if If it should be locked ?" said Eleo¬ nora, as they reached it. " But it is not locked, Lady, at least here is the key," replied Edwin, and drew the door back upon its hinges as he spoke. The page entered first, and having mo¬ ved on two or three steps, he suddenly stopped, turning his head at the same mo¬ ment round to Eleonora, who was follow¬ ing him, and making a signal with his hand to enjoin her to silence. She stopped likewise, and immediately heard a voice in the apartment beyond the trellis-work, which she recognised to be Lord Fitzroy*s—" You know," he said, " that
tc that I have ever been, and ever will be your protector—will you not rely on me ?" " Bely on you !" echoed Sir Valentine ; ir generous, noble, god-like man ! do I not adore you, worship y ου, hail you, as the preserver of my life ?" The thick foliage ofthe woodbine, which had been courted to intertwine its sweets amongst the trellis-work, shaded Eleonora on the spot where she stood from their observation ; and she felt it impossible to tear herself away from a scene of this in¬ teresting nature. <{ Think you Fabian w r as privy to the villany ?" asked Lord Fitzroy. Valentine's reply was only ofa few syl¬ lables, and Eleonora could not distinguish what they were. rf Depend on this/' Lord Fitzroy re¬ joined, " that your captiv ity shall be but for a time ; but we must proceed by gen¬ tle means; Sir Hildebrand must not —-------------the only certain method is o ? to
t 0 --------^ consider how my— you surely would not so severely injure Sir Sigismund --------- ?" The other words which composed his sentence were lost to Eleonora. kt Can I feel for Sir Sigismund ?" ex¬ claimed Valentine, " who owe to him all my injuries, my pangs, my agonies, my __ j> Lord Fitzrov interrupted him— (( Come, come," he said, tí follow my steps, come ___________ t> Λ deep groan followed, which it was natural to suppose fell from the lips of Valentine—a silence then ensued — and shortly after a door was heard to shut ; from which circumstances Eleonora con¬ cluded that they had left the apartment. She stood entranced in reflection ; she could not doubt that Sir Hildebrand had made an attempt at depriving Valentine of his life, in which he had happily been frustrated, perhaps by Loid Fitzroy ??¬ ??И ; 4
self; and that Lord Fitzroy was now about to conduct the unhapp) sufferer to some spot of greater security. What most asto¬ nished her was, that Valentine had named 8ir Sigismund as the person to whom he owed his injuries. This f.he thought could only be the rhapsode of' one whose reason was impaired ; it must hc iin possi ble that a character to all appearance so spotless, humane even to a fault, if there could be a fault in over-strained virtue, as she had witnessed Sir Sig ism un d's to be, could be deserving of the opprobrium which Val¬ entine had thrown upon him. Still there now appeared to her so great feeling and consistency in Valentine's words and voice, that she almost doubted whether he were oppressed with the insanity under which he was represented to the world to labour. She recollected that Sir Hildebrand had re¬ plied with a sneer to her assertion of the amiability of his parents ; but what credit could be given to the effusions ofa mind so
so diabolical as she had received proof that his was ? s " To have heard Sir Valentine speak as he did just now, would not every one have believed him to be in his senses?" said Edwin. ei Indeed I think so," replied Eleonora ; and, after a short pause, she added— w Come, let us depart; if Valentine has not quitted these apartments, asî think he has, this is no time for us to see him." They repassed the door leading out of the garden, and when they had reached the foot of the stairs, turning to her com¬ panion, Eleonora said— (e What we have just now overheard is -■- ■" A sud¬ den sound, which she believed to be that of a hasty footstep, caused her for a mo¬ ment to discontinue speaking ; but as she did not hear it repeated, she proceeded thus :— V It is a secret to every being but yourself and me, Edwin, and I enjoin you to keep İt so." (( Whatever
tc Whatever you command me not to reveal, shall never escape my lips; no one shall know from me that you and Sir Val¬ entine have ever met," replied the page. scarcely had he spoken ere the noise was repeated, and through the Gothic eyes of the balustrade of the stairs, which she was beginning to ascend, iikonora caught a glimpse ofa figure which she believed to be Su- Sigismund. Eleonora had not been long returned to her apartment, ere Gillian camie to inform her that Lady Blunt had been taken sud¬ denly so very unwell, as to be obliged to retire to bed, and that she wished to see her. Eleonora immediately went to her chamber, and approaching the bed. Lady Blunt extended towards her her hand, and said-—' f Do not be alarmed, my dear child, on my account ; I am not so ill as I fear my message may have led you to believe ; my disorder is only fatigue ; I have ex¬ erted myself beyond my strength in my attention
attention to the royal invalid ; a day or two's quiet and repose will, I doubt not, perfectly restore me." Eleonora prayed fervently that such might be the event, and was seconded in her wish by Lady Godolphin, whom she had not perceived to be in the chamber till she had spoken, and who was seated on the other side ofthe bed, " I feel," rejoined Lady Blunt, " that to be left to the solitude of my chamber, and to endeavour to sleep, will be my best medicine ; 1 iherefore desire my two young friends fo pass the evening to¬ gether.' I sent for you, Eleonora, to in¬ form you, that Geraldine wishes to be your companion." The arrangement was easily made, and after a short interval, Lady Geraldine pro¬ ceeded with Eleonora to her r-partment. From the revered friend whom they had just quitted, their conversation turned to ihe king, »nd Elepnora enquired who would
would supply to him the friendly office of nurse, which had hitherto been performed by Lady Blunt ? Geraldine replied— ff That Father Saint Ethelbert, vvho had been accustomed to attend Ihe sick in his monastery, had kind¬ ly undertaken that the royal Edward should suffer no diminution of those attentions, which he had, since his arrival at Fram¬ lingham Castle, so unremittingly received at the hands of Lady Blunt." " How eventful, and how sorrowful a life hasthat of our beloved monarch been," said Eleonora, " for one so young, and born to so elevated a station !" *' lt has, it has," replied Lady Godol¬ phin ; ** but think you not," she added, a tear stealing down her cheek as she spoke, " that mine has been equally so ? But per¬ haps the particulars of my history are not known to you ?" Eleonora answered that Lady Blunt had repeated them to her. "And hnve not I drunk deeply of the CUJÍ
ctip of sorrow ?" returned Lady Godol¬ phin ; If my fate has been to hasten the death of an only parent—to know my hus¬ band a murderer, almost immediately af¬ ter I had fled to the protection of his arms • —to see him ultimately condemned to suf¬ fer execution on a scafTold !" " But he is now restored to you," re¬ plied Eleonora ; tc and every prospect of future bliss awaits you in the reaccession of Edward to the throne of England." " ? gentle maid !" exclaimed Geral¬ dine, the tears flowing more hastily down her cheeks, " the kind, the benevolent spirit of thy soul, which displays itself in all thy words and actions, allies my heart to thine, and I cannot forbear to open my bosom to thy sympathizing ear. Oh how does that husband, on my restoration to whose arms you congratulate me, meet the wife who renounced every connexion, every tie, for him ! Cold civility is the gentlest name by which his conduct can be spoken of; he pretends that important cares
cares occupy all his thoughts, and leave him no leisure to display his affection for me; but I am too well convinced that his affection no longer exists ; and that I am become too indifferent to him, for him even to be careful of dressing his neglect in such apologies as might impose upon my heart. Oh, how truly did my poor father predict, that with the vanity of tem¬ per inherent in the mind of Godolphin, constancy of afiection could not unite !— but I believed the tempter—and severely have I felt the rashness of which I was guilty—painfully do I experience what it is to wed for love !" Eleonora endeavoured to pour balm up¬ on the wounded mind of Geraldine, by attempting to persuade her that the live¬ liness of her afiection for her husband, might incline her to think too unkindly of any slight on his part ; that it might in¬ deed be possible that the important crisis of the times might weigh down his spirits, and entirely fill his mind ; and that the agitated
agitated struggle ín the causeof the wrong¬ ed Edward being once past, he would re¬ pair to her, by his future conduct, every neglect of which she at this moment con¬ sidered him guilty. C( Alas !" cried Geraldine, te you argue from belief, 1 speak from feeling ; the eye ©f an affectionate, and ill-requited wife, beholds ten thousand instances to give her pain, which those who listen only to her woes cannot comprehend. Long, long ere his implication in the fall of the Duke of Northumberland, had I per¬ ceived his love for me upon fhe wane ; but I concealed my observations, lest a display of them should only increase his disposition to give me pain ; and the pe¬ riod for vvhich we have now been separat¬ ed, appears entirely to have obliterated me from his heart. ? how my bosom bounded with delight, when my affectionate aunt summoned me from my convent to meet my Percival ! and oh, a bolt of ice shot at my heart could not have communi¬ cated
cated a severer pang to my soul, than the indifference with which he greeted my ar¬ rival !" " How great a sufferer," replied Eleo¬ nora, t ' must Sir Percival have been, con¬ strained to wander a disguised outcast over the kingdom !" <c There was one who sincerely pitied him, who ever will pity him !" exclaimed Geraldine. " I almost wonder," she con- tinned, " how he found the means of sup¬ porting life ; I have seen so little of him since my arrival here, that 1 have no: even heard the subject mentioned by him." " He had probably some trinkets of va¬ lue upon him, at the time of his escape from the Tower, which he exchanged for the mcansof life," said Eleonora. i( Hc had only," replied Geraldine, r< a ring of rubies, and one other trinket, which he had often invoked Heaven to witness that no extremity should induce him to part from." " Was it a portrait ?" asked Eleonora. As
As she spoke she fixed her eyes almost un¬ consciously on the countenance of Geral¬ dine : the action did not escape her, and she replied— tf Yes, it was a portrait ; why did you ask ifit were? The expression of your features informs me that you had some reason for advancing the question— disclose to me, I entreat you, what that reason is." With some degree of hesitation, Eleo¬ nora confessed the truth ; and added,— " that she considered the extremities to which Sir Percival must have been reduced a sufficient sanction for him to have part¬ ed from the trinket, however highly he might have valued it." The fervor of Lady Godolphin's united love and jealousy, would not allow her to behold the circumstance oí' the picture in the same favourable point of view ; and letting her head fall upon her hand, she gave free vent to her tears. It was in vain that Eleonora attempted to sooth or console her—Sir Percivals ne¬ glect
gleet was a wound which no balsam was capable of healing— u ? that I were as in¬ different to him as he is f o me !" she ex¬ claimed. f ' Oh how acute is the pang of loving one by whom we feci ourselves ne¬ glected ! Cruel perversity of our nature, which will not suffer the heart to withdraw its affections from the object which is un¬ deserving of them, and converts the most heavenly passion to a scorpion in the breast which nourishes it ! There is not an action of my life with which hc can up¬ braid me—I loved him alone of all Heavens created beings at the moment of our union; and thus purely, and singly, I adore him still." The romance of Lady Godolphin's love affected Eleonora, although she consider¬ ed her culpable in not exerting some litfle degree of fortitude to meet an evil which she had not the power of subduing ; and warned her, that if her husband perceived the influence v/hich his conduct had upon her spirits and her peace, that she might onlv
only be adding a feeling of triumph to the alienation of his affections. All arguments appeared to be lost upon Geraldine, and she shortly after retired to her chamber; Eleonora immediately entered her's, and received from the hand of Gil¬ lian a note, which, she said, Sir Sigismund Blunt had commissioned her to give her mistress. On breaking the seal she found the paper to contain these words :— " Dearest Eleonora, Sir Si¬ gismund Blunt entreats that you will meet him in the chapel of the castle, to-morrow morning at five o'clock ; half an hour af¬ ter that time is appointed for his depar¬ ture ; and he has something of the utmost importance to his own happiness and her's, which it is necessarv he should communi¬ cate to her before he quits Framlingham Castle ; therefore he once more implores that she fail not to come."
This
This circumstance, Uke almost every other event which had lately occurred to her, appeared of a most extraordinary na¬ ture; and she was for a while irresolute whether or not to comply with the request which the epistle contained. Twelve hours before she would have felt no hesitation in determining to accede to it ; but the assertion which she had that afternoon 'heard Sir Valentine make, that Sir Sigis¬ mund was the cause of all his agonies, his pangs, his injuries, had unsettled her opi¬ nion of him, and she could not prevail upon herself to view him in that decidedly favourable light which she had done pre¬ viously to that moment. Ainiin «he con- sidered, that although she had believed Sir Valentine to have spoken like one pos¬ sessed of reason, still she might have been deceived in her judgment ; that Sir Sigis¬ mund deserved every mark of aftention from her, in return for the kind treatment which she had experienced nt his hands ; and that it was extremely uncharitable in vol. n. ρ her
her to suffer the many proofs which she had received of his excellence, to be outweighed by any one single circum¬ stance of a disadvantageous appearance. She accordingly resolved to meet him in the chapel. Reflection on the past, and anticipation of the future, suffered her to enjoy but little repose ; she rose with the sun, and as the castle clock beat three quarters after four, she left her chamber, and proceeded towards the chapel. With some difficulty she pushed back the heavy door upon its hinges, and en¬ tered beneath the holy roof. The sun had vet scarcely risen above the horizontal line, and the interior of the castle was un¬ enlivened by its rays, their infiuence be¬ ing excluded by the high walls and ram¬ parts ; the chapel was yet wrapt in gloom ; partial streaks of light peered through the painted windows, and formed a striking contrast to the pale flame of the silver lamp which burnt before the altar. The figures
figures on the cloth of arras, wrought in gold and colours, and representing the Passion of our Redeemer, with which the chapel was hung, were yet scarcely dis¬ cernible ; the white marble of which the iîoor was composed gave the only relief to the scene. But a few minutes were given her for contemplation, ere footsteps drew her at¬ tention to the door, and she beheld Sir Sigismund entering ; she perceived that he was dressed in his travelling habit ; and as he drew near to her, she beheld vvith alarm an agitation of the most violent na¬ ture pourtrayed on his countenance — " Kind, excellent Eleonora !" he exclaim¬ ed, f< I knovv not in vvhat terms to thank you for your compliance with my request ; but had you not acceded to it, I could not have departed from hence till 1 had found the means of conversing with you in pri¬ vate ; I appointed this spot, because I re¬ garded it as one where we might be cer- * 2 tain
tain of neither being interrupted nor over¬ heard." ' f You alarm me," said Eleonora. " Believe me that fhe feeling assails you unnecessarily," he returned ; " I meet you here from a far difterent intention than that of alarming you, Eleonora—I come to render you an essential service." He paused, looked around as if to convince himself that no one was near, and then proceeded thus :—" You cannot have for¬ gotten the moment at which I first beheld you—the surprise with which you saw me agitated — the promise which I exacted from yonr lips— ----" Again he paused. " f have not broken that promise," said Eleonora. ft ? no, no," he exclaimed, " the ex¬ cellence of thy heart is too great to suffer thee to betray a trust ; and to prove to thee my opinion of its being so, I am come hither to repose a second in thy keeping." Eleonora's
Eleonora's surprise increased, but she did not reply ; and Sir Sigismund conti¬ nued thus :—" Eleonora, be not offended at vvhat I am going to say to you—rely on this, that I am your friend—you have refused the hand of Lord Henry Fitzroy— you have confessed to Lady Blunt, thai your reason for so doing isa prior attach¬ ment which exists in your heart.—you be¬ lieve the object of this attachment to be a secret to aU the world—it is not so to me ? A start of surprise shook the frame of Eleonora ; Sir Sigismund took her hand, and pressed it in an affectionate manner in his, whilst a struggle of a violent nature appeared to be passing in his mind. Af¬ ter a few moments silence he spoke thus : — " I now experience one of the most trying conflicts that ever wrung the heart of man—pity me, for I sincerely pity you, and call upon your sense and fortitude to bear you through the knowledge of a y lì truths
truth, which every impulse of duty com¬ mands me to unfold to you. Nay, nay, tremble not, but attend—these moments are precious ones— Eleonora, you must for ever banish from your heart the recollée* tion of him whose image novv reposes there." Eleonora attempted to speak, but could not command the power of utterance. " Promise me," rejoined Sir Sigismund, " by all your hopes of eternal bliss, that you will never reveal the secret which I am about to impart to you." *' Can you fear me ?" with difficulty stammered out Eleonora ; "you told me just now, that you did not doubt my dis¬ cretion, and novv you------" Sir Sigismund interrupted her—" True, true, pardon me, Eleonora," he said ; " I am half distracted—I do not doubt you— but I must have your promise—the pre¬ sent is a case in which I would, if possible, add security even to safety's self—bear with
with me, pray bear with me, and for your ewn sake I entreat, I implore you to móke the promise I require." As he spoke these words, the agony of mind under which he was suflering was visible on his countenance—the tears were stealing down his cheeks—his lips were quivering—his cheeks pale.—His appear¬ ance interested and distressed Eleonora, and she replied— ir T do give yon the promise which you require—by my hopes of fu¬ ture bliss, the important secret shall not pass my lips." Sir Sigismund now appeared almost un¬ able to speak himself; he fixed his eyes upon her—they beamed with an expres¬ sion of gratitude—the tears were still in them—at length he said— if When I have revealed it to you, question me not— fol* low me not—seek not at the present mo¬ ment to know more than L shall vo¬ luntarily unfold to you, or you will- drive me to distraction—will subject me s 4 to»
to pangs more acute than those from which ï am now rescuing you." <( Of what nature are those pangs at which you hint ?" asked Eleonora, ,r ?? Incest!" returned Sir Sigismund. His voice was deep and hollow; ifs tones pierced the heart of Eleonora. <c Incest !" she repeated.' After another affectionate pressure, Sir Sigismund let fall her hand from his, and retired a few paces from her— " See thou obey the injunctions which I have placed upon thee," he said—still he receded from her, « But------" said Eleonora, her counte¬ nance implied, {t you have not made the disclosure." " Aye," cried Sir Sigismund, stopping for an instant, as he spoke, " the secret thou wouldst say—Heaven in its mercy support thee under it—Valentine reigns the idol of thy heart—and Valentine is— thy brother !" " How !"
" Iïow 1" exclaimed Eleonora. But Sir Sigismund had already fled from the chapel.. Unable to support her trembling frame,. Eleonora sunk upon the nearest chair,, where she sat lost in a stupor of astonish¬ ment. AVhen her mind became again ih some- degree collected, and she was able to em¬ ploy the powers of reasoning—* f Valen¬ tine," she cried, " that unhappy Valen¬ tine, whose wretched fate I have so often. lamented, my brother ! can this be pos¬ sible ? yet if he were not; to what end. should Sir Sigismund have declared, him» so ? and if he be so, by what means can it be known to him ?-—Are not those my parents whom I have been accustomed to consider as such ? or is Valentine likewise iheir son ?—With what wonderful, what perplexing eventsis my path of life doom¬ ed to be strewn!" She recollected the words which she had overheard, Latimer pronounce on the evening previous to his departure from Worcester Castle ;, they p. 5. had ι
had mentioned a packet relative to the mysterious occurrence connected with his Eleonora, and had been given into the custody of Cyprian.—" This circumstance," she considered, <f appeared to assert the possibility of the fact which Sir Sigismund had just communicated to her, but in no¬ wise to develop the mystery in which the truth was wrapt." She wished earnestly that she had Cyprian at that moment with her to refer to; but the wish was ineffec¬ tual. She clearly perceived that she owed the knowledge of the secret which Sir Sigis¬ mund had disclosed to her, to an error on his part. He had heard her speak in the tenderest terms of Valentine at Castle Gower; he was acquainted with her having visited him since his removal to Framling¬¬ ham, as she had herself received proof, by having beheld Sir Sigismund, near the stairs leading to the vaulted passage, in her re¬ turn from the little garden, the last time öf her attempting to see Sir Valentine; and
and these circumstances, united in his. mind with the confession which she had made to Lady Blunt, of a private attach¬ ment having place in her breast, had be¬ yond all doubt, as had indeed appeared^ from his own words that morning, led him to believe Valentine the object of that attachment, and prompted him to a dis¬ closure, which it was evident that the ap¬ prehension of a crime ensuing from its. being neglected to be made, had alone wrung from him* <( If Valentine is indeed my brother," continued Eleonora,. " what delight would; it aiTord me to give him my constant at¬ tendance—to sooth, by my sisterly en» dearments, the asperity of his fate— to communicate to him the tender connexion by which we are allied to each other. But from this I am withheld by the promise of secrecy which I have made to Sir Sigif> mund. How strange, how inexplicable is the fate by which I am guided!" The tears Mowed down her cheeksr—" To the- p G. mercv.
mercy of Heaven," she cried, "I confide the development of the mystery by which fam encircled ; it will not desert the suf¬ ferer who has never intentionally erred from the paths of virtue and religion."
CHAP,
CHAP. XL
" Oh, why should fate sic pleasure have, Life's dearest bonds untwining ? Or why sae sweet a flower as love, Depend on Fortune's shining ?" ?????.
*' Virtue may be assail'd, but never hurt ; Surpm'd by unjust force, but not enthrall'd ; Yet even that which mischief thought most harm, Shall in the happy trial prove most glory : But evil on itself shall back leeoil, iind mix no more witb goodness ; when at last, Gatber'd like scum, and settled to itself, It shall be in eternal restless change, Self-fed, and self-consum'd." ????*.
When the morning was a little farther ad¬ vanced, Eleonora proceeded to the cham- 3 ber
ber of Lady Blunt ; she found her raised* upon her pillows, with a book of prayer before her, and in tears. Eleonora enquired tenderly after her health,; she replied— " That she felt her¬ self refreshed by a night of good repose, but that her spirits were unusually weak that morning ; she had been parting from Sir Sigismund, and she felt a presentiment that she would never see him again."— Eleonora besought her not to encourage an idea of this melancholy nature, assur¬ ing her that a few days would, in all pro¬ bability, restore her to perfect health. (C It is not," she answered, " that ï ap¬ prehend my own dissolution ; but Sir Si¬ gismund will be unavoidably exposed to many dangers, in prosecuting the cause which he so justly espouses, and I. have a bewildered opinion that thcy will, by some means, prove fatal to him." Placing herself by the side of Lady Blunt's bed, Eleonora endeavoured to in^ stifl into her mind a composure of spirits which
which was at that moment very foreign to her own feelings. Lady Blunt continued for some time to turn the leaves of the volume before her, and as she closed it, one of her servants entering the chamber, informed her that Lady Godolphin was suddenly taken ex¬ tremely ill. Lady Blunt lamented that she was unable to visit her niece, or to attend upon her, and enquired vvhat was her disorder ? The servant replied, that she had been seized early that morning with extreme sickness, and a violent pain in her heart ; that both these symptoms had now in some measure abated, but that she still continued very ill. " íf I shall not be considered as an in¬ truder in her chamber," said Eleonora, <( I will divide my hours between yourself and her; and render Lady Geraldine the best service of which I am capable." " That I am certain you would," replied Lady
Lady Blunt ; tc and from the terms of ad¬ miration in which I have already heard her speak of you, I am equally sure that it would afford her satisfaction to receive them at your hands ; I need not add, that in performing a kindness towards her, you will make me also your debtor." " Whatever service lies within the com¬ pass of my ability," returned Eleonora^ tf is already your's, and those connected with you, by the right of gratitude." " Excellent girl!" cried Lady Blunt, pressing her to her breast as she spoke; and Eleonora then requested the servant to lead her to Lady Godolphin's chamber. The fair invalid received her with marks of the greatest pleasure— (( I am glad you are come to me," she said, " fori am cer¬ tain that you have a kind and an affec¬ tionate heart, and that you will sooth the last moments of my care-worn life ; and I am convinced that I shall never quit my bed again." Eleonora
Eleonora did not reply to this assertion, which she considered as the effect of low¬ ness of spirits, but said— (< Is the pain re¬ moved from your heart ?" Cf That will never be," replied Geral¬ dine, " never, never ! my heart is cleft— f die of a broken heart—the neglect with which an adored husband has returned my love, presses me down into the grave, I mastered my feelings effectually through the period of his cold indifference pre¬ viously to our separation. During the months of his unavoidable absence from me, I still fed on the hope that if he were ever restored to me, the misfortunes which he had endured might have mellowed his feelings, and adapted them to the soft har¬ mony of domestic bliss. Thus impressed by the idea of what I wished, I obeyed with extacy the summons which I received to meet him here. But alas ! how vain were my hopes !—I see myself forgotten, neglected, and despised by him ; 1 have struggled
struggled a few days through the miseries of my fate ; my heart is now broken, and the oblivion of death will soon grant me ease." It was in vain that Eleonora attempted to act the part of a comforter; no words were capable of giving relief to the wound¬ ed mind of Geraldine — " Shnt out the light," she cried, " pray shut out the light ; the agony of my head is as acute as that of my heart." Eleonora drew the curtains round the bed ; they were of a dark green silk, and cast a sickly reflection on the already wan countenance of Lady Godolphin, which gave an awful ghastliness to her appear¬ ance, that caused Eleonora to shudder as she contemplated it. The only person within the castle who understood the operations of nature, or was skilled in the properties of medicine, was a venerable man named Father Sylves¬ ter, whose office it also was to assist in tho
the duties of the chapel, when the supe¬ rior priest, whose age was extremely great, was unable to perform them alone. Father Sylvester had already been sum¬ moned to attend Lady Godolphin, and novv for the second time entered her cham¬ ber; he perceived the apprehensions which were pourtrayed on the countenance of Eleonora, and besought her to dismiss them from her mind, as he did not consider his patient by any means in the danger in which she believed herself to be ; but ra¬ ther regarded her malady as the effect of extreme despondency and lowness of spirits. This assurance on the part of the father gave satisfaction to Eleonora, and in the gentlest terms she endeavored to com¬ municate it to the suflerer ; but Geraldine only replied—" He knows not my feelings -—I am dying, I am dying !" The day, however, passed without any alteration having taken place in her. In the evening Eleonora was called away from
from Lady Godolphin's chamber, to ar¬ tend a person just arrived at the castle, who, she was informed, had a packet which he was unwilling to deliver into anv hand but her own. She descended into the cas¬ tle-hall, and found there a young man, whom she recollected to be a servant of Sir Sigismund Blunt, and who had been one of those left at Castle Gower. C( The packet with which I present you, Lady," he said, cc was three days ago brought for you to Castle Gower; and according to the directions which 1 receiv¬ ed from my master Sir Sigismund, before his departure, I have used all speed in proceeding with it hither." Eleonora perceived the superscription to be in the hand-writing of the faithful Cyprian, and rewarding the courier with a liberality equal to the joy which she ex¬ perienced at beholding it, she flew to her own chamber to break the seal iu soli¬ tude. The cpiütle ran thus :— " With
ct With tlie humblest duty, iand the sincerest affection, Cyprian greets the daughter of his revered master. Little îs the information which he is able to con- vev to her, relative to those in whom her beart takes most interest, but he never¬ theless writes, in order that she mav not suspect him of neglect, or apprehend worse evils than exist. *' No one, dearest Lady, is allowed to approach the objects of our concern ; î have made every possible attempt to gain admission into the Tower, but my en- tleavours have proved wholly unsuccess¬ ful ; whatever therefore I am enabled to relate to you, is gathered from the tongue of common fame. My re\cred master has already twice appeared before the council convened for his examination ; with the vSteadiest fortitude he has replied to their enquiries ; and neither threats nor pro¬ mises have been able to cause him to waver from
from the religious faith which he has hi¬ therto professed. A day, at some consider¬ able distance of time, I believe that of two months, is appointed for his final arraign¬ ment. The God of mercy grant that his tnumph be the event of that day; but I fear, I fear me much ; the worthiest of men is an object of hatred to those in power. " I can, however, console you by the assurance, that the equanimity of neither his temper nor his spirits has suifered by his confinement ; I have heard an instance reported of him, vvhich powerfully affirms to the contrary. In the gloomy and dreary apartments of the Tower, a fire is neces¬ sarv even at this season of the year, to ren¬ der them habitable with any degree of comfort; and his attendant having one day omitted to bring him his usual quan¬ tity of wood, he said— ' You vvill much more strongly disoblige your employers thau you are aware of, if you repeat the negligence of which you have to-day been guilty
guilty towards me; for I may chance to die of cold, and disappoint them of seeing me perish in the flames.' " Do not despair, dearest Lady ; the evil at which this excellent, this upright man, whose thoughts arc all placed in Heaven, smiles, it may yet be the will of the power in whom he confides to avert. lie requires not the fire to purify him for the crown of glory vvhich is prepared for him in the skies í <c Farewell, beloved daughter of my re¬ vered master ! Whatever Cyprian can learn worthy of communication, thou shalt im¬ mediately be made acquainted with ; iu the meanwhile he prays the God of the righteous to protect thine innocence." Eleonora sat weeping for a considerable time over the contents of the faithful Cy¬ prian's letter, and the reflections whit h thcy brought to her mind ; she then left her chamber, intending to go and read it to
to Lady Blunt, but learning that she had *unk to repose, she struggled to regain her composure of spirits, and proceeded to the apartment of Lady Godolphin. She found her sitting up in her bed, and supported in the arms of an attend¬ ant ; by her side knelt, praying, Father Augustin, the superior priest of the cas¬ tle ; when his devotions were ended, Ger* aldine addressed Eleonora—" Are you then returned, kind friend ?" she said ; " Oh, I have suffered agonies, tortures, since you left me ! a raging fire burns in my heart ì and, oh, it has scorched me so dreadfully ! —1 am «lad vou are come back, verv glad indeed !" " í will remain with you all night, if it is any consolation to you that I should do so," replied Eleonora. ** Will you ? will you be so very kind ?" cried Geraldine, in a tone of mingled gra¬ titude and joy ; " I would not suffer you to doso, but that I am certain it is my last night on earth." Bv
Ev the direction of Father Sylvester, a sleeping draught was administered to thè sufferer; and when she had drunk it, Eleo¬ nora took her station in a chair by the side of her bed, and refused any longer to con¬ verse with her. In a short time the opiate took eflect; but her sleep was far from composed; she woke often, and raised herself vvith sudden starts in her bed, then sunk down again, overpowered by the dose which she had taken. When asleep her mind was still employed ; she spoke of her father—of Sir Philip Willoughby— called again and again on her husband— besought him to explain why his affection was not as strong for her as ever ; and appearing to gain no reply to her enqui¬ ries, she wept. Eleonora was surprised that Sir Percivai did not visit her, nor even send to enquire after her ; she considered that this ne¬ glect on his part appeared strongly to cor¬ roborate the want of affection of which his wife had complained ; she could not be- voL. n, q lieve
îiev« îthat his ftifnd was so entirely occu¬ pied with concerns of a public nature, as to prevent the idea of one so nearly allied to him, and :at that moment so great a suf¬ ferer, from entermg his thoughts. ^bottt an hour after the dawn of day, with a loud and piercing shriek* Lady Go¬ dolphin shook off sleep— " ? hold me, pray hold my head !" she cried, (< my brain will soon burst—it cannot long endure this torture—and the fire at my heart—Oh ! oh ! oh !" Again she shrieked aloud for se¬ veral minutes, and appeared only to cease her screams because nature was exhausted within her, and she had not strength to re¬ peat them. Not less alarmed for her safety, than shockeel by her sufferings, Eleonora sent to request the presence of Father Sylves¬ ter. In a short time he obeyed the sum¬ mons. Geraldine was then become more composed, and he pronounced it as his opinion—" That the high fever in which he had found hk patient, had caused her fo
to dream wildly, and that she had awoke under some terrifying impression, which she had not immediately been able to dis¬ miss from her mind." In a voice scarcely audible, Lady Go¬ dolphin requested some cooling drink ; a beverage agreeable fo her inclination was administered to her, and she then sunk into a stillness which appeared more like death than sleep, and which was merely produ¬ ced by an entire exhaustion of faculty. When Eleonora visited Lady Blunt, it af¬ forded some relief to her overburthened heart to find that friend sufficiently restor¬ ed to have left her bed ; she enquired ea¬ gerly for her niece, and on being informed of her melancholy situation, would have gone to visit her; but Eleonora, consider¬ ing that she was neither sufficiently well to quit her chamber, nor her spirits suffi¬ ciently strong to encounter a scene of so melancholy a nature, overruled her inten¬ tion by her persuasions, and prevailed on o, 3 her
??? to promise not to make the attempt till the following day. As they conversed together, Lady Blunt expressed her surprise at the apparent strangeness of Geraldine's disorder—" Ne¬ glected love," she said, " to which she herself attributes it, does not produce ef¬ fects of this violent kind ; it steals gradual¬ ly upon the sufferer, and by imperceptible advances undermines the health and sys¬ tem ; there must be some other unknown cause for pangs of this extreme nature." Their opinion of Sir Percival was the same ; they regarded him as one careless about the happiness of the woman who had made every sacrifice to him. Lady Blunt spoke freely of him to Eleonora, as a man whom she had ever regarded in a suspicious point of view, and as a selfish and undeserving character. The spirits and health of Eleonora were fn a state to require equally the refresh¬ ment of the air ; and in the afternoon she wandered
wandered out upon the ramparts; after having walked for nearly halfan hour, dur¬ ing vvhich period the busy scene of the workmen employed in repairing the for¬ tifications, had withdrawn her ideas in some measure from herself, she re-entered the castle. In passing a gallery which led from her own apartments to the chamber of Lady Godolphin, she observed, standing by a. lofty arched door, at its extremity, the page Edwin. His attitude was that of an anxious listener ; and when she arrived at an angle, which turned towards the apartment to which she was proceeding, she stopped a moment with the intention of observing him. He almost immediate¬ ly saw her, and as soon as he did: so, he came running towards ???. * f Can't vou guess, Ladv," he asked, f ' whither that door leads?—but perhaps you are already acquainted." tk No, I am not," replied Eleonora. Q.3 "Τα
" ïo the apartment which Sir Valentine now occupies," he replied; "but I be¬ lieve it is a long way from that door, for since I have discovered whither he had been removed, I have often listened at the door, in the hope of hearing him ; but all is still within ; I can't hear any body breathe or stir." Eleonora was going to reply, but was interrupted by the voice ofa servant, who called to Edwin, informing him that Sir Hildebrand enquired for him ; upon which he bade Eleonora a hasty farewell, and ran to attend the summons. Eleonora could not immediately turn aside from contemplating the door which shut her out from the presence of an un¬ fortunate being, whom she had so mys¬ teriously been informed to be allied to herself by the nearest ties of consanguini¬ ty ; and as she shuddered to reflect on the bitter and unfeeling enemy Valentine pos¬ sessed in Sir Hildebrand, it aflbrded her some
eome consolation to reflect, that she had received an undoubted proof of Lord Fitz- rov being his friend. Eleonora had, in the course of the morning, left Cyprian*s letter with Lady Blunt for her perusal, and when she re¬ turned to her in the afternoon, Lady Thomasine informed her that she had read it to Lovel Fitzroy, who requested that she would rally her spirits, as some ma¬ terial change would beyond all doubt take place, ere the expiration of the two months of which İt spoke. Whilst they were in conversation to¬ gether, Father Sylvester sent an earnest en¬ treaty to be admitted to their presence. It was immediatelv complied with ; and as he entered, they beheld on his counte¬ nance marks of the liveliest concern— (t Surely," exclaimed Lady Blunt, " Ger¬ aldine is not dead ?" ** No, daughter," replied Svi vester, "she still lives, but I much fear that her augu- tations respecting the short period of time <i 4 * that
that her earthly life will continue are huí too just, and are founded on a too cer¬ tain knowledge of her own. it is of her that I come to speak to you. It distresses, if shocks me greatly, to be compelled to declare my opinion of her malady,'but I consider it my duty to acquaint you with my suspicions." Lady Blunt entreated him to unfold his sentiments. " 1 have just left her chamber," rejoin¬ ed Father Sylvester, " and from certain symptoms which I have observed in Lady Godolphin, I much fear that she has swal¬ lowed some noxious potion, which has accelerated the termination of her exist¬ ence." '< Great God ! Geraldine do this !" ex¬ claimed Lady Blunt. " You cannot mean that she has swal¬ lowed poison ?" cried Eleonora. " I do most steadily credit such to be the sorrowful truth," replied the father, " although she denies to mc, in the most positive
positive terms, her having committed this rashness." "Oh Heavens!" replied Lady Blunt, " is there no medicine, no antidote which, can bc administered?'* " 1 have already," replied the venerable man, " given her the most powerful one with which I am acquainted ; but I fear the deed has been too long done for any efficacy to be expected from it.'* Ladv Blunt declared that no arguments should now withhold her from visitino· her- niece; and requested Father Sylvester to summon Father Augustin to the chamber of the pitiable sutferer, that she might not die without the benefit of absolution. c ' ? merciful powers !" exclaimed Eleo¬ nora, * e how acute must Ime been the miserv which she derived from the neglect of the man on whom her aflections were placed, to have driven her to so horrible a mode of imagined relief." Almost unable to ?????, and rendered, by the shock which «he had just receh ed, u j ??
still more unable to support her own trembling frame, Lady Blunt took the arm of Eleonora, in order to accompany her to Lady Godolphin's chamber. They had not proceeded many paces along the gal¬ lery, ere they were met by one of Geral¬ dine's attendants, who, with terrified looks, informed them that she wás coming to re¬ quest Eleonora 's return to her lady's apart¬ ment, who was again seized with one of those violent paroxysms of agony which had before assailed her. They quickened their steps, and as they reached the door of the chamber, a la¬ mentable shriek, which caused them to shudder, burst from the lips ofthe suffer¬ er ; they rushed towards her bed ; but the Jast struggle of nature was past ; thcy he- held Geraldine a corpse in the arms of her attendants. The sight overpowered the feelings of Lady Blunt; she sunk upon the foot of the beel, and fainted. It was with some diificul¬ ty that she was revived ; and when recal¬ led
fed to life, she found the Fathers Augus¬ tin and Sylvester by her side. They united their lamentations with her's upon the fate of the unfortunate Lady Godol¬ phin ; and whilst they were bewailing that she had died without absolution, and other religious offices of their church, Eleo¬ nora looked with anguish and horror on that countenance once so lovely, whicà was still distorted as it had been wrung by the convulsions in which she had expired ; the black spots which were becoming ap-. parent on many parts of her skin, and the dewy foam which was collecting on her lips. Ill-fated Geraldine ! not a doubt remained of her having died by poison— " God forgive thee, wretched, pitiable being . r ' exclaimed Eleonora; '* is this the· event of thy having wedded for love Ì" Father Augustin was the only ono of the holy men acquainted wifh the secret of Sir Perci\al's residente in Framlingham Castle ; and Lady Blunt whispered to him her wbh lor him to üccoir.pany her fo Go* fk (i dolphin's
dolphin's apartments, and give her his aid in breaking to him the fate of his wife ; accordingly they left the chamber of the deceased, and Eleonora, following their example, retired to her own. ·. The dreadful scene of which she had just been a witness had not yet drawn the tears into the eyes of Eleonora ; the stupor of astonishment had checked them in their course; now left to the solitude of her owti reflections, they burst freely forth ; and with the tears of regret which she shed for the melancholy fate of Geraldine, mingled themselves tears of apprehension for the happiness ofher own future life— ? man to whom she was almost a stranger had engaged her afiections—might not the event of his having done so, be as Un¬ happy as that which had been experienced by the wretched Lady Godolphin ! The hours were passed by her in medi¬ tation, till the usual period for retiring to rest arrived ; and desiring, before she composed herscif to sleep, of addressing her
her Creator, and imploring his protection against those calamities to which she had seen a fellow-being subjected, she found that her book of prayer was not upon her table, and recollected that she had left it in the chamber of the Lady Geraldine, whither she had taken it early that morn¬ ing. If she required Gillian to fetch it for her, she foresaw that the simple girl's terrors would be excited by the idea of entering an apartment which contained a corpse, and accordingly she.resolved to go in search of it herself; she took up her lamp, and as she moved along the gallery, she heard the castle clock strike three quarters after eleven ; she was sur¬ prised at the lateness of the hour ; and doubted not that every one had already retired for the night. The chamber towards which she was ap¬ proaching, had two entrances, one from the great gallery, and a second through an oratory communicating with a closet which opened upon a back stair-case. Bv
By the first pf these Eleonora entered ; she found the chamber deserfed, and a tripod lamp placed upon a stool, burning at each corner of the bed ; she had pro¬ ceeded into it only a couple of paces, ere she stopped, and cast her eyes around upon the half-obscured, half-enTightened objects which the chamber contained ; and the melancholy gloom in which the whole was enveloped, communicated itself to her heart in chill shiverings, closely allied to apprehension. The tapestry which covered the wails represented the labours of Hercules; and the lamps were so situated, that their rays fell immediately on the compartment which represented Diomedes eaten by his mares : the limbs of his mangled body ap¬ peared almost to writhe within the jaws of the fierce animals, and the eye-balls to fiash fire ; Eleonora had frequently before beheld it without any particular amotion, but as she now gazed upon it, she sliud¬ dered, in
in the oratory she remembered that she had left the volume of which she was in search ; in her way to it she must neces¬ sarily pass the bed ; this she in a few mo¬ ments assumed courage to do. Having reached its farther side, she could not for¬ bear stopping to contemplate the lifeless clay which it contained'—the countenance was shaded with a veil ; and the form of the body was visible through the thin co¬ vering which was ¿spread over it —" Fair flower,** exclaimed Eleonora, " how much has that husband to answer for, whose neglect has driven thee to this pitiable state !" At this instant she imagined tbat she beard a sigh, and even fancied that foot¬ steps accompanied it—she bati no reason for dreading the approach of any human being, and yet an undefined fear shook her trembling limbs—she scarcely allowed herself to breathe, lest she should lose a repetition of the sounds—but they did not return ; and believing her fancy to 3 * ha\ e
have deceived her, she entered the ora¬ tory. ; She proceeded to the table upon which her book lay, and at the moment that she had placed her hand on it, she heard a bolt withdrawn, which, from the noise that attended the action, appeared to have been rusted in its socket ; she turned her eye in the direction from whence the sound had issued, and beheld the arras on the side of the bed, of which she was enabled to catch a view as she sfood through the door of the oratory, lifted gently up, and a human form cautiously enter the chamber. Various undecided ideas assailed her senses; she trembled more violently than she had done before, and feared to stir from her station. The form advanced a step or two, and she descried it to be—Fabian—again he moved on—she heard his steps pacing the chamber; and after a few moments he again returned to the spot by vvhich he had,
had entered, and lifting up the arras, said — (C Here is no one, you may advance." A second person now entered, but as Fabian stood between him and Eleonora, she could not distinguish whether he were known to her. They approached the bed—their backs were turned towards Eleonora —Fabian's companion appeared to wear a suit of ar¬ mour beneath a surcoat of cloth; on his head was no covering. After a pause, Fabian spoke-— ft Are you now convinced, Sir Percival?" he said. t( Sir Percival!" echoed the heart of Eleonora; t( it is the destroyer cometo behold the destruction he has made !" " Lift the veil which covers her face," said Sir Percivai. There was something so familiar in the tones of his voice to the ear of Eleonora, that they caused her to start ; but the con¬ fusion of her spints was too great to al¬ low
low her to determine where she had before heard it. Fabian withdrew the veil, and when he had done so, he held over the lifeless countenance a Ian ι horn, with which he was pro\idcd, in order to assist Sir Perci¬ vai in his observation. Sir Percival leant forward, and after a few moments contemplation, he turned away from the corpse, exclaiming— <t í am satisfied, and happy— Geraldine is no more—Eleonora will now be mine !" These words alone would have been suf¬ ficient to have convinced Eleonora who was their utterer ; but as he pronounced them, the light from Fabian's lanthorn fell on his countenance, and she beheld in Sir Percival Godolphin her mystenous acquainfaiK ofthe wood !—A loud shriek burst from «»er lips ; all sense forsook her; and she fell to the ground.
?И??*
?И??. XII.
" Now o'er the one bait world Nature teems dead, and wicked tlrcims abuse The cuitalnM sleep j—now witchcraft celebrates Pate Hecate'* offerings} and wither'd murder, AlarumM by hi« sentinel, the wolf, Whose howl's his watch, thus with his stealthy pact, With Tarquin's rav ¡thing strides, towards his design, Moves like a £he»t,"
? « - .- » . — ■■ ---------- White I threat, he Kves, Words to ihc heat «>f deeds too cold breath gives i I go, and it is done." ???*???.
« Mercy herself, who only seeks for crime», That she may pardon, and rctorni the guilty, Wirtild change her nature at a sight like this." LtliO, When FJeonora awoke from the stupor of insensibility into which she had fallen, %ho found
found herself still upon the ground in the oratory, and alone. Her lamp had been extinguished by her fall ; and the only light which she beheld was a faint gleam proceeding from the lamps stationed near the bed of the deceased Geraldine. With, difficulty she raised herself upon her feei ; but her trembling knees were unable to support her, and she sunk down upon a step which encircled the altar. The loud voice of the thunder, roaring through the troubled sky, was the first sound of which she was conscious ; but it created her no alarm ; her faculties were bound up by a chain of wild astonishment, little short'of madness. The fact which she had that night ascer¬ tained, appeared to her like a dream. Sir Percivai Godolphin, the man who had in¬ sinuated himself into her affections—the hu^bapd of a woman equally beautiful, interesting, and amiable—and who had stepped through blood into the possibility of fulfilling his vows to her !—More than horrible*
horrible, nameless vvas the dreadful im¬ pression under which her senses laboured. She could not weep ; she could not rea¬ son ; she was sensible only of an agony of heart, which alone informed her that she lived. The first apprehension which assailed her senses was lest Godolphin should still be near—no sound was audible in the chamber—no form appeared near the spot where she had seen him enter. At length she became in some degree capable of re¬ flection—" This," she exclaimed, Ci is the dreadful event ofa clandestine intimacy— this is the event of trusting to specious appearances—of entering into unguarded promsies—of having relied on my own judgment, instead of having sought the counsel of those vvho would have admo¬ nished me vvith the fidelity of real affec¬ tion. These are the fruits of having lis¬ tened to the flattery of inclination, rather than to the whisperings of prudence. I believed
believed him what I wished him ; and oh, merciful God, how dreadfully is my error punished ! Happy, happy is the murder¬ ed Geraldine, compared with me who am condemned to live a monument of broken peacp ! Yet, are there no thanks due to Heaven, fhat I have been preserved, by the discovery which its omnipotence has per¬ mitted me to make, from becoming the wife of a murderer? What might then have been my fate ! I might have fallen a second victim to his vanity and cruelty !— Linked to a being whom I could not do otherwise than despise, oh, what must then have been the torture of my future days ! — Davs which ------" The fierce lightning darting through the panes of crimson glass vvhich composed the window of the oratory, flashed imme¬ diately upon the countenance of Eleo¬ nora ; and lost as her mind had been to outward objects, it produced a sudden shock on her spirits, which communicated a mo-
& momentary strength to her Hmbs, and shriekitsx insensibly aloud, she fled into the chamber, Λ clap of thunder, which burst in tre¬ mendous loudness over the castle, imme* diately analyzed to her the cause of her ular m ; panting for breath, she leant for support against the wall ; easting her eyes at the same moment wildly around, still dreading lhat Ihc wretch Godolphin, or his vile adherent Fabian, might not have left the place. The rain was descending in torrents to the earth, and its patterings on the pro¬ jecting buttresses of the castle, and against the casements, rendered it impossible for her to dbtingtiish any other sounds, if there were any passing near her ; and her apprehensions gained strength from un¬ certainty. She still trembled violently, and a faint sickness oppressed her ; but she resolved, if possible, without delay to repair to her own chamber: she approached the bed» and
and taking the lamp from one ofthe tri¬ pods, she could not forbear casting a glance of commiseration on the unfortunate be¬ ing who lay before her, extended in the cold embrace of death ; she observed that Fabian had not replaced the veil over her countenance ; and at the moment that she did so, she believed that she saw the head slightly raised. She turned her eyes hastilv aside, and unable to assume sufiicient courage to look again, she entered the gallery—still the awful voice of the thunder was roaring İn the sky, nnd the vivid lightning darting its brilliancy through the casements on every side. With feebb steps she moved along. and had not proceeded many paces ere she beheld a faint light, which, at the fim view fhat she caught of if, she believed to be borne by some one who was approaching towards her: but in the next instant it turned into an opposite direction. A momentary check had been made to her progress by the sight of this person. which
which, owing to the feebleness of the tlame emitted by the lamp which it car¬ ried, had passed before her as an undis¬ tinguished shade, and she now again mo¬ ved forward. Arrived at an angle of the gallery, the ligure again became visible to her ; she wa*« now much nearer to it than before, and clearly distinguished it to be Sir Hildebrand —Sir Hildebrand in the very act of pavsing through that door w hit h the page Edwin had, on the preced¬ ing day, informed her led to the apart* nienis now occupied by bir Valentine î A terror of a new nature instantly seiz¬ ed upon her senses. She had, within the hour, ? -en Labiati in the employment of Sir Percival. There could be no doubt, ú\e heme imagined* that Sir Hildebrand had gained information of his absence from his prisoner, and had fixed on the present moment for the accomplishment of the horrid deed Avhich he had beiore been withheld from perpetrating. To save «ι brother's life vvas now the only idea of Aot, ιι. ? htr
THE UNKNOWN.
her brain—the only wish of her soul ; and without a moment's reflection on her own danger, shepursued the steps of Sir Hilde¬ brand. The door through which she followed him, led by a short passage into a spa¬ cious apartment, at the extremity of which she beheld him : he had placed his lamp upon a table ; w T ifh his right hand he was drawing a dagger from the folds of his vest; his left hand was placed upon the lock of a door, which appeared to lead into a succeeding chamber. Eleonora rushed to hisside — "? hear me! hear me! forbear, in mercy forbear!" she exclaimed. Even the savage spirit of Sir Hildebrand started at the unexpected sound of her voice; he turned his eyes in astonish¬ ment upon her, and several moments of awful silence ensued. ** Forbear ! from what, Lady ?" he at length exclaimed. Eleonora knew not how to reply ; she dui^t
durst not confess to an avengeful mind like his, that she had been a spy upon his actions ; and worlds would not have bribed her to have left the unfortunate Valentine exposed to his cruelty—she stood the ef¬ figy of misery growing into madness. Sir Hildebrand repeated his question. " Pray leave this chamber." said Eleo¬ nora ; " I entreat. î beseech you to leave it;" and as she spoke her eye glanced at' the dagger which he still held in hishaiuL " Do you fear a minion s safety r" cried hir Hildebrand, with mixed indignation and contempt. " Nay, if it be so, and vour visit to this chamber at this hour seems pretfy plainly, methinks, to bespeak if, I shall not scruple to tell you that thw weapon is not drawn without a purpose— What ! here lives my rival, does he ?— thank you, Lady, you add fire to mý pur¬ pose." *' By your hopes of eternal bliss, 1 con¬ jure you to spare him !" exclaimed Eleo¬ nora ; "Odo not raise your arm against the life ofa brother !*· a 2 "??
<r He is not my brother !" roared out Sir Hildebrand ; ff I disclaim the tie ; that he is believed so, is a falsehood propa¬ gated by my amiable parents—hc is to me nothing, a beggar, an outcast, an encroach- er upon what is justly mine alone; for that, I hate him sufficiently to have deter¬ mined on his death ; now I learn that he has gained that aflfection from yon which I had bespoken for myself, hell shall nat turn me from my purpose of his death." Eleonora sunk down upon her knees, and held his robe with a convulsive grasp, whilst wild and broken accents of horror and entreaty fell from her lips—she at¬ tempted to call for help—her tongue clove to her mouth, and the sounds were not audible« Sir Hildebrand now burst open the se¬ cond door— <f ? Heaven, Heaven, look down and interpose l* feebly breathed forth Eleonora,- -----He broke from her, and darted forward—phrenzy winged her steps, and she overtook him as he reached the side of Valentine's bed—" Wouldst thou 4 wed
wed the dead ?" he cried, as she approach¬ ed him. A deep .moan burst from her lips. " Then this blow makes thee mine, 4 ' he added. There was no lamp in this chamber, and Eleonora could merely distinguish the blade of the dagger, reflected upon by the lamp in the adjoining apartment, as he raised his arm to strike ; she threw her* self beneath it ; and the blow which was intended for Valentine pierced her shoul¬ der. The approach of hasty footsteps drevi Fir Hildebrand back into the first apart¬ ment ; and he perceived entering info it Lord Henry Fitzroy, followed by two of his attendants ; they were armed, and one of them bore alight. * f Whence arises it, Sir Hildebrand/* demanded Lord Henry, " that I behold you in this apartment at thb hour of the night ?" " What brings you hither ?" cried Sir Uildebrand. r 3 *'A very
u A very different motive from your's, 1 apprehend," returned Lord Fitzroy ; " I come to protect from injury—you to in¬ flict it." " If my conduct offends vou, my sword shall answer it," exclaimed Sir Hildebrand. "Ishall not expose myself to a con¬ tingent redress of that nature," replied Lord Ilenry ; *' the laws of justice and of hospitality demand from mc that I should protect those under my roof—I hope I am arrived in time todo so; let me request you to end all dispute by retiring to your chamber." · '- *** « - ·..... * -* . Sir Hildebrand was beginning to replvj when a deep groan uttered by Eleonora, issued from the inner chamber. " Merciful God !" exclaimed Lord Hen¬ ry, ** can it be possible that thou hast raised thy hand " ■" Sir Hildebrand interrupted him — " I have," he cried, " and thou därest not say I had no cause." * t Thou hast no mercy !" returned Lord Fitzroy, and rushed into the chamber; but
but what language ran express the hor¬ ror, the indignation, tlie rage, which filled his breast, when he beheld upon the ground, at his feet, the fainting Eleonora» ber lips of ashy paknc&s, and l.cr fair bo¬ som stained with the blood which wa> flow¬ ing from her wound !" " Wretch! monster : villain ! * with lîif- İiculty he articulated—·* Lo^î to the name and feelings of a man ! to what dbboüt al end but that of wanton ???!???\, <?:? thou have done this?—Tor thou canst not deny it—I ??? thou caibi not ; and my sword shall write lhe hatred with which my q}es behokì this deed upon thy worth* lenes heart/' Lord Fitzroy's sword was already drawn in his hand, iind he rushed towards Sir Hildebrand, who snatching his weapon from its scabbard, by the force of superior strength, knocked that of hb antagonist from his hand, and would have followed the action by piercing him through the body, if Lord Fitzroy's senanb hadnot interfered and disarmed him. « i í. Tis
" 'Tis well done this !" cried Sir Hilde¬ brand ; tf you attempt to take my life ere you hear my justification—is that your justice ? you set a force upon mc in your own castle—is that j/our hospitality ?—but í have revenge in my power, and I will use it—I will expose to public infamy and disgrace, yourself, and those amiable pa¬ rents of mine, whose champion you stand so nobly forth—yes, by the fire of hell I will!" He followed his threat by a look of sa¬ tire, fury, and hatred, united, which he cast npon Lord Fitzroy, and adding—" If I do not this, may I myself perish, blasted by ignominy!" hc darted out of the apart¬ ment. Lord Fitzroy scarcely attended to the words of Sir Hildebrand ; the phrenzy of passion, with which the first discovery of Eleonora's dreadful situation had filled his breast, was now superseded by his sympa¬ thy in her fate, and his desire of relieving her pangs. Raising her gently from the ground,
ground, he called to his attendants, com¬ manding them instantly to summon assist¬ ance—" Bid Father Sylvester rise," he said ; « r require Saint Ethelbert to attend —bring all who may afford relief without delay." An instant alarm was spread throughout the castle ; and in a short time most of its inmates were collected round the suffering: Eleonora. Her wound was examined, and discovered not to bc deep ; but the quan¬ tity of blood which had flowed from it was great, and her debility proportionable to the loss which she had sustained. When a styptic had been applied, and a sof* ligament bound over the gash, by the direction of Lord Fitzroy, she was laid upon a couch, and borne on it to her chamber. Slight as was the exertion which she thus suffer¬ ed, she fainted a second rime ere she could be conveyed to it ; and with the utmost caution she was then placed in her bed. When every possible attention had been paid to Eleonora, Lord Fitzroy's thoughts turned
turned towards Sir Valentine, and he wish¬ ed to ascertain whether or not he were in safety. But ere we accompany him in this investigation, our readers may desire to know r by what means Lord Henry so opportunely arrived to the assistance of Eleonora. The author of this good was the grateful page Edwin; he had in the course of the preceding evening over¬ heard Sir Hildebrand and Fabian talking together in a dark corner of the castle- hall ; hc knew Fabian to have the care of Sir .Valentine; he knew the hatred borne hitn by Sir Hildebrand ; and as he passed «ear them, he,·.wrth/dismay* and appre¬ hension, heard them mention his name. He placed himself behind a pillar, and en¬ deavoured to hear more, but they moved away a few paces from the spot where he had first seen them standing, and his at¬ tempts were at that moment fruitless— presently they again advanced towards him—Fabian was speaking, and he con¬ cluded his sentence with— %{ must have it, \I10W/.' « There/*
** There," cried Sir Hildebrand; and Edwin believed that he had taken a purse of money out of hh pocket, and put it into the hand of Fabian, for he directly heard .several pieces of heavy coin Iall up¬ on the marble pavement, and Fabian said — " Go, go, 111 pick them up." To which sentence Sir Hildebrand made no reply, but complied with the admonition it con¬ veyed. It was already between the hours of ten and eleven when this occurrence took place, and Edwin being almost immediate¬ ly called upon to attend his master to his chamber, had no opportunity otcommunfc. eating what he had witnessed to any friend of Sir Valentine's, if even he could have assumed courage to have done so, upon the* .strength of that suspicion which cir¬ cu instances had created in his mind. When Sir Hildebrand had entered hh chamber, Edwin, as was bis usual custom, knelt down before him to unlace his bus¬ kins—·« Sor cried Sir .Hildebrand, tf Iet them
them alone, and go you to bed-— ï shall read tm hour, and then undress myself." Edwin obeyed, and retired into an ad¬ joining closet where his bed stood, and which he immediately entered ; but a pre¬ sentiment of evil filled his mind, and he resolved not to sleep. He placed himself in such a direction, that between the cur¬ tains of his bed he could cemmand a view of Sir Hildebrand's chamber. He observ¬ ed him at first with a book in his hand, but in the course ofa quarter of an hour, when he probably supposed him to have fallen asleep, he saw him rise, go to his cabinet, take out a dagger, examine its blade, and then stick it into an inside pocket of his vest. This tlone, he girt on his sword, and again sat down. When the castle clock beat the first stroke of the twelfth hour, Sir Hildebrand started up from his chair, and advanced with the lamp in his hand towards Edwin's bed, who immediately shut his eyes, and counterfeited sleep. After a minute's con¬ templation»
templation, lie appeared to be satisfied' that Edwin's senses were locked in obit* vion, and returning into his chamber, he cautiously opened the d bor, went out, and closed İt after htm. The danger of Sir Valentine now ap¬ peared to Edwin certain, beyond al! pos¬ sibility of donbt, and he resolved· at any price to save one for whom his grateful heart beat with the warmest affection ; he sprang from his bed, drew on hastily a few of his clothes, and proceeded to the chamber of Lord Fitzroy, whom the con¬ versation which he had, together with Eleonora, bearti pass between them a few days before, had convinced him to be Val¬ entine's steady friend. Lord Fitzroy grant* ed him instant admission into his apart¬ ment ; and having heard the cause whieh had brought him thither, he summoned to attend him a couple of domestics, who slept in a chamber adjoining to his own, and accompanied by them» he instantly proceeded to the apartments whicb Valen¬ tine
tine now occupied. Of the critical mo¬ ment at which he reached them, we are already informed. Lord Fitzroy had at present no clue to the mystery of his having herc found Eleo¬ nora bleeding beneath the cruelty of Sir Hildebrand, for she was utterly unable to explain the cause ; he was, however, satis¬ fied that she was once more in safety : and another circumstance for which hc could not devise a reason, was that Fabian should have been absent from the apart¬ ment of whom it was one his exclusive duly to guard. On returning to Sir Valentine's apart¬ ments, the first object which he beheld was Fabian, examining with marks of lhe greatest surprise, the stains of blood· upon the bed and floor ; on observing Lord Pitz- roy% he exclaimed—- <f Whose blood can* this bc ?—know you, my Lord, what has happened here r " " Where have you been, that you. were not here to prevent this horror and con¬ fusion ?" demanded Lord Henry. " I know
" 1 know not, my Lord, of what you speak," replied Fabian. Lord Henry explained, in as brief a man¬ ner as possible, the late event, and then repeated to him his question of— fi Where have vou been ? whv were voti absent ?" " My Lord," answered Fabian, " Sir Valentine awoke suddenly, and complain¬ ing that a burning heat oppressed his lungs» requested me to give him a cup of water to allay his thirst ; I rose from my bed for that purpose, and finding the vase which usually contains water in our chamber empty, I went down to procure some from below ; in my return 1 had the misfortune to e.\iingubh my lamp ; and taking ? wrong turn, amidst the winding passages which are so numeroii!» İn thb extensive build¬ ing, 1 have but this moment regained the chamber." *' Where can Sir Valentine be ?" ex¬ claimed Lortl Fitzroy, casting hh eves around the chamber. " I perceive that he is not in his bed," replietl
replied Fabian, " and cannot imagine where he is, unless he be retired into his closet to pray, as îs «orne t i mes his custom." The closet was examined, but Sir Val¬ entine was not in it. Doubtful of Fabian's truth, Lord Fitz¬ roy questioned htm in the closest terms, whether he really were ignorant of Val¬ entine's fate ; and Fabian having declared hinwelf in the most solemn manner to be so, Lord Fitzroy summoned to him seve¬ ral of his domestics, and a search was made for him in every part of the castle, but in vain—Valentine was no where to be found.
end or vot. ?.
Um, Dâriing, t&d Co. Lawkob»U*Strtt»,
