Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Munster Abbey: a romance: interspersed with reflections on virtue and morality: written by Sir Samuel Egerton Leigh
û
№.
VífiS
ΐ
Li-*-
ч|ч
>JJöW
«ttr
i*^r
1
MUNSTER ABBEY-
J. he trite remark, that appearances are oft¬ en deceitful, held too true of the French Peer.—He possessed nothing noble but his title.—He remained, however, some weeks at Munster Abbey, and received every at¬ tention which benevolence could suggest.— Yet, amidst all that politeness and hospitali¬ ty which he experienced, a certain captious- ness in argument, a peevishness in his tem¬ per and manner, and an indisposition to be pleased, rendered his society far from agree¬ able to the mild and gentle spirits of the family who had taken Ыт under their pro-
tection. He discovered in his conversation and conduct, more and more every day, that littleness of soul, and that contmctedness of sentiment, which are the mortifying conco¬ mitants of want of education and liberal knowledge ; and which rarely even conver¬ sation with the world, supperadded to rank, can supply the place of. For the Mar¬ quis de Ville Neuve, independent of his own natural gaiety, which often betrayed him into acts of folly, let fall several hints which rendered it perfectly clear that nurture and admonition of no valuable kind had been his lot in early life :— that his father was a man who, adorned by no literary accomplishment himself, treated with contempt every species of learning ; and looked upon all men of knowledge and science as mere pedants,—He also gave Mr Belford and family to know, that he was the darling of his mother ; that he was from a child indulged in every request he made, and not the least check given to those fol¬ lies and extravagancies ofyouth, which re¬ quire all the delicacy, and prudence, and address, of the wisest parents to regulate by the laws of moderation.—What could be
expected from the son of such a father and mother ?—And what can be expected from any of the children of persons of superior rank, or superior fortune, when their parents are so criminally neglectful of forming their minds, at an early period, to the love and practice of virtue ? In every age, and in c- very nation, a sacred attention to the edu¬ cation of youth of the higher orders, has been productive of personal, domestic, and public blessings, beyond all possible calcu¬ lation : While, on the other hand, a general neglect on the part of parents of high rank, oj of superior affluence, have brought in its train the most fatal effects to their own fa¬ milies, and to society at large. No powers of mind can estimate the extent of the bad influences of ignorance, inattention, dissipa¬ tion, and profligacy, in persons of elevated stations in hfe. Though the delicacy of attention display¬ ed, on the part of Belford and his amiable lady and daughter, to the Marquis de Ville Neuve, would have excited the warmest e- motions of gratitude, in a virtuous and grateful breast, yet, scarce any such im- * 3>
pressions as these were made on the mt- forrned spirit of this unworthy guest. Gentle and placid, however, as Belford's temper and manners were, the unhandsome returns which the Marquis made fbr tiie many obligations conferred upon him, and the increasing unpleasantness, and, some¬ times, rudeness and insolence of his man¬ ners, determined all the family to treat him with that polite distance and reserve, which would lead him quickly to perceive, if he had any degree of understanding or pene¬ tration, that it was their desire, rather to untie the knot, than to cut it.— According¬ ly, so much brains being left to this feeble Marquis, as to permit him to observe a change of disposition towards him in all the family, he soon after took an opportunity to express his sentiments of gratitude to them, particularly to Aurelia ; but in such a constrained and unnatural manner, as in¬ dicated the callousness of his own heart ; while it filled the honourable mind of Bel¬ ford, \vith sensations of the most pungent nature.—The Marquis, after a speech wor¬ thy of his intellects and his dispositions, im¬ parted his intention of setting out, next
morning, for the continent. Belford, agree¬ able to his most gracious aad uniformly a,- miable character, attended the Marquis two stages from Munster Abbey, and then, with an honest and warm heart, took leave ef him, wishing him every sublunary bles¬ sing. It is impossible for the attentive mind to look back on the scene which a few weeks presented itself to the eyes of the lovely Aurelia ;—to mark her unexampled huma¬ nity and tenderness fbr an unknown fellow- creature, whom she found almost in the a- gonies of death : to reflect on the steadi¬ ness and perseverance with which she con¬ tinued, to a late hour, to administer relief to him, and to recover him, to some degree of strength :—to follow the miserable man to the sacred mansion of Belford :—to «ee him there treated, for many weeks, with the affection of fond parents :— tò behold him restored to perfect health :—surely it is not possible to take such a retrospect, and not, at the same, time, be filled with indig¬ nation and horror at the ungrateful returns
of thk unprmcipled, шгШогеа, and unna¬ ts -al GaBican. Wkhoot doubt, еще of the severest trials which humanity is caled to contend wkh, is a cold and unfeeling return for acts of kindness, mercy, and benevolence, which we confer on our fellow creatures;—and still more so, when these acts are beftowed in a manner wholly disinterested. Such ill returns unhappily tend to sour the minds of too many who aspire to the character even of sanctity. But if, from injurious and un¬ grateful conduct from those whom they have even loaded with favours, they become tinctured with peevishness, and, of course, with misanthropy,—let such men not dare to assume the garb of a religious profession. " Never to be weary in well-doing" is one of the sacred mottos of the sons and daugh¬ ters of genuine benevolence and true reli¬ gion ;—at the same time, prudence and wisdom unite their voices in dictating ma¬ ny lessons of caution and reserve, after we have been frequently disappointed in our hopes and sanguine expectations of kind: returns.
As soon ш Belford mtâ again Us beloved wife and daughter, к was natural §sm tbe family to cast their eyes back on tibe histo¬ ry of t he scenes which bad presented Леш« selves within a few weeks past :—and here the native virtue, tbe candour, and ** that charity which thinketh no evil,** were dis¬ played ia die gende and calm discussion of the conduct of their recent guest. Hk de¬ fects of eariy éducation, hb natural, nation¬ al levity, his many temptations to dissipa¬ tion, his want of understanding, were all pleaded alternately by the heavenly inha¬ bitants of this terrestrial paradise, as allevia¬ tions ofhis improprieties, bis errors, and e- ven ofhis rudenesses. Ibe day after Belford returned from es¬ corting the Marquis de Ville Neuve, he re¬ solved to put in execution a plan which he had formed a considerable time before, but which had been interrupted by his close at¬ tention to this French stranger. The plan was, to make a tour over all his large estates in the adjacent counties ;—to learn precise¬ ly the condition and circumstances of every
peasant, of every cottager^ and of er^ry rtfhger ;—to take down ш writing* with as much accuracy as in his power, every particular relative to their moral characters, modes of living, and their industry ;—to ex¬ amine into the state of the mamActures within his domains, and to observe which of them were in a prosperous, and which in a declining condition ;—to afSx, in his own mind, certain premiums for the industrious tenant, and labourer, and villager, and tradesman ;—to find out every young per¬ son of distinguished quickness and excel¬ lence in Ms calling, and to take him under his special protection ;—and, finally, to leave at each house or cottage, a small treatise, of a few pages, composed with perfect simpli¬ city, by himself, which should contain plain rules for sober and virtuous living,—for a sacred regard to rational piety,—for hating all strife and division about any subject re¬ lating to religion and government,—for peaceable and quiet dispositions,—and for faithful attachment to their King, Country, and Constitution.
Thk p&ubrje plan was worthy ef the heart of Bel&rd ; and he delayed not to proceed to the execution of it.— As soon as Ье was able to arrange M his scheme in proper mťtíiod, and to take correct notes of all the particulars vthich were to engage hi* attention, he set out, with enthusiasm, on this patriotic employment.—»In the course of three weeks, by the aid of an intelligent and accurate secretary, a man well versed in letters, and in domestic affairs, he made the round of his several estates, to the joy and transport of every virtuous and well¬ doing inhabitant, and to the terror of all the idle, intemperate and worthless.—On the first, he bestowed these rewards which he judged proportioned to their merit :—to the last, he mingled gentleness of manners with severity, and counsels of wLdom and affec¬ tion, with marks cf just displeasure· The effects of the benevolent and judi¬ cious operations 'of this great and good man exceed all description. The several orders cf people on his estates, persons of all trades and callings, vied uith each other in efforts
to |й*е^ет1% or ш gsm Ле fimmr and e- чеет of tl^ bekreá Ima wi tht Мшж. Шев example rocttsed tbe torpor and índolerjte öf ьоше f^^ie^rs ^f brad in he vkmky,^— Getrde»« of gooå Шша&в htğm to be a- saarøed wkem tbey saw the teшш$s of Bei- tbrd dra« ing doubk artd trebk stores of gram from their fields to what tbeir most knowing farmers could bring their own grounds to ykM. But a srrøt of етпкгжщ is the parent of all excellence. Шу degrees the flame spread to a very considerable dis¬ tance in every direction in the country. Munster Abbey was the resort of ail the nobility and gentry of the adjacent coun¬ tries.—Every query they were pleased to prefer to the patriot, (for with this most dis¬ tinguished of all appellations he was now dignified hy all the country round,) he en¬ deavoured to solve with his usual goodnes« and affability :—He had early applied to the study of agriculture, and united two qualities too seldom combined İn the same person, great knowledge and great modes¬ ty :—He carried on a regular correspond¬ ence with the most celebrated men, for their acquaintance with the theory and
practice of thb noblest of all агь, t.\ every quarttr of the km^daai;— лпа Lh huu^i and table wzr* и* ай sea-ïj.ii f»psn Гжг thtir recer>Ïïon. In the cmir>e tu d few ^c-ws, the lace of the countrv' uaJ^Avent a complete change. —Heath, w hin, and bn»m t had now almost dkippeared ;-~Ltkes and mmhe* were drained,—and new creations of th^iu- ьапая of acrei of rich a:id Vvdaablj >Ы\ uere gained, which hud Ыт u-.ele>s ¡»İnce the flood. Few cliantcters among men,—indeed scarce any, claim more respect and aff;c% tion,—nay, veneration,—than a man of rank or of opulence, who, possessed of large estates in land, devote* much of his time and attention to bring his lands to the highest possible degree of cultivation : Every man of this condition, wlio, from the time he enters on his estate, endeavours by every effort to distinguish himself as the patron and support ofthe farmer,—deserves a statue to be erected to his memory ;—. nay, every gem'eman, of even moderate Vol. IL В
propeîtj\ merits tbe ртз -bes and blesyng^ *'f bás coœtrymen, who is assid^ïus ш the nrforatioa of every acre arou-nd his ггшпькзп-Ь^ше, а»ша 'm giving every ea* cnuragetnent m hb power to the mdustii- тгь farmer vvho rest^ his fiekis. But when це subjoin another quž^ty to íha zealous vuhivator of the earth, we complete his i haracter ;—the qualky 1 mean k, gene¬ rosity of soul kt giving proper leases to his tenants'—and in treating them as his chil¬ dren, —and not as mere dependents, whom he Ь entitled to squeeze by cruel racked icnts. It deserves also to be mentioned, that e\ ery gentleman ofeílate, and whose family has been of some standing, should be acquainted to a certain degree w ish clas¬ sical learning. This accomplishment, with good sense and good breeding, throws a lustre over his character, more striking, nay, more brilliant, than all the titles and honours which princes can bestow. On the other hand, a more pitiable, a more melancholy object, cannot present itself to the eye of taste, elegance, and discern¬ ment,—than a man of property, which has descended by inheritance to him for gene-
trnom, utterly Шкете, vulgar, уоЫ of public spi rit. and, perhaps, a hard brd to aa industrious and sober peasantry. Such a bemg m a moral and political mûsaace ;— and, though he deserves not to Ive, yet the order of society requires that ht should be permitted to eik. Of this order of squires, and higher than squires, we have «ome ki every corner of Britain. Nations advance to maturity опту by de¬ grees : Much improvement, and much po¬ lish of every kind are yet to take place, ere tbe higher orders of men in the three king¬ doms throw that lustre on thek elevated station, which can alone dignify and adorn thek characters. While Belford was assiduously employed in these schemes of private and public be¬ nevolence, which increased the stock of ru¬ ral happiness and prosperity around Ыт ; a circumstance occurred which tended to af¬ fect in some measure his domestic felicity. His lovely daughter was universally admir¬ ed, and, independently of her superior beau¬ ty, she possessed the enchanting quality of Ba
haijr«; a very superior fortune m prospect. —The*« unked ullurements have produced wonderful effects on the minds of admkers * ť the fair ъех m ail ages, The eldest son tjf л wealths Knight of a very old family, ard of a handsome fortune, \ias one of Au- n*)iu\ devoted admirers.—The name ofthe Knight was Sk John Hidley, The heir ap¬ parent was a young man of an elegant ap¬ pearance, and had much of the man of fashion ш hk address and manners. But young Hİdîey's accomphshments were mere- * ly external :—He had nothmg in hkn to gain the esteem, or to win the heart, of a lady of so superior a nature, as the object of his affections. One weakness, or rather disgusting failing, in the opinion of a wo¬ man of understanding, marked this young man to a very great degree. It was an in¬ cessant loquacity, at all times, and in every company, without any regard to superior rank, or knowledge, or age, or profession. This indication of defect of intellect, not to say of becoming modesty, rendered him con¬ temptible in the mind of the discerning Au¬ relia : And though his form was elegant, and his address and manner (as we have al-
ready remarked) were very superior, yet hk Êur inamorata justly and wisely concluded, that no rank, no fortune, no exterior quali¬ ties whatever, can compensate for weakness, absurdity, and folly, İn a companion for life. The young Knight had already de¬ clared his passion, but hb addresses were re¬ ceived with that marked coldness, distance and reserve, which every woman, who is not a coquette will consider it a point of honour to observe towards a man to whom she U determined not to give her hand. Indeed, it was with this most amiable young lady a fixed principle, which no temptation of grandeur, or even of princely splendor, could shake, never to give her hand, when she could not at the same time bestow her e- steem and ardent affection. By this prin¬ ciple, she uniformly regulated her conduct towards the many admirers who solicited her affections. Young Hidley, however, resolved to per¬ severe in his addresses to Aurelia ; relying, no doubt, on the consciousness of his supe¬ rior fortune, and of external personal qua¬ lities. The lady continued to follow her
determined purpose :—she received him with cold civility,—nay, sometimes with in¬ dications of aversion. A fool discerns no¬ thing quickly , nay, he often misinterprets what a moderate degree of understanding discovers intuitively. Taught, too, by the licentious or ignorant companions to whom his passion was known, that all women are coquettes in love,—that they are creatures of mere affectation,—and wish always to enhance the value of the honours and fa¬ vours which they are to confer on their lo¬ vers :—instructed by these lessons of folly and falsehood, Hidley persevered to harrass and teaze this amiable young lady to such a length, that a peremptory command, not to enter Munster Abbey, was the conse¬ quence. But the sage instructors of this foolish youth did not cease to assure him, that Au¬ relia's conduct was mere coquetry ;—and did not fail to repeat to him daily those mean, false, and licentious maxims which govern the minds of libertines, in their ad¬ dresses to women of honour and virtue. They insinuated, (in their coarse* expres-
sion,) that Belford was the channel, by which the fort was to be attacked with suc¬ cess,—-and that the prospect of ten thou¬ sand pounds а -year, to be added to the es¬ tates which he was to leave to his daugh¬ ter, woidd not fail to make a powerful im¬ pression on his sentiments. But men of unprincipled minds, and of dissipated lives, can form no just idea of what passes in a heart of such spotless purity as Belford's. He had perceived the attentions of young Hidley for a fevv weeks past, and had just taken the resolution to impart his own sen¬ timents on this momentous business to his beloved child, when the lover made his ap¬ pearance in the avenue to Munster Ab¬ bey, Belford met him a few yards from the house, and gave him the opportunity he wished for to open his mind for the firft time to him, on the subject of his attachment to his daughter. After having declared, in strains of rapturous affection, his admiration of Aurelia, —and request¬ ed, with the most ardent importunity, the favour and countenance of her father, this amiable parent calmly and polite¬ ly addressed him, with these sentiments, ivhich can be easily anticipated by men of
undemanding and worth. He assured Mr Hidley, in very handsome terms, that he was perfectly sensible of the honour he did bis daughter ;—that his birth and fortune ¿ave him a title to address any lady m the kingdom ;—and that, on his own part, be had no objection to his general character, but that he had formed an unalterable re¬ solution, never to prescribe to his daughter in a matter of such infinite importance as marriage. His paternal counsels, he added, were ever ready to assist and direct her views ;—but beyond counsel and direction, he would never proceed one step in controul- ing the choice of Aurelia, in whose prudence, judgment and taste, he had reason to place the most unlimited confidence :—He assur¬ ed the young man farther, that, in the mind of his daughter, and in his own mind, too, birth and fortune were but secondary con- sderations, when so serious and so interest¬ ing an object was before them, as an union for life ; and that he was firmly persuaded Aurelia had not yet seen that man who so perfectly answered to her idea of accom¬ plishment, that she could venture to spend her life with hkn.
After tbis full and honourable explana¬ tion on the part of Belrord, Hidley declin¬ ed urging his suit any farther : besides, he did not torget the positive prohibition sent Ыт by Aurelia, to interrupt her domestic tranquillity, by the continuance of addresses which were so unpleasant, and whieh never could be successful.
CHAP. Ц. JMeanwkile, the joys and innocent festi¬ vity of Munster Abbey flowed on in their usual delightful course :—Time was here di¬ vided in a rational manner :—The morning was consecrated to studies which tended to improve the understanding and the heart : ■—After breakfast, the duties of active life engaged Belford, his amiable, but delicate spouse, and his beloved daughter :—-Every day was marked by some new scheme of benevolence for promoting the happiness, or alleviating the distresses, of the poor a- round them ;—and if ever the blessings of the indigent, and of the widow, the father¬ less, the orphan, and the forlorn, ensured happiness to any individual or to any fami¬ ly, it was bounteously showered by merci-
ful heaven on this angelic. family.—But every sublunary enjoyment is mingled with a destined alloy.—For sometime past Mrs Belford's health was visibly on the decline, although her complaints had never been so severe, as to exclude her from partaking of the amusements and pleasures of the fami¬ ly, and of company.—In the ensuing spring, however, the symptoms of decline became alarming, and, upon consulting the first me¬ dical characters in the kingdom, it was deemed necessary that she should travel to, and inhabit for some time, Montpelier, in the south of France, the salubrity of which has so often proved efficacious in decays :— And accordingly, with as great expedition as the requisite preparations could be made, they set out from Munster Abbey with a suite becoming their rank. The prayers of all their neighbours attended them :—and tears of the poor flowed with unaffected sorrow for the departure of their beloved protectors, and from their fears that the re¬ vered lady of the manor should never again return.
O ye great ones of this world ï how fri¬ volous, how insignificant are ail the com¬ bined joys and fleeting pleasures which are the oflspring of never ceasing bustle and dissipation, compared with that solid satis¬ faction which flows in upon the soul from the consciousness of a regular discharge of the many relative duties of elevated station, or of superior affluence î The feeling expe¬ rienced by this blessed family, when leav¬ ing Munster Abbey, must have exceeded all power of expression.—Yet it is in the power of every family of distinction in the kingdom, (if dissipation and folly have not brought them into despised circumstances,) to experience the same pleasures, or at least some degrees of these pleasures, every day, which we have now seen Belford and his family reaping as the reward of their most exemplary virtue. Temperance and order are the parents of ceconomy,—and (economy alone can per¬ mit the affluent to employ a considerable share of their fortune in acts of private be¬ neficence or of public utility,—Confusion and intemperance banish ceconomy, and JVol. IL С
prevent the possibility of relieving the dis¬ tresses ofthe miserable, or of promoting any scheme for the general good. Happy, thrice happy, would it be for the great and the rich, if such maxims as these were in¬ culcated on the minds of young men of for¬ tune from their earliest youth.—We should not, in this case, behold the many misera¬ ble objects in city and country, not only wholly useless members of society, but, a- las I most pernicious by their contagious examples.—Wise men are of opinion, that when dissipation and vice mark the cha¬ racters of the great proportion of persons ofthe first rank in any nation, no remedy but one can cure the fatal malady :—And that remedy is an awful one :—it is na¬ tional calamity :—may heaven avert it !— but it is in the moral world, as in the na¬ tural, effects flow naturally from their causes. If a distempered person has no salutary medicines administered to him, or if the patient obstinately refuses to receive them, dissolution must be the consequence. After the tender and interesting scene at Munster Abbey was over, the family set
out for Dover, where they arrived on the tenth day by slow journeys, on account of Mrs Belforďs state of health. In order to recruit her spirits, which I^ad been infinite¬ ly exhausted, even by a short journey, and to amuse her mind, a few days were spent at Canterbury, the ancient and celebrated seat of the metropolitan of England. Belford was not only a man of consum¬ mate moral excellence, but an accomplish¬ ed gentleman, which no man ever can be, without having received a polished educa¬ tion, and been also careful, after the period appointed for education is over, studiously to improve his mind. He was perfectly acquainted with the history of his country, both civil and ecclesiastic,·—and he was e- qually able and disposed to mention with reverence, to the ladies, many ofthe names of those illustrious men who adorned the chapter of Canterbury. If there were, a- mong those names, any who, by weakness or folly, had dishonoured their 'rank, or who, in rude ages, had been transported in¬ to acts of violence, by the influence of bi¬ gotry and superstition, the benignity of his С 2
soul either concealed their names, or he threw a charitable veil over their imper¬ fections. Belford's elegant, refined mind, however strong his internal disapprobation of characters Hving or departed, never per¬ mitted him to descend to the plebeian prac¬ tice of abusive expression, coarse epithet, or malignant description. Many departed he¬ roes, in the cause of religion and liberty, he mentioned wkh rapture to his daughter, though his narrative, from the shortness of time, was necessarily very laconic. It was on the third day after the family arrived at Canterbury, that Mr Belford and Aurelia resolved to spend some time in vi¬ siting the tombs in the church-yard of that city. While they were indulging this me¬ lancholy but instructive curiosity, their at¬ tention was arrested by a scene truly in¬ teresting and affecting :—They observed, at the distance of thirty or forty yards, a young man standing in a pensive attitude, with his hands folded on his breast, and his eyes several times raised to the Heavens, as if he had been transported by the fervours of devotion. Delicacy forbade to intrude
upon the amiable mourner,—for mourning and devotion were mingled in his gestures. However, they gently approached the spot where he was stationed :—He stood silent and motionless as they advanced :—After a few moments, he beat on his breast, and ex¬ claimed, in the agonies of grief, " О my e- ver, ever beloved Louisa ï —my ever revered and adorable sister î —here lie your sacred, your dear remains !-—but I know, I know your immortal part is now united with the blessed spirits of yonder regions of glory and felicity ï —If thou art permitted to look down upon the scenes of this lower world, —and if power is given thee by the Al¬ mighty to be a ministring angel to frail mortals, O, my Louisa, impart to my soul some portion of that virtue and goodness which irradiated thy whole life, while in this valley of tears. After these effusions of fraternal piety, he gently moved forward,—and, pausing a moment, he seemed again absorbed in me¬ ditation :—But *in a little time, he softly turned, and looked back towaids the tomb he had just left. At this moment he per.
ceived Belford and Aurelia slowly advan¬ cing :—He appeared as if in some degree of confusion :—The tone to which his soul had been wrought up by grief and solemn re¬ flection, did not admit of a rapid transition to observe ordinary objects : But no ordi¬ nary object presented itself ; The moment his eyes beheld Aurelia, he seemed enchant¬ ed,—his looks betrayed the emotions of his soul,—it had a mixture of the wild with the affectionate :■—no wonder !—for all who e- ver beheld his lovely sister, and the daugh¬ ter of Belford, agreed in observing the most striking similarity in form, in features, and in expression, between Louisa and Aurelia» It was destined that the present should not be the only interview they should en¬ joy.—Meanwhile, the family prepared to embark at Dover, and next morning set sail with a fair wind. The passage to Calais was short and plea- sant, save a little sea-sickness on the part ofthe ladies. In order to indulge the cu¬ riosity of Mrs Belford and Aurelia,—and also to give his wife time to recover the lit-
tie derangement she experienced from the sea-air, Mr Belford remained three or four days at this once celebrated city. Indeed, there was not much to gratify taste to be seen in the place, or its environs, excepting the fortifications, or rather the remains of these fortifications, which, in former times, rendered it almost impregnable. Before our family had left Munster Ab¬ bey, it was determined to observe, as much as Mrs Belford's delicate state of health would permit, the manners and customs of the several provinces of France ; and ofthe provinces, or republics, or kingdoms of Italy, through which they were to travel. These remarks were indeed often interrupted or suspended by Mrs Belford's situation, but not so much prevented, as to forbid the party to collect many valuable observations, and even anecdotes, of celebrated names in these countries. From Calais to Rome, the characters, manners, and customs of the inhabitants, bore a wonderful assimilation, compared with their resemblance to those of the sons and daughters of Britain. The sprightliness and levity of a Frenchman is al-
most a perfect contrast to the steadiness, the composure, and even the gravity of the ge¬ nerality of Britons : And it is a curious, and nearly a singular fact, in the natural history (if we may so call it) of nations, that since the days of the celebrated Roman Histo¬ rian *, the French have retained, among all the kingdoms of Europe, precisely the same character which that great author ascribes to them. It is true, there are various mo¬ difications of character and of manners, in the different provinces of France ; but the veritable Frenchman is seen in them all. In Italy the diversity is striking ; yet a strong likeness is observable by every tra¬ veller of discernment. Both kingdoms have given birth in every age to men of high fame and superior worth ; for great are the advantages of their climate, above every o- ther in Europe ; But the wretched govern¬ ments by which they have been for centu¬ ries afflicted, has wonderfully diminished the numbers of those men in every order of so¬ ciety, who would in different situations have
distinguished themselves by the superiority of their genius, had they lived under the benign influences of a mild and free govern¬ ment. A traveller, however, of taste and education, (for both these qualifications are absolutely requisite in every traveller who would not wish to return to Ые country with the character of a fool,) must draw ten thou¬ sands of pleasures from the vast variety of sources which open to his eye in this de¬ lightful and extended tour. The cities, the towns, the villages, the seats of families of rank and fortune, the fortresses, the cita¬ dels, the fields, and many of the high roads, are objects of one species which must strike every judicious mind. But the enchanting manners of the people of fashion, thek easy, their polite, thek disengaged address, form such a contrast to the manners of almost every other European nation, that it must be highly captivating at least to a young mind of an elegant or social turn,—We are here, however, speaking only of those plea¬ sures, or the sources of those pleasures, which are of a secondary nature, where only taste» elegance, fine-breeding, or splendor, pre^ sent themselves. Of the fountains fron*
whence more refined delights flow in upori the mind, few, alas ! is the number to be discovered by the most inquisitive, or chari¬ tably minded traveller. The morality of France and Italy have been for centuries past regulated by a very low standard ; Though, as has been mentioned above, many individuals in both kingdoms have shone conspicuous for every quality which adorns humanity ; yet, from the nature of the re¬ ligion and government of both countries, morals, in the higher and lower orders, have been relaxed to a most lamentable degree. The reader will forgive this apparent di¬ gression. The author humbly presumes it may be attended with some benefit to un¬ experienced and modest young men, who travel into foreign parts in quest of know¬ ledge, and to make observations. Mrs Belford, for feveral days, bore the fatigue of the journey beyond expecta¬ tion ;—but at Fontainbleau, she became suddenly affected with a kind of shivering, which justly alarmed her affectionate hus¬ band and daughter. By medical aid, how*
ever, and favoured by sound rest during the night, she was able in four days to set out on their journey. As our travellers were not blessed with the highest spirits, from Mrs Belford's state of health, of course many observations es¬ caped them, which otherwise would have attracted their attention and their taste,—- We shall, therefore, without any more his¬ tory of small occurrences, only take notice, that the route they pursued was not exact¬ ly towards Montpelier,—From Fontain¬ bleau, they proceeded through Orleannois, Nivernois, Bourbonnois, Lyonnois, Au¬ vergne, and Languedoc, to their place of destination, Short stages, and gentle motion in their carriage, enabled the amiable invalid tQ support her. spirits to a wonderful degree. They were, in fact, censiderably supported by one object, which must strike every ι traveller ivith astonishment,—and which ! presented itself towards the close of theiť journey :—this was the canal of Languedoc, begun by Lewis XIV. in 1 666, and com-
Зб" MUNSTER ABBEY. pieted 1680.—The object which this strange and mconsistent Monarch hadin view by this wonderful work,—was to form a com¬ munication between the Ocean and the Me¬ diterranean, for the more speedy passäge of the French fleet,—But, after a most e- nörmous expence, it has not answered the end intended by it. It was carried on a- bove an hundred miles, over hills and val¬ lies,*— and even through a mountaini in one place. After a journey of nearly seven hundred miles, the family of Belford arrived at Montpelier, which they effected in eleven weeks. Mrs Belford, as well as Belford and Aurelia, were charmed with the place. Of the purity of - the air,—and the serenity of the sky,—the/ had formed no idea be¬ fore their arrival. The beauty alfo, and the fertility of the country all around, were enchanting. They had not been established in their lodgings many days, when there was a pleasing and striking change for the better in Mrs Belford's looks,—and as remarkable
an alteration in her spirits. But, alas ï these delightful symptoms were of short du¬ ration ï —Her constitution was shaken to the foundation :—Her complaints were of the most alarming nature :—And though the most eminent physicians were called to her aid, yet it was visible she was daily los¬ ing strength. Another gleam of hope, however, raised the drooping spirits of the best of men, and the most dutiful of daugh¬ ters ;—and they fondly flattered themselves with the transporting idea of Mrs Belford's convalescence,—from her sleeping welz¬ and her return of appetite. She rode out in the carriage a few hours every day, and seemed to recover her wonted cheerfulnefs and spirits. She could receive a small se¬ lect party, and was much pleased with mu¬ sic, being passionately fond of that heaven¬ ly and pathetic amusement.
Vot, II. D
. ^-l^Mfa-m ..... '-'-""^tiltil II Г II Г ir-—«- ^° ---- Д" ·>'"- »" j,. ίΜ , i, ^ A.«». ^ - -.^t-*^-. ^-^1»— i.— . ^jfı ι, |ΜιΜΕιι.ί(ί1ιιίΕ>ίΕΐΜΜΜίΜΜιϊ
CHAP. III. Jö Elforb and family had net been more than amonth at Montpelier, when the charms 'of Aurelia had attracted more than the mete attention of many young men of rank* Und fortune in the vicinity of that place,— Indeed, it was not possible to behold this amiable young lady without admiration and affection, mingled with esteem.—The state ofher mother's health, too, gave her some¬ thing of a more interesting air or cast of countenance :—Fcr, amidst all her polite exertions to shew forth agreeable manners in every company s in spite of the most stre¬ nuous effort she could make, the marks of some interna] emotions were perfectly visible in her lovely features;—for she now began to prcj-ag-e thnt fatal event which not long hence
the decree of heaven had fixed to take place. A few miles from Montpelier, there liv¬ ed a nobleman of ancient family, and of ample fortune.—His name was Count de Bryon :—He was now in the bloom of youth, ofa graceful person, and of the e- legant and accomplished manners which has generally distinguished a man of fa¬ shion in France. But he possessed more valuable qualities :—He was a young man of singular virtue and moral worth,—of ex¬ emplary filial affection,—and a fond and dutiful brother.—He had acquired fame, too, for other acquisitions, which, unfortu¬ nately for the happiness of mankind, are too little valued and respected by the great or the affluent in most countries :— Hè was highly informed :—A patron of learning,— and the avowed protector of all young men of genius, whose finances did not e- nable them to prosecute their studies to ad¬ vantage. Such is the character of the person who declared himself the professed admirer of
Aurdia. Count de Bryon did not per¬ mit his aflection to violate the laws of delicacy or prudence:—He had observ¬ ed in his beloved a superiority of mind, as well as of beauty and form :—He had for many months remarked her discernment, and soundness of judgment :—And, after a period which he considered of sufficient length to put it in the power of Miss Bel¬ ford to have a satisfactory acquaintance with his character, temper, and dispositions, he embraced the first opportunity of im¬ parting to her the warmth of his attach¬ ment, and the sincerity of his esteem. His addresses were made i i> that re - spectful and elegant manner, which at once marked the lover and the man of sense- i ? j But к was not the will of heaven tliat this amiable nobleman should prove suc¬ cessful rin . his sttòt, Aurelia received him with alľ that politeness and attention which к .becomes". 1 every ..woman- to shew to- wards* a man of honour and character, who offers his., all - to ker disposal. She »3
expressed the sense she entertained of the very high honour conferred upon her by Count de Bryon,—her opinion of his exalted worth,—and her great respect for his general character :—But, with that firmness and dignity which never forsook her, she acquainted him, that there were several very serious reasons which at pre¬ sent determined her not to enter into the married state :—One above all was decu sive :—this was, the alarming state of her mother's health. Her exquisite sense of dehcacy and propriety, Would not permit the idea of change in condition at pre¬ sent to enter her mind ;—and, afíer ex¬ pressing in the strongest terms her grati¬ tude for his partiality, she requested of hmv to withdraw his attentions, and to cease to make any future applications of the same nature, as her vows and resolutions were irrevocable. The Count behaved like a man of proper spkit. and dignity. He was- , perfectly sensible that Miss Belford, abhor- ied the vice of coquetry even in, idea,, anď that the spotless purity of her heart revok¬ ed at the thought of playing wkh the af¬ fections and happiness of men of honour·.
Such characters he knew were too com¬ mon in both sexes ;—but he also knew, that the frequency of the crime never could lessen the infamy of it; and that none who were guilty of it, became, in future- life, either happy husbands or wives, This- prudent and spirited nobleman, therefore, resolved from henceforth not to visit Au¬ relia, nor a second time to solicit these re¬ turns of affection which it was not in the power of a woman of her principles to make. He therefore judged it to be the wisest step he could take, to travel into some foreign country,—and there, not only dissipate his present melancholy, but also add to that stock of knowledge which he had already stored up. like a man of re¬ flection, he concluded also, that time and experience would enable him to judge more clearly and decisively of the probable re¬ sponse of any fair one whom he should in future pay his addresses to, before he pre¬ ferred the last question. From the conduct of Count de Bryony the giddy and unthinking part of the;
world, which indeed compose a wonderful proportion of it, will be apt to conclude that he was a very cold and stoical lover. -^•Such a conclusion is worthy of le vity and thoughtlessness. Wkh a few exceptions> teazing, importunities, and persévérance^ as it is called, have îiot enabled ohe òf ä thousand lovers to gain . his -рйке ;^-butv even then, what sort of prize tes it al¬ ways turned out to be ?-^of Httle¡value * ^-Of little value did I say ,-^öf norite at all·:—For, caprice, whim, and éoquetry r are the blessed ingredients of ; the charac¬ ter of a woman who purposely keeps & man in suspence for months,--^-ňay/ for years, after she is resolved to accept of hi* hand at last. This conduct is utterly be¬ neath a woman of principle :-*-»and yet к is not equal in criminaHty to the behavi¬ our of those who have at thei same îţime many men kept in a species of thraldpm, by practising upon them silly imposisition and deceit, which nothing but judicial in¬ fatuation could prevent them frstm l detect¬ as- ■■".-:■ -Ï;m : ". -:■> ■:"
We may take the liberty farther to ob¬ serve, that neither in our drama, nor on the stage, have these vices, practised so frequent¬ ly by dishonourable men and women, been exposed to that just odium and indigna¬ tion which their levity deserves :—Levity is too fair a term :—But what can be more unfeeling in man or woman,—what can be more unprincipled and immoral,—than to wantonly sport with the time, health, peace, and character of a fellow-crea¬ ture ? Every day affords instances of unhappy consequences following from a bfind attachment to the most unworthy ob¬ jects. May some happy, superior genius be raised up by heaven, who shall possess the powers of a Demosthenes or a Shake¬ speare, to rouse general horror at the cha¬ racter of coquette in either sex, to expel them all society, and to condemn them to eternal celibacy î That melancholy hour now approached, when Belford and his amiable daughter were to be called to sustain one of the hea¬ viest shocks ivhich our frail natures are heirs
to,—the loss of an amiable and beloved spouse, and of a' fond, affectionate, and du¬ tiful mother.—Mrs Belford's decline had hi¬ therto been gradual ;—and, at times, there ivere some gleams of hope, that the original strength of her constitution might overcome the malignity of her distemper ; but òf late, that is, about four months after they had been at Montpeher, the decline was visibly rapid.—The ablest medical aid was called in :—but no hopes were entertained of con¬ valescence by the physicians, by the afflic¬ ted Belford and daughter, nor by the amia¬ ble Mrs Belford herself. Kind heaven was so gracious and indulgent as not to appoint to her acute pain. She gently wore away : —She preserved her understanding in full vigour :—She conversed with Belford and her darling child, with the utmost compo¬ sure, and gave her, with many blessings, evey aflectionate and solemn counsel :— She warned her, by every thing sacred, ne¬ ver to seek for happiness in any sublunary object :—to guard her heart against attach¬ ment to any of the other sex, be his rank or fortune ever so high, unless she had sa-
tisfy ing evidence that he was a man of vir¬ tue and of moral worth. She*, ivith her dy¬ ing breath, deplored the lot and fate of so many poor females, and some of them too of high birth, who, from their circumstan¬ ces and situations fbr life, were induced to sacrifice their persons at the shrine of misery. In her last moments, she ascribed this fatal conduct in so many, rather to the absence of all principle, than to indigence of condi¬ tion,—insisting strenuously, that a truly virtuous woman, however dependent, will sooner encounter every difficulty, than throw herself into the arms of a profligate or a vil¬ lain, because he is great or rich. For some days after Mrs Belford had' poured forth the best, warmest, and most pious sentiments of her soul to her beloved child, she was fa¬ voured with an interval of comparative free¬ dom from pain :—nay, the fond hopes of the dear husband and daughter were flat¬ tered with the prospect òf returning health. —But, alas î this was but a delusion of the affections :—Nature was exhausted : A ve- xy short time after these favourable symp¬ toms appeared, suddenly strong indications
of approaching dissolution called forth all the sentiments and emotions of connubial and filial love, in the breasts of Belford and Aurelia. Mrs Belford, after exhausting her I remaining strength, in blessings and prayers 1 on her husband and daughter, fell into a j kind of torpor, which turned into sleep for I many hours :—and, after lifting her eyes, and looking benignantly, but faintly, around her, she raised her hands ;—she made a sign fbr Belford and Aurelia to approach her,— heaved a deep sigh,—and expired in the arms of her affectionate husband. The scene which ensued no fancy has ever possessed power to paint, much less a- ny orator to describe :—There are, and e- ver have been, distresses in human life, which baffle all human eloquence to pre¬ sent, even to the soul of sensibility, in their genuine colours. 1 The grief of the afflicted survivors did ! not resemble the boisterous and noisy sor¬ row of common minds :—It was internal woe. It brooded on the soul :—The re-
sources of religion were not wanting,—for Belford and his daughter were pious,—but rationally pious :—they mourned,—but they mourned not as those u who have do hope :" —They were mortals,—therefore they were **ot possessed of perfection :—They indul¬ ged, with full flow, the tears of ardent love, —but, amidst all the overflowings of sor¬ row, they retained the dignity of principle, and recollected, that " there is an appoint¬ ed time to man upon earth/' Heaven graciously conferred on Belford and Aurelia that composure of mind, and tranquilhty of spkits, which enabled them to regulate, with propriety^ every circumstance respecting the last honours to be paid to the memory of her who was no more. The generous and enlarged mind of the British Protestant, pitied the miserable and con¬ tracted spkit of ecclesiastical domination, ivhich forbade christian burial to any Hu¬ guenot ; or, at least, forbade that any Pro¬ testant should be buried in the same ceme¬ tery wkh a Roman Catholic.—This was a matter of no moment to Belford :—His principles were too exalted, and his under- Vol. IL E
standing too enlarged, to regard in what* spot of this globe the ashes of his beloved were deposited, provided they were laid down with decency and solemnity :—With singular decency and solemnity they were deposited ;—for in Montpelier, and ks close vicinity, there were many families of the first respectability who professed the Pro¬ testant faith :—The principal men of that' profession attended Belford to perform the funeral rites to the remains of her who was now a seraph in glory :—and even, it is af¬ firmed, the Catholics, in numbers, saw, with tender sensibility, the melancholy proces¬ sion, and mingled their tears with those whom they dared not to join :—For such was the popularity of this delightful family* of Belfords, that they were but a few weeks established in Montpeher, when the fame of their superior virtues was carried over all the place, and indeed over all the numerous parties which are always to be found there, in quest of health or pleasure. The last solemn offices being paid to the departed saint, the disconsolate husband and child found they could relish none of
the gaieties of Montpelier. Though many invahds were assembled here, yet the far greater part of the visitors were blessed with perfect health :—And the eontinuecl rounds of balls, assemblies, and routs, little accord¬ ed with with the tone of souls whose feel¬ ings were wound up to the highest pitch of grief, and to the strongest desire of solitude. Accordingly, after settling, with his u- sual accuracy, every particular respecting the funeral of his beloved wife ;—-after ha¬ ving made a handsome present to a land¬ lord who had paid singular attention to his family ;—and leaving a fifty pound bill for the poor in his vicinity, Belford ordered Ыз carriages to be ready early next morning to proceed for Italy. f % Ί It was necessary to travel slowly on ac¬ count of Mr Belford and his daughter's health and spirits ; for they were deeply af¬ fected by the late melancholy event. Interesting as many objects were which presented themselves on the journey, yet they did not gratify their curiosity by re- ^ E s
maining at any stage or town, above & few hours, and to repose at night, till they ar¬ rived at Turin. At this noble cký they re¬ mained eight or ten days, ъпа viewed with admiration the fortifications, which are e- qual in strength to any in Europe. This metropolis of his Sardinian Majesty could have afforded great variety of elegant a- musements to our travellers ; but, in their present state of mind, they could enjoy none of them with any degree of relish. They visited, however, all the principal public buildings, cabinets of curiosities, and the public libraries.—In this there was nothing but the simple indulgence of a rational cu¬ riosity, and the gratification of taste. Resolved to see most of the chief cities of Italy, without taking the shortest route to Rome, Mr Belford bent his way next for Milan.—Aurelia joined with her father" in praises of the Milanese.—That country is, the most delightful and the most fertile in Italy. And the approach to the city is beau¬ tiful beyond description. Both Milan and its citadel are fortified strongly. It suited the present solemnity of the minds of the
travellers, to take a view of one of the most magnificent Cathedrals in Italy. It was one ofthe first built after the venerable Gothic taste ; and its treasures, in ecclesiastic riches of gold and silver, and precious stones, will . one day become a valuable prhe to some formidable invader. During thek short stay at Milan, one morning an uncommon spectacle presented itself to their astonished minds. It was a young man, dressed after the English fashion, . dragged by a furious mob along the street where they lodged. Mr Belford instantly . dispatched his first servant, with one of the sons of his landlord, to learn the cause of this violence ; when he was in a few minutes informed that, in fact, this was a young English squire of fortune, who had insulted a religious procession as it passed through a street in close vicinity, Mr Belford did not . delay one moment to make enquiry to what persons, civil or ecclesiastic, he should make application, in order to attempt- to rescue -his foolish'and rude countryman from, per¬ haps, public punishment. Fortunately for theyoung man, Belford had interest and Е3 ' * "
address to get access to a venerable church¬ man of a liberal mind, and a benevolent heart. An adept in the Italian and al¬ most every modern language of Europe, he informed Father Contini that he had got perfectly good information that tiie jfoohsh young Englishman, who had offered the ih> suit to the rites of religion of this country, Was scarce nineteen years of age—that he: had last night been revelling with a few more of his British brethren to a very late hour, —that the fumes of wine had not yet for¬ saken Ы$ head, when he perceived the pro¬ cession pass his windows, and, amidst deli¬ rium, sallied out into the street, to commit the act of folly for which he could offer no apology, but youth and ignorance. The good old: man bid BeUprd make himself per- íecly easy : he assured him· that the head of the convent to whicb his countryman was carried, was a worthy honourable man, andí that he would himself instantly accom¬ pany Mr Belford to Father Arrigonľs a^ partments. They immediately proceeded ; and found poor Spencer the culprit brought? before ten or twelve stem countenanced priests. Spencer was placedat a. kind of
Ьат, and, besides his austere looking judges,. he was surrounded by guards and officers of the peace, by clerks, and the whole so¬ lemn inquisition. Father Contini, who enjoyed high bene¬ fices in the church, and who was a personal favourite of his Holiness of Rome, was ησ sooner observed ' to enter the place where the assembly was held, than, with a stea¬ dy and commanding voice, he demanded an audience, before one article of procedure should take place against a young and friendless stranger in a foreign land. Bel¬ ford was astonished at the awe which Con- tini's dignity of demeanour impressed on the countenance of every one of the sancti¬ fied judges, and even on the countenances of the ruffians who surrounded the prisoner. In a short, but liberal and eloquent ad¿- dress, he informed the court of all the cir¬ cumstances relating to the young man's conduct ;—pleaded the cause of youth, of folly, and ignorance : He enlarged on the generosity of the English nation towards all foreigners, particularly towards the nation of Italy ; and concluded, by requesting that
Spencer should^make, by an interpreter, a most humble apology for his conduct, and pay a moderate fine to the Convent of Do¬ minicans. Without debate or hesitation, the chief of this blessed assembly agreed to the request of Father Contini, and young John, after a hearty drubbing, and a mose hearty fright, was dismissed. - The benevolent priest, who became Spen¬ cer's protector and counsellor, carried Bel¬ ford and him to his own house, where, in a mild, yet solemn manner, he offered him his most earnest advice never again to commit the same offence in this, or in any other country ; but, on the contrary, whe¬ ther he should travel into Turkey, or China, or Indostan, to remember it was one cha¬ racteristic of an accomplished gentleman, to pay a marked external respect to the rites of religion of eyery country. After addressing Spencer in this serious and kindly manner, he requested his guests to take a little refreshment after the fatigue of the morning. They politely an4 grate¬ fully accepted л1%е invitation., Meantime
quiry, and had hitherto never known any instance of similar outrage to* have happen¬ ed at Milan, requested of the young English¬ man to be so obliging as to give Ыт a short account of hb family and education, benig¬ nantly hoping that his relation might afford some apology for his conduct. Spencer, after expressing himself in a ve¬ ry handsome manner to Father Contini, for hm singular benevolence and kindness, rea¬ dily agreed to indulge his benefactor's cu¬ riosity, and thus proceeded* *' I am the eldest son of a wealthy squire in the south of England^ who traces his ori¬ gin beyond William, of Normandy :—His name is Spencer :— He is a worthy good- humoured man, beloved by all his peasants, and by all his neighbours :—He has a rent- roll of ten thousand sterling a year, with no more incumbrance than ten or twelve thousand pounds :— Ke has been too indul¬ gent a father ; and one of the fatal effects of this indulgence your have this day wit¬ nessed. My mother also did not tail tc*
contribute her share in disqualifying me for acting with prudence when I should go in¬ to the world. I had not attained" my tenth year, when my father, (who loves money,) employed the curate of the parish to look out for a tutor; (or governor, as the term is in my country,) for the domestic education of three sons. The curate was, like to« many of his poor miserable brethren, not only á man of little erudition, and less taste, but he was the ten times humble servant of the family of Spencethall/ Well awarethôt myfather would reluctantly pay fifty pounds a year out of his ten thousand, to a peda¬ gogue with whom he could not converse (for my father liad, like his son, woefully neglected his education), the poor depen¬ dant curate procured him a low-born, ill- bred lad, from the fens of Lincoln, for thirty pounds a-year :—His name was Tom Hopper :—Tom looked like a clown, ànd a fool,—and a clown he was ;-*-but no portion of the last quafity formed any ingredient in his composition, Tom quickly saw the cue of the family, and, in a few days, tho¬ roughly discerned the weak side of every man, woman, and child of the house..
; ''The elements of knowledge, only, this elegant tutor had to impart to his three pu- , pils ; and it was the fint and the strictest charge he recived from my father and mo¬ ther, and an old aunt, who governed all, tiiat Hopper was never to contradict, re¬ prove, or punish, in the slightest degree, a- ny of the young gentlemen ;—nay, more, he was enjoined and commanded not to teach them a longer lesson than one hour. " Tutor Hopper remained in the family five years. At the expiration of this period I was sent to Oxford, a seminary of learning which has sent forth more philosophers, and more fools, than any in the world. Of the merits or demerits of that University, as to the ability and industry of its teachers, I profess not to be a competent judge. But this I fatally know, and do now experience, when I am afraid it is too late, that, what with the ignorance, the low-breeding, the sycophantish manners, and the want of principle in my domestic tutor, and what with the reverse (in manners, at least,) in my academical superintendant, who was a professed buck and a fine gentleman, I left
Oxford rø ťhe beginning of my nineteenth year, (that is about 6 months ago) thorough¬ ly disgusted with tutors, professor», and books : For I saw I had been lost in my ear¬ lier education, and that the habits in which I had been bred up, of living half ţny time in the stable-yard, or about the kennel, had prevented me from acquiring any taste for letters. Indeed, I wrote to my father to deliver me from this learned Furgatory, as I termed the University ; and I had his im¬ mediate permission, by return of post. ** But I W49 i*ot £uU tern days returned, 'when Sir Charles Chase, a neighbour of my father, paid us a tbat, and express¬ ed his surprize at my leaving Oxford be*. fpre the usual tini© of a&endanee at that place. The old gentleman explained to the Knight, in a manner perfectly adapt¬ ed to Ъщ inteVeets^ the reasons of my return to Spencer haU :^he assured him that the young man's spirit was broken by being сощре4|е4 to read Latin two hours a day t mid spend one hour in some other åsy pedantic employment, aad that upon I>ick's application h$ h^d agreed to receive him at
home with all his heart, in order to be per¬ fected in the noble and rational arts of fox, badger, and hare-hunting, which would brace his nerves, invigorate his whole con¬ stitution, and give him the ideas of a gen¬ tleman. " His honour Sir Charles, though a man who will never overturn a flate, had yet fuch a quantity of underftanding as to per¬ ceive something exceedingly erroneous in Spencer's future plan of life for his son ;— and, rousing up all his latent powers, with such eloquence as he possessed, he conjur¬ ed his friend to alter his intentions respect¬ ing Dick ; and by all means to send him abroad to see the world, or, as it is called, to make the grand tour ; and to be parti¬ cularly careful to find out, at any expence, an accomplished person, half tutor, half companion for his son,—a man of a liberal mind,—not very nice about certain points óf moral manners,—and divested parti¬ cidarly of all religious prejudices :—that is, one who considers all kinds of reli¬ gion on the face of the earth, as equal¬ ly true and equally false. He assur- ^Vot, Д. F MİMia&ı^^ımMMfaj.iÎ^lıuMMlfli^^j^m^^ ι-,, ι .nifi ι Г .....-' --■........
ed Spencer, that with such an enlightened guide, young Dick could not make one false step till he returned from the conti¬ nent, " My father received the knighťs counsel with evident symptoms of approbation (for I was present) and without deliberating one moment, swore, that aş soon as he could procure the said tutor, his son should set out for Paris. One month had not elaps¬ ed, when I embarked at Dover,-^attended by a person qualified apparently, as Sjr Charles and my father wished,—a hand¬ some, agreeable, easy-tempered, gay, thoughtless fellow of one or two and twen¬ ty, who had never been out of England.— At Calais, we ordered a post-chaise and four. I had two servants, as great bloods as their master and his friend,—and off we set, in the true English stile, at the full gallop, bespattering all who came in our wa y ;—But we galloped a very short way, and went at that pace no more till our ar¬ rival at Paris ;—for the drivers, the car- * riages, and the poor animals who drew them,
Were of such a kind that we did not arrive at that city in less than three days and a half. *' We had never once dreamed of pro¬ curing letters of introduction to any persons of rank or fashion in this great city. Ac¬ cordingly, when we issued forth on the morning after our arrival, we found ourselves two bewildered, stupid beings, who knew not where to go, or what to enquire after. —For I ought to have informed you, Sir, that neither my tutor nor myself under¬ stood one word of the language of the coun¬ try :—All our aid consisted in my first ser¬ vant's having a miserable smattering of French, which he had learned from a cook, a natív» o£ GascoYUe,—a dialect of that language hardly intelligible by a Farisbu, However, fortune favoured us in a very short time. After we had strolled and stared about two or three hours, we observed a young man of a genteel appearance, eyeing us with very particular attention. Imagine our agreeable surprize, when he addressed me in my native tongue, requesting to know Fa
whether I had been lately at the university of Oxford, and if my name was not Spen¬ cer. I replied, I had been lately at Oxford, and that he named me rightly. He added, " My name is Tomkins. I had not the honour of your acquaintance in England ; but I could not resist the impulse of addres-, sing a gentleman from my own country, when I met him in a foreign land." I as¬ sured him that I never felt more delight¬ fully than from this interview, and can¬ didly acknowledged to him in confidence, and not without blushing, that I could not speak one word of French. Tomkins was a young man not only of abilities and of address ; he also possessed a warm and a benevolent heart.—He bid me be per¬ fectly at my ease, assuring гае that in a few weeks, by being frequently in good company, and by immediately ordering an able master to attend me, I should be able to understand what passed in conversation, —nay, be able to hold some conversation myself." " Determined to conceal nothing of my present situation from so generous and dis-
interested a benefactor, I frankly told him, that my friend and myself had brought no letters of introduction with us,—and that I made him this confession with shame. " It matters not, replied Tomkins :—An¬ swer me fairly, like an open honest English¬ man,—of what rank and fortune are you in» England ?—and ivhere is your hotel here ?—and what is your establishment or attendants ? I answered him as he desired. And are you, rejoins he, the heir of Spen¬ cerhall, —the son of as honest a Squire,- — and as honourable a family as in all Eng¬ land. I have heard of your father of¬ ten,—as an hearty, hospitable, well belov¬ ed man by all around him. Be now assur¬ ed, Mr Spencer, that I shall, with pleasure and joy, perform you a piece of service, or rather discharge a duty, by taking an early opportunity of presenting you to some of the first people in Paris.—I mean not to a- ny of the court. My own rank and fortune, tho* inferior to yours, is yet such that I have access to many families of the highest respectability, though not all of noble rank $ F3
—but they are families of distinction, part¬ ly by birth,—but more of them by their e- legant accomplishments,—and by their vir¬ tues and hospitality to strangers, especially to the English, whom they love,—and whom they would love more, if we would throw off some of that rough, horse-racing, and fox-hunting kind of manner which is so of¬ fensive to polished minds. I accepted Ins offers with the warmest gratitude ;—yet felt very aukwardly in the prospect of ap¬ pearing in a fashionable Parisian circle, as a dumb animal, and with my plain rural or academical manners. But Tomkins bid nie take courage, dress well, and assume no airs, but preserve my own natural man¬ ners ;—and he added, he would carry me by degrees, from families of lesser polish ; that is, who were not distinguished by high manners, to those who led the van in fa¬ shion. In short, I owed infinite obligations to this amiable young man,—and might have owed him many more, if the remains of the miserable habits I had acquired in former days, had not counteracted his sin¬ cere wishes for my improvement. I made, however, some exertions immediately. I
called to my lodgings one of the first teach¬ ers of the French language in the city :— I spent five hours each day with him,—^so did my tutor :—Three hours were employed in lessons, and two in conversing with our teacher. Ten days I spent in this way. ^-*Next morning my kind friend called on me, and informed me, that, if it was agree¬ able, he would carry me in the evening of that day to the house of one of the no¬ blesse, a Monsieur de la Croix, where I w T ould meet w T ith a polite and kind recep¬ tion, and find myself quite at home. He told me I should find a man of much information, yet of great modesty, and of most elegant address,—>and hoped I would relish so much the first party, as to wish the continuance of them. I made him a grateful return for his goodness, and promised to attend him at seven at night. He was so polite as to call on mc at my hotel at this hour, and carried me directly to the house or rather palace of La Croix :—We were ushered into one of the most splendid apartments I ever had seen, furnished in the most sumptuous man¬ ner ;—and, on the very moment of our eiv,
tering the room, the master of the house received us in a manner so superiorly ele¬ gant and fashionable, as can be seen only in Paris. In a few minutes his lady, two daughters, and a beautiful boy of eight or ten years of age, joined us ;—and, in half an hour, a crowd of company, all carrying the appearance of rank and fashion. I acknowledge I felt myself by no means at ease :—The society I had hitherto been ac¬ customed to keep,—the plainness or rough¬ ness of manners of that society,—I could not resist contrasting with that which now so brilliantly presented itself to my eyes : Added to this, I was ignorant of the lan¬ guage ; so that I neither could address any one ofthe company, understand one word of ten that was addressed to me, nor compre¬ hend a single sentence of the conversation of the evening. Instead of enjoying, there¬ fore, this elegant society, I was quite unhap¬ py ; a situation, I understand, many of my countrymen, qualified no better than my¬ self, have thousands of times experienced in Paris. I was impatient till supper was over. I was ashamed of my conscious awkwardness, and secretly resolved never
to expose myself in the same manner.— Would to God I had done no more than made this foolish resolution ï —Alas ! I found good Tomkins* society was too refined for my unpolished mind ; and, after this eve¬ ning, I not only avoided his company, but never again saw him. " Next morning, walking with my tutor in the gardens of the Thuilleries, I had the misfortune to meet with two young English¬ men of a very different character from my late friend. They were also Oxonians : I had some acquaintance with them. I am ashamed to mention their names. They were as ignorant as myself; and they were far more dissipated than I yet had been. However, I found their stile and manner of living quite congenial to my taste. Accord¬ ingly we dined together that day, and drank till a late hour. We meant to go to the Theatre,—but one of the young men, on reflection, observed that, as we were all much intoxicated, and none of us could speak the language of the country, the most proper step we could take, was, for each to depart for his own lodgings. But before
we separated, it was agreed for us to meet the next day, where my new friends assur¬ ed me I should find several more additional countrymen, precisely of the same stamp with themselves ; all of them determined to make the grand tour, and all of them e- qually prepared with myself for the expe¬ dition. c< Six weeks I spent in this species of low dissipation, in spite of the remonstrances of my tutor, who, to do him justice, was nol only seldom of our parties,, but frequently threatened to abandon his charge. One morning, after breakfast, he addressed me so seriously, and with such severity, that I swore I would not bear such liberty to be taken with me by any pedant or tutor on earth. These terms raised his indignation, and he left the room for an hour. On his return, he told me he had resolved instant¬ ly to return for England, as it was impossi¬ ble his attendance could be of any farther benefit to me ; and as he saw that, both from the company I kept, and from my growing aversion to himself, he was both a restraint and a burden upon me.
" Like an infatuated fool, I bid him in¬ stantly do as he pleased, and abruptly left the room. I set oñ directly for the Hotel of some of the new corps into which I had entered, a little disconcerted, however, by the squabble with my tutor, and under much anxiety, lest he should actually set out for Britain. Accordingly, after remain¬ ing a few hours with ray companions, I re¬ turned to my lodgings, determined to make a proper apology to him,—when, to my utter surprise, I found he had set out above an hour before I returned, leaving me a very temperate note.. I can repeat the words of it. It was very laconic, and made a temporary impression on me. ■*· Sir, " It is with sorrow I feel myself un¬ der the very mortifying necessity of aban¬ doning a charge, which for sometime past I found couid confer neither honour nor credit on me, I leave you with regret ;__ and I have only to beseech and entreat of you, that you would forsake that wretched society to which you have attached your-
self, without one day's delay, and, for hea¬ ven's sake, with the utmost industry look out for some excellent young man who is travelling for real improvement, and endea¬ vour to join him. I commit you to Hea¬ ven's care," " I was struck to the heart on reading this short epistle. I saw my folly. I sat down and pondered on my past conduct. After sometime spent in as serious reflection as a dissipated mind is capable of, I re¬ solved, without the loss of a day, to follow my tutor's counsel. I was fortunate enough to succeed in my enquiries after a young man of sober manners, and of good educa¬ tion ; and who was also a gentleman. In the course of the day, I was informed that at an hotel very near to the one in which I was lodged, there was a Mr Walpole from Sussex, who was to set out for Italy in a few days, and that he would be happy in having an agreeable companion. u Sensible of my own literary deficiency, of my foolish appearance in not speaking
the French language,—and sensible also of my unpolished manners, I felt very disa¬ greeably on the prospect of calling on one who, though he was an Englishman, I had no acquaintance with, and who might be a young gentleman of such superior accom¬ plishments to me in every particular, that there could be no proper society between us :—Sensible of all these circumstances, I resolved to find out some person of con¬ sequence to introduce me to Mr Walpole. But to whom could I make application ?— The young men I had lately unhappily at¬ tached myself to, were the most improper persons in the world to address. My ho¬ noured Tomkins I had abandoned.—How to act I knew not. At last I summoned up courage to go and cast myself on the goodness and compassion of Tomkins, who was not only fond of youth, but made the most generous allowances for their follies and errors. I immediately, on collecting spirits, set out for his lodgings ;—but, fi¬ gure my situation of mind,—when I found that he had set out eight days before for England.
Vol. IL G
" Necessity is the parent of invention,— Urged by the pressing situation I found myself in to leave this corrupted city, and, if possible, to be introduced immediately to Mr Walpole, I boldly resolved to wait on him personally, and in an honest, open, and unaffected manner, to lay before him very shortly my history since my arrival at Pa¬ ris. I instantly executed my purpose.— I found this young gentleman at home ;— î sent in my name by my first servant, mentioning only that I was lately from Ox¬ ford. Mr Walpole received me very gra¬ ciously,—talked with me a few minutes in a general and easy manner,—and inquired into my future views. This was a fair o- pening for me. Without any preface, or any attempts to elegance or eloquence of expression, of which I was incapable,—I begged leave to request his forgiveness for an intrusion which I v/as by no means en¬ titled to take the hberty of making ; and, in simple and plain language, I told him with regret all that had passed since I came to Paris. I expressed my earnest desire to become acquainted with some gentleman of character, who was to make the tour of
the southern part of Europe,—and that hav¬ ing no person in this place to introduce me to him, I had summoned up courage to pay my respects in person, and to request of him, that if he had formed no previous en¬ gagement, he would honour me, by per¬ mitting me to join him in his travelling in¬ to Italy, which I had been informed was his intention. Walpole, in that handsome manner which gains the heart, after thank¬ ing me for the partiality which I had dis¬ covered for his character, assured me that, from my candid and opennes9 of commu¬ nication, and from (he was pleased to say) my personal figure, he should account it a very happy circumstance to have so agree¬ able a companion,—and hoped it would not prove inconvenient for me to set out soon. I expressed my anxious desire to leave Paris as quickly as possible, adding I could be ready in a few hours. In four- and-twenty hours, said he, I shall be ready >: —but cannot in shorter time, on account of some material pecuniary business. " I remained with Walpole some hours*, charmed with his conversation, and in* G г
wardly bighly gratified by reflecting on my resolution, and the success which had aueuded it, I left him for a little, with many expressions of gratitude,—and return¬ ed to my lodgings, determined not to see or take leave of my late companions, and to be scarce abroad, till I should call on Walpole, in order to set out on our journey. I employed a few hours in writing to my father, and some select companions in England ;—and I thought it my duty also to write to my tutor.—To all of them I made, in general, a frank confession of my foolish and idle conduct since I came to Paris,—or, at least, a very few days after I arrived there. I requested my tutor to for¬ give me,—and assured him that I recol¬ lected with gratitude, shame, and pain, the honest and friendly remonstrances he had made against my irregular and dis¬ sipated manner of living :—I acknowledged the justice of his observations, as to the consequences of such conduct ;—gave him a full account of what I planned, and pre¬ pared now to execute, respecting my tra¬ velling with Mr Walpole:—And I con¬ cluded with assuring him, by the most so-
lémn expressions, that if heaven spared me to return to my native country, I should give him the most substantial evidences of my grateful remembrance of the honest discharge of his duty. " After settling with the master of the hotel, I waited, next morning, by ten o'clock, on Walpole, whom I found perfectly ready to set out. He propo¬ sed we should purchase, jointly, a hand¬ some carriage, which could hold two per¬ sons, which could be had in a few mi¬ nutes. This was instantly agreed on,— and, by two o'clock, we left Paris, to my great joy. After a pleasant journey of ñve weeks, we arrived at this city, where I have been, I may say M r ith propriety, a pupil, though an unworthy pupil, of this amiable young man. Unfortunately, this morning I strayed from him, and, in the wantonness of folly and ignorance, committed the out¬ rage of which you have heard, against reli¬ gion and decency. But be assured, vene¬ rable and truly holy father, a like offence I shall never commit again."
O i
CHAP. IV. Montini was charmed with the ingenious manner of young Spencer, assuring him, that, in the course of a long life, he had u- niformly observed, that wherever openness and simplicity of heart discovered them¬ selves in early life, it was a happy presage of the virtues of more advanced years,— After some conversation with Belford on Italy in general, and of Milan in particular, the benevolent deliverer of Spencer request¬ ed the honour of the gentlemen to dine with him next day ; and learning, from something which fell from Belford, that he had a daughter travelling with him, he, in the politest manner, begged her father would permit him to walk to his lodgings, and request the young lady to give the ad-
ditional honour of her^company to the par¬ ty. All accepted, readily, of the gracious invitation. Though the acts of this half-tragedy were many, they were all performed within the space of four hours. Spencer's seizure, commitment, deliverance, and his narrative to worthy Contini, were all dispatched with¬ in that short space. Mr Walpole had strolled, this eventful morning, about seven or eight miles from the city, and had but just returned, when Spencer entered his apartment, with plain evidences of disconcertment, and something of that aspect which indicates conscious - guilt. His friend was a young man of sin*. gular decorum : Spencer had discovered this in the course of conversation with him du-. ring their journey from Paris. He there¬ fore trembled to open a. subject in which he must expose himself as a barbarian. On a second thought, he resolved, however, to give him a full account of the matter, from the moment he committed the unguarded deed in the street, till he left the ever tou
be revered Father Contini. This worthy man, instead of chiding him with severity, after the relation of his adventure, only re¬ marked, in a mild manner, * 4 that it was a rule, sacredly to be observed by all gen¬ tlemen who travelled for improvement, to respect the rites of religion in every country through which they passed, be they ever so seemingly ridiculous or superstitious." Without his friend's knowledge, Spencer, aftet he had related his late history to him, returned quickly to father Contini, and after repeating in the most affectionate manner to him, by his interpreter, his acknowledg¬ ment for his transcendent goodness, re¬ quested his forgiveness fbr a hberty he was ashamed to take. Contini bid him use no ceremony, and begged to know what his request was. Spencer mentioned with great modesty the name of an amiable companion who had come lately to Milan with him from Paris, who was at the same hotel with himself ; and that, reluctant to leave him alone, he now presumed to request per¬ mission to bring him to morrow with Mr
Belford and his daughter.— Contini replied as every well bred man will do. Next day was a delightful one.—It was a feast to the soul.—It was a repast to taste. Though Contini's elegant entertainment was a mark of his politeness and hospitality, yet still the fascinating pleasures of his con¬ versation surpassed all luxurious indulgence. It not only charmed the enlightened minds of Belford, Aurelia, and Walpole, but even honest Spencer himself was transported with rapture. He began to taste some of those sweets of which a rude and illiterate mind can form no conception, and for which he has no more relish than a Hottentot. Contini had a history which, however, we shall not here detail. He was not original¬ ly bred to the church. He was educated a soldier, and distinguished for courage and humanity from the time he entered the army, till he quitted the service. Among many causes which determined him to give up a military Hfe, the least, he declared, was not the ignorance and licentious man-
ners of his brother officers. He had no al¬ ternative but to bear with their wickedness, or forsake their society. The last he em¬ braced,—and, at the age of thirty six, he commenced his theological studies, which he prosecuted with success. For though our worthy father was not bred to the church, as we have just now mentioned, yet he had received a regular academical edu¬ cation, and was an adept in the Belles Let¬ tres. In the course of conversation during this pleasant entertainment, and while the company were at coffee, our venerable land¬ lord frequently lamented the melancholy defects of the officers in various parts of Europe into which he had travelled, in point of liberal knowledge, ascribing it compas¬ sionately and candidly to the unhappy mo¬ dern practice of sending youth into the army, mere boys, uneducated, unexperien¬ ced and unprincipled, and where they but too often enter into every species of dissipa¬ tion and vice. After many hours spent in the most de¬ lightful aud rational festivity, the party broke up, but not before Mr Belford en-
treated the Holy Father to honour him with his company the first day which suited his convenience* Contini with sweet affability expressed his desire to join the agreeable society he was about to part with, as next day, adding, with singular grace, that he was seldom blessed with such company. Bel¬ ford, Walpole, and Aurelia, spoke Italian with fluency. Poor Spencer felt somewhat uneasy, but his sufferings were greatly al¬ leviated by the goodness of his two country¬ men in interpreting whatever was material in their conversation. The next day was a counter-part of the former. AU was hospitality, elegance, li¬ beral communication of sentiment, and the harmony of the blessed above. The pre¬ judices of narrow minds in every country, (the offspring ofa wretched education) were deplored, and spoken of with becoming pity and contempt. Even the subject of tolera¬ tion was treated of, by this generous-mind¬ ed priest, with a freedom and liberality which science and philosophy only could have enabled him to display. But Contini
had been the companion and the friend of the divine Marquis of * Beccaria, than whom a more glorious spirit never illumed the regions of this globe. Aurelia charm¬ ed him with the propriety and justness of her observations on whatever she saw since she came into Italy ; and the modesty with which she delivered her sentiments, en¬ hanced their native merit. The company were about to part, when Walpole, wkh grateful Spencer close by him, came up to Contini, and, wkh that modesty so charm¬ ing in youth, begged leave, İn the name of his friend, Spencer, who would bless him while he lived, that he would be so condescend¬ ing as to put it into the power of two young foreigners to say, that they had not only the honour of visiting so illustrious a character in Italy, but had the still higher honour of receiving a visit from him. He beseeched liim to forgive presumption, and to indulge their vanity and ambition, by warning a day when he would partake of the best
which their hotel could afford. We may easily conjecture the answer of the good- man.—He complied at once with their re¬ quest, and the second day after was fixed for the party. Suffice it to say, that the last meeting was perfectly similar to those of the preceding days; and that never any so¬ ciety, so generally acquainted, broke up , with more lively tokens of mutual esteem and admiration. One circumstance ex¬ plains this singularity :—It is this :—Every member of the party was blessed with a good heart and a generous mind. Where these qualities are united in the same per¬ son, and where they are united in all the individuals of a society, lesser or greater, there, discord, rudeness, contradiction, scan¬ dal, nor any of those demons which haunt the societies of men, dare venture to in¬ trude their detestable heads. It is the wise destination of Providence, that man should not enjoy a long succession of even refined pleasures, or joys of any kind. His imperfect nature would not admit cf such fruition. He would become giddy
and elated, and be apt to forget those more exalted duties, the sincere, rational, and manly performance of ivhich constitutes the dignity of his nature. The father of the convent and his belov¬ ed children must now part,—never more to meet in these realms of woe :—It was an interesting parting :—The venerable sage could not conceal his inward agitation :— He dropt the tear of philanthropy :—The gentlemen were deeply affected. But the gentle, the tender-hearted Aurelia retired from the scene, unable to sustain the shock of taking leave. Belford, at night, announced his inten¬ tion of leaving Milan next day, and of pro¬ ceeding for Mantua, wishing Walpole and Spencer every blessing ;—and offering also, in the most insinuating and kindly manner, his best counsels to these young men.— Spencer poured forth, in return, his prayers and supplicarions to heaven, that every good which Providence showers down up¬ on the virtuous and benevolent, might be the portion of Belford and his Aurelia, H 2
They took leave, with looks expressive of mutual undissembled affection. As our travellers proceeded to Mantua, after half an hour's departure from Milan, with paternal fondness, and heaving a deep sigh, Belford thus addressed his beloved child : " My Aurelia, I praise that benevo¬ lent Being, tlie source ofall goodness, who mercifully mingles comfort with all our woes,—that, in his mysterious administra¬ tion, he has made the apparently horrible scene at Milan a few days ago, a cause of considerable alleviation of that load of grief that hung over my spirits. I hope, my dearest child, the elegant, the benevolent, the virtuous, the serious conversation we have enjoyed for some days with the divine ecclesiastic, has impressed you with feelings of a similar nature." " They have," rejoin¬ ed Aureha; " they have, my beloved fa¬ ther, attuned my soul to a gentle and com¬ posed melancholy, in room of that violent perturbation which for these many past weeks agitated my whole frame. The me¬ mory of that good man is indelibly engra¬ ven on my soul ;—never can it be effaced,
Did you not remark particularly, my father, how feelingly he expressed himself concern¬ ing the uncertainty of all sublunary enjoy¬ ments,—and of the precarious tenure by which we hold themľ^and with what a grace he referred to his own happy change of profession,—contrasted with the miseries and calamities which so many are destined to undergo, by an alteration in their perso¬ nal, thek domestic, or their pecuniary con¬ dition ?"—Yes, my love, I did remark, with ecstacy, Contini's heavenly language on these topics, so interesting to you and to me, and all mankind. Such liberality of sentiment in an Italian priest, is a com¬ plete phenomenon.—He is not tinctured in the smallest degree with bigotry, and the vile spirit of intoleration ;—but, on the contrary, is entitled, in the fullest sense of the word, to the noble character of Ca¬ thofic. Silence for some time ensued, after this conversation, when Belford addressed his daughter in these tender expressions of pa¬ ternal love ; *' My dearest child, by the desti¬ li 3
nation of infinite wisdom, you are now be¬ come my whole solace :— О may heavenspare you to be the staff of my declining years ! I centre, under the Almighty, all my hopes of future worldly bliss in you. I praise that Great Being, who has so conducted all your steps in life hitherto, as to enable me, with¬ out partiality or presumption, to anticipate still more substantial happiness. I feel not the most distant apprehension that you will ever give me one moment's uneasiness by your conduct. Such purity of heart, and such innocence of manners you have uni¬ formly displayed. This, this delightful con¬ sideration has wonderfully alleviated my grief for your ever beloved and revered mother, and checks any rising complaint against Heaven's decree. Gracious Provi¬ dence may yet be pleased to confer upon me additional blessings, by restoring us safe to Munster Abbey, and, perhaps, seeing you established honourably at the head of your own family. We ought to have noticed some time be¬ fore that Belford continued to correspond • regularly from Montpelier with his valua-
ble and faithful steward in England, from whom he received the most satisfactory ac¬ count of Ыз many friends and dependents. In hh last letter from France, he desired his correspondent not to write him again until he should hear from him from Florence, and then, in course of past, to send him а long epistle, addressed tc him at Rome, to the care of an acquaintance he mentioned, who was to reside some time in that city. In three days our travellers arrived at Mantua, once a city of high fame, but now, from various causes, fallen into comparative decay,—All the world knows that Mantua claims the honour of giving birth to some of the most famous Constellations, that have ever graced the literary hemisphere, and (eminent amongst them) here the immor¬ tal Virgil first drew his breath. The fortifications of Mantua are reckon¬ ed equal in strength, if not superior, to any in Europe. This place has, for a very long time, made part of the dominions of the Emperor of Germany.
After a short stay at Mantua, Belford and his fellow-traveller visited Parma, Mo¬ dena, and Lucca, and, in a few days, ar¬ rived at the beautiful city of Florence, the capital of the Grand Duke of Tuscany. All the brilliancy of poetic imagery would fail in attempting to convey a just idea to a reader, of the enchanting situation of this celebrated place. It stands between moun¬ tains, whose sloping sides are covered with olive-trees, vineyards, and delightful villas, and is divided by the famous river, Arno. It is impossible for any traveller of taste tó pass hastily through Florence. Months might be spent with infinite mental gratifi¬ cation, in viewing the innumerable wonders of art which are to be found here. The palace of the Grand Duke exceeds all de¬ scription in magnificence ; and also on ac¬ count of the thousands of cabinets of curi¬ osities which it contains. Excepting in magnitude (for Naples exceeds Florence by far in numbers) it surpasses in beauty and riches every other city in Italy, save Rome. Accordingly, Belford and Aurelia aemained above two weeks here, charmed
even to exstacy with the variety of objects which every day presented themselves to their astonished minds. Tens of thousands of instances of original genius display them¬ selves in this wonderful collection :—Indeed human art seems here to have exhausted herself. It was a most fortunate circumstance for Bedford and his daughter, that, on the se¬ cond day after their arrival at Florence, they were introduced to one of the most celebrated of the Literati of that city. The name of this accomplished gentleman was GanganelU; distinguished by the urbanity of his manners, and his attention to travellers of such appearance as those who now court¬ ed his protection. Ganganelli was a man of birth, and had seen the greatest part of Europe ; for he had unbounded avidity for the attaintment of universal knowledge. He spoke the English language almost with purity ; for he had resided some years in London, and expressed himself with rapture on calling to memory the polite attention and hospitality which he experienced in that metropolis of the globe. Belford felt
the happy effects of his partiality for Bri* tain. They had access, by means of Gan¬ ganelli, to see what seldom or never are shewn to the vulgar travellers of various orders; we mean, those persons who, by their observations, and by their ignorance of the Belles Lettres, betray the secret of their having left their several countries utterly untutored, and unprepared to re¬ ceive those high intellectual repasts wliich justly belong to the assiduous students of every rank of life. This good Italian's house was almost Belford's and his daugh¬ ter's home. It was the ňxed purpose of his mind honourably to repay, to the utmost of his power, the debt of gratitude for the ci¬ vilities and friendship he had received in England, by omitting no opportunity of shewing kindness and polite attention to e- very stranger from that country, who had even the slightest introduction. But his re¬ spect for Belford was peculiarly marked ; and no less for his fair daughter ; for indeed in the countenance of both native goodness and excellence displayed themselves, even* to an eye of httle discernment.
Ganganelli, however, did not entertain his strangers by mere exhibitions and hospitali¬ ty. He discovered a particular satisfaction in giving Mr Belford the most minute ac¬ count of whatever was curious and interest¬ ing in the religion, the laws, and the con¬ stitution of Florence, and of Italy at large. This goodness was the more gratifying, as Belford had resolved, before he left Mun¬ ster Abbey, to take down as correct notes as a traveller generally can make, who does not reside long in one place. He had hi¬ therto done, in this way, as much as was in his power ; and Ganganelli contributed not a little to that store of knowledge he was ac¬ cumulating, and which it was his intention to arrange, when he should return to his own venerable mansion. Philosophy had enlightened, in an high degree, the mind of this illustrious son of Florence. Belford was, at times, astonish¬ ed by the freedom with which he spoke of the state of religion and civil liberty in I- taly : And when he expressed his surprise at his free and seemingly unguarded bold¬ ness of sentiment ; ** Hark ye, my friend,
replied Ganganelli, " thank God, we have no inquisition in this country. Every man, here, who takes care to pay an external re¬ spect to the religion, and the ceremonies of the religion of his country,—and who does not, by word, writing, or by any overt action, endeavour to disturb the public peace, may express himself on any subject, in what terms he pleases. I had the ho¬ nour, and the highest I ever expect to en¬ joy, to be the intimate friend of a noble¬ man of Milan, the illustrious Marquis of Beccario, of whose fame, sir, a gentleman of your intelligence must unquestionably have heard. This great and good man, the ornament of learning, and the enthusiastic friend of the human race, blessed the world, a few years ago, with a performance which will live for ever. The title of it you must know :—perhaps you have perused it."— " Indeed I have not," replied Belford, " though I have often heard of its high re¬ putation." " Be assured, then," added Ganganelli, " that this work has pleaded the cause of mankind witli more ability and success than auy whicii even Italy ever pro¬ duced. A statue of gold ought to be erect-
ed to his memory, for that wonderful dis¬ play he has here made of the moral recti¬ tude and humanitv of his own heart. He has, besides, wrought miracles on the minds of even some of our most bigotted ecclesias¬ tics, by his writings ;—and in his life and manners, as well as by his compositions, he has exhibited the most convincing evidence, that a christian, without the spirit of mer¬ cy and toleration, is a mere name, an im¬ position on the common sense of man¬ kind." Such was the spirit, such the sentiments of this superior man.—His conversation and society rendered Belford's and Aurelia's stay at Florence truly delightful ;—and it was with reluctance they resolved to leave a place where so much was to be found, to instruct, to entertain, and to charm. But Munster Abbey, with its many attrac¬ tions which yet remained to solicit their partiality, was ever occurring to the mind of its amiable lord ;—and lovely Aurelia, from time to time, hinted, with her usual ¡ gentleness, her anxious desire to re-visit her native land. * Vox, II. I
Accordingly, after remaining three week* at this magnificent city, our travellers, with hearts overflowing with gratitude and af¬ fection to their polite and elegant patron, waited on him, at his own house, the morn¬ ing of their departure ;—and both, in the handsomest manner, expressed the feelings of their hearts in the language of genuine integrity. Indeed, what heart would have been insensible to the liberality, the hospi¬ tality, and all the virtues of Ganganelli ?— After a mutual and tender advice, this lit¬ tle party separated, never perhaps again to meet ;—not, however, till the most solemn promises were made by the gentlemen to preserve a regular correspondence. Belford ordered his carriage, and di¬ rected the postillion to take the road for Rome. In a very few days, though the weather was unfavourable, he and his beloved daughter arrived at the seat of his Holiness. Elegant lodgings wait¬ ed them;—for, by means of an artist from England who resided in Rome, every thing convenient and comfortable, as well аз splendid; was prepared юг their icception.
No person of classical knowledge, even in a very limited degree, can behold at a distance, much less enter this most cele¬ brated city of all the ancient world, Avith¬ out a variety of emotions, which the pover¬ ty of language can never express. It is utterly impossible for a mind even of torpor and apathy, to view the remains of former grandeur, without being struck with awe and reverence. How inconceivable then the feelings!—how undescribable the so¬ lemnity of mind of the sons of refined taste. It was here also the good fortune of Beh ford to be early introduced after his arrival te a few families of the first rank, and (what is often thousand times more conse¬ quence) of the first worth :—For it did not suit the present state of his mind, to form a large circle of acquaintance : at no time could he descend to mingle iu a promiscuous crowd, and stiil less at pre¬ sent, when he was in pursuit only of ra¬ tional or innocent entertainment ;—or of adding, at times, something to his stock of knowledge.
Two days after Belforďs arrival at Rome, it pleased heaven to send him intelligence which gave him an elevation of spirits, of which he thought himself utterly unsuscep¬ tible, from the depression which yet hung over his mind, ever since the death of his beloved wife. The singularity of the circumstance by wh%h this happy intelli¬ gence was brought to bis ears, deserves at¬ tention. It related to his brother Charles, for whom he yet retained a warm fraternal affection. Turning the corner of a street adjacent to his hotel, after he had been to view one ofthe ancient amphitheatres, he was ac¬ costed by a plain man of ordinary appear¬ ance, but of singular benignity of counte¬ nance, who civilly requested to know whe¬ ther his name was Belford. The reply was of course in the affirmative. The stranger told Ыт that he had passed from Dover to Calais in the same vessel with him (Mr Belford) and his family, and had received at the last of these towns a very full account ofthe character he bore, and pub¬ lic spirit he displayed around Munster Ab-
bey. Belford did not possess one grain of suspicion in his nature ;—yet prudence dic¬ tates to every man of common understand¬ ing to guard against precipitancy in con¬ fiding in address or information, much more when they favour of the mean vice of adulation. He immediately enquired of his countryman, what was his name,—and in what county of England he was born ?— " My name, he replied, is George Roddam : —I was born in the West Riding of York¬ shire,—and am employed here (and I trust with honour and integrity) in collecting various antiques for the curious and the learned,in South Britain. But, Sir, he ad¬ ded, at present my time is very precious, for I am engaged half an hour hence with one of the greatest virtuosos of Italy ;— though in all his cabinet of curiosities, there is not one half so great as himself :—-Still, however, I can spare a few minutes to give you the pleasant information, that I spent a week at Leghorn with your brother Mi- Charles Belford;—and, Sir, without flatte¬ ry, which my soul scorns, I will affirm, that a more agreeable and more intelligent man I have seldom or ever met with;—-
102 MUNSTER ЛВСЕТ. though I must at the same time observe to you, that there is an uncommon de¬ gree of gravity, if not something of the sorrowful or melancholy, marked on the features of his countenance. He entered on no explanation with me ;—but I several times remarked him involuntarily heaving a deep sigh. He mentioned your name 'n a general manner once and again ;— though I remember that, in ояс instance, he suddenly checked himself when he was ubo u t to put some question to me concern¬ ing his beloved brother (as he expressed himself) whom he had not heard of for a long time." " Gracious and benevo¬ lent Ruler of íhe universe," exclaimed Bel¬ ford in a ft of ecstatic agitation, " And is- my clear dear Charles alive and well.—I give thanks to heaven, and devoutly trust we shall ngmn meet, —never more to part, till the awful curtain is dropt on the theatre of life. Dear JVIr Rodeiam, give me leave to detain yoď one mement, by enquiring, whether you learned any thing of the bu¬ siness or profession in which my brother was engaged ?" " Yes, Sir, I can satisfy * ou particularly as to this matter also*—
He acts as principal factor, and as partner too, in one ofthe first mercantile houses in Leghorn. And, be assured* Mr Belford, that he owes his present comfortable and most reputable situation almost entirely to his own merit. Of this I had the most un¬ doubted evidence, when I was for some time in that city. The name of the mer¬ chant with whom he is connected escapes me at present ;—but I learned from several persons of character, that he is a man less distinguished by his large fortune, than by his virtue and public spirit,—and that your brother Charles was treated as a brother by his partner." " Again, exclaimed Belford, I bless God with fervent gratitude.—My dear dear Charles, I shall now lose no time in acquiring a perfect knowledge of all your history, sufferings, and success. To Leghorn I will instantly dispatch an express, to pour forth by epistle every effusion of my heart to a brother who was lost, and is found again. Meantime, Mr Roddam, I beseech you to forgive me for breaking in upon your business ; suffer me only to en¬ treat you to do' me the honour of a call as soon аз in-your power; and, ifit bc in the
compass of my interest or ability, I shall be happy to shew you the sincerity of grati¬ tude for the delightful tidings you have brought me ; for you are a messenger sent from Heaven for my consolation. After Rodam's departure, Belford remained for some minutes absorbed in a profound re¬ verie. On awakening from it, he hastened, in transport, to carry the joyful news to his Aurelia. Although he found his daughter engaged in conversation with an amiable young lady of distinction, Signora Valen¬ tina, he could not resist the powerful pro¬ pensity of his soul, but instantly, after making a pohte address to the stranger, in a tone of voice more loud than delicacy and good-breeding would have warranted on any other occasion, he cries, " О my child, my Aurelia, rejoice with thy transported fa¬ ther !—My brother Charles lives ï —he is in good health !—he is as happy as he can be on eanh, removed ihr from Munster Ab¬ bey :—he is esteemed, respected, beloved, and is partner with a merchant of the first eminence in the great City of Leghorn. I am this moment to dbpntch an express to
him to learn every thing concerning him since our woeful separation, and to entreat his presence at Rome, if it is possible that his affairs will permit him to bestow this in¬ effable satisfaction on me«" Aurelia's sensibility could scarce sustain the shock ; for excess ofjoy puts to the test the strength of the human nerves, as well as the excess of other passions :—But, after pausing a few moments, she flew to embrace her father, and, in the strains of an Angel, thus addressed him, with a composure which an Angel only could have displayed : " To the preserver of men, I offer the de¬ votion of my heart.—While I live, Iwill trust in that great, all-wise, and beneficent Being, who, by methods incomprehensible by man, brings so often light out of ch 4 :ness, and order out of confusion.—My ever dear uncle, are you then as happy as you can be at a distance from your native land ?—May felicity attend you to the end of yqur days on earth ; and may you, my father, and Г, soon enjoy the requisite pleasure of seeing this dear recovered friend in these very a- partments,
Belford lost no time in sending an express to Leghorn. The language in which he addressed his brother may be readily ima¬ gined to be worthy of the warmth of his heart, and the worth of his moral character. He wrote to him in raptures of joy. He gave him a full account of the manner in which he had made the discovery of the place of his abode, of the employment in which he was occupied ; and he enlarged with transport on the certain intelligence he had of the esteem and affection he had acquired among all his acquaintance. He then entreated him in the most earnest man¬ ner to relinquish his present engagements, unless honour alone should forbid, assuring him that while he lived he should enjoy such a portion of his fortune, as would render him independent and comfortable tor life. He beseeched him to set out for Rome, if possible, with the courier ; and if that was impracticable, as soon afterwards as in his power.—And here for a httle we leave our convert Charles. As Belford and Aurelia were returning one morning from viewing the most magni·
ficent temple which ever was erected to the Most High, they were agreeably surprised by perceiving, at the window of a hotel, the young nobleman whom they had accident¬ ally met at Canterbury church-yard. The instant he saw Belford and Aurelia, he flew like lightning to bow with most affectionate respect before his beloved ; for, ever since he had seen her at Canterbury, the sweet and enchanting idea of her charming fea¬ tures and manners, had been so very pow¬ erfully impressed upon his mind, and had in truth so absorbed every thought, and af¬ fected his spirits, that his friends daily im¬ portuned him to make the grand tour, in order to dispel that gloom and melan¬ choly which had for sometime hung over his mind. But, alas I travelling and variety cannot always banish that nameless some¬ thing which agitates the soul that is pier¬ ced by the fatal dart, Altamont's love was love at first sight,—an idea ridiculed by the soul of insensibility in all ages :—But an insensible soul İs seldom blessed with a sound judgment ;—Thousands, and tens of thousands, of the most wise, the most pru-
dent, and the most worthy of men, have confessed the force and truth of the adage. Lord Altamont passed the Channel with a heavy heart, unable, by any prophetic powers, to foresee those delights he was des¬ tined very shortly to taste. About two hundred t miles southwards from Paris, he had somehow been able to trace Belford and Aurelia to Montpelier. Hither he in¬ stantly bent his course ;—and, though the journey w r as long, he arrived at Montpelier, not exhausted by it. But Belford and Au¬ relia had left that celebrated asylum for the infirm in body or Jspirits, ten days before. Altamont remained no longer at Montpe¬ lier, than to refresh himself after a very tedious journey : —He found, from good authority, that Belford and his daughter were gone for Rome, and were to remain in Italy for some months :—One day seemed a year to Altamont, till he arrived at the place where his beloved and her father now resided. After his first discovery of their route, love carried him rapidly along ; and, ciated with the prospects before him, and the &weet expectations, perhaps, of love re- turned,—his spirits c\cry moment ıevived,
health, which had been in some degree af¬ fected, became perfectly re-established,— and, in ten days after Belford's and Aure¬ lia's arrival at Rome, he joined them In this mistress of the ancient world. To attempt to describe, or convey any„ adeqiate idea of the joy and happiness of Lord Altamont, and also of Aurelia (for Aurelia, too, acknowledged the truth and force of the adage just mentioned) would require a pencil which has not been hither¬ to formed by any mortal artist î The joys and raptures ofthe human soul never have been, nor never can be, described.—Here, as in numberless other instances, the Divine Fiat is pronounced, u Hitherto shait thou go, and no farther," This delightful English party were intra. duced to some of the first families of Rome —and were entertained with hospitality and splendour. Happily Belford, Aurelia and Lord Altamont, were " feelingly alive" to Cecilia's heavenly strains,—and of course, in private parties, as well as in the opera ; and theatres, engaged all the ecstatic pleaJ
sure wbich the powers of harmony can be¬ stow. Ye sons and daughters of men. who arc utterly deprived of all taste for the & trains of Orpheus, little know ye what it has been the pleasure of heaven to deny you !—Yc, who neither can convey plea¬ sure to others by your own performances, and who feel not the least relish and en¬ joyment in the most sublime strains of har¬ mony, ye are bound, by very sacred ties, as members of society, to compensate for these mortifying defects, by cultivating the ашь able and engaging qualities of affability, gentleness, elegance, sincerity, kindness of heart, and oppenness of soul ! This happy taste for music was, among others, (yet still far more delicate and re¬ fined) an additional bond of union of souls, between Altamont and Aurelia.—Yes : far more delicate and refined, especially in the married state :—For, in this state, a taste for any or all of the fine arts on the female side, will keep possession of the heart of a шап of sense and elegance for a very short lime, if it is not accompanied hy other qua¬ lities and accomplishments of a more res-
pectable, and still more fascinating na¬ ture. Prudence, economy, sweetnes of tem¬ per, and gentleness of manners, and, above all, pious dispositions, are requisites indis¬ pensible to ensure happiness in this situa¬ tion, Aurelia was, in person, dress, and man¬ ner, every thing that was elegant and engaging :—For she had been taught, from early life, by her amiable and accomplished mother, those soft and attractive virtues that command the esteem, and irresistably captivate the affections of men of sense* But it was not to the pleasures of harmo¬ ny only^ %that our travellers were indebted for the happiness they enjoyed in Rome.— Amidst the weakness of superstition, and the gloom of bigotry, they were able to discover many valuable characters, whose minds, enlightened by rational religion, and the study of true philosophy, soared a- bove every vulgar prejudice. In socie¬ ty of this nature, there was a source of inexhaustible pleasure ; though it must be К 2
acknowledged (from his own candid con¬ fession) that Altamont's was frequently ob¬ served wrapt up as it were in profound thought, in appearance totally absent from the company. Yet it was not absolutely his love for Aurelia which produced this eftect on his manners :—It was the idea of her lovely form and countenance resem¬ bling so strikingly his dear departed sister, which often broke in upon his mind, even amidst the most pleasant and instructive conversation. There was one family of distinction in this city, winch paid a very marked atten¬ tion to Belford and his daughter. It was the family of the Marquis of Sojerno :— Ke was not a native of the Papal domi¬ nions :—His estate lay in the territories of the Grand Duke of Tuscrny :—But at¬ tached to Rome î by his intimate acquaint¬ ance with many families of rank, and with many men of taste and learning in this city,—he had for many years resided here, to enjoy the sweets of elegant, en¬ tertaining, and of improving society. The Marquis was married to one of the
most accomplished ladies of Italy,—a wo¬ man of high family,—and of equal worth. They had no children ;—but they were both in the middle period of life,—and were equally blessed with that equanimity, mingled with spirit, whicli is pleasant to e- very virtuous mind,—though a rare cha¬ racter in a native Italian. With this family, and a few others of the same, or of a similar taste and fashion, Belford and Aurelia passed their time in a most agreeable and rational manner :—But we must not omit to remark Belford's at¬ tention to Altamont immediately after his unexpected arrival at Rome, by introdu¬ cing him to all the families of note with whom he himself had been acquainted ;— for he perceived iu this young nobleman evident indications of so polished an edu¬ cation, and of such excellent dispositions, as must render him a valuable acquisition to any society :—Accordingly, Altamont made one of all the parties in which his benei\>bnt friend and fair Aurelia were engaged. These parties were very unlike the general run of those of high fashion in¬ most of thï gr¿at citi ¿s of Едгэр.2, except b\
the article of temperance in drinking ;— for the vice of habitual intoxication is un¬ known, is almost unheard of, over all the Continent.—What I mean is, that this happy society admitted nothing of the riot¬ ous to approach their presence, Bucks and bloods were a species of animals they knew only by name ;—but their manners, principles, and habits, were beheld here with pity and indignation. Meanwhile, the heart of our young Peer was every day more fascinated by the na¬ tive charms and manners of Aurelia. She could not be insensible to his partiality :— But both possessed prudence and wisdom above their years :—Delicacy marked both their characters ;—delicacy of sentiment and of conduct. Altamont invariably per¬ ceived the dignity and reserve of Belford, —and at once concluded, from his general demeanor, that if ever he should be so for¬ tunate as gain his favour, after he had won Aurelia's heart, it must be by uniformity ia the practice of every moral quality, as well as every refined and polite attention.
Indeed, itwas visible that Belford be¬ held Altamont already, (that-is, in the course of some weeks) with no ordina¬ ry degree of partiality. But, whatever secret wishes he might entertain, that thia amiable youth should, at some future pe~ ïiod, form the nearest connection with his family, every principle of prudence dictat¬ ed silence on this subject to the world,, and even to his beloved child. Altamont, influenced by the principles of honour and gratitude, equally, if possi¬ ble, as by the passion of love, made it his study to recommend himself to Belförd by the most correct as well as by the most pleasant trian ners;—and not only rendered himself a delightful accession to his fellow- travellers, but was, every where, received with>marjks of favour and distinction. The return of the courier from Leghorn was expected with anxious solicitude :—A dajr or two later than he might have ap¬ peared^ a letter from Charles was received, such as might have been looked for from a
man who had seen, in their full deformity, the follies and errors of former days :—He poured forth blessings, in 'the most affec¬ tionate terms, on his brother and niece :— He expressed his gratitude to heaven for his present comfortable establishment, and for the ease and happiness he enjoyed by his connection with one of the first ornaments of the mercantile world. At the same time he regretted, that, even at the generous desire of the best of brother's, he could not leave his present place of residence for some time ; for honour dictated to him, as well as friendship and attachment, that as his partner in trade was not only a valetu¬ dinarian, but was also at this time engaged in very extensive concerns, which required the most intense application, he could on no account whatever leave his friend, with such a heavy bad of business, as. might in¬ jure his' interest, and even his health : But, to the joy of Altamont and Aurelia, he added, that if his brother could prolong his stay in Italy for three months, and return to England by the way of Leghorn, he would make every effort to settle all his af-
fairs by that time, and gladly attend him .to Britain. This epistle produced a very powerful effect on Belford's spirits. Though he en¬ joyed a consolation which is not bestowed on or experienced by the majority of pa- Tents, namely, the society and filial reverence and anection of the most accomplished of her sex, yet, ever since he lost his beloved partner, there were visible traces of melan¬ choly to be observed very frequently in his countenance. Even the intelligence of Charles being alive, well, happy, and re¬ spected, gave him but a temporary feeling of satisfaction ; for he had no positive know¬ ledge or acquaintance with the person who brought him the information. But when, from his brother's own hand, he received the pleasant accounts confirmed,—when he had evidence most undoubted that, in health, in honour, and in prosperity, he was passing his time in the best of society,—and, added to all, when he read Charles's promise to ac¬ company him back to Munster Abbey ; and doubtless promised also to acquiesce in his fraternal and generous proposal to share with
him such a part of his fortune as should render him independent and comfortable, every demonstration of internal transport was delineated in his manly countenance. When Belford had first received the. news of his brother's situation, prudence, which never forsook him, forbade him to indulge the first propensity of his soul, which was to request the honour of a visit from his se¬ lect friends in Rome, to announce to them the glad tidings, and give them an entertain¬ ment suitable to their rank and to the joy¬ ful occasion. But he was determined first to ascertain, on the surest information, from his brother himself, the authenticity of his intelligence, that, in case of any error or design in the accounts he had received from a stranger, his folly might have, on disco¬ very, been exposed to public observation. The moment, however, after he perused Charles's letter, he renewed his former in¬ tention, and went in person to every family who had shewn him the attentions of hos¬ pitality and polite reception, and requested the honour of their company at his lodgings a few days afterwards, in order to enjoy the
pleasure of their society, and to celebrate an event which he should impart to them when assembled, and which he did not en¬ tertain a doubt would afford their benevo¬ lent minds very high satisfaction. In the interval between receiving Charles's letter, and the day of entertainment he had ordered for his respected friends, Belford wrote him, that, at the same time that his heart beat with joy on receiving such de¬ lightful accounts of his situation from his own hand, he gave him his assurance, that both himself and Aurelia would, perhaps, in less than three months, if heaven per¬ mitted, embrace, him at Leghorn : mean¬ time, he requested that their correspon¬ dence, until that time, should be frequent· The day of festivity arrived. The Mar¬ quis of Solerno, the Counts of Castallianco, Priucisco, Pignatelli, with a few more select persons of the first fashion, or of high worth, with their ladies and families, dined with Belford, at Devenťs Grand Hotel. It is a news-paper-like thing, to detail a re¬ past, be it ever so sumptuous. An epi-
cure may descend to every particular t— a gentleman may be able to do so, but he cannot disgrace himself by the meanness and unmanliness of the enumeration. Suf¬ fice it to say, that the entertainment was splendid, served up in the highest taste, and conducted with all that elegance and order which might be expected from one of the first gentlemen of fortune in England. It was pleasant to observe the different, yet not contrasted manner of the party;—The gravity or reserve of the master of the feast, Aurelia, and young Altamont, wa» much relaxed by that charming vivacity, mingled with elegance and fine breeding, which characterize the first ranks in Italy. As the strangers could speak the language of Rome with facility, (Altamont excepted, who yet understood all that passed in con¬ versation) tliis circumstance contributed in¬ finitely tø increase the joys of the day. Ail was regulated by that decorum and urba¬ nity which distinguish, at this time, in most nations of Europe, the higher circles from those of inferior rank. At Belford's table, decorum and urbanity were the effect, how¬ ever, not of a high and polished education
only ; they were the refult of principle :— for it was this woithy man's care, wherever he travelled, or should travel, to become ac¬ quainted only with those individuals and fa¬ milies who rise above the crowd, and who dare to be singularly virtuous and exemplary in manners.—His own natural dispositions led him to make this selection. But he had an additional motive for this caution. It arose from his attention to , her who W'as the last remaining pledge of pious and most tender love> and hope of once too hap¬ py union :—Not that Aurelia stood in need of any additional example of goodness, but her father wisely considered, that the more frequently and the more uniformly young minds are accustomed to behold the amia¬ ble and respectable qualities of our nature displayed in the characters of those with whom they converse, they themselves be¬ come gradually more virtuous and accom¬ plished. The Italians were charmed with the man¬ ners of Aurelia and of Lord Altamont ; for this young man made one of ail Belford's Vol. IL L
parties.—They were both conspicuous for that " modesty which ever sits so becoming on youth." The young lady spoke Italian, as we have already mentioned, with ease and elegance, (making just allowance for a foreign accent,) and conveyed a very high idea of her superior capacity and excellent dispositions by the sentiments which she expressed. Altamont laboured under some difliculty from a want of fluency in expres¬ sing himself in the language of the coun¬ try ; besides, he was naturally of a reflect¬ ing cast, often did he tenderly muse on the beloved face of his Aurelia, when he coidd do it unnoticed. His silence was elo¬ quent :—for silence is often eloquent. He listened with the countenance of placidity, and wkh the attentile and elegant manner of a well-bred gentleman, to all that passed, and especially to the remarks or short rela¬ tions of any lively story from the ladies :— He had his reward ;—for, during his stay at home, he experienced the highest degree of kindness and hospitality from all the fa¬ milies who were present.
After a few hours spent at dinner and coffee, and in the pleasant communication of mutual sentiment, the company took an airing. They were engaged by Belford, when he first requested the honour of their presence at his hotel, to return in the even¬ ing, and partake of a musical repast. He liad been at pains to engage some of the best performers in Rome to attend hh guests ;—and, at an hour not very late, the party re-assembled, and found an orchestra elegantly fitted up in a very splendid room, and above thirty vocal and instrumental Italians and Germans ready to entertain them with Orphean strains :—For what music on the globe can compare with that of Rome ? The words being pronounced by the vocal performer with all the pathos of sensibility, and pronounced clearly and fully too, produced a fascinating influence on every musical ear. After a concert which lasted four hours, and one of the most perfect in execution which this great city could produce, the company were conducted to another superb apartment, where a light, elegant collation L 2
was prepared for them. As every lady and gentleman present observed the laws of temperance and moderation in all their pleasures and scenes of festivity,—so, of course, very late hours were their utter a- version. By ii o'clock they broke up, ?upeiiorly happy on reflecting on the ra¬ tional joys of the day. As they were just about to depart, and the Countess of Cas¬ tel Bianco observing it was not yet late, the Prince de Pignatelli gently addressed her, by remarking that 1 1 o'clock was a late hour at Rome ;—and that no person in that city was more exemplary than the Countess, in order and regularity of every kind :—that he well knew, from his own present feelings, that it was an effort to lea\e such pleasant society; butas the ex¬ ample of persons of their order was of me¬ ral importance to society, he hoped and entreated that the hberty he had taken would be forgiven. The Countess bowed assent ;—and, in a very polite return, thanked him for his ob¬ servations and his candour.
The day after Belford gave the enter¬ tainment to a small party so well entitled to his best attention, he received a letter from his brother Charles, which afforded him the highest satisfaction. In this letter, he mentions' the exertions he had lately made to settle his aflairs at Leghorn, in a shorter period than he had formerly inti¬ mated to him :—heXvould now, by the con¬ tinuance of those exertions, be ready to sad for Britain three or four weeks sooner than he formerly imagined he could effect this object :—that the circumstance which had produced this agreeable change, was the arrivals, from very distant parts, of seve¬ ral richly laden merchantmen, much soon¬ er than was expected. Charles assured his brother, that, in four weeks at farthest, he should be fully prepared to receive him ; and, after spending a few days in so noble a city as Leghorn, he should find a vessel perfectly to his mind, and to the taste of his niece, ready to sail from thence. As our travellers were incapable of any species of dissipation, of course they sjient their time at Rome in a most agreeable
manner. The infinite variety of monu¬ ments of ancient Roman grandeur,—the many magnificent modern palaces,-—above all, the stupendous cathedral of St Peter, —the places of public entertainment,— and the daily society of their select friends, —enabled them to pass their time with more advantages than mere amusement. But Belford and his accomplished daugh¬ ter carried their observations much farther than our ordinary itinerants ; and they dis¬ played a spirit superior to those vulgar pre¬ judices, which in every country flow from the sources of a weak understanding, or a narrow and bigotted education. They as¬ sembled every Sunday, and sometimes on other days, with their fellow-christians, to pay homage to their Creatojr : They per¬ ceived external forms and ceremonies to which they had not been accustomed in their own covmtry, and they perceived these rites with, the spirit of rational toleration. Pèiâiaps they secretly lamented that so much superstition should be mingled with devotion : Yet both Belford and Aurelia have often declared, with visible emotions
of joy, descriptive of the charity of their heart, that they have often, at Rome, and in other parts both of Italy and France, be¬ held, with the highest satisfaction, such symptoms of genuine manly devotion, as might put to shame many of high profes¬ sion among those who call themselves the Reformed Church, They frequently saw priests of various ranks, from the highest of the Hierarchy to a humble curate, perform the sacred offices of religion with every de¬ gree of becoming gravity and apparent sin¬ cerity, and heard them pronounce discour¬ ses, as sound in doctrine, and as pure in mo¬ rality, as ever were dehvered by any priest or presbyter of Britain, No gentleman should presume to say, he had made the grand tour, in order to see the world, and to improve his mind, unless he is conscious that he either has most as¬ siduously made previous preparation for travelling, by a proper acquaintance with classical learning ; or has been attended by an enlightened tutor, who, in some degree, might, by his assistance and instructions, compensate to him what he wanted in ne-
eessary knowledge. To travel into foreign countries, at this day, without some fund of ancient and modern learning, more espe¬ cially without the knowledge of the history of Europe ; and more particularly still, with¬ out a tolerable knowledge of the history of his own country, reflects just disgrace on any young man of birth or affluence, who had opportunities of л acquiring knowledge before he went abroad. But, alas ! so it has been, so it İs, and so it will be, till other methods are adopted at home, and at the Universities, with young men of rank or of wealth : The wisest and most virtuous part of mankind cordially agree, that this me¬ thod must be more strict than domestic and academical discipline. For want of atten¬ tion to th?se most interesting objects, both learning and morals are deeply aflected. Belford began now to prepare for his jour¬ ney to Leghorn :—He and Aurelia employ¬ ed some days in taking leave of the fami¬ lies who had paid them so many polite at¬ tentions, and even shewed them instances of the most genuine hospitality :— And in this business Belford was not actuated by
the vulgar and dishonourable idea of too many unfeeling strangers or travellers in e- very country, namely, that taking leave, e- ven after receiving the highest favours, is a matter of mere good-breeding or ceremony, where the heart has no concern. No :— The sentiments of this amiable man were far more exalted. There was not a plebeian idea durst enter his honourable mind. He was fair, candid, and honest, in all his pro¬ fessions, and in all his actions. He bid his friends farewell with gratitude and affec¬ tion, wishing them all those blessmgs to which superior virtue and merit are ever entitled. The lovely Aurelia joined cor¬ dially in the same sentiments and wishes. A tender and d. Late scene now opened, which was to put to the test the nicest sen¬ sibilities of this lovely young woman. Altamont informed Mr Belford, on the morning before he was to set out for Leg¬ horn, that having given his honour to his former guardians and professors at Oxford, Ihat he would visit Switzerland, before his return to England, he could not think cf
remaining at Rome after the departure of such endearing society : That it was his most earnest and anxious wish to have the permission to accompany Belford and his daughter from the place of their present re¬ sidence to Britain ; but that so sacred he had held, and he trusted he ever should hold, his honour, that he was resolved to spend a few weeks in visiting Geneva, and the several Cantons of that singular country. While Altamont thus addressed himself to his ever revered friend, he could not con¬ ceal the internal emotions which agitated his whole frame : For, in fact, he was now engaged in a very serious warfare ; no less than whether love or honour should pre¬ vail. Heaven strengthened the native virtue of his soul : he was enabled to preserve his ho¬ nour, without forsaking his love. He form¬ ed a bold resolution, With equal manli¬ ness he put his purpose in execution. He requested Belford to favour him with a pri¬ vate audience.—Assent, of course, was
given ; and they retired to Belford's apart¬ ment. Shortly after they entered the room, Al¬ tamont, with dignified composure, and with the most profound respectfulness, opened his heart to his friend, as to a parent : He frankly acknowledged he had, from esteem and love, and by every tender attention, en¬ deavoured to gain his daughter's affections : —that he had been careful that every part of his conduct, since they became acquaint¬ ed, should be not only unexceptionable, but should be markedly attentive to the young lady. " Forgive me, Sir, (he added) when I presume to say, that I have, for some time past, flattered myself with the fond hopes that I am not quite indifferent to the beloved Aurelia. To her 1 have never ut¬ tered one expression on the subject on which I have now entered with you. If my eyes have spoken the passion of my soul, for this I am not accountable. 1 know the \alue, the justly inestimable value you put upon the adorable treasure ; and that mere rank and fortune arc objects, in your bight, comparatively contemptible, with
qualities of a very different nature. The former, I venture not even to mention. In my own mind, I assign them no other rank than things adventitious deserve : but if, to these accidental circumstances, I have been so fortunate as, in your opinion, to show forth the indication of any superior endow¬ ments, and of those dispositions which bear even but a remote resemblance to your own, suffer me to entertain some hopes of your countenance, when I approach the lovely Aurelia, to throw myself at her feet." Belford heard the modest declaration of Altamont, with every degree of polite at¬ tention : and though he was uniformly un¬ der the guidance of the laws of caution and prudence, he resolved at once, like a man of honour, as well as an affectionate parent, not to keep the mind of this amiable young young man in suspence.—In few and sim¬ ple words, he thus replied : " The expressions of esteem and affection for my daughter, and for the sentiments which you have now made, do you the greatest honour, 1 frankly tell you, for a
considerable time past, I have entertained a very strong partiality for your belevolent character and dispositions.—I will also be free enough to inform you, that, remarking very early your attachment to my beloved daughter, I wrote to a faithful friend in England, who is well informed of the re¬ spectability of your family and their con¬ nections, and who could give me the most perfect account as to your own exalt¬ ed character. It is with heart-felt joy that I assure you, the result of my anxious en¬ quiries have been not more to my satisfac¬ tion, than to your honour. Delicacy, and my contempt of what wears the most re¬ mote appearance of adulation, forbid me to enlarge on this topic. When I say, that your worth, in my mind, adorns your rank, I have only to add, that you have my most cordial consent to pay your addresses im¬ mediately to my dearest Aurelia :—And, if you have already secretly won her heart, you shall both receive a father's blessing." As those superior spirits, who are ever a- live to sweet sensibilities, are struck with ecstasy, on beholding, in the mirror of fan- Vol, IL M
су, the countenance of Palemón, when he first saw the lovely Lavinia, gathering, " spike after spike, her sparing morsel :"— so here, an imagination of no very fertile nature, may figure the brightened features of Altamont,—who, almost persuaded, from signs that lovers only know, that he enjoy¬ ed no ordinary degree of favour with Au¬ relia, and transported by her father's ele¬ gant and manly consent to his addresses, could scarce utter one word in return. His soul was overwhelmed. The same feeling of gratitude which Palemón experienced on viewing " Acastor's dear remains," that noblest of virtues inspired Altamont's heart with the most exalted sensations of the ьате kind :—He fell down at Belford's feet :—He kissed his hand,—and poured forth the prayer of reverence and affection for him who was soon to bestow on him su¬ perior honours. Cupid has always been painted, in the purity of taste, with wings :—On these Al¬ tamont fiew to his beloved.—But, recollect¬ ing himself for a short while, before he approached her sacred presence, deliča-
су, modesty, and every grace and virtue were the ornaments of her character,—he determined to collect all his force of mind, and, from respect to his fair one's dignity, as well as to his own, to address her in strains difieren t far from the mad, intemperate jar¬ gon of modem lovers. We attempt not to describe the first meet¬ ing of this delightful pair, after Altamont had parted with Belford. Fancy may,—fan¬ cy must paint here.—And they who cannot figure what passed, when this excellent young man opened his soul to Aurelia,— have neither soul nor heart. He addressed her like a man, and like a lover.—The most ardent affection was re¬ gulated, in expression, by good sense and reason. Aurelia, animated by the noble principles of honour and truth, after a moment's hesitation, began with a voice that would have allayed the most savage breast, and charmed the wildest discord, into calm attention ;—every accent breathed the soft emotions of lier spotless mind :—Her words were befitting a divinity :—She, with a fal- Мг
tering voice, acknowledged that she had long esteemed him, (at the word esteem, Altamont turned pale,) and that esteem wss still heightened, if possible, by the very high estimation in which he stood with her ever revered father. Seeing Al¬ tamont in some agitation and distress, she endeavoured, with much confusion, to ex¬ plain her truly delicate and refined senti¬ ments more to his comfort and satisfaction ; therefore, soaring above silly affectation and dissimulation, she frankly made known to him her unbounded love and affection :— To describe the transports of the happy Al¬ tamont would be impossible :—Oh, too lovely woman ! he exclaimed, am I then to be blest with the most perfect of human beings !—to be—to be—I am distracted with pleasure :—Oh love î thou pleasing painful torment, is it possible for me to en¬ joy my present felicity !—A thousand times blessed be the heavenly power that has made me thus happy:—What language can paint the emotions of my soul !—Here he flew to embrace the idol of his affection, and again exclaimed,—am I then to be made a thousand times more tlian happy, by the
possession of the hand and heart of the most beloved of her sex. Aurelia, with the most heavenly and bewitching sweetness, blush¬ ed consent. Thus did this happy couple, with the full consent of Belford, bring to a hap¬ py issue the great object of both their wishes, without foolish precipitancy, or those tedious delays occasioned by sordid and interested views of settlements, jointures,. pin-money, &-c. No :—The parties placed confidence, and they had every reason to place unbounded confidence in each others integrity and worth :—hence' it was resolv¬ ed, on both sides, to reserve all that unplea¬ sant, (though necessary) business, till they should meet at Munster Abbey, After these interviews., it was resolved* that our travellers should proceed directly for Leghorn and Switzerland, Altamont discovered all the symptoms of the fondest affection at parting with her who was now his bride in the sight of heaven :—Pie vow¬ ed, and vowed again, everlasting fidelity,™ but such vows were not requisite from sucb M 3
a soul :—He assured his dearest friends, that, if it pleased God, he should, by the expiration of two months, pay his devoirs at Munster Abbey, being determined to make no unnecessary delays in passing through the different places which it was resolved he should visit.
CHAP. V. JN ext morning, by six o'clock, each party set out on their respective journey. We leave for a time the British Peer, and ac¬ company Belford and his Aurelia to Leg¬ horn. In a few days they arrived at this noble city, vying with the metropolis in gaiety of every kind, and far, far exceeding dt in commerce and wealth. We may conclude that Charles was waiting, at the lodgings he had provided for bis brother, with a variety of emotions, af«. fection mingled with shame, and gratitude with the highest esteem. But it had been previously fixed on, by the dehcacy and
good sense of Belford, that .when he and his brother should meet, riot one word should be uttered, not one reference made to whatever had been, but all buried in e- verlasting oblivion. The meeting was such as might be ex¬ pected between brothers of such excellent hearts ;—and their tender and interefting in¬ terview was not a little affected by the pre¬ sence of Aurelia, who, on this occasion, act¬ ed no indifferent part. She embraced her uncle with that filial (we may justly call it) affection, and unaffected ardour, which af¬ forded the most unequivocal evidence of her native goodness. Ere we enter on the pleasures, the en¬ tertainments, or the amusements at Leg¬ horn, it may be useful and instructive to that great proportion of mortals, who nei¬ ther do think, nor can think for themselves, to look back a little, and revolve in thek understandings, (such as they are) the re¬ solution which wisdom and delicacy dictat¬ ed to Belford, respecting the mode of meet¬ ing his brother Charles. We have just said,.
that it had been fixed on as a settled point, by this good man, that not one word should be uttered, not one reference made to'what- ever had been, when they should meet, but all buried in everlasting oblivion. This re¬ solution, on the part of all men of good sense, who have either had the misfortune of being put to shame by relations; or who have unhappily fallen into quarrels,coldness,orab- sence of intercourse with friends, or even ac¬ quaintance ; this resolution, we say, is found¬ ed on this wise axiom, namely, That mutu¬ al explanations, or accusations, respecting disagreeable circumstances, instantaneously tend to irritate :—The first effect of this ir¬ ritation, is to call forth some species of de¬ fence :—The second, is to retort :—and the third is, to make the breach wider than e- ver. The manner, therefore, truly wise, is that which Belford adopted, and ought to be a model to all persons placed in similar situations.—We say, similar situations : for there are some singular exceptions to this general rule. There are cases of so trying a nature, as put even religion to the severest test ; and here, we do affirm, their laws per-
mit, nay, command us to shun all future ia- tercourse with persons who are capable of wounding the feehngs of another,—by writ¬ ing torrents of abuse, or by using severe lan¬ guage, and the most bitter reflections,—even though true. To the honour of birth, edu¬ cation, and of principle, there is no instance of a man born a gentleman, or who has been taught his duty by elegant, well-bred, and well-informed parents, who was ever ca¬ pable of forgetting the language ofa gentle¬ man ; much less of such expressions com¬ mitted to paper :—the low-born, ill-tutored, neglected, unprincipled of mankind ; they only fall into this detestable practice. But to return from this moral digression. Charles, as soon as his brother and niece nad taken some refreshments, begged leave to have the request of his worthy partner indulged, wdiich was to have permission to pay his respects to Mr and Miss Belford, im¬ mediately on their arrival at Leghorn,—The hospitable and polite offer was received with gratitude. Charles returned to Mr le Fevre, and conducted him directly to his brother's
hotel. The countenance and manners of their new friend were visibly pleasing to the strangers, and they were a just index of his heart and dispositions. It was noon, when Belford arrived in town : M. le Fevre, therefore, requested the honour of Belford and Aurelia's company to dinner, át what hour would be most agreeable to them. Charles fixed the time ; and he conducted his brother and niece there at the hour ap¬ pointed for their entertainment. It filled Belford's heart with inexpressible pleasure and satisfaction, to see his brother the companion and the favourite of this ex¬ cellent man ; nor did it lessen his agreeable feehngs that he was enjoying the comforts and elegancies of life, not only as a partner, but as a brother, with le Fevre. The wealth which flowed in upon this great mercantile house, was the eflect of industry and of honourable transactions : And this wealth displayed itself in part, on his table,—yet without profusion or ostentation. The en¬ tertainment was elegant. He had notice from Charles of the day when his brother
should arrive,—nay, that he should be in Leghorn by eleven in the morning, and had therefore, not only made an additional course, but had also invited some of the first com¬ pany in town to be of the party. Le Fevre could, but had not the folly or vanity to produce all the first wines of the Continent. But, at this table, as in most foreign nations of the southerly part of Eu¬ rope, intemperate drinking, to their honour, is unknown. The pleasures of the table were enjoyed with moderation and with e- legant festivity. The repast did not occupy much time, for it was proposed by Charles to go to a very celebrated Opera, where, that evening, a new performer from Pisa was to make her first appearance. After having coffee, the whole party set out, and were feasted in proportion to the dehcacy and sensibility of their musical or¬ gans. Madame Cori sung wkh enchanting taste, and was received with repeated bursts of applause. Indeed, the whole entertain¬ ment was conducted in a manner worthy
of so noble a city as Leghorn : They spared no expence to procure the best performers from every quarter of Italy, and from Ger¬ many, It had been agreed on, before the party set off, to return to M. le Fevre's to supper, which was a cold collation of all that was rare, and in season. The company remained only two hours; yet, during that short time, the hospi¬ table landlord had the address to introduce a variety of topics equally informing as enter¬ taining. In a particular manner, with great candour he enlarged on the superior style of music in Italy, to all nations ofthe world, adding, that his own native country was not only far inferior in that respect, but also affirmed that the French, like the English, have no marked national music of intrinsic merit or originality. As Belford had expressed at dinner a de¬ sire to see every thing in Leghorn which deserved the attention of a traveller, one of the gentlemen present, and an intimate friend of le Fevre's, politely offered hb ser¬ vices, and requested to know at what hour Vol. II. N
next morning he should do himself the ho¬ nour to call on him at the hotel. Twelve o'clock was agreed on. The object of first importance which demands the attention of a benevolent and public spirited traveller, is the harbour, the ware-houses, and ship¬ ping, of this illustrious place. Leghorn car¬ ries on a trade far superior to any city on the Mediterranean, and displays striking proofs of that affluence and fullness which commerce never fails to produce, when the Government is of that mild nature which this part of Italy has for a considerable time experienced. The next source of pleasure which opened to their view, was the ele¬ gance and splendor of several of the public buildings. After a few hours spent in this rational entertainment, Lavanti, their con¬ ductor, proposed to introduce Mr Belford to some of the principal English merchants who resided in town. This proposal was attentive and polite ; but as our traveller had no personal acquaintance with these gen^ tlemen ; as his stay at Leghorn was only to be short ; and as his great object in every part of his tour was to know the customs, the manners, the religion, and laws of the
countries through which he passed, as far as his time would permit, he declined for these reasons, any introduction to his countrymen on this occasion. He was im¬ patient to proceed to England ;—and na¬ turally concluded, that if he was to become acquainted with so respectable a body of men as the gentlemen of the Merchant's Company at Leghorn, he should be obliged to prolong his stay beyond the time whicii he had fixed for his departure. A few days more, however, were devoted to visit different parts of the city and adjacent country ;—and the hospitality and polite¬ ness of attention he experienced, were sur¬ passed only by the elegant and instructive communications he received from the se¬ lect foreigners with which Mr le Fevre and Charles had made him acquainted :— And the pleasure the Italians enjoyed in Belford and his daughter's society, was wonderfully heightened by the facility with which they spoke the language of the country. The day of departure was now fixed___ The intervening days were spent in the N %
painful duty of taking leave of their ge¬ nerous benefactors; It cannot be imagined, that Aurelia and her beloved Altamont parted without the most endearing expressions of mutual in¬ variable attachment,—and with promises of as regular correspondence as possible, till the period of their separation thould ex¬ pire. Accordingly, the day before Belford Jeft Leghorn, Aurelia received a letter from her beloved, dated from Berne in Switzer¬ land, giving her the pleasant intelligence,- Ihat he had as agreeable and pleasant a journey as he could expect, apait from the idei of his heart ;—that he was in per¬ fect health,—rand well received by ail to whom he had letters of introduction. He had seen Geneva, and gave a beautiful description of that romantic city, a- dorned by every object in nature to ren¬ der it delightful, especially by the lake in its close vicinity. As Amelia was educated with singular attention by the best of pa¬ rent?, she was of course acquainted inti¬ mately with the geography of Europe, and, indeed, of all the globe. She relished
therefore a minute account of this celebrat¬ ed city,—but could not help lamenting to her father, that spirit of folly and absurdity which Altamont took notice of in the close of his epistle, which marked the political sentiments of the Genoese,—democratic, to a degree inconsistent with that subordi¬ nation which is the very bond and cement of society :—Hence, he observed, the inso¬ lence of mechanics and the rabble,—who all erected themselves judges in matters of state ; while every man of wisdom and of modesty knows, that there is not one of a thousand in any, even the freest state in Europe, who is entitled to converse on the subject either of political or religious government. Altamont sagaciously remark¬ ed, that politics is a science, and a profound science,—which the ignorant or the half- learned should not presume to give theic sentiments on,—much less dare to violate the public order by attempting to take a share in administration. Aurelia was requested to address her next letter to him to Lausanne, where he proposed- N3
to spend three weeks. She instantly wrote him, expressive of the tender sentiments of her unalterable esteem. In all the beau¬ ty of female delicacy, she bids him hasten his return to his native land, as much as was consistent with fulfilling the plan of his travels,—giving him, at the same time, the most perfect assurance, that his idea ivas engraven on her heart in indelible cha¬ racters, and that her ambition was, and ever should be, to improve herself in those valua¬ ble qualities, as well as elegant accomplish¬ ments, ivhich alone can render man or wo¬ man truly noble. The assiduity and attention of Charles procured not only an excellent vessel for Jìelford's family and suit, but every kind of comfortable stores, to provide against the accident of a long voyage.—It was fortu¬ nate that he was so provident;—for, by con¬ trary winds, they were at sea some weeks longer than they expected. There ivas, however, no stormy or tem¬ pestuous weather ;—the vessel was well
manned,—and the party was agreeably increased by Mr Belforďs permitting two English gentlemen, who had beeu at Ve¬ nice, to sail with him and his friends —This accession gave more variety to thcir conversation, and to their amusements, especially as both the gentlemen evident¬ ly appeared to have received a liberal e- ducation :—a circumstance ivhich, with a very few more qualities, (prudence, tem¬ perance, industry, and good temper,) will ever carry a man through the world, with credit to himself, and with satisfaction to his fnends and acquaintance. One of the gentleman was of a remarka¬ ble grave turn, or rather wore, in his coun¬ tenance, the traces of sorrow or disappoint¬ ment. Belford, wishing to render their pas¬ sage as pleasant as possible, endeavoured, wkh all his address, to preserve his party in the best spirits ; and, in a day or two after they set sail from Leghorn,—he told the strangers, with his native openness of man¬ ner, his name, and place of residence İn England,—the melancholy cause of his
journey to the continent, and the hea\y loss he bad sustained :—He introduced them to Aurelia and Charles, and expres¬ sed his benevolent wishes that their so¬ ciety might be mutually happy while they sailed. Belford was now entitled to take the liberty of requesting to know the names of the gentlemen who did him the honour to accompany him. The eldest replied for himself and his friend, " My name, sir, is Piercy. I am a native of Northum¬ berland, and have been at Venice, to re¬ cover the property of a brother who died there about twelve months ago. The name of this gentleman, my cousin, who was so obliging as to attend me on my journey, is Meredith, and was born in Shrop¬ shire." The party had now such general know¬ ledge of each other, as rendered their inter¬ course, more easy than it possibly could have been without these mutual communica¬ tions. Indeed, they perfectly possessed that noble openness of soul which charac¬ terizes a native Englishman above every
nation on earth. Frankness, and unsuspi- ciousness, appear in all their manners, with the exceptions of some individuals in high, and in commercial life, who have permitted their souls to be tarnished by cunning and dark reserve. On the morning of the fourth day after leaving Leghorn, Aurelia observed to her father, that she could not help noticing a certain kind of oppression hanging on the countenance of Mr Piercy ; and that, though his good-breeding led him to make every exertion to preserve his spirits in proper tone for company, yet it was ob¬ vious that this was a severe constraint on his internal feelings. Belford agreed with his daughter, that there certainly was some¬ thing resting heavily on Piercy's spirits, adding, that he would endeavour, to the ut¬ most of his power, to raise them, by exhila¬ rating conversation, and amusing histories or tales. Meantime, it farther occurred to this worthy man, that, as nothing tends more to alleviate inward woe, over whicii the unfortunate or the distressed are ever
disposed to brood, than to have a proper ) opportunity of pouring forth their heart to ¡ the benevolent and compassionate, it might f therefore relieve his mind to give a rela- I tion of his story or his affliction ; and that j he would first try this expedient, the for- f mer would follow naturally with more ef- * feet. j \ In the afternoon of the same day, there- * fore, Belford, with the address ofa gentleman, ¡ entreated Mr Piercy *' to forgive him for pre- I suming to ask a question, concerningthe so- \ lution of which he could say, from his heart, ¡ he was anxious from the most disinterested í motives." Piercy made him welcome to put a what question he pleased, assuring him that j he would answer Ыт to his satisfaction, if I in his power, ·· I I " If then," said Belford, " there is any j affliction or misfortune oppressing your f mind, of such a nature as may, without j wounding your feelings, be imparted to the present company, pardon me for indulging the opinion, that a communication ot it to
sympathizing spirits, would not fail to di¬ minish, in part, that load which evidently bears you down." Piercy thanked him, and replied with composure : " My tale, Sir, is no secret in my own country ; it is, too, the tale both of distress and misfortune, and you and the company shall immediately be¬ come acquainted with it, if you have pa¬ tience to attend." He then proceeded in the narrative. It seems as if I had been doomed the child of sorrow from my earliest hour ;—for in a space little more considerable than that above mentioned, my tender mother fell a victim to my introduction to life :—Langour and faintness succeeded excruciating pain, —her fleeting spirit vanished, and left a world in which she had passed but few years, though these few were numbered by her sufferings Ï* —Unfortunate in wedlock,— delicate in health,—a martyr to feeling and sensibility, she had few objects of attraction left behind her. Alas ï I was the only one which might have been dear to her, and I cost her her existence. My infantine years (uninteresting to all who are not connect- Vol. II. О
ed by consanguinity) seemed wholly unim¬ portant to my father. I shall pass them over : The only trait which seemed promi¬ nent in my mind, was a pensive, indescrib¬ able regret for my dear departed parent : My fancy pictured her in almost every circum¬ stance of life :—I felt her loss deeply,—fain would my towering spirit have flown to those regions of peace, which she, no doubt, inhabits, to enjoy her embrace,—to lay my weary head on her maternal bosom, and to deposit there every secret of my heart, had not religion checked this presumptuous wish, and made me feel, that if I thus long¬ ed to see that parent I had never known, but who, from an involuntary irresistible impulse, was so much the object of my love, —what must my adoration be,—what my desire to behold that eternal benignant Pa¬ rent, known to us by his mercies, and his preserving grace, in every occurrence of life, and admirably provident in all the ar¬ rangements of the Creation ? My father (peace to his shade) was just the reverse of what I am told my mother was :—Unfeeling, formed of cold clay, and made up in a course athletic form, he was a perfect sen-
sualist :—his horses, and his hounds, the scrupulous study of every thing that could invigorate and preserve a wordiy existence, these were his only cares :■—Shortly after my mother's decease, he married a beauti¬ ful interested young woman, by whom he (though at an advanced age) had a nume¬ rous family. He entirely neglected me, and left me to mine own free agency, till, by degrees, he began to dislike me : My step-mother in¬ cessantly armed him against me, having al¬ ways regarded me as an intruder in her fa¬ mily, and an unsuccessful candidate for those affections, the alienating of which from her family, she would have deemed an un¬ pardonable usurpation. I was, in a manner, an orphan, though not fatherless. To please all parties by my absence, and to employ my mind, I entered the army, in which my father expected mc to live on my pay, in order to dispose of his ample fortune in fa¬ vour of his children of the second marriage. I took my leave of him at Brussels, where he and family were on a party of pleasure : and, when I was a dependant in his house,, О 2
and watched on every side for three months, my nature was analysed, and my conduct scrutinized daily, to find out some particle of guilt, which might have entirely thrown me from my father's heart, (if there I had ever dwelt). Always of saturnine habits, I courted solitude, loved books, con¬ templative scenes, affecting topics, and in¬ dulged gloomy ideas.—From this languor of the mind, the beauty of Camilla de Clerey roused me :—Graceful in her appearance, and accomplished beyond the power of de¬ scription,—I loved her with a phrenzy I now blush to own. I was born to love,— to love to madness.—I could do nothing te¬ pidly :—At this period my every power was absorbed, my every happiness concentrated in one object :—those charms she really did not possess, my fabling fancy lent her,— Love decked her mind and body, and my romantic brain made her an angel—She was to me, wife, mother, sister, mistress, friend ï Camilla, of an attractive person,. young, warm, and passionate, certainly lov¬ ed me, but it was such a love I hate to recol¬ lect it ;—it was a sensual, a transitory love, —a love of vanity :—to be brief,—we were
married privately by an English chaplain, and were obliged to conceal our marriage, for she was the daughter of a ruined, ava¬ ricious nobleman, who meant to lepak his finances at the risk of her connubial happi¬ ness ; and I, though once heir to an im~ mense fortune, was only heir at will, it be¬ ing acquired ; and well I know that this imprudent step would forfeit every title I might have had to my father's countenance and support. Concealment heightened every enjoy¬ ment, as sable night sets off the starry or¬ bits ; or a black ground shews forth the sparkling diamond. Stolen hours of bliss, —nocturnal rambles,—moon-light appoint¬ ments,—anxious absence,—ten thousand devices to see my beloved, occupied my whole time, and made life appear too short a period for love. At last the fatal order to join my regiment in America announced to me a speedy and heart breaking parting ! —When I left my wife, I was in a situation Httle short of madness ; for our union seem¬ ed to me rather the connecting of souls tlian the common linking of properties and сз
persons. Judge, then, dear gentlemen, (á tear stole from Ые eye ) judge, I say, my feelings on my return,—to find Camilla had set aside our marriage, which was account¬ ed invalid, and had united herself to a na¬ bob, for the love of gold: My father died, and, having disinherited me, and I forced to sell my company to pay a few trifling debts of my own, and to defray the ex¬ pences of having incumbered myself to as¬ sist a brother-oflicer.. The only friend I had in the regiment, to whom I had confid¬ ed every thought, was killed by my side in the first campaign ; and I returned to my native land, merely to find false friends, -—rejecting acquaintances,—and departed school-fellows,—and to see how differently Mr Piercy, heir to an estate,—and Mr Pier¬ cy, ruined and disinherited, was received in the world. For a long time I was a com¬ plete man-hater, and the veriest wretch on earth ;—at length, however, religion and philosophy cured me, and I assumed a tran¬ quil gaiety ; and am determined, through the thorny journey of life, to pluck every flower ivhich Providence may place on the road-side, I have inhabited different parts
of Italy for many years, on account of the cheapnessof the country, ivhich enabled me, on the smallest pittance allowed me by a distant relation, to support myself as a gen¬ tleman. Heaven never deserts the resigned* and those who humbly hope. My cousin Mr Meredith, who accompa¬ nied me on my journey from England, has been my constant companion, and I have found the greatest assistance from his be¬ nevolence. I am now independent, and I trust shall never prove ungrateful :—Wc were last at Venice together for the pur¬ poses I have already had the honour to men¬ tion to you, and the circumstances of which are singular enough. My youngest step¬ brother, in spite of the antipathy of his mother, and the hard usage of my father, had ever shewn the warmest affection for me, and marked my melancholy with re¬ gret from his earliest years, Indeed I was kind to him, and, in many instances of life, both by advice, and what pecuniary aid was in my feeble power, I was a second father to him. We always corresponded, and he preferred me to all his other bro-
thers and sisters. Seeing my father's injus¬ tice during his life, he resolved at his own death to make up for it, and has left me not only his portion of my father's fortune, but also much property acquired in this country. Opulent I therefore again may be,—but bappy never. Wrecked in my first adven¬ ture for felicity,—deprived by infidelity of the once dear partner of my heart,— for¬ ced to despise one I can never tear from my perverse affections, I must be a weal¬ thy pilgrim in a land of sorrows ;—but pa¬ tience shall be my portion,·—and, when my journey's done, I shall trust all to that supreme Being, who, though he checkers life with adversity, makes up the balance of happiness deficient here below, in a woild to come. " Gentlemen, I have done ;—and have to request your forgiveness for the rela¬ tion I have made, which, I trust, however, will not be wholly uninteresting, as it pre¬ sents some instructive lessons in passing through life,"
The company, though much entertained by Piercy's interesting story, were, at the same time, exhausted by the length of it. The hour of dinner approached,—their spi¬ rits ivere revived by good cheer, and easy, elegant conversation. Meredith was a plea¬ sant, good-humoured young fellow, who. from pure friendship, had accompanied Piercy in his journey to Italy. He told the party, that he had no story to succeed his friend Piercy*s 5 as hitherto his life had been all sun-shine. Yet, adds he, I expect to share, like others, a portion of these ills to whic h all mankind are ex posed. My friend's history, I think, will guard me a- gainst one rock on which so many ill-fated mortals split, which is never to be precipi¬ tate in any one important step to be taken in hfe. After dinner, Meredith observed the com¬ pany still somewhat grave, and therefore proposed to give them a specimen of his musical talents :—He sung well,—like a gentleman ;—but he was no superlative a- dept. He requested lovely Aurelia, (whose name we long to mention) to do him the
honour to name a song, which, if he could sing it, he would be happy to perform to the best of his power. Aurelia, who was distinguished by propriety and good judg¬ ment in every part of her conduct and man¬ ners, observed that, in her opinion, the best song which could be sung at present, would be one which called to their mind* with warmth their dear native lands ; and that it would, she was persuaded, be highly grateful to the company, if Mr Meredith would favour them with " Britannia rule the waves." He sung this air in true style, to the great satis¬ faction and exhilaration of his audience. Af¬ ter a little interval, he entertained them with a few more airs of the gay and light kind, but all of them expressive of some benevo¬ lent and virtuous sentiment. None of the other gentlemen possessed the powers from nature of performing vocally. And deli¬ cacy forbade addressing Aurelia to bear her part for obvious reasons. During the re¬ mainder of the voyage, Meredith was the joy of the party, for,» besides his musical taste, he possessed the agreeable qualities of wit and humour, which when relgulated by good sense and good temper, (as they were
in him) are always fascinating to any so¬ ciety who are not Cynics. Our travellers now approached the shore of that country which is the glory of all the earth. They landed at Plymouth in per¬ fect health and good spirits, though some¬ what fatigued by the length of the voyage, and by tossings from contrary winds. It was therefore resolved to spend two days at this place, chiefly on dear Aurelia's ac¬ count, who, though in good health, yet wished for some rest and relaxation at land. The shipping, the harbour, and fortifica¬ tions, afforded them amusement during their short stay here,—for the town does not de¬ serve tc be mentioned, either on account of beauty or elegance. This excellent party must now be sepa¬ rated, never to meet again in these sublu¬ nary regions. The parting was interesting. Mutual good wishes were expressed with unfeigned sincerity. Piercy and Meredith were obliged to return by the луау of Ports¬ mouth, on account of-business of import¬ ance; and Belford, Charles, and Aurelia",*'
set off directly for their own terrestrial pa¬ radise. When he landed at Plymouth, Bel¬ ford immediately wrote to his steward, inti¬ mating his arrival in England, and that in six days from the date of his letter, he pro¬ posed being at Munster Abbey.
ΐ
MUNSTER ABBEY.
CHAP. VI. Ат the time appointed, the long absent travellers arrived. It was rather at a late hour,—and by intention,—that the villagers might not be thrown into any bustle, by running out from their houses to pay their heart-felt respects to the adored lord of the manor. Indeed, Belford had expressly charged his steward not to mention any thing of the letter he had received from Plymouth, to any but one or two of the servants of the family, who had been or¬ dered several weeks before to have every thing in perfect order, and to receive the family at whatever time they should arrive· It was a transporting, a celestial omen to lovely Aurelia, to find, the moment she entered her own apartment, a letter from Vol. U. Ρ
her beloved Altamont : She opened it with that delicate, that exquisite sensibility of soul, which a being of an ordinary nature can form no idea of. Salutations of love were impressed pn every word pf the epis¬ tle, and she lifted her eyes to heaven, ador¬ ing that goodness which had preserved in perfect health the treasure of her soul, and which opened to her the prospect of be¬ holding him not long hence at her father's mansion. This letter from Altamont filled Belford and Charles with the most delightful emo¬ tions. Who can paint the sympathetic feelings of a benevolent and affectionate parent and uncle, with a child who is wor¬ thy of their most fervent affection, and who commands their esteem by filial piety and by exemplary goodness ï But we must not omit here a very inte- resting circumstance to every virtuous and benignant soul, which is, the ecstacy of transport which every servant of the family discovered on the arrival of their master and his dearest child, after so long an аЫ
sénce. And the scene was rendered still more interesting by those mingled feelings ofjoy and sorrow, which nature called into collision, on recollecting the loss of their e- vei-beloved and valuable mistress. Bel- ford and Aurelia received them all in the kindest and most gracious manner; and, with that condescendence which elevates and adorns our nature more than all the bauble of titles, and the splendour of wealth, en¬ quired after their health, and the health of the wives and children of those who had families. Thus they laid down their heads on the pillows of sleep with that conscious¬ ness of virtue, and with that rational sense of the divine beneficence, of which, alas ! so many of the great and the wealthy in all ages, cannot, from their lamentable ha¬ bits of dissipation, form even an idea. О ye infatuated beings of either sex, placed by heaven's command at the head of great¬ er or lesser families ! of what pleasures and joys do ye deprive your souls, by haughti- tiness, by tyranny and severity, to those partners of your kind, who, (but for some sinall accident, a few generations or a few ye&is back) might have been placed in the P 2
very same superior stations which you hold Γ Ye want all principle,—and therefore ye can possess nothing that is valuable. Kind heaven, however, be praised, that amongthe great and the wealthy, some excellent spi¬ rits are ever to be found, who make it a point of conscience, to shew forth a spirit of kindness, mildness, and gentleness, to all their domestics,—to reward their faith¬ ful services,~to patronize their children in their views of raising themselves in the world. For the well-informed man, of the noblest blood, never forgets, that a few generations past, the founder of his fa¬ mily might have been some humble pea* sant, or some industrious arti и Pride e- v/>r ¿grades high birth,— -ana fools of qua¬ lity only are proud. A transaction was now to take place at Munster Abbey, which puts to shame a very large portion of the human race. Bel¬ ford was now to fulfil his promise to his be¬ loved brother Charles. But as delicacy marked every part of his conduct when he conferred any favour, he was resolved to observe this nice virtue on the present oc-
casion, with the most scrupulous attention. The idea of laying his brother under an o- bligation was too gross for his pure and ge¬ nerous soul. He determined that the an¬ nual sum which he should settle on Charles should be held by him as an evidence of brotherly love, by the acceptance of it. Accordingly, the morning after his return from Italy, Belford proposed to Charles to walk in the garden for half an hour, re¬ solving to execute his benevolent purpose in a moment ; and, of.course, without for¬ mal address, or the most distant reference to what bad been. This good man had early this morning cast his eyeonthe state of his affairs, and found them in the most flourishing con¬ di tion.— He saw himself possessed of a clear landed estate of twelve thousand pounds per an. and eighty thousand pounds in the funds. —In two sentences he imparted his whole scheme to his brother :—" My dear Charles, let me intreat you to add to that felicity which I already experience, by the good¬ ness of heaven, in the temper and manners of my Aurelia, by complying with a request I am to prefer to you, with the utmost ar¬ dour cf fraternal affection."------« My dearest
brother, (rejoined Charles) request, did you say ?—your will is, and ought to be, and e- ver shall be, a command to me.—I also re¬ quest to know what that will is." Belford flew to embrace him.—" Charles, (says he) my fortune is overgrown :— 4t is far more than I was born ever to expect., I have found this morning, by glancing o- ver my books, that I have a vast estate in Jand, unincumbered by a single shilling of debt, and a very considerable sum in the funds :—the former will be an ample for¬ tune for my Aurelia ;—the latter I request you to share with me. Know, you will make me happy by your compliance," And again he embraced him. Charles was over-powered. He paused a few moments ; and then, in broken ac¬ cents, and in a kind of a soliloquy, or fit of absence, exclaims,—" Giver of all good, I here behold thy paternal hand. I feel, with extacy of gratitude, thy ineffable good>- ness to a prodigal child. I devote my fu¬ ture life, by thy aid, to temperance and to< benevolence.—While I live I shall bkss
thee." And, turning to Belford, with a look more expressive than a seraph could paint, he adds,—" My>brother! my bro¬ ther ï thou art more than man !—thou art an emanation of divinity î —My soul is over¬ whelmed by thy unparalelled benignity. I know thy exalted mind scorns all adulation and praise. I receive thy bounty with the warmest fraternal gratitude :—and I bless God and you." Here was a scene worthy of the record* jng Angel.—We see, " Such things are,'* in this world ; but, alas ï they rarely 4 * are."' Thé reasons are obvious. The very first les¬ son most children receive, is, to pay an im¬ plicit respect to rank and to riches, inde¬ pendently of the character and manners of the possessor.. In the country especially, the reverence which the peasant is taught, ab most frcm infancy, to pay the lord, knight, or squire of the manor, aproaches to adoration : —not that we mean to insinuate here, in the most distant manner, that the great duty of respect for superiors should not be sacredly inculcated on the minds of all young per¬ sons :—we only complain of that indiscri-
minate respect which most parents, in the presence of their children, pay frequently to the most unworthy of mankind. On the other hand, to teach the tender mind to look up with affection and regard only to the worthy and virtuous, has a most happy tendency, when the lesson is given with sound judgment, and with a good heart. Indeed, if any of these qualities are wanting, the lesson is not only lost, but per¬ verted to the worst of ends. A parent of a weak understanding, and of a bad heart, is under the influence of mean prejudices, and very often of the lowest bigotry. Hence the child is taught, not rarely, contempt for superiors, and that insolence and audacity which is incompatible with the good order and peace of society. In a particular man¬ ner, if the parent is of the last description, he commonly endeavours to inspire his children with the utmost aversion from e- very superior or equal, who does not hold the same creed of superstition which infests his own plebeian mind ; and which he dares* to call by the sacred name of religion..
The reverence which was paid to Belford by all around him, old, and young, was a~ tribute justly due to god-like qualities of mind and conduct. The parents who train¬ ed their children to pay Ыт this reverence, acted a worthy part ; and, by this species of culture, the peasant and the cottager taught their offspring one of the greatest duties of life. A few days after Belford's arrival at his blessed mansion, his neighbours, of various ranks, came to pay him their compliments, —not in the ordinary manner, which gene¬ rally signifies nothing. The intemperate only shunned his house. In the course of some days, these visits were all made. And now he resolved to lose no time in making the round of all his estates, accompanied by Aurelia, that he might have personal ac¬ quaintance with the circumstances and si¬ tuations of all his farmers, peasants, and la¬ bourers. These dependents heard of his intended tour,—and they heard it with un¬ feigned joy,—for they knew it was their common parent who was to take a mud, a
benevolent, and liberal view of all their la¬ bours, and of all that concerned them. The sober, the industrious, and the honest farmer, was the object of his particular at¬ tention. And indeed, he was blessed by having, almost to one, all his farmers of this description. If any of them had met with an unforeseen calamity, by the less of any part of their substance, he remitted a cer¬ tain portion of the rent, according to the specialty Of the circumstances. If any had shewn a very superior degree of industry and of ingenuity, in improving his farm, and by raising superior crops to his neighbours, such a man was distinguished by him with some badge of honour, or some useful pre¬ sent. The less industrious he gently admo¬ nished, and expressed his hopes of their fu¬ ture activity. But the poor labourers, the cottagers, were the objects of his most particular care. He considered them, as every man of sense and reflection does, as forming the strength and riches of every country on earth. He made a most minute enquiry into all their wants
#nd distresses, and especially since he took the last tour over his lands. With pru¬ dence, with humanity, with soft and win¬ ning expression, he imparted his favours to them ;—he won the affection and hearts t of all ;—he left not one in misery behind him, in whatever respected those moderate comforts of life, which best befit their sta¬ tions, and which are ever most favourable to their moral behaviour, The young men and women on his estates, who distinguished themselves by uncommon ingenuity·, industry, and good conduct, he marked with particular favour, and gave each of them some token of his regard, which was an incentive to thek future ex¬ ertions. To youth of opening genius, (we mean who shewed something of originality or invention in their callings,) he became a willing patron ;—and never failed to carry them forward, by pecuniary aid, and to e* stablish them -in that branch of business, or mechanism, in which they excelled. After making, every where, a very minute inqui¬ ry into the effects of his last visit to his peo¬ ple, and especially into the use they made
of the small performance of a moral nature which he had then distributed among them, •—and having received a most satisfactory account of the effects of his good counsels and benevolent actions towards them, he re¬ turned to Munster Abbey, with sensations which baffle all the descriptions of men. Ye great ones of this world î we humbly and respectfully beseech you to hold ever in your view such noble models of exalted virtue :—then shall you taste a species of fehcity, which in vain you pursue in the gratification of frivolous amusement, fashion¬ able follies, and in the üstless and melan¬ choly haunts of intemperance and sensu- ality* After Belford and Aurelia returned to their paradise, another scheme of benevo¬ lence engaged the heart of this singular man. It regarded his brother Charles,—and we shall very shortly relate it, after mentioning the reason why he made not one in visiting the estates of his brother.
Charles had been, in early life, much in¬ debted to a family in the vicinity of Mun¬ ster Abbey, for their affectionate attentions to him. He had learned, that, amidst all his errors and strayings from the paths of wisdom, in former days, the two worthy heads of this family, and their eldest son, were his steady and unwearied advocates in every company ; that they uniformly pre¬ saged his return " to his brother's house," as a penitential and a virtuous man. The name of this family was Draper. Charles spent the days of his brother's absence from home at Draper-hall,—and was received with most marked attentions and affection, above common fashionable politeness. He returned not however to his brother, until he had obtained the pro¬ mise of all the family to pay an early visit to Munster Abbey, and to spend some days with his brother and niece ; for they had only paid their respects in form at Belford's arrival. The scheme we have just hinted at, and which Belford was so sanguine to accom- Vol. II. Q^
plish, was to gei his brother persuaded to marry, as soon as he could fix his mind with prudence ;—for Charles was but a young man, not yet more than thirty-five, years of age,— tall, handsome, and in every respect had the appearance of a man of bkth and fashion. But, above all, he had a benigni¬ ty in his countenance, which was, in fact, acquired by his long return to the habits of order, the practice of virtue, and the spirit of a manly and benevolent religion. For, had he continued in the habits of riot and dissipation, these noble expressions of countenance would have forsaken him.— The discerning eye vvill at once distinguish the poor miserable rake from the man of temperance and virtue, by the very exter¬ nal traits of his countenance. Belford did not need to employ elo¬ quence or argument to induce a brother who revered and loved him, to comply with his counsels. He gave him his assurance that he would lose no time in looking out for a young lady possessed of that charac¬ ter, and of these accomplishments which he considered indispensibly necessary to ren-
der a man of virtue and of some taste, (as he modestly expressed himself) happy through life. He insinuated to his brother, that, during his visit at ûraper-hall, the eld¬ est daughter of that woithy family had more than attracted his attention ;—she had made no small impression on his heart. But " I am determined, my dear brother, (he added) from my experience and obser¬ vation in life, to observe the sacred adage, to take no momentuous step in life without serious deliberation, and without employing time to form a proper decision. I have re¬ solved to discover, above all, the temper of her to whom I shall give my hand and heart. Many other qualities I know are important in a partner for life,—but with¬ out this, all, all lose their virtue. A few weeks hence, the family of Draper-hall are to pay you a visit, and, during their stay here, my eyes nor my understanding shall not be unemployed. And I intreat, my brother, that you yourself will make your silent observations on Miss Louisa Draper, for her person is intuitively unexception¬ able.
Belford was overjoyed to find Charles so much disposed to enter into, his views,— more especially as he had, during the time he made the visit to his estates, learned,, that one of the finest places in England, not above nine or ten miles from Munster Abbey, was to be exposed to sale at Chris¬ tie's in Pall Mall, five or six weeks hence. An estate of three thousand a-year,—high¬ ly cultivated,—most enchantingly situated, —and adorned by a mansion-house built in the Gothic stile. The money which Charles now possessed, (for in part he was now pro¬ prietor of the sum in the funds which we have mentioned) was more than equal to the purchase ;—and he proposed the scheme to his brother, who, to the end of Belford's life, acquiesced with ready consent to every scheme he devised for him, and to every counsel which he offered him. The attorney of the family forthwith re¬ ceived orders to appear at the sale, and to go a certain length in his offers for Ben¬ nington Castle. The purchase was made, —all necessary rights and titles to the e- state drawn out, and put in registration ;—
and Charles Belford was now an opulent squire, not two hours journey from the re¬ vered author (under heaven) of Ыз happy independence. After Belford had performed an act of generosity to his brother, of which no age affords many examples, he resolved to pay a visit, which he had long intended, to one of the worthiest characters in the land, and one of his own first favourites. This was a Mr John Hammond, a vicar on one of his estates, about fifteen miles from Munster Abbey. Here he spent eight or ten days, with that ineffable pleasure and satisfaction which flow from rational and virtuous con¬ versation, where two souls are in perfect u- nison. Hammond, like Belford, was a man of letters,, and a polished gentleman.—He was also a man of public spirit, and, like e- very worthy Briton, enthusiastically attach¬ ed to his King, and to the Constitution of his country. In the discharge of the duties of his function he was surpassed by no cler¬ gyman of any rank in the Church,—With such a man Belford must necessarily enjoy the highest mental repast. This good man
had ample experience^ that the "various turns of fortune ponder." His story is wor¬ thy of being transmkted to posterity, for more reasons than one ;—though that one is important, as will be seen by that detail of it. Mr Hammond was the son of a respecta¬ ble merchant in the city of Norwich. He was the second of four sons, all of whom be¬ came prosperous in. the world, so far as the acquisition of wealth, or, at least, something more than competency, can be called pro¬ sperity. After the best education at school· which Norwich could afford, he was sent to Cam¬ bridge, where he very soon distinguished himself by assiduity in his studies, by su¬ perior abilities, and by exemplary correct¬ ness of manners :—of course, he received very marked attentions from some, of the first professors of the University. He car¬ ried the premium on several occasions, by distinguishing himself by the superiority of his compositions on literary subjects ; and left his alma mater with the reputation of
one of the first scholars of his age it ever could boast of. He early discovered a strong propensity to go into holy orders ; and his father, who was a man of sense and virtue, not only did not thwart his inclinations, but cherished the good dispositions he discovered in his amia¬ ble son. In the twenty second year of his age, he entered into priest's orders.:— andin eighteen months afterwards, he was called to an of¬ fice of a very sacred nature, which requires not only much caution, and the manners and address of a gentleman, but the supe¬ rior qualities also of a good understanding, and a well-principled mind. The office we mean, was chaplain to a regiment. Never was a young man of his profession more for¬ tunate in a department of this nature. He remained five years with one of the most respectable corps in the British service. —During this space, all his officers, from the Colonel to the youngest subaltern, dis¬ covered such particular respect and atten¬ tion,—nay, partiality and affection to him,
as could not, upon so excellent a spirit as Hammond, fail to produce a powerful re¬ ciprocal effect. It is worthy of observation, that no church¬ man has ever displayed more of the man¬ ners and behaviour of a well-bred gentle¬ man, (fascinating to all men, except the rude and vulgar) and of the decorum ofthe clerical character, than such as have been sometime in the society of men of wortb and merit in the army. On the other hand, there are too many melancholy exceptions, owing both to the previous defective education of 'chaplains, and of the younger officers of many corps. -—So it is in all societies of men.—But Ham¬ mond's happiness was chiefiy the effect of his own pleasant and agreeable manners, his various conversation, his talent for ance- dote, and, above all, ofhis attention to every soldier at quarters.—Not one of the private men but adored him. The additional al¬ lowance he had from a kind father, enabled him to do many kind offices to the men who had families,—he entered into all their distresses,—he was truly a partner in their
woes,—and he was indeed their affectionate friend, as well as their faithful chaplain. The fame of this superior young man reached Munster Abbey, Belford was charmed with the accounts he had often heard of him from a young officer, the son of a neighbouring squire who had been to see Ые father on leave of absence. This young man, on a visit to Belford, expatiat¬ ed largely in praise of Mr Hammond, and asserted, with youthful ardour, that there was not an officer or soldier in the regiment, who did not revere, and love him with all their heart,—for (he added) he is the de¬ lightful, but exemplary companion of all the gentlemen of the regiment,—and the father of all the men. At this period, that is about four years and nine months after Hammond had join¬ ed the regiment, a living of five hundred a year in the gift of Belford, became vacant. Many an express was sent, and many a call made at Munster Abbey, immediately on the demise of the former incumbent.
High political influence was exerted in fa¬ vour of several young men of family. But Belford was in every thing a man of prin¬ ciple. He had previously formed a resolu¬ tion, when the old gentleman of fourscore, who had lately held the living, became wholly unable to discharge the duties of his office, to look out with care for a clergyman entirely suited to his own taste :—a man of piety, of learning, and of agreeable manners; more especially as the parish, where this vicarage lay, required a person who would devote much of his time and attention to the inspection of the people. To explain causes here, would be unpleasant and inde¬ licate,—-nor is it necessary. Belford resisted all solicitations with the utmost firmness;—but one loquacious ora¬ tor, in favour of a young clergyman, the son of a respectable man not many miles from Munster Abbey, disgusted him so much by his eloquence, and by the rapidity with which he expressed himself, that he deter¬ mined to have the living disposed of to his own mind with the utmost expedition*
Heaven favoured his views :—Mr Ham¬ mond's name was accidentally mentioned at Belford's table by the young officer we have mentioned, and a single post was not lost to make every farther enquiry, which du¬ ty and prudence required.—And, in a very short while, Mr Hammond was inducted into the hving of Woodland. The people, who are always well dispos¬ ed, except where they are misled by the base and designing, had already anticipated the happiness they were to enjoy from the fame of this young man. And his recep¬ tion by them was a demonstration of their affection. In the near vicinity of Woodland, lived a family of singular worth, with whom Ham¬ mond became very early acquainted after his settlement. The name of the gentle¬ man was Squire Langhorne of Rosehall. He was blessed with an excellent wife, two sons, and two daughters. Mr Hammond was charmed with the manners of this fa¬ mily, because they were so congenial to his own. Uniform decorum was mingled with
hilarity, and innocent pastime with serious occupations. The eldest son was bred to the bar, and was now resident in the tem¬ ple :—the second was a lieutenant in the navy :—all who remained at home, then, were Mr Langhorne and the ladies. Miss Langhorne was endowed with exter¬ nal channs, and mental accomphshments, which could not fail to strike every visitor. She was affable, gentle, pohte, ahd elo¬ quent ; though, like a young lady of sense, she spoke but little. Miss Langhorne, how¬ ever, was not quite in the ton, —for she was remarkably pious :—But her piety never ap¬ peared but by her conduct, and by her con¬ versation, only in select society, ever mark¬ ing time and place, and never " casting pearls" before unworthy objects. Such a character could not escape Ham¬ mond, who was " feelingly alive to each fine impulse." He saw, and he admired Miss Langhorne on his first visit. The more of her society he was honoured with, the more did her charms of mind and person attract
hisiesteémanå affection. He felt a strong ambition rising in his soul, to render him- | self reciprocally agreeable to this amiable í young lady :—but to accomplish this grand I object of hb heart, he resolved not to re¬ peat his visits too frequently, and thus ne- | gíecťhis important duty, and wound the peace of his own mind. He was so firm and steady in his principles, that he con¬ cluded, if Miss Langhorne was indeed the 1 lovely and respectable character which she appeared to be, he could not act a more wise and prudent part to gain her esteem, perhaps to win her heart, than to discover, in every part of his conduct, a strict sense of honour and duty. He judged rightly. Hammond's charac¬ ter and manners had made already no smau impression on Miss Langhorne's heart. But she was prudent and guarded; and, like * evety young woman of sense, she was resolv¬ ed to guard her heart to the utmost of her power, in case Mr Hammond should make any serious propositions, till such time as she should attain as perfect knowledge of Vol. H. R
his temper and disposition as possible. Her precaution deserves applause,—but here it was unnecessary. Seven months after this excellent vicar was settled at Woodland, he became the husband of the amiable Miss Langhorne, — with the full consent of her worthy pa¬ rents. Tramed up by a mother who was tho¬ roughly versed in the whole art of domestic economy, Mrs Hammond, though she brought but a slender fortune with her to Woodland vicarage, became soon a pattern to the families around her, (not for being a notable wife, for that is a vexatious qua¬ lity) for her elegant simplicity' of table, and the whole of her family management. England undoubtedly excels all the nations of the world in neatness and simplicity : We refer not to the higher and middle classes only, but even to the lower class, who, in general, are more cleanly than any common people in Europe. .1
Hammond's house was the resort of ma¬ ny young men who were to follow the same profession with himself. He delighted in their society, (for the worthy of them only could find acceptance at Woodland). By his conversation, and by his example, he conveyed instruction to their minds, and improvement to their manners ;—and, by the pleasantry and affability of his conversa¬ tion, he gained their hearts. The vicarage was never without one or two of these e- leves. For this good man asserted, on every occasion, that with him it was an establish¬ ed and favourite opinion, that every cler¬ gyman of independence, who did not make it a point of conscience to have students of theology, and young men who had not yet been promoted to livings, frequÄtly a- bout him, was a disgrace to his profession ; and, if law could permit, should be expell¬ ed from the church. An excellent and benevolent idea ! For, who are so qualifi¬ ed to train up young men in knowledge and virtue, as their superiors in the same train of studies ; and, more especially, when they »are men of exemplary conduct.
Rz
Man is born to trouble. The joys of this world are often mingled, by the hand of infinite wisdom, with hitter alloy. " Where we cannot unriddle,-«-we. must learn to trust." ï . l A cloud was soon to cover a part of the future days of our admirable Hammond. The health of hiß beloved spouse had ne¬ ver been perfectly re-established, since she had been afleeted by a fever . about three years before her marrjage. Not long after their happy union, Mrs Hammond became extremely nervous ^-sleep forsook her,***· and she discovered visible symptoms of some serious internal ailment, ν The first medical aid in the kingdom was called in ; but it was not the will of heaven that she should " see many days." During her ill- hess, which was of no less than five months duration, she preserved a serenity of mind, and even cheerfulness in conversation, which alternately affected her admirable partner, with rapture and grief. Actuated by the purest principles, she had her be¬ loved sister and other young ladies frequent-
ly with her; before whom she displayed a fortitude and dignity of mind which could not fail to make the deepest and the hap¬ piest impressions. These impressions were indeed powerful, as her most amiable sisters, and others of her select friends, who visited her in her distress, often acknowledged, after she had ascended into the regions of bliss. Let us not fix our eye too long on this affecting scene : It was the destination of mysterious Providence, that within the e- leventhi month after the union of these an¬ gehe spirits, Mrs Hammond was to be trans¬ planted into these realms, ** where sorrow, weeping, and pain, are no more,"—She gently slept away, in the arms of her be¬ loved and afflicted husband. Grief would have overwhelmed this ex^ cellent man, and. rendered him unqualified for the duties of life,' had he not learned those lessons of piety, and been enabled to practise them, which are-the solace of the soul in every affliction in this sublunary R я.
- state. He mourned as a nian of й sublime and dignified mind,—that is, he mourned as a christian. The family of Draperhall arrived at the time they had appointed with Charles to visit Munster Abbey. Their stay was ne¬ cessarily short ; as matters of the last mo¬ ment were now soon to engage tlie whole attention of Belford and his sweet Aurelia, Letters had been received the evening be¬ fore Mr Draper and family arrived, with accounts of Lord Altamont, which, had he wrote more early, would have filled „Bed¬ ford's mind with alarm, and lovely Aure¬ lia's with distraction. His Lordship, for three weeks, had been afflicted by a severe fever, the effect of cold,—but was now per¬ fectly recovered. And he informed his Aurelia, with regret, that the period of his arrival would be prolonged necessarily for tour or five weeks beyond the time he had fixed for returning to England. The epis¬ tle our amiable young nobleman wrote to* his beloved, was worthy of the benignity of his heart, and congenial to the ardour of his b\ с Thcir souls were in perfect harmony ;
nature had blessed them with the most a- miable, and virtuous dispositions, and edu¬ cation had adorned them with every quality atid accomplishment which can ensure fe¬ licity after the hymenean knot is tied. Au¬ relia's love was, if possible, heightened to a higher degree of warmth, when she found her lord so intense in acquiring a stock of knowledge and information, which he might turn to the highest account on his return to his native land. After pouring forth his heart to her wlio had full possession of it, in all the strains of enraptured passion, he en¬ tertained her with a short sketch, or plan, pf the manner in which he was to employ his fluture life, if it should be the will of Heaven that he should settle on his estate. The phű was worthy of its author. It was a scheme of pure benevolence. It was not fancifnLand aerial. It was practicable, for it had been practised in all ages by those superioac beings who are born to bless man¬ kind. He expressed, in language moderated by reason and good sense, his impatience to embrace her whom liis soul loved:—but,
knowing her exalted understandmg, and her admiration of every species of excellence, he assured her, that no inducement under heaven could; retard him in setting out for Britain, but his ambition to appear more worthy ofthe first and most accomplished ofher sex,. Altamont wrote also to Belford in a stile suifed to the dignified character whom he addressed. It was obvious that his esteem and affection for this good man were as high- as one mortal can entertain for another. He gave a· short relation of his studies and' ge¿ neral pursuits, adding a few remarks on that happy country where he had resided for some time ;—and concluded, by requesting of him, that if it was consistent with his ma¬ ny plans of beneficence and attention to his people, he would meet Ыт at Dover six weeks from the date of his letter.. In sweets soft, and endearing language,.he respectful¬ ly hoped that his Aurelia might be prevail-. ed on to attend Ыт to that place. The request of Altamont to Belford would have been perfectly agreeable, independent·;
ly of every other consideration, but, in fact, he had long resolved (for years past) to pay a yisk, in the county of Kent, to an old Ox- qnian acquaintance ; and it was fixed that, as soon as some important matters, respect- ingthe improvement of his estates, were settled, he should accomplish his intended visit. Not one day passsed in which this admi¬ rable man, and Ые angelic daughter, did not perform some act of beneficence to farmer, cottager, labourer, or the poor people for miles around. His family was an emblem of paradise :—His domestics adored him. In¬ deed, he was at infinite pains to find ser- vatns of the first character for virtue and sobriety, and he was almost universally suc¬ cessful. But his own example, and Aure¬ lia's too, contributed to establish the habits of virtue which they had brought into the family with them. As Belford was a man of sterhng understanding, he resolved, from the time he became the head of a house¬ hold, to place himself in idea, at all times, in the situation of his servants, and to fol¬ low the sacred rule,—" To do to them what
he would wis*h his master to do to him, if placed in that humble station." "Scarce ever a servant left him, but to be settled in a mar¬ ried state, or to be advanced to a higher si¬ tuation. He delighted to reward merit in every rank or calling ;—and he had always a number of young persons, of both sexes, in his service, whom he was careful to e- ducate in the plain and simple principles of religion, and in the knowledge of their moral duties ; to any of superior quickness, who discovered marks of genius, he was particu¬ larly attentive, and never failed to advance them in the world.
END OF SECOND VOLUME.
