Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Munster Abbey: a romance: interspersed with reflections on virtue and morality: written by Sir Samuel Egerton Leigh
MUNSTER ABBEY.
CHAP. I. About three weeks after the receipt of Altamonts letter, Belford and Amelia re¬ ceived another from this admirable young Peer :—He repeated his former request, and modestly expressed his dependance on the compliance of his dearest friends, as to meet¬ ing him at Dover. The day was now positively fixed for setting out for Kent, But it is worthy of remark, ere we accompany Belford in his journey, (and we ought to have made the observation* before) that whenever he was to leave Munster Abbey, even foi a few A*2
weeks, much more for a longer time, it was his practice to draw out a set of rules to be observed in the family during his absence. The love his servants bore to him rendered these rules easy in the observance. And, indeed, c^awn by iuch a hand* they must have been dictated by the maxims of wis¬ dom and of goodness. Immediately on arranging every thing in the family, and giving his steward, who was a very superior servant, and an excellent man, every direction concerning the prepa¬ ration to be made to receive Lord Aka- rjont in proper stile, on his arrival at Mun- stei Abbey, he set out for his friend's seat, and performed his journey from Devonshire in a short time.—But, behold his disappoint¬ ment !—not having announced his visit, he learned Sir Henry Smith had gone eight days before to the continent, with all his fa¬ mily, not to return for some months. In near vicinity to Sir Henry's seat, there was an excellent inn, where Belford and Aurelia had every accommodation they could possibly wish. Disconcerted to no
small degree by the absence of his much- respected friend, he resolved, after passing the evening and night at the inn, to make a tour over the adjacent country. Mean¬ time, he called for the landlord in the morn¬ ing, and enquired of him what company were vt the inn. He mentioned several military gentlemen, officers of cavalry, who were quartered there ; and also Lord Dun¬ feir, a nobleman whose seat was only at a few miles distance.—" Lord Dunfeir !—I have heard (said Belford) often of this wor¬ thy peer ; and I should be proud to be made known to him. I perfectly recollect his Lordship, when very young, at the Univer¬ sity, but we were not acquainted :—and, if I am not in a very great mistake, he knows something of me." Gentlemen possess an ease and address in manner, which vulgarity interprets for for¬ wardness or impudence.—But a vulgar mind is no judge of men or manners. Na¬ ture here does much,—but a polite and fi¬ nished education far more. Belford, though the most modest and unassuming of men, was master of all the free and disengaged A 3
manners of a man of birth and fashion. He formed the resolution of requesting permis¬ sion of Lord Dunfeir, to have the honour of waiting on him at his apartments in the inn. But he was anticipated :—This amiable and hospitable Lord had, accidentally, in the morning met Mr Belford's first servant, and requested to know who the gentleman was who arrived at a certain hour last night. The servant answered, Mr Belford of Mun¬ ster Abbey, in Devonshire.—" Mr Belford i (exclaimed his Lordship) your master's name is perfectly familiar to me ; and his charac¬ ter is held sacred over all this country.— One of my best neighbours was, not long since, at Rome and Florence, and gave me such accounts of his excellence as inspires me with the strongest desire to meet with him. Be so obliging, Sir, (he added) as waik to Mr Belford's apartment, and pre¬ sent Lord Dunfeir's very respectful compli¬ ments, and say that he requests to have the honour of calling on him." The servant complied with his Lordship's request. He went to his master, and delivered the mes¬ sage he had just received. Belford was struck :—" Repeat, James, (he says) hb
Lordship's words." The servant did ??.— " Explain to me, if you can, (said Belford) how Lord Dunfeir came to know any thing of ??." This explanation was instantly made. Belford would not be surpassed in politeness, even by his Lordship. He iife- stantly went to wait on him, and found him just ready to fuffil his purpose in paying his respects to the ** stranger in the land.** Belford introduced himself widi modesty and grace. He expressed the high sense he entertained of the honour Lord Dunfeir intended to confer on him, and frankly de¬ clared to him the resolution he had formed that morning, of waiting on his Lordship. Lord Dunfeir received Belford's compli¬ ments with the elegance which always ought, and generally does, accompany the manners of men of birth and fashion. He expressed, in the warmest terms, his happi¬ ness at meeting with a gentleman of whom he had often heard, and for whom, long ere now, he had been led to entertain the high¬ est respect. Belford was struck anew, ana expressed lus surprize, in the language of
HK)dest enquiry. Jus Lordship with equal modesty explained. But Lord Dunfeir had further learned, fiom the landlord of the inn, Belford's dis¬ appointment by the absence of Sir Henry Smith : and he was resdived to attempt to make compensation for this mortification, by requesting of Belford to do him the ho¬ nour and happiness of visiting hb mansion, which lay only a short distance from Sir Henry's. The request was put in such a manner, that good breeding and a sense of duty commanded acquiescence. But (ad¬ ded my Lord) I learn, Mr Belford, your daughter is also here.—Do me the honour, I pray you, to introduce me to the young lady. He was immediately conducted to tlie parlour, where Aurelia waited for her fa¬ ther, who received Lord Dunfeir's compli¬ ments with that engaging modesty which distinguished her on all occasions. When this Httle party were seated, Lord Dunfeir thus addressed Belford and his love¬ ly daughter :—** Give me leave to request of Mr and Miss Belford an honour which
I am most solicitous to enjoy :—It '? that yoa will now agree to spend the time at Dunfeir-house, whkh you had fixed for liv¬ ing with Sir Henry Smith ; and be assur¬ ed, that, on my part, nothing shall be want¬ ing to render your stay agreeable*" Mr and Buss Belford made a reply suitable to the goodness and hospitality of his Lord¬ ship's address. By twelve o'clock the carriages were or¬ dered ; and both families set out for Dun¬ feir house to dinner. Mr and Miss Bel¬ ford were introduced to the ladies of the family, besides a very large party wlto had assembled for a purpose which shall imme¬ diately be mentioned. After dinner, Lord Dunfeir pofitely in¬ formed Mr and Miss Belford, that to-morrow evening he proposed a theatrical perform* ance should be exhibited in the great hall, for the entertainment of his company, add¬ ing, that the performers were all present ; and that he flattered himself the exhibition would be agreeable. Mr Belford express¬ ed, in his own name, and in that of Aurelia^
the highest satisfaction and gratitude ft* tbe very polite att^rómi of hb ??? ûfcmà* and assured Mm that performances of such a nature, by private gentlemen, he highly approved of, when under such direction as Lord Dunfeir's. Aurelia was transported in the prospect of enjoying a pleasure she never had experienced before :— (oc though she had often seen pubhc theatres, she never had yet been present at a private perform¬ ance of a theatrical kiad. It was the intention of the party to re¬ present the tragedy of Hamlet, after whkh was to follow the pantomine of Harlequin Faustib ;—and this evening every one had their part assigned them for to-morrow's ap¬ pearance. Aurelia was all impatience till the hap¬ py hour should arrive :—She scarcely en¬ joyed an hour's sleep the whole night, her mind be/ng so occupied in the anticipa¬ tion of the approaching pleasure. Every time she sunk into a dose, either the ghost of Hamlet, the grave-digger with Yorick's skull, or Harlequin flying through a balooa
<£ tire, tem Sett high, were pic ke ted to lier ima^kiatbn : and she frequently calighe lierself rouzmg from the reverie, excîaém- ing^—Oh, charming, charming ! excellently perfumed, indeed ! The pantomime was proposed, in order to display the surprising agility of Colonel Vanctiir, who, fremi being an uncommon active man, was to undertake the difficult part of Harlequin. The Earl of Dunfeir being the principal performer in the play, dinner was order¬ ed earlier, next day, than usual, because his Lordship, and several others of the company, were obliged to retire immediate¬ ly after the cloth was removed. Accor¬ dingly the repast, though served up in the first stile, was but of short duration. But before Lord Dunfeir departed, he very kind¬ ly entreated his sisters, Lady Cecilia and Lady Elford, to be particularly attentive to Miss Belford, and to carry her with them to the stage-box. They promised they would exert the utmost of their power to promòte her happiness,—which happen-
mg to ?? áeclared within her hea rmg, §??, m the moist delicate manner, expressed her warmest thanks for the ?€?? singular ??~ tion paid her. General Ruddybrow, who was to perform the part of tbe Ghost, proved tbe instrument of tauch merriment, in this cheerful circle. This humorous old officer, who, as well as having employed much time in the service of his country, had been a long-standing votary of Bacchus, was unanimously voted to represent the ghost, because his appear¬ ance was a direct contrast to a figure so emaciated and ghastly. 'Twas impossible to gaze on his fiery looking face, which the tint of strong liquors had marked with a deep red, without tittering, when the reflec¬ tion arose in the mind, that he was to be transmogrified into the form of an appari¬ tion, to be displayed in the most moving scene of a deep tragedy ;—and when it was suggested to the company, by one of the ladies who dehghted in merriment, that this was the part allotted to the convivial Gene¬ ral, a burst of laughter escaped the lips of all, and contmued with such a vehemence,
that scarce a fece could be discerned in the roam, that was not as deeply vermillion¬ ed as the one that had excited so much mirth, which, being observed by the Gene¬ ral* who was rejoiced at having so favoura¬ ble an opportunity of invigorating the ridi¬ cule, ro&e from his seat, and, wringing hi$ hands over the table, exclaimed, 'm a loud voice, " Why, ladies and gentlemen, you laugh at my ruddy countenance ; only look at your own sweet faces !—Why, you are all ten times redder than ever I shall be, were I to drink all ¿he port that is shipped for the service of this country ;—aye, or all the wine that is dispersed to the four quar¬ ters of the globe !" The proof which the aspect of the company afforded to each in¬ dividual of the verity of the General's asser¬ tion, failed not to kindle new sensations of mirth, which rendered it impossible to dis¬ pel the laughter for some considerable time. The appointed hour for this much wish- ed-for representation arriving, the party broke up from table, and repaired to the theatre, which was happily situated at the bottom ofthe garden. Its external display Vol. IIL ?
of variegated ights jiudickrøsfy statree^, at ???? gave pmof that the Noble possessor was by no means deficient in taste, and much gratification was, in consequence, ex¬ pected from an internal view. The eyes of Aurelia and her father were not disappointed ; on the contrary, as they entered, ihey were struck with a degree of astonishment at the magnificence they be¬ held, which far exceeded in grandeur what their imaginations had previously pictured to them. The display of imagery round the boxes produced a wonderful effect ; and the fluted columns, decorated with white and gold, that were stationed on each side of the stage as roof-supporters, were striking objects of splendour. The following lines also, which were dis¬ covered over the front of the stage in large letters of gold on a sky-blue sattin ground, bordered with a silver fringe, were grateful to the minds of the perusers, as they shone in testimony of those principles imbibed by the noble Earl, which, when grafted in the hearts of the great and opulent, are the
means oí' pfoducing ^ects most salai^uy, ?*?? 'm publk and t^iyate h$e* ??? mirth with ìove ??? Innocence unite, To soften cas-e, and give each miftd delight ; Aad ??? the sacred cam*· of virtr* too, Beneatfa this roof ? kept m constant view. The happy display of figures on the sil¬ ken curtain, were proofs ofthe firm byalty oí Lota Dunfeir. In the centre appeared an emblem of «ur gracious Sovereign, exquisitely painted, standing between two guardian Angels, the one on the right hand, holding the British Crown high above the possible reach of the promoters of tumult and discord :—the other held in the right hand Magna Charta, —and in the left, a first rate man of war, with an Admiral's flag on the main-top-gallant-mast head, as an emblem of those brave mariners who shelter the shores of Great Britain from a descent being accomplished by the ene¬ my. In the lower right hand quarter of the curtain, was represented a beautiful gar¬ den, in the centre of which was placed a splendid throne, emblematic of a seat of per- B 2
matent rest, towatds w%àch the ??? cern¬ ed to ??? wkh a countenance of benignity, and an air of serene ????????, as if he had been secretly authorised to believe it was prepared for hk repose and comfort :—In the opposite quarter, a tremendous rugged precipice pre>ented itself, on the summit of which stood a British officer, shaking out of a great bag all the oppressive laws enact¬ ed by the French nation, which, as they fell into the sea, were drifted away by a powerful current ;—denoting, that British virtue shall wash away foreign vice, and promote universal welfare and peace. In the upper left hand quarter appeared seve¬ ral ships of the enemy, directing their course towards the shores of Britain,—but as their intentions were founded on immoral princi¬ ples and pursuits, the powerful blasts of Bo¬ reas, in the opposite quarter, threw aback heir sails, and impeded their progress, so as to render their proceeding impossible. Thus did the first scene excite general admiration, which the audience acknow¬ ledged by a continued clap of hands, until the striking up of a fine band of music in
the orchestra, commanded immediate «alenee and attention. The mind of Aurelia was on thb occasion much elated :—Twas to her quite a new scene :—and though excess of grandeur had never been known to accord with her dis¬ position on the score of approbation, yet, in this instance, she conceived no degree of disgust :—The moral lines over the stage, which she frequently perused with infinite secret satisfaction, and the enchanting pic¬ ture before her, of the best of Sovereigns, placed in a situation to which she consider¬ ed him entitled, were objects too gratifying to induce her for a moment to form the slightest opinion of an unfavourable nature. In the midst of her contemplations on this dazzhng scene, the httle beii rung the signal for commencing :—the music ceased, —and the beautiful display of loyalty was suddenly raised to the cieling, to favour the temporary gloom of an affecting tragedy. The parts were uncommonly well filled by ladies and gentlemen of superior talents and education j—»and the scenery and dresses B2
corresponded with the brilliancy of the house. Just as Marcellus concluded his sentence of" Peace, break thee off; look, where it comes again !"—poor General Ruddybrow entered in the character of the ghost :—He displayed much accuracy in his look and gait ; but an unfortunate recoliection of the late mirthful scene tickled the fancy ofthe audience, and, looking significantly on each other, another burst of laughter proved in¬ evitable. The General, who had never before enter¬ ed into the train of Melpomene's followers, —suddenly rushed to the front of the stage, and exclaimed, " Ah rot it, I thought you would all laugh as soon as I made my ap¬ pearance." Horatio, wiffing to put him in mind of his misconduct, hurried his steps to check him, and giving him a smart blow on the shoulder, reminded him of the necessity of attending to the performance,—which he immediately did, by turning, and pacing in the solitary style of a vision. Horatio, conscious that in his precipitate attempt to
adjust the mistake, he bad given the ghost such a blow as the whole house most have heard, with a happy degree of presence of miná f turned to Marcellus, and said, ·* Alas î Marceïïus, how great b the power of ima¬ gination ! I could have sworn that when I made an attempt to strike the vision yet before us, that I felt a substance, and even heard the report of the blow : but I have done, he is in the same figure hke the King that's dead." It was well imagined ; much applause in consequence ensued, and the remainder of the performance justly mented that appro¬ bation which Jn general attends a respect¬ able and well conducted representation. The Earl of Denfeir, taking no part in the Pantomime, he immediately, at the con¬ clusion of the Play, exchanged his habit of royalty for his own, and repairing to the box in which was seated the incomparable Aurelia with her father, and a large party, failed not to receive general gratulations, on the masterly style in which he had dis¬ played the character of Hamlet. By the
bour of eleven, the whole of the perform¬ ance had ended, when the audience return¬ ed to the noble Lord's mansion,—and were immediately seated to another repast equal· ly splendid with tbe former. Much convi¬ viality, as naturally must be imagined, pre- vailed in this circle of gaiety, and Aurelia partook of every lively joke of innocence» with much spirit, until a dejection in the countenance of her father suddenly attract¬ ed her attention. It was enough that be looked grave, to cast every smile at once from her delicate cheek : She was on the point of exclaiming, w are you not well, sir," when the attention of Lord Denfeir was likewise directed towards him, who perceiv¬ ing his gravity, immediately addressed him saying, " Good sir, is any thing the mat¬ ter." Belford could not utter a word in re¬ ply, he let fall a tear, descriptive of some tender emotion, and, rising from his seat» precipitately left the room. Aurelia, with streaming eyes f followed in haste, and Lord Denfeir begged a few moments leave of absence, to assist in restoring him to the a- mazed circle·
^ñh Lordship overtook him in an adjoin- ing parlour, when, again addressing him, he begged to be informed whether any un¬ pleasant circumstance had occurred, that he had the power of adjusting, assuring him he would exert all his efforts to dispel the gloom. Belford could yet say not a word in reply. " Oh pray, my dear sir," exclaim¬ ed Aurelia, involved in tears " make known your sufferings, I am sure his Lordship will delight in affording you comfort. ** My dear," returned Belford, in a faul¬ tering voice, " I fear, if I describe the par¬ ticulars of my pain, Lord Denfeir will be offended with me." " Oh, sir " rejoined the Earl, " nothing I am sure a man of your delicacy can ut¬ ter, could contribute in any degree to create any displeasure ; therefore let me be¬ seech you to afford myself and your amia¬ ble daughter, the means of alleviating your uneasiness, if we have the power, merely from a recital of what now oppresses you."
" Then, my Lord," returned Belford with a more lively voice than before,, " as your Lordship is good enough to express yourself in terms so uberai, I will venture to tell you, that you have indeed the pow¬ er of dispelling the pains under which I at present labour, and the means I will in¬ stantly describe." Aurelia smiled, and in the same moment Lord Dunfeir exclaimed, in a rapturous tone of voice, " Charming opportunity ! I pray you, Sir, proceed." " Why, then, my Lord," added Belford, " I will,—to preface my designs, first of all declare, that since I had the honour of be¬ ing introduced into your Lordship's agree¬ able society, and happy circle, I have much approved of every species of entertainment which your Lordship seems to countenance, for the,purpose of promoting innocent con¬ viviality ;—but I think I could make a pro¬ position that would greatly improve your entertainments in every respect. I how¬ ever scarcely dare make the offer, for I feel that I, in so doing, shall intrude much, perhaps even to impertinence, from having
so recently been flattered with your Lord¬ ship's acquaintance." ** What," returned Lord Denfeir, in a tone denoting surprize, " have the power of improvmg my entertainments, and yet fear to give me offence !—Oh no, my good Sir, I shall consider myself, under such circum¬ stances, greatly obliged to you." " Well, then, my Lord," rejoined Bel¬ ford, I must bluntly inform you, that I am one of those men, such as I conceive your Lordship to be, who rejoice in the adoption of plans that tend towards promoting the happiness and welfare of the indigent ; yet believe not that in my wishes to lead the poor into the path of prosperity, I would so far jar' the misfortunes suffered by the helpless into the ears of my friends, as to cast a gloomy cloud over those, hours which they are entitled to, for relaxation and in¬ nocent mirth ;—by no means ;—a medium in all cases ought strictly to be observed, otherwise we might ponder over the mise¬ ries of the wretched, until we sunk into
an irrecoverable state of melancholy. The plan which I have now in view, would, instead of casting a gloom on the hfe of your sports, add that felicity which could by no other means be attained." " I pray, my good Mr Belford," exclaim¬ ed the Earl impatiently, " let me immedi¬ ately into the knowledge of this admirable secret !" " I have this day," returned Belford, " reflected on the pleasure of your innocent pastime,—looked round me, and reflected likewise on the independence of your Lord¬ ship's friends, who formed the agreeable party. When I had reason to believe, from various observations which I made, that many of them could boast of independence, even to an excess of wealth,—I could not help conceiving, that some plan might be readi¬ ly adopted, from the nature of your diver¬ sions, to relieve those who are sorely oppres- ed by misfortune, in the same moments that you were erasing from you own minds the recollection of troubles or disappointments. As I pondered on this newly imbibed fan-
??, a happy thought suddenly occurred, which induced me to beheve that I could offer a plan, which, if adopted, would, while it was producing the wished for effects I anticipated, tend likewise in a great degree to augment the conviviality of your own circle. From the tenor of the general con¬ versation of the day, and the liberality of sentiment, which, from unobserved remarks, I had reason to believe each individual pos¬ sessed. I felt confident, that to propose a benevolent scheme, would prove at once sufficient to favour its immediate adoption. Still a degree of diffidence hankered about my mind, and, from my recent introduc¬ tion, I feared that even in a good cause, I might give offence by discovering too sud¬ denly an unreserved degree of freedom : lt was a desire to unload my bosom of what I doubted not would prove the effect of much cheerfulness, if distributed to the company at large, that cast on my countenance the look of dejection at the supper-table ;—and I was seriously meditating on the great be¬ nefits that would arise from the private the¬ atrical performances of the higher classes of society, if but the small sum of half a Vol. UL ?
guinea was exacted from each individual who attended, to be applied to the relief of any class of persons whom penury had in¬ volved into that state of misery which ne¬ ver fails to excite the compassion 'of the merciful. When roused from my reverie by your Lordship's kind address, in conse¬ quence of noticing my air of gravity,—I could not suppress a tear which fell in tes¬ timony of my emotion,—and, anxious to conceal from observation my suffering, which I feared might throw a damp on the entertainment, I precipitately left the room, which I have now reason to suspect ren¬ dered my situation more conspicuous than it otherwise would have been, had I remain¬ ed true to my seat,—and braved the in¬ quiry." " Oh, Sir" exclaimed the noble Earl, " your plan is most admirable indeed. I know not how I shall ever compensate for your kindness in suffering me to share ?? enviable a thought." Aurelia, though accustomed to witness $??? acts of her father's benevolence,
could not refrain from letting fall a flood of tears. The eyes of Lord Denfeir like¬ wise displayed tokens of his sensibility : He continued, saying, u I already feel as if thou¬ sands were relieved ;—a scheme so desirea¬ ble must not be delayed a moment,— let us fly instantly and propose its adoption !" As he concluded this sentence, he wait¬ ed not for Belford to express his desire to absent himself on the occasion, but burst¬ ing the room door open, in which the com¬ pany were seated, surprized them with an affecting view of himself, Aurelia, and Bel¬ ford, entering in tears. Not a cheerful cast of countenance could be discovered in the whole party :—In this moment of awful doubt, all were involved in serious reflection,—and silence prevailed for some considerable time. At length one of the ladies, who had recovered the pow¬ er of articulation, addressed Lord Denfeir, and proposed the party immediately to break up, apprehensive that some event had occurred, too serious to render their continuance any longer desireable*. ? 2.
The Earl, approaching his chair hastily, in order to detain the company, who, from this observation, were rising with an intent to disperse, solicited leave to dispel every unpleasing conjecture which the late ap¬ parent discomposure of Mr Belford had created, and which in a few words he would accomplish. His Lordship, perceiv¬ ing every one seated, and silent with atten¬ tion, he proceeded in the following manner, to disclose the causes of his affections, and to advance the amiable proposition suggest¬ ed to him by Belford :—" It is with pecu¬ liar satisfaction, ladies, and gentlemen," said Lord Dunfeir, " that I am empowered not only to dispel the temporary gloom, which, I perceive, is cast over this once cheerful circle, but to suggest a plan for the improve¬ ment of our entertainment, which, if adopt¬ ed, cannot fail to elate every bosom with those sensations of joy, which, doubtless, far exceed any thing we have hitherto experi¬ enced," Every countenance, at the conclusion of tbis sentence, quickly brightened.
" Ha, ha, ha," exclaimed General Rud- dybrow, laughing, on whose weather-beaten face still hung those dewy drops of ten¬ derness, which, in- scenes exciting compas¬ sion, never fail to deck the brave and be¬ nevolent. " I fancy this last expected tra¬ gedy will not be attended with real conse¬ quences, more serious than that which has lately been represented on the boards of Lord Dunfeir's theatre ; but I beg pardon, my Lord, for interrupting you, I pray you proceed, and make us all as merry as you can." " The plan I am about to propose," said Lord Denfeir, " has just been suggested to me by my good friend Mr Belford, who, anxious to unfold his wishes, but too deli¬ cate to offer them abruptly, conceived emo¬ tions within his bosom that called for tears to give relief, which was the occasion of his so precipitately quitting the room. I will not now enter too minutely into every par¬ ticular, or offer many encomiums on the be¬ nevolence of this gentleman, who is pre- sent, as public praise, within the hearing oí a good .man, never fails to entice n ???? Cl
and confuse the individual towards whom our applause is directed. I shall, therefore, in as contracted a speech as possible, make the proposition desired ; which nothing but a perfect confidence in the liberality of my guests could induce me so boldly to bring forward under my own roof; but I know it is enough to say charity is the plan, to jus¬ tify my proceeding in a cause of such im¬ portance." The proposition, the proposition, with a loud clap of hands, rent the air for the space of a minute ; when silence being restored, Lord Denfeir continued, " My worthy friend Mr Belford," said his Lordship, " has been pleased to express his entire satisfac¬ tion at the manner in which the entertain¬ ment of this day has been conducted ;—he has observed, with an impartial eye, that our plan is to promote mirth and good humour within the limits of reason, throwing aside every idea of encouraging those scenes of dissipation, which but too often disgrace the circles of upper Hfe. I am happy that he has at once so clearly discerned the na¬ ture of our designs,—he has, however,, as. I.
before observed, suggested an improvement, which cannot fail to be attended with those congenial effects, which I flatter myself will establish our society upon that footing of happiness which we may justly style the summit of terrestrial bhss. He has, amidst his various observations, reflected not only on the independence of this circle,—but the state of wealth in wdiich providence has been pleased to place us; and as a man whose mind is bent on tranquillizing the penurious and unfortunate, whose suppHcations and cries should never be lost in the roar of a convivial board, but whose lamentations should ever find a quick ear within the walls of the opulent, he has happily conceived, that, on the evenings appointed for our the¬ atrical representations, if the small sum of half a guinea was exacted from each of the company present,—some fc unhappy objects might be relieved with the produce, which would, while shaking the yoke of misery from their long oppressed bosoms, be add¬ ing greatly to our own entertainment, as the satisfaction of reflecting, each time that we met, fresh objects of misery were re* Heved,, could not fail to create most plea-
sureable sensations, such as, indeed, we can,. at present, have scarcely a conception of.— Oh, happy conception ! Glorious proposi¬ tion ! was the general exclamation. " I think," continued Lord Denfeir, as he threw five guineas into a plate that lay on the table, " the justice of so laudable a plan is sufficiently proved in the simple pro¬ position, to render any further observations necessary, and I will venture to consider it already adopted r—-the additional pleasure, however, we are to expect from such a sys¬ tem, shall not be deferred to future occa¬ sions, let the present likewise give proof of the yet unknown joys we are to experience. I am an advocate for mirth, and conse¬ quently ambitious to embrace every oppor¬ tunity that may tend towards enhancing our entertainment." As he concluded this sentence, it became a doubt which flowed fastest, whether mo* ney from the pockets, or tears from the eyes?—the plate, however, was in a mo¬ ment filled. Here was a scene of benevo- lfenGe, that might have rouzed the prodigal.
to reflection—that might have softened the flinty heart of the tyrant, who had before no conception of the happiness which the truly charitable could only experience ; for envy at witnessing that extreme of pleasure to which he had ever been a stranger, might at first court him to exert similar en¬ deavours to seek the conception, which pro¬ bably, from a continued habit of such pur¬ suits, would let him into a true hght of in¬ tegrity, which, though sought at first from envy at seeing others happier than himself, might, in the course of time, constitute him as amiable a member of society as any of those who, from their earliest days, had been accustomed to sympathize with the afflict¬ ed, and extend a liberal hand towards their succour ;—for, in whatever form virtue is first solicited, there can be no doubt but vir¬ tuous pursuits must produce virtuous effects. The sum collected on this happy occasion amounted to 1201. :—Lord Denfeir propo¬ sed, that Belford should point out the best method of distributing it ; which he, howe¬ ver, wished to refer to the opinion of the company in general. The lovely Aurelia, equally alive to the feelings of humanb
ty with her father, and forgetting, for a moment, the diffidence a young lady should observe in every society, in which she was by no means deficient, but which a sudden thought of kindness had for a mo¬ ment dispelled, hastily exclaimed,—" Oh rhave it, 1 have it ! pray let me point out a method to dispose of the money." f As she concluded the last word, a recol¬ lection of her misconduct occurred,—a deep blush betrayed her suflerings, and gave proof of that artless simplicity, which courts the honest mind on all occasions, to offer its sentiments in a style of pecuhar„unreserved- ness. The Earl of Denfeir, ever awake to true politeness, and anxious to relieve Aureha from the embarrassment which he perceiv¬ ed she laboured under, immediately obser¬ ved, that he conceived a young lady, of pe¬ culiarly delicate sentiments, such as Miss Belford discovered, could not fail to propose such a plan for the distribution of the mo¬ ney in question, as must produce every de¬ sired effect ;—he therefore confided, that if
she would honour the company with her o- pinion, she would have the satisfaction of witnessing the adoption of her proposal. As every voice in the room cheerfully assented, Aurelia, at once, saw the impossi¬ bility of her remaining silent, when, mus¬ tering that fortitude which is ever attend¬ ant on the virtuous, she ventured to address the company in general on this important subject. Her beauty, connected with the lovely figure of a delicate female, about to under¬ take tbe tender office of soliciting repose for the indigent, failed not to create admira¬ tion ; but when she breathed forth her com¬ passionate and refined seatiments,.slie thrill¬ ed every bosom with sensations not to be described. " The honour conferred on me," said Au¬ relia, in a soft and pathetic voice, " in be¬ ing suffered to offer a plan for applying the money collected this evening, merits my sincerest acknowledgments, I cannot», how¬ ever, avoid considering myself incompetent
to a task so important, which a moment of thoughtlessness has obliged me toundettake : —but, as it appears to be the general wish I should proceed, I will describe my wishes in as few words as possible, convinced, that from the humility of any observations I can offer, I shall prove but an intruder on your time. " I have often heard, that in most of the prisons of England, some unfortunate per¬ sons linger for having contracted debts, which, from various causes, they are unable to discharge. I cannot help thinking, that if our donations were directed towards the relief of this description of people, every de¬ sired effect would be produced :—for what so ill accords with the disposition and constitution of Englishmen, as a state of bondage which the mildness of the British Government has, from habit, long render¬ ed odious and terrifying, even in thought. Freedom, I have been long accustomed to believe, is the boast of Britons ; then, in what can we exert ourselves better, than in seeking to promote its blessings as often as opportunities occur." " Oh, charming!"
was the general exclamation, " beyond de¬ scription, glorious !" , When silence prevailed again, a gentle¬ man at table, named Sordidus, interrupted, for a few minutes, Aurelia's charming dis¬ course, by a few observations, which, on this occasion, he felt inclined to offer :— " I beg pardon, Miss Belford," said this limb of the law, who, in his profession, was termed a solicitor ; " for retarding, a few moments, the remainder of your senti¬ ments. I likewise must apologize for pre¬ suming to oppose, in "the slightest degree, the plan you now offer for the distribution of the money in question :—But, if you will permit me, I will afford you some informa¬ tion that may incline you to believe ob¬ jects may be difcovered more worthy of our attention, than the prisoners in whose be¬ half you have commenced a solicitation." Aurelia, ever anxious to improve her mind, by attending to the instructions of others, readily bowed assent, allowing in thought the possibility of her being misinformed ;— when Mr Sordidus continued : " The seve¬ ral persons," said he, " confined in the dif- Vol. III. D
ferent prisons for debt, are, in general, by their conduct, constituted disgraceful to mankind :—The best method we can there¬ fore adopt, is to obscure them from obser¬ vation,—and, whilst we are holding them within the impenetrable walls of a jail, we check any further process of the depreda¬ tions they have long committed on the pub^ lie. Debtors are a body of people who have robbed the honest tradesman of his dear earned comforts,—who have impover¬ ished innumerable industrious families, and turned thousands upon the world to pine in misery ;—and what punishment do not such beings merit î —Imprisonment is too merciful a doom for them !" " The gloomy picture you paint, Sir," said the lovely Aurelia in reply, " has, I confess, thrown some check on what I was on the point of bringing forward ; but, per¬ mit me to ask, What proof you have of the unworthiness of these persons characters ? We at least ought to have proof before we condemn !"
What an interesting moment was this ! The anxiety of the company in general was beyond the conception of any who did not witness the important scene !—The al¬ most unparalelled Aurelia, had already ex- ■ cited the extreme of every person's esteem, whilst the observations of Solicitor Sordidus had created fears, that one sat in company on whose heart hung the sentiments of a monster ;—-but, conviction that true virtue would gain a decided victory over an op¬ pressor, induced each to remain neutral, at least for the present, oflfering no remarks that might disturb the important argu¬ ment. " Your observation is just, Miss," resum¬ ed the soHcitor, " that before we condemn, we ought to furnish proofs of the crimina¬ lity of persons accused. I think I shall be enabled, in a few words, to give evidence sufficiently satisfactory, to justify my pre¬ sent opinion. I knew a man, who, within these last three months, was thrown into a prison, for debts contracted through the medium of long practised deception. This peace-devouring monster (for such I can Dì
only caii him) had for years contriv¬ ed successfully to rob many credulous tradesmen by an artful and applausa- ble method of convincing them he pos¬ sessed a fortune, sufficiently ample to e- nabie him to defray the various expences he incurred. At length the truth, which, in all cases, sooner or later, must appear, came out. One of his creditors, happening to be particularly pressed for a sum of mo¬ ney, made application to him, not doubting but his demand would be immediately dis¬ charged, from the confidence he had long placed in this worthy character :—The de¬ ception at once appeared: no payment could be obtained, and his other creditors, gaining scent of the unfavourable news, took a lucky opportunity of fixing him in prison, before he became suinciently aware of their intentions, to attempt a retreat from the kingdom. Within a fortnight after his con¬ finement, they waited on him, knowing he had hoarded goods to a considerable a- mount, and oflered to present him with a discharge in full, on condition of his restor¬ ing every thing then in his possession,—But no :—he had been too long initiated in the
arts and practices of vice, to feel inclined so suddenly to exchange a principle of im¬ purity for one of honour : He replied, with an air descriptive of the utmost composure, that he was sorry they had given them¬ selves the trouble of calling, though their visit afforded him an opportunity of thank¬ ing them personally for placing him in his new habitation, where, he doubted not, he should spend the remainder of his days in that state of happy tranquillity to which a bustling world was a stranger :—That he perceived for a trifle of money every thing could be obtained, but liberty ; and, for his part, that proved no check to his enjoyment of life, for he had no desire to take more exercise than what the extent of a room would affoid :—And as for the green fields, mountains, dales, meadows, &c he confes¬ sed their verdant appearance never proved so gratifying to his sight, as the lively glit¬ ter of gold and silver :—In short, he gave them to understand, that the goods then in his possession he should quickly dispose of, and the produce would enable him to live as a gentleman. This circumstance, Miss ßelford, happened, as I before observed, *>3
within my own immediate knowledge ; and does it not prove the infamy of these con¬ fined debtors, and, likewise, how much too commodious and comfortable the prisons of England are rendered ?" " And is this all you can offer to justify our condemnation of this unfortunate class of people ?" returned the fair Aurelia, whose countenance evinced her disgust at the con¬ tracted sentiments of this inhuman solicitor. " And have I not held forth enough, Miss ?" rejoined Mr Sordidus, in haste " to prove them entitled to the severest of pu¬ nishments ?" ------ " Alas, Sir !" said Aurelia, ** this is the first instance I ever met with, 4 where the vices of one man were supposed to contaminate the minds of all who were compelled to reside under the same roof with him. I may perhaps, on, this occasion, be induced to oppose your observations more pointedly and more severely than I could wish, but I feel engaged in a cause of hu¬ manity, so very important and interesting, that I should consider myself for ever de¬ graded and involved in the blackest guilt,
were I to suppress that degree of candour which ought to be attendant on every ex¬ planation*" The confusion at these words displayed in the countenance of the solicitor, proved him anxious to put a period' ta tfie contest. The well-framed argument of Aureha. con¬ victed him of his guilt ; but he could invent no excuse to cut the thread of the dis¬ course ; he perceived a fbrther conviction of his contracted* sentiments would prove inevitable, and quietly submitted to be dis¬ graced. " From your sentiments, Mr Sordidus," resumed Aurelia, " we are tb condemn eve¬ ry man to the gallows, because one had clandestinely deprived us of our property ; and the government, I suppose, must forbid the general use of knives, because one un¬ fortunate person fell a victim to the mur¬ derer's steel. Alas> sir, these are not reflec- sions to which I have been accustomed. When you offered to convince me of the misconduct of debtors in general* I confess Lnever expected you would have introdu* ced one character as their representative ;
the injustice of such an attempt must at once appear. The man you have just gi¬ ven us the history of, deserves indeed the infliction of a punishment much more se¬ vere than that of imprisonment;—and I heartily wish any method could be discover¬ ed, to enable our government to discrimi¬ nate, with that accuracy, between the frau¬ dulent and unfortunate, that the actions of the impostor might be rewarded in propor¬ tion to the enormity of his guilt ; and that some method might be adopted, to release, from the oppressing hands of a cruel credi¬ tor, those whom unforeseen misfortune has thrown into a state of bondage. Your ar¬ gument, Sir, has in no respect altered my opinion :—I could wish to see this money appropriated to the same use I at first pro¬ posed :—I cannot help thinking every pro¬ duced effect would prove propitious :—If some were relieved by the attempt, whom not only unforeseen misfortune had involv¬ ed in the calamity of a prison, but thought¬ lessness and folly, I have reason to believe much good would be the result of such a proceeding; for those whom imprudence had embarrassed, would, from their late su&
fering, and the manner in which they were relieved, be probably brought to that re¬ flection on their misconduct, which is sel¬ dom encouraged within the solitary walls of a jail, and thereby be restored to society,— and become useful to mankind ; for I have been told, that for reflection in the chains of bondage, every species of dissipation is substituted,—and the mind, unaccustomed to submit to the gloom of long confinement, seeks relief from liquors which deprave the senses and sink the unfortunate victim to slavery, into a gradual decay of health, which terminates in death, who comes be¬ fore reflection and contrition has sufficient¬ ly prepared the unhappy being to welcome a visit so awful and important. I fear I have intruded too long on the patience of this good company :—I shall only further observe, that should this humble proposi¬ tion accord with the sentiments of Lord Denfeir and the party present, his Lordship will be enabled, in the course of to-morrow, to obtain a report of the unfortunate pri¬ soners now confined in the jail of Canter¬ bury, and relieve such as he conceives are most oppressed and afflicted, to the extent
of the money collected this night for chari¬ table uses." The air was immediately rent with every demonstration of joy and applause :·—Bel¬ ford flew to embrace his daughter, and, du¬ ring this animated scene of long continued rapture, the solicitor, stung to the soul with remorse, and unable to offer any expressions in vindication of his conduct, precipitately absconded, leaving the company to enjoy those happy reflections, which he, in his then uncultivated state of mind 1 , could form no conception, of. The exquisite plan, was at once adopted. AurehVs eyes streamed with tears of grati¬ tude mingled with joy. The Earl of Den¬ feir delivered, strict orders to the domestics to repair early in the morning to Canter¬ bury, in order to obtain from the keeper of the prison, an account of all who then in¬ habited the solitary house of bondage,— that the release o£ some might be effected as expeditiously as possible.
Several enquiries now into the character of Solicitor Sordidus, naturally occurred in conversation, from the sentiments he had discovered. It appeared, that he had but recently become acquainted with the Earl of Denfeir, in a coffee-room by chance, who, with that affability that ever diftinguished his gentlemanly conduct, invited him to his house, and, from the pleasure experienced by the Solicitor in his Lordship's society, his visits became frequent, which were pleas¬ ing to Lord Denfeir, as he venerated him for the respectable station he occupied in the law. It seemed, however, that scarce¬ ly one in the company knew any thing of him, except General Ruddybrow ; and he could only observe, that he claimed Scot¬ land for his place of nativity, and had ever borne the character of a morose, imperious ruler, happy in every opportunity he could embrace of exercising power over those whom he considered too feeble to oppose him, but often, like men ?£ this tyrannical stamp, overruled by his own exertions. " I have no intention," however, said General Ruddybrow, " by naming his place of na¬ tivity, to cast any reflections on the people
of Scotland : I am a Scot myself, you know, but I hope we are all too liberal in this cir¬ cle, ever for a moment to encourage a sus¬ picion, that a particular nation or country can ever in any degree influence us in our actions. There are some peculiarities, I be¬ lieve, attached to every nation, but in points of virtue and vice, I fancy all countries are much on a par." General Ruddybrow gave a strong proof of his liberality by this remark, I could wish also, that men would not so frequently give way to the idle practice of stigmatiz¬ ing a whole nation, because a few vicious characters have been rendered conspicuous, and held up to public execration ; the thought is as unjust and illiberal, as the sen- timentsof Solicitor Sordidus, who introduced the most obnoxious character he could trace out, to represent a whole body of unfor¬ tunate debtors, many of whom, (though confined within the remote bounds of a so¬ litary prison, where the great earthly enemy of mankind, penury, had driven them,) pos¬ sessed feelings that would have graced the bosom of the most upright man ; and I have
reason to believe, that, within the iron crust¬ ed walls of which I speak, pure and unpol¬ luted virtues are enclosed, which, though offended by the oppressive measures of flinty hearted creditors, are still preserved for that reward and rest which the rude tyrant has neither the power of destroying, or the hope of enjoying. If we constantly reflected, that no reli¬ gion whatever countenanced the promotion of vice, but, on the contrary, all were found¬ ed on some moral principle, we should at¬ tribute mens faults to their own inclinations, and not cast the darkness of their guilt on the nation that held them in their birth. The increase of happiness, in this exalted circle of benevolence, soon displayed its fascinating charms over the mind of each individual. How could it be otherways ? —when the restoring peace and tranquil¬ lity to the bosom that had been long hea¬ vy laden with oppressive indigence, was the successful effort :—In whose counten¬ ance could be traced the sullen look ? or from what heart could issue the deep
toned sigh,—the melancholy token of de¬ jection ? No :—all was cheerfulness, rap¬ ture, and the summit of joy. Each felt entitled to the bliss experienced, (such is the reflection of a pure conscience) and the emblazoned coronet of the noble house of Denfeir, embossed around the summit of each room, justly adorned the hospitable mansion of its illustrious possessor. Oh that each edifice of pomp, where ho¬ nourable marks of royalty are seen, could boast such virtues as the house of Denfeir í Then would the grandeur of the great in¬ deed resplendent shine. No dim cast rust of vice would darken their abode, but the bright polish of their virtuous minds would seem to light the atmosphere with lights of new made glory. The utmost conviviality reigned until a very late hour, when part of the company returned to Canterbury :—Amongst those who remained for the night at the Earl of Denfeir's, were Belford and his amiable daughter, who soon alter retired to their
chambers, I cannot say to sleep, for their minds were too much engaged in the anti¬ cipation of experiencing indescribable plea¬ sure, which the expected release of prison¬ ers on the ensuing day afforded them rea¬ son to hope for.
CHAP. IL X he lively aspect of glee, the next morn¬ ing at the breakfast table, with which each countenance was decked, painted in still deeper colours the rapture of the heart— Every ring at the great bell,—every sound of approaching footsteps, kindled a hope that the report of the unhappy victims of imprisonment was on the way and near at hand. At length, at the hour of ten, a servant of Lord Denfeir's entered with it. Aurelia, with impatience, could have torn it from his hands ; but Belford, aware of her anxiety, and suspecting her desire to peruse it might over-rule her diffidence, had previously cautioned her against ano* ther precipitate step, to which she attend»-
ed, and very collectedly waited for the no¬ ble Earl to make known the contents of the paper. The emotion of Lord Denfeir, whilst he silently traced the gloomy lines drawn by the uncharitable hand of the iron-hearted turn-key, could not be described ? Were I even to compare his anxiety to that of a ten¬ der female, when, through the medium of royal clemency, she flies with a reprieve for her condemned husband, I perhaps should not picture agitation above what the noble Lord discovered. At length, after perus¬ ing the report, his Lordship, with tears in his eyes, looked up and exclaimed, " Alas ! when I commenced erecting my theatre, I feared I had planned it on a scale too ex¬ tensive ; but this paper has indeed altered my opinion. I could wish it were three times its present magnitude ;—and, instead of any longer desiring to contract my circle of acquaintance, I feel a wish to court the society of every wealthy subject in the kingdom, that the exertions of a few even- inffs mijrht render useless the kevs of every dread abode, beneath whose gloomy roof
Kngers the helpless and unfortunate debt¬ or. But I am too extravagant, perhaps, in my new desires,—patience on this occasion must assist me." Here the charitable Earl paused for a few moments :—His tears of compassion fell not unaccompanied :—Torrents of ten¬ derness and benevolence streamed from e- very eye,—when, recovering himself, he ad¬ dressed his company, saying : " I will not however rend your hearts with a dismal view of the most tragical picture I ever yet behelp. I must be permitted to conceal the gloomy prospect, else, like myself, you will aspire to a state of wealth too bound¬ less ever to be attained :—Let it suffice, that I select, from this unhappy register of human woes, such objects as I think stand most in need of our aid, whose cries I al¬ most fancy now I hear issue from this sad record of their pangs, in supplicating tones, piercing the opulent to melt in pity, and look on their distress," This observation of the almost unpara¬ lelled Earl, excited the utmost curiosity in
every one present, to be apprised of the contents of the dismal narrative before him. But, as his Lordship observed, a recital would furnish them with pain at the suffer¬ ings of those whom they had not the pow¬ er of at once relieving, and which he con¬ ceived justified his concealing the doleful news, they consented to remain ignorant of the particulars in general, and patiently waited to peruse the selection which his Lordship said he would make from the re¬ port. Half an hour was expended in silent re¬ flection by the company, on this important occasion,—whilst Lord Denfeir was busily employed in tracing out those unhappy ob¬ jects for relief, who to the shafts of misery had served the longest period of time.— The task concluded, he presented the ex¬ tract for general inspection.. " This*" ex„ claimed the noble Earl> as he gave it to the company, " I could not desire to conceal, for, however strong the proof of long-felt an,. guisli may in those lines be discovered, still the reflection, that ere tbe sun shall this day sink into the west, those objects shall
again boast of freedom, and all the blessings of sweet liberty, cannot but elate each mind with that extreme of bHss, which must at once dispel all gloomy thoughts, and tune our hearts to peace and cheerful¬ ness." It proved indeed a moment of ex¬ tatic joy ;—for, had the presented paper contained authentic intelligence of a de¬ cided termination of all hostilities over the universe,—which news to a British heart can never fail to be grateful, whose possessor had been accustomed to counte¬ nance war, only when the promotion of justice called for measures so harsh, and so affecting ; it could not have been received and embraced in a style more zealous or enthusiastic. Its contents, however, when displayed, created those tears which dispel oppression from the compassionate bosom. The greatest sufferer on this list proved on old Farmer, who formerly had tenanted a small farm on a nobleman's estate in Der¬ by-shire ; the produce of which, favoured by his own exertions, he had enjoyed with
his wife and four children for a number of years :—and as his conduct through life had constituted him a man of strict integrity, the noble owner of his rented lands, who was, in the true sense of the word, a com¬ passionate man, would frequently, when a severe season had thrown him a little be¬ hind hand, suffer him to retard the pay¬ ment of his rents ; and occasionally he would decline receiving the produce of a quarter ; but an oppressive steward, who, by mere dint of cunning, had so far gained the confidence of his master, as to turn this Peer out of his possessions, and constitute himself suddenly and unexpectedly the owner of the estate, at length turned the tide of happiness, and over these once cheerful bounds of prosperity cast that sud¬ den and lasting gloom, which darkens e- very track of land where the fell footsteps of a tyrant constantly tread. For a trifling portion of rent, this newly established ruler ordered the seizure of this unfortunate man's effects, who, judging his goods, sent to so disadvantageous a market as a public auction, would not sell to the a-
mount of the tyrants demand, fled imme¬ diately with his family to seek a temporary refuge in the southern pait of the kingdom ; but being traced by the steward, who never discovered a deficiency in points of art, was overtaken in the county of Kent, and im¬ mediately conducted to the prison of Can¬ terbury, where, for the paltry sum of twen¬ ty pounds, he had lingered for the space of seven years, involved in the extreme of in¬ digence with his family, whilst his inhuman detainer continued to wallow in the riches he had amassed by a life of unexampled cunning. Oh ! that mankind would but unanimous¬ ly join to execrate such reptiles !—to hold up to public horror such degraders of the human species ï —and shun their society as cautiously as that of the assassin :—then, probably, reflection in solitude might in¬ duce them, out of policy at least, to act with justice, when they perceived their ac¬ tions had ensured them general contempt, and that their ill-earned wealth afforded none of the enjoyments they had anticipat¬ ed.—But, alas ! we are too apt to be daz-
zied with the glitter of riches, and to treat those with the greatest reverence who are best enabled to afford us entertainment, ne¬ ver bestowing a thought how or in what manner they fell into such extensive pos¬ sessions :—and this respect and homage it is, that urges man to seek a state of wealth at any price ;—when, if we but reserved our attention for the virtuous, the poor would escape oppression, and tyranny, disgraced, would die away. The account of this unhappy prisoner proved sufficient to satisfy the curiosity of the company, who begged not to retard the wished for release, by pondering over the sufferings of the rest. The carriage of Lord Denfeir, and that of Belford, were ordered to the door :—The breakfast concluded,— the Earl, his two sisters, Belford and Aure¬ lia, repaired to Canterbury to wait on his Lordship's attorney, in order to settle the business as expeditiously as possible : The rest of the party remained at Lord Den¬ feir's mansion, as their attendance would have occasioned too much parade. During this approach to the ancient city, innumer-
able sensations of joy ran on the mind of the lovely Aurelia : she frequently exclaim¬ ed, and scarcely aware that she uttered a syllable, " Oh ï freedom, freedom, greatest of earthly blessings ! What joy can be so great as the expansive views of liberty, the long and glorious boast of Britons." Her exclamations charmed the sisters of Lord Denfeir, with whom she sat in the carriage, they could not help observing, that her sen¬ timents seemed raised almost above the con¬ ception of her sex ; —that she expressed her¬ self in noble terms, such as might be ex¬ pected only from a politician or statesman. At length their chearful observations were interrupted by the carriages drawing up at the lawyer's habitation. Lord Denfeir and Belford, who were in, the foremost chaise, immediately alighted, and assisting the la¬ dies, conducted them into the parlour, where * they found the good attorney Mr Binny, to whom the noble Earl, with all the dig*- nity attendant on a virtuous effort, made known the cause of his visit, and, present¬ ing him with the list of selected prisoners, begged he would wait on them immediate- V». HL F
* 3y, and request to be informed with whom he might negociate for their release, ob¬ serving, that himself and the party present would wait his return. Mr Binny perused the paper presented to him, when, starting up suddenly with tears in his eyes, he ex¬ claimed, " Oh, my Lord, you are too good !" " Nay, my good sir," said Lord Denfeir, in¬ terrupting him, " offer no encomiums in fa- four of me on this occasion, 'tis to that young lady," said his Lordship, as he directed the attention of the lawyer to Aurelia, " that ail merit is due on this occasion, but to bu¬ siness, my worthy friend, for we are rather anxious, I assure you." " Oh, returned Mr Binny, 'tis an act of benevolence that ought to be registered in every public office in the kingdom ; you have indeed, (he continued) been fortunate in your selections, for these prisoners were all arrested by officers whom 1 employ, from which circumstance, re¬ lease may probably be expedited." " Oh, çay not probably" rejoined the noble Earl, " let no obstacles occur to check the progress, make out their discharge, and bhould the sum collected for tbeir release
be inadequate to the expences, I'll make up every deficiency myself." " 'Tis done, my Lord," replied Mr Bin¬ ny, " I wish no other security than your Lordship's word." As soon as the several discharges were made out, Lord Denfeir requested the lawyer to repair immediately to the jail, and present each with their freedom :— 41 but," said his Lordship, " by no means, Mr Binny, inform them to whom they are indebted for their release, (at least for the present,) it is our wish to con¬ duct this matter privately, until the sur¬ prize of such an event is passed, as it might occasion taking our horses from the car¬ riages, and drawing us in triumph, a species of pomp to which we are as little inclined, as entitled. We could wish the matter al¬ together to remain a secret, were it not for the many good purposes we conceive may be derived by bringing the plan to light. When tbe prisoners, however, ask by what means tbey obtain their liberty, tell them, by the good efforts of a few friends who F 2
wish them well ;—but on no account satis¬ fy them with the truth at present." " I shall obey your commands, my Lord, most strictly, you may rely," said Mr Bin¬ ny. " Come, Mr Binny," returned the Earl, " we will attend you until we arrive in sight of the prison gates ; for, though we do not wish to be noticed in this affair, yet we cannot let pass the joyful opportunity of witnessing the release of six long tortured debtors. I have cautioned our servants to keep counsel ; and I shall now desire them to conduct the carriages to the west end of the town, where they can wait unobserved until this glorious scene is concluded." The Earl of Denfeir having given the do¬ mestics their instructions, attended the par¬ ty who followed Mr Binny through the streets, with accumulated glee, until the ancient and gloomy front view of the af¬ flicting edifice of bondage, suddenly check¬ ed their progress, and created a temporary chill of horror in each bosom, which, in the
awful moment of reflecting on the pangs suffered within the impenetrable walls of that dread abode, courted the cast of ?? -ery eye towards the Heavens, whilst each heart was lifted in supplications to the Deity, to look in pity on the distresses of mankind. Here the Earl of Denfeir and his bene¬ volent party paused, while Mr Binny pro¬ ceeded to the prison to present the prison¬ ers with their discharge. Every mind was now occupied, forming various conjectures of the effects so sudden and unexpected a change would produce within the bosoms of the yet unhappy people :—pleasing was e- very reflection ^—but how much more so, when the sudden exclamation of Lady Ce¬ cilia Elford,—" See they come," rivetted e- very eye on the jail entrance, out of which hurried the six selected debtors, followed by several of their children ; their glee of countenance not even Michael Angelo or Corregió could trace, with all their skill, had they still lived aad borne witness of the scene.
??
They had scarcely descended the last step of the flight before the gate, when they instantly fell on their knees, and di¬ recting their ???? towards the heavens, of¬ fered their fervent thanks to the Author of their being, for tbeir unexpected and mira¬ culous escape. Oh vvhat a scene of joy ! " There," exclaimed Aurelia in a tone denoting extacy, when they vvere engaged in their devotions, " does that scene favour the account given us by the worthy Solici¬ tor Sordidus ? Does not it prove, that, with¬ in the remote walls of a jail, virtues lie concealed?—Oh ! I've been justly inform¬ ed,—else would religion never so deeply engage their attention. They are worthy of their release !—Oh ! blessed be the mo¬ ment for ever, that first favoured so happy a thought as directing this charity to a pri¬ son. I am enchanted beyond my power to support myself !" The lovely Aurelia exhausted, could ut¬ ter not another word,—and, weakened with excessive deHght, leaned upon her father's arm for support. Assisted by the Earl of
Denfeir, she was conducted into a shop, where, with the usual attendance necessary in a state of languor, she recovered in the space ofa few minutes. During this interval, the released prison¬ ers had dispersed. The lawyer, true to his trust, would not return to the party, lest his being seen with them might raise a suspi¬ cion whence the means had been obtained for liberating the late unfortunate, though now happy people, Aurelia, too much indisposed to proceed on foot to the end of the town, where the carriages were waiting, was handed to a chair, which the company followed to the destined spot, whence they returned to the magnificent seat of the Earl of Denfeir.— The utmost joy pervaded this unparalelled circle the whole of the next day. Every sen¬ sation that had been anticipated, they ex¬ perienced, and many more they had before no conception of. In short, all the delights which take their source from benevolence, were centered here,—and another conviv-
vial evening wound up the transport of the day. Next morning the greater part of the company left Denfeir-house, enraptured with the hospitality and splendid entertain¬ ment of its noble lord. Mr and Miss Bel¬ ford had many days yet to spend before they were to set out to meet their beloved Altamont at Dover. This interval was employed ¡n short ex¬ cursions into the adjacent country, before dinner, and the evening was devoted to some rational amusement, chiefly to music, —for both the ladies of Denfeir-house sung and played with exquisite taste. And, though lovely Aurelia did not sing in a su¬ perior stile, she performed with inimitable grace, and with wonderful execution, both on the harpsichord and harp. With the aid of some young ladies and gentlemen in their neighbourhood, they were at times en¬ abled to form an agreeable concert. Though Aurelia was possessed of a de¬ gree of self-command, which is too rarely
the gift of ycu';h, though her prudence and reserve (still mingled with benignity and cheerfulness) were above the ordinary dis¬ play of those qualities in the greater part of mankind ;—yet it was visible to the eye of discernment, that, at times, she discover¬ ed a certain pensiveness which imported some hidden emotions which the most guarded cannot conceal. How natural was it that she should feel !—and feel with the most exquisite sensibility. Next to her re¬ vered and beloved parent, all that was dear¬ est to her soul in this world was in a fo¬ reign land :—He had been confined some weeks to his apartment by indisposition :— His convalescence only was announced ;— and love inspired her with anxious fears that his health might not be perfectly re¬ established. Her affectionate father also remarked this temporary gravity or absence. With his never-failing candour and good sense, and with all the endearing softness of parental partiality, he called his Aurelia aside one morning, and mentioned to her his suspicions, that she had permitted some anxieties to take hold of her spirits, which was unlike to her well-principled mind,—
" My dearest child, (he pathetically said) distrust in that superintending power which governs all the concerns of man, I well know you consider as an offence against the duty which dependent mortals owe to him who acts by the laws of unerring wis¬ dom and goodness. I know also the cause of your present internal agitations. But, rouse up your reason,—collect your mind, -s-cherish these principles concerning the divine benignity, which have hitherto been the solace of your soul,— Altamonts idea is, and ought to be impressed on your heart. But you have had most comfortable accounts of his convalascence ;-—his complaint may be said to be merely accidental ;—he en¬ joys the blessing of a sound constitution ;— and, by his singular temperance and mode¬ ration, you may, without presumption, hope that you shall spend many days in happy union. A few, a very few days hence, hea¬ ven will restore him to you, and you will not be unmindful of that celestial mandate which committed his protection in distant regions to a guardian spirit."
Aurelia, with a benignant smile, received her parent's affectionate and salutary coun¬ sel ; expressed the highest reverence for his sentiments,—and bid him rest assured, she would exert the utmost of her power to shew forth every degree of chearfulness du¬ ring the remainder of their stay at Dunfeir- house. Eight days after this tender interview be¬ tween Belford and his inimitable child, they prepared to set out for Dover, and request¬ ed to have the honour of any commands for that place, which it was in their power to execute for the family. Next morning, after breakfast, they took leave of Lord Denfeir and his sister, who reluctantly saw them depart. In a short time they arrived at the place of their destination. Mr Belford had sent a servant some days before, to secure the best lodgings, and found himself, on his ar¬ rival, accommodated perfectly to Aurelia's satisfaction, and his own. Every vessel which arrived from Calais was instantly an¬ nounced ; but their patience was now to
be put to the severest test :—A second, a third, and fourth day past, and no sight of their dear Altamont,—till at length the love¬ ly delicate Amelia began to feel those in¬ describable sensations, attendant only on a truly refined being, whose whole soul is wound up in the beloved object of its af¬ fection and regard. Belford saw, with the most bitter sorrow, the health and spirits of his incomparable child fast declining, at the same time endeavouring to assume a chearfulness foreign to her heart, fearing to alarm the most indulgent of fathers :— But alas ï all would not do ;—grief had tak¬ en too full possession on her delicate frame : —She struggled, but struggled in vain, to conceal her distracting thoughts from the best of parents :—he saw the agitation of her spotless mind, but hoped to be blessed every hour with the sight ofthe dear object of her sufferings ; and flattered himself, that a very short period would restore her to her usual health and spirits :—But judge, reader, what must have been the feelings of this fond parent, when, on entering her room, one morning, ^he found her, as he imagin¬ ed, a cold, lifeless corps !—Horror fixed on
his soul, and, for some moments, his senses entirely forsook him : He flew to his dear be¬ loved child, in a state little short of distrac¬ tion, and exclaimed, " Oh ! my dear,—e- ver dear 'Aurelia !—Am I then more than miserable ? ------Oh, Almighty Power ! this is too,—too much, for feeble man to sup¬ port !" He took the cold hand of the suf¬ fering angel,—pressed her to his breast,— and again exclaimed, " Am I then depriv¬ ed of every happiness in this life ?—Oh, mi¬ serable, wretched man ! I had vainly hop¬ ed, a few days past, my felicity complete, in the transportmg thought of seeing my lovely Aurelia blessed with her dear Alta¬ mont.—Oh, Aurelia !—my angel, Aurelia ! —if thy heavenly spirit is not flown to the mansions of eternal bliss,—speak, O speak to thy distracted father." In a few mi¬ nutes, he perceived her delicate bosom a- gitated :—A deep groan escaped her :—she opened her fine large blue eyes ; and, per¬ ceiving her revered father, endeavoured to smile, as she gazed on his benignant coun¬ tenance. To describe the raptures of Bel¬ ford would be utterly impossible.—lie in¬ stantly flew to give orders for the best ad- Vol, III. G
vice to be procured ; immediately return¬ ing to his dear child, he embraced her, and a thousand times blessed the Divine Power that had restored her to life. By this time, the physician was arrived to the assistance of the innocent sufferer. He gave orders for a composing draught, to be given to her as soon as possible, and requested she might be kept free from noise, and every attention paid to her for some hours, when, he assured Belford, he had no doubt but in a short time she would be perfectly recovered.—What a transition for a fond parent, who, a few moments past, con¬ cluded himself entirely bereft of every earthly happiness. Auielia was now much better; she at¬ tempted even to be cheerful; and, after conversing with her father for some time, she fell into a sound sleep, which lasted many hours ; and the happy Belford seem¬ ed to have forgot his late distress, in the pleasing idea of her being much recover¬ ed and refreshed with the sweet sleep s\ie was then in : he hoped her indisposition would novv be of short duration; but, alas !
this pleasing reflection was too soon inter¬ rupted,—as she now began to breathe with difficulty, and to discover much inward pain ; frequently a deep sigh would escape her, and her whole frame seemed agitated with strong convulsions ; after some hours, she again opened her fine eyes on the mi¬ serable father, but looked at him with a de - gree of wildness and disorder that cut him to the soul ; he beseeched her, if possible, to speak to him, and inform him if her pain was in any degree abated ; but, alas ! she knew him not : No,—the tender, refined, lovely Aurelia, was by this time in a high fever, and alike insensible to pain or plea¬ sure : She looked, it is true, on her dear pa¬ rent ;—but such a look ! it would have mov¬ ed a savage to pity !—called on the name of her Altamont, and that of her beloved fa-* ther; and would frequently exclaim,—Oh, he is dead ! he is dead ! The physician was again arrived, and e- very means used within the power of human art to restore her to some recollection ; but to no purpose :—she became considerably worse,—few hopes were entertained for her Ufe, The state of Belford may be better
conceived than described. The physician, a worthy humane man, endeavoured to give him some comfort under his severe afflic¬ tion,—begged him to place his reliance on that all powerful, benignant, and supreme Being, who never forsakes the wretched, if they trust in his mercy ; and who brings good out of evil j and, when we least ex¬ pect it, restores to us a state of peaceful tran¬ quillity we could ourselves have had no conception of. During this melancholy distressing tran¬ saction, arrived in perfect health the happy Altamont, He had been informed at the inn, that Belford was then at Dover ; and, as may readily be supposed, he lost no time in flying, on the wings of love, to throw himself at the feet of his dear Aurelia ;— but, on entering the house, he found every servant in tears, and exclaiming, Oh ! My dear, dear young lady î —Altamont conclud¬ ed immediately the object of his tender af¬ fection was no more. He beseeched the servants to give him some information of their lady ;—but not one could make a re¬ ply ·—they were overwhelmed with afflic- rifMi: — he there fore flew, to .every; room in
the house, in a state little short of distrac¬ tion, till he reached that of the sweet suf¬ ferer. Oh, heavens ! what a scene present¬ ed itself to the fond lover ! Words have never yet been able to describe such a pic¬ ture ! He beheld his dear Aurelia, in a state, of delirium,—her tender affectionate father kneeling by her bed-side, in fervent prayer for the restoration of his dear child. The sight of Altamont doubled, his afflic¬ tion ;—he could not utter a wx>rd ;—it was too much ;—he burst into tears.. Altamont approached near his Aurelia; —pressed her burning hand a thousand times to his lips, and discovered every symptom of madness. Nothing could pre¬ vail on him to leave her, even for a mo¬ ment. Belford likewise sat by the side of his darling amiable daughter, in the utmost anxiety and misery, for many days* She continued in a state of the most imminent danger ;—no hope could be entertained for her recovery. Belford himself became ill. Nature seemed exhausted, and he was for¬ ced to, leave his dear charge, and retire to * his. bed ; and, in a few hours after, it seeraj Gl
ed difficult to decide which was in the most danger, the incomparnble Belford,—» or his- lovely daughter. For ten days, the mind of Altamont was kept in a state of the most excruciating a- gony and suspence ; —his attendance on the two amiable sufferers was incessant. What an awful trying scene !—every mo¬ ment expecting to be deprived of all his soul held dear on earth,—his divine Aure¬ lia and worthy friend,—required more than manly fortitude to support ; and he began* to sink under his load of affliction, wheri a guardian angel seemed to rescue him from his impending misery, But such is the heavenly power,—and man should never despair of assistance and comfort from, the Almighty. Altamont being quite exhausted and. weak, owing to his long watching and at¬ tention, was prevailed* on by the physician to take a few hours repose, promising him that he would himself remain with his dear friends. Altamont beseeched to be cal¬ led, if any change took place* His rest
was frequently interrupted by frightful dreams. At one time he fancied he saw his lovely Aurelia a lump of cold clay,— and his dear friend Belford, in the agony of death. At another time, he thought he petceived them in the supreme mansions of bliss, mixing with angels, and surrounded with every enchantment ! From these disturbed ideas he was sud¬ denly awaked by the tender-hearted phy¬ sician, who had gone to his room with the pleasing news of Aurelia's having enjoyed many hours sweet sleep, and had now en¬ tirely recovered her recollection. Altamont, the moment he perceived the humane good man in his apartment, imme¬ diately concluded all was over with his be¬ loved, and began bitterly to lament his cruel fote. " Oh, my dear Aurelia ! (he exclaim¬ ed) angels have ere this received thy spotless soul ! My dear sister, too, she was taken from me in early life ! Gracious power ! en¬ able me to support this weight of misery V 9
At this the physician interrupted him> with the unexpected happy news of the: sudden and pleasing change of Aurelia;. The overjoyed Altamont could scarcely credit his senses, and fancied himself still in a dream* The physician begged him to compose his spirits,, and not to appear be¬ fore his patient, until he could by degrees inform her of her happiness in having him* so. near her.- On his return to her room, fie found her anxiously enquiring for her de,tr father, and. if Altamont was yet arrived. This was a favourable moment for this worthy- man¡ to give her the best information in his pow¬ er :—he therefore assured her of her sooib seeing her beloved Altamont, as he was ex¬ pected in a few hours :—that her father- was then taking some repose. He was* careful to conceal the least hint of his in¬ disposition. After this conversation, he re¬ paired to4he apartment of Belford, to im¬ part the glad news of his daughter being much recovered, and her wish to see him* The heart-felt transports of Belford were unbounded :—he instantly deterrninei ta>
attend his dear child, notwithstanding his very delicate state of health. In çntering her room, he was agreeably surprised to find her so much recovered ; he ^embraced her with the warmest affection : —tears streamed from his manly eyes, as he pressed her to his throbbing breast. The dear Aurelia clasped her delicate arms round the neck of her revered parent, and assured him, with a heavenly smile, that she hoped, in a few days, to be perfectly re¬ covered, and restored to him and her dear Altamont, who, she was told, was hourly expected. At the same time the pallid looks of Belford did not escape her, She entreated him, for her sake, to be careful of his health ; that she trusted they should yet spend many, many happy years toge¬ ther with the accomplished Altamont. She became every moment more anxious to see him ; but it was thought prudent to con¬ ceal from her his arrival some time longer, justly concluding the meeting would be too affecting for her present delicate state to bear,
During this period, the once more hap¬ py Altamont, could Scarcely be prevented from rushing into her apartmens, and throw¬ ing himself at her feet. Belford assured him, that the first moment of her being a- ble to sit up, he should be admitted^ Eve¬ ry hour seemed a year. To our young lo¬ ver, at length, the happy, affecting day ar¬ rived. AureHa was so much recovered, as to walk across the room : the pleasing thought of seeing her Altamont, added' much to her restoration. Her affectionate father, a little before Altamont was an¬ nounced, gradually prepared her to receive him, by assuring her he had every reason to say that he was arrived, and would be with them in a few minutes. Why should the feeble power of poets and orators attempt to exceed those boun¬ daries by which nature has limited the fa¬ culties of man ?—Imagination, even in the peasant, can figure ideas which the prince of poets could never express in numbers. " Ask the swain, " Returning homeward from a summer day's·. " Long labour, why, forgetful of his toils
** And due repose, he loiters to behold *' The sun-shine, gleaming as thro' amber clouds, " OVr aU the western sky : full soon, I ween, *' His rude expression and untutor'd airs, " Beyond the pow'r of language, will unfold ·' The form of beauty smiling at his heart.'* To draw the picture of an angels coun¬ tenance, impressed by the feelings of the purest love :—to convey to the souls of readers an adequate idea of the raptures ex¬ pressed in every feature of Aurelia, when she met her most beloved Altamont, is re¬ served for those promised times, when " a new earth being created," a superior order of beings to man shall be called forth into existence. Suffice it to say, Altamont and Aurelia met with the mutual expression of celestial spirits. They remained at Dover, until Belford and Aurelia was perfectly recover¬ ed. The happy party set off for Munster Abbey, and after a short and delightful journey, hailed this mansion of sublunary bliss.
It is utterly impossible to convey the most distant idea to a vulgar soul, of any rank, of what is perfectly delicate and pure¬ ly refined, either in sentiment or manners. Altamonts feelings, in the prospect of the necessity of entering on the business of set- tlemets, and of holding conversation with men, many of wdiom.he had been taught to believe were not governed by the strict¬ est regard for integrity,—experienced all that derangement which is natural to- a mind of superior honour and sensibility.— Propriety, duty, and justice to his most be¬ loved,—all called upon him, however, to observe the legal forms in fixing settle¬ ments, on account of subsequent contin¬ gencies, which might fall out both to Au¬ relia and to himself. He was fortunate enough to have an ex¬ cellent man, an attorney, to direct every thing necessary in this weighty business,— a man of sterling worth,—and who lament¬ ed that so many of his profession, (as of e- very other profession in the three king¬ doms,) by reason of their low rank, low e- ducation, and dissolute habits in early life,
became the very pests of society. This good man had laboured long, and had ma¬ ny good clients,—yet he was not rich, be¬ cause he was honest and honourable in all his transactions ;—and further, because he 'held it as a principle, sacred in its nature, not to forget his rank in life. He knew it did not become an attorney, w r ho had a few cfients of opulence, (and many poor and needy ones, whose misfortune was going to law, or rather being dragged into it,) to vie in splendor with the first squires of the land. He considered such an appearance as inde¬ corous, even if he could honestly afford it. This valuable man was also the terror of the low executioners of justice, the very dregs of human nature, because a species of assassins of the sons and daughters of dis¬ tress. Every circumstance, therefore, which the hearts of Belford, Aurelia, and Altamont could wish for, was adjusted by Mr Képpel with the utmost correctness and propriety, The deeds were extended in full, and a co¬ py deposited with each family. Vol. HL H
.86 Previous to making out settlements, the lovely pair, with Belford's consent, had fix¬ ed the fourteenth day after their arrival at Munster Abbey, for proceeding to the al¬ tar of Hymen, It was determined that the nuptials should be celebrated without magnificence, and in the presence only of a few select friends. But every thing elegant, and becoming Munster Abbey, honoured the happy occa¬ sion. As soon as Altamont arrived at Dover, he wrote his steward, and gave him very particular instructions to have his mansion- house in full preparation for his reception, with some select friends he should bring with him a few weeks afterwards. Before he went abroad, he had given strict orders that the greatest attention should be paid to preserve the elegant furniture in perfect condition, and all the pleasure-ground a- round kept in the best order. And now the day dawned when two hearts and hands were to be united in the
bonds of the purest love. Nothing, in this world, has ever been known to surpass the refinement of principle, and the excellence of moral conduct, of Altamont and Aurelia, —and, by consequence, their characters and their feelings must have soared far a- bove the generality of imperfect mortals. It was the particular wish of Aurelia that Mr Hammond should perform the marriage service;—and Belford and Altamont re¬ joiced in her choice. The woithy vicar was honoured by the lord of the manor's wait¬ ing on him at Woodland, and requesting him to accompany him in his carriage to Munster Abbey, to perform a ceremony in the issue of which centered all his happi¬ ness under Heaven. At length the long-wished event took place, not only to the transporting joy of the revered Belford, but to the universal de¬ light of all the county for many miles a- round. , The second day after the celebration of the marriage, Belford, Altamont, and Au- H %
relia, (accompanied by her dear companion Miss Draper,) set out for Altamonts house. A palace opened to their view at the dis¬ tance of eight miles from the place. It was situated on a rising ground, and water¬ ed by a beautiful stream not half a mile dis¬ tant. Cascades, and fine pieces of water, embellished the scene :—And the venera¬ ble oak, and other lofty trees, added to the magnificence of this charming seat. The approach was by a gentle winding avenue, nearly two miles in length ;—and, at once, the front of the house presented an extent which, to the eye,J could not be less than two hundred feet, without the colonades. Altamont had, with his usual delicacy and goodness, formed a plan to give an a- greeable surprise.to his beloved Amelia, and his venerable father. Eight days previous to his marriage, he had written to two or three famihes of distinction, not far distant from Altamont-house, to meet him to din¬ ner at an appointed day,*to receive him and his lovely spouse.
f
Accordingly, on his arrival from Munster Abbey, he found several of his select friends, ladies and gentlemen, ready to meet him and his beloved Aurelia. Belford was charmed with this attention ; aad naturally presaged the bliss which was to follow this early indication of Altamonts desire to an¬ ticipate every wish of his amiable daughter, Altamonts fortune was ample. It was superior to Belford's. And his establish¬ ment was befitting his noble rank. His ser¬ vants, his equipage, and his table, displayed elegance, without extravagance : And in every department,order and economy were established by the attention and fidehty of the best of stewards. Mr Brown, this faith¬ ful old servant, perfectly understood the management of a table. On the present occasion, he was particularly attentive to display whatever was splendid and superb. The side-board presented a rich service of plate, a royal present to his father,.when he was ambassador àt the Imperial Court. The courses were served up in the first stile. The wines were the first Europe could pro¬ li 3
duce. And the joys of the company were superior to all the mere feasts on earth. In the evening of this happy day, two young ladies, who performed on various in¬ struments with inimitable taste, were so obliging as to play some of the first pieces of modern composition. Handel was the favourite of the evening. One of the young gentlemen, a companion of Altamonts at Oxford, entertained the party with some exhilirating songs, perfectly adapted to the season of mirth and joy. Altamont was now established the head of a great family. Heaven had not been pleased to leave him father or mother, bro¬ ther or sister. We have learned before, ttìat the darling of his heart from his ear¬ liest life, the lovely Louisa, his only sister, had been cut off in the bloom of youth. Endowed by nature with the best disposi¬ tions, of an excellent understanding, im¬ proved by assiduous culture, by the best company, by travelling, and by accurate observation, he had long been confirmed m the opinion, that it was the duty of ^\txy
ifam of superior rank and fortune ta stand forth, in an examplary manner, in paying all honour and respect to the rites of the religion of his country,—firmly persuaded, by accurate observation, that they, of what¬ ever rank, who neglect or despise this duty, have no religion at all. He also avowed, on every prudent occasion, that he could not conceive men and women of distinction acting a more impolitica], as well as irreli¬ gious part, than by throwing contempt on the religion of their country, because (he asserted with sound wisdom) that, sooner or later, such conduct would extend to the in¬ ferior orders of the people, and would gra¬ dually produce a disregard to orderand sub¬ ordination, and consequently to every moral «virtue. On Sunday, the whole company appear¬ ed in the Cathedral of Canterbury, to in¬ voke the blessing of Heaven on the happy event which had lately taken place. The service we s performed with every external mark of devotion by a dignified clergyman. And the discourse was suited to the occa¬ sion.
But Altamont, amidst the joys he felt from the possession of his dearest Aurelia; could not resist the impulse of again visit¬ ing the place where the remains of his be¬ loved sister were deposited. While his guests, with Belford and Aurelia, were view¬ ing the venerable fabric, he retired for a few minutes to pay the tribute of fraternal affection to her who was now joined to the choir of celestial spirits. Manly religion^ tends to elevate the soul. Rational piety is the offspring of principle. Submissive to the wise disposer of all, and anticipating the ineffable joys he was to participate above with his Louisa, when his mortal part should be thrown off, he joined his friends with a countenance composed, but not dejected. After which they returned to Altamonts house, with that decorum of manner, and that chearfulness of mind, which the duties of the day prohibit only to the bigot and fanatic. Before leaving Munster Abbey, it had been agreed between Belford and Lord Altamont, (as they had resolved to live and die together) to spend their time al-
ternately at Altamonts house, and on the beautiful banks of the Ex. After remain¬ ing, therefore, a fortnight at his Lordship's seat, they returned to Munster Abbey, as business o£ a very important and interesting nature, in Belford's mind, was to be settled without delay. This was no less than the marriage of his brother Charles, whom, next to his Aurelia and Altamont, he loved a- bove all the world. They took leave of their kind and affec¬ tionate guests,—but not without requesting them, and obtaining their promise, to pay a visit soon to Devonshire. On their return to Munster Abbey, they found Charles there, with two or three friends of Belford's, who waited his arrival. On the morning after he returned, Belford carried Charles into his own apartments, and, without any of those prefaces which generally mean nothing, he assured him, that, amidst the joys he had lately experi¬ enced, in the happy settlement of the dar¬ ling of his heart, few hours had passed since they parted, in which his dear brother had
not occurred tojjis mind. " I *%m not, my dear Charles, (he said) completely happy till I see you, hke my Aurelia, properly set¬ tled,—that is, till you are happily married* May I flatter myself that you have mad$ your choke, (and that it may be a.happy one is my most fervent wish !) Fortune is no object ta you. And you have an elegant mansion-house perfectly ready for her re¬ ception. During the time that the family of Mun¬ ster Abbey had been at Altamont-house, Charles had gone on a visit to Draper-hall. For a considerable time past, he felt him¬ self warmly attached to Mis^Draper. All that was desireable in woman he saw in her. —And what he himself perceived, (though love is too often blind) he rejoiced to learn,. all who knew her acknowledged slie pos¬ sessed. He then formed the resolution to em¬ brace the first opportunity of imparting ta this amiable young lady his esteem and af¬ fection for her. He pled his cause with that modesty and diffidence which will e«
wer lead a man of sense and worth to do. He did not, from delicacy, urge án imüie* diatç return to his suit, but respectfully re* quested permission again to pay his huni* ble addresses to the object of his affection. His manly attentions were received by the whole family with the highest pleasure, satisfaction and delight. The worthy fa¬ ther knew not in what language to make a reply to so flattering a proposal for his love¬ ly daughter. He begged him to take up his residence for some weeks at Draper- hall, which Charles readily accepted ; and, during that period, he embraced every o- portunity of making known his unbounded loye and affection for the amiable Miss Dra¬ per, until he, by the most refined attention and respect, drew from her the much-wish- ed-for, delicate confession,—that she had long more than esteemed him. Charles felt that transport which lovers only know when their love is crowned with success. Good Mr Draper's consent was readily obtained, to fix a day not distant
for the union of two superior young per¬ sons of perfectly proportionate ages and sta¬ tions. A wonderful momentuous circum¬ stance, to ensure happiness in future Hfe. Immediately after this important busi¬ ness was settled, Charles flew to Munster Abbey, to impart the joyful tidings to the best of brothers. We have just mentioned Belford's address to him. Let imagination then fancy what must have been Belford's feelings, when Charles gave him the infor¬ mation now in his power, and assured him that the day for his marriage was fixed. Never did joy sparkle more lively in the eye of youth and beauty, than it now did in Belford's. Expression failed. He clasp¬ ed his brother in his arms, and embraced him with a thousand blessings, " My very dear Charles (he says) let kind heaven ever be praised. My happiness is now as com¬ plete as man can enjoy on this scene of uncertainty. I rejoice in, and perfectly ap¬ prove of your choice. A more amiable, or a more respected young woman, does not adorn our land. I know her education
from her earliest life : I know the admira¬ ble example she has had ever set before her by superior parents, who have uniiormly scorned the fashionable follies of the world, and the madness of its dissipation, but who have ever retained a just sense of the rank they hold in society, and have been careful to bring up their children as became the sons and daughters of Mr Draper of Dra¬ per-hall. I hope the day of marriage is not remote :—I shall feel every hour a day till it is accomplished. Meantime, know that my children and I must be present to rejoice with you on this blessed event." Seldom have there been more interesting scenes on the theatre of this world, than the present. No imagination can be so languid, as not to look back some years, and behold Charles agonizing the soul of his angelic brother, who felt every species of horror from the fear of Charles being brought to infamy and disgrace. What mind so unprincipled as not to perceive here the wonderful, the gracious interposition of an Almighty p:>w- Ypu IIL I
er, which saved Charles from impending destruction !—And it affords the instruct¬ ing and solacing lesson, that where there remains goodness in the heart,—where the seeds of virtue and honour are not wholly destroyed, hopes of amendment are ever to be entertained ;—where those seeds are totally lost, alas ! all, all is gone. Four weeks after Belford had made his truly fraternal address to Charles, the fa¬ mily at Munster Abbey received an affec¬ tionate invitation to Draper-hall. Thi¬ ther they directly repaired ;—and two fa¬ milies of more intrinsic worth never were assembled within the same walls. The ceremony of the marriage of Charles and Miss Draper was not delayed af¬ ter Belford's arrival. On the evening of the same day on which their dear friends appeared, the happy couple were united in the sacred bands of Hymen. Those benignant spirits, who look down from the regions above with complacency
on sublunary virtue, rejoiced in the felicity which now reigned in this mansion of bliss. It was a season of joy and festivity, too, o- ver all the neighbourhood. For Mr Dra¬ per, like Belford, ???? adored by his de¬ pendents as the kindest of masters, and as a man of public spirit. After a few days spent at Draper-hall, Lady Altamont requested the company pre¬ sent, to honour them with a visit at Mun¬ ster Abbey ;—and, to enhance the value of the pleasure which she anticipated, she made the additional entreaty, that they would accompany her father and Lord Al¬ tamont there, as next day. Kindred souls relish the same pleasures. The prospect of visiting that delightful place, and enjoying such charming society, commanded the assent of the worthy fa¬ mily. Next day they arrived at Belford's,—- where they found the benevolent vicar of Woodland waiting the return of his friends, í 2
—for Mr Hammond was the particular favourite of Mr Draper and family, both on account of his personal worth, and because he had taken a very warm in¬ terest in tlie education of Mr Draper's sons. To entertain his guests with every degree of elegance as well as hospitality, Belford had been at pains, for some time past, to assemble at Munster Abbey several ladies and gentlemen, particular friends of the family, who were remarkable for their taste in music, all of whom sung or played in a very superior style. Among other pieces of music, one of the gentlemen introduced something which may be called original to all the company. It was a Scotch song, or paitoral,—enchantingly soft and plea¬ sant, though plaintive,—and calculated to awaken the sweetest sensibilities of the soul. Indeed, Mr Bendy sung seve¬ ral of these charming melodies. Above all, the company were charmed when he sung Tweed-side, which he did with ini¬ mitable pathos. The words in this song are beautifully simple, and have a trans-
porting effect on a fine ear, when they are distinctly pronounced. We therefore ima¬ gine it will be agreeable to insert them. " What beauties docs Flora disclose, How sweet are her smiles upon Tweed, Yet Mary's still sweeter than thofe Both natute and fancy exceed. No daisy, nor sweet blushing rose, Nor all the gay flowers of the 6eld, Nor Tweed, gliding gently thro' those,. Such beauty and pleasure does yield« The warblers are heard in the grove, The linnet, the lark, and the thrush, The blackbird, and sweet cooing dove, With music enchant every bush. Come, let us go forth to the mead, Let us see how the primroses spring, We'll lodge in some village on Tweed, And love, while the feather'd folks sing," &c Mr Bentley sung many of these delight¬ ful melodies, with the highest applause from excellent judges.
??
CHAP. ?. After spending some time at Munstet Abbey, in the most innocent and delight¬ ful amusement, Charles mformed the whole party, that, m the prospect of hk intended happiness, he had, a few weeks past, given orders to his servants to prepare every thing -at Bennington Castle, for the reception of the families of Draper-halland Munster Abbey,. He flattered himself, that the fehcity he anticipated would not be denied him, and, with his usual good humour, he added, I wiH not yield even to my brother, that the beauties of this deHghtful place are supe¬ rior, nay, nor equal to those which I shall introduce you to at our charming mansion,, (at the same time bowing with a smile to
his brother.) It was^ agreed by every one present, to set off in a few £ays. But the intended visit met with a ve*yunexpected in- terruptiortv by an affair ofa* singular nature. —Immediately after this conversation, one of the servants perceived from the window of the great hall a carriage driving furious¬ ly towards the Abbey. The hospitable Bel¬ ford imagined it might be some friend com¬ ing to congratulate him on the happy event which had lately taken place,—when, to his astonishment, he saw a beautiful young fe¬ male, in an elegant habit, alight from the chaise. He heard his name pronounced, with a faltering voice, and with a kind of wild¬ ness of look: He flew to the unknown fair one. Perceiving her in much distress, he beseech¬ ed her to walk in and take some refresh¬ ment :—Indeed, her palid looks, and the whole agitation of hér frame, would have roused any one to pity ? It cannot, then, be surprising, that the humane Belford, who was ever tremblingly alive to sensibility, could view this young stranger, and not offer her every attention and politeness. After some minutes, the young lady exclaimed : " If you are Mr Belford of Munster Abbey,
my soul receives instantaneous consolation. To this blessed assylum I have made my escape, as I am well convinced it İs a re¬ fuge for every innocent sufferer, I there¬ fore, Sir, implore your protection for a poor, persecuted orphan, whose father had the honour to be your friend." " Be assured, madam," replied the good hearted Belford, " nothing in my power shall be wanting to alleviate your distress ; in the mean time, let me intreat you to endeavour to take some repose, as your spirits seem much agi¬ tated." Lady Akamont instantly appeared*, with a look more expressive of native good¬ ness than all the language of men can de¬ scribe :—She approached, took the hand of the lady, and, with a benignant smile, of¬ fered her every consolation in her power ; at the same time intreated her to compose the perturbation of her mind, and, if possi¬ ble, take a few hour's sleep. The stranger blessed her, and looked thankfulness and affection :—The lovely Lady Altamont led her to an apartment, and desired her woman to attend her ;—she then left her, and returned to her dear father. Curiosity is natural to man :=—It was impossible, at
present, to resist the propensity of knowing something of this elegant stranger. Beauty in distress would melt the heart of a savage, —and who could say but the distress of this unknown female might be of a singular na¬ ture ? Her appearance wore every symptom of it :—Belford resolved to make some en¬ quiry ef the postilion, (who had been, witli the usual goodness of the house, ordered every thing comfortable,) concerning the lady :—But the man could give no infor¬ mation ; all that he knew was, that she came to his master's inn, to all appearance much frightened and distressed, where she ordered a chaise to Munster Abbey. Belford possessed other qualities besides genuine benevolence. His imagination was lively, and his understanding was profound. He was also blessed with that talent, so rarely found,—presence of mind. It struck him, that from what he remarked in the countenance and manner of this young per- sou, that she had a moving history, of a singular distressing kind, to relate ; or that some uncommon accident might have fallen ©ut, which had so much overwhelmed her
spirits. As soon, therefore, as the lady a- gain made her appearance, which she short¬ ly did. much refreshed, he begged a few mi¬ sâtes private conversation, which was rea¬ dily granted by the lovely stränger. The moment they were seated, she exclaimed* " Ever blessed be this heavenly mansion, and may every happiness shower down on its benevevolent inhabitants ! My inten¬ tion, Sir, is to open to you every circum¬ stance respecting my family and my own forlorn situation. My name is Amelia Howard ; my residence was within a few miles of Bristol. I am an orphan, and have fled from persecution. My parents both died in my infancy :—I was their only child. I was left to the care of an uncle ;—who, I am sorry to say, never discovered for me that affection, that parental affectie ; w r hich a well principled man, blessed with affluence, ought to have shown to a niece and an un¬ protected orphan. I was not left in indi¬ gence :—My father's property, at his death, amounted to eight thousand pounds, which my uncle took charge of. One morning my unkind uncle entered my room, with more tenderness than f usual ;—he took my
hand,—called ?? his dear Amelia,—pres¬ sed me to his breast,—and discovered for me a fondness I never before experienced. My grateful heart beat with raptures at this unexpected affection. After seating me in a chair near him, he began nearly in these words :—" Amelia, you are now at a sufficient age to make happy some worthy man with your hand and heart." At this time I was only in my eighteenth year :— I knew not what to reply :—I assured him that at present I had no wish or intention to alter my situation, as I had never yet seen a young man that I thought could make me happy. At these words he paus¬ ed,—but immediately exclaimed, " I have fixed a match for you,—not a young man :—What do you mean by a young man ?—The gentleman I speak of is not a young man, but he is a man of family and fortune ; he is a worthy man, far superior in every respect to those insignificant young fribbles, one of whom you no doubt have fixed your affections on." " No, my dear uncle, (I replied^ my affections are not fixed on any man.-^-I am young, and not perfectly dependent,. I trust, therefore, you will, with
parental lové, give me liberty to follow my own desire, in a case so important ; and permit me to say, I never can give my hand where my heart is not engaged." At this his countenance suddenly changed, and he ex¬ claimed, " Madam, you know not what you say. Iam,by the present transaction,shewing you a parent's care. You must know that two thirds of your fortune is gone. The per¬ son, in whose hands your money was vest¬ ed, is become a bankrupt ; and I am now in considerable advance on your account. Reflect on this calamity, and take my coun¬ sel ; and give me leave to introduce to you Mr Curtis, a gentleman whose character and circumstances I have already made you acquained with." " With ardour, yet with filial respect, I told my uncle, that, as I was nurtured in the veneration of divine benevolence, as I was young and healthy, I still considered myself as independent, and, with the aid of what remained of my fortune, added to my own industry, I entertained no doubt of living comfortable. Voi, III, ?
M But the story of my loss of the greater part of my fortune was a mere invention, in order to alarm my mind, and frighten me into the match wliich he had proposed for me. He bid me prepare to receive Mr Cur¬ tis, as he next day had invited him to din¬ ner,—and to behave to him with every de¬ gree of polite attention." Is there any species of barbarity more cruel than this poor young woman was con¬ demned to suffer ? Her own unde, her natural guardian and protector, urging her by violence to act a false, a hypocritical and base part. But the Lord of nature is the " father of the fatherless," who put their trust in him ;—and he hears the sup¬ plications of the oppressed. Miss Howard, in a gentle, but firm man« ner, informed her uncle, that, as she had hitherto paid attention to all the guests who visited him, she should certainly pay every due civility to Mr Curtis. ** But, (she add¬ ed) " My dear uncle, how can I violate my best feelings, by shewing a peculiar marked attention to a man introduced to me as a
lover, to whose age, manners, and person, I have a confirmed aversion. I have seen Mr Curtis several times before, which you seem not to have known. And, good and excellent as the gentleman* may be, I can¬ not, even in idea, think of ever becoming his wife· *' He again pressed me hard, from the cir¬ cumstance of the reduction of my fortune, —of his intention to travel into foreign parts,—and of my being left helpless and forlorn, without relation or friend. " I told him I had no fears, that my trust was in the Almighty, and in my own acti¬ vity. I fell at his knees, and conjured him, as he valued my peace and happiness, to cease importuning me on the subject,— and I thought, by his looks, that I had ex¬ cited his compassion, and brought him to relent. But he suddenly left the room, in visible agitation, commanding me not to stir from thence till his return, which was to be in half an hour. ??
" Within that time he came, apparently cool and composed,—and in language more affectionate than he had held for some time past, he began to reason on the folly and imprudence of my conduct, and again kindly to express his suspicions that my heart was otherwise engaged, " To his reasons I answered as formerly : And as to the last, (his suspicions öf my being " attached to some young fribble," as he again expressed himself,) I repeated my assurances that my affections were wholly disengaged. "Enragedby my discovering the determin¬ ed purpose of my mind, he told me (with a menacing look that made me tremble) that he should countermand Mr Curtis's vi¬ sit for to-morrow ;—that he would give me three days to consider more dispassionately on a matter so intimately connected with my independence and happiness,—and if, within this space of time, I would not, as an obedient child, give my consent to his proposal, he would follow a plan of a more decisive nature*
<l Kind heaven came immediately to my aid !—I drew instant comfort from the mention made of three days being given me, to prepare a final answer to my uncle. I was inspired with the immediate resolu¬ tion to embrace the first opportunity of flying from the house of this unnatural guardian. And I have been successful in the. execution of my scheme. " The day after he made me this violent speech, I was favoured with a short call by a widow lady, who lived in a neighbouring village, and who was not unacquainted with my sufferings. Her visit was truly charitable,—for she was a woman of a true benevolent spirit.. With many apologies for apparent inter¬ ference in family concerns of a serious na¬ ture, Mrs Beverley gave me her best counsels to continue firm to my purpose, and, on no account whatever, to act so un¬ worthy, so unchristian a part, as to accept the hand of a man to whom I could not give the least portion of my heart. She advised me to find an immediate asylum,,
with some faithful friend or relation, at a considerable distance. And she under, took to give me every aid in making my escape. The counsel I received from this excel¬ lent woman, was perfectly agreeable to my present state of mind. And I assured her, that, without losing an hour, I would pre¬ pare myself for taking leave of a place which was now become utterly insupporta¬ ble to me, " Accordingly, by Mrs Beverley's aid, a post-chaise was in waiting next evening by 7 o'clock, about half a mile from the vil¬ lage. I imparted to her my resolution of going directly for Mr Belford's at Munster Abbey. Forgive, me, Sir, when I seem guil¬ ty of adulatioa :—For indeed, (I added) he is " the father of the fatherless, and the or¬ phan's stay." My story is finished, when I mention my cause of knowledge, that my father had the honour of your acquaint tance..
" I frequently heard so from two gentle¬ men who lived near my uncle's house. They remembered my father speaking of¬ ten with rapture of the many happy hours he enjoyed in your society»" Belford was struck with amazement at the recital he had just heard. " And are you, Madam, (he exclaimed) the fair re¬ presentative of my dear old friend, George Howard of Stanton !—Behold then a friend and a father in me, ------ Welcome, ten thou¬ sand times welcome to Munster Abbey ! Fart of your trials are at an end ; and it shall not be from want of care and atten¬ tion in this family, that my bvely child A- melia Howard shall not have many chan¬ ces of future happiness, by an establish¬ ment suitable to the rank of her father's daughter. Lady Altamont wa« charmed with the simplicity of manner withwhich Miss How* ard related her story. She felt also a deep interest in her present afflicting situation. But, as the souls of Belford and his heaven» iy daughter w T ere ever in perfect unison^
she instantaneously had formed the same- resolution with her fasher, which was, to take this amiable orphan under her own immediate protection. * Lady Altamont requested her father to* join the company above stairs, and prepare them to receive a young friend of the fa¬ mily, who had come on a visit, and had been very much indisposed.. Belford did so. His spirits were visibly elevated :—for his heart rejoiced in every act of goodness : And he had now rescued, from the jaws of persecution, the only remains of an old be¬ loved friend.» He presented Lady Alta¬ monts best respects to all his guests, and, in her name, requested their forgiveness, for a little time, till the lovely young stranger should be ready to make her appearance. In little more than an hour, Lady Alta^ mont sent a message to her father, that she wished to speak with him for one moment.. It was to conduct Miss Howard to the company ; who, by this time, had wonder¬ fully recovered her spirits, from the gentle-
attentions and the unbounded goodness she had experienced from two luminaries of be¬ nignity. Belford requested her hand, and led her into the hall, presenting her to all the com¬ pany as an adopted daughter. Thç elegant appearance of the young lady, her youth, her beauty, and her easy manners, pre-possessed every pne present in her favour, and, during the evening, she received every mark of attention within the power of hospitality and good-breeding. After supper, it was agreed, at Charles Belford's express request, that the whole party should set out to-morrow morning, according to previous appointment, for Ben¬ nington Castle. Miss Howard was a delightful acquisition, Mrs Charles Belford, in the kindest man¬ ner, expressed her hopes and wishes that she would add to the joy of the present occasion, by honouring her with her com¬ pany to-morrow,—assuring her, at the same
time, that she should be proud, if she would promise to favour her further, by remaining at Bennington Castle the few weeks that the families of Munster Abbey and Draper- hall were to continue there. The friendly And kind invitation was ac¬ cepted with gratitude ; Miss Howard assur¬ ing her, that she entertained the warmest sense of her pohte attention, and that her heart overflowed with joy to be introduced to society so superior in every thing that was agreeable and excellent. At twelve o'clock next day, the whole party pioceeded towards Bennington Castle from Munster Abbey, in six carriages, with suitable retinue. A superb dinner was prepared for what we must now call Charles's marriage-com¬ pany. Every thing, the first and nicest of the season, appeared at table ; and, as at the hospitable mansion which they had lately left, joy and gladness were diffused over every countenance.
ïn the course of two or three days, eve¬ ry individual at Bennington Castle had learned Miss Howard's history, through the amiable Belford and Lady Altamont. Each* one felt a warm interest in her future ha- piness. And this interest suffered no di¬ minution, when they found she was not on¬ ly accomplished in all the parts of polite education, but that her mind was stored with valuable knowledge far above her years. Add to this, she sung and played with exquisite taste. Each day at Bennington Castle was in some measure a transcript of the former,— Not in mere dull uniformity,—but employ¬ ed in rational amusement, and in forming some useful schemes for promoting the in¬ terests of society. A very singular circumstance marked this company. They were all blessed with superior education,—and, what is of infi¬ nite more consequence, they had all improv¬ ed it to the greatest purpose. There was not here one vulgar soul,—we mean, one of that debased taste, or deprived whoUy of
all taste, who could relish nothing but the pleasures of the table, and who is unhap¬ py, unless entertainment is carried to in¬ temperance. No :—The pleasures at the several seats of the families who were met here, resemb¬ led (though faintly) the joys which are prepared for the virtuous and benevolent in the regions beyond the sky. Yet, let not the gay and the giddy imagine, (for it is an imagination equally false and hostile to virtue) that this party were a grave, moping party, where pleasure was bound in fetters, and an unnatural constraint put on every word and action. Are mirth and joy confined only to the riotous and dissi¬ pated ? Alas ! their joys are tumultuous and transitory :—They cease with exhaust¬ ed spirits. More than half of their days is spent in languor and melancholy,—and they terminate in disease and misery. After three weeks, passed in a manner which does honour to human nature, the company returned to Munster Abbey, not without pouring forth every blessing on
Charles and his amiable wife. Miss Dra¬ per remained some time with her sister ;— and, after spending a few days at Mr Belford's, all the company separated, with sentiments of such mutual esteem and af¬ fection as can rarely happen among such numbers. Belford, Lord and Lady Altamont, and lovely Miss Howard, were now the only fa¬ mily at Munster Abbey. And, though the venerable lord of the manor knew well ** there was a season for every thing ;"— " that a feast is made for mirth ;"—and that it is the evidence of a gloomy and cy¬ nical spirit, to condemn mortals for inno¬ cent indulgences,—yet still this good man began to reflect, that he had been now al¬ most three months engaged chiefly in joy and amusement. The happy union of his Aurelia with a man of worth even superior to his rank, —Charles's marriage to a young lady pos¬ sessed of every accomplishment which a- dorns the sex,—and his rescuing from an abyss of distress his sweet young ward
ι Miss Howard, filled his soul with complacen¬ cy and delight, and gave him the most trans¬ porting views of the ways of Providence. About this time Lady Altamont brought her Lord a son. And it was the request of Belford, that, as soon as his daughter was so far recovered as to be able to leave her room, the baptism of the infant should be performed by his friend Mr Hammond j and, that Charles and his lady, with the fa¬ mily of Draper- hall, should be present. Four weeks after Lady Altamonts con¬ finement, the young heir was baptized by the name 'of George Frederick Augustus. The sponsors were Charles and Mr Draper, A few days were spent at Munster Ab¬ bey, in joy and harmony, as perfect as be¬ ings not celestial arc permitted to taste.— An unexpected accession to the party add¬ ed to the festivity. It was the arrival of young Draper from London,—an event which, in the sequel, increased the delight which flowed in on Belford's souh
Lord Altamont iti a few days set off for Kent, on business of importance. Charles also and his lady were under the necessity of leaving Munster Abbey at the same time, in order to receive company who were to spend some time at Bennington Castle* In order to entertain Mr Belford and La¬ dy Altamont, Mr Draper and family a- greed, at her Ladyship's particular request, to remain with them until Lord Altamont should return» The delights which flowed in on Bel¬ ford's soul were to be heightened by an e- vent as pleasing as unexpected and unfore¬ seen. It was perfectly visible to the company,. a few days after young Draper had arrived at Munster Abbey, that the charms of love¬ ly Miss Howard had touched the nicest sensibilities of his soul. He was constantly paying her those nameless delicate ani sweet attentions which are more decisive La
of the reality of love, than ten thousand fulsome speeches, protestations, and vows. Belford saw this accompHshed young man's rising passion with heart-felt plea¬ sure,—for he knew him to be worthy. Her ladyship also perceived the attachment with the same feelings of joy as her father. But the benevolent, the godlike Belford, (though his prudence had ever taught him the impropriety of match-making) could not resist the impulse of requesting his daughter to sound Miss Howard's disposi* tion towards Draper. Nay, farther, he en¬ treated, if she found his lovely ward enter¬ tained any partiahty for the young stranger, that she would, to the utmost of her power, cherish the attachment of her compa¬ nion ; for Lady Altamont treated her as such,—and she was entitled to this distinc¬ tion, from her amiable manners and accom¬ plishments, even more than by her birth, which was equal to her own. Young Draper received, at this time, a letter from town, informing him that his presence there was necessary immediately,
as a very great caufe, in which he w 7 as a retained counsellor, was very soon to be brought into Courts Love, as well as necessity, is 'the parent of invention. He wrote, on 'receipt of the letter, in the fullness of integrity of heart, that a matter of infinite moment prevented him from being in London for some time : Hoped that the cause would not suffer by his absence, as so many counsellors of the first name were engaged on the same side with himself. He went farther, and assur¬ ed his correspondent, that the business to which he referred was of such a nature, that his honour demanded his remaining, in the country perhaps for two or three months.. The fact was, Draper had been so fortu¬ nate as to enjoy an opportunity of seeing; Miss Howard one morning alone, half an hour before breakfast, when, in the most delicate and affectionate, but at the same time in the most respectful manner, he de¬ clared his passion. It is sufficient, at pre¬ sent, only to take notice, that her returiu ??
to his elegant and warm declaration, was at once expressive of her own prudence and good sense, and of her very high idea of Draper's superior excellence. Perhaps more than " a dawn of hope his soul inspired :"—Yes, it was more. And though he was ever void of forwardness and presumption, he flattered himself, from this interview, that he was not indifferent to the beloved Amelia. It was the force of this delightful feel¬ ing : It was the strength of this persuasion, which dictated the epistle to the metropo¬ lis, and determined him to employ more time to render himself still more agree¬ able to this amiable young lady.. Wise and unerring Heaven! thou art daily witness to the fatal, the dreadful consequen¬ ces of the shafts of calumny cutting asun¬ der the cords of love !—When shall those unhappy beings, who delight in the misery and torments cf their fellow-mortals, cease to exist on earth ? Assassination is not such a crimc^as wantonly toblast the reputation:
of a young man or woman, when they have anticipated ten thousand refined joys. Such human demons, we trust, are rare :— But they do exist. What a heavenly contrast in the conduct of the amiable Lady Altamont !—She em¬ braced, with studied assiduity, every oppor¬ tunity in private, to expatiate on the prais¬ es of ,young Draper. She dwelt chiefly on his manners, his morals, his temper and dis¬ positions j and, above all, on the admirable principles of his mind, which had, to that day, guarded him from the melancholy con» tagion of the times. Miss Howard listened to Lady Altamont with visible emotions of inward rapture Her boks expressed the feelings of her soul. With that dignity becoming a young wo¬ man of vast superiority of mind, yet, with that sweet, that irresistible blushing modes¬ ty, which is the richest ornament of the sex, she joined in the praises of Draper. It was perfectly perceived by her noble friend that lovely Amelia also had received a shaft from Cupid's quiver, and Lady AltamonJ;
was fully determined (ever^prudent and ev ver wise as she was) to bring to a period the present grand object of her heart's de¿ sire, the union of Draper and her Amelia* without any unnecessary delay ; yet with¬ out any of those precipitate steps, which call forth public notice, and lay the parties* open to indelicate censure. Our accomplished counsellor, in perfect consistency with the excellence of his prin¬ ciples and character, considered İt his duty to communicate his intentions to his father.. Altamont was to return in eight days ; and by that time Draper proposed to be again. at Munster Abbey.. The interview at Draper-hall was such; as might naturally be expected between an affectionate sensible parent and an intelli¬ gent, dutiful son. The old Squire almost leaped for joy, when he heard his son's de¬ clarations concerning his immediate inten¬ tions of becoming a married man; He em¬ braced him with tenderness, and thanked kind Heaven for inspiring him with such a- resolutions and he entreated him,, wheirhfiL
was setting out again for Munster Abbey, to take the earliest opportunity of inform¬ ing him, by express, what progress he had made in his suit. We cannot omit mentioning here, that the joy of old Mr Draper, in the prospect of his seeing the heir of his family and for¬ tune settled in life, was exceedingly height¬ ened by his admiration of Miss Howard's temper, manners, and character ; all of which he had an opportunity of personally observing, or being satisfactorily acquaint¬ ed with. This is a circumstance which must ever fill the heart o£ every parent with inexpressible delight, as it is the happy presage of every degree of happiness which can be expected in this sublunary state. After a few days stay at Draper-hall, Mr Belford returned to Munster Abbey, where he found Lord Altamont returned from Kent, All the family in perfect health, and a letter waiting him from his brother of Bennington Castle, announcing a visit soon to this mansion of hospitality, elegance, and virtue.
The day after Altamonts arrival, his lovely spouse gave him the pleasing intelli¬ gence of young Draper's attachment to Miss Howard,—of his having declared to her his unbounded love, and ofthe happy train in which matters were to crown both theyoung persons with happiness, Thé native goodness of Altamonts heart disposed him at all times to " rejoice with those that rejoice.** He was transported by the accoutits. For he entertained a very high regard and esteem for Belford's orphan ward. r Agreeably to Lady Altamonts prudent plan, of not precipitating any step in the present important transaction, the counsellor was to spend some weeks at Munster Ab¬ bey, while the heavenly Belford should ex¬ ecute a scheme he had formed for the re¬ covery of Miss Howard's fortune. This scheme he was determined to exe¬ cute in person. And though the time he saw he must necessarily spend to accom¬ plish his object, and the season of the year
was far advanced, his purpose was fixed, and he set out attended by his faithful and worthy steward. Success crowned his benevolent labours, «-and, without any law-suit, this good man recovered Miss Howard's fortune to the full. He did more,—he brought the uncle of this amiable young lady, to a just sense of the impropriety (not to say the unnatural style) of his conduct,—he brought him to express contrition for his behaviour :—nay, he so far wrought on his feelings, which were not totally callous, that he expressed himself in the warmest tertis concerning the happiness -she had enjoyed for some time at Munster Abbey, and the prospects which opened to her of being soon established in so com¬ fortable and honourable a manner. This was not all. Her uncle declared he would double his niece's portion, as some compen¬ sation for that severity with which he had to his sorrow, treated so gentle and ami¬ able a young woman* When even a vulgar mind experiences success in the prosecution of any favourite
plan, it is apt to be elated. But this ela¬ tion has nothmg great or noble in it. The emotions of great souls, the souls of catho¬ lic benevolence, after v perceiving their schemes crowned with success, resemble the ecstasies of the blessed. Belford returned to Munster Abbey with a heart so grateful to heaven, and with a countenance so obviously expressive of" the happy issue of his expedition, that all the family anticipated the joyful tidings he was about to announce. As soon as he had taken some refresh¬ ment, he requested his lovely ward to walk with him a few minutes in the portico of the house,—and, without any speech or preface, he made known to her, in very few words, the success which had attended him, in the transaction with her uncle,— the just sense he entertained of the impro¬ priety of his former conduct towards her, —and of the resolution he had expressed, and would forthwith execute, of doubling her original fortune.
The gentle and forgiving Amelia raised her eyes to heaven* In soft and devotion¬ al accents, she exclaimed. " I adore the father of the fatherless. I bless, and will bless while I live, the lord of Munster Ab¬ bey. I forgive, and I bless also my uncle, may happiness ever attend him !" Mr Draper had received letters from town of a very satisfactory nature, respecting the business which he had been called to attend in court. His apologies w 7 ere readily sus¬ tained,—-and he had the additional plea¬ sure to learn, tliat the cause in which he liad been engaged was carried with ex¬ pences of suit. It w T as however absolutely necessary he should be soon in London, and therefore he resolved, two days after Belford's arrival, to wait on his beloved Amelia, and to make offer of his hand and heart. Lady Altamont, in benevolent concert with him, (for to this angel he had opened his whole soul) gave him an early op¬ portunity of meeting his beloved. Vou HL M
Miss Howard," we have seen, towered a- bove the greater part of her sex. She e- steemed,—«rshe loved Draper. His ?????? plishments, his character, his person, and his birth, were all unexceptionable. She did not detain him in the cruel bonds of suspense :—but, with the most angelic look, blushed consent, Praper's present feelings, we must ob ν serve, as on a former occasion, exceed all power of description. He was a young man of exquisite sensibility,—and the transports of joy he now experienced almost deprived him of* the power of speech. Bending his knee, and softly touching the hand of his Amelia, he blessed her a thousand times, and vowed " perpetual affection to the loveliest of her sex.' 1 Propriety marked every part of Draper's conduct. He proposed to his dearest Miss Howard, that he should go directly to her rather, (for so he justly denominated Bel¬ ford) and acquaint him with what has bee* concluded with the smiles of heaven. A- melia (the tear starting in her eye) said,
(i You do honour, Mr Draper, to your own judgment and feeHngs, and you do me the highest honour and pleasure, in going in¬ stantly to wait on this representative ofthe divinity on earth. My dear, very dear friend Lady Altamont, I know, has impart¬ ed already our mutual attachment to her father, and I am confident he will be more than happy, to find his formerly helpless and unprotected ward enjoying the prospect of becoming the companion for life of a man of honour and worth." Draper found Belford returning from a solitary walk, in which he was accustomed to indulge himself for the most solemn and serious purposes. He requested to know. whether it would intrude on the business of the day, if he should return for a very few minutes, as he had something very in¬ teresting to say, and which he considered it as his duty to impart to him. Belford never refused any thing but what was im¬ proper to be granted. He turned directly aside to a serpentine walk with Draper, and heard with exstacy his short detail. M2
Belford embraced, and blessed him. And when he understood the necessity of Mr Draper's being soon in London, in an open and parental manner, he expressed his earnest wish, that the nuptials should not be delayed a day beyond what propriety dictated. That day se'night was the time ap¬ pointed. Belford dispatched letters of in¬ vitation to his brother Charles and his lady, to the family of Draper-hall, and to the ve¬ nerable Vicar of Woodland, to honour Mun¬ ster Abbey with their presence, some days before the celebration of the marriage. Mr Hammond was to perform the ceremony, ? The blessed day soon dawned, when Bel¬ ford, (next to Draper) was to receive one of those feasts of the soul, of which the giddy and dissipated in the higher circles, are incapable of forming any idea.—Then- joys are all tumultuous, and mingled with such a derangement of mind, as bereaves them of all that is exquisite in genuine pleasuie.
The Lord of the Abbey, with his uni¬ form benignity, resolved to shew every mark of honour to his beloved Amelia on the present happy event.—As soon as he had been informed, by Mr Draper, of his having obtained Miss Howard's consent to become his bride ; he gave instant directions to his steward to prepare as sumptous an entertainment as ever appeared in Munster Abbey, and to put every servant in new and handsome liveries. The joyous day arrived, The sun shone bright. The sky was serenity itself. A- melia appeared in all the glory of form and beauty, dressed in the first style of elegant simphcity. At twelve at noon the master of this Paradise conducted her into the greajt drawing room, and Draper led his angel to the Altar. The ceremony was performed with that decorum nnd solemnity which distinguish¬ ed all the devotional offices of Hammond. The hours before dinner were spent ? visiting some favourite works of Belfords : · Mí
These were a few artificial cascades, amidst several groves of most romantic situation. Hehad labourers employed in these works ; and on no part of this good man's estate was an idle vagrant to be found. Such nuisan¬ ces, by the universal consent of the lord, the farmer, and the peasant, was hunted out of their society like an animal of prey. The company were next conducted to view one of those scenes to which we have formerly referred, namely, Mr Belford's im¬ provement of waste lands, which formerly were not worth sixpence per acre. But by judicious methods, familiar to a- depts in agriculture, they werel now cover^ ed with verdure, such as the season per¬ mitted, and shewed every appearance of their being in the highest state of cultiva¬ tion. After a few hours spent in this agreeable manner, the company returned, highly gra¬ tified, to partake of the princely entertain- inent prepared for them at the mansion of terrestrial bliss.
Whatever could please the eye of taste, ut table, at siderboard, and in service, Bel¬ ford honoured his welcome guests with, m all the fullness of an hospitable heart, and in all the benevolence cf a lover of, man- mankind. AH was joy,—all was happiness, fer superior to vulgar felicity. Amidst his conviviality, the arrival of two gentlemen, in a post-chaise and four, was announced. Mr Belford immediately waited on them ; when, to his surprise and delight, he found two old friends, though but young men, who had travelled from the most northerly quarter of Wales, on purpose to pay their respects to him and Mrs Bel¬ ford, and spend some time at Bennington Castle. The names of the gentlemen were Jones and Lewellin, both men of handsome pro¬ perty, Charles made them acquainted with the joys of the place, by the bappy fate of his
brother-in-law young Counsellor Draper, in being united to one of the most acconv plished women of the age. He shewed them the way to the room where the marriage-party were at table, and in his own easy and handsome man¬ ner introduced them to the company. They were a charming accession to these sons and daughters of joy who were here assembled. They joined in the festivity of the day, üke men of sentiment and of fashion. Lewellyn retained an, enthusiastic attach¬ ment to the ancient music of Wales, and played on the harp of that country with inexpressible taste, and with inimitable ef¬ fect. Mr Belford, whose museum was equal¬ led by none, had one of the finest of these ancient instruments. In the even¬ ing of the day, Mr Lewellyn was so o- bliging as to regale his company with many airs both of a grave and cheerful kind ;—
One air above all, quite adapted to the joy¬ ous occassion, entitled the Banks of Olla, mu with the loudest bursts of applause. This gentleman also sung to the harp, and he sung with the same exquisite taste that he played. The words were worthy of the bard of Mantua. They were descriptive of the blessings which attend beauty, accom¬ panied by virtue and goodness. The feast of Hymen was prolonged to six or seven days, when important and in¬ teresting business called on Mr Draper to prepare for his journey to town. Accordingly, on the morning of the eight day, after his soul had been transported by the possession of his angehe Amelia, he and his lovely spouse set out, amidst the bles¬ sings and the tears of all they left behind them. Next day, Charles and his lady, with his two friends from the north, went for Ben¬ nington Castle.
We must now drop these visitors at Mun-» ster Abbey, aad leave them in the enjoy¬ ments which virtue and worth ever confer on their votaries, We must concenter ma¬ ny years in a short, but interesting detail ; —a detail to be chiefly devoted to the his¬ tory af Belford, during the remainder of his days,—to Lord and Lady Altamont, and his beloved children. In the evening of that day, when Bel¬ ford's dearest friends and the strangers left him, Lady Altamont observed to him, with an enchanting smile, that " she could not but take notice of his absence of mind for some hours past." My child, he rejoined, you remark right¬ ly. I am sensible 1 have all the appearance? of an absent man ;—but I will not conceal from you nor my revered son, what has been passing in my mind for some time,— indeed for days, though you have not hi¬ therto discovered any symptoms of this thoughtfulness.
Know then, my dearest Aurelia, that I feel myself so overpowered by the singular and unmerited goodness of heaven, from such a quick succession of happy events, any one of which is a just foundation of the warmest gratitude to heaven, that I trem¬ ble, lest some fatal and untoward accident, (a part ofthe alloy of human Hfe) may soon damp all this overwhelming felicity, I am perfectly sensible, how unjustifiable it is in man to anticipate evil,—and to invade the prerogative of the Almighty, in daring to pry into futurity. But my happiness has been beyond all comparison. Out of dark¬ ness, how often has light arisen upon me with meridian brightness ? From the depths of woe, how often have I been raised to the summit of unforeseen and unexpected joys ? You, my child, have witnessed these bless¬ ed reverses of fortune. Lady Altamont, with that fiHal reverence which uniformly distinguished her charac¬ ter, begged leave to call to his father's re¬ collection, ** that Heaven had been pleased to gi\ r e him to taste, in former days, many a bitter cup of grief, and sorrow;—that,
from what she had learned from his own ex¬ cellent instructions, the moral government of the Almighty was regulated by laws marked with as striking uniformity and or¬ der as the natural world. And (she added with the accent of a Cherub) you-know, my dearest father, far better than your af¬ fectionate daughter, that to enjoy the pre¬ sent with gratitude and moderation, and to Uve. in a state of constant preparation to re¬ ceive the dispensations of Heaven with a submissive and resigned spirit, is the duty of every rational Christian," Belford thanked and blessed the best of children, and acknowledged the justice and piety of her observations. Lord Altamont appeared as this short conversation was finished, and informed ,his father, that he had just received letters from his steward, requesting his presence, as soon as possible, at Altamont-house ; and, if it was agreea- able, it would make him happy beyond ex¬ pression, could his affairs permit him to ac¬ company his children, for a few weeks, in¬ to Kent,
Though Belford had a thousand schemes of public utility or private benevolence in view, yet paternal affection commanded his assent to Lord Altamonts request,— But he requested, in his turn, that their stay at Altamont houfe, at present, might not exceed three weeks, for weighty reasons which he mentioned to his Lordship. Next day was occupied in preparations for the journey to Kent, and in Belford's giving directions to his faithful steward, to have every thing in readiness to enter on the execution of his various arrangements by his return to Munster Abbey. The journey to Altamont-house was per¬ formed in few days. This heavenly party arrived in perfect health; and found every thing in the highest order for their recep* tion. Belford's experience, and his excellent un¬ derstanding, qualified him for assisting his son in various important arrangements which he had now to make, respecting his estates. In a particular manner, he called his Lord Vox. HL N
ship's attention to the manner of letting leas¬ es of his farms. He showed him, from his per¬ sonal knowledge, that the real interest and comfort of landlord and farmer were inse¬ parably connected, and that no man of pro¬ perty, possessed at the same time of com¬ mon sense and humanity, ever forgot this important truth. Lord Altamont, with his usual attention., had requested by letter, sometime before he left Munster Abbey, an excellent lady, his near relation, to have the goodness to meet Lady Altamont and himself, when he should come to Kent, as Mr Belford and he would be under the necessity of being much engaged in business :—and as he could not bear the idea of his amiable wife being left so great a part of every day alone. Lady Monson arrived the day after his Lordship, and, with all the ease and affabi¬ lity \vhich ever flow from good-breeding, expressed her extreme happiness in having it in her power to make Lady Altamonts time pass away more pleasantly, while the
gentlemen were to be busily occupied, the greater part of the days they were to re¬ main in that part of the country.—This lady was a widow about forty, and per¬ fectly suited to Lady Altamonts taste and dispositions ;—for she was prudent, well-in¬ formed, benevolent and chearful. We shall not follow his Lordship and Bel¬ ford through all that train of agricultural operations which employed them very close¬ ly for almost three complete weeks,—Suf¬ fice it to observe, that the mornings and e- venings, before and after the tolls of the day, were perfect models of elegant, and chiefly of mutually instructive conversa¬ tion :—And, that after Altamont had brought successfully to a period the great object of his journey, they set out, at the time fixed, at Mr Belford's desire, for Mun¬ ster Abbey, having prevailed on Lady Mon¬ son to honour them with her company. In carrying into execution plans which merit the epithets of great and extensive, wise men have ever preferred uniform me¬ thods ' P —though, to an ordinary observer, N2
there may appear difference, or even, con¬ trariety. Sagacity, forethought, deliberation, ar¬ rangement, perspicuity,—all these qualities display themselves in men who have ac¬ complished w T ith success, enlarged schemes, either of a private or public nature. Belford possessed all those requisites,— and many more,—we mean, the virtues of the heart, which ever adorn the endow¬ ments of the head. During a period of nearly twenty years, this great and good man continued, by e- very exertion within the compass of human power, to promote the public undertakings of every kind which were carrying on, in his own vicinity and the adjacent counties. The first object on which Belford had now intensely fixed his mind, was the esta¬ blishment of two accademie s, novel in their nature, and noble in the institution.
. These institutions were designed for the reception of the sons and daughters of gen¬ tlemen of mediocrity of fortune, who, by calamity, or misfortune, had been reduced from affluence or competency, to very con¬ tracted circumstances. The two' academies founded by Mr Bel¬ ford were fituated, one at Rose mount, the o- ther at Biandford, The fund necessary for establishing and keeping them up, flowed in part from his own extensive and generous donation, and in part from a fubfeription on a very enlarg¬ ed fcale, which he raised among his nume¬ rous friends, relations, acquaintances, and neighbours ; and, finally, from the produce and improvement of fome lands, let at long leases, at à reduced rent, and under the ma¬ nagement and improvement of Mr Belford himself. In the evening of iife, it was his delight to train up' the youth around him to virtue, and to industry. Numberless were the young men, who owed their fortunes and prosperi- n 3
ty in life, to Mr Belford's parental care du¬ ring their infancy, or in the hour of adversi¬ ty.—The orphan, the widow, the industrious trader, fallen from ease and affluence by un¬ foreseen calamities,—the unprotected female, ensnared by the insidious arts of men,—the stranger, the wanderer, and captive,-the a- ged and difabled,—the sick and afflicted,—all these he looked upon as the unprovided chil¬ dren of one large family. He thought they had natural claims on his expanded heart; and, wisely reflecting that a rich man is but the steward of the Almighty, to \vhom he must be accountable for the use or abuse of his wealth, and who is intended by the Su¬ preme Being to enjoy prosperity merely for the profit of his indigent brethren, and to consecrate, by all possible means, his world¬ ly treasure to the honour and glory of his e- ternal Mafter, Mr Belford performed every work of charity and mercy ; not with osten¬ tation, but with an inexpressible pleafure, a mostbecomingease,and with that punctilious exactitude which flowed from his conviction that he was only doing a holy duty. Eacli object of compassion, who approached him, felt, like the fufferer debilitated by sicknefs,
(tranfported to a warm climate) the genial glow of his benevolence, and the warm rays of his reviving charity. To bid the wretched fmile,—to wipe the tear from offthe feeling eye,-^gently to lead back the deluded wanderer from the paths of vice,—to reconcile those that were at va¬ riance,—£0 advocate the cause of the distres¬ sed and abandoned,—to see justice done to the helpless,—and particularly to comfort and give independence to those objects of charity, who, from fenfibility an$ a. once ele¬ vated statiou in life, wither in the shade of adversity, without daring to face the frowns, or encounter the repulses, of insolent, unfeel¬ ing rieh men, and unable to mingle with the common sons and daughters of poverty,— These were the pleasures, these were the oc¬ cupations of Mr Belfords lire !—and to this last class he gave as though he had received* with agrace that enhanced the price beyond the power of expression,
CHAP. IV. W e deem it proper to offer fome apology to our readers, that good Mrs Melville, Bel¬ ford's mother-in-law, and the amiable Julia, Mr Belford's sister, have never again appear¬ ed in the course of the history of Mr Belford, esince their first visit to Munster Ab bey. Our plan was, not to introduce these good ladies till towards the rlose of our work; as Mrs Melville, immediately after her return to Shrewsbury from Munster Abbey, recei¬ ved a most pressing invitation from a near relation in Copenhagen to pay a visit to Denmark, with assurances that her visit wouid redound highly to her pecuniary ad¬ vantage.—She accepted of the invitation,
and both ladies set out for the Continent in less than six weeks after they had left their friends in Devonshire. Mrs Melville, before she left Shrewsbury, wrote her daughter Mrs Belford, that she proposed to return in a ihort time. The good old lady's health was much in¬ jured by the voyage. From the day of her landing at Copenhagen till the period she was called to throw off this mortal veil, five months had not fully elapsed,—Both Mrs Mel¬ ville and Julia were received by Mr Neville, their cousin, with the warmest affection ;— and, during the whole time of Mrs Melville's illnesis, his tender attention and assiduities could not be furpassed. After the death of this excellent lady, Ju¬ lia was blessed with every degree of paren¬ tal attachment, both from Mr Neville and his sister. Mv Neville was a batchelor, on the verge of seventy, and his sister only two years
younger,—but they were both under the in¬ fluence of the kind affections, and were fond of the society of young persons,—disposi¬ tions, which, alas ! little to the honour of our nature, do not generally distinguifh men and women in an advance d period of life. Mr Neville had no other relation except¬ ing Mrs Melville and Julia, but what were very remote,—and both he and his sister had destined their fortunes to their sister and niece. Julia, we have formerly mentioned, was all that was amiable and accomplished.—After the time had elapsed which duty and deco¬ rum had prescribed her not to appear in the circles of fashion, flie was introduced by her cousins to several English and Danish fami¬ lies of distinction, who were deemed supe¬ rior in Mr Neville's eyes, on account of their hospitality and their worth. Julia was now considered in Copenhagen as heiress to a handsome fortune ;—but her cousin had made no such declaration to the world as entitled any person to draw this
conclusion with certainty, even from all the partiality and aifection he had shown to¬ wards her. A parent, an uncle, or any near relation to a young woman who is dependent on them, can fcarce act a more inhumane and cri¬ minal part, than to permit the world to con¬ sider htr as a rich heiress, and, at the same time, not avow, openly and publicly, of what fortune she shall be immediately put in pos¬ session on her marrying a gentleman of ap- proven character, manners, and difposition. This cruel silence corrodes many a young heart,—rand, not unfrequently, brings the " grey hairs" of parents, and even other re¬ lations, " with sorrow to the grave."—-But there is not a corner of the land, in which instances of this barbarous conduct are not to be found, Neville was a gentleman of an amiable cha¬ racter and dispositions the very reverse of those to which we allude.—Delighted with Julia's manners, and warmly attached to the memory of her m toher, without affected
parade, and without secrecy, he settled on her a dowry of twenty thousand pounds, payable on the day of her marriage, and the residue of his fortune she was to enjoy after his death andthe death of his sister.—This residue was full fifty thousand more. This excellent young lady, independent of fortune, had charms which could not fail to attract numerous admirers.—But Ju¬ lia, to all the gentleness of her sex, added that firmness of mind which is perfectly consistent with excellence in the female character. Many young gentlemen, of va¬ rious characters and fortunes, were ambi¬ tious to win her heart, and failed not in all those assiduities which the spirit of elegant and virtuous gallantry inspires. Neville had acquired his fortune in the ho¬ nourable line of a Danish merchant. His transactions were extensive,—his foul was en¬ larged,—his principies noble ;—and there¬ fore he knew nothing, even in idea, of those mean and fordid arts which too often debase the character and manners of men in com- Vol. III, ?
mercer He had remarked;for some time, the excellent talents fbr business, on a great scale, thé ¡extensive vievvs,theattettttón, and assiduity of Mr Seward; the eldest son of a brother-merchant in the city, and who, to these qualities, added the superior merit of every species of moral worth,^a mind en¬ larged by ah assiduous cultivation of the belles lettres, and the most useful branches of philofbphy,^--a heart susceptible of every benevolent feeling,—awake to the miseries of the unfbrtunate^ever prompt to alle¬ viate their sorrows, and to anticipate their wants.*., ■;'■' Julia, whose mind was the seat of conge- iiial virtues,—and whose foft, benignant countenance confessed the native feelings of her heart,—was not long insensible to the merit of young Seward. Unacquainted with affectation, she was incapable of con¬ cealing the pleasure with which she listen- to his con versa tion,—whilst the philanthropy of his sentirnents so perfecily coincided with the benevolence of her own ideas.
At firft, captivated by the attractive gra¬ ces of Julia's person and manners,—Seward soon felt his heart more irresistibly assailed by the superior endowments of her mind. In every fuccessive converfation, he ¿¿^redis¬ covered new beauties Her unaffected mo¬ desty and artlefs candour, formed a striking contrast with the unblushing forwardness of modern beauties* —who, thinking they thus display their superior claims to fashion and good breeding* divest themselves of the most engaging of female virtues. Seward, too, had early witnessed the exv exemplary behaviour of Julia towards her excellent mother,—her anxious folicitude for her during her last illnefs,—and the warmth of maternal affection with which that solicitude was repaid :—Indeed, never were the hearts of mother and daughter li¬ nked to each other by flronger ties of reci¬ procal attachment, Mrs Melville, with a parent's fond assi¬ duity, had marked the expanding virtues of ? 2
Julia's ingenuous mind,—had taught the young ideas how to shoot,—had reared them to maturity,—and, with inexpressible de¬ light, had feen her unrivalled charms fur- passed by the blaze of her superior virtues. Julia, with refpectful love, looked up to her accomplished mother as the most perfect pattern of every female virtue,—listened to her instruction with unceasing pleafure,— hung upon her words—disclosed to her, as they arose, every emotion of her soul,—and consulted her in every action of her life, Seward, charmed by such endearing dis¬ plays of domestic virtue, felt more irresisti¬ bly attached to the amiable Julia,—and anticipated, in an union with her, the ex¬ treme of terrestrial happinefs,—rightly pre¬ saging, that a daughter of such exemplary filial piety would, with equal propriety, discharge every other relative duty. The overwhelming blow which deprived the tender-hearted Julia of the most indul¬ gent of mothers,—the best of friends,—the kind directrefs of all her actions,—whilst it
plunged her into an abyss of. unnittterable woe, aroused a thousand conflicting emo¬ tions in Seward's sympathetic foul.—The lovely mourner never appeared more amia¬ ble than in the midst of grief :—Sorrow fu- peradded to her other charms a melan- holy expression, irresistible to the heart of sensibility. Seward's tender assiduities became now more frequent and respectful, but, to a mind under the influence of exces¬ sive grief, he dared not talk of love. Mr Neville obferved the frequency of young Seward's visits, and his obvious par¬ tiality to his young ward,—and he obferved it with heart-felt fatisfadion. Open and in¬ genuous himself, scorning all art and finesse, he called one morning on Mr Seward, the father of his young friend, and made known to him what he had observed for some time past, at his own house, respecting the evi¬ dent attachment of his son George to his young cousin Julia Melville.—With the o- pennefs of an Englishman, he assured Mr Seward, that if his son could win Julia's heart he should have his hearty consent,
? %
with the dowry which he had declared to the world he had fixed for her, to be paid on the day of their marriage. He added, " I have reason to believe, my friend, that the young lady, on her part, beholds Seward with a partial eye, and I give him my per¬ mission, if his intentions are ferious, to lofe no time in making offer of his hand and heart." The old gentleman was struck with asto-* nishment ;—for he had never heard one syl¬ lable from his fon on the subject :—fo pru¬ dent,—fo cautious,— and so delicate was this young man. He embraced the very first opportunity to speak with George on this interesting topic.—He communicated to him in a few words* what Mr Neville had imparted to him, and he entreated to know whether he had ever made any declaration of his passion to Miss Melville. George re¬ pHed " he had not,—but, on the afternoon of this very day, I had refolved, my father, ίο lay before you, with that filial révérer»* which I owe to the best of parents, my in¬ tentions of taking the. first opportunity ofa-
vowing my attachment to Miss Melville, whom I have, with rapture, admired ever since I first saw her, and whose accomplish¬ ments and dispositions are excelled by none of her sex." " My fon, replied the venerable old man, you rejoice my heart,—It is my most ardent wish that you were fettled in life in a comfor¬ table and honourable manner,—and by your own, by Mr Neville's, and by the univerfal account of this young lady, I give you my hearty consent and my best blessing," George's addresses were honoured by Ju¬ lia. In a few weeks afterwards they paid their devotions at Hymen's altar,—and they are now blessed with a healthy and numerous family.
CHAP. V. We left Belford at Munster Abbey, with Lord and Lady Altamont, refolved to spend the greater part of his decHning years at this delightful mansion. Mr Belford had ever been a speculative man,-«-but, far different from common pro¬ jectors, his plans were never for the acquir¬ ing of mere lucre, or perhaps to be (like too many fpeculations in life) eventually preju¬ dicial to mankind, by shaking the basis of religion^—undermining established forms of government,—enlightening fubjects, merely to lead on the mercenary children of rapine to some untroad road to gain,—or to ex- 03
elude the poor, by abridging the objecls of their labour/ His researches, in all his tra¬ vels were, to fearn the better to^accommo- date,—the better to alleviate the wants of others.—He, like the humble but kind gleaner, tried every field until he had amas¬ sed a treafure to feed the poor fond family at his return, of which he fairly might be deemed the parent. Many were his pro¬ jects for public good ; fome failed, but ma¬ ny others he had the felf-approving gratifi¬ cation of executing during his life. We must also mention his institution of a fociety, by whom premiums were to be gi¬ ven annually, (according to circumstances) to, labouring men who had reared up a number of children without becoming a burden on the parish, . He established, in several parts of his e- ftates, manufacbries, and gave particular countenance to active and enterprising workmen employed in them.
Another favourite object he accomplish¬ ed, and with more difficulty than he had e- ver experienced in carrying any of his other fchernes into execution :—It was the inclos¬ ing and cultivating of many thousand acres of commons, those nuisances which dis¬ grace so many parts of England. His popu¬ larity and assiduity however carried this im¬ portant point, and he lived to see thousands of pounds raised annually, and added to the national wealth, where formeriy only a scan¬ ty subsistence could be found for a few half- starved animals. The last of Belford's noble actions, of a public nature, was, his procuring double fa- laries to a great number of poor curates.— This he affected by personal addresses to their superiors. His eloquence was fre¬ quently necessary to attain this object, for it was a kind of extorting from men of un¬ feeling minds, who performed almost no clerical functions, even the poor additional pittance of twenty, thirty, or forty pounds, out of living of many hundreds a-year.
The situation ofthe curates over England and Wales, afllicted this good man's soul.— He saw the fatal consequences of the po¬ verty and dependence of those humble men, to religion, to morals, and to government :— of those men* who are called, amidst misery and contempt, to perform all the practical parts of the sacred rites of worship, and to instruct, reprove, and exhort the people. Belford had now arrived at the zenith of sublunary honour and glory,—a species of adoration was paid to him by all orders of society. Of no man in the kingdom could it be said, with equal justice, that he had completely answered the end of his exist¬ ence in this world. From his youth he had learned the invaluable lessons of piety and virtue, ever mingled vvith moderation and benevOİence ;—he never lost one moment of bis life in dissipation,—he knew the in¬ calculable value of time,—his fortune was chiefly devoted to acts of public or private beneficence ;—yet (such was his cecono¬ my) Munster Abbey was, at this time, ihe
mansion of affluence, elegance, and hospita- Hty. The most enlarged and extensive mind can form no accurate calculation of the ex¬ tent to which the influence of this great man's example reached.—Such calculations are beyond the powers of man. Exalted patterns of virtue not only diffuse their be¬ nign effects over the prefent generation, but these effects defcend to ages to come. It is not too late to inform our readers, that Belford, under heaveri, owed all his ex¬ cellency and superiority of virtue and fame, to the firil of blessings which God bestows on man.—His mother was a woman of un¬ derstanding, prudence, temper, and princi¬ ples, very transcendent. From infancy this heavenly parent " taught tlie young idea how to shoot,"—day after day she saw ** the labour of her foul, and was satisfied," It is a fact with which every one the least versed in the history of mankind is perfect¬ ly acquainted, that the world has been in- Voi. III. Ρ
debted, in every age, for the far greater number of illustrious men, in every depart¬ ment and profession of life, to the early e- ducation they have received from mothers of superior worth and intelligence. Anti¬ quity and modern times record the names of thousands of these angehe characters. But let it not be rashly and Weakly ima* gined, that thefe distinguished women were celebrated chiefly for tbeir learning, their e- loquence, or their taste for the fine arts,— No : thefe are not the provinces in which the great superintending Power has called the fairer part of the creation to immorta- lifc their names ;—though a certain degree of knowledge and leaser literary accomplish¬ ments are in all ages necessary to women of genteel rank in life,—yet, in the eye of Eternal Wifdom, in the mind of every map, and of every woman of good understanding, it is an established, invariable adage, " That a mother's chief department is domestic. and that to fill this department with ho¬ nour, requires talents and virtues which a- dorn human naître.
What signify all the frivolous accomplish¬ ments and acquisitions of common education? —of what consequence is a little fmatter- ing in some species of polite literature, in comparison of those virtues which are the ornament of the soul, which alone enable a mother to rear up her offspring to immor¬ tal fame? Without minutely dividing Belford's ac¬ tions by the terms of months and years, we have now followed him above the period of life allotted to the far greater part of the sons of men. He had now attained his seventy eighth year. Temperance and e- quanimity, with a " conscience void of of¬ fence towards God and man," had preserved all his mental faculties and vigour. Yet the moitai frame began rapidly to fail. His me¬ mory was the first of his powers which was evidently afíected, though yet but in a small degree. Fully sensible that the whole fabric must soon be shaken, he thus addressed his most amiable and beloved Altamont : P 2
" My son, I feel I am going the Way of all the earth :—Gracious Heaven has be¬ stowed on me firmness of mind to make such settlements, many years past, as I have never had one moment's temptation to alter or amend. My confidence in your wisdom and worth, of which you have afforded me innumerable delightful evidences, rendered it perfectly superfluous to express, in my last will, what I now personaUy, and nearly with my dying breath, request of you, which is, that you will, to the utmost of your pow¬ er, continue to promote t schemes I have established, and carry ?? those which are not yet fully completed. To offer reHgious or moral counsels to my Altamont, or to recommend to him a parental care of his people and his domes¬ tics, I should deem an insult to that exem¬ plary conduct which you have uniformly displayed, and which has been one of the many solaces of my soul, for which I have daily offered thanks and praises to the giv¬ er of all good. Of your tender love formy dearest Aurelia, and your singular love and
attention to your children, I am every day the happy witness. The blessings of an aged father ever be with you !" Lady Altamont, and his dearest Aurelia, were the objects of his most tender concern. He now devoted much of his remaining hours to " sweetly serious converse" with them : And they listened to him, as to an angel. He often blessed them, and embraced them ; and in the pathetic ardor of patriar¬ chal affection, he " commended them to God and his holy keeping." All real Chris¬ tians, who have the exercise of their under¬ standing, close the last,—the most interest¬ ing scene, in the same affecting and exem¬ plary manner. The day of dissolution approached.—The western sun now shot a feeble ray :—The scene was calm and awful. Three weeks after the interview with Altamont, which we have just mentioned, Belford was sensi¬ ble of those alarming symptoms which are P3
the certain presages of deliverance from the toils of our earthly pilgrimage. Every domestic, all the inhabitants ofthe village, all the country, felt the pangs of af¬ fectionate children. Three days after the harbingers of death gave the alarm to Lord and. Lady Altamont, he feebly expressed his desire to give a· part¬ ing embrace to his children. This great and good man, beginning with his lovely child, gave every one around him^ severally, his blessing ; and lifting his eyes to heaven, and feebly uttering, " I go to your God and to my God," his spirit ascend¬ ed to heaven, without a groan! I come, I come ï and joyfully obey The fatal voice that summons mê away : With pleasure I resign this mortal breath, And fall a willing sacrifice to death. ? welcome stroke, that gives me liberty ï Welcome, as to the slave, a jubilee ! Of the vain world I take my last àctìeu,
The promis'd land is how within my view ; The ckuds dispel, the stprrny danger's past, And I attain the peaceful shores at last ! My hope's dear objecis now are all in sight, The lands of love, and unexhausted light ; The flowing streams of joy, and endlefs bhss, The shining plains, and walks of paradife y The trees of life, immortal fruits andflow'rs, The tall celestial groves and charming bow'rs: I breathe the balmy emyprean air, The songs of angels and their harps I hear ; And scarcethe fierce tyrannic joy can bear, **?? ^L *^ ■ ■ &. -^ ^. *?■ ^^ <■? *?, ^^ .' ■ : 'ft*- ■' *|* *f* ■ ·Ρ» .·Ρ ' . *I* ■ **W . *^- " ^*W * ***** * *, * * * *- How deplorable is it, to reflect, that so few characters as Belford's adorn humani¬ ty !—And how is this to be accounted fbr ? It is mere pedantry, or ignorance of the na¬ ture of man/ to ascribe this melancholy fact wholly to the corruption of our nature, and to the force of bad example. These, we grant, are causes which operate with wonderful effect on all orders of men,
But the true radical cause ofthe vast pro¬ portion of mankind becoming early the vo¬ taries of folly and vice, and of the very small number of characters, resembhng Belford's, appearing on the theatre of life, must be accounted for in the total neglect of education ; or a defective species of educa¬ tion, far worse than none. And we will be forgiven to repeat, that the moral nur¬ ture of the nursery, the conscientious dis¬ charge of duty by mothers of good sense, good principles, and (we had almost said, above all) good tempers, have been and ever will be productive of consequences to the happiness of mankind, beyond all the powers of calculation. The memory of Belford will be held not only in Munster Abbey, but over all the country round, "in everlasting remem¬ brance." And had there been no Alta¬ mont to raise a monument to perpetuate his fame, a thousand would have been found to contend for the honour of transmitting his name to the latest posterity,
CHAP. VL After the laft offices were performed to the departed saint, his brother Charles, Mr Draper of Draper Hall, and good Mr Ham¬ mond, who had been all prefent at the fu¬ neral, attended, at Lord Altamonts desire, in the library of his deceased friend, to wit* ness the opening of his will. It is almost superfluous to obferve, that Belford's will must necessarily be every thing that was natural, parental, wise, and good. Indeed it was perfecly entitled to all these epithets.
The marriage-contract between Lord and Lady Altamont iettied the estate of Mun¬ ster Abbey, and his grandfather's other e- states, on their Lordship's second son.— Handsome provisions were alfo made for his other children at the same time. Belford's ceconomy was such, amidst his many expen¬ sive schemes, and his uniform hospitality, that each of Lord Altamonts younger chil¬ dren were possessed of handsome fortunes ; and the lovely family were now four sons and two daughters. He bequeathed a thousand pounds to each of bis hospitals, (for they may be said in some measure to be of his own crea¬ tion) and fifty pounds to each of the poor curates whose salaries he had procured to to be doubled, but who were still far from comfcrtable in their stations. To each domestic, an annuity in propor¬ tion to their services, to none lefs than ten pounds.«—To his butler, who had lived with him forty years, fifty pounds a-year,—?
and to his faithful steward, two hundred, for life. A great many mourning rings he had ordered, as testimonies of regard for those characters, of both sexes, whom he had ap¬ proved and admired on account of their vir¬ tue and happinefs in their several stations and professions in life. Lord Altamont, with the excellent men .we have just mentioned, Mr Charles Bel¬ ford, Draper, and Hammond, were nominat¬ ed guardians to the younger children. The heir of Munster Abbey was declar¬ ed, by the will, not to be arrived at the age .of majority until he completed his twenty- fourth year,—a whe and judicious destina¬ tion ! Happy had it been for millions over Europe in past ages, and in the present, that the period of majority had been pro¬ longed by law still further,—many an e- ftate might have been preserved,—many a constitution saved from diseafe and debi-
lity,—and many a character indefaced from infamy. The amiable Lord and Lady Altamont were now at the head of a beautiful fami¬ ly, and two large estates :—Happy in the en¬ dearing society of each other,—blessed with the most dutiful children,—adored by their servants, and every peasant in the country,~beloved by people of their own rank and connections,—dignified by the rectitude of their principles, and benignity of disposition, they were almost too happy for this world of trouble and mifery. His Lordship's ample fortune enabled him not only to live in a magnificent, elegant stile, but, what was an object often thoufand times more moment in the mind of this represen¬ tative of the departed Belford, it conferred on him the ability of diffusing his benevo¬ lence around him, both in Devonshire, and his own estate in Kent :—Above all, it ena¬ bled him to fulfil the first and most ardent desire of his heart,—namely, to give his dear children the most perfect, elegant, and refined education. His lovely Aurelia's i-
deas beat in unison with his own. In¬ deed, Heaven designed them for each o- ther. Lord Altamont was the best, the most affectionate, and the most indulgent of husbands. He viewed, with horror and dis¬ gust, what is commonly denominated a fa¬ shionable husband,—who, instead of paying that delicate attention to his wife, which e- very woman (who gives up the world for him) is entitled to—spends his time with his dogs, horses, gamblers, &-c. Is this the way to procure happinefs to himself, or pro¬ mote that ofa deserving female ? Surely uot. Lord Altamont would frequently exclaim, " How little do men of the world know of true and lasting pleasures ! Their enjoyments are only momentary,—their pleasures arc mixed with that nameless something which prevents them from tastingany one real com¬ fort. They are constantly on the wing for Vol. HL Q
new objects of mirth and diversion : but all will not do :—When they have attained e- very wish, still they are not happy." How different, how widely different, did the en¬ viable Lord and Lady Altamont pass their time !—They were never tired of being ra¬ tional, but every hour of their existence were, more attached and more dear to each other;—and woukl often wonder how so many beings in this world, furrounded with affluence, couhl be unhappy. Lord Alta¬ mont frequently looked with tenderness on his dear beloved wife, and exclaimed, " Be assured, my love, there is no happinefs 'm this life compared to domestic happiness :—Eve¬ ry man that has not tasted that blessing, has yet to learn the true pleasures of this world." Lady Altamont was, as we have mention¬ ed before, the most amiable of her sex, and possessed of every virtue that could adorn the human mind, Her whole happiness was
centered in her beloved husband and her children ;—and it was almost impossible for any one being to enjoy more real felicity than the enchanting Lady Altamont at this period,when an unexpected misfortune turn¬ ed, for a while, all her joys into sorrow and misery. But, such is the fleeting pleasures of this life,—the moment we are, as we ima¬ gine, experiencing all the blessings of the world, our enjoyments are suddenly dashed from our fond embrace, and ??? are instant¬ ly plunged into an ocean of wretchednefs ; which ought to be a fufficient lesson for im¬ perfect mortals, to shew the uncertainty of real pleasure here, and a convincing proof that this world is beyond all doubt intended as a scene of probation. Lord Altamont, as was his constant prac¬ tice, rode out one morning to view the im- provements of his estate, and give direc-
tions to the many labourers employed on his extensive plantations : He was in sight of his workmen, when his horse suddenly took fright, and flew off with such velocity, that in a few minutes he dashed his rider to the ground, to all appearance lifelefs. The men ran to his assistance, where they found him senselefs, and much bfuised from the fall. Lord Altamont was adored by every class of people, and particularly by his poor la¬ bouring peasants : They rent the air with their cries and lamentations : They support» cd him in their arms to the house. The lovely Lady Altamont was strolling in the garden with her children, when she perceived her dear lord in the arms of his distracted peasants.—She screamed, and in¬ stantly fell to the ground ! What a scene ! Every servant was employed in endeavour¬ ing to restore the two insensibles to life. Lady Altamont was the first that recover-
cd :—She flew to the apartment of her still lifelefs busband, where she found him co¬ vered with blood. The servants had by this time procured the best advice :—However, little or no hopes were entertained of his e- ver again opening his eyes on his beloved wife, who was in a state little short of mad¬ ness and distraction,—Gracious Heaven ! she exclaimed, restore my Altamont to the wretched Aurelia !—Oh ! my love, could I once more behold thy manly countenance, animated wdth returning life, my future days should be spent in praising the Omni¬ potent Being for his merciful kindnefs í In a few minutes Lord Altamont difco¬ vered fome faint signs of life :—he was im¬ mediately ordered to be put in bed, and the physician never left him for a moment un¬ til he found him free from every idea of danger, 0.3
Lord Altamont was now perfectly sensible : —His lovely wife was all gratitude, all joy, and delight : She fell on her knees, and of¬ fered up her most fervent prayers to Hea¬ ven,—threw her delicate arms round the neck of her fond restored husband, in a state of rapturous intoxication !—She was a- gain too happy. Lord Altamont, however, recovered but slowly ; the wound he had received, though slight, continued to keep him in a degree of fever, and he felt weak with the loss of blood ;—but when his incomparable wife was sitting by his side, he forgot all pain in the delight of attending to her innocent though improving conversation, and would frequently press her and his dear children to his breast, with the most unbounded affec¬ tion and love.
He attended to the improvement of his tender offspring, and made it his whole study to rear them in the paths of every thing noble, good, and virtuous,—whilst his angelic AureHa assisted him in this enviable task. In a few weeks Lord Altamont w r as per¬ fectly restored to health, and his friends :— The joy of every servant was without bounds. Lord Altamont thanked them with 'the most gracious condescension for their affection to¬ wards him, and each of them was favoured with some tokens of his bounty. Thus again was happy Munster the seat of every earthly happiness, delight, and plea¬ sure. *********** ***********
No human being, that has not tasted such enjoyments, can form any idea of the con¬ tinued happiness of this superior couple.— Each day encreased their love and affection, —and each moment feemed lost that was spent apart from the dear object of their regard. How trivial,—bow fulsome, was the unmeaning prattle of the conceited cox¬ comb, to the delicate refined Lady Alta¬ mont !—and how disgusting appeared the forward advances of the modern coquette, to the manly dignified Altamont ! Few people but what aspired to the ac¬ quaintance of the peaceful inhabitants of Munster Abbey,—but few,—very few, were their intimates.—They were unfashionable enough to be pleased with the endearing society of each other, and, which is seldom the case, never felt the want of company.
But, when they were separate, * the un¬ friendly crowd to them appeared absurd, and unlike rational beings,—but the sensi-* ble elegant improving conversation ofa few select friends, was their great delight. Lady Altamonts whole soul was bound up in her dear husband, and, since the last acci¬ dent, that had so nearly deprived her of the invaluable treasure, he became doubly dear to her >*-Such it is with every blessing and happiness we are permitted to enjoy :—The instant we are, or imagine we are, going to be deprived of it, then, and then only, do we know its true value. Lady Altamont would frequently gaze on the countenance of her Lord, with her fine eyes overflowing with tenderness, and pa¬ thetically exclaim : "Oh ! my lave !— what state of happiness can equal that of two beings, bound to each other by the
sacred ties of marriage !—Surely none :— No, there is no true felicity in life, but in this enviable state,—all other joys are mo¬ mentary, are nothing. I could dwell for ever on the pleasing subject!—Oh ! my dear,—dear husband, how can any one be unhappy in this blessed enjoyment ?" Lord Altamont embraced his beloved wife with all the lovfe, affection, and tenderness of an indulgent husband, and assured her he was delighted with her innocent observa¬ tions, and that his own ideas coincided, in every word, with her own,—that he was as happy as man couid be. Love gives a new existence to the soul, —a character of mildness and humanity :— While other passions concentrate man in himself,—Love makes him exist in another object :—This precious delicate sensibility, is the greatest virtue :—Love cannot dwell
in the breast of the unfeeling stoic :—Love communicates its heavenly amiable ideas, —it inspires the most sublime passióé¬ it is a friendly passion to genius and vir¬ tue !—No wonder, then, that these two exalted beings, ever were happy.—The tender passion we have described, detach us from ourselves, and accustom us to at¬ tach ourselves to others :—it weakens pride, and sweetens the bitters of Hfe :—it is a pas¬ sion worthy of Angels :—In the moments of its truest bliss, it occupies the whole soul, and absorbs every other thought,— the lover becomes a husband,—a parent !— what undiscovered joys open on his soul !— he is a transported being !—he is happy !—· he is more than happy !—at least, such was the situation of Altamont at this period, O tell me, thou, for whom I prove The softest languishments of love,
Thou dearer than all human things, From whom my purest pleasure springs, *********** <Tf »Γ" π? "? * *?* ?* <? ?> *»|> ** Lord and Lady Altamont continued to en¬ joy years of uninterrupted felicity :—Their sweet children's improvement in every ele¬ gant and useful branch of education, was their chief amusement and delight :—Their sons were now ready to commence their studies at the University. Oxford was the seminary to which Altamont had ever dis¬ covered a partiality for. The lovely girk were provided with proper governesses at home, and instructed in every thing be¬ coming the tender offspring of the incom¬ parable Lord and Lady Altamont, Lady Altamont assisted in this pleasing de¬ lightful task, and with the most heavenly
sweetness, infused into their young inno¬ cent minds every moral and sublime instruc¬ tion. No doubt, the giddy unthinking part of the fashionable world, will be surprised to find the lovely accomplished Lady Al¬ tamont so insensible to what they call the pleasures and amusements of life, and will of course give her up as lost to every thing charming* But little do these infatuated, misled be¬ ings, know of true happiness ; for, as we have before mentioned, there is no enjoy¬ ment equal to domestic fehcity and peace¬ ful retirement. Sweet Sohtude, when life's gay hours are past, Howe'er we range, in thee we ?? at last; Vol. HI. R
Toss'd through tempestuous seas, the voy¬ age o'er, Pale we look back, and bless the friendly shore. Our own strict judges, our past life we scan, And ask if virtue has enlarged the span ¿ ; If bright the prospect, we the grave defy, Trust future ages, and contented die. ********** It might justly be said of the enviable inhabitants of Munster Abbey, that they had spent every hour of their past lives in acts of some moral good to themselves, and to the comfort and alleviation of distress in others. They continued their ever revered departed father's various plans of public utility and privare good :—their benevolence know no bounds.
They spent their time alternately at Mun¬ ster Abbey and at Altamonts house, in Kent ; but the peaceful shades ol Munster Abbey were their favourite place of residence. Indeed, this charming scene of innocent re¬ tirement was enough to incline the minds of its blessed inhabitants, to expect a fife of serenity, peace, and- happiness, which they continued to enjoy many, many years :— And in this endearing situation we leave them, to experience that uninterrupted fe¬ licity they are so justly entitled to.
