Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
The bravo of Venice: a romance: translated from the German
THE BRAVO OF VENICE. Translated from the German. BOOK THE FIRST
CHAP. I. Venice. It was evening------ Multitudes of Ught douds, partiaUy Ulumined by the moon-beams, overspread the horizon, and through them floated the full moon in tranquil majesty, whUe her splendour was reflected by every wave of the Adri¬ atic Sea. AU was hushed around; gently was the water rippled by the в night
2 night wind ; gently did the night wind sigh through the Colonnades of Venice. It was midnight«—and still sat a stranger, solitary and sad, on the bor¬ der of the great Canal. Now with a glance he measured the batüements and proud towers of the city ; and now he fixt his melancholy eyes upon tlie waters with a vacant stare. At length he spoke: —"Wretch that I am, whither shaU I go ? Here sit I in Venice, and what would it avail to wander further?— What wiU become of toé ! AU now slumber, save myself! the Dogé rests on his couch bf down; the beggar's head presses his Straw piÜtíw; but for Ше there is no bed, eäcept the cold tktrip earth ! there is no Gdndoleer so vVretdied, but he khdws where to find workbý day, and Shelter by niğht-=>- whUe
3 while /... . whüe I. ... Oh ! dreadful is the destiny of which I am made the sport !"— He began to examine for the twenti¬ eth time the pockets of his tattered garments. —" No ! not one paolo by heavens ! —and I hunger almost to death !"— He unsheathed his sword ; he waved it in the moonshine, and sighed, as he marked the glittering of the steel. , — " No, no ! my old and true com¬ panion, thou and I must never part! î.fiıvethou shalt remain, though I starve for it.—Oh! »was not tlut a golden time, when Valeria gave thee to me, and when as she threw the belt over my shoulder, I kist thee and Valeria ?—She s 2 has
4 lias deserted us for another world ; but thou and I will never part in this."— He wiped away a drop which hung upon his eyo-lid. —" Psha ! 'twas not a tear ! tho night wind is sharp and bitter, and makes the eyes water ; but as for tears. .. . Absurd! my weeping-days are over."— And as he spoke, the uiifortunate [for such by his discourse and situation he appeared to be] dashed his forehead against the earth, and his lips were al- ' ready unclosed to curse the hour which gave him being, when he suddenly seem¬ ed to recollect hirr-elf. He rested his head on his elbow, and sang mourn¬ fully the burthen of a song, which had often delighted his childhood in the cas¬ tle of his ancestors.
—·" Right '" he said to himself, " Were I to sink under the weight ot my destiny, I sliould bc mvse'f no longer "— At that moment he heard a rustling at no great distance He looked around and in an adjacent street, wheh tbe moon faintly enlightened, he pe-ceivd a tall f gure wrapt m a doak, pacing »low ly baiiwards and forwards —" 'Tıs the hand of God, which hatlı guided him hither—Yes'—1*11— I'll beg ' —Better to play the beggar in Venice, than the vülaın in Naples, for the beggar's htart may beat nobly though covered by rags '"— He said, sprang from the ground, and hastened towards the adjoining sti eet luit as he entered it at one end, he per¬ ceived another person advancing through в 3 the
ь the other, of whose approach the first was no sooner aware, than he hastily retired into the shadow of a piazza, as anxious to conceal himself —" What can this mean «"' thought our mendicant " Is yon eaves-dropper one of death's unlicensed ministers' Has he received the retaining fee of some impatient heir, who pants to pos sess the wealth of the unlu».ky knave who comes stroUmg along yonder so care'°ss and unconscious '—Be not so confident, honest friend 1 I'm at your elbow ' — He reti ed further into the shade, and silently ard »lowly drew near the lurker, who stirred not from his place fhe stranger had aheady passed them by, when the concealed villain sprang «suddenly upon lum, raised his right hand in which a poignard was gleaming, and
1
and before he could give the bjpvv, was fcUed to the earth by the arm of the men¬ dicant. The stranger turned hastily toward«, them ; the Bravo started up, and fled ; the beggar smiled. —" How now ?" cried the 6tranr,er ; " what does aU this mean ?''— —" Oh! 'tis a mere jest, Signor, which has only preserved your Ufe." — —" What ? My life ? How so ?"— " The honest gentleman, who has just taken to his heels, stole behind you with true cat-like caution, and had al¬ ready raised his dagger, when I saw him—You owe your life to me, and the service is richly worth bne little piece of money! Give me some alms, Signor, в 4 for
8 for on my soul I am hungry, thirsty, cold!"— —" Hence, scurvy companion! I know you, and your tricks too weU. This b au a concerted scheme between you, a design upon my purse, an at¬ tempt to procure both monoy and thanks under the lame pretence of having saved me from an assassin.—Go, feUow, go ! practise these dainty devices on the Doge's creduUty, ifyouwiU; but with Buonarotti you stand no chance, beUeve me."— The wretched starving beggar stood like one petrified, and gazed on the taunting stranger. _ ■ — « No, as I have a soul to save, Signor, 'tis no lye that I teU you !—'tis th<» plain truth ; have compassion, or I die this night of hunger."— —« Be-
9 —" Begone this instant, Isay, orby heaven... »"— The unfeeling man here drew out a concealed pistol, and pointed it at his preserver. —" Merciful Heaven ! and is it thus that services are acknowledged in Ve¬ nice?"— —" The watch is nt no great dis¬ tance; I need only raise my voice, and
—" Helland confusion! do you take me for a robber then?"— —" Make no noise, I tell you! Bc quiet, you had better!"— —" Hark you, Signor! Buonarotti «s your name, I think? I vvill write it down,
10
down, as belonging to ihe second scoun¬ drel with whom I have met in Ve¬ nice."— He paused for a moment; then con¬ tinuing in a dreadful voice,—" And when," said he, " thou, Buonarotti, shalt hereafter hear the name of Abel¬ lino ...... tremble!" — Abellino turned away, and left the hard-hearted Venetian.
π
CHAP. 11. The Banditti. Ако now rushed the unfortunate wüdly through the streets of Venice; he railed at fortune; he laughed and cursed by turns ; yet sometimes he sud¬ denly stood stiU, seemed as pondering on some great and wond'rous enterprize, and then again rushed onwards, as if hastening to its execution. Propped against a column of the Sig¬ noria, he counted over the whole sum ofhis misfortunes. His wandering eye- baUs seemed to seek comfort; but they found it not. —" Fate," he at length exclaimed in a parox-
12 a paroxysm of despair; " Fate has con¬ demned me to be either the wUdest of adventurers.... or one, at the relation of whose crimei the world must shud¬ der! To astonish is my destiny. Ro¬ salvo can how no medium ; Rosalvo «can never act like common men!—Is it not the hand of fate, which has led me hi¬ ther? Who could have ever dreamt, that the son of the richest Lord in Naples should have depended for a beggar's alms on Venetian charity! ƒ....ƒ, who feel myself possest ot strength of body and energy of soul fit for executing the most daring deeds.... Behold me creeping in rags through the streets of this inhos¬ pitable city, and torturing my wits in vain to discover some means, by which I may rescue life from the jaws of famine! Those men, whom my munificence nou¬ rished, who at my table bathed their worthless souls in the choicest wine of Cyprus, and glutted themselves with every
13 every delicacy which the globe's four quarters could supply, those very men now deny to my necessity even a miser¬ able crust of mouldy bread.—Oh! that is dreadful, cruel! Cruel of men! cruel of Heaven!"— He paused; he folded his arms, and sighed. —«.« Yet will I bear it! I will submit to my destiny! I will traverse every path, and go through every degree of human wretchedness; and whate'ermay be my fate, I will be still myself, and whate'er may be my fate, I will itili act greatly I ------ Away then with the Count Rosalvo, whom once all Naples idoli <-.ed; now ___ now am I the beggar Abellino ! ■ —A beggar?—that name stands last in the scale of worldly rank, but first in the list of the famishing, the outcast, and the unworthy."— Something
14 Something rustled near him—Abelli¬ no gazed around. He was aware of the Bravo, whom he had struck to the ground that night, and whom two coin- partions of a similar stamp had now joined. As they advanced, they cast inquiring glances around them. They were in search of some one. —" It is of tbee, that they are in search," said Abellino ; then advanced a few steps, and whistled. The ruffians stood still—they whis- p«3red together, and seemed to be un¬ decided, ι AbeBmo whistled a second time. ·—" 'Tis he!"—«aiuld he hear one of them say distinctly—wd in a moment after they advani-ed slowly towards him.
Abellino
ıs Abellino kept his place, but unsheathed his sword. The three unknown [they were masked] stopped a few paces from him. ^-" How now, fellow?" quoth one of them, " what is the matter? Why stand you on your guard?"— Abellino __It is as well that you should be made to keep your distance, for I ¿«дай; you; you are certain honest gentlemen, who live by taking away the lives of others.— The First Ruffian—Was not your whistling addre«· to us ? Abellino— u was. A Ruffian—Andwhat would you with us?
Abellino
18 Abeffino—Hear me! I am a miser- able wretch, and starving; «give me an alms out of your booty! A Ruffian—An alms? Ha! ha! ha! By my soul, that is whimsical!- -Alms from us, indeed!—Oh! by aU means! No doubt, you shaU haveahns in plenty! AbeUino—Or else give me fifty se¬ quins, and I'U bind myself to your ser¬ vice till I shaU have worked out my debt, A. Ruffian—Aye? And pray then, who may you be? AbeUino—A starving wretch, the re¬ public holds none more miserable. Such юа 1 at present; but hereafter .... I have powers, knaves .... this arm could pierce an heart, though guarded by three breastplates; this eye, though surround¬ ed
17
ed by Egyptian darkness, could still see to stab sure. A Ruffian—Why then did you strike me down even now? Abellino —In the hope of being paid for it; but though I saved his life the scoundrel gave me not a single ducat. A Ruffian—No? So much the better. —But hark ye, comrade! are you sin» cere? Abellino—Despair never lyes. A Ruffian—Slave, shouldst thou be a traitor ..., Abellino—My heart would be within reach of your hands, and уош- daggers would be as sharp as novy. c lhe
t«
Пе Üvm 4w«ľ?rpus «JmpaeioM again whispered among tht^riselveíj for % few moments, after which they returned tbárá^ses» »№ the,sbealh, —" Come on then," said one of them; » fpltow «us to лиг borne. It «were un¬ wise ta talk over certaja matters in the open Street,"^ W I follow you," «was Abellino'· an· ewtr; H fait tremble, should anyone of you dare to treat me as a foe.—Com¬ rade, forgive me that I gave your ribs somewhat too hard a squeeze just «now; I will be your sworn brother in recom- pense.*'·™- —" We are on honour," cried the «banditti with one voice; « no harm ihaJl happea ta you: he, who does yö« an injury, shall be to «w as a foe. A fellow
1»
fellow of your humour suits us well: follow us, and fear not."— And on they went, Abellino marcbing between two of them. Frequent were the lodes of suspicion, which he cast around him; but no Ш design was per¬ ceptible inthe banditti. They guided Him onvvârdb, till tliey reached á canal, laosetled' agendola, plared themselves in it, «and rowed, till they- had gained the most remote quartet of Venice. They landed, threaded several bye-stŕeéts, and at length knocked at the door of an house of inviting appearance—It w·«·). opened by a young woman, who con¬ ducted them ihto a plain but comfort¬ able chamber; füany were thè looks of Sürprize and enquiry which she kast bti the bewildered half-pleased half-anxious Abe'lino, who knew not whither he tad beért cöttvèyed, and still thought it unsafe to confide entirely ift the pro¬ mises of the banditti.
20
CHAP. III. The trial of strength. Scarcely were the bravos seated, when C'nthia [for that was the young woman's name] was again summoned to the door; and the company was now in¬ creased by two new-comers, who ex¬ amined their unknown guest from head Ло foot. —" Now hen," cried one of those, who had conducted Abellino to this re¬ spectable society, " let us see, what you are like."— As he said this, he raised a burning lamp from the table, and the light of its flame
21 flame was thrown fuU upon AbeUino's countenance. —" Lord, forgive me my sins!" screamed Cinthia; " out upon him! what an ugly hound it is!"— She turned hastily round, and hid her face with her hands. Dreadful was the lopk, with which AbeUino repaid her compUment. —" Knave," said one of the ban¬ ditti, " nature's own hand has marked you out for an assassin—Come, pry'thee be frank, and teU us, how thou hast con¬ trived so long to escape the gibbet? In what gaol didst thou leave thy last fet¬ ters? Or ftom what gaUey hast thou taken thy departure, without staying to sav adieu?"—
AbeUino folded his arms. с 3 "If
-«* У î \xt such *» УОИ di-scribi},'' said he with an air of authority ¡uid in a voice which made his heai ers tremble, " 'tis for me all the betteft Wkate'cr шау be my future mode of Sfe, Heaven can have oo right to, Ы fault «vith it, since it was for that it formed and fitted me.''— The fcve bravosi stepped aside, and consulted together; the subject of ttteir Conference is easy tobe divined. In the meanwhile АЬеШпо, remained quiet and bdiaëreet to, what was passing. Ateu a, few UM>U»tes they agaia apr proaçhodhim: one,Miliosi countenance was the most ferocious, and whose forqn eshibitméthe greatest marks of muscu¬ lar strength» adiyanced a, few pactes, te- fore the rest, and addrest Ahellino as follows:
—" Hear
ÍS
—* Hear ше, coňiťatlé. fe Venice there exist but five bantHttit; jot ie«3 them before you, «ilt thou be the sixth? doubt not, thou wilt find suffident em¬ ployment. My name is Matteo, and í am the father of the band: that sturdy fellow with the red locks is called Ba¬ luzzo; he, Whose eyes twinkle fike a cat's, is Thomaso, an arch knave I pro¬ mise you! 'twas Pietrino,. whose» bontS you handled so roughly to-night; and yon thick-lipped Čobssus, who stands next to Cinthia, is namettŠ'tiuzza. Now then you know us all—and since ybu are a pennyless devü, we are willing, to incorporate you in our society; but we must first be assured, fhat yûu mean honestly by us."— Abellino smiled, or rather grinned, and murmured 1 hoarsely— a t am itarv- ing!'"— с «1» —« Answer,
24 — u Answer, fellow! Dost thou mean honestly by us?"— ■—* That must the event de¬ cide."— —" Mark me, knave; the first sus¬ picion of treachery costs you yonr life. Take shelter in the Doge's palace, and girdle yourself round with all the power of the republic—though clasped in the Doge's arms, and protected by an hun¬ dred canons, still would we murder you' Иу to the liigh altar ; press the cruci¬ fix to your bosom ; and even at mid day, still would we murder you! Think on this well, fellow, and forget not, we are banditul" — " You need not tell me that------ But give me some food, and then I'll prate with you, as long as you please— At present I am starving' Four and twenty
25 twenty hours have elapsed, since I list tasted nourishment."— Cinthia now covered a small table with her best provisions, and filled several silver goblets with ddicious winç. —" li one could but look at him without disgust!" murmured Cinthia} " if he had but the appearance of some¬ thing human! Satan must certainly have appeared to his mother, whi^ she wis big with him, and thence came her child into the world with such a fright¬ ful countenance' Ugh! It's an absolute mask, only that I never saw a mask sp, hideous!"— Abellino heeded hei npt: he plated hjmself at the table, and ate and diank, as if he would haye^ satisfied, himself for, ύφ next six months. The banditi eye(J ; him with looks of satisuctiijn,, ancl con- ¡ţntuhted
ав gratubűed each ойег on such· a Vaíaable· acquisition. If the reader is au-iuos to know what tins sam» Abeffino was like, lie must picture to Mmselr a young stoat fellow, whose limbs perhaps might have been thougSt not ffl-formedi fad not the most horrMè countenance, that »vw was în- »rented by a caréaturist, от tfott Sfilton αηΐΐ have atfaptecE to· the ug&st of hfe fallen ingeb, entfrery marred tlie lâ- »Kmtages of JMV person. Blatck and shnr- ing, but long-and straight, Bis fair flew wildly aboot Ks- brown necfc and jnÆow fát», ffiiniiomh wast so wide, thut bis gums and discoloured teeth were »risMe - , and a kind of convulsive twist which «rørceliy ever was at rest, bad formed its expression rato air eternai griff. Hfe eye Efor he bad bof one] 1 was strnit deep- in Ш bead', aaid liftte mow tfent die white-of it was visibili; and eve* that little
27
little was overshadowed by the protru¬ sion of his dark and bushy eye-brow. In the union of hb features» were found collected In one hideous assemblage all the most coarse and uncouth trålts, which ever had been exhibited singly in wooden cuts; and the observer was left in doubt, whether this repulsive physiognomy expreet stupíkUty oftntel- lett or maliciousness «Jj>S<S«lirt, or whether ii implied them-both together. — " Now thenîamratBfied!" roared AbeUini», «aut cfasîıeıi the stffl-full goblet upon the ground.—" Speak! what would youkocur oi'me? 1 aim ready to give you answers."— -—« The firs« thing,"* replied Matteo, и «-Jie-first thing necessary is to given* a proof of your strengdh, for this й г оГ material importance in our undertakings. ■™A^yoшgβot^atl'Wtωtlmg?"— — —" I know
88
—" I know not: try me" — ί Ι I — " Cinthia, remove the table—Now then, Abellino, which of us will you un¬ dertake«? iWhom among vis dost think, thou cahst knock down as easy is yon poor dabbler in the art, Ketrinb?" «■—" Wliith of youi" cried Abellino; " all of ypu»togätber, and háttá dozen more sucli, pitiful scoundrel·* 1 "—And he sprang from his seat, threw lus sword on the table, and measured· thejstrength of his antagonists wuh Ms single eye. The banditti burst into a loud fit of laughter. —" Now then," died Abellino fierce¬ ly;," now then for the trial'—Why срще you not on?"— — K Fellow," ţepUei Matteo, * take my
29
my advice; try first, what you can do with me alone, and learn what sort of men you have to manage. Think you, we are marrowless boys, or delicate Sig¬ nors, who waste their strength in the embrace of harlots?" Abellino answered him by a scornful laugh— Matteo became furious: his com¬ panions shouted aloud, and clapped thdr hands. —" To business!" said Abellino; " I'm now in aright humour for sport! Look to yourselves, my lads!"—And in the same instant he collected his forces together, threw the gigantic Matteo over his head as had he been an infant, knocked Struzzadownon the right hand, and Fietrino on the left, tumbled Tho¬ maso to the end of the room head pver heels, and stretdied Baluzzo with¬ out
30 out antmtition upon the neighbouring benches. Three minutes elapsed, ere the sub¬ dued bravos could recover themsdves ; loud shouted Abellino, while the asto¬ nished Cinthia gazed and trembled at the terrible exhibition. —" By the blood of St. JanuariUB," oied Matteo at length, rubbing his bat¬ tered joints, " the fellow is our master. Cinthia, take care to give him our best chamber."— —" He must have made a compact with the devil!" grumbled Thomaso, and forced his dislocated wrist back into its socket. No one seemed inclined to hazard a second trial of strength. The night was far
ai fer advanced, or rather the grey «of morn¬ ing already was visible over the sea. Tlie banditti separated, and each letired to his chamber.
снлг, rv. The Daggers. Abellino, this Italian Hercules, all terrible as he appeared to be, was not long a member of this society, before his companions felt towards him senti¬ ments of tlic most unbounded esteem. AU kved, all Valued him for his extra¬ ordinary talents for a Bravo's trade, to whidi he seemed peculiarly adapted, not only by his wonderful strength of body, but by the readiness of his wit and his never-failing presence of mind. Even Cinthia was iildined to feel some little .affection for him, but.... he really was too ugly.
Matteo
83
Matteo [as Abellino was soon given to understand] was the captain of this dangerous troop. He was one who car·« ried viUainy to the highest pitch of re¬ finement, incapable of fear, quick and crafty, and troubled with less, consd- ence than a French financier. The booty and price of blood, which his assodates brought in daily, were always dehvered up to him ; he gave each man his share, and retained no larger portion for himself, than was allotted to the others. The catalogue of those, whom he had dispatched into the other world, was already too long for him to have repeated it : many names had slipped his memory; but his greatest pleasure in his hours of relaxation was to relate such of these murderous anecdotes as he stiU remembered, in the benevolent intention of inspiring his hearers with a desire to foUow his example. His weapons were kept separate from the rest, and occu- B pied
M
pied a whole apartment« Hère were to be found daggers of a thousatld difterefit fashions, tvtth guards and without them; two—three—and four edged. Here were stored air-guns, pistols, and blun¬ derbusses; poisoïis of various kinds and brsèi ating h-ľvarioiis -tváys, garments fit for every possible disguiiié, vVhether to péfsôïtate the Monk, the Jew, or the Meridkant, the Soldier, the Senator, or the «Graiädeer. ! 1 Oné day 1 he summoned kbellino to attend him in this armoury. —" Mark me," said he; " thou wilt turn out a braVe fellow, that T Cati see alHéady»' It Is no* tíme tllaťyoii «shooli earn that bread for your«ľ3f, Which hitherto you hive owed to oui bounty. ·»—I ook ' Here hast thou a dagger of the finest steel ¡ you must charge for its ■Use by the «rnciV If -you plungfe it <ш1у i »( - one
as one inch deep into the bosom of hie foe, your employer must reward you with only one sequin : if two inches, with ten sequins ; if three, with twenty ; if the whole dagger, you may then nafte your own price.—Here is next a glass pani- ard ; whomever this pierce«, that manis death is certain.— As soon as the blow is given, you must break the dagger in the wound ; the flesh wiU dose pver the point which has been broken off, and which will keep its quarters tUl the day of ìesuirection !—Lastly, lobserye this metaUic dagger; its cavity conceals a subtile poison, which whenever you touch this spring, wül immediately in¬ fuse death into the veins of him whom the weapon's point hath wounded.— Take these daggers ; in giving them I present you with a capital, capable of bringing home to you mosfheavy and most precious interest."— n 2 AbeUino
36
Abellino received the instruments of death, but his hand shook as it grasped them. —" Possest of such unfailing wea¬ pons, of what immense sums must your robberies have made you master !"— —'' Scoundrel !" interrupted Matteo, frowning and offended, " among us robbery is unknown. What? Dcsttake us for «common plunderers, for mere thieves, cut-purses, house-breakers, and ■«Auns of that low miserable stamp ?"— —-" Perhaps what you wish me to take you for, b something worse ; for to speak openly, Matteo, villams of that stamp are contented with plundering a purse or a casket, which can easily be filled again; but that which we take from others is a jewel which a man never has but once, and which'once stolen can never
87 never be replaced. Are we not then a thousand times more atrocious plun» derers?"— —" By the House at Loretto, I think you have a mind to moralize, Abel¬ lino ?"— —" Hark ye, Matteo, only one ques¬ tion ; at the day of judgment, which think you will hold his head highest, the thief, or the assassin ?"— —» Ha! ha! ha!" —" Think not, that Abellino speaks thus from want of resolution. Speak but the word, and I murder half the sena¬ tors of Venice ; but still..,. "— —" Fool ! teow, the Bravo must be above crediting the nurse's antiquated tales of vice and virtue. What is vir- D 3 tue?
se tut? What is vice ? Nothing, but such things as forths of government, custom, manners, and education have made sa¬ cred; and that whidi men are able to make hottouťábie dt one time, it Is in their power to Лаке dishonourable at another, whenever the humour takes them : had not the senate forbidden us ttí 'give opinions fredy respecting the ««Jöİltks of VUnícéj there Would have been nothing wrong In givitig such opinions ; and were the Seiiafe to declare that it is right to give sudi opinions, that which to-day is thought a crime would be thought meritorious to-morrow—Then pry'thee' let us have no more of such doubte as these. We ate men, as much as are the böge and his senators, and have reason as much as they have to lay down the law of right and wrong, and td altei 1 the law of right and wrong, and to decree what ShaU be vice, and what shaU be vii tue."— AbeUinq
3»
АЬеШпй laüg)\ed— Matteo proceeds with increased animation. 'i J , ! ·—«* tferhiips ybù will tell me, that oui J trkde m dishonourable ' And what ťhtíh is 41* *hing «caUed honour ' Tis a word, aiv empty sound, a mere fantastic «¡reatuile of Ae imagination '-^Ask, as ytoti'tSfaVerae somé r frequèi«Aetì street, in what Jhonòur'consists rí-theijsurer wilf answer—J- r TV be honouraiile is to bo rich, «and lie has most honour, who can heátp'bp the greatest quantity of sequins.' J-* By г яй híeana,' cries th¿ voluptuary; ' honour consists in being beloved by every handsome woman, and finding no virtue 'proof! against yopri attacks.'— « H«sW mistaken'!* Interrupts the gene¬ rili!! ' tö conquer -wlíble cities, to destroy whole armies, to ruin whole provinces, lhat indeed brings real honour 1 '— The man«. 'M leai nín¿ places his renown ill the number Of pages'which he has 1 d 4 either
40 either written or read, thé tinker, in the number of pots and ketitles which he has made, ol mended, the nun, in the number of good things wjijch she has done, or bad vbmge «whichliähe has. resisted, the coquette, in the li« pf her aclmirers, the repubhe, jja^e éjjent of ber prOvinoes» aiad IthuA my &ien«di every cue Ithrnks, that -honour, consiste, m something different frqm the ţest — ι And why then should pot the Br«avo thmk, that hptiwr «jusasts m reaching the perfection of lus ftiide.apd щ guiding a dagger to the heart of an enenvy with unerring aim? \ —f By my life, 'Ц& a pity, Matteo, that you should be a Bravo, the schools have lost an eksellent teacher pf phi' Josophy ' ' / .—" Po you think ffl ?"-»Whyr, the fact ρ thus, Abellino----- 1 was «sducated ад amo-
41 a monastery ; my fathei was a dignified prelate in Lucca, and my mother a nun of the Ursuline order, greatly respected for her chastity and devotion.—Now, Signor, it was thought, fitting, that I should apply closely to my studies, my father, good man, would fain have made me a light of the church ; but I soon found, that I was better qualifisdifofan incenthary's torcho J followedrthebtmt Of my genius, yetıçount liuot inyfatudies thrown away, since; ' they) taught me more philosophy than to tremble at phantoms created by my own jfrajjiiia·! linn. Follow my example, friend, ind 89 ftirewejl "— ( „ , t I '' I
! Iiii, / '
m
lini«- ,. IH il I <ч „ι ir ıı ι л,! ι -, u ' j, ι. ι- '- II I У »1 CITAI·. V. ι ι Ο , ч ι \ UOİ J ) ν 11 Solitude. .λ J , b , ' AssriuKÓ had alieady passed six weeks îhb Venice, audi 'y« ţeîţheif «from ■mkt of opportunity, or of uidmation} he had suffered Ms daggers to remain idle in thèiinsheaths. This proceeded partly fto* his nöt being aS yet' suffioif éifäy lalsqUaitítetl with the windings aftd turnings, the bye-lanes and private alleys of the town; and partly because he had hitherto found no customers, whose murderous designs stood in need of his helping hand This want of occupation was irksome to him in the extreme: he panted for action,
43 action, and" wai cceidemned to indo¬ lence. With a melancholy heart did he roam trough Venice, and number every step witlra "«sigh." He fretjuented the public places, the taverns, gardens, and every scene which was dedicated to amusement;' 'Biit' nö where!-could he find Whit hë'SOUght —«tranqliilfity. One evening, he had loitered beyond tlie other visitints in a public garden, situated oh ohe 1 of fhe most beautiful of the Venetian islands. He strolled from arbout 'to 'arboil?, fhrevV himself down on the sea-shorè, ahd watched the phy of the waves, as they sparkled'in the moon-shine. —-" Four years ago," said he with a sigh, " just such an heavenly evening ¡Ws it, that I stole from Valeria's lips the
44
the first küs, and heard from Valeria's Ери for the first time the avowal, that she loved mç." ι He was sutáit, and abandoned MmseK to the melancholy reooUfectjons which thronged before his wind's eye. [Estgry jthiţig aroupd him was so cabp, so s2ty»tti Not a single zephyr sighed among the blades of grass ; but a storm rageoVin th«? tiosam pf AbeUino, i M nnf ï" our y ears "gQ could I have be- Ueved that a tiţne would cofpe when I jhould»play the part of a Bravo jn Ve«. cjţe ' tOh! where are they flown, l Í! e golden hopes and plans of glory, which smiled upon me in the happ) days of my y uth ? —I am a Biavo, to bea btjgg«»" Ψ-Κ !« ob ? something bettor. I 1 U 'í í 11, ,' , t When «my gçpd, old father in thç enthu-
45 cnthusiasnv of i paternal vanity -Λ oft threw his arms around my neet, and cried—' My boy, thou wilt render the ' name of Rosalvo glorious!'—God,i«4i í listened, how was my blood on fire! What thought I not, what felt I not, what that was good and great did I.not promise myself to do !—The father is dead, and the son.... is a Venetian Bravo ! ------ When my preceptors praised and admired me, and, carried away by the warmth of their feelings, dapped my shoulder, and exclaimed—' Count, thou wilt immortalize the ancient race of Rosalvo !'—Ha ! in those blessed moments of sweet delirium, how bright and beauteous stood futurity before me ! -----When happy in the performance of some good deed, I returned home, and saw Valeria hasten to receive me with open arms, and when, while she clasped me to her bosom, I heard her whisper—· Oh ! who could forbear to love
4Ì3 lore'the great Rosalvo ľ— ι ... Godi bh! God MAwayV'away, glorious ■visi¬ ons df-the pásť! < Tö loot on-you drives memad'!"—^ - > - « · « 10, » x . ai - ; He'was agijin Silent; héíbítltisUpin fury, raised «зае emaciated hand «to héa- «m, and struck his forehead Violently with the other. -**» ABBjäSassin. .. .the slave of cow¬ ards and rascals... .-the aUy ofthe great¬ est viffians, whom the Venetian sun ever shines upon.....Such is now the great Rosalvo!— Ще', oh! fye on't i —And yet to this wretched lot hath fatality condemned me." Suddenly he sprang from the ground aftei a long sUence ; his eyes sparkled ; his countenanoe was changed ; he drew his breath eaier.
—«Yes!
44
«—»«Yes! by Heaven, yes ! Greats GolihtRùsalvo,thitcan Ibe no longer ; but from being great as a Venetian Bravo, what prevents me?—«Souls ift bliss !" he exclaimed, and si-.nk on his knee, «White he raised his folded Hands td Heaven; as if about to pronounc« «the most awful Oath, " Spirit of uty father! Spirit of Valeria! I will «Hot become unworthy of you ! Hear me, «if your ghosts are «permitted to wander near me, hear me Swear, that the Bravo shall not disgrace «his origin, nor render vain the hopes, which soothed you in the bitter¬ ness of death ! No ! sure as I live, I will bèi the only dealer in this miserable trade, and posterity shaU be compelled to lionour that name, which my actions Shat render illustrious "— ' Hebovvïd his foreheavl, till «it touched (he eswli, ¡ahd« Ш' tears flowed «piente* étišíý. «Vast conception«! swelled Ms 1 '' " soul:
48 soul: he dwelt or» wondcrous views, till their oxtnnt bewildciod, his «brain;» yet another hour elapsed, and ho sprang from the cai tli to realize them ! , -r-J/f I »will enter into no compact «against human nature with five miser¬ able cut-throats. Alone will I make the republic tremble, and before eight,days «re flown, these muiderous knavei» sliall swing upon a gibbet. Venice shall no longer harbour β ve banditti ; one and one, only shall inhabit here, and that one shall beard the Doge himself, shall watch over right and over wrong, and accord¬ ing as he judges, shall reward, and pu¬ nish. Before eight days are- flown, the Itate shall be purified from the presentia of these outcasts of humanity, and then shall I stand here alone! Then must every villain in Yenice.who hitherto has kept the daggers of ray coijipanions ia tmploymentj have recourse to me ; then shall
49 shall I know the names and persons of aU those cowardly »murderers, of aU those iUustrious profligates, with whom Mat¬ teo and his companions carry on the trade of blood—And then .. .Abeffino! AbeUino !.... that is the name ! Hear it Venice, hear it, and tremble !" Intoxicated with the wildness of his hopes, he rushed out of the garden; he summoned a Gondoleer, threw himself into the boat, and hastened to the dweU¬ ing of Cinthia, where the inhabitants already were folded in the arms of sleep.
50
CHAP. VI. Rosabella, the Doge's lovely Niece. —" Hark, comrade," said Matteo the next morning to Abellino ; " to-day thou shalt make thy first step in our profession."— —"To-day?" hoarsely murmured Abellino; " and on whom am I to show my skill?"— —" Nay, to say truth, 'tis but a woman; but one must not give too «difficult a task to a young bei: ner. I will myself accompany you, and see how you conduct yourself in this first trial."—
—« Hum!"
51
—"Hum!" said AbeUino, and mea¬ sured Matteo with his eye from head to foot. —" To-day about four o'clock thou shalt foUow me to Dolabella's gardens, which are situated on the south side of Venice ; we must both be disguised, you understand. In these gardens are exceUent baths ; and after using these baths, the Doge's niece, the lovdy RosabeUa of Corfu, frequently walks without attendants. And then... you conceive me ?" —« And you wffl accompany me?" —«' I wiU be a spectator of your first adventure ; 'tis thus I deal by every one."— —" And how many inches deep must I plunge my dagger ?"— e 2 —«To
5Û
—" To the hilt, boy, to the very hilt ! Her death is required, and the payment will beprincely; Rosabella in the grave, we are rich for life."— Every other point was soon adjusted. Noon was now past, the dock in the neighbouring church of the Benedictines struck four, and Matteo and Abellino were already forth. They arrived at the gardens of Dola- bella, which that day were unusually crowded. Every shady avenue was thronged with people of both sexes; every arbour was occupied by the per¬ sons most distinguished in Venice ; in every corner sighed love-sick couples, as they waited for the wished approach of twilight ; and on every side did strains of vocal and instrumental music pour theu- harmony on the enchanteu e*r.
Abellino
53 Abellino mingled with the crowd. A most respectable-looking peruke con¬ cealed the repulsive ugliness of his fea¬ tures; he imitated the walk and manners of a gouty old man, and supported himself by a crutch, as he walked slowly through the assembly. His habit, richly embroidered, procured for him univer¬ sally a good reception, and no one scru¬ pled to enter into conversation with him respecting the weather, the commerce of the republic, or the designs of its enemies.; and on none of these subjects was Abellino found incapable of sustain¬ ing the discourse. By these means he soon contrived to gain intelligence, that Rosabella was certainly in the gardens, how she was habited, and in what quarter he was most likely to find her. y r 3 Thither
54
Thither he imme«diateiy beat his course; and hard at his heels followed Matteo. Alone, and in tlie most retired arbour, tat Rosabella of Corfu, the fairest maid in Venice» Abellino drew near the arbour ; he tottered, as he past its entrance, like one epprest with sudden faintness, and attracted Rosabella's attention. —" Alas ! alas !" cried he, " is there no one at hand, who will take compas¬ sion on the infirmity of a poor old man!"— The Doge's fair niece quitted the ar¬ bour hastily, and flew to give assistance to the sufferer.
—" What
ás —f' What ails you, my goodfether ?" she enquired in a mdõdious voice, and with a look of benevolent anxiety. AbeUino pointed towards the arbour ; RosabeUa led him in, and placed him on a seat of turf. —«"God reward you, lady!" stam¬ mered Abeffino faintly ; he Taised his eyes ; they miet RosabeUa's, and a blush crimsoned his pale cheeks. «RosabeUa stood in silence before the disguised assassin, and trembled with tender concern for the old man's illness; and oh! that expression of interest ever makes a lovely woman look so much more lovely! ------She bent her delicate form over the man who was bribed to murder her, and after awhUe asked him in the gentlest tone— " Are you not better ?"— e 4 " Better ?"
56
—" Better ?" stammered the deceiver with a feeble voice;—" better ?—oh! yes, yes, yes!—You....you are the Doge's niece? the noble Rosabella of Corfu?"— —" The same, my good old man."— —" Oh ! lady.... I have somewhat to tell you.... Be on your guard. ■.. start not.... what Iwould say is of the utmost consequence, -and demands the greatest prudence—Ah ! God, that there should live men so cruel—Lady, your hfe is in danger." The maiden started back ; the colour fled from her cheeks, —"Do you wish to behold your assassin ?—You shall not die, but if you value your life, be silent."
Rosabella
51
Rosabella knew not wbat to think-, the presence of the old man terrified her. —" Fear nothing, lady, fear nothing ; you have nothing to fear, wjiile I am with you—Before you quit this arbour, you shall see the assassin expire at your feet."— Rosabella made a movement, as would she have fled ; but suddenly the person who sat beside her was no longer an infirm old man. ,He, who a minute be¬ fore had scarcely strength to mutter out a fevt sentences, and reclined against the arbour trembling like an aspin, sprang up with the force of a giant, and drew her back with one arm. —" For the love of Heaven," she cried, " reléaseme.' Let me fly."—
—" Lady,
58
—J" Lady, fear nothing ; / «protect you."—-Thus said Abellino, placed a whisde at his lips, and blew it shrilly. Instantly sprang Matteo from his concealment in a neighbouring clump of trees, and rushed into the arbour. Abel¬ lino threw Rosabella on the bank of turf, advanced a few steps to meet Matteo, and plunged his dagger in his heart. Without uttering a single cry sank the Bandkti-Captain at the feet of Abellino ; the death-rattle was heard in his throat and after a few horrible convulsions all was over. Now did Matteo^ murderer look again towards the arbour, afld beheld Rosabella half senseless, as she lay on the bank of turf. —" Your life is safe, beautiful Rosa¬ bella,"
59
beha," said he ; " there lies the villain bleeding, who conducted me hither to murder you. Recover yourself; return to your uncle the Doge, and tdl him, that you owe your Ufe to Abeffino."— RosabeUa could not speak. TrembKng she stretched her arms towards him, grasped his hand, and prest it to her Ups in silent gratitude. Abellino gazed with delight and won¬ der on the lovely sufferer ; and in such a situation who could have beheld her without emotion?—RosabeUa had scarce¬ ly numbered seventeen summers ; her light and deUcate Umbs, envdoped in a thin white garment which feU around her in a thousand folds ; her blue and melting eyes, whence beamed the expres¬ sion of purest innocence; her forehead, white as ivory, overshadowed by the ringlets
60
ringlets of her bright dark hair; cheeks, whence terror had now stolen the roses ; Ups, which a seducer had never poisoned with his kisses ; such was Rosabella, a creature in whose formation partial Nature seemed to have omitted nothing which might constitute the perfection of female IoveUness—Such was she; and being such, the wretched Abeffino may be forgiven, if for some few minutes he stood like one enchanted, and bartered for those few minutes the tranquilUty of his heart for ever. —" By Him who made me," cried he at length, " oh! thou art fair, RosabeUa ; Valeria was not fairer !"— He bowed himself down to her, and imprinted a burning kiss on the pale cheeks ofthe beauty.
—"Leave
61 —" Leave me, thou dreadful man !" she stammered in terror; " oh ' leave me!"— —" Ah ! RosabeUa, why art thou so beauteous, and why am I.... Know'st thou who kist thy cheek, Rosabella? Go! teU thy uncle, the proud Doge, 'Twas the Bravo Abellino." — He said, and rushed out of the arbour.
62
CHAP. VII. The Bravo's Bride. It was not without good reason, that Abellino took his departure in such haste. He had quitted the spot but a few minutes, when a large party acd- dently stroUed that way, and discovered with astonishment the corse of Matteo, and RosabeUa pale and trembUng in the arbour. A crowd immediately coUected itself round them. It increased with every moment, and RosabeUa was necessitated to repeat what had happened to her for the satisfaction of every new-comer. In the mean while some of the Doge's courtiers,
63
courtiers, who happened to be among the crowd, hastened to call her attend¬ ants together ; her gondola was already waiting for her, and the terrified girl soon reached her unde's palace in safety. In vain was an embargo bid upon every other gondola ; in vain did they examine every person, who was in the Gardens of Dolabella at the time, when the murdered assassin was first disco¬ vered—No traces tould be found of Abellino. The report of this strange adventure spread like wild-fire through Venice— Abellino [for Rosabella had preserved but too well in her memory that dread¬ ful name, and by the relation of her danger had given it universal publicity] Abellino was the object of general won¬ der and curiosity. Every one pitied the poor
64
poor RosabeUa for what she had suffered, execrated the viUain who had bribed Matteo to murder her, and endeavoured to connect the different circumstances together by the help of one hypothesis or other, among which it would have been difficult to dedde which was the most improbable. E^ery one, who heard the adventure, told it again, «and every one who told it, added something of his own : till at length it was made into a compleat ro¬ mantic novel, which might have been entitled wWi great propriety " The Power of Beauty ;" for the Venetian gentlemen and ladies had settled the point among themselves completdy to their own satisfaction, that AbeUino would undoubtedly have assassinated RosabeUa, had he not been prevented by her uncommon beauty. But though AbeUino's interference had preserved,her life,
es life, it was doubted much, whether this adventure would be at all rdished by her destined bridegroom, the Prince of Mo¬ naldeschi, a Neapolitan of the first rank, possest of immense wealth and extensive influence. The Doge had for some time been secretly engaged in negociating, a match between his niece and this powëir-' ful nobleman, who was soon expected to make his appearance at Venice. The motive ofhis journey, in spite of all the Doge's precautions, had been divulged, and it was no longer a secret to any but Rosabella, who had never seen the Prince, and could not imagine, why his' expected visit should excite such general curiosity. Thus far the story had been told' much to Rosabella's credit; but at length the women began to envy her for her share in the adventure. The kiss, which she had received from the Bravo. ţ afforded
66 «¡|fferd«-d them an excellent opportunity % throwing out a few malicious insinu- atipnij—" She received a great service," said<Hie, " and there's no saying how fat; the fair Rosabella in »the warmth of gra·» timde may have been carried in reward, ing. her preserver!"—" Verj tme," observed another, " and for my part I diink it not very likely, that the fellow, being alone with a pretty girJ whose life he had just saved, should have gone away contented with a single kiss !"— " Come, come," interrupted a third, ' ! ,Do not let us judge uncharitably ; the fact may be exactly as the lady relates it; though 1 must aay, that gentlemen of Abeffino's profession are not usually so pretty-behaved, and that this is the first rime I ever heard of a Bravo in the Çlatonics." — la. short, RosaibelîiıV and^the Horrible Abellino furnished «the indolent and . I . gossiping
èf
®*s.ping Venetians with conversation » bug, that at length the Doge's niece was universally known by the honour. able appellation of « the Bravo's Bride.» But no om- gave biitisetí more trouble about this affair than tieDoge, the good b« prôttd Andrej, He imtoedliteiy «Süea ordew-, that ^ry persoti of su spi . «•^ar^tofceAóiridbèWa^ ttoseiy than ever: thé ni-At-öttrolte Wte doubled; ítidSpiéH were empbyétj «ШУ ώ procuring lùtelllgeïité of АЬЯ. ««ο ; and уй was ай in vain, Afclffiitfs •TCfreatv»asins«a-utaiMe.
88
CHAP. VIII. The Conspiracy. — "Confusion!" exclaimed Parozzi, a Venetian nobleman of the first rai.k, as he paced his chamber with a disordered air, on the morning after Matteo's murder ; " now aU curses Ught upon the villain's awkwardness ! Yet it seems inconcdvable to me, how aU this should have faUen out so untowardly! Has any one discovered my designs?—I know weU, that Verrino loves RosabeUa; was it he, who opposed this confounded AbeUino to Matteo, and charged him to mar my plans against her ?—That seems likely.—And now, when the Doge en¬ quires who it was that employed assassins t# murder his niece, what other wiU be suspected
69 suspected than Patozzi, the discontented lover to whom Rosabella refused her hand, and whom Andreas hates past hope of recondliation ?—And now hav¬ ing once found the scent.... Parozzi ! Parozzi ! should the crafty Andreas gef alt insight into your plans.... should he leàrrt, that you have placed yourself at« the head of a troop of hare-brained youths, i·.. hare-brained may I weU call chUdren, who; in order to avoid the rod, set fire to their paternal mansion— Parozzi, should aU this be revealed to Andreas.... !" Here his reflections were interrupted, Memmo, Falieri, and Contarino entered the room, three young Venetians of the highest rank, Parozzi's inseparable com¬ panions, men depraved both in mind and body, spendthrifts, vofuptuaries, well known to every usurer in Venice, and owing more than their paternal r S inliei itancc
70
»heritance would ever admit of ti\e\ţ P«vyirig, -ŕ" Why how is this, Parozzi?" cried Memmo as he entered, [a wretch whose every feature exhibited marks of that libertinism to which his Ufe had beep ■deijiicati!d,3 "I can scarce recover mysdi frani щу astonishment ! For Heaven's sake, is this report true ? Did you really hire Matteo, to murder the, Doge's niece?" " I ?" exclaimed Parozzi, and hastUy turned away to hide the deadly paleness which overspread his countenance; " why sho»\ld you suppose, that ару bujşh d«3sjgn.... surdy Memmo* yo» are cUstractsed." — Memmo—By my soul, I speak but the plain matter of fact. Nay» only ask Falieri ; he can teU you more.— FaUeri—
71
Meri —Faith, it's certain, Paroazi, tliat Lomeffino has declared to the Doge as a truth beyond doubting, that you, and none but you, were the person, who instigated Matteo to attempt Rosabella's Ufe. Parozzi—And I tell you again, that LomeSino knows not what he says. Contarino —Well, well! only be upon your guard. Andreas is a terrible fellow to deal with. Falieri— He terrible? I tell you, he is the most contemptible blockhead that the universe can furnish ! Courage perhaps he possesses, but of brains not an atom. Contarino —And I teil you, that Andreas is as brave as a lion, and as ciafty as a fox. г i Taliei i —-
72
FaUeri — Psha! psha! Every thing would go to the rack and ruin, were it not for the wiser heads of this trium¬ virate of counseUois, whom Heaven confound! Deprive him of Paolo Man¬ frone, Conari, and Lomeffino, ?nd the Doge would stand there looking as foolish as a school-boy, who was going to be examined, and had forgotten his lesson. Parozzi—FaUeri is in the right. Memmo—Quite! quite! FaUeri—And then Andreas is as proud as a beggar grown rich and drest in his first suit of embroidery? By St. Anthony, he is become quite insupportable!—Do you not observe how he increases the number of his attendants daily?
Memmo—
73 Memmo— Nay, that is an undoubted fact. Contarino—And then to what an unbounded extent has he carried his influence !—the Signoria, the Quaranti, the Procurators of St. Mark, the Avro- catori, all think, and act, exactly as it suits the Doge's pleasure and conve¬ nience ! Every soul of them depends as much on that one man's humour and caprices, as puppets do, who nod or shake their wooden heads, just as the fellow behind the curtain thinks proper to move the wires. Parozzi—And yet the populace idol¬ izes this Andreas ! Memmo—Aye, that is the worst part of the story. Falieri—But never credit me again, if
7« i£'h* «does «not experience a reverse of fortune speedily. Cont-arinc*—ThatmighthappeiijWould we but set our shoulders to the wheel sitmtly» «But what «do we do' Wepasu our time in taverns and brothels; drink, andigante, and throw ourselves headlong into such an oceani of debts, that the best swimmer «must sink at last. Let US resolve to make the attempt. let'ua seek recruits on aH sides; let us labour wit It all«our might and main: things most change ; <w if théy dö not, take- iny word for it, my friends, this world is no longer a world for us. Memmo—Nay, it's a meiaïielmty truth, that during the last half year my «editors have been ready to beat my door down with knocking ; I am awak-« ened 'mt of my sleep in the morning, and hilled to rest again af night with 1 no
7«* no «pther music (than their «eternal clamours, t Parozai—Ha! ha! ha l-wAs for me, I peed not teli, you bow f «am situated ! _„ jtalifflh-Had we been less ejftravagaht, vife»jRiighi(|iţt.|thjs moment have been sU^ng.^iuietly in our palaces, and-,v.. But as tilings stand now.... PirnzzİTTT»WeH 1— r* aH things stand now".,.. I verily believe^tbat Frieri is going аддаогаН»е| » Çontariııo— That is ever the way with old (tiniMrs, when they have lost tho powar-ito iin, any longer : then they are ready enough to Weep over their past life, and talk loudly about repentance and reformation. Now, for my own part, I 'am perfectly WeU satisfied with my wanderings from the common beaten ι ! paths
76
patHs of irtorality 'atid prudence. ' Théy serve to convince me, that I am nbt-one' of your every-day men, who sit cramped up in' the chimney-corner, lifeless and phlegmatic, and shudder, wheWfliey hear 1 ofanyextraoidinaryoccurrence. Nature evidently intended mé to 'be'a -libertine, and I am determined to fulfil %ίγ desti" nation.—Why, if spirits lilté oUrHveíè not produced every now and tben, tie world would absolutely go fast asleep; but we rouze it by deiTÙtgingHli-i'old order of things^orce mankind toqui'cken their snail's pace, furnish a million of idlers with riddles which they puzzle their brains about without beirtgiable'to comprehend,'infuse scmiefewlitmdreds of new ideas into the heads of the «great multitude, and, ih short, are as useful to the world, as tempests arfcy which dissipale those exhalations, with which Natuie otherwise would poison herself. ' Falieri—
Т7
FaUeri—«JÊxceUent sophistry, by my honour! , Why, Gontarino, antient Rome has had an irreparable loss in not hairitìg numbered you arnongher orators : it, is a,pity though, that there should be so little that's solid wrapt up in so many fine-sounding words.—Now learn, that while you, with iithis rare talent of «loqUBnce. ¡■¡.ve' befen most unmercifuUy wearing out the patience of your good- natured hearers, Falieri has been in action! The Cardinal Gonzaga is discontented with the government ; Heaven knows what Andreas has done to make him sa vehemently hift enemy; but,'in short, Gonzaga now belongs to our party. Parozzi—[with astonishment and delight]—»FaUeri, are you in your senses r-^tThe Cardinal Gonzaga ? Ι Ι' «,,Ι ι ι ' FaUeri—Is ours, and oursiboth body and soul. I confess, I was first obliged i to
TS
to rhodomontade a goou deal to him about our patriotism, our glorious designs, our love for freedom, and so forth ; « in short, Gonzaga is'an hypo- «crite, and therefor« is Gonzaga the fitter for us. ' ' Contarirto—[dasping Falierl's hand] —Bravo, my friend ! Venice shall see a second edition of CatiUiíe'í cottejtiŕacy.«— Now then it is my turn to speak, for I have not been idle since we parted. In truth I have as yet aiugbt nothing, but J have made myself master of an all- powerful net, with which I doubt not to capture the best h«alf Of Venice» You aUknow the Marchioness Olympia? Parozzi—Does not each of us keep a list of the h^clsoJ»e«t) wbtnen in the republic, and can we have forgotten number dne? —·« 'A ' „v í 1- FaUeri —
Ï9
Falieri— Olympia and Rosabella arc the goddesses of Venice : our youths burn incense on no other altari. Contarino—Olympia is my own. Falieri—How ? Parozzi— Olympia ? Contarino—Why how now ? Why stare ye, as had I prophecied to you that the skies were going to fall ?—I teH you Olympic's heart is mine, and that I possess her entire and most intimate confidence. Our connection must re¬ main a profound secret ; but depend on it, whatever / wish, she wishes abo, and you know she can make half the nobility in Venice dance to the sound of her pipe, let her play ι -hat tune she pleases.
Parozzi—
80 Parozzi — Contarino, you are our master. Contarino—And you hid not the least suspicion, how powerful an ally I was labouring to procure for you ' Farozzi—I must blush for myself while I listen to you, since as yet I have done nothing. Yet this I must say in my excuse : had Matteo, bribed by my gold, accomplished RosabeUa's murder, the Doge would have been robbed of that chain, with which he holds the chief men in Venice attached to his government. Andreas would have no merit, were RosabeUa once removed. The most iUustrious families would are no longer for his friendship, were their hopes of' а connection with him by means of his niece buried in her grave.' RosabeUa wiU one day be the Doge's heiress Memmo—
81 Memmo —All that I can do for you in this business is to provide you with pecuniary supplies. My old miserable uncle, whose whole property becomes mine at his death, has brim-full coffers, and the old miser dies whenever I say the word. Falieri—You have suffered him to live too long already. Memmo—Why, I never have been able to make up my mind entirely to.... You would scarcely believe it, friends, but at times I am so hypochondriac, that I could almost; fancy I feel twinges of conscience. Contarino—Indeed! Then take my advice ; go into a monastery. Memmo—Yes, truly, that would suit me to an hair ! « g Falieri—
82 FaUeri — Qur first care must he to ¡find out our old acquaintances, Matteo's едпарапюш: yet having hitherto always transacted business \rith «Леда through their .Captain, I know not where they are to be met with. Parozzi—As soon as they are found, jtjieh· iirst employment must he the removal of the Doge's trio of advisers. Contarino—That were an eJseeHent idea, «¡f it were «but as easily done as ¡said.— ι —Well then, my friends, this prindpaj pojut at feastis ¿eddfsd· Either wg wiU bury our debts .under the ruins of the existing constitution of the repubUc, or make Andreas a gift of our beads towards strengthening the waUs of the building—In either ease we shaU at least obtain quiet. Necessity with her whip of serpents lias driven us to the very highest point of her rock, whence we
83 we must save ourselves by some act of extraordinary daring, or be precipitated on the opposite side ihto the abyss of shame and eternal oblivion. The next point to be considered is, how we may best obtain supplies for our necessary expenses, and induce others to join With us in our plans. For this pbrposc, we must use every artifice to secure in our interests the courtezans с «"the «greatest celebi ity in Venice. Wha we should be unable to effect by every vower of -persuasion, banditti by their dag), »rs, and princes by their treasuries, can «He of those Phrynes accomphsh with a single look. Where the terrors of the scaffold aie without effect, and the priest's ex¬ hortations are heard with coldness, a wanton kiss and a tender promise often perform wonders. The most -vigilant fidelity drops to sleep on the voluptuous bosoms of these vvltches ; the Warmth of their kisses can thaw the lips of Secrecy о 2 itself j
84 itself; and the beU which sounded the hour of assignation, has often rang the kneU of the most sacred principles and most steadfast resolutions.—But should you either fail to gain the mastery over the minds of these women, or fear to be yoursdves entangled in the nets which you wish to spread for others, in those cases you must have recourse to the holy father-confessors. Flatter the pride of these insolent Friars ; paint for them upon the blank leaf of futurity bishops' mitres, patriarchal missions, the hats of cardinals, and the keys of St. Peter; my life upon it, they will spring at the bait, and you will have them completely at your disposal. These hypocrites who govern the consdences of the bigotted Venetians, hold man and wo¬ man, the noble and the mendicant, the Doge and the gondoleer, bound fast in the chains of superstition, by which they can lead them wheresoever it best suits their
85 their pleasure—It will save us tons of gold in gaining over proselytes and keep¬ ing their consciences quiet when gained, if we can but obtain the assistance ot the confessors, whose blessings and curses pass with the multitude for current coin.—Now then to work, comrades, and so farewell.—
88
CHAP. IX. Cınthia's dwelling. ScARCiLY had AbeUino atchieved the bloody deed which employed every tongue in Venice, than he changed his dress and whole appearance with so much expedition and success as to pre¬ vent the sUghtest suspicion of his bemg Matteo's murderer. He quitted the gardens unquestioned, nor left the least trace which could lead to a discovery. He arrived at Cinthia's dweUing. It was aheady evening. Cinthia opened the door, and AbeUino entered the common apartment. —" Where are the rest ?" said he in a savage
87
a savrage tone of voice, whose sound mïde Cinthia tremble. —" They have been asleep," she answered, " since mid-day. Probably they mean to go out on some pursuit to-night."— Abellino threw himself into a chair, and seemed to be lost in thought. —" But why are you always so gloomy, Abellino," said Cinthia, drawing near him ; " it's that which makes you so ugly. Pry'thee away with those frowns; they make your countenance look worse than Nature made it."— Abellino gave no answer. —" Really, you are enough to frighten a body'! Come now, let us be friends, Abellino -, I begin not to dislike you, o-l and
88 and to endure your appearance ·, and I don't know but.... "— — K Go ! wake the sleepers !" roared the Bravo, —" The sleeepers ? Psha ! let them sleep on, the stupid rogues ! Sure you are not afraid to be alone with me? Mercy on me, one would think I looked as terrible as yourself ? Do I ?—Nay, look on me, AbeUino !"— Cinthia, to say the truth was by no means an ül-looking girl ; her eyes were bright and expressive ; her hair feU in shining ringlets over her bosom ; her Ups were red and full, and she bowed them towards Abeffino's—But AbeUino's were stffl sacred by the touch of Rosa¬ bella's cheek—He started from his seat, and removed [yet gently] Cinthia's hand, which rested on his shoulder. —" Wake
89 — "Wake the sleepers, my good girl," said he, *" I must speak with them this moment."— Cinthia hesitated. —" Nay, go !" said he in a fierce voice. Cinthia retired in silence ; yet as she crost the threshold, she stopped for an instant, and menaced h'un with her finger. Abellino strode through the chamber with hasty steps, his head reclining on his shoulder, his arms folded over his breast. —" The first step is taken," said he to himself; " there is one moral monster the less on earth. I have committed no sin
во sin by this murder; I have but per¬ formed a sacred duty«—Aid' me, thou Great and Good, for arduous is the- task before me.—Ah ! should that task be gone through with success, and RosabeUa be the reward of my labours ... RosabeUa ?—What ! shaU the Doge's niece bestow on the outcast AbeUino .... Oh! madman that I am to hope it, never can I reach the goal ofmy wishes ! —No ! never was there frenzy to equal mine ! To attach myself at first sight to.... Yet RosabeUa alone is capable« of thus enchanting at first sight !—Rosa¬ beUa and Valeria !—To be beloved by two such women ...... Yet though 'tis impossible to attain, the striving to attain such an end is glorious ! Ulusiom so delightful vvill at least make me happy for a moment, and alas ! the« wretched AbeUino needs so much illusions, that for a moment will make him happy !— Oh!
91 Oh! surely knew the world what I gladly would accomplish, the world would both love and pity me !" Cinthia returned—the four Bravos followed her, yawning, grumbling, and still half asleep. —" Come, come!" said Abellino; " rouze yourselves, lads ! Before I say anything, be convinced that you are wide awake, for what I am going to tell you is so strange, that you would scarce beliiive it in a dream." They listened to him with an air of indifference and impatience. —" Why, what's the matter now ?" said Thomaso, while he stretched him¬ self. —"»Neither more 4 nor less, than that our
92
our honest, hearty, brave Matteo. ... is murdered !" —" What ! ------ Murdered ?"—every one exdaimed, and gazed with looks of terror on the bearer of this unwelcome news : while Cinthia gave a loud scream, and dasping her hands together, sunk almost breathless into a chair. A general silence prevailed for some time. —" Murdered ?" at lepgth repeated Thomaso—" and by whom ?" Baluzzo—Where ? Pietrino—What ? this forenoon ? Abellino—In the gardens of Dolabella, where he was found bleetling at the feeţ of the Doge's niece.—Whether he fell
93 fell by her hand, or by that of one of her admirers, I cannot say. Cinthia —-[weeping]----- Poor dear Matteo ! Abellino—About this time to-morrow you will see his corse exhibited on the gibbet. Pietrino—What ! Did any one recog¬ nize him ? Abellino—Yes, yes! there's no doubt about his trade, you may depend on't. Cinthia —The gibbet !—Poor dear iMatteo ! Thomaso—This is a fine piece of work ! Baluzzo — Confound the fellow ! who would
94
would have thought of anything hap¬ pening so unlucky ! AbeUino—Why how now? You seem to be overcome ? Struzza—I cannot recover myself: surprize and terror have almost stupified me! AbeUino—Indeed ! By my Ufe, when I heard the news I burst into laughter —* Signor Matteo,' said I, ' I wish your worship joy of your safe arrival.'— Thomaso—What ? Struzza—You laughed' Hang me if I can see what there is to laugh at ! Abeffino—Why surely you are not afraid of receiving what you are so ready to bestow on others? What is your object?
9S object? What can we expect as our reward at the end of our labours, except the gibbet or the rack ? What memorials of our actions shall vve leave behind us, except our skeletons dancing in the air, and the chains which rattle round them ? He who chuses to play the Bravo's part on the great theatre of the world, must not be afraid of death, whether it come at the hands of the physician or of the executioner.— Come, come! pluck up your spirits, comrades. Thomaso—That's easy to say, but quite out of my power. Pietrino—Mercy on me, how my teeth chatter! Baluzzo—Pry'thee, Abellino, be com¬ posed for a monent or two! your gaiety
9ű
gaiety at a time like this is quite hor¬ rible. Cinthia —Oh! me! oh! me!—Poor murdered Matteo ! Abellino—Hey day ! Why, what is all this ?— Cinthia, my life, are you not ashamed of being such a child ? Come, let you and I renew that conversation which my sending you to wake these gentlemen interrupted—Sit down by me, sweetheart, and give me a kiss. Cinthia —Out upon уоц, monster ! Abellino—What, have you altered your mind, my pretty dear?—Well, well; with all my heart ! When you are in the humour, perhaps /may not have the inclination.
Baluzzo—
97
Baluzzo— Death «and the devil, Abel» lino, is this a time for talking nonsense ? Pry'thee keep such trash for a fitter occasion, and let us consider what we are to do just now. Pietrino«—Nay, this is no season for trifling. Struzza—TeU us, AbeUino ; you are a dever feUow ; what course is it best for us to take ? Abellino··—[after a pause]—Nothing must be done, or a great deal—One ot two things we must choose.—Either we must remain where we are, and what we are, murder honest men to please any rascal who wiU give Us gold and fair words, and make up our minds to be hung, broken oh the wheel, con¬ demned to the gaUeys, burnt aUve, crucified, or beheaded, at the long run, и just
98 just as it may seem best td tho supreme authority -, or else. ». » , Thomaso—Or else ?·"—Well ? Abellino—Or else we must divide the spoils which are already in« «rur pos¬ session, quit the republic, begin n.iarvt and better life, and endeavour to make our peace with Heaven.—We ι have already wealth enough to « make it unnecessary for ns to ask-»-" How shall we get our bre id?"—You may either buy an estate \n some foreign ctnnltry, or keep an Osteria, or engage in com¬ merce, or set up some trade, or; in short!, de whatever you like best, so that you do but abandon the ptofesjioji of an assassin. Then wd may look/ out foe a wife among the pretty girls of our own rank in life, become the happy Äthers of sons and daughters, may teat gild drink in peace and security, aWsoiake amends
Ö9
amends by the honesty of our future Uves for the offences of our past. Thomaso—Ha! ha! ha'. AbeUino—What you do, that «will I do too ; I wiU either hang or be broken on the wheel along with you, or become an honest man, just as you please—Now then, what is your decision ? Th«omaso----Wae there ever «such a stupid counseflor! Pietrino—Our decision ?—Nay, the point's not very diffictüt to deddtk AbeUinc—I should have thought it bad been. Thomaso—Without «more-words then, I vote for our remaining as we are, and h 2 carry-
100
carrying on our old trade : that wiU bring us in plenty of gold, and enable us to lead a joUy Ufe. Pietrino—Right, lad ! You speak my thoughts exactly. Thomaso—We are Bravos, it's true ; but what then ? We are honest fellows, and the devil take him who dares to say we are not. However, at any rate we must keep within doors for a few days, lest we should be discovered ; for I war¬ rant you the Doge's spies are abroad in search of us by this. But as soon as the pursuit is over, be it our first business to find out Matteo's murderer, and throttle him out of hand as a warn¬ ing to aU others. AU—Bravo! bravissimo!
Pietrino—
lOJ Pietrino —And from this day forth I vote, that Thomaso should be our Captam. Struzza—Aye, in Matteo's stead. AU—Right! right! Abeffino—To which I say amen with aU my heart—Now then aU is dedded.
End of Book the First.
IOS
BOOK THE SECOND.
СЯАР. I. . ;. '^yTJx&rtkfDay, '. In solitude and anxiety, with barred windows and bolted doors, did the ban¬ ditti pass the «day immediately succeeding Matteo's murder ; every murmur in the street app«3«j)d A ţţ) ,«А«зт ». a ^ «cause of apprehension ; every foot-step which approached their doors made them tremble till it had passed them. In the mean while the ducal palace blazed with splendour and resounded with mirth. The Doge cdebrated the birth-day
1103 ЫгЛ -cVay of his feir niece, iRoiabeUa-, and the feast wa» hortoured by the pre¬ sence of the chief persons of the city, «Sf t&e foreign amba«!»acbrs,and of many illustrious strângerii 'who were at that «tlme'lissident ih Venice. ι ι ' ι On this occasion «no expense had been sparad, no source of pleasure liad been iiegtod. The arts contended with tads other for superiority; thebes|tp^tB in Vtflice, cdebrated this «day with powers exceffing ¡jny thing which they ha4 before exhibited, for tbe subject of (heir tvaí^jViMjRwbelJai. ^epusiçiaesand ,ιιι^-ίνι»» «Sírjjasseii aU their former tri- uftipijvi. fcr íhejr #bjeet waa tp^htajn tl« suffrage of RoiabeUa. Thesingular nnton of aU kinds «If pjţaeur« imojr»icatf;d -ttor cimsgí nation pf eyery guest, and •Ле iißiewujitiaef Delight ι β*^βι»φΐ(1 his influence over the whgM iwenibly, oyer η 4 the
s 104 the old man and the youth, over the matron and the virgin. The j venerable Andreas had seldons been seen in such high spirits, as on this occasion.—He was all life; Smiles of satisfaction played round his lips ; graci¬ ous and condescending to every one, he made it his chief care tu prevent his rank from being felt. Sometimes he trifled with the ladies, whose beauty formed the greatest ornament ofthis entertainment ι sometimes he mingled among the masks, whose fantastic ap¬ pearance and gaiety of «omVersatloh enlivened the ball-room by their variety; at other times he played chess with the generals and admirals of the republic ; and frequently he forsook every thing to gaze with delight on Rosabella's dancing, or listen in silent raptlire to Rosabella's music, Lomellino,
105
Lomellino, Conari, and Padlo Man- frolle, the Doge's three confidential friends and counseUors, in defiance of thdr grey hairs, mingled in the throng •df youthful 'beauties, flirted first with one, ahd then with another, and thè arrows of raillery were 11 darted ' ahd received on both sides with spirit and good hufhour. - ' ' ll , « »1 i-H-ff Now, Lorn effino," ι said Andreas 'to His friend, who entered the saloon, in which the Doge was at that time acci¬ dentally alone with his niece-, " you seem iin gayer spirits tiis evening than , when we Were lying' before Scardona, and hadi so hard a game to «pla), against the Turks."— ' Ί > Lomdlmo—I shaU not take upon me to deny that, Signor. I still think with a mixture of terror and satisfaction on theınight when we took Scardona, and carried
Л06 НЯМ fa» iW-n>op« 1>efort. % Pty Wtel Sy«9aywtí,víVy«№etÍ№sfQ«ght like lions, m ti) Iui« n nb I ıı ' ι Uf«, Апф^ц^Щ 'thjs gébjét «tp thàr •W»«W^.,í^tio]dil№Wipríi TW hsvit «еадо^да«сге» д Ьгм(<!11· ι ι Li Ι, í ¡'w , » ' ,tl 1 J , ι >ι Lomellino —Aye, Signor, /HldjiţhJ jt is so sweet to rest on laurels!— Butin tratlh,.' 'iiito' v«o.Üuit 1 arntndeWed for «mine— lát iíflybu who haveirnmWtaHaid me. No adlil ijoni earth woild ihave known, thrt iLceiellino existed/ had he Tank fougbtiri ß»».1n»ti)t and SicMaa under ,liehanœwi<dfi«the gréai:. A-ndrcas,,:ind ässistedji«hisiiii«> inutingeteroaliwojUiiis in honour of the republic. 11, ' » Antlreas~My good Lam«UiiU5,«tlieCy- prus wine has heated ypur imagination. Ifurmllino-r-J^, i knew «well I ought ι not
107
not to «cal) you great, and praise you thus openly ito your, face; but faith! Signor, I am grown too old for it to be worth my whüe to,fla)*er. That is a business whidi I leave |to οψ young courtiers, wh» haye never ,y£t да» within the эдаЦ «^powder, and tever hav« foftght for- Vtjiàœ and Andreas. n , Acdxeas— ilfou artj^n o$»enthusiast —Thmk' yo» tlijţ'Emflertţif ¡a, qf&e «lame opinion ? ΙΓ T' 'l'« 1 ' 1 'IT Lomdlino—¡Unless GJiades-the Fifth is deceived by those about him, or is too γτομά. σ ίο Щощ tbe(greajţness r JOf r an еЩР№> ФР /BW W PP#ïftr-" ."tbjjff •and wbp,is worthy ^o¡con):en4 witj^me, awl ţha,tj»an «1?.Andreaa^^r , , ' I , 1 1 I 1! » "' r « 111' · djiçlgisjtdwhfift heji^^my^nsweï
108 to the message Ъу which hé notified to methe imprisonment ofthe FrenchKing. Lomellino—Displeased he vvill be, Signor, no doubt of it, but what then ì Venice need not fear his displeasure, while Andreas still lives. But when you and your heroes are once gone to your eternal rest.... then alas for thee, poor Venice! I iar yolu 1 golden timtjs will soon «come to their conclusion. Andreas—What« 1 Have we not many young officers of'great promise f 1 lamelim·*-- Alas ! what are most of them ? HeŕcWin the fields of Venus ! He^ari'a^idtmg-bont! Efleminate striplings,'relaxed both in mind and body '—But how cm I running on, for¬ getful. ... Ah ' when one is grown old, ind converting vAh-'an Andreas, it is easy to forget «very thing, else—Afy Lord,
109 Lord, I eought you with a request,' a request too of consequence. Andreas—You exdte my curiosity. Lomeffino—About a week ago, there arrived here a young Florentine noble¬ man. caUed Flodoardo, a youth of noble appearance and great promise. Andreas—WeU? Lomeffino—His father was one ofmy dearest friends ; he is dead now, the good old generous nobleman ! Id our youth we served together on board the same »vessel, and many a turbanned head has fellen beneath his sword—Ah ! he was a bravs soldier. Andreas-wWhUe celebrating the fe- ther's bravery, you seem tùhave quite forgotten the son. Lomellino—
lio
I^'f'îpB.c— -Hi» son ia arriyed ia Ve¬ nice, and wishes to enter into the servici of the repubUc. I intreat you, give the youBg man some respectable situation ; he wiU prove the boast of Venice, when We shaU be in our graves, on that would I kiiard toy existence ! '.4 ,i *«- Andreas— H« «he gense and talent ? Lomellino—That há hK,aodab heart like his father's—WUl it please you to seti aodi converse with him? Heisyion- «der.ancxigjthe masks inthe peat Saloon. Oaei«diiiigi,must«teU yoo, ae,a- spedmeji ■ij^-hbf..»ifesigni« He has beard of the ha«B«lhti who infest Venice; and he eiigigev-tbab the first «piece irfs«rvfc* which he renders the repulÆclhaube the delivering into the hands «of justice «»»ЬезеггошааЫ assassins, 'who làtlterto bap elnded ti» irigUææofoucpoUce. .'- . lk.i7S.-t> - -« . * Andreas—
lil
iiAudreat^Ind^jV^-I doubt that pro¬ mise will bé tootntťch for/ his .power to perform—Flodoardo, I think you called him ?—Tell him 1 would speak with Шп. Lomellmo-4-Oh ! · theh I have gained at least the half of my cause, and í be¬ lieve the whole of it ; for to see Flodo¬ ardo, and not to üke* him, is as «difficult as to look at Paradise and not wish to tuter» rToiisee-FlodaOTtlo 1 , -luidto! hate him, is «as unlikely, «as that a blind man should hatetlie kind hand which removes tbe cataract from his eyes, and pours upon them« the blessings of light and b«autìeso£ Nature. ι « л· ι « Aiidreas^-[ilriiltng]--In, the whole couŕseŕ of our aojuaiiitance, ixrmeilino; never did L hear you sç enthusiastic!-— (3d then ; cúàduot ι tiri· prodigy' hithuii ЬотеШпоч««! hastet, 1 to find hini-« ι And
112 And as for you, Signora«», look td your¬ self L look tò yourself, Isay! Rosabella—Nay, pry'thee, Lomellino, 1 bring your hero hither without dday ; you have raised my «curiosity to the height, in jh »ιί Ί ,, ι Lomellino quitted the Saloon. "I Andréas— How comes iti that you rejoin not the dancers, my child ? ι ! Ι ι RosabeUa—I am weary, and besides Curiosity now detains me here, for I would fáin see this Flodoardo, whom Lomellino thinks deserving of such ex¬ traordinary praise. ShaU 1 teU.you the truth, my dear unde ? I verily believe that I am already acquainted with him. There! was a mask, «in a Gredan habit«, whose appearance was so striking, that it was impossible for him to remain con-
113
confounded with the crowd: the least attentive eye must have singled him out from among a thousand. It was a tall Ught figure, so graceful in every move- 'ment. ...then his dancing was quite perfection! Andreas—[smfling, and threatening with his finger]—ChUd ! child ! RosabeUa—Nay, my dear unde, what Isay is mere justice: it is possible, in¬ deed, that the Greek and the Florentine may be two different persons ; but still, according to Lomeffino's description»... Oh! look, dear unde, only look yonder! there stands the Greek, as I Uve. Andreas—And LomelUno is with Mm —they approach—Rosabella, you have made a good guess. The Doge had scarcely ceased to ι speak,
1J4 speak, whenLomeffino entered «the room, conducting a taU young man, richly habited in the Gredan fashion. -»-" My gracious Lord," said Lomd¬ lino, " I present .to you the Count Flodoardo, who humbly sues for your ^»TOtectioii.'' - Flodoardo uncovered his head in token of respect, took off his mask, and bowed low before the iUustrious ruler of Venice. Andreas—I understand yuu are de¬ sirous of serving the repubUc ? Flodoardo—That is my ambition, ^should your Highness think medeserving of such an honour. Andreas—Lomeffino speaks highly of *you; if aU ^that he says be true, how * '. came
came you to deprive your own country of your services í ' Flodoardo—Because my own country Ib not governed Ъу an Andreas. Andreas—You have intentions, it seems, of discovering the staunte «ef the banditti, who for some time past havte caused so many tears toftsw 1ft Venice? ' í ' Flodoardo—If your Highness would deign to confide in me, I would answer «with "itty head for»'their delivery into the hauds of your officers,' and that speedily. Ahdreas-—That «terê much for a stran«ger to^erform—Jl would faifi mài« the trial ^whether -you tan keep ¡your Word.
12 Flo-
не
. Flodoardo— That is suffident—To¬ morrow, or the day after at latest, will I perform my promise. Andreas—And you make that promise so resolutdy ? Are you aware, young Oían, how dangerous a task it is to surprize these miscreants'' They are педег ts be found when sought for, and always present when least expected; they are at once every where, and no where ; there exists not a nook in aU Venjçe which our spies are not ac- quainted with, or have left unexamined, and yet has our police endeavoured in νφ to discover the place of their concealment. Flodoaido—I know all this, and to knovv iţ rejoices me, since it affords me an opportunity of convincing the Doge of Verice, that my actions are not those of a common adventurer. Andreas—
117 Andreas— Perform your promise, and then let me hear of you. For the pre¬ sent our discourse shaU end here, for no unpleasant thoughts must disturb the joy to which this day is dedicated.— Rosabella, would you not Uke tojóin the dancers?—Count, 1 confide her to your care. Flodoardo~I could not be intrusted with a more precious charge. RosabeUa, during this conversation, had been leaning against the back of her unde's chair: »she repeated to herself Lomeffino's assertion, " that to see Flodoardo,«and not to like him, was as ; difficult as to look at Paradise and not wish to enter ;" and whUe she gazed on the youth, she aUowed that LomelUno had not exaggerated. When her uncle desiied Flodoardo to conduit her to the 1 3 dancer«,
tia
cUnçert«) a soft bhish overspread her cheeks,· and she doubted whether she should accept or decline the hand which ■was immediately offered. » < And to tdl you my real opinion, m'y feir Ladies«, I stspect that very few Of you would have been more coUected than RosabeUa, had you found your¬ selves similarly situated. Ια truth, ¿uch a form as Flodoardo's; a countenance whose physiognomy seemed a passport «at once toithe hearts of aUwhtfexamhiPd it ; features so exquisitely-fashioned, that the artist who wished t* execute a model of manly beauty, had he imitated them, would have bind nothing to supply or impiove; features, every uie of which spoke so dearly—" the bosom of this youth contains the heart of an hero :"— ......ah! »Ladies, my dear Ladies, a man like thb might well make some little
U9
little confusion in the head and heart of a poor young girl, tender and unsus¬ picious ! Flodoardo took Rosabella's hand, and led her into the ball-room. Here all was mirth and splendour; the roofs re¬ echoed with the full swell of harmony, and the floor trembled beneath the multitude of dancers, who formed a thousand beautiful groupes by the blaze of innumerable lustres—Yet Flodoardo aud Rpsabella past on in silence, till they reached the extreme end of the Great Saloon. Here they stopped, and re¬ mained before an open window. Some minutes past, and still they spoke not.— Sometimes they gazed on each other, sometimes on the dancers, sometimes on the moon ; , and then again they forgot each other, the dancers, and thş moon, and were totally absorbed in themselves. 1 4· —" Lady,"
120 ~_«Lady," said Flodoardo at length, " can there be a greater misfortune ?" —" A misfortune '" said Rosabella, starting, as if suddenly awaking from a dream; " what misfortune, Signor ? who is unfortunate ?"— —" He who is doomed to behold the joys of Elysium, and riever to possess them : he who dies of thirst, and sees a cup stand full before him, but which he knows is destined for the lips of an¬ other!"— —" And are you, my Lord, this out¬ cast from Elysium ? are you the thirsty one who stands near the cup which is filled for another ? Is it thus that you wish meto understand your speech ?"— —" You understand it as I meant; and
121
and nowitell mé, 1 lovely Rosabella, am I not indeed unfortuiiaťe?" — — M And where then is the Elysium whieh you never must possess ?"— !—« -Wherei Rosabella is, «there is Elysium."— Rosabella blushed, and «cast her (¡yes On the ground«. — " You are dot offended, Signora«?' said Flodoardo, and took her hand with an air of respectful tenderness ; " has this openness displeased you ?"— , -ш" You are a native) of Florence, Count Flodoardb ? Tö Venice we diskke these kind of compliments ţ at least I dislike them, and wish to hear them from no one less than ftom you."·*— J i' -"By
122 — ",Яу ( œyj% Signora, [I spok« feuţ; as I thought j my щоца^ /эдпсеаМ да flattery."— —" Sije !, the. Doge «Rtejs ,the ^pop with Manfrone and LomelUno, he will »tek w »moug.tlw dancers., 'Comuvlet us join them."— , _, i JRodiiardo ι foUqfred Jtir, in, зЦедсе. The dance began. Heaveftaliho/wteyely looked RosabeUa as she gUded along to the sweet sounds of mu^, t Gon«ducted by Flodoai do ί How handsome tcoiţed Flodoardo, as Ughter than air he flew down tlie dance, whUe his briHiaşţ pytis saw no object but RosabeUa ! He was still without his mask, and bare-headed ; but every eye/glanced aw4y from tile hdmets and barrettes, waving with plumes and sparkling with jewels, to gaze on Flodoardo's raven locks,-as they floated on the air in wild luxuriance. A murmur
murmur of admiration rose from every corner of the saloon, but it rose un¬ marked by those who were the objects of it, neither Rosabella nor Flodoardo at that moment formed a wish to be applauded, except by each other. ' I
ι' if I I
124
CHAP. V· Tbe florentine Stranger. Two evenings' had elapsed since the Doge's entertainment; on the second Parozzi sat in his own apartment with Memmo and Falieri. Dimly burnt the lights : lowering and tempestuous were the skies without ; gloomy and fearful were the souls of the libertines within. Parozzi—[after a long silence]— What? are you both dreaming? Ho there ! Memmo, Falieri, fill your gob¬ lets. Memmo—[with indifference]—Well ! to please you.... —But I care not for wine to-night. Falieri—
125
FJieri— Nor L— Methinks iţ tastes like vinegar—Yet the wine itself is good ; 'tis our ill-temper spoils it. Parozzi—Confound the rascals ! Memmo—What ? the banditti ? Parozzi—Not a trace of them can be found! It is enough to kill one with vexation! Falieri—And in the mean while the time runs out, our projects will' get wind; and then we shall sit quiedy in the state prisons of Venice, objıjçts of derision to the populace and ourselves ! I could tear my flesh for anger !—£An universal silence.] , Jfarozzi,—[striking his., hand «gainst the,, table .passionately]-»—Flodoardo! Flodoardo! ч FaHeii—
126
Mieri—bi a «ectopie bf hours 1 must attend the Cardinal Gonzaga ! and what inteUigence shaU I have to give him í Memmo—-Come, come 1 {jbntsrmo «cannot have been absent so long without «cause ; I warrant you he WiU bring some news with him when he arrives. FaUeri^ftha! 'peha! Mý life on'f he Ues at this moment at Ötyïn«pia's feet, and forgets us, the republic, the »jMj-iditti, and himself. ' ir , r 1 it ι < ЙгОй-и— Ahd so ncifhefof you know «My'tíáAgrfti^Flodoatdöí '» ' í il Ι Ί Memmo—No more than of what happened on RosabeUa's birth-day. Й -feri— WeU the», I-kuW eWíâng ¡mere Йкйк him,- -PlrflH»W. is''J»i«åfcu#»f him. '—-oboli Farozzi—
ÎS7
Parozzi—I? Rkliirulous! RosabeUa may bestow her hand on the German Emperor, or a Venetian Gondoleer, mthout its ^-vingàie the least anxiety. FaUeri—Ha! ha! ha' Memmo—Well, none thing at least even Envy must confess ; Flodoardo is thehan^mestiiianimViffliiæii'ilvlbubt ■whether there's á wrananin theüty who has virtue «enough to Tesist him. j < ι Pafozzi^J-And í «shouid ' doubt it too, if women hat| sir little «sense «as ynW have, and looked only at the sheU, without minding the kernel.. . "ti' '' ''Mèmiílt»«-^ Which'unluekUyis ewtly the thing which women always dor > 'йУаШвЬи^Ье di.£omeffino r ¿etíms to be extTeinaly 'intmiate-wíth « tJiis'ŕlodo- '* ardo ;
128 attkij they say he was well acquainted «with-his father. Memmo—-It waţ hp who presented him to the Doge. Parozzi—Hark 1 —Surely some one knocked :at the palace door ? J 'л Ji ) t ''Mudimo— dt can be none but ¡Contai· riño. iNovv then we«shalLhetr whether he has discovered the banditti. íitFalleri— [stattøg tnm his chair]— 1'Ui swear to- that -footstep ! it's Conta- rinajrw I ıı ι 1 1 r » n II The doors were thrown open ; Con¬ tarino entered hastily, cnvdppt-4.il> his doakt ι , ι ıh ' -tu li ч ι ı ««^«ï-G<>odievramg,;ivv-eeSg^nttóin'iii!'' sifidibVanctthrew hhtibiantte aside^-f rx. And
124
And Memmo, Parozzi, and Falieri started back in horror, — " Good God !" they exclaimed, " what has happened ? You are covered with blood?"— — " A trifle !" cried Contarino -, " is that wine ? quick ! give me a goblet of it ! I expire with thirst."— Falieri—[while he gives him a cup]— But, Contarino ! you bleed ? Contarmo—You need not tell me that —I did not do it myself, I promise you.— Parozzi—First let us bind up your wouniis, and then tell us what has hap¬ pened to you—It is as well that the servants should remain ignorant of к your
130
your adventure ; I wffl be ypur surgeon myself. Contarino—What has happened to me, say you ? Oh ! a joke, gentlemen ! a mere joke!—Here, Falieri, fill the bowl again. Mqmmo—I can scarcely breathe for tei ror' Contaimo— Very possibly; neither should I, weie I Memmo, instead of being Contarmo—the wound bleeds plenteously it's true, hut it's by no means dangerous-»r-[He tore open his doublet, and uncovered his bosom]— There look, comrades ! you see it's only a cut of not more than two inches deep. Merino—[b|iucldering] 7 -Mer«cy on " me'
131 me! the very sight of it makes myblood run cold. Parozzi brought ointments and Unen, and bound up the wound of his associ¬ ate. Contarino—Old Horace is in th* right : a phUosopher can be any thing he pleases, а соЫег, a king, or a physician. Only observe with what cUgniSed address the phUosopher Parozzi spreads that plaister for me!—I thank you, friend; that's enough—And now, comrades, place yourselves in a cirde round me, and Usten to the wonders which I am going to relate. FaUeri—Proceed. Contarino—As soon as it was twi- Ught, I stole out, wrapped in my dOak, determined if possible to discover some k2 of
182 of the banditti: I knew not their per¬ sons, neither were they acquainted with mine. An extravagant undertaking, perhaps you will tell me ; but I was re¬ solved to convince you, that every thing which a man determines to do, may be done. I had some information respect¬ ing the rascals, though it was but slight, and on these grounds I proceeded—I happened by mere accident to stumble -upon a gondoleer, whose appearance ex- dted my curiosity. I fell into discourse „witl. him -, I soon was convinced that he was iot ignorant ofthe lurking-place of the Bravos, and by means of some gold and many fair speeches, I at length brought him to confess, that though not regularly belonging to the band, he-had «occasionally been employed by them. I immediately made a bargain with him ; he conducted me in his gondola through the greatest part of Venice, sometimes right, sometimes left, till I lost every idea
1S9 idea as to the quarter of the town in which I found myself. At length he insisted on binding my eyes with his handkerchief, and I was compelled to submit to this condition___Half an hour elapsed before the gondola stopped ; he told me to descend, conducted me through a couple ef streets, and at length knocked at a door, where he left me still blindfolded—the door was opened, my business was inquired with great caution, and after some demur I was atiength admitted. The handker ; chief was now withdrawn from my eyes, and I found myself in a small chamber, surrounded by four men of not the most creditable appearance, and a young wo¬ man, who [it seems]] had opened the door for me. Falieri—You are a daring fellow, Contarino! к 3 Con-
134 Contarmo— Here was no time to be lost. I instantly threw my purse oa the table, promised them mountains of gold, and fixed on particular days hours, and. signals, which were necessary to facilitate our future intercourse. For the present I only required that Manfrone, Onari, and Lomellino should be removed with all possible expedition. Al·- «Btavo! 4, ι Contarino —So far every thing,Went exactly as we could have wished; and one of my new associates was just set¬ ting out to guide me Iţome, when we were surprised by an unexpected visit. Parozzi—Well ? Memmo—[anMoiislyJ—Go -op fcr God's sake!
Con-
185 Contarino —A knocking was heard at the door; the girl went to enquire the cause; in an instant she returned pale as a corse, and—" Fly ! fly !" cried she. Falieri—What followed ? ' Contarino-— Why then followed a whole legion of sbirri and police- officers ; and who should be at Iheir head but.... the Florentine stranger ! All—Flodoardo? what, Flodoardo ? Contarino —Flodoardo. Falieri—What demon could have guided him thither! Parozzi— Hell and furies ! Oh ! that I had been there! Memmo—
136
Memmo —There now, Parozzi! you see at least that Flodoardo is no coward. Falieri—Hush 1 let us hear the resti Contarino—We stood, as if we had been petrified ; nöt a soul could stjr a finger.—" In the name of the Doge and the republic," cried Flodoardo, " yield yourselves, and deliver your arms."— " The devil shall yield himself sooner than лае !" exclaimed one of the ban¬ ditti, and forced a sword from one of the officers ; the others snatched their musquets from the walls ; and as for me, my first care was to extinguish the lamp, so that we could not tell friends from foes—But still the confounded moonshine gleamed through the win¬ dow-shutters, and shed a partial light .through the room.—« Look to yourself, Contarino !" thought I ; "if you are found here, you will be hanged for com-
137
company !" and I drew my sword, and made a lunge at Flodoardo—But, how¬ ever well-intended, my thrust was foiled by his sabre, which he whirled around with the rapidity of lightning. I fought like a madman, but all my skill was without effect on this occasion, and before I was aware of it, Flodoardo ripped open my bosom. I felt myself wounded, and sprang back; at that moment two pistols were fired, and the flash discovered to me a small side door, which they had neglected to beset; through this I stole unperceived into the adjoining chamber, burst open the grated window, sprang bdow unhurt, crost a court-yard, dimbed two or three garden-walls, gained the canal, where a gondola fortunately was 1 waiting, per¬ suaded the boatman to convey me with alLjspeed to the Place of St. Mark, and thence hastened hither, astonished tp find
188
find myself still alive—There is an infernal adventure for you ! Farozzi—I shall go mad ! FaUeri—Every thing we design is counteracted! the more trouble we give ourselves, the further are we from the goal! Memmo— i «confess it seems to me as if Heaven gave us warning to desist— How say you ? Contarino—Psha! these are trifles! —Such acddents should only serve to sharpen our wits !—the more obstacles I encounter, the firmer is my resolution to surmount them. Falieri—Do the banditti know who you are ï Con-
139
Contarmo — No; they are not only ignorant of my name, but suppose me to be a mere iustrument of some powerful man, who has been injured by the ducal confederates. Memmo—Well, Contarino, in my mind you should thank Heaven that you have escaped so well ' Falieri—But since he is an absolute stranger in Venice, how could Flodoardo discover the lurking-place of the ban¬ ditti ? Contarino —I know not—Probably by mere accident, like myself.—But by the Power that made me, he shall pay dearly for this wound ! Falieri—Flodoardo is rather too hasty in making himself remarked.
Parozzi—
1-40
Parozzi — Flodoardo must die ! Contarino —[filling a goblet]—May his next cup contain poison ! Falieri—I shall do myself the honour of becoming better acquainted with'the gentleman. Contarino—Memmo, we must needs have full purses, or our business will hang on hand woefully—When does your uncle take his departure to a better world ? Memmo—To-morrow evening!—and yet.... Ugh ! I tremble !
141
CHAP. IU. More confusion. Since RosabeUa's birth-day, no wo¬ man in Venice who had the sUghtest pretensions to beauty, or the most re¬ mote expectations of making conquests, had any subject of conversation except the handsome Florentine : he found em¬ ployment for every female tongue, and she who dared not employ her tongue, made amends for the privation with her thoughts. Many a maiden now enjoyed less tranquil slumbers ; many an expe¬ rienced coquette sighed, as she bid on her colour at the looking-glass ; many a prude forgot the rules which she had imposed upon herself, and daUy fre¬ quented the gardens and pubhc walks, in
щ m which report gave her the hope of meeting flodoardo. But from the Липе that, placing him. self at tlie head of: the sbirri, he had dared to enter boldly the den of the ban¬ ditti, and seize them at the hazard of his life, he was scarcely more an object of attention among the women tian among the men. . Greatly did they, ad¬ mire his courage and unshaken presence of mind, while engaged in so dangerous an «adventure ; but still more were they astonished at Ья penetration in discover¬ ing where the Bravos concealed them¬ selves; an attempt which had foiled even the keen wits of the so much celebrated police of Venice. The Doge Andreas cultivated the ac¬ quaintance of this singular young man with increasing assiduity ; and the more ht converged with him, the more de¬ serving
143 serving of consideration did Flodoardo appear. The action by which he had rendered the republic a service so essen¬ tial, was rewarded by a present that would not have disgraced imperial grati¬ tude ; and one of *he most important offices in the state was confided to his superintendance. Both favours were conferred unso¬ licited ; but na sooner was the Floren¬ tine apprized of the Doge's benevolent care of him, than with modesty and re¬ spect he requested to decime the pro¬ posed advantages. The only favour which he requested was, to be permitted to live free and independent in Venice during a year, at the end of which he promised to name that employment which he esteemed the best adapted to liis abilities and inclination.
- Flodo-
144
Flodoardo vvas lodged in tho magnifi¬ cent palace of his good old patron Lo¬ melUno : here he lived in the dosest re¬ tirement, studied the most valuable parts of antient and modem literature, re¬ mained for whole days together in his own apartment, and was sddom to be seen in pubUc except upon some great solemnity. But the Doge, LomelUno, Manfrone, and Conari, men,' who had established the fame of Venice on so firm a basis that it would require centuries to under¬ mine- it ; men,' in whose sdciety one ¿eenied'to be-withdrawn from the circle of.ordinary 'mortals, and honoured by the l»ter«ourse of superior beings ; men; WhoiniSwigracitJUsly received the Floren, tinesfratigerüntatheir intimacy, and re¬ solved to sparti ño pains in forming him to support the character of a great man : -kU"I ι-* it
us
it could not long escape the observado« of men like these, that Flodoaido's gaiety was assumed, and that a «ecr-tft sorrow preyed upon his heart. In vain did Lomellino, who loved him like a father, endeavour to discover the source of his melancholy ; in vain did the venerable Doge exert himself to dis¬ perse the gloom which opprest his young favourite; Flodoardo remained silent and sad. And Rosabella ? Rosabella would have belied her sex, had she remained gay while Flodoardo sorrowed. Her spirits were flown -, her eyes wete fre¬ quently obscured with tears. She grew daily paler and paler ; till the Doge, who doated on her, was seriously alarmed for her health—at length Rosabella grew really ill ; a fever fixed itself upon her ; she became weak, and was confined to L hei
146
her chamber, and her complaint baffled the skill of the most experienced phy¬ sicians ¡n Venice. In the midst of these unpleasant cir¬ cumstances in which Andreas and his friends now found themselves, an ind- dent octnirred one morning, which rais¬ ed their uneasiness to the very highest pitch, Never had so bold and audadous an action been heard of in Venice, as that which I am now going to rdate. The four banditti, whom Flodoardo had seized, Pietrino, Strazza, Baluzzo, and Thomaso.had been safdy committed to the Doge's dungeons, where they underwent a daily examination, and looked upon every sun that rose, as the last that would ever rise for them. An·« dreas and his confidential counsellors now flattered themsdves that the public tranquillity had nothing more to appre¬ hend,
147
hend, and that Venice was completely purified of the miscreants, whom gold could bribe ţo be the instruments of re¬ venge and cruelty. .. when all at once the foUowing address was discovered, affixed to most of the remarkable sta¬ tues, and pasted against the corners of the principal streets, and pillars of the pubhc buildings. VENETIANS! Struzza, Thomaso, Pietrino, Baluzzo, and Matteo, five as brave men as the world ever produced ; who, had they stood at the head of armies, would have been called heroes, and now being called banditti, are fallen victims to the in. justice of state-policy ; these men, it is true, exist for you no longer : but their place is supplied by him, whose name is affixed to this paper, and who will stand by his employers with body and with soul ! I laugh at the vigilance of tbe ι. 2 Venetian
148
Venetian police ; I laugh at Ле crafty and insolent Florentine, whose hand has dragged my brethren to the rack'! Let those who need me, seek me ; they will find me every where ! Let those who search for me with the design of deliver¬ ing me up to the law, despair and trem¬ óle ; they »will find me tio-Where—But I shall find them, and that when they least expect me !—Venetians, you understand me!—Woe to the man who shall at¬ tempt to discover me ; his life and death depend upon my pleasure.—This comes frbm the Venetian Bravo, ABELLINO.
149
—« An hundred sequins," en chimed the incensed Doge on reading the paper; " an hundred sequins to him who dis¬ covers this monster AbeUino, and a thou¬ sand to him who deUvers him up to justice !"— But in vain did spies ransack every lurking-place in Venice; no Abeffino was to be found. In vain did the luxu¬ rious, the avaricious, and th," hungry stretch their wits to the utmost, indted by the tempting promise of a thousand sequins. AbeUino's prudence set aU their ingenuity at defiance. But not the less did every ope assert that he had recognised Abeffino some¬ times in one disguise, and sometimes щ another ; as an old man, a gondoleer, a woman, or a monk· Every body bad seen him somewhere; but unluckily nobody could teU where he was to be seen again.
150
CHAP. IV'. The Violet. I INÏ0RMED my readers, in the be¬ ginning of the last chapter, that Flodo¬ ardo was become melancholy, and that Rosabella was indisposed : but I did not tell them what had occasioned this sud¬ den change. Flodoardo, who on his first arrival at Venice was all gaiety, and the life of every society in which he mingled, lost his spirits on one particular day, and it so happened, that it was on the very same day that Rosabella betrayed the first symptoms of indisposition.
For
'151 For on this unlucky day did the ca¬ price of accident, or perhaps the God¬ dess of Love [who has her caprices too «every now and then], conduct RosabeUa into her utìde's garden, which none but the Doge's intimate friends were per- «miitted to enter, and where the Doge himself frequently reposed in solitude and silence during the evemng hours of a sultry day. RosabeUa, lost in thought, wandered Ustless and unconscious along the broad and shady aUeys of the garden. Some¬ times, in a moment of vexation, she «plucked the unoffending leaves from the hedges,' and strewed them upon the ground; Isometimes she stopped sud¬ denly, then rushed forward with im¬ petuosity, then again stood stffl, and gazed ilpon the clear blue heaven. Sometinţes her beautiful bosom was heaved with quicki and irregular mo- L 4 tion ;
152 tion: and sometimes an halfvsiipprest sigh escaped from her lips of coral, —>■" He is very hantüome !" she mur¬ mured, and gazed with such eagerness ■on vatsuury, as'had she seen there iotne- thing which was hidden from the sight of common observers. —" Yet Camilla is in the right," she resumed after a pause ; and she frowned as had she said that Camilla was in the wrong. This Camilla was her governess, her friend, her confidante, I may almost say her mother. Rosabella had lost her pa¬ rents early -, her mother died when her child could scarcely lisp her name ; and her father, Guiscardo of Corfu, the com¬ mander of a Venetian «vessel, eight years before had perished in an engagement with the Turks, whüe he was still in the prime
ÎS» prime of fiffe. Camilla, one of the wor¬ thiest creatures that ever dignified the name of Woman, supplied to Rosabella the place of mother, had brought her up from infancy, and was now her best friend, and the «person to whosfe ear éhe confided all her little secrets. While Rosabella was still buried in her own reflectionsi, the excellent Ca¬ milla advanced from a side-path, and hastened to join her pupil. Rosabella Started., · 'fcosabdlai-Ali ! deal» Camilla, «klit yóu í What brings you hither > ι i I Camilla—You often «all tne your guardian angel, and guardian angels should always be near the object of their can!. Ί ι ' Rosa·
ıs*
RosalÄ—Camilla, ; I have been thinking over your arguments ; I can¬ not deny that all you« have said to ше is very true, and very wise ; but still.... .i Camilbi7-Buţ stilb though your ргш dence agrees with me» yoilr heart is of a contrary opinion ? Rosabella—It is indeed. ι u I : ' ' ι СдщШа— Щт do I bţatne your heart for differing from me, my poor «girl ! I have acknowledged to you without dis- gaislVJltøtiWjire /|it уоцг tifliejpf Же, and wer* Jítj&hia pıaş as Flodoarďoi ţo throw himself in my way, I could not receive his attentions vyith indifference. It cannot be dented, that this young terger jiÃtW^aooiyJElositlg', lijrnd indeed, for «any woman whose heart« iş disengaged, an uncommonly dangerous ε -o г compa-
ISS
companion.—There- is something very prepossessing in his appearance, his manners are elegant, and shoit as has been his abode in Venice, it is already past doubting that there are many noble and striking features in his character— But alas ' after all, he is but a poor no¬ bleman, and it is not very probable that the ridi and powerful Doge of Venice will ever bestow his niece on one, who, to speak plainly, arrived here little better than a beggar. No, no, child, believe me ; a romantic adventurer is no fit husband for Rosabella of Corfu. Rosabella—Dear Camilla, who was talking about husbands? What I feel for Flodoardo is merely affection, friendship ..... f 'Camilla—Irideed ? Then you would be perfectly ktisfieri, should some one of
ш
of our wealthy ladies he stow bét hand on Flodoardo ? , ι Rosabella—[hastily]—Oh ! Flodoar-, do would not accept her hand, Camilla ; of that I am sure. ι Camilla—Child! child! you would willingly deceive yourself. But be 4*. sured, that a girl who loves ever соц- uects [perhaps unconscioudy] the wish for an eternal umon with the idea of an eternal affection. Now this is a wish which you cannot indulge« iu regard to Flodoardo, without seriously ofiénding your imele, who, good man aa he is, must still submit to the severe controul of politis and etiquette. Rosabella—I know all that, Camilla; but can I not make you comprehend that I am not in love with' Flodoardo, and
ısı
ind do not mean to bé in love with him, and that love has nothing at all to dó in fhe business ? I repeat to you, what I feel for him is nothing but sincere and fervent friendship; and surely Flodoardo deserves that I should feel that senti¬ ment for him—Deserves it, said I ? Oh! what does Flodoardo not deserve I Camilla—Aye, aye ! friendship indeed »...and love....Oh! Rosabella, you know not how often these deceivers borrow each other's mask to ensnare the hearts of unsuspecting maidens! you know not how often love finds admis¬ sion, when wrapt in friendship's doak, «into that bosom, which, had he ap¬ proached under his own appearance, would have been dosed against him for ever !—In short, my dúld, reflect how much you owe to your unde ; reflect how much uneasiness this inclination would cost him ; and sacrifice to duty what
IJS what, at present is a mere caprice, but which, if encouraged, might make too deep an impression on your heart tQ he afterwards removed by your best efforts, , ι«. , Rosabella—«You say right, Camilla; I really believe myself that my prepos¬ session in Flodoardo's favour is merely an accidental -fancy, of which I shall easily get i the better. No, no, I am not in love with Flodoartlo, ofthat you may rest assured,, I even think, that I rather fed an antipathy-towards him, sipe«? ypu have shown me the possibi¬ lity of his making me prove a cause of uneasiness to my kind, my excellent uncle. ¡ «- Camilla—[smiling]—Are your senti» ments of duty and gratitude so very strorig ? I
Rosa-
ilS9 RosabeUa— Oh! that they are, Ca¬ miUa, and so you wffl say yourselfhere- after—This disagreeable Flodoardo...» to give me so much vexation !—I wish he bad never come to Venice ! I declare I do not like him at aU ! « . ' , CamiUa — No?—What? Not Uke Flodoardo? RosabeUa—[casting do«jvn her eyes] —No ; not at aU—Not that I wish bini Ul either; for you know, CamiUi, there's no reason why I should bate this poor Flodoardo ? Г, « I · I » I i!t Camilla—Wdl, we wffl resume,thi) subject when I return; I have business, and the gondola waits for me—Farewell, my chUd, and do not lay aside your resor lution as hastily às you, took it up !.' д , 1 11 « ι Camilla
160
«Camilla departed ; and Rosabella re¬ mained melancholy and uncertain ; the built castles in the air, and destroyed them as soon as built; she formed wishes, and condemned herself for hav¬ ing formed them; she looked round hef frequently in search of something, but dared not confess to herself what it was of which she was in search. ,J > i The evemng was sultry, and Rosa¬ beUa «was cbiripelled to skelter heftelf «from the sun's ov*iipowtmng heat.« In «the garden was a small fountain, bor¬ dered by a bank of mose, -over which the magic hands of art and nature had formed a canopy of ivy and jessamine. Thither ¡she bent her step* ι sh» arrWed «■the fountain.... .шва instantly drew back, -covered «with blushes·—For on the bank of moss, shaďtd ¡by the protecting canopy, whose waving blossoms were π « reflected
161 reflected on the fountain, Flodoardo was seated, and fixt his eyes on a roU of parchment. RosabeUa hesitated whether she should retire or stay. Flodoardo started from hb place apparently in no less confusion than herself, and relieved her from her indecision, by taking her hand with re¬ spect, and conducting her to the seat which he had just quitted. Now then she could not possibly re- tire immediately, unless she meant to violate every common prindple of good breeding. -Her hand was stUl dasped in Flodo¬ ardo's—But it was so natural for him to take if, that she could not blame him for having done so.—But what was she next to dç ?—Draw her hand away ?— Why should she, sinœ he Æd her hand M no
162
no harm by keeping it, and thi keeping it seemed to make him SO happy? And how could the gentle Rosabella resolve to commit an act of such un¬ heard of cruelty, as wilfully to deprive any one of a pleasure which made bml so happy, and which did herself no harm ? —" Signora," said Flodoardo, merely for the sake of saying something, " you do well to enjoy the open air ; the even¬ ing is beautiful." —" But I interrupt your studies, hty Lord ?" said Rosabella. —" By no means," answered Flodo¬ ardo ; and there this interesting conver¬ sation came to a full stop.—Both looked down ; both examined the heaven and. the earth, the trees and the flowers, in the hopes of finding some hints for re¬ newing
168
newing the çonvertaüon -, but the more anxiously they sought them, the more difficult did it seem to find what they sought : and in this painful embarrass¬ ment did two whole precious, minutes elapse ! ' ' —« Ah I what a beautiful flctwer!" suddenly cried Rosabella, in order to break the silence; then stooped and plucked a violet with an appearance of the greatest eagerness ; though, in fact, nothing at that,moment could have been more a matter of indifférence. —" It is a very beautiful flower, in¬ deed 1 .'' «gravely observed Flodoardo, and was out of all patience with himself for having made so flat a speech. ' ι I —" Nothing «can surpass this purple!'' continued Rosahella ; " red and blu* so m 2 happily
164
happily blended, that no painter could produce so perfect an union!" ' , ι —" Red and blue ? the o«aej the sym¬ bol of happiness, the other of «affection .... Ah ! Rosabella, how enviable will be that man's lot on whom your hand should bestow such a flower ! Happiness and ■affection are more inseparably united than the red and blue which pur¬ ple that violet !"— —" You seem to attadi a value to the flower of which it is but Uttle de¬ serving."— 1 f Might I but know on whom Rosa¬ bella, ,wiU one day bestow what that flower expresses.... Yet this is a sub¬ ject, which I have no right to discuss— I know not what has,happened to me to-day; I make nothings but blunders and
165
and mistakes—Forgive my presumption, Lady ; I will hazard such forward in¬ quiries no more." He was silent: Rosabella was silent also. AU was calm and hushed, except in the hearts of the lovers. But though they could forbid their lips to betray their hidden affection ; though Rosabella's tongue said not— " thou art he, Flodoardo, on whom this flower should be bestowed;"—though Flodoardo's words had not,exprest— " Rosabella, give me that violet, and that which it implies ;"—oh ! their eyes were far from being silent. Those trea¬ cherous interpreters of secret feelings acknowledged more to each other than their hearts had yet acknowledged to themselves !
мЗ
Flodo-
i fie Flodoardo and Rosabella ¡gazed on each other with looks which made all speeA unnecessary. Sweet, tender, and enthusiastic was the smile which played round Rosabella's lips, when her eyes met those of the youth who«! she had selected from the rest of mankind ¡ and with mingled emotions of hope and fear did the youth study the meaning ofthat smil«í —He understood it, and his heart beat louder, and liis «yes flamed brighter. Rosabella trembled s, her eyes «mid ho longer siretain »Ле fire of bis pastes, and a modest blush oversfireUd hei fate and bosom. —'* Rosabella ! at length murmured Flodoardo trnfamscieuslyj and—" Flo¬ doardo '" sighed Rosabella in the «дате tone. —" Give
167
r»^·" Give fe fhfľ violet!" he ex- chuined eagerly ; then sank at her feet, and in a tone of the most humble sup¬ plication pepeated—" Oh! give it to /tie I" Rosabella held the flower fast. —" Ask fbr it what thou wilt ; if a throne can purchase it, I will pay that price, or perish I—Rosabella, give me that Hovner." — She stole one look at the handsome suppliant, and dared not hazard a second. —" My repose, my happiness, my life, nay, even my glory, all depend on ttø possession cf that httle flower ! Let that he mine, and Ъ<$ е l solemnly re- ijouflce all ,ejse which the woild call» precious !" M 4 I lie
163 The flower trembled in her snowy hand ; her fingers clasped it less firmly. —" You hear me, RosabeUa? I kneel at your feet, and am I then in vain a beggar ?"— The word beggar recaUed to her me¬ mory Camilla and her prudent counsels —" What am I doing?" she said to herself; " have I forgotten my promise .... my resolution.... Fly, Rosabella, fly, or this hour makes you faithless lo yourself and duty !"— She tore the flower to pieces, and threw it contemptuously on the ground. — " I understand you, Flodoardo," said she ; " and having understood you, wül never suffer this subject to be re¬ newed. Here let us part, and let me not
169
not agam be offended by a similar pre¬ sumption—Farewell !"— She turned from him with disdain, and left Flodoardo rooted to his place with sorrow and astonishment.
140
сна*?, v. The Assassin. Scarcely had she reached her cham¬ ber, ere RosabeUa repented her having acted so courageously. It was cruel in her, she thought, to have given him so harsh an answer ! She recoUected with what hopeless and melancholy looks the poor thunderstruck youth had foUowed her steps as she turned to leave him. She fancied that she saw him stretched despairing on the earth, his hair dishe- veUed, his eyes fiUed with tears. She heard him term her the murderess ofhis repose, pray for death as his only re¬ fuge, and she saw him with every mo¬ ment approach towards the attainment of his prayer, through the tears which he
m
he shed on her account. Already she heart! those dread&l words—" Flodo¬ ardo is no more !"—Already she saw the sympathizing multitude weep round the tomb of him, whom aU the virtuous loved, and whom the wicked dreaded ; whom aU his friends adored, and whom even his «lemies admired. —" Alas ! alas !" cried she, " this was but a wretched attempt to play the heroine; already does my resolution fail me. All ! Flodoardo, I meant not what I said ! I love you, love you now, and must love you always, though СатШа may chide, and though my good uncle may hate me."— In a few days after thib interview, she understood that an extraordinary altera¬ tion had taken place in Hodoardo's manner and appearance; that he had withdrawn himself from all general society ;
172 society ; and that when the solicitation» of his intimate friends compdled him to appear in their cirde, his spirits seemed evidently deprest by the weight of an unconquerable melancholy. This inteUigence was Uke the stroke of a poignard to the feeling heart of RosabeUa. She fled for shelter to the boUtude of her chamber, there indulged her feeUngs without restramt, and lamented, with showers of repent¬ ant tears, her harsh treatment of Flo¬ doardo. The grief which preyed in secret on her soul, soon undermined her health. No one could relieve her sufferings, for no one knew the cause of her melan¬ choly, or the origin of her Ulness. No wonder then that RosabeUa's situation at length excited the most bitter anxiety in the bosom of her venerable uncle.
173
unde. No wonder, too, that ţlodoardo entirely withdrew himself from a world which was become odious to him, since Rosabella was to be seen in it no longer ; and that he devoted himself in solitude to the indulgence of a passion, which he had vainly endeavoured to subdue ; and which, in the impetuosity of its course, had already swallowed up every other wish, and every other sentiment. But let us for a moment turn from the sick chamber of Rosabella, and visit the dwellings of the conspirators, who were now advancmg with rapid strides towards the execution of their plans ; and who, with every hour that past over their heads, became more numer¬ ous, more powerful, and more dangerous to Andreas and his beloved republic. Parozzi, Memmo, Contarino, and Falieri
17< Falién [the chiefs of this desperate undertaking] now assembled frequently in the Cardinal Gonzaga's palace, where the different plans for altering the constitution of Venice were brought fonv ard and discussed But in aU these different schemes it was evident that the proposer was solely actuated by considerations of private interest—The oliject of one was to get free from the burthen of enormous debts; another was wiUing to sacrifice every thing to gratify his inordinate ambition; the cupidity of this man was exdted by the treasures of Andreas and his ftrends-, while that was attuated by resentment of some fanned offence, a resentment which could only be quenched with the offender's blood. These execrable wretches, who aimed at nothing less than the total overthrow of Venice, or at least of her government, looked
175
looked towards the completion of their extravagant hopes with the greater confidence, since a new but necessary addition to the already-existmg taxes had put the Venetian populace out of humour with their ruléis. Rich enough, both in adherents and 'in wealth, to realize their fearful projects} rich enough in bold, shrewd, desperate men, whose minds were well adapted to the contrivance and execution of revolutionary projects ; they now looked down with contempt on the good old Doge, who as yet entertained no suspi¬ cion of the object of their nocturnal meetings. Still did they not dare to carry their piojects into effect till some piincipal persons in the state should be prevented by death from throwing obstacles in their way. For the accomplishment of
176
of this part of their plan they relied on the daggers of the banditti. Dread¬ ful therefore was the sound in their ears when the beU gave the signal for execution, and they saw their best- founded hopes expire on the scaffold which supported the headless trunks of the four Bravos. But if their con¬ sternation was great at thus losing the destined instruments of their designs, how extravagant was their joy when the proud Abeffino dared openly to declare to Venice, that he still inhabited the republic, and that he stiU wore a dagger at the disposal of Vice. —" This desperado is the very man for us !" they exclaimed unanimously, and in rapture; and now their most ardent wish was to enroU Abeffino in their service. That object was soon attained— they
177 they sought the daring ruffian, and he suffered himself to be found. He visited their meetings, but in his pro¬ mises and demands he was equally extravagant. The first and most earnest wish of the whole conspiracy was the death of Conari, the Procurator ; a man whom the Doge valued beyond all others ; a man, whose eagle-eyes made the conspi¬ rators hourly tremble for their secret, and whose services the Doge had ac¬ cepted, in preference to those of the Cardinal Gonzaga. —But the sum which Abellino demanded for the murder of this one man was enormous. —" Give me the reward which I require," said he, " and I promise, on the word of a man of lioaour, . that after this night the procurator Conari shall give you no further trouble. Exalt n him
178
lint to heaven, or imprison him in hell, «j!U engage to find and stab him." „ .,1 J s I ' What could thef do ? Abellino was not s man to be easily beat down in his demands. The Cardinal was impatient to attain the summit of his wishes; but his road lay straight over Conari's «grave! < I Abellino received the sum demanded ; ,the next day the Venerable Conari, the Doge's best and dearest friend, the pride and safeguard of the republic, vval no longer numbered among the living. — « 'Tis a terrible fellow, this Abel. ilinoj!' .cried the conspirators When the news «reached them, and celebrated the Procurator's death in triumph at the Caidinal's .midnight feast. J 'i , ,ι The
179
ЖЬ» Doge watv «il«M«st diätraoted witb •«ternor «ША «tølb^hinefat. H« epţagtd «to give «tee tíin-usand seqiims «о 4пу tme who ehouîd djsosvijr Ijy whom Goswi had been removed fram aie world, ι A proclamation to this effect was published stt' the corner of every street in Venice, and made known throughout the territories of the η public. A few days after this proclamation had been made, a paper was discovered affixed to tlie principal door of the Venetian Signoria. VENETIANS! You would fain know the author of Conari's death: to spare you much fruitless trouble, I hereby acknowledge, that I, Abellino, was his assassin Twice did I bury my dagger in his heart, and then sent his body to feed fishes. The Doge promises ten thousand sequins to ν 2 him
180
«him who «shall discover -Conan's iñur- -derer ; and to him who shall be clever enough to seize him, Abellino hereby promises twenty —Adieu, Signors; I remain your futhful servant, fc/ ' ABELLINO.
m
CHAP. VI. The two greatest Men in Venice, It must be superfluous to inform my readers that all Venice became furious at this new insolence. Within the memory of man had no one ever treated with such derision the celebrated Venetian police, or set the Doge's power at defiance with such proud temerity. This occurrence threw the whole city into confusion ; every one was on the lookout; the patroles were doubled; the sbirri extended their researches on all sides ; yet no one could see, or hear, or discover the most distant trace of Abellino. The .priests in their sermons strove to ronze the slumbering vengeance of « ι n 3 Heaven
If» Heaven to crush this insolent offender. The ladies were ready to swoon at the very name of AbeUino, for who could assure them that, at some unexpected moment, he might not pay tkeik the same compUment whidi he had paid to Rosabella ■* As for the old Wdmen, th^dnailiBriOusly asserted, that АЬеШпо Bad sold himself to the Pñnte of Dark¬ ness, by Whose assistance he was 1 enabled to sjWrt with'the patience of «a&plbug Venetians, and deride fhe impotence of their just MigHatton. Ihe Cardmai and ids assodates were proud of their terrible confederate, and looked forward with confidence to tile triumphatlt issue of their undertaking. The deserťeď family rjf Coriari caUed down curses olt his murderer's head, and wished that their tears might be changed into a Sea of sulphur, in whose waves they might plunge the irionttèr AteUino : nor «did Conari's rdaöons feel more grief fdr his loss
188.' loss than the Doge and his two confi¬ dents, who swore never tb rest till they had discovered the lurking-place of the ruthless assassin, and had punished his crime with ten-fold vengeance. —" Yet, after all," said Andreas one evening, as he sat alone in his private chamber, " after all, it must be confest that this Abellino is a singular man ..... « He who can do what Abellino has done, must possess both such talents and such courage as [stood he at the head of an army] would enable him to conquer Half the World ¡—Would that I could once get a sight of him !"— —«"Look up then!" roared Abellino, and clapped the Doge on the shoulder —Andreas started from Ms seat. Á colossal figure stood before him, wrapt in a dark mande, above which appeared a countenance so hideous and forbidding, n 4 that
İM
that the universe could not have! pro-· duced its equal. —" Who art thou ?" stammered out the Doge. —" Thou seest me, and canst doubt? Well then! I am Abellino, the good friend of your murdered Conarvand the republic's most submissive slave."— The brave Andreas, who had never trembled in fight by land or by sea, and fori whom no danger had possest terrors sufficient to shake his undaunted resolu¬ tion, the brave Andreas now forgot for a few moments his usual presence of mind. Speechless did he gaze on the daring »SSissin.who stood before him calm and haughty, unappalled by the majesty of the greatest man in Venice. Abellino nodded to him with an air of
185
of'familiar proteetion, and graciously condescended to grin, upon him, with a kind of lalfrfriendly smile. V >.'''' —" Abellino," paid ,$е, t Doge,, at, length, endeavouring to recollect ännin self, " thou art a fearful.,' », a detestable man !" —"Fearful?" answered the-Bravo; " Dost /io« think me so ? Good ! that glads me to my very heart!—Detestable? that may be so, or it may not. I confess the sign which I hang out gives no great promise, of good entertainment within; but yet, Andreas, one thing is certain— You and I stand on the same line, for at this moment we are the two greatest men in Venice ; you in youi way, I in mine."— , The Doge could not help şmi'ing aţ (^Bravo's familiar tone. ι ' —" Nay,
ιββ
—" Nif, му !" íöntittíMd АМИио t " no anules of diSbeUef, If you please. AUow me, though a Bra«rO, to compare myself to a Doge ; truly I tiink there's no great preaümp 1 tion in placing myself on a level with a 1 man, whom I hold in my power, and who therefore is in fact beneath me."— The Doge made' a movement, as would he have left him. —" Not so fast," said Abeffino laugh¬ ing rudely, and he barted the Doge's passage. " Acddent seldom Unites in so smaU a space as this chamber a pair of such great men—Stay'where you 'are, for I have not done with you yet : we must have a little conversation."— —" Hear me, AbeUino!" said the Dogi, mustering up aU the dignity winch he possest ; " thou hast received great
187·
¿rm 'taleftts from 'Nature : why dost thou employ them to so little advan¬ tage ? I hete promise you, on my most sacred Word, pardon for the past, and protection fior the futurei, will you but name to me the villain Who bribed you tb assassinate Conäri, abjure your bloody trade, and accept an honest «employ¬ ment In the service Of the republic¬ ii tíds offer Is i-ejected, at least quit with all speed the territory of Venice, or I swear.. "— " Ho' ho 1 " interrupted Abellino; " pardon and protection, say you ? It is long since I thought it worth my While to care for such trifles—Abellino is able to protect himself without foreign aid ; and as to pardon, mortals cannot give absolution fbr sins like mine. On that day when all men must give in the list of their offences, then too will /give in mine,
MS
mint, but till thwt HWiH-YifUj, wouJd know the name of hinv who bribed me¬ to be Conari's murderer ? Well, well ; you shall knpw it,.. , but not to-day.·— I must quit jyiithatl speed ,the Venetian territory ?.gnd wherefore ? through fear of «thee ?, Ho ) ho ' through fear oft Venice ? Ha ! Abellino feare not Veţiice ; 'tis Veijice,tbat fears Abclliup!— Υομ would have ipe abjţu -едау profession ?j-n Well, Andreas^ there is pne cojjditioij, which peihaps ......"— -rít.NamR it!',' cried the Doge ea¬ gerly ; " will t§i\ thousand sequins pur¬ chase, your -¡departure from the repupy lie?"-«» , ι,. , ι . I —" I would gladly give you twite as mudi myself, could you recall the injulţ of offering Abe^moitsp/miseraJiliiät'bribfiL —No, Andreas, blí* tme роед^аО pay, me :
189 me ;> give me your niece for my bride ; I love RosabeUa, the daughter of Guis- card of Corfu."— —" Monster !—what insolence.. " —" Ho ! ho !—Patience, patience, good ,pnde that is to be ! WiU you accept my terms ?"— —" Name what sum can satisfy you, .and.it shaU i¡e yours this instant, so you will only feüeve Venice from your pre¬ sence. Though it should cost the re¬ public a miffion she will be a gainer, if her air is no longer poisoned by your breath."— —" Indeed ît-, «Why in fact a miffion is not so great a sum ; for, look ye, An¬ dreas, I have just sold for neai half a million the lives of your two dear •friends, Manfrone and Lomeffino.— Ί Now
190
Now give me Rosabella, ahd I break the bargain."— ' — u Miscreant ! Has Heaven no lightnings......"— — a You will not?—Mark me! In four-knd-twenty hours shall Manfrone and Lomeffino be food -for fishe s ' J ^ Abellino has said it !—Away !" And witb these words hè 'àrew a pis. tol from Under bis doak, and flashed it in the Doge's face—Blinded by the powder, and confused by the unex¬ pected explosion,' Andreas started back, and sank bewildered on a neighbouring sofa—He soon recovered from his asto¬ nishment ; he sprang "frimi his' seat to summon his guards, and seize Abellino —But Abellino had 'already disap- peared. ' *"
Oa
191 On that same evening were Farozzi and liis confederata assembled in the palace of the Cardinal Gonzaga, ι The table was spread with the most luxu¬ riou} profusion, and they arranged over their flowing goblets plans for the re¬ public's ruin—The Cardinal related how he had of late Contrived to 'insinuate himself into the Doge's good graces, and had succeeded in impressing him with' an opinion that the chiefs of the confederacy wore'fit men to hold offices of important trust. Contarino boasted thai he doubted not before long to be appointed to the vacant Pŕoeiiratorship. Parozzi reckoned, for his share, upon RosabiTİla's hind, and the place either of Lomeffino or Manfrone, when once thpse two chief obstades to his hopes should be removed. Such was the conversation in which they were engaged, when the clock struck twelve, the doors flew wide, and Abellino stood before them ' —" Wine-
192 — a Wine there!" cried he; " the work is done—Man frone and Lomeffino are at.nipper with the Worms."—« All sprang from their seats in rapture and astonishment. — B And I have thrown the Doge himself into such a fit of terror, that I warrant you he will not ι ecover himself easily.—Now answer ; аде you content with me, you blood-hounds ?"— —" Next then for Flodoardo "' shouted Farozzi. — a Flodoardo ?" muttered Abellino between his teeth ; " hum ! hum I — that's not so easy."
End of Book the Second,
BOO» THE THIRD.
CHAP. I. The Lovers. Rosabella, the idol of all Venice, lay on the bed of sickness ; a sorrow, whose cause was carefully concealed from every one, undermined her health, and destroyed the bloom of her beauty. She loved the noble Flodoardo; and who could have known Hodoardo and not have loved him ?—His majestic sta¬ ture, his expressive countenance, his en¬ thusiastic glance, his whole being de¬ clared aloud—" Flodoardo is Nature's favourite !"—and Rosabella had been always a great admirer of Nature. о But
194
But if RosabeUa was Ш, Flodoardo was scarcely better. He confined him¬ self to his own apartment ; he shunned sodety, and frequently made long jour- nies to different sities of the republic, in hopes of distracting his thoughts by changeof place from that object, which, wherever he went, stiU pursued him. He had now been absent for three whole weeks. No one knew in what quarter he was wandering ; and it was during this absence that the so long expected Prince of Monaldeschi arrived at Venice, to claim Rosabella as his bride. His appearance, to which a month be¬ fore Andreas looked forward wjth such pleasing expectation, now afforded but little satisfaction to the Doge. Rosa¬ beUa was too Ul to receive her suitor's visits^ and he did not aUow her much time to recover her health; for six days after his ..arrival at Venice, the Pi ince
195
Prince was found murdered in a retired part of one of the public gardens. His sword lay by him unsheathed and bloody ; his tablets were gone, but one leaf had been torn from them and fastened on his breast—It was examined, and found to contain the following Unes apparently written in blood : —" Let no one pretend to Rosabella's hand who is not prepared to share the fate of Monaldeschi ! ----- The Bravo " ABBbLINO." —" Oh ! where shall I now fly for comfort ! for protection !" exdaimed the Doge in despair, when this dreadful news was announced—" Why, why is Flodoardo absent ?"— , Anxiously djd he now desire the youth's return, to support him under the weight of these heavy misfortunes ; nor о 2 was
1Θ6
was it long before fhat desire was grati¬ fied—Flodoardo returned. —" Welcome, noble youth!" said the Doge, when he saw the Florentine enter Ms apartment ; " you must not in future deprive me of your presence for so long. I am now a poor forsaken old man—You have heard that Lomellino .... that Manfrone.... "— —" I know all!" answered Flodo¬ ardo with a melancholy air. —" Satan has burst his chains, and now inhabits Venice under the name of Abellino, robbing me of all that my soul holds precious. Flodoardo, for heaven's love be cautious ; often, during your ab¬ sence, have I trembled lest the miscre¬ ant's dagger should have deprived me too of you. I have much to say to you, my young friend, but I must defer it till ■ the
197 the evening ; a foreigner of consequence has appointed this hour for an audience, and I must hasten tp receive him—But in the evening...." He was interrupted by the appearance of Rosabella, w'io, with tottering steps and pale cheeks, advanced slowly into the apartment. She saw Flodoardo, and a faint blush overspread her coun¬ tenance. Flodoardo rose from his seat, and welcomed her with an air of distant rcpect. —" Do not go yet," said the Doge ; " perhaps in half an hour I may be at liberty—In the mean while I leave you to entertain my poor Rosabella : she has been very ill during your absence, and I am still uneasy about her health. She kept her bed till yesterday, and tiuly I think she has still left it too soon."— о 3 The
198"
The venerable Döge quitted thií apart¬ ment, and the lovers once more found themselves alone. Rosabella drew near the window ; Flodoardo at length ven¬ tured to approach it also. ' —" Signora," said he, " are you still angry With me ?"«— —" I am not angry with you," stam¬ mered out Rosabella, and blushed as she recollected die garden-scene. —" And you have quite forgiven my transgression ?"— ■—" Your transgression ?" repeated Rosabella with a faint smile; " yes; if it was a transgression, I have quite forgiven it. Dying people ought to pardon those who have trespassed against them, in order that they, in their turn, may be pardoned
199
pardoned their trespasses against Héâ·· ven —and I am dying ; I feel it !" —" Signora!" — —" Nay, 'tis past a doubt—It's true I have quitted my sick bed since yester¬ day ; but I know well that I am soon to return to it, never to leave it more.— And therefore.... therefore I now ask your pardon, Signor, for the vexation which I w?s obliged to cause to you the last time we met."— Flodoardo replied not. —" Will you not forgive me ?—You must be very difficult to appease ...... very revengeful !"— Flodoardo fixed his eyes on hei oun- tenance with a melancholy smile—Ro- o 4 sabelh
200 tabella extended her hand" ton-ards him — —" WiU you refuse my offered hand ? ShaU aU be forgotten ?"— —" Forgotten, Lady? Never! ne¬ ver !—Every word and look of yours is stamped on my memory, never to be eflãced. I cannot forget a transaction in which you bore a part ; I cannot for¬ get the scene that past between us, every drcumstance is too precious and sacred. —As to pardon".... —He took her ex¬ tended hand, and prest it respectfuUy to his lips—" I would to Heaven, dear Lady, that you had in truth injured me much, that I might have much to for¬ give you—Alas ! I have at present no¬ thing to pardon."— Both were now suent ; at length Ro¬ sabeUa
201
sabella resumed the conversation by say¬ ing—" You have made a long absence from Venice ; did you travel far ?" —« I did."— -" And received much pleasure from your journey ?"— —" Much ; for every where I heard the praises of RosabeUa."— —" Count Flodoardo!"—she inter¬ rupted him with a look of reprehension, but in a gentle voice, " would you again offend me ?"— —" That vvill soon bc out of my power—Perhaps you can guess what are my present intentions."— •—" To resume your travels, soon ?"—
—" Exactly
202
— ι" Exactly so;-and the next time that 1 quit Venice, to return to ir no more."— —" No more?" she repeated eagerly; " Oh ! not so, Flodoardo ! Ah ! can you leave me?"—She stopped, ashamed Of her imprudence—« Can you leave my umde, I meant to say ? * You do but jest, 1' doubt not."— ·—«■" By my honour, Lady, I never was more\in earnest. \ —" And whither then do you mean togo?"— «—" To Malta, and assist the knights in their attacks upon the Corsairs of Barbary. Provident» p;rhaps may en¬ able me to obtain the command of a galley ; then will I call my vessel 'Ro¬ sabella,'—then shall the war-cry be still ' Rosa-
•303 ' Rosabella ;' that name will render me invincible !" —" Oh! this is mockery, Count; I have not deserved that you should sport with my feelings so cruelly."— —" It is to spare your feelings, Sig¬ nora, that I am now resolved to fly from Venice ; my presence might cause you some uneasy moments. I am not the happy man whose sight is destined to give you pleasure ; I will at least avoid giving you pain."— —" And you really can resolve to abandon the Doge, whose esteem for you is so sincere, whose friendship has always been so warm ?"— —" I value his friendship highly ; but it is not suffident to make me happy —and could he lay kingdoms at my feet,
204
feet, stiU would his friendship be insuf. jfident to make me happy."— —" Does then your happiness re¬ quire so much ?"— —" It does ; much more than I have mentioned, infinitdy more !—But one boon can make me happy—I have begged for it on my knees."—He «caught her hand, and «хгЧ it eagerly to his Ups —« I ha» u for jt, Rosabella, .... and my s been rejected !"— —" You are a strange enthusiast !" she said vrith difficulty, and scarcdy knew what she said; while Flodoardo drew her gendy nearer to him, and murmured in a supppUcating voiœ — " RosabeUa!" ------ " What would you of me ?"— /
/ —* My
205 —" My happiness ! '— She gazed upon him for a moment undecided, then hastUy drew away her hand, and exclaimed—" Leave me this moment, I command you ! Leave me, for Heaven's sake!"— Flodoardo clasped his hands togeth«» in despair and anguish—he bowed his head in token of obedience ; fie left her with slow steps and a melancholy air, and as he past the threshold, turned to bid her fareweU for ever. Suddenly she rushed towards him, caught his hand, and prest it to her heart. Flodoardo !" she criée» " lam thine!" and sank motionless at his feet.
206
CHAP. H. A dangerous Promise. And now who was so blest as the fortunate Flodoardo ? The victory was his own ; he had heard the wished-for sentence pronounced by the lips of Rosabella—He raised her from the ground, and placed her on a sopha— Her blue eyes soon unclosed themselves once more, and the first object which they beheld was Flodoardo kneeling at her feet, while" with one arm he encir¬ cled her waist. Her head sárik upon the shoulder ofthe man for whom she had wept so many tears, for whom she had breathed so many sighs, who had occupied so many of hei thoughts by day,
207
day, who had been present in so many of her dreams by night. As they gazed in 1 silent rapture on each other, they forgot that they were mortab ; they seemed to be transported to an happier, better world. Rosabella thought that the chamber in which she sat was transformed ,into an earthly Paradise; invisible seraphs seemed to hallow by their protecting' presence the indulgence of her innocent affection; and she poured forth her secret thanks to Him who « ι given» her an heart suswptible of 1< ' Through the course of man's existence Such a tit as this occurs but once. Hapj. « e who sighs'for its arrival ; happy is he wüo when it arrives has a soul worthy of its enjoy¬ ment ; happy is even he for whom that moment has long been past, so it past - . not
208 not uneiijoycd, for the recollection of it still is precious. Sage philosophers, in vain do you assure us that the raptures of a moment like this are mere illusions of an heated imagination, scarcely more solid than an enchanting dream, which fades before the sunbeams of truth and reason. Alas! does there exist an happiness under the moon which owes not its charms in some degree to the magic of imagination. —-" You are dear to me, Flodoardo !" murmured Rosabella, for Camilla and her counsels were quite forgotten; " oh ! you are very, very dear !"— The youth only thanked her by clasping her still closer to his bosom, while, for the first time, he sealed her coral lips with his own. At that moment the door was sud¬ denly
209 denfy (-brown open; the Doge Andreas re-enteieo the apartment; the expected stranger had been suddenly taken ill, and Andreas was no sooner at Uberty than he hastened to rejbin his favourite. The rustling of his garments rouzed the lovers from their dream of bliss. Rosabella started from Flodoardo's embrace with a cry of terror ; Flodoardo quitted his kneeling pos'ure, yet seemed by no means disconcerted at the dis¬ covery. Andreas gazed upon them for some minutes, with a look which exprest at once anger, melancholy, and the most heartfelt disappointment. He sighed deeply, cast his eyes towards Heaven, and in silence turned to leave the apartment. —" Stay yet one moment, noble Andreas," cried the Florentine. ρ The
210 The Doge turned, and Flodoardo threw himself at his feet. Andreas looked down with calm and serious dignity on the kneeling offender, by whom his friendship had been so un¬ worthily rewarded, and by whom his confidence liad been so cruelly betrayed. —" Young man," said he in a stern voice, " the attempt to excuse yourself must be fruitless."— —" Excuse myself!" interrupted Flodoardo boldly ; " no, my Lord, I need no excuses for lovmg Rosabella; 'twere for him to excuse himself who had seen Rosabella, and not loved her— yet if it is indeed a crime in me that I adore Rosabella.... 'tis a crime of which Heaven itself will absolve me, since it formed Rosabella so worthy to be adored·!"—
—"You
211 —« You seem to lay too much stress on this fantastic apology," answered the Doge contemptuously; " at leastj you cannot expect that it should have much weight with me."— —" I say it once more, my Lord,'' resumed Flodoardo, while he rose from the ground, " that I intend to make no apology. I mean not to excuse my love for Rosabella, but to request your approbation of that love—Andreas, I adore your niece ; I demand her for my bride."— The Doge started in astonishment at this bold and unexpected request. —" It is true," continued the Flo¬ rentine, " I am no more than a needy, unknown youth, and it seems a piece of strange temerity when such a man proposes himself to espouse the heiress ρ 2 of
212
of the Venetian Doge. But, by Heaven, I am confident that the great Andreas means not to bestow his RosabeUa on one of those whose claims to favour are overflowing coffers, extensive territories, and sounding tides, or who vainly deco¬ rate their insignificance with the glory obtained by their ancestors; glory of wMch they are themselves incapable of acquiring a single ray. I acknowledge freely that I have as yet performed no actions which make me deserving such a ïevvard as RosabeUa ; but it shaU not Ъе long ere I will perform such actions, of perish in the attempt."— The Doge turned from him with a look of displeasure. —" Oh ! be not incensed with him,, dear unde!" said RosabeUa: she hast¬ ened-to detain the Doge, threw her white arms round his neck fondly, and
213 and concealed in his bosom» the tears with which her countenance was be¬ dewed. —" Make your demands '" continued Flodoardo, still addressing himself to the Doge ; " say what you wish me to d°> and what you would have me become, in order to obtain froni you the hand of Rosabella. Ask vhat you will, I will look on the task, however difficult, as nothing more than sport and pastime. By Heaven, I would that Venice were Ht this moment exposed to the most imminent danger, and that ten thousand daggers were unsheathed against your life, Ro/sabella my reward,,how certain should ţ be to rescuş Venios, and strike the ten ţhqusand daggers down·"— —»"ihave served ihe repuhJic faith- Ы$ ■»^fcsvimtly fpr majay a long jtB»r," ajiswered Andreas with a bitter ι ri? emile;
214
smile , " I have risqued my life without hesitation ; I have shed my blood with profusion ; 1 asked nothing for my reward but to pass my old age in soft tranquillity, and of this reward have I been cheated. My bosom-friends, the companions ofmy youth, the confidents of my age, have been torn from me by the daggers of banditti—and you, Flo¬ doardo, you on whom I heaped all favours, have now deprived me of this my only last remaining comfort.— Answer me, Rosabella; hast thou in truth bestowed thy heart on Flodoardo irrevocably «"' One hand of Rosabella's still rested on her uncle's shoulder ; with the other she clasped Hodoardo's, and prest it fondly against her heart—Yet Flodoaido seemed still unsatisfied. No sooner had the Doge's question struck his ear, than his countenance became dejected ; and ν 4 though
215
though his hand returned the pressure of RosabeUa's, he shook his headmourn- fuUy, with an air of doubt, and cast ой her a penetrating look, as wou.a he have read the secrets of her inmost soul. Andreas withdrew himself gently from Rosabdla's arm, and for some time paced the apartment slowly, with a countenance sad and earnest. RosabeUa sank upon a sopha which stood near her, and wept. Flodoardo eyed the Doge, and waited for his dedsion with impatience. « Thus past some minutes. An awful silence reigned through the chamber ; Andreas seemed to be labouring with some resolution of dreadful importance. The lovers wished, yet dreaded, the condusion ofthe scene, and with every moment their anxiety became more painful. r 4 —« Flo-
216
—" Flodoardo !" at length said the Doge, and suddenly stood still in.the middle of the chamber. Flodoardo ad¬ vanced with a respectful air—" Young man," he continued, " I am at length resolved ; Rosabella loves you, nor will I oppose the decision of her heart; but Rosabella is much too predous to admit of my bestowing her on the first who thinks fit to demand her—the man to whom I give her, must be worthy such a gift : she must be the reward of his services, nor can he do services so great that such a reward will not overpay them.—Your claims on the republic's gfat«,tude are as yet but trifling ; an op¬ portunity now offers of rendering us an essential service—The murderer of Co¬ nari, Manfrone, and Lomellino.... Go, bring him hither !—Alive or dead, thou must bring to this palace the terrible banditti-king, Abellino!" —
217
At this unexpected condusion of a speech, on which hia happiness or de¬ spair depended, Flodoardo started back; the epjouţ fled from his «dieeks. t —" My npble Lord!',', he said at length, hesi|ating; " y/au iknpw weţl that...'. "— I - ' —" I kfi >w yeU," inţermpteeţ ,Δη-ι dreas, 4 '5,hovy Hifijrii) i¿ a task, I ¡enjoin, whsp I req»ire,thfţ deUvery, of AbeUino, Çor rflyseif 1 ! swţear^tliaf,! had, ratbpr a thousand tintes fcrţe fpy passage wjth. a single vessel through,fhe whole Turkish float, эдД,]саг,1-у off, the admiral's ship from the midst of them, thau attempt to seize this AbeUino, who seems to have enteredjiinto a compact »with Lucifer himself ι who is to be found evţery where, and np^here; whom so many have seep, but whom Щ one knows ¡;
21« whose cautious subfilety has brought to shame the vigilance of our State-mqui- sitors, ofthe College of Тей ? and of all their legions nf spies and sbirri-; whose very name strikes terror into the hearts ofthe bravest Venetians, and from whose dagger 1 myself am not safe upon aty throne!—I know well, Flodoardo, how much I ask; but I know also how much I broffèr.4—ÏW seem irresolute?— Yöu aie silent«'—^F1odoar3o l , I'have long watched you witii'attention ^ I have Discovered in you marks of a Superior genius", and therefore I am induced to make such a demandi If any one is able to cope with Anellino, thou art the man-» -----1 Wait your answer."— Flodoardo paced the chamber in silence. Dreadful was'the enterprise proposed: woe to hirtf should Abellino discover his purpose!—But Rosabella was
219
was the reward ! He cast a look on the bdoved-one, and resolved to risque every thing. He advanced towards the Doge. Andreas—Now then, Flodoardo? Your resolution ' Flodoardo—Should I deUver AbeUi¬ no into your poweť, do you solemnly swear that RosabeUa shall be my bride ì , I ' ι T Andreas—She shaU! and not till then. , Rosabdla—Ah ! Flodoardo, I fear this undertaking will end fatally. Abeffino is so crafty.... sú dreadful...... Oh ! look' weU to yourself, for should you meet with this detested monster, whose «dagger,'.,. l ; ι, · Flo-
220 r 0odogrdo-«r-[int4rrupting her hastily] -nQhi! sdeíceji Rosabella'—at ¡«east at,- low me to hope '—Noble Andrejs, give me your hand, and pledge youi princely word that Aibeffiuo once in your power, nothing shall prevent me from bemg Rosabella!!! husband. > , Andreas—I swear it, deliver into my pcfKisr, either alive or dead; ithis most diiageroHsi foe «Of Venice, ι and nothing šhbllipreraiiťRosibeilafrorn being your wife. In pledge of which I here give you my princely« hand. '- 'i « Flodoardo grasped the Doge's hand taisiteilc-e» апЛ'-ЛиУг 1 it- thrìce. Йе turned« to RosahellíiV'and 'seemed on'the point of addressing her, when he sud¬ denly turnedvawáyi'Str^'Ms'foireh*kd, amil mčasured« thé 'apir íraent) «Wrthths- ordered and unsteady steps. The^Jock in
221
in the tower of St. Mark's church struck five. ¡, ι —" Time flies !" cried Flodoardo.} " no more delay then. In four-and- twenty hours will I produce in this very palace this dreaded bravo, Abellino."— Andreas shook his head—" Young man," said he, " be less confident in your promises ; I shall have more faith in your performance." ι ι ' / ι Flodoardo—[serious and firm]— ťfit things terminate as they may, either I «will keep my word, or never again will cross the threshold of your palace—I have discovered some traces of the mis¬ creant, and I trust that I shall amuse you to-morrow·, at this time and in thk place, with the ι epresentation of a comedy ; but ehould it prove a tragedy instead, 4jöd's «will be , dpne. l ' » » Andreas—
222 Andreas —Remember, that too mudi haste is dangerous ; rashness will destroy even tlie frail hopes of success, which you may reasonably indulge at present. Flodoardo—Rashness, my Lord? He who has-lived as I have lived, and suf¬ fered what / have suffered, must have been long since cured of rashness. Rosabella—[taking his hand]—Yet be not too confident of your own strength, I beseech you ! Dear Flodo¬ ardo, my unde loves you, and his advice is wise! Beware of Abeffino's dagger! Flodoardo—The best way to escape his dagger is not to allow him time to use it: within four-and-twenty hours must the deed be done, or never.— Now then, illustrious Prince, I take my leave of you; to-morrow I doubt not to
323
to convince you that nothing is too much for love to venture. Andreas—Right ; to venture ; —but to atchieve ? Flodoardo—Ah! that must depend ......—He paused suddenly ; again his eyes were fastened eagerly on those of RosabeUa; and it was evident that with every moment his uneasiness acquired fresh strength—He resumed his discourse to Andreas, with a move¬ ment of impatience. —" Noble Andreas," said he, " do not make me dispirited ;—rather let me try whether I cannot inspire you with more confidence of my success. I must first request you to order a splendid entertainment to be prepared. At this hour in the afternoon of to-morrow let me find »Ц the principal .persons in Venice,
2М
Venice, both men and women, assembled in this «chamber ; for should my hopes be realized, I would willingly have spectators of my triumph. Particularly, let the venerable members of the College of Ten be invited, in order that they may at last-be brought« face to face· with (his ter. ihie Abellino, against whom they have 1 so long been engaged in fruitless »i-ãrfaré» ' Andreas —«[after «eyeing him some time «with a look «of mingled surprize and uncertainty]—They shall be pre¬ sent, í L ■ Rodoirdo—I »understand also, that tbee Conari's «death «70u have- btţen reconciled to the Cardinal Gonzaga; «and «that he has convinced you how unjust were the prejudices wiďi which Conari had inspired you against «the nobili Рагюиу Coagulo; ìmdthe«rcst«-of that sodety —
«225 society—During my late excursions I have heard much in praise of these young men, which makes me wish to show myself to them in a favourable light—If you have no objection, let me beg you to invite them also. Andreas—You shaUbe gratified. Flodoardo—One thing more, which had nearly escaped my memory.—Let no one know the motive of this enter¬ tainment, till the whole company is assembled. Then let guards be placed around the palace, and indeed it may be as weU to place them even before the doors of the saloon ; for in truth this AbeUino is such a desperate villain, that too many precautions cannot be taken against him. The centinels must have thdr pieces loaded; and, above aU things, they must be strictly charged, on pain β of
226 of death, to let every one enter, bat no one quit die chamber. Andreas—AU this shaU be done punctuaUy. Flodoardo.—I have nothing more to say—Noble - ndreas, fareweU.—Rosa¬ beUa. ... To-morrow, when the dock strikes five, we shatt meet again, or never!" He said, and rushed out of the apart» ment —Andreas shook his head ; while RosabeUa sunk upon her unde's bosom, and wept bitterly.
227
CHAP. III. The midnight meeting. " Victory !" shouted Parozzi as he rushed into the Cardmal Gonzaga's chamber, where the chief conspirators were all assembled ; " our work goes on bravely ! Flodoardo returned this morning to Venice, and Abellino has already recdved the required sum." Gonzaga —Flodoardo does not want talents ; I had rather he should live and join our party. .He is seldom off his guard .,. Parozzi—Such vagabonds may well be cautious ; tbey must not forget them- Q 2 selves
228 selves who have so much to conceal from others. Falieri—RosabeUa, as I understand, by no means sees this Florentine with unfavourable eyes. Parozzi—Oh! wait till to-morrow, and then he may make love to the devil and his grandmother, if he likes it— AbeUino by that time wiU have wrung hb neck round, I warrant you ! Contarino—It is strange, that in spite of aU enquiries I can learn but Uttle at Florence respecting this Flodoardo. My letters inform me that some time ago there did exist a famUy of that name ; but it has been long extinct, or if any of its descendants are stiU in being at Florence, their existence tt quite a secret.
Gon»
229 Gonzaga —Are you all invited to the Doge's to-morrow ? Contarino —All of us without ex¬ ception. Gonzaga —That is well; it seems that my recommendations have obtained some weight with him, since his trium¬ virate has been removed—And in the evening a masked ball is to be given; did not the Doge's Chamberlain say so? Falieri—He did. Memmo—I only hope there is no trick in all this—If he should have been given an hint of our conspiracy...... Mercy on us, my teeth chatter at the thought. Gonzaga —Absurd ! By what means q 3 should
230 should our designs have been made known to him? The thing is impos¬ sible ! Memmo—Impossible ? What h- when there's scarce a cut-purse, house-breaker, or »lagabonď in Venice who has not ,been enUsted in our service, would it be so strange if the Doge discovered a Uttle of the business? A secret which is known to so many, how should it escape his penetration ? Contarino—Simpleton? the same thing happens to him, which« happens to betrayed husbands : every one can see the horns except the man who carries them. And yet I confess it is full time that we should realize our projects, and prevent the possibUity of our being betrayed. FaUeri—You afe right, friend; every thing
281 thing is ready, and now the sooner that the blow is struck the better. Parozzi—Nay, the discontented po¬ pulace, which at present sides with us, would be perfectly weU pleased if the sport began this very night ; delay the business longer, and their anger against Andreas wiU cool, and render them unfit for our purposes. Contarino—Then let us decide the game at once; be to-morrow the impor¬ tant day! Leave the Doge to my disposal; I'U at least engage to bury my poignard in his heart, and then let the business end as it may, one of two things musl happen : either We shaU rescue ourselves from all trouble and vexation, by throw¬ ing eveiy thing into uproar and confu¬ sion, or else we shdl saU with a foil wind from this cursed world to another. Q 4 Parozzi—
232 Parozzi—Mark me, friends ; we must go armed to the Doge's entertain¬ ment. Gonzaga —All the members of the College of Ten have been particularly invited.... Falieri—Down with every man of them! Memmo—Aye, aye' Fine talking! but suppose it should turn out to be " down with ourselves ?" — Falieri—Thou white-livered wretch! Stay at home then, and take care of your worthless existence—But «if our attempt succeeds, come not to us to re-imburse you for the sums which you have already advanced. Not a sequin shall be paid you back, depend on't.
Memmo
233 Memmo —You wrong me, Falieri; if you wish to prove my courage, draw your sword, and measure it against mine ! I am as brave as yourself; but, thank heaven, I am not quite so hot¬ headed. Gonzaga —Nay, even suppose that the event should not answer our expecta¬ tions ; Andreas once dead, let the popu¬ lace storm if it pleases ; the protection of his Holiness will sanction our pro¬ ceedings. Memmo—The Pope ? May we count on his protection ? Gonzaga— [throwing him a letter]— Read there, unbeliever!—The Pope, I tell you, must protect us, since one of our objects is profest to be the assertion of the rights of St. Peter's Chair in Ve¬ nice. Pry'thee, Memmo, teaze us no more
234
more with such »doubts, but leťConta- rino's proposal be adopted at once." Our confederates must'be summoned to Pa¬ rozzi's palace with aU dffigence, and there furnished with.such weapons as are necessary. Let the stroke of mid¬ night be the signal for Contarino's quitting thebaU-room,and hastening to sdze the arsenal: Salviati, who com¬ mands there, is in our interests, and witt throw open the gates at the first ■summons. FaUeri—The Admiral Adorno, as soon as he hears the alarm-bell, wiU immediately lead his people to our as¬ sistance. Parozzi—Oh ! our success is certain ! Contarino—Only let us take care to make the confusion as general as possi¬ ble ; our adversaries must be kept in the dark
235
dark who are their friends and who their foes ; and aU but our own party must be left ignorant as to the authors, the origin, and the object of the up¬ roar. Farozzi—By heaven, I am ddighted at findrng the business at length so near the moment of execution ! FaUeri—Parozzi, have you distributed the White ribands, by which we are to rocognize nur partizans ? Parozzi—That was done some da»ya ago. Contarino—Then there is no more necessary to be said on the subject. Comrades, fiU your goblets ! We wffl not meet again together till our work has been completed,
Memmo
236
Memmo— And yet methinks it would not be unwise to consider the matter over agam «coolly. Contarino—Psha! consideration and prudence have nothing to do with a re- belUon : despair and rashness in this case are better counseUors. The work once begun, the constitution of Venice once boldly overturned, so that no one can tdl who is master and who is subject, then consideration wUl be of service in instructing us how far it may be neces¬ sary for our interests to push the confu¬ sion.—Come, friends ! fiU, fill, I say!— I cannot help laughing when I reflect that, by giving this entertainment to¬ morrow, the Doge himself kindly affords us an opportunity of executing our plans! Parozzi—As to Hodoardo, I look upon
237 upon him as already in his grave ; yet before we go to-morrow to the Doge's, it will be as weU to have a conference willi AbeUino. Contarino—That care we wiU leave to you, Parozzi, and in the mean while here's the health of AbeUino ! AU—AbeUino ! Gonzaga— And success to our enter- prize to-morrow. Memmo—I'U drink that toast with all my heart. AU—Success to to-morrow's enter- prize! Parozzi—The wine tastes well, and every face looks gay—Pass eight-and- forty
aes forty- hours. ..... and shaU we look as gafly ?—We separate smfling, shaU we итТе when two nights hence we meet again?—No matter!
939
CHAP. IV. The decisive day. The next morning every thing in Ve«. vice seemed as tranquil as if nothing- more than ordinary was on the point of taking place; and yet ànce her first foundation, never had a more important day rose on the republic. The inhabitants of the ducal palace were in motion early. The impatient Andreas forsook the couch on which he had past a sleepless and anxious night, as soon as the first sunbeams penetrated through the lattice of his chamber. Rosabella had employed the hours of rest in dreams oí Flodoardo,'and she stilt seenwd to be dreaming of him, even after
240
after sleep was fled. Camilla's love for her fair pupU had broken her repose ; she loved Rosabdla as had she been her daughter, and was aware that on this interesting day depended the love-sick girl's whole future happiness. For some time Rosabdla was unusuaUygay; she sang to her harp the most Uvdy airs, and jested with CamiUa for looking so serious and so uneasy : but when mid¬ day approached, her spirits began to for¬ sake her. She quitted her instrument, and paced the chamber with unsteady steps. With every succeeding hour her heart palpitated with greater pain and «violence, and she trembled in expecta- tion of the scene which was soon to take place. The most iUustrious persons in Venice already fiUed her unde's palaci; the afternoon so much dreaded, and yet so much desired, was come ; and the Doge now
№
îiôW'desired-GamUla tO conduct his niece t-Oîthe «great! tlaloöii^ Where she Was ex«· pected with impatience by aU those- who were of mosi: Consequence in the re» «public. ' ι» ι ι RosabeUa sank on her knees before a statué df thé Virgin.—« Blessed Lady «"* Stó^írclàinied with lifted hands, " have mert) 1 '¿¿-''me! Let aU to-day end welTl^-i Pale as death did she enter the cham¬ ber, in which, on the day before, she had acknowledged her love for Flodoardo, and'Flddoardo had sworn to risque his «fe^obtiUi^her.— Flodoardo was not yet arriv%ď. 1 The assembly was 1 briUiant, the con¬ versation was gay. They talked over the politics of the day, and discussed the various occurrences of Europe. ' r The
№
The Cardinal «wd ■«^■jrjnp .№8ţe,»<m- gaged in a ţflii^nw.-wjth tji* JPfige, Wjiile Метто, %№Щх! «Hiidí/iEiiilW st«o«d<siİQitt 4<^<Ц^г, «íd-reyofeediiíw project whose execution was tp, ţ«ikf place it midnight i .li 'lhe weather was dark ап^етре^ц- ous. 'Xhe wind.TOared l«unqi^^e waters Of tlie canal, and the vaues,pf ¿fee l^lace- towers creaked shrilly and discordantly. One stoi m of rain followed hard upon another. ' The clock struck fop:. The^iheeks iif RosaljeBi, -ff ^gsg^te, ¡became, pakf thaiiihefoig. ^n^ßijiAnsmß«9mr what to his chamberlain. IriJ>ffW»w- nutes the tread of armed men seemed a.pproachirig ¡the d«ors ^f the gajoon, aud» í «»íí«}fifter-4ie daţi^i;>ai;pfiiry.i»ppfl(, «Stas lieard. , Instanti«/
24S
Instantly a sudden silence reigned through the whole assembly. The young courtiers broke oflF their love- speeches abruptly, and ihe ladies stop¬ ped in their t-riticisms upon the last new fashions. The »Statesmen dropped their politicai discussions, and gazed on each other in silence and anxiety. The Doge advanced slowly into the midst of the assembly. Every eye was fixed upon him. The hearts of the con¬ spirators beat painfuHy. —" Be not surprised, my friends," said Andreas, " at these unusual pre¬ cautions ; -they relate to nothing which need interfere with the pleasures of this society. You have ail heard but too much of the Bravo Abellino, the mur¬ derer Of the procurator Conari, and of my faithful counsellors Manfrone and lomeffino, and to whose dagger my il-, ' a 2 lustrious
244 lustıious guest the Prince of Monaldes¬ chi has but lately fallen a victim. This miscreant, the object of aversion to ¡every honest man in Venice, to whom nothmg is sacred or venerable, and who has hitherto set at defiance the whole vengeance of the repubUc... before another hour expires, perhaps this out¬ cast of heU may stand before you in this very saloon. AU — [astonished] —AbeUino ? What ? the bravo Abeffino ? Gonzaga —Of his own accord? Andreas—No ; not of hb own ac¬ cord, in truth; but Flodoardo of Flo¬ rence has undertaken to render this im¬ portant service to the repubUc, to seize AbeUino, cost what it may, and conduct him hither at the risque of his Ufe.
A Se-
åa
A Senator — Ţhe engagement will be difficult to fulfil ' I doubt much Flodo- aido's keeping his promise. Another—But if he should perform it, the obligation which Flodoardo vvill lay upon the republic will not bo tri¬ fling. A third—Nay, we shall be all hi, debtors, nor do I know how we can re- Ward Flodoardo for so iinpoitant a ser¬ vice. , Andreas—Be that my task. Flodo¬ ardo has demanded my niece in marri¬ age ; if he performs his promise, Rosa¬ bella shall be his reward, All gazed on each other in silence, some with looks expressing the mpst heart-felt satisfaction, and others with , с ' « «» »UJ ' ■-,. ' Il glances.of envy and surprize.
84β FaUeri —«[in a low voice]—Parozzi, how wffl this end ? Memmo—As I Uve, the very idea makes me shake as if I had a fever ! Parozzi—[smiling contemptuously] —It's very likely that AbeUino should suffer himself to be caught ! Contarmo—Pray inform me, Signors, have any of you ever met this Abeffino face to face ' Several Noblemen at once—Not I! never! A Senator—He is a kind of spectre, who only appears now and then, when he is least expected and desired. Rosabdla—I saw him once!—Never again shaU I forget the monster ! Andreas
2№
Anidre*·— Ani my interview with liirtii isi too wdl'kriovvn to' make it need¬ ful for me to relate it M«smmo*-l.i have' heard arthoUsaud stories about 1 this miscreant, the one more wontterftl«Aan the'other-, and for my- ownr pirt,< I verily believe tliat he is Satan himself ineihumahiform. I«must say, thar IitHink'it would- be wiser not to lilt ttihx be brought in' among us; for heii dapaUli' of strangling us all as' we- stand here, one after another, without mercy ! » 1 » »u*· Gťacious heavren !" screamed se- «v«ral?of the) laditW ; · " you don/t say so ? What ! strangle us in this very chaiti' ber ?" Contarino«—The principal point is, whether flodOiïrdo vľili get'the better of him, or he of Flodoardo : now I would r 4, lay
248
lay a heavy wager, that the ilorentme wUl return without having finished the. business. ι . A Senator—And /would engageyon the contrary, that there is but one man; in Venice who iS capable ttf ι sdzingt« Abeffino, and that that man is Flodoardo of Florence. The moment that I be-' came acquainted with him, I prophecied? that one day or other he would play. a briUiant part in the annals of his., tory. Another Senator—I think with you, Signor; never was I so much struck with a man at first sight as I was With Flodoardo. Contarino—A thousand sequms on Abeffino's not being taken.... unless death should have taken him first.
The
349
The" First Senator—A thousand se¬ quins on Flodoardo seizing him,... Andreas—And deUvering him up to me, either aUve or dead. Contarino—IUustrious Signors, you are witnesses of the wager— My Lord Vitalba, there is my hand on it—A thousand sequins ! The Senator—Done! Contarino—[smffing]—Many thanks for your gold, Signor : I look on it as already in my purse. Flodoardo is a dever genüeman, no doubt ; yeţ I would advise him to take good care of him¬ self, for he wiU find that AbeUino knows a trick or two, or I am much mistaken. , Gonzaga-t-May I icquest your High¬ ness
aso Mss· ta inform« me,, whether Flbdoitdo is attended by the sbirri? Andreas—No, he is albaer п<Яг four. and-twenty bouts have elapsed' Sntce hé set out in pursuit of the Bravo. •Gonzaga— [to Ctontìrino,««itH a staine» ef-triumph]— Γ wish you joy of y«cmr thousand sequins, Signor. Contarino —[bowing respe»dÄ.rly] — Since your Excellency prophecies it, I can no longer dbubt my success; Memnic—-I begin to xeeervèr tì-ys*!f r Well ¡'well! Let us'see the end: Thr«^aııd»twıî«ty hours had 1 elapsed since* Flodoardb haď enteAď into Ш rash engagement; the four-and-tweir- tieth now hastened to its completion ; and yet Flodoardo came -пот! '
2Sl·
! )
I 6НЛГ. v. The clock strikes five ! The Doge, became uneasy. The senator Vitalba began to tremble for his thousand sequins, and the conspirators could not restrain their spiteful laughter when Contarino gravely declared that he would gladly lose not one thousand se¬ quins, but twenty, if the loss of hi» wager through Abellmo's being captured might but secure the general safety of the republic. —" Hark 1 " cried Rosabella, " the dock strikes five !"— All listened to the chimes in the tower of St. Mark's church, and trembled as they
■2j>á
they counted the strokes. Had not Ca¬ milla supported her, Rosabella would have sank upon the giound. The des¬ tined hour was past/and still Hodoardo came not ! The venerable Andreas felt a sincere aflection for the Florentine: he shud¬ dered »as he dwelt upon the probability that Abellino's dagger had prevailed. ' Rosabella advanced towards her uncle as would she have spoken to him ; but ittxiety fettered her tongue, and tears forced themselves into her eyes. She struggled for a while to conceal her emotions, but the effort was too much for her. She threw herself on a sopha, wrang her hands, and prayed to the God of Mercy for help and comfort. The rest ofthe company either formed groupes of whispe'rers, or Strolled up and
253 and down the apartment in evident Un¬ easiness. They would wiUingly have appeared gay and unconcerned, but they found it impossible to assume even an affectation of gaiety—And thus elapsed another hour, and still Flodoardo came not. At that moment the evening sun broke through the clouds, and a ray of its setting glory was thrown fuU upon the countenance of Rosabella—She started from the sopha, extended her arms towards the radiant orb, and ex¬ claimed, whUe a smile of hope played round her Ups —" God is merciful ! God wUl have mercy too on me '"— Contarino—Was it at five o'dock that Flodoardo engaged to produce Abellino? It is now a fuU hour beyond his time.
The
•¿s* The senator Vitalba— Let him only produce «him at last, and he may he a month beyond ids time if he «chuses. Andreas—Hark!— No !—Silence! d. lence! Sut»dy I hear «footsteps ^preach¬ ing the «saloon ! The words were scardtiy spoken when lås «Jbkimg «doors rocce thrown aţev, and flodoardo rushed into the mom, enseleped io his maatie. His hnir ıteı^med си the air ш «wild disorder; a deep shade «was thrown over his «fece Ъу the droojjing ţilmaes oí üs barrette, bam. which the main was «flowing; ex¬ treme mrianrholy was imprest on al his features ; and he threw gloomy looks around him, as he hewed his head in sahitatnn of the assembly. Every one crowded round him; every mouth was unclosed to question him ; every
m
every $ye was fix^ on his «асе, «s if eager «ţp lintíçtpate Jus answers. —" Holy Virgin i" exclaimed Msun» mo, " I am afraid that.... "— ι >i —" Be silent, Signor !" interrupted Contarino sternly ; " there is nothing ^beaRffldflf,"— —" JţBustrious Veneliaps !" it wa» thus that Flodoardo at length broke si¬ lence, md he spoke with the command¬ ing tone of a hero ; " I conclude that his Highness has already made known to you tlie obi/aa of your being thus jasr sembled. I come to put an end to your anxiety ; but Jirst, nable Andreas, I must once more receive the assurance that Rosabella, of Corfu bhall betűmé my bride, provided I deliver into your power the йг -rvo AWiw·
Andreas
25ο'
Andreas —[examining rus counte¬ nance with extreme anxiety]—Flodo¬ ardo. ... have you succeeded ' Is Abel¬ lino your prisoner ? Flodoardo—If Abellino is my prison¬ er, shall Rosabella Ъе my bride ? Andreas—Bring me Abellino, alive or dead, and she is yours—I swear it beyond the power of retracting, and swear also that her dowry shall be royal' Flodoardo—Illustrious Venetians, ye have heard the Doge's oath ? All—We are your witnesses. Flodoardo—[advancing a «few paws with a bold air, and speaking in a firm voice]—Well then! Abellino ts 'm my power... is in yours ' AU
257
AU-^[in confusion, and a fand of up roar]—In ours ? —Merciful heaven '— Where is he f —AbeUino ? Andreas—Is he dead or living ? Flodoardo—He still lives Gonzaga —[hastily]—He lives ? Flodoardo—[bowing to the Cardinal respectfuUy]—He stiU hves, Signor ' RosabeUa—[pressing Camilla to her bosom] Didst thou hear that, CamiUa ? Didst thou hear it ? —The viUain stiU lives ' Not one drop of blood has stained the innocent hand of Flodoardo The senator Vitalba — Signor Conta¬ rmo, I have won a thousand sequms of you
Conta
2,53
Contaťťno —So it should seem, Sig¬ nor! Andreas—My son, you have bound the rqiilbliC to you for ever, and I re¬ joice that it is to Flodoardo that she is indebted for á service so essential. Vitalba— And permit me, noble Flo¬ rentine, to thank you for this heroic act iti the rlame of the senate of Venice— Our first care shall be to seek Out a re¬ ward proportioned to your merits. Flodoardo—[extending his arm to¬ wards Rosabella, with a melancholy air] — There stands the only reward for which I wish. Andreas—[joyfully]—And that re¬ ward is your own—-But where have you left the blood-hound ? Conduct him hither, my son, and let me look on him once
259 once more— When last I saw him, he had the insolence to- teU me—" Doge, I am your equal ; this narrow chamber now holds the two greatest men in Ve¬ nice."—Now then let me see how this other great man looks in captivity. Two or three Senators—Where is he? —Bring him hither ! Several of the ladies screamed at hear¬ ing this proposal—«" For heaven's sake!" cried they, " keep the monster away from us ! I shaU be frightened out of my senses if he comes here !"— " Noble Ladies !" said Flodoardo with a smUe expressing rather sorrow than joy, " you have nothing to appre¬ hend. AbeUino shall do you no harm ; but he needs must come hither, to claim " the Bravo's Bride." —And he pointed to RosabeUa, s 2 —" Oh !
2-SO —" Oh! my best friend!" she an¬ swered, " how shall I express my thanks to you for having thus put an end to my terrors ! Ishall now tremble no more at bearing Abellino named ; Rosabella shall now be called ' the Bravo's Bride' no longer !"— Falieri—Is Abellino already in this palace ? Flodoardo—He is. Vitalba —Then why do you not pro¬ duce him ?—Why do you trifle so long with our impatience ? Flodoardo—Be patient! It's now time that the play should begin.—Be seated, noble Andı cas! Let all the rest arrange themselves behind the Doge !— Abelli¬ no' s coming 1
At
261 At that word, both old and young, both male and female, with the rapidity of lightning flew to take shelter behind Andreas. Every heart beat anxiously ; but as to the conspirators, while expect¬ ing Abellmo's appearance, they suffered the torments of the damned. Grave and tranquil sat the Doge in his chair, like a judge appointed to pass sentence on this King of the Banditti. The spectators stood around in various groupes, all hushed and solemn as were they waiting to receive their fipal judge¬ ment. The lovdy Rosabella, with all the security of angels, whose innocence have nothing to fear, reclined her head on Camilla's shoulder, and gazed on her heroic lover with looks of adoration. The conspiratorSj'with pallid cheeks and staring eyes, filled up the back-ground ; and a dead and awful silence prevailed s 3 thiough
Î62 through the assembly, scarcely inter¬ rupted by a single breath ! —" And now then," said Flodoardo, " prepare yourselves, for this terrible Abellino shall immediately appear before you ! Do not tremble ; he shall do no one harm."— With these words he turned away from the company, and advanced to- «wards the folding-doors ; he paused for a few moments, and concealed his face in his cloak. —" Abellino !" cried he at length, raising his head, and extending his arm towards the door.—At that name all who heard it shuddered involuntarily, and Rosabella advanced unconsciously a few steps towards her lover. She trembled at the Bravo's approach, yet trembled
а«зз
trembled more for Flodoardo than her¬ self. —" Abellino !" the Florentine re¬ peated in a loud and angry tone, threw from him his mantle and barrette, and had already laid his hand ori the lock of the door to open it, when Rosabella uttered a cry of terror !"— —" Stay, Flodoardo !" she cried, rushing towards him, and.... Ha ! Flo¬ doardo was gone, and there, in his place, stood Abellino, and shouted out— "Ho! ho!"—
s 4
264
CHAP. Vi. Apparitions. Instantly a loud cry of terror re¬ sounded through the apartment. Ro¬ sabeUa sank fainting at the Bravo's feet; the conspirators were almost suffocated with rage, terror, and astonishment; the ladies made signs of the cross, and began in all haste to repeat their pater- ' nosters ; the senators stood rooted to their places like so many statues, and the Doge doubted the information of his ears and eyes. Calm and terrible stood the Bravo before them, in aU the pomp of his strange and awful ugliness ; with his Bravo's
Bravo's habit, his girdle filled with pis¬ tols and poniards, his distorted ycUow countenance, his black and bushy eye¬ brows, his lips convulsed, his right eye covered by a large patch, and his left half buried among the wrinkles of flesh which sweUed around it. He gazed round him for a few moments in suence, and then approached the stupefied An¬ dreas. —" Ho ! ho !" he roared in a voice like thunder, " you wished to sec the Bravo Abellino ?—Doge of Venice, here he stands, and is come to claim his bride !"— Andreas gazed with looks of horror on this model for demons, and at length stammered out with difficulty—" It can¬ not be real ! I must surely be the sport of some terrible dream !"—
—« With-
—" Without there! Guards!" ex¬ daimed the «Cardinal «Gonzaga, and would have hastened to the folding- doors; when Abellino put his back against them, snatched a pistol from his girdle, and pointed it at the Cardinal's bosom. —« The first," cried he, " who calk for the guard, or advances one step from the place on which he stands, expires that moment—Fools! Do ye think I would have dehvered myself up, and de¬ sired that guards might beset these doors, had I feared their swords, or in¬ tended to escape from your power ?— No ! I am content to be your prisoner, but not through compulsion ! I am content to be your prisoner, and it was -with that intent that I came hither. No mortal should have the glory of seizing Abellino ; if justice required him to be dehvered up, it was necessary that he should
267
should be delivered Up by himself I — Or do ye take Abellino for an ordinary ruffian, who pastes his time in skulking from the sbirri, and who murdets for the sake of despicable plunder ? No, by heaven, no ! Abellino was no such com¬ mon villain !—It's true I was a Bravo ; but the motives which induced me to become one were great and striking !" Andreas—[clasping his hands toge¬ ther]—Almighty God ! can all this be possible ! An awful 'ilence again reigned through the saloon. All trembled while they listened to the voice of the terrible assassin, who strode through the chamber proud and majestic as the monarch of the infernal world. Rosabella opened her eyes ; their first look fell upon the Bravo. —« Oh!
268
—« Oh ! God of mercy !" she ex- claimed, " he is stiU there !—Methought too that Flodoardo.... No, no ; it could not be ! I was deceived by witch¬ craft '"— AbeUino advanced towards her, and attempted to raise her. She shrunk from his touch with horror. —" No, RosabeUa," said the Bravo in an altered voice, " what you saw was no Ulusion. Your favoured Flodoardo is no other than AbeUino, the Bravo."— —" It is false!" interrupted Rosa¬ bella, starting from the ground in de¬ spair, and throwmg herself for refuge on Camilla's bosom. " Monster, thou canst not be Flodoardo! such a fiend can never have been such a seraph !— Flodoardo's actions were good and glo¬ rious as a demi-god's ! 'twas of him that I learnt
269
I learnt to love good and glorious ac¬ tions, and 'twas he who encouraged me to attempt them myself! His heart was pure from all mean passions, and capable of conceiving all great designs! Never did he scruple in the cause of virtue to endure fatigue and pain : and to dry up the tears of suffering inno¬ cence. ... that was Flodoardo's proudest triumph !—Flodoardo and thou ......! Wretch, whom many a bleeding ghost has long since accused before the throne of Heaven, dare not thou to prophane the name of Flodoardo." Abellino—[proud and earnest]—Ro¬ sabella, wilt thou .forsake me? Wilt thou retract thy promise ? Look, Rosa¬ bella, and be convinced : I, the Bravo, and thy Flodoardo are the same !— He said, removed the patch from his eye, and passed an handkerchief over » his
270
his face once or twice ; in an instant his complexion was altered, his bushy eye¬ brows and straight black hair disap¬ peared, hb features were replaced in theu- natural symmetry, and lo! the handsome Florentine stood before the whole assembly, drest in the habit of the Bravo Abellino. Abellino—Mark me, Rosabella ! Se¬ ven times over, and seven times again, will í change my appearance, even be- fore your eyes, and that so artfully, that study me as'you «¡vili the transformation shall still deceive you—But change as I rhay, of one thing be assured; / am the man whom you loved as Flodo¬ ardo." ! The Doge gazed and listened without being able to recover from his confu¬ sion; but every now and then the words—« Dreadfull dreadful!" escaped from
271
from his Ups, and he wrang his hands in agony. Abellino approached Rosa¬ beUa, and said in the tone of supplica¬ tion—" RosabeUa, wUt thou break thy promise ? Am I no longer dear to thee?"— RosabeUa was unable to answer ; she stood like one changed to a statue, and fixed her motionless eyes on the Bravo» AbeUino took her cold hand, and prest it to his lips. —" RosabeUa," said he, " art thou stiU mine ?"— Rosabella—Flodoardo.... Oh ! that I had never loved.... had never seen thee!
AbeUino
272 Abellino —Rosabella, wilt thou still be Ле bride of Flodoardo ?—wilt thou be w the Bravo's bride ?" Love struggled with abhorrence in Rosabella's bosom, and painful was «the contest. Abellino—Hear me, beloved one ! It -was for thee that I have discovered my¬ self. __ that I have dtdivered myself into the hands of justice ! For thee----- Oh ! what would I not do for thee !— Rosabella, I wait but to hear one sylla¬ ble from your lips ! speak but a decisive " yes !" or " no !" and all is ended !— Rosabella, dost thou love me still? And still she answered not ; but she threw upon him а кюк innocent and tendei as ev er beamed from the eye of an angd, and that look betrayed but too
273
too plainly that the miscreant was still master of her heart. She turned front him hastily, threw herself into CamiUa'a arms, and exclaimed—" God forgive you, man, for torturing me so cru¬ elly!"— The Doge had by this time recovered from his stupor: he started from hia chair; threats flashed from his eyes, and his Up trembled with passion — He rushed towards Abeffino ; but the sèna· tors threw themselves in his passage» and held him back by force. In the mean while the Bravo advanced to¬ wards him with the most insolent com« posure, and requested him to calm his agitation. " Doge of Venice," said he, " wffl you keep your promise ? That you gave it to me, these noble lords and ladies can testify!"— τ Andreas
27*
Andreas — Monster! miscreant I—oh ! how artfuUy has this plan been laid to ensnare me!—TeU me, Venetians; to stub a creditor am I obliged to discharge my fearful debt ?—Long has he been playing a deceitful, bloody part; the bravest of our citizens have fallen be¬ neath his dagger, and it was the price of their blood which has enabled him to act the nobleman in Venice. Then comes he to me in the disguise of a man of honour, seduces the heart of my un¬ fortunate RosabeUa, obtains my promise by an artful trick, and now daims the maiden for his bride, in the hope that the husband of the Doge's niece wiU easily obtain an absolution for his crimes. TeU me, Venetians, ought I to keep my word with this miscreant ? AU the Senators—No ! no ' by no means !
AbeUino
Abellino —[with solemnity]—If you have once pledged your word, you ought to keep it, though given to the Prince of Darkness. Oh! fye, fye! Abellino, how shamefully hast thou been deœived in thy reckoning!—I thought I had to do with men of ho¬ nour ! Oh ! how grossly have I been mistaken !·>-£Ιη a terrible voice]—Once again, and for the last time, I ask you, Doge of Venice, wilt thou break thy princely word ?"— Andreas—[in the tone of authority] —Give up your arms. Abellino—And you will really with¬ hold ftom me my just reward?—Shall it be in vain that I delivered Abellino into your power ? Andreas—It was to the brave Flodo- T 2 ardo
270
aldo that 1 promised Fosabella; I nirver ent eed into an engagement with the murderer Abellino — Let Flodoardo daim my niece, and she is his; but Abellino can have no claim to her» Again I say lay down your arms. Abellino — «[laughing wildly] —The murderer АЬеЩпо, say you ? Ho ! ho ! Be it your care to keep your own pro¬ mises, and trouble not yourself about my murders—they are my afiair, and I warrant I shall find a word or two to say in defence of them when the judg¬ ment-day arrives. Gonzaga —[to the Doge] — What «dreadful blasphemy ! Abellino·— Oh ! good Lord Cardinal, Intercede in my behalf—You know m» w«?U ; I l)ave always acted by you fike a t man
277
mán of honour, that at least you cannot deny !—Say a word in my favour then, good Lord Cardinal ! Gonzaga —[angrily, and with impe¬ rious dignity]—Address not thyself to me, miscreant ! What canst thou and I have to do together?—Venerable An¬ dreas, delay no longer ; let the guards be called in ! AbeUino—What? h there then no hope for me ?—Does no one feel com¬ passion for the wretched Abellino?—« What ? no one ' — [a pause] — All are sUent >— all ι — 'Tis enough ! Then my fate is deddcd—CaU in your guards ' RosabeUa—[with a scream of agony, springing forward, and faffing at the Doge's feet]—Mercy ' mercy !—Paidon him.... pardon Abellino ' τ S Abellino
37»
Abellino— «[in rapture]— 5ay"et thou so?—Ho ! ho ! then an angel prays for Abellino in his last moments ! Rosabella — [clasping the Doge's knees] — Have mercy on him, my friend ! my father ! —He is a sinner.... but leave him to the justice of Heaven ! т-Не is a sinner.... but oh ! Rosabella loves him still. Andreas—[pushing her away with indignation] — Away, unworthy girl ; you rave ! Abcllpio folded his arms, gazed with eagerness on what was passing, and tears gushed into his brilliant eyes. Rosabella caught the Doge's hand, as he turned to leave her, Idst it twice, and said—" If you have no mercy on him, then have none on me < The sentence whi«ch you pass on Abellino will be mine ; 'tis for my
279
my own life that I plead as weU as Ahel- Uno's; Fľiher! dear father! reject not my suit, but spare him! Andreas—[in an angry and decided tone]—Abeffino dies ! AbeUino—And can you look on with dry eyes whüe that innocent dove bleeds at your feet ? Go, barbarian ; you never loved Rosabdla as she deserved ·. now is she yours no longer ! She is mine, she is Abeffino's !"— He raised her from the ground, and prest her pale lips against his own. —" Rosabdla, thou art mine ; death alone parts us ! thou lov'st me as I would be loved; I am blest, what¬ e'er may happen, and can now set for¬ tune at defiance—To business then !"— τ 4 He
980
He replaced Rosabdla, who was almost fainting, on the bosom of «Гцш'Ия, then advanced mto the middle of the cham¬ ber, and addrest the assembly with an undaunted air : —"Venetians, you are determined to ddiver me up to the axe of justice ! there is for me no hope of mercy ! "fis wdl ! act as you please ; but ere you sit in judgment over me, Signors, I shaU take the liberty of passing sentence upon some few of you ! Now mark me ! you see in me fhe murderer of Conari! the murderer of Paolo Manfrone! the murderer of LomelUno ! I deny it not ! But would you know the iUustrious persons who payed me for the use of my dagger ___"— With these words he put a whistle to his Ups, sounded it, and instantly the doors
281
doors flew opon, the guards rushed in, and ere they had time to recollect themselves, the chief conspirators were in custody, and disarmed. —" Guard them well '" caid Abellino in a terrible voice to the sentinels ; " you have your orders'—Noble Venetians, look on these villians ; it is to them that you are indebted for the loss of your three noblest citizens! I accuse of those murders, one, two, three, four, .... and my good Lord Cardinal there has the honour to be the fifth."— Motionless and bewildered stood the accused ; tale-telling confession spoke in every feature that the Charge was true, and no one was bold enough to contradict Abellino. —" What can all this mean ?" asked the
28-2
the senators of each other, in the utmost surprize and confusion. —" This is aU a shameful artifice," the Cardinal at length contrived to say; " the viUain, perceiving that he has no chance of escaping punishment, is wil¬ ling, out of mere resentment, to involve us in his destruction."— Contarino—[recovering himself] — In the wickedness of his Ufi, he has surpast aU former miscreants, and now he is trying to surpass them in the wickedness of his death. AbeUino—[with majesty]—Be silent ! —I know your whole plot, have seen your Ust of proscriptions, am weU in¬ formed of your whole arrangement, and at the moment that I speak to you, the officers of justice are employed, by my ordei «»,
263
orders, in seizing the gentlemen with the white ribantls round their arms, who this very night intended to overturn Venice —Be siLnt, for defence were vain- Andreas—£ip astonishment]—Abelli¬ no, what is the meaning of ¿U this ?-т- Abellino—Neither more nor less than that AbeUino has discovered and defeated a conspiracy against the constitution of Venice and the Ufe of its Poge ! The Bravo, in return for,your kind intention of sending him to destruction in a few hours, has preserved you from it. Vitalba —[to tlie accused]—Noble Venetians, you are sUent under this heavy charge ? AbeUino—They are wise, for no defence could now avail them. Their troops are already disarmed, and lodged in
2S4 in separate dungetbasof the state-prison : visit then« Bieft, and you -witt leam more. You now u-,vderstand probably that 1 did not order the doors ofthis saloon to be guarded for the purpose of sdzing the terrible Bravo AbeUino, but of talang thdse heroes into secure cus¬ tody. Am! now, Venetians, compare to¬ gether pur conduct and mine ! At the hazard of my Ufe have I preserved the slate from ruin ; disguised as a Bravo, 1 I dared to enter the assembly of those ruthless riUains whose daggers laid Venice waste ; I have endured for your sakes storm, and rain, and frost, and heat, 1 have witched for your safety w hUe ye were sleeping ; Venice owes to my care her constitution and your Uves ; and yet are my services deserving of no reward í — AU this have I dorte for Rosa¬ bella of Corfu, and yet will you with- ' hold
285 hold from me my promised bride ?" 1 have saved you from death, have saved the honour of your wives from the poUutor's kiss, and the throats of your innocent chUdren from the knife of the assassin.... Men ! men ! and yet will you send me to the scaffold ? Look on this list ! See how many among you would have bled this night 1 ad it not been for Abellino, and see where the miscreants stand by whom you would have bled !—Read you not in every feature, that they are already •»andemned by heaven and their own conscience? Does a single mouth unclose itself in exculpation ? Does a single movement of the head give the lie to my charge ? Yet the truth of what I have advanced shaU be made stUl more evident.»—
He
286
He turned himself to the conspira¬ tors: —"Mark me!" said he, "the first among you who acknowledges the truth, shall receive a free pardon. I swear it, I, the Bravo Abellino !"— The conspirators remained silent— Suddenly Memmo started forward, and threw himself trembling at the Doge's feet. —" Venetians!" he exclaimed, " Abellino has told you true !"— —" 'Tib false ! 'tis false !" exclaimed the accused all together. —" Silence !" cried Abellino in a voice of thuiider, while the indignation which flamed in every feature/truck terror
281 terror into his hearers ; " silence, I say, and hear me—or rather hear the ghosts of your victims!—Appear! appear!" cried this dreadful man in a tone still louder, " 'tis time !"— Again he sounded his whistle; the folding-doors were thrown open, and there stood the Doge's so much-lamented friends Conari, Lomellino, and Man¬ frone ! —« We are betrayed !" shouted Con¬ tarino, drew out a concealed dagger, and plunged it in his bosom up to the very hilt. And now wh^t a scene of rapture followed. Tears streamed down the silver beard of Andreas as he rushed into the arms of his long-lost compani¬ ons: tears bedewed the cheeks ofthe venerable triumvirate, as they once more dasped
283 dasped the knees of their prince, their friend, their brother! These exceUent men, these heroes, never had Andreas hoped to meet them again tUl they should meet in Heaven ; and Andreas blest Heaven for permitting him to meet them once more on earth. Those four men, who had valued each other in the first dawn of youth, who had fought by each other's sides in manhood, were now assembled in age, and valued each other inore than ever !—The spectators gazed with universal interest on the scene befo.-e th«sm, and the good old senators mingled tears Of joy with those shed by the re-united companions. In the happy deUrium of this moment nothing but Andreas and his friends was attended to : no one was aware that the conspi¬ rators-and the self-murderer Contarino were removed by the guards from -the saloon : no one but Camilla observed ■RosabeUa«, who threw herself sobbing on the
281)
the bosom of the handsome Bravo, and repeated a thousand times—"Abellino then is not a murderer !"— At length they began to recollect themsdves—they looked round them— and the first words which broke from every lip were—" Hail, saviour of Ve¬ nice !"—The roof rang with the name of Abellino, and unnumbered blessings accompanied the name. That very Abeffino, who not an hour before had been doomed to the scaffold by the whole assembly, now stood calm and dignified as a god before the adoring spectators; and now he viewed with complacency the men whose lives he had saved, and now Ms eye dwdt with rapture on the woman whose love was the reward of all his dangers. — "Abellino!" súd Andreas, ad-» u vancing
290
vancing to the Bravo, and estending his hand toiv ards him. —" I am not AbeUino," repUed he smiling, whUe he prest the Doge's hand respectfully to lib Ups, " neither am I Flodoardo of Florence. I am by birth л Neapolitan, and by name Rosalvo; the death of my inveterate enemy the Prince of Monakiesclii makes, к no longer necessary to conceal Who I really am."-— —" MtJiiaUE3cbiï" repeated Ажкпва with a luok of msiety. —«fear no« 1" continued Rosalvo} '♦ Monakteschi, iťs.trae, feft, by иу hand, fait fett ki homnrable combat. '\%a Mood which stained Ue sword flowed from my ι »stins, mui; hi his hub moments conscience asserted her empire •m his bosom» - He «üerl «atı till»!* had written
291
written in his tablets the most positive declaration of my innocence as to the crimes with which his hatred had con¬ trived to blacken me; and he also instructed me by what means I might obtain at Naples the restoration of my forfeited estates and the re-establishment of my injured honour. Those means have been already efficacious, and all Naples is by this time in* 7 rmed of the arts by which Monaldeschi procured my banishment, and Ofthe many plots which he laid for my destruction; plots, which made it necessary for me to drop my own character, and never to appear but in disguise. After various wanderings, chance led me to Venice ; my appearance was so much altered, that I dreaded not «discovery, but I dreaded [and with reason] perishing in your streets with hunger. In this situation accident brought me acquainted with the ban¬ ditti, by whom Venice was then infested, и 2 I will-
202 I willingly «united myself to their society, partly with the view of purifying the republic from tlie presence of these wretches, and pardy in the hope of dis¬ covering through them the more illustri¬ ons villains, by whom their daggers were employed. I was successful ; I «delivered the banditti up to justice, and stabbed their captam in Rosabella's sight. I was now the only Bravo in .Venice ; every scoundrel was obliged to have recourse to me : I discovered the plans of the conspirators, and now you know them also. I found thit the deaths of tha Doge's three frien«ds hadbeen determined on ; and in order to obtain full confih dence with the confederates, it was necessary to persuade them that these men had fallen beneath my dagger. No sooner liad my plan been formed, than I imparted it to Lomellino ; he, and he only was my confidant in this business. He presented me to the Doge as the son of
293 of a deceased friend ; he assisted mc with his advice ; he furnished me with keys to those doors to the public gardens which none were permitted lo piss through except Andreas and his particu¬ lar friends, and which frequently enabled me to dude pursuit; he showed me several private passages in the palace, by which I could penetrate unobserved even into the Doge's very bed-chamber ; when the time for his disappearance arrived, he not only readily consented to lie concealed in a retreat known only to ourselves, but was also the means of inducing Manfrone and Conari tojóin him in his retirement, till the fortunate issue of this day's adventure permitted me to set them once more at liberty. The banditti exist no longer ; the con¬ spirators are in diains ; my plans are accomplished; and now, Venetians, if .you still think him deserving of it, here stands the Bravo Abellino, and you may и 3 lead
294 lead him to the «scaffold when you wiU!" —" To the scaffold ?" exclaimed at once the Doge, the senators, andthe whole crowd of nobili ; and everyone burst mto enthusiastic praises of the •dauntless Neapolitan. — K Oh ! Abeliini," exdaimed An¬ dreas whUe he «wiped away a tear ; " I woidd gladly give my ducal bonnet to be such a Bravo as thou hast been !— ' Doge,' didst thou once say to tne, ' thou and I are the two greatest men in Venice'—but oh ! how much greater is the Bravo than the Doge!—RosabeUa is that jewel, than which I have nothing in the world more predous; RosabeUa is dearer to me than an emperor's crown; Rosabella is thine."— —« Abellino !" said Rotabefla, and extended
-3İJ5 extended her hand to the handsome Bravo. —" Triumph i" cried he, " Rosa¬ beUa is the Bravo's Bride 1 "—and he dasped the blushing maicj to h ! oosom.
U4
ЗОР"
СНАГ. VII. Conclusion. And now it would be not at all amiss to make Count Rosalvo sit down quietly between the good old Doge and his lovely niece ; and then cause him to re¬ late fhe motive of Monaldeschi's hatred, in what manner he lost Valeria, what crimes were imputed to him, and how he escaped from the assassins sent in pur¬ suit of him by his enemy ; how he had long wandered from place to place, and how he had at length learnt [during his abode in Bohemia »¡vith a gang of gyp¬ sies] such means of disguising his fea¬ tures as enabled him to defy the keenest penetration to discover in the beggar Abellino
207 AbeUino the once-admired Count Ro¬ salvo; how in this disguise he had re¬ turned to Italy; and how Lomellino, having ascertained uiat he was univer¬ sally believed at Naples to have long since perished by shipwreck, [and there¬ fore that neither the officers of the In¬ quisition nor the assassins of liis enemy were likely to trouble themselves any more about bim,] he had ventured to resume with some slight alterations his own appearance at Venice ; bow the ar¬ rival of Monaldeschi had obliged him to conceal himself, till an opportunity offered of presenting himself to the Prince when unattended, and of demand¬ ing satisfaction for his injuries ; how he had been himself wounded in several places by his antagonist, though the combat finally terminated in his favour; how he had resolved to make use of Monaldeschi's death to terrify Andreas stUl further, and of Parozzi's conspiracy to
ao« «to obtain Rosabella's hand of the Dòge ; how he had «trembled fest the heart of bis mistress should huve bean only cap¬ tivated by the 'romantio «appearance of the adventurer Flodoardo, fend have re¬ jected bim when known ťo he the Bravo Abellino ; 'how he had resolved to make use of the terror inspired hy the assassin to put her lov« to the severest trial ; and how, had the failed in that trial, he had determined to renounce the ¡neoiWtant maid for ever ; with many other hotes, whys, and wherefores, which not being explained will, I doubt, leave much of thit tale still involved in mystery : but before I begin Rosalvo's history I must ask two questions— Tirst, Domy readers like the manner in iwhioh I relate adventures ŕ Secondly, If my readers do like my manner of relating adventures, can't I employ
employ my time better than in relating them? When these questions are answered, I may possibly resume my pen. In the mean while, Gentlemen and Ladies, good night, аШ ptóàkrit arearas åttetid you !
Fruited l>yD N Story, Berwick Hrt«, Srb·.
