Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Romantic tales: by M. G. Lewis
My Uncle s Garrei WÍMaoii\ ? PANTOMIMIC TALE. '
- α lic looks througli Galita?o*s ????. ? — - ????.
My Uncles Garret- flíndow.
—" Witti silent steps ?? follow ym ill day.*'— Dryren,
Mv uncle was a genius and a poet—of course, he was as poor as David's rat, and lived in a garret. He was a kind-hearted man, and I loved him too sincerely to hesi¬ tate at putting my neck in jeopardy once a day by climbing the crazy ladder, which af¬ forded the only means of reaching his ce« lestial abode. Yet after my taking all this trouble it frequently happened, that ï found my uncle too busy with tîie Muses to bestow any of his attention on so insignificant an animal as his nephew. On these occasions, he contented himself with shaking me by the hand in silence, laying his finger on his ? 2
lip, and pointing to a joint-stool, which ..lood close by the window \ for he occupied himself the only chair in the room, and even that had but three legs to boast of: the joint-stool therefore, though not so digni¬ fied a seat, was in fact a much more secure and comfortable one. But when I found myself established on my joint-stool, how was ï to employ myself? —When my uncle was seized with one of these fits of inspiration, they frequently con¬ tinued for a considerable time : where then was I to find amusement during this inter¬ val ? My uncle was too much an author to think any body's works worth reading ex¬ cept his own ; for those I happened to have no great taste, and ï did not care to affront him by asking for the productions of any other brain. Reading then was out of the question ; but in order that my eyes might not be quite idle, I employed tliem in exa» mining what was going on in the house op¬ posite'to us. By the help of a pocket tele¬ scope, could distinctly see every thing
miiích passed in oor neighbour's first and second floor : and after indulging myself for some days in these observations, I became so well acquainted with every member of this unknown family, that I fell myself as much interested about their proceedings, as if I had been a member of it myself* You will say that this systematic espionage was not very honourable : I allow it—But then, on the other hand, it was very enter* taming } and I am now going to bribe you to approve of my conduct, by admitting you to a partnership in my stolen know¬ ledge. The street which my uncle inhabited was narrow, and the quarter was not one e£ the most fashionable : but the furniture of the house in question convinced me, that its o#ner must certainly ' be ? ?? of considerable opulence. This owner [for the sake of distinction, we will call him Sem- promus, for I have been too much occupied by his actions, to have inquired for his real name as yet] this owner is not exactly %?
sort « if ?? % whom I should voluntarily bave selected for the hero of my tale; but beggars must nor be chusers, and 1 must take the good man* as I find him* He seems to labour under some hypochondriacal complaint, and as îte frequently suffers him¬ self in his moments of weakness to indulge liis ill-temper, I have not the least hopes of working him up into a portrait of hemic fortitude: on the other hand, I have as little .hopes of his furnishing my drama with a striking character for my villain. It's true^ he governs his * wiiole family with a rod of iron, and 1 have already discovered, that ? h completely a domestic tyrant : every one Piems to feel constrained in his company j and it is only in the absence of tiie master of the mansion, that innocent mirth ventures to show itself within its doors. Yet still I observe, that with the same unbending gra¬ vity with, which he censures his wife and rates his servants, he receives every Sunday the visits of 'a distressed Emigrant (with whose worth and whose wants accident has
made me well acquainted)^ to whose com» plaints he seems to listen with unwearied patience, and whom he never sv.'îërs to de¬ part with empty pockets. As th^ poor gen¬ tleman retraces liis steps : I observe, that his walk is firmer and lighter, and that not un* frequently a tear trembles in his eye ; but he never quits the street without turning back, and with clasped hands casting a look of gratitude towards the window: of Sem- pronius's study—Sempronius then has a good heart, but a most intolerable temper—* Well ! well ! we will hope, that his ill-tem¬ per proceeds from ill-health and from in¬ creasing years, for Semprcnius cannot now be tar from his grand climacteric. I con¬ clude this from the colour of his hair, which here and there age has already silvered, I conjecture, that he must be a merchant of some kind or other. What makes me think this is, that the ground-floor of his house looks, as if it had been converted into a magazine. Besides, he is regularly absent from home exactly at 'Change-hours : ? 4
ï ?? rather of ©pinion, that lie dabbles in the funds. Bnt how io the name of wonder, coukl Sempronius, so little amiable m be appears , io be.) have obtained such a treasure, as the wife whom 1 am now going io describe ?—, or rather how came he to be so singularly fortunate as to draw two such great prizes in Hymen's lottery ; a lof tery, in whicb (Heaven have pity on all poor Christian husbands!} there arfe so many blanks?-— Many years ago be lost a wife. ·. · Oh i she was worthy to have bøen the empress of her whole ees i—Sø beautiful» * · « sø good*. ? ,?^ ? ??? ?? seen her ????"— [Such was my uncle's demand one ?? $ when I was indulging myself in enthueiastie but just commendations of the lady in question]-— w You have ???? ber then? You knew her?"—Alas! never! ? was not so form- nate— " But you have been told of her charms and merits?"—Not a syllable; 1 ttcver he-*rd her mentioned in my life-- — •"Then pray, how are you so certain t
that she was so beautiful and so good ? fi — why, mydearmicle, you must know, that her picture in oils hangs in the second wifc*g sitting-room, imd never was my eye gratified by more perfect features or a more noble countenance : and that this counte¬ nance belonged to the wife of Sempronius, there can be no doubt. Sempronius himself (but much younger) is introduced in the picture; and the attitude ? which the painter has represented them, sufficiently marks the relation of the parties: besides, if there* were no other reason for concluding; that she was his wife, I should be convinced of it by the striking resemblance between her counte¬ nance and that of a young man about twenty* whoTippears to be our neighbour's son, and probably is the only offspring of this marriage,. ~~" Well ! Sir ! well ! so much for her beauty, and her marriage. Now^ Sir, grant¬ ing that she was a wife, what ????? you suppose, that she must necessarily have been a good one ?*'*— — u My dear Sir^ it is quite impossible. ? 4
th"vt slie should hr-ve beea otherwise— Wheuever Sempronim is displeased with his preaent help-mate, he never faas to point to ihat portrait : heseeim to" contrast, her con¬ duct witb that of the object of his reproof, and töhold lier up as ¡, modoî for the imita¬ tion of her whole sex«-while on the other ????!, his second wife--[she is reading King Lear at this moment» for the edition is* Boydells, and I can distinctly read the tide; so we will call her Cordelia, if you please]-— Cordelia then, whenever she finds her pa¬ tience on the point ot being shipwrecked among the numberless little domestic storms, which the unhappy temper of our friend Sempronius is perpetually raising, constantly fixes her eyes oa that rr ild heavenly counte* nance, and seems to ask—" In this situation how would you have acted?"—She then t>irns to her peevish husband with a serene look ; the clouds of displeasure, which were gathering on hci brow, have totally disap¬ peared; she takes his hand kindly, as if imploring his pardon fcr having given him 2
offence ; and never leaves him, till her win¬ ning manners- and-engaging smiles have charmed away his iil-humour, as David's lyre banished the evil spirit from the bosom of the frantic Saul."— —" But pray t nephew, what makes you be so certain, that the original of this por¬ trait, which produces such beneficial effects, is no longer in existence i^— —» Ct Surely, the presence of a second wife is a proof fully sufficient of' the decease of a first."— ~* 4 But there may be no second wife in the case : Cordelia may be his daughter*"— —*'Impossible, my dearest unde! abso¬ lutely impossible! A thousand little cir¬ cumstances. m .. the tender famiHarity which exists between her and Sempronius.. * · the authority with wiiich she governs the whole house,... the intimate yet respectful con¬ duct towards her of her step-son Edward [you see, I make no scruple of christening my neighbours over again].... the differ¬ ence, which Sempronius ????? in his lie« B<3
haviotir, *whcn addressing her, atid when addressing the saki Edward.. ·. No ; it is quite impossible, that Cordelia should be any thing but his wife* Besides, to put the matter out of all doubt, you must know that there is a little boy about eight or nine years old, whose features exhibit the same mixed resemblance to Cordelia and Sempro¬ nius, which Edward's exhibit to Sempronius and the lady, of whose portrait I have spoken in terms of sucli warm approba- tion·"— Cordelia then is the wife of Sempronius ; and what a wife ! Perhaps, slie is the only woman on earth worthy to occupy the place of her predecesor ! Her whole constitution seems to be composed of gentleness and be* nevolencc ; andin truth, it was necessary that she should be composed of such matériák, in order that the vinegar of her husband's dis¬ position might be softened down and render¬ ed supportable by the infusion of her oil of roses. ï am thoroughly instructed in her mode of life, for I can overlook the whole !
of her sitting-room, it joins on to her hus¬ band's study, and here sfv passes the great* est parr of the day. Here she sits, works, writes, and reads : some of lier books are now lying in the window, and even at this distance I can distinguish the names of « Shakspe;irc* , ~" Cowpftt," and «Paley." ~Hcre It is, that she settles all the affairs of her household, and from hence as from their centre I can see good order, diligence, and ceconomy spiead themselves forth, and per¬ vade every department of her family. Dif¬ ferent occupations have all their stated hours: always active, always employed, without noise, without hurry, she manages, that every thing should be done in its proper time and place ; and the hßnd, with which she governs the whole machine, is no less lights than sure and steady. I will only mention two other points in Cordelia's character, which have struck, and which please me particularly. The one îs, that in spite of her husband's lectures and frequent appeals to it, she still suters
the portrait of his first wife to decorate her own private apartment.* The other is, tbat in her endeavours to soothe her husband rhe never fails to be successful, and that in her presence Sempronius always seems to be kss gloomy endless unruly, than when he is beyond the sphere of her influence. Her stop-son is established in the second floor ; his room is exactly ove*' liis father's study, and there prevails in it an air of such systematic confusion, books, letters, old pens and inkstands He so mingled together upon all the chairs and tables, and sheets cf half-written paper full of blots and scratches are so constantly fluttering about the cham~ ber, that ï have no sort of doubt of his being a poet \ not to mention a large book in a white parchment cover, which has quite the look of a common-place book, and in which he frequently writes a few lines, afler biting the top of his quill for some minutes, and taking two or three turns up and down the room, accompanying his movement by vehement gesticulations. 1 am abo con-
vinced, that Ms verses are generally amatory* and addrest io no imaginary »object—He often copies something out of the aforesaid book with the white-parchment cover, and seals it up carefully In the form of a letter, which he always gives the postman with his own hands· Iteides, when he has secured his door agamst intruders,. . * [ah ! pour lad i how little he suspects, that I see every thing that he ? about].... he frequently reads over and over again certain little notes, (written on a fine shining paper with coloured edges, and very neatly folded up,) and which he seldom fails to press repeatedly to his lips, before he arrives at the end of them. As to the peculiarities of his temper, I ob¬ serve by what passes between him and his father, and still more between him and a certain aunt who frequents the family, that his feelings are quick and susceptible, and that he easily takes offence, lie is careless and rallier harmn-sharum*> for he sometimes leaves the key in the secretary, where all these precious billet-doux are deposited, and
then suddenly recollecting his neglect, he flies up stairs to repai** il in such a hurry, that I expect him every moment to break his aeck by the way. He is benevolent, for he D'aver sees a beggar without relieving him ι extravagant, for he receives „his ah lowance monthly, and it never lasts above hall the time ; proud and high-minded, for having applied to his father either for an increase of allowance, or an advance (Ì could not exactly ascertain which), and re¬ ceiving a refusal m the first instance, when * Sempronius sent him a bank-note the next morning the youth returned it, and pre¬ ferred waiting till the first of the present month. 1 observe too, that he is sometimes a little out of humour without cause,-in which 1 suppose he takes after hm father : however, his ilhtemper never is vented upon any thing except his spaniel, whom he feeds all dinner time, and who ahvays sleeps with his head resting upon the foot of his Blaster. As tø his half-brother^ little Willy, h% h
loo young as yet to show much character ; but I am very much mistaken, if he has not a decided genius for the arts. Every morsel of paper, which falls in his way, is imme¬ diately covered with his inventions. If Ws pencil is taken from him, he hunts about, till he finds a piece of coal or chalk, with which he scrawls landscapes and figures over all the doors, walls, and tables, to the great annoyance of hist>rder-loving mother, and of the house-maid, whose wet napkin has no iort of respect for the productions of thb juvenile Sir Joshua* In a moment the effu* sions of his genius are efikced for ever : but in vain does his mother scold, and in vain does the housemaid scrub ; he sets to work again wiih unabated ardour, and in defiance of these enemies of art, in a few hours the walls, doors, and tables, are as fully deco¬ rated as before* But I must not omit the portrait of the afore-mentioned aunt 9 who though not an inmate of the family, exercises over it no iiu considerable authority. From her likeness
to Sempronius, she must certainly be his sister, though evidently some years older: she is tall, thin, pale, and then such a nosê and chin !—She is almost a daily guest, and Sempronius never suffers himself to indulge his ffl-humours in her society. Sempronius is a shrewd long-headed man, and minds the main-chance : from the respect which he pays her, 1 conclude^ -that the old lady is in good circumstances, her own mistress, with¬ out children, and that her brother flatters himself, that either he or his ofispring will hold no contemptible place in her will Naf, î am not only persuaded that she has no children, but that the venerable lady is still a votary of Diana ; which conclusion I draw, not only from observations made cm ?? person and manners, but from the extreme love and intimacy which prevails between her and a large tortoise-shell cat, which ge« nerally lies busking before Cordelia's fire. This good lady.... [what shall we calí her? Her brothci'sname is Sempronius— tt Amandus hej Amanda she"—-So says
Sterne—Sempronio be her name then]— Sempronia then seems much attached to imt brother, but Cordelia is evidently no «fa¬ vourite with her.—She treats her with such cold and formal politeness..,. She so often bites her thin lips, ! as if desirous of repressing a scorului sneer, and which she takes good care rør to xcpiess... .If she opens one of the volumes placed on Cordelias table, she never fails to clap it down again hastily with such a shrug of the shoulders, and such a shake of the head, and then such a turning up of the whites of her eyes to Heaven* *.. From the latter circumstance I am tempted to believe, that the good kdy has been a little bit by the Methodists-—However, Cor¬ delia considers it as beneath her to take no¬ tice of these little pieces of impertinence, and only answers the sneer of contempt, with which her sister-in-law occasionally favours her, by a smile of the sweetest gentleness and most heavenly forbearance. As to Ed - ward, he and his aunt are at open enmity : three minutes of conversation with her are
gener.-lly sufficient to make him throw out fire and * flames ; then he flies out of the room, and up go the whiles of ber eyes more piteously than e\ r er. But undoubtedly tier greatest favourite m the family [I mean, the greatest upon two legs] is little Willy ; he holds the very next place in her good gracesto the tortoise-shell cat Of this^ theyoung rogue seems con« scions ι and proud of enjoying that sunshine which is bestowed upon so few, he never fails to welcome her arrival by a voluntary offering of his rosy lips $ and sports and frisks about her armchair as merrily mâ m wantonly, as a butterfly flutters about a honey-pot*«-»I warrant me, ths good lady is seldom unprovided with ? ??? full of sugar* plumbs. Such are the persons who compose this family, and such is the knowledge, which I have obtained of them during a daily obser* vation of several month&-*-But lately some circumstances have occurred, which have excited my curiosity respecting their con-
cerns more than usually. I have fortunately succeeded in communicating this curiosity to my uncle's bosom ; he has consented to be niy amanuensis ; and to-morrow—[ife pro¬ vided with plenty of ink, pens, and paper, and myself furnished with my aforesaid pocket-telescope]—it is our intention to com¬ mence an exact and systematic account of everything, which passes in the house of his opposite neighbour* /am to report, and He is to register* Having completed this introduction, which was necessary to make my read¬ ers acquainted with our Dramatis Per¬ sonae, í shall proceed to my employment- Hark !—the clock strikes ten—that is the hour, at which'Sempronius regularly makes his appearance at Cordelia's breakfast table, and I hasten to post myself at MY UNCLES GARRET-WINDOW
Tuesday, May 5th, 4 o'clock. Your new appointment of secretary, aiy dear uncie, îs likely to be a sinecure for to¬ day* Coi delia and her boy are just gone into the country, and mean to pass some days there ; for I saw her maid pack up two clean muslin dresses and four shifts in the chaise-seat—Sempronius and his eldest son dine out. I saw the former show Ed¬ ward the card of invitation, and by hm pointing out a particular part of it, I conclude that he was bidding him observe the dinner« hour, and take care to be ready in time ; for punctuality is not among the number of Ed« ward's good qualities—However, he will not be too late to-day, for he is dressing at this moment—A hackney-coach stops at the door •«-»Sempronius and Edward are both gone, so you may lay down your pen^ my dear uncle ί
Wednesday, S o'clock» '????? promises to be as barren as yester¬ day. Sempronius has * finished a solitary meal in his own study, and is now making a tooib-pick-~~ T - seems, he is not very skilful, for he has already spoiled two quills—and now in a pet he tíirows the splinters of the third to one side of the room, and the pen¬ knife to the other—Deuce take the peevish old fellow ! I protest, his ill-temper almost makes me lose mine—I'll step up stairs, and see i( what Edward is about. I plight as well have staid where I wás î Edward is not at home. Look! look!—the study-door opens— now then we shall have something interest¬ ing—Pshaw ! it's only the maiden-aunt—But this is not her usual time for visiting ns.... and bless my heart ! what a fuss the old woman seems to be in!—She opens the door, which communicates with Cordelia's drawing-room, and looks round to see s Whether the coast is dear*™·! protest, 1 can ? little teU what to make of her mysterious
proceedings, as her brother ; who sits there with his mouth open, his eyes staring, M$ brows drawm together, his hands resting on liis knees, and his whole body bending for« wards,—He ís mightily puzzled ! But now we shall get a little insight into the business. The virgin has seated herself close at his elbow, and with her nose almost running into his ear— [lm sure I pity h5m s poor man ! I should dislike so much myself to have the oldcatthusnear me I j—-she opens all the sluices of her eloquence, while her arms assist her speech with all the powers of gesticulation« Now what can she be chattering about ?**— Something of consequence, that is certain—* .... and of no pleasant import, that is equally sure^ for Sempronius grows darker with everrò yllable—there ! he was on the point of jumping up in a rage \ but his tor« mentor grasp?d him by the arm, and forcing him into his chair again, insfcted-upon being lieard to the end—still do the symptoms of represt passion grow stronca· and stronger,
—Now then*.... aye ! now the Eava over- flows !—the man is absolutely terrific, when he is really incensed—-till now I had only seen him play the Jupiter Tonans, when lit¬ tle domestic contrarieties had occurred to put him out of his way ; but his anger w T as merely a gentle breeze, compared to his pre¬ sent emotions. His mind is now agitated by a tempest, a tornado, a sirocco burning and pestilential !—I never saw a man in such a passion before. Bless my soul j bless my soul !—what can the old cat have been tell¬ ing him l AU of a sudden, he leaves off prancing about the room, stalks up to his sister's chair, and standing before her, looks her full in tlic face !—an appeal to her conscience, no doubt ; a solemn inquiry, whether all that she has been saying is not a falsehood of her own in¬ vention—-the aunt is highly offended at the question—she rises with great dignity from her seat,<~she stretches out her yellow arm, and is going to call Heaven to witness that .... no ; no—she points to the door leading VOL. IV. ?
tolhe staircase, and a contemptuous sneer which accompanies the action, assures me, that she tells Sempronius, that there lies the way, by whicli he may remove all doubts— 1 am right»—Sempronius bounces to the door—in his impatience he cannot turn the lock; he kicks the door violently,and at length it gives way—he beckons his sister and disap¬ pears—A prayer book has almost forced it¬ self out of her pocket : She stops to push it back again, and then follows her brother, with her hands placed orderly before her, and the composure of a saint !—Good soul ! Bless my heart í what mischief can she be about !—it is growing dusky*—I declare, I have a great mind to run down into the street, and watch for their coming out : then by dodging them unobserved, who knows but 1 may discover at last.... ! stop ί stop ! ■»—I may spare myself the trouble—-as ï hope to live and breathe,... the amiable pair are at this very moment in Edward's cham¬ ber. Sempronius stands before his son's writing
desk—it is fastened, but that matters little : the father has forced the lock—open flies every drawer-—out flies every paper—surely .. *. no deficiency in the counting house.... no suspicious entry in his books. *,. oh ! no : I have been too long intimate with Edward, and know his character and heart too well : such a thing is quite impossible % besides, Sempronius finds a purse half full and throws it aside with an air of indifference,... ha I ha !—Now I understand him !—He examines, the secretary—he suspects that there is a pri¬ vate drawer—yes ; what he wishes to disco» ver. ... [Ah î ƒ could tell him, where to find them !] are precisely those very things which Edward is most anxious to hide from every one—No eye has ever been suffered to see them, but his own—(and mine) —these are what Sempronius wishes to find... . Mercy upon me ! He has found them ! the secret spring has given way \ the drawer is open ! —And what does it contain ?■—First comes a thick packet of letters, carefully tyed toge¬ ther with a ribband, colour skv-blue— Riaw
you \\ ritten it down, my dear uncle ?—Very well !] Secondly, a nosegay, but so faded, that í cannot even guess at lhe flowers.™ Thirdly.. .. upon niy honor nothing less than a miniature in a shagreen easel—Sem¬ pronius shakes his head, and shows it to his sister ; it is plain, that lie has never seen the original His sister scarcely looks at it, but shrugs up her shoulders : it is equally plain, that she has never seen the original either, and that the object of Edwards attachment as yet is only conjectured. Yet Sempronius does not seem the less displeased, for down goes the miniature on the floor, and away flies the poor skeleton of a nosegay out of the window. Alas ! alas for Edward ! the ill-natured aunt lias certainly discovered, what I flattered myself was a secret only known to himself and to me ; and she is now determined to take ample revenge on him for having occasionally dared to be ofo?îe opinion, when she was of another. While Sempronius is busied with the se- cretary, the antiquated dragon of virtue is
by no means klie —bhe ha-; been tossing over Edward's wardrobe; tor the careless youth had left the key in the lock, Her brother is now reading the letters one after another ; however their contents seem hv no means to his taste, for he seldom gets through more than halt a dozen lines before the paper be* strews the floor with a thousand pieces ; yet « still he proceeds to inspect the next.—Hold! hold! Sempronia interrupts liim! she has found a prize !—But I cannot see any thing in it, which should give her so much joy—-It seems to me nothing more, than a plain white dimity waistcoat, w r hich was hanging upon the arm of a chair, unconscious of harm, and meditating no treason.—Ha ! but the aunt has discovered an inner pocket on the left side, exactly on the place against which the heart must beat. From this, Sempronia now draws forth with a look of triumph a rib¬ band, ornamented with embroidery in silver. —Well ! I protest, I can still sec no harm in the ribband—Sempronius however, is not of the same opinion, for down go the remain-
hip: letters on the floor, while he seizes the ribband, and examines it closely—Ha ! now I comprehend ! tho letters were not signed ; there w.b a doubt respecting the writer ; but on the ribband, the name of the giver was embroidered ; though whether at length, or only the initials, I will not pretend to say.«— However, either has answered Miss Grimal¬ kin's purpose, for she draws up her scraggy îïcck half-a« yard higher ; while her brother's face looks like a volcano, all black and iiery ? and away fly the ribband and the waistcoat through the window into the street* They fall exactly upon the head of a pas¬ senger, who quite surprised at this unexpect¬ ed salutation, slops, and disengaging his head from the waistcoat, picks up the rib¬ band, whose glittering ornaments.... may I never speak again, if it is not Edward him¬ self !—He recognizes the precious pledge of aflection: but thrown into the street...? He makes but one spring to the door—-ring, ring, ring% goes the ???- an old grey-headed footman opens the door—Edward rushes in ;
iiii* rh\f\\· fAii4?~~~JÍ e/Mi I?,-it* Qtifiin^nnM·^ if.fi his amiable sister have heard the bell ring violently; but before they have time to con« jeclure the cause, Kdward stands before them breathless with speed and anxiety, his cheeks* burning, his eyes staring, his mouth open, and the important ribband still fluttering in his hand : his spaniel too has recognized his master's property, and has dragged the white dimity waistcoat up stairs in his mouth* Ed¬ ward has got no further than the door ; there he stands like a statue, as if petrified by the sight of the two arch-foes of his love, while the fragments of the letters strewn on the floor leave him no doubt, that the repository j of his dearest secret has been violated. —** Walk în, young gentleman ! pray, walk in ; we shall be very glad of your com¬ pany !" cries the father : not that 1 hear a syllable ; but nothing can be more expressive of sarcastic politeness, than the frequent bowing ol: iiis head, and the waving his band backwards and forwards, while his lips qui¬ ver and hb eyes ilame· And now he points C é
to the miniature as a proof, which puts the case out of doubt. And how does Edward look ? like some miserable simic;, surprized in flagranti ?— not he truly ¡-—the first thing he does îs to seke fhe info-used picture, and press it to his heart, as îi anxious to make atonement for its having been treated so unworthily: and now he advances towards his father, slowly but firmly, and with humility but not meanness, takes his hand, and raises it affec* tionately to his lips. Now if ƒ were Sempronius, this submissive action would go a great way towards soften¬ ing my heart : I should find it very difficult to remain quite as angry, as I intended.—^But whether he is himself conscious of this effect, and is afraid of giving way to his own weak¬ ness« ... or whether he is ashamed of yield¬ ing so soon, and before a witness who would not fail to upbraid him for his folly ... „ whatever be ihe cause, it is certain, thai Edward's humility has not produced the desired effect. on the contrary, Sempronius
Seems to be more incensed than before ; and repulsing his son with violence, the sudden movement makes him strike his hand against the lips, w hich were in the aci ui" kissing u\ Edward starts back hastily and covers his mouth with his handkerchief; but he en¬ deavours in vain to conceal the blood which gushes from his bruised lips : the cambric is dyed with crimson. This sight rouses even old grimalkin's sensibility ; she looks alarmetl and places herself between them, while slie grasps her brother by the arm. And now instead of being Sempronius, if ï were Edward, 1 would stand boldly on the consciousness of my good intentions, and col¬ lecting the whole firmness of my character, 1 woukl tell the choleric old man—" And yet in spile of this ill-usage, l sfili kiss in spirit with sincere affection the hand, which repul¬ se.-, mc so unkindly*—Yes, I avow it ! £and my only fault is, that í did not avow it soon¬ er] a virtuous ma* h n po^esscs my who.e heart ; I love her» and .diali love her vhle i live.,— Hev? ib Iver portrait * s bat İt is painted t $
/dTt'^-fand then ld pi.int to mj heart | " in colotes nover to be effaced.—Perhaps \ «Λ! w ill tlisapprove of my at tachment at first ; İmi only become acquainted with her merits, and 1 am certain of obtaining your consent. .Nay ; I shndd be ceri aia of il even at this moment, if instead of tearing 1?? letters you cou id Imt have had patience to read ihem throiHi.' 9 —· Now !\1 wager my pocket t eloscope [which n t tins moment is invaluable j against the old goo^Miu 11 with whkh you are writing, my doirunib, rial as soon as the blood would ρ ""mit him tospeals, lùhwivd said these \ery v\4>rtb , > or at least something \ery like them* —lie show edüie miniature—«ho pointed to 'Ids heart, aud afterwards to tho letters—he damped his Ii;i3ids togethor, and raised Ins eyi: to hoa\en with a UuïL of such ontlm- Kj^a\ \\it\L· attesting the p, rfociio.ns of Ins mlVire. s, . t . l 'pou my word«, 1 did not give the ?κίί -bv.Vd %o.:ih credit for ¿'O Hindi ?'???? andi r·;* ;ocl s^u'**. ; ; ompro;duis n\cyeb'U< hh oniy uleni : ho
filmos aud Storms, ??? Malk*, «unmi lb" HH!;!U and curse-ì, and swears, aml calls heaven and hell to witness : mìiìIc tho p;ood hulv sî-ï, r, !;uving completed her benevolent work, ?? ; by the window 7 * and looks into the street, Mile unconcerned., andas if shehadxioihitut at all lo do witli the business. vSo much tho betier—now that her ve¬ nomous tongue is at rest, the storm begins tc) slacken* Sempronius walks backwards and forwards in silence for some minutes.— Now he stands st:il,and leans arainst the wall wiih Iiis fore fnu-lo** extended upon his cheek, asit buried in profound thought—be ??? come to a decision ; he advances towards his son, and . .. Heaven be thanked ! then paternal aifection still lhes in Ms bosom, for of his own accord be offers his hand to Ed¬ ward—Kdward springs forward eagerly to ri.sp it.... But luid ! Sempronius draw.- it back, and the fore-finger of it repeatedly moving upwards and dowuw ard assures inc., that lie h laying down tho conditions upon ο β
which Edward may be restored again to Edward ? tarts back; he stands motionless ; his eye burns ; he seems to struggle against his feelings : if Sempronius were not his fa¬ ther, î should expect lo see the youth turn hk back upon him wilh contempt. In shorts he looks to me exactly, as if the terms of peace just proposed had been— α an absolute renunciation of the maiden in question, and for ever Γ«~Ι am certainly right ; for at length Edward has recovered the power of speech. He places one hand upon his heart ; he raises the other to heaven with an air of the roost determined resolution ; and with every word which he utters, his courage and his enthusiasm appear to increase,—But he is not suffered to speak long.—The tempest again rages ; Sempronius interrupts his son with a fresh burst: of thunder ; and now that the fire ís re-kindled, the rattlesnake in petti¬ coats takes care to throw in a word or two, as «she looks over her shoulder towards ύψ 1
disputants, and kindly prevents the fíame from being extinguished a second time. The Lord he praised ! this embarrassing scene at length ? concluded—Sempronius's passion on asudden gives place to the most fro¬ zen composure : he spreads his arms out wide« iy, and with a shrug of the shoulders and a slight inclination*of the head, he pronounces a single decisive sentence, and quits the room. Edward turns pale ; he looks as if he could scarcely credit his hearing, and remains like one thunderstruck.—Can you possibly guess, my dear uncle, what it was, that Sein- pronius said at patting, and wiiich produced st) strong an effect ?—4?>? my own part, í am completely puzzled. The aunt however, does not think proper to make her retreat at present—No ; she is preparing to give her nephew a long lecture; for she turns her chair round, clears her throat in her pocket-handkerchief, smooths her petic.xits, and lake? a pinch of snuff. Now then she begun* She might spare her buath«, for Edward
doei nol hear a syllable: he seems totally absorbed in hi·, own gloomy r:llcc r ioas. The virgin might have talked on till doorm-day uninterrupted by him, îf she bad not un¬ advisedly taken it into her head to piek up the fragments of one of t hi letters, which acculent had thrown ?,t her fee- ; and now as proof of the facts advanced in her discourse, she proceed.'» to read the lette** aloud with ? sneering look and theatrical action. The well known words give Edward the iiiarm-— lie awakens from his lethargy. Thi i unwar¬ rantable intrusion into the secrets of his heart, this scornud. treatment both of his mistress andi himself, at once restores his presence of minti. He snrurø forward, buatches the paper írom lier hands, and throwing his arms around her, bears her svsiftly [but withouf roi ghuess] to the landing-places- She evidently resists; her open mount as¬ sures mo, that slv* protests loudly agiuist this involunlary exit: but she is already on the wrong siilo of the thro;Itokl— !, ?1- wardcloses and bolts tbc door, ,md niy eje-
behold no lon «??? this model of feminine perfection ! My grief for t iis loss, however, is but of short dure* ion—-she bounces into her bro¬ ther's study, and renews lier attacks upon liim wilh increased zeal-—Sempronius has seated himself at his wriiing-dcsk—he has written two notes, ard in one of them (which was very short) he now encloses a par« <tl of bank-bills: he rings the bell and sends the old grey-headed servant out with the other.—The aunt continues talking wirii- out repose, but she gets no answer* Sem¬ pronius w-i'ks up and down tîie room, si- l"iit, and gloomy, and without attending to her-—he seems impatient for the mes- sender's return. The domestic is come back-·—he re« reives the otlier note with its inclosure, and ι « tires a second time—but in a minute after í see Edward undraw t lie bolt of his door, and : he son mt ent' ry™IVobably, lhe good old man ginsts the contents of the note, lor while he delivers it, he turns away hh head, and
f lie back of las hand passing over Ins eyes lapidly appears to be wiping away The unfortunate lover receives lhe note with a firm countenance; but his resolu¬ tion only lasts till he has perused the con¬ tents—-the letter falls from his trembling hand ; his arms drop powerless by his side ; he rests his head against the frame of the window : he seems totally absorbed in tlie bitterness of his sensations» The old domestic opens a closet-door, and draws forth a moderate sized trunk: ande- rired, he proceeds to pack up the contents of a wardrobe, and of a chest of drawers,— Alas ! alas Ì poor Edward ! now then 1 know the decision of your unjielding father !~ The punishment pronounced upon you for possessing a feeling heart, eyes lor beauty, and sympathy for worth, is nothing less than banishment from your paternal ???- sion, Tho trunk is packed and corded, and now with a countenance expressive of the
deepest melancholy the old man offers Ed¬ ward the key.—Edward sees him not.. ». hears him not.... heeds; him not* *.. till he leels his right hand moistened with tears —he starts from his lethargy—he looks down—the venerable servant kneels at his feet | he has clasped the hand of his young master in both of his, and presses his lips upon it—Edward compels him to rise, and shakes the old man by the hand heartily and kindly—he takes the parcel of notes from the floor, and selecting one, gives it to his old attendant—but the servant looks at it v/ith a melancholy smile, shakes his head, lays it upon the writing desk, and hiding his face with both his hands, he quits tîie apartment. Edward now proceeds to examine his papers. Some of tliem are fastened toge* ther again with the afore-mentioned blue ribband, and deposited in his bosom—with the rest he fills his pockets, indiscriminate* ly ; the bank-notes are placed in a small red morocco case, and confided to his waist«
coat— tlie spaniel frisks around the table, and every now und then I hear him bark joyoibly ; probably, he is aware, that his master prepares to go out, and for his part, he is quite ready to be of the party —But his gaiety makes a singular contrast with his master's melancholy. Hark!~a post-chaise comes rattling up the streel l—4ì stops before Sempronius's house—the door is already open : the pos¬ tillion dismounts; he and the old servant are now in Edwards room, and carry out the tîtmk between them .—-What, then, my poor friend Edward! Am 1 quite to lose you ?-—Will your severe father not even suffer you to breathe the same air with him ?—Now by in γ soul, my heart bleeds for you ! The trunk is tyed on—the postilHon is on lis horse—the chaise-step is let down—the old servant appears again in Edward's room —-Edward starts up, and follows him, evi* denily making a violent efíbrt to tear him¬ belf away; but when he reaches the door,
İte stops, and turns to take a melancholy hirewell-look of that chamber, which per¬ haps he lias inhabited even from his earliest year». * * * whero he has ???. so many hap¬ py and so many bitter hours., .. where he has so often smiled, and so often wept.,.. which he now quits and probably ¿or ever ! —He draws his hat down over his eyes, and ?? he pass the threshold, I can se^ his knees tremole I—Alas ! poor youth! with a broken heart do you quit your fa¬ ther's dwelling ¿ it seems, that even to say farewell to yivl stern judge is forbidden you [«--Oh ί suffer with patience ; suffer with firmness ; preserve your good heart pure from every too bitter reflectionupenhim, who, harsh as he is, is still your pare:it* He has ceased to act as a father, but never forget that you arc a son* I am too much grieved by Edward's de¬ parture to attend with any patience to the amiable pair in the study below ; they may do what they please—for I will not honor them at present with my attention,—There-
tore, my dear uncle, you may Jay down your pen for to-day ; into the baig.in, in half an hour more it will be too dark for me tc 4 -, . ι Sit down a«*ain ! sit down dis*" niy dear «.í «Tí «í mich·! I f .award is not yet gone! At thib moment ne stands before his mother's pic¬ ture, wiiich (as 1 told you formerly) hangs over the sopha in Cordelia's sitting-room ~hi$ eyes are rooted upon those beloved features—" Ah! mother/ ? methinks I hear him say, tí it is well for you, that you sleep m the grave! It is well, that you are not here to see your only son banished from the house and heart of his Either, and to kiss away these tears, wliich you would surely mingle with your own ! Perhaps, were you still ahve, all this would not hap¬ pen ; perhaps you would fold your arms round the son, who to-day is thrown out upon the wide world without shelter, and then when my father heard the prayers of an agonized mother pleading for her only child. ·.. Oh ! were you but alive, my
mother!—were not your place now filled by a stranger. «., l $ No ! no ! these last sentences Edward did not say—-I wrong his iustice ; he is not so ungrateful for all Cordelia's kindness, for see !—he fastens the silver-embroidered rib¬ band round an alabaster vase, which stands on Cordelia's chimney-piece; doubtless he wishes to convince his step-mother, that he thought of her at parting, and has bequeath¬ ed her this precious gift of love, as a si¬ lent memorial of his undiminished friend- ship—-Oh ! she will certainly find your le¬ gacy, poor Edward, and her own feeling heart will interpret to her the intentions and the sentiments of yours—she will often think of you while absent, v.¡11 labour in¬ cessantly to effect your return ; and while Cordelia remains there, you will not be quite forgotten within the dwelling of your father. Again he turns to his mother's picture- near it hangs a small sketch of it in Indian ink, the production of Willy's all-imitating
pendi ; it is drawn upon a sheet of letter« paper and fastened against the wall wilh a pin, thus (with the true vanity of a youth« ful artist) boldly challenging a comparison with the original—there are a thousand de¬ fects in the drawing ; but even from hence I can see, that he lias succeeded in catching the resemblance*—Edward eagerly snatches the paper from its place, and then having prest his lips with pious enthusiasm upon the frame of the picture, he hastens from the apartment as abruptly, as if he dread¬ ed, iest his faiher should appear and de¬ prive him of his newly-found treasure. Kdward is in the chaise—the post-boy flourishes his whip—Edward is gone!
Friday Morning. I have nicked the very moment : Cor* delia*s chaise stands before the door, and the old servant and the maid are bu¬ sy in taking out the seat, and several par¬ cels. The drawing-room door opens, and gay as a lark little ^ Villy comes jumping into the chamber. His mother then cannot be far off—He carries a roll of paper under his arm, as black and smoaky, as if it were a manuscript dug out of the ruins of Her- culaneum—-he unrolls it and holds up the contents to admire their reflexion in the looking-glass,—Now 1 understand what makes the boy seem so proud and so hap¬ py : at the house w r here he has been visit- ling, he discovered two old coloured prints, [one representing a battle, and the other a .hunting-match ; and his good-natured host has gratified the future Raphael by making him a present of ι he m both.™ Well, Willy ! thi* is a treasure indeed ! . But see ! Kis mother makes her appear« ance— the old domestic follows her,— Aîi !
ihen she has already heard of Edward's ba~ mshmcnt ; I could swear it by her pale countenance, and dejected air. Without taking off her pelisse, she walks slowly to* wards the sopha, seats herself upon it, and leaning her arm upon the table, and her cheek against her hand, she seems buried in thoughts evidently of no pleasant nature- she now addresses a few short questions to the servant—-his answers are equally brief— he is dismist, and Willy is ordered to accom« pany him. Cordelia is now alone—she sits with her hands clasped, her eyes fixed upon the car* pet.—Now she raises them to heaven, as if she uttered a mental prayer, and then wipes away a tear.—Ah ! her jiusband has long ac¬ customed her to the expression of this silent grief—she rises, ant, paces up and down the chamber with an absent look ; now her eye rests upon the flower vase, round which the embroidered ribband is fastened ¡«-»she stops -—she seems to be endeavouring to recollect where she had seen ît before—-she wityes ît,
aad while she reads the silver characters, a melancholy smile plays on her pale cheeks, and she shakes her head dejectedly.·—Now she unlocks a small japanned cabinet, in which she is accustomed to keep her most valuable ornaments, aad in one of the drawers of which she deposits the embroidered ribband —now suddenly she closes the cabinet, locks it, ancf conceals the key in her pocket. The door opens—Sempronius enters»—Oh ! then she had heard him coming up stairs» Hu has a pen stuck behind his ear, and pro¬ bably is just come out of his counting-house [I suppose, that it is in the back-part of the house] to welcome his wife on her return home. The visit, however, does not seem to be quite to his taste : he looks like a school¬ boy, who lias committed some fault and ex* pects to be scolded by his tutor,—The first compliments are over, and the interview becomes quite comical—he evidently does not well know, how to begin the relation of what has occurred during her absence ; and she for her part does not seem at all inclined VOL, ÎV. ?
to give hi,m the least assistance."—They are both silent : he hums, and haws, and scrapes the carpet witli his feet, and sits by no means comfortably upon his chair.—Bravo ! how unusually polite the man is grown! he insists upon helping Cordelia to take oif her pelisse, the pelisse is folded up ; and yet the conver¬ sation does not get on-—Sempronius walks to the windjw, and draws one of the venetian blinds quite up.—Thank you, good Sir 1 It was very much in my way ; but now 1 can see what you are about much better—he picks up a knitting needle, which had fallen on the floor ; he looks out of window, and beats time against the frame with his fingers -—now he walks to the fire-place, and sets his watch by a small chamber-clock, which stands upon the mantle-piece : the dock is aut of order, and has not gone for these nine days to my certain knowledge. But Cordelia, whose gentle heart cannot bear to see any human being suffer, how¬ ever deservedly, now relieves him from his pain&l embarrassment—she rises from the
sopha ; with a look at once expressing the most friendly interest and ihe most dignified reproach* she clasps the hand of her husband ; she leads him back to the sopita, and places him before the portrait of his deceased wife, —tfiere is something so noble, so exalted in her look and attitude, that she appears to me like a superior being ! how clearly does lier countenance express, that she says at*this moment to her husband—·" Could yonder Hps now say to you·*—* thou harsh father, where is my son ? —to such a ques» tioa what answer could you make ?"·— He fixes his eyes on the ground : he dares not look upon the face either of the inani¬ mate mother of bis child, or of her living re¬ presentative. And now the excellent woman implores lum not to be cruel to his son and to him¬ self, while she gives unrestricted course to lier tears, and while she endeavours to awaken his feelings by caresses, which express the most heartfelt interest and good will—and υ '2
can Sempronius possibly resist her cntrea« t ies ? No, no ! ît would have been impossible, it he were not already so very much in the wrong—he feels, that to give way at all, would now be to confess, that in the wiiole affair iiis harshness had been inexcusable : false shame prevents his retracting the sen* tence, which he ought never to have pro¬ nounced. Unless Kdward were declared to be an undutiful son, he should be tacitly proved to be himself the most unnatural of fathers* He therefore wilfully hardens his heart and blinds his judgment, in order to escape from the conviction of his error ; and he now begins a long and animated narrative of all that has past.—Oh ! how-1 wish, that ï were at his elbow, in order that I might set him right occasionally in point of historical fact, if it were only for the love which î bear his good lady-sister, who (if I had the management of the brush) should not be painted in tîiis family picture in colours too flattering.
Scmproníus's narrative has not produced the desired effect upon his wife; but at least he has contrived to talk himself once more into a persuasion, that every thing which he has done, has been perfectly proper. It was visi¬ ble, how his importance and self-satisfaction increased with every succeeding period ; for the longer he talked, the redder grew his face, and the more violent his action—at first his only object was, to conceal, under an ap¬ pearance of resentment, how much Corde¬ lia's representations had affected him : but he has succeeded in working himself up into a real fury, whicli has now got such com¬ plete possession of his mind, as even to make him unjust towards Cordelia, Her tears, which stream afresh,... the sudden glow, which flushes her pale cheeks,... the look of mild reproach, which she casts upon her accuser, and which declares herself fully jus¬ tified before the tribunal of her conscience.. •. all these circumstances can have no refe¬ rence, except to some severe reproof, which Sempronius, in the violence of his passion.
lias just pronounced against his admirable wife. Perhaps he accuses her of countenan¬ cing his son In hi» disobedience««—perhaps she lias been long the confidante of Edward's love-affair—perhaps she Is acquainted with the maiden in question, and it was throng her means that her step-son first foraed an acquaintance wliich (according tu- Sem» pronius's view of the business) threatens to overturn that prosperity and respectability^ which he has been labouring all his life to e^ tablish.··—Whatever be the fault laid to Cor·* dclia's charge, at least her husband ceases to 'reproach her with it for the present*—The church-clock strikes—I suppose, that it re¬ minds him that it is time for him to go to the Exchange, for he quits the room abruptly^ and bangs the dcor after him with such vio¬ lence, that he makes all the windows rattle» Business also calls me away myself ; there¬ fore, farewell, my dear uncle^ tül after dinner«
Frídí y Afternoon* Sempronius dines at four : the meal to¬ day has been unusually short* It is not yet five, and Sempronius has already shut him¬ self up alone in his study, a certain sign, that he is still out of temper. Ah ! Cordelia is never out of temper ! With a resigned me¬ lancholy air she is seated at her piano-forte» A small upright book is open before her % to judge by its dark blue cover, and by the small proportion which the music bears to the words printed* at the bottom, I suspect, that she is singing something out of the Edin¬ burgh edition of Scotch Melodies : probably, some plaintive air, which accords with the present disposition of her thoughts* At least the slow movement of her fingers, the ex¬ pression of her countenance, and her head reclining a littie (but only a little) towards her left shoulder, convince me, that she must be playing an adagio. A girl enters with a band-box* Surely, I have seen her face before* Oh ! now î re* collect ber j she carries out parcels for the d ê
milliner, who Uves a few doors further down tïie streef. She opens her bandd>ox; but Cordelia shakes her head. It seems, that she wants nothing of that kind at present; but when refused în so gentle a manner, why should the girl look so frightened? She casts a look of apprehension round-her... .Hey¬ day !—she has suddenly snatched a letter out of her band-box, thrown it into Cordelia's lap, and now she rims down stairs ready to break hei neck* The ambassadress must know but little of .Cordelia, if she supposes, that she will receive a letter*, which reaches her by so mysterious a conveyance. Accordingly, she has already quitted the piano-forte in pursuit of the fugitive—the letter has fallen on the ground, and.... but softly ! she stopa sud¬ denly with her hand resting upon the lock of the door. The letter, which now lies on the carpet, has caught her eye; she certainly must Iiave recognized some well-known hand-writing. She has !—she springs towards the 4 letter, seiz.es it eagerly, and conceals it in her bosom,
while a deep crimson overspreads her face. She now opens the other door, opposite to that by which the milliner left her: proba¬ bly, it leads to her bed-chamber, whicli ís in the back part of the house : the door closes, and 1 see Cordelia no longer. What can be the meaning of all this? Surely, I know Cordelia too well to.... Is it possible, that í should have formed an cr* roneous opinion of her character and princi¬ ples ? Nay ; if I find myself deceived here in my notions of female virtue, I will never look for it elsewhere. 11a ! I begin to fear, that the mystery will be unravelled in the most disagreeable man¬ ner. The stair-case door is thrown open, and Sempronia makes her appearance, and hands into the room. « .. (not very gently, or politely, Ì must confess).... the milliner's apprentice ! The venerable virgin seems to be in a great heat ! What 1\<? happened r î suppose, she met the girl on the stairs; and it ??? was hurrying down them as quick as she bolted out of the drawing-room, 110 ? 5
wonder, if she excited suspicion in the fair bosom of Miss Grimalkin, who (? warrant) has brought her back, in order that she might examine her quite at her ease. The examination is not a very quiet one. Our dearly«beloved Amit is somewhat more violent than becomes a grand inquisitor; and the supposed culprit does not seem to want for spirit. Now they both talk together. If J were not so intimately acquainted with the affairs of this family,. I should think, that Sempronius had imported^ two fish-wives frori Billingsgate» The music of these two nightingales has attracted the notice of the master of the liouse s and he leaves his sUidy to enjoy it more distinctly* Ele inquires the cause of all this uproar ; but the ladies talk on with¬ out listening to him. Sempronia examines the band-box ; the milliner with sarcastic polite» ness turns out the contents of her pockets, and begs the virgin to convince herself, that there m ibthing concealed in her thimble ami a-žíilver nutmeg-grater. Now the storm
rages more violently than ever; till Sem* pronius bursts out Hke a clap of thunder, and terrifies them both into silence. He menaces the girl with his finger. He points down the street. Aye; I suppose, he threatens her wiih a complaint to her mistress, for she begins J:o look uneasy, keeps edging away towards the door, and at last appears to have considerable satisfaction in being permitted to make her escape in a whole skin. Sempronia, however, seems more mar¬ tially inclined than ever since the retreat of the enemy. Slie proceeds to harangue with the most violent action, heedless of her bro¬ ther's impatience, while he walks up and down the room, and.... but on a sudden he stands- stuf, ana stares her full in the faccv while his countenance expresses the greatest dismay and astonishment. Some important word has escaped her* which evidently has touched the master-string of his whole unit¬ ed sensibilities. She too seems considerably cmbarrasbcd at the hardy assertion, which has just fallen from her. She is silent : but n íl
now she makes up her mind. She strikes her right hand closed against the open palm oi her left with a look of diaboHcal determi¬ nation, and then «seizing her brother's arm, draws him back again into his study, and tvlmts the door. The secret, which she is now disclosing, is clearly no trifle» How uneasy, how gloomy seems Sempronius ! Now he starts from his chair, opens the door leading to the drawing* room, looks ín to ascertain that nobody is there, then enters, and motions to his sister to follow him : the sweet creature does not require to be told twice : they approach Cor¬ delia's writing desk: it is unlocked—now shame upon him! He is examining the pens, to see whether they have been used lately ; while his worthy sister inspects the ink-stand, in hopes of discovering some fallen drops upon the brink of it, and feels, whether there is ??? remaining warmth to be perceived in the sealing wax. Tliey have made no discoveries, and are nov/ returning to the study» Sempronius,
liowever, comes back to the writing-table, and counts the sheets of paper, in order, that if his wife should carry on any correspon¬ dence unknown to him, the deficiency of a sheet may apprize him of the fact* Ah! my worthy friend í how richly do you deserve the fate, of which you are so apprehensive ! I am tired of this tête-à-tête. Is no¬ thing to be discovered in the other apart¬ ments ? Stay ! did I tell you, my dear ancle, that there is an old lumber-room, which joins Edward's forsaken bed-chamber ? A.·. nobody ever enters this place, except to store away empty boxes or useless furniture, Willy is here secure from interruption, and has accordingly selected it for his painting-room. Here he passes hour after hour in scratching and daubing, and here he is established at this very moment* The two coloured prints are stretched against the wall, and he often suspends his work to gaze in admiration upon the gorgeous assemblage of reds., and blues, and greens, and yellows; an assem¬ blage, however, which he is unable to rival
în Ins present performance ; for he hasr t nipt led all his shells of paint, and lias no bettor resource than the ink-stand. The work is complete* He seems to be mightily pleased with it. He opens the win¬ dow, and holds the piece of paper out of it, waving it backwards and forwards, in order ihat the ink (which he has not spared) may dry in lhe open air the sooner. If he would but turn himself ever so little more to the right, I should be able to favour him with røy opinion of his performance» That will do, my Hule friend ! Upon my word, very clever ! I never saw a more striking resem¬ blance! 'Tis the aunt's profile, and as ugly as life! There is no· mistaking it; not a wrinkle about the corners, of her Httle fiery eyes is omitted 5 the twist of her nose is hit off to a nicety, and ihe falling in of lier toothless mouth (though perhaps sather overdone) is excellently preserved : nay, he has not for« gotten even the great wart, with which her chin is decorated. To be sure it is not a flattering ???, but the portrait is the very
counterpart of Nature in all her undisguised deformity. But what can have induced the¬ young rogue to employ his pencils or rather his pen, on such an unpromising subject ì This is the first caricature, that I ever saw him attempt ; and if it should fall into the hands of the original, í am afraid, that the painter's reward would by no means be of the most satisfactory nature. He still stands before the window, and seems to be holding forth to himself. He lases a great deal of stiff action, as if he was repeating a speech out of a play. He stops.» and appears embarrassed. Now he takes a book from the table, looks into it, sets it upright and epen against the window, and proceeds again in his recitation with renewed spirit* I think, I can make out a G and an F.... Stay ! Oh ! I see—" Gay's Fables."—. livery now and then he stops, and looks anxi¬ ously up the street ;—'tis by that way that his aunt always comes, and this is about the time, that she usually pa) s her e\ ening visit* 1 have ii! I have ii!—He has some lav our
to ask of his aunt, and hopes to bribe lier tt> grant it by repeating a newly-acquired fable of Gay, and by shewing her, that he has past the time of her absence in retracing her be¬ loved resemblance. Oh! poor Willy! I fear, th it if such is your intention, your portrait will be thought much too like to be pleasing. It seem?, by his looking so often Into the street, he is not aware, that Scmpronia has been in the house above this half-hour* Be begins to suspect it, for he puts his drawing into his pocket, gives a parting-look to his tawdry prints, takes up the box con¬ taining the empty colour-shells, and away he goes. The empty colour-shells ? There then we have the key of the whole mystery ! He is ambitious of making a picture aU red and yellow, like his favourite prints; but his colour-shells must first be replenished, and this then is the favour, tc obtain which, he lias given himself so much trouble.
Cordelia has just returned to lhe drawing- room. She is already gone again. She only looked at a card which was stuck over the mantle piece, took a key from a bunch whicb was in the drawer of her writing-table, and immediately left, the room with it.
Willy has entered the drawing-room· He bas heard his aunt's voice in the adjoining closet, for he advances towards it. Probably, > the tone is not encouraging, for he hesitates, and opens the door softly and by degrees, in order to reconnoitre the field of action, before he commences the attack* Sempro« nins looks as black as a live lobster, and his sister as red as a boiled one. Willy seems not to admire the appearance of either, and draws his little curly head back again: but his aunt is already aware of the young spy's vicinity, and before he can effect a retreat, she has taken him into custody. Now then, placing him between her knees, and coin*
peiling ?? 1 e look her full in the fece, (how €\m she bo so barbarous ?) she insists upon his making an exact confession. Perhaps, she Mispoets, thai his mother had sent him to overhear what slie was saying to Sempronius* The poor child weeps, and protests his innocence. Now she loses all 'patience, and drags him by the arm to the window, which. she opens« What! Is she threatening to throw hini out of it, unless he instantly con« fesses himself guilty ? No, no ; not so bad as that ! She is only going to bring forward a proof of the truth of her charge so con« vincing, that there can be .no denying it* She points to the story above ; she holds a sheet oí paper out of the window, and waves it, just as Willy did the portrait. She saw him then^ and probably thought, that he was making signs to somebody in the street. Did she take the paper for a letter ? Per¬ haps, too^ for one written by his mother. Was there ever such a lynx in petticoats ! I am half afraid, that her keen eyes will dis¬ cover me with my telescope at the Garret-
window, and then I shall be suspected to be the lover in this romance ¡—-Fortunately, this business can be easily explained. Don't be ?? frightened, my little friend! you need only put your hand in your left pocket, and your deceiver will be confounded. And that is exactly wiiat he does : with trembling hands he draws forth the last pro« cluction of his genius. She opens it eagerly I Nay ι there is certainly / no mistaking the subject, and now, Willy, now I there's a glo* rious subject for your pencil! Le Brun's Passions exhibit nothing to be compared with it î Unkckily, she does not allow him time to study her, To tear the paper into a thousand pieces, to apply so hearty a slap on his cheek as left five white marks behind it, seize him by the arm, and turn him out o.f tfie room, slapping the door in his face, was the work of but a single minute. The un¬ fortunate little artist retires sobbing, to mourn over the annihilation of all his air- built castles,, The doset<onference too is at ?? end*
Our beloved aunt has done all the mischief in her power, sees no prospect of doing more at present, and therefore takes her departure quitta satisfied with herself. ï assure you, my dear uncle, I do not like the look of this business at all. Cordelia went out, just as the postman was going through the street : she sent the old footman back for something, and seized the moment cf bis absence to give a letter into the post¬ man's care ', there was a hurry in her ???« ner of giving ît, and she coloured so sudden¬ ly and so deeply, that I am certain, there was some mystery in the business. In all proba« huky, this letter was an answer to that, which she received from the milliner, I begin to grow very uneasy ; it is at least certain, that Cordelia carries on a correspondence un« known to lier husband, with some person in London, lor it was not lhe general post, by which the letter was forwarded.
Sempronius is still alone in his own room* He seems in a brown study; sometimes he walks up and down the chamber rubbing his forehead with his hand thoughtfully : some¬ times, he beats tho devil's tattoo, sittmg ín his elbow chair ; at this moment, he is playing upon the table with his fingers, but evidently without attending to what he is about. Hark! a knock at his door! What! Sem¬ pronia returned so soon ? it is very unusual for her to make two visits in one e venin sc· What an air of triumph she wears! She must have done some notable mischief, she looks so happy. She puts me in mind at this moment of her prototype Miltont Serpent : —~— · ζζ Hope eíovatts, anel Joy Brigbiens ber crost. ? — The door opens ; she goes in, but her companion remains in the street. Surely, I have seen that fellow's face before : as I hope to live, the very postman, to whom Cordelia confided her letter ! lie is trying a piece of money with his teeth ! A bribe, no doubt,
and if tbe fellow received it from Scmpronia» alas ! lor poor Cordelia's secret. The aunt throws open the study door, apd with a look of exultation slaps down a letter upon the table before her brother« He seizes it : he recognizes the hand-writing. I think, î can see his hands tremble, while he bursts the letter open. Hal something has fallen from the ground, which SemproKİa possesses herself of with¬ out loss of time. She holds it up triumphant¬ ly to her brother. A key ? Can it be that, which I saw Cordelia even now takeoff the ring ? The same idea has struck tîie amiable pair, for they are already in the drawing- room. The bunch of keys is in the hands of Sempronius. The look of anguish, with which he lets the bunch fall again, tells me too plainly, that it is that /ery key. Scmpronia urges him to read the letter. To judge by his countenance, matters are now worse than ever. The note could have contained but a few words, for it was read hi an instant, and if his «ster had not
stopped him in time, in another instant he would have torn it into a thousand pieces. i suppose, the postmän Is impatient, for he has just sent the maid-servant up with a message. She is gone down again with a small wax-light in het hand, which usually stands upon the chimney-piece. Sempronia pkk§ up the bunch of keys, and replaces them in the drawer. She takes the letter from her brother and examines it. She points to the superscription with an inquiring look. He shakes his head. No ; he knows nothing of the person, to whom the letter is addrest. Cordelia in secret correspondence with a person,of whom her husband knows nothing? That looks very ill Î— And yet that person may be a woman. Come, niy dear uncle, let us believe the best : when there are two sides of the question, î always prefer the most favourable ; and to think an accused person in the right, till he is actually proved to be in the wrong, if not the most prudent plan as the world is constituted, at least, is certainly the most amiable.
The maid returns with the wax-taper lighted* The letter is sealed again with one of Cordelia's own seals, which lay on the writing-table. Now then away stalks Scm¬ pronia. Site restores the letter to the perfi¬ dious postman, who bows, and leaves her ;~ and now a corner of the street deprives my eyes of the pleasure of gazing upon tins· paragon of female chastity* What do you think of all this, my clear uncle ? That cursed key ! I am horribly afraid, that it was the key of some private entrance«, of some back door, or garden-gate, and that tiie note specified the hour and day for using it : it could not have contained inore, from the short time occupied ?? its perusak If this conjecture be just, Sempro¬ nius is as well informed of these particulars, as either the writer or receiver of the letter; and by his sending it to ils destination, I ? include, thai he means the assignation to be kept, ís it his intention to surprize Cor¬ delia with her unknown correspondent ? It looks very like it.
At any rate, I hope, that this impor¬ tant interview is not fixed for this even* îng, as business fwhich cannot be delayed) compela me to desert my post this very moment, and will prevent my resuming it tili to-morrow ; therefore, my dear uncle, I must beg you to supply my place. I will leave you my telescope ; keep a sharp look out, and then I shall at least have the satisfac« tion of learning from your report to-morrow, everything which has taken place in Sem« pronius's family during my absence. Saturday. And so, my dear uncle, you are quite certain, that ï lost nothing by my absence yesterday evening? Nothing occurred worth noticing ? Well then, let ?? see, whether f can have better success in my discoveries. Hey-day ! the old footman is at thfc door adjusting the stirrups of a Httle grey poney, md Sempronius is in the very act of drawing VOL, IV. V
on his -boots* He seems preparing to go a journey. Well then, this cannot possibly be the important day, for so well informed as Sempronius is of the time of the assigna- tien, he-certainly would take care not to be out of the way : and that he does not mean to return to-night, I condudc from his carry¬ ing saddle-bags. However, he does not leave Cordelia's a fair side all unguarded* ;" for his she-dragon of a sister is just arrived, antl her maid fol¬ lows her, carrying a bundle of clothes* Cor¬ delia's máid appears, and the she-dragon's abigail is given in charge to her ; so that, I conjecture, the sisterin-law is appointed to keep a strict eye over Cordelia's conduct, till her brother returns. Methinks, Cordelia does nøt seem quite pleased with this ar¬ rangement, though she strives to hide her dissatisfaction under the veil of civilities. N. B. The she-dragon's abigail is almost as old, and quite as hideous as her mistress j
to make her more so, was out of the power of nature. Sempronius is gone. Cordelia is busied with household affairs. Our dearly-beloved aunt has fixed her spectades on her hawk's nose, and is knitting away as if her existence depended upon it. This day will probably be unproductive, but I will just look in upoa you in the evening, my dear uncle.
Saturday afternoon* Cordelia is more ornamented than usual : she has a turban on with a sultana plume, which becomes her singularly, Willy too has got his best cloaths on. There İs certainly something in the wind. His mother is reading to him out of the large Shakspeare, which I mentioned before, but ae finds it difficult to make him attend to lier; he jumps up every minute, and runs ? look out of the window. A quartet past six—stay!—have the good- E 2
?^? to hand roe that news-paper, mý dear uncle« Let me see— u Drury Lane—the Honey-moon."——" Covent Garden—Mac- beth. M — As sure as fate, they are going to see Macbeth, and Cordelia is trying to make her boy understand the story, before they set out* Just so. A plain decentJookiag coach with two ladies and a gentleman in it, has just stopped at Cordelia's door. Cordelia takes her gloves and fan. She seems through civility to press her sister-in-law to join their party* How Miss Grimalkin turns up the white of her eyes! Aye, I warrant her! She looks upon a theatre as an invention of the Wicked-one, and would as soon set her foot in purgatory as in a play-house. Cordelia- and Willy leave her, and she ejaculates something as the door closes : but whether it be a prayer or a curse, I will not pretend to deckle—for charity y $ sake, we will believe the latter. The coach is gone, and I may as well go too : there is nobody at home but Serøpro»
?? and to the shame of my taste be it spoken, I have not the least inclination for a Ixkc-à-tête with her.—Good night, my dear uncle*
* Saturday, ten o'clock. No wonder, my dear uncle, that you are surprized at my returning so unexpectedly : but would you beHeve it ? as I was on my way home even now, a man past me, whom in spite of his being muffled up in his great coat, and his having drawn his hat down over his eyes, I recognized for Sempronius ! I instantly turned, and followed him. He stopped at Ms own house, and struck thrice with a pebble the drawing-room window, in which there was a light* Instantly the light disappeared. In a minute aftei' the door was opened without noise; the candle in her hand shewed me the figure of Sempronia. Her 1 brother stole into the house without speaking, and the door was closed again, as softly as it had been opened. e 3
Then this ír the important moment after alî ! Cordelia looked at an invitation card : do'nt you recoUect that circumstance ? She was aware, that her husband was engaged to pass a day in the country, and appointed the evening of it for her assignation. He, on his side, was aware of her arrangement, and pretended to keep Iiis country engagement, m order that he might surpiise her with her lover. Poor, poor Cordelia ! To be sure, her im¬ prudence is highly blameable, but still ·.. if she could but escape this once undiscovered, who knows, hut the recollection of her dan» ger might induce her to reform altogether ? Stay! slay! cannot L *. * Hang me, if I don't warn her.
Eleven oMock· 1 was too late ! The play was over ! Cor¬ delia was gone, and ï am returned fatigued to death*
See! see! Cordelia sits in her drawing- making a tremendous bustle, would be im¬ possible. She must tako her chance*«-*~Poor, poor Cordelia! What is she about ? She takes papers out of a red morocco case, which was deposited in her jewel-box; they seem to be bank¬ notes. Surely, she cannot be meditating an elopement ? She seals them up, and leaves the room. Sempronia is not to be seen, nor her bro¬ ther. The servants are gone to bed. ^very thing seems to be dark and still in the house. Surely, that confounded key was not the key of her bed chamber ? Such an imprudence would be quite unpardonable ; especially as hei bed-chamber is in the back part of the house, where î cannot see what goes for¬ ward. Now would I give all that ï am worth in the world (it would not be pacing a very high price, heaven knows!) to ascertain what Sempronius is about at this moment ! ? 4
4 Ì warrant him, he stands in some corner unobserved, (just as 1 am doing,) as atten¬ tive with his ears as 1 am with my eyes, listening for that which he is afraid to hear, and every instant in danger of betraying him¬ self by the loud and anxious beating of his heart» Ah ! if I am right in this conjecture, in spite of all his faults, 1 can't help pitying the poor miserable devil ! Ha !—how is this ? A faint ray of light plays upon the glass of the lumber-room windows ! This is very unusual ! What can any person want at such a time of night in this desolate apartment, which hardly any one enters even during the day ? Can it be Willy, whose zeal for the fine arts has in¬ duced him to leave his bed at midnight to prosecute his studies, unknown to the family? No ! the shadow thrown upon the side-wall is of too great a length to be Willy's. The person, who carries the light, throws it on different parts of the chamber, as if examin¬ ing, whether it is already occupied by any one» Can it be Cordelia, in this solitary
apartment.. , . so late at night... · her hus¬ band supposed at a distance,... expecting some one to whom she sent a private key ...... Oh ! if it is Cordelia, she must be guilty !—~ Guilty ! Guilty !—I could discover in the shadow the peculiar form of the turban, and of the sultana plume, with which it was decorated ; they were marked out most distinctly* It is she ; it is Cordelia : no, never again will I pin my faith upon a woman's virtue ! The door has been left a-jar ; purposely, (Î suppose,) lest the lover should make a noise in opening it* I can see a faint light advancing along the landing-place. From the circular form of the radiance, I should ima¬ gine, that it is produced hy a dark lanthorn» Now it enters the mom, and shews me the tall figure of a man wrapped up in a great coat. It seems too, that Cordelia's maid is in her mistress's secrets; for the stranger is accompanied by a female, whose height* ? ã
shape, and white petticoats, perfectly answer ihe description of Mrs« Betty. Cordelia's rush-light is too near the win¬ dow, and the beams of the darkJanthorn are both too feeble and too far off to permit my distinguishing the emotions, produced by this mysterious meeting, on the coun¬ tenances of the lovers ; not to mention, that the gentleman's round hat shades a great fart of his features, and that the lady's back ís turned directly towards me : however, the eagerness with which Cordelia hastens to meet the stranger, and the tender attitude which he assumes without delay, leave me no doubt of their mutual satisfaction. He is already on his knees before her, and is press« i ng her unresisting hand to his lips most pas¬ sionately : and this is the signal for the storm breaking loose, which is destined to over¬ whelm them* The worst fears of jealousy are confirmed beyond the power of doubt* i ng ; mortal patience can endure no longer ; a closet door suddenly bursts open* and like
2
a dap of thunder Sempronius stands in the midst of the affrighted groupe ! The whole party seems petrified, not excepting Mrs. Betty. Yc*, yes, Mrs. Betty ! I make no doubt, that your mistress's secret- keeper had many a pretty perquisite, but now you must prépaie yourself to look about for another place. Oh ! how Sempronius storms i How he threatens the lover! How he upbraids Ms wife ! How, with bis hands clasped together, lie devotes himself to the infernal deities, if he does not Like most ample vengeance on the authors of liis dishonor I The stranger seems lo be converted into marble by this unexpected appearance, feu* he has not yet bad the power of quitting his kneeling atti¬ tude. Sempronius makes such an uproar, that he' will soon raise the whole house. The com¬ pany is already increased by two new-comers, but their stature and riiape easily enable me to recognize them for old acquaintances ·*. the one is a large water-spaniel, vriiich 1 h^v© l (j
often seen running about the house; the other short figure, who holds a rush-light, and stands there astonished in his shirt, can be - no other than Willy* I suppose, his father's voice had broken his sleep, and made him tremble, lest thieves should have found their way into the lumber-room, for the express purpose of carrying off such a trea¬ sure, as his two darling pictures. His entrance only seems tp increase the displeasure of Sempronius. I think, 1 can hear him cry at this distance—' 4 What busi¬ ness have you out of bed, Sir ?* —and at the same time he applies a hearty blow on the round cheek of poor Willy. The boy stag¬ gers under the eflect of this uncivil saluta¬ tion, and fearful of a second, he hastens out of the room: only in his confusion mistaking the way out, he suddenly pulls open the door of Edward's room, and.... why !—what the deuce have we got here ! A sixth person has tumbled head foremost into the room ; Willy has fallen undermost ; the spaniel helps the general confusion by barking, and I
has estabiishcd himself oo the back of the out-stretched intruder. Willy has dragged himself from under his oppressor j he calls off the dog ¿ raises the new-comer (who brings his garments hastily into order,) and is rewarded for his kindness by a second sound box on the ear. No, fair lady ! (for it seems the intruder is a female) even if that action had not revealed yon, that shape and air are not to be mistaken : you can be no other, than our dearly »beloved aunt« 1 suppose, the kind soul was indulg¬ ing her innocent curiosity to know how the storm would end, which she had been so instrumental in raising. With this view, she concealed herself in the adjoining bed¬ room 5 and she was in the very act of listen* ing at the key-hole with all lier ears, wiien Willy unexpectedly pulled away the support* ing door, and occasioned her to make her entrance into the society in a manner so novel and unceremonious. This occurrence has the power of suspend¬ ing even the torrent of Scmpromus'5 resent«
meni for a moment; tlie seducer has now re¬ covered tlie use of his faculties, and has quit¬ ted hi» kneeling posture. 1 le seems dh posed lo make use of the present confusion, in or¬ der to eflect his escape; ï saw Mrs. Belly whisper him, and í guess, that it was a kind hint to seize the opport unity of withdrawing ; for he pulls his hat still more over his eyes, and advances towards the door* But Sempronius is aware of his intention ; he springs afler the fugitive, grasp.» him fu¬ riously by the arm, and forces him back into the middle of the chamber. Now shame on the dastardly wretch-—the seducer falls at the feet of the man, whom he has so grossly injured, and wilh uplifted hands seems to implore his compassion—and Cordelia.... ï ain amassed at her assurance ! she walks boklly up to her husband, as if slie coukl justify what ? itself is totally imjusLi- ¡Libk— or is she going honestly to avow her preference for the yoimg offender, and her determination to bet her husband's a.'g ?*, and the contempt of the world at defiance ?
*-4 should rather suppose the latter ; for with a confident air she extends her light hand to the kneeling stranger.... and take.* the dark lanthorn out of his ¡—What is thai for ?~-Hey dey ! Now she pulls the seducer's hat off, throws the fight full upon his face ? and shows her husband.... huzza ! huzza ! huzza ! Edward, by Heaven ! Virtuous Cordelia, what injustice have we all done you ! How rejoiced am I to find myself mistaken, and Sempronius (I fancy) is by no means dissatisfied in finding a ba¬ nished son, where he expected to find a fa¬ voured lover ! It is at least certain, that he does not withdraw the hand which Ed* ward has seized, and is in the act of pres¬ sing to his lips'; and what makes me con¬ fident that his feature? have relaxed some¬ thing of their severity is, that Mrs. Betty is disposed to profit by rhe present moment to obtain absolution for her own share in die business, and without more ceremony he plumps down on her knees, dose by Edward.·—-And now Cordelia tinning th,.
Ianlhorn away from Edwards face, and tiirowing tlie light fuU upon her suppliant abigails, discovers, (not the features of Mrs. Betty,) but those of a girl, not more than seventeen, and lovely as the virgins of Ma¬ homet's fabled paradise* This then was the object of this mid¬ night conference.-—While we fancied Ed« ward many hundred miles distant from London, love had forbade Ins wandering further than the residence of his beloved : and for what purpose he sought îi; is now made quite evident, for he holds up the left hand of the fair stranger, and points to the ring, which ornaments the wedding fin- ger— this important step once taken, he* communicated ii to his adopted mot f ι er ; he entreated permission to make known to her the bride of his selection (perhaps) be¬ fore he set forward to seek with her lis forlune through ihe world.«—This request must certainly have been conveyed in the supposed love-letter, brought by the milli¬ ner's girl ; the short space of time occupied
in the perusal of her answer, (as I said be¬ fore,) proved, that it only contained a few words, probably nothing more than the time and place of meeting ; and as Sem¬ pronius %vas ignorant of the address on the back, Edward must have taken the pre¬ caution of desiring his step-mother to direct to him under a feigned name, fearful lest his father by some accident should disco¬ ver his being still in the metropolis, and prevent Cordelia from granting the so much desired meeting.—The conversation which succeeded her return from the country, left mc no doubt, that all intercourse be¬ tween his wife and son had been prohibited by tha stern Sempranius ; Cordelia was obliged to have recourse to mystery, how¬ ever innocent her purpose ; and the ne¬ glected lumber-room (as being least liable to observation from the servants) was fixed npon as the most fit place for the inter¬ view, at which she proposed not only to embrace her step-son's wife as her adopted daughter, but to smooth the difficulties of
their road through Hfe, by giving the new- married couple all tlie pecuniary assistance wliich it lay in her power to command. It was for this purpose, that she sealed up the bank-notes so carefully ; it was for this .... but while I am making these reflec¬ tions, a most animated conference has taken place between the undeceived Sempronius and his amiable sister—he seems to reproach her aud her misrepresentations for having practised npon his foibles, and rendered him so unjust to his wife, so harsh to his son, so contemptible in the eyes of them both, and even of himself.*—But the fair accused- one does not listen to his remonstrances without evident signs of displeasure* She enters upon her defence wilh the more warmth, the less there is reason upon her side—-he rejoiEs~she replies—whh every moment their expostulations grow more ve¬ hement.—But now Cordelia interposes like an angel of peace, gently places ore w I ute kind liefere the lips of her incensed losband, and extends tlie otlier in sign of amity to
her embarrassed sister-in-law* It h received with an air of overstrained humility, that shows Miss Grimalkin would still be imperti¬ nent, if she dared ; and now she thinks it fall as well to take her departure, courtsey- ing all around her repeatedly and down to the very ground, and taking care to display all those signs of ironical civility, which con¬ vert the compliment into an insult.—Now die has reached the door, and turning her back most heroically upon the company with 4İ1 the majesty of a turkey-cock, she gratifies me with her absence.—Good night ; thou model of stale virginity ! Sleep soundly upon your well-earned laurels, and may your dreams be as sweet as your temper! With her departure from our horizon, all clouds seem to vanish. Her brother appears to be grown quite another man—his brow is so clear, his countenance is so much bright« ened, and his whole attitude expreses, ihat he feels so much more at his ease !—Now he embraces his charming wife, and that repent¬ ant kiss entreats her pardon of his unjust sus-
picions.—-Now he extends the hand of pa« ternaí forgiveness to Ms son, who presses it to lis bosom with enthusisasm-—and now wiwn Kdward leads lhe partner of his heart towards him, does he noi foki her to his bo¬ som with all the tenderness of a foi her i— Oh ! bow lovely appears this scene of domes* tic reconciliation, though acted in an old lum¬ ber-room, and only viewed by the unsteady glimmerings of a rush-light and a dark Ian« thorn !—- You may as well lay down your pen, my dear uncle ; there is nothing more to be seen ~or if there were, ï could not see it, till die tears are wiped away, which have dimmed my telescope.—And now, thou happy family, for to-night farewell !—Here ï lay down the office of your historian : and having now been for above two months Edward's most intimate confident and warmest friend, to¬ morrow I'll set myself at work to become his acquaintance.
BILL JONES;'
A TALS ØF WONDER.
ts Mutiler ??? pass ο α ρ a» i sh ed for a time, Bat tarcly justice «stii! o'cr-tnkes the erime. 4 And oil a speedier pain the guilty feels ; The kucahd cry of Heaven pursues him at the heels.**
Bïî î ????? «2 *
[For some curious particulars respecting this Tule, v. 'Ae amWe intitUd * r Bill Jones,'* «m Me Preface.]
«** rr Now welba-day !** the sailor said, " Some danger must impend ! Three ravens sit in yonder glade. And harm will happen, I'm sore afraid, Ere we reach our journey's end."·— *>»*·*' And what have the ravens with m to do? Does their sight then bode us evli ?"-— * tf Why, to find one raven is lucky, its true; But its certain misfortune to light on two, And meeting with three Is the devil !
rt Fye known full f hrpescorc years go by. And oi.ly twkv before Pve ???? three ravens nearmc fly; A ekI twice good cause to wh had Ï, That ï ne*er might see them more. ' f The first time, î was wrecked e at &ea¿ The '**cond time by nre 1 lost my wife and children three That self-same (light ι and woe ís me, That I did not then expire S ff Still do I hear their screams for må P Which to give was past man's power ! ï saw io earth their coffiiis laid. »..*,.* Weli ! my heart of marbîe must be made, ,Since it did not break that horn !**—- *·***** Poor soul, your tale of many voes Brings tears into my eyes ; Bat think you then, such ills ?????, Because you saw your fancied fue» Tii rec ravens near you rise r ie No doubt, since this fantastic fear Has rhuá pos404st your head, You firmly beHeve, tbat ghosts appear* Aud that dead meìì rise from the blood-stained . To haunt the murderer's bed ?"—
«*- ír lkİievc it, master > well I may! Now snark, what I'U relate ; -For gospel-true arc the went*» í?» 1 »ay, Vhen î swear, t hiit during three wc^ks and a<lay, A ghost %\?*> my own ship-mate ì ' f My cash rah low ; no beef, no flip, And tlic limes were bard to ih ? ; So I ('*üti re>nirH f ? iiinkc a trip For slaves on board of a tiuinea-ship« AVbich «Timtj may Ood forgive! c> ' Oh î it's a sad, sad thing ?? hear Tin· negToes scream and groan, And curse the billows, which bear them iu*a<* To the tyranr \vbitti*i»ãti*s land offrar, And far, far away fiom their own. <e Hut soon tbe .sailor found his .part .Scarce bettor lha» the slave- ; 1 or ou r -captai n bad a lyger*» heart, ?« d hí» plagued his crew wi.hsm.h barbarous ari, We all wishod us in om* g.aves. u \\ r c scarce were two days' bail from |>ort, Eve many a back was ûayed $ Ile Hogged ns oft ia wanton sporr ; lbs heart was of &tone, not ilesh— In ülior»% lie was fit for such a trade î VOL· ÏV. ?·
** Tliough ep,ch m turn was treated ill, *Mongst all th« crew alone Bill Jones opposed our tyrant's wiU ; For Bill was cross, imd oldj and still ÏIe*d givo ?? back ins ov. tu ** And many a brutal harsh command Old Bill had grumbled at, Till once he was ordered a sail to hand, Whe» Bill was so weak that he scarce could stand ; Butthe Captain scoffed at that. er For a e 1??? old brute* poor Bill he abused* And he forced him aloft, to ?? t Bîjt their duty to do his limbs refused, Aud at length from thf. ropes his bauds Bill loosed, And he fell òn the deck below» H Towards him «straight tím Captain flew, Crying—" Dog, dost serve we so P"—- And with devilish spite his sword he drew, » Aud he ran Bill Jones quite through and ihrough, And Ihe blow was a mortal blow. " At the point of death poor Bill now lies, And stains the deck with gore ; And fixing his own on his murderer's eyes, —.* Captain, alive or dead/ he cries, * I'll »ever kave vou more !'**»·
»—/' ' You wont ?' says the Captain'; * time will show, If you keep your word or not ι For now in the negro-ket*le below, Old dog, your scoundrel limbs 1*11 throw, And I'll see, what fat you've got l«*» u So he caused the cook make water hot, And the corpse, both flesh and bones, (To see what fat Bill Jones had got,) The Captain boiled in the n egro -pot 5 But there wasn't much fat in Jo næs* * ( If well his word the Captain kept, Biil Jones kept his a$ welt ; For just at midnight, alt who siept* With one consent from their hammocks leapt» Roused by a dreadful y el h 4 Never was heard a more terrible sound X Fa^t tu the deck we hied; And there by the moon-beam'.« light we found ? ? «g fhe murdered man, in spite of his wound, Sitting close by the steerman's side. *' And from that hour among the rest. Bill served, nor left us more ; With jblody trowsers, blondy vest, Ana bloody shirt, and bloody breast, Still he stood our oyes before: - . F 2
" ??\? bo'il clean the deck, or fill the pall, Or he'd work with right good will To ? -top a lenk or to drive a »ai! s iîut \vheiiüvt-r the bubínoss was futndinga ??> Tiiea specialty ready was Bill, ** And to share in all things with ihe crew Did the spectre never mi*? ; Aüd when to tlic cook for his portion due lateli sailor went, Bill Joncs %wml too, Aiid (endot'tid hib platter tor Ã /? " IIb face looked pule; his limb* seemed weak ; Hh footsteps fell so «stii í» That to hear their sound ???'? vainly spcfc ; Anu to tioaeof the crew dkl Bill tier .speak, And none of os spoke to Bill. " But who» three weeks had crept away Just as yo« aow have heard, The Captai« ???? on derk oue day ; Aud qjoth he, s Hy Má, I've something to say ; Bill Joftesisi*« good as hie wor*í* " * lie never leaves me day nor m(»ht í He haunts ??, ifâuîiti ?? süli I By the midnight lamp I sm the sp right, Aud when afcmorn the iky grows light-, The fíret sùubgam shows im BiH.
" * At meals, his pale lips speak the grace, iiis cold hand give.s the wine ; At every hour, in every place, To which overside 1 tommy faci. «j j Bill's eyes »rc fixed on mine ! " * Noiv, iad-s ray resolutions raadej One tueaus will set mo free, And Bill'» pursuit for ever evade..... » lie· comes! ho corneal then away ?— he said, And plunged iuto the sea.— si None moved a joint the wretch lo save î All stood with staring oyes ί Each clasped his hands ! a groan each gave ? When ? î on a sudden above the wave Once more did the Captain rise. a Fixt and fearful was his eye, And paie ? -i a eorpjte hib brow, And we saw him clap his hands on high, And we heard him scream with a terrible tryv *—.*■ By God İ Bill's with ire noiv .''— tr Then do -? n he sank through the foaming flood To Hell, that worst of havens !-—. Now, Heaven preserve yon, Masrer good¿ Front perilous rage, and from innocent blood* Ai\d from meeting with ¿àne ravens ! vî
AMORASSAN,
Oll
The Spirti qf ike Frozen Ocean,
AN OfilENTAL ROMANCE,
— u Heaven*» iSoverelgïi spires alî ercatwres but htm* self That hideous s!ght f a naked human heart."«— Υο?ίΝΦ.
AMORASSAN ; OB The Spirit qf the Frozen Ocean;
CHAP. L i¿ Still oVr these scenes my fancy wakefr, And fondly broods with miser-cares Tim-ï bat the impression stronger makes, As bt reams (hek channels deeper wear." Burns» From the very depth of his soul did Mu· zafîer, the Grand Vizir, detest the poor wan¬ dering Hebrew, Ben Hafi. He knew well how to manage the strings of the Calpii^ Leart, and resolved, that not one should re¬ main unsounded, till the destruction of thi> hated stranger was accomplished. But here
for ihe first tíme he found his arts baffled; a proof, that rectitude of mind, and innate goodness of heart, are such celestial and enduring gifts, that although they may bo sometimes overpowered by guile and falsehood, they can never be entirely des¬ troyed. The Caliph listened attentively, paused for some minutes, and then replied by the question— u What harm has Ben Hafi done ? whom has he injured ï*'— Muzaffer w^as of opinion, α that Ben Hafi was universally considered as a dangerous person ; that there was a mystery about the man, which at the best wore a very sus¬ picious appearance; and that although, in truth, he had as yet done no harm, per¬ haps, he was only waiting for an oppor¬ tunity to effect his evil designs with the more security." THE CALIPH. Perhaps so.. » « and perhaps not ! Allah, -who reads the hearts of Ben Hafi, of you, 1
and of myself, alone knows what he means to do : we, Muzaffer, will content our* selves with knowing what he has already done. Since his arrival in my dominions, no fault has been found in his conduct ; if ?#? could have been found, you. Vizir, (I am weli assured) would, not have failed to find it» The man is charitable, modest* wise : and does not my faithfol dwarf Meg¬ noun think well of him ? Ah ¡ he, of whom my good little deaf Megnoun thinks well, can never be a worthless man I for the spirit of truth resides in the heart of Megnoun, the arrows of discernment shoot from his bril¬ liant eyes, and therefore needs he not the sense of hearing. Allah has' taken from him in one respect, but has given to him most bounteously in another. He conceives the meanings 'of men from their looks, from movements of thcir lips, to us im¬ perceptible ; he decyphers their thougiits expressed by the sinking or falling of the eye-brow, or the momentary play of the muscles of the mouth ; he reads the heart
through the bosom, and his eye pierces as deep, as is permitted to mortal man. Oh ! had 1 but always valued the advice of my good Megnoun as it deserved, how dif¬ ferent would have been my situation now ! My brother, my Abdallah, would have still been at my court, and I should still have possest a real friend ! When all conspired to blind me. *.. when my senses w 7 ere be¬ wildered 1 y calumnies, whose falsehood I discovered too late, and whose author I still seek in vain », > then did no voice speak in lavor of Abdallah, none but Megnourts ! But ! «coined the warning of the honest creature ; my eyes were dazzled by the splendor of my newly-mounted throne ; my ears were lilieci with flattery 5 and 1 shut my heart against my brother* Oh I when 1 remem¬ ber, while our faiher was yet in life, what an affectionate friend, what a cheerful com¬ panion, what a disinterested adviser, what virtues and what talents once were mine hi Abdallah ; and how from the moment tliat 1 mounted the throne, 1 repulsed bini %
with ihat haughty coldness, which by yon and by my courtiers, was termed necessary prudence ; and bow [oh ! that w T as unjust, was tyrannical, was barbarous !] and how 1 judged him to be guilty without hearing his defence!...... oh ! Muzafler, when I recol¬ lect ali this, most heartily do I wish that İ had been the younger brother, and that Abdallah had borne the sceptre in my place. I should have gained by the ex¬ change, both in this world, and the next ; tor I swear to you, Muzafler, by the eter¬ nal splendor of Heaven, fhat had he been Caliph, Abdallah would not have condemn¬ ed his brother unheard. No, he would not ; for the actions of Abdallah were as just as his affections were tender; his head was as wise as his heart was good! MP \vv ER. Mighty Lord, remember that Abdallah w uh mi condemned by you ; circum¬ stances, whose illusion (as you κιγ) you have since discovered, compelled you to
believe him guilty ; but before you could adjudge his doom, he avoided your sen» tence by a disgraceful and suspicious flight. THE CAUPH. Muzaffer, you are generally skilful in pour¬ ing balsam into the wounds of my bosom ; but this is too deep an uker, and defies your art, You buccced no farther than in scarring it over, but .the slightest emotion is able to rend it open anew. MUZAFFER. The too great sensibility of your heart. the over-stretched gentleness of your nature, were ever your greatest torments. Me¬ thinks, by this time, your every dayV» expe¬ rience, how klîle men deserve to excite such feelings, and how little gratitude is return¬ ed by your subjects, might have taught you. THE CALIPH. And even allowing, that men arp unde-
serving, and that my iu^j-xts are ungrate¬ ful, what have I done to deserve their grati¬ tude ? !t$ true, my throne would be delight¬ ful as a bower in paradise, were I permitted to be as beneficent as it is my wish to be : but \? you who convert it into a bed of thorns, by still convincing me, that it is ne¬ cessary to act with coldness and rule with severity. Be it so j but for that coldness and severity, Viair, must you answer at the day of judgment, since He who retds the heart, knows well, how foreign and how hateful they are to mine. Perhaps, your lessons of government are correct, but Ab* dailaits were very different* MUZAFFKR. And 4is that very circumstance, mighty Lord, which makes me suspect, that the maintenance of your government was not sincerely wished by Abdallah : nay, which makes me even still doubt the reality of those discoveries, by which you suppose his inno¬ cence to be so fully proved. If the Prince
was conscious of no rauh , wh) did he betake himself io Üklit ì THE CAUVK. Ik Win compelled to fly ι to fly from im brother : he fled to preserve his Hre, * * « per- hips to preserve his brother from the com» mission of a crime ! Oh ! v. here is lie now ? hi what miserable hut does he now hunger.. whüe 1 revel here in superfluity, and lavish away the treasures of Arabia? In vain have my messengers traversini the globe : no ves» tige of my brother can be found ¡—Perhaps, he already appears as my accuser before the Eternal*«» throne, and the spirit of my fatiier stands at his ride ! líeis revenged! Better, for better woukl it be for me to sulfer what he lias suffered, than what I ?? doomed ίο aiivTer now«. The unjust monarch sits oa his golden throne, and his beai t îs bleeding; but the blooming gardens of the Prophet are open to the unjustly persecuted, and the fairest bower in paradise becomes his e\er- lasting abode!"—
The Grand Vizir had heard these lamenta« lions so often, and had always combated these reflections witlì so little success, that lie at length made it a rule, whenever liis so* vercign touched upon this subject, to let him talk as long as he pleased, and content him¬ self with listening in siknee· He only now and then endeavoured to mark the interests which he did net feel, by a sympathetic sigh, a melancholy movement of .he head, or a look of pious resignation cast towards Hea¬ ven* . ·. · or rather towards the ceiling. After a pause, the Caliph resumed his dis- couree-*-" But the lot is cast, and there is no recalling it. I have thrown away my natural friend—now I must be content to seek a friend in any one, towards whom niy vacant heart feels an inclination. Its true, you assure me, (tød indeed my own experience has sufficiently convinced me of die veracity of your assurance) that the Caliph can only be loved for the sake of the influence and wealth, which it is in the pow er of his friendship to bestow* I <&u*
not change tho nature of mankind ; im¬ perfect as they are made, such must 1 be i'ontent to take them. All that 1 now tie« &ire is this : that those on whom 1 bestow wealth and inlluence, should employ them to the advantage of my people, aiid that they should still remember, that the ministers to whom their indulgent sovereign confides his power, if they misuse it, are doubly cul¬ pable in the eyes of God and man."«·— Here for this time the conversation end¬ ed : but it was not long before the Vizir brought Ben Hafi on the carpet again. He had frequently found, that when he could make the Caliph heartily weary of a subject by frequently dwelling upon and repeating It, his master was glad to free himself from the persecution, by giving up the point However, he always took special care to ma- page the business in such a manner, that the Commander of the faithful believed, either that he gave his consent from his own free will and better judgment, or that he made ?? heroic sacrifice of the feelings of
1\? heart lo his love of justice and the severe dudes of his exalted station» Expecting similar success in the present in¬ stance, he again prest the Caliph on the sub« ject of Ben Hafi : but the event did not an¬ swer his expectation. Amurath w f as proof against all his attacks, and at length asked htm~" whether he was in truth afraid of the influence of this poor simple Hebrew ?"«— The Vizir*s answer was a contemptuous smile.*-* —** Then why are you so much his ene¬ my ? w — rejoined the Caliph : u trust me, Muzafifcr, it does not please me, when you express sucli aversion against a man, whose conversation has beguiled your sovereign of so many heavy hours. Ben Hafi's Tales, and descriptions of various countries and the manners wliich prevail in them, furnish me with much amusement wdiile he is with me, and with much matter for reflection when I am alone* Often in discourse with him have I forgotten myself; and he who makes a monarch forget the sorrows of a throne.
trust ??, Mirzafler, can bc no common man«*'™ They were here interrupted by the little deaf Megnoun, whom the Caliph had ordered to summon the Hebrew to the seraglio: the portal curtains were drawn back, and Ben 1 ïafi entered. ?? sim, when at mid-day he shines upon the ocean. Is not brighter than the smUe with which Muaaffer greeted Ben Hafi : the song of the nightingale, when he wooes the rose ki sot sweeter than the tone, in which he bade htm welcome. Oh ! at that moment how Mussafler must have hated him !—J3en t ïafi waa seated on cushions arranged oppo« site to the Caliph's sopha ; the dwarf took ?? accustomed slation aî his master's feet: and now the Grand Vizir seemed by a res¬ pectful bow to request permission to break silence. The permission was granted, and ho thus addressed the object of his aversion and fiis fear. „« Worthy and wise Ben Hafi, there is a point (and that a point of no light import*
ance) on which our Lord the Caliph has long differed from the humblest of his slaves, and which í have obtained his authority to sub¬ mit to your experience in the nature of man* kind* 1 maintain, that a sovereign, who has no other materials to work upon, and no other instrument to work with, than men, must govern his actions entirely according to the dictates of cool and unbiassed prudence^ and without suffering himself to be, in the least influenced by that most danger« ous of all delusions, which is no less er¬ roneous than dazzling—the enthusiasm of the heart, 1 maintain, that that govern« ment only can be of use to the whaie^ wliich is grounded upon a knowledge of the depravity, the baseness, the selfishness, the incapacity of the individuals, of whom that whole is composed ; and thai all those plans must come to nothing, which are built upon die idea of ruling men through the medium of their good qualities ; which aim at substi¬ tuting the rewards of virtue for the dread of punishment ; and wliose foundation re-as
upon the belief, that to keep a kingdom in order and tranquillity, and render a people happy and contented, it is only necessary for a sovereign's views to be those of equity, be¬ nevolence, and foresight. ï maintain also that the bbck drop, which the angel Gabriel removed from the heart of Mahomet, exists in the hearts of all other children of Allah ; that on account of this innate depravity, the sovereign must possess a sceptre of iron, as well as a sceptre of gold^ that he will oftener find it necessary to use the first than the se¬ cond : and that true wisdom will make him consider man merely as an animal, who must be compelled to do that which is useful, and abstain from that which is pernicious ; the one, by bis passion for pleasure, the other, by his fear oi pain. a Such are my sentiments ; I have the mis¬ fortune to find them disapproved of by my Lord the Caliph, and but too often have the still greater misfortune to see him act from sentiments in direct opposition tolhem,"—
THE CALIPH. And if your opinion were just, Muzaffer, why in the name of AH, did nature give the king a heart as well as the beggar ? In or¬ der to rule as you would have him, and yet not be the most miserable of earthly beings, a monarch should be born without the feel¬ ings of a man. MUZAFFER» The feeHngs of a man and the duties of a monarch are always different and always in¬ compatible, THE CALIPH. If that be the case, I pity both; but most ihe monarch!-—To dare confide inno one*.. * to be deaf to the pleadings of benevolence.. .. to repress all warm affections, all generous sensibilities, and to shut our bosoms against the whole world, at the very moment when the heart overflows towards the whole world with love, with friendship, with philanthropy .... always to threaten, * * * always to punish
t . .. ahvays to be an object of alarm and avei - sion*.., to be cursed for all the ill that hap» pen.... . ♦ to resign to ministers alt ihe merit oii he good which is done... » to delight in conferring happiness, and yet to be obliged to resign the power of conferring happmess into the hands of others*. *. oh ! if this be indeed tlie lot of a sovereign, his lot is a dreadful one !— Lord of creation ! unless you weigh im conduct by lhe measure of my good inten¬ tions, how shall thy servant stand uprigln before thee ! bi:n hah. Doubt it not. Commander of tlie true be¬ lievers! at the last great day, our actions will bo judged, not accordino; to their conse¬ quences, but according to the views will·. which they were committed. '?? ????1. 1 trust so» Ben I í afi ; and therefore ï w i.» not repine, that my seat isa throne, ralhei
tiran a couch of straw. On the throne, as well ?? in the peasant's hut- it is still possible to be virtuous ; and surely the rewards of virtue will hereafter be proportioned accord¬ ing to the difliculty, which its possessor found in retaining it. Were not this the case, alas I how much to be pitied wouid be the Groat-ones of the earth!— î *-t we have wandered from Muzafler's dispu 3 with me. Tell me, Ben Hafi, (and speak without reserve,) is it better, thai a man.... [you hear that 1 say a man, and not 'a monarch-, for in spite of alt my Vizir's arguments, I cannot help flattering myself, that they are the same]—is it, I say, better that a man should act accordino: to the warmth and enthusiasm of his heart, or thai he should merely obey the dictates of that cold discretion, which, before a step is taken, weighs its merits in the nicest balance, and examines it with the severest scrutiny ? Do not answer, that the right thing ? to make a proper use of both ; I know that ah ïeady,— But Ì wish you to .decido between VOL. IV· Ü
two people, who seldom can make prudence and enthusiasm walk hand in hand.—Mu¬ zafler sees me act imprudently without thinking of any thing but how to confer pleasure, and then he shakes his head : on the other hand 1 see him act discreetly with- cut caring whether he inflicts pain, and then I feel, that my heart is bleeding. Both of us are in the wrong ¡ but which of us is most so?"— Ben Hafi paused for a few moments—at length he raised his head, and the genius of inspiration sparkled in his expressive eyes. — a Commander of the faithful V* said lie, " the life of an illustrious person, who still exists, will be the best answer to your important question.·—Am I permitted to re¬ late his adventures ?"—· —" By all means, Ben IIafi, e? answered the Caliph, " and you shall have not merely my permission, but my thanks : your narratives please me well, especially when they are wonderful; and if any spirits or genii should appear in the course of your story, they will
be extremely welcome, and I shall like your discourse the better—that is, provided ah ways, that your story be no fiction.~And now then, begin your narrative, my good Ben Hafi."—· The Hebrew bowed his head, and com¬ menced his tale as follows*
? 2
????. ?. »·- ζζ Aîi! if ilmsc dreams fallacìonn provo, Which paint the world so fair ; ïf Heaven has placed for virtuous love No West a«yhim th«rc; ïï men fair fame, íaír faith derìde, Bent on those crooked paths, which guide To Interest's sordid bhrinc, Be yours, ye gloom)- sons of woe, The melancholy truth to know, The dream of bliss be mine."— MERCEK. The words of power were spoken, and a thick grey cloud came rolling from the north. In its passage over the mountain Caucasus, its shadow fell on the pavillion of mortal excellence, and immediately the bright pic¬ ture was obscured, on which the Genius €eläj£ddk was gazing.
The roof of this brilliant pavillion is form¬ ed of moonshine ; the golden columns on which it rests are beams of the sun, and in number a thousand and thirty: its walls arc composed of woven æther, meteor- fires, and the condensed evaporations of aromatic shrubs and flowers. A profusion of falling stars is showered over the whole pavil¬ lion, and it floats upon the clouds of au¬ tumnal evenings, which form for it a floor of the most brilliant crimson» This is the abode of „ the spotless and generous spirits of those, who while on earth dignified and enlightened human nature by their virtues, and who have purchased for themselves after death a seat in the society oi the pure Genii, by their glorious actions and by self-devotion to the general good. Gela-Eddin, a superior Genius, equally endowed with the love and the light of truth, is tlie happy ruler of these illustrious spirits. On the ethereal walls of this pavillion arc continually represented every pöble and vir-
ruoas action, from the first instant: of its suggesting itself to the moment of its com¬ pletion. Nothing can be more brilliant, no¬ thing more soft than the colours of wliich these pictures are composed; unlike those of carili, instead of fading they become mere bright and fresh with each succeeding day, except when the celestial motive which animates their authors is obscured and tar¬ nished by weakness, apprehension, self-in¬ terest, indolence, uncertainty respecting the consequences, or reflection on the little merits of those for whose benefit the noble action is intended, Bui when a mortal even to the moment of dissolution remains faithful tolhe heaven¬ ly inspiration, which incites him to glorious deeds : when the lamp of his life in expiring still throws forth a llame, which warms and enlightens posterity with the remembrance of his virtues, then does the whole pavillion btee with celestial radiance ί The reflection of this saci ed shining light pierces through the thick vapours, wiiich compose our almos*
phere, and illumines the horizon with a soft trembling glo\^. The pilgrim stops, and gazes in rapture on the lovely vision ; the iimorant man of wisdom affixes lo it some unmeaning name, and leaves the maller just where he found il ; and the natural philoso¬ pher accounts for the phoenomenon falsely, and astonishes his auditor at the profundity of his science. The setting sun poured its lustre through the transparent pavillion, gilded its roof and pavement, and illuminated the pictures on the walls of æther. The spirits of the pure enjoyed in silent rapture the sight of the glorious actions of the good on earth : when suddenly the airy fabric trembled to its very base, a chilling wind breathed through the pavillion, and the words of power ascended from the rolling globe beneath. The spirits of the pure veiled their heads in sorrow ; for at that moment tlie picture-, which displayed the conduct of one of the noblest of their earthly brethren, grew dira upon the brilliant wall.
The Genius Gela-Eddin approached ihe pavillionjs entrance, extended his wand, and arresteci the further progress of the gny and frozen cloud, —«Who art thou?" inquired Gela-Eddin ; « by whom art thou summoned, and on what business ?"-—* A voice issued from the midst of the cloud™" Powerful C ¿la-Eddm ! 1 am α spirit of the frozen ocean ; one of those, who in¬ habit the islands of dullness and gloom ; who sometimes, careless of al! sublunary things, float in the atmosphere, which every where surrounds and s apports the earth, and at other times descend into the lower restless whirling air which mortals breathe, at oncv to govern and obey them ; who are by turns their slaves and rulers, their enemies and friends; who now injure them, now benefit ; but who equally in benefits or injuries feel for ihem neither love nor hate."— Gela-Eddhij— Awa whither is thy course addrest? Why hast thou left thy gloomy islands ?
The Vûlcc— Amorassan summons me, and I dare not resist lus voke : he calls me m the name of Solomon the powerful and the wise ! GV/tf-£cA#//.—-Amorassan ? the Grand Vizir of Guzurat ? tha friend and favorite of its'. "uitan ? who lias hill·' 1 > trod that ¿rook. d slippery path with steps so bold and steady ? how can the glowing heart of Amorassan ever have desired thy aid ? The Voice.— His heart is wounded by the perverseness and treachery of mankind ; iio is disappointed by the worthlessncss of those, with whom he is destined to tixist, and ior who^e welfare he has till now still lived and laboured: he, who has hitherto undertaken every right action, merely because he relt t lui*· it: tev/j right, will now weigh his pro¬ ceedings, not by their motive but only by their consequences: keen foresight, exact judgment, and justice impartial ami severe, must henceforth freeze tho ardour of his. iuelincix and overpower tlie voice of hU heart, * But, hai ? ! the charm is repeated l' (Jt «A
tlie powerful words ascend even to th« clouds [—-Mighty Geia~Eddm f delay my flight no longer !— The Genius sighed, as he dropt his wand, and a tear glittered in his eye, when he saw the grey cloud hover over the palace of Amorassan. THE CALIPH. My good Ben Hafi, before we quit this wonderful pavillion, 1 cannot help saying, that 1 never remember to have observed the brilliant show in the skies, which according to your account displays itself upon the re¬ ception of a mortal into the society of those ????? pure spirits. During the whole time that 1 have been upon the throne, not once have I witnessed such a sight. Does this proceed from ?? own want of obser valion? Ferhaps the chief persons of my kingdom Iiave done nothing worthy of being repre¬ sented on those ethereal walls, Alas ! men must siili be men—it is not in the power of a mere man to mend them!
MUZAFFER. Permît me to inquire, w L ether the evil deeds of ?r' , as well as their good, were not also r« ^ tiled ?? the wails of this pavillion ? THE CALIPH. Allah protect usi No, to be sure not, Muzafler í Why, if all the wicked and foolish things which are done on earth, were to be represented, the very vault of heaven itself wouid not be able to contain them !«— But now then, Hafi, let us hear more about tbis Amorassan ; 1 am curious to know, what made the Genius sigh so piteously on his account; for I protest, at present his resolution appears to me to be a very wist one.
β #
CHAP. Ht — vfc Â thousand glorious systems be designed ; A thousand great ideas filled his mind ; Itu è with the clouds they fled, una iaît ?? trace behind«*' Thomson» BEN HAH. Amorassan, the Grand»Vizir of Guzurat, was such a man. . .... as grand-vizirs seldom are. He was his master's favorite, and yet was he more the friend of the people than the servant of the monarch : he governed every thing, and yec was he less anxious for the glory of the kingdom, than for the hap¬ piness of those whom it contained : he was Grand-Vizir, and yet he valued his place more, because it enabled him to produce the welfare of the Sultan's subjects, than because
it furnished him with opportunities to pre¬ serve the Sultan's favour \ thougii it was to that favour alone that he was indebted for his place, and that he could expec* to pre¬ serve it. In short, he was the minister of Guzurat, not of its Sultan. THE CALIPH. Stop one moment, Ben Hafi : do you re« collect, that I requested you to introduce no fiction in your narrative ? It requires a large portion of confidence in your veracity to believe the existence of such a man as tids Amorassan ; and even if there should be such a man as this, how could he evei come to be a Grand-Vizir? He seems to me totally unfit for the situation; and though I heartily wish, that my Grand-Vizir shoud be as anxi¬ ous for the good of my people as for my own, yet were 1 in the place of this Sultan of Guzurat, I am not certain, that I should be quite pleased to hear my G rand-Vizir call himself more the people's minister, than illine* at least, if 1 were quite pleased, I must
be in an uncommonly good humour at the time, that is certain. MUZAFFER. Aye! aye! Such a Grand-Vizir is only good in a tale. TUE CA.UPH. And why should he not be good out of a tale? Trust me, Muzaffer, were you to think like this Amorassan, ï should not be at all displeased $ provided always, that you kept in memory, that you are totally dependent on my sole will and pleasure, and that the same breath which has elevated you to the highest alike, can degrade you again to the very lowest ! BEN HAFI. Even that thought inspired Amorassan with no fear. TUB CALIPH. Ho r What then did ? fear ì
BEN HAFï* To act unjustly. ?И? CALIPH. When Abdallah was here, there was one in my court who thought so too! Ah ! that h past ¡—Proceed, Ben Hafi, BEN hafi. Amorassan, Commander of the Faithful, was one of those men, who, inflamed with enthusiastic admiration of the good and fair, are capable of undertaking and executing plans, whose accomplishment seems to re« quire the life of an anti-deluvian» Such a man is seldom happy ; nay, to prevent hk being totally miserable, it requires him to possess firmness enough to forgive every fault in others, while he excuses none in himself: it requires, that his experience in tlie nature of those, with whom, and fir whom he labours, should produce no more effect upon his heart and temper, than va¬ pours produce upon the sun ; which can dø
no more ihan obtrude themselves between the planetary sovereign and the human eye in tlie form of clouds,and wiiich soon, overcome by his warmth, fall dowrn again in fruitful ¡showers to freshen and fertilize the earth. The ???, who can pcrseverc-wUh unabated ardour in labouring for the good of human kind, in spite of every day's conviction of im man depravity, that man alone is perfect. Such a man woidd I gladly see, but the world has never seen .Aie yet. Amorassan*s heart was the most tender, lus sympathy the most warm, his courage the most undaunted, his activity the most indefatigable: he wished ardently what was right, and he iio sooner perceived that good might be done, than he hastened to do it. But he,v who hurries on with too much eagerness and rapidity, is frequently apt to overshoot the goal, and by not allowing himself time to take every necessary precau¬ tion, he sometime* r mis the ri»que of fading m liis .object : he cannot do everything him¬ self; he must employ agents, whom hcimdj
it diflicuit to inspire with the same enthusi¬ astic ardour for the execution of his benevo¬ lent projects, which animated their projector when he formed them : nay, sometimes, he will find himself counteracted by tliosc very agents, because they find his plan conducive to the general good, but tending to their individual disadvantage. Amorassan believe edr that could lie only prove, that his schemes aimed at the universal benefit, self-interest would induce mankind to forward their ???* cation : he was not aware, that the universal good is än object too remote and too uncer¬ tain to exalte very warm sensibilities, and that few men act with ardour and spirit in affairs, with which their personal and par¬ ticular advantage is not in some degree connected. Amorassan thought, that when he liad found men able enough to execute his schemes, every thing was done; thcir own common sense would be suihcient to make them willing. So erroneous did he find this opinion, that much, which he had designed in the true spirit and with all the fire of the¡
\j ί"ί
most extensive philanthropy, was so marred ia the execution, tliat he started back appalled at the sight of his disfigured work, and íound that he had earned curses, where he had sowed blessings with such labour and »udi care« Amorassan, however, was not of so weak a minci, as to be easily driven from his glo¬ rious career by difficulties or disappointments. The consciousness of bis good intentions consoled him ; and the Sultan did him jus¬ tice, even when both the court and the country murmured« This Sultan [his name was Ibrahim] was ia tr jth a very good kind of man : his great¬ est fault was, that he was totally dependent on those, who possest his confidence. His heart was warm and susceptible ; his imagina¬ tion was easily inflamed* and he was possest by a most inordinate desire to obtain renown. The enlarged and glorious plans of his Grand- Vizir dazzled and enchanted him ; and there were moments, when in the warmth of Ins enthusiasm for virtue he would have obeyed
Amorassan, even had he been advised by Mm to excha ige his throne for the cell of a dervise. The love of virtue, the abhorrence of vice, the sacrifice of self; philanthropy to wish, resolution to decide, and vigour to execute ; all these were communicated to him by Amorassan ; but that which alone could give duration to these qualities, he did not possess from nature, and Amorassan could not im¬ part it :—the Sultsn had no firmness of character. Yet this defect was not only a secret to the Sultan himself, but even to his minister. The former adopted all the sentiments, and entered into all the ideas of the latter with such ardour, that both were equally delighted with the apparent sympathy : yet in truth, not one of these ideas and sentiments origi« nated with the Sultan. He only echoed back with enthusiasm in the evening, what he heard from Amorassan with such pleasure in the morning; and while the one em¬ ployed, and the otlier witnessed the same language, the same looks, and the name ges*
lures, neîiher suspected, that the Sultana bhare İh the business was a mere eflbrt of recollection, in which the head and the heart liad but very little concern. Among the courtiers, by whom the throne of Guzurat was surrounded, Kbu-Beker, the son of the laic Chief-Cadi, was numbered« The Julian neither loved nor esteemed him, but his society was agreeable to him ; and I have heard persons,conversant in the arts of courts afirm, that to inspire this sentiment is the Mirest means of reaching preferment, The friend or the favourite must inspire a degree of enthusiasm, wliich becomes insipid unless it increases daily, and which, when it has reached a certain height, can increase no further : attachment then gradually cook into esteem \ enthusbbm subsides ; defects become visible, and the sovereign feek dis¬ appointed, Bui the man, who is merely suffered as an agreeable companion, and who pretends to nothing more than to amuse, gradually and imperceptibly continues to rise ί favour ; till his vocici y becomes ? habit*
and the prince finds it so necessary, that it ís impossible for him to do without it. Of all this Ebu-Beker was well convinced. He therefore never transgressed the bounds prescribed «johim; professed on all occasions the most profound admiration of the Sultan; and by throwing himself into lhe shade, contrived to make his master's merits shine with the greater lustre. This conduct was highly agreeable to the person, whom it was designed to please. In Amorassan's com¬ pany, Ibrahim coukl not help being conscious that he was inferior to his minister : in Ebu- Beker's, he was exalted ia his own opinion, and he feit grateful to the author of this agreeable sensation. It's true, he had still no great opmion of Ebu-Bckets talents; bin he gave him credit for what was a much higher merit in his opinion™i. e* the most unbounded admiration of the Sultan's own exalted person. Ibrahim's attachment to his minister, however, had as yet suifered no diminution : he still considered liim as the firmest support
of h'is throne, as lhe brightest ornament of liis court, as the most active instrument for promoting the welfare of his people, and consequently of their sovereign. Nothing, therefore, was less agreeable to Ibrahim than to find fault with his friend, or put a nega¬ tive upon the benevolent plans, which his brilliant genius continually suggested« Yet he did this upon some occasions, which Amorassan considered as of too great impor¬ tance to abandon witiiout extreme pain ; and as he was too keen sighted not to dis¬ cover, that this opposition proceeded less from the Sultan himself than from the prí¬ vate insinuations of Ebu-Beker, he grieved to sec his master subject to such unworthy influence, and his brow became clouded with vexation and discontent. Discontent and vexation are but sorry recommendations to the favour of the great, The Sultan was surprized to fmd, that Amo¬ rassan was become a less pleasing companion, and Ebu-Beker's society gained by the com¬ parison» The friendship between the sove-
reign and his minister had indeed now reached the highest point ; it had not de« creased, but it remained stationary ; and this is a situation almost as dangerous in a monarch's favour as in a mistress's love, since both depend in a great degree upon that enthusiasm, which delights in the boundless, the excessive, and the undefined. THE CALIPH. Shall I tell you the truth, Bei? Hafi ? AU this may be very just, and very wise ; but I find it extremely tedious, and you would oblige me by being a little less sensible iu future and rather more entertaining. ï con¬ fess, í regret the pavillion and the Genius Gela-Eddin, and should be glad to hear something more about the Voice which came out of the cloud, BEN И?И. Grant me your patience for a few mo¬ ments, and your wish shall be obeyed, Amorassan's ill-humour was further in-
creased, by discovering the worthîessness oí severa! of those persons, to whom he had confided the execution of his plans, and wliose talents and knowledge made their oflence the more unpardonable. He found Idm self betrayed, deceived, disappointed, and disgusted-: misanthropy began to steal in¬ sensibly imo his bosom ; and it was in thk dangerous temper of mind, that an Egyptian was brought before him, many mysterious circumstances respecting whom had caused him í ? be suspected of sorcery. The Egyptian easily read in the minister's eye an inclination to become better acquaint¬ ed wilh his scientific secrets. They had many private conversations together; mid no sooner did the necromancer hint at certain cabalistica! words, whose power could give the speaker absolute authority over spirits of a higher sphere, than this thought darted like a flash of lightning through his hearer*s biain:-—" To become the lord of 4icli a being is the only certain means ot
enabling me to execute my great and glori¬ ous plans !'*— — C€ Y es j»» sa id he to himself; u could 1 but once see clearly into the hearts of men, my designs would then be certain of success^ î should then be armed against deception, might select none but fit instruments, ami could reckon upon gathering securely the fruit of my benevobnt labours. Yet hold ! to be proof against the illusions of others, is not enough ; I must also be guarded agaimt those of my own heart. The being, whom í need t must nót only warn me against tbe hypocrisy and artifices of my fellows, but against the deceitful enthusiasm of love, of friendship, and even of mistaken virtues. İ must be enabled to read the human soul, to distinguish the semblance from the reality, to see before-hand the consequences of my own actions and those of others, and to remove from my senses ail those deceitful cloud*, with which sympathy, imagination, and the passions obscure the sight of men, and mis¬ guide their foot*steps. M — VOL* 1V 4 H
Inflamed with the most ardent love for all tliat was good and noble, the heart of Amorassan bounded with rapture, when he beard the assertion, that it lay in his own choke to realize this glorious vision. He became the Egyptian's scholar ; the further that he advanced in the acquisition of the secret sciences, the more was he delighted with the beauty, the grandeur^ and the utility of his views. His mysterious educa¬ tion was now completed ; he was master of the important words, which enabled him to summon to his aid an immortal spirit. The Egyptian's labour was rewarded with life and liberty j he immediately departed from Ahmedabad, and Amorassan now lost no time ia commencing his magical operations^ THE CALIPH. ï am heartily glad to hear it ! Now then we shall meet again with the Voice out of the thick grey cloud. But I declare to you, Ben Hafi, that 1 can as yet see no reason, whv the Genius Gela-Eddin should have
nighed* It seems to me, that Amorassan # s plan was a very discreet one ; and ï should like to have just such a Spirit myself ??? tinmliy at my elbow tø give me a hint s when my courtiers speak truth, and when they are deceiving me. Ten years ago had ï possest such a warn¬ ing spirit, my brother would still have been here!
U 2
???. ÍV. - u Charm bis eye, and grízre bîslieart; Come Hke shadows ; ao depart ! ,? — -
Amorassan's whole frame trembled with impatience, while he pronounced the power¬ ful charm. He stood in the midst of the most retired apartment of his palace: the doors and windows were all carefully closed; light was excluded, except what proceeded from a golden chafing-dish which stood before him, and in which at intervals be burned perfumes and various other ingre« dients of magic efficacy. The spell w;i, compiete ; thrice had he pronounced it in the awful name of Solomon, the powerfui and the wise ; and now a thick grey doud
descending into the room, hovered a while over the chafing-dish, and then spread itself through the whole apartment. Gradually it dispersed ; and now Amor?s* san beheld a female figure, the faultless per¬ fection of whose form and features suffi* cîentïy assured ??, that she was no terrestrial being. Her robes were of the purest white; and her veil, which was thrown backwards and fell to her very feet, was fastened upon her brow by a garland of white roses; but the mildew had sullied every leaf, and in every flower there lurked a canker. Her forehead was smooth and fair as polished ivory. Her eyes, darker than jet or ebony, were large and bright 5 but their lustre resembled the shilling of chrystals rather than the sparkling of diamonds : no fire emanated from their orbs to Hght up her countenance, and she always bent them straight before her with a fixed and steady gaze. Her eye-brows were formed in the softest and most regular curve. Her full bosom betrayed not the gemle rise and fall h f?
rf respiration, much less did it seem to havo been ever agitated by the tempest of the furious passions:· the breath of life was not perceived to impart its warmth to her hps, as red and as cold as coral ; much less had they ever burned with the fiery blast of desire! never had either joy or sorrow drawn a wrinkle round that lovely mouth ; and her smooth and blooming cheeks were equally unconscious of the tears of pain and the smiles of pleasure. Every feature was modelled in the most exquisite and most harmonious proportions; never did the poet's dream present an image of such fault« less beauty, as that wliich now stood before Amorassan : ideal perfection was here em¬ bodied r but yet the whole appeared so cold, so indifferent, so insensible, that though the fir&t glance was that of admiration, the se* coud was accompanied by a sensation of lineasi ness and anxiety indescribably dis¬ agreeable and painful. In vain did Amoras¬ san gaze upon those cœlestiai features ; in her whole face could he not discover ihe
slightest trace of character, not even the most distant shadow oï expression, which could point out the way to the heart, or give a clue to the sentiments of its possessor. With her hands folded upon her bosom* the Spirit stood fixed before Amorassan silent and motionless. Equally overpowered by her exalted nature, by her surprizing loveliness, by the dignity of her demeanour, and by the killing coldness of her look, he sought in vain m her countenance for some¬ thing of that expression, which encourages us to address a person still unknown. At lergth he said, in a subdued voice, while he felt his respiration so opprest, that he could only pronounce his words with difii* culty— u Answer í What art thou ?"— The Spirit.' —She, whom you summoned, and whom you need; a Spirit from the islands of dullness and gloom. Does not my countenance tell you, that I am tho right ? Amorassan.—I know not yet ι I can only feel at present, that the sight of you congeal i H 4
the blood in my veins* You are bcauüíut as tlie fight of day; yet deformity would bt febs painful to me, for that at least must possess some expression. The Spirit.—Thai want of expression proves, that 1 am the very Spint, whom you need* But ν you like me not, being such as ï am and must remain, dismiss me. To me it matters not where ï am, whether here or else-where; whether 1 bask in the warm sun-beams, or bathe in the coki damp vapours of the islands Ά dullness and gloom ; for to me the sun»bcams are not warm, nor the damp vapours cold, 1 w ill serve you, if you command it ; í will leave you, if you permit mc, and cither way shall be equally well pleased. Amorassan.— ??\1 me, thou frosty being, know'st thou the word virtue? Tbe Spirit.—I have sometimes heard it mentioned, bul it is no concern of mine. Aworassaii.—išo ? And vice then.... ? The Spirit.— -Ohi that ? 'have heard mei s tioned much ottener : but that is no concern
of mine cither. I used to hear much about such things, when I lived in the court of Solomon. Amorassan,— Oí Solomon the wise ? The Spirit.— -Aye ; the wise.... as he was cailed. I was his slave, and in his latter years his constant companion. It was in my society, that he learned, that every thing on earth is vanity*· Amorassan.- —What? even what he had done for his own pleasure and advantage ? The S//r/V.—Even that; and as soon as this last point was ascertained, he dismist me. Since that time, I have inhabited the islands of chîlîness and gloom, which «exist;.. iu the frozen ocean. Amorassan.— From so melancholy ?? abode, you must needs be pleased at ???? deliverance. The Spirit.— -Melancholy ? What is melan¬ choly? Pleased? Nothing pleases, or dis* pleasc4 me. Amorassan*— Fedest thou neither Ukim\ "or disliking ? neither love, nor aversion ? XI 5
Tie Sýitii*—0£ zìi this I know nothing j and therefore am I the very Spirit, whom ??? need. Amorassan·-—Then it is a matter of in¬ difference to you, how ï employ you ; and you will execute evil as cheerfully as good^ good with as little remorse as ν τ *ύ ? The SpiriU"~Good ì Evil ? All this is your af&ir, not mine, Jnwrassan.—A3ü{eelmg Spirit! You grieve my very heart. The Spirits May be so ; but the grief of your heart is no concern of mine, Why at that declaration is your countenance so suddenly overcast? What strang" things are mortals! Now that you have found in me the Spirit you desired, you recoil with horror at the fulfilment of your own wish. Ah ! ï see, that the sons of earth are not changed since Solomon's time. Amorassan.-~jAiid what then is man in your opinion ? The Spirit.-*~lle is not that, which he fain would be ; and were he everything, which
he wishes to be to-day, he would wish to¬ morrow to be that again, which he was yesterday.> Now then inform me in your turn, why am İ summoned hither ? Amorassan*—I wish to make the people of Guzurat content and happy. The Spirit.?—And what then is thy sta¬ tion ? Amorassan.— í am Gu^urats Grand·Vizir, and its Sultan's favourite. The Spirit.—Oh Γ wise and powerful So¬ lomon ! then at least one of thy sayings is false* Amorassan*— And which is thai: ? ?? Spirit.—' -There is nothing new under the sun.™And how would'st thou have me help thee? Amorassan.— -Guard me against others..., still more against myself. Unmask the wil¬ ful hypocrisy of those who surround me, and dispel the involuntary illusions of my own enthusiastic heart. The Spirit.— Thou shalt be obeyed, No sooner does rny chilling breath fall upon 11 0
her, than Faîshood perishes : there is no veil so thick, that my piercing eye cannot pe* netrate it. Neither the sweet voice of praise, be it flattering, or sincere ; nor the moutlts enchanting smile, be it artificial, or natural ; nor tha look expressive of good-will, be it worn from real feeling, or assumed to serve a momentary purpose; nor the overflowings of the warm heart, whether they arise from a wish to deceive, or from the enthusiasm of the moment; none of these can 1 mislead me. Nor. ani 1 røøre bewildered by the brilliant dreams of imagination, or tempted from my steady course by the melodious pleading of sentiment. Love and friendship wave their torches before me in vain : I gaze steadily on that which is wise and true, and their glare can neither dazzle my sight, nor their vapours obscure my object, Amorassan, speak but the word, and no¬ thing shall henceforth deceive you* Ytm shall see men and things, as they really arei you shall see your own heart, as it reallv is, andas it will.be, 1
Amorassan.*— i speak that word, and from thh moment date the commencement of my bosom's peace* Now then I can execute my glorious plans witiiout fear of treachery« or of ray own weakness* The happiness of Guzurat and of its monarch is secure, and my friend may defy the malice of his enemies 1 The Spirit,— All this concerns not me. Amorassan, —Insensible being, what then does concern you ? At least you must love yourself; and caring so little for the happi¬ ness of others, probably you care the more anxiously for your own.. ?? Spiri L— Happiness? My own? Myself? I hese are all words quite unknown to me. Happiness ?—I have heard it spoken of. But as for me...... I neither weep, nor smile ¿ and except'smiling and weeping, I see no¬ thing of consequence which men do on earth : whatever lies between these two, only serves to conduct either to the one, or ? the otlier» dmcratsath—l\\\k not thou of what men
do, A being, so destitute of all feeling, is not fit to mm with human creatures ! Tbe Spirit.— -That is true, and therefore %m I exactly fitted for the associate of a man like yourself 5 unless you have already forgot¬ ten the objectj for which you called me hither. Amorassan» —Leaveme! I feel· ill at ease ib your society. The Spirit.—in yours, I feel neither ill nor weih But now the bond between us is be¬ come indissoluble. 1 must henceforth ? your constant attendant, and aid' yen to un¬ ravel the web, which- destiny has woven for you. Your future fortunes are well known tome; but lam only permitted to lay the leaves open before you one by one. Had í been permitted to read the last leaf, then í should also have known, how long 1 have to remain your slave ; but this contained my own destiny, and the volume was suddenly closed. Amorassan.-—r\nd does this ° . '/^ vou ? The ¿?/>//7/.-—Nothing t^r". -, -, ^ »leascj mc.
Amorassan.—-Lowe me !..... r Yet stay ! When I require your aid, by what name ■¿mist I summon you ? The Spirit,—I am called—** the nameless* one ;"—you will bestow on me a better name hereafter. But whenever my ministry is needful, I shall stand before you uncalled, and invisible to all eyes but yours. Of this be assured, for your master and mine has enjoined it. Amorassan.— There is much more, which I woukl gladly ask; but my heart feels changed to ice by that chilling look. Re¬ tire, till my blood has regained suflicient warmth, and my heart sufficient feeling to support your presence. Leave me! Begone! The thick grey cloud again spread itself through tH apartment. It rose into the air, and when it dispersed, the Spirit wad no longer visible, THE ??1??. Now trust me, Ben Hafi, I am heartily
pleased with her departure; this freezing Spirit had produced just the same effect upon me, as upon Amorassan ; and her wearisome insensibility has entirely cured me of the wish to have such a being at my elbowe MUZAFFER», Amiable, in truth, this Spirit is not ; but itili she must probably be of great utility in the service of a Grand-Vizir t at least, she will enable Amorassan to see through the veil of humility and disinterestedness, with wiiich hypocrites so frequently conceal tbeir private views with the most success and the least suspicion.. Ben Hafi, the Sultan waits for tho remainder of your tale. (Ben Hafi marked well the malignant glance, with which this speech was accom¬ panied, and the insinuation which it was designed to convey. But he answered not-, and tiras continued bis discourse.)
CHAP. V.
—** Oh ! bow wf etched ís thut ???? mm } who hawgs ?? priööes^ favöuri î Thera is between thut ümİlû we wouî4 aspire to, That sweet aspect of princes må our rum, More hopes and fears, than war or women hare.*'— * Henry the FJghtL·
Somjs hours elapsed, before Amorassan re¬ covered from the effect produced upon him by the, Spirit's freezing demeanour. But with the return of day, all his glorious vi¬ sions for the happiness of mankind resumed their influence over his mind with renewed vigour ; and he rejoiced in the prospect of being now able to carry them into execu¬ tion without fear of further disappointments.
The light of virtue irradiated his whole soul^ and envy, treachery^ self-interest, and hy¬ pocrisy, alike Virtue's foes and Amorassan's, Hed from its piercing beams, as ghosts from the splendour of the approaching sumshinc, The governor of the frontier-province of Burglana was deceased, and it was necessary to consult the Sultan respecting the disposal of this important place* Ibrahim had slept well, was in high spirits^ and received his Vizir with a smile of such good-will, a:: touched him to the very heart. That it bad produced this effect was evident, and the consciousness of having afforded satis» faction, increased the Sultan's. He welcom¬ ed Amorassan in the most engaging man¬ ner, and marked by his reception, that he- considered him as the companion of his youth, as the friend of his selection, as the favourite of his heart, and the partner of his most secret thoughts. With every moment their discourse became more warm and more confidential ¡ and as their intercourse had rather languished for the last few
months, this unexpected renewal of affec¬ tion was doubly grateful to the sympathiz¬ ing heart of Amorassan. That heart now lay expanded before the Sultan's eyes; the Vizir laid open his dis¬ tant glorious plans for the prosperity of Guzurat j his eyes floated in dews of rap¬ ture, while he dwelt upon them, and the spirit of inspiration seemed to flutter round his lips. Ibrahim entered into all his feelings, ap¬ proved of all his plans, echoed back all his wishes. Amorassan's soul overflowed with gratitude, and his satisfaction seemed to be complete, when his sovereign, taking his hand, and fixing his eyes on his face with a smile of benevolence, informed him, ζζ that he too had a plan to propose, and a wish to be complied with." Already did the as¬ surance of his ready and unconstrained consent float upon tlie lips of the delighted Amorassan ; when suddenly in the further part of the saloon he perceived the Spirits with all her calmness, coldness, and oppres
rave gravity. Her right hand pointed to the Sultan with a warning gesture; the fore-finger of the left was placed against her Hp, as if enjoining süence. The colour instantly fled from Amoras- san's cheeks f he gassed steadfastly upon the vision ; the fire of enthusiasm was extin¬ guished in his eyes, and the assurance, which he had already unclosed his lips to give, dissolved into unintelligible murmurs*. Ibrahim drew his hand away^ he garni upon his Vbir in astonishment ; and the cold constraint of Amorassan's manner pro» duced a corresponding change in his owa. After a pause, he said with an embarrassed air—" Perhaps, you already guess, wdiat 1 am going to propose. Perhaps, you are un¬ willing to comply with my wish ili this respect."-^ Amorassan.^A. have not the most distant suspicion of your plan* Nor can 1 feel un* willing to comply with any wish of yours ;. of yours, whose wishes are commands*
Ibrahim.— Ah ! when I mentioned to you, that I håd a wish, it was not the master who spoke to his servant, but Ibrahim to Amoras¬ san ! true, I command, when I address my Vkir ; but when I converse with my friend, I can bnt wish, and am only happy in the completion of my wish, if it meet with my friends approbation. Amorassan.~*¿Ihisn name vour wish! Sure- 4 ly, you need not now be assured, that Amo¬ rassan would think your satisfaction cheaply bought by the sacrifice of his existence ! Ibrahim.—Some other time, wiien you are again in die same disposition., ,. when your manner is the same.. *. when your heart is as harmoniously attuned to mine, as It was this morning when you first addrest me. 'lis very strange! What could oc¬ cisión in yon so sudden an alteration ? Nay* own the truth, Amorassan : you certainly must have guessed^ what it was that I in· tended to propose to you. Amorassan.—I did not. ¡¿rahim, —So drv ? So brief? ?
Amorassan.— Τα convince you of a truth, hitherto a single word of mine has been thought by you sufficient, Ibrahim,^Wél then ! there Jet the bust» ness rest. Perhaps, the unaccountable hesi¬ tation in your manner, which communicat¬ ed itself to mine, and made me in my turn hesitate, was a secret warning to weigh the matter more carefully, before I submitted it to your inspection- I will follow the ad¬ vice, and now let us call another subject."— The conversation then turned entirely upon topics of indifference. Amorassan vainly endeavoured to recover his former ea^e ι he was absent, embarrassed, and the discourse languished. At length Ibrahim relieved both his Vbir and himself by suf* fering him to depart, and Amorassan hasten¬ ed homeward. No sooner was he alone in his palace, than the Spirit presented her¬ self «before him. The Spirtt.~~You see, that I am faithful to my promise : I have not waited for your summoning me*
¿Murassan.— Answer without delays what meant your unexpected appearance even now at the seraglio ? The Spirit.- —I appeared to fulfil your in¬ junctions, and warn you against yourself« Fascinated by the delightful feelings of gra¬ titude and friendship, intoxicated by your sovereign's flattering praise, and overpower¬ ed by the condescending marks of his affec¬ tion, you were on the point of promising to comply with his wishes, without giving yourself time to learn, whether they were wishes with which it would be right or prudent to comply. I appeared to prevent your contracting this rash engagement, and at my presence your fond illusion fled. ?????*$???-~?\?? even had I formed that engagement, would he have held me to it f if it proved to be either imprudent or wrong? No; Ibrahim himself would not then have wished the engagement to be kept. What he had asked, and I liad granted, in the warmth of affection. The Spirit^^ASécûon ? Affection for you?
The Sultan's kindness this morning took ila lise from quite another source, Amorassan.*·^ then lke Sultan my friend no longer? The Spirìt.-~It is evident, that he is still your fiiend, since he endeavoured to entice you artfully into doing that, which otherwise lie would have commanded» In truth, lhe wish to ensnare a person into doing any thing, is no proof of an honest or manly heart ι but it proves at least, that the Sultan esteems the friend, loves the favourite, and wishes to preserve the Grand-Vizir, Amorassan*"~-And what then was It, that ihe Sultan was abon t io propose ? The Spirit.-~-¥le ardently desired to entice you iato consenting, that the place of Chief· Cadi should be given to a certain Ebu -???* r, vilume faiher formerly possest it, Amorassan.<~~hnå your appearance pre* vented me from giving this so much-wibh'\i consent? Fatal being! you have deprived ine of one of the happiest moments of uv* esnktru?.
The Spirit*-—. Nothing ís more probable ; but; that is no concern of mine ! ï have done my duty, and only done it, because it was røy duty : if you found pain in it f í found no pleasure, for pleasure and pain are alike to me. Amorassan. —Oh ! had you not appeared .... had I but foUowed the emotions of my heart! This Ebu-Beker is my mortal enemy; 1 know well the plans, wiiich he lus laid for my destruction ; 1 woidd have made every thing known to the Sultan« ï would have shown him, how deadly the man hates me; I would have pointed out to him the personal dangers, to which his élévation would expose me ; and then I would have fallen at the feet of my friend, md told him—** and all these considera* tions do I sacrifice to your wish ! Let Kbu-Beker occupy the wished-for place; not that station alone, but my own would I surrender to him with good will, could it afford my sovereign the slightest grati¬ fication· Let Ebu-Beker still be my enemy; VOL· ÏV, \
Amorassan bhall henceforth be his friend, since Ibrahim values Jiim!"—But now, in¬ stead of this, when the Sultana heart was open* * « « when his kindne,^s was so wann •... to repulse him by my í hilling air.... to make him so naturally bciieve, that 1 guessed Ids wish, and prepared myself to counteract it.... away from my presence, thou cold insensible Spirit ! I hate thee I Toe Spirit.— indeed ? Aiready ? But as you please ! I expect no other reward from men* And have youthen forgotten the secret character of this Ebu-Beker, to whom you are so ready to resign your station, and with it the care of the happiness of Guzurat ? Is he not avaricious, luxurious, envions, cruel, and malignant ? Are not hh principles, his views, his plans of government«, exactly the reverse of yours? You would have told the Suitan, that he is your mortal enemy ? Think yon, that this is not ahead)' known to the Sultan? Were he ignorant that Kbu-Beker hates and has injured you, and that you have reason to hate Ebu-Beker,
would he have endeavoured by an artifice to ensnare you into consenting to his eíe« vation ?-~Höwevcr in what regards the resignation of your own station to him, respecting that step you need be in no haste: let him only obtain the place of Chief Cadi, which is now his object, and fhat of Grand Vizir will soon follow it. Amorassan.—0£ Grand Vizir ? Ebu-Be¬ ker Grand Vizir? The S//r*7.—Infallibly— unless indeed you adopt the courtier's policy, and destroy your rival before he has time to destroy you. Amorassan·—\$ it even so ? nay*, then the Sultan's affections must be totally withdrawn from me, and from this moment 1 have no¬ thing more left to care for. I never made hut two requests to Allah ; the first, to retain Ibrahim's friendship ; the second, to make him happy through his people, and his peo* pie happy through him. Ihe loss of my power could only grieve me, if Guzurat and its monarch should lose under my successor those advantages whicli they Iiave acquired ι 2
under ine, and those which I hoped they would acquire still further—but the loss of Ibrahim's friendship, ..... The Spirit.— Sud ï, that you Iiave lost it ? No ; you possess it still; will still possess it.. ». even when he bestows your station on your rival The Suitan himself will lament the necessity, which occasions your fall : he will shed more tears at parting, than your¬ self, and those tears wil! be sincere : he will regret your absence^ will miss your society with every hour of the day...... Amorassan·*— And yet will part with me ? The Spirits—And yet will part with you ,... for Ebu-Beker will have it so. Amorassan.— Ebu-Beker ? can the cold- hearted, malignant, unfeeling Ebu-Bcker, he who is unable to sympathize wilh one of the generous Ibrahim's emotions, can he possess such influence over the Sultan's heart*. · · The Spirit.— Oî the Sultaits heart he pos¬ sesses no share, and never will possess any : but he ? the mastcrof that which often has
more infiuence over a sovereign than the heart, and by which the heart itself is fre¬ quently misled,—Ebu-Beker is master of the key to Ibrahim's imagination : he is skilful in tlie art of showing ihe Sukan to the Sul¬ tan in a light, in which he appears tabe much greater, much wiser, much more brilliant and majestic than he either />, or -zt/7/, or can be* Such a maa is not esteemed by a sovereign ; but before the thing is even suspected,, his presence becomes indispensable—Ebu-Beker is determined upon your ruin : the Sultan will resist awhile, but friendship will at length yield to necessity. You will still be Ibrahim's secret friend, but Ebu-Beker will be the Sultan's Grand Vizir, Nov« 7 then make your choice ! either while it is still in your power, yon must ruin this Kbu-Beker, your enemy, and the enemy of* those views which you term so great and benevolent ; or ebe you must consent to his ücvatioii and leave the Sultan to proceed further as caprice or accident may direct,—! leave you to determine"—- ι 3
The Spirit disappeared—Dreadful was the contest, which now arose in the bosom of Amorassan,—Should he represent to Ibrahim the dangerous character of Ebu-Beker f were he to do so^ would hb representation be believed, coming from the lips of a man whom the Sultan knew to be his enemy ? Was not the Sultan already secretly determined to make him Chief Cadi ?—Should he wait in si« lence for the Sultan's orders r or should he surprize the Sultan agreeably by proposing, as from himself, that Ebu-Beker might be raised to the desired dignity; and thus should lie strengthen his own interest with Ibrahim by affording him an unexpected gratification, at the same rime that he bound his rival in chains of gratitude, whicli might possili) wUh-hokl him írom endeavouring further to poison his masters mind against him ? He dwelt for a few moments on this last idea with satisfaction. Iiis understanding told him, that it was the ??? prudent and craftily-imagined ; but his heart soon reject ed it with contempt, and shame coloured hb
cheeks at having suffered ? to pollute his mind for an instant. ™ ££ What !" cried he, starting from the sopha, <á would I then purchase the continu¬ ance of the Sultan's favour at the price of the happiness of his kingdom l shall the adminis¬ tration of the laws in Guzurat depend upon the justice of anEbu-Beker ì Shall 1 today make the first step by a side-path towards the degradation of my character, in order that when 1 fall, I may feel that ï have deserved my fall by deserting that straight path, which I have so long trodden with steps so firm and with courage so undaunted ¡—ne« ver! never! I swear it by the Prophet's tomb ? ~ As Amorassan pronounced these words, a soft ray of light fell upon the picture of liis actions in the pavillion of mortai excellence» The spirits remarked it with joy, and their prayers of gratitude mounted to the throne of Allah. 14
?И? ??1???. Truly, Ben Hafi, this Amorassan of yours seems to be in such a ticklish situation for a Grand Viair, that were I in his place, Ì should be extremety puzzled what to do. But of one thing f am certain ; such a man as Amo¬ rassan is the very sort of minister that I should like, and it is well for Muzaffer, chat hitherto í have sought for such a man in vain, MUZ AFFI· R. And what then could this Amorassan have done for your service, Commander of the Faithful, which Muzaffer has neglected ? do î not labour day and night to make the mo¬ narch's privileges and the people's prosperít) go hand in hand ? THE caliph· Why, Muzaffer ! hust thou really under¬ taken a task so difficult ? Now may Allah support you in it, poor Muzaffer ! for truly it
seems to me very like making the tiger and the lamb draw in the same v ok^% MUZAFFER. Are not your rights enforced? Are not the laws exercised most strictly? ís not im¬ plicit obedience to your will inculcated wilh incessant care ? By wholesome severît j 1 hive produced among your subjects such a sense of duty, that only command them to spring from a precipice, and you will see them rush towards ît, [İlere the Caliph's heart swelled with the pride of power, and he rewarded bis Vizir with a smile of ap¬ probation. Mmafter continued Q Or say, that ihey should hesitate ý there is a sure means of subduing their obstinacy* It h but making parchment of the skins of a do¬ sten ring-leaders, and covering )our diurni with it ; I will sfake'my head, that their com¬ rades will follow to the musk of tlube drams without so much as uttering a whbper.
1 J
T«il£ CALIPH. May Allah forgive me that smile, which polluted my lips even now ! By the light of Heaven ? swear, Vizir, if I thought that such musk had ever been heard in Guzurat, î would myself order one skin to be made into parchment, that I might stamp on it in golden characters the rights of human na¬ ture ; that skin should be your own, Vizir ! MUZAFFER. Mighty Lord, whence this anger l—í spoke- but figuratively« THE CALIPH, ï hope so } but Allah sees the heart. mm ? afi. To know in how far that speech was figura¬ tive, the Caliph should ask his -subjects* Nay, Vizir, frown if thou wilt, and strike me dead with a look if thou canst ; still will I assert 3 and loudlv, there is no station on earth more dreadful than a sovereign's throne, whose 2
steps are wet with tears, and whose curtains are shaken by the sigh, and groans of his subjects. THE CALIPH. I hear noc those sighs and groans on mine, Een Hafi j oh ! believe me, í deser -ve not to hear them. I swear, if I heard them once, that moment would I break in pieces my golden throne, and make myself a coffin from the fragments."— As lie pronounced this solemn declaration, the benevolent monarch's eyes overflowed with tears, and he felt his hand prest to the lips of Ben Hafi, who had thrown himself on his knees before him-—he bade him rise in a tone of affection, and the Hebrew- resumed his narrative.
CÎÏAR VL "•- Ct Quel guardo suo a dentro spìa «Noi piu »vervi» lur gli diletti umui«.* 4 -— Tassì».
BEN HAF L ( Amorassan's reflections were interrupted by a summons to attend his father, who had been long unwell, and whose dissolution was thought to be at hand. He found him ex¬ tended on his couch; near him sat his younger son Zemaun, his countenance over« cast, and leaning his head on his hand. On Amorassan's entrance, the old Moawyah raised himself v/ith difliculty, grasped his hand,and thus addrest him. Moawyah. —I sent for you, my beloved son, that I might bestow on you my blessing before wc pait for ever; I wished also to
mention one last request ; it is the only one which your father will now make to you on this side the grave. [Amorassan was deeply affected ; his eyes overflowed ; he bowed down his head, and sealed a pious kiss upon the hand of his fa¬ ther. The old man understood the answer of the heart : he gazed upon his son with kind¬ ness for a few moments, and then resumed his discourse.] —" I have ever found in you a dutiful son, and an afiectionate friend ; and such you remained in a station, in which those names are remembered so rarely ! to-day I remind you for the first time (though 1 know well that you never will forget it) that ser¬ vices rendered by me to thé deceased Sultan were the sole means of bringing you into an intimate connection with his son, and of mak¬ ing you what you are ; the first in all Gu¬ zurat for power and happiness, Seeing you such, I should have nothing more to wish, had I not another son, whose claims to a brilliant station in life are no kss urgent
upon me now, than your own were former¬ ly. 1 blame you not for having hitherto delayed to exert your power in his behalf, or in that of any one of the numerous rela¬ tions of our family : yet I cannot but think it strange, that our house should be the only one of distinction in all Amedabad, which deserves your favour, and which has not ob¬ tained a single mark of it. Amorassan.—My father !.... Moawyah.— Look, my Amorassan, look upon your brother Zemaun ! a man .of cou - rage, sense, and active enterprize! he has already shown the foes of Guzurat in bat· j tie, that he is worthy of the race froni whence he springs, and the vacant govern¬ ment of Burglana is well suited both to his abilities and his claims. All that I request, is this, no more ; obtain for Zemaim this dig¬ nified office«, and prove that Amorassan is not more a dutiful son, than he is an affectionate brother."— —" Amorassan," said Zemaun, while he rose, and advancing towards him, clasped
his hand ; íC It is against my will, that our father presses this point upon you, I con¬ fess, too, that every one of my owrn age, and equal claims, whom I saw you raise to dignity and power, made my pride feel humiliated j the thought, that you must needs entertain a very mean opinion of my talents and charac¬ ter, embittered my heart towards you, and for some time past has made me shun your society. But at the death-bed of our father, letali these little animosities be forgotten! Willingly wouhl I wait, till the length and number of my services should force from the Caliph and yourself an acknowledgment, that they merited a reward : but since my father wishes to see me established before his eyes close for ever, I am ready to receive this benefit at your hands, and owe it entire* Iy to fraternal affection, rather than to any merit of my own"— 'Moawyah.— -Spoken, as a brother should speak t-—Now then, wint answers my Amo¬ rassan ? Amorassan,— You see me, my father, deep«.
ly afflicted by what has just now past. Was it not your own injunction, that I should not give envy cause to say, that í laboured to se* cure my power oy filli. .g every place with my own relations ? 'Did you not charge me to employ, not such as I loved dearest, but such as I esteemed moat! Remember, that I am not Guzurats Vmr for my own sake, but for the people's—I can act boldly, while the loss of the Sultan's favour involves no sacrifice but myself: I can now present my neck to die bow-string without fear in" the cause of virtue ; but oh ! how much shall I tremble to risk my life, when the loss of mine may draw after it the destruction of those, who are connected with me by the bonds oí affection and of blood ! I feeJ, that my virtue is too weak to support so severe *a trial. Moawyah.—It is for your brother. ... for your only brother, that I plead ! Show hiin some favour, and set your other relations aside* Ãmôrassars —it is only by adducing of my
brother asan example,that I have been able to resist the importunities of all the rest. Moawyahs—ñy which conduct you arc become the object of their united ha¬ tred* *.. Amorûssan^-'Wlûch I lament, but which I must endure. Zcmaun.~~*And will still endure it, even though it should be increased by that of your brother ? Amorassan.™«·*! think too well of my bro¬ ther to suspect that... » Moawyab.—And by your fathets displea» sure ?·—You are silent ?—Enough ! I wouk! gladly have owed this obligation to you* Since you reject my request, I will apply to the Sultan: am \ to expect your opposi¬ tion ?~ Amornssanj—l shall perform my duty, but no more* ????????.—" And who then, will yon tell the Suitan, is the fittest person to be governor of Burglana? Amorassan.-** Khaled ; he to whom Gussu-
rat has been already twice indebted for her preservation ! him must 1 recommend : to deckle belongs to the Sultan» Moawyah»—Now then it is indeed time for m ? to die !™I ha ve brought into the world ? cold-hearted statesman, who is only anxious for the security of his own great- sess ; but î possess no son in him ! he, who -affects to have an ear ever open tö the prayers of all who suffer, ís deaf to th* en¬ treaty of his expiring parent í He, w r ho can sympathize with the calamities of the mean¬ est beggar, looks with firmness and indiffer¬ ence on the wound, which he inflicts on bis own father's heart Before roy eyes, which perhaps behold him for the last time, he scorns and rejects the services of my bravo son ; of his own excellent brother t of a ma rt whose tatenÊs would shine out as brilliant as his own, were they not kept purposely in obscurity by his envy and unnatural hatrcJi *—Leave me ! leave me !—-I possess no son ii. thee!— Amorassan.— Oh ! my father, how totali 4 ;
do you mistake røy heart ! But I have done ; be it, as you wish ! fat this moment he per¬ ceived the Spirit standing beside him, who warned him not to proceed ; but Amorassan heeded not the warning, and continued as follows]—! know well, that I ought not to yield ; my reason remains unconvinced, but my heart cannot support the bitterness of your reproaches j to-morrow I will demand the government of Burglana for my brother : if evil arises from this appointment, Aliali grant that it may all Ml upon my own head, and if my compliance gives you, my father, one moment of satisfaction, I shall bear that evil without a murmur, however heavy its weight may be."—· The old man repaid this promise with a profusion of blessings ; but while his lipii overflowed with gratitude, his heart w r as conscious of nothing more than exultation at having carried his poiat. Zemuun ad¬ drest all his thanks to his father, explicitly declaring, that he considered himself as in¬ debted to hmi alone for the promise, which,
he had with so much labour extorted from the unwilling Amorassan. The latter was now dismissed affectionately by Moawyah, and he hastened to collect his scattered thoughts in the most secluded chamber of his palace. He threw open the door hastily, and the first object which met his eyes was the warning Spirit, He started back, and turn¬ ed away his head in disgust. Amorassan.—'And must I then meet that freezing aspect at every turning? Answer røe, thou sullen thing! what meant thy presence at my father's ? The Spirit.'—Yon were on the point of committing an absurdity ; I appeared to warn you against the illusion of your heart; but you heeded me not. Amorassan.— An absurdity ? was it one to comply with the last request of an ex¬ piring father? Tbe Spiril.— Your father is not expiring ; bts illness was dissembled, that liis entreaties might have the greater effect· The auifice
lias succeeded ; you have been weak enough to give a promise, whose fulfilment will shake the whole happiness of this kingdom to its very foundations : yet to break it will subject your own heart to the most exquisite of human sufferings ! Know, that your father's request was dictated by Ebu- Beker, who is engaged in a secret conspiracy with your brother, the object of which is your destruction. And have you then for¬ gotten the nature and principles of the man, to whose government you have promised to commit this important province ? Are you not aware, that even in childhood Zemaun*s character has displayed nothing but an as¬ semblage of the most hateful passions ? His darling vice was originally ambition, bound¬ less and insatiable \ and heedless of the means by which its gratification was procured, as long as he counted upon your assistance, he only envied you: disappointed in that ex~ pectation, he now bears towards you aversion the most inveterate and deadly. To gratify his ambition is become a secondary object :
liîs first is, to be revenged on you and on the Sultan, by whom his services (as he thinks) have been neglected. Vengeance is his daily contemplation, his nightly dream : now then make him governor of Burglana, and he will seize the first opportunity of forming an alliance with the Sultan of Can¬ dcish, Ouzurats most dangerous enemy; lie will deliver to him this important frontier- pro vince, and will thereby afford a free passage for his troops into the defenceless country. The kmd will be deluged with blood, the air will resound with groans and curses; the Sultan's throne will loiter to its base; and you will be the author of all these miseries to Guzurat ; yoa 9 who wilfully committed JBurglara to such a brother ; yot^ who will also be suspected of participation in your brothor's plots and treasons. Now then, if ? ou dare, perform your promise, Amortissan.— Monster ! and if I break it, with it I break my father's heart. The weight of years already presses him down to the grave, and shall 1 udd to that weight the
bitterness of disappointment ì His winde soul seems bent upon the fulfillment of my promise ; his life hangs but by a thread ¿ vexation at this breach of faith may snap it! Leave me ! Leave me ! Oh ! that I had never seen thee. The Spirit.·—I confess, that were it not for my warning, you would enjoy to-mor¬ row an hour, such as few taste out of Pa¬ radise. The accomplishment -of his hopes would supply the almost exhausted lamp of your father's life for years : when you brought him the wished-for tidings of suc¬ cess, he would bless you with a faltering voice, and with eyes overflowing with tears of gratitude and joy : your brother would clasp you to his bosom with well-dissem¬ bled affection; lhe Sultan would load you with flattery, and express his warm ap¬ probation of your choice ; and thus would you dream away time, intoxicated with the sweet illusion, till the tempest should break too.e, and the dæmons oí' vengeance and
war cover with misery Guzurat's now happy plains* . Amorasxan.-*~lt must be done! wretch that I am ! í must then break the heart of my kind, my venerable father. The Spir//.-— That is no concern of mine.— ^;worÆWJW.~Fiend ! thou hast nothing of humanity about thec, but the outward form ! could thy marble heart reel but one touch of pity*. ». Tke Spirit.—~l?ity ?—now you speak non¬ sense, and I leave you—-but first know, that Ebu-Beker has prepared the Sultan to hear you demand thö government of Burg¬ lana for your brother : in return for which he means to ask your consent, that Ebu- Beker should fill the place óf Chief. Cadì.— Now then decide, as you like best ; hoia you decide, I care not."—And the Spirit vanished.
THE Methinks, Ben Hafi, this Amorassan of yours does nat rightly know, what he would have. This disagreeable Spirit (though I must confess, that she is no great favour¬ ite of mine, and think the universe should not induce me to have her so continually at my elbow) acts exactly as he desired her; and yet the better that she obeys liim, the more is he out of humour with her. I really think, that he is by no means entitled to use such angry language to her, and call her by such harsh names. Not but Amorassan stands high in my fa« vour : for a Nïûr he seems to be a very good kind of mtn ; oaly I am heartily sor¬ ry on his account, that he ever took it into his head to be a Vizir at all—But proceed; I am curious to know how 7 he decided. Μ ? J Z A WR R. I can guess ; liis place depends on his vol» iv. ?
Opposing Ebu~Beker f $ views, and EbuJBe- ker favoured Zeraaun s s pretensions: Amo¬ rassan therefore will counteract them. BEN H AFI· Your guess ss right; oaly instead of Amorassan s s motive, you have named your tiwn*~ï proceed with my narrative.
CHAP. VG.
Now withered murder thuis with stealthy p&ce, And Tarquin's ravishing strides* tow'rds his design Moves like a ghost."—* ????????.
Kbu-Beker had succeeded în persuading the Sultan, that Amorassan took to himself all the credit of the good which was done throughout Guzurat, and that the people only looked upon the monarch as an in- significant tool in the hands of his, Vizir. The consequence of these impressions was, that Ibrahim received his once-loved friend with the most studied indifference. He affected not to perceive his entrance: he continued to play with a favourite ape ; he took care, in conversing with his eunuchs, ? 2
to let fall sarcastic observations, whose con¬ cealed object was to wound the feelings of Amorassan. At length when he had dis¬ charged one of these poisoned arrows so dexterously, that he thought it could not fail of hitting the mark, he cast his eyes upon his Vizir to enjoy the sight of his vexation. Then did Amorassan answer his look with one so expressive of good-will, so free from reproach, so mild, so humble, and yet so open, so dignified, and so firm, that it pierced lhe Sultan to the very heart, ills dormant affection was roüzed, and his faltering voice betrayed the emotions of his bosom, -while he inquired—" And what then brings my friend Amorassan hither?"— The well-known tone of afieciion touched the finest strings of Amorassan's heart : the memory of their long and early friendship filled his eyes with tears. He saw, that his evident emotion had communicated itself to Ibrahim ; he resolved to seize the fortunate moment, and come to a full explanation respecting Ebu-Beker, and his projects,
Suddenly the recollection struck him, that the Spirit had apprized birci cf the Sukan's design to ask that morning the place of Chief Cadi for Ebu-Beker, and he suspect« ed, that this show of friendship was assumed to win his consent with the less difficulty,. Immediately, his enthusiasm died away, and he replied coldly and gravely—" that he came to recommend a fit person to fill the government of Burglana.^— Ibrahim eyed him for some moments in astonishment: he had marked the sudden glow upon Amorassan's cheek ;. he saw, that tears of aflection had gushed into his eyes : and now how came it that all was gone so suddenly ? After a pause, he recovered him¬ self, and inquired with equal coldness™ "whom Amorassan's judgment favoured?*'— He already anticipated the answer, and was prepared to grant the government to Zemaun, requesting in return Ebu-Bcker's nomination to the place of Chief Cadi j for thus had it been beeret Iy arranged between the Sultan and his ? 3
favouritew What then was his surprise to hear the name of Khaled! Against this hero no objection could be raised* Mortified, confused, disappointed, ibrahim stammered out a faint approbation; and with a bleeding heart the Virzir regained fiis horne^ conviuced that he no longer pos» sest the Sultan's confidence, dreading the reproaches of Ms incensed father, trembling for the welfare of Guzurat, and destitute of alt consolation, except the consciousness of having done his duty* MUZAFFER. And what lie could to preserve bis plac¿· ?И? CALIPH» it's a great pity, Muzaffer, that you never can feel otherwise than like a Grand*Viasir ! Yet that is not your fault, and we must take mmi as tliey are. And wlwt, Ben Hafi, did this unfortunate Amorassan do next? for that he is, and always will be^ imfov-
tunate with that freezing Spirit of his, I have no longer any sort of doubt. Not that I think the Spirit to blame either; she only does her duty; but then to be sure she never has any thing to say, but what is extremely disagreeable. BEN HAFI. «After this last interview with Ibrahim, Amorassan began to feel that his own friend¬ ship was shaken : he doubted whether this dissembling Sultan, this man in secret alli¬ ance with his enemy, this luke-warm friend who had withdrawn his confidence without the slightest ground of reason, merited that he should devote his life so entirely to his service. He forgot, that this want of con¬ fidence was mutual; that he was himself in secret alliance with a being, of whose- virtues he was less persuaded than tîie Sul¬ tan was of Ebu-Beker's ; and that when the heart of his friend was warm and open to bim, his repulsive coldness had compelled 1 him again to close it, il 4
Absorbed în melancholy reflections, did Amorassan with the break of morning ascend a mountain at no great distance from his country-palace. A profusion of cedars, cy¬ presses, and lemon-trees adorned v it even to its loftiest summit. At its foot stood a pagoda of great antiquity and of extensive fame, venerable and magnificent» Here lived the light gazelles in tranquil security; many ? sweet rivulet sparkling among the cliffs supplied their drink, and they satisfied thcir hunger with aromatic herbs: nor had the hunter's step ever been known to frighten huo silence the brilliant-feathered choristers ot these protected groves» The air was freshening* A cool and plea¬ sant gale played round the thoughtful brows of the Vi/ir, and bore to him on their soft wings lhe fragrance of the flowery vales below. The dwellings of men, (as yet silent aed tranquil as tîie grave,) the blooming mea¬ dows and gardens, the mighty rivers, and the gently-flowing brooks, all glowed and glitter¬ ed, and melted together in a stream of ro«
seate light, which w r as poured full upon them by the glory of the now-rising sun. A deep silence prevailed above, below, around him : till the songs of birds seemed to bid creation awake, and awake tc hap¬ piness. Amorassan felt, that at least in Guzurat that happiness, was bestowed by him; he felt, that it was the consciousness of his unwearied watchfulness for their good, which enabled these still-slmnberiag men to slumber on in such security: he fancied, that he could hear the mother teach her infant to lisp his name with a blessing, aad the old man (recounting to his grand* children the sufferings of his youth) congra* túlate them, that under the governoient of Amorassan they had no such sufferings to apprehend. In this moment he felt, that it was only by preserving his connection with its mo¬ narch, that lie could preserve the power of conferring happiness on the kingdom : and he now resolved more firmly than ever to persevere îa his benevolent designs ι he ti ã
resolved never to abandon the weak and un* grateful Ibrahim to the mercy of his iatterers j and even (ifit were necessary) to sacrifice his life, rather than desert the cause of those millions, whose welfare depended on 1? resolution, ™ €Ê Yes !** he exclaimed in virtuous rap« ture ; " the sight of this general content rewards me for all my labours ; and if ï must fall a sacrifice for their sake, the blessings of thousands will surely s follow me lo the scaffold l"— Scarcely were the words uttered, when the oppressive dullness which seized his heart announced, that the Spirit was near him* THE CALIPH. Ah ! holy, prophet, how it grieves me, that she should come just at such a time; for I am certain beforehand, that she comes to say something disagreeable ! I should like so much myself to stand on the top of a· mountain, overlook my kingdom, and. feel 2
exactly, as Amorassan felt! Mark me, Mu*> «zaffer, I had rather hear you my of your¬ self, that which Amorassan said, than hear myself saluted sole monarch of the universal always supposing, that you could, say it with as much truth as Amorassan, which (I am sorely afraid) would not be exactly the case* Now proceed, Ben Hafi*. BEN IlÄFU — i 01 Unwearied persecutor! 1 * exclaimed Amorassan, * 6ei what brings thee hither just at this moment ?. It is the first happy ona wiiich 1 have known, since I entered into alliance with thee. The Spirif.—Then must it needs be also the weakest and the wildest, and the one in which you delude yourself the most com¬ pletely: for it is only by delusions, that man can make his moments happy* Amorassan,—'ihen leave me my ddibtou! The Spirit. —For uhat then was I sum¬ moned from my gloomy islands? Was it.not! ? 6
to dispel thy delusions ? Thy petition comes too late, and I must do my duty. Amorassan.-—Oh \ I was so happy, *.. ! the balmy air. « * . the beauty of the rising sim. « *. The «fo/nV."«-Short-sighted mortal ! Thou know'st not, that the breeze which plays round your brows so voluptuously, and tools so kindly the fever of your blood, at this moment loosens in the north a mountain of snow, which overwhelms whole villages : thou dost not think that the sun, in whose warmth yon bask and whose glories you admire, sucks up even now, from fens and marshes, pestiferous vapours to spread disease from province to province, and collects from the aromatic exhalations which flatter your sense so agreeably, tho elements of lightning, whose shafts shall pass over the villain's head harmless, while they strike the virtuous man to the ground» Amorassan.—And what serves all this to »rove ? That enreat benefits are sometime!»
attended by inferior eviis: nothing more. I pretend not to counteract the established order of Nature : but all that man can do, have I, even I* · ; * · · The Spirit.— Yqs ! yes ! I heard the boast of yom fond enthusiasm! You spoke of Gussurats happiness; of her happiness through you ! Vain man ! look on yon so¬ litary cottage, which the tamarind-tree over¬ shadows: there expires the virtuous father of a virtuous family, expires of a broken heart, and his last moments are embittered by the cries of Iris starving orphans. THE CALÍPH. Allah be their comfort, and guide them to me 9 that I may cloath and nourish them ! BEM HAFİ» —" The author of all this misery," con¬ tinued the Spirit, a the man, who out of spite and vengeance has brought this whole family from opulence to want; who has· broken İhe father's heart, and has turned
out the children to beg their bread through the world ; thi? very man is one of those judge», wîtft% hand· has been armed with authority by you I Anwrassm*-?vx? him! name him! and immediate punishment...... The Spirit,—And what would it avail to point out one, when thousands are equally guiky? Mortal, I tell thee, could thine ear receive at once all the groans which are uttered by the unfortunate,, the perse* cuted, the opprest in this Guzurat, which your fond illusion believes so happy j could I suddenly place before thine eyes in their whole gigantic deformity ali the cruelty and injustice, which is committed ia this king* dorn in your name, the consciousness of your innocence v/ould vanish like a dream, your heart would burst in pieces, and hor» ror and despair woukl terminate your ex¬ istence at once, without allowing time for the gusli of a tear, or the utterance of a groan. Oh ! what sovereign could en¬ dure the sight of that accumulated guilt
and misery, which afllicts his kingdom, without his brain being turned with horror ! THE CALIPH. For pity's sake s Ben ??% stop the mouth ofthat terrible Spirit t While I listen to her, my blood runs cold, and I feel my heart pressed together. Allah knows, that for my own part, I have always ι leant to do that which was right ; if 1 have erred, the fault is theirs, who deceived me. At the last dreadful day will I advance boldly to the judgment throne with my Vizir and my ministers, and say— C€ To do justice to all was my only wish on earth ; but I was a man, and compelled to employ men as my instruments: my agents may have sinned* but my heart is innocent."— The Caliph's eyes were raised to heaven, and his hands were folded upon his breast : the little deaf Megnoun believed, that his master was at his devotions, and he sank upon his knees, and murmured a prayer softly. The Caliph raised him with a smile
of benevolence, and resting his head upon his hand—" At that day," said he, w thou shalt stand nearest to nie, and testify for my heart."-—He paused for a moment; his countenance became dejected, and he added lo a low voice—' 4 There is but one accuser, whom İshali fear on that last day \ and that one.. ? . that one is my own brother."— ^ Ben Hafi fixed his eyes for a moment upon the Caliph's face with a look of the deepest emotion : he then looked down, and a tear trickled on his silver beard* His voice fab tered, while he thus resumed his narrative. — α The Spirit continued.**— THE CALIPH. f am ???? sorry for it ! I wish she would hold her tongue. BEN í ÏAFI. Amorassan wished it loo, and her voice \ V brated to his Inmost heart, while bhe proceed¬ ed as follows.— ~—" Cast thine eyes on the smiling river, ? hich winds among ihe flowers of yonder
meadow, and whose waters sparkle in the sun-shine: those waters bear with them into the ocean ihe corse of a blooming boy* whose nearest relations have secretly mur¬ dered him for the sake of his rich inheri« tance. Ask me not the murderers name ! even should I teli it, darkness covers the crime t the accuser would not be believed ; the instruments are paid j and he who paid them, sits among those, into whose hands you have committed the superintendance "of the orphans of the land. See ! see ! where yonder hag creeps cau¬ tiously among the bushes below, and collects various flowers in her basket. She tramples under foot without regard the wholesome and medicinal herbs, and only gathers those blossoms, which conceal poison in their va* ricgateel cups. Slie needs them for a future crime, whose price îs already paid, and whose commission you would vainly labour to pre« veni. And hark ! 'twas the trampling of a cour¬ ser's hoofs. The victim approaches, and the
assassin has already taken his secret standi the bow-string sounds ; the poisoned arrow whistles through the air ! It transfixes the innocent bosom ι he falls, and malignant joy triumphs in the heart of his murderer. He struggles! he dies! Hark, Amorassan: hark l "twas a hero's dying groan j 'twas the dying groan of Khaled Γ— Amorassan uttered a cry of horror and surprize ; the blood rushed violently back from his heart, and he sank ^on the ground deprived of animation. Commander of the Faithful, if you have røy wish to see this Amorassan tried by ad¬ versity, the moment is near at hand THK CAUPH* Nay, Ben Hafi, make him not unhappy for my sake. You know well, that I feel even for those, who deserve their misfortunes : bow much more then must I pity a man ?e your AmQXrøan» especially since he has
the misfortune to have such u disagreeable Spirit continually at his elbow. MUZAFFER. And yet permit me to observe, that this Spirit speaks very sensibly ; she paints the natural depravity of mankind in very true colours ι and thereby she makes known the necessity which there exists for treating them v.ith severity, and the folly of hoping to cor* rect their vices by mild means ; which, as your Highness may remember, was always my opinion when. ..... . THE CALIPH. I remember it well, Muzaffer, and I hear¬ tily wish, that you could forget it—-say nø more'about it, but let Ben Hafi proceed*
CHAP. VE
— a Caitiff, shake to .pieces, Who utider covert of <ionveni(mt ??? lias* pfttôtifred on man'« life—lam st >¡ » More einneii against, than slimmg."— When, on the return of his senses, Amo¬ rassan hastened back to the metropolis, he heard in every whisper of the wind the tvlhîstîifig of the poisoned arrow, and every accidental noise sounded like the dying groan of Khaledv His first care w*as to send to the warrior's dweiling : the answer was, that he had de¬ parted for his country-house that meaning. Amorassan's messengers were ordered to fol¬ low him, and entreat his instantaneous re¬ turn. After some hours passed in the most
painful anxiety«, he saw the Chief Officer of the Police enter his apartment and heard him announce, that the vaibnt Khaled was inur« dered. The Vizir clasped his ilands in agony at ilm confirmation of the Spirit's veracity ; his voice faltered, while he inquired the man¬ ner of Khaleds death. —-" He perished/* replied the Chief of the Police, &i by a poisoned arrow ; but the as¬ sassin has been seized, and is in confinement. Hts name is Cassim \ he has long been openly KIrJed's inveterate enemy; and he was found aimed with a bovv and piiwr, close to the fatal spot,"— The Vizir accompanied the Chief of the Police to "the Palace: they found Ebu- Bcker with the Sukan, to whom they ex« plained the melancholy occasion of tlieir coming, ~ u The news had alreadv rear ívd ???* answered the Sultan coldly—" 1 i . · \ κ? even now the necessary orders for the uimhuls examination, and shall sit in judgement on him to-morrow myself/'— I
Having said this, Ibrahim turned away, and resumed un uninteresting conversation with Ebu-Beker. Deeply was Amorassan affected by the evident indifference, with which the Sultan treated the loss of ? ??? whom he had for¬ merly declared to be the bravest and most faithful defender of his throne, and to the victories of whose sword, he and his people had been so often indebted for security. — Ci The Sultan is lost !" said te to him¬ self ; C4 Ebu-Beker has succeeded in making his master's heart like his own/— This reflection added so great a weight lo his former vexations, that he was scarcely able to support their burthen, much less lo enter into a contest with the arts of his insi¬ dious foe. He abandoned the field to Ebu- Beker, and his trembling limbs with difficulty bore him back to his palace. Amorassan passed a night of agony. With the dawn of morning he hastened to the Di¬ van. Tiie Sultan was already on his throne ; his Princes surrounded him. The Vizir saw
with surprise, that by the side of Ebu-Beker stood his brother Zemaun magnificently ha¬ bited : but that astonishment was considera¬ bly increased, when he also beheld his father, whom he had so lately seen on the bed of death, but who now, apparently free from all complaint but old age, stood at no great distance from the throne; while triumph and resentment reigned alternately in his eyes, as he turaed them now on Zemaun, and now on Amorassan. The Sultan gave a sign, and Cassim was brought before the assembly. The charge was read 5 witnesses attested, that the accused person had been found at no very great dis¬ tance from the corse, armed with a bow and arrows; and the bloody shaft being pro¬ duced, it was found exactly to resemble those remaining in Cassim's quiver. Cas¬ sim was now called upon to make his de¬ fence. —"'That I was long Khaled's enemy," said he, " it is not my intention to deny ; my hatred was open, and its motives were
well-known.—Hurried away by «seal for the Sultan's service, he once did me an act of the most signal injustice·—In the hearing of my brothers în arms he undeservedly branded me with the name of a coward. Appearance was against me, but appearance only ; when 1 seemed to act from cowardice, I in truth efiected that object by a feigned retreat, which was not to be attained by the moat courageous assault. But Khaled was unjust to me, and I felt the more resentment, be¬ cause I was the first and the only one, to whom Khaled ever was unjust. Loaded with disgrace, I withdrew from the ranks of the brave, and sought a refuge from the fin¬ ger of scorn in obscurity. Khaled at length discovered his mistake. Often did he sue to be reconciled; but my hatred burned as fierce- ly, as on the first day of my injury : Often did he knock at the door of my hut, but I still drove him away with curses. Yet within these few days he forcibly obtained an entrance, and standing upon the threshold without heeding my execrations, he addrest
me with these words ; oh ! never shall I forget them. — ζ£ Hate me still, Cassim, but hear me: still reject my friendship, but at least al¬ low me to be just. The Cuitan has con« ferred on me the government of Burglana; and if this accession of rank rejoices me, ît is because I am at liberty to bestow on whom I please the station next to me in power and dignity. Thus only can I con¬ vince all Guzurat, how unjustly I have treated you, and that Khaled is not more liable to commit an injustice, than anxious to repair it."—- My hatred was unable to resist his mild tone and submissive looks. He extended his hand to me ; I sank upon his bosom, and those who had so long been enemies, parted friends. When he left me, he appointed a day and hour for my meeting him at his country-house, and finally arranging the business of Burglana* With a light heart and alone, 1 set forward for the habitation of my new-made friend ; I was already near it, VOL* IV. L
when I heard the cry of murder 5 and before I had time to recollect" myself, 1 was seized, informed of Khaled's death, and accused of being the assassin. I Iiave no more to say ; but what ï have said is tlic truth !"— lie was silent* Proofs of what he had just advanced were demanded: but as he had nothing to bring forward but Ids bare asser« tion, and as he acknowledged the bloody arrow to be his property, no one entertain* cd the least doubt of his guilt ! Accordingly sentence of death was past upon him, and he was ordered for Immediate execution. J'his act of justice being done, and while lhe guards were removing Cassim, the Sul tan proceeded to declare Zemaun governor of Buruiana. Amorassan started : he re- membered the Spirit's dreadful prophecy respecting his broiher ; that Spirit, whose prophecies the event had always so fatally confirmed. He shuddered... * he turned pale.... he hesitated, but it was only for a moment. The strength of his innate virtue overpowered all other sentiments, and lu·
resolved to risque and to endure every t lung, rather than by preserving a guİİl y neutrality t acili v to consent to the devastation of Gusmrat, and the downfall of its monarch and his friend. Impressed with this idea he stepped forward ; and his lips were already unclosed to remonstrate against his brother's elevation, when he suddenly perceived on every countenance (the Sultan himself not excepted) marks of tlie most profound con¬ sternation and alarm ! All were pale, trem- Wing, agitated, looking as if they had been struck by the wand of some supernatural power. Every eye was riveted upon a sin¬ irle point : Amorassan turned towards it, and lo! there stood the Spirit, with her spotless robes, her chilling looks, her calm and serious countenance, holding a bow of ebony, al¬ ready bent jrnd provided with an arrow. The sound of her flowing garments, as she glided majestically along, was like the rush¬ ing of a tempest. With a firm air,'motion¬ less eyes, and a countenance terrible in its beauty; calnij dignified, and awful, stood the
Spirit before the Sultan's throne, and direct¬ ed her arrow right against his bosom : yet was there no one among his numerous guards and courtiers, who dared utter a word, or move a finger, or advance a step, to rescue their astonished lord from the dan¬ ger of that well-aimed arrow» The Spirit spoke ; and loud, and slow, and solemn, as thunder when it rolls among dis¬ tant mountains, fell her words on the hearts of the petrified spectators. ~ 4t listen, ye sons of the dust, whose eyes are ever dazzled by appearance, by pre¬ sumption, by deceit! ?, the avenger of eternal justice, am come hither, armed witli rhe never-failing bow of truth, to punish the offender, to absolve the guiltless, and to pre¬ vent the crime of shedding innocent blood« This warrior has told you true ! The arrow which was produced by that suborned wit¬ ness, was stolen from Cassim, substituted for the true one, and artfully stained with blood, for the purpose of misleading justice, and removing suspicion from the real murderer.
That poisoned shaft, which was in truth the cause of Khaled's death, at this moment « stretches the chord of mv never-erring bow ! Mark me now ! let the innocent rest secure, and let only the assassin tremble, while I turn myself first right, then left, till I shall have made the round of this whole assemblv, not even excepting the Sultan himself: but no sooner shall my arrow point against the bosom of the assassin, than untouched by me the fa¬ tal bow-string shall sound, and the poisoned barb, which pierced the heart of Khaled, shall stand quivering in the murderer's own.''—* She was silent ; and now while her eyes seemed to read the very heart, she moved her bow slowly round, till it had traversed the left half of the circle. Every one shud¬ dered, when he saw the shaft directed against his bosom ; yet every one kept his posture, though with difficulty and with trembling knees. The Spirit now turned to the right, moving her bow in the same manner« Suddenly the string was heard to sound, and tliough the expected arrow had L 3
not flown, Zemaun was beheld extended on the marble pavement» —"Deluded monarch! said the Spirit, ** look down, and witness the force of con science : Khaled's murderer lies at your feet!"— The veil was now suddenly removed front the eyes of all present ; and AmorassanV, heart was torn by agony scarcely to be en¬ dured, Iiis old father lay senseless on the carpet before the Sultan's throne; whii. Zemaim, suddenly starting from the ground, raised his clasped hands to heaven, and cn> claimed in the tone of desperation—»" Ac¬ cursed be my brother, my perjured bro* ther! Eternal curses upon his inveterate enmity, upon his broken promise ! I com- milled the Woody deed to obtain that by "v itkenee, which the Sultan was willing ω grant me, but of which î was debarred through my brother's envy! Had the mo¬ narch's grace towards me beeu suffered to take its free course, Khaled would still he living, and 1 should still be innocent! 'Tb
mv brother, who stained these hands with blood; 4is my r brother, who in fact is Khalects murderer !°— The Spirit addrest Amorassan. —** Now then-/' said she, a let me see, whether your virtue can support this trial : let nie see 5 whether you will deliver up to tbe vengeance of violated laws that criminal, in whose veins the same blood cir¬ culates which fills your own, and whose guilt you will share, if you exert your pow* er to shelter him from punishment.—Fare¬ well!"— She said, and disappeared. The Sultan with a faltering voice ordered the guards to release Cassini and conduct Zemaun to pri¬ son, and then hastened from the Divan, bewilclere :1 and stupelie J with, terror and amazement. And now were the ears of Amorassan deafened w ith the curses and lamenta rions, of liis grey-headed father, wliose «senses were at ι length restored;, anel who was vainly en¬ deavouring to break the chains, with which L· 4
Zemaun was aiready loaded, Amorassan fell at his father's feet, and would have clasped his knees; but the despeiate old man re pulsed him with fury, and spurned him with his foot* Tears and blood at once bedewed the face of Amorassan ; but he wiped them away, and bending himself still lower, kissed, in submissive duty the foot, wiiich had spurned him with such harshness. Ì lis submission was in vain. Dreadful was the curse., which fell from the lips of the frantic father. But at the same moment a blaze of light flashed through the pavillion of mortal excellence, and illuminated the pi«, ture of Amorassan's actions, ihat Spirit, which 5s superior to Fate, awoke in his bosom ; the spirit of conscious virtue suffering undeservedly. He rose from the earth,and thus addrest Moawyah calmi), modestly, but firmly. —*' 1 reproach you not, my father, that your foot spurned me : bad fhe blow even deprived me of ??, in the moment of my soul's departure î would have blest you still'
Here ! stand, odious to you, censured by all, and with nothing to plead for me, except the voice of my own conscience, which can¬ not reach the ear of man. Oh! surely could you hear that voice, you would pity yonr son, and think on your rash curses with regret. Your foot has spurned me ; true, it was the foot of a father, but a father ? still but a man : though you reject me, Allah will not I All here condemn me, but 1 retire acquitted by my own heart. This is enough for me : the rest i commit to heaven ! M — He boweel his head to his father, and casting upon him a look of mingled pity and afiect ior, he quitted the Divan. He was summoned to the Sultan, whom he found still opprest by the recollection of tlic strange and awful scene, wliich he liad just witnessed. Kbu-Beker was present : he had already heard hii master pronounce his de¬ termination to inflict on Zemaun the utmost rigour of the law, and had not dared to in¬ terpose a word in mitigation of Ms friend's death-warrant. Ibrahim received his Vizir L 5
with open arms, and a countenance which exprest the greatest tenderness and compas¬ sion. „« Unfortunate I" said he, " how hard n fat e is thine ! Yet let it be some comfort to you, Amorassan, that Ibrahim under- stands your merits, and shares your suf¬ ferings* Still continue true to yourself, and í swear by Allah, that I will ever con¬ tinue îrue ioyöm 5î ~ - Amorassan prest his burning lips upon the lund of the monarch« ™" My sovereign and my friend l n ho said with difficulty ; " I come before you bowed to the ground with my father's curse. Meensure, all abhor me: for yonr sake and for yonr people's 1 am become the object of general detestation ; if I possess not ???? ap- probation, then am 1 a wretch indeed.*'— The Sultan replied by embracing hhn witb evident emotion, and Amorassan quitted tb: seraglio with a bleeding heart*
?ΗΒ CALIPH. Trust me, Ben Haiî 5 1 am heartily rejoiced, that this poor weak Sultan escaped the mir- fortune of punishing the innocent instead. of the guilty : and in consideration of u\h worthy action, 1 am willing to be on good tenns with your cold uncomfortable Spirit ι who after all may be a very good sort of creature, though it so happens, that she never has any thing to tell but what is unpleasant to hear, However, I confess, she is obliged to tell the truth ; and, if that truth happens to be painful, to be sure, (pour thing!) that is no fault of hers.
0
CHAP. IX,
-— ui Have 1 ihen no tears for thce, my father ì Caa I ftirgot tlty cares from helpless years«, Thy tcndrrutìss for mv, l— -Shall I for these ìfepay thy sfoopin^·; venorabloaito %\'?1 «????, disquiet, anguish, ??! dishonour ?"-— TilOMSON". tliN HAFI. Heavy was the burthen, which now opprest Amorassan^s heart, lie saw his bro* ther loaded with chains and condemned to die the death of a murderer: he saw his fatiier tearing his grey locks in despair, ex¬ piring on the bloody scaffold of one of his sons, while his last words were curses upon the other. lie heard the unjust accusation of all Guzurat—·'*■ Thou art the sole cause of thy family's ruin and disgrace, and hast
* richly earned the execration of thy fa- ther!"~And he aow looked with horror oil his connection with the mysterious Being, wliose counsels had governed his proceed¬ ings, and whose fatal prophecy had com* pelled him to oppose his brother's exaltation« Yet on further reflection he could not deny, that the Sultan had been on the very point of shedding innocent blood, and had only been prevented by the interposition of the Spirit. He felt also, that Khalcds mur¬ der had conlîrmed the character given of his brother by his mysterious counsellor ^ and that this one action was suihcient to prove, that by fulfilling his duty and opposing Ze¬ maun's appointment, he liad himself pre¬ served his native land from being made lhe theatre of crimes still more atrocious. This idea gained additional strength, when he remembered, that Zemaun had listened with¬ out compunction to a sentence of death pro« nounced upon an innocent person, a sentence which ought to have fallen upon his own head ; and that he bad dared f ? retimi lhe
Sulran thanks for hk new dignity in lì.·* presence of thai very man, whom he w.. on the point tïf sending to tho scaíloid conduct, which marked so hardened a heart. that the thought of ît extinguished even brotherly compassion, and told Amorassan, that to lament the fate of such a mor..* monsicr was weakness not to be excused. In spile therefore of the general disap¬ probation, of hu father*s hatred, of the re¬ proaches of his other relations, of the forced politeness or avowed hostility of the cour¬ tiers, of Ebu-Beker's increasing hi üuence, and of the Sultan's increasing coldness ; iu spite of all this., still woukl Amorassan have persevered in the course which he had cho¬ sen, and have sacrificed all other consilier· at ions to those of justice and virtue, had not his father unexpectedly summoned hiin io his presence. The shock of the hi: dreadful transactions, and the approach í í the day appoint v d for Zemamts execution, had now really v. ;luced Mo.iwyah to thu dangerous situation, which (ia order to tarr;
íik point with Amorassan with the more facility) he had formerly dissembled.«—Amo¬ rassan found him evidently on the brink of the grave» The cold dews of death al¬ ready stood on the old man's brows, as fie with difiiculty beckoned to his son to ad¬ vance, then grasped his hand, and pressed it against his clay -coki lip¿, — c * Amorassan!" he said in a voice wliose murmurs were scarcely audible ; 4C your bro¬ ther. . .. oh ! save him ! buffer him not to die the ignominious death of a criminal, and I will forgive all the misfortimes«, which your conduct has drawn down upon him ami me f Let me noi sink under the burthen oi that dreadful thought,—'* my son peridicd as a murderer, because his brother hated him,"— and 1 will recall my curse, and my last words shall be, c Blessings ???? sou Amorassan l Oh ! hasten, hasten î 1 feel that my heart- strings are breaking 4 , and will scarcely last so kmp; as thy return."— On his entrance Amorassan had prepared himseli for curse.) and ropruauie^ bui mach ]
more powerful than all curses and reproaches were the gentle words of his imploring dyin^ father·«—the pale countenances animated alon-* by his only wish, by his final hope !.... the faint pressure of the chilled hands.. the eyes already glazed by dissolution. * « « these decided Amorassan's fate for ever ¡—Guzu¬ rat *s welfare, duty, friendship, justice, virtue, every thing disappeared in that moment, lie kissed his father's cold hand, bathed îi with tears, and hastened to sacrifice all the fruits of Ids past labours, all his plans for the present, and all his hopes for the future ; forgetting the rules which he had formerly laid down for his own conduct, and to which he had hitherto so strictly adhered ; and rt» menibering nothing, except his anxiety to smooth the death-bed of his father. It was already night ; he hastened towaul· the royal prison, into which a secret entrance was known to him. As he hurried alonp he fell his cheeks chilled by the breath of th; warning Spirit* —" l)eluded man !" whispered tho Voice
α what are you about to do ? You are going to sacrifice your magnanimous designs, to exalt Ebu-Beker, to destroy the fabric of your own power, to snatch a murderer from the punishment due to hts offences, and to turn him loose upon society, in order that he may commit still greater crimes l ? *™ Yet stilt Amorassan hastened onward, —at the door of the prison, he again heard the Spirit's murmur. ™^ Madman that thou art ! to spare a few moments of pain to an old man, who at all events will be an insensible corse to-mor¬ row, wilt thou forget thy duty ? and art thou the man, who was lo be deaf to every voice but those of justice and of truth ? s, <™ ™ gf Ah ! that old man is røy father l* sighed Amorassan. The Spirit.~Oh I partial minister ! oh ! violator of the laws of justice ! because he is thy father's son, shall the murderer then es¬ cape unpunished ? Amorassan^^o ! no I—The consciousness
of his crime will pursue him ; that will be punishment enough, The Spirit,— To Zemaim that will be none, 1 tell- thee, his heart is hardened : release him« und under Ehii-Beker's secret protection Ik: will commît all those crimes and bring al: those misfortunes on Guzurat, which you have already heard explained by my prophe¬ tic warning."™ Amorassan hesitated for a moment; but the last words and looks of his expiring fa¬ ther were stiU present to him, and the feel¬ ings of his heart overpowered the voice ? 4 prudence and of justice* lie rushed into the prison» —~" Now then,** whispered the Spirit ; ' 4 now then learn from bitter experience what you gain, when you follow your'owp inclinations, and not my warning."— At that moment Amorassan lieard a vi · lent uproar, which seemed to be at no g **■ * distance* It came nearer. Numerous torcí es were seen hurrying along in various d « rectioib. The guards, m traversing the ?
terior court of tho prison (in which the Vizir was then standing), surrounded him, exclaimed, " that they hud at least found ao accompike/* and without listening to his re¬ monstrances they dragged hiin into the pre¬ sence of the governor of the prison. That officer appeared to be in the greatest confu¬ sion, when he recognized the Grand Vizir, and immediately rescued him from the hands of the tumultuous soldiery. He then in¬ formed Amorassan, that all this disorder had been occasioned by the escape of his brother Zemaun, which had but that moment been discovered, and the manner and means of which were still a secret. Equally surprised and rejoiced at this intel¬ ligence, Amorassan returned to liis father without loss of time* „«« Yonr wishes are gratified !" he ex« claimed; "before î could reach the priso.i. Zemaun had found means to escape from it. Ami hab saved himself from ??????.? by flight ?— Moawvah raised hb clavied hands in ^rn.
titude to Heaven, and the last spark ot joj. illuminated his faded eye, He bade Amo» rassan approach, that he might remove the curse from his head, and give him his dy ing blessing. It was in vain, that Amoiuv ??? repeated die assurance, that Zemaun had fled without his assistance. The old man was persuaded, that no power interior to the Vizir's could have unclosed the gates of the wei! -guarded fortress, and was con* vinced, that modesty or prudence made ?? son deny, that lie bad dared to violate the Sultan's orders* He blest him with ferven¬ cy; but while the old nun\s hands rested! upon his head, Amorassan shuddered to think, that his fatiier spoke in the belief, that for his sake tiie laws had been viola¬ ted, and a murderer enfranchised to com¬ mit more crimes ι and while thb; thought tormented him, he felt, that such a hie s bîpg could never find audience in heave». Ivloawyah now sank into a sweet and tranquil slumber. Amorasban was sliti watch¬ ing by ?? fathers bed-side, when he was sum-
moned to attend the Soitan. He obeyed : the saloon, in which Ibrahim was seated, was thronged with courtiers, and among f^».-i were Ebu-Beker and the governor ? the royal prison. ~ 4 1 have been just informed," began ihe bulran sternlv, α of vour brother's es- cape* Kir let the murderer fly, and wan¬ der round the world like a perturbed spirit, till remorse brings him loan untimely gravel —ills flight matters to me but little: bul that you, Vi /??, should have so far for¬ gotten your duty, as to violate tho^e h\v¿ wîubo assertor you o u idi t to ?? ? through compassion for a brother whom your af- hctation of over-justice compelled to be¬ came a culprit, this both surprises and affects me to tlie very soul : neither regard to my people nor to myself can permit so gross a violation of justice to pass with impuni¬ ty. The law decrees that he, who procures the escape of a criminal, should hrnueli ???? the penalty of the crime. The me- ???? of our eariy friendship, aud that af-
fection which (i own with shame) 1 cannoi bdp ?? íceling for you, will not suffer that law to exercise its whole rigour·, yet punbhment of some kind ought to be in- flicted.—--Retire from my presence; you will soon know your fate, and till ihm Zc- nvaiuts forsaken dungeon must be your abode.'*— Amorassan .—A mazcm en 1 !—Mi gh t y İbra» hini, you condemn the innocent unheard ! 1.swear by he Prophet, that 1 had no share in the escape of my wretched In other. Sultan.—Wow Ì have you the assurance to dear, what is in itself so evident? Were you not found within the prison at diwd i}f night ?—Had you not entered ît by ? passas* known only to yourself and to me: AVhat oilier individual in tiiis whole king¬ dom could have penetrated unseen into thai iron fortress, aiid carried oil* a captive, guarded by such innumerable bolts, and bar% and walls, aud soldiers ? yiy//(.r«/jv.///.~Appearanccs are agaimt me, but appearances deceive.
,Stt//j;;.— What then could be your busi¬ ness in the prison at an hour so unseason¬ able ? Amorassan,—I came to do that, of which I am now accused«—but the business was efiected before my arrival* Sultan,—So then ! it seems, this virtue is not alwa} s so immaculate, as its master would willingly have Guzurat believe It : this inflexible Justice can yield ouurion.iily, v her il suits with its owa private v iov. » and passions ! Yen confess the intention, 2nd in what docs the intention differ from the fact? And how can Amorassan hiubelt justify his conduct even on his own grounds ? Yet more ; how are we to be certain of the truth of an assertion, which appears so strange? It will be sutlicknt to belivi e you innocent of your brother's escape, havim*· elicli strong reasons to believe you guilty, when you can make known to us the real criminal—till then, farewell; guinvls lead liim to prison."— At this moment Amorran '-???? the
Spirit whisper—" Draw forth the paper, which is concealed betw cu the foldings ol your girdle on the left side, and desire, that it may be read in open court : it con¬ tains the name of Zemaim 9 s deliverer/*™ Amorassan found the paper and deliver» ed it into the hands of the person who ¡ftood next to hini. The Sultan gave orders for its being read aloud.—What was tho astonishment of all present, when they found it to be an order to the governor of tho prison for permitting Zemaun's escape, written with tlie Sultan's own hand, and sealed with Lis private signet. ît ??? com manded the Governor to keep this oidoi secret, on pain of death. As he listened, a deadly paleness spread itself over Ibrahim's face : in a moment at ter, it gave place to the burning blush ol convicted falsehood, and tears of mortified pride gushed into bis eyes» lhe perusal was endet!, and an universal silence suc¬ ceeded. It was broken by the Sultan* starting from his throne, and seizing tlu
important scroll. Ile cast a fugitive glance upon it, and having ascertained that it was the original order, he asked in a terrible voice, while shame and fury struggled fur empire in his countenance.-— bC Vizir ! how came yon by this paper ? ,? ~ Amorassan answered with humility«*" It has proved my innocence, and more needs not to be said™Mighty Sultan, permit me to retire, to close the eyes of my dying fa¬ ther, and commit his ashes to the tomb."—- The Sultan bowed his head in silence.. and. Amorassan withdrew. ' V UE OALÎPH. Let me not five, Ben Hafi, if this wat not a most scurvy trick of your Sultan ! md had he really charged his friend with that as a crime, of which he was himseli the author ? ÜEN HAH. 1 îe had indeed ; such was the consequent' 1 .; (»f his intimacy with Ebu-Beker. Hut in U VOL* IV- U
dious counsellor had gradually taught the Sultan to consider Amorassan as the origi¬ nal cause of Zemaun's offence. He la* mented over the Vizir's too strict adherence to justice, which had involved his brother îîi üiöoti y iiaci orougåit Ciown upon jìimsen the curses of \m father ; had made him be looked upon by all Guzurat as a man, who sacrificed the ties of nature to the oratifi- cations of envy and ambition ; and had even induced the people to censure the Sultan himself for intrusting his power to a mi¬ nister so odious. He then expatiated upon Zemaun's míli tary talents, his youth, his misfortunes, and the services of his father; and the Sultan was persuaded to authorize Xemamts escape from prison and from pu¬ nishment* He fled; and now came the news, that Amorassan had been found within the pre¬ cincts of the royal prison. Ebu-Beker im¬ mediately turned this circumstance to hii» own advantage.—-He told the Sultan, that by laying the blame upon the Vizir's compa"·
mon for his brother, the public indignation at his fox mer inflexibility would be abated: he reminded him, that had it not been for Amorassan's pretentions to immaculate vir* tue, Zemaun would stiU have been innocent, Khaled would still have b^en alive ! and he assured him, that if he could but humble the Vizir's pride a little, by convicting him of a supposed fault, he would make him more indulgent to the feelings of human nature for the future, and thus would ren¬ der him a most essential service. Ibrahim was easily convinced by these arguments, or at least fancied that he was convinced by them: the real motive, which (unknown lo himself) made him consent to this ac¬ cusation, was a secret inclination to morti¬ fy that faultless excellence, which soared to a pilch so far above the flight of all others,, and to bring it down a linie nearer to hb own level. But now when he found the t ibles turned upon him, and that he stood convicted of a 'nost gn>4 and wiltuJ íaUehood in rite íac* ? 2
of his whole court, lus vexation was withoui bounds : and Amorassan's triumph over him was a much more atrocious crime in his eyes, than that transgression would have beea of which he had so wrongfully accused him. Envy, spite, rage, jealousy, all look pos¬ session of the Sultan's heart at once : to be revenged he was determined ; and he now resolved to tuke that step respecting which he had so long hesitated, for the sole and express purpose of mortifying Amo¬ rassan, and acting contrary to his advice and inclination. Accordingly, he the next day announced, that Ebu-Bcker woukl henceforth execute Ihe functions of Chief Cadi,
AMORASSAN.
AJ^áUÍ
\ íiljüil t Λ*
— ~ u Π?νοι KOivoi /\oywv, Ομ,οα?εγος τε ?? cuvstrnof C*öí* ? Aiz&Kehdtai 7favtcc¿ spptTtfm %cc^at ; ? ««-¿.?* ?£^??-?< raf ????? ????,^. 1 *— · Gregory Nazianzcn, - ? Our common studies, in our breasts one mind, Our lives from youth by choice and habit joined, These fragile bonds now sink in swift decay % Far bear the winds each ìo»g«Io¥cd hopu away ! î? ~-
Amorassan was sorrowing by the side of his father's tomb, when the news of his ene¬ my's advancement reached him ; it grieved him more for the Sultan's sake, than for m 3
Ms own, and for Guzurat's more than for the Sultan's : for Ibrahim's perfidious and spiteful conduct respecting his brother's es¬ cape, had wounded his heart too deeply to permit the existence of their former friend¬ ship in all its original warmth and purity. He now stood alone in the world, at • once opprest with the weight of his brother's infamy, his father's death, the loss of the Sultan's confidence, Ebu-Beker's enmity, and the universal hatred: for the people were persuaded, that he had driven his brother to perdition and had broken his father's heart : and they could not easily believe, that the man who dealt so hardly by his nearest relations, could possibly mean kindly by them. But to obtain their gratitude was not: Amorassan's object, and willingly would he have passed his whole Hfe in heaping bless¬ ings on those, who loaded him with cur¬ ses : but alas ! his activity was palsied, and doubt bewildered all his thoughts. Every plan which his genius inspired, every wish
which his heart formed, immediately faded away before the chilling breath of his per¬ secutor, who forced him to remark ali the dangers and difficulties, and all the disadvan¬ tageous consequences which must necessarily accompany the execution/. If Amorassan stretched out his hand to do a benevolent action, the warning Spirit made it drop again inactive, by coldly pointing out the worth¬ îessness of the person, or the defects in his project for relieving him» If he prepared to give his opmion in the Divan, the Spirit never failed to place before him the oppo¬ site side of the question ; and as mortals can give no advice to which there are not some objections, and take no important step without the benefits being necessarily accompanied by some disadvantages, he felt doubtful of the propriety of giving such an opinion, and the advice expired upon his lips, unsaid. On the other hand Ebu-Beker's activity seemed indefatigable—he lost no time in hesitating ; he resolved, and the thing was m 4
clone at once* As his actions were adapt ed to tlie momentary occasion, they in ge« neral were attended with success ; but ii his projects failed, what mattered it to liim ? I lis only care was to conceal his fail¬ ure from the Sultan : who, on the other hand, found the business of government greatly alleviated by the despatch of his new minister, and began to consider Amorassan as a well-meaning man, but totally without talents for business and unfit for the sta¬ tion of Grand Vizir. Such was the state of things, when one evening as Amorassan sat by his father's tomb absorbed in deep but not unpleasing melancholy, the warning Spirit suddenly appeared before him. —** Tremble as thou mayst," said the persecutor, a frowL, if ihou wilt, but thou must hear me ; for necessity (thy master ami mine) compels me to speak, and thee to listen* This morning did Ebu-Beker sit in judgment for the last time upon San- ballad, the governor of the royal prison,
from whom, for your sake, I secretly with¬ drew the Sultan's order for your brother's flight. This man has been accused of de* Uvering that order into your hands, whicli he was commanded to keep secret on pain of death. His sentence is already pronoun« ced, for he can produce no proofs of his innocence. In his mortal agony he appeals to you; he implores you to divulge the means,by which you obtained that paper: his life and death arc both in your powei j what will you do?** Amorassan. ~~~??? you doubt it r Fly to the Sultan, declare tliat that paper was given me by you,. . » The Spirit.— -By me r a supernatural being? and thereby show yourself to the Sukan as a practiser of forbidden arts, as a sor¬ cerer, as an ally of liblis.... Amorassari.— het him think me so! bet¬ ter that the Sultan, nay, that all Guzurat should bhun and abhor me, than that this innocent man should perish on my account. The Sphit.-~Do this, and you are Vizir m S
no moment longer—act as you will, but forget not, that 1 warned you of the con¬ sequences. Amorassan.'—Oh ! that I had never heard, liad never heeded thy warnings ! The Spirit.—! own, you would have been happier ; yet blame not me. It was not my fault, that you aimed at uniting what was in ihei.* nature incompatible—the warm en- thusia&m which animates men to noble deeds, and that cold prudence which foresees ami reckons all their various consequences. Amorassan,—I am at length undeceived, dreadfully undeceived* Be satisfied with what- Ì have already suifered ; warn me no more ; leave me and for ever. The Spirit.— Whether 1 stay with you, or whether 1 leave you, to me matters nothing, but you have bound niy destiny to yours: lill your fate shall be unravelled, 1 must pursue j ou still. Amorassan.—And when then will my fate be decided ? The Spirit.—I was not permitted to read
the last leaf. Oh ! were I able to show you this also., wretched ???, what would there be left for you to hope ! Hark ! a messenger enters your palace to summon you to the Sultan. What mean you to do?— Amorassan.— -To declare all to ibe Sultan, appeal to his former friendship, to the me¬ mory of our happy hours of youth, to his heart ! The Spiri t.-^Do it ; and become the Où ject of universal fear and horror, as much as you arc now an example of misery and mischance! Now then, ï leave ilio Π; Jr for ever ; but Amorassan must not hope to es¬ cape me !"— The Spirit disappeared, and the .mrøeiv ger entered ; Amorassan followed him to the Seraglio. >—·" Mighty Ibrahim!" he exclaimed. while he threw himself at tîie Sultana feet, and clasped his knees, α if ever í possest ι place in your heart, ifcwr ) ou thought me worthy of jour confidence, be u.oved M G
by my entreaties, give credit to the oath which I now take ! May the lightnings of Heaven strike me dead before your eyes, if Sanballad be not innocent of the fault laid to his charge ! he did not give me that fatal paper ; he knows not, by what means i procured it. ibrahim.— And what then were those meclis ? Amorassan.~~*$e gracious, and suffer me to remain silent. To explain this myste¬ rious circumstance could produce no advan¬ tage, and might occasion much distress, Ibrahim.—It is enough! continue obstinate, I will remain so too : preserve yonr mys¬ terious secret, as I will my resolution. If Sanballad is really guiltless, it rests with you to prove his innocence : if you remain si¬ lent, he dies, and his blood be upon yonr lurada not mine ! now save him, or condemn him, for both depend on you. Amowtssan.—Oh ! Ibrahim! and does ? ken the memory of our long union entitle
me to no more confidence from my friend ? Ibrahim.— And can you still pretend to ?? confidence? Amorassan, do 1 possess yours ? Your late mysterious behaviour, the coldness with which you received my caresses, the care with which you kept your heart closed against me, were these likely to preserve my confidence ? And dares the man, who has treated mc tfob so long, still call himself my friend ? Amoras¬ san, you are no longer the man, whom 1 once loved so heartily! no longer, did 1 say? Olì ! you never were the man, whom 1 bo lieved you to be, the man who merited niy affection so well. Amcrassan, — İ was that man, I am that man still ; and if ever 1 deserved your friend¬ ship then, a thousand times more do I de¬ serve ît at llus moment, the most painful one of my whole life, H>rabim~~VrovQ it then by saving the life of the accused Sanbaltad ; for if you perse-
vere in tins obstinate silence, innocent, or guilty, Sanballad dies ! Amorassan.— Ibrahim ! I entreat I. I con¬ jure« . » . Ibrahim—I have said it! he dies! by Ab tab, lie dies at sunrise. shnorassati.—YTite, thou hast conquered, ?nd I bow beneath thy power.—Now mark me, Ibrahim ! Words cannot paini the Sultan's surprize and anxiety, w hile he lisi ened to Amoras - sui'b account of the Egyptian sorcerer«; hut no ????? was the appearance of the Spiri« described, than he uttered an excli mation of alarm and horror, and drew back í '«me paces from Amorassan. _t* ? ?? ??? me!" lie cried, "that dread¬ ful being, who blood before my throne armed vi »li tîie Low ??\ arrow, and who discovered t!,^ concealed murderer,... was not thh thy Spirit I ? — Amonusati.—lt was the same! fön.·/ //?/-— ????????? ! and couid you then enter into this dangerous league, unknowu
to me? and could you then live with me ín the strictest intimacy so long, and still retain by your side a being, whose very re¬ collection makes my blood run cold ? You shut your own heart against me ; you em¬ ployed the most unwarrantable means to become master of ihe secrets of mine; and yet you still called me your friend ? Amcrassan. —It was for your sake,,. . for the sake of vour kingdom.. *. Ibrahim.—Aw ?? with these pretences ; they cannot impose ??? me any longer! Yonr own incapability of friendship made you doubt the stability of mine ; ambition made you tremble for your stations and \ou scrupled not to employ infernal ans to preserve iu You dared not to confide ín me, in human nature, nay not even in tour- self; and who then will dare to confide in v ? P Who will endure the presence of one, by wiio.se side an invisible ally ever stand. to enable him to dissect the hearts of others, and teach him to conceal the real emotion
ι
of his own ? You have broken all the bonds of society ; you stand no more on the same level with otlier men ; you act no longer from the motives, from w hich other men act.™!! is this chilling, dreadful being, who has forced our hearts asunder ; you have preferred her friendship to mine, and now enjoy the fruits of yonr supernatural al¬ liance ¡-—Hence from my sight ! never let me -ee vt'U more!"— With every appearance ol* abhorrence and disgust, the Sultan hastened out of the saloon.—Amorassan returned home, com¬ manded his slaves to load the camels with lis treasures, and before break of day, Ame¬ dabad was left far behind him* TIP. CALItíI. To tril you the trulli, Ben llafi, thougi iiiis poor deceived Sultan İs no particular ■favourite of mine, on the present occasio:. I cannot greatly blame hiin. in Ibrahim* place, í should have done the very ???·
thing: and İn spite of Amorassan's merits, ï should rather have parted with him, than ha\e kept such a disagreeable Spiril conti« nually about ine —though after all 1 think, that Ebu-Beker was a much more danger¬ ous companion for the Sultan, than the Spi¬ rit would have been* AIUZAMT.R. Permit mc to observe, Commander of the Faithful, that so far was this Spirit from being dangerous, that she would have been a most inestimable ally to a minister, who knew how to make a proper use of lier.— Why did not Amorassan follow her advice, and exert himself to ruin Ebu-Be¬ ker, before he had time to obtain the Sul« tan's confidence, and estrange his heart from his Vizir ? BEN H All. Because Amorassan did not resemble Mu- zafler !
-
THE CALTPH. Nay, that is certam, Ben Hafi; ! really think, í never knew two people more ?? like*—But what became of Amorassan, aftei he left Amedabad ?
,',
?И?? ΧΙ.
Away !—»the hul fiend follows mc,"—- Ki.NCi Leak,
BEN HAFİ. Amorassan wandered onwards, followed by his slaves and loaded camels, Where he laid his weary head, was now a matter of indifference to him : Yet recollecting a dear and faithful friend, who inhabited a distant province, he resolved to direct his steps thither, and shelter his misfortunes under his hospitable roof. lie found there what he sought, grate¬ ful hearts, a kind reception, compassion, and ??????. Here then he resolved to pass uit remainder of Ids j ite in tranquil ob-
scuri! y : but scarcely had three days elapsed, when in the twilight his persecuting Spirit stood before him. —" Away, Amorassan !" she exclaimed ι *· call your slaves 5 let your camels be load¬ ed ; you must be gone this very night, The Grand-Vizir, Ebu-Bcker. *.... ha ! at those words how the colour fades from your cheek ¡-«The Grand^Vizir, Ebu-Beker, has been entrusted by his sovereign with your secret ? he has not failed to employ it to effect your complete destruction. He has convinced the Sultan, that you are a necro¬ mancer; that his former affection for you was produced by spells and talismans \ and that all the misfortunes with which his kingdom has been visited, were the conse» quence of yont alliance with the infernal powers. Ibrahim has abandoned you to the Vizir's malignity ; the guards are now hastening hither, and if you are found, you will perish as a sorcerer by a fiery death. Amorassan,-~And let me perish then ί life
îs become hateful to me, and I will net wan« der further to preserve it« The Spirit.— -Thou must not perish, and thou shalt wander further. Amorassan.—Whzt can compel me ? Tke Spirit— That, which you summoned me from the islands of gloom to coun¬ teract ; your heart ¡—mark me—your Host will never consent to surrender you to the Sultan's guards. ?? will either perish in defending you, or be compelled to share your flight, and tear himself from all that is dear to him. He has a wife.... children .. .. friends. *, . Ebu-Beker's vengeance wili fall heavy upon them ι his possessions will be confiscated; his family will perish in misery ; your friend will never cease to lament their loss, and will sink into the grave broke: -hearted. Your flight can alone rescue him from these misfortunes ; now then, Amorassan, remain here, if your heart will let you.* 9 — *— * ς Away ! away !" cried the Unfor-
funate to his slaves, and in a few hours they were once more upon their journey. It was evident, that in Guzurat there was no safety for Amorassan. He resolved to take shelter in the neighbouring king¬ dom of Candeish. His road lay through Burglana, and he was already within a day's journey of the frontiers, when he perceived a small troop of travellers, who, attacked by robbers far superior in num¬ ber, still defended themselves with the great¬ est bravery. ~" Oh Ì Allah !" he exclaimed, cc tha: I might but lose my own wretched life in preserving that of a fellow-creature !'*— Hecommanded his attendants to unsheathr their sabres, and follow him. Ile gave lib Arabian steed the spur, and darting dow p the hill, from whose brow he had descrycit th^ combatants, was on the point of joining ihem; when— u Right ! Right!"* he hcaro the Spirit whisper ; " hasten onwards ! lo¬ no tíme; save tlie villain's life, that he ma*
become siili more a villain, and then own lhe truth of my prediction ! The man, who lights yonder, is your brother Zemaun, is Zemaim the murderer !"—- —"May he become my murderer too!'* replied the desperate Amorassan ; * ς thus at least I shall be freed from thy persecu* tions ?— He urged his courser forwards with in¬ creased speed, fell upon the robbers, and decided lhe combat. Part of them fled ; the rest were bound. Amorsssan now ad¬ vanced towards his brother, and extended his hand ; but no sooner did Zemaun re« cognize hini, than with frantic gestures and dreadful execrations lie forbade his ap¬ proach, at the same time threatening hiin with his unsheathed sabre» In vain did Amorassan attempt lo appease him ; Ze- maun's rage increased with every moment. At length Amorassan divided his well-laden camels into two parts, left the richest share with his brother, and then with a heavy heart resumed his journey»
But scarcely had Zemaim lost sight oí him, when the thirst of vengeance, and desire to possess his brother's remaining treasures, took possession of his bosom, He imparted his plans to his companions, and procured their assistance: he offered to set free the captive banditti, provided they woukl elect him for their chief* His pro» posais were accepted ; he set forward with his new associates, easily overtook Amoras¬ san in the desart, plundered the Httle cara¬ van, and thus became the captain of a band of robbers, as the warning Spirit had fore told —" Rich in virtue/' he exclaimed to the bewildered Amorassan, " you need no other possessions« Your virtue, has made me a fugitive, an out-cast, a robber : now let us see, what it will make of you. I now be* hold you such as ï was myself, on that day when I was compelled to preserve my life by flight: but fortune sniles on me once more ; and by the help of my good sword and these my brave companions, í doubt
not soon to regain by plunder more, than I have lost through my brother's spite and envy, I leave you life, not from any sense of kindness, but because I trust, that an existence so miserable will punish you with every moment for the sufferiags, which you have inflicted upon me."«— Amorassan sank upon the earth, and without speaking envelloped his head in his garment» The sun soon poured his blazing fire over these unbounded desarts, where the eye was not gratified by the sight of a single bush, no, not of a single blade of grass! The robbers were gone, and bad carried off his slaves, his camels, and his treasures* Amo¬ rassan was left alone. He wandered on* ward, while the burning sand scorched the soals of his feet 3 and while the only mois¬ ture, which dewed the earth beneath, was the tears which fell from Amorassan*s smart ing eye-lids. And now a thick gloom over» spread the heavens. The whirlwind was rouzed; columns of sand rose into the air, VOL* IV. N
and the waste beneath seemed agitated like the ocean, The thunder rolled heavily over Amorassan's head, and no cave ivas nigh to afibrd him shelter. The whirlwind en¬ veloped him ; it raised him from the ground, and then dashed him down again with vio¬ lence. He struggled, with every effort sank deeper, and was conscious that he was onl) struggling to dig his own grave in the sand. He resigned himself to his fate, and soon lost all recollection, THE CALIPH. My good Ben Hafi, if yon make this un¬ happy man suffer much longer, I shall never be able to hear your story onto Pry'thee, if you can do it without spoiling your narra- tî ve, bring him some relief with all speed; even in a tale, it grieves me to see a good man suffer* BEN ???, Be all your wishes fulfilled like tluV AmoraSì>an*b help is at hand.
"ΓΗ 4P TTT V-aÍ-XA-I. » Aii« — ? In woeful measures, wan despair; Slow suîït'n strains her grief beguild : A mingled, strange, and solemn air, By lits *t\vi'.* sad, by starts 'twas wild, 1 *— Colli ν.*. In this melancholy condition was our hero found the next day by a caravan, which accident conducted thither· A young ???, (his name was Massouf,) whose camels had been hired by the merchants, was the first; who discovered him. ï Ie stopped the marcii, restored the suspended powers of animation in Amorassan, and when he understood his forlorn condition, proffered him a bheltev in the Carnatie. The unfortunate man accorr- N 2
ed the proposal witSi gratitucîc, and ???? fouad himself a welcome guest i a the family of ihe benevolent Massouf. That family wa;» a perfect model of do* mebtic happiness. Massouf had a young and blooming wife, whom he loved with his whole soul, and whose bosom gave nourish¬ ment to his first child. Oh ! while he gaz- ed with tender emotion on these wedded lovers, blest in the enjoyment; of tranquil obscurity and domestic comfort, how dúl Amorassan lament his o r n hard fate, which had condemned hini to be a monarch'^ friend, a favourite, and a Grand-Vizir ! One morning the lovely Fatine was ro posing under the poplars, which shaded hei dwelling; her child was in her arms, arJ all the heart-felt tenderness of a mother w.b pourtrayed in every look, which she <;.? upon the smiling infant. Every movement of his little hands, every indistinct murmur which issued from his coral lips, seemed h> afford her such delight, as all the world's wealth could not purchase. Sometimes ??
cxprcst her rapture by a thousand names of endearment, and then again she sang some infantine ditty, and hushed him to sleep upon her bosom» Amorassan stood opposite to her, and while he viewed this picture of maternal love, he feh, tliat happiness existed ??? earth ; nay, at that moment he felt, that he was himself happy. He dwelt with plea* sure on the thought, that, nourished, bv this tender mother, and protected by so good a father, the child would grow up in inno¬ cence, and when grown up, would be placed in a station of fife, wlune rural quiet and enviable obscurity would form him for vir¬ tue and domestic happiness. His heart over« flowed with a tender benevolent emotion, and lie blest the fond mother and her child. Fatme returned into the house, for her infant had now fallen asleep. Amorassan's eyes still followed her with delight, when the sight of the Spirit made his cheeks turn pale, and the tears of pleasure which glittered in his eyes* seemed changed into N 3
ice by the freesing breath of his perse¬ cutor« — u You see, 55 she began, a that î forget not my duty. When i would not the sight of this afiectionate mother and her innocent babe deceive ? But you have commanded me to warn you against deceptions ; others may enjoy such delightful illusions i but they must not be enjoyed by you* &ς Here in this very place, in thirteen months and two davs from this time, will that child become tbe prey of the monstrous sr. ake, the Anaconda, who.'e very name makes the hearers tremble ! V you reper t my prophecy to the mother, she will ¿r?rt in horror and turn pale, as you do now. and yet will she forget that day and that hour u hen it Arrives, for b\ ihat time her maniagc-vmv will be already broken; and cìasoed in the licertious embraces of a man (whom ::hc now abhors) she will not re» member *he danger, till the fatal moment ís past, ard îier child is become the prey of the huncrrv Anaco ι? da/'—
— ζς Murderer of my happiness !-—of my repose l* thus exclaimed Amorassan, and tore out Whole ringlets of his hair in agony ; ts thou art no warning counsellor! no daugh¬ ter of the world of light !—thou art a tor¬ menting dæmon ! thou art to me the Spirit of Despair!"— —" Hast thou guest it at last ?" answered the Spirit ; u right ! Despa?? is my truest name indeed ; and the moment, v/hen that word escaped from thy lips, was appointed by destiny to lay before thee the full extent and fatal consequences of thy folly and thy pride—hear me !'*— -* — sc Never ! Never I" shrieked Amoras¬ san ; u herald of evil tidings, never w ill I hear thee more/'-—And with frantic despera¬ tion he rushed towards a neighbouring pre¬ cipice, whose base was washed by the ocean, lie reached the summit ; but there already stood the Spirit in all her freezing over¬ whelming majesty, and Amorassan remained rooted to his place, immoveable as a statue. —~" Shortsighted mort u p ' - J i ' \?? Sohii,
u hear, what thy bond-slave has to tell thee, then die, if thou wilt : I shall view thy fall fremi this precipice, calmly as the descent oi the autumnal leaf. All that \^u have com- manded, have I punctually fulfilled. 1 have placed the truth before yon : I have enabled \ ou to read the hearts of others ; I have dispelled the illusions of your own. Now mark, what would have happened, had you t:usted to the power of virtue and the protection of heaven, and left me undisturb¬ ed in the winter of my gloomy islands. —" Yes ! Ebu-Beker would still have ob* tained the Sultan's favour, would still lune risen to power and dignity; but your genius, unembarrassed by doubts, and confident in the rectitude of your intentions, would have enabled you to counteract the baleful effects of ?? power« The Sultan's heart 'would still have been estranged from you, but onl) estranged for a time. Trusting in his friend ship, because you felt that you deserved ii and that yoar own for Jiim was midimini-fo cd, you would have combatted Ebu-BekeirV
artifices with the irresistible arms of truth and candour. You would honestly have hid before the Sultan your hopes, your fears, your doubts : the coldness of his affection would have melted before the warmth of yours 5 and while he felt, that your confi¬ dence in him was unbounded, you would still have preserved a &hare in the Sultan's, Your brother would still have been a villains but it depended on yourself, whether it should be vour hand or Lbu-Beker's, which led him to the commission of crimes. Had you through affectionate weakness complied with your father's request, and made Ze¬ maun Governor of Burglana, he would have betrayed that province to the enemy, and blood would iiave deluged the fertile plains i i Guzurat : but this would only have fui - nibbed you with the more brilliant oppor tunity for displaying your courage and your fidelity, your love for your native land, and tlie icsources of your genius. Tbe sense of danger would have revived in Ibrahim's me- ii.ory the consciousness of your talento» Y ru ?? ¡J
would have been recalled to power : Khaled would have been still alive to execute your desires ; and with the hand of strength to weild the sword of his armies, and with the head of wisdom to direct his counsels, soon would the Sultan of Guzurat have triumphed over all his enemies. Zemaim made captive, would have owned with gratitude, that lie was indebted for life to his brother's inter¬ cession : Ebu-Beker's perfidy would have been discovered, and his head falling on the scaffold would have paid the price of his crimes : the Sultan's whole heart would again have been yours, and yours for ever - 9 and then might he indeed have become such a man as you fondly believed him to be, and such a monarch as you so earnestly desired to make him. Amorasmn.—Oh ! thou perfidious coun* selior ! What prevented my producing ef¬ fects so blessed—what but thy prophetic warnings ? ?? Spirit— What 1 prophecied was true ; what Ì prophecied has happened, and must
mJ .f'
have happened ; but it depended on yourself alone, whether or not it should happen through your agency. Was it I who sought you ì Was it I, who needed your ministry ì Amorassan, weep, rave, despair ; but blama no one except yourself. Yes * despair ! for now learn the ivhoh extent of the miseries, which your presunijv îuous pride has drawn down upon your native land. Zemaun lays waste tlie frontier- provinces ; the robbers, from whom you rescued him, fight beneath his banners ; the treasures, which vou were the means of throwing into his power, have enabled him to multiply the number of his adherents. Burglana is deluged with blood, and he pre¬ pares to carry his ravages and his vengeance into the very heart of Guzurat. All is terror ; all is tumult ; and the armies of Candcish will soon take advantage of the* general confusion and dismay. Nor will the enemy's approach be unwelcome to Ameda- bad, so heavily do its wretched inmates feel ι ho iron sway of Kbu-Beker. Every hour ???? N ti
the scaffold stained with innocent blood; every hour hears the shrieks of the widow and the orphan, deprived of fiithers and husbands by Ehu-Beker's cruelty, and robbed of subsistence to gratify Ebu-Bcker's avarice, ????????.— And does the Sultan know all tiiis, yet not redress it ? Oh ! how must his heart be changed ! What, Ibrahim ! whose virtues, whose character of mînd. ... The Spirit.— lik mind has no character; im virtues were but the reflection of your own, ic ou were the object of his admira¬ tion, and while she spoke ihrough your lips, he fancied, thut lie loved Virtue ; but you wilfully resigned the empire of his fancy ; another now reigns m your stead, and the Sultan only see.> and hears with the eyes and ears of Ebu-Beker* In vain flows the blood of the innocent* ín vain do the streets of Amedabad ring with the shrieks ni box row, with the execrations of despair! When he ceased to love ??? Ibrahim ceased fo believe in the existence of virtue. He considers you ïis a hypocrite, an impostor,
the slave oí self-interest, and a pracliser of infernal arts t and believing you ?? be worth¬ less, he despairs of findmg others deserving, Persuaded of the falsehood of him, by whom they were inculcated, he believes your prin¬ ciples to have been false as yourself, and he now rides his empire on the principles of Ebu-Beker: yet the softness of his heart makes him still regret the happy days, when he believed virtue to be no phantom ; he still most bitterly laments, that your perfidy dispelled that fond and fair illusion ; and when he hears the curses of his people, he curses you! Amorassan.— ïlxve mercy ! Let me die î The Spirit.—As thou wilt! í with-hold ìlice no longer. She lowered her hand, and Amorassan dashed himself headlong from the precipice. THE CALİP!!. Ah ! barbarous Ben Hafi Ì And did the. Unfortunate perish thus ? Save him this in¬ stant, 1 charge you; ï am now more anxious
than ever for his preservation ; for as liis insupportable Spirit has taken her leave of Mm, there arc hopes that the poor man may at length enjoy a Httle peace and ctuníbru Now then, Ben Hati, let us hear what became of him
???? XIIL
«— Cí Tbc fairost iiowers lhe yíuc prefer*. Aiul "diva thpïr ííAVoeícst odours there; While the fall pine ami mountain onk Ol'i feel the t cm pests nul est stroke, Here in this lowly moss-grown seat t 'ahn peace and rund quiet dwell; The storms, whieh rack the vlch and p,reaf, ¥\y hiirmle;.b o'er the bneplienls cell."·—
BEN HAFİ. Thií ocean received Amorassan, but aot tor ever. When his senses returned to him, he found himself stretched on t he sea-shore, while by his side knelt an ancient fisherman,
who welcomed his return to life with a smile expressing the most sincere and bene¬ volent pleasure. ™* u Where am Ï?** inquired Amorassan, titer a few minutes past in silent recollection 3 u how came í here i**— Alcouz (for that was the fisherman's rame) replied«, w that while watching hk nets, he had for some lime observed him on the cliff above in earnest conversation with a person of singular habit and ap¬ pearance, and that he at length saw him ?? If seized by sudden giddiness fall from the Hirmnit of the precipice into the bilious which bathed its fool : that he had imme¬ diately left his neis, jumped into the sea, and brought him saie to land, where the pleasure of seeing him revive had amply repaid him for his labour and his danp'cr/ - - Amorassan thanked his preserver wiih e\cry mark of heau-felt gratitude; adding wilh a sigh,—" lb irks are ai!, which it ? la my power tt» give you in return ior ia·, presen ation of my ufo/ 7 -™
u Not so," replied Alcouz, " for if your inclination be as hearty as von sav. our meeting may be fortunate enough for both of us. 1 have made to-day (at least ï guess .so) the richest draught of fish, that ever foil in my way since I first threw a line. My nets are so full that I have been long labouring without success to bring them to land ; now if you will return the service which I have done you, by lending me a helping h nd with my booty, I shall think myself richly repaid, and you shall have an ample share of the prize into the bar¬ gain."— These words, the tone in which they were spoken, the friendly looks which ac¬ companied them, seemed like balm to the wounded heart of Amorassan. —-" You have saved my life," baid he, while he took the fisherman's hand ; " you have a right to my services; command them ! and if you dare put so much confi» dence in me, grant the rights of hospitaH¬ ty to a wretch, who has nb place on earth
f o rest Ms head. Gladly will 1 render yun every service of which 1 aia capable, or wliich you can leach me ; but 1 fear, you will find me an awkward and unapt assistant, though not one deficient in attention or good will."— 4i Mahomet himself would require no more," replied Alcouz, and then led the way to the nets. Amorassan laboured with his whole strength ; the draught was a rich one, and nearly filled the fisherman's little bark. This important business accomplished, Alcouz steered homewards, and the new as* sociales soon reached a small but neat-look¬ ing cottage, at no great distance from the city of Meliopour. oii hearing the fisherman's voice, who loudly proclaimed the day's success, his daughter unclosed the window, and wished lum joy oi lis good fortune. The sun was ja»t sinking into the western waves, and the reflection of its glow throw a veil of the softest roseate light over the smiling fate of the maiden. Amorassan gazed upon her with admirat ior», but he was suflorcd
ti) contemplate the lovely sight but for a moment. No sooner was she aware of a strangei'h presence, than she concealed her face wilh her veil; and then accompanied by her aged nurse, she came forth to usr.i«t her father in conveying his prize into the cottage. Alcouz now presented the females to Amorassan, and informed them of the es¬ sential service, which he had rendered him in assisting to bring his nets on shore, Amorassan on the other hand, maintained, that he had only repaid in a very smaU part his obligations, and related the man¬ ner, in which Akou» had preserved Ms Wie at the risk of losing his own» —^ And yet my father is the most in* debtedof the two," said the maiden; " what lio did for you, was a mere act of huma¬ nity, and done without reflection ; but what you did for him, must have been a p.miful .sacrifice. Your Lmuua^e and an- Ö o í pearance make it evident, that you are nut accustomed to sucli mean oilier ¡ aud
ilicreforc while you rendered him your aid, you must have either fell your pride wound¬ ed, or at least must have sorely remembered the extent of your misfortunes. Gratitude overpowered these feelings; but alas! good stranger, the effort must have cost you much."— It was now, that Alcouz for the first tirne observed, what his daughter's more acute observation had penetrated with a single dance. With some embarrassment he en- «1 treiicd the stranger's pardon for having treated him with so little respect, when it was evident, that he W'as entitled to so much, „« Good old man," said Amorassan in a dejected tone, " i am an unfortunate! ï am an outcast from society, bereft of all my hiends, persecuted by many enemies : but î swear to you, that î am innocents if he dares call himself so, who has murmured against the dispensations of Heaven, and quarrelled witli the imperfections of man. I have no resting plate on earth, no roof to shelter my head from the tempest. Have
pity on me ! Grant me the rights of hos«. pitality !"— He had not ceased to speak, wiien the damsel approached in trembling eagerness, and tendered a cup of water with a cluster of freshly-gathered grapes. He tasted the fruit and water, and as he returned the cup into her hands, she thanked him for his acceptance with a benevolent smile. —" Ask not who I am," he continued ; €S suffer me to render you such services, as are within my power ; and when we have tried each other sufficiently, you shall know, to whom you have so generously afforded your protection.""-- -"-" But yet," said the girl with timidity; " but yet zve have all of us some name or other. My father is called Alcouz, my nurse Dilara ; my name is Leilah ; and yours* «.. r"— —" Call mc," answered Amorassan, " call me Zeyn ; that is my name at present."— Ihe women now placed the frugal meal upon the table ; when ît was finished, Leilah ?
riang to her lute, and while he listened le her sweet and plaintive voice, Amorassan forgot his misfortunes* After an evening ■past in happiness, he was conducted into a small but cleanly chamber, and as he laid lus head upon his pillow— <e Thou fearful Perse¬ cutor," said he to himself, * € visit mc no «???, and 1 am saved."— Zeyn (for as he was only known by thai name m the fisherman's family, by that name he mibt be called henceforward) was treated from this moment as the adopted son of his kind host, líc exerted all his powers to repay such benevolent protection ; and success crowned his toil so uniformlv, that frequently did ????. repeat«— C4 tlu* blessings of Allah came 'into my house with Ze) n."-—The heart of the young man bounded wiîh joy, as he heard the sentence; lor so completely had despondency crushed his spirit, that he had till then looked on himself, as on a wretch destined to bring mLfortune, wherever his accursed footstep · fell But now he again raised his head,
anel existence a^ain became valuable in his eyes, for he felt, that there were beings in the world, * to whose happiness Ids existence was of consequence. In this manner had several months past away, when the venerable Alcoufc, by sleep¬ ing imprudently in his boat at night., con¬ tracted a malady, which terminated in his losing the total use of his limbs, Zevn tended him during his illness, as if he had reali v been his son ; he now undertook alone the charge of supporting the family ; and in the intervals of labour he omitted no means of cheering the old man's deprest spirits, and soothing his sufferings by discourses of hope and consolation. Daily he bore the helpless Alcouz on his shoulders to an open place ? .oar the city, which was planted with stately trees, in order that he might enjoy the freshness of the air, the pleasant shade, the songs of the birds, and the occasional society of his passing acquaintance : and the neighbours, who saw him constantly pass 'ibng with his venerable burthen, blest his
filial piety, and prayed, that their chilidren might but show them as much affectku, as Alcoirz experienced from the youthiu! stranger. ·—" My friend ! My son !" said the fisher man, one day white he gazed 4 upon Zeyn affectionately, and tears of gratitude filled his eyes; "were it not for you, what :; miserable wretch should í be at this tuomeni An helpless cripple, who must lie down and* die of hunger with his poor innocent: chile:« or must owe a precarious existence to tin charity of passers-by ! Ah! never did \1\~' sea yeild me so rich a prize, as when 1 snatched you from its billows! Even nv : bodily suflerings scarcely seem to me a mis fortune, the solicitude and the pleasure which you seem to feel in relieving them. makes my heart glov/ so warm and beat ?- grateful And yet it is very hard, that you should he obliged to labour singly to suppori usali! How happy shoukl 1 feel, were it not for this care, *.. and one other,,.. Zw,— What is that other care ?
Alcouz.— Åh I I should long ago haVe en¬ trusted you with it, could you'have reHeved it, as you do the rest : but that may not be ! you are not of our station ; you have, it is true, lowered yourself to us, (as my daughter says,) and at present deign to share our obscurity and want : but justice cannot long leave a man like you in misfortune, (at least so says my daughter,) and therefore any connexion wiiich you form with us, must be considered as merely temporary. I confess, at first I thought otherwise; but aiy daughter convinced me, that she was in the right, and therefore I must take my anxiety with me into the grave undivulged. Zeyn.'— If that anxiety regards your daugh· tor, let me spare you the necessity of re» veiling it, You have long treated me with the afiection of a tat lier ; you have bestowed on me the name of your son. Worthy Al¬ couz, give me with Leilah'o hand a titb to that name !"~ The good old man was unable to answer.» but he pointed to the road conducting VOL, IV. ?
him to. hb cottage»· Leilah stood on the threshold, and hastened with anxious ten¬ derness to inquire, what brought her father home so much before his accustomed hour. Alcouz told her, what had past; and the Maiden blushed as deeply, as when on the first evening of their meeting the set¬ ting sun illuminated her countenance with its roseate Hght. Zeyn placed his hand in that of the trembling girl, and pronounced the vow of eternal affection. As the words past his lips, he recollected the warning Spirit« The biood fled from his cheeks, as he cast a look of fearful inquiry round hîrni and oh! from what an oppressive weight did his heart feel relieved, when his eye encountered not the chilling glance of that dreaded enemy. MUZAFFER, Manifold as have been the follies of your fantastic Hero, Ben Hafi, this last surpasses them all ! What! a poor fisherman's daugh-
ter become the wife of the Grand-Vizir of Guzurat, whose power... * THE caliph* In the name of heaven, Muzaffer, do not interrupt Ben Hafi; I had quite forgotten, that Amorassan had ever had the calamity of being a Vizir, and now only recollected, that he was fortunate enough to be a virtuous man! Go on, go on, Ben Hafi! Tell your tale according to your own fancy ; introduce as many Fishermen, and Cripples, and Beggars as you chuse ; they shall all be welcome to me, and my only objection to their introduction is, that it is not in my power to make them all rich, and all well, and all happy»
u 2
, CHAP. XIV.
— Ci Oh ! Conspiracy, NV hore wilt thou find a cav-cm dark enough Ty mask thy monstrous visage ?*'—- Jultus Cæsar
BEN HAFİ. It' was midnight when Zeyn sought the sea-shore, in hopes that a lucky haw! would enable him to furnish the table on his wedding-day more ptenteously than usual, He steered towards the rocks, threw out his netSj and having fastened his little bark to the shrubs which were rooted at its base, lie for the first time ventured to ascend the precipice, on which he had formerly
•endured all the agonies of dying« It was here, that lie determined to wait for sun« rise* He was weary with rowing, and the awakening morning air blew keen and cutting« To guard himself from the blast, he entered a narrow clift of the rock, laid himself down, a*ul was soon buried in slumber. But ha had not long enjoyed this repose^ when he was rouzed by the sound of voices; they ascended from a cave in the lower part of the rock, which happened to be exactly under the place where he was resting» He listened, and heard the whole details of a plot formed against the government of the Sultan of the Carnatie* He collected from their discourse, that the speakers were per¬ sons of considerable consequence in the Sultan's court. Every one complained oí the sovereign's severity, of his neglect oír his nobles, of his exaltation of men of low birth to tlie first offices of the sta*e, and particu¬ larly of the ill-treatment of Ms deserving son, ? a
According to their account, this young Prince was compelled by his father's avarice and jealousy to submit to the most degrading humiliations, was restrained in all his pur¬ suits and indulgences, and carefully debarred Som all share of power and exertion of influence ; and it seemed to be tht,- universal opinion, that nothing could release him from this disgraceful captivity except the deposi» tion of the man, who treated him so little like a father. Every one endeavoured to excuse his treason under colour of justice and the necessity of the case : and numerous arguments were advanced to prove, that the execution of their design would be one of the most noble actions ever accomplished ; since, instead of the weak and bigotted Sul¬ tan, it would place a youthful, wise, and generous-minded Prince on the throne, whose brilliant talents and extraordinary virtues could not fail to produce the happi» ness of the whole kingdom, and to restore that vigour to its government, which had mouldered away under the erroneous ad·
ministration of the reigning monarch. Oc¬ casionally, the conference was interrupted by a soft complaining voice«, which appeared rather to moderate than incite the resent¬ ment of the rest, till at length it even seem¬ ed to be changed into the tone of supplica^ tion ; but its accents were so low, that it was impossible for Zeyn at such a distance to collect their import. > The conference was now at an end. The plan was finally arranged, .nd its execution confirmed by solemn oaths. The beams of the rising sun now glittered upon the ocean's bosom, and Zeyn heard the Confederates be^ low as if preparing to depart. With caution he advanced his head beyond the precipice, and saw the Conspirators issue forth, and trasten to their horses, which Slaves hekl for them at some distance. He counted tour- teen ; they gave the spur to their coursers, and soon disappeared from his sight. Zeyn now quitted his lurking-place, and soon discovered the entrance to the cave. He entered« and seating himself oh a projec- O é
tion of the rock. ; remained for some lime meditating on the important discovery, which he had just made. He had heard the Sultan described as a man, who dis¬ tributed justice \rith the strictest impar« tiality ; \\ ho was not known to be the slave of any particular weakness himself; and who never suffered , gimes to pass un¬ punished, whether their perpetrator was a member of his Divan, or a driver of camels. Zeyn, therefore, thought it absolutely ne¬ cessary, that this dangerous conspiracy should be revealed without delay: yet ho couid not think without repugnance on again interfering with the aflairs of sove¬ reigns. Besides 3 he was now nothing belter than a poor fisherman, and how could he expect to gain an audience of the Sultan ? ilxe very request must needs excite sus¬ picion ; and if the slightest hint of his business once reached the conspirators, how easy would it be for such powerful per¬ sons to prevent his story from ever coming to the Sultan's knowledge, either by dû«
patching him privately, or burying him in some secret prison, tiil their plan should be effected ? Such were the reflections, wliose thread was broken by a noki but too well known to him ! It was the garment of his persecu¬ tor, which streamed in the wind with a rushing murmur, 'm the same instant the Spirit stood before him, and the sun, which pierced through a chasm of the rock, threw its beams upon that countenance, so cold, so· serious, so awfully lovely. A groan of des¬ pair burst from the bosom of the wretched man, who felt, that he was again the persecuted Amorassan ; and at* he gazed in silence upon the dreaded vision, all his tran¬ quillity, all lis happiness, all his -wishes, all his hopes, seemed at once to espire in his heart« —** Amorassan," said the Spirit, ** when hst I parted from you, í thought, that we parted to meet no more : but the sea was· not suflbred to conceal you, and í am s rill your slave, Yet tremble not at my prvence ι O ã
Thal last page, which I was not permitted to read in the Book of Destiny, and which contains the sum of your future fortunes, at this moment is unfolded ; but your own heart must be your sole guide on this occa¬ sions and I am not permitted to. warn you or foretell the consequences of that act, which now agitates your uncertain thoughts. Happy is it for you, that I am not permitted ! *' Look down, Amorassan ! a seal-ring lies at your feet, and that seal-ring will confirm lhe truth of your discovery* Hereafter mankind shall vaunt the lucky accident, which drew it from its owner's finger : perhaps, you will even yourself believe it to have fallen by accident, for such is the name, which short-sighted mortals bestow on all occurrences, whose concealed principies are beyond their comprehension. Guard well that ring, and now act according to your free will, aided by no better counsellor than unbiassed human judgment* Fortune again proflbrs her sceptre to your hand; and it now depends upon himself alone to decide, who-
ther Amorassan will resume all that he has lost, his wealth, hia power, his greatness. FareweU ¡—Probably for ever! í came to you without joy, and 1 leave you without sorrow."—She said, and disappeared. Amorassan carefully secured the ring with¬ in the folds of his girdle, drew his nets hastily, and regained the shore, while his mind was all confusion and alarm* Almost unconsciously he directed his steps towards the Sultan's residence ; the market-place lay in his road, and while traversing it, he heard a herald proclaiming— " that the Prince had lost his seal-ring at the chace ; and that whoever could find it, and restore it to its royal owner, should be rewarded with two hundred drachmas, and a robe of honour."— The herald proceeded to describe the signet; Amorassan fell a cold shivering seize his limbs, when he recognized ihe riiip; which at that moment was envelloped ïn his girdle. Before he was yet well re¬ covered from the alarm of um discover v, O G
he was rouzed by a sudden tumult in the market-place, and on inquiring the cause, was informed, that the Sultan and his son were passing through it in their way to the principal mosque. Thither also hastened Amorassan, eager ro see the two illustrious persons, of whose destinies he was so unexpectedly become master. He forced his way through the crowd with an impetuosity, which bore down every obstacle, and soon found him» seif within the consecrated walls. The Sultan was a man still in the prime of life, majestic in his deportment, but whose serious look mus prevented from wearing any appearance of severity, by the benevolence of his expressive countenance. The Prince was at no gye.it distance from his faiher ; he was a lovely youth ; yet the brilliance of his personal beauty was con¬ siderably obscured by a certain pensive gloom, for which Amoratsan knew but too well how to account. Ills eyes weie Mill iked upon the Frmce's face with in-
satiable curiosity, when he heard a voice from the pulpit pronounce aloud—" Ye true believers, know, that the Chief Iman has a dead person in his house, and is forbidden by the law from haranguing you this day. Let him therefore, who feels the inspiration of Allah, assume his place, and may the Prophet shed his spirit upon the speaker's lips !"~— Instantly a ray of light penetrated the mind of Amorassan. Eagerly he ascended rhe pulpit, and after a prayer for the pre¬ servation of the Sultan's life, he announced in a prophetic tone the existence of a most dangerous conspiracy, and called upon the people in energetic language to unite in de¬ fence of so excellent a sovereign. His dis* course and manner excited universal as¬ tonishment. The people concluded, that the fisherman must needs be some unfor¬ tunate person, whom religious enthusiasm had deprived of his senses. But the wiser oukan read in the orator's eyes, that his warnings were founded on more substantial
grounds, Unn he judged it prudent to explain to the multitude. Accordingly, the fisher¬ man no sooner quitted the pulpit, than he was summoned to tbe palace by a royal command. lie lost no time in relating to the Sultan lus adventure on the rock in all its circum¬ stances. The monarch doubted the ex¬ istence of so atrocious a plot, and warned his informer, not to trine with him in a matter of such dangerous importance *, yet even granting his story to be true, how could the culprits be recognized ? The fisherman had not. heard a single name ; and he had listened at too great a distance to allow the possibility of his discovering them by the sound of their voices. ~ w Mighty Lord !" said Amorassan, ** thus much I know, that the fourteen con« spirators are all members of the supreme Divan. Let a herald immediately call your whole council together, announcing that you require their assistance in consequence of the discovery of a most dangerous and
treasonable plot. My oration in the mosque must already have given them the alarm, and this further mention of a conspiracy will confirm the justice of their fears· s ?? my life, the culprits will not dare to show themselves in your Divan."— —"I like your counsel wdl," answered the Sultan ; " and I like it the better, be¬ cause by thus allowing them time to fly, 1 shall spare myself the necessity of shed¬ ding human blood ; a necessity ever painful to my heart,, however guilty be the sufferer- The Divan shall be summoned instantly."— —·** Yet one word!" observed Amoras¬ san ; " your enemies are equally the enemies of your son; perhaps are even more so* Then before your herald announces the Certain existence of this plot, let your guards instantly hasten to the Prince's pa¬ lace, and prevent all possibility of his falling into danger by escorting lám to the Di- Tocirii* -** ?? *« 1 * — u So be it !" replied the Sultan.—Th> Divan was summoned, and thirteen of the
principal members of it failed to make their appearance, Messengers were dispatched a second time to require their presence % when it appeared, that ???? hours before, they had quitted tbe metropolis with every mark of terror and consternation. On leaving the Divan, the Sultan's first care was to su.namon the fisherman to his presence, —" Your veracity is confirmed/* said the monarch ; " yet my preservation is still incomplete. But thirteen of my nobles failed to appear in the Divan - y and while the fourteenth (who perhaps is the most dangerous among them all) remains undis¬ covered, 4?hafc perils have í not to ?????.1 from his secret machinations ?"— —" Sultan," replied Amorassan, " that fourteenth is well known to me; but till this moment I judged it unwise to discover that knowledge. Look on this welUknown ring; it belongs to the cnief of the con¬ spiracy."*— «—" All powerful Allah I" exclaimed the
Sultan, and the colour forsook his cheeks ; ^ My son ! My only son !"— Amorassan.· —it is but too true ! 1 feel in my own heart, how deep is the wound s 1 have just inflicted upon thine. The Sziltan.*— And why did you not reveal his guilt immediately ? Amorassan.'—I feared, lest in the first movements of sürprize and indignation, you should divulge his crimes to the Divan: terror would probably have forced from the Prince an avowal of his transgression; and while you punished his accomplices, with what show of justice could you have suffered the principal offender to escape with impunity ? Either as a sovereign you must have resigned your sole offspring to the scaffold, or by pardoning him as a father, have shown your people a partial monarch in their ruler, and an unnatural son in his destined successor* I therefore put myself in your place; I felt for you # as a father should feek It now rests with yourself to act towards the Prince as parent, or as
judge. Hiš evil counsellors are removed; their places, filled by honest men of your own selection, will prevent the recurrence of this danger; your son is still respectable in the eyes of your court and of your people ; you only are conscious of his of¬ fence, and (might I advise) he should re¬ main for ever ignorant, that it is known even to you ! Aim ! hov/ would he ever dare again to meet the eyes of the father, whom he had so much injured? How could he ever place confidence ia that fit« ther's love, who had such good cause to despise and dread him ? The Sullan*~~\\\ this, as in all else, you have acted with true prudence! Yes! hi the first moments of surprize, I should have sacrificed my son to my resentment! and the rest of my existence would have been one long agony of remorse! You have saved niy life, but that is little ; yon have saved my son's, and that benefit is inesti¬ mable. And yet can it be possible? What? The son«, whom î have ever loved rø dear-
ly, can he ...... what cause. · , * ·. what mo» live...... ^///or^i^/z.—Pardon mc^ while I explain even that. You have loved him as your son and as your heir; but your manner of loving him has been adopted according to your own affections and views, not ac« cording to his. You forgot, that he is young, and that youth is the season of the passions. You censured his failings with severity; perhaps with more, than you would have censured any failings except his: the trifling levities, natural to his age, were magnified into heinous offences by your over-eagerness to see your son a model of perfection : yoar anxiety to accustom him to ceconomy, and to save your people from tbe extortions of a profuse and voluptuous sovereign, induced you to limit him even in his lawful and unavoidable expences, and it is easy for parsimony to degenerace into avarice. It was by placing these fea* tures of your character painted in exag¬ gerated colours before your son's eyes,
that he was Induced to favorir this con spiracy. î speak not this at random; 1 repeat but the discoure of the conspirators themselves, while conversing with the Prince in the secret cavern. But though his rea¬ son was deluded, they could not corrupt his heart. î heard the mournful sound of his voice, which never rose above tha ??« cent of complaint ; he spoke to soften* not to exasperate | Sultan, act by htm with prudence, and ï will stake my life, that your son's heart will still be yours. The Sidlarh—Yimr words Iiave been like daggers ; but I thank you for them, since 1 feel their truth. But you, whose eye can pierce so deeply, v. hat is your name and your condition ? Amorassan.— ï am a humble fisherman* What I was, ask not; I desire no other reward. The Saltan,—Ho it so ! let us forget what you were ; let us only speak of what you shall be* I need a man like you -, my son (as \ou know but too well) needs such a
??? still more ihan myself. Remain at my court; the place of Vizir, weakh, honour, and the fairest virgin of my Harem...... Amorassan.—The daughter of my benefac¬ tor is already my betrothed ; and the hut, which I inhabit, is much too small for the habitation of a virgin of your Harem. I am a fisherman now, I will remain so. The Sultan.-— -Yet let me do something towards your comfort ! The reward pro¬ mised to the restorer of this ring, is at least your legal due. Amorassan.—'Then give it quickly and let me away ! My bride must already be un¬ easy at my absence ; and the hour draws near, when I am accustomed to bear my Ume faiher to enjoy the evening-breeze. The Sultan.—And should 1 need your counsels, (for where bhall I obtain wiser ?) will my friend refuse them ? How shall I hid you ? Amorassan.—My name is Zeyi. ; I dwell m the sea-shore with my adopted father«, Vlcouz, the palsied fisherman*
The Saltan*— Zeyn, from this moment 1 too am your father. And will then my son leave me without making one request ? Amorassan.~~aio 9 I will make one. Be gentle to the deluded youth, your son ! Tbe Sultan,— Generous Zeyn! i' swear it! On my death-bed only will í give him this ring, and tell liim, how and where I found it ! It shall be handed down in my family as an heir-loom, and every possessor of the throne shall bear it oo his finger. But mark me, Zeyn; unrewarded you must not leave me, not for your own sake, but for mine. The city talks of nothing but your services; who will in future render tón* services, if you are seen to go without reward ? The tale will spread from town to town, from village to village—" The poor fisherman saved the Sultan's life^ and the avaricious Sultan suffered the fisherman to remain as poor as ever/'—The love and respect of my subjects are my dearest treasures, and of these i must not suffer your disinteresteduebs to rob me. Accept
therefore enough to maintain your fiimily in ease and comfort, and save me from the heavy charge of ingratitude. Amorassan*— Your reasons are just, and î obey i I accept your proffered bounty ; I thank you for your generosity to your son; 1 bathe with my tears the honoured hands, which hold so well the scales of justice; í bless you, and depart !"— -* Amorassan hastened back to the hut, embraced Alcouz and his bride, and forgot, ihat he had ever been any other than Zeyn, the fisherman. The next morning was to make Leilah liis wife* Buried in tender melancholy, he stood alone at his chamber-window, when suddenly the form of the warning Spirit showed itself in the cold bright Hood of moon-shine. Amorassan started, — c * We meet for the last time,'* said the Spirit; " your heart has decided your future fate ; by the command of my omnipotent Master I now separate myself from you for ever, and return to the frozen ocean and
my native islands of dullness and gloom» Whether you have learned any thing during our intercourse, ï neither know nor care. Truth was shown you ¡ you coukl not support the sight, and sighed more anxi¬ ously for illusion, than you had ever sigh« ed for Truth. You have rejected the Sul¬ tan's favour ; you have resolved to remain an unknown fisherman : perhaps you have fudged wisely, perhaps not; I know not! but this at least I know \ in order to make yourself what you are now?-, there was no need of culling me from the frozen ocean. With this truth 1 dissolve our union ; farewell, and for ever."— She placed her hand on his forehead ; her touch congealed the blood in his veins; his heart seemed frozen, and he sank upon his couch insensible* And now stood be¬ fore his mental eye in bright vision the assembly of illustrious Spirits, who inhabit ihe pavillion of Mount Caucasus. The su¬ perior Genius extended his wand, and. Amorassan jaw the glorious deeds of ihi
Sons of Virtue trace themselves on the airy walls in the brilliant colours of morning. At length his own praise-worthy deeds ap¬ peared upon the glowing pannels; but far out-shining all the rest, was the service, which he daily rendered to the poor old palsied fisherman. ~" Amorassan !" said the Genius Gela- Eddin, a your affections have revived those flowers of your life, which the breath of cqld unfeeling Prudence had chilled and blighted. In fulfilling well the every-day duties of our station, not in its height or its extent, consists true greatness : in the rectitude of our intentions, not in the suc¬ cess of our actions, consists true merit. Let the heart prompt his measures, let the un* •åerstanding advise the means, let Benevo¬ lence and Reason unite in forming liis plans, and then ??? the mortal walk for« ward in his appointed course with firm and fearless footsteps* Beyond this, all is Des« tiny's l*— Amorassan awoke; the roseate vapour* vol, iv* t
of the vision still seemed to glow upon his countenance ; the voice of the Genius still sounded in his ears, and the pulses of his heart faithfully echoed back every tone of that celestial harmony. THE CALIPH. Ås many visions as you please, Ben Hafi, but no more freezing Spirits! However, Amorassan has parted with his persecutor for ever ; and since he would now no longer bring such a disagreeable companion along with him, 1 am truly sorry, that his dislike to Sultans will prevent his accept¬ ing an invitation to Bagdad* I should have been heartily glad to see him ; but it seems, he is determined to do nothing for the remainder of his life but catch fish, and keep clear of courts and princes ; and truly i cannot but acknowledge that he is very much in the right,
?И??. XV.
—^ Wiííiess ??????«, What hne bîncei'c and rovoíviíoo· iu ??\ hea? f î bear thec, and unwwtiiu; hayo ??????И, (ïiihcippïly ih'ccivtd.**— "SÍM ras
BKN HAFİ. Tr is true, most mighty Lord, that Amo¬ rassan wished in future to avoid princes; but it was his destiny to find their affairs continually intermingled with his own. Scarcely had three months elapsed since his marriage, when one niglit a knocking was heard at the door of his new dwell¬ ing ; it was a modest but convenient house, which the Sultan in gratitude lud caused ι» 2
to bc erected on the very spot, to vriiidk Amorassan liad been accustomed to bear the lame Alcouz every evening. Leilah hastened to open the door. A youth in mean apparel, but whose pale countenance immediately interested her iu his favour, complained of weariness and hunger, and requested hospitality for a sin» gle night It was granted readily ; but the next morning the stranger was too ill to proceed on his journey. He remained in the cottage, and for many weeks received from Amorassan and his wife the attentions due to a brother. Their care at length conquered the obstinacy of his complaint, and the stranger declared himself indebted to them alone under heaven for health and life. During his convalescence, a friendship of the dosest nature was formed between the stranger and his host, Amorassan at length < arried his confidence so far, as to reveal ίο him even -the most secret transactions d
his life; and the stranger repaid confidence with confidence. — u Your story," said he, u in many respects is not unlike my own. I too was born to prosperity and splendour; my eyes fm»t unclosed themselves in a palace, and my father was one of those ii-fated mor¬ tals, to whom the painful task is allotted of governing their fellow-creatures. u ï had an elder brother ; never did Nature form a mortal of milder materials, or one who possest a more pure or more generous heart ; and this brother loved me 9 as never brother loved a brother before; and í loved this brother, as never man be¬ foie was loved by man* ** Our father was a wise and deep-think« ing sovereign : he had witnessed our child* ish affection with satisfaction ; but now that the years of manhood were approach* ing, he apprehended, lest the younger son should be tempted by this apparent equality to forget his duty to Ids future master, and began to consider so intimato
a connection as highly dangerous to my brother and the state."™ THE CALIPH« Ren Hafi !—«Surely, it is not possible.. ». buí proceed! Quick, quick, Ben Hali î ^.«.€« One day» onr iather sent for us into lib closet, read us a severe lecture upon the different dudes of our stations, and command« ed me in future never more to address or ap¬ proach my future master with that ??????« ly faimlurity f to wLich 1 had UUwrto lx\ η accustomed. Tie lefl us—we remained for ???? minutes silent and bewiìf lei ed; at length 1 raised my eyes to my brother*·, »did ï sa ?-, tliat they were filled wiih tt m»."*™ (And at this moment tears gushed from ilæ eyes oi ilio Caliph. Ben Hah appeared lift to remai ? his emotion, and continued.) " i threw m j self on his bosom, and ex- cLiimed— 4 Be my master ; ??. strict, m>
/pvered, my dreaded master ; a master as ttrict and dreaded, as our father appears to as. But yet love me still in yonr heart, !Uy brotbu , í Oul; ,ι^ίκ td bc- ?? ίν?νι, -d iu the secrecy of your heart !' "-— ~ Γδ You aro my brother," he n-plieJ, while he prest me to his bosom ; € " how then can I ever be yonr master? We are brethren now; ond how can ve ever be aught else ?"-— —" Tiie next morning he entered my chamber with the first beams of Hght. He took my arm, rubbed upon my wrist a little ointment, and then stamned ? with a signet, on which his name was engraved* Such was the virtue of that particular oint¬ ment, that the characters from that mo¬ ment were impossible to be effaced. He then obliged me to stamp my name upoa bis wrist in a similar mannen —* e And now," said he " if ever the slightest suspicion should arise between us, if ever the most trifling movement of dis¬ pleasure shall evince itself in my conduct F 4
towards you, come to me without fear, and show me this mark. î shall remember the occasion, on which it was engraved ; I shall banish all distrust and displeasure from my bosom ; and be the cause of our disunion slight, or important, 1 swear by Allah î that î will instantly forget it, and remember no« thing, except that you are my brother and my friend."·— M Shortly after this we were ieparated 9 and our education was conducted on different plans. My brother's instructors were quite of another species from mine, and the : *r lessons were solely calculated îo form the sovereign: what regarded the man was (they thought) no business of theirs \ or if it formed any part of their instructions, it was only to impress upon their pupil's mind theif great leading maxim, that the feelings of the second ought always to be subordinate to the rights and duties of the first. £b My father died ; my brother ascended the throne ; and now».....!
u No; ì do not censure my deluded, my misguided brother ; but 1 censure myself, that when 1 possest in letters of my ene¬ mies the certain vindication of my affection and fidelity, I suffered the feelings of in« dignant pride and wounded friendship to make me disdain all explanation. These tears do not flow because I now wander through the world a houseless beggar, hut because my absence has left him alone må defenceless in the power çí ?® seducali Why did I not appeal to his fraternal friend* ship ? Why did I not trust to his generous heart ? Even had he still believed me to be a traitor, even had he punished my supposed crime with death, the attempt at vindica¬ tion would but have cost me my life ; but silence and suspicious flight must surely have cost my brother his innocence. Believing me to be false, he will believe no one to be faithful ; believing my virtue lo have been a mask, he will believe others to lie equallv dissemblers, I left him surrounded by men but too weil disponed to take advantage of
his generous yeilding nature, and mould it to their own ambitious and interested views* His power will be abused; his people will be miserable ; and he will himself he wretched on his golden throne, for ï know that, deprived of me, his heart never can be happy."—■ At tliis moment the deaf Megnoun started from the ground, and exclaimed with strong emotion-—" Ben Hafi, you surely speak of the good Prince Abdallah ; nothing else could affect my Lord so strongly l'— - —"Yes! oh! yes!" the Caliph pro« nounced with difiiculty ; u the poor forlorn stranger,..... was Abdallah ! was my bro¬ ther ?— He reclined his head upon the shoulder of Megnoun, and sobbed aloud. — a Amurath i'* said, after a few mo* ments, a gentle ^oke, whose well-known melody pierced io the Caliph's very heart* He uttered a cry of astonishment ; he start¬ ed from the sopha, and unclosed his arms, Ben Hafi had thiown off his upper garment;
tite «grey beard and wrinkles had disap¬ peared, and the roses of youth glowed upon his smiling cheeks* lie now wore tli2 same dress, in winch the Caliph had seen his brother on the night previous to hk flight from Bagdad, and he pointed to certain characters imprest upon the naked wrist of his right hand. -•"Abdallah!** cried the Caliph» and threw himself upon his bosom | " my friend, my brother ! I have thee again then, my Happiness! my Strength! my Reason! my Virtue!—Ah! Abdallah! canst thou forgive mo ?**""■«" — cc Say rather/' repHed the Prince, ? canst thou form ve me for luninr? re- jected all explanation ? I ought to have insisted upon admission to your presence ; I ought to have shown you this well- known mark, these characters imprest by the hand of fraternal friendship...... 9> —" No, no, my brother !'* interrupted the Caliph, while he kissed the mark on his brother's wrbl, and bathed it with renou-
ant tears | " you did wisely and wdl tø avoid me* Had you at that time ventured into my presence.... I was so blinded.... *o deluded«.. „ but 1 have since discovered the treachery, though not its authors."— — 4€ Their Barnes are well known to me" replied Abdallah ; u Muzafler will see, that their guilt is placed beyond the power of doubting by this letter."— As he said this, he presented a paper ίο the thunder-struck Vissir. He read but a few lines, then fell at the Prince's feet, and murmured—" Be merdfuL"«—The Caliph's eyes flamed with indignant vengeance ; but Abdallah became a suppliant for his van¬ quished enemy. Muzafler was allowed to preserve his life, and a moderate proportion of his treasures, but was ordered to quit the Caliph's dominions within eight and forty hours on pain of death, And now Amu¬ rath turned again to his brother with tender reproaches for having kept him so long in ignorance of his being so ned.r him. —" Report," said Abdallah, ** represent
ed you to me in such odious colours, and the miseries, wldch 1 witness^ h4e tra¬ velling through your clon linio \· < \ '.'r .ied so strongly the belief of your altered dispo¬ sition, that I thought it imprudent to pre¬ sent myself before you without having ascertained your real character. But I was soon convinced, that the Vizir, not the Ca¬ liph, was the tyrant, under whose oppression Arabia groaned, and that my brother was as a man the same benevolent generous being, whom as a boy 1 had loved so dear* ly.'»_ — u But your voice.... so soft.. ». so touching.... how could I have ever mis¬ taken its sweet harmonious accents ? s, ~ — £C You were misled by a thin plate of silver placed upon my tongue, and which altered its tone completely/'-— — u And your friend Amorassan ? Alas ! ï fear, that he was a deception too ! But one thing, Abdallah, I cannot consent to be¬ lieve ideal ! Oh ! still preserve in my mind the -belieft that there reatty røsts tbat tdgbt
pavillion ; and let me die in the happy per» suasion, that hand in hand we shall one day be received thc^e. Then brother, then shall we take our places among the Spirits and the Genii ! and you shall sit by my side ; and my poor deaf Megnoun sball sit at my feet ; and Allah shall send down a friendly gra¬ cious look, as a benediction on his chik
dren."·
T?ACh iil· \H'rø YOU, AND WITH ME i
??',
LISTED ?1 I». ?, SHVaY, BBKWICX ai'ÄEET, »OHO
