Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
The infernal Quixote: a tale of the day
THE INFERNAL QUIXOTE. CHAP. I. t A HE history of Wilson, not yet re¬ corded, to the period when he encoun¬ tered his twin luminary, under the auspices of the bloody planet Mars, though not pregnant with adven ture* had nevertheless been highly interesting to himself. The corps, in which Wilson had a command, thought proper to volunteer vol. iv. в . their
their services, in defence of their Pro¬ testant Brethren iu Ireland, contrary to the opinion of some or their Officers, among v* horn was V\ ilson* Yet, when the Gos emment accepted their offers, the virtuous puncipleof WiUon was not sufficiently strong to bear the oppro¬ brium of cowardice, though in a right cause. This shews how weak is virtue when the temptation comes in the most trying point : " Take anv foi m but that, and my firm· nei vea *t Shall ntvei tremble·'* Wilson had, whit alî the world are trying to ujet as an excuse for their own faults— exam ρ LF, to countenance him ; .and it was not till the rest of the Officers
Officers had agreed to go, that lie also assented. Yet, by particularizing these circumstances, a defence for his con* duct is not intended. He certainly acted wrong, and he himself was after¬ wards most ready to own it He had with difficulty prevented himself from accepting the challenge of Marauder ; in that case a plea was want¬ ing—-in this, he fancied it was his duty to act as he did. Had he more nar* rowly asked his conscience, he would have found that there was a duty supe¬ rior to the one he obeyed, and which he ouîţht to have followed.—The stigma of a public coward is most hard to be bornei— True.—The trial it is confess« ed was difficult, and Wilson was con- » 2 quered.
quered. Few people will condemn him for acting as he did ; but it is to be considered that he was in a corns where 1 the going was voluntary, and not ac= cording to any articles he had entered into, lie went over to Ireland, therefore, with the rest, in the beginning of the spring, and was for some time quartered in the neighbourhood of Dublin ; hut afterwards two troops were stationed in that part of Munster where M'Ginnis met with him. Wilson could not leave England without visiting Fanny. He, called ; and, after common civilities, mention¬ ed his intended departure. Fanny,
. Fanny, who was no casuist in these? cases, whether or not he ought to go, considered only that he was really going. She burst into a flood of tears the mo¬ ment he had spoken. " Oh Mr, Wilson ! you know I con¬ sider you as a brother,"—That unlucky word gave an electrical chill to the spirits of Wilson.— u I cannot hear of your going to that wretched country without shewing my sorrow. Let me entreat you not to go. I shall lose alt my friends. My good guardian is going to Edinburgh, and will not be back for some months, If you, my brother, leave the kingdom------" " Äly dear Miss Fanny, my, promise is given to go with the regiment· в 3 Were
Were it possible to be otherwise, one word from you would turn me at any time ; or, could I be of the most trifling service——*" 44 You know, Mr. Wilson, how I am situated. Willingly would I live with my sister—she will not permit it."— (This conversation Mas long before the meeting with Rattle.)—** It is some con¬ solation to me, to hear how agreeable her retirement is become, by the friend¬ ship of the worthy Vicar and his family, whose residence is so close to her own. To my earnest entreaties to join her in Wales, she as constantly replies, that my affection shall never suffer by her follies and imprudence. Mr. Townsend and yourself are the only friends to луЬощ I can unburthen my mind ;— now
now you both leave me.—My acquaint¬ ance in this lamily are kind and amia¬ ble;—but, Oh how different from the friends of the heart—relations natural and adopted, in which last light, Mr. Wilson, I have long considered you." " It is the pride of my Hie to be so highly favoured. Yet why, Miss Fanny, should you think yourself deserted when so many young men are ambitious of your notice·" In this awkward manner did poor Wilson commence a conversation, which Mr. Townsend desired him, that Fanny might chuse one from the many beaux that surrounded her, before his journey to Scotland ; for though she lival, by choice, in a very recluse manner, she в 4 had
had not escaped the notice and admira¬ tion of the other sex. Many splendid offers had courted her favour, but all had been heard with the greatest coolness. Her guardian also had received overtures from many ; but among others, he wished his ward to chuse from two young men, whose birth, persons, fortunes, ami accom¬ plishments he considered as unexcep¬ tionable. Frequently he had spoken to her himself upon the subject, but he could never get a satisfactory answer. Upon tins point he addressed Wilson, when the other informed him he was about to go to Ireland, and desired him to try to persuade Fanny to make a choice before they both left her. " The
" The friends I have," said Fanny, in reply to his last question, " I so severely feel the loss of, that I have no wish to entangle myself with new ones. It is better never to have, than to have and be forsaken. n " I did not think, Miss Fanny, I should ever accuse you of unkinducss ; but so far from forsaking you, indeed, if it would promote your happiness, I would suffer every ignominy sooner than . leave you.—You frequently honour me with the title of brother,"—Wilson sigh¬ ed; " may I not as such enquire if, among the gentlemen who court your favour, you do not approve of one mora than the others." " No ;—why should I ?—I know- very little, and wish not to know в S more*
more, of any of the persons you mean." ťí Mr. Wildermere," continued Wil¬ son, with the greatest resolution, Ci you have been acquainted with some years, and Mr. Townsend informs me that he is a respectable young man of family and fortune;—the Honourable Mr. Leeson is the second son of a very worthy Nobleman, high in favour with the Minister. Both these, Miss Fanny, have long declared themselves your ad¬ mirers.** " I have frequently answered them, Sir, that I have no wish to change my situation." " When so valuable a prize is in view, young men are not so easily daunted."
У Mr.
(i Mr. Wildermerc I particularly dis¬ like—he is so great a coxcomb. My acquaintance is less with Mr. Leeson, but I do not desire it to be greater." "He bears a most excellent charac¬ ter ; and his family------" " Do you wish, Mr. Wilson, to re¬ commend him to me?" ic My dear Miss Fanny, I cannot so far presume. My sole intention, as well as Mr. Townsenďs, was—to see—we thought—if—1 mean—had you chosen one protector before we departeds the rest would keep at a distance.— We should be happy to see you well allied." á< Ifit will make you happy to see me married," replied Fanny, with a little- spirit, il I will endeavour to fix my £ 6 affections,
affections, since a single life occasions so much trouble to my friends/* ťí No, Miss Fanny, do not, I beseech you, attribute my interference to so unkind a motive. Mr. Townsend wishes not to constrain nor to hasten* your choice. The gentlemen I have mentioned, he considered as most eliiii- ble. I am but little acquainted-with either of them. There are many others I know, who------" ťí Weil then, as my friends are so anxious I should be settled, I will en¬ deavour to remove their suspense as soon as possible." ' ť You have then a preference, Miss Fanny ?" exclaimed Wilson, in evident alarm ; u may I presume to ask who is the man so highly blessed ?" " Surely,
" Surei v, Mr. Wilson, it can be of no great concern to you. You are going to leave the kingdom long beforer it can take place. Perhaps it is neither of the Wntlemen vou have offered to О v my notice. It may be I have reason* for concealment, even from you." Fanny still spoke with some asperity* perhaps coquetry ; if it w r ere so, it was but a slight portion of that innate play¬ fulness of the sex. Wilson, neverthe¬ less, was extremely hurt ; and trem¬ blingly alive to his feelings, replied— iC I shall be most miserable, my dearest Miss Fanny, if what I have said has offended you." " How
" How can it, Sir ?—You speak but as a brother, who finds the care of a. sister somewhat troublesome to his feel* in <>'$." " No, Fanny, I speak agamst my feelings ;—I speak what, I hope, may be for your benefit, but what ruins mine !—Yes, Fanny, 'tis the greatest happiness of my life to see you, to speak to you, to write to you ;—- but, when that day comes which gives you to an¬ other, I must write, speak, and see you no more»" Wilson was greatly affected. During the wliole of the conversation did he try to overcome his sensations ; he trembled as he uttered the last words, and, as he finished, walked towards the window. Fanny
Fanny could not fail to notice the agitation of his mind ; she walked up to him, and taking his hand, kindly said— " My dear brother !" Surely never did the note of affcctioit come in so unseasonable a moment, or was so kind an epithet ever so ungrate¬ ful. Wilson could not stand it ; hastily withdrawing his hand from her's, then again as eagerly catching it, and im¬ printing a kiss, he dropped it with a sigh, and said-— " Dear Fanny, God bless youf— I can no longer dissemble.—If I must be as a brother, never can I see you again ; unless in the hour of difficulty and 5 danger,
danger, which I trust will never be* your lot ;—should you need a protector, then, wherever he is, »Wilson will leave the world to fly to you.—Yes, Fanny, my life, my fame, my fortune, III wil¬ lingly devote to your service. Eut I cannot stand by, and give you into the arms of another.—Fond fool that I was !. I have nourished the passion that con» sumes me !—Presuming on your friend* ship for me,, I sometimes fancied I might have another interest in your. heart, very different from that of a bro¬ ther. God bless you then, my deac sister ! —Since it must be so, your bro* tiur will send his last farewel from» Ireland.'*
Wilson^
Wilson was rushing hastily out of the room ; Fanny spoke. t( Dear Wilson, stay—-don't leave me in this hasty manner !—You shall be all that's dear to me;—but not my bro ------- The last word hung upon her lips as Wilson, having turned round, triumph¬ antly clasped her in his arms, and stop¬ ped any further confession by the chaste kiss of love. Fanny smiled upon him ; the enrap¬ tured lover poured out the secrets of his- whole soul to his' mistress, and every fear fled away before a mutual eclair* cissement. Mr.
Mj;. Townsend was not long in know* iug the effects of Wilson's oratory to induce Fanny to sanction the addresses of a more favoured lover, and he highly approved of her choice· The Irish expedition was considered by the gentlemen as too far advanced to be now delayed, and Fanny silently acquiesced. Wilson, full of hopes, left England ; enlivened with the promise of his Fannv, that her hand should be bestowed where her heart was already* as soon as he returned-
CHAP.
m
* СНЛР. II.
VV MEN M'Ginnis was somewhat re* coveted from the faintness which the great loss of blood had occasioneel, the agitation of his mind became so violent, that it was with difficulty the surgeon could restrain him from sallying forth in the evening, wounded as he was, in search of his adversary. Exclusive
Exclusive of his original hatred against Wilson, revenge for his late miscarriage spurred him on ; and, to complete his angry passions, he found that the other remembered him. In the person of Wilson lie saw his ancient enemy, his present foe, and the man who, at a future day, might be his utter ruin. Willingly would he have given half his property to accomplish the destruction of Wilson, which he was resolved should take place in a more sure, though less public manner than he had so lately at¬ tempted. He spent a restless, sleepless night ; full of plots, unresolved and confused. The
The next day he was in a high fever ; and being satisfied of the absolute ne¬ cessity of his own confinement and quiet for a time, he gave orders to the most trusty of his Officers, to take all but twenty chosen horse, and, with as many of the infantry as they could muster, to endeavour to join the French forces ; he told them also, that he would himself follow as soon as his wounds would permit, which he hoped would be in a few days. In the evening of the second day after his rencounter, M'Ginnis sent some trusty horsemen to the neighbour¬ hood of Kilnclugh, to endeavour tobring off a few prisoners, that he might gain some information of the forces that remained
remained in those parts, and if Wilson was still among them. He had reason to think that they had joined the troops of the Lord Lieutenant ; though he was fearless of any attack in his present stution. They brought two men. By them he found that to prevent a junction of the rebel forces, they kept the same situation ; and that Wilson, and part of the corps to which he belonged, were in barracks without the town, in an old Monastery. One of the men was of the same troop, and forsorne time M'Ginnis questioned him, in hopes that he might prove equal - to the task, wlűch he at present intended. He
He found this man, as well as the other prisoner, totally unlit; and his miad now revolved among his own men, for one bold and resolute, whom he could trust. After a little thought he fixed upon a feilqw, of the name of O'Rourk, one who had repeatedly signalized himself for his intrepidity and spirit, and but the day preceding M'Ghmis's last at¬ tack, had been engaged in skirmishes in the same part of the country. Often when M'Ginnis has viewed the bold, haughty, savage, and desperate conduct of this fellow, has he said within himself-—
" Such
u Such a one should I have been, had I been born in his humble station.'* When M'Ginnis first came to Ireland, this man was at sea, whither he had fled to avoid, the stronger arm of the law. In a private quarrel with a countryman ' concerning a pretty girl, O'Rourk had left the other for dead, and fled the kingdom immediately. Hearing his rival was recovered, he left his ship, where he had also signalized himself in the mutiny, and returned home. His mistress he found in the house of M'Ginnis» and much too high to listen to any overtures from him. O'Rourk joined the United Irish¬ men; and having very soon brought himself
himself into notice, M'Ginnis took кип into his own corps, and in a little time he became a great fitvourite, and domţis- ticated in the house. Here having fre¬ quent interviews with his mistress, it is likely his violent temper would have burst all bounds, had he not had suf¬ ficient employment to prevent brooding, mischief-making thought. M'Ginnis had frequently noticed his behaviour rto Nelly. Sometimes the damsel would condescend to trifle a little with her old lover, and the ruffian would catch a half-willing kiss. About a week! before he had received, his wound, 'M'Ginnis had discovered their farmer acquaintance, and lie had wavered in his mind whether or not he should get vot. ¡v. с rid
rid at once of so dangerous a rival ; but well knowing it was in his power at any time?, by sending him on a dangerous adventure—or, if that should fail, by his own pistol in the confusion of an action, he spared him, at least for the present, while he had occasion for his services. Concerning the fair Nelly, M'Ginnis cared but little ; yet he was never in¬ clined to resign any thing without an equivalent, or for bis own peculiar ad· vantage* He now sent for OTlourk into his chamber. The man came. The at¬ tendants were all dismissed out of the xoom. " O'Rourk,"
" O'Rourk," said M'Ginnis, ξζ I saw you kiss Nelly the other day as I cross¬ ed the court." O'Rourk coloured with anger. ξζ Nay, n continued M'Ginnis, " per¬ haps you can tell me you have a prior right^—a better title than myself," 0*Rourk was silent, but his gloom gave way to his attention· " O'Rourk," the other proceeded, " answer me with your usual candour- bow do you like me as your Com¬ mander?" " Well—very well," replied the other j "inaction no man can excel c Ä you.
you. You are haughty at home ; but perhaps that is what they catl discipline. I am satisfied." iC Of what use is my courage now ?" said M'Ginnis, with a deep groan. ťí I am sorry to see your Honour so grievously wounded," exclaimed the other, somewhat moved; iC would I had been with you at the moment—my trusty shellala ----- : ' " I marked my enemy ort the left cheek," M'Ginnis continued, " but my sword failed me."—The nicety of truth he no more regarded than his kinsman, Marauder.— " Had you còme up, OTburk, the villain wotrld nét have escaped·" 41 1 hoffe we shall førve 'tóm yet," retried
replied O'Rourk, with glee, forgetting Uic beginning of the conversation. " I know him well," said M'Ginnis; " had I not beeţi in this state, Ц should, ere now, have bit the dust. Щ England I have before seei\ the fellow* lie is the rascalth^t ruined thçjfortunç of my worthy relation, Marauder, your exççUent, İ9Ad)pçjd·'' — Щ indulged hiaat şdf ne^t m biş, in^cţivfs igfirwţ ЛУЦт 8QÇU tül %ç ikmğht bş had ещощ^ № ЩщеА th^ ршЬш of his v^ss^L <fc Wp,uki I bad him here by thş thrpatf! ^xcl^med Q^ourk; <ť 1'4 Ь ш ;у ад, skçanja, Щ heart's Wpq^." ť f Щг& ş& §щщу şo in%nou^ trear şfeef^s, §pd ujpr^nçipl^i, gţiy ЩЩЩ ще ftjp?v« sa¡4 ţiţs 0$5ççr jto Ijiiin, p^ feg hiş Ψ®4% щ$$ forgi tf д arøtios,- с 3 " ün-
' e Undoubtedly, " replied the other. M Never again will the M'retch meet me face to face m battle. I hear he still survives, and I am cautioned to beware of treachery. It is my duty not only to guard against it, but to serve him in his own kind·." * u If í should find him in his bed, your Honour, IÌ1 not ask htm to rise. If I can catch him in his cups, I wilt trot wait tül he has finished his draught." " Yes, O'Rourk/* said M'Ginnie? warmly, u that brave spirit of thine made me fix my eye on thee, as onci most trusty, and never to be daunted· But think not I mean to send thee on a hazardous attempt, and then talk of Some petty reward. Να; Ill furnish thee with the means of success. The danger
danger shall not be great ;—to a' man of thy courage it shall be as nothing,— If then, O'Rourk, thou wilt undertake this work of friendship, not only will I give up to thee a comfortable farm, with ready money, and for ever make thee independent ; but I will sacrifice my own desires to thine—thou shalt bave Nelly too." The joy of the savage forbade all ut¬ terance ; the moist drops of gratitude glistened in his eyes ; his rugged fea¬ tures softened v,ith his silent thanks. But ardour in his generous patron's cause, revenge against lm enemy quickly roused him.
с 4 "Where
found?—Tell me, your Honour, but how I am to know him, and the first day he ventures into the field, though the «levil himself'were by his side, ΪΊ1 ride ίψ to your enemy, and cleave him hi his beat, or perish in the attempt !" £ * liis coming into the field," remark¬ ed M 'Gin nis, sarcastically, "may be long, and uncertain at last. ITI shew you a nearer way. Get privately to his presence, shoot him, and make your escape. " tc Sir !— nıurdçr him in cold bkod Γ' " Do you demur how you are to destroy such a wretch ?—my enemy-—* your enemy—the enemy of every United Irishman, every friend to his country?"
" General,
u General, have I ever been slack in the cause—when, in the day of bat¬ tle, have I shrunk back ?'' ' ť What, then you. require the noise and confusion of a coniraon fight to rpuse your courage-—-Is it the brave O4tourk that I am talking to ?—Am I myself a cowaid who propose the deed ? k —Is the lovely reward of no value ?" t£ It is enough," he answered witb firmness, <ť you are my Commander ; —it shall be done. I would, indeed, rather have met hand to hand ; but your reasons are sufficient—ypur cause, røy country's cause make it right," A sažtisikotory smile iHumined the fear tures ď "MOkrnis i —ho perceived O'Rourk had somewhat more to sav. с 5 u May
" May I see Nelly before I go ?— How am I to satisfy you the deed Ы done ?" * 6 I'll take your word/' replied M'Ginnis, with an affectation of can¬ dour. * c See Nelly if you like : yet I ihh*k you had better not, till you re* turn· Women—are women, O'Rourk ; there is a kind of foolish pity they can** not overcome. " " I will not see her till I return *ith success- If I fail, you shall, never be* bold me more/' ы You cannot—you shall not fail,** exclaimed M'Gkmia, with a dreadful oath,—** Now, O'Rourk, hear atten¬ tively the methods I bave taken for |T4Mir success.—Dayou know my famous? Eoglish stallion ?" , "Do
" Do I know the first horse in the world, your Honour«?—In speed, in strength he excels all I ever saw \ —and in leaping, not even our famous Irish horses can beat him· On him I fear» nothing J> 4 c On him you shall ride.—Know уош an old large building, once a Monas-r tery, near the town*of Kilnclagh ?" " Close to the left hand of the cid gateway ?" " The same. In those apartments lodge niy enemy and his comrades. Bide to the gates of the building, ring the bell, ask for their Captain Wilson* Take this parcel. "—As M *Ginnis spoke, he opened a drawer, and holding its in his hand, continued^—".Say you must deliver it to none, but himself.—Mind g 6 ще,
me, O'Rourk ;— examine this part which I now touch with my left hand—pull that piece which rises at top ;—there, 'tis a pocket-pistol. Now *tis cocked ; see, the trigger is sprung from beneath. I have loaded it, and made it fast tb the paper. Thus easily it uncocks, the trigger flies up. It goes with ease and safety in your pocket. Though small, Tve proved 'tis sure." O'Rourk expressed his surprise at the ingenuity of the contrivance.—"I could have £worn к had been a bundle of papers." * M 'Ginnis, all animation, continued— '" Have it ready in your 'hand ; wait till this Wilson comes elose 4o you ; 3 reach
reach out your arm with tbe parcel—be steady—fire into the middle of his body. If it fails, blame me. I ask no more.-—Then try the speed of my raoer ; and Nelly is for ever y our 'e·" O'Rourk felt himself inspired with Hie ardour of bis Commander.-~-" It cannot fail," said he ; " if he will not come to the gate to me, I'll enter the court-yard. I know the low wall on the other side—'tis nothing of a leap.*' " Be calm— be efetermmed^-and you are already successful " O'&ourk seemed to reflect a momjent. —" Why his body?—Let me shoot him in the head ?" ** No ; it is possible to miss him there.
there. Make sure of the body. I haver prepared the balls. A touch is death/' , It was early on the thmF mornîngî that this conversation, took place.~ M 'G innis proposed that he^ should set off, immediately; O'Rourk assented. The distance was , about eight Imh miles.. The horse was ordered. Wary and thoughtful, M'Ginnis had revolved the whole plot in-the preceding night ;' and such was his eagerness to complete the deadly deed> that^. in «de¬ fiance of his wounds, he sat up in his bed as soon as it was light, and prepared the fatal gift for one, to whom* from his
foe. AsO^Rourk was leaving» the room* M'Ginnis again spoke. u Stay one moment my friend. Do yon remember the name?*— Tıs written en the parcel·; but, to prevent a mis* take, take this paper." x The fellow read—" Captain Wilson,. of the* Southford Fencibles. r~-1 cannot mistake my man." ** Mind also a. fresh wound on the left cheek, or lower part of tlie tem¬ ple. " 4 I shall know him in an instant," said O'Rourk. " Hark Γ
4 * Haxk 1" exclaimed M'Ginnis, " the horse is ready—I hear him walk¬ ing in the court-yard. How well I know ills anxious step—so sfearp and quick in all his p^ces ! Wkm i ne&ţ hear him again, O'Rourk, I shall have bst my greatest enemy—and thou wilt bave gained thy depejst friend. -^Çome, onegfes£,ııw£ tø hejr }iea|ţb, and thy. success." O'Rowk tossed off fe&glrø .ofìbrandy» . and aqïarted dkeeijy.
i
CHAP.
___ JB., mu ijl ni ...... ι
СНЛР. II î.
JLONG did the time seem to МЧЗ in nk after Oliourk was depaited ; be found himself in a state of dreadful suspense, such as he had never before so strongly experienced, M'Ginnis фад now treak with h» wounds, and feverish with the agitatioa of his spirits ; every thing affected hirct Щ
in a more powerful manner than when> he was in health. When two hours had passed, and O'Rourk was not returned, alarm, ap¬ prehension, suspicions of a thousand different kinds began ta torment him, He could not beat any person in the room with him ; yet every five minutes was he ringrøg his bell for the assist¬ ance of some one,* that, together witÜ tlie aid of his crutebav he* might; bok. aut at the window. The evening at last closed in, an*, Ollousk teturned not Yet M 'Giani* was rather calmer than he was a few hours before, and tried to reason upon tlœ ¿object.—Wilson might not be at t, home*
home. O'Rourk лvas resolute and trusty 9 and waited, perhaps, for his coming·—* He might have changed his quarters ; O'Rourk would certainly go after him» It was now quite dark. M'Ginnis lay upon his couch, listening, to every wind; the gnawing fangs of suspense, writhing htm to and fro, nokmgerga,ve him a moment's еШ* He hears at a distance a horse com¬ ing;—he is all attention» Neater and more near it approaches. 11 It is— ГИ swear it is my stallion ľ* The horaie neighs, and trots into the court-yard* ♦ "Huszad
"Humt" cries Μ Ό innb, u 4» th^ note of triumph/' «ŕ He ring^ his bell violently. His ser¬ vant comes. He hears a buzzing of voices in the yard. The name of 4 O'Rourk iş sounded. " Fly P crie« M'Ginnb, ** bring O'Rourk Kere immediately ľ* The attendant disappears. No one for some minute» comes near him.-— M'Ginnis rings and caUs ; he strikes his crutch against the ground, to bring up hit smmnta. . The attendant coinés up alone.
MOinni*
M'Ginnis exclaims—" Where is Oliourk?—Is Le wounded—is he hurt? No matter—he has succeeded in his business, and he shall have his те- 4rard." Cautiously his servant answer Ъ!т, knowing the violence of his master's €fem|*éŕ— ťí ТЫе hor^, Шг, fe l^li^ied •Without O^Röüffe»" «* What?" ílie*ttí№ t^c^a^^^ft^ tföftte. <* Who rode him ?" "It
" It must be so,—Yes, yes, he was thrown at the waH. I never had any great opinion of his horsemanship ;~ these sailors ! Go down." says he to the man, 4t examine the horse i see what trim he is in ;—bring me, as quick as possible, the particulars." .j !Tl»e man was not long in returning^ The horse, he said, was very dirty, the bridle torn to pieces, the saddle shewed he had been rolling in the high grass, wherş iţ was evidçnt also the animal liad filled his belly. . M'Ginnis heard ail this with pleasure. The last remark convinced him that it was some time since the horse. had thrown
thrown his rider, and where ^o likely as at his taking the leap. Again he sent down tlie man to ex¬ amine his legs, if any of tlie hair or skin was rubbed of£ The fellow reported that one of Ъщ hind-legs was grazed in the inside, as if Ъе had come over a wall* **' Then Iliave no doubt.—Lead ще down—111 examine the marks myself. " The surgeon, who had been soırçe ^tirne present, strongly objected 3gafe$t it; but so anxious was M'Ginnis, that he would not be satisfied unless tlie horse could, be brought into the roo^i he
he was in. As ihis was impracticable, M*Ginnis was carried by four people below, and the horse brought to him. M'Ginnis narrowly examined his leg. — ** Iťs as clear as the day," cried he; " on leaping he struck the wall, which threw O'Rourk, and occasioned this Тйяагк Γ With the greatest surprise the sur- *frcdn, arid others t^ho were present, saw his agitated behaviour, -and heard his words ; so very different from his usual Wttduc* concerning hiitl^lf, which had %vťr Ъе!№ cautious #nd reserved. Atfiráťhis sui^eôn thought that he was iight-feçâdYa/atïd'ieiHEîfi now he began to apprehend
Ïpprenend that the fever was settled upon his brain. The purport of his words, and the whole of the circum¬ stances to which he alluded, no person present had the most distant idea of. O'Rourk, they knew, went out in the morningt and the horse was returned without him ; but why the latter should be a circumstance of joy, they could in no respect conceive. M ť G irmiş now began to recollect him¬ self a little ; and to the entreaties of his surgeon, who begged him to be more quiet, and wished to feel his pulse, he assented. The surgeon declared that he was in a high fever, and desired him to take some cooling draughts. To this M Oinnis was necessitated to consent, ' vèiÎr iv* d and
and a strong opiate at h^t lulled Ji¡«| into a temporary slumber. It is time to see w;iih what success O'Rowk conducted himself.
CHAP.
'èL -ίι ,,'.iìi.ì ------ uil-. 1 " ' ' 'Î ' itfı
CHAP. IV.
\J ROÜRK was dressed în a plain garb, and a great-coat of M'Gintvis's; and furnished with an orange cockade, which he exchanged into the place of his own, as $οψι as he had proceeded a few miles on the road. He went at a pretty good rate, and did not attempt to indulge in any reflections upon the business he was about. p Ä Ια
In little more than an hour he ar¬ rived there ; for, as he intended to re¬ turn with great speed, he purposely went the slowe&r He rung at the belL A soldier appeared in the yard, 0*Rmirk. —"Are the Southford Fen¬ cibles here?" Solalcr. —" Yes, some of them,— Whom do you want ?" O'Rourk. — " Captain Wilson." Soldier. — i( 1 am his servant, and have known him many a good year» You may send your business by me."
The
The man who spoke was evidently an irishman. - * " And you are an Irishman ľ' said O'Rourk, who forgot at the instant the colour of his own cockade. ťť Well," replied the soldier, " is there any things surprising in that ?*— One would think you were of this unitecE gang by your question^ But what is* your husmess with my master?" O'Rourk, —'* 1 have papers* of great/ consequence, which .1 am to deliver unto his own person ; so 1 beg you'll tell him that I wait here for the purpose;' as I have a great way togo to-day." " Well, come into the yard," sdd the other, opening the gate;. " 111 call my* master directly." в 3 O'Rourk.
O'Rourk entered ; the gate was again closed. The ruinan smiled at the need¬ less precaution. The soldier went in to call Captain Wilson. O'Rótirk recovered himself from the ríttíe confusion bis first mistake had wade, and walked his horse calmly up to the wall, to review the spot where he intended to take his leap. He had just fixed it in his mind when Wilson,, with his servant, came out. With caution the messenger of death took out the fatal parcel He delibe¬ rately placed his thumb on the cock· Wilson
Wilson approached hirn in a loose morning-gown, as from a sick chamber, with his handkerchief to his face· " I am to deliver this to none but Captain Wilson, of the Southford Fen¬ cibles," said Oliourk, in his rough tone. " I am he," replied Wilson, with his voice rather muffled by his handker¬ chief. " My master thought—heard, f> con¬ tinued O'Rourk, upon his guard, and determined to make sure of his right prey, ** that you were wounded, the other day, on the left cheek." *■* Who is your master ?" replied Wil¬ son, and, as he spoke, he took his liand- fccrohitf irara las face, to shew the cut ν 4 near
near his left eye, which was covered with a black patch, and much swelled, CTRomk lifted up the fatal instru¬ ment, and pointed it with a certain aim. Wilson's hand was stretched out to, receive it. The savage fixed his eyes, as he cock*, ed the pistol; on his intended victim. In an instant he started in his seat, ut¬ tered the horrid yell so well known*, among the Irish, and dropped the fatal weapon. , " Gracious God !" exclaimed the fel¬ low, lifting up, his hands in an agony ; .
<% \ have not murdered him !" ь id tlie big tears rolled down his brawny cheeks» Wilson's servant sprung forward, andi seized the reins of his horse. Wilson cautiously picked up the par¬ cel, and feeling it hard, tore open the paper,, and found the pistoL For some seconds O'Rourk sat on his* torse, as one thunderstruck- " Who sent you here-?" said W'ilsony. speaking to him as if he recognised a person he had seen before, and guessed. at his errand ; " who employed you in this work* of death ?" looking ajt the pistol» DO " Youft
<ť Four life is safe," replied tlie other, in a kind of frenzy. " Though hell, Γ know, is open to receive me, I will not carry the murder of him who saved my life even there.—Come,"'continued he, looking wildly at Wilson's servant, who still held the horse, and who had drawn his sword, " dispatch me!'* and he threw himself with violence off the horse, and laid on the ground· Wilson desired his servant not to touch him, and ordered him to stand up. The man obeyed, " Give me then the pistol Γ Wilson
Wilson hehl it from him- " Oh wretch and villain that I am,"' exclaimed he, « ' it is fit I should be my; own executioner ľ' and he looked wildly about him,, as if for the means of de** stroying himself. Wilson's servant let go the horse, aiui seized him by the arm. The fellow at¬ tempted not the least resistance^ '* Well, then lead nur to ťhc'čónimcg*. death. I had rather die publicly ott the scaffold, amid the shouts of 'the people, than live in peace and plenty by the mtirder of røy preserverà ;. \α " Your life, is safe;—Answer what X have to say to you," said Wilson* и б m
It has been mentionét! that O'Rourk was not present at the engagement be¬ tween M *Ginnis and Wilson; but had been out in a skirmish in the same part* of the counts, the very day before. Surprised in their plundering, many hail· been taken prisoners. Oliourk having* been disarmed by Wilson, was compel¬ led to surrender* Touched w!th compassion for the fate of a man, whose death he knew was inevitable, he gave credit to a pitrful story of G*RouikV~-that Jie Had a wife and alurge family, to save whom he had b*en obliged to join the United Irish¬ men ; and Wilson, trusting to his pror mises,; permitted his escape., Though
Though long had every virtuous glow been smothered in this man's breast, yeť still a latent spark survived, which the strange occurrences of the day had sud* den ly excited. O'Rourk's horse, the moment he was released, began gallopping around the court. Captain Wilson ordered his sei * vant to catch him ; and thus addressed his late foe. Wilson, —Who set you on this at* tempt ?" O'Rourk,—«" I must not tell." Wilson. —*' If you have, of your own accord, sworn otherwise, I will not re¬ quire his name of you. Even torvil¬ lani an oath is sacred/' O'Rourk
O'Rourk.-**! swore never to see his face again till I had murdered you¿ yet hail I rather be ten times forsworn, than be guilty of your blood. My life is forfeited. Death I deserve. If you 'will not take it from me, I shall not long want the means of freeing myself. Why should I discover my employer ? let the villany die with me !" Wilson.?— Cannot another attempt the same?—May not a timely discovery prevent it ?—You but half save my life, if you will not forewarn me against whom I am to be upon my guard." O'Rourk. —" Yes, yes, you are right. I'll sacrifice every tie to save you.— Beware of M 'Ginnk " Wilson.—« Of whom ?" O'Rourk*.
(
O'Rourk —" M'Ginnis, brave, haughty, and cruet Î—M 'Ginnis, sly, treacherous, and revengeful 1—M'Gin¬ nis, who fears not God nor man !—· M ( Ginnis, my employer, my Com¬ mander, a General of the United Irish— my patron, on whom all my hopes de¬ pended?-who, as a reward, promised me wealth, independence, and the womnn that I loved." Wilson.—" Why against me does M'Ginnis send the assassin? I know not M'Ginnis.'* O'Rourl·. — iC Not know M'Ginnis, ^vho now lies on his couch with the wounds you inflicted ; and the mark of whose sword you still* bear on your left cheek."
Wilson*
Wilson. —" That came from anotfter hand--Marauder's. " O'Rourk.—" No, no* M'GinnhV the kinsman—and, as they, say, a strongs likeness—of Marauder* J ' Wilson,— ~ u 'l cannot be mistaken*. The villain's looks reeognized me,; M'Ginnis'S' name I have never heard till I came into Ireland. M'Ginnis Ь have never seen. M'Ginnis I nevei> offended,—Marauder, from my youth, has been the first enemy—the most rest* less, the most inveterate-1 ever had. It must be Marauder/' While this* conversation was taking place between Captain Wilson and O'ltourk, the servant of the young Officer was trying to catch the horse. The¿
The noise brought a few men out of the building (for the rest of the troop- were exercising in a field at no great distance), and, with their assistance, the horse was- enclosed near tire corner* "When tlie animal found himself hard; pressed, and as,one of the men caught at the bridle, which had fallen .down,, lie turned short round, reared on his., hind-legs, and took the same walb O'Rourk had intended to ride him over ; though not without striking one of his hind-legs, through the accident of the/ bridle being in the way. Now in the» open country, he disregarded the trifling hjurt, and gallopped away with incredi¬ ble speed, while Wilson's servant return*, e.4 to Ш master.
Wiisoqu
Wilson clearly found from O'Rourk, that the person he had taken for Ma¬ rauder, whoever ho was, was the same that had plotted to assassinate him. Satisfied in this point, lie turned his attention towards O'Rourk, andı taking him up alone into his chamber, he at last, more by tbe force of entreaties than arguments, made the savage promise not to destroy himself. O'Rourk declared every particular/ that he knew of M 'Ginnis, as well as, øf himself, Wilson, hearing that he had been ia the sea service, and wishing to provide a safe situation for the man, gave him a passport to Dublin, with a letter to a fiiend
and whose ship he knçw was at tliat time victualling. The letter hinted at O'Rourk's for¬ mer riotous conduct, and his leaving his ship (now in the Kast Indies) ; but Wilson dwelt at large upon his remorse amd repentance ■> for he had no doubt that it was real, and bad every reason« able hope that it Vas permanent, from the strong mind of the man. Wilson knew that the gentleman to whom he recommended this man, was, of a free and liberal disposition, unin¬ fluenced by the selfish fears and illiberal suspicions which generally accompany thosç who are hackmed in the affairs of tfce
the world, and who, in their conducť with others, proceed with a caution,,! misnamed prudence, that damps every kind, generous, and virtuous emotion. of the heart.—That merciless, that un¬ forgiving temper, which so many pos* f sess whom the want of temptation, or. the apathy of their passions, keeps vir» tuous, is indirectly the causa of as mucb; vice in the world, as the uncurbed? violence of indulged youth, whose wib-* ful desires are their only law* Who threw ihat poor girl on the town ?" the hapless victim of poverty, ignominy, ^ disease, and death ! !—Was it the unre¬ strained passion of the sön, in an un¬ guarded moment ; or tbe cool and de-. Oberate judgrnenţ of his mother, that? . turned*
^turned her penniless from her house* Wasted her character, and took írom her «very friend ? The poor wretch that yesterday paid the forfeit of his * crimes at the fatal tree, some years since committee^ a petty theft, was discovered, and. pro* perly punished. f Shame drove him from home, repentance kept him honest- Many years had passed by, and he had gained a new master, hew friends, and a new name ; when, lo ! a purse-proud man, who never felt temptation without the power of gratifying it, came to the spot. He recognized the poor sinner, lie tore open the half-healêd wound !— His master discards him—his friends forsake him 5—again necessity and « ' revenge
revenge supply him with the means or subsistence ; he robs him whose exces*· sive honesty had destroyed his daily bread —he is taken—and dies i That these poor criminals neglected their du ty to God, and to their neigh* bour, by yielding to temptation, is «vident ; but who was the tempter ?—* What then (a man in tbe full possession «f the good things of this world, may шу) are the wsckeé to be treated like other men ?—No ; but the penitent ure ever to be forgiven ; nøt m mri only, or in deed, but, m far as w# are able, i a thought. Tb£ pj»verb says, u forget and forgive;"—whichb, white you cease punishing the crime, let not your remontrance, directly ör indp rectly, 3
meetly, revive the offence. The man who reminds the faults of another to that person's disadvantage, can never have forgiven the offence ; because the very act of reminding, is indirectly punisMng the offender. This is what makes scandal so hated of gods and men, as it is contrary to the first part <o( charity— f$pgwene$s. €< Let him, who is without sin, throw tLe first stone." And the whole life of v Jesus Christ was in direct opposition to this сотш©п , conduct of mankind—* oppressing the falten. The rich, the great, the noble, tbe proud, the self* satisfied he avoided ;—the man of fame, of honour, of renown, he noticed not. No; the wicked ke exhorted, the penitent
penitent he sought for, the repentant «inner lie cheered. What others zvho -called t hems t Ives good, would not do, Jie did—seek the society of those, whose noted crimes separated them from others, that, by his own conduct and doctrine, he might convince, re¬ form, and save them ; and this thè Saviour continued to do, even in the agonies of death. This want of decent pride his enemies objected against him. Yet which of all his * followers proved - an offender against human or divine laws ? But one, and he was a man of wonderful honesty, who carried the, bağ, who boasted his good-will to the poor, who quickly saw a foible in another, and condemned tbe offender*
ortender. In short, I firmly believe that as much goodness consists in turn¬ ing another from vice, as in being vir¬ tuous ourselves. To a man of this liberal turn of mind O'Rourk was sent. When Wilson's letter was brought, he desired O'Rourk to come into the roouu <f My friend Wilson has candidly told me your history, as well as cha* raeter." " I know it, your Honour.** i( I am willing to try you." u Your Honour shall never repent it.» VOL. IV. E «I
<c I hope not—The secret shall never escape my lips to any one. 1 *—He put the letter into the fire.—" You have now the opportunity of beginning the world anew. You are safe with me; and, as you conduct yourself, so shall I trust you." ' c I thank your Honour—I ask no other. " 4i I can get your pardon from the Government, as a repentant United Irishman. This will also exempt you from punishment for having left your ship, if by any accident you should hereafter b¿ known. Consider me as your friend—behave accordingly—and you'll always find me so. " " God bless your Honour ! If early in life my masters had proved my friends,
friends, I had never, I think, turned out the rascal that I have." " Well, all the ill, I trust, is now past.—If you require any money to *ig yourself out, I will advance it you." O'Rourk thanked him ; but said the generosity of Captain Wilson had made it unnecessary. O'Rourk was sent on baard the ship the next day ; where we *,'w-ill leave him, and return to his cm- irfoyer·
fe S CHAP.
a»
СНЛР. v.
Though, on the over night, M'Ginnis considered the return of the* horse without his rider as a favourable " circumstance, yet with the morning, in .t- spite of his confidence and self-deceit, his apprehensions returned, and he was restless and uneasy to know for certain whether the murderous business had been carried into effect Concerning the fate of Oliourk he was quite indif-
indiffèrent ; and, provided he could hear that Wilson was no more, the death of his messenger would have af¬ forded him rather joy than sorrow. This perturbed and violent temper greatly delayed, from day to day, the recovery of M'Ginnis. Sometimes a messenger would reach him of the suc¬ cess of the French ; and then his ťage and indignation, to think that he was prevented from participating in their glory, could scarcely be restrained. One dav, about a week after O'Rourk's expedition, when he was somewhat in the mending order,—the wound in his side was closed, and he was able with one crutch to walk about the room,—his £ 3 servant
servant alarmed him with the news, that one of the men, whose turn it was to keep guard at the entrance of the wood, had just arrived with the intel¬ ligence that the enemy were endeavour¬ ing to make their approaches through it. M*Ginnis convinced of the strength of the spot he had chosen, and well knowing the badness of the roads, the difficulties of the way, impervious to a stranger, could at first scarcely give credit to the man. He sent for him immediately into his chamber. The fellow corroborated the story. Orders were instantly issued to pre¬ pare for their defence, and to recon- ' . hoitre
rroitre what forces were coming against them. Cannon, M'Ginnis was certain, could not act ; cavalry to a large amount, he knew, with his small and chosen troop, be could oppose with thè greatest suc¬ cess ; and infantry were so exposed to the fire of his men, that he had little apprehension, unless they were in great force. He was sorry, in his ardour for the general cause, that he had sent away any of his men before him ; with the whole of his forces, in his present situa¬ tion, he would have defied any numbers that the Government were at present able to send against him, as long as his provisions lasted.
E 4
Now
Now he began to suspect that O'Rourk had betra) cd him; yet, from the great proiiiiì»cs he had made the man, it did not seem likely. In a very little time another messen¬ ger саше, who informed him that the enemy were proceeding with the greatest caution, and protecting themselves as " they approached. All hopes of ensnaring them he re¬ signed, and determined to oppose every inch of ground; and, if he found the number too powerful, to cut his way through them-towards the French, or retreat intő the wild country behind him.
Now
Now again did the Irish hero, in no very mild terms, lament his incapacity of heading his forces. With so choice a set of horses and men as he had re¬ maining with him, and so well acquaint¬ ed with the country, he would have had few apprehensions of joining the foi' : gn supplies. The advice of his surgeon could no longer prevent his going out on horse¬ back, with a soft pad on his horse, in¬ stead of a saddle, on which he could rest his leg. He soon saw, from the number of his foes, that he could not withstand them for many days, when once they came to know the small num¬ ber of his soldiers.
E ù
By
By making the most of his men, sometimes shewing them on horseback, sometimes on foot, he kept the enemy at a distance, and made them proceed, in the most regular manner. He was now certified that O'Rourk had not betrayed his strength, and the best method of attacking him, from the systematic conduct of his enemy ; and anxiously with his glass he looked among the foe, and rejoiced that he saw no one that bore the port of Wilson. On the third day he discovered an opportunity of cutting off a small body of infantry ; and be sent ten of his best horses down an intricate path for that purpose. Till this time he had ventured 3 nothing
nothing in the open day, but made all his attacks at night. His men sallied forth, and were pro* ceeding to tlie charge, when some ca¬ valry he had nevşr seen before, rode up to support tl.e pioneers. Greatly superior in number to hie horse, the latter turned round, ami made all the haste back. The others pressed close upon them ; but finding the pursuit in vain, retiretl slowly to their former station. M ť Ginnis fancied that the uniform of the cavalry was like that which Wibon had worn. When the pursuit was over, lie was able to take a more distinct view в б, of.
of their leader, and, as the Oiìicer oc* casionally tinned his head towards them, he observed a patch on his left Λ 1 ____ к Not anotlier object human could have struck such terror into the soul of M'Ginnis!—Nay, I doubt if any of the victims of his infamy had, in the dead of night, appeared before him, that the horror of the spectacle would so strongly have affected his feelings, as the side-view of the face he now saw at a distance, in tlie full blaze of day. When the horse of the enemy, in their return, came up to the pioneers, they fronted round, and stood still. M 'G in n is's
M finnis's glass had dropped from his hand, and broke ; he called for one more excellent, and recovering his pre¬ sence of mind, dismounted from his horse, and leaned against the side of a tree. With his telescope fixed, he had now a full view, though, the distance was greater. The more he looked, the more was he assured that the Officer was Wilson. He saw him get off his horse, he saw him go towards the infantry. M 'Ginnis directed his glass to the spot where the supposed Wilson stood. As he looked, he beheld a party directing a glass towards
towards him. Wilson applied his eye to the instrument ; M'Ginnis, for the first time in his life, felt the appalling stroke of shame; he went behind the tree. From this moment a gloomy despond¬ ency, owing to the late virulence of his passions, his disappointment, his ill·· ness, his present debility, seized on the soul of M'Ginnis. His former confidence railed him,. and he instantly determined on tüght, if a vigorous attack he meditated that night did not fully succeed. The assault was returned with redou¬ bled fury; M'Ginnis's men fled, and some few were taken prisoners* Their
Their Chief resolved to make his escape the following evening ; and, having packed up every thing worth carrying oft* he sent a, few of his h'oop, with all his domestic servants, the wives of his men, and the whole of the baggage, down into the ulterior of the country, and, with the rest, prepared, to join the French.. He arrived at a small town near the river Shannon, which he purposed to cross in the morning; but great was his surprise when he found his party opposed at the entrance into the place. His men attempted to fight, but were soon surrounded. Four of them, with their Genera^ whose woundhad induced him
him to go in the rear, and who was mounted on his famous horse, alone got off. Narrowly did M'Ginnis escape being taken. He received a shot from a car¬ bine over the right temple, and another grazed his shoulder, in the pursuit. They were closely pressed for many miles, but the excςllency of their horses saved them. They got at last to a poor hovel, whose owner they knew had been a violent Defender, and here they left their Commander, \vho could not proceed any further. What a change for the gallant, gay,
and
and haughty Marauder !—Disguised like a poor female, sore with his wounds, without necessary attendance, food, or clothing, he was left on a miserable couch, with the sole attendance of a man, who seemed the legitimate child of rapine and hunger. V If Marauder (as a lady high in rank once said he did) bore the appearance of Milton's Satan, the Prince of Hell ; one of tlie lowest of the fallen angels could not have been better personified than by the wretch, whose guest he now was. This man might have lived in peace and plenty, with not only the neces¬ saries, but the comforts of life, had not è an
an envious and ambitious temper ran* kled in his bosom. Among the first to> take the Defenders oath, he had rode nightly about the country, with a des¬ perate gang, to plunder, lay waste, and sometimes murder : not that he was in want of any thing,, for he lived as a. gardener to a gentleman, who paid him most liberally*. One night, in an attack upon a bouse in the neighbourhood, he re¬ ceived a shot in his leg ; this he endeavoured to conceal; neglect pro¬ duced a mortification, and he was obliged to lose the limb. He had been before susj ect ^ 5 tn * s corroborated the suspicions ; he was of course discharged fjroai his present service· His master's, humanity
humanity did not attempt to get any proof against him, but generously gave him for life the house and garden in w hich he now lived. Que thing only works upon a mind like this—interest. This M'Ginnis knew, and, as soon as he was alone with the man, he gave up to him the best part of the property he had visibly about him, and promised him without end at a future day. Nor did. this man know the consequence of the person who was with him, M'Ginnis wearing the garb of a private man* When the other four men departed; they promised to return with a proper convey-»
conveyance. Their present object was to reach the French army as soon as posible, which they had no doubt, by this time, wcic got near the capital
С11ЛР.
" II —
CIIAP. VI. vJ*N the first evening that M'Ginnis occupied his forlorn habitation, he had to experience another mortification.' His host, who had been out to get him some better refreshment, had heard a flying rumour, that the whole of the French army had surrendered prisoners of war to Marquis Corn wallis. This was certain, that the French forces had made no progress towards the capital, and
and few of the inhabitants, as they pass¬ ed along, had joined them» If this news proved true, M'Ginnis saw that the great stake he now played for was his опт safety, and he deter¬ mined to leave the kingdom as privately as possible; and, as Marauder, arrive ia England, an)d be the most inveterate agamst his rebel cousin, M'Ginnis.—- His leisure time, and he had at present enough for reflections of all kinds, was ehiefly occupied by schemes of English glory ; yet, whenever he had moulded one to his purpose, the form of Wilson would start up, and haunt his prospects. The death of one so hated, so dreaded, he was resolved to perpetrate with his own liand ; and the best method to put this
this în execution, was another amuse¬ ment for him. The wound in his face was not long in healing. The scar he would greatly have regarded, had it happened sooner, ¿is it would have marked the person of M^ünnis; at present he cared little about it. The large seam which remain¬ ed, rather assisted to disguise him, than otherwise ; and he knew he could easily invent a plausible story of his having received it in the West Indies. As his health g$ew better, his views were moreliold^ and Fanny, whom he had almost forgotten, was no longer left out erf the prospect* In
In this concealment the Irish Chief remained a month ; never went out in the daytime but as a poor, old, infirm female; in the night he could prowl more leisurely about in his own garb. A fifth week he staid at this hut to provide himself with a safe disguise, the search after the Rebel Chiefs being most diligent. Neither of his attend¬ ants 1 ever returned, and the news of the defeat and surrender of their French Allies had been full surely confirmed. When he at last left the hut, he had torn off the binding of his clothes, and fastened on a different colour, and other¬ wise altered his dress. His beard was grown, his hair long and matted, his whole
%hole appearance wretched, and the noble Marauder sallied forth from the Cabin—A BEGGAH. When he departed, he thought it prudent to give most of Ids remaining things of value to his host ; and he en¬ deavoured to make him believe that he purposed to destroy himself. He had still some money about him, and notes on England enough to pay his expences there, as soon as he could get to a place where they might be turned into cash. He had travelled a few miles, when a thought struck him to assume the per¬ son of a foreigner; and, as he was perfect master of the Italian language, vol. ιν· ν he
hş adopted that in preference to any otitjer, ajs being İçss liable to be detected, and not subject to those suspicions thş French would creşte* When questioned by any one, от I* want of necessaries, he made use of such phrases aş these— ·" Me be ищ poor Italiene Jew; nie va goine to Angle. Me lose ship—all go! M# swim—all die ! Vat ppo? jew 4°?*'— He forged also а дате for the vessel. By this disguise of an Italian Jew^ he passed without the smallest sus¬ picion«. At a gentleman ¿ seat-, where he wa& hospitably entertained, he inst with, an оИ
t^lcl acquàntance, who had fiili reasoa to remember Ыпц as Marauder. This was no other, than the young emigrant Officer, who carnee over to England with Captain Çreutesprere, to cali aí*· lauder and Fahany to an a£cou it con* cerning the atrair of Leonova, Captain I>uchesne*s regiment being disband d, he was arrived in Ireland for an asyl un, as he was rather fearful at present of going to England, This Offiter conversed with the Italian Jew for some time in the Italian lan¬ guage, and, among other things* told bim how very like he was to a man, whom he should remember as long^ as he lived, though he never saw him but шее> Th« Frenchman particularly f Ä noticed
-noticed the sound of his voice, which Marauder had not thought it necessary to disguise, not at the first recollecting the other. He left this place as soon as he decently could ; the scrutinizing looks of the young Frenchman, and the officious manner so peculiar to that nation, teazed more than they alarmed him* The late wound he had received ош his right temple, the Officer enquired about ; and the Jew gave„ him some plausible account of his receiving it at the time of his pretended shipwreck When Duchesne first addressed his old opponent, he asked if he understood French· The incautious Jew had just before
INFERNAL QUIXOTE.«' Before conversed with the emigrant's ser¬ vant in that language ; and, uot immedl·* , ately recognizing »informer antagonist, replied, ' * A little; "' Instantly the other began with his accustomed volubility ; Marauder,, at the moment, remembered his features, and in his answer spoke so bad, that the emigrant was constrained to talk with the Italian Jew in his own language.. The subject for alarm here was not that he had the smallest idea of being taker* for Marauder ; but M'Ginnis, the rebel,, was like Marauder, and if the young Frenchman's fancies became known to others, some one who had heard of the likeness between tliem, might conceive that he was M'Ginnis, f 3 after
after wliom, at this very time, a diligent search was making. This circumstance made the Jew more careful than ever:, and ^ager to get out of tue country. To prevent being traced, lie furnish¬ ed himself with other clothes, which he took care should assist the character that-he had assumed; and, by the time he got to Dublin, he totally relinquish¬ ed the shipwreck story, and had pro¬ vided himself with a box and trinkets. From Dublin ht easily got a passage to Holyhead ; and now Marauder felt himself a man again. In the evening after he landed, he bought himself a large brown- great* coat *
* ¿mt ; scissars and razors he had in his box. In the street, before he went to ' any lodging for the night, he cut his beard off as close as he well could. Muffled up irr his great- c<>*i, with his little box under his arm, the rest of his dress-was not visible; and the s war thi- ness of his appearance was not easily noticed. In the morning early he set to itfork, shaved himself many times, cut his hair close to his head, plucked his eyebrows, put on ágain different clothes of a plain colour, but perfectly fashionable ;. a light coloured wig he had also provided, and he tied a silk handkerchief round his neck as if he had a violent cold, and wrapped him¬ self up ia his great-coat., s 4 As*
As soon as he had breakfasted, he ordered a chaise to the door, and set off. After the first stage he took off the handkerchief, and by the time he arrived in town f was ready to appear in his proper person. While Marauder was changing horses at a mean post-town in Wales, his cu¬ riosity was excited by a mob at some distance. He found the people had taken the law into their own hands, and were punishing a thief caught in the fact. Being ever a warm admirer of popular government, he soon became a near spectator* What was his astonish* ment I
m ent !—the victim of the Welchmen's rage was. his friend Cowspring 1. He was too near the object to retreat, as he found himself recognized ; there¬ fore affecting compassion for the poor criminal, he gave some money among 1 the most active demagogues, and, in a tone that told the other not to know him, ordered Cowspring to follow hinu When alone, of course, he gave venu to his surprise*. " I am eternally ruined !" exclaimed, the ci-devant General, in the most dole¬ ful tone; " my law-suit is determined against me. A copy of the cursed will к found. I. iled from London to save Ж â my
íny life ; and arrived so far on foot alone in a fruitless endeavour to fly the king¬ dom* Three months have I been wan* dering about this wild country. My fears so alarmed me, I fled without any means of support. Every thing of va* ïue sold, I was caught this morning borrowing that of my fellow-citizen, which I had ra>st need of.*' Marauder, finding how his affairs were, felt more contempt than pity for him ; and giving him ä trifle, under pretence of not having further means of assisting him, hè took a direction to him under a fictitious name, and, with ŕrany promises, which he never meant to perform, left him. -...... . . . i .·- *. л - £ So
So little more is to be said of this Wretab, that I shall conclude his in» famous story here* After this meeting, the misčrabtó* Cöwspring, finding his corporeal as well as,mental troubles increasing upon him,. and the promised succour from Marau¬ der never arriving, with the last surn h# was able to raîse> purchased a deadly dose, and died as he had livcžá, witfo contempt and infamy*. The fact of wilful suicide* wás clearly proved, and the wretched body Was čon^ demned to that ignominious punish^ ment, the whole of his life had before shewn that he deserved., ' ' ' * ' * ' " l ж б Marauders
Marauder, as soon as he wasr alone in his chaises turned his thoughts upon- his dear self, as if nothing concerning one, with whom he had been in tlie highest intimacy, had happened, and began reasoning upon his own affairs. Still totally irresolute how to act,, one moment he had a mind to turn his chaise ftom tlie London road, and smuggţe himself to the West Indies», and return immediately as Marauder; and this he was not so much deterred from through difficulty and danger, as through dislike to losing the time it would consume to put the scheme in execution. Repeatedly did he revolve in his mind
mind the proofs of identity that could be brought against him; and Wilson. stood alone as the only person the least likely to offer any. The death of Wil¬ son he was resolved to perpetrate a& soon as his enemy returned to England,, even if the act was accompanied by his own destruction ; and so inveterate were his malice and his revenge towards lnm, that this also was an argument against his going to the West. As for proofs that he had been there, he disregarded them.; his care was that his.enemies should not be able to prove the contrary. Ever upon his guard, befou he left England he had at no time toVi any one
one to what island he was going, or the business which carried him there. His friends thought it was to Jamaica, and that he had an estate there ; but this was only conjecture, which he had never corroborated. In his new cha* racter of M'Ginnis, he was equally careful what he said of Marauder ; and their English acquaintance, who werö most able to speak concerning liis af* fairs, were now no more. To clear himself írom being an abet¬ tor of M *Ginnis*s conduct he thought was of more consequence ; and here , too, whilst he knew there was no prooï> no M'Ginnis to be brought against him, had he most craftily provided.
" As M'Ginnis, he had written many tetters to Marau 1er, in England, sup¬ posing in them that his kinsman was arrived from the West Indies* In some of these he professed great penitence for having abused the commission his generous kinsman had entrusted him with ; and in his last letter, having de* elared that all hopes of establishing himself in Ireland were lost, he thus concludes :—-
<ť My sole aim now is to get ta France, In the disguise of a female emigrant (you know how well I un¬ derstand their language and manners) I have no fear; and"'then, 'devoted to 3 the
the French service, you shall never again hear of your ungrateful kins¬ man " PATRICK M'GINttIS»" But then Marauder, as well as hi& cousin, had taken the oaths of the United Irishmen, when he wás the first time in Dublin. Yes. Here was his answer*—He took them, as believing, the cause to be for the general benefit of Ireland, in a peaceable way. To second this he had witnesses of power and consequence ia that country ; and his subsequent conduct in leaving the kingdom, when he perceived they were about to act in an hostile manner, was his
his proof that he entirely disapproved of their measures. The corps that M/Ginnis had raised, was originally for the service of the Government ;—-this Marauder approved, of; but the rebellious conduct of his cousin-afterwards, he knew not for? a long time, and was too far from the spot to be answerable for it.. All these thoughts, and many other to the same purpose, were again and again revolved in the mind of Marauder, as he travelled to town ; and in lib journey he amused himself with putting them upon paper, and forming a regu-* br, systematic scheme.
Marauder,
Marauder, from the earliest a^e, had ever had the highest opinion of his own abilities ; and many a pang did it cost him, when he was compelled to re¬ nounce the grand idea of being the Cromwell of Ireland. All .his subsequent misfortunes he at* tributed to the wounds he had received in his rencounter with Wilson, which. prevented his acting in person ; and the removal of him he considered as essen¬ tially necessary, not only to every worldly happiness^ but to his very ex* istence*.
CHAP.
.»„И, „ i ι ШИ— .11.1 .Hill! ULI > ■
CIIAP. VIL MARAUDER made immediate en· quides after his friend Arnon, and . heard with pleasure that he was in town. As he was fully prepared to appear it* bk own character, he drove to his bouse.
A whİ5^
A whispering, and rather confusion- among the servants surprised him a* he got out ; but the moment his name was announced, he was shewn into the room where his friend was. There lay the philosopher, in a large sick chair, -pale, emaciated in the face, his body puffed up, his legs enormously swelled* Even Marauder started as he beheld him. " Arnon, my friend, " said he, assum¬ ing, as well as he was able, a mild note, ° why do I st j you thus—what is the* matter ?"
Arnon>
" Arnon shook his head, and scarcely Űried to smother a sigh. "Marauder, welcome!—You arrive iit the very crisis.— 'Tis passed—I can¬ not keep up tlie ball any longer. " Mr. Arnon made a motion to a ser¬ vant who attended bim ; the man, ad¬ dressing himself to Marauder, informed him, in a few words, that his master's disorder was a dropsy, which the doc¬ tors had declared to be incurable, Mr, Arnon rousing himself— *** Now ihc hour is come," continued the man, from whose lips he had heard, and gree¬ dily imbibed the modern and ancient precepts of stoical sceptics, — * 4 now the
the hour, is come, I shudder at the thought of death !-rOh Marauder 1 what nonsense —would it were but non* sense !—what proud, vain-glorious doc* trines have I talked to you!—Foolish wretch ! to fancy tliat I knew every thing, when I know nothing·'* Marauder looked disgusted; Агпоа Vas too faint to< regard his looks, and continued— " My disorder, you've heard, is á dropsy, I know it is. My physicians tell mesor—my apothecary—all of the same opinion»—1 know full well the cause too—the deadly liquor I have lately so plentifully taken, to drown thought» Yet knowing all this, with all
^ţll our knowledge we cannot find a re* medy. I still linger and linger o&. Even in this miserable state do I wish tp. live.—-Oh Marauder! you are yet young, I liked your, bold, aspiring temper—I wished Hambden to be like .you."—Marauders animation was re* yived,, but was instantly depressed. -*· *' Alas í I think otherwise now~*-l wish you to be; like him* —Hear my dying words; for tiiis purpose I have sent for my-son, and he is expected every mo¬ ment." Marauder was restless^ and very sorry that he had come to the house without proper enquiries» " Nay, naj% my -frtefidy'' said he,* ''drive
** drive away these weak thoughts ;-*» be yourself agititi/* " Ahí young man, what for?-— Again to vaunt myself in my weakness ;—again to impiously throw the bolts of the Deity, and talk what he can, and 'what he cannot do? This is all my knowledge—that I am a poor, misera¬ ble wretch 1" Marauder. —" Do not give way to the disorder—it overpowers your senses. " ¿trnoth —" Ah i there's the sting.—» 1 am conquered indeed—my fears con¬ quer me—they force me to speak—they make me, in spite of myself own how wretched, helpless, and ignorant I am." Marauder.—" Hut why now more than at other times. You always knew that you must die. You knew the uncertainty
uncertainty beyond—yet still how im¬ probable*—how-——'* Arnon interrupted him.— u Ah Ma¬ rauder ! Marauder I it does not seem so improbable now* Is there any other animal, but man, that shews the least belief in a future state ?—Saw you any of the savage nations, while you were in the West ? Do not the most ignorant still look forward to an hereafter ?" The questions of Arnon staggered Marauder in more respects than one ; and, even iri the presence of a dying man, he could not entirely overcome his alarm. <ť Savage nations !>--Oh ! yes*—no; I have been chiefly in the civilized vol. iv. g ^ part;
part;—but----- ~* flying from a sub¬ ject to himself most personal,, Marauder continued^- <ť Why should you credit now the tales of Priests, whose art, whose interest it is to raise tbbese bug¬ bears?" " With some it may be^but even the worst still believe and tremble*— Priests, Marauder, are men. What might the world have said of them, if you or I had been one of them ?" Marauder w#s rather offended; but this was no time to shew it. He mut¬ tered something about hypocrisy« Arnon understood hira. —" Of hy¬ pocrisy—I cannot say.—The weakness of human natur« sways us all from our principles,
principles, without being hypocrites· Yet, Marauder, it is some merit to re¬ spect tlie virtue of'others, though we мре wanting ourselves.'* " Come, come, my dear friend," said Marauder, afiecting to be the phi¬ losopher, <ť rouse the wonted vigour of your mind./ Let reason, which has ever enlightened you, shew you what is truth ; your actions and your words Jiave always yet agreed. " " Ah Marauder ! there again you rack my inmost soul;·--would I had been an hypocrite ! My w r ords, ľm sure, were wrong—what then must have been my actions ?—Others I have ruined as well as myself.—Poor Royston Santhorpe! there was ä soul, Marauder, —alas ! ho>v debased—how perverted ! о % What-
Whatever wrongs we may suffer, that which is evil can never redress them. This truth I feel at last. Unhappy Santhorpe, thou hast made a dreadful expiation!" As yet Marauder was not informed of the fatal catastrophe to which he al¬ luded, but he embraced this opportu¬ nity to turn the subject of conversa¬ tion. * ' I know nothing of Roy ston/' said he ; " I have not seen him since I left England. I heard, indeed, that he had espoused the cause of the French ; and I made no doubt, with his ardour, reso¬ lution, and abilities«—»"
« Alas I"
"Alas J" exclaimed the philosopher, u what are they all without virtue? He has yielded to ambition, to interest, and to revenge—he has fought against his country—he is taken—and dies the death of a traitor I—Oh· Marauder, be¬ ware !—God, I thank thee ! mv son is safe Ш" Marauder felt niore indignant .than affected ;—he knew not what to say. Arnon in a little time continued— a Is there another state, Marauder?— What must it be ?—What a part here have I played!—and the end too!—I drank to drown thought ;—and, as I laid me down at night, wished I might awake no more.— —Suicide! what art о 3 thou?
thou ?—Is there any other animal be¬ sides man that deliberately seeks thee ?" (i Yes," said Marauder, eagerly, " 'tis an innate principle planted in our nature.— Tis a love of liberty !—Birds and beasts in con finement fiequently perish by their own violence, and by voluntary hunger. " " Tis specious, Marauder," replied Amon, faintly smiling, yet with a vigour of mind the other did not think him capable of; u how often have I thought of it ! Yet, when the savage s beats himself to death in his toils, can you for a moment think he means to destroy himself?— Mo, no ; he tries % escape· So, if lie refuses his food, is it nót through fear ? Does not tbe alarm ef unknozim danger take away tlie sen* sation
sation of hunger ?<—Do you tìtink they mean to фе f*— Offer to destroy theni, even in this state, will they not resist?*' "Oh my friend Γ exclaimed Ma* ramler, afteering a passion he did not feel, " how it grieves me to see your noble mind become a prey té the weakness of your body ! This is not Arnon that speaks !—'tis sickness, a temporary de¬ bility; again, I trust, your native ţ)ow^rs will be renewed—and again well latfgh at these childish alarms, ^ml listen to thé dictates of Atfnon." u Ncv Marauder, n Arnoñ spoke wit& & woÄtofui p^sioÄ, ťf it is not witÄ me ás you thiftk $ newr l«r Шу Mc did I feel inf thoughts more êteár. My тШ гштт its forcer food, and men tfee тты $f Шшгу, ime lost 0 4 their
their relish. The head is right—but the heart is Wrong. There is a weight upon my, soul—a heavy secret rests there, which, as soon as Hambden ar¬ rives, must be dragged up; then,-in defiance of this half-expired, body, the nobler part, you will see, still lives." Marauder was very restless. He was relieved from this conversation by the arrival of young Hambden. He waited to see the interview between the father and son, well knowing the dislike the father had to the company of Hambden before he had himself left England, and the uneasy sensations Arnon felt ^fcen in his son's company. From this the malicious temper of Marauder .expected food, in the interview which was about to
to take place between them ; and con¬ sidered it as a pleasing revenge fo*' the penance that he had suffered from the foregoing conversation. The anxiety of Mr. Arnon, when he heard his son s voice, cannot be express¬ ed.—" He comes ! he comes !" he cried, ° f nd raising himself with an exertion in us chair, he fainted on Hambden's bo¬ som. A scene so moving Marauder little expected to be present at, but he attri- buted it to a wrong motive. He was quickly undeceived by what followed, and set right. Mr. Arnon soon reco¬ vered. g 5 « Oh
" Oh Hambden !" said he, . t( your presence gives me one moment of com¬ fort before I die. Long you have been as an alien to me—rather I to you* — Say you will hot leave me till I am gone.—Ah, my poor boy, happy had it been for you if I had gone sooner V* Hambden said but little, yet that tittle was in the highest degree soothing" to the heart of tjie father* Marauder ^as heartily tired, and about fo take his leave. Arnon stopped him. " Stay a few moments. I have a heavy secret to disburden my mind of. The particulars will be found in my 4 bureau
bureau when I am no more. Answer me, Hambden, one or two questions.— You know, my Childs how I educated you in prejudice of those very princi¬ ples Which you have since adopted.— Alas 1 I fear yon re right !—Do you for- 4 give me ?" " Yes, my clear Sir, from my heart. You were prejudiced, as well as myself. Let me hope then* like me, you see your error, and-----" "Ah Hambden! talk not on that subject;-—I am all wrong, I ieel, I con-* fess —but I dare not, I canno* think further. Answer me again-*-Have I, in other respects, acquitted myself to you as a father ?" " Some pitiful stojry*" thought Мгь auder, " about the woman that he о 6 kept ;
i
kept;—perhaps he has married the trull ; or perhaps Mr. Hambden Arnon, after all, is a bastard ; some such wou« derful secret, I suppose. Would I were fairly out of the whining fellow s house 1 —the devil a bit would I enter again to hear all his secrets." To Mr. Arnon 's question, if he was satisfied with his conduct as a father, his son replied^— " Above my wishes, Sir; far above my deserts. 1 ' 11 No, Hambden, no,—Come a little nearer to me.—Hear, and forgive me· 4 Every thing I have was always your's—» J am not yourfatheťŕ " My
íc My dear Sir, speak again. To whom do I owe my being ?" Mr. Anion was much distressed with the exertion he had undergone, and ^ven wept. Hambden held him affectionate¬ ly by the hand. A train of passions hovered on the brow of Marauder. In a few minutes Mr. Arnon proceeded* '* Will your kindness, my dear boy, and my weak deserts entitle me to your pardon?" " Dear father, you have acquitted yourself to me as if I had been your son—do not for a moment doubt it.— · Yet tell røe, Sir, who was my father ?" " Hambden ! whose name you bear. Hambden ! the confidential friend that fled
fled with me from England when you were but a little Ьоу*-ипу own son the same age. He died in the passage. We were driven on shore among a savage people. Your father soon died. I adopted you a# min# ; because by that n*eans I possessed the property, which, in case of your death, was left to mé ind my son% Many years I lived among this people. The few of the sailors, if any ever returned tp England, knew nothing of iôy аоЫгз, or уошг father's. We fled the country witk fie* titious names. A discovery I never feared ; yet something within me t I cannot acisouint for» made w n^rable^ till I had discot meå tliis secret to you, that I might die witli your forgiveness."
Marauder
Marauder couldüot refrahi a taunt¬ ing white at hi» last wérds, as- he con¬ temptuously turned towards the win¬ dow. Neither the sick man nor Hanrb^ den noticed k. The latter again ex¬ pressed his gratitude to his foster fittiler for the care that he had taken of bitty and fór his constant liberality; and, what was an additional consolation to Mr. Arnon, promised not to leave the house till the termination of hie dis* order. Marauder, of late, had been in the habit of exercising himself hi the stoical school of necessity, and in practical philosophy was become a most wonderful adept A placid or atı angry brow hè could
could assume at command ; and by his looks, as well as his words, could he hide the purposes of his heart. W r ith a well-studied compliment towards Mr. Arnon and Mr, Hambden, having re¬ moved a handkerchief from his eyes as he turned from the window, he prepared to take his leave ; and, while he pro¬ mised to be frequent in his visits to his sick friend, he mentally determined this should be his last, since he saw no prospect of ever getting any part of the property. No conversation, except of the com¬ plimentary kind, had taken place be¬ tween Hambden and Marauder; yet the latter, who was ever suspicious, re¬ marked
marked that Hambden seemed to regard him with scrutinizing eyes : and he be¬ gan to fancy that Wilson might have written to his friend the particulars concerning him*
CIIAP«
CHAP. VUL İYİ R, ARNON was so weakened by the exertions he had made in the late discovery, that he was obliged, soon after the departure of Marauder, to be carried to his bed, which was in the same room. He dici not recover suffi* cient strength to have any conversa¬ tion with his reputed son that day. Thinking as they did on religious subjects,
subjects, when they conversed the next , morning, the discourse insensibly turn¬ ed that way. Hambden was anxious that his foster father should profess the doctrines of Christianity, and adduced many argu¬ ments to the purpose. " My dear boy,** replied Arnon, "if I had any hope that my life might be spared, I would make it my study to understand those truths, which Ï own, for purity, morality, and every human virtue, surpass all others.—Your pre¬ sence revives me—your forgiveness comforts me ra the hour of death.—A knowledge of Goďs word, 1 rear, I have grossly neglected ; and I have alarms and
INFERNAL QUIXOTE. and apprehensions of I know not what nature, which all my philosophy cannot subdue. I dare not say, I believe in the Christian religion, lest I should die with a falsehood in my mouth ; for I cannot ^say what I believe. All I am conscious of is the wretchedness of my own nature, my own imperfections, and ignorance." " My dear Sir, already are you half a Christian," " Would to God I were 1—I cannot deceive myself.—Oh Hambden i 'tis one happiness to me that my sophistry has not misled you. The whole course of my life has been against Christianity ; yet, lost in doubts concerning its his¬ tory—ignorant of its mysteries—neg¬ lecting its precepts—·despising its tenets —I
—I own, with my dying breath, that it is the only system of virtue. These, the thoughts of my death-bed, I care not how public they are made. I fear they have little errect on the "ambitious soul of Marauder.—Of ι Hambden, be¬ ware of him !—Like other rash young men, he gratifies his passions ; but, un¬ like all others, he commands them*" Hambden informed the sick man that he was fully acquainted with the character of his former friend ; and that Rattle had, many years ago, cautioned him against him. The name of Rattle recalled many circumstances to Mr. Arnon 's mind; he could not forget what labours he had taken
14ii INFEÄNAL QUIXOTS. taken to instil into him his own notions, and with what ease Rattle had baffled them*. * 4 That wild young man," said he, <ť is another strong instance of the Weakness of my philosophy. I could not repel his loose, irregular wit.—Do you remember, Hambden, his reply to a full and systematic refutation which I thought I had made of the sacred books of the Jews and Christians?" << Very well, Sir;—it was soon after my return to England, when you had been reviewing the writings of some notorious characters, who then made a noise. You had given him, some time before, the works of that wretch, Tho¬ mas Pain, and you took, With the book in
in your hand, a complete review of tlie subject." Arnon sighed— M 'Twas so indeed. Go on." " Rattle heard you out with unnsual patience, and then» in his calmest man- * ner, replied—'* If, Mr. Arnon, your ar¬ guments were unanswerable, which I -deny— if you could prove that the whole of the Bible was the work of priestcraft in the present century—if you could convince me that Judtrn was szvallowed up by an earthquake long before the circumstances happened recorded in the New Testament, and lately came up again ; yet I should conimue to believe that Jesus Christ was sent from the Almighty to give the world a full light of tlie most perfect system of all that is holy
holy and good towards God and to¬ wards man. Believing this, no matter to me when, where, or how it hap¬ pened." Ai Yes, Hambden, you repeat verba¬ tim* I laughed at his notions then ; now— -Oh Hambden i would I had fol¬ lowed that system î" Ät the words of comfort which flow¬ ed from the lips of Mr· Hambden, the despairing philosopher shook his head. He tried, for a few moments, to escape from such thoughts which pressed he? ,r y on him ; and, in the most affectionate manner, enquired after Hambden's wife and child. The answers were such as he wished. He
He informed Mr» Arnon, also, that he expected them in town the next day, with the father of his wife, whom he had left at his house in Wales. The respectable ¿haracter of the Priest did not escape the notice of Arnon, though he was a man with whom he personally had not the least acquaintance. If Mr. Arnon had lived, Hambden purposed introducing the Dean to him ; but the present appearance of amend¬ ment was solely occasioned by the turn his spirits had taken on the arrival of his reputed son, Sir. Arnoii's weakness and faintness vol. iv # π returned
returned in the evening. Mr. Hamb¬ den was instantly summoned to his chamber. The agonies of death were upon lurn. A servant remarked how ill he was. The dying man heard him,—" My heart is broke !" exclaimed he* Hambden held his hand ;—the other, grasping'it tight, turned his eyes upon him. " One good lesson I give thee, child — my death /" He spoke no more—convulsion sue* ceeded convukipn ; and, in the space of
Of an hour, the dreadful scene was ter¬ minated. Thus perished Arnon. A man, who for many years had carried a species of morality, independent of every religious principle, as far as most men of his day. After living a plotting and abstemious^ life, from the twenty-fifth to the fiftieth year of his age—at the very time when he was in high reputation for convert¬ ing others, both by his conversation and writings, to his own ideal plans, did he begin to doubt and waver upon what he had so often asserted to be clear and positive arguments. His alarms daily pressed in upon him. His и Я reputed
reputed son—educated by himself, or un¬ der his own eye, who had from his earliest age learned his notions, and im- bibed his prejudices—saw their falsity ; the old arguments weakened of their effect at every attempt to recover him to his original principles ; and soon young Hambden was lost to the cause. - Now his own philosophy began to be staggered, and he found himself bewil* dered in those paths he had all his life been treading in» Insensibly he flew to the bottle. There for a time he found oblivion ; novelty, for a little while, continued the deception. More and more fre¬ quent was the remedy applied-~more and
and more weak were its effects* So un¬ stable proved all his mental researches without the foundation of religion, that in a very few years he fell a victim to those intemperate habits, in opposing which he had, for a long space of time, considered his greatest virtue to consist. Unhappy in the turn his son's abili¬ ties had taken, yet he could not blame him for his conduct; and though Hambden acted in opposition to those principles he himself professed, still he could not help confessing to himself that the young man's conduct was more and more worthy* his notice. The paper which Mr. Arnon left be¬ hind him, that contained the particulars n3 of
of his flight from this country, when he adopted Hambden as his own son, it will not be necessary to trouble tho reader with. The method of their escape ; the fíe- titious n^mes they assumed; the diffi¬ culties of their voyage; the death of Mr. Arnon *s own son; the notice he took of young Hambden ; their ship** wreck ; their sufferings on shore ; the suspicious conduct of the natives ; tlie death of Mr. Hambden; the manner of Mr. Anion's escape with young Hamb¬ den ; his kindness and affection toward» the boy» whose death he might easily have accomplished if he had been so disposed ; their arrival in the civilized parts of America; and, finally / their return
return to Europe after the termination of the war ;—all this was minutely re- r corded by Mr. Arnon, that his treat¬ ment of the youth might be some vin¬ dication for his having assumed the fortune during his life ; but has nothing to do with the present story, and which I shall therefore willingly omit. Neither did Mr. Arnon fçrget to leave satisfactory proofs that „Hambden was really the son of his deceased friend. The great use of these was establishing Mr. Hambden's right to the property, then litigating in the Court of Chan¬ cery, as the heir at law ; under which title it was disputed, in contradiction to Mr, Hambden the elder's bequest
в 4 When
When Marauder heard that Arnorv. was no more, he determined to keep the specious form of civility by calling on Air. Hambden ; though his real motive was to endeavour to discover if he had received any suspicions from Wilson. After enlarging on the virtues of the deceased, Marauder said—" Probably, among Mr. Arnon's papers, you will find some letters of mine from the West Indies. ч Of course you will destroy them. But one that I wrote from St. Kits, which concerns some private bu¬ siness of my own, I will thank you to kçep for me. In it there is an estimate of a small property of mine, which a friend of Mr. Arnon's had thoughts of purchasing ; I brought a copy of the estimate
т. estimate with me, but have mislaid it among my papers* " " Certainly," replied Hambden, "all timt cam© from you, I will keep, that there may be no mistake. You men¬ tion St. Kits. Was that your residence while you was abroad ?"' " I was only there a few days—my business was very urgent. " * ť You were in many of the islands then?" "Yes." "'How did* you- escape the yellow fever ?" " About a twelvemonth ago I had it dreadfully. My*lh% was .despaired of for some days. It carried off all my hair, as you see." And Marauder lift¬ ed up his perriwig, under which was not и 5 the
the smallest vestige of hair ; an appli¬ cation of slack-lime, and other powerful destroyers, had unceasingly been ap¬ plied since his return to England. " It is astonishing to røe that it has not grown again/' " The ravages of the fever were so ψ- dreadful. Dr. Balder assured me, among the thousands of patients he had attended, he never saw one so grievously afflicted, and survive it·" Marauder had seen in a morning- paper, that a physician, of the name he had mentioned, was lately dead in Jamaica. Hambden. had observed it likewise· " I see," said he, "by the papers, that
that the Doctor himself is dead. You were well acquainted with him, I pre¬ sume." Marauder testified his surprise at the account of his death, and answered— " As much so as any person in the island." " Was he a young or an old man ?" Hambden asked this with great indif¬ ference, as is often the case in a forced conversation. Marauder considered the question as ensnaring, and cautiously, with seeming ease, replied-— " Upon my honour I can't tell. Of n 6 a middle
a middle age, I should think. Tliat climate is so prejudicial, there is no> making any guess." Marauder ran into a dissertation on the country, and the conversation con¬ cerning the Doctor ceased. They now talked of the affairs of Ireland* Marauder was very indignant against his cousin, but he hoped the re¬ ports were not true that MOİnnis was· in arms against the Government. íť That L wished," continued Ma¬ rauder, "for Catholic emancipation, and Parliamentary reform, I never denied ; they were the early principles of my soul, for which I- have sacrificed the most
most splendid prospects ; but my love of peace overcame these, andl earnestly desired my kinsman, when I saw him in England before my departure, on no» account to oppose the Government, but, , in case of emergency, to arm in its de¬ fence* How he has abused my confi¬ dence you must have heard. On my arrival in England I found this letter from him." Hambden read the letter before men* tioned. Marauder continued—" I met with a gentleman, the other day, who was just arrived from France, and M'Ginnis,, I find, is now in the French service." 4 " Your
' # Your kinsman is quick in his mo¬ tions," replied Hambden. u You met him, I think, at my house in town ?" said Marauder. Of course Hambden replied in the negative; yet such was the language of deceit that he now held forth con¬ cerning himself and his cousin. He soon after concluded his visit·
CHAP.
CHAP. IX. Maraudera .»e mo^gpa». ing, in his chariot, by the Admiralty, when, among some saik>rs> who were standing near the spot, he recognized the countenance of O'Rourk. Instantly he threw himself back in his carriage, that the other might not notice him ; but it was too late—the fellow be saw was struck with the like¬ ness,
ness, aiul he observed him run forward some distance, that he might have an¬ other view of hhxu Ever a master of dissimulation, Ma¬ rauder was resolved to practise it in its full extent. Late trials had made him a thorough adept in the art. He stopped his carriage directly op^ pošite to O'Rourk, tokl the footman he should get out, and walked'up to a shop, near the door of which O'Rourk stood. As he came up to him he turned round, looked at the concourse of peo* pie that were assembled^ and¿, with a placid
placid brow, a soft and polite tone> asked O'Rourk what the bustle meante O'Rourk for a moment could scarcely answer, but he soon replied—'^The confirmation, your Honour, of AdmiraL Nelson's victory." " Oh !" said Marauder, with a smile, unlike any thing of the kind O'Rourk had ever seen before, " you were with* him, I suppose/' The thing was impossible; O'Rourk was in the house of M'Ginnis on the very day of the victory. " No, your Honour, I had not tlte good luck, " he replied. " I am sorry for it," continued Marauder/,
Marauder. " Here is a trifle to drink the King and the Admiral's health ; " and he put a shilling in his hand, and with great indifference walked into the shop. O'Rourk looked at the shilling, and then at Marauder. It was impossible to be M'Ginnis—yet how wonderfully like him ! O'Rourk civilly asked the servant his master's name· " Marauder!" thought O'Rourk to himself, ζ ' then it is no wonder Captain Wilson took M ť Ginnis for him.— D — mn him ! this may be alt a sham- that devil M ť Ginnis is up to any thing, Yet that scar in the temple M'Ginnis never had while I was with him.—How* differen the talks !—I scarce know what to
to think. Could Captain Wilson be mistaken?—No matter—M'Ginnis, or Marauder, he's the enemy of the Cap¬ tain, and 111 have none of his money ;'" and, as he walked back to his comrades,, he gave the shilling to a poor beggar woman,. " Lord bless you sailors !" said the woman, " you be the comfort of the nation. Come," continued she, to an¬ other beggar that came up, " 111 treat thee to a glass of gin. We've beat the- French, and Tve got some of their money. tr " Hurrah !" said the other, " old England for ever !—Come along !" Ye modern patriots of the French school, is your love for your country les»
less disinterested than that of thèse poor wretches ?—-Ye fake Philosophers ! true Diabolists í every comparison degrades you* Marauder had supposed, when he perceived that Wilson had escaped the intended assassination, that accident had prevented O'Rourk's attempt on horse¬ back ' f anil that fear, or remorse, had hindered Ms perpetrating it on foot, and »eturaing to him : but, Marauder's co¬ gitations on the subject were not always the same, and the only thing he was* certified of in his own mind, was, that O'Rourk liad , certainly not betrayed him to Wilson, because the troops which attacked him were: ignorant of the best means of making their approach. Had
Had Marauder been told that there was a principle of virtue and honour in such a savage's breast, he would have most contemptuously despised the idea. Yet such had been the case, which, in the first instance, turned the hand of O'Rourk from the murder of Wilson ; and, in the second, prevented him from making those discoveries, which it was in his power to have furnished Wilson with, to the ruin of Marauder. Still the conduct of O'Rourk was to Marauder a mystery; willingly would he have had it unravelled, but he was not willing to risk his own personal safety. This grand secret of the iden¬ tity of Marauder and M'Ginnis had never yet escaped liim ; even Imphell, devoted
devoted to his service, who fattened upon his smiles, had never been entrust¬ ed with it. The inconvenience of being *S 'ta/ lus mon confidant hadat times indeed been very great; and though he might rejoice, in the instances of Fahany and Anion, that he had made no discovery, still the want of a friend, in whom he could im¬ plicitly trust, was not less apparent. As he was purchasing some trifles in the shop, his mind even wavered if he should not again trust and employ O'Rourk ; attributing his first miscar¬ riage entirely to accident. A second reflection was conclusive against it. The interview with O'Rourk, though favourable to Marauder, had clearly shewn
shewn him that even this man was not without his suspicions ; and the deeper he reviewed his past conduct and present situation, the more fully was he con¬ vinced that, in spite of all his exertions, bis affairs were extremely critical· Themost trifling circumstances would continually bring such thoughts to his mind ; and witli a strange anxiety he waited for the moment, when Wilson should arrive in England, resolved with his own hand to perpetrate the act that should for ever break the chain of knowledge which linked Marauder to M'Ginnis.
CHAP.
шшавтвж&яаяввагв&т
CHAP. X. ÒCARCE a week had passed since the death of Arnon, when, as Marauder was leaving the Opera House, a young sprig of family, who was generally in London, for the same reason that some plants are never seen out of the hot¬ house, because they are fit for no other place, and just vegetate there, came tripping up to him,
"Arc
ζζ Are you going to leave us so soon ľ' ťí I have an indispensable engage¬ ment. " "Ah! 'tis bad indeed here;—but you should stay and see the grand caper of the Olympia." " I saw her six years ago, at Rome." ' ( Ah I you like not ancient beauties. What think you of the young damosel, who has fascinated all our glasses this evening ?" Marauder had not been long in the house. A foreign Kobleman, whom he expected to find there, did not come that evening, and he was going straight to a house, where he expected to meet him. vol. iv. i ťí Whew
* 4 Whom do you mean ?—I saw no beauty worth a second view." " Ah ! you did not see her then, or you are impenetrable. I know all her history. She has twenty thousand pounds. She refused Wildermere two winters ago, and a dozen Lords, two dozen Baronets, and Squires innumera¬ ble since. She lives at Richmond, and her name is------" " What?" said Marauder eagerly, u Now, if you can tell me her name, I shall be eternally obliged to you. I am dying* to be introduced to her—and as you------" ť ť What part of the house is she in ?" " She comes with Lady Modeley, and is in her box; opposite mine.—· This is mine. Entré, and I will shew her
her to you in a minute.—Ah ! here, take my glass. Look straight before you. Use your eyes, and bless me for shewing you such an object." The hopes of Marauder were realized* It was indeed Fanny Bellaire. " Butterfly," said Marauder, in an animated tone, to the other, " you are a*devilish clever fellow. I had no idea you had so exquisite a taste. Do you know Lady Modeley ?" "Ah no." " Or any person in the house that is at all acquainted with her?" " No, upon my soul—I thought you might introduce nm"
i â Marauder
ÎVlaıaudcr could not well help mut¬ tering "ľool ľ' between his teeth. But- teiflv did not take it to himself but continued chattering. Among the loveliest of women the beautiful Fanny might contend for the palm. She was now taller than Emily ; and though she excelled not her sister in that fashionable en bon point the princely taste of the day so highly ap¬ roves, yet the native symmetry of her shape, delicately true, would have claim¬ ed admiration from every clime. Her clear complexion was animated with the glow of health, and here and there the transparent skin discovered the purple veins. Her countenance, open
open and engaging, invited love ; while her forehead, of a charming form, \v r as the very emblem of dignity, lier hair, fine and dark, flowed adown her polish¬ ed neck and shoulders in beautiful ring¬ lets; her nose was a model of the Grecian; her eyes black, with long lashes and arched brows, were mildly bright, yet they rolled not with a vo¬ luptuous round, but by their penetrat¬ ing steadiness, commanded respect from every one· Her smooth chin, when she smiled, was ornamented on the right-side with a dimple, which seemed to point to the bewitching assemblage adjoining, where 4 thc whiteness of her teeth endeavoured in vain to rival the rubies of her lips. ι 3 Her
Her arms were elegantly rounded; her hands and feet small, and every motion delighted with a graceful ease ; and, when she spoke, the sweetness (if her voice equally charmed, as the mild¬ ness of her manners was sure to interest· The dress she wore was always— fashion improved by modesty ; and every part of it seemed designed more for use than ornament. The splendid trifles which, with an unmeaning shew, glitter upon the per¬ son, she needed not ; and the costly dresses, in which Folly loves to vaunt its greatness, she neither required nor ap* proved of. Elegantly neat, the diamond of her person shone through its simple
encasement with an irresistible grace,- while every motion, shewed its beauties in a new light. Such now was Fanny Bellaire, whose person and countenance truly beamed those virtues which reigned within ; and if her form was fair ; her soul was fairer. With a mind firm and undaunted, ihe was never bigotted to her own opinion; and with a heart tlie most tender and friendly, she could, pity and« relieve the sorrows of others,, without a foolish indulgence in the false luxury of grief. Her liveliness was tempered by prudence, and her wit by innocence. г
An innate love of virtue, which the sad conduct of her sister had strength¬ ened, kept, like a magic wand, the li¬ bertine in awe. Even Marauder s im¬ pudence felt abashed, and, in the midst of all his depravity and licentiousness, whenever he thought of Fanny, his amo¬ rous desires put on the form of marriage, though every obstacle was the same, as in the case of Emily. The lovely object before him fasci¬ nated all the senses of Marauder; and the fashionable remarks of Butterfly evaporated, as fast as they came forth, in the vapid atmosphere which aided their birth» Tor some time Marauder was. lost in thought.
thought. Suddenly starting up—" I think I remember the young lady my¬ self—some years ago, before I went to the West Indies. If I am right, I'll in¬ troduce you, Butterfly, another time." Without further ceremony Marauder Jeft the Peripatetic Philosopher ; and; determined in his own mind how to act, went at once into Lady Modeley's box; Walking up to Fanny, he accosted her in the easiest manner, though in most polite and respectful terms. Fanny gave something like a scream ; and, had it been possible, would proba*-» bly have flown away* He regarded it as thejmrprise of an 15 old
old acquaintance, and addressing him* eelf to her, said—" I presume you have not heard, Miss Bellaire, of my arrival in England, The moment I saw you, I couid not resist the opportunity of paying my devoirs. I have been ab¬ sent, indeed, longer than I intended, on very urgent business that called me to the West Indies· I am but lately arriyed, and have ever since been making the most anxious enquiries after you. I was informed you had left England." Whether a thing was true or not, Marauder never considered ; whether it would answer his purpose or not, was the question. Λ lie, that could not be detected, stogped him not a moment 3 He
He had before enquired for Far^y, and heard she was with her sister ; but knew she had not given up her residence at Sichmond· Fanny, overcoming her alarm, re· plied—'* Why, Sir, should you wish to see me ? When------" " To entreat your pardon and for» giveness. That I offended you, though unwillingly, has made me most wretched and unhappy. Now I can fully explain my conduct; and I trust I shall be en¬ titled to your favour, and the honour of your acquaintance* May I take the liberty of asking your address, that, with the sanction of your friends, I jnay—"
1.6' Marauder*
ν Íjjaiv^der spoke in a soft and in- sinu^inğ tone · lanny knew him too ^vell to be easily deceived, and inter¬ rupting him, with great firmness said— " Mr. Marauder, I must beg to de¬ cline your acquaintance ; the unhappy circumstance which happened in our family for ever precludes it. My for¬ giveness, Sir, if it is the least necessary, you have long had ;—to forget is not in my power. " Not so-easily daunted was Marauder; he kept his station to the end, made oc*· casional remarks, and attempted to hand her to the carriage ; but, perceiving she was resolute against it, he had the ef¬ frontery to conduct another of the party,
party, who, perceiving him to be an ac¬ quaintance of Miss liellaire's, permitted his civilities. Mr. Townsend aud some other gen¬ tlemen were of the company. As soon as Fanny arrived at Lady Modeley's, she spoke in private to her guardians mentioned who the stranger was, and desired, if Marauder called, he would say that she had positively refused to have the least acquaintance with him. He did call on Mr. Townsend the next morning; and, after a very plau¬ sible speech, that gentleman answered him, that Miss Fanny had particularly requested he might not be introduced 'to lier.. "In
<ť In а йлу weeks,'' continued Mh Townsend, ťí she will be under the protection of anottu r. " " Sir ? ? ' said Marauder, questionary, but checking his anxiety, Si I presume you mean as to her leaving town/' t( I allude, Sir, as to her settlement in life, which is no secret. I hope, in less than a month, to give her away to as worthy a man as ever breathed." Mr. Townsend had mentioned this^ thinking it would totally check any fur¬ ther enquiries». " As you say, Sir, it is no secret, I may enquire who is the happy man ?" '* Captain Wilson, Sir, whom you once knew. He is at present in Ireland,
{Ireland,, but expected home in a few days." Mr. Townsend knew no particulars of any animosity between Marauder and him, except in the aflair of Emily ; and Marauder had just declared, in most solemn terms, his penitence and remorse for his former conduct to her, and hia resolution to have married her. In defiance of all Marauder's philo* sophy, his heart so vibrated when he heard Fanny was to be married to Wil¬ son, that, though he contained liimself, he could not make an immediate reply. Such was his inward agitation that he bit hisauider-lip through with his teeth. Mutteringsomethingabout how happy he should
should always be to hear of the welfare of one, whom he ever bhottld consider as^ a dear relation, he finished by saying— i£ I suppose of course you remain in town till the ceremony is past ?" " No, Sir; my ward returns to Richmond to-morrow ; and hence¬ forth you may always consider her as Mrs.. Wilson." Marauder's rage was such, he „ould instantly have hied the house, and borne Fanny away in the midst of tne Sames; but, as things were, it wasim*· possible : therefore all smiles and out¬ ward civility, though his heart rankled with revenge, malice, and disappointed passion, he took his leave,.
The
The mind of Marauder M'as resolved how to act—to get possession of Fanny's person as soon as possible. To leave England he had before resolved for some time, till the present disturbances- and suspicions concerning himself were blown away. " Fanny shall accompany me," said he; ťí her haughty little spirit will, at the most, be tamed in a few weeks. I know what women are !—Aline she shall he. The house on the ,Downs will answer every purpose. I'll hasten to prepare the deaf man and his wife to receive her ;—and then, my sweet little devil, escape me if you can. "
С11ЛР.
CHAP. XI» AS preparatory to every thing else, enquiries were duly made concerning Fanny. She was at Richmond; and Marauder hastened instantly to the house on the Downs· An old deaf maní and a woman had been left there when he went over to Ireland. The house stood alone, sur- ţouiided with a very high wall. The garden.
iranlen was small, and there was no other land belonging to this property ; the house had been originally built as a. hunting-seat. Here Marauder had formerly had many private meetings with the self- * elected friends of Freedom—here he had carried many a lady—here he had accommodated many a friend—· and here were hidden some private pa¬ pers, the place of which was known only to himself· It has been mentioned before, that Marauder had first let, and afterwards mortgaged all his property in the pa- fish where Wilson's parents lived. His house in town had only been let by the year ι
year ; but he had also taken up money on this, to nearly its value.. His present residence iiv London was a ready-furnished mansion, by the month ; and the small property on the Downs was all that he kept in his own hands, and which, under the care of Imphell, had occasionally been lent to* some of his friends«. To this he could retire, at any time, in the most private manner; for not even the people who lived in it knew the real owner. It is not to be sup¬ posed that he had entirely neglected the house since his return to England ; bis attorney had been down, ordered some
•»ome necessary repairs, and sent some furniture. He was not sorry to find, at his ar¬ rival, that the old woman was (lead ; the extreme deafness of the man he had always considered as of the greatest con¬ venience to him. + His next care was to send for his at¬ torney, Imphell, across the country a few miles. "Imphell," said he, "I want two trusty fellows, to assist me in a little job.—You can get me such ?" " Is it a business that requires reso- ut ion and spirit, Sir ?"
u Yes;
íť Yes ; though nothing very partis cular, 'Tis to carry offa girl." Imphell thought a little. £< There are two to be tried next week at the Assizes. They applied to me to get them a Counsel ; but the fools had been so improvident as not to have a farthing of cash, and I Heclined the affair." tc Are they deserving?" Marauder -asked. v Imphell was inclined to be witty.— " Very deserving of the gallows, Sir." Ie Ah my friend !" said Marauder, coolly, " little rogues swing, and great ones break the halter. But 'tis pity merit of any kind should fail for a trifle. Do you think they are to be got off with a little money?—And would they be grateful for my friendship ?" " Leave
4Ä Leave that to me, Sir. Ten gui¬ neas, I suppose, will save both their lives. It is a common bundar ν ; but the chief witness is a man of great con¬ science—we must therefore puz le and frighten him ;— new dress and shave the delinquents, and then endeavour to set up an alibi, We'll do it, Sir, depend on it." " Imphell, you are a worthy fellow, You are a man I can always depend upon. Ingratitude is not my fort." The other bowed to the ground, pro¬ fessed how handsomely his services had been rewarded, and how devoted he was to his commands. The two mvn escaped ; and on the fourth
fourth day after the conversation be¬ tween Marauder and Imphell, decently ílľŕioe^rl \\?iì\tf*A ηη IVI чгр iiŕlnr "¡4 tnv v « They brought a letter from the at¬ torney. î u I understood from Imphell," said Marauder, " that you were two deserv¬ ing men in distress, and I am happy to see you have escaped. The men properly thanked his Ho¬ nour. u He tells me,*' continued Marauder, " you are not deficient in courage. 1 have a little business to employ you in, perhaps
perhaps it may require a small portion. —How do you feel yourselves?" Like the French* at the renowned attack: of the Bastile, they botii burst forth in the same sentiment.— " We'll go to the devil to serve your Honour." " A young girl has played me а еф- founded trick» " The fellows shook their head. " And I wish to play hér one in re¬ turn."
voi. iv. к The
The fellows «tri n ned. о " Any knocking on the head, your Honour, to gain the lady ?" Marauder paused ; he thought of Wilson ; but in that case he w r as re* solved nöt to trust his revenge out of his own hands. He replied— " I hope not.—Are you known in Imİs part of the kingdom? 4 ' " No, your Honour—We ben't ac¬ quainted with the Bow Street gentle¬ men. Our business has been generally in the West—in the horse line; but, being hard put to it, we opened the door of a dwelling-house, Jast spring. I've been
been an ostler, and a postboy, your Honour, and understand something about cattle ; and Dick has good con¬ nections, to take them oiF our hands ; and he's a man, though I say it before his face, that won't flinch to any man breathing." Their noble friend was again thought¬ ful. %i A postboy you've been í —I'll alter my plan. You shall be postillion. M y own horses will do. One pair shall be with us, another at a trusty house on the road. Get a hack-chaise to this side of Westminster Bridge, by five o'clock to-morrow morning.—You can read?*' t( Dick can, your Honour." к С " ГЦ
tc ГИ irrite my orders on a card, then there can be no mistake. Ľeware of tip- plins: ;-— vou shall have time and means enough afterwards." lie wrote clown the. particulars, and, with some money, gave them to the men. They went to Richmond the next V day. Marauder took good care not to be visible in the daytime, but prowled about the house where Fanny resided, the greater part of the night. He saw it was in vain to make any attempt upon the house, Most
Most careful was he in his conduct, most cautious in his enquiries ; yet he discovered, the second day, that Wilson was not arrived. Marauda- bore about him constantly the fellow pistol to the one O'Rourk had been trusted with. Ile had steeped the balls in a deadly poison, and primed and loaded it himself. It was so small ho carried it with ease in a side-pocket, and waited with increased anxietv for the return of Wilson, that he misrht make the intended use of it. One or other of the men kept regular watch in the daytime, that notice might be given if Fanny went out к 3 The
The second dav, which was a Sunda v. she took an airing in her guardian's car* riage. Marauder, without loss of time, followed İt in his own. Dick behind, upon a saddle-horse. Tom drove. They watched their opportunity. Marauder and Dick, with masks on their faces, stopped the other carriage. They made Fanny and another lady get out. Marauder's chaise came up. He lifted Fanny into it, and seat¬ ed himself. Dick cut the traces of Mr. Townsenďs carriage, and, mounting his horse, they set off with great speed.
With
With difficulty Marauder had forced Fanny into the caniage. He spoke not a word ; and finding she still cried out, and endeavoured to call for help, he drew up the blinds, and by main strength, tied a handkerchief over he;* Dì yiith, to prevent her speaking. By this means he succeeded in avoiding all interruption, and arrived in safety at his house with lus lovely pike. During the journey, Fanny had been frequently offered refreshments, which she as often refused. » Fatigued and alarmed, she was car¬ ried up stairs ; and Marauder, locking the door, left her.
к 4 Through
Through the whole of the journey Marauder had been most completely disguised : a mask covered his face, and his apparel was such as to preclude all suspicion of his person.
CIIAP.
цми—шдаршм
CHAP. XII. ж ANNY had not been in the apart¬ ment above half an hour, before Ma¬ rauder entered her room by another door. He was well dressed, his hair powdered, and his whole appearance Mich -as if he had not been from home. Fanny screamed the moment she saw him. With a smile, he begged her not to be alarmed, for that the making of к 5 any
any noise was as useless as it was un¬ necessary. " Then restore me," exclaimed she, tf to my friends again. For what pur¬ pose am I forced away hither, thus cruelly used and insulted ?" " What, " said Marauder, u has either of the men I commissioned to bring you hither* dared to oirer the least aftront ? Г11 make an example of the wretch directly ľ' This he spoke, that he might induce her to believe that he had not been him¬ self actively concerned, lest the circum¬ stance of the handkerchief being put round her mouth, might have created any personal dislike. 4 Fanny
Fanny told him no particular affront had been offered her, except as before mentioned (for she was fearful that he would commit some violence on his in¬ struments), but that she alluded to the general conduct of carrying her away ; and she again demanded his reasons for his present behaviour. Marauder, with the utmost shew of humility and softness, replied— ' ' Dearest Fanny, hear me for one instant, that I may excuse this seeming rough con¬ duct, which necessity has compelled me to adopt, and apologize for my whole behaviour." " Return me to my friends, Sir ;— then I'll hear and forgive every thing/' fci That cannot be as yet. You arc к 6 entiiely
entirely in my power. None but my own servants are concerned. This house stands alone, surrounded by a bleak down ; not a hut within five miles. No pursuit can trace you. Nay, should any one by accident arrive at the house, a wall, ten feet high, covered with iron spikes at top, must check further pro¬ gress ; while I have a dungeon under ground, where I can safely deposit any thing, and the way to which it is im¬ possible to discover. The only servant that remains in the house is one man, so deaf, that I give him all his orders by signs and writing. The three fellows who brought you here are gone. Escape me then you cannot." " Why all this on my account, Sir ? How have I offended you ? I was neither privy
privy to my sister's flight, nor did I in¬ fluence her ------ " " Sweetest Fanny, I think not of your sister. Can it be possible my be¬ haviour is a mystery to you ? Beloved Fanny, 'tis you alone I care for. You, as a child, í loved—as a woman, I adore !" and he dropped on one knee, and seized her hand. Fanny started away, and retreated to the door.—" What is it you say, Sir ?*— Me !—It cannot be." " By all that's sacred I swear 'tis only you. Dearest, most lovely Fanny, turn not from me. You are the only woman for whom my heart was ever concerned. Without you I cannot live, and for you I will willingly die»"
Calmly
Calmly and deliberately Marauder spoke, and calmly and deliberately he swore to what he said* Fannv felt a horror she dared not fully to express.—" Do you forget, Sir, my sister?—Is ît possible I can ever think of the man who deceived and de* sérted her?" " Yes, lovely Fanny, 'twas your be¬ witching charms that are answerable for my conduct there. How could I marry Emily when I knew there was a Fanny r Why did I get your sister into my power; but in hopes that my Fanny would have accompanied her ? - Why did t lament her loss, but that Fanny was lost too? All my thoughts, my wishes, ever turned to you. To have lived
lived in your sight—to have seen your daily improvement—and, at a future day, to call you mine, has been the study of my life, írom my earliest know¬ ledge of you." ťí Was it your love to me, Sir, that pledged the alliance with Aldermaii Barrow's daughter r" " I swear the story you have heard is all false. I refused the alliance.—* W r hy did I refuse it? because I remem¬ bered Fanny." * TV^king so favourably of me, is it not strange you never discovered it till this day ?" ** Dearest Fanny, you had taken.an unnatural dislike against me, on ac¬ count of your sister. Can you be igno¬ rant why I so often sought your com¬ pany ?
рапу ?—You repulsed me ;-—you would not even give me an audience. I was forced to act in this violent manner· Love, the purest, the most true and fervent that ever glowed in a human breast, has from the first influenced my conduct. I may have erred, sweet girl ; yet the love of you has been the mo¬ tive—Accept then my vows," and he took hold of her hand. " It cannot be—I am betrothed to another." " lie cannot love you with half the ardour that 1 do. Every thing I will sacrifice for you—every thing I will venture on your account. Drive away this childish love from your thoughts, my dearest girl, and accept the heart of him
him who solemnly devotes his- existence to your service. " €i You talk in vain, Sir ; I can never be your's. If you really love me, will you not oblige me ?—Let me return to my friends. The person who carried me away shall never be known." " You hate me !" *' No. I shall always esteem and respect you, if you will permit my de¬ parture. n . " You will?" " Indeed I will." * · And will you then accept my vows ? Will you sacredly promise me your's in return ?" " It cannot be—they are already given." " Love breaks every tie.·—I have staked
staked all for you. Most charming girl, say you will be mine!" and he endeavoured to catch her in his arms, Fanny, in spite of her danger, could no longer conceal her disgust.-—" No, no—never, never!" Marauder's restrained anger burst through the contending passions of his bosom, and he swore, in the most strong and sacred terms— t( You shall be mine —and only mine· AH opposition is vain. I see it is of no avail for me to fawn and to flatter ;—contempt is my sole reward. My rights I claim*-pos¬ session—conquest. Let me exert the man/' # Fanny had fled from him to a distant part of the room, and, dreadfully alarmed,
alarmed, sunk almost lifeless orr a chair. Marauder approached her.—" Hear iiic, Fanny—sweet Fanny—dearest Fan* ny—I would say !" softening his voice and smothering his violence» ct Fa¬ tigued with your journey, and harassed with unknown fears, perhaps you may require rest.—Be it so.—I leave you till to-morrow ;—let me not appear in my Fanny's eyes аз a tyrant ;■—then 1 shall require your consent. Let me, as a fond lover, beg and entreat ; I would not, as a master, force it from you." Fanny endeavoured to exert herself· u My life is indeed at your disposal. You can take it ;—but no earthly power shall
shall ever constrain me to give you my hand." <ť Ah ! talk vou so bold, Madam ?— Beware !—Is my alliance to be despised ? The day may come that you will throw your arms around me, and beg to be the wife of Marauder. Then, I may think otherwise. Noxo I am willing to take you on your own terms. I wait till to-morrow for your consent. Let me not again plead in vain.—Beware! my will is fixed.—Refreshments are pre¬ pared for you in the other room.—Shall I partake of them, or do you wish to be alone ?" The determined manner in which Marauder spoke, roused Fanny to a full sense
sense of the danger she was in. She forbore saying any thing further that might irritate him, and, in a taint tone, replied— a I am much fatigued and very weak. I shall take a bit of bread and a glass of water.—I had rather be alone." Marauder, ever suspicious, said— ζί Beiore I leave you, I must beg to see the contents of your pockets." Fanny was necessitated to obey· u On your honour, are these all?' 5 "Yes." He took away with him a small knife and a pair of scissars.— " Once more, Fanny,
Fanny, remember the cast is thrown, Mine you shall be !—willingly, or not, depends on yourself. If you accept the first—marriage, love, and gratitude await you ;—if you compel me to the last ------ Fanny, remember, ere it is too late. Think in time, and—beware !" So saying, Marauder went out at the same door he entered, leaving the com¬ munication into the other room open«
CHAP.
*■■ ___ L ■■■■ . ■ , ' g
СНЛР. XIII.
Jf ANNY was so absorbed in thought at the wretchedness of her situation, that she sat for some time in her seat, [ike a second Niobe, A seasonable 'lood of tears afibrded her present relief· Afterwards she walked into the other oom. A table was spread with cold neat, red and white wines, water, bis- Hiits, and fruit. Fanny
Fanny ate some fruit and a biscuit* and drank a glass of water. The evening closed in. She rung a bell for a light. Nobody answered it. She repeated it again and again. It was all in vain. She tried the doors of each room. Both were fastened. She examined if there was any fastening in the inside. In the room she had first entered, and in which was a bed, was none ; but to the door which separated it from the other room, were two bolts, and a lock on that side. She next went to the win¬ dows. Iron bars made them sufficiently secure, both from within and without· She
She determined to quit the room where 'the bed was. She drew the bed, which: tan upon casters, easily against the outer door, and then secured the door of par^ tition in the inside, with the bolts and Jock. A small bell to the other she also fastened, and endeavoured to ham¬ per the locks by putting into them some pins. She looked around the room, antl with difficulty drew a chest of drawers against the door. This took up some time, as she endeavoured to avoid noise. Tables and chairs, and every bit of fur¬ niture in the room, were sedulously .placed for the same purpose. In removing the drawers, she per¬ ceived a large piece of cord ; one end of this she fastened to the lock of. the vol· iv. ĺ chamber,
chamber, and the other to the lock of the passage-door, which, as the latter open« ed from her, she conceived to be ho¬ best security. Fanny 'drew an arm-chair towards the window. The moon was rising· She perceived many trees before her, and fancied she saw the high wall Ma¬ rauder had mentioned, beyond them, Fanny remained in this station for some hours, till exhausted nature in¬ sensibly lulled her into an irregular slumber. If fears and alarms of the most dreaded kind harassed during the still hours of night the mind of Fanny, and kept aloof
aloof the sweet soother of cares—gentle, mild, invigorating sleep ; phantoms of another form passed before the eyes of Marauder, and the possession of the lovely enchantress wh'o raised tfifcm, realized the same. *?*' Restless, plotting, and abandoned to his passions, for two nights had Ma¬ rauder been incessantly on the watch around the house where Fanny dwelt at Richmond ; the occurrences of the fore¬ going day, therefore, his exhausted body felt, though his mind disdained to own it. It was this lassitude which liad induced him to put on that shew of favour towards his captive, which no mental feeling could ever have induced hi m to grant, Marauder felt his corporeal ь % frame
frame unequal to that violence his daring «oul had resolved on. As soon as he left Fanny, he sat down to a repast, which he greatly needed. Imphell was*at the time in the house, and had assisted in preparing it for his reception ; this trusty confidant was to leave him in the evening. The two men who'had ßeen employed by him, had before departed with the carriage and horses. About nine o'clock, Imphell set offi Marauder had before drank freely, and, as soon аз he lud made fast the outward door, and sent his deaf servant to his repose, he returned into the parlour. Completely tired, he dropped asleep in his
ríl chair. He was awoke, about one, by falling off it. His light was ex¬ hausted ; he roused his servant to strike anotlier, and proceeded to his chamber. Rest now forsook him, and his dis¬ turbed thoughts kept him awake. The scheme that he had before plan¬ ned, of carrying Fanny off with him to America, was again revolved in his ac¬ tive brain. In the lone and distant spot where she was now in his power, far from the busy ken of men, imper¬ vious to pursuit, was he resolved to con¬ fine his lovely victim, till he had bent her stubborn heart to his wilt. The obstacles which might oppose ĺ 3 him,
him, from hatred and anger, with hH usual philosophical forecast he thus rea- CntlOíl HUAI! OV /HV-Vi uuvu« u The most savage of animals, by the attention of a watchful keeper, be¬ come tame, and the person against whom they first vent their rage, in the eud is ever the dearest object of their love.—Is a woman's heart alone not to be subdued ?—-No. The experiment has for ages been repeated ; and when,. but through the foolish feelings of the master, has it failed ? " The rising state of Rome made not a single trial, but by thousands attempt¬ ed it, and by thousands succeeded.. Not one of all the Sabine Virgins, who were forcibly carried away and detained, but*
but, when the choice came, gave the preference, before all others, to the ra~ visher. ** Is it to be supposed that none of these fair ones had, in their own neigh» bourhood, still dearer ties than fathers, mothers, kinsmen, and friends ? ťí Is it possible so many lovely and beautiful young females could have been without luvers, tlie objects of their own simple fancies?—Xuy, m tlie war that tollowed, many, of those c hosen youths were doubtless destroyed by their present violent masters ; yet, in defi¬ ance of every obstacle, possession once obtained, easily held its rights. " Shall I forget the noble, the 'va¬ lmat, and, I doubt not, handsome,"— Marauder always prided himself on hi* ь 4 own
own personal beauty,— <ť Richard tlie Third ? Willingly did the Lady Aim marry him, though with his own hand- he thought proper to take oft* her young husband, and her father-in-law. That he subdued the implacable hatred of the Queen mother, is universally allowed, whose sons, brothers, uncles, he had all destroyed ; and the fair Elizabeth herself is generally supposed not to have been indifferent to the match : for, while his¬ torians own that the mother's favouring ef Richard's suit, occasioned the en* mity of Henry tlue Seventh, they do not deny that tbe knowledge ef the game induced the King to dicüke Ъш spouse Elizabeth. " Have Д any cause to doubt my success?—Not the smalkst.^Ib any simple
simple feelings harbour in my breast, unworthy a rational man, to check the dictates of my will?—Am I a tame, weak, wavering fool ?*—What my men¬ tal faculties conceive to be right, domy animal powers fear to execute?—Irre¬ solution is the curse of fortune. " Success has as yet crowned my ut¬ most hopes. To-morrow completes my glorious attempt. Why riot this night ? why not this moment ?" Marauder started up from his couch ; the fumes of the wine animated him, and he proceeded to Fanny's chamber. He tried the door. It was fastened, He had forgotten the key, but not at L 5 the
the moment recollecting the circum¬ stance, he slightly knocked· Fanny, in the adjoining room, heard him not. He put down the light. The wind whistling under the door, it was in¬ stantly extinguished.. Marauder paused. He remembered, the key ;—as he returned to his roem to renew his light, · his promise of forbear¬ ance till the- morning occurred..—The ardour of the moment was lost.— u Yet as I have promised till to-morrow, per¬ haps the breach of my word may create a needless hostility against me· Tof* morrow is already arrived to me—but a few
few hours, and it will be to her!" And he threw himself again on his bed. Vague and wandering thoughts of Fanny, of Wilson, of his flight to Ame¬ rica—schemes, plots, and contrivances, roved incoherently through his mind during the rest of the night.
ĺ 6 СНЛР.
CHAP. XIV.
ТЕГ JlLARLY the next morning, for she lost not her recollection the whole night, Fanny clearly distinguished the high wall, and a wild dreary plain, as far as her eye could reach. She took ont her handkerchief, and, opening the window, would have waved it.—" Alas !" cried she, " the trees are too high!—Who is there to see it?— Should
Should a shepherd look this way, would he understand the signal ?" Looking despondently round the room, she perceived a curtain-rod in a corner, to which the cord had belonged that she had fastened to the doors. To this she tied her handkerchief, and, lifting it as high as possible, forced it through me of the upper-panes of the? window, and stuck it in the shutter* For three long hours anxiously she looked over the plain—mot a being waa to be seen» About nine o'clock Marauder came, and tried to open the door. Finding it was fastened on the inside, he requested it
it to be opened, and said he had brought her some breakfast* Fanny was prepared witli her answer. " You promised me to-day to myself- Γ wish not for any other nourishment than the food upon the table." " No, Fanny," replied Marauder, in the mildest accents, " I promised you but till to-day. But, to oblige you, I wait for your determination till tlie evening. Let me not be trifled with·" He was not displeased of having made : a merit of obliging her. He smiled to ¡ himself as he went down the stairs. " How easy are women taken í In twelve hours she wavers. Let her have a little
a little more reflection, and I am sure* of my prize. Fool that I was to doubt for a moment my success L'* After deliberately breakfasting, Ma* rander walked into the garden. The sun shone bright. The birds- were singing. The lark, mounting inta the air with his cheering note, seemed to animate the rest. All nature hailed the genial warmth of the coming spring. Even Marauder could not help ad¬ miring the scene around him. " What a charming day !" exclaimed he. " England, thou hast!few sucht' but soon I leave thee for a more genial clime, where, in the arms of my Fanny, : I shall
I shall taste perpetual spring and love. This day I shall for ever bear in my memory ------Ah! 'tis the twenty-first of March—'tis the day of my birth, and again a day on which a second life de¬ pends !—What would an old Grecian, or Roman have given for so good an omen, at such a crisis !—It would have immortalized an Alexander or a Cæsar*'* Visionary prospects of Miss, of a su¬ perior kind to any his soul had yet con¬ ceived, floated before his fancy. In the course of his walk he came opposite the window of Fanny, and with the softened smile of success he looked up.
Her
Her white flag expanded before the breeze ; she herself was anxiously look* ing out at the window. " Oh the sorceress !" exclaimed he, * · she still hopes for assistance. " Fanny heard his exclamation, and timidly drew back. In an instant he was in the house, and ran up stairs.—" Fanny," said he, in a sharp tone, " you infringe on the privilege I give you. You abuse my kindness. Take down your ensign di¬ rectly, or I annul every agreement.** Fanny made no answer.
€i Again*
u Again," continued he, "I km going into the garden. If I see it i» not removed—beware of a man, who will not be injured with impunity." Quick as thought, he was again be* fore the window.-—Fanny had returned to it. She looked eagerly forward, as if t>he saw something. She regarded not; the threatening gestures or words of Marauder ¿-—-she shook her white en¬ sign ;■—she cried with her loudest voice — "Hp!oI help! help!" It was in vam. The objects passed at a great distance* They heard not her voice ;—they could not distinguish her signaL
Ια
In the meantime Marauder had rush¬ ed into the house, and hastened to hes room. Fanny, still at the window, beheld distant objects passing. The noble stag bounded over the plain. In a few mi¬ nutes came along hounds, horses, and hunters, now just in view of their game. Intent on the object of the chase, all eyes were directed towards the flying animal ; while the sounding horn, the encouraging tally-ho, the enlivening notes of the hounds, more antl more anxious as they approached nearer to their prey, left no hope to poor Fanny that the weak screams of a female could f each their ears. Clearly
Clearly could slie discover the colours of the different sportsmen. Two dark- coloured coats, on one of which a scar¬ let collar was evidently distinguished^ passed with tlie foremost hounds- Then first к was she shook the flag, and exerted her voice. —They see not~ they hear not—and quickly are tost to her sight» Now come on a troop, where the green and red coats were easily per- eeived. Again she exerts lierself. In vatn— they pass away as the former. Marauder had violently assaulted the door. He found it was too well secured for
for a common exertion ; he rushed into the kitchen for the cleaver. As the scattered hunters behind pass¬ ed, Fanny, indespair, continued shaking to them the flag, and crying out with her utmost might.«—The whole are lost to her sight witìlout the smallest notice. Nor dog, nor horse, nor rider is to be seen. The distant noise dies away— her hopes weaken—her spirits fail. Marauder returns with the die&ver. He thunders against the frail wood.— Whither can Fanny fly ?—In a few se¬ conds he cuts the door to pieces. En¬ raged, he throws tlie other objetes aside, and rushes to the window.
Fanny
Fanny endeavours to defend her en¬ sign—in vain 1—Marauder tears it down.—Fanny screams more violently than ever· " Mad, rasb, foolish girl !" Marauder exclaiming, catcher her hand, "what mean you by thus irritating me ?" A buzzing noise is heard through the trees. Again she exerts herself, break« from his grasp, and screaming, flies to the window. He pulls her hastily away to the other end of the room. The hunts¬ man's horn re-echoes around the plain. Marauder knows the note.—" The gallant
gallant deer is taken/' exclaims he. * Sweet Fannv, it is an emblem of thee· Why then this useless opposition?— Your toils are not less certain than his." Mirauder, as he speaks, seats himself in a chair, and holds her firmly by the hand. " Far, too far off are the sports¬ men to hear your alarms. Their own noises drown a thousand female notes. Come, dearest girl, be pacified. Listen to the man who adores you, who wishes to be every thing to you, and is willing to own his bliss not to his own success, but to your kind consent.—· Most charming Fanny, why should we wait for the morrow ?—Say you will be mine, andlet me kiss these pearly drops from your sweet face;" and with soft insinuating
insinuating blandishments he endeavour¬ ed to mill her upon his knee. fi Never, never, never !" exclaims Fanny, struggling from his hold. " I am betrothed to another, and his alone I will ever be." Marauder restrains himself no longer ; he gives his passions full scope.— ť ζ Dam-*****on ! is this the reward of my lenity ?—Is.the alliance of Marauder spurned for the cursed son of a base mechanic? His blood I have long vowed to my injured honour ;—yet .consent to be mine, and I forgive him*" " It cannot be,—Oh spare him, spai e him !" "Beware! I deign to intercede;— and here I call every power of Heaven, Earth, and Hell to witness," and he 4 drops
-¿rops upon one knee, still holding her fend, and swears with that depravity he was accustomed to, " in spite of your future tears and supplications, when I have humbled you beneath my feet, his death shall-complete my triumph." Marauder rises up, and with affected calmness continues— u One moment yet remains to save him, and your own honour.—Will you accept me for a hus¬ band?" u Never ! whilst I have life !" ítí Then I'll exert the rights of a con- queror. . f This instant I claim my own. Henceforth, nor vows, nor tears, nor even a forced consent shall check the love that burns within me.—-Now, even now, will I make sure of my lovely prize."—And, as bespoke, he seized her, vol. iv. m with
, "Norman, nor devil, nor G—d shall Birnkrnle!" Hei screams rend the air. Marauder pauses u moment. He holds her firm by the arm, while he unfastens the door that leads into her chamber. In vain she struggles;—like as the ! Hon the lamb, he grasps his prey. Her screams are repeated—¿he holds by the door—he tears her violently away from it.
ClfiVP.
ц%.'. ,„ I" 1 1, J,' 1 ..... м | ì', ^-Μί ί ί
CHAP. XV. İıL NOISE in hmtà without, m mme me vtøtøitiy aasanltirig the door which leads into the house, Maæatfder stifles heť cries* end listens. The doop burst? open—a person rushes .into the house. H« leaves his vietimi md, with a hellish horror, glances his etes around m SS the
the room for the cleaver. She guesses his intention, catches up the deadly in* strument¿-«and flings it out of the window. Marauder, with a curse, strikes her; puts his hand in his pocket, draws out a small pistol, -and rushes to the head of the stairs, • Fanny, with dishevelled' hâir, a wild and alarmed, though resolute look, fol¬ lows him. Arhao, in a blue chat arid scarlet collar, is seen flying up the stairs. ' Marauder exclaims—" Ah ! now I'll make'sure'of thee, though ~a legion of fiends*·*-**»*' ' î i' *
aién speech. She looks at her defender, and throws her arms> around «Marauder» —around him whom, a few moments before, she had struggled ta get free from. Marauder now spurns the embrace he had just so-eagerly-solicited, and,, des* parates fli»øe· h*? with vblcucø ^ft'OlU bim*. . , 1 χ t. The pistol goes off in the air. Fanny falls lifeless against the stairs. The stranger has gained the landing» place.— Tis Wilson! Briefly shall I relate the circumstances M S which
wbkh Ьтиф% Wifao& ţoaeţ teip, må % m$mé Ыт&кт, wirøed, toíh^fury orili? é%sA, hk Is^Umhlv roe* Earăy ia the feegoing day, on which Fanny was so forcibly carried off, Wil¬ son arrived ia England. The house of hil året pfsi&m m& ítítnd, Щ\ Ьэеке- *tetøe 3 hy jm Ъш w%å to town ; and lief® $Μ®γ Ma tqp*é&i&ii*&A ü tettes for him, that the lover, without loss of time, might know where to find his mistress ; for, as yet, ho. was in douht whether she was in town, at Richmond, or at her sister Eattle\ in Wales. On Sunday, about thf hour of din¬ ner, Wilson arrived at Wheatland.— The expected letter was not cotne. There
London, for it leaváinotthe metropolis, till Monday evening ; therefore all let- Цг$ thiţt go inti) the dbtfrøt'pcMt of lä»e country, croş^pqşt«, £çc> He. mø шЛ reccivød before the Tue$d^y» This Mr. Lockeridge explained to the «&p£Gtant lovar, wbich indued him ^to accept the kind invitation of his friend to st*y with him wothft* <%; Mr. Lockeridge ? in spite of some touches p£ thç gout, was ovgaged to follow the hounds од the Mmdejr mormng. He iç®t WÜspm one of im hunter« f and г mo%t nobk snhpai h«4. led than ад еке^Ищ^ oh|u^, whe» tbfy- с^шд щ V4W «f th« #i^, wbUT4 Wií««fe м 4 had
had little idea his fair mistress was con-* finecb Her shrieks were lost in the air. Her white flag, the fair emblem of her mind, * was unnoticed, as intently they follow¬ ed their game. * Near the house of Marauder was* a fine piece-of water. · To this the wearied* animal turned, and, taking to the midst- of it, kept his pursuers at bay. The dogs launched. into the flood ;* tbe attendants, with proper toils ready, endeavoured to save the object of their sport, white the toud horn of the hunts-* inan called the scattered hounds toge¬ ther, and declared.the pursuit at an end. The
Ľockendge and his friend ; as soon a^ the huntsman and'some bthèrs^árae up, Mr. Loekferidge motioned té Wilson to** Mlow him out of the groups and sata; pointing- to Marauder's hoţise—** Thisr is tlie stťange plae^ ^ ^Шк yoü <heär<l· mentioned yesterday, that all the neigh- bouı3ıoo€İ believe^ to bc haunted; шн1 no one creatore knows whp lives in ίφ or who is the owner of the spot." /Wilson ıbde ! close Ш the· ^affi 1 — f * Thať there ii an inhabitant of same kind or other, is evident, for I seq through thé tre¿s something like а white flag suspended from an upper w irido \vi -— Hark, Loekertdge! on my life I hearţl a shriek !—Sec,, see, .the flag, is taking! down! The trees prevent my full. ¿I u S view.
view of the window/' and he changed his spot, " Surely I discern people struggling," exclaimed Mr. Ľockeridge. " Anothef shriek !" and they both, actuated by the same sentiment, kapai from their horses, and strove to fotce the door* Now the fuU sound of the hora drowned every other noise· They couäd not ihake the feast hn- pression on the dopn Mr. Ľockeridge proposed returning to their companion« for further assistance ; but Wilson, im? pdled by that herokm which fearless flies to the succour of the distressed, prepared to scale the wall
Ia
took the «addle ш bis hands, ч>шп^ upon hm friend'* horse, mi threw the saddle on ihe snifceş, Quickly he wasi upon it ; and springing Щ safety ovet the spikes, he let himself down, with the assistance of the stirrup, en the con¬ trary side. The depth was great, and, with the quickness of his exertion* and the strength of his efforts, he tore the saddle on one side, and left Mr. Locke- ridge, who, forgetting his gouty impe¬ diments, was preparing to follow him, unable to give him any assistance· Wilson rushed towards the house. The door was only closed by a Spring¬ ing latch. The shrieks were clearly heard, and demanded immediate aid. и о The
The voice vibrates to his heart The quick blows of Wilson soon forced his way within ; and, without the smallest weapon in his hand, Ы resolutely flew towards th« soundi
СНЛР.
INFERNAL QVlXÖttJ $5& i m ι l i ..imi- ........ m.» Ί, 11 »," 1 .φ *
енлр. xvi. AS it possible to describe the agonizing. pang which tore the heart of Wilson, when he beheld the lovely Fanny dasiH ed lifeless by Marauder, as she attempt¬ ed to turn aside from him the murderous Veapon of that assassin. À Not less enraged was Marauder tò be checked in the very moment of sue- 'cessfuf -viih¿y by* 'thè mW who % had *" * already
mv кия al ôd ι хот«. already overthrown his most flattering* schemes of glory and ambition, and whose testimony now threatened his life. Like famished tigers, they seke on each other. Each strikes at his enemy, and despises the defence of himself. Their strength is nearly equal ; both have exerted themselves before. Their blows soon labour— they struggle—they pant for breath. Marauder, ¿kilkd in every species of warfare, tries to fiee liimself from the other's grasp. He succeeds* A mo» mentis pause ensues, Mamuder feels in his packet for a clasp»
ing it; and again grappling with hh foe, strains every nerve, exerts his whole force to throw Ыш» Wilson Uns hilft f mm the .grørød ι Marauder, ut the instant, stókes him wWihisfbot; they both stagger» avid fall together mûı great violence against the îai'iing of the &Ыгб» The frail wood cracks with the double weight. It gives w&y* Marauder and Wibon are ttnkmg with tlte brokea fragiwnte into the stony abyss below. The forouer cïasps both hands aronnd 'the other, who catches hold on thai part of the railing that remains firm. 3 Each
Each sees the iínminenť danger thafe threatens hinw, Wilson tries to disentangle himsehf from tlie deadly hold of his adversary. Marauder strains to rise; big drops : of sweat roll down his forehead ;—-his grasp bfegins to fail him;—one hand after the? Other Jooses its hold ;—he fetches asleep groan, and tumbles headlong ош tiíè pavement below ! ' Wilson, exhausted, %Hth his utmost ^ effort rises upon the stairs. -4& tríente prayer ascends the'throne òf Heaven;td ihat Almighty føwér« which* had ^¿J ■ '" . ť ·..* t'» i.i | lå
în an instant he springs to Fanny,* and raises her in his arms. He bears her into the next room. Among the fragments scattered ирош the íloor, he perceives a broken bottle of water. 1Ге sprinkles the remains upon her* face, and kisses Ker palé cheek. A noise of people is heard below. The name of Wilson is sounded. As he replies, they come up the stairs. He- knows they are his friends. Mr. Ľockeridge enters the room, holding in his hand the. pistol that Ma¬ rauder had so lately attempted to fire ať* Wilson; others »accompany him. * f - Thejr
They find their friend covered witb blood, supporting a lifeless fernale in bis. arms. Every face exhibits a scene of horror ! », As soon as Mr. Ľockeridge perceived the melancholy situation of Fanny, he hastened back again for a surgeon, whorn they bad left attending on th$ miserable Marauder» ( The gentleman came without loss of time into the room, and opened a vem in the fair arm of Fanny. Wilson still held his lovely burden; he scarcely breathed as tbe surgeon performed his operation ; his eyes were rivstted to th© fascimting oigect before Ыда ; her blood befearedbad&toffed t never to now again. Happily
• Happily lus &l$rmş, in a few seconds, subsided. Th^ pure stream trickled f Pith, smd Шту csened her eyes.— Kningthm on jlhe Woody œuntenance of him she had so l(mg, so dearly loved, she Ый тъеу s.wpoaed a seoopd time ; but the we of her fond lover recover¬ ed her,— " Be w>t alarmed, dearest Fanny ! These ure »U your friends. " ťť But you are hurt, dear Wilson?" Wilson made light of it, though tho strength and virulence of his enemy had left legible marks of his pugilistic skill. His friend Lockeridge came up, and wiped the blood from, his face. Not a word would Wilson hear of hue wu hörts ; but* together with the surgeon*
s^vrgeon, minutely enquired of Fanny if she felt any pain in her head. While the anxious lover supported her, the sursreon careful! ν examined her lëft-side/ on> which she had fallen*; and then an* nounced, to the great joy of the whole company, that he. was certain· no frac* ture had taken place, though a larger swelling was very evident«. The medical gentleman now left them; to attend on his wretched patient be¬ low, and all the spectators, except' Wil¬ son and his friend Ľockeridge, accom-* panied him* In the midst of a group below, stood'* the old deaf servant, who had been ttmsed-from his, work, ať the other end> o£
ю( the garden. , Some of the servants of the sportsmen had found ,Ыщ ; they seize, and question hirn. He tells them of his ^malady, and ? professes total igno¬ rance of the affair. Ttøey, bring him an to the house along with them. * Marauder was a,dreadful spectacle; one thigh broke, his ,ankle dislocated, and a violent contusion on the upper part of his head. For some time the surgeon thought his skull was fractured, but his side had struck against a pillar ; and when thesurgeon returned to him, ,he discovered that three of his ribs were broke. Though he shewed signs of life, he was Oţ long time in recovering his senses. It
te ivaŕs nearly ¿tt hour before his re* <söHéctiou fully returned ; the viiUleiice *f hte passions was Still evident, in d$- flange ùf tø weak state, s^nd the paia Äe experienced. « The first word Marauder spoke was with his usual haughtine;^— ťí Let me be 1Ш with the surgeon^ $ml Щ sei^ vant*' ^eyaaftfefttheroom» fr ala ť the «mly vletím?" suîd Ma* rander to the surgeon, in a surly tone. The other replied^— u No one besides is materially hurt" He gnashed tói ttfcth together, and mutierte
, muttered a curse of displeasure.™ u ΠΙ leave this infernal place directly ľ' "It is- impossiblfe, air. Ymťft en« danger your life." ^impoasi^! i ^Hndängeftriy life !— Tliink ybu rriy Kfé h my Ärsf eáre?— Let a ehaîse be sent fòt dftecf fjr; That? drfffellmv/'eontintieiihe, prjlncmg to his man, 4t cm fëcetfe otdfcťr in mit^ mg. In the room were irífe atfď рз^еГ. The surgeon gave the orders, as Marau¬ der desiied. İte went äufcoŕ Ше rdôm to get other assistance, atid, at the same time, desirtd am öf tlk eorhpany tú in¬ form Wilson that the gentleman Btfow, in spite of his hurts, tediiut Ш set- vant off for achate. Wilson
Wilson was resolved not to let him escape him, and therefore made enquiries for the nearest Justice of the Peace. The master of the hounds and Mr. •Ľockeridge were both in the commis¬ sion. As it was necessary to take Wil¬ son's deposition on oath, a man was in* štantly sent tó the next village for a Bible, pen, ink, and paper. The dis¬ tance for a chaise was ten miles-—to the village but four» When every thing, was ready, Wilson swore that he believed Mr. James Ma¬ rauder to be the .person who, under the name of M'Ginnis, headed some tropps in open rebellion, in Ireland.—* The assault upon Fanny was for the present
sons, it was an affair not of so serious a nature, and for which Wilson well knew the Magistrate could not refuse bail, Fanny, who was rather alarmed at the detention of Marauder, had wished him. to be suffered to depart wherever he thought proper, glad to be so easily rid of him ; she was therefore greatly sur¬ prised when she found herself extricated from personal interference, by the depo¬ sition of Wilson. It was necessary to inform Marauder of what had been done. The other Magistrate, Mr. Woodland, wrote upon a piece of paper the following :—
vox,, iv. n " то
U TO JAMES MARAUDER, ESQ. - " Wilson Wilson, Esq. a Captain in the Southford Fencibles, has made oath before me, Thomas Woodland, and an¬ other Justice of the Peace for this coun¬ ty, that he has every reason to believe that you, James Marauder, unde» the assumed name of M c Ginnis, commanded a body of rebels in arms against his Majesty's troops, in the late disturbances in Ireland."
The surgeon received it at the door. " 'Tis a note for you, Sir." " Read it," said Marauder. " Wilson Wilson, Esq. a Captain in the Southford Fencibles, has made oath before me ------" " Curse
' и Curse on their arts ! Do'they dare to think of detaining me, till I get bail, for this pretended assault." «' No assault is mentioned by the Magistrate, " said the surgeon. '" Well, Sir," exclaimed Marauder, impatiently interrupting him, " go on." The surgeon read the note. Marauder seemed evidently confused. He paused a moment. His usual hau* $eur forsook him, and, assuming that fashionable suavity, in which he excel¬ led, he sent his compliments to the Ma** gistrate, and begged the favour of hi$ company for. a few moments. Mr· Woodland came to him. к 2 Marauder,
Mamuder, in spite of ail his pain, trnd the weakness Ъе experienced from loss of blood, in the interim öf the surgeon s going up to the Magistrate, had fully recovered the command of himself. When that gentleman had arrived, therefore, he said, reclining on a couch, and holding the paper in his hand— i: This falsity, Sir, I hope is not to be made the instrument for detaining my person." " Captain Wilson," replied, Ma Woodland, ŕÉ has taken his oath. We must do our duty, as Magistrates.*' As yet Marauder knew not by what circumstance Wilson came so oppor¬ tunely to the rescue of Fanny. little did
did he think that he was one of the sportsmen ; but supposed that he had broke his v /ay through by the chance assistance tf the others, or that he had been accidentally followed by them. He conclude;! that one of the fellows, whom he had employed, had betrayed him ; and, having conducted him to the house, had perhaps afterwards left him. Believing any thing but what was really the r case, he did not consider that Wil¬ son was likely to be known by any of the company. Thus reasoning, and swelling with hatred and revenge towards his enemy, with difficulty lie stomached his passions to the Justice's remark, and replied calmly— ť< Beware, Sir, how you meddle n a in
in this affair. In another quarter of the globe was I at the time. I have thou¬ sands, ten tiiousanu oi witnesses to prove an alibi. A Magistrate is not obliged to proceed on so gross a false¬ hood as this, even where it is affirmed by an oath." " True or false, Sir, we must detain your person. If you are injured by a perjury, the laws are open for redress," " The villany of my adversary's con¬ duct—the high respectability of my own, is a sufficient excuse for you, С!« " Dir. " How am I to know this?—I am not acquainted with either of you." " My assert?^. Sir. He does not deny my name I am nephew to the late Puke of Silsbury, and by right am, at
at this moment, the present Duke ; but by the chicanery, forgeries, and per¬ juries of this Wilson, I am for a while kept from the title. I tell you, Sir, the infamy of his character/* " He says the same of youťs. Mr. Ľockeridge, who h the other Magi¬ strate, and a respectable Clergyman in this neighbourhood, is above, and is well acquainted with him." Marauder was abashed.—" I am sur¬ rounded by a gang of designing and prejudiced people. My bodily hurts prevent my personal exertions. My friends are absent From hence then I will not be removed. This gentleman, " pointing to the surgeon, *' will confirm the dangerous mature of my case. If I must be your prisoner for a few hours,, n 4 while
tsrhile I sçnd fo^ my fiiends, let it be here." *' I understood you had ordered a» chaise." " No matte?. I feel myself worse» Enquire of my surgeon." The surgeon of course said, as he had before, that a removal would endanger his life. The Magistrate told him that he mmt appoint people toattend in the house, till he could be delivered up to more regular custody. While this conversation was passing below stairs, another circumstance had occurred above, which furnished addı* tional proof to Wilson that Marauder and M CHnnis- were the same, Mr*
* Mr. Ľockeridge, when he first came np, had picked up the pistol which Marauder fired off. In assisting Wil¬ son to recover Fanny,' he had put it ia his pocket. He now drew it forth, and ôhewing it to Wilson, related where he had found it- Instantly Wilson recognized it to be the fellow to the one (XRourk had Ьеегь employed with. He took it in his hand, and had not fhe smallest doubt. The maker's name was the same, a person- well known; and. upon whom he had? purposed to call, as soon as he carne ta England, to, see if he could make any discovery by that means. Thls^hédîÉtstteeë, in a few Vòrds, Ъе ' л n5 did
did not fail to mention to Mr. Woed- land as soon as he came to them,, and Mr. Ľockeridge delivered the pistol into his care. •i i -■ A servant had been dispatched for Mr. Lockeridge's chaise for Fanny, Mrs. Ľockeridge, receiving a slmrt note from her husband, that a young lady was in distress, had, instead ч of being over anxious to exhibit two pud¬ dings upon her board, thought proper to she^r her hospitality щ a far better yay-— by coming herself. Mr. Lockeridge's Parsonage was about eight miles off ;—the chaise had been sent for wjiea the surgfon first left the room
fooni to attend on Marauder, and ar-i rived a tittle after the Justice had set-, tied his business- ; Mr. Ľockeridge was agreeably sur* prised when his servant informed himr that his mistress was arrived. He wel¬ comed her with a warm kiss, the ardour of which twenty^ winters of matrimony bad not in the least damped. —·" Dear Mary, you are: always so kind and con¬ siderate^ I shall fancy y èu are possessed of my thoughts, as well şs my heart" . t( If my actions are ever different from your wishes, it is solely occasioned* шу d^r, ţ by my want of judgment** 7 * . *, « , * I sball repeat rib more: of the short conversation that passed between the и 6 t husband
husband and wife, as they crossed ths court-yard, with her arm în his, and ascended the stairs, lest that 3 should be supposed to have borrowed the con¬ versation of a he 1*еу*птП) * * that had not y£t filled her horns. " - When Mrs. Lockewdge was intra· daced to lanny, ha* bright eyes again thanked tlte wife of Wiboa's* frfc&d fot her kindliest 'm cofning hei»elf; and, nvithouJi loss of any further time, they immediately kft tbe place* WUsom was* obliged to flagri kb fishes'of aecompanymg them, Ы be á guard that Marauder was not clandes· tkely earrîed o^ Ш $щ er $щ\е Äad 3 ш'*тЦ
arii^aljítrhoiií the Magistrates had sent for. x The instant Marauders man return* ed, he was again sent away for his fa* vourite attorney, Imphell ; neither pain nor remonstrance prevented his wiiting the following to his trustv instrument.
" I am much hurt. Come instantly, and bring a surgeon with you I can 'm all cases depend upon. " J. M. f *
The common attendance of servanta Marauder greatly needed; the man therefore was ordered to send a man î ' ľ ) v ană,
and a woman from the first village he was to pass through ; and the surgeon gave him a note to proper people for that purpose, who were approved of by ţ)ie Magistrates.
CilAJr·
sar
CHAP, XVIL дТ was evening before the persons, ap¬ pointed by Mr. Wpodland to watch the prisoner, arrived. , Wilson, with Mr. Ľockeridge, then left the house ; and» having detained the chaise which the deaf man had ordered for Marauder, and »ent their horses home before, the happy lover soon clasped hb beloved Fanny кь his arms*
The
The next morning Imphell came with two surgeons. The gentleman, who had as yet attended Marauder, had staid with him tbe whole night. By the patienťs earnest desire, he remain¬ ed with him till his steward and his- own surgeon arrived* Marauder now dismissed him with a very handsome- present, conceiving к the best way to ensure his good word» though he dispensed with his attend·* imce any longer. In a short private conversation witrr Imphell, Marauder soon understood» ihaťomeof the perneas, A whoni he had brought, was engaged to stay with him 1 as long as he thought proper ; the other was
was a gentleman of great eminence ia his profession, whose abilities and skill Imphell thought might be necessary. When this last, with the other two, had thoroughly examined the hurts he had suftered, and given directions to the one who was to stay, he took his leave, promising to call again in two days, to meet and consult with the surgeon who had first attended him. Skeibar was the name of the person who remained. His look was the true index of the man—an adventurer, equally needy in pocket, principles, and ability. As soen as Marauder was aloné with ImpheH, he discovered thş particulars of his ill fate.—" D~~natioa ! I am a pi*
a prisoner in my own house !—What ís to be done ?" " The confinement," replied Imphell^ " is scarcely legal ; yet the very at¬ tempt to set it aside, will only involve you in worse circumstances. At pre¬ sent, Sir, your illness prevents your removal. This you may lengthen out to what time you think necessary, while you consult how you shall act, or to plan your escape, as you think best." Imphell spoke in this manner, that he might sound Marauder, whether he were M'Ginnis, or not; but the hero was resolved not to expose himself, to any person breathing, and replied—" A trial I should court concerning my kin&r man,, M'Ginnis, did I not kno* w -
when they fail here, I shall be indicted for the assault on that young vixen. Unluckily I have no witness on my side, and the girl and her paramour will out- swear me." iri Can we not make witnesses?" " No one but my deaf man was on the premises." " I wish, Sir, you had suffered those two fellows to have—»but 'tis too late to reason now. Shall 1 question him ?" " Not at present, Imphell ; that you may do at any time· The greatest ser¬ vice you can at present do ine, is to en* deavour to find out in what manner my enemies intent to proceed.—I can depend on your friend Skeibar ?" ; " Yes, Sir, înjjst assuredly. I have him in every point." 16 Know
íť Know you any thing of those two* fellows, whom I employed ?" u I can find them, Sir." u I wish to see them in a few clays» when I feel myself better. But take care that they are sufficiently disguised not to be known.—Call Skeibar here ;— I feel myself faint." From the great exertion Marauder had undergone in this conversation with his trusty agent, he, nearly swooned by tbe time his apothecary came. SJt& and hartshora recovered him; and,, having rested a few hours, he dismissed. Imphell on the search for intelligence of lus encimes' intentions towards him, and took a composing draught, according.
to the orders of the medical men, who had departed. Nor was Wilson Wie in hastening to substantiate the charge he had advanced concerning his rival. To explain whicfif more clearly, it will be proper to hote somé circumstances \vhich had happened/ since tlie day when M'Ginnis anil MÌ party had been attacked, as they endear voured to enter a small town, in his way to join the French, : •••4 By the men, who were rnade prisoner^* the nåme of : theif leader was diácö^ vered* ' A diligent search was immediately set on foot to discover M'Ginnis; but, owing
owing to his very cautious behaviour, it proved to be fruitless. A little after he had recovered of his wounds, and left the cabin, one of the men who had conducted him there was made a prisoner· In hopes to secure his own life, he betrayed the conceal· Bient of his General.—The pursuers came too late. By a bribe to the lesser villain, his host, they partly discovered his disguise, and continued their search ; but M'Ginnis, who trusted no man, and endeavoured to deceive every one, had «either exposed his xeal intentions, or his road, to this needy wretch.
Wilson,
Wilson, on account of his knowledge of the person whom the Government v/ere so desirous to apprehend, was the principal employed in the search after him. Once or twice they gained some tidings, and, among other places, they came to the house where Duchesne, the Emigrant French Officer, the friend and second of the unfortunate Geutespiere, was. With the owner of the mansion Wil¬ son had some acquaintance, and dined in company with Duchesne. Wilson, mentioning the object of his search, said— u M'Ghmis's face I should in¬ stantly recognize in any disguise ; he is so extremely like his cousin; Marauder, whose large property he has had the command
command of, and whose features I háve known from my childhood." *' You said, Marauder, Sir?" said Duchesne, quickly : " Mr. James Ma* ràuder, the nephew of the Duke of Silsbury ?" " Yes, of the late Duke. Do you know him r M ** It has been my misfortune Γ re* j)lied Duchesne, shrugging up his shoul* ders ; and he told, with his usual volu¬ bility, theitoryofGeutespiere, Leonora, and the unfortunate double duel. - u Fahany has shot himself," said "Wïfeori. u Ah ! ah!" replied the Frenchman, " then my countryman's grand ally has got ome of them. ** '« Who, Sír Г Cť The
Wilson, t was about to tel! yèu ťhat Γ s sa# the very spectre of Marauder, the ifther day, in the forra of m oM Кайап Jew." " Sir?" exclaimed Wilson, as asking α question that expressed surprise and doubt. *f No joke, upon my honour, Sir," answered Duchesne, assuming the ut-* most gravity, asid clapping his hand «po» hb breast. " Mr. OXeary and Madame, and Miss O'Leary, and Mr» Steele (an ¿elderly gemttemnn, Mrs. OXeary's father), " Duchesne continued «ailing each of the company by name, te corroborate Ш assertion, " ^ iti all «tssure you I tetø them so immediately φβϊ the J^w w^íťft^y." LtOb iv· о Wilson
Wilson made many enquiries concern¬ ing the person of this pretended Jew, The emigrant gave him a much more minute detail than he had any Teáson to expect. Duchesne did not forget to mention that their conversation was in the Italian language, yet his features were neither of the Jewish nor Italian cast.—" I beg pardon of his Roman nose—He could not spedi decently to me in my native tongue ; but since, I understand from my servant, that he spoke very good jFrench to hira." This, in Wilson** mind, was a very strong circumstance that the person was otherwise than beseeroed to be; and what
what is more likely than that Marauder recollected Duchesueí He desrred Duchesne^ servant might be called into the room; and ques¬ tioned him closely upon this dreunt* stance, which the man fully con· firmed· ž Duchesne mentioned thè strong scar on the left-side of his forehead, and was very nice in pointing out the spot; but concerning this wound which had so- fuljy marked him, nothing had trans¬ pired to the knowledge of Wilson, and it neither fevoured the supposition that the person was Marauder or M'Giunk u Do you think, Sir," said Wilson, о Я as
as u concluding question upon the sub* ject, " that you should know this per« son again, if you were to see him in a v*ry diiferent g*rb ?* £i Most assuredly," replied the Offices warmly, ' * Were be in the royal robes, if be had on the r$gs of tlie Witch of $ ndor, or were he in masquerade, like an English fox-hunter, I am sure he could »ot deceive my inspection."—The com¬ pany smiled at the Frenchman's similes,/ which alluded to some pictures in the ţoom, while he continued—** I narrowly observed the form of his teeth, the shapfc of his eyebrows, the ver^ turn of his tţpper~]jp ; and 1 trod on his toe, for tjie purpose of seeing him raise it." u But why the last, Sir?" "It
* ť It throws the features out of att disguise, Sir."' Wilson could not fail admiring how wonderfully deep the Emigrant Office* was in the science of Pathognomy and Physiognomy; and Duchesne gave him many other curious and systematic re¬ marks upon the former subject, hut which are now totally erratic from mine* A fortnight had passed since the Italian Jew made his appearance at Mr. O'Leary's. No doubt remained in the mind of Wilson that this was M'Ginnis» and it seemed to him most probable that be was gone to England* WüsoE hastened from Mr. OXeary*s r *t · \ o S and *· * r
and stated to the superior powers the particulars which had come to his knowledge ; they thought it right that he should go over to England, and try if he could gain any intelligence of Marauder. Duchesne also agreed to give him the meeting in London»
CHAP·
CHAR XVIIL Л HE scar across the forehead of Ma* rauder had not escaped the observation of Wibon ; and, soon after he arrived at Mr, Lockeridge's, he wrote a letter to Duchesne, to come dowr. to him into the country* In the morning after the rescue of Fanny, Wilson, with his friend Locke- ridge, waited upon an attorney in that о 4 пеЫг-
neighbourhood, with whom they wem both acquainted. Mr. Warwick was an honour to his profession. He was neither the haughty, proud, insulting demagogue of his dis¬ trict ; nor the bast, litigious, pettifog¬ ging scribe ;—he was neither the fawning, sycophantic tool of the great ; nor the~ ready, ofliciotts buQy of the Hcentbm„ vulgar He was to the роож an ad visere- to the great a peace-maker, and to all m friend. In three tilings particularly he had made himself beloved ш the соипн try : his attentiouto the poor laws; Ыш compromising, in lieu of the payment of tithes m kind ; and? the methods he bad adopted tío prevent the petty vil* ianies of the тШщ (¿ & inching*; robbing
by allowing to the labourers a moderater quantity of land for the support «rfthek^ feffîiiiesfc He was supposed to bare Шее mòre uien from the gallows, than any Bow Street Officer ever sent; y€t ήο man Was more resolute against open idleness øt profligacy. He has been known tó talk to à eon* firmed reprobate in this manner.—" My fri&td/ ľm ¿Raid you're hardened m these bad habits*. " ·** Why^· your Honour, none of th«* farmers like to employ me. n " And you are not fond of work.— Why аоцЧ ¡yog go for a soldier P' * *\.t.\i as "Bettev
** Better be hanged, your Honour^ than flogged to death for deserting/' #i Go to sea, then/* ct There, your Honour, I can't even îun away from the cat-a-ninetails." ** Come, come, yon don't want courage* and when you are out of the old way, perhaps, you may mend. If you continue in tbe country, you'll very soo« come to the gallows. Bad as you are, you cannot but believe you bave got a soul .?'* The fellow scratched his bead, and, without speaking, looked affirmatively* Happily Ae wa» nú modern Philosopher I Mr. Warwick continued— ¿¡¿β/Μ m worth saving, ifyoudiuVt think
think your body is. Have some respect for the service of God, if not for man». Try at least—take my advice~go to* sea*" The шап did* and went from hár house, without going home, to the nearest sea-port,, and entered imme¬ diately. In the late mutiny, this verjr fellow cut down, with his own hand, two of th& chief mutineers, in the ship in which he was stationed ;, wkh a fevt pthers who joined their Captain, he pre¬ sented the massacre of their Officers ; and he is P now the bpatswain of а тьц. ef war, under the command of the same Çapta«! %'hom he sg gallantly derenged*. He never comes into the country withr out paying b^ pspççts lf xptà ш mmţ , об . grateftà
n^isvery earnest with that gentleman to accept tht medal, which had been - given him for his good conduct, arttt which Mr. Warwick, explaining its ш- Űividual worth, of course refused. Such was thé matt of law, on whom Mr. Lociceridge and his friend waited. Wilsrm, in a few wortfe, rdated the whole of thfe story^ and dwelt on the corroborating circutnstoices Ihat itt¿ dttCfd hira to believe that Marauder and Urøinnb were the same peison. ţfc, Warwick ìbìa him that the me- ifcud of pr<K:eedîng was very simple and plain; that it would be »eeemry tb S ч inform
inform tbe Gøver nment, ths& he might le taken into legal custody, and, as. éooft as his health would permit, be sent over to Ireland to take his trkl. Th# attorney advised Wibon to go himself io town fo* that purpose ; to see the maker of the pistol, and get his testi* mony properly authenticated, and to brings Duchesne back with him* As Mr* Ľockeridge and Wilson earner ] ¿ut of Mţ. Warwick's house, Imphel! r "Who knew all the parties, and naturally guessed to whom they would apply, wal riding down the street Imphell, seeing them a little before him, turned his horse, and put up at a different honsfc than he intended. 1 With
W r ith great cifi ontcry he-went to Mr. Warwick's, though he knew be was had in abomination by him, and had ever and anon come under his lash». 4ť Good morning to you> Sir," said Imphell. Mr. Warwick, with unusual hautwr* slightly bowed hisliead* €f I understand," continued ImpheH* u that yon arc employed by Mr; WnV эоп in the cause against ш" ^WhQiswtf?" 4i Mr. Marauder I mean;. I am always his attorney, you know;, and my Lord, his father, used to ■ '* y Prajv Sir, who could tell you so?" "1
* ** I of course concluded it, knowing your intimacy with the Reverend Mr* Lockeridge ; and I just saw Mr. Wilson and his clerical patron come out of your house;" . " On this business, yon can have nothing to say to me," and Mr. War* wick got up. Imphell kept his seat.«—" Oh, yes* I have a great deal. I know you are not fond of a losing cause, and I wish to forewarn you in this ridiculous case» which fa all occasioned by a family likeness." ** So I have been informed*" *' Yet there к a very great difference between Mr. Marauder and Captain M'Ginnis." u You have seen Captain M 'Ginnis ?" " No,
и No, I cajnot positively say, upon my honour, that I have*" *' Are you in doubt then ?" The biter began to be bit; though Mr. Warwick was mistaken,, Imphell was not in the secret* Imphell replied— u When Captai» l# ( Ginnis was in London, before Mr* Marauder went to the West Indies, I called at his house ; but Captai« M 'Gin* »is was very Ш, had been overturned in a carriage* But, Mr. Warwick, I was saying to you how very clear this business is. It m impossible Mü. Ma- iauder can be Captain M'Ginnis, be* cause he was in the West Indici at thé . rtìtnej
1mm í and,. hesides, Mr, Marauder is % Papist." 6( He &m. f> " Wje've ten thousand witnesses to prove an alibi.' 9 " You are not one» I find ; as you cannot say, upon your honour, that you çver saw the Captain. "—Imphell looked confused, A thousand iancies, crowded iato hit head: his friend, Marauders might perhaps wish him to be a witness.. Mr. Warwiok checked all his ideas by enquiring—" Who are your witnesses ľ* . ix The Captain and crew he went out with ; the Captain аш! crew he came back with ; all tlie people he met with* there.* * u What are the names o£ the tira * Captains*
Captains, whom he went out and came back with ?" Imphell endeavoured to be more on his guard.*—*' Upon my word and ho¬ nour I have forgot their names ; but I am going to London on purpose to find them out." " And then—you Ί1 know their names■?'*■ £t I shall see Mr. Marauder again? before I go to town.'* " Your visit to-day was purposely to me ?** Imphell was rather confounded ; but though fee often tost himself, he never bit his assurance, but replied-*-* 1 1 had a little business besides in town ;* and,. endeavouring to turn the· conversation. to tliat point for which be came, said— "Yoi*
At You see how sure an alibi we*ve got* Now you have no witness at all, but tho bare word —I should say fancy-~ of Cap¬ tain Wilson." " Indeed !" Imphell was obliged to ask the ques^ tion —" Have you?" "What?" M Any body besides Captain Wilson* who fancies Mr. Marauder and his kins¬ man, M'Ginnis, the same?" " III tell you something, Mr. Imp* hell," replied Mr. Warwick. The other was all attention ;—now, thought he, I ehall get all the particulars.—" I am not to be the attorney in this busines*. ** "Strľ* exclaimed Imphell, with the utmost astonishment. " Who is ?** H The most honest attorney we can ι find
h ever tried for being the rebel M 'Gin* nis, depend upon it the trial must be there. Neither, therefore, can you act^ Μι -u Imphell ; and it's extremely un¬ lucky you cannot be a witness." Without any further ceremony, Mr. Warwick, who had been standing some time, rung the bell, and wished the other a good morning Not so wise, nor so able as when Ы entered, the pettifogger departed, having* kft a certain portrøn of his knowledge* behind him,, and lessened, the means ©If bis exertions for theiserviceof his patron. From the foregoing conversation, Mr % Wsiwkk Ъщт to he øf Wilsons- ι h opinion,,
φϊηίοη, which he rather doubted before, thatM ť Girmísand Marauder were more than cousins. * Imphell, thoroughly disappointed in his first attempt, was yet resolved to wait in the town till the two gentlemen left it, that he might know if they haď another conversation with Mr. War* wick. They dined with that gentleman, and Wilson took a place in the mail to go to town in the evening. This Imphell having discovered, as soon as it was dark, be, disguised in a horseman s large coat and a slouching hat, dodged thern to the inn fremi which the mail-còaclí set off. As he hovered around them, * * listening
listening to the conversation, among other things, he overheard the fob lowing. Mr. íockeridge.-^Do you think Du* chesne is already in town ?" Wilsm. — ic I have reason to suppose« from what he said to me in Ireland, that he has been there a week." " Have you any thing to say to Fannv, concerning your return ?" " 111 write the moment I get to London, and follow it as soon as pos* sibic.» With this, as the reward for his day's trouble, Imphell returned to his em¬ ployer* He himself ^conceived it to be of very little consequence, bat he knew not
before he went to the house upon the Downs, it was necessary to see the two men, who had assisted in the carrying off of Fanny. One he found was gone to New* market to try the strength of his new pocket, at a famous race there; the ether Imphell dressed in Marauder's livery, and took back with him as a servant» His business detained the tnan Of law aver the nights but in the evening of the next day he returned to the expect* cant Marauder·
CHAP·
*fti,.l)lMft ľ 14u
CHAR XIX. JlMPHËLL found his noble ешрюуег ^somewhat better in health, and con¬ siderably better in spirits. When the attorney had been a few minutes with him alone, he mentioned the servant he had brought, and tbe man was called He proved to be the one of the two whom Marauder most wished to.see. After
After asking him if he had a mind tô sstay with him .as a servant, and the other having ıvîHingly assented, Marau¬ der was left alone with ImpheH· The attorney now told the fruitless- ness of his attempt to discopertile proofs Wilson might be able to produce.—" I •could get no intelligence whatever of that sly fellow, Warwick; but I ©ver* Ъеаса a trifling conversation in the inn- yard, concerning Miss Fanny Bellaire, *nd one Duchesne*" t( Wiio?".vociferated Marauder. " Out Duchesne, Wilson had met with in Ireland." Marauder shook as he lay in the bed¿ with unusual agitation. Nothing but ^a fe\v curses for some moments escaped V05U ι ν* ρ him»
him. Recovering himself— <ť Imphell/' said he, ** deliver тпе, as near as pos¬ sible, the very %vords of the conversa¬ tion. " Imphell, who had taken it down, re¬ peated it verbatim* " Confusion on the Frenchman's tongue!—I see their cursed plots! — This damned scar t—Call Skeibar here." Imphell hastened out, thinking that Marauder was worse. Skeibar returned with him« u Examine thfstéar," said Marauder, as if nothing else ivas the matter with him. Skeibar,
Skeibar, noticing it, replied— " The wound is perfectly healed, Sir ; you need not fear that it will open afresh. " * * Fear ! " exclaimed Marauder. i ζ It must be opened afresh ! Nay, what İs more, it must be taken quite away." iC Impossible, Sir." " I say it is, and shall be possible.— Yet, let me see—if I can get rid*—»~ Ah ! it will do* "—Marauder seemed on a sudden deeply in thought.—·" Mr. Skeibar, I can dispense with your at¬ tendance for the present, —Send my ser¬ vant here." The man came in. Marauder spoke to Imphell.— u You ŕ S said
said my enemy promised to send a letter the instant he got to town?" " Yes, Sk" " I must have that letter. * "Sir!" " I know it's a cross-post from the town Woolborough to the village where that Parson lives.—Dick, come nearer. —Are you not able, without assistance, to take a parcel from a little boy ?" Dick, whose taciturnity had caught the notice of Marauder, replied, with a sneer—" Yes." t " Imphell shall tell you when—shall completely disguise you, and shew you the place. Bring the bag to me.—111 make your fortune, you dog;*—you shall have its weight in gold,"
Dick
Pick grinned, and went out. Marauder now explained to Imphell his firm determination to get rid of Wilson.—" Yet while the Frenchman lives ----- " Marauder checked himself. Imphell was greatly alarmed; he per¬ ceived himself involved deeper in Mr. Marauder's affairs than he had any in¬ tention of. He was almost necessitated to be a patty in jobbing the mail ; he was made privy to an intended mur¬ der ; and, if the fellow should turn in¬ former, or they should by any means be discovered, he saw no loop-hole through which he could escape from the gallows. The attorney was not much afraid of the devil, unless he came я 3 in
in an hanging form. Money could purchase any thing of him but a swing. Too much in awe did he stand of Marauder to dare to dissent from him when Dick was present ; but now they were alone, he was determined to use every argument to dissuade him both from the robbery and murder, at least for the present, till his own neck was out of the coilar. From Marauder s conduct too, he had no doubt that he was the renowned M'Ginnis; and he was astonished at his want of confidence in this point, when he exposed hunself so openly in the plans of murder and robbery.
Tire
The arguments of Imphell prevailed on Marauder to give up the idea of the robbery, chiefly on account of the im¬ probability of any letter from Wilson leading to a discovery, when he himself was to follow it so soon after. Yet still more determined did Marauder seem in his resolution to destroy Wilson ; but Imphell painted so very strongly what he felt, that the suspicions would imme¬ diately fall upon them, that there were spies in the house, who watched their whole behaviour ; and, what was a more forcible reason than any of the rest, that Marauder- should first consult his owrç safety, while thç delaying of щ tbe blow would occasion« it to fall witfc double force·
f 4. "Neither,"
u Neither, " concluded the lawyer,. " have we time to think of any thing but your escape. A different kind of guard, appointe/1 by Government, will soon be set over you, which will make it much more hazardous» '* Marauder was struck with his argu* ments, and began at once revolving the means of effecting his escape. This he would have considered no difficult mat-· ter, if he had been able to walk ; but, as it was, it required the utmost ch> cumspection and prudence, At last, however, it was settled that a chaise and four was to be ready at some little distance from the house ; that the surgeon, who was a strong muscular man^
man, was to let him down from the window ; that ^Imphell and Pick were to carry him to the chaise ; that Skeibar was to join them, and all four leave the kingdom together, Imphell knew he could easily get the key of the garden- door, as, from Marauder's ill health, the people who were appointed to watcb him, could have no idea of his attempt^ nig an escape. But this scheme was obliged to Ъе laid aside from the indisposition of the principal, whose, weak state would not permit any exertion, and whose fever, from the agitation of his spirits, increased so considerably in the evening, that his medical attendant assured him that the very attempt would certainly cost him p S hia
his life. This person, being let into his intentions, endeavoured ft prevail upon him to wait with patience till his health was established ; assuring him that ho would so deceive his guards, or even any other medical man that might be called in, that no one should discover any amendment either in his health or personal hurts. Thus totally prevented, at present, from making his escape, Marauder, ever restless and dissatisfied, insisted on Dick's robbing the mail. Imphelľs ar¬ guments could not swerve him from the purpose; and the pettifogger having discovered that the lad who carried the letters, was no regular messenger of the King's, but solely employed by the in¬ habitants
habitants of Wheatland, took fresh cou- rage upon the occasion, and agreed to equip Dick for the business. The parcel of letters wao but small ; but among them was one for Fanny, Eagerly Marauder tore it <open»
u BIY DEAREST FANNT, u I have concluded every thing ín town, but finding Duchesne. If I am so fortunate as to meet with him at Windsor, where I am going instantly for that pur¬ pose, 1 hope to anticipate this, by being my own messenger ; if not, you may expect шс every hour. —Dearest Fanny, beloved f 6 o£
of my soul, every moment seems lost to me when absent from you,—Your most faithful friend and grateful lovers " WILSON WILSONS*
" Stuff!" exclaimed Marauder, throw* ing it contemptuously from him. " Is tliat fellow, Wilson, returned ?" Imphell told him he believed he was, A little bustle without, and a violent ringing at the front-bell alarmed the group. Marauder and his gang supposed the ι obbery bad been traced, and he ordered hi»
his door to be fastened, and all the pa¬ pers to be put in the fire.. The papers were quickly consumed, and soon after some one rapped at Mr. Marauder's door, and desired ta be ad¬ mitted. The surgeon said— u In a few mi^ mites. Any thing particular ¥ % The petson who had the chief guard of the house, answered, that the Bow Street Oflicers were arrived to take the charge of Mr. Marauder's person, and required immediately to sec him. 41 Cover my forehead instantly with some piaister," exclaimed Marauder; " and
ťt and to any question that may be ask¬ ed, let me answer." The surgeon covered his forehead with some salve, and, by his patienťs- order» also pricked it all over with a needle» The new guards were now admitted· They came up to the bed, and, in a very civil manner, told him their busi¬ ness. They asked the surgeon how his patient was, and where bis hurts were· Marauder, in a faint tone, answered them, thať if they were not satisfied that the general state ef his health was such as to confine him at present, they might send for any other medical advice ;
advice ; and he referred them for unin¬ terested information concerning his si¬ tuation, to the other two surgeons who liad visited him on the foregoing even¬ ing. He added, that particular enqui¬ ries w r ere troublesome, and that they had no concern with any thing belong¬ ing to him, but the guard of his per¬ son ; and he concluded with saying, that so far from wishing to lengthen his illness, he had already witnesses suf¬ ficient to establish an alibi " It is necessary, Sir," said one of them, " that we should have a thorough knowledge of your cerson, as it is com¬ mitted to our care ; and I must beg leave to see your forehead, which is so strangely covered ** The
The surgeon spoke— " I have but just dressed it, and it will be highly im¬ proper to tear off the bandages." " How came it hurt l·" asked one of the Officers* " A violent bruise, which we did not at first notice, by being neglected, ha^ spread all over the forehead/* " I must desire you to leave me,'* spoke Marauder, as if in much pain ; " if you have any desire to see the* place, the surgeon shall inform you when; it is next dressed." The Officers of Justice spoke together, and civilly retired. Imphell» who might have sat for the picture of Sir Trevisend, in the Cave of
of Despair, began to breathe again, and Marauder now required of the surgeon, without loss of time, to apply & blister all over his forehead ; resolved, in his. own mind, that the cicatrice of his wound should be covered, before it was exposed to the inspection of his guards. Whatever suspicions, therefore, might- be entertained on this account, on the morrow, when they attended with tha surgeon, the whole forehead was. com¬ pletely covered with the effects of th^ blister. But the scar was much too deep to l>e erased by these means ; and three weeks having elapsed since the Officers меге in the house, and Marauder in no respects. better»,
better, their suspicions began to be strengthened, and they positively re* quired that anotlieţ surgeon should be* called in. Marauder, who had always before op¬ posed it, pretended also to wish for such ι advice, and agreed to receive any per¬ son they thought proper to send for. His real hurts were by this time nearly well, and, in defiance of the remon* strance of the surgeon, he was resolved in the night to attempt his escape»
CHAP.
СНЛР. XX. A HE following was the plan Marauder adopted. A fortnight before, under the pretence of having fresh air, he had been carried to the upper story of the house. Tlie windows were furnished with bars; but his intention was to mount up the chimney to the top of the house, and to let himself down by a long cord, prepared for the purpose.— The surgeon and Imphell were to be off early
early in the morning, before it coutd be discovered, and to take care of them¬ selves. Yet Marauder did not intend to leave the premises, as he doubted if he should be able to get over the spiked wall, and the outward door he knew was suffi¬ ciently secured; but, by throwing a rope over, he intended to cause suspi¬ cion that he had escaped by that means. In an out-house, where the garden- tools were kept, was a secret opening,. known only to himself; here he pur¬ posed to concealhimself, till his guards were supposed to be absent in pursuit of him, and the house deserted. At twelve
twelve at ìioòn, Imphell and Dick werö $o return with some fresh horses, and they were to be provided with pistols, to shoot any one who might oppose them» In vain Imphell used every argument to dissuade him from this desperate scheme. ImpheH chiefly dwelt upon his innocence, earnestly entreated him to stand a trial, promising to get any kind of witnesses to assist, if it were necessary, to prove an alibL Marauder, still tenacious of his secret, was positive in his determination· The attorney no^v began to be most grievously alarmed. He not only saw the
the dreadful danger his patron ran, and the utter improbability of his succeed¬ ing, but he knew that he himself was an accomplice in the attempt, and the violated laws of his country seemed ready to overwhelm him. His fears at last overpowered every other sensation ; even interest crouched before them; and, under a promise of secrecy 5 he gave tiotice of the intended attempt to the Bow SUeet guards. Most cunning was the game Imphell played on the occasion. By these means he gained their confidence; and, as tliey were not to betray him, Marau¬ der was to suppose that they heard someone ascending the chimney, and had
ïlad mounted, by the trap-door, upon the house top, ready to receive him. This petty treason of the attorney's had not yet proceeded further than the before-mentioned circumstance ; and the motive he alledged to the Bow Street people was, that he believed Marauder to be light-headed, which was partly confirmed by the surgeon, who had lately told Imphell that he feared the ¿gentleman's brain was affected. As soon, therefore, as Marauder had descended from the top of the chimney to the roof of the house, and began ail* justing his cord, the Officers rushed from a door which opened upon the leads, and seized him. In
In vain Marauder attempted any re> distance; after one faint struggle, he ^quietly surrendered himself. Without Speaking a word, he was conducted down into his room. His jguards searched him, took away some improper weapons, and two persons re* «mined with him· About one o'clock Imphell was ad*· mitted to him, who had invented a plausible «tory for the purpose. Marauder heard him in silence. -** tť Where's Dkk?" said he, Imphell replied that be was at a little distance, with the horses* Marauder
Marauder faintly smiled, ordered him to be called, and mentioned the name of Skeibar. ímphell professed his total ignorance of* him. The truth was, Imphell wished to get rid of both. Dick stuck close to him ; but Skeibar, who was to wait at a certain place for the party, had been literally supplied by the attorney with money, in hopes that he would abscond with it: and Skeibar perceiving the ticklish situation in which he had involved himself, had acted ac¬ cordingly» While these things were passing at the house upon the Downs, the less con* spicuous persons in these memoirs were not idle on their part. VOL. iv. q Wiivm
Wilson had discovered Captain Du¬ chesne at Windsor; but the French¬ man, bearing the condkiorn of Marauder, bad given him t4ie slip, and was gone for -a short time with а гпегш to Scot¬ land. In ^ain W'thon remonstrated ; he aítedged ťbait Ы$ presence was not yet necessary, and faithfully promised to ¿amweriris fir^t letter in person. Ш\т Bellaire^ friends fiad received «n express of her srfety, as soon as pos¬ sible after her arrival at Mr. Lockeridge's. Mr. Townsend came himself for her, and abe tetxtmeã vrìth iam to Rich- mond. As it was necessary íbr Wilson to attend the trial of M'Ginnis alias Marauder, in
in Dublin, he was obliged to yield to the arguments of the friends of Fanny, and poatpone his nuptials till his return. During the confinement of Marauder, most of his time was spent with the'be- loved object of hi$ heart, at Richmond. He now received notice of Marauder s being sufficiently recovered to attempt his escape, and was ordered to prepare to gp to Ireland in eight days. He ac¬ cordingly wrote to Duchesne, and only waited his arrival. They were to pro¬ ceed to Holyhead, and cross in the osarne vessel that was appointed to carry Marauder., 1 * Ordets instantly followed the inform¬ ation of his intended escape, to the о С keepers
keepers of Marauder to set off with their charge. He heard of his removal with one of his contemptuous smiles. The violence of the hero's temper was wonderfullv subsided since the failure of his attempt ; the Stoical principle seemed to have taken possession of his whole frame. Imphell, who had before resolved to confess every thing, now began to think his own neck was safe without any further discovery; and, with a full confession, he knew he must say—" farewel 1"—-not only to his great¬ ness, his interest, but to the little por¬ tion that remained to him—of character. Alarmed with perplexities and doubts, one moment buoyed with hope, the next sinking
sinking with'fear, was Imphell. Ma¬ rauder, on the contrary, was unusually calm, even less communicative than before, and, to all the solicitations and artful questions of his attorney, con¬ cerning the expected trial, kept the secret of M'Ginnis safe, and solely an« swered—" I defy them," Every thing was now ready for Ma¬ rauder's departure. Dick was not to be found ; he had not been seen since the evening before. Marauder heard of his absence with¬ out any remark. lie dressed himself in the morning with unusual composure, and his faithful steward began to sop¬ ii 3 pose
.pose . t hatt his fridancboly silence Vaâ^ wealing off., i l'iűnr»' \ t т -r α τ>]γ\ί*>λ> .-. Ci Tmnliall " *,n' fí i* åk%i\.j \ifn\, uiuíiv· ---- xinpriCn, acuti Marauder, looking upon the, ground, " will you also forsake me?" Tlie attorney's fidelity flowed trip¬ pingly from his tongue.. " Come here," continued Marauder, in a mild tone* Imphell went up to him, Mamiâer laughed; mè îîttîag* шр his eyes, with a sly tøoft', ^hfch akiied the very heart of the other, exetómed^ к Who drove them fmm me?—If I am mad,.
mad, wreteh, beware of my fangs ! Would these were the infernal regions, that I might toss thee into the fhwnes !-*-A<2- cuissed rascal ! tlimt liast betrayed meJ'* As he spoke, he seized him by the collar. Imphell cried out. Now burst forth the restrained rage of Marauder. He shook the lawyer with a desperate violence ; he struck him again and agai n with his fists ; he pushed him against tfte wall ; he threw him upon the ground with all the viofenceof revengeful rage. Quickly had the base tool of his vil¬ lany met the fate he deserved from his еЕгфЬусгЧ* bmã% but the attendants came to bk rescue»
4 4 Ali
AH reason had forsaken Marauder», He sprung upright upon the prostrate, senseless wretch ; his eyeballs glared with, fire, and he rushed, with verv little appearance of thought, against the per¬ sons who entered the room, and endea¬ voured to force his way through them. With great exertion on their part was he at length overpowered, and he sunk to the ground exhausted. It was but for a moment— his rage returned with redoubled violence; he cried but on Imphell, and with the most shocking execrations swore he would destroy him. By force only was he restrained ; he seemed lost to every thing that was said. to liiin, and still repeated his curses. Every ■s
JE very feature was distorted with mad¬ ness ; confined to the ground by cords, he tried to gnaw them asunder, and when all other means of offence failed, he venomously spit at his opponents. At last, finding himself completely subdued, and entangled in the cords which were bound round him, he roared oat with his utmost efforts ; his screams pierced through the apartments, and he only paused to give vent to a tor¬ rent of oaths and blasphemies. His attendants, who were not igno¬ rant of scenes of horror in every form, stood aghast at the one before them, and looked at each other in a silent agony, q 5 unknowing
INFERNAL QÜIXOTJE. unknowing how to dispose of their pri¬ soner. , — * 'i ïmt&élr, dreadfully bruised and hurt,, lay senseless on the ground.—Marauder, bound hand and foot, glared at his prey, against ivi >m аЦ his rage seemed directed* Implicit? somewhat recovered) was led out of the room, Marauder even to the last straining to force the bonds tfaat held him, that he might satiate his ven¬ geance. As soon as the- lawyer was removed out of his sight, th^fiSrý of Marauders subsided ; but the attendants, not wil¬ ling to trust to appearances, lifted him 4 upon
upon tlie eouchv anad fastened him there täi the surgeon ahauld aiiive, whom tuey Ыа, at the appëaranca of tkeir ptí*onèf 's insanity, sent for. 'Hie gentleman* i¥ho had at the fimt attended Mm, arrived. When he felt his pulse, Marauder exclaimed— u Well, Doctor, if he's mad, there's reason in it." He was bled without the least resist¬ ance. The surgeon next examined hiš forehead, and testified his surprise at rinding any injury there. Marauder unwillingly suffered his interference iţf this case ; but knowing all opposition *tóeless, heat length silently acquiesced.
α б The
The surgeon discovered that a large sore, which covered his forehead, had been improperly healed over, and that the morbid substance had penetrated inward. To this corporeal ailment he partly attributed the deranged state of bk patienťs intellects ; little did he know the far more grievous mental evils which racked the inmost sbwl of Ma¬ rauder. The various medical men who. had attended him, had found it no dif¬ ficult matter to administer such remedies as ins body required ; but among the whole circle of his acquaintance, where was he to find one who could ease the agonizing pain of thought ? The dry scaly flesh being removed from Marauder's forehead, the malignant humours.
humours received a vent, and in a few hours the patient seemed easier, and fell into a repose. In the evening the fever had considerably abated ; and, though Marauder spoke but little, the surgeon remarked that the deadly frenzy of his eye was much calmer, and his manneg more consistent and composed.
vJi'iAl *
m, 'j ľ." r , ■■'■ f ■ ■ pi 1 я г
CttAP. XXI. f' 1 tf"·* A HE amendment of Marauder on the following day was truly astonishing. He spoke rationally, even professed a readiness to set off immediately towards Ireland ; and calmly desired that that infamous villain, Imphell, might not again be admitted into his presence. Imphell* indeed, had taken the oppor* tunity of the chaise which had been ordered for Marauder, and, urged only bv
by tiis present fears, returned to his own home. In the evening of the sante day, at his earnest entreaties, Marauder was re¬ leased from the inconvenience of a strait-* waistcoat, which, at the surgeon's first arrival, had been placed upon him. On the third day, no appearance of insanity returning, and Marauder him¬ self being extremely anxious to depart, the Bow Street Oflicers proceeded for¬ ward with their charge. To their en¬ quiries—if he did not require a servant—« he accepted the attendance of a man, who had come with them, and who had waited upon him for the last three days ; thu#
thps removing every suspicion of his wishing to make his escape. Before his departure, he ordered the deaf man to remain in the house till his return, of which he spoke with con¬ fidence ; he made a handsome present to the surgeon, and wrote some let¬ ters, lie received also, from his medical attendant, proper dressings for the hwt on his forehead, which was ordered to be kept open, and also some medicines. They now proceeded slowly on their journey, with short stages ; as the Ute frenzy, with which Marauder had been seized, had left a weakness and languor upon him. His mildness and civility were remarkable; and though for a while he
Ы would be wrapped in thought, he asked many questions, and spoke morfr than he had been accustomed to for some weeks. In the course of the jour¬ ney he frequently got out of the car¬ riage, and walked for a few miles, that he might enjoy the full breezes of the re¬ freshing spring; but ever on these oc¬ casions his attendants were on their guard : one of the men, who rode in the chaise, always walked with him, while lus new servant, and another man on horseback closely followed. Without any interruption they con¬ tinued their progress till the well known shores of Holyhead, and the adjacent ν jew struck the notice of Marauder.
Ib
He was now within a fewmiles ţ of tire pfece ; and close on one side of the road was an entrance into the 6ver in emo* rable wood, where the fatal double' (feel had taken place, and the unhappy Geutespiere had fallen by the pistol oť Marauder. Marauder desired the carriage to stop ; lie got out* He praised the genial! warmth of the day, and taking oŕf hi* gte&t»cottti gave it to Mreervmtr He sbwly approached an opening in the wood—he paused—the attendants stop¬ ped at some Ritte distance* In an irrøéånt Re rtrshea атао% fffé trees—more lo the astonishment than the confusion of iris attendants. Beyond the
passable cliffs ; around it an open and lével country. In such a situation they had no doubt of quickly recovering him- The two men, who had accompanied him ín the chaise, hastened after him on foot, and the horsemen skirted the - extremities of the wood. Now alone and free, Marauder, with maddening fury, rushed desperately through the most arduous places. The brambles, the bushes yielded before him, and he was soon lost to the sight of his pursuers. Their shouts quickened his pace, as exulting he bounded along ; aĂd now he had gained éle opetting to the fatal town where Geultespiere fell. One
One moment he paused. Recollée» tîon flashed across his mimi Λ guilty pang smote him ; and, with incredible speed, he flew across tlie plain. íšow, almost arrived at the other* end, sudden the sound of voices checked his. career. With eyes intent, watchful cars, his breath scarce moving, observant he stood.—Who can conceive \ihot thoughts, what ideas, strange, confused, unbounded, infinite, pressed upon his, distempered brain r-~Like the wary tiger, lie crouched, as it were, on the watch» to fight or to fly. Forth from the opening came a figure —such as had just marked itself in hi& müid in tlie vague form of Geutespiere ; the
iho military garb and uniform were like \ii-»4î the murdered Geutespiere had worii. The soul of Marauder stageled. Tlie ligure stopped. Every deadly fiend of guilt, depravity, and madness urged Marauder forward. He was sibout to force his way against it, when, loft another form sprung forward, in which his appalled heart recognized the features of Wilson. Marauder trembled ;—his eyes avoid¬ ed a sight so dreaded. Every form but this, Marauder could have opposed; against every otlier he had been suc¬ cessful ; here he had been again and again subdued and humbled. Guided
Guided only by fear, away the con¬ scious Marauder flew—no matter where —every thing dreaded was behind him. Wilson was swift of foot—he closely fallowed his prey» Each Fury aided timU^eed of Maraur der —Despair goaded him forward to the «edge of the yawning precipice that over¬ hangs the town ;— ¿ufet:tøttering on the brink, oné look he .tì>rèw behind him —he saw—and leaped with his utmost exertion, into tlie deadly abyss. Wilson, petrified &t the ghastly, act, instantly paused. The horsemen galr 4i>pped up; ftøm them die first learned of the frewted váruJenae tótU which disappointed
disappointed guilt had smote the soul of Marauder. - The horsemen hastened round the cliff. The haughty Marauder was no more. That turbulent and fiery spirits which spurned the laws of God and man,* had fled his-harassed body ;—dash 4 - ed to pieces by tlie tremendous fall, it lay deforiited, and scarcely to be known f upon the beach t They bore it to the town. Wilson and Duchesne came tip.-— Wilson turned from the shocking sight Duchesne took on* look at his old enemy, themurderø· of-his feiend, but Êfoke not a word, liarror sat in the
the countenances of every person pre* sent Wilson and Duchesne instantly set off to town : they had been some days at Holyhead, waiting for the prisoner and his escort ; and, without knowing the reason, had been surprised that they were not arrived. Duchesne, wishing to review the fatal spot where his coun¬ tryman fell, had been accompanied by Wilson, when they, to the amazement of all parties, so strangely encountered the execrable cause of all. The Officers of Justice, who had had the care of Marauder's person, prudently applied, by the advice of Wilson, to a respectable attorneys the place, and, in
in his presence, searched the pockets of the deceased, for the purpose of rinding either letters or papers, that might give them a reference to some friend or rela* tion of his ; but not the least clue could* they find to direct them in this point. The Coroner's Inquest having deter* mined the suicide insane, he was buried in the plainest manner on the third day. The gay, the gallant Marauder, whose birth, fortune, and expectations made him equal with the first characters in the kingdom—whose pride, conceit, and ambition lifted him abom them alb— whose graceful person and manly strength were the praise erf* one sex, and the envy of the other—whose ardent vol. iv. e and
and indefatigable soul never flinched at what his imperious will commanded ;— Marauder—whom not to know was ig¬ norance, to whom every circle in life had produced friends and followers by tlie dozen—Marauder, the active Chief wherever he appeared, untimely perishes a miserable suicide, the wretched victim* of Despair ! Not a friend—not an acquaintance*--* not even a domestic is to be found* to/ pay the last offices of his funeral.·—· A felon he dies ;—fear and frenzy per¬ form the part of the public executioner ; and the servants of Justice сюзе the* scene, instead of the ever deair connec¬ tions, of rektion or friend*
What
What knowledge the departed spiriti may possess of the things of this world» has nothing to do witli our duty towards God or man ; but it is one of those speculative reflections which a religious belief will be apt to raise in the mind. Conceive the proud, tyrannic, and restless spirit of Marauder beholding his funereal obsequies ľ— Conceive it impo¬ tent and disabled, yet swelling with İKitred and revenge—conscious that all it ever held dear was now become the property of its first supplanter— «con^ scious that all ks woridly art and cui>~ ning had not the common prudence to prevent this!~The young Duke of Silsbury, as hek at kw, takes posses¬ sion of the wliole estate of bis. kinsr it £ man*
аш, Marauder, in lantis and per¬ sonals* Reader, what are thy intentions in thifrlife?--Inspect thy prospects—look boldly at the summit of them. Is it wealth, honours, or what dost thou call it?—Cast thine eyes around—among the myriads before: thee find out the fa¬ voured mostal, whose envied state thoci hopest to resemble. Observe him nar¬ rowly—see him ať home, abroad, in the moments of pleasure and of retirement» Now answer thyself,—Art thou willing to talie his station for. that uncertain period of existence which may happen to4heei —Wilt thou sacrifice to this idol all hopes of a happy lot in the bound- tes% unknown region beyond ? or wilt thou
thou check thy worldly career now, and turn thy feet, without loss of a moment, to the path of futurity ? What "art thou, reader?—No matter. -—Be thou ever so great in thine own eyes, thou must yield to the power of that Almighty hat, which can say— " This night thy soul shall be required of thee!"
к 3
CIIAP.
«BsssKseoaeBBsassKBsss«
CHAP. XXII.
W ILSON had many reasons for leaving the spot immediately upon the death of Marauder. He not onlv wished to inform the Government ; but, as he was the head steward of the Duke of Silsbury, who was Marauder's heir at law, he avoided at present any inter¬ ference into his affair% till he was in¬ formed whether there was any will ; and be thought, also, that his Grace ought to
to know, without loss of time, of his kinsman's fate. Before he left Holyhead, he wrote to Imphell (though the Bow Street Officers told Wilson of the late chastisement that he had received from his principal), as the attorney was the only person he knew of, who had anv trust in Marau- deťs affairs. Imphell denied the least knowledge. of a will; and, after the most minute enquiries of every person with whom Marauder was in the remotest degree connected, the Duke of Silsbury took possession of the whole of his property. The history properly closes here;— n 4 but
but a page or two may not be amiss con¬ cerning the more prominent characters, which have appeared in these volumes. Wilson's regiment soon returned to »-í England ; and the warmest wish of his heart, his union with Fanny, imme¬ diately took place. The Duke made him'a'present of the house at Hazleton, where he now resides, in the same vil¬ lage with his parents, and but a small distance from bis patron. Marauder had deeply mortgaged this property ; but the Duke instantly clear¬ ed the whole, and keeping the manor in* his own hands, gave the estate to Wilson.—His parents, and Dr. Line, are all in high health and spirits, and are
are ever the mo&t welcome guests to Mrs. Wilson and lier husband. The Rev. Mr. Lodkeridge has changed his residence, to be near his young friend, having been appointed domestic Chaplain to the Duke, and occupies a «ring ¡of the Castle ; though the slan- iderous part of the neighborhood says:» is for the sake of hunting with his 'Gfãcm afoxfliouucÍ3, that ke has«ap¬ pointed a liurøte, at Wlitatland, where the nevertheless spends the summer months. The Duke of Silsbury's household is *теру targe, -Щ explosive of his brothers aad abters, he has thought proper tè adopt
adopt a large family of orphans, his near relations by his mother's side. Mr. and Mrs. Rattle seem exactly suited to each other, and frequently enliven the group at Hazleton. Young Harrety is *in orderá, and is married to Nancy Evans. He lives with his mother ; ami, having learned moderation and the manners of the world, brandishes the scourge over the head of Vice with double success, no longer liable to the terms of madman and enthusiast« Tèe virtuous and inflective Hambden is now in the Senate, equally respected in public life, and beloved in private. Imphell
Imphell did not long survive his base 'employer. Dick, having been appre¬ hended for a highway robbery, told, at the fatal tree, the whole of his trans¬ actions with the attorney ; whose fears preyed so violently upon his miserable state of health, that he never rose from the sick couch, where the revengeful frenzy of Marauder had thrown him. Cloudley remains among the incura¬ bles in Bedlam. His, Messalina ,flew with the re-coated Philosopher to the soft Italian plains. Oţliei- Syrens war¬ bled upon the young Ivory, and Ue basely fled from Maria. The dame had too much of the Roman in her soul ţo bear tbis insult to her virtues. She grasped the dagger of Justice, nør ceased to
to pursue the traitor to Love, till she had fixed it in his heart How the violated laws of the place where the ^leed was nernetrau'd. mnrht have treat- ed the lady, cannot be said; for Rea¬ son, Liberty, smd Equality then ruled thecountry; and the virtuous dispenser *öf justice, a gallant General in the Frendi- services being tempted to see the fair heroine, was instantly smitten, and crowned the-noble act by *hk peculiar ďavour and tove, J * Of the other -characters, who liave -mot appeared in the foreground of the picture, it *will -be melese to remark.-— Mrs. Sloirnt&rd^ ber ^daughters and son, and the Honourable Alisi Berwicks тщЫ 'mdeeê mme forward in an^episode of
tíŕsome fourscore p»ges ; or, with the assistance of the worthy Mr. Townsend, and the simple Vasaley and his trifling wife, be woven intoa pretty little Novel, Then there is the reformed villain* O'Rourk ; his brother Irishman, Wil¬ son's servant, who had lived with his present master from a child ; Nelly, the former flame of O'Rourk; Alderman Barrow, his unmarried daughter* and I know not how many others, might he* made most excellent use of* To aid the plot, Emily's pbttire, which was given by Marauder to Fahany, might be given to some one else, or found among his papers, and brought forth for notable discoveries. The late liabitation of Marauder, on the Berk* . . shim
slìire Downs, ¡fit were narrowly seardi- cd, who knows not what wonderfid papers it may contain : ••and, above all, that secret ptace in the house, which· has been so* careftdry kept from intru¬ sion, that Marauder himself was never seen, in these pages, to enter it. Un¬ like the profound Godwin, who oftere sets kis -'murderer to explore a wondrous; iron chest, and his hero, at last, to break it open ; then, gking other places to the implements, ami all the things, directly or indirectly belonging to the »Minier, he leaves u& to guess what can possibly be in the chest # -
li'or
For my part, I shall leave this recess of the Díabolists in the same manner as I first spoke of it—unknown. Let some other find the place, send forth his searchers, and discover ite contents*
UN r Si.
y.AKf» ШН£*?Л»?*Ж»·, LIAOfcNHAli.aTfftBíT.
