Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
The milesian chief: a romance
THE MILESIAN.
СНЛР. 1. ïînt МШ l fued each fıckîo mí. Importunate and \л«п, And while his pasîîon touelťd w\ íuavt, 1 triumphed in hi*, pain. Goldsmith. r fllE next morning she timidly mention¬ ed to Desmond an interesting female she had seen the preceding evening, and re¬ quested him to learn from his brother who she was ; but all the little art Ro¬ sine was mistress of could not conceal from Desmond that there was another mover, and a deeper interest in the in¬ quiry than she avowed. VOL. 1Ï. ч
Desmond eagerly set out in pursuit of Connal. He found hira stretched on the rock where he first beheld Armida. Desmond threw himself beside him, and wben he saw tbe deep melancholy that shaded his brother's face, he almost re¬ proached himself for the thoughts with which he had sought him. He hesitated, changed his posture, and at length forced himself to say. " You can enjoy solitude, Connal, it supplies you vvith so many delicious images." " Are the images that visit my solitude delicious?" said Connal, raising his eyes to his brother. " Oh, yes, for solitude is so congenial to the thoughts of love." " I am glad to see you in such spirits, my dear Öesmond," said his brother, while his melancholy smile shewed he was far from partaking them, "Oh, notliing in tbe world gives such comfort to a young graceless sinner like
nie, as to find out a few comfortable, consoling infirmities in a character tbat has hitherto hung before you like a very scare-crow of morality, and terrified you out of all imitation, and your senses beside." (t No man has more imperfections," said Connal, mildly ; ťf but from which of tbem do you draw all this consolation ?" " Ob, my dear Cornial," said Des¬ mond, eagerly, <€ do not attempt to deny it ; I know it all ; I have been at tbe cabin, and seen the girl and kissed the baby, tbe little darling, and felt how delightful it was to be even an uncle to such an angel. No one could see i(s beautiful black eyes and not know whose they were. í know it all you see: the very girl you used to torment me about two years ago. How little did I guess your motive was to keep her to your¬ self." (t For Heavens sake, Desmond, what is the meaning of all this ?" в 2 .'
<c Why only tbat you, like a wise Mentor, sent your Telemachus on his travels alone, and kept the Calypso to yourself—you hypocrite !" " I know to whom you allude," said Connal, his features all glowing vvith the radiant shame of virtue; " and on surmises so weak, you pronounced your brother a libertine. Desmond, your brother would have defied the whole world in your cause, before be would liave believed it of you." " Facts, fiets" cried Desmond, already blushing with conviction : * f this is mere declamation." "Then you sball have facts," answered Connal, and he circumstantially related the story of the unbappy woman to Des¬ mond, whose heart, during tbe narrative, alternately burned with admiration of his brother, and with abhorrence of a very opposite character. "I will fly," he exclaimed at the con¬ clusion ; * f I will fly this moment to tho castle and repeat the whole story/'
"Never," cried Connal, grasping him with his strong arm ; "never : the circum¬ stances I have related never must reach the castle through my means : my only wish is to be forgotten there, or at least not remembered as one who employed the secrets of the family to assassinate its peace/' " By heaven, Connal," cried his im¬ petuous brother, ce you are enough to drive one mad, with this obstinate stupid¬ ity of honour, Here, when I came ex¬ press from ------" The very feeling he was reproving checked him now, for be felt the impro¬ priety of thus committing the character of Armida, whose name had not been mentioned to him, and be added more calmly :— " How can you tell the good fortune that may be the result of this dis¬ covery ?" "I know not nor do I care," said Connal, resolutely ; " the good fortune вЗ
tliat must be purchased by mental trea¬ chery would be more oppressive to me than all the accumulated evils of my JOl. ' e And what shall I say on my rrturn tothe castle ?" said Desmoud, dejectedly. ff Say nothing of me." Armida had not quitted her apartment all day, and she passed her time in tra¬ versing it with burning cheeks and a rapid bten, as if she meant to fly from her own thoughts. ín the eveninjr Rasine entered her room, and in a few words told her unsuccessful commission. It was twilight : she could not observe tbe change in Armida's countenance as sbe spoke, and after a long interval of silence sbe again repeated that Desmond had informed her he was well acquainted with the history of the unfortunate fe¬ male, but was forbid to disclose a par¬ ticular of it within the walls of tbe castle. Armida was still silent, and Ro- áiňe, believing that it proceeded from in-
difference to what she had said, approach¬ ed to converse with her usual familiarity» when she was terrified by Armida sud¬ denly starting from the sofa on which she was sitting, and repelling her with a gesture of desperation. The passions she has been all day struggling with now burst forth. " Ob, dupe, dupe, that I was," she exclaimed, wildly striking her forehead, " thoughtless, senseless ideot, to be im¬ posed on by his indifference ; to believe there was such a monster as a mau w ith¬ out passions : I imposed on myself. He never deceived me ; his coldness left me no excuse for my infatuation. The talents that have excited admiration in far differ¬ ent circles, the songs that ItaHan princes have supplicated to hear, were lavished ou a savage Irishman, and he scorned them : no wonder-—he was revelling in thought with his cottage paramour; im¬ maculate purity ! You came, palled and weary with the blandishments of your
favourite; and Armida Fitzalban, with all her talents, bad tbe honour of wind¬ ing you up to fresh spirits, like a Cir¬ cassian slave dancing before the mighty master of the seraglio," All the haughty passions cf her soul flashed in her face as sbe spoke, and the step with wbich she crossed seemed designed to crush the whole race of O'Morven into dust. Terrified as Ro¬ sine was by her passions, sbe yet rejoiced to find that her pride predominated, for sbe trembled at the consequences of this ill-omened attachment. But the feelings of Armida soon subsided. " How often," sbe exclaimed, " did I think him a being above the temptations of sense, and only alive to the passions. He has no heart*—none: oh, could he have had one, and seen so much of mine without compassion? What night was that we were together on the island ? Oh ! wby did be not lot mc perish on the w r aters that night? That night 1 believ-
ed he loved me : yes, when the waves came dashing over us, when I clung to liim, not in hope but in despair, the looks be threw on me were dark and bright with grief and love. Tbe light¬ ning tbat shewed me his looks bad no terror ; I watched for its flashes ίο see him; and when twice he snatched me from death, was it but bare humanity ?" Touched by her distress. Rosine faint¬ ly suggested tbat bare humanity might be all that interested him in the late of the unhappy female. " But would bc not have spoken ? vvould be not have told me all you have said in a single look? A single vvoul would have brought conviction to my heart. He let me depart without a look." Rosine vvas silent. Armida felt it ia every fibre of her proud beart. (t I am not vvhat I was," tulu she, '· I am not what I was. The iirst cf hU sex never drew a sigh fiorame before; li ii
never made my heart beat with hope or fear. Let hito boast of his triumph if he will, over my grave : my heart may be broken, but never can be humbled* Could I seek his love, I were as unworthy of it as the creature that is preferred to me/' Rosine, who trembled more and more as the impassioned character of Armida developed itself, and the evils of this ill-fated attachment rose to her view, strenuously applauded her sentiments, and endeavoured, even by topics drawn from her pride, to support and confirm them. " Oh ! do not insult my despair ; do not reason with me," cried Armida, again yielding to tbe wild vicissitudes of pas¬ sion. (< You first mentioned his name to me ; you first set me on fire with his praises : go to him yourself—learn the truth from him, adjure him to tell you all ; but tell him not wbo is waiting in agony for his confession/'
Rosine was silent, but her silence shewed her steady reluctance to under¬ take this shameful commission. Armida, blinded by passion, still importuned her, " Will you be bribed ?" she exclaimed, tearing off the diamond clasp of her robe, and throwing it at Rosine 's feet ; " will you be implored ?" she continued, sink¬ ing on her knees before her. (i Oh ! bc not so bard; lam not used to tears or to intreaty. A few days ago, a,nd who would bave foretold I would kneel to you, and for one who is perhaps as in¬ sensible as yourself." Rosine was now compelled to an ex¬ ertion of mind and resolution sbe had hitherto been scarce conscious of. Shocked as she was at the situation of Armida, and still more at the fatal pros¬ pect of her passion, she revolted, with all tbe strength of her mind and princi¬ ples from the confession of such a pas¬ sion from a woman on the point of being united to another, At suffering she
wept, but at the remotest p« S4.ni!if y of guilt *he sbuddcrrd ; and wiih a! 1 the eloquence of virtue she aťjired Armida to remember the solemnity other engage¬ ments to Wandesford, the impossibility of a successful attachment to Connal, in¬ sulated as he was by every circumstance of nation, birth, and habit ; and though she í rcrnbl» d at the word, she represent¬ ed the still greater horror and iniquity of her being united to one man aud attach¬ ed to another , and not even Armida's pride or superior powers deterred her from displaying her consciousness of that attachment witb a force that shewed she was better acquainted with tbe secrets of her heart than its possessor. Armida, t ho us: h sbe still remained on her knees, and overwhelmed with tears, seemed touched with this appeal to her honour. " I am ready to fulfil my engagements," sbe cried, 4( I am ready to marry Wandes¬ ford; and then, I swear on my knees, I swear never to thiuk of him more : only
let me hear bim vindicated ; let me know hirtv not degraded by a vile passion.; let me -tliink' bhn the being I thought him yesterday: I ask but that nhought to live on, and you may grant it/* she added still more wildly; "for if I must be the xviie of Wandesfbrd, I feel I shall not live too long." Heart sick and appalled, Rosine sunk into a chair. <f Oh ! ■■Armida/* she cried, "I am weary of importunity it am terrified bv passion; I will interfere or resist you no more, but I cannot do what you re¬ ft aire: I will go no further in this busi¬ ness." Ci You will not!" cried Arniida, start¬ ing from her knees: her longhair fell over her face as she rose/ she flung it back, and flashed the full lightnings of her eyes on Rosine : < c Then you would ^ not have him justified; you love him your- V self." " Rosine could have smiled at the sug¬ gestion, but the maniac figure before her
was no subject for smiles; and she said with a firmness that commanded the passions and faculties even of Armida, " You have at length found a way to subdue me, Armida; but it is a way neither honourable to your generosity or to my affection." She was quitting the room, when Armida, who appeared at her last words to awake as if frora a dream, called to her to stay. Rosine paused : " Is it possible," she exclaimed, " is it then possible that I bave sunk to this; tbat twice in one shameful day »I have supplicated, and supplicated in vain; tbat I have forgot my birth, my character, шу pride for a stranger, a savage stranger ? Ami Armida fitzalban ? " Rosine," she cried, her native cha¬ racter returning, " let ibis night be erased for ever from your mind, as I wipe away the traces of these shameful tears, the first and last that passion shall ever wring from me,"
As she spoke, with an emotion that made language impossible, she rushed into her boudoir, and Rosine did not attempt to follow her. During the remainder of the night all was gay in the castle ; and to the officers Lady Montclare appeared a charming woman, and Wandesford the happiest of men. Lady Kilcarrick alone, who still remained at the castle, was silent aad anxious. She had profited but little by her observations: the rapid changes of Armida's mind baffled her penetration, and the mysterious and mutual avoidance of Endymion and Desmond, while if ex¬ cited her curiosity, defied it. Lady Montclare, too, in spite of the external smoothness of her manner, at times be¬ trayed an inquietude that suggested doubts, which were increased by her long private conferences with the monk, and her evident impatience for the unioa of Armida and Wandesford: at length, finding she could make nothing of them
as they were, she determined to draw the . enemy out of their entrenchments, and invited tbe whole family to an entertain¬ ment, which she said she gave in honour of Lady Montclare T s arrival in Ireland. Wandesford eagerly accepted it, though he hated Lady Kilcarrick, as it gave hini an opportunity of appearing publicly as the intended husband of Armida ; and Lady Kilcarrick set oil* tbe next day to prepare Lady Gabriella for the important part, and to summon all tbc country to her fête. Armida at first determined not to go, but sbe was no longer tbe mistress of her own actions, and sbe bad no excuse for resisting tbe importunities of Wandes¬ ford : during the interval, she remained in her apartmeut, into which not even Rosine was invited ; nor for a week did she quit tbe walls, or even approach the casements ofthe castle that looked to the shore. But thougb her pride could command her feelings, it could not her health.
She vvas consuming with a slow fever of mind and body, and one night that the officers who, now were constantly at the castle, were dining with Wandesford, and Lady Montclare shut up with Morosini, parched and panting for the cold sea- breeze, she threw on her veil and walked on the rocky terrace with Rosine : they bad taken several turns in silence, when they observed a figureslowly approaching them; itwas almost dark, and till tbey passed her, tbey did not discover tbe woman tbey had seen in the cottage: she paused as if with a wish to address them, but Armida moved rapidly on, yet the next moment turned and encountered her: the woman now made a visible effort to detain them, though she did not speak, and Armida, after a few quick unequal steps, paused : <( Does he send her here to insult me ? ,# said she in a stifled voice : " this was needless, and he shall know it," and col¬ lecting all her spirits, she turned: (C Oh,
lad;, will you but listen to me," said tbe woman sinking to the ground as she ap¬ proached. " What would you say ?" said Armida, calmly. Between weakness, fear, and the dig¬ nity of Armida's presence, the womari did not hear, but anxious to detain her, she again said tremblingly, " Noble, beautiful lady, will you listen for one moment ?" The wretched Armida leaned ou Rosine for support. (C Ara I noble, am I beautiful," sbe repeated in agony, t( am I distinguished by nature and fortuae, and yet I am wretched ! I tremble before a creature upon whom perhaps my whole sex looks with contempt." " If you have any thipg tp say (o Miss Fitzalban," said Rosine, t{ proceed." " Will she listen to the speech ofsuch a creature as I am ? I would not dare to speak of myself, but for one that is be¬ yond all the world beside." Sbe stopped,
and Armida, over whose mind a vague hope began to dawn, desired ber to goon." " I was not always sueh a creature as I am now," said the woman, drying her tears : " I was the child of an honest man, whom my wickedness killed: he was a tenant of old O'Morven, at the tower yonder. I used to see him at chapel, but I did not go tliere to mind my reli¬ gion, or any thing but Connal O^orven : Oh ! from the first day I saw him coming tlicre with his grandfather leaning on him, and putting him in his place, and never lifting his eyes from the altar while he staid, and bowing to us as he led ihe old man out, I thought I could die ont the spot for a look from bim: at first I was so melancholy, I did not think it could be love for him, till one day as I was sitting at the cabin door, he rode past oa an unruly horse; and as 1 looked after him as far as I could see, he dropped bis whip: oh, I thought I never would he ia
time enough to pick it up for him, and when I did, and gave it to bim, he thanked me in such a voice: oh! the sound of it will come to my ears when I am dying. An he rode aw«\, some briar-roses tbat be bad in his breast dropped from it : when he was gone I caught them up, and though their scent was gone, I kept them in my hand, and stood looking after him, though I could not see him, till I could stand no longer. From tbat minute I gave myself up to a wicked mind : I was a likely girl, and I thought I might please him as well as another. I was always throwing myself in bis way, and going to chapel, and keeping near the old tower, and at last when be met me, he would blush, but I never could get look or word from him, for he minded nothing but his grandfather or his brother, to keep him to bis book, and from running after the girls. ff Then, my lady, I grew desperate like, and minded nothing, and my poor
fiiher finding he could get no good of me, sent me to my uncle that was in a very good way at Birr, in the King's County, and I went tbere ; but I did no good tbere neither, for though I was a modest girl before, yet thinking so much ofone man, made me at last that t conld think of nothing else, and I minded nothing but going to the squarcio look at tbe officers, for I was determined. Colonel Wandesford was tbere with his regiment then, and oh ! bow can I tell my shame¬ ful story to such honourable ladies. When lie left it, he took me with him to Ene:- land : he was very fond of me at first, and he brought meto London among all the fine people ; and I thought with myself I ought to bc happy, but I never was. The thought of Connal O'Morven kneeling in tbe old ruined chapel was the only thing I loved to tbink of: and I would rather have been bitting on this stone watching for a sight of him, than in all the fine places I was brought to : for though I
was so bad, I was not bad enough for what I was, and the oaths and the wicked things I heard frightened me, though I had brought myself to it. I knew it was wicked to go on as 1 did, yet I was not good enough to have off; and though I bad no pleasure in tbe clothes and fine things I had, I thought I would miss them now l was used to them, but I had grown so melancholy, that the colonel began to be tired of me, and when the regiment was going to Italy, he told me yawning one day, be would not take me with him. Oli ! then my heart was ready to break : I was all alone in a strange couniry, and I eould not go into the streets, or speak to any body without being known for an Irishwoman, so no¬ body would Hke to employ or trust me, and I had lived so long in idleness, that half the work I could do before would kill me now, í begged and prayed him on my knees to take rac for a servaut, or give me to some one else to keep me out
of want and wickedness, but he only laughed and went out from me. I saw liim no more for some days, aod in the mean time I found myself in a situation that I was sure he would not quit me, arid the next time we met I told him so, and intreated him for his child's sake not to turn its mother into the streets ; but he fell into such a passion on hearing of it, that I thought he would murder me, He cursed and swore, and beat me as long as I could stand, and longer, for I only re¬ member fal Hng on the ground and beg¬ ging him not to kill me, for I was not fit to die ; and all that went to my heart was his saying tbe child was not his own, though he knew it was as well as I, for I never was false in my life but to him. The people of the house came up and took bim from me, and I remember no more of that night, nor many a night after : I was not myself. The people thought Γ was dying, and I wish I had died before I had lived to bring trouble
on Connal O'Morven. It was a great while before I was myself again, and then I remembered every thing in a mo¬ ment and asked where the colonel was : tbey bid me keep myself quiet, and then I knew there was something worse than they would tell me, and tbey sat watching me all nigbt, and 1 kept quist for fear of them, till at last one went away after another, and tbc only one that staid fell asleep : then I got out of bed as softly as I could, and began to look about the room—1 hardly knew it again : all the ornaments and presents the colonel bad given me vvere gone ; the people bad taken them I suppose for their trouble. On ihc table there was a letter and a bottle, both directed to røe : I did not know wbat it meant till 1 read the letter, and then the light left my eyes, and the whole room looked on lire to me : it was from Colonel Wandesford, the man that had ruined mc, that left шс and his child to famish. He told me tbat lie sent me a
a bottle of laudanum, and the best thina: I could do was to drink it and end my cares at once; but if he ever knew me to follow him again, be vvould shoot me with his own hand : iny heart was so for¬ lorn and broken, tbat I thought I could not do better than take his advice. "I looked about me; all tbe bouse was quiet : tbe woman that staid to watch me was fast asleep, and I thought before she awoke I would be out of the way of giving mure trouble to her or to any one ch.e. The thoughts of my religion came across mc once or twice, but when I thought of that, I thought too of the chapel where 1 had first seen Connal, and «sirice he did not care for me, why should I Hve. " I took up the laudanum, and just at that moment the poor baby stirred within me ; I felt it for tbe first time, and from that minute, lut me be as wretched as 1 could, I determined to live, <ť I got out of the house unknown to ■\o:.. n, с
them, and, weak as I was, I was far enougii from London before morning. I need not tell you, my lady, all I had to do to keep life in the cliild and myself for three ye »*s tbat I wandered about looking for w oik : every wbere, because I was an Irish woman, tbey thought me a rogue, and at last I thought I could not be worse in Ireland ; so I came over, and when I was once in Ireland, I could not bear to be any where but wbere I was born, and where O'Morven was : I beg¬ ged and worked my vvay here at last, about a week ago ; it was nigbt when I carne ; every thing seemed changed, yet I remembered every thing well. I did not dare to go near my father's house, and I sat down near this on a stone to think how I had left it an honest girl, and but for my own wicked heart, how I might have been a bappy one. I could have sat there for ever and cried my life away, but my poor child began (a cry too: it was cold and hungry, and 1 had nothing
to give it ; and though I had no heart to ask for food myself, I thought my father would not see it starve at lıîs door : I got up and crawled towards the cabin ; all was dark, I waited for a light or a step for an hour, at last my child cried louder, and I knocked; no one answered. T cannot go on," said the wretched wo¬ man, weeping bitterly. "Tbe next day I heaTd my father was dead-—dead for my wickedness and folly ; I broke his heart; 1 killed my fatber. " I wandered about some davs: I don't know how, nor where I lived, nor where 1 lav ; I wonder I was not killed : I believe the mark of God was on me, and that no one cared to hurt the like of ше. " Of all ï knew once no one minded or looked after me; I would have perislied but for Connal O'Morven: the very one that I tried to ruin in my folly and wickedness was the one to save me. \i<* kept my child frora starving; he c2
fixed me iu a cabin witb bis nurse, and I came to myself; he got the priest to take my confession, and to give me abso¬ lution, " He would talk to me for hours, and his voice was the first thing tbat brought mc to my senses ; when I heard it, the thoughts of my youth came into my heart, and tears fell from me for the first time, and that crying was better to me than food or sleep : when I was able he read to me out of a book, and bid me c go and sin no more/ and I felt as if some angel took away the burning in wy head, and the tightness tbat I felt about my heart. " I was growing calm, and thinking to do something for myself, when I heard all of a sudden that Colonel Wandesford was come down to tbe castle to marry you, my lady." Armida trembled, but she did not speak. " It was Hke a flash of Hghtning to me when I beard it; I thought nothing but that he was come to
murder me, for my head grew unsettled again : I ran home to tbe cabin and locked myself in : they asked what ailed me, but I could not tell, nor knew what was going to happen to me. te I dreamed that night Colonel Wan¬ desford came to me all on fire, like the devil from hell, and he thrust the fire into my eyes, and bead, and breast, and I got up screeching and ran out ; the people iu the cabin were fast asleep, and for two days and nights I wandered, still thinking to hide from him, for I was quite beside myself, and that niglit you saw me on the rock I thought he was running after me, and I threw myself int» the sea from him. It was Connal O'Morven that saved m ν life that night ; I wish he had let me die so lie saved the child, for then he would never have been brought to trouble for the like of me, for ever since that night he comes to the cabin, but not as he used to do : be never speaks to me^ c3
nor looks at the child, but he sighs aí* if his heart was full ; and once tbat he was sitting at the door with his hands over his face, I saw by tbe way he tossed Iiis hair forward when he got up be bad been in tears. Oh ! my lady, all I ever sufTered was nothing to that : my whole generation is not worth one tear of his ; and I am sure by tbe looks he gives me I am some how tbe cause of it, and I dare not ask him, my heart is so full, and I have such a reverence for him : they arc not angry looks, but full of sorrow, and wben he smiles through tbem, sometimes it is like a knife going into my heart, and so I knew, since there was blame aud unhappiness some way, it vvas best for me to tell tbe whole story, sad and shameful as it was, to your ladyship, for all I wish is that O'Morven was happy, and that I and my child were in the grave." Again she burst into an agony of tears,
but she might have wept for ever un¬ heard by Armida. Gasping with different emotions, sbe said, mentally :— " Is this innocence, or is it mockery ? Am I the object of derision even to this creature, or may I not become so if I utter another word ?" Rosine, astonished and perplexed, ap¬ plied to her in vain to answer the wo¬ man. " I dare uot speak to her/' said Ar¬ mida : " she has seen my heart : a wo¬ man cannot avoid the penetration of a woman." Rosine thus called upon, said firmly— " What reason have you for relating your story До Miss Fitzalban, or imagin¬ ing she could be interested in any thing relating to O'Morven ?" The woman appeared confounded, but in a few minutes she said in a tremulous voice, " 1 will tell you, my lady, I will tell you the whole truth, and what made me c4
intrude with my shameful story on such a noble lady. I savv O'Morven whenever lie came to the cabin, and be had a black rose ia his breast, and he would take it out and press it to bis Ups, and to bis bosom, as I would a child, and if I am a living woman, I saw that flower, it is black velvet, in her lady¬ ship's hair not ten days ago; she wore it just on her white forehead: I knew it weil, thougb I saw her but once before that night, and so I thought—I don't know vvhat I thought, but that it was best to tcU her ladyship every thing, for if O'Morven is not blamed 1 don't cait if I was thought the vilest wretch on «earth, as I am." Armida now struggled in vain with the feelings tbat overcame her : she would have assured the woman of her protec¬ tion, of her pity ; but she had no voice ; and eagerly throwing her purse at tbe woman's feet, she turned awav. " He is again tbe idol of my imagina-
tion," she cried ; " his image appears to me once more in its original brightness ; I am happy though I never saw him more. It is tbe character—the hero I love, not the man. " And was I not worthy," she mused, " to be entrusted with tbis ? How is it that he can thus repel the heart he has subdued." " Hush, hush," said Rosine ; " I see him on the rock below : 1 have seen him every night since your last meeting : he seems to Hsten to the sound of the waves, but his eyes are fixed for ever on the windows of your apartment." " Oh ! fly Rosine, fly—pursue that woman, and tell her, as she values my protection, or dreads my resentment, never to mention to Connal that sbe savv me to-night." Rosine retired, tiiough reluctantly,and Armida approached to meet Connal, Tbe light of a pale autumnal moon, truggliug through watery vapours, con- € 5
cealed tbe struggles of pride and passion in her countenance as she advanced, determined to bide the secret of her heart, and force from her proud slave the confession of her power. He folded his arms, and coldly bowed at her approach. Tbe majestic submis¬ sion of bis figure touched her, and sbe hastened to speak before her impressions of resentment were effaced, but just in view was tbe very spot where be bad saved her life on the dav of arrival at the «j castle, and she could only observe : — * e How little value you have for the life you preserved." t( I would sacrifice my own to protract it for one moment," said Connal, pas¬ sionately. tc Am I to believe your language or your actions?" said Armida, unconsci¬ ously sofiened. ίς You have indeed pro- served my life, yet you could deliberately devote it to wretchedness. 3 ' Cornial started.
" You saw me on the point of union with a monster: you were acquainted with circumstances tbat would have made me renounce him for ever : you refused to disclose them : you resigned me to him without reluctance: you could have pre¬ served me from worse than death, could and vvould not." " I dared not." " Dared not Í" repeated Armida, scornfully. " Do you fear Wandesford ?" " I fear no human beins: but mvself- When I suspect my own heart uo tempta¬ tions can urge me to yield to its dictates«, and vvould not others too have doubted the motives I doubted myself" In these words Armida felt sbe was mistress of his fate, and determined to exert her power to tbe utmost : she demanded if he had disclosed tbe story of the deserflcd woman : what motive could the dibclosure possibly have been ascribed to, but that of commou interest in the fate of a stranger. Conual gazed
wildly on her; his voice was lost; he retreated; he rushed back and sunk at iicr İtİCt. " Will you then force it from me ; the secret I would have kept on the rack ; tbe last retreat of a proud and agonizing heart : you shall^—I adore you : start not back; by heaven you shall not: the death- wound of my pride shall be revenged on your own : the beggared outcast, devoted Connal, dares to love you, he dares to tell you so; even now while your heart swells with pride, while your eyes flash with anger, he invites your scorn, he bids you spurn him tbat he may fly from you for ever." But had he dared to raise his eves to Annida wbiie he spoke, be would have seen uo scorn in her eves, no banishment in her lips. Contending with Ler emotion, she faintly asked :— " Was it then a proof of passion fhat h% had refused by disclosing tbe story of
the unfortunate female to save her frora an union with Wandesford." i{ Yes, a proof of passion the most exquisite : a proof that noue but a heart silent and devoted like mine could give. Oh ! bad I but uttered a word of that story ; bad I but looked ; had I but thought of it ; a word, a look would have betrayed the secret I would have died before I had told ; but could I have borne to appear to you, to your proud family, an officious slanderer, who, destitute of claims, feeds his mean malice by disturbing their peace." " Proud and selfish being! " said Armida, mentally ; " his own feelings, his proud reserve, his sullen dignity, is all he values :" and she said aloud with haughty irony :—" Is this tbe softness and sub¬ mission of a man who loves ? You strug¬ gle like a lion in toils, aod convert your very homage into a reproach." " Oh ! wbat had I to do with love?" exclaimed Connal, still more wildly;
" whatbad a thing like me to di», to gaze on you ; the wolf tbat bays tbe moon has more reason, more hope than I : from tbe first moment I beheld you 1 fled your sight; I hid myself among rocks, and you vvere there ; I closed my eyes, and tbey beheld you still ; I wrap¬ ped my heart in pride and reserve, aud the pressure kept your image closer tbere. What have I to do with love ; far, far away my course rnrnt He, from the fairy isles of beauty and of love, my dark and perilous course. To rne life is an ocean in storm ; I am embarked in tho wreck of a ruined name ; I stand on its last fragment, and stand alone : I will sink not without a struggle, but with¬ out a murmur; thus hopeless, heart¬ less, fortuneless—cut oif from life, almost forgotten by heaven, wbat have I to do with love?" Armida's resolution shook witb every word he uttered, and she collected its last remains to wy in a voice tbat con-
Iradicted her language·—of hopeless pas¬ sion it was fruitless to prolong the pain by complaint. ct Yes," said Connal, sadly, tf we must part ; go like the sun to light other worlds, and leave mine in darkness ; for the one bright gleam you shed on the existence of a wretch he will bless you for ever ; my long nigbt will be without a ray, but not without a dream : on my desolate rock the light of your image will visit me, as the moon does tbe cell of the maniac, it brings madness with it, but it brings the joy of madness too; it shines on him, and amid chains and straw lie laughs at the pride of kings. Go, for what have vou to do with one like mc; go and shed tbe influence of vour bril- liant and lovely mind on the gay, tbe eminent, and tîıe fortunate. Oh ! for¬ tunate tbey must bc who behold it. Tbey vvill worship you, and ycu will enjoy thcir homage: but will they love you like him who on his lone rock will still
see naught but you, who, amid wretch¬ edness and ruin, will tbink of you alone ; will tbey love like Connal ?—oh ! never, nevtn !'* Armida now felt sbe must tear herself away, vet determined that this should ν *· not be their final parting. Sbe faintly observed, if they must part, their parting might at least be less abrupt, and nam¬ ing the night of the fête, told him she would be there. ' f But I shall not be there," said Con¬ nal, retreating, and folding himself in his mantle. Confounded and incensed at this re¬ fusal, she demanded if be bad not been invited. " Yes," answered Connal, gloomily, éŕ I bave been insulted with an invitation, but I will not go. Tbe grandfather of that woman was tbe servant of mine, and grew rich by his spoils. Must I go to see the plunder of my family shining on her walls ? I hate those revels. The
very air 30U breathe is tbe sighs of her racked and wretched tenantrv ; the luxu- rious heat you inhale is purchased by their resting, after a day of toil, ou the naked floor of their'hovels : the only light of tbeir wintry nights is borrowed from the glare of the torches that con¬ duct you to her feast. I hate those revels. Wben foUy is contrasted vvith misery, its colour darkens into guilt. The country is bleeding-under ignorance, poverty, and superstition, and we cast over its wounds a gay embroidered gar¬ ment of voluptuousness, beneath which tbe heav ings and shudderings of its agony are but more frightfully visible." Armida, who expected that the .slight¬ est bint of her presence would have made him rush uninvited to meet her, imagined that bis refusal arc»«? from not under¬ standing her, and in language that sbe believed equal to a command, again in¬ timated her expectation that bc would meet her there.
" I will not go," said Connal, rc;urg¬ ing all his Milesian character. (i \ ince I was there with my grandfather- Ì was there to see him placed in the lowest seat at her table, amid men whose f utbers feasted with his servants: and when their splendid equipages came to convey them home, I had to lead him through a crowd of sneering, pampered ruffiaus, who grinned to see O'PÆorven with no other support than the soHtary arm of his grandson. With one blow I felled those who were nearest me to the ground, and quitted her walls never to enter tliem* again/* Unused to opposition, Armida lost all self-command at this refusal. " Heavens !" she exclaimed, " am I the daughter of Lord Montclare; am I her whose look was once equal to a com¬ mand, whose words w«re obeyed almost before they were uttered. Ob ! why was I insulted with the mockery of superior reverence, when even the com«
pHances the meanest of my sex receive are withheld from me. The first request I ever stooped to make is rejected to my face : the only man I ever deigned to solicit refuses to sacrifice au absurd and savage pride to my intreaty." " To a Milesian," repHed Connal, " the sacrifice of bis life is trivial to the sacrifice of his pride." Armida contended no more, but, re¬ tiring, in a broken voice sbe said :— " You are right ; í should thank you. You dreaded my weakness : you fcare J tbat yielding to the softness of the mo¬ ment I might there have uttered some¬ thing you would hear with reluctance ; that I might have disclosed what our short tumultuous meeting would not permit. You have saved me perhaps from doing what would have made meliate myself. 1 have now no excuse for not bidding yon farewel for ever." As she spoke she turned away, yet the mooulight that shewed her parting
figure showed too a gleam of passion struggling through tbe cloud of pride, anger, and shame, that darkened her angel features. She was retiring, when Conual, on whom a new sun seemed to rise, sprung forward, and with that mixture of awe and boldness which love alone can teach detained her, whiie he knelt at her fee',. fi Armida," he cried, " you do not hate me." Armida struggled to release the hand he held. " Armida, I adore you." Her struggles insensibly abated. 4ς Armida, we must never meet again." He sprung from tbe ground, and dart¬ ing from her sight, disappeared in a mo¬ ment. Chilled, lost, annihilated, Armida re¬ mained on the rocks alone. Was it Conna4 she heard ? Was it Connal who quitted her? Was it the man whose prostrate homage, whose burning confes-
sion but a moment before had almost drawn from her the secret of her heart? Was it he who had voluntarily bid her an eternal farewel í Neither her pride nor love could sustain the shock. Her reason was disturbed, and she continued to repeat the words— c We never meet again/ without remembering their meaning. At length the voice of Wan¬ desford, who, much intoxicated, had quitted his party, and had come out in search of her, restored her recollection. Starting with horror at the sound, she flew from him with the swiftness of a bird, and reached her apartment before he could recognise wbo it was that had escaped him. He now roamed up and down the pas¬ sages ofthe castle, cursing, complaining, and demanding Armida from every ser¬ vant he saw, till Lady Moutclare, finding her efforts to pacify him ineffectual, had recourse to Rosine, to whom even ir drunkenness he paid a kind of surly *e-
speet, and who at last succeeded in per* suading him to retire ; but it was so long before she could accomplish this thatshe -did not get to Armida's apartment till some hours after midnight. Armida was reading; the tapers tbat burned before her shed so little light through the vast and sombrons chamber, that Rosine did not mark her peculiar expression ; and in the burning spot that dyed her cheek, her loose hair, and trembling hands, she imagined sbe savv the confusion and the glow of triumphant love. Agitated with hope and fear, Rosine demanded tbe re¬ sult of her conference with Connal. Ar¬ mida made two or three attempts to speak : at length, with a convulsive ef¬ fort, she said :— " We have parted, never to meet more." "What can this mean?" exclaimed Rosine in amazement. "Is this parting the result of principle, or of some new discovery?"
" It would be easy for me," said Ar¬ mida, with an agonizing smile, " to in¬ vent a proud tale of his having knelt to me, and of my rejecting bim ; but sufler¬ ings make us sincere. He has rejected me : his own lips pronounced tbat we must part for ever, and that too when Her voice was choaked, but rising with dignity, sbe added :— " Little does he think how I vvill be revenged." " Revenged !—on whom ?" cried Ro¬ sine. * " On myself, on tho weakness, the follv of the degraded heart that brought me to this : the woman that has thus sacrificed her pride can make it but one dreadful reparation.—Within a week I shall bc wedded to Wandesford and to despair/' Rosine burst into tears. " INow go, Rosine," said Armida, ex-, hausted ; " leave me, I implore you ; my
reason I believe has been disturbed already, and if I speak, or tbink, or listen much longer, even Connal might feel remorse for the misery he had brought on me."
CHAP. II. I spoke to try thy loro, she said: I'll ne*er wed man but thee : My grave shall be my bridal bed, Ere Grame my husband bo. L«%ncashihe Trvceoy. But two days had uow to elapse till the fête was to bc given ; and when the night arrived that she was to appear iu public as the destined wife of Wandes¬ ford all her resolution seemed to fail. She at first intended to appear with the utmost simplicity of dress, till recol¬ lecting that splendid ornaments might withdraw attention from tbe expression of despair in her countenance, she put on a dress tbat sbe bad worn at a brilliant Parisian fete, and tried, by the lustre of diamonds, and an unusual quantity of V#L. II. 1)
rouge, to veil her features from obser¬ vation. But wbile adjusting her gorge¬ ous dress, her hands trembled while she thought of the change in her character since she had worn that habit, vvhen, con¬ scious of resistless loveliness and com¬ manding talent, she seemed only to claim and receive homage from every eye and heart ; while now, heartless, dispirited, and deserted, she only wished to hide from that admiration which contrasted the neglect of one for whom she vvoulfl have exchanged all. Wandesford, insensible alike to her sufferings and her aversion, gratified his pride by the thought of his appearing in the possession of so much beauty and talents. His vanity might indeed be indulged by the contemplation of her beauty, for never was it more resplendent : formed to dazzle and to shine, her dress was per¬ fectly adapted to the character of her figure, and the fixed expression of her
countenance, though suggesting to a feel¬ ing spectator the idea of intense and si¬ lent suffering, gave the superficial one an idea of calmness tbat siiiTcred him at leisure to contemplate features whose perfection any change aim jsî seemed to diminish. In tbe mean time crowds arrived fom every part of tbe country. Though Armida had resided some months in ireland, she had been seen but by f vv ; and the curiosity which her character, her talents, her beauty, and her situation excited, 1ш1 ч ощиги11 this night obtained a chance of gratification : all came alike prepared to wonder, to admire, to envy, and to discover defects. Of her beauty there was but one opiniou—an universal murmur, almost amounting to acclama¬ tion, announced the universal sensation. Armida heard it, but no longer with pleasure or pride, and the consciousness of this change in her feelings deepened her melancholy ; but when tbe (hit »-nri
was over, her unchanged features, her motionless attitude wearied the eye, and the youthful and animated beauty of Lady Gabriella, though of a common character, moreiban divided tbe admira¬ tion of tbe company. Lady Kilcarrick, who, to give splen¬ dour to her entertainment, was content that even Lady Gabriella should be eclipsed for a time, now advanced to Armida to intreat her to sing, and at the same time the folding doors of tbe spa¬ cious music-room were thrown open, dis¬ playing amid ablaze of lights the superb harp and piano, so often sacrificed to Gabriella's neglect: but this, by remind¬ ing her of former scenes, only increased her inability ; and accustomed to exercise her talents only when inspired by feeling, she retreated with a timidity wbich was for tbe first time falsely ascribed to pride ; tbis only increased the importunity tbat assailed her, loudly mixed with Wandes¬ ford's angry expostulations, till feeling
less power to contend than even to com¬ ply, she rose and placed herself beside the harp. The attitude she assumed, though unconsciously, formed so perfect a picture, that the circle waited as if for the strains of a muse they imagined they saw. Formerly this admiration would have excited her talents, but since a deeper sentiment had touched her heart, it gave her no sensation but embarrass¬ ment or pain. Her hands wandered over the chords. The harp is adapted for airs of expression, but with expression, or any thing connected with emotion, she dreaded to trust herself, and imagining she had still sufficient powers to execute difficulties, she hastily arose and went to the piano. Wandesford placed a bravura song of Catalani s s before her, and re¬ luctantly she begun tbe symphony. Habit supplied the place of talent for a time, and she sung a few bars with her usual excellence, but when she came to the passages of execution, she found her o3
voice as much impaired as her musical feelings; and the volubility and compas« that could once have filled a theatre were totally gone. Amazed and de¬ pressed, sbe stopt, and savv on every side that painful expression with wbich ad¬ miration contends with pity, Wandes¬ ford now almost with oaths insisted on lier proceeding. Oppressed and intimi¬ dated, sbe vainly declared itwas impossi¬ ble : be persisted, till looking round the circle for compassion, her eye caught that of Desmond, sparkHng with sonie¬ thing Hke a tear, and laying her d «imp and trembling hand on his, sbe asked if it were possible with such hands to strike a chord. " Impossible," cried Desmond, and taking the hand sbe held out to htm, he led her away before Wandesford, who, too much incensed to speak, did not fol¬ low her. Lady Kilcarrick seized on this unex¬ pected moment to place «Lady Gabri-
ella at the instrument, not without con¬ trasting her forward compliance withthe caprice of Italian singers, where she continued for an hour to exercise the patience of her hearers, who in vain wished for the relief of the broken but exquisite notes of Armida. The dancing now commenced, and Wandesford, striding over to the remote corner where Armida was seated, re¬ minded her of her engagement to dance with bim. " I do not intend to dance," said Ar¬ mida, starting from a reverie, and liardly recognizing the person wbo spoke to her. " What," said Wandesford, with sar* castie rudeness, " has the sea air depriv¬ ed you of the use of your limbs as well as your voice ? You had better, madam, wander less on the rocks. Have you forgot you are engaged to me ?" A spark of its native haughtiness kindled in Armida's heart, as she answered:— " No, I have not forgot, but you seem d 4
ťo forget that you not only anticipate your privileges, but abuse them; tliey do not extend to insult yet." He seized her reluctant hand and led her tothe seat; and Lady Kilcarrick, who saw her dejected figure, anticipated a new triumph for her darling Gabriella; but here she was mistaken : voice is a local quality, of which the slightest ac- cideut may divest the possessor; but while Armida's figure retained hfe, it was impossible it could lose its celestial grace, and though to herself her move¬ ments appeared lifeless and mechanical, tbey converted tbe dancers almost into spectators : but Wandesford, wbo re¬ membered the animation, the vivid and visible language of her action, wben he had seen her in Italy, and believing her present languor to be solely the result of caprice or contempt, whispered the most insulting sarcasms to her with every opportunity, and danced with a negli¬ gence wliich filled every one with indig-
nation but Armida: at length, at the close of tbe set, he awkwardly en¬ tangled part of his dress in her's, and de¬ tached it again with such rude violence, that her light drapery gave way, and, glad of an opportunity, she hastened from the dance. Lady Gabriella, inward¬ ly delighted at an accident that removed her resistless rival, followed her with a rude laugh, which was scarce concealed by her affected concern at the accident, and her offers to assist in repairing it. Armida glanced at her dress, wbich consisting of the slightest gauze over silken drawers, had given way in every direction, and accepted her offer to re¬ tire to her dressing-room. This room, like tbe rest, had been laid out for company, but was now empty ; the lights burnt dimly through the tbick foHage with which it was adorned. Tbe coolness, the calmness, and the rich and deeply shaded green of this little apart¬ ment, presented a delightful contrast to no
the noise and heat of tbat she had quit¬ ted ; and with the hope of composing herself rather than her dress, sbe entreat¬ ed Lady Gabriella to return to her party. (t I am sorry for your accident," said Gabriella, tripping away, " for as yoa are &o fond of dancing you must bc greatly disappointed. I'll send my cou¬ sin Rosine to you." 4( Do not," said Armida, *' the is fond of dancing." " She ! oh, poor creature, it will bc quite a cbarity to prevent her exposing tbat old frightful blue dress : sbe lias had it these three winters, till tbe colour is quite dead, and sbe has raised tbe ghost of it again to night to frighten us/' Armida mentally thought of tbe lines— tìut oh! what masquers richly «light, Cau boast of bosoms half so light. Walter Scott. She was now alone ; she sunk on a seat;
a large mirror was opposite to her ; in¬ voluntarily her figure was presented to her; her torn dress, the perfumed and brilliant roses that had adorned it, hang¬ ing on the ground ; her hair, which had been so lightly arranged, that the slight motion of her dancing had loosened it, and her rouge, whose unwarying, unim- passioned dye seemed to mock the vicis¬ situdes of feeling that wandered over her mind. The music, and the sounds of mirth still reached her ear, and she thought, with a kind of melancholy, surprise, of the crowds of trivial, uninteresting, un¬ endowed characters, that, without a power of communicating pleasure, could thus busily enjoy it; vvhile she, for whose ap¬ proach pleasure seemed to wait as for a signal, alone, neglected, deserted, listened to its sound like an exile to the songs of his native country. The mystery of her fate seemed to oppress her like a spell ;
again her eyes fell on the mirror ; it dis¬ played an image of beauty still perfect, an expression of genius still unimpaired, though clouded and dim : there was no external cause for this desolation ofthe heart, and she mentally asked whence it proceeded. A voice from within her uttered the name of Connal : it was a tone of reproach, Connal, sbe repeated again : softer recollections accompauicd tbe sound, and it was a tone of sorrow—alone, uuheard, no witness to check the wild and weeping luxury of passion, she sighed forth the name a third time—it was tbe tone of love, A rustling noise iu tbe foliage started her—she turned : be whose name slie had called ou (as if by enchantment) stood before her. Her first impulse was to fly from the apartment, and sbe only paused to cast a glance on tbe intruder that was intended to transfix or strike him to the dust ; but that irlaoce shewed him in au attitude
so hopeless, yet so pleasing, that she lin- irered involuntarily. tf That look bids me begone," said Connal, " and yet I dare to stay. The wretch who is self-condemned listens without terror to his sentence : I have no defence, no pica to offer. The madness of passion urged me last night, when I avowed tbe secret of my heart—pas¬ sion to madness again brought mc here." 4i Have we not parted for ever ?" said Armida, repeating his words with melan¬ cholv triumph. * c We bave, we have," cried Connal, " and therefore I dared to venture here : I bad no hope, no wish to meet you : to catch a glimpse of your form, to guess even at its shadow, perhaps to hear tbe sound of your voice, or even of your name, to mix tbe sighs of passion and despair with the incense that was breathed around you, even though they could never reach you—this was all I dared to
think of. I wandered round the gardens, till I found this apartment bad a com¬ munication with them : I gazed on you madly, believing I could retire from tbe view when I would; but I heard you sigh, and forgot every thing. Ob ! turn not from me, I am humbled below scorn, I am unhappy beyond all fear." Armida lingered ; he ventured to ap¬ proach : 4< And can the brilliant enchan¬ tress, amid these bovvers of luxury, so suited to the sweet spells she casts on the beart and senses, can sbe have cause for asigh?" ' f The sigh was not for myself," said Armida, and she trembled lest she bad said tuo much. " Oh ! happy is he whose thought is embalmed by your sigh," murmured Connal. tf Then let him be happy in ray tears too," said Armida, and tbey flovved un¬ restrained. ƒ/ Oh ! heaven," he exclaimed, rush-
Ing to her feet, " do you weep, can you weep : I thought you all pride and arti¬ ficial feeling: I thought you a being only formed for homage : one who if the world was prostrate at your feet would not steop to bid it rise/' f ' We vvere then mistaken in our views of each other," said Armida, weeping still. " Oh ! yet, yetj let me live on thi» moment. ; let me impress it on my heart for ever, that I beheld you weeping, and still you weep. For whom, oh ! for whom are those tears ?" tf Wbat avails it for whom are my tears or smiles/' said Armida, "since your lips have pronounced that we part for ever?" " Oh ! no," said Connal, shuddering, " it was my fate tbat pronounced it, tbe mystery of my fortune, the thought that is consuming my youth, and blasting life to my view : in the only moment of joy I ever knew that thought came across me, like a spectre. I started ; I uttered a few
words of madness, and fled from vou : and even now/' he cried distractedly, " even nov«' it visits me—it tells me 'tis madness to look on you, to listen to you, to linger near you." He retreated from her, and throwing himself on the seat she had quitted, leaned his burning forehead against its edge : part of her drapery still rested on it : sbe attempted to draw it away, and as be raised his head to release it, he pressed it passionately to his eyes and lips." Armida felt this was the last moment she dared to stay : " Go then," said she, in a broken voice, " and remember what I would never have told you but iu our parting hour : she who weeps i u secret never wept for hatred." She was rushing away, but Connal was already at her feet, speechless, trem¬ bling, yet glowing and exalted. Speak, speak again: may I—dare I think·—is the fate of the ruined Conual not indifferent ?
Speak to save me from running wild with joy·" " Must I «peak," said Armida, shed¬ ding tbe softest radiance of ber beautiful eyes on him, " must I speak to con¬ firm it." ťť Oh! no, no, no," sobbed Connal, prostrating himself almost on the earth, and convulsively hiding his face in her robe, " titter not a word ; I bear your silence—it is iike the Fmiling silence of the angel guide of whom the departed spirit inquires bis destiny." There was a solemn, almost a sacred joy in (he pause that followed. t( You shall know all/* said Connal, slowly raising his lead: " you shall know She dreadful secret of v;»y heart to-mors u v? : my way v «jirducss, my melan¬ choly, my despair ; уо ? л rh. U know itali" In fhe rapid change of her feelings, Armida scarce beard these omipous words.
The difficulties of fortune she believed her rank and wealth could easily remove, and even Wandesford's claims were for¬ gotten in this triumphant moment. He was still at her feet, when an approach¬ ing step startled them; and «Lady Gabriella entering, exclaimed, " I thought you vvere alone, Miss Fitzalban." Thougii Armida would have avow¬ ed the object of her approbation to an assembled world, sbe shrunk from this clandestine appearance, and she said fal¬ tering, with the necessity of falsehood, " I was here alone—Mr. O'Morven en¬ tered by accident: he mistook the way to the baU-room, which I was just going to shew him," Connal could not utter a falsehood, but bowing to hide his blushes, he said, " I had no intention of intruding on Miss Fitzalban when I approached this apart¬ ment." Lady Gabriella, secretly delighted that tbe handsome Milesian would grace
her ball; and ignorant that they had ever met before, readily believed them both, and glided away, inviting them to follow lier. " And will you not come ?" said Ar¬ mida, extending her white hand to him. He must have been more than mart who could resist her—her siren tone, her attitude, at once voluptuous and timid, intimating tenderness, and inviting to pleasure ; her pride, her beauty, her pas¬ sion, sparkling round her Calypso figure, and biendi g the softness of the woman with the splendour of the genii," " Yes, I will go with you, enchantress," exclaimed Connal : " I care not for the event, for what can to-morrow bring that will not be lost in the remembrance of this night." He then hurried from the boudoirs and Armida, after adjusting her dress, followed, but she had recollection enough to follow in another direction.
But what a different figure entered the ball-room from that which had quitted it—glowing, brilliant, e fea¬ tures sparkling with the tremulous, with ihe gem-like lustre of hope and passion ; her form almost too bright and light for any element but air to support or to con¬ vey ; her very vestments seemed to un¬ dergo a change like the Cameleon from tbe air she respired ; and her whole figure realized the fable ofthe statue converted into woman by the charm of love. No longer shrinking into obscurity, she ac¬ cepted the trembling hand that Connal offered, and when tliey joined the set, they scarce seemed beings of the same species witb tliose who surrounded them. When tbe dance began, all the otlier performers paused almost involuntarily. Envy was stifled by resistless admiration, and even applause by wonder. The per¬ fection of tbeir figures, the ease^ light¬ ness, and enjouement of their movements, the exquisite modulation of their atti-
tudes, that seemed to form a kind of visible music, gave to the spectators the idea of two descended genii mixing in the festivity. The light movements of Connal scarce disturbed a ringlet of the glossy hair tbat fell on his white neck: and as Armida's nymph-like form glided among the dancers, it appeared like a star sometimes passing through the clouds, sometimes sparkling as it emerged from them: all gazed with delight, but the anxious Rosine (who could as little ac¬ count for Connal's appearance as for Armida's sudden re-animation) and the disappointed Gabriella. The pressure of company tovvards the doors announced the approach of supper, and Connal, ignorant of the modern custom of the young, hurrying down to secure tbe best accommodations, waited with the reverence of other days, till every female had quitted tbe apartment. Tbe supper-room was completely filled when be entered, but Lady Gabriella eagerly
displacing those near her, offered him a seat next herself, but Connal slightly bowing, placed himself at the back of Armida 1 « chair, and intoxicated with his situation, forgot alike tbe luxuries ofthe feast and the gaze of strangers. Never had they appeared to each other so resistless : that rose-coloured light which a brilliant entertainment diffuses on every object was more congenial to the voluptuous splendour of Armida's beauty than tbe gloom of rocks, or the paleness of moonlight : aud Armida, who amidst all her passion revolted from the chill and stern character of Connal, his apathy of life, and bis contempt of lux¬ ury, now amid scenes that renewed her former existence saw bim all she wished, and like the sun-flower expanded in his unclouded rays. Lady Montclare, who had observed tbe events of the night under her unvarying mask of suavity, at length excited Lady Kilcarrickto remove Connal from Armida,
but at the same time guarded her lan¬ guage so artfully, tbat it was impossible to urge her as authority, for the Lady Kilcarrick, who knew but one way of doing things, immediately approached Connal, and said plainly : " Mr. O'Mor¬ ven, your marked attention to Miss Fitz¬ alban is highly offensive to Colonel Wan¬ desford." Connal started, but soon recovering, said : " Did Colonel Wandesford com¬ mission your ladyship to give mc this information ?" Wandesford, who was near, relieved Lady Kilcarrick from her perplexity, by de- mandingdidhc suppose he would contend with bim about Miss Fitzalban : " It is useless for cither of u« to contend for an object so infinitely superior to us both." Wandesford rejoined something almost unintelligible that intimated menace : the proud reply that already spoke from the eyes of Connal was prevented by a look hom Armida, who had Hstened with ter-
ror to their conference. He bowed si¬ lently, but he retained bis station. Wan¬ desford filled bumper after bumper of Champagne till his spleen fermented into something, like courage, and he began to pour forili a torrent of abuse against Ireland, her natives, and her national character. The checks of Connal and Desmond faithfully reflected the glow of their indignant hearts, and Desmond was bursting into reply, when a glance from his brother calmed and stilled him. " There is a gentleman," said Wan¬ desford, pointedly addressing Connal, " who would persuade us of the potency of an Irish howl over all the music in the world." " To one wbo is insensible of its ex¬ cellence," said Connal, " it would be iu vain for me to impart the feelings whicli heaven has denied them." " Aye !" exclaimed Wandesford, with a contemptuous shout, " I suppose your country, like its ancient inhabitants, is
the happiest, freest, and richest in the world." " Sir," retorted Connal, his eyes flash¬ ing with a spirit that awed even Wan¬ desford ; "its infirmities, like those of a parent, are sacred to its sons : we cannot prevent their being violated by the eyes of a stranger, but we can defend tbem from being profaned by their tongues,"* Wandesford was silent, and Armida, trembling at tbe spirit her own enchant¬ ments had raised, called on Connal to join her in tbe air which she had once h 'M r d bim sing, accompanied by her lyre. To Connal this public display was hateful, but the spell of Armida's smile was once more exerted, and thougii he blushed with almost female sensibility at tbe eftort, he complied. The rich, mingled, solemn stream of sound that rose on the loud, tumultuou· gaiety of the revellers, hushed it in a moment into tbat deep silence that is the most audible language of pleasure. That VOL, II. Ë
deep and heart-thrilling expression which passion gives to the voice seemed to de¬ velope new resources in it, even to the singers themselves. Armida, accustomed to the science and modulation of Italian music, exerted all her powers to follow the wild and indefinite cadences of the Irish, and the exertion strongly resembled the influence of her mind on his, pur¬ suing its wanderings, and shedding sweet¬ ness and brilliancy on its gloomy and inaccessible wildness. The silence that followed was only broken by Wandes- ford's whispering to the officers some of the lines of the air : " Are the sons of Erin so good and cold, They cannot be tempted by woman or gold," Connal did not hear him ; he appeared indignant at the situation in which he was placed, and no intreaties could pre¬ vail on him to sing again, thougb the in¬ treaties were enforced bv Armida's looks : €t How," he murmured, <s shall I sing the song in a strange land ?"
But though they ceased to sing, those looks, so full of eloquence and passion that they may be called the music of the eyes, with which tbey viewed each other, alarmed Lady Montclare, who, already apprehensive of the notice which the effe¬ minate beauty of Endymion, and the close attention cf Desmond to him excited, rose abruptly to depart. As Armida retired, she asked if her song had caused his sud¬ den dejection. fi The mermaid," said Connal, ζ{ al¬ ways sings sweetest before a storm." She believed these words to allude to tbe secret be was to disclose at their next meeting ; and though sbe conceived tbat her wealth and rank would obviate all this dreaded secret could menace, vet these ominous words sank into her heart. During tbe journey home, the silence was unbroken by a single word. On her arrival at tbe castle, Armida flew to her apartment: delighted and dVairbe«:*, elated and trembling, she wished to tgoi«
the luxury of passion alone. As sbe passed through her dressing-room, she caught a glimpse of her beautiful figure, sparkling less brightly with all her jewels than with love, hope, and triumph, and che feit tbat confidence revive that sbe never bad know« since she quitted Italy. Every object around her appeared 'tinged with a fairy light: she approached the casement from which she had seen him the first nigbt of her arrival, as if it was the confidant of her feelings, and opened it to inhale the same air sbe had breathed that night. She remembered she had seen him there, and she thought that her imagination, concentred as it was, had pictured to her the object with which it was filled. Sbe looked again : a dark figure stood in tbe shadow of tbe tower, and a voice, hollow and deep, unlike tbe voice of passion, pronounced her name. " Wbo is there V* said Armida: *' who calls on my name?" tff A restless and wandering spirit,"
answered the voice: " Armida, tbe bar-" then 'of my heart can no longer be borne : grant me a last request, and listen to me/" "A last request!" repeated Armida, faintly. " The rushmg ofthe tide drowns your voice," said Connal : " tbere is a flight of steps from that tower to the rock : come down, and listen to me." Armida paused a moment; all was still in the castle, and she descended tbe steps, and, lightly dressed as she was, stood trembling on the rock beside bini. The sad and solemn hour, contrasted with the glow of their late meeting, em¬ bellished by luxury and passion, struck her imagination Hke an omen, and in spite of all the confidence she felt in her own power, she approached anxious and dejected. " Is this the man/' said she, " over whom my smiies and frowns have such power ? Is this he who but an hour past called rae the arbitress of his fate ?" кЗ
" No, I am one who can yield no longer to the intoxication of sense or of fancy ; a few hours must dissolve the il¬ lusion, and precipitate the disclosure that fixes my destiny." "Why hours?" said Armida, trem¬ bling : "oh ! tell it now ! What is tbis mystery that I dread without knowing it?" " Is İt a mystery," said Connal, in a broken voice, " tbat I am ruined ? the last of a fallen race, on whose single head tbe accumulated evils of past ages have fallen, wbo, stunned by the crash, is looking round, not how to escape, but how to perish with dignity." Armida, ignorant of life and its diffi¬ culties, scarce comprehended him, and she said timidly : " I have no experience; alas ! I know nothing of Hfe but splendour and luxury. Is there no path to distinction for talents and birth like your's ?" " None : I know no art : I have no
profession, no means of subsistence: I am a Milesian, proud of blood, and haughty of heart as any of those whose pride has made me a mendicant, yet I would lay hold on the plough, or the oar : I would toil away my iron frame, my swelling heart, till they became a clod of the valley, could I earu bread by tilling it." He stopped, but Armida, breathless with emotion, attempted in vain to speak, and he went on with the voice of one who forces himself to confession : " Why should I hide it—I have tilled the eartii for bread. I told my grand¬ father I was going on a pilgrimage, but I went where I believed my person w*s unknown to offer myself as a day-labour¬ er. My appearance promised strength, and I was employed to dig the ground that should have been mine : I worked hard." He continued/ liis breath grow¬ ing thick : " There was a ruffianly over¬ seer there who oppressed a poor sickly
lad, wbo worked to maintain an £^cd parent ; always he abused, often bc struck tbis poor wretch. I told him Iwas will¬ ing to undertake his labor and my own ι from thet moment be perse ruti d him with more malevolence than ever. Once as Ьс raided his whip at bim, ï rushed on liim, and wrested it from bis band : foam¬ ing with rage he caught it up, and aimed a blow at me : yes, I felt hh lash curi round my body : the fire of bell boiled in roy veins : I seized the reptile, and rushed with him to thebrink ofa river. Heavea saved me from murder: I could have crushed bis life out with my single hand, but the screams and terror of tbe v/retch made me feel him so despicable that my passion was gone-in a moment ; I threw liim from me alive, and quitted tbe spot and the attempt for ever." Armida's feelings rising rapidly to & •well of agony, forbade utterance, and be added in a deeper tone, and witb many a pause :
" My last, my only resource is to fly to some country where tho labour of my hands may procure me bread without in¬ sult, and without dependence, where siot one single chord of my heart will vibrate to the tone of birth, or hopes, or country more. For this I have been long preparing, for tbis I am now pre¬ pared : in a few days the last of the Mi¬ lesian race quits the country for ever." At these tremendous words Annidai resolution forsook her: her prid?, her dignity, were all forgot, and wildly ex¬ claiming : " Must you go then ! Take mu with you, Connali" sbe fell convulsed, but not senseless, into his arms. He clasped, he almost crushed her to his burning beart. " Armida! angel! you follow a ruined wretch to distant countries ! you bear the change of climate, the hardships of want t y 0u ^ ------- Still delirious, and believing he wa* L· «Λ
flying from her that moment, she strug¬ gled to hold bim with her cold, convulsed hands, wildly repeating : " Then you believe all tbey told you falsely of mc : it is not true. My early days were passed in pride and luxury; I was a vain, proud girl, but I am no longer so : it was all false and affected, I can endure difficulty and want: I will be your faithful, humble mate," she cried, vvith increasing agony. Wild as herself, Connal knelt beside her on ihe cold ground, now strewed with her sparkling ornaments : her head rested on his bursting heart ; his tears dropped fast on her cold cheek. Never in the pride of beauty was sbe so lovely r never in the intoxicating moment of splen¬ dour was sbe so dear: she lay on his bo¬ som pale as a dying rose, whom no dews can revive. " Armida, my glorious flower ! that came frora the south, burning with beau¬ ty, the child of the suu ! aud must you
wither in the cold bosom of one who cannot love?" " Is this the hope with whicii we parted ? Is this the light that shed rap¬ ture on our last brilliant hour?" cried Armida. (( Oh, why/' sbe exclaimed, tearing off her ornaments in despair, gc wby do I wear this splendour, like a victim, attired for sacrifice ? Alas ! does it become a wretch who supplicates for life?" Her hair dishevelled, her gaudy d res* soiled and torn by tbe rock she knelt on, she stretched out her arms to him : et Connal ! Connal ! by these tears, by this despair—alas ! I have nothing else to plead with : I have no brilliancy, no 'iálents, no charms now. These frag¬ ments are the emblem of my situation : you have torn away the flowers from life, and crushed them in the dust like these." Gasping and speechless, Connal gazed on her.
* e This sight makes rae a monster," he murmured. " Armida, spurn mc, hate me, bid me begone : where is your pride, Armida ? " ce Alas î when I have sacrificed ail the dignity of ray character and sex, why should I spare my pride, why should ï spare a few fruitless words ? On my knees I have implored you ; tbe proud Armida, whose heart no human power has ever touched before, has knelt to you. Whafc can I do more?" " Then I will stay," said Connal, with dreadful resolution : tc I will stay and perish before your eyes." " But I have wealth enough," said Armida, tf I am bound to brave and faithfut men : I will desert them : I will stay, and be a villain." " I have wealth enough for alb" again repeated Armida. " Oh, God!" exclaimed Connal, in tbe proud torture of his heait, " I mutt
feed „on the spoil of the first of human hearts : I would sooner," he cried, stamp¬ ing with fury, " I would sooner, like wretches in a wreck, gnaw the flesh off these strong arms than suffer them to fall idly by my side, while a wo¬ man fed the descendant of Irish kings," *' Go then," said Armida : (e I am un¬ able to contend : my knees are weary, my struggles are over. Go, burdened with my death, but never, never with my re¬ proaches !" A noise, like that of an opening case¬ ment, reached thcir ears at this mo¬ ment. Armida started, for sbe saw it was in Wandesford's apartment, aud she adjured Connal to quit her in¬ stantly. " And leave you exposed to his insult," said Connal, indignantly. * ζ Oh, no, no ; begone r it is your presence can expose me to insult. I can reach my apartment in a moment.
Begone, if you value my peace or fame." Connal disappeared in a moment, and Armida returned to her apartment with all the speed terror allowed her, and extin¬ guishing the lights, she stood watching at the casement. In a few moments Wandesford, who had been obliged to find his way through the passages of the castle, appeared be¬ low her window. He looked round in¬ tently, and then appearing to catch some - distant object, pursued it ea¬ gerly, aud was out of sight in a few mi¬ nutes. Armida, trembling for the fate of her lover, could support the terror of solitude no longer: she hurried into Rosine'* apartment, and, waking her, briefly told the events of the night, and her present terror. ** Rosine, throwing on her morniug dress, followed her, and Ihey remained
watching at the casement till the set¬ ting moon deprived them of light. No object had appeared, no sound was heard : all was stillness, solitude, and fear.
, *
CHAP. III. The harp that once through Tara's laìbi The soul of music shed, Now hargs as muto on Tara's walls As if that soul were dead. MeoRE, Armida, starting from her late and fe¬ verish slumber the next dav, saw Rosine standing at her bed-side. She had at first determined not to appear that day ; but yielding to Rosine's remonstrances, she rose, and descended to the apartment where the family usually assembled. Her mother, who was there alone, ad¬ dressed her with her usual suavity, and seemed quite unconscious of tbe events of the preceding night, and of her having exposed her partiality for Connal to a crowded assembly: but to Armida this silence was more oppressive than reproach
or menace, and though she tried to imi* talc her mother's self-command,she shook -ú every sound, and listened every mo¬ ment in the hope of hearing Wandes¬ ford 's name mentioned. At length, to con¬ ceal ber fluctuating complexion, she took up a book ; but she bad hardly done so wben Wandesford entered the room, bis dishevelled appearance proclaiming thai he had not past tbe night at home. He did not notice Armida; spoke slightly to Rosine ; but addressing Lady Montclare with unusual solemnity, de¬ nred a few moments private audience with her. Lady Montclare, trembling, but exter¬ nally calm, rose to grant it, and Armida and Rosine were left alone aghast. Their suspense did not last long, for Wandesford, returning in a few moments, and solemnly approachiug Armida, said— " Miss Fitzalban, will you honour me with your attention for a few шо·* ments?"
Rosine was now quittingthe room, when he called aloud— (( Miss St. Austin, let nie request you to stay, and be a witnesi of my conference with your friend. " Miss Fitzalban, I demand whether my addresses to you were not sanctioned by tbe approbation of your late fa¬ lber?" Armida, who had laid aside her book, but had not ventured to raise her eyes from the ground, bowed assent- ingly. (t Were they not also honoured vvith vour own?" With some hesitation she bowed »gain. " May I demand then, (as I am justi¬ fied by your extraordinary conduct last u : ght, ) may I demand on what pre¬ tence is that approbation now with¬ drawn?" " On no pretence, sir," said Armida, now darting the full fire of her eyes on hira : <( on the ground of facts, which it
would be alike injurious to your honour and to my feelings to allude to." fr I understand you," said Wandes¬ ford, his expression darkening with rage and shame : " but I have no time to waste on the despicable subject you hint at : I demand are you ready to abide by the engagement you entered iuto on quit¬ ting England?" (t Your own conscience, sir, may spare the question, or may answer it for me." (( I demand your answer," said Wan¬ desford. " Are you ready to abide by your engagement, and unite yourself to me?" " Never ! never! Neither force, or art, or importunity, shall compel me to fulfil an engagement from which your own depravity has fully absolved me." " This is your resolution ?" said Wan¬ desford, speaking calmly, but trembling with stifled fury.
€c It is," answered Armida, attempting to quit the room, tr and I call heaven to witness it." (i Then I call heaven and hell to wit¬ ness mine," said Wandesford, in a voice of thunder. " Proud vvoman/' he conti¬ nued, fiercely grasping her arm, " within twelve hours you shall bewail it in tears and in blood." He rushed from the room. Armida sat still in despair ; and even Rosine, terrified by these incessant scenes of passion, lost ail her resolution, and ex¬ pressed her fears for Cónnaľs safety. tc And do you think, said Armida, ani* mated by the spirit of her lover, "do you think Gennai dreads the anger of living шап?" ťŕ Why are jou then terrified ?" said Rosine. íŕ Oh ! I canuot bear that any one thould tremble for him but myself," A short and fearful consultation was then held, and they determined to send
Desmond to warn Connal of his danger, for Armida too well knew bis sanguinary and vindictive beart to doubt of his em¬ ploying tbe darkest means he dared. But Desmond was not to be tound in the castle, and Mr. O'Morven or the priest she dared not trust, for both appeared devoted to her mother. The day was passed therefore iu an agony of suspense, which tbe silence of Lady Montclare rendered insupport¬ able. At dinner-time she slightly observed that Wandesford vvould not return to the castle for some davs, and Armida, who lis- tened as a criminal wouid to a respite, determined herself to go in quest of Con¬ nal in the evening, as her mother never assumed the least authority, or even hazarded an inquiry after her move· ments. The evening was dark and gloomy; the autumn was far advanced, and tbe shore, the rocks, and the heathy hills, wrapped
in mist, resembled the ocean in thcir un¬ varying expanse and tbeir tints of shade- less grey. Armida, accompanied^ Rosine, tra¬ versed the shore vvbere Шеу had so often met. He was nut tbere. Sbe approached the cavern ; but the waves dashing against it prevented her entrance ; and at length, more terrified by bis absence than by tbe gloom and rudeness of tbe scene, sbe en¬ tered on the bare heath that divided Con¬ nal's ruinous mansion from the castle. At the extremity of it she saw him ap¬ proaching, and all her fears were forgot in tbe contemplation of his figure as he towered along like one of the heroes of his native bards, around him heath and rock, above bim mist and storm ; and ber passion exalted by her imagination, sbe felt that to such a being she dared not mention tbat sbe trembled for his safety a moment before. He did not observe tbe emotion she betrayed ; but his face, suffused with a
glow that made tbe scene Hke summer to Armida, he whispered, " Love has made me superstitious. A thought wilder than a dream crossed my mind this evening." Armida listened with pleasure to the confession of weakness, for she wished for an excuse for her own. " The old harper," said Connal, " who still follows our ruined fortunes, has touched my imagination deeply. Amid the night of age, aud want, and blindness, a spark of poetic fire burns in his soul. Ill-fated man ! he touches his harp in empty halls, and wastes on the ear of age sounds tbat might have roused heroes to battle. He played for me this evening ; but the martial airs I loved to bear wearied nie, and I asked him for airs of passion, which bis memory, long a stranger to youth and love, had lost. "O'Morven/ said the old man, drop¬ ping his burp, and stretching his ancient
hand towards me, c you love ! I need no eyes to see it. Your heart is iio longer set on tales of woe or war : it is filled with woman's love/ " He needed no eyes to understand the burning sigh that answered him : and he implored with such vivid and prophetic energy to hear her voice, that I yielded to his wild request, and even came out to seek you. " Often," he continued, leading her onward, " when sitting on the grey stone, or by the mossy tree, the only memorials of the heroes of our bouse, he believes himself inspired, and imagines that th« spirits of other days prompt tbe involun¬ tary burst of song, in whicli be announces the fate of those who visit him,—He is waiting near us: come, and let us hear if his harp has one chord that vibrates hope or joy for us," Armida silently placed her slender arm on hissi There was something in this oracle of song that touched her imagina-
tion, for when labouring under the un¬ certainty of fate, the strongest mind will descend to the humblest resources. He wrapped his mantle round Armida to shelter her from the damp, and as they moved slowly along the misty heath, Ro¬ sine thought she had never beheld forms so fair, so towering, so unearthly : their majestic motion, their paleness, their burning eyes that alone conversed, and the dim and shadowy air that fell on tbem, re¬ called to her fancy the tale ofthe Persian princes emerging from the palace of death to begiu their flight to Para¬ dise. The scenery around bad tbat pale and misty look that fancy too might believe tbe colour of tbat intermediate region where tbe bounds of the invisible world are mingled with those of life. The old harper, seated on a grassy cavin beneath a tree, was waiting for them. His harp was beside him, and tbe rush of the wind through the leafless vol. ιι. ρ
branches above seemed like a prelude to its mournful and neglected tones. Their steps gave no sound ; but he turned his ear towards them with a quick¬ ness that proved his bearing compensated for the loss of sight. Armida uttered an exclamation when she savv him, for his flowing dress, his long, white beard, his large, blue, sight¬ less eyes, and his thin hair waving, like enow drifted by a wintry wind, pre¬ sented to her sight a being she thought almost imaginary. The old man's figure seemed illuminat¬ ed by emotion at the sound of her voice, for he believed that he knew the figure, and even the character of the speaker from its tones. He spoke eagerly to Connal in Irish, who as eagerly interpreted his words. " Daughter of beauty !" he exclaimed in the impassioned language of his coun¬ try, " the sound ofyour voice makes me bewail the loss of my sight again. Oh I
if my harp had but one string left, that one string should bc alive with your praise." He caught up his harp as he spoke; but, long accustomed to sounds of sorrow, be faltered in the attempt to revive those bright and deHcate tones that the pre¬ sence of youth and beauty suggested. " Fair lady," said he timidly, "let me feel your soft band : its touch will re¬ mind me of tbe time when my harp could reach the heart, and the fair maids loved its sound well : but none so fair came to listen when I could sing what was plea¬ sant to the ears of lovers." Armida placed her white fingers in his withered band, and they looked like snow-drops springing from the brown soil of winter. He again touched his harp, and Con¬ nal said with animated fondness, " Give us Coi mac, the sweetest song that ever was inspired by love and beauty. f2
At *he moment the old man bent over bis harp in a trance of feeling ; a loud blast of wind swept across the strings, and tlie sound,deep and mournful, resembled a human groan as it passed along the heath. The old man shuddered : he dropped the harp, and his sightless eyes rolled in. their sockets with a force that seemed stronger than actual sight. " The hand of the dead is on my harp !" he exclaimed : " there is a spirit in the air—the voices of other days strike my ear—there is a spirit in the air ! I feel bis touch on ray beart ! I see bim though lam blind! O'Morven, he whispers, * No song of youth or love 1 / O'Morven, he bids me sing of woe and deatii !" Armida, trembling, grasped for sup¬ port the arm on which she leaned. " Heed him not," said Conual ; " it is the wind that sweeps the strings of his harp " " It is not the wind," said the old man ; ." it is not tl\e wind that bids me utter these sounds."
And with the inspiration, the solema fury of a prophet, he struck the chords that for centuries past had summoned the funeral procession to the grave of aa O'Morven, and echoed the dreadful cry that was raised over the corse. Connal, with all his firmness, trem¬ blingly alive to national superstition, shuddered too. He led Armida away, and they crossed the heath in silence. It was now dark, and Armida, whose mind, tinged by destiny and love, was as¬ suming the gloomy colour of Connaľs, felt herself unable to resist the oppression of this dreadful augury, and chilled and trembling, her frame weakened by her mind, she hardly suppressed the tears she did not dare to let him see. As they approached the castle, starting from his trance, Connal implored her ia subdued tones to meet him the following evening on the same spot. " On the same spot ! " repeated Ar¬ mida, shrinking : " ah î do you forge* F 3
that spot has menaced us with woe and death !" " The heart is above all omens," said Connal, passionately ; " love is stronger than death." As he flew along the heath to his lonely tower, he heard the sound of rapid steps pursuing him. He turned, and found himseif clasped in the arms of some oue who fell breathless on his neck, " Is it you, Desmond ?" he cried. " No, no," answered a struggling voice : ' r I am all air, fire !—I am in¬ spired! I am i .-d !—Stay, Connal, you shall not stir from thk spot till I have told all, or 1 shall run wild with rap¬ ture." Connal paused, and the rising moon revealed his dark and agitated fea¬ tures. Desmond gazed on him for a mo¬ ment. " I will not speak," he cried, 'I will »ot utter a word : you are not happy.
Connal, and I cannot bear to insult you with my joy.*' Connal turned his full, dark eyes ou him with an expression that at once thanked and repressed his vivid sensibi¬ lity. '* I am not happy, my Desmond ; but while you are 'so, I cannot be very wretched : but what is this itnelligence tbat has elated you ?" '· What!—I cannot tell : I can hardly think.—Love, youth, beauty, woman ! Connal" <f Woman !—What woman ?" "Why, Endymion: Endymion is a woman !" cried Desmond, delirious with joy. tr I knew it; I never could be de¬ ceived : I knew it from the first I could not be tbe victim of au impossible pas¬ sion. " The old harper, Cormac—ten thou¬ sand blessings on the dear old dotard ! I could kiss every hair in his white beard with more devotion than he kisses tbe re- f4
lies in the chapel. This morning he wandered to the castle, and got into the chapel, imagining there was service there, and wishing to hear iU sounds once more within those walls. Lady Montclare and Morosini are in the habit of passing hours there, and as they are supposed to be employed in devotion, no one intrudes. They believed themselves Jone, for tbe old man was kneeling in silent prayer in an obscure corner, and in their conference every thing transpired. " Endymion is a female : Lady Mont¬ clare, banished from her husband because sbe brought him no son, determined to impose her on him for one : the priest was lier agent, and by his artifices Lady Montclare delayed to introduce her to her father till on his death-bed, when he no longer discriminated her female figure. They spoke of the difficulty of carrying on the deception, and of their apprehen¬ sion that Wandesford or my father might suspect her sex, unless the former was
conciliated by an union with Armida, and the latter by some expedient he couid not distinguish. After remaining two hours discussing their plans, the execu¬ tion of which had almost driven me raad, they went away without discovering him. It is all true, all certain," he continued, anxiously observing Connal's silence. 44 But on my knees I adjure you," and he knelt to his brother, 4ς never, never to disclose it. Oh ! think of Endy¬ mion." Connal was silent. £f We are the rightful heirs," said Desmond ; " but Wandesford, that hateful Wandesford; lie has wealth and power : he would dispute our claims, and our lives might be exhausted before his opposition." Connal was silent still. " And Armida too," continued Desmond : " her proud heart would sink with the shame of her father and her family." Connal with sudden emotion raised his brother, and vowed he would perish before be disclosed the secret, f 5
" And look here, Connal, look at this delicious paper ; but recently it was put into my hand : it is from her : how delightful it is to say her: she invites me, invites me to meet her this night: no, 1 will not read it ; it contains words sacred to my eyes, to my heart: there is no name, but I have thought of a name for her already, the sweetest, the softest ever borne by her sex; )et still I love tbc name of Endymion : I shall love it for ever." Connal, his cheek crimsoned with re¬ sentment and shame, emphatically pro¬ nounced the name of Desmond. ζί Oh ! I know all you ought to say ; I see even in the dark, the frightful face of virtue you have put on : but I am no demi-god ; I leave heroism to you : imagine my situation—imagine yourself eighteen, in love, and me-—" <( It is a subject I must not trust imagination with, nor must you : Des¬ mond, this is not a time for trifling,
the deluded writer of those lines tha* have intoxicated you Í3 unconscious of her sex." " Bat she will * long be so," in¬ terrupted Desmond, " Libertine !" exclaimed Connal. ie Ah ! Connal, have you no mercy ; does nature and passion plead to you in vain ? Is tbis tbe heart of a brother ? For months past I have never closed my burn¬ ing eyes : my nights were without sleep, and my days passed in a dream of fever. I am worn to a shadow : I am dying of passion. Connal, have you no mercy : would you dash the drop of water from the lip of a feverish wretch who must drink or die?" " Yes, if it poisoned him, and his re¬ covered Hfe would bless me for it." " Ai.d would you reject it, if Armida's hand held out the drop of refreshment to you ?" " Oh ! mention uot her sacred name," cried Connal, with proud indiguatioib
"with lips polluted by a guilty pasv sion," " Guilty !" repeated Desmond. "Yes, guilty: what is the object; what is the hope with which you seek her ? Ah ! Desmond, tbat guilt tbat hides itself even from imagination is the first that presents itself to opportu¬ nity." " My heart is at this moment as pure as your own," cried Desmond, proudly ; "I will but clasp her toit; I will but tell her it beats for her." " You will press her to that heart ?" said Connal, placing his hand to bis brother's bosom, whose audible pulsa¬ tion bad struck him in every pause of speech. " Then you are undone, and she will be undone; she whom you love. Desmond, I would rather see you lie on this cold heath all night beside me, than let you go to this guilty meeting." " Connal, you grow too Lot ; уэи tyrannize over me : you are too much
(he elder brother : you are but five years older than me, and yet you imagine me a boy : by what force do you pretend to detain me?" "By this," said Connal, and he bent his proud knee to his brother, and at¬ tempted to seize his hand. " Begone!" said Desmond, who felt it necessary to force himself to passion. " I despise the humility that only masks an usurped power." " Despise me if you will, to-morrow you will thank me." " Never : my whole life and happi¬ ness have been sacrificed to your influence : 1 have worshipped you like a deity, and vou have ruled me like one; but the reign of your violence was short : it ends to-night." " If to save you from vice and passion was a crime, I am ready to bear your reproaches." " I have no time to waste on you. I
fly to happiness : I leave you to gloort and solitude, and virtue." " Oh, Desmond !" said Connal, his eyes fast filling with tears at tbis un¬ natural reproach. He choaked the strug¬ gling emotion, and grasping his brother's hands, said firmlv:— « You shall not go." "Shall not!" said Desmond, fiercely struggling witb him. In the contention, Connal, who could not hurt him, released bis arm suddenly, and the recoil struck bim on the lips with such force, that they were instantly bathed in blood. (( Desmond, thus bleeding from your band, thus more than lacerated by your words, you are still my brother; still the boy whom I love so well. Oh! let not this night say how vainly—I will not be provoked, but I will not be resisted." u You will not be provoked !" said Desmond, madly : i( th#n take that."
And he struck bim. " Desmond," said his brother, starting from him, to shun the temptation that trembled iu every nerve, " at this mo¬ ment a single blow of this band could dash your baby-frame in splinters. Go in safety ; but go not to shame and danger : to-morrow you will weep on my neck." " Never : I renounce all connexion, all intercourse with you. I abjure you ; I abhor you : tyrant and no brother." And he flew with the speed of light¬ ning from the heath, for he dared not trust bimsclf with another tone of Con¬ nal's voice. " Cruel boy ; return, return—even to¬ morrow ; return no longer innocent, but even repentant, and my arms shall be open to you again : reject my advice, spurn my intreaties; but if you re¬ nounce my affection you are lost." Desmond was gone : he took refuge in flight from the reproaches of his heart,
and redoubled his speed to escape the tones that recalled ihem so loudly and bitterly. Disastrous love, violated friendship, and hopeless fortune, rushing together on the mind of Connal, for a moment overbore its firmness. He threw himself on the heath, and hiding his face in his mantle, wept. The night grew stormy : the wind scattered his dark locks : the rain beat on his bare breast: better ac¬ customed to the elements than to man or woman« he felt their rough greeting like that of a friend, and refreshed and strengthened by what would have sent half of his sex shrinking to shelter, be spread his arms to catch the blast that cooled bis burning breast and throbbing head. It was already past midnight, when the sound of horsemen galloping over the heath struck his car : he turn¬ ed : the party passed him, and in a few moments the castle gates were thrown open, and by tbe light of the torch which
the porter bore he saw Wandesford and his servants alight and enter. The gate remained open, and soon another figure rushed out. Connal saw its dis¬ tracted movements : it approached : the moon fell strongly on it. Conral's heart beat strongly: it was Desmond: he threw himself on the ground, and his deep groans struck on the heart of Connal. A spark of passion burned there for a moment : in a moment it was extinguish¬ ed, and he rushed to his brother. " Desmond, you are unhappy, and you are no longer guilty in my eyes." The wretched boy clung to tlie cold ground: he beard his brother, but he dared not meet bis injured eye: he shrunk frorn his upbraiding touch. " Desmond, Desmond, dearer to my heart than ever; if unfortunate, even if guilty, still too dear : speak to me; rise from the eartli ; rise and tell me is that unhappy girl still innocent." " More innocent than I dare utter/*
Sobbing with emotion, burning with gratitude, Connal snatched his brother from the earth, and held him to his heart. te Am I clasped in these arms again/' cried Desmond, agonized with contri¬ tion, " the arms I flew from ; the heart I trampled on ?" f( It was a moment of madness, Des¬ mond; perhaps I did not deal mildly with you : we will both forget it : at this moment I forget every thing but tbat you are innocent." sc Oh ! no, no—I was as guilty as I could be : that letter was not from her, it was from» ....... » " " From whom ?" cried Connal. tc Ask me not to disclose her name," said Desmond, while the moonlight, pale as it was, shewed bis young cheek dyed in crimson. "I vvill never utter it; I will never encounter her sight; never sleep under her roof again. Connal, cau you shelter me for one nigbt: I will
never enter those guilty walls more. There sleeps the innocent object of my love," he continued with a burst of anguish, " sleeps without a thought of the wretch whose heart is breaking for having even in imagination doubted her purity : yet, oh ! yet, that she knew the consolation that I feel in the thought that she is so pure." He dried his hot tears, and convul¬ sively tore himself from the view of the castle. " Connal, can you shelter me for one night; bad they not turned me out, I would never have entered the den of that sorceress more: but now I have no home but this heath-—no shelter but these rocks ; let me rest my burning head any where this night, and I will quit this place to-morrow for ever." Connal seemed to pause at this request, but recollecting himself, he' bid his brother follow him, and led the way towards the cavern. Desmond, exhaust-
cd by emotion, and unable to contend with the storm that raged on the bleak shore, threw his arm over СоппаГэ shoulder as they walked. " Is this," said he, shrinking, " the support I am worthy of; is this tbc posture I should assume : oh ! no—on my knees I should have supplicated before I dared even to approach you." (€ For shame, for shame, Desmond, are we not brothers ?" " Yet you knelt to me," said Des¬ mond, tortured by his very penitence. <f I keelt to heaven when you were gone, and my prayers were heard ; you were preserved from guilt. 3 * They reached the cavern : the tide was out; and darkness and silence formed an awful contrast to the agitated passiona of tbe intruders. fi Here you will be safe," said Connal, in a voice of such chilling solemnity as seemed inspired by the genius of the place : " but I must leave you for a few
tnoments to discover how long you may remain here." Desmond listened to the sound of his receding steps, till fancy was wearied io following their track, and he wished even for their echo to relieve the intolerable loneliness of the place. An hour elapsed before he returned, and silently led his brother to a recess where some art seemed to have been employed to form a resemblance to a domestic apartment. The roughness of the rocky walls had been removed : a turf fire burned in a niche: there were books and lights on a rustic table. Des¬ mond gazed around him, and Connal, as if to anticipate inquiry, demanded the events of the evening. " The moment I discovered my dan¬ ger," said Desmond, blushing, " I flew frora the spot ; she called, she tried to detain rae. Oh ! Connal, I cannot dwell upon that guilty, that horrible moment. fţ Though the object was revolting \o
me, yet so inflamed were ray passions, so subverted my reason and principles, that I felt had Endymion been there—Oh ! Connal, you were revenged that moment : I knelt on the ground, and uttered a solemn vow never more to endanger Endymion's peace by my presence. (< I have little merit for this resolu¬ tion. It is impossible after the discovery of this night that I should ever again appear at the castle ; but as if every demon of bell had conspired to drive me raad to-night, as I was rushing out my father met me, and—oh ! Connal, bow shall I utter it—-commanded me never to see you more," <e My father!" repeated Connal, in amazement. " Yes, I was too distracted to attend to what he said, but he talked of some oflence you had given to his friend Colonel Wandesford." " His friend ! a man tbat has treated him before my face with an insolence that made the blood boil in my veins.
" Gracious heaven !" exclaimed Con¬ nal, traversing the cave with rapid steps, and seeming to commune with some phantom in his mind : " can it then be possible ; can Wandesford be such a monster : Wandesford, whose life last night lay at my mercy, and whose life I saved." Again he importuned Desmond to re¬ peat the subject of his conference with his father, and Desmond, shrinking again, repeated his unnatural injunctions. Connal silently continued to walk up and down the cave. (C My dear Desmond," said he, at length, " I am not able to speak to you to-night. There is your bed of moss : it is all 1 have to offer you. Sleep there, my Desmond, and may no thoughts visit your dreams like those whicli take away rest from me." Desmond threw himself on his rustic bed, and thougii too much agitated to
sleep, willingly closed his aching and fe¬ verish eyes. " He sleeps," said Connal, bending over him a few moments after : " how calm and heavenly is the sleep of youth! He is happy, for he knows but one pas¬ sion : no bloody and mortal sumraons will wake him to the strife of life and death, of honour and shame. Desmond, those bright hairs will never be soiled with the dust of a scaffold ; that young form never will meet the gaze, and rage, and curses of a rabble. Oh ! there is a blessing even in evil, when it does not reach to those we love." He then threw himself against the side of the cave, and hiding his face with his hand, remained silent. In a few moments Desmond heard him quit the cave, and by the sound discovered he was descend¬ ing a flight of steps. A murmur of voices then struck his ear: they were sometimes loud, and at times winding
among tbe echoes of the vault, Desmond imagined he was deceived by the wild and indefinite sounds of tbe wind. Restless with many emotions, be гоье, he listened, be examined tbe cavern: in one corner be observed a cavity ; the Hght of the liaif-cxtinguished fire fell dimly on it, disclosing a flight of steps which Des¬ mond for a moment was about to descend. As be paused irresolutely, the sounds ceased, and the last flash of light falling on tbe cavity, rendesed it impossible for Desmond to penetrate its depth : be re¬ treated, and his weariness botb of body and mind overcoming his curiosity, he again threvv himself on his bed of moss. Frequently his slumbers vvere broken by the sound of voices from beneath, and more than once he thought by the dadı of arms. When he awoke, the beams of morn¬ ing bad broke through the cavern, and Connal was sitting beside hiin in an atti¬ tude tbat shewed he bid not slept all . u, G
night. Fevered, bewildered, and unre¬ freshed, he rose, and hastened to the en¬ trance of the cave to cool his parched lipe with tbe air of day* The morning, cold, calm, and grey, after the storm of night, resembled that sullen repose which the mind feels after tbe conflict of passion. " What is your present plan?" said Connal, as they stood at tbe entrance of the cave. (C My only object last night," said Desmond, " was to fly from this place; but I am now resolved to join my re¬ giment : its quarters are but a few miles off, and tbe hurry of a military life may benumb my feelings; perhaps some wel¬ come summons may terminate my life be¬ fore it is further embittered or disgraced by a passion tbat I cannot resist, that I cannot even contend witb." Connal, vvith tbe eloquence and the benignity of a ministering angel, tried to sootli and strengthen him in vain. The parting hour arrived; and wildly calling
on the name of Endymion, he stretched bis arms, bis eyes, his heart, towards the castle, mingling vows of everlasting fond¬ ness vvith resolutions ofinstant departure, yet still delaying his departure to repeat the vow. " Go, Desmond," said his brother, trembling for his stability; " go, while your resolution is yet a virtue: in a few hours it may be impelled by necessity, and then it will be virtue no longer. Go, and remember, whether tempted to weak¬ ness, or summoned to danger, you are an Irishman, and an O'Morven : however it may please heaven to dispose of your fortunes or your feelings, may your ho¬ nour at least be immortal." Λ crimson flush tinged the wan cheek of Desmond, as he listened to his brother. " I have noihing of value ίο give you, my Desmond ; but had I all the treasures of tbe earth I give you more in this little volume. (He drew it from his bosom as be spoke) Tbe words of worldly wis- 6 2
dom are vain, and those of worldly pride vainer still : but in the conflict of passion should you ever ask of your conscience the question—Wherewithal shall a young roan cleanse his way ? it contains the an¬ swer—even by ruling himself after Иш word,"
*
CHAP. IV. Yet cold in the dust at thy feet I would rather be, Than wed what I loved not, or turn one thought from thee. Mooiti. The following day gave Armida an interval for . reflexion. Connal's image appeared involved in a darkness sbe could not penetrate : his gloomy irresolution, his vicissitudes of passion and melancholy, his flying from her while he almost wor¬ shipped, and bis deferring tbe disclosure from nigbt to ι. ight, while be called her the arbitress of bis fate, made her tremble at tbis mysterious character, while sbe longed to develope, and dreaded the reso¬ lution whicli «she had employed all her powers to precipitate. The day was marked by no event: Wandesford left g3
the castle in tbe morning, and this still¬ ness increased the agitation of Armida. Wearied by that intolerable effort which confines us to society from which our hearts are worlds away, Annida thought the evening prolonged for ages. At length Lady Montclare retired, and Armida alone hurried to the spot wbere Connal was to meet her. It was almost dark : tbe clouds of an autumnal evening mingled tbeir grey and heavy masses witb the dark ocean, a bleak wind swept along the rocks, and the sigh of tbe moss and the thistle as it bowed their heads, with the distant shriek of the sea-bird, were the only sounds tbat reminded her of life as she traversed the shore. Alone, pale and shrinking from fhe chill and cheerless air, how different was she now from her who hitherto re¬ spired only the brilliant and balmy air of the south, whom even their genial wind bad never been suffered to visit too rough¬ ly, and whose steps had only pressed the
perfumed and velvet path of luxury. Insensible to the gloom that gathered round her, she continued to walk, in vain straining her eyes to discover through the mist a glimpse of Connal's figure. Night came on, but the agitation of her heart prevented her perceiving it: that form which could make midnight noon still hovered in her imagination, though her eves could not discover him; and the in¬ creasing darkness, by excluding every external object, only concentred her mind's eye on the object which filled it. A step was heard on the heath : she started and turned, and almost before she saw him, Connal grasped her in his arms. Dark as it was, siie savv with terror his distracted figure, his bare, dishevelled head, and his features, in which the sub¬ limest expression of character contended vvith despair. Her heart told her this was no meeting of love, and she in vam tried to collect voice to speak to him. g 4
"A moment! but a moment!" cried Connal, " is allowed mc to bless you, and to part." " Ob, wbat is tbis !" cried the trem¬ bling Armida : " give me time to com¬ prehend this terror." " I had no time given me : treachery and hatred have destroved mc: my fate «z j is no longer doubtful : tbis moment I am called to decide it by my own arm. Armida, tbe mercy that heaven has de¬ nied me visit you a thousand-fold— farewel !" 4( Ob ! do not bless me with that hor¬ rible voice," cried Armida: "stay but to tell me what is this new danger ? What ------" " Tbere is no danger/' said Connal, with a dreadful smile; " but fly before you see me perish at your feet ; fly, for my arm can no longer guide or defend you." Armida's reason failed her : she tore lier hair, her shrieks echoed along the
sbore, sbe clung to his knees ; yet unable to bold them, she sunk on the ground at his feet. " Oh, God !" cried Connal, throwing to heaven his strained and blood-shot eyes, " let me but bear tbis like a man ; let me not meet my foes bereft of all strength." " Oh ! leave me not to die here," cried Armida, writhing at his feet in her ravings; <f a single blow will end my misery, and yet you delay, and yet you leave me to die : your bands are strong, and yet you have not the mercy to end me." Connal, beside himself, knelt on the ground : be attempted to raise her, but at tbat momeat the alarm-bell rung out, and tbe discbarge of musketry burst on his car like thunder. He started, and through the darkness ofthe night he saw the flames bursting frora the old tower, and spreading their burning volumes on the air. g 5
" It blazes, it blazes," he cried in agony : " he is perishing in the flames, and I stand here fondly talking to a woman." He tore himself from her, and she sunk on the earth. Rosine, undismayed by the danger and terror ofthe night, had gone out in quest of Armida. The mist that had gathered over the heath, and the roar of the sea as it lashed tbe rocks, concealed every object, and drowned every eíľort of her voice to make berseli heaid. Drenched by tbe rain, and breathless from struggling with the wind, sbe con¬ tinued her dreary progress alone till the flames that issued from the burning tower, glaring widely on tbe dark heath, shewed something white stretched before her on the ground. Sbe hastened forward : it was Armida, pale, motionless, and pros¬ trate. Struck to the soul at beholding this woman once ьо celebrated, aud still pos-
sessing every distinction of rank, genius, and beauty, in a situation so helpless and deplorable, Rosine, almost execrating Connal, knelt beside her, and attempted to raise and revive her, Armida recognized her voice. She re¬ covered, and her mind overcoming her weakness, her recollection returned in a moment with her reason. " Is this terrible dream over ?" said sbe, with a ghastly emile; " I know you —you are Rosine : but where is Connal ?" Rosine exerted all her strength to raise and lead her from the spot, for the noise саше nearer, and she could distinctly see the troops approaching by the light of the burning tower. But all her intreaties were answered by tbe inquiry—" Where is Connal ?" Rosine then trembling, confessed what she had heard·—that an insurrection had broke out, military law had been pro¬ claimed, and troops had marched that evening to search the tower in which tbe
O'Morvens lived for concealed arms, on the information of Wandesford ; and pointing to the burning ruins which the soldiers were now quitting, she implored Armida to fly from this scene of violence, before insult or danger reach'd tbem. Of all sbe said, Armida appeared to re¬ tain but one sentence. Ignorant of the distracted state of Ire¬ land, sbe did not comprehend the rest ; her heart had room but for one image— " And Wandesford leads the soldiers !" she cried—" Wandesford !" " Oh ! come," cried tbe terrified Ro¬ sine, " come, while we can escape with safety : this is no place for unprotected women : come, or I shall not have cou¬ rage to stay vvith you." Armida attempted to follow her, but before they reached the castle, her eyes caught a glimpse of tbe flames that sunk for a moment as tbe roof fell in with a horrid crash, and then rose in erect and livid spires, triumphing over the ruin.
She darted from Rosine, for her dis¬ turbed imagination presented to her the image of Conual engaged in a conflict with numbers wbo overpowered him. 44 My band and fortune," she cried, grovelling on the earth in delirious agony: 44 my band and fortune to the meanest wretch who will save his life; and no one," sbe cried, after a pause, " nò one hears, and no one will accept nve; and yet they told me I was rich and beau¬ tiful ; but all tbey told ine in my youth was false, or why am I thus deserted now ?" Rosine, unable to contend with or to support her, flew toglie castle for assist¬ ance, and she was at length conveyed to her apartment. The castle and tbe whole country were now in a state of alarm. Tbe report was universal tbat a rehelľ.on had broke out, of which Connal was me of the principal leaders, The troops who had marched frora the town where they were quartered
were now dispersed over the country searching for arms, and taking up sus¬ pected persons. The alarm-bell of the castle rung all night, and was loudly answered by that from Lady Kilcarrick's mansion, which they could distinctly see illuminated as a beacon to the neighbourhood : the wretch¬ ed inhabitants of the few cottages in the neighbourhood came flying for pro¬ tection to the castle, whicli was now for¬ tified as if for a siege ; the draw-bridge drawn up, the windows secured, all the servants whom they could depend on armed for defence, and the family re¬ treated to the most remote and best de¬ fended parts of the building. Lady Montclare and the priest retired trem¬ bling to the chapel, but ι he elder O'Mor- veu, with sonici hing of the spirit of his family, presided at the directions given for the security of the castle, and at¬ tempted to tranquillize the family by as¬ surances of safety.
Some of the attendants who were posted on the turrets of tbe castle about mid¬ night exclaimed tbat they savv the king's troops scattering tbe rebel forces in every direction, that the tower was in ashes, and scarce a man was now to be seen on the heath. Apprehensive that tbe rebels in their retreat might assault tbe castle, the guards were doubled on every side, all the lights in the front of the building extinguished, and every preparation made on that side of the castle which was assail¬ able from the heath : the other sides, sur¬ rounded by rocks, were impregnable to forces who wanted artilìerv. A few moments after an express from Wandes¬ ford arrived at the castle. He was ad¬ mitted with caution, and darkened with blood, and smoke, and toil, he presented a frightful picture of tbe conflict to the inhabitants of the castle, who crowded around him. His first intelligence re¬ moved their fears : he announced that oo
the tower where the O'Morvens lived being invested by Wandesford's regiment, a formidable body of rebels, well armed and disciplined, hal appeared to defend it, but as thcir efforts were more directed to preserve the building* than to assail the troops, they* h ad been quickly routed, and the tower reduced to ashes. Rallying at some distance, under the conduct of an unknown leader, tbey bad made a vigo¬ rous defence, and though half of them had been cut lo pieces, and the remainder wounded, by the steady and well-directed fire of the soldiers, yet by the skilful conduct and supernatural courage of tbeir leader, they had succeeded in securing tbeir retreat to the recesses of a wild mountain, at the distance of two miles, from which it was impossible for the forces tbat bad pursued to dislodge them. Here, therefore, Ihey had paused for the night, after sending expresses in every direction for assistaE.ce, of which one,
taking the castle in his vvay, had stopped for a few moments to announce that tbeir immediate danger was removed. Rosine, who, with the trembHng inha¬ bitants of the castle, bad hurried tothe ball io hear the report ofthe express, at once comprehended the dreadful mystery of Connal's" character, and not less dis- maved, even for the awful events of the niglit than for that of Armida's ill»fated passion, she hastened to her apartment before the precipitation of some terrified domestic should disclose the intelligence. She found Armida, though unable to quit her bed, and thougb every attempt to speak was convulsive, yet resolutely determined to listen and to inquire into cverv particular ofthat dreadful night, Her total itrnorance ofthe state of Ire¬ land, a country of which she had never thought till sho beeame an inmate of if, made her slow in comprehending what Rosine told her. At length she seemed to understand it all, and hiding her face,
she sunk back on the bed in silence, Rosine tried to give her the hope she wauled herself, by intimating that this unknown leader might perhaps be some stranger. Armida shook her head incredulously ; " Ah ! tbat s u per- h uman courage," said she, " can belong to but one шап on earth. Oh !" she added after a pause, t( Oil ! that I bad beheld him on tlie dark mountain's side, when he gathered his broken band, and told the proud tide of pursuit—hitherto shalt thou go, and no fuither. (c And I shall sec him," she mur¬ mured, <r I sleali see hi и there " <e Arımda," cru··.. Rosíte, believing ber again deh nous, t( vvhat eau you mean Ъ\ th;» se w о .dh?" f ' To follow bim," said Armida, epeak 'ng with difficulty, but with pcrfret decision, to follow this fugitive, this out¬ cast, this rebel to the mountain, to tbe end ofthe earth."
Rosine long expecting this fatal reso¬ lution, beard it now without surprise, but not without grief and horror : " Oh! Armida," she cried, bursting into tears, " how can you, nursed in pomp and lux¬ ury, talk of following tbe desperate for¬ tunes ofa rebel leader : the wind of hea¬ ven was not suffered to visit you roughly in your youth, and how will you bear tbe storm in its fury ?" " Rosine," said Armida, faintly but resolutely, " do not weep for me, I am past tbe kindness of friends: let me be forgotten by the world, I shall never embellish it more. 1 am no longer the ambitious sparkHng female who Hved only to tbe vvorld and to fame : I am a woman overcome b ν passion and destiny : I am embarked in a wreck, yet 1 do not cast one look toward tbe shore." Rosine continued to weep and to supplicate, but Armida interrupted her. " I have nothing now to require of you, Rosine, but secrecy : perhaps
your principles may oppose this ; you may tbink it your duty to betray me, but I warn you it will be in vain : I do not want resolution, and I cannot want the means to execute it long : alas î I feel I am strong only in despair ; had life any charms for me I should value it more." During the remainder of tbe night she was frequently and alarmingly ill, but at every interval of ease sbe recur¬ red to her purpose, and spoke of it with a calmness, that wbile it removed Rosine's apprehensions for her reason, awoke others even more dreadful. Almost as soon as it was light she rose, and vvith incredible exertions prepared to meet tbe family, who ba i none of them been in bed all night; and now assembled, at tbe first dawn of morning, were anxi¬ ously waiting tbe arrival of an express from Wandesford. Tbe danger and terror of their present situation seemed to concentre all thcir different and opposite feelings into one
mass of gloom and apprehension. Little was said except by O'Morven, who, equally regardless ofthe fate ofone son, and the absence of the other, seemed, like all his countrymen, to feel his spirits raised by the approach of danger, and displayed tbat mixture of spirit and unfeelingness that is common to them all. Tbe day was past in wandering silently from room to room, viewing tbe country from tbe casements in tbe turrets, which being bey oud the reach of assault, were not secured ; in vain exploring the bleak and empty heath for the sight of the mi¬ litary party they expected to be quarterei in the castle for its defence, and at times listening to the heavy roll of the waves, whose sound they imagined the discharge of distant artillery. Evening at length arrived, doubling the terrors of which sbe who felt the most had «poken the least, when the ar¬ rival ofa party of soldiers was announced
by the servauts who were stationed on the turrets of the castle : the intelligence tbey brought removed their immediate fears, though they represented the disturbance as much more serious than was at first imagined. The rebels had in the nigbt broke from their retreat in the mountains, and attack¬ ing the troops that pursued tbem, re¬ pulsed tbem with considerable loss : a strong detachment, commanded by a gene¬ ral officer, had marched that morning from Galway against them, and Wandes¬ ford's party, who had suffered so severely in the engagement and pursuit, were re¬ turning to ¿«heir former quarters in the neighbourhood. He himself bad been slightly wounded, and purposed if bis presence was not necessary at the scene of action to return to the castle and make that his quarters for a few days. Intel¬ ligence had been sent to Dublin to ap¬ prise government of tbe state of the country, and troops were marching in
every direction ίο tbeir assistance ; but ihey bad not yet been able ίο discover that any disturbance bad existed in tbc adjacent counties, or that there was any «*« » connexion between tbis and tbe rebellion of 1798 It seemed like Emmet's insur¬ rection, the isolated and hopeless attempt of a single enthusiast. Orders had just been given on the ad¬ mission of tbe soldiers to secure tbe castle for tbe nigbt, and O'Morven and Moro- smi were gone to inspect its execut ioii^ when a carriage was hi ard driving ra¬ pidly into tbc court, and in a moment Lady Kilcarrick rushed into tbe room in an agony of distress. In tbis hour of terror, the sight of distress produced in¬ stant sympathy, and though every one disliked her, they all gathered round her with expressions of concern. * f Oh! Lady Montclare," she exclaim¬ ed, " my child, my Gabriella : oh ! that villain, tbat monster; he has torn her from ше, dragged her away to shame and ruin,
carried her off to those wild horrid moun¬ tains, to live vvith ruffians and rebels, and with himself, the worst of tbem all." (t Whom doyou speak of?" cried Lady Montclare vvith unfeigned amazement. " Whom! wby Connal O'Morven ; he has seduced my child ; taken her from me : my Gabriella —my child, whose rauk and beauty and accomplishments might have entitled her to tbe first families iu Ireland : oh ! the honour aud comfort of tivy age is gone ; ï am ruined and undone for ever: oh ! that he bad the mercy to kill me before he bad done this. 1 hope I may live to see him on the highest gibbet iu the country, like a rebel and a villain as he is. As old as I am, I hope to sec that day, and so I will ere long, if grief does not kill me." Lady Montclare, whom even danger could not divest of art, loudly joined in her lamentations and invectives, while Rosi ne, thuuder-struck at t his intelligence, of which it was impossible to doubt, sat
bereft for some moments of all reflexion» and when at length she raised her eyes to look for relief on those around her, she perceived Armida had quitted the room without uttering a word. She rose me¬ chanically to follow her, yet when she reached the door, she retreated and sat down in that sick and hopeless state of mind in which we seem no longer to know good from evil, in wliich charac¬ ters change before us like figures in a dream, and the landmarks of life appear to be removed from their places. She wns startled from her reverie by the sound of Armida's steps^—she then ven¬ tured to enter : Armida was walking up and down the room rapidly but silently : her step was firm, and but that her hair hung loosely on her shoulders, there was not even a trace of emotion iu her figure. In a few moments sbe was astonished tö sec her approach a glass, calmly arrange her hair, and throwing on her VOL. ιι. η
veil, advance to the door : then Rosine ventured to inquire where she was going. ct The air of this room oppresses mc," said Armida, evidentlv speaking witb difliculty, "and 1 think I can only breathe in the open air." Tbe passages of the castle tbat opened on tbe sea-shore had not been secured like tbe rest, for in tbat direction no danger was apprehended, and tbey reach- cd the rocky terrace, wbere Armida so often walked without observation. Rosine, as they walked along., placed herself instinctively on tbe side next the sea ; and though it was twilight, sbe savv Armida's haughty smile of contempt až this involuntary movement. The nigbt advanced ; it became dark and cold; »and tbe spray of the ¡sea reached tbem, wet¬ ting tbeir light garments at every step; yet Armida continued to walk till it was totally dark, and then, as if she had waited for it she hastilv traversed that
side of the terrace, and descending, enter¬ ed on the heath. Rosine, now forced by her fears to speak, mentioned tbe intelligence of the day, and the probability tbat some stragglers from the rebel camp might be in tbe neighbourhood. Armida walked on swiftly, without appearing to hear, but at length she said :— " What were you saving of the rebel forces?" Rosine mentioned the loss tbey had s и stained 3 and the ¿.trong party ordered ayai ust them. ""Their leader is bold and brave," said Armida, tf but conscience vvill sub¬ due the boldest." And she continued to proceed so swift¬ ly tbat Rosine cculd hardly keep pace with her. As tbey passed the ruins of the tower, wbich were nearly a mile from tiic caslle, n 2
no longer able to suppress her terrors, ihe exclaimed :— " Good Heaven ! Armida, where are you going? or What is it you purpose to do? Alone at nigbt, and in a country like this, what will become of us should we meet with danger ?" 44 We are so wretched," said Armida, with a soul-drawn sigh, " tbat no one will injure us." " Do you know where we are?" said Rosine, as she tottered through the frag¬ ments of the tower : " here has been death but a few hours past. Do you see the darkness ? do you hear the c torra ? and yet this is nothing to what vve may meet." " There is no difference between day and night to me, between storm and calm," said Armida; " it is all the same, or will be soon." " Oh ! Armida, I can follow you no longer ; tliis frightful language terrifies
me more than even night and our förlora situation. Oh ! Armida, before you leave me dying with terror, think where you are going, and what is it 30u pur¬ pose." " I know not where I am going or what I intend," said Armida, pausing, and wringing her bands in the extreme of suffering : <( if my strength does not fail me, I will hear my doom from his own lips. A last appeal to his heart, even if it should end in my death, will be better than thus dying by inches' away from him, and listening to reports that tear me to pieces like demons. Perhaps when he sees me he will not deny com¬ passion to the dying hour of the woman he has destroyed." She still continued to hurry onward, and Rosine now followed implicitly, terrified to proceed, yet more terrified to return alone: she felt as if Armida's fate at laet governed her's. As they passed the ruins of the tower, нЗ
the moon broke faintly through the clouds, tinting its grey fragments with a sepul¬ chral light, and revealing tbe long track of bleak and barren heath that lay be¬ fore thern. As they hastened on, wifh a speed far above the strength of cither, they be¬ held the mobsv stones and the withered аьЬ -tree under w hich but two nights before Armida remembered her fate bad been announced by the aged harper. This sight overcame her, and tottering towards it sbe sunk on the stones, and supported her head against the trunk of the tree. " Alas !" she cried, " is this the first omen of my disastrous journey. Here woe and death were announced to mc, and my heart verifies the prediction. Ah ! with what hope can a woman sup¬ port herself wbo goes to revive passion that never felt, or soon forgot it. These stones are not more cold than his heart, these branches are not more withered
than mine. How different vvas I even the last sad night I was on tbis spot : then tbe gloomy prediction I heard terri¬ fied me, but it did not destroy all self- confidence, uor did it make mc doubt him. How vast is the interval between even our worst fears, and tbe actual burthen of evil when it arrives." Rosine, though weeping too, seized this moment of calm to represent the danger, the terror, and tbe desperation of her present enterprize ; the improbabili¬ ty of meeting the leader of a rebel army amid inaccessible mountains, and the still greater, that amid scenes of tu¬ mult and horror such as bc was now involved in be would listen to or feel for her. ' ( Ah !" said Armida, her voice grow¬ ing fainter and her cheek paler at every word, ({ that is all I wish for ; let mc hear my fate from bis own lips if he can pronounce it : perhaps he will be spared even that trouble, if the old man's pro¬ li 4
phecy should be true : if I perish here," she added, leaning her cold cheek on Ro¬ sine's breast, " let it be told that life and fortune courted me in vain, for my heart was on the dark hill's side with Con¬ nal." So shrunk was her form, so broken her voice, that Rosine believed her actually dying, and in her terror screamed aloud for assistance, though conscious none was near. Yet affrighted as sbe was, her terrors were increased by tbe sound of approach¬ ing footsteps, and sbe would have given the world to be again left to the solitude she dreaded so much a moment before. The steps approached slowly, but dis¬ tinctly, and she now attempted to rouse Armida, and if possible excite her to escape, or conceal themselves from tbose who were passing the heath. It was too late : two figures visibly ap¬ proached, but there was nothing menac¬ ing in their attitude : it was a man and
woman ; his arm was thrown soothingly around her, and she leaned on him with an air of softness and submission : they advanced : the light of the moon fell strongly on their figures. Tbe man was Connal, the woman Gabriella. They were conversing in a low voice, but of their conversation nothing could be heard but the tenderness of tone and ex¬ pression m which it was murmured. Tbey passed near the spot, but Armida and Rosine were in the shade; and as they crossed the heath near this desolate pair, they seemed like spirits going to bliss, whose bright journey leads tbem for an instant near the abode of final woe. The steady light discovered tbem but too plainly to tbe wretched Annida: under the impulse of despair she stretch¬ ed out her arms to him; she tried to call on his name in tones that would bave pierced his soul, but she had no voice ; a deep sigh, like that preceding dissoni¬ li 5
tion, burst from her heart, and she sunk into the arms of Rosine. "Was tbat a vision we saw?" she cried, after a long pause, raising her eyes fearfully to Rosine. "And am I here," •he cried, " wandering like an outcast, alone at night, hazarding reputation and life for a man who leaves me to perish." She stretched her arm vvith wild emotion towards Connal. " I would have knelt at your feet, I wouid have died at thera," she cried; " but I shall save you the guilt of spurn¬ ing me. May you never know the heart you have rejected. Alas! you will know too soon her whom you have pre¬ ferred." As they returned to the castle, a num¬ ber of lights and a crowd of soldiers and domedics at the gate announced the re¬ turn of Wandesford, Armida, now well acquaieted with the windings of the rocks, pursued another direction, and in tlie tumult that
accompanied the arrival of Wandesford they reached her apartment without dis¬ covery. She eagerly threw offher wet garments, and Rosine saw with astonishment that she even took some pains to arrange her dress and her dishevelled hair: she dread¬ ed some new convulsion of passion, and followed her, unable to speak, to the apartment were the family, even at this late hour, had gathered round Wandes¬ ford, to listen at last to authentic intelli¬ gence. At Armida's appearance he bowed slightly and continued bis conversation, wliich was principally addressed to Lady Montclare. lie described the force and astonish¬ ing efforts of the rebels ; spoke mode¬ rately of his own conduct ; but appear¬ ed to think that the danger, thougii rc* mote, vvas by no means oyer. Tbe scenes in which he had bçen en¬ gaged had excited bis spirit, whicli was
naturally daring, and tbe consciousness of his own distinguished conduct gave a degree of dignity to his manner, for nothing exalts a man so much in tbe pre¬ sence of women as tbe knowledge that his character for courage has preceded him. Lady Montclare, who heard with horror tbat tbe rebels bad entrenched themselves in the mountains, and that the country would probably continue disturbed for the remainder of the win¬ ter, as thcir inaccessible situation com¬ pletely defied military force, now trem¬ blingly inquired if it were possible for them to be safer in Galway, or any town where a military force was stationed, during tbe winter. " It is my advice," said Wa» Jes ford, " that your ladyship and the family shouid immediately quit the castle, and fix your residence in Galway or Lough- rea, as in this remote castle you will be exposed to the incursions of tlie rebels.
I will undertake for your safe conduct to any place where you may fix your re¬ sidence. I cau still undertake for your protection: once," he added, " I had hoped to urge a more tender claim, but that I must now endeavour to forget." Every one was silent ; but Armida, collecting all her strength to meet this crisis of her fate, said faintly :— tr Do yon then wish to forget it ?" The haughty soul of Wandesford could not resist the triumph of this mo¬ ment, and he answered :— " At least I wish to forget the com¬ pel itor for whom I was dismissed/' 4t Oh ! mention not his name," said Armida, with an impulse she could not resist, " if you would have me listen to you." * ( I will forget him as willingly as you," said Wandesford ; '^ I will forget every thing but the hopes those delicious words revive. Armida, ^vhat am I to understand from tbem ?"
" If you are willing to understand me," said Armida, in vain forcing her features -to assume a sickly and heart- forbidden smile of encouragement, " I have said enough, and if you are not I have said too much." Sbe held out her shrinking band to him, and Wandesford, seizing it } began to pour forth the most rapturous ac¬ knowledgments ; yet, even at tbis mo¬ ment, the hand of tbe first of her sex did not give him such pleasure as the triumph of his proud and vindictive heart announced over the шап he hated. " Oh, spare iF*e," cried Armida, break¬ ing from him, " spare me; I cannot bear this ; I do not deserve it; it is not in niv nature to deceive: if you can accept of an alienated heart it is your's ; your generosity has already taught it grati¬ tude, aud time may teach it esteem, and even give U peace," Unequal to any further effort, she
retired to her apartment, but Wandes¬ ford, in spite of his fatigue and bis wounds, continued to sit and consult with Lady Montclare for the remainder of the night.
CHAP. V. u She pined in thought, And sat like patience on a monument, Smiling at gnef." For some days Wandesford supported the character of an assiduous and happy lover, but his pride could wear tbe mask no longer. The artless complacency with which Armida received bis attentions irri¬ tated him the more, as it left no room for complaint, and tbe consciousness of not being loved is fhat sensation of all others which makes us the most anxious to seek for the evidence of what we fear. Letters now arrived from England, from his mother and his uncle, Sir Edgar Etheling Wandesford (the oldest and proudest baronet in England), intreating
him immediately to quit Ireland, and so¬ lemnize bis marriage at the old family seat in England. Lady Montclare eagerly pressed him to comply with their advice, mentioning that Endvmion and sbe vvould ñx. their residence in Galway for the winter, and Rosine might accompany Armida to Eng¬ land. Wandesford, whose regiment was now off duty, and who was anxious to convey Annida from Ireland as soon as possible, embraced tbe proposal, and it was settled tbat they should quit the cas¬ tle the moment they could with safety, Armida vvas present at thcir confer¬ ence: she listened to everv thing, assented to every thing, and beard or understood nothing. Her mind, fixed on tbe one great effort of making the sacrifice that approached with silent dignity, had no room for its details ; and if she had a wish at this moment, it was to be away from Ireland, for every ехргезз brought accounts of tbe heroism with which the
rebel leader kept his ν tie hand together, in the centre of a bl» л л, mountain, amid winter, famine, and the foe ; of the con¬ duct with whicli he bad hitherto repelled tbe approach of disciplined troops ; and ofthe humanity with whicb, amid all bis hardships, he protected tbe peasantry from the aggressions of his fierce anű mutinous forces. Winter had approached with unusual severity, and all its gloom seemed con¬ centrated in the castle.—Tbe inquietude of Lady Montclare became daily more obvious, and at length declaring tbat the severity of the season must preclude all danger on the part of the insurgents, she announced her resolution of quitting the castle the foUowing week, and pressed Wandesford to fix his departure on the same day. Wandesford, who had pro¬ tracted his stay only with the hope of torturing Armida with Connaľe fate, was obliged to comply. Servants were dis¬ patched to clear the roads, which were
almost impassable from the snow, and a party of Wandesford's regiment was ap¬ pointed to escort tbem. But during this interval of prepara¬ tion, Hke Satan, knowing his time was short, his ríigc and malignity were in¬ creased tenfold, and Armida's resolutiou was hourly triedlo tbe utmost. Ors one of those melancholy days, while Rosine and siie were sitting toge¬ ther enjoying tbe dreary consolat ion of silence, ho broke :.ήο the room, and tak¬ ing out a letter he had just received, be¬ gan to read aloud an exaggerated account of the sufferings of the rebels, with a sanguinary denunciation against Connal, containing a copy of the reward oftered for his apprehension. Armida, on whom he fixed his eyes with savage triumph, grew pale, but did not utter a word; but Rosine, whose spirit was roused by this unmanly persecution, said indignantly, " Are you a man ?" "Yes," replied Wandesford, with a»
brutal oath, <f and a man tbat will not be governed by a woman that defies either their art to defeat, or tbeir inso· lence to disturb him." Rosine, not trusting herself with the answer that roseto her lips, quitted the room, and Armida was about to follow her,till bearingthe rude laugh with which Wandesford was pursuing her retreat, sbe calmly resumed her seat. ff Is this your resolution ; is tbis the self-command with which you flattered yourself and me ?" said Wandesford, strid¬ ing up and down the room to wor!« him¬ self into a passion. " You cannot contain your emotion at that ruffian's name : in* stead of execrating him you are at this moment ready to weep, and nothing but your infernal pride restrains your tears. Wbat hope can I have ofthe confidence, wbat security for tbe honour ofa woman thus debased by passion?" " Mention not honour or confidence," said Armida, struggling with her emo-
tion ; " you have violated both. I could not expect sensibiUty from you, but I have at least deserved respect : I bad no re¬ serve: I exposed my beart to you—I laid it at your feet—I did not conceal its weakness or its wounds ; and you have trampled on it, and stabbed it." " The hearts of your whole sex," said Wandesford, furiously, " arc not worth tbe earth I tread : vou have no heart. you have nothing but pride, caprice, and desire. Wbiie the first men in Europe were at your feet you spurned them. My honourable addresses, the addresses of a man ofthe first fiimily, fortune, and cha¬ racter were despised ; but tbe moment you saw this Irishman, tbis beir of the poverty, and pride, and infamy of his country, you rushed into his arms, though he dashed you from tbem. Perhaps his figure awoke your classical taste, and you wished to transfer your study, like the statuary of old, from marble to flesh."
Armida was indignantly retiring, but he detained her by force. " Mark me ! by Heaven, I am not lamenting the discovery of your worthîessness !—no, I rejoice in it; but í will make such use of it as will effectually secure my ho¬ nour, and your repentance, if not your reformation. I vvill watch your very soul : 1 w ill sift your every word ; I will be an Argus on your conduct, and an interpreter ofyour very eyes." (i Hold, sir !" said Armida, vvith a look that awed and silenced even him, *' and let me remind you ofyour only se- curity, my own honour : at this moment it enables me to despise your menaces, as at every future one it will to defy them." He relinquished the arm be bad rudely seized, and walked sullenly away, ashamed ofthe conviction it had forced on him. ťt Bnt let mc warn you, Colonel Wan¬ desford/' she continued, leaning on her scat to support her trembling frame, (( that, unless you intend to defeat your
own power, you wiil uot again thus ven¬ ture to abuse it." " What i'" said Wandesford, starting at her last words, c< do you then intend to retreat from your engagements ?" " Oh, no !" said Armida, smiling with high disdain: i{ Oh, no, thou honourable lover ! I will fulfil the bond : my person and fortune will be your's : you shall bear about this wretched, faded figure, in all the heartless pageantry of splendid mi¬ sery ; but take care that even before your victim is bound she docs notescape." cc And wbo can take you from me now?" said Wandesford, with a mixture of rancour and fear. ff There is a band even stronger than your's : 1 tbink while I am speaking to you I feci it on my heart: its touch warns' me tbat iny present sufferings will last me all my life, but will not last too long." She retired toher apartment, which she
did not quit till the night preceding that fixed for their departure for England. During tbe interval, Rosine frequently entered her apartment, and always found lier employed in writing : sbe never spoke, or even raised her head ; and Rosine re¬ tired silently as she entered. But on that evening, after having made her own brief preparation for tbe journey, unable to bear the still and omi¬ nous gloom of her apartment, and the silence of the castle, only broken by the half-heard step of a hurrying domestic,«, she went at a late hour to Armida's apart¬ ment : she found her in a travelling dress, and prepared to sit up all night, as the carriages were to be ready in a few hours. A large packet lay on the table before her : she looked at it for some time, and then said calmly, " Take those pa¬ pers, my dear Rosine : let thera meet no eye but your's. It is no superstition that dictates to me this journey will be íny last : once I had hoped tbat admiration,
not pity, would have accompanied my departure from life. Alas ! I now feel tbat nothing but my sufferings will sur¬ vive me," Rosine took the papers ; but on her re¬ turn to her apartment she found it im¬ possible to retire to sleep» The castle clock had struck two; at six their drea¬ ry journey was to commence. The snow that drifted against the casements obscur¬ ed all view from them ; and the hollow sweeping of the wintry wind making her thoughts every moment more gloomy, sbe revived her dying fire, and sat down to examine the papers that lay on her ta¬ ble. Yet often as the storm beat strong¬ ly against the walls, and imagination formed other sounds within her desolate chamber, she dropped the papers, and mentally exclaimed— Ci Is this the prepa- tton for a bridal journey !"
VOL. II. j
Armide/ s thoughts since the departure of Connal. " These are the last lines I shall pro¬ bably write, and there is but one human eye they will ever meet : thus the last efforts of a mind once destined to celebri¬ ty will be lost, like itself, in oblivion ; and this consideration presses on my mind eveo at the moment when I believed but one thought could reach or move it. How much was expected from me !—how much was bestowed on me !—and bnfw little have I done. 4t The grave where he lies could not more effectually convict my poor father of the vanity of his fondness than if be could behold his darling Armida now." 4c "Щ Ж Ж Ж ifs "«4P " Alas ! how different are the impres¬ sions we receive from imagination and passion. Educated in a celestial climate, wbere every object excited the mind and senses, my young and ardent miud rc-
fleeted every image presented to it brighter than the original : every effort I made to express my sensations increased thera ; tbe images multiplied, tbe language coloured and kindled as I spoke, and the praises I received won tbe race for mc before it was concluded. But now my imagination is gone: an object without dimensions and witbout colour seeras to occupy my mind's eye : I want strength to conceive the ex¬ tent of my misery : when I would speak of it, I have no words; when I vvould pirrat it, fhc picture is black, and a voice from the bottom of ray heart tells me death alone слп penetrate or express the depth of feeling there." " Anyone that remembered mc would advise me to apply to my former re¬ sources, and tell methat one Hke me could never want means to occupy his mind and time. Alas ! I feel that a common mind would not feel half my wretchedness. i2
Calypso, when she was deserted, felt the consciousness of her immortality and genius a curse—and the eternal verdure of her isle was a reproach to the desola¬ tion of her heart." " I may say in the language of the Eastern fable—I am a ruined building, and he is tbe architect." * * * ***** Kŕ Alas ! had this sacrifice been made for him, with what triumph would I have sunk into obscurity, with what delight would I have given up my talents, as the deities are said to put off the rays that surround them when they stoop to a favoured mortal. But when we make a sacrifice without consolation and without praise, our own hearts begin to doubt their motives, and the exertion of the sublimest energy, wanting its honour, al¬ most loses its reality." <** * #,* * * * " That luxury of the imagination and
senses, to which I was accustomed, has long ceased, and I resign it without a murmur, but not without life can I resign the luxuries of passion and the heart." *·#·»***** " Even at this moment of desolation I cannot envy Gabriella : she could not have won him by any thing that had alliance with the passions of the heart, or greatness of mind : I could not stoop to her art even for him : I never employed the art of woman, I had no occasion for it, but if I had a superior mind, how wretchedly has it been appreciated. Often in my own heart I read my epitaph, as ifit was inscribed by an invisible : she whom he left to perish deserved him better than she whom he preferred.—But, alas ! the place to which his perfidy is hurry¬ ing ine fast annihilates pride as w«li as love." ·**##.**** " How often in the day I think I hear i3
the sound of his voice: how often I watch for his light and rapid step, and when I turn and see only vacancy' " A lingering of my former .-härader has made me wish even in these pages to produce something worthy of myself: impossible ! the passion tbat takes away our minds takes away latiguagc too, and denies us the relief that ordinary distress extorts by its very clamour." *' It consoles me that his crime was committed against me alon:-, and I for¬ give him. 4 ' To me his image still appears in that dazzling and cruel perfection, that seems to throw the blame of desertion from him, and makes me accuse mvself instead of him. " Ah ! what are his talents and virtues to me: what avails it to me that his name will one day sd the page of history on fire, if it only speaks death
to me. He is gone to make a new era in the history of roan, and who will pause in writing the story to tell that he left the woman that loved him to perish. The storm that fertilizes a country crushes the rose and violet into dust." ** # - # * ·* ·#.*· <e My sufferings are great, for there is no commiseration for thera ; no one pities the victim of sensibility and pas¬ sion. €( Every one can commiserate the ordinary calamities of life, because they are within tbe reach of ordinary con- ceptions, but is it ever in the power of circumstances to make us as wretched as our own hearts can. * ff I am still young and wealthy, and therefore the world will laugh, and tell me I must be happy. ' e Alas ! were I old, indigent, and destitute, I should perhaps meet with i4
compassion; but should I so certainly die of a broken heart." " Sometimes I wish to balance my sufferings by the pleasure his image once gave me; but I cannot: in vain 1 sit for hours trying to recall it: of the in¬ numerable graces of his figure I have not at times the slightest recollec¬ tion ·— chance, not thought, restores them to me, and I repeat to myself lhe name of Conual a thousand times a day, without a distinct idea annexed to the name." " Gracious heaven ! how couid he thus drive to despair the woman that loved bim as I did ; is he really depraved and unfeeHng, or am I with all my talents and passion unable even to inspire pity. Alas ! it is the fate of woman always to do too much or too little ; perhaps tbe powers I was so anxious to display
wearied and disgusted him: men of the most powerful minds, it is said, admire females of a contrary character ; but did he not see it was love, not vanitv, that prompted me, and that my talents w r ere displayed not to demand homage, but to offer it." "Ж* 'F Ж Τ φ Ж Ж ** " I have a sensation in my inmost heart like a burning thirst, incessant and intolerable ; but the water to quench it can no where be found on earth." " When I lie down at night, my imagination, even in sleep, is tinged with ihc gloom of that scenery in which I first beheld him : I dream of heath and moor, of ruins and moonlight ; my feet stumble on the dark mountains, and when I awake, I am further than ever from him." *♦ * ♦ .& ♦ -Heft / f I wish that night I went in quest of
him I had been carried dying into his presence, that he might have said :■ ■■ * She İs not what she was when I beheld her first," " My fate is hard : many complain of difficulties in life, which their pru¬ dence or their resolution might remove ; liow could I have contended with cir¬ cumstances. " The world, its events, and its charac¬ ters, were as dust beneath my feet. But his heart is changed ; his heart is turned against me : in tliose few words my destiny is written as with a pen of adamant; I am hound with a chain whose corrosions prey on my heart like vultures, whose iron enters the soul. His heart is changed, and what re¬ mains for me. I am so out of charity with myself, that I no longer wonder no one loves me." " My wretchedness sometimes forces
me to look abroad, and observe a fate similar to my own,—When a woman ceases to love, she ceases to love the whole world ; no pursuit can interest, no human being can please her. " Man has enough to do in life; he ean embroil himself in its tumults; he can forget himself in its pleasures ; but woman, born for passion, if she ceases to love ceases to live. <e Love to man is like a flower that he steps out of his path for a moment to gather : he is pleased with it ; he gazes on its beauty ; he inhales its fragrance, and flings it away to wither. But wo¬ man, like the Persian Peri, feeds on its odorous essence, and feeds on it alone, or dies. €< Yes, I feel it ; all that agitates or embellishes life is over with mc ; nothing disturbs, nothing touches, nothing awakes me: like the ancient cities of Italy, the burning tide of passiou aud despair hm
passed over me, and art and genius, the picture, the song, and the landscape, sleep bçlow for ever." *·*·*«**<.** fi My talents arc gone, the impulse that pride and flattery once gave them was worn away by repetition. (C Passion succeeded, and—oh ! how brilliant and eternal seeras that light with which genius irradiates the new world of love. In his presence, I couid have been all that has been fancied of a muse or a grace. But he is gone, and I am nothing ; like the children of Israel, on their march from Egypt, he has taken the jewels of silver and of gold, and left the first-born of my heart dead within me." *#*****·» i( Tbe bitterest conviction that can come to the heart of woman reached mine. A youpger and a fairer than me lias wou bira : — alas ! what can 1 oppose to nature and to youth, to the
vivid and celestial bloom of eighteen» warm with the first light of passion: whatever graces I possessed were in¬ tellectual ; it was taste, it was im¬ agination, that gave expression to my figure. " And when her bloom is fled, what will she retain. But wbat can be more fugitive than the boasted powers of mind : will the glow of her form be as soon lost as that of my mind ? A younger and fairer than me has won him, and though every deserted woman may com¬ plain like me, yet my destiny seems strange, it seems to unfold a new page in human suffering, though I have but to add my name to that of myriads, who have traced it like me with å dying hand." ·*#-*-*·-#*·*** ** As great as my sufferings aro, I dread still more the moment when they shall cease, when I shall think of hira no more." ********
At this moment Rosine, who had often paused to weep, beard the voice of Wandesford, and in a few moments the hurrying steps of servants announced their approaching departure. She concealed the papers, and hurried to Armida's apartment, who, standing silently amid her attendants, appeared to witness the preparations as she would those for her approaching death. Lady Montclare now entered, and after a cold embrace, and an unanswered inquiry for the unfortunate Endymion, who did not appear, they descended to the hall : Wandesford was waiting with loud impatience for them. As Rosine crossed the immense gothic hall, tbe darkness, the dim lights and the looks of the half-awakened servants, faintly appearing in its wide extent, seemed to her to resemble a funeral pro¬ cession to a vault. Shuddering with cold and terror, sbe placed herself in tbe carriage : the roads
had been cleared, and attended by a strong party, tbeir gloomy journey was performed in safety and silence, and about noon they arrived at Lough rea.
СИЛР. VI. How far is't called to Fores. What arc these So withered and ьо wild in their attire. SlIAKESPE.XBt. On their arrival at Lougbrea, Wan¬ desford learned tbat Ba nag her was but twenty miles further, and that wben tbey reached it they would be out of Con- naught; and in spite of a tremendous snow-storm, and the remonstrances of the people at the inn, he determined to press forward and reach it if possible before evening. Armida and Rosine made no resistance. Tbe soldiers were dismissed, as the part of the country they had now to travel through was perfectly tranquil, and after a slight refreshment, they again set off about two, menaced on every side by the state
of the elements and of the country. The sun set: the country was one bleak expanse of snow, intersected by tracts of bog, to which the unfrozen water gave a dusky hue; and the sky, livid and lowering with the pallid gloom of winter, seemed to denounce all its terrors against the travellers. Armida, throwing herself back in the carriage, and cover¬ ing her face with her handkerchief, kept a profound silence ; and Wandesford appeared to be asleep. Rosine, left to herself, involuntarily threw her eyes on the dim prospect around her, and better acquainted with tbe country than either of her fellow-travellers, she soon dis¬ covered that it was not the road to Leiuster they were passing, as that would long since have led them through Kiilimer and Eyrecourt. With difficulty she roused Wandes¬ ford, aad made him comprehend that tbe driver must have mistaken the road. Wandesford, with a peal of oatbs, stop-
ping the carriage, demanded of the man where he was : he at first persisted that he was right, and that they were now near Banaglier, but affer a short exami¬ nation of the country, he confessed lie liad lost the track ; and blaming Wan¬ desford for forcing bim to pursue the journey at such an hour, and in such weather, refused to proceed further with¬ out information. Rosine, during the debate, examined the country still more closely, and in spite of the darkness, discovered with horror that they were in the very part of it which was infested by rebels; this discovery she did uot com¬ municate, but her silence only increased her fears. The driver, urged by Wan¬ desford's execrations, proceeded a few yards ftirther ; but the horses then sud¬ denly stopped, and he declared that their restivencss proceeded from their intuitive sense of some danger, which the dark¬ ness of tbe night prevented him from discovering. Wandesford, now compeli-
èd to exert some degree of reflection, ordered the carriage which followed with Armida's female attendants to pre¬ cede them cautiously, and in a few minutes they learned the dreadful neces¬ sity ofthe precaution. A horrible crash, accompanied by the pluugingof the drown¬ ing horses, and tbe screams of the un¬ fortunate women, compelled them to stop. Wandesford, unwilling to encounter the inclemency of the night, still urged tbe driver on, and slowly the half-frozen horses dragged on a few steps further, and heavily the carriage followed through the deep roads, sinking up to the nave of the wheels at every step ; till Armida and Rosine, terrified at tbe fate of the unfor¬ tunate women, and trembling for their own, insisted on quitting the carriage, aud seeking some shelter even on foot. Tbey alighted, and called aloud on the sufferers : no voice answered them : the «dirili wind bore their voices far awav #
and the outriders, half-blinded by the snow, and frozen almost to their saddles, could give them no information: they had seen the carriage suddenly disappear : tlwy had heard the cry of those within it, but they knew no more. The horror that sat on every counte¬ nance was rendered more ghastly by the light that played over the horizon, Tliere was no moon ; but the quick and vivid coruscations of the sky, revealing nothing but snow and heath, seemed to appear only to mock their terrors. During a long interval of their disappearance, Rosine discovered a Hght at a vast distance, whose dim but steady ray was soon distinguished by tbe rest of the party; and thither tliey determined to turn their course, and if possible to pro¬ cure assistance for tbeir unfortunate attendants, and shelter for themselves. The servants again mounting their horses, proceeded cautiously ; and Ar¬ mida and Rosine followed in the car-
riage, till the inequalities of the road, never intended for the passage of vehicles, compeUed them again to quit it, and some¬ times supported by, but oftener shrink¬ ing from the oaths and impatience of Wandesford, tbey attempted to follow the direction of the light. With incredible difficulty they at length reached a large desolate building, vvhich stood without office or improve¬ ment near it, alone on the heath. The light disappeared as they approached it, and their loud applications for admission produced nothing but their own echo. At length a voice from within inquired tbeir business.: they demanded admission and shelter for the night, and were told there was no accommodation within ; that it was a deserted house, inhabited only by an occasional tenant, and in the disturbed state of the country the inmates were afraid to admit travellers at that unseasonable hour. Wandesford, in a fury, commanded the servants to break
open the door; and the people within, apparently terrified by his violence, after a muttering consultation between them¬ selves consented to admit them : the light re-appeared, and the harsh and grating bars of the door were slowly withdrawn. A man and woman stood at the door : famine, want, and wickedness, were painted in the most lurid colours on their faces, and the miserable blue light they held darkened the expression while it revealed it. Tbe features of the man were rendered wilder by a grim smile, as he viewed the figure of Armida, and her superb, though soiled dress. The party hurried through the Iarge damp ball, and, uninvited, entered an apartme.it, which, though little less dreary, was illuminated by an immense turf fire burnhiíí on tbe hearth. Their grim husts gave tium no welcome ; and even while reviving tbeir chilled limbs at the «fire, tbey stared round them with
terror at the damp, dripping walls, the broken floor, the black ceiling, and the vast, shapeb'ss, creaking blocks tbat seemed not to have been put to tbe use of chairs, for half a century since they were made. Some brown bread and whiskey were on the table, of which, after a long silence, they were sullenly invited to par¬ take, and on tbeir refusal, the people, wbo seemed to think all claim on their attention was over, lounged gloomily against the window, surveying their guests with looks of murky inquietude, which they tenfold returned with looks of dismay. Rosine, as one of the jarring doors moved behind her with every blast tbat bowled round the bouse, caught a view of a number of arms depoiited in the next room : she had resolution enough to con¬ ceal a discovery tbat sbe felt could do no good, but she felt her terror intolerable from tbat moment. After a sullen pause, the man turned
to the window as if to examine the wea¬ ther, and then with his back turned to tbem, said: " There will bea moon in less than an hour, and you had better pursue y ou r journey." cc We don't know where to go," said Wandesford as sullenly, " and considering the little accommodation we trouble you for, you can afford to spare it somewhat longer." " If vou do not like it," said the man, " tbe sooner you quit it tbe better." The woman gave him a look, as much as to say, we bad better keep them as long as we can ; but he repelled her by an angry motion, and Rosine, astonished at a degree of inbospitahty from which the poorest Irish cottager would have revolted, could not reconcile it with the apparent poverty of tbe people, and the liberal compensation tbey might expect from the appearance and equipage ofthe travellers.
The servants, who had found a shed for the carriage and horses, now returned to request a light and some assistance to discover the rest ofthe party, and the man went muttering with them. The woman remained : the same dead and chilling silence continued. Armida leaned exhausted on the shoulder of Ro¬ sine, and Wandesford strode up and down the room, grumbling curses between his closed teeth. Heavy steps vvere now heard approach¬ ing the room, and two men suddenly entered it, who starting at the sight of the strangers, retired to the other end of the room : the woman spoke to them in Irish, bui they did not seem to heed her, and conversed together in whispers. As Wandesford crossed the room, his eye suddenly caught theirs : he started, and stifling an exclamation that seemed to partake of hatred and terror, he threw himself in his chair, and spread his band- VOL. п. it
194 THE MILESIAN. kerchief over his face. One of the men then rose, and placed himself opposite Wandesford, as if determined to meet his look : and Wandesford, who felt from his steps he was near him, seemed forced by some invisible power to raise himself and meet his eye. The man grinned and nodded at him with horrid significance, and Rosine, roused by this extraordinary scene, observed with terror their coun¬ tenances thus fixed on each other, glaring with the paleness of malignity and fear. Unable any longer to bear her fears alone, she touched Armida, who raised her head, and they interchanged looks of alarm, but they had no time for conjectural terror, for the otlier man rising, they both seized Wandesford, and with loud curses, they attempted to drag him from the room. Wandesford struggled witb bis utmost strength, uttering the most dreadful cries for assistance, vainly echoed by Armida
and Rosine, who, screaming and mad with horror, expected to see him mur¬ dered before their eyes. His strength encreased by despair, he resisted them at first, till the female fury held tbe lighted candle to his hands, with. which he had grasped the table. He was then torn away : the woman followed^ and Armida and Rosine, who had sunk ou tbe floor together, were left alone. Gasping, almo. t senseless, and clinging to each other for the support which nei¬ ther could give, t hi y did not dare to raise tbeir beads, to speak, or even to breathe for some minutes. A loud noise at the door roused tbem, and they recognised tbe voice of one ofthe servants demand¬ ing admittance, " The door is locked," said Rosine; " I heard tbem fasten it as they went out." " Try to escape by the window, my Jady/* said the man, in a voie* of *2
terror : " I cannot assist you, and there is no good meant you here." The terrified women examined the windows, but they found them all secured beyond their strength, and the man felt from their silence the trial was in vain. " Ah !" cried Armida, sinking again on the ground, " Connal is not here to save us." " Where is Colonel Wandesford?" said Rosine, almost afraid to listen to the answer. " I saw thera drag him from the house, roy lady," said the man : " they said they would not do his business here." " Gracious heaven!" cried Armida, " then they will murder hira." " Oh ! Edward, if these people are banditti, tell them I have articles of value, tell them I have jewels in my possession : I will give them every thing; I will make tbem rich for life, if they will let us es¬ cape witbout insultand danger. 3 '
" Ah í my lady, they took care to find tbat out themselves," said the man, " for they are now busy plundering the car¬ riage ; but they said all their business was with Colonel Wandesford, and per¬ haps you have nothing to fear." " Perhaps !" repeated Rosine, " oh! we have every thing to fear from such wretches : try, my good fellow, to make your escape from this dreadful place ; I know wc arc not many miles from the castle ; try to reach it, and send us assist¬ ance, before we die of terror here." The man was going to reply, but he was repelled by the approach of some one, and in a few minutes the woman agaia entered the room. Hard as she was, she seemed touched by the sight of tbe deso¬ late females, and she attempted to give them some comfort, but her words were contradicted by her voice and looks, that seemed only calculated to inspire disgust and dismay. Sbe pressed the spirits on Armida, кЗ
and when they were rejected witb horror, said calmly, " Poor thing, he was your sweetheart I suppose : well, don't fret, he is in ÊToed bands." 44 Oh ! tell m only," said Rosine in earnest agony, " in wbat hands wc are, or what is it we have to expect; "and Armida, forgetting all ber hatred for Wandesford, in tbe horrible contempla¬ tion of his murder, pleaded as earnestly for his life as if her own depended on its preservation ; but neither inquiry nor supplication could extort more than cold and coarse assurances that they were in safety and in good hands, that tbey bad nothing to fear, and with a good fire and good whiskey to warm and comfort them, it was their own folly if they fretted for any thing : sbe then left them, adding she would tell them more to-morrow ; and wearied with terror and with conjectures on tbis mysterious adventure, tbey at length sunk into mute despair, and with eyes fixed on the dim windows waited
for day, in the prospect of which even the most hopeless feel a kind of indefinite se¬ curity. As the men dragged Wandesford from the house, they expressed no intention of immediate violence, but finding he still continued his struggles, they secured his arras with strong ropes, and placing him on a horse between thera, they set off at full gallop. The dreadful state ofthe weather and the country, and the weakness of their miserable horses, often threatened their lives during tbeir perilous journey, whicli was pursued at full speed ; and Wandes¬ ford, stupified by his struggles, his ter¬ rors, and his speed, resigned himself with¬ out speaking to his conductors. At length they arrived at a river, and here Wandesford believed their progress must be checked, but the men seizing his reins, plunged in : their horses swam or rather floundered through the broken ice, k4
and drenched and chilled, and almost lifeless, they reached the opposite bank. There was a dim and clouded moon, such as shews itself through the thick vapours of a snowy night, and Wandesford disco¬ vered on an eminence the ruins of an edi¬ fice that had once been sacred : the nu¬ merous narrow spires, the crosses on every pinnacle, and the vast eastern window, were faintly touched by that cold and shadowy light that seems to announce the habitations of the dead, AH round was bare, bleak, and deso¬ late ; but as they then approached, some¬ thing like a watch-word was given, and echoed from the walls, and some figures were seen moving, and apparently armed, in the shadow of the building, and their forms, covered with snow from head to foot, strangely contrasted the dark and massive walls, and the deep silence that pervaded them. Wandesford was led forward, and tbe
men left him in a room, which, vvhen he examined, had some appearance of mo¬ dern comfort. Tbere were seats and a fire, and from its look it seemed to have been once tbe cell ofthe abbot. lie was roused by voices in tbe next room, into which the men had passed, and he heard them relating with wild exulta¬ tion the prize they had seized. He knew too well the cause of tbeir hatred, and he shook with uncontrollable fear. "What, is Wandesford in your hands ! " said a voice whose tones*froze his blood : tc how, where, by what me&ns ?" The men related tbat tbey had found him in a house of theirs, about two miles off, where they believed he had been by accident for shelter, and tbat he was tra¬ velling with his wife and another fe¬ male. <f Leave me, leave me for a moment," said Connal in an agony of emotion : u I cannot speak to you now ; but/* calling af-
ter thera, " touch him not at the peril of your lives : leave him to me alone/' Wandesford was now fully awake tohis situation; and he collected the small re¬ mains ofhis mental dignity to meet it. He believed his death certain ; and he felt, as most men destitute of religion and princi¬ ple feel in tbeir last hour, a sense of pride, a false but imposing substitute for both. In a few moments a number of men entered the room, and silently ranging themselves round it, leaned on their arms with their eyes fixed on the ground. Connal entered last, and stood amid his desperate band like the great angelic chief among the fallen host of inferior spirits, awed by his strength, dazzled by his brightness, and lost by his example. Wandesford, rising, proudly stood op¬ posite to him with his arms folded ; but he could not lift up his eyes to that figure which still stood ¡proudly eminent above that of all the sons of men.
ff Wandesford," said Connal, in a voice which swelled to thunder as he spoke, " let this hour convince you how vain are human distinctions. " You are a man of rank, and power, and character ; I am a rebel, aud an out¬ cast from society ; one whose life you might devote to public justice on any »spot of England or Ireland but this wild heath alone. Yet you are in my power: a single word from me, and you are swept away from the living world : a breath of this hunted fugitive can scatter your birth and honours like dust before him. You are i u шу power, and I will make you feel it in every vein of your stubborn heart. " Look on these men : you know their faces weli : look on them and tremble at your crime ! They are brave and faith¬ ful : they might have been useful and in¬ nocent,—What are they now, "You shudder in dread of the depra¬ vity to which you yourself have forced
them. When they saw you first tbey owned their delusion : they flung those arms from their hands : they threw them¬ selves on the mercy of government, and on your honour. ** Traitor ! unworthy of the name of soldier ! Cold-blooded, mean, and mer¬ ciless betrayer ! what is the reward of their generous submission, of tbeir naked, unstipulating confidence? *' Tbey are lost to tbeir families and their children : tbey are without home and without country : they are hunted to tbe wilds like brutes : tbeir blood is bought and sold ! Yet, guilty as they (and they are guilty), with infamy around tbem, and death in tbeir view, there is not one of them who cannot, laying bis hand on bis condemned breast, thank heaven he is not such as you. (C For myself, Wandesford, who twice saved your life, who held rny naked breast between you and these men when thcir just and ominous feai s demanded
your life, for rae, I will not speak of myself, lest I should forget you are de¬ fenceless. " I will not pollute my lips, rebel as I am, with your crimes any longer : I has¬ ten to pronounce your sentence, for I am now your judge. Such mercy as you shewed me wben I was in your power you may expect from me. You are de¬ ceived : I will be most exquisite in my vengeance. " Go ! begone ! quit this place in safety and in infamy. The word of the man you bave ruined is pledged for your safety : the hands of the men whom you have dipped in blood shall lead you hence. " Begone ! and to the last moment of your life remember the vengeance of O'Morven." Wandesford, stunned and overwhelmed, scarce heard his last words ; but the men did,and they murmured loudly, and struck their arms vvith that wild aad inarticu-
late expression vvhich supplies, and more than supplies tbe wantof language among a ferocious and mutinous soldiery. Connal rushed forward. " Let none of you lay a finger on him. Who is your leader? Not a hair ofhis head shall fall to tbe ground !—He is her husband." He leaned trembling with agony against the wall. " I will cleave to the middle the first of you tbat touches him !—he Í3 her husband !" Wandesford saw his agony: he saw the thick drops stand on his quivering forehead : he saw him in vain drag his luxuriant hajr over his cheek to bide his distracted features: he feasted on tbe sight ; and neither honour nor gratitude codtd impel him to tbe discovery whicli at that moment he would have even sacri¬ ficed his life to conceal. The murmurs of the party subsided, and they were leading Wandesford away, wben Connal, who bad ^covered him¬ self, exclaimed—
ee Let him remain lipre to-night :' let , bim have the best accommodation the cir- cumstanceshe lias reduced usto will allow. t€ Colonel Wandesford," be added more sternly, tc we trust you no more : you must be conducted blindfold from tbis ruin to-morrow, " If we meet you in the field, y u will then be at my unshackled mercy : but tell your friends who arm against us tbat tbey fight against men, who will gnaw the roots of tbe earth for sustenance, who will bear this bleak season on their naked bo¬ dies, before they will sell those bodies at less than a life for every limb, or yield themto your gibbets while a soldier's hand remains to give them a soldier's death," The next morning Wandesford was conducted in safety from the ruined ab¬ bey ; and forgetting even Armida in his determinations of instant and dreadful vengeance, be set off with the utmost ipeed for the town wbere his regiment was quartered.
His proud heart could sooner have submitted to deatii than to owe his life again to Connal, and be indulged his passions, that tbey might stifle the re¬ proaches ofhis conscience, and his trem¬ bling recollection of danger. Armida and Rosine passed the night in speechless solitude. The morning broke, and though they had longed for its light, they started, for they feared it vvould only discover new dangers. About noon tbe woman entered ; but lier maimer was now totally changed : she behaved with the utmost scrvilitv, and entreated them to take some refresh¬ ment, and to quit their dreary apartment as if tbey were at perfect Hberty. They foUowed her to a room which had been rendered as comfortable as any room in that dreary mansion could, and exhausted by fatigue, willingly partook of the refreshments which were heaped on the table; but neither inquiry nor sup-
plication could extort from her a hint that might intimate into whose hands they had fallen, why they were detained, or how tbey might be liberated. "You will know all when the captain come«/' was tbe answer; and when entreated to discover wbo this dreaded шап might be, on whom their fate de- pended, she left tbem in silence. Yet ofteii sbe returned and shewed a solicitude for their accommodation, which tbey felt must be owing to another. Of¬ ten too she shewed a wish to communi¬ cate more ; but then starting at the sHghtest sound the wind produced in the passages of tbis desolate building, she hastily quitted tbem, as if fearful of dis¬ covery. None of the servants who attended tbem appeared all day, nor could they trace from the windows tbe slightest pros¬ pect of assistance. The country was covered with snow, on which no trace of human foot vyas
visible, no vestige of human habitation discernible; and they sat shuddering over their fire during the whole of that drearv dav. ι/ J Night came ori. Rosine, whose terrors were increased by her stronger sense of danger, walked restlessly up and down the room ; but Armida, oppressed more by the burden of her heart than her situ¬ ation, sat passively. Starting, sbe called on Rosine to listen to the sound of a harp. " What harp ?" said Rosine; " I hear no harp." " But I do," said Armida—" I hear the harp of the old bard. Is it an omen of fancy, or a real sound?" They Hstened, and then heard it faintly but distinctly in a remote part of the building. Both eagerly attempted to open the door, but it was secured : they called on the woman, but no one answered; aod* Armida, returning to her seat, resigned
lì rself to that delicious but mournful sensation which music excites wben it revives tbe scenes in whicii we first heard it. Her heart was with Connal on the lone heath again—again sbe offered him tbe sacrifice of life, luxury, and fame, but tbe tear that wandered down her pale cheek was dried by the recollection for whom tbat sacrifice bad been rejected. At that moment tbe woman hastily entering, exclaimed— " The captain is coming." She retired before any inquiry could be made or answered, and Armida and Rosine hurried to tbe window with min¬ gled curiosity and terror. A severe frost bad succeeded tbe snow ofthe preceding day: the surface of the ground was bard, dry, and glittering. They heard from a great distance tbe tramp of horses: the moon was bright, tbe troop approached, and several per¬ sons with lights appearing at tbe door to receive them, they distinguished a horse-
man of superior figure alighting first, to whom all the rest appeared to pay a kind of rude deference, but he was in a military uniform of green, and all their fears were re-increased, as they beheld his wild, martial figure, his commanding gestures, and the mute and savage sub¬ mission which the party appeared to pay him. The loud noise of their entrance echo¬ ing through the spacious building drown¬ ed every other sound, and Armida and Rosine had no beart to mention their ter¬ rors to each other ; but before they could speak, the woman rushed in to announce the captain was approaching, and a light and rapid step followed her. Tbey rose at his entrance. There were no lights in the room, and the dim fire did not reveal his figure ; - but tbey could distinguish his taking off his cap as he entered, and advancing with graceful dignity. " Forgive this intrusion," said he, " it was caused by my \\ ibh to remove
your fears : dread nothing from us : we are unhappy men, whose feelings are at war with our situation ; but desperate as it is, it cannot compel us to oppress those whom man is bound to protect and honour," He was interrupted by a groan from Armida,, who in the first sound of his voice had recognized the voice of Connal, and vainly attempting to suppress her emotion, sunk from her seat on the ground. Connal rushed forward to as¬ sist her : lights had been brought in, and he discovered tbat the female he was sup¬ porting was Armida. The burst of agony with which he called on her name, ihe impassioned clasp with which he held her lifeless form one moment to his heart, the despair with whuh he relinquished her while he still continued to bend over her, amazed Ro¬ sine, and sbe said mentally— " Is this the lover of Gabriella? Is it repentance or compassion ?"
" Rosine," said Connal, recollecting himself, "are you here too? Forgive me, I did not see you : my eyes are still dim, and aching with the snow." And as he turned away, his luxuriant hair in vain concealed the tear he wiped away— " I will not insult her by my presence," said he, mournfully retiring : " tell her I am gone to give orders for her safe conduct. While she remains, she shall be unseen by me, and when she departs, the blessing that follows her steps shall be heard by heaven alone," Armida recovered slowly she looked round, and saw he was gone - " Why did he go ?" said she, faintly : " does Gabriella forbid him the exercises of common humanity ? Alas! if he could bear the reproaches of this wasted figure, be bad no other to fear." Rosine, attempting to console her, mentioned the assurances of safety and liberation she had received from him. " Yes," said Armida, "yes, I need
«ot be told that he can resign me without a sigh, though it will cost me life to resign him. Alas ! what a difference does the heart feel between those cold and measured duties that the man of ho¬ nour pays the helpless female, and thať burning tribute—that gift of the free- grace of love, that like that of angels seems intuitive and involuntary." An approaching step was heard, and Connal again entered. Armida bastily drew down her veil, as he approached with faltering steps. <* Forgive tbis second interruption," said he, instill more faltering accents: " I had forgot what I meant to say ; Colonel Wandesford is safe, and at li¬ berty,. Your attendants too are here, and to-morrow shall accompany you wherever you wish to go I need not add/' he continued, while his dark cheek was tinged with crimson, " that even in tbis den of rapine all that belongs to you has been as sam ·- iq a eanctuary, My
own faithful men shall to-morrow attend you within a mile ofthe castle, or where you wish, at the risk of their lives." "And is Wandesford safe?" cried Rosine, to whom tbe frightful image o£ his murder was still present; and even Armida uttered an expression of pleasure, for she felt that she was not deserted while Wandesford lived, and this gave her a degree of confidence that her for¬ lorn situation seemed to demand. The awful frown that was sometimes seen on Connal's brow gathered as he looked at her ; his voice suddenly became firm, and he said : " The honour due to the sex and rank ofthe wife of a general officer shall be paid strictly by the man who avows him¬ self his mortal enemy, and who will never forget it, except when he has him in hi: power." "His wife! did he say his wife! cried Armida, starting from her seat í be proudly retired ; " but what matte
it," she added, resuming her seat with dignity, " wbat matters it to tbe lover of Gabriella whether 1 am the wife of Wan¬ desford or not?" The woman now returned, and from the increased servility of her manner they easily comprehended that they were in¬ debted to Connal for the change it had undergone. Profuse and even elegant refreshments were spread before a cheerful fire, but Armida could not partake of them ; and Rosine, who shuddered to think the pur¬ chase of thera might have been some brave man's Hfe, declined them too. The woman retired, after inquiring at what hour they wished to depart in the morn¬ ing. Armida, after some ineffectual at¬ tempts to speak, motioned to Rosine to answer, and she, who felt from this ap¬ peal ihey could not quit this spot too soon, naming an eariy hour, the wokaan retired. The presence of Connal seemed to act VOL. " h
on every inmate of this rude mansion: no loud voices, no hurried Φ -ps, no mut¬ ter of conspiracy, or bar-4 of riot, an- noimrcd the haun» of banditti ; yet Ar¬ mida and Rosine felt terror even in tbis strange caini, till weariness overpowering every other sensation, thev threw them¬ selves in their clothes on the humble bed, as the hoarse clock below striking one, was answered by tbe jarring sounds of bolts and locks strongly secured, and the solitary step of some individual, wbo appeared to be stationed as a sentinel in the hall.
ENØ OP YOL. II.
В. Ci A HE ľ. Printer, Well-it ι ret, Loado».
