Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Theodosius de Zulvin: the monk of Madrid: a Spanish tale, delineating various traits of the human mind
THE
MONK OF MADRID, A SPANISH TALE. CHAP. XL Man ís but man, inconstant still, and various ; There's no to-morrow in him like to-day : Perhaps the atoms rolling in his brain Make him think honestly this present hour; The next, a swarm of base ungrateful thoughts May mount aloft, Drydek. xjl month now elapsed, during which the twins received letters from their uncles in answer to those they had written immediate*» ]y on their arrival at Madrid. Although the style of these epistles were as different as the dispositions of the men who composed them, yet they both contained the warmest assurances of affection and regard. VOL. II. в
2
Orlando's passion for play had increased, since the first night of his success at the public rooms to which he had been intro¬ duced by Don Esau de Cavet. Although fortune had frowned upon him in almost every attempt since that period, he was too infatuated with this dangerous amusement to fly from the allurements it held forth. Perhaps the principal incitement which first urged him to enter into such scenes of dissipation was the universal neglect he experienced from the generality of those with whom he wished to associate. He soon discovered, that, whatever might be the powers of his own mind, or however superior he might suppose himself to the rest of his brother-citizens, he still possessed those na¬ tural ties of consanguinity which binds a manto society, and which is perhaps one of the most noble characteristics of his nature. However his pride or misanthropy might prompt him to abandon those pleasures which áre derived from a social intercourse with the world, the gratification of his spleen was at best but a poor compensation for such a sacrifice. He could brood over
3
imaginary wrongs, he could dwell on his own abilities, he could pretend to look with contempt on the generality of his fel¬ low creatures, and spurn at their efforts to draw him into the general corâaéi t.- but his own feelings daily whispered tarhiril he was no happy man : although he atteint) ted to deceive himself, he soon discoverèctithathe languished for objects he vainly -had en¬ deavoured to consider as baubles beneath his wishes ; that with all his distaste for man¬ kind, or all his power of intellect,·* society was still such a necessary instrument hi the fabric of his happiness, that without it he was unable to support the tottering edifice from a slow and fatal decay. Such was the situation of Orlando de Mellas : while he proudly looked upon the world with, con¬ tempt, he himself perhaps was as great an object of pity as any who composed it; He was a young man of classical education; but it was a source of neither pleasure nor satisfaction to him. Whatever enjoyments he "might derive from study, he discovered they required others to make him feel them in b2
4
their full force* Sedentary confinement after some hours palled upon his mind ; it was in thiöe^&tervâlsbibe stood in need of social comforts mM relaxation to such employ- menis, whk-h would have aided him to re* tum id ttófa^ttëkh renewed vigour and plea- тт&огфпт did he envy the rhearty wel- conltŕíofeAiis/own domestic from his fellow- sezvaiîtsî; iio such smiles greeted him ^ his presunse either inspired gloom than happi- sress* yyffiiih. all his penetration he was unable toîdiscovër the cause : his knowledge of.thfeîiworld was too trivial for such per¬ ceptions. . Had he formed accurate ideas of mankind, he would have perceived that the essence of sociality is most liable to dissolve when, á pre-eminence of any description is e^bernexerted on the one part, or felt by i\mjQáhfup:\ Equality both in mind and rank ЬГЬ rÄgmdifband to those ties in which yaribuSíjciassiesíof men are connected toge¬ ther \ψ tíístt open and reciprocal esteem for ieach other,which form a principal source of genuine -and lasting felicity. .Although Aere шауЪе exceptions to this maxim ; and
5
in certain cases individuals in different spheres of life, and possessed of very dif¬ ferent abilities, may from various causes be united by the strongest and most lively feel¬ ings of regard ; yet such instances are merely secondary to the general system. Orlando, had he wished to have been initiated as a friend with those around hira, should have been most carefully tenacious of convey¬ ing to them the faintest idea of his supe¬ riority ; and when he required them to bow to him, as a being elevated above the common level of their order, he should at the same moment have resigned every thought of joining with them under that confidence which is the result of an intercourse where equality forms the principal basis. His constant attendance at the public gaming rooms at first originated principally from his uncomfortable situation in every other party. His pride would not suffer him to seek companions; nor were his manners by any means so fascinating as to procure him more than common attention from the disinterested part of those to whom he was introduced. в 3
6 The political motives which first urged his gambling acquaintance to receive him with pleasure and flatter his vanity ap¬ peared in his eyes to proceed from the most pure esteem and just sense of his worth ; he felt the effects with redoubled warmth when he experienced a general coolness in all other assemblies. Although such sensa¬ tions might at first be accounted tbe principal incitement to his inclination for play, they were very shortly reduced to a decided taste for such amusement. Habit soon rendered thecompany and game familiar to him ; he felt more at ease when at pass-dice than at any other time or in any other situation ; he gra¬ dually became interested in the movements ; he staked higher, and his interest increased. Time flew on the wings of expectation : if he was unfortunate one night, he flew with eagerness the next to repair his loss ; if he was a winner, he was again equally anxious to win more : in short, he soon, very soon, sunk under the various passions which form a complete gamester. It was unfortunate that such impressions should be the first (possessed of any dura·
7 biíity) which his fluctuating mind received* They at once formed a root to evils as va* rious as they'were dreadful ; which, under a regular gradation, distortect his character until it became hideous in human nature, a burthen to himself, and detestable to man¬ kind. The actual source of these tremen¬ dous effects might be traced to that critical part of his education by which his uncle, Don Diego de Mellas, conceived he should instil into him the essence of every vir¬ tue. In his over care to preserve his principles from being tainted by the world, he reared him an unsocial object of its contempt ; and when he vainly threw him into its vortex a being on whom they were to gaze with awe and admiration, he was received as one whose value they despised, when it merely ¿ended to remind them of their own unworthiness. To gain some little relief in so torturing a situation, he grasped at the very bait which threatened his destruction. Yet, as the shadows of vice slowly darkened' his character, he stood an object of sincere commiseration to the few who were acquainted with the в 4
foundation and properties of the structure they saw gradually harden into infamy. He | entered into life with a heart neither callous j to the feelings of humanity, nor depraved ; under an insensibility of error. His mind ι was naturally strong and vigorous ; he was a fair work of nature, capable either of an elevation to its highest summit of excellence, or a degradation to the lowest pitch of hu¬ man frailty and disgrace. The pen of his biographer must with reluctance trace him through the gloomy, the horrid recesses of the latter ; and while justice urges him to present his distorted portrait to public view, the arduous task will réceive a material alle¬ viation in the idea, that it may serve as an example to many against a perfect re¬ liance on their own opinions and abilities, and a too little consideration to those in others. His progress in play, and his regular at¬ tendance at the public rooms, did not pass unnoticed : signior Zadok observed it with alarm. The generosity of both the uncles, and the particular admonition of Don John the night before their departure from Seville^
struck forcibly to his heart : be resolved immediately to warn him of bis danger, while there was a chance that it might pro¬ duce the desired effect. In a man of signior Zadok's character such an effort required considerable exertions ; it was perhaps one of the most disagreeable tasks he could have imposed upon himself: to any other persons except his pupils, who had asserted a partiality for gaming, he would in all pro¬ bability immediately have acquiesced in their opinions, and probably bave declared it was one of the most elegant amusements of the age ; to them and them only he ap¬ peared bound to speak the genuine senti¬ ments of his mind: yet this very liberty, which by other men is considered as one of the most valuable prerogatives in existence, to him was a tie of restraint, and an irksome control on the general tenor of his conduct. Gratitude was not however a trivial ingre¬ dient in the composition of the tutor, and it was sensations of that nature which spurred him to the lecture he conceived it was his duty to recite. He soon procured an oppor¬ tunity to speak with Orlando alone He в 5
10
commenced with the most scrupulous deli¬ cacy ; yet the conclusions which he drew, and the advice which he gave, were delivered with considerable firmness: although he mildly cautioned him to beware of the ef¬ fects, still he did not fail to present them in their most obnoxious colours. Orlando received his observations in sullen silence ; his pride was severely wounded under the idea, that he, who had ever been considered as an example to young men in general, should thus stand open to rebuke for the very dissipated folly he oftentimes had been heard to condemn in others with uncom¬ mon rancour. Signior Zadok's expostula¬ tions were useless ; his pupil neither owned his errors, nor agreed to his anticipation of the consequences ; while he obliquely gave him to understand, that he conceived himself fully competent to regulate his own con¬ duct, nor should by any means agree to its arrangement by any other person. The tutor withdrew, disconcerted and embarrassed. Although in the habit of studying charac¬ ters, the traits of Orlando's disposition had never impressed him with such force as in
11 this last interview ; he foresaw a train of evils most seriously to be dreaded ; while he trembled for the happiness of Don Diego, if it rested on the welfare of his adopted nephew* It was but a week after Orlando's first introduction to the gaming house by Don Esau that this interview took place : he continued the same regular attendance after it: even had not his inclinations prompted him to follow up the amusement, he would most certainly have done it, as a compli¬ ment to his own judgment, and a proof of his contempt to those who dirle red from him. Although he daily became more expert, and sometimes found himself a considerable gainer at play, yet fortune was generally against him ; and in the course of a month the whole of his cash only amounted to thirty pistoles.—In returning from the pub¬ lic rooms on the very evening which re¬ duced his finances to this small sum, he was suddenly accosted in passing through a lonely street near the suburbs of the city by a man whom he had noticed to have fol·-
lowed him for some time. « Signior," said he, " I am unknown to you, yet will soon convince you I am your friend, if you will follow me." " What shall I gain by that ?" asked Or- fendo. " What to a young cavalier," answer¬ ed the stranger, " is the most tempting*trea¬ sure upon earth—a beautiful woman. Listen but a few moments to what I am going to re¬ late, I am servant to Don Caleb de Velde ζ, one of the most avaricious hidalgos in Madrid : he has a lovely young girl for his daughter, whom he has bartered for a considerable sum to a rich Jew, nearly of his own age, and equally parsimonious. She detests the choice of her father, but is unable to extri¬ cate herself from his tyranny : they ha\ e taken apartments for her near here, where she is confined as a prisoner, and neces¬ sitated to receive the visits of the disgusting Israelite. She has lately had an opportunity of seeing you in public ; although accom¬ panied by her father l.A the Jew, they could not prevent her eyes from wandering to the place where you stood; she was struck with your figure, and languished for
ıs an interview. I am in the confidence of her female companion, and received thi& information. We have both a sincere esteem for her; we pitied her situation, and were de¬ termined, if possible, to bring you together* Before, however, I introduce you, you must make one promise : Donna Alethea is totally unconscious of our proceedings, nor would we wish to shock her delicacy by the sup¬ position that you were thus made acquainted with her passion ; you must therefore so¬ lemnly assure me that you will declare be¬ fore her, that you was struck with her charm s at the theatre, and that you have never ceased since that time to importune me for an interview. My name is Conrade, and i have the pleasure to say I am in the good graces of her waiting-maid ; it is necessary you should know these particulars the bet¬ ter to substantiate your story." During this harangue the fellow had gra¬ dually drawn him towards the end of the street, and was turning short round into a narrow paved court, in which appeared large and seemingly respectable houses;
и
but the situation was extremely gloomy and retired. Orlando suddenly halted. He was per¬ plexed with very different emotions. Since he quitted his uncle's castle in Andalusia, various passions which agitate the human breast had been raised from that dormant state, which a life of peculiar retirement and sedentary employments had occasioned· The effects of female beauty were perhaps the strongest he experienced: his imagi¬ nation was fired with the description which he heard of the fair incognito, and his pride was flattered with the preference which he supposed she gave to him. He entertained no doubt of the veracity of the man who addressed him ; for neither experience nor information had taught him to beware of the frauds so often practised under such appearances. Still he hesitated whether he should follow his guide ; not on account of any apprehensions for his own personal safe¬ ty, but through the natural diffidence which formed a principal trait in his character. The warmth of his anticipations, however,
Î5 overcame his hesitation (caused by the idea of being introduced to a stranger), and be resolutely followed his guide to the upper end of the court. They stopped at the door of a house which seemed larger than the rest ; the guide knocked softly, and it was opened by a female who answered his de¬ scription of the lady's attendant. " Lydia," said he, " I have brought the young gentleman with whom our lady is so greatly enamoured." Lydia pretended to be alarmed. " I dare not introduce him," said she : " What would my mistress say if she knew what you have done ?" " Be not uneasy on that account," replied Conrade ; " the cavalier has promised to be most circumspect in his behaviour ; our lady's delicacy will suffer nothing by the interview, depend upon ir." After some fur¬ ther hesitation, she was prevailed upon to announce his name as one who wished to speak with her upon business of some con¬ sequence. But these instructions came chiefiy from Conrade. Orlando, when he understood the manner in which he was to
ÎĞ be presented, and that he himself must be under the necessity of declaring a passion for the lady, would gladly have withdrawn ; but tbe fear of ridicule prevented him from fulfilling his wishes. They followed Lydia up stairs, and were desired to sit down in a small anti-room, while she made her mistress acquainted with the visit. In a short time she returned, and desired Orlando to follow her, whisper¬ ing him that he need he under no fear of the Jew, for she had seen a note which had just come from him, saying that it would not be possible for him to see his beloved that night, as he was under the necessity of going a few miles out of Madrid upon ur¬ gent business. Orlando with faultering steps was just going to obey her, when his male friend gently pulled him by the cloak, and hoped he had not forgot his exertions. He immediately threw a pistole into his ex¬ tended hand. Orlando trembled as he entered a splendid apartment into which Lydia conducted him, and instantly disappeared closing the door after her. At the further end, on a couch
11
of white sattin, was reclined the figure of a beautiful young girl, seemingly about eighteeen* On the first moment of his en¬ trance she was unveiled, but immediately threw the muslin overber face, as if diffident of exposing it to view. Orlando, however, had time enough to witness charms which raised in his bosom a warmth he had seldom experienced. The novelty of the scene, the idea of his situation, and the agitation of his passions, at once so far served to overcome him, that he found himself unable to utter a syllable, while it was with difficulty he could support himself to a seat. Donna Alethea soon dis¬ covered the character with which she was engaged ; and rising, she, in a soft voice of much sweetness, desired to know his bu¬ siness, while she pretended to labour under a confusion equal to his own. The very idea of her embarrassment was perhaps the only specific to have relieved him : as her assumed diffidence increased, Orlando be¬ came more collected, and at length stam¬ mered out the story he had been taught to recite with some degree of spirit.
i3
The ficttous Donna Alethea was all alarm y she knew not how to reply; she seemed near fainting ; her veil was thrown back for air ; and Orlando, as he supported her to the couch, gazed on the symmetry of her countenance with admiration* The lady was very soon reconciled to the visit, and he acquired unusual courage. Lydia brought in refreshments, but Orlando had little appetite ; he was wholly engaged with his fascinating companion. Fler dress was light, elegant, and voluptuous ; it ex¬ hibited the delicacy of her form to peculiar advantage: the acquired playful languish¬ ing of her eyes excited the most amorous emotions ; while a lascivious smile of wan¬ tonness gave an invitation to every liberty. To a man with even a small share of pene¬ tration her manners would instantly have confirmed her to have been a professed cour¬ tesan ; but Orlando's vanity urged him to suppose such behaviour was only reserved for him, who was master of her affections. As he became less embarrassed, his passions increased ; he ventured to take her hand ; his vows of love and admiration were more
19 warm and fervent. Alethea seemed over¬ come with tenderness ; his arm by degrees encircled her waist, and her head sunk upon his breast. Orlando was not now the timid bashful youth of sober morals. No longer master of his conduct, his freedoms be¬ come more daring ; while Alethea with but little resistance was yieldmg to his embraces. At this instant there was a loud rap at the street door ; the lovers were rather alarmed. In a few moments Lydia entered the apart¬ ment in haste: she informed her mistress that her father Don Caleb had sent for twenty pistoles ; he was in want of this sum to make up two hundred to buy a necklace for the Jew her lover, which she was to re¬ ceive as a present from his hands : Don Caleb had no more than one hundred and eighty in the house, and the late hour of the night prevented him from getting it at the banker's or any other place. He had sent her the necklace to look at, which he said was at least worth three hundred ; on that account he did not wish to part with the man who offered it for sale until he had se¬ cured the purchase*
m
i€ I declare," said her mistress, seemingly much chagrined, " I do not think 1 have half a dozen pistoles in the house." " I was afraid not," replied the waiting- maid ; " your ladyship is so charitable, that you are continually drained of your loose cosh. If, however, you cannot send him the money, your father requests you will step to him immediately, as he particularly wishes to see you, to consult on the means of procuring it." This last part of the message was as a thunderbolt to Orlando; in that case he must have lost the lovely Alethea ; a sepa¬ ration from her at this moment would have been a mortification, even philosopher as he was, he could not have endured with any degree of composure. Alethea sighed and arose. " I always obey my father," said she, " and always will; although his demands. may sometimes prove a sacrifice to my in¬ clinations." She threw her veil over her face—she appeared to hesitate, and tremble with emotion. " You will not leave me !"" said Orlando. " For heaven's sake send
«ome excuse^ —say you are retired to rest, or that you are unwell—say any thing, lovely Alethea, but do not drive me to distraction by your absence."—" Oh, sig- *iior," said Lydia, ^ it will be impossible to deceive the old hidalgo by any excuse of that kind ; he is so choleric, he perhaps Would be here himself in a few minutes to discover the truth : perhaps, signior, you have a trifle of that kind about you ; we can easily repay you to-morrow." Orlando, however anxious to retain the lady, hesitated at this proposal : not that he suspected any deception, but on account of the very low state of his finances. This accommodation, however, appeared to be most strenuously opposed by Donna Ale¬ thea ; her delicacy seemed quite shocked at the idea— she*røøz//a? go to her father. If Orlando had had four hundred pistoles instead of thirty in his possession, and that sum had been required for the purchase of Alethea's company instead of twenty, al¬ though the following day must have pre¬ sented to him the consciousness of poverty, with every evil that attends it, in all pro-
22 babiiity he would at this moment have parted with therrì. His passions were ele¬ vated to that height which at once threw him into a state of intoxicated madness. He took the twenty piãtoles from his purse, and counting them into the hand of Lydia, be begged he intreated Donna Alethea would permit him in this case to be her cashier. The lady, however, still continued to refuse her consent to such a measure ; there was an inexpressible something in it which shocked her ; if hurt her feelings ; it might—dreadful idea—hurt her character. Orlando was importunate : Lydia joined her intreaties to his; but the lady would consent but on one condition, that he would keep the necklace as a pledge for his mo¬ ney; which might be easily done, as she would send word to her father she should detain it till the following day to show to a friend. Orlando unwillingly consented to this proposition. Lydia disappeared with the twenty pistoles ; and, after praising the beauty of the necklace, he placed it in his pocket.. This trick, which at once robbed him of
23
his money, served to heighten the character of Alethea in his esteem. The lovers were again left without interruption ; her fond¬ ness appeared, if possible, augmented by this instance of his generosity ; her eyes beamed upon him with inexpressible tenderness, and he most forcibly felt their power. Again he clasped her to his heart* Alethea seemed too languid to resist his freedoms ; she hid her blushes in his bosom—his raptures were complete. So engaged was Orlando in his voluptuous revelry, that the first beams of the morn¬ ing light glared on the windows of the apart¬ ment before he had the least idea of quit¬ ting his lovely companion. A large mirror on the opposite side of the room reflected their figures : Orlando, through the faint rays of day, perceived the accurate delinea¬ tion. He started from the couch ; his own countenance was pale and haggard, while that of Alethea presented a very different form to what he had beheld some few hours before. Her dress and hair were dishevel¬ led : the rouge, which by candle-light had -
2ê
served to give her face an apparent glow of health and delicacy, had in part been taken from hei cheeks by his lips ; while the re¬ mainder was partially left in spots upon a complexion deadly pale and sickly. Her eyes, that in'the former part of the night had sparkled md languished under a studi- ' system of exertion, aided by the ar' spirits she had received from а ток common quantity of wine, were now he<^ dead, and inanimate ; and the dark pencil¬ ing of her eye-brows was disfigured in va¬ rious directions. Her features had been somewhat handsome : but the extreme thin¬ ness of her face made them now appear large and masculine ; in short, her whole form was emaciated by disease and dissipa¬ tion. The warmth of his imagination and passions were subsided ; reason began to dawn upon his mind, and he suspected he had been duped* At this instant a man dressed in every respect similar to an alguazil entered the room, and pretended to arrest him in the яате of his Catholic Majesty.
£5
Orlando, ln a faultering voice, desired io know on what charge such a mandate could have been issued. The man roughly answered he should enter into no particulars· " The house," said he, " in which you now are, is a sufib cient warrant for your being immediately secured." 44 What is it you mean to imply?" said Orlando, whose whole frame shook with agitation : " Why do you lay so great a stress on my being found in this house ?" " You know as well as I," replied the mock alguazil, " that its infamy is notorious through all Madrid ; and that whoever is found in it at those times when it -is searched by order of the civil power, is subject to those punishments which are executed on the strolling vagabonds of the city." Orlando's distress increased; he impli¬ citly believed the sham tale of the pre¬ tended officer, and the horrors it presented almost drove him to distraction. He, the immaculate, the moral young Spaniard, who was considered as a very model of virtus vol. п. с
and excellence, to be publicly disgraced, to be held up to the multitude as an ex¬ ample of depravity, were reflexions which Orlando had no philosophy to support. He sunk into that torpid state of terror and irresolution which produced a total inca¬ pacity to extricate himself from the difficul¬ ties that surrounded him. The lady of the house suddenly vanished from the apartment, and left him to answer for his own conduct. The pretended alguazil perceived the pusilîanbnity of his prisoner, and found it necessary for him to give some hints on what conditions he might escape, as his alarm seemed totally to kav?e deprived him of the idea of making such proposals for himself. This intimation he com eyed in oblique hints, which raised Orlando from his temporary stupor; he soon under¬ stood his meaning, and found he could procure his freedom for nine pistoles. Such a sum cleared his pockets to a few rials: he had at this moment however little con¬ sideration on that point ; he gladly emp¬ tied his purse into the offered hand of
Ti
1rs companion, who having charged him tei be secret (as he should be severely punished for taking a bribe on such an occasion as the present one), ied him out of the house, and put him in the right track to the castle of Olvernardo. It was now broad day-light. Orlando felt the blush of shame burn on his cheek be¬ fore every solitary pedestrian whom he met. Although those persons were chiefly labour·* ing men going to their daily employments, many of whom perhaps neither saw or noticed him, still he experienced that con¬ viction in his own breast, which urged him to suppose he appeared in their eyes the same easy tool of imposition he represented in his own. He no sooner entered the castle than he softly crept to his apartment, and, sinking on a chair, abandoned himself to retrospective reflexions on the adventures of the night. His mind had for the last few hours been in such a state of agitation, that he had neither inclination nor power to consider the effects or consequences which might resultfrom them. Thelossof his money gave rise to the most poignant sensations he с 2
235
éxperiendcä ; he had but a few rials re- mümîfrğ froťft the five hundred pistoles that were presented to hkn by his uncle on his kaviiig Seville. He was certain there was no chance of his feoeiving any fresh supplies until the beginning of the next ^quarter, to which he had near two months to look for¬ ward. No one as'yet was acquainted with hiš^oVerfy ; but to conceal it for that length of time he was con v inced would be impos« sibîfé. ¡He fully anticipated the increased SurpMše and contempt which would fall· upon him in such a- confession, to that which Would have been produced by other young meri in a similar situation* He was aware that he had ever been the first to cotïdémn those errors in 'others he now so severely experienced in himself: often with ajsofernivcountenance of purity had he ut-· terëd 'ШоШ1 ^^İctures upon youthful follies which produced their own pumshments. His cénsurø Were always severe ; his opinions onthö fewards v of indiscretion seldom mer- cKtíí*' ;; ' ţîtţle did he suppose, when he cast such opprçrbriöu s epithets on the débauchèe, № so ^ 'фШАу exulted in the villany which
29
often unjustly oppressed him, that be might himself become transformed under the disgraceful character* or feel the effects of those artifices which tended to its de¬ struction. He could expect no pity or consolation, for he had never administered such comforts. He could look forward but to little assistance, for he had been al¬ ways the first to refuse his aid upon such occasions. Orlando could have forfeited every plea* «ure which the money he had lost might have procured him with some degree of fortitude ; but when a slur on his moral character stood as a point in danger, his dread bordered upon childishness, and he was eager to grasp at any antidote to screen his shame. Nor were his uncle's fervent ex* pectations of his virtues forgot; he could not but feel a consciousness of his demerits. He 'could no longer call himself prudent or wise: his passions had overcome his reason ; he « had been most egregiously duped. ι In the midst of this reverie he suddenly ! recollected the necklace, and found he still ! had it in his possession. Although he did ί c Ζ
30 not flatter himself it was worth a tenth part of the sum he had lent upon it, yet he conceived it might produce him a trifle of ready money ; and thk trifle he could with strict ceconomy make last him for some little time longer. He began to con¬ sider how he could discover the real value of it, when signior Barnarvo, the jeweller whom he assisted with money one evening at the gaming-table, and who had since very honourably paid him that sum, entered his mind, and he determined to take aa opportunity İn the course o t f the mornmg_tø go to his lodgings, to which he had lately received a direction. Having fornita this resolution he threw himself on his bed, but sleep Was banished from his pillow : although harassed and fatigued, the perturbation of his mind totally precluded rest, and he met the family at breakfast with a countenance more, than usually discomposed. In a few hours after he set off for the apartment of signior Barnarvo, and in a short time discovered the house in which he resided. It was a miserable, looking
31 dwelling, and appeared to be let out m tenements. Having inquired for the jewel¬ ler, he was directed down a small passage, where he discovered a stair-case, which he ascended as far as the third floor. Or¬ lando gained with some difficulty the door; he knocked, and the voice of his friend desired him to come forward. He accord¬ ingly entered, and beheld a scene which to him was as novel as it was wretched. The room was most dreadfully out of repair ; the walls were merely plastered, and even that was in parts decayed. Asmall dirty bedstead, which was now down, and the bed unmade, appeared the principal furniture in it; with one broken chair, a couple of stook, and, a small looking-glass without a frame. In one corner sat Barnarvo, (wrapped in an old flannel gown, and his head bound round by a pocket handkerchief,) surrounded by cards» He had likewise a box of dice, which he threw occasionally. He seemed busily era· ployed in his amusement y he was calculat» ing the chances of various games in parti¬ cular situations; and his agitation on the events in different throws was almost equal с 4
io й real interest incited by a large stake. His wife, a genteel looking woman appa¬ rently near his own years, was engaged at needlework ; and his daughter, an engaging delicate girl of seventeen, was seated by her, knitting. The whole party appeared much confused at Orlando's appearance among them. Barnarvo- himself, who had no con¬ jecture he was the person who knocked, and who did not even observe him when he first entered, was distressed and chagrined ; he was naturally easy and polite, but this unexpected visit overwhelmed him with confusion, and it was some minutes before he could utter the common salutations of the day. Orlando's astonishment at the scene which surrounded him rendered him nearly as em¬ barrassed as his host; while the mother and daughter shrunk from his gaze under the hu¬ miliating idea of the miserable situation in which he saw them. The latter was one of the first objects which struck him forcibly. Although by no means a regular beauty, there was an innocent simplicity in her coun¬ tenance truly interesting. Her light blue
53
eyes did not possess peculiar fire or animation* yet they were mild and languishing. Her form was delicate, her voice soft and melodious ; a placid yet melancholy smile was expressed on her features, while an uncommon diffi¬ dence and modesty was apparent in every action. Orlando apologised for his in¬ trusion. The jeweller took his hand, and pressed it with great emotion. ft Signior," said he, ** you do me honour in this visit $ I may perhaps blush at the situation in which you find us, but in my heart you must ever have a welcome most warm and sin¬ cere. Here," continued he, turning to his wife and daughter, " is one, who, in a cri¬ tical and dre-idful hour of adversity, gene¬ rously rescued me from horror and destruc¬ tion—who, when I had involved you both in common ruin with myself (his tears almost prevented his utterance), when I had robbed you even of the morsel that should have formed your next day's meal, held to me his benevolent purse to procure you the daily necessaries of existence." Orlando was unable to answer the grate¬ ful effusions of the jeweller. The wife had с 5
Sê with some difficulty the power to utter her thanks, while laura gazed on him with a countenance beaming with admiration, until her eyes overflowed with tears, and she stifled her sobs in the bosom of her mother. Her filial îove'wouïd have led her to contem¬ plate any form with admiration wbo had al- IevtatedJter fatheťs misfortunes, from what¬ ever source they might have originated; but when a young man of Orlando's appearance was presented to her, with such a fascinat¬ ing qualification in his behalf, in the eyes of the affectionate Laura he instantly be¬ came an angel. Artless and inexperienced, she conceived no boundary necessary to those sentiments she felt in his favour, be¬ cause she had no hesitation in supposing that they were merely the genuine feelings of gratitude, which she would have expe¬ rienced towards another on such an occa¬ sion. Her young bosom fluttered at е\егу sentence he uttered ; her eyes were conti¬ nually turned towards him; but if they chanced to meet his, she trembled* blushed > and looked towards the ground: she thought зЫ had never before seen so noble,
55 so handsome a youth ; he had succoured her father ; she therefore could not but admire him. Orlando was by no means insensible to this behaviour; the simple neatness of her dress, the delicate appearance of her per¬ son, and the uncommon softness of her manners, at once rendered her an object extremely pleasing. After about half an hour's geí¿eral conversation, he requested the jeweller to walk with him on the parado. Barnarvo, throwing off his morn¬ ing gown and apologising for bis dress, consented to the proposal, and they de¬ parted together. They had no sooner gamed a retired place* than he presented hia necklace to his companion,, and requested his opinion with respect to its value. Barnarvo, the instant he saw it, could not refrain from smiling. *« My dear friend," he exclaimed, " it is composed of the most common metals gilt." Orlando was thunderstruck : he inquired what even in that case it might be worth. ** But a few rials," replied the jeweller*
36 rc It was giren me for gold," said the formér. <( I would not pay you so ill a compli¬ ment," answered Barnarvo, " as to suppose you was deceived by so glaring a decep^^'* Orlando coloured with shame : he wished to mafee the jeweller a confidant in his adventure ; he knew no one whom he could consult upon it with a less degree of embar¬ rassment at the idea qf his want of penetra¬ tion than Barnarvo, and he accordingly, without further delay, began his tale. Orlando watched the countenance of his friend during the relation with some anxiety; he marked, his astonishment at the easy manner in which he had been imposed upon, and attempted to palliate his ready compliance with the fraud to the very great beauty of Alethea. Barnarvo silently heard his narrative with¬ out interruption: on his conclusion he thus addressed him : " Signior Don Orlando, you have reposed in me a confidence which should be repaid by a candid opinion on my part. The task, however, is rather irk¬ some : I must be under the necessity of in-
37
forming yoUj you have been.most egregi- ously duped ; you have submitted to an im¬ position, the fallacy of which even a school¬ boy would have discovered : you have been tricked by a common courtesan, and after¬ wards laughed at by a pretended alguazil. They saw you so easily deceived by the first part of their scheme, that they attempted and succeeded in the second. Excuse me, but they must even have known, by public report, you was a stranger to the world, or they never would have dared even to have attempted such systems of finesse ; and it is a chance but they will follow up their vil¬ lany by publishing the affair in some way or other, and raising the mirth of the whole city at your expense." Orlando stood for some moments con¬ founded at the words of the jeweller ; his pride was most severely wounded in his in¬ experience being exposed even to Bar¬ narvo ; but he now trembled under the anti¬ cipation that it might become a general sub¬ ject of entertainment to Madrid. " Is it possible," cried he, " that the man
за who called himself an officer of justice could be an accomplice in the trick ?" ' f There is not the least doubt of it," an¬ swered his companion. Orlando was »unable to conceal his vexa¬ tion ; he beat his forehead with violence. Barnarvo pitied his distress.—" Remem¬ ber," said he, <c the recluse manner in which, as I have heard you mention, you were educated is no fault of yours > any other young man, under similar disadvantages, would have been liable to the same er¬ rors." These observations, which were intended to soothe him, had entirely a contrary effect. They implied a pity for his ignorance, which they openly acknowledged, and cast a direct contempt on the mode o£ his education,, which he had been taught to believe would raise him superior to the chief part of the world. They likewise arraigned the con¬ duct of his uncle Don Diego for following such plans. Orlando had ever been used to consider him as the wisest and best of men in fc existence, and himself the v^ry
3~9
counterpart of such excellencies. It is like* wise but just to observe, that, independent of the veneration he had for ,his character, he felt for him those sentiments of affection and regard, which reflected the highest honour on his feelings. It is probable that the last words of Barnarvo, which openly condemned the proceedings of his uncle, would at once have called forth his resent¬ ment to such a height as totally to have broke up their friendship, had not the latter instantly appeased him by an apology. He likewise advised him. by no means to take any steps with a view to recover his money, as there was not the least probability of suc¬ cess! while they would only tend to make the affair publicly known, Orlando had concealed even .from the jeweller the low state of his finances; but although he rea¬ dily acquiesced in his opinions with respect to the danger of making public the transac¬ tion, yet he could not dwell on the idea of remaining some time almost pennyless, with¬ out considerable emotion and distress. Had Barnarvo known of his embarrassment, there is little doubt but the natural generosity of
40 his disposition would have urged him to have returned his obligation to him by а шап of a few pistoles he might haye possessed for another night's venture at pass-dice. His unfortunate infatuation for play was the only failing of any magnitude he pos¬ sessed; yet so pernicious were its effects, that they cast a shade over every virtue, and reduced him to a level with the most vi¬ cious. After some further remarks, Orlando wished him a good morning, and slowly returned to the castle of Olvernardo. His reflexions were as various as they were tormenting. He was totally at a loss in what manner to act. It was impossible for him to remain without money in his present situation, yet how to procure it he knew not. If he attempted to borrow, he instantly discovered his poverty ; and the inquiry how so steady and careful a young man could become poor would immediately follow. Orlando sickened at the very thought; he trembled even at the idea of his character being tainted by such a disco¬ very. He had been taught to Value a good
41
name with such fervency, that the mere an¬ ticipation of losing it almost drove him to disti action. He revered it with such adora* tion, that he would have made any sacrifice to have maintained it. The very pride which urged him to be considered among man¬ kind as a being without frailty, by degrees incited him to preserve it by actions not any way consistent with the appellation. He by no means felt an equal abhorrence for errors themselves to that which he had imbibed for the title of them ; and while he had neither resolution nor fortitude to with¬ stand temptation, he increased the magni¬ tude of his failings in his exertions to hide them from the world. These considerations were not all which served to agitate his bosom. The figure and manners of Laura had made a most sensible impression on him. His adventure of the, last evening was productive of far more consequences than he at present foresaw. However he might suffer by its effects, and afterwards detest the subject of his amour, his passions from that time became far more violent» The made-up form of Alethea
40
«erved as a foil to the natural advantages of Laural; and he considered, if he could re¬ ceive pleasure from the caresses of an ob¬ ject so detestable as a common courtesan, .what might be expected from the love of so charming a girl as the daughter of the jeweller. Her attention to him during his .short stay he had noticed with a scruti¬ nising eye; bis vanity left him no doubt of his capacity to possess her affections ; and though he at present shuddered at the^. thought of becoming an instrument of ruin to so lovely a young creature, yet he began to nourish ideas which tended to overcome every resolution of his boasted philosophy. * The remaining part of the day he spent in joining a party from the castle to a small villa of the marquis's, about thirty miles from Madrid. Orlando received but little gratification in this tour. In the sociality of the company he was as incapable and less anxious to join than usual ;. he appear¬ ed sulky, and buried in his own reflexions. His. behaviour to signior Zadok, since the advice he had received from him, was cool and distant. The tutor had very little en-
45
eouragerøent to alter his system of generai acquiescence, when his very first essay was productive of such disagreeable conse¬ quences. But signior Zadok was not a man who easily resigned a point where he conceived his honour or his gratitude de¬ manded a sacrifice ; he determined secretly to watch the actions of his pupil, and lose no opportunity that might offer to save him from the destructive amusement with which he appeared so uncommonly fascinated. Orlando was necessitated for the present to give up his nightly attendance at the gaming-house ;< he had not money enough for a single stake, and he was ashamed to borrow even of the jeweller. The. sharper to whom he had lent the twenty pistoles ia the evening as he presented a loan of the same sum to Barnarvo had disappeared from the rooms ; and his character as a de¬ sperado was so fully confirmed, that it was hinted to him he had better quietly rest with the loss, than attempt to recover it, even if he happened to meet with him. . « The world," said Orlando to himself;
ЧгтР H^eems composed of a set of beings, who consider each other aS a prey for general imposition! Honour and virtue are consi¬ dered by thehi as subsisting' only in names, which they wield as implements of their duplicity, and behind whose shadowed forms they shrink in ambush, to fall with greater certainty on their adversary. Their teligrøn J is a larger and more extensive co¬ hering for their vices : they have converted Its tenets to accommodating rules for their 4)wn conduct; and while under its ban¬ ners they commit the most daring acts ιοί injustice with impuniíy, they even at¬ tempt to palliate them by a pretended zeal for moaralitjfc Self-defence almost demands a mode of conduct parallel to their own : to stand an inanimate spectator and sufferer of imposition, without even a struggle for pro¬ tection, is a sacrifice neither consistent with reason, nor a demand to which any one ha« a right to subscribe." This was a mode of argument in Orlando equally new and dangerous ; to become vi¬ cious under a determined opinion of his
45 right to be so, was at once a screen for licentiousness "the most unbounded and . dreadful. A few mornings after his return from the excursion to the marquis's villa, Or¬ lando was informed by Otto, of its being whispered among the servants, that Don Everard de Gosmond intended to make a collection for a poor family who had been reduced to poverty by some unforeseen misfortunes. This intelligence gave him considerable distress; he had not even a pistole in his possession to give towards the benevolent subscription. He was totally at a loss in what manner to act: he could form no excuse for not joining his mite to those of the rest of the family of Olvernardo, nor was he able to contrive any expedient to procure money for that purpose. He was well aware, if he attempted to borrow, of the universal surprise it would occasion, and of the suspicion and ridicule which would follow. Had he been looked upon by the multitude under the general character of a young man subject to the follies and indis-
4$ cretîons of youth, the present circumstances in which he stood would have been con- sidered as trivial. It was the very imma¬ culate name which he had acquired that served to magnify his errors; it was the very great contempt with which he looked upon the world that would occasion the world to retort upon him the instant he was discovered to be guilty of those follies he had so severely condemned in others. He dreaded to join the family until he had ñx- ed upon some expedient to obviate the dis¬ grace which threatened him. He was, however, unable to think upon any which would answer his purpose ; and he was at length necessitated to come to the resolu¬ tion of requesting a loan from his brother, under the feigned excuse of having lent some considerable sums to a friend, who promised to repay him in the course of a week. Orlando was fully assured this plea for the loss of his money would easily be dis¬ covered to be false ; but so tenacious was he of owning himself open to error, that he preferred a mean paltry artifice, which held
47 fortn but little chance of concealing his embarrassments, to a more noble and ge¬ nerous confession of them. With this determination he immediately repaired to the chamber of Osmund: his agitation was extreme; he was going to so- , licit a favour; the situation carried in it a kind öf humiliation greatly degrading to his pride. He found the room empty; his bro* ther had just left it to join the family at breakfast. Osmund had been gazing this morning, as he had often done before, upon the miniature he had found in the casket. He bad neglected to replace it in his escri¬ toir, and the glittering of the jewels which surrounded it caught the eye of Orlando the instant he entered the apartment. Curiosity at the first moment tempted him to examine it more closely : he looked for some time on the lovely features it represented with admi¬ ration; the richness of the frame then claim¬ ed his attention, and a supposition of its va- ^ue naturally followed, while an idea instan¬ taneously darted on his mind which tinged his cheek with a conscious blush. He con¬ ceived, had he such a miniature in his pos-
*i
session i, Jbow easily he т\ф t -raise ©ni ts va* lue a sum fuJly equivalent tobis wants for the present, as well .Ш. a plentiful: supply ^11 the payment of his m ext quarterly allow¬ ance frombisluncle^howijïleasantly he could screen his fosses írom ¡ lhe world, and still retain the ira maculate name he had ac- ''quired,;':./: ■'.:.'?■; ■;■ The breakfast bell a second time sum¬ moned Щт to the eating room. He was distressed beyond expression ; he could now have no opportunity ίο speak w ith Osmund alone. Don Everard and Cassandra were appointed to be at the castle át aý very early hour ; they were in all pro¬ bability arrived^ and he anew not how soon the subscription •might commence. Again he looked at the miniature, and again he dwelled on the thought, how soon he could raise money on it by the assistance of his friend ^Barnarvo the jeweller. Hiš ¿reflex¬ ions Were confused and wandering : he considered if he could not take the picture ; he trembled violently at the thought ; such an act ^was à robbery. Could he not ask his brother to lend it him ? But then what
49
reason could he give for the request ? He could not, would not confess he wanted to pledge it ; it would blast his character, which was dearer to him ¿han life. He might take the picture, and an excuse for his conduct would be time enough when it was missed : but what excuse could he be prepared to make if he was unable to restore it when called for ? He did not anticipate the resentment of Osmund ; his fears were wholly selfish : he dreaded the idea of being reduced in the eyes of the world from that standard in moral virtue to which he had risen. Again he argued with himself, Could there be any harm, as Osmund was out of the way, in taking the picture for a few hours as a loan ? It would at least extricate him from his present difficulties. No sooner was he going to place it in his pocket, than the last words of advice given by his unçlè when he left Seville struck forcibly upon his mind—" Beware of committing one disho- iiourable action, however trivial or petite it may appear: consider it as the link of a chain composed of many more." vol. ii· ь
50
He halted for a few moments ; he was distracted with doubts and apprehensions. The breakfast-bell rang a third time; he heard the footsteps of a servant ascend¬ ing the staircase; he precipitately placed thû picture in his pocket, and hurried to iiis chamber. With a trembling hand he instantlyi wrote ^the following note to Bar¬ narvo, and inclosed it in a small parcel with the miniature, " Sp,i>№ ^unexpected circumstances having occurred, wJiich call upon me for a very large sum of money, I am in want of a few pistoles to make it up. You will greatly oblige me if you will immediately, by the aid of the inclosed trinket, raise for me something upon its value. By no means sell it : it will be redeemed in the course of a few days. Lose not a moment in this af¬ fair, and you will render a most essential service to your sincere friend, Orlando de Mellas." Castle cf Okernardom " P. S. You may send the money without hesitation by the bearer of this,"
5i
The packet was instantly given to Otto, with orders to use the utmost dispatch in bringing an answer. He descended to the eating-room. How¬ ever he had attempted in his own mind to gloss over the action he had committed in taking this picture, he felt that kind of in¬ ward confusion and shame which at once denoted he was unable to reconcile it to his conscience. He fancied every one looked upon him with distrust. He conceived se¬ veral parts of their conversation were level¬ led at him, while he trembled every time Don Everard spoke, for fear he was going to commence the subscription. The agony of his suspense at length became too much for him to support: he hastily swallowed his coffee, and retired to his chamber. He watched most anxiously the return of Otto: various fears and anticipations of his unsiic· cess in the embassy served to agitate him. He began to reflect what account he should give to his brother for taking the miniature : —he could decide upon none. He repent¬ ed having parted with it. He determined to send for his brother immediately, and ac- D 2
53
*juamt him whh the transaction. He hesi- tated-^-his resolution faultered, and he wish¬ ed to defer the explanation. It was most like¬ ly Osmund would miss it in the course of a few hours, he must then come forward and ^ive some reason for his behaviour. He beat his forehead in an agony of suspense. A thought struck him which would at least give him a few days* respite. But then iţ ¿would occasion him to utter a most palpable falsehood ;—it would force hini to place con¬ fidence in his servant—in fact, to put himself in his power. Orlando shuddered at the means, but he shuddered far more at publicly Josing even a particle of the moral cha¬ racter he had acquired. He resolved on persuading Otto to assert, that having been sent into his brother's chamber to bor¬ row some trifling article, the miniature struck his eye, and his curiosity tempted him to take it up, when unfortunately he dropped it upon the floor and injured a part of its frame ; that on this account his master had taken upon himself to send it immediate¬ ly to be repaired. He had no sooner fixed upon this plan
5а
than he observed Otto crossing the courts yard. Breathless with agitation he met him at the door of the apartment, and inquired after the message he had brought back. The servant delivered to him a small parcels he grasped it with ecstasy : he felt it con¬ tained money* Otto was dismissed for a moment, and he eagerly opened the packet. It contained sixty pistoles, with a few words from Barnarvo, saying he had raised him that sum upon the miniature, which he had placed in the hands of a Jew, who promised not to part with it. Thia money exceeded his expectations :- he conceived* with the plan of economy he; intended t& adopt, к would answer all his necessities until his next quarterly payment from his uncle. The most disagreeable circumstance which now awaitedhim was the request he had to make to Otto^ but äschere appeared no alternative, he gained some degree of ref solution for the task. He had 1 had some proofs of Otto's love of money in a few br stances since they had quitted Andalusia, and he determined to promise him a considerable reward,, as the most likely method to puiv D 3
5h
chase his assistance. Otto, after a pretended Sfjueamishness at the idea of uttering a false¬ hood, was prevailed upon to accede to his master's views, and Orlando with some de¬ gree of courage ventured once more to de¬ scend to the eating-room. Don Everard had just begun his collection after a speech of some length, in which he gave them to understand, that although he, by the favour of heaven, was surrounded by all the elegancies of life, yet he was not cal¬ lous to the calls of those who were distressed. " To be sure,"' said Don Everard in his tedious harangue, " the very large fortune -*which I enjoy elevates me to an eminent distance from the vulgar : but I am aware of the feelings which must be produced by the sting of poverty* Tis true I can recline my body upon a bed of down ; I can purchase the luxuries of the East, and exist in a style of grandeur which dazzles the commonalty of .Madrid; yet I do not forget there are those 'm the world who labour under various ills, but who, by the very great difference in our situa¬ tions, are not permitted to cross my sight." Don Cæsar de Grolvo, whose petulant
55
exclamations, and shakes of his head, during these words, confirmed his dislike to them, hastily replied immediately Don Everard arrived at a period, " Aye, aye, we are all convinced of your feeling, Don Everard, and there is a good reason for it. You did not always, you know, recline upon a bed of down, or feast upon the luxuries of the East: mean no offence ; but, if you recollect, you have witnessed many a scene of distress in your own little hut, and knocked many a good ox on the head in the public slaughter¬ house. Why, where's the harm of that? None. It was an honest calling ; you filled your neighbours' bellies with beef, and your own pockets with gold. No bad maxim, neither. Beg pardon ; but always speak my mind; that's my way." " Sir, I must beg your pardon," replied Don Everard, unable to restrain the wrath which these hints had occasioned. " To let you know, signior Don Cæsar, I never knock¬ ed an ox on the head in my life, nor was I ever engaged in the vulgar employment of cramming my neighbours' bellies with beef. I confess, that a few years back I dealt in a d 4
56
few caMé for my amusement ;— m ind, gentle¬ men, I say for my amuseinent ; for it is well knowa J fed my family witb nothing else, but beef for a considerable time, because I Would have us little as possible pass down the throats of the vulgar." Don Silvius de Roseverez'declared, that the very idea of a piece of beef under such circumstances was notto beendured, and occasioned inhim asen* sation too indelicate torment ion. /Signior Za¬ dok contrived, as usual, to agree with, every observation. I To Don Everard he asserted there was tbe greatest merit to remember the • ** - —„- ^ -*.и~*. л «гК:*~— — *- * . · . mistorrancbOi ounu, .»une we naa notnmgí to remitid üs of them but а philanthropic disposition arid gfood heart. With Don Cæ¬ sar he declared there could be no disgrace in a profession, by means of which a competen¬ cy was procured that eriabled us to alleviate the miseries of our fellow creatures, and pour balm into the wounds of the afflicted. And with Don Silvius de Roseverez he confessed, that the idea of either beef or mutton, cram¬ med down the throat of a poor man, must occasion, in refined breasts, sensations too horrible to be named.
5Г Don Silvius gazed most insignificantly ât signior .Zadok for some time through his eye-glass; and then offering to sprinkle his handkerchief with some of the most de¬ lightful scent in all Spain, as a token of his favour, he declared he was the most genteel little gentleman he had conversed with fora/ long time. Don Everard finished his speech without further interruption, and commenced his gathering for the poor family whose miseries he had recited. The donations were liberal; most of the company gave five pistoles. Or¬ iando determined to stand first : he gave ten. His generosity was greatly extolled, his cha¬ rity became the theme of conversation. Although he gloried in the popularity this gift had gained him, he could not very well reconcile his conduct in'his own mind ; nor did he derive that inward satisfaction which is in general the result of an intrinsic good action. He continually whispered to him¬ self the question, if what he gave was his own ? He blushed at the many compliments which were paid him upon this occasions for he very much doubted if he deserved d 5
58 them : nor could he help trembling every time Osmund moved, under the idea that he was going to his chamber. He had given Otto orders to relate his feigned tale concerning the picture, the first opportunity he could procure to speak to him alone. In a few hours the party broke up, Or¬ lando shrunk to his own room, and waited with impatience the return of his servant, who had stopped his brother on the stair¬ case which led to their apartments. In a very short time he returned with Osmund, who begged they would neither of them be unhappy concerning the miniature, but only requested to know to what jeweller it had been sent, as he might himself give a parti¬ cular charge with respect to the care of it. Osmund was the more urgent in this point, on account of the promise he had made to Albert of concealing both the cas¬ ket and its contents. Orlando was not prepared for the ques¬ tion; he hesitated forsorne time; his embar¬ rassment was visible : at length he replied, he had sent it to one whom he knew in the outskirts of the city, of whose care he was
59
well convinced, but whose address he could not very well give him, as he did not re¬ member the name of the street. He how¬ ever would see him that evening, and add additional cautions to those he had already sent. Osmund, although he had no suspicions but that he was told the truth, was not very well satisfied with this answer : he did not like to press his brother further upon the subject, yet he was hurt at the idea of the miniature being exposed to public view. In the evening Orlando proceeded to the lodgings of Barnarvo with an intention of again enjoining him to be careful of the picture. Finding no one in the lower part of the house, he ascended the staircase, and' gently tapped at the door of his apartment. The soft voice of Laura bid him enter : to his surprise he beheld her weeping and alone. She appeared more lovely and interesting than on his last visit. " I am afraid I in¬ trude," said Orlando : " I expected to have found your father and mother here." Lau¬ ra handed him a chair; but at the mention- of her parents her tears increased.
eo
> cc May I," said he, with some emotion, " inquire the cause of your uneasiness ? Be¬ lieve me, it is not an idle curiosity which urges me to it, but a hope that I may be able in some measure to alleviate it." She informed him her father had that day been arrested for twenty pistoles, and was conveyed to prison, where her mother was gone to attend upon him. Osmund hesitated for a moment. He now possessed much more than that sum, and his wishes prompted him to release the jeweller ; but he dreaded the idea of being again in want of money before he received his next quarter's remittance from his uncle. He used every argument to comfort the fair Laura, but she was inconsolable. He gazed upon her with admiration. The innocent simplicity of her manners affected him beyond expression ; he sudden¬ ly declared he would discharge the debt. Laura could not express her gratitude: her joy overcame her: she sunk almost sense¬ less into his arms. . Orlando's passions, since the evening he had met with Donna Alethea, had gained
βι
considerable ascendency over his reason. However susceptible he might before have been to the charms of female beauty, he was always checked in his advances towards gratification by a diffidence and anticipation of the consequences it might produce. He was able to argue with himself under some degree of coolness, and regulate his actions according to the dictates of policy. But Orlando was now no such philosopher : his diffidence, his bashfulness, remained; but when these were once overcome, he did not as formerly hesitate with a lukewarm dispo¬ sition. Although plundered and laughed at by Alethea, he recollected the rapturous sensations of the fore part of the evening y and, however he might dread a repetition of the conclusion of that adventure, yet he could not but languish for similar pleasures he had experienced on the commencement of it. On his first interview with Laura he had not beheld her with eyes of indifference ; but his mind had been under such a continual agitation since that time, that he had had but little leisure to reflect upon her charms.
62
In this second visit he found his passion return with considerable augmentation. As he held her nearly insensible in his arms, through the sudden joy she experienced at bis declaration of releasing her father, he could not refrain from ravishing a few kisses from her pale and trembling lips. Laura was not in that torpid state of insensibility bnt she was able to discover and resent the liberty he had taken. She struggled to re¬ lease herself from his embrace ; she trem¬ bled with her emotions, and burst into an hysteric flood of tears. Orlando felt a blush burn upon his cheek. <f Am I not,' 3 said he to himself, " merely releasing this poor girľs father under the idea of rendering him miserable for ever by the dishonour of his daughter ? Am I not a villain ? Gracious God 1 it is impossible. í am the slave of my own fears ; I have not confidence enough in my own virtue." He begged a thousand pardons to Laura for his rashness ; he swore it was infatuation, it was madness, - which urged him to take such liberties : he would be more discreet for the future ; he would
63 produce her father as a voucher for the sin¬ cerity of his contrition. His pleadings had considerable effect upon the innocent girl : he had already gained an interest in her affections, which would have procured her forgiveness for faults of a far greater magnitude than the present. Laura doted on her father. Orlando was his friend ; he had assisted him in his distresses, and most nobly and voluntarily offered to release him from a prison. These circum¬ stances alone would have made a powerful impression on her affections. But Orlando's person was by no means ill calculated to inspire regard; and the peculiarrestraint and formality in his manners was not perceivable to one as little used to the world as himself. Orlando had no sooner received her par¬ don than he hurried to the creditor at whose suit he understood Barnarvo was arrested, discharged the debr, and procured an order from the corregidor for-his release. In the course of a few hours he returned to L tura with her father and mother. He stopped them in the thanks they were going to utter.
The jeweller grasped his hand with a fer¬ vency of gratitude bordering on phrensy;, his wife bedewed it with her tears ; while Laura looked upon him in a manner which fully repaid him for his generosity. It will here form a natural inquiry, whe*> ther the secret springs in the bosom of Or» lando, which urged him to this act of bene*. volence, originated from a goodness of heart truly disinterested ? or whether he had not some incitement in the idea of making him¬ self agreeable to Laura ? On these questions it is impossible to decide. The actions of men are often so opposite, and arise fronv notions so combined and perplexed,, that they are themselves unable to trace the foundation of many parts of their behaviour,. which, after a certam tíme, strike them with- astonishment. To affirm that Orlando re¬ leased the jeweller merely under the selfish^ gratification of winning the affections of his^ daughter, would be putting rather too harsh a construction on his conduct, which, abs¬ tractedly considered, reflected on him con¬ siderable honour; yet^ by events in the
65
sequel, he certainly stands open to be con¬ demned for such views. In his favour it may very justly be urged, he had no similar temptations in the voluntary loan he offered Barnarvo at the gaming-rooms. In short, Orlando appeared about this period to be struggling against various inclinations which threatened his destruction. He was imperceptibly advancing towards vice with- Dut being aware of his danger ; the great confidence which he had in himself tended to screen from him everv idea which created doubts of his own worthiness : and although he could not at all times so far palliate hi& proceedings (even in his private reflexions) as to detach from them all appearance of blame, yet, as his actions became more atrocious, he found stronger excuses in their favour; whijeon every successive error (how¬ ever the magnitude of it enlarged) he locked with an increased coolness and unconcern. Whatever might have been his motives in the release of Barnarvo, he was not yet so callous to those sympathetic sensations in the happiness of others as to become an шь
66
interested spectator in the scene before him. Orlando perhaps never spent an evening with more genuine felicity than in the few hours he remained with the jeweller and his family, after he had recovered tne former from the gloomy cell of a prison.
ßl
CHAP. XII. Self-ftatteťd, inexperienced, high in hope When young, with sanguine cheer, and streamers gay, We cut our cable, launch into the world, And fondly dream each wind and 3tar our friend, 'All tn some darling enterprise embarked ï Eut where is he can fathom its e vems ŕ Young. OsMt/ND de Mellas, since his residence at Madrid, had by no means kept free from extravagance or other foibles. But in him it was a matter of little wonder ;. there was a levity in his manners which appeared totally inconsistent with prudence; anjd although the goodness of his heart, to those-vvho were well acquainted with him, formed,a powerful plea in his favour, yet many of his actions were very justly considered as highly reprehensible by the severe and tenacious advocates for morality. One of these errors was his amour with Donna Bertha, the pro- tegee of the duke de Brevon. Although the
6S
intercourse which subsisted between them became a public topic in the city, the infatuation of the old grandee was carried to such an extent, that he disregarded them with contempt, and actually increased his favours towards thè young Spaniard : he was a most constant attendant at the duke's castle, and more generally introduced to Donna Bertha than any other visitor. The duke usually slept at an elegant villa he had, a few miles from Madrid, once a week. Donna Bertha had lately taken a peculiar disgust to that place, and begged to réffîaib^t Madrid on those nights. ■ The old noble ШиШ-г efuse her nothings, parties feriy · whefr «he careššedi him. He certainly bad- every right t^ demand such caresses,, &Ш ^be^diike could enjoy 4itf le else fe bis pàWoMgéi { On these < evenings it wp rei таШе^ 1 that· thé УЫутШгШтеаУШ gueeÆ ì№ her dŕešsing-f ooni, and г-е tatóe, â ítíiat twq ^r^á^ňt^^^íčh^Wé^efeher^ ^äiüng^möids. ^ This guest was soon disco· v&red to be Osmund ée-Mellas, who sèi· dom slept atthè castle of Ohernardo;when fhie dÄ^btired to his villa* i The çircum**
69
stances which attended this intrigue were too glaring for it to be concealed from the marquis's family. Signior Zadok disco¬ vered he had another task to fulfil; his lectures were again necessary, for the character and rank of the duke de Brevon rendered him an enemy greatly to be dreaded; and however he might for some time continue in a blind security of Donna Bertha's constancy, there was every proba¬ bility to suppose he would, in the end, be convinced how egregiously she had duped him. In that case, not even the power of the marquis d'Olvernardo would have been sufficient to screen her gallant from his vengeance; The anticipations, how¬ ever, of advising Osmund to alter his conduct were, to signior Zadok, by no means so unpleasant as those he experi¬ enced on a similar occasion with his bro¬ ther. Osmund had never been considered as a being without frailty, nor was he ever held up to the world as a model of excel¬ lence w 01 thy of imitation. To a character like the former the task of discovering error was far more unpleasant than to that
70
of the latter. The idea of finding fault with one who had always been taught to sup¬ pose himself faultless, encouraged little hope of success in the experiment ; while every thing might be feared from wounded pride and mistaken confidence. On the contrary, as Osmund stood no otherwise than on a par with the.generality of young men of his own age, whose manners he was known to follow, arid whose follies he too often practised, there appeared by no means that peculiar delicacy necessary in speak¬ ing to him on those frailties he was con- *scious were well known to the world. Signior Zadok met with a far more pleasing reception-to his last advice, al¬ though it produced but little reformation. Osmund' heard him with patience, and returned him thanks for his hints. 44 On my soul," he exclaimed, " she is one of the most charming creatures in existence î Such beauty, such spirit, such vivacity ! Her bewitching manners would warm the heart of a hermit, melt the frigid bosom of a stoic philosopher, and even tempt a puritan to sin/'
71
Zadok could not refrain from smiling. " I know you laugh at my vehemence," he continued : " but, by heayens ! did you know her as well as I do, you would be equally infatuated. You must have been in lov^i and consequently have experienced its' all-powerful influence." íť Never," answered Zadok. cc Never in love !" echoed the amorous Osmund. " How have you possibly sup¬ ported your existence? I have been con¬ tinually in love for the last eight years." * c Our destinies, our situations, and pur¬ suits," answered Zadok with a sigh, " have been greatly different. The external circum¬ stances and events of a man's life are in general the principal moulds which form his disposition and regulate his passions. Every scene which opens to his view, whe¬ ther tinged by the warm ray of prosperity, or overcast by the chilling gloom of misfor¬ tune, tends to impress on his mind (though perhaps insusceptibly) certain notions, sen¬ timents, and opinions, that in time form an accurate outline of his character. In me, Don Osmund, you behold the child of mi-
n sety from the earliest period of existence. Had the power of infant intellects been Strong enough to have conveyed a sensibi¬ lity of my situation, the very first moment my eyes opened to the light of the sun they would have been dimmed by the tear of anguish. Nor did progress of years dispel the dark clouds which enveloped me : every new day presented new sorrows ; joy was a stranger to my bosom; I knew how to weep, but in the smile of happiness I had little practice. The deformity of my person seemed to accord well with the gloom of my mind. I was no object for love, but to those who experienced it by the strong and genuine ties of parental affection. I had passions, it is true; but they were soon weakened by penury and mental agony. I viewed with admiration connubial happi¬ ness; but I viewed it under the idea of being in all likelihood for ever precluded from the blessings it produced." " Good heavens!" cried Osmund, ťí what a picture have you drawn ! I blame myself for having given you occasion to present the melancholy portrait. Let us however now
IS
hope that the whole features of the painting may be changed, and that thé happiness and prosperity of the remaining part of your ex¬ istence may compensate for the firft. Be¬ lieve me, I most sincerely thank you for the advice that gave rise to this conversation. To promise an immediate acquiescence to it would perhaps be more than I could per¬ form ; yet you may depend on my attend¬ ing to the cautions you have given me with respect to the power and resentment of the duke." " It is absolutely necessary," replied Zadok. " You have perhaps but little con¬ ception how far the revenge of such a marí might injure you. His rank and station in Madrid would at once empower him tò fulfil any schemes he might plan for your destruction." Osmund, although he received the advice of signior Zadok with a better grace than his brother, paid as little attention to its dictates. In him, however, the cause of neglect proceeded from natural careless¬ ness and levity. In Orlando it was the result of a haughty obstinacy, which urged VOL. II, б
74 him to follow his own opinions in prefe¬ rence to those of any other person. Osmund still viáted Donna Bertha, and the, duke still continued blind to the con¬ nexion which subsisted between them. ,It was about this period tţiat he attended ah assignation with her as usual one even¬ ing in her dressing-roomr.. The duke, as was supposed, slept at his villa. The lovers sat down to a slight supper, which was served up by the two confidential wai tin g- znaids. They had not finished their repast a quarter of an hour, before a loud rap at the outer gates of the mansion announced the approach of the duke. The select party in the dressing-room were for the first few moments mute with astonishment There was little doubt but his sudden and unexpected return was a designed plan, occasioned by some suspicions lately im¬ bibed. The only point to be considered was, how to get rid of Osmund, without his being noticed by any of the house¬ hold, before the duke (who was extremely Infirm} could ascend to the chamber. This, however, appeared a task impossible to ac-
iS m - * *" T complish. His return akonce called all thé servants about in every part, and there ap¬ peared no probability of escape^ In the dressing-room was a piece of fur¬ niture of considerable elegance and magni¬ tude. It was a dial, supported by two bronze figures of colossal size. At the back of each of these figures was a small door, which admitted one person into the interior of them, for the purpose of regulating or repairing the clock. The waiting-maids proposed that Osmund should get into one of the figures, and remain there until the duke retired to rest; which would most likely be in a short time, after he supposed there were no grounds for hiš apprehen¬ sions. It was the only method which held forth any probability of success. He readily consented to the trial, and with some difficulty placed himself in 4he inside» They had no sooner closed the door than the duke entered. He attempted to assume good humour, but it was easy to perceive disquietude on, his brow. Donna Bertha, as usual, began her caresses ; but they did not appear to convey to him the satisfaction e 2
76
he usually experienced from them. He was peevish and uncomfortable ; he would take no supper, yet did not appear inclined ta retire to rest. The dial had been out of repair for some years. Osmund, whose situ¬ ation was extremely unpleasant, being ob¬ liged to stand in a very cramped manner, extended one of his arms to acquire some little ease by a different posture, and unfor¬ tunately thrust his hand into the midst of the works, whicb occasioned a sudden temporary action in them, and, to the asto¬ nishment of the duke, and the infinite alarm of the women, it struck twelve in a most formidable manner. The old noble during tbe awful sounds was unable to utter a sen¬ tence. His jealousy was for a few moments lulled by bis astonishment ; but it soon returned with redoubled force, when he began to consider the cause which might bave occasioned the effect that bad for a moment struck him with so much wonder. He Misted on instantly examining the internal part pf tbe figures. The women knew not where to find the keys. This ex¬ cuse availed little, he ordered the doors to
77
be broke open. Such proceedings they oon^ sidered might be worse than hazarding a quiet delivery of them. The keys were accordingly given up, and the waiting- maids found means to conduct him first to the figure which they knew did not contain Osmund. The door was unclosed, and the duke with a small wax taper crept into the interior with some difficulty. At this instant one of the girls, who was at his elbow, contrived to extinguish the flame of the candle, by a sudden forced cough, while the other with great dexterity opened the door of the second figure, and released the prisoner» The duke was some time before he could disengage himself. The waiting-maids, in their pretended over care to assist him, surrounded the opening, and confined him in darkness until they saw Osmund had softly glided out of the cham¬ ber; who, immediately descending a few *steps (fortunatelywithout meeting anyone), opened a staircase window on the landing, and sprung from thence to the garden. The height was considerable, but he re¬ ceived no damage. He instantly proceeded e 3
7S
to sl small gate, with which he was well acquainted in his nightly visits, and, having unbolted it, safely entered one of the back streets of the city. In the mean time the duke proceeded to search the second figure : but finding it empty, his fears of a rival began to give way to the terrors of superstition, and he instantly conjectured that the striking of the clock was a warning of his death. He trembled violently, while a cold perspiration bedewed his body. The caresses of Donna Bertha were totally lost upon him, and he- was conveyed to his bed in a state little short of insensibility. Osmund, when he quitted the castle of Olvernardo this evening, had, as usual when on a visit to the duke's mansion in the absence of its lord, left word that it was uncertain when he might return. Under these circumstances he was rather awk¬ wardly situated; for it was now midnight* and he by no means wished to, ring at the entrance gates, as it would not only call up the porter, but might create some causé of alarm to the family* The streets were
Т9 entirely forsaken, every house wa* closed, while a cold sleet made it still more uncomfortable to be deprived of a lodg¬ ing. Osmund hesitated for a few mo¬ ments : he recollected that Albert had one morning, in a ramble which they had taken together towards the external eastern part of the castle, discovered to him a small archway, which he had observed led to those apartments that were reported to be haunted. Osmund had no inclination to spend the remainder of the morning in these gloomy chambers ; but he had a still greater objection to be exposed to the inclemency of the weather. Although totally free from superstition, a natural curiosity seemed to invite him to this spot, and the idea of receiving some hours shelter from it fixed his resolution. He accordingly proceeded towards the east part of the castle, where he arrived in a short time. The night was uncommonly gloomy; dark and heavy clouds passed slowly over the refulgent face of a full- moon, whose beams at intervals gleamed partially through the less condensed parts of them.. The intcr- E 4
80
section of the buildings of the castle of Olvernardo and the monastery of St. Mark formed in outline a figure representing the two sides of an obtuse triangle. The anti¬ quity of tne architecture in both, their mouldering walls, heavy battlements, and lofty turrets, at once rendered the view in this part majestic and awful. The pale rays of light, which at intervak glimmered on the upper casements of Olver¬ nardo from the half-obscured moon, were blended with the more faint and feeble gleams of several wasted tapers, which might be perceived in the lower painted windows of St. Mark. Qsmund viewed the scene with a kind of melancholy admiration* His reflexions were vivid and various ; he became almost insen¬ sible to the damp which fell; while he anxiously watched for those short intervals' of light which gave him a more perfect view of the scenery. He thought he heard distant voices ; he drew nearer the monastery ; it was part of the brotherhood joining in a midnight hymn. The melody was delightful; the
81
harmonious sounds seemed wafted to him on the bosom of every breeze, and he listened to the following words with pecu¬ liar pleasure. Mionight Hymn. "Hail, Father of Light ! of heaven, of earth- First mighty cause-j—mpreme ! Whose creating power gave nature birth. Whose mercy all redeem. With holy flame We bless thy name, Our strains ascend above; With humble heart, These strains impart The dictates of our love. 4t Hail, gracious God ! this midnight hour Receives the inspired lay \ We chant thy glory, hail thy power, Which gives returning day. Thy^heavenly light Dispels the night; Our strains ascend above ; With humble heart, These strains impart The dictates of our love." At the conclusion bf the second stanza the voices gradually died away, and the E 5
82 awful silence which succeeded was only interrupted by the agitation of some cypress foliage which surrounded a part of the base of the castle, by frequent and sudden gusts of wind. He at length began to experience the in¬ clemency of the weather, and sought for the opening which had been pointed out to him by Albert. This he discovered, and with difficulty removed some brambles which impeded his entrance. He soon found it would by no means afford him a com¬ fortable shelter; for, owing to the lowness of the arch, he was unable to stand upright. The rain violently increased, and he per¬ ceived he must either be exposed to the disagreeableness of it, or penetrate further towards the interior. He began to consider whether he had not better, without further hesitation, gain admission at the principal gates. But Osmund not only disliked the idea of hazarding alarming the family ; as he knew at all events his return that night, after mentioning he should remain out, might occasion many inquiries he wished to avoid,, and perhaps make known his adventure at
83
the duke's, which he intended most carefully to conceal. He therefore resolved to pro¬ ceed forward, and gain some place where he could remaiu with more comfort. The passage was extremely narrow ; in parts he was almost unable to pass; while the faint light which proceeded from the entrance was of little service a few paces from it. Having with great difficulty continued moving on for some time, his progress was impeded by a wall, in which he soon disco¬ vered there was a door. He pushed against it with considerable violence; it instantly opened, being unlocked, and apparently al¬ most separated from its hinges. He now entered a small lobby supported by heavy piers, and arched over on the top, in the centre of which was a large opening; im¬ mediately opposite a flight of stone steps led to a small Saxon door, which was fasten¬ ed by two heavy bolts. Osmund congratu¬ lated himself, at the first moment he entered this lobby, with the idea that hè might re¬ main there till day-break ; but he perceived it would be a more unpleasant and dan¬ gerous situation for a lodging than the pas-
и
sage which led to it; for the opening on the top rendered the damp of the night in this part more to be dreaded than in the open air, where he was less partially ex¬ posed^ He determined, if possible, to un¬ bolt the door that faced him, which he had little doubt led to habitable apartments. This after some pains he accomplished, and discovered a staircase which ascended on each side, and appeared to terminate in a handsome landing decorated with brass railing. The pale beams of the moon, now totally unclouded by the dark misty vapours which had forsorne hours obscured it, shone with uncommon lustre through several lofty casements ranged at a considerable height. Osmund, having surveyed the place with some attention, felt an irresistible curiosity to enter the rooms above, and immediately ascended for that purpose. He continued along the landmg till he arrived at a.pair of folding doors that stood about the centre, on each side of which, at the extremity of the staircase, was a single one of less size, and which he conjectured led to different suits of chambers. He pushed against the
85
double doors with some violence, and they flew open with an uncommon noise. He now entered a room in which he could discover little but its considerable di¬ mensions. He had no light but what pro¬ ceeded from the staircase, and a glimmer¬ ing which appeared at some distance to his left. This be supposed to come from a small closet at the extremity, and he began to walk towards it with great care. He had proceeded about half way, when a faint groan struck his ear, and he involuntarily halted under some degree of surprise and agitation. Osmund began to consider whe¬ ther he had not already gone too far, as he was alone, and without any instrument of defence. At the first moment he deter» mined to return : but this resolution seemejl to question his courage, and he remained doubtful in what manner he should act. " The noise which I have heard, or fancy that I heard," he whispered to himself, " has the appearance of distress requiring aid, rather than an omen which should cau¬ tion me against proceeding farther. Can I reconcile it to myself dastardly to fly from
86* the cry of the unfortunate, under terrors tha*É would disgrace me ľ r This question at once fixed his resolu¬ tion, and he boldly continued forward. The groan appeared to come from the part to which he was going, and it was repeated before he had moved three steps further. He again stopped. " This is no fancy," he exclaimed : *' the ehild of misery appears to have taken up its abode within these awful and gloomy apart¬ ments.'' No sooner had he uttered these wordsj than, in extending his arms again to pro¬ ceed, his hand was suddenly repulsed by a body, the chilly coldness of which struck to Mis very heart, and his wrist was suddenly seized by the grasp of apparently a human hand. Osmund at this moment felt sen¬ sations of alarm and terror he had perhaps never before experienced* "Unhand mei" he cried with a faulter* ing voice. u By heavens, L will submit to no perfidy !" During» these words, the idea of hia situation recovered 'm some degree his reso-
87 íutľon, and he disengaged himself from the grasp which detained him with peculiar strength. He immediately hurried forward towards the light, which he discovered to proceed through a door that led into a long corridor, instead of closet, as he had supposed, and along which were several lofty casements that admitted the pale beams of the moon. The walls were adorned with large heavy picture-frames, the gilding of which was de¬ cayed, and the painting entirely obliterated by time and damps. Osmund threw himself on the first win¬ dow-seat, and began to consider if he had; not been too precipitate in proceeding thus far unarmed for any defence that might be necessary. Nor was he altogether free from, terrors that he would willingly have sup¬ posed himself incapable of feeling. The- uncommon tales which he had been told. respecting these apartments of the castle, the remarkably gloomy appearance of the chamber he had seen, the groans which he had just heard, and the cold form which he had crossed, served at once to inspire ideas,
8В by no means comforting under his present circumstances. He wished to return : but an insurmountable dread of meeting the same obstacle he had found in coming served to keep him where he was; and he conceived, let that obstacle be what it might, policy re¬ quired he should at all events, if possible, shun it. After these considerations he rose and walked slowly towards the upper end of the corridor, which terminated in a small circu¬ lar lobby, and opened at the top in a sky¬ light much out of repair. He had noticed several doors on each side, which appeared to lead to separate chambers ; and he now began to conceive he should be able to gain the inhabited apartments of the castle, which he had once heard communicated by an open passage with some store-rooms over those where the domestics slept. This idea Was heightened by observations he made from a low window in the lobby ; for he could perceive the east turrets over a pile of buildings seemingly parallel to those where he at present stood. He wished to proceed as nearly in a direct line forward as
89
possible, supposing by such means he should cross the eastern part of the castle, and gain the western by the communication he had heard mentioned. There was but one door in the lobby, which led to a winding stone staircase. Again he hesitated whether he should ascend it* The considera¬ tion that he was totally defenceless made him dubious of entering any parts but those which prudence seemed to dictate were the most likely to extricate him from the un¬ pleasant situation into which he had heed» lessly plunged himself. The obstruction with which he had just met gave him every reason for alarm. Who or whatever it might be that occasioned it, he was at present to¬ tally in their power, and the danger of re¬ turning seemed equal to that of proceeding forward. He was by no means pleased with the appearance of the staircase which now opened to his view. It seemed to continue a considerable height, and he was unable to observe in what manner it terminated through the gloom which obscured the up per part* He was returning to the lobby under considerable agitation, when his foot
m
struck against something which at the flrst moment he was unable to make out; but on closer inspection, to his great surprise, he found it to be a sabred He hastily took it up and drew it from the scabbard; when he found, though seemingly it had lain there for many years as lumber, it would yet serve as a most formidable instrument of defence. He now felt no hesitation at the idea of ascending the staircase, and his curiosity again revived with redoubled force. Still the groan which he had heaDd arrested his attention to the spot where he stood. He again paced the passage which he had pass¬ ed, but could discover nothing to have occa* sioned such sounds ν and he now began to be convinced they must have proceeded from the person who had so abruptly impeded his progress.. He returned to the stairs, and began to ascend them ; when several faint mournful noises were again repeated,, which appeared to issue from the lobby he, had left. He immediate¬ ly hastened back to it : yet nothing human appeared, and all was again silent. He more minutely inspected the walls ;. and in one
9Ï
part of them he perceived a small door, which, by being closed, had, through the imperfect light that guided him, escaped his notice. He instantly found it open¬ ed, the groan again struck his ear, and he thought a heavy footstep seemed to approach. Osmund placed himself in a posture of defence, and rushed forward; when the door was suddenly shut after him with uncommon violence, and he remained in total darkness. This last event served to confirm that some kind of treachery awaited him; and he returned with an idea, if possi¬ ble, to force his way back to the lobby. This however he found impracticable; for all his efforts were useless to re-open the do#r by which he had passed. Having in vain attempted it for some time, he agaia proceeded forward with an intention to ex¬ tricate himself as soon as possible from the darkness that surrounded him, and which he considered served greatly to increase his danger. The passage was not long : it open¬ ed to an apartment that appeared to have been formerly fitted up with great magnifi¬ cence. The casements, which were a consi-
92 derabîe height from the floor, were placed in deep recesses ornamented by heavy mouldings and carved work: between them Were pedestals, on which were placed sta¬ tues of various descriptions. The walls were hung with tapestry partly decayed, on which several groupes had been delineated. The effect which the pale partial moon-beams had upon this apartment was both awful and interesting. The deep and lengthened sha¬ dows which ' fell from the figures extended a considerable distance, and involved the space in which they stood with melancholy obscurity. In the midst of this gloom the statues themselves received a strong and mellow tint of light from the casements above, which, added to the livid whiteness of the marble, rendered a most striking con¬ trast to the dark and shaded parts which surrounded them. Osmund, although he proceeded with more confidence since his possession of the sabre, still hesitated, and was irresolute which way toturn. In spite of his attempts to rally his spirits, the tales that he had heard respecting these apartments still kept pos,.
9$
session of his mind, and inspired him with sensations, which, although he was un¬ willing to suppose could proceed from an apprehension of supernatural appear¬ ances, yet still served to alarm and perplex him. The closing of the door in the circu¬ lar lobby at once precluded all thought of returning the way he had come* This event likewise seemed to indicate that he was fol¬ lowed ; and he conceived it was by no means improbable that the desolate parts of Olver¬ nardo were inhabited by banditti. The groans which he had heard might have been merely uttered to draw him forward; and this thought was strengthened when he considered the consequences which had followed. He most sincerely repented hav¬ ing wandered so far without anticipating the danger tq which he might be exposed. During these reflexions he continued walking slowly to the upper end of the apartment, which finished in a recess sup¬ ported by heavy columns, between which was a pair of large sash folding doors. He looked through the glass, with an intent to observe the internal part before he entered.
§4
It appeared to receive no light but by re¬ flexions from the room in which he flood, Althoughhe supposedit, by the situation and entrance, to be a mere closet, the boundary of it was lost in darkness. While his eyes were stedfastîy fixed upon the interior part, he thought he discovered a human form in the midst of the gloom. So imperfect was his vision on this appearance, that he was unable to discover whether it represented male or female, while it paced backwards and forwards with a slow and solemn step. Osmund involuntarily pushed open one of the doors; but it immediately glided for¬ ward, and vanished from his sight. He in¬ stantly sprung to the part where he lost it, but could discover nothing but a blank w T alI. In short, he now found that his conjec¬ tures with respect to this apartment were accurate, for it seemed merely a closet or small anti-chamber to the spacious one into which it opened ; nor was there any door* way » but that through which he had en¬ tered. Osmund threw himself on a sopha which occupied one side, harassed and fatigued.
В5
He was confident in his own mind he had beheld a human figure through the glass. The manner in which it vanished he could account for only by supernatural means; He could discover no communication which would lead him forward in that direction he wished to follow, and which he supposed would take him towards the inhabited part of the castle. He began to consider if it would not be moft prudent to await the break of day in the place where he already was, without attempting to explore any further through the apartments, as their in¬ tricacy, added to the faint and uncertain light of the moon, seemed to suppress every hope of arriving at the extremity of them» Under this resolution he attempted to com¬ pose himself on the couch; but he expe¬ rienced those sensations of alarm which threatened totally to preclude sleep. It was in vain he argued the inconsistency of a be* lief İn supernatural appearances of deceased persons; it was· in vain he attempted to alleviate the horrors which oppressed hinn by upbraiding himself with pusillanimity for feeling them. He grasped the sabre in'
9ϋ oné band, while he rested his head on the other. He listened to the gusts of wind which at intervale rushed through the chambers. The hollow murmuring con¬ veyed a comfortless and awful sound; it seemed to chill his very heart. At length he fell into a disturbed sjumber; while the most strange and terrific images presented themselves to his mind. He thought he was returning through the same apartment in which he had been intercepted by the cold and sudden grasp of an unseen person ; a violent storm seemed to agitate the heavens ; continued flashes of pale and vivid lightning in some degree dissipated the darkness which surrounded him, and he perceived the form of Theodo¬ sius glide before him. There was some¬ thing in his countenance more than mor¬ tal—a dazzling lustre in his eyes, which af¬ fected the sight of the beholder, and in¬ spired both awe and terror. Nearly at the same moment that his attention was arrested by the figure of the monk, another form ap¬ proached from the further part of the cham¬ ber; at the first sight he conceived it to be
a beautiful female, but its appearance gra¬ dually changed as it slowly drew towards him. Its colour by degrees faded, and be¬ came deadly pale; its eyes visibly sunk in¬ wards ; its lips turned white, while its body contracted to a mere shadow. This trans* formation was no sooner accomplished, than the priest, under considerable emotions, with a small book which he held in his hand, appeared violently to work on it an exer¬ tion of magical power, in order to procure its disappearance. His efforts, however, were vain; the form still remained, while Os¬ mund felt himself unable to move from the spot. In a short time Theodosius seemed to give up his attempts through an incapabi¬ lity to continue the strength they required, and the spectre instantly acquired an in¬ crease of power over him. Its withered hand grasped his arm ; the monk groaned with agony; a thick mist rapidly encom¬ passed them ; and the skin of the spectre, apparently shrivelled up and, crumbled into atoms, presented a complete skeleton. Theodosius in vain strove to disengage VOL. II. ρ
himself from its hold ; the mouldering bones seemed to twine round his body ; while a vivid flame burst from below, into which he sunk with a most tremendous noise, Osmund started up with horror : drops of cold perspiration stood upon his forehead,, and every limb trembled with violence, " It is but a dream !" he exclaimed : "What have I to fear? Nothing is inclined to molest me, and yet I experience the torments of the guilty." He turned his head towards the sash doors, where, to his inexpressible sur¬ prise and terror, he perceived a human coun¬ tenance apparently as ghastly as that of the spectre. His blood curdled with horror; the power of utterance was denied him ; yet he had resolution to force open the door, which was nearly closed, to gain a more perfect view of the apparition, but it in¬ stantly fled. He followed a few paces ; it glided towards the opposite side, and was lost in the gloomy obscurity of that part of the chamber. Osmund again returned to * the closet, where, fastening the doors as well as he was able, he once more threw himself
99 upon the sofa, and continued buried in re¬ flexions on the several terrific events he had witnessed. The first obstruction that he met with in crossing the entrance-chamber, Which opened from the staircase, was of too powerful a nature to have been produced by the power of his own imagination : he even at this moment felt the effects of the grasp which detained him. Ifit was a rob¬ ber or assassin, why did he not at that mo¬ ment take his life when he was totally'at his mercy? The groans which he heard had been repeated so often, that he was confi¬ dent he had not been deceived by any fan¬ ciful conceptions. The violent closing of the door immediately he left the circular lobby confirmed him in opinion that some one witnessed and attended to his actions, while the countenance he had a few mo¬ ments before gazed upon gave rise to suspi¬ cions he in vain endeavoured to suppress. He now determined to wait where he was until break of day, and accordingly attempted once more to compose himself: such at¬ tempts were fruitless; his mind was too F s
100
greatly agitated to sleep ; he started at every gust of wind, and his eyes involuntarily turned towards the glass doors of the closet. After a tedious interval of some hours, the gïëy tints of morning light darted through the elevated casements in the next apart¬ ment ; Osmund gladly left his couch, and proceeded to examine it more carefully. The statues were of admirable workman¬ ship, the columns classically proportioned, while the whole appeared formerly to have been fitted up in a style of elegance truly superb. Ijt had the appearance of a banquet¬ ing room: the opposite end was formed in a large handsome recess, supported by co¬ lumns, and the ceiling finished in a dome, - divided into compartments by heavy gilded mouldings, in which there were still traces of admirable paintings. He had little incli- . nation, after the sleepless night he had passed, of suffering his curiosity to lead Mm into any further search. He expected the door of the circular lobby was still closed, and in that case resolved to trace his way by ascending another staircase •which he had observed in a further angle of
101
the banqueting room. To his very great satisfaction and surprise, however, he found it open: he gladly proceeded along the cor¬ ridor he had traversed the night before, and entered that chamber in which he had Ьеед so abruptly accosted. The shutters to the casements were closed, by means of which, although it was now full day-light, he had a very imperfect view : it appeared to have been an anti-room, and to have partook of the same degree of magnificence as the other apartments, but was somewhat smaller, and had a less number of windows. Find¬ ing himself extremely fatigued and unwell, he remained to make few observations ; but descending immediately to the passage through which he had entered, he soon found himself on the outside of the castle walls. Osmund arrived at the principal entrance of Olvernardo, and gained his chamber without much observation, few of the do¬ mestics being stirring. His reflexions on the night he had passed totally precluded rest: he now began to consider whether he should make Alberťac- f 3
• ^»itefi^i;.-4fiŕ3%bi ·'bft'-'e^hre^toyrea* 'or for'the "^ ;.3^Stséi^4^^4ál. J toccar'- jţjFţthm-, his own bo* ,\$tmi. ^f^^j^f^^^^satly- open and •xandid^'^hk jih^îï^tions' strongly prompted hitó fo rţ ¿жщ){ What he had witnessed ; but Ö*imuju4 wãs„by no, means destitute of ргц- %^ee ? and forethought, when the,vQJatifity of ^temper 4Й not check their action. J^ew^^îi convinced of the „flighty and unthinking character of Albert; and vtry ngßßly conceived that a recital of the events hffvi^d tø conimunicate would most likely i^Hø;his curiosity, and inspire him-with a romantic ardour to comniit any acts, how¬ ever preposterous or dangerous, to gratify '^'^iiď' сЫщега§ his disordered fancy nitgţţ^proauce. The marquis and his. son had âlrf a^y disagreed several times on these traits in the character of the latter; and Osmund well knew, that if Albert at¬ tempted to exert them on a point which appeared so materially to affect the feel- Ыф öf his father, it would create consi- derable dissensions in the family. Yet to proceed no further upon \ the grounds of what fee fed already discovered, would, he
i considered, stamp on him the epithet of aj coward, and be considered as ingratitude! towards the marquis, to whose hospitality and politeness he was so much indebted. He therefore determined to makeanother attempt in searching the eastern part of the. castle, attended by Cecil, in whom he had confidence enough to entrust the knowledge of the' af¬ fair, and who he considered might be use* ful should any treachery be intended. In his^ , choice of a confidant, neither his brother nor signior Zadók were forgotten ; but the , former had of late so far restrained himself from every kind of sociality with him, that he had no inclination to request hk assis¬ tance, or indeed little hope that hé would give it; and with respect fo the latter,*he- had every reason to suppose he would im¬ mediately object to the plan he had formed of again entering those apartments, through the idea of personal danger, Under these circumstances he determined to keep them ignorant of his proceedings until he made further discoveries, when he could regulate his conduct according to events.
GíöfioiíS hypocrisy ! I^böt fools are they, г φ}», 1ш$Ы mih fetftfl or ambiiîous views, ' W^^Mhiy.^^^sinasU - Vi* i' i? -,* í ,-. .. JWF*f ьжн*» Tru(gťt%, of Mahomet. " ■ľn i ·, ·■ '.' ti í ' ^Jİrî*ANDö, by his last act of generosity, in relieving his friend Barnaryø, .had again re- duced his finances. He, discovered it would require strict шеопоту to make the remain¬ ing sum, which was kft from the loan he had raised upon^ the miniature, - support bis neces^ry pocket expenses until his quar- terly remittance from his nncle became due. His pride prevented him from contracting considerable debts; and although his pas* ψ№ for play wnuîd AOţ permit him, entirely 0 abandon the gaming table, yet he was {gaulions and timid in bis stakes· Osmund's anxiety for the care of the pic* toe urged him again to mention his appre· hensbn for U$ safety to bis brother. Or*
IOS kudo answered that he had seen the mah in whose hands it was pkeed* and who had promised to finish the repairs it required in the course of a fortnight Osmund was dissatisfied; he greatly wished to know this man; brit as he had observed the inquiry gave his brother consi¬ derable distress, he forbore to repeat the question, which he had already so carefully evaded. Orlando was equally alarmed for the safety of the miniature, as he knew the secresy of his proceedings depended upon it; and he determined, if possible (by means of the jeweller), to gain an interview with the person who actually possessed lt. Fol* this purpose he paid Barnarvo апоШег visit*. He was received with the most heart-felt pleasure. Barnàrva grasped his hand, which he bedewed with tears. u You can conceive, my young friend," he said, f * the- felicit/ ôf being seated between these two dear oh- jects of my love (pointing to his wife and daughter); be no? disgusted fhm with the tributary drops of gratitude; which your presence hm called forth; deem them ink
eiismbi^» fot iliey, butst from <a, source whkh wouW#i#gme%uö mtn^ - τ ι Orlando, * reque^^d, he ^ wouíd * Ы . com* posedy he seated hitn^îf hext to Laura; Ы te|iderly inquired after her health:.she answered Ыш with less embarrassment ^an tisual. - She ga^ed on him every tiine im spf %ё with ÂdíÉiimtidn ; she listened tő Mm ι with, profound attention ;—-his voice was melody to her ear'. This behaviour did not pass unnoticed by Orlando. It flat¬ tened his vanity: little used to receive atter> tion from the female part of society, he experienced the greater satisfaction in the * peculiar manner of Laura towards him every time they met. Her person appeared more interesting than in their first interview, and lie fc}t uncommon pleasure in every little ^ţviiity she paid him. He opened his busi- ¿K№ to Barnarvo with respect to the man iwfed had .advanced the money upon the picture^ jmo> »ymtei. %-Ç%te te p^r-
Λί ,*.«^*^
jfoî !,Шс vapoiıs løan^v$*feh Ы advanced,
and génerjäily supposed fø be ťoleťabl/ bonest in his dealings.* *« Israel Ezra," said he, u b at present^ some few miles in the 4 country ι bnt t think I may venture to *ay be shall meet you at the hotel near,the parado the day after to-morrow, atan early hout in the ìmórning. You have however," continued the jeweller, " no occasion to be alarmed at the idea of his parting with the pictures be is not distressed for money; and the very strict charge I gave him will, I am certain, prevent his letting it pass into mother hands." Oriando felt relieved from considerable anx* iety by this positive assertion of Barnarvo's, and the conversation became general. Laura was more than usually animated ; the atten¬ tion that Orlando paid her elevated her spirits, which for some time bad been greatly de¬ pressed : his manners seemed to confirm a supposition her flattering heart had scarcely dared to encourage, of his experiencing towards her a similar regard to that which she felt for him. Nor did the actions of either in this visit escape the penetrating eyes of Laura's parents; they occasioned in them various ideas, anticipations, and errio-
tm tions : the mother tøt those thrilling sensa¬ tions yvhmh %^ visionary conception of a# elevated settlement for a beloved chijd mlgbt be supposed to inspire. To have entertained suspicions $f Orlando^ honour towards ber daughter, w^uld, in the humble mind cff Donna Barbara* been doubting the perfection of herLaura : she could not con¬ ceive there was in existence that being who Would voluntarily injure her. Almost as great a novice in the vices of mankind as her daughter, she was no match for their duplicity, Not so Barnarvo ;—he was too well acquainted with the world to entertain such sanguine views of Orlando's inten¬ tions; and> although he conceived the be¬ haviour of his yonng friend was very dif¬ ferent from general gallantry or politeness, yet the htiniiliating idea of the very great difference *of their situations in life served totally to preclude every hope of Laura bejng united to him. With these thoughts, his observations on the peculiar behaviour of his daughter towards Orlando gave him but Me joy f he was bound to him by conside*
Iø£ rable obligations; but Could these obligations make him less susceptible to the horrors of a beloved child's destruction? No—Bat- narvo's character was a strange compound of opposite principles ; he might be said to entertain for his wife and child the most tender and lively affection; but his unfortu¬ nate partiality for gaming was a vice which dimmed the lustre of every virtue he pos¬ sessed. He would,have submitted to the most laborious exertions for their subsis¬ tence ; he would have risked his life for their safety or honour; in sickness and distress he would have nourished them with the care and tenderness of a woman; in adversity he would have defended them with the spirit of a man : yet so inconceivable, so contradic¬ tory, are the various passions which agitate the bosoms of human nature, that this same Barnarvo, in certain moments, would hazard on the turn of a card the very sum which was destined to procure a meal for bis beloved wife and child. He would have succoured an unfortunate with his last rial ; but he would play with another equally distressed, and, if possible, reduce him to half
I
но & òhe* He wbuîd share hk purse, às long as it toted, with his friends but be would strive to* bankrupt him the next hour with hm dice. Such were the strange* the hete¬ rogeneous traits in the character of Barnarvo the JeWţlÎet. The business which be inhe¬ rited from his fathér wasted through indo- ¿ence ι his creditors sebed upon the -wreck of his fortune j und 9 as his infatuation for gaming increased, he became idle and dis- sîpated." Se was engaged as shopman, at & salary which would have supported him¬ self and family with tolerable comfort ; but he was "neglectful of the duties of his sta¬ tion, was dismissed from it, and obliged to depend on casual jobs in the working part ojfhit ^profession. His profits, however, in this way,were at times considerable ; through his ingenuity and abilities be was seldom at a loss for employment* when he had resolu¬ tion to exert himself; but the money which he' earned was instantly appropriated to his favourite amusement. Barnarvo was not - *a!årø}fs % loser; but when fortune smiled u^n-hirn^^l^relîance on b®i\&vour became* sjmgui&e, his stakes, were doàbfed, and Щ
ш generally had reason to complaint the fickle disposition of the goddess Th^in^ dustry of his wife and daughter was, their chief support. ' Barnarvo's earnings were rarely appropriated towards domestic com¬ forts ; he seldom, after having received a small sum of moaey for his own labours visited his lodgings until he had lost it at the gaming table. His education had been liberal, his manners were genteel and ев* gaging, and his mind strong and penetrating*; Orlando found himself more than usually comfortable: his spirits were elevated by the behaviour of Laura ; he was unable to tear himseif from her, and he yielded to the solicitations of her parents to spend the remainder of the day with them. He de¬ parted at a late hour in the evening, and Barnarvo offered to accompany him part of the way towards the castle* Orlando re¬ ceived the proposal with pleasure, and he took leave of Laura with reluctance. They - tßmUEmr ţhfc: house^ wbere^ ^tbey bad first tmt 4 Barnarvo proposed -looking in, røereiyf v as spectators, $nd this proposal was top agreeable to be rejected by his companion.
Í12 là the passage they saw; Don Esau de Cavet, in botìVersatiotì vŕith a shabby-looking man, Who appeared greatly disconcerted by the discourse. Don Esau pulled Orlando by the cloak as they passed,, begged* he would wmt á few moments, and they would ascend tó the rooms together. «''Signjor Am¬ brose," he cried to his companion, ťí you want to impose upon me ;^*»by the mass the use of the basket is at least worth a rial !" 4t Bf St. Anthony himself/* replied the man, ** I ¿ever heard of such a demand . Did I not pörçhaşeihe grapes in the basket which wtì placed in your cart as a satnpie ? Did you not offer me yourself the loan of it to coövèjr them to my stall ; and, when I turned them out, were not the under bunches good for naught ?" > Odanda soon discovered by this discourse that the mân had, as he stated, bought a quantity of grapes of Don Esau. By agree¬ ment he bad taken them home in the basket ín which he purchased them, and which, according to his promise, he returned in the course of the day. He had at the pre- sent time been settling with Don Esau for
ш bis commodity, and given bim a sum for payment above the amount of tbe goods> out tiî whicb he required the necessary change*. But Don Esau stopped froni tbe balance a rial for the use of the basket; which he had voluntarily offered to lend thè purchaser, to convey ttfe fruit to his own, stall. The man, irritated-at the idea of receiving a rial short on so frivpldus a rear son, began to grow clamorous^, Orlandé and Barnarvo by no means wished to become partners in the squabble; but Don Esani stili detained tbem. His/character could not be more strongly delineated tharji in bis dis¬ course and manners af this moment: he- was afraid of their ascending ta tbe room and engaging in play before he could join* them, and on this account be alternately addressed them during his dispute'with the* ' market-man. He was going to risk hun¿ dreds at the moment he was attempting tot deprive a poor wretch of u sum which would not purchase him even one humble meal. " I will not be plundered 1" he exclaimed i " How do you thintk I can afford to Ые a
"'I 14 sèi at so low a profit. Dört iC^fili^Étp.'ïï*!! attend you instantly^—play for «Sy jS&kg, you like; - Donk teil me—always щЩЬ Xû cbarçe for the feasket^-y ou might ( ~ 1Г $&аЪ& same, onljr you have more money Шщ wiţ*«r-Signior Barnarvo, I will bet ybu one: hundised pistoles your friend Don Or¬ lando throws the two highest in the first game>" -, Again turning to the man: ** Don't 1^: íŕ a pasşionţi-^-sell you two jars of olives №ЩШош**г&\ bargain-*-fit for the king; bought of a rogue fø be swe, but none the worse íar,.Âat» 1 TelLyou how to get rid of your rotten grapes. Don't say alvord more about the. ráÍ.-í-^Signlor Barnarvo,. will you take my bet ? I'll lay oh the contrary, to make it agreeable*" *v ** My finances ^ are but low to-night," replied Barnarvo, " but I '11 take you at ten**' '*. Done," replied Don Esau, with great·. joy*?*?*« Signbr Don Calando will Rouble iťiV-Well, what do you say to half the rial : I am too easily imposed upon, but I don't like to make my friends wait: can't /^yy^ţjţ^n^w though* deduct it out of the neu& Ъщ&% J°xk but of *me."4~He had- ηα
ЩйШг^^ fh¿aj|u^^o^^ man became sö îond^thàt ■ Ш was pushed out of the house by tvrWof ;' the!waiters. : ■. V : .ví ' : - ; Ц ^^f^y"^ ^ thé proposal of Barnarvo for entering the house Under a iuH determination hot to play* yet the bet which the former had accepted^ a^d which he had not resolution enough ίο wijÈhstand, formed a good excuse for theŕlať^ ţer breaking his word on this pointf and his inclinations made it ho veiy arduous task. Barnarvo won his bet, which £nâ* bled him tq increase his stakes* Orlanda * likewise was fortunate the fore part of the night. In, a rew hours, as usual, fortune was reversed, and before they left the í roomy they were each left pennyless. Barnarvo rayed in agony—Orlando trembled with despair. The miser, who had bankrupted them both, parted with them in the roöntşı for Don lisau generally remained behind to deal wi]ţh the waiters for the ends of the s wax tapers* which he r contracted for ;Weel$Jy V ;; ; ;v-' ■'/■■;:-■■";;' ^у'уууу-'\ : г уч.
116 Orlando and Barnarvo proceeded to their ififere^è habitations under a state of mind Stóe^^rt of madness^ Orlando's pertur- ba^w "ţ$m too great to be concealed from his servant Otto. This fellow was artful ед$ tosinuating: he had contrived, during ©on 0iego f s stay at Seville, to ingratiate himself in his favour by a pretended sanc- títyiof manners totally foreign to his dispo- sition; he had from a child been in the ser* f$ø& of different young men of fashion y. he hni$ profited Щ thek, extravagance, and preyed upon their liberality. Otto pos¬ sessed powers of intellect far superior to What might have been expected from his me¬ nial situation, btît they were exerted only ш actions artful and cunning : his sagacity was of that species which is seldom suc¬ cessful but upon the unwary, and his heart УШ as callous to the feelings of humanity аж it was frembliîïgly alive to his own in- terest and personal advantage. He was? cruel and ferocious in his sature* but das^ tardiy timorous for his safety and preserva¬ tion.* €owardke was the only check which prevented Ыщ from becoming an open and
117
public villain. He had a w ? ill to commit crimes of the darkest dye ; but he had no courage to execute them. This man, how¬ ever, with all his finesse, was easily disco* vered by an adept in the knowledge* of mankind. Unfortunately his master wás not of this class ; his whining and hypocri¬ tical tones of religion and morality were considered by Orlando as the genuine effu¬ sions of a mind more than usually given to: devotion : he had no conception of the lurking villany which is sometimes veiled by such pretences; be had studied no portraits of human nature, to make him acquainted with the different vicious traits which too often predominate. He believed Otto to be a saint, because Otto called himself one; the very reason, according to worldly expe¬ rience, which should have occasioned him to think otherwise. Otto had considered his master's character with far more judg¬ ment than his roaster had studied his ; and he secretly congratulated himself upon the distant prospect of being enriched by his ruin. The first operation which this plot* ting domestic conceived necessary to. for-
ward his feterest was to entwine himself with Qrlando's affairs in sucha manner that ; should; secure hám from dismission in case bis master should receive hints to his disad¬ vantage ι and ever since their arrival at Madrid he had been gradually working for this point He had likewise formed other arrangements which will be hereafter ex¬ plained. The crisis had now arrived and ap¬ peared to bring forward circumstances that by^ dexterpus management promised an op- ЬуЙ^ half confession, of the latter's distress ? för money, and it was oh this ground bé baci determined forest the coftipìetioh of his schemes,* Otto only WÄ ment when he. -simula be у^гтеЩ1&Ше^ mities, and then resolved on yènturjn^ become a banker-i-^to■■■-■fe'fe; ^áéteťt'-vhé/^aSí'':- about to. bavé made ^ò^osàls^ when Orlando gained some relief to his embarrassments by thè pö^seMgä øf the miniatúre, and by that ¡пише Щ 1КеШ^ ment frustrated the views dE bis servant;'
119
But Otto was not disheartened ; he wastoo greaf a connoisseur 'tn character to despaif ol· another opportunity ; and even that ad* venture partly produced the effects he wished, by the falsehoods he consented to utter at Orlando's request/ He had narrowly attended to Orlando's actions since that period : he had information of his being at the gaming house : he had great expectations from the result of this night's adventure; and, to second his views, he procured a letter from a tradesman to whom Oriando was indebted ten pistoles, which contained a peremptory demand for his money, with threats of immediately ap¬ plying by law if the debt was not dis¬ charged. It is easy to conceive the sensa¬ tions of Orlando when this letter was pre¬ sented to him on his return to the castle : he was distracted with apprehensions and alarm ; his manners were * similar to those of a maniac ; not a single rial remained from his last supply y he appeared surrounded by difficulties; disgrace threatened to envelop him every hour. Otto saw his misery with a satisfaction he scarcely, with all his art,
ito çmtâ cønceaJU He now conceived he* Might tenime to make the offer with tfamer degree of security, and he thus be· gm witb,a ptetendcd sympathy for his ^ cr I am eorry to see your honour so un- bappy : hope no ill has befallen you I The *Loľd protect us, but we are poor mortals." " Silence 1" criedX>rlando, with his usual austerity. ** Leave me to myself." Otto bowed m he was going to leave the room : his master called him back. • ** Otto," said he, « I am to blame : ex¬ cuse my petulance : you do not deserve such treatment ; but I am mad, distracted with my own feelings" ** lam sorry I intruded upon you, signior,'* said Ottó, 4t but I cannot help partaking in your troubles. I would risk my life to ease them." 44 Ì believe you from my soul," answered Orlando, ** but you can give me no assis» tance;— Oh God ! why have I not more reso¬ lution? why am I thus the slave to a pas· ém I thought -myself fully capable to anni· hilste?"
ш
4í Alas! we are alî tì*e slaves of o^r pas¬ sions, as I may say. As to oyercoming them, ît is not m our power : Satan is too strong within us." * Otto*s preaching was lost upon Orlando: he heard not a syllable he uttered. " My dear master, I hope you will not be offended," he continued; " but perhaps, sir, perhaps you are in want of money. I Hardly dare to make tjie offer ; but, if you would accept the Joan of thirty pistoles which I have in this bag, you would be greatly wel¬ come to them." Orlando's eyes sparkled with joy at the sight of the gold, nor was he insensible to the apparent affections of bis servant : he clasped his hand with ardour. " Otto," he exclaimed, " thou art indeed a friend, nor will I refuse thy timely onler : this generous assistance alleviates · nio$jt considerably my uneasiness. I am one« niore restored to some degree of peace* discharge early in the morning this feHø^r'fc bill, and tell him he shall never have another opportunity to behave in a similar *matb ner." Otto gave his store with pfcţ$$№fc but it was necessary for his purposes ЩХ Jie should have some kind of certificate for the VOL. II. О
loan. Ife^tlfód to tlfesan^á^ffil· his otb^p^ mind of it, by declaring there was no occa- sibníbr^iieb ä ceremony ; and he continued to spur him to the exécution, while he pre- tendedbe batdno wish to^demand it. Orlando, although elevated at the moment under the jŕdea of being relieved from his immediate embarrasstnents;- soon felt the degradation to which he had submitted. He bad' placed himself under an obligation tó hisieryant; be bad made a confidant of him, when he bad riot da^ed tó irust those whose situation, by being more^equalwith his own, wöuldbáve rendered his confession less dis¬ graceful. During tbis day he complained of indis- poskion, and confined himself to his cham- feer*/ Bqt such a plea answered little pur¬ pose with respect to his remaining alone, for bet was „visited by chief part of the family. /The following was that on which he had appointed with Barnarvo to meet the^ew; znd be repaired accordingly to the.lodgings of the former, who had pro- mised to introduce him. Barnarvo was
İ23 seated alone—melancholy and dejected г bis face was more than usually pale, and his manners uncommonly languid. Orlando, however the business of the morning might occupy his mind, was not so totally en¬ grossed 'by it, but he instantly experienced a peculiar disappointment in not seeing Laura· u Are you quite alone ?" sard he to Barnarvo, after the first compliments bf thö morning were over. "" How are Laura and her mother? You appear very ill P'^ €( I am indeed, Don Orlando, much indis¬ posed," replied Barnarvo: ** my wife is gone to procure some medicines from a dniggist'è near, and Laura was obliged to take home some work which she this morning finished· I expect them both to return shortly."—·" I am sorry to see you so unwell," said Orlando: ** your loss the other evening has, I am afraid, too much oppressed you." íť »Oh! signior Don Orlando," cried the jeweller; 4( I ara a villain, a wretch who has not power or resolution to be virtuous. The last night on which we separated I found myself inca^ pable of supporting the horrors of my own mind. In> returning home I mét with an acquamtaBcej who persuaded me to disperse G 2
124 them by copious draughts of wine. The very great degree of intoxication to which I was reduced almost destroyed me, and I have not yet got the better of its effects." Orlando attempted to condole with him ; but he was a poor comforter; he stood much in need of the specific himself, " I will not require you to introduce me to the Jew this morning," said he : " you are too UL· we will defer it to a future day.'* ** By no means," answered Barnarvo : " the walk will be of service to me : I only wait for the return of my wife or daughter.—Oh ! Orlando, my young friend," he exclaimed, ** tf yoe knew the tortures that rack my soul when I reflect on the injuries I have done those dear objects of my affection, you would indeed pity me. I am not a hardened villain, вот can I view tbe miseries in which I have involved them without distraction. Gra¬ cious God i Why was I suffered to exist, thus ţo heap affliction on the very beings who adore me ?" Orîandç felt sensations, in viewing this example of the effects of his favourite passión, which for the moment occasioned serious resolves never to gratify it again, He requested Barnarvo to take
Vlo
comfort ; but he had little to say that could ensure it. In a short time Laura returned : her appearance surprised them : she heeded not Orlando, who asked after her health, but sunk into a chair breathless with agitation and alarm. They flew to her assistance. Orlando seized her hand with peculiar warmth, and inquired with much energy who or what had terrified her. His voice appeared instantly to recover her scattered senses : she turned towards him with a lan¬ guid smile, and, resting her bead on the bosom of her father, burst into a flood of tears. It was some time before she was able to discover the cause of her alarm : but they at length found she had been grossly aifronted by some young men of the city who were returning intoxicated from a late carousal. Orlando was for immediately pur¬ suing them; but they found by Laura such an attempt would be useless, for they had already been seized by an alguazil for an insult they had committed before. Laura soon recovered. The warmth of Orlando had not passed unnoticed either by herself or her father; nor did the former G 3
IM regret the accident which had occasioned her the affright, since it had produced her the high gratification of a further proof of Orlando's affection. Barnarvo now proposed they should fulfil their appointment with the Jew, and they departed for the hotel which had been, ñxed upon for their meeting. The jeweller rested on the arm of Or¬ lando: he was weak and languid, while his mind seemed greatly harassed and dis¬ tressed. They had entered the hotel but a few moments before Don IsraeLEzra was announced ► Orlando had pictured to himself, for the portrait of this usurer, an old decrepit miser past every enjoyment but that of counting his riches, with a person and manners totally antique and disgusting. How great was his surprise when a young man, apparently but JLittle older than himself, entered the room, and saluted them with all the polished negligence of high life ! His conversation^ instead of turning bo the subject which had occasioned their meeting, ran on the pub¬ lic amusements of Madrid, upon which
127 be talked with a,volubility that confirmed him to be perfectly conversant with them all. Orlando instantly conjectured there must be some mistake, and inquired of the jeweller if that was the gentleman whom he had mentioned to him. Barnarvo an¬ swered in the affirmative,, and, addressing himself to the Jew, began to open the pur¬ pose of their meeting* But Don Israel paid little attention to what he said ; he rang the bell in the midst of his discourse, and or¬ dered coffee ; then throwing himself on a sofa, he resumed his remarks upon the theatre and various other places. However tedious such behaviour might ap¬ pear to Orlando under his present situation, he was elevated with a hope, by the appear¬ ance of this man, that he would by no means have so hard a character to bargain with as if the usurer had answered the ideal form he had given him. Coffee was brought according to his desire, and after a little per¬ suasion Barnarvo and Orlando consented to take some with him. The jeweller again mentioned the miniature he had in his pos¬ session, and requested he would now have G 4
i *¿&
the goodness to proceed on that business. Agreed," cried Don Israel : «· egad, I had almost forgot the circumstance. Well, signior Don Orlando, you are uneasy I find on ac¬ count of your miniature, and fearful it should pass into other hands before you are able to redeem it. Ha î is not this the state of the case, signior Don Orlando ?" « Ex¬ actly," answered Orlando, somewhat of¬ fended at his abrupt manner. " Why then, by Moses, I will annihilate your distress.' There, signior Don Orlando, is the picture which occasions you such extraordinary concern." In uttering these words he threw the miniature towards him, and began to sip his coffee with a most fashionable air. Orlando grasped it with eagerness, conceiv¬ ing that Ezra bad returned it to his posses¬ sion, and would depend upon his honour or note for the payment of the money he had advanced upon it. His joy for the moment at this supposition rendered him unable to return his thanks : but he soon recovered* and delivered his gratitude with great energy. Don Israel immediately arose from the very comfortable posture in which hs
129 had placed himself, and, snatching the picture from his hand, gazed on him for some moments with a stare of vacant astonishment : then turning to Barnarvo, he asked with much earnestness if his friend was a little deranged. Orlando co¬ loured with indignation: he was going to remonstrate with him on the rudeness of his behaviour; but he recollected he was in his power, and concealed his choler. " Don Israel/' answered Barnarvo, " I believe my friend mistook your meaning—I must confess it was rather ambiguous : he thought you meant to return him the picture/' " So I did, to look at," replied Ezra; "and for the sight of it I ought to be allowed two pistoles." Orlando's surprise increased. " To be plain with you, Don Orlando, 1 * be continued, " I bave this day been offered twenty pistoles more for this picture than· I advanced you upon it ; in consequence of which, without you redeem it in the course- of an hour, I must be under the necessity of parting with it," Ail Orlando's expectations in the genero- G 5
\ гт sity of the Jew from his appearance now va¬ nished : these last, words put him under the most serious alarm. He had no resources to^ raise the mon^y, but by exposing his errors- tq the world ; and death at this moment ap¬ peared far more- preferable than such a sa¬ crifice. Barnarvo was equally distressed. He was conscious of being indebted to Orlando* a sum which would have served as a princi¬ pal part towards his present wants; but, so- far from being able to repay him„ he was in debt twenty times the amount, and was^ not in possession of three pistoles. ' The Jew repeated his assertion. Orlando was distracted with doubts and anxiety in what manner to. act : he dared not part with the picture, yet there appear¬ ed no possible way of redeeming it. * u Signior Don Orlando," continued Ezra,. after waiting some time for his answer, " I have a desire ta serve you. I am gay myself* and have experienced the difficulties which a few juvenile follies will sometimes occa¬ sion us. By our sabbath,, I am too generous l f But I cannot help it, it is a fault in my na¬ ture ; I had always too liberai a disposi-
131
tion. Thus, then, I will act with you : I will enter into a bond to keep the picture for the term of twelve months from this date, under what penalty you may choose to propose, on condition you shall, at the expiration of that time, or before, pay me two hundred pistoles for the redemption of it." Both Orlando and Barnarvo were thun¬ derstruck at the assurance with which this extravagant ofier was made : and although the latter was tolerably well acquainted with his character, as well as many others in the same profession, yet this exorbitant pro¬ posal, after preluding it with a pretended zeal of friendship, exceeded, perhaps, any circumstance of the kind he had ever be¬ fore met with, and he abruptly demanded, with a look pf considerable anger, at what rate of interest he calculated this bargain ? cc Look ye," cried Ezra, ťí I like to be¬ have genteel, but I must not suffer myself to be imposed upon. If you do not ap¬ prove my offer, I have done, and know in what manner to act. I will not be laughed at : so I wish you a good morning," Orlan¬ do hastily detained him,. "Be not impa-
ısa
tient," he exclaimed: "by heavens I am almost distracted I I know not in what man¬ ner to act ! I have no possible means of raising the sum you have advanced upon this picture ; yet to part with it will involve me in the most embarrassing circumstances." " Then accept the liberal Offer I have made you," answered Don Israel. " It must be so," said Orlando, after a pause of some minutes. He well perceived there was no alternative; and however glaring the imposition might be, he would be un$ler the necessity of stifling his resent¬ ment, and acceding to it without murmur¬ ing. A written agreement, according to the Jew's proposal, was immediately drawn up* and signed by the parties ; after which, Don Israel Ezra, having finished bis coffee, called for his carriage; and wishing them a good morning, he whispered in the ear of the waiter, that the-young cavalier who remain¬ ed behind would discharge the bill. By this agreement, the Jew bound himself under a ¡forfeiture of two hundred pistoles if he parted with the miniature before tbe expiration of one year*»—" I was de-
133
ceived," saidOriando to the jeweller, ζί by the appearance of this man. I expected, when I first beheld him, to have engaged with one who possessed too much levity to make even a good bargain in his own behalf: he seemed, in the beginning of our conversation, to be a mere butterfly of pleasure, who I should have conjectured would scarcely have given himself the trouble to have calculated or cavilled for common interest. By his dress, open countenance,and agreeable man¬ ners, I supposed him to be liberal and ge¬ nerous; by the lively turn of h i ¿ ? observa¬ tions, I considered him neither selfish nor unfeeling. How greatly was I mistaken î I am unfortunate in my speculations on cha¬ racter; my perceptions, which I flattered my¬ self were even more accurate than those of the generality of mankind, are continually erro¬ neous." Whether the last words of Orlando were considered by Barnarvo as obliquely hinted at himself (which it is but justice to remark was by no means the case), it is certain the feelings of the latter were never so visibly exposed to him as at this moment : he ap¬ peared struggling under emotions the most
ш
violent and distressing. ** Signier Don Os¬ lando," said he, " I was born to be a burden to my best friends. I am indebted to you a sum which would considerably alleviate your embarrassments : I am unable to discharge this debt. Could you experience my sen¬ sations, you would pity the sufferings which the consciousness of it occasions me : by heavens, I would most willingly sacrifice my life to repay the obligation !—-Oh God I" he exclaimed, ec thou who art acquainted with the various machinations of the human mind; who cans^ trace the causes of those propen- sities s the effects of which produce their own punishments; who canst mark the numberless intricacies of intellectual reflex¬ ion ; who canst witness every thought of de¬ pravity ; and create the pangs of that an¬ guish which proceeds from a conviction and self-accusation of guilt : thou only art able to judge of my feelings !" Orlando was sincerely concerned for Bar- narvo*s distress : he said every thing in his power to comfort him. The jeweller, how¬ ever, appeared more than usually depressed ;, his health had long been upon the decline y
J 35
the continual agitation of his spirits had most materially weakened his nerves, and occasio* ned a general debility of constitution, which threatened alarming consequences. Al¬ though at an age which might be considered as the prime of life, dissipation had rendered him subject to the most grievous diseases. His prospects were gloomy in the extreme ; he was not capable of supporting even an ideal view of those scenes which a retrospection of his past errors would some¬ times delineate. Still his favourite passion was always predominant : under the pain of bodily infirmities or mental agony, the gra¬ tification of it was at once a charm, which^ for the moment, annihilated all sorrow. Bar¬ narvo possessed sentiments too refined, too delicate, to sink into that torpid state of in¬ sensibility, which might have rendered him callous to the powerful ties of nature to¬ wards his wife and child : he could not view their discomforts, which he well knew were occasioned by his own misconduct, without distraction : yet such punishments were no antidote against future errors ; convey him but to a gaming-table, he was no longer
136
master of his actions, but would plunge' with a frantic temerity into increased horrors and distress. Orlando repeatedly mentioned, it was to the character of the man who had just quit¬ ted them he particularly alluded. " You must not, Don Orlando," said the jeweller, after he had become a little mare composed, " always suppose the mind and passions of a man to be similar to his external appearance or general behaviour. In Don Israel you have a proof how greatly they sometimes differ : with all that apparent neg¬ ligence and gaiety of youth, his avarice is in¬ satiable ; and however his fancy may lead him to mix with the dissipated, his pru¬ dence never forsakes him. Under a pre¬ tended glare of fashionable extravagance, an observer at the first moment is deceived by the supposition that he possesses the con> ponent parts of that generosity which is ge¬ nerally to be found in those dispositions where a more than usual vivacity predo¬ minates. But Don Ezra's composition is> softened by no such amiable essence ι it is true he is a lively, spirited, and agreeable
131
companion ; but in his hours of the most ex¬ cessive hilarity his heart is not to be touched by the soft pleadings of humanity : he could spend the evening with his friend under the warm and cheering powers of sociality ; but would the dGtd procure him a ducat, and he- had power to execute it, he would conclude the night by sending his companion to a jail, and let him perish under" the miseries of want ; while he searched for new objects of conviviality to contribute to his pleasures. Nor is he ashamed of being guilty of thé most flagrant meannesses. As the greater part of the persons with whom he associates are iri some way or other obligated to him, he generally leaves them to pay his share of the costs which the entertainments may have occasioned. Still he is accounted to¬ lerably honest; and his reputation stands more fair in Madrid than ofthat of any other money-lender." "I must confess," answered Orlando, at¬ tempting to make light of the bargain he had entered into, "I have not the most firm opi¬ nion of his honour ; but, however, the agree¬ ment I have made with him is of little conse-
ÌSB quence, although, at the first idea of his pro¬ posals, I was vexed and chagrined ; if, how¬ ever, in the height of my spleen, I have ut¬ tered any thing which you may conceive as pointed at yourself, I hope you will now ac¬ cept my apology, and believe that I could have no meaning in what I said." Barnarvo shook him by the hand; he could scarcely contain his tears. " Don Or¬ iando," said he, " this goodness hurts me : I am become childish, but be assured I am not ungrateful." Orlando haying discharged the bill parted with his friend, and returned to the castle melancholy and dejected. His behaviour towards Laura that morn¬ ing had made the strongest impressions on her father. The jeweller, however his knowledge of the world might before have prompted him to suppose the attentions shown to his child were mere common¬ place gallantry, began now to encourage hopes similar to those of his wife. The ten¬ derness of Orlando's manner, added to the seeming unaffected anxiety he experienced for her alarm, served to convey the strongest
Ì39
ideas of his attachment. Barnarvo could not but feel sincere pleasure at the supposi¬ tion of a splendid settlement for his beloved daughter ; and although he did not perhaps place such a perfect dependence on his an¬ ticipations as Donna Barbara, yet they were powerful enough to create a considerable confidence in their accomplishment. Laura, who was already more strongly attached to him than they suspected, soon perceived that the expectations of her parents were in part parallel with her own. The hopes of her Jove being returned, increased with this dis¬ covery : the natural simplicity of her charac¬ ter rendered her incapable of concealing those emotions in the presence of Orlando which served more fully to confirm her par¬ tiality. Constantly educated under the eye of a tender doting mother, who had but few op¬ portunities of introducing her into life, she was the mere unaffected child of homely retirement ; and although her manners par¬ took in part of that polish which she had received from those of her father, yet in a short time it was easy to discover she had been little used to general society or fa-
140 shíonabíe conversation. Innocent herself, she had but few suspicions of duplicity in others. Orlando was perhaps the only man she had ever seen who had the most trifling ascendency over her affections ; and for this reason they were the more warm and per¬ manent. His person and manners had, in their, first interview, made a strong impres¬ sion on her mind ; and his conduct towards her father had most firmly fixed her regard towards him. Barnarvo, when he once en¬ couraged the idea of his child having made a conquest of the heart of Orlando de Mel- las, conceived he had no right to check those consequences which his hopes had whispered him might proceed from it, when he conceived Laura to be worthy of the most elevated station in life. Such were the effects which Orlando's behaviour had upon the jeweller and his family. It is true, he regarded Laura with peculiar attention ;. but it most probably arose more from the Stimulus of youthful inclinations than any other source. His passions were strong; the curb which bad hitherto been placed upon them was now no more; he suddenly
141 enjoyed their gratification with but little experience to guide his career. He was virtuous while exposed to no temptations to be otherwise ; to struggle on this point required efforts to which he had been little used ; and he was consequently not compe¬ tent to the task. Those actions which he had hitherto considered as criminal he now saw generally practised in common through¬ out all ranks of society, and of course their atrocity appeared the fainter. In his pre¬ sent situation Laura was the only female who received him with pleasure, or paid him any attention gratifying to his pride: that dimdence so predominant in his man¬ ner he no longer experienced in ber com¬ pany. Under these circumstances Orlando and Laura mutually imbibed a strong par¬ tiality for each other, although the essence of that partiality was extremely different in each.
UŽ
CHAP. XIV. What dost thou mean ?—Thy words, thy look, thy manner, Seem to conceal some horrid secret.—Heavens ! No—That was wHd-*-Distraction fires that thought! Thomson. JtbiGHT months elapsed, during which no material circumstances occurred to the visi« tors or family of Olvernardo. Although Orlando de Mellas had been paid two quarterly remittances from his uncle in this period, and although he had deter¬ mined in his own mind that the restoration of the miniature to his brother should be the immediate use to which he would put the first, yet even with the second he did not fulfil his resolution. Nor was the loan from Otto discharged; every week had intro¬ duced him into new pleasures and new dif¬ ficulties, and he had not even exerted ceco* nomy enough to keep himself free from seve¬ ral small debts. In short, Orlando was now
143
rapidly degenerating into that brutal insen¬ sibility of error which threatened the most dreadful consequences. Habit gradually rendered those scenes of dissipation pleasing to him which on his first introduction into the world he was unable to enjoy. The follies, the extravagances, and what are even termed the vices of mankind, failed to inspire him with that disgust which he for¬ merly felt for them; and the recollection of the very recluse manner in which he had been educated he now treated with contempt and abhorrence. The general diffidence of his character was still predo¬ minant in every company, but where noisy revelry, and common-place indelicate voci¬ feration, formed the touchstone to convi¬ viality. In assemblies of the latter de¬ scription Orlando had an opportunity of displaying in some degree his erudition ; for he generally contrived to mix in his dis¬ course a certain quantity of quotations and terms which very few of his hearers under¬ stood, and consequently by these means he acquired some celebrity for his learning. He was seldom engaged with the parties
Îé4 formed by the family of Olvernardo; nor indeed did he associate much with any part of the inhabitants of the castle : he selected none for his friends but those who would flatter his vanity, and allow him a superiority in, every argument and observation. The ill effects of these selections are obvious ; there were few who would covet his friend¬ ship under such a penalty, but from motives <of the most sordid interest and imposition. This degrading connexion and imprudent conduct were now become too glaring for concealment. Signior Zadok, during the last three months, had expostulated with him several times, but to little purpose; and in their last interview on the subject Orlando treated him with considerable dis¬ respect. It had been a matter of debate for some time in the mind of the tutor, whether Don Diego de Mellas should not be in¬ formed of the apprehensions entertained for the principles and welfare of his nephew ; but the idea of occasioning the uncle that poignant distress which he was certain the information would give him, added to the hope that Orlando might, like many other
145
young men, in the course of a little time, discover his errors and reform his conduct, still kept him from the disagreeable task. Osmund, although perhaps as dissipated as his brother, still met with a general allowance for his follies; he neither asso¬ ciated with gamblers nor black-legs, nor assumed any pretended sanctity to cover his indiscretions. The pleasantry of his manners made him a universal favourite, and consequently his errors were beheld with a more favourable eye. His intrigue with Donna Bertha had already been discovered to the duke de Brevon, and the threatened vengeance of the old noble had occasioned considerable alarm. He had received seve. ral lectures from various parts of the family; but Osmund, though he seldom profited by their advice, yet always appeared sensible of the good intentions with which it was given. Although he had launched into several unnecessary expenses, yet he had managed to keep himself free from any pe¬ cuniary embarrassments by ^ the income he received from his uncle. If he sometimes gamed, he had penetration enough to select vol. п. H
14:6 d party w r here he stood on an equal footing with respect to judgment and fair play; while he had command enough over his actions to prevent him following up a run of Ш fortune at the hazard of becoming a bankrupt with his last maravedí, lie was generous, liberal, and brave; yet gay, thoughtless, and extravagant. His mind was naturally quick and penetrating, and bad been highly cultivated, though not un¬ der those laborious attempts at perfec¬ tion which were exerted on his brother. Every thought, every sentiment he pos¬ sessed, was manly and unequivocal; an easy frankness in his behaviour occasioned a prepossession in his favour with all whom Ъе addressed ; and whatever they dis¬ covered in his subsequent conduct, still it was impossible to accuse him of finesse or deceit. Albert d'Olvernardo (whose romantic ardour produced a continual source of plea¬ sure and difficulties to himself, and often a considerable share of entertainment to lus friends) was generally the companion of Osmund: with Orlando he seldom asso*
14?
ciated, except at meals ; and even in those interviews he had acquired a decided dis¬ taste for his company. The very great inti¬ macy which subsisted between the mar¬ quis's family and that of Don Everard de Gosmond occasioned them to be often to¬ gether; and in these meetings it was not 'difficult to observe a mutual attachment subsisted between Albert and Cassandra. The parents of each were not displeased with the discovery, and consequently no methods were taken to interrupt that pro¬ gress of affections which was likely to pro¬ duce such a share of felicity and satisfaction to all parties. The principal traits in Cassandra de G Os¬ mond's character were in some respects peculiar. Deprived of her mother in the early stage of infancy, she was entrusted by her father to the care of an old maiden aunt s a rigid devotee, yet perhaps an exception to the generality of that class in the benevo¬ lence of her character and goodness of her heart. Most carefully secluded from the world, in a manner something similar to Or¬ lando de Mellas, she was reared under a re¬ tt 2
us
finement of tenderness and delicacy not altogether calculated to lay a foundation for her happiness, when introduced into the busy paths of life. Her constitution, natu¬ rally delicate and sickly, was rendered still more so by the uncommon care which was taken to preserve it. Her mind, by a con¬ tinual round of undiversified scenes, gra¬ dually sunk from the splendor of intellect it seemed likely to produce ; and although too űncly organised to waste into stupor, still arrived not at that perfection к had pro¬ mised. The uncommon graces of her per¬ son ajt once rendered her an object of gene¬ ral admiration. She was tremblingly alive to every sentiment which does honour to the human heart,; but she wanted that fortitude and firmness which it might easily be per¬ ceived had been lost in the mistaken mode of her education. Her disposition was mild and placid, her manners soft and engaging; yet a nervous timidity, which she was un¬ able to overcome, formed a continual source 4>f unhappiness to herself and anxiety to her friends* The cause of this unfortunate dis¬ ease originated perhaps not so much from
149 the infirmity of her health as from the su¬ perstitious dogmas which characterised the first lessons of her instructress* Through the religious phrensy of her aunt she im¬ bibed a taste for those relations of horror and wonder which were laboriously im¬ pressed upon her infant mind, and which time and habit rendered permanent and lasting. The terrors which they produced, far from being lessened at a more advanced age, greatly increased : to be left alone at night occasioned her terrific sensations, which threatened the most fatal conse¬ quences; while she would greedily listen to those narratives which encouraged her ma-* lady. The marquis d'Olvernardo, whose gloom and melancholy daily increased, seldom ac¬ companied his family in any of their parties; and even when etiquette obliged him to re¬ ceive company at home, the task appeared most irksome and unpleasant. The soothing attempts of his relatives and friends were in vain. The depression of spirits under which he sunk seemed capable of no alleviation, h 3
150 while nis bodily health visibly declined, His private interviews with father Theo¬ dosius always augmented his distress. The peculiar character and behaviour of this man kept him apparently excluded from all society; and although a general attendant ιΛ the table of the marquis, he was seldom ob¬ served in the castle at any other time, nor did he hold the least intercourse with any of its inhabitants. Orlando had not forgot the scenes he had beheld in the solitary inn, where Theodosius was so principal a per¬ former ; nor had he failed to make many inquiries concerning him, with a view, if possible, to elucidate what he had witness¬ ed. But the history of the monk appeared wrapped in a veil of impenetrable mystery, and it was in vain he attempted to discover actions which might be traced to' those events. Albert, who had already avowed to Os¬ mund his love for Cassandra, in one of his usual flights of romantic ardour determined to serenade her, and applied to his friend one evening to join him in the excursion.
Ï5 1
Osmund readily consented; and a small band of very choice musicians being pro¬ cured, they proceeded to the back part of Don Everard's mansion, where the windows of Cassandra's bed-chamber opened to a balcony supported by columns below. Al¬ bort determined to accompany his own voice by the lute ; and being all arrived at the spot a little after midnight, the following air was executed with considerable taste ;—» SERENADE *..—TO CASSANDRA«, " Avsake, fair maid ! The sylvan lyre,. Now j fraught with love's poetic fire* Floats on the zephyr's wing j It waves (he lilies o'er thy head,. It hovers round thy virgin bed. Yet scarcely dares to sing, " The bosom of the ev'ning gaie, Which sheds its dew-drops o'er the vale, Receives the am'rous strain ;. Alas! that breeze, how highly blest, Shall nestle in thy snowy breast, Whisp'ring a lover's pain.
U 4
Ì52
u The beauties of the May-blown ftoweiv New blossomed iß a sunshine hour, Where sips th* enamouťd bee, In accents soft, the zephyr tells, Yet not a flower in which it dwells," Is half so fair as thee. '* Could I assume his airy flight, And, shaded by the sable night, Play round thy sparkling eye ţ Ne'er from the magic charm Pd part» But languish on thy panting heart» And call it bliss to die,"
Cassandra, who, attended by her own waiting-maid, had just begun to undress, was at the first moment of this sudden burst of harmony rather alarmed. The ready conceptions of her servant, however, soon made her acquainted with the cause of it. Don Everard> who had returned late from a carousal in which he had taken rather more than his usual quantity of wine, was instant¬ ly fired with the idea of the degradation in having his daughter thus publicly addressed; and without inquiring or considering who was leader of the music, he swore vengeance
153
against the whole band, and immediately summoned his servants with their fire-arms to meet them in battle array. In the mean time Albert and Orlando, being made ac¬ quainted with Don Everard's irritation and his threatenings by the waiting-maid, who spoke to them from the balcony, conceived ît most prudent to withdraw themselves. They ac¬ cordingly dispatched the musicians, and were themselves preparing to follow, when signior Zadok, having been upon a visit to Don Cæsar de Grolvo (with whom he had become a great favourite), passed them on his return to the castle. Osmund, sup¬ posing that the tutor would be a proper person to apologise and explain the matter to Don Everard, proposed that they should request his interference in the affair : this point being settled, the whole of the busi¬ ness was explained to signior Zadok, wha, with his usual politeness, readily undertook to adjust the business* "As the good old Don is rather warm about the head," said Albert, " suppose you take this lute, which is marked with my name, and which will consequently sane* H 5
154
tion what you say." Having uttered these words, he hung the instrument on Zadok's shoulders, and they both wished him a good night. The tutor immediately proceeded to the spot which the party had left, and by this time Don Everard had mustered his forces, and was actually marching towards the place to secure the musicians. Observing Zadok at a distance with the lute, he instant¬ ly ordered one of the men to seize him. The tutor, conscious of the part he had taken, was under no apprehensions ; but he soon observed that, although he mentioned his name to the man who held him, he was not released. Don Everard and the remainder of his servants soon arrived. The heated imagination of the former actually occasion¬ ed him to suppose that signior Zadok had been serenading his daughter. This idea was confirmed by observing him with the instrument. Under these cjrcumstances, the situation of the tutor was truly embar^ rassing: it was in vain he protested his innocence, and the reason for his being found with the lute, Don Everard upbraid-
155
ed him with great acrimony, declaring Ы never could have supposed a little gentle¬ man of his merit would have acted with such duplicity, and have attempted to gain the affections of a young lady without the consent of her father. Signior Zadok, finding all his assertions lost on Don Everard in his present state, wisely withdrew, amidst the upbraidings of the latter, and the high entertainment of the domestics. Osmund and Albert parted a little di¬ stance from the house : the latter was en¬ gaged to escort his mother from a party where she had spent the evening, and the former walked slowly towards the castle. Osmund had not yet entered again the unin¬ habited parts of Olvernardo. Occupied by successive* amusements and engagements, he had little time for reflexion on the strange things he had witnessed in those apart¬ ments, and a principal impediment to his project was the indisposition of Cecil, who he had resolved should accompany him in his next visit. The idea that a certain class' of banditti had taken up their abode in this place made him determine never again to
156*
attempt it without a companion; and his reasons for not trusting any of the family with the circumstances he had witnessed have al¬ ready been explained. It might be said* that prudence should have urged him in¬ stantly to have taken methods for discover¬ ing who were the inhabitants of these parts of the castle, as the safety of the marquis's family was endangered by the uncertainty. This, however, was not altogether the case ; for the very ^reat number of servants who lodged near that side of the building, and who were always well armed, totally pre¬ cluded any fears which might be enter¬ tained from two or three robbers, and it was by no means likely that a greater num¬ ber should conceal themselves so» near Ma¬ drid. Still Osmund had by no means aban¬ doned his project, and the sight of the east tower, which he now passed, brought it again to his mind. Cecil was so far recovered as to be able'to renew his attendance, and he resolved to take the first opportunity to trace once more those dreary chambers. As his thoughts were wandering on this subject, he suddenly observed some one advancing towards him; and moving on the
157
opposite side, he discovered it to be father Theodosius, who, without noticing him> passed with a hurried step. The character of the priest had already raised in Osmund too great a curiosity to permit him to lose the present opportunity of following him unperceived. He accordingly turned round, and continued to walk through the suburbs for some time. The road at last became so gloomy and intricate, that it was with difficulty he could keep up with him without being observed. At length he stopped about a league from the city, in a place apparently equally destitute and retired. It was sur¬ rounded by trees withered and decayed, in the midst of which stood a small cottage, seemingly much out of repair, and which he would have supposed to have been for¬ saken, had he not perceived a faint light in an upper casement. The monk knocked gently at the door : it was opened by a fe¬ male : he entered, and immediately closed it after him. Osmund supposed for the mo¬ ment that the gratification of his curiosity was at an end ; and he was going to return, in some measure disappointed with the little
Î58
information his excursion had produced, when a thought struck him, that this per* haps was the habitation of the female whom they had seen with the priest at the solitary inn, and who was in all probabihty the ori¬ ginal ofthat bewitching countenance which was pourtrayed in the miniature he had so often gazed upon with admiration, and-the loss of which he so greatly regretted through the means of his brother. He had often so- licited for the recovery of it, but never could get any satisfactory answer. These ideas, wild as they were, were fully sufficient to inflame the mind of Osmund. The evening, though dark, was serene and pleasant : he determined to wait until the priest quitted the cottage, and then by some means con¬ trive to gain a view of the internal part. With this resolution he stationed himself on one side the building, where he remained near an hour; when, to his great satisfaction, he saw Theodosius depart. He now began to consider in what man¬ ner he should procure admittance. He he¬ sitated on this point some time, as he was fear¬ ful of alarming the inhabitants at so late an
159
hour. In the midst of his reverie, a violent shriek from a female voice in the cabin ar¬ rested his attention. Without further con¬ sideration he immediately knocked at the door, and the female who opened it exclaim¬ ed with great eagerness, " Oh, father ! I am glad you are returned—Ursula is dying." At the end of this sentence she discovered it was a stranger to whom she had spoken, and her alarm and anxiety greatly increased. Osmund, by the faint light that shone upon her features from the small lamp which she held, instantly discovered the original of his much valued picture, and gazed for some time in silent admiration on a countenance far more beautiful than any he had ever beheld. Recovering from this momentary trance, he begged her to be composed, de-.. clared he was passing the cottage, when her cry had urged him to knock, and offer his ser¬ vices. The very great distress under which she laboured prevented her from paying at¬ tention to what lie said : she called upon the name of Ursula in agony, while her anguish appeared to increase with her tears. Os¬ mund in vain endeavoured to comfort her»
160
He followed her into an inner apartment, where, on a miserable bed, lay extended the still more miserable form of a very old wo¬ man, apparently in the last stage of exis¬ tence. She breathed with difficulty; and her withered face, bedewed with the cold per¬ spiration of expiring life, formed a spectacle equally awful and appalling. Leonora (for such he had little doubt was the name of the lovely creature he beheld, when he recollected it to be that mentioned in the manuscript he possessed) was wholly occupied in acts of tenderness to the dying woman ; while at intervals she seemed embarrassed and distressed at Osmund's being a witness of their situation. He offered to procure medical assistance ; but she would not hear of the proposal, and only appeared anxious for him to quit the place. ** Heaven İ" cried he, " what can I have done to make my presence and offers of service a misery to you ? Surely I cannot have offended, that you thus only wish for my absence ?" " Oh, no !" exclaimed Leonora, " I am sensible of your good intentions ; but be as-
Ì61
sured I shall suffer for them :—you cannot conceive my distress*" During these few sentences which passed between them, the sick woman languidly opened her eyes. She seemed sensible of the purport of their discourse, and uttered a faint groan, as if she sympathised for her young attendant. She waved her hand to Leonora, to procure her some medicines -which stood in the next apartment, and, im* mediately she had quitted the chamber, mo¬ tioned Osmund to place before her a sheet of writing-paper. He then raised her in her bed ; and having given her his pencil, with considerable difficulty she wrote a few lines^ and hearing Leonora again coming towards the chamber, she thrust them into his handi with a motion to conceal them. He had no sooner placed them in his pocket than the latter returned. The exertion of the old woman had brought her to the last moments of her existence. Leonora hurried to the bed-side ; when the former, clasping her hand, pointed to Osmund with a look which implied she wished her to receive
162
his protection, and in a short time after she closed her eyes for ever. Osmund now requested she would per¬ mit him to procure assistance 'to perform the last sad offices to the deceased ; but thia she resolutely refused, declaring they should be done only by herself. She appeared, how¬ ever, sensible of the tenderness and solici¬ tude of his manner; and when she objected to his request of visiting the cottage the fol¬ lowing night, it was plainly to be perceived $he laboured under a drea<¿ of the interview being known. Having written Iiis name and place of residence upon a card, he begged she would accept it ; and if any circumstances occurred where his exertions- could in any way aid her, he hoped, he trust¬ ed, she would allow him that high gratifica¬ tion. Leonora returned him her thanks in a manner which fully confirmed how greatly she admired his conduct, and he tore him¬ self away from this desolate habitation witb uncommon reluctance. During his return to the castle his mind was wholly occupied by the lovely figure oS
163 Leonora, and the strange situation in whîcTï she appeared involved. Her person was not only the most beautiful he had ever beheld, but her manners seemed equally refined and fascinating, although her distress and agita¬ tion during the short time he remained were in the extreme. Why Theodosius should have chosen such a spot to sequester his daughter from the world was altogether unaccountable : there was a mystery in the conduct of the monk which placed every attempt at defiance to develop his actions* Osmund, who was never backward to aid the unfortunate, experienced a more than usual desire to be of service to this fair re¬ cluse ; yet even the offer gave her uneasi¬ ness. An uncommon terror, at the idea of her father's power, was visible whenever she spoke of him. The letter of Theo» dosiusj, which was discovered in the casket, appeared written for the express purpose of encouraging such fears, and even his gene¬ ral behaviour was«fully calculated to confirm them. Osmund had no sooner gained his. own chamber, than he hastily unfolded the paper which he had received from the
Î64
dying woman, and with the utmost surprise read the following words :— "You are a stranger, but your manner and countenance demand you should be trusted. Leonora languishes under the ty¬ ranny of a cruel parent. Theodosius is a villain. I cotdd reveal much more, but my hand faukers. Oh God î this cottage con¬ tains the talisman af his destruction:—the north chamber within the recess—*" Here the sentence broke off. The cha¬ racters of the writing were hardly legible, and it was some time before he was able to make out the whole of their meaning. Yet it was plainly to be perceived the author of them was a woman of education. Os¬ mund was perplexed in what manner to act. At the first moment he considered the words might be the produce of a bewildered imagination : but this idea soon vanished, when he reflected upon her manner subse¬ quent to her writing; and the apparent unconnexion which might be observed in it, could be easily accounted for by ths consideration that it was executed under the pangs of dissolution*
165
One of Osmund's first resolves was, to return to the cottage the following night, attended by Cecil. At present he determined to bury the affair within his own bosom, and watch most carefully the actions and manners of the priest. Justice likewise now required that he should return the casket and its contents to Leonora, who he had no doubt was the real owner of them. Yet the miniature was still missing. Whatever delicacy had hi¬ therto prevented him from pressing his bro¬ ther for its restoration, he now considered it would be actually necessary to gain some information of it, and determined in the course of the day to speak to him upon the subject. He waited with anxious expecta¬ tion for midnight; he pictured to himself various consequences which might be pro¬ duced from this adventure ; and he antici¬ pated with some certainty a further acquaint¬ ance with Leonora, which seemed to pro¬ mise the highest gratification* Theodosius, as usual, dined with the family. There appeared no difference in his manners: he was, as usual, sullen, unso¬ cial, and forbidding. The marquis appeared
166
&ven more than ordinarily gloomy, and with* drew immediately the meal was concluded« Osmund, having gained an opportunity to «peak with his brother alone, once more be¬ gan to urge the return of the picture : he confessed it was not his own, and that he had now an opportunity of restoring it to the person to whom it belonged, Orlando, always when this demand was made of him, laboured tinder a confusion and em¬ barrassment particularly distressing, and on this account his brother had failed to inquire after it so often as he would have wished : Ъе now, however, was more determined in his request, and begged at all events to know where he could find the man who had so long possessed it for the purpose of repairing the frame. Orlando was perhaps never before so awkwardly situated : his brother did not seem inclined to put up with an evasive answer, and there appeared no alternative but to confess the truth. Yet that was at once to stigmatise his cha¬ racter, and publish his disgrace : death had been preferable to such a sacrifice : he was however necessitated to declare, that either
167
*
fo produce it immediately,, or give -a refe¬ rence to the person who had it, would, ow¬ ing to certain circumstances, occasion him ¡peculiar trouble ; but that he would take upon him to promise, on his honour, that it should be returned in the course of a few days. Osmund seemed satisfied with this positive assurance; and Orlando had to encounter the mortifying reflexion, that there was no probability of his being able to fulfil his engagement. About an hour before midnight, Osmund, accompanied by Cecil, quitted the castle by a private gate, and proceeded towards the solitary cottage. They were both well armed, and the latter had orders to keep secret whatever he might chance to wit* ness. In a short time they arrived at the desolate spot. Orlando was rather surprised to observe no light from any of the win¬ dows ; and ordering Cecil to stand a few paces on one side, he gently knocked at the door. No one answered him, and he repeated it several times. He at length determined to enter without further cere¬ mony; and desiring Cecil to follow, he
16β attempted to unlatch it; but found it Slightly fastened. Still more astonished, he pushed against it with some violence, and it flew open. They entered cautiously : but the cottage appeared deserted; the fur¬ niture of every description was gone, and nothing was to be seen but the bare walls of the apartments. Osmund stood for some minutes confounded and amazed : he al¬ most mistrusted his senses ; he could hardly believe but that his adventure in this place ihe Right before was a mere dream. Cha¬ grined and disappointed, he searched the building; but all was in the same state as the rooms he had first entered. Not a chair, a table, or the most common article for domes¬ tic use, was to be seen; and,bytheappearance of every part, no one could have supposed it had been occupied for a considerable time. Osmund reflected for some moments on what he witnessed ; he had flattered himself to have been of service to the lovely Leo¬ nora ; but his hopes were now frustrated, and it was not improbable that he might never see her again. This idea occasioned him considerable uneasiness ;—all the pur-
169
poses of his visit however were not yet use¬ less, though his attempts at the remainder were at first languid and irresolute. He was directed by the paper he possessed to a recess in the north chamberí The north chamber was the next to that in which the woman had died ; but he now searched in vain for the recess which it described. The walls were in parts bare, and in some places covered with patches of antique tapes¬ try. Cecil, after some time, by chance moved one of these pieces, and they disco¬ vered a small iron door. Near it was sus¬ pended a key, which they had no doubt belonged to it. Their conjectures were right: with a lirtle difficulty it opened to a recess in the wall, in .which they found a small slip of parchment. Cecil looked with astonishment. Osmund immediately un¬ folded it, and read, by the help of the lantern which he carried, the following words : " Whatever may have been my own errors or crimes, 1 never have been instruí* mental in shedding the blood of my fellow creatures; and although I am involved in VOL. II. ι
Ì70
circumstances which may render it neces¬ sary for me to aid in concealing for a time such acts of atrocity, still the accusations øf my conscience have fully punished me for the secresy I have maintained. Having however nothing to fear from the art and power of Theodosius de Zuivin after my dissolution, I have resolved to place this memorial where, at a certain time, there may be a probability of its being disco¬ vered ; and where I may be able to direct some one in my last moments for that pur¬ pose, should I be permitted such an exer¬ tion at the awful period. " I here then solemnly accuse, in the name of our holy Lady, Theodosius de Zuivin, priest of the order of St. Mark, with the wilful and deliberate murder of Lutretia de Ravîllina, offspring to a noble¬ man in Madrid of the first rank and fortune. She was assassinated in a journey from Ze- brixa to the capital, and 'was privately in¬ terred by her destroyers in a small garden at the back of a solitary inn, on the Seville road, kept at that time by one called Guz¬ man Calvaro. If further proofs are want-
171 îng to confirm this accusation, let his own daughter Leonora be questioned under a sacred oath, and her evidence will at once criminate her father. Whoever un«- dertakes the awful charge of procuring retribution to the guilty in this fatal ca¬ tastrophe must be cautious of the arts of Theodosius. He possesses means of re¬ venge as unnatural as they are powerful: he is no common tyrant : aided by the in" fernal enemy of mankind, he rises superior to his fellow creatures in certain attributes, which he employs only for their destruc¬ tion. Ursula Elva." Osmund's astonishment at reading the parchment may well be conceived. He was aware that this affair required him to act with considerable caution : the purport of the paper demanded some reflexion, and for the present he could only resolve on one point, which was to secure it. Having done this, and replaced the hangings, he quitted the cottage, and returned directly to the castle» He had no sooner gained his cham¬ ber than he once more examined the manu·* 12
Г72 script. The'characters we^tojerably plain» - but appeared to have been witten. ¿y^an. aged person. v The author seemed to ? have been nearly connected with the, * accused; confessed herself guilty őf errors, and even crimes. Osmund for,a moment hesitated whether her assertions ought to be de¬ pended upon ; when he considered the man¬ ner and time in which tţtis paper was dis¬ covered to him, at a moment when no in¬ terested motives could have biassed her intention, he conceived himself fully jus¬ tified in placing for the present some con¬ fidence in it« But when he reflected that the person accused was the father of Le¬ onora, that she herself was fixed upon as the instrument to bring him to justice, he faltered at the idea of becoming a prin¬ cipal in the demand of so dreadful a sa¬ crifice, and almost wished he ,had never discovered the secret of his guilt. To trace the place where she was concealed was his first consideration: but there ap- * peared considerable* difficulty in the task; he had no clue to guide, him, npr dkl he know any one to whom he could apply for
115 information. Thé discovery made by this adventure was of so delicate a nature, that h ; conceived for the present the knowledge .of it should be confined to himself; while he determined to make every possible exer¬ tion to find the lovely Leonora, who he was resolved should regulate his conduct on a point where she was so materially con¬ cerned. During the latter part of the next day, while he was meditating in his own apart¬ ment on the events of the night before, Albert entered, in a state of considerable agitation. Osmund immediately inquired v what had happened; and he soon found hé had had - a very warm dispute with his fa* ther. Albert informed him, that having been sent for to his study, he found the marquis labouring under very great emo* tions ; that he wished to have withdrawn, but was desired to remain, as a* request of much consequence was to be impartedto him. After some hesitation, in which he seemed to struggle greatly with his feelings his father declared he must think no further ofan alliance with Gassandra de Gosmond*. i3
174 Amazed and distressed at the command, he desired to be acquainted with the reasons for it: but was told he could not be answered ; that it was a point fixed, which he must not attempt to alter. He begged to know if it was by the wish of Don Everard, whohad taken any sudden dislike to him. His father replied, that, far from that being the cause, Don Everard did not yet know of his change of sentiments, and that he therefore wished theacquaintánce to be broken off by himself Irritated and grieved, Albert declared he could not comply with so cruel and unjust a demand. Although it was the first time in bis life he had ventured to disobey his father, yet he was positive and, firm in his declara* tion. The marquis suddenly burst into extreme passion and agony; insisted upon his swearing that he would abandon all thoughts of the union; declared that his life* his honour, depended upon his acquies¬ cence. Still more astonished and alarmed, Albert attempted to sooth and compose Km; but he would hear no,expostulations, »or listen to any entreaties. Albert however lãaintained his resolution : he declared he
Í15 would make no such \.w with precipita¬ tion ; and the marquis, after giving him a few days for reflexion, left him under great resentment· The young man now came td communicate the affair to his friend, and consult with him on the mysterious and distressing event. Osmund could give him but little comfort or advice : he caution¬ ed him against provoking his father by un¬ necessary reproaches ; at the same time he could not but commend his conduct, in refusing to yield, without some considera¬ tion, to a tyrannical and perhaps rash request. They both considered it would be prudent to conceal the affair for the pre¬ sent from Cassandra ; as the marquis might be induced by caprice, or unforeseen cir¬ cumstances, to alter his wish. Each, per¬ plexed and agitated by recent events, retired early, to plan new modes of pro¬ ceeding, and anticipate with youthful ar¬ dour the fortunate results which might arise from them.
1-4
Мб
CHAP. XV. ■ Ab, wretched weakness î That thus inthralls my soui—that chases thence Each nobler thought, the sense of every duty ! Thomson. X he last and very urgent request of Osmund to his brother, for the recovery of the miniature, occasioned in the latter considerable anxiety and chagrin. Although he had made a promise to return it in a few days, he was sensible he had no means of performing it. His finances were even more low than usual; he had contracted debts of some consequence, and had thrown himself under further obligations to Otto, by borrowing of him another small sum. This man's ascendency over him daily increased : his artful and insinuating man¬ ners had drawn from him, by degrees, involuntary confessions of many of his errors ; and he was now his entire and only confidant. His embarrassment on the sud-
177 den ånd earnest request of Osmund for the miniature was of course mentioned to him, and his advice required. Otto appeared much distressed, and sympathised ir» his difficulties. He knew not what could be done: all he could say was, that, if the sacrificing tó life Would be of service to his dear master, his uneasiness should not be of long duration. He hesitated some time :—was there no friend of whom he could procure the loan of a few pistoles ?— " None," answered Orlando, *' none, but those to whom a confession that I wanted such a sum would be worse than death." Otto, after muttering over some names, as if striving to recollect who could be of service, fixed upon that of Don Esau de Cavet. Orlando seemed astonished that a person of his description should enter his mind. Otto however appeared to lay great stress on the hopes that might be enter¬ tained from his generosity, to one whom he was so partial to as his master. *' Your honour has never tried him," said this comforting domestic, " therefore you are not sure how far he would wave ι 5 ,
17В his general mode of conduct in you* be¬ half." Orlando, who . in the present crisis was glad to grasp at any attempt which held forth the slightest probability of extricating him from his difficulties, by degrees list¬ ened to thé project of this strange applica- tion> and at last determined to put it in execution. Otto's motive for proposing such a re¬ quest to be made to Don Esau was merely because he knew it would be refused, and add still more to the poignancy of his master's distress : it would also defer his adopting any more successful plans; while a part of the time which he was given to return the picture would elapse, and his situation consequently become more criti¬ cal. He wished him to be driven to extre¬ mities that might force him to some despe¬ rate act, which would at once place him in his power, and give him a full scope for any impositions or exorbitant demands he might choose to impose upon him, Orlando determined immediately to pro¬ ceed to the lodgings of Don Esau, and at
179 once put the touchstone to his generosity. He was just preparing to leave the castle for this purpose, when he received a mes¬ sage from the marquis, saying he wished to see him in his study. Orlando accordingly attended him there. This interview was to request he would leave a sum of two thousand pistoles, which the marquis had just received, at his bank¬ er's, if he was going towards that part of the city in the course of the day. As the lodgings of Don Esau de Cavet lay in the road, Orlando immediately under¬ took the commission. Although he had by chance gained his address, he had never visited him ; and it was with some difficulty, after searching a long time, that he discovered the house, in a very narrow dirty lane of the suburbs« He ascended three pairs of stairs before he gained the chamber of his friend"; and then he was at a loss which door to knock at, as there were several that led to the apart¬ ments of different lodgers. At length, how¬ ever, the shrill voice of Don Esau answered his rap, and he entered a small dirty room.
180 barren of furniture and necessaries. The miser was wrapped in the remains of a ragged blanket, which served bim for a night-gown, a?id his head was covered with a cap apparently, mude out of the inside cat¬ gut of one of his old wigs. A miserable truckle bed was placed in one corner, with a coverlet formed out of some pieces of dirty canvas sewed together, and the hangings were composed of weather-beaten sail¬ cloth. A frail wooden stool, and an old deal table so roughly manufactured that it greatly resembled a butcher's chopping- block, formed the principal comforts and accommodations. Added to which, was a piece of broken looking-glass; some old dice, and a box ; several packs of soiled cards ; and a few ragged volumes of books, placed upon the tester of. the bed, among which was " The Art of getting Money," and, next to it, " Rules for playing various Games." ., } Don Esau, although rather surprised at this visit, was far above feelinghany embar¬ rassment at the situation in which he wa& found. He bsgged Orlando to be seated
181 upon the old stool with great courtesy and politeness, while he. immediately placed himself upon the bed. ■ Orlando at first began upon the general topics of conversation, and wondered he could make himself comfortable in so strange a mode of living. " I. like it vastly," replied Don Esau : " it suits my taste. I like to be snug and private ; hate pomp and parade. I always was much given to retirement from a boy." " How is it then," said Orlando, " that you visit so much?" " Because other people pay for it," said Don Esau. " Like enjoyments very well when I get them cheap — Can't afford to buy them myself* Hard times, young man, make us poor folks careful." Orlando after some little time opened his business, declared his distress, and begged the loan of a few hundred pistoles. Don Esau looked aghast. A few hundred pis¬ toles ! Where was he to find them ? He could not tell how to procure a single dozen. « Orlando urged his necessities, and the
П2
considerable service such a loan would be to him ; while he hinted, there could be no doubt of his honour with respect to the pay¬ ment. Don Esau, however, could not be brought to confess that he had any to lend ; and Orlan db, too proud to become a press¬ ing beggar, was going to take his leave. As he was on the point of quitting the room, his host spied by chance the top of one of the marquis's bags in his pocket. His coun¬ tenance immediately changed ; and, pull¬ ing him by his doublet, he exclaimed, "Ah ! what, you was going to deceive me ! Got plenty of cash in your pouch. You are so sly ! Sit down a little longer. Where is your hurry? No expense in talking, you know.*' *« The money which you see in my pockets," replied Orlando, " is not my own ; it belongs to the marquis of Olver¬ nardo." 44 How much may there be?*' asked Don Esau, while his small grey eyes glistened with uncommon pleasure. " Two thousand pistoles, in cash and notes/* replied Orlando. " Two thousand pistoles 1" repeated the
185
miser with--· ecstasy ť *<:&.;■ r^eciò.uS" round sum ! Suppose we throw the dice for a few ofthem;f"^:- ,::v;:V-y--ìl· Orlando gazed upon him with astonish-* ment and anger. ; > ^Signior Don Esau," said he, u what opinion have you of my character, that you thus insult me by such a proposal ?" " Don't be so cursed choleric," said Don Esau : "I proposed it merely for a little pastime. I have a pistole or two aţ the bottom of one of my drawers, and they might serve to entertain us for an hour or so; in which time perhaps I might hit on some scheme to raise the sum you want." Orlando listened to these artful insinua¬ tions with, some attention. Unfortunately he possessed a few pistoles above the sum which he had ,of the marquis's. Play was a temptation he could never » withstand 5 arid the sight of Don Esau's gold, which - Was now brought forward, at once fixed his resolution to try some chances with tuV own money. Don Esau capered with joy: he bolted the door of the chamber, cleared
184 the tables апФ procured the dice immedi¬ ately, . ' * .л >. t : His withered and infirm limbs appeared té acquire -ne w strength;, it seemed as if the vigour of youth for a moment diffused itself óiét his Whole frame;,while he trembled with anxious expectation. Orlando was not less eager, although his spirits were less elevated. They commenced the gante with equal precipitation and avidity : in a very short time their minds were wholly taken up with the destructive pastime. Orlando, after a few throws, won twenty pistoles, which the miser produced at different times, de¬ claring, with the most flagrant assurance, that he did not know*he possessed so much. Orlando was heated with,his success; they doubled the stakes, and he soon gained fifty more. Don Esau became more warm in thé contest, and Orlando more elated; the lattar considered he raight perhaps in another' hour 4 be able to redeem the mi¬ niature without the inconveniences he dreaded.
185
He won two hundred more pistoles: his emotions bordered upon phrensy ; he would send for some wine; which having done, he drank a great part of it himseif. Dòn Esau could not be persuaded to put his lips to it: he paced the room rin agony-; he said little, but the violent sensations. of his soul were easily to be perceived. All the cash which he had in his possession was now gone : but he knew where to procure more; he begged Orlando to remain a few moments alone, and he would try to reple¬ nish himself. This difficulty was however obviated, by the latter offering to lend him the sums which he had won to goon again. They accordingly recommenced their game with increased avidity. Fortune, ever a fickle goddess, seemed to change with'the loan. Don Esau, in thé course of art hour and a half, won his two hundred and sef venty pistoles back. л - - * Orlando was now in his turn depressed; but he was too far involved in the delirium of infatuation to stop here ; he ventured at one throw the few pistoles he had in his
Ik
ise pocket of his" own, and won them doubled by Don Esau's stake. Don Esau proposed trebling the next; but Orlando knew in that case he must infringe on the two thou¬ sand he had entrusted to his care; He at first steadilyiremsed Don Esau's challenge, who exerted every art of temptation and raillery to make him alter his resolution. "Suppose," said he, iC you was to take twenty or thirty pistoles from this sacred sum; and even still further, supposing the worst, that you was to lose them, could we not, as friends, easily contrive to make it up again to take to the banker's?" Orlando listened eagerly to this artful insinuation: elevated by the success of his last throw, he determined to add the thirty pistoles to it : his bánd trembled as he untied the bag to take tbem out ; and the last words of admo¬ nition from his uncle, *' Beware of commit¬ ting one bad action," again darted on his mind. He hesitated for a moment, whe¬ ther he should proceed : but he had gone too far to retreat; and his senses were in that state as to make him capable of any act
m however rash or indiscreet. The dice were again thrown, and Orlando, with distraction, saw himself the loser. After the consideration of a few moments he madly doubled it again with the mar¬ quis's money, and again lost. He raved with ali tbe fury of insanity, and, hardly sensible of his actions, followed up his stakes. In a very short time he found himself deprived of the contents of one of the bags, while despair and horror agitated every feature of his countenance. "Oh God! 1 * he cried, "vvhy am I thus made the sport pf every vicious passion? Why am I marked to be an example of the sufferings to which they are doomed who follow not strictly the hackneyed rules of morality ?" *« Nay," said Don Esau, " do not preach: follow it up, signior Don Orlando.*' " Damnation!" he exclaimed s « are you not yet satiated with what you have got from me? Is not my ruin as complete as you would wish, that you thus tempt me to plunge still further into the tremendous abyss?"
ив Г fi " I, continued Don Esau perfectly com¬ posed, α might have had a« similar excuse to have been guilty of this*extravagance a-very shorts tiine past, when you, signier, bank¬ rupted me to my last rial." Orlando (distracted as he was) felt this reproof in its full force. He seized the bag which held the remaining thousand pistoles with frantic eagerness, and, halving it on the table, dared his companion to take them for a stake. The challenge was immediately accepted by Don Esau, whojn less than five minutes cleared the table. Orlando clasped his hands in agony; drops of cold perspiration stood upon his forehead; his limbs trembled, and he sunk almost senseless upon his seat * c Blasted infatuation!" he whispered with a feeble voice: ** how much longer am I to be the tortured fool of worldly eti¬ quette ? With all my exertion and penance* I have not been able to gain that summit to which from childhood my ambitious hopes had been taught tq asp¡rs 4 Why then should I play the timorous hypocrite with
189
mankind,, who will not acknowledge me their superior, even under a character of the most rigid sanctity?" This reflexion was hurried and confused, but its effects were powerful : without Ш- tering a word he staked again the last five hundred pistoles, and with breathless agita¬ tion watched the throws* The f figures of both were at this moment highly interesting· Don Esau with a countenance wrinkled by age, yet pervaded with a wild intoxicated joy at his good fortune, was a strange con¬ trast to the youthful figure of Orlando, with the violent emotions and distraction under which he laboured. his features were dis¬ torted with agony of mind, and his whole frame convulsed and shaking with expecta¬ tion ; "Oh God!"-he cried, "this is the very crisis ofymy fate; the single turn of these.dies may damn me forever." Orlando's observations were prophetic: he saw the last five hundred pistoles swept away by the greedy hand of Don Esau: he saw no more; his eyes grew dim, his hands were clenched together, he breathed with difficHİty, and fortunately tears, gushed from
Î90 bis eyes, which in some measure relieved İtim from the dreadful effects that otherwise might have followed» The miser beheld his situation with calm indifference, and offered him a glass of the same wine he had sent for in the moments of hilarity. Orlando, during perhaps the whole of the play, had entertained hopes that, in case he should be so unfortu¬ nate as to lose the marquis's money, Don Esau, from what he had said' at the begin¬ ning, might have generosity enough to re¬ turn it, and depend upon his honour for the payment. But he now discovered how greatly he was deceived in his supposition; for the old signior, in answer to some faint hints which the former uttered for that pur¬ pose, gave him to understand he had plenti¬ ful use for it himself. Orlando left him in disgust, and, hardly sensible of his actions, walked towards the lodgings, of Barnarvo. The jeweller, whose health had rapidly declined for the last six months, had for a considerable part of that time been confined at home ; and the visits of Orlando, either from an actual friendship which he might
IDI have conceived for this man, or from the at¬ tractions of his daughter, were extremely fre- -quent. Laura's attachment hourly increas¬ ed, unchecked by her parents, who, from Orlando's behaviour, now entertained no doubt of his intentions to marry their child. Under these ideas little restraint was used» and every liberty was allowed consistent with propriety in two young persons who were shortly to be united by the most sa¬ cred ties. It is true, Orlando had never made any declaration of such sentiments ; but this was supposed to arise from the situation in which he stood with his uncle* and a wish first to procure his consent. Barnarvo would by no means have suffered such an intercourse, had he beheld in Orlando the gaiety and levity of most young men ; but his reserved manner and steady deportment at once led him to suppose his principles were as saintly as his appearance. The jeweller viewed his character on the fairest side : he was under considerable obligations to him ; he knew but of one erroneous trait he possessed, and that irait was the charac¬ teristic of his own» Under these circum-
192
stances Orlando daily attended his lodgings, and ¿was always received by the innocent Laura with that joy which confirmed she made no attempt to conceal her regard for him. His pride was flattered by such a preference: the pleasing simplicity of her person raised his passions, and made her a desirable object for attainment. At the first commencement of their acquaintance, Or¬ lando would perhaps have shuddered at the idea of becoming instrumental to the ruin of so amiable a girl : but his opinions and ideas in the few last months had greatly altered ; the strict moral lessons of his urcle by de- agrees faded from his memory; while he re¬ flected on the'mode of his education with dis¬ gust, and condemned his protector for having practised it He no longer balanced be¬ tween good and evil ; the beam was already turned, and the part he was to perform in the chequered scene of life finally decided. On his arrival at Barnarvo's lodgings, he found Laura alone under the utmost distress : her father had been again arrested that morning, and her mother, as before, had attended him to prison. Alarmed at the
193
wild and terrific appearance of Orlando, (whose emotions had rather increased than subsided since he left Don Esau's lodg¬ ings,) she flew to inquire the cause with the most anxious solicitude. Not able to answer her, he threw himself upon a chair, while he laboured under an agony of mind truly dreadful. Laura wished to call assistance, but be prevented her: she placed herself by his side, and, in the effusions of her tender¬ ness, insensibly used many little endear¬ ments to comfort him, which at any other ame, or under any other circumstances, would not perhaps have been altogether consistent with propriety. However inno¬ cent such behaviour might be in Laura, it served but as an electrical spark to the passions of Orlando: he experienced a thrilling .sensation through every nerve, which seemed to promise a momentary antidote to those horrors he had neither fortitude nor resolution to support. Fired with the thought, he instantly formed the diabolical determination, if possible, to sa¬ crifice the affectionate Laura for such a short-lived suspension of his sufferings. He vor-.ir. к
Ï94
considered they were alone, nor was there any likelihood of interruption. The rage, the revenge of her father would be impo¬ tent while he was confined within the walls of a prison : from the mother he feared no¬ thing; and he knew Laura had no other friends or protectors. These reflexions in Orlando were wide¬ ly different from those in his first career: the inward soliloquies of his mind, at the moment he was plunging into error, were then characterised by a hesitation, a wavering between right and wrong: no such dubious considerations now marked his conduct ; his plans were fixed, without one squeamish thought on their justness; and the only drawback upon them were puny and dastardly apprehensions for his personal safety. Laura, distracted by the situation of her fath er ^nd Orlando, was far from suspecting the crafty designs of the latter: her love had acquired that ascendency over her reason, which blinded her to eyexy im¬ perfection, and left her totally unguarded against the villany which threatened her
ш destruction. Her affections were elevated to that degree of enthusiasm which would have urged her to have sacrificed her life, or even her honour, for the man whom she adored. The, traits of her character were not of a firm or heroic nature: she could not perhaps boast of stoic virtues; yet she possessed that feminine softness, that good¬ ness of heart, which was sure to interest all who knew her. Orlando worked upon her feelings by the most artful insinuations and address: he remained with her until a late hour in the evening. Laura listened to the open declarations of his love, which-he now made, with rapture; she sympathised in his distress with floods of tears; every word he uttered was harmony to her ear: he promised again to release her father, and the excess of her rapture almost deprived her of reason. Orlando snatched these mo¬ ments so congenial to his cruel plan; he redoubled his caresses; his freedoms (which were but slightly rejected) gradually in¬ creased ; his schemes succeeded, and Laura was lost for ever. к 2
196 This day with Orlando had been one busied scene of depravity, in which he was the principal concerned:—but so subtle and encroaching is the regular progression of vice, that his reflexions upon it did not produce half those poignant sensations he experienced in his first amour with the courtezan who robbed him of his money. It is true he was chagrined and distressed ; but it was more through fear of personal in¬ convenience and public defamation than any self-reproach on his imprudent and immo¬ ral conduct. He yet wished to maintain something like a fair name, and still deter¬ mined to struggle for superiority: he well knew that, under a masked sanctity of manners, he could commit the most atro¬ cious actions with more facility, and less danger, than by commencing a public champion of vice, and an open foe to man¬ kind in general. There was a degree of malicious gratification in the resolve of Or¬ lando pn this subject, which was the result of pique and displeasure.: he was disap¬ pointed in becoming an idol fco фе world, and be determined %o revenge himself for
197 the supposed injury. His career now be¬ came marked, not only for the enjoyment of his wishes, but for a general hostility to his fello f w creatures. Such then might be considered as the effects of Don Diego*s mode of tuition. In this experiment of his hypothesis, the recluse home-bred boy, so carefully secluded from all knowledge of vice, so tenaciously reared a stranger to those of his own years, till arrived at an age when his passions were in their meridian, and then thrown into the most dissipated paths, with full power to gratify every wish, was now transformed into the most detest¬ able of all characters—the hypocritical Vil¬ lain, waging war,, under a semblance of meek-eyed piety, with all-who were so unfortunate as to become objects worthy of his notice. And in his progress towards this state of definitive vice, the causes rnisht be certainly traced to that very critical part of his education which was intended to raise him as a high example of superior excellence. Had Orlando imbibed less ideas of his own consequence and abilities when a child; had he been reared in a к 3
ш
social intercourse with boys of his own years, which would have prevented his experiencing those embarrassments that be¬ come doubly grievous when felt at a more advanced period ; there can be little doubt, from the motives which first urged him to err,, but he would have proved a di¬ stinguished and valuable member of so¬ ciety. He left the disgraced, the ruined Laura at an early hour in the morning. Her despair bordered upon distraction ; nor was his heart yet so hardened as to prevent his expe¬ riencing some powerful pangs of remorse at his conduct. He returned to the castle wrapt in the most disagreeable retrospec¬ tion of the last day's adventures ; and he fully perceived that the difficulties which they had produced demanded violent measures to extricate him, or threatened an imme¬ diate exposure of his errors. Having gained his chamber, he threw himself upon the bed, under all the horrors of a mind loaded with guilt: he slept; but his feverish brain produced images which tormented him almost to madness, and he was necessitated
199 ef to pace the room in agony to prevent a repetition of such slumbers. Osmund, who had already commenced his observations and inquiries relative to the priest, could make out little from hk strange and mysterious behaviour v he was seldom seen or ţo be found except at the dinner-hour, and his manners at that time continued the same as have been already described. He considered that one of the most likely means to gain information would be, for Cecil to ask questions among the servants, as if the curiosity proceeded from himself, and likewise of the lower class of the inhabitants of Maxi rid. Accordingly, after repeated cautions to be careful not to discover that any other person was con¬ cerned with him, Cecil was dispatched on this embassy, and returned at night with a quantity of miscellaneous tales received from various persons. Osmund, however, could gain but little from them, except that it was generally believed through the city the monk possessed powers superior to his fellow creatures. Some declared that he had been seen conversing with the devil к 4
200 in the open market-place ; others swore that he vvas the devil himself, and that his tail and cloven feet might be viewed, if the beholder would repeat certain prayers back¬ wards. The servants of the castle univer¬ sally agreed he was a magician, and that a part of the building was haunted by his spirits ; that one of the chambers which was allotted to him he never suffered any one to enter; but that, through the key¬ hole, they had witnessed the most dreadful sights. It was also generally allowed that he had been in several places at the same time ; that his countenance varied in a peculiar manner; that his eyes were by no means like those of other men, and that his shadow was often seen in places where his corporeal body had never been. Osmund smiled at these reports with contempt, but Cecil seemed to have a better faith in their authenticity. lie de¬ clared that he had watched with two ser¬ vants of the castle, on the last night, and that as soon as the clock struck twelve they saw a figure stalk along the terrace which surrounded the east apartments.
201 Osmund at first classed this with the other tales that Cecil had related : but the poor fellow persisted in his assertion with such earnestness, that he at length determined to watch himself, and for this purpose in¬ quired which was the best place for his observations. <ť Lord, your honour," cried Cecil, " there cannot be a better than my bed-room window, where ) our honour may be as snug and as private as possible." Osmund declared he would be there that night, but desired Cecil to keep his inten¬ tions as private as possible. Cecil promised obedience, and immedi¬ ately went to prepare the room for his re¬ ception. Osmund rightly considered there was more probability of this figure being· an actual corporeal substance than an empty sprite ; and it was likely, in that case, the adventure might lead to some discovery. About midnight he was conducted by Cecil to the apartment he had described, and which, by its situation in the upper story of the castle, commanded a view of the principal part of the east wings, and a perfect sight of the terrace, which was к о
202
much out of repair, and in some places had already fallen. The moon gave but an im¬ perfect light. The extremities at each end finished in a short piazza of stone arches, the further one of which was involved in deep shadow. " There, sir," cried Cecil, pointing to the most distant part of the building, '* is the very place where the spectre first appeared.. Oh, sir, it was a dreadful sight 1 It seemed to look like a female ; and one of the mar¬ quis's grooms declared he cculd see blue flames come out of its n'ostrils. Why, your honour, it got from one end to the other in a matter of three steps ; and I dare swear it was upwards of twenty feet high." Osmund could not refrain from smiling at this extravagant description. A violent exclamation from Cecil shortly after occasioned him to turn his head towards the place, and he plainly perceived a female form glide from the shade, and walk slowly along the terrace. Osmund at the first moment felt a slight зешафоп of horror at the idea of its being
£03 a supernatural appearance ; but he instantly recovered himself, and a moment's delibe¬ ration gave him reason to suppose his con¬ jectures were well founded, and that what he saw was a female by some means con¬ fined within the desolate part of Olvernardo. It occurred to him that it might be Leonora imprisoned there by her tyrannical rather* Reflexion seemed to strengthen this opi¬ nion'; and so sanguine were his ideas on it, that he fancied, even at his present distance from the spot, that he could perceive a simL> iitude in- her manner and figure..., He was going, to repair to the terrace directly ; but he soon considered that this would not only be a task of some difficulty, but that so abrupt an intrusion might alarm the incognita. She continued walking near a quarter of'an hour, and then suddenly disappeared in the gloom of the further piazza. Osmund resolved on the next night to attempt the means of introducing himself to this seeming sprite. He dwelt with rapture on the idea that it was the lovely Leonora,, and he anticipated with peculiar
204* Satisfaction the probability of his being able to render her some services. The marquis d'Olvernardo discovered, (however irksome the task might be,) he would be under the necessity of inform¬ ing Don Everard de Gosmond himself of the sudden change in his sentiments with respect to the union of Albert and Cassandra, and he considered the best method of conveying the information would be by a letter : he accordingly in a long epistle pretended to palliate his conduct*, without assigning any reasons for it. It was easy to be perceived he in vain attempted to conceal his own chagrin, in his lecture to sooth that which Don Everard might be supposed to feel at the event. Whatever were the feelings of the latter, with re¬ spect to wounded pride or disappointed am¬ bition, he certainly had resolution enough to conceal them, and answered the marquis's letter by a very spirited reply ; at the con¬ clusion of which he declared that, whatever satisfaction he might have experienced in the society of the marquis and his family, it must now cease, for he never could consent
205
to live in habits of intimacy with one whom he could not with justice respect or esteem. He, likewise, in a separate billet addressed to Albert, forbade him his house,. and at the same time apologised for his be¬ haviour in referring to that of his father. The situation of the two lovers in this ex¬ tremity may be easily conceived. Cassan* dra on the first intelligence summoned aï!· her pride to aid herin the conflict ; but when she received a letter from Albert a few hours after, breathing vows of the purest affection^ and declaring that the arbitrary resolution of his father should never force him to an alliance with any other, every doubt of his constancy (which she had in the first moments mistrusted) vanished, and the cruel resolve of the marquis appeared to afFect her with double poignancy. Cassandra was not able to refuse his re¬ quest for a meeting after twilight in a sequestered grove near her father's garden ; and he there confirmed every vow of unal¬ terable fidelity which he had declared in his letter. The marquis of Olvernardo would give no explanation of his motives for so
нов
strange an alteration in those arrangements which had appeared to diffuse happiness over the whole of his own family, as well as that of Don Everard: he only declared it was his wish to join his son to another lady; but he never mentioned who she was, or when he intended to introduce him to her. Neither the marchioness nor Isabella were capable of thinking on any female among the whole circle of fashion upon whom they could fix his meaning, while the gene¬ rality of Madrid, when the affair was made public, supposed it to arise from intellectual derangement.
201
CHAP. XVI. Was ît for this you took such care to form me ? For this endued me with the quickest sense Of shame ; these finer feelings, that ne'er vex ' The common mass of mortals, dully happy In blest insensibility ? О rather You should have sear'd my heart; taught me, that poweï And splendid interest lord it still o'er virtue; That, gilded by prosperity and pride, There is no shame, no meanness :—temperM thus, I had been fit to rule a venal world. Thomson. Orlando's reflexions after his return from the lodgings of Barnarvo were various and distressing. Although he might not feel those strong reproaches of conscience that had been produced by his former errors, yet a dread of the discovery of not hav¬ ing fulfilled his trust with the marquis's money, which he knew full well would at once blast him with infamy, served to drive him nearly to distraction. He was well aware that he was liable to this stigma every
90S
hour, and there appeared no possible means of averting it. His brother was likewise promised the return of the picture in the course of a very few days; but there was not the least probability of his being able to redeem it. Nor was the poor ruined Laura forgotten in his meditations: although hardened in vice, he could not think upon her situation but with horror, neither could he reflect on his own conduct towards her without disgust. Surrounded with difficul¬ ties, embarrassed on every side, Orlando began to grow desperate : he was certain 4 of disgrace unless he attempted some means to obviate it, and he cared but little what those means might be : he considered they could not plunge him into more dis¬ agreeable dilemmas than those which at present encompassed him· His attempts however to form any plans! for extricating himself were useless. Tortured almost to madness with the horrid expectation of the, shame which he every moment expected to experience, his actions were wild and fran¬ tic. Otto had entered his chamber to attend
20£ him. to dress, many minutes before he kneist he was there. This artful domestic immediately per¬ ceived his master had plunged into new difficulties, by the disturbed state in which he appeared 5 and he beheld his misery with concealed joy, while his exterjor manners indicated most sincere sorrow for his distress. But Otto failed this time in becoming his confidant : Oriando was certain his last embarrassments were of too great a magni* tude for any assistance to be derived from his servárit, and had therefore resolution enough ióľ' conceal them within his own bosom. With respect to his triumph over the virtue of Inaura, he still retained a suf¬ ficient degree of delicacy and discretion to consider that he was bound by every tie of honour and humanity never to disclose it. Otto therefore, to his great disappointment, had only to condole with him on his suffer¬ ings, without being made acquainted with the cause or extent of them. Orlando confined himself to his chamber the chi^f part of the day. Towards the after«
210 noon, as he was crossing a corridor which? led from that range of apartments to the staircase, he observed in a room, the door of which was opened, the marquis d'Olver¬ nardo : the situation in which Orlando stood totally precluded him from being seen, while he had a full view of the former. This room was appropriated wholly to the use of the marquis, chiefly as a private study. At the moment Orlando first saw him he was in the act of opening an escritoir in which he sometimes kept considerable sums ; and having apparently placed some¬ thing within iL*, he was suddenly interrupted by a servant who delivered a message, and whom- he instantly followed out of the Ghamber, seemingly without locking the desk. Orlando viewed his actions with pe¬ culiar attention: a thought darted on his. mind, which at the first moment occasioned him to shake with horror; but he soon recovered himself, and resumed it with less emotion. He considered whether he could not without discovery rob this escritoir, and,, by assuming resolution enough to accom¬ plish so desperate an act, at once extricate
211
himself from all his difficulties. Such a reward was a temptation the splendor of which dazzled his eyes against the dreadful consequences of detection. Orlando was no longer the puny votary of indiscretion : no longer the trembling child of infant error, he dwelled on this last act of im¬ morality, so greatly superior to any former one, with a coolness he had never experi¬ enced in a retrospection of far more trivial crimes. The present time was not fitted for his purpose ; servants were continually pass¬ ing backwards and forwards, and it was not unlikely but the marquis might return. He therefore resolved to take another op¬ portunity, and defer the execution of this grand plan till night; by which means he would gain time to reflect upon it. These reflexions however served to confirm him in his determination; and he resolved, after the family were retired to rest, to enter the chamber and search for the contents of the escritoir. In this last act of Orlando, the very great increase of depravity in his disposi-
2Ï2 lion is easily io he observed г İn his consi¬ deration upon it, there was no attempt to- persuade himself that he was doing right : be was conscious it was an act of the darkest dye of criminality ? yet he now suffered no anxiety but what proceeded from his ap¬ prehensions of discovery. The circumstances under which he la¬ boured were centring to an awful crisis ^ the preservation of his character, which he so dearly valued, seemed on the point of being forfeited; every moment threatened him with the horrid idea of falling from the elevated height he had assumed among his fellow creatures ; while he would be exposed to the world in colours the most accurate and glaring. " What are the torments of hell" (he whispered to himself) " compared with such a state of degradation ? Is there an act I am capable of committing that I would hesitate to execute, could I escape such a damning scene of infamy? Oh! no; if I succeed in this attempt, I may yet main¬ tain my place in society; I may still com-
213
mand respect, and attain that rank at which my wishes have so long aimed.'V- The hour of midnight approached. Orlando heard the family retiring to rest: he told Otto he might go to bed, as he intended to read some time longer: having procured a small shaded lamp, he put it in order for his purpose, and he several times listened at the door of the chamber to hear if any one was stirring about the castle. All however seemed perfectly quiet, and the critical time arrived for him to execute his purpose. He trembled violently ; the words of his uncle Don Diego again sounded on his ear, " Beware of committing -one rash action." This act required more reso¬ lution than he had at first suspected: he now anticipated more fully the consé¬ quences of a discovery, and his heart sunk under the mere thought. But there were yet more powerful stimulations to keep him to his intentions. Disgrace was sure to overtake him ; and if he attempted no mea¬ sures to obviate it, he was well aware of the result. Like a gamester engaged in β, last stake, he calculated that he had little
2U to lose; but he might gain considerably, and that therefore the chance was worth the risk. He had no apprehensions, after once securing the money, of molestation ; for he was certain, when the robbery became known, the servants would immediately be suspected. r Urged by these considerations, he softly opened the door, and with a fakering step proceeded with great caution along the corridor. The apartment was at the further end, and did not join any of the rooms that were inhabited. Being arrived at the door, he softly opened it; and having unshaded his lamp, he perceived there was ηα other entrance : he directly fastened it on the inside, and hurried towards the escritoir. He breathed short with alarm and agita¬ tion 5 he hastily opened the desk, and beheld with a greedy eye notes and gold to a con¬ siderable amount. He grasped them wiih rapture, and placed them precipitately in his pocket. He turned to leave the room with exultation beaming in his countenance ; but, as he elevated the lamp to Observe more clearly the way, its languid beams darted
215 on the pale and ghastly visage of Theo* dosius the monk. The light dropped from his hand, and he sunk almost insensible in a chair which stood near him. The priest prevented the light from being extinguished, while he seized Orlando violently by the arm, and exclaimed with a malicious smile of satisfaction— ■** Puritan ! have I caught thee ? Thou most immaculate young man ! Oft will you rue this hour in bitter agony. Oft will you have need to repent of it with tears of blood." Orlando, who had în some measure re¬ covered, was well aware of the horror of his situation : he grew desperate, and at¬ tempted to struggle with the priest, who instantly drawing a dagger from his side held it to his breast. " Resist not, or you die !" he exclaimed, while he elevated his arm in a threatening posture to stab him to the heart. Orlando involuntarily shrunk under his grasp ; every effort of fortitude, courage, or resolution, failed him at once ; he sunk into the pusillanimity of a child ; he fell at the
aie ľeet of the priest ; he conjured him with tears to have pity upon his situation; he promised any reward that came within his power, if he would conceal the events of this dreadfol night for ever from the world. * ς Hear me without interruption," said Theodosius. <ť Your offers are addressed to no common man ; the buz of public report must already have delineated in your mind the strong outline of my character ; you are no doubt aware that I stand the object of general abhorrence, of universal detestation ; that I am daily pointed at and cursed by the multitude of Madrid ; that this body, if not preserved by superior power, would become the prey of their ferocity, and the mangled proof of their direful vengeance: *—such then İs he to whom you offer your services; such is the man who now has you ia his power." Orlando shuddered at the idea ; he well remembered the scene he had privately witnessed at the solitary inn. " I have marked you," continued the priest. " from the early state of infancy, as my slave:
217
this awful hour has riveted your chains. If you have a soul capable of becoming a dar¬ ing villain, you will not perhaps repent your bondage." Orlando's eyes were fixed upon him with increased amazement and horror. That he should have been marked by this dreadful monk from the early state of in¬ fancy as his prey was totally inconsistent, unless associated with the idea of his being more than human. The monk still continued :—" Lay aside the paltry prejudices of mankind, and be¬ come the founder of your own pleasures and happiness. Gratify your desires with firmness; let not a frigid timidity dash the cup of bliss from your lips. In procuring your own happiness pay no consideration to that of others; but live for yourself, and place your fellow creatures at defiance." « Oh God i God !" exclaimed Orlando ; " But will this procure me the real essence of happiness ?" " Fool !" replied the monk with a con¬ temptuous smile, " is your squeamish appe¬ tite still so green, that you can only digest the dainty sickly enjoyments which the moralist vol. u. ι
218
prescribes? Where is the youthful vigour which proclaims your manhood ? where is that daring spirit which should shine forth through the robust and athletic actions of the male of the human race ? How stood your morality affected when you sunk into the arms of the common courtezan, who defrauded you of your money ? Where was your morality when you pawned your bro¬ ther's picture, and deceived him by a deli¬ berate and egregious falsehood? or when you gambled away two thousand pistoles which belonged to the marquis of Olver¬ nardo ? What were your ideas of morality when you last night took advantage of the girl who loved you, and, while her father was confined within the gloomy walls of a prison* robbedherof her honour?—or at this hour, when you shrunk into the mere com¬ mon thief, and have been discovered plunder¬ ing your host, who has lavished favours on you ?" Orlando's eyes during these accusations were wildly ñxed upon the monk. u О heavens 1" he exclaimed, " tell me who and what you are ? Is it possible you
219
should thus Ъе acquainted with évente which have never passed my lips? that the very secret recesses of my soul are known to you ?"—■" You shall have further proof," continued the monk:"promise me your aid in certain circumstances I shall require, whatever they may be, and I will instantly extricate you from your present difficulties." Orlando hesitated. <c You know the alternative," said Theo¬ dosius ; " consideration is unnecessary : -either your name must be branded with pub¬ lic infamy, while you become a mark of derision to the world ; or, by silencing a few foolish qualms of conscience, you re* tain your character, and possess every enjoy¬ ment, which by nature you are born to desire."·—" I accept your offer," exclaimed Orlando with a violence which showed he was desperate in his resolution. " I re¬ nounce the ideal visionary name of virtue j no Iongerwill I bow under the yoke of slavish custom ; no longer will I allow myself ac¬ countable to the despotic laws of mankind. Since the character I at first assumed,. al¬ though saint-likes received nought but their 2
220
-contempt, my future conduct shall be marked by a more profitable progress; and as I can¬ not command them by a rigid life of abstemi¬ ous mortification, I will at once become their enemy, and seize on the gratification of every wish as the just spoils of war."—· " Now," replied the priest, " you speak like yourself:—as a sample of my friendship take these notes, which contain the value of three thousand pist Íes, and replace those which you have procured from the escri¬ toir." Orlando grasped the offered treasure with rapture, and instantly returned the money of the marquis to the drawer from which he had taken it. " As another specimen of my power," .continued Theodosius, " here behold the picture which has occasioned you so many pangs," Orlando saw the very miniature he had pawned. " Heavens !" he exclaimed, " what -am I to suppose from all this ? Do I talk to a man or a God ?"—" You must," said Theodosius, " at an early hour in the morning, replace the marquis's two thou-
221 sand pistoles in the hands of his banker ţ and afterwards apply to Don Israel Ezra for the redemption of this picture, which he no longer possesses. Tender to him the sum noted in his agreement, and be reso¬ lute in your demand. He will at first at¬ tempt to put you off with trifling excuses to a future time ; but you must threaten the enforcement of your bond, and after some little trouble he will produce the money be bound himself to forfeit did he part with the miniature before the stated time. This will in some measure beîp to retrieve your pecu- Л1агу affairs. The picture shall be yours by the day you have promised to return it to your brother. He, however, can claim no right to it ; nor has he any knowledge of the original owner." о Orlando's wonder increased with every sentence which the monk uttered. Theodosius continued : (t Meet me to¬ morrow at midnight in the dark walk on the east side of the castle, and I will ex¬ plain to you how you may gratify your own passions in aiding my interest." Orlando promised to be punctual. " Mark L 3
222
me," cried the monk ? while his countenance again assumed that ferocity from which it had a little relaxed : " play not the hypo¬ crite with me. Attempt not to defy my power : it will be an unequal contest. You have entangled yourself in my web, nor will you ever escape me but by death." At the conclusion of these words his eyes appeared to sparkle with peculiar fire, while he slowly left the apartment. Orlando remained some moments mo¬ tionless. He was aware, however, of the danger of being discovered in this room, and he immediately moved with tottering limbs to his own chamber. Having thrown himseif upon his bed, he reflected on the events of the last hour with amazement and horror. The impressions which he had received, in his distaste to Theodosius, commenced on the dreadful sight he had witnessed in his chamber at the solitary inn. He there saw enough to convince him he was no common man ; but this idea was considerably strengthened by their late conference. He was now in the power of the monk. He shrunk appalled at the very
223
thought. Still he had relieved him from a load of terror and apprehensions ; the pre¬ servation of his character was yet in his power, and he was promised a full scope to his inclinations. " Can I desire more í" he exclaimed : " can I have greater felicity than in the completion of every wish ? Theodosius is tight : it is more noble to defy the world than to accede to its ridiculous customs· Well do I remember, in my retirement at Andalusia, I languished for objects my mind could not conceive. Is such a state pf pining melancholy a happy one ? Oh, no : I was greatly deceived. I have been a mere subject of experiment for the narrow- minded hypothesis of an individual. Yet did not this individual nourish n:e as a parent ì Did he not form the outré scheme of my education under an idea of its produ¬ cing my own happiness ? Oh God ! God ! I thought so once ; but it has proved a curse to me. Instead of elevating me, like a divinity, among my fellow-creatures, it has marked me for their contempt. Am I then bound to the world, by any ties of gratitude, L 4
22i< to become their puny slave, and bow before their mockery ? No—I have every right to declare myself their foe. I have too long been the tool of their imposition." Such were the reflexions of Orlando. But whatever pleasure it might have given him to suppose he had escaped his embarrass¬ ments, he felt by no means happy or satis¬ fied in the idea of having fallen under the tyranny of the priest. There was an inex¬ pressible something in the manners of Theo¬ dosius which made him tremble at the idea of the situation in which he stood with him. He shuddered even at his name, and his heart sunk at the recollection of his appointment with him the following night. For the present, however, there was no alternative but to follow his direction. After taking his breakfast (as he had done for some time past) in his own chamber, he walked to the marquis's banker's, and paid in the two thousand pistoles. He then proceeded to find out Don Israel the Jew, to whom he had pledged the picture. A considerable difficulty now arose in disco¬ vering the place of his residence, which he
225
had never asked- Barnarvo. To apply to the jeweller, under his present circum¬ stances, was a task he hesitated to perform?. He was not even yet so callous to the feelings of honour and humanity, but he dreaded to meet? the eyes of the injured fa¬ ther. His reproaches already sounded in his ear, and vibrated to his very soul. But to disobey the monk was what he dared not think upon, let the consequences be what they might. He flattered himself with the hope, that Laura had not revealed her situa¬ tion to her parents; by which means he might gain the information he wanted, and escape their resentment. He immediately hurried towards the pri¬ son, and, having knocked at the outer gates, was admitted into the court, in which a number of people were gathered together under considerable consternation and alarm. Orlando, without making any inquiries; walk¬ ed directly towards the apartment where the jeweller was before confined, while several men were running to and fro greatly agi¬ tated. He now had the curiosity to.ask ^stranger if he knew what occasioned such. L.,b,
226
confusion; and was answered, that a debtor had just destroyed himself. Oriando ran towards the room which he supposed the jeweller inhabited. Finding the door open, he instantly entered, and beheld, to his astonishment and horror, Barnarvo covered with blood, and in the last agonies of death. Neither his wife nor daughter were with him. He was supported by strangers. His ;eyes were partly closed, and his countenance was bedewed with the last perspiration of expiring life. Orlando flew towards him with great eagerness. The jeweller lan¬ guidly opened his eyes: but immediately he cast them upon Orlando he uttered a faint groan, and, as he turned his face away with apparent abhorrence, expired in the .armstof those who supported hint. Thus ended the existence of Fabian Bar- îiarvo— an example of the dire effects in fol¬ lowing, an infatuated thirst for play. He possessed sentiments and feelings which .were an honour to his nature ; but the es¬ sence of every virtue was contaminated by bis ^unfortunate passion. The catastrophe which closed his life might in part be
221
traced from the ruin of his child» Laura, in a fit of distraction, confessed her situa¬ tion to her parents, and in the course of a few hours after fled from the city. Her mother sunk under the horrors which sur¬ rounded her, and lost her senses; while her father, unable to endure such accumulated misery, by the assistance of one of his fel¬ low prisoners procured a dagger, and-stab¬ bed himself to the heart. The last look which he gave Orlando struck his very soul. It well confirmed to him he knew his inju¬ ries. It accused him with a force which no remonstrances could have effected. It produced in him a momentary conscious¬ ness of his cruelty, which no verbal charge could have called forth. For some moments he gazed upon the body, insensible to those who surrounded him ; but he soon reco¬ vered his recollection, and stifled his emo¬ tions as much as possible. The by-standers, the chief of whom knew of the intimacy which subsisted between him and the de¬ ceased, supposed that his distress originated on that account, and therefore made but few remarks upon his behaviour* Orlando
228
soon found that neither Laura's disgrace nor bis own villany were at present publicly known : but he dreaded the ravings of the mother. He had however no opportunity of preventing them, as she was already con¬ fined in a place appropriated for lunatics. He left the prison as soon as possible, and took his way towards the parado, in some measure to recover from the surprise and horror which the scene he had just wit¬ nessed occasioned him. He likewise con¬ sidered in what manner he should proceed to discover the habitation of Don Israel. He at length determined to apply at the hotel where they had met for his address, as it was probable the inhabitants could in¬ form him. He was successful in this attempt, and was directed to the house of the Jew. He found it was a miserable dwelling, but poorly furnished, and situated in an inferior and private part of Madrid. He was intro¬ duced to the usurer, who was very carefully dressing himself in a dirty apartment, and who appeared much astonished and cha¬ grined at his visit. Orlando opened to him the motive of his errand, and easily disco-
229
vered his vexation, although he greatly exerted himself to conceal it. He hesitated a considerable time with respect to produ¬ cing the picture. Orlando however persisted in his demand, and tendered him the money for the redemption of it. The Jew then became boisterous; declared he should have it in the course of a few days ; that it was at the house of an intimate friend, some distance in the country, to whom he would directly write for its return. Orlando firmly declared he would either have it immediately, or the sum which had been agreed upon as a forfeiture provided he parted with it—and threatened, if they were refused, to apply for them by the laws as his right. The Jew, sensible of the preju¬ dice of such tribunals against him, thought it better at once to satisfy his demands than to proceed to extremities : he there¬ fore, after some further altercation, paid down the money, and cursed his ill stars in having any thing to do with either him or his miniature. Orlando once more beheld himself rich ; but the idea was in some degree embittered
230
with reflecting on the source from which he had derived his wealth. Nor could he erase from his mind the pale and bleeding corse of Barnarvo the jeweller. The last look which he received from that wretched man was still delineated in vivid colours on hisimaginarion, and oppressed him with the most melancholy sensations. On his return to the castle, he was informed that great preparations were mak¬ ing for a masquerade which the marquis intended to give the following night. Some chambers were to be opened for the enter¬ tainment, which had been closed for several years on account of their communication with the east wing. Orlando dined with the family, and heard their arrangements for the entertainment. Theodosius was absent. The marquis appeared in better spirits than usual. In the evening several visitors were announced. Among them were Don Esau de Cavet, Don Cæsar de Grolvo, and Don Silvius de Roseverez, with the duke de Brevon and many other persons of distinction. The unfortunate end of the jeweller be-
231 came one of the topics of conversation; and Don Cæsar, with a liberality which ¡ did him honour, immediately undertook to commence a subscription for his wife and daughter. " Pish !" exclaimed Don Esau, " the daughter is run away, and his wife is mad : —can't conceive for whom you can think of making a collection, Don Cæsar?" " Your thoughts," exclaimed Don Cæsar with a voice that made the miser tremble, " are trash:—beg pardon; hope no offence? but I can't help saying you talk like a fool, Don Esau* Search is now making for the poor unfortunate girl ; and the mother, al¬ though in a mad-house, is in -want of as many comforts as you> who should be in one —Don't mean to offend : speak my mind rather freely, that's my way." iC It is supposed," said the marchioness, " that the poor young woman was fond of some one, who took advantage of her affec¬ tion, and cruelly deceived her; which, ac¬ cording to report, occasioned the rash act of the father." Orlando felt a conscious blush glow upon
232
his face : he retired to another part of the room. The donations were all liberal, ex¬ cept from Don Esau, who declared he had no ready change in his.pockets; and when he was offered several loans by the company, replied,, he would see into the affair, and re¬ lieve them privateli/. 44 It will be private enough, I presume," said Don Cæsar de Grolvo, " even to the holy proverb : Your left hand will not know what your right hand gives—Speak as I think ; hope it is not taken amiss ?" When Orlando was asked for his boon, he gave sixty pistoles. Don Cæsar thought he made a mistake, but was informed by him that it was the sum he intended to bestow on the relatives of a man of whom he had some little knowledge. Panegyrics on his benevolence and charity were buzzed about the room, while the mar¬ quis of Olvernardo beheld the act which. occasioned them with admiration. " Young man," said he, *< this generosity does you the greatest credit. It is a glow¬ ing example to those of your own age, and reflects the highest honour on him who in*
233
stilled into your bosom such noble senti¬ ments of philanthropy. Much do I wish they were the models of imitation in the ge¬ nerality of our Spanish youth. I cannot, perhaps, pay you a greater compliment than in contrasting you with the seducer of this poor young creature whom you have so no¬ bly held forth your hand to save." Orlando's eyes were fixed upon the ground ; his countenance turned pale, and he trembled violently. His emotions were considered by the company as the effects of extreme sensibility, and his diffidence at re¬ ceiving such high encomiums. The mar¬ quis continued :— " In him we behold the cruel, savage, and wanton destroyer of innocence ; the wretch who dastardly took advantage of the heart which loved him, and robbed that heart of happiness ; who may be considered as stain¬ ed with the blood of one parent, and the cause of insanity in the other; and who has driven her to infamy, misery, and want, who would perhaps have risked every thing to have saved him from either.of those calami¬ ties, Oh ! Don Orlando, however splendid
234 may be his situation in life ; however he may be surrounded with the comforts and luxuries from which she is excluded for ever; he will experience moments when? the stings of conscience will appeal forcibly to his soul, and create pangs that may serve as a retribution to the unfortunate vic¬ tim of his cruelty." Orlando scarcely breathed ; his whole frame shook with emotion. '* What, then, must be your feelings," continued the marquis, ec even in the most adverse scenes of existence, when you can exclaim to yourself, € I have succoured the unfortunate, and done all in my power to heal the wOunds which have been inflicted by the vices of my fellow-man !' Believe me, signior, it will serve as a powerful alleviation to every woe^ and may soothe you in those moments when all other at¬ tempts at comfort or consolation will fail tó produce the effect." Every one present chorused the com¬ mendations of the marquis ; while Orlando, unable to answer, shrunk from their sight. The. words of his host carried a rebuke
235
perhaps more severe than if they had been intentionally uttered with that view, and Orlando almost regretted his mock libe¬ rality for having been the cause of them. He was conscious he represented the very disgraceful character which had been drawn as a foil to the supposed purity of his own. It was impossible for him to smother the idea that he had been the chief instrument of those calamities, for which he now stretch¬ ed forth his hand as one wholly unconcern¬ ed but in relieving them. He retired to his chamber, but was unable to overcome the tormenting ideas which haunted him. Albert this evening was summoned to at¬ tend his father in his library, and on his en¬ trance found the marquis in a melancholy posture, perusing some written papers which lay before him. He was desired to be seat¬ ed. There was less austerity in his manner than usual, but his looks indicated the poi¬ gnant uneasiness of his mind. "Albert d'Ol¬ vernardo," said he, after some hesitation, " you must surely be impressed with the idea, that the happiness and welfare of my family have ever been my principal thought
236
and aim. However circumstances as ex¬ traordinary as they are dreadful, and of which you have not the most distant suppo¬ sition, may have destroyed my health and sunk my spirits to the most afflicting state of depression, yet my affections have never been estranged from them, and I have con¬ cealed within my own bosom every woe, that theirs might remain untouched by the direful ravages." ^ Albert was much affected; he clasped the hand of his father with eagerness. <c Oh, sir," he exclaimed, " why not let us relieve you by partaking of the burden of your sorrow? why not confide in us the cause of your unhappiness? Cannot any means be effected to give you comfort? May not our exertions in some measure pro\e an antidote to your distress?" " Never, never," cried the marquis with great emotion : " there is no hope, no conso¬ lation, for me ; a gloom of horror is set upon every day of my existence ; nor is there any alleviation for my sufferings but in the grave :—alas 1 I view that through a tedious and desolate perspective." Then,, turning
237 towards his son, with a stern aspect he con¬ tinued : "You have offered to relieve yourfa- ther by partaking of his woes. Now, then, I put you to the test. You have it in your power to render me the most essential ser¬ vice. It is the first solemn request I have ever made to you, and in all human proba¬ bility it will be the only one." Albert demanded with considerable agita¬ tion the terms ; and his father replied thus:— " Give up for ever the thought of a union with Cassandra de Gosmond, and consent to marry the female I shall propose to you." Albert remained silent. *' Is this," continued the marquis with vio¬ lence, <f your profered service to your father? Ungrateful boy ! do you falter in your duty ? do you equivocate on the terms of serving a parent?" "Oh, myfatherľ'exclaimed Albert, "con¬ sider the sacrifice you demand : it is no com¬ mon one. My love for Cassandra was en¬ couraged, was promoted, by yourself; and after having imbibed a mutual passion for each other, you cruelly demand our separa-
2ВВ
tion, and attempt to destroy affections which can only be annihilated with our existence." ** Romantic foolery!" cried the marquis : ** this is the very essence of that infatuation which has ever marked your character. The female I am going to propose to you is no withered «ister of the infernal art. She is neither an enchantress of a mouldering castle, nor a wild travelling aerial being. Her per¬ son is as beautiful, and her manners as fasci¬ nating, as your Cassandra's ; and to convince you that I speak not without a sample of these excellencies, here behold hér exact re¬ semblance." The marquis produced a splendid minia¬ ture ; which Albert no sooner gazed upon, than he recollected it was the same which Osmund had shown him in the casket, and which they had conjectured belonged to the daughter of the priest. His father perceived his emotions. "Ahl do you know the features?" he cried with considerable anxiety. " Why are you thus agitated ?" 4( Because I suspect," replied Albert, <f that
23$
they represent the offspring of Theodosius de Zuivin, the monk." * c Gracious God !" exclaimed the mar¬ quis, <c how know you that ? Have you seen her ? Have you ever had any private conference with her father ? Has he dared to calumniate me ?—Trust him not. What¬ ever you may have heard, suppose it false· He may accuse me of deeds dark as his own mind : but I know them not ; they are the produce of his infernal brain, the damned machinations of a vicious soul." The marquis sunk back in his chair with the effect of his exertions, Albert ran to his assistance. After a few minutes he recover¬ ed. His son explained to him that he had not seen the original of the picture, and so¬ lemnly declared he never had one conference in private with the monk 4€ but my father " (continued he at the conclusion of his asser¬ tion) " surely would not wish to join our family connexion with one whom, according to your own confession, you abhor !" The marquis was aware that in the mo¬ ment of his alarm he had confessed too much. It was, however, too late to recant ;
240
and he, after some hesitation, declared to his son, that, by a train of horrid circum¬ stances, with which he could never be ac¬ quainted, his fortune, his reputation, and his life, were in the hands of Theodosius. "Do not then," he cried, while he burst into tears, " refuse to accede to this request, which will save your father from his power. You, Albert, are the only friend whom I dare trust ; you are the only being who is capable of preserving me from the direful vengeance of this terrific monk/' " Oh God !" exclaimed Albert, " how cruel is my fate ! You have, sir, but a small conception of the task you demand." " By heaven you wrong me 1" replied his father. " I have felt the pangs of disappoint¬ ed love, and experienced the bitter agonies of parting with all my heart held most dear. I have seen her snatched from rae by the cold icy arms of death, whose last murmurs from her dying lips should have uttered curses on me. Oh ! merciful God ! why is not the memory of that fatal hour obli¬ terated from my mind ? Why do I recol¬ lect it but with madness ? Why do I relate
241 it only to increase my distraction ? Young man, young man," he cried, turning to Al¬ bert, " I perceive you tremble even at the mention of your father's misfortunes ;—what, then, would be your sensations to see me co¬ vered with disgrace ; to view me held forth in Madrid an object of criminal accusation; and suffer an ignominious death, under all the reproaches which the darkest crimes would call forth ?" " Oh ! may I never live," answered Al¬ bert, "to behold such scenes of poignant mi¬ sery !" ce I solemnly swear," returned his father, fervently appealing to Heaven for the truth of his assertion, " that such scenes must come to pass, unless you consent to marry the female I propose." * c Then," answered Albert with firmness, although the inward conflict of his soul was easily to be perceived, cf I consent to the sa¬ crifice, and, to save my father, barter my own happiness for ever." The marquis embraced him with an un¬ usual warmth, and informed him that the masquerade was to be given principally for VOL. II* M
U42
fte purpose of introducing him to h»s in* tended bride. As she had hitherto been so cautiously concealed from the world, her sudden appearance would occasion consi¬ derable surprise, and bring forward inquiries he most anxiously wished to avoid. Under the present arrangement, they might have an interview without any particular notice being taken ; and in the mean time they would have leisure to consider on some »eheme, to render her public in the castle and Madrid without any very great curio¬ sity being excited* Albert listened to these plans with in¬ creased astonishment and anguish; while Ы& father proceeded with further directions. He presented him with the miniature, and told him he would point out the domino he should address, to whom he was to give that picture; by which she would im¬ mediately discover who accosted her, and would shun all other attempts at conversa¬ tion. For the better preventing any remarks which might be made upon tbeji tête-à-bête t he had desired, under a feigned reason, that it would be more productive of entertain·»
243
ment that even his own family should ap¬ pear in dresses unknown to each Other. These preliminaries being settled, the mar· quis demanded his son's acquiescence cn another point, which confirmed he was even yet suspicious of his fidelity to the plans he had acceded to : he demanded that he should solemnly swear, by a sacred oath, never to reveal to any one the conversation or purport of what had just passed between them. Albert, after some hesitation, con¬ sented to this last request, and then with a heavy heart parted with his father, retiring to reflect on the sacrifice he had made. Orlando dreaded the approach of the midnight hour, as it summoned him to an interview with father Theodosius, in whose presence he always felt appalled and mi¬ serable: but he was so entangled by the knowledge which the priest possessed of all his actions, that for the present he found it absolutely necessary to comply with every demand he might make. He left tìie castle early in the evening to avoid observations that might be made upon his quitting it at *n unseasonable hour,, and proceeded ex- Ai 2
Ые
tctîy at twelve to the eastern walk appointed for their meeting. Along this place was planted a range of large spreading trees, tbe thick foliage of which formed a com¬ plete arbour. A pale moon at intervals shed its faint beams on the melancholy grove, while the deep lengthened shadows which covered the ground served to in¬ crease the effect of the mellow tints of light that* fell on the yellow autumnal leaves above. Orlando had arrived but a few mi¬ nutes before he observed at some distance the figure of the monk slowly pacing the avenue. His pale visage, which seemed still more ghastly by a black cowl that nearly covered it, at once rendered him an appropriate figure to the scenery which sur¬ rounded him. As Orlando approached, he waved his hand for him to follow, and they walked to a further part. " You are exact to your appointment," he exclaimed in a voice which Orlando thought even more hollow than usual ; *« we must straight to business, or the morning light may surprise us before our plans are arranged. We have much to settle. You
245
have beheld the lovely and fascinating figure of Cassandra de Gosmond ?" Orlando answered in the afnrmatîve. " You have looked upon her with all the warmth and ardour of youth, and lan¬ guished for the enjoyment of her charms, from which you have believed yourself to¬ tally excluded." Orlando declared that such had been the secret sensations of his soul. " To confirm to you then," continued the priest, " that I have not promised more than I have an intention or power to per¬ form, I here offer you the full accomplish¬ ment of your wishes. Cassandra shall be in your power, and you shall have an oppor¬ tunity to take every advantage of her situa¬ tion, without any dread of the consequences that might result from it, or the general in¬ dignation that would follow its being pub¬ licly known." Orlando's eyes sparkled with the antici¬ pations which the words of the monk ex¬ cited; while his looks indicated some doubts of his ability to make them good. The priest, after finding him willing to agree m 5
Üè6
to any plans he might propose, informed him of the following particulars. Don Everard de Gosmond had been sud¬ denly called to some distance from Madrid on urgent business, and a forged note, in imitation of the writing of Albert, had been conveyed to his daughter, which requested her attendance at the masquerade to be given by his father the next evening, in a dress unknown to any but themselves, and which was minutely described ; as by such means they might enjoy an uninterrupted conversation for a few hours, without no* tice, or even suspicion of their being to¬ gether; and the better to prevent her en¬ tering into discourse with any other, he would present to her the picture of the un* known female, which she, by chance and unexpectedly, had noticed one evening in the possession of his friend Osmund de Mellas. This picture the monk explained to be the same that had occasioned Orlando so much uneasiness; which Cassandra had once seen in the hands of Osmund before he was aware she was near him. " But do you conceive she will agree ta
247 this arrangement ?" said Orlando:, " Would not her quitting the house of her father alone at such an hour occasion considerable sur* prise and inquiries among the servants ?" ** You are but little aware," answered the monk, " of the resources of a woman's mind in the accomplishment of the first wish of her heart. Cassandra's love for Albert is no luke-warm passion ; and she has but little fortitude to support the thought of a disappointment in it. Had Albert requested» in terms as strong and urgent as those in which this note was couched, a meeting even in the most profligate house in the city, there is no doubt but she would have com¬ plied, confident in his honour, and blinded by the warmth of her affection to the irø* propriety of the act. She has therefore set· tied to go out early in the evening, under ţ pretence of visiting a friend, whom she can make a confidante : she will dress there, and afterwards proceed to the çastle." " In the name of Heaven 1" exclaimed Orlando, "how are you thus acquainted with the most secret designs of those with whom you have no intimacy or connexion? m 4
âé8
How îs it you thus dive into their thoughts, and plan schemes upon the very working of their minds ľ* " Those questions," replied the monk sternly, " concern not the present business. Albert has already made engagements of a solemn nature with his father to meet an¬ other female, who is to wear the picture it is necessary you should possess. This how¬ ever signifies little : I shall myself attend the festival disguised, to aid those schemes for which I urged the marquis to give it ; and shall be able to procure you the mi* niature in time to present it to Cassandra." Orlando gazed every moment with greater astonishment upon the monk, who conti¬ nued— u Several rooms are to be appropriated for this entertainment, one of which joins the un¬ inhabited apartments of the eastern v/ing of the castle ; and from a lobby which opens to the ball-room is a private way, known only to myself, that leads to the deserted cham¬ bers. It is through this passage, which I shall point out to you, that you must con¬ duct Cassandra, which will shortly take you
249
to aft apartment 'where her cries at. 1 resist¬ ance will be of little service. Do not fail, however, to keep up the character of Albert» by speaking as little as possible, and imitat¬ ing his voice as far as you are able. Her terror, when she once finds herself in the eastern chambers, will at once prevent her from discovering the deception, and she will become the more easy victim to your plea* sure* By these means you will escape to¬ tally free from censure, while the whole ignominy.of. the act will fall upon Albert.** Orlando promised to perform faithfully his injunctions. " Fail not to the very letter of them," cried the monk, while his countenance re· sumed its usual ferocity, " nor suppose that it is merely for your gratification \ have framed these plans. My own interest re¬ quires the ruin of Cassandra's reputation, or her death. Therefore let the idea of our former engagements add an additional irir, citement to the execution of them." After explaining some further particu-. lars, he wrapped his cloak around him* and departed with precipitation. Orlanda M 5
2BQ
slowly returned to the castle, occupied with various thoughts, on the mysterious and un* definable character of the monk, and on the yet more strange and peculiar plans in which he had just joined with him. He forgot every difficulty which would be likely to occur in the task he had undertaken, under the sensual idea of the reward held forth ой the accomplishment of it. Osmund watched the east terrace the fol¬ lowing ntght to that on which he had seen the supposed spectre, but was disappointed in the hopes of its; reappearance : he deter¬ mined, however, to continue his visits. Great preparations were made for the masked ball, which was to be given in a style of elegance equal to any: entertain* ment of the kind ever produced in Madrid,
.ш
CHAP. XVII. The world approve! What is the world to me? The conscious mind is its own £,wful world. And mine is fixt. —Distress me then no more. Not all the heart can plead (and it, alas î Pleads but too much) Shall ever shake the unalterable dictates That tyrannise my breast. Thomson. J\ numerous and brilliant company of the first fashion in Madrid assembled at the castle on the night of the masquerade. The dresses were elegant, the characters admirably sustained, and the rooms for their reception fitted up in a style the most superb and beautiful. The ball-room was the nearest to the eastern chambers. It was an extensive apartment* Trte »width wa$ formed into three divisions by two screens of light columns of exquisite workmanship,, ßetween them was fantastically twined a netting of artificial flowers» in which weye.
â$2
suspended various coloured lamps. The centre part was kept entirely free for danc¬ ing, and that on each side for a prome¬ nade. A space at both ends of the room was likewise preserved, by means of pillars, which continued round, and finished on the top in a painted dome, richly embellished with gilt mouldings, and from which were suspended glass chandeliers illumined with wax. These places were for slight refresh¬ ments; and an artificial fountain in the middle, which worked with considerable facility, added to the gaiety of the scene. Albert, who under his present circum¬ stances had but little relish for the en¬ tertainment, waited, in rather a melan¬ choly posture, for the signal of his father to introduce him to the incognita. A light tripping female figure, who appeared to represent the goddess of pleasure, ap¬ proached, and, dancing round him with infinite grace, while she waved her spangled wand over his head, accosted him thus : «* Thou art a dull mortal, and unfit to mingle in the society of my votaries. Child of Melpomene, permit me to try an experi«
253
nient of my power upon thy torpid and insensible clay. - Thus I infuse into thee that spirit of vivacity, which shall render you a more welcome guest in my revels, and inspire you with a greater relish for the joys they hold forth." After uttering these words she was quit¬ ting him with the same airy step; but catching her arm he detained her. " Thy power is perfectly omnipotent," he ex¬ claimed, in a voice which he disguised as much as possible, " and the first use I make of the inspiration must be to pay my adoration to the goddess who produced it. By heavens, I feel the most beneficial effects from the mere touch of your enchanted wand ! What then may I not expect in the sensations produced from an embrace of the divinity who has so charitably relieved íme from the stupor in which I lay entranced r" " Oblige me not to repent my charity," cried the female, striving to disengage her¬ self from his hold : " I am too copious in my beneficence^ I should have been more considerate in your reanimation. I now perceive you are susceptible to the slightest
35*
eit^rttoji of my power* and that a mere electrical spark will set you in a blaze." * e Tme," answered Albert ; ·* nor can the flame ever be> extinguished while the beams- from those sparkling eyes keep it within tb$ vortex of attraction. For mercy's sake* then, throw off that envious visor İ" w Oh heavens Í" interrupted the female, u this is worse and worse. But look yon¬ der, that white domino appears to beckon you." Albert observed it. He knew it was his father. He was therefore obliged to relinquish hts hold of the goddess, who he had strong suspicions was his sister. Appa¬ rently glad of her release, she tripped away in a fantastic dance ; while he proceeded to the part of the room to which the marquis had motioned him." ** Albert," said he, " the lovely Leonora (гогж> she is called), waits for you. Remem- bért whatever sacrifice νομ. 'make* it i& to save your father." Albert bowed ? he was perhaps unable to speak. Hk father, after a few moments» hd him to a parr of the promenade where a female, Ь а ущ plai»
dress, wa$ seated, partly alone. To prevent peculiarity, they did not approach her toge¬ ther : but the marquis, having pointed her out to his son, proceeded to another place y and Albert, after a few minutes, joined her in à common salutation. She made but a trifling answer, and seemed to wish to avoid him. He took an opportunity to present to* her,> in a graceful posture, on one knee, the miniature which he had received for that purpose from his father. Her emotions were considerable ; she trembled violently, but she placed the picture in her bosom, A party of reapers and hay-makers, dressed in English habits, now arrived at the spot where they stood. The leader of them was soon discovered to be the protégé of the duke de Brevon, who sung with infinite taste the following stanzas, which had been presented to her by signior Zadok. ueply то dr. Percy's " о nancy, wilt thoit GO WITH ME*?** " Yes, Edwin ! yes, with thee I'll go Through evVy hardship life displays ; With th«e Tit tread December's snow, Or brave the dog-sAar'e keenest blase·
256i
Dîstressfol~waiït, or perils keen,. With thee ГН unrepining share ; Nor e'er regret the splendid scene Where I was fairest of the fair. ** But wherefore should thy plaintive breath. The dreadful close of life pourtray, Or paint the awful arm of Death, That spreads o'er all despotic sway? The village maid and sceptred queen Alike his gloomy empire share ; Nor will he, 'mid the courtly scene* Regard the fairest of the fair. *' Yes, Edwin ! constant by thy side Thy faithful Nancy would remain, The frowns of fortune would abide, And sooth the languid couch of pain. But do not deem my love &o mean, Unmov'd my Edwin's death to bear, Though many such perhaps are seen Among the fahrest of the fair." Albert continued the conversation witb his fair companion, and she appeared to give more attention. Although his thoughts were wandering on Cassandra, he was by no means in want of volubility on the occa-^ sion; and so conversant was he in warm and amorous tête-à-tête* that the incognita could have little reason to suppose she had a powerful rival in his affections. They
257
were at last, however, interrupted by a figure in a black domino, who on his first entrance attracted the eyes of the chief part of the company. His attention seemed chiefly confined to a few masks. This figure had no sooner arrived at the part where Albert and Leonora were seated, than he beckoned the latter ; and she instantly left her com¬ panion, and followed him. Albert was astonished at this event ; he almost doubted whether he had been addressing the right person, his father haviqg so particularly mentioned, that after he had presented the miniature, by which she would immedi¬ ately know him, she would attend to no other. He further considered, if the asser¬ tion of his father was true, that she was totally unknown, in Madrid, how she could thus follow a mask which he had ηα doubt was a person of some rank and fashion. His reflexions were shortly interrupted by her return, unattended by the black do¬ mino; and she made a slight apology for her conduct. There was considerable sweetness in her voice and manners; yet they were pensive and melancholy, Albert
25Ş found Hwelf more and more,interested in her: but the figure of Cassandra, die much* injured Cassandra, continually crossed his imagination; and although the phantom did not detract from the fascinations of Leonora, yet it served to prevent their taking any effect upon his heart. Orlando, habited exactly similar to the orders he had received from the monk, waited for him with the utmost expecta* 130й| to receive the miniature by which he was to deceive Cassandra. Theodosius was in a black domino. It was he who accosted Leonora for the* purpose of receiving the picture, which he shortly,after presented to the anxious må impatient Orlando*-with further ex* hortations to be careful how he proceeded m tbe plans bé had undertaken, for fear of discovery, or suspicions of the perpetrators of tbem. He then pointed out to him Cas¬ sandra, who bad just entered an anti-cham¬ ber. Orlando immediately accosted her ia a low feigned voice, and presented the pic¬ ture, whispering that he could lead her to a private apartment, where they would ha*£
ш a better opportunity of enjoving their own conversation. He clasped her hand, and they followed at a distance the steps of the monk, who suddenly turned into a dark narrow passage. The entrance was partly concealed by the gloomy recess in which it stood, and by some means he soon vanished from their sight* Orlando and Cassandra pursued their way towards a'glimmering light ; not, however, without the latter ex* pressing considerable fears at the idea of their going towards the eastern chambers*, After some time they found themselves in a spacious room ; which, although fin> nished, seemed to have been uninhabited for some years. Two solitary wax tapers were the only illumination it received ; arid Cassandra's alarms increased when she saw the place which terminated their ramble. Orlando was confident that precipitation was now the only means to keep her in ig* norance of the person with Whom she had entrusted herself; as every time he spofeţ he had apprehensions of her observing the voice was not that of Albert. For these reasons he immediately commenced a dif«
260
ferent mode of conduct, and his liberties were even too daring to be excused by the mild and unsuspecting Cassandra. Her distress and alarm became inexpressible, and would most probably have prevented her from discerning the deceit by which she was imposed upon, even had it been less artfully managed, A thousand wild and horrible conjectures entered her mind. The firm reliance which she had always placed upon Alberťs ho« nour made her doubt the reality of the dreadful scene which surrounded her, and for a moment she flattered herself the ter¬ rific sensations which she experienced would sink into the mere recollection of a disagree¬ able dream. But Orlando's conduct became more in¬ sulting and brutal. Her cries were in vain: they procured ho one to her assistance, till with affright and terror she sunk senseless Ön a seat which stood near her. Orlando's passions were elevated to the highest pitch, and he now saw the apt moment to gratify them. At this instant, however, a hollow groan issued from a remote part of the
261
chamber, which chilled his very heart, and immediately arrested his attention to the place from whence it appeared to sound. Nearly at the same moment a human form seemed to move in the gloom. Orlando's limbs trembled with violence : he was scarcely able to support himself, while he staggered out of the apartment with the utmost speed, disregarding the situation of the terrified female whom he left behind. He determined to return no more. It is probable, at the first moment of his quitting the chamber, his affright was too great to permit him even to recollect that Cassandra remained behind ; and after he regained his own room, to which he immediately fled, and had in some degree recovered himself, he conceived there would be the greatest danger of a discovery, should he attempt to go back to the chamber. He therefore resolved to remain where he was ; and as the company were not to unmask till a short time before they left the castle, there was little probability of his being missed. As for his considerations of what might I become of Cassandra, he comforted himself ï
262
with the idea that there was no doubt but she would gladly escape from the east chambers as soon as she recovered and found no one to detain her : and even if that was not the case, some of the servants would of course have curiosity enough to enter the apartment soon after the conclu* sbn of the festival. In the mean time the hilarity of the com¬ pany remained undisturbed. Cassandra, as she had passed one of the outer apartments which led to the rooms of reception, had accidentally dropped her mask, and she was immediately recognised by Cecil, who was waiting for some orders from his master. Osmund arrived a few minutes after, but Cassandra had passed on : the man imme¬ diately acquainted him with his discovery, but his master would not believe the asser¬ tion. That Cassandra de Gosmond, in the absence of her father, should come uninvited on such a night to the castle did not bear the least resemblance of probability : but Cecil was so positive, that Osmund determined, * could he ind Albert, (with whose dress he
263
was unacquainted), fo inform him of the cir¬ cumstance. It was a considerable time be¬ fore he Was successful in his search : at length, however, he discovered him in close conversation with a female domino. At the first moment he conjectured it might be Cassandra, but the dress did not answer the description given by his servant. He drew Albert aside, and mentioned to him Ceciľs information. At the first moment he totally discredited the report, as Osmund had done ; but, after some little reflexion, he resolved to search for one of the figure and dress de¬ scribed to be Cassandra. He was, however, awkwardly situated, as it would oblige him to leave his companion in a manner unprotected. This difficulty he soon surmounted. Mak¬ ing a handsome apology to Leonora, he re¬ quested she would permit his friend to take his seat by her for a few moments. He proceeded to the most crowded parts of the assembly. He considered himself in some measure safe from his father's resentment in this
Ž64
neglect to the incognita, as the marquis had already retired for фе night. Osmund, in the first, answer he received to a trifling remark made -to his fair charge, immediately discovered the voice of the fe¬ male of the deserted cottage. 44 Good Heavens !" he exclaimed, " am I so fortunate as to meet with you once more ?" Leonora instantly recollected him; she seemed confused and uneasy. " Alas ! Donna Leonora," he continued, " my presence even now seems to make you unhappy : in our last interview I flattered myself the attendant circumstances might have produced this chilling reserve ; but in the present there is no such alleviation to the cruel idea." " Believe me," answered Leonora in a voice of much sweetness, " I am sensible of your offers of assistance, ånd have no doubt of tbe willingness with which you would execute them ; but, alas ! my whole life is such a tangled scene of misery and distress, that to accept the proffered kindness of re-
265 lief is but to involve humanity in a part of my sufferings, without the most distant prospect of their being lessened by its ef¬ fects." " Permit me," exclaimed Osmuncl with much warmth, ** to accept the hazard, if it is merely but to enjoy even a visionary idea of being serviceable to you." " Never," cried Leonora : * c it must not be. You are but little aware of your oppo¬ nent in such a struggle; you have but a faint conception of the horrors into which you would plunge." Osmund paused a few moments. " This," cried he, tť of all others, is a place in which I should have least thought to have had the happiness of addressing you, and with Albert too. lie, then, it seems, is fortunate enough to possess, without imminent danger, a de¬ gree of confidence from which I am ex¬ cluded forever?" " There are circumstances which demand it," replied Leonora, and sighed deeply. " Oh ! Donna Leonora," exciaimed Os¬ mund, " I am tortured with apprehensions. I have discovered you this evening in seem- VOL. H. N
266
ing familiarity with my friend* On the sup¬ position that he is already engaged by the strongest ties of affection to another, I have in his absence addressed you with a warmth perhaps, under other circumstances, not altogether allowable by the terms on which we live. If then the happy Albert 1 d'Olvernardo is fortunate enough to be con¬ sidered in a more favourable view than the generality of the multitude, whose admira¬ tion you must always call forth, however great the sacrifice may be, I submit to my fate, nor will dare to intrude on his happi¬ ness ; which although I must envy, I cannot but rejoice at." The information of Albert's love for an¬ other appeared to have a very sensible ef¬ fect upon Leonora, although she attempted to conceal it as much as possible from her companion. Osmund now ventured to men¬ tion the casket which his servant had pre¬ sented to him. She confessed it to bc hers, and seemed greatly pleased at the idea of regaining it. * s I would," said he, " 'nstantly present it to you, but by an unfortunate accident I
mı bavé been deprived of the picture for some time. I have, however, the promise of my brother to receive it as to-morrow." " Your brother !" exclaimed Leonora with great astonishment: "not two hours past I received it from the hands of Albert d'Olvernardo*" " Albert dOivernardo !" re-echoed Os¬ mund with equal surprise : " this is a my¬ stery indeed." At this moment they were interrupted by a group of masks, the principal figures in which were a dancing bear and his master^ with an old pedlar. The master had purchased of the lattei a collar for his bear, for which, to his amaze¬ ment, the other charged a very high price j it being customary, at a private masque¬ rade of such consequence as the present one, for those characters who vend goods to distribute them at any trifle, to keep up the idea of the purchase. It is not probable that the pedlar's demand would have been cavilled at, had the person to whom he made it possessed the necessary change, and who, under these circumstances, required N 2
268
an abatement, unless he could give the difference of a pistole. This, however, the pedlar pretended he could not accomplish ; but he appeared uncommonly anxious to possess the gold, and at last proposed to play for it with a small gambling machine which he carried with him for that purpose. This was agreed to, provided he backed the collar with a sufficient quantity of his goods to make up the value of the pistole. It was in the settling of this point that they drew away from the body of the com¬ pany to a more retired part, where Osmund and Leonora were seated. The collar was already placed round the neck of the bear, who appeared extremely orderly and docile, and who, squatting on his hind legs, watched the transactions with far more curiosity than might be expected in his nature. Osmund soon discovered in the harsh voice of the master, Don Cæsar de Grol vo; and in the squeaking tones of the pedlar, Don Esau de Cavet; but he was at a loss to imagine who could have undertaken the more degrading character of the bear. No persons were admitted
269
but those with regular cards of invitation from the marquis, or he would have sup¬ posed Don Cæsar had introduced one of his own domestics, to personate the necessary appendage to his character. A dispute now arose respecting the equi¬ valent value of those articles pledged by the pedlar against the pistole. The master as¬ serted they were not worth half of it, and the former declared he would not place an¬ other atom upon the chance, and demanded that his collar should be returned : but his opponent swore, as it was not worth above a ducat or two, and as that had been already offered him, his bear should not be deprived of so useful a part of his wearing apparel to satisfy so paltry a picaro as the pedlar. The pedlar, slinging his box over his shoul¬ der, had the temerity to attempt a seizure of the collar from the animal round whose neck it was placed. The master instantly hollaed to the bear to hold him; but the bear was by far the best-mannered of the party; for, instead of returning the pedlar's assault, he motioned him with great polite¬ ness to be patient, and bowed in a manner N 3
270 far superior to the generality of his species. The pedlar, however, who was not to be deprived of his property, either by the fero¬ city of the master or the politesse of the bear, made another desperate attack, and, grasping the collar with both hands, in striving to open the joint, pulled with such force, that he not only procured his collar* but the head of the bear with it. The attention of all was now turned to¬ ward the unfortunate victim of the pedlar's avarice ; and, to their astonishment, from his tugged hide peeped the face of signior Zadok Belizenipp. Don Cæsar, having had an inclination to attend the masquerade under the character he now represented, was only at a loss for a bear; and mentioning his wishes one even¬ ing to Zadok, who supped with frim, the tutor always striving to make himself agree¬ able to every one's humour, immediately offered his services to represent his rugged companion* Don Cæsar was delighted, and they planned their dresses accordingly* Numberless compliments now passed be¬ tween the pedlar and the bear: the former
271 declaring he had no intention of depriving him of his head, as he only wanted his pro-* perty ; while the latter, with his usual ac^ commodating civility, begged he would not discompose himself on account of the acci¬ dent—and for his head, it was very much at his service. But the master was not so easily satisfied with these apologies. He declared that the pedlar was perfectly in character, for there appeared to be nothing liberal in his behaviour. The bear, having replaced his head, begged his master would desist from any further notice of the affair,, and the parties accordingly separated; while it was universally allowed by those who witnessed the affray, that the bear was by far the most polite of the party. Osmund's tête-à-tête with the incognita was in some measure interrupted by this dispute. He however found it was her whom he had seen on the terrace in the east part of the castle ; and she promised to meet him there the next ni^ht, to receive the casket and its contents, provided the ap¬ pointment was not kept secret from Albert· Osmund readily agreed to this proviso. N 4
212 There was a mystery in every part of the conduct of Leonora, which he was totally unable to develop. He would fain have persuaded himself he felt no more towards her than for any other beautiful woman; yet the idea that Albert, by some extraor¬ dinary means, was not only known to her, but appeared to have some claims on her - affections, gave him considerable uneasiness. Albert now returned after a fruitless search for Cassandra : he conjectured that Cecil must have been mistaken; and he again joined Leonora. The company did not break up till an early hou* in the morning; and the incog¬ nita, who departed with the black domino, was one of the last of the guests. Soon after the rooms were cleared, a ser¬ vant who was walking over them to close the lattices before he went to bed, by chance saw, near the entrance through which the priest had conducted Orlando and Cassandra, the white glove of a female. This occasioned him no peculiar surprise, but in stooping to take it up he discovered the door that led to the. passage they had
273 passed, and which Orlando, in the hurry of his return, had neglected to close. Astonished at the sight of such a commu¬ nication, hitherto unknown to him s he pro¬ ceeded a few paces, when a mournful noise struck his ear. The thought of that part of the castle to which he was proceeding, add¬ ed to the darkness of the passage, alarmed him too much to go on, and he hurried back to the place he had left. Still the noise which he had heard appeared human, and seemed like the cries of distress. This man had a feďing heart, but a cowardly one. He could not bear the idea of disregarding the voice of misery, yet his terrors would not permit him to answer it. At last he deter¬ mined to acquaint one or two of his fellow- servants, who were not yet gone to bed, with the aflair. This he accordingly did ; and after some consultation it was agreed they should proceed in a body to the place. Having procured a light, they commenced their search, but not without some agitation. Neither this communication, nor the room« to which it led, were known to any of the domestics. It was formed by a pannel of
214 the wainscoting sliding back ; and the bet¬ ter to keep it from chance scrutiny, it was situated in a very dark and gloomy part. The monk had placed the lights in the chamber to which Cassandra was led by his own hand, and had given Orlando a strong caution not to neglect to close the pannel on his return. The servants no sooner gain¬ ed the apartment, than they recognised the figure of Cassandra, totally insensible, on the seat where Orlando had Uft her. She had recovered soon after he quitted the chamber ; but the idea of being left alone in the apart¬ ment where she then was occasioned an immediate relapse. The servants, astonish¬ ed at seeing her in this roon and unable in any way to account for the manner in which she could get there, instantly attempted her recovery by every means they could devise, while one of them ran to call up the princi¬ pal female attendant on the marchioness. By the time she arrived, Cassandra showed some signs of returning life, but was too weak and languid to speak. This domestic was in the confidence of the family, and, bving well aware of the situation in which
275 the young lady stood with respect to the late resolution of the marquis, resolved not to convey to her mistress the information of her being in the castle before her lord, sup¬ posing that it had been a private appoint¬ ment of Albert's, unknown to any but them* selves. Under these considerations she or¬ dered one of the marquis's carriages to be got in readiness, and attended her in it to the house of her father; where she was re¬ ceived by the servants with equal, surprise and alarm. Two medical men were im¬ mediately procured, and a messenger sent off post to Don Everard with intelligence of the event. Orlando, who had so precipitately quitted both Cassandra and the company, sat brood¬ ing over the occurrences of the night in his own apartment. He now began to regret he had not taken Cassandra from the eastern room, although in the state she was in there . would have been imminent danger of a discovery. He dreaded the severe reproaches of the monk for his pusillanimity, and he an¬ ticipated with considerable anxiety the great rise for suspicions which Cassandra's rela-
276 tion of the picture he had presented to her would occasion. This very miniature he was, by the monk's permission, to return to Osmund the next morning, and the circum¬ stances which attended it might appear most glaringly against him. - Orlando, it is true, had submitted to the tyranny of the monk, but it was far more through compulsion than inclination. How¬ ever tempting his promises might be, he would most willingly have forfeited them to have disentangled himself from his power; and the question whether this might not be done, now agitated him. The money which he had received from Theodosius, added to that paid him by Don Israel, left him in pos¬ session (after having discharged the chief part of bis debts, and placed the sum he had lost of the marquis's in the hands of his banker) of a considerable sum; and he began to consider whether he could not at once escape from the threatened influence of the priest, by immediately abandoning Ma¬ drid. Orlando had already determined to prey upon the world. C( The worid/' said he,
277
<( has preyed upon mc, and retaliation is a law of nature." In Madrid he was too well known for the plans he intended to pursue, and he conceived it would be easy to frame an ex¬ cuse to the inhabitants of the castle for his sudden departure. He at length deter¬ mined to leave the city early in the morning. The resentment of father Theodosius was perhaps the strongest excitement to these resolutions. He anticipated with horror a meeting with him. He was aware that the priest had urgent reasons for wishing him to succeed in the plans he had formed, and he trembled at the effects which a disappoint¬ ment might produce. He had but little ap¬ prehension of the monk attempting to de¬ stroy his reputation. It was a kind of power over him, he well knew he would use with more discretion, and preserve as a threat to procure other services which circumstances might occasion him to require. After reflect¬ ing some time, he determined to leave the castle immediately, and accordingly wrote a short billet to his brother, in which he in¬ closed the miniature, and apologised for the
278
length of time he had been deprived of it. In a postscript he mentioned, that he had forgot, through the bustle of the last night's enter¬ tainment, to mention that he was engaged to spend a few weeks with a friend some distance from Madrid, and, by appoint¬ ment, was obliged to leave the castle early that morning. In another letter, addressed to the marquis, he formed a similar excuse, and returned numberless polite thanks for the civilities he had received. These letters being written, he called Otto (who had not long retired to rest), and ordered him to pre¬ pare their horses as soon as possible, and pack up a change of dress for each of them, as he was going some distance in the coun¬ try, and it was uncertain how long he might remain there. Ot.o was astonished: he would have asked questions, but his master was not in a humour to answer them; and much against his Inclination he was obliged to do what he was ordered, without know¬ ing the reasons for it* In the course of two hours every thing was prepared for their departure, It was деаг seven o'clock ; but, owing to the late
219 hour of the last night's carousal, none of the domestics, except the porter, were yet stirring ; and to him Orlando delivered his letters. As he rode through the external s:ate of the castle, vitiated as his mind and о . principles were, he felt a somethmg at leaving the place where he had received, for a considerable length of time, such un¬ common marks of hospitality, which might be said to arise from the better part of his nature. In the bosoms of the most depraved there are, at certain times, sensations pro¬ duced from peculiar events, which would grace that of a puritan. A tear from the most refined and delicate source will some¬ times bedew the cheek of the sinner. Let us not scoff at the poor and solitary drop, but welcome it as a long-lost friend, and cherish it as the produce of a struggling effort to be virtuous.
END OF THE SECOND VOLUME
