Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
The vampyre: a tale
THE VAMPYUE
ρ i jjuj i mmrgninm in iiMuw f m
IT happened that in the midst of the dissipa« tions attendant upon a London winter, there 'appeared at the various parties of the leaders of the ton a nobleman, more remarkable for his singularities, than his rank. He gazed upon the mirth around him, as if he could not participate therein. Apparently, the light laughter of the fair only attracted his attention, that he might by a look quell it, and throw fear into those breasts where thoughtlessness reigned. Those who felt this sensation of awe, eould not explain whence it arose : some attributed it to the dead grey eye, which? fix*?
ing upon the object's face, did not seem to penetrate, and at one glance to pierce through to the inward workings of the heart ; but fell upon the cheek with a leaden ray that weighed upon tlie skin ii could not pass. His peculi¬ arities caused him to be invited to every house ; all wished to see him, and those who had been accustomed to violent excitement, and now felt flie weight of ennui, were pleased at having ¡something in their presence capable of engag¬ ing their attention. In spite of the deadly hue of his face, whieh never gained a warmer tint, either from the Mush of modesty, or from the stroag emotion of passion, though its fonn and outline were beautiful, many ofthe female hunters after notoriety attempted to win his attentions, and gain, at least, some marks of what they might term affection : Lady Mercer, who had been the mockery of every monster Aewa ia drawing-rooms since her marriage, -threw herself ia his way, and did all but put ©11 the dresa of a mountebank, to attract Ыш notice:««»though in vain:—when she -stood before lim^ though Ms eyes were ap«
parently fixed upon her's, still it seemed as if they were unperceived ;—even her unappalled impudence was baffled, and she left the field. But though the common adultress could not influence even the guidance of his eyes, it was not that the female sex was indifferent to him : yet such was the apparent caution with which he spoke to the virtuous wife and innocent daughter, that few knew he ever addressed himself to females. He had, however, the reputation of a winning tongue ; and whether it was that it even overcame the dread of his singular character, or that they were moved fey his apparent hatred of vice, he was as often among those females who form the boast of their sex from their domestic virtues, as among those who sully it by their vices. About the same time, there came to London a young gentleman of the name of Aubrey t he was an orphan left with au only sister in the possession of great wealth, by parents who died while he was yet in childhood. Left also to himself by guardians, who thought it their duty merely to take care ofhis føiitee 5 '
-n hile they relinquished the more important charge of his mind to the care of mercenary subalterns, he cultivated more his imagination than his judgment. He had, hence, that Mgh romantic feeling of honour and candour, which daily ruins so many milliners' apprentices. He believed all io sympathise with virtue, and thought ihat vice was thrown in by Providence merely for ihe picturesque effect of the scene, as we ^ee in romances : he thought that the misery of a cottage merely consisted in the vesting of clothes, which were as warm, but which were better adapted to the painter's eye by their ir¬ regular folds and various coloured patches. He thought, in fine, that thc dreams of poets were, the realities oflife. He was handsome, frank,, and ricli : for these reasons, upon his entering, into thc gay circles, many mothers surrounded him, striving which should describe with least truth iheir languishing or romping favourites : ihe daughters at the same time, by their brightening countenances when lie approached, and by their sparkling eyes, when he opened, his Ii|^ soon led him into false notions of his
talents and his merit. Attached as he was to the romance of his solitary hours, he was startled at finding, that, except in the tallow and wax candles that flickered, not from the presence ofa ghost, but from want of snuffing, there was no foundation in real life for any of that congeries of pleasing pictures and de¬ scriptions contained in those volumes, from which he had formed his study. Finding,' however, some compensation in his gratified vanity ; he was about to relinquish his dreams, when the extraordinary being we have above described, crossed him in his career. He watched him ; and the very impossibility of forming an idea of the character of a man entirely absorbed in himself, who gave few other signs of his observation of external ob¬ jects, than the tacit assent to their existence, implied by the avoidance of their contact : allowing his imagination to picture every thing that flattered its propensity io extravagant idea®, he soon formed this object into the hero of a romance, and determined to observe fhe offspring of hk fancy, rather than ihe person
before hîm. He became acquainted with Ыш, paid him attentions, and so far advanced upon his notice, that his presence was always re» cognised. He gradually learnt that Lord Ruthven'® affairs were embarrassed, and soon found, fmm the notes of preparation in -— Streets that he was about to travel* Desirous of gaining some information respecting this lingular character, who, til! now, had only whetted his eurio$ity s he hinted to his guard- inns, that it was time for him to perform the tour, whieh for many generations has been thought necessary to enable the young to take some rapid steps in the career of vice towards putting themselves upon an equality with the ågedj and not allowing thera to appear as if fallen from the skies, whenever scandalous intrigues ate mentioned as the subjects of pleasantry or of praise, according to the de¬ gree of skill shewn in carrying them on* They consented : and Aubrey immediately mentioning his intentions to Lord Ruthven, was surprised to receive from him a proposal to joia Ыш, Flattered by отсЬ α mark of
esteem from him, who, apparently, had nothing in common wiih other men, he gladly accepted it, and in a few days ihey had passed the circling waters. Hitherto, Aubrey had had no opportunity of studying Lord Ruthven's character, and now he found, that, though many more ofhis actions were exposed to his view, the results offered différent conclusions from ihe apparent mo¬ tives to his conduct. His companion wás profuse in his liberality >--the idle, the vaga¬ bond, and the beggar, received from his Imnd more than enough to relieve their immediate wants. But Aubrey could not avoid remark¬ ing, ihat it was not upon ihe virtuous, reduced to indigence by thc misfortunes attendant even upon virtue, that he bestowed his alms;— these were sent from the door with hardly sup- pressed sneers ; but when the profligate came to ask something, not to relieve his wants, but to allow him to w r allow in his lust, or io sink him still deeper in his iniquity, he was sent away with rich charity. This was, however, attributed by him to the greater importunity of G
the vicious, which generally prevails over the retiring bashfulness of ihe virtuous indigent. There was one circumstance about the charity of his Lordship, which was still more im¬ pressed upon his mind : all those upon whom ii, was bestowed, inevitably found that there was a curse upon it, for they were all either led to the scaffold, or sunk to the lowest and the raost abject misery. At Brussels and other towns through which they passed, Aubrey was surprized at the apparent eagerness with which his companion sought for the centres of all fashionable vice ; there he entered into all Üıe spirit of the faro table : he betted, and always gambled wilh success, except where the known sharper was liis antagonist, and then he lost even more than he gained ; but it was always with the same unchanging face, wiih whicii lie generally watched the society around : it was not, however, so when he encountered the rash youthful novice, or the luckless father of m numerous family ; then his very wish seemed fortunes law—this apparent abstractedness of mind was kid aside, and hfe
eyes sparkled with more fire than that of the cat whilst dallying with the half-dead mouse. In every town, he left the formerly affluent youth, torn from the circle he adorned, cursing, in the solitude of a dungeon, the fate thai had drawn him within the reach of this fiend ; whilst many a father sat frantic, amidst ihe speaking looks of mute hungry children, with¬ out a single farthing of his late immense wealth, wherewith to buy even sufficient to satisfy their present craving. Yet he took no money from ihe gambling table ; but im¬ mediately lost, to ihe miner of many, the last gilder he had just snatched from the convulsive grasp of the innocent : this might but be the result of a certain degree of knowledge, which was not, however, capable of combating ihe cunning of the more experienced. Aubrey often wished to represent this to his friend, and beg him to resign thai charity and pleasure which proved the ruin of all, and did not tend io his own profit ;-—but hc delayed it—for each day he hoped his friend would give him some opportunity of speaking frankly and openly с 2
to him ; however, this never occurred. Lord Ruthven in his carriage, and amidst the various wild and rich scenes of nature, was always tlie same : his eye spoke less than his lip ; and thougli Aubrey was near the object of his curiosity, he obtained no greater gra¬ tification from it than the constant excitement of vainly wishing to break that mystery, which to liis exalted imagination began to assume the appearance of something supernatural. They soon arrived at Rome, and Aubrey for a time lost sight ofhis companion ; he *eft him in daily attendance upou the morning circle of an Italian countess, whilst he went in search of the memorials of another almost deserted city. Whilst he was thus engaged, letters arrived from England, which he opened with eager impatience ; the first was from his sister, breathing nothing but affection ; the others were from his guardians, thc latter astonished him ; ifit had before entered into his imagina¬ tion that ihere was an evil power resident in his companion, tliese seemed to give him hnost sufficient reason for the belief His
guardians insisted upon his immediately leav¬ ing his friend, and urged, that his character was dreadfully vicious, for that the possession of irresistible powers of seduction, rendered his licentious habits more dangerous to society. 4 It had been discovered, that his contempt for the adultress had not originated in hatred of her character ; but that he had required, to enhance his gratification, that his victim, the partner or his guilt, should be hurled from the pinnacle of unsuUied virtue, down to the lowest abyss of infamy and degradation : in fine, that all those females whom he had sought, apparently on account of their virtue, had, since his departure, thrown even the mask aside, and had not scrupled to expose the whole deformity of their vices to the public gaze. Aubrey determined upon leaving one, whose character had not yet shown a single bright point on which to rest the eye. He resolved to invent some plausible pretext for abandon¬ ing him altogether, purposing, in the mean while, to watch ¡iim more closely, and to
Jet no slight circumstances pass by ид* noticed. He entered into the same circle, and soon perceived, that his Lordship was endeavouring to work upon the inexperience of the daughter of the lady whose house he chiefly frequented. In Italy, it is seldom that an unmarried female is met with in society ; he w r as therefore obliged to carry on his plans in secret ; but Aubrey's eye followed Iiim in all his windings, and soon discovered that an assignation had been appointed, which would most likely end in the ruin of an in¬ nocent, though thoughtless girl. Losing no time, he entered the apartment of Lord Ruthven, and abruptly asked him his inten^ tions wiih respect to the lady, informing him at the same time that he was aware of his being about to meet her that very night. Lord Ruthven answered, that his intentions were such as he supposed all would have upon imch an occasion; and upon being pressed whether lie intended to marry her, merely laughed. Aubrey retired ; and, immediately Writing a note ? to £ay 5 that from that moment
he must decline accompanying his Lordship in the remainder of their proposed tour, he ordered his .servant to seek other apartments, and calling upon the mother of the lady, informed her of all he knew, not only with regard to her daughter, but also concerning the character of his Lordship. The assigna¬ tion was prevented. Lord Ruthven nest day merely sent his servant to notify his complete assent to a separation ; but did not hint any suspicion of his plans having been foiled by Aubrey's interposition. Having left Rome, Aubrey directed his steps towards Greece, and crossing the Pe¬ ninsula, soon found himself at Athens. He then fixed his residence in the house of a Greek ; and soon occupied himself in tracing the faded records of ancient glory upon monu¬ ments that apparently, ashamed of chronicling the deeds of freemen only before slaves, had hidden themselves beneath the sheltering soil or many coloured lichen. Under the same roof as himseif, existed a being, m beautiful and delicate, Üiat Ле might have formed the
model for a painter, wishing to pourtray on canvass ilie promised hope of the faithful in Mahomet's paradise, save that her eyes spoke too much Blind for any one to think she could belong to ihose v/ho had no souls. As she danced upon thc plain, or tripped along the mountain's side, one would have thought the gazelle a poor type of her beauties ; for who would have exchanged her eye, apparently the eye of animated nature, for that sleepy luxurious look of the animal suited but to the taste of an epicure. The light step of lanthe often accompanied Aubrey in his search after antiquities, and often would the unconscious girl, engaged in the pursuit of a Kashmerc butterfly, show the whole beauty of her form, floating as it were upon the wind, I о the eager gaze ofhim, who forgot thc letters lie had just decyphered upon an almost effaced tablei, in the contemplation of her sylph-like figure. Often would her tresses falling, as sho ilitted around, exhibit in the sun's ray such delicately brilliant and swiftly fading hues, as might well excuse the forgetfulness of the
antiquary, who let escape from his mind the very object he had before thought of vital im¬ portance to the proper interpretation of a passage in Pausanias. But why attempt to describe charms which all feel, but none can appreciate ?-—It was innocence, youth, and beauty, unaffected by crowded drawing-rooms and stifling balls. Whilst he drew those re¬ mains of which he wished to preserve a me¬ morial for his future hours, she wouid stand by, and watch the magic effects of his pencil, in tracing the scenes of her native place ; she would then describe io him the circling dance upon the open plain, would paint io him in all the glowing colours of youthful memory, the marriage pomp she remembered viewing in her infancy ; and then, turning to subjects that had evidently made a greater impression upon her mind, would tell him all the supernatural tales of her nurse. Her earnestness and apparent belief of what she narrated, excited the mterest even of Audrey ; and often as she told him the tale of the living vampyre, who
had passed years amidst his friends, and dearest ties, forced every year, by feeding upon ihe life of a lovely female to prolong his existence for the ensuing months, his blood would run cold, whilst he attempted to laugh her owt of such idle and horrible fantasies; but lanthe ciied to him the names of old men, who had at last detected rne living among themselves, after several of their near relatives and children had been found marked with the stamp of the fiend's appetite; and when she found him so in¬ credulous, she begged of him to believe her, for it had been remarked, that those who had dared to question their existence, always had some proof given, which obliged ihem, with grief and heartbreaking, to confess it was irue, She detailed to him the traditional appearance of tliese monsters, and his horror ivas increased, by hearing a pretty accurate description of Lord Ruthven; he, however, still persisted in persuading her, that there could be no truth in her fears, though at the ьате time he wondered at the many coinci-
dences which had all tended io excite a belief in the supernatural power of Lord Ruthven. Aubrey began io attach himself more and more io lauthe ; her innocence, so contrasted with all thc affected virtues of thc women among whom he had sought for his vision of romance, won his heart ; and while he ridi¬ culed lhe idea of a young man of English habits, marrying an uneducated Greek girl, still he found himself more and more attached to the almost fairy form before him. He would tear himself ai times from her, and, forming a plan for some antiquarian research, he would depart, determmed not to return until his object was attamed ; but he always found it impossible to fix his attention upon the ruins around him, whilst in his mind he retained an image that seemed alone the rightful possessor of his thoughts, lanthe was unconscious of his love, and was ever the same frank infantile beina: he had first known. She always seemed to part from him with reluctance; but it was because
slie had no longer any one with whom she conk! lisit her favourite haunts, whilst her guardian was occupied in sketching or un- еоч ering some fragment which had yet escaped the destructive hand of time. She had appealed to her parents on the subject of Vampyres, and ihey both, wiih several present, affirmed their existence, pale with horror at the very name. Soon after, Aubrey deter¬ mined to proceed upon one of his excursions, whicli was to detain him for a few hours ; when tliey heard the name of the piece, they all at once begged of him not to return at night, as he must necessarily pass through a wood, where no Greek wouid ever remain, afìer the day had closed, upon any considera¬ tion. They described ii as the resort of ihe vampyres in their nocturnal orgies, and de¬ nounced the most heavy evils as impending upon him who dared io cross their path. Aubrey raade light of their representations, and tried to laugh them out of the idea; but when he saw them shudder ai his daring diu» to mock a superior, inferna! power, ihe
very name of which apparently macìe iheir blood freeze, iie was silent. Next morning Aubrey set off upon his excursion unattended; he was surprised to observe the melancholy face of his host, and was concerned to find that his words, mocking the belief of those horrible fiends, had inspired them with such terror. When he was about to depart, lanthe came to the side of his horse, and earnestly begged of him to return, ere night allowed the power of these beings to be put in action ;—~he promised. He was, however, so occupied in his research, that he did not perceive that day «hght would soon end, and ihat in the horizon there was one of those specks which, in the warmer climates, so rapidly gather into a tremendous mass, and pour all their rage upon the devoted country. —He at last, however, mounted his horse, determined to make up by speed for his delay ; but it was too late. Twilight, In these southern climates, is almost unknown ; immediately the sun sets, night begins : and ere lie had mU vanned far, the power of the storm wa¿ above
-—its echoing thunders had scarcely an interval of rest—-its thick heavy rain forced its way- through the canopying foliage, whiisi the blue forked lightning seemed to fall and radiate at Ws very feet. Suddenly his horse took fright, and he was carried wiih dreadful rapidity ihrough the entangled forest. The animal at last, through fatigue, stopped, and he found, by the glare of lightning, that he was in the neighbourhood of a hovel that hardly lifted itself up from the masses of dead leaves and brushwood which surrounded it. Dismount¬ ing, he íipproached, hoping to ñná some one to guide him io the town, or at least trusting to obtain shelter from the pelting of the storm. As lie approached, the thunders, for a moment silent, allowed him io hear ihe dreadful shrieks of a woman mingling with the stifled, exultant mockery of a laugh, continued in one almost ■ nn broken sound ;-—he was startled : hot, roused by the thunder which again rolled over his head, he, wiili a sudden effort, forced open ihe door of the hut. He found himself In utter darkness : ihe sound, however, guided
him. He was apparently unperceived ; for, though he called, still the sounds contmued, and no notice was taken of him. He found himself in contact with some one, whom he im¬ mediately seized; when a voice cried, " Again baffled !" to which a loud laugh succeeded ; and he felt himself grappled by one whose strength seemed superhuman: determined to sell his life as dearly as he could, he struggled ; but it was in vain : he was lifted from his feei and hurled with enormous force against the ground : —his enemy threw himself upon him, and kneeling upon his breast, had placed his hands upon his throat —when the glare of many torches penetrating through the hole tliat gave light in the day, disturbed him ;—he instantly rose, and, leaving his prey, rushed through the door, and in a moment the crashing of the branches, as he broke through the wood, was no longer heard. The storm w r as now still ; and Aubrey, incapable of moving, was soon heard by ihose without. They entered ; the light of their torches fell upon the mud walls, aiid the thatch loaded on every individual straw
with heavy Hakes of soot. At the desire of Aubrey ttøey searched for her who had at¬ tracted him by her erics ; he was again left in darkness ; but what was his" horror, when the light of the torches once more burst upon him, to perceive the airy form ofhis fair conductress brought in a lifeless corse. Hc shut his eyes, hoping that it w r as but a vision arising from his disturbed imagination ; but he again saw the same form, when he unclosed thera, stretched by his side. There was no colour upon her cheek, not even upon her lip ; yet there was a gtillness about her face that seemed almost as attaching as the life that once dwelt there :—- upon her neck and breast was blood, and upon her throat were the marks of teeth havingopened the vein :--—to this the men pointed, crying, simultaneously struck wdth horror, íť A Vam¬ pyre! a Vampyre!" A litter was quickly formed, and Aubrey was kid by the side of her who had lately been to him the object of so many bright and fairy visions, now fallen wiih the flower of lifo that had died within her. He knew not what his thoughts were«—his mind
was benumbed and seemed to shun reflection, and take refuge in vacancy—he held almost uncon scion sly in his hand a naked dagger of a particular construction, which had been found in the hut. They were soon met by different parties who had been engaged in the search of her whom a mother had missed. Their lamentable cries, as they approached the city, forewarned the parents of some dreadful catastrophe.-—To describe their grief would be impossible ; but when they ascertained the cause of their child's death, they looked at Aubrey, and pointed to ihe corse. They were inconsolable ; both died broken-hearted. Aubrey being put to bed was seized with a most violent fever, and was often delirious ; in these intervals he would call upon Lord Ruthven and upon lanthe—by some unae« •v * v countable combination he seemed to beg % of his former companion to spare the being he loved. At other times he would imprecate maledictions upon his head, and curse him as her destroyer. Lord Ruthven chanced at this time to arrive at Athens, and, froin whatever motive, upon D
hearing of the state of Aubrey, immediately placed himself in the same house, and became his constant attendant. When the latter recovered from his delirium, he was horrified and startled at the sight of him whose image tie had now combined with that of a Vampyre ; but Lord Ruthven, by his kind words, implying almost repentance fbr the fault that had caused their separation, and still more by the attention, anxiety, and care which he showed, soon reconciled him to his presence. His lordship seemed quite changed ; he no longer appeared that apathetic being who had so astonished Aubrey; but as soon as his convalescence began to be rapid, he again gradually retired into the same state of mind, and Aubrey perceived no difference from the former man, except that at times he was surprised Ы meet. his gaze fixed intently upon him, with a smile of malicious exultation playing upon his lips : he knew not why, but this smile haunted him. .During the last stage of the invalid's recovery, Lord Ruthven was apparently engaged in watching the tideless waves raised by the
eooling breeze, or în marking the progress of those orbs, circling, like our world, the moveless sun ;-—indeed, he appeared to wish to avoid the eyes of all. Aubrey's mind, by this shock, was much weakened, and that elasticity of spirit which had once so distinguished him now seemed to have fled for ever. He was now as much a lover of solitude and silence as Lord Ruthven ; but much as he wished for solitude, his mind eould not find it in the neighbourhood of Athens ; if he sought it amidst the ruins he had formerly frequented, îanthe's form stood by his side—-if he sought it in the woods, her light step would appear wandering amidst the underwood, in quest ofthe modest violet ; then suddenly turning round, would show, to his wild imagination, her pale face and wounded throat, with a meek smile upon her lips. He determined to fly scenes ? every feature of which created such bitter associations in his mind. He proposed to Lord Ruthven, to whom he held himself bound by the tender care he had. taken ofhim during his illness, that they should D 2
visit those parts of Greece neither had yet seen. They travelled in every direction, and ¿sought every spot to which a recollection could be attached : but though they thus hastened from place to place, yei they seemed not to heed what they gazed upon. They heard much of robbers, but they gradually began to slight them reports, which they imagined were only the invention of individuals, whose interest it WBB to excite the generosity of those whom they defended from pretended dangers. In consequence of thus neglecting the advice of the inhabitants, on one occasion they travelled with only a few guards, more to serve as guides than as a defence. Upon entering, however, a narrow defile, at the bottom of whicli was the bed of a torrent, with large masses of rock brought down from the neigh¬ bouring precipices, they had reason to repent their negligence ; for scarcely were the whole of the party engaged in the narrow pass, when they were startled by the whistling of bullets close to their heads 3 and by the echoed report of several guns. In an instant their guarde
had left them, and, placing themselves behind rocks, had begun to fire in the direction whence the report came. LordRuthven and Aubrey, imitating their example, retired for a moment behind the sheltering turn of the defile : but ashamed of being thus detained by a foe, who with insulting shouts bade them advance, and being exposed to unresisting slaughter, if any of tbe robbers should climb above and take them in the rear ? they determined at once to rush forward in search of the enemy. Hardly had they lost the shelter of the rock, when Lord Ruthven received a shot in the shoulder, whieh brought him to the ground. Aubrey hastened to his assistance ; and, no longer heeding the contest or his own peril, was soon surprised by seeing the robbers 5 faces around him—his guards having, upon Lord Ruthven's being wounded, immediately thrown up their arms and surrendered. By promises of great reward, Aubrey soon induced them to convey his wounded friend to a neighbouring cabin ; and having agreed upon a ransom, he was no more disturbed by
their presence—«they being content merely to guard the entrance till their comrade should return with the promised sum, for which he had an order. Lord Huthven'g, strength rapidly decreased ; m two days mortification ensued, aad death seemed advancing with hasty steps. Hk conduct and appearance had not changed ; he seemed as unconscious of pain as he had beea of the objects about him : but towards the close of the fast evening, his mind became apparently uneasy, and his eye often fixed upon Aubrey, wlio was induced to offer his assistance with more than usual earnestness——"Assist me! you may save me—you may do more than that—I mean not my life, 1 heed the deatii of my existence as little as that of the passing day ; but you may save my honour, your friend's honour."—" How Ì tell me how ? I would do anything," replied Aubrey.™"!' need but little—-my life ebbs apace»«-! cannot explain the whole-«-but if you would conceal all you know of mc, my honour were free from stain in the world's mouth*—and if my death wore unknown for some time in England—-1
„«-J-«-but life."—" It shall not be known."— " Swear !" cried the dying man, raising himself with exultant violence, " Swear by all your soul reveres, by all your nature fears,» swear that for a year and a day you will nút impa?tr your knowledge of my crimes or death tø Ш$* living being in any way, whatever may happen^ or whatever you may see."—His eyes seemed bursting from their sockets : "I sweari" said Aubrey ; he sunk laughing unm Ы.4 pillow, and breathed no more. . t<* r - Aubrey retired to rest, but did mot «leep ţ ihe many circumstances attending his acquaint« anee with this man rose upon his mind, and he knew not why ; when he remembered his oath a cold shivering came over him, as if from the presentiment of something horrible awaiting him. Rising early in the morning, he was about to enter the hovel in which he had left the corpse, when a robber met him, and informed him that it was no longer there, having been conveyed by himself and com¬ rades, upon his retiring, to the pinnacle of a neighbouring mount, according to a promise
ihey had given his lordship, thai ii should bc exposed io the first cold ray of the moon ihat rose after his death. Aubrey astonished, and taking several of ihe men, determined to go and bury it upon the spot where it lay. But, when he had mounted to the summit he found no trace of either the corpse or the clothes, though the robbers swore they pointed out the identical rock on which they had laid the body. For a time his mind was bewildered in conjectures, but he at last returned, convinced that they had buried the corpse for the sake of the clothes. Weary of a country in which he had met with such terrible misfortunes, and in which all apparently conspired to heighten that superstitious melancholy that had seized upon his mind, he resolved to leave it, and soon arrived at Smyrna. While waiting for a vessel to convey him to Otranto, or to Naples, he occupied himself in arranging those effects he had with him belonging to Lord Ruthven. Amongst otlier things there was a case con¬ taining several weapons of offence, more or
less adapted to ensure the death of the victim. There were several daggers and ataghans. Whilst turning them over, and examining their curious forms, what was his surprise at finding a sheath apparently ornamented in the same style as ihe dagger discovered in the fatal hut—he shuddered—hastening to gain further proof, he found the weapon, and his horror may be imagined when he discovered that it fitted, though peculiarly shaped, the sheath he held in his hand. His eyes seemed to need no further certainty-«-they seemed gazing to be bound to the dagger ; yet still he wished to disbelieve ; but the particular form, the same varying tints upon the haft aiid sheath were alike in splendour on both, and left no room for doubt ; tliere were also drops of blood on each. He left Smyrna, and on his way home, ai Rome, his first inquiries were concerning the ladyhc had attempted to snatch from Lord Ruthven's seductive arts. Her parents were in distress, tlieir fortune ruined, and she had not been heard of since the departure of his
lordship. Aubrey's mind became almost broken under so many repeated horrors ; he was afraid that this lady had fallen a victim to Urn destroyer of lanthe. He became morose and silent ; and his only occupation consisted in urging ihe speed of the postilions, as if he were going to save the life of some one he held dear. He arrived at Calais ; a breeze, which seemed obedient to his will, soon wafted him to the English shores ; and he hastened to the mansion of his fathers, and there, for a Moment, appeared to lose, in the embraces and caresses of his sister, all memory of the past. ff she before, by her infantine caresses, had gained his affection, now that the woman began io appear, she was still more attaching as a companion. Bfiss Aubrey had not that winning grace which gains the gaze and applause of the drawing-room assemblies. There was none of that light brilliancy which only exists in the heated atmosphere of a crowded apartment. Her blue eye was never lit up by the levity of Üıe mind beneath. There was a melancholy
charm about it which did not seem to arise from misfortune, but from some feeling within, that appeared to indicate a soul conscious of a brighter realm. Her step was not that iight footing, which strays where'er a butterfly or a colour may attract—it was sedate and pensive. When alone, her face was never brightened by the smile of joy ; but when her brother breathed to her his affection, and would in her presence forget those griefs she knew destroyed his rest, who would have exchanged her smile for that of the voluptuary ? It seemed as if those eyes,—»thai face were then playing in the light of their own native sphere. She was yet only eighteen, and had not been presented to the world, it having been thought by her guardians more fit that her presentation should be delayed until her brother's return from the continent, when he might be her protector. it was now, therefore, resolved that the next drawing-room, which was fast approaching, should be the epoch of her entry into the "busy scene." Aubrey would rather have remained tn the mansion of his fathers, and
fed upon the melaucholy which overpowered him. He could not feel interest about the frivolities of lashionable strangerb, when his mind had been so torn by the events he had witnessed ; but he determined io sacrifice his own comfort to the protection of his sister. They soon arrived in town, and prepared for the next day, which had been announced as a drawing-room. The crowd was excessive-—a drawing-room had not been held for a long time, and all who were anxious to bask in the smile of royalty, hastened thither. Aubrey was there with his sisler. While he was standing in a corner by himself, heedless of ail around him, engaged in the remembrance thai the first time he had seen Lord Ruthven was in thai very place·—»hc fell himself suddenly seized by the arm, and a voice he recognized too well, sounded in his ear—»." Remember your oath." He had hardly courage io turn, fearful of seeing a spectre that would blast him, when he perceived, at a Mile distance, the same figure which Ъва attracted his notice on this spot upon
his first entry into society. He gazed till his limbs almost refusing to bear their weight, he was obliged to take the arm of a friend, and forcing a passage through the crowd, he threw himself into his carriage, and was driven home. He paced the room with hurried steps, and fixed his hands upon his head, as if he were afraid his thoughts were bursting from his brain. Lord. Ruthven again before him»—circumstances started up in dreadful array—the dagger—his oath.-— He roused himself, he couid not believe it possible—the dead rise again !—He thought his imagination had conjured up the image his mind was resting upon. It was impos¬ sible that it could be real—he determined, iherefore, to go again into society ; for though he attempted to ask concerning Lord Ruthven, the name hung upon his lips, and he could not succeed in gaining information, He w r ent a few nights after with his sister to the assembly of a near relation. Leaving her under the protection of a matron, he retired into a recess, and there gave himself up to liis
owti devouring thoughts. Perceiving, at last, that many were leaving, he roused himself, and' entering another room, found his sister sur¬ rounded by several, apparently in earnest conversation ; he attempted to pass and get mm her, when one, whom he requested to move, turned round, and revealed to him those features he most abhorred. He sprang forward, seized his sister's arm, and, with hurried step, forced her towards the street : at the door he found himself impeded by the crowd of servants who were waiting for their lords ; and while he was engaged in passing them, he again heard that voice whisper close to him— "Remember your oathi"·—He did not dare to turn, but, hurrying hig sister, soon reached home. Aubrey became almost distracted. If be¬ fore his mind had been absorbed by one sub¬ ject, how much more completely was it en¬ grossed, now thai the certainty of the mon¬ ster's living again pressed upon his thoughts. His sister's attentions wore now unheeded, and ii war! in vaisn that she intreated him to
explain to her what had caused his abrupt conduct. He only uttered a few words, and those terrified her. The more he thoughtý the more he was bewildered. His oath starded him;—was he then to allow this monster:to roam, bearing ruin upon his breath, amidst all he held dear, and not avert its progress 1 His very sister might have been touched by him. But even if he were to break his oath, and disclose his suspicions, who would believe him 1 He thought of employing his own hand to free the world from such a wretch ; but death, he remembered, had been already mocked. For days he remained in this state ; shut up in his room,he saw no one, and eat only wlien his sister came, who,with eyes streaming wiih tea^s, besought him, for her sake, to sup¬ port nature. At last, no longer capable of bearing stillness and solitude, he left his house, roamed from street to street, * anxious to fly that image which haunted him. His dress became neglected, and he wandered, as often exposed to the noon-day sun as to the mid¬ night damps. He was no longer to be
recognized; at first he returned with" the evening to the house ; but at last he iaid him down to rest wherever fatigue overtook him. His sister, anxious for his safety, employed people to follow him ; but they were soon dis¬ tanced by him who fied from a pursuer swifter than any—from thought. His con¬ duct, however, suddenly changed. Struck with the idea that he left by his absence the whole of his friends, wiih a fiend amongst them, of whose presence they were uncon¬ scious, he determined to enter again into society, and watch him closely, anxious to forewarn, in spite of his oath, all whom Lord Ruthven approached with intimacy. But when he entered into a room, his haggard and suspicious looks were so striking, his inward shuddering« so visible, that his sister was at last obliged to beg of him to abstain from seeking, for her sake, a society which affected him so strongly. When, however, remonstrance proved unavailing, the guar¬ dians thought proper to interpose, and, fearing that his mind was becoming alienated, they
thought ii high time to resume again that trust which had been before imposed upou them by Aubrey's parents. Desirous of saving him from the injuries and sufferings he had daily encountered in his wanderings, and of preventing him from exposing to the general eye those marks of what they considered folly, they engaged a physician to reside in the house, and take constant care of him. He hardly appeared to notice it, so completely was his mind ab¬ sorbed by one terrible subject. His inco¬ herence became at last so great, that he was confined to his chamber. There he would often lie for days, incapable of being roused. He had become emaciated, his eyes had attained a glassy lustre ;—the only sign of affection and recollection remaining displayed itself upon the entry of his sister ; then he would sometimes start, and, seizing her hands, with iooks that severely afflicted her, he would desire her not to touch him. " Oh, do not touch him—if your lovo for me is aught, do not go near himt" When, however, she
E
Inquired to whom he referred, his only answer was, "True! true! and again he sank into a state, whence not even she could ' rouse him. This lasted many months : gradually, however, as the year was passing, his inco¬ herences became less frequent, and his mind threw oif a portion of iis gloom, whilst his guardians observed, that several times in the day he would count upon his fingers a definite number, and then smile. The time had nearly elapsed, when, upon the last day of the year, one of his guardians entering his room, began to converse with his physician upon the melancholy circumstance of Aubrey's being in so awful a situation, when his sister was going next day to be 'married. -Instantly Aubrey's attention was attracted ; he asked anxiously to whom. Glad of this mark of returning intellect, of which tiiey feared he had been deprived, they inentioned'the name of the Earl of Marsden«' Thinking this was a young Earl ^whom he liad roet with -та society, Aubrey seemed |>1еаш1, and astonished ' them * etili mom by
his expressing his intention to be present ai the nuptials, and desiring to see his sister. They answered not, but in a few minutes his sister was with him. He was apparently again capable of being affected by the influence of her lovely smile ; for he pressed her to his breast, and kissed her cheek, wet witli tears, flowing at the thought of her brother's being once more alive to the feelings of affection. He began to speak with all his wonted warmth, and to congratulate her upon her marriage with a person so distin¬ guished for rank and every accomplishment ; when he suddenly perceived a locket upon her breast ; opening it, what was his surprise at .beholding the features of the monster who had so Ions; influenced his life, He seized the portrait in a paroxysm of rage, and trampled it under foot. Upon her asking him why he thus destroyed the resemblance of her future husband, he looked as if he did not understand her—-then seizing her hands* and gazing on her with a frantic expression of countenance, he bade tier swear that she would e2
? iover wed this monster, for he«—«But he could not advance-— it seemed as if that voice again Ьшае him remember his oath—he turned sud¬ denly round, thinking Lord Ruthven was Bear him but saw no one. In the meantime the guardians and physician, who had heard the whole, ñnd thought this was but a return of im disorder, entered, and forcing him from Miss Aubrey, desired her to leave him. He fell upon his knees to ihem, he implored, Iw begged of them to delay but for one day. They, attributing this to the insanity they imagined had taken possession of his mind, endeavoured to pacify him, and retired. Lord Ruthven had called the morning after the drawing-room, and had been refused with every one else. Wheu he heard of Aubrey's ill health, he readily understood himself io be the cause of it ; but when he learned that he was deemed insane, his exultation and plea¬ sure could hardly be concealed from those among whom he had gained this information, He hastened to the house of his former com¬ panion, and, by constant attendance, and the
pretence of great affection for the brother and interest in his fate, he gradually won the ear of Miss Aubrey. Who could resist his power î His tongue had dangers and toils to recount—could speak of himself as of an individual having no sympathy with any being on the crowded earth, save with her to whom he addressed himself ;—could tell how, since he knew her, his existence had begun to seem worthy of preservation, if it were merely that he might listen to her soothing accents;—in fine, he knew so well how to use the serpent's art, or such was the will of fate, that he gained her affections. The title ofthe elder branch falling at length to him, he obtained an important embassy, which served as an excuse for hastening the marriage, (in spite of her brother's deranged state,) which was to take place the very day before his de¬ parture for the continent. Aubrey, when he was left by the physician and his guardians, attempted to bribe the ser¬ vants, but in vain. He asked fbr pen and paper ; it wais given him ; he wrote a letter
to liis sister, conjuring her, as she valued her own happiness, her own honour, and the honour of those now in the grave, who once held her in their arms as their hope and the hope of their house, to delay but for a few hours that marriage, on which he denounced the most heavy curses. The servants pro- raised they would deliver ii ; but giving it to the physician, he though! it better not to harass any more the mind of Miss Aubrey by, what he considered, the ravings of a maniac. Night passed on without rest to the busy inmates of the house ; and Aubrey heard, with a horror that щау more easily be con¬ ceived tlian described, the notes of busy preparation. Morning came, and the sound of carriages broke upon his ear. Aubrey grew almost frantic. The curiosity of the servants at last overcame their vigilance, they gradually stole away, leaving him in the cus-. tody of an helpless old woman. He seized the opportunity, wiih one bound was out of the room, and in a moment found himself in, (Jie apartment where all werenearly assembled.
Lord Ruthven was the ñrst to perceive him : he immediately approached, and, taking his arm by force, hurried him from the room, speechless with rage. When on the staircase, Lord Ruthven whispered in his ear—"Re¬ member your oath, and know, if not my bride to day, your sister is dishonoured. Women are frail !" So saying, he pushed him towards his attendants, who, roused by the old woman, had come in search of him« Aubrey could no longer support himself; his rage not finding vent, had broken a blood-vessel, and he was conveyed to bed. This was not mentioned to his sister, who was not present when he entered, as the physician was afraid of agitating her. The marriage was solemn«» ized, and the bride and bridegroom ieft London. Aubrey's weakness increased ; the effusion of blood produced symptoms of the near ap¬ proach of death. He desired his sister's guardians might be called, and when the midnight how had struck, he related com-
posedly who t the reader has perused—he flied immediately after. The guardians hastened to protect Miss Aubrey ; but wiien they arrived, it was too late. Lord Ruthven had disappeared, and Aubrey's sister had glutted the thirst of a Vampyre |
EXTRACT OF A LETTER, CONTAINING AN ACCOUNT OP LORD BYRON'S RESIDENCE IN ТНБ ISLAND OF MITYLENE*
ACCOUNT
Oť LORD BYRON'S RESIDENCE, Sçc.
" The world was all hefore him, where to choose his place of rest, and Providence his guide." IN sailing through the Grecian Archipelago, on board one of his Majesty's vessels, in the year 1812, we put into the harbour of Mitylene, in the island of that name. The beauty of this place, and the certain supply of cattle and vegetables always to be had there, induce many British vessels to visit it-—both men of war and merchantmen ; and though it lies rather out of the track for ships bound to Smyrna, its bounties amply repay for the deviation of a voyage. We landed, as usual, at the bottom of the bay, and whilst the men were employed in watering, and the purser bargaining for cattle with the natives, the clergyman- and myself took a ramble to thç*
cave caĽed Homer's School, and other places, where we had been before. On the brow of Mount Ida (a smell monticule so named) we met with and engaged a young Greek as our guide, who told us he had come from Scio with an English lord, who left the island four days previous to our arrival in his felucca. r * He engaged me as a pilot," said the Greek, u and would have taken me with him ; but I did not choose to quit Mitylene, where í am likely io get married. He was an odd, but a very good man. The cottage over the hill, facing the river, belongs to him, and he has left an old man in charge of it : he gave Dominick, the wine-trader, six hundred ze¬ chines for it, (about 2501 English currency,) and has resided there about fourteen months, though not constantly; for he sails in his felucca very often to the different islands." This account excited our curiosity very much, and we lost no time in hastening to the house where our countryman had resided. We were kindly received by an old man, who conducted us over the manøion. It
consisted of four apartments on the ground- floor—an entrance hali, a drawing-room, a sitting parlour, and a bed-room, with a spacious closet annexed. They were all simply decorated : plain green-stained walls, marbie tables on either side, a large myrtle in the centre, and a small fountain beneath, which could be made to play through the branches by moving a spring fixed in the side of a small bronze Yenus in a leaning posture ; a large couch or sofa completed the furniture. In the hall stood half a dozen English cane chairs, and an empty book-case : there were no mirrors, nor a single painting. The bed¬ chamber had merely a large mattress spread on the floor, with two stuffed cotton quilt» and a pillow—-the common bed throughout Greece. In the sitting-room we observed a marble rco°sss, formerly, the old man toid us, filled with books and papers which were then in a large seaman's chest in the closet : it was open, but we did not think ourselves justified in examining the contents. On the tablet ofthe recess lay Voltaire's, ShakspeareX
Boüeau'e, and Rousseau's works, complete ; Volney's Ruins of Empires ; Zimmerman, in the German language ; Kiopstock's Messiah' ; Kotzebue's novels ; Schiller's play of the Rob¬ bers; Milton's Paradise Lost, an Italian edition, printed at Parma in 1810 ; se% ? eral small pamphlets from the Greek press at Constantinople, much torn, but no English book of any description. Most of these books were filled with marginal notes, written with a pencil, in Italian and Latin. The Messiah was literally scribbled all over, and marked with slips of paper, on which also were remarks. The old man said : " The lord had been reading these books the evening before ' he sailed, and forgot to place them with the others; but," said he, "there they must lie until Ms return ; for. he is so particular, that were I to move one thing without orders, he- would frown upon me for a week together ; lie is otherways very good. í once did him a service ; and I have the produce offhis farm for Üıe trouble of taking care df-'it, except
twenty zechines which I pay to an aged Ar* menian who resides in a small cottage in the wood, and whom the lord brought here from Adrianople ; I don't know for what reason." The appearance ofthe house externally was pleasing. The portico in front was fifty paces long and fourteen broad, and the fluted marble pillars with black plinths and fret-work cornices, (as it is now customary in Grecian architecture,) were considerably higher than the roof. The roof, surrounded by a light stone balustrade, was covered by a fine Turkey carpet, beneath an awning of strong coarse linen. Most of the house-tops are thus furnished, as upon them the Greeks pass their evenings in smoking, drinking light wines, such as " lachryma christi," eating fruit, and enjoying the evening breeze. Qn the left hand as we entered the house, a small streamlet glided away, grapes, oranges and limes were clustering together on its borders, and under the shade of two laroe myrtle bushes, a marble seat with an orna¬ mental wooden back was· placed, qu wliich
we were told, the lord passed many of his evenings and nights till twelve o'clock, read¬ ing, writing, and talking to himself. " I suppose," said the old man, " praying" for he was very devout, and always attended our chureh twice a. week, besides Sundays." The view from this seat was what may be termed " a bird's-eye view." A line of rich vineyards led the eye to Mount Calcia, covered with olive and myrtle trees in bloom, and on the summit of which an ancient Greek temple appeared in majestic decay. A small stream issuing frora the rains descended in broken cascades, until it was lost in the woods near the mountain's base. The sea smooth as glass, and an horizon unshadowed by a single cloud, terminates the view in front ; and a little on the left, through a vista of lofty chesnut and palm-trees, several small islands were distinctly observed, studding the light blue wave with spots of emerald green ,¬ ί seldom enjoyed a view more than I ■ did this; but our enquiries were fruitless as to¬ the name of the person Svho had resided'in
this romantic solitude : none knew his name but Dominick, his banker, who had gone to Cândia. ci The Armenian," said our con· ductor, " could tell, but I am sure he will not."-—" And cannot you tell, old friend Ψ said I—" If I can," said he, " I dare not." We had not time to visit the Armenian, but on our return to the town we learnt several particulars of the isolated lord. He had portioned eight young girls when he was last upon the island, and even danced with them at the nuptial feast. He gave a cow to one man, horses to others, and cotton and silk to the girls who live by weaving these articles. He also bought a new boat for a fisherman who had lost his own in a gale, and he often gave Greek Testaments tn the poor children. In'short, he appeared to us, from all we collected, to have been a very eccentric and benevolent character. One circumstance we learnt, which our old friend at the cottage thought proper not to disclose. He bad a most beautiful daughter, with whom the lord was often seen walking on the sea-shore, asid he
F
had bought her a piano-forte, and taught her himseli* ihe use of it. Such was the information with which we departed from the peaceful isle of Mitylene ; our imaginations all on the rack, guessing who this rambler in Greece eould be. He 'had money it was evident : he had philanthropy of disposition, and all those eccentricities which mark peculiar genius. Arrived at Palermo, afl our doubts were dispelled. Falling in company with Mr. Foster, the architect, a pupil of Wyatt's, who had been travelling in Egypt and G reece, " The individual," said he, " about whom you are so anxious, is Lord Byron ; I met him io my travels on the isbad of Tenedos, and ï also visited him at Mitylene.' 5 We had never then heard of his lordship's fame, as we had been some years from home ; hm "Childe Harolde" being put into our hands we recognized thc recluse of Calcia in every page. Deeply did we regret not having been more curious in our researches at the cottage, but we consoled ourselves with ibe lden of returning to Mitylene on some future day ;
but to me that day will never return. I make this statement, believing it not quite unin¬ teresting, and in justice io his lordship's good name, which has been grossly slandered. He has been described as of an unfeeling dis¬ position, averse to associating with human nature, or contributing in any way to sooth iis sorrows, or add to its pleasures. The fact is directly the reverse, as may be plainly gathered from these little anecdotes. All the finer feelings of the heart, so elegantly depicted in his lordship's poems, seem to have their seat in his bosom. Tenderness, sympathy, and charity appear to guide all his actions : and his courting the repose of solitude is an additional reason for marking him as a being on whose heart Religion hath set her seal, and over whose head Benevolence haih thrown her mantle. No man can read the preceding pleasing " traits" wiihout feeling proud ofhim as a countryman. Wiih respect to his loies or pleasures, I do not assume a right to give an opinion. Reports are ever to be received with caution, particularly when directed
against man's moral integrity ; and he who dares justify himself before that awful tribunal where all must appear, alone may censure the errors of a fellow-mortal. Lord Byron's character is worthy of his genius. To do good in secret, and shun the world's applause, is the -surest testimony of a virtuous heart and self- approving conscience.
TÏÎE ENØ.
Güler, lYìMm Crowu-courtji Fleet screen
