Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
A Suffolk tale: or, The perfidious guardian
(ll\P I. ' In inlure s I urest lorun, il augia se fan Αι ι Huons Inon Мир, ıs ılıı· uııj.4 blush Ol lııtıı ıs liti ıtmıs witli lorum« la b? jusi. Ih«, grkelul icir tint ,[reams t„r oUıer s vroısı, llr tlie mild maje.lv· of ıtrinle life. Where peate ·· Ilh eytr blooming olilecrossill Ule gale, when honour s liberat hand, «-ŕiuM Unenvied treasures, and (lic snowj. wings Ot innocence and love protect the »cene ' ' Disn.\'Díi) fiom an «intimt «inil noble Ianni) in tlie South of liame, the Marshal Duun, with an amiable and lovel) wile, quitted his nativi miniti ) vol ι. в
to settle in a southirn countj in Iir land, m that mediocrity of life, whith, imdir the dirci ting lnnd of Provi deuce, anbraıeı tomfort and tranquil liti, andvvlnihtl iiatrned tn be denn d to hım fıonı polıîıcal motlus lı id İve ilintinin d to risai« in a tountry «buh givt bnth tn tilt tıtlıs he rınounııd, to assume the moie humble one of Pf CjUBioob. Ihe monıtnç of life bid ılosııl aiound thnn, and tht tuning »«.nud to рам with cahn placidity Mr Dc < lai uliţe inheiited ι ¡tomi pattinai propti ty ti vilin h lu ititivul ι h udsome addition b) lu» marri .«ri» with the daughti i (t a vualthy ιηιΙ much «steein« d ι lcrßv man Their onlv offspring w η in adored and idol
t/cl son whom thev named \ltiisd. whole mmd tliey tally cultivated and although from vounger liti he нал des¬ tined to niove in a professional sphtre lie vv as edui xtcd m ev er\ branch of elegant and useful science, whcllier or not connected with tlie un medíate views ot his tender and indulgent p iren ts i-ond of literature, he promised to drink deep ot tlie Pierian spring, ind Alfied was -arly pronounced t v excel in classical and gineial kno». 'tilge All the earthly hopes of this t nd and muih ailnmed-couple centred ι this hvelv and pi vmisirrg yo-th pon whom they resolved Dbestow ilu whole of their attention and nhose r bication Mr De Claiidgc had deta r n β
mined to take chaige of himself, at leas: till he could duiover from his disposition nul iharactei the exact sta¬ tion hi shiiuld hiieiltei app«ar bist φι dilini ti fill lorepicsint Mr l)e( Urulgcımulı as abtei uv (haraçtır would no' be doinj«; sul'" "- nl (futni to hım, be was a gentil m in «í ji^rt it nıtıu d as well a» mental «juihtiiatione, and In» ixten sive attunmint» bv no unan» kssenul his gener d exicllinie as a husband nul л í ithe ι , on the tontr iry, lus acquire incuts all took ι usitul ami luppv tutu He iiiuleiul Ins talints seivinable both to himsilt aud to uthei», mil the refinement ol kiiowlidgc and undei Handing, wluth »beau and wa» aduni ut ш a httiaiy ajstinbly, equally nia
,1ı itul and enhghtined tin urile «л his domestic tiiilids Mis DcCliiuUt vvas a laik wlo possi std tontit ind stuing natu al pow« ıs with ι will ıııltıv Util mind S, e w ıs uhu ılık td ipti ! to tull 1 «.11 the smial duties ul a wik, and 1 1 bestow upon her lovily biv the it- tcntiins ot а motlier Mie lovtd lıtr Alimi with tht must in iti mal tendei nts» vet her iovi w s not weakness Slu Iul undi isLui,lui„ lo disunì Ins I mits nul ι, ungi ι ι tinik tinin, w lult slu taught lum to look up to his liţhu foi infoi uation nul intelligente 1 hus tai h íonit puent was rquallv tn- diaied to thur sweet duld, and h« knt vv not ι hu h of them to lov e best Allied (as tál as judgment could be n 4
loi mcd) hade fair to be a pioud oinu incut to th it socRlv Ins Ы lovttl patents «о einintntlv ti utd IK wisguitk, »flectionitt trutitul opn md gent- lousinhisdispositHit., uulht( istovtrctl grt it acuteness of puts, (¡uickneas of underst inrims and a cíp u. itv to leim, which ıs st Idom m initiated at so taily a penod of lift IU was not spoileri hy indulgence and his W( iknesscs ami лоцМи! İoıblcs wtrecoirutcH bj ma¬ ternal solicitud, and u.th tlit utmost tendt ι ness md itïcc tton 'Hm-, heipţnlv piA^eri ilw childhood of Alfud nn tunpest ind ,d ixatui upon ht> ( nív \outli u>bL-.t hul nip pod tlit ttíiritr itlossomi ot wtll lormed lıojKî ]|«<1щ1\ ai(utnulat(ri inform¬ ation яи<4 кпо\у1и1щ, irom tin paternal
«· it calion whith Iıe ıeceıved Uls ınınd also was с ni« tırtıl iu a train of Ätudv bintcd to one wliosi pursuits wen mint duetted to a btu irv line, and tin undu stinding of tht p eut bid 1 ш" bı .run to cast a lustre on the faie ol Ins pionusing son when it was de ttniuued to plait Alfred at the mıh tarv aıadıınv Suninin Hill, Dublin, umici tlie tıııtııe nul w itihliil tare nt thi burlili ııspectııl piiieptoi ot that Uicfiil uni in, tun liv« Minuun who vias ibo tht intimati aiqni nil mee ot Ins fıtlıı r Ли ııı ingénient ol s« pltasinsr a na turiptomisid thi m ist happy tesnit, wlien Allred in consequence prepaitd to li ive the pıtın al roof w hti с he had spiai ts tinaur uuni tn ι upted daj sof hap- 1.4
pmess, toi tint ot Ins tathırs fuend Hi w ıs now tuultiin veirs otağı anıl althoinrh he İnil lift lus li, ни» fui the habitation ot tıtuvıUlııp it vvas not vv ithout the most seven ıııd I m iy add lici't icndin„ fıılın„s fhe seminan to which Mr DeCla- ritlgc was on the point ot conducting Ins son muld not propuh be termed a school though it had everv advan¬ tage that an expensive , t iblishmcnt could affoul it lnd one l'so whuh all expensive est lhlislun, nts do not iflnul 1 | implor who km w h ivi to hli n, I sotun ss md iiidiil„(iiii w ith the ste a dv jııd„'iıınt tint pûmes without l)lightm„ tin «Militi tnt blossoms ol Minili — lie lnd ilwivs hithi rto pui fluid 1ns studit» undu the causses ot
lus preceptoi, and he duply ft' t tht change w huh was about to Uki plait lit als а pen lived that the resign ition of his .,1111 ,Uc molbu t udd not »huld her bosom rioni the pang» of »ipara- Uon Miemuniiuiid noi nul whin shi wept, snidili thiough her tiais, to conciai it possible, tin throbbi.igs ot bei uixious luut Slit q.piaud t,ia- tiliul it tin situiti n wl i, h vv is pin vidul hr hu \ lul ııı tlıı t nııılv un du tlu t ııe ol hu tını ds, ıııd lınally »iincuili uti hun to titt puiseeution oi hb new stııdns with all the fortitude slu could summon to bei ulut forthe tiuq.oiaiy ibstnu ot lum in whom her tt ndt ust afliitions were tentied Mı Dt t lantlgı auompanied hts s jii to Dublin, nul ptisonallv delivered ι а
hım to llie can of hu friend, whom he entreated, in the tenderevt manner, to interest InnisiK m the welfare anıl happinels of his son , and having set¬ tled some othir engageinenls m town he took an aderti nate though distiess- ing len, с oi Alficd, aml retuimd to the fond bosom of hn beloved wife
CHAP II -------' Hiena s smiles lie wears, «tuj in his lieart nu trice of candour > found ' At the military academy tvery branch of »iunie «md polite literature waav taught, and the t»tabh»liuitnt obtained this tule fıonı tin nunabci ot you«)«»; •tenth inen »ho lud bitu bduiattel tilere «ıs oline, s, and w Ilo, by then actions, proved tt>ei.i»dve» роаяе&гюг* of distinguished nient iu Uu Majesty» militnv semce Altred »êxul became the fatounte of hi» kind tutor, he pursued bis stud Ш with elehght, and by Ins acquiretuitrits gate eaily pnwts ot nu авеотши» at* dò
taehment ţo military science He formetl a friendship oa his part sinceri, witli a fellow studmt named W iuiam OCoxxoii, and through this became a victim to the v dist perfid) He had pursued his studies for »wo jears at this seminary, anil begin to unite funiness of charaiter ind n ible ness of mmd to mildness and gentle ness of disposition He was knovv n to «sympathize in every species of sufleiing and 1 is heart bled when he could not wipe iw a) the tear from the cneek of Miser> 1 It was naturally warm but not pass onate, and tlic flame suddenly kindled, hav ing nothing to nourish it as quit kl) expired Such was not W ilham Less im table titta Allied, he coutd look with a
morc senne tve u|>on unpleasant events, antl lit had a well adapted and superior power ot suppressing his. emo¬ tions upon all occasions, tunul in ap¬ pearance, he coultl lie viewed as re¬ served and retiring, dissimulation hung upon his smiles, and every day prov ed that he had an artful method, not only of obtaining conhdentc, but ot gaining possession ot the heart Conscious of his own integriti, and tin purity ot his motives, Alfred sus¬ pinul not those of hi» friend, and he itintiattid an intimacy, whichmaturid into a peimancnt and lasting tiiiud- ship William was destined to exert his labours and talents in the field ot ¡J- lulapius, and had made gicat progrtsi
hitheeduction wlmli led to that «ns· Ail and reputable hram h of science Friendship in oneof the sweetest bles»- rags of human life and few there are who have not felt soniitlnng ot its b«. ■ngn iniliiemr-e At seminaries of thn description connexions and rrtcntb>hipi are fretpn'iitly lormril ot the m Λ im¬ portant nature, antl engender in them vonwipuMine, vvhu h atleet m manj m- stimin-s the progress through lite c tlie Toothful possessore Alfini aml William continued their intimacy during their rtsideme at the academy, and wne never known, ow ing to thi gem rous openniss and mildne» 1 ,, of Alfred β disposition, tn h ive tlie slightest disagreement with each «ther
Altred, vs hose mimi, fron tlie foater· mg carı of lui parent had early im¬ bibed the first principles of irtucation, now made nipid prognss m his studwa; and tht reports madt by his tutor of his ucqutn aïeuls, and the turn of lttt disposition tor intilitarv hti, eletermin- ed llr DeClariilirc te. hi upon that protbssion tor htm lhc jienod at hmi'tli in iTed when his t itlicr resolved to withdraw bun from further studlea, his lust wis) hniibr that otgivinir to Alfred in opportunity of eratheritig laureie in the held of Mars, while lid had (intheorv) applied b s jouthtul studies tn порше a knowkdge of tie art bv whi« h tli« v vwie to be paiaed Satisied with tlic puns and attention Bestowed by his fntml, and which
were ι leai lv ext n| hh, tl m the genetal appearance nt Alfred Μι DtCliritlge liad o lv to otter ttie gnat remunera¬ tion for ill taiiiily Imulili grititude for the iniprtivttl st itt antl satt return to lus aims ol tin oljt 1 1 of his blight est hopes Altiul pmetrated Ins fathers feil ings, and with diihtulty lestrained hn ovvn be tt It mon than he could ex¬ presi antl with ip| irt.it inquisii took an affutionitt Ituvt ot his good pre- leptor lie had yet anothu struggle toundergt hi Inveii his tiiuid W ilhanı, the tarly tonipainon ot his juvmile sports, the shirt ι ot I is pltasuics, and thepartnirot Ins litui t II t knot which united thtm lnd ' tin too firmly drawn to bt t.ibily distiitanj-ltd, and the task
nf i> ılın«; tuim Milham ippMrrd ibe mist sm ι that hid been all itici to Alfud lic tl, w fo seek hmi tmmi_Ţst Ins « nnipaiiinns thev met, but w hin he ion meilied tin. inf rmation nf tin si ¡ni ıtıoıı th«>t vus on the cieot likn ^ plate, his anguish could only be equal¬ led by his eiinest entieaties not to be foigotten by William, to whom he pıomısed the most sineen and lasting fuendship William insueicd ill the solicitations and eutrtatics ot ms tm nil with muked comp ısım mil ilthoiiirh the heitt ot Altiul w ıs o ııUrıtlj tull ot sonow it tin uni ml ul loi itmoval Il om tht se, uı ol lı s liappii st d y s, ami tht LiiiiscijuLiit scpaiatioii troni the paitner ot bis pi, isiucs vit Milium « as onlj known to İRivt a s lıtaıy
ч>,1| w lu и lu I, idi lm uni ι bit tompa ııı ıı ıııd Ιιιιη,Ι iaitvvtll Μι Dt LI inildi madt iinniuliatt pıt, natiiins loi thuı ılı pallini, llıcy stt ι ut it ııı t ul} houi the ntxt tuotu ııijî, anıl ı ıı tlıı iveinng of the follow¬ ing day Alfud found hunsilt once moie at the happj lesulenit of Ins be¬ loved fathei, anil pressed to the bosom tat his toiul aud tuiaptuieit mother Tht fııeıııl» ot Mı De İl ıııdsrc wtie (Uilj seen paying their uiniri itul ıtıoııs »nd vıeluınııııg to tluu soniti the young and admired Aliiul, ind all ap peaied eagei in then taiesses, and an\i Ous to νιο with eitb otliti in attio- Uons to tin« early misare ut lu» Ы dici s βλίχΙΙιιιιι
nur ш ' Vr, 1 vvl.il s Ir eiidsli p bul ■ iun ι, Λ cluni lli«t I ills η sleep A shade tl 41 follows wealth or ramt, Aort «save» the wretch to wepp I «' And love is snll an emptier souoil. The modern tur o ıe jest, On e«rlh u ι «in ur oi ly I mi To warm lhe turtle s nest Soon iftcr Alfred s di pirtuie from the academy, W.U. ıın vvaâ t unni vuth* ciently advanced m lits «.luth&i to. ontci upon a prottssioii, tlio attainment of which alone compi ised his tuture hopes and prospetta m lite His f muly wi ι с by no me uu vv eal thy, and luv ing 'tini ihtidan ti pi о vidt tor, tiio)
(«insidimi a pi .lusioil ι η,ιιιρι tent pioiisiontoisi.ilihslihnninht, Milli tlus, ,!, ,s he wis pl ino villi a munti) suigion I,, , lu, ,t, ,1 | , t. 1. ■it tin expiijtion ol wh Ιι Ικ w ıı ialini) to walk tin hospitals, and to attend the lettine» of those eminent prolessois, vvho finish «mil quality lhe youthful »nigcon toi tutuic pi utm William pisstd this tun, in ,11 the idle follits ol tin mitiopolis, evci aiiMoiis to tiuut tin Iavoui ol thosu acquaintances, who hul it m thuı power, fıonı the icsptitibihtv ol thur iamily connexion and Innu,., to b'- »tow kindnesses upon bun, ami who appeal td hKtly to be scaviti ible m torwauiing Ins plans of Cit-bb-Jiiiniit.
He titqot-iitly corresponded with Altitd toncuvuig it of gieat colise quince, as will as cert t n idvaiitagi, to sttuit ι continuance ot his good opinion intendili,; to profit ultimat, ly bv his promisul friendship mil strvues Inali lus letteis heiontrivtd, ıs usual by ihbsunul ıtıoıı and artilut to ι is tt tht attenti, η ıııd iffettion oí the un* sııspıı ίιημ Aliud vv hose unespond tint m uplv, i\liihittd the wauntli ot his finn uu! sünire atUihnuut, bunding t unind tiu li vouthtul tinnii slup nul uni νιιημ;, on lus pait ılıt most ι ıııııst ι\| iıssı insol ııiMCtv I » tht vvtllait and h ippints» .1 Hilluin tilt Iti uní «host similis ivas iinilv tlosul fm it tnilv runami <· tu ilioosi а ны, linn whin lu ionii! |U tısı u illin 1 ν thi j ιυΐη ι I ' s j ι Ιι ι
I« the course ot his introduction-, Iw fnrrml ai. mtinmcy with ι yo»«R Udy—Kli/a G.antJmni, tİR' dansım r ot .»wealthy antl respectable taimer, who uas visiting a relative m London She \*asyoung and bcuuUtul and trul) sus¬ ceptible ot those tender impressions which the «k-iicmng William could at all tim« make upon in unsuspect¬ ing and ïnnofcnt nıınıl, and bmiïç the only child ot <ui uinnarncil parent, no exppnseor puns w cır spartii to ι din ite her titoligli an ıll-e«ritimıfc ohVpinM, while lew accomplishments *crt pt ι < ť ptıble citlier in her mııımn» oı ip¬ pt ıram с She Inti assurances ot ın- luntinií ber íitliris pioppit\ at hit- det case ind a hındsomt poitiou at hnr nwmţ^, whicli \\δη suthcieiit to цни
the ımmedı ttc attention of William and with a vitw ot obtaining her hand antl firtune be re ,aiied to the neighbour hoodwhu bei tither resided, ind be nig satisfied on impurs , that the old gentleman possessed an amph share ot what is termed the good things of this world ht soon cumulimi «m object sneh a» tins worthv of the greatest j ain» , and the more casils to obtain wlnt hi now set his heart upon he I m d a risiili ni e in tht ad| it ent vill ige, and coniniuiieel tlie piaetau of his μ lllssion Hi/ 1 sborth aftir retutnul from ι iwn ıııd betamı inxious to sci lum , nd Ihough hır acquaintance had been hut she alreadv felt the powerful 'Hiits of hi» ittractmg manner» sht
silind to behold tin objut tint li ul tust taught hei to feil tl intuitive passion of love, and to ılışıl ısı а ыт «, w Iııılı pi udirne riuuiiidliti t ) tonnai, ) ct lahoin mg to w ithliuld tlıı imoti ni» ol hu nıınıl Sin İmi d hini, loi lı« had gauııd tlıı umpleţi possıssıou ot hır iıcart An opportuni tv soon aftır oıuıııı I, м huh ¿aie lui tilt pliisuie sn ııı Molisi) w ishul tor Ilıt sı ısım luv tıı,; toııuncnıul vılım gant) ınusth pnv ads manv tlavs hid not 1 1 [sid biiore 1 h/a miniti a taid t f η ι it ι tjon to tin house oi m intimati tunni whue slu inulti sto id sht should nix ι * tbt ntw Dottt ι, who lid by tins tuni ingratiatid hi.nstif u h tlu In t in of nun) oi tin In pita'alt villigei·
aud putinii uly thost who wen most likt Iv bv tlitu count violis to ι stabhsh lum thirc lhe div it length ııı ived when 1 1 zi irosi tiom her pillow in ill tlie doubtful susp, ns( ot an enamoured fen-ali she tilt ill tlu pams w hull al tei natt ho|i(ä ind fears pr idute, con- timnllv rising w itlim hci breast St¬ rnutý vanished ind in its plaie suc «cedi d conţii tuit s wishes doubts, tms and all Tl с cl arm ι g ig n es of lov e wlioie ширим dtl ght In thi cv ening she buit her tiembling steps tou ards the plate of festivity, determinili in the event ot not finding William there to mike know n, piev mus to his irrival the partit ulars of hu HU 1
acqu n ılım. with Inni I lu un is¬ sai ν ¡π, 1 nun η ν being iccoinplislu d, tlU Ull' il 11.1, ss sllipilsid 1|U llll »I, thm ' tin I)., to, all., tud to he vhcn Iit «nti mi imi jitumu! 1 h-a (w hose sili nei lusi bı spokı tin kıl ings slu lonlilsi ıııılı tonu d) (.ood Huvens' lu cx lunini ıs it 1 h/a How uiiexprttid i pli ısın, 'illuminili have dici nt ot tht lıappıntss 1 now expcriiiu, in nutting so yod uni diu ι gul I s,,,,, „lv nmg, Hulit, vou ou ν, η , Hinn into Suf),, Ik Hls woids win „tuml ,„ , suun whuh t ui Jit Im to unu ludi tjıııı was thit m< iiiiie· in tlu in »hi hail so toiidk ho[.id and wuh in unli.ii inssin, in tudi nt οι tills ,uasion, and pu ubai t lui Icthııgs, she suiqilv tuanku!
hun m riturn and suu en lv wished Inni long and happv residi neţ in tlie ικ ighboiirhood Ли ei i nmg passed ivtumelv pleisint and proviti fivour alili to ttie wislus ot both parties for previous to their departuie I h/a hail tiie ga itifii ation of hi armg William duini lus tender ie„urd and honour abli intuitions towaids her, while he appi are 1 no Ins pleisul to find hi wat m fussession if the (onfidincc and ifleition of this inn lient gnl and still mou so is »he had no objection to hit mime «hatch ipplvtng to her fither upon ihe suh|ei t With this encouragement Ins first object was to wait upon her parent, md endeavour to obtain his approba¬ tion С outrions th it to »eenre tint,
cv erv tiniig dependi il upon the im tpretmon lus first appearance and oflei shouiil wear, hc proi nuleil to «KUl the mutual rcgartl antl affection that »ub «nted between them, tin great proba bilitj, niy ccrtaint), of his having a lucrative and extensive praitiic, and the getvotal regard in w IikJi he was held m thcniighbouihood lo tins hc add »d the poseis-Mon ot a small annuit) tliough tins J«itt«r vvas only pnti me and condudid by hoping th it lus ι on -duit tl Hough lift, and tin love hi bon »Ws iliuglitu, would »it urc Iur h ıppı ж ss md compi tun ι , it not Kplıuıluur Suipnsed atso unexpected a visit and tin pripibal madt to luin, tile «111 (gentleman hita tatu I ni Ins reply, he luti luiard of tin Uoctoi ь ıtsıdeaııı
aiul intention ot est ilihshing huns, İt ııı tin vill iľt ıııd umitimi lus olt, ι a disťituisltd antl honourable ont lit loved his daughtei, yet taking intu consideration her illegitimate birth and other circuirstances, he concluded the proposal to be w 01 thv his acceptance. and finally agreed to bestow α lus·« pírt ot lus piO|«erty on 1- h/ı as a m I'¬ ll ige poi tion, and to sniuo tilt rt- niaindtr to htr at his dttii»t This being all tht cratty \\ ilium sought 1 1 obtain, m in j weio tire thanks ht η turned for the kind reception lit had experienced, and tlie conhilcnce ьо ge nerously placed in him, and taking leave, he returner! to his home, to contemplate on lut» future proceedings £hr.a was not piesent during thu t 1
llll, IV ιι ν, hiving uliu, I to ι lllli.lt bolli, lig lllUld s t„ IVOI I tb· .llMglll able diu b of iiiiiisd, uh ,1, she ,.p pitliendcel ν ouai at in»t bt given to W ilham, bu wluth Ins specious ail- dri ss and depth „ť ai ti fice had carefully preventtd On her return she received the happv intelligente from her fonu father, who presented hci with tin following Lettei finm M un vu I Ι Al Ul 11Ι7Λ, " \» I hail not the plea me ot seem«, uu aflu ııly ılıttı t ııu with vour kind uni alle, „oliale tatlın il wilv um uı. tın nit totakt tin Inst . ppoıtıınılv tn issiiu vou that 1 teil It impo, »ıblt lol nu to ılı sn ıbt my lui
I |ll Ilv it ilo,, I ,1 w I ıbt ιι t' )uu lıovv gratetul I untomul ni lulg ı t I itlin, t n Insappiobition , t mv ıth tion torvou II ι otiti ι I π v luim , will tkııfoıı pluti mv imusi toi tin mu hutut v of th ι pi,'!· ' ll vv .1 il> httle η, < timi ml nn im d< η 11 ι tint 1 Invi obtint 1 th um,» nt il İki tıtlıu to numi h ι hini I ni in un igt «.nil m. v 1 1 m ι lu ι pin ι ıs, til lonıplı in», tiusting Ihn ιι ι η 'ν thv »dl Iu nunul Itu it N. .,1 i n.l ınv »h an >t 1 lui, ho» tııı.l, .lv I Imi un ind thit tht u înmiii ι I inv du sh 11 ht dimmi tn pillinoti thi hi ι miss ind pl, ısınış ul ni) „mis lit, t u ,h s Ulu u mv t 4
buoni! „nľ 1 slnll unlu κι tin flist < I poi nunti ot siung vou whuh mv piolessional duties will admit ot, till then believe nie, wlut I ehall ever Ы, ' ι oui affectionate " W illi vsi ' The rn upt of tlus cpistl,, though unlookul ior, give Lh/i tin most in ixpressibli joy »lit was impitient lo convinte \\ dilani of In r willingness to rciuvehmi at the hallow ul allai ol Hvinen but she tould nol dist ovi ι the η ison ot lus w ıslımı, hu to nune so ι ııly t d 'ν t η η ,ι ting luni lh( u -b, vould nıtıu ilk hm to make nam pep ι itn lis fisi smous a tilangi ıııd ti ι nui ııı iti tlie tu luinstinit Ό lnr li un, Ν md ριιν ılıt
an accusation of having taken them by surprise She actoidtngly repliée! to his letter as follow To Л\ u liv u " IİEAIU.ST WIIXIAM ' Notlimg coulel give me mort inexpressible ehhglrt, thin tin receipt of v ( ur affectionate fav oui vv hu h per Ice tly rilnved me troni ι si ite i f tilt most dreaehul »uspi use -niel -«tisficd mt as to tin ause e f v ur absence " liad I not tbt g e est rebanee nn yo ir aflu titu inel honour 1 eould mier ln induced to change my present most h q pv situation Indeed the rew su nes ol lifi 1 ini about to enter upon, and the dutu» I Int I am so ill quah- Ί d to dise! ugi 1 a( uioileetp-e matet
mt sui us ιιι I unhai p) ľuliaps I tın w ron,; to lo, к upon the most gloom) si,I, ot th, pu luu but 1 cannot av old U tlu ictnimtnt and perfett ıı;nonııce of tht toi in» and customs of tilt world I hav, bten brought up m, have ırıven mt a distaste fm thtm this, I am fear lu! w ill disgust you I sometimes think our pic isurcs aie not congenial, at least if I nuv judjţt bj your most esteemed friends, thtir manner of living is by no means sudi as I could like or ap prove, yet I respctt them яч being your choice Hit cultivation of my mmd will form my hijjitbt ,l,h„ht and the etudy of it to make у ι u li ıppy , and this (an inly hipptn liom our puısuıts bung th sum 1 will not howtvti writt mor, on in ь suhjtıt
vu shıll havı tiiqu ut ι pportımıtıı s ot uınvelsıng u 111 It ιηι e 111 I till amoincnt thmk t mu lm, vnu t tin Ilt me mal «Ital so Instili ıs v„u r< quii« vv luie vu uut lu tou, u ısınış luk mv tluu nil li pn nt llu tunul ubtliss will In s'u it t u usuiti «bat 1 havt dieadv lonsui ulto usigli toi vuil sıkı ( ııı vou tliiii uqtiist ant utlu ι punt ot n v h ,h припои aud sııııuı dit ıtıoıı Ιι ι vou 1 vuv tiun, tilit ıs tuule ıs e ont um el η Ull lllUsUlt tv buoni voui wilt uni I hivi unly tO sllllSUlbe IllVSllt Diiust At ilium, \iuit evei aítec'toiiatc 1 1 17 1
W ilham w as bv no means pleased on the nu ipt of this Utter, he »as in,pat,nil fin manv íeasons, to effnt an nnnitdi iti union with this innotent and unsuspecting fun ik,* hose iortune lit nail) rigarti» d пине thin h»r p»r- sun , lit iouiiil l.oiuiu that In shouiil wait a nisonthlc ptnod, anti t ntlca- v ouiul to ilo so, vi ıth ι, mudi sinning *onipo urt ι, » iun si inns admitted of Ilii) wert stldom ι thv absint from calli otltii »luting tin ρκ,ιιιΐηιΐ ılıtın I, «nul »vuv nu rs» u ν pripa ution bung iiadv tiu 1 ni, »islii«'- lor iL) it ltngtl ι nud, »hui tht и nuptials wen snlimni/iil in tl ι pii- srnee ni sivuili! thuı inuitts wli f,.· highly.', hid t mnou t' t atit ii(atul ılı. b ıı U t | 1 « 1
ha| p.mss foi this ntw ma.nul pair, and nom muu truly so that, the ve¬ nu ıblı punit ot lh/ 1, t ι whose duelling this ah itpaiicd toulebritc tin |ovous diy W ıllı un soou afttr lindt known tn Altiul the puntului ol lus reicr,t nııııı igt, aud tht settled »itu ıtıoıı le¬ iliini to hım bv hn new connexion, aud u ι, uingiatul itul ılı uturn on lux ut шиш ut ot domcstn bliss and ас u ssion to indi pimime ι no. dui li- tud tul toixpiiss lus anxiety loi the innal it that junod, whuh would pennit Ins visiting thtm, and piying his | u sonai lisputs to 1 lua ' Ihı Doitor now began to con sultr lnnistll ul sutlu itnt u n upit nu to attempt au inliriourse with lu» -u
.»M peri ıs m thi munti lie ι muted lhe souCv of thi w« Ithv mil uputiblt ilnnttrs imund lnm but to no pul¬ pos« for m guieiillhiv viiwul bun with ι suspii mus «vt mil uinsidtud him mori in adventuur thm tin nun «f red pnnupli or inuit mil stu¬ diously iv onk d lum in umscqui in с Hi found howiMi iifhcient -,κιιΐι by mixing with thi gav mil volinle ihiriitirsoltlu villag« mil to unit м thin ixiiiq I. In lonmiuiud in ι «« pensıv indi Mr iv ıgant ist iblisimi nt andin tigixtiiintk | util! to Ins bottk and tin sj oits 1 1 tlıı fıı'ıl he ..btiintd tin j l' tt. η ol m hospitihli md sou 1 1 n.n pnnon \it thest wu, η ι proots ι I ord « stun iti .ıı noi uiulfl hi bt «tintimi as m ittuitivi indi nd
husband, or an opin and dismtiiestiil frullìi but w ıs gemi illv lound to be di hi nut in thos. istimaldi quihlua- tınns vvluılı tanalont uniin ıhı dia- ia« ti r amiabil, and connu ml tlıı 1 ist¬ iug iisputoí tht good, tin virtuous, and ugular numbers ot »otiety Wi slnll lluritore have lnm thus settled, ud utuin to Alfred
СНЛР IV. " There и, no rourJgL b it in innocence, .No tonslancy but n an h «u i tduie A rítacmmfst ol x\y&K pill int regiment, " The Prmre of λ^ ales s Irish ' were íjuaittrul m tin nerghUittihnoclnt Al- fr* il s result net ami iiom the niti\< and just 1) t·» tu. ii4(l.ul hin ıblt dm u tti of tht nuli t it ig ıblt soldur and lino, v b» ι tistd ind still retinis tilt tom maiidot thatdistiiij-iiislud cdips itu ıs de tu m ııu d to plut Viticci \n\iU\ bis immediate protection ,ι commission was itcoidm^K solicited and obtained ш this uginiuit, and the \< uttitnl Aliud so η a[ pciicd upon tlu ¡Miadı. ss in ottucr
\cvcr did huilun ifìhdiin morc ilieply petviei pu, utal iiixiity than on h s dep u tui e fumi the ab ılı ot lus loved parents, he tenderly embraced them, and havmg received their fer¬ vent blessings, departed from the agonizing scene, leaving them to in¬ voke Heaven to watch ove. and pro tcct lum A short residence with the regiment soon conv me td thi ( lone I tint he hael a zealous th )ugh vouthtul subii tem under his command and the otli ıcrs m geuci il admiii.il Allied and consideied bun a most euditabli ind happy acquisition to their sotitt> and to the ie,iment Detachments win »hot-tit after oul, i, d out to ι ecru t the »tirngm ot the loips, winch hud sul
tlllll I «_U.lt lllllllllllt« ıı ılıı li' tili rnnpu IIS,,., till inlltll I lit lllll Mi ul wns iippniutul 111 ill ntn llHl 1,1.1 liilnnd on tins duty Vnui il t, lm armod nt his post, tho icarımı nt rt- cetvtd ottlus to cmhuk toi tin Mist Indies, anı'· In, w ithatew otherollit er», remained bı hind to compi» be the mips, antl to Wltll. ss linrxpntltl sums 1 1 ıhsordcı «mil u billion in thin nilivt. milimi The lmtortuniti- ılıştın b nues ni I79S lud u uum m ι d md ılınalım I toil, stinv tluixistiiig tutki nl g«. veiimiint lu ısını lıııkı d undd ı 1 - mostııtıv nul anıl lı, Inul h, 1>ш to exhibit a dit uittil pırtım ot nimby and contusiti!] Ιικ In qui lit lıı ııı li .ng and u u i'« ııı li пц il tmoj s I -
ι une nu iss uv in dl ibitiUiiis md tlıı to» n lu w hull Uticd was sti- tum» tl, w is lisul upon ut tlu heul t|uaitiis ol un 1 nghsh Hjniihle legi- mint Skirmishes wert daily taking phce bt tween the Kings troops and the rebels, the latter hav ing in some counties assumed a formidable appear¬ and llittlts iteivv uds ensued and on all onasioiis tin biave tinops and Inval sub|iits oi llisMijist) piovili^ viitoiious tin fluni, ot nvil discoid at length appi ned on tin ivi it iv imi. t uni in in mv ılıştın ts Utuni sı ııııl) rıguttıd the ılıpaı- Uııı nl his rıgınıcnt, and that the du> tııs bı » ıstııif loud upon, ıhıl not nu¬ lu ut riluse oi thi liiltl hi was, ιιυ&> t ıth, talliini«, ut tivi aud iudit.4tig«tblc
m pi i.curuiiţ reeiuits, mil soon ппи- tprfxl a liamlvoini nililition ι I s iliher. (o adel to tlie atiengtli of h-s ιι ι ps Λ ctrcumetance ahortly aftti ortunerl, which ¡rave lum an opportuint) ofehs- play.ng hia cou rapse m the cause? of lua Sovereign—Having roccivoeloielcts to proceed with lus dttailiiiieut to tlie pince ot embai kation I u tbe rej,iiniiit, he lost no tune in obeying tbt mane! ttc, »nd set out with lus party lor Dublin On lita inarch lie was nut bv the light ermip inv ot the leni .bit regiment alludili to, who had luen untx|ice todly surprised аш| attacked at an nut post by the rebels, and were ret.eating fiora them The offiter whoeo.ninaiuleil be mg ameielv wounded, Altrui could •ot ior t moiaeut resist the impulse o'
!TUF pruni nevus eatAalUAU 4j martial ardour, which gloved i|i hn- Ioy al breast, nor tlie duty he owed to that Sovereign by w hoia be was com¬ missioned, and whose power lie beheld attacked he instantly flew to the peut nf honour, rallied the disheartened sol¬ diers around him, eecourajţed tbem to recommence the fight, pledging him »elf to lead them on to victory The »pat It of enthusiasm, now kindling to thur view, <oon animated and awakened tvhcjr courage thev «obeyed the orders ot their heroic leader, aud attacked tht rtliel» in a manner which did gicat credit to tht military skill of Altre««, u ho pursued, disptrsed, and totally dtleate.d thcni, then led tlie party batik to tlie regi¬ ment, crowned with laurels, that had
neirh been eni tebe d trom them inå amidst the phuHrM of the solthcis m ho \ic\A"cd him as tht protector ami rcitorcr oi tit it fame and honour which wis on the pomt of hem.» t arm thcrt Alfred recened as the reuaid mie f» îm \ al ou r, the commini! of the rom jvm\ he had so gilhnth It<l mt» action and \\лч promoted to tlie r nk of л í ι p tain in tint leçımont His filial dut\ now promp trd hım to rom mn n iot t this ťhin^e to hb parent*, ind rclitncs vho л\сге <1ЛС1- rnj td it tlu mt n torums condi« t ml good fortunt of tht ir Mhed nor rould he resist th< pltHSuK ofmikinsfkiinmi to his fntnd λ\ illnm the entire parti cular« uhn ш rei 1) highh ilatttied
ıııd loııuiHUılul İm bıavırv, as»uııd bun ni lus pulul itinIııuı aud tlie •aiixiitv lıı ttlt to »u. bim 111 bnglaud 1 lom tlıı vigciouii iuti pionipt inca sun» adoptul bv tbi govtruinint. u luqudhty via, at lmgth iistoml to this tb-tiaitcd anıl uuliappv countiv tbc dt ludul and di,iuavul ııbıls ie tUl lllll to Itpillk Hill dutlt.ll iľl.,1 of dligi ııııı Хо a v irtiiiiiu -M ix vnui, tlie ι xainpif ol (iı ıgı iu whuh he lives who t txiiiipluv uliului t ıs «ι model foi ill king, and bv who ι godhki iluutiuv a (uiiMivins wis t hosm, mtl unpiivitiitl to extend vinti v, antl I utstoii to thuı t mullís inddtscrtcd hiiiut s, tliuiisiuds ot tbosi iiustul nid puutuit subj, it¬ lin iigimint to »huh U'ittl now
Iwlonged, being abo nrrieh rcduceil tu numbers parties were «selected anıl sent to ľngland to recruit its stiength, lír was imongst the numliei of «flit d» chosen for this service, and rcuuved orders to holil himself in rcitlmess in cordmgly Several stations were »e lected and he obtained permission fiom his commanding ofluer to pro cetd to a military post in the imme diat» neighboui hood of his tnend William
j < II \P v ----- ■ 1 кНшгп IİUIII- 411 uli I 11,,, la.illv ılı, ..m ii π ι, -k, t«·.-, i \\ill,»hll i„|4,io„<f„ri» u İH-ıl, n.ybic.«. \,,,„„m,.l, .pn.h |,r,|,a,at,om for İ1I..1. putui. . ..11(1 11 ниц »utrui t.) lus (in. lit, on th« ,iili|i.t, stating the IlltllK .il 111·, (МИШИ, 'tul the lii|i|>> innspilt, it (inin ι, ul, s. Г uut t"l aiul , ми iimcliiil-oniliin ] li numidi ıtoly ...Idr.,,, d Willum ııı ıkın -ţ kno« и lus t ıııv il, л. „inni; linn hi, ,t ı\ wouldnot I t,, ,u linn \,i , ,lioitl\ lkinsrnudi i lltMIII.I In u.i, лимон, to iţet scttkil in lu, mu ι,ιι irtir, ıs soon as possililc,
«¡Ilı :.m i.ilU ЧЧ1. ,^ I, In,,I l„,| tl l'.« nil.- .Ü-I π,. Ι',,,,π Ι,,,Μ.,,,η,,. '11» ivffliiiie ,it 1ч1ц|1ч,ми«.1 « Ь, » Alfi. d .11-. f., ш l,is ι Ίΐ-,ν. » irli a I:. .„I lull ..|'..l.,.ti„i.. „i„l .,l , m ·., I'... t 'i. ... ι .1 , I In- l„. ..πι li, ,;,
I - ........ |...... - . ■ibt'l . i.;..-n..ii·· tl ...... ¡ ν In, Ι, Ι,,Ι t,, :ı >.- iubi ..... lı,- I..Iİ lıl 'II ..... „Ιι.ι,Ι :.lı. '.i. ι.ι.ι.,Μ,Ι t;„ ,.;ıı „ı.ılıt!. ,.|' İl. 1...Ι. ....... ..ı.l I. ,! ;,w ,11..... ιΐ|·.·ι· Ι,ι- .. m-, II,, . -ι. ,,ι ıh, .„ι. im Mİ, ι- ............., v ,, u ,| ,,, ılı,- bi....; tbr I,.. ...ι- -; М н„ц il, Ľ .I... ılı. ι -mi ... I...... ,,Ι ΙΠ IİH , ,,(,, aml Ιι,,ι,, ,,Γ il.,· „,,,,,,,,, il,,.,,,-.
tin woods u ulmul with «hversiln-d liiiinonv , mil tin tvvittiiing of the su dlovv alu ulv outin u n.g m paisuu ol Ihı insul, imnul „ıth Ihı «Imp¬ ingui till sp illl.VV, Vvhobollllv sought llu en, „I unn, unu sui Ilid t , ııı tu¬ nu İh. ınınd nl Altiul ixpiiulul ev ıth plı İMİK is h< uıııul th. «I« hgliiliil sun, , In pııtuıul to liunselt ıhı Inppv uniting h. should have wilh W ıllııın, Ins inxiely null ist el ıs lu ıppınıeİKil Ihı spot, ,ı„l In, bosom ııliı ıdı ope m d to un ive tlıı fu, mily On piss ng the h nnlel lu stoppeıl It not! ig, to ιι,,,ηι, tin mid whuh l.d to tin villig, lu lud su „ut Ιηι Oi mumi; h. vv is di Ujmi' with thi¬ ll· in and mat ippi ıı ııı, e ol thi insult; л »
nor couhl ht usist athniiing tin pine h ıppını ss and un h u ting ti ηη,ηιΙΙιΙν svinili appunti on tlıı lunu st munti¬ li unis ol tin good cottaiMts, who w ι lumini hun lo thuı peni ful but lovih ι, ot , ,ι,,Ι, anxious ίο oblige luin, duv , dini thuı d m Jıtı r I oı ısı ihn ti i„l sinu ıh, μ, „Uı ,η,,ι, ıhı „,,Ι IO Ih, Dul, is Ν,, 41.1111 Г ,1,1 ıh, vou'htnl Mlıul In hold his n wuli „In ι, пит ,,,,Ι ι.ΐιιιη lun. nt Λ J,,,, , uld nol h.V, pi. -Uliul to Ιη¬ ι „ιι a non | ι Un l nindil ol loi, hl -S .,J1 11 ο,,,Ι ,m„ biilslidsrnliRni., V, I ,,) II lıı ,„ I in I lnr 1 t Пи li„i»t vva- li.joml thi povvu nt
lulur КЮП he so. h sni. .V li Ule liuu teil stnsitmii, e , ld not ex pi. ss, ind lie sib nth |u 1 li >m In Mith ι ΙηΛ «hun h ,t Ι, ρ ',i t h, mm.imiitsi.t hi, iisuiiľu! I On (in, sınır ι,Ι,ηη,ιν n Ι ι ,· '. I null. nn ,t th, , MK,nilx „I İM Mi I IM IL« Ill Μ , ν, ill, 'l tion, lhe .'.„up,,,,,, „ul dn.,.,, „, ı.ıımıl 'ι ι İm lı,„, m, ι,, st Uh nmt, d lu, m u m .η lu . ni ului t., h, tlie 1. d. IUI ot W,| , „, W ,,Ι, |, ы , t., . Ι» , ι ι ι, Ί ι rn, ,1 . r u lu, h
simlis vv hu h ι,Ι,,ι tullin Iiq , ν u„ ι tinani t ol I h/ ι Ιιι,ρ,ιι ι, s soou look plu. on I, I. si.l.s, win, hunhund ill th, pi 'IUI- lus and uiciiinst nuts that lud ni¬ nnini from the pmod ot thuı sepa¬ ration to that nioinint, and manv wtre tlu '' ppv scents tiny ttucvvu! toc uh o hus in ollet tını. Altiul ,ı, Imnul İhı usul, nu ıııd bistowul grt it < ιι¬ ι omuiins ııu İh/ ι luling a simul¬ ami (Miluit lingul ot gı U ılıt .ilion at till d.lıjıllııl situinoli nul loinloits t huh su ..... lult·! U ıllı un hi ıııd, t v inul to l„ inppv bins, U Imt , ,„ Id not am Ulit l' 1 tu, U,l, is sl ,|, ,,t h,s İUİUU.S ,,,,Ι Μ, sti, ss,,ss »In, I, pu v idul Insinuili uni ilmu Jits Ih ,ο'
'I ""I ' 'I '·"" ч P" '"i" , hHIii, su, ,, ,, ,, , , ,, -U ,11, ,. Ull 1|1Ι , -πι, ι,, ρ ,,.,,„11.1 ,|Ι„Ι|1Μ,ρ>|> ,1 „ |„ , . Ι| Ι ..... η.| IM H|l .M s [ ,
ПИР M 1 \ irme may be assai] d, but never hurl, Snrjimllv unjust f ne buttio emlimi] tt Uı 4. ıı ll ıı .Iııılı mischief meins most brni, bli ill li Un lı ıvı.'y irul prove most ι,.ογ) «Λ ι ιι u reni η η intr a feu il iv s at the v il lıo;e, nul ем h 111(141«!: tlıı uınıplmııu- tiiv visits puil hnn Mimi letuini.l t.. lus qiiiitii, .((ширин il bv Wil li im In ρι,,ιη« ıh· ..ıı ^. vv lu. h cont um d tlıı (b|..t ni İn, ıllı ti. ι manv win the inquines hi in ılı и spoetili.; the li ιρρν (oli ins, . .1 I tlimi.Ji h s uu lui .lions ti u_.li pioni) tul h 111 tO | IV till 111 I VI 1' 1 «•annuiti vil Ins I n misli ,. I ι \. il
ıııı ľ. κι ι mot ¡s ( i umi w ¿ľ put. ulus oi lis j( (¡u unt trut pic- VIOlls t„ Ills ,,.„. SlUng Ih. hl Imid , lipuol lus »ι,Ιιι, IK limlihllglv ,, idi кипни tl uu iiiiist mu tl his h iv ...g . Hul al tlu ι. tugt, Ins in mu, * with md uhm. mon „ι Ι,,,ιι,ι, md lu, illv mu. lud, ,1 bv it'l и; hım hi lov.,1 hu η, , muldn, b, h, pp) imul h, .gnu bilit,. 1 hu nul , st ι hl ,ι ,,Ι ,11 „it. uou s, „nT! Ы, Ul¬ ti, lis Will, ιηι ,η,,Ι, it at »lut I, n mul ílu minuit t tu η , t Ul ,,Ι, idi „ nid usui tv, iv ıı ut и. ι li »as ρ,,,,,,,,ιΙ „I, t.. pu vil „,ηι, ,,,,η ,ο gli, up SO 11,11 1,1 .„ , bu, un,,, «İmli рюш „il m hıı ι. t ι ig but tlı, gnu lllll unu il lu ptisi-tul IH tilt pui suit of il It w ıs tun hi gunin! tliit I ulusa »as In mt, tul uut ншо- 1) j
cent tid lud s, „minik u jut, d th. »idill tm (iftus of tilt IluJlbnllllllL. squm but thin he lininkul, tint hu ! units wm pou ıııd ιΙ,„,ηιι iti and tliiiuth hoııısl thv liidit ini m thuı powu to idd to lu pı.ıpııtv noi tin Msputihl lv ,| Insinuili Milli Ilı, I i).,i il luu ι 1. diluì lud liuti 1,1 vtars witn tlk squills m о stoi s, nil, siq, mu ,,Ι bv ι„ι id inil, ul -uv u I, ...mil ıs th, itw aid ut lusfu'il t a I. _ u v of ılı, tuttine and „ , , ι ν , ,ι, lu tcsnl.,1 with ι puisi, n 1,ч nI t.ii ıblt hin to hu .,ι Ίι ,1. Ihı до, d ,1,1 inoliai lud sun hilu d vs in tin e ulv pi ıı,d of he, vi us ι,Ικ,ιιν,,ι a tol. uhi. ulun ,ιι 1 1 , li ι η ,Ι , ,Ι hır loin, ııısı th uni loitsii Ι,ι. d
dining lid, by tilt pioli!, ansiiighoin bu l.ttli sihool, vi litri ..i shi dad} iii- stiiKtul the V'uitliliilntlspiing ot tht 1, unter «Vlnil lu ud thi, к, „unt ot tlit go „I tottens with diligili plı istd to Inul tint thi ι ıh, ι muti bulli nul bumbii situ iti m dul η ,t dm ut fıonı lllll. hllll, sl „„Ih , V , „silts „1 hi, n.i tnul.l hi u ti lui I .m tspitssimr h , istniiishiniiit t W il iiiii lor not ■ fn, ι huhu V lllll on thi inuits of th„„ , od old pi opi. iiiil putiniini} on tin villnis ni lu vi hn ii id nobly pi, u, I munitili, uni vi tut with ρ nuti tn tin mì in atta· Ini ti» h« h polisin d suhu tion ιη,Ι „udul af ιι и nu η ,ι tout 1 ill ılıt mt ι ıtıcs t I W ι',ι un tu tlıı emiti ,ιν pusu uk lııı,
to ìelmquish thi )..isilivc iluniinia ti in hi thtn ι nti ml into ot visiting u il uilt ν ılın,' in и punitami with those luuni I I it h inst mtt ι,ι ıs anıl thur luv.lv . uhlu Milium h,·. 11, uni biniseli ι . spud th« ti n n ll Viml ml b m, ılı I n ,1 v tin t u vv s thi ι,κΐ v b v ISU llll ιι ιιι,Ιι Imuun, vl,, nih kıs ılı, thuı h n Ь ι lııı ниш ·1ι ru miting ι ι ι ti n Ι t · ι ulivi η the cene ι il ι | ( ll u in , ν , ι ι η umcd n t. e tlie lie vv 1 ι h ] i u ι il tlitm nıuı h ph huh t ,ν u ııhııjy p.nposul allı riling Ine pl m Ι ι u 11 t шиш nt, and Min d suit to ι , ι,ι pi lies for tin ι. κ ι plu n No sooiiu ι' , ν u . ml wut.
«a itcd, th η tn, ν lulu Id tin bı ıı.tı ou, louis ι vv,ıh h, un uhi, ρ, unt Ч 111,1 ill İh pt .1| 1,1111, ibi Ι.,Χ thi v ou up . ! И - ahi ,1 III h, soul uiumul ,Ι «Ιι ,, ιιι. ι,ι lus In ut ulmii η tın lv ι ιο,Ι, u I ıhı most ıllu tuni I .I'll til ıs ni lus ,111t, ll! klllllKuitll iN llll piv Iliid upon thun to ..... u ti lis , U and hl HOI b'issld Ι , 1 llll It V Ilidi g,v. hun th, hi, ρ ,„,, 1 IVOt ,, „nun, lus liquami uu, ι,,,Ι , st ι bhshing thu intuì uusi t ll ι lottie ll, so nun II V ishul loi İhı ıııtııtuiııııu ut Ihey vine ple¬ snitul with vv ıs Uv ι ns V, «s Λ|. tud and loinsa wu« tquallv pl, .sni with mil idiiuuilth. Ilh il ami Iıu, и айн lion ut hidunk, i» will as ibe
ll ιι tfılt li puil нш iliil noble «ı.nduct of ıhı 11nın M ılılı nhııııı vvlnlt ılıt hıuırhtv ιη,Ι pıoıııl s, „it ot Willum would not illow hnn to slim tin evenni·, s unut unn mt md I·· putui tının thi v"" 1 ufisr.is nul uiumul to the ııııııtıısı.t Miu, I vvitbniit mn pfiloiininir ıhı ninninin nullius of wishing thun ι ,π,,ι,Ι ηι,Ιη Nit s„ With th( num. us \ltiul h w IS hüjılv plı isid in thin sunti unt vuth wlnt lud pi sul ml VI İHI, tık mır luv« ot thun he soluti«, thuı pi unissi« ıı to visit It till Ulltli,! whuh vv is silitul ti.Inni whin un Ins utuin hoin. Ik i unid not ıı ti nn lunn tilling Milinin huw umih lus aibnnitiiii md lovi mm s, ,1 hi bausi, .md assillili hım ot Ins hu
»unit in tn ns, iun honnui lllll ine th „1 in Ins ρ, ι ei tonlunu 111 tum of ill, III II h l.l ht I Wilh 111 II lljl If j.l il.llul İnsin initions „ι,Ι usul IVUV 1.1. Ili, ,11 point nI in.ii.nuil to ıhım hım (mm Ills p „pisis lllll t v< η huitul ih. p Sibiliti nt übt ниш „Μ Ills ,,,Ι, t ,ι I Ιι isiilt m, niv pnnupli Ilt ни Ι ' ,и_г ι, to dnu f. ıth th, mu, I „ι tilkut 111 lllll nprouliis ,1 M , I vi lııı ıssıııul hun ııı uplv t. h V unns iiàruintnts tliit Ιι· ιοιιΜ iu vu ι misi nt to lllll HIV UlllVilsll „ ,, tliit siilniu, «huh İmi mtl, its tını oliji 1 1 tlıı lı ıppını ss tin J Ι, ι suits uni vuitul ot Ionisi ,,,Ι „,, Ι Utili, lu ι unisti) llltlll, Ι lu
»ouldnot pioposi mv tinnì, ol a cun¬ tían nilul, ni Intui, toliini 'lluv ıhın sı,,,, ,ι,,Ι ι, , tlu ι ν til¬ ing ıııd mitil ıtlıst indin, ılı. ııppıı.ı- 11.111 ttlill Ull IXpillLlllul '1 Ills ,,Ι ms «lg Illist till ll ipplUl s. Ol 11 İt llllloUllt Loins ι and tlıı чип ini ..... m whuh thu ικ,· ilili l.d lie um.d with I ,,! IİU t tl.llll|. nihti .lul th t alintul lomposiııı ot ıın ul ulu, Ί ııı.hu ul .Viml m ionu. .1. lu Ind given up, vııy,.!..l ol «ι tutuu attempt todisluih tlllll lı ıppını »s, «n lo mu I nipt th. inumati inttrtoiusi they now
( í! W» \ Π — -'· 'Ilıt:) ..«Vt! — T wae fneiiíiilil|) lıcıglıie» d by ihe muUinl with ι L h' enchanting hopo «nd lympntlitr-c glow Леят',1 from ibe mutual eye, uevoimg nil '1 о love ţ --i. h wai to eacb n dearer »elf, Siipiemcly ¡, .(>py m th* awaken tl power Ot g.,.n SJ ms ' Λι ι nit) became a constant visitor at tííťtotttv . .'(id (кип tho «ittt'iitioii·, „ulvulhv Louis... sheapptaiul s„s- leptible ul tin tuitlu st niip.i ssınıı, and hi soon liliputul to h, ι tin ι ulj llame whuh «iniiuitid his lnnd b.vsim, 'Hit open, .„«unions, md nol.lt ι,ι ni¬ neis he tlisnl.vi.l Oil IVUV IK,.nion, piotili.ed ııı hu nıınıl ılır in 4 lııst ul¬ mi «mon, and «İnli hu h ľ « is .,
luti ll ,1 ".ııı. I ,u n -lı- vıtvvı Alimi ıs tlıı ııı st tı Ι, ,ιιιι, , l,|ı , t , Ilımı III ρ, ıh, tion md hstui,, I t , , İHS .ОПИШИ,,,, V I h I , Jltlll I
Vlili, aud tlıı pannu ot all Ins jovs, lııı hıaıt İnat in unison with lus очи, noi muld sh- longci withhold i dis¬ closuie ot liti tenth r sentin ints, ind tlıt gitt nt th.it li md to hun slie ownttl as tht soli possissor ot lut ln ut, An ι ng igt ment ni i must lıoııı.ııı ıblt Batını aıuııtlnıg'v took pint itul tin \ » m h ingl ih ovv s of 1 1, ι lasting itlu tinn to ι ai h othu pnmiising m tin most h.vint m n.ni ι not to sutlu ınv impe¬ llimi ut to pu vuit till n union Unis,
1 t V I . „I, vv η ιν, -h .ju", ninnili I ,m '. I ,1. W . . ililinr ni 1'. ιΙ,,,,Ι „I I, Il .1 OU 111 sli lh, ol |[, un, lo. Ih, loiiiplitiiiii ol tliiu wishes, itsohing tu tomniiitiieatc them to then paient» a» soou as possible As the lust »tep towards atcoin- plishnig thuı di, ne,, Allied madu know n llu ι .itin piitieiiliistol.ouisa's, pııı uls, and hid tin gt it-lu ition to hu I th, ν ıstı unul and pi uui the honoui he une nilul then ilaughtii ısıt duh m· , nul , but m the most ρ ubiti, in um ι tini entiiattd Imu tu lonsid, ι I J j ι,Ι tlıı t, ins« qiiinu, atti nilani on in i t'liajiii wilh then «n U, mnou lit am'
«Ullis, issin w ι, mil uni < и ..... I tolh, vv ,vs ,1 ıh, unid lini dis, ι liti of situ ilmu ııı I nuli lı ısın il hi Ulille ll lllll ir Ol Jllst ınlıst, I 1 l! n, anıl requncd the intupusilu.n it his leflee tion, tuul thev hutublv m ' ud Inni not to (bpiivt thnn ot then only happiness, ııııdtı mv impression of regaid oi alfietinn, ulmii w ıs not founded on the most honoin bli ρι ιη¬ ι ıplıs, h iv nig ni su vv nul ι inin ıı mg tlıı tutuu willire inildenin stu qui« t tıı bfı ut llıuı 1 1 uuhtıı ıııd su, h ıs w ι, fieelv s ιικ tının d bv lus min t mills idilli! SI η vvh 1(1 lis nt to tin pm posul lllll III I Olllll .11 11 İlişim tlllll. Mf ıı il hívni',, fn obtun, 1 vvhu lu к q ııı .1 ut tlıı ıvoıthv ι ľt ,(ls i. iní lu b d his nitu ι vv 'iv kın Ilı, ıs
sining thun oi thi sınıuıt) and ho¬ noui ol lus motives towaids their lainisi to innvinn thun of whuh. Ins n solution w ıs equallv lum to pir- foim the s unt dutv to his own funily he hid tilt it intunibcnt upon him to •lotothun ind on then bung in pos sı ssion of tlie niiitiid allei tum subsist in.rUt im n thun hi ft lud not but tint lu sh mhl shoitlv hivt it in Ins ρ ι«, it., lum tluu sun 1 pionus, , and liivm„ t istd th, u uiuiils it ,v,ry Uu hi unin uui his ι,,, Ι Ι,.,ι,,, llllosiliqpiiKsswlsup, Molns.,,,, nor muld ailmum^gi ititmli ht mon tiuly pııtuıul tl in in tin silmt tiar whuh stoli down tlu ι Ink of this lovilvgul, In minuti« tutun tıkın ot y ıtılııl lov, ai d ι vliihitnig m ι «
lustri 111 ,11,, Hol, II ,ΙΙΙ Sill, 11, tlllll ııııı sinuun us, It Nun vini umilitul hunts nune ibis, Iv nui tiiiili.lv inului thuı bip puııss suinul tomph ι, nul thıv nul) awaited tlıı vv ishul loi suntion nI tht Inuitts ol \lliul tustne theni- « lu s tu nu h otlu i loi evn
( IMI' \ in miire \ι„Ι„ι„,Γ »lut ıııtı rini po« <· r 1 „,Ιι, u ! il,,,, η, ,ι, il,) u,m с ,!,(,!, , Mır» , Ι , .ulk ılı, , ,nlı wuli Hiv d· sırını ıc liam 1 ,1,. li·., I ııııl liam!' I., ıı „1, «lumisin Jujee, An 1.1 r, unni It, ľ mı th, siimi ι, puni nil nullul ',ι W ilhiin in hs ,,ιι,πιρί m sulu., Mlıul lıııııı tht pıtls ot iutn, ami honoııı hi usuimi to uimin ig, Imn III 111- W islll, lllll M SU Olili lllS.florfs ni ıppı u um \ u uh a v ıı w nt h istut¬ in.. It possibl, II llll Uin With I.I11IIS.I • Oliti Ul ti, bis p,l, Ills I Otis, nt II, Ilid hls bis, VKUS lllll „Mì,UIOUS ρ,Ο- ııı ts mı s, dom» whuh vu ι. nt tb, • 'u ι , si uni iiiiist danguous ılı s, πρ-
luin ıs his onlv studi vi ıs to enni h himself, rigaidliss ot the mtans he tısırt to uiquue ρ opeıtv 1 lit mon «omplitdv to iriul his puipnsis mil to gun tin good (pinion ot Utreds fithu, lu addiessid the tollovuug let ter to lnm / 1// Di t ι viti mi ion no doubt h ιν ι hiin nl imul by v., ι soi ,t lh, , nlv mil ninniate ι in \ι m tint to I j I Utituiinisdl mil hnn uni whuh immuni bv ι I ng md vouthlil mti ι « uu , at tin si h ioi ot om stııdns nur ıflu tion lias »mn up« nul into ι luppv IllltlllltV ' l'I ıııd agan thuı thi u u h « f
silili шип ι sı I luvt with tbr most pıııılııl fulings attenilint upon l smuri ıııd ıllu tını. iti π ι; l.d toi lus vv ι Kau hihihi hun sinu lus ıı nv il in tlus niurlibiHiilmnd, attilli himselt to a vunthliss and dtiţe nente h ııı ılı thi d inoliti i nf a initiier possi sslll_r II ι (Itili I pillili! itllll] tO 1 i 01I1111I llll 1 ( I lo 11 Ul , ll.lt (Stillili ,( Ulti .1 ι ( Is in iiiiI iKitiulh I ml η j 1 hi ι u uu itul mil nlv ısı ,1 hnn t Ι Κ ΙΐΙΗ,ΙΙΙ,Ιΐ S. disili«! l |)lllslll! h. ρ,Ι, İSİ, ııı tın nu, t ι ,ιιι ιν I Ml nt In, tliee tiiiii Ι ι hu ind 1 un som lo uhi lıı his iiill pi ip is.il to hır points 111, , >lllllllll> voui ι, 'ismt in I юни, inn, ι to ifleil ,n Ihinii hv ιηιιιπ,ι with tiiiii I umlv \, I have 1. ISOlItU ipp.lİKU.l llltlll .Kilt, t 111,
«о doing, tlllt lus allt ι tiiiii tıı thıv fuııalı in i) lı ul hım mtıı au , \tı iv ı- gııııı of punse ind misu pıısrııt ıtıoııs, vvluılı lu. vv oııltl m anv tıtlıu «-ılıı ıtıoıı} oı on ıııotl ι suinul ht gundul m nuking to vou I liivi thniijit lit to aiiniamt vou with thr t ıı ts md I big ll.IV! tillllll Г tO issili» von, that ııtı'lıııı, but mısın ıııd ılı,gı uı ian attuili so iiiiiipiil ıııı ni misi, whuh, toi thr sıkı ol his lutnu lup pllltss, sbollili 111 HIV , Ij, llll , I, lu sus puidut " On ınv put, mv tlt u "su i luve tnilv to olin mv stiuus mtl to st iti mv putut »diurni ss to lindi hv my dni tU ms vou ınıv bı ph Isid toglie mı ıs ıhı sinun lıı, ıııl nl Mim!, and I hunıhlv iı.ıst, tint I sii ill ht tıı «il ul hv v „ı ah ut ııııl miliónu
t ι pu vuit tlıı poMibilitv ot ,ο greit ι uusiin tun» atta» lung itself to hiiii I bball thiutuic aıı-uıııısly await jour replv nuanlune I entitat^oW silence, until vou ruem a communication from himselt on tin subject, Us I have not noi do I consider it would be pin|ii li un prudential motives, to intuim hım nf m\ having tıkın the libutv nt iddrissing мш Trusting, t ului tliat vou will impute the in ι t ι in ilice t muat» ıegırıl toi what umt 1 1 ns li sfiituri vi ι İt uı lıoııı lude with „in mus ot pıııtıuıııtl respect, vılıılı I Invi gii it plı ısıırı in sub· ,ι idling ınv sı İt Ilı ıı Sn Most , neeıılv voıırs, U ıı π uı O Inwon
The receipt of this epistle shoi ked Μι De Clandg( to a elcgiee which rcndereel Inni for the moment uua- pabli ot at ting, it was a diath blow to Ills linnusti« prace, and tunul in its deslniitivi ti.un the lnnneihiti siib- scision (I evuv luultilt hope and jn, Jill illeitinii so stioli,li, but .utiullv eshibitul m tin inniluet uni linguigi d William w ıs wdl ι dui latul m du uv ι Ins upni nul ..tin¬ tinnali buast he uiumul his ıpp nent sensi mti, ulv ıııd gıcıt ugııılloı lus son and In iisolvid in tınısı «pume, to awan a lettu linin hım outin suhu. t, pi. v inns to uiinnicn- I lllg HIV slips toi uiiintuai ling tin iv. 1. împlini, dot Willum, in tht mun tune, gavi a
diti, u nt uluce to Alfieri, dud, pur¬ suing lus (ouist ot ıııtαm^ desiitri luin to ulriicss hi·» fatlui on the buh tut turi to tutu it Jum to «tive tint мис tion tohis ubhts, lh, was ьо .in xious to obtain, a^unn^ lum oi hb cordial support thioughout the busi¬ ness and intentions of forwarding his ricsircs in every respect Alfittl accoui- iiij;!} urate to lus father upon the súlyút, as follows У« Ur Di Ct \ridol " M\ Of AUF ST Ь\ТИЫЦ It would apjícir uncfutiful and a mnt of tint K-siHxt ana dñection which I owe to \(hi, as tht author of my existence, ami tht best of piients, ilui I longtr htsitatt in comniumcat ti
III, tuv. u in lilt..... 1 V lllll itt tihnii lit I luviiittntli I iintdi ι „ι ..... „uit aml luv, Iv lunile in this ηιι,ΙιΙιοιιι- li.nl Ilı. ι ılv duld nl in h.iust nul iisji lil It e tt ,t I umlv ' It dese ulu in uní ble indaitlcss dispuşii ion tin beautiful ttum of hi. pirson, anıl llu lovihntss ot hır coun tenanie isbe}ondanv povvei I possess Imngin ıtıoıı ща} supplv the pl mot dilutive poi ti ..teut vet pietuie to yourstlt, in} tit u fithu thit m\ Ioutsi is everv thing whuh ι ııı bı ialini gemei, mudile ındlnıtlı uni tlitn adtl to mv pustiit I. ıppını ss h«, telling ine y ou 1, ιν ι nn obiet tieni to ut alliante ot an hoi« niiablt nituit t ıkın · place bttwetii tins lıetvınh, tins «n thant.nggnl, and youi son "Bc assumi that her pin nts th i h
11 ul in nhseiiiitv, are I onest mil v t iv of sudi ιι duld anıl lit ne tell un that when I pioposul to them n union v itb thur diu,htir, tluy ι b'v st ч 1 to mt tlu 11 nsequi nei s, ıı ılı ntu 'ul 1 would n.n gun lm if fei tion nor depi ue them ot her society fur any pur|Kise or under any pre- t ne« which b id not foi its basis the piiust and most viituous motives, nor would tlu ν ι unsi nt, on thin pait, to m\ ip| In ıtıoıı until I hid obtained in iinqu dificil approbation fiom you I « t me tltuefore urge vou, mv dear p n« nt, is ν on value my 1 istiug »lappi¬ la s nit toob|ut, iu this particular uistime to mv iWust vvi»hc» and ex¬ pei t ,tions , but istibhsh my tuture bliss bv innstilling to niy alhauat t 4
with Ihat Iovul obın ι ni w hosi sn ıh, il. ni I t III 111 U. Il IVV Ild ι\ρ· MIH. Il ıl lı 1,111t,, ıııd ν Uhuul vihot al tuli n tin ιιι,ι „ılıı nt |· vs oi ıhı, vıoıldtuılıl il' uinu but httlı pit ısım \dıtıı,nıv tlı n luhu M ıth ılıt ut pOSStssttl li tlu lllllst uııılıı and ţinu¬ tul .libitum lui mv Invul paiinb anıl anxious itu vnui uplv, 1 lilluu mı evir vonis, " Λι uııt)" During the pei inti whuh ι lapsi d previouslo.nl insini buing bun uh tamed to tin fou going litt ıs Uliul was continu ills, at tin ι ıtı ıgı wilh bausa, anıl on ılloıı ismus ht ι ,ΙΊ à upon, and stud sonn tuni »ıth \V ilhanı anıl Llıza, who had t пич ıı ul
at ltngtli to in introduction, and the «tuist quint ite υ v nig of Louisa at thin Imusi, md b} thus I u «u quiesiing vv tili their wishes tin } lendini! tin timets litiii.l} igni ıblı to thtm, whin Al¬ fud ut uv id the Iollowing ltttir from Jus talhei Ι υ Annui ' in rinn sus ' Nothing, unid possiblv give ine muri be utleit pini ıııd sınpiısı than thi ρ« ι us il ι t vum lat« epistle Io finei hv it tint voui ilinti« n is so stroiulv nul пир pulv pi nul up, u a in« u mil woitldiss intt i„i ,nl is to mt tnilv lilbitin, II vou in I lut }inil ouu situiti.. η ııı hl( mil it illv uspict it, von will numidi iti I)
give up the thoughts of ıhı« vain and volatile passion Let rctlution inttr pose, and η ι doubt you will pueuvi the tolly ol vour pursuit On mv pait lhave to assın vou, tint, vvh ıtcvır your wishes nuv bein tins subitei, or how tv 11 «Ir m·, ν mır diu tion lor tie <ih|(it tu questi, u 1 shall lu vu um sint to unu ıllı mu with in» pusou Ы ni İtli V ıır OW 11 Г Ulk ľ'.l situ mon 111 liti and 1 should hopi vini ıllu tum foi me ıs too powutiil nul vom ılı tv mou lum mil eoniplite thin to pu mit vum wilting to ηκ ι, un on ι »uh |(( t Ι Invi lu ul quite sufnin ut ot and whuh I Imi id iu mv luturi nu¬ ri sponduici with mc It tl eu lore onlv r, minis tn uld lini sh „Id vou in du et ud ıtıoıı 1 1 mv ulun pin «ut un Iqu ι vv hu li will lead vou t. ılı»·
gì ice and nun you must have no other ι хрм t ıtıoııs fıonı mt, «lianatotat loss . í mv (Hutuin, «util a disutili ι it uitti lunn ivi iv thing risi valuablt and dcai t »von, and ln ıssıııul a dıstınv in this ι ise shıll ıw nt vou, vvluılı I vvılltıııst t„ ıııdı, İv upon vom Intuì« (ondiiit to İpllsulı foi iin snfltrınu ot it nn v, iu p ut ι vin ni uln, ι on odi s no ι ma¬ gin Idilli 111! VV, lililí 'ИЫ;!! mı to m tirittim Ιι 41 m ' 1>" not ılı. ufon mv ι', ir \lt.i d In ip ıllı. lion ujon vom I nil p mills but utuni to is.nst ot dutv and lu hng puis,,, th. p, h ol In, mu ndli-l, ginn, um „ıhımı : . mg uid mil wlmli holds lotih t iv ι «v«rv Inppv pios,,,,, I!, .„„„lul Iv vont punit 111 this, IS vuil .- in ill thıngs wh.«, I,,,,,,,,,, ss hall uu ι.
conuiitud ni ioni ual good ind lastin^ pliisiiits, imi whi no» «„b Miibis biniseli »lut ln wishts v ιι ever lo loiisitlti hun, " \ our indulging and fonti I ıtlıcı, "1 Üt ( ı VHII4 1 The letter w hıı h (oliti» s» ıs ılso ri tııvul bv Milium ııı uplv lo his Sı tıshetl ,ιι lus ı\|iı tilions, tht it und ι tum ol lus tutuu pluis « ıs m w sı unul, aiul mining tint tint ııı i„t mint beso insiuiislv sought to ι ht un hc wis giatiliid m nt ssi ssn g tin u n fitinin ot Mı Dt ( Inul ι nul in pin lining tint iiilhouiv ovu tht u tit ns ol \lficdw huh luv isns. Ivulti in ikc suit ihit to Ins u« ıı pııı post s Vlnil lu laiifullv ton cilul tin nutun uni
»iihstiiiee ol lus h ısı ıh signs liom. ae h pııtv, ııı ıppı ıııd tin siilien tullid ot both hv uln h nu (US tlu utt il livp uııt. vv Is enibled to pi tltut. ι ι, ul,, luu, utlu sinini ol ıııl mv and t.. u .st. til It dum. st., ρ ιι ι nul Ι ρ pin, ss h< uh ted to hi n muni.! uı tlıı pintu Ιι,,η ot ıııd vvluılı lu w ıs bolind by thi i nist surul pioiiiisisot tiieinlslup to pioinote l'uisiung sueh ι ondili t will nugbt hi in the hu- gu ige «it lus utmuş exe 1 um "Ol ,iouslIi|. cos)' ivl.it loi li-ire «Vy Wl, ιπιιι,ΐι v it.l isin.lnrj.nl lu ısı,, vs, yVeir not lliv sj,., mus nusk' Ittttl tO W III I XXI " vav 11 vr sm, 1 u is «luh honoured with your kind lavour, and also with out
from v son onthi s une siih|, ct to ibuil Ihm icphtd bv this pust ıp¬ pı ding to his diu unu ıtı iu bugs md u 'ıc ıtıng hım t,, siilit ι tin mteıpıısı- tıoıı ut lillutun to ıılıtvt hım tunu such idi ıs ot mn mtıı ttıllv 1 luve abı tim ıtuidlhınııuthdısıııhentııu «hııııld bı ptısıst (ııttlıcı m hı,prı,uıt atlı nipt to gnn ll e u tt ıgı ırııl anıl I hopi ind sınnıı h tiust fıonı w h it I bui w ııttın in tin s, I,,, it ilut he will it turn tn ι prnptr stn-c ot Ins dutv ind situiti! n in liti ind tlnlv ιρ prilliti Ihı idi ıııtıgts ot ι mou ix litui uni u pul hit t« innx.on ' Ίο хин Inu div t u I un gu iti) indilitul ıııd I t oninit nd hi- tutuit I Silfi net to vom supt 1 llltt lllll nu tn tilitin; vou to pitviiit bv ivciy
niiaus the possibilité, ot so uncini il uı albanie taking ,,Ι u с noi uin 1 »uliin cntlv tlı ink vini tni tbe ittutioiiat inttituence and uq boni ııı ıblı put vou hit« aliiadv attui tow irds nu silt and A.Ired whuh niikis me tbc ηκ ıe rcıdıh grant tlıı .utho. itv whuh vnu require, andvo. have thueloie my iinqiiihlied permission to tike any »tips vnu mav think proper and liest e iliulitcil to ensuie the e omplitioll uf v ur good wislus towaul» hım I sliall Ilıttı ι η v self with tin ho¬ nour of vinu futun loıusponılınec, while 1 subsiiibi invsilt toi the pi ι sent, ' W ıth grateful esteem, • Most ti uh vour», ' 1 UlClaiiuxi '
William ρ» insiti this ι pistle with İnanlı İt dılıght ρ n titul ulv as it give hun that povin hi »asso disiious to t hi ıııı, and h ιν nig «ııttın ill siltnii and with tıı ulumuş tlı signs tow nils ΛΙ- frid, hi dittimi!!»»] tu kttp Imu un ti- ijudintul w itii this un ıı spumimi с, nul tlıı uiniidcnii sn hliuall) plaiul in hnn b) his iuntl and anxious painit, rtsolvmg to probt in his pu bilious plans by so tining How diHiunt wis the conduit of the uiisuspiiting Alimi' Ilı lluv to William imunih ıtılv on tlıı leıııpt t>t his fatili ι » Ittici, ind minimum attil tıı hıııı tin loiitints lı mtıı with ihsappointinint and tlı span, In lungul and intnitul hull to mutunu lus fiitndship, and not to tiki am steps
V I h lllllll t· III tO till disiti- 11 £,. 1 „t ot his intuiti ns ii, hutl I ıs I ısı tun luii'ti v Го turs ıkı hu hi I iti tiiit llu t rit n md multi not withhold tiom lui the possesion ot his, vet he wis unuilling to make known his í ıllu i s determination, fiat ing he should distro) hi r h ippiDcs« bv so doing, antl tiso lose bis inter- toursc it tbt tottigt, is hn piients hail cpicssul ι usolutioii not to ι ıl¬ ınmağı tlıı ıııııııcMoıı contıar) to tlu appu bitumul his tiiuiils lit ttlt .1 ι loss h ι» to nt Hit dut) nt din tiun Ins bint told hnn hi owed ti his pnuits ι ııisıtl lum thi utmost guit, ., tlı, ν ihsippiovul ol lus w isinsin tl ıs put ıhı vttlıı mm ludul with in lus mui lin, ııı t, lııltıl lus n
In vihit m uuur thi uhm he should ifliitii.dlv ι umpli ti tin n bn mu uu lust oh|, 1 1 nt lus tlmiiirhts puuou- to (lisilosinir hissintinants to «ilium, and Inputul tunn hnn vuth a ıııisu- abli heart and dıjcctıd app« aranti, to return to his quaitcis pionusing to sie hıra thu ni xt day, and to consult rc- ipectini; his future proceedings illative to the attainment ot his first ambition.
( 11 vl' l\ u - Il ve wl | . r 1) ι 1 sirre | ll с 1 . ny I I VJl ll akı »lllll 1 r I U| p II 11 Vnd lo tl e world acquit π y bitan sl d 1 uu. Ox 1 Alfred s arm al at home, and being lttt to leflection the unea-smtss et his mind eanbt lasily connived >lui- tuating beteuern love ind tiltal dutv, he w a» at 1 1 ,» to knovv whit eouise he »hould puisin lo disobey the in uni ite ot bis indulgent punitile was η itui dh unwilling ut ht loud and vv ıs eqiully belovid hv L uisi hr v ovu d ind bul ıcıı ιν ed vows of cvi I ting itlu ti n nul ln» own Inppi ıı ι pe m 1 ot httlt comem when
would nu ι,ι ulli iiiii u u .mih te. ıs lundi Iv il, itn, I ι tin veiv lb, u, hl,il v 'udi h noul fulul Hi hul tastul tui ч ni, thus .1 ıhı most pun md he tittelt lovi and hie withuut itle e I ion now anpeuid to bun an ixistcnic tbe most hoinble ' M ith these impte »sions he coulel ıı,)loıu,(r hisiute and fin ilh determiniti on t ik¬ ing tn his aims the amiable ob|u t .f lus youthful ehoiee , mil reginlless ot the enn sequen, ι s he lesoli iel to doso vv ıth iiutlhcle ist .1, lav, Ικ thuefore u ρ und ti lm tuend Willum to tousult, md fix upon a plin which would stunt tht t tuupittuni ot his wishes, aud it w a» instanti», advised tint hi sliould piopost to I urns ι tht ixpidicnt ot
quitting her paıents linine loi an ıın im ılı ıtı tııp tıı (ırıttıaOııın tlıııı tıı solt ııını/e tlıııı ııı.pt. ils vvluılı bung aııoınphsbul, thıv should ritinti tud mike a ıhıt. tul intuii ssınıı to obtain painit d bn 'lieiuss Pleased with in idi ι wheh | и mised lum soinuih bliss Uh, d soon appi ıııd it the tott ι,. nul muk suit ıblı ipubuics tu m ıpp u, „t il, sın«« lu wis inviliti} i.u.vedbv lus tue h uiting I musi who Ilı w to mett and îmbiau linn md ittit manv iu quii us nid llllllll ι nuv u s itu n in vvluılı bi sruili. iislv avoided tht sub leet ol bis liti littu), lu pioposid a walk vvluılı w is i. nlilv undid to, md leaning on the aun ot ln ι lovu, this шип. ent ,πΐ duceteli lin sti ps to
Ihı llsuıl phu ol Iond mil siluit ul tuoniisi uni misi mus ot thi pioposal sht w ison tin point ni mining Uticd hid now a t isk to putunu, flit most ilitiit ult in its 111(1111 and (li vi rv uln nt whit lu w ıslıı 1 to romunum itt nnderul hnn um ısı — Ins filnl tinti urun intuii ud with lus intuit ulu tion lint his suıtnnınts • t İn noni toi b idi hun tonu kt tin se vims hi hid matit, οι to itti n tint altu tuni lit mulli not fullv utuin hr multi ht -it itt no lougt ι — hi, at tuns nid fulingi alniosr giviutti. mu to his thoughts uni hi disclusid the sein t ot his inguish nul lus wishts in tlu mı. t ttmlır nul utils, mannt ι issuiing lus Limisi hou pu lu tlv honoııı tblc lus intuitions ti
w ml, lu ι vvi . ι limiting bel to um h.U nu lutnu dıstınv to nut who tuuli ι Iv Inveii nul woulil ni vi r di¬ mu hu qqi, dni, to hu itlutiim «ml vows ol uu ıltı i ıblı Kg, ml, hi ,1111 solunu' hei ι on», nt to hls wishes. is tlie ıııııst satud pledge ot both, anıl the pu hult m th it luppi¬ in ,» ind bhss Ικ was »о mxious to bestow iqoii, as will ts neuve írom hu Ihe blushing and inno ent loinsa was astonished at ibis uni spitted and stimigli, ui gul pmpos.il, »hi dilettiti ln» attention, but ni v un tn tlıı pos- »ıhılıtv (t olit lining it sonu Intuii pe¬ rind lhat nuisent vvluılı vv ıs now eli- inni , in vim dıdslıı pietiin to bun . tlıı distri »sis niel .lilluta uı» »o ıaih a
" 1! ι, j it, ι mv I, Ime! Mlini w ıs 1 , ι u jih ν, ıı ııe sc, ııu in the t ııı· vnu ut 1 1 mv lust ıllu n u mv I ml h, iitshill nivu ,wn but v ni tol its p ssissoi nul tiu div I hope will soon nuve whin vu lull he unitul in ti t, midi st tils without muun till displ, |SU it tilos, It IS „111 IİIIİV to ni k, happv but win si nil ι m bimijit mi hi us would .nlv find to the gu ittst mısın, mil bun,; tin nithois, t oui own ılıştım t pi i hij s to an ulitim, h glavi ' I connue vou (1н ıı ton not to ıııgı wlnt maj piovi vour own nun and tin nun of mv nubi, nusliul inno,enee nor to in¬ sist upon i s unfit ι mv bent tills nie it would hi bis, ni s to dim
Dihghtetl with the remark» and couttssisMi so aitlissty maile by this liiiiotont girl, the enraptured Alfred picssnl htr fond bosom to his own, and plaoing lus h mil upon hie heart, he un okul Hıav ι η to witness his vows ot iv ti lasting iffittion, and appealing to Ins Ood toi tlie puutyöt hie infen nons lit ig ıııı solicited that sau idce in unsiispttting and irtltss soul could no longei withhold aud ι est ing her htad upon his bosom bin tommuni cateti liti lonsint m α Ι ιοί, of expres siv t sili nt t u nv tv u g a lov c surpass mg evin know litigi itself, and which u would bi wtakness in language to ittnnpt to desinili J hi) tcndtrlv unbraced eai h other, while Altiul cxilauned, Now then, Mil P
mv beloved Ionisa, wc shall lie happy indeed tor we shall tastı the pleasuies of domestic bliss—the jo\s of matn nionnl love, wheic eveiv kını' expris sion ts remembered eveiy thought cherished and treasured up every tes timon ν of afleítion iitumcil' nesini! enjov in ι uh othei s soi и tv ill Ihı jıtı ısıırı s ot in iiduit md suur, Inv, md theie ıs no fi ι lingot ι tendt ι liatun which will n< t e nımunıı itt it silf to un v ontlit il In, ists and tint pi ι. ι w' , h tlı, („dof , .r,,,, h s sı 1> f g lv nul it, I uitiin ,,, h и hill fu ,,,ι nn ι mli s о id and ilvvivs dni l 'ed I» ihosi pli isu «s v huh slnll sunn tons tin hfn,ht I I ¡ pııı s hu, and an Uu u d uw ml ι u itli ι ' ( mu 'lun ·
mv mils ) ou intstnniblc girl, and pres» those lips which shall tre long ас know ledge vou at the altar of Hymen, ци ing vou tin heart ami hand ot your Alfied tor iver' ^t tunable ventin fiom whoso minds tin irtifiies and gaieties of the woild hive not )ct obliterated tin puupts oi ι viituous education, who aie not ν it intt etiti with tin inglorious Vilnius nl tins lite and who still ignor n t oi the blandishments of per¬ jului seduction have preserved in v m s nils the disire to [«ertorm some notili antl gt nerous action—mutate the iiiiitliu t of tlu viituous Utred andlet tin mic» if ixptriinci ftatli vou to ıııltıv ite ι fondness tor doıncslu plea snu s ιη,Ι to aııpıırc that benevolent
tnd «ulmu ıblt spuit w hu li tcichi* vou to estimati llu t baiai teis ol the woild und tlu pltasiutsof souttv hv thuı ınlıııısi, valut alımı 'İhı Iollowing morning was ap pointu I foi tluu întinde,! |oııın(v mil bausa w ıs umdu, I, il buk to tin |н nilul honu whuh gm hu bnth md lill I. mum, ,t, dunng th, night, on Ilı, πι inv iiiiliippi thou Jits vt lm h Oppos, tl till Ills* Il IX to III ι pm llllstd bltss, „ul to, u pu, 1,„ , sud • 1, η,¡, ρ,ιιι,ιι, Поп, ıh, su ıı unlunu. of all bu ι uk lovsaiul ıllu tiens Aliud Iustinul to W ilinin, ıııd with a luut lull ol ı;ı.ılılıı,I, nudi known to hım tin phasing usuliot lux sohuťtions md tin d. tumin ι tiun ht lud ioniini ol s. ttıııg ι 11 ılıt
next morning tni Sı otl md to sob m- nı/e lus m in lag. with I ouis ι lie addressed ι Uttu to his fıtheı on the suhint, v i ittt n in till most alb, tion ate m mm ι whuh lu ele live ml to \t il ham, to be torwardeel bv hmi, and he also en treated his in teile к ıı e unu ıtıng to hım, ıııtlııeııı mg tint Inrgiuni,! he teired »nuld othu wise Ικ ılı inul W ilh un pronmid on his pait to m teiest himselt m th. bih lit it \ li .1 with histtthtr and ton», cierv ;u suisive lrgnmnit in his powei to in. dun hun to look over that w hieb »aa on tin ponit tf liking plaee and win ι th uigli he hid premised, anil was antlı, u/ed to preieut he nun en. mungili Ιο the utmost He also took e hai gi ol Altiul s lettei, ingaging to i J
MIU (lililí 111 11,1 Kilt I I I I I V pulul t kl Ig 111 llll II II n I v and Uliul nou uh ιν nul ılı. 1 ιρι V IIKIlllint V I I, Ulti list ll tl 111, ( ui tili puitu ιιι u ot in mnt ie nl nil lovelv gnl wlo leeouhng to pioniisi nitt I nn at the hour ot appointment, and suruiuliiiil her linn and tati to Ins piotuting ι iu At ι shoit distinti fıonı the "lanilit the servant ul Uluel was in wilting with a e liaise an I the necissaiv equi page tor the jiuiinv a h unikin hut tout umng ι li ve ih>n,is w ill ll ι mnou ni Ionisi t ,', with lu ι Ι om tint humi ,Ικ now ılı sı ι' Ι ι 1 arms ot hu Ufıul u d
rur ruiti' s , ------ W 1 toet jm.«· H ..,, ,, llliu.,,.» '·' ,Ι,,ι („und il .1 ^ "■i'" nul th, , ud il tb viii ι,ι >. . «tul mg tlı. ,. still, ni vv s ns u Ч ,Ι,ονν,,,Ιιη t . uitiin. '' wheels
( 11 U' \ Wiy Uil )l nn il , ι. im Iiiiisui , Ιιοι I, thai vie m,g l ı ki. iv t avoid гк -rfitlioiis nionals' ' Annum al tilt I ist slage inti ttatltss ot pursuit, Λ lud with lus lui tiigi- IMI' Stoppili tO llll iki ist HOI llllllll thi) It sist tin impulsi И hit 11 plolliptlll thun at tlıı ıııoıntnt to »un to tin Illlll ippi »Ott Igt is, Villi! »Ul Illicit Ild uimplitilv ni.su thi. hv tlıı sıul.ltıı «ııııl ııııı \pı ι tul dtp, ıtıırı III ılın ınııoıınt d'ıııgl, η binisi mm, pniitlv add..... I bu unh ιρρν ρ mits md Utml ι и I ul tlıı lıttı i I,, W ıllııın . imsin ln
to liait upon tutl explaiu to thnn lus motins antl hoiiouiabli intiiitioiis itt tin slips in bad tıkın, Ih liso cn- tıeatıd lus laitiist attention 'o lus own ipislli mil tin Inrvv iriluig ot it tolu» Militi, with tin httu William hid | ion, „il to »nu m his t ιν nur nu thi ,,ιιιι ubutt, aud silisindin had s . Ul ι u un mul ui muu ibuil dut), hi η, ι ρ iism.l Ι,, ι mn. ν vuth thi unni li uttt. t ph .suit nul piau nl li. h lu- win dutv intinti bv W „Ι ι wiui ι utul ι du uud the 111 I . I , , tulit p Ults vu.lt I llll, I v t Usul tl ,1 U Us to Slib „k ml luliľ.v ι lud thun ,1 ılıı Ιι η nubi· m ıs hv whuh U lud wa, uluitul ι unu th s ,ιι
pie hut linnest pt opli thai tlıt gieitist hippini s« -nil plı ısım, ıvı utul ıhı ıı duıghtıı but h ss pini, tual ııı ıhı ρι ι h rnıııtı il In, sni, nm t ng п., пи "t to Altmi í ilthough lu milosul nis »pistli ıs dınıtuh hi addı. « ul lu¬ nttiin m a ditim lit stilt to th пиши ιι , η ι dipi v u. , I h, .. пр. Hul ıı thi muls ol tu , on 1,1, and pubi'i.iis f,,» nd hip ιη,Ι Ι,,Ι ,11 ι ιΙ,,ιΙιΙ, Ι Ι | ιι,ιιιι. ti ,t , ul · whuh tl. f. ..... ., , ΛΙ,ι,,Ι ν,ιιιΐν s, , |, ,,, |, , | ι ,1 , „шп,, Ι „,, , pos, Ι luu, Ι Ι,,Ι, ν , ,, tlıı iı.llııv nt, '.fu luni
Wim vi ι 1Λ Ь, ( ι vi, к к ÍIV 1 I It sın I Ul İ1VOIII U s dllh II uliul Ι η ι. v I dl punid 1 h.V. VV.tl, UU. ,, 1, .1,1 lllVllh Uh suml th .ulu ι ι Uliul t v ml, ιηι ιι , η 1 ilili gh 1 hul llu pl. .1 . VI 1 „11,111, 1 U! hu th 1 dnu 1 sum , Ι u I h n ι In I l. Mih sulisaiul n, h, m vr 1 n ιν. ι ll insl ,u luen ill ılı 1 ι p u ι ι nue luhti ivi ι,Ι I v .u une pl ι , ι ν , Il Ι ι seit d ι 1 , Ι ! U lilt ol it llll ti itti ud , , I , li t
ob|ect of Ins juv t inb p issimi whin, alas' I Гоши! niv sı II ih, ι ,,,ιΐν ılışıp poniti d m mv inst h | taam! · χρ· ι ra tions, but dinned hv Altrui in dl lus pronusis " I liavi thiiilini tin m itun tını to intiimi vn ι t. it vnin soh 111- in th raOSt Ulli «¡K« ,1 Uit s|| ill H III ΙΠΙΙΙ I dlS p|«iud tinill hls „, ,,Ι. I ¿ sti tlOII t kl.,' Ml 11 I Ul ť, ,|, , ..... f dm lilii it lm ι ι ,., s «hu. th. v havı İh İt ıs ,,,,,Ι, , ι,,Ι ||„ lipi)! s I, I U ., Ι ,,,,, ,,, ι , „s ytt I lllll 11 t 11 III t > I , Ι U ľ I thir Insiliti 1,1,, tni, ,,„ , htr İHS Will thlls ,1 s.,1 III. I t, mdv and iun ι .nul undun < ι, ι ful 111,1 .listini,,; Kill t ..... , of his own ni η
" I am so «leepiv eonuninl m the tate nt /Utied and ,si iiiiieh regaid his wilt ire, thu it dii u s mı to bc obliaseli t ι r·. ıh to юп, ,, his pan nt, sudi nI nu, us pi, . u, ding, on Ins put nul 1 luvt to ıssın, sou hi» tiuh Inppv 1 shıll tevl moh, ι ng inv (ninni nul, v. ιι ιιι ιν min ,t mi with m u I 4 ι ι vv hu h ılı |, ml upon mv most t iiililul mil , mi,, ι ihs.hii ι at the- sun, ti , I big li ivi lo inumiti thr jn | , *v nt kn ping mv ι m π spond uni ι dou ,1 s,,,, ι il, t 1 nnv III ill I I, u illuluihv I ini, „hi vnu , I ill lull ul ills ol \llu.l will· 1Ю dm b пи h utuni will sl.te to ini tlu pitiuilii,, Ι In,! nun pi ms mil HOI I ing IW ll Ol OUI lllll 11 Olirsi h« will the moie rt uhli umilde tlwsi s«
cuts it will bi uuu inte list, aud pei¬ li ip» v nur w ıslı to übt un a know lıdge of nul hv this n ..... sl sh dl havı it in niv ι «nu ι to gu« uni i liill (Ittad ot ινιιν Ιι tını ti ms,, lion on Ins put " l!ı uni Uni mv ılı n Su ulans iii.lv Vit turi ι ut ıı ι ılı İn tttt than tlllll pi slllt |-||, I Ili MIS Г, ISO!! tO ы,|,ри, ,Ι,,ι η I,.,,,, ,Ι,, sd, ,„ e ol thi (Ull .u ...I I „II sulllnig lllll epullitv I ti u í »v u not oulv pu luth К (pi 11 lllll llll vuil ,.Ιι,ΙιιιΙ I ıh Ι I I is I , , l„, \ hul, t «will. , I , . ι utuiliis I s¡, ,,Ι 11 I „111 .„ I d h VV 1,1, III I I, s I Ml 1 bin li mil Ι , , ι ι ι pulili), tin pu lud «I lus ι,ι, Π, II ι u« „us, h« ,, I,,, nu Uti» iii Utuni in ιΐι,μαιηιι in pu
,enci ot tin Iu Id oil ici at thees pira- tion ot ttn divs nulli when, I midli¬ st md lit ohi, ııııı, I lı ııe t, oui hnn to absint luinsill trom dutv İhı nu Insul Itttcr was lift thi- inolimi-, at inv houst bv ont ol lin , hu, with ι utpust Unni Utrni tu ι I should fumarti it to vou tin nu mut I itiiivul it 1 no» tin so, as ritpiliul lid no doubt It ι Olit uus. I '.UH listilo tlllll 111 Ul klllg kllOW 11 tO I nn nun b disti, ss, d and tul sı ν, , ι t ,, ν η, nıtıııal aıiMitv on tin» , , ,,„ vu I hopi von vuil, ο,,,,.., ι ν , . ili ıs nıııılı ıs possibl, I I nuit tin t ondili t ot vrni ·"■" u ' v un vili ısı intenst «ıııd h tppııııss [
would luve willingly sacrificed iny own Mj spirits an quitt di |ect^l and di|ires»id, is no doubt youis will be on ıhı in upt ot this hut we must lie patu nt, .mil learn to rillnt on tin mini, mux and s, veie tnals ot othtis, wis, к . on-ui, ung tint ------·■ ΛΙ1 II tes nre р. чЧ«. Aud „cl m, uni II, Us humls n Inv.ii " I 1111 tiosfllsd к ,Ο,, lui to 11', nore it pris, „t u I uhli. I IV ut vour uplv h III l I lil to η ni un wilh «, ninni uls I hslu „ .slum ·· 1), u s,, • .„„IS V,,V smi,,, к WllllWI (Χ,,χχ.ι Who ian ııssıblv puusi tht Ion guuig Itttu, vv ithout vitiving tin pu
rilhais « Iluni is i nup lllll llll pohshııl hv poi > Itt , l lllll I tu too altiul toisposi lus ovv ll huidui 111 uıv m a piuiuti.il thsilusuii ,ι,,Ι li ι »old,, iloiil.ul h) tiiuulsliip mi, In, hai bingers ol thi tuiilisC dnut and pei Ini) ' Ihı following ıs the mı (osure al¬ ludi d to lıoııı Un rD to hi« Father ' VIV 1 1 viisi ι щи u, U tl iiuiod I had tin. plı ısım tumuii)uui liti atlııtaoııata .ρ,Ι, ...v n md »a, st,., ι,,,Ι) „n- |iis„,| vuth t lu b ,ρι that it would hut bun launilabl«. to thosi wldli-i , iintaiind in mv last It tier I!« ıssuııd, ny itigli talina, tin iuu.su! of vou.s.
Ιι s I. Ι ι I ll ι Ι ι v< I ,1 ,Ι ι Ι ι 1 κ' ,,Ι bumbii ι ti η li, ι tl ι ι η- tiaiy she will bı found run thing )ou cm possili) adının, and by no means w hat ) ou suppi st " I Invi imdi ıvtr) appui 'o mv own feelings, anıl tin ruollection ot m) situation in lilt wlult tinti n h ıs interposed butin vam t ι Ιι ι t ni) opinion of this mistui Ih ^ul, and altlını 'ι ην II I il itv mil il fi «tion toi ην I tini ρ ιι pt ni ti adlın, stııt th to 1 ıs ılım ut t sinse of bonom ıııd ıhıt ill poučit jI
in, ι nuvi livi I uliul nu to icvoke lints 1 liai »ud« nul muml nul tin пит, utlu utol tint lun I. w hus, ıllı iti ns I hm iraintil ι innot bı ılın nul in Its pilind opinion (it vnui sons inn ,ι iv vvhoiould ntvii enter into tin iiuliilunr eletti nun itinn ot betiaying a tiust imp ι. teil by the most ai tless and ardı nt leition " In luvin,« tin, «İne, obeıeal the dittati, ot inv ovi n lu ur, and satisfied the tlisiıcs oı ı iv loud and inipıssıoned aftntioii, 1 lut 1 have too stnously ofitmlid to (\pitt an instantaneous toi filili« ss, nul as vou so fortibiy toi bid tins siilijiit, 1 shıll not enlaıı*;o upon it luithii than tostate that 1 have bttn pinniptid by a sense ot honour¬ able dutv to л pu toi niante ot promises
vvluılı, in mv ι pnnon. should mwr bl lll.lllnl Ol I, Itdtul .lid III lOlls,- 1,111 IN, (II VOK 1,1,14 ill S I sh||| hi th« hl|.pv hiishnld,! ill s ,,,Ι s I „uls ι " U hv ıhıl ν,.ι, η ν <Ι· ,ııst punit, implant m inv vouthtul hıaıt the pıe- ecpta of early virtue, hut that I should pursue tlie happy paths u huh lead to it"- why bestow upon me ail cdueition, aad place ns, in a proli »»юн th it li uls tn j/brmui. deck but that I slmili«) peľtorm- ьотс noble and disinteiestfil Hftttmr l«»?t this be recorded as the ptniwleit ot mv e nlv divs, for mv heart assilli» mt it is, and that the »leáll·™ oí bulloni entwined on tho youtlrtulMilihei s hio«, can nevet tade within the sort einbiaie ot love, and ■vhould your sou he blessed »nil a.
leinlti oflsj ting, «uni hvi to bt aocount- (d ι Uttian vv au mr, vour grand, Iııl dun 1 tiust will unitati thur tatlın s ι s imple nul bless tlıı ι losing of thur gi iiulsuis sitting dav s and this not onlv hv thur gı ıtılııl a« tions buttimi guinou, «!<«/], I « r m« tliuetoi« uı nut mı ılı nest pıııııt Ih it vou ıı ill ııı I tnt nu tin s( ue tin« Hs ( out until in vn u li tlu noi put ıhtın in prillili ig ıı ist voni Mtieil w lı ısı Intuii fitt к Sls iqillll vinu tuuli ilu ι, nm and 1 1 rn It nu t I 1,111111,1 vnu tlllt It IS VOUI sillVvhilliql, l|st,„,lVUltsS lllll Slhtlls V ,11 til tOI, t till IllSt Otlllll« lu ıvıı unn ι nud ignnst thi iliititts nf his ıllı e tliill iti lint indul,int t ithu , anıl, is ν ιιι know mv nmtivis, a lov „ hkı ι nr |iih is nnv iltsuvi tin
tribute of ι teai and edl one gentle »igh trom v our ι denting heirt lor gı t mv tiaiisgressions I beseteh vou and while mv virtues (it mv) live lei mv follies (Ik vutlini vnui bnsom ' \diui mv d« irest fıtheı lh the time vou em fivnui n« with a icph tu tins I tiust 1 slnll luu ι,ι,,ιιιι, I In inv stltl ll bhssul in tin posse» sum if u ι ι uhi« will who now imitis ι ι undue t dutiful Inn while I uni un 1(111 (in ill«, li. nit, lun Ihr riMi|t ,1 ıhı sı httu, , ν, li Mr De ( Innig« tlı. most „vu, d„ appointment lu bid ein ixpuiuiiul as a păruit hi peu nul lv the un
tents th t it was impossible tor luni ti ρκ vuit lus sons union with tbc ioti ge gnl, it was indeed tını lite t punid to tike auv stıps foi that purpose, md lie iilueel his eolincsion with Γ oins ι ι« tin gu iti st possible ihsgi m tint could attilli itself to Inni ululi he fiaieil the worst eeiilst- (|in m « s fom ι tulliin inUiiourse with hu ρ m nts uni ulunes , bt would not thuttoii be iu,mulul to m ιι ι m, n elf Ii nigh tin pus.usive . ι tn mis mil illuti. n ite 1 ingu lg.· sı 1 hv Mmd ui lus Iutii lud ι un ρ,, u il ι! ıııd ııııpıtssııt « flett . f nu hls mimo anıl hl Iisolvid tO ,ν ul hım ilt nt tlu pıoHuul ıbııt tuo ululions nitu lu um ol W ilium, and
to ρ ofit b) lus inlluenct w ıth Mtrcıl in piev tiding upon hım tu ıcıııovı into ı legnili nt on tonigli smut as the siuiitst intuis ot piivintingth.it in tnnite inteu olirsi nt tin cottage he ti is so uixious to hue discontinued, is will is satistv Mind tint Ins nn multiti compii mu tould done It id to tin tor_in ni ss he stun itul mtl insult In bun i unitmu tint nt Ins atlı t turn md tutuu suppi it thio.is.li hit İndi im in nig thut,nt toiuoiuili to Ins lttlm_s ulut hid pisstd mil unwilling to · \utt ılımı ni tlistiub thit lnppv tianquillitv bv wluih lit itas otliti use suiroundid hi ion -idimi it as piudtiit to lit inutu,
ust until the return of Alfud to his quiittis ind till lit had i uı re pır tu ul ıı uni positivt conunuiuiation tının ιΛ ıllııın on tins painful but iu ti risting slllljllt
r.
(ΊΙ\Γ> \Ι «« lïow can tbil jnssion be a crime Wl, ılı Ь )и to ЛНге I bril, II w .mil«« J.i n ι It li ne Wlnli nuki lliitvu, η carili Tni tnoiiiing ut tht du on »1 h Aliud stt uit on lus m il innoin il ι s ll.l SIO 1 » I« | 1SS.Iİ П1 11 İV 111 Sill liti, Ι, ι Ι ι liiil hit tliit lnppv mt tin whm SO in mv divs hid |l 1SSIIİ m ti iiipidlitv, with inmtiips whuh I , Id И,,! hlVI ISI ipid divi Olili, hill si. iitunptul In tomusi -lhi) who luv, bun pinul in ι mullistuin s s, ιι iiii to those dt stuhni iiill don, bı abli tojiulgi oi tlu luhn,s »hub
suth ijniiiicv would CMite There ait uitam s, as,,ns in lite which de stiiptiiin fads in pnnlnijr, and wluth tht imatr nation ol the rtader must pntuli ti ilselt, and if there be a )outh!u! ınınd tinploiid in realitný tinsi раци, that has reali) expel leneetl tht sums that are hırt poitrwed that nunti will bt niov etl at a picturi d, hinliktin faithful colours, and tlu; uutal ol tlıı ilopunint of thi innocent 1 ouisa may t Mite tili linest ft elings of tbc hiart mav milt down every linktim,? pission, and letali to lus iciolliititin tin pltasuics of tht sc hap] ni diva, ovu vi Iııılı peilnps ob Iivion niav hive tons on ihoppnl hu liuntlc A> tin d iv adı mci d, aud the нн
poimii light mır tilt tice ol natine, tin gl юни mtl ippiifiit li irsot I omsa v unshed md Utu d lu g in lo engage her itttiition bv ρι iiKing nut Ilıt vi I Ils oh|ll ts pirtuni iris, vv m thv nt lıtr olisi iv ıtıtm Sonictnnrs lu tiurt ti t! bri rryrırd to ibe in hl, ν hnsr 11 itliiit wis inttrspusul with tin snuj İv ılı gant Ilmu rs penili ir to tin sı ısım mildst ılır ¡,γ iss writ seen tin t n» slip antl thi butti r ll ι» ir, vuth Iıııı ııııl there ı pıııııu sı pu ping fıinı inidir tin bulge or tintolthng lnr modest İt vt, ılıııısrtht hınk ululi tin this) 'ııı , in ti| |>t 1 g ivi vauét) tu the su ,ιν ııııl nini (otlu ive S ι ııı ι, Ihı ı nıınlıı bills dinu n ni 1 idul liv ι , Μ'ι ht η u aml dun» I
1 1 ρι ispet t wh tlı tin pen il ot . tl u ιν ouiil hul it dilli, ult to ılı- •u ht I un 1 ihe пиши il thur un u η ι , ti, t sth, pul, if ιι ,h |l ν ι ι li Hill s , ns, nuusin tlı ι 1 ııstı .η ιι ι ! ι ι αι. t ι ι jlstıt haml 11 \ it U th, ι linini« tu tıı sı ι ıı s ι ι η ι ι η hır ti tint h ιρρν st lı t win ou th ponit ot tuti Altmi lud disputimi Ins sui int liioie hun to in ik piiparit, ms nul hivin_, uitvul ılın ι tatlanmış цшг ut ν ol th u tl ιν s) it thi u suluin ot thi ılı stuıtlaııt <l \ uhan tin« h istih abilititi li in tht post ıh ust , nul ııt iv tlıııı^ bu.i-ruipiiiiit nuli niss, tlı insilili tu iiiuiioni wis o J
performed, «A III II \lfird tini'il'l f , 1- briieilhi^lovdv budí ι his t, us hid now subsulid, an I v h ι is, I und m .h« „Titmnliofhiilu η· ıs b, ρ,Ι,, d hur to hci enr iptiiriit bosom, Oli ην гк lov ed Alfi ed jeui fiithful disihaijtű of *ho«c sacted promises I lud ven¬ tured to hplıeve, and anlının upon tıhııh Ins brought me hue and iiiufeil rae tilth a generous and loud bush ind, cau never bc lost m mv rciolleitiou May I (ver prove deseıvınır ot that heut, «ludi lus tlus du κ,ιυιι- lidgid nit a» ils proud ¡«ossi s,ni m ık¬ ınır m< Ih« hippe. tof mı v e к ilmindi boıstıım six, imi nuv vu, mv Utin! loup du« 11 ııı thtt |к tic md ııııınhı rupted tianqiii'liti vvluılı ılnııe ein hvem tiu hejil or íutuoiľ. nubi, intui »Ud loin,, sı unıifr 'l« n j ι
•mil« s«,l uu) uhug bhs, md theuijoi- III« ut «it those | I, wm, u İndi ,· «u t .Г (U Г U,th lllll.l III hul,. I, dilli Vt ι unu I ııu ι I « ν 111 Ί t Ι ıııl, vv Ιικ ι. wen s_ uit ι ι | utitt u tlieme it, ind detoled to the sott em- btaus if tin most impassiiinui I ivn, this tond ani lui 1 1 pur utunn Ito then p itiis ,ι itil ul in ivi rv wish thin youthiul henıts could d ir« ıııl wuc now anxnnis ibne tn remove tinin their revered parents bosoms ill tlu inxii tv disuppr« bdtin'i and di-np- I in ι n whuh thur hastv md iu ι ııı ι uı ılı pirluie must hivt oua- Iniiiiiihitilt mi thur mini Alfred w utul upon the írnod uittigus and puseului t ι thun is Ins wilt, their e. I
lnppv d lughtt ι who with t, us nl it- (iitinu impuntii mil < ht ι nul Ihıl toi gıvuııss slu otun, bv soin UllOIll İ1U U llll lllll pil.llls, «ho,, Itu, win now tingln to subsidi, «uni w host ıı ıttiıl beai ts besto» ni upon tliem thuı pu ınlıst blussing while thıv m- vokttl lb ivin to watih ovu thin futuic tli-t nv «Ulutl wis siiipiisnl at rn t ulv houi tin m\t nitu mng bv tin arnv dot M lib un mtl Cliza, vv ho t une to bıı ık- fasivvitb hmi, jov tnilv vvilionimg his uturn, and wishing ι unit ıııı uııt , t alitin hippiiiissluslitutt, hl hım li must possıss in tlu su ılı s mil all ι tion of In, anu ıblı 1 '«uisi w hom tin v inviteli Willi Aliiul to sptnd ıslını tmu mih 111 in, thu, t ι luuu il <
urniţi itul ilions ol thuı lı к nils, viliid. inv u mon w ıs u ıılılv ι. utul tn ısıt anıt thun ııı ι pportuintv ol Kutsuit ııı, ıhı m uinu in u lm h he < „uld most rili u illv i.lihess Ins titln , tn ι hum u ι lut η 1 ι vili t hul passul lui ι к d к ,<t .11 nııııı« lutili itm Ι ι Ι t nt t u the İninim, ι. it «In 1 in, ι hi tv ι ill η th . t. , ,11 pss.,1 И I I · k V 1 V, WU, spr„t in,c- ι II , η 1 111. ,ιι test ,s „ , I, I I IV „,« ,ι ν ! Il s ι^ ,||| wntten il | I. t sı Seitiini, ι Ι ν ι ,,,Ι Ι un lie lud İsli ι I ıh, ,,„, ь ľ u ııı tin и in ι iiqiiuiilil lum,
130 τ' 7 minriwi ti inni v«, it appcirnl tht mire mv sti nous to Alfred, tint then littus sbolliti bı treated w itb silt nt t it wis tn nunc quence ik tu minul ııpnn tint hr should wnte again to his t .thu wluth lu did as folio» s /ti Mi Ui C ι лип ι ι " VIV 1 I ll I II VII II Stoti ud I h ,1 tin , , ut ι ıllı )tnı st ıtıng tl t 11 is I s v I Ιι , suinul mı |i nim ν tin ıı Ilv fo ininim von ι f ıı ) ulu ti t ι t tıoıı litt i thrtııtnıiHH ılılı Ihı ι nul dt ir v m ut mul ml ll t I thm ırııııı d tit hım uı I I, | s , ss η of tin mist. η ıh olju' if n) ť · It thiiilori bm im, n ('d 'v m
solut vou r toi gı ventas tur having m lhis instaiiu. mm lctul mvself in op¬ position to the dictates ot a most in¬ dulgent mil tendu pamit whose ni- gu I trust I hive not so tır pro- v kul but tint h« will pitiuith hear tih tr his síin lus to ofler m e xt( íiua- t u t lu» Inst olienti ' Mucitti! in puu iplis rrpiignsnt toviir indln til. t nu ihinguhiili app u I mimu ,1 to uituc, the v niv h I ti igs sointi «m ·ιιιηι «rt little ν Iiii uni p nul ν ith the donu stie fel itv win Ί ıs uu ixpuieneed in thi ι η ¡ mv nul unui Hum i f ιι> an ible luu le ho ι eh unis awake» all th duni nt Hult es t th. snui, an I u sj . th ni u 1 w th h ıır ener- jı.» than 11 ι ı ı (rtıons could ob e b
tam, vilin ni thi ixiuitinn ol oui en Ulpusi, plompt, u, bv lul a , i, t mie, to suunmu t ινιιν ,ΙιΟιιιιΙΙν , who η, pilssls Us Will. lo. gu m« ss И II. ulia» ind thi sul Iiii itv ol lu ι s,,, ι, llllllts VlhlHVlUhs Uld IX 1,11 - VU 1, 1,1 s , ,„„.„„„ „u.a. lin s -u, V ll.ll lllll , tU IV ho illisi, V s , Ι , ,, Inibii, VI , 11,11, With UUU 'V d lih M ι, Ι, ιι. ss ..,1 ,,· ,ι who le a Ii mur uu ι ιιι ι, ıtıoıı ot ill lu
, „,ι,. . ni И, Ιι,ιη« s , Ι hu ,,< и nito
mussi ulv lo tlıı ıs, uisi Um, and loinpliti» Un po
,.[ i Iııd > I tl u <il «uu eh ι .1(1 hv lhc s n ,', ,, „u nts ot love u .1 the tl.'uhllul ι nu ,id ,1 lui s ,. ,„is \ lb l.sliill „. th. insidi II- _,,
th. ι ,,,Ι n, ι,
s II en In u ,,1 v,u , , , „ ι «h, , „,,,Ι η ! , ..... „. 1 , ,, 1VI.S, Ι ,ι , „ s ,J ť „ J),, ' Mi.ul.lv a u, vv „,-, tl . the ·ν e „1
vvilliuiit doubt will|iiil„ ,Ι „,ι as v ou do ııııl this ι» ulotin 11 us, „t mv unt a- sincss \i,u ιιι hi| pv intin sınıl, s lllll aflu tl, 11 Ot I u isl undu ind „inibii witi tlu 11 lov ul mollit ι <t mui sup phi mug Mtiul 1),, not thu. hi Sit It to hi, s, m. n.n ín tin usi in ,t vom twn Uniti lut mıdır ini ıs blissful i il' I slnll ıhın lit Univ b I ¡,ι 1,1 t \ρ, ιι η ι upon ınv ] ,11 w ι ι 11 sı İmli .il ılı iiiil minil ι tl n.l units nun svint thuı slup η t lıı.|.(s-,,l mli -intimi nts of hst ,, , II I I , ılı virtù, lllll I Mil- lili, mli luhu slu ut, tıı thi¬ ll ılı s, f vv I. Il i sh It It IVI tin ust, 1 ιι, ι u ηι hult bv s«b|oni4ig tlu rt л ik t f ι li inn d ant' celebiated [ hilu
supli.! MI th,- sl.l.JIlt V ho su- Mi s iiii ρ, niini itlin "t viilut tO ni kl 1 111 lis .İnil lup) IIII-s 11Ы Immi ,ιη-, Il nul Ins mu, mudin t \ b.d nıuı ıs vilu ih tin in mui "I И« vv ι ,1 lu h mgs upon lts Ι ,ν au hus In ι s sınıl,, ,ι,,Ι ι, Ιι ;pv oi uns, , ■ lllll ι ι impiumili to Ins suu, ss ľ. It tO , UltilOH- 1,1.11, SUU,- IH siul, Ulli!, Itlknio I- bilt I sutllllllV Kill Si', llll 11 I libs, 1,11 gt Ills OM11 pilt ι ,ι , „ ,, mv nul h, „our, 1, his tilitt , ιι 11 ht Ins don, pmptilv vvh it was ....... ,ι „рои hım to dtı his mind , t u ι m Ihm d. ıııı bı It ms tl ,,,Ι Sitisli.il with tilt ιρρ,,,Ι,ι I , к t lit vm iliil tht Usuinoli) ot ι ρ ,1 uns, „nu, Ιι. uijov s hnus, Τ, .„ dilt -pisi s tin triumphs of guilt ·
IMVV VHS, U „J I,|,|»|| U „nlslUlO III s,„l ,,,, ,„, «,,-,« ,, 1S s, ,¡,1 p,i„.i,s J,| Vllss,,,, H, S, VV 11 |, I |\ pipi IIS 11,1 OipV III I],I U V| |,,Vn ldl> V|UÌlll| -IMI Il||l| S,,,, ,„ s, „ЦП") lt|[, . "1Н1Ц , l'" ''' '" 'м> ι n. , .,ιι Sui ν „, «I Iin ι 11 Ы1П IMI» plo ınov Ι|)1·. I ни, v 4 ρ ι pms „s ,.,, ,„,,,, „,, 1|U|S| ·),| , M ,,, „, ,,,,,-η ,„ „||pvv |ΐ|Ι··,|ΐ·,ι ",,\ s Λίι llll vpis , ,ίΐι,ι,ιι, SII (,. НИШ pilli., Ι II »|„ Ι ,,Ι,η ·|,||,.νν ац Ι |ο iu,nuv, Ι,|„|, .11,1, ,„, ΐι,,ι pms, -111-ΗΙ JOS,,, ,,| „|, ,,„,«,,,',,,,, Ι ,,,,„„ 4 >η ....... Ι ""Ι" »"Ι«»Ι< ,,Ι ι,[
/ 1/, Di ( v I w u 1 ι ' t , ti I vou ıvıth l İl it ıtı ι ιιι ι , dinu ll til the utuin ot vnui son, »lib is hdv, to this neighbourhood 1 now lit , liavt to intőim vou tint thev hivi it luutii, until, md I am son ν to add, Mimi his bun so niipiutlint as to in ilu tin nittigi ί,ιιΐ his w itt bv a solimiiiidtion ot matiinmiiv at (nitni (.leen Пи Instvis, tlu v ııı t It on llu и lituni vv is it tl , mttı_ı , tin inin ıtı s ol vv huh inund thu ι ,ιι ıs! kınıllv ιη,Ι vvuı ,k ul no iloiiht it tit ι iiiii mid hv tin n iliujin Ν . „ vi ih ν ι ml..... ulu tl"
\ И il , , , ' t , , \ 1 ,, il, Ι , ι 1 Ι ι Ι 1,1, St .vu II , Ι 1 ι ι ιι 1 m ιι,ι 1 vu ιι 1 ılıl u h I ob» tul tn it b ι i I uv ,,Ι b η Sllbll Ittld III 111) t pinion, It suit it I have not as vet uitoin ul hnn nl niv intirc nrsi hv lettu v ith v n noi ilo I t ont uve this inform ıtıoıı would -u v о ««■ou ι vv isht s oi pioni· ti lus well ut s snili, I shall mun d Imi,, ι ni ι ,1 cu v puso, tin honoui vi ıı t Hill ι on un in this m. .li, l· ,ttt Wlut his intuition au, 1 knm not ifpiisuil h, littpillltly tllks 1,1 gllllf, lllll . ligniinit on ι ionig I stltl, 11 V 1 llll İhı mtt ig· is, ι, llu,hdv,hv no η »in.
η Ι ι ι I II, uit и U hıı. 111 tepuiiil I hu ι it ıs, 1 think thn somei lıı is u ovul tinnì «nıııngvt them tin Intt ι \\ ith «¡nib «nlv u ι I ihall conilutli this и ttu, assunng you, I slnll it all turns be watchful 1 1 hu ponnin gs- ııııl ıı rcıısr, antl cmtniue и it th ¡ess to fi ru ud vont isÏils m rv ry iispect, while I шини ' Dt u Sn, • U iťi ι stu 111, \ .urs tinlv, ' U И НАМ О ( os- 1 lhi t it^ nng 1 ttu 1 oni Mli 1 t. h, tathn ivi, ul uli ul tuim ılı·.
Iııııst Ιιι ingsut ih. h, ,ιι ,ι ,Ι will II «itli ,11 tl„ ,,, ........ U, IH, ,s| , UIİU.İ1HIIUİ lid Viituous I IU V Uli thi , Disti, Ιι „ V , hl Ρ Ι Ι Ι II, ,Ι hip, UISV 1Г Ι | 11, 1« 1,1 II u. Ι , « ι л itvv, su ν η,; to lull .Μ, Ρ ( ,ι,,,, llltO ri lUnlltiUHl ll tOO LintlOlblv and lataili bistowul, m toi siqm nie, upon so altiul anıl disigillila a du¬ ratili, who had no ıı tl oh|iıt ııı mu* tcmplation, hit that ot supusului; Altiul in tin itli ıtıoııs and good opi¬ ni ,n ol Ins iathir, to lausi, it possihli a si p ıı ıtıoıı mil ılış ı<;uı mei t Ι ι 'w u i ıhını, ol ι nah n to u, puu ι n, u, jlilliiuhali liituliuui on h s pul m 1 wluih would | lu, Ihn, futni 1 ι pi Uls, II. hls piWll , Willi, hl I II), I ,1 lu muniti a;, utol Mı Pt' lindai
I
ui tlk ρ ιν ιηι ni ol ι ν е и lv allowance tobis ,οιι ıs «dl η, I, lonsuleud tl, „mil not lu, I,it, ιι, i. „ „l, nor , ι ι m , , ι ,ιιι , , ι . ' „i t ι
, ,,, ,11. „ ,„„ IO , | V, In , n - I, II | ,„b II ,1 llll to, d ,1 I 1 , и 'inulilv ' „is,,, tuiul popiti s İr, ılı, vul, r vili ri! İr, , к , !,<[. II и, , ιι but spuıoııs aie the , ,ιΊ „ι u lusin ind illishlivpoirisv, whue ιν,ι objut κ nils to subvut , di ti, ν Us piate llıuı lus, iu
dilati conci alını ut, tlıı baılıı d aııovv ot ııısatııtı ılı ıllı , «nul m ınv, ııı ılır boni nf false suurus, lall its limonin and uiman vu tur».
fll\[' \11 ■ 1 , ılınılın Ил« ıı . ij.ire Ituni ι . Il ШЗ} iin tt Ыи in m muti n , , »ηι|)11 ιι Dims, tin , und tint elapsid pi lions ti untung Μι Di thud·;, s uplv to thi fou going litttis, thi 111 .umnimi Viti« tl ny ι} ι il thi svititi -t dom, stu h union«, in thi sou, tv ol 1 ıs Όν t Iv luuli and l'ta.t lugui ,1u uk lo, pu id Ι» ι ing, İnin. s insimi thun, whin, ılış' thtn bosoms, wlnth hid piiviinislv httu till silt of tun qiulhtv win now distillimi nul tlıı Kliv il ol th insilili loi I,'lus pio .limd sı ns m, ns ot ι most цирк ıs ηιΙ nituit, md sml, «ıs hv no mtms ч
tisliulthem, ıs vv ill ippeir on pet using ıh, Utleis lioin Mı De ( lıııılgı ι ınsvvıı tothnsı lıı umu 1 < u ılı, sul: Jilt 1 t İIİS S II 11 il , ,1 s I 11 ι , t, 1 bv Ull il ml his siqp, I ι I I M ι 1 , ι v uı to tin luun, dh ι Μι Di ( ι mn u luu ' Vlv Ι1Γ Vili I VI! HI 1 Ν ι , . 1.1 i il v moie istonisl, m, ıhın tlıı uııt n nf vom lih l| sili η ι , ν tl m nuni s, nsıblv lint nu Ihın th un dutiful Uld lllsobldiellt hut Ot ( n •hut vou id pul ml Inu | nisuni ' Viliiiittni tint v, ııı ulutalım ind tkt perfoını tuil ol a nobb and ι,ι n
ι nis died ind that maniage ι, the lust stati tor mankind elo }ou not think it a pitv, that the intens, and lust lteqies ed a paient should bc satui¬ hini not onlv to tht folli, s of Ins son, but fo tin pleasuit» and ioni imenei ot eulieis Ni i am I less soıry to ob stive tliat suth is tlic common protese «t late man uges (by wluih I tear lluv ι in nevtr bc eminently Lapp}) •\}outh and enl inciting by chante, οι brought together by aitibte, ex* «hange glances ictiproeatc civilities, go honte and dream ot tail, otlier, ami basing little to divert their attention, 01 divcisil} thought, tluy luid tlinn- telves uniasv wbui thev an absenr, and thtntore loniludt thev shall bt hippy t igitliu , tbey nnirv, and at voi ι Π
length disi ovi ι wlnt notlung bnt vo¬ ltu fırt blindness helor, hid mnceilctl, (ni tht v lıtıpııntlv w, u out htt in .ilunations, and ι Inui nitnic with multi v\ lut cm bt rxpiiledhut ılışıp plautini nt ııııl it pt nt inn lu ııı u hım e matte m tlu minutni itv nt voiľl ni tin iiiloiirot disirr without pitlgmuit uithout fincsi Jit vutliniit impui ι ıfteı coni irnutv of opinioni siuiihntv t,t ni unit IS irttlllllli nt luthgnicnt o! inilnps pin itv ot sintiniints ' Suulv dl tlu «i pmbibh · vilsmught havi lu rn noi, I,,I bv tint ilt liimatuin ind tlilav wbiib pi udi nu pi, s,,, b s tniritvtii bl, ih ,11 lu tin v mtv ind folliis il mtl ful pli isuus liti i nv be will tu ıııjı suppôt tul without
tl-c assistane! of « partner, longer time wxinlil hive nu re tscil e\|iericnie and w uli r ν it w s would Ιι ιν ι illow cd better Oppi rtllllltlis Ili 111 pi IV Ulti st ItrtlOn , ııu uh mi ηϊ tl li ist vv mild have Inn unun— In pııı nis w oııltl hivt Inn vi illv oldu ılım thuı ıhıldım W lu n 1 sought ι vııtı nnnv vint niv ι ni uli ι tions nul mv Inst led nit t ι ιικρηΐ! w lu tlıı ι shi w ıs willing to In h d bv ri sin Ίοιι hivi int. ıııl ut ıs ti uı 1 * upili tlıı hun ıııı ıblı state t tintinnimi witliniit ılıt İt ist ριι¬ ν uus loıısidıı ıtıoıı vit 1 vuil h»| ι, that bv puiduitial loiisigbt ıııd t limitili adhuııııı to thi pıuıpts ot vour paıınts, vou vuil maki nnuiii^e happv I 't ht ıssuııd mv d, ir \ltrtd on this aline list all vuur hopis ol
fitlin bliss and ıs vou havı now bi¬ corni a husband, Itt me entreat 50u rot to liattu virnistit w itli routii¬ ni tıı s ol pli suu lie spai mg in vour trusts ind in voin tutuu dteds ot guiirositi, umeinbu, lit docs no¬ thing, vvho indeuiouis to du mon th ,11 1 allowed to humanity Ot the luppi nis» set Ixfou von 111 ike your t liou e anıl be loııltııttıl Iet 110 uu un st mu nor hope ol addition d pleisıııs or granulations, ριιν ι' upni u uidun jou to h e tl il wluih v ııı lul it jm ht I s ь . ! with ( Il W ι ρ Ut ikt „Ι tht innbot 111 unin wink sunt ι 4 Ih diligili! 1 iiliurs oi spi mg No nm , ni at th »un, timt lill Ins mp fıonı tht soıııcc, ıııd Ironi titt niouth ot lhe Nili
«t 11 V ,11 II" 1 V I , |l t I V I sdt s well s t l, l.e luti, ι t aud u. ıptıon ol y 11 vil as thu addition to την I tinilv wluih vous he it sin »hould bi («insulinet " I h ivi lung thought that vou atı losing vou »une, and the ι mk in tn·· su v iu, which I wish vm to obt un, bv umanımı, m a I.neihli u ips (ui¬ ti g s it «ullevn la tome delings, *o lillut upon thi uicumstaiiies thit plinei un in the tiginient to vvh ch you at prisent bil ug vit I must eon- sieli ι it as disddv antiguáis to v our tutuu pros|«eit» remaining in it longtr ıı 3
In toistqu.nu 1 wish VOU tO (Χ . I IOLI to 1 ligniinit ol lill Inu, sın ııı,· on a loi. ι,η sf ıtıoıı n. kul I un so mxious that «ins should tiki pi u«. tl t I big \uu will losi no tinn m ι Ilı (ting it 11 in loi inn su ν lies, no doubt, will be uiiisiduul, and re- waidid vvlnlt on shall hive everv assistami m inv povvtr to pioiuu vou the »ami lank in tin Lint, whuh vou low hold m th«. Forcible 1 " I »hill, in а fi w Mais, have an oppoitumty ot judging how Iir jour piestnt albanie ıs tali illatul lo pio- mote jour hippim »s, anıl should vour conduit meet niv appiobalion, aud vour lady piove birseit, by hets disti Miig oi iny afleítion, tin utmost
of inv wishes will bt sitislitd I will then tmbraic anil licit }Ou as tlic promit st nrn iniint ot m\ dublung vi us innvi vou both to my igid b som with luai tfılt |ov and not onlv bless tbc div wluth give to mc in Ufiul but tint vvluılı ılso give to hnn 1 1 uis t ı\ ou sitali thtn uturn, and injoy tin pit isuns ut a paternal dvvtiling whuh gave you bnth be¬ neath its peuttul ıoof and in wit mssuig voir h ippmess my own will bi toniplitnl İhı tuning ι í ni} then Itiigtliniitl ehy will elusi in soft tian [milits mv svvtittst bliss will bc 1 1 gi¿cupon tın Miriti, lo listtn to bis duds ut Iıııoıı v dour pe ι toi ined on disluit pinns ubili lus t blithe n, u ι tltiibt will ılı ut bv tlıııı inga·; n I
ing manners thtir ei unisin s leisuii moments, nil blis» hun to tht 1 tisi puiod ot lu» existente bv thut diu tion iti simlis mil dutiful attı ntniiis " bue h thtn, mv de nest Altied, uie my piesent vvnhis thi jnvs I pictutt tonivsdf lienattei Ί hi height of ali my happiness you find, ıs centied within ν onr nach Íly ν our future con¬ duit I sh ill bı rendiied exceedingly happv, 01 truly miserable С hoone bı tvv u n tvv ο «sui h opposite ixlremes, but let vour ıhııııe lunu anıl gummis and do not dunli ignnst youi uub ıı ıtıoıı and ,h sull v ur tu, mum and wish s agiu with nııııı, I shıll nuli vou atı utile pt nd nt illow u u ι χι lu¬ sin ot ti. prol , vour ι .Immission will allın d, with w h iti v ti an u g
ment you may requiiefoi thi payment of it to you Ucipicstitug therefore, your pal titular attintmn to mv wishes, and ι speedv, ılıt imului replv, believe me tn rem un, with JI due regard tor voui lidv • Mv ditrest Altrul, \ oui aiixintis, ΛηιΙ ıvır arlutıoııalı, " 1 Dt Clariix e ' Ihı í. Ilı, wing ıs a «parate cpıstlı lo, a, Ml Ul С 1 ШИЛ t /v M ILHAM. VV 1 I VU slk • i\h ti 1 iikn nv ledge th. nuv J it vuur lati t ìcid'v tavouis, «How me to ritui n vou sintere thank-
toi the manv mailsS ot kindness von bave ishibittd towaul» nijsilt and son, and to ovvn my çu it oblig ıtıoııs to you on this aııount The renqit of jour list Iıtuıs surpiistd tnd lausid tie inuch iiniisiniss as thost finni -Ufiul hid lonfuiniil tin 1 u N voi. comminiti itcd '1 un ptrliitlv oi opini m vi uh sou, that tlıı sonun lu quits tin soniti it thi lotturtis, tin bittu tboui,h I am (putt indini d to maki tin lust it vi 'nit I misidir ι hid bu gain ih p s his munn nuv not piove su v( ηι,ιη к ıs tn 1 nn ıs 1 hul it inst i in ln upposi liukui I 111 willing ti h >| t it in iy u'tınıatılv ι quii iun mv hist ι \pi( tations I have vu itlin Ια nv »on on tin subjiit, in
replv to Ins littus, anıl as lie will, no (Niuht, isliibit mv eoiiespoiidniit to voni peıusıl it is uiinieess.irv toi me to i(|)cat in this, what 1 have vinttiu to hm, 1 will simply întreit vou to us« vour nilluinti m tuiviaiiluijr mv wish« s as ixpiesscd in mv Ittttl I uu h ıppy to luid nı> son ıs m ι linul to iutn a iiginiint on luiii^n чипе, .is it is mj paituul.ii wish ho should do so, bn this tull, mall pio- bibihlv, tiustiiti tin eltsigns ot the lottigli s nul bul hım nito ınıv Mints ι,Ι hie, diluting lus ittuitiiins tının thuı pııvıtı w nins, aud living α funnel ıtıoıı lui lus tutun h.ıppıue s, lb hd} w ill also havı in nppoih.uitv of seeing ıhı .unid, nidot piuliting bv tin lissons oí it, aud hi iiiideicel, и (>
in consequt пес e ompetent to fill her situation as bis companion through lift "With these hopes I have given lum m} advice which is cliulv es¬ pressivi of my dete munatuin eumeni ing lus futuic adv mu muit and 1 sinn reiv tiust he will nilhue to nn wishes and rt ip the buut is iu ι ul ingly my best hnpes wil 1 thtn ht ί ι- tiľied, ind niv lı ıpp ness u ıı plı li il Meantime I must leun tn p u tıs. pıtıenee not vulling to iiisj u t tb volumi ot tutunn (ılıe | ι ns, 1 vılıılı vv oııltl but elee e ive mt) consilium, tint tin olqiets whieh mı ıı sı me tuni s le huld at a distinti with lui au I ti n bling İnsi, ona ncarıı ıppııaclı not only then dmgreľibli anıl munem.· aspect, but frequenti!., m tlıı est nt
Titl TTtUinlnl s .~ produit tin η ι 't ulli spee ted and agiu dih p'tasuKs for hi who tries evuv t s . uhuit vibe, bol.llv opposes himself to eveiv diliiiulrv, who neg¬ let ts no t sı iti within his power, but relies with trmi dm. upon the nittrfticnii ami is ι,ηηιι ut lus (nul will not onl} ι sti ai t tu in iiflution, both its poison nul i's nu«, but ıh privi misfortuin ol its ıı.tı rv " Vlnu, mv dui '-ir With ι pır fttt reli mei upon ν uı fıırıullv mttr tiru, к and toin tubi g ill mv w ι s he« togi liur »ι itin hipi nuss ot m; son nul itqutsting aun miniti iti η tının vim in reply, I big to b u iisitltieil, л ıth unceasing и, ih! "Il our gı utul ıııd sn m " 1 Dl (.«-.'Kilt r
Altiul, ou tlu tceeip' ol lus lettel, niiiucihati h tnnnnuiueattd the ton- tents to W illuni (v, ho e one cali el, with the utu osi υι, ,ιι, the irumist.ui, ,· ol lu» hav mg rum ul o, e lb hail now to. le Inuline upon a ni w collise ot life, to obtain a iceoltuhitit.n, ..nil tht 111- jnvment nt pli-Miits | u instil to 1 in , as tht ultiuialt uw.iul nt nonip mi» with tht dtsiris of his painit, vihiisi hopes bc was vulling to ıı 'ı/ı v hile Ills llll.ülCilt Louisa . ..s ll liss u ions он lnr pait, to mutuili thi gnu i il aggngatiol lus ispit talions İh ıt- snlvul, honmi, tu nllut iq>. n ile inumi taníts as ıhı ν ιι ight „Hut ıhı ριιν iti wi.liis oí tlu ι ot t igt ι s, .nul to take thin opun, η on tili , uinut, |n- vıııus to suhu ittin¿ his tlı tun ııı tun
foi thi suiţii.. η ot William whom lu iiiihippilv uiiisidiudas th» but » il ι ni iti il Ιο adusi hun on tlı tilstill) • I his lutnu ha) pun ss thıv tht ıı tını sipu itul tn thi iviiiing mì Ulied lltllllllll to lus ιρι lllll İt ivin, th altiul hv poi liti lo ui| ) in siimi ι »»IllfllllUll lo.) profusi IV .1 ,1111 louslv hi ipn', lipon hl η to id uit nI llu possibili!, ot anv dnu Hun in hu lllsl„IIS llpilll till llllSllspil III _, Utili, who tould not as)it dismin ılı it • Ici, I,mr,, ilu-.ll, nol in tlic il,ss,| Hct ΛΙ1 I »III 11
( ПАР ХШ " Tıs nol tlie balli, hul acıanıs of a man. Ihıl .ein [i v« li ,1 ,, l), , r numi »itli slnmi ()\ \hiuls u tinn to his quai ters lic «lıspılıl ul is, ivaut to the lottigli·. nqiii ι · , Ih, u ittinilanic to unisiilt upon ıhı -ulydt ol Ins tatlın s lıttı ι aml ,lıloıı.;h he lud su u tiv u solu, 1 mhis own ι nnd to abuk In the dit i- sii n nul v isi, s of Ins aflu Honan pa iun v,il ,pp,ihin,lidtliei, wiiililhe un, ,,,,„,„„ on th. panol lus ni vv ul tivi lo ıhı pi n sit tiuth tot this lia, ..... s- ıs ih, j had luvailahlv ob- ,,,i ,ι ,o I is dias ot going on aitivi suvin loubvıatt and »tt asuit tlii4"
ılıı ti ms nas tluiefuic the intenti m ι 1 tins niiitin_r and to m oui il« il! pai tus tn Ins Iathei s will vi ıs η ιν th, lust nul must anxious vvi»h ol Ulıclj Mitlinin hcait İt nas evenuıg before these people amvcd, and bemg seated m the pre¬ tence ot their son-in law, and lovely daughter, the former communicated to them tht contents of Ins fither s letter «xpiessmg his disne to pursue the ad uu contained ш it, hi also ( \pi nued to them in the mo, t titling manner the advantages whuh wn ı d uise fiom Ins beimţ eınplovcd on ι moie pnniantnt service, indimi, ivoned, tu a mainili ptiulin tn tin im ι denie ot hi» »in Ih ut to eist all tlıı |piunt Ιι ι s tl iv mt« ι tainul f ir lus η ' tlu
daughtu s s if, tv and lita'th nul hiv mg sitisi» .1 thtm itspiiting ıhı lutnu liuulits w hu h suth uimim would lunik plodmi hi tont ludul hv ıssın nig thun, tint tin utmost ambinoli ot his life shouııl bc that ot piottttıııg tlıı hıaltlı antl ıııcıeasmg the happiness ul lu» Loinsa, guiding hei tlıı,1,4lı hit il' the most ttiulei anil atlttti m ite mayı¬ ncı V, ith these assıııancts thi v wut satisfied, antl took a hippv ltave, red¬ ing most fully iq on the pionnscs in uli to thun, as tin v hul bun t night pu viouslj, that tht vu ul anıl lu ut U Aliud wtu tut ip ıblt ot anv (hingt Huv now, with iiUiilant and nıt- 1 mı holy plusmi, lousynul thuı limili loud diligimi t 1 llu .111 s ,f lui iiti.iluabli hiisbuid
İt n w iun unul tubivi tin opinion • 1 U ilh un who (fıonı motit rt ol ni mt lesteel nituit.) usuimi on lilis οι ι ιι to ι nu ud thi wishes ot Mı Dc thud,« andou Mtııets loniiliunicat- inghis intentions to lnm of compiling with lus f ither s adv ne, as contameli in Ins list letter lv liiglilv applauded I un m his résolution and reiunimeauied In, nnniieliitt itiuivit into another u ,imtn pıevıous tn ins aguuaddiess- nu lust thu nn the siibjeet lung thin loie willing to peitnrm whit hi eeinsulirtel an .iKiuubent d uv due to his inviel and iispeetid fitli« t, Ik lost почте in in iking m ¿| | In ıtıoıı to the 11 unu nule, in ( lm 1 toi umumi stıtıng his loimu sei nus iiiil olltıııı, ι (ontiniiaiiii ot
thein in «mx u munt unplnud m ι tonigli siltliiniii' ,,Ι ,, huling tin Iivoni ot bung ,,], , nilul s „, ι, ι possible Alne to tin ni u anıl pus ι I wishes ot Mhed th« ( omni nuh ı m Chief ree ene dins menin nl with ,n t satisfaction, and in lh« nost «gt и ι us maur -t conipl'til w ıth his rupiivi In rctommtnding hun to Ins lin 1 [ atin i for thr ippointniint licdeMiui, ι il tht nixt C.a/ttt« placul hım ae с oidi« v in a iee,imcnt stiti ne el nithcpiovn . of New Ľiunsvuek Noith An u < ι He at tin same tin ι lueivul a lutti Irom Ilı» Rov il Highness s seeritiry, xquuing hun to pineuril without de¡- hv to the held (piliters of Ins nup, («latilicl by tlie attention paul t·»
lus ıpplıı Hun nul ii|uallv dchgbtid with tlıt |ios|»»t nI btingiiMblcd ti Iubii lus puints »ominands, he re inulti tht most lu utiilt thinks to 1 ıs mv d ρ ıtıoıı wild» hi filini turtii tin umitimi ol lus hint lo dictate the following huts to Ins indulging pi It lit Jo Mi Di C ι uuni ι »v m- мим- ΐΛΐΗΐΗ, " 1 luve bien fivouied with /mır vırv afľn tinnite t pistli, and have now tin pleasuri to answer it most lull), by issuring jou, I feti etpiallv/ idi ititi by your intpiictude at what von have termed mv follv and di,obe- thtiHi the tormei idea I will trust to f Uucivcutett crasi lıoııı )our mind,
while 1 hope loi a putut foigiveness u« aïknowlulging tb« 1 it tt t 4 l our afiei tionate disquisition on linindi lus I, miniti Iv «riven nu m , ppoitiuiitv of nukin,, known In vou Ίκ ι χ titillali ot mv ult ıs upon that Uti ot hli m vi hu h it his ,t linkli pl, isid Piovili, nu topim nu Ulmi nn thud m mv di u luhu to u p it till! il İn ikl 111 v nun situ ıtıoıı tl ι o m ,,Ι, vu h all mv sentimi nts nt h ip- p n« ss ııı this win ld bv an union w itli ι ıııııst endi ıı nur, ann ıblc aud v ıı tuons lein ılı aud uıııtıııııı to conduit hei md mv sı, ľ thiough tht viussitudis ot lift with an bontst ami hunouiabl« tunc, l tunu it uiuceive leisou toi « ıtlıcı v°ur ho|«es to Ik dei ideii unla- vouriblv, or your bist wi»his disup
pointed md tf 1 havı evin servul the (oiivuucnus (I tlie u nerible uid vurihv riitugiis suulv vılıılı ικ «n I I IV Olirlo Slllt (ИГ OVV II piirposis Iti hut ι. ison ıblı lo grint the sun« privi I gis l„ itheis vvluılı vve ouis. lus n, h t, p „ht bv and uijov I tin u loie hop, undírthe impiissinn ot snili (lin fions uni will ııolongır fuldis- ioiKUtul with this partiiulir partot On niussarv nul nie ltibleivils dl disput ıtıoıı ıs u vini w Ικ n tluy h ıpp n thi v must he ındııu d p «tiuit h, vılıılı it ıs ev idi nt tint most ot thosi pi inuplcs vthiih pu tine univ ι ıs il „u li ıppını ss and distiess au in ginu d ııı« u dn dul thin telt for tlınıısımis ıııd tın thons nils tlouusli in south
and w ither in agt, without tilt knoiv- ledgt ot any nihil evil than domistii ihiqinctuilc, oicasiomd at all tunis bv tin eipnuirti» trim ol ultas attend mt ■upon putit, and llie ignobli usolutinn ol piituiing wt.iltli and unw , ι ıhım -, to humilily and stilling woith I shall not, hevvevci, endiavoiu to ι b inge lhe sentiment» ol ol hus m this sli inge and nditulous пыхни it »hall bi m v stink alone to consulii what a bung like nıvselt mav putunu, or, in labour¬ ing foi my own tnppiniss, 1 shall t.y to pionmu, within mv tutli, howivu nanow, tlie felit ity ol others till» is iviiluitly tin dittate oi natine .ıııd hıuıaıııtv, .nul ıs tlie »екс» wtu mult in lie tlıı compaiiHins of < atlı othu I < minit ! e pctsiuik.il but tlıut manı igt
ıs an ısscntıal piomotcr ofalllıappı- tııss " W İni re on cannot collect, antl vi h it e\pu nuuit has not > tt taujrbt. can ceitniilv In known onlv fiom tho repoit nl othirs ι mi niy dt ai father, nt of np num th it I ite man míos can- n U lit eminenti«, h ιρρν llus is 4 question tooni pirtmt In be ne<rlt etui, and 1 Inn oftui ρ iposul it ( ) 1)10,0 whose ait 111 arv nl nniaik, and com- piiliuisiiintss ol knnvvlul,r ( „„I·. thur snilrijisvvoilhv ofit_raid They bave frinii illv determined tint it 14 (lingiious for a inan 01 vioniin to siisptiid thur titi upnn с irli othu if ι tinn vilun 1 pun ns u, Ιιμ,Ι iiiil biluts uı ıs! iblisimi, whin tnt misini s luvt htm unum rul ,11 b th sults, ι ι ι ι
whin liti has bun j, kumul into .ur¬ tilo I, and thi ninni ha» long enjoytel the contemplation ot its ovvn pio- " İt ıs scireeh possible that, tra- vilhng thiough tin vvoilel under tht nilului tot ih inri,two pe ι »ons »hould have been eluntul to tin siine pith, and it wdl not ottill ll ippen tint titilli will quit thr ti uk whuh li tbit has in uh plı ыи, Nm au 1, ıı, ısta- hlısİK d customs! ısıh lunken I, Ihat illunpts tn v irv llu unnsi of lus ovi n li I, vuv ollen toil, in v un .nul how slnll wi puloini ıhıt loi ..thus, whiih ιν, „ι dil, ιιι ι ,| ıblı ot lonq Uting In „ι d ıs loin , indul bv u ison ıs ııodoubt a u iv Inppv itquisiu m nut.. iiiiiiiv ,
but thus it i, thit man\ are diicivcd Λ he are a thousand tamili ir disputes, vvluılı ııııtheı u asou nor judgment ι in deildi — <ци stions tint dude in¬ vestigation ind ıııılı lugu insipid, «ises uhui son» ι bing ηη «t bi dum, mul w ln re httlı ι in lu sud ' ( insilili mv di iu»t I itili ι the sf iteo, linnkilld imi uiquiu li ivv fi vv ι in hi supi osed to ai t upon mv nu ι sı, ns vi bi tlıı r »null oi guit, with all thi reas ns nf u tion piisint t ι thuı minds W utihni would hi ln piu, ılımı ill n uni s if vv u ti ludniss who win ι и nud t ) ıdjııst by ıı ısım, ι vırv ınnıınıı ' ali tlıı minuti di tul ı t ι donn stu div Ihosi wli,,,,,,,v it m ulv unid iga vuil piibibli ısı q ι tilt iiiiiuaih
mints ot tlıcır ıhıldıen but m ılınvı- nutı ıı nl ,ιιι lı ııı ıdv ıtıtagc, tht) will lı hkı İv to lııvc them, ignorant and lıılplts, ti ı giurili m s nıııcy, or, ıf th И simuld not b ippm, thıv must t hast „o ontui tlu world bit ire tlu v sfitlmsi tht\ lovi bisl utili i vv ısı ol· li om their tliiltlien, it tht\ have h ss to fi ι tlu v 1 ave liss ds ι toin pe md thıv losi w uinnit iipiiv ılıııt tin 1 ,vs ot t ılv hm iniltin toııvunııııı oi uniting vullı ııı tııııeı- plinit, and inintls su-u ptıblt ut ni VI lll.pllSSlllll- N itun thiiilori sus hn pilts in tin njit haml nul on tht lilt w luh thn t t ,n, Iıııoıı, wluth liattu hope md it li и t tlı su. ·>ι -ο ι institutul, tbn, is ııı i| , ıılı om, »ι iettili lıoııı tin
uliu ι and time are pleasures, no doubt, so opposed, that w t cannot trrasp at Iııılı, vit bv too much prutltme wi in iv p iss bt twit n them, at loo irriat a dist mu to leuh nthci' Antl you snu v imul ule toolustih mv bilovid ¡litLtit, liom the infihcitv of tally marriage against its institution 'W ill not the misery ot life prov e equallv that life cannot be the gift of Hi iven' '1 he world must be ptopled by mar¬ mge, or peopled without it " If marri ige thi refore be the best for mankind l inil m mv opinion it cei¬ tainly is) it must be evulenth best for individuals or a permanent «.ml netis- sarv tlut) will hi the louisi of evil and some will n utiblv lie sacriliud to thi ι in ι uu ι f ι thus Intin ¿ι
ııııl ι sinuati vi hıı lı vou luvt ııı ult ,,Ι till tVVO I \tlllllls It 1| |)< lis tl II I tlllt Ihı niuiiivtnitiii ıs I ι sın, It In, „, u 11,1. itunisuit mussili mil iei tun wlnli thost ot tin ioii|u_riI stale tit ituiluitil and avotilable ' Indu a conv ntion of tin se ule is I hivt tıkın to ni} bosom tin tond objitt ot ni' hcait s bcstaflutn n, and in 1} ¿hi 1οη·τ piovi to mı a lasting Aouin of tint nmmibial bliss I now ııi|oy and fısıl bound to iiknniv İtilme in tin possession ot mv innoiint and loved I nuisa vvhusi tını ıı ti m to Witts vom «on ipptais tiu οΙΚριιη·? ufan uıılıouııılııl tri ılıtıldı -4id vv linst lovt su ι ρ issi ιι ι·, ivin bum m c\ptť 1 1 tinn vv, , ubi uijiini tlıı unni, ıı I il pııı of a «Milton to ılı sı ubi
Ι ι η ι unu now HIV dilli s| Jlth, In tlu puusi! ot tliat | ut il | ut ol vum Itttu vilu, h muit ons tın ti rins ι u vvluılı il ,ηι I int t x put loi „iv ι n, ss i n ti uigram vour tunini mils IS Will Is to I vi ην Louis ι unind bv vou ist . tendu plcilgt ot tetin liiti,· itin nou Hippi in bıııi4 tlıı uistimin nt ni olit lining tht first vvishtsit mv li, ut I leulily »pelt, and toionvinu voll ot my dt tumultuou in iinding bv tlu usult, I h u ι ılıt uk , lit uruti an ippoiutiuuit in 11 lilt s, mng u lint ιιι ι with oi I lounhaik mil ,οιη uitli „it «Ι,¬ Ι iv n d I onk u au v un ans m, pilliini; out Ilıt nıuı ııı m whiilll αιη ti u ι liv ι ibi stipimi y>a kindly
pi. Ulls. lo illow UH, in uldiliou to II V ,1 v w hui 1 shıll quit till suni i¡ ,1 mv youthiul luppiin ,s bid an lluiioiiiti uh. ι to mv ton,I pnuits ud i. uds auds.ik ι luut otl dist mt sh, us tiu iu vei fuling Imitis of whuh uloin tin blow ot tlu proud xvcaiei, stttumg to hnn a happy lecep¬ tion on hi» ι itin n to hi» native country, and suth is is now promised to vour Allred, and whith I will anxiously look forwird to as the greatest lew aid, of all my toils and dangers My Louisa »hall shaie tue tate allotted to htr husband, in every situation will she be found the companion ot his for¬ tunes and should the God ofall «It »tiny restore us with а double poi tion of bappint»s, and bliss m, w uh tht sındı s
ot an endi uing oflspnng, enir tup ot pli isuic will lie more than Iilled our bliss w ill then indeed bc lompltt« el, and w hil« I pictuie to my »tit »lull seme» a» thtst, suirounded as 1 am b\ all tin piospcct» atn nd niton tlu ni, aid lookini, to m\ Lniusa a» the sourie ot nui ddight I cannot usist cxilaim- mg in thi ι iptiuisotatoninluig heait, " Sviril innocri «.' thou «Inntrer I , timur-, Anj ,. vard stomi Hr vvlm m il. u mııılıı» I ir uns, f Inkl es ıvtr sn nui ıheo 'V il, к nil «Tiril " vahen, mv ılı lust tatlın Tlıı eviri u momit int ι', light miv lu u ■ 1 /ul munii -ixi, u, bosom, ıs nu ıııd sl, ill, vu li tlu aident elesne ol tint son who sul sume, hnise t, W ľh mutul inddutifiil attutii n leun evn loud 1 " \ll tl
This lellu wis as usuil, submitted to W ilham, ıııd iııghlv approved ot b> him, while lu f ului not in renew ing hn insidious repu si nt itions to the t itlu r ot Alfred, in ınsvvıı to Ins last Iavoui ic ceived lhe oppoit unity was unitul too important tobis iiund to Itt ρ iss nu! lus perfidious dt signs wuc piusiiid in thi following mannei, eMinphl)ing but too fullv tins mipoitint tiuth tint "our good ipiilitics nu t tlıııı uu unns, is-piist ns to , munti, η 'In Μι Di Ci -Λΐϊΐηι ι " »ιγ млн sm, "I sluuldhavi u knov Ι ,Ι,ιιΙ voui last istu inul Ιι ι in ι ιιι tn this puiod but vw utul ιι ι 11 | iti ι itv wliith^ivisint tlıı plı .sun „ι ,,,Ι, ,ηι Jii„ юн 1 havı at lu „th ι,ιΙΙιι mu h
puns nul persuasion) priv atleti upon voui son to adopt tht adv ne you so stienuousl} irne lnm m vour las* Itttu I havcııovvtİK satisfaction of com u unit iti ig to л ou tins ague ible ıııtıl hasúm indilli, vou to ıtttı to \l litis stateintnt toi ill pattn niai s I un it tbt saint tune tuil sinsibli the s ι nu hi dıpiits tiun tins niijţbbour lı d tin more it vv dl conti ibtiti to lus inluist ıııd should }Ou on inatuit ıı tit ıtıoıı intuin ι« ııe to advanie lum ι inns nv snpi 1} ot tisli for that ρ trposi 1 11 itti i niv stlf in bnns; en iblul to .ţit lum til without dılıy llus no doubt vou will with me ste thi nucssit} oí u lompl sli ng whin I assilli vou tht ι ttijiis ικ Iv no
means rtconcilul to his dcttrininntion, but aie using every mctliod in then power to iflcct thtir putposcs in ill vinih thi lath of Alficd is by no means deficient to thange his present sentiments is thin daily employ " 1 he accomplishment of) our wishes in this respect will depend upon vour final reply, vv huh I big to be favoured with as soon as possibk, foi tilt na¬ soni above nimeti IS or can I con- ilutlc without olding ny future ser- Miis to yourselt anil son iu hemming tlu insti umilit in ащ ut to any allow ance you m ıs Ih plı asul to gı int hun, ıntl iv hu li 1 t in maki un immediate arrangolili ut f. t Inving paid to hım rigidul) ou' s uni 1 m Amerin by tın lushing hım with kltırs of ııldıt toi tin un, uni ι fit
AI) best wishes will ever atrend his futuri destui) Antl while Iain anxious foi his vnllare, belrvi me den Ьи ' W ıth sinceri leg ird " \ ours most trui y , " \\ ιιιίΛΜ Oí »wob ' M fi «I being still ignorant ot tlıı tit uhcnıus antl designing lornspontl une earned on bv his vipposul fuend, and supcrscdid in his military dutv u that iicighbouihiiod by Ins latt ць pi intimili he runout! with I«oııısı to the itsidenicof W ıllııın beina; invitili to к in un then until tlıı urival ofins next. Utus antl until tiny win ıatlı to einb ırk for Anlını a to join ins tmv n .runnit
Uhi' MV " 11 πι 'o bc gt о 1 ι ι I let] p> · \ncf Is Ли lii| pi, ι tlmi m ink n I Iiunsrlliri r belter („ill. nil, soukou ur.tt I bill, till I III n.n, пц Ik n I ll ι ι 11 v. u, Juliul Will, vtlnji, ııı İsınıp llu bltsl know I lie tl till« But Usi in mrlisl n b p. ,.«uf ιι ι | Λιι,Ι find llu lit, b llul ill il urlu iun mg 1 Di nix, Ilus .шмон, inttivtl, Uliul had liliputit iippoituuitiis ol witlus,- lllg tin in ill. niions aud , ol,ln, ss ol M ilhanı tow ud» tlu niv ihi.il.lt 1 h/a, «юг did hi tvu ful to upínaní hnn m tin most gun rous and timidly niiniitr f ir w hat ht umsulercd uigi ititiuli and a vv mt ut inquinai aflu tum loi au amiabil w itt, by wliobt patiiinony «.nil
allını ι solelv he vv ıs ist iblisimi in tht vvuı Id and placed ni a »lati ot ıe putıhlı jııdtpcndınu , but alas' lus ıntııluı me provili ul little moment Un tunki tu, oi disimeli stul love h ni m vu nutid lus hi ut with beis noi vv ıs ι , «vi, knov n to e xp iti iti on thi sııh|iıt ut (Ionium bhss md hip punss, (Il td lOilsidll tlt'll ι s att un ible, but when an an umul ıtıoıı ol pr.ıptltv led the vv iv to his ι ontui tul sentiments, anıl pu, mised to sn nu hım thi guidili (ili)tit ot all Ins ılısın» — sóidul width "flli'iiiw I I ist f ,r g Id' winn frllii sıkı The I.» 1 thr v., uu Im ,ι temi in bolli <*»il,h, Ьы sljn «1 ¡i, Ilio, tleai tlamu «1 in lli.it loton . it was in this mmner hi enplovul the most precious moments «,( } s ht« 4
ılısdaıınnr; th, ixcuiscoí tlmse ittioli* whuh would hivt sti lirui to hım rr bpıct and lıslııif; liunouis wlnli his mind must havt bun ,1 timstant pnv to tint avcııırııif·; I nul, itmoist ot ton «cunte, atlindant on jitrfiilious nul lonupt ikuls Hovv ,hi!, lent и ь tlit ι nuis" lil, [lirsin, Ι 1ι> Aliud aud limisi »lui luíame tlie aduni il n ml puilt ot tlmse «ho lnd tin ] I, ismt ol bt uijţ know n to th, m , ud tin n inti ι dul (liparimi fıonı ılı, 11 ijţt now insul nnnv to leirit tlmi los loi thur Miictv « ıs ln hiv <st nmd hy ill .uni 111 puoi li 1 dan! Iiuintdto li ul thnn s ıhı ıı Uu lut ns noi vv ıs Ilıtır lu¡ pim ss uer ruin, ιοιημί,ιι than whin, in visitili,; tU. lijiiiits (I
ρ ivi rtv, thev 1 .' m oiportiiiiilv nt ıh i] pııı,« ι ti u ,i| on the ei ιιι Ιι ι 1 sut 1 m ud vv qui , lvv iv those vvlu h tul tuin tlı chute ot tlıı misti ıblt, bv s,q , lung the, wants Hius pissed tht t li H di}siif lon- jug il fihuty, ui|ovnl bv this fond «uni cxnnpliiv pui, when thev wen suni¬ ninim! to othtr stenes, and the iiiival of the litters vi lue h tollon, lush utel then ılıputuıc finin the itimi ol all then youthiul |ovs 31ı Vr tuRiĽCE /o Inu n " VIV ĽrvllLSI ЛИ UI D, ' I havı now tlıı ] li asu cr tisk nor onlv (»t tipl 1H-Ì" to vnui l! v oui but assın mg -v, on bow lu,hiv I i uppioie ni voui (Illuminiti i nd
th, undun vv nuli 1, I to murunne duli Kİııptınn il mj dums .s speil lud m v uu lisi lulu ' 1 sh II,,, t,x|, t, ι, imlini „pou tlıı tvils itinduif, Ihı pl, ısınış an »mg tiom ııı itlim mı I illunus w he¬ tin ι ill ıııd ul m untunk ,οη-ηΙ,,ι,Ι Uu mv, dimst Útiul luvt diudttl Mill liti upon this subjttt ind it nnk rem mis toi uu to hopi it nny piove pmpiti, us Nivoin 1 istiiigtilu ity " I 111 VI bl„ K m tO lllgl tilit von will nut losi mv timi in itpiiiing to the qiilltiis ot voin ui vv q puintiin ut, and iluiiblliss vou will punivi tht ncnssitv ot so d ..... g whin vou lellit t how vtiv «lisu put dili it must ippi u, to lontinui loni.ii in astiti ııı mit¬ li ılı mil idli nt»» 1 tuist, theitloie,
vm »ill »uinut fintini ılıt iv, | io ut m ι lubuk Ιι ι voin lorps andin • n hl V , tO ll) ,11 11 sputlllll ι nt I h ıh sı iv iddiissul voin inuit W Ι un u pıt, ting linu to atl vnu v m vv Ii «ti ν 1 1 t ıslı mav In ni¬ ns, uv li tlt II iv v nn txpinsts inil likivvisi iinpi.vvtiul lum to altas Ibc agun tn v i uun'tiuts trom me, wlnlt von now pisst-s mv uitboiity to ılı ıvv ııpnn hıııı I, ι voin tutuu sup plu- I un minimul in ln, univ ing ınv hutr hi vuil ι xhiliit ι pulut Milliliğin ss t ıııı ıi| lv with mv w ıslııs and adl ιιι ιιι,ι ıvuv pullulili to Villi llltlll Sitisi ЦП Η I llll Ulilllt tti t ι pilli tills lllllll duni ui inni ιηι ι, muni ol tlt vuv sının mi li nudi) disposi шп li hu
It tiltil İSI sini ι ul 111 .lilts \,„ ,π,Ι till lllllll , 1 lllll ll SHIU Milli Its, ılı ικ ι η s ,ι,,Ι „,Ι I „,ιι ı, suu ninth t .....ín ν It ι vou to It ill Ilk tlllt I I 111 I ll loi Sillit till Ipıl a must «ıtrin u ,ι tin ι «Ίι ι,ι ,ν iti ι, ι risp, ιηΐιικι unti bini, tlt u tint oi vAİınlı conıınıcs mt ot his «Нин» le- gaid anıl «ıttıt liinuit tou ι ,1s мш I therefoie adv ısı von, in th most stri - nuoııs inanılır tovıtvv linn ıs a hım anıl ııiMiıııs Inınd, aud to ht urinili il bv hun in ill things vvluılı u, ııu ııı s, oui ıııtı rt-t nini wtltiii, w ht u von linnut, at tin moment, limit ulvice 1 am n u lı plı ısı d to observ e th it tin ι lui и, vi n n он tht point ot run λιιι Ιο, ıs ι onn nial to ılıı hi dlh
ol I urn,ic in residents, and contluduig that I shall, on nceipt ot voui ntxt epistli, find von in ι statt ot ri dines» loi vour voyage, I will so fır ust sı- tıslıul Mı ultime it vv ill, no doubt, piovi 41 ıtılv nig to vour fitlings to be ıssıııul I slnll htnuloiwud istuin ν,ηι inn,., 11 limsa ıs ι luppv id¬ ol 11 t 1 mv ta· ulv and in tins is¬ su nu ıs, nit unul 111 equal pırtın pıtı m in tin llu turn 01, 1). 11 Uliul, ^ 111 illuminati i itber 1 Dt I 1 Mil« 1 llu toiUintsoi this I« ttu wen pio- 4 uti > « t ivuv wish tint lillui ıııd u uld ui tltv t u 111 ut ol tht ılıtıp tu is M u uı wh li it »lupusul «U
fred to leaın tint a s,cret ими spntul- eiici hu! been so lom; ι ai i u d on ht tim n lus titilli and hun, nor, ould h, toihi η ιιριοκίιιη^ Ins I. iui, I tor this In, uh ot ι ,nit,,!· m ( , tli4iiir.il his fallid sassuianus lul hun to lousidtr il is ,1 luppv ι ui iun«tani ι in its ce¬ nini tuidunv In uplv In liis uplıı.ııılıııçts he was »Iso ıssın, din W ilh un tint ıhı s, шш. паши и ons wi и ol ι то«! simple and , lisu tuist.,! n ııııc and 11 ul ριον.,Ι lııjhlv adv intimons ui toi «.tulum lus vv.slı s ,,,,ι umld lu l.ıııjr,! ulum Imin tilhin hun Huv Ind ıhı ι liti t o) aııoıııjıshııi!. (lut к, .muhatımı 11 1 ıs lau uin, hut whuh had takın pla,,· ou tlı, pa,· „i |„s t ith, ι 1 1» ai ι ojnpaııv пи; , pistit that W il-
Inni ι, u ııııl hoin Mı Di (lırıılge (and w Int h h, dissimili siibniittid to imputami togi ılın with thi «ulv ııı· tont tını d ııı Vllııds litui, ti udul to m puss his nunii with this ulta and ru, Inul Ins ili,, lion nul lunul Ι,ι «ι I uu thi mint ski,,, , „οι , in this In ι 1 U llll ,l W 'it 11 till I ,11,111 mg mills ρ, ,,,Ι 1/, Di Ι ι inixi I· \\ in
Ílu n u ipn ι vours dinului ιηι Ihı 111 ist ,\| It slid, ,It h,l.t 111 isimu b is n s, ,,,Ι ι , tonunu IIII thi ino , i.iiunlv nI von цп t narini K.i uıv son Ml ia mt to ι Hun von mv mosi lu Ull It thinks I, , vun nu IllUUUS kl i ılı sui- to lililí «l' .1 ПИЩИ lit
M Iiii li gives me the pleasing opporlu- nitv ot piacing hun moie immediately under v nur guid nice cci tain as I am tint von will, on ill illusions, ten ilerlv ibeiish Ins intenst " I have bv this pust, madi knnvi ,ι to Allied tint hi nnv lenivi liom vou not onlv ι supplv ot ( ish to t ike linn to lus rikuin lit but tint lu m iv «I in up .11 v. u to furnish ill other « 41, ι η ι s im ι sırı i n lıı, ınıv il u. \ıi( . nl ılının,« his stiv with his π, munt I will thuı lor« glııllv ι in In η ι vnui ıllu nl bu .lining in ıgınt in tins bllSUKsS md I will think Villi t ι prismi İnin with tin Itttus ol . it • ht vou hiu h ui ph ısı d to umitimi , nul ni rilliin von will hivi thi good IH ss tu ıh iw iq in m· loi «vuv ıs
pi usi uhi ni iv sustanı, accoubug as it ıs пкчп. ul hv lum 1 uu still vm «mxious tint he should dtptit In in uuu nughboui- homl, n 1 in hopi s with vour in- fluinu to leeoinphsli this wish ahu 1 shıll с om lude, assın ing um ol my guit ohhgıtıon, hv siibsxiibiiig ny¬ silt, 1), n Sn, With sincere estuili 1 Ollis nuh, ľ Di ( ι nun, ι W ι ik ıııd ι.η-ί,ιικίι .1 bungs, who thus pl iu unpin it mil iiuliiuitul uni- lui, nu uı Ihı dillisin fuinilships and iitiliu, ,,Ι tin illuminons and pri¬ mbon. İllisin ints nI tin pustiit div, uhosi ι matı anns ut aloni dm Util vol ι к
II) distil h llolll, -tl. tl lliqillllltl tO ι flu I llu unu ol till ι Ii dillons tlu uıısuspıılıng anıl un,mulul nul hv abilitai, tv limosi muniu ivabl, sı,,, hng it Ihı sinul nııııı ot 1 ι κ ιι,Ι-Ι,,,,, pintisi uııılıı И, pu , nun. 111 Ull-I, thi most dum, (unities in ıkıın. d, still, Il ..... IIİİSUUI ISJ (O |b> II l.l~( I KlldlUg s .....V Ilo« tillin till s,,,, (,| tlllll ρ. Ilídio Ils ,ι,ιΐΐ,η, ss
t) li, vi im ,|4in, ,Ι lu. η ..iubii ılı II, ııu. dl J u J г) .1 ,„ «Vm I ,1,) Whi, „ » sl, us ill il, li, mli , I .un. Vu lbv imi liv ul u l uke, ,11 w. w Il ,Ч( pil U ....., lor Ulllllslliplltlll, u lı m, „,,Ι hv W ilh un wh hu, u
I.......... luns, ι , |,„ |„„ м , (у и I ss, 1,1, „ , ,Ι,,Ι |„ |,| „, I I III Π! . Ι 1, lit 1 I Ι111Ι1Ι1, ι χχ n ι«, Ιι , ll ■ Ι Ulis Ol nullt IM sl, ι,,,Ι,,, ,, ,,,,,.οη ΠΙΙ,Ι,Γ ο , h s „,,ν ,Ι n ľoiismoiiih, , Ι,, W IS IO I,, bill, ıııd ıh, „, ι, lusi,, ..... itin Ununa I luv . III. 11,1h hung („llipi, ml U only iu, ,1 t,, t ,ko in alluminati кат»
i.l tiliisi luun' III uhosi s,„l, IV hl liiil spini m mv h |, v .livs ю hul th, bumbii ...Hımış ι tuul, ι „lui ti.«in¬ lin« ι his tunul Willi un uni s,, к, „w -"»'- '."M'""" ...... υ spun ηη..,', „, , disi uit ıhın, jov, and pl, „,„,,, Vll.lll .uls' piovili bilt too, spi, s,,,, „1 the umut un ırloıv oi m \p il d.v His hut dutv vv ıs i,, addı,,, I, ansiou, ρ um, vvluılı 1. İti ı w ı, « «impalimi hv ılı w hm, lı nn W il, ι un and but ıh. ι,, liuun lu Ima, ,,Ι lıı, b, ut will hi lii-i pom in.I in h s I niw. II Im ι /./ I// 1)1 t 1 Vllllll uv ι ι VIII s| I Villi I 111 IIISVHI VOUI lis! Iilllll 1 waited the puuni w ln, h now pi nut« 4
ınv inhuming mu tint 1 shıll ı iun· - • I. itt Ιν Ι, ,νι tin, to imbui, toi Uni II, I Noi lllll Ι Ι,,Ι .11« lllllf II! ni ik. lig tlıı pıt pu itinn, su absoluţi ly mussili loi 11111 mv. neto Ni vv limns· wuk 1 anı blu «nt h ιρρν in bung inalili d to ·■ ninnini iti tlllt niv gond antl muons Un ni Willum Ins pio¬ sului lui VUth l VU V I- UHUI II ipilslle in ι pu 11111111 point ol ν ич, .„gut ible tomuri untul пыша, ms And while I itinin von ınv most gı mint thinks Im vom boniititiil muks ot ailu tion, SIIİİU llll dso U, iss.ili m,, tlllt Itul Sltlsliul m,, VV .11 ni VII li IV ι tms, to II „U t till LUIIIOIIs lllllllllt m e mu luu thus SO | , pp.iv pluul 11, tlllt llllllll 1 slnll, VII look liplo ıs , pin¬ tu toi, „id bi pioudlv , uitlul hv u к !
. lllll I 'u I vo ι η ..... ıh, , .„ıslını, id „Ι. .< ,,ιιι pi, „ni, m. ι lion ,Ι mv 111 silisi 111 ISU,, llll , UHI |[|„|, ,, ι ,ν .uuu tht vv umist t ilum .tiv guidili heut О ntv deinst t, thu' wlnt pie ısım s Invi 1 mit ılıı ulv ix pu unul, vvl it lovs hivi 1 not d u ulv lelt fıonı an intuì musi so ti il ill ili SO lUtllll Iti İV „1 IİIİSIİV llllltlll l'lı ısınış vi huh em doni In eqiullul Ι,ι tinsi Ul lui Ululili, ling oul dilti lui md unitul I ivi 1 ι tlu bh s mg, vou Invi loudlv h..|>ul up, n vou ıhıldı, n ulms, IV, s now si, „„nig Wilh llll ι lion, slnll lu . .иЫ nit tv up hited III misons to ill, lull lllll II Hol bisiulun, limito wat( h "u ι md pi
lutili, p.... nul Inppmiss ot, „ι,η- ι stun ıblı ,Ι lil Hts Il n,u ι inim, liv ,1 „.stillili. Ιι Ι,,,Ι , puntul ulun lllll lu . II VIHI. .1 Ul ile I li, s, it ι in tlu lutin ms, „1 ,„v lu lit 1 u nullte a sul I m vu 11' ΛιιΙ m tin, trud hun ot sipu m, η 1 ix, Inni uui in tin 111 Slush ut mv soul tint ııı til mv (xii tum» to (Ί, good mv gu it. st uu ud slnll lu tn ¡,ικ vou ph ısını toi flu hi] puu ss ol mv liti , li dl loi evei bı loiiuntieil in tlu jov, vvluılı vou Uhui uhu.' iun ııu t uu! ıııd diu tun iti Unui, ' l'"· Ih .1 ne uh I ugninolo siv, tint Ululiteli itt I \ on oui airival ni h. t
Λιηηιιη I slnll not 1 il to uliin Vili ,Γ1\ΐη π Mill tilt plltllllllls t<l I V V Igl ' T Ml Df C L VRIDC! " ЛУ Di VH Sill " 1 li iv с now the pleasure to n know litige tht rt rupt if vour list esti t ιηι d funni and to stih that vour son is it Itmrth (iftt ι minv t\utinns on mv put) in peiltit icuhmss for mibuk ıtıoıı and It ivts this plıcı ib¬ ret tlv b ι tint pu p 1 un bu'hlv dittimi »ul ^i m fied vwtb the t «ululent ι von Invi bein plcasid to coniti on tut nut he assumi шу servîtes irt, ou dl ona sions, at your command while my in-
tui tuil Hillut ut c shıll bt attendant onth v., lini ot Mimi I hivt molding to vuur w ıslııs ılv nud linn ısıi| ply ot t ıslı ındtur- nishııl Ihı lıttı ıs ot ι it tlıt as leıpıııcıl, ıııd u luu in n ul tit it iiitbtiistiiiint I slnll ι ι Iv t.v ıı ıs disimi I wnl tikt ρ n mul ir urt tint vinu s in s imimi ıs not ınıpıdu! by tlıı tott ıgıı s md \iliili 1 shıll re¬ mun inxiiius to hi irol lus siti anival at the st it inn ot his it runtut allow mı to subst i ıbt ıııvsı It ' lllll! till snildt Ιιιιη,Ι, ' M II U VU O (t SNOI! A most puntili tisk still iun micit toi Altied tn pul un u nm Iv tint oi sepai ıtıng liom Willum «ııııl Llıza,
while tin (ulings ot luu ι win m, 1, ss ,,t ι 1 ι tin thoiu.hts.illi iv n, hu nıtıu vill ,ι nul pumn, tumi hu unu I, li piiillts ind tlu ıııılı ol ISO. ntv uhu II it vv is lui pildl to ||V( ni but to vi hu li lis' sin lusdooinul h\a to uttun Oh' li v stimigli ı'ul -lie mov. and intuisi ıhı h, ut nt Mind when, in sp iking nl the (Illusiti ot sunes anıl plı ısınış the e ıppıııeıl betou thun this ιιιιι,,,οι.Ι uil susui plı ıııd uti, sh „||,dt ,Ιιι,ιι 'I simuli pudl ι η ι, luin in mv nıtıu li, I, Is w ,11 „thus mt lu ιιι , lill ν ni mou h, utilul but hee un 1 v as bi.iuglit npthui 11 sp t on wind. I hue suut ehlim, ııı ıııı\pıı»,ıhlı in
ι ιι uitiin Hl, supi IMI tO .111) ι ht. thi imi Id mulli , Ilınıl anıl hu t it loss ol ıı lıı. lı III, munti ι , |||..,||||| siti— ,Ικ spit w hu, th, gunhol- nl ınv miaut ,I,V- „Ut pillili tho-, „ip,,) dll, whuh ρ ssııi without 1 ı,|iuıtuılı Ol tus 11 ιρρν, mv Altın', au thıv, who hivi it in thin pi wu to residi at tin plut nl thin att uhun ut, that spot wilt u thıv Invi (..tulli lixiil au alin tmu on all aminul tinin and w ht u ινιιν ubin t appi us .iiiu.ibli to thuı ivi- tun Ihı lutili In hl- in W hli h thi) III »Olit l„ l M 11 l-l tİKlll- s.1 Kl-' ' Husi .Itlu, lilliil ulus hivi ιπ- ι, I nul linklimi ni ınv In ut ıhı li¬ ni, „ıhı..,., , „I „İV lllll... It ,,,Ι, U İt tl,< ι .'t gl Ol HIV llllllll»!· p un its,
andni tims« Inppv d iv s 1 hiv, pissid with s«, umih iltasiin in tlıı (hum mg sh h ol mv ıı alivi bnt lim Iv lumu V ho ıs tlıııı, ıın tleaitst \l- friil who his not expuitiKid (vin m tlı, h, nis ol lingiioi and disgust, th, suit «tints whuh ι vu w ot thi cnı hunting ph «suns iniovul bv tin villigt nisin» ısıapıblıot dituding- " It is onlv in mı d lilt 1 it ıı thit VV( ι ,n tnilv ui|ov tilt tin- suies ot tin hi ut m th( sm и tv ot α Iond husbind, ıııılı un. 4 ilnlihui, and sinun In, mk oin n nm Immi all otlu ıs Ihı pıosputs m ıvtr sınıl ın„ tin I1V1114 unni ut 1 lı, tlıı nıuı nus simpli and tlıı nıınıl vu tuons In siah α hli tlıı pissions untold
lliinisHu, V1IİIIOIIİ inpiiv οι lllll lo anv pus in iiiil tin bosoin in-pind W llll till Illist tillllll İnli I lllllllltstll dt punit. ton Ilt ivin lllllll loi llll till r jm- Ни w un, ı ınıv toll nv tin ılın „t , I isimig ums inti tlu itu,, tlıı vohıplıını nnv ι tilliv ıtı tht iiili tiuitsot tlıı t iiili ud tlu phılosophır llllllll.,, İHS I imtUlipl lllllll it, ıs, but •un 111, ЦП lllllll Villig, I I l Usi¬ li, 11,1 iiii souttv ot mv nlitnis, and ılıt hoşum ol mv Uhui ι . ıcposı „pou in snui muti ntn,, in uns İS ill 1 shıll lupmi t ,, ur,] In., mv lup p.lKSS Ubili „Il lllldld İl IİU t Ul b Ol HIV V Ulli lllll sunil III Ull itlu t ton „I ,1 llllllll Uld m tunns lu, h mil V disumisi sn nm,,,, „t uni pillu , muld not lul tu π i' i du | n
pu ssınıı ηη tiu fuling nul susci pnble hi ut nt Uliul «hi к idilv toiouv Ihı «bili u ni ili-ing.s w ludi nuuht fikl pllU III till (lllllsi ul a n u u irs 'Ни liiiliiWnps Ol lllllllg, i hI, h Ulllsldlllll I, lil, ЩО,· sUllt (Ulit MU n,« in ι minisi „m ιη,Ι Ιο,,, ,Ι,οι.ι tblln »hh 11 I, pililip, IIIUI İtin w u, I, (xpiiiin.ul vilul h, vi is, Iv lltlllll I tilit IUIV II |>| lll.s 11 , il, ııı« Ilımındı hlı „mou md j ι _, ,„ I lill Ul IS ι inutilii ι,ιιηι,ιΐιιΐιη,, >..... '"""„th,, \tt u, İVV Ithst Hiding h s Usivi, mon Ιι« ıhı nini ıhı llll ι ol ıhı ıııonıı nt illudi ıııııst s. pıı m his lllllst İIOI1I llll uutıı ol ill lııı ι ıılh'v plı -,ΙΙ, s lo avoid ıhııd.ıı 'ııı pings whi ll
would nu.ssillh aiioinpinv l l„llll.d idilli İU U SOİVUİ toil ,k. .ih isti 111,1 nn, sp,, tul dipanili, not s,,,·, ,„., ....... t..... .„h, ixpuulul m.p.mng η ,1„ „, tlllll w nulli he ouupiid 111 siung I u. vv. 1Γ I IUI thllUg bull. ρΐ.,.ΙΚ.Ι Ι U tills at „ι , „lv h ιιι llu . xl ι , ni „· I'll V „I , ll ν It'l ι. nu ι hi 111 l', pi..... ! lllll, Ilk ill, ni W llll I tlVlllg -Ull, W Ulli , 1 ,Ι | 1 1, • „tf g,,,' ν 11 Ι ι ι untul 111.11,111 . I ν η ,11, ι,ο, t. Ι,,,Ι, un! uli. vu. ' nol pi „u I lliii ιι, Ii ıh. mingili 1 nul „osi <lltilil.Il | uh. vili,,, u,n,lini, ,1 bv the lumi ılı, χ lov. 1 Xli Ol VOL I
