Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Mary-Jane: a novel
M A R Y - J Λ N E.
CHAP. I Л liityitte " I TULL vou, FIciirv,! t n not to be dil- fuided, thcieioie moie wards on the lubjeéT: would be ulelei " " Nij, but heir n e, and------" " 1 v ill not hcaı i ve oui jou lı ive to lay. Is the fithei to bc ι uled bj tnc ici, o tl · fon by the fallici ' —When j< ui mothti ens liv nigl evis obli¿cd to f ib ıııt , but it ıs my tuın to govern noie, nd I wnl not cali у rcfign mj pieiogit v. " VOL. I. n « But
" But furely, Su, ι feu wc I« -----" " Do Ilot Ulk lo 1 e ol J ) I le ι Week Am I to bc [ioli ! up uit un ıhı In kc of this conloa ded с \, until I I) come ıs dij an! ıs ruítj i i r 1 lie n , bec lu e jou ftel vomie f u I to ι nu nv i L '" to i mı on cf tile Willi ι ! ice , h ic 1 fliail fpt π I the lunule clu Ι Ιι, tj ıj i'c bencin oí ι chu ι in ) plı uı! nm Ί htiltli 1 Π ι 11 to ci ι ι ubil thou 3 i llu e ll ,ιιιι li ' υ uı' ¡inni ι ι 11 ou 'itu " lì «t, S r, J luu J lie 11 lllf Iliit will mal с it lelj ι q I ıu t u m , ίοι u leiíl thelc tlu e ι, e l> ι ι l u un" " lou lui ulic i bun ι I - ) u bc •------' i' IV, Sı, ν UI bulinei I jouui ιι j ли ha ids, 11 it I un uiucq «uled ut ι but l nue pl dj. ' ni} m i nul lu mc Uion
" Thn in rk ll ,ЧГ h, Il uiu re-dy to-tiionov moinmg at in caii, houi, lo let cil ι Uh ι e οι Μ ιι 0 te, uı, lut lic, lo
1 1 lolle, ıs jou hne ti) thing lo pírt uuh, îou (lull cul' up «η ] lcil D e , oı ııl ıpt lomt other method of ruling lu, plits to keep 5 ou iiom ft irt ш_, tint 111 Ixttcrn tjouiii dilution, Ι ι, jou dü 0 l will ililinhtni )ou, uu' leii ι ill lam u οι li to Mt ¡ Jmc Mui -I ine it l! e nula il c f trul the 100 11 " W ti', Mil) 'uc j 1 , Ululi,! Ile η obj tl IJlt) lj Ul (J to Mu utt ' " If it ıs ι jui ι Ιι little,' к, li ι! λι ι i Ι , , "tuli.il> mt" " Ihn', ι gud gul, Itu i, In ι u ıgı ittful on if mne ------ Ľutul dil ııı ıtıoıı lıuı '-, ıl'be ıtMaıgıte t nnı- 10W ııı (pıtı i the dciıl, and ai lu pırıl iı hc 1 ot th it İne ile ' ' Bel ıt mc, ' 1 01 id Huu,, « 11 İni " 1 ııı noi 1 1 ι tid, π o ıln, 01, 1- ¡tra uould iifìnuit , ıı 1 ρ (¡ıoı,— but dont piclUTlc tot ııtıı Ιι l ıııt igun, 01, b) the Lord, Hi bink ι our tidl" ι 2 "Μγ
All )1U di(, с ( , I w li II 111 )OU h l te, d ι ) и wíl d it lo, ι i-
о 1 i—l iti I I" imi edn(cl) .lu Ι ι . 3 M n me i J 1 b iin í ι ι с ι Ι un to i t ol, ι ι excelled at ч 1 ι η 1 ι II Ι ice 1 ι 11 Се to ici 1 1 \ h lhe ..η 1 lut 111 turn ) Il lieu of Mu i ir I 1 J toi, nI, cil ι I Je I cicin, 1111 t 1 , Ι iun! jou >j de- ι et je u ι (, uid u nel a 1
ch d mic¬ ci ι l СП ι 0 ι Mr i к ic mill, modulai ιη^
modulit ng lus vone, ordere 1 h m to eon¬ ii iet the gentleman tj h n uniidatclj. JMr. Nuilhcjtc, however, Ι . cd h n the trouble, for Lefne he hau tune to ivnhdri», he enteie' lhe ] arlour. Tne ufu il 1 aiuta¬ ti ns bcin t ' over, Mr Nortlic )tc le itcd hun¬ felf b) the'nrc, 1 d a fpice ol nnilj tiv«· ity minutes с ipicd ue another ucid wis et¬ ching«! on ciihcr fide , at lift Mr Rulmill, who h 1 1 not quite r"gnne 1 tl at trinquiliitv his fon hid dilluibc I, tl us iddiclied his illiler — " No v do ι ou 1 no ν, Mr. N ir lieo e, if 1 was not iell aupi unicii ivitu jou, u d ιί- fuied of the conn irj, I Ihould pionounce jou one ot the mull ill bıcıl men in tne ιν 11 ld" Mr Nhiithcote, liking his ejes from the tip of a b ι lit hr if headed poKci, on ι In h lluv lud for lome time been intently fived, hunié'! u " c i'ibiin lity of cogita- l юл, ' and tut ıoı t upl ,i u gued eiuieilly 11 j It
at Μι. Radmill, it was fuch a look, how¬ ever, m nhich the other could not be unf- t ıkın , it fpoke, ıs plain as a look could İpek, "This finiture upon m j behaviour« 1 j no means pleafing, and 1 c\pec~t an apo¬ log) for the r ilh words you have had the temerity lo utter ' Mr Rad mH, confcious of In, error, re¬ plied— " Nay, now don't be -ngrj—)ou know I have lucha rclpeft even for )Oui peculiari¬ ties, that I would not offend jou for the world." The look of feverity which lowered in the eyes of his offended auditoi, immediately vanillicd, and he again filcntly fixed them upon the L4trennty of the bi ifs-hcadcd poker All ıemaıned mute for nearly te ι minutes longer, a ten minutes painful in the extreme to
to Mr Radmill, who was at ill timesgarru- louflj inclined, when a iccond time he ven¬ tured to diaci a fcev words to Mr Noith· cote. " Whj, mygood fuend, jou ippear un- ufuillj penfive this evening—vvhat his oc¬ curred to perplex vcu '—Come, come cheer up, I cannot bear this taciturnity—it rather heightens thııı dinnuihc trouble ,—it pro¬ duces reflect on, ind when the mind is Lut ill it e iı, ι ııt is ι diligiecible eonpani in v e fliould in bnei the full opportunıtj of finking oil —Don t jou think I am ng t '" Mr Noithcote, witiiout ılterıng his po¬ fıtıon, eniplntically pronounced the freezing nionofyllablc, " No ' ' " The devil you don't I" returned the othei, " then jour feelings on theie occa- iionsire flnngel the revcrh of mine Did jou ever fn d cileíhon at thofe tunes ¡ ro- ducc happinefs ' ' s 4 Agun
\ i n the inono r yll d 't " No ι ' met lus
" Wl j, ihen mt to bclnppj istobeun- 1 q ] j— nh) then peifift m that which muft г ir fou nq I ilmt to jotirfelf? ' " Ι ter og ito it , ' he rt, lied, " b) no nuni (uit ni) d Ipolition, thei foie I never nluei l' m ' " I'll η ι returned Mi Ridmill, nthei icn uo uouf 1 ), " luiclj )ou will tl nou¬ le ! e tint lo Itt inopin^ in ι chi ni ci s enr nei, nd keepng othcu fi η ıı | ¡ ng the Lencfit of chceríul ind tıılııtııı^ с «merla· tion, kil it ihould proie umici une to jnurielf, hovener jou nuj Iccl, cin b) no meins be d r ible to them ' Mr Njithcite ι nmcdiatelj irofc, mil with much it! cnlj ic,ltd — " 1 il с maj llu cuile, mil the cleft v ill ceifc ,' and m del. He of ill the ipolo D ics or remo llrinccs oi Mr RidmiM, or even и ithout
tını; lor t' e i ιι nt tu lhe hun il', ι little chigiinel it the u - t 1 hllllielf Ul the thill, t\-
llll politii t') COljlj 1 eS 1 ) V ^ i e -u e t i « olhei niin ilun N oi th- iotc ul i h ti u ucci t i't ' il ·. ι (luon, .ot u c it le u d citi elaikcu ni) iloois "'' W h), , ' beried H 11), ll h linei i ıth Mı i [tne bem if eltlVltllel I ll, til It Ín! pukei, "I un lu puled, knoi ι iuti tibeio «e lic juin le I \м t h M N i h oie ills oddi ics, md it t t 1 ime ι ιη ρ ο- le nng Ιο u uth itljittt fir lun, tl ,ι ) u lho« ΙΊ / id hısıhlpleiluie bj co upl un ig OÍ h s peculi lltlcb " " ı'u; ι ) I lejt I Ite e 1 Rtd n'!, " ini J tO bc iccount Ule t 1 ) )U loi ) t lit 'Uet > ' " '!, ПО m li, letuined 1! lij, "£ only ıııtı t to inimi att — ι¬ β 5 « R,
to ,ι elo M .'
" Rot jour ìnfinmtions 1 " rejoined lus angry fıtlıcr, " I wonder, Sır, that you, who hive profefled fo much refpeft for me, fliould u(iV my difpleafure by your impei¬ tinent infinuitions — But, honever, be you ready eirly on the morrow to accompany mc to Brighton , and d'ye heir, Mirj J mc, do you ule betimes in the monung, that we may be able to get our brcakfafts before wc bcyn our journej."
CHAI'.
СНЛР. II. Tlic Beatile. JOLI ORL we proceed vvıtlı Mr. Radmill and Ins funily to Bnghton, which tetuany took place, is he himlelf had determined, on the folioeving morning, the rcidcr pio¬ bably nny wilh ю be bettu acquainted w th hun, tnd the eccentric Mr Northcote, eve will theiefore take a lctrolpecttve vuev ι no (ome puticulus he at preient mult be en¬ tnely unacquainted with , ind then, thou d hi ha.e the indin ıtıoıı to nuve the jou uj, we will let oll polt huk for Bıı o iı0u hue- wile. в S Mr.
Mr Rulmill s fıtlıeı, for ι number of jeus, fel'oevcd the ıvocıtıo i e f drj filter, in hit lııfl: ol mcrcantı'c cities, ihc metro¬ polis of 1 ι J ml, md it his deith the prc- i nt Mi Ridilli, lu ig in I Ion, the whole of il с I ulun I i v le d t > I ıııı, toge¬ thu uni. f ne ¡iui} ι imi inns in the fund , lie h vevu, not осени i 0 it j rudcnt to quit ι tude which houli) mucilcd ins ciptil, mil fion ıftcı muiyin 0 ι eeonmi with 1 tt>e or no foitune, uid, in ill humm probibiilj, ι numerous piogeiy might ful- 1 ev, which, U ν future period, muft be pioudcd for, he, for ncai lj t e ¡at tinny jeirs of his hf , e«ı ıs cduİJib 11 pie re mg wlnt lif turned crumb, ol coiutoit fo old a^c, is if hi enly depend mce hul b-.cn tier η Huuy Ricinul, howtvei, vis the fole fruit ol tin uni η, e ho ve ıs at this period beut five ind tevcnle jeus of ige, of t ime ţ ci ion an 1 ¿afj department, uıd lı id ıeceıved a i beril edueition tt the Unıvcıfıtv ot Cım- * b idge ,
,ΝΓ bn ! e , f л Rul n 1!, on the d ıtiı of hb ııılc, Im h p[ cn dıı'ıcıı 11 i) insoti'y tlırcc ıcus с 'd, rekli d, \% сь ulj ь it ivis I is mtu tui nc r *o n vi) цат tint lus fon fhould n rl li«, mı ıcnf ι ıltlı, uncie ι ilici d ι th 1 ι il cl , l'ıcıı ι h f| rdnop нь ıc\|c ce ilutn Jit cnibl hnn uith j rjr ne ) lo f [\ ι ili«- cliiricUr of 1 geni с ι η
cr pr q =1 p ude f
RV i!, nntu, . ft of 1 ι ι if « J 1 Ind i i h 1 ci J Hellit lul e C e 1 lv' en lic ι t 1 i 1 CO ioli ll 1 1 I 1 ICCU! 11 t 1 , III 1 the circi Ol ll I,
as *cl u ь iti ι ι it \ η , uıd fu du Β ilu . ou ь 1 1 0 'i uj with ut em юу- ment, he n ueh ıllıetl to pı ocu е лп cnut- M'eut tO Oe U,) hib IttelıtlÜll, tnt t ПК
might as glibly roll away is it hid done for¬ merly. To begin his career at fome one of the witering ¡ laces, ippeared to him the moil eligible phn he could purfue to forward his purpofe, as he conceived it more eafy to form a connctftion with the faiiuonable part of the creation tint reforted thither but for a few months, and »ho of courl wire more in want of fociety anil amuiement thin in London Radmill uas а min tint conceived lncef- fintlj talkı g, ind fj. ак ng lib mind ireely upon eiery fubject, ind eien gmng Ыь opinion ind idnce upon r! ings nhich lt- reill) knew nothing ibout, uis the lureft method to be d ftınguıfhed ıs ι man of ta¬ lents and piolound audition, ofuhch lie wis not ι little ambitious , though, to his gieit dilippomtment, he frequently found tho fjlle n he adopled filled m the defired ilTcft, id more oltc ι procured hım ınlult anel
ind contempt, th uı the cxhilarit ng phudits of fmceri ipprov ii. He was irritatile m the extreme, and would, from the moft trivial ciulcs, fpeik a thoufand t nplc ι int things a thoufind times in a dij , an 1 would, within the la 1 e time, bc as oiten in ι ood humour, forget¬ ting wh t Ind occuned tocnnge him, until the next g «ft of pauion would bring it frefh ui on Ins mc nor) To my peifon 111 the vvoill, Northcote excepted, he eeouJ 1 never jield in chfpute, even though Ins atlv rhry hid lucceedcd in LViiiLing to him tliat evi it in defended was loplull e d mil u rone >us, f r to be foiled ill an aigu nent, he с inc ved, was v dil D racc to beicmimbciel by U ıvho witnclfcd it—a m i ııl ev uid to that cti icity and (ound jud n nt ot vv 1 h he evis evei anxious to be tliougl 1 111 poUcfhon ot
Though
ΓΙ ough eeıtlı all thefc foibles, or, if the reader pie ile , finit , hc wis at bottom not a 1 ι ' h 11 tcd min he ее ıs humane and be¬ nev ι lent , ι piteous llory from in obj ct in chila ι I ire io find tie ro-«d to his heilt, and 0 uiclc iislund tolnspuiic flung To j io t this, ivc nud but to enum rite oi с ι iil nu —a pool wo ι an, nulled by t! ui ut o rıuıtn f o' a Π 1 1 e v ho evis uure η liun a ud uere t rllı ihm was (.onhftcnt ν nh the fu nn of tus of¬ fice, о e mo n" ttrictcd ki lı ılı s at¬ tenuo ι " Inde d, ud et t, e i) In ι ' cv- clumccl the j oir un u tun Ue t " Bat ι )t í)! ud s tU 1 t d of ι ruig I, eoeiíer itcd ılı Ii ' , tl ι lo e ĺ .1 lit tike jo ir t u о , viť) v u " JJ) no hurij mc, ' Ilu tr nalomí cjlĽulltiť," ndl 11 't veto beyjou,' then takın a duld ıı ıu ι cicli ir n, an 1 tottering vvı h t u btn t n, vv s v ι hi ıı chi¬ co U tely
confuhtcly away, whe it " fi r j I iute in ^cd her to qu clan her | ι «, 0\ei > v. with term and Uu b u , fii- dr^j j t 1 on thv. с ld cuth, and, with ejes iwuun 1; m tears, bt 0 ed of I 1 n, fui tl ю\е oí God, not to treat 1кг with I ) c' ι iju 1 ce ι d en lf j . (t Co ıc, conıt i e \ch men iy r [lied, "n> trerv u n tiuelleis,— 11 Ли tl) quit this 1 la t, 01 tojilym go Stizin^ hu ludeU bj t f ι arı ts ht íprke, ind eno'cï- \ouring (u ruft her uprn htr f t , when tl e tei ile 1 duldun, cli ı 0 ıng fut round t hur¬ me th r, pie\ente 1 11m, one of tien, l с ub >y boy, \ei tured to ıaıft Ins eyts to the objeti of his tei ror, and blľbbeud, as tht big rou к1 d) ijb o' tarJy miler) trickled d) nltsch -сЦ— ' E Pt ıj с о 1 1 hurt mammy— mammj \ery lll—fiieno huu 5 u,—daddy de, or jou no chu uit mimin) fi " * c ııu chutern¿ imp 1 " report d the Btadl,, "juu h u kai ied joui kii in Lt- titnc —Hut come, tıs in vain oietüe —hit ufi, or to pi iion you go, ' Л\ ıth
With greit difficult) fhe obeyed this dog¬ mitica! command, fot hiving agam replaced htr childien one under c ch arm, herwcaiy limbs could hardly fupport the burden. " And mirk me," thundered out the Beadle, "let me nei cr fee your f ite agun, as the next time you pop your phiz athwart me, I mi) not be in the humour to fhew you fo muth indulgence " Л ftrange voice, in the uords of our im¬ mortal bard, pionounced— " Th lUlionm ¡ItUioId " The grejt image ol unho ity a «lug s obey J " 111 oflite The Beadle, turning himlelf to difcover from uheiiet the founds piocceded, faw Radmill and his ion Henry it his tlboiv. " A dog in office I" faul the Btadle " Aje, antl a molt inhuman dog," fu- rioully exclaimed RadmiU, " tliat abules the power
power that ıs veiled in him, and opprcflla thole whom diftrefs has already humbled in the duft." " 1 only do my duty," obfeived the Beadle " 'Tis falle'" letörted Radmill, more funous, " you were aflmg the part of a fcoundre!, in hfhing, with the iron rod of power, an unfortunate viftim, when the mild peifuafive voiee of pity and condolence would have better uiiueied jour purpofe — Rot me, * he continued, as he haftened after the poor ft Hiring wretch and hu infants, " I would not po(Te r s a heait fo totally de¬ void of leelmg as that mécréant ь, to be ap¬ po nted I mperoi uf the world '"—He foun overtook hei —" Htie, Hun), ' faid he, " do )ou cany the bu)—and now, good woman, give n e the girl, and rot me but 1 U conduit you to ι phce that, in tuture, (hail make jou afli uned to be feen crawling about the ftrcet, with jour childien, in this abiurd way."
The
The poor woman ι ι at (lift frightened, but a lm ie Ιι η Η i ry inip red her with coLiuge, as (lie, with« t reph mg, foi her heut was too fu co ìiplied with Radmill's requeft, and ¡ raeeedcd dejeäedly after them. Süflice it f r th" prefent to obferve that Rachiu I piovide 1 Ihem, with the ncCLİTutcs of ie to the pil id check of penuij, and the eji dinned ııj tlıc cncrıachni'-nt of misfirtiuc, he on e more gave the rodjy tint (f h ıltlı, and brig itened into a filile ol meil iblc joy and с ) ite tment He lite¬ rals kept his word , he conducted them to a place ihat lo truh altered then fituation, that, to ufe lus own words, thej would have been aíhanT-d to be agan 1 en ciawlmg about the ftri ts m that ab,urd mannei, which firft intioduced them to his ac¬ qu unta ice Radmi'l, though at tunes an impartial oblcivcr vvojld have conceived the reveife, vv ι
ν ıs palľionatclj fondof his fon , and Испц, vuth ill thefc hults, in hb ft hci far Ins belt fricad indii nclitor a 1 though he now and then fli milted the old gentle nin to uttu a few ralh evotds, Ik il v iys j icleled at lail, and of courlc was alev ijs forgiven Sucl ι man evas Radu 1 , -Ге-скг, defpıfc h n, it ecu cin
СНАГ.
СЧЛ1> III. llıı tlifioiitinlitl Man Mr NORTHCOTE veis ibout fKtj of age, «en jeus old ι tlnn Ridnull, evith yens whom he hid been icqu unteci alinoli iiom his infine j , md who, until nitlun the lifi leven j e irs, li id mide it a tuie, once m fhe courte of a twelvemonth toll ι d i fcev weeks eeıtlı hun it in Id Goth e b Π ig of ins, lituited on tl e bold ι of \e u,, to vvl leh he hid given llic nunc ol R uk- cl ile Tluie vihts niofl likely would hive been onliiiucd until this tunc, but foi a rej oit tint hid been cncul it d bj 1 ie ma¬ licious pet pie, tlut Rook dale Abbcj.fo« io
lias the building ufually denominated, uas Intinteti , tins, together with fome bringe noites hc hil hcud when hc lift iojourncil theie, (oi ! с impliciti) believed in iupcrni- lural appena icce, io mueh aluuieti him, tlut he rclolied it tint tine, wlcn once lu got finii ivi i) fıom it, the dtul himlelf fliould nat tcınj t inni lo cnt ι it igun, which relolut on lit had to this time moil re- lyoufly I ept lhou 0 h ihc с ι ever ι « ι & riaf r lıiTimı- 1 ıı ıty ot teıi[ci tlııı b ıttıı \oıtlıCote uıd Rıd mil, ι et d d tlıeı eflce m cicli other the one ι no b A the poilon t f cie у triml tmplcifait oceuiieiiec, matin 0 hit almoft л binti en , ι lult the с h-i e p elle 1 lus Ге- Icntinent, ni = )od ìouii 1 terms, ı^ınft ever) thing he diflikcd, ind the nc\t miiunt foigcttng iutli inconicnicnces hel citr exiilcd Rook dale together u ıth fonic ι limbic pofllflions, Noi thote minute«! b) hereditär)
rij ht , uıd tlıouglı lie could not e ıj j thofe biçilin ıs Pıoeıdı -e lud bcftovıd o ı hım (foi hc Ins 1 eei hcud to iffirin tint lie nevei pifled one dij fice fiom loini dılı 0 tccıblı event tlit did not contiibute to lour his tempei, i d m tkc lu η wrUc' id in tin ix- tremf), he wis generous, ı d eeıtlılıcl I not from others tho с encfits wlucli mt η ite the fombic fe times of \\ oc evith a ltn lc In 'us Lft , articular he rcfunble 1 Ri 1 null, ich m ııv behoved ev ıs tlıı ccm ufi of t t ι udii pof lo minj yeirs lii ding, tlıou 0 ı they hud j evei met but t icj puled thoougilj dill uisfie 1 ev lib cicli otlıu, jet e ou 1 1 tie) m et ι un anıl a = ı ı t) put en nues, a 1 pa tc 1 emuileS out to u cet ι,ιιη as in nd Ν) ılı ote η ide il i i ile to refi e thice η nn in tl ĺ jeu U Ilo )l-d ile t citim 11 ic ne d die lcd to trtecIllllT cv i diflerent I a ts ol th ku B nm, m qucíl ol e hit hi ten nil a u « s ha cis, e lucii, fu e ipi г
fpice of thirtv jeu» that he lud been feck- ш" to obtain, he ncvervct could accompliih, but returned to Rook dale it Ins wonted time, if not more tacituiu (t r that was next to in iinpolfibilite, as he hır I y ever uttered a ij liable еч ept ι h η abfolutely forced from liun, or to m ' с iı nc ru le ob- íer\ Uion ivhich he u v vvou i ofi n 1 lus m litui ) it le ili e ι h ι unciei, 1 portion ot glooıııj di conte ıt 11 1 d i[ л 1 ey 11 m lie d 1 l ed \u t cote, I с ı ıl out th ι oíteieiit) tour, m tu d ıı ııı u «b Ώ ι 11 ^υοιΐ ίοι tunc, J Itei of S \ di e ( ι elce, ι uth Pır ict, ι nlu Uinuu t) t ici - ul I elti, hue e r bon d 4 u ed S ııdı- roi til, ,» ,1 ibi ι ι,,, ni ıh ι mul leu ale unni ι o ıt t ı uo uhs eld, on ll ici; dij 1 ь eeitc dud, tü 0 cll ι ivi ι tier nuri , dil q pu d ı i inoli tıaoı ıı naıj min ıu hom 1-е ıol 1 ile. tot 'e 11 Liduıts nnn; al übet' tint mcliiichol tic ι iu mty mtl cvUeuic peviiluv-fs ν inch voi. ι « mi 1 1
mai ked the lift tlnrtj yea s of his life. But Noithcote, ere lie entered the connubial (lite, hid oblimeli ılıe ippellation uf the T)i contented Wm, and u tvts genenlly wiihed and imagined that Ins wife, whom he de ılı 1 ved, would hive luoujit an ilrii- .ıtıoıı in his tunpei , a id tlu ρι ι > bly π ight lııvc happened, hid not eV Uh uniortun Uch feparated tlicm. Ilici ft tut lei il ivcrfein his child, was in quittui« the putiicnt in which шь wife had mill uthed he-lift, he lu liei mtİLiıınfe's aun, who it tint nioment pad" d hım, ι id delu ulul 'he fluis, aul no о с evei runuiibcrcd Icuiij thun if ci-
The co ıftcT ttion ud d tlicfs ilut for fu ne time prevailed lt ľ oc k cl ne, aie more ι ifih concern 1 thin duc ibed , and, not- v itliftn ding cvu\ pofnbie leucii ani cn- «ruiiy, no t uclli^c ice o£ the nurle οι child Lould evu bc ebtaini 1. Time,
ľi.ne, hoiicvcr, alleviated the fuffenngs of în oı thcote, though it could not entirely efface them from Ins mind , and thit chill¬ ing gravity and relent natuial to hun, were heightened, no doubt, by thefc occurrences. Mrs. Moivlnu, ι diftant relative of Northcote's, and lor whom lie h id t ıc highcit rclpeft, İmce the d Uh 1 1 lu ivife had alici 1 it Roil lile Ш, ι, ind to whom, ο ι 1 ι I licit t с pedi ι > uı Lıie'ı of hıppınclb, lc never failed to lı uıınııt let¬ ters, íníüriuuig Iicl of everj tiiin^ivoithj ol remar', tint oteuric ' beneith lu ι tiee , to evince to hci, η tvviihfliiidii ,'ic had bein fo mam je ■> m quell ifit, limpinds on earth ιν ь not to be louud, tnough uumucis laughed «hen it uou! 1 1 We со iun tted leb Violence on thıu I ul ι s Io hive с tcd, 1 ι I vv re oiten loudly c\cl i tu ig a D i nil tne ficl.lei Us of I Ultunc, 111 СП tney hid elei) oUcnlible icafon to conclude ilniolt all hu¬ ni m beings ivcie at leiil a» vvrctel eel is iberniche . L 2 Olí
One pofituc injunâi n, however, he laid on Mrs Mowbra), which vv ıs nevir to an¬ fwer his letters, is fiom that moment hc would nevci write to liei again " bor," iad lu, " if jou linean) plea¬ fint occurrences to communicat«, I imj not hive the ippciite to u |o) thcin, and, flioc'd it 1 anj tiling the reverfe, it will onlj augment my cup of miluj, which now neaily run c over Stiange as it miy appear tlat a mm of Worilieote's temper mil ddpofition eon! 1 be rational с îou h to deche Uc a fe ν 1 ur , and thofe too trequentlv, in wnting and tianfmitting his runat ks to ι frund, jet was it no more ílnn¿c thin true mil whin lie was with Mis Mowbiay, lo guit was his efteem for her, that he woul 1 open his mind in convcrlation to her for the three moiithslic continued at Rook dak, moie thin to all the world befide, even vvere all the woild
«oild to luve inge 1 hım in the lu liequcnt ¡Ulle ς uc!, re der, wis Mr Northcote—'lit mtn ill Ins CeC nfricitits lu poflefled ι trul) benevolent hcirt, vvlueh, in tiue times, is a jcnel nrt!) to be met uith.— U Int ι pıtı th ft whom I'rovidtnct Ins hleilld un ι it, fh juld 11 unhippv
<· J
CH \P.
Cľňl l\ IL· Ile,, h,i ,1(1 , S t MaRÌ |\i\¡ , j'« Ιι un н haie ) £ lud but lutk, vus u nu Ihipc ulu dio Radmill, but mtru lee d uitu lus funily with hei patents, m ι moll îiugulii imunii, uıd were as fi pillai'« leceueil , for tl ι uja peor, hek, "u' m w mı, tl cy vvcie ts eo li lly i cleome I as hud the vealth of nations been at thcır dili el il —The le ider hc ut of Rad¬ mill bled with pıt), ind a defue to leive them, ıs hc vvitiieiied then diftieb, and though ftiangcrs to him, when M iy | inc s patents expired, he vowed never tofoifile the friendlefs orph in. It
Itivi icnet П| I' îou, с cuing, to iául liti eil t limn as Ridnull, ι lei « ι fri it 1 с 1 Oli luci i, ins nun in to h ' I i'iiceiiij с neh, ilehu voice if ι с \ ι 1 1 ι in li id iireidy I ivied ι lil t 11 Oe! ck, 1Vİ1C1 ι VI leit Ideili hollit Ille ¡10 1 elellUlL 111 dilti b L CHIO 1 I 111 tO 01 ! 1 t İL cinici to İlip li hui , ino, ttlO Jl vu j lehlet intlv, ol) cl n Hl İnlen d bı i ne ime b t ill со it nued filc it, cept tie lonl Utili g Ot 1İCİVJ Hue Ol lllll ind Г 11, ιι nel it that moment wis ripulii cl IcLn 1 ι ^, i d t ie noilo v nui nuun a M the wm 1, ich echoed dilma'ly tnioüg ι the iljjin- 11 0 itrtits. He w s loout to outer ι! e clu cr to pro¬ leet« to lib refidencc, ulien igun i ícicm, h miar to tlıe one he lı d at fırit hea d, in¬ duced hun to iltei lib Intel tion, and íequcít hun to chive, "s iicarlj is hc coultl, to tht, paceiioiii whence the voice cime, -this the
m 11 at h tl rdi le 1, b ıt o ı л tlmili » pr ι- iniliig to jiy lum 1 in 1 omel) I «i lo bug du umt j 1 m i.doiiuu ι η Jit, 1 e cjııı- ,Ι,ι,Ι Πι) ! u! not ulv ι icul tuin; ι ııds velim Rad η II, wid h d let e v n tlu Jal , md indcipitc oi the r. ın ind lu', ivi uh tic wind blew viole it!; into li lice, kej t lus held without the ioidi, in 1 ln\iou(lj vent- ad foi ι iqititcn of thole I luniL evlucli might conduci nun to the relief of mifuj Ыс hid in t been long m this attitude uc he hend the folio» u g woul, in ι fenile voice, tremu ouilj piuioui cul — " Almighty Г uhei , he'sdeid—and vint will become of my poor infant '" Radmill loudly called to the coachman to nop, m au mfl int evis out of the carriage, and, as a watchman paffed, crived the afhll- ance
ance ofhis h a ht, whieh was imnediUely gì anted Не foon difcovered on the pavement, but a fliort diftance from him, ftretched at full length, ap] arently lifelef , α peifon m α mi- lit iry uniform, on one fide of him fat a female lupporting hb heail with hci aim, wl ile in the othet ihe held a beautiful child, which (lie \ unly en lca\ouied to fereen from the meleme icy of the weathei The watchman, not in the mildcft terms he could have uttei d, began not to enqune ú it was in hib pov\ei to lender them any fervıeı., but to lepunand them for pre fum¬ ing to walk the ftreets when all ho left peo¬ ple, women in particuiu, ought to be within their олп d vellings, and had not Radmill, with а loud ïebuke for his inhumanity, put an end to his loquacity, the poor wretches, ior fome mmutes longer at leait, muft hive enduied the pitileU pelting of the hm and ram с ς "Is
" Is it m му po\ei,' tendeilv U^oi Radmill, "to be o r tU lead arili ance in cvtiie lmg j )u fi )in jour pieient unln])py fituation?—Believe m , I lmc tie will, ind it )űur diilrcls h°b pioc eded from pe cuniarj emban aliments, thu к He uen, I am Llefled with the mems to fi-ive yuu ' The poor ftiiiin, ruling hei head, md looking him full m the fice, which the dim ]i_,ht of the hntern juft mide uhble to her, lephed — Alls ' ' ind Sir, my hufbind, J feir, ь dead—be 3 jur cln Hable endi-ivours be- itowed upon him ' —I hen niimg her eyes, Hie exchimed—" And in mercj, Oh thou all-wife Difpoier of all things, once more nilore lnm to mj arms, or in deith let us not bc fepirated ! ' « ( Come, come,' rejoined Radmill, much alľečiicd, " be of good heait, and what pof- fibly cm be done to preferve your huíbind, finii bc done ' " Hea\cn, '
" II ιι η, ' lhe ıe) ι u, ' nd ιΗ good iii r U rtu ud ioni— Oı fi t hım, Uit lu i— md with ni) 1 it« lì br th 1 il think jou— M) p or lufi nnj inf int—tht fu t u οι ds ihc ıs tiught to h , , lh 11 bc ι bene- uu tion on the ι inouï of Ilei luhu " Ridi u 1, with tht ilTiftm e ofthe witch- m m, n lui her I uf Vi ul fiom tl с hu uıd ς irth, i I, ι ithout ρ ıeııı mg mı ligas of life in lull, Idled Inn in tie b lt mannei they could in th Incknc) coicli, then billened back foi ihc womin inel her child, a iu foon piietd them by his fide " Now,' tendili) enquu ed R ι Imill, -ъ he aftended the спице liimftll, "to wlut pirt of the town dull 1 onici the coichi nu to drive ? —1 hope your dwtlhng is it no gre it diftincc, for the poor gentleman's f,ke ' " Alls 1 ' anfwered the ft naie, is a co¬ pious flitini of teirs gulhc 1 fiom hei tus, "wc Ime no home—no friends— noi my с б t¡ m¿
thing to Willi to live for bejond ourfelves, and could vve die io 0 ctliei, I fhould be fatis¬ fied ' Radmill waited to heai no more—the eoach fion after fto¡ ped at lus owi dooi , but too hte vv is the reviving h uid of fnend- lhip applied to the po ι luldiei—deatli hid terminated h s fufiu in 0 s, and rclcalcd bun írom a renewal of milerj ' 1 1 s wife no f oner became acquainted with the melncholj truth, which buried hope, and lelcaied her irom the hoi roi s of lulj cnie bj plunging her ι ito the moil diead ful certainlj than uttenng ι piercing fhnek, lier child fell from her enfeebled grafp, which Radmill timely faied clc it had reached the ground, her Acuities were fulpencled, and /he dropped inanimate at I is ieet. Radmll, though dut ping wet from the late tempeft, left hu to the care of Ins houlchold, and ran 1 imlclf to pro urc a lerjcon,
furgeon, and not long had hc departed ere lie returned with the objeft ht fought, whtn bj Insordir the poir wretch, who begin to difcover fjmptoms of leturning lift, wis convej cd to the bell btd lus holpitiblt roof iffordtd. It uas then, know ng he could be ol no furthei ftri ce, lu ι enture I to change liu, ipparel, which hel, id it ucci) iccomphlhed, when tht lurgeon tip, cd gently it hi, door, and wis dchred to enter —Radmill began to enqune iltti the hei tli ot his pitient " She is b-«d enough—bid enough 1 " re¬ plied the furgeon, fluking his held " I) )c think flie'U be quite rtcovertd by to-morrow morning r ' " If jou mein bj recoveied, out of pin, fhc mil bc much bctttr crt the fun datts his nys into htr apirtment " " I'fluw· I ipplied to jou to prtfervt lift—Ihe could but hai с diu! without your lilt rflRlltC." J ·· 1
" I im fori j nıy ıntu fu ence will prove of fo little fcrvıc " " But vou nuj be midiken in youi opinion " " So mav thofe who hue opinions the lcvcrlc ' " I ho] с not, In ececr eee e ill do the bell we cm with her, Ι ι the ch Idsl tkc " " fie child míj do,—but as for the mother, Ihc, poor urc ch ι eeill loin be with her huihind , fui I un fi 1 1 it ее ill \ rov с bcjoid my irt torcftoichci—her tillo du proceeds ------' " A riddi flick for lier diioidu· 1 —cure her lirft, and talk of her chlordcr alteiaarcls " " She but juft now exprcflcd a defire to fpcak with you , and left a relapfe, whicli I much apprehend, fhould carry her ori eie you had notice ofher requeft, 1 hurned my¬ felf to infor η you of it ' " A relaplc—fhc will hive no fuch tlimg, if fhc is fo much recovered, and that tuo m fo fliort a time, as to be able to fpeak, I im line
fure there is verj little d übt of her doing well " " If to die llioitly be to do well, 1 knoiv no puf ι thai is hi cly to do better " " Rol mc but v u a-e the moft bílinatc man I cu ------but I tell jou that you will bc deceived — S ic'll I we 1 cno igh m the π e. ,ιιι 0 to brc ι 1 fill vitli me in tlu lit- ťe p r ıu, , aul bine of the belt cicám, ave, uıd the ЬД of cvtrj thing tint can be got, (h 1 1 be readj l r her,—an 1 111 nurle her chi I, ind Π η In U w ut upon her, ι ul if eve cm but ρ event her thinking oí the pooi foil tint died m tlu itrcet, flıe ili 11 b«· happy, and 111 beh ıppv , ind Henry (İnli be iiippj, md well be all happy, m deli ite of jour ι rcdiftions, or all lhe ıpo- thecanes, (urgcous, or pliyiicuns in the three kingdoms " Saying theie words, he left the room, and, as ι teat tell from his eye, entered that of the poor invalid s CHAP
CHAP V. litt Οι pitan İM O fooner had Radmill entered the eh im¬ ber, than loftly takmg ι than, he fcited himfeif bj the bed fide, when the objeft of his folieitude fixed her linguid eyes upon lum, and buril into tears Radmill uas too mucli overpowered by the ilrength of his own feelings immedntely to offer hci my conlolation , he, however, at lift taking her hand, which fhe had, on firfl. defcrying him, made an eflort to extend towards him, ejiculated— " Come
" Come, come, checrlj , cheer!) , all will loon be well igun—we, uiing mortals as vve are, aiL all iubjefl to mbiortuncs, and bod onlj knows whole tuin it will be ne\t, but leaton and fortitude often mahi ail right again.—Your facet little girl is cjuitc. reficlhed, and wants onlj jou to make her cheei ful and contented." " Oh my child '" (lie feebly exclaimed, " when I am gone, who will protect my child ?" " That will I," fervidly cxchimed Rid¬ mill, " I will chcnfli lier as my oien , and you filali ilve to fee hoev fondlj vve will pai, our time togethei " " May cveiy blefling, ' flie rejoined, "Providence can beftow, rewaid the oiphan's friend '—But fot me—Oh '—bowed down by fuffenngs—here will niy fonoevs tei¬ minate '" " Moil afluredlj," interrupted Radmill, " heie vill ail your ionows termínate, for when once we Lau difiiuls the doctor, and • have
have jou lafdj reftored to jour infant, all will be happmefa agun " " I feel it muft not bc," Ihc replied , " the hand of Deatli alreidv pants my pal- fage to eternity ,—yet—ere I die—1 would mfoim you whol am—foi which purpole 1 w idled ------But my decrcafmg ftrength will not permit me to fulfil the t ilk —Soon, foon fliail 1 meet my hufbmd in the realms of л bhfs— nevei, never to part again '—My poor mfmt only—do not fori ike her— Oli I— when J am no moie, caft liei not foith to encounter the frowns of thofe whofe breafts h irbour no pity for the friendlefs oiphan— promile —promife mc this—and—I fhall die hippv '" " Moft readily, and when 1 forget mj? promile, may God forget me '" " Blsfs— blefsjou 1 " fhe rephed, though iiei words vverc icarcely audible , u tike tins j icture," loofciung a mimatute which hun 0 fufpended fiom hct neck, and which, when undrelicd and convevcd to bed, (he would not luffa tobe removed, ·« take tlusp.fture—■ at
at fonie futuic pt ι юс! it may leid ------ Oh' do not put nuli it—bat—but pidcive it foi mj Lini -lt míj lcul to------Oh 1 — bids—bid —jou'— t le'e mj—mj с ul I '— and—Oh ι —my hufbnd—deir objcéì. of— Oh'—Iconic—Iconic—Oh'—mercy------" Tlic words died iway ere flit could give thcin t tlei nice, md igun Ra Imiti beheld her as in the ums of Death. The warm tide oflife, hove ver, oice more anmutet! her debilitated fiamc, but it wis of lhort du¬ rinoli , nd is the lui geon hid predicted, ire the lun d u lcd lus beims into her ipirtment, fhc uas no mon, 1 In fpeechlcfs agony Radmill quitted the clnmbci, ind proceeded to his own , but in vuu did Iil couit the leaden God to dole in fleLp I is eyelids, the lid niLidents of the ni 0 lit dwelt upon lus mind, and baniihed rcpofe , tuin wlnci way he would n the bed, be he quiet, 01 as refllefs as he cho'e, ftill it was all the (ime —the big drops ot Ijmpitliy
fympitliy ind regret kept trickling down Ins fice, rendering humid ind unplcafint tlıe 1 illow th it fupportcd his head " But,' he cxchimed, as he left his room in the monung, llıll rcfleâıng u| on the mi- lancholy occurrences of the night, " thank God ' the child is fa с , and flu ih ill niver want fuccour fo long as I poflcls the mems of bcftoeving it ' boon after the furgeon made him a vifit, and the foiegonc circumftances, m fad fuc¬ cefiion, were recap tulated. " Were you acquainted with this pool unfortunate couple," interrogated the fur¬ geon, " that their death fhould occafion you fo much forrow '" " 1 have been acquainted with part of then fuffenngs, and gnev e that I could not remove them—The fituation in which I found them was enough to have made iny man, who had a fpark of humanity, exert hunfelf
himfeif in then btliilf, m me it did moie— it kindltd the fj irk of humuuty whicli D l iwtd in my bofom, into tlie bhze of fraudili p, uluch n ijit hiic remained un txnnguilhcd, lnd the) fuivived, when their troubles had been forgotten, i d the dılıp- poıntnieiıt I hut cxpuicnce 1 fits lwavy at my he irt " " Uns,' faul the fu geo i, prcftiıtıng a let erto Ridmill, " uas fouil in the iol- ther s pocket, though from wlut it cont un, I could learn but little, onl) tint he had been ι Licutenmt in the army , but his ıeıl name is concealed, confequcntly your at¬ tempts to diico tr his finul), to apprize tlicm of his d ıth, I im afraid will be fruitici;, Ridmill eigerly took the ltroll from the fuigeon s hand, unfolded it, md read is foliou s —
* DEAR
" DEAR EDU ARC, " Ere )0U rettile this, I filali bc 01 u y piflage to the Laft Indíts , of ni) motne for this vo) ige I beline I informed you in a foi nier letter—I wis extremely furpnftd whtn I heird j ou hid fold jour commiffion, ind like« ilt thit jou fliould requeft of me to direct anj cpiflles friendffnpmiglit prompt mc to tranfmit to jou, under tht fictitious nimc of Romlej ,—however, no doubt jou hid wift reafons for fo doing, and if tlic) do but render )OU more happ), 1 Hull rcjoitt in the altention, though I cimi it help thinking thit hid vou kept )Our cominiilion, know¬ ing the relpeit llic Colonel lus foi )OU, )ou would foon hive been piomottd to a moie exalttd ind lticritive fituation in the irniy —Give mj bell and moft finctre refpects to your amili 'e wife ■—Wtcks, months, ind probably years maj pils eie I fct cither of you agiin, but, believe me, 1 fluii elitnih tht rtmtmbruice oí both, and intieipate, fiom abience, the plealuit I Hull enjoy when we
wc meet atún — Adieu, n y good and nor¬ th) fum 1, ulicu ι " Your'j trulj, " J STAMProRD. " ľ S As foon as I arrive at Madras, ι ou may expect to hear from me agam " " Poor fellow ' ' exclaimed Radmill, as I с folded up the letter, and put it into his ι ockct, " how it will fhoLk him when hc learns the deplorable fue of his fnend ' ' " 1 wifh," replied the furgcon, " 1 knew this Stimpford, as through the medium of his· tanni), who, 1 dare la), aie in Lnglmd, poflibly we might obtain the real mine of the deceafed Lieutenant " " I wilh fo too," uttered Rad inli, " tliough, upon fecond tlioughts, I know of no good like!) to proceed f o ıı it " " İt ıs icquilitc, lıoee ver, hısfrıends and relations fliould be appnzed ot his death " " His 4
" His poor wift told me the) had no futnds , therefort I fhould imagine by his dcnnfthis fimily becomes iMinčt " I fliould inngine to the contrvy, for t! ough they hid no friends, they tmy hu с relit íves, —for I nu forry to obfen e that, in thefc dcgei ente limes, friends ind reli¬ eves ire not ılıv iys fj no n mous teims " '* Mcie cint '—I don t believe i uord of it —A fig for the times '— ι good mm is is much reipefttd in thefe times, as a good mm wis five hundred yeais ago, ind what's more, there are is miny to be found, if people would give tlicmlelvcs the trouble to feaich for them—But how fucs the little girl this morning ? ' " Wtll as heirt can wifli,—her little cheeks dimpled with a inule, as I but juft now took her in my arms ' " Poor httle wictch ' fhe is ignonnt of tlie lofs flıe Ins fuftııncd, and ever Hull fhe remun unconfeious ofit, for I will be lo her what hct fithcr might hive proved, had Heaven
Heiven fpired пь life— ι pioteebr and a f lend ' Tlicj foon aftei fcpiritcd, md tw ) diys aftu th UR I id ntes eeue id in uilcied to tl l unfortunate | an , and tlcu uff pung, hom the inme of Mu) Jue bung cl Ic nere', woiled in h u, toui d the nuniiture th t Ruinul! lud icce v cl fıom tlıc mothei ere flic expired, evincili 1 if let tint mine Nineteen yeirs ftom thu puiod to tl prefnt ch|fcd, ml the ι mc ol M115- [irc's pile its R 1 1 ill neu c u' 1 obi tın, 01 evhlt h d nem th m ııt ) tuch ι c n ] licitili) of d lieis llll mie J 111 ill lu uiqui ics idi un ?. ť mı, tbc. evorls of Miij Jin s mihu r cuu cd to lus mc m re ' Wc e iloin ,11o fu 1 İs, )i íny tıııı l jo d cuilc'ves t) i lı 1 1 I ior,'— foi nn e o ill tel iny tin i' j t thun, n 1 ill ее ' к ' ho v Rl 'ml e n 1 idopt the cl lu of ¡ с ц e who n il« Iv kneev VOL 1 I) Rl 'l 1
Radmill was ıs h, 1 1 of Muv Jrnc -ьЫ nieicillj been Ι ι ο n lu ıkı, ııııl ccıuly runted tint ıu « η ese t 1| , uıcd t > lili¬ pute lus e ııııı, ui 1 ul e liei fro ıı hım. Mii) luie, it th if < tl tluu h ι t wlnt the eonii nife ııs ν ıu o lııv t ınıed ι bı ıııtı, pöllille 1 он of II ι m ll ıçiıcibıe facis v tını ıvır! m l,lul ш , tlıoıı«h r th ı dm mutu , ν , e ıı ıı ı ıl "int , fi ItiL 0 II lllll I , Vt' V S ť Ul 1 Illl- tliuiiioi kli' lu ι il ni h ι in¬ iler, tint but to I 1 ll lllll Ute wi h lur, w is evu allei t > ell e ıı 11 1 «ow liei S' evvıse ııııplı t Iv n iflkls of ini.f.c, -nd duicLcl momi u bij well, io Ri mill, who cuil Ί cl he ь Ins ovn child, hid liei ci u i d s luch and Iııl ilen) be¬ tin d ι j ι lu ι in ι ) ıc un her a 1 u clu uoiiitiii'i, he oul llnve L cn ln] pv m cui u ί m un te 1. Wl cthci
Whethei Hcnrj s iffection for Μι / fin n is merci) Pi itonic, foi ioic her lie cutimly did, is did limoli eiei) one uho к κ ι lui, ti 1 c ull cunee
CII 1" M Ί 1 ¡J ι-ι ml -ul ι Ι, , ι ¡ il I\.<iP>[ILI , lince 1 ml dt ici bm on t e nn llll ^ lic hild Kl line ' lo I thu ? m 1 ι 1 e ч u t, dur Mun nil! nn nolo ıı рил ıtııl 1 hu! Imd) fi l! 1 Lı ık ill, a J U lltin o tO Ь J I I ll J JUHU). OJ I e
The ncccflaij luggage vvas foon fiieccl to the vehicle, ind Ihoitij vliti t cj nmed it Suttin Here Rid mil ordered p ll holies. ind dein d tlıc с ıchn in to lo low gently aftci eei Ί 1 ι , nib it ',r lit n mj tunc in the com eelt ihv/ i = il T ıı sı it ci puí ι ι to ill ı ııtı s u til t v ıı lho t d Я i c c i c , i p «le¬ bo s t ι 1 i v t u 1 1 it m ] I c i ıı 1 1 as mi ch l i ) ι 11 ι ι ι 11 ι i) c iul I do , t ι n i mc c qu t ! t I h i¡ c ! onlı ıpııı [ p ic i i i n the roil, n cínu ι 1 ihn Iıv i i id brol С l V heel It c h , t η, ι Iı¬ tı fi d m h ni)" ¡ d il cu ,, Ι , bc¬ cnııc ι ıeı') d nill e II 1', eel kuliul, v hl ее mech ι' I) 1 ) ll Ol by t « s ι d ıc ι d tc oi (ι ıc tınını, ıı la ! ι n le I ι 1 cl Igl, О) с ıcd lic CİLDİ, ι 1 ιρ ut Hej
Henrj did the fime oı the oppofite (id , ail Miry line the next moment Iprung into his arms Rihnll feeing her m fifeti, and fup¬ poitcd bj Hcni), be, m to queftion the poftbo) s " \ u internal b e I neck fcoundrels ' u' -t 1 iu lei u f r «oir circled leis ? ' I ui e 1 11 S r, о lt of th-m re¬ pi 1 ' tl ι t su ιι oul ib! , the If Ibi er ι lu ıeıl bı the I ell wl ie h ι j i 11 iuck ot one oi the (lı ııııı ! cııt juif pıiltd ,—we lui 1 vt tlum te ι, but lhe) nevci lerved t 'u ι ıh uj t е Л bel t ' « it it I L ıtıt iwoidof it —But lo í tul ich o, toi? brd je fct, ) uli li ileal, a n lo the с image ıs ι ' li ) ilv υ m к to Cuckfic el, md, fio ! íonoiii [ I 1 t ike oii ons of d 3 the
the horfes, r de thither, and return as foon аь poffibk. mıh a chute." " If it bc as ţou faj, only one mile, ue can walk thcri. in lek time thm you cui pio- cure us a comet ance — λ Vint fay jou, Mary-}me p ' who was now quite recovered fum Ki unwelcome lu pnie, " vv at lay \ hi, Hi ill we u it fui a el ile, oi w ili· on to Cui idd í * 11 e\ loon agreed to wal, and the poft- Ьоуь \eie oidered to í Uou genti) aiter ll em with the еагпач, ¿ί the i\hecl was not ίο η uch bioken, bat witheire thej mi D ht manage to get it at leatl; a mile, without much diilieulty. Thej had proceded abouthdfwiy when a man, bent al no l double with age, and inferably clad, approached them, took off hib hat, extende I it towaid tliem, and in tremul us aecenb begged only one [ ooi lo- litai) haileni)) might be bellowed upon him,
hım, as for fome hours no lood hid entered hts lips Radmill gazed it lum for fonie time in profound allonifh n nt, at lift he ex¬ claimed— " Sure!) there muft be a provifion fot men ot ) oui je гь , οι di j «u ι húfe ths mode of ııııııg jo r 1 ι u nec, ııı ¡ rtf «-- с ι с to g ) d h « ι ι ad, ι ci mf 1 1 e hıbıtatıo , a d a ι ι ni İne, vl ı li 1 1 | a- ntlie aie eo ι j died to lud f ι t cu o uı pur" *' I anan Ameucan born," he replied, " and luve no lc 0 il claim on the buildings onlliu led aid a, piupiiaied toi the rccip- tionot tic ρ юг in this fluid, oi jou had not icen me in tins dilliefle 1 fituation, bovLVci, if 1 cin but holl it out until I leach london, which, with ihc ilnllance ot be icvu ent ¡um, 1 nuil I Hull bc enabled to criect, I n wc a friend thue who will not о 4 luller
fuŕľci me to flarve for the want of his pio- teuton " " Come, Marj Jine," exclumcd Rad¬ mill, "empty jom pockets, girl, and do jou likewiie, Henrj, b how ι trifle to re- heve this honeft felloe M irv [ ι ic pio lued! a b u i ca, H nrj the f "ic, R m 11 f Ilo v d thi r e\am| le, and each dr pped then ofl nn r into lhe hat — 11 o'd η an ivstu mut ι lib »ill cd im- mcihttclj to tl ai k tiun — ι , ho ever, as lluj ln'ie cd hom h m, le t ι LI t i 0 aft r tien, a d thej loo ι after irrived t Cuck- íielel , here thej ord lcd duner, which, by the tunc ť cj had linilhed, tbc с image was icpaiu 1 H ving ¡ad tnc ¡ooi fellows ivlio chove tlicm when the calualtj oecurred, tl e) very ι aturallj petitioned fui fumciliing extia lor thcmlclvcs, which R ch nil e ıs predeter¬ mined not to give, for lie coull not diveft himlelf of the idea that thcy wuc m fault One
One of them, finding hun deld mined, replied- " Go] b cfs jou, Su, I nn is forry for Ihc lee lie t IS JOU ıu, ııı! im equilly ιη¬ ι ore tol ulut jou impuliti ne, thouji I ıı i hkeli to ice! ti t nitom iniuicc infìng iıom ıt ııuclı loı 0 ei , ! ut neie 1 to be the oi 1) İnimi, it u itikin t grin e mt " " 1 plnn jouilelf, ' fuel Ridmill. " liic ι uic and fix chi dien," hc continue), " ne! tkt lois I Ilı ill t\, enenee u 1 be ' t ıy ıh ι Wc 1 e pooi, jour Ilonom, b,i honili n l indult i ms—thougli nn fe tui co mi) h ι «pen to the 4ft of j, " " Then, m confidtriti ι of t!n n, I gne ι hi tins, ' ι ι inul Rullili 1, putting hilf a- ' η ι into hi, hind, " thouji 1 conceive ι u lo 'uil«, deferì mg" " Mo jou neier Inc ίο lant it ' ' uttcr- ι 1 lin pollilo) , "and nij the h tidltoncs, uhi i had n il) depilici! nie ot u li it Ihould luit puitu I d t fuft Imf for my farnih, d S bo
be the hh misfortune jour Honour mij ever encomi cr ' Thcy foon after ic ìfccnded the coicli, and in about two houis wcic fafely fct doevn at Henwoods Ncev Inn and Hotel, и Brighton Hcie thev evcie comfort iblj ic- commodited for the ught, mil thej, on tlic fucceeding daj, lured a plcaiant houfe on the Marine Paiade " W ho would live in London," obferved Radmill, ashe icviewed the occ in from the druving-room windoev, " in the dij ¡ irt ι ť the j ear, wlien thcy cín be Io much cooler tud o ì ortably lecomniod ned m the coun¬ try Mtrj Jane e predili hu fitisfadi m at the houle he hidcholen , ind I lení j с nild do no other thunpprove eelutfoanply 0 ti- t fied tlicm
In
ln lhe iľtcrn ıııtı the) atmı.ed themfelves b) Wilkin» ı oııfıdcr ıble dılh ccontlıelca- (hoiL 01 th ir r tmu tluj ] affed a youp of h ics a I entkn uı, «lu, hlc them- fclie , Ind bi n rambhng and ml aling the filub i us u I иЬсПшц brce/e lint floated ovcrthelv Ihn wive mil were tl cn 1 II ti¬ llig t > the ioc fi ш ь e narı tue ol a mimed fail ι I ill ıs Ruhu 1 cine up to th m, oic t tl e g lillunen, in iiilwer to the in or, e\ lu ic 1— ' I in r, ι I 1 vou appi) not to jour 1 ıı Ih ıı ru I —though j tur Innb »a, h tt ıeıl in l d itr hug veflel tint mult prntel I r u " 1 un in Λη rican b ι ι, ' hc rej hed, '· ii i 'uve η ) I ¿il cium on ile buildings ci t d ud q propini ' ' ir th recep¬ ti i t ıe | i r m t us illan I oi j uu luci it i i ie u t iis ι nlrcl с 1 fituuoti,— 1 > ve , if I с m but loll it out u ml I i- uı Lo i Ion, wh ch, it ι the ШШшсе of ой bc LVulent
bercvol nt men, I ttuft 1 diali be enabled to ifl I, I have a In nd there who will not furtei me to ftaive fui the want ol h s pio- tCellOll ' R id ill was ] lanet (Irucl·, they were the veij woi Is m ι I uh lie h il been iddicífcd b) tl e u d u uı he luci been ίο h ier d to v iti i a ι le uf Cu khed, the voce he tho hthei ι mbu d hk w ιι , though the trinili vi li cc пра ied tic winds then v ıs 1 I 1 , 1 ι 1 1 pe ion, f on who e h, s thu η ι il'iul, ppeu d lt le liai) yeais juin ci !i mpt il b) lut) u 1 euu- fit 1 e a ccJtuwiid n i, thccn¡ pic uo foo \ ι t an linting back, h s 1 g, wciii i e bcfoic fc mcd of no ufe to hui, ic o ι it formu vı^ou, and he, wu u w iti »ıı I ıı ulatlvi mil hid t) ι , c u ď о 1 uth fue i çiticine vc'o ıt ; , ti li ulh puzzled tue ilouteft of the ıı la i ivc ovuueui hun.
Ihe
Tl e hdics in I «c uleni n tur ι 1 io Rid¬ null loi 111 IN])' 11 tOl, whici 1 prelently »m thcin, they hu ednini a' ril ıj.aııd Ridnull ııı not ılut! huit ' j fu ding he lllll been ΙΟ Cjľeje lllll pOİL I t po 1. " R )t nie, ' h t La excl ι n.tl, " I tou!. Iıııı to bc 11 hu died je ir, eld at lelli ' « Tic nixt une, ι 1 "entlc i-n,' ob- feiicd a pot e"í η ι Uc , , " jou с in¬ in ı «ccm tili lı ıı ıs uf t e 1 с , ' г , in 1 ι ι lhe Ιιηι,ι ι 1 ιι ıı «t t «e, JIU „e I Ull , tb I IV le de- llLİ u ni rióle dl, ι' bl J is шел in¬ fil I ) ι u t rielle 1 I 1 the bl U-L u ι ,. of bu с. οι I ı'u ul ' "A ', ' ¡do ■ 4 i), v h ι flood lull he' in 11 ι, ι d m lu h 1 1 n it noticed th el) Cl ι joui e Ι, ι , t e . u И e joueiletid . lutnu ol mi ic, ¡our bung ι ıt i 1 mus
lathis diali not lenen jou fıom tint chıftıle- lllLni ludi llllolt ICe meliti ' " Ifid 1 ' re¡hcd anot ier of thein, " Jcflimy, ıoı lu em t ınh joji unteli, no «jou lııvc ıh )| ııtıı ıtı ,ou lııvc ong ıvılhcl for, o ell-h ıllıın 0 jotr ı | ut mon as a min ol couı c " I anı, h"v ν ı, ııs to) much con¬ fuí ! uı π ι I to ι ui ai ul vei, hut ti I а к II с I unii) s po ket, 1 ced ι io I ι ti η « ι 1 vv и cd w j , ll Ι ι th ι lei ι e\ ln ig ill 1 1 ι 11 1С ι' 1) ι ι , 1 e i i 1 ıy anıl ι ι ι ııl , ι ι li 1 ir ud pell tl 1" I Г 1 UV CU 111 ! 'li' 111) j ι cl, 1 il n il m rulj Hei luu Ruh Uw s, e fel, ani Ihı ııı 0 fen/ bj the I ııı' с m ıcıled hin foi lus í¡„
lhe ıııbjıc , , ovevci ul rh h 1 cccı- f oned lo much nti II Ί ι e ι po i R '- null.
null'·, mud , nul is lit m, iboi t to citer Ьь lodgings, lie ouiii) сч„1 и ıcd — « Rot ıt, mu I n vei di , if I once fuf- pecied tht old i ıl al ol ш Λ llene in uas in imp «itor ' ' » Antl for ni) led, ' am leled Hell ), "I fuljictcd------" " You fui|icttc I, j up ι ' vehe eııtly llltc rupted Rul ill, ' ι ι ι ι'ι did jou j emut me to'In ι; ııl ι ι ıı ıı ι '-Rit ni il I leli ıc jou, lud it b u utlun the c iciiniltiibcd jı ci oi li nun j> .ti. anon tO hile detected hill, lit 11 lel 11 Iti tl IJlttl " 1 b g yon iii'ii,' ııphıd Henry, ")OU illlll.llUtlluJOll l« Ut 1 II 5 mout to uttei— to ulu h il jou will but hue the patience to 1 ten until I hue finilhcd the lenience, jou mil hnl------" " Well,' cxtln.itl h", " pi elite, preacuing j upp) —plotted '
" I wis about to faj , continued Henr), " that I It fpcflcd not the lmpoflor Ridnull uis appeifed, ind Henry was Ins dea boi ıın A pillile in Cu ber¬ im ! s be ci ent ] ι ι cuntí to his me¬ mon as th y enttrtd tht 1 о le, ind he lot 11) exclu lel— " Il m; mo e O o ι , ııj i ıûtıves lie
СП VI'.
CH\P. VII. lite Sleinr. TI ΠΓΥΙι -djiiP· l il en their tea ind coffee velien Hei j, echo ее ıs lit tng neir to the window, leit'dcily c c ι med — " Yondei Id ι e ıs j our ol I icquaint- a ce, I 1 1 ι, ľ " I'll ιι , Η π, dd j ou I «v ' ' replied Ruinul, evi eii_ t) tic iv indo v b he ipjhc "1 n t . I luie enouji We'll Ime lum in, l,e il ,ч ne ι e dui le ι Milton to out party, fui ni ul hk ly he cin teli tıs the laflııon iblc mode lì killing tine at tins phce." Ridmill
Radimi π me lu'elj ring the beli, and ordered the ervintto icqu unt the gentleman whom he pointed out to hım, thit a perfon bj the inm of Ridmill, would be hippy to (Iule hindi wuh h m The fu-vul hiilened to deh er his mef- fige, uid 1 I giuy loon liter tu uthered up Ridmill hid kn мп Pi 4 nij foi a num¬ bei f jcus, he \ is \h nil hib o m ige, ind, like hım ei,, h liniek ι tortu ıc In ti de, } et u ıs he ίο \ 1 ni ıc 1, the Hi nut unplea¬ fant, m Ыь dd oure, whu ι he wis s cel¬ fan t ly inteilpciii ) 0 witi quoi tn s from diflerent worl ь1 e iul puu d, ılı t though many eeníured, few giew tired m lib com¬ pany Wien the fnendlj grectincs b\ all pittus were lulpended, 1 agi iry begin to ciquirc how long they had been at Brighton, whe¬ ther they had iublcribbd their Uve ıhıilıngs each
cicli at the librine, and vifited the Bill- rooms, the Grove, the Theatre, and 1 long hit of et celeras. Го evlucli Ridmill made inf ver, tint they lnd 0 il j armed 01 tl с pieceding evening, and much evinteci Ins fncndlj tnllruct ons is to the modilb method ot Ipciiilnig their hour» " Oh foreg id I ' he re] lied, " I «ill bon put jou into lhe nght wie 1 Iil libi mts ve 11 v ılıt dueftly , thole le tl c f illllonabL loupes, and -η this tunc in the cv eni g tliey tre 111 0 cn r 1 ni iiligiouile cioeeded —What (ay you, Mils Ridnull, will a gcntiewalk pioec уссаЫс '' Being infiecrcd 11 tie ifhimitivc, they loon vilited the phus iboi e menu ned, fublcubed their (nc flulh ig it cicli librai), and then eii|0)cd 111 agree b' promena Ic on the Sterne, Piagni) imufing then bj giving fhort accounts of almoft eiei) indieiduil they
tl j pf d, f t sle n 1 Ihcm, be 1 be at B ι ι I ι u ι ıu ly lix vv ıks, a id hi 1 i 11 il It iur (ome j ca s pl , ot f ι e ıı at lc 11 ılır e m nths tl ι , ι I n t ! 1 le v the ι ıı pírt of the til oııll s lo ι it licit íummei s rc eit I ut th t ba lo " Dob tullene, h c t ıel, 'jon¬ der ıs ı o[ t | 1 ait lies ın th ı t , ' c j cW ι mercenaıy pu , h no 1 t t 11 To the ı t l \- 1 ] ı , fc с d bj a nu- ı ι η η yco) t at d il tteıcrs , a ıhe 1 it a I 1 ï ıpble over le ' 1 i kb —Lut fc , hitliei con i \ 1 Ί ıoı t, v 1 o has ι lıand- iome vi' a η t ı lu 'Ί mis fio η this placc , aı d juft Ld uıd 1 ( ıl tai) a 1 de- jecìed, a , с uut, ic η ι у eiiii- rrenced wh n 1 Roj 1 M ílu luft ied lina then he la wandeied л 1щ lc r s evne over a for ıgı 1 il, and h urly j unions Heaven for a reftoratien ol monarchical jow r
power to cuirpte the banriil t-« ■ of libati, rclloie the olive of pu e, -nd o cc mori gì ι ti in u ill t) to In dilliefle 1 с uin¬ ti), ľ h ', the I ло ict turns id o>cl cs hnn, he til s Inn <u I ill, h) tie 1 ι il , tie I uuı с in ι le it tint vv ,ııld do bo¬ nom to ι ί ι и, u 1 tin i ıoı í Hileli¬ min' юн ıc lic ıs ta let. 0\Icd o e lt , ft. 1 c,h s leinbic fc tur s bri,litui luto alınlı- U uıs bccı culo tunte, uıd lint ıs í İmi ι t n make tın İJuoıct I ıs fucini. ľih 11, ικι uc uk _ι-ο_, l'i ,tl е Ггс ıch- ın η ıs uı bu nning lı "gı ct, md lu luditor t,¡etis iiìec4 luuli the t.le "Mijtlieeye ili t ılı ι s for lhe nıısfo tunes of othırs, nc u Ihid ι tear foi its own ' — Jull Lc «ıe us ire an iile π I 'ige oí B ice-, nul a httle beyond t ııı ι e,ıo ip ıs gı if cl is ıs each, lice, md Ρ ııu cin make them—But turn jou ejes tins va), u. d, lupi orte I by hu aged mothei, you'll behold the beauteous Lmma. "IfjMlJ.ll Kill, | rej «с и fli 1 tlic η now. ' Poor
Poor Emma! flic had phced her afieftions on a Nav.il Olilcei, though " She ntur tolj hi. Int, >' Ilut let em il unit, II t «ontt ι ihc huil, " F.ctU.nh.1 Unnlktbe k. ' He, houcvei, ua fliin in the mimor.blc aŕlion ol the infl of Auguft—an unfortunate day for Enima. She has been for feveral weeks pift con¬ ili cd to 1er room by fickncls, nnd tliough now n'uch rccoicletl, "pines in thouglit," and cndcaiour· locoucei! I.er inivaul nulei). " S ,11» CnllCCll.l, like in «>i t n ľ ]t,i I, " Ílom, the Iltart lo tuultu „lu. ιι ιι." Ridnull and Hcniy were moved, and M.« ) 1 me ,ι| plied her liandLci chief to catch a ftai ling tear. Λ filence
Λ ill nee for lome min itcs cnfued, 11 hen Muy Ime it i tl lj icul Uni— " If lhe n cr told her loie, how be¬ cime it u Ιο u 11 infor .ied ol ihe liite ot hel 111' •111 nu Ihıl knon,' infuc cd Ρ ι¬ ηι ι, " ai 1 ıh (loi) ti I uni 11 enfi, 11 hen ne lie noie .u lcilui~ lo 11 tei into рте ' 10
" P ıoı I 1111"' lul Ha 'm II " I iilortuhui uľ' eMiuiiied Henry " I u uuld lhe nete U, uuh pny ' ' li_Jied Muj Jmc, "but hope dclliojcd, peice and iniiquili tj no moie befriend the wretch¬ ed lull lei " • Γ, ,, , ,,y, " Λ,,Ι,,) ts, ,, t, с loudl) rejoined l'I ijarj. " Suie,"
"Sure," fuddeii« çulumu! Ridilli, " JO der 1 pereille NoItlleJie, ОГ Uı) CJ CS decine n e '" " Noithcote,' fud Plıgıırj, " he ıs a urarge (elloil " Hi ι lt m «ci«, " Ile „ t - e t ttt , t I Ile leks " Qjtte liuti _htlt de U et men " I [ oteli lt ıs he," cxclimicd Marj- Jane and Hcnrj " Then he muft join our pirtj," faid Plagiary , "fols d ft I u s «Ш1| ι dnR: « ь ι ь « u 1 o¡ ııtııı, «■ Amibi y itti bto stnet n„ « r cl, '· It fi ill Ь ill 1 I mc t iti lo t I t 1 , » О ) tl, Ulii, (İnil no t I ti|, ι, ■■ b II U búj «I »I 'S ' J «Cim ," hnlRidæill/'lctu lıeırılıtlle more to the light, and uc ili 1 1 meet hım , 1 ki.eu
know he will be glad to fee us, though he uaj not podeis t'ıe caud urto avow it.' « Not viti (ludins ill Ins oddities" ob- fcivcl\t ty 1 mc, " 1 cvci feel mj Ich nappy when I i u m Ins compa ıj , but there ıs an liidcieribablc fomething in his nancer when¬ ever lie looks or fpeaks to me, which is but feldom, that awes me 1 am fuie it is not fu, )et I would not incur his difplcaiaie ior the woild ' " I believe him lo be a worthy man," faid Hun), " but lo cxticmel) nuiufi ι id telly, 1 feldom iddicis a word to lum left I fhould offend ' " I never Ιιλι hım ine ned to muth," rejoined PI igt ir), " and 1 ho/e known h τι lo ne ) eaı% md been often in co upan) with huu "Sellu U full , a II il S uılı ılın ' As f I c »u. 1 li I II, «n I ta, I li | I ' Ila culli«! I «uv I to fill li aui y lh ig " Hcobfirvcsu ," re narked Mai) Jine, " and is making tow vrds us " voi ι в He
He foon came up with them, (hook Rid- nuH by the hind, mide ι foi mil bov to Pla_,iaiy, uid leemed plcaíc 1 when Mue- Jinc nul Hemy profcflcd tlicmfcl es g ad to ii) him. Ridnull, as ufinl, wis ov cieehclnnng lum with a toirent ol nimiosat )n s, fich is, why he informed lum n t, evn i he 'ıft pırtcd with hım, tl ıt 1 e e s ıboııt to ıı d с uıovcuıfıon ıntotlıecıı ılij — H ıe 'on^ ere he re uıncd to t een í ive ι с , evin h Norıhıote, ıs ulu ı, ınleeeie ıı t, but ıl- t, j le.tlıım " I decine," ful Г nul', "he eeent oll in fuch ι hurrj t ııt 1 főiéit to in own hun where I ind I ln) leli cuce , but m íl hk 1) eve ili 1 1 loin ι cet ее uh 1 ııı ıgı , id il 1 e D ıııs n с ti ι e, 1 cu ac luauit lini then — fiul ccuit, fiul eee w ih h mc ird '- W li i Iiy v ) , Pl 0 iuj, li-ec j )u arj ol i ¿non to 0 liip « ut of the LVClllIlj, vvitu us ' ' " None,"
" None," he rtp'itd , ind foon lei they ιι rt ili loniloiiibly i ıttd in Rul nill s d ı ııı 0 ınoı , on tht M r le l'anele Πι y nd Ridmill were loon engaged ııı enn ier!) , Huny л d Muj J ıııt fit hlciıt Ijit editors and is Ridm it lud bedi fiequently ronfia lifted b) Plagia,, in i ime clienti ι! points oí 1ь i D umuit, thcy anti¬ cipiteli ılıt ı fing ftorm " Riele , lul Ri 'mill, « Г| ite of ill 1 ill ti ι ιι ι met, will net tulille 'n¡ irris ' " alile, ıeplıcd he t ıhtı , " but Jio- lelt) Ь [ rillfit HI lllltll ' " Λη lnduitiious mu will thine m my counti) ' " lit ma) keep hi ıılelf , but lf lit has a family, ılıt aflifl ι ict of a inend miy prove lei) accej t ibit ' " ťioudtnct ntver fends childien but clothes aie lent hkuviic, ii the mm be elt- iclllllg" t 2 " But
" Bui by fome ftrange miftake, which I never eould account for, the eludici arc fometimes fent to oiil houfe, ai d the e ithcs to another " " 1 afinm that lndullij, u in upi 't man, never goes unic aid I, le uch tie woild tluough, and jou will fin 1 it lo , ind that miler), dilet e, an 1 | overt!, wc i 'cut from intempci nice, ic lei el , uu! «olh ' " Thatb not awijs tU e ic, u I will loon make it ıppc τ " " Rot me but it is ilwajs the e fe and you aic an ol itinaie blocklic id lui pu u i ing to lij it ıs i ot ' " С ttu w ıı 's'" vv inn') icphed Pia air) , " for, by tic Geds, ihou w it better 0 all the devil tlnn gill ι e' « I defy t с devil idi! his woiks,' le¬ törted Radmill, "ad cue as little for jou or jour ι i 0 cr, s I do tor lnm « /ouncb, mil) 1 fudPlagaiy, «'Ik 11 f I I l| ik , " M II 1 ^ v \ i y ι D сЫ ' ' Ь .11 I kf gl leu 1 .vi n с iiaJ ι a il " Rot
" Rot youı quotations '" lociferated Riamili, " but this ıs language, be whole the eleni if mi), I feti io ivtric to hilen 1 1, that m lutine 1 do rtqucft ue miy be. better (lllll'els ' Ph" ty uas biry lie hi I gone fo fir, he r ι ie I 'vu ш I, nd κηηνιη; the no псе t listelli b ι ied Inulti t r | rov > mg lnm, but Ι 1 ,ιι ws 1'civile ııcııı ı tcd uıtlı the tertun n t iod ί t mci lite mt- teıs a 0 in 1 r , Larici 0 nito i bud laugh, ht e t ıı ed —· " And ile , ıı rılced feiıojly nigiy ? •41 ml Uj " Rot it,' fuel Rid rull, much foftened, " fp ík to me in ioni un 'eims mei 1 will luvt the piticncc to hiten to )ou ' Ч "I
" 1 kne«, ' к t, ι.' Plym "I (Inuld beili Ilen, tlou 0 ll
" O« jou f) proiokintr, ' и ι ! td Ridimi!. " 1 fiiul bt no cciutiouuii f tui , Ιι I Plıgıırj , " ΤΙ ι Ilg r f ι , η,
« V tl!, ^ι," pıoınınccl Γ ulmii!, " I tiufi jou uil nou dmit tl it in indulliious ШШ lllll del ilid СПО ,11 <f llic L d thng oí llii ι oı d toi he ni chelitul and coi tentui " " And noi e lo r , ıc,' ıııtı с Plig-nj. " l'e iecds ι , ' Ind R dimii , " enough ь as mucii as a a ood mm ltquues, ind mc re lh η ι bid ne delti ies." " Iiuc,' u, lud Pi gui), ■ II . Ito jtll ti о - cm í ly ll ι·,, « l luset,«.« jlietiUstuul ι Thii
li j rv ι ion nude Rnhıııll 11 1 ľli- le I ι i 's .,ιιιι , lluv İpu t the rcmim- e t ι ι ln^ men lv to uhu, md t it h nu ľ r , lilin- fron lı, icat, «■T « ' fi u«nii¡» · < lk « u y N с VV ι ι JO l ν tl a Ι itle ıtt Ί "¡ii 11 n 0 then, idicu, he departed.
Ľ 4 с: Ι ΑΡ.
CHAP. VIII.
tmi tl ι. Μι. У οι theolc to Uıs Молоту. bı 'in, Jib 9 IM O doubt ) ou iiill be furpriled it re¬ ceiving a letlei irom me dite ι at Bnghton, particularly as, but a r c ι cKvs li ce, I wrote to you tic m Loud i, ind, contraiy to my ulual cuftom, loi with 50111 hai e no feeicts, 1 appnzed jou nut tint I »as about to mil e fueh an cxcuihon ,— hov could f ? — .it tint t me J l.ne -. it nol mı lelf—Radmill who, but for his eUiemc girruht), in 1 In·, uiliippoitible
mí ippoi tibie i iquifitiie le s info mattes lut с )ncu ι 'um not, u el ehlcli ou η ι - el ι e m to tie it hnn uuh CO Ut ,j , [ ,] ill b ııııııl to eonle fs my Ii «I, 1 ,t I) 111 le İC le 111 —1 к 10 II t İlle/ ıt ı , v t t thue I meihin leut ı- coiint ιοί, tint b ids ι ıc t ) huu, ι d, in
uul-
I e l e l'U ') e jUliltlOll t 1 1 IJ 111 l I t In the muit D deuee lu, il Ru ,1 ipcılls I el 1 , 1) te ehi g lie tl) и 1 1 ıc Ιγ с lib lih ie one ее и il 1 il it Wil n í u incul U (le IS 11 lü ril ul — I Invelici »h. b tiel Ιο ÍL, I η ,, 1 hini uıv Id! t )д ıtıtc. tie up ı hu cm, aid ai.D íly ее itch] g lier ι ien nno ι, in I, m I nie of mj dl nis t) iı pprel , ι ι 1 It till) e tın S Will lilt ι ., ,, ν -_ lei) uni tf) e iil III, Ιο ι ι Ιιιι ι ii e ι ι ,. cin tuch feiılatı ms oi i 3 iiiu» οι «ην il) I] 1 ic 1 moie micie ul f ι M ι) | ,e ι ι ц otiieis whom jt tec cv ry daj, ecjuulj ш ue >■ 5 and
ind cnn'lj ť i e! unii e ιι n enl i! tt compi Ihnient ?— \. , ι n ι imp Ι İt Ι ι jou to dil ΙΛ tli li Ini in , ululi ι "tu ıtt « i ul h n η , ι luth u 11 Il I, Wll t I 11 lllll 11 — к uhi ι 1 ι n u ι 1 r , Ι Ι ι ι e h с n lu e j 1 1 t İt
pic le I ι ıob ιρ Π ι rence e u i ti 1 ıııll í. uu Je I
ulj
trte , foi ιι I it η et ini 1 ι ot · io 1 — wlnt lot ttus mt t te — ti u 1 I I t foui t) , ind I 1 1 t to b il m I r 1 c ι not ud rt ni)Ici)— h t rouiil 1 ιι Int tro İden ni qu iı ot it, to it u с nil ic ι 0 fen cs, mil lu gun lu ııtıı b n u iiqu u j ini! tontentmt t ? — Л1а, t ) ıtııuı ie tole ш unii, υι, li t j io ill, tlıeı
1 L α η D. oo. ep , ι, 'not, ι, ΙΠ ι»ι penultimi -tj ιη ι ι 'ιρ ι <ο) ьч ι« ιι inq 'n n Ί il ι , - ,—Χ ι Μ«! J ι πι ■> ι ο t ρ« - ' ι ι ι ι Á¡ 11| IUI 13 1)11 ι' ι fil« Π IJ v I f pu '(itn IUI ι , 'p VIII IIU.....I „ve i ¡ ------- „ u - τ Ul 1-1 Γ , nn , (j— ρ ι η s . l'i e «
ρ,ηη. , ,,ι,,,, , ,,,νν ' Ι ι 1' Ί ι S ρ ti ιιιρ Ц T' " ' ΙΊ ι 'Ю '1,4 11 ρ« '| - 1 1 , Ι 1 «> V™ Ι ^ t ν ι ) η [ m ι ν ρ-ιιπ ' ι s ,, -, , ι ,· ι e' ut ( -II ICH llt| I [> S| ( 1,1 li" Л , « ' ι lu, с иц ı »ııı tl ι i ıı U I , 1, l|J 'l 4| 1 ι i i U ) -, it i n ij' i/e , , iv "'U " и ' < И' ' l" 0 " 1 ' u 1 l J "" 'virui-,1 o n ia mm up u t n i no [i q д m/iu «i up ι nup цп ' m ι с tn pu -Oipi[]SllIlipiLJ vioiyiiii 11 ι π siyi ν ία invi λ avu
with tlum but ifho t time. Ridnull was beginning to bt impertinently loquicioui, and I ibruptl) left tlicm —My good and .imnble coulin, .idicu '"
CHAP. IX. 'I he Letto— the ilnjl 'J—an I,he S«j< , „n JbeADMILL hid been it Brighton neir') ι week, uhen one ironin ^ 1 fen int ci teiul lhe room, and delivered to lícni) α letter he hid juft received from the poll- unci.—■ Hc broke the leal, finding by th lupcrluip- tion it was for himftlf, and not his fithei , and ashe made himfeif aequamted null tht tontents, became vifibly agitated. Ridnull, 5 ulo
evho obfuvc 1 ir, a nuil) enquued evhat lud lo Icnfiblv aflcucd Inn " Oh ' it ij of ι ) coniequence," [Ic ι y replied, " to any o u but mel If, a d cou'd J hae e pi cv ulu! up ıı von, ' ι , t ) 1 ite coi¬ ti u ed butafcev dubbiarli tuen, ceco by n v lelf it lad be n veil d" " λ\Ι it Ι ι' le ι ι tied, Hcnij '' huiilv v., ι il teil iiii " ^ i n ike m unni) , I u lill u ι i j iui m ig me vv it th it ι i uh ρ ) cim " 1 dan ne', i, eı i e и , i u' 0 cd nij ev id not to cl ) it, ι iu e v m/ í i ier 111 i u cuinii nies, to bie 1 1 it ' " ln t o'e с l-s" o Herved Ruinul', "th le Ile UW IJS СЧ ept 01 b, Helli) ,—ι i ıtheı Ibai ij.ıt ev hu ι u] u с 'cs ill ou e , lie li ıs rı 0 t o louhi ın 1, uıd ll tile leıı b dutiful, le lull i ot псише to o ue ' " illtllispirtl u'll Ollly, iettili e I Uc 11«, " 111) CiL 1Г oil, 1 lllllekle,— 11 lo 11. t I. tun period, when 1 an loiovcd n ч ш ; pio 1 e
, r ι juli ic Ih Iti to I to I 1 II! o j u 1
y , 1 1
1 j t о
i I fi
L o 1
coadunan to he in rcadhicis, almut deven o'clock, lu bri;)- then back a 0 ahi. ТПк'у had j u íl reach,;] the Steine, when a lar¿e nial'iiil", with whom lome | eriönä had becnauuilm-tlicrr.ielvesliy Γ.·ι:·.'.Ί:^ inwtl.c water, and wh.o, to dry i-.':,-.i.e:f, lia.l been roiling in the d .¡l o. t: e road, unfortunately
pal
fil
Iiii
I'jnhble of the I.ok ha had с ;:::üiued,
hed at
k
1 1
\
t
t
Mil Tint nul li nrj ι tu ι 1 luth 1 m, looi ıftu 1 ι ι « in cl I mi-id, md, fet Ir m Itu. tr iteidciit, irmeli it l' e II ! ıooııı, Muj ι c I ! ' i bu t lì ut ti ne m the ıooııı, ilici ıc İp ı ııı ı[ pıieiltly 1 ut í ) tl λ ι tl e, rc ] u i th liti- n ш ο ι ι ι ι 1 i tl t it *d nt Inl¬ ıı Ι! 1 1 1 с , I it t c m n 1 1 prt- ιι 111 , ti I с ι u ν ti il tud 1 minit to ι ι ι ,ιιιι ( sl it d cl ι - t ııu ι ııı, ι η, ıtıt med 1 1С t Dl ilei l b) 11 i «lllllll r/m llUllltlll I Cll 11 UlSlt- rutP, ıılı, Ilei ihtilnu, he lcd 1 ι lo a I ι Ι u 1 u I ľ ij ut , ıtt, e ι. Ι, t, 1 ılij Ime, u ιι , ¡ il 1 ) lun Ol duc I^, lud Ull ell l e el t 11.
ITci ja Inu pud ' u evuy ıtt mnn,and (he nuv ırılj, con ıel ι« ι he e ıs ι t ιαι e , Ultircd li tO l Ull) Cl) Vell tıoıı iuti luu, he foon poil lied hiniicll о le nine, tint ıs, t e name R ulmul с cr vvı 1 cd Iıu to il¬ lume— tl 0u o h n )t b lu.ıcı to hni b, mj tus of confinguinitj, he wiihed her tobe eon¬ ii icic as lib duplici, ine] Mu) J mc v as 1 1 cciiílom d t) be cillcd b) the nunc ot ividnull, th t lhe ledom lungimii ihe luci t j othu Aliiadj had flıe given hci confent for an¬ other dince, when Worthcotc, veli uı Miry- Imc hid not bc.oie icrcuvee!, aelv ι e d to¬ ve не ь hu, uıd uıtlı a liuu luokc\ e led lus laid Marj jane, a ved lud lljiiii'ud by hb mainici, involunt inly pliced ui I end witl in his, a id hc, u th л uttenn^ ι ote!, tonel eled hu into t e I Cet 100111, lett lui with Radmill and ILnij, and pied) lately deputed lie,,,)
Hcnrj pcıceııcd b liei countenance tint foıııctlun ищ ' liant I 1 с ureo to dil- trclbh ι,ι d d еч idini ι Ilı mı cl huniéit foi lei ugh ι , lllll) Ι ι 111 e , picid¬ éi iidilpe u , nI it lu ci t ıın eleven o el ek, hndın 0 Ine cu ι 0 e in wait¬ ing, they «ere fct donn t the ι ο in dooi. Mi) Jine, when к ıc ' o hei ıh- nber, be -,ιη to ici li ui lu ι ι tl Ιι ι 3c in¬ cident tint 1 1 1 о с 1 1 n t 1 ıc ıb 1 )- 10011 Selt uı lı , ) I Ilı 1. ел nit wii) , t 1 u 1 ci p iti с lı u 1 ! oc mtl 1 to bc I ıc d fon lini ι i icat cicli a- poilu! m ri t, t ıe i e onu! hile ıcd in lo cxti ι ı ııııı ınu r,muiliJl onilhcd liei Иь ι ι 1 Ilı nei iot, but ıs this, flıe с с il 1, nuit с iet 1 с lııı ι и to thole «I lu ¡u ni lu h o, IU c uld not ıın d ı с iiiii llie h d e mun lcd an Ulli I ) lell l 1 \1 11 II lus 1С pi lt uheil hc lu t i I e 1 ι d 1 1 h d η ,ci been ıııdcı Din, it ı ıs ι ri e, »ι u I Ihc kllUlV tli t ť с et ,JctteO Uil 1 biLi 1,1111e 1 Д,
it, but vi» 'il ' u' οι Ί 1 η ', ιν ь ШОК tiltil 'l I t lev — IVe. Г, t IlOie (ile iti' 1' e p [l' Γί b c im , li e bi n e 1 i 'cu , hu, lu Ctili t ι L) 1)Ц 11 ι 1, infilate ol mmd not tue molt enviable, en c.vuuted to ioiget the occu rciiee m tl ep. ii the morning Noilhcote called upon them. Mii) jinetret.ib'cd it his ipproieh, though u c« nleious ot hıvı c ictcd wiong, )et COJİd l'le 111Д с dilim Uld le t ellllgs. " So, mj good frc d, ' c\c ıınied Rıd- llllll, IS he enter d, ")OU lille UMIld us out — Co ne, lit do; η, ι id Ipeiid an liuui or ίο Vvith US.' Nitlicote fated hımllf oppolıte to M i 1 ne, W Cl Utel »uu el u h« .re¬ fe 1С, lid 1 tl I Ci Ш1Ц İKİ CV tl u Is lllll t t ) Houli incei ll,t, 1 ,<_. lıcrlılt ll 111 1 el cil.lllll.il 1141., «hie lip
the fid), and made lone tuning remai ks on tfie weither At tint moment a gentleman pifluig hj, ind di Ili j ing Muj Jim, po- htilj took ofl his ι it, md boivid to lur , he at firfl iicnicd inclined to flop, but, on ob¬ taining a ghmpfi of Noithcote, a'tcicd his intention, and walked aevaj. Muj lilies checks v c- f Tuf d with blullicseelicii, m the ι cr ι hj ileted lier, flıe ıccjgııı/e I he. p it ι f tn ¡ leceding cv ening Radmi'l, vvh), as vee'l is Heniv and Noithc tc, had uDlue J e 1 it paled, et¬ elät md— " Mij I nc, do jou In , t'nt gentle¬ min >— 1 ¡is I uui in I сал 11 nt hc has forne kno elui e ot v u ' «' Iliivel ei lııı о lj once be 'oie, Su," timidly. rc,lel vi ııj ' ıc
Henry
İle ırj wis luıpiıied it her шише , and, if he hid inj ıeıl ılLc ι m loi her, ionic¬ ii ing hl с ι i'jj') u th t Hument Iliuck uı jili h ut, , In nquniii venere and vien lie hid'let te le l h n In this putu ulu Mt« | inc foon fltlbfrd Inni, ť ou, ι Ihc di 1 ne t icqu nt lnm in . >e ( i^tl ι eeij 1 h d leul intu¬ ii, el " tv ι it, ' (blue el к l'unii, " it jou luni ι pib net I k oit, lienu, we Ihı 'oe ΛΙ e Γι e ι ' ıu ο. th le 0 ıy ¡ ice , oiie t) ne o. mol ι — D) ıoı 1 noıv e ι о ιι ι jou ,ι ι , N uthulte '" " ld),' hc ni upi u " Χ.Ίο ι I wint ь Ie' niteiiog lul R ul ,ι 11 " Ac ι liuun ti fi u dul," iud Noıtlı- COtc, Il 1 ig illb CJej 1 i eutly U[10ll MllJ- J inc a» ne (роке.
" Induci,·'
"I h ι,' ι ,c un il kulinil , « why 1 I I«, M II, Jl e, j tu hut mile 1 ICI} I I I equ lllll ι ice ' ' 4 ıı ııtı се, 4 i," icilcntcd Muj. 1 Cl led, "Llllll Ul ıııg't I llll ΙρΛ to lull, 11 ', Ilel wlut 1 11 e Ι ι , llclcl Willi to lee ıl lp lk tO ' 1 11 1 " Λ'ιι b ol," Iud \ in holt « W. I w 1, ıj uı il .in',, 'I, "lut who ι К uu h s nunc — Ur ' s le e ne Im '- hou lu lu le bten Il Iil c il 11 -t il III crt t'ic e' Vll clxs I refi с " \i titt f. ıı ned, Lui ful i ting « H ! ί! ι,ρ" t o'a gentium, bııı С 111 İlle İR I 1 " li Ih I Iııev İıını,' ujon dlteiiiy " linci Kl 1.1. Il), lit, JUI g P 1 1," acrim ni uG) t Ы ved "NoiLiejte, "■ li iti plutu b) hib i dUieUon." » But,
"But, fi nd No tlicoc'cvchiii 1 Rul¬ li 1 1, preiei tın; Hen j lı ıı „leııgıı ι¬ ΐ ei ίο e hat Iıul beil u tered, "jou hile not toll! teiuilll ' " I nqune oi « le jin ," i mo ülely κι lud , " 1 1 ι ' ; t m j be 1 1 'ui poeeei t) ι ile e ι lul d e!, тмин IL io v mt," I ' W ıj ! ıc, ıııı e en! eo 11 0 lo t p- p ι te r which N t co , iipciicrni iii.pu ι pioi'uced, ' ιηι ceel do 1 ее Ihto
; P b"
ilu Ic 1 R- Inul , " rot
ill'
г о он ι i's unco, с fti deny lef ıhı, ill ebıl ,1ı ılııı hu cum uy m tin , ι m lie 1 ι , ι ııLel) tobe lı- ıııl ıı ! e, lui ι ıdulıl nn lu kid tonıoicınlcıı ¿it J ι , fecali ledine no. Oli, и 1 I fein , ее lio it u uhu o| ¡uituiin) wis dite iunie 1 to mullique the 1 1 ur bcteieeti Mitj-
Mtrj Ime and tio unuiuiv ι, licfit.ied not to 0 ivclus lllelt IleeWli In th cvenin-T, Rad mH benig cnrjagL 1 at Orc;. ıı j sın cloic com cri ıtıoıı with Plı 0 ı ırj, ileni) aid Mm-Jıne ıvcre foı İme time b) ıhcmlches when the Iollowing difcourfe took p'ace between them — " M) dear M ri lai c, vvh-1 co ild o« cui Mj nihil 11 bt ι th i'oumstl at induc il koninou tob (о fiveie vıdı juu this mornii g ' " And piij, nn fwi i ínquifitive gentle¬ man, wlnt w «s the iı lllincc of the lettel jou to di) ıeceıved, thu jour fithcr ind mjlclf, UiliT i ılır to jour woi ted milom, arc to be ' ept in g ior nice of ' " Mm Jane, j ш 1 ave beloie heard my reafon,andcouk! I navi loiii¡ hed with joui lequefts, peih ps neither jour advice, nor the advice of niy fathu could have bceii of the leali beneht to mc Mj advic , pio- bablj, in the prefent uitlaice, iniy pavent yotir
ν ur encountering tlie unt ι npleiíinf Ibi - eeues in futuic, jou bjt tins morning cn- 1 el ' « liut lf I llnuld f lunni 1 u с pledged 11) и ml nil to llfverlhclc quelli ns> ' " Such 1 prom f , in I to ι Hunger, uould hu Ί η llu h ight cf impu knu, ııl I cm uv mine Marv 1 ι с would ¡ ıc, lij luve η e it I the rc, r ithcs of hd fue u W • Л d I fnccrť) tiuft Ι ι cui (lull, fn· I Hurt i u Iltnry, Mr Noithcote Ins I di) in net d ι ton d p in than I n IleicMuv ]ι ι f i udi air o ci у tlung thith ! , ì I lei ι uı her ini ılı u I iom, ml ilu f i ul r bel inouï ot hoıthc ıe . ıı ılıt o e ι j , ι d ı\prcflc I in rh , 't lu id fun n с t il her , inner 1 il notile litiu« unii i ol h n k r luci. t\t n ι we' t i u f voi t. i ITtniy
Henry could form no probible concilinoli ether, he blamed Mary J mc foi danem., with a perlon flic hid nevu been intioduced to,and promiled in future, when the) vifilcd the public pl ices of amufement togither never ig un to le te e her unprotCeted " I would to Heaven, Henrj, e icul iteti Muy-Jmc, " that letter jou have ic ived may not eventually prove a fub|ccì of 0 r ter uncahnefs to us all, ıhan ıvh it my funí e ııı difcretion has, or ь likel« to do ' ' bienrj returned no infwer, buí uıs for fome time lofi in levine, Mue Jue eoulc iiave given the world to luve reiniv d ev h it ficnied topice upon his fpu t% bur knoee ing her oeen uiipicitv, even Ind llcnij jiioved lefs inflexible, (lie became gı ее in 1 tacitul n lıkeıvıtc How Ιοη 0 thev e ould haie continued in thisniufng fitu ılı «n, hid not Ridmill ind Plagıaıy oken m upon their meditations, wc cannot poťittvelj nečr¬ tám. CHAP
CHAP Χ Ilte Story oj I tiima Q_¡nif tlo t , e ct a I I rj VlRf-IL 1YİY good fnends, exclaimed Plagiar) > m peiceiving their dejetlton, Wll g sfili etile, lccoi,)Oii c! o ks " Rot it, ' lud Ridmill, b fort urhei¬ li id timt to reply, " I hope tlitre hiie been no more letters uhom eier) bodj is to bc denie 1 ι figlit of, noi any acquaintance lor ned with peoj le before you know who il cj aie г 2 Plagnry
Pligiary would willing!) lint been moni fitive, as he knew not to ulut Ridn ill il- lutled, hid not Miry jane preien id li in b) dcfiring to heir the ft in ol Liuun, uhieh he hid prtviouih piomilcd '■ Wtll," fiul ht, " 1 lııı с no (b|i ilion, ind, ıs it ıs but Ihoı t, с in comj 1) ııı hyoııı rtqucft in a teiv words " t And without fuilhci tııtunıl ıcutıon, having feated hunfelf, lit begin is lo low, — " Emma ıs the mil) tluld ofi refbtibb'e Clergyman, rch in even gift N turc cou d bellow, flic gıeıv tht pndt ind jo) of her find jnient , j li)fulis tlie ei ι, ii I jlure in innocence is is the fiker firt i u uj on ι gilden fod, icarieiy tien now ha, flıe numbered nineteen ye rs, and min) jouth 1 , Iliuck with her excellence, Inie fohcitcd In Irnd in marriage, and lome of lııılı uno ι n, ıntl opuknt, hut to her father made honoi г iblc diertures,—he, toohteun tht nealthy pi uns of
of Indeltan, inidd not hue butcrcd in a tile lo nice, but icfen d ılıt n to his d lugli t ι, rc oli d, ulien 1 a t aid i dilution could go tig thu, lus tančlton flioul I not bc wiih! ılı! " 1 mini, dti oid oi guile, fcorıitd to up¬ hold ui expeu ition when Ilıt nttr dehgied to gu it, uniti), though pufmvt m ini vei, ill itjtfttd , —her hcait, untuned ti lou, jet well conceuctl tht ttndcr piflion, ind, m honefl woull, ditenun d us potent in¬ fluence, ndtd by difcretion, on!« fliould guide lier Innd, and dircft her choice " One wintiy eve, flic was fitting joyous iound a cheerful fire, m merry chit with a. choice few, uhom friendlhip hid felecled , htr latlier, to idnnmflcr tht folemn rites to one deceafed, was abfent The funeral ob- feciuin ovti, he joined the pait) ittuided by a youth juft ripening into manhood, but on whofe expreflive feituics the lombrt traits of furrow weie legibly depiucd —' This," •nd the worthy Clergyman, liking him by the hind, and leading lnm to his wift and г j daughtei,
daughter, c this ıs the fon of thofe who were once our neighbours, whom we all eileemed ind much regretted wlien thty departed and flttled too far foi our fnendly enquiue.. to reach, you cannot Ьчтс foigotten the mme of----------j though Ľnuna at that time was too \oung to have an) recollection of it it 1 r lent They, however, aie no moie 1 and this their only furviving огТърппд, ere lit. fills a fituation in the Ro> ii Navj his il- lit iv e have prouired ior him, hft tht h in 1 of J-atL fliould clofe hb cic* u iga n İh ıe tunis, an fheathhı mudtn í \o d m de ti, ь com-to bid faic\cl to th ife v ho onet uere pioud to be accounted his parents' fıiend* " 1 he tea ι offjmpathj wat mioljiítau y íhed as they wek omul him to then ho pi table mauhon , and ashe dep u ud, an uı ıoı in pious ejicuhtion, fion hearts uncoitami- n ite ΐ ν it 1 £,Ullt, V\dS ι lie u\ f и his fif tj " 1 rom th it ti nt Lmm ι Wuul í ír uneiıt- Ij make enquiries abjut the )outl, and к lined tint his fathu, α Bııtılh merchant, once
once bltflcd «ltli riches in ibimdince, was, by niilnps md d it ıııı lortunc, robbed of ill 1 lenti rc bol I, behkc impiudtnf, on hnding lus wei ılı d uınıllıed, ht ın l luck- !cf, hour, h p ng to renin Ins lories, fent to Ι ι In s lhorc, the icfi I homt ard bound, tlut would I aie f| rt id the hi ling balm, ind m idt 1 1 fnootli igun, cnuilftd luudit tl t fuming lu cs, pendiceli- Sioi did the fitil ut s 1 iŕt lus m ithtr, pni = m 114 etv of счр с ation !e!l 1 1 e mi tunc (Inu d bi'il u it tht) n d 1117 dc ', fui- \11cd not the ih ick, ind his fuher, fonie few months iftcr, lunk hkewilc to the griic, leaung lum poor, dependant, ind ntily heart broken, to lame t the fad cienis^ — S ion aftti, it I is own rt pitit, tht 1 lrluence of Ins inends piocured i un 111 , , o u nent indie Νινί, wluch ht liut to к 'cive of the höntit Ciergjmin ind his flu ily to till. ' Twa» 1 till, iws ϋ ho ι« j ι lu] " Ľmmi, on a fudden, loft that phjfut lolatility which hid fornerly marked htr f 4 Heps,
fícps, diíFuíing hippmefs to ill who fiw ind vvifljcd her well, becan egloomj md penfive, and would feck fome fcquclteicd Ipot wheie, fn с from interruption, Ihe could fit ind iiiji alone " 1 Ici p nuits, fır fıom ftıfpı ling whence her milady on ınıtcd, and feirful for her life, were atlv itcd to tij the efìeeì of change of itmofphcrc, ind from Cambdcn in Glou- ccftuihne, then nitive lefiduiCe, fur fome months fojoun ed it Tunbrulj. \\ ells , b it find n 0 In di r order rıtlıcı ine efe tl an 1 1 nuniíh, travelled as fu as Bitli Here their tendu folieitude ind attention made con¬ fider iblc improvement in hei lp\ its uid they exultingly anticipated returning heillh, when the glorious «lews wis piocliuned ίΙηΊ ť С biave Nelfon had fought, had conqucie I, had deftrojed the Gallic fleet, tins hei fi¬ ther nnpaited to Lmma, and, is я teir fell iıom lus eje he hkeivife tcld hu A Ioli hus ——— , ''c jouth he hid intiuiluced to «hem ere thcy quitted Cimb len, wis num¬ bered among the flam I—Lmma, « As
" As it «lic mn ι, «' Siici flum tile itili y level ef a gun, '« Л I mur к« lier, dropped fenfelefs it his feet, a riging fever fucceeded, ind (or mar«) weeks hei ntc u is defpauid of,—it wa then, uid only then tliey conce ud whit had wrought the gutious clun_,e, u d thcy betime dniuít as dilcontilitt aid mıltrabıe .la then hip cfs diuglitu. " L m .«ι at 1 iff. begi i fl uvK to recover, aniliutlun th It few weeks, wuh her p r nts, arrueil itlusjlee ün lie inn of then ir - ιιιι,Ι n net ned topi) m) ıılpccb to tl em, our irieidl) jt lings mei, I b) dunce mentioned the peilon who İl d betn 1 1110- itnil) tue fou cc of lo much pam i el lor- row, for I hid known hun fio n h s uitane) 1 mina ílarted on ht iring his name, ■· TI«. ir.Hi lena «' Siood on liei check« , ι« lolli the honey «lew «' lipon 1 gulie, ii Illy alinoli wither «1 * г 5 « Htr
s' Her fıtlıcr drew me afide, ind, 1 (t ΐ Ilı uld agam vound the feclın 0 s oflus dıııgı- ter, acqciuntcd me with what I I ave ι iv been tilling jou, time, he trufts, will 01 liteiate his remembrance fiom her nun I, d once mo e biels hım in his child, giv a id volatile as llie wis wont to Le —May it prove fo ι at lc.ift it is evile to deem it nut impoffible , for « Wl у Л ο И e Ant i e fim, ν? Γ s 1 kc tl «sfe i Tl at ti t fe lu ol 1 iti Here Plignry finiflied lus tile, and per cuving 1 is aud tors' affé t d even t ) teai , to give the convcrfitim a moie fpriglitiy turn, thus idchcffcd Kidmill— ' r How del jou approve of whit tint won d be tliougl t an oritor advanced at the hbrirj r ' " Leuy body," exchnned Ridmill, " feemed ch gufted with ium, md v ell t y might,— foi шу j ait I could lıave ki ock 1 hım
lnm down. Win, he it laft wis ulung downright feluiou , ind nude аь tue with the lion irary chili itions oi I is country tsif it weie 1 cn ue to beilo ι tlicm, tvtn ıs a tribulirj reıvııd to nıtııt ' " P hty m hım, nıy gooıl Sır, ' i id Plagiar) , " for " Ί eı I αν, II " Π c u iw t II II ι vs ι 11 I) ň e Ik " Tme," rc, hed Ridnull, " )ct she l dl i D u и с nun, ind delenes as lue 1 to bt taken nonet >l. " Ifl t bed 111 erotis," iiif ι r d PI 11 ıj, "lu ıılelf 'lis oıılı lic с 111 ι ι , n t his countr) or hls K ng u ulu u iole tu id in¬ fluenct ht 1, lullt td to tut, for « O lel sl I ,, III , ,Ι η t Hid hc İten 111 1 | lice le pubi t I'm ul ne ut lai hin I I il bui ıu lı v lin s 1 о 11 S 1 к ι, , mtl 11, 10,1 1 [ realo nng, u ludi io 1 c n ed tl o t ul о il İ б i, Ult '
liftcned to hım, would have lacked greater lupport than Ins fragile underfhndmg could have given." " I am not quite fo convcrfant in Sinke - fpeare as jou aie, therefore fliould like to hear ev hat then you wanted but an opportu¬ nity to utter, and, if it be to the puipofe, 1 fliail thank jou." Plagnry, thus invited, recited as follows part of the fpeech dehveicd by Uljfles to Agamemnon, in the much-admired tragedy of Tioilus and Creffida — " The huvens ιίιυηΓιΙ«««, tlıe ¡«buets, -«ml lins cenici , ■' Otórec ile-ree, опешу, -nul | Itti, " Innlime, с «ιΓι, p« >| .....ill, Γ lon, fenn, " Office, aml «uttom, ni vll Ime ol ordci . " An 1 tlienloie is lin ¡Julmus | lanet, Sol, " In nohle eminence lutinomi inil luhu d " Anui'lt tlie ollitr , ve hok mı Ieın itili eye «' Corieŕb tl e ill alu.a, of pl inns ivil, " Antl polis, Iďe the comımn I mm of a Kinrr, «' Sans check, «o good and hni. But «vieil the pl mets, " lu evil iniittuie, to diluitili v« in lu, " What %
» Wll« flip««, 1,1.1 «vllit poitOM' »'l« llll .») í " Wll lt iv ng ot the In—lìittCnit/ ut tiltil— " Com notion 111 tlıe wm U ? Γι «¿hia, cl tugts, borici s, «' Dive t nlcnck, lend aiul i'ei^iiute " dette rio 11 titen fi« lit'— Oli. olitili! gıc. t, (lok d, " Wlucli ıs ihr iniile« 10 ill lı ¡Jı İtliği!, ·' Πι cııle.jrıie ,s I.ck« — Hot» с ul I comminuti«., '< Detieib 111 Icho I , ni I 1 tollitilioo 'e 111 cuits, «. ΡηαΙΊιΙ contnittct fio 11 In lib'«, lhu ., ·' Hit pi ingiuntile, inltltitoll) ll, " Pur g"ite ola с α, tub, Ice ti,., turb, ·· 1 l.t.t «Ugice mit, uni ıııt t' Ulung, " Ani, İnik' »Ini tl kei I tollo» s I I teh t mg metts .< In mete oj ριι ; tunc) Th lı ιι n .tl » ci« " S mil I I ft Illen Ilotoin, ι ι.'ιιι U 11 II« Illőre«, ·' Anlttille ι I pol ,11t re Πι I (.1 he. » « i.n th llioul I he loi 1 tf ι ni tc , ty, '· «ln I the, tule lon 11, ii I ll, Ce .sfilici ,1 ul , ■' I net İlimli lie «¿ht, 01, ndl«. 1 «e.1 1 11 l»ion s <■ (it»e.«vl,,rei,itllu,,„ Jutteielil J « Shoul 1 1 le their mine, с 1 J 1. (heul I J itlice too. '■ ! İten etu) l'ııııg ıntl 1 le, ul 11 in ¡.otrer, " Towel 11 to w tU, «vi 1 tuto ipnttik, » Aid
«« Ani цип- ι ıı se I 1 If, • S I uli I e Ι Ι ν I | »Ipıl, "Ilici ,», uh . le e i, f flj li, " I oll w llıı iluk ut Ridmill hunig счрнП d himftlf muth grılıİKtl in ulic ıııg to lhe f licione lines, uheh in til Pligiu) Ipmt with great iiii 0 ), jnd L 4iuit, ui I duen iiniiliun, the du oulll, lelcrlll g to genu ll t , le , becunc hul iiiii enten iiiiiu e , in uuitli Mi y Jine a I lu i) bore ι , ui, and fumul lilac fogniti ul ι I il lo ι tenti) d ι iipcd the auloin oi tin и i, ıı i , l'ut tliti i pc ι it ontot the m 1 p'tilıııt tuning, the) hul sut nqeiici « ttl fiuct tht) hid I \td then a ode m Bnjiton.
CHAP.
СИЛР Xl
LETTER II ill Xoltheolelo Uıs Μο,' /litj h По «« r ι T ıs now fonic vint b |i r than ι e eck tu ce 1 unee 1 t tins p асе , uul eee ill İL t| ıc on itli lliil could , vecit ιι Ι 1 1- У tl KM, J 1 Ittlcelil.llKl ll le 111 ull 1 cp i tu imd it lt ι clehjil Hv It nted ibout (ut I mr mil s Ι ι n tl cti ¡ olis, on on I t u n olt loi t ici i 1[ ts in ι ι_ co mty f Snili ν, ııl ıı I miy venti re juftly to foun aconclulion Iro n tlu mu ul ir appi uic,
appeinnce, ind ficcs blulhing deep nuli the uni ly i ni ion ol he ıltlı, ıth u Inch m (loi ns ınh ibu ints ire cn lued pill 11 s oneol ılı ııı İt ılub îou a d in\i D iriii i¿ ilmu pheres mouds cier ınh ded Ilid tickiicls oni) ııi|urcd ι ) Irane, liere I (lı uıd not uc(| ııı ol 1 Ipeedy r cuıcıı , bul my chfoıdcı ıs ιηη ıınlccl ln lnL ' ını ' inter¬ woven uıtlı t ıe vc') ılııeıd t f n ) e ill ice, and with ni) ex ilence onl) с in t r ni ι ite, for u Inch greit cic с I un t re } iel, and patiently wut the ıııoıııeııt ivim ni) refileis bodi Hull find a peac ul lui luir) in the gr ve — Ί t ulu tlo I d llrcls ioni (rie id j bol m ıı pour n¿ f Dui) gref' —I it Οί¬ ο ıulc I L ow )Olu tendei h irt will Iccl foi mc , oı ıs ι b Çin'e I mi pionpted by tlie delne ti nnke jou, m comm lei itiii a nıy lulleiuı D s, as wretched as myleli f — Wh it - cicr be my motne, it cm neithei augment or relieve the jirnng dilcoid oi my ie lies. liut, nere it in m) power, I would fnateli fiom pun the meaneft niiefl Nature has en¬ dued with hie, then fuıely l would not voluntarily
voluntml) give aii 0 uiíli to mj frun ' — lull night 1 drtımt 1 lav my i unt d nife, щ ! m utr irms inj long lofi ditighrir, ihn h lo mui) jeirs luit piuifully tl ip t 1 I. ıtt lit liei I pinted, nict'lOU lt ti c Ull I - ptirtd )« uig n I l lutiteli ılıt 1 1 i en them Yet il 1 le in ı t 1 1 ι· ι ι 1 n ılı 11ЦС, , tu oblii иы I, и I Ich b IU» whit ι ι 11 ni Iw ti , ll ιΙη , el c'y cnicbpcdmi I с ι tit , uh ι ei ι ι I ľ v t) g ilp t t i ta i \ 1er, tlu cín n ankcred i e - j t! I .pı e ııı n ent, ıı ıtri tht deludo» ι ıs no mou, fen can con eue, ind none deliíibt — U ι jou, inj dt ir Mr,. Moivbr s, ιηιΐί,ιηι tlut mj diughter ibi! furiiiis ' or it flic dots, ifiir laung loll hci η >w neu Ioit) jeirs, there ь inj clunce tint 1 yet nuy find hei ' aid, ıı ıe I loto do, would it milt me luppj —Wuc 1 lnppj bcfoic I loll her? In tcmiiuilon, I mlwti, tuperlitii lj lo ,—then tonnelier ıs to be ompuuivcly bltll-tl '------ 1 muli- drop mj pen, or tl ult ι lubjice winch in¬ terefts mt 1 1, oi it will drive me uud m letel
indeed —Ytftcrnoon, ıs inutili ti t loft) eminentes ihıt oıcrtop this , ıtt of guety, I ins pc ì/ivcly puifimig ι i ii tir) iii ! k, the tnc'olcd Ijtm unfo'dc I in mj , uh, niiuctd n 11 nI t it jp, nd rcul it. I Inund it to lit t e f ι muit of ι lelfır, tlıt (uptiliiip- tı ıı I ı ııı, ıs ι ıs h tı ılt t'ıt lign iturt, 1 I , ι I of I it it lı d fonun y cont ıı ıcd , h ι ei, ι Ι ιι le ι us u ll llungllun ulut j ıı hiv fien h i I mt Hi m, Unt ul hu¬ ni i I ι s ι t I t ι i u ι ι, ι J, l'i mji ite Ι, t m, к , mut ii u, m I h — Altu'— L.4j_ ut n ' u lr "e" 11 ""· '6 lm Ilion y "
CHAP
с' π l -m ! M n j * ι ι mg o\er ι4_ da \пь í
hoifilnck, Marj J ne, unikillei! igiecahe motle of exercife, veas
to accompany ti em, and in contcqu ce evaï left u h м с , fion after they li id lift li r, tempted bj the Imuicf of the uun 1 j, Ihe vcntui d io un ite the no s unt I th y re- turiiLii,in pióme adı -, tlie Stei Not') g hl I lhe been th ceh t ь е tovaid h 1, ud ) i ıly ic M rj Jmc tien )lcd uiivc Iıl ellen Ilio agun beheld her putun it the Ailemi lj , ihe
m this :oo t mı id
Ilıt viould hue given ılıt ıvoıld, lnd if it th t moment been u 1 rıh!, Iıl, to I ııt nud illnn, Ilıe ' un n t ulut ti tlo or how to ufi — hır o j 1 |i" vv ь ihıt, ifttr lu n , ntuintd lu fili i, lun kl I ut Itft bti , but in ths llu vvı ur uuchdil- 1J I oini ei, lir e liuun nuo t ııııı ttıoıı, uhi h M ı\ I nt co i d ι ot uth ρι i, rut) eı ide, , iole Ι lus intention of conti umg lon er vııllı her than Ihc cube vvıllud or txpttltd. It then ìecurred to Maiy-Jine tint by quitting the btemt, md hiftening home, was the only method left her to g t fıom hım , but then it wis not improbiblt but I e might fol ow hci thither, ai d, on finding Radmill ind Ileniy abfent, be induced to obtrude himlelf until the) returned mil iftcr what had pafltd with Northcote but the da) be¬ loie, the idea die idfully ihrmed her. li refolute how to procted when flit hid again liathtd the South tnd ot the gicen, wluch joins
1 in- tbc Minne Pinde, flu Infinteci , the
η le nun, III Cl Illeti ll Ille vu e
cl, tht, icqu , uıd tlu) ı 0 iiiı и Min-Ine u И 1 e,li I ll 111 e 1 111 /1 tw. lo the , m flu ton I 1 cil Ι I 1 m, is ι III nge ,
emb ιι I i c t, en¬ li till, ufe I, 111Iİ i r f un t ) с cort İler ιι ι II ρ] lelıcnd- d I iei ıboııt,
η«, ι > id Ι ι 11 Ι η, οι ile ut Ί lu ¡, luu n ui, ι,
ıly
cr, ld tilt tilt, tm i t ί¬ ιι u'd cicr remu ι ι e ι ί ol er liul uhu ,ei ein denn 1er vvlcn, tu in, hu h d, h b -
lcd
ragt, Ν π с lut hu üb ıı Sli tl и 1 in lnioluitary fert im, ııl lu hum el pill them, exclaiming loud e ìough for both to lıtır— " Gui t
" fj^ilt and hjpncrii) '—never couple wcic bettLr n alche 1. ' Man Jane, unknowing whit Ine did, ran, oi ratler íle \ aciofs the Steine towaid 1 er refidence Having, asili imagined, ıeached the hoi fi-, flic commenced a vı ılcnt ι ippmg at the dooi, when the flranger, thclourcc of all hci trouble, who had in piofound amize- ment followedj flie igain beheld at her fide Mai} Jane then, a^ the teirs of anguiih buifl from her ejes, defire 1 htm, if he wifiied not to fee hei expire it 1ь feet, to lei\e her Aft iniihed at the incoherence of hei ex¬ preffion, and her ïecent fligit, uid fearing her faculties Wi.iL deranged, hc conceived it not pi udent to ccmpl) with her requeft, but lulled— « loul) Mifs R limili, let me but fee j ou m ıj Ικ of falei j, and jour conmands, houevei ] tin fluii be obc\cd Muv-
Mil) Jı ıc, ipin I noci mg irnienti) at tin 'oor, berti c umelí aina/cd tint no¬ li dj auf ucci to the tununun , as eeell as monili d it the unknown's obftinicy, he, p iiuung Ί r perturbinoti ıncrufv, a 0 ıın ul lefle i 1 ci " İM) de ı Mil m, I be'icei ) ou Ine e conmute 1 ı t ıllu u nuil il e , tin-, cmnot ic, .. Π , „,, .-,,„, ,, „.„, tlın . occLDied I ) inj b dj '' Mil) line, louf d h) th o' fele tic)), ou riling İni cjcd to the evi do e, d Icon red her uroi , f™ c n one ol ılıt ι ι u Ih ρ ı- cııvctl, ml illette, , " Lı'c L İJ '^ ' Moa c nlufeil, fhe fullered the tigu ta connue h« to tlıc ııjıt houle, ve Inch he re¬ li cm ıu ed from the iı 0 lıl he lud obt lud of hei fıom lhe dn ving loon tnc ci ıy bere re , ce, hoevever, ille I d qi ite pined it, Nortlicitc, ivith a look of the ι loll ıncıhblc contempt, agun paffed the n
Mite-
Pel π Jine, a un overeóme uuh teuoi, and Invi ^ rcichctl the e itiancc, which lol- tun itele ve ts o| cn, d irtcd up fluis, the next noment entu d lur ovn apartment, and doub'c 1 el eel tl e d ıoı , t ) completely vvas fhe ovu come, tint flic reali) uni b ined the ume cene utuni eeoulel have (olioved liei, heıececı lepugnant to hei wilhcb. Hue flie gave vut to a copious fl )od of teais, eh n rei cein^, the agony of her overchirgcd lent, Ihc le m beca ne iuoil com oled, a d it Aas with uj tını Hil it lait leid Ral uh ·. md Heni) s voice re¬ build from below, mi evince to hu thuı return Yet hove to recuve them, when, b) the fev II n' 1 ici mcc of I cr ejes the) muft loon die eer th t lhe 1 lei been Weeping, fhc knee« net. At full flic lormcd the refolu¬ tion of icqiiunting ihem with every par- ticuhr that hid lo much contributed to dillrefs her, but in doing fo, fliould Ihe be able
al le to convince them flic had not acted ι ïyirudcntl) ' or would it not feem to Noithcote, to whom undoubtedly they would nut keep her confeffion a fecret, that I) endeavounng ro prejudice her fuends in her favoui, and poflibly ci eating a coidnefs between the n and the paity who only could accufe of her impropci contluci, as a certain proof of guilt Yet furely keeping tliem m ignorance, b) giving cvafive atilevers to their lend ι entruiries, or Hooping to a falfchood, vv is not tliL wa) long to poflils the efteem of eithu С onlcious of hiving nuu con¬ ni tte 1 a fault th tt could rule a guilt) blulh upon her decks, why Ih , uld fhe conced n) thing from thun, or t om the kno vLdgc of all the worll'—Northcote had tieated hei moil leverei) , buc what hal lhe todo with ho ihcoic, lo long is Radmill and henr) lepioichcd her not—her belt, her only triends, whethei he apptoved oi chlap- piuïed of vvhat ihe did ' vol ι с Thus
Thus ìeafoncd poor Mary Jme, jet ins Northcote cici uppcimofl in lui thouglits, and his difpleifure I id ever appcircd mo t terrible in eontenijilation thin eien Radmill s or Henr) s ind if he but chinced to com¬ mend her action", or looked but co ι pl i- cently upon her, it uould render htr fuper- lativel) happj Howeier, fully deteimined not to inluer the enq unes tint might be made uith a fillehood, and lech ig heifelf muth recoveied, Ilıt |oincd ki Imill ind Htmy in tht diiwing loom. 11 с trills of her lite uneafuiefs, as (lie expected, u ere too confjiituous tir a mo¬ ment 11 ele ipe tııeır bltrıatiuıı , (or is loon is the) iaw htr, uuh ipj ırtnt ir \i I) and ilai in, thcy bean tu enquire uhat fudden ciuft had j otluced then Miri Jane, igun diffolvmg in teir , in¬ formed them unutely ul it had occurred Hein), fir from rej roich ng her, cxciied his utmoft elf rts to ft 11 th tumult of 1 er fears,
irars , and Radmi 1, whofe tender heart was not pio f agamft her dillreG, vowed that, notwithltanding theu fnendflup of fo many ν ıı s to affront N01 thcote the vei y firft time thcy met This determination Mat j Janeevasanxious il polliblc to fuperledc, as fuch an event would indeed mike hu mituiblc, and at lafl fucceeded 111 chflu uhng lum, ind hke- lvlie obtained a promile, both lion him tnd Ilurj, not to mention evh it then d related 1 ) tlicm, to ai ) boeh, but lo u it the oppoi tunit) wlun NoitliLotc Inni lt (h)ild in t it ucc the lubjeci, t) cicu hei tion tlıe odium ofl jprcrıfy uth which lic li id foun- 1 1 tcoufl) tahua' het Mu,- 1 mc, evcil plei d liat liei ululi e indo u had n it been nule 1 1 'lucei, iiMoul- 1) ее uted 01 the tine telen ¡S irtlicotL t jouli agun p y thun a v uit, indllenrj, » ho, tıoın tı git lipid c hul had ot tilt un- Λΐιον π, douLtc 1 not but he ftiouki know с 2 hım
hım again, lefolved if poffible to obtain h s name md chirailei , this he the lame div cffeiiled, for on dcfcrjmg lum, while pur- fuing a walk with Plagiary, and pointing him out, fiom lnm he leirned the following account That his mme wis Birville, the cldcíl fon of a Su Benja nin В in ille, w is about tiurrj- Lľdit j eirs c f ige, md hacl, about thirteen years ago, paid his addreiles to ι neh citi¬ zen s daughter,—hei father, fhtlcrcd bj the piofpeft ot hb Muia hereifcer being chiliu- guiihcd bj the title of Lady Barvil с, en¬ coungc 1 his fuit , and thougli he knew Mi Baiulles fithcr tibe cxecfiieclj poor, this he cletc nincd ihould be no obflaclc to thcır unun , a tl Mai ι chlplajing no pirti¬ cular ivcrlion to accede to lis ev lilies, they were toon after u ntccl The daj ftu then mainage, Barville re¬ ceived, as his wife sdoevrv, fcv nty tlio Imd pounds, and lour jeirs after, his father in laev
law piying the debt of niture, and Maria being his only child, he ıeceıved eighty thoulmd pounds more. But notwithftind- ingtlic immenfc we ilth he obtained through the medium of his wife, no fooner was the chinncl fiom whence it proceeded drained, ind he hid nothing mote to ix| eft, than he left hu with lout children, to lubfift upon whit hid been fecured to her in her oevn rig it, which howee cr did not exceed fix hunched pounds annually , for lo totally had hu farherbcen blinded bj the iflumed vir¬ tues which he imigmed inherent in Barville, that hc left lum the whole ot his property, exclufive of tin tuili above mentioned, to difpole of 111 whatever wav he choie, as moil congenial with his oevn feelings. Barville took an elegantly furnifhed houfe in Pall Mall, and leduced the wife of a Mi. Sellivorth, then his moft intimate friend, whom he ran through the body by way of making htm amends for the injuiy he had done him, for tin», however, he was g 3 tried
tried Гог his life, but Sell worth having fent the ch Лк ige, Băniile was acquitted Ht and Mrs Si.ll worth toi iome timi cohibí tul together, her, however, lie at hft ditcaid- cd, and fi un that ame to the pre cnt 1нч hk. hacl 1 een (pent in a continued round of (Loauehfy and intemperance, that he uas defpiied and execrated by all u ho kne v hım, md refpefted bj nme Hts f ither, \thom, lince his n arriare, he had t ouilj neglect «ed, wasat the point of deith, and he hourlj cxpefled, not to inhent his wealth, bi he had but little to bequeath, but his title, and to commit frefh atiocities when di^nmtd bj the hononiy diílinčlion of Sir Γι incis Bai- vdie. Henry fhuddei ed witii hoiror tint fuch a monfter of depravity was fuffered to exiil, and, much as he had before condemned Northcote for his harfh conduit towaid Mary Jme, inwardly put up a pra} er for hib prefervation, and determined, m the waimth of his heart, to nJk oftendmg him by per¬ fonal ly
foinlly returning hun his moil: încerc ac¬ knowledgments ior his kind, though ip- paicnt rudcncls, the very fiill opportunity. On his return ho ne, he co umiinicitcd to R 11 uil! ind M ir) J ine what he h id learned fon l'I ¿ni) Mir) Jim trembled ex- ccilıvelı, and fall n¿ on her knees, Iervently flunked tne Al ııılıt) Ruhr tint, by his divme lnteiiention, llic hil been rclcued fioni the fin of Jiftcnng 10 one, tihoic itro¬ cities π lift ief Idillio οι ι aid contempt upon ill uho icictlit 1 cred 1 ihb coi ıpııy, and the tlic 1 u ι mli r prd cc ot N n th¬ cote now a, u c to her is au i,enr f t from heave 1 to fice hei iıom tli 1 ohuted bieith of guilt. Rid ull hiniiclf was horror ftruck, and tlio ig 1 but a ihou tunc 1 cloic he lnd \o\cd to ctlcncl No tieotc the full tune thcy met, he « is now nun tian eur en- deired to lum , md he ıcd d th r iijdity he before had Jou I) b a 1 ul, is it n ■>·> but g 4 adopted
adopted to preferve lus darling Mary-Jane, the poor orphan for whom he hid in oath in heaven never to ft rlakc, and «ho, w it li llenrj, Ihired equally his tendeieft regird. iVarj-iane, who i oıv on'v ee«ited foi in oppoitunity to onie to in ixplin t on, and to j our foith her tlunk. t \oiticotc, foun legni cd her ferenity of mmd , and Radmi'l, when d Icourfingoi the villames of Birville lı d giar'i llj died iway, recovered his ufual giictj and garruli,) lhe con v ci 'at ion re¬ verting Ό gcncnl lubjefts, he fuddenly ex¬ cl lined— " Rot it, Henrj, I declare I hal nea ly forgotten the invitation e«e this monu ig re¬ ceived fiom Sir Watkm Cevcrlj, to «hom vte were introduced bv ľa 0 itv, to fpend this cvcniig »ith him it his houfe in Pavlon-Pande,—evlnt fav you, Maiy- Jane ' We hive now been a moli a foitnight m tm phce «ithout extendi g the cncle of out acciuauitanLC , andas tuat «as the pnn¬ cipal
cipal motive fır which we came, 1 think vve fliould not neglect the prêtent oppor¬ tunıtj Mary Jane at that time would have felt it more giateful to her feelmgs to have de¬ ferred the vilit , but as it had ever been an mvanable rule with her never to withhold an aflcnt to vvh iicv cr might afford the moil diftant plcalure to her benefiftor, (hewithout 1 enfinoli give her moft hcartv concur-
Henry hkevvifi felt himfeif much inclined to rLquift his fathu, for this time, to de¬ cline the ïnvitition, and was adually upon the point of putting a negative upon ¡t himfcif, but on perceiving a froivn gather¬ ing upon Radmill s featuies, which would have Vented itfilf m opprobnous expreffions, luchaspuppj, fcoundrcl, or fomething elle CHitUy pleafing to be gieeted with, (and, aftei all, ho knew, it M iry-Jane conlentcd, с 5 he
he would remam firm and unlhakcn, and follow the bent ofhis own inclination), lc artfully concealed what hcwas about to fay, and readily agreed to attend the η , and for his pains, faw the countenance, which be¬ fore was beginning to t\a\ gloony with dif- pleafure, brighten mto a funk, and he w ıs faluted with the grateful appellation ot deai bo), for the Ihefs he had put upon his in clmation As the evenmg ad\ anted, the moon n filent grandeur ilium ntd the ocean, wl ich flowed, unruffled by the bieath of Borta , krene and calm beneath J he mduftuoub filhermen, lepaiating with their oars the liquid element, were haitenmg to then noc¬ turnal uocattons, wluch, as the watei foam¬ ed and bounded to the ihoke, and ghit.cn- îng in the moon beams, illumed a rich variety of colours , while the white fionts of the tiill majcftic chff, which appealed to confine the watery woild within its propsi limits
hunts, were, bj the refulgence of the god- dels of the nioht, edged and ftreakcd with filver, iffoiding ° fpečiacle more grand, fublinie, ind beiutiful thin punting can cxpitis, 01 pen delcribe, and which the trio 111 the tin ing room on the Mirine Puade, hit! foi fome time been enjoying, when the tiniage dioie to the door tint was to convey them to Sir Watkin Beverly's, m Pavilion P ir ıdc
ci
CHAP.
CHAP ХШ. Pataion Pinade SiR WATKIN BEVERLY, at vvho'L ic- fidence thej foon aimed, wis about fixty years of age, his wife had died one jear previous to lus hiving obtained his title, which was granted htm in the jlu 178g, for beanng an addrefs from the cjunty wherein he refided, cpngi ituhting his Ma- jefly on his happy recovery from a leveie fit of illnefs, which had filled lib fubjefts with the moil heartfelt concern, left it fiiould prove fatal to his life, and depnve them of a 5 Soi ereign
Sovereign, whofe virtuous and lenient go¬ vernment had ende ircd lum to bis people. Sir AVatkin's fither w is in haberdiHier, md on his death the preient Sir Witkin, being Ins eltlcft fon, lucceedcd lnm m the bufinefs, m which, to do both of them juftice, they had ever ¡loffeíled the chanc¬ ters of being mci of woith and principle , and in coniequence of the refpeeft entei tatned lor lum bj the to*ii oí which he was Major, Mr Bevcilv evis fclcĽlcd to beir tlic ad- drefs beiore mentioned, ind which hid pro¬ cuied lnm his title. Having returned to his native refidence no longer plain Mr Be ťerlj , but Sir Watkin, lie conceived it deiogitorj to a Knight to continue in bufinefs, particularly as he hid aiieady amiűccl a fu hciencj ta live 111 a flj le of elegance, by his former c ide поигь , there¬ foie he quitted tude, intl in onl/ biother, vvho hid for fome tine been in affiliant to lnm, lucceedcd inn 11 the lliop Sr
Sır Watkm had no male iíTiie , two lhu lite s onlj, vvho were at tins time both with lum the rl left, Llcanor, was juft of ag , aid cxcluhvc of what her fuher intended t « beilo ν upon her, a loitu ıe of nearly t гю bundle I pounds ι j ar had been recently le't hu by ι muden lunt, tins gave Lie an r an iu of fupuionty over her filler 1 hz i, wo w ıs four j ears youn 0 cr, ibout tli i a u)f Miij line, and in figure and amiab e ids of n anı ers mucii ıcfcmblcd hu , vvhı'c I le mor wis haughtj, piovi], nioiifc, viudiclnc, md tluuji re mirkibly plam in hu ] er on, conceived hulclf, both in mental and pulon il ас iiin- plilhments, not onlj Unun ι to hu filiei, but to the wl ole creat on befide Л Mı Barneombc, who had been m the habt if vum g the f mill), and kniving Sı Wallin eould beftu v I methi ig hind¬ icine uı on cicli of his uacglı e ь, onee be- trıjed fome lıtılc inci ıtıoıı to ) ıy his addreiles to LI za, until Lica ıoı beco τ mg mıftıcb
miftrefs of tlıc three hundred a year, by the death ot her aunt, he wift!) dteied his in¬ tention, and Ы с une htr proítÜcd ıdmırcr Lleanor, though flie had no particul ir parţialii) foi Buncombe, ielt gratified that (he had depnved Elliot htr lover, it flat¬ tei td her vınıt), and ihe feeietly duc rt - nnned that, in e ife ι 1W, í nitten b) hei eh ini s, lud not lus íitlt uıd fortune at her feet, at lome iuturt period, ior Ban t nbc*s good tafte, judgment, anddiicn nmution, to eward him with hei hand ľ h/ 1, to whom his former attention had betn extremely dii igreeable, was hıpjy m being leltifed fron «Ьь too pointed ıcgırc!, ind envied not her filler the conqueil fne had tndde. Sir Witkin, who «as himieif α flave to tht ly mnical tempti ot Lkanor, never \entuied to coi tn hct oj to tinviit her \ilhes m an) ih ipe, tor ht conceived tlut w ien
when eafe ind comfort could be obtuned bj fubnutting to thole we 1 ne 1 ught to com¬ mind, a man mull be a fool to (land up fori 1 rcrog une whuh might endinger that tranquilla) it behoved him to prelerve Ehzi, however mide hım imple amends, docile and fubuiíhic, her onlj inxiety was lefl lie was not fo ln] py ıs lier ıffeclıonate heart would have ud hım ind bir Watkin, tlıouglı he daied not to aeow it in the pie¬ fence of Lleanoi, jet Ins countenance, ipite of liunfelt, ivould often ind cate that he loe ed hu before anj earthly bung befide Radmill, Henry, and Miry Jane, on their armai, found a luge puty alfeinbled, the moil of whom were imufing themfelves at the cird t bles , S r W atkı 1 give them α m íl cordul reception, Ihook hinds with Kid nil and Heuij, with 1 wilh tlut thcy 1111 J t be better icquunted, then intioduced tieni to the companj, ulule LI za paid ever) attent on to Mai) Jine. Ľleinoi conceived
conceived it beneith her to piy any paiticu¬ hr regard to the funily of a chyfalter (is Plagiary, who by dint of flattery and adui i- tion, of which he wis a complete mailer, had gained her good graces ind h id g ven her the vvho'e Inltorj «if them, not foi- g tting the ilorv of Min-Iane, fo fir is he wis acquami«! with it, tin day b.toie), with a flight nod, as fhe vvas dealing the cards, convej ed to them, that though thcy were honiured in being confidercd ofthe party, hoped they ivould not forget the de¬ ference due to their fupenors Ridmill and Henry, on being foliated by Sir Watkm, joined the card paities, which Miry Jane deLİıned , for having dif¬ covered aheady in Lli7a, fentiment and feel¬ ing congenial with her oevn, and Lltza being equally pleafed with Mary Jane, they nad no wifli to be feparated, tint they toon be¬ came as firmly attached to each other as if they had been acquainted for years.
Mary-
Mary-J me, ilmofl a ftr in¿er to every one prefent, wis too intcieílmg α ligure to efe ipe a number oí enquiries, bythe title men m pirticuhr, when they ouii mke them without being bfened, or ace u ful of lude- nefs, fuch is uho me uas P how long Sir Witkm had knov, n hci ? h And í jme of them reaching the ears of Eleanor, who en¬ vied her the admratioi flie had mfed, flie becameicdulousm acqu· 1 ntmjthem thit lhe was the diu 0 hrer of Ume poor wietches whom nob dj ki w inj thing ibout, onlj that thej hal been ftirved to death in the ftreets , ind tlut Ridmill, fmdi ig, Miry- Jane in ι moft с1ц lon >ic htu ilion, had, to rob Henry of Ins right, a loptcd her, and cheated the wo id of ι go xl houleoi kitchen- maid, m uhieh i t heie Providence had it fii ft n¿titly orciai ed lhe lliould move This, with the mijor pirt of lhe interro¬ gators, who lu I little to boaft but lint their fnends weie i oin betöre then, pro 1 ueed that expicihon in their feitures n lieu ig conleious
loiiíeioiisiupcriority in themlelves and con¬ tempt oí Muy-Jme, while with a diftcni- mg ttw, for it \ is lojn mide stilerai, rc- ipecland venei uiun ioi Ridnull, md fneml- ilup and i)n pathy ior the poor 01 phan Nothir 0 , hovc\er, \ ач г iterai loud enough to hurt the fcnfibility ot Mary- Ja ıe, evtıy thırg «ent pleaia tl) on until fome ot theni, rerdered iı letıo s oy then loiks, be¬ gan to exj ι is their diU,- pou tments. " I vov and proteft," exclaimed Lady Dreadniu 3 ht, to whofe lot Rulmill hid fillen for а putner, ' í never fm fuch ţhock- îng play in my lift —Good Gad ' Mr \.\lut is joui name—it is moull) 1 npofiible we fliould win'— í never had fuch 1 fuccefiion of bad iuck, and ill owing to youi intoleia¬ ble play— í declare it is downnght mfup- poi table " Radmill, who undeiftood very little of the girne, begged to decline phy , but tht rubier
rubber not being finiflied, this wis objected to, and the ηι Λ ί ded terminating much in Ins favour, Lady Dreadnought did lum tlie juflice to obferve that he had profited by her ïebuke, and ha! re illy become more attentile to his cards, but tlie next round (unfiling the game to then di idvintigc, kadnulj levas а 0 ащ obliged to heir himtelf accufed as tlie caule of it Tins was too much, and more than in any degree of tem¬ per he could biook, wheictoie lie loudly vociferated— " Rot it, Mida 1 —my Ladj, I onlj play for amuiement, and vvlien it ] roves the reverfe, it is 1 iule with me to leave of! - Zounds ' do jou ta e me for a fotdier, and obliged to hiten to the word of command ' ' Ladj Dre dnought, fur| rifui at this fierce retort, tut led her ejes t neard Eleanor, who was luting it the next table, and ejiculated, juft loud enouji for her only to heir—
'' Oh
" Oh the brute ' ' 1 leınoı fnıılcd, and Itemed gntified tint her ultis of tin dryl ilter ueit funilir to hei oi\ 11. Mil)-J inc begin tobe a little alarmed, ind Henr) iit not lo eai) in Ins chair is he had hit leito done, but, hoieiei, ionie olhirs oi tlic paity beconu ig equilly violent, md londcnng how people uho underftood fo lntle ot the gime, Ihould fit down to lofe their pirtner's money is well as their own, relitvtd them from put of their apprehen¬ fions, and Ridnull wis much tonloled that there ucrc thole in the loom as unpleilantly fituatcd as himfiif Ridnull quitted 1 is filiation is foon is he coul I confiftcntl) ι ıth good manner,, and with Sir Watkm, и ho eh I the lame, cnjoicd 1 cheerful converfation, in uluch Miry Jane ind Llizi joined, until afeivmt entenng ind mnouncing the lupper to be
in rcaclinefs, the cards were immediately ic- figncd, ami thcy all adjourned tothc fuppcr- room, apparently as good friends as if tbey had been all winners. They fat down to a cold but an elegant entertainment; and Radmill, it being the firft time hc had ever Ieen a table laid out in luch ftyle, was all aftonilhmciit. The fupper ended, moft of tbem again new to the ,:ard-rables, to which Radmill and Henry, not finding tbemfclvcb ¡igain inclined to relort, they, with Mary-Jane, who took an affectionate farewel of Kliza, foon after departed, and about two o'clock in the morning were conveyed to tb'jir own refidence, but not without making many remarks, when feated by tbe-mic-lves in the carriage, upon the various occurrences of the evening. « Rot it," obferved Radmill, « 1 never law fuch a tei rible brow-beating vixen in my
mj hfe a a that Lady Dreadnought, whofe curled ofhcioulncls, while it lupper, fet all mj teeth to dan mg by prevailing upon nie to t lite tl at confoun leu ice cold enough to havefrizenth devil —Sn Watkin is ι libe al hearted fello ·> id i fliould like to be better acquainted with lnm " " And Lhza,' fud Miry Jine, " is an angel " Lli/a's well enough," uifwered Rad¬ ní 13, " but iot mc it I itlnure her fifler " " Wuc jou fucccf lul, Sir, ' interrogated Henrj, " it the wh 'I table ? ' " Rot it, no, replied Radimi!, " 1 loft two guinei , anel got mjlelf abuleel in the bai D iu Ί lie 1110 uj 1 fliould not have minded, had it b en ten tines t ic lun , — and but lor tint fc на с furj, Ihould hue been vuy camfurtible " I h/i, ' lud Maij-Jue, wifhing to ch i D e the diicou I , " his pio mied to call u, on me 111 tie moinng,—1 int cq ate me ch plea uie iroin hu ac ¡u intance, uul, fliould it meet with joui qpiobaeii ), vve intend
intend to iiiit the Iheatrt togithu 1 1- niorroii cicnmg Ri Imill gne his aifent, ind, with Hcnrj, pionului to atcompinj thtm The cirrnge flopping it tlieir door, put an end to then conitrfalion , ind thej Ihortl) allei run ing to then rcipcftivc ι, 11 tments, were loon fill locked in the do ι m ,11110ns of Morpheus
CHAP.
lite,li е. EAR I ι on the íolbivnig cl ıj , I lui per¬ foim d tlıı piOTilfc lhe ini mide t) Mıry- Jinc, \tei ı D ıın thur proteft itiotu of ínend- íbip were lenevved Ridmill ıntl Iienry were cinti char ucci with her, and I li/ 1 beeune Ι) well pica cd with tlıuı), that lhe requeued, dunng then ici dence tn Brighton ar hid tl at thcy might ipend as much of flic r tune togethei is the) could poffiblj find 0pp0rtL.il 1С .
b r Watkin, Lh?i informLd them, 11 tended doms; himfeif the p' amre or ufïtii ¿ the Tlieatrc with them, but that I Lanoi being engiged, with Mi 4irnconle, to ipend the evenn^ at Lidj Dreadnought s which unit tion S г Wat I in and 1 e ielt had declined, itwould not be in hei pov\ei tobe of their part) This vias a piece of intclhitcna Mirj- Jane was b) no mcins forr t ) lieu , an 1 Radmill and Hemj, common ţ olitene ¿ rendered it ncccíhrj, uere mhncae enougi to expiefs regret that the) muft be dej me 1 of the pleafure of Mifs Be\erl) s and Mr Birncombc s prefence Πίζα, after continuing with them nearly two hours, took her leave, firíl icqucíhng that, as one carnage was fufficiently com¬ modious, without inconvenience to contain the whole party, thcy would permit Sir Watkm to cdll upon them, and convey them 3 t0
to the Theitrc in his Matters being thus un iged, Ihc deputed Pi g ırj foon after calling upon tliem, enquiries evere made whether he had 1 itely ice 1 Northcote , and, as tl ey had now par¬ ticular 1 calons f 1 vid in 0 to fee lum, ever- much dilappoint d vvhen he «cquainted them that he lud not leen him fincc he had parted with him in compii} with thcmfclvei " Suppo r e, lie conti lued, " eee pay lum 1 uit,—hc has tee ice or tlnice cilled upon jiu, md probiblj exnefts it llus idv ice tiie) lnl no objection to fol loie , but then the d Ih ully irofc how to find Ins lodging, as Iil hal never coude· Icended to infot n them of it Plag ary giv ι*- a his opinion that he 1 ad fettled hi rlelf it one oi the bonding houfes, it iny rate, liLobfeiecd, if thee wiihed to f nd lu t , there coul I be nothing wrong in enquiring at (he 11, and, fliould tl eir я 2 enquiries
enquiries prove fruitJcis, thcy \\ouid enjoj their walk, and mve it in thur powei, when next the) faw him, of evincing to lnm that his vifits not being returned, proceeded not from any uant of refpečl towards him Though Radmill wcl! knew thit Noith¬ cote would much nther have difpenfed with this mannei of proceeding, jet, as lie miWi Wifhed to have the affair with Mir) Jnc and Barville entire!} mule known to him, hi heiitated not to comply with Platan s advice, and they imuediitelj Wt foiwud, with the intention, ihould tht.) nit mc t hım m then walk, to vilit cvexy boırJı 0 - houfe in the plaee Than В i¿hton, no place is better fui mill¬ ed with genteel receptions of this kind, and, from the judicious mannei n which they are conducted, the pieafantneis of their fituations, either comnnnding a view of the Steine, or а beautiful and extenfive piofpert of the occaiij fome of the firft company relort
rcfort to them , and, from the hberal treat¬ ment, ittention, and refpect thcy experience iiom the piopnttois, gıneraüy make thein, if their familits are fmall enough to admit of it, their iummtr's refidence. The inns, hktuift, ire fitted up in .1 fu¬ perior iiyle of ekgance rarely to be met with in tht countrj, the pnncipal of which arc, the Calile, the Old Ship, tht New Inn, the New Ship, the White Horfe, and the Star and Garter. The two former have each fuperb ball ind caid-rooms, aflembhes are alternatei) held at each houfe, the nights, ufually diftinguifhed as ball-nights, are held at the Caftle on Mondajs, and at the Old Ship on Thurfdays, on winch eitn- wgs they are in general numerou/lj/ at¬ tended. In fliort, Btighton altogether has been rendered by «ts inhabitants lo loniplctt, ι id the pitees of amufement fo w il adaptée! and diverfificd to fuit the tafte of tvei} one, и 3 that
that thofe who vifit them ate rarely known to quit tliem dıffatısfied. To return to our ftoiy —In vain were en¬ quiries made to difcover the refidence of the eccentric Northcote, vvlien arriving at thi 1 ift boarding-houle they had to call at, in which they met with the fune fuccefs thej had encountered at the others, Plagiary brug known to a perlon there, he and his fnends wue politely invited tow ilk m this, ι thej were nearly tued evith ev Uin», the) « onlcntcd to do 1 htv had (cateti theml Iv-s but a lew minutes m the parlour, nen (onte perlons vn loud difcourle in the adjoin¬ ing room, w Inch Plagiary's friend infoi med (hem was appropnated for hair dreffing, attricied their attention, more partuularlv Radmill s, as th^ voice of one oí tluu he imagined he had heard before, but емлис or when he could not lecollect " Well non," exclaimed one of them, " am 1 not the tipj y, the kick, the dafliu ŕ Ci ops
Crops ire all the Jtmmy now jou know, ind give 1 man infinitely more the appear¬ ance of a gemmán than when bedi7cned out with a ftiff queue, like a French dancing- mailer —What fay you, Mr Frizeur ? of tourfe jou muft be a bit of a judge 111 thofe mittels " " Why, Sır," he replied, "as I am mudi in the habit of Iptaking mj real itntunents и lien my idute or op nion irere puiul, m 1 Often Unlortl Ul II Oif 111! tliofe lllllll, Ol llie Icore ot mttrelt, it benovts mt to piti e, poflibl), m tlıe piticit 11 ftai ce, I may noi prove more iuctelaiu!, Ihould 1 iddrds you with uıy uıual candouı ' " Oh neiirfearme, Ipeik freely,— wlur, offended when you but comply vuth y ovin lequtít— 1 am not fueh а take —Come, let nit htar jour rtal opn ion itipcčlui^ tne ippearance of cmpped nobs Art tht) not cify, tenant, convenient, and filhioiablc i' and a body mi) as well bc out of the voild a, out of tht faihion, luiely you would а lult а man to appear like tht reti of tht ueatıon Hi "I
" I would not adv lfe a gentleman to launch into extremes, or to make an afs of himfeif, even though it fhould be the iafluon " " So then, in your wife cffimation, the prefent fjftcm of head-lhaving is might) ndiculous ? ' " Moft aflurcdl), Sir, a head, without a moderate port on of h ur, poflefles a defi- cuncj, as obvious to be perceived as a coat wnhout buttons " " Compar Ions are odious —a coat ve ith out buttons, and be------explun jouifelf, Si ' " Nothing more eafj tbe battons are cei ami an efllntial ornament to the coat, and witl out them it would appear vvhn ficai and abfu d , an 1 equally fo, in me o¡ ι non, docs a flnvul İnal with mt а чц " Wl it im I indebted to jou ' — There, Sir, tike t, uul the only iccomocnce jou can make mc for fuch confu limite impu¬ dente, ıs bv never fhceving me your face agun ' Saying
Sajing thefe word«, the offended perf m haftcned from thedrefling room, and entered tlie parlour where Radmill and his friends lud oveiheard every wo r d tint had pafled, exclaiming to himlelf as he entcicd— " The dog, to till n с to mı face tint mj head app ns ь ridiculous vvitliout a tul ıs coat would »ithout buitons 1 ' lt evas n t in the poiver of ratate to reiift htiglitu as the Inii chiflei! (puk cotind the ι mm , with Rad ι iii and i íeniv it co u der illy itciaud, wlun in the c u 0 cd b ш the) agun chio с cd [ell unj, wlu οι t ιιι¬ ι ig а dimple of 11 nr), tne vi lence oi lis patiion becunc n «n inftant f perlided by leir, not doubting but this vii t hadbeen mule impolcl) to call him t) an iccoui t fr lib iormer ini ile ice, tli retne, not daring ta encoui ter hui, he turned lutlduily round upon his hec!, left the uum, and dai tul up Iraib я 5 Nothing
Nothing beyond the hugh, which wv, in· ftantmeous and irrefiftible, paflLd at the ex- pence of Jeflam) , for Plag ary s frn.nd, wlio was in ever) fuile α man of worth and prin¬ ciple, could not have reconciled it to h mfelf to hue fpoken difiefpeftlully of anj perfon, particularly one who dined at the fame tablc wnli lnm Could he w ith piopnety hive laid arj thing to his advintige, Tettamy lud not wuted his fuppoit, therefoie, as lie could not make him confpicuous foi his virtues, I is follies bj him rem lined undifturbed, for, as was his ufual method under luch circuni- ñance*, he faid nothing, and Jeffamy by aH of them «a« loon forgot Radmill, mueh difappointed in Ins fearch after Northcote, now propofed walk¬ ing home, and tliey lhortly after regained the Marine ľnade , here Plagiary left them, having retufed an invitation to dine with them, but promifed to meet thera m the evemng at the Theatre
Mari
Miry- Jane was more grid ed than Rad¬ mill at their bad fuecels, but cnful ng her¬ felf with tlie idea that it was by no ueans improbable that Northeote himftlf m b ht call upon them ni tne cimi e t the ittcr- 11)011, or Ionic tine on lie next cuj, ilie lccovcied hei lpirtb, and w fcty det im ned pilici tij to inuit until he give her an op¬ portunity of conurling with mm " Dl b lis ring D crnl),' fud *i fillicr- l n to hib idociilc, ia they palled hem. " It is ilwijs a h lidij with иь he c w icn de I ш ce of Wile au ι s " Dat it lar cnlj ıs, ' lcjoinc 1 the ottici, " -nd he ı ot o ılj ιη сь и | )llj it dis t n e of deje ι, f, od bi rs h ri ' bu hele ds de luina; y ni dc uin cr, ho dcy uc dtpmcd of de m ns to feed с' miche ' " lins m Ve 1,' oUervel ka Inull, "ıs tuie prüft. — Heuen [ ι «iper hun «ho his •he virtue to dc erve it ' 1 h j Ipe h Iron the genuine ι npulfe ofthe h-irt, whichever piompts the tnbute of ippliule to e ilici и 6 woith,
worth, fuch as the ofkntatious ani vain glonous never can infpire —-Then tumin» bis face tovvaid the honefl iifhcrmcn, though the) were thcnwithoutheinng, hcc4clumcd, " Lonrmi) )ou, h) upnght conduci, ile idy allegiance to jour King, and good w 1 flies towaid )our counti), merit the proteciiou of the object if )our prefent eulogium ' Thcy foon after ıeached their refidencc tbe attt noon piflt 1 awa) , levtn о tlock cane, and bu Wttkin Bucrh s cainage, with Sir Watkm and Lhza, drove 10 the door Radmill, Henry, and Marj Jane weie ioon with them, and Sn YVıtkın haun·^ taken the precaution to iccurc good \ lac s, were foon all eomfoi tabi) icated m oie of the fide boxes at the Theatre lhe phy was Mis Inchbald s admuable comedy of " Every One has his l lult ' Ihe diftrefled fituation thciein ío ŕcehnglj depitUd
depicted of Lady Elemor ind Captain Ir«in, Intl (uch an effect on Mary Jine, who could not help reflci-img, it the moment, on the fate of the authors of her being, tint the big round I с 1rs ti lehled f oíd hc r ej es m quick fucceíiion Henrj, perceiving her fo much oe er come, perfuaded lier to rei re for а (ел mı nutes 1 to the lob'ıj , he evas himlelf not en¬ tirely d vod of fome paınmllj peiling len litions which the drum had e cited, it 1 cing ] ci foi mid with tnt juft diicnm 111 ti in ind leeling, с ilculated to nuke it Ipeak home to th he irt, ρ micul ırly the ch riders cf Lily 1 cino, by Mr Karg, Ciptim li vin, by Mr Pluli p , I tl v ird, by M. s Di I lnr, 1 dihe ìiillcxible Lori Nori uıd bj Mı King, as wolIcI have done honoi r to a y libile clu icatc 1 to Tnali 1 ι id MeU ponieic in Lurcpc N л were mane of the othei pans le s ablj fuppoitcd, as Mrs Wil¬ mot s Spinller, and Mite s Solus, aHorJed unple tulim nj Sir
Sır Watkin, RadmiU, and Eliza, judging from the efFečt the reprefentation of tlie piece had upon tiemfelves, the motive that had induced Henry and Mary Jane to with¬ draw, conceived it moft prudent not to ac¬ company them They had fearcely returned to the box. when an alarm of fire evas given, and a blaze burfting out at the ftme time in the lobbj, filled tliem with the mod lively apprehen¬ iions foi their fafctj In an inftant the Theatre was in tlie moll violent confufion, every one ternhed led the conflugiation fhould extend itle f lo la¬ pidi , that their hies might be endangeicd e e thcy cjuld leicli the (licet Henry and RadmiU beflowing their at¬ tention upon Muj Jine, Sr W itkin bei ig wilh Ľhzi, tl ey followed the eximple of other», and foon uere without the building But Mirj Jine ind Eliza, fpite of tlieir ellorts
tfforts to prevent it, were, in the general bullie and confftrnation, feparated from tlum. The voice ofthe Manager was now heird, afluring the ladies and gentlemen tint thej h td nothing to f ai, and tlıat the alarm had been octifioned bi the fill of one f tht limps in the Ьоч lobby , but that tlie Ыаге ofthe oil, which hui f 5 terrified them, hid been almofl; immediately txtmguifhcd. Thus fitisfied tint the danger «vas over, the major put oflus auditors returned to the pl ices they had to pıtcıpıtattly fl d from, while Sir Watkn, Ridmill, and Henry were leirclung for Llizi met Ыиу- Jme They licit not long eie thej defenecí Lhzı, but M iry-Jane ins no whtre to be found,
RadmiU
Radmill became extremely uneafy , they vvere now at the entrance of the Theatre, when Hemy thus addreffed him " Do not make yourfelf uneify, Su , it is impoffible fhe cm be fir off, and if jou will wait here, I will feek fo her by myfelf, moil probably (he is (till without, and then we will return to the box together ' To tlus he readily confented, and Henry agnu examined the front of the building, but no Mary-Ja ι could he find , he en¬ quired of th coachmen, who had alıcı 1/ begun t> afleinLle with then cirn ges, if Ihej hau peice ved ι lady, dclciibing Ma j Jane, and in what maucr flic was dieiied, mi e hom the Th urc borne of then ol fervid tint thiy lnl fcen level il, but velie thu my one of them was the pufu he fought, wis moie thin they eou d declare, and another qmintiy re mrke l , that all drefies being dike in the duk, it wis mi- pofnblt
poffible by that particularly to hive diftin¬ guifhed her Hem j, chignned ind alarmed at thefc anfwers, returned to his friends, who were ftill wilting forhim, and informed them how unfuccefsful he hid been , but begged them to continue uheie thtj ivcrc until lie hid furche 1 tht uppei boxes not и ilhng to gue ovti the fearch while there jet re¬ rnuned a probibiltty of finding htr In no place couid he perceive her, in vain with his ejes did he feirch for her even in the pit andthe fhillmg gallerj, as from the upper boxes he could obtain a diftinft; view of every perfon m all parts of the houfe, which but evinced to him that M iry-Jine ιι is (till viithout More diiconcerted, he again joined his fa¬ ther, vho, tiembling и uh feai left fome¬ thing bad had 1 apptn^d, though of what nature he could not conjecture, he urged him
hım a fecond time more accuiately to ex¬ amine the (treet Henry, purfuant to this advice, a third time left hnn almoft finking beneath the ac¬ cumulating horrors of futpenfe, and every part of the ftrcet minutely, but truitleflly, inveftigated. He vvas again proceeding to¬ ward him, when Sir Watkin Beverly's car¬ riage puffed lnm, it being now the time the coachman had recciecd oiders to attend them at the 1 hcatte ,—he с died loudly to him to flop his horlcs, which he immediately did. Hemy then informed the footman who at¬ tended with it, ofthe extiaordinary manner in which they had loft Maiy-Jane, and with him commenced another relearch Again were the со chmen interrogated, and again was Henry obhged to enduie the moil cruel difappointment. in fhort, Henry at laft returned again to his father, aud acquainted hırtı hoiv unfuc¬ cefsful
cefsful lie had been, and waited for him to advife what fat ther could be done. Radmill, in the delirium of defpair, rulhed fiom tliem to fcek for her himfeif, but his endeavours proved not mure fortunate thin Henry's Su Watkin at lift, with miny perfuafions, prevailed upon tliem to afcend the coacli, and proceed to lm, houfc, as it was by no im ins improbable tn it Marj - Jiiil had ¡Ttŕencd thithei without tliem Radp ill, a httic icvived by this funt fpark oi hope, funded himlelf to be convej ed to Sir Watkm's reiidence in Pavilion parade , but no one there had feen οι heard any thing of Mary-J me, from thence they proceeded to Radmill's, on the Marine Parade, win e thej likewiie received neaily the fame an- fwers Radmill now became ilmoft raving mad, nor was Henry haidly more co lfiftcnt Тле со ich, hoAevcr, was ordered to return with the
tlıe trembling Ľhza to Pavilion Parade, whilft bir Watkin, Radmill, Henrj,and Radmill's fervants, went different roads in queft of Marj Jane
СНЛ1' XV.
LETTER III· Mr. Northcote to Mrs Mowbrai/. л DID not imagine it poffible, when 1 laft evrote to you, that any occurrence, how¬ ever dilgufting and unpleafant, could make my life moie wretched, more miferable, more painfully infupj>ortabie, more fraught with
with anguiih> difcontent, and inquietude than 1 at that time felt it —But I have b en deceued — Marj jine has d ceived me— that Miry Jane, whom 1 raflily conceived to be all angelic punt)—all excellence— every thing that coul I enfure eíUem, refpeft, and \eneration from the good and virtuojs —I once prevented her liitemng to the profare difcotníe or а reptile bj the name of Barville , ï iftcrviards, obferved, m her preftnee, that be ъ vs a fcoLndieî ,— ilio fecmed terrified, and I h pel m; words hid made thu mipieffionon her heait I intende 1, for her fafety, the) Ihould,—but I wis duped—moil e¿regiouíl) dujul, ioi tht next diy I again fav them together—Uv them publicly torcili r , — ind iron that moment vowe 1 never to ihcik, or, it j c í «ti¬ bie, thnk oí Miry ïane mot but fon rhe very bottom of mj foul to detp fe ei Notttirh ftand mg thb half formed reío и nn, every fibre of m) heart quiveierl with a 1- guiih when Radmill, thit. da), defpair an i w ild nefs in his look 4 , told гас tint Marj- J\ne
Jane fince the preceding night had beer miffing '—My amiable friend, it is impof fible for jou to conceive the innumerable pains with which tlus information afflicied me, yet I expected, from the lecond time I dif¬ covered Mary-Jane with that helhfli fiend, llie would entail mifery, riot only upon her felf, but on all who felt interefted in her welfare 1 fud as much to Radmill, though it was cruel to augment Ins fuffenngs—I hive feen hım once fince, pale, melancholy, and neaily heart broken, but my feelings were too much in unifon with his to offer hım anı confolatıon , for M ry Jane occu¬ pied a fpa " in our affections, wlucli fo fud¬ denly to be rendered a vacuum ıs teırıb e — Barville left Brighton laft night likewilt—I 1 new I was right —Oh that I had him at this moment within mj grafp, Id difli his ioul uno eternity, ind rid the earth of a miicrcant, tliough I mounted the fcaffold, and, bj an ignoble death, receivetl the re¬ ward of my temerity '
" Of
" Of Bn v die's chiriftei and conduri, which have loiuc wttlun my knowledge, at pieient you ire ignorant,—tike it, read it, and drop a tear for tlu pool loft Mary-Jane ' " He is the Ion of a woithy Bironet, vvho attlus penod lies at the point of deith, and with whom, foi manv jeirs, I haie been intimately acquamted Hib Ion 1 hue Lnoivnfro ichildhood, and rioni thcmiligii and infidious conduct which he ever adopted to extricate himlelf liom bovifh troubles, it an eulj a Q e evinced to me the depravity ot his heart " At the age of twenty teso, his father purchaftd hım a LOiııtıııffıon in the armj, which he but received to di pofe of again, tven ei ithout joining the reg mı nt , and not until the whole of the ¡urn evas expended m intemperance, did his fatli-r behold lnm agiin " But to relate to you the whole of his atrocities would fwell a volume , 1 fh ill therefoie merely confine myfelf to thofe, 111 which I may add 1 have been interefted , tor what
what diftrefled my fuends ever proved a f)uiceot uncifinelbto myfdf " It is now fifteen yeais fince, that pur- fuing one of my annuii perambulations thiough Someifetibirc, I \asinluccd tocill upon ι Mr Kni^htlej, (n he is one of my oldefi: friends, v^e were fchoolftllows Юцс- ίΙκΓ, and a better mnn I never knew —On ni) entering hb d willing, 1 w к much Гьг- prifed to behold him and lis familj ıı «mourning He lnd, when I before vifited him, a wife and fix childien, alias а nable ач their fathei , а pıelcntımcnt told me tlut fome of them wcîc no more, and Knightley ÍÜ5H atei ınftr-ned me that their e deft daughter, about f veateen jeirs of age, the j iy and pride uf their fond heart 4 , they had but a iew hours before blioued to an un timely grave '— Mina 1 ad been а favounte oí mı t, and Co unexpected у to loft her, biought ttars into mj ejes, but mj (enfi¬ lions weie rendered doubly acute when i leu ned lhe mehncholy particulars ot her death, and that a villain had been the occafion
oí a « ataftiophe almoft too ten iblc to rei ite, and tint viilun no other tl u the ufamous Birvill . With Sir bcnjimui, lus father, who refided but я flioit diftance fiom KnıghtİL) s, Knıghtl j was on inendly teims, he refpefted hım beciulc he was vir¬ tuous, and Ins fon was ever a welcome viftter at his houle —Little did hc fulpcit the viper he was luunilung in his biloin, would fling him to death—little did he tin yne that a fon of lie good Sn Benjamin would bring Ins grey hairs with foriovv to the giave " tëaivillc, foi ionic tune, leemed much attached to Manı, Knıglıtiej with pLalure obfeived it, particuhrlv as lib a lilrellcs were not lndifieicnlly ıeceıved by Muia — kn 0 'itlcv hal even hinted Ins lulpıuoı to Sır Uc yanın oflus fens putıalıtv to his daughter, andas it was in hi jovel to give her a tolerable fntun , Su β j imin w ас by no mema ılıfp'ealed it the inte 1 ö encc A fuv weeks after tin , Mini one ic 11 g ıe¬ tuınıng f om a v ık with lä mile, whom lhe iheady began to conhdu as a man who voi ι. ι «ould
nou' l Ihoı Ilı l cıon с hır hi fh d, i , -ıt- tilth »dcıcd ıı d un' pj , her ı tlıu in¬ quirid uhat lud ııııl d Itırlı ι fu dei ıe- loluton m lı r Ipiritb, ıs but in houi li - ίο ι lit lud lun hu chttiíul m toiitented. Hu ini) rtp) ιι s s lhe lullicd pie i, 1- tllcll fi ıı İıını—' PuulL ıs ι lillun' — Τ uk Go', t e ıt ui, Doliu, I llUcdlf- co.titd lhe di, ι iuti ol lu, he ι i ľ ■' Hei I thci, hni ι Ihuck, filio ed, and indite 1 i] in leu m tl α ι,ι intt! nuh ιι u 1 d 1) nuch clilluibed h r, md Mini t ΙΛ infoi mt I lııı tut Rıuılt lııılı lulııd ul) th l I ' ol 11 pı >, ılıb, t« Ulu a! tel« t't.lt «Stelt his , iuti lo ni ni her, ulit I d ι enly tol¬ ti t 1 e 1 nn tli D i uıun duıjıtır, iho e ııııı uile iu uh, hc t ıu ! il, Ind bııı lis ¡ol ml t nuit, lit ulici oil) с id bt of uluc blu , ni Ihjrtd it li lh lm He t en ti cd lu U) ch, t ι nh im, ob ru ι ι tU iul t! he ıu uıd ι ι t oı eı to hu, inuııld cıcıı fileiıct flit lı ıj csof h i lattici. Tne ınnoieiıt loul ot
mıfcrcuıt, lı ι luılcs ío iíiw nınncnts loı- look her, mil Ihc funk into Iıı ir ns, lie, imiğinim lhe acce led to In, eeilhis, ι id oecrjojed tlut he I id I ) cilil clc tellus puipofe, impilile! liei Ιι s eeıtlı i kils ol ı ıptıuous tum' s , t ι «,ιι i) reil ired li r to hfe uni ri il η, e I c i u u ι 0 I u d ίο n llllll, İpi e cl Ol hls elui, t C 11 n lie , mil iü'hin 0 uto t и lune, Il eie u i l her fuller " kli ι! J, m lilei.c l e ıth i ı e, ' t hu ıntl e ent ııı quii oi Punic , but ι , luipcclııı 0 ее ut e u c' ι,ι, ıs i e «cly on ins joui nej 1,1 11 ' )iı , 11 1 'us mu, ı 0 e boi iter, ivi ltll e l/ell d ι lg ter, wis ìpiiou cc 1 ι ι u c ρ] ι " Pm I j η! Ins inimile noe ledu О lb m 1 vi r J e, l lk Ile tl с impie! 111 Ι ι e ılı i j ıı ıcL ο ι die heatt ol iı, ι * ıh« mı h r lati ,ι ie.ee e ι , ce 1 nil e ι n\ )l limi but eu i b οι ι ι ,,ι ılı. dl и nu-
muit flic liiil c\ptruntcd, ucighed helij ι hci hurt. " Sum iiccks chplcd, Jîııl ilic Гита! pul у to hivt regnnet! hel loi nei puit^, ivilen compiutili!!; Olle Cl с« ¡11«, of lltlll«; rıriıcr indifp ilici, Ihc ictiied to lui tinnititi culler tiun и uil , ind o i tht luMtqu nt m« ııııııg, on her moıhcı's ııiıtıng Iıcı ipnt ici t to с ι jUirc aitti ile flue if lier heı th, ulut pen tın diuiieitc her itelıın«, when Ihc I Clitic! htr d luj t l l life cb corpit ' " Knighllt), ilnmclb, ihc lerci us of Imuil , huincd t th πι , ι ι! li mid the ine mt l) I, euic'c t lis vif h d hileni nui iute! tilt! e ι iile, le ,исЧ funno ed In;, I mth liti hit, ıflılt ute, ι ph)fıtıın in ioon ι г iti red, lib \uie ι s finii ul 1 iul to'nm, hut M nuns gone for tur 1 -·> t h d b m и ul ipjl.ciiil) fonu h s 1 1, to htıjıt n nie ι cumu- 1 itn gl « ^Γί ii ¡кг, η «ti, he , loíiounccd hei to 11 e il cd bj , ο 1 1 1. " Το
'· lod le.ıl e u.inutelj lhe fuffering of il ts uulrp[ j 1 1 uılı , noul I be unnecdhniy t« jı 1 1 jour tını at 1/1 ig he rt, wlueh I kne« die Iţ Oleei IU l lelli — 1 h lt M tni, le d ie I e t lj ile bv die uilu man treat- it u lhe li ее,е1с1еее1 ftoii İlimde, h I c j unit 1 111 1 c it luie ti , appc ırej 1 1 о «ι ín ι, them íl!, t ) ji the puti¬ ni I 1 ι « , lie ld lhe pillile 11 e I I, level 111 u nv llllll .le 1 bejond " 1 lı d 1 tAl j'ıtUy neir fi\ months, 11 Ί 1 ch lie- с i a L d nie lo В ıth, where 1 cci li 1 1 h i nt uth Bun' e , he cai e up tin , η! adl ei! d me ι nil il the ниц- li 1 j о m о d act u ши ««е —Му blo d l oilcl n ti „к s 1 be t I 11, uhell, to 1 ileinli ıc, ι < ~' «ou ho hend, 1 ¡le¬ lu .1 , 1 1 ti t lo ııı ki 1) ? litio .1 lo 11 ,οι ι ,4 1 el I 1 tt diel¬ cu ne 111 1 11 tl u — le iline I, t 1С co- 1 Ш loiluole 1 I ij j, Ilio .lellllee fflllcl Ij Ide llll-
ι dctlil ! e liti , tiuj Innb tiembled with gu It a, he trttcrc I fio ıı my prclence " Barville, fion that time, noids me¬ ht fliuns mc is he ivould a peftiltnce, and ihuddcr, uith guilty ipprehcnfions when we calmili meet, uluch emotions, though I plnili putene he flines to lubdue, yet he ι ι ot itrcoic So ibjcčt vicc in ikes us, u ! n coi ιι ietti oui iniquities ire no longer io cc 1 d I tit icloffttiec) ' C e fc l lt"ls lier illy Г nCOlintcr uıı I in 1 bit , I I irned that, hiving it nil th ic ji lis fntnd, ird minderce! lc liioindfo ρ cfjının; to ıhlıppıoıc his c d с , 1 e h u b condecí hum lus famı j, ai J ' ud J üblich u 11 heı, u itil 1 mated, n i n'inıt e lis cnme, h ib indonni I ci foi oi'c cıı imtnls в 'ich wanted i t tl t j kıl t ti ι ıetj to ret uimei d ıh n ' İhı, h il, iciitiïïiig a f ι outfid , t ι h ι! ι I e e is Im u uhu , I much i i t c fl etions of M ırj Ime— 1 ι.
has feduced her from her duty—has torn her from the paternal proteftion of Radmill—has-------Paffion enervates my irm, that 1 can Icarcely guide my pen —111 feek for hun —I ¡I innihilate hini—I U tread lum out of exiltcnc - , or penili mjfelf—Mary- Jane (lull------But wlnt is M iry-Jane to me ? —I muil endeavour to fuget her, for fhe is no longer worthy of my regard.
LHAP.
CHAP, XVI lile III Ι ¡Η Γ etl lil/ t. CoMLMPI \V\, the f Idei fp in¬ gles с f m ir r r as '1 1) c\ α 1 e 1 umit es οι er the natti) ι iftt, to Ridi ull, li ıtt Ins lirini it Brigiitől, had proved а fource of ineffable en|ri me t —it g addcned md t\lii- larıtcd Ins I u' , but the moinin» futtted- m¿ lis 'ofing lVir -Jine, wis the nfing luminai) of di , wheh feemed to Ipreid uniuril chtertu ne s, fo the fiill- η 1 1 utul with fitlin., the leieifc , foi ıs Auıorı bıiıhtıncd l' e e (lern I10117011, it butienu du! hn th t M ) 1 1 e, if ltr lo man) hours' ablente, migi t hue been ton ve j cd
vc_, ul m mj mil = ava), and poñibly he Ih uld nevei belull lierai) moie, Nor was H nr> lnrdlv Lfs affcitcd than his fuher Ul fdt, fo the hi ft tme, tint tl- } ic cucc of Mai) Jane was eflciitial to his} cice , h knew not what to do, or how to co dole his fıtlıeı, being ft much in need ol ithmlcif 1 nev had b en foi ftme lime togethei m ihc hie, ıkı ill 1 0 11, the tc 1 equip ige as ufu ll n ıs I ud out, but not 1 cup or a lauccı u ıs t indicii bj eith 1 of them Ridm 11, with jieituibtd pices, wis v liking about the 10)111, Ins hcut lecmul il noil burftnig, big 1)1 ips ь u lic 1 ed in his ejes, an«l tuckkd donn hi che ,, ι hile Ileiır), и uu idt I to the li ut wuh o iiel is he «1(11 (led the igony cl his 1 uici, in idc 111 clicii t to l| e 1&. corn¬ iin, and ılıll th tLinult tlut л as riging uıtl 111 hnn, but uttei nee was for tome tunc dc 1 .d , — tt lilt he ej teul tted, tıkıng hm by tlıehıtıd- 1 5 " My
" My den Sn, do not t u, dcf[ onci — foi myille, eid ivour to coi 1 r e murlelf — ltvviindj mc to the ioul f e v ti thus in Inj pi —Mm I u e n 5 be η ι ] I e 1 ľl'ctj — ifcl Ur, [ellli ,ιιι I'ovule e m y iell ıe 1 r t 1 u " Neie , n« 1," Ind Rul ul, " will thefe cies bchilil her m ıc \omirc w 1 ih b g ıl ıh heu luu s í 1 1 ı_t , ι tl ι len t'ı ι 1 "ci h 11 g ti Ici — Mi pu 1 I [ c, un¬ ie 1 u 1 d the lıİLut 1 , 1 m il lb 1С 1 1С CL nuj 1 111 dull I ell j 1 I t ll 1 ,— Iİ1L lb ni , U ) I , no h Ul 11UI il J OIC tilt nil 11 и I, ief in hti t chi , mì gtnrl hei f 1 1 1 In res oi tie ιν cl d ıs 1 would iı ve du ,— nul, nie illcmu tint I 1 1 , I 11 ι ι e cr beh 11 'lel 1101Ľ ' Λ 1 iui' 1 «ρ it the dt 01 ' ugl t boılı of tliLiıı to tl e window , ıt ι «, the ¡ uftooj Hope 01 ce moie rcvılıtcd ť 111
« О
" Oh 1 fliould it be fr) 11 Miry finei" Ruinu I exclu lied, foigetting that tlıc fhort tt ıc fhe hid been iblc it iviuld hiicllj ad¬ mit of hci w itmg Mc folbwcd Hcuj to fhc door, hc faw lull leCclVe ι luter, ind inftantly breik, it opei) , but no fuoner htd his eyes glinced oiu ts contents thm he ipccdilj lefoldcd it, ind hunicd it into his pocket, ticmu- loufly cbiei vin 0 — " It is îotlnnţ, o c îmjioitiiice —it is hum 1 llien 1 1 1 mine in town Rulmill, wlio iv is ft inch ig !>) lib fide, t с ni h g ιν it Ιι feu uıd dıtıppoıntment, en¬ quued— " Miy 1 not fee it, Hunv '-It it be 1 letter ot no import nice, ıv'ıy deiy me a iijit of it ! ' 1 6 Hemy,
Henrj, with cvi, f virara ng in teais, looked hnn in the fice, but lud nothing " Oh Hcnij ' ' (ud Radmill, "have 1 deferved th s '—Fías a fatl cr, ind lucii ι father ıs I lıave beul, no ug it io expect jout confidence f— Ciuci b ıj '—Milj jane and jLiirlclt will hurry me 11 the u ai e ' Henry gioaned wilh agony as thcy again flowlj eı tered thebicikfuc io im. Plıgıary, though he had not, as he pro¬ mifed, been with them on the preceding evening at the lhcatre, foin aitcr heard oi the rajfterious abience of Mtij-Jaiie, and hid, wuh Ralmill and Huir), been ill mg! L wandenng in qucfl of liei, hc now jome 1 tliem, with bir Watkin beverly and his daughter Lh/a Again weie tlie foregone milanchoty cir¬ cumfiinces rccapitul iteti, wlii'e the pooi Eliza, who imagined herfelf indirceli) to 5 have
have been the cauk, of al 1 thur trouble, (it ablurbid in grief lhza on her ıetuın fro ι the Tlicat c, ι quainted her iiii ι 1 ι or t ŕ lie ili ице difippeiance of Mu) Jine, but tint uniaUc lid) b t atcd no ij ι , to ıı lıı- row on the осе ilion, bat ρ, 1 1 lel h il í for her didcrn nent, ul) n 0 ο μ L m oni mon of Mai) J ne the fi l t me lhe ev r law hei « I I ne v (ne id le 1 " Ihe w s , о b ttei thm Γι llu 1 ι , I Ι ι it wil b a wi шц t t c d v i ne cr i au t ) a 1 ¡ t ι I c ai bi t, b it n I Innleit h i| py with tint I rov idence ln ic t hni I li?a, difgufted at h i (iler s iniiuna nt) , withdrew to her ehiubu, where, i íllcís md unhappy, foi íleep Ind fjrlakcn her ejelids, Ihe cont nu d until mirning wlcn Sn Watkin and hu lel f, vvıtlı Pla 0 uıj, whom thcy
thej overtook in tiur e alk, proceeded to R ulmii s Tl ev h d been at R imill s but a few lTinutes veh n Nortluote entued He klicev ne tli ng of what liati iappel cd refj uit¬ ing M ırj Jan., an I velien R ulmi!' informed 1 im, he b cam gre ati) agit tted , however, flıortb ι_ tting the better of his emotions, he lulit ucci not to declare ' is fttfp cıon, that, as Bi vile lelt Bii 0 nton, tolu knowledge, abcut tlie tme Maiy jene h d vbf ondeei fion ticin, flıe lıtd takın the allantage oi tlu ci nlifion t the Huître, tnd eloped л Uli lum 1 tem, filing at this f ugget on, ni eied hu ι not m t ic moft polite tunis he could lııvc ufed and to convince lum lı ııv ui jutt a conclulun lie h»i louncJ, woul 1 lıaıc re¬ lated to lnm the onticului cu Mai) J ne s acquaintance vvıtlı ßaivillc, and the obh 0 ı- tioii they eeue ui del to lnm in rclcuin 0 her iiom lum , but Nortl cote gave lum not the opportunit),
ορροί tuıııij, for not ilto^ th ι appriviigof 1 hit Huuy hid before ulte ed, he abruptly leit tin ho lie 1 1 nigh none of thci 1 lcc η tl to ciedit what Nirtlu t 'n m tte 1, tint iuj- Inchid voluit 1 I) II d vvitii Bi e к, ,et hid it lu h 11 eil et upon tl η, th t thej mime telj det 1111 d tn nukc tiiuiies uhi w n_, tier 1 1, u int, lett B nľaľu li h ln tl U ι m i id hl 1 111 ll I li le lt с Ге IO ICU e 111 S ) , ι d de nin ' il h n 1 i e ev ıy tl 1 ' 1 e 10 ihc t 1 ) t l le oc ur
ç i tl 11 11 I zi J)i Iter cl ]iil d, l I ! I ) il 1 ,'ll 1 iet 0lItt) o Cl Cl fol Uı u'l s dj _, ııcı с с 1« \ ti Lr) 1' ce Ih intl Icci gne b- tei tlnn »о h ıs, uni R. dm 1, to ее 'uni the tın ıp- 1 el ıhı lelilí of tftojc.r?, giew imp ι-
tient at their long ftii , Ihej had left Inni it ten oclocl, and u uis now piit tuelle. « Wlnt cm hue dclincd them? ex¬ tl in cd Ri h nl to hi ıcf. ! no o'elotk cim , ni h ι ifpatchid а fen ıı t in ljutit о, , hem — 1 , ts unkind— tu ıs unfeeling, '.ι η, ing tne j ι lui bed 11 ite ofhisiuiid. tol сер lu η io' j ^ n (ulji-nlt. Tlıc Imiit loon са e b.tk _, in, hut could ι in i o ıııt lu_c ice ol с 1 - 1 our o'clock 11 lived, nd (ell t t) leitul IU, foul houis m к j и u U iı i 0 i t! а u, uhell lll'lin, ill loutlltuy, t ilei ed tht di uiin^ ıoom. « WI.utu.Heni) feigem nttn gMt 1 Rulmill " Wlut h .s denn d jui lo long' —line you heaid any пень ot Mı j- Jllt r" " None," anfıı ltd Piigi ΐ) , " ind is foi Henr), I Ic t hım í on at ti e lean cd, at Bııvılit's lodgings, that he fet oil hfi. in 'it
night for town á\nd I imagined Hliu), ioinc hours fince, had a¡ pri/c I jou ofit, and that )ou hid lent h m aftei bi ville in conleqiic ice, i-> 1 Ua lum, about eleven о clock, in a poll с iute, anu with um a ¿-n- tleman whom 1 kí с ; not, going at a b reat rate on the Lon Joa load ' R hull ga7ed at 1 n far fame tune tn I, Cell s ib ib ic t, ι со aui lel In checks, lelpiration was choked, he D f[ed for bieatli —i' agiary was tc r fie 1 at the altcrittoi ie bcicld in lum, and vvo u la e rung the bell for aflittance, as he e nccived hnu to bi fudduilj attacked it ι lo ne dan¬ geious dil rdei , lie, however, feeng ι ıs in¬ te шоп, lud juli; U efi -,Πι uı u 0 b let to pievent hım, and at lalt ııtıcuhted— " Huu j n a ¡oft chule— g nc— "cd— def-rte I uic in ill ni) tioublc —ılı s ι too much —Oh Gil' whu nev cil imts, ani dell ned to enduie'— Г1ю1е lcttcıs — thoc tıırıble lettus '—Both gone at cue 1 veep — « Oh
Oh Henry, Henrj ' I did nol thmk joufo inhuman —Never, never fl.all 1 tafte of comiort more '" Radmill, overcome, lusftrengthquitegone, fui к 1 1 on a lofa , and Pl igiarj, moie alarm¬ ed, puuued his faril dchgn, rung the bell, and I elk v mg R dmıU s fenfes to be affected, chin itched one of his fervtnts for ι phyfìcian, fitting b»fide hnn hunfelf until the phjficiaa a r r ved.
СПЛР.
CHAP. XVII. Villany fuccefsfiä. JDIÎFORE we proceed any further in dc¬ fciibing the fufienngs of' Radmill, it is ne¬ ceflary to account for the fingular manner in whuh Muy- Jane difappeaied, and whac afterwaids befel hei ; and give Noithcote fonie little credit in pronouncing Barville to beacceliuy to her elop tnuit, but not, as he fillelj conjačtcucd, with hei 0 «n contint and ¡.¡chimion : loi to Maiy ).mc, alter the limbic account Ihe h.'d hiaui ot him, Harv ille had becoaic an obiect to be fe ire and avudcd ; and had hc been the içerle, fotot ill) had Hcity guncc'. her molt affec¬ tionate i
tioiiite regird, tli ii 0 h almofl ы 1 nown to h ilclf, tlut it wiul ι hiu b en ι poffibl f ι hun tomake I hu 1 1 , le ι ıoı hu 1 cai t, Ν ι theolc io muc i i, i re u ded i e hid. Lm Че, fro-o the fiifl mome ί ! c b h 'el Л y|i ıt t'ıt Adun , ν, ι 1 ı ıh tlıt buut) of h ı itile ı, 1er t t α lı be tlınj o nt fu lui feti 1 1 ı« , t П« С II.OIC t\[ .Πι. , ılt i le I e t bloomed on heı thteks , her d rk ejes, be im¬ ing , kılurc ıs (lie g zed on tht ppa^ently In, py gioup iiound her, 0 ne in 'd.iionil lufl'e to the liar noni of liei fe tuas — Bändle b hell ier loi f) etime ın filent admiration, tluı cn I u m d to le ri vi ю flit was, bat noue o tlıoı to whom ht ıd- drıflıd limitli, evci icmenibcied to hue feen lui bel ıc, ıh ıı kid mil ind Ilcıııy leam g lu to etaiinc the other roons, «give hmi ш op tun tj of oo ini ig tint kioulcelgc li m heilui, he lnl fru ileffly attempted to procure fion olheis. Biivihc,
lil ville, fiom t'ı π ıu ι 11 which Μιΐ)- ]ιη ad coi mie 1 toj чп with htm in the dan ,1m la flung r í i her, u is con¬ vincili ι li h h ld beeil but little Ute I tO coup u , «h ι blufhi ξ with mo left dif¬ fi li nee as In al helled her, win h, hovel er, gı dull) ililptrlin , via lucecedc I b) tint cat) rctincil b iiiwoui in nd mt on native «olili ı/ı I con ci ш ie tieik, ivhľ-li har- bouiii^ и uile, al c s it not metlici , cinicei t лц 1 j li it) ol nei hcaı t If Maiy-fine h d bc' rc rr atıl a fpark of lou'e delile 11 hi Ι ι η, ılı ι he fav lier, lı Jit as a iı j I , liciti the ílov e y m i/c. f t ıe d mee, it e mi e 1 mto a (la ne, an I he iicictly detenni icd to accompli!!) her atın Tlıc dince over, he 1 d hei to a feat, where ioı fonie ι ι then coiurfuonhad been uıunt ırupted, d t ig wluth h„ pjl- feiicd himlcif ofher name an 1 ¡ iele it ibode, this being all he then wiihed to knuw, Iil agun
agun fohtitcd hei hv 1 1, u 1 thcy eecic ι i conti tunc a ıout to join the dtneus ivheti N rtlicotc, is before dclciibed, ich tnced and lepa itcd Ihcm Bileille ticmbed it his ap; eirancc , Noi ihc ite, he feared, knew lnm but toi v 11, m I to mitite lini by ic¡ roic mg lini for lis incluíeis mi D ht ha/aid ι thfeovcry о lib chirietu, evlucli he hoped, to Marj J ui , u> jet ее mid not be revealed Barville, ho vve , «,η Ih n~ lu« teeth evith rage, feir, cnve, nidi ippo nt ι cnt, f lently vvitncflcil her depir urc That Noithcote fiiould be icquunted with her, flung ium to the loui But Mare f tnc wis to ι lovely a vlitim entirelj to I refilled, a id he vowed within 1 m I, ıh t though \oith cote fliould ( ul hlh nl ι ι iı ', ini ι , ι very thing he kıcev fim , it Ihou I ı t deter lnm irom еч ι ι i n eve ν ib it 0 c η Irdch ty could inv it, to ,ct liij ]aue withm Ins power
Though
Though Mı )- j ine lai m more of Bir¬ uit о 1 tint tvcni ig, jet m r fır o ice did he lolt lijn of her ! c n I er o ıı t t unns, Hid 1)1 01 I l' chi ihltl tol¬ le telle l>tlť\ une P 1 de , Ι e Ι η her al ¡Jjt i m it unh i ι ι nd к ııl', ι honı h cone 1 1 ti b 1 r I ııl brot ci , ln 1 ı n 1 ι ι' ι
b 11 η β ınoı 1 1 I 11 lil i I' e 1 ι cd heı ıel d 1 1 1 li , lie uıs It llllll 1 t) Po i ul i, d to liei, Ι η on eh с ι Ins heil 1 ılı 1 1 ι 1 h , md guilt, l 11 lic 0 ll I t 1 tO 1С i, uh 11 kell .111 у
Oll tl f 1 1 , t , S C t 1 te Stenic, fi nih ι 1 11 1 t с un l C J m linns 1 li II o, t t , H 1 I mlel ol th pu onu Mai) j uı , tlıc t ι l' j et, on whofe dclbu l on I с ι s ι uh _, pilci hım, ııtl ılı ie Uıs 1, ıt 1 ouiuľcd mu joy ıs lie hailened ionici ıeı , —thtj un c lirs
Iţ)î MARV JANE culais of this ruicountei have been given dheadj Bai ν l'le, from the hapj flight and fubfe- quent beh lv oui of M ırj Jane, at firfl con¬ ceived hu to be inline, but S un ıdc ıs vvıdclv different informed h m of t! с true ciule vvı ch had fo much ilifirdcrcd lur Noithcote, 1 ľ evil a uuiis th t h muted nun perpetuali) , he ri^htlj conjcclur (1, lnd pıe¬ judıced her ı 0 uıft 1 m, thereioic, as he planile pi ceive I it w uld be imponible, haung his ii 0 c id ι oult ins to fuunjunt, с ei fairly lo obla n anot! er tntemew with her, «nd if 1 e cau ei, 1 e iaw no adva it ige¬ ous jiu^ ic it would an wu, is Ihc icemed fo nuen picp He 1 ϋ a 0 ι it lun, lie d tır- mincd to atch her tn ro lv, -ч d lu/e tlıe firft opportunıtj , íhoi ld ι j el er, of ai- ij ıııg her uil , nd when e kill с pected η, ι as I e ι )kdio put 1ц di moneti deíiua imo ucLutiLii.
Гог
1 or on t! e ii eccedili, evening, being it the T heitre vv hen t'ıe alamı of fire fprcıl fuch generi! colili itoti, lie, hunjınr with the multiti d fi 11 the houfe, be eld, much agit Ucci, ini' с, atcd fiom I ci inends, tlu tın objeft t'nt с of, cl 1 thelitis, veli n földiig а ρ ίι D c t 1 ug! th cloeed, hc 111 lc to ir ls 1 ι η Ilı liei in Ins
ams, i i ıj 1 ıc hu 11 i il. -hode An İlle Ι tihe 111 Ι) ti' иск it it an p- portuıı t) 1 oe ι Ut! e e hei fi id , lus сашто e 1 Cl il 1 mg ior ¡11 1 but ι I ıoı t I ih и с, mil ıs Μ ι ι 1 i i t cl th ıııjı t noi in Ins im 1 a 111 I, I bloot nn' 1 .pn lefll'l с 1 1 ιοι- coui с ot j с >p! in the lire b ι 1 'l ocLlip d ev ılı du le ılı of t ι d 0 1 t ley 11) ι imel le) 11 d dei , till, UII¬ noticed hy 0 m, ю и ıı II , ihed hib pu 1 líe oí CJI elin o 1 <l l ) md ulnl| cicil 1 i tu , e 1 сити-, ll f 1С bočnice 11 ıj t hb v II ııı ι L VC t Itlers to tl e Се с η in tu , cel u 'ut IJ VOL 1. 1 fai
foi Cuci field, ind ti tal e hoď himfcll, fet dl loi the f u vl phee, nd I ivc inny cfiieili rcul)f(l hım, ıs lt w ι lıioiıteıı- t on, il pofiible, to icich Lindou befoie dijlijit Τικ orilcb wc с t)i ι el) ob )cd, and a 'n mi icnt iltei tl ) weie in the Cuck- ileld leti 1 Thej 1 1 ,ι r- ' I lc ι al miles eie ?,îıi)-Jaı Ι 0 > с vei li μι hci I voon , ai It с circi fil nlıt u Ih e\\ elidiceli, wnen (lef uıd 1 ielf ι о к imu В ıvılh. таСсПКЦс u natinin, a ctlciineev (1 tl n ι e cubed n rvil с li cd ill his ai ,.ιη vini, to com¬ pofc bei lunts, ud ìeroncilo 1er to the cvet, u kiii 0 lhe oll hb ul oll ci s (lithe leim li ul ma) bc a[ ¡ hed, ilcioŕľucd as tl с 1 1" s ol un μι t) ), if (hc would but conlent tu ioilake hei father, and live with hun. Maiy-
Mily-J inc fliudducd at the hornd pio- jofil, flunk d, and cndeivouied to lo cc open the d юг of t с cirmge Bu ville, finding lus proues ml per unions of ni avail, md kin gic с ies mijit rc ch the ens of bue tt edus eu o poli bij ι n Jit be on the ioti, inc! bin ζ, tl m io lier lefeue, ludet; lc 1 li s ¡ eket u .ndieCiclitcf cblclj pt lTell to 1 е. 1ц s UlVlIg ' J t le I İS 1С " 1 h r to filence, aid li ilinp-, ılıoıjı t uı b ь v ıo- lcntl), flu lud not a f cond ti , c f inted, he c\ luned— " Mils Rıhın ı, mı 1 v 1 ıt I ı ı nov iboit ontici — íl eoa p с leut, u , iuti out înv Iuithcr ap ι с it di ine i tou οι av ι iii η fi r ti mv i vitun, no ııı u t Ilı 14) i e 1 1 ) e u , and if, at the eı 1 oí с ıc e ι , pu ll 1 ρ ι с eie m lc- fulii g the ^ η ι u piopof Is I luve ťn night nuh to ţoi, jou hull bc I ile y re¬ floied to j uiu ι eh, until tbc c Dilati u ι. 2 o f
of wlucli Iın e no poni ι tu t'iti fhill teir ) OU fi Olii Ше lìut lt, t) i t'ıt tonti U l, JOU ptrfıil in vour prt lnıt indu, t UIS tO Ittll- titc jourit If, ι!' îou tm hu to di ciel, fpite of vom Iecble effort , (lull bef 1 itu , thcrdoit thult for youilill, 11 d jou will lind mt ìtloìutt tuoi to keep ni) ucid. Nou then uicl oui ti uhlcieioi" He rtleifed hci firm tht h ndi.eichi f, tiu, ugnila ht lud ııtı ed ι uu tl ton piu hti pul nt ίι mì ι с , ι d induet lier ejmet') to pioceed uuh Ini th «ci Untier of the jour .e). The tu rified Mn; I nc, fi du ' ιΊΤΌ much ч , ıs mem, t ) t ıı 1 1 ıt l { ni¬ elen, ıs ucll ь Ilıe uıs ι le, minie ble X .tli ' 11, Uld IllilC lo conc ulu fcirs, hoj i ıl t in o )¡ oituiut) \ jlioffel,cre th ι ¡ ritte I ti min) mili, lui'ner, of clt ipn ¿ «ioni hım.
Afew
Λ fcv mínu c i r 1, the tnm¡ ling ot hmle , ıs il ionie ι ve le pi ig the callage, met I -ΐ cır, Miry J ic, in¬ fpired eelth tie hjj e oi bei g lelcucd, 11 .¡n u uit hr d eı «le gis, nul cillcd loudh f , iii ice i 1 ι,ιιι vev r, li ird hu iur, "nd li vık, ıl ivin« hu rudely tonai 1 1 mı, л lııı 1 lhe lil ice ol the night Tjiin ııııı flui űl ', rcclj c\c mi¬ ed— " ) 1ч ' 1 не jou d ci cd ıı -l' ) d runni 11, ilu ill ııl ι n 10 ι 1 e I,' ani 1 L , 1 Ioli c lun urnei m .b с li b Hils ten hel per 01 M r I ıu , hrnicd Ivjond d ГспрПоп, at i ¡Ι th с ν ! ei e ί upon li i i u , ind ııtıcuhted, lj.j ılın il pıcıentng uttcı- UİLL ---- " O 1 ncıcj '- ı' cl, 1 deed I ее ni or¬ ienti muire, — reif nut juli 'ornici protei- te , tations,
i itiom, m I I will pai cnllj wait ioı jou to ful il tl m " «Veh then, ' he morofel) anf ered, no¬ wn I ft iccl bj her diftrefs, lI be ι rudent, and 1 wll a lh ie ta what I have before aliened " J j f ι in iftcr entered Cue' field , and Row 1 1, 1 is honeft feivant, who it was ť ť dp, d t m cn t r d, bulhem ' ııcı bir lem, „nd thu, Lonl Tue hie di j ate -nd fecrcev wuc oh- fincl it vu (lige v util «hej leiched Cıaıle/ ilel Nudliul, bj oiikroflns mafii , h d te ι le flec prepne 1 loi tlum, jud b iiu the tgit tei li uits, ot Muv J me wo ild be 11 re con pi le 1 by a little rcli uid lcrdhncit, hu ever, bcfuic il y hd amed ıh ho L, hc cxchimed, ulei , hu 1 ν the hind— " Now,
" Noe, Mıh. kuliul 1 finii put уош inte ritj to the ıft, — t Ciwlcy eve velli alight—I have o dere 1 tea nnd coffee, vehıch [ truft vou ev ill not hcftate to putike of, buti e u pr lume to inform α iv [ e lons, wi о it t ι ti »η \cli ce to be there, that I m foiu -, y u aevaj frcm vour friends, from tl it no nt it i m ablolvc 1 f о 11 my pinrr —I 111 0 ec 1 lu porte i to dievel cv ry ill co ιί qu cc ret un will attach о
1 i teri), I ie cl 1 İtici 1 nivel vt 11, its ί- Ι t ι il 1 evu he .1 ι İtte ι πι I ly.1- t _, in I filer 1 1 I ııııı l a he e tie 1 1 1 ued ι icily of
Hid
lofing JOU, tl re re Itt 1 r U 1 1 I y„LI 1 no , llj \ I I ill ]i ei 1 il,e 1 1 il rcc ι j nl 1 1 1 ut et il ri
ill to 'ier, 1) Ulli 'llcdtoinjete^lc, ti η of tlıc η, - ь of the in ι flic coul 1 η ι 1 iv с '' с с! I cr ] uq ole, « fli iı ŕ io inui'ii ir mul, i d ti 'i ι tier
by
hu ht
! ie wi r ι o chiUT i ugl relente i ig it pu-
ııv, eh ! Ι ι í tij te ile illi 1, tl it 11 evi, lı cl ι Jut, lum lic hil runde m liei íli 0 ıt eeıtlı a voung rike, toei ', u iO c , i d bi», c, of hci to uic hu etin ilmi ι ce to pree ul upan h r to l с İDİ L little i 1 el incit cu lie ıpuı pioecei ci ее th ha tj toeen lhe g il, who belieicct cvciy evolti ! e li ei Aid to hu, ie is noev by no means iui pi lied at tlıe dillieffed aj)[cimice of Mııj-Iıuı, who,
ν ho, hon ci ei, ,e s Ico nucii overcome to bc pi c ν ilul u ion to t e ane tlnn , and to hu rut liuti leiuclls could nil; ie]!yvvitli io'isndtc ,—tins the pooi gnl thought nitunl i u h, 1« ihe hid b uı lo u c ntly depilicelo! tint Ih Ice ned lo inuou, to hive hid— ι hiiíbmcl. " Pooi К 'nil'" ι I 1 ^i \ T ne, " h ее h ее 11 lev '- ntl lì ııv tul- Ol e I - e 1 ihi } ť ¡u f me ibe ce —Oh, eit i I n ucu il bodi о ce m r lefloie I e I « il ll-leel. i С Ile 1 I hutllUl d ι ) ι ve o t s t n me ¡ıc η i iun, oı ıu e ι ι liere 'u , lun ıe l' ' une noee en ci ι g, - cl ι ' uı 0 1 cr by ι ι ' t l i e l'ili, [ ' tlllt ivi rj- [ elll'l ellil llll lie 1П I )l pitl 111^ oí eei t ind i) n piovi 1 fui liei, he le¬ vi U lell tei 1) lt! 'l ll 1 lj fui t'iL ι ibi lu 1 1 uılı, ι ' t / clepart- c ', uıd ıs ι. e 'ululi i j li d tlıe 1 ", I.OUUUS
ö Jiut I ie ìt hi, icfide ce ш P.l Mill.
l'iivilh I id ficquuitlj.i 'it on tht roil, di! lei ιι di ih!., nid. t t eb flpliCe, ind the le (1 ι ι le O ι e t ı, li" cou'd
с ni ) 1 ildhu! Il ıh ' , 1 il, 1 < 1 Ι ι t o in İd , 1 m. } , 1 l' ' 1 _ 1 ín 1 nie, /cn s d ι f l'e , ι ! I ι t ι ııtl ini ult! ι of 1 1С 1 gool„ tl ne I ', " ι 1 • ' , It 11 tl ll fine- t li¬ ll l С С 111- fil e I l ill be ι . C 1 il ol Г th it ρ ,,ι ιι f thci t Cl ' ι l IO 11 1 n 1 lt < .oo. )V,1 1 , ho tk! d Lc , ч ι inclite 1| C 1 ι ι 1 h f l h le) ecu of in ilt 1 fli i Id lu η lt thit .r fhoul 1, to
1 ell leCtj tlOll.
iv j Μι ím 1 it il i Iht timbo e ι 1 ι ι ι 1 1 n t > ι ! not tO n ι ι ι ι u nul ι hi, man ni , I c-
lie 1 t utı li¬ li ui ) ilit- , tl lh ι 1 ii uld in t ι ι fri id ,
Idt ! ulj ι ıth t li ! ι Ι, ι ııl Ι is ler- ti 1 le tt ell I IOted tO ι ci le ltd hc uou 1 j ιο¬ ί L to I p' 'lei pl t — l mu ibiih t ìtxcilt lini, ilei ,ιι ttl h m ht linu 1 inni e nie tmí r ni I h ll ι li, ud h ml I t e u ее , t uld bul .acıt ι 1 lerelule.
he litered In (u l intentio , and «-ι,ο rulu to be* ι' uu) to In 1 oul in ι il V I Io 'ılı j F ι, «η lei mil, В mile ρ ι ι e ' lus ionie ρ inule , md pei um j huj le, V CU , 1 e lel, deli¬ le cl uu 1 , lhe ille ιΐ 11 delcih veoni n, e ho he miou lc I ! i ıe ,ι'ι οι! ρ rlon f с ιν cuki 1 e, hini 11 c\e mcl, ıı itil th¬ ie I t ) I , ¡ ib tl ι 1 It ' ι, u 1 ι ' I I h t nb t, c i cl i ι t lllllll i lie ее ılı ι mil iljui j lu tt 1 ι ulu ι
Ml I b c ι the , I t .1 I le, J ul о it ! t - tl «L ll « t <f u l t ι « I ' h I n' I 1 1 Ibi' ι ι tj ι tl
) 1 e ıs il rutili ι π ι , ι d h c- ie i e b ! ell e ' tb in í
t 1 t ιΟ
M u bliep' ulj pc cc Ved tint (houli ľ, uvi e not keep Ins wor I, t j iibu ite I cr it the t id of the weck, Ihc in I mithin,, toci- pcít fıom Mibcl in 1 ling Iıcı to cíc ipe, and hung с p( ι cile d bj her p cicice, lhe α¬ ι tieft«! to lic let l'ore Mil« lth n uistili« to tike cofie» or tei, о is Ihc Iceincd indifpoi d, ι 'tth uum ιν ι κ ι I «.'l«-, t'n , I ) c' r Μι, Jiiil ι' ι I ' о It Id ul ι ' Vincili elice l)J t )) ι il ι Ίί ι ι le unte nr -n ap¿ ctite, el ι ι 1 ıe ould u -uu n lu bounty.
it 1 ι , ι
Λΐ -IJ-ll
u g the ree Cl¬ out., le, vlci mut ıc bed, ,.,.ι, d.opp,i 0 .1 Cl jlJtiftlO ι
' e 1 ind Ut «, С cd «О CMI
liepa flic ι ιι It ııı ι по л fuperb uhi h ] ned tl с 0[ ıleiır ι ο intr, Oll e OUI ( llll open lo t, I lit 'neh lcd .ito ι l útiul hni ! n i ioni iii- j ni n' ch vi dt i d in 1 (bulir m of ' ) ι I 1 l ι 1 t le ıs no entri e ' ι t b tl ι i t it _,jous Ih in us J 1 in d ll (t,
lil, bi
S 1, ll t t ) lil ιι IJ b ι ι 1 1 t 1 ι
α t e t WlA/
M ιν Ιι < Ini t f cıı d oı ı hm f i ' b I ili'nciui out ι «href u it i lut ıu и 1 , о , ınh ibi ki' I ml Π ji« c umu d'y j it lo I e mı η tını, ι. ul it tl су i t ıı ute her г с , ' it 1 1 le у i t ıc ' ılı ı i eı ι if ι ι in, Ιι ι ι '1 ι a 1 i; hoi-
CÍIíiľ.
ι/ι lit' tul a Join e/ tu II ule·
j , ' ι Ι Ί I i n t u 1 bı I trftif I t 1 ι ι iit'c e r \libcl i 1 ! n tli i , ne it red to t ! ' , i t Ire t oot , tl I gue 1er
"lì li ечи ' Mibcl, is Πιε c l' i j til I li, je i hne ¡riel с ι,ι' ie, ihv, j u 1 u ut ılın bt ci ı —G i' ; n ν. Ι ι ' ι lo u ıı ıra upu , 1 ιι ιι ι — itll, ι Ul, il in tud tını <
Mu·}-
Mai) Jaie, c\ti emelj fliock 1 at this ¡n- dclic' uigu ^c, me' liona one ol h I own кл, could no luagei conced hu terror, but bulling into teati, and .o! bin э ь tlıouglı her heut would bıuk thin hci'cll it hu fcct, in I in the bitte lie's of aı uıllı, c]a-
" Oı fave ie, f ν, ι f. in 1 ıs (Hit —rekle mc fluii tus te.ll') ul Ce— ud indeed, indeed 1 1 ucu η к .me¬ nih tuiul m'' „'lu η M ibel, ·' w n the ι c own ιι и t Ic ι ml ne —ai I « - ι ι¬ ν I oild tbc c j ueii, leu,, j mil t t i , U, I , I eı 1 ; ,шЛе, „1 e , il ot ou ol tl b te uo'e ¡ ıc„ u С iL ',ι ut f ι ο doi ¡--ΙΊ ) c u ll r «hoi, b U 1 wo t n ľne, i 1 «.end ill, 1.1 ! 1)1
icquaint hım hk lufe of the bribe jou of¬ fered, to coırupt my honeflj." Mary Jmc, cvccffivc'j ahrmed, is Mibel wis iftualh on t ıe pjınt oflei ng hu tj put her th eit in foice, hdd hu fib t e apron, cscluming, or ııtnc fue -m i 0 — " Oil η η crev do not fend h m to m", mi f eu I do ι j lung you 1 1 n —L-t IU Otr t } >L О Oll sí] Пе J ' Г- ings— kl» Ille, L Ule li Ί 11 fi , ııul, ıs 1 < ι , nn ' tii br ıth (ir 1 bien κ ι bene tiel o ı ıj i k chiefs.' Γν ıbclsh ut ем fof'elicci , Ih I io!, u r b) the hm ', ι < ,cntly ıaııcel ııcı ıı jii her fect, is t i u t d— " Dei — Ml v u — e iv tl e i idik'/ hu e ош 1 telili ι ) 1 jit a lu i u, i eur held , nd inj n r, I kno , dotes u¡ on jou, md il jou ic ave «.md to Inni, il jou could „it jAl, you in¿lit Ini c u — W hi, tl iL
there was young M da ι 1 tl'l si nd- fLine 1 od) as vc tht 1 i ll u i, wl o ha tl ele я\ artmonts Uli, alivoli bioke her hea t when my madu told hu hc loved her no loi u, a If nt her ¡iaci mg abo it h r bu Is,— v h Ihev uld jui p oat of hei fieli to bc а ц) s j lu i ia b ' Mar« {inc, ( iure o ercome, fuik ι ito а ch u, uıd Ma) I, fei ι τ fh ias fd «ug, 1 a d t ) ρ ) ι laite ir 1 ( 1, VV I IL С 1[ J ) Ι l ! 1С ' , and h 0 ι cl t , u it ¡UC j iu c t lev с , h с
i u í t ι l e ob —1 ell oll ıt ılı I 1 ) u not I 1 1 e te e t 1110 1 1 Ii c t 1 with ι ν t. ι tj tl ι ιι ¡ilus ι Ι ju 1 1 jot I I ti cl la ie i d t a le l 1 t OL 1 ι
hive happe icei. Hoevever, keep your elf quiet, and I will get it for you now , fur, as the faj tng is, better late than never." Mabel then left lier, made a fire n tlıe driev ıng-room, and foon had the breief ft things in older , wh n Mary Jine took ι cup of colic, ind ate a fmall piece of t )aft, though it wis with much difficuhc 'hecoui I fwi'lo v L ther. Mabel, vvho lnd lite ' her nn " I n cunchoU cpiíl, on fi 'mg P) с uh' it no mor , id if d ' еГ, ıs hc (lili ce neo í nt ind c'cjccard, i Q ain to lie doe/n otte Ded " Aid ıs tır fıflcnııg eom t'ı r ! ,d ılı , s ııj Jı cee-s ıbnı ti) ι her aıluc , " 1 с ıı if ire e ι ther ıs no осе ι fioni« it, Ό 1 ll U tevı s ti le il it en ti ou ' n v ell, lot ι с ole cu COllle t") Ilteliipt OU IUI ıout llll I eV lcd 0 c, is 1 livv i) s c u j the ki j m my j 11 , ¡IOV-
hoivever, in that rc-ľpecíl you may do as you pícale, as you may in every otlier, ii'yoa aie not a linipleton." " If," replied Mary-Jane, " I may do as I pícale, without ofiı-.ldinç; you, I ihall ¡manine myfcif much more iccurc if í bolt Thefc- words w-;ra not hft upon Mahd, who, by the lull lady that had eccupL-d the chcnied— «¿avs you ¡uy ¡i.'.vi.«, but do as you pícale. — What it pity ti.at Inch a pretty, good-natured own Ii^Ih !~i e. .di 1 evas as young and as haiullenne as jt... are ; 1 a.Ture you Ì Ihould behave Leite t!i!','erent!y.—'let, there, lome ¡■.copie· don't kuow when thcy arc ivcll oil'." Mary-Jane having filkncd the door after her.
teiuled to 1 cr fi lends ' Once cc. Iiicc\cl m d," ι" tv 'l m ıılı ! u ilv ] 11 ve ι I h libe i I md t il -,ιι'ι , ι te ' jou 1 ι ι η )t th ι ι ) ιι ι J el v idi D e ,ι ι lifli¬ mi at I , t ' ai 11 ιι- ι η ııı tlılı ■) e ι , uıd ί Ί 1 11 еГ 1 1 le , it Ι j и .lb) a ι ι uv bl ue ι 1 Ull 'U III H с lut veh I, UL 11 С L lel 11, tht Ыс к η t и I eı i), il ι ll, lei 1 of ι 1 , tic о eoi eon 1 Ш ni 1С tu e le , , id ieel V Itici al l el 1, edel, aul [suil pj e j ι d i 1 ,— li to vint nny not tlıe ic ι ı 0 'u ι ι atu uute η j abiencc ' Iu
In ignies indefciib"! le flie threw heifelt uj on the bed, fiom w inch Ihc hi^dncier a 0 in« to nie. Tîarı lie, i f tcr hiiin^dtliicicd ^'Ίl) Jme lot eci of Mi ! w utid imi alienti) to lemi Iıı flıe le n d to i proie ol hel i¡ aiti ic its, tuni η tU brillunt md e\- ¡icifiit unner in ihith the) wcic fet fnth, ııou d cimce to ' r tlıe lıbenl off ıs lic ¡ud mide lici, uould flu but conlent to his lililíes, le lnd impe întins to fulfil, and induct he , ι ul els relucíame thi ι (lie lud hitherto dilphjed, to I fien to uhu furthu he night hive to pi opofe On * 'abel s rc.u n, lie wis bolh ! urt ird kuipi.fed to leirntl t ť e chlp ay ot lo much glitter lid mi b n licentt 1 d bee ι b) itr unnot ted, i d tint die (il lciiui eel ill ind ignited Hc defi cl fWabcI to pi¡ h r tien j ofliblc attenn n, tc lin = liti Itili uld iot ulit Mar)-Jant 1 1 tlf until the follow¬ ing
η·« ι' ıj, ι VnliL tiuitei lhe ivould Oe lettu in ¡1 aldı ip 1 fpıuts to lic 1 elun 1 the ıft ıi)Ol, 1 re vi, he 1» in in-
I l lìlll e l t h d ι Vi cl 01 Ie I l »c t ι ıe t ι ι ι lh ill el, ее Π 1 11 ied '' t Mı 1 ll e , VI 0, s a ■ thng ) Ill's эи d llic üiıbl I L ' evli ı i e 1 ufi led is lhe
1, I l'i ' , 1 bu ılı, eııiu.1 I 1 14 11 oı 1 luve uı ivmeli t) ι m t lit, wis iti cl cd it die I llllt ι , ι 1 litici vvıtlı lt, Mil I, lıovcvc , ir vent İhın Ij nloım- 11 1 nil tl it the d n' с I il te 11 e hich Jıcl d liftken h ,fhe ulij pj 111 ms ie eovclcd fldll, lud 1 duce 1 hl 11 to deier 111» intention unti tlien telt) j ie then nnde Mibcl ι huuli ne pi ic t foi li 1 iı e ıty, uıtl ıcllcılın 0 tiu Mu) Janes conduct wou'd aflord lnm 111 cxiule tn breiking 1 piomifc
poi fe I с never intended to keep, became pleafed that fueh an incident had occurred lu the evenuig M ibel uun faw Marj - J uie, whole pill d couitu ance evinced hci tone une 1ш 0 1 cl ι e, idle 1 than U e b ull cu m tl с ι шпц M ibel, ho vever, natwitlillaiidii = M y la ıc ihn mul ihc had ıu ıj petne, ml li ! cij ο i hu e iileivüuuiig tocat hme d nnu, mil iltu ait', ob'ic, d 1 cr lo Iw illow ι 0 1 to oi two ot e mc , ob- icmi = t'n ıl ılı coi ι 1 to fi I oıv her mllruciio is, ΙΙκ ) ι I o i b íl Maiy J me, ııı t evini ^ с m pl ι g of ι ν ю с it ¡ au ι ι ι ι ci' л 1 bel uh lied hır loundiels Ι, , ι a w nto ctırc to iell. " But nun 1, a 1 « ab 1 " it I ii id, by your a¡ ( en n c u tli u n «-, tlllt jou 1 ven t lud jou с ciliés о), 1 eildcpuve jou oi the itiviícgLOt ieeuiiii^ the door of j our apartment " This
1 lus menace had tlıe defired effeft , — Mibel oliënd to libit htr in undreffing, which, homier, Fvíirj Jane refuted, and M ibel left htr liaving mide ill r ecure, (lie lentured, as Alabil s thrtit ftill dwelt upon her nund to ılılrobc, in t once more tried to forget her troubles, and court the influence of tlie leaden god Marj Jme, fron the vim. ¡Vilbel hid forced htr to fnallow, ind from the e\* treme fatigue fli had undeigon , e^ojeel ¡г bitter n 0 lit thııı fıom tlıt fituation Ilıt nas ıı, mg t 1-ıc 1 tc ı 11, t tel, tlııt ι ıen Kub 1 lav her m llu* morning, I с hols b lpoke lur ti be muth better m ! talih th n Pie lnl b t ie icen her —M ibtl ï- 3 ellj percened th ilici mon, ind c%ult- ii 0 ly esclamili! — ** Well, now vou fee wlnt it is to bt n led by me—uhv, 1 low jou are not hie ıoı. I L the
the fame perfon,—but come, now we'll hai e lome breakfaft, and then 1 think you 11 bc quite recovered Mabel foon hid every tlung prepired for her, and defcended and informed lier mailer ofthe vifible change ш Mary-Jane, this wis glad tidings to him, and thanking Mabel for hei care of liei, and dropping afew more pieces of goid into her hind, he haftcned lo make her a vifit hunfelf Mary Jane, thougli flie cNpečled fuch in event, could not conceal her fear and abhor¬ rence of him as he entered, and as he ad¬ vanced towards her, flie dropped on her knees, and, m filent anguifli, more expref¬ live than words, betrajed her fcclin 0 s, winch in lnm, whofe heart «as liirdened with guilt, excited not one ping of compaflionating re- motfc that he hid been the occafion of her mifery, but miny of chfipi ointment and regret that (lie ftill continued lo inexorable, lo unchangeably rcfolved not to hilen to Ins bafe
bale offei s Ht, however, genti) rufed her upon her ftet, ind led her to a thair, then felting himfeif a flioit diftincc from htr, tcndtrl) urged liei to be compoled " Wh), Mifs Ridnull," fud hc, "will you ftill perfcvere in this inconfidente weak¬ nefs ? —why fo ciuftleffly alımı yourfelf?— "Vou knosv I have iolemnlj pledged my nord to reflore jou to your friends at the conclufion of ont fliort week, unltfs 1 can pici ul upon you to continue with me , and I ilattu myfelf tint, ere tin neck expires, yuu iiill mort trul) confider )our inttrtft, ι id einige the preftnt unlunu ble fenti— mints jou enttitun ut me, foi thofe of thinkfulncfs and lue' " Ixcver, iieiu ' fh fen lly tttı u i e !, " cidi new d ıj itili bı t , redi ct ι ìtnovit d pomon of d liftimi, uııpıthj, and dıl- t ıft, — neler uı 1 i beıonn thıl dıgcnırıle ıvıcitlı ı!ıuu ııoulchl luvt mt — \ ι eck to 1 1 wuhl eld iıom my fr t id, -Oh it will bt -n agt '- Oli ulut uı 1 th j think ol mt ' ' L 2 "R 111 Uil
" Remun here, and )ou have nothing to fcai,—eveiy Лиц this woild ean beftow to mike you hapı ) Hull be j rocuicd for )ou —give but j iui w Ilı s words, ini o ι tie wmgs of i| ec I thej fliail be grit fied ' " Oh ' no more i fult η e with luch ıb- liorred dilcourfe , m/ Ll «oil ehil s uıtlı hur- 101 as 1 am ob i B ed to lillen to it —A time willcome when thou ihalt vvnthc wth eoiy and ι enrol fc foi everj ]iemidiutcd fault thou haft coumittcl —Turn tic uc it t e too late, left an oflended God llioul i not hereafter alio ν thcc time foi repentance, but, m lus wrath, hurl thee into that pro found abjfs wh ic th) toinients ihall be eternal ' ' Mary Jane, as (lie uttered thefe wuids, arofe from her fett, lhe lpoke with ai un¬ ufual degree of energy, fnnincfs, aid feeling, the woids iflue 1 from hci h] s as bj divine infpiration, and reached the ears of the aftonifhtd and coi founded Bimlle who, awed by her manner, vie ved her as an angel of
of light fent from hcaien to rcproicli hım wuli lus iniquities , —he llıuddcıed as me¬ morj, in temblé aim, biought lib former ılrncıtıes before lus cj es, but quicklj oier- c lining theie unple il int emotions, ind ifliiniei ofhis wciknefs that could for ι moment jield to thun, he agun uiged his purpole but finding hci ftill more aı er e to hilen to lnm, he foon aftet withdiew, md Mtb.l idumed her [htion. Barville, notwithflinding whit hid pafiec', imagined that Mai j-Jane, iather than be kept a clofe prifoner for iny length of time, would eventually purchafe her liberty it a iy puce , at lead he was determined to try to lubdue her fortitude, ere 1 e proceeded to extremities. Tov ards the clofe of the fame dai, a pei¬ fon arrived at his houfc with a letter, which he told the footman who opened tho door for him, tlut he mull deliver ι to Mr Barville's hinds hunfelf, the footman ĺ 3 apprized
ippii/el Ьь mailer of it, and the ftranger in tonlequciice was conducted into the pal¬ loin u liLie Barville wis fi t í ing ilone, who, is h on is he fiw ll с nun, a deep blulh о crfjrcid his face, for hc remembered io la\L fien luin bcfoic it Bnghton, and the lively he wore lc kneiv to be Ridmilľs 1 le to к the letter and, to conceal Ins em¬ bai r iflmcnt, retired to the further put of the room to j crufe it, and, as he had con lefttned found it to be nutien bj Radmill Innfell, íl ıtıng the ludden dılappeaı ance of Muy Jane, and that it had been mtl nated to him that he was accelfarj to her flight, and begged he would fave his grey hairs nom delcen lmg to the grue with forrow, ind igun reflore her to him In fliort, the letter in« iltogether couched in terms that woud luve foítened any heart but one fo tompletclj deprived as Bimlle s, and have rufed the tear of coinmifciation to the eye , but in his it produced no fuch effeft—it merely pioved to him tl it Miry Jine could not remun in London with fo httle chinee of
of i difčovery is lie had 4t firft ipprchendcd lie, hoevever, as an anfwer was requited, LilLd for pen, ι ik, and paper, and wrote the following uords —
" sm, " 1 am extremely furpnfed at the contents of the Lpiftle 1 this day ıeceıved fiom jou, and, on the woid of a gentleman, atluu you that 1 was totally ignorant of every thing refpciling Mifs Radmill untili had peru 'ed it. 1 fincerely condole with you in the un- eafinefs fuch an unpleafant event muft have occafioned, but requeft you will not hefi¬ tate inftantly to inform me of the name of the perfon who has prefumed fo unjuftly to calumniate my charafter, that 1 may give lnm that chaftifement due to the diffemi- nator of a falfchood. " 1 am, &c &c. " FRAÎ.CI5 SARVILIE."
ι 4 Hiving
Hiving given this to the fere int, he de¬ puted, and liai ville difpitchcd Roevlmd to witch hull until he hid agim quitted I on¬ dói) He then b ave t iders to have Ins tnvet- hngciiin 0 c m rcidtncls, as he wis del 1- nuncd to I t off with Mar) J uic, to cards the old caille m Wales, the (une night, tl ere it would be impoffible, Iil imagined, lie fhould evu be dcteclcd, as it not only was too remote to diead it, but ver) fcv J с pie hneev thtt it ivas inhibited He then rung tte bell for Mabel, and bade her prepare Miry-Jane for the journey, and herfelf hkewtíL, as he intended Ihe fliould accompany them , but firfl to purchaic all kind of weai ing apparel for Mar) Jane, who hid left Brigliton in too gieat a huiry to have provided anj of thofe neceffanes foi herfelf. Mabel thus mfcruiled, ere flie informed Mir) Jane of the alteration file was about to expenence, vifited feveral (hops where fi l knee
knew (hecould fuit herfelf u ith the trticlcs flıe had occifion f r, rul) mul , ini, thoujit lhe to liei elf, if thcy ihould net quite (it the young lid), flic could remedy thit fault helfet ind her miller, (llenas ccrtiin, ivould piy lier libera I) foi her trouble. On ΛΙ ibiľs ain n, (lic h ifh ic 1 to f í ir) - fine ine! opened the i ι leí tole \ э ι did ılıe poi r gul uıı Io с her t ııhıı, у Ί ι , but ucll ki о in., 11 wou! I Lc in mn ' r hei lo ob eci comp!) 11 , 11 ftl iu foro vi ni 4 tlit ti 1 etl I ςιιι Ικ ι pirici I ut to «lat j hee lhe ms ¿ou 0 Inc к с οι Пои lini, uho In lı tın 1 id 11 ıııı ì li s miile tint lu Ind kc 1 Ruim I c u it I ile out of ton 11, hid bc I leiil t me с I I itched to procuie ieh)s ot h rl 0 cn lie roid When tlieciiin^c droiv t the пол the Ilidig 1 - ч· 14 f ,on iccurcd to it, 1111 tuo footmen, well aimed, on h íleo cl , ι ι ej 01 'с ι
ordered to follow as guards, when M ibel was defired to conduct Marj JanL to the coach. The melancholy image of defpair, flie foon after defcended the flurs, md wis feated in the carriage, Mabel and Barville amend¬ ing it after her, md, ere it drove from the door, 15 irv ilie iddreffed Mary Jane as fol¬ io vs — " Now, Mifs Radmill, the fame conduct I required of jou on a fimilar occafion, 1 im under the neceffity of commanding tl it jou it piefent obferve if you obey me, and purfue not wlnt I hive interdicted, at the conclufio ι of the vv ck, the promife I have n ade to you l will fulfil, until then you muft fubmit to bc governed by me Mirj ]inc replied but vv 'h a deep figli, ι id they vvere foon after out of Ight of I о idon
To
Го enumerate the puticulus of their journey ivould prove tedious and unintereic- ìng, as nothing worthy of moment occurred , ani tovards the evening of the next dav, having tnielled with all poffible expedition, and meeting with no obilacles to retird thetr piogrcfs, the mouldering turrets of the old caille met then view Miry Jine fhudilcrcd is flie fixed her cj es on the gloomy el lice, and hilf ftupificd b) fear, is the carrn 0 e proceeded m ι cli— rečlioi towirds it, Ihe enqunec, if that was tlieir definition. " Fven fo,' replied Bimlle, "but if you diiipprove it, )ouhaie but to iccédé to my former propofals, ind tlic horfes heads (liall inftantly be turned towards London ' Mary-Jane fi d no more, and foon ifter, pile, and ilmoft infenfible to whit was piíľ- ing about her, was led into the building
Ro« hnd
Row lind had been there fonic Iiours ert the) uinet!, md lud much furprifed oltl Duuflin uit! Ins wifi IVIiriln, who lnd the care of it, as thty lit»le es\ ečlcd lucii a Vílit , ! e, houcvei, Icon infoimed them tint h s milici, и cl part of the trnul) , nouki quid lj be lhue likenifc ind aflifted them in kindim^ lues, ind Inving ever) thing m tie rtfptctivt apntment5 it idy foi theu reception Mat сь lung enrr'o tibi) tinined, R) indic in to interioéuti Dimilin ho v ! e ippruitd of ins fıtuıt л« " ( h mím nel!, hc «-tp let!, " t! o i 0 h t ic 1 i )t b 11 living foul hcie, lile *' rl il mi feli, fina, jou let us I 1 и ıı fric Is tuit lue uouf f ч mil s et, th it would noev ι id then i, end m 1 our ulo with mt, but thcy hai с got a ftringe 1 int! oi 1 notion into thur I cads that ihc t i İt ıs h luııtıd, intl ire afraid to come i uı», md tlio _ 0 Ι Ι „ι e oiten toid them
ıt ıs no fuc'ı tlıuı » tl.ej v on t t chcvc ınc Го be fuie the h-ieceh o I m к s 1 dilimi ııoılc, nov uıd then upon the rott n btttlc- ments of the uninhibited [inst' it, hut i ncvei go theie ,—lid thouji Mutlu and 1 wcic a 1 1 le fnghtened ι fii l, ı e ire uled to fuch nones noev, and don t nu cl them ı lluv PeOevland commcrc 1 1 in loi Ί u υ! - tıoıı, md lu chutní, euh hun ıı 1 M tha until the fmuk of t pc t d ' hi, un¬ formed them of tlıeı maft ι s ippoici.
kHO Ol VOI,, t.
