Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Don Raphael: a romance
DON RAPHAEL.
CHAPTER I. The Heavens are juft »nd hate impiety, And will (no doubt) reveal fuch heinous crimes: Cenfure not any, till you know the right : Let him be judge, that bringeth truth to light. Old Plays. X HE fight of a man in the chamber of her. father, at that unufual hour, and /land¬ ing almoft over him, with the lamp in one hand and a dagger graiped in the other, ftruck her at once with the той horrible apprchenfions ; and uttering a cry of fear, (he attempted to throw herfelf between me and the bed, when her foot flipping, ihe would have daihed her head againft the frame of the bed, had not I fuddenly V0L · ". в leaped
о
leaped to fave her, in doing which, I trod upon the lamp that had fallen from her hand. I caught her with one arm, and ftretching out the other with an involun¬ tary impulfe to fave myfelf, I ftruck the unfortunate Don Raphael with his own dagger. My foul was agonized with horror at this terrible accident. I ihould inftantly have plunged the fatal weapon into my own breaft, had not the cries of Cornelia, and the groans of her father, called me from the miferable and íelíiíh fuggeftions of defpair. I threw the dagger from me with a vio¬ lence which made it penetrate the oppoiite wall, and railing Cornelia, I flew to affift Don Raphael. He was wounded in the breaft, and the blood flowed profufely. No words of explanation could be fpared. 1 lifted the lamp, which was near expiring upon the floor, and gave it to Cornelia, who, pale as the corpfe of a departed nun, ftood зл almoft lifelefs horror, while I en¬ deavoured
3
deavoured to bandage the wound, which from the nature of my fall, was in a floping direčlion, and though eonfiderable, did not appear to me to be deep. "Oh God!" exclaimed I, when 1 had made an end of this terrible office, " who would have thought of this !" I turned my eyes upon Cornelia, who ftood with very little appearance of life. I looked upon the pale countenance of Don Raphael, who appeared faft approaching diifolution, and madnefs feemed gathering upon me. î felt as if I had been at once the murderer oi'both father and daughter. (( It was well—it was well," repeated Î, without knowing what I uttered. ({ It was not without reafon Don Raphael denied my entrance into his fociety. His fore¬ boding fpirit, penetrating futurity, read in me the caufe of his death. О Cornelia, beloved objeci of my foul's beft choice, am I to approach your heart through the bo¬ fom of your father ? Kill me not with looks like thefe, I am already diílračied. Would в « that
4
that I could for ever fiy from this leene ; but while memory remains, it will crowd upon me." I gmfped her hands between mine, ga¬ zing wildly in her frighted cuuntcnacc. where mingled appreheníions pourlnned a meaning ftie had no language to utter. 4 * How dreadful is this," eried L glancing alternately from the daughter to the father, who lay without power of fpeech. ** Shall I not lofe you for c\cr. I cannot, cannot think of parting in this fituation, and л et infurmountablc neceftity requires me hence. Cornelia, you know how I love you. But a moment, and we ihall never meet again. But is not this moment left me to lead you hence. Fly with me, let ns feek fome far diftant abode." As I pronounced thefe incoherent ex¬ preifions, I attempted to draw her from the bed-fide, but this acìion recalled the fenfe of her fituation to her bewildered mind, and ihe ftruggled with indignation to efcape. « My
5
** My fiither was right," cried ftie bunt¬ ing into tears. '* (> what a creature h man î fnfidioiis and humble in his approaches : but terrible when he has the power ; Leave me, Lorenzo; leave me to die here with my father." ** You deftroy me ;" cried I. " You rend mv foul with agonv î —Leave vou here to die with your father; whom I have---- Great heaven ! thîb is too much. You muft abhor mc, Cornelia : I will remain and die with you, for I have no longer defìre to live." She gazed upon me ivith a look of the moft tender expreffion. " Ah, Lorenzo," faid ftie, fpeaking through her tears, " how greatly wretched has this ftrange bufinefs made us. By what way could you enter this chamber, and on what occafion could you come?" " Your words," replied I, prejudge me, and touch me with grief: this is not a moment for explanation. Your father is too probably on the verge of life. His в 3 wounds.
ii
\мтыК which i haie bound up, have re- due«. d him to the Lift ftage of weaknefs. We we bere hr from hunion aki, and beiore I cot, ¡d fend from Leon, Don Raphael w ili no longer require relief ; whit then тми be<ome of vou? Shall von be left expofed to all the borrors of fuch a fituation, and the danger of thk foreft, \*here malignant and mifchie\ous fpirits are abroad," * I ha\e no dread of thefe," replied ihe; my father has taught me otherwife." * í mean not of immaterial beings; I fpeak of men." ·* Too true î —Too true ľ' cried flie, with a look of dejection. "Man is the being I i'uel 1 ought to have dreaded moft, and whom I will in future avoid. I conjure л ou to depart. I muft fetch an elixir I have too long delayed, and which my ter¬ ror caufed me to forget. My father charged me to remember its ufe, and this is the miferable moment to try its power."
I took
#
I took a long look at Don Raphael, whofe e\es were clofed, and who breathed fo weakly, that 1 had no doubt in my own mind of his rapid diflblution. 1 accom¬ panied Cornelia to the libran', where flie felecled the elixir ihe had mentioned, of whofe efficacy I had little faith. The moment drew near that was to determine my fate; when I muft either leave Cornelia and her father in their un¬ certain and expofed fituation, or for ever abandon all my projecls in life, and what was to mea thoufand times more infuffer¬ able, be branded with infamy, and if taken, condemned for defertion. The paflions of honour and of love, were in counter array within my bofom, and each in turn arofe fo violent, that oppo- fition appeared vain. I wiflied to detain Cornelia that I might fay every thing which crowded for utterance, but the fitu¬ ation of her father would not permit delay. I trembled at the thought that he might even then be expiring, under the agonizing в 4 refleciion
ci
reflection, that his daughter had deferted his d) ing bed The ctò at this moment itrutk four; 1 turred at the fummons for my depanure. î reflecied, that to ftav would render my own wiihesaboni\e; my fate feemed determined, and preffing the hand of the trembling maid to my bps, and mv bofom, " Go/* cried 1, as a miniftering * - J с angel, l£ go—may you cam' peace and blefling to the couch of) our father. What¬ ever ihall be my future fortune, dear Cor¬ nelia, forget me not.'* She moved away too much agitated to reply; and fearing to truft the imbecility of my refolution, i immediately left the li¬ brary, and following the paflages i had be¬ fore traverfed, with fome difficulty 1 gained the open and ruined part of the building, taking care to clofe every door behind me. It was yet dark when I entered upon the foreft; the breath of morning was begin¬ ing to move, and the mills which hung amongft the boughs, to difperfc before the coming day. I ftole
9
I ikoL· wàh cautious, yet rapid fleps. along the winding paths, wet ^ith dew ; tbe cliarras of fiatune had no power to touch m\ ìmagimatìon ; my thonsrhts were all inverted upon my felf. and tbe objecb I had left behind ; and the foft breathing -of fhe air drew fremi me many a figh. ï mo\ed on as by inftinci, to the foot where i had attached my mule ; and had it been day. 1 ihould doubtlefs have lingered in the grove, wnere every objeci would have reminded mc of Cornelia; but a deep ţdoom now refted upon the thicket, and a dark vapour curled upon the furface of the ftream. 1 quitted the fpot with the fame melan¬ choly as a man going on a long exile, would quit his native ihore, abforbed in my reflections, and unmindful of the way. The day broke, the blue clouds of night pafl'cd away beyond the mountains, and the fun arofe, diifufmg gladnefs over many lands;.but its beams could not penetrate the night within my foul, nor diffufe one в 5 cheering
10
«beer mg reflection ikmigb tke tio«ds of misfortune whi< h hung asO<w«.«d me í kkhzbt »of btw k>ng 1 rode t thus, en- ъ rapì m melancholy thougfob. whrn ï wjs fuddenh roufed by the diiunt пшпЬЬпц of a d ruin. I paufed ; a ft rai n of martial mufic írok through the air ; ав4 as the I о un d ca iii e nearer and gre^ louder, it м- h rated o\ermv nenes % ith an effect, fuch ль I hadne\er before experienced. It was a fen fa tion of exceflhe, yet me- lanchoK pleafure; itwas a language which }>cnerratcd my whole exiftence with fome¬ thing fuperior to articulate expreftion. I paufed, I fighed, I wept, and was loft in a tranfport ofmingled mifery and delight. When I awoke from the delirium of high ftretched feeling, the rougher notes and loftier ftrains drew near ; the rolling drum thundered diftinctly, and my nerves reco¬ vered their tone. An innate fenfation of fliame tinged my cheeks, and my heart began to beat with firmer pu İfa tions. I recalled my fcattered
Il
fcattered ¿dea^- and hafteTîed ta joui the lesion* that were advancing α I or g tbc rasé. ï knew not uhat e.xcufr ï сочк! male to the Buke, and bthen be came near mc. ' (иг 1 had to pafs ro the тешт / I turned m\ rves to the ground, my confuí ion depri¬ ving me of wordi ; he fmiled aï m v cm- barraffment, and pointing to m v fituation. ** You ^iìl learn İK'tler' faid he, * in a Ik- tic time/' 1 hatlene«! to aflume тл ibtion, determining in my own mind, that future \igilancc fhoukl repair my prefent neglect. Our march was through a countrv, very partially enlivened with agriculture : the brown fterility of the paltures fuited the difpofition of my mind, arul was indeed but too proper a prelude to thofe feenes of devaftation and diftrefs we were quickly to witnefs." It was many days before we reached Balbaftro, on the river Linea, which takes its rife in the Pyrenees and runs into the Ebro.
Î2
L bro ît was from this town that we took the ftVid and entered upon active fervice. If is natural to luppefe, that however exterior objects might engage me, or the 'neceftluy duties of my ibtion require m\ attention, that ail my leifure moments and midnight thought·» were directed to Cor¬ nelia and Don Raphael ; and when I re- iiecled on the defperate fituation i left ihem in, and the utter impoffibility of pro¬ curing any information, iiefpondency prc\cd upun my fpirits, and I had no en¬ joyment of mv exiftence. The nature of my employment was ill calculated to give peace to the mind ; the whole province of Catalonia was in arm«. Shall I, my dear Count, draw a veil over their fufierings? are you already acquaint¬ ed with the miferies of a wretched people, opprefled by a licentious military, and to fay the leaft, an imbecile Governor ? Shall I paint to you the famine which the free foraging of the foidicry had created ; the diftrefs, the diftraciion, and deftruciion which
IS
%hkh every where тж$ the eye - Young woeaen and chtMren ^ruling for i*am T the fubject* of outrage to their unfeeling oppreftbrs ! But no—I fee your blood riles jt thefe things, and 1 will bun them in filence. The outrages of warfare, and particu- larK of mil difcard, are too terrible for cool narration ; they cannot be heard without horror—they are the ultimatum οΐ human paftìon bearing boundlefs fway, and rioting in ail the demoniacal phrenzy \*hich the dark principle of evil can fug¬ geft or purfue. Reafon, juftice, and reli¬ gion are trod down, and man becomes to his fellow a more dreadful curie, than all the difeafes floating on the earth s furface. Great God, what are the feenes I have wit- nefifcd, and which thou alio haft beheld ? but thy forbearance prevented thy ftretch¬ ing forth thine arm, and fweeping from exiftence the whole fpecies of mankind. During the winter, I was more than once engaged in light íkirmiíhcs with knots
14
knots of the diCaftWIrd» in ail of nhkh they were defeated, after the moft obftinste refitfønce ; and notwithftanding tbe freib hopes the fudden revoh of Portugal, and the ferret aftiibnee of France infpired in them, it was eaíy to percebe they would find it impoffible to make head againil rhe torrent of forces Philip poured upon them, from every quarter of the kingdora. The unexpected prvolution, effected İn the name of the Duke of Breganza, how¬ ever it roufed the dormant energy' of our Sovereign, it did not appear in bis eyes, of equal moment with the fubjugation of Ca¬ talonia ; and every effort was made to open the campaign in the fpring, with fo much decifion, as fliould crufli at once the in¬ trigues of France, (ever bufy in promo¬ ting mifchief,) and ihortcning the fuffer- ings of a people, who, whatever they might have endured beneath the preifure of an ill chofen Governor, had now plunged themfelvcs into tenfold mifery.
My
15
My own private ittisibrtyjies fed me more partkufarly to fee! thofe of others ; and it was now in aciuai fenrict\ that the pageantry and glitter of military parade faded in my efteem. I fighed for the juve¬ nile retreats of my early years; the íhaded alleys, and the folemn cloifters, where the cbng oí anns never founded, and the cry of murder never pierced the ear. I wondered at that infatuation, which before my entrance on aclive fervice had in¬ duced me to pant foran opportunity of ac¬ quiring fame, and difttnguifhing myfelf on the lift of heroes. In a word, 1 became en¬ tirely difgufted with my fituation, for na¬ ture had not förmednie to delight in war. it was now near a twelvemonth that I had not received any fupply from thofe who had regarded my early youth, and fe- lecied this ftation for my adoption. I had never received from them any one token of recognizance or efteem, and I conceived myfelf wholly emancipated from obligation, and without any controlli upon my aciions. It
16
It was true I had no other dependence than my fituation, yet my difguft every day increafed, and when my thoughts turned upon the caftle of St. Helma y I was more than once on the point of facrificing e\ erv future prof peci, that 1 might reftore and fattòfy the fears which for ever haunted me, and deftroyed my repofe. It was impoffible to fly from my ftation, from any motives of private feeling; 1 had put m\ hand to the plough, and there was no turning back. Count Pandolfo was alfo unremitting in his attention to my aciions, and he feemed to' overlook them with a fpecies of jealoufly,which defired todifcover an error ; at times he would treat me with the greatefi familiarity and confidence, and then he would fink into coldnefs and ne¬ glect, nearly bordering upon contempt. This treatment was far from gaining either my refpect or efteem, though felf- love induced me to emulate appearing in his eyes fuperior to others in my fttuation. I endeavoured to trace this behaviour to its
17
its fource. î knew not by what invifible coajteŕtioa he was amanced to me, though I certainly fuf peeled ¡тот various incidents. that if any man knew the fecret of my birth, it was he. I confidered that Ippo¬ lita might have influenced him againft me, and ftimulated him to a\enge the flights I had thrown upon her; but 1 knew not that ihe had quitted Leon, having never feen her fince the morning of my departure to Dajos. Be the caufe what it might, it was fufficient to render my fituation painfully irkfome, had my mind been free from other cares, or at leifure to humour all the caprices of this ever variable man. The benumbing powers of winter foft¬ ened into the balmy breathings of fpring» and nature waking from the arms of fteri¬ lity feemed to call on man to enjoy the beauties flie expanded to his view; but with what difterent fentiments were the paffions of the people infpired. Every preparation for warfare was made, and it feemed as if reft had given new ap¬ petite
m
petííe m vengeance. An accident prevent¬ ed my partakiii^ í» Ae gloríes of Ae cam¬ paign, rifili completely Шеа шр tfee таеа- fure of mv difguii againft the employ¬ ment to fehttiı I was confined. The Count appomted me a detachment» v*hh wfiichi wa^ to peiieixafe fåe country, and collect a ãepòt of forage a* a finali \iilage near UrztL For two áã\% the country round wm hád under reqiiiiition, and even' article whieh could be converted into human fu#e»snee was carried off or deftroyed ; it being the command of our generate, that a partial fa¬ mine fhould be created to ftibdue thofe» whom the force of arms touki not reach, î had no power to difobey thofe owiers, and I lamented that the ferocity of the com¬ mon foldiers even outran the commands of their officers; they feemed to take pecu¬ liar delight in acis of outrage and cruelty. The thirmefs of the inhabitants at this poor part of the province, did not render the fervice very dangerous, having only to guard
19
w-uard atrmmû any ferret umre, which the revenue of Ле people might with too much jttüice рттщ* It was evening when I was returning from femu§ a İmali and fecret liore of com, mtm Ave foldters aud a waggon, when a bitó cry from fom« littk dilbnee attracted my attendo». I immediately turned my horfe, aed purfued the path which led m a imai! ftream, bordered by a thicket, firom whence die cries continued with increafed violence I ruihed forward, and the found of my approach giving the alarm, I was too late to prevest the efcape of a wretch, who kid committed one of the moft ihocking acts of barbarity I had witneífed. The firft objeci I perceived waa a little boy lying upon the ground, drenched in blood, and feemingly dead ; near him was a young girl about fourteen, bleeding v iolently from a cut acrok the forehead. I difmounted at fuch a horrid fight, and haftening to the girl, defired her to tell me
'20
me infiantSy what was become of the nwwiler who had been guilty of fo in* fomous an ail of wanton cruelty. She pointed to a narrow path, winding along the banii of the ftream, and fo much was my vengeance roufíed, diat not waiting to stremi the poor creature, who might have cied from thb neglect, 1 wns mounting to fiy after the villain, when the clattering of horfe» behind, and the voices of men, ahrmed me formy own fafety, fearing ï had füllen into an ambufcade. Fortunately it was three of my own men, who had left the waggon to the care of their comrades, and come forward to partake in my danger. „ ťŕ Purfue that path/* cried I, pointing the way. if Seize whoever you meet, and de¬ tain them. They galloped orf at the word, and once more difmounting, I endea¬ voured to relieve the wounded girl, in¬ quiring of her the nature of the outrage ihe had fuftered. She informed me, that her parents lived at about half a league diftant, along the banks
2i
banks of the rivulet. That the\ had been ftripped of all their provifions by a party of fix rebels, who had feverely beaten her father becaufe he would not J€»in them. Bein«: left without food, and in thefe calami¬ tous rimes not knowing where to procure ain. fhe had left the cottage u ith her little brother, to fee if the) could find any thins to eat, their father being ill in bed of his bruifes. They had been at a convent at fome diílance, where thev had received fome coarfe bread, and were returning, when thev were met bv a man dreffed in the rebel uniform, who had led them into the thicket, under pre tence of giving them fome provifions he had there. But thev had no fooner entered than he knocked down the boy with а finali fword, which he wore in a belt, and began to ítrip the girl, with other acis of violence^ repeatedly ftriking her, till ihe was fo overcome, that though flie continued to feream, he was on the point of completing hi?, brutality, when he was alarmed at the found of my approach ;
ΟΟ
approach; and in the rage of his di (ap¬ pointment, he had cut her over the fore¬ head, being in too much hafte to fly to take a certain aim. Such was the fubftance of this tranfac- tion; which the poor girl related with tears and pau fes, and which 1 filled up w ith vows, of vengeance on the head of this wretch, if he \%as taken. The fituation of this girl aroufed all m\ compaflion. She was fo feeble, and unabic to ftand, that 1 doubted whether I fliould be able to con¬ vey her alive to her iather's cottage. The boy was quite dead with a deep wound on the head; and ha\ ing placed his fifter on my horfe, I mounted behind, fupporting her in my arms; and it being by this time quite dark, I had fome difficulty in tracing the path that led by the river. My horfe, which was fomewhat high- blooded, becoming tired of the curb, gaл с figns of uneafinefs, and beginning to cur¬ vet, his foot flipped in the narrow path, and he fet ofl* at Ml fpeed. It was with difficulty
о 5
difficulty 1 could preferve my charge from falling. We quickly drew near the cot¬ tage, at the door of which 1 could per¬ ceive a light, and feveral people were round it. I endeavoured to ftay my horfe, but he was not to be managed \%ith one hand, and I was obliged to pals the cottage. The peafant, who had left his bed, and ftood at the door with his wife, and two other women, anxiouily looking out for the children, feeing their daughter thus forci¬ bly hurried away, by they knew not whom, fet up at once a loud cry, and at the fame moment I found myfelf wounded in the flioulder by a piftol the diftracled father had fired. The fmart of the wound cave mc ftrength to rein-in the horfe, and turning round in anger, I ruihed towards the cot¬ tage. The peafant flew to meet me with a large knife in his hand; and notwith¬ ftanding his weaknefs, his defpair gave him fufficient ftrength to wound me feverely in the
24
lhe arai, without my having any means of defence, my fword being entangled in the garments of his daughter, who lay without fenfe upon my left arm. 1 knew not that I had ever been in fuch evtreme danger; my words being of no ¿nail to appeafe the man; whom injur), and the fpedacle of his bleeding daughter, ftimulated to actual madnefs.—He foamed at the mouth with rage; and while the wo¬ men rent the air with cries, he attempted to wound me mortally, which 1 could only prevent by clafping his daughter more firmly in my arms: as it was, he cut me feverely in feveral places, and throwing him¬ felf at me, more like a beaft of prey than a man, he would, doubtlefs, have deftroyed me, had not, fortunately for me, and to clofe this fad adventure, three of my troopers, alarmed by the piftol they had heard, rode full fpeed to the fpot in doubt for my fafety. When feeing my fituation, by the light from the door, they took no time to wait for orders, but milling upon the un¬ fortunate
25
fortunate peafant, laid him dead in a mo¬ ment beneath my horfe's feet; and it was with the greateft difliculty I reftrained them from putting the women to the fword, and burning the cottage to the ground. Such are the nature and events of civil war, where it is impoffible to diíliiiguiíh juftice, and where often acts of generofity are terminated by the moit finitici* events. My wounds were extremely painful, bleed¬ ing profufeîy, which fo much weakened me that 1 could fcarcely fit my horfe. 1 delivered the girl to her friends; and not flaying for explanation or thanks, i de·* manded if the men had fucceeded in difco- covering the villain. They informed me they had been beating about, and had juft got a glimpfe of a man ikulking amongft the bullies at the edge of the water, when they had been called off' by the report of the piftol to attend to my fafety. <s Lead on then, my bra\e fellows/* cried I, ' ( if this man efcapes, we have but с half
26
half done our duty." We extended our line, riding brifkly down to the water's edge. A fudden plunge engaged our attention, and perceiving a man fwimming acrofs the ftream, I immediately daflied after him, with no little imprudence, but my fpirits had been roufed, and I confidered nothing but to make an example of this- wretch. I was up above the faddle in water before ï reached tbe other fide, wehere I found him juft landed ; and finding it impoftible to efcape, he begged on his knees for quarter. My men landed at the fame time, and fecuring his hands behind him, they threw him over one of the horfes, and we returned to the baggage waggon. Provi¬ dence had determined to take the puniih¬ ment of this villain off our hands; the horfe of the trooper who carried him taking fright, he was thrown head-fore- moft over the battlements of a bridge, and daihed in pieces down the rocks. By the time we readied the village, I was fo faint and ftiŕľcned, with fitting fo long
27
long, wounded and wet, that I had no power to difmount, and I was obliged to be carried into the inn where I lodged, mâ put to bed. A furgeon immediately at¬ tended me; the wound in my Shoulder was confiderably irritated and inflamed, ■ and itwas confidered hazardous to attempt the extraction of the ball, till thefe unfa¬ vourable fymptoms ftiould fubfide. The agitation I had fuftered, and the * incidents I had witneífed, preífed upon my fpirits; and now that I became con¬ fined to bed, where I had leifure to furu¬ mon every unpleafing incident into view—the fubjeci became too power¬ ful for fi.lferance, and a fever preyed upon my fpirits. It was not long belore ï ceafed to be confeious of pafting tranfačiions, and while war fpread devouring flames around me, an eternal and unquenchable fire preyed within me. In this fituation, at a mifera¬ ble inn, I lay, the object of pity, and ex- peciing diifolution. The buftle of war с 2 prevented
23
prevented much delicacy of attention, and I muft have funk beneath the com¬ plication of my diforder, had not the vi¬ gour of my conftitution been aflifted by the kindnefs of thofe whom I know not.
СНЛР.
29
CHAP. Ib
İT was feveral days that I lay deprived of reafon, and when the firft faint glimmer¬ ings of underftanding broke upon this frightful night, I was bewildered by the obiecb that furrounded me. I had not the fmaileft recollecìion of any thing that met my fight. I taxed my memory, but no trace could lead me to judge of my fituation, and I had only a very confufed recollecìion of the adven¬ ture .which involved me in thefe circum¬ ftances. No perfon near me moved, and when I raifed my eyes, I was aftoniihed at the ele¬ gance of the furniture, and the hangings that adorned the walls. с 3 I lay
so
I lay fome time in a fort of pleafing wonder, almoil believing that what I be¬ held was the lively impreffion of a dream. It was not long before I again fell aileep, and w hen I awoke, the evening fun ihone through the windows, with a golden ray, tempered by the mildnefs of the fpring. A fweet perfume of flowers entered the !attice> which was open, and I raifed my¬ felf to enjoy the freihnefs of the air, as it breathed through feftoons of jeifamine and fcented clametis. My wonder every moment increafed at the objecìs which met my eyes, but much more when I looked towards the window, and beheld two ladies elegantly robed in black, fitting in the balcony. One of them had her back towards me, and the other was leaning in a penfive attitude, contemplating the extenfive country before her. The profile of her face, as íhe thus fat, was inimitably beauti¬ ful, and touched with fo much thoughtful- nefs and delicacy, that my heart muft have been
31
been inftantly captivated, if it had not been already charmed by the innocent and beautiful Cornelia. The eyes of this lady were half clofed, as in deep medita¬ tion ; and not a paillon that was allied to roughnefs, had impreifed one trait of ex¬ iftence in her penfive countenance. Her hair was modeftly concealed beneath an antique, and clofe-fitting head-drefs; and had the been in an appropriate fituation, I fliould have believed her a nun, in the aci of devotion at theihrine of fome favoured faint I gazed upon her with a fenfation of refpecì and admiration. Divinity, thought I, is impreifed in thy features ; refignatioiiji piety, and meeknefs mingle in thy counte¬ nance. Cornelia is beautiful, ihe is the only objeci I do or pan love, but thou art of Celeftial birth, and I am tempted to adore. I found it imponible to withdraw my eyes from this fafcinating objecì. Surely, thought I, I am yet an inhabitant of the world, for I fee and feel as formerly; but may we not в 4 retain
32
retain our fenfes in the world of fpirits? Muft not the objecìs of our regard and de¬ light have fome affinity to human paffions, or is it that the foul takes upon itfelf new impreffions and new defires? Some motion that I made as thefe reflec¬ tions paífed in my mind, attracied the at¬ tention of the ladies, and ftarting, they looked round with pleaiing furprize at the fudden turn my ilinefs had taken. The lady, whofe features I had not be¬ fore feen, entered my room by the Vene¬ tian lattice, and coming towards me, made many tender inquiries after my health, in a tone of voice, that was even more pleaf¬ ing than her folicitude. She was apparently turned of forty, but her features and figure retained much of beauty, and much of elegance ; particu¬ larly when her eye fparkled with the ex- preifion which frequently, though for ihort intervals, lighted up the melancholy of her countenance, like the breaks of fiin¬ iinne
33
filine through the clouds of an autumnal day. I inquired by what means I had become the fubjeci of her care; and learnt that the royal army had been obliged to retreat, and concentrate its force at a diftance from the village where I had remained, and that with fo much confufion and fpeed, that I had been left to the hofpitality of the people at the inn ; who, though they confidered me as an enemy, had been fo charmed by my behaviour in the unfortunate adven¬ ture which expofed me to their mercy, that they interefted themfelves in my fa¬ vour, and circulated the ftory. It foon, reached the lady and her daughter, who fearing the rebel army might not re¬ ftrain the impulfes oí civil vengeance, had me conveyed beneath their roof, where I had lain for ten days with very few fymp¬ toms of life. This lady' alfo informed me, with many fighs, that her huiband, the Marquis de Mirandula was unfortunately engaged с 5 in
34
in the provincial forces, leaving herfelf and her daughter Chriftiana, in all the anxious uncertainty fuch a fituation muft neceíľa- rily infpire. It might be, that never having received attention and fervices from female affec¬ tion, the words of the lady were to me pe¬ culiarly pleafing, and acled as a balm in tranquillizing my mind. Her care and her attention were as efficacious as the pre- fcriptions of the phyfician, and I was never more fatisfied, than while I liftened to her voice, and received oifices from her hands. Her daughter Chriftiana every day paid me a vifit in the company of her mother, and I muft acknowledge, there were mo¬ ments when I thought Cornelia her un¬ equal ; but then ï recollecied that I had never had an opportunity of obf erving the mind of the latter, which might be lefs poliihed, though not lefs excellent. The one poffefíed all the charms of nature, her fentiments flowed from the native inno¬ cence of the human mind, unrefined and unrontrouled
35
uncontrouled by the dicìates of prejudice or cuftom ; the other was improved by all the refinements of education and fentiment, and was preferved in the path of virtue and honor, by the ftricieft rules of pro¬ priety, and the moil exalted principles of piety. I found infinite pleafure in the conver¬ fation of Chriftiana, her remarks being ele¬ gant, and her fentiments the moll refined. It is certain that had I feen her before my paffion for Cornelia had fo fully taken pof- feffion of my foul ; I fliould not have be¬ held her with indifference, as it was I did not behold her with indifference; I felt for her the moil fincere efteem, which could only be removed a few degrees from love. I lamented the vifible grief which preyed upon both thefe amiable women, and which 1 endeavoured to difperfe, by being as cheerful in their prefence, as my own misfortunes would allow me. In a ftiort time ï was capable of enjoying the open air, every day paíľmg fome hours in
36
in an elegant garden, attached to the man¬ íion, where 1 had the pleafure of obferving the opening fpring; and I felt new life cir¬ culate through my л eins. My thoughts were perpetually recurring to the caftle of St. Helma : my anxiety after the fate of Cornelia and her father became every day ftronger, and poifibly aíľecied me more, as I had no particular engagements to divide my attention. The Ladies frequently attended me, and not feldom attempted to draw from me fome explanation of the chagrin which was but too vifible on my features: but the uncertainty of my birth, and the po¬ verty of my fortune, were fecrets which I did not like to difclofe. To their intereft- ing inquiries I returned general anfwers, fufficient to inform them that I was parti¬ cularly unfortunate ; and more than once J perceived a tear glitter in the eye of the mild and gentle Chriftiana, which gave n the moft exalted opinion of the delicacy of her mind ; and was a ftrong teft of the paflion
37
paffion I felt for Cornelia, which ftood un- ihaken againft fo much merit. Love is perhaps a difeafe of the human mind, for under its influence the fmaileft trifles become objecìs of importance; and whatever reminds us of the objeci beloved is contemplated with pleafure. At fo great a diitance from Cornelia, I was frequently fo abfurd as to addrefs fpeeches to her, as I rambled through the gardens of the Mar¬ quis ; and it was in one of thofe moods I compofed thefe lines, without reflecting that ihe would never fee them :— REMEMBER ME. A BALLAI». 1 Remember me, when, far away, I journey through the world's wide wafte ; Remember me at early day, Or when the evening fliadows hafte. When high the penfive moon appears, And Night, with all her {tarry train, Gives reft to human hopes and fears; Remember—I alone complain.
Remember
38
2 Remember me, whene'er you figh, Be it at miduight's filent hour ; Remember me, and think that I Return thy figh, and feel its pow'r. Whene'er you think on thofe away, Or when you bend the pious knee, Or when your thoughts to pleafure ilray, О then, dear Maid, remember me ! * Thefe fimple lines I wrote upon a flip of paper, as I fat in a little alcove, and was fo much pleafed with them, that I forgot the paper and left it behind me on the feat. I returned in a very few minutes, but they were gone ; either blown away by the wind, or as I had afterwards occafion to fufpeci, taken away by Chrifliana, whom I faw haftily tripping along a diftant walk. It was long fmce the ladies had received information from the Marquis de Miran¬ dula ; and fo many various reports were every
39
every day circulated, that it was impoffible to know what to believe. One day we were informed that the royalifts had been defeated, and the next day we were under conftant alarm, from the report that the provincialifts had been routed, and were flying in every direction, plundering and burning in their flight. This uneafinefs of mind retarded my perfect recovery, notwithftanding the at¬ tention I received from thefe ladies, who feemed to regard me with even relative affection, and to look forward to the hour of reparation with regret. Donna Chriftiana was more referved on this fubject than Lady Sempronia, her mo¬ ther : and I could not but obferve that flie ceafed attending me in my rambles through the garden, and by degrees I loft her com¬ pany altogether, unlefs in prefence of the Marquefa, and then there appeared f о much reftraint in her manners, that I began to fufpečt that fhe had taken the lines I had written to Cornelia, as intended for herfelf,
40
herfelf, and tha^ my prefence was no longer welcome. About this time they received difpatches from the Marquis, informing them of fe¬ veral fueceífes they, had gained over the royalifts, and his hopes of again enjoying tranquillity in the bofom of his family. Λ letter of this nature could not be re¬ ceived without fatisfacìion, and fadnefs for a few hours gave place to cheerfulnefs. We walked together on a fine. terrace of foft grafs, which commanded an extent five range of view, beautiful and verdant, with all the freihnefs of fpring : the moun¬ tains were fmiling with fun-ihine, and a thoufand flowers fpangled the extenfive paftures, which the fummer heat had not yet embrowned. Chriftiana walked on one fide, and her mother upon the other, leaning on my arm, frequently pointing out to me fome attractive objeci, and as frequently fighing, while íhe fometimes gazed earneftly in my face, as if on the point of making fome inquiry
41
inquiry íhe had yet feared to hazard. After fome time, ihe call her eyes upon the ring which Don Raphael had given me. <c Lorenzo/' faid ihe, with fome little he- iitation, " methinks that 1 have feen that ring before—is it a family one?" I felt the blood flow in my face. (( I cannot fay that it is," anfwered I, " it was given me by a perfon, who is to me al¬ moft a total ftranger." " Then he mull certainly have had very powerful reafons/' replied íhe, " for the original owner of that ring held it in high efteem, and when I faw it on your hand, whilft you lay ill, I had no doubt of your belonging to the family. Do you know the name of the perfon who made you the prefent?" " His name," replied I, ff is Don Ra¬ phael, the moft lingular of men."—-" Don Raphael," repeated ihe, Cf I do not know him. You bear fome refemblance to the perfon whom I once knew to be the ι \ owner of that ring. He was, indeed,
a man
42
a man very different from many. But í have heard that he has been long dead." Her words ftruck me as fomething un¬ gular. I recollecied that Don Raphael had told me, that the world believed him dead; and I was about to make farther inquiries, but fome remark of the Mar¬ quefa's interrupted my thoughts. Chrifti¬ ana fpoke little—but her fmiles, and the mild beaming of her eyes, when ihe turned them upon me, expreffed more than I dared to underftand ; and for the firft time gave birth to a fufpicion that filled me with inquietude* Infenfibly the thoughts, which mutually engaged us, fileuced remark; and Chrif¬ tiana having taken tke aim of her mother* we walked without exchanging a word for a eonfiderable time ; till the íhades of twi¬ light began to creep upon the earth, and the cool air reminded us of the approach of night. Lady Sempronia fmiled at our inatten¬ tion. " I ihould think," faid fhe, " that our
43
our minds muft be nearly allied, or we could not have been equally abfent. No doubt, Lorenzo, you were thinking of fome diftant lady, or you could not have been fo inattentive to thofe prefent." I believe my countenance gave credit to the fufpicion. Chriftiana glanced her expreifive eyes towards me, and with a faint fmile, and in a voice almoft indifrinči, bade me good night, and immediately re¬ tired. My fears, by this ačiion, received ftrong confirmation. I knew too well, from ex¬ perience, the fymptoms of that fubtle and terrible power, which one time or other fubdues the ftrongeft hearts; and I re¬ gretted fincerely, that I had unfortunately given birth to a paffion, neither my rank nor røy inclination permitted me to re¬ turn. I made a confufed apology to the Mar¬ quefa for quitting her abruptly, and haf¬ tened to the chamber allotted me in this hofpitable maníion, where I might deter¬ mine
44
mine, at leifure, what was moft proper to be done. My health was every day increafing, though a weaknefs and languor yet hung upon me, and prevented my delire of re¬ turning to the exertions of military em¬ ploy. It was very dangerous to attempt pafting the frontiers of the province, over¬ run with marauding parties, and a prey to perpetual ourages; yet I faw the necef¬ fity of quitting a houfe, the peace of which my prefence might interrupt. I balanced long without decifion : my mind wanting fuificient vigour to form any refolution, which arofe from that lan¬ guor of body which ever accompanies con- valefcence, and frequently unmans the greateft heroes: I fat debating till the night began- to advance. I was without light, and as I had retired early, and from the low cafement could caft my eyes over the obfcure fcenery of the gardens and country, my mind was too much en¬ gaged in refleciion, to tafte the beauties of
45
of nature, though the fitnefs of the night might have tempted me to leave the roof where I had been fo hofpitably treated, without other ceremony than a note of thanks. But why, thought I, ihould I ileal away like a thief--and whither can I go ? Would it not be more agreeable to my characler, to feek occafion of difclof- ing to thefe ladies all that I know of my¬ felf?—without friends, without fortune, without fame—they will no longer regard me with efteem—my engagements with Cornelia will not occafion any figh of jea¬ loufy, or any feeling of regret. In this final refolution of facrificing my own pride, to the tranquility of this family, I rofe to clofe the cafement; when hear¬ ing the founds of diftant mufic, I ftepped out into the balcony to liften, the night being calm and ferene. This balcony ran along the garden-fide of the houfe, and the doors of feveral apartments opened on to it 1 ieared to venture far, left 1 fliould create alarm, or appear to intrude; but the
46
the fweet voice of Chriftiana, which fhe accompanied with a guitar, fixed my at¬ tention. I liftened to feveral pathetic airs that íhe fung; and feveral times fan¬ cied that it was Cornelia I heard. At length I heard the words of the little bal¬ lad I had loft in the alcove, which ihe fang with fo much feeling, that I fighed when fhe pronounced the laft words, (( remember me;" and, turning away, I entered my own chamber, where I retired to reft. Sleep for fome hours was a ftranger to my eyes, and it was early in the morning when I awoke very little refreíhed, and more unwell than I had been for feveral days. The chirping of the birds amongft the trees and flowers that intertwined near the lattice, reminded me of the finenefs of the weather, and a frefli air breathing the fweets of the morning, invited me to try its efficacy in difpelling the vapours that clouded my fenfes. I defcended with caution to the garden, where I endeavoured to indulge myfelf in all
47
all the luxury of flowering fweetncfs, in¬ haling the fragrance of a thoufand flowers, that hung embofled with glittering dew. Several times I paufed to liften to the ftrains of the birds which fportcd along the vallies, and I could have fancied myfelf in the wild fcenery which formed the valley of St. Ilelma. As I advanced along the fliady grove of orange trees, blooming with flowers, and hanging with fruit, I perceived a folded paper upon the ground, fteeped in the •dews of the night ; I took it up, and open¬ ing it, read thefe verfes, iň the writing of Chriftiana : 1 The breath of rifing morn is fweet, When fpring perfumes the air with flowers, And genUl gales, from each retreat } Embalm the groves and lcent the bowers ; Awaking nature fmiles delight, And bids increafe the coming year : Cloth'd in a drefs of verdure bright ; She comes, and all things gay appear:
The
48
о The groves refound with cheering ílrams, Melodious warblmgs round me move ·, One general Tong, the hills, the plains Return in founds, attun'd to love. .Love wakes in ev'ry breaft, the flame Which firil wns of celeftial birth, But caught by nature, quickly came To foften man, and reign on earth. 3 Love moves in ev'ry air that blows, Or wantons on the zephyr's wing, With limpid ftreams it gently flows, Or flings frefli flow'rets o'er the fpring. Then come, thou pow'r of foft delight, With me thou ihalt for ever dwell ; My pains with fome return requite, And charm the youth I love fo well. Several times I perufed this paper, which was more than fufficient to confirm my fufpicion. "Alas!" faid I, as I held the verfes in my hand ; " how wayward is this paflion. Why did nature leave its con¬ duci to chance, fince chance is ever at va¬ riance with reafon, and fince fo feldom two perfons regard each other with mutual efteem ?
49
efteem ? How many quarrels, how many heart burnings, how much mifery and defpair would be avoided, were love only to he produced by the collifion of minds, which to all others ihould be cold and in¬ different ? Now, the flighteft trifle, a phan¬ tom only exifting in fancy, gives birth to this paffion, even againft the dictates of judgment ; and the wifeft of mankind» make the molt abfurd connections," While I ftood making thefe reflections, and turning the paper in my hand, I was fuddenly interrupted by a light quick ftep along the path, and looking round, I per¬ ceived Chriftiana advancing, her eyes fixed upon the paper, which her knowledge of the contents did not permit her to con¬ ceal. She bluftied repeatedly, as my eyes turned upon her, and holding out her hand in iilenee, her down-caft looks feemed to requeft that I would fpare her confu¬ fion, and return her the verfes. Had I been myfelf infpired with the moft timid and delicate paflion, I could not vol. n. d have
50
have experienced more embarraíľnient ; I had no words to exprefs my fenti ments, and giving her the paper, I bowed and haftened from her prefence. It w. s impoflìble after fuch an interview, to enter into any particular of my own fortune ; it woukl imply my knowledge of t)oniia Chriftiana's fcntimenls; it would appear like a rcfufal on my part, and every word I ihould utter, woukl feem loaded with a double meaning, or iiudicd neglect. I was almoft afraid of again appearing in her prefence, left on the one hand I might give encouragement to hopes, which had í been wholly unengaged, I ihould not have dared to imagine ; and on the other, left my evident coldnefs ihould be conftrued into ingratitude. It was impoflìble to think of remaining any longer beneath the fame roof; and in the prefent diftracled ftate of the country, I had but one way of probable efcape, ( through
51
(through fhe mountains) till time ihould hâve cleared the frontiers of the province ; where I might then coniider, whether I ihould purfue the road to Leon, where my inclinations pointed, or weak as I was, haften to the army, which was every thing but ahfol irtely rou ted. I retired to my chamber, where I em¬ ployed myfelf in drawing up the belt apo¬ logy I could form for my flight, without betraying the real caufe, and having pre¬ tended a flight indifpoiition to the Mar¬ quefa, I was permitted to remain alone, fearing to meet the eyes of Chriftiana ; for though 1 felt not the fmaileft degree oí paflion, there was lucha fecret attraction in her pious and angelic features, that I could have fpent hours in gazing upon them, as upon a being of celeftial birth, whole image bore the impreffîon of a deity. I watched the approach of evening with impatience, yet with forrow : it feemed as if I were going to plunge myfelf into dif¬ trefs, and to leave an afylum where, for the d 2 firft
52
firft time in my life, I had received the pleafures of the tenderefl friendihip. I looked from my window upon the ihadows of the mountains, and the land¬ fcape tinged with gold ; Donna Chriftiana and the Marquefa were walking on the ter¬ race beneath the balcony, and for the laft time 1 had the pleafure of obferving them unfeen, as they fiowly, and arm in arm, paffed by. The night came on apace, and the hour of my premeditated departure drew near; the caprice of fpring had ihadowed over the heavens with clouds ; and when I looked out to fee if any ftars were vifible, the chill winds that paífed by, made me ihrink back and figh at the neceftity there was that I fliould encounter them. 1 waited at the window till ten o'clock, watching the lowering horizon, in hopes that the clouds might pafs away, but impe¬ netrable darknefs hung upon the earth. At the moment of execution I felt afliamedof my flight; it would unavoidably create
53
create no little alarm, and feemed to call fome degree of meannefs upon my charac¬ ter. Why, indeed, was there a neceífity that my departure fhould be iecret ? Chrif¬ tiana would not compel me to remain, and I might, if it were necefiary, only make the Marquefa privy to my intentions. Thus I flood in the balcony, revolving every circumftance, and little inclined to fet out, I knew not whither, till the clock at length ftruck eleven, and the founds died away in diftance. Either, thought I, I muft go or return. This indecifion ill becomes the charačier of a foldier. Thefe thoughts were inter¬ rupted by a low whifper of diftant voices, which feemed to come from the retired part of the garden, and leaning upon the fret-work, I expecled the ladies would pafs beneath me, though I wondered at their late and folemn walk. They evidently drew near; and as they advanced, I could diftinguiih feveral words ipoken in anger ; and yet both parties, by d 3 the
54
the manner of their expreftion, - appeared deíirous of not being heard. It was not long before they came immediately be¬ neath me, where they paufed. " I will go no farther," faid one, in a deep rough vpice ; (t you defign to betray me to the fervants—be aifured, the mo~ ment you call for help you are a dead man." ** Confider," Ыа another perfeon, in an expoÜUrfary voke. ff Confider the de¬ rangement of my aflàirs," u And confider that mine a#e abfolutely ruined—that 1 am in danger every mo¬ ment." ff What then," eried the other, " yon fty from the band of juftice, and I ant flying from the power of military violence. I know not even to-røorrow where I fhall tind flielter; and iş this ^ time—" * *' It is," cried the ruffian« " It is the only time*r*and by all the holy faints it fhall not efcape me. I am well informed that
55
that you have eonfiderable property about >ou."— "And what then?" ťt What then í " cried he, raifing his voice. (< Is that a difficult queftion to re- folve ? I am without money, and muft have it—I will not ftand parlying here, till fome waking ear gets information of our bufinefs.—Inftantly divide with me the property you carry, or I will take your life, and the whole.— Λ traitor ţo feis king, cannot betray me !" This was pronounced with a voice that exulted щ milçhiff, and feared not the fuccefs ; and while I was aftoniflied at the incident, ï was no lefs fo at the voice of the rubber, which certainly was familiar to my ear ; I had no doubt but it was the Marquis de Mirandula himfelf, who time ftood beneath me, expofed to fuch immi¬ nent danger. Buta moment remained for me to aci, foas to refcue the Marquis with¬ out expofing him to more certain danger, η 4 it
об
it being impoftible in the dark to diftin¬ guiih the one from the other. The ruffian prepared to execute his threats : " Accept or reject/' cried he ; ťť the night flies," <( I will compound with you/' faid the Marquis, " I cannot fee my wife and daughter reduced in one hour to abfolute poverty. You cannot be immoveable." (< I will not retract a pillole of the half you have about you—but a moment longer, and I will have the whole." " Come hither; come hither;" cried I, making as much noife as I could in a mo¬ ment. " Fire ; Fire half a dozen of you at once ; Jerome—Tomafo—Roberto- leap the balcony, fword in hand ; we have not watched for nothing. The Marquis is befet." While I uttered thefe words, I made a tremendous noife, throwing down feveral vafes of flowers, which made a terrible clat¬ ter, as if thefe fervants had actually leaped down, and followed myfelf, fword in hand, firing
57
firing a piftol in the air ; for I dared not venture to fire at the one I imagined to be the robber, left in the gloom I ihould wound the Marquis. This fudden buftle and clamour, which was the more effectual from the darknefs and ftillnefs of the night, threw the robber into fo much confufion, that he retreated in an inftant, giving the Marquis fuf¬ ficient time to prepare his arms, if he Ihould again dare the attack, Which he might be inclined to do, when he perceived all this rout and noife to proceed from only one perfon. "To which of my faithful domeftics," faid the Marquis, " am I indebted for this fortunate affiftance ? You may depend I ihall gratefully reward your zeal." " Your Excellenza/* anfwered I, " is un¬ der a flight miftake ; I am not a domeftic, I am a ftranger—." " A ftranger," cried he, in a tone of fup¬ prefled paffion ; " at this hour, in thefe gar¬ dens ; in the balcony of the palace of the n 5 Marquis
58
Marquis de Mirandula. But my arm ¿hall revenge my diíhonor. О wretched for¬ tune, for what am I referved ? When mil the malignity of my ftars ceafe to perse¬ cute me ?" f< You are too hafty," replied I, " if уоц would byt attend three minutes with pa¬ tience—" "Three minutes; three hours;" cried he, " I would attend you for a month, if you conid expJkun away what is too clear ; and. make me believe that thefe are not my gardens ; that this is not my pa* lace ; that my wife and daughter do not in¬ habit tbefe walls, and that I am not Miran¬ dula, the moil miferable of men." " Your wife and your daughter/' cried I, *' are angels of purity." " Would to heaven," cried he, interrupt¬ ing me, " that I had fallen by the ftiljetto ofthat mifcreant; I had not then witneffed fuch angebe purity ; yet I muft tamely fubmit to this. The Marquis de Mirandula muft fubmit to his own difgrace. You have
59
have refcued me from death, and here I bid you depart. Go then ; fly me, whoever you are ; we muft never meet to know each other, or the death o^ one of us muft be the confequence." " No/* cried I, <( Marquis ; I am not the wretch you think me. I will not ac¬ cept life a moment from your hands. It is true, that I have owed it to that wife and daughter you fo rafhly calumniate, and it has pleafed heaven that their favour to me, ihould be returned to you in a way fo fin¬ gular, that providence evidently direcied the impulfe, You have only to enter your palace to be fatisfied ; your wife and daughter will not blufh to meet you in my prefence, nor ŕhall /íhrink from the inter¬ view. Danger awaits every moment you remain" here. '* " True," replied he, more calmly ; " moft true.—That villain, no doubt, is lurking near. I will follow yon, you probably know the private door of the houfe better than V' « You
60
cc You will quickly learn to do me juf¬ tice," replied I. " Some of the fervants will have been roufed by our voices ; let us go to the garden door." A few minutes brought us thither, where we found the porter juft rifen from his bed, and preparing to refift any attack on the houfe. He opened the door on our dif¬ covering ourfelves, and we entered the anti-chamber. He was going to ring the alarm bell, to awaken the fervants, but the Marquis commanded him to be filent, to faften the door, and attend us with a light to his chamber. The Marquis, when he firft faw me on our entrance, ftarted with evident fur¬ prize, which I would have attributed to his alarm at feeing me dreffed in the uniform of his enemies, had not his fubfequent ac¬ tions informed me that other refleclions paffed through his mind. He defired that I would follow him with caution, he having reafons of the utmoft magnitude, to conceal his arrival for fome time.
61
time. fť For," faid he, " you know not what at this moment hangs over me." We proceeded to a room, of which he had the key, then taking the light from the porter, he ordered him to go and prepare forne refreftiment in half an hour, and at his peril to awaken his lady. Having clofed the door, and placed the lamp upon the table, he turned fuddenly round, gazing at me with earneftnefs a few moments before he fpoke, while his coun¬ tenance betrayed extreme agitation, not a little heightened by the derangement of his drefs, and the fatigues and dangers he had undergone : His cloak was torn, and his whole drefs ftained with blood, and dif¬ coloured with duft. "My eyes," faid he, at length; " my fenfes confpire this night to confound me. You will excufe my freedom, which the moment infpires ; of what part of Spain are you ?" "Caftille."—"And your name ?" 'J Lorenzo." " And your family ?"
Pardon
62
" Pardon me," faidï, colouring, <ŕ I have particular reafons for concealing my fa¬ mily ; reafons, that 1 am certain can no way afteci you, nor is it material towards proving that I am no difhonorable intru¬ der into this houfe." " Who, and whatever you are," replied be, in fome confufion, " I am now ready to attend to your explanation, would to heaven you can prove your innocence." I explained to him the rank I held in the Spanifti army; the unfortunate adven¬ ture which had introduced me to his family, and without the moil diftant hint of my intended flight, or the motive, ï merely mentioned, that I was ftanding on the bal¬ cony to enjoy the cool breezes of the night, when I was fo fortunate as to ren¬ der him fervice. " It is enough," replied he, bowing ; " I am greatly your debtor ; excufe my ab¬ fence for five minutes. This is a night in which much muft be done."
With
63
With thefe words he retired, leaving me not a little aftoniflied at this Angularity of behaviour. I fufpecled that he was gone to learn a confirmation of what I had told him, from his wife and daughter, be¬ fore he fliould fully grant me his confi¬ dence : a fufpicion, which, while it roufed my pride, I could not but allow was ex- c u fable. I did not remain long in fufpenfe, be¬ fore he returned, with a countenance even * more folemn than he had before difplayed. He fat down near me, and looking in my face : {t Lorenzo/* faid he, " were you ever in love ? Is your heart at this mo¬ ment engaged by that moft dangerous of paflions ?" I ftarted at fo unexpected a queftion, the import of which I could only furmife, and. was unable to anfwer, revolving in filence, the part I had now moft reluclantly to per¬ form, ï made not the fmaileft doubt, but in the firft and abrupt examination of the Marquefa and her daughter, the fecret of the
64
the latter had inadvertently been difclofed. But it appeared next to miraculous, that a man of the Marquis s family ihould thus, in a moment, refolve to beftow his only daughter on a ftranger, and that ftranger ranking in oppoiite warfare. Every pro¬ bable reafon failed me, while I lamented the repulfe I muft neceifarily give, and re¬ gretted that I had delayed a day in exe¬ cuting my projected flight. What, thought I, will be the rage of the Marquis, and the feelings of his too amiable daughter ; and how ihalî 1 find expreflions fufficiently de¬ licate, not to abufe the high favour ftiewn mc ? The Marquis fat regarding the working of my countenance with fo much attentive eagernefs, that he trembled with impati¬ ence for my reply. • f You hefitate," faid he ; " perhaps the very exiftence of my family depends on your anfwer ; be then as candid as I have hitherto found you."
" Good
65 5 " Good heavens," faid I, more embar¬ rafted than before ; "Why ? Where¬ fore ? How is it poffible that your houfe, or your family can be interefted ?" ' { That is our greateft misfortune/' re¬ plied he, rifing, and walking from me. This fpeech, which I conceived to be flighting, roufed my pride, and I determin¬ ed to íhew him, that I would not increafe his misfortunes by accepting his offer. "Believe me," faid Í, "1 fincerely la¬ ment this misfortune ; but my heart and my áffeciions have been long engaged." He turned round with fatisfacìion, at thefe words, and again fat down. " I re¬ joice," faid he, "at what you tell me. You are then pofitively engaged, and you have been long fo ?" " it is true." " Then the offer I am going to make, will, perhaps, not be fo dangerous." " I am all amazement," returned I, wholly unable to guefs at what thefe infi- nuations might mean. " Your Excelle nza may command every fenice in my power." " I thank
66
u I thank you," replied he, taking my hand. " Your countenance demands my confidence. Y'ou fee before you at this moment, a man utterly ruined, and whofe calmnefs only arifes from defpair/' " On this fatal day the provincial army has fuffered a total and irretrievable defeat; thofe who dkl not fall before the fword, пал e either been taken prifoners, or have ííed and difperfed. I efcaped by a variety of accidents; two horfes have fallen be¬ neath me in my fiight hither. I was at¬ tended in my flight by a mau who joined us fome weeks lince ; I knew him to be a perfon of defperate fortune, having known him many у ears fince in profligate affluence. He knew that I had about me ail the money and jewels I could carry off in my hafte. You know the event. It is by your means that I am eııablçd to offer to your guar- dianftiip the half of my fortune, which re¬ mains in moveable property, together with my wife and daughter. I myfelf muft fly before the day dawns, 1 know not whither. Thefe
67
Thefe lands and this maníion will become a fcene of defolation ; I almoft fancy, that even now the fliouts of the foldiers found in my ears. You feem to hefitate. You think it extraordinary, no doubt, that half an hour ago, and I was ready to deftroy you, for a fuppofed familiarity with thofe relations, and now' I offer them to your fole proteciion, But I confide in your honor. I confide in the integrity of your countenance, which reminds me of a per¬ fon, that I ihould have been proud to con¬ iider ps a friend : but above all I confide in your prepoifeifion for another, for if you fincerely love, тау daughter will not have power tó move you. Teft me then, if you have courage to accept this oftice of friend- ihip ; and generofity fufficient to refcue from pofitive deftruciion, the family of a, man who has ranked againft you ; and if you have fortitude fufficient to refift the temptation, which the beauty of Chriftiana might hold ont to you, in oppofi tion to the interefls of your firft love ! " Here
68
Here the Marquis made a folemn paufe. I had been too ftrongly agitated with va¬ rious refleclions, while he had been fpeak¬ ing, to attempt interrupting him. I fe¬ cretly feared the greatnefs of the under¬ taking, and the various feelings it involved. How ftiould I fteel my heart againft the filent and modeft paffion of Chriftiana. How ihould I, almoft a ftranger to the modes of mankind, preferve with decorum, the characler of guardian to two ladies. What afylum could I ofľer ? In a word, I myfelf had almoft an equal need of pro¬ tecìion ; not to mention the innumerable embarraflments it would fubjeclme to. On tre other hand, it was impoffible to refufe. I faw impending defolation ftriding with a rapid movement ; every moment was im¬ portant, for on a moment might depend our efcape from the flood of calamity, which was rolling in rapine and flame over the furface of the country. t( Am I to read in vour filence, a de- nial?" faid the Marquis, with a deep groan, and vifible palenefs.
69
" Does your lady and daughter know of your propofal ?" demanded I. " No/* cried he, "they are at this mo¬ ment in fancied fecurity. They dream not of the horrors preparing for them ; but by the Holy Virgin, if you do not undertake their protecìion, I will poignard them this dreadful night. Never, never ihall they remain to be violated by an infolent fol- diery. My perfon is too well known to protecì them. To fend them away alone, is to expofe them to every outrage beneath the fun. This night they muft die, unlefs ------Speak, Lorenzo. Swear by the Great Creator of the Univerfe, that you will not abandon them/' "It is too much," cried I, unable to re ftrain my tears, at the terrible picìure his words prefented, and which my experience told me was true. " I agree;—-give me your inftruciions ; the clock is now ftrik- ! ing twelve : Alas, in one hour, what mis- I fortunes may come upon us !"
"Be
70
^Be cool/' faid the Marquis, trembling. *' My foul is torn to pieces ; but you fee í preferve my fenfes. How many in tny fituation would fpend the time in the ra¬ vings of defpair. I fliali, if poffible quit the kingdom. For fix months at leaft, I requeft you to remain in concealment. I ihall deliver you fome fealed papers, which upon honor, I charge you not to open, unlefs my death is pofitively con¬ firmed. Here is a caiket of jewels to a eonfiderable amount, and there are two hundred pifióles in money. Take this key and open that ivory cabinet, you will there find many trinkets of great value ; take as many as you can conveniently conceal about you. I muft now go to prepare my wife and daughter for this fudden reveriion of fortune." The fcene that enfued, may be more eafily fancied than expreffed. It was with difficulty their fenfes were preferved, and their fpirits foothed by the arguments and pleadings
71
^pleadings of the Marquis, who conjured them by every tie and every reafon, to acl with more calmnefs, and not deftroy him, by deftroying themfelves. (t Alas," faid the Marquefa, " My years ill befit me for flight. Let my daughter ^efcape, and let me remain. My infirmi¬ ties will only prevent your flight, and in¬ volve us together." " Lorenzo muft be your protector," faid the Marquis. ť I muft fly alone in dif¬ guife, if at alL Why, Lady Sempronia, do you fink into the woman, when we have fcarce time to efcape, before our houfe will be delivered to the fword and the flames ?" "How can I fly with Lorenzo?" laid Chriftiana, at the fame time. " Fly your¬ felf, my dear father ; bid him alfo haile away. Indeed I do not mind my own fife; ï do not fear to die/' " But the triumph, the exultation of our enemies," cried the Marquis. " Death is not the worft we ha\ e to fear. Lorenzo is
72
is honorable. The moments admit no longer delay. Unlefs you aci with more firmnefs, you will fee me die at your feet, for here íhall my enemies find me. Give me not caufe toaccufe you of pufillanimity, of worfe than wonuuVs fears. Great clau- gers only awaken refources in great minds. It is for the .vulgar to fink before evils, they have no energy to combat. If you preferve the firmnefs of your mind, if you attend to my advice, our fortunes may brighten after a few months obfcu¬ rity ; and life be doubly pleaiing for what we have fuffered in preferving it. But re¬ member that to die with honor, is better than to live with infamy." íť I am refolved," faid the Marquefa, drying her tears, and fupprefling her fighs. <c Chriftiana, my daughter, arife, and re¬ member the world is no refting place for mortals. But why may we not retire into a convent—fuch a retreat would furely be more unexceptionable than the protečiioii of a young man?" "It
ТЗ
" It might be more agreeable to eti¬ quette/' anfwered the Marquis, " but cir¬ cumftances forbid it. Such an afylum would become your prifon; you would not then be at liberty to join me, ihould I fucceed in eftabliihing myfelf either in France or Italy. But we muft no longer wafte the moments of aclion in debate, Collecl your moft valuable jewels; call your fervants, and difpatch them on differ¬ ent routes with your clothes, and whatever you can confide to their care. In a few minutes attend me in my room/'
VOL. II.
Б
CHAP.
74
CHAP. Ш.
1 HAl>Cörirrivedtofecrete jewels andfmaîl trinkets, to a large amount, tog"erher with thofe important papers the Marquis had given me, about my perfon, by the time he returned; but a large treafure of plate and other heavy articles yet remained, which would afford an ample booty to thefoldiery, if the houfe ihould be fubject ed to pillage. Thefe it was impoffible to remove, and we had no time to bury them in the ground. The Marquis entered the room with va¬ rious emotions ftrongly painted on his fea¬ tures. "Good heavens/* faid he, " Lo¬ renzo,, what a night is this ! Look through the
75 the window. Do yon fee yonder rifing brightnefs ? That is the village of-------on nre ; but a few moments, and thefe wretches will behere/' I looked out at thefe words, and my foul felt fliocked at the portentous appearance. rf We have no time to lofe, indeed/* faid I, turning pale. " I hear the found of horlee along the road." While I fpoke, a loud rapping was heard -at the door. The Marquis fmiled faintly. iC I queftion now," faid he, (c whether I ef¬ cape ; but my enemies fliali have fonte trouble to feize me with life." The fervants were now raifed in the ut¬ moft confufion. The knocking proceeded from two or three ftragglers, who being %weM mounted, had already reached the Marquis's, with the intent of alarming the family of their danger; and not knowing that he had efcaped, they informed the fer¬ vants that he was ilain in battle ; tha^ the victorious troops were in rapid purfuit, л я burning
76
burning and plundering every village and cottage in their way. Confternation and difmay fpread with fwiftnefs amongft the domeftics. The wo* men were incapable of attending the com¬ mands of the ladies,and the men only ran itf, to demand orders of the Marquis, which their fears did not permit them to execute. The Marquis eonducìed himfelf with admirable eoolnefs in this moment of dread¬ ful fufperice. He left to my care, provi¬ ding for our efcape; and hurrying away, he exhorted the fervants tofortitude,andgiving, to each a fum of money and piece of plate, according to their fervices, he direcied them the way they ihould fly, delivering the women to their protecìion; and in lefs than five minutes, there was not one domeftic left in the houfe, In the mean time I haftened to the fta bles, where I found two mules, the only cattle the Marquis had referved from the fervice of the provincial forces : thefe I immediately faddled, and leaving them ftanding:,
77
ífonding, haftened to the apartments of the ladies ; propriety being now baniihed by •the increafing terrors of the hour. The trampling of horfes was now heard every moment. The voices of men, and the cries of women driven from tlieir homes, with their almoft naked children, rent the air of night ; and the fpreading rednefs at the edge of the horizon, proclaimed the inevitable approach of deftruciion. I found the Marquis locked in the era- braces of his wife and daughter. Not a word was fpoken, for the grief of each was too mighty for utterance. We were now alarmed by a violent thundering at the great gate, and the fmaih- ing of the glafs in the windows. (f 1 muft be gone/' cried the Marquis. "This is the edge of the tempeft; the ftorm rapidly-comes on. Lorenzo, to your ho¬ nor and difcretion 1 commit thefe preci¬ ous reliques of a ruined houfe. Would to heaven I had never enlifted in this defpe¬ rate enterprize ! Ha ! they already ftiout e3 at
TH
at a diftance. Adieu ! Be calm,—'be col- leéled. Adieu. Do not delay/* As he uttered Ih efe laft words, he moved towards the door, having torn himfelf from fhe filent embraces of hb lady and daugÎK ter, who, pale as death, were every moment finking to the ground, A gentle violence was abfolutely necef¬ fary to tear them away from this chamber, but in ^paffing the door of tibe Marquise room, where a light burnt faintly and alone, the Marquefa, unable longer to fuftain the oppreftion of her fpirits, funk npon my arm. A filence of horrible portent reigned in the houfe, all the fervants hav¬ ing long fince fled, while without, the cla¬ mour and confufion was increafing and dreadful. What were my feelings at that moment, I myfelf am unable to defcribe. Chrifti¬ ana hung about her mother, and hariplly her tears relieved in fome degree the op¬ preftion of her foul In thefe moments of awful fufpenfe, I expecled every moment
7θ
ihat the hoüfc woutó beeøme a ptey tø plunder, even by the vanquished force»^ whofe fituation made them defperate, and as much ш be fea*ed a* the епещу that purfued them. A volley of fmall arm* rattled through the window* where the light iho&e* amdal the fame moment we were аЬгяш! by tbe tremendons crtfti of the outer door, which was fplit into piece?. A mingled uproar of oaths and Ihout» came forward up th« great flairs, and it шт evident the тШт wereinxMvpwjrlmàe*. Chriftiana uttered a faini feream, and fell upon my arm, already employed in fupporting her mother. a Qţe&k God/* cried I, drawing my iword, " grant me eoolnefs and ftrength in this important hour!" The party who had forced the door, ruihed up the ftairs with incredible noife. Ivery thing feemed falling to piece* around thera. They quickly filled the rooms, and fell to plunder ; while a feieÛ band» e 4 headed
80
headed by a tierce and Angularly habited ruffian, advanced towards me, uttering the moft hideous outcries, and calling aloud for the Marquis with the mofl: favage threatenings. Their weapons were raifed in an inftan t to my face. Their appearance was more like a banditti than foldiers, for their re¬ bellious uniforms were torn, dufty, and bloody, and their own imminent danger gave a ferocity to their features, that al¬ moft obliterated the lineaments of man.. " Where is Ле Marquis f Where is Mi¬ randula ?'* cried they at once. " In that chamber," replied I, pointing to his apartment ** Difpatch this man," cried the leader of the band, whom I now recollecied to be Fiielfo, as he turned his eyes upon me with a malicious grin. "Give him no quarter— î have nobler game in view/' One or two lifted up their fwords to obey him, " Stay, comrades," cried h " You
ai
* f You miftake; this" is only a difguife that ï wear, the better to efcape. Hafte after them ;—all the jewels and plate of the Marquis are in that chamber/' The mention of the treafure inftantly diverted their attention, and in their hafte they had nearly fallen out with each other. This was the only moment for efcape. 1 raifed the Marquefa on my ihoulder^ and grafping Chriftiana by the arm, hurried as faft as poffible towards the liable, while the banditti in the houfe were tearing down thevery wainfcots, and deftroying the fur¬ niture, from the mere fpirit of mifchief, or in fearch of fancied treafure· At the gate ftood two men they had had the precaution to ftation. It was fortu¬ nately extremely dark, and without op- pofing my paftage, they inquired if the lady I carried was dead. " Yes/' faid L " Hafte up flairs ; there is Filelfo, and all our comrades, loading themfelves with treafure ; there is more than they can all carry away/* " Come в s along,
№
along, туЪоу," cried one of them. * f We muft take eare of ourfelves ; thofe fellows will not give us any of ťheir plunder for Handing here." ff Right ; right ;" an¬ fwered he, roughly. " We ihall none of us ftand long, ï fancy :—the country is all in a blaze." This little accident of fuccefs infpired me with frefli courage. I foon reached Ле ftable, where a moment later would have been irretrievable, a trooper having feføed the mules, and was leading them from the door. " Halt, friend," cried I, ** thefe are already engaged : help me to place this lady on one of them." " May I be ihot if ï do ;" returned he, with an oath. *' What is the lady to me ? My wife has broke her leg a quarter of a league from here, and fhe will be trod to pieces on the road, if I do not find means to convey her away/' * # If am very forry for it," replied I · ** thefe mules are my property ; I have no time either to fpend in argument or fight- ing.
83
ing.-f-Let theni go, and here is a diamond ring for your kindnefs." " Take them, mafter, and give me the ring," cried he. " My wife may lay in the road if ihe likes it. I can eafily get ano¬ ther; but not fo eaiily a diamond ring." I made no remark on this fellow's bru¬ tality ; for time was of the utmoft value, and having affiited me in fattening the ladies upon the mules, he haftened away. Chriftiana had charge of a fmall box belonging to her mother, and one mule : while I rode before the Marquefa, whom the motion began to recover. The whole country was overfpread with ftraggling parties of every defcription. Women and children were flying in all directions ; and bowlings, lamentations, and defpair, filled the air. Several times I was obliged to ufe my fword againft the peafants, who feized the bridles of the mules, in hopes of re» iieving their relations; but pity would have been my owa deftruciion, and for feveral
84
feveral miles I rode, with my .fword in my hand. I was moft apprehenfive of falling in with ftie main body of the inf urgents, who fwept every thing before them like a flood ; and from whom I ihould have little chance of efcaping, as my uniform would betray me. To avoid them I ftruck into a crofs road, which penetrated deeper into the country, towards Aragon ; the dreadful line of flame, which fpread up to the heavens, ferving to warn me of the roads I ihould avoid. Iendeavoured to infpire Chriftiana with fpirits and confidence ; but lhe had too much of the female in her characler to fupport fo great a trial with other fortitude than what naturally arofe from her piety ; and it was now ftie found in full force the efficacy of principle, and the ftrength of faith. Thefe fupplied her with hope, and infpired her with fortitude, by raifing her fuperior to the dread of death, and I waa aftonUhed that her delicate frame and ten- 4er
85 der difpofition, were capable of enduring, the numberlefk diftreíTes that every way encompafl'ed us. . The road we had entered was rough, and in many places fo much deftroyed, that our mules were fatigued with very incon- fiderable progrefs. We had not proceeded^ more than three leagues, when we entered a little village of about twenty houfes. The panic had already reached this wretched place, and the inhabitants were heiitating between flight and fear. The young and vigorous were eager to fly, while the aged, the infirm, and the children, clung round them, befeeching them, with cries and tears, not to abandon them. I attempted to get fome wine, to relieve the exceffive weaknefs and ficknefs which hung upon the Marquefa ; but a draught of cold water was all I could procure. From this fhe found eonfiderable relief, and be^ coming aihamed of her own imbecility, in the midft of fuch public and genera! сакт mity,
86
mity, lhe roufed her languid fpirits to action. Partlyby force, and partly by purchafe, I procured another mnle at thk place, I halted a ihort time to exhort Ле people to more fortitude, obferving that it was more than probable the army had given over the purfuit, it being now paft four o'clock ip the morning. While I yet fpoke, a number of flying provincials entered the village, fome feverely woundr ed, fome with arms, and more without. They knew not whether any one purfued them ; yet f о great was the alarm, that no one believed himfelf fafe while another was before him. I immediately left the village, and quickly found that we were in imminent danger; one wing of the army having taken this route, overfpread the roads and the fields like a fwarm of locufts. We found it impoflìble to proceed, and turning afide into a fmall inclofure, thickly planted with olives, determined to wait there till the roads fliould be more clear, or the day break upon us. In
8?
In this fituation we remained till the morning difcovered that the infurgents had fled while none purfued : we ventured to leave our retreat, where we had been fortunately protected by a deep ftream, which turned a mill in our rear. The flying party were now out of fight, leaving behind them felf evident marks of their route; the very cattle in the fields, and the gardens of the peafants, having been wantonly deftroyed or maimed. The Marquefa and Chriftiana had been greatly difguifed by the affiftance of the Marquis, in fome of the; clothes of the fervants, but my uniform, which could not be miftaken, rendered us every inftant liable to deftruciion : to prevent which, we were obliged to ride fwiftly through the villages, and to put up with the poor ac¬ commodation the huts on the road afforded, paying the moil exorbitant prices for the coarfeft fare. It was not always poffible to procure any thing, and for many hours we were obliged
88
obliged to ride onwards, expofed to a vio¬ lent hot fun, without alighting for a mo¬ ment ; fo that our mules, as well as our¬ felves, were nearly finking with fatigue and thirft. The country glowing with heat, pre¬ fented no charms to us ; the tired eye turning away with difguft from the moft animated landfcape. To increafe our fuf- ferings, the wind raifed the light duft upon the road, almoft blinding us with the drifts that whirled through the air, and it required no little degree of refolution, not to fink beneath thefe accumulated evils. We had travelled for feveral hours, over a wide and barren plain, where neither refreflrøient for man or beaft was to be found, and our mules began to lag beneath their burden. Behind us we had left the feat of war ; before us new dangers pre* fented themfches,* and the ladies more than once declared it was impoftible they could proceed much further. In
89
, In truth I was tempted to fit down with them upon the defolate plain, and await the event, for my fpirits and ftrength were equally exhaufted, and the defire of life had fcarce power to animate me. The dull and heavy filence of nature fpread every way around us; even the cry of defpair could not reach us. Popu¬ lation feemed ban i ihed from this region, and wherever the eye turned in fearch of flielter or inhabitant, it beheld only an extenfive wafte, bounded by a thick vapour the heat had exhaled ; nor did a fingle ftepherd's hut flatter the traveller with relief. Every moment on the point of yielding to our fate, and too much difpirtted to offer comfort to each other, we fiowly and filently continued to creep forward, till the milder rays of the evening fun began in fome degree to cool the exceifive and oppreffive heat which exhaufted our fpirits. Still, however, no cottage or village ap¬ peared, where we might hope for refreih- mem,
90
ment, and reft from Ле advancing night, whofe damp and chill air threatened no* thing leu than death to the ladies* A dump of dwarf trees and flirubs at a diftance from the road, invited our regard; and we turned afide towards them, in hopes of finding Some fpring to allay our thirft, and refrem our mules. We were fortu¬ nately not difappointed ; a beautiful thougb narrow ftream breaking ita way through a circle of mofe, giving verdure to the ground for a eonfiderable diftance. It was with infinite pleafure we alighted to tafle of thi* fountain in our way, Tbe choiceft wines would not have been more deliciou«, nor ihould we bave felt all the homm of our fiiuation, if nature bad № quired no other refreftiment. It waa ne« eeflary we fhould not remain long on thia fpot; but tbe few moments given to reil bad fo ftiffened our limbs, that when the Marquefa attempted to ftand, flie funk upon tbe ground, incapable of fupporting herfelf, CbriJUatia was fo much overcome, that
91
that flie defired we would permît her to ileep ; and к was with much difficulty I could prevent the lethargy which bent down her eye-lids, from clofing them for ever. How weak a creature is man, when at a diftance from the aids of fociety, he is every moment liable to fink beneath the burthen of his own exiftence í and from the loweftto the higheft we require mutual and unceafing fupport. What are the re«· fources of human reafon ! How vain is the boaft of our knowledge í Without fociety we become imbecile аз infants, and more expofed to danger, than any other being which inhabits the earth's circumference. Such were my reflections as we fat befide this pleafant fpring, fo much overcome with Ле length and difficulties of our journey, that ï very much doubted whether we ihould ever proceed from this fpot* Qttr mulen refreshed themfelves with grazing on the fhorbtnfted grafi, and ten¬ der leaves of fome osiers, while we fat without utteriug a word, except to roufe Donnu
92
Donná Chriftiana from the opprciTivè fen¬ fation of fleep which càufed her to behold with indifference every hope we could place before her. It is probable we might have remained upon the damp ground till our ftiffened limbs had wholly refufed their office ; and the morning fun would have found us ilretched upon the plain : but when we could leaft have expecled it, relief was Bt hand. The ihades of night began to gather on the plain, and to circumfcribe the boun¬ dary of fight, The chill winds of the evening caufed us to fit clofe, though we had neither power nor refolution to rife; and Chriftiana, unconfcious of any impro¬ priety, leaned upon ray bofom, while her mother reclined upon my arm. From this forlorn fttuation we were foon roufed by the itrampling of a horfe at full gallop, which feemed every moment to advance nearer the thicket, I had too much indifterencc to attempt any defence, whatever might be the confequence ; and this
93
this indifference I can only attribute to a malady of the mind, when the nerves have been exerted beyond their tone. ín a fliort time the horfeman entered the thicket at full gallop ; but as foon as he beheld us, he turned round on the fpor T and was about to retreat, when I begged him to give us fome aififtance, or fend ив help from the next village, " Do you know what you aik of me ?" cried he, ftopping his horfe. u By the mafs, 'tis as if you had aiked me to go and hang myfelf. Do you think I durň ven¬ ture into any town or village, mounted in this delicious manner ? ( pointing to two caiks of aqua vitæ which were balanced behind him.) Befide there is not a vil¬ lage, nor the leaft bit of any thing Üke one, for many a good league. However, I fee plain enough what you want—you have been drinking nothing but water, and that don't agree with a Chriftian : it may be good enough for a Moor. But we'll have
94
have а ейр of die beft fort that ever croffed the Pyrenees." From this fpeech it was eafy to gnefit this ftranger was a fmuggler. He was not long m quitting his horfe, and faftening him to the ftump of an old withered tree. He untied the kegs, and placing them upon the ground, came clofe to me, more mi¬ nutely to examine who it was that thus ftood in need of his aififtance ; for I be¬ fore obferved to you that the evening began to throw twilight amongft the buihes of this little retreat. He flarted on perceiving my un i fonn, which before he could not diftincily do, the ladies fitting before me, i( By the mais," faid he, " I have made a flight miftake ; I muft be gone. Buít, however, Cavalier, if you ftand in fo mucà need as you feem to do, I will ven¬ ture to grve you a glafs," ** My friend/* replied I, " at prefent I have not the power to betray you, ií I had the will; but reft aflured, and I fpeak upon the
the honor of a Caftüian, that if I ever have the power, I mail not have the will, provided you affift thefe unfortunate per¬ fons, whom I have endeavoured, though very unwell myfelf, to refcue from the mi¬ feries of war." " It is well faid, Cavalier," Tepfied he, running to his horfe ; " a Spaniard never breaks the word he has given ; and by the mafs, I am glad to have tumbled on fuch good company, when I expecled to be fit¬ ting by myfelf all night, with only my horfe, and a good dram of aqua vitæ to comfort me. Perhaps, Cavalier, the ladies may not like to partake of my ftrpper, but fuch as it is, they are heartily welcotee. I at» not fo blind, that I cannot fee the ho¬ nor I have in your company. When I was in ray better days, I was company for thofe that don't know me now. But no matter for that ; Hang care and érbe away sorrow ; the xétetched to-day may be happy to-morrow. Befide, it is time enough to fret
96
Fret when all the brandy is gone, and there is a pretty deal of it left yet/* I had neither power nor inclination to Hop the eloquence of this ftrange Charac¬ ter, who, whatever might be his prefent fituation, had certainly known better days; and above the harfti' traits of hiš occupa¬ tion, hofpitality was evidently paramount. From the front of his faddle, he lintied an old bag and a pair of piftols/ which he thruft into a broad leathern belt; then fe¬ curing one keg among the buihes, he ap¬ proached us with the other, and fat down before us on the grafs. Without fpeaking " a word, he began to empty his bag, turning out upon the grafs feveral pieces of , broken bread, fome cheefe, garlic, and hard eggs ; thefe he arranged upon an old piece of fail-cloth, that had ferved to cover the keg when he rode. An old wooden cup, which he filled with brandy, and a hrge clafp knife, finiflied the decoration of this rural repaft. I had
97
I had fuificient time to examine the figure of this our entertainer, while he was intent upon laying out the viands to the beft advantage, and muft confefs, that under any other circumftances I fliould not have been charmed with his company. He was rather above the middle height, with broad features, and fwarthy com¬ plexion, his eyes full of vivacity, and there was more of boldnefs in his face than ma¬ lice or cunning, yet that boldnefs was not altogether pleafing; and the abrupt and fomewhat rough turn of his fpeeches, at times, íhewed that he could aci the bravo ; to which character his muftachoes, extend¬ ing from ear to ear> gave no little fupport. His drefs was a mixture of French and Spanifti, of the difterent colours of crimfon and black, both fo much tarniihed by the weather, that the original tints were only to be gueífed at. Round his waift was a broad leathern belt, in which were placed two matchiefs piftols and an old fword. Over his flioulders hung an old rufty cloak, vol. n. r and
93
and his head was covered by an enormous hat, decorated with a broken feather. He wore French boots, much too large, and certainly, had he been thrown from his horfe by accident, he would not eafily have efcaped from a purfuit. Such are the outlines of a man, to whom we were to be fo eífentially indebted, and whofe name he told me was Nugnez. When he had fpread all his ftores upon the ground, he invited us to partake, him¬ felf fetting us the example, by firft drinking a cup full of brandy. The long fail we had fuffered, had de¬ prived us of any inclination to eat, and certainly the food before us was not the moil tempting ; but knowing the neceftity there was to overcome this repugnance, I prevailed on the ladies with fome difficulty to take a cru ft of bread, with fome brandy and water, which produced fo great an ef¬ feci upon their fpirits, that they feemed infpired with new ftrength and life.
Nugnez
m
Nugnez congratulated them on their vi¬ fible recovery, which he imputed to the ex¬ cellent virtues of brandy, running on in its praifes, and doing honor to his fentiments by fo many libations, that I began to fear we ihould experience its oppofi te qualities. " Come, Cavalier," faid he, " you muft empty another cup, and then we íhall all be chirping merry. My grandmother ufed to fay, that care was drowned in the bottom of a barrel of wine, as he was attempting to drink at the edge ; and 'pon my honor I think there's fome little truth in the faying. You are the moft fortunate man in all Spain, Cavalier." "How fo ?" demanded I, expečling he meant me fome compliment on the fcore of the ladies. " Do you mean to remain here all night ?"------" Not willingly," I replied, ff but I am a ftranger to the country, and do not know the way to the next town." " That's the reafon," cried he, laughing, " that I faid you were moil fortunate. f % " Have
100
îîave you not met with me ? And don't I know every town and village in Spain ? I can travel from the Pyrenees to Andalufia, from the Mediterranean to the Bay of Bifcay, and never enter a town. There is not a track, a defile, or a pafs, that I don't know. I would wager my horfe and the two kegs of aqua vitæ, that I would lead an army often thoufand men from any quar¬ ter of the kingdom to Madrid; and no¬ body at the diftance of a quarter of a league Ihould ever hear of them on the road. I wiih I had been a general, I ftiould have outdone Hannibal, or even Cortez himfelf. I would have ftiewn them what it was to be taken by furprize. I would have popped upon them, when they thought me fifty leagues off. I would------ ·** The ladies, dejecied as they were, could not refrain fmiling at the grotefque cha¬ račier of this man, who feemed unwilling any one ftiould fpeak but himfelf, now that his fpirits were elevated by the liberal draughts he had taken. But night iaft
101
fail approaching, I was obliged to inter* rupt him, that I might learn if poífible,the route we ihould purfue. I was not indeed altogether fatisfied with our ftrange friend, fufpecìing that this folitary fpot might be a rendezvous for their company ; nor could I be certain that temptation might not induce them to other practices than fmuggling ; for when once a man's confcience permits him to overleap the law, he cannot himfelf fay when he will ftop. I had indeed carefully concealed the treafure I pofleffed, but it was natural to fuppofe, we had not fled without pro¬ perty; and I had obferved him feveral times fix his eye upon the Marquefa's lit¬ tle box. Nugnez replied to my queftion, at the fame time that he bufied himfelf in -col¬ lecting the remains of our repaft " It is feveral leagues to any town ; but if you dare truft yourfelves to my protecìion, I will conduci you to a houfe, where you f 3 will
102
will find every refreftiment. I am going thither myfelf, and only turned in here to take a whet by the way/' I knew not how to accept or refufe this propofal. I confidered that the hazard we ran by appearing in public, was nearly equal to what we ftiould incur amongft a company of fmugglers. So long a want of reft, and our extreme fatigue, rendered it morally impoftible the ladies could pro¬ ceed much farther, and deciding npon cir¬ cumftanccs, without appearing to hefitate or doubt his honor, I accepted his propo¬ fal with tb greateft marks of fatisfacìion. It was evident the compliment I paid to his honefty, did not lofe its eífeči ; he ftarted up with an alacrity proceeding from good will, and began immediately to prepare his horfe. " I will aftift you direčily/' faid he, w to place the ladies on their mules ; we íhall not have much time to throw away, I can ell you. I will lead you toa place, which even an inquifitor would never find out. I only
103
only wifli 1 was to be your guide to any part of Spain or the frontiers, with the whole army behind us ; you would fee what a dance 1 would lead them, and yet not be more than two or three leagues be¬ fore them. You think perhaps, Cavalier, that I boaft and lie like a Frenchman, but my trade requires this knowledge, and a man ftiould never be afliamed of the trade he lives by ; whether he is a courtier, a lawyer, or a fmuggler ; body of me, but it is all one, fo as a man gets a living ho- neftly !" I had penetrated fo far into the charac¬ ter of Mafter Nugnez, as to perceive, that nothing could pleafe him better, than to attend without interruption to his lo¬ quacity, which was broken repeatedly by loud fits of laughter. Aififted by Nugnez, the ladies were once more placed upon their mules, and we left this lone retreat, as the mills of night ihed obfcurity over the extended plain before and behind us. Nothing, certainly can be f 4 more
104
more defolate and dreary, than wandering' over a far fpread wafte, when night cano¬ pies the earth in darknefs, and the cold winds blow over us. The volubility of our guide, and the furprizing ftories he entertained us with, diminiihcd the apprehenfion filence would have created, and prevented our feeling in full force, the uncertain iftue of our enter¬ prize. The flow of his fpirits prevented the total depreifion of our own, and the length of the way was ihortened in calcula¬ tion. The barren level of the plains, by degrees was broken in upon by fwelling lulls, and after we had wandered fome time, through the mifty darknefs, we found our¬ felves fuddenly entering a narrow defile, which wound between mountains, whofe black fummits we could not diftinguiih* from the hanging clouds, or the ihades of night, but by their fuperior darknefs. Nugnez became at once filent and cau¬ tious. I caft my eyes upon the promifcu¬ ous confufion of mountains and clouds, and remembering
105
remembering the romantic valley of St. Helma, and its inhabitants, I forgot that Chriftiana was riding befide me ; I forgot the prefence of her mother, and our guide, and fighing deeply, I exclaimed ; " Happy rctreatt !—here the innocent need not trem¬ ble at the turbulence of war, and the weary may repofe in peace. Take me, ye ftill and peaceful ihades, to your receftes; and let me recline on the borders of the mur¬ muring ftream, Let the willow and the palm wave over my head, and the whifpers of the voice that I love, lull me to flum- beri" A deep figh from Chriftiana, and a loud laugh from Nugnez awoke me from my fo- liloquy. " Truly, Cavalier, I did not pro¬ mife you any thing of the kind, and I fear you will be wonderfully difappointed. Thefe mountains are very bare of trees, and water tumbles from the rocks^ without a fingle flower, unlefs you can fpy a little tormental on the broken edge of a cliff. This chain runs from Tarragonna to Pam- F ó piona,
106
piona, where it joins the Pyrenees ; we fîtaîî continue amongft them, till we come to the fide of the Kbra, when you may crofs into Navarre, and be perfecily fafe from the feat of war/* " You feem to underftand my inten¬ tions very well/' replied 1. " Suppofing us in Navarre, which will be the moft prudent method of aci ing ?" ** Yon may then crofs into France/* faid he, if without Ле fmaileft danger, if you intend leaving Spain ; or 1 can give you a paíTporf to any fafe retreat, where you may remain concealed for a twelve¬ month; or what may be better than either, ! myfelf will accompany you, if you have fuificient to pay for my trouble/* ** That is very frank/' replied I, "I will be as free with you, 1 am a foldier of for¬ tune, my pofit ilions are no more than my daily pay, and it is from motives of grati¬ tude and obligation, that I have endea¬ voured to preferve thefe unfortunate com panions of my journey from the defini¬ tion
IOT
tion of civil war. I acknowledge that they are ladies, but their fortune is deftroyed, and their houfe was plundering before our eyes, while we efcaped with difficulty/* u m't fay a word more," cried he, *' you may fpare your breath. í have told you my name was Nugnez, that's enough: we fliali foon reach the end of our night's journey, which 1 fuppofe thefe ladies will not be forrv for. Mind, however, to be filent as to who or what you are, and leave the reft to me." This advice was by no means calculated to leflen my fufpicions. But whatever they might be, and whatever might be the event, there now remained no alternative; and I endeavoured to animate the fpirits of the Marquefa and Chriftiana, who were finking into their former defpondency. Nugnez now changed the order of our march. i( Thefe hills," faid he, * r run al¬ moft together at their bafe; there 'm no path, and it is diftkult to unravel the laby¬ rinth, I caution you to follow me 'm filence.
lOff
Alenee. Some of my friends might hear your voice, and fpread an unneceffary alarm." " Good heavens^*' exclaimed I, " have you then betrayed us ! Who are your friends ?" " Follow me, and you will foon fee," replied he, roughly ; " I underftand your fufpieione." ** By all that İs good," cried I, * e if they are juft——" ° And what if they are ?" returned he, fiercely, w How will you proceed ? What will you do ? What is your power ?" * r Wherefore i% this ?" faid the Marquefa, fuppreffing her tears, " Lorenzo, you in¬ jure our friend Nugnez by your fufpicions. Do you not know that the officers of cuf- forns are ever on the watch to detcél any fource of diminution in the revenue, md have you fo foon forgotten the occupation of our friend and his companions? And you Nugnez, you muft impute this fudden snd unjuft fuggeftion, to the awful impref- lions
109
fions of thefe difmal hills, and thofe deep vallies, which the eye cannot fathom, and which feem capable of giving inciter to an army!" "Lady," replied Nugnez, " I am willing to forgive the Cavalier's injuftice; but hüd I not already cautioned him to pru¬ dence where we are going, and where fuch an expreffion would have inftantly coft him his life ï —there arc thofe amongft us, who are only honeft from neceftity." The Marquefa confeifed to me after* wards, that ihe ftiuddered at this con fei Π on, and was confinned in fimilar fupicions to mine, though ftie wifely confidered it beil io appear perfecily confident of the honor of Nugnez. He placed himfelf with a forced com¬ placency before us ; the ladies followed, and J clofed the rear ; winding along a Ja- byrinthian track, of which it was impoftible to remember the maae», nor did we at all times feem to advance the fame way.
Moft
110
Moft aífurcdíy, thought I, Nugnez fpoke truth, when he boafted the fecrecy of this place, for here are neither figns nor traces of human habitation. For near an hour we continued this route, without a word being fpoken ; when Nugnez fuddenly paufiug, took from his pocket a whiftie, in which he blew three times, the flirill note thrilling amongft the rocks. He paufed in filence; the echoes had ceafed, when the tignai was returned at foroe little diftance ; though it was fo impenetrably dark, I could not dif¬ tinguiih the fmaileft figns of a houfe or other abode, and the Marquefa defired to know from whence thefe founds pro- reeded, ·* Fram our dwelling/* replied Nugnez; ** all к fafe and well ; we have not fix paces further to advance/* He alighted, and leading us round the corner of a large fragment of rock, which fome earthquake had riven from the tide of the mountain, we found a perfon coming to meet m, but **hofe figure \%e could
Ill
could not examine in the dark. The watch-word was given, and Nugnez taking him afide, remained a few moments before he returned to us, defirtng that we would alight, for he had fecured us a welcome re- сер ti on. " Our family at prefent/' faid he, " is very fmall, there are only three of our com¬ pany at home, fometimes we have ten or a dozen. If it were day, you would admire the contrivance of our dwelling, it takes in a cavity of the mountains, and runs to this rock, but it is fo fupported with fragments of ftone, and covered with turf, like the reft of the hill» that a ftranger would not conceive that it was a very comfortable re¬ fidence," We followed Nugnez, through a door fo narrow,, that it might have been milinken for a chink in the rock, and found ourfelves in an anti-chamber, formed of rough pieces of rock, piled one on the other, irt the maimer that iliepherds femetime» erect temporary flickers on the mountains, aud a tra-
112
a traveller who might have entered by chance, wo ûd have taken it for fuch ; we were eondticied by a nan, whofe appear¬ ance would hate condemned him as a rogue in any town in Spain. His countenance was fly, and a caft which he had with his eyes, betrayed the wrong bids of his difpofition. lib words were flat¬ tering and fmooth, not lil e the rough liold- nc& of Ntigticz; but as an enemy he was the mofl to be dreaded» and a& a friend he was not to be trufted. * " This man honor, your Excellenza/*faid he» bowing as he led the way into the kitchen, ** fuch as we never before received ; and ihe ladies too !—never before did fo much beauty grace our humble habitation. I only grme, ihat we bave no better en* irrt ainment fø öfter ; ш hearty welcome Ы vt tem every thing, and that you will receive from røe and my friend«. I pray you be feared, and partake in the refrc&V ment before you : it is a late hour, we ex» peûed Mailer Nugnez before rhis." At
m
At my defire the ladies feated themfelvcs, and Nugnez haftened to prepare fome hot wine and fweetmeats, of which he obferved they muft be greatly in need; propo¬ ftng that they ihould retire to reft im¬ mediately after they had taken fome re¬ freftiment ; and this propofal 1 earneftly feconded, their fpirits being nearly ex¬ haufted. I feared to hazard any particular con« verfation, left it might excite fufpicion iti thofe men whom even Nugnez had cauti* oned us to be guarded againft, and who certainly were not injured by any fufpi¬ cion in their disfavour. Two of them had never fpoke fince our entrance; but wrapped in gloomy filence, fat fmoaking tobacco, and drinking brandy and water befide the fire. The whole appearance of the kitchen reminded me of the cottage of Filelfo» when I was ftrft benighted in the foreft of i St. Helma, with thm difference, that the I walb of the roof were Hone, and that fo low, that
114
that îl was difficult to ftand upright. The narrow neu of the doors was fo contrived to prevent a forceable entrance from with¬ out, it being eafy to repel a eonfiderable number, At the further end of the kitchen, were two doors, leading to fepa- rafe apartments. There were no upper rooms to ihc dwelling, part of whkh was actually excavated out of fhe fide of lhe mountains, having been gradually im* prmed by fome general ¡om* of fmuggler·, who banded down the fecret with wonder¬ ful fidelity, nor had it ever been betrayed. The Afcttpsefa and Chriftiana having taken fome refrcfliment* Kugites lighted a hmp, md remarking lo them that they had nothing to apprehend, more than if fhey were at borne in profound peate» he de* fitcd tî«m to toke pofleflìon of tbe cham¬ ber be wat going to allot them, and ufe it » their own. 4 * A% to )«wr ftımû İm rento/' fmd he» ·* be dæ« nm fecni miicb leii in want of reft Iban }ourfche* ; we will fpread bit» f oiue dry fi»îİ4 lotb, and
115
n goat Vikin before your door; we have no other accommodation to offer him; and if he is as much uied to a foldier*s profeffi¬ on, as wc are to our's, he will not fleep the worfe for the coarfenrfs of his bed/' 1 faw that the propofal infpired the la- dies with fat ¡sfai lion ; it feemed to pro¬ mife them Mety from the intruñon of thefe ferocious looking men» from whofe regard they fhrunk with trembling. They immediately arofe, but were unable to walk without fupport, which gave me an opportunity of obfervmg the accommo¬ dations of their chamber, which 1 f ound fitted up in a ib le of neatnefa, we had no reafo.i to rxptci« It contained two beds, í ml eonfiderable wealth ; calk» of fpirit*, md large chelK being piled to the root¡ on one fide. In a few worck, f requefted the ladies to hope their mwfortune» would foon be at an end, fince we had efcaped the firil «nd mill alarming of evib» which timar¬ en; 1
116
emú us, and were now in a place of eer~ fain fectirifr. ■m They fmiled, bidding me good night and requefting mc not lo forget, that î wai only twovering from a fevere ilinefs, and might bring on a rehtpfe by my own exertions in their iavour. On my return to the kitchen, f found only one of the fmugglers remaining, the imo olhem having withdrawn to ihe inner mom, the door of which vemained open, ** You will watch to night, Gaudente/' bid tfugneţ, ** 1 hid my mare of duty fome day f ţmu ţ and mill now tale foroe Ikep. The Csvstter Lorenno tiili fleep in the kiteheti." "* АШ опеГ faid theftifty Gttidentb, mho had not before deigned to fpeak; md wrapping himfelf in a large French coat, he leid a tratte of рШоЬ upon the table, and threw himfelf d^wo to fleep upon ш bench, which шт pbeed on mm uåe of the Üre. Jbugiim
ИГ
Ktıgîie« then furniftied out my homely eouch, upon which I was very glad to lay myfelf, and in defiance of every fufpicion» and ihe certain danger that furrounded m f my extreme fatigue over¬ came every ejeertion» and funk me into a profound and continued fleep till Biorning.
CHAP.
113
СНЛР. IV.
X WAS awakened in the morning by the preparations of thefe men for breakfaft, and found tbe tnblc fpread with profuiion of provifions, a large omelet, and a diih of bacon ftood in the middle, with coftee and brandy. "" You fee how we live, Cavalier," cried Nugnez, as I raifed my head, looking round with my eyes half open. ' ( I quef¬ tion whether you foldiers fare fo well. Here we enjoy ourfelves, and laugh at the reft of the world/' " But you are often in danger of the gibbet or the gallies," faid I, " How can you be happy, with thefe before you ?" "By
119
<c By íhutting our eyes that wc mav not fee them/' replied he, pouring fome brandy into a cup of coftee. "What is the future to us ? Habit is every thing/' Nothing could be more true ıhan this proverb : How impoffible would it be for half mankind to reit, if they looked into futuritv, or were not accuftomed to the toils and dangers of their profeffion. It is this, which makes a foklier fleep found in the midft of tbe rattling of arms, and the cry of war. It is this, which allows the failor to fing iu the midii of a ftorm, and look with indifference on the boifter¬ ous waves. I liftened during breakfaft, to the ad¬ ventures of fome of thofe men, who de¬ lighted to repeat their efcapes from dif¬ ferent dangers, and the artilices they had employed to elude the officers of the revenue ; indeed it was eafy to perceive, that perhaps, with the exception of Nug¬ nez, they were only one remove from rob¬ bers ; and I ftrongly fufpecled tbe íly Gaudenti^
Λ *í¿·
though the neceífities of my 'private for¬ tune required it, It was not without exacling the molt binding promifes that Nugnez permitted us to breathe the pure air of this defert fpot, and even then, wv were reftricled to the limite of our walk. So careful were thefe men lo guard againft the fhaclow of fuf¬ picion» ihat they did not attempt the tlighteft cultivation, and had even rendered the pathlef« binding more intricate, by here and there planting briars in the midft of the way, There was fomcrhing fo wild and tin- couth in the \irws around us, that they mijţht Hate infpired melancholy in the »tind of tbc mofì gay. Steep mid abrul t tulU arofe every where around, denvistg any evtetu of prof peei, and running their hnici* (o clofe, that in times of rain, the tiarrov lute of % alley» was generall) formed into lb bed of a ftream, and when the witcr İ u oud cd, there remained in many place« a uãgmte iwamp* No road ini i ted ev en
№
even the vagrant ftep of a cafual paften· ger, and лоне but birds of prey found fuf¬ ficient temptation to build their abode in the fteep and barren crags of the rocks, Dreary defolation fat brooding in iilenee, and the profoundeft thought received no interruption. The foreft of St. Helma poíľeíľed mim¬ berlefs charms to gratify the mind, when reileciion might ceafe to pleafe ; its ihades invited to indolent repofe ; its mur¬ muring ftream led to the day&of romance ; its ¿lowers gratified the eye, and the warb¬ ling of its birds the ear : but here, nothing that was pleaiing in nature appeared ; the rain, and the burning beams of the fun, were alike uninterrupted ; and a barren wildernefs induced the mind to defpond. In fuch a fttuation, our only amufement muft arife from ourfelves, and it was the» that I was perpetually on the point of re lating my own ftory \ but a falfe ih»me y and a fear of wounding the feelings of Donna Chriftiana, bound me in iilenee. u 2 More
124
More than once, our converfation took a tender turn, and then it was difficult to ef¬ cape the meaning of her expreifions, and we frequently became abruptly filent In the hurry of our departure, we had neglecicd means of correfponding with the Marquis ; and it was not eafy to fug¬ geft a mode of overcoming this difficulty, fince we could not without hazard, ac¬ quaint any of his friends with the place to which we ihould hereafter retreat; nor could I think of any other way by ^hieh he might .difcover us, and inform us of hiš fate, than by myfelf appearing again in public, in my ufual characler, while the ladies ftill remained concealed under my protection, I was a ftranger to any other large towns, but thofe of Toledo and Leon. In the former I was only known to few as a gownfman» nor would it be prudent to pro¬ ceed thither, as I fliould hazard the impu¬ tation of defertion, while to the latter I might have fome excufe for retreating, being
V25
being ignorant of the prefent fituation of the army, and what to me was a convincing argument, I might then learn the fate of Don Raphael, and perhaps again fee his daughter Cornelia. This laft conftderation was paramount to all others, and it was eafy to induce the ladies to agree with me in the propriety of tbs choice. The frank behaviour oCNugnez, though deficient in delicacy, recommended him to our confidence, and I propofed to engage ] him as our conducior, without promifin^ to reward him till our arrival at Leon. The Marquefa left the whole to my dif- cretion, and for a hundred piftoles he agreed to accompany us, as foon after the arrival of any of his company, as we fliould chufe to depart. Meanwhile he employed himfelf in fug- gefting to us various difguifes, as a greater means of fafety, in cafe of any unforefeen rencounter. й< It is not every one," faid g s he,
m
he, " that carries their true characler on^ their outfide. Now, I would undertake to transform y ou,Cavalier Lorenzo, into a friar: your face is fo grave, and your manner fo folemn, that nobody would ever fufpeČÍyou for a foldier. I would fwear myfelf, you were born to be a monk, and your own father ihould not know you." My confcience was flying in my face, at thefe Words, which fo nearly traced my fortune ; and to avoid any remarks he might make on my vifible change of coun¬ tenance, î inquired what characier he would contrive for himfelf and the ladies. " They fliould be nuns," replied he, "were it not dangerous for nuns to travel in the company of a holy friar; the world is fo cenforious ; but we can eafily convert the young lady into a fcholar, un¬ der the conduci of the lady his mother ; you her confeftor, and I your valet; I will anfwer with my life for the fuccefs of the journey.
127
journey. Under fuch a difguife, I would travel through every city in Spain." When I found that his propofal was fe¬ rious, I made feveral obječiions to my in¬ tended habit, particularly to the difgrace I ihould incur upon deteciion. "My dear Cavalier," faid he, m a jelling tone, " monks and foldiers afe more nearly allied than you imagine. They both wear an uniform, they are both dil¬ ti nei claffes in fociety, and are both un- produciive. I could run the parallel much farther» and if you had ever been a monk, you would readily conceive the ex¬ tent of my meaning. I acknowledge that it is not altogether fogood a travelling habit as that of a foldier, but it will pro¬ cure us fufficient refpecì, and enfuie us from fufpicion." I had not much averfion to this difguife, for the early part of my life, as well as my difpofition, well adapted me to the charac¬ ter, and in company with the father's themfelves, I fliould not have feared ex- « 4 pofing
128
pofing my ignorance. Chriftiana made more objection to changing the appear¬ ance of her lex ; and indeed fo doing, fub" jeŕted her to mimberlefs difficulties, her e\treme delicacy could fcarcely fupport; but at the fome time, it was a protection fuperior to any other. When we had determined on the adop· tion of thefe difguifes, it took up fome time to prepare them, and to accuftom ourfelves to wear them without reftraint ; and as the time drew near, that Nugnez expected the return of his companions, we laid them afide that our ftrange appear¬ ance might not give rife to fome unplea¬ fant miftake. About ten days after the departure of the party, they returned, and the fame evening feveral others arrived from a dif¬ ferent route. During all the time of our ftay in this place we had never feen either a fliep- herd or vagrant traveller, and it iş poffi¬ ble that except the fmugglers, no human being
129
being might vifit the place in the life time of a man. It w T anted only fertility to make it a retreat, truly defirable to thofe who wiflied a feclufion from fociety, or without interruption to meditate on, and repent of the crimes of former days. We retired to take a walk on the re¬ turn of, the company, that we might not be any controlli upon their councils. For about two hours, we amufed ourfelves with clambering the fteeps, but the fum- mit did hot prefent us any more enlivened picìure than the bafe, all being alike barren and rugged. On our return we were met by Nugnez, with a countenance very different from the gaiety that ufually fported upon it. " We muft be gone this very night," faid he ; " our company are going to de¬ part different ways, and the entrance to our retreat will be blocked up with fragments of rock. We have information that this place is fufpeoted ; a mifcreant who has heard of it, but was never here, and who once с 5 belonged
130
belonged to this fociety, has given ft ent to the archers. He has lived for lome time by difcovering our haunts ; but his reign will not be long : fome of our chofen fpirits have fworn to hunt him down." He accompanied thefe words with a fierce look. "We are ready to attend you at an hour's notice," replied I; " the mules which brought us hither have had liberty to range and recover ftrength, and we have only to accommodate our dreffes/* " By the mafs," faid he, laughing. " my companions will think us mad. Were it not for the pleafure I promife myfelf in this adventure, and my word given to the ladies, I ihould engage myfelf in other em¬ ployments. I propofe, Cavalier, that we ftrike over the mountains that divide old Caftille, and paifmg near the city of Bur¬ gos, purfue our way to Leon." I had no objeciion to make to this ar¬ rangement, leaving the direčiion of our route to him, whofo well knew the intricate and
131
and forfaken roads of the country. We found the little cabin filled with noife and fmoke, every one folacing himfelf with brandy and tobacco; amongft which, they repeated vows of vengeance againft the traitor who had betrayed them, and I fan¬ cied that feveral times I heard the name of Fiielfo. I whifpered Nugnez, to inquire if thia was the man, and was not a little afto¬ nifhed, to learn that it was no other ; that he had many years been thought dead, but had returned from nobody knew where, and as they would not admit him again amongft them, he had, to revenge him¬ felf* become informer. I concealed my knowledge of this in¬ famous characler from Nugnez, and having difguifed myfelf in an old habit of the benediclines, which we had found amonç the ftores, I fat down at the requeft of thefe men, to partake in their entertain¬ ment; and certainly fo motly a group, half loft in the fumes of tobacco, I had never feen before.
132
About eleven o'clock we mounted our mules, and pledging our honor to the company, that we would not betray them, we began once more to wind through the intricate labyrinths, with which Nug¬ nez feemed to be perfecily familiar. It was not neeefthry .that we mould travel in fo much hafte, as when the roar of war ran behind us ; we . therefore lei- furely traced our way ; the moon lighting «p the opening landfcape with its penftve luftre, and leading forward the mind into fublime reflecìions. When the day dawned upon us, the country opened to our view, ftretching far beneath us like a painted map, or a garden divided into beds of variegated flowers, in the midft of large fpaces of brown pafturage, which the fun had ex¬ haufted of freilmefs. The charms of na¬ ture are ill beftowed upon thofe who carry caufe for fad refleciion in their breaft, and who have a diftant objeci of hope, which they fear, yet are eager to attain; they pafs
133
pafs, unheeded, the greateft beauties of creation, and even the fublime and the grand, fcarce arreft their attention. We flopped not a moment to gaze upon the landfcape before us, but followed the paces of Nugnez, who pointed out to us a little cluiter of houfes, furrounded by a grove of olives, where he informed us we might fafely reft for two or three hours. The diftance deceived our fight; the road which led thither winding fo much that it was noon before we gained the village, where our accomodations were fo miferable, that we could not find a bed to repofe on; and after refting for about two hours in a wretched hovel, the owners of which were but juft recovering from a fit of ficknefs, we again began to move forward. About two hours after dark we gained another clufter of houfes, where we were glad to remain, notwithftanding the want of every thing that could be called con¬ venience; and here it was that Chriftiana firft
134
firft found the great inconvenience of her dref%; mnd fhe muft have remained ill night in the little chamber which was allotted to me and Nugner,, had I not eon* frtved that a coarfe kind of bed fhould be made wp for her upon the floor of the room where her mother was fo fleep, who pretended the could not fleep found if her fon mm out of her call in the night Torcíate to you all the minute and unpleafant rimimi* a nee* we encountered, would be to с \ hau ft your patience, and occupy that time which к fo rapidly Hy¬ ing ; but I cannot paft over unnoticed ш little incident which occurred to m on fhe fom; h day < if our journey, which was a mean of difcovering to me, that the Martpiefa had other fource« of forrow, than the ah» fence of her hufband, and the ruin of their fortune, Jt wa* G% o'clock in tbe evening, after a very fultry dUy, that we arrived, covered with duft, at a little village, where ι few neatly dreiïed girls had aflemhlcd on а СшН green to dance.
135
Â youth, whofe fratures were embrown¬ ed by the fun, and whofe drefs was com¬ pofed of various fragments* fat upon the bench at the door of a cottage, playing npon a guitar, which he touched with a mafter t finger. Hk dark eyes were full of fire, and the intelligence of hb coun¬ tenance, befpokc hh* intereft in the fcfiivity around him. We advanced towards ihe little throng» who ceafed their fport at fight of fo fin¬ gular a group as we exhibited, advancing with funeral ftowaefs. The mufician made a low oheifance as we paífed him ; and fpeaking to a countryman who ftocd near the peafant r in up to ut, and oiercd mt a lodging tn hk cottage, if we did not think it too mean. lits hofpitality waa accepted with thanks, and we turned round to the cottage, bé¬ fete which the tillagers were aftemblcd. We quickly learned that the octafioo of thb joy mm a marriage in the village, whkh the accidental arrival of thk va* grant muncim had contributed greatly to tnbven* The
13Ö
The wife of the peafant, who had thm unexpectedly received us under his care, was good noturcd and talkative; and while Ihe fpread before ш the beft her cottage afforded, flie entertained us with the loves of the nc%v married pair; imi even her eloquence was fileoced when the young mufician began again to play, which he did with fo much fpirit and grace that we all liftened io him with delight We continued to üt for fome time af¬ ter we had finiflied our repaft, liftening to lhe \ ariei y of airs which he played; but fttddenly changing from the brilk allegro, he funk into the plaintive; his hearers, as if actuated by the magic of found, ceafed at once to dance, fiandmg in d i fleren t aî- lîiudcs, or gathering round hira to liften» fearful that their motions might interrupt him. ** Let us quit the houfe/* faid the Mar- queíii, *' and take a bok at this wonderful boy. Where ran he have learnt fø much null? fome of his fymphonies are con¬ duced
137
dueled with exquifite art, while his original airs poffefs fo much true melody, that they thrill over the nerves in unifon." Chriftiana arofe without fpeaking, and giving me her hand, we went on to the green, taking a feat upon a little bench, a few yards from the mufician, where we fat down, fearful of interrupting him. After he had performed a variety of airs, fome of them familiar, and fome of them foreign; the .dlage youths and maidens, no longer deftrous of dancing, fat down on the grafs around him, each with their partner: and love might have been traced in many a tender regard. After looking round him with a fmile at thb rural arrangement, he reñed himfelf a few moments, and the bufy hum of praife was whifpered round. Again he refnmed his inftrument» and liftening ex- peaation wa« hulhed into filence. The miídnefíi of the evening gave a peculiar charm to the plaintive tones of the in¬ ftrument. Ue caft a look towaub us, and
139
and after ftriking one or two chords, he fang thw balbd In a ftrain fo fimpîe, anıl fo pleafing, that e%ery line, and every tone of hit voice fixed itfelf on my me¬ mori*. THE РГЛЖМ BOY. A »AIXAD. !. t hi«T Ыт ?*э ft ι* holy bitd, 1 Ыт tmn *t %Ы СЬгЛЫ Omn* ι &*f tbr Г^4*»ч Wiik %шШ(ш Ъ/та,, İlâ* iefmw'â ïb« temple «Ь**ше* Javdılcm 4 «y, how t*m*å t Tliy piwfeíi 4i4 (Ьн»Гл1мЬ emp!oy t But ıfcf glc<rv nß^t Icattc ш î» mon'd lu tbe Ioni oí * pugnai boy. f. İ |tfiv# beett «t the Holy |да4« I kêVf Ьтп ufm C#l»iiy*i mount ι Вт Ыа t «#к^к y<Ai% ·ι с«шюш4« Mf toi«» § I сшЫшм штти 1 tm« г »cpî *t ılır føff^ws ef busi» Wfco m*pí sb*t we- all eight hifV# joy ι Ve Chi «Пипе, ti&rø m*Lc Ыщ yo«ï lhe»*, Ät fct ii of ihe püf tie Ьо¥# Huv·
tm
ä. I hivcbeťn to the iïoîy Land, ! have feen wh<re th« vintage fiaiľd; But now 'ti* t ideu of fimd f The garment a horrible wild ; The temples, the cities o'enhrewn» By Fagans let forth m deílfoy ï By its people now could not be known, liow mm h Ма Ьу the pilgrim boy. 4. 1 h* ve bren to the lîoîy Lancí^ Whťfe the daughters »í Zion emce: Tung, But the wretehetì nor now underftand The miiftc thai fîow'd from their tongue* I have tr4veïi*4 in hanger and p*i«, From Jeruiakw even to Tmy í Then pity, ye children of Spain» The long of a pom pilgrim b#y** Thk îaft appeal wa* Irrefifttfeie— î ßarteti ep, and running toward him, prefented him with a pitóle, which he received with a look of gratitude, and yet with a grae© peculiar to himfelf. A pretty maiden,
wtm
140
ν,νΐιο had fat with her eyes earneftly fixed upon this enchanting mufician, advanced, and prefented him a little üTver coin, which from its brightnefs flie had no doubt, long regarded as a trealure; ftie requefted him with a blufh which fpread over her face a thoufand beauties, to fmg them a love fong. cr That I will, my fair maid," replied he; " but I never fing of love for hire.— Let me return your prefent, which you are to keep for my fake/' I reaftumed my feat befide Chriftiana, whofe eyes overfpread with the fympathetic emotions of her bofom; and the Marquefa feemed deeply concerned. We expecled fome¬ thing extremely tender and pathetic; but ftriking over the firings of his guitar in г playful manner, he fang this little air. 1. Blooming virgins ceafe your pining, Winter flies, and fpring returns; All that's fair and gay, combining, Round the youthful heart entwining, Leads to love, and foftly bu,rns.
141
9. Pleafing fancies, withes dealing, By unknown deftres poffeft, What can caufe this new-born feeling, Which the confeious maid concealing, Hides more clofely in her breaft.* Chriftiana blufhed as the arch mufician turned bis eye upon her. The Marquefa fighing deeply, faid, ' ( this youth is cer¬ tainly of better birth than his fituation feems ίο fay.—He is, poffibly, loft to his forrowing parents, and now is become a vagrant for bread,—Alas, how do I know but my own chikl is firaying deferted and forlorn, dependant on the hand of cha¬ rity!" While the Marquefa pronounced thefe words, I was feized with a fudden trem¬ bling: my pulfe beat with emotion, and fixing my eyes upon her—"ís it pofii* ble," faid I ; " how did you lofe this child?"
144
About fourteen days after this event, wc arrived within fight of Leon, having twice in our journey been obliged to reft for a day or more, to refreih ourfelves and our mules. The firft fight of Leon, and the mountains, which at a little diftance reared their dark fummits in confufion to the clouds, gave a fhiih of joy mingled with apprehenfion, to my fpirits. I fixed nu¬ eves upon the well known hills, behind which lay the valley of St. Ilelma. " Ah, Cornelia ! " laid I, internally. " Do you ftill refide beneath the ihades of the foreft— do you ftill remain beneath the mouldering roof of that ruined and gloomy caftle? Is the fevere Don Ra¬ phael yet alive, or has he expired, and left you to all the perils of your expofed fituation?-— foon fliali I know. Soon ihall I learn what is your fate. But О heavens ! ftiould I find the caftle empty, and Cor¬ nelia gonel" The fuppofitiou made me Hurt with a pang of terror, and the ladies reproached me with my abfence of mind, having
145
having feveral times fpoken to me without receiving any anfwer. " One would fuppofe, Lorenzo," faid the Marquefa, <( you had a miftrefs in Leon, and that you did not expeci a favor¬ able reception." " You miftake/' faid I, very ferioufly ; " there is no lady within the walls of Leon who will acknowledge that title." lť But if not within, Cavalier," faid Nugnez, "there may be without the walls, and all-I can fay is, you are not much of a foldier if you delay the ftege till the fort is relieved." I fmiled without reply, and a flight bluih tinged the cheeks of Cornelia, who readily underftood the iniinuation of Nug¬ nez, which was made with a look of ex¬ preffion towards her. At a little village within half a league of Leon, Nugnez defired us to halt; turning a few yards down a green lane, both fides of which were covered with trees, whofe vol. ιϊ, h branches
140
ЬглпсЬп e»ífed ai tbe top* formiiij* ш cool штё ЬешипМ retreat, "Ye* wull Måliowledge/* UM Nu^- ner* " thå-f İ luve performed шу pro» ernie* зта Ъти%Ы чш tefe to the Ца1е% of ţjtmt I Ihoon Ime doíie Ле fawe i í all the мете bdi hmm Ы oor brek I *мЬ ι fe yet« lo deb) ettteirøjt the rity till thr« eirmntt. bill %ot> ntolt ev^uír m% fot ι Iter iHrt)iUner \«%* tbat I ha%r fulfill««I m\ eiigi^rtuffïit there t coutei» ooh %oiirp-»rt io prrl*»fw Ir m í* wn convenient io ion о» the ipái. appoint шт pime m Ijtatu *bcor I Ih-ll tnrrt %m io*inorrow Mţs^t « but I ftmuhl tse better pleali^l not lo rinrr ihr «»IK ** ii » mıh regm* ' teplied I* ·* ihat I prs f mm *mt шЬт км olúígté yt with lo pum ^*^ш1 &iï#e% t та the mote fo м I can«**! fieeiitd tm } ou to breóme ш wgu* Um »ember <wf $ш*т%„ I mm m hopt^ %îm чш шфг kê\e ^шЫЬеа Е m our ют- |мюу ш ft lie Ut mme и-шла тжжт mâ ct^onesCktitiii tluti that of }uitrbteiiun|M' prillimi .
147
tuons; but I perceive that habit к more powerful th«in reafon. 1 ihall not ¡n any degree willingly bë the теапч of vour de¬ tention; let us» however» now fit down in thi* pleafant biuation» and iharc the ílotť% %eba\e teft, oler which we will fettle our arcounf " I delhcred f« him the exaci fum fot %ihtth *** had agreed. The Marqueia, a» w r had pre-conrrrfed, gwe him a ring of morr thun eiptal %ulue, which he reeeivec! bitli many exprelltona of gratitude, "1 haie mm only to Jet joii into ii lit¬ tle leeret before I go*** laid he, '* whieh í», that I hate known you ladies all »long. The Marqua de Mirandula m by ihm tíme fafe irt France, f met mıh Ыт by chance the \ery night of hi» İ%ht # and wa* the mean« of dífeétínn him to hk ťveretary, Vafeo, who wa* ih ing after the baMİe* and knew not of the efcape of the Mar· qui» ** ·* Why/* cried the Marquefa, with a ftulh of joy, * r did yoit »ot petition tlim u f before?
ue
beforr?— I low could vo« retain fuch a fc- cwt for fo mam dbv* ? ** *' To ftirw \mt that î am riot one who lelb all he know«; and befide, lady, t thought \tm wotiW noi trufl me with fo miiïh c««ıtfîdemr Ml 1 might bette} you ** "ihe Matt|i*rfa cawld atf»f apjior dif- fde*fed wnh ılıî% riirj«w* íjwnrimen of lide- itii k ccmientt«!)« hrtfrlf %*ifh making cvm jKiffiWr ιρί|4ΐί«^„ but mûmut leamift^* any ţhmţ mute (atufa im} î ï«*|iiiît4 uhat mme he intended m pttffne whrp hr quiffed ut He replird ttui br Hatt тл }*i determined, but that îi br саше mmh Лаг tteltor· Fıleifa, he Ihouhl ^ifw* oui all the delii» beii* een ilici« î tf kt not attempi to chec I thi* fjiittt of ir^rtif r, mid after л bttle more romerfa- fioti. hr »rofe, ш%й roncraliit|» the mottet ta* Шт tawi? of hwJiiilillr, he mounted ana rvde «ff* M full ttot Left «ibolh to ourfehf», for the Crii tíme lance out t|iıîttiîî| the houfe of the Ы'Шриъ
149
Marquis we entered into a more particu¬ lar arrangement of our affaim, Chriftiana, ne%er eafv in her mafculine «lrefs t de- ferminetl on reftiming her own, imme¬ diately after o«r eftablifhment at Leon, mid at î muti of neceftity be frequently in their company, I propofed that I ftiould paft for a føn and a brother. Thk projeci necefllirtly led the Mar¬ quefa to inquire if my own parent» were not lb ing» and in what part of Spain they reßded? 1 evaded thb queftion, by ob« ferving that rny family was of fo remote a part of Spain» that no one of leon would difcover our drftgn. The Marquefa did not appear perfectly fatbfted with my reply ; there was fomething in her manner* which fttewed that ihe wa$ not ; but being unwilling to by hold ott my evident amin í h w k the canfented to the plan* f%ith one or two modification*. %\ e waited till towards evening before we entered the rît) «f Leon, where leaving the Ld¡€% at an inn, tku they might there a * сЫще
ш
ihr the fafety of two ladies, who were in faci as much a tic upon my aÊlions, as if í bey had been a family of my own, and I Was at as little liberty to leave them. The jewels and trinkets of value, which l had received from the Marquis, I con¬ fidered as their property, which honor obliged mc to dedicate to their fervice ; and my pride was alarmed, when I per¬ ceived, that in faci I was become a pen- fioner upon them. I knew not whether I ihould receive my pay from the army, and particularly in the prefent deranged ftate of public Üînances. My thoughts became gloomy at thefe refleclions; it feemed utterly impoflìble that I could ever aik the hand of Cornelia, and provide her com¬ mon fubfiftence ; even if ihc ihould ven¬ ture to difobey the implacable commands of Don Raphael. " But how do I know," eried I, rifing and pacing the room; "How do I know that he yet lives, or whether he languiihes under the eŕfeéb of that fatal wound, Ah, if he is dead, and Cornelia left
153
left deferted and alone ; with what plea¬ fure ihould 1 bring her into fociety, and place her beneath the maternal care of the Marquefa, in the company of the tender and amiable Chriftiana !——But no í --how cruel is my fortune, and even more cruel fliould I be my felt were I to introduce this dear miftrefs of my heart, into the com¬ pany of the too fufceptible Chriftiana.— Good heavens ! what is my fituation ? In¬ volved as I am, in a labyrinth of oppoiite and irreconcilable difficulties. Unfortu¬ nate from the firft hour I drew breath, a dependent on an unknown bounty ; a fol¬ dier without pay ; wanting almoft the com¬ mon means of exiftence ! Who can advife me ? To whom ihall Hook for aififtance ?" Thus I continued to lament my fortune, till the latenefs of the hour invited me to bed, when my fleep was difturbed by har- raffing dreams, and I repeatedly awoke in fudden fright. In the morning I haftened, before the ladies were vifible, to procure information и 5 from
i 54
ÏVdm thè army, and leaŕn the prefent fi tua* tion of my own troops. I muft confefs, I was aíhairiea to be thus abfent in time of danger, but hitherto it had not been pof¬ ïible for nie to act Otherwife. î learned With no little furprize, that after the flight of the infirrgelits, they had rallied with eonfiderable force, and in turn routed the royalifts in repeated aciions. So fickle is fhe fortune of war, that no patty ought to exult in victory, or be dejecied on defeat, till the í nal terms of peace are ratified. The army agent at Leon had received aft account of my death, after I had been de¬ ferted at the inn ; and í learnt with no little vexation, that my name had been erafed, and my command given to another. I expreíľed my furprize at this hafty proceeding, requefting the agent to write, as I ihould myfelf do, both to Count Pan¬ dolfo, and the Duke. " Moft willingly," replied he, bowing profoundly. " You will not, I fuppofe, think of joining the агту д till you fliali re* ceive
155
ceive an anfwer. You muft exj. ,cl the aflair will take fome time to arrange, for it will not be very pleafant to difmifs an able oificer from his fituation, till another fliali be found. You may, however, rely on my exertions in your favour, a« much* as ifit were for myfelf; and need not take any trouble, as it will go through my hands in the common routine of bufinefs." I returned this gentleman thanks, being -very well fatisfied to truft to hh promifes, not knowing that he had at that very time received a prefent from my fuccefTor> to haften his commiftion, fo that in place of writing in my favour he wrote to his friend to be on hw guard, till he was con¬ firmed in the rank. Meanwhile, 1 was the dupe of hk proe¬ mi fes, being very well fatisfied with the leifure they allowed me to attend to other concerns, with which I was much more in¬ terefted. I made no fecret of my return to Leon, that the Marquis might learn røy refidence from the public report, and my time
156
time was very agreeably fpent in the pri¬ vate fociety of the Marquefa and her daughter. One u n forefeen delay followed another, to prevent my executing the intention I had fo much at heart, of vifiting the valley of St. Helma; and when I had made every necefiary arrangement for fome days ab¬ fence, my journey was fufpended by the fudden ilinefs of the Marquefa, who was attacked by fo violent a fever, that I greatly feared it would terminate fatally, and in¬ volve the unfortunate Chriftiana in greater diifícuíties, with which ihe was no way qua¬ lified to ftruggle. This new and terrible caufe of grief, feized upon her fpirits, and reduced her to fo much weaknefs, that it was with diffi¬ culty ihe performed thofe little offices, ficknefs cannot difpenfe with. I endeavoured to infpire her with brighter hopes, but wlien the heart is fick and the fpirits faint, even hope lofes its power to charm, and foreboding melan¬ choly
157 choly leads to the moil finifter conclu- fions. It was impoflìble under thefe circum¬ ftances, I could move from my ftatipn, every moment being employed in attendance on the Marquefa, or in confoling her daughter, who feemed to caft herfelf upon my pro¬ tecìion, and to Janguiih in my abfence. It was with forrow, that I faw this deep and incurable paffion mingle in every ac¬ tion ihe performed towards me, and which the honor I had pledged to the Marquis, would have prevented my returning, had not my heart been engaged to another. Yet, notwithftanding the engagement formed by preference, and endeared by time, it was impoftible tobehold the touch¬ ing and diftreftlng melancholy, which had feized the inimitable features of this charm¬ ing lady, without feeling : and if the fa- crifice-of my life could have procured her happinefs, I would willingly have parted with a bauble I had fo little reafon to prize. I frequently
*53
I frequently attempted, by indireci in¬ timation, to hint the folly of a woman's plaeing her afteciion on an objeci, which might not, when known, be found worthy of efteem ; but ftie anfwered me only with a figh, and a timid glance, which fpoke more than fentiment could utter. The attention required by the Mar¬ quefa, brought us often together in her prefence, and we have paífed whole hours near the bed-fide of that amiable lady, without interchanging a word. I lamented the impoftibility of inform¬ ing the Marquis de Mirandula of the dan¬ ger of his lady, of whom the phyfician, who attended her, had very little hopes, and I looked forward with apprehenfion to the hour, when I fliould be left fole guardian to Donna Chriftiana. For near a month the Marquefa lin¬ gered upon the bed of death, vifibly wail¬ ing into ihadow, and haftening to that ftate of unknown being, where every con¬ jeture fails in hope. I daily and hourly looked
15$
looked forward to this fatal event, fcarce venturing out on the moft important bufi¬ nefs, left I might find her no longer living at my return. When the day broke in the morning, I expected that flie would not breath at its clofe ; and when the night came, I could not hope flie would again open her eyes on the morrow. The fallacy of human hope is never more evident, than nearthebedo/ficknels; we catch with ardour at the fmaileft amend¬ ment, and are funk in defpair at a contrary fymptom. Our fpirits had been confider- ably raifed by the apparent cheerfulnefs of the Marquefa, and having fcarce refted for many days, I retired to my chamber to feek a few hours repofe. About midnight, I was fuddenly roufed by the calls of dame Sporza, who begged me inftantly to de* fcend, if I ever wiihed to fee the Lady Sempronia alive. I hurried half dreffed, and in thentmoft confufion, to the room where ihe lay, too feeble to give utterance to fpeech, bnt her eyes
160
eyes yet díftinguiílied objecìs, and, her fen fes were un ih aken. She fmiled, when I drew near the bed, almoft choaked with unutterable grief. Her daughter, the filent picìure of dying mifery, fat befide her with one hand in her's. The Marquefa beckoned me to draw near, holding out her other hand to me, which was already damp and chill. She gazed upon me, and then regarding her daughter with a look of tendernefs, ihe drew her hands together, giving that of Chriftiana to me, then clofing her eyes, ftie feemed fink¬ ing under the effort ihe had made. The foul of Chriftiana was too feverely touched by this unexpecìed acìion. She lifted her hne eyes for a moment upon me, and doling them, funk fenfelefs upon the bed of her mother, who, with a faint figh, that inftan t expired. I took Chriftiana in my arms, and wept over her like a child. My whole foul feemed ready to forfake its habitation, and my fenfes were bewildered with grief. I gazed
161
gazed upon her lovely features in filence, and ihe feemed a thoufand times more dear to me than ever, and for fome time even Cornelia was forgot, I knew not how long I remained in this fituation, nor when I ihould have ihaken off that ftupor, which attends excefs of misfortune, had not returning fymptoms of life in Chrif¬ tiana, reminded me of the part I had to perform. I judged it beft that Chriftiana ihould be ignorant of her mother's death till the morning, and carrying her into the next room, I defired dame Sporza to attend her, till ihe could leave her with fafety ; while the nurfe ihould remain by the body of the Marquefa. The little box which this unfortunate lady had preferved in her flight, and which I believed might contain papers of confequence, I took to my own chamber, and placing it beiide my lamp upon a table, I gave way to exclamations, and the bittereit grief.
I threw
162·
I threw my fd f, half dreffed as I was, upoi* the bed, vthere I remained till the clock firuck two, I was aíioniílied at the tardi- nefs of time, for in my apprehenfion, it was near morning» Sleep was entirely de¬ parted from my eyes. I arofe, and looking out, the ftreets of Xeon were defolate and eladc, not a footflep trod upon the hollow ground ; nor did any ilar {hed a ray of light through the gloom. I took, a chair, and began to turn over the contents of the box, intending to take an inventory of the trinkets, and * fee if there were no papers that might be fome guide to my aciions. I found a. packet of letters, which appeared to have been writ¬ ten by the Marquis, at different times, and many of them on the tenderei* fubjecb ; but I had no inclination to enter on the pernfal of what was fo foreign to the) fo-f Iemnity which hung around me. Three or four folded papers lay at the bottom, tied with a black ribbon, and on the outfide they were direcied to the Marquefa, in a different
16,3
different hand from fhe firil parcel, and by ihe name, which was this lady's prior to her marriage; I immediatly fuppofed ťhem io have been fent by fome unfortu¬ nate candidate for her áffeciions. At another time I ihould have examined thefe letters with curiofity and attention, but now I regarded thern with indifférence. u Alas/* faid I, rf fuch is the circle of hu-> fnan affairs ; fuch is the tranfaclions of our paftage through life. To-day we are diftracled with paffion for an objeci, upon which we concentre every wifh and every defire. A few days, a few months, a few years, fwiftly fly; but not a year, not a month, not a day, paffes xvi thou t fome change in this objeci of our af- feclioîı. Before we have well confidered that we have equally changed, death has already laid his hand upon us, and the beauty of youth is departed for ever. How important, perhaps, were thofe letters at the time they were written ; but of what confequence to any one is the hiftory of
164
of former yearns The prefent, whkh we never enjoy, к all ihat we know, and all of which we are certain ! 1 lifted up the kíl parcel, with intentio» to replace them, and a very elegant tittle portrait flipped from them, tied with black. Thi* circumftance aroufed fome little cu- rio%, and holding it nearer the lamp, I flatted with furprize, at beholding the fea¬ tures of a man, whom no one had ever feen once, and forgotten. Is it poffible, thought Ï, that Don Ra¬ phael was ever in love with Lady Sempro¬ nia ? What muft have been the difappoint¬ ment of a roan» whofe every paffion feems fíre» and who knows not how to fulfer controul ì No wonder that a man like him, whodifdains the f malle ft check upon his actions,, ihould feel the violence of fo fevere a loft. I wonder that his mge did not involve in 'm ciTeife, the deftruciion of its objeét But can he, could he have ever known the genuine influence of love, and deliberately doom his daughter to forego
i6â
forego any, and every objeéì íhe might chance to choofe, and bar her from all af- fecìion Ì It would not be Don Raphael if he acìed like the reft of mankind. On the revetfe of this portrait, were feveral initial letters, which I could not ex¬ plain, having no relation to the name of JDon Kaphael, and I concluded they might have fome fecret allufion, known only to the objeci of his paflion. laying aiide the portrait, 1 again took up the letters, which had now aflumed a very different value, and foon interefted me. They were written with a feeling that at times approached nearly to raving, and again expreíľed fuch exquifite tendernefs and defpair, that tears flowed from my eyes as I read. He complained of the pre¬ ference flie gave the Marquis de Mirandula» in language which I ihould have thought irrefiftabte, and which no heart unpre- pofìeifed could have withttood. Some¬ time» he hinted the fuperiority of his birth and fortune above his rival, and fometimes h?r
16ü
he iníínuated that he could never behold her in the arm* of another, and endure cvîftcnce. Bat the laft letter, evidently fent after her marriage, wat dicbted with пшгу maris of infan ity By imrm he em· pb\cdcvcr> gentle name he could lix upon her, or execrated her at Ле hane of hk e&tftence. He menaced her with hm eternal hatred, aud concluded with the mofl aident ¡«жует for her foppincf». Such had been thb impériom man beneath the tfiãuetieeofUne;-- -lie, who to the ligbs of another wa« as obdurate m marble, wm editable of the deepeft and moll violent defpair. ßut however the portrait aflured me that it muft have been Do« rbphael who had written thefe lettera» the initials upon it coinciding with the ugnature, yet it was дтроШЫе for me to diføover from them the real name and rani of their author. After reading thefc letten feveral tiwef, I took up thofe belonging to the Marquis, ^ Ьк h, ¡ke Ле other*, had been written in the
IOT
fhe days of courtfttip, and, probably, re¬ ferved by the Marquefa at memóriák of her youth and the power of her charms. How different wat the language of thele letters from thofe of Don Raphael ; the moft patient and conftant attachment vtm marked in words of equal tendernefs and refpeil ;—The moft delicate turns» and fhe moft infinuating wit, ran through every line ; and the preference whkh a woman of underftanding and wit would give, wa» quickly deckled in favour of the Marquis The morning found me engaged over thefe papers, which 1 confidered very ill fuited to meet the eye of Chriftiana, whofe heart was already too deeply engaged for her tranquillity :«-To preferve them for the Marquis wa» a» little eligible, wad to keep them myfelf» ï Mem not whether honor permitted. I reflecied that Chrtf- tiarsmuft be acquainted with the contents of this little box, though ihe mtght not have perufed the papers ; and that upon the whole, thefe papers had better be com¬ mitted to her difcretton.
ies
The fttdtftjt of thefe letten, and my тйеШтш «pon tliem, 1ш1 tn ¡Mît fuf- penàeà the fottent of grief chicli at irft tnci rjrïie ше» and enabled me to think %tiih fome ilegiee of cajianeft upo» fhe engagement 1 bad before me. The Iaft «Hion of the Marquefa freme*! ян avo**! of her daughter** fe« t í ments» and ш claim upon røe tø return them ; but I could neither receive fhewt, nor fpeak lîpcııs the fubjert. I fortfaw how impof· fjble it would be that we ftiotild remain İti the fatne houle* and though ftie paffal «öder the »ame of шу filler» yet decornili fcarcely permitted fo mmh iftfcrcotirfe as woukl the« be uita^oMabie, In a convent Ihe would iftd every attemîoıı, and if ad¬ mitted under ш lietit ions mme 9 woukl avoid any dang» from the enemies of her houfe. îi wis ш fe%ere шШ to hint the neceftity of fuch » utesfttre* but I faw no other way by which her peace might be reftored. The tfittàeti in my pôifelïîoa, with tlrøfe of ber mulher» would amply proxtdc for
1бУ
ben even if her father ftiould fall a farri- fire to bm ill fortune ; ami unpleafant as was tbe neceffity of reprefenttng thefe 1а€Ъ to her, î refolved upon the meafure* when t ftiould have performed the Iaft ottico* of ftiendihip to her deceafed parent, I con¬ fefs tliat I appeared cruel in my own eyen, 1 could have wiihed that Cornelia had not been lo dear to me ; but 1 had not refo¬ lution to forego tbe one for the other.
vot. it* ι CHAP*
Iî»
ащ\ v.
АшШТ Û% în tbe morning» I dc-f« ended %«îtb tbe intention of taking a nalk in tbe air» m try ifit« ftrmnefn would dïfiîpaie a fevere bod -дсЬе, %*birb want of reft bad occafmned, I went into tbe ñreet, whicb wms%n without any paflengen, bnt forøe det utre* going to morning prayets, Thofe who kite never experienced» can ne%er know tbe fmgtibr fenfations of tbe human mind* when tt bai but juft qui r fed the bed of death* and filled with thoughts of mortal infignifieanre, walii out amongft tbe little elevations wbk b men inhabit, and whieh rom pofe a city. We fee every objeel with a melmncboly and indifferent regard ; our thought*
Ul
thought» are wandering to other workb, wfiile our bodies feem of little confequence İn thb ; and we move on, rarelefs of the obfervations and opinions of thofe around tti. There was fomething folemnly pleafing in thh ftate of mind, and it wa* with pain tny thoughts were interrupted, by a grave man, of little flat urc. who inquired of me the way to the ñreet in which 1 lodged. I paffed him without reply» being unwil¬ ling to diffohe the illufion which wrapt me ír» iN imagei ; but repeating hk quef* tion f and planting Wmuif in my way, he obliged me to flop and anfwer him. While I was giving him directions ( for 1 had infenfibly walked to a eonfiderable diftance ) he eyed me with particular at¬ tention. He apologized for the trouble he had give» røe, and obfemng that he wa· a ftranger in JLeo», inquired farther, if I knew any of fhe people refMing in that ñreet.
1 4
I
172
** I live there myfelf/' anfwered I. Again he looked earneftly upon mc, and iìanding a moment as if còníidering fome¬ thing of importance; " You live there you fay ? Can you inform me of a perfon of the name of Lorenzo de Ferara?" In my turn I gazed upon this ftranger, but not reading in his countenance any embarraíľmont, which might bave excited my. fufpicion, I replied, "If you have anv bufinefs with Lorenzo, I am his moil intimate friend, and will cither carry your mcifage, or lead you to himfelf." i( My bufinefs is a mere trifle ;" anfwered he, fmiling; "it is only to inquire con¬ cerning a vacancy now in the army :— I will follow you to him if agreeable." I endeavoured to draw from him, during our walk, what was the real objcčl of his mi Шоп ; what he had aifigned being, ob- vioufly, only a pretence ; but he was im¬ penetrable to my queftions, fmiling at my expecìation of difcovering more than he intended. I knocked
173
I knocked at the door, and dame Sporza opened it, faying, as foon as we reached the firil room, " Indeed, Cavalier Lorenzo, you need not have been in fo much hafte with the funeral of your mother, for poor Donna Chriftiana, I fear, will very foon follow her—ihe is extremely ill indeed." "Is the Marquefa dead?" cried the ftranger, turning pale ; " what fatal cala¬ mity is this which has happened ?" " It is, indeed, too true," faid L " The Marquefa expired but a few hours fince : we will talk on this doleful fubjecì when yon have delivered your bufinefs to Lorenzo, whom I need not now inform you, ilands before you." He looked at dame Sporza, as much as to require her abfence : but conducting him to my own chamber, I begged him to be feated, and to inform me of bis miffion. " My name," faid he, " is Vafeo. I am the fecretary and confident of the Marquis de Mirandula. I have brought letters for you, for the Marquefa, and for Donna i s Chrif-
i 74
Chriftiana ; but what wretched tidings fhall ï have to carry back !—Will fortune never be weary oí ~ persecuting the vir¬ tuous ?" I inquired where the Marquis had found an afylum ; and by what means he had fo foon gained intelligence of my refidence. He replied that it was with extreme danger, and under various difguifes, that he had efcaped from Spain ; that he had found it inipoíľible to enter France, through the cordon of troopfs which were ftationed to cut off any communication with that country ι that adopting the habit of a blind beggar, attended by Vafeo, whofe dark features eafily paffed for the gipfey breed, they had kept along the feet of the Pyrenean hills, till they arrived at St. Se- baftian, on the coaft of Bifcay. There they were recognized inquiring fora veíľel to go to France, and would certainly have been taken, had they not moft opportunely met with Nugnez, the fmuggler, who in¬ formed them of their danger, and advifed them
175
t em immediately to put themfelves on bcaid a little veifel they had in a private creek, bound for Ferrol. They had fcarcely time to reach the bark, before their purfuers came in fight, expreíľmg on the ftiore their anger at this efcape, and firing their carbines without any hope of execution. From Nugnez they learned the fafety of our party; and having been beaten about for a fortnight, by contrary winds, they put in at the ñrñ creek on the Portugueze coaft, where they could land in fafety ; from thence the Marquis and Vafeo fet out for Villa Franca, within a few miles of the frontiers, whence the latter had ventured with difpatches from hb mafter, and now delivered them into ray hand. Had he been only one day earlier, the Marquefa would have been living; and tbe certainty of her huiband s fafety might have given a favourable turn to her diílem- per. I haftily opened the Marquis's letter to myfelf: it was written with kindnefs, 1 4f recom-
176
recommcndir^ his intereiìs to mv further care, till fuch time as he fliould be fettled enough to take the charge from my hands. lie requefted me to fend him, through the hands of Vafeo, thofe papers he had de¬ livered to me on the night of our flight, and concluded with inviting me tojóin him in Portugal, where he would procure me a fuperior command under the Duke of Briganza. I exprefifed my difpleafure in plain terms to Vafeo, at this overture againil my loy¬ alty. (( What," faid I, "does the Mar¬ quis take me for ? It feems he confiders me a raw boy, who may be fired with the fopbifms of difaffecìion, and ignorant of the genuine appellations of patriot, fince he confiders no man a patriot, but who would oppofe the prefent eílabliíhment, right or wrong. Does patriotifm confift: in wifh in g fuccefs to a fworn enemy ? No, let the meafures of government be everfo oppreffive, there are other means of red refs, than inviting, aiding, and affifting an enemy,
Iff?
eneni ν, \vho in one week would do more mifchief, than the defpotifm of power in a century." My conneciion with the Marquis had nothing in common with politics, and I determined in my anfwer to be wholly filent on the fubjeci; indeed I had fufficient matter to employ my pen. I propofed to Vafeo that he ihould witnefs the inter¬ ment of the Marquefa, w T hom it would not be poíľible for the prefent, or at leali pru¬ dent, to convey to the tombs of her aii- ceilors. The danger which attended Vafeo, whofe perion was almoil as well know T n as that of his mailer, determined me to receive him for fome days into my lodging, and í de¬ bated with him the particulare of the folemn ceremony, which remained for me to perform. It was with fome difficulty, and not without the aíTiílance of dame Sporza, we arranged our fchemes; for as the Mar¬ quefa was to be interred under the name of ι 5 my
170
my motber; it mif bt be dinlcult to claim brr f when tranqtidlity might allow her re- mo%al. Thk good w^oman propofed to afk leave of tbe fuperior of a coment, who wa» ber relation» io admit tbe body into tbe vault of their church, as that of a lady» who, in раШпд through the city, had been liiddcifly talen illand dieti; and might be i Umed by her relation«, who refided at a dffbnt part of Spain» when they fhould learn ber fafe, I irave dante Sporza a fmall fum to tin** dri'fakc and defray little c^pcncc^: and this arrangement being finiflied, all my care turned upon Chriftiana, whofe fpirits w ere fa low, and hrr frame fo weak, that f feared tbe flit*hlefi agitation might o\ er¬ róme brr, I difclofed to her with caution, tbe tiding* l liad received of her falber*· fafety, and finding fhe liftened to it with calmnefs I delivered hk letter into her band. On tbe fourth day after tbe deceafe of tbe Maiquria, î followed her, in company with Vafeo,
iľí)
Vafeo, to the vaults of the dead, Chriftiana being too ill to partake in this folemn ce¬ remony. It was the firft time I had ever followed a friend to the grave, and my mind was too much afteélrd to permit me to examine this fanauary of mouldering mortality, through which the ilaibing ta¬ pers ftied a dreary ftame. To defray thefe expences, and beftow a prefent upon the convent, where feveral mafios were celebrated for the repofe of the deceafed ; I was obliged to part with forae jewels, keeping an exact account of of my dilburfementíí* Vafeo had remained iMth me during hb ftay in Leon, but now the tragical fcene being clofed, he pro¬ pofed to depart* having ufed the fubttlty of his art in vain, to draw me over to the eaufe of rebellion. He was under the ne¬ ceffity ofufmg much caution at his depar¬ ture, being appteheiifive that he ihould be known. After Vafeo had left m, our family re¬ turned to fomething like tranquillity, though
18í)
though a fettled melancholy fixed itfelf upon Chmïijna ; and our difcourfes fre¬ quently turned upon the merits of a life, fpent within the walls of a convent. It was impoftible not to perceive the mean¬ ing, couched beneath thefe difcourfes, which me was the firft to promote. ** Sime/* faid ftie, ** life has no charms tor me» 1 begin to feel an inclination to pafs my days within the wails of a convent, where the contentions and ftrivings of fo¬ ciery will be excluded from my fight ; and where, if I am not happy» I Ihall at leaft learn refignation to the deftiny of provi¬ dence," So much fweet and modeft eloquence flowed from her tongue, while her angel countenance feemed illumined with more than mortal expreftion, that i was fre¬ quently obliged abrubtly to fly her pre¬ fence, left my tongue Ihould have be¬ trayed the purpofe of my heart ; and I ftiould have uttered vows that cooler reafon could not have fulfilled. Some
jai
Some weeks paífed away, without any news from the Marquis, and I began to entertain fears of his fituation, or the fafety of Vafeo. I had repeatedly folicited the agent, for my own finances were exhaufted, and my p.ïy fufpended, but he never wanted means of delay» and my difpofition did not once fufpect or penetrate his defign. In this interval, 1 determined no longer to delay my journey to the caftle of St. Helma, I informed Chriftiana, that fome little bufinefs of material importance to myfelf, would require my abfence for a few days. At the fame time 1 delivered to her the box, containing her mother's let¬ ters, which I had deferred till now, when the keen edge of her forrow was a little blunted. The portrait of Don Raphael, whom /he had never heard named, ihe moft willingly gave me, and bidding me remem¬ ber, that while I fhould be abfent» ihe re¬ mained without a protector and without a friend ; ftie haftened to her own chamber, that
182
that flie might conceal the tears which fwelled to her eye. it was early in the morning that I de¬ parted from Leon, well mounted on an Andelufian courfer, which I had hired for the purpofe ; and the day being beautiful, a few hours brought me to the foot of the mountains. My hopes and fears ultimately bore fway, as I drew near the eventful, though fecluded valley ; and it was with pleafure, I lingered to examiue objecìs that recalled fo many pleafing thoughts, while I almoft feared my approach to the caftle, left I might be only going to plunge myfelf into a new feries of difficulties. It is in vain we reafon with fate, and thofe who think themfelves only guided by reafon, are im¬ pelled by irrefiitible circumftances. Since the time I had firft rambled from the fort of Dajos, and lingered on the mountains till the íhades of night hung around me, when I was ftruck with more tiun common aikmiihmeut at the phan¬ tom
183
tom or fliadow of unknown exiftence which paífed by me, I had never experienced any incident of fupernatural appearance ; nor did the many tales, I had at times liftened to, touch my mind with thofe common fuperftitions my education at Toledo had helped me to overcome. But, however we may condemn the errors of the vulgar, and fmile at the fpirits faid to dwell in dreary ihades, and mofs-grown ruins, yet we muft acknowledge, that we know little of the economy of nature ; and from our inability to account for many accidents which daily arife, can only refer them to unfeen caufes ; and, without the hazaixl of fuperftition, may allow that intervention of fingular and tmdefinable natures, have happened at various times to man. In this belief I am confirmed, by an in¬ cident, I myfelf experienced in the foreft of St. Helma, as well as by that tremendous phenomenon, which I have juft mentioned. The fervent heat of noon blazed upon the mountains, and obfcured the akiire of . the
184
the iky with vapour, giving to the diftant country an appearance of being involved in fmoke. When I entered the pleafant íhades of the valley, the birds had ceafed to chirp amongft the boughs, and every wind of the heavens was ftill. The waters of the river feemed to have fufpended their mur¬ murs, that they might liften to the filence, and fancy might have concluded, that fuch was the paufe before animal exiftence was awakened into being. It appeared a fpe¬ cies of facriiegc to interrupt the tranquil¬ lity of the groves, and wrapped in reflec¬ tions on the reception I might hope to meet from Don Raphael and his daughter, if they yet remained ; I moved ilowly towards the caftle. A voice behind me, pronounced the name of Lorenzo ! in a tone fo clear and diftincl, that I turned in¬ ftantly round, with a ftart of furprize, but no perfon was vifible—and what perfon could have followed me ? I paufed.for a moment, confounded at fo myfterious an incident ; but willing to think
185
think that my fancy had deceived my under- ftanding, I turned about, and began to purfue my way. The found of a quick footftep behind me, caufed me again to look round, and a trembling crept over my nerves, when I could perceive no fign of any perfon near me. All now again was hulhed into the profoundeft filence, and again the fame voice, at a diftance before me, clearly pronounced the word Lorenzo ! I was filled with fear and uneafinefs; it feemed an omen of fome fatal accident. It might be a preparatory warning, or a fign that I ihould forbear my intentions, and return. Eut the intervention muft have been more evident and more power¬ ful, that could have deterred me from the fteady purpofe of my heart, at a time too, when I was fo near the decifton of my doubts. The impreflion of this incident upon my fpirits, was ftrong and immoveable ; I en¬ deavoured in vain to reafon upon the fub¬ jeci ; I ho longer beheld with delight any one
m
one obječi around me.—The flowers loft their luftre ; and the verdure of the groves its green ; yet in defiance to thefe melan¬ choly forebodings, I continued to pro¬ ceed» When ï gained the thick labyrinth of trees which encompaifed the outer walk, and were purpofely interwoven with cop¬ pice-wood ; I fecured my horfe in a fecret recefs, moving myfelf cautioufly into the more open path to make obfervations. I could not perceive the fmaileft external change. The tottering ruins ftill threaten¬ ed to ftrew the ground, and the ivy crept over the gates undifturbed. I proceeded wholly round in expecìation that the win¬ ter's ftorms might have broken an en¬ trance; but the ftrong creeping plants, which clambered the wall, acied as a ce¬ ment in binding the rough and heavy ftones together. My heart beat while I made this cir¬ cumvolution, being aflured that the place was inhabited, the little door refilling my cautious.
187
cautious attempts to open it. I fat down on a bank of flowers at fome diftance, to coniider by what means I might gain ad¬ miifion. Whether I fliould wait, as here¬ tofore, till night fliould wrap all things in obfcurity, when I might fafely fcale the wall; or whether I ihould, without hefita* tion, prefent myfelf at the gate, and de¬ mand admiifion, to inquire after the health of a man who, notwithftanding the unfortu¬ nate accident which took place at my laft vifit, was under fome obligation to my fervices. I was not long in determining on the latter, as the moil eligible upon feveral accounts; and while I fat a little time to reft, I enjoyed the pleafure I ftiould re ceive in furprifing Cornelia, who muft have confidered me as either dead, or in- conftant to the profeffions I had haftily made her. I was every moment on the point of rifing, but my heart as frequently failed me, till the fun had already paífed feveral hours.
188
hours fince noon. At length I arofe, and cautioufly advanced to the little door, which I had gained within a few' feet, when I heard the bolts withdrawn on the inilde, and fearing thus at once to expofe myfelf to the eyes, and to the anger of the imperious Don Raphael, I ftarted afide behind fome tail buihes, which effec¬ tually concealed me, and had the fatisfac- tion to fee this man, whom I fo much feared, pafs by. Sufpicion marked his fteps, and he darted his glanées around him with fo much jealous precaution, that I feared he would detect me, and I bluihed at the meanefs of my concealment. A much greater'degree of palenefs had taken poflefíion of his gloomy counte¬ nance, and his ilinefs had given an expref¬ fion of anguiih to his features. His drefs was not fo uncouth as I had before feen him wear; and his cloak hanging on one fide for ahe benefit of eoolnefs, I per¬ ceived that be was armed with piftols. He feemed, in my eyes, like the lordly ty¬ rant
189
rant of the foreft, trembling at a founding leaf. I dared not quit rny covert till I judged, by the timej and the meafure of his pace, that he was at a eonfiderable diftance; then ftealing with as much precaution as himfelf had ufed, I \enturcd from the iliade and approached the door. I had been acquainted with the fecret of open¬ ing it when not barred w r ithin, on the night that I had preferved his life. "What are omens/' faid I, fmiling as I entered; ' ( if they have any value, this is an omen of fuccefs." Then clofing the door behind me, I fecured it with the bolts, and ad- \anced acrofs the weed-covered yard to to the door of the caftle. No one who had cafually found an en¬ trance, would have fuppofed thefe trem bling walls contained an inhabitant: the outward bars, halfeaten through with ruit, would have effectually prevented their cu¬ riofity from prying further—thefe I re- removed, and entered on the winding paf¬ lages
190
f ages u hit h led to tbe furniflied part of the building- The folemn lor·«» of the organ, played with ш very low Uøp # filled tny bretil with tumultous emotion, and combit led шу ücp% without error. I feared to prefent myfelf at once, left the furprize ftiould produce unpleafant circumftance*; %et fearing the fudden return of Don Raphael, İ had no time to delay, and opening the door, I ftood al once before the objeci of my «flfrcìtons. She ft»ried up from ihe inftrument, al¬ ternately colouring and turning pale; then again me fat down» und %*ïihout fpeaktiif, fixed her eyes upon me, ** My deareft Corneli»/' faid Í» " be not alarmed at my abrupt entrance; I had no means of preparing you for a vifit, whicb I hope h not unwelcome.** Tean gathered in her eyes as I fpoke, atı« flie gave way to them fo much that ihe perfecily fobbed. I could have borne her company* but checking h much weakness, I took
191
t took ber pallive hand, md preifcd it to my tipt. **Tel! me, dear Cornelia; 11 f&W î, ** whence flow thefe teats? are they from a remembrance of the ptft; ©r m yom heart full to overflowing ? ,f She wiped fhe lean from her eyes» and turning them upon me, foft at violet» dipped in a ftWer # *«~ ** Do 1 indeed/* {aid ftie, " be* hold you? h tt in *ery truth loremo that I fee? How many day«, and how many months have gone fmce 1 kft faw you!—«Indeed 1 thought that you were dead, or bad ceafed to remember me,** ** IrapofftbU/ faid 1, prefling her bandì " I mnft forget myfelf before I forget you. You, dem Cornelia» who have been fhe conftant objeeì of my tbonghts, and whofe image im ever ftood before my eye·,- * Tell me, my angel, for we have no time to Me; by what providence did your father furtive tbe røtfcbance of my hand, and tbe wound* be brd before received?"
'Don
192
94 Don Raphael,** replied Ihe, " lay for a long time ill, but the powerful cordials he poffeffed, and the ftrength of his con- flittittøn, fo long deprived of the luxu¬ rie« of poliihed life, in time recovered him, He is now perfecily well, and more fevere than ever; but do you know, Lo¬ renzo, I havc # a fecret to tell you/' 11 And what is that?'* fatd ï fmiling. ** Don Kaphael intends to many me ! Is ît not ridiculous?" eried flie» laughing. " Good God ! " exclaimed î in tne utmoft aftonimment. " Don Raphael marry you*. you, Cornelia ?—what an infamous and infernal project Do you know that it h impious in extreme?" 4 * Whatever it may be," faid flie, lightly, *' You need not be in a paffion ; I have told him 1 would not have him, even if he wai my father 1 ." 1 ftarted up in perfeci amazement; what, thought I, is this beautiful creature an ideot after all.— u Heavens!" cried I, half
193
half diftračted; st yon fpçak ftrangely^ Cornelia;—What is it yon mean ?" " Have I not told yot^ then?" faid fhe. " 1 was fo overjoyed to fee you, that İ for¬ got: bitt I have difcovered that this odious Don Raphael h no more my father than he к your's.—Yon need not ftare fo, for it is m true as that he wants to marry me; bat I told him 1 thought you а thoufand timen more handfome, and he has been ill- natured and gloomy ever fince.** " Heavens, Cornelia/* faid Ï, again fit¬ ting down, i( yon confound mc with your words; If Don Kaphael is notjfom father, what is he?" * "A tyrant!" cried fhe with indignation. " Has he told you all this himfelf? " faid Ï, beginning to fufpecl Don Raphael of playing upon her ignorance, € ** No, no;" replied fhe, " he kept the fecret locked up in that large iron cheft you might have feen in his room. If you will have a little patience, i will tell you all about it." vob. u % « You
394
**Yøu wilt oblige me/* replied I, ·· I will be attentive.** "To begiii then," faid íhe: «It was not his intention I fliould ever learn this importmt farm, till after hk death, which he hat kept for fo many years in profound filence. It шт one night when he was fo much overcome with hi« fever, and had - no expectation he ihould furtive, that he made me fit down by his bed» and at inter- ten al« gave me itifîruéiiom about many things 1 was to do, immediately on his death, Amongft others he gave me the key of andiron cheli, which always re¬ mained in that chamber, which is fo ftrongly guarded; he informed me, that within it 1 ftiould tind a large fum in fpe- cie, and fome papers of the iWmoft confe* quence to myfelC with directions ï niult religioufly obey. He fo much eichaufted himfelf by talking, that he fell into fo deep a ileep, that while 1 watched the glimmering lamp i could not hear hiir breathe, and concluded he was dead. 1 cannot
Ì95
cannot defcribe to yott tbe fmgularity of my feelings at this idea* fo altogether new to me» and which I had never witneffed, but in that of expiring birds; and I felt tboeked at the thought that he would never fpeak to me any more. " But this reflection gave way by degrees, M the recollection of what he had com¬ manded me immediately to do, upon hi* deceafe ; and leaving the fide of the bed, í opened the iron cheft with the key lie had git en me. The papers lay in a little divt¬ fion, on the top of feveral bags of money— they were my principal objeci ; and taking out the upperraoft parcel, I haftened to the lamp, which burnt very faintly, throw¬ ing a trembling light into the room. 1 broke the feal of a letter, directed to my¬ felf in the writing of Don Kaphael, and my eyes were immediately rivetted upon the firft fen tence, which filled me with aftonifhment. It was thus : * Cornelia, пщ beloved girl\ I have educatiti you in igno¬ rance of your real birth : You are not my к ¡ ¿ daughter^
m
aâuşfıter* ihmgh Mømé wkh ерш/ 1етЬт* m-m. Your parente mît —«-* At thefe wotds a deep groan ftom Don Ibphacl thin* we into the utmoft confufion, 1 knew not wliat шш% going to follow, and ttffttHtiiR as much a% if ï had been guilty of a capital ctíme— 1 haftily replaced the paper** &nd ilofed the cheft," 4i Hul why/* rrird Î, ** did not you re¬ tain a paper of fuch infinite confequence to yowtlelf ?*' ** 1 know not/ 4 replied flic, ** I was fo mur h aftoîîiflîfd at ihw difco%ery t atsd the return of Don Kaphael to life, that I knew not what I did, I turned round at librali» for l beline fhe noife of tlofmg and locking the cheft had aroufed htm. * Vome hither» Cornelia/ faid he in a faint loice, ** bring me thr ke>a 1 ga\e you/ ** 1 returned them with fo much con¬ fufion, that he remarked my agitation, and demanded of me if J had opened ihe cheft, " I had
197
*' î had ever bee« taught to anfwer but with truth, and replied that i had. • You have/ replied he, gnafhmg his teeth *rth m much fury as hb enfeebled ftate would luffer.— * You bave read the papers too, I fuppofe/ *' Yes/* replied Î, " I have read that 1 am not your daughter/* * You have then difcovered this fatal fe¬ cret/ faid he, with a look of bttternefs. 'Whofe daughter are you, if you are not mine?' " That/' anfwered I, "I had not fuffi- ent time to read ' Then you know not whofe daughter you are," faid he, clofing his eyes firmly for a moment, then opening them, he gazed round him with a wild look; * if you do not know, you never fhall—bring hither the lamp to the fide of the bed, and put fome more oil in it/ <*l did m he commanded me, for I had no idea of refuímg any thing he ordered. 1 it was my fault, Cornelia, that ihk κ φ ί hun
im
há% happened/ faid be, in a voice more ц«ш1с *l ihoidd haxe lemembered the ci^nofity inlterent in your exiftence—* Htrc, fakeilla key again, and bring me hither tbe paper* you faw,—Now, now/ ι «minised be, * take that firil, the feal of wfikb you baie btoke»,-**It contains tbe fee rei of your birth*—burn it in tbe flame of tbe bmp * " Wc tore tt in førend piece·» »nd my dtfappoifitmettt wa* extreme, for I had IUi tenti «n felf be meant me to read it. I %%i*\ obliged to obey ; and not onl% tbk» I «,t m*ny **iher papeiv he commanded me ţj «onitiioe« ami fötter tbe aflioion the finar» ·' W hen l км! made an end of ibi* tor¬ menting employment—· Ko**/ laki be» with a fmile, whkh I thought, made him more hideout iban 1 bad e\cr feen bim, 4 *sr are Ые. What you have now dnïrmcd %*a* the biflor« of % our birth» m * îmd oí rø) hír . iher* 1 re-main* now only one tb*»¿ io peiforttt— ¿о to tW chcil and
199
md bring hither a liftle bundle that you will ímã * ** î fiffi as he ordered me; unrolling the drcft of a little child which was made of rich ftiifft, md highly ornamented— * You looked very pretty, Cornelia/ faid he, * when you wore that drefs— İt к almoft a ptiy to bum it/ t# Surely you would not burn thh/* faid Ï» breaking into tears, '* it cannot tell me to whom î belong; and now that í know you are not my father it can be of no con- ftt|wetice to you : nnd here h a little chafed bos you cannot burn, * Shew me that/ faid he ** He o|>ened the lid. md immediately doling it and fighing deeply» he bade me, İn a v oice much altered, to tye them all up together ãgnín, and put them into the cheft. * I will explain all thefe things to you when I net well, At prefent you, no doubt» thiuk me m%d I have been once mad, Cornelia, but time has recovered me/
«rø
" î would willingly bave retained this little bo\, but be watched me fo clofely, %Ы% I bad not елен an opportunity of ХшЫпщ, at the contento« Kor did 1 know. ult long after hts recovery, that İt con¬ tained tbe ptelture of my motber. " This was all the information be con¬ defcended to give mc, commanding me never again to bint at the actions of that «igbt, « 4 Ii« manner« towards mc were now \ery moth changed, and he perferuted me with fpeedics and addrefles I ihould not h;tve imdcrftood, hut from your for« tmr wo»l>. 1 confel* that be feeks to oblige me in »II things but in allowing me liberty, lie will not permit me to fet foot in tbe foreft» nor to vifit my little ar¬ bour» where I «fed to take fo much plea- lure: and if be intended me utterly to bate him» be could not take more effectual means. He will not fuller me to mention vour name before him, whicb only makes ше think more about you; and when he fighs.
20Ï
fighs, and teíh me that he adores me to diilraciion, 1 tell him he к not half fo handfome« nor fo elegantly drefled as you* He has, İt b true, changed hia drefs to fomething more agreeable, but ftill he is fo ferions, fo pompous, and fo—I do not know what, that 1 cannot bear him/* ** Your words, Cornelia/' faid í, * ť have planted daggers in my heart, but they have rendered you dearer to me than ever. How da n g ero tin is your fttuation in thm dreary place ? You have here no protec¬ tor but this man, whòfe ways, and whofe actions are wholly different from thofe of other men» and even approach to infanity. What fort of pauhut can he be infpired with, who 1ш numbered twice your days, and doe* he know fo little of the human heart as to expect fuccefs from feverity ? How more than cruel was the acìion of forcing you to deftroy, with your own band, the tefti mori ics of your birth? and what confidence can he expeci, who lock* up from you the tokens of your family яз and
mr¿
шпй n лте? Syre ly you cannot think of remaining here ** dJ To what purpofe mould 1 ííy f" fatd ťbe. ' 4 Dtm llaphacl lm informed me that all mankind are treacherous er url, and felf- iUt, llenan told me, that if they natter ñ ¿ъ to decerle; if they fmile, it к to be¬ tray; and 1 ba%c found that himfelf ъая not exempt from thb characler." **Ye*/* crìed h with emphafis: "He drew hi* ошп characler, and palmed it opon tou m the characler of all men. Whti eøéntbl difterence ha& itrture made ki the m ìndi of women from men ? Do jou ftnd then that thw character attaches to } ou ŕ If h doet» «ot, lielieve that there muy be røe« equally exempt from deceit/* ahe fmiled, and replied» ** You are %ery warm» Lorenzo; but how do you know thai my heart it not deceitful?" *· Tbe folings of the human heart are great/ 1 returned I, ** but while my Cor* nelia pofteftes thk amiable franknefs, ftie cannot
!Ш
cannot deceive —At what time do y#u ex- peti the return of Don Raphael?" ·* î have no means of gocRing/ an¬ fwered ihe. ** lie never declares to me the intent of his авют. He goes out and returns without a word " ** Ihn e you tourage, (4>mrl¡a ?** faid í, taking each of her hands in mine, and rifing. *' Dare you hazard your fortune upon mine, and permit me to liberate you from thi» fingular flavery; io Angu¬ lar, that throughout the kingdom of Spain there U certainly no other example ? Per¬ mit me to lead you into that world of which you ha\c onlv heard. This İh the moment, and perhaps thr only moment fãtv h;rs given, which if fuffered to efcape, will never again return." " Moft willingly would ï truft myfelf to your protection, if I could depend upon your word," faid flie, deeply bluming. ** I tale all the faints ш heaven to wif- nelV' faid ï, rhfpinç my arm round her, *· that 1 um fuıcerc—- that I adore you to fremy,
го4
frrtt/v «-r*d ih^î îicjîl.rr vme nor cirmin- futu r* mn tİiâbgc røy <-©1*Длп<л/* ** 'l 1ч тттф,"* replic«! ílvt, " there is røy ïïüïsd— if }<iudc4ct%c mc. nn heart t* ¡H fic\cr morc placc confidente in man" ï Ыа been hurried fon* л rd to thh pro- ¡mrât by iincvpcdcd rírruniflaiiircs, and iverns no other ъау lo preveni m\ loting her for rv cr, I haficitcd lhe triíiiiig pre¬ paration that %*ач nercf&ry for our depar¬ ture, every moment fearing the return of Don Raphael, *holc poucr I knew, and *ibofc ihimih I had to dread. The pïomifrs» he lud formerly extorted ft am me %*ere ail cancelled b) the dîlco» \щ that Cornelia \лаь »ot hb daughter; hut the folemn threat* he had uttered arofe too ftrongly in my mind to be /light¬ ed What к it ι hat love mil not over¬ look; or ι* hat daring mal! а тип ¿brink from in purfuit of that pleafure ? It is a рпгеогу oí the foul^ during u hole exift- enee* reafon, intereft, and every barrier, are only oppofed 'm vain? If
20ò
If ever there was an inftance of fuch extravagance İt was now exhibited in my¬ felf,——Without friends» without fortune, where had I fhe means of providing com¬ mon exiftence? But thefe reiieetions, at that moment, did not enter my mind, f remembered only that now to leave Cor¬ nelia was to leave her for e*cr. It was not long before Cornelia, confid¬ ing in the innocent fimplicity of her own heart, and my promifes, gave herfelf up to my protection, and we haftened to leave behind m this gloomy building. This ilighi reminded me of the night when 1 fied with the Marquefa and her daughter» and the grief I was preparing for the lat¬ ter infpired me with a fadnefs I could not controlli To fay the truth, I was not perfectly fatisfied with my fiight, and al¬ moft repented my precipitation; but it wan now too late for thefe refteciions; though ï could not but reflect on the meam Don Raphael might poilefs of exe¬ cuting his vengeance« " Teil
№
"Tel! me, Lnrrnxo." faid Cornelia, %bîng a« ftie leaned on my arm, * * What ate yo« ihiiitcing on Ì Forgive fhe fince- rífy of my wadk hul you feem at thii moment very lilse Don Kaphael, gloomy, filent, and fad, 1 fear lhat all men are Hike, though fome may have more power f о irai« confidence than others. İ fmiled, İnil waf unable to return atı anfwer* and wc quickly came lo lhe place where my horfe remained ftationed. I placed С *orndia behind me, after tranquil- fixing her fears, far ftie had never feen fuch an animal before, and coidd not for- lurar expreflions of wonder at hh beauty. 1 feared ihat our voices might betray m t through the deep filence of the foreft» and advifing her fo lie filent, I flruck into the high road, proceeding at a round pace. We had not proceeded far before a voice commanded me to flop, and I was nearly obeying, when I was ftruck at the fighi of Don Raphael juft before me, with гще in hb countenance. ."Villain!
207
M Villain! affaffm! robber!" cried he ftamping with paffion. " h it thus you betray me Ì Stop, or íhudder at my re¬ venge!" The fcreams of Cornelia prevented my reply; and ftriking my fpurs into my horfe, he darted by like an arrow. Don Raphael, feeing that his words had no ef¬ fect inftantly fired hk piftols after us, but the ihot rolled amongft the branches, with no other effeci than that of frightening the horfe, who daihed forward with the ut¬ moft fpeed ; and all our caution was necef¬ fary» to prevent being ftruck down by the fpreading arms of the treen, which ex¬ tended, and dipped over the path. The found of his fteps thundered through the foreib and difdaining the reins, Don Ra¬ phael was \ery foon left far behind; but our fpeed was unfortunately interrupted by fome intertwined roots, which crept over the path, and which catching hi» feet, we were all thrown to the ground together.
My
208
My left arm was con fiderably brut fed, and Cornelia was e%tremely frightened, but our horfe halted in fo crippled a con* diiion. that I İeared he had dİİÎocated his fliüuhİer, and could not poftibïy carry either of ш. în this forlorn fttuation î knew not what would be mofl conducive to our fafely ; for though Don Kaphael was far behind us, he uotild cerlainly overtake ш before long. ît became abfoİutcîy necef- fan 10 quit the direi t path ; and by ftriking ft« iher amongft ihe mounialm», endeavour to reach Leon by a muer circle: now the evening \*»ь faft approaching» and it was both uupîeaûıiî and dangerous to pafs the night expofed to the damp of the foreit İ was obliged to 1е&ле the horfe to his íme* it being impotfible to lead him through the intricate mazes of the wood ; and ftriking, m far as poflìbJe, in a direci line from ihe path, we hoped to und fafety iii the defolatio« of thb wUdemefc. The
209
The ground over which we trod fcarce ferved to fupport us, being rovered with luxuriant grafs, and formed of a thick ftrata of leaves, which the winds of autumn ihook from the boughs, and where they fell, they remained to enrich the principle of re-production. We continued to wind along the open¬ ings, frequently ftruck by recoiling boughs, or flopped by entangled briars, till Cor¬ nelia, wholly unufed to fo much exertion, declared flie was fo weary ihe could pro« ceed no further. It was vain to wiih for relief, for none could be expecled in this deplorable wild. I endeavoured to infpire her with courage, and fläcken ing our pace, we proceeded till we came to a gentle defcent on the left of our way, which feemed to conduci to a fecluded dell, where at leail we might ex¬ peci fecurity, This defcent floped gently for fome yards, then turning abruptly, we opened upon a little fpot the moft roman¬ tic in nature. We
2 ГО
We had to defcend by the affiftance of the trees and ftrong fhrubs which grew in di forder down a precipitate bank, formed by nature, of about thirty yards, when we entered upon a fmall plat of fhort grafs, kept ever frefb, and covered with flowers, by the ftream which crept along one fide, over a bed of flat and broken rocks, fo clear and tranfparent, that it feemed to the eye a moving mirror. On the other fide of the brook, and forming a part of the circle of this delightful place, arofe a broken and ftupendous precipice, in the interftîces of which, at intervals, grew various ever¬ greensand mountain afli. Several myrtles îti full bloom fpread upon the utile green where we ftood, in the centre of which grew a Sarge oak, whofe branches would have íheltCTed a company. If the eye looked along the ftream, it was inter¬ rupted by dark and tremendous rocks, and we ftood in a magic circle, formed by na¬ ture, of beautiful verdure, and of gloomy grandeur, " This
Sil
u This is eminently beautiful/' faid Cor¬ nelia, " and far fuperior to the little recefe where you firft faw me. I think 1 could be content to live in fuch a place/* I fmiled at her fimplicity ; and being my felf charmed with the fituation,and more fo with the company of this innocent girl, I baniftied from my mind every unpleaimg refleciion, difcourfing with her more freely than till now I had ever had opportunity. The time flew fwiftly away J( and the even¬ ing fun funk unregarded behind the weftern mountains. The increafing gloom of evening changed this fequeftered dell into a retreat of dif¬ mal appearance. Darknefs fettled upon the rocks, thick mifts arofe from the black¬ ened water, and canopied over our heads; a cold wind followed the channel of the ftream, and fighed through the cavities of the rocks, with a found like the fancied invocations of invifible and fabulous dei¬ ties; and fuperftition might with eafe have here taken her dwelling. Cornelia
2Ш
Cornelia had been ufed from her earlieft memory to gloomy and awful fcenery: ftie had frequently írod the dark and dreary paflages of the mouldering caftle, when the wind roared, ihakîng it to the bafe with its fury : ihe was not therefore alarmed at the approach of darknefs, which for fo many hours was to overihadow us. The fcreams of the birds of night echoed through the hollows of the rocks; and thè rifing wind founded in the tops of the trees like <the ruíhing of diftant waters. Be¬ neath the thick foliage, of the feathered oak we liftened to the figns of a gathering ftorm; for in this mountainous part of Spain, the vapours are collected by the hills; and the exhalations of the day, condenfed by the coldnefs of night, fre¬ quently defcend in torrents, accompanied by the thunder and the wind. With thefe Cornelia was better ac¬ quainted than myfelf, and ihe aflured me a ftorm was approaching.
The
213
The broad drops of rain foon began to patter upon the leaves, and the vibrations <tf the air conveyed to us the murmurs of 4iftant thunder. I was fearful that my fair companion would be frightened at the tempeft; but ihe replied, that nothing could be more familiar—that ihe had fre¬ quently, from the turrets of the caftle, beheld the lightnings play upon the diftant hills, whofe fummits were feared by the fubtle flame—and that Don Raphael would at times accompany her to contemplate tliis awful but fublime phenomenon of nature, when the dark woods and the black mountains have been lighted up by re¬ peated flames, and all the furrounding landfcape feemed in flames. . While I liftened to her defcription, the tempeft drew nearer, and the faint light¬ ning penetrated our recefs, throwing an obfcure and dii'mal gleam upon the threat¬ ening precipice, and the water which fo¬ lemnly daflied at its foot. The peals and repeals of the thunder ihook the earth, and
214
and rolled over the hills with tremendous grandeur, infpiring irrefifiible awe; while the vivid and fucceífive flalhes of lightning feemed to threaten nature with univerfal combuftion. The founding rain hilfed and fang amongft the foliage, through which the collected drops began to pene¬ trate. We ftood up, Cornelia leaning on me for fupport, both liftening in filence to this elemental uproar. The embodied and cumbrous clouds, impregnated with fulphureous matter, and agitated by the howling wind, feemed gathering over our heads. An immenfe blaze of light for half a minute illumined every leaf around us, and penetrated the darkeft chinks of the rocks. The thunder almoft inftantly fol¬ lowed in founds as if the rocks had been ihaken from their ftations, and were tum¬ bling upon us; while the wind howling with dreadful fury, ftripped the boughs from the trees, f weeping them like ftubble in a harveft field. ï clafped
215
I clafped Cornelia in my arms, expect¬ ing no lefs than that we fliould both perifli together ; but a deluge of rain that mflied down feemed to calm the fervor of the tempeft, the violence of the ftorm paifmg away to a diftance. I began to fear the fwelling of the ftream would overflow the place where we ftood, and led Cornelia to the rifing ground, where fome large hawthorn buihes partially flieltered us from the torrent which con¬ tinued to defcend. , # "What a night is this !" faid I. « You would have been more agreably fituated in. the caftle—" ff Iiufli !" faid flie in a whifper: tc What is that?" I raifed my eyes, and perceived the red glare of a torch reflected againft the op¬ poiite rocks, and could plainly diftinguiih voices above us. It will be too much, thought I, if Don Raphael difcover us in this retreat: his vengeance is more to be feared than all the fury of jarring ele¬ ments.
216
ï dared not venture from the fpot where we ftood, left the diftant flames of the lightning might betray my figure. I could clearly diftinguiih through the gufts of wind two voices, which fometimes called to each other, and then feemed to Hop in confutation. They paufed on the brow öi' the hill juft above us, and their torches reflecied down to the water, which was now wholly above the ground where we had ftood, whirling along with frightful vio¬ lence. l< I tell you what/' faid one of the men; " my torch will go out, in fpite of all my care. I don't much fee the ufe of it, if it is not to tell we are here." fC Let it go out then/' replied a rough voice. " This is the place; let us defcend." c< That is what you might have fpared to telime/' faid the other in a deep tone; ' ( and a better place there is not in all the foreft. But as to defcending, I fay no" " What are you afraid?" faid his сот - Ľade in a farcaftic manner. " I thought we had known how to act in the dark."
m
"Fool!" cried the other with pee v i ili impatience, " of what ufe is defcending ? By this time 'tis a foot deep in water. I am for going on immediately to the caftle i we ihall be well accommodated there—we filali reach it, I warrant, in an hour." " Well, well/' faid the firft; " the old Don muft give us a lodging this night, and fettle a long account before morning." " No more of that," returned the other; <( he may chance to hear us; he is perhaps at this moment wandering about the foreft, to enjoy the fcenery, as he calls it. Let us away !" Such was the dialogue of thefe men, as they ftood on the top of the afcent ; and when they moved away, my blood ran cold in my veins at the fuggeftion, that their errand was no doubt to murder Don Raphael. Imperious and myfterious as was the characier of this man, I felt an inconceiv¬ able repugnance againft allowing thefe villains to proceed in their fcheme ; and vol. h, ĺ cer-
318
certainly tf Cornelia Ьша not been %ríth me, ï fhmU have followed шЫ attempted to prevent f hem: but to leave her behind, ex'pofed to acrhtaif, ш% m utterly im- poffible а<| to tåke her with we: %ñd v-'hiîe î lamented my own wimf. of power» î rouhi not but rejoice at our efcape from thefe mbliers # who 1 had no doubt fubftflod by outrage, ** How ihorkifig i^ tf/* fiid ï to Cor¬ nelia, ** Лт even fht« foren» which feemed intended for franquillify und реже, ihould give rtteitr r to men fuch » thefe. Open or inditeci uoletice appear« to be the chararìcriftir of man : and thw earth» at time* fodelighffuL « oierrtin with crimes» wiih raiíen·, and with deftmeìioti/* "« How differently," fatd Cornelia» with a deep figh, " did you paini the world to me before 1 lelt the caftle ; and now joti «fe the very words Don Raphael hm re* peatedry itnprefTed upon me, Why did í ever quit the days of my youth : шЫ ! m Iin-
319
I fiiereaľe "m уешп and in knowledge, аш f to iiirmfe Iti wre^kedne^ ?'* ** It t» frequently but tøø true,** atifwerrd 1: ** the lot of mail b wonderful! v caft. He, who of all beings hts the grmteň rhim to happtnef», if pre-eiRinenre of intellect and førultte» сян beflow ît t î» yet the ob¬ jccì of perpetua! und fcarce mmîfed cabnıîty, and the dreary maniions of the gra%e Hand at fhe end of hk career/* " But furely he «tuft have fome other evtitenee," laid Cornelia gravely, und preftlng my hand. " He muft—«he rou ft !" replied I : ** or of all created beings hb lot m the wmiV* Thefe reflections, the time, the fttuatiotı and circumftance» had infpired, tilled m with the moll feriou* thought*; am! I found, that though Don Jtoplmel 1ш1 hekl hh pupil ín the moll profound ignórente of the worW «ml Ш people, he ЫА tttkert care to cultivate her wind wltb a know¬ ledge of the great principle« of natural caufesami ctttdk, md mme than ever í f* f Uccpi v
«о
ЖшьА*а*Аш» èhm 1Ш*1Ш*ЛМ*гА >3п*>4 lin*» «Ш|«.«· ШакМ*. ΜΜΊϋ ШРГ^щу |1|рИР»1* 11^ «Ш1 Wffi W4Pk шу шш!, ι^Ι аш It м* «ttfffy ш^оНШ t fwM w«f « In» of "tó áiÄfW, I IhmI **f # Ь»*»^»еГа · lumi Ътре flu« bit 4fita«NNi *f ι be Wi of СошрЫ wí»M lufti Ь« «ι tbc «laftrli« if br Indi no· ţmt» îmé «Act «ä* lidi t 1ш»^г fell well hm mmm iá éeferne, m етЫ Ae exrnî tî Ы tmtmê i%e fhøneu ifotm Ы mm дорЗЫдо ISittMum, wet with rm% tmå wmåée № fif dmm «tfiofi ibc lawful, шс ееттшЛ fewnâ teéímm hmr% t »Il tbr цег ψ ¡щЫ of røom^if tutoie tu l^raiif «рш! il* wofMi шта ihe w»å»g telili íum$ ibr ^l«*r* of Ле сшш^ dby. tite «tf ^ttUiíi^l İş- the hm temm*, d*ť Meé û* tbm фпаацк* ef life ТЬе ъшш Ьша MMeè m tuâáetâ* m fhey ndt, mâ Ле jswli g tmmvl wub ЩшЫ All fbrfe e Ьшю «rtvr iH betow^öpo« щ, ш!^Ш9 btijpie wemêeteê тШеееть wnâ Ыщег weaå If шт m %шш m expeti шу татжш ш Ле îWïî, tbr yem being tm
22 t
too young tø offer he? fruits; nor did I * mm of either town or village in thb road to !x*>n, Comeha. uniffed to b»rd^ip 9 bepn f о droop* шпе f had need ofall my Éftngth to fupport km. When we baile adieu to that delightful but dangerous retreat» and began agat» to paft along the entangled foreft. the breath of mom wat a cordial to our fpirit»» aod the İne vapours exhaled frem feen ted пошет шпе ßimb, delighted the fenfe», and encouraged m to proceed. Abou« two hour* brought us io a narrow paf* between the mountains, where there was little mme opening than wan occupied by the ftream With much dm%ulty we раЛЫ along the mefviisg roeb that dipped hito or hung over the water, and vety foon opened upon ш wide country» free fmm fmreu to«, and fcattered with floeb. Hope again revived, and though »either habitation nor man was vifible* we pro¬ ceeded with faffcfacifcfi, having now nothing tø dread from the purfuit of Bon t J Jtaphaef.
nt
Kaphael, We had not advanced far, before the ruflk notes of ш fliephenľs pipe, mingled in the pleafant airs that dew over the walie, and filled us with joy. We liiiencd with rapture to thofe pleafing and innocent founds, which poets fable of the primitive ages, when princes and heroes played upon the reed, and fylvan feenes were fhe perpetual fubjeefs of fong. We moved with lighter ftep over fhe wide-extended pafl ures, and following the bri ík found of the pipe, were not long before we difcovered a young fhepherd bcue»lh the few fhrubs that grew near the water, furrounded by fame iheep,which quietly fed around him» taking care not to wander far, left they fhould lofe the foft tones of his pipe. His dog, the faithful companion of his fteps, and the partner of his toil, lay repoting at his fide ; but his attentive ear catching the founds of our ftep at a diftance, he ftarted up and began to bark.
At
223
At firft the youth feemed inclined to run, our appearance and drefs being fuch as he had never feen before. 1 called to him to inquire the road to Leon, and if he could direci us to any village or cottage, where we might procure fome reíreíh- ment. He replied that Leon wast a long way off; ïïnd & very different road, and that we mould not find any dwelling for the diftance of two long leagues; at the fame time he offered ut part of his breakfaft, if we did not think it too humble. We accepted his hofpitality with real fatisfacìion ; and fitting down without ce¬ remony, he took from a little fcrip that lay beiide him, a bottle with milk, fome eake, and cheefe, to which hunger gave a relifti, fuperior to the moll luxurious viands. We remained near an hour, converfing with our young friend on the nature of a fliephcrd» life, or liftening while he played over to ш the few Ample airs he was maf- 14 ter
ш
ter of, but to which the novelty of the cir- c urn fiances gave a peculiar charm. We received hk directions for finding the cottigc he had mentioned, where we pnrpofed to reft during the heats of noon; und while the morning air was yet frefli, we took leave of our ftiepherd, continuing on our way over a wide but uneven coun¬ try of pitture, fcattered at diftant intervala with itocks. So great a contrail from the other fide of the mountain, where fpread the gloomy foreft of St. Ilelma, could not but excite furprbe ; and î wondered to whom thofe untouched grove» belonged, whofe owner permitted them to remain in all the wild and unprofitable luxuriance of nature. About noon we reached the hut to which we had been direcied, where we found fome goatherds, who fpread before us the ftores of their cabin. They were not a little curious to learn the reafon of our fingular mode of travelling, and from whence we had come. I informed them* that
П5
that we had loft our beafts in the foreft behind the mountains, and were there¬ fore obliged to proceed on foot to Leon. " It was well," faid a grey-headed fire, '* that you did not lofe yourfelves there. You muft have been ignorantSenor, of the ftrange reports that go about that valley, or you would never have entered it/' " What are thefe ?" faid I. ** О they are too many to be repeated* at once. There is an old caftle there that they fay is in poílèihon of the O/ä Sertjerti. Holy Virgin ï I would not enter that old tumbling ruin for all the flocks on thefe waftes." I fmiled to myfelf at the wonderful and impenetrable charm Don Raphael had formed around him, by building upon incredible tales, and popular ftlfities ; arøf finding 1 could gain no real information, I changed the fubjeci, requefting to be in¬ ftrucled in ourroad. " You go ftraight to Leon," faid he, with a look of refleciion. "You will fcarce ι s reach
tlú
reach Leon thm night, that İs, before ι be gafes are ¿bu!. Yo« bave got ten good league« before you, whith. may-hap, thr« tad) mil find too long a journey /* This information was by no meam pleafing, 1 found that we bad hitherto been purfuing a \ery oppofife road ît wavtmpoflfble to think that Cornelia could atcomplifti fuch a journey on foot, flie being пои fo much overcome that our progrefs was cvtremdy flow, and 1 re¬ queued ihem to direct me to fome village where we might procure mules or other conveyance. i4 If ib a main intricate road for a ftran¬ ger/* replied one of them f ·· being that there is nothing but tracks for cattle over tbefe wilds and high lands ; but if you will wait İn our cottage till towards fun¬ ie!» 1 will myfelf attend you to a village, where you may have every thing you want, with a night's lodging into the bargain, and you may fet ofl* in the morning frefli and ftrong.'* Though
П7
Though 1 regretted this delay, I knew not how to avoid ii; and ît being impoffible to reach Leon that night, if we had had all the day before us, 1 accepted the offers of the goatherd with acknowledgement. When they had finiflied their meal, they went out to attend to their flocks, with a gaiety of heart arifing from eafe and health. Lxcepting their expofure to ftorms and the inclemency of the feafons, their life appeared enviable for its tranquillity and carelefsnefs. Some hours before fun-fet our new guide delivered up his charge to his com¬ rades, and accompanied by us, fet out from his native village, from which he had never been asfar as Leon in his life ; nor did he regret his ftation, iince having feen only plains and mountains, with people of his own rank, ambition lay dormant m his breaft, and he remained fatisfied with the place his birth had allotted him How much more happy fliould I have been, thought 1, as we moved (lowly for¬ ward,
£S8
ward, had thofe» who took upon them¬ felves the dtfpofa! of my fortune, placed me in an humble col tage. The folitude and fitidies of a cloifter would not then have refined my feelings and gi%*en me a thirft for fuperior con¬ templation. The leanyng of a college would not have placed me above others, and fickened me with Ihc common rou¬ tine of life, by painting to me ils folly and mifery : nor ihould 1 have been com¬ pelled into the army r to act at once repug¬ nant to all my feelings, and my nature. How ill had my education been adopted to my profeftion, and how much more titan cruel in the guardians of my youth, to teach me ideas and principles which were to unfit me for their final deftina- tion, and then wholly defert me to all the horrors of poverty. My refleclions were bitter in extreme; nor could even the obfervations of Corne¬ lia, as flie walked by my fide, and endea¬ voured to lead my thoughts to pafting ob¬ jecte,
229
jeéb, take my attention till this remark, which ihe made, roufed me with its truth. " Methinks/* faid (he, " that at this mo¬ ment we are like that unfortunate pair» w horn judgment had banifhed from paradife« Behind us are the mountains that conceal the valley where I fpent all the hours of innocence and youth. Curiofity led me to the fecret of my birth, and forrow has been my portion ever fmce. Before us is the world, of which I know nothing ; and by my ide m Lorenzo, once fo chear- ful, but now fo overwhelmed with fadnef«, that he feems, in my eye, as our firft pa¬ rent muft have looked when after falling, he experienced the vengeance of his maf¬ ter, and with füllen fteps left the garden with this his erring companion/* I felt the pointed keenefs of this re¬ proach, and blulhed at my own thoughts. "Forgive my negligence, Cornelia/* faid I; "having you for my companion I ought not to repine at fortune; hut man is fo îucojifjftent a being, that he laughs
230
laughs and cries at ideal evils, and is often more aflečied by thefe than by reality." t( For my part," faid our guide, " I always laugh; it is only for children to cry ; and as I never trouble my head with any thing that is paft, or grief that may come ; 1 am grown old, and ihalî, no doubt, live the reft of my days as con¬ tented and happy as you fee me now." " That is true wifdom without argu* ment," replied I; "How far do we want to the village? the fun finks faft, and the fliadows ftretch far behind us." ri Yonder," faid he, pointing below us. '♦You may juft fee the houfe, covered with cork, peeping through the trees.—We fliali be there before the fun has quite left us. There you will find my wife, and our two daughters, as pretty girls as any Spain can boaft, and merry as larks.—I will en¬ gage they are now trimming the fire, and getting things ready for my return. You cannot think how much pleafure I have in returning home at night, efpecially when the
231 the weather is bleak.—When I come plod¬ ding and dripping with wet, and think of my fnug little corner in the chimney, befide a roaring fire, and my laftes fmiling befide me; that, Senor, is what I call su- perfative happinefs." We reached the cottage before ouť guide could find in his heart to be filent, giving us the hiftory of his daughters from their cradle. We found thefe luch as he had led us to expecì —modeft, lively, and hofpitable ; and we received from them an agreeable welcome, their mother haften¬ ing to place before us the ftores of their cottage. If Cornelia had been furprifed at the goatherd's hovel on the wafte, how much more was flie aftoniihed at this little clut¬ ter of houfes, and every thing that ihe faw? She had expecled to find all human dwellings like the caftle of St. Helma, and ftie was every moment remarking to me the pleafing difterence between obliging eafe,
£32
eafe, and the folemn gloom of the awful place ihe had hitherto been ufed to. The toils of the day were now over, and the labours of the village ceafing, feveral young men and women came to vifit our hoft, and his family. Every one fang fome little ballad, and ftories cf love and murder beguiled the hours. I may truly fay that this rural entertain¬ ment baniíhed from my mind all the evil of my fortune. Cornelia ihared in my fentiments, fo much that we regretted when the fleeting hours obliged us to de¬ part, notwithftanding the neceftity we had of repofe. In the morning, having provided mules, anda driver, we fet out iur Leon, arriving there late in the afternoon. I diichargedour guide and his beafts at the firft inn, and providing Cornelia with a thick veil, and a drefs more fuitable to the city than the lingular habit ftie wore, and which had fixed upon us the eyes of every paflenger, I ventured to lead her towards my lodg¬ ings,
233
îngs, propoftng to introduce her to Donna Chriftiana as my relation, though I was at fome lofs what degree of affinity to aifign her, which might, in fome degree, apolo- gife for my cruelty in carrying her there; though I much feared that all my precau¬ tion would not prevent the quick eye of fufpicion from difcovering the truth. If I could with fafety have trufted Cor¬ nelia from under my immediate protec¬ tion, I ihould never have thought of in¬ troducing her to the company of Chrifti¬ ana, who I feared would impute this aciion not merely to contempt of herfelf, but into an infult of which my heart was inca¬ pable. Such were my refleciions as we paífed along the ftreets of Leon, where every obječi had fomething new, and fomething wonderful in the eyes of Cornelia, who would have lingered with pleafure to gaze around her, had ihe not been frightened by the numbers of people, whofe unce¬ remonious
ш
remoniöiis and various manner«, were alî ftrange to her. I rapped aioud at the door of the widow Sponsa, waiting for fome time, but ihe did not appear, nor was it till I had knocked feveral times that ftie came pale and trem¬ bling to the door. " Good heavens!" exclaimed ihe, ftiut* ting the door haftily behind us, and faften- ing it; " by what means have you efcaped, and *here did you meet with my lady Chriftiana ?" "Chriftiana!" repeated I, feized with a fudden apprehenfion of I knew not what. "This is not Chriftiana—-what hast hap¬ pened?" "Ö bleifed faints," cried ihe feveral times. "Then you are ignorant. You know not what has happened. I was ta hopes you had found your poor fifter, and recovered her. Such doings ! O, Holy Virgin, that I ihould fee fuch things in my old age!"
"Be
235
rí Be a little calm," faid Ï, " if Donna Chriftiana İs gone, lead this lady to her chamber, and then come and relate to me all you know." " You cannot ftay here, indeed you cannot," faid file, " it grieves me to forbid my houfe to fuch a friend. But—" " But what," faid I, aftoniihed; "is the woman mad ?" " I am not mad, heavens be praifed that I am not. But fuch another night as the laft would makerne fo," I now began to be ferioufly alarmed ; for hitherto 1 had thought that Chriftiana was moft probably gone to her father, upon fome meífage fhe had received, with¬ out communicating her intentions to dame Sporza ; but it was now too eafy to fee that fomething of more terrible confequence had occured, and paffing by her into an adjoining room, I begged Cornelia to, be feated ; and dame Sporza, who followed us, to fit down, and calmly repeat what had happened. This her terrors rendered im¬ poftible,
236
poffible, but the ftory I drew from her, was more than fufficient to daih to the ground all my fancied happinefs- I learnt, that on the preceding night, about an hour after dark, two favage look¬ ing men, muffled up in a fufpicious man¬ ner, knocked at the door, demanding if I was within ; dame Sporza let them enter without fufpicion, and informed them that I was not at home. One of them inquired if there was a young lady in the houfe, who lived with me ? Dame Sporza innocently replied, if they meant my filler, ihe was at home, but ihe believed, retired to reft. " It makes no difieren ce to us, fo as we can fee this fame fifter/* replied he, with a grim fmile.—" Lead on mother/* Dame Sporza begged them to confider; but roughly puihing her forward, they commanded her with imprecations, immediately to lead them to the lady's chamber, pointing at the fame time to the arms they were well furniftied with, beneath their cloaks. Dame Sporza, by thefe aciions was too much frightened,
237
frightened to call for affiftance, and in¬ deed, they informed her, that a whifper of that nature, would be the ftgnal of her death—a threat their countenances, and- favage appearance amply confirmed. At the fame time they informed her, that if ihe would produce the Cavalier Lorenzo, flie ihould have the pleafure of feeing his throat cut on the fpot. When they came to the door of Donna Chriftiana, they did not wait for her to Un¬ fällen it, at one blow fplitting it from the top to the bottom, burfting at once upon the terrified lady, who, moft fortunately was not yet retired to reft, but remained to fintih the duties of the day, by perform¬ ing the duties of religion. So fudden and fo terrible an entrance, roufed her from the pofture of applica¬ tion, and nearly finking at the fight of thofe fierce barbarians ; ihe yet had pre¬ fence of mind to fuppofe they were come with intention to rob her. She befought them to take the lit tie box, which contained all
238
all her wealth, and fuflTer her to remain without harm. " You miftake us," faid the ruffian, who had heen moft forward. " But as you offer itasagift,we cannot do lefs than take it.— You muft go with Us."—"Go with you!" cried ftie, ihuddering at the idea. " Oh î where is Lorenzo, that he has deferted .me?"------ " That is what we want know T ," faid he, " we have got another commi f- iion for him. Your father commands you to accompany us."------" My father," re¬ peated ihe, gazing wildly upon them. " He could not wiih me to go with you —you de¬ ceive me—I will not go."------" That we will fee," cried he, advancing to feize her, his coutenance inflamed with malice. '* Our orders do not admit delay, or we would wait the return of your gallant. He muft be very fickle, fo foon to tire of fo pretty a girl."------" O, Holy Virgin," ejaculated the terrified lady. " What mean thefe fpeeches? Has my father forgot the family that I am defcended from,
239
from, and can he liften to calumny ! Is this his cruel mode of revenge ! But as I am innocent, I care not now what becomes of me. Men, I will follow you, be it even unto death;"—" Perhaps it may, and perhaps it may not," faid the hardened wretch, unmoved by her agony and her tears, " Here comrade, you carry the box.'* Then taking her by the arm, and partly fupporting her, they hurried away. " Great God ! Omnipotent Judge of mankind," cried I, rifing with frenzy in my mind at this narrative. " Oh, where was Î, that I could not protečl fuch inno¬ cence ? What muft have been the torture of her delicate mind ; but I fee clearly into the miferable plot : it is Don Raphael who has begun to exert his threatened vengeance ; it is not the Marquis de Miran¬ dula, and the haplefs and innocent Chrif tiana has fallen a viclim to the malice in¬ tended for us. Thefe mifcreants are the tools of this man ; they are doubtlefs, thofe robbers whom we heard in the foreft of
£40
of St. Helma, and Don Raphael has found means to turn them to his purpofe ; their ignorance of your perfon, Cornelia, pre¬ vented their difcovering a miftake, the words of that unfortunate lady only ferved to confirm." Cornelia fat pale, without uttering a word, and when I had finiflied thefe excla¬ mations, dame Sporza informed me that lhe had yet only related half the terrors flie had to fuffer. "What I have further to fay," added ihe, " more nearly concerns yourfelf. Thefe banditti had not been gone an hour, which I fpent in lamenting the diftrefs of fo mild and fo beautiful a a lady, when a loud rapping made me believe they were returned, and would perhaps, take me with them next. Inftead of going to the door, I went to the win¬ dow, and there I beheld a number of men with torches, and a file of mufqueteens ; an officer commanded me in the king's name to defcend and open the door. I was obliged to obey them, and in they inftantly
Hí
Inftantly ruíhed, to the number of more than a dozen, demanding to be ihewn Lorenzo de Ferara. I informed them that you had been gone from my houfe for two days, I knew not where. Not contented with my aflertion, they examined every crack and corner of the houfe ; finding you were not to be found, they commanded me, on pain of imprifonment, to inform the magiílrate Mendoza, or the officer of thegarrifon, the moment you ihould return. One of them who had formerly been ac¬ quainted with my huiband, whifpered me, that you were difcovered to be an accom¬ plice with the enemies of the ftate ; that one Vafeo, or Vailo, or Bafto, had been ar¬ retted, and that if you were taken, you would be puniihed without mercy." My limbs trembled beneath me as dame Sporza fpoke. It feemed as ifan unfathom¬ able gulph was opening at once beneath me, to involve me for ever. I was fo con¬ founded at this detail, that iinking into a chair, I covered my face with my hands, vol. ii. m and
242
and for a long time remained in a ftate, little ftiort of diitraéìion. 1 was in too much agitation to be capable of any clear reflec¬ tion, and the bittereit grief took poffeflion of my foul. The tender voice of Cornelia roufed me from thoughts that ftung me to madnefs. "Let us fly, Lorenzo/* faid flie, "to the village where we were fo happy laft night ; let us take upon us a new characler. You ihall lay afide the gay drefs of a foldier, for the cloaths of a peafant, and I will remain in our little cottage, to wait your return from the hills, in fome plain habit, fuch as the villagers ufe. They appear to me the only people in the world who look happy. Every body feems ferious and frowning, that I have feen in this great city, but thofe villagers had little to do but to fing and to laugh. I know that my fcheme is not to be executed without money : Don Kaphael has taught me the value of that. I have brought with me fome little trifles, which he gave me from time to time ; telling me, that
243
that if any accident was to happen him, 1 might live upon them at Leon." ff Be it fo," cried I, rifing and taking her in my arms. " A time may come, when Don Raphael fliali lofe his power, and the Mar¬ quis de Mirandula find means to clear my character from this infamous afperfion, which I dare not meet ; fori have no friend that will interfere, and fee that juftice is not overcome by deceit ; and I am too certain, that had I not fome powerful and fecret enemy, this accufation could not have arifen aörainft me. I know that mv О j flight will be conftrued into guilt ; but am I, as a teftimony of my innocence, to re¬ main, and fuffer all the degradations and infult of office and of power ?" C( Dame Sporza/* faid I, <c you muft give us a little affiftance, for this very even¬ ing, at nigh tfal, wc muft quit Leon. Ihave many jewels belonging to the Marquis, but their fale might create fufpicion. You may difpofe of fome of the leaft valuable μ я this
244
this lady will give you, and haften to us without delay." When ihe was gone, I gave to Cornelia the fcholar's habit Chriftiana had formerly worn, and drew over my military drefs, the habit of a monk, which had once fo effec¬ tually ferved me. Thus metamorpholed, we fcarcely knew each other, and I could have believed, at a little diftance, that I had again fcen Chriftiana ; fo nearly in certain pofttiom, did the perfon of Cornelia re- fcmble her, though the colour and vivacity of the latter, much better fupported her di fçııife. (c Charming creature ! " cried I, <c if you were a man in reality, it would be danger¬ ous for you to walk the ftreets ; all the ladies of Leon would be in love with you." i{ Do you think," faid ftie, half fmiling, and half ferious, (C that your fifter Chrif¬ tiana, whom you fo much admire, would fall in love with me?" " She is not my filler," replied I, " but a moil unfortunate lady, whofe hiftory I would
Q45
would before have given you, but that í hoped ίο have introduced you together. When í have leifure, I will make you ac¬ quainted with what I know of her fate, and you will then join with me in lamenting the accident that has happened. I hope, however, that Don Raphael, in common juftice, will fend her back, when he per¬ ceives the miftake of his creatures ; for though his revenge is boundlefs, he yet poifeftes many virtues/* " I muft confefs/' replied Cornelia, "that I felt an odd kind of fentiment towards a lady you feemed fo fond of, and yet had never mentioned to me ; but I am now fatisfied." I fmiled at this inftance of native jea¬ loufy ; which, though ihe felt, ihe knew not how to name ; but the entrance of dame Sporza ended our difcourfe. She appeared furprized at our change ofdreísj but putting into my hands the mo¬ ney ihe had received : u You have not a moment to Iole," faid ihc, in a trembling μ '5 voice,
246
i oice ; u even now your enemies may be behind me. While I was in the filver- l'ini th's fliop, there came in a gaunt, dark, ftrange looking man ; he ftared at me in fuch a manner, that I felt cold from head to foot. He took up one of the rings, and his countenance changed. ( Thefe are your's ?* faid he to mc, in a deep voice. I replied that they were ; turning pale at his queftion. He ftalked out of the ihop, without faying another word, and I hurried flraight home, afraid to look behind me/' It was in vain to reproach this poor woman with want of thought. í had little doubt, but this man was Don Raphael him¬ felf ; and telling dame Sporza that I ihould take the road to Portugal, for I could not truft her difcretion, I hurried Cornelia away through feveral dirty lanes, in the greateft anxiety, left we ihould be flopped at the gate, it being now quite dark.
CHAP.
247
CHAP. VII.
jfxT the moment we reached the gates, the centinels were clofing them. "Ah, father," faid one, " a moment longer, and you would have been too late."— " It is never too late, my fons," replied I, <c to do a work of mercy.—Even the gates of heaven open to charity," My heart feemed in my mouth as they allowed us to pafs, and our feet moved more fwiftly when we heard the gates bolted behind us. ï confidered myfelf now fecure from purfuit, for one night at leaft, and before the morning I hoped to be at a eonfiderable diftance.
M 4
An
248
An open inn-yaid, where there were a number of carriers, invited us to enter, and with fome difficulty I hired two mules, for which 1 paid down more than their value. While we were mounting, a bene- dicline monk, on a forry beaft, rode into the yard, and feeing me habited like him¬ felf, immediately accofted me with great loquacity, inquiring whence I came, and whither I was going. " I am going," faid I, "to Toledo, with this youth, my companion." " Are you fo," cried lie, " then am I in fortune's way.—Here, hoft, a glafs of aqua vita?, for I have a pain in my ftc- mach, and muft immediately join this good company, who are going to Toledo." " I beg," faid I, very much chagrined, at this impertinence, " I beg you will not hurry yourfelf for us, we travel very flow/' fi I like f о take my time myfelf," replied he. "One might as well be a muleteer as run over the road. I am fure we fliali be good
249
good company, and our number will keep us from fear in the dark." " We have no fear," replied I, whip¬ ping my mule, <e there will be a moon in an hour." He fwallowed down his glafs in hafte, and fpurring after us, joined us with a loud laugh. " You are very uncharitable, brother," cried he. " I am only one, and yet you want to leave me behind you. Pray what are you going to do at Toledo ? To what convent do you belong? Shall you call at the convent of Benedičiines, and fee your brethren of that city ? I will bid you welcome, notwithftanding you made me almoft choak myfelf with the brandy. I am a member of that founda¬ tion." (( Indeed," faid 1, admiring his loquaci¬ ty, and recollečiing with various emotions the place where the firft years of my youth had been paífed. " How came you to leave the walls of your retreat, and wander about like a mendicant ?" m 5 <( You
250 u You do me wrong, brother," faid he ; " my bufinefs at Leon was of fome little importance, but 1 have not been able to fucceed, for which I am forry, as my dif¬ pofition leads me to do good." " May I inquire the name of fo charita¬ ble a perfon ?" faid I. He replied that it was f father Timotheus/ u Father Timotheus!" exclaimed I, " what, the moft facetious brother of the order, whofe cell is more adorned with legendary rhymes than verfes of piety— who was always believed to have more religion than formality ?" "Heaven be thanked," cried he. ŕc I knew that if I fell out with one adventure I ihould fall in with another: fnce I miffed finding the perfon I have been to feek, let me know whom, without feeking, I have found." " Do you remember, father," faid I, " that many years ago you had an unknown youth in your convent, whom a ftranger paid for, but never owned, and who was after-
251
afterwards fent to the college at Toledo, by the fame invifible friend ?" " A miracle !" cried he, with a ihout of joy. tc Are you little Lory, that ufed to throw about the incenfe with fuch grace ? I remember your voice. How came you to leave the armies of the world to join the banners of religion ? if you had been fo inclined, why did not you come to our convent, which has a natural claim to you, and where you would have found a welcome reception ? Do you know my journey has been wholly on your account ? and it was very unwillingly you fuffered me to find you at laft." " You furprize me greatly. How could I be the objeci of your journey ?" ff I fuppofe," faid he, " your compa¬ nion is difcreer." tf He is the fame as myfelf.—You may fay any thing before him." " I have then to tell you that a lady of rank has inquired for you—ihe has given a eonfiderable fum to our convent for our care
252
care of your early years. She made inte¬ reft with the fuperior, that one of us ihould go to Leon, where you had been laft heard oif; though flie feared that you were dead. She concealed her name and abode from us; and we could only guefs by her appearance that flie was of rank. I have been three days at Leon, feeking for you. Some told me they knew you were dead, for they had feen thofe that faw your funeral; and others, that you were ferving in the ranks of rebellion: fome that you were taken up, and lay in prifon : while I find the truth is, that you are alive and well, and a brother of my own order." " Holy father," replied Ï, " even you are not acquainted with the truth. I am not ignorant of your integrity. I know the rečiitiide of your morals, but at the fame time I know your indulgence of the failings of human nature. Others in your fituation would condemn me for impiety. You know it is not the appearance of fancìity
253
fancìity, the lifting up of the hands, and the eyes, but the heart, which diftinguiihes the truth of profeffions." "After all this," replied he, "you are going to tell me you are an impoftor, and want to engage my vanity in your favour. Proceed, however, to confeffion, and I will confider the penance you will incur."' I made no fcruple to relate to this good natured monk our prefent fituation, and the dangerous occurrences which had led to it, and ftill threatened us with deftruc- tion. When he had heard me to an end, he remained a few minutes filent —then raif¬ ing his voice—" You, Lorenzo, and you, Cornelia," faid he; " the one for aftuminsr the fecular habit, and the other for chang- ing the emblems of the fex, muft perform a penance our church will inflict, and which 1 fincerely hope may laft for life. In a word: I charge you as you would obey the commands of your confeflbr, to marry as
254
as foon as poillble, even at the very firft town you arrive at in the morning." if What hinders, reverend father/' faid Ί, " that you perform this fervice upon the fpot. The oath of conftancv, and the prayers of religion will be as binding be¬ neath the ftarry canopy of the heavens^ as the roof of fretted ftone; that Being who pervades all exiftence muft be prefent to all." " That is moit true/' anfwered he, " but it is necefiary for decorum and ex¬ ample, that thefe ceremonies be perform¬ ed in public places. Man is fo fallen a creature, that much ceremony, and many witneffes are required to bind him to his duty." {( My dear and early friend." faid I, "It feems in my eyes an efpecial favour of heaven that has eonducìed you to \\z at this time, involving fo much of our fate. Whom durft we have trufted with our fitu¬ ation, and how ihould 1 have ever been efpoufed to this obječl; of my fincere af¬ fection ?
155
feeìion ? You muft not then, holy father, refufe us your benediction." " But how am I certain this lady will confent to have you in this abrupt man¬ ner," replied Father Timotheus,. (i me¬ thinks that you are very ungallant." iC If I may anfwer for myfelf," faid Cor¬ nelia, in a modeft tone of voice, c< I have already given my promife to Lorenzo; and a promife delayed, he has told me, lofes half the merit of fulfilment—befides, Lo¬ renzo has a ring upon his finger, given him by Don Raphael, which will anfwer the purpofe." " Excellent cafuifts, both of you !" cried the monk, laughing till he brought on a fit of coughing, which nearly difplaced him from his mule. "Well," added he, " if I muft of neceffity confent, let us turn a little afide into this grove, amongft whofe branches the moon feat ters her peaceful light." It was there we pronounced the irrevo¬ cable vow. The good father uttered a ftiort
256
ftiort but fervent prayer for our happinefs; and being now in titled to claim Cornelia as my wife, I felt lefs fear at the threats of Don Raphael, propoiing to continue our journey direčl for Toledo, under the hope which I yet dared fcarcely indulge, that I might find a parent who would be fuffici¬ ently powerful to raife me fuperior to my enemies. The moon ílione feren cly in the azure heavens, attended by innumerable ibrs, and peace was fpread over ihe face of ihe earth. Nothing could be more pleaiing than this tranquillity, and having re íl cd ourfelves, we arofe to continue our journey. The clattering of horleV feet alarmed us, for though we had no idea that ourfelves were concerned, every trifle had power to afľecl us. We remained in filent expecìa¬ tion till they mould pafs us, but flopping at the end of the lane, one of the horfe- men cried out, (( Halt! let us fee if this will produce any thing." I now began to be alarmed,
2Ò7
alarmed, I knew not why, d ifen tan gl ing my fword from my monkifii robes. (( Thefe are, moft likely, robbers/' whif¬ pered father Timotheus; "we will give them a trifle, they will not expeci much from monks." Λ man rode furioııfly up the lane, which was fo narrow there was no room to let him pafs, and I feared he would have rode over Cornelia, who fcreamed as the horfe came clofe up to her. I feized hold of the bridle, and exerting all my ftrength, checked his career. " Come on, come on," cried he, " my revenge will be complete," I ftiuddered as he pronounced thefe words, too well remembering the voice of Don Raphael, though his perfon was dif¬ guifed, and his face concealed in a black maik. Two men rode up at his call, dreffed like himfelf, and maíked alike ; but before they could arrive, he had fired both his piftols^ and attacked me fword in hand, with the fury of a madman. His Ikill at that wea¬ pon
253
poh was fuperior to mine, and his advan¬ tage on horfeback fo much, that while I in vain attempted to touch him, í received fe¬ veral wounds. His attendants came up in lefs than a minute, and feeing how their mafter was engaged, immediately fired; one of the bullets penetrated my arm, and my fword fell to the ground ; another mortally wounded Cornelia,, and faintly crying out " ihe was killed," flie fell upon father Timotheus, whom thefe wretches were going to difpatch, had not the com¬ mands of Don Raphael flayed their hands. I flew to Cornelia, wounded as I was, and caught her hand ; it was already cold, and her eyes were clofed forever ! A fud¬ den tranfport of rage fired my heart. I darted upon Don Raphael, intending to tear him to the ground, and trample him beneath my feet, but I received a blow, I know not from whom, and I fell upon the earth, wholly deprived of fenfe. When I opened my eyes again upon the world, I found mvfelf in a fituation, of which
259
chicli I could give no account, it was dark, and I was moving along with ra¬ pidity, which motion, no doubt, had con¬ tributed to recai me to life. I felt eonfi¬ derable pain in my arm and head, and en¬ deavouring to ftretch out my hands, I found they were tightly bound. Through the obfcure darknefs that prevailed, I thought I could trace two figures ieated before me, but they neither moved nor fpoke. It was fo extremely clofe and hot, that I found it almoft infupportable ; and judg¬ ing by the motion, that 1 was confined in a carriage, I demanded of thofe before me, by what authority, and by whom I was thus made a prifoner. They returned no reply to any queftion I propofed, taking fo little notice of me, that they did not attempt to prevent me freeing my hands, probably becaufe they knew all my erTorts were in vain. I conjectured that I was by fome ftrange accident, become a prifoner of ftate, and í? 1 'o
560
giving myfelf no uneafinefs about the confequences, ( for í did not regard my in-* nocence) I felt a fort of fatisfacìion in reflecting, that 1 ftiould very foon be li¬ berated by death from all perfecution. As the gradual dawn of day broke through the obfcurity, I had leifure to ex¬ amine the figure of the mutes before me, though from their external figure, I could make no rertain inference. They wore marks, were both of them tall, with long mourning cloaks wrapped round them; they were well armed, and one of them fat with his hand refting upon his fword. I begged they would permit the win¬ dows to be opened, but they made no anfwer, and as they neither ftirred nor fpoke, I knew not whether they were living or dead. For fome hours we conti¬ nued to move forwards, without once ftop¬ ping to change the mules, and I endea¬ voured in vain to catch a glimpfe of the countrv, through a little window behind them
2£i
ihem, which fcarce ferved to diflipatc total darknefs. At length they flopped fuddenly, and I heard the voice of one or two people, and the unharneffing of the mules. I begged -that they would now permit me to have fomething to allav the third and heat which tormented me, but they preferved the fame profound iilenee. I was aftoniflied lhat themfelvcs fliould not accept re- frciliment, as their malks muft prevent a free refpiration. When the frefli mules were harnefled, I heard a ftrange voice from without, demand if we were going to a funeral, whieh was anfwered in the aflirmative, and the driver immediately cracking his whip, we began to go forward. This is myfterious indeed, thought Í; are thefe men before me then not the minu¬ ters of juftice, but hireling murderers of Don Raphael ?—and to whofe funeral are they dragging me! Surely they would not take this pains to make my own exit more mfu-flerable ;
262
infufferable ; and how could thev have ar- ranged fo much machinery in fo fliort a time ! Can Don Raphael poifefs powers like thefe ! Where could he find men fuffici¬ ently depraved—menwhom he could truft to ftep forward at his call? Are the fiends of the air,and the demons of the earth obedient to his will ? and is there more than fable in thefe ftrange reports that concern the caftle of St. Helma ? So well contrived^ and fo admirably adapted to meet the wifhes of a mind unchecked by morality or religion;- ties, which affuredly Don Raphael has over¬ leaped, fince he has fo many years bade defiance to all the cuitoms of men. Is it to fatisi} his cruel difpofition in witneffing mv aïOîiies at the grave of Cornelia, that I am thus convened a prifoner? or does he mean fo Ïcc me die, that he may be fatis¬ fied I filali never in this world appear againft him ? Thefe reflections were interrupted by the fudden flopping of the carriage, and the door being opened by a perfon on the outfide,
263
outfide, the man who had fat with his hands on his fword, ftepped out, the other remaining without the fmaileft motion, and I fluiddered at the idea that he was dead. I looked out at the door, but the country appeared wholly different to any I had be¬ fore feen near Leon. ît was a wide cam- paign, and fo barren, that no flocks were to be feen browfing upon its fcorched herbage. My view from the door was very confined, and it was in vain I called to them, to permit me to quit the carriage ; for being on the oppoiite fide, they either could not; or would not hear. Having made an end of this repaft, the fame perfon, attended by another alfo maíked, came up to the carriage : he made a fign that my hands fliould be liberated, and Handing over me with his fword drawn, he waited while I (wallowed a few mouthfuls of b i leu i í and a glafs of wine. He*faw thai I was fo much enfeebled by .the fever, which crept through my veins, that I could fcarce move my hand to my head,
264
head, and perhaps being afliamed of thus, appearing to fear a man who had neither weapons nor power to ufe any ; he re- fumed his ftation, permitting my hands to remain unbound. More- than ever I was aftoniflied at the total inaőlion of the other perfon. Surely, thought I, were he dead he could not fit fo creel, nor would this man ride in fo fami¬ liar a manner with a corpfe, unlefs his foul were as callous to feeling as that of Don Raphael, and why may it not lie Don Kaphael himfelf? This is much the fame figure, and by the rings upon his hand he cannot be of common rank. The carriage again proceeded, and again we were almoft fuffocated with the intenie heat, which the blazing fun, in all its luf- tre, reflected and refracted from every fide, while the duft rolled in clouds through every chink. My guard began now to be uneafy in his fituation, partly loofening the faftening of his maik for air. I wa*
î65
I was fo languid, that death feemed at no great diftance ; and clofing my eyes, I endeavoured to fuffèr with refignation, I did not venture to addrefs one word to this mute conducior, for I felt the ut¬ moft repugnance in my foul to fpeak to a man whom I took for Don Raphael, whofe aciions had infpired me with an abhor¬ rence that words were wholly incapable of expreffing. Intolerable as our fituation was, we con¬ tinued without remiftlon till the abating; heat proclaimed the approach of evening, and the jolting of the carriage informed me that the roads were broken and rug¬ ged. Some break in the road,on a fudden,nearly overfet our crazy machine, and the perfon who had hitherto remained without mo¬ tion was thrown upon me. His maik fell off, and my conjeciures were confirmed in the horrid truth, that it was indeed the corps of a man which was thus conveyed. His features were almoil livid, and a deep vol. n, n wound
Ебб
wound in the face gave him fo frightful an afpeči that I fhrunk from him in the utmoft horror. Without appearing to notice my agi¬ tation, and with the utmoft eoolnefs my condueor put back the funeral cloak, which was wrapped round the dead body, and placing him in an upright pofition, faftened á bandage, which the İhakîng of the carriage had loofened, and which con¬ fined him to an ereci poihire. He fuffered the maík to remain off, and when my eyes turned upon its grim and ghaftly vifage, iny foul fickened within me. After proceeding for more than two hours over this very difficult part of the road, we again came to a more even fur- face, and the wheels making very little noife, feemed fmoothly rolling over grafs, while every moment the boughs of trees daihed or trailed againft the fides of the carriage, and more than once we were ftopped as if to allow time for clearing the шу. Now>
867
Now, thought I, our journey is nearly ended : this is, no doubt, the foreft of Ht. Helma; buí what indifcretion, to bring fo many witnefles to an act which will one day or other tranfpire, ımîefs, indeed, thefe men do mifchief, more from the love of it than the defire of reward. The carriage flopped, the mules were unharneíľed, but the door was not opened* and I remained in the moft fingular un^ certainty for near an hour,* almoft believ¬ ing that we were thus to pafs the night, it being by this time quite dark. The man in the maik began to íhew figns of uneafinefs, ftriking his fword againft the bottom of the carriage* At îength a flaih of light gleamed through the little window, the door was opened by the fame man who had appeared in the morn¬ ing, and now ftood with a lighted torch in his hand. "Is every thing prepared?" faid my guard, in a voice I knew belonged to Don: Raphael; and feeing me ftart be withdrew n 2 his
2С8
his mafk, cafting upon me a look that he intended ihould petrify me with horror, lie ftepped out, and made a fign that I fliould do the fame; but I had been fo long confined in one pofition that my limbs refufed to fullain me, and his at¬ tendant fupported me by the arm. I looked round me, but a deep gloom in- velopcd the filent foreft, through which the rays of the torch had not power to pe¬ netrate far. í perceived that the machine which had brought us was a hearfe, and neither mules nor any perfon but him who held the torch, ftood near. An exceflivc carelcflhefs about my future fate was the confequence of the debility of my body ; and following Don Raphael, a few paces brought us to the well-known gate, which led us to the court-yard of the caftle of St. Helma. A little to one fide the earth appeared newly turned up, and a torch was burning upon the ground. Don Raphael paufed, and making a fign to his mute companion, he
269
he left me to fupport myfelf as well as I could. For fomc minutes we remained in this ftrange fituation, for both the mailer and his fervant feemed refolved not to interrupt the folemnity of the fcene by fpeech. The latter quickly returned, bending under the body of the man which had been our companion through the day. He advanced to the grave, and without ceremony threw in the corpfe, which he immediately began to cover, with the af¬ fiftance of Don Raphael. Good heavens ! thought I, as I witneffed this tragical fcene, what are the actions of this man to which night is the only witnefs. How many outrages, how many dreadful crimes, cry aloud for vengeance ? Who can this be that they take fo much pains to conceal ? Father Timotheus is not fo tall ; nor is it that wretch, Filelfo :—No, it is but too probable that he is the fervant of this myfterious man, who triumphs alike over the machinations of the wicked, and the plans of the injured. n a Having
270
Having ended their employment, Don Raphael advanced to me with one of the torches :— íť I bid you welcome, Cavalier," íaid he, " to my caftle—your vifit is rather late." " Don Raphael/' replied I, indignantly, ** there was a time when I thought you fuperior to the reft of men-—I now think you beneath them." He replied only by a ghaftly fmile, making a motion for me to proceed. We entered the caftle by the poftern gate, which he barred behind us. The doleful echoes of our fteps ran along the galleries and loft themfelves in diftance. " Methinks," faid I, " this place is fad. What have ye done with Cornelia ?" The queftion touched the latent feelings of his heart ; it was unexpecìed, and the cheerlefs gloom which hung upon every objeci, gave it an increafed expreftion. His countenance turned pale, his lips trembled, and in an hefitating voice he replied, " Thou limit fee her !" I felt
27*
í felt myfelf ihocked in my turn ,* my knees trembled, and í had fcarce power to follow. He unlocked the door of a fmall chamber, which opened into the galleries, and raifing the torch, its gleaming rays ihot into the room. He pointed, and with evident difficulty pronounced the word " The?e." My eye glanced for a moment into the chamber:—a feeond look would have been death. The dead body of Cornelia was ftretched out upon a black cloth on the floor. My head was feiyed with giddi- jiefs—clouds fwam before my fight, and I fell upon the boards. Don Raphael clofed the door with a violence that ihook the caftle, and in a voice at once harfti and terrific, commanded me to rife. More dead than alive I arofe, and with a ftaggering ftep followed this unihak'en man, whofe long funeral robes gave his figure an air of fomething more than human. Wc paffed a range of galleries in which I had never before been, and n 4 through
272
through whofe half-broken windows the cool air of night mournfully fighed. We were flopped at the end by a door, iludded with knobs of iron, and ftrongly barred. Don Raphael drew back the rufty bolts, and raifing his toreh, pointed out to me this infeription in Italian :— Voi chVntrate, laiciate ornai ogni Speranza.* Hope had already taken leave of my heart, and not deigning to make any ob- fervation, I ftood ready to enter, though I had not forgot the chamber, which had been prepared for my reception, the firft; night I entered this building. Don Kaphael pointed meto advance. I fmiled with indifference, turning my eyes upon his palici countenance, where ftern nefs was mingled with mifery, and it might have been difputed, which of us had moft caufe to mourn. I entered this place without hefitation, though I expecled nothing but death, and that
273
that perhaps of a cruel nature. í found myfelf in total darknefs. I heard Don Raphael fecure the door, and the hollow echo of his retreating fteps ran along the galleries. Overcome with fuŕfeťing and fatigue, I funk down upon the ftoor, remaining in the fame/ituation till the morning, when I found myfelf almoft incapable of moving from the pain of my wound. A faint glimmer of light fhone through a fmall window far above reach, and only ferving to render vifible the objecìs around me. Had Don Raphael contrived a chamber that ihould have fuited the defpondence of my foul, he could not have furniftied it more exacìly : yet indifferent as life was become to me, I could not look round me unmoved. Tliis chamber was extremely lofty, lighted only by a fmall grating at the top, facing the door. The plain boards on three fides were painted black, on the fourth fide, hung down a curtain of the n s fame
274
fame colour, concealing a recefs; the boards of the floor were ftained with blood in feveral places ; a table and two chairs compofed the furniture, and thefe were ftained black, which produced an effect the mofl gloomy. Some ftrong iron rings ri¬ vetted into the planking, declared the fa¬ vour Don Raphael did me in fuffering my limbs to be free. A litter of ftraw pointed out to me the corner where I might feek íleep, when it fliould vifit this melancholy abode ; and a pitcher of water, and a loaf of bread upon the table, íhewed I was not intended to be famiihed. " This is then all that this man allows me," faid I, as I fat down near the table. *' for what purpofe does he keep me here, for what does he defign me ?" I was obliged to break the bread, for I had been robbed of every weapon ; and I wondered they had not ftripped me of the jewels which were concealed in my garments. Without doubt, this Ample diet ferved to reftore my health, by cooling the ferment of my blood,
275 blood, and thereby tranquillizing my fpi¬ rits. My wound had no other dreflfmg than a bandage dipped in fome elixir, which Don Raphael brought me the fol¬ lowing morning 5 with my portion of bread and water. He made no inquiries after my health, nor condefcended to reply to any of my queftions, preferving a haughty and impenetrable filence. He attended me regularly every morn¬ ing himlelf, wrapped in füllen .gloom. ïf 1 ventured to reproach him for his cruel injuftice, or to intreat him at leaft to fuffer me to enjoy a freer air, he received all I faid with an impenetrability bordering upon contempt, I could neither irritate him to anger, nor bend him to kindnefs; nature feemed to have intended him for the ofBce he impofed upon himfelf. He never approached me, without the caution of being armed ; and more than once I was tempted to fnatch at the handle of a dagger he wore in his veft, but his eye was always fteadily ñxed upon me, and he obferved
S76
obferved a ftated diftance, never venturing more than a yard from the door, fo that ï could not make the flighteft motion without alarming him ; and I knew that to attempt difaiming him by open force, was to court my own deftručlion. Many days and many weeks paffed away, before my ftrength returned ; and toge¬ ther with it, that defire of life, nature has fo ftrongly planted in the human breaft. Inclofed in a gloomy cell, where found could fcarcely find entrance, and where my mind had leifure to brood over all the ideas my experience in life had impreifed upon my memory ; the time did not ap¬ pear unemployed: and when I remembered that could I have power to quit this prifon, and return again to the world, I ihould be only plunged into a troubled whirlpool, with no hope of ever finding reft. (e Of what value to me," would I fay, ff is li¬ berty, the choiceft bleftmg of man ! Were I to quit this tranquil abode, it would pro¬ bably be only for the public dungeons of a common
277
common prifon. Were Cornelia living, I might have looked to the hours, when my innocence would have liberated me, and her company charm from memory the paft. Even for the fake of Chriftiana, I might wiih to be free: in her piety, I ihould learn to look to a brighter exiftence, and her divine countenance would affure me of a more perfeci; being. It was after a long train of refleclions, fuch as thefe, that I fat liftening to the deep fighings of the wind which penetrated through the little grated window above me,* uniting founds, that fometimes rofe to a mu ficai cadence, that I fancied the black hanging moved with more than ordinary impulfe. I fliuddered while I fat gazing at the flight undulatory motion ; for folitude and refleciion had now ftrongly tinctured me with fuperftition. I called to mind the phantom that had paífed me on the moun¬ tains, and I remembered the warning voice which had called me in the foreft, and even
278
even then feemed to found in my ear. The wind blew loudly, and ihook the tottering turrets ; a ftrong guft raifed a part of the black hanging fo much, that I perceived behind it a fmall and dark recefs, which I had never before had fo much curiofity as to difcover. I immediately arofe, and drawing afide the curtain, found a fmall cell, which re¬ ceived no other light, than the fcanty refleciion from the other appartment; a crucifix upon an altar of black wood, in¬ formed me, that this was a place for devo¬ tion ; at the foot of the crofs, was placed a human fkull ; a memento, which cannot be feen with indifference, and which filently teaches us our own infignificance. Turning round, I perceived a coffin upon the floor, covered with a pall ; this objeől aroufed my attention. " Doubtiefc," faid J, "this contains the mouldering remains of fome former inhabitant of this dreary place ; who, before me, paífed his life 'm perpetual filence, and ghmmering uncer¬ tainty.
279
tainty. Alas, what crimes do not large and inicrutible buildings like this, give birth to ! Here revenge may brood over its viclim unfufpecled,and paflion be tempted to outrage." I took up the pall to examine fome let¬ ters that glittered on the black cloth, and taking it towards the light, I was ihocked at feeing my own name, Lorenzo de Ferara. My blood, for a moment, feemed to ceafe its circulation, and groaning deeply at this refinement of cruelty, I threw myfelf into a chair in the bittereit anguiíh. " Why/' cried Î, recollecling myfelf, " Why do I permit fuch a trifle to aifecl me ? What is there in this, more than in the garment that I wear? It is fancy which gives importance to objecls fuch as thefe. Let me fee, however, what are the contents of this coffin. Perhaps he defigns to fright me with a ikeleton !" I again entered the recefs, and putting afide the lid of the coffin, which was loofe, I found that it was empty. * "It
280
Çf It may be," faid I, "thatlamdeftined to fill it; and what then ? Shall I die the fooner, becaufe I know that a fiiell is pre¬ pared for the fragile part of myfelf ? No ! Don Raphael, your power cannot reach all things. I defpife your malice—I will the w you that my foul rifes fuperior to your oppreftion. This gloomy chamber, decorated as fora funeral—thefe objecìs of mortality only remind me of human weak¬ ness, and when I rcŕlečÍ in how very few years, even you and myfelf muft quit this exiftence; trifles inŕignificant and worthlefs in my efteem, are all and every thing this world can give." I determined to íhew Don Raphael that I defpifed his meannefs, and fpreading the pall over my table in place of a napkin, I determined it fliould remain, as it feemed to fini/h the furniture of the room. On the following day, when Don Raphael entered, with my ufual allowance of bread and water, he ftepped half a pace back¬ ward, at fight of this arrangement, then turning
281
turning his eye upon me, the blood tinged his cheeks, and he retreated in hafte, unable to ftand the contemptuous fmile with which 1 regarded him. From this time, I determined to pre¬ ferve an equal filence with himfelf, nei¬ ther requefting his clemency, or irritating his anger. I had no hopes in attempting to efcape, having minutely examined the walls and the door, which were abfolutely impregnable to any effort I could poffibly make. As my health and ftrength returned, the flow progrefs of time became irkfome. I had no aclive amufement to divert my at¬ tention, and the minutes might be counted as they paífed. Refentment preferved me from,finking under thefe evils, and I have frequently doubted, which was the moft wretched, Don Raphael or my¬ felf. For the whole circle of a year, I endured this imprifonment, and in-complianrewith the inscription on the outfide of the door ; I did
2S2
I did not permit myfelf to hope, that any thing but the death of one of us, would terminate my misfortunes. If I felt any fear, it was at times that Don Raphael would himfelf be fnatched away before me, and I fliould then perifli with hunger ; an accident to which I was every day liable, from the violence of his paflions, though his years were little more than beyond the meridian, and his health was eftabliftied by the regularity of his life. About this time my portion of bread and water, was changed into wine and* drefled diihes. I was utterly at a lofe to account for this indulgence; but from whatever motive it might arife* I reía- lutely pçrfifted in filence, for my fpirit was wound up to the full height of refentment, and words could not expreß» the feelings of my fou L Some weeks after this change, Don Ka¬ phael paid mc an unexpected vifit. He faftened the door behind him, and taking one of tbe chairs, fat down. I was afto¬ niflied
283
nifhed at this aciion, ceafing to walk too and frOj which I frequently did, without deigning him the fmaileft notice." I took a chair, and fat down facing him. His colour changed repeatedly ; he gazed upon me with a fixed regard, which I re¬ turned with a look of haughtinefs. In about a quarter of an hour, he arofe, and retired without having uttered one word, nor could I conjecture his reafon for fo fingular a vifit. For upwards of a month, he treated me with his ufual filence, when one day he entered a feeond time, about an hour after he had provided my daily allowance, and taking a chair, he fat down as on his for¬ mer vifit. Is the fame farce to be played again, thought I; does he wiih to fpeak, and dare not truft his voice; or am I to believe that I am under the guard and keep of a lu¬ natic. líe gazed at me as before, nor did I flirink from his glances, taking my feat facing
283
facing him, but as far diftant as the narrow bounds of my prifon would allow. " Lorenzo ! " faid he, and remained filent. "Don Raphael!" replied I, in the fame tone, without faying more; anda frown lowered his eye-brows. " Unbending fpirit," faid he, if can no¬ thing íhake you? Do you triumph over me though impriioned, from whence you can never efcape ? " ŕť My fpirit," replied I, with rifing in¬ dignation, ( ' is fuperior, Don Raphael, to thy threats, and thy power. I was an or¬ phan, and thy caftle has given me an home.—1 was without revenue, and my table receives a conftant fupply.—I was toiled by the ftorms of life, and thou haft provided me ftillnefs and repofe.— I mar¬ ried a lovely wife without means to fup¬ port her, and thou—thou haft taken care of her. See then my obligations, but aik mc not to repay them."
-The
2S5
íc The balance of our accounts is not equal," replied Don Raphael, pale and trembling with paflion. " I was fecluded from all the viciftltudcs of life, in the peaceful bofom of this foreft, where I ex¬ pected my years to roll by undifturbed as the filver ftream, which wanders over an even furface of fand; but, like Satan, thou didlt enter my retreat, and biaftcd the fchemes of many years. ťí In this caftle, which is mine by the right of anceftry, I had gathered round nie all that could charm the tedium of foli¬ tude, give pleafing themes to melancholy, or life to the moment of mirih; but thou haft daflied from my hands the cup of fe¬ licity, and left me nothing but the dregs. 1 had feletted from the world a child, whofe pure foul, as it fprang from the fountain of life, was yet uncontaminated with the vices of a degenerate work!, and with the fondeft alfection of a lover I watched over her welcome. But the years of maturity no fooner advanced; no fooner
286
íooner had ï faid to myfelf, now íhall thi* fpotlefs angel become indeed my partner in this tcrreftial paradife, than thou, born to blaft me, tore her from me, defiro) ed her, and for ever planted a dagger in my heart. Was there no other in the world that could have fatisfied thee but her? or wasit the wantonnefs of youth that led thee on to ruin me?" BiiT tears chafed each other down his vheeks at thefe words. I was aftoniflied, difmay ed, and wept at his fu fieri η gs. "GoodGod!" cried I, íť whata wretch have I been ! What dreadful fatality hung over my head ! Why did you not deftroy me at once when my raihnefs firft led me to explore thefe walls? But give me leave to fay that your fcheme muft have been formed in a delirium. Who would enter- tcrtain fuch a project, and wifii the world to think him in his fenfes ?" if I \alue not the world, and all its opi¬ nions, at the price of a breath of air. Let alî mankind believe that I am mad: ƒ have
287
have been fo, and my aciions for many years have partaken in the eftecls. I know it. My foul is too mighty for its mortal exiftence. This feeble fragile frame can¬ not fécond its impulfcs. The darknefs of night gathers round me, and hangs upon me in perpetual gloom. I am become fit to be thy companion, for no hope ever dawns upon my foul." Don Raphael continued to rave in this manner for fome time. By turns he groaned, and by turns he wept : and re¬ peatedly beating his forehead with his fift, acied the part of a lunatic, and I believed myfelf in no fmall da3iger of iharing the ftorm. When he had cxhauflcd this eflcr- vefcence of his fpirits, he fat down, remaining for a long time filent. " Lo¬ renzo/Maid he at laft, with a figh, (( if you have not had fuificient knowledge of me before, you muft fuppofe methe moft in- confifteıit man beneath the heavens ; but if you knew how much I have fuftered by the
283
the human race, and more particularly that moft falfe and perfidious fex, you would allow that I have fome caufe for my ac¬ tions. Liften to me then, for this is not the leaft of my abfurdities, that I am going to make you my confident.—You who have injured me beyond forgivenefs—you whom I have fworn to hold in perpetual imprifonment." ît is beyond the fmaileft degree of doubt, thought I, that this man is de¬ ranged in his intellecìs. ζ( I know" faid I, il what you would tell me. I am not igno¬ rant of your attachment to lady Sempro¬ nia, and that the Marqukde Mirandula—" " Hell and all its demons feize the Mar¬ quis de Mirandula," cried he, his coun¬ tenance ailuming the darkeft dye. i( Never let me hear his infuiferable name ; my nerves are torn by the found :—you tell me you know what I have fuftered— you know nothing—you never did—you never can know what it is to be diftrafted with the moft ardent love—treated with rcpulfive
289 *
repulfive difiiain, and racked with all the pangs of jealoufy ;—-to fee the miíireíe that you wæihippedfrøwn upon yon, ahá take to her arms y dur rival ;—to go raving mad and pais two years in all the wretched¬ ness of infanity, with reafonable intervals, * at times, that were more infufferable than death. Nature has not formed your frame to know this :—You would expire beneath half that I have fufered!" "Don Raphael," replied I, " permit me to obferve, that the mind which tuners in filence, which, deeply wounded, broods over an inward and inexpreffible griet may feel as acutely as that fire formed fpi¬ rit which blazes into aciions of extrava¬ gance at every difappointment. I have feen lady Sempronia, and the piciure of her youth. I have perufed your letters, and can allow the full extent of your lofs : but did the world contain none other her equal—could no other have "power to charm your heart ? is not the contrariety of inclination become a proverb ? fo much vol. п. o fo
290
fo, that one would think there was a fata¬ lity attending us; for not one inftance in a thoufand can be brought of reciprocal efteem." <ť How coolly," replied Don Raphael, u do we reafon, when we ourfelves are not interefted. Wherefore did not you follow thefe maxims when the mild and beautiful Chriftiana was in your company, and un¬ der your protecìion. Reafon unprejudiced would have given her the preference over her fifter Cornelia, who wanted that fafci- nating foftnefs, and amiable meeknefs—" " What," cried 1, " is it poffible, Don Raphael, that Cornelia and Chriftiana were fifters? Was it you who ftole away the daughter of the Marquefa, which has coft her fo many years of forrow? and was Cornelia that unfortunate child ? But alas I of what import now is this difcovery?" ' e Say no more—fay no more," cried Don Raphael, " probe not the wounds which rankle at a touch. 'Tis fitting that you, who have been to me the inftrument of
291
of heaven's vengeance on my crimes, fliould know their extent, Liften then, but do not interrupt me—I cannot bear it. I do not exa6t from you now any oath of fecrefy, for you will never have an op¬ portunity of publiihing what I tell you, unlefs it be to the winds which wh iille through your grating, or the walls which cannot anfwer. Attends then to the fear¬ ful and eventful HISTORY OF DON RAPHAEL.
END OF VOL. II.
£xton, Prints; 87, Great PortlamLßrcit.
