Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Theodore Cyphon: or, the benevolent Jew: a novel
THEODORE CYPHON.
CHAPTER I.
" Again the bark approaches land, Again it nears tbe sbore, But tlasli'd upon α faithless strand, It sinks to rise no more ' X HE various modes of life, and habits oi men, Hanson had witnessed in his circumambulation, took from him every appearance of constraint, and he sub¬ scribed, without difficulty, to the ways of Shechem. He was a man qf the earth, one wlu> regarded -the various follies ofhis species as trifles; (lo censi¬ vo!., ш. в dered
dered the .Jew, thç Ç иЦап, and the Infidel, аз standing pi) α ¡level Hi» tra- v ?i? Ь Ц a« v< î4 l um ^ШЙ rC *"? s «n bţO^s şfıa^e of feature, лпа from the time he firet .sfiv lyve, he fancied she possessed tlie charms ot Asiatic beauty, with the more permanent quality of du- i ation Yet, before he gave way to the piibsipn \\hu;h had touched him, duty led him to inquire out his relations, and îus^tţitţ. а sı ru tmy aftel the lost lili/u In tins point a)l his endeavours were e^erted^ yi lthput fruition, with so much сщ had she eluded those whose sight iyopl4 have wounded her to the heart, tbat love, friendship, and fiaternity, sought m vain His company, by supplying the ab sence ot ¡Theodore, wis pleasing ţo Sheçhem, wl)ø loved to listen to lui Eastern descr.ipţţpns, and retraced those places wbţere юис^о£1>» youfh ţ h,ad.htei» spent . Hauion,
Hanson, m tarn; made ho scruple of accepting a chamber ill &e houWöP the Jew, as it furnished lhnumerable oppor¬ tunities of performirtg those little fiiteii- tlons that Wm tlie* heart of thè fair, for love, like many other passions, is tbe child of society Edward, who so long had balanced between loVe and prejudice, and had, under what he called dtsmterestedßiend- s/ap, promoted the interests of the younger Miss Hansons, now, when 1 her brother was returned a nabob in' Wealth, though not m character, began to fear some other, less scrupulous about 'the world s opinion than himself, would car¬ ry from him a woman he might in vain endeavour tó equal he therefor" otar- tame ïhe pride of blood, arid her brother bestowing tm her a competent Settie menti Sophia was married to another brahchidf Ш6 ¡трШ'еуроеш в 2 It
( It was not possible that Eve, who had experienced the tender passion/could mistake its actuation in Hanson, 'but she did not yet find herself disposed to encourage him, though his virtues and generosity commanded her esteem The fute of Theodoie yet hung u suspense. The man who had savetl he honour and, perhaps, her life— w ho had first impressed on her heurt the univei- sal impulsion of nature and refined sen¬ sation, was under circumstances of fear ful doubt, and whilst her heart vias weaned from him, in the conviction ot the impossibility of attainment, it could not readily adopt another in its place, whose qualities, though great, were not parallel. A lawyer of note had been sent to squire Cyphon, with ft mandate of threatened prosecution 'oil tluj'part'öf a brother, unless he produced Eliza ; but the
the tyrant, confident in his measures, de¬ clared he could bring witnesses of the death of that brother, anď tţat,' there¬ fore, he who now assumed the name must be an impostor. He was, how¬ ever, far from being; easy in his own mind, though he could not possibly ac¬ count for such a return, and sought, in augmented precaution, to obviate the unknown danger jealousy portrayed as hanging over him. It is not easy to imagine a state more miserable than his. Under every dark suggestion of an evil mind, and the know¬ ledge of repeated crimes, the phantom oi' power and honour he had pursued ever eluded his grasp, he found tbat mankind would not tamely endure op¬ pression—he knew himself the object of inveterate hatred, and had the consola¬ tion eyer before him, that no eye would weep at his death, and that those who beheld liim, though menials in his ser- l в 3 vice,
vice, would gladly have attended bim to tbe gmve. Tbe estate of hie brother, the occasion of all bib domestic domination, wd She abject ofi every hour's ooncern, be saw thrown into chancery by another Qtaunaiit ; and tbe grey hairs whicb re. minded bim of mortality, informed him «bo, that.ui that oourt he simuld, never see the issue. He seemed to stand blast ed among mankind, and found the want of that son to smooth bis declining days, whom he had doomed to suffer the most exeraejating distresses the feebngs of man can endure. The high reward he now held out was not so much to avenge his. brother's death, as to prevent the odium «f public justice; and bis design was, if be could not prevail on Theodore to bow to his will, under a statute of roadnese to shut him up for lifo. His constitution was fretted at bis continual disappointments, and three of the most active thief-takers* like weH- ' trained
trained bbodhwwids, ranged' through the nation in his pay. Ïhe barefodt cottager, in scant attire, was seldom seen on bis batate, the whole trai» of pövèty being banished, and monopofeers^Kced in their room. Farmers, mere 'likŕ 'in¬ dependent gentlemen then the «thtple inhabitants of the field, vied in hixUVy with the landholder over them. Such is too frequently the barbarous' policy of landowners, wbo forget tbat 'tacit convention alone keeps them in piMs№ aion, and that the earth was 1 created for man. ' 1! fi One day, when Hanson was coovtr'- sing with Eve, and painting to her ima¬ gination the pleasures of connubial fol». city, a man of shabby appearance rapped at the door, and desired'to spvak'to Shechem Bensadi. " W bo'do yen còme' fremii" demand¬ ed Rebekah. . ι ' >>> '' ,„! Bi «My
, " My business," replied the roan, " is with Mr. Bensiidi, pr bis daughter." Eve, who heard and supposed it re¬ lated to some petition, descended, and desired he would walk into the audience- chamber, where he might deliver his message. " And you, ma'am," said he, " are po¬ sitively the daughter of Bensadi the Je,w ?" "lam, I may venture to say. But why so particular ?" " Because, ma'am, the gentleman bade me be special careful to speak to none but you, or your father, as it is a busi¬ ness of importance." " From whom then do you come ?" ".Tliat paper," replied he, " will in¬ form you. The gentleman has also sent д note, be desired should be given me as a reward, in case I delivered my mes¬ sage faithfully." „ The
Th* note was for five pounds, drawn by Theodore Cyphon. "Theodore !" exclaimed Eve—" where is he—is lie well ?" " He IS not very well, indeed, Miss," said the man ; " and you look so'very ill, I am afraid to say where he-is." · " Alas '" cried Eve, " is he apprehend¬ ed ? tell me—tell me, is he in prison '" " He is," replied the stranger, hesita¬ ting—" he is in gaol ; but, no doubt, if lie knew how much he was pitied by so fine а lady, he would not take on as he does." Eve, too much distressed to attend to the compliment, desired the stranger to walk down stairs till her father came home; meanwhile, with the packet of papers he had brought, she ascended to Hanson. He was alarmed at the sud¬ den alteration in'her countenance, and having procured some hartshorn drop.·,, в S he
be endeavoured to prepare her for the contents of a paper, he doubted not, would unfold many sufferings, anticipa¬ ting, with grief, thŕ tate of Ins friend, and inwardly vowing revenge on the atitnbr of so many calamities. By the time her father returned,' the attrintive kindness of Hanson, rind her ov+h active reason, i>i a degree quieted htíť apprehensions, and hope, the sedu¬ cing friend of man, ognin smiled upon ïierv The eyes of Shechem were too weak to suspend the ready tear, at the account of Theodore's imprisonment. He pro¬ posed, on his part, to exert all the toree 'of law, bribery, and interest, against pa¬ rental prosecution ; and- having duly ho¬ noured the note, he sat down, with a sigh,· to attend the conrnHiatiori 'ef a 'flfn-ratWe, wbioii it "wars the task of Ben- »wrto'ftiKl. " ! ''' ·■■" i"> I 3 The
The Sktquüúftht Confissions of f hm dore Сур /um. ..... " Ignorance, Ito mW« Ás oňeiitiniet. more beneficial than knowledge, and the mind, unconscious of distant evil, rests secure till it is brought home ; but hav¬ ing unbosomed to you the troubles that destroyed me—the щиЦвнвпсу, which pursued me, and tlie crimes which were suspended in fearful array over in«,,.! again bring before you the unhappy be¬ ing you called your friend, and find, amidst the darkness of the gulf', dowp which I am precipitated, some gleams of satisfaction, in reflecting tliat учм will commiserate, and your daughter shed а tear of pity at my fate. , , Wretchedness hath selected me as her dading; »urUwed me in affliction,, ща provided for me in the dungeons, of, nfc • % в 6 faniy,
famy; but I Will collect my scattered intellect, ìó' arrangé what, perhaps,'will not reach yob till I ño longer meám on the bounds of existence. This confes¬ sion will give amusement to hours other¬ wise rrtlrey'ro tntVmaanesSOf retrospee- tidn, ér thé Inanity of a 'common »cell, fiotti when* Ï Write ' >' Having determined to 'aliandoli the hospitable asylum' of your house, and the fascinating company of your daugh¬ ter, it was immaterial into what part ot society I plunged, since to me'all weie equally dangerous. ' I reflected, how¬ ever, tnat the ardour of pursue must have evaporated in disappointment, and that a common degree of'caution might suffice. Merc seciàeion-Wouldhavë been easy, your bounty taking' fron* me the necessity of exposure in obtaining sub¬ sistence; but F-naB'lotut wefgtUsMhe worth of life in à baİMıct*, ! and found it wanting 1 . My -silili', Wltrt* had'so. com¬ bined
bıned with ita veiy existante the pøsses, sum of JKliw, found, uţiţipuţ her, «iţiaţ. ence a burden. I£ ţ fqw^ W Е ^^ round over the whole ,βκ», pf «reaţipn, I saw not one tobjecjt,of r .e,nt|cem£n^ for, m the vyhol« «oç«m4 0 İ4t|p n of the earth, t oppression and «vil saţ eţţ throned, I therefore proposed, as the sole end of my existence, to traverse the island m search of Kliza, aud, if unsuc cessful, to end the pursuit «nly νγίί,ΐι my life The common business of menfw;aş ( ţ<) me insignificant, theic toils and ЦЬоиг« ap|>eared the extremes of folly I pars¬ ed by the wharfs and wareljojises,, I smiled to see them sweating under hur¬ dens, rolling large casks before Щщ, and marching about with importance I proceeded to the fower, where jt щ\г some dreMed m scarlet and white, tprn- Wg t« the Hgbt ai^-the left, lik,e a ma ebne« and tb*"»iH»bii> had f ae air, ţ pjÇjjm- i J portant»
oortance. I proceeded tbuoughttw streets ef sbop»*-sonie were measuring,, some weighing tobacco, and some sitting be* bind their counters-with an sir of' iin- portanoev .some were sweeping the streets, and others whirling over them in carriages; but I saw nothing in tins bustle tliat could fix my attention or derate my ideas of humanity. I purchased a- sailor's dress at a clothes' shop, under that character venturing to pass the day in the streets, not having sufficiently considered from what point tp commence my search. Night came on whilst I was yet irresolute. I had insensibly walked on to London-bridge, where I sat down to reflect The so¬ lemn motion of the water-works lulled me into a reverie, from whence I was roused fay α smart stroke on the shoul¬ der, and a voice bawling oebm". What •beer, my hearty?" Γ started upat seeing myieU surround¬ ed
ed by severa) JB-lookÍBg seameov with bludgeons, and demanded tbeir buifc- ness. ** That's soon settled, my ladi" coed one ; " come, hoist your main-sheet, and let us bear down on the enemies of king George." " Not so fast, my good friend," said 1; " I am not willing to fight; therefore quit your hold, and let me go." " D—n your jaw I" said a grimJook- hlg fellow, throwing a quid of tobacco in my face. " ifou're a lubber, are ye ? Dash my deadlights, but you shall have a satt eel to supper ! Tow him along, Jack." . It was in vain 1 told them I did not choose to fight, that I was a Briton, »nil protected by laws that did not allow my being dragged away like a slave from the eoasts of Africa. They laughed at my jabber, as tbey called it, end hurried ttte· on board the tender. I wa* there ι chained
chained in a hold, amongst men whose minds were as low as their situation, and whose round of conversation con¬ sisted in epithets and ribaldry.—" And these," said I, mentally, as I looked over the motley group, " are the brave British tars who echo thunder on the bosom of' the deep !" I was at a loss to discover what stimulus could impel to actions so great, since every sense of honour, and the dignity of man, seemed totally era¬ dicated; but whilst I turned those thoughts in my mind, I heard a shout¬ ing on different parts of the deck, and a cry of " grog. Here, you Tom, fill my can. D — n it, this is stiff!" No longer at α loss to find out the real spirit of bravery, my thoughts re¬ verted to extricating myself from amongst them. I had concealed, with particular care, the sums I had about me next my person, not knowing how soon Τ might be'obliged to párt from my outward ap-
parel. I had witnessed so much of man, invested with petty authority, that I knew nothing was to be expected from the inferior officers but insolence. Pru¬ dence taught me to conform to their humour, until chance might bring me before those who had real authority, or furnish an opportunity of flight. As I was silent to the execrations of the seamen, and behaved with calmness, I was liberated from the irons, and sent down to a frigate lying off Chatham. I here entered on an employment I loath¬ ed, not so much from its labour,,as the vile company with which I was associ¬ ated. I had read in poems of Arcadian pleasures and rural delights, but I had ever found in the country excessive la¬ bour and meanness of sentiment. So I had also read of the noble soul of α sai¬ lor—his generosity and benevolence ; but I found a ship an epitome of the world, where oppression descended in regular gradation,
graditi*«», and boys in blue hnd white domineered over men who had circum¬ navigated «be globe. There wm, it is true» a spirit of oareleiinese, but it was only from example, and that loss of re¬ flecto» which had swik the mmd from every pursuit, save th« one before it. Having completed our complement of men, we dropped down to the Nore, tberelayiiig by for tbecaptadn. The ves¬ sel being dose trp to Sheernesa, it did not appeat impossible to make the shore in lb« night, especially for me, who had been inwrcd to encounter danger in shades; . 1% was my turn to watch, and tbe night being lavouMtble, I slipped silently to tbe stern, the tide flowing; I disen¬ cumbered myself from my jacket, and, without noise, let myself doma by a wpei which was (rttacbed to· one of tb« lumging ladders The toat fairing atatg- ,. j side,
side, obliged me to use precaution in striking, as the smallest alarm would have brought thein opon me. It was almost a dead calm, I glided smoothly along tbe surrace of tbe tide, striking deep and slow, creating scarcely a ripple in the water. Borne as it were on the bosom of the waves, I made land be¬ neath some cbalk elitu, where 1 sat down to recover from tbe fatigue of ex¬ ertion. I had more than once 1 «unbred for disguise; my invention was-almost exhausted, and this lost adventure'sick¬ ened nie with folse uppearaiices. ' I mourn¬ ed to myself tbe prejudices of man, in condemning me for executing what the law wa» defective in; and yet it was better that I should suffer, than' that every ma» should hold tbe dagger of revenge. ■ The reward of two. thousand pounds rendered disgwise.indispensable, however it might expose/roe to awpicìon or ни*. , take ;
takei and I spent some tíme in adopt· ingoneof security. Sometimes I thought of assuming the dress and character of α gentleman, the better to awe the vulgar ipta respect, but then, by exposing my person, I became more liable to. detec¬ tion. I knew that I should be missed at the changing of the watcb, and that unless I cquld gain the opposite shore before morning I should be almost to a cer¬ tainty discovered. I rose up, and shak¬ ing myself to ¡recover the stiffness which rendered moving scarcely possible, I ad¬ vanced slowly along the beach. The waves gently beat at my feet, amusing me with their irregular dashing. At length I came to a kind of pier, that ran out for the convenience of landing, to which I perceived a boat fastened. I ran to it with exultation, intending to ferry myself across, without reflecting that by so doing I ran the hazard,,of hanging
hanging irt' chaim, a* a fresh water pirate To this necessity I was not driven, a man and boy being off board, I pro¬ posed them to take me over, which they refused, as I must be running from some of the ships. I had before this had re¬ course to invention, and now, to clear myself with probability, my habit de¬ claring I belonged to the sea, I con¬ fessed that it «as indeed true I had escaped from a ship, but that I was the ьон of a gentleman, and had beén'tre- panned, as a proof of which 1 would give them a sum beyond their expectation, when on the opposite shore Tö this they readily «greed, first desir¬ ing to secure a few runlets of brandy in a recess amongst the chalk cliffs, after which we launched'out, and were not long in bnding 1 on thé shore of Essex. Having satisfied them for their trouble, and
aud being-Secure of their silence, 1 has- tened up tbe country, to leave the water as far behind me as possible by morn¬ ing. As I could not adopt m this place anyhabitof permanency, I barely changed my dress for that of a peasant, with a trusty stick in my hand, setting forward on the common road. I had proceeded nearly nine miles, when I Was overtaken by four sturdy men, whose countenances wore every lineament of hard inhumanity. Ae.I always expected tbat some day I 'slimilrl inevitably be discovered, I had no doubt, for a moment, as I saw them advance, but I was the object of their pursuit. For though this class of people may be necessary in a state, their deal¬ ings < with human misery has deprived them of every tender feeling, and stamp¬ ed their features with'» mark not tobe mistaken. They run down a criminal for tbe reward, with all tbe sagacity ef , hounds,
hounds, and traffic in the vices of the abandoned. Indifference, in those sudden encoun¬ ters, had always proved my best protec¬ tion, and habit had given me a facility of arranging my ideas instantly to the occasion. I neither slackened my pace nor increased it, but continued on in the touting country gait, which I could imi¬ tate with exactness. " Halloo' you toney 1 " cried onei " the top of the morning to you. Have you seen pass a, tall chap, in a light blue coat, with striped trowsers?" " Mea," said I, " I hana seen um ; what sort a man was en,?" " Why a rush made fellow, witb a brimstone faca He's run away from the bilbqes, and so, d'ye see, we want to hangi him up to dry." " What, be a been in tbe river, has em ?" said Ι,, ι 11 ι ι " Where
" Where the devil were you.-bom ?■' cried they, with a loud laugh, at my af¬ fected ignorance. " I tell ye, Cymon, he's alad that's run away from transpor¬ tation, and so if we catch him, we snack tlie. bit, and give him a look above the cotmtry." " Come, Ben," said the others, " kuve the fool alone; don't let's dally here, when we should be putting on." To this the others assenting, I at¬ tempted not to detain them, enjoying to myself then- sagacity in leaving the meat for the shadow. One of them, by accident, let fall a newspaper from his pocket, which, when they were out of sight, I took up, and had more occasion to rejoice at the narrow escape I had had, than at first aware of, the first para¬ graph which struck me running thus :— " It is supposed the notorious Theo¬ dore Cyphon, who raurdered.liis unele, lord D ------, in so inhuman,» marme*, ι .ch«
has 1 quitted tmscountry,-the- mosÎ mi- nute" researches baring'been triade to bring to abandoned an e№nd№<to jns. tice in vain. His person is not Hinlike the^famous Ned Harpoon, tlie 'highway¬ man, and he it equal in-dexterous 1 dis¬ guise, having lived for many weefcj un¬ discovered within twenty miles of the scene- of his atrocious offence." ' Men have invented modes of torture to excruciate the soul in the agonies of dissolution ; but surely in the brahd of universal infamy, though maiming is not endured, an equal suffering takes place The mind is held in perpetual suspension—no situation can give to it that consciousness of security, which alone can render life of value; every shade furnishes out α betrayer—every face is fnVexeeutioner, and man no longer is the friend of mim.' Thus I considered death'asti'much "to 4îé preferred to that decree of anathematization, which inter- *rbL. m. с dieted
dieted an offender in former times from the use of fire and water, and prevented the hand of charity being extended with relief. Bitte and grievous, were my reflec¬ tions as I passed along, and my hopes— hopes that but faintly glimmered, alone sustained ttiy courage, in the flesire of knowing if Eliza, the darling of my contemplations, was yet ín existence. Once arrived at a certainty in this case, I liàVl buta clioiceof action; if she lived, I determined to live only with ond for her—were'she По more, justice should receive satisfaction, and send fiom the world a man long made miserable.
. II 'l ' v 1 1 , , 1 it I..... I i bilt 1 III II ιι,Ι) 1 i-' l,,v CHAP-
CHAPTER II '
" Let mercj teftch the breast of raar, to glow, With soft eontpauioit for a fellow's wo " This advertisement had renewed my fears, though the security of my dis¬ guise might have pointed out my safety, yet I was. unwilling to throw myself in the way of' observation, lest a fugjtive suggestion should lead some one to cer¬ tainty Towards nightfall I turned aside (as I used formerly to do) from the com¬ mon <road ; а field of hay laying a httle to the right, afforded me at once shelter and warmth. I had a few biscuits and some fruit I had purchased at tbe hut f w с 3 village,
village; on these I sat down to supper. Whilst thus employed, I perceived, thro' the dulness of twilight, .the heap oppo¬ site begin to move, and, for the first time of my life, was tempted to credit super¬ natural appearances; but at the same time I iras very little alarmed, waiting with cuiiosity the event. After a second heaving of the kittle mountain, not a mouse, but a tall man, in α light blue coat, mede his entré. 1 instantly recognised him by the descrip¬ tion, to be the man the terriers of justice were in pursuit of. He started at the sound of my Voice when I culled him, and wis going to run, but seeing only one person, he turned and demanded what I wanted.' " Why, 1 friend," said I, " do you know yon'are valued at at hundred pound«?. theft why do you tarry in< this part of. tbe country, or wear a. dress so remark¬ able?" - " ' ' »'«i İHIM " Truly,"
" Truly," he replied, " because Ί am short of cash. But how do you know me so well?" > " Sit down," said I. Then relating my rencounter in the morning, I asked hitn candidly to confess the crime for Which he had been transported, proffer¬ ing, if he owned the truth, to give him sufficient to change his dress. *' Well then," returned he, with an air Of candour, " I confess I was trans¬ ported for drunkenness." ι '" For drunkenness'"i repeated I, in surprise; " I always thought thei law considered that as a vice Which was cer¬ tain to punish itself, and all in connexion with it; but this is the first time I ever heard of its transporting a man." " That may be," returned he, laugh. ing; " <but my case is 'something'dike that of the man who stole'the baiter, without intending 'to take the hbrseat the endi öf it.'^So-B.imust know then» that being born with a temper a little. Y 1 '" 1 ' c3 too
too easy, I seldom refused to drink, or share äie contents 'of my pocket with any man who called himself adietó, by whloh means I acquired the' title of a very honest-hearted fellow, and was at the head ofl a set of cronies ι who only worked when it could riot be- avoided. One evening, having taken otif dose at a neighbouring fair, we reeled home 1 'to¬ gether, and chancing to pass.the planta¬ tion of a person who had. ak different times sent some of us to-the stocks ifbr sweármg, whilst' 1 he would utter oaths by-the'bushel/ and others.to Bridewell for wiring a. liare, in- mischievous re¬ venge, we proposed to root up -а num¬ ber of young trees'»» hadiplairtedi , " Wŕ were, however, observed, in the iriidstbf ouťspert, and whilst wetbought no harm'in the World, were seized and maderaet by Che heels. I atiďff«**<»tliers Were'transported 'to Virginiat' which. I thotìgbt'-H- little' hard tot .pulling, up a tteey though/to Ье/'звгвй bave, since ' COIl-
considered it as a gie.it crime, aud dear enough have repentedi My voyage cured my habit of drinking, and had I been allowed to. return, should have settled to work, *nd made α sober industrious fellow. . , " You must suppose a chap, of аду cast had not been without sweetheart«, and, between us, I had engaged my pro¬ mise to little Nancy,, apd she in turn told me, she ivoujd make a nice, work¬ ing, clean, sober wife. I. was born on Englishman, and my spirit was proud. 1 could not, therefore, think of losing so many years from, Nancy, and. being .a slave witb the. black, negrees, because I had pulled up.» tree, and so I took it in my head to return if. I could. , I ran away to ai Prendi ship, >though, ifrom my heart, I hated tliem r asasetof'meaii- spiritedeilavesj and.was. by, them landed in Flranceinbut I kmged.toiseeold Eng¬ land and Nancy again. 1 found,,huw- ever, that Nancy, was become the-spouse i' с i of
,32 of another; and my character being blasted, ,1 was forced to fly. The squire, perhaps apprehending my revenge, laid an information against me. I have since, from finding employment impossible, subsisted on little depredations I con¬ trive in the night; and thus you see, from an honest man, severity has made me a thief, and for pulling up one tree, I must hang upon another." " 'Tis too true," replied I, " that the laws, in some cases, exceed the just bounds of severity ; but in contemplat¬ ing one incident which comes to us under favourable circumstances, we should con¬ sider the universal tendency of the prac¬ tice. This crime of yours, taken as it stands, is a trifle, but extended, goes to destroy all the trees in the island ; every man might then take for firewood plants which were designed to erect our build¬ ings, and launch our commerce on the ocean; thus, you see, in the ultimate, our very being, as a nation', vould be annihilated.
annihilated. It is also to be considered, that laws, in their principle and essence, are more intended to restrain, than to punish actual transgression; for which reason, those crimes easy to be commit¬ ted require α severer punishment, in order to deter, than what the intrinsic value of the damage demands. For the same reason, stealing cattle is made capita], because it is almost impossible otherwise to prevent it; and thus, when we balance the scale of justice, we ought to admit the facility of the action as a counterpoise to its seeming rigour. Be¬ sides, the laws, to embrace every species of crime, extend to the utmost verge of punishment, leaving the magistrate to extenuate as circumstances appear fa¬ vourable, whilst his power of extending the punishment is bounded." " I own," said he, " I never consider¬ ed it in this way before ; but ought not magistrates to be chosen who might act without prejudice, and who would im ' 5 partially
partially limit the punishment to the crime ? Besides, Why should I be haug- ed fbr breaking from what might be called my prison? Why not sent back again, when tbose who break prison in England' duffer no greater .punishment than/ What •wes'nuttira'Hy attached to the crime' for which they Were commit¬ ted?" " I own," said I, " here the law is severe. Transportation is only an im¬ prisonment at large. A prisoner, con- 'demhed· to perpetual durance in Eng¬ land, would not be hanged for breaking frem bis confinementj then why should the other? Why not re-transptjrt the 'offender, and by way of'prevention, add so much to his term as was employed in his voyages ? It is a pity society should thus lavish away her members ; and-1 agree with youi that «ien trusted with tl» ailmmistrarion ,of law, should be leiimed, and not·illiterate-.country squires,'wbo mind· only .«omen and ί m „ . game.
game. But," continued I, " as tlie law still remains in force against you, it is your wisest way to return to America; and as Nancy has jilted you, yon hpve less enticement to 6tay." , , " I wish," said he, " for nothing more ; but how can I, who have not a, sixpence, and who am forced to pilfer for a meal, take a voyage of so great a length ?" This difliculty I removed, ¡by furnish¬ ing him with a trifle;,and that my la¬ bour might not be frustrated, I retained him in company till the ¡ neut, day,, ,1 then provided him witb α disguise, and had tbe satisfaction to think, I had con¬ tributed to lengtben an existence too much good natureibad forfeited. On my parti I had some little trouble to parry his curiosity, at α person of my mean figure .possessing so lin-ge η fund of wealth,, andı the capability ,of distri¬ bution ; and perhaps I suffered in bis с 6 opinion,
opinión, nmler tbe imputation of dis¬ honesty Having taken leave of him, I struck nway from the high roads, to avoid fell ing In again with the tlnef-rakcrs, who, I doubted not, would hover round the spot nherei their scent was at fault, and might chance to discover in me a resemblance to the notorious Cyphon Bmguise is a perpetual torment, as, at ■every little incident, a new (.hange of ftirw becomes necessary 1 had no rea ьоп to suspect the honour of the youth I had just relieved from distress, but 1 knew too mucb Of man to trust to temp tation I therefore cast off my peasant ¡> dress, once more taking the habit ot a. beggar, with the addition of a wounded arm, and the lost of an eyej concealed by a large patoh of black plaster A grizzle wig end hump back completed my ap¬ pearance, and no man could have recog nised beneath it the;pereon ef Cyphon I was
I was so pleased witb ray complete transformation that I venturedtocreep along the high road, and to stop in vil- ■ lages aí I passed ; indeed tbis was neces¬ sary, if I hoped to discover Elba, as I might wander in fields, »nd ι by-lanes to eternity. The progress I made was sbvv, my inquiries being conducted with cau¬ tion, and constantly - ending in disap¬ pointment; for Burely it was impossible to find a person less calculated than my¬ self for such nn expedition, labouring as I was. under the necessity of .perpetual concealment. . . .. ,i ι ,' ' One evening, .when I had seated my¬ self on a bench .before anniehouse door— for the, impenetrability of my disguise, and. the change in the colour of my skin, Imving ¿yedtit a brown, yellow, rendered me bold in security—a dark romplexiobedinany with largehushy eye¬ brows, anâfmaligaantuflipect, sat-down beside me, calling for a mug of ale.— "Pray,
" Fraye my old dad," said he to me, '< how goes trade ? ï da'e say you pick up an easy loaf now, with this here game arm and eye." " No," said I, shrugging up my shoul¬ ders, " bread and cheese and, at night, a mug, like this, of atout, is my only com¬ fort ; but if I had my precious limbs sound as yours, I would make shift to procuije a little .better " " Pray how many miles may you got in я day ? I suppose you have tra¬ velled all over England, by your wea¬ ther-beat look ?" " Nearly," I replied ; " and were you to walk as much as, I do, you would not think it a pleasant employ." " As to matter of that," said he, " here's t'ye, my old boy 1 but if I had as many guineas as I walk miles, I should be a rich dog." " I suppose then,", returned, Ι,ι " you travel .the country with, goods?" 'I No» not Imbuti I'll tell you what— I'm
I'm after n d—-d onnningfellow t who, I believe, is net always above, ground, or I should have found him .before this. Did you ever in your walks meet β fel¬ low rather taller than you, but not much, light hair, fair complexion, and something grand in his gait ?" " Why," replied I, gazing' at him with surprise—■" why do you ask me a question like that? I dare say I meet such every day of my life." > ι " Oh ! but this is a remarkable man, always varying bis disguise, yet I be¬ lieve I should know him among a thou¬ sand. I have his picture ! n my pocket, drawn purposely from one in liistfiither's possession, and so I shall be cotk-sure of my bird, if I once get a sqtiint at him," I trembled at tbe danger that 1 .ran, and was more than ever shocked at this new mark of my father's unremitted pursuit, .for having desired -to iseethe picture^ 1 found it.theeopy*!'one taken < when
when I was seventeen. I returned it to him, saying, I believed I had once seen the man on the great western road, de¬ manding who he was, that so much trouble was taken to find him. " You must know," said he, " he murdered his uncle, and if I can find him, I shall have two thousand pounds I have a suspicion he has been seen late¬ ly in tbis country, for some of our squad met a' country-looking fellow, who, in part, answered the description, and the ninnies were taken in with his cant, for he's а rum chap, as you would own if you knew all his pranks. What makes the suspicion stronger is, I was at jus¬ tice F ----- 's, when a tall man was brought before him, on charge of suspi¬ cion of having stolen α twenty pound note, which he declared he had given him by this very country booby, whom he described to be thè most sensible man he had ever met; but as "his' story 'did not
not gain credit, aud I was.npţ going to balk game, the justice pocketed ,ţhe note^for the right owner, and would have sent the fellow to the lipuse.of cor¬ rection, but one °f the nabbing toys knew him to have returned across the herring-pond, and so lie'U swing for it." I had some difficulty to coţiceal my confusion at this account; whilst I ad¬ mired the sagacity of this man ju com¬ bining circumstances, I was |imaned x at his present blindness, wbich held цр a true portrait of human foresight and self-consequence ; for whilst he condemn¬ ed his friends for not perceiving me un¬ der the disguise of a peasant, he made me his confident under tbat of а beg¬ gar. I durst not leave him abruptly ; and trusting in my disguise, I ventured to inquire into his adventures. I found he had traced the circumstance of the bunk- note,
noto) when I ran the danger of being committed for forgery. He had follow¬ ed me to town, where he lost me, spend¬ ing many weeks ranging over it in every direction ; atlast he met with the thieves, and comparing my time of coming to town, the circumstance and description they gave him, he made little doubt of having again recovered his track; hutas none of your neighbours were acquaint¬ ed with my admission into your house, he found himself again at bay. He hud «ince travelled over Wales and the North ; and coming through Essex, to take another'turn in London, in hopes I might have thrown aside precaution, he hnd met his present intelligence from those who had formerly been his com¬ rades. 1 1 shuddered at this detail, which ex¬ hibited so much sagacity, and the nar¬ row escapes I had bad, even at times when I thought myself most secure. I '· » was
was sickened at reflecting on the nume¬ rous toils I had yeťto undergo, and 1 saw, that if I wished to remain undisco¬ vered, I,must seclude myself for a,time, till he should have quitted this part of' the country. I made littie doubt of his discovering my change of dress, at least from that of, tlie peusapt, as, contrary to my usual practice, I had sold the clothes to an old countryman for a few shil¬ lings. We continued in discourse for some time, I, in turn, relating adventures which had never happened, and escapes from danger which had never existed. We parted atlast, when night involved us in darkness, he wishing me good success, and that iny lame leg had permitted me keeping him.company for a time; and I hiin,, that he . might soon receive the grand reward, with how much sincerity you'may, easily, guess.
Though
Though occupied with considerations of personal safety, I lamented the fate of tbe young man, whom Inadvertency had léd to ruin. The extension of cle¬ mency, where it did not relax into licen¬ tiousness, has ever proved beneficial, and man will more leadily follow the voice of counsel, than the stern commands of authority. By the multiplication of pe^ nal laws offences are increased; and, to the honour of the present day, men be¬ gin to perceive the true modes of go¬ vernment, though its progress to final perfection is, of necessity, slow. " Yes," said I to myself, " argument rriay deceive us, but facts speak convic¬ tion, and shew that mercy is better than strict justice." In the reign of Henry VIII. seventy-two thousand souls suf¬ fered the punishment of death, which is at the average of nearly six a-daý,' in¬ cluding Sundays. In our days, about a hundred are executed annually; and f ' were
were the number less, I do not imagine our vices would be greater : it would therefore be to the credit of our feelings, if we would sometimes overlook private injuries, rather than prosecute where le¬ nity can be extended with safety. Occupied by these reflections, I con¬ tinued down а dark lane, shaded on both sides by overspreading trees ; at length it branched off in several ramifications, but not into a common road, as the swath was scarcely broken, being more like a long lawn than a road. Assured, by this token, that I was far from the haunts of men, and an universal stillness reigning around mv, I sat down to indulge the pensive reflections which arose in my mind ; but the more power¬ ful fatigues of the body overcame me with sleep, and I, αγ /оке not till the dawn of morning. A brisk air rendered motion neces¬ sary.
sary. I continued down the lane for a great length of way ; it wound in ro¬ mantic meanders, then sinking into α hollow, above which, on either side, arose craggy scars, interspersed with brambles and slbe bushes. A little ad¬ vance brought me within sight of the ocean, whose fluctuating waves glitter¬ ed in the morning sun : at a distancé, I beheld the spreading sails navigating through the deep, and stood to enjoy the singularity of a scone to me so new. Having vithh'ed myself' with gazing on uniformity, I followed the lane to the bench, where was formed α kind of harbour, so sheltered by rocks, that it brought befoie me views' I had seen of banditti or pirates in their secret haunts, for not an eye could penetrate thè seclu¬ sion from any point of observation ; the little bay, turning round a projection of rocks, formed an alcove perfeci'y secured from 1 the sea-side. T)ebghted
Delighted with the place, I spent some time in its examination ; but tbe lane bending to the left, I pursued its direction, taken up with the idea of ad¬ venture the preceding singularity of prospect bad contributed to raise. I had scarcely advanced two hundred paces, when I perceived, through the thick en¬ closure of trees, the top of a house» by its size of considerable grandeur,, and by its situation, the abode of some one who loved the dark romanticity of na¬ ture. To me, who was interdicted the residence of society, this discovery was by no means pleasing, and I stopped to weigh the hazard of advancing. It was possible I might meet another Shechem Bensadi, but it was not prob¬ able, and the risk was unwarranted by prudence; yet,.that I might not trust to chance, I examined every leading avenue. The unfrequented aspect of the place excited suspicion, that it was ' ; either
either not inhabited, seldom visited, or that the occupier was a recluse from the world, either of which conclusions were conducive to safety, and incitements to advance. I sauntered at a distance till I could have a view of the front The windows were all close, and no smoke arose from the rhimnies. I ventured to advance; grass grew in the gateway, and even on the steps of the door; but yet it was possible some one, at least, might reside in it, though I began now to en¬ tertain bopes of its total desertion. A large orchard was planted round, and though it appeared much neglected, I yet fancied I could trace the band of cultivation. The branches were bowed down with variety of fruits—the wild poppy intermingled with the garden flower, and the lowness of the wall held out temptation to the passenger.
CHAP-
CHAPTEB III
Com-wmed by the umversal stillness which reigned, that no human being re.· suled m the mansion, I was at α loss to discover why so charming α place should be deserted lhe doors of sonte out¬ houses were unhinged, no poultry or domestic animal was visible comparing the solitary situat on to Cowpers de scnption of Selkirk, in Juen Fernandes I repeated— I его moDWcb of şjl, I şıu -цву, ι uf^r ƒ ^'t 1 - ther ^i Λ ΪΡ° *Ч í »J"ív« ^ '"ŕ," 1 ; 1 i-sap ■o'" 'fe да - ι Inn lord of li с fowl und tl e b ute VQtøHjr D О,
Ob, Solitude I tthere tire tho clmrrns VV hieb »iges bnve seen ш tbj. fucer Better dnell ш tbe midst of »larms, Than reign in tins desoline pince " There is a melancholy reflection ari¬ sing ir/the mind, on the view of desert¬ ed habitations ; we are insensibly bewil¬ dered in pursuing the fancied causes of migratıon-t-rtve attach to ourselves the fallen fortunes of grandeur, or partake the bard fate of the wandering cottager. " No doubt," thought I, " this house has tbe reputation of spiritual visitants, and, probably, under their protection, is safe from the plunder of tbe vulgar, who would, perhaps, think U a sacrilege to pluck those fruits, which ripen unre¬ garded." As I was not troubled with any qualms of tbis пцйце, I made a circuit round the wall, as well fo bar against surprise, as to ensure a retreat, in easeof unex.
unexpected interruption. A little back gate opened into the orchard, it sas without fastening, so that, accorditi to the statute, I was not gu lty of break¬ ing, it not being so much as closed with a latch. I made free with the fruit, sitting down to my repast not a little pleased with the fairy adventure. I looked in vain for the drawbridge and brazen trumpet to dissolve the enchantment. Indeed, had I been a hardy steel-clad knight, I should have pitied spoiling so delightful a scene, or scattering in the air the fragments of so noble a house. However, no fair lady appeared on the battlements, nor muslin scarf streamed from the loopholes. Whilst these fan¬ cies gave some relief to my reflections, I considered that no place could be better adapted to my present necessity of con¬ cealment, the outhouses furnishing eve¬ ry security. d a I arose
I arose to consider this plan, anil opening a wicket, enteied a flower-gar¬ den, where many curious plants met the eye, equally in perfection, as though under the immediate hand of cultivation It was impossible to account for so sin¬ gular a circumstance, and as I advanced towards the house, I began to suspect it contained some eccentric mhabitan' Having knocked for some time loud ly at the door without any one ippear- mg, I walked over the garden, orchard, and outhouses, weighing the behaviour I should adopt Behind the house was a tenate, level with the first flooi, sup¬ ported by pillars, forming beneath a pi¬ azza A door here presented itself, opening, as I judged from the plan of the windows, into a saloon , the door I discovered to be only on the latch, and after some little hesitation, I ventured to enter tins palace of enchantment I found myself m a kind of common room,
room, the walls of which were pl ister, without any embellishment about it lay several staves of casks, and the re mains of some heavy package I ven hired to call, but received no tnswor, and taking my stick in mj hand, I as¬ cended the stairs the same appearince of confusion was here visible, and on opening several doors I found the rooms scattered with lumber Thei e was some old furniture remaining and my asto nishment increased at observing, on a large oak table m the dining-room, emp¬ ty bottles, with glasses, and the dregs of wine, yet standing As I gave no credit to enchantment or supernatural agency, the idea foicibly occurred, that I had, by accident, stum¬ bled on a rendezvous of robbers, which the peculiar seclusion of this place gave credit to The more I examined the objects around me, the more I became confinyed m this suggestion, though I D 3 was
was unable to account for this negli¬ gence, in suffering the outer doors to re¬ main unfastened; under this suspicion precaution became necessary, and I look¬ ed round for means of defence, in case of attack. The room I was then in fur¬ nished no weapon, but on entering ano¬ ther, I discovered several blunderbusses, pistole, and cutlasses, Confirmed now, beyond doubting, of the quality of the tenants, and not being very desirous of а visit, I ventured to take α glass of their wine from several hampers that lay in one corner, and not knowing how soon they might return, hastened from the house. I reflected, in passing the wood, that they could expect nothing from one of my miserable figure—tbat, probably, they might be on a distent expedition, and that, in the mean time, I might se¬ curely pass the days » the wood, and the nights id the outhouses, until I could,
could, with safety, continue my progress, .and penetrate to the seat of despotism, firom whence I expected, at least, to col¬ lect the vague suspicions of the vulgar, which might eventually conduct me to the object of all my pursuits. For two days I adopted this plan, without the least signs of man appear¬ ing, and becoming bolder as danger seemed more distant, I even ventured to range over the house, in eveiy cham¬ ber open to entrance. The third night was cloudy and rainy, and finding my¬ self more at ease in the large house, I concluded on passing the night within it; for this reason I selected α small room on the second floor, as well for its distant situation, as that it contained a quantity of hay and old hampers, serv¬ ing as substitutes for a bed. At midnight I was awakened from a disturbed sleep by the bursts of hilarity D i and
and the shouts of mirth I trembled at the situation to which I had inadvertent ly exposed myself, making no doubt that the robbers were returned, ind en joying themselves over their booty I figuied to myself the large dining room se ittered in confusion with the offal of intemperance, a large table loaded with liquor and round it a set of miscreants such as I had seen before at the mid house The horud parallel struck me fortibly, is it biought to my mind i ti un of ulens obscuied by the subsequent suf félins I had endured I shuddered n¿ain at the tonfinement I had under gout and at the narrow escape I had made from one of their tlass I summoned to my aid the lesolution md calmness which ever befriended mt, and rising with caution from my bed of straw, I advanced with care to the top of
of the stairs, I listened to catch their discourse, but could only distinguish songs, laughter, and noisy jests I con¬ sidered that, half intoxicated with re¬ peated libations, they might not attend so as to bear me in passing down the stairs, a hazard I was bent on encoun¬ tering, lather than fall into the hands ot a savage banditti, whom I pictured mei- ciless as the loving Stythi.u I de¬ scended with caution, step by step, but when nearly at the landing, had the dis¬ appointment of finding the door open, and the light shining into the passage, left me little room to expect escaping, without detection I ventured to lean over the banister, to discover, if possible, the numbers ot this noisy crew, or if I might venture, from their situation, to attempt escape I was confounded at the unexpected quality of the carousers, as, in place of a set of the vilest miscreants my lmagma- D 5 tion
tion bad figured, I saw с nly a number of men, like country farmen, some even possessing tlie air of gentility On nearer examination, I perceived that they were armed, but I found it impossible to conjecture the intention of this nocturnal revel I turned round, after a few moments' reflection, to regain, if possible, tbe chamber where I had slept, as it was not improbable this might be some house dedicated to Вас chus, where those sons of the grape held a meeting, and tbat tbey might leave it before morning. By some accident they were disturbed at the noise I made, and starting up, several of them, with can¬ dles and pistols, ran towards the stairs Thus inevitably discovered, I determined it once to declare the means of my en¬ trance·, resting on the convictive power of truth I was seized, and burned, without struggle on my part, into tbe banquet room, wbere some condemned me
me to immediate death, whilst others demanded how I came there, threaten¬ ing to send me to gaol as a thief and a vagabond. " You go," cried I, firm and undaunt¬ edly, " a little too fast. I nm not to be intimidated with fear. Your threaten¬ ed murder has no power to afreet me, but, for your own sakes, I would have you proceed with caution. It is true my habit is against me, but I have seen better days. I was born a gentleman, though now circumstances have reduced me to a beggar. I passed accidentally by the gate of this house, it was open, and I ventured to enter. I demanded loud and long admittance at the door, but every circumstance declared the place without inhabitants. Your negli¬ gence left the door on the latch, I enter· ed, and ventured this night to sleep in а room above stairs from the storm ; what is there in this can render me guilty ? d 6 and
and I appeal to yourselves, if I have me¬ nted the unjust suspicion and threats you have cast against me ' " Well said, by the head of my grand¬ mother '" cried one of the best looking amongst them " Come, my friends, sit dose, and let this unexpected guest taste u drop of the neat, untainted by the bmell of custom house rats ' Tins last expression perfectly opened my eyes to the characters of my enter limeis, and I made no doubt tins house was iet. uned for tlie purpose of storing smuggled goods " Here," said one, offering roe a glass, " dunk confusion to all excise in a bum¬ per 1 ' " Bravo 1 " cried they, filling up their tumblers—" here s perdition to mono poly and impost ' ' 1 saw the futility of argument, and sat
sat a spectator of then manners, which possessed a share of brutality, though refined ш compaiison to that of the rob bers Their declaration was untontiol- ed to enjoy existence, but th it enjoy¬ ment with them consisted in intoxica¬ tion and excess In every class ot society I had wit¬ nessed, reflection Ind disgusted me with the manners of men, noi tould I leiiain exclaiming to myself—" Is this the im¬ mortal being, the loid of the earth' are these the attnbutes ota soul which is to exist for ever? Those men who spurned at the institutions of govern¬ ment as oppressive, conceived liberty to consist in licentiousness, but as I had never found the most abandoned with¬ out some argument to urge in their favour, I doubted not but those men might reason wiong from right princi¬ ples, and I proposed to mv self making the
the inquiry, when sobriety should allow the return of their reasoning faculty. One after the other sunk down on the floor, or reeled to different apartments, the chief alone retaining any sobriety, though that was merely sufficient to at¬ tend to tbe general safety, by extin¬ guishing the lights, and bolting the doors. As I had, by some singular ex-* pressions, recommended myself to bis notice, he offered me a shelter till morn¬ ing, the rain still continuing violent. The next day I arose before the fumes of wine were sufficiently evaporated to allow its votaries to assemble, and de¬ scending, I entered the garden, where I was soon after joined by bim I fancied the principal person in the community. " I doubt not, sir," said I, " that you are surprised at one who says be has been in a more exalted station, appear· ing
ing in the miserable habit in which you see me; but give me leave to say, my surprise is greater, that a man of your sense should associate witb company so extremely debased from the character of man." " Hold, I beg, my good man," said he, smiling, " we only take a trifle from the contributions raised on the whole nation; for as to decreasing the re¬ venue, that's a mere farce, because, if de¬ ficient, it is supplied by new loans and new taxes." " Granted," said I, taking bim by the arm ; " I allow, that for the support of government, such a stated sum is ap¬ pointed, and which must be made up by new imposts, if the old fail. Now, by deducting from tbe old, and thus causing a deficiency, you prevent an article of luxurious consumption contri¬ buting in place of the more necessary, it being clear that the revenue must either be raised by excise or tax. Thus you
you stand in the odious situation of being a secondary means of oppressing the poor wretches, one half of whose scanty pittance is given to piotect the other He was startled by this mode of aigu- ment, which he had not before consider¬ ed He paused a few minutes, and then replied—" I know not how you have come by this objection, which I feai makes against us, for considering that the excise would not allow an honest man to drink as much as he pleased, I determined to havt my share under hand, and to this I was led by the form of swearing in excise offictis, and the infamous practite of appealing to Hei¬ ven at evtry turn of liuimn action No man cm smoke a pipe, or swallow a glass of wine, without its undergoing several attestations before God and the little pedlar, who vends snuff by the halfpenny worth, must go thiough the forms of α man on examination ot life and death " 1 am
" I am grieved," said I, " at the just¬ ness of this remark, but I have seen the negligence with which this jrticle is performed, and the oath which ought in every nation to be hold sacred, as the most solemn appeal, where direct wit¬ ness cannot be pi oduced, is m the и hole tram of excise treated as the most in¬ significant jest, and pei jury is a matter of course ' " This," said he, turning upon me, " is warrant sufficient to avoid those foims, and you may say what you will, I am now convinced, in my own opinion, for, ' continued he, with an air of triumph, " what by our means is added to the burdens of the people, we refund bicir to them, by supplying them proportion- ably cheaper in the articles we ι un, and save at the same time to ourselves a char conscience " I perceived, indeed, that argument could not shake a fixed opinion, con firmed
finned by habit, and convenient by pro¬ fit, and I turned the discourse to the dangers they incurred from the officers of excise. " Why," said he, " we sometimes have a brush with a revenue cutter; but you understand trap —we know pretty well how to keep clear." Thus we ended the discourse, return¬ ing to join in the hall the rest of the gang, who eagerly devoured a quantity of cold meat, which they largely diluted With brandy, and seasoned witb oaths, a strange example of inconsistency. In the midst of our repast, we were alarmed by the trampling of horses, and one of them, boking from the window, let us understand a company of light horse were advancing. " Well, my lads," said the captain, " we have only to be firm, till these locusts
locusts have passed us; let every man take his post." Two flew instantly to bar the bottom doors with heavy chains and fastenings. The ground windows were never open¬ ed ; others ran up to the room where I had seen the arms, and where stood a few hampers of wine ; these, as well as the arms, were instantly carried into a side parlour on the ground floor. Tbe glasses were left on the table, that the hungry hounds, as they called the light horsemen, might feed their eyesight with emptiness. Tlie whole number being assembled in the parlour, the chief whispered to me, that being а stranger, I must sub¬ mit to have my eyes covered for а few minutes. To tbis I consented, with an air of confidence, being willing to see the event of this extraordinary business. In less than a minute they raised me in their
their arms, and taking some steps, I found we were descending I was then permitted to walk by myself After about a hundred paces the bondage was taken off, and I perceived we were in ,i room under ground, lighted only by a candle, and crowded with casks of spirits and chests of tea " Here," said the captain to me, " is л glorious booty, if those hounds knew how to scent it, but they may ferret to eternity befoie they find an ounce of coffee, tea, or tobacco, above-board ' We lemained in this room, which was extensive, till night, when they opened a little door into a subterranean passage, of neai two hundred paces, end¬ ing m an opening thiough the chalk rocks into a sequestered part of the wopd, adjoining the coast A thousand jests were uttered on what they called a dead retreat, and having now to separate about the
the country, before they ventured to re¬ turn, Iwas conducted in the dark through numerous intricate mazes, to do away any temptation to inform.
CHAP-
CHAPTER IV.
■----------- Oh, it is iixmbtiiius' monstrous' Methotight the bilious spoke, mill told ше of it, The «mils did sing it to me, and the thunder— lempest Beino thus again left alone, the singula¬ rity of the recent adventure occupied my attention, till concern for my own safety recalled my thoughts to the centre from whence they seldom deviated. So many accidents perpetually retarded my re¬ searches, that my soul sickened at its ixion prospects, and sighed at the unre¬ mitted chain of labour it had yet to pursue. Was it possible to form a dis¬ guise so inscrutable, that suspicion should examine
examine in vain ? was it possible to invail my person in mists of impenetrability, from the keen eye of stimulating re¬ ward? If these were not possible, it was impossible that I should discover my injured Eliza, or learn the sequel of her fate. " However," cried I to myself, " I am resolved not to endure this dreadful state ofsuspense. I will not be hunted through the world. Then why this cowardice, this imbecility of enterprise ? Am I no longer the Cyphon who defied bolts and bars, who possessed courage to descend the high walls of an infernal prison, amidst the roar of elements? Is the spirit of the mighty so fallen, that I must hide my head in woods, and tremble at a sound ? No, I am determined to die, but it sball bc in pursuit of Eliza; for her I will brave the power of wealth, the inveteracy of hatred, and tbe arm of law;
law, yea, though kings should orise, I would defy them !" I made some trifling alterations in my figure, taking the patch from my eye, and, the bandage from my arm; in their place substituting bow legs,, and con¬ triving to sink in my height several inches. Thus deformed antjUdecrepid, I ventured again into the main, road, striking off towards the seat of my father, , As I passed along the roads, an object of insignificance in the eye of the tra- vellers I met, and the villages I passed through, I often smiled to tbjiik that my person was valued at two thousand pounds, α sum sufficient to have raised every village upon me. But whilst I wandered on slowly and sad, my thoughts reverted to the treatment I had received, and smarting as I was, under .the exalted hand
hand of power, I considered that policy demanded some sacrifice of that pride which yet reigned within me; and I conceived the strange design of casting myself on the mercy of my latber, and trusting to nature for its effects. Not but my heart rankled at the usage I had received, and my soul shuddered at the tate of the Hcnsons; but somehow I believed him to be privy to the situa¬ tion of Eliza, and to wrest this secret from him, no medium was degrading. About Ave miles from the house of my father, as I passed along the road, agitated by tempestuous feelings, which tossed me about at pleasure, a man on horseback rode by me in haste, whom I instantly recognised to be tbe keeper of the private madhouse where I had been so long confined, and where, for what I knew, Eliza at this moment might be immured. vol. ni. s My
My blood boiled in my veins at ¡Jght of this tool of despotism, and I made до doubt he was returning from the author of my being, and my woes.—" Alas!" cried I, " of what materialis composed the heart of man, that he can thus de¬ light in destruction and persecution! But now is the test, now is tbe time I must either conquer by submission or perish." ι The hopes I had entertained were considerably damped by a rencounter wbich had, in spite of my usuati pre¬ sence of mind, so much discomposed ще, that, unable for a time tot proceed, I sat down on the side of tbe road, giving way to a torrent of tears, reliev¬ ing the weight of anguish tbat oppressed respiration. The resemblance of the unfortunate Eliza recejvjed my caresses, and invoking Heavť» to oonirnijeiii- tion, I pursued my journey. Op the preceding day I had changed my men- i disant
dicant attire for the dress of the country, that I might pass without creating sus¬ picion, though I still retained the marks of deformity. It was (¡t* dusk of the evening before I assumed coolness andı courage sufficient to rap at ţbe door, apd inquire if the squire was st home, " Yes," replied the porter, eying me witb curiosity, though he could not penetrate my disguise, " my lord is at home, but he sees no strangers, and so, if you have any business, my good man, you may deliver it to me." " The business," I replied, " is pf great importance to your lord ; it can be com¬ municated to no other, and therefore I must, see him." " You must see him 'Ί repeated he ; " you must call again to-morrow." " No," said I, "my good friend, don't let us have any misunderstanding; if my eagerness is interpreted into imper¬ tinence, here is α guinea to soften the asperity. But what I have to impart e S to
to squire Cyphon is of very great im¬ portance." " Walk into this room, if you please, sir," said he, with a servile cringe ; " my lord is not in the habit of seeing stran¬ gers, but if you will send up your name, I will venture to deliver it." " My name," I replied, " signifies no¬ thing. Tell him I come from his son, that I have power even to deliver Theo¬ dore into his hands, but that I must first speak to himself, and without witness." The porter gazed at me ; he seemed as if he wished to speak, but as I desired be would instantly go to his master, he left the room. I waited near half an hour, a subject of the most tormenting suspense; now thinking tbat nature might soften his heart, and that yet lie might relent; then, that I should find his obduracy increase at this mark of my submission. t
At
At length the porter returned.—" My lord," said he, " after much considera¬ tion, has consented to see you, but in¬ sists it shall be in the presence of a third person—a precaution you would not condemn, if acquainted with the danger he apprehends." " I must either," replied I, " see him alone, or not see him at all ; were I his son, he might fear my revenge, but as it is, his timidity is puerile." " If so," replied he, " I am commis¬ sioned to offer you conditions, which are, that you allow yourself first to be searched, that you may not secrete any weapon in your clothes, without which, my lord positively declares you are not to be admitted." " A weakness such as this," said I, " must render every moment of your master's life a torment ; but as I am not come with murderous intentions, I sub¬ mit." Having undergone this precaution, e 3 which
which exhibŕtedthe terrors and jealousies ef' tyranny, 1 was conducted through apartments I could have traversed with¬ out в guide, and 'délivered by the por¬ tør to another pemon, whom I knew «at; ¡but Who, it stons, had charge of ävery message, and was a kind, of sen¬ tinel -, bê opened the door of the ¿ham- ten My fachen wholly resided in, and *ortvmg down to <the. floor, repeated^ " My lord, thè stranger waits to be ad¬ mitted," . ..»fcLet.ihimjenter^^said a voice I dis- tHlgteilbeditts my lather's, and Jat which ev«ry nerve, trembled, and the blood flMbedtomyfacev libad my hand on 4ny beating 1 bosom, and felt the picture of Eliza. I became at obcfe sufficiently .inaster of myself to advance, an* bow¬ ing as> I 'entered,- was ibut fat by the fMrvwnt. 'On the.table lay a brace tof pİ8tols,îwHh aidravnrwrrordi; buťallimy attention was rivetted on the figure of my fttfatft Tlie plump ippearanoe of ruos ŕ τ manhood
marihood was no more; his features were distorted by suspicion and anxiety,' his eye was rambling and wild, but at tbe same timestern s nd ferocious; and whilst I euŕťeyed the shattered remains' age and retrospection contributed perpetu¬ ally to decay, I pitied, I trembled, and was dumb.—" The man,'! ι said hi, 'Shas informed me, and that there, that you know where the rebellious and abandon¬ ed man iti concealed Who was once ι my son. üs it true?" t.> " Шу ferd " cried I, «stingmyself on my kriees, " it is true ; bnt he isinat tbe abandoned wretch you term him. 1, Ί myself, am that unhappy, that miserable son-Miie. mirk of, yonr vengeance, tbe victim-of your wrath.".· 11 > '^ You !" cried be, starting from me, whilst 'å thousand emotions shook hit uamfyit· you Theodore! And «re yen theneome to murder your father?" ι IjNo," nil Iť'í'aoti may.the.tmivtn»! be abake» to nonnntity, if I ever bar. I - tlttl E i bour
bour the thought ' No, my father, be· bold and pity the object Of your rage Reflect to what the madness of dfspair urged me, when the elect of niy soul was torn from me, destroyed, polluted, contaminated Reflect on all I have endured, on all I bave suffered, then ask yourself for what When did I oppose your will but once' Was not my whole ¡Ее, ttll that moment, a tenor'of obse¬ quious obedience ? Cannot th« calami¬ ties of a son touch у our heart with pity a Cannot you feel the claims of nature, and restore me 'to Eliza and my birth¬ right ?* '' İ have sworn," cried be, ghmdng a Ilio! of Malice, and stamping with fury, 1 I bave sworn bý tbe Heaven of Hea¬ vens, she shall never be yourS. I have glutted myself to fulness oh the vile worm which arose to curse me, and des¬ troy all the plans I bad formed,' and that ¿here, for the exaltation of my family Sut 1 have cast >o% off' got go and 141 partake
partake in her company all you deserve. She; i* at tbis moment a common pros¬ titute; her blood is mingled with its original foulness, and the blow I received from you, on her account, measured upon her and her family with thunder¬ ing»." I was transported at tbis speech be¬ yond bearing. I started from the pos¬ ture of supplication. I gnashed my teeth in the wddness of fury.—" Mon¬ ster !" cried I, " inexorable tyrant ' what power did the fortuitous chance qf my birth give to you? Did it bestow on you the right of torment and destruc¬ tion? No, there are bounds of tacit oampact in every connexion. There are degrees of reciprocal duty, which, when broken by the one, are no longer bind¬ ing to the other. From this hour I re- nwwe^tde^ypu.r , , J tear from.my l«wrt,«wery tøff·«* 0 *' llìlUd- afe^tipn; j.your bţadiţjijrqw^^witiji grey t( haire, 'Hut B * will
«•gldfetidias.a blasted tree ih ihe nudit .ffiithei forett, and you wfflidtscaml to thetigmvB without a .name remaining amongst meh. II will blaze in colours udB bkiaA y**Kitn»amous character to the дтоЖк J,W<11 give yofiiup и a» ex¬ emple to tyrants—and the stings of'ore- iinortie,'and .bitter penitence, will .-create Mt) you, through the short, remains of lyour ptecatious existencie, the excruoi- i eting tortures of hell !" . . . H tUll Jill cc t Julle was toarnöch confounded to re- iplyij »he deemed to labour tunder ЛичнП tef *»pri5»sion, and thetsuffoeationr.of ;«Bge.v He stood «tiu, his eyes wildly i staring í upo*, me; my soul waiipiereed with misery, aneli 'hastened -anay^jfe- jfosing to ι answer .the servant»; '«who licrowidedi round· m« to^öquirfc ι.Αβ I rentered the halk' bibjsmiAe.isekiev.ttt 'Wiy father, oomsuaedeig uhetoitofstop bsnti but vowing id«ath)tb.anyen«'»ho u is attempted
attempted to do «», in a tone and ges¬ ture tbat shewed ¡the denger of trifling, I opened the outer door and escaped. It was a black tempestuous nigbtv tbe wind howled in wild roarings, suiting the distraction within me. My. brain seemed юп fire, and .the dreadful idea of Eliza a prostitute—the angelic form, tbe divine soul of the virgin I had loved, polluted by the drags of society,¡fixed on my senses. I am mad witb the re¬ flection! Alasi I scarcely know what I write. Thedeseending rain overwhelm¬ ed me in torrents. I opened toy bo¬ som toits fury ¡ I spread forthuny arms to defy &e elements; I.iwi forward; I «topped ; I was distr#etedj I .cast .my¬ self on ¡the ground; I .repeated,the «awe of Eliiat large drops of' sweat gathered on· mp tatty, already d*«»cned with rairi- I wished Do dets» to. Л*, ffr» .wheie world«wembefotemyisebt; iwjoiead •><4 ^ E 6 İn
ifíi'tb*f jarring oonftudon of the stono, еф should <ha*»'saiiled to see oanvuk sion» warp tbe earth witb distortion·, and hurl the universe into onginal chaos. E*e»y l*t(|i was dark as the secret oham- berhctjf.ihivııçrave, and my soul seemed capable '«f rising above every form of destrttetlon, bf vkling on the wings of whirlwind andflre. 11 Irt 3V > Ч haws since wondered tbat I did not mjti*m% destroy myself, but deatbmever aeeetfdwyrefleotfon. I seemed to to war abrJvé ite consideratíoní every mode' Of denger -vanishing ihto nothing; , ι Yet, However tlie soul may be stimulated to madrteftby passion.'itsphysii!«! eflectson He bc^yquiekly wduce it beneathi the ccWnlön ton* df energy, and almost de- prlve'it ef active power, с Thus a prey to%«W»rl1rrnltjd io^reblon, I had rambled førwerdl I knewnofwlver«; norregard- ЩЦ^т titt^H««<»l»ée;a/l*upor<ovor, '- ' L «ame
cmnotmev'eveiy object.at onetiiwaa.shut <№ fiam-rintelleetUai recogfiiMncA' ami I sunk down upon the road. v , ,,, rili I ' ■ u n nm 'H. i f I liknow nothowjmlmyÆQvt» .Д-.геч muned in this situatipniieKpqssd ito ţjie, violence of the »torm ( «ad Síeeped.ííi wetejsw ЖЫ grey νρίιΛΛιη,βιηύιβίνββ just visible above the topsiofithediMant hills, when I again opened my eyes on a worldio" badi iieedy.ifoaake»· me.iever. A'bornmg beat suffinediitislf. oVüWimy bodyí and circulated.tbiwegb my! vejnŕ, thetJ»rtain«y«iptom.of;*feyeM, \№% Bsètretpleasure intheţbeught— Ibug- ged tbe very naihe-ief death 4 i, Ι.,ίοωκ), however, my present i»ituetìoeie»tatOl4- ly'disagreeablej btiegvllWumbed, wiţb caid juiďdamp, whilsVät tb»eai?»«)íhne, anidnte»n»t firo devpured «to. tlt, v?i« withicKtotoe dinieulíyi ¡I'.iadvauoed.a few pacetite-ia-idryohaek,, jvberBiX.sat dew» «IrcHyjeiihiUisted^tmyi mind.st^l '«ι* turning
.timnr.Ţto the dreadful account I bad heard, and which yet tingled in my ears. In the tumult of my crowding reflec¬ tions libad omitted inquiring where Eliza might beifound, a circumstance that started, upon me as а faint glimmer of hope, and 1 indulged а fancy, that what I had beard might have been only α malicious aspersion, an attempt to less¬ en in my sight tlie perfection of female excellence. Whilst muie eye turned with indifference over the country be¬ tore, me, and my soul retired within the recesses «f'deep reflection, а single-horse cart, with a man and bis wire, who had been at a (neighbouring market, came up. .They stopped at observing my si¬ tuation, inquiring, with the kindness of charity, if I would accept a «Mt, as I seemed it^tigued? ι . > ThiaihumanSty to 'me WMeddrtioii- - ν ally
ally welcome, having so seldom heard tbe voice of compassion, and being real ly unable to walk, I consented to enter tbe cart I sat down in silence, being too weak to answer their questions, and my imaginatie n too bewildered to at tend I continued in this kind of stupui till we arrived at the little town whert they dwelt, but by that time I was be tome wholly lightheaded and, aftei muth difliculty was admitted to a bliel ter under tht shtd suppoited by parish bounty from the temporary deiangement ot my senses the strength of my constiti! tion shortly relieved me but a violent ftver flamed through my body, and m satiate thirst incessantly tormented me rhe good woman who had by her in¬ tercession proturcd me this asylum, was a farmer s wife, and now and then sup plied me-with fruit, which allayed, in some degree, the fervour of iny suffer¬ ings
ings She had wisely taken care of my pocketbook, containing my fortune, well knowmg that otherwise my whole personal property would be in a state of sequestration
CHAP-
. - 11 . к, ., ? . r
CHAPTER V.'
Death hath th" tempte raz'd, hive's empii* toiľd, The world of honour, worth, and sweetness spoit'd. Dkumhomd. After the furor of the malady was aba¬ ted, and sunken nature existed but faint¬ ly, I had leisure to look round on my companions in misery, and on the house which preserved us from the weather. Ere this I bad witnessed the ostenta¬ tions of charity, but now, in the secret vale far from the glare of reflective pride, wbere tbe pittance was only collected from tbose who bad little to give, and pompous subscription was unknown, I beheld,
beheld, I felt the boasted providence for misery, want, and worn-out age Beneath the thatch of a tottering building dwelt the outcasts of poverty. Mothers, who had never known the name of wife, were here deserted and forgot ; children, the offspring of unpro¬ tected parents, or the remains of some family, whom indigence had starved to destruction, cold, naked, and hungry, turned the wheel, which is the support of th» mighty empire. ¿eft on -the world's blekk WMte forltxn, t Ie »in ^ondfliv'tl, ir tprrow born, , No guid« the fbvıoııt mate to tread, ЛЬоуедво friendly »helter éprend J^iooe, amidst surrounding strife, ^nd nuked to Uie storms of life, Despair lot ks round witb aching eyts, Aud sinking tinture groans nnd dies .Fvundimg- Hymni ι ι л Here
Here Was the enfeebled peasont bleached and stiffened by the morning dews, the winter's cold, stretched on the flock bed, the picture of famine, and the prey of disease, left to breathe out his last sighs to Heaven, without a comfort to soften his way. Every breath of wind whistled through the broken casements, being the only remedy against the various ill scents which arose from disease, and loathsome filthiness. No plaster covered the bore walls, formed of irregular stones, be¬ tween the interstices of which were pegs of wood, that suspended pieces of appa¬ rel, rags for the dressing of wounds, and more disgusting objects; yet into this Chamber of wretchedness the poor were often denied admittance. Miserable sons of the'earth, better, better would it be never to have been st all ! This was the last Stage of life, when sickness calls -for indulgence, when the parting seal trembles
trembles in uncertainty, and sighs for the aids of friendship, wheh it lingers in the world, and fears to leap into the dark state of unexperienced existence, rendered grim by a thousand horrors of superstition. No hand of comfort was nigh—no voice of soothing consolation poured balın into the ear—the shrill tones of the magisterial nurse carried instant obedience, and the tender part of her office was lost in callosity of feel¬ ing. The apothecary executed his part with indifference; he was above giving to the sick those hopes which might have contributed to linger out existence; and even the priest, whom religion should have softened down to humanity, enter¬ ed with stiff constraint, to mutter а lew prayers over the dying victim; that over, he hastened to the revels of mirth. How unlike the unfortunate Hanson ! w hose, soul was the emblem of Christian patience
patience and goodness ; but, alas ' Chris¬ tianity is now a name—a mere passport to office. " Oh Fortune 1 " cried I, " is it thus thou dealest with the children of men ' is it thou, who givest beds of down, and all the various luxuries of the earth's production, to α few, whilst thou de¬ nies! the common enjoyments of savage nature to others, emerging thein in wretchedness and wo? yet man boasts himself the lord of creation, though sinking under labour, disease, and want." It is true, there were in this house whom a love of idleness hud brought there, but these ought not to have been received, or, if received, employed ac^ cording to their strength. When the fever ceased to rage thro,' my veins, I lay on, my wretched pallet in a state so exhausted, that nature seem¬ ed
ed to have made her last struggle, and death silently and slowly to be stealing upon me. I felt witb satisfaction its approaches—I regarded the hour of dis¬ solution with a composure, alone dis¬ turbed by the remembrance of Eliza. The tear started in my eye, at the utter impossibility of once more calling her mine—of once more beholding that countenance, whicb had first taught iny heart to sigh—to beat at the impulsion of love.—" Oh," cried I, " that I could press thee to my bosom! oh that our souls might breathe their departure to¬ gether, and, at once, leave behind us this scene of variegated unhappiness '" One night, when all within the house was hushed, save the snoring of the nur¬ ses and the moans of the Sick, I wqs dis¬ turbed from that state of inactive reflec¬ tion, when the spul is bewildered, with¬ out forming ideas of distinction, by deep sighs fiom оде who occupied the bed
bed next to mine I knew it to be an unhappy female, who had been overta- ken by disease m the practice of Vice I had even heard, that some circum¬ stances ш her life were particularly pi tiable but I had not seen her and now, when her deep sighs sunk into my soul, I caught the sympathy of distress, and turned round to listen. " Unhappy being ' thought I, " this then is the end of α life of pleasure- tins the goal of a race in pursuit of gra¬ tification ' but perhaps thuu wert be trayed—perhaps some second lord D ----- planned thy destruction Oh, cned I, aloud, " Omnipotent Being ' if indeed thou lookest down on the actions of men, let not lust triumph unpunished ' and oh, protect from an end like this the unfortunate bhza ' ' Who, said she, faintly—" who do I hear call Eliza?
The
The sound of her voice struck me with the rapidity of lightning, and deprived, in that moment, of speech, I started up, I made an effort to throw myself upon her, but enfeebled beyond exertion, I sunk again upon the bed, m a state too painful and too confused to admit description " Oh, Theodore ' said she, scarcely loud enough to be heard, for she now recollected me—" oh, Theodore ' is it indeed you ? Ob, look not upon me ' I am vile—I am worthless ' A burst of tears choked her utter ance for a time My heart seemed to rise to my throat, and every power of speech was suspended " Miserable that I am, said she, " I frayed to die in obscurity, but even this •s denied me ' Oh, 1 heodore ' pity the Eliza you once loved—pity the suffer ings I have gone through ' and oh, pity the
the. weakness of human, nature,.which held me to life, though debased beneath myself í But a very .few hours remain to me;. I shall then leave a world wjiere I have had little .but sorrow?—where shame anď misery havebeenimy por¬ tion." ' '.·( к 1 ι 1l " No, no," cried I, struggling for ut¬ terance, " you shall not ; by Heaven ! it cannot be—you shall live—you arc dear to my soul—you are my wife—my Eli¬ za—my only love !" " Wound me not so," said she—"spare ine, I entreat you ! those names of en¬ dearment cut me as reproaches ; for long sunk in my own esteem, my very being is loathsome to myself, and cannot but be so to you." " You wrong me indeed—indeed you do," said I, with vehemence. " I love— I will love you for ever. Still to me you are the same—1 am the origin of all you have suffered ; but for me you might have lived a life of peace—the. yol. iii. f humble
humble thatch of the cottage would nave sheltered you; but 1 turned you eut to the storms of We—I exposed, you to the ЬШ* of power ; «nd if «ruel for¬ tune permits you not to li-ve, we will db* together—we- wilt sink at once farom being, or rise to worlds of immortal ex« H*ence." " You know not," she replied, " what a Wretch 1 anti Oh y if my father, when here, had foreseen tiie- lot of hi« daughter' mercy would have taught ШЛ to end her existence' but who would desire life« were th» tontiiigen- dlei Within the» power of prescience? Tell me, Theodore, how Ъ find you in thi« lowest of human, habitations—Why did you dip your bands in the bloed of? й wreteb, whose Very touub was eonta- lrrmatio* ?"' " Oh/' cried I, *' the* he had ten thousand Kves ί my mull would have rioted' Ίλ vengeance- Was it Hot bine vsf^dwttoyedu*? 1 wask-nothirmw*«» ν ι blurted
blasted our existence? we« it not bim who murdered my son ? but I a» rising to madness, and Ì would fain be calm. I would, if possible, swallow down the long train of my injuries, that I may not bse the indulgence of the present moment in allowing me to be near thee ""to speak to the darling of all my re¬ flections; but I fear, my Eliza, I shall exhaust your spirits—live for me—we Will fly to some other kingdom—we will·—,» " Cease, cease, dearest Theodore*" srid she, faltering, "this is too much fbr my Wounded spirit to endure, I kridw but too well that tbe dart of death evert now rankles In my heart—I feel its poison floating chilly through my frame, and that nothing can now save me." S» dreadful a sentence seemed too gretti to endura; a cold shudder, a con¬ vulsive ttembliŕlg overean* tnt. I felt ί F S a pang
a pang as if every nerve had been pierc¬ ed with the acuteness of torture, and nature fainted beneath the shoik It was day before I wholly recovered, the preceding scene returned on me like a dream—I doubted its reality, but I ventured to murmur out the dear name of Eh/a, and listened to catch an an swer The nurse vv as employed at the othei end of the room I riised myself upon the sack, which serv ed as a bolster, and listened to the intermitting breathings ot а broken sleep, that served to dull the senses without calming the spirits of the once thorming daughter of Hanson A part of the sheet concealed her fate, I ventured to remove it with one hand, that I might again gaze on her inimitable countenance, and enjoy the silent pleasure of tracing those features that had fascinated my senses, but I started
started back with horror at the dreadful alteration, the sheet fell from my hand, and α burse on the author of all this was rising unbidden Her once blooming face now bloomed no longer—her features were swollen with haidship and grief—her eyes were deep sunk in her head, the paleness of snow, tinted with a sickly yellow, co loured hei skin, and corrosive disease preyed upon her, like the canker which destroys the fruit, and saps the first principles of vitabty A sight so shocking would certainly have affected me to excess, had I been capable of any exertion, but so weak was every energy, that no new calamity could reach me, or untate feebngs blunt ed beyond the power of stimulation When the first sensations of disgust were subsided, I ventured to take ano ther view of the Buffering fair, who, f 4 whilst
whilst alive, was subjected to tbe empire of corruption I even traced witb fond¬ ness the remaining lineaments of fea¬ tures, where once Envy β self would in vain have sought a fault, and on which I bad often gazed witb secret rapture But who can tell the tortures of my mmd if a moment admitted reflection ' I durst not glance a look at retrospec¬ tion I would have wept for Eliza, but I found it was impossible—I found my gnef too deep, end I wished fbr dissolu· tion 1 he fan sufferei awoke with a start, and convulsive kind of gasp she raised her eyes feebly towards me—but, alaa' they conveyed only languid dejection, every higher animation being gone no more did they beam with etherial ex¬ pression—no more did tbey shine with intellectual meaning they indeed re¬ tained a power, but it was the ppwer of exhibiting bumamty sunk by excess of pam,
paio, and deadened t» further, endu¬ ran«. I had now found the object for whom I had alone consented to live, but to find her in this situation—in the lowest state of expiring life, destroyed the pleasure I had expected from her sight; I bad, however, no other motive to live than for her, end, by tbe help of my friendly countrywoman, I exerted myself to pro¬ cure lier some assistance. Too enfee¬ bled myself, I gave the task wholly to ber; and as money will procure civility and attention from an enemy, Eliza was something better provided for, though every hour convinced me that the ma¬ lady was too deep for removal, and that a consumption had long preyed upon her. I forbore, from tenderness, to touch oa her misfortunes, but from tbe farmer's wife I learnt some particulars, wbich, if F i possible,
possible-, strengthened my hatred against the man who could, in mere wanton¬ ness, murder every feeling of humanity. It appeared that she had been traced by some instrument of my father, to the house of a cottager, in a distant part of the country, where she had found shel¬ ter, and earned her bread by labour. With this cottager she lived in fancied security, till she had recovered from the effects of the violence she had suffered ; after this she was apprehended as an ac¬ cessary to the murder of lord D -----, and confined for many months; but, at the intercession of my father, and no person appearing against her, she bad been liberated. Tliie appearance of lenity gave colour to his actions, and brought htr deeper into his power; for being now turned on the world, without money or friends, ber character blasted, and laying under suspicion of murder, no one took com¬ passion
passion on her sufferings, and those who knew not my father, condemned her story as the forgery of ingratitude. Thus driven from every resource, and encom¬ passed round by the lines of the spoiler, she was assailed by temptations forti¬ tude could scarcely resist, and she took the resolution of hiding herself in the fields, where she might die unobserved. The villain who kept the private madhouse was chosen as the instrument of executive vengeance—a vengeance so brutal, that even his abandoned soul shuddered at the proposal, being only brought to conform by threats of punish¬ ment for his former actions. In a state of weakness which deprived her of the power of resistance, again was the wife of my bosom violated, and contaminated with a disease, that instantly fixed upon a constitution already far declining. Humbled beneath the dust, she was г S now
now left forlorn, abandoned to the mercy of the elements. She possessed not cou¬ rage to put a period to her being, for, broken-hearted, all her firmness was gone ; and thus й burden to herself, «he lingered, for a time, on the offerings of the compassionate, when «inking down before the door of a gentleman, she wm, under his direction, conveyed to Ле place where I once more found her. A detail like this was ill calculated to restore repose to my bosom, or give strength to my slowly-recovering health. Indeed, I had no longer one single wish to live, except that I might not leave behind me my injured wife, for such I considered her, in defiance of the decree» of lawyers, and the outrages of cruelty. I watched with fearful anxiety tlie vi¬ sible advances of death, for hours bang¬ ing over her languid form, whilst our sighs reeponarvely expressed the unut¬ terable
temblé feelings of our souls. Every day deducted from my hopes of ber re¬ covery, as every day produced an altera¬ tion, visibly for the worse. Spasms, at intervals, deprived her of self-command, and shook her frame almost to dissolu¬ tion; her voice was sunk into faint and languid sentences, and scarcely an bour seemed allowed her to live. I paid no attention to my own weak¬ ness, exerting every faculty to serve her, whilst, in tum, she endeavoured to soften the distress she saw prey upon me, and which hurt her feelings, not yet weaned from that tenderness, whose existence commenced the first bour we beheld each other, and which every suc¬ ceeding interview increased and cement¬ ed. Exhausted with fatigue, I had suffer. ed myself to fall in a kind of doze to¬ wards midnight, when I was awakened ρ 6 by
by a touch of her hand, already chilled, arid clammy with death.—" Theodore P' said she, softly—"my husband ! I would fein once more hear your voice—I am going." "Stay," cried I, starting up, and press¬ ing her hand to my lips, almost uncon¬ scious of what I said or did—" stay, I conjure you, my Eliza, one day—give me only one day more, my angel, my friend !" n Ob, Theodore!" said she, "death bad no terrors for me till this meeting with you. I wished to repose in thé arms of my father—to lay my head on the lap of my mother. I wished to em¬ brace the etherial spirit of our ehildi but I find that my husband ties and attaches me to life—I feel—Theodore—my—it is done." Clouds of darkness swam before my eyes—chaos Uroke in upon my senses—I threw myself upon the bed, and embra¬ ced
ced the inanimate remains of the injured saint, whose soul had for ever departed from its unworthy habitation. Wrung with insufferable anguish, no exclama¬ tion could give expression to the poig¬ nancy of my feelings. My spirit made an effort to escape, and deeply groaned at its impassable durance. They endeavoured in vain for some time to part the corpse from my em¬ brace, my arms encircling it with a firm hold, as if I feared losing some invalua¬ ble possession. The whole circle of feel¬ ing seemed to have been exhausted by my prior calamities, so true it is that by familiarity, either pleasure or pain loses its effects. A dreadful calm succeeded ; I Was convinced of the irreparability of my loss, and my mind brooded in silence on the most eligible means of recovering her society, for, said I, she shall never come back to me, but I may go to her. With
With difficulty I prevented tbe over¬ seers putting her in one of their miser¬ able shells ; J had even tbe firmness to take a last kiss of her pallid cheek—-a last look at her emaciated form, before I allowed them to screw down the coffin, which was decked witb flowers. But when tbe melancholy procession, mourn¬ ful and slow, moved along, attended by the weeping maids and mothers, who owned ber misfortunes when she no more regarded tbe world—when the bell toll¬ ed solemn, every stroke was as tbe pang of death, and I found it impossible to attend ber to the grave. When I beard the bell announce tbe finish of tbe sad ceremony, I felt a pang of madness rush through my brain, and a desire to fly and tear her from the depths of the grave. But again I be¬ came calm—again gave way to the pro- foundest melancholy.
lhad
I bad now seriously resolved to die, but I was undetermined as to the mode I should adopt; for I wished at tbe same stroke to plant immoveable remorse aud everlasting shame in the breast of the cruel monster, who could, unpitying, give а loose to the virulence of over¬ bearing pride and passion. After much consideration, I adopted the purpose of making himself tbe ex¬ ecutioner of bis own punishment, which I knew would brand him with universal infamy, and shatter at once the high cas¬ tle of pride and power he had so delight¬ ed to erect, and whose foundations were laid in blood and destruction. In this purpose, as soon as my strength permit¬ ted, I left the workhouse, hastening to the next magistrate, to whom I desired admittance. " I am come," said I, " to inform against a murderer, for whom two thou¬ sand
sand pounds are offered by squire Cy¬ phon." " Are you certain you have the right person ?" said he, " as a mistake in a matter of this nature is particularly dan¬ gerous." " I am so certain," replied I, " that 1 am the man, and I demand to be com¬ mitted to prison, that justice may be sa¬ tisfied." " Reflect," said he, " what you are about to do ; I have yet power to suffer your escape, as you are here on your own testimony." " I have considered, sir," said I, " I sm perfectly calm, and wish that one guilty of so enormous an offence may no longer remain unpunished." " My duty, then," he replied, " is to commit you, though I confess my reluct¬ ance." I was accordingly conducted to the county gaol, where I now continue— where
where I have employed my melancholy hours in writing α narration I could not have pronounced My intention was to leave behind me this testimonial, which might excite the tear of friendship from you and your daughter, and be the only tnbute of gratitude I can give to those, who, though they knew me not, yet be¬ stowed on me the gifts of friendship and love But as I find I have not many days to remain m this world, and as then this paper might never reach your hands, I have contrived а mode of conveyance Should I be no more by the time you receive it, I bequeath to you the unwel¬ come office of interring me beside the remains of Eliza To your daughter I give the portrait of that murdered angel, as the most valuable of all my posses¬ sions To you both be peace ' '
CHAP-
CHAPTEB, VI.
It was not without frequent interrup¬ tion that Hanson bad been enabled to finish a narrative, that filled him with indignation aud grief. The fate of his «ister, wbo had been bis favourite, tbe abominable violence sbe had suffered, and the persecution of bis friend, altoge¬ ther raised within bim a thirst for re¬ venge; and like tbe Arabian, wbo mea¬ sures death on the murderer with his own hand, he solemnly vowed, tbat tbe grey hairs of Cyphon should not descend to the grave in peace. This intention he however concealed for tbe present, as be had to exert every ability to sooth the weeping Eve, wbo was nearly distracted at
at the thought of Theodore's imprison¬ ment, and the impending darkness ho¬ vering over his fate. " Oh, my father !" said she, " casting herself into the arms of the trembling Shechem, from wboee eyes dropped tears, like the oil which descended on the beard of Aaron—"oh, my father! cannot he be saved—cannot he be re¬ stored to us—cannot we carry up to the throne a petition for mercy?" " I fear not," replied the Jew; " be is guilty of murder, and this crime cannot be pardoned. But we will go; we will endeavour, by our presence, to soften bis affliction. Consider, and be calm, my dearest girl. Dost thou not see that life is become loathsome to our friend, and that the suspension of his fate would be only adding duration to his sufferings? Let us then only seek to ease the irk- someneas of bis stay, and by the offices of ftiendthip dissipate, in a degree, the loneliness
loneliness of a dungeon, and reflect some ray of brightness through the enshroud¬ ing gloom." It was in vain Hanson exerted all his eloquence to dry the tears of Eve, whoso grief wounded him to the heart, and was not a little augmented by reflecting, that affections so fixed on another, had little chance of turning on himself. But these sentiments he concealed with se¬ dulous care, as of all moments none could be more unfit than the present to de¬ clare himself, when every consideration was absorbed in the fate of Theodore. He had at times flattered himself (for who that loves does not, however ab¬ surd his pretensions?) that Eve bestowed on him an esteem superior to friendship. 'Tie true she listened with delight to his discourses, she even courted his com¬ pany, and when he went out, often de¬ sired him not to stay ; but this might be merely
meiely a wish of society, her secluded life not allowing her the diversity of common visitants 1'icparation was now made for a has ty join ney, though necessarily delayed longei than the impatience of Eve al¬ lowed, from the many concerns Shechem could not leave, without throwing his affairs into confusion Thus Hanson, who listened to every wish of her whom he sought to oblige, as well as to his own desire of once more embracing the friend of his vouth, prevailed on himself to foi ego the pleasure of escorting Shethem and his daughter, setting out the same evening for the residence of his biother- m-law Edward, which lay upon the road to Theodore AVlnlst the chaise waited at the door, be stepped into the apartments of Eve to bid her adieu, and once more to en¬ treat she would hope for the best " Alas ' '
" Alas i" she replied) " I am convinc¬ ed of my weakness, I know that it Is impossible he can be eared, and I shall be for ever miserable." " Not so," said Hanson, trembling— " not so, I hop*. Ah ι how readily would I exchange situations, if I could give peace to Eve '" " You mistake," said she, blushing, atid turning down her eyes, that were dimmed with tears ; " Theodore is the husbwid of Eltøa." Hanson knew not what to reply, l'» Wished to say much, bu« et this moment he could say nothing. He ga/ed upon her for ad instant; he attempted to speak, but bowing, silently he hurried into the chaise.—" You mistak«; Theo. dore is the husband of Eliza," repeated be to himself, as the chaise' drove off. "Can slrøfilenregardMøWltliafMon ? Yet why so feme«« Theodore? ľh« she loved hiw I know; she huseonfees- ed
ed it to me. Bui what am I to conclude from tbis? Surely she meant some¬ thing more than common. I wis a fool not to ask an explanation." Thus Hanson reasoned, and from α simple reply flattered himself that he was not wholly an object of indifference to Eve. These reflections» as he drew nigh the house of Edward, gave place to кепев he had now to encounter, and he prepared to meet with firmness any ad¬ ditions of ill fortune. £[e learnt from his sister that Edward had set out the preceding night for the town where Theodore was confined, that he might be present at his trial, and by his company support his firmness in a moment so terrible. She added, that they had По hopes of his acquittait he being resolute in bis determination of iHiffering;
!
Glad
Glad even to find that Theodore yet lived, he took a hasty leave of his suter, without dai ing to. mention to her the fate of Eliza, it being a subject on which he durst not trust his own feelings, as it never rose in his mind, unaccompanied by vows of retaliation. Obliged to put up on the road, he re¬ tired early to Ы& chamber, that he might more readily be at liberty to pursue his journey at an early hour. Whilst un¬ dressing, he heai d the voices of two per¬ sons in the adjoining room, the one in a tone of advice, the other in that of com¬ plaint, which naturally attracting his at¬ tention, he stood still to listen. " Trust to my honour," said one ; " I would advise you in this case so as shall be most beneficial to you and sir Rich¬ ard. Besides, you must be conspious that to have recourse to law with a man of his property, is only bringing on your¬ self
self certain ruin, witliout a shadow of redress." "And then," said the other, "are the laws so ineffectual, or are they made only for the rich ? Had this infamous scoun¬ drel seduced the daughter of one rich at himself, durst he, I ask, have left her with impunity? Would not the law have given him redress?" " Why, if she had been an heiress, it might have been capital I grant, but j'our daughter you know is without any fortune, and he offers to compound gen¬ teelly." *' And so," cried tbe father in a rage, and stamping on tbe ground, " because my daughter is poor, she is to be ruined by a d—— d scoundrel, and turned off when he has satisfied himself! 'Tis true she has no promise of marriage hi writ¬ ing, but he certainly gave her a verbal engagement, and I will bring an action against him—I will try if justice cannot for once be liad by a poor man." vol. ni. a ■ " Will
" Will you hear me calmly?" said the lawyer ; " this is a case where you must submit. There is no law on your side but what will got be effective. You may prosecute him iindeed for the loss of .her labour during her pregnancy mid nurturage, but then tbe damages will be trilling, and not to the amount of the compensation be offers;* besides, he will provide her, a husband, and give them a snug farm, at» that in fact the ho¬ nour lie has done you, is an advantage which you could not have expected." " And this is justice," replied the cither; "one man,shall be bung forse- ducitig en heiress, another shall pay а trifling fine for seducing а girl, perhaps much superior in every point except fortune; and even that pitiful t»mpen- siition must be sued for in tbe reo* de¬ grading manner, .as if she wae a beast ef the field, who bad received a damage tliat rendered her «trit for Mboar, and ...·,:.: wliese
whose loss of time must be made good to tbe owner." The next day brought him to the town where Theodore was confined, to whom, after some difficulty and bribery, he was admitted. A faint light shone through the grated opening at the top of the cell, scarcely sufficient at first to trace an object ; but the eye soon accom¬ modating itself to the gloom, perceived tbe engines of confinement—bolts and chains. On a litter of straw sat the heart-broken Theodore, in whom the beauty of youth had bloomed and was gone. He was unchained, they having no apprehension of his attempting an escape, after a voluntary surrender, though it was well known with what facility he had eluded his form..- keep¬ ers, and with what success be had secreted himself from every research. Wbea Hanson entered, he was sit¬ ei 2 ting,
ting, his hands supporting his head, whilst the portrait of Eliza lay before liim, the subject of deep meditation. He looked up at the opening of the door; he gazed with a vague remem¬ brance upon Hanson, but till he heard the sound of his voice, was unable to fix certainty to his person ; for though the features were familiar, he had so persuaded himself of his death, or station at an impassable distance, that reflection never glanced towards him. " Is it possible," said he, in a voice too enfeebled to take the tone of satisfac¬ tion, " is it possible you can be here in the dungeons of a prison, whom I thought had long since been dead ? How have yon escaped the destruction which was suspended over you? What clue has conducted you to this my last earthly habitation ?" " I grieve," replied Hanson, taking bis hand, and sitting down on the straw beside
beside him ; " my soul is afflicted at this meeting. Is this the pleasure our youth¬ ful imaginations had contrived for the years of manhood ? Is this the end of our felicitous schemes? Oh, Theodore! no more shall I taste satisfaction, since you, since my beloved sister, and my parents, are fallen the victims of mis¬ taken and terrible passion 1" " Yet shall the tyrant feel," said Theo.. dore, raising his eyes' with somewhat of fire; " I, from tbis miserable cell, will launch the dart of remorse into hie heart, and avenge the fall of your sister." " But how ?" said Hanson—" by de¬ stroying yourself? Were it not better, even now, to endeavour to escape ? I am assured there are no witnesses against you; and consider if this voluntary sur¬ render does not constitute suicide." '· No more of this," replied he. ** I would not for all the world contains be much longer its inhabitant. Common¬ place passions might be satisfied to live, c3 but
but I have no design—no purpose—no pursuit. I Ьате been harassed in every form. I have endured beyond the pow¬ ers of human nature. I have loved with *n ardonr not to be destroyed, but now it is nearly over, and I will die '" Determination so fixed as this, Han¬ son attempted not to remove. But after a moment's reflection, he prevailed on himself to offer what the most exalted friendship could neither have expected nor desired. " Theodore," said he, " I am satisfied your present hatred of life arises from the loss you have sustained in my sister. To give you then a motive to live, Is only to give you a new passion. You aie sensible that the daughter of She¬ chem Bensadi beheld your merits with partiality; tbat from the hour you be¬ came her deliverer, she cherished for you a secret love. She is possessed of every ualifica-
qualification which cm render a woman amiable, and without those frailties sa very common, and so very disgusting. She is peculiarly suited to please you as a companion, and I see no obstacle to prevent your accepting that portion of pleasure you yet may attain." " I bave yet to learn," answered Theo¬ dore, " by what accident you have made acquaintance with the man who should give Christianity the blush ; and to an¬ swer your advice without considering 'it, would not be the part of prudence. I held myself to blame for not flying from her the first hour suspicion told me her sentiments, and therefore, when disengaged from Eliza, I coolly reflected if I could any way contribute to the peace I might accidentally have hurt; but I felt within myself tbat nature wag wounded to the centre, and that it was morally impossible I should continue long. I felt also, .that however I might esteem ber as a friend, beyond that, a i every
every feeling was engaged to the re¬ membrance of Eliza, and tbat, had my health been perfect, and the promise of years yet in store been given me, I could not have so behaved, but that she must notice my coolness of affection ; nnd thus every moment of her life would have been imbittered, and grief preyed upon her in silence. For I know well that Eve is too tender to'divide the affections of α husband, or indeed to be satisfied with the common expressions of regard." ' Hanson was not perhaps chagrined at the negation of his proposal ; he found bis friend unchangeably firm in his re¬ solutions; and to put off fore time the sense of his immediate sufferings, he re¬ lated his journey through Arabia, with observations on the manners of men, describing them in every 'stage, from the simple Hindoo'who fed On fruits in the woods, to the monarch who struts in
in imperial pomp, as tinctured with folly. Before the conclusion of a narration engaging to Theodore, Edward entered the cell, and informed them that squire Cypbon had retained a lawyer of great abilities as counsel in favour of the pri¬ soner ; that the plea of insanity was to be insisted on, which several country people, and the keeper of the madhouse, were to support by facts. ! Theodore was silent at this ; he seem¬ ed to consider in himself some concern of moment, evading reply by desiring Hanson to go on, and leave matters of so trifling an import to some future dis¬ cussion. They remained tbe greatest part of the day in the prison, their com¬ pany restraining the fatal indulgence of griet which gapped the energy of Theo¬ dore.
о 5 About
About an hour after their return to the inn, Shechem Bensadi and his daugh- ter arrived. Some little confusion was visible in the meeting of the latter with Hanson,' but grief so choked her utter¬ ance, that sanguine hope could draw no conclusion to reckon on. As it was impossible so late to be ad¬ mitted to Theodore, the benevolence of friendship had longer to endure sus¬ pense—a suspense that was beneficial to Eve, as her fatigue, added to the agita¬ tion of her mind, rendered her Tittle able to sustain the shock of beholding the man she first loved, and whom even now the regarded with the tenderest affec¬ tion any other name might warrant, in the abodes of a common gaol, whose gloom alone was terrible ; but bow much more dreadful when connected with death, under circumstances so awful ' Her soul shrunk fearfully from the thoughts
thoughts of bolts «nd chaina, whose dis¬ mal clanking already sounded in her ears. But the pallid countenance ot Theodore, the trembling eye of suffer¬ ing, she already fancied turned upon her, almost deprived her of sufficient fortitude once more to speak to her friend, before the fearful day of trial, on which was suspended his fate. labouring under so much agitation, it is not to be supposed that sleep pre¬ sented images of pleasure, or calmed to repose the labouring mind of this daugh¬ ter of Jerusalem. By turns Theodore and Hanson occupied the moments de¬ nied to interrupted slumber. She had long been conscious of the attachment of tbe latter to her, as every look and every action sufficiently expressed it; sbe wti not blind to his merits, and the native softness of her beert tought her to pity any who loved. When once a woman beholds with pity the attach- G 6 ment
ment of a man to herself, love is not far from the heart, though circumstances may prevent the extension of its empire. Theodore was lost to her in being al¬ ready married, and much of her affec¬ tion naturally reverted to Hanson, who was nbt undeserving, and who was pre¬ sent to catch every moment of tender¬ ness; for assuredly the passions of man¬ kind are wrought on by tbe present ob¬ jects'; and what love is so refined as to continue its existence, when gratifica¬ tion is irrevocably proscribed, and the object 'itself removed to a distance? Nevertheless, that certain something, which is not to be described, and which binds us to the object we have once held valuable,' suspended the resolution of Eve ; and though she was satisfied Theo¬ dore would never be nearer to her— though she now did not even wish it, stie wavered in her mind, and could not resolve on accepting Hanson.
The
The resuit of many hours' meditation was, to wait the event of the trial, before she held^out to Hanson any encourage¬ ment, or allowed him to hope that it might still be in her choice to remain free, or give him her hand, when she should find how the fate of Theodore affected her, it being confined on tlie points of death, or confinement for life on the statute of insanity. She endea¬ voured to reconcile her mind to either of these events ; and as misfortune when it advances before our sight loses much of its weight, so Eve became «aimer as reason had room to reflect. . On the following day, after embracing Theodore, Shechem left to Hanson and Edward the care of his daughter, pro¬ posing to ride to the country seat of squire Cyphon, nnd endeavour to dive into his intentions, and if possible pre¬ vail on him to suffer bis son to escape, should
should they esUblis'j the plea of .In¬ sanity. He had rode httle more than eight nnles, when the chaise overturned on the part of a road which was repairing, and .the axle being broke, he was ob¬ liged to walk to a little alehouse at half s mile's distance, there to wait till an¬ other could be procured, age and infir¬ mity rendering bim incapable of sitting ahorse. ■ Whilst he took some refreshment in an upper room, be observed aJarge sa. vage-looking man ride up and dis¬ mount; soon after a chaise, attended by three servants, well mounted and armed, drew up to the door. He advanced to survey this.new comer, not without some suspicion, the inn not bemg of ap¬ pearance sufficient to invite the dig¬ nified, traveller to refresh. He
He perceived a middle-sized man get out with the help of his servants, on whom he leaned to the house; in his face was observed a deep melancholy beneath a frown, which spread over eve¬ ry feature the darkest gloom ; his eye was turned with haste and suspicioni, on every object, and witliout knowing why, Shechem immediately concluded it to be squire Cypbon himself. A little confused at unexpectedly meet¬ ing the man he was going to seek, and whose character of imperious vindnrtion was imprinted on every lineament of a face, wbere time and disappointment bad made many ravages; he sat down· to consider on his line of action, ι ι He suspected some design ι to'be in agitation relative to Theodore? and the first person, whose ill-looking visage be disliked, he judged to be "the keeper of tire madhouse. Whilst he sat consider¬ ing
ing whether or no he should declare him» self.'he heard them enter the room im¬ mediately adjoining, where, after some general observations, squire Cyplion opened the business of their meeting.— " And so," said he, " you see, after all my sohemes, and that there, this obstinate boy will outwit me at last, and escape from the circle of my power, if we do not contrive some master-stroke." " Let me alone, I'll answer with my neck,'' replied the other ; " 1 have a cle¬ ver set of fellows, that will swear α man's alive wbo bas been buried these ten years; and besides, lookee, I knows what's the go ; a few shiners tipped to I knows who, to drink his majesty's health, will bring it in lunacy, as fair and clever as ere a man in Bedlam." " All that there," returned the tender father, " I know we shall manage; I will spare no expence, and that there, rather than one of tbe Cyphens should swing on a common gallows. Heaven and earth !
earth ' my name would be eternally blast¬ ed. But what I would i> this—when we have him again, how shall we keep him, and that ? He will break through your secunties." ι ι " Trust me, I knows а rig worth two of that. Let me have him once again, and he never more sees the blessed light of the sun." " How do you mean ?" said Cyplion, lowering his voice; " you do not intend to make away with him, and that '— Though, to be sure, it will be a happi« ness if he was dead, provided my name was unsullied, and my injured honour satisfied. That blow which he gave me in defiance of my will, 'the opposition he has made, and the degeneracy he has shewn about that strumpet daughter of Hanson, has destroyed all my pity ; and yet, and that there—no, he must not be murdered. 1 ' ι > ι < ι Shechem shuddered at words like ι these;
these; be could not perceire the coun¬ tenances of tbe speakers, and therefore knew not how far the keeper agreed with sentiments so sanguinary; but it not being bis place to press any argu¬ ment of destruction, he seemed to drop the affair, and turn the discourse to an¬ other object , " I have," said be, " a scheme in my head, for I've a great itch to travel. I intend going to America ; now suppose I carry over Theodore, and settle there, you will be for ever freed from him, and I will answer no tales are told." The chaise whicb was intended for Shechem now rolled up to the door ; he had lost any inclination for an interview with .a man in whom nature waa revert¬ ed, and rejoicing tbat accident had given him an insight into intentions he shoidd otherwise have little credited, he hasten¬ ed back to impart bis discovery, and concert
concert with Hanson and Edward some scheme of frustration. " I rejoice," said Hanson, " at this for¬ tunate discovery; we shall traverse the designs of the enemy, and permit them to perform for us what our own want of power is incompetent to. When by their projections Theodore shall be ac¬ quitted of the murder, I and his cousin will step forward in the face of the court, and offer ourselves bondsmen for his security. We will parry the claims of tbe latber, by declaring that thus will be removed the odium of suspicion from himself, and convince the world that he has acted from upright prin¬ ciples, and not from disappointment and pride." So flattering a promise seemed to flash like a dawn of hope upon the friends of Theodore, which was the more readily received, as probability appeared in its favour ;
favour; though, lest some unforeseen event might occur, it was to remain wholly with themselves. Theodore, as the day of trial advanced, became more collected in himself; he seemed to have acquired a degree of firmness, and ceased to mention Eliza; but as to his intentions they were doubt¬ ful, as he sedulously guarded against any expression glancing that way. As the day drew nigh, the resolution of Eve began to falter; she had intended witnessing the trial, but her heart failed, and she found it impossible. She almost wished to return to London, that the certainty might be longer unknown, and would probably have been influenced by this weak argument, had not the presence of Hanson's sisters restrained her, and in some degree supported her drooping spirits.
The
The assizes were begun in the town, und but for the influence of squire Cy¬ phon, the trial of Theodore had been first brought on, his crime being of the high¬ est charge, standing next to treason in the penal law, and equal to it in the law of nature.
CHAP-
CHAPTER VII.
Yes, I du think timt you might pnt-don luin, And neither Heaven nor urau grieve Ht tho initrcv.
A trial of so uncommon a nature was matter of universal curiosity and expec¬ tation, rumour having already spread the particulars, which touching on the passions of man, few but were convinced of the prisoner's guilt, and yet at the same time earnestly desired his ac¬ quittal. It was not the least extraordinary cir¬ cumstance attending, that tbe rather should at once be prosecutor against, and counsel
counsel for the prisoner ; and a vast con- course of people took their places early, to be spectators of a scene at once so so¬ lemn and so important. Theodore, dressed in deep mourning, attended by his three friends, entered the court, and after bowing to the audience, was indulged with a seat, his enfeebled state of health not permitting him to stand. The portrait of his wife, bung in black, depended from his neck. A paleness equal to death spread over hit emaciated cheeks, and his eye seemed not to obseive the passing transaction, but to contemplate some matter of su¬ perior importance ; it was however re¬ marked, when his eye glanced upon bis father, that a universal tremour shook him, and that his lips appeared to trem¬ ble. The easy dignity he displayed in his beluwiour, tbe deep-rooted sorrow whioh the feintest glance discovered, ex¬ cited an universal murmur of pity, and many
many an eye glistened with a tear that did honour to human nature. Squire Cyphon was seated at a little distance from the bar, an object, perhaps, of equal pity. His features were alter¬ nately suffused with the deepest crimson and a carnivorous yellow. A gloomy frown hung perpetually on his brow; he seemed to labour under disease, and a thousand jarring feelings, which alter¬ nately elevated and depressed bim, and which might be easily mistaken for the emotions ornature, though arising from wounded pride, and tottering domina¬ tion. Could any circumstance be more galling to a man, who was tremblingly alive to all the whispers of pride, to find himself exposed in a public court of jus¬ tice to all the calumnies his behaviour justly warranted, and to that universal indignation, every moment ready to be poured out upon him, and which respect tor the court alone held in bounds ? ι An
An universal stillness prevailing hi the court, the indictment was read, stating that Theodore Cyphon, not having the fear of God before bis eyes, but being in¬ stigated by the devil, did, with intent to kill, inflict on the body of lus uncle, the late lord D— τ-, one mortal vvouud, beneath the left breast, with a poniard, or dagger, of which mortal wound the deceased had died in the space of six hours—Guilty, or not guilty ? Tbeodpre was standing, whilst, the charge was read, and instantly, to the sufprjse of all present, pleaded ¡guilty. The cpunse? then arose, and risking per¬ mission first to speak, yyas allowed the indulgence.—" My lords," w\d¡ he, " and you, gentlemen of the jury, as I possess incontestable proofs that the prisoner at tbe bar is non compos, mentis, and of Which, this, I think, is, sufficient testimo¬ ny of itself, unsupported by.prior facts, I entreat tl that he ГОДУиЬел challenged t vol. m. h again,
again, and the trial allowed to proceed in form." ' To a request so reasonable the judge bowed assent, and the recorder again demanded of Theodore, Guilty, or not guilty ?—-to which he replied- 1 -" Since it is a matter of form wherein truth is not expected, I plead— Not guilty .'" The witnesses for the crown were then sworn, the sum of whose evidence tend¬ ed to prove tbat Theodore was a mad¬ man; The fortune-teller was supposed to be him, from the circumstance of the clothes found in the well, and the ostler's coat, and a pair of shoes in the large drawing-room. The poniard, which had been found by a countryman, was produced in court, where it was -proved to have been sold to a stroller, though the person, when now confronted with Theodore, could not swear to his person. The most material evidence was the persons
persons who lind guard over 'I heodonc, who both agreed in saying, that, instant¬ ly as they heard the report of the pistol, they burst into the room, and heard distinctly the words, Theodote, you have killed your uncle ' that they perceived α man without α coat rush out at the opposite door, whom they pursued, but could not overtake in the dark The next witnesses were the men who had discovered Theodore in the ruins, who stated that when the old woman was apprehended for a witch, and interro¬ gated concerning Theodore, she had, to clear herself from the first suspicion, con fessed that he had owned himself as the murderer to her Thus the fact was clearly proved, though involved in the mystery of night, and no doubt of the perpetrato! could be entertained, especially when the cır cuinstances of his various concealments and disguises were related, which could Η 2 anse
arise from no other motive than to elude justice. The evidence of the crown being clos¬ ed, the counsel for the prisoner, who was employed by squire Cyphon. arose, and before he called up any witnesses, desired the attention of the court.—-*' My lords, and you, gentlemen of the jury," said he, " fiom facts so plainly established, and 10 incontrovertibly proved, I shall not attempt to draw your attention; but us no man who has not the power of mo¬ ral agency can be guilty of a crime, I venture to pronounce tbat you will find your verdict in favour of the prisoner. It is seldom, in my opinion, a case so clear as the present occurs, where every {Shadow of doubt must be done away, on an attentive consideration of facts, to which I beg leave to ilead you. " The first symptoms of insanity par¬ ticularly noticed in the unhappy gentle¬ man before you, was in .the midst of some
some private conversation with his fa¬ ther, when he was observed to ramble in his words, and otherwise give testimony of Some derangement of intellect, which shortly became so alarming, tbat it was necessary he should be confined, though even this measure of common safety was not adopted until he had, in the frenzy of passion, given his father a blow. Yes, gentlemen, incredible as it appears, that father who had ever attended to his wants, and whom grief at bis present si¬ tuation has brought down to the verge of existence—but who can answer for the sallies of madness? " Twice he nearly escaped from a temv porary confinement in an upper room, and behaved otherwise so outrageously, that it was judged necessary to send him to Mr. Y— 's private receptacle for lu¬ natics. From that gentleman (who is α man of .character in his profession) I learn, that, notwithstanding every care, he be¬ came so outrageous, that it was dangerous Η 3 to
to visit him ; and that he once laid vio¬ lent hands on one of the assistants, bit him severely in the arm.and threatened to tear him into atoms, which was probably only prevented by timely assistance. Af¬ ter this, by an effort of incredible prowess, much beyond the physical powers of man, unaided by foreign agency, he brake in pieces the chain with which he was confined, and made his way through every obstacle. " The malady, after this wonderful ef¬ fort, appeared to decrease, and rationality might be said to have again marked his actions. He was received by his uncle Thompson, and after some time renewed acquaintance with α curate who had once been his tutor, and by him was drawn in to marry one of his daughters, with whom it is supposed, antecedent to this period, he had had connexion. "The unhappy father, lamenting this ruin of his son, on whom he had fixed his hopes, and irritated at the conduct of
of the curate, wbo, taking advantage oi the weakness of his son, seduced him into a marriage with a daughter, whose favours were not denied to every one, commenced an uction against the curate on the statute of Clandestine Marriage I will not trespass on your patience and feelings, by entering on a detail of every minuţia , for, pressed as I am by iiliun dance of matter, my diflkulty is not to substantiate proofs, but out of so many to select the most striking " My lords, I now come to that part of my narrative which touches me with grief, which I am sure must affect every person present, and even compassion will attach itself to the unhappy gentle man at the bar, for though a person whose intellects are deianged may be in¬ capable of a proper concatenation of reasoning, yet their feelings, when touch ed in the point wbere they have asso ciated objects of pleasure, may he as и 4 acutely
acutely wounded as those of a man in his most perfect state. " The daughter of this curate, who I have said before had been by her father compelled to marry, tbat her disgrace might be concealed, waited only the de¬ cease of her parent to fly with her para¬ mour, and had the effrontery to circulate a report, that tbe late lord D— had by violence carried her away. " Does not the mind recoil at a false¬ hood so dreadful? Can it be supposed that a man of so mucb known genero¬ sity, would even think of dishonouring the wife of his nephew?' I think that a simple statement of the monstrous hy¬ pothesis must be a sufficient refutation. But mark its fearful effects on the mind of the unfortunate husband. Once more was tottering reason wholly overthrown, and he was again confined, not by his father, but by the cousin with Whom he resided. At length, when nature bad ex-
exhausted berseli, and some dawning o£ reason again appeared, be conceived the fatal resolution of avenging the fancied injury on bis uncle. " In the mind of insanity there is usually but one leading and governing idea, on which perhaps every thought shall be clear, and unfortunately tbis idea was murder in tbe object before us. You already know be effected this purpose, that he escaped, and wander¬ ed for many months in the woods, and other places; during this time his ac¬ tions were so very extraordinary, and so far above human effort, tbat the simple country people believed he dealt with some internal agent, which is a, matter of so much notoriety, that I believe there are few present who cannot remember some of! the stories in circulation, " In a state ofdelirium.be was admit¬ ted into — workhouse, where, in one of bis lucid intervals, he discovered his former wife, but a short time before she Η В expired,
expired, in consequence of disease con¬ tracted in her illicit connexions. " Were it necessary, I have many witnesses to prove the facts I have as¬ serted ; but I shall close this statement of particulars by observing, that even the recent act of surrendering himselfto justice, after having so carefully fled from its pursuit, must evince undeniably the irregularity of his mind. " I would desire gentlemen to consi¬ der, what must be the sufferings of his unhappy father, whose brother has been destroyed by his son, and that son the only heir to their illustrious house. Necessitated, in order to gain possession of his son, to come forward in the odious light of a prosecutor of his own child, what must have been his feelings ! Yet no other mode of action was left him, whilst his sufferings were increased by tbe reflections circulated against him by unthinking persons. His days bave been shortened by grief—his constitu¬ tion
tion undermmed by perpetual alarms, for he knew not but every succeeding hour might bring account of his son's death ; and finally, what must he suffer in the event of this day ' " Gentlemen of the jury, with you it rests to restore to the rather tbe soli¬ tary right Of superintending'the wan¬ derings of his son Nor can you with safety bring in a man guilty of murder, who had not, at the time of the act, the command of his reason. As well might a man who was precipitated by sohle fo¬ reiga agency down a precipice, be deem¬ ed guilty of suicide; for in the one case, as well as the other, we know,'that could the will have been exerted, а contrary action would have been chosen. " But if the established maxim of phi¬ losophy be true, the extension is carried to a wider range".' * WhosoreaSons· wrong from right principles, or right from wrong principles, is a madman *.' Now h 6 Theo-
Theodore, te taking' upo» himself the executive power of justice (supposing lordD— to have been guilty)« reaaenx ed wrong from right prinorptes, because the law should have been, his avenge» Thus heit mathematically denionstrated not to be in bis true senses. Besides/ it ought not to be forgot t tliat where just tice is doubtful, or even at equipoise! mercy ought to preponderate the beanti arid recollect, that by giving your ven diet on the side of mercy, you will no» hereafter suffer any internal reproach» hut may reflect witb satisfaction to your latest hour, that you have saved a man triorally innocent. " Remember also, that hera the/plea of prevention does Hot occur ; you. are not going to let loose oiv mankind а rob- beıv^you artı going to giv« toi a father the care of hi« айщ misled by« derang«» meút of intellect, under, circumstance» that require security ; andrthus lie wiU be as effectually prevented α repetition of
of an act whioh I shudder to name, as though your verdict brought bim in guilty. " But he is not guilty. I repeat again, that a man in bis situation cannot be guilty; He does not rank under the class of a drunken man ; though the in« toxicated person may not in fact be guil¬ ty of intentional crime, yet as prior to the committal, he voluntarily deprived himself of reason, he knew, or might have known» the consequences of pah- t'ud insanity, and therefore becomes, amfe nable for every crime he may commit under that influence; but here the insa* nity arises from the visitation of God; the will is not at all consulted; and. I assert no mancan be guilty of any crime, where he had not power to will the con¬ trary, I beg lestve now to turn you to tbote.witneisesi who will support the- facti I hay» stated» ami I sit dawn confident you will give your verdicte« reason, jus¬ tice, mercy, apd humanity díctete." As
- As several witnesses appeared in co> rt to confirm by their evidence the asser¬ tions of the counsel, one of the jurymen came forward, and said—" That they were perfectly satisfied with the state¬ ment they bad already heard, and did not conceive any additional weight was necessary by accumulating evidence." He was interrupted by Theodore, who had .hitherto sat overwhelmed with va¬ riety of agitations, to counteract which, alibis powers of resolution were exerted, andı now wiping from his eye the solita¬ ry .tear which nature had conjured up, he bowed respectfully, and desired, be¬ fore the jury gave in their verdict, he might be permitted to speak. Leave being given, and every specta¬ tor., stilled by expectation, and scarcely breathing from anxiety; he pressed his right)hand fora moment on his breast, as if to quiet the tumult within, and be¬ gan.
gan, in a vince clear, yet solemn, and softened by melancholy, whilst a faint blush of timidity dyed his cheek—" My lords, and you, gentlemen of the jury," said he, " this day I have witnessed the terrible weakness of human nature, and the moral impossibility of practical jus¬ tice. Man to decide with impartiality must be created without passion, he must be omniscient ; but whilst thelight of human reason gleams on us so faintly, all we have left is to catch at its rays. " I have sat ι still—I have endeavour¬ ed to overcome the weakness of human nature, and to triumph above reproach ; but I have discovered that agony yet can reach me. Yes, my lords, I And I am still a man, and that I yet retain 'too nice a sense of feeling, to let pass unre¬ fined calumnies of the darkest dye, of the most crini and malignant nature. What dol suffer, to hear, iti the face of so many virtuous, females, the character of one, virtuous and chaste as any here, traduced.
traduced, aud ber réputation blisted! For it iS an eternal trutb; as the able gentleman has already stated, tbat where tbe will does not participate, crime can¬ not attach; " Could tbe depths of infernal dark¬ ness bave produced a train of more inea. tiate malice than has blazed in this court' 1 for, driven as I am to place be» fore you tbe character of my wife in its original lustre, I must exhibit to the world a concatenation of circumstances whioh will recoil upon the heads oi' my persecutors, and blast their names to eternity." Here Theodore related tbe outlines of bis story, in a manner so interesting, that every «ye and every heart that was uninfluenced by bis father, felt and ac¬ companied bis sufferings with sighs and tes«.*— «Thus," he went on, "has ethe¬ rial purity been blackened and polluted —thus bave the sufferings of the virtu¬ ous
ous Eliza been brought to prove ber ori« minalİty, and thus power expected to sweep all before it as a mighty torrent. But I ask pardon for this deviation fromt the direct subject before us, for though I had been determined to be silent« to meet my fate unresisting, yet having been irritated by so mean an attack, .1 must, in spite of myself, heap shame on that man wbo would stand forward here as the patron of virtue, who baa blazoned forth his pretended merits, wba has, under tbe mask of paternal care· per· secuted me witb a rancour, irreconcil¬ able to the common rules of nature. " I have stooped to his power—I have spurned at his vengeance—I have be' sought his compassion—I have defied his malice; but only one line of conduct has he preserved towards me, which was to torture me with all the ilb bis station allowed him to inflict, to destroy for ever every object of human .love and affec¬ tion; and now, when my wife has been violated
violated and murdered— I repeat it— murdered) by those infamous means— when my son has been consigned to a fatal grave—when I myself bave been hunted írom one corner of the kingdom to the other—he would again enclose me, under pretence of insanity, in the abodes of groaning nature ; that so, shut out from observation, I may languish in se¬ cret.' But I am not a maniac; my rea¬ son is active ; and I swear, by the eter¬ nal Father of being, that the crime of which I this dav stand charged, was an act'of the coolest deliberation and de¬ signi ι" Was it madness to travel into Ire¬ land, to sink tbe traces of my person? Was it madness to disguise myself, and gain, as I did, an entrance into a bouse guarded witb jealous precaution ?—Was it madness to elude the pursuits of jus¬ tice, of parental vengeance, of ¡friend¬ ship, andı. thirst ι of reward? and even those stories so much insisted on, of su¬ pernatural
pernatural action, must evince the full vigour of reason, which could play upon the follies of mankind. > < ¡ " 'Tis true indeed- that I have been actually deranged—that my soul 'was stabbed by the crime of that detestable monster Theodoric—»but that efferves¬ cence had subsided; and finding .the fu¬ tility of law to restore my wife her pu¬ rity, to give my son again to existence, and Mr. Hanson from the grave, I coolly determined to be my own avenger,, and level the tyrant to his native sod. > " It has been said he was innocent— that a man of so much honour, so much generosity, would not dishonour the wife of his nephew. But where was honour —where was generosity, when the Han¬ sons were driven from their bumble shed' When the young man who stands there was sold to the East India Company asacominon soldier, dragged as a slave from, the burning sands of Af¬ rica, and consigned to the markets of the East?
East ? And where, I demand, was con¬ scious innocence, when this Tbeodoric, unacquainted with my intentions, igno¬ rant that I was evän released from the confinement of delirium, held in. pay Щеп to Watch' over and guard him— from What? from the haunts of an evil conscience, or the phantoms of frenzy ? No, but fiom the bands of an injured husband—from the arm of secret justice he knew he had merited. He knew that no other fona could touch him; like а tyranll· be laughed at justice and at law; but what precaution could protect Mm from, the silent assassin ? " Perhaps it miy he considered an aet of mercy to give number to my days; but' bow it Would be tlie greatest cru¬ elty, ası well as an outrage of the law. Already I have bees a sacrifice to un- meriteďcontmeraent; the barbarouıoom- raand* of a rather loaded me with chains; and gave me to the hands of men inured to the greatest crimes. I was hurried into
into this confinement to revenge an ac¬ cidental blow; for had I been insane, would not means of recovery have been resorted to? Would the tender and mourning father, such as mme bas been represented, have consigned his only son to α dungeon, hod be been mad, without first calling in the assistance of the facul¬ ty ? But none of this was done ; and those proofs of my superior strength were not the efforts of insanity, but the exertions of youth to regain its freedom, and spurn at the iron hand of power. " It has been said that Mr. Hanson sedueed me into marriage with his daughter, No, sirs, Mr. Hanson was η man of uprightness. I extorted from him Ms consent; circumstances urged me to naaard the happiness of a man I loved ; but he fell a sacrifiée to the ma- «hinations of dignified villains, to an act which .nullifies itself. "The honourable counsel, whom I conceive to have been imposed on by ι specious
specious pretexts, bas stated to you thehy- pothesie, that a man who reasons wrong from right principles ¡в amadman; he has told you that this opens an extensive range—wide and universal indeed would be the influence of such a principle ' there is not a crime beneath the heavens, but would receive from it а sanction. The robber reasons wrong from right principles. His principle is to supply himself the comforts of life, but his rea¬ soning is erroneous when it leads him to force. I myself sought retribution for a crime, for an injury nothing in na¬ ture could repair ; tliie was a right prin¬ ciple ; but I .reasoned wrong in taking to myself private justice, because, were tbat allowed, society would be destroy¬ ed; but this cannot argue me insane. Ministers, merchants, shopkeepers, and every individual member ot'the commu¬ nity, either reason wrong from 'right principles, or right from, wrong princi¬ ples ; tbus if .you condemn' me on this dogma,
dogma, you pronounce the sentence of insanity on the whole race of man. In¬ deed, a latitude may be allowed, if we place ourselves on the basis of reason ; then we may be said to bo universally mad—but if we consider the clash of various passions, the influence of self- interest, we shall find that those actions which mark universal insanity are only erroneous deductions from right prin¬ ciples. " Perhaps to entreat you to divest yourselves of mistaken pity, would be to ask you to cast aside the feelings of human nature, for where is the heart which beats not at the destruction of a woman, beautiful as the fairest daughter of Eve, who sits before you —modest as the vestal virgin, and united to the man she loved from the moment passion had a name ? To say she was undone is a phrase unequal to the meaning. Was there ever'a crime of deeper malignity, of cooler'cruelty, which has sullied the annals
annals of man, than the present before you? Ye fathers, ye mothers, Whose nightly dreams áre the welfare of your daughters, whole daily delight is to mark their progress to blooming maturity, what would be your feelings at seeing the tender object of every anxiety torn from your arms, blasted by vile contami¬ nation, thrown amongst the lowest dregs •ef society?' Would you retain the com¬ mon routine of reason, to visit in the hovel of indigent obscurity this object ef your affections, and see her on the Iverge of existence, deformed by disease, broke down by despau- ? Ye brothers, •yï* sisten, what would be the reflections er your minds at such a deed? But ¡above all, ye lovers, ye young men who «fist ' but: in the wellbeing of tbe maids ye have chosen, What would ye endure tío see all this in the woman of your ■soul's selection—to see those features ye adored a prey to corroding humours, to ■see death already devour tlie object of . II I your
your love ? Yet all this have I endur¬ ed, all this have I suffered, and I know that my crime will, in your eyes, become α virtue, and ye will no longer accuse me of madness, in taking on myself the task of vengeance. " I have been hurried by my feelings beyond my intentions ; my spirits have suffered uncommon agitation, and na¬ ture bids me spare reproaches on the man who sits before you. Not that the name of father can touch me, after all that I have suffered from his hand ; but I observe that .passion has already spent its fury on hint. I лее that .tranquillity has- for, ever forsaken him, and that the rebut of ,»11 his schemes has perhaps pierced him as deeply as the callosity of bis feelings could suffer. My soul was formed to exercise the duties of a son. I should fondly have served him with filial affection, had his pride allowed m* a trifling indulgence. What is it gives the boasted superiority to rank ? Is it vol. Ш ι the
the,bubble of a name, which like a glo¬ bule of air glitters in the eye, but is no¬ thing? Is it possession of wealth, or exaltation of intellect? . " You, gentlemen of the jury, I would remind of your duty. You have pledg¬ ed yourselves to your country, and be¬ fore the Principal of eternal truth, to give .your verdict to the best of your judgment, without favour of any, "Now, if you are convinced that at the time I stabbed Theodoric I was insane, you must pronounce accordingly ; but If by iny present statement of facts, If by the clear and succinct account I have given you, if by my solemn appeal, tbat I was cool and deliberate in tbe act, you are satisfied 'I was not mad—for passion is not madness, thirst of revenge is not madness, in both these cases we retain the power of willing—you must pro¬ nounce me guilty ; you have no subter¬ fuge, to give room for what.ypu may think mercy—you cannot acquit your-. ,1 ( selves
selves before God ond the law, to whom you are pledged; and however harsh the sentence, you must pronounce it." A universal murmur for some time impeded the progress of the court, sighs and sobs spoke the feelings of the ladies, and even the stern hardness of man was seen lo melt. Squire Cyphon, unable to stand the looks and frowns of the spectators, retired through a general hiss, which the judges in vain endea¬ voured to suppress, by declaring it out¬ raged the solemnity of the court. Shechem, too much affected to wait the sentence of the jury, retired, attend¬ ed by Edward ; but Hanson, whose feel¬ ings, at the'recapitulation of his sister's sufferings, 'had been stimulated to a re¬ petition of vows of revenge, waited with a deep frown of determination on his brow, and vengeance rankling in bis heart. ι a The
The judge, when the tumult subsided, addressed the jury. He observed«-" that never had he witnessed a trial so peou·. liar, where the father was at once prose¬ cutor and counsel, and the son counsel against himself,'and against the father, He lamented that the law pointed) to so dreadful a punishment, fora crime which, commonly taken, was of the deepest dye, but as it now came before them,bad lost much of its criminality. ■ As every doubt of Theodore's not being the perpetrator of" the act was done away, ■ their verdict solely hinged on the plea of insanity ; for his part, he had no doubt of the prisoner's being hi bis right mind; and considering lum a man who had lost every .relish for existence, their feelings would be less Wounded at doing tbeir duty, if they considered it their ι dotyiito. condemn him." '* ' ι . . ί ' ', Tbe jury then retiring, a most pain¬ ful suspense held every person present. ' Many
Many ladies, no longer able to sustain it, withdrew, whilst others entreated him to accept some trifles of fruit, part of which was also offered to Hanson, every one being willing to bestow some mark of favour. In better than three quarters of an hour the jury returned ; a deep dejec¬ tion was marked on tbeir countenance, and after a moment's hesitation, the foreman, in a voice that faltered as he spoke, pronounced Theodore GUILTY qfthe death of lord D ------ « Not guilty, by Heaven!" cried se¬ veral voices from the gallery—" Justice ! justice!" cried many others—" Where is the justice of hanging a man for re¬ venging so infamous an injury ?" The whole place became α scene of confusion—many of the female sex faint¬ ed away—an universal discontent pre- 13 vailed,
vailed, so much indeed, that the judge feared some act of outrage to rescue the prisoner. In the midst of this tumult Theodore again arose; he begged to be heard, though he had no right; and silence being at length established, or interrupt¬ ed by taint murmurs and under sobs, he began by turning round to the jury. —" Gentlemen," said he, " I return you my sincere thanks ; you have eased me of a grievous burden, for to me existence was become of all things most painful. You have shewn tbat your love of jus¬ tice is superior to pity ; and I perceive the difficulty you have had to act up to the line of rectitude as you ought.—As to you, my friends (bowing to the au¬ dience), I wonder not at your feelings ; it gives me pleasure to see that human nature yet can distinguish the language of truth from sophistry; and conscious that with you the character of Eliza is vindicated,
vindicated, my present situation is far from intolerable. May the lesson you have this day received influence your actions to the latest moment of your ex¬ istence' This sentence you so much deprecate, is to me the tidings of peace, for I will confess to you, that gloomy ideas of self-destruction have often ob¬ truded themselves, and if I have resisted them, it was not owing to common¬ place arguments, but merely from doubt. This is а point on which the most in¬ genious of human reasonings-must .ever rest as speculation, and I considered,it the part of wisdom not to run unqeces- sary hazard, where so much depended on the cast. From this uncertainty. I am now liberated—I shall escape every future persecution, and suffer th« penal¬ ties of that law I have .outraged. Re¬ venge for enormous injuries may, for a time, blind tibe understanding .to .the atrocity of. murder,* .but no possible circumstances,q»n justify, any individual i i to
to usurp .the prerogative of God. It is a crime-which, from the days of Cain, has been "marked with an indelible stain, and in all ages, «nd in tail nations, can only be atoned by death. I sincerely thank you all for your interest in toy welfare, and recommend to Whom it may concern, to restrain the passions." 'After this address hei was permitted to return to his dungeon, to which he was attended by Hanson, wbo then left him, to communicate to his'friends the fatal "event. Her found tbat, the evil tidings ι «ad already preceded him, and the deepest sorrow fixed upon them, but 1 more especially the grief of Eve claimed 'his attention-. Inconsolable by the voice and endearments of her rather, she could with difficulty be preserved from fainting ; and when Hanson enter¬ ed he found her, sitting on the sofa, sup¬ ported on one side by bis weeping sis¬ ter, on the other by the sorrowful Jew. Their
Their eyes alone communicated the lan¬ guage of their minds, it being impossible to give utterance to common expressions of grief. Hanson ventured in silence to take the hand of Eve and press it to his lips, but she withdrew it in haste, and in a manner that filled him with dis¬ may. He cast his eyes upon his sisters, who were overwhelmed in tears ; he was hurt at the behaviour of Eve, which wound¬ ed his feelings ; and giving loose to va¬ riety of passions which at once flushed upon him, be determined no longer to delay bis intended interview witb squire Cyphon, whom he had vowed to bring to a severe account, and now hastened to put his project in execution.
ι 5 CHAP.
CHAPTER VIII.
"Let darkness overslisaW it Yen, let tbe cluuds ol night enivrltp it, and nature tremble." The gloomy frown which suddenly overcast the brow of Hanson, as he has¬ tened from the room, raised suspicion in the- muid of Edward, and terrified Eve. —<" I am wrong," said she, " in receiv¬ ing him so. Oh, my friend, if you knew the agitation of my mind, you would not wonder at my inconsistence' I scarcely know what I do. But run, I beg, dear Edward ; prevent, if possible, any mischief between Hanson and Cy¬ phon, for I very much suspect, from some hints I bove beard, and the pre¬ sent
sent manner of his behaviour, that a purpose of revenge has hurried him away." Edward was of the same opinion, though all his apprehensions turned on the safety of Hanson, who, he feared, might fall by the treachery of his ad¬ versary ; be therefore hastened out, not so much with intention to prevent the rencounter, if he found such the pur¬ pose of his friend, as providing against unfair advantages. ' ■ < The trial had continued till late in the evening, so that it was now perfect¬ ly dark, involving Eve in a state of'fear¬ ful suspense, which every moment 'in¬ creased. The benevolent Jew, whilst his own feelings were severely wounded, endeavoured to pour'hope into the bo¬ som of his afflicted daughter; but he found the inefficacy of words, when grief preys upon the mind, and perhaps he 1 6 did
did not lurrijice bis expectations of fu- tui%t t joodytwith that confidence which could gain attention firom one labouring under immediate and suspended evil. The .mind of Eve was divided: and distracted ; she felt a. great degree of attachment to Hanson, but. the company of the broken-spirited'Theodore had re¬ vived· in her those ideas which ever occur at sight of. the- object of ai first pas¬ sion. Moralists may define, .and meta¬ physicians may deduce, but. human na¬ ture will still retain its principles, in spite of every fine drawn theory. It is therefore possible the affections , may suspend between two objects ; it is, there¬ fore noťunnatnral that Eve, at sight of"Theodore; .and'though attached to Hanson, should ι find much of. her for¬ mer affections return, and hesitate to re¬ solve. ' It oannot be said that she -was influ¬ enced
enced byt the most} distant hope.of union.;; she beheld Theodore on thebrink of'an ignominious grave-U-to him therefore she, could beconly tied by, the indcacribabteu faseiuation of love. A sentiment of deli¬ cacy ако had some influence.; she fan¬ cied accepting the addresses of Hanson, under so peculiar a situation, would ap¬ pear like a determination to bave some one; and in fact, she could not resolve to take one man for her husband, whilst she wae conscious of a partiality 4br an¬ other, though that other should be even, mouldering in tbe grave. ι ni ' Ilı Animated by this sentiment, she had abruptly withdrawn her hand from Han¬ son, and as instantly repented when she observed the change in his countenance. He· had not deserved this capricious;be¬ haviour; she was conscious ¿>f'imving allowed him to hope; she saw that be loved her, and she sickened at a situa¬ tion to strangely«mbarrasive. ι .Butnow, ' as
as Ле hoUrs passed away Without the return of the friends, she began to re¬ proach herself with having hurried him to some act of "violence, that might per¬ haps have been wholly prevented, bad she not, by her inconsistent behaviour, irritated that anger, but too much en¬ kindled before. Her father would have persuaded her to retire to rest, but her mind was too much agitated, and every hour seemed lengthened beyond its ac¬ customed duration. Two o'clock had already been struck by a neighbouring church clock, but neither signs nor sounds of their approach drew nigh, and she could no longer refrain expressing the extent of her fears. Shechem endeavoured to reason with her apprehensions, by representing the probability of their having gone to Theo¬ dore, to pass with him as much time as his sentence would allow—" For if," said he, " Hanson bad entertained those de. signs
signs thou appréhendent, this is not the time, neither do I think Cyphon would be prevailed on by any instigation to hazard his life; let us not then wrest into evil what perhaps is only a com¬ mon oversight; and at any rate, there is Edward to prevent treachery. But tell me, my darling (went he on, for he was desirous to engage her attention in con¬ versation), am not I right in conjecture, when I suppose thee to have transferred to Hanson those affections which once were Theodore's ?" " Alas !" replied she, " where is the signification of my affections? Theo¬ dore is condemned, and Hanson, for aught I know, is by this time mur¬ dered." " You raise up," said the Jew, " im¬ ages of'terror, that only exist in fancy; this late hour, the solemn stillness of the night, and the train of misfortunes we have witnessed, is sufficient indeed to excite ideas of melancholy; but let us
us trust that no new accident hath hap¬ pened." The clattering of horses' fèet now in¬ terrupted them, and excited their atten¬ tion ; but passing by, tbey folt tbe full force of the disappointment ; tears start¬ ed from the eyes of Eve, who, half over¬ come by drowsiness, which bent down her eyelids, rested her head upon the edge of the table, sinking into a kind of reverie. Shechem, pleased to see that nature in some measure exerted her influence, arose, and opening the window, leaned out, to look for the return of Hanson and Edward. He had no belief in their supposed visit to Theodore, Edward having left them expressly to bring news of Hanson. The number of hours ok ready elapsed inspired in him fearful fore¬ bodings that some accident must have happened to one or both. Three and four
four o'clock: had struck, but no person appeared, and Shechem found himself Completely miserable. He had remained at the window* 'tbat the might not inter¬ rupt the· slumber of his daughter; the candle wee; burnt down, to, tbe socket, and a streak of morning dawned at a distanoe.-n -'Л <Whaty' thought he, " isj man in this lite of perpetual car«,? what aUjinsignifieant miserable being! what with his actual ills, retrospections of past, and anticipations of future, he seems destined to a circumvolution of suffer¬ ing." , . , , ft ,0 At thi» moment he perceived β man walking hastily dowrn the town ; he was unable to distinguish exactly who it was by the light, though he believed it to be Edward. He beckoned to Shechem, who hastened, with as little noise, as possible, to admit him, presaging some accident, filom bis returning akmø. The
The house they occupied had'been hired for their use, so that Shechem con¬ ducted him into the parlour ; and bad he been a man unaccustomed to > the sudden emergencies of fortune, he would have been unable to stand the shock of his appearance; but Shechem, though he could feel the most trivial of human distresses.possessed a soul which was calm amidst the widest devastation, and col¬ lected amidst universal destruction. He perceived that the clothes of Ed¬ ward were stained with blood, that he bad lost his hat, and that a handkerchief was bound round his forehead ; he had also in his hand a naked sword, and ap¬ peared exhausted with fatigue; never¬ theless, the descendant of Abraham, commanding his feelings, inquired what was become of Hanson, and how he came in such a condition ? ■ - ι " I have scarcely," he replied, " two minutes to say, what can hardly be re¬ peated
peated in two hours—Hanson is despe¬ rately wounded, and is now at the Red Dragon, on ------road. I must, if pos¬ sible, see my wife for a minute ; and yet I fear to shock her by this condition." " Why should you see her?" said Shechem. " You had better retire to your chamber, and let me send for a sur¬ geon." " I believe," he replied, " I am in no danger from these scratches ; but I must quit the kingdom, as I have killed the keeper of tbe madhouse in a duel, and I wish to reconcile Sophia to follow me." " Attend, I beg," said Shechem, sup¬ pressing his surprise; " this is indeed an emergency of moment, and will be too mucb for your wife, who has not long been laid down. I myself will endea¬ vour to soften it to her; and, if it is possible, make the most of your time in flying to France, from whence you may write, and she can then follow you in safety." As
As this advice appeared most rational, Edward hastily changed his clothes ; and accepting of Shechem a sufficient supply to defray bisiexpences, in less than half an hour'quitted the town, leaving a short note for bis wife. TIhs sudden transaction over, She¬ chem stood for some minutes as much confounded as if he had seen an appari¬ tion; to- many daims now crowded to hiajattention, that he knew not to which first to attend. He saw the necessity of hastening to Hanton ; but how could be break the- matter to his daughter, and to Sophia? yet this must instantly be done, and with a heavy heart be as¬ cended the stairs. Eve bad just started from the inter¬ rupted doze into wbicb sbe bad fallen, and was rising with terror to inquire after her father, when he entered the room. He advanced, and took her hand, then
thon «topped, unable to say what he knew would so greatly distress her '' I perceive, said she, calmly, " you have something bad to tell me, but I had a tire un that has composed me to suffer all the inflictions of Providence I will learn no more to repine, and re¬ ceive with fortitude whatever is prepát*- ed me " ' "Then, 1 cued Shechem, kissing her, • thou art my daughter, and thfe blêssJ ing of the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Tacob, rest upon thee ' Prepare for yet another trial, and abide the event in patient resignation ' She was silent, and he went on to in¬ form her all be had beard, commending to her care the discovery to Sophia arid her sister, whilst he proceeded to HalV- son, whose situation he encouraged her to hope was not much worse than that of Edward > W j ι и " I will
" I will confess," said she, speaking through the tears, which, in defiance of her boasted strength, gushed from her eyes, " that I am more satisfied with certainty than suspense, as I had every thing to fear from a character so savage as squire Cyphon's. You know not the dismal images that haunted my fancy, and made me miserable indeed. I feel that now I have more than ordinary courage arising to combat this new dis¬ tress, and surely some portion of Theo¬ dore's spirit rests upon me." Shechem smiled at this enthusiasm of expression ; and glad to see that in the moment of trial, energy had taken place of feminine weakness, he again saluted her, then hobbled from the house to the inn, where he hired a chaise, to convey him to the Red Dragon. 1 When Edward had sallied out after his fnend, he hastened instantly to the inn
inn where he knew squire Cyphon had put up, wisely considering that the most obvious point of Hanson's intention. He learnt on inquiry, that Cyphon was already gone; and whilst he was order¬ ing some wine from tbe hostess, with intent to watch the arrival of his friend, Hanson entered with α stern ferocity on his countenance, sufficiently indicative of the desperation of his purpose. He started back at sight of Edward, and was hastening away, but the latter fol¬ lowing, took him by the arm, easily re r straining the slightest efforts he made to escape. , " We were all alarmed," said Ed¬ ward, " at your abrupt departure. What purpose can biiiig you to this place, when we so much require your presence to sustain us under the evil of Theodore's condemnation ?" , " Leave | me, I conjure you," cried , Hanson ;
Hanson ; " my purpose is fixed, end is the voice of honour." " I understand," replied Edward ; " I know you have intention to call Cyphon to account ; but tbis is neither the tíme nor the place. Besides, how, on tbe eve of Theodore's dreadful fate, can you think of putting your design in execiu tion? How much will it imbitter his last momqnts, to know tbat either his lather or his brother bave suffered by the hand of the other? Besides, how can you leave Eve on the tortures of suspense, such as your absence must give her ?" ' " My absence '" cried he, peevishly ; " 'tis a pleasure—I am hateful ťô Ber sight—I know she despises me< ind I care' not what may be the issue of (his due}. I wţll, by Heaven and earth, I' will attempt to avenga tbe wrongs of my father, my mothei, mý'eiítóryMaílny friend •',[>Tbeìi'>tnt№dlyolc« demanda it , И.П , , of
of me, and all the dastardly arguments of cowards cannot wrest my purpose." "You mistake widely," replied Ed¬ ward, With emphasis; " I offer no argu¬ ment from fear; but is it reason to put in the power of chance a life so valuable, and tbat against α villain, who is un¬ worthy honourable treatment?" " 'Til veiy well" replied Hanson; " those arguments may be reasonable and philosophical ; but I am not the man to be trod on without turning. If the law could give me restitution, it were otherwise, but this is wholly out of Its consideration; and I swear by the spirit of my rather, his destroyer shall not ex¬ ult in safety ' Return then, Edward, go to the company of women, and re¬ concile them to any event by your cool miusimi ; but 1 have not traversed the hurtling sands of Arabia, and plundered with the furious and b)»odthir»]ty robber of the desert, to stand a tame spectator ivoii. Ш. к when
#Кеп-ту friends onÄrslations ага »wept Hweyhbefotemy «уч·.? " ' < '/iThle-íípeèch: had 'iţei effect upon Ed- Ward ,- ihewa» indeed cooler, and uw#e pWideftt' thah Hstison, but he possessed courage and resolution, and waslbeiides somewhat piqued at the insinuations thrown out,— f Bince," said hej if' your purpose is.fixed, and as this it)not a l»e*ty' quarrel at a brothel or gaming- honset ι but .to send punishment where damme«, «odes cannot teach, command nte-toithe last drop of my blooď." ι iflsfiWell said) my brave fellow!" cried Hanson ; '> you are now worthy to be nty companion, in a eause so notte; anď itoňtlet us instantly set about this glori¬ ous task."' ' ι 'u» » ι morí ι ι 'm t ^i( JiEÔward returned to the inn to make ftMbw' inquiry into ithe? rout» Cyphon Htfd »taken; ¡Whilst.Hanson.bastened. to #*idjnfphou»e-to procure iiones, Jwving Ьзтиу , I /iti) «ι «tttttu)- «Æalteady bw ν к I
already provided pistols and a. sword These latter accoutrement». ' Edward (bund means to procur« for binaseli, und then hastened to the place of rendez¬ vous, from whence they followed the track of their enemies, ι > <. It had been some time dark before they set out, so that thty bad no assur¬ ance of overtaking them, but in thesup- position of their own safety, which would probably keep them 'in the high road, so long as it continued towards Gyphon's residence. The night was extremely dark, not a single star shone through Hie mass of clouds to direct them ; but inspired by the spint of valour, they rode forward at full speed, without at· tending to the road. In about an hour they reached an inn, where they had the satisfaction to learn thit the chaise had changed «horses notlmore,tlian twenty minutes Jjefore them» 'Not waiting an lnstanttfbr further inquiry, they spurred к S forward,
fotward) often fancying they could dis¬ tinguish the' rattling of a carriage at a distance*, which served to increase their ardour ι They now came to a part of the road which, dividing, involved them in doubt, the one appearing to be the main road, by'its breadth, but branching away in an deposite· direction to tbat of Cyphon's •abftSèl the other was a dark lane, over- Hdtíg Wltll oaks and elms, whose brahch- "rit^mterwove, rendered the gloom more Ïm perviene.»- 'ι ч ι» ι w j· Thfr-ŕillain," cried Hanson, " loves thcbregioni of darkness, we shall tberc- fltre'probalily find liim in« road, dismal enough for the highway to Pandemo¬ nium." Ί ι I · I I 1.1 f' . ! ' :>,!, >. OiitliiS'Suppoeition they turned down tbe lane, into tenfoldujbrbnett. audv ow- in^toitbe.iiiievenBeee of.the turf, were ,m*r often
often nearly thrown from their hqrses. One advantage they perceived in the soft¬ ness of the road, it prevente)} the platter¬ ing of their horses sounding the alarm, though, at the same time, it also sunk the rattling of any carriage at a,dis¬ tance. ,. Tbey continued in this gloomy lane, without any addition of hope, till tliey arrived at a ford of water, of consider¬ able depth. Whilst they were ßf[i\ta- vouring to discover the most passable place, they could distinguish oublie breeze which floated down the lane, the voices of several men, and Hanson even fancied he could trace Cyphon aitd the keeper. Considerations of personal safe¬ ty were instantly forgot; their horses were plunged into the stream, and out of breath with the exertion of swim¬ ming, Were spurred forward by the impe¬ tuosity of the rMere.' In less than three minutes they" came -up to a! carriage, к 3 which
which might have escaped in the dirk, but for the voices of the persons around it. Their numbers' were not taken into consideration;'Hanson rode ир to the door, to examine who were there, whilst Edward prevented the driver proceed¬ ing. ' " Here, here," cried a person Hanson instantly knew to be his enemy, " take my purse, and all that, and let us go on, for Heaven's sake !" " No, no," replied Hanson, in fury, " villain, f know you ' I am no robber; you are the vile plunderer—the legalized destroyer' I am Hanson—I am the man whom you sold for а slave—whom you sent to fight the battles of injustice —whose father you destroyed—whose sister you polluted. Do ýou know me now ? 1 1 am come to demand the retri¬ bution for your'entries —prériáre then iţistaţitiy —I give you the advantage of
Tbe keeper, who was a passionate, brutish fellow, at this address,, without speaking, discharged a pistol through the carriage window, but without mis¬ chief, his aim being taken at a guess. Meanwhile Cyphon called loudly, with curses and threats, on the driver to proceed, who spurred his horse, and ex¬ ercised his whip. Edward, who' was not to be trilled witb, brought him 'to the ground with a severe stroke ori tìie head, and hastened up to the carriage with a pistol cocked, to revenge the fire of the keeper; but the servant wn'o' Was behind coming up, and attempting to grapple Edward, received the contents in his shoulder. ' ' Witb cool intrepidity Edward wheeled round to the opposite side of the car¬ riage ; Hanson opened thé door where he stood» vowing, if the coward soul of Cyphon durst not give hitn the satisfac K 4 ЙОП
tion of honourable terms, he would shoot him as he sat This menace aroused the dormant fe¬ rocity of Cyphon, his imperious spirit instantly caught fire, and grasping at his arms, he cried out—" Wretch that thou art, insignificant germ of a maggot, stand by, and tremble at my wrath' Who art thou, that därest lift thy sacri. legious hand against a descendant of the Cyphons—thou, who art unworthy to breathe the same air ' ' A volley of curses were vented on the part of the keepei, whose notions of honour were savage violence The laws of equabty were, with him, the laws ot folly, for he considered that when a man stood still to receive the fire of his ad- versary, if killed, he should lose his turn, he therefore hastened t to procure him¬ self the priority, at the instant when Cyphon descended from the ohaise, in acceptance
acceptance of the challenge of Hanson, which, however his fears prompted, his sense of dignity would not permit him to refuse. The keeper threw open the door on bis side, and, with an impreca¬ tion, fired at Edward. The ball grazed along his forehead, and feeling himself wounded, as well as irritated by so trea¬ cherous a proceeding, he instantly fired ; then dashing his pistol in an aim the flash had given him, he leaped from his horse, running, sword in hand, to cut down the keeper. This man, who had been familiar in actions of blood, but did not expect so vigorous an assault, darted, at the same instant, from the carriage, armed with a broadsword, which he used at random in the dark. It was impossible to attempt coolly to parry a thrust when it could not be seen, and therefore Edward strik¬ ing in a sloped direction with his sword, to turn aside any blow that к 5 might
Wight be coming, closed with his ad¬ versary, and shortening his point, stab¬ bed him twice 1 in the body, atwhich the keeper fell down with a groan, and ex¬ pired. ' In the mean time, Hanson and Cyphon bad' taken the ground at random, and fired their first shot without taking place; but the momentary illumination discovering their position, their second ftro had an equal effect, both being dan¬ gerously wounded. " I have received your fire," cried Hanson, ■< but I am not satisfied. The crimes you bave committed are not yet expiated, and I defy you to continue the combat till you either own yourself the blackest monster the earth suffer» pn its groaning bosom, or till we both fall." ^ 'Worm !" cried Cyphon, in «holer— ' "«insignificant brat of a three-halfpenny curate, 1 a fetkhY #hom I. turned out (h.if ι for
for rent, what wait thou 3 Did I not send thee to school, and pay for your education ? but chance has made you<sn upstart, and all that Know, that one drop of the blood of the Cyphons is more valuable than all that ever flowed in the dirty veins of thy whole genera¬ tion since the days of Adam, and„yet thou därest defy me." >...■· " Miserable self-created being of non- importance," replied Hanson, in a tune of the deepest contempt, " of wbatl value Is tby boasted birth,, since it only gave thee power to be α villain ' of what value is thy existence to mankind, when no eye shall weep at thy death? aud of what value is thy mighty ancestry, when the last of those illustrious per¬ sonages shall, the day after to-morrow, be banged like a dog ?" This reproach was too much for the keen pride of C' ihon ; bursting r with rage, he cried out to Hanson to .make к 6 ready,
ready, swearingthnthe would stand bis fire whilst a nerve gave; hiia strength to draw tbe trigger. * y .,·.., ι > In this temper they charged and fired at the same time, with the most invete¬ rate animosity, but both being again wounded, they sunk upon the ground. Edward, though cut in several places of bis arm, now came up, and raising his friend from the ground, supported him to his horse, which he mounted .with ex¬ treme difficulty; the servants, at the same time, busying themselves, as well as their wounds would permit, in placing their master in the carriage, who vowed to prosecute, with all the tbunder of the law. the outrage he had suffered. Faint with loss of blood, Hanson was conducted, at an easy pace, to the Bed Dragon, where he was admitted to a bed; and as any delay might be fatal, 1 ' Edward
Edward slightly bound up his hand and arm, and mounting a fresh horse, has tened to send a surgeon, and acquaint his friends with this event
CHAPTER IX.
Wbsii 70u bave tbouţiKt αο tbis, then Answer mo, Irti ese be hours uf courtship! <E.(.f>«t When Bensadi arrived at tbe Bed Dra¬ gon, be found a surgeon attending an the room where Hanson lay, wbo had suffered so much fiom loss of blood, that it wa» deemed dangerous to attempt ex¬ tracting the balls,-until rest should, in some degree, have fitted him for exer¬ tion.—" I am something satisfied," said be to the Jew, " that I beve revenged my injuries on the bead of the old ty¬ rant; I shall now be'willing to die." " How so?" 1 demanded Shechem. , « Were
"Were I in tby situation I should desire to live." " This i» not the time," replied he, " to stand on punctilio. I will candid¬ ly own then, that I have long loved your daughter, but I ber J passion for Theodore prevents her partiality for me I am hurt at her coldness ; I see she can¬ not return my affection, and without her I do not desire to live." > ι . " I believe thou mayest think so at present," answered Shechem, " and that thou lovest my daughter by thy melan¬ choly accents; but dost thou not know that, even if she could return thy affec¬ tion, thou art a Christian?" > " No," replied Hanson, "I nn not a Christian, unless being born m Christen¬ dom constitutes me such. My religion is universal, it embraces all sects, coun¬ tries, and tongues; it is tbe religion:of reason ; and as to the various modes of expression, in England I can hsten with attention toitheT national faith—at Smyrna
Smyrna and Jerusalem to the' law of Moses—in Arabia to that of Mahomet; and I do not see Why, because I do not think exactly like another, that the af¬ fairs of life should be retarded." Shechem smiled —-« Well," said he, " this is niy daughter's business, with her yoU must settle it" After some time the surgeon entered, and having procured other assistance, he proposed to probe the wounds, which operation the feelings of the Jew not being'familiar with, be retired to а pri¬ vate room to reflect, and to prop up fall¬ ing nature by a slight refreshment. Hanton being much exhausted by the tortures he underwent, was, for a time, relieved by a restorative cordial and an opiate, being tben left to the protection of the nurse. bl tbe mean time, Shechem walked in the
the garden, and listened to the bells which proclaimed to the glad peasants that it was Sunday. He sat down on a bank, and bis benevolence was gratified in beholding the gay sons and daugh¬ ters of labour, with sunburnt faces and gaudy-coloured dresses, hastening to the churches, or to visit some lover or rela¬ tion.—" Yet," thought he, " some self- styled philosophers*, men, who know not the beat and burden of the day, would destroy this excellent institution, because it robs the nation of a seventh of its labour. Is man then become a slave ?—is tbe meal of the next hour only to be provided by the drudgery of the present ? This, indeed, is too generally the case; but let us see tbe benefits ari¬ sing from this addition of national la¬ bour. Why then, the poor would earn more—would be «ble to pay moţe taxes, and α few might then ride in their coach¬ es, who now walk on foot." , , , It
1 It must be confessed -this Was « Jew¬ ish reflection,! and'dlvertedfVom striking itself ftrtherby ι the arrival of a chaise; which broughť Eve, and tho sisten of Hansdn, to the Bisa Dragon. -' Shechem Would bave attempted to rally* this visit of his daughter, but he found that tbis was nbt a time, Und that his Spirits, were fin· 1 too low. He received tham witb bis wonted smile of goûdnesl|*nd attempt¬ ed to cheer the fears «f Sophia) who was greatly afflioted at the sudden departure of her¡hueband,>and Would immediately have followed ham, bad she been ac¬ quainted with bis toute. I.' ■ I » 4İ .. л , ■So many intereets Mew 'demanded the attentmn of Shechem,-tliat he knew not Which to attend·«) first; for however his care might be required >by those arpuud him, bis thoughts retumedf to tlie un¬ happy Theodore; .immersed in ¿he dun¬ geons of condemnation, and left to all the misery of solitary reflection, with the
the speedy prospect of to-morronr'emr- rival, when ho was doomed to make re¬ tribution to the laws of hie country« and plunge into the vortex! of darte uncer¬ tainty. A picture ilike this conld not fail affecting the mind of the Jew; he saw no danger that could attend com¬ mitting-to the care of his daughter and Hanson's sisters the care of their wound¬ ed brother, and he determined to hasten to Theodore, whose spirits hoi knew must droop at this seeming neglect. He imparted to them his intention, and de¬ sired that Hanson might not be disturb¬ ed, as his present Weakness rendered any agitation extremely dangerous; but though Eve would have been tihe last person to retard his cure, she, yet could not forbear, after her father's departure, stealing a visit to the sick room, to con¬ vince herself, from observation, of the true 1 state of the patient. 1 1 She
She had been informed that he was fallen into a doze, and that the nurse remained alone with him. She wisely considered, that though her entrance might not interrupt his sleep, being ac¬ companied by his sisters might; she therefore slipped away from them, and was admitted by the nurse, who endea¬ voured, in а low voice, to satisfy her in¬ quiries. The entrance of Eve had not been so silent as to escape the notice of Hanson, who* Started at the most trifling sound, and turning round, he raised his eyes on thè object he least expected to see.— " Leave me," said he, faintly—" suffer me, too lovely Eve, to die in peace, since I am thé object of your hatred." " I hate you !" said Eve, with simpli¬ city—" no, very far from it, Hanson." " How !" cried he, with more spirit than he could have been supposed to possess—
possess—" am I then so blessed,—am I then loved by the charming—the excel¬ lent Eve?" " I did not say so," replied she, Mush¬ ing. " Is there no medium between love and hatred ?" " True," said he—" very true ; 1 once thought your friendship alone could make me blessed, but I am glad that I shall soon be no more, since your affeqtions cannot receive a warmer impression. Ah, lovely Eve ! what shall I say j!, for whilst I would endeavour to explain to you the fervour of my love—my aţdent desires, I feel that I shall, perhaps, very shortly be incapable of action, and, like Theodore, leave this earth, unblessed by the society of the woman on whom my soul doated to delight—to misery." A picture like this, expressions so sad from the.man, who, at least, was equal in heart to any other, instantly fixed the hesitating reason pf Eve, and giving vay to the sudden impression it had made
mede' upon her, she burst into teanvand sàt 'down on a chair beside the bed.->- " Live, I beseech you," said she, in a voice 1 scarcely audible for teare—" I Will nöt »disguise to you my weakness. Yes, 1 Hanson, you are dear to me, but you know that I loved Theodore—you know his virtues—you know his terrible situation at this hour. Can I then give encOutagement to love? can I accept another, whilst he lies under sentence of death?' Pity me, Hanson—judge of my distracted mind, and sparerne. This confession ought to content you. Your resemblance to Theodore was the first attraction you possessed ; live then, but allow me time to overcome the agita¬ tion which distracts me." "Excellent girl '" replied be, "pardon me—overlook my selfishness—allow me a prospect of hope, and I am contented. I wilt endeavour to live, eince you wish it, and trust my desires to your gene¬ rosity," l ' 1 Here
1 1 Дете the nurse interposed, ån regard to hecpatient, and live willingly retired, for ehe felt so much confusion at the cqii- feeaion she had made, tbat ehe wished to retire, to reflect and satisfy herself that lier actions were consistent with de¬ corum, ,i Shechem fonnd Theodore firm:,and collected, though sunk m the profeund- est melancholy. He qualified, us múch as consistency permitted) the action be¬ tween Hanson and his father, and would wholly have suppressed it bad »ny-PÄsr exeuse ¡presented, to account fon their absence and neglect in not bidding, bim a last adie.«. и , " I have considered," replied Tbeo- tlore,.".that in the most enviable situa¬ tion· there, is little fbr us, to desire to live i, bnt ( when I look intoj.4he more humble,stations, I„şee muclvt/qrus to desire to die. This new transaction! tias confirmed
confirmed myi opinion, and I almost pity Utose whom I-^ıajl leave behind me. I lia^iij.tli^iBßJrtationsof the night, run ove; tije, .statest' man, from his most sa¬ vage existence« to what is termed his refineçimode ofcivilized life, but I find thuaVJţew equaljy dark, and that blood anjţjvjce.are the colourings qf the picture. WJifit ii called still life is a life of toil; aridj^bg envied station of the ridi and the nojjje is corroded by jealousies, and destroyed by jarring passions. The in- ,satia^e appetite of self-interest is univer- şally.precltmıiıınte, and natural as it is, sqch is, the ill construction of this world, that ft cannot be satisfied in one, with¬ out advancing on the rights of another ; even Nature herself, in nil her varied de¬ grees of existence, is imperfect. One class is alone called into being by the de¬ struction of another. Man thrives on the plunder of man, and one animal en¬ gorges another. The plants spring up, wither, and die, then becoming manure » " to
to others, and the very elements destroy and produce each other. As members then of this universal mass of corruption, I know not whether it is wisdom to de¬ sire to be, or not to be." " You have plunged me," said She¬ chem, " into a vast labyrinth of disquisi¬ tion, where the light of human intellect is inadequate to illumine or to guide, and where every speculation muat lead to the mazes of doubt. I cannot then pronounce with decision, but Ibis I can think, that if man is confined to this ter¬ rene habitation—if the limits of bis ex¬ istence are no farther extended than while he gropes about on the surface of the earth, he is of all animals the most miserable, and the transcendent gift, the mighty prerogative of reason, is but a mode of torment." " I have," replied Theodore, " in situ¬ ations where no human eye could pene¬ trate, retired from lite and from man. I have shut up my soul in the chambers vol. in. L· of
of reflective reason, and giyen loose to, my doubts I have,even been on the point of cpnclııdıng with the matenalist^ tliat all is the fruition of chance, and that the soul anftT body are one and, indivi sihle,, and must perish together» But wben I remembered that no efftít сап be produced wAthout ι cause, I followed up tne chain ţo the commencepient of creation and, thus I stud— If there be no Creator, bow came tbis harmony of parts? for chance must have produced confusion The attributes of matter are extension, gravitation, and attı action w ith these properties the various worlds must bave sunk into the bottom (if I may, say so) oí the vacuum, apd by force of attraction been united m а mass How comes it then, that, ¡they revojye in unceasing and unvarying ecjipjtics ? If chance produced meo. antjl animale, and planjş, wh» does ( not chappe. nqw prp ducV p them ' Why do they,nţţţ ţpnhg ııpşporltaneciusly in oiu- fields,şnçl y^pods?
There must have neen a first qf each, whence, when, and how were tbey pro¬ duced by chance ? Thus ţ beheld de-^ sign, and beheld a God Again, for the aigumeht was specious, tbat pur soul and body was the same, t reflected that if one, the vital spint must fly off and ( decay, the same as the body, and there fore in a course of years not one particle ι emani the same thus the next moment 1 should be a different being, and the soul of a year hence could not be punish ed for a cnme committed by the soul of today What also must beconţe of memory and how, if always changing, haw am I conscious of being the same ? \et I can trace back my actions for years—I am conscious that I am, and have been, and therefore my soul is not the same as my body, but a purer sub stantie, because like the body it tjoes not evaporate The metaphysicians of to day telt u's the soul is without parts Why don't 'they say at once there is ho L 2 such
Щ\ tbrţş » for } ы tW same as saying tl at a tiling cap be. and not be at the ¡¡ада tuup for whateyei is must have parjfø or. extensioi We see that the ho<jy csujrjot act without the sou) nom ^Ьщс we may infer tl at the soul can i\ţt vji^hou^ the body because irit can tifjt^jttljmji may it not att without the Ifodjj^eing mere matter and can add nothing to the qualities of spint ? I no longei doubt replied Shecl em J, ncjjfji, did dotiht of the being, of a (fţpd^i^Ujţ ţ knew not what to tlunl vvhejţjl saw the abominations diulycom щСЫ with impunity when I saw inansjajuiht« tapght as a science and J,he папу of tlie Most High profaned as )anttiomn¿ the murder of tliose beings 1 would havepermittedtolive Where U (fjbtl, wasi'iovidencetv hen Alex nder şlaıyhteredhıs thousands ? Where 1 en the gold thirstinj, Spaniards put ffye ¡cpife to the; throats of mţllions of ^ţcxieans and Peruvians ' anct wtiere— but
but alas my frieDd, my soul sickens at the picture, andi will believe there mitst be a time of retribution Perhaps sau^ Theodore ' thé crimes themselves produce sufficient punish* tnent A wounded mina is а eonipámòii tbat permits no rest to ihe WrMved soul but follows alike ťo tlie bouquet and the pillow besides, is' there а petty crime that brings not with it a pUnWrl ment? I know not whether my reader's rh-ij take pleasure m attending to the dis course of a dungeon, or to those tieten ie flections the misfortunes and impending fate of Theodore excited Perhaps the gayer scenes of life may please ünem bet ter and feebng in themselves the truth of those positions, may endeavour io shake off the dull consideration, and aim to live, whilsjt to Jive is allowed thein Shechem returned aţ night tti tllemn ĺ Ъ where
'where .lie found'Hanson something'bet¬ ter,, and the»ladies, calmed into resigna¬ tion, endeavoured to support themselves under the event of to-morrow. Eve found »it impossible to sustain herself un¬ der a last farewell; her soul recoiled with a cMlbehudder from the thought of em¬ bracing, fbr tbe last'time, a man whom sbe had loved, and who was to be torn from'before her, and extended on a gib¬ bet. But though his two sisters under¬ went much the sanie sensation, they re¬ tained 'firmness enough once more to biu bim adie«, and mingle their tears with his. Shechem wished them to Temain behind, ás well from his fear of their in¬ ability to support so great a shock, as «hat 'tbey'might «ustam the spirits'of his daughter; >but finding (жен! determined to go,'be did not Ventai« to oppose .them. >'J t An
An unusual soleroutty seemedíothem to reign in the prison, and.i« *he.y ad¬ vanced, « dampness etiept over,them. The grating bolts smote чроп their hearts With terror.iand wheH.theyieuter- ed the cell, tbeysunk down, overcome with sickness and fear. Some water was provided to 'recover them, and Shechem, notwithstanding aH bis firmnessi was glad to swallow a few spoonfuls, which restored to him tlie power of utterance. This scene was grievous to Theodore, who seemed reanimated with new'firm¬ ness, in place of dismay, at approach¬ ing dissolution. He embraced bis sis¬ ters and Shechem.—" Why," said be, " do you lament at my happiness? ei¬ ther I am going to meet Eliza, or this day I cease for ever to be, and oblivion will enshroud me. Do not then inibit- t* tbis *ny tìay of triumph, but let me see you resigned 'and smiling, that J may recall to mind the delight I experienced L i the
the first day I beheld you in your fa¬ ther's cottage " " Oh '" cried the youngest, throwing her arms about his neck, " surely they will not have the barbarity to hang so amiable a man ' Is it not all a dream '—am I really awake '" " True, my sister, ' said Theodore, and now for the first time а tear started m his eye, as he pressed her to his bosom, and kissed her cheek, which, though blooming, had now faded to а cold white " true," said he, " this is all a dream, and you would prevent my waking be¬ fore you, to enjoy a more happy reality The door was now opened by the keeper, and two men advanced with im¬ plements to knock off his irons " Who are these ' cried Sophia, start¬ ing up with α look of wildness, " oh · my brother, v, hat are they going to do ' Surely, surely, they will not take you from
from us' —Take me," cried she, thrdvv- ing herself before them; И'Ье is not guilty—he is indeed ribt guilty '*' The colour flushed fh the ftcesdf the men—for what heart could resist tìfé im¬ pression of compassion, when "enfbvced by the voice of beauty and grief? They stopped—tbey hesitated, and agreed to wait yet halfan hour. ' This tiivial res¬ pite was quickly elapsed, and they again entered, attended* by a'cleîğymütl.'Vvııt') endeavoured to exert the Voit* of reason, tostili the tumults of nature and passiöh. They were torn from his embrace by violence, and as he quitted tho dell, sunk down in a fainting fit, to which even Shechem had not strength to attend. 'f hat benevolent descendant of Abraham found himself so shocked the moment he lost sight of ThedflOie in the gloomy passage of the prison, that reflection fad¬ ed from him, ahd he cast himself oír the i. 5 mound
ground in a momentary suspension of .reason. He then arose and mad« sn ef¬ fort to fallowi Theodore, but he found i his.enfeebleďframe bad received a stroke itB"HJolent,i«Aat j»i* strength refused to > Busttán him; and ita a gloomy kind of for- .tllnde 'be sat) dawn, gazing on tbe two idsters, who remained insensible, not- i withstanding the efforts of the Burgeon, ' who iiintantlyatteiided. ··". In thfe mean time the melancholy pro- 'ceSsion, attended by vaet crowds of weep- i' irig spectators, advanced slowly to the "place of execution. No smile was vi¬ sible on any of their features, and many quitted a scene too mournful for their 'feelings. With a calm and settled dig- . nity Theodore sustained his situation; '.h**ndeavoured to smile upon tbecrowd, bat again his features relaxed to the so¬ lemnity tbey liaď long acquired. ι I ; ι •., When, they arrived at the platform, a •ţinu ' dead
dead silence prevailed, whilst Theodore pronounced with .the minister a short prayer ; but this office' finished, an' uni¬ versal sound of weeping was heard, and Theodore apntemplaled for a moment the many who pitied his fatei He ad¬ vanced, by permisskmtøP the slieriff, to the edge of tlie *nrt, and waving, bis hand to tiie people, they were bushed into silence.—" Learn, my fnends^rsaid he, " from this, the obedience due to the laws. It is necessary I should thus suf¬ fer for the outrage I have committed ; and let all mankind learn, tliat when passion overcomes reason, desolation; is the consequence." He tben remained silent, and taking from his bosom the picture of Eliza, pressed it to his. lips« and afterwards gave it td the minister.—" Now," said he, " I am ready ; and tell my father, that with my last breath I forgive the wrongs he has done ïne.fns I consider thcni pro- . ceedine
ceeding from erroneous reasoning, and the unrestrained passion of power." The knot was then fixed—the cart withdrew—and the sufferings of Theo¬ dore ended. A general groan burst from the spec¬ tators ; murmurings of execration were mingled in the air with tlie numes of' Theodoric and Cyphon. After tlie usual time, the body was cut down, and deli¬ vered to the proxies of Shechem, by whom it was afterwards interred in the same tomb with Eliza. A messenger immediately set out for the habitation of Cyphon, uho lay wounded, and a prey to all tlie sugges¬ tions of disappointed ambition. lie had employed all his interest to procure 11 respite or pardon, but never having learnt to cringe to any above him, delay succeeded to delay, till intercession be¬ came
taine ineffectual The certain know¬ ledge of his son's death struck him like л clap of thunder over the bead of a man committing some att of outrage, and the last dying speech and confession, which was cried beneath his windows, shook every nerve to anguish He re¬ pented having pursued with so much madness a son, whose firmness he admir¬ ed, and whose virtues he could not but acknowledge Even pride lost much in his sight, as the suggestion natural¬ ly presented, that had he listened to the wishes of his son, he might now have seen him happy, and been blessed with descendants to continue lus name The two estates devolving on Theodore would have ensured wealth and honour sufficient, whereas now, bis biothei had been murdered, himself stained in san¬ guinary crimes, and his son executed by the hands of the common hangman
Where
Where was now the honour of accu¬ mulated, dignity ? Where was now the boast of power? he alone, reduced by disease and corrosive jealousy, remained the'subjeot of despair, and smarting un¬ der tbe anguish of a mutilated frame. Front. reflections so galling toa man of his imperious nature, be struggled to fly ; and finding that opiates were admi¬ nistered to relieve the acute pains of the body, he applied a larger dose to alleviate tbe more excruciating sufferings of bis mind,»' Perbapsi on summing up bis worldly account of happiness to come, be found thefetlance so far against bim, that spurn¬ ing»* the-harid of retributive Justice, he resolved to quit astate now become insup¬ portable. Opium furnished the means, and 'dosed the eyes of' a man whose existence was a cune upon the earth, and whose death was considered by the t neigh-
ııeighboumng (poor, as a judgment for his crimes, mďa subjectoí'irejoioing, as α liberation from slavery. / This event occasioned some.ťbar to Shechem .and tbe Hahama, wbo «x- pected tlieir brother imghb be.raued.tt) account; but (from this they were re¬ lieved by the depositions of the servants and the verdict of the jury, who very wisely imputed it to insanity, because it was inconsistent with decency to bury a gentleman in a cross-road, or mutilate the body of a man so wealthy ; and if any doubt might remain, it was (toni; away, by a self-evident argument ad¬ vanced by tbe foreman of the inquest·— " We all know," said he, " that to be re¬ spected and honoured has been tliecliifl' end, and motive, and idesign of 'thu № and action« of tbe squire. And so new, gentlemen, don't -we all know, that be hanged bis жш, rather than be should marry,
marry.and hav e connexions and live with a woman of a ioiv and a grovelling birth. Now this being clear, the squiie could not be in his senses, and right mind, as we say, or he would not have gone to run the hazard of being trod beneatli the feet of every swine-driver and com¬ mon beggar in the parish." No one attempted to dissent from so just an observation ; and the person who had thrown Theodoric's estate into Chan¬ cery, to testify his sorrow at the decease of his relation, blazoned his vil tues in marble;, and succeeding ages will won¬ der at his charity, humanity, parental tenderness, and exemplary piety. No inquiry bad been made into the decease of the keeper, whose death had been found accidental, as the servants, not having the fear of their master be¬ fore their eyes, and having the gold of Shechem
Shêchem in their pockets, made oath that lie was the first to begin the attack, which was in fact the case, and that, ow¬ ing to the daikness, it was impossible to distinguish persons. Time had restored to Hanson bis sti cngth, and taken from the grief of the ladies, whose thoughts again veeietl to the enjoyments of life Eve had not yet consented to be the wife of Hanson, as she pleaded for a year to moniti the fate of Theodore, considering that pro¬ priety demanded this attention. Edward, invited by tbe little notice tahen of his late exploit, and trusting to the defect of witnesses, who could not possibly asceitain his person in a night so dai к, ventured to return from France, and Shechem, retiring to the Minories, continued to extort from the spendthrift, to accumulate bond to bond, and in de¬ fiance of every Christian example, to be¬ stow
234 íŕlTEtoBbRŕícYTHOr/' ştovv charity withputapolause, and be¬ nefit mankind ih secret ' * * lei tim» wl if mourn our heros ftayn-ud lute I о УЦ <» rytmin ψιίί ^»»Of.f^ifitliiig ο ,« Ι npuhivp pnssioii, lebt reiţent-ince I ue Vlmuld «ue to mis it each succ Ι ι g I .
Pni fed bv J dling Lea i nliUlitr t Luudi
