Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
The castle of Otranto: a gothic story
THE CASTLE Ol OTRANTO.
CHAP Τ E II I. J.VÃ л s Pit F η , Pline*- of Otranto , had one Ь>а ami one d au „lua : 1 h«- Lunt, a nmít ht α unì ui ui· ■pm , a^tti ught* ut, w .u tailed ¿Man u<a Lç/ıraJ , the fou, ЛЛ as tiu vt у tau u -ung.'!, а Jmrndv v о, uh, flekk , ai. d ot bu pi ■miling dttp« litt* iì ; Vtt L» Was ríu* dading t»t bis iathtl» W ilo lu.vtľ IhoW f Л anv lv umttïu s ul *it< m* n to Alu/, da A* i'ffeJ liad tutii.utul a li ali !)_,«- lui ills Ktii with tho INÎaoptb oi Vuntiza*·* daughìu*, Jjabtlla; and lìu Í* td alo ady bit n dthvtud by lut guauhaus inro tiu bandi ol' Manj r ul * that ht might i th hute the w »titling a« îoun а« ivtiraďb infuni liait td ht dih Would permit. Man f uď·· uupauuict lot du- Cere¬ monial ν,α* ieui.4i„cii by lu«, lamilv and m tgh* bouts. TJie humu imktii, appidu-nding the Ľ Λ4ιΐΐν «i thtu Piuııe'k tili ρ υ ¿i Uu u , did nvt d**e ta
r\
unei their furmifes on thi;*} üretip' tation. Hippolita^ ids wife, an amiable lady , did lometones ventine to lepicfent ılıt danger of many ing tìieii only ion lo early , eoniidcïhtg lii* great ν outh, and gre at 1 1 iııfirmuk- ; but Ihe m vu it tei vt d any olhei anfw u ıhan it-flection**, on iter own fterility , w Ito had given him but one hi ir. His tenants and tub- jerrs wu-.' Ids ,kun<niy in iheir «likourfts: Titty" atiriiuued rios haftv wedding to die Prmec'-v do ad of leeing actompldiud an am km piophccv, wduch w,u Ludio luwt pronounwd, tiiat the taf le a:<d Lot dj h } xj OirãuUi /'.ould paj·, jrern tin prt^t/J jamit« , w'. etti vet the /ta* u u-v * 'honid be ¿;rvnn roí la/pf to inhabit rf. İı w a«- difti» tilt to make aîty fení» »'f this propherv ; and İnil lvï> »af ν to toii- Hivc whar ir bad i«» ikt with the nuouge in mifltie-n. Yu thefe mvftuh-s, ui counadutie-ns, did noi make thv popula* <* adliue tht ltk to their opinion. ioui¡£ Conrad\ biith-tLty лла** fixed for his tpowbth. The lompauv was aftunbied in the di On I <»f th» í -aitle , and ev uy thing ìzdd\ for h« ..ни»; 1 . ílu- tiiv on.· »dine, when Lv nr ad İıonhif W a iuìihiu. Mat J/ td tmjjtnnr. ot th.» kaft dria\, riíid wh·- had mM ohh-rv »· I ho hui lelne, dilp.it- ch'.i o St " < i ios uMuid.U'U tu tummuu the veuuig tU? Ρτί.'κ·. Tin- iu. v ant, whu Juul not ftattl l'»i 1 *5 euoi.^U ι v luve- UuftVd the cwUit tu Сош<ла\ itpaU-
3 jm e nt , (ЯШс limning bad bieutideh, oıafıami^k maunu» ids eyes /tai ing , and h Milling al tlw mouth. He Luti noïJdn,_ » Imt pointed m lit« ι otot. TJie ι с, n -рану w u ι-· İti ш к with Muu and аша- zemuit The Print td ч Htpjvtita, wiilmiit knowing wliat vv»- die nutter* but апчюпэ iot hu ioti, .VVoouid away. AUot/r^d* iels uppicLu.uvt- ih.oi «■f u aü* d at the pie/ciaitiu.tuon t*l the nuptial- » uid ai die íulJy oi hu duodtu , .dived ìmj clic ufly , xs hai «aus the mattel I fhe Idiow made no anfw* 1» buí coutimietl pointiiu tow did * ihe toiut-yard; and al laft» ain r lepeaied quelli ous put to hirn, cried our, oil! tin- hdmtt! the iitlmet! lu lho iman ume, fortu; ot fite (ompaiiv bad run mio die couit» íie»m wJiencc w ль iit-atd а conťuícd noite \ď iiuitks, horroi, and furpníe. AU*rfr\d t w İto bc¿aa ro bt* aiarmtd at nol feciu_ hi^ ion, went himlelf to get iiifoímaíiuu of what occïfiumd thii ítiaitge (onfuíiou. Alatilda lemained endeav outing to uftut íi c r mother, and Ifabc'ia ÍUid idi rhe lame purpuíV» and to avoid f ho wing ..ην i m pa t i ene* toi th** btidegrooiii, fot whom, in muh, ťhe had conceived little affection. Tlie fu ft thing ibai i U иск Alanj.rd'î eve> w ti а group of his hrutnts endeavouring to luì» ioiue- thing that appealed to inni a mountain ot Libie pl tum s. He waxed without bdievin^ bis fight. What oat je doing? tried Alanfnd wi«ahiuiiy; A *
4 where ί$ my fon 7 A volley of voices reni ft d , Ob í My Loul! tlie Prince! the I' tince! the helm* 11 tlie híJmef ! Símtked with dule lamentable föumh, and dreading he knew not what; he advanced Jhaitiiy , — but what a light for α fathids eted — he beheld bi. t hild d af hed to pieces, and almoft buried muh r an otomions helmet, an hundred tmu i moie buge than any cafque ever made for luunau biing, and fhadtd with a p rop o r ti on ab lo quantity t»! black ft other*. Tlie boa tor of the fpectacle, the icnorancc of all around how this misfortune had happened, and above Al, I he tıemencbatî phenomenon before *him, took an ay the Prince's fpetcli. Yet his fthiue lafted longei than even griel could occafion. He íiKťd hi:> eyes on what he wiflied in vain to be¬ lie ve α v i bo u; aud feemed lefs attentive to his lois, tlian bulled in meditation on the ftupendous objet. С that had occafioned it. He touched, lie examined the fatal cafone; nor could o\ en the bleeding man* £İC'd remain» ol' the young Piince, divert the ey e$ of Maf f Vid fio m the porti nt before him. All who liad known his palliai fondnefs for young Contad, Were ла mudi furpiized at their Pi inte:» infenfibi¬ iity, as thiuuk'L-ftruck themfehes at die miraci© of the helmet. They convey ed the dhsnguied corpk into the hail, wilhout receiving the leaft *Uifeai*m horn Manfrtd* Аь little was ht attentive
5 tn the Ladies who remained in the chapel: On the conirary, wilhout mentioning ihe unhappy Punc-lTes, ids wife and daughter, the firft founds that dropped from Alanjted % s lips were, trtke caie of ihe iady Jfabella. ΤΙ i e domeftics, without obferving the ftngti- ladlv of tliis direction» лл ue guided by ihiii ftflection to their miftrefs, to confider n a.s pecu¬ liarly addrefted to hu ftttiaiion, aud lic w m lier aíkftance. They conveyed her to her chamber more dead ıhan alive, ami indifferent to all die ftrange circumftances filt lu ard, exea pt lhe death ot iıer fon. Alatilda, who doated on Jur modici» fmodif ltd lier own gdef and am^uneul, and thought of nothing iiu! f» fli fling ai d r> mfuuing Jnr afflicted parent. Jfabella, wdto Ld híre nea- ted bv Hippolita like л daughter, and win, 11 tur¬ nul dui tendernefs vvilh equal duly and affı mon, Λγα*·. Icai ce k ľs affiduous about the 1 linctk; at lhe fame (ime e udeavomiu-, to partake and h flui lhe weight of forrow wddch fhe taw Alatilda ftiove io fupprefs, for wheun Hie had conceived ihe ллмг- nirft fympathy* of hi rdihip. Yu Ju *· own iiltu- fion could noi hi lp fiidnig its plue in In r thoughts. 51m fell n » сичч-и i γ tile dedi of young Con r - d, t xcťpt toimujíi ι 'don ; and fiie wa* •not tony te be d eli verp d fiom а mo u bue л -s ludi liàd pLinniied her little ft 1 ir i ι л , tiihei ftom lur
6
deftined bridegroom, or from ihe levere temper of Alanfred, wdio, though he had diftinguifhed her* by gieat indúlgeme, liad imprinted her mind with terror, fiom itis caufelefs iigour to fucli amiable Prim erles as Hippolita and Alatilda. While ihe Ladies were t on vey ing the WTeU ched moiher to her bed, Manfred remained in the *Onri,, gazing on the ominous cafque, and regard- lefs of tlie crow-d which the ftrangenefs of the event had now affembled around him. The few words he articulated, tc'ù'd fedely to inquiries, whet hei any man knew from whence it couhl hnve come? Nobody could give him ihe leaft in¬ formation. However, al is feemed to be tlie folft objecl of his curiofity, it foon became fo ro the reft of the fpectators, vvhofe conjectures were a» abfurd and improbable, as the cataftrophe itfelf was unprecedented. In the midft of their fenfelefs gueftes , a young peafant , whom rumour had drawn thither ftom a neighbouring village, ob¬ ferved tliat the miraculous helmet was exactly Üke that on tiie figure in black niarble of Aifonfo the Good, one of their former Princes, in the church of St. Nicholas. Villain! W'hat fayeft thou î cried Alanfred, ftarting from his trance in a tem¬ peri of rage, and feizing rhe young man by the collai ; Jiow dareft tliou utter fucli freafon? thy life fhall pay for it, The fpectators, л\1ю as little
7 comprehended the caute, of the Prince's fury a* all the reft they had feen, were at a lof«, io miravi this new circumftance. The young pt afant himfelf was ftill more aftonifhed, not crmtt iving how lie had offended tîıe Printe: Vet recollée. ι ing himfelf» widi a mixture of gia^e and humility , he difen¬ gaged himfelf írom Aíanfreď's grîpe, and then with an obeifance, which diftovered mene jea¬ loufy of innocence, than difmay ; he afked, witli refpect» of what he wai guilty! Alanfred, more enraged at the vigour, hov*, eve r decently exerted, witJi which the young man had í haken off his hold, than appealed by his fubmiftİenı, ordered his attendants to feize him, anel, if he Jiad not been withheld by his friends, w'hom he had in¬ vited to the nuptials, would Jiave poignarded tiie peafant iu their arms-. During diis akercation , fome of the vulgar fpectators had run to the great church, which Дΰod near the caftle, and came back open -muu· thed, declaring, that, die helmet was milling fiom AlfonfoH ftatue. Alanfred, at this news., gi ew perfectly frantic; and, as if lie fougJit a fubject on Λτΐιΐ^ι to vent the tunpeit within him, he rufhed again on the young peaknt, trying: Villain! MoiiftVr! Sorcerer! 4is thou liaft done iJiid 'lis thou haft -ilain my fon! The mob, who w ano d Ionie object within the kope of t Ju i r capacities, A 4
on whom they might difcharge their bewildered rea ft m ings, cauglu die words from the moulh of their Lord, and re-echoed: Ay» ay; 4is he» 4is he : He has /teilen the helmet from good Alfonfo'' s tomb, and dafhed out the brains of our young Prince wilh it, — never reflecting hovv enormous the difproportion was between the marble helmet thai had been in the church, and that of fteel hefore their eyes; nor Jiow impoffible it was for a youth feemingly not twenty, ю wield 'a piece of ermo u r of fo prodigious a weight. The folly of thefe ejaculations brought Alan· fred to himfelf: Yet whether provoked at the pea¬ fant having obferved the refembhuice between tho two helmets, and thereby led to the farther difco¬ very of the abfence of that in the church; or wifii ing to bury any fuch rumour under fo imper¬ tinent a fuppofition; he gravely pronounced that the young man was certainly a necromancer, and that tiil tlie church coidd take cognizance of the affair, he would have the Magician, whom they had thus detected» kept prifoner under ihe helmet itfdf, whicli he ordered liis attendants to raife, and place the young man under it; declaring he fhould be kept, there without food, widi which his own infernal art mighl furnifh iiim. Il was in vai π for tJie you ih to repıefent againff this prepofterous fentence; In vain dia
9 Manfredi friends endeavour to diveit him froTO this favate and ill - grounded it fol u tion. The generalily wue charmed with then* L »id's ded¬ ucili, w ideii, io theii apprdmníiuus, canied giu'l appearance of jultİec*, as the Magician was to 1-«**· ptinifiicd hv die л t iy in/immuti wilh whieii ím Jiad offende d: ¿Sur w ' ' Ί '' du y hiiu-k with lite leali compunction at lhe prxibability oí die youth bung itarved» for Iney firmly beku. ed, ihat, by lu* diabolic fkill, lie could cabik' kïpply uimCdí vvi U nutriment. Aîanfrcd dims faw hi-* eon.mands cv f, n cheu·- fully obeyed: nnd appointing α ^ti.u İ wnii /tiujt orders to pu vt in any kiod bu»"_ convey t ,1 to dur prifoner, iu di*-mifted his kit uus and attendaui.->, and retired to liis own chamber, after locking die cat- ; of the calde, in which h»· fuik red none but his domeltic:. lo remain. In du ravn .ime, the саге and zeal of the young Laüivı. lut brought the Princefs Hippolita to herfcll» who amidit lhe tranfpons of her ολλίι forrow, ft*t qm útly demanded new«* of her Loid, would have uismiiľed hu attuuìaub tt) watt h ол г ег İıim, and at laft enjoined Alatilda to kave hei, anã viht and comfoit bei father. Ale t ¿Ida-, who Wanted no afieciionaic duty to AU¿njteJ f though flie trembled at his auiteriry » obeyed the orders of /hppolita, Λνΐιοηι fhe rendu iy recommended to
IO Jfabella; and enquiring of the domeftics for hef father, was informed that he was retired to Jiis chamber-, and had commanded that nobody fhould have admittance to him. Concluding that he wan i miner fed in forrow for the death of her brother, ñna fearing to renew his fears by the figli ι ot his b'k remaining (child, fhe hefitated whether fhe Ihotdil break in upon his affliction; yet folicitude fm htm, backed by tlie commands of her mother, encouraged her to venture difobeying the orders he had given; a fault, fhe Jiad never l>een guilty of belure. TJie gentle timidity of her nature made her paufe for fome minutes at Jiis door. She heard Iiim traverfo Iiis cliamber backwards and forwards with difordered fteps; a mood which increafed her apprchenfions. She was however juft going to beg admittance, when Manfred fuddeniy opened rhe door; and as it was now twiliglit» concurring wit ϊι the diforder of Jus mind, he did not diftin- fittifh the perfon, but afked angrily, who it vvas? Mal tilda replied trembling, My deareft father, İt is I, your dangliter. Manfred ftepping back ha- itily-, cried» Begone, I do not want a daughter; and flinging back abruptly, clapped the door againft the terrified Alatilda. She was too well acquainted with her father 1 » impetuofiry to venture a fecond intrufion. When fhe had a iittle recovered the fiiock of fo bitter a
Ιϊ
reception» fbe wiped away her tears to prevent the additional İlah that the knowhdg«· of it would eive to Hippolita, who epuftioued her in the moft anxious terms on die Inalili ed' Mar jred, aud hovv he bore hk loh. Alatilda aifun d Ini he- was well, and fupported Ids misfortune with manly fortitude. But will lie not let me fee him? faid Hippolita mournfully ; will he not permit me to blend my tears with Ins, and fhed a mother's forrows in tin* boforn of her Lord ? Ordo you dee;eive me, Ma· tilda? I know how Manfred doated on his fon: îs not the ftroke loo heavy for him? has he not funk under it? — You do not anfwer me — alas! I dread the worft! — raife me, my maidens; I will, ï will fee my JLord. Bear me to him inftantly : He is dearer to me even than my- children. Matilda made figns to Ifabella to prevent Hippolitďs rifing; and both thofe lovely young vvonien were uftng their gentle violence ro ftop and calm the Princefs, when a fervant, on the part of Alanfred, arrived and told Jfabella tiiat liis Lord demanded to fpeak. with her. With me! cried Jfabella. Go, faid Hippolita^ relieved by a meffa£e from lier Len*d : Alanfred cannot fupport tlie fight of his own family. lie thinks you lefs difordered than we are, and dreads the fhock of my grief. Confole him, dear Jfabella,
ï - und teU him Ι ΛνίΠ fmothev my own anguifh ra- ther lhan add to his. As il was now evening, the fervant, who con. dueled Jjabella, bore a torch before her. When they came to Man/red, who was walking impa* tiently about the gallery , he ftarted» and faid ha¬ ftily, Take away thar light, and begone. Then fhuiting the door impetuoufly, he flung himfelf upon a bench againft the w r all» and bad /fabella fit by him. She obeyed trembling. 1 fent for you, Lady, faid he, *— and then flopped under great appearance of confufion. My Lord! — Yes, I fent ftir yon em a matter of great moment, refumed he, — dry your te.us, young Lady — you have loft your bridegroom. — Yes, cruel fate! and I luve loft the hopes of my race! but Conrad was not worthy of yem e beauty — How! my Lord» faid Jfabella; fuie y'.m d t noi fufpect mo of not feeling the concern 1 ought: My duty and aflection would have always — Think no more of him, interrupted Alanfred; he was a fir kly puny child, and heaven lias puhaps taken iıinı away, that I might not. truft die honours of my houfe on fo frail a foundation. The line of Alanjred calk for nume- raui fupports. My f-mhfh iondnek for that boy blinded the eyes of my prudence —but it is better as it i?. 3 hope» in а few year«;, to hive reafon to ic juice at the death of Conrad.
*3 Words cannot pdiit the aftonifhment of /fa¬ lcila. Al firft fiie apprehended that grief had difor¬ dered Alar if r ed 's underftanding. Her next thought fuggefted tliat this ftrange difeourfe was designed to enfilare her: She fuo'ed tliat Alatfred had per¬ ceived her indifference for Ids ion: And in confe¬ rence of tliat idea flie replied, Good my Lend, do not doubt my tendernefs: My heart would have ac¬ companied my hand. Со/'гос/ луоик! have en g roiled all my r care; and wherever fate fhall difpofe of me I (hall always cherifh his memory, and regard your JHighnefs and the virtuous Hippolita as my parents. Curfe on Hippolita! ciied Afanfred: Forget her fiom this umment as 1 do. In thort, Lady, you have milled a hufband undtferv ing of your charms: They filali now be better dilpofed of. Inftead of a fickly boy, you l'hall luve α hufband iu die pri¬ me of his age, лл ho will know how to value your beauties, And who may expect а шииегоия offspring. Alas! my Lord, faid Ifabella, my mind is too fadly engroO'ed by die recent cataftiOphe iu your family to think of another marriage, Jf ever »iy father returns, and it fluii be his pleafure, I ihall obey, as I did when J confented to give my hand to your hm: Bui until Jus return, permit me to remain under your buípítable roof, and employ the melaut holy hours in aíhuging yours, Hippo· ¿«ť«**, and die fajr Af atildad ailÜctiou,
14 l defired you once before » laid Afanfred an¬ grily, not to name that woman: From this hour .flie rnuft he а ih anger to you, as f Jie muft be to ■me; — in fhort, Ifabella, lince I cannot give you my fon, I offer you myfelf. — Heavens! cried Ifabella^ waking from her delufton, what do I hear İ You ! my Lord ! You ! My Lidie r - in - law ! the father of Conrad! tlie hufband of the virtuous and tender Hippolita ! — I tell you, iaid Manfred imperioully, Hippolita is no longer my wife; 1 divorce her hum this hour. Too long has fhe curfed me by her un t rui tf ulu t Is. My fate depends on Jiaving fons, — and this night I truft will give si new date to ray hopes- At thofe words he feixed the cold hand ot Ifabella, who was half-dead 1 with fright and honor. She fhrieked and ftarted from him. Manfred ride to purfue her» when the moon» which was now up and gleamed in at rhe oppo¬ fite cafemeut, prefemed to his light du' plumes of .rhe fatal helmet, w iodi role to tht height of tho windows, waving backwards and forwards in a tempeftuous mamur, .md accompanied vvith а hol¬ low and ruftling loiiiid. /favella, who gathered com age from hu firiution, and who dreading no¬ thing fo much as Manjhd's purfuit oi İıis dedala- tion, cried, Look! my Lord; ke, heaven ilfelf declares againft umu impious intentions! — Hea¬ ven «or hell J hull impede my deften? , faid Alan*
лР
"5 fred y advancing again to feize the Princefs. At that inftant the portrait of his grandfather, which hung over the bench where they luid been fitting, uttered a deep figh , and heaved its brcali. Ij abe lia 9 whole back was turned to the picture, faw not ih<£ motion, nor knew whence the found came, but ftarted, and faid, Hark, my Lord! What found was that? and at the fame time made towards; the door, Alan/red, diftracred between the flight of Jjabella, who had now reached die ftairs, and yet unable to keep his eyes from the picture which began to move, bad however advanced fome fteps after Ju-r, itili looking backwards on th^ portrait, when he faw ii quit ils pannel, and defcend on the floor widi a grave and melancholy air. Do ï dream? cried Alanjred returning ; or are the devil« themfelves in league againft me? Speak, infunai ipectre! or, if thou art my grandftre, why doit thou too conlpire againft rhy wretched ddcendantjp wlio too dearly pays for — ere be could fmifh rhe fentence, the virion lighed again, and made л ihm to Alanfred to follow him. Lead on! cried Ahm· fted; I vvili follow thee to tiie gulph of perdition. The fpectre marclied fedately, but dejected, ro the end of tlie gallery, and turned into a chamber on the right-hand. Alanfred accompanied him al a little diftance, full of anxiety and İıorror, bui le- f tilved. A* Jie vvfuid liave entered the chamber*
I'J the «mov wa* cb.p¿M λ ro with \n ìence by an invi¬ iible hand. The Ptincr , ttdhttinj: toiira^f* from this tb lay , Yioi.ll Jiave foiLihiv bmft ojn n iho door with Ϊ.· 1^-ϊ, ;>ut found that it i· ft ite d io* utiutdl tfte-il-. Stu, b.Uwiü uot fatisív nn cu, î ioli; v, fait! . r .^t¡/ed, í will nf. fat bailan unan* ia n.y pow< ι iui pidenin^ my iace; /jabtlla lhAl not * ft ape me. Tini ^ά\ , whofe refolution liad given way to t< iroi' the moment ihe Jnid quitted Manfred* continued hci Higbr to tbe bottom t f the pûncîpal tia irca te. There íhe hoppia, no«, snowing \\1ιί- ther to direct he- ť fups, nor how to tfc.-tpe fn»m the impetuofity of the Piinee. Tii gatt v of tha Caftle fhe knew weie locked» and guaicb placed in the court. Should lise, as her heart piompted hei> go and prepare //Ippolita foi tiie eniel deíliny thaC awaited lier; ihe did not doubt but Manfred would feek lier there, and that his violence would incito Jlim to double til» mjmy he meditated, without leaving room for them to avoid tho impuuofity of his pallions. D» lay mİ^ht give hım time to reflect on the honid meaimvs he had conceived, or pro¬ duce lome cireımut ¡uç in her fa\uur, if flie could for that night at leait avoid his odious purpofe. *— Yet v> lu rt cone* al li лсН! how av oni tlie purfuit íhc w< aid infallibly make tiuougiıoui die calile! As thefe thoughts pafft d rapidly tiuough liti juin d, ilie
17 (he rei dk eted a fubteii aneoii5 paffage which led from ıhe vaults of the calile to die church of St. Ah.7i<-'u'. Guild fiie reach die akar befele flie was oveitakui, Hie knew even Alanjrtďi violent» •Would nut tiare to podane die lacredm f» of títe place; and íhe determined, if no otitei means of ddiverattte offuul, to timi İuıftif up for e\ f er among tlie holy virgins» whofe convent was con¬ tiguous 10 the cathedral. Iu this rtfolution» fhe icizetl a lamp that burned at tiie foot of the iiair* cafe» and hurried towards the fecret paííàge. Tiıe İt * wei part of the caftle was hollowed into feveral intricate cloy fters; and it was not eafy for one under fo much anxiety to find the door that opened into the cavcın. An awful fdencc reigned throughout thofe fubterraneous regions, except now and then fume hlaib of wind that ihook the doors fhe Jiad paffed, and wiiich gra* lingon the rufty hinges, were reechoed through that long labyrinth of darknefs. Every murmur .truck her with new terror; — yet more fhe drea¬ ded to hear the wrathful voice of Alanjred urging his domeftics to purfue her. She irod as foftly as impatience would give her leave, — yet frequent¬ ly ftopped and liftened to hear if fhe was followed. In one of thofe moments fhe thought fhe heard * figh. She ihuddered, and recoiled a few paces. In a -moment fhe thought fhe heard th· Hep of В
iS fome perfon. Hei blood curdled ; fhe concluded it was Vanfred. Eveiy fuggi ft ion tliat Ьоглп' tould infpire rufhed into inr mind. She condemn* d her raf h flight, which had thus expo led her to his rage in a place where her aits were not Ük* ly to draw any body to her aflìifauce. — Y u die tomul feemed not to come from lieh ind — it Alan/ Ί ed kut-w where fhe was, he muft have followed he t : She was ftill in one of the doyfiers, and the fteps fhe iiad heard were mo diftinct to proc ι ed from the way fhe had come. Chea red with this rc- fiectipn» and hoping to find a friend in whoever was not lhe Prince; ('lie was going to advance, wlien а door that ftood a-jar» at fome dittante to the lefl» was opened gently: But ere Jnr lamp, which file held up» could difcover w hei opened it» tlie perfon retreated precipitately on feeing the light. Ifab tila, whom every incident was fufficient to díímay, hefitated whether fhe fiiould proceed. Her dread of Manfred 'foon outweighed every- other leiror, The very circumftance of the perfon avoi¬ ding her» gave her a fort of courage. It could only be, fhe thought » fome domeftic belonging to the caille. Her gentlenefs liad never raifed her an enemy, and confcious innocence made her hope tliat, unlefs feut by the Prince's order to feek her, ius few Aids would ratlier «iflift than prevent hei*
*0
flight. Fortifying liei felf with thefe reflection«, and ht lit л ina by what íhe could obferve» that fhe was inai dn* mouth of tin: tnbterraneims cavern, Hır appruadud the door ıhar had been opened; but а huidui guft of wind that nut her at tlie door, exfinguiflt» d her lamp, and left her iu total dai km k. Words cannot paint the horror of the PrinctlVs fituation. Alone in fo diimal a place» lnr mind impiinted with all the terrible events of the day, hopelek of draping, expecting every moment the arrival of Manfred, ami far from tiaiupdl on knowing fhe was within reach of feunebody» fhe liiitw not whom» who fur fome cauft* feemed con¬ cealed thtrcabouts; all thefe diougJits crouded on her diíiracted mind, and f Jie· was ready to ftnk linder her appi ehenfions. ŐJie addrefted lierit If io every Saint in heaven, and inwardly implored their aft ifta net*. For a remiid érable time lhe remai¬ ned in an agony of defpair. At laft, as foftly as Was pofti hie» file felt for die door, and it a ving found it, entered trembling into the vault from whence fhe had heard the ii^h and fteps. It gave her.a kind of momentary joy to perceive an im¬ perfect ray of clouded moonfhine gleam from tht? roof of the vauh, width feemed to be fallen in» and from whence hung a fragment of earth or buil¬ ding, fhe could not diftinguifli wliich, dut Β α
so Appeared to have been crufhed inwards. Slit ad¬ vanced eagerly towards this chafin, wiien fhe difcerned a human fonn ftanding clofe againft: the wall. She fhrieked, belkwing it the ghoft of her betrothed Conrad. The figure advancing, faid in a fııbmiİhve voice: Be not alarmed, Lady ; I will not injure you. Jfabella, a little encouraged by tlic words and tone of voice of tlie ftranger, and recollecting that this muft be the perfon wlio had opened tiie door, recovered her fpirits enongli to reply r , Si/, whoever you are, take pity on a wretched Princefs» ftanding on the brink of de- itruction : A/Eft me to efcape from this fatal caftle, or in few moments J may be made miferable for ever. Alas! faid tlie ftranger» wliat can I do to afliltyou? J will die in your defence; but Ι лил unacquainted with the caftle, and want. — Old faid Ifabella , haftily interrupting him» help me but to find a trapdoor that muit be hereabout, and it is the greateft fervice you can do me, for I have uot a minute to lofe. Saying thefe words, flie felt about on the pavement, and directed tlie Uran¬ ger to fearch likewife for a fmooth piece of brafs inclofed in one of the ftones, TJiat, faid fhe, is the lock, which opens with a fpri"g » of Avhich ï know the fecret. If we can find that, I may «efcape — if not» alas! courteouí Ärangcr, ï fear,
21
I fhall have involved you in my -misfortune»; Manfred will fufpect you for tlie accomplice of my ßight, and you will fall а victim to liis refent- nient. I value not my life, faid the Uranger, and it will be fome comfoit f » lofe it» in trying to deliver you from his tyranny. Generous youth, faid Jfabella y how fliall I ever requite — as fhe uttered thofe words, a ray of moonfìiine ßreaming through a cranny of the ruin above fhone directly on the lock tliey fought. — Oli! tranfport! faid Jfabella, here is the trap-door! and taking out the key» flie touched the fpring, which itarting afide, difcovered an iron ring. Lift up the door, faid the Princefs. The ftranger obeyed; and beneath appeared fome ftone ftep*s defcending into a vauit totally dark. We muft go down here, faid J[fa- bella: Follow me; dark and difiual as it is, wo cannot mifs our way; it leads directly to th© church of St. Nicholas — hut perhaps» added the Princefs modeftry, you Jiave no reafon to leave th« caftle, nor have ï farther occafion for your fervice; in a few minutes I fhall be fafe from Afanfred** vase — onlv let me know to whom I am fo much obliged. I will never quit you, faid the ftranger eagerly, until 1 Jiave placed you in fafety — nor think me, Princefs, more generous than 1 am; though you are my principal care — die ftranger was interrupted by a fudden noife of voices tliat В 5
aa feemed approaching, and they foon diftinguifhed thefe words: Talk not to me ol necromancers; 1 tell you fhe muft be in the caftle; 1 will find her in fpite of enchantment. — Oh! heavens, ciîed Ifabella, it is ihe voice of Manfred! make halb; or Vu are ruined! ami fhut the trapdoor aker yon. Saying this, fhe defcuitkd die fteps precipitately . and as the ftranger haftened to follow her, he let the door flip out of Jiis hands: ii ft 11, and the fpring clofed overit. He tried in vain to open it, not J laving obferved Ifabella's method of touching the fpring; noi had he many moments to make an effay. The noife of the falling door had been heard by Manfred, who directed by the found, haftened thither» attended by Jiis fervants with torches. It muft he /jabella; cried Alanfred before be entered die vault ; fhe is efcaping by the fub¬ terraneous paflage , bm fhe cannot have got far. — Wiiat was die afton i Πι ment of the Prince, when, inikad of Jfabella, the light of tlie torches difco¬ vered to him the y oung peafant, whom he thought confined under the fatal helmet! Traitor.' faid Alan- fred, Jiow camcft ihou here? I thought thee in durance above in the court. I am no traitor, re¬ ylied the young man boldly, nor am I anfwerabie for your thoughts. Prefumptuous villain! cried Manjied, doft thou provoke my wrath? tell me; bow hait thou efcaped frwa above ? tiiou haft с«лч
ťtipted thy guards» anıl their lives ihall anfwer it· My poverty, faid the peafant calmly, Λνίΐΐ difcuL pan; tiicm: Tiiemgh die rninifters of a tyranOí wrath, to thve they are laithful, and but too wil- ling to execute the orders which you tmjuftly impofed upon them. Art thou fo hard y as to darò my vengeance? faid the Prince — but tonnes fhall force the trutJi from tliee. Tell me, 1 will know thy accomplices. There wus my accomplice! faid the youth fmiling, and pointing to the roof» Alanfred ordered the torches to be held up, and perceived that one of the cheeks of die enchanted с α ft] u e Jiad forced its way 1 1 iron gii the pavement of die court, as his fervants bad Jet it fall over the peafant, and had broken tiuough into the vault» leaving a gap through which die peafant had pref¬ fed himfelf fomc minutes before he w*as found by Jfabella. Was that the ллму by which thou didft: defcend? faid Afanfred. Jt was; faid the youth. Eut wliat noife wus dial, faid Alanjred, which t heard as I entered the cloy fter? A door clapped : laid the peafant ; J heard il as well as yon. What door? faid Alanjred haftily. I am not acquainted wiih your caftle» faid the peafant; this is the firft time I ever entered it; and this vault the only part (tf it within which I ever лл*ач. Ibu I tell thee, f.dd Manfred (wifhing ю find out if the youth Jiad difcovered the trap-door) it was t Jiis В 4
54 way I heard tbe noife : My fervanu heard it too — My Lord» interrupted one of tbem officicitfly, to be fure it was the trap-door, and he was going to make liis efcape. Peace! blockhead» faid the Prince angrily; if he was going to efcape, how Ihould he come on this fide? I will know from his own mo tuh wdiat noife it was I heard. Tell me truly; tiiy life depends on thy veracity. My veracity is dearer to me than my life ; faid the peafant*, nor would I purcjiafe the one by forfei¬ ting the other. Indeed! young philofopher! faid Manfred contemptuonfly ; tell me then » what was the noife I heard ? Afk me what I can anfwer, faid lie, and put me to death inftantly if I tell you a lie. Alanfrtd growing impatient at the fteady valour and indifference of die youth, cried : Well then, thou man of truth! anfwer was il the fall of the trap-door that I heard? It was; faid the youth. It was! faid the Prince; and how didft thou come to kuow there was a trap-door here? I faw the plate of brak by a gleam of moonfhine; replied he. But what told thee it was a lock? faid Manfred; How didft thou difcover the fecret of opening it? Providence, that delivered me from the helmet, was able to direct me to the fpring of a lock ; faid he. Provideuce fhould liave gone a little farther, and have placed thee out ofthe reach of my refentment, faid Manfredi When Provi-
*5 ¿ence had taught thee to open the lock, it aban¬ doned thee for a fool» who did not know how to wake ufe of its favours. WJiy didft thou not pur¬ fue the path pointed out for thy efcape? Why didft thou f Imt the trap-door hefore thou hadft defcended tlie ftepà? I might afk you» my Lord, faid the peafant, Jiow I, totally unacquainted with your caftle, was to know that thofe iteps led to any outlet? but I fcorn to evade your qiiefiioiis. Wherever thofe fteps lead to, perhaps I ihould have explored the way — I could not t e in а worfe iituation than I war. But tíie trn. h is, I let th« trap-dotji* fall: Your immediate arrival followed. 1 had given the ahmi — what impor* ted it to me whether I was feized а minute foouei or а minute later? Thou art a refolute vd lain fot thy years; faid Manfred — \et on reflection İ fufpect thou doft faut trifle with mc: Thot haft not yet told me how thou didft open the lock. That I wiU fhow you, my Lord; faid the peafant; and taking up a fragment of none that liad fallen from above, he laid himfelf on the trap-door» and be* gau to beat on the piece oí hrafs that covered it; meaning to gain time for the efcape of the Ihinctfs. This prefence of mind, joined to tho frankuefs of the youth» ftaggered Manfred. He even felt a difpofuion towards pardoning one wlio had been guilty of no crime. Manfred was uot one of thoíe В 5
аб fnv.ige tyrants who vyauton in cruelty unprovoked. The circumftances of his fortune hue) «iven an <y afperiiy to liis temper, which was naturally hu¬ mane; and his virtues were always ready to ope- late, when his paibons did not obfcure Jiis reafon. While the Prince was in ibis fufpcuíe, a con¬ fufed noife of voices echoed through the diftant Vaults. As the found approached, he diftinguifhed the clamours of fome of his domeftics, whom he bad difperfed through the caftle in fearch of /fa· bella, calling out, Where is my Lord? where is tiie Prince? Here I am; faid Manfred, as they came nearer; have von found the Princefs? the firft that arrived, replied, Oh! my- Lord! I am glad we bave found you — Found me! faid Manfred '; Jiave \óu found die Primcfs? We thought we had, my Lord, faid the fellow, looking terrified — but — but, what? cried die Prince; has file oicaped? — Jaquvz and I, my Lord — yes, 1 and Diego, in¬ terrupted tho* fecond, wiio carne up in ftill greater cunliernation — fpeak one of you at а time, faid Manfred; I afk yon w here is the princefs? We do not know; faid ihey both together; but wc are frightened out of our wits — fo I think, block¬ heads, faid Manfred; what is it lias feared you thus? — Oh! my Lord, faid Jaquez , Diego has feen fucli a fight ! your Iïiglmefs would not be¬ lieve our eyes — what new abfurdity is this! cried
27 Manfred — give me a dimi anfwer, or, by hea¬ ven —■ whv , my Lord, if il pleafe your Highuefs lo hear me, faid the poor fdhjvv; Uogo and I — yts, 1 лш\ Jaquez, ci ied his comrade — did not í lordici von to ľp« ak buih at a time? faid ilio Pihicu: Уои, Jaquez, aiifvyu; for dm other foot leems moie diftr.teltd dum ihou art; what is ihe matter? My gracious Lord, laid Jaque), İf İt pleafe yom* liighnek to hear me; Diego and Í, ac¬ cording to your Highntk's orders, went io leardi for the young Lady ; hut being comprdtenhve thai we might meet the ghoft of my ymmg Lord, youi _Uighnch\s fon, God reft Ids foul, as Jie lias not received chriftian' butid — lot! cried Manfred in а ra«*» e, is ir only а ghoft thuı tiiat thou fiait ft t n ì ohi worfe! worfe! my Loni, uied Нг\ с .о : J ΙιλΛ ralht-r have feen tru wiiole ¿Jmíis — grun me pa¬ tience! laid Alar jred; thd'c blockhiv.ds iliftract me — out of my tight, Dtego! and them Jaquez, tuli me iu one Λνοπΐ » art tliou fober? art thou raving? thou wait wont to have Lome feule; has the other foi fri^liLened himfdf and dice tool fpeak; what is it lie fancies he has feen? W hy, -my Lord, replied Jaquez trembling, 1 was gtung; to ttll your Higbnefs, that ftnce the tuhunhuus misfomme of my r young Loid, God reii hk pre¬ cious loul! not one ol' us ytiur lliglnicfiAs faithful fervami* , indeed wc are, my Lord» though j»"or
25 men; Τ fay, not onr·. of us has dared to fet a foot abemt the caftle, but two together: So Diego and 1, thinking that my young Lady might be in the great gallery ; went up there to looli for her» and tell her your Higimefs wanted fomething to impart to her— О blundering fools! cried Alanfred: Anã in die mean time fhe has made her efcape» becaufe you were afraid of goblins! — Why, thou knave! fhe left me in the gallery; X came from thence myfelf. For all that, fhe may be there ftill for ought I know» faid Jaquez ; but the devil fhalt have me before I feek her there again — poor Diego.' I do not believe he will ever recover it! recover what ? faid Alanfred ι am I пел т ег to learn what ÍL is 1\л$ terrified thefe rafeáis? — but I lofe my time; follow me flave ţ 1 will fee if fhe is in the gallery ——« for heavens\s fak*?, my dear good Lord» cried Jaquez, do not ¡*o to the galle. y ! Satan himfelf I believe U in the chamber next to the gallery------ Alanfred, who hitherto had trea¬ ted the terror of his f-rvants as an id.hj panic, was ftruck at this new circumftance. He recollected the apparition of the portrait, and the fudden clo¬ fing of the door at the end of the gallery — his voice faltered, and he afked wilh diforder, what is in the great chamber? my Lord» faid Jaquez, when Diego and 1 came imo ılıe gallery, he went firft, for he faid he had more courage than к So
cc when we came into the gallery, we found nobody. We looked under every bendi and ftool; and ftill wc found nobody —were all the pictures in their places? Ldd Manfred. Yes, my Lord, anfwered Jaquez ; hut we did not think of looking behind tbem-wt 11, well! faid Alanjred, proceed. When we came î о die door of tlie great chamber, conti¬ nued Jaquez, we found it fhut — «aid could not you open it? faid Manfred. Oh! yes, my Lord; would tt» heaven we had not! replied he «— nay, it was nor I neither, it was Diego: lie was grown fool-hardy, and would go on, though I advifed him not — if ever 1 open а door tliat is flint again — trifle not, faid Alanfred fiiuddering, but tell me wdiat you faw in die great chamber on opening tlie door — 1! my Lord! faid Jaquez, 1 faw nothing; 1 was behind Diego; — but 1 heard the noife ——- Jaquez, faíd Alanfred in a folemn tone of voice ; tell me, I adjure thee by/ tlie fouls of my anceftors, what was it thou fawed? wbat wasit thou h ear- deft? It was Diego faw it, my Lord, it was not I? replied Jaquez; I only iieard the noife. Diego had no fooner opened the door, than he cried out, and ran back — 1 ran back too» and faid» is it die ghoft? the ghoft! nono, faidlhVgø, and his hair itood an end — it is a giant 1 believe; he is all clad in armour, for I faw his foot and part of hie leg, and tliey лге as large as the helmet below in
3° the court. As lie faid thefe words, my Lord, we heard a violent motion and the raiding of armour, as if tho giant was ηίοιμ , Lu Diego has told mo lìnee, that he beheve ч tin giani was king down, lor die foot and it g wue Jii etched at length on tJm floor. Ikfore we cuuitl ger to tin vneì of thü •gai krv , we braid the duor of tin goat cliamber clap lu-himl us, but луе dul nol dare imn back to fee if the giant was following us« — yet, now X tJdnk on it, we muli have iu'.od him if he had purined us —— but for iieavuľs hike, good my Lotd, ft nd for the thapiain, and have the caftle ехо rciied, for, for temin, it is enchanted. Ay, prav do, my Loul, cri. d all ıhe kıvanış at once, οι we muft leave your IliglmttsH fei ν İt e — peace! doi.iiik; faid Manfred, and follow me; 1 will "know what all ifds means. VVe! my Lend! tried they лч ith one vence, vve would not ^o up iodic galhiyldr your Highntk's revenue. The у тш» peaLmt, who had flood filent, now fpoke. Will youi Higimefs, Lud he, permit me to try tid** ad¬ venture? my lih* is of tonic quence to nobody : I fear no bad angel, and have offended no good one. Your behaviour is above youi feeming; faid Manfted, viewing hím wiih fmpiife and admira¬ tion ------ hi-rtMttt-i 1 wdl ι -ward your bravery-*-* but now, contituu-d he with a ftgh , 1 am fo cir- cımUianctfd , ihat I dare truft no eyes but
З 1 my own — however, 1 give y*ou leave to ac* company me, Ala/ ¡fred, when lie flrft followed Ifabella Îr от the galluv » Jiad gone dhtuiy to the apartment; of Jiis wife, concluding the Pdncefs inul retired thhhu. Iltppolitay who knew Jiis* ftep , re íe w í tii anxious íonihiek to meet Ju r Lord , whom lhe lud m »t hen ítne с tiıe diadi of their fun. ¿du; would hav с flown in а tranfport mixed of joy ami gdcf tohhbuium, but he pfifhed htr iitebly off, ami faid, Wlufvhlfabiila? Ι/αΉ//αΐ my Loni! faid lhe afiuııilh'd llippolita. \u; If abeila ; éried Alatfred imperioufJy ; I want Ijabella. My Lend, replied Alatilda, who peseeived how much hi**; behaviour had fhocked lier molliti , fhe has not been with us ftnce your llighuds fummoned her to л onr apaiimeiit. Tell me w litre fhe is; faid (he Princi ; I do imt want iu know where fhe Juv been. My good Lord, Ltys Hippolita, your daughtu nils you the trulli: Jjabella left us by your command, and has not returned ííiicl ; *— bui, mv good Leutì, eompofť y ondeli: Kuilt* tO your reft; 'Phis diimal dav has difordered yon. Jfabella fhail wait youi orders iu ihe morning» Whar thvn, yon kuovv where fhe is! cited Man¬ fred: Tell me directly j İor I will not Jok an in¬ ftant — and vou, woman, fpeaking to Ids wile, tuder у our chaplain to attend ще for.irvvi.k. У /α-
Sì hella, faid Hippolita calmly, i« retired, I fup» pofe, to her chambe-i : She is not accuftomed to watch at tïïis late liour. Gracious my Lord, con¬ tinued fhe» let me know what has difturbed you. Has Ifabella offended you ? Trouble me not with icmeftions, faid Alan/red, but tell me where fhe is. Alatilda ihall call her» faid the Pnncefs — Sit down, my Lord, ami refume your wonted forti* tude. — WJiat, art thou jealous of /fabella, re¬ plied he, that you wifh to be prefent at our intei- view? Good heavens! my Lord, faid /Hppolita, wliat is it your Higbnefs means? Thou wilt know ere many r minutes are paffed; faid tlie cruel Prince. Send your chaplain to me, and wait my pleafure Itere. At thefe words he flung out ofthe room in fearch of Jfabella: leaving die amazed Ladies thunder-ftruck with hk words and fraune depoií- ment, and loft in vain conjectures on what he was meditating. Afanfred was ne>v returning from the vault, attended by the peafant and a few of his fei vani« whom lie had obliged to accompany him. lit afcended the flair-cafe without hopping till he arrived at the gallery, at the door of which he met Hippolita and her chaplain. When Diego lud been difmiffed by Afanfred, he liad gone directly to the PrincefA apartment widi the alarm of what be had feen. That excellent Lady, who no mor* than
33 th.rn Alanfred doubu-d of the reality oí rhe vihon, t er affected lo ire -u n as a th imuni oí lhe hrvam. Willing, howevti» u» fave iur Loid iiom anv athlidonal íiiock, and pict.uid |jy u lu n s ol gud not itt ц -çïiuble at anv αι n ilion to it; l», e th termi¬ ni d ut make he-iblf ihe firft iacrihie, if fee h td marked tbe preknt iiour fur the ir deh tuet h uu Di--- rniiltng lhe rdiiciani Alattlda io lier left, win» iu vain hu d for kav e to aciompany lier mother, ΛίηΙ attended only by hu* chaplain » Hippolra Lad viii- ted die gallt ry and greni chamber; л\\е\ now vv irli umie krenity ol' Lud dum ihc· Jiad hit for mam, hours, liie met her Lord, and aftured him thai the vihon of die gij» aulic kg anei fotti w .e* ail л fablı ; ;\\\e\ no doubt лп impeditoti math.· by hat» and the dark and difmai horn of tJie night , on tin* minds of ins hrumi**, ohe лш[ the thaphdn lud examined thv chamber, and found evuy thing iu lhe ulııal ordi r. Alaton d, th uti gh peifuatkd, like Jii 1 * wife, t luu the vihon had been no woik of fancy, i*Ľ<ovued и little from the tempeft oí' mind into which fo many ftrange events had thrown him. Athanud loo cd 4 his inhuman tuatnunt ot a Prímek, who iet u rued every injury wilii new nurks ed tunkt- ι\νί\ and duty ; be fdt ictutuing love toieiıu: hhlf iuti) his eves — but imi ìds afhamed oi fuling lemolie towardj one agaiult wJiom » he wa¿ iu- C
?1 ward! у meditating a yet mme lutter on t rag« ; h* einlud the yearnings of his in,art, and did iu " daì j lo ìf\nì even towards pit). The ne\t trauh- n*'ii of fhs Juul was to evjiiifiie villainy. Prefu- inina <'ti the uuthaktti iubmiJhou ot J/tppo/tra, lm ílaíided hìmlelf that fhe would ma only aupaieh« vMfb patience to a tlivtnte, i>ut w*mld obey, if it was hb plealure, in endeavoming to peiluade JJalnlla ю give Join bei band — but ere he ţ ould indulge hU horrid impo, he reflet ted that ¡fabtlla W.1MII1I tt> be lountb Coiium» to Ijimb if, he ^a л ti flitler^ that every avenue to the taille Ihould be íiriítJy gıtartîed , and e barged lus domeftic« ou pain fif their lives te» fufter nobody to ^кй'< mil. The \ 01ШЦ peabmt, tti whom he ipoke buoni d»İ\» he ord ι π ti lo remain in a İmali «bambei ou lite liaii-ì, ín w bicİı there wat. л pallet - bed, aud tb<j key of u hieb he took away himbli, tilling the \oufh he would talk with him in the morning. Then tlilmi/bng his attendant-., t ind beftow ¿пц л füllen kimi of halí -nod on ììippolil a , ht itímd n_> ids own chamber»
Ω li j J
m
CHAPTER II. j/yf** r r Ы) л , who by ffippolt'ttťs otib r iiatl j ţ ti¬ red to her apartment» was ili-diípohd о» take any left. TJie ihotkiug fife of lnr htoîher ίίΛ<\ deeply äfft eted her. Ыт was ftujui/ed at tna f eifig Jfabeila: But the İüaııge words νλΐιίιΐι h.ul fallcu from her fatht-r» aud \пь obfcure meiıaee to the Prim -i-U Iiis w ile» accompanied by the moli furious behaviour, iiatl ftlletl her i',cuile ıuimi wilh nuor and alarm. She wailed anxiouily io* she utanı oj' /Hanca, a young damfel that attendi d he-", whom fhe liad lent to leant w hat was ln come of /fabilla. Bianca loon apptaied, aml inloinu.d her Hiilin й of what íhe had galheivd trom the bi- \ vi i í t ч , that /Jabel/a was uo wiuie to br biniti. She related the ла\ t untie of th. у otm,; pi .ihiut, \v ho had been tbb ov t red lu the vault, tho' with manv limpie additions hum the imoheiem at¬ torniti ofthe tlomcftit ι ; and fhe dwtlltd pruni· pally on die gigantit leg and foot w hu h bad ht eu leen iu lhe galíeiN -chamber. i hb laft ttitum- İlam e had teiiííied Bianca Jo mm h» that lhe wa> lejoitcd wiunt Matilda io\A her tiiat fhe w-uld
Зб
no* go to vdt, but лл*оиЫ watch till the Princefs fhouhl ¡He. Thv voting Princefs weaded herfelf in con¬ jectures on the flight of /fabella, and on the tintais ot' Alar fn d lo her modier. Jiul what buftnefs could lie have io urgent wilh the chaplain? faid Alatilda. Does he intuid ίο have my brother's body in tei - ved priv af d ν in die chapel? Oh! Madam, laitl Bianca, now" 1 guds, As you are become Jiis iıeı- rrfs, he is impatient to have you married: He has always been raving for more fons; 1 warrant be is now impatient for graudious. As fuie as 1 live, .Madam, ï filali fee ytm а bride at laft — Good Madam, you won*'I call off your failhfid Bianca*. You won't put Donna Rofara over me, now vou are a great Princefs. My poor Bianca, faid Ala¬ tilda, bow fall your thoughts amble! I a great* Pjinctfs! Wdial haft thou (cen in Alanjreďs beha¬ viour fmce my brother's death that btfpcaks any increafe of tendernek to me? Ко, Bianca", his heart was ever а ftranger to me — but he is my Lihu , and 1 mult neu com- ' in. Nay , if hea¬ ven fhnb mv father's bean againft me, it over- pays my link* muit in the tendernefs of my mo¬ ther — О ihat dear molher! yes, Bianca, 'ds ihe-re 1 feel ihr rugged tempel' of Alanfred. 1 ели hippou ids lia rt h ucis to mc wiih patience; but it wounds my loid wht-n 1 ani wiuiefs to his cauk-
37 | e fs fe\-erity 'towards her. Oli! Madam, fod Bianca, all men ufe thtir wives h», when duy are weary of thun —- and vet von (ongutiuhued me but now, laid Alatilda, when you fanı it d uty fat heu* intended 10 dífpole of me. ï w «udd have •\on а great Ladv, íeplied Buona, tenete what will- 1 do not Λ\ίΠι η* lvv yon moped in a t ки¬ лии , a« yon would be if у tui İıad youi vvili, and if my Ladv , лечи* mother, who knows tiiat a bad hufbaud k bi Ut r than no hufband a all, tini imt bindel лой — bb k me! wliat muh ι thai! Si. ŕltcholas forgive me! I was but in jut. Ji k the wind, faid Man, fla. лл hìhhng through the baulc- muifs ín tlie tower above: ^ ou havı lu-.od it а thouland times. Nav, f.dd Biam a , ilute Λν,^ по iıaım n< idle r in what I İ ud : it k no fin ť» laiii of matdmony — ami ί Ό , Abulam, а** I was faving; if uw koid Alar j r ed fhouhl oii u* v mı a bandíonie voung Printe loi* a hi id» groom, л*ш wi uld di p him а curl lv , aml uh him v tm vvould ι at lu ι take lhe veil. Thank heaven! ï am in no lm h dinger, Udd Alattlda'. You kuow Juuv manv putpokk for me he has rejuted —* and uo i hauk lont, like а eludiu 1 daughter, do von, Madam?—* bui come, M.uhuu; fuppofe, io - mot row morning be wis jo ft ml for у un io the great, count il t lumin ι , and there y on fhould hud at liis dbovv a lovelv vömig Prince, wiih large black oo, а fiuoolh white С ι
3* forehead, aud mani v curi ι ug locks like jet; jit fiioit, Madam, α young Huo relembloig die picture of tiie good Aljonfo in thv gallery» Λνΐιΰΐι y oil fit мп\ ga/e at ior hours tugefhci — do not ipeak iighiiy oí' dial pie iure, interrupted Matilda fighing: I know the adóiadon with wliich 1 look al that pici tire is iimunmmn — but J am not in ïnvt wilh a e edemi ed panned, 'file chai.u ter of thai v muons Prince, the venerauon Λνίιίι л^lıich my moi ht r lus infpired me tor iiis memoiy , ilie oii fon s vvîıi* h 1 know nol why fhe has enjoint d ine to poni f unii nt bis tond), all hav ι concili i c-d It) peiíu, ulepme f hat fome İıovv or odien niy ıh fi i uy is ii n keti wddi ft »mel İı İng relating (о him — Lend! Madam, how ihouhl tí it beu' (aid Utanca: i Iíakô jdwav s heard dial \<нп family was no way ıdateıİ to he«: And 1 am fine 1 cannot conceive whv my r L-ady , die Princtk, femk y cm in а cold minning í '* а damp ι ли ning to рыл at Jiis tomb : He is uf) Saint by the Almanın.*. íf vou nidi ρ ra л » why does tiu not bid you ad hek yourfelf to our gieat St. N' cuoiai? \ am fun 1 he is the Saint i piay to foi а hul hand. Perhaps mv mind would be it fs aftVrted, iaid Alatilda, if my mollici would us- piahi Iu ι teaf tms to me: Jhit il is the myfieiy ifm ohiu ves, th.it inípíres im* with this ■— 1 kimvv nol what to , all it. As ihc* m ver aus from ι,ι- piiee, I am ture there is fouie f.ťtal let ret at Imt*
30 freni — пят» i know t liei e is: In bel ,V"ìu ■-! iit if í foi u» y bi t Л lu ds death lhe dm^^t] law woi ds that Jniimaied a^ much — tdi ί ό· π TVI «» - dam» trud Utanca, What were ibey ? No; lud Madida, if a jian ut his bdl л word, aml wíilns it iet aJled, ii i·* nol Itu a e hihi to ulu t il. W Ini í Tras- íhe bn ry foi wint í he had lait!? aílo d Utunca. — I am ture, iMadam , ytni iiì.in t j nit im* — vuth »n owti little igenis, wíun I bast 1 ил % , f mav; fani Matilda ; bul neyi i with tn\ modni"·-: Abbild oughı to basenti tais οι eses, but as a pai t ni di- l'tls. \Λ(1Ιί tobe bm , Alada m» von wav коп to be a buut, Lod Juanea, aml Unit j. nn odiihug om S s r ot aluni * Vou will emi in a t ощ * m at lih, Hut ibne iş mv Lad\ //t Л -//a wo'dd not ht lo ifi M ľ ed it» me: She will b ι un laik io Iní td л 'ioj;, men; and when α haiidhum t atalt» i bas ι otite n» lhe < aftlc, íhe has ow iu d o· m*· ihat Пи* л\ ıthttİ yotti biodiei Conrad n*f un, b tl hom /ìfanca, faid the Piimi k, | do not alb-w лой to im ul ion m\ flitini tìihi İpi t ıtuiU. Ifd^lla ı> of a dn aıful tlİlpttlition , bul b. ι bed i·, pun α- vo¬ lne í (fc If. Hie know s \ oui i ill t* baldın.», Ьмию ( ц, and pethaps has now aml then em ooi no d il, i»* div* it melam h»d\, ,\t\ã uniısdi de í lii ide o« w hu b tin fat hu k» »p- its — Hb (led Mmy' bini /Itatna harting, íht rt if i> ацаш! — »b n'Mnbm, Do you hc4i' nothing? «— dos t \[\\i j» ottaitih
40 haunted! — реясе!' faid Alatilda, and hiten! î did tliiuk I heaid a voice — but ÌL nudi be fuicy ; лош* tenors, 1 fuppofe, have infera» d me. lu¬ det d ! imked ! Madam , faid Bianca, liait - weeping* with agony, 1 am fuie I heatd л vence. Does any body lie in the dumb- r heueaih ? laui die Pdn- cek. nobody has dared to lie der-, anlweľed Fiaii a, hnev the great afiiologcr that vv as vuo* brother's tuior» thow ned Iiimh If. For 11 наш, ЛЬикт, Jo * giudi anti llie vomij. Prim t's ,ικ. тлт met İti du dnıiubu* below - foi he αν cifi, lakelet u* íl v to your modn r\> aparfm- ia ! f chaig' v oti not tt» hu; f id Mattida. H ílu v ли. Ipıdu iu p.iiu, v.« mav » л\'г diur ŕuifu*H*_-.s hv eptuooning r h un. Tiu ν ι an nu au по huit tu us , ίοι vu hu e n "t i njun d í hun — and d t\n \ í hot dd , fhall vv о be more fafe in one thamltci dian in anodu-i ? Peach me my btads; we vu U lav ajuavu, dnd linn Ipi.tk to tin m. Oh! dun Ladv, 1 u udd nul fp t ak lo а ;dioí( bu the wühl; eind Л,\. in a — as fhe fail thofi werk, tiny hi ani ¡In- taic- •nunl ol du Hule (handur bdcvv Vnt'tlda's »-puu 1 he v Hitene. 1 .ul« uliv t lv , and in hw minute«; du nu fu tii v ht aid a pu f« »n h ο ¡ι, bui с« »uhi not d dt í n .i to í h the w ords, 'f hu eau be m* e\ il í¡ mt; laid the ľrimeísiu α low veio ; li ív indouìm diy ont oí tlie lan, dy — ep n ílu* window, Mid wo filali ku-'VV tlie л oi c í . ! *Ιλι<: 11 oi hukt d , ľd.iiiani ;
41 faid Bianca. Thou art a very fool; faid Alatilda f opening tiie wdneiowgusliy iit i it if. 'Mie noire tin Pi utu к made w «s how t v u iu ai d by tht pu¬ ltin bunadı, wboífojv*.!; лп\ tht) tondu 1 d fiad íieaiddu eaítiHM'f op n. Is ,'uy body Ь ! »w? faid tin· Рит*!»: li lb» n ı>, fpıak. ^ t s ; (ani ut nnknonn voi,,·. Win» i t n.' laid AI .tilda r -V líian^u'; jt.plicd íiie v« 'и ¡ . Wha: Ιίΐαη,,ι » í hud. iin ; ,iud Jiow didit dnu с »пи diere at d. t. nul¬ luni hour, vviiMi dll ílu- gaies id íhe (,ιί i- .mt loi kt d.' I nm uut h< îl '.ulkn^ly ; udvvıu u* voíti — but paidou me, Lad ^ , ii I Ιιλ\^- tiiiíe:- bed лот t İt: I kıiMv ıu»t tin.t 1 vv a«· ov» do ,n h Sleep iı. tt! lot laken me*: lì á <ı ľ* likk fondi, л\ 1 ι ame ίο w .die tiu ккЬши bonis w lib ga?'n_, ou lhe iaii .ıppioadı »»í moiiùiìg, impatu ut to İye tii i — m ifi t tl it от tin*) са t ík. 'í hy w οι ds and а* í t nt«;, laid Alat /hla, ai. td α nn laududv call: if ih >n ait unhap] ν , í piiy dut. h povuty atìhffs î.ı\. iu un know li : I Will uu ,ιί mu liite lo lhe i'un- с« К , w hot bt ni fi t m foul u. u melts loi tiu tit- íľffh'd; and £ Ji* will it luv* íhet. I am unh · <1 nidtappv , Lud the h.'tgii, audi know not w L.n v> ι al ii¡ ι··, l', u i do not < ou planı ol ıhı lot w hu U Lí.'ivil iı.:*- * aii ou un · ì . '.ì vo;.n„, aud in alih*, u. d .-m u . U » о« », d of t. vv ii_ ту i, i p pol I ίο l' v - 1 U — y* i u ч n e not pi и-. \ y i u ìli. .t 1 i\l'u\ ,ti y out gt uw u ι ui u, I νν ill u им : t ht t \ oii m my
A* (Tuions, and will pra*» ί«η· hlefhiigs ου your gľs- fions felf and your nobb» miftrefs — di íigh , La¬ dy, it is İki («iin u, nol for mv hdf. Now I have it, Λίαιίαιη, faid /ilanca, whiľpt ι ing lhe ľriiicek. This is cu'iaiuk die л onne ju ai. mi, and by my t «-n IV i t nee he is in love —Wedt ! di i s is α ι banning adventure! — ti", Matlam, ht u; lift him. Π" doe- ))( ,| know л oii, but takt s νου for one of mv Lak Hfppotifa ,< · women. An limu not afhamed, Bianca! faid lhe Princ к: Wh ¡ι i к ht have We to pry into ihe fet n f s '»í dus voting man's ( (t ш? lir ieems virtuous M\d trank , M',d idk us he is tui- hapin " -Vie tinde t m uınftaucı s that audmri/e пч to make a propu*t\ of idm? hovv are ne intitbd to hi·« tiudith n< eV Lord! Madam, kov linie vou know «»f lov. ! r» plu d Hiancti. Whv kuis biye no 'deaiure s ouai ίο î .iL: ï iu: "i t bur mihu Í-. And Would v tni ha uu/ze·* İn t ome a pt ihmf« eıııliılüit * faid die Puu .к. "Udiden, İu me talk it» him ; hild li'anta; Though í Jiave dn· irnuoui ol h< Hg \o.ji Highmb's maid oí botmur, í wis not always Jo guai: (».fid«··., if l-»w led. ranks, it ι til.·, th: ш ion : I I * ι л » α ulj - U f ι r а и y y m mg m .m in ¡ n , ( , __. pra» t ! ft m pb ion ; Li i d i in Pi im t ís. 'I ho-tgit jie laid he лга- mdiaj>¡»y , it doe«; not f«dko% that Ijc цщ.'! be in h-w Tb'"k ol all ih.it h.b inpp*- ned io-d.tv , .mil . d m»' if th* r- ас- Л п misiuihi- »u but wJirti io\u tauies. Sliaegu» leftimed tli<*
45
Prineefs, if thy misfortunes have not btui осея- fium.'d bv thy own fault, and are within die corn- pats u í lhe ľiiuccfs Hippolita'* power to redteh, I will lake upon me to anfwer tiiat the will be ihy piolet trd-. W İten thou ait d if miffed from thii caith; пр. iii to iioly l t \\hvr Jerome al' th© convent adjoining in die thun h of Sı. Nicholas, and mak« dı> iíoiv known ro lum, ;:s far as riluti ihíuke it meet: He will m »l fail to inform the Prímek, wiio is tiie motlie:i' oí all ι bat want lier aihftauee, i art will: it il not kemi y for me to hold hut h ei' eonvufí' wilh а mau at this unwound hour. Млу the Saints guard diet, giacious Lady ! replied the pea fa ni — bm oh! ifa pooi and wort Idel s ftrrtiigu ndglit pre lume" to big а minute's audiente ťarihu — am 1 fo happy? — the cafemeut is not fhut **—■ might I venture to aík — ipeak cpuekly; Luti Afa' tilda; the morning dawns apace: Should thv ia· ho n ru* ΐ ce»nie into the fidiLs and perceive iu **— Y\ iial Wíutldíi thon afk? ■— I knc»w not how ~~ 1 know not ifİ dare— hod the young fhangu fak irring — yet the humanity widi width yon have fpoken to me t mbohh ns— Lady ! date· İ null \ ou .' — İh av t ud laitl Alatilda, W Ji.it doit tlitui mean/ with what vvoiddk thou liuft me ? — Ipettk bohd\ , ii títy letu r is ft ι to be inti tilted to a vitim-tn bnall — 1 would nik, húd die peafant, ite ď letting Jiimldf, wbuher vvhat 1 ha?« heard hom
Ai thr donieitic4 ïstrue, that tin* Prínref»t is miftinâ; from die caítb 1 ? What import* it to dire fo kmnv? lephid Vnukla. Thy firft words befpokc a pru¬ dent and bt .-onnng _;ravi»v. Л о ft thou come hi- thei to pry into ılıt 1 İt« íets of Manfred? — Adieu, 3 have been miftaken iu thee. 8a\ in«?, thefe wotds, fhe Unit the eafemeiil haíiíly , without „iving die учти, man time to reply. I Jiad at,ted mort 1 widely, faíd thePfinctfs io Branca vvith fonu 1 fhaıpnek, if \ had let tbee eonverfe witli thi > peafant ; His inquiiitivem fs feems tifa piece w idi thv own. It is noi fit fórmelo ardite with \onr IHjihuefs, re- plied Jiianra; bui pei haps lho qiieliìons 1 fhould have put ίο him, would have been more mibe purpole, than thofe yon have ive и pira led to afk him. Oh! no donbi ; laid Matilda, you are л very dih reel pudor-age! may í know what )ou would have aiked him? A by -bander often fees move oi die game than thofe dial pk v ; anfwered Jlianca. 3)o- s your Hjghnek think , kladam, that hi* mn·- ftjoîi obotJt my Lady Ifabella was thv icfult of m í reemi !: ( v ? Nti, no, İM adam; there is more in it ihan Mm git M hdfcs aie aware of, Lopez told mediatali 1 he h*rvaiu> hi İh \ r ibis young fellow conhJved mv Lady Ifabella* *U apt' — now, pray, JVIiidam, ohf-ive — yon and f both know dial my Lady Jfabella never nun h laur ied lhe Prince your brother —Well! he is killed juft İn the critical
-Γι minute — ï accufe nobody. Λ bdim t f M^ kom the moon — ίο, my Loid, y uur hihei' lay»; but Lopez and ail the fervants fay thai dds young Ipaik is а magitiau, and ftole it horn Al/ о fo\ loud) — have done with this rhapfody of impei ducute , laid Alatilda. Nay, Madam, a-; y ou pícate; u İt d Bianca — yet il к very particular iho', thai my Lady Ifabella fliould be lnifting tin- v 1 1 у kmt (ia у, und dial tiiis young fon erer Ihould be found al the mouth of die tup-door — 1 au ufc* nobody — but il mv young Loid ï ame houdìk by hi- thaih — Dare not on diy duty, hod Alatilda, io bu »du* а fufpicion ou dm purity oí my dear If abe На % lanu» — purity, ov not purity, ΪΛΐν\ Ulama, gone du, is — а ftranger h found diai nobody knows: ï ou mtdtion him y omtell' : He teils yuu ite is in love, or nnJhippv, it is tho hi me thing — nay ; he o w m d lie was unhappy about ofiurs ; and u any bouy uniuppy abouL anodici', unid-, tluy aie İn love vvith tliem? y\ne\ al the- v u y m-\l word, he aks innocently, puut foul! if my Lady ljubil ti is milling — to be íme» laid Matilda, tliy obb rva- lions are not totally without fuundadou — Ija* hella' $ fli ghr amazes me : Theciuiohty ot diis itr.m- gu is very particular *— yet IJ'abei/a never com ru¬ led a thought fiom me — iu ihe told лой, laid Bianca, to fifh out your hutb— but who kuow s, Madam, but tiiu luangeu nuy be foniti Punce ïu
4&
diíguífť? «*— do, Madam, let me open the win¬ dow, and afk him α few epteldons. No, replied Alatilda » I will afk him myfelf» if he knows Aught of /fabella: He is uot worthy that I fhould converfe farther wifh him. She Avas going to open the caí eiiicnt, when they heard (he bell ring .a the portern -gate of the raftle, which is on die* right baud ofthe tower, where Alatilda lav. This pre¬ vented the Princefs from renewing the converfation widi the ftranger. After conlinuiug filent for fome lime; I am perfuaded, faid fhe to Bianca, ihat whatever b« the caule of /fabellah flight, it Jiad no unworthy motive. If tJiis ftranger was aeceftary to it, flie nudi be fatisfied of ids fidelity and worth. 1 ob¬ ferved, did not you, Bianca? tliat Ids words were tinctured wkh an uncommon inf niion of piely. It was no ruffian's fpeech : His phrafes w ere beco¬ ming a man of gentle birth. I told you, IVI adam, faid Bianca , tliat I w as fure he vvas lome Prince ín difguife - yet, faid Ma/ilda, if lie was privy to her efcape, Ιιολλ*" will yon account for his imt ac¬ companying her iu Jier flight? why expofe him¬ fdi' tmneceilarily aud raf hl y to my father's refent- rnent ? As for that, Madam, replied fhe, if ite could gei from undu* the helmet, he will find Wav s of eluding vom Fai heds aug' η I eh» not d (»übt but he has fome laliíman or odier about him
•47
— You refolve everv titing info magic; fai il Ala¬ tilda — bulaman who lias any iniueouık· w uit infernal fpirit-., does nor tho e tu md·.»* ule oi dude îrcmeudous and holy words, width he mitred, Didft thou not obferve with vvJul fervour be v o- w til it» iemember me lo Jieav en in hi- pray trs'.' — U-.«; /jabella л va s uneloubttdiy emis inet tl td he» pieiv. Commend me Jo iftr pu iv oi a voung ici- lii\v and adamh Ì tiiai confidi to cioj e í Lad ßut/ica. ]So, no, ¡Mat!. un; my Ladv Ifabdla is of auodur gut Is moniti dun л'ои take her for. ¿ite uLd in- deed it» figh Mid kit up lier eyes iu vonr готр.шл, becaufe ("Ιη* knows леш are а Saint —but when your back was turned — Yott wion_. Jnr; faid Ma¬ tilda: I jabella is no Jrvpoeriit : She iu- а dm It ule oí devotion, but never .dítxtt .I а (ali fİıe lias not. On the connary , fhe alv\a\s combaied un intli- iratiou lor liie cloyftu; Ami I hough I own lho myftery ilie has made to me ed' lit л flight, con¬ founds me; thoti-.ii it feems imonfifteur with the friendfhip betwten us; 1 cannot í о г- u tlie dííin- 1í refted' warmth va ith width íhe alwavs opptded my taking tlie veil: >1ΐι; wiliu-d to fee me maiiied tlu.*ugii my dow i-r vvould have beui α Jok io hu* .md my brodieds ebiidruı. Fm* her Like I will inlieve Well of thk young ptaiaut. 'i hen wu do tliiuk there к fouir liking between ihem; laid Miutiea -»Wiiile fhe was fpeaking, а leiv aul cam*
4? haftily into the chamber and told the Princefs» thai die Lady /falcila was found. Where? faid Alatilda. She h<\*> taken fanctunry in St. Nicholas's church; replied the frrwmi : Father Jerome has brought the news himfdf: he is below with his Higimefs. Where is my Mother? laid Alatilda. She is in Jier own chamber, IMadam, and has afked for л on. Alanfred had rifen at die firft dawn of light, ami gone to lHjnH)/ti:a\s apartment, to impure if flie knew ought of Ijabclla. V\ idle he was »pie- .ftioning' her, word was hromih t dut Jerome ov- ¡man ded to fpeak widi İtim. Alar ft ed , litde fuf¬ pecting the caufe of the Fiiar' s arrival, and kno- win«_ he was employed bv Hippolita in iier di.ni- íies» ordered him to be admitted, intending to leave them together, while he puihied Itis fendi aber Ifabella, İs your huhntfs whh mc en* die Princefs? hid Manfred. W ith hoth. Keplied the hob' man. The Lady /fabella — what of lier! interrupted Alanfed eagirly —is al St. Nicholas's d tar, replied Jerome. Thar is no bufinefs ed Hip¬ polita; faid Alan/red wilii confufion: let us retire to my chamber, Father; ami inform me how fhe cime thither. No; my Lord; rejdied the good man Λνίιίι an air of ftrmnek and authoi hy, tiiat d.uiultd even the refolute Ala/jred, who could not help reveiing the fainuUke virtues οΐ Jerome-. My e emu iui h ο η
49 conmii/fioii ís to both; and widi your Ilighnefs'ii goodkking, ín the prefence of botJi I fiiall deliver it — but Krit, my Lord, ï muft interrogate the Princefs, whether ihe is acquainted with the caufe of tlie Lady Jfabella ь retirement from л our caftle — no, on my foul; faid Hippolita: does /Jabella charge me with being privy to it? — Father, in- teirupted Manfred, I pay due reverence to your holy profeflion; but I am fovereign here, and will allow no medding prieft to interfere in tlic affair* of my domeftic. If you have ought to fay, attend meto my cliamber — I do not ufe to let my Wife* be acquainted witli the fecret aflfairs of my flate ; they are not within a woman's province. My Lord, faid the holy man» I am no intruder into the fecrets of families. My office is to promote peace, to heal divifious, to preach repentance, and teacli mankind to curb tlieir head ftrong pajflions. Τ forgive your Higlinefs's uncharitable apoftrophei I know my duty, and am tJie minifter of a migli- tier prince than Alanfred. Hearken to İtim who fpeaks through my organs. Alanfred trembled Λνηΐι rage and fliame, Hippolita\ countenance declared her aftonifhmeut and impatience to know wher« this would end : Jiei' filence more ftrongly fpoke lier obfervancc of Manfred. TJie Lady /fabella, refumed Jerome, commend«; Jierieiï io both your Highuefles; ike thanka Jwtli I>
for the kindnefs with which fhe has been treated in your caftle : She deplores the lofs of your fon, •лпа her own misfortune in not becoming; ih« daughter of fut 1 · wife and noble Princes, whom fhe fhall always refpect as Par ents ; fhe prays for uninterrupted union and felicity between you; (Alanjreďs colour changed) but as it is uo longer poffible tor her to be allied to y r ou» flic entreats your confent to remain in faiiciuary, till fhe can learn news of iier father, or» by the certainly of his death, be al liberty, with the approbation of her guardians, f o difpofe of herfelf in fuitable marriage. I filali give no fttcli confent; iaid the Prince ; but infift on her return to the caftle лл İ t lt¬ on t delay : I am anfw érable for her perfon to iier guardians, and wdll not brook her being in any hands but my own. Your Higbnefs will recollect ■whether that can any longer be proper; replied the Friar. I ,want no monitor, faid Afanfred co¬ louring; /fabella's conduct leaves room for ftrangô fufpicions — and tiiat young villain» who was at leaft the accomplice of her flight, if not die catifa of it — tJie caufe! interrupted Jerome; wns a young man the canfe! This is not lo be borne! cried Alan· fred. Am I to be bearded in my own palace by an infolent Monk! tliou art privy I guefs, to tlieir amotus. I would pray to heaven to clear up youť Uncharitable |цг_щ,_е;> , Lid Jerome, if у our High·
5 *' _iefs were not fatifietl in your confcience how un* juftly you accufe mc. I do pray to heaven topar» ¿on tluit nuchtiritablcnefs : And I implore your Ilkhmfs to leave die Princefs at peace in that holy place, wliere fhe is not liable to bo difturbed by fudi vain and wordly fantafies as difcourfes of love from any mam Cant not to me, faid Alanfred \ but return and bring the Princefs to her duty. It ia my duty to prevent her return hither; faid Jerornz, She is where orphans und virgins are fafeft from the fnares and wiles of this world; and nothing hut a paienťs authority fhall take her thence. 1 ami her parent, cried Alanfred, and demand her. She Wifhed to have y r Ou for lier parent; faid the Friar: But heaven that forbad that connection, has for ever diffolved all ties betwixt you : And I an¬ ii o unce to your Higlmefs — ftop! audacious man» faid Alanfred, and dread my difpleafure. Holy father, faid Hippolita , it is your oftice to be no refpecter of perfons : you muft fpeak as your duty prefcribes : Buf it i$ my duty to hear nothing dial \ it ju cafes not my Lord I fhould hear. Allend the Prince to his chamber. I wdll retire to my ora¬ tory, and pray to lhe blefled virgin to infpire you witli her holy* councils, ami to reftore the heart of my gracious Lord to its wonted peace and gent¬ lenefs. Excellent woman! faid the Fiiar *—* my JLord, I attend your pleafure.
52 Mar f red, accompanied by the Friar, pafled (o his own α pait incut, where fJiutiing the dot»r, I perceive, father» faid he» that Ifabella has acquain¬ ted you wiih my purpofe. Now hear my refolve, and obey, Ileafons of fíate, moft urgen** reafons, my own and die fafely of my people, demand tiiat I fhould have а fon. It İs in vain to expect an heir from Hippolita. I have made choice c f /jabella. You muft briug her back; and you limit do more. ï know the influence yon have with Hippolita; her confcience İs in your hands. Slie is, 1 allow, a rauldefs wom.in : Her foul is (ct on heaven, and fcorus the little grandeur of tliis world : you can withdraw her from ii intirely. Perfuade her to confent to the diflbhuion of our marriage, and to retire into a monaftery — fhe fhall endow one if fhe will; and Hie fiiall Ьал-е the means of being as liberal to your order as flie or yon can луИЬ. Thus y ou will divertthe calamities that arc han¬ ging over our heads, and liave tlie mei it of fa vin g; the pıincİpality of Otranto from deftruction. You are a prudent man, and though the warmth of my temper httiâyeâ me into fome unbecoming expref* lions, I honour your virtue, and wifli to be in¬ debted to you for the repofe of my life and die prefervation of my family. Tiie will of heaven be done í faid the Fri dr. I ftm but iu worthlefs iidhumcnu It makes ufc -Д
53 mv tomme, to tell thee, Prince» of thy un war* uiiiable defigns. TJie injuries ofthe virinoti·*; Hip¬ polita have mounted to the throne of pity. P, y me ¡thou ari reprimanded for thy adulterous intention of repudiating her; iíy me thon an warned not to purfue lhe inceftuous defign on ihy tontraeied daughter. Heaven that delivered her from thy fury, when the judgments fo recently fallen on tliy houfe ought to have infpired thee with other thoughts, will continue to WMtch over her. Even I, a poor and defpifed I'riar, am able to proie, , t lier from thy violence — Í, fumer as I am, and uncharitably reviled by y our Higlmefs л< an ac¬ complice of I know nor what amour«;, frorn th* allurements wilh whieh ii has ph aft d dier to tempt mine honefty, I love my r о uler; I honour devoni fouls; I r» fprct the pkty of thy Princck —* but I will not betray the confidence fhe repofes iu me, nor ferve even die caufe of religion by foul and finful compliances — but for footh í the wel¬ fare of the ftate depends on your Highuefs having a fon. Heaven mocks lhe fhort-ftgJited views of men. But ycfter-morn, whofe houfe was fo great, fo flour i fhing as Alanfred* sì ·— where is youníç Conrac/imw! — my Lord, I refpect your tears — hut I nu.iii .mt to check, them — let them flow, Prince! they will weigh more with heaven to Ward the welfare of thy fubjects» than a marriage, υ 3
54 which» founded on luft or policy» could nere**·; profper. Tht: reenter, which paffed from lhe raco ot Alfonfo to diiue, canuoi be preferved by a match. which the rhurch will never allow. If it is the Will of the moft High that Afanfreďs name muft perifh, refign yourfelf » my Lord» to its deuces; and thus dekrve a crown thai urn never рак away· — Come, my Lord; I like ibis İorrovy — iet из return to the Princefs: Slie is not appii/ed of your Cruel intentions; nor did I mum more lhan la alarm y r Ou. You faw лл ith Λν hat gende patience, with wdiat efforts of Jove, fiie heaid, fheiejetted hearing (he extent ed лош' guilt. I know fhe longs to fold you in her arms, and affure you of her un¬ alterable affection. Talher, faid the Prince, you miftake; my compunction: true*; I honour IUppoli- lois virtues; I think hvr a Sdul ; and wifh it were formy fouPs health to lie (after the knot that has unind us — but alas! father, yon know noi dio hittel eft: of my pangs! it is fome dme dial I liavq had fciupics on the legality oi our union; Hippo* Uta is reda t ed to me in ihe fourth digue — it is true, wc* had a difpenfation: But 1 -have been in¬ formed lh.it flic had alfo been contracted to ano¬ ther. Tiiis it is that fits in avy at my heail: To this ftate of unlawful wedlock I impute t fu л ihta* tion that has fallen on me in tbe deal h of Con¬ rad.' — eafe my conference of this hinden; dif-
55 fol ve om- marnagpy aml accomplifli die woik of fodlinefs which your divine exhortations have commenced in my fwuh How cutting was the unguifh which tlie good .man felt, when he perceived this turn in the wily Prince! He trcmbhd for Hippolita, whofe ruin he faw was determined ; and lie feared if Alanfred had no hope of recovei 'ing /fabella, that his impatience for a fon wouid direct iiim to fome other object, who might not be equally proof aga hi it the temp¬ tation of Alanjreďs rank. Ftir fome lime the ho!) man remained abforbed iu thought. At Ic.gdl, conceiving fome hopes from delay, he thought the wifeft conduct would be to prevent the Prince from defpairing e>f recovering /fabell- Iler ďttč Friar knew he could difpofe, from hw affection to Hippolita, and from the averfion fhe had expref¬ fed to iiim for Alanfrcd^s addieifes, to fecond his views» till the ceniures of the church could be ful- ■minatc'd againft a divorce, Wdth this intention, as if ftruck with the Princt's fcruples» he al length faid; my Lord, 1 have been pondering on what youriiignefs has faid; and if in truth it is delicacy of confcience that is the real motive of your repug¬ nance to your virtuous Lady, far be it from mo to endeavour to harden your heart. The church is an indulgent mother: unfold your griefs to her: fhe alone can admİuifttr comfort to your fouJ, υ 4
56 either by fíitisfying your confcience, or upon rxa* mination of your fcruples, by fetting yon at liberty, and indulging you in the lawful means of conti¬ nuing your lineage. In the latter cafe, if the Lady Ifabella спи he brought to confent — —- Manfred, who concluded that he had either over-reached the good шап, or that his firft warmth had been but a tribute paid to appearance, was overjoyed at his fudden turn» and repeated the moft magnificent pro¬ mifes , if he fhould fucceed by the Friar's media¬ tion, The well-meaning Prieft fuffered him to deceive himfelf, fully determined to traverfc hi« views, inftead of feconding them. Since we now underftand one another, leftuned the Prince, I expect» Father» that you fatisfy me in one point. Who is the youth that I found in the vault? He muft have been privy to Ifabella's flight: Tell me truly ; к he her lover? or is he an agent for another**« paffion? I have offen fus- pected Ifabella's indifference to my fon: a thoufand circumftances croud on my -»dnd that confirm that fufpicion. She herfelf was fo confcious of it, that while I difcourfed her in the gallery, fiie о una n my fufpicions» and endeavoured to » juftify herfelf from coolnefs to Conrad. The Friar, who knew nothing of the youth, but what he had learnt oc¬ cafionally from the Princefs, ignorant whit was become of him, and ngt fufficiently reflecting o«
57 the impctnofiiy oí Afanfreďs temper, conceived that it might not he amifs to fow the feeds of jea- louii in his mind: they might be turned to fome ufe hereafter, either by prejudicing the Prince againft /Jabella, if he perfiftcd in that union; or by diverting ids attention to a wrong fcent, Ai\d employing his ihouglils on a vifionary intrigue, prevent ids engaging in any new purfuit. With ibis unhappy policy, Jie anfwered ín a manner to confirm Alanfred in the belief of fome connectient between /fabella and the youth. The Prince, whofe pa/lions wanted little fuel to throw them into a blaze, fell into a rage at the idea of what the •Friar fuggefted. I will fathom to the bottom of this intrigue ; cried he ; and quitting Jerome abruptly» with a command lo remain there till his return, he haftened to the great hall of the caftle, and ordered the peafant io be brought before him. Thou hardened y r otmg tmpoftor! faid tbe Prince, as foon as he faw the youth; what becomes of thy boafted veiaciiy now? it was Providence, was it, and the light of the moon, that difcovered the lock of the trap - door to thee? Teli me» auda¬ cious boy', who thou art, and how long thou haft been acquainted witli die Princefs — —» and take care io anfwer wiih lefs equivocation than thou «lidft Lift night, or tortures ihall wring the truth turnt thee. The young man, perceiving that hi» D 5
r >3 khave ín dt,.- '' iit (d ihe Princefs was difcovered, and «ош tuding dial any titing fie fhould lav could no longei lu* td h iv i<» eu du ι intent to Iter, replied X am no imputou , my Lord, noi luv e i deferved Approbrioiis language, i aulvund to evei y que- luon your liigbut f. pul to me j.di ni- In wiih the fame vuaciiy diai i íhall fpeak now ; And that WÜI imi ¡ie f nun fear of vour toitures, but beraufe ïny ioni abhors а falfhood. Pica fe to repeal your «jucftions, my Ltu'd; f am n id y tu give you all the íalkfacíion in my powu*. ton ku «vv my tpte- fiious, replied the Prime, und ónk wan! lime to piep.tre an evaíiuu. S]>eak diiu.tiy; w İı о art theni? ;uıd Jiow Jong halt thou been known to the Prin¬ ce i.s / i «un а laboure r at the next v dnu* ; iaid ılıe ptaiaut; my name is T/a odore. The Prince's found un in tlie vault laft night: .Jìefore íJiaf iiuur J ne- \ vi was in lu r p rei une. 1 may beheve as mucit cu as lilde as 1 ph ab- oí this; laid Alanjred, bul 1 will beai thy own ftory» befo * e ) < хлиипе into thv t tulli ol it. Tell me, what nahm did the Puncéis givt tht v bn making her eitape'** ihy life depends on thy anfvvu'. Siie toid me» ophed Tnecdorc, dial flu was on dm brink of ddiruedon, ami dial il fhe (.ould not efcape fiom the table» fhu was in dangı r in a few moim nts oi bung nude n diu able for evo. And e«n dds flight h »nudati on, on a filly gil l's крои, faid Alanjred, tiiou didii
59 fiaenrd my difpleafure! I fear no mam's difpbafnrc, faid Theodore, when a woman in di Л ref·»- puis İ ι er- fel f under ni) pmtectiou — Jhuiti^ this examina¬ tion, Matilda was ¿ΐοίημ to tbe aparïmtut oì ¡¡Ip¬ polita. At tlie upper end fd'the hall, w hete Man· fred fal, was a boarded calici) vwih iaiti' ti win¬ dows, thro' ллЬкЬ Matilda and Bianca w» ir to pafs. Hearing ht r fatbei^ лоюе, ami h<İu :ı lho fervants aÍJembled round him, (he /íopped ίο ham <he occafion. TJie prifoner íoou tí i e vv înv ai n n-r tion: Tbe fteady ,\nà (tunptdetl πι,ιπιια in whidi he anfwered, and the galani r^ »d 1ач lalt 11 ■ | 1 \ » >vliit;ii wet'- tlie hríl Wt^rds fin 1 heard dihîuıÎİ\ 9 int ereit ni lier in 1пл favour. lÜ^ jjeifon was indile, jiandfoine, and tommamliuv;, eyt η in that laua- tiou; Hut hi> tonun nance ίοορϊ fii^roiîed hcrwht^c care. Heavens! ií/rt/iCíí, faid the ľriuca Γ; foli 1л , t)o 1 duam? or is not that \ouih the exact ivfVnu blanee of A/jon/e's picture iu the £a!hr\ ? Sho could Глу nt) more, for her father's voice ^rew Imi- tlf r at every word. Tiib hray.ulo, laid he, fur« palles all ihy former infohure. Timn fhali exi>e- rience ihe uraih with whit b thou dareil lo trille. Seize him, dnliuued Manfred, and bind İıinı —» rhe fiih тлхъ tln> Princefs bears of her ι lumpion fluii be, thai he has loll his hvad b-r her Ule. 'J be itijufìiee of width ihoa ait üuiiry towards me, iaiti Tht adore, convinces ше that 1 have dojiø
бо a good deed ín ddiveríng tiıe Princefs from thy tyranny. May fhe be happy, whatever become» of me! This is' а Leiver! cried Alanfred 'm а rage: A peafant vAİıhin fight of demli is not animated by fuch fentiment «u Tell m***-, tell me, rafli bov, who tliou art» or die rack fhall force thy fecret from thee. Thou haft threatened me with death already, faid the youth, for the truth I have told thee: If trh at is all the encouragement I am lo expect for iuirerity» Iain not tempted to indulge thy vain emìoni у farther. Then ihou wilt noi fpeak.' faid Alanjred. I will not; replied he. Bear him away* imo die couri - yard ; faid Manfred ; J wil J fee his head ibis infuni fevt reti from his bodv — Matilda *r fainted at bearing t hub* words*. Bianca fhrieked, ami cried, Hdp! help! the Princefs is dead! Man¬ fred ftarted ar this ejaculation, and demanded what vvn' the malt* id The young peafant» who heard il loo, was ftruck with honor, ami afked eagerly the fame queftion; but Alanfred ordered him to be hurried into die court, and kept there for execu¬ tion, till he had informed himfidf of the caufe of Biancas fhrick's. When lie learned the meaning, he treated it as а womanifh panic, and ordering Matilda to he carried to her apartment, he rufhed into the court, and calling for one of Ids guards, b,\d T';eodore kneel down, and prepare to receivre the fatal blow.
б!
The undaimted youth received the bitter fen¬ tence widi а rdigualion that touched evcty heart but Manfred's. He wifhed earneftly to know the meaning of lhe wotds lie had heard relating to tiie "О «- Princefs; but ftaring to exafperate the tyrant more againft her, he defifted. The oniy be>on he deigned to afk» was, tliat he might be permiiled to have a confeflbr, and make his peace witli heaven. Alan- fred^ wlio hoped by the coufeften% mean·* to come at the у enilh's hiftory, readily granted Ids lequdt*. and being convinced that Father Jerome was now in his intereft» he ordered him to be called and f brieve tiie prifoner. The holy man, who Iiad little forefceu the cataftrophe thai his imprudence occafioned, fell on hk knees to tiie Prince, and adjuied him in tiie moft folemn manner not te> fhed innocent blood. He acenkd himfdi in the bitterdi terms for his indiicretion, endeavoured te> dikulpate die youth» and left uo method untried to foktu lhe tyrant's rage. Alanfred, morc incen* fed than appealed by Jeromť's inteieeflion, whofe retrat lion now made Jıİuı fufpect he had been im¬ pofed upon by both, commanded t Jie Fiiar to do İtiş duty, telling hini he would not allow die pii- funer many minutes for t on ft ih on. Nor do I afk many, my Lord; faid the unhappy young man. My fins, tJiank heaven! have not been numerous; zi wi exceed what ıuigkl be expected at шу y eau«
f.2
Dry yom* tears, good fathor, and lei us difpatch: This ir a bad woi Id ; nor have I had caufe to leave it widi regret. Oh! wretched youth! faid Jerome; how canil ihou bear die fight of mc with patience? I am thy murderer! it is I have brought this dif* inai hour upon iliee! 1 forgive thee fiom ту т foni, faid ihe youth, as I hope heaven will pardon me* Hear my confeflion, father; and give me thy blef¬ fmg. How can İ prepare thee for thy paflage, as I ought? faid Jerome. Thou can ft not be faved without pardoning thy foes —* and candii them for¬ give that impious man there! I can; faid Theo* clore; í do. -*- And does not diis touch thee! cruel Prince·! faíd tiıe Frİ.ıı. —■ 1 lent for thee to eonfds liim» faid Alan/red ftuuly; not to plead for li im. Thou didft firft ine rufe me againft him — his Mood he upon tiiy Jnad! Jr will! it willl hid the good тлп, in лп agony of forrow. Thou and I muft never hope lo go where dik blefled youth is going! Difpatch! fai el Atanfrea am no moo* to he moved by the whining of priefts» than by the fhrieks of women. What! faid ihe youth; is it poflible that my fate could liave occafioned what 1 Iieard! is the Princefs then again in thy power? Tliou doft but remember mc of my wratii; faid Manfred: Prepare thee, for diis moment is tiiy laft. The youth, who fdt liis indignation rife, and who was touched witlţ the furrow whicli he faw he lud
í ' '-
ínftifed into all iìv fpectators, ля Well as hito th«* Tiiar, fuppitfhd hi* rmonoiev, t \nd putting οΙΓ hil doubler, ^nd mdiuttnuing Jiis collar, kndt doven to his prayers. A* f * Ih» peel, ins Hurt flipped down below lik f houldu » and dtieovued die iiiíii,, ofa blotuH' ai*ìovv. Oracioudu avu η! < ι к d ífie imlj, mau flart ins, w lut do I ke! isis my ddld! my Theotlore t Thv paffions that euimd» muft be concuvu I; they cannot h" painted. TJie· liar; oi' the afhfunis weie fulpuidul by wonder, ialini' lhan Jloppul by joy. 'Ibey íe« med u· oiijuirc in flie eyes of thtir Loid w h tl lin s ought te) feed. ťuipiife, doubt» tendu m b, idptti» fueee-ded cadı eitiiu in tİıe couiilen.me ι oí tiıe yoıülu Heieciivuï with ïimdeit lubmiftc u dm dhdİun «ti the old т.т'ч teaıs and einbu . 5ı 1 1 ah.ud <»ť giving α loóle to hope, and (nip- .„ lietm what had jtaftid llu iti* flexibilii у ot Mar ;r<.d\ temper, he caft л «Luier ίο - wards tht Ptint ' , a.s if tt> lay» cui ft thou be unmo¬ ved at fuch a L u. f - as dds! AlanJ/ed\ In an w as capable* of being* tone bed» He foigot hi·, лп т ^\ in Ins aftoiufhmuir; yit hu pride forbad hu owning idmfelf aíTu ud. líe « wn doubted win thu ibis dıfcoyuy was nut а conni¬ vance of the ία 11 to fave du youlh. YVÌut may this mean? laid lu ; ifovv tan lie be thy fon.** ıs it coniiiient wilh tl v pi okikon en* о puted iane thy f о avow a ptaiuut4 dhpihig ior the h fiad of thy on.-
«u guiar amours! Oh! Ood, faid the holy man» doft thou queftion liis being mine? couid I feel the an- guifli I do, if T were not his father? Spare Jiim! good Prince» fpare hhn! and revile me as thou pi eafe ft. Sparc him! ('pare him» cried die atten¬ dants, for this good man's iake! Peace! laid Alan* fred fternly : 1 nudi know moie, ere I am difpofed to pardon. A Sainl'o bafta rd may be no taint Jiim¬ klf, I inuft know more, ere I am difpofed to par¬ don. A Sainds baftard may be uo faint himfelf. Injurious Lord ! faid Theodore; add not infult to cruelty. If I am tlds venerable maif¡> lon, dm' no Pance» as thou art» know» the blood tliat flows in my л т еш5 — yes» faid the Friar» interrupting Imn» his blood is noble; nor is he that abject thing, my Loid» you, fpeak him. He is my law¬ ful fun ; and Sicily can boari of few houfes more ancient than that of Falconara -------bur alas! my Lord, лу1ш is blood! what is nobility! We arc- all reptiles, mifer.mJe, finful creat u n s* Itis piety alone that can diftiguifh us from the duft whem e* We ípning» and windier we muft return ·— Truce to your fermon; faid Alanfred: Vou forget, you are no longer Friar Jerome , but tlie Count uf Fal¬ conara. Let me know your hiftory : you will Jiave time to moralize Jiei eafter» if you fhould not hap¬ pen to obtain die grace of that fturdy criminal ι here. Mother of (j od! faid the Friar, is it poflible my
my T-Cid cru icíuľ« α Luhu di к « f ht »uk, İt lo gd di ehildi fi tmph un , mv L t i, fu, m, •d- , im , au^pl ou h' f hu his , imi (pu- my ion' i 'mu t adi iul idit, fod Marj/ d, wh n u iv to lott an oidv 1 m! — a hide Innu u о thon tb ot j o idi Ut OU ati ι , η jìft ii ,ıh , il ίαϊ« I" pl h d , urnii pe ui h — bu! tli ( o elit of J o f onara — ahu! mv Lord, í id je ton, t , I > tu id I l¡ iv ι oIĽniluk imi .g ι v m n i m ι ul m n 1 *- fiiff пни' ï fio.ih not r t mv fut ik , π u did. d 1 idi \ ii yi* -— j' u j ¡f nu dut j! r ! í t do * 1), v , u i dit пм d -»ıs ddt ι' ι w t' о hott lom — ь flu , ¡ ■> U"' /,ι d, dt d ' *— Ihı hul hb long be t n vu ¡ h tía İd ,Ί ! , í nd 7 ι od ƒ.. Oi ' how * uhd f и / h , ull ut — T*, > -» t i t ís Imj t v ' f hou αιί ali mv ti » '\ ' — ¡ o, 1 do ti h< ! id Will \! ι — vu II u ı u í j n ην j tm i lu \\ lut J hitein t ι i fi v t ' u\ ut , ,ιί Ku. I /i* c 1 / ι ■ tondue t t k ľu uu hului <î ц \ -u in vv kıt dh il ou kın Í! , ii İ m ». ■и li lhe tl uit d du í m —· Ob 'uvled,! I J t. í ι , i «- j n v h m d v i i ι f pilii í tmu ¡ «, f ( d '' i V t iií !Г li! ! \ — í t i ! F U! d i ('Ul¬ iti i '« th а ihon· n«' ıh iihs , ui hu liuu ŕ» un tiv I ' î 'Ulit. Wi wis Uti НИИ! Ulli, ( Ч N i od lu -'i«. I t ih ой d h d. M di f i >ш hu p w u -* p oii e u ht ι , ile í - nu uh od uu n , u d ' t II tiu Λνι^ΐιί oí hu vv udi íall »π nn ju ¿m*. V
60
endeavoured io direk dm impel 11 oft t y of th* Λ outh; aud ere Alan/red could reply, the tram¬ pling oí bodes was heard, aud a brazen trumpet, wliich hung vyiihoüï the gaie of die caftle» was fuddeniy founded. Al lhe fame inftant die fable plumes on the enchanted lielmet лл bieli ftdl lemained at die oilier cud of ihe court» wue leiupeftuottfly agitated, and nodded ihlice^ as if bowed by fome inviiible wearer.
í
f' 7 «М_Ш_И>*** > ЮШГМГ>ммм>шгш'а>_^ с н л ρ ι к и ui. /t I í v / r j //U h" o f m î L, au» him w h» n i" he* b hi S fo jdf.fi ι , on ih' noi., t uh'Us tahpu- (tuk n ΐο e t '<< t t í W ¡t ίι íi í íoumbiu. ι í the h» ut n ti um* p -. iathu! hud he to Jerome, whom fu now e- f'd ton, aí „■ L. lint oí Fahofta/a, what mean tí ι fe ρ* ι η nt* Ί i fl ha ν e o'ïunh d — the plumes W' к liuku» w iiii gıu iu víohu'e ihan b( îoi'c. l r .dnppy Vìhu " iii if i am! e did Мач/ n d — 11 ed у 1 s dit ι ! w İiî ** on i u . dìift mc* w ¡di y oto* prav u s i' Mv Тю d, τ jI i-d Jerome, fu >vui is uo doubt d s'ph ah d Λν i, h y ou r nmt kt м oí* it-- fn ams. f », mu y oto P> ¡t' t o the duot b ; nnd u ah* to pu* iuţite hfrmim.hu·*. İ dí'mífs this hmo ( cul V'Uth; ''"d Lun ι<> ! intel dm imly diaumi j wtar: Ihavui will ιόι fu« tt.fttd wilh: you Ire — ihu tmmpii ff.-i; î .» α lain. J ac knuw luigi- I havei Leen íoo hdu ; hdd Ma·j/eJ. í „ bi ι , do you go ť» lhe W idul, uni demand W ht) is* ,|i (he gitu "D *you gi m n^tìn du lil d 7'd(di.U'.j'iid ihtl'itai. i eit); Jud Afa»fi,d\ Unt impide w Iui ií without! Jetem- fd I hig cm tl, v ut f k P f his fon, dif- chargui a flood «d teas, ih.it fj oi\e ıhe fuktek of
u bis f o uk Vou pronii led to go to the gate; faiei Alanjred. 1 though! . r» piu d lhe friar , voto Uiiihnofs would e.vruíe my ıhanLug \ou firft iu thi.-« tribute oí' mv heul. Ľ', ru .treft Sır, fűid 'J hi.Oitore. ; obi \ lhe Piince: J do not tieft rve that you Ihould delay his fathiactiuii ihr nu·, Jerome , hup d ι hig w ho was vv i í imul , w a;. uif'vYUcd , a ih ľalii. í ioni whom ? lud h*. Fiom lhe Kadoin oi the bigamie- iahe ; t od íUv İlendik, and i mult leeak vuth lhe iiíuipu of Otranto, jetvt.u ru urut í to J¡e Prince, aml aid ijol fail It» ľ, puií the IheUu . iu die Very worth !( liad bcui ulu n d. Tin fir'! h »mtk ftiuik Mar Jr, d witb teii'or; bul W hui he hi U d htnifdf ftikd ufurper, ids i age i ek í nuh d , anti ali Jiis eourage revived. Ulurptr! ~ juî-hnl villain! aivo hr, wiio dares lo queliio.i my ut je? red re, Fadier; ibis is no buJmefs ior Aiojuk: I w İİİ İitcet lids prefumptuous man my h li, (jo to у ont* íouvuu and prepare the Piiiictb-V e turn; ι our Son (indi be а holiace for your fìddiiy : dis life depends nu your obedience. Go« »d heav ud my Lord, uied Jerome, your liighnek did but this inftant fruly pardon my child — hade you io foon forgot die ' inlerpolidon of heaven? Heaven, replied Alanfred, docs not f-md HerahLs l<; qudiion lhe title of a lawful Prince* — 1 doubt wdmthcr it even notifies its will through Friars — but tliat is your affair,
С-9 nul nune. At prehni von hnow T my ıdcifııî** ; and ji is no! a Lıucv Herald, lli.U ih.di fave your fon, ií vou do not relu ni vi idi dm Proud 1 *«. it was jn vain Ľ г ťhe Judv man Ίο »"'p'y. Alm ft ed command» d İtim u» be <ouduU«d io ıh», pi dieru -g;ıle, And fimi uut trom iile talih : Aiid fc ordered hune of his aituıdants to ι an у Theodors jo the top of the hi irk lovv'U', and guard iiim 4 iuictk; ÍVaice peru»iuin_ liu- fatiuu and Lui i') ev haiu'e α lia fi ν t m lu, и " а) pan ing. He then w il beh ι vv to ihc lull, ami ft*.'tin· Juuddl in prinedv lian, cii!. ul the İh-raLİ to be ahniuuï f.» iii«; prelciH l , \Λ til ï finni iuh'hnl! laitl thv Velta e, what Wouldft iiltíU w uh fut í i U-îlie, r.'piuii he, fo ih <-, Motf-cd, uJroper of the pi : u t jm ti i y oí Otranto, from the о now ned aud ¡uv unible Kidali!, dte Kuighi oí tfie (idande fdue: iu ih:· u,tme »d' İtiş Lord, Fiedeitc Manpus ed ľ/cu..·,/, iu* de¬ mands the Ladv* IJabetla , daudiit e of dui Prime, whom ihou ludi bddy and η.ύΟΊ'οηίΙν goi iun» ihy powu, by biibh'g h- i - İdle guardians dining itis ahiuit'e: and hi o-ipoic* dne to odign the print ipaiitv oí' Otrant·) , whtdi ihou haii ufinpetl itom dndaid Ľúti Ftedcric, rhe ut ardi of blood lo tht*. iaft rightful L«»nt Al/on/h the рча\. it tliou duft nut inftantlv eomply with thefe jnfì de¬ mands, he dt fies diet 1 lo ftugle eunhal lo ihe Lift L j
70 еч» rem i t y. Aud fo faying, die ffuald cafi down his w artier. And where is this btaj.gait, who fenek dee? faid Ma/ijred. Λι the diifaiue οΐ а ieagm , Lud the Huakl : lu tomo to make ¿«ood hk Loid\s claim againft ihee, as he is a line Knight and ihon ли dimper лш\ lav ifhej. liijudons а·* fins (balbuce w,;·,, Manfted re- flee* ied th. tt İt was nu hu 'smucit to pn-wde t ko Ma repík, líe knew Jmw W vil - founded ihe cdaîiu οΐ Ft ederic was; nor was ibi-*, ι L e ίί * i* lime in lud iieard of it. /-"rt aer i d'à anu hor«, had ailumttl iin» İtile οΐ Print t s of Üftan/o, Гют the t', .'di of Alfo /tjo the good without iftiíe; but Man/ 1 ed, hİ> fu ht ι , and gi.tudfalht τ, lud ben too powubd for tlie holde til Vii.ttiza lo ilifpolh l·« dum. /ve- ibrtc, a mai îİal aud amorous vontig İ'ihk«', had married α beautiful youn^, Ladv, oí whom ho was uiamoui.d, un^ who hatí tlied in ihildbtd νΐ (/ain l/a. İki thaih aifecied him fomiich, diat htdiad takın lhe croîs and gone io die Imly hud, w hue he wab wounded iu an ingáiméul a,;,duft lìu- iuíidek, made |uihnicr, aml repen led to ba dcAd. Whtn tin tuns reachetl Alan/'n iF a ears, he bubed the guardian«, of the Lady ljabe ! a to deltvu her up to him as a bdde for his ion Con- tad, bv wlinh alliance in· bad piopofed to untie" 1 du; daims t»l du two hoult :;. '1 iiis motivt, ou
7i Conrad's dcîi\h, had co -operated to make him Co fuddeniy nfolve on tipo uftng her himfdf; and tlie fame reflection determined him now m en¬ deavour at obtaining ihctuufenl ot frederic io tlıİs marriage, A hke policy infpired Jiim with the ι hou-du of inv iling Frederic's champion í iitc* Ids taide, Jeft lie fhould be informul of I/abella's flight, vvhich he ftríi tly enjoined his domeftics not to difclofe to any ed' ι he Knight's lelinne. llvidhl, f.dd Alan fred, as laun us he liad di* gefted theft: rdleclíous, return to ılı y mafter, aud leli İıim, eie wc liquithue: tutr differences by ihti fword, Manfred would hold fome converfe with him. liiil liim welcome Ht my calde, where by my fa İdi , л^ 1 am a tme knight, lie lindi fiave tourleous reception, and full fecurîry for himfdf ami followers. If we canniti adj uit our quand by amicable means» I fwear he* fhall depart in fafely, and fhall Jiave full falisfaoiion according; to tho laws of arms: 5 υ help me Ood and his hoJy Tri¬ nity! tbe Herald math; duce obeifances ami retired. During ılık interview Jerome's mind yva« agilaled by a lhoufand contrary pallions. Ile tumbled for the life of Ids fon, and his firft thought was it) perfuade l/abelta lo return to tho taide. Yet he was fcarce his alarmed at ihe liie »ught of her uidun with Alar jred. lie dreaded Jltppolitas unbounded fubiniflion to the will of E ,.
*7 *t hrr Leu d; and though be did not doubl bui he tould alarm her piely not to t on fen t lo α divenre, if lie ι ould ¿el a< u fs to Inr, yet ihould Marjad difi ovn diat the obítnudon cairn« from h\;n, it migli! be equally fat d lo Theodore, lb* was im¬ patient to know w hun e t íme ihe íleuid, vv Itt) wilh f«) little ìn.magemt nt itati oneftieuud lin tide ed Man/red· ли he dni not tlart abbui bindt Ц* from the convent, k fl Ij avelia fhould leave it, aud lur flight bt* imputed to him. He tetunud dih on fo Lit dv i'» die monaite rv , um и t ai и on w hat conduci It» o fol ve. А Лкшк , w ho met him in the ut »n h and obferved lui imkududy ли, fan!, alad brodier» is il dun tine dial we hav» loft our « χι (Пии Plime fs lHj>polita? The holy mau fiai h d, nud uit d, vvhat nu а ne ft thou, btothci! I t о tue this i и lì ani h »m lhe caftle, and hb fu г iu puku h» dlh. Alat teilt , η ¡dit d the oth» r l \1лг 9 pafled by tin convent bnt a quariu of an houi ago on his was hom dnu a f Ľ , ,md re poi u d tini her Huhn* ís vvas dead. \11 une inedtien aie gm." to the diapd io piay fot lut íuprv luuLî m a ht itti litţ , л\'<\ willed me to wait ihy nnh.d. They know d.v hok atu· ¡ши nr to thai good Ladv» and .ue au'vions for iii· adiu don it will tank in diet- — indud we h„ v f ad o afon to weep; fhe w,h a modn t' to our I ■ nl>* — but (his hie is hut a pdgmuage; yve mult not murmur — we (ball
'T '*» /.) ali odlow hu ! may onr oul b·" Lde bet\s! good hioilui, ihon dirami ff, lad«! Jerome· l rdl il* e I (Omeliomdn , ddt, aid İu'ı du Pıiruds w II — ллпео i* d>" Ldv f favillo ť — ¡ющ íduď wo¬ man! tuk d ii· I îi, ί ; î i-hl int th*. Ld m w s, nndiií t ' hudpoii d u·* --ni: i i um ndt. í hu' of íhe oaníhoi v u md ο u m ο! i»iotu4iy, Aud aSsİ* fui b i í ı t d e íl· v t d : I «pt 'l· d lio- t sample of lhe (¡oh Ih inu к Sa' ■ Ina oí Αι ropon — thy /,v.d was Luidıbîe, laid /uu».», irup iduìtìy , Lmi at prehni it was tonu u lho v - ¿Ippolita is лл υ Π — al leaft í nuit tu th« Ľud (i· ■ ι ;ϊ fit aid ι ο) .hing to the »onu, oy — у« t muhh!*"·, lhe futo 's earndhu Is — w t lì, bn ibu*, but when« h tho Lady Ijaltľtiť I know not; faid .du lii u; ŕ« he ЛУер( mut İı, and í itd 1 lie Wouui Шт. to In ť cliandje ι. Jervtrit bit hu со m ratle abrupllv , aml haftened to ibe Pi im ds, bui die wa**' m»t oi lov chamber. Ile unpuied ot' the domdlh s «d ıhe couvent, but um hl learn no news οι hu. i fe ftaichcd in ν ñu ihroughoui die monaítuv and lhe chiodi, and difpaidiul meffengtis ìmuul die neighbemrliooiì , io gel inielìigi η с e d tiu* bnd heen feen; but lo no puipott. Nothing could equal the go* tei mauV perphsiiv. He ¡ι u! gu! that /jabella, hdpt eting Ala' ¡nd oí having precipita¬ ted his wile's thaih, lud r«\ :i ¡he .daini, .\i\d witlidiawu hukif to h un "..tv ieuu place ut k d
74 concealment. This new flight 4vonld probably c.rry the Prince» huy te) the litighi. Tbc repoit of I Hppolita* s death, though it let med almoft in¬ credible» im leafed bis confternation; and thoinft //uhellas efcape befpoke her averfion of Alatfred for a hufband, Jerome could feci no comfort from it, while it endangered the life of his fon. liti ď'íermineíd. to return to the caftle, muí made ft ve- ral of his bledimi accompany him to audi his innocence t<» Alati/ red f and, if neceiïary, join lluii inierceftion with Jiis for Theodore, '1 he* Pi İm с , in lhe; mean lime, h ле! pafled juto lhe court > and ordere-d lite gates of the calilo lo be ftung t»pui for the reception of the finniger KuLhí anel hi·» train. In a kw mìnmcs the cavai* t*· uide ai rived, lì tit came two liai bingers w ith w. unk, Nexl a herald, followed by two pages i\uå two trumpiís. Then ли luiudvvd foot-guards. Ilude л\стс ai'ended by as, many horte. After them fifty footmen, eloadud in íearlet and black, the ctibuirs of (he Knight. Tht n а led horfe. Two herabb ot« ( uh iule of a gentleman ou hof¬ ft hack beai in:*, а banner widi the arm«, of Vtem .a . u i O'tanto epi.iluly -- а uu unman* с that mueh oth. ndt d Alan/ r ed — but Ju* ftiilcl lds tďeiilmeiil. 'J \v о im Г' paj' s. 'fhe Knighl'i unibftor telling ík bead«-, i tit y пиле looi un u t hid as befo i e, i uu Kiii'.hu iukiud ju ι compiei- armour, their
75 beavers down, (omrades io the prim i pal Kukhi. TJie hjunes tí ihe two Knu It I- , e,or\ing ıh* i e fhhhis aı;d .b ii..-*. i.'i- ληί J Fi «лл u hjuiie- Aiï JiUii'íiu! ;. :.d* mell b» ,u ¡п.. . η ι m-t umu«, f u m d, nnd !·■■ iui« _ I" kiül undt ι lb ' wdjil ·'! o. 'Πιο Κιιΐ -dit hh»*ı h <-n :: ib»hu:i h» - d , πι f.un¡-lirc íimionr, his k", f h: th- ríf, hi. late tundy conceded by ids vku', w í ith vui·. homouund hy a huge jjhtiee ol' fcadcl.a.d »d.uk baihtH. Fifty foot -LLturiiïs widi tliuu.·; and ltump»is cÍ<d»d the procefliou, width whe. led off to ihe right and left to make room for lhe prím í pal Knight. As fo ui ;ţs he appioathtd tin; gale, Jie ftop¬ ped; and ihv huakl advaming, read again lb« words cd lhe ehalituige. Ahn f red's eyes Wire; fixed on ihc idgantie fword, and lie fcarce feemed lo allend to lhe cartel: Ihıl hk-uiendon Was foon di verled by а ι cm pedí ul' wind ihat rok* bdiind him. He turnul and İıdu ld the plumes ot die enchaníed Ji.lmei agitated in die fame exirau.di- natv manner as befon*, il reep ι i red intrepid il у like Alan/rcdU not lo fink ııutîeı a concurrente· oi circumftances dial feemed to ammunee Jiis fate, Yel ft orning in ihe preklice of ft ¡angers to betray the courage he had always uunifelkd » lie laid boldly, Sirknighi» whoivudmu arı i bid thee welcome. 3f limn an of mo* i d mudd, div valour filali шеи ii» t.. pud: Aud ií'lho. t αιι α : tiuKníglu,
*?г> dj on wih fcorn io employ* forcery ro c t \ir\ ihy puinl. lie thefe omens from beaun or hell, Man¬ fred imlU to ihv righttOi'inefs of his canfe and to the aid ot St. Nicholas, who h t \< t ver protêt ted İıis honk. A light, Sir Kııight, aud ırpofe thyleif. Toniotiowthoii fhah havca fail held; and heaven heldend ihv juíhrftde! The Kuighi made no reply, but difmeninling, M'as continued by Man/red lo die giuit hall oi the Caftle, As they u а v ufed rhe court, die Knight hopped to £Λ'/,ν on ihe miraculous eafepie; and kneeling deiwn, feemed te» pray inwaidly for fomft minutes. Riling, Jie made a fign to die Punce to İradem, As fotm. as duv entered rhe hall, Alan¬ jred propofed to the ftranger to difjvtn, but die Knight fiiook hk head in loken ofrduLd. Sir Knight, laid Ala /ff red, lids к noi еошп-оцч; but by mv good failli Г лл i Π not с ι ok dne; noj fhalt them have caufe ю complain of tilt Piince of Otranto. *N'o treaeheiy is deftgnt d on my pari; I hope none is inhndid on ihine; ihr- uke my gau 1 : ( giv mg hhn his ling^ v our hi uk.mdyuu íh.di enjoy the law*; of Jicdphality. Ihdt Iiue» until ttfieihmutls aie brought, 1 will bm give oihis ί«Ί tin* ¡icre,mmodad«in d y (»ni ir.du, and return io лет. Tin ili ree Knights bow* d as ac¬ cepting hk tourtc-fy. Alatfred din ι и d ihv hi.in- j*u\s retinue to be conducted to an adjacent
77 hofpífd , founded by the Pdncefs llippolita n.r die lecepfiou of pilgdms. A^ ihey made die tit- cnil of lhe eoiiit lo return toward, ihe gat» , ι ! .■ gi'Mitde (word burft lıom the íuppe>itus, diu\ tai¬ ling to ihe ground oppofiie lo lhe iu kuet, remai¬ ned immoveable. Alan/red , almoft bárdente! tO preternatural a j »pea ranees , fui mou η f ul die ihot к of ξ tlii» new prodigy ; and retinuing to die had» wdieic by this time the feaft was n ady , Jie invi¬ ted ids iileut gutfts to lake tin ir phues. A'Umjred, however ill Jiis heart wns at eaie, ( mkavoured to infpire tbe company with minh. He ]mt b-veial «pteftions it» them, but vvas anfwered only by iigns. Thev ι ailed iheir vi/<ns but kiibcientlv to feed themfelves» and that fparin-dy. Sirs, laid the Prince, ye are the firft guefts I ever mated within tin fe wails, луЬо konu d ю hold any iu- tercOmíe with me: Nen has it of ι been cuftouiaiy, J ween, fm ρ ι inces to hadaid their ibi ι e and dignity againft Urangets and muns. Yon fay you come in die name of Frede/ ic of Viterua; I have ever heaid thai he was а gallant and tonil·«. us Knight ; nor would lie, I am bobl to lay, think it bem at b him to miv iu iocial toe »ah w.sh л Prince that is bis equal » and not unknown by det'db iu arms — Still ye arc filent — well! be it asit may — by the laws of holpiuliu ami e bi¬ vaky year« maliers undei this roof: \e l'hall do
VS •yom* pleafure — bul come, give me л goblet of wine; ye will nol refufe to pledge me to thv. heahhs of your fair miftrcih"*. The prindpal Knight hgiud and croffed Jıİmfell', and was riihu- from the board — Sir Kniidn» hdd Alan/red, vdi.tl 1 laid was but in fport: 1 fhall coulirain you i u nodo* ng: Ufe vour mtod liking. Sinet; mirdi is mn у oue moud , ki us he fad. iiníímfsnuy hit your fancies bt Uer; İ..U. us wilhdr.ìw; ami beai· if wii.il 1 bave io un!''hi, mav be tu'iu* rdifhed than die vain e fhts :> 1 h,wo made h r v our palli me. Alatfred t!.· ¡: ! . ,:dm ling the 'h ree· Kuighfá Îjüo an inner fui'/:'")', ihm' d.u Λ r, and invi* thi.» du m í«) h-* (Ί.ίΜιΙ, bt g-m dm- , addrcfling! hi m h If ίο i\í^ e ni> Y pu uu w, . Уои e ome«, ^h" К ui-. îi с, ; ■ 1 lutdtrfìand , in tin- »ume of lhe 'Xíuí-uis if ]'Íceir:t{, lo rede-mand lile Laily IfabetLt his ıhı ighiei, who İıas been COiiíraelcd iii du* ¡'лес td.' lody chuľdt to my but, bv the confem of her b ¿*ti guardians; and to n unire* me to ľeftgu my domhimns to vour Lord, лл ho givts himhlf for the* ucmft of blemd io Pi hu e Alforjo, wJmfc foul God relt ! 1 fhaU fpeak to die: latter udih* (d your tb mands f İri t. l ou muft know, vour Loid know«*, tiiat I enjoy die pdticipality е -f' Otranto from mv father Don Ala* navi, as lie received İl fiom bis father Don Ricardo. Aljonfo* their pvedetcflor, dying childlefs iu th*
19 И-Л y Land» h^qneathed his eft.ıîes to my grand* bthu* Don lliia.do, in couftdtT.itiou of itis Liííh- ítii fervices — die ftranger ihook his bead — Sír Knight , faid Man/ted warmly , Jiicardo ллм*- n valiant and upright man J he wus а pious man; witnefs his muniiiccnt touudation td die adjeiitdng^ chui'di and two convents. He was perul ¡ady patronized bv St. Nicholas — my grand fai her was incapable — 1 fay, Sir, Don lit bar do was hirapa- bie — excufe me» your inte i ruption has ılÜor- deied me. — f venerate* the memory of' tn\ grand* father — well! Sirs, lie held diis eftate; lie luid İl by his good fword and by the favour of St. Ni¬ cholas — fo iud my father; anel h/, Sirs, will f, come wh«i t come will — but ¿raderle, your Luid, is neareft İn blood —*- I liave coufuiud to put my¬ thic to the jft'ue of the f woul — does that imply a л -i lions tide? — 1 might h.wv ,d\vd , win tc is Frederic y (Mir Lord e' К с port (peaks him dud in «taptivity. Ì «mi fay , your aclLur, fav , indivis — 1 cjneíiion i: imi — I might, iurs, I mighl — bnt I do ml. Other Primi*» Would bid F/ı/, rie lake his inheritance by ft »ree, iť hv <лп: Huy would not itale their dignhv on a Angle tom- hat: They would not iubmit it ío lhe dee ihon of unknown muí s! — pardon m«·, Guitkmtu, ï am too wann: Jhit hipede y ourle 1\ es in mv iitua¬ tion; Aï ye are ftout К its, would it тл «mvr
8 ο your dioici' to luve νοιιν own and die honour of out* anceftois raliul in queftion ť — bul lo lhe p e. :o. k: reunite tnt) to th hv cr up the L. id у i . , /la — 8 к s, 1 nulli ä(k il ve aie audmd/.ed lo ííiuu Jier? Tiu, Kmghi uoílduk İhıuvı Jur — eouimud Afanjnd; w t II ! y ou an aul ďi »/ed io ru u \ e Jnr — hm, genih* Knight j may 1 aík if y ou bave full poyv u *· .' 'liie kni*,Ju no.VuL 'Tu ЛЛ v ii ; I did Mânjii il Ί lien beai w hai 1 h. ι , e to OÍ fu* — vi fu» (jcnlhmen, before nai dm moft ımhı'pv of men ! (İn began ίο Wup) dît и! пи yo:;: t о *«:\ilhuu ; Ι ,.ηι m l uh d lo it ! \^ч l ^^ t dl 1 am. K ! ' '\ν , 1 ίιαν< lod my emly hope, mv joy , ihv Li -poo of my b"if(e —* Conrad diul videt nmu ïîi.'_. 'ifm Knights difcovered figiu »ď ho pi lb*. Ye,-, o-d , Lui lia* d İ ('poh d tof my '^u. //. i«; at übt /iv — ï)o vou ıhuı nitoo· huí uiul Hl-' dn- 1 KnJďu htuikhig íiluue. Λίίοο! iu; Лонг patiu'.c* : ί.·οί uûu;/du. i ı*t ¡"hi io find, hy ihh ¡uiimun, "f y ur good-will, d,U dlh u ϊ¬ η r mav к* л 1 juft I whhoui bĽoJ. h ıs uu*. lenit of mim du ί,ι*· , vd u huh i !ыо kith<¡. i> lay. >c bihold ι,» «■> .· a ı.nuı thi.. ::. nd whh du; Woďk The j.-í*. id m«. 1 ¡, í-.u w -, e. d tm h mı cardın tao s. Pıou ¡ . . . u ,u ,uís h.ı , . η ■ h ι „ r any e harms in iuv , ·. , ■,. S w Uhui to u.,, omo ıhe fceplei í liad rei., i vui i, om my .unt!:, n wo h lionour tO my luit ~~ buí dul is ov et í Lile lib h is
81
is fo indifferent to me, that ï accepted y onr de¬ fiance with joy : A good Knighi canımı go to the «rave with more fadsfacdon than wJien billing in Lis voealion. WJiatever is ihc· will of heaven, 1 fubmit; for alas! Sirs, lam man of many forrows, Alanfred is no object of envy — but no doubt you aie acquainted with .í» v ftory. The Knight made figns of ignorance, and feemed curious lo haw Alanfred proceed. ? s İt poflible, Sirs, conti¬ nued the Prince, (hat my ftuiy fiiould be а fecret to you? liave you Jieard nothing ι elating to me and the Ρ rí net Ts llippolita ? They fhook their heads! — no! thus die», Sirs, it is. Ion dunk me ambitious: Ambition , alas! is coutpoftd of int)i e rugged malerials. If i were ambİUOus, 1 fliould not for fo many years luve been а prey to all the hell of confeientious fcruples — bui 1 weary your patience: I will be brief. Know then, that I have long been troubled in mind on my union Avidi ihe Princefs Hippolita. — OJi! Sirs, il ye were acquainted with ihat excellent wtunan ! Ίί yt knew tliat I adore Ju-r like a miftrefs, and ι h crii h iur as а friend — but man was noi boni foi pu¬ fa t happinefs! fhe f h a res my fcruples, ami with Jier confent 1 have brought tiiis matter before die church, tor we are related within the foibidden degrees. 1 expect every hour the definitive fen¬ tence that nudi feparate us for ever — I am fure i·*
Sa vou fed for me — ï fee you tio — ρα ι d ou ι befo teats! Tlie Knights ga ?л d on ι ae h other, wonde¬ ring whu t íhib w<Mihl end. Mttr}/ ¡ etl e onunned. Thcukaih of my l.ui buiding wbiL m\ lojil ^vas undu dits« anxìtt v , I thought o! imtíoug imi le- ligutng mv diini'uuui**, л\и\ u no 1 -u t vt i hont ihr light of mankind. uí\ oj l· di .к uh v was lo fix on α íucceíh>i , w Im va oui '' «. ¡unhr of mv people and tO dííptífe of t fu Ladi Adc'U, W'llt) is dear to nie as m> own idood. 1 v v a > vulling to reftore ihe line of Alfonjo Ť even in hh moft di'tant kimhed : And diough , ]iardon me, Ì am fal i died it was lus wdll titat Jiu ardo\ lineage I hould lake phut* of his own relations, y ei w hue was I tt) İcardı for thofe relatum-d 1 kin-w oi nom but F/ederic your Lord; lie wat a lapiive to tlie inii* dds, ordeael; and weie he living, and at home, would Jnupiit ihv fiondi hing itale of Vicenza fol¬ lile- iuconiideiable piim jpaliiy ut Otranto ť Jt ho ■would not, coidd 1 btar lhe ihoughi of feeing д haid unfeeling Viceroy kt over my poor hdddul people, лпа ι hank heaven am hdovetl bv diem — but ve will alk , wJdifur unik thk long dit- conrie * brie Rv then» tìm*·, Siu, ïh-aven in \ ^>m* arrivai leenis topnim oui а гемтичк fot thefe diíh- cidiit-s And my m'sfortunes. Tiıe Ladv /Jabella is al liberty ; 1 fhali ioou be fo — 1 would fubmit m any tiling ior the good of шу people — were it
83
•not die beft, the only way to cxdnguifh the fends herween our families, if 1 was lo take the Lady Ifabella It» wife — \on hall — but though Hippo· lira's virtues will ever be dear to me, a i'duee rmtft not colluder himidf; Le is hoin ior hú people. — A fervant ai liiat inftant unlu İng the chamber apprized Mar jred tliat Jerome and leverai of ids inclinen demanded immediate ate» h* lo hinu Tiu- Prince, provos ed at dik interruption, aud tearing ihat ılıt- Fiiar would dih over to the ftr.mgus tiiat J/ub*l,'a h,\d taken fane!uary, was going to forbiti Jerome" 1 ! entram e. But r; rolke dug diat he was certainly arrived to notify the PihicefVs return» Alatfred began to t setik* himfdf to tJie- Knights for leaving ihem for а few m et m ents, bm was prevenit d i) y diet arrival of the Priais. Alanjred angrily rr pri¬ marului them tor t lie ir intrufton, and vvould it ave forced ihem back from ìli e chamber; but Jerome w\is lot) much agitateti to be repulhd. lie decla¬ red aloud the flight of Ifabella, with proidtauuns of liis own innot t nie. Man/ted diftractcd at die news, ami not Ids λι iii coming to the knowledge ot the ftrangers, nitu'ed nothing but incoherent leniences, now upbraiding the Ti iar, îmvv apoio* gi/ing to the Knights>, earneft to know what лл'аз become of Jjabella, y u eepually ahaid of theii knowing, impatient to piume her, у el dreading
sı fo inne dum join in the pm Inii, He offered io thĺpaít h mdlutiM'u tu ip u ii <d lut, — hut the e híí i Knight tm huí;«.» ι kef ¡ипц ( b u« t«, ti рги.п liva Mat: /u d \п dii u lu m-v hu İns ıhtık uni ambi- gnous ıh ahne. , aml »h m-· mb d lhe emu ol f /abel* la"'· fidi .ihh m e fumi the ι alde. d/md/*//, tailing a iìei η İ -Ό к at У* нот , impi v ou a. t опипа ml of iil e ut e , pui ended 1 11. u on (,οη rn d У ıh adi lie had plai ul in t in hıncı uai ν un' d he ι < ч dd delu mine how to dilpoti d hu. ριυηι< y w lm trembled foi hts ΙοιΓ> lift, did tmi due contradict this falfbood, hui om (d lds hu dirt n, not under die fame auviuy , dedan d íhmUy diai fiie had fled to lliui thiuth İn the pu < reding ioghi. Tlie Plinei in v аш eiuh α\ our« d U* íiop this dih ov ery, vybieli overwhelmed him with ihame and touiu- hon. 'ihe prindpal ftiatigu , ama/.ed nt the eon- tradii lions lie iieaid, and moreiban half perfuaded that Alanjred h ла fecreted die Princefs, imiwilh- ftauding ihe concern he e\ prd f ed ai her flight, milling to die door, (aid, t bott t rdl or- Pi ince ! I/àbella f had be found. Ma? j r ed uufeavomvd to buhl bini, but the uthu Knights affifting iheir conimele» iic bioke from die Ptinee, ami baflemd into ihv comi, demanding bis attendants. Alan· fred, finding if vain !<■ divut him from lhe put¬ init, uffu'ed lo .ucompany htm!, and fnmmoiiiiig his attendant*», and laking Jerome and fonte of th*
S5 Friavs to guide them , dn y i fined fi ««m dm raftle; Man/red pıivaitdy givnig oíd« ι-, ίο ίιανι tiu Kadghi's company luut(*d, while ι« the hiu^ht he allerti d to dıl|)ai» Ji a пи ilt n_ı ι n» iirptitt il-.n alhfiaiu e. Tin; company had no iooiju epiitled the udde» than Mattida, who Idi loiftlf dctply inleidted kit* the young peafain , ft in e fhe had I« » n hım соц. demited to death in the had, and whole dn»u^bts had been taken up with tout uting пи aim t s to hive him, was inhumed by hune of tin· luidde intendants ihat Alat j r> d had dílpaidud all lus meu vadem ί ways ín purinií oí IjalJ.'a. íle had in his İmi ι y au eu ibis onici ín ^ennl η ι ms, not meaning to t vti nd ît io the gu.ud h h.ui ť l upen Titeo tior e , bui Luj u i uu ti. "İn. dumb u s, oihuous \u obey ίο putmpluiy α ľuno f ami in¬ ged hv dieii own uuiohly aud iov t oi imvtity io jtdii in any pieupitaít tiuut, had to a man hú lhe calile. Alatilda ihíui-_tg, d huídl houi hi W <nn* n , itole up io iin hink t о л u , aml ι od toi* ling the d oui , pu h nt ed ht ι td I itt die a fiou ι f In d T ·* od h e \ οι, iui utan , Lud { he , though hh d «biiv , imd wom.udy mo ¡uu tombini lin fup I am takın;,, vî t Judv thaiitv, hmm-uni t j » _д ad otlu ι tì* s , j u, Ί ι Juu ι í in au, 1 ív : ıh« doou oj (hv pi ihm „iľ opt n : Чу luhti ,uui lu.ďmuín«- aie ahíuit; hut lie v mav ¡ооц tunni: lie goiu πι
6 ft fafety; and may the angels of heaven direct thy ceñirle! Tímu art fund y one of ihofe angels! faid the enuprured Г'и odore: Nume but a blefled faine could fpeak, tould at.l — rmdd kx»k like thee! —* m,n I not know die name ofm\ divine proiectıefsî meibonght thou nauudii ihy lather: Is it pofhblei two Manfred's blood it ed hoK piiy! ««*· lovely Lady, thou anfwueft m»t · bui how avi thou here thy tel ť ? why doft thou neglect ihy own fafely, and wafte a thought on a wretch like Theodort r k-t u% flv loget her: TJie life thou be¬ r¬ ilo w eft fhall be dedicated to (by defence. Alas! thou mifukeft ; faid Matilda, fighing: I am Alan* fredh daughter, but no danger* await me. Ama¬ zement í bud T'tt odore: Ibu laít night I hhdhVd myfeif for wilding thee tin· fervice thv ^rations compalbon fo diantabK returns me now. Sdii ihou ait iu -ut erroi ; Lud du Pdncefs, but ihh is no lime iot explanation, llv , virtuous \ outh, while it к in my powu to fave ihte: Should my father i etin η , thou ami I bol b íhouhl indeed bave caule h» tremble. How! laid 'Theodore, dunkelt dmu , (banning maid, that I will accepf of life at die hazard ed augii) eulamifoiis lo thee? belur I г« enduH'd a thoufand deaths, — I run nt» ril к, laid Matdda, but by thy th lay. Depart; il tanimt be known that í dfbfted thy flight. Swt ar by lhe faints above, faid Theodore y that thou cauft not
s;
be fufpec led ; elfe here I VOW to л Wait W hat« vet¬ ean helai me. Oh! thou art too gemiojH; laid Mattida í hut ι eft aifuted thai no Inlpicion ела íduht on me. bi ve me thy htauícom* hind m ioìo'ii ihat dum «loft noi deceive me, laid 7/ico- do/e: and hi me b.tlhe il with tbe warm fears of pjiUiude, — forbear, faid the Punuk; this muft noi be. Alas! faid Theodor,-, i have nevű* known buf calamity undi ibis hour — pt dups (half never know other forf u m· again: Softer die chafte nipt ures of holy gratitude: 'Tis my loul w mild print ils eíTuftons ou ihy hand. l'orbi .и, aml be Gone: Said Matilda: — i low would l/u bella ap¬ prove of feeing thee .it my feet/ Who is fjabella? laid the young man wiih lurpn/.e. Ah me! i fear, iaiti tiie Princefs, i am fuv'oua deuiiiul nnd — haft ι Imu foi i>oi ths ruriofiu this moniiiu? Thv looks, thy actions, all thy brauu-on·* iell' kerns an emanation of di\inity, laid T/'uodotc, bnt ihy woids are dark and myiteiious, — fptak, Lads; í peak it) thy fet vaul's t tunpiehcnlion. — Thon underííamieft but too well! laitl Matada- Pmt otiet' more I eommanti due to be ^(»ne: Thy idood, which 1 may prehive, will be on usy liead, if í waft e the unie in vain dibourfe. I go, Lady , faid TJieodote, bet aule il is di\ wdl, am! beeauU I would not briuj; die. -¿rey İîaııs *d' my falber луъ'Ь lorrovv to ihe giav«. Say but, adoied r i'
ss Jjady» that 1 have tliy gentle pity — Stay; faid Matilda' ] will conduct tliee to the, fub terra neon» vault hy which ¡Jabella efcaped ; it will lead thee to the church of St. Nicholas, where thou mayft take fanc.tu.iry. — WJiat! faid t Inodore, wasit anotlier, and not thy lovely felf that I affifted to find the fublerraneous pa ftage? Il >vas; faid Afa» tilda; but afk. no more: I tremble to fee tbee itili abide here: Fly to the fancfuary, *— to fanctuary faid Theodore: No, Princefs, fanctuaries are for¬ hel plefs dam kls, or for criminals. Theodore's foul is free from guilt, nor will wear the appea- ïanctî of it. Give me a fword, Lady» aud thy father fhall learn that Theodore fcorns an ignomi- jiious flight, llafb youth! faid Alatilda , ihou wouldft not dare to lift tiiy prefumptuous arm againft the Prince of Otranto? Not againft thy falber; indeed I dare noi: faid Theodore; Flxcufe me» Lady; I had forgotten, — but couid I gaze ontJiee, and remember thou art fprung from the tyiaul Alanjred? — but. he is thy father, aud from t Jiis moment my inj m ies are buried in obhvioib A deep nnd hollow groan, Λνϊιίϋΐι feemed lo tome from above, ftartled the Princefs and Theodore. Good heaven! we are overheard! faid the Princefs. They liftened; but puceivingj HO farther noife, they bolli concluded ii die effect «f peut -up vapours: And the Princefs preceding
so
Theodore fold y \ carded Jiim to her fa t huk atinorv , win η* equipping iiim with α cetmpleie fuît, he was t opdm ted by Matilda tt) ilie poilu n- gate. Avoid tin t->wn, faid the Princefs, ami all the wcftu'u Ihh * i ılıt taide: 'Tis iheie* lite kart It muft be так i tu by Manj r ed aud die ftrangers: f »ut hie thee m lhe oppoiitc quail« r. Yonder Inbind ihat Ionit to ıh»· rait i> a t bain oi rocks, hollowed lulo a labyrinth of taverns that reacli lo the fea- coaft. 'fitere thou mayft lie comealed, till tiiou cauft make figns It) fome veflel lo put on fhore and lake due off. Go! heaven be ihy guiele! — and fometimes in thy prayers remember — Alatilda! Theodore flung himfelf al Jur feel, and feizing her ρ ρ lilly hand, wliich witb ftruggles ihe fullered him to kifs, he vowed on the eariieft opportunt! v t*> get himfelf knighted, and к rvc-nliy intreated ht*i permi/hon to fwear himfelf etei naliy her knight™ KVr the princefs could rtqtly , a dap ol thumlet was iuehktily heard, dial (hook the baith mt nt«. Theodore, regard к fs of the tunpeit, would haw urged his fuit; but the Piiutefs, difmay cd, luiuu ted haftily into tlie caftit 1 , antl commanded the youth to in: gone with an an dial would noi be difobeyed. ile lighed, and ruh ed, Lut w idi eyus fixed on the gate, until Alatilda dornig it, put an end !»■ an inierview, in whieh ihc ina:ts F U
Г}0 of both had drunk fo deeply of a paftion, which both now i aft eti foi die 0 ϊ ίί lime. Theodore went puihvely l'» dır» convent, io acquaint, his ialine' wi'h ids thhv erante. There lie learned the ablente oi Jerome, and die purluh. th.it wa!« making ahu the Lady Ifabella, with fomc particubu s 'd whofe ilory Ju* now firft became accpi.ihiteeh iin geie rous galani rv of'ids nature pro m ted Jiim to wifh tt) afhh iier; imi lhe Monks coukl lend him uo light*· io gmk at the rouie fhe iidd iıinı. He w ,. noi tempted to wander far in fenn h d her, lor tiu- olea ot Ala· tilda hati imprui'cd itu li fo líiouglv em ids heart, thathe could nol heir to abfuil himfdi at much diiuuice from ϊη? dmde. Tim temhrueh Jerome had exprefled 1er htm eouumed to < oníhm ibis rduuanee; aud he t v en puluaihtl himidf tiiat (dial affettimi was ι he ι hid caufe of his ho vu ing be I Wien the ι aide aul monahi rv. Cndl Ju ome i honid reumi ,ιί right, Tl t odore ai kngth dett i- mined to 11 p-dľ l" l h'' hu lì thai Мм il da bad pointed om lo iiim. Vinvoig ihui , h^ tungin line ghmmie/i dude u .u hi'! í, du el w die plea¬ ting ındauchük ih, α \ ι gnu' m his mind, in ìbis mood he iovul ınîuıfddv lo thv eaves w iddi hui formuly krved as a ьчо.ч io inumiti, ,v\d w*oì ïiejvv reponed muml dır (imnuv to he haunted by evil fpil'itS. He ľfidktted lo h.'Vı íuud dili
9* tradition; and being of α brave and adventurou* difjtoiition lie willingly indulged his curiohty in cxploiing the fecret recefles of this labyrinth. He Jiad not pentlrated íar bt iure he thought he heard the fteps of fome perion w ho kenud to retreat before him. Tutxlse, diough ftrmly grounded in all our hok both enjoins to be believed, had no appieh» niion thai good men Were abandoned without caule to lhe malh e of the powers of darknefs. Ht- thought the jAdio more itkdv ю be iuieiud bv robbers than by thofe infunai agtnis who ли- n poi ted to mob ir and bcw i hk r travdku. He iud long bunu ti wdrli iitppaií« nee to approve ids valour — di.iwhi;; his fahrt, he marched h daidy emwaitk, inil directing iiis ihpf, as tm İmpuhı». itiíihu·. í. un í bťfore Jdm ied ihv w.iv, 'i lie armour ht- vu ie was а hke indication te* the pufun who aumhd him. Theodore now* t onv hiúid ihar he w t- n -r miftaken, ledouliicd ids j.ict , am! t viti* no 1 *, gained on the perfon thai ftcd , whole iu.n и . u'eafing, Theodore came up jnft as a vunuiujul brealhkk b( fure iiim. He li a iteti to ralle m ι » but her lu roi was fo gre. t that he appreht inhd к.л would faiut in Ids arms, iu ufed e vu ν unde Word ίο dilptl lier alamı·., and allured Jiu ih., t iar kotu uıpu'nıg, he w uuhi defend Iur at the pedi or ids lik-, Ihe Lady movering Jier fpirus
q<2 from his courteous demeanour, and gazing on her protector» faid» fure I liave heard that voice be¬ fore.' not lo my krmwledgť, íeplied Theodore, unlefs as I ton jcetun* t Imu arı tiıe Lady Jfabella, —· merciful heaven! cried fhe, thou ait not fent in qtitft of me, ait ihou? лт\ faying ihofe woids, (he threw herklf αϊ his feel, and beionght iiim not io deliver her up to Alanjred. To Alanfred! ciied Theodore ~ no, Lati y , 1 luwe once already delivered thee ft ош his tyranny , and it filali faie haid wiih me now, buL ] Λνίίΐ place ihre out e»f iln reach of his dating. Is it poflibïc, Lud fhe» thai thou f h ou b I ft be die genu ous unknown ■whom I mei laft iiiìdil in the vauit of die caftle? fute i hou αϊ I not α mm tal, bnt my guai.li an angel : Ou mv knees Je! me; thank — hohl, gentle- Prin- i cf u Laid Tlteotlotr, tun demean thvfdf before а pooi and feküdlek vontig man. İl" înavuţi İıas kk* led me for diy ehkvcru, it will auumplilh ils woik, ami iheiigliieii my aim in thy caufe — hut (omo, Lady , we Λνν too near the mouth ot lite cavern; let us ft ek its inmoft ΐ -u*'! es: I tan hav e ло íianquilíity till I intve phiied thee bt v mid the icadı of danger. Ala«*! wdnU iman you, ¿ut .' f.dd fhe. Thoneh all your aedon; ue noble, ilmindi v our huihm-nts ipt d ihe ¡пни*, ot youi foul, is ii fitting thai I ihould a. мипрапу you abtue into their peiple.ved к tie au? fhouhl we b·
found iogediei» wìtat wonbl а cuiforious wudd iJiiuk of my conduci? I rtl[>tct your viituous dtli- taev , iaiti Tlitodo/*.: mn* do \*m Jurbour a fulpi- (ion that wounds my honom, i meant to conduct sou into lhe moft pi ivate* ca\ily of thefe rocks, and then at the ha/ui'd of mv liie to giuid ıheİı' entrama· aíiainlí e\ erv Üvín_; diiii-.;. İh-lide«*, Ladv* continued be drawing а deep figh, beauteous and all perfect as your foi m İs, лиа thıuıgiı my wiflies are not guiilleis of aipiriiig, know, my foul is dedicated ю iinot İter; aud although — a ludden noife previ ni t d Theodore lıom pi ocot d İ ug, liity ţoou diftinguiíh' d theie kumls» Ifabella! what lio! /jabella! — tiıe trembling Primefs rihipkd into iier fount r agony of bai. Thu, do/e tm deavonied lo entom agt lnr, but ín ■% ain. Не aílured berin w ould die ralin r than fufter het' to return muler Atcirjred\ powu*; and begging her to remain concealed, Jie went forth lo prevent the pei fun in fearch of her fremi approaching, At the moulh of the caveui he found an armed Knight, difcoiuiiiig with α peafant, who afliiied him he had ken a lady enter the palles of the lock. The Knigh: was prepáidig to feek lier, when Th 'tre, pl.iu.ig bimklf in bis way, with bis hv'.J duwn, iterili y forbad him àt his puil to advance. And who art tliou who darei! to ends my way I laid the Knight haughtily. One who
doe«: not dare mere dian he will puform, Lud Theodore. 1 luk the Lady Ifabella; hud lhe Knight, and umh о. and ihe has taken uluge among ilute ro, к . Impede nie not, 01 ihou Λνίΐι repi ul Juv leu jìovoLtd my ltLuUnun. Thy pu ι poft* is as odims, ,i4 thv ldtnlmeni is cent- templlbit', t.litt i ίιί UKW , . Гк -itifJ, W iľ ilt t tiiOU eamdl, or we Ih dì toon know w hoft nientmcni is moft (uribk, İhe íŕiangti , win« was the pıt«. cipal Knigilt tiiat iiad aıuved fu »m tiıe manmis ed' Vicenza, had '.udhmi-d from Mo/ . e? as he was bubeei in getiing l.tdu mation ol tin Pi incela, and giving, various о re! erv to pit v eut »iu hilling into lhe petwei ol du thu e Kuiiihls. 'i hui tidd iiad fufei Ue d Man/r ч/ oí bimj. pitvv lo (he Punud-'s aiu* ouditi¿ ; and tîü» u-ínii írom a man, whu he (onduihd wa> íiadiniel h\ thaï Punit to kuete hu, confirming Lu htlpi mus, к madem» upi у» bm chídiaiging a blow w uh lu n-.bii at Theodoii, ллч -aid foon have ι un«»v*t d all obiti ue t ion , n 'Fht 'ìdo/e , who ι ut dv him fur one oí Marfa d \ i mi ons, лnd win» had im hxuiu ¿iiv.n lb» рюу«>- t emu than prepotd ίο iup[>ui4 iv, liad not rete i veel rhe íookc on ini íhidd. íiie ν .doto thaï liad h» loti' İnen fmoiJnied in liis bn ah , hioke, ioidi г omu; be inlin d impi tuouik on lite Knight, win, Ir pi id, and лл1\иЬ w* ie not itis powu fui incentive*. to iuidy dteth. The tombat wa-> fuiious, but ie t
J 0i 7' ·- / ' W «t unh d llu ui 'İU ui dll 'f h\
U' .'
, . d ti u'i ('ti ¡ Ι ioni as it L nitt tl iu, ţi,, tolv « » rnh'o , i ji, j « S «m , vdio Ji.nl Jiul tui di í ii. » di ί , ί η' дп ' o itn .о 'un fu lome of M 'ft/r* d\ ui , t s, Wl. i hu tutku wu*e thlpuh u no . . Ί du 1 u Ί ι ! ; ι mil oí Ι ¡abilla. 1 In ν < m , 1 ν d K.,í„. f ' tul , vdmm du ν íoon dihov и ! ι ht die pod. İıinı;« 1 . Ί 'n odor 1 9 not W i di h o ii ¡, . iii . iul tui f o Mai ι/ r td t ould not behold the viiloiv bt bid gained without uno- uuiis ol piiv and genudhv ; Jhu Ju 1 was moo* lotdiul, when Iu hdip f r! oiuiitv <d his advuhuy, And was infoin. . f 'at hv w ль no íe- taimi, 'ни iiuii.iti 1 , «.. t/ r^d. fit iff,ft, el die fuUlluv Ot tin Ι ι,Ι U О « ! ',tinUt'g th' huidií- ,«hd ot t« »ui ; , " u. h i\n idot d th it flo W ' 'í '« »nJtl V. (По. , idi к m di t o e ov u om Γ*ΐ ios ipt t dt, i -d O' al, d 1 mht ting v oh f, g« m ι * İ » , w h.t\· h ί ! а ot m uitu I letok do ι 1 i itn j ıh » uu ' dj * t v 'UU , 1 f t 1 » e t n t i 1 1 ι í i ' u < m s i U» i , v j , í í i. t — 11 i f „o Lift f ι « 4Ut.t — I Lont — tl 'fid^ľ t ts ai h md — (dl hu - I íi »v f ηι,ρο'ί ,, f κι«, to —- Ht u dvui„! ! t 1 « n« ot ıhı ..dil; İus uuhodv л "iud. .ıh «, t ilon ' л ί«, ii" liou pi tv evi ι hon — (, ο h lonu w iu ι , Lud // - don , .imi pout it d«, vvn his tin mi, whd 1 lulu u to \h? Ptiicd-» — living ibi!, he lho iu /janiiéi, ami
in few words told her modeftìy, that Jie had been fo uui'oiiunatc bv miftake as io wound a ¿»eniJe¬ mati from her father's tourt, wlio wifhed e'er he died to impali íoinething of conletpieuce to hu. The Piina k, who had been tranfporied at h carili«· the voice oi Thiodore, as he ca)led to bei io come forth, ллм*-. afionifhed at what fhe Jieard. Suffer¬ ing herfelf mbe conducted by Theodor i , tbe new proof of whofe valour recalled her difperfed fpirits, fhe tame ллЬеге the bleeding Knight lay fpeechlefs on the ground — but liei fea u returned, when firn beheltì die domefiies of Alanfred. She would again have fled, if Theodore had not made Jier obferve thai dit у were unarmed, and had not thruituied them with hilum death, il ihey Ihonid dare it) fei/.e the Princefs, The iti anger, opining liis eyes» and beholding а woman, faid — art thou — prav tell me truly — art ι hoi ι l/abella of Vicenza? 1 am; lani íhe: good heaven reftore thee! Then thou — dien thou — laid the Kuighi» ftrtuding lor uUuante — keft — thv father — ΓΠ Ρ giverne one — oh! ата/а mutt ! hoi ror! what do I hear! what tio 1 lee! tried /jabella. My fathei! you my falhei ! hovv саше yem here, Sii, íor heaven's lake fp* ak ! — oh! run for help, or he will expire! — 'Fis moft true, faid die wounded Knight, exerting all ids force-; I am Fredin* ihy father *— yes, 1 came to deliver the — It wìlì not
97 rot be — giverne a parting" kif?, and tale? — c ir, faiei Theodor e , do no! t xhauft youdelf: í uffe ι us toionvey you lo the caille — Ur the iáidé! laid Ifttbslia; is there no help nearer dun ¡he call b-Ž would you cxpoie m\ f.uher it> the iyuoiii if ht-î goes di ulier , 1 d лее noi ace» »m pa n у İıinı — and yet, lm\ 1 leave Jiim! my child, iaid / /cderic , if matters imi for me whiihei J am carried: A lew minutes will place me beyond thmger— but while I have eyes to doat on thee, forfake me not, deai J/abeiia! Tids brave Knight — J know uot wJm heis, will protect ihy innocence — Sir, you vviJJ mn abandon my eld Id, will you! Theodore ibed- ditiii tears over Jiis victim, and vow hu ю »nard the Princefs at the expence ut ids liie, puíuathd Fred-tic to fuffer himlelf io be coiutuiod io thv t, iftle. They plat td him tui ι hork ín Io.-_.tng го one of the domeftics, after binding up his woumk a; well as tliey were able. Theodore man h etl bv Ids ftde; and die afflicted l/abellu who <,ciid not bear lu quit Jiim, followed moiunlully к hind.
98
CHAPTER I V. 1 iti: forro wf ul troop no fooner arrived ai the calile, than they were met hs llippolita and MatiU da % to whom /Jàbeiln had hm 'nn of the domeftics before to ad ver life of their aj pioath. The Ladies Caulins Frederic to be conveyed into the neareft chamber, retired, while the burgeons examined lus wounds. Matilda blufhed at feeing Theodore and /jabella together; but endeavoured to conceal it by embracing lhe latter, and condoling w i ill her on her father's mifehauce. The furgeon s *<«т came to acquaint Hippolita dní none of the mar- quib's wounds were dangerous; and that he was defirous of letini* Jiis daughter and the Prineeftes. Theodore, under pretem e of exprefting his joy at being freed from his apprchenfions ed' the tombai: being fatal to Frederic^ eould not reftft the impulfe of following Matilda, liti' eyes were ío otten caft down on meeting hb, tliat /jabella , who regarded Theodore as atientiveU as he trau t d ou Matilda, foon divined who the object was tiiat he had tolti her in die са*», e engaged liis affections. While this mute itene palled, Hippolita demanded of Frederic the \,¿uic ol his having ukeu tliat
9 У
myfìcrioi.s courfe for reclaiming Jiis daughter; and threw in valions apokigies tu excufe her Loid fol¬ lile match contraen d between thtir children. Tredene, howovtr iuc-nfed againft M и fred , was not infeiiíiblc to the counefy and btnevokuee of Hippolita: lint he was itili mote ftiuck wiih the lovd> form of Matilda, Wifhing to tutdiit them by his bediide, lie in förmedj llippolita of his hoiy. He told her, that, while prifouei to the infidels, he h,id dreamed that his daughter, of whom he fiad learned no news ftnce his captivity » was del ained in а caftle, where fhe Wã$ in danger of the moft dreadful misfortunes: And that if he obtained his liberty , and repaired to а wood near f oppa, he would itanı more. Alarmed at this dieam, and incapable of obeying ihv direction given by it, Ids chains became more grievous than ever. But while iiis tbougíits weie occupied on the means of obtaining his liberty, he icceived the auieeable news that the- conft derate Princes wlio were waning in Irak jl tne , had paid Jiis ranfom. He inftantly fet out for the wood that had been marked in his dream. Lor thiee days he and liis attendants had wandered in the foreit Withutit feeing a human foim: But on theevening of thu third ihey came to а cell, in which ihey found а venerable hermit in the agonies of death. Applying rich cordials, they brought the hunt* G '2
100 Itke mau m bis [pece h. My fons, l'aiti he, J am bounden io л onr charity — but it is in v. un — I am going to mv tierna! r< ft —■ yet I die with tbe falisf.it tion of ped'orming the will of heaven. When fidi i repaired io this folii udi , after feeing mv country become a pi ey to unbelievers — it is alad above hfl ν л ea u iin, * î vu·»* vviuuf-f io thar die.uhul feene t .SV. Л'/ 1 t>o 'a s .-οί.ικα to me, and revealed а fecret, ν huh Ite ha ' uu: nevű dífdofe to mortal шап, bul on mv th aibi. ed. Tifisi-, diat tremendous lion r, aud Λ t are ne» doubt the çimlen vvatriours to when»! 1 w.u oreh-red te* n-ve.d my truft. As foon as ye Jiair done lite laft offices to this w retched code , dig under the feventh iiec on ilie Jeft bruid of diis poor e ave, and your pains will — Oil! good ht*avui receive my foul! \\ irli thole woids «he dev oul man breathed his laft. By break of day, continued Ff edet ie, when we had commuted the holy r<-licks to earth, we dug according to direction — but wiiat Λν.ι$ our aftonifhment, when about the depili of ίίκ feer we difcovered an enormous Libre — die very- Weapon yonder in liie tourt. On die blade, vvhich was then partly out of die fcabbard, though ftnce clofed by onr ciTorts in icmovhig it, were written the following lines — no; excufe .tue, Λ bulan j , added die Marquis, turning to llippoltra, if f forbear to repeat them : I refpect your (ex und
101 rank, and would noi be guihy of um tiding yotiv ctrwitb founds injndotts to ought that h »luti to ЛОН — ile pauk'd. /Ippolita tumbled. .She did noi doubt but fredt nt was tbftined by heivui to accomplifh tiie file dial h ι med to due, uni iui houle. LoeAíng w i tii austom, fond m ís at Mattidit, a İdeni lear itole down Jiu < heek: Ihıl lecdhuiiig bedelf, ihe Lıİd; pıuceed, my L<ml : Ih.tvut does: nothiug in vain: Uoüak muff iri u ve its divine beli cíts with low luit fs and lubmi li ¡on. It is our part to deprecale ils wrath , οι bow f»» İH dectees. ilepeat the lenience-, my Ľud, w ** liften refigned. Fredertc vvas grieved that in had pm- cceded fej far. The dignity anel patient jtimm h of Hippolita pen tutted him wilh ídpetí, ani the- tende i lib ni .lift 1 1 ion with width tJie Putu r к and hei daughter ngaitbd cadi olhei, im lieti him almoft to tears. Vet appidienfivo th. if his fuihea- ranee to obey, would be moie ahu mí ug, he iep ( a- ted in a fallering and low voice the iollowug lines ; Whiľťer a cafpie rhat /uits tits ju ord İs fontu f Wa 't perils i¿ tin dicala er cornpa /Vd round; 1 fonftí'- blood alone can /aie riu maid , v And t μι iet α Λ ί*φ nji le /\ Vr tme* s jh nde WJiat is theie in dich inns, Ltitl 7'/ f . odure impa¬ tiently, tliat affetts did« Pum dhs/ wliy were (л 3
IOS they to be fliocked by a myfterious delicacy, that has fo little fecundation? Your words are rude» young man, faid the Marquis; and tho*' fontine lins favoured л ou tutee — my honoured Lord, iaid //abeila, who refeiited Theodor е^ч warmth , wliich fhe perceived vvas dictated by Iiis íeuth-tent·» fur Alantdi, difcompofe пея лоцгГеИ' for tbe gl of 'mg of a ptafands fon: lie forgets tlie lcverence he owes you; but he is not accuftomed — Hippolita^ concerned at the heat that had arifen, checked Theotlore for his boldnefs, but with an air ackow- ledging Ids zeal; and changing the converfation, demanded of t rederic where he had lefl iier Lord? As die M an piis was going to nplv , tltev heaid а noife w i: bout, and riling to impure tin* caufe, Alan f r ed , Jerome, and pail oí the troop, who iıad mu οι im pei fee l rnnmur of what had happ« ned, entered die cha mht r. Alan fr ed advanced haftily towards Frederic's bed to condole with him on his misfortune, and to Lam tbe cirrumfiaue ΐ <* of the combaL, \л1нп hailing iu an agony of lerror and am/uemeul , he uicd, ÌÌAÌ wiiat art thou? thou eh uid í id ípt e u с ! is mv buio come ^ — my di, iiett, ¿.oauuus Loid, tried H/ppoiìtn , dafphig him in fui arms, what is it vou fee? whv do you fix vour eye-halls thud -- Λ λ bill! cried Mun/red hrc-adď fs — dolt limu fee nothing, Hippolitaf is this ghaltiy phantom fuit to me alone — to me,
f 103 who did not — for mercy's fweeteft ' felf, my Loid, faid Hippolita, refume your foul, tommand your reafon. Theie is none heie» but ns, your friends — wbat is not that Aljonfo ŕ u kd Man¬ fred: Doft thou not lee İıinı? ran it be my hum's delifium? — This! my Lord, laid Hippolita; this İs Theodore, tlit youi h wlio has b*en fo unfor- tunate — Th eodore i' laid Alan f re d m o u r n fu Π y , and ftriking his iorehead — Theodore , or a phantom, he lias unhinged the foul oí Alanfred — but how comes he here? and how comes lie in armour? I believe he went in feaich of Ifabella; faid Hippo* lita. Of Jfabella I faid Manfred, reia plina into rajic — yes, yes, that is not doubtful — but how did lie efcape f nun durance in whh h 1 kit him? Was ii Jjabella, or ibk hypocritical old fuar» thai prot ured itis eidaigement? — and would a paient he eliminai, my Lord, (aid Theodore, if In* me¬ ditated the deliv« tance oí his child? Jerome, aim* xed ro hear liimfelf in a manner accufed by bis (On, and without foundation, knew not what to think. ile could not comprehend, how Tin odore had efcaped, how he came to he aimed, and to en- counter Frederic. Sdii Jie would not venture 10 :tfk aus queftions thar might tend to inflame- Man. jrtd\ wiath againft his fon. jeromt*» libine rom vinced Alanfred ihat he ind contri veti Theodoren rtkaíe — and is İt thus, thou ungiate E ul old man» О .»
faid ílu. Prince, addreftìng himfelf to tbe Friar» that tiiou π ■ påveit mine aml HippolitiCs bounties? And not content witli iraverhng my beau's neareft wiflies, thou arm eft thy badarti, лпЛ bringet!, him ium my own cafih: to infult mei i\i\ Lord, laid 'Uuodore, you wrong my fadier: iSe>r he nor I are capable of harbouring a thought againft your peace. Is it infolence dms ro furrender niy fe U* to your HighneLVs pleafure? added he, laying liis fword refpettfully at AlanfrecPs feet. Behold my bufoni; ftrike, my Lord, if yon fufpect thar a diskiyal thought is lodged diere. There is nor a fentiment engraven on my lieart, that does not ■venerate лет and yours. U he grace and fervour with whi< h Ί heodare uttered there* words, intu- eftt tl every perfon ρ re ft m in ids favour. F.een Alanfnd w,\^ louehed — y tï ftill poflefled widi his rduiibhuue lo Alfonjo, ids admiration was dafhed vvith f urei iıorror. Rife; faid he; ihy life is not my prefent pnrpeee. — Jìnt tedi me tliy hifteiiy , ami Jiow ihou rameft ceumecied wilii this did tiajtor liete. i\íy Lord, faid Jerome eagerly — peace! impoftur! laid Alan/red; I will not liave him prompted. Mv Lend, bdel Theodore, I want no afluíante: My ftory is veiy brief. I was car¬ ried al five years of л^^ to AljcUets wiih mv mo¬ lbu» who had been takt n by corfairs from die coaft of Stcily. She dhd td grief iu lefs than л
юз twelwemoiith — the tears gnflnd from Jerome** eyes, on whofe countenance а dimifaud an\iotis paffions ftood expreiled. iìeioie thv died, e ond¬ imeli Tht odore,, fhe bound a writing about my arm under mv garments, whh h told mt- í w u, the fon of du· Count Falconara — il js nudi tou , \aìd Jerome; i am dut wo it In d father — α„.ιοι I cujoin thee ii lence, Liid Alanjrtd- Pioceuf , 1 re¬ mained in flavery , laid Theodore, until лл il hin thefe two л ears, win η .ltundiug em my maiiu in his cruizes, 1 was dilivued by a Chiiftiau \<ft I, which overpowered the pitate* and dift overing myfelf to die taptain, Jie generously put me on fhore in Sici/\ — imt alas! iniuad of iuulhu a Γ* la I Jier, 1 ha: m tí that İıis chate, w hit it was hi uai ι d on the uní!, had, during lds ahit псе, be« η laid wafte by the Hovel, wiio iiad nurhd my modni and mi" itilo taptivity; That iii*· taitle bad inen burnt to tin- giound, and that my faliiev on hh reinrn had iohl wbat remaiuetl, and wms irdiui into religion in the huigdom of Naples , hut \\ lutu no man centid inform me. i Mi hule and fionditi,» hopelefs almoft of attaining the 1 1¡ oil poti ol α parent's embrace, I roeik the fiift opportunhv of letting fail for l\nptes , Iront w huıce , whhhi ι lek- li \- days, ] wandtied into this piovince, lid! fup- poiiiug my h if by the labour of mv 'lauds; mu until vdienuoiu did ï belit v e that leaven iud
j об .referved ялу Jot for jne but peace of mind and contented poverty. This, in v Lord , is Theodore* $ Jtorv. I л m ЫеЛЫ bevoj. юре? in Unding a fatine; I am miforunnü. -id my tiefen in having jnenrred your Hl;;hneis^s dijpleaíhre. He ceafed. A murin tu: υ ť aj>probatioo ^eutly arofe from ihe audiente This is not all; faid Frederic: I am hound in honour to add what he íuppreíľcs. Though lie is ш od eh, I muit he generous — lie is one of the brav eh youths on Ciinhian ground. He i^ warm loo; and from the Ihort knowledge I have of him, I will рЬ -diìe in^ielf tor his vera¬ city: If what he reports of himfelf wen; not true, he would not utter it — ami lor me, \outh, I b· »n mi' л írauíuu.-fs whit h beeome* 1 1 и v hnili. But now, aud thou dittir oih.'iid mi : \ et fhe noble bİ ι tod w liie h flows j n thv veins , mav well he allowed io hnil out, when it lus fo recent I v tra- eed itl< li ίο irs fource. ('ume, im Lord [turning lo Aluffjreď] it'I can pardon hin», lin* K von mav : it is nor the \oitth\s fault, if \ou took lum lor а ('pec l re. This hi tier i<mnt ¿:alíed the íoul t ď Marj f td. }ΐ Ih î η^ b li'oin aiioiín. r woild, leplicd he h ai ι rí h tl) , have pow? r to i m preis my π ι Li id wiih л we, it İ4 more than living m.m tail eo; nor eould a ii.riplin_,'s лпп ■— im Le.nl , inier- ľiti'ed ŕlitipolifa , л (¡ur unei t has oe(i)iie»tı tor repofe: Shali we nor leave him to his it It ? Saving
107 this, and taking Alanfred by tbe hand» fhe took leave of Frederic, and led the company fori b . The Prince, not forry to quii a converfofiou, which recalled io minti the dihos r eiy he bad made of ids moft fet nt fenfations, fnftuvd jiimklf lo be (.on- ducted to his own apartment, a fit r pern ódug Theodore, tho'under cnuuetm nt to remrn to die caftle on tht: morrow (V condition theyonn^ man gladly accepted] io retire with his father tt» ι he- convent. Alttiitta and I/abilla were too mueh o*- copied with their own reflection«*, and too litde, content with each other, to with for farther mn- verfe thai night, 'ihey hpaiated t-acJi loherthatn- ber, wiih move expreflmm* of ceremony and fewer <»f aftei lion than iiad palled betweeu them huo' tlieir < hibl hood if they parted vvith fmall eordklitv, thes did but mett with greater impadeiue, a-> foeui as the fun was dlVn. Iheir minds were in α ΠηιαΠοΐι that «\tbnled fteep, ami each rtcdleeted a thou* laud tpiehions which fhe wifhed Hie had put if* lhe olhei overnight, Matilda η Heeled lint t'-t- bella J» nI İnen twice delivered h\ Tit*, vdor e İn very uid« al üiııaiiuiK, wíiit h fhe tould nu b*-- liue aecitluiiah íli^rvťs, it wa·«- trne, lut! heen fix· d on hu in Frfder/(\ rhambu ; bul ihat m'ubi liave been io diL,nife bis palitou fm ¡¡tigella lt.. nt ihe father.·, of both, it w-t-- br u. r to »baľ dús
up — She wifhed to know do** ι mıh, bdi fiie Ihoni 1 wrong her fri ru d îıy eet uta i ning ·> paffion ior IfarnJhts it »v er. Thus jealoufy p rom pl ed, and ai the hone lime borrow »id an extuie from friend¬ fhip io juhil') its rnrioftiy. falcila, ne»i h h n îi lefs, had betler founda¬ tion ior ber iiilpiciOiis, Hodi Thtodoreľs longue and eves Jiad told hvi' Jiis heart was engaged — it was true — yel perhaps Alatilda might noi cor¬ ri fpuud lo Itis palhon — fite itad ever appeared iníuuihic to loye: All her thoughts wue ft,- 1 оц ín avui — whv did 1 dilluadt: lud [,dd Jjabella Ю iuridf: i am punífhed for my guteroiity — but vv In u did duy шее) I w here ? — it t annul be : .i have ıh, uvee' myfeif — pet lups hdì night vvas thv foii lime dn-v evi r h*du Li cadi other — ir unui be fome fother object that had prrpoliclï'ed his albe fioin — if it is, T am nor io unhappy as I thought; İf ir is uot my fiiend Matilda — iıovv! tau 1 ftoop to ΛνίίΊι for tlic affection of л man, ЛлЬо rudely and unneeefLudy acquainted me with his indifference? ¡md that at die кету monteni ín which common courlefy demanditi ai leaft expiei- ftojis of civility. I will go to my de. о Matilda, who will confirm me in this becoming prid, — m tn is falfe — I will advile widi iiu чп 1лк'ш^ llu veil: She will rejoice to find me in lids difpo* filimi, and I will acquaint iter that ï ut» louger
i od »mude hi, imlinatioii Im dn cloiftcr. In thi5 f i íiaiue of imod, and dett imun d lo open hu inait o.¡ j P lv to Manida, She v*, tni to ihat Piinciís4 e handu i, vvín m die t »tu d already dreíltd , aud lea.aiu p»iiiıvtlv on hu am. This auiíndr, lo coro Ipond« n' to w ítat fin bb ht delf , revived /ftibtlhŕs íiiipit ums, nnd dutiovellhe t.oulideuce í in- hati put pofed to pia< e at hei íiieud. 'liny blufhed ai meeiiiu, and wen ι >o mueh novice* $0 difguife their feufadons wiih addi* Is. A fier fome unmeaning quefti«»ns and replies, Matilda demanded of /jabella die < duh' of her flight ? the* latter, who liad almoll fm potten Man/n ďs paf¬ fion, ίο eutiitly wvs lhe occupied by htr own, conthiditig titat Alatilda rek i red to heilaft eitape from the touvent, wliich had ott aihmt-ekthe events of die pi et etling evening , ti plied, Ahtrttlli biougfu Woi d to the convent thai v oui molbu* was dead —- oll! faid Mattida, intuit. pling ilei, /iianta ha* explained dut i .d Ihı ke te» nie: on feeing melaini* ťhe t ri t d tmi, tbc Pnúce i- is dt ad! and Alart^llt who had tome ío>* tlie niual dok to the eaith — and what made you faiul ŕ faid Ij abet la, hiddle- ľent to die u it. Alatilda blidhed, and hammered — mv Luhti — ite* vvas lining in judgment ou a crimmal — what eliminai I faid /fabella tag« d v — а yoımg man; faíd Alatilda — I believe — 1 dduk it was thjt young шап ihat — what, XAtctit /л**"
1 J Ο¬ ία id Ifabi ľa. "Ses; ani wen d fbe ; ï m vu L t w htm b» iot. , í tio not kuovv İıovv ile iiad ofhndıd my ialini — bui as in has been ol finto' tu v tu, l аш 'ad mv Lotd has pai dom d lum — luv t tl me/ itjhtd i¡a ( t lta\ ¿^ \ ou temi u Livuit me, lo Wound mv lillui, Mìei alindi οι t ahon iıİ > tb atlı ! Thon di u ıs imi Liu ι vt, iu f a\ dut l am bidled vv iţii know tug α {.ut. о, 1 hopt Mutilili dots nol think 1 am iuu'i ι in aiuti to filial (induiufs as not to к l ш i\u kdd.li k ot diai anda« mus у outh, and dut и ıs inyoiludt foi nu t vu {к» luì any aflu I mu loi um who daitd lo kft his ann againft the authoi of mv hum;. \o» M a ihla, my lit ait ahhou hım, aud il > ou hdì ι на in tht tutndfhip for Ш' 'ku von have vt, wed hom уело hdaiiey» \ ou wdl iltieñ α m.iii w ho lias luen ou the point of nuku д nu tm iu alde hu evet. Alatilda lidd d'"\vn hii iuul, aul n plu ti, 1 hope my dcaitft ffahtdla dm, m»t doubt lui M u<lda\ hictidihip: f m ver liehdtl thai votuh until yduitiav ; he i·» almt»it ri /lian„t ι ίο ttľ . ihit as du iuigums liãve proäionne ed л out talliti out oí ιΐαΐϊ,',ιΐ , you ought rt(»f to innbour um hat nable- rtleiitimni againft one, who I am puhi.uhd dui not know the Maiqui. wu-uLiteil to von. Sou pkad his lauleVtiy pa- dt ίκαΐΐν > tau! l/abilla, coniubitug hv is to mueh a liuiuu io you' J am miftaken, e»i he itinin·» Λ our chanty. What mean you/ faid Alatilda.
1 11 jNolhmír : euid f/abtľa, lepeulhu tliat fhc lizd ŕgivtu Matilda л hint oí Tf.eo !,>e\ lutlinadtm b ί hu. Tilt u diaiiiiiiig tlie dd onde, íhe .d ki d Ma¬ tilda what* occafioned AHvtfnd lo lake Jln.odure foi α íptttK? likk me» laid Matilda, did not you obferve İii"« t vt»emt иЬгпЬкше* to the pou liait oí Al/on/o in diegaìkiy / 1 took notici oi it ro Bianca even beku e í law Jam in aimoni; hut with lhe helmet on, he ι du un hnag< oí that ри tuie. 1 elo noi much tdtfuve pulun s; faid Jjabella Mueh kls bav I < xamim d this young man io attentively aá you hun to have denie — ah; Alatilda, л otu beai t ıs ш danger — but let me wain you as a fiieud — he Jus owned to me thai he is in love; it cannot Jie with von, tor ydluday was ihe fuit lime лой cui mit — was 3í noli* certainly: replied Muuliin, hut whv does my dtareii Jjabella tom lude from any thing 1 have iaid, that — ihe paukd — then continuing:, he law л on fidt» and I лт lar honi luv uu lhe vanity tothink that my bule poriion of titanns coniti tngage a lieail dt v on d io \uii — may you bc happv , Ijabdta, w h ли \ t r ıs die íalc oí Ma* tilda*! Mv lov tly fiiunk had IjabJia, vv ltok beau was too huitei! lo lehli α knul txpielbou, n is you that Tfnodo/e admito; î Li w it; 1 am pei- fuaded td it; iwi ihall a thought oi my own Ιϊλό* pineis íuftei jue tu inici teie \>iih yours. Tiu»
î Î2 frän к nefs drew η\ιι>* fr* mı üıe gemle Matada*, uno jealoufy tbat for a moment had raifed atoolmfs between thefe amiabh maidens, ioou ga\ e way to tlľ' natural fincerity and candour of their fou k', î'ath confeíléd lt> the other the intpreftion that Theodore had made on iier ; and this confidence was followed hy а ftruggle vd' gcuerofily , each iu- ftltinir on vieidhsg iier claim to her Iriend. Λι lengdi, the dignity of l/itòella^s virine reminding her (»f the preference vvhich Theodore had ahnofi deci art d for hu* rival, 'made her determine to conquer her paftion, and cede the beloved objeU to iier friend. F)uring this conteft oí amity , llt,,p,>·' \i um nd Jur daughtiu's chamber. Matlam, laid ihi to rja* hella, \ou have io much lendernefs foi Abatida , and intereft yourfelf lo kindly in whatever affet t< our wretched houfe, thai I can Jiave uo feci els widi my child, wdiith are not proper for yon t<« hear. The Prince!! es were all attention and anxiuv. Know then, Madam, continued Hippolita, ami \uu, my de areft Alatilda, that being convinteti by all the events of du к two laft ominous days, thai he -ал* en purpofes the fceptre of Oft artro fhould рай from Alanfmľs funds inni ihofe t ď ihe Maru.uk Frederic, í luve been perhaps infpind with die thou'dit of averting our total deíiruc tinti b> lhe f^ w * union of onr rival Jioufes. Widi this view í Jiave been
из been propofmg to Afanfred my Lord to tende-r this dear, dear child to Fredet ic your father — me to Lord Frederic! cried Alatilda — good lira* vens! my gracious mother — and have you na¬ med it to my father? f have: S Aid Hippolita: He* liftuied benignly to my propofal, and is gone to bleak it to the Marquis. Ahí лугепке^ Piin- eefs! cried Ifabella; what hält thou donel wJiat ruín has thy inadvertent goodnefs been preparing for the felf, fen* me, And for Alatilda ! linin from me 10 you and to my child! faid Hippolita·, лл hat can this mean? Alas! Lud /jabella, tlie purity c»i your own lieart prevents your feeing tiie depra¬ vity of others, Alanfred, your Lord, thar im¬ pious man — hold, faid Hippolita , you muft not in my prefence, young Lady-, mention Alanfed witli disrefpect: He is my lord and hufband, and — vvili uot iong be fo, faid Ifabella, if his wdeked purpofes can be carried into execution. Thii language amazes mc ; faid Hippolita, Your fee¬ ling, Ifabella, is warm: but until this liour I never knew it betray you into intemptiance. ЛЛ hat dovei eď Alatfred authorizes yott to treat him as a murderer, an afìaiìin ? Thou vii tuous, and too tiedulous Pri u eck! replied Ifabella; it is not ihv life lie aims at — u is to leparan* himfelf from thee! to divorce tiiee! to — to divorce me! to divorce my modici'! cried Hippolita and Aluattda H
1 14 ai once ·—* yes» faid Jjabella; aml to complete his crime, he meditates,*— j cannot fpeak ii! What can fui pafs what thou haft already uttered? iaid Alatilda. llippolita was blent. Grief t İma ked Ji er fpeech; atui the recoiled ion of M ¡njr eds ^ Lue ambiguous difcouifes confirmed v\ hai fhe heard, .•Excellent, dear Lady ! Madam! AîoîheTÎ cried Ifabella » flinging herfelf al JJ/ppolda's feel i u a íľaufpe v t οΐ paftion; truft me, believe me, I will die a thoufand deaths loouer than confent le, în¬ jure yon, than yield to io odious — oh! — This ís too much! cried Hippolita: What crimes d ties one crime faggeft ! rife» dear Ifabella; 1 do not doubt your virtue. Oh í Alatilda, this ftroke is too heavy for thee! wu.p not, niy child; and not a murmur, 1 charge thee. Remember, lie İs thy Father ftill ! — but you aie my mother too; faid Alatilda fervently; and you are virtuous» you are guíldeťsí — Oli! muli noi I, muft; not 1 com- plain? Vou muit not : faid Hippolita — com«;, all will yet be well. Alanfred, in the agony for the lofs of diy brother, knew not what he faid: perhaps Jjabella inifunderitood Jiim ; iiis heart i$ good — and» my cJiiid, thou knoweft not all! There is а deftiny hangs over us; the hand of Provideuce is ftretched out — Oii! could I but fave thee from the wreck! — yes, continued fhe .in a firmer ione; perhaps die facrifice of my kif
"i may atone for all — Γ will go and offer my fdf m diis divorce — it boots not. w lut hecem ies of me. i will withdraw into tin; neighbouring mo* nailery, and wafte the remainder of iile in pray eis and tears for my diild and — die Prince! Thou art as much too good for this world, f.dd Ifa¬ bella, as Afanfred is execrable — bm dunk noi, Lady, that thy weaknefs fball determine for me. J 1'\Υί·Λν, hear in>: all ye angds — hop, J adjure tliee; died Hippolita : Kemember ihou doft not depend on dry fdf; ihou haft а father — my fadier is too pious, too noille, interrupted Ifabella % to command an impious deed. But fhould he ceuii- uiaud it; can a father enjoin α curfed act V í was conrracted to the ton, can 1 wed ¡he fat hud — no, iMadam, no; forte fhould not drag me tu Alanfred' s hated bed. 1 loath him, 1 abhor Jiim: Divine and human laws forbid — and my fiiend» my duueft. Alatilda! would í лл -otind hei ten¬ dei' hud by injuring her adored modu r t my own moiher — I never have known another — Olt! lhe is the mother of both! cried Matt/da: Can wc, can we, If ab J la, adore lui too much? My luvely c.hihhen, faid tlie touched lltf polita, your tendernefs overpowers me — but i muft not give way ι о it. Jt is not our» to make deci i on for (jitrtdves: I leave η , our fathers, and out hufbands muft decide fur us. Have patience nudi you huar 11 i
1 İl» w lut Matij i ed ,.nd Frederic have determined. If the Marepus ае cepts A!atilda*$ hand, I know fhe will readilv ('bey. Heaven may inb r po fe and prevent die reli. Wdiat means my child? conti¬ nued flie, feeing Alatilda fall at her (Vet with a flood of fpeechlefs ttavs — but no; onfwer me not, mv daughter: f mufi. not hear а w cud againft the pleaiure of ihy fadier. Oh! doubt not my obedience, my dreadful obediente to him and to you! faid Alatilda. Bm can Î, moil refpecte;d of women, can I experience all thÍ4 tendernek, ibis world of goodnefs, and conceal а t bonghi from lhe beft of mothers? What ari thou going to ul¬ ier ? faid Jjabella trembling. R cedi cet thy ft If» Matilda. !No, /fabell·:, ftitl die Printch, I fhould not deferve this incomparable parent , if the in- moft receftes of my foul haiboui'ed a thought with¬ out İıer permiflton —■ nay, I hive oftcnded her; I have» fnlfcred a paftion to enler my heart wiihont her avowal ■— but here I diklaim it; hue ï vow to heaven and her — My child! my child! faid Hippolita , what words are thefe! what new cala¬ mities has fate in (tore for us! Thou, a paftion! Thou, in thi* hour οΐ deftruction — Oh! I fee all my gudi! faid Alatilda. I abhor myfelf, if I coft my mother а pang. Slie is the deareft thing I have on tardı — oh! I will never, never be¬ hold iiim moie! /fabtlla: iaid /Uppslita, thou
lif art confcious to ibis unhappy fecret, whatever it is. Speak — what! cried Alatilda, Jiave J fo for¬ feited my mother's love, that fiie will not permit me even to fpeak my own guilt? oh! wretched, w retell ed Alatilda! Thou art too cruel; faid /fa- bella to llippoltra: Cauft thou behold this angiiUh of a virtuous mind, and not commiferate it? Not pity my child! laid Hippolita, cattJiing Alatilda in her arms — Oh! I know f Jie is good, fhe is all virtue, all tendernefs, and duty. I ilo forgive thee, my excellent, my only hope! The Priuceiles then revealed 10 Hippolita their mutual inclina¬ tion for Theodore, and the purpofe of Ifabella to refign him to Alatilda. Hippolita blamed theii imprudente, and fhewed them the impiobability that either fatJier would confent it» beftow his heirtfs on fo poor а man, diónak nobly born. Some comfort ,it gave her to find their paftion of fo recent α date, ami thai Tlaodott had had but little caufe to fufpect ii iu eiihu. Slie ftrictly enjoined them to avoid all torrefpondenee with him. This Ataluda fervently promifed : But Ifa¬ bella, who flattered Jieift If that lhe meanr no more dum to promote his union 41 ith herfiiend, could not determine , to avoid him ; and m atle no reply. 1 will go to the convent , í aid llippolita, and order new nulles to be Lod foi a deli veranee from I liefe calam ide?. — Oh! my mother, faid Alatilda, H 3
Mg you mean to quit ns: You mean to take fanctuary, and to ¿rive my fallier an opportunity of purfuing his fatal intention. Alas í on my knees I fuppli- cate y on to forbear — will you leave me a prey- to Frederic? I will follow you to the convent — Be at peace, my r child í laid Hippotitu: I will re¬ turn inftantly. I will never abandon thee, until I know it is the will of heaven, and for thy benefit. Do not deceive me, faid Matilda. I will not marry Frederic until thou commandeft it. — Alas! What will become of ше. Why that ex¬ clamation? laid Hippolita. I have pronii fed thee to return — ah! my mother, replied Matilda , Itay and fave me from rny felf. A frown from theo can do more than all my fathers feverity. I have given away my heart, and you alone can make røe recai İt. No more: Said lìtppoltta: thou mult not reiapfe, Matilda. I can quit Theodore , faid ihe, but muft I wed another? let me attend thee to the allar, and flint myfelf from the world for ever. Thy fate depends on thy fai her faid Hip* polita; I liave ill beftowed my tendernefs, if ir has taught thee to revere anpjit beyond him. Adieu! my child ! I go to pray for thee. Hippotitcrb real purpofe was to demand of Ju¬ róme y whether in confcience ihe rm^hr not con¬ fent 10 the divorce. She had oft urged Manfred to religa the principality, which the delicacy of
1 19 her confcience rendered an hourly burthen to hex. Thefe fcruples concurred to make the: feparation from the Jmfband appear Jefs dreadful u> her, than it would hdve feemed in any odici iituation. Jerome, ar quitting the caftle overnight, iiad questioned Theodore feverely why he had accufed Jiim to Alanfred of being privy to hi* efcape. JVteodore owned it had been wiih ddign to pie- vent Alanfred\ fufpicion from alighting on Ala¬ tilda; and added, the h oit nefs of Jerome" 1 * hfe antl character fecured him from the tyianfs wiath. 'Jerome was heardly grieved to diftovu* his hufs inclination for that Pdncefs; and leaving idm 10 Ids reft, promifed iu die morning to acquaint him widi important reatou^ lor conepiuing Iti«· ¡мПпнк Theodore, like Ifabella, w as too u 1 endv a«- quainted wilh panmt.d authority to inhmil t<» its decifions againft lhe impulfe of his hear!. lit had little curiofity tt* barn lite F rial's u afoni, and lefs difpofttiou to obey ditin, lite lovely Matilda had made ihoitgu irupidhou.s on idm than filial affection. Ad night lu- p kau d hiinfdf with vifions of love; and it was not till Lie atiu the morning-office, dial he u collet ted the- Ftiads commands to attend him ar Al/onJo'¿ tomb. Young man, faid Jerome, when lie law him, this tardinek does noi pícale me. ILive л Lulurku rummands already Io little weight ? Theodore
120
made aukward excufes» and attributed his delay to having ovedlept liimfelf. Am\ on whom were thy dreams employed ? faid die Friar fteudy. His Ion blufhed. Come, come, refumed the Friar, iaconftderate youth, this muft not be; Eradicate this guilty paftion from ihy breaft — gnihy paf¬ fion! cried T/ieodore- Can guilt dwell with in¬ nocent beauty and virtuous modefty? it is ftnful, replied the Friar, to cherifh thofe wJiom heaven has doomed to deftruction. A tyrant's race muft be fwept from tlie eartìi to the diird and fomth generation. Will heaveii vifit the innocent for the crimes of die guilty? faid Theodore. The fair Matilda has virtues uioiigh — to undo thee: In¬ terrupted Jtrome. IIAt thou fo foon forgotten tliat twice the favagc Alanfed lias pronounced thy fentence? Nor Jiave I forgotten, Sir, faid Thtodore, that the charity of his daughter deli- veied me from his powei. I can forget injuries, but never benefits. The injuiies thou haft received from Manfredi race, faid the Friar, are beyond what thou cauli conceive. — Keply not, hut view dik Jioly ima_re í Buitath this marble monument reft the afhcs of tli (í good Aljonfo i a Plime adorned with every virtue: The father of his people! the delight of mankind ! Kneel , head - ftrong boy, and lift, while a father unfolds a tale of horror, tliat will expel every fentiment from thy foui ?
1 2 ï but fenfations of facictİ venu л>ч e — Alj^nJ - ' minh injured Piincr - iet ihy uuhi, uhi d í budt Lt awful on the tiotibh d air, w hib ìhtU tiemhih-g kps — ha ' Λν ho unne·» tini' ί — 'í itt im .t Wictehed of women ! laid /It ρρο,Ίία , ι nit ung ι Le dioir, Good I aditi', ait thou al hilun ? — but w íiy this knelling youth? W hu mean> the hoi - юг impi inled on cadı corniteli «m t, ? whv ai ibis venerable tomb — aks ! hall ihon imi aıuhk/ We w ci e penning ioidi (»ur onions it» Ιιι,λ.μ, ıcplitd lhe Tiiai with íume toníuLon, lo pur an cud to the* woes of this dtplouddc piovinte, J< - ι with lis, Ladv ! thy Ipothk lout may tmi.iin м\ exemption 'ют die judgments which the po.itoU* td theie days but too ípcakingly di nouncc ,. r ,.u.íi diy houfe. ï piay ferventi v to in.Uvtn to thv t n thenu faid ílu ptous Pi inc k. X huo Kn»»WtL r has been the occupation td mv ku lo w u L ,r bldhiig for my Lend and my Lumf l«u hihhui — One alas! is taken hom me! would biavi n imi heai me for my pooi Matilda.' 1 adiu * imund· for her! — Eveiv Juan will bkL hu : t u. d Theodore with tapını с- — İle dundu uih u-uiL ! faid Jet orm., And thon, kuel Pdi.ctfi, unitemi not with the Povvuc" above' the Lo>d giveih , ami the Loid takt tii awav: lUck bi> Imk name, ,md J -f ' fubmit to ins dtfutu 1 do moft di vomivi ¿aid il j
Hippolita: Rut w »İl ììor fpare my only romfort? muft Matilda perifh too? — ah! Fathei , ï came — but di fm i fs thy ft и». No ear bm thim· muft hear Λχ}ί?1 1 havelo u* uu. ^İaydıuıven grain thy every wiih, moft exrellfnt Princefs! faid Tin odore mi¬ tu u . J''f o m e fre ι wi ed. llippolita dun «o-epiaintcd the Fiiar with tin* piopof'al fhe« had fuguelted u> Мач /red, İu's ap- ì rohalion of it, ¿\nd die tender of Matilda that Le was gone to made- to Fredetic. Jet v trie tould j· j conceal bis difiiké of the motion, whicli he ι лиги! undei pretence oí the impiobability that Frederic, theneaiUi of Idood to Affonfv, ми\ wdio was come to claim his fucceifmn, would yield to ап alliance wiih thr· ufurpei of his tight. Hut noi b ing could eep»d the perplexity oí ihe Friar, when Hťpj /olita rouidíed her readíutk uot tn ορ¬ ρό u rhe fepatalíou , and demande d iiis opinion on the legality of hu arepiit-fcem c TJie i riai* embed eageıİy at her jcqudi t ď hi«· aduce, and without explaining hi* avufton ю the* piope»fed mainale of Manfred and IjUďJla, lu painted to H" polita in the moft aiarmhi-j udonu x\\i· imfnk nek of hu* confent, denounud ¡ml tm nts againft bej if fhe complied, and en {dim d hu iu (he L'util lemis to treilt -»".v fm h pmnohfion with evfiy maik of indignado?* and riïu',.d.
1 *ϊ n л - f Manfred, in die mean lime, Jiad broken lds putpofe lo Predine, and ptemohd fhe deutbJe mat liage. That weak Piince, who ínul bu*n fu ue к with the dumts t>f Alattlda, iifiuui but tuo eageily to the offri. He Lug«»! los enmiiv lo Alan/red , vviioiu Jie law bur hub hope of ehi- puftefling by íe/ice ; and ihmuing, iomícif d,,-t jit> iíiiie might fucceed hom tin unitut oí iu daughter With lhe fy iam» he looked upon hi* own fmceflion lo lhe pıhıupdıry as Luihun»! by wedding, Mftltla. llv math Lout oppohimu ť» tite propohd; aftecdng, foi foint onh , not ·*■ accpiiefce unh fs llippolita ihould touhut to dn divoiec. Mitrjrul n»ok thai upon iomfelh 'li.a,- ipoited widi ios fuccefs, .md imj.,iiieut lo h. iomfclf in a iituation io espiti fons, fie hab» n· d lo los wife's apaitment, duumin* el to exloil iot eomphanec. He leained wilh imlignaimn dial ih· лл ..sabbili at lin conveni. Hts undi iuggdn d ut¬ lum litat ihe h ui pmhahİy bun otloruu d bv l'a belia t»t Jus pmpok. He donhiııİ whetjiei lui ι<- to« uu ut lo iin rom uit did noi impoit an ino n- tum oi o m oiling thue, unid ihe could tali» obli u Ies io tiuit divoiee; .md ihv fuipu mus h» İuliI aht ady utiui.Hueiì td 'frorıu , made hım ap¬ po hi ml tinti the luai луппЬ! tua only ti.iv t dc los vow«*, bul nu Ju hav ι inlpıud Hr<>po>':r,ı wilii the nkdudon of taktug ťaniuaty. lit pi-
IH tif-m to unravel this due, and to defeat its fuc¬ cefs, Alanjred haftened to the conveni, and ar¬ rived ihere, as the Friar was earneft exhorting the Princefs nevtr to yield to the ehvoice. Mariam, Lid Mi: f red, what bufinefs drew ycu hidieid why did you nor await my return Ihım the Mai quis? 1 came to implore а blefting trii your couneds: Kephed Hippolita. My councils do not need а f liar's intervention : Said Alan¬ jred — ami of all men living is that hoary traitor du only one vvli'Hii von delighl to couler with. Profane Piince! laid Jerome; i«> it at the altar that thou chufeft to infııİL the krvauts of tin: altar? — but, Alan/ r í d, thy i m pi ou»** fchemes are known. Heaven and this vdrl nous l-ady know them — nav , frown uot, Prince. The church defpifes thy m maces. Her thunders will be heard above thy wiath. Dare to proceed in thy curft: purpofe of а divorce, ıınül her fentence be known, and here ï lance her Anathema at. thy ί ι each Audacious lebel! faid Alanfed, endeavoming to conceal the awe with which die Iri a r's words infpired him ; Doft thou prefume to threaten f by lawful Prince? Thou art no lawful Prince; Lid Jt.rome\ thou art no Prince — go, difenk diy daim with Fre¬ deric; and when that is done — it is done; re¬ plied Manfre d : Fre deric a ce e ρ χ -* Alat ilda 's i ι a nel , and is content to wave his claim, unlefs I have
no male iffue — as lm fpoke thofe vvtmh linee drops of biood fell from ihe nole of Aljorjv'$ ftatue. Alan f r ed turu ed pale , and lhe Puntéis funk on Jier knee?. Behold! laid the friar; maik ibis miraculous indication thai the blood of Al¬ jonfo will never uv witli tliat ed Marj red: My gracious Lord » iaid Hip; o^'u , jet n s h; bini t ourfelves to Jjeaven. Think imi thy ever obe¬ ri ietti wife rebeds againft thy authority. I hav« no will but thai (»ť my Lord anel the church. To tiu! revered tribunal let us appeal. It doe«** not depend on us to burft die bomk that unite us. If the church fhall appiove the díftolutiou <<t onr rnariiage, be ii fo — ] Lau but few years, aud thofe of forrow to pak. Where can ihey be луогп awav Jo well as at the fout of this aliar, İn pray us for thine and Alatilda 4 Luety ? — bur thou fhalt uot leinain heie until then: Said Alati- fred, Th-pai r widi me to the caftle» and there I will advife on the propti mcafmes for a divorce; — but thi:' meddling fiiar tomes not thither: My hofpiiable roui Hull never more haibour a tiaitor — and for thy Reverencds ulkpting, continued he, I biiniiJi Juin from my dominions. He, 1 ween, is no faci ed perfoıuge, nor under the рю* rectiun of die thurcli. Whoever weds Jfabc la, it fiiall not be lathor Falconara"**, flailed-up fon They itait up, iaid the fiiar, who aie fuddeitly
io G beheld in the feat of lawful Prinus; but duy wither away like the grafs, and their plate knows them uo more. Manful ca fling a look of fcorn at the Friar, led llippolita forth; bnt at the door of the church, whiipered one of his attendant!? te) remain concealed about the convent, and brinte İıinı inftant imlice, if any one fiom the calile \ hould repair tither.
1-2 7
C ίί A P T K R V. EvbRv refl« ct ion whicJi Alanf/ed made on íhe Friar's behaviour, confpired to puíiiade Jun* ıhar Jerome was privy lo an amo ui between ljube! ία aud Theodore. Pmt Jerome's new prtlupmiion, ίο diiïonaiit from ids ftn'mer mceknek, íuggeíted inil deeper appreJıcnftons. The Prince even juipeend ihat the Friar depended on fome furti fuppoii from Frederic , ,yhofe arrival coinciding wilii flie novel appearance of Theodore, fcc^y^L^o befpeak л eorrelpondeii« v. Still more was he troubled widi the refemblance of Theodore to Al/onfo\ purlraiu The latter he knew iiad umpieítiojiabíy died without í Lue. Frederic had confented to bt-ltow /fabella un him. Thefe tonti ¿dictions agitated his mind with uuinhtiitls pangb. He faw but two methods ol extntadtîg bimklf iiom his difhcultics. 'liie one was to tilinn his dominions to the Marquis — Piide, ambition, and ius ic* liance on antient piopïncïes, which had pointed out a poibbility of his puk r v in g tliem to hi» pofterity, combated tliat thought. The other wa* io piek his mariijge with /jabella. Aftei Join*' ruminating on theíe anxious thought. , as he marched iiicmly with Htppolua to the еаШе , h*
i :.s at laft diİLOtııi'd with that PriiiceLs on the fub¬ ject of his difepiki, and ufed every iníiima'ing and plaulibh* aigument to extract Jiei confent i /» even hu* pjoiniie of piomoting the divorce, li'p* polita needed litde peduahons tt* bend lier to iiis pleafure. She endeavoured to win iiim over to the meafure of rriigning his dominions; but finding her exhortations imitíeis, f Jie al'uitd iiim, thai as tai as her eoufcience w ould allow, the would raife no oppoiidon to а feparation, though with¬ out belter founded fcruples dian what lie ver ailed -u d , flic would nol engage to be active jii demanding* it. This compliance, though inadetptale, лгл* fuk Ruent lo rade d/-."///tv/V hopes, ile trufted that his power anti wt.Jdi would eafily advance bis fuit al the tonu oí limte, whither he refolved m еп^але Fredet ic to take а jontaey ou purpoíe. That Prince had diicoveied io much paftion lot Matilda, that hlatjred hoped to obtain all be wifhed by holding oni or withdrawing his daughter's charm·» ; .»ccoidnig a* the Marepus ihould appear ii.oi. or k-L> diij o í ed to ( о- opera te m his view«. Tven the abitan· · 1 ľrederic woxáà be α material point ¿ained, mud he could take kuibu* nuaiuiu. for Jiis huniiv. Difmìftina· Hit-polita lo 1er apartment, he i<- pair^d ш that of th_ iMaiijni»; but crofting the git; ¿X
Eurent İnil thi oiigh which lie was to pafs, îi c» nttt /kanca, 'lhe damfel he knew was in die con¬ fidence of both the young Ladies, It immediately octuned to him to hit her on the fubject ot Jja¬ bella and Theodote. Calling her alide into die rec fs of the oriel window of the hall , лпа fooihiug her wirb mans lair woids and promi¬ fes, he demanded of her whether f lie knew ought of tlie flato of /jabel/ďs affections, lì my Loid! no, my Lord — yes, my Loid — P 0ul ' l-ad\ ï ilio is wonderfully alarmed about her lathed«; wounds; but 1 fell her he will do neli, don't ■«our Higlmefs think foi* I do not alk yott, ie- piit d Alati j r al , what fhe thinks about iter iadier : But y on are in her lee j eis : Come» be a good gid and iell me; is there any young man — In ! —- y ou underhand me — Lortl blefs me ! nit- du (land your Higbnefs, no, not I: I told her л few vulnerary bubs and lepofe — J am not talking, replicii lhe Piince impatiently , about Jut father: 1 know he will do well — Biefs me» I rejoice to hear your llighnefs lay l'0 ; for though 1 diought it uot right to let my young Lady defpond , methought his tiieaiiitls liad a wan look, and a fomething — I remembei when \ouug Fer dittami was wounded by the Venetian — Thou anfweieft Irons tlie point, iniertupted Afa'tjrtd; but here, take thb jewel, perhaps tliat may fix I
•4° ihy attention —* nay» uo revei. nees; my favour íhall not ftop h eie — tome, lell me lody ; hovv ftanek ljalxella\ (heart. Well! у our Highiu ís has fuch л wav ! laid Bianca — to be fu re — but can youi llighuds keep a İçeni/ if it fliould ever come oul οΐ your hps — it fhall not, ii fhall not: Ciied Alan//ed — nay , but fwear, your Jlighncfs — by my hahdame, if it fhould evei¬ be known tliat İ faid it — why , tiuth is truth, I do not think my Lady Ifabella ever mm h alïectioued my young Lord your Sou — yet lie wa-» а f weel у ondi as one ihould fee — lam iute, if I liad been a Pihieek — bul blek mei I muít attend my Lady Alatilda; fhe will marvel w itat is become of me — ftay; crictl Alanjred; limit haft uot ladsiied my queidon. Jiaft tiiou ever car¬ ried aiiymeffage, any Idler — I! good gradom! cried Bianca; 1 cany a letter? 1 would neu to be a Queeu. 1 hope your liighnefs thinks, though I am poor, I am honeft — did your Higlmefs nevei hear what Count Alarf^li offered me» when lie came а wooing to my Lady Alatilda? I h¿\e. not leifure, laid Alanjrtd', lo liften to thy t tales. J do not cpitftieui tliy honefty : lint it is tliy duty to conceal nothing lıom mc. How long lias Ija* hella been acquainted with Tlnodvre? \ay , liter« is nothing can efcape your Highuefs! laid Bianca --" not that 1 kuovv any tiling of the mat tei —
»3> Tìieodore т to be fure, is a proper young mar» and, as my Lady» Alatilda fays, the very image of good Aljonfo : Has not your Higbnefs remarked it? ves, yes, — no -— thou tui-mrdt me: Said Manfred: Where did they meet? when? — who! My X.ady Matilda? faid Bianca. j\o, no, not Alatilda: /jabella; whui diel Ifabella flrft become acquainted with this Theodore? Viritti Alary I kid Biama, Jiow fhould 1 know? Thou doit know; faid Alanfred; and I muft knenv; ί Λνίϋ — Loid! vour Higlmefs is not jealous of voting Thtotlor* ' faid Bianca —■ jealous! no, no; Why fiiould í he jealous? — peihapi I mean to unite diem — if I vvere fure If uheila лvυıdd luve no repugnance — repugnance! no, Til warrant her; faid Bianca ■ lie is as comely a youlii as ever nod on Chrifİiau ground. We are all İn b-ve with Iiim; dure is not a foul in the caftle, hut would be re-joitfd te> have Idm for our Prince — I mean, — w hut it l'hall pleafe hurven to call your ilighiu-k m İlklf — indeed! laid Alanjred, Jias ii gone fo Lt * oh! lids curfed Friar! — bur I muft not kdt: time — go Bianca, attend /fabella: but í diat_.v thee, not α word of wliat has pafled. Find oni how fİıe is affected towards Theodort * İııin^ nie good news, and that ring hds а companion. Wait at the foot oî the winding fiancale; i л т I j
Г) 2 «oin« io\ífií (he Mai-pììs, and will talk fai t lier w itle ıh« e aï m\ ic tui n. Mun/ftd* after tome „emial conveifaîii»n, dt- tiuil f/edujc m dilmíl> ι lie two K n o; h i s híí companions, intim; lo i aR nidi hım on ure. ent .diaiig As foon as í ht \ Wi n alone, be biga n iu iítttul gnite lo icnind the Aiiïijuis on the bthjut id" Matiht'a, ami iiutlin^ him till pofed to İıis wilh» he hi drop iíinií isu the' diílunltics lhal Would attend lhe t eìebrat ion ot duit maniate, unbh — at thai iuftaiit P.wyu a bunt into tin loom with a w lid m f s iu lu r look α etl ¿ч lim t ^ that Ipoke lhe utmoft nitor. Oh ! my Loid , mv Land! cried l'ho; we aie all umhin! it i romo a_,ain! it и с tune au .u η ! \\ hai is come η·ί iin í t rit d Man¬ faat ama/t tì í — oh! tht ha»id ! die hıanî ' tít^ hanti! — fupport nn! İ am ii-üind out oí n, у fenfes: Ci itd ŕttanea, I will n a Ibtp in tiu; cadde Го- night; w lu r»; fhaìl 1 go? m\ tioj w iii t i\ come after me to-imu i ow ·—- would 1 b,, d bein coulent lo wed /v/ï'Ji .'/m ' dus ti -пич o<' ambiti· ut ' W bat bas ir 1 1 tf ed dne diu-, \»>;¡ua, woman? laid tht ЛЬиоиК: 'ïlh'U ait Life luo ; be nat alaimeil. Oh! \otii (»oatutf^ i> Woiulii- lulh eoiitl, Lad jiiui t (a t but I dan· not — no, pi ay , kl me üo — I had íaíb ι bue t ν 11 y tiling bt biml me, tb ¡u Пач anui 'u r hom initier this loof, Ъо to, tímu í „ut kdí d \ teufe»; ¿aid Ма'У
i Z% jred. Interrupt ns not; w e wur communi iu oit on pt » rt α ni ma 1 1 eis — ms, Loni , dits w un h ıs lubjtu to btfi —* (tmu* wiih mt, Липка — oh! die Sai nt->.' no, Li tri Rtanta — foi t u (am it ro- incito wain soni Highiirk; w h\ íboidd il ippt «r lomečih? ï i '\ m\ pj. \\ o s шо)п*ш<д ai. d es » iiii'g *— (»h! îi y oui ilişilmiş h,ui kliet «d iiieyo' Ч ıs lhe Lime baml thai he Li w ihe ίο*. t io İ,ı ¡he ţi ilb ι \ - < hambt ι — I adu i /u№,ľ has oíiui hdtl il s ds'* piopbet \ лл oubt ht oui one о! th( le da S S — lì/ an ¿и ^ laid lit f maik ш\ woitk — ihou t.^ik; bini Manjiid in α ι,ι ( ; b·* ¿j>r t P am! k* í p í ln ŕ e h > L í i tt> hi b tut I b\ < > u p ι , ions — sa h'i í nw Loid, tinti Лиг>а, du \iu thmk J lias t h ť u notion·: ' í,o |.i t! íool o ŕ ík ^ м rt í: : ι . M>iHÍt ii — а 1 ku I Im it. *■* w ss í ti ' Ι·11 m« , un m u<k \> h.u d "*ι h di ' и . ** ' о) l'/ 1 ч\ > п. . С η \ out Ih ί, ι t ís 1¡M« η , 1 ol ЛЬ"г- Jted, to (he tl* îo ii, ni ».· α ¡ils w tud», win» Las b« ,'ld Jiu t* s oi ,» j ρ ·: , » ι ·η*. t. iit d ί Π" Ι ι !ο ν * *· ih in? 'Ilos js nn*, d οι ! lint , Lul tiu Mat¬ tiul·· ; It»! tuiul js lo.· ШИИ d д(н! f, » hoit, i\ íuijiiíhd lo be (he SS"!4 m' intacın liou. í ι íl ıı>, lan niii'i'ii, w L u tt n has nM'ud ď» t tbu . Ws m\ koid, thank uni (otaimi-, iod Utant a — 1 b h»'\e I look \u\ pilt ; í íhdl be buttu wdn tl Ih.r.e H t o\ 'Itd UJM« if --- f \S,h _tıiîl_ lo my Laus J/a'i tla* ъ chambci h\ Ιο> ih^ííutk'·*! 1 "i
-34 ot dev -■- we do not want the circumftances; in- lerrupied Manfred: Since Ids Highuefs wiii luve it fo, proceed; but be brief. Lordi your High¬ uefs t h wans one fo! replied Bianca — I fear my hair — 1 am fure I never in my life — well ! as I was telling your Great neb, I was going by iiis Highuefs's order to my Lady Ifabella's cham¬ ber: She lies iu the wandlet- coloured chamber, on the right hand t one pair of ftairs : So when I came to the great ftairs — J was looking on his Highiufs's prefent here — grant me patience İ faid Mai jred , will this went h never come to tlic point? what imports it lo die IVIartpiis, that I gave thee a bavvble for thy faithful attendance on my daughter? we want to know wliat thou fa weft. I was going to teU youi liighnek laid Bianca, if uu луонЫ permii me. — So as i was i tıbbini* die ring — I am fine I Iiad not gone up dure iteps, but I Jieard die rattling of au iiiour; ior all ihe world fuch а с Lit tei » as I>iego fays lie heaid wlien the Gİam turned him almut in the gdh-ry» chamber — what does the mean, my Loid! faid the Marquis; is у tiur cafile haunted by giants nnd gobhns? Lool, what» has not your Co camels henid die Ihn у of the Giant in the gallery - chamber? cried Bianca. I m<uvd Jiis Highmk lias not told yem — тал hap you do not know diere is a prophet у — This t lifting is
intolerable; interrupted Alanfred. Let ns díuiiif-t liiis İiİ ly weneb, my Lord? we June more im¬ puttanì a fla ir β to ditrids. Iîy ytuir favour, faid Irredertc, thd'c areno lidie,·*: Tiıe enormous labre 3 vvas directed to in the wood, you c.iftpie, ils fellow — arc theie viiions of this poor maiden's brain? — fo Jaquez thinks, may it pleafe your (»reatnefsi Said Bianca, líe fays this moon will not be out without our leung fome ftrange ie- vohition. For my part I fhould not be furprized il it was ■ to happen to-morrow ; for, as I was fa\ in■"-'» when 1 iieard the clattering of armour, J was all in a cold fweat — 1 looked up, and» 3İ vour Oreamefs will believe me, ï faw upon the uppermoft bani fter ol ihe great haos а hand in armour as bigi *«s big — 1 thought Ì fhould have fwooiiťd — i m* v er ftopped undi 1 t, oue, iii t her — w md d i were wdl otit td lids ca it le í JM y Lady Alatilda mid me but y t ííutnoming thai her liighnefs Hipp^hta k im »i s lomuJiing — Tímu ml an hiCoìuu! с lied Ala/jtid — Lotti Marepus, ir mudi ndùives me tint tins buie İs co η cer! ed io aíTiunl me. Are: my own domein es fuborned to fpiead tales injuriou.«» to my bonom ? Piidiie vour ι hum bv manly daitnig, or lei us bury our feuds, as vv as pi о pofed, by the intu- \ mai dage of our children: Hut indi me, ii ill becomes a Printe of youi healing to piactile on
13-ï m ere en a rv ллимпЬея — í horn vonr imputado«; hud Frederic: until ibis hour J never fef eyes on this damfel: l Itavi* given her no jevvd ! — my Lord, rny Lord» vour confcience, vour guilt ac¬ cules von» and would throw die fufpicion on me — but keep vour daitghler , and dtink no more otljabeila: The judgments aki adv Lillen ûıı vour houfe fot bid me matching into it. Alarjr ed alarmed al die refolute tone in w bĺch Fredeitc delivered tinle words, endeavuuretl to pacify iıinı. İJifmiihng Bianca, lie matic indi íííbniiiiions ft» die iMaiepiľ*;, aud thievv in fut h ardui encomiums on Mutilila , that Frederic was once more ftaggered. However, as his paftion w as of fo recent a date, it tould not at once immouut die fcruples lie iiad cone» ived. He luid gathered enough from Btarna"s thlcmofe to puiuadr him thai heaven declared itfelf againft Alanfed. The propofed mai nages too removed los daim to a diilance; and tiie priudpahiv ed Otranto was л ftiongu n-mptatiou, than the mutingen: reverimu of it wiih Alatilda. Still hv vv mild not abfolult Iy rttc-di' fonu iıis enga genuni s ; bul pu r poi ing to gain time, he demanded of Alattj/td il it was nue iu fac L that llippolita tonhmu! l<> ihe di¬ vorce. Tİıe Piince, tranfpotted to Jind no tidur obftade , .mil depending ou liis influence over lus wife, aftured die Alar-piis it vvas ίο» and
lu 7 thai he migli! fatisfy idmídf ed die muh from lu ι » 'vvn mouth. As (lit ν wue ihus (hit oui fing , wood was in oughl ihat the b.o'tput was pi paru', Aîct/i/:ttl itmiuuted Tnflerit Io tiu git.»! i d), vditie th«v W < te ree ei yed by litpptjtta ,uid , „r v oung ľíiľ- 1 1 í!« s. Alan/tcd piat ( d llu .Mai pits muf to Αία- tilda , and hated himfelf hua .ut fis vv ii" and I/abr lie, ìltp.potLKt com poi ît d hu ί ι h* wiih an t al v gì a vii v ; bot l he \ omu * 'o s лл uè hh m and jinlanth'dv. Aîatjrtd, w ·ο vt :s duumimd io purlut: lds pídut widi tiu "'' piu iu tin le¬ liţa nul« r of the < ve mug, nui h* ť ou iin· hau unid it waxed lale; abulim; ımoiuun-tî -^kís, and piv ing Τι edera w idi rt pi att t! gob lu«, t ď w tm . 'Fiie Ια Uer, mori* upon İti> gu "Η than Alan/ r* d wiihed, dei hm d his ď quer! d.ilhn_'S, ou pr*. tem e of lus htr h«b oí blood ■ w ¡, d- die Pi ini e, lo raih* Ids own diloi'dtitd loo u, and to (oliti¬ teli u î mu om t in , i udu !.u d mml« И ш }»h utilul duughts , tìmn;.h imi io the !u¡"\icadun oi liis it n!t s, 'J ïu* evening be ing bo .ulv ,¡m t d , the hamput con d u ded. Alati f t ťtl v v* *ihl İ 'a v t w *: hdiaw n w oh Ft edit te ; bul du* Luni phad»m; vveakmL ..nd want of n pole, ìeiiideì u.' id, (haudu r, g.dhmtív idling ¡he Prime, ihat hh d ui-bu r iíionbi .umu- iiis iítghiu Is until hımidt ·. ^^hl attend ium 1 j
AL'jitf'ed au*espif«d the pu ty » nnd to lhe no fmall í и г \l If^'ji "a ai < on panied İtti ίο lur apait- mut . Alct/dihí w a urd ou lier mutlu ι iti en joy du* hrfhnefs of the evening on the lantpaits of lhe t dih . Su« »n as t he c umpati v wur difpcded theii fe- v rtal v\ .tv s , Jri åene, moumg io^ diamhu , en- ijiiitid il ïïif)f>olt/a wis alone, and was itdd by ou- il iit ι att+tuĽnls , who bad not imuceel iiu ■ľ'iiL ioidi, dut at that boni ' he gnıendiy widt- uu w to In t oul ot v , w heur iu pi td) dil y w ould fut 1 lui. flu \iiiijiil· dining tht opali had be¬ bt hl Alaoldfï vv uh ι* ut dt oí p síl on. He now wo In d io limi ììipj/ottta ni the difpt huon ilei km l ind pomul· d. 1 lit poîiruts tha* had ahumu! ium, w u« iotgofu u οι los tlelo t s. Ntvhng leddy and m.obfľivtd to ii 1 »' apaumuit ul Hippoina* \a uiiuul ii w''1j a itjoluiitm tet emoioago hu âoı ii, Jon. in the d ι voice , h tv mg put u\ e d tl· u *·ƒ'")ƒ o'Z was ïihtkcd to makt iUv polh /bon oi I; ι Uï an umiliti dd·- eoinhiion, bebne he Λν ' ol guuf M'ttd ¿ , ii* his wiidi«· '1 ii« Mo«pos w "s not Lopnod U tin /ilence diu Ml unti ni lin PtlIUih* ip.Uiil 'lit. ('un. du iı ng bu, a*· lu h d litu advuu/id, m bei * in» iv, be ¡nihil on l lv tio« ι wasa|.ii; ihv ft,iit,i v gloon ν and «o. t u ilt. Puihin^, opin the «loei guid \ , Jie law з puí »u kui-ding luioie
3 30 tiıe allar. As he approached nearer, ir feemed neti a wennan, but one in a long woedkn weed, whofe back was towards iiim. The perfon feemed abforbed ín piay er. The Mar-pns was aboui to return, when the figure riling, ftood fome mo¬ ments fixed in meditation, w it houi и^а tdiug hhn, The Akirquk» expecting the liolv pedon to e ome jouli, and meaning to txuile his mu ivil İniu- luptioii, Ltitk revciem! Father, í íou^hr the Lady' Hijijiolita — llippotnal replied a indlovv vuite: camcft thou ui lhi> t.ddc to ice к ììippiditaf -— and then liie figure, t.nniitg iiowk ttííuui, thk co vered m Frederic \hv íklídefs jaws лпа t mptv itíckeis í, f a ikt lutai, w tapt iu а humid-, fowl. Angels of giace, prUiet mt ! iiud Ireder/c ¡t- Coiling. Del u Ve dici ì' prof, t U io n ! Lod tin ¿«peí ! ri . Frederic falling on iiis knees, .idjuied the Phantom to take pif \ dli aim. Doft \\шн noi remembe) me? faid the apparition. Th tuunhir tiu Wood of Jojijui ί Art ihou that holy íhtmiu 1 uhd Frc dene trembling — can 1 do oud, t for diy uern.d peace? — Wait thou ddiveied hom beimi ige, faid tlie fpecire, о purine tamal delights? ihiít thon forgot 11 a die bioicd labte, aud the beheft oí Heaven en^iv.vtn cm it? — 1 have noi» 1 have m U Lud Frederic — but fay, Iddi fphit , w Lai 'к div errand tu me? what remains fo be done? Tt» lurv t Alattlda' laid the appaiiuoii — nnd vaniihed.
ι io />i',/c7/c\s lil* ad fio/i in his veins. Toì fome minuti s İte 11 mai m d moponi is. 1 iu n falling pioíuať' on los huv bdoie lhe aliai, he h< - fotighl du oiuituhon oi tveiv t.iittr fot paith'it. A iìuod ci n.ns hutctihd io thii iimip'iu; and fìi una;· d ih- In ..u'« mu. Alno, hi t t' f hou m i pil t* ot hou «o hu linu hts, k kv ou dit giomid m a u nul u í d puiOtm t and puin n. í ,¡e h·· f . uhi о t «ue ι lu ¡u í hi a .ot v t i ii t s Ij u Os, tii v Lm'imÍs if λ ·"' ί w uh a u; »u οι lut h.md ш- ? ι S th« «n ttot v h .· í* u u i man w u hont j u * »n * ι du h u I ht . a* d h* u \ , « om huhuu h on ıh α ί. Пи fi « k hiougí î / ». u o io h 'midi. P, tiu» í <uíd t uk . h: - !.v * i f ıh w« d Wilh lui·, he И ' uhi Ιι,.ν* od h d h»m hu pul и . but /İ/u- ji.' tt hom m ί un, ionu , i ' ¡m in ď< nudí / i K p! IM't .V e tí MiW 'o I\J.IHI (¡U í Olí» of f.J> díl- ť ,, ;,», aed î»v \io.i hi ui ' ''ui.'odi;· lud totoni Lin, d>' k m ď ti pm 'un. \Ί! vit mie- ľtl.udsí Pld lío "d.uqu's, ptili.Uîtd Wit ft g, I td — Uld fu,jM t d. lot , ! í.'U d Поли·, mv kotd, unti ;; ; tua y ıhı. 1* '■ tí"*· i .ut- ol tíos и impon ! v. hu m» ui ıh·! ('obud löiouk, tbu. akımı ¡g и d un il и hi ο·- iuv utu } Wh f vu .t s lus iu av ι и ltd) HI lu.O lot du W» h 'u el H^pf'irtt? — VU tj, ,, t ,_.„ j s (.-m puvtug ui.uk 1 adpto tfu", jtotib Vi uiu , f onmim d Uu», I *lhu ai ís bu, M dih loíe tin pm; »it ' i w h,.i h « л tiu h* oi —
T h c iho, ι f« th:: ho me; lho» fn-Iilt lho iharp p.oij^ iJmc îhou inlİKitit — ip, iL loi pit v í — (Ье, ou^hi ihon 1vìio4W íl conçu u my ι hihi / — Ϊ cannot Ipıaû: 11 itd Fretterà t bm İtilip lıom lier — Oh ! Muti'.!«* (hlinitú the í**Ín<<f* ι Ьп^ ahnipîîs , h^ ]i,:íf- i mo to 1нъ (\>ìi арапин m. \ f tb» tb ot ol u ht wis at с «Jt*.d b\ Mo^ft<'it t u h > Muf lud Ь> v, İne «uni 1<<\е Juh! í. n.t ю f» Л hım, .oni ю pn.p. 'e io wníte lomí houis oí ihc tá \a in muí. uí. 1 it\«llou:. ľitd'tn , oíleinU i ,ч k »u 'un it.hľui lo diuominl ioíiii ti r ιμ'.π,Ι oí Ιιΐιί.,ηΐ, j iilh» .1 hım iKtbK aítde, aiid tnítiinj, b^ tluti.liu, liiHij, ihte doi.i if.ťf 'i>|4 ja'f J\ a, ui.'J* Ma> ¡nd f .чч! ledo d it mv. ati. 'Jiu bas. !ı!\ J 11 ri >· , en ι yy à Л\ IİJIS IlftiioJllH! lilll b' ! l\HiUI, vwthditW in л iiamt of mmd ta} d»ît *d tin m dt í aal «'.ni! '- Л> lie ι lolled (iu (ο,ιιί, li' W. л nui bv ílu ί.'"- 11Η ílíc whom lie Lad jd.oU) d ,a ti.« tınısın! a> Λ İp\ on Jťro/Kč and 7' od >·., 'Jhh man, almi'j· hnaihh b' YV ¡(h tin b 'Itt in ilad nude, iiíotimd Jıiü Jjoid, (lìti 77леЛ-/е and bmit J ^ i i v inni the «aitle W M t .Ί ihat n í >Ы ш j „n. a - (Oj.ıe- iniiľ ai (he ют!) «d A ( ¡ / > m *ч, Л л иЛ. i" i (bui ι lì. İle İt -d d'· ___ ed '1 'и v.Ulv t hl! în t , bo L tbe μ!« »ornimi·* ol tht íiijihí h td ри \ ou '-d in fi diKı»\ они; \s ¡и* ib. woman \w-
Ч 2 Manfred, whofe fpirits were inflamed, and whom Ifabella had driven from her on his ing¬ ing his paftion with too little referve, did not doubt but the impiictnde fhe had exprefled, liad Jieett occafioned by hev impatience to meet Theo¬ dore. Provoked by thi« conjecture, and enraged at her kuber» be Jiaftened fecretly to the great chimin Gliding foftly bt tween lite iiles» and guided by an ini pel feet gleam of moonfhine that Ik »ne lamdv 'hiough the illuminated windows, he ftub· iovvanh ihr- nunb of Alfonjo, to whicíi lie was directul by indiftinct whiipers of the» pedon s 3i e hm hu Tiıe firft founds lie could diftinguiih wtie —· İJı)es it alas! depend on me? Alan/ 11 d will u-u cr permit our union — İSO, this filali purent il! ciied the tyrant, thawing ids daggu , s 'ud pumping it* over her fhouider into tlie bohmi »»f tite pufon that fpoke — aht me, 1 am flain! uhd Alatilda linking: good heav ι ceci ve tny funi! Savage, inhuman moli¬ ftei hat haft thou done! cried Theodore, lufh- ing on him, and vvienddng Ids dagger from Jiim — Slop, ftop ibv impious Jnmd! cried Alatilda: it is my fathei I .Ik njtcd waking as from airante, beat Jiis breaft, iwifted liis liauds in his iocks, and endeavoiued ю iccuver his dagger from Theo* dore to difpatch himfelf. Theodore fcarce lek diíiracted, and only mafteiing ihe tranfports of
Ж 4..
his í^vief to a ifi ft Matilda y bad now by his crh». drawn fome of the monks ю Lis aid. While part of them endeavoured iu concert with the afilicted Theodore to ftop the blood of the d\in^· Princefs, tbe reft prevented Manfred fiom la\ ing violent hand? on himfelf. Mutilila reigning helft И' palieníU to İter Γλϊρ, acknowledged with looks of grateful love the /tai of Theodore. _ et oft as lier íaintmfs would per¬ mit her fpeech ils way, (\ic begged tbe atfiiiaun to comfort hef father. Jetóme by tiiis time bad, learnt the bit al news, and reached the chuu h. His looks feemed lo reproach Thevdvrc: but turn· iiii»; to Manfred , he faid, now, ty rant ï behold the completion of woe fulfilled on thv inipiou.; and devoted head! The blood of Alfoilla cried i'* heaven for vengeance; and heavtii Uns permitted its altar to be polluted by aha/lin.uion, that thou mightelt fhed ihy own biuod at the fuot of thai Princess fepulchre! — Cruel man! eıİed Matihhi^ to aggravate the wots of a parent! хпл^ heaven blefs my father, and forgive him as ï d»» f My Lord, my gracious Sire, doft tinnì forgive thy child? Indeed I came not hither to meet Theo¬ dore! I found him praying at this tomb, whither my mother leni me lo intercede for thee for bei — deareft father, blefs yom* child, Δηά fay vou forgive her — forgive thee! murderou. nioniUr !
1 İt' cried Manfred — can aíbtiTms forgive? J took thee for /jabcila; bui heaven directed my hJoody hand lo lhe lieart of mv child — oh! Alatilda — I cannot uller it -- ennîî ihou forgive the burnì- nefs «ď my rage! I can, I tío! and тал heaven tonbnu it ! Liid Matilda — but while I ha\eJife to aík it — Oh! ш\ inollici ! what will ihe kíl! — will you toudoľí iier, my l,oid! will you noi pul Jur a\s..\ ;' iiit'eed ihe loves you — oh! 1 am Liiiu ! btar mt io the ι aille — eau I list: to luve k-r floh nn eyes/ 'Jhìodott and the monks 1нЬ»ицЬ| her earneftly IO fuliu* bu h 'l to be boj. lie into the torneili ; but her inham ■ ·. wue io pniìnu l'» be cai ried to tiu; caule, th, α [dating 1ил uu α ïitît ι , diey CtbiVeyid hu ihíihtľ as liie îeqilefted. Tlnoilvre iuppoiîin^ hei luaţi widi his aim, and hanging (»ser bel' m an .щопу <jf ilelpaii mg Iove, Jtdl endeavoiirctl to inijiire ber wit/i hopt s of hie. jfironie on the odar fide < unfonid her wiih elife entries of heaven, ami hohlnu а <ru*iíÍ4 be- fore Jnr, win* h íhe baiiied with imutrenf lear·:» pr« pared Jit ι lor i ι ei pa 'hue i«· imumrtaliì\ . Aían* //td , plunged İn the deepeft afili t don , follow cd die lilier in di í pai). Тле they rt ai heti the < Λίύν ' /Hppolita , in¬ formed «»f the dr-adfuJ eatainophe, had flow u to meel lier murdered child; but when lhe faw the
43 the afflicted proceíTion, the mightinefs of her griet deprived her of iier fenfes, and fhe fell lifdehí to die earth in a fwoon. Jfabella and Frederic, who attended her, were overwhelmed in almoft eqifal furrow. Matilda alone feemed infenfible to h tir own fituation: every thought vvas loft ia tendernefs for her mother. Ordering the Hi ι ei¬ to flop» as fotm as /Hppolita was hi ought to her¬ felf, fhe afked ior Jier father. He approached» unable lo fpeak. Matilda, feizing Jiis hand ami Jier mother's, locked them in her own, and tJieu claiped them to her heart, Alanjred could not iupport this act of pathetic piety. He dallied liimfelf on the ground, and ended tJie day In* was born. Jfabella , appielienftve that ihefe itruggles of paftion Were more than Alatilda loidd iuppoti, took upon herfelf to tuder Акт /red to be borne to his apartment, wltiie lhe tau I ed Ala¬ tilda to be conveyed to the ntaieft thamber, Hippolita, fcarce more alive ıhan her daughter, луаз regard lefs of every thing but lit г : but when the tender Ifäbellcľs care would have likc-wif»» ïeinoved her, while the furgeons examined Αία- tildais wound, fhe cried, remove me! neverí never! I lived but İn her» antl will expire* with iier. Alatilaki railed her eyes at htr molheis лчисе, but rio fed ihem again without fpeaking. Hei Unking pidfe and ihe damp coldm f s of her hana К
HQ
toon difpelled all hopes of recovery. Theodûre followed the furgeons into the outer chamber, and Iieard them pronounce the fatal fentence with a tranfport equal to frenzy — Since fhe cannot live míne» cried he, at leaft f Jie fhall be mine iu death! — Fathei! Jerome' will yon not join our hands? cried be to the Friar» who wilh the Marquis had accompanied die furgeons. What means thy diíiracted ra f h ne k? faid Jerome; is this an hour for nmrbigid It is, it is, cried Theo« dore, alas! tliere is no other! Young man, thou art too miadvifed; faid Frederic: Doft thou think We are to liften to thy fond tranfports in this hour of fate? wliat pit tenuous haft thou to the Princefs? Thofe of a Prince; faid Theotlore; of the fovereign of Otranto. Tliis reverend man» my father, has informed me who I am. Thou raveft; faid the Marepus: there is no Prince of Otranto but myfelf, now Ahmfred by murder, by facrilegions murder, Ϊιλά foi fei ted all preten* fions, My Lord » faid Jerome , afluming an air of command» Jie telJs you true. It was not my purpofe the fecret l huid d lia ve been divulged fo foon', hm hue preffes onward to its work. WJiat his hot-headed palhon lias revealed, my tongue confirms. Know, Prince» that when Al/onjb fet fail for the Holy Land **«— is t Ids a íeafon for «xplanatious ? cried Theotlore. Father ¿ come and
47 unite me to the Princefs; fhe fhall be mine — in eveiy other thing I will dutifully obey y tut. My life! my adored Alatilda! continued Theo» dore, rufhing back into the innei chamber, will voti not blefs your — /fabella made figns to Jiim to be filent» apprehending the Princefs was near Jier end. What is fhe dead? cried Tneodore ; is ir. poflible ! The violence of his exclamations brought Alatilda to herfelf. Lifting \ιγ lier eye*;, fhe looked round for her mother — Life of my foul! I am here: cried Hippolita; think uttt I will quit thee! Oh! you are too good ; faid Matilda — but weep not for mo, my motJier! I am going; where forrow never dwells — /fabella, dum liait loved me; wilt thou not fupply my foi ui net s ю êhiâ dear, dear woman? — indeed I am laint! Oh! my child! my child! faid /hppolita in a llood of tears, can 1 not withhold tJiee a mo¬ ment? — It will nor be; laid Alatilda — commend me 10 heaven — where is my father? forgive him, deareft mother — forgive him my death; it was an error — Oil! I had forgotten —deattft mother, I vowed nevei* to fee Theodor* more — perhap» tliat Jtas drawn down this calamity — but it was not intentional — can you pardou'me? — Oh! wound not my agonizing foul! faid llippolita; thou never couldft offend me — alas! fiie faini**! help! help! —· I would fay fomething more» laid К j
48 Matilda ft niggling, but it wonnot be — ¡fabcfla -*~ Theodore — for my fake — Oh! fhe expired. Jfabella and lier women tore Hippolita from dio corfe; but Theodore threated deftruction to all who attempted to remove him from it. He printed a thoufand killes on her clay-cold hands, and ut¬ tered every eKpreffion that defpairing love couid dictate. Jfabella, in the mean time, was accompanying the afflicted llippolita to her apartment; but, in the middle ol' the court, they were met by Manfred, who, diftiarted with his own daughtci, was advancing to the chamber where» f lie Jay. As the moon was now at its height, he read in the coun- tenances of this unhappy company the event he dreaded. What ! is fhe dead í cried lie in wild con¬ iti ίί* »n — а clap of thunder at that inftant fhook the caftJe to its foundations; the earth rocked, and tlie clarrk of more than mortal armour was Jieard be¬ hind. Tredet ic and Jerome diought the heft day ■was at hand. The Jalter, forcing Théodore along with tliem, tufhed into the court. Tbe moment* Thtodorf appear« d , the walls oí the caftle behind Manfred weie thrown down w ith a mighty forre, and the form of Ålfonjo, dilated lo eoi iniimufo magnitude, appeared in die center of the ruins. Behold in T'sbvdore the frue heir of Aljonfo ! hiã the virion: And having pronounced thofr wtnd* r
MO ■accompanied by a riap of rhundei , ίί attended fo* lrninly towards lieav**!!, \л lien-the elemdi parting «funder, the ft rm of St. ISic/tolas was \een, and ieci'iving ; AfjonJQ^s fhade, they were foon wrapt fiom morial t\< s in a bhi/.e of glory . The b< holders fill profilale »m their fa» es , acknowledging the divine wdl. Tin 1 fidi that bioke filence was llippolita. My Lend, Lml iin tO the defpennkng Manfred, behold die vanity of human grealmd>! Conrad is genie! Alatilda is no more! in Tht odore we view 'he true Piince of Otranto. By what mirat le lie is fo , i know nut — fnflice İl to us, our doom is pionomiu d ! íhall we not, сап we hut dt tluate the kw deplorable honi %ve have tO live, in tìt pu t ating the fa t th t r w i adı of heaven? heaven t jr с t <; и«, — w huhei саплуе flv, ïiul m у on hol\ calls dut л et edh ι tua letität? — Tímu gtiildek but uníuppv woman' mdiappy b\ rny crimes! ľ plied Alan/ n d , my Inait at Jaft is open to thy devout admoniji.nis. Ohi eoull —■» buí il Cíiiinoi be «— ye are lof' in wonder — bt me ut laft do juftice on imbik' To ht .»p İham« o;ı my own head is ali du* fíii^fattiou 1 lt¿\í' Ult lo о flu to offended heaven. M\ ftun î „ . η 1ιν \ιι tìowu theíe judgments; Ìaì my conUÎÏum atone —· but aii! what can atone foi ufurpatiou and a murdeted child! achikl nuudeied iu a confetsiled place! —« К 5
_5·> Lift, Sirs, aud may this bloody record be a war¬ ning to future tyrants!* Alfonjh, ye all know, died in the holy land¬ re лтопЫ interrupt me; ye лгопк! fay he came not fairly to his end — it is moft true — why elfe this biitcr cup which Alanfred muft drink ю die dregs? Ricardo, my grandfather, was his chani- buhiin — I would draw а veil uver my auditor's uhnes— but it is in vain! ¿ilfonfo died by poi¬ fon, A fictitious лли11 declared Ricardo his heir. His crimes pu i fu ed Jiim — yer he loft no Conrad t no Matilda' \ pay die price of ubo paliou for all! A. ftorm overtook him. Haunted by his guilt he vowed to St. Nicholas to found а church and two convenís, ίί he Jived lo reach Otranto. The facri- iiu' was at;« epi rd ; lm faint appeared to him in a ılıcam, and promit· d that li ien/ r/o's poft eri i y fiiould ìiign in Otranto, until lhe rightful owner fhouhl he grown too large to inhabil llie e alile, and as IT * bmg as ifthr »male from HiLardo"$ loins fliould remain to enjoy İl —- Alasi aias! nor mak nor h-male , exet pţ my f if, remains of all his wrcitditd iace! — I have done — thv Woes of thefe three davs fpeak ther» ft. How this young man can be _1//Ь*.'/.'Л heir, í kuow not — yet ï do not doubt it. His are theft* dominions; I refign dum — yet I knew not Alfonfo had an heir — I rpieftion nor the will of heaven — poverty and puyer muft fill
1^1 up the woeful fpace, until Manfred fhall be fara- inoned to Rica) do. What remains, is my p¿m to declare, faid Je* rome. When Aìfunfo fet fail for the holy bind, he was driven by a ftorm to tlie coaft of Sicily. The other veflel, which bore Ricardo лпа hÌ<s train, as your I.ordf 'up muft have heaid, was fepaiated from him. It is moft tiue, faid Manfred; and thy title you »ive me is more· than an outcaft can claim— well î be it fo — pro* v.. .1, jr/ame b Juf he J, and continued. Fot' three montiis Lord Afjonfo was wind - bound in Sicily. There lie became enamoured of a. fair virgin named Victoria, fie was too pious to tempt tier to foibidden pleafure?. Tliey were married. Vet deeminp; dm amour in¬ congruous лл ith the hoi) vow of arms by which he was bound» he determined to conceal thtir nuptials, mud Jiis return from the Cru fade, when he purpofed to feek and acknowledge her for hi$ lawful wife. He left her pregnant. During his abfence fhe was delivered oí a daughter: But fcarce liad flie felt a mother's pailas ere fhe heard the fatal rumour of her Lord's death, and the fuc- ceibon of Ritardo. What could a ftieuiDefs, help¬ lefs woman do? would her teftimony avail? \et, my Lord, \ h ( \ve an authentic writing — it need* not; faid Manfred; tbe horrors oí thefe da>s, the vUïün we have but now feen, all conoburate thy
*_iä evidence beyond a di ou fand pat chínente. Aïatilda's death anel my expuiftem — Be compoied, my Lord, faid llippolita; t hid holy man did not mean to recai your griefs. Jerome proceeded. I fhall noi dwell on wli.it к needlefs. The daughter of whit h Victoria was delivered, was at her maitidty belhnyeti in martiage on me* Victoria died; anel the let rot remained locked in my breaft. Theodor i."^ nanadve luu told the reft. The Friar ceded, lite diiconfolate company retired to die remaining part of lhe caille. In the •morning Mvnjrtd [\^wd bis abdication ol the prim eipalily, with the approbation of llippolita 9 and each took on them the liabii of religion in tiieneigh- bouriiig соплч'ПЬ'. Frederic offered his daughter lo the new Plime» which lli/>poHta % s tendernefs for Jfabella toiicuned to promote: Hut Theodore*» grief was too flefli to admit the thought of ano¬ ther love; and it waàuoi until after frequent difcouifes with If ab t ila of his dear Alatilda, that he was peri nadeel he could know no happinefs but¬ in the fotieiy of one with whom he could for ever indidge the melancholy tiiat had uken puileJftoii of his foul.
FINIS*
