Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Netley abbey: a gothic story
NETLEY ABBEY. CHAP. XL x\S foon as the firft tinge of day appeared, young de Villars arofe, and began to prepare himfelf for his meditated expedition. The only difficulty was, in difguifing himfelf fo effedually that he might not be known to father Peter, or the porter of the abbey. As, however, he had only been once feen by them, on the evening of his vifiting that mo- vol, ii. ? nailery,
nailery, he trufted his perfon was not fo accurately obferved, as to be difcovered under the habit of a ftroiling minftrel. He therefore e- quipped himfelf, and was prepa¬ red early in the afternoon to fet out. His drefs confifted of a long îoofe gown of bright green, gather¬ ed at the neck and faftened with a filver clafp. A crimfon girdle en¬ circled his waift. Round his neck he wore a filver chain, from which depended a fmall fcutcheon of the fame metal, emboffed with the armi? of the college to which he was fuppofed t$ belong. On one fide of his girdle hung the wreft, or key of
of his harp, on the other, a neat filver mounted dagger. His luxu¬ riant locks were concealed under a clofe cap that came low upon his forehead. An harp, flung over the left ihoulder depended before him ; and a pilgrim's ftaif fupported his fteps. Thus difguifed he prefented him¬ felf to the baron, who confirmed the improbability of his being dif¬ covered, by the furprife he ihewed at the fingular alteration which this garb had produced in the appear¬ ance of his fon. He was fully of opinion he might venture to the monaftery without danger of detec¬ tion; he therefore gave him his blef¬ fing
fing, and difmiflèd him, faying; " Go my child, and God grant thee fuccefs. May he be thy guardian and diredor in this undertaking, and endow thee with fortitude and prudence to fulfil properly his wife and unfearchable behefts." Ed¬ ward alfo breathed a filent prayer to the fame effed; and full of ar¬ dour and confidence departed cheer¬ fully from the caftle. Eleanor had rifen early on the morning of the day fucceeding the adventure at Netley caftle. A thou¬ fand anxieties prayed upon her mind, and difturbed her ufual placid flum- bersv The recolledion of the ftran¬ ger would perpetually crofs her thoughts ;
thoughts; and tho* ihe endeavoured to reafon herfelf out of the abfur- dity of d wdl ing on the remem¬ brance of one whom perhaps ihe ihould never fee again, yet her heart tacitly told her, his image was too deeply imprefled there, to be erafed or obliterated by all the arguments of reafon. The threats of fir Hil* debrand would then recur, and fill her with dread ; which was by no means leffened at the apprehenfion of her ftill being perfecuted by hi» odious add refles. Somewhat alfo of myftery appeared in the condud of the baron and his fon ; ihe could not help remarking their unufual bufile and agitation, and her fears as well as curiofity were awakened B3 by
by feeing her brother in a difguife, new, ftrange, and unaccountable. The more ihe reflected on thefe various circumflanccá, the more her uneafinefs encreafed. She wifhed for an opportunity of unbofoming her anxiety to fome one ; thus in a degree to lighten its load. Edward, how¬ ever, was gone, and de Villars had ihut himfelf up in his appartment. She therefore refolved to communi¬ cate her emotions to the trufty Bea¬ trice, and accordingly defired ihe would attend her in a walk thro* the wood which lay at the back of the calile* Thither they repaired, and foon penetrated far into its fo¬ lemn glooms. Db
De Villars had retired to his chamber, to indulge reflection, and give a free fcope to his melancholy. It was to the anni verfary of that aw ful day, which had matched from him the partner of his foul. Several years were now elapfed fince this cruel lofs ; yet the remembrance of it was ftill freili in his mind. Time had indeed blunted the arrow of afflic¬ tion, but nothing could extrád it from his heart. It had been his confiant cuftom, ever fince the de- ceafe of the baronefs, to devote the day of her diflblution to folitary forrow, and the contemplation of his own mortality; and his orders were, that no one, upon thefe oc- cafionr*
cailøns, fhould interrupt his priv»^ cy. It was for this reafon that Eleanor would not difturb her father u hen fhe found he bis ihut up in his chamber; fhe recollcded the pur¬ pofe of his retirement, and tfkem- cd his grief too facred to be broken in upon. The baron, how r ever, did not cx- hauft thefe hours of feclufion in unavailing tears orpaifionate exclam¬ ations. Something might be allow¬ ed to the weaknefs of human na¬ ture on fuch a fad occafion, but the guih of afflidion would be but tran- fient; reafon would foon refume its place, and refignation again compofe the tumults ofhis foul. Religion would lend
îeiKİ her friendly aid, and bid him look forward to that happy period, when he again fliould meet the dear departed, and meet to part no more. She too would lift his mind to thankfulnefs and gratitude, for the kindnefs of heaven in having fpar- ed to him his children, the props of his declining age. In Edward he beheld every virtue that his fondeft wiih could fancy ; and in the bloom¬ ing Eleanor all thofe amiable qua¬ lities which had endeared her mo¬ ther to his foul. Contemplations of this nature engaged de Villars ; " Oh î" exclaim¬ ed he, " facred iliade of the de¬ parted Ifabel, if thy pure fpirit can c're
e* ft bend a thought t© earthly things, fure ? ??? gaxe with coøtpåacenqr mì thy virtues offspri^f ; Edward the gallant and the ^aod ; ami Eka- ??? whofe foul refiectj all thy prr- ftdiom«. Perchance, e'en mm thou fao/ereft round them, and deiigbteft to make their Mety thy particular charge·" He had juft uttered thefe words, when he was alarmed by the cries of a female in the hall. It was the voice of Beatrice. A fudden and prophetic horror chilled his foul, and he ruihed from the apartment to en¬ quire the caufe of her diftrefs. She had fainted when he arrived ; but immediately recovering, de Villars ex-
exclaimed, " where w my chdd, my tltan>r ?" The violence of Beatrice's grief prevented her from auf wering· Tbe baron half diffracted with ap- prehenlion, repeated his queftion; "ubere ib your rmffrefs? Is my child m fafety? " Ala»! my brd, fobbed out Beatrice ine is loft------- gone for forever î**——** Merciful God !" returned de Villars, " what doft thou fay ? Who has robbed me of my darling ? What horrible mif- fortune has torn my Eleanor from her father's bofom, and burft my aged heart?"— f< My lord," replied Beatrice, " I will endeavour to com¬ pó fe myfelf, and relate the ? i reuni¬ da nces of the difafter which has be¬ fallen my beloved miftrefs ; but alas! I fear I ne'er ihall fee her moie." —· "Be
** Be quick then ;" faid the baron.— ** My lord," refumed Beatrice^ "early this afternoon the lady Eleanor order¬ ed me to attend her in a walk through yonder wood.—I obeyed ; and we pro¬ ceeded for a considerable time in a diredion from the caille, being fo much occupied by converfation, and the various beauties around us, as not to confider the diftance we had ftrayed. Your daughter, my lord, at length obferved that it might be prudent to return. We had fcarcely, however, began to retrace our road, when the noife of horfemen alarmed us ; and looking back to difcover who they were, there appeared too ill- favored men in the habits of fervants, mounted on black horfes. On feeing us
us, they immediately rode up ; and one of them looking ftedtaftly at the lady Eleanor, exclaimed with a tre¬ mendous oath, " this is the objed of our fearch."—Both now alighted from their horfes, and one feiz¬ ed my miftrefs, the other myfelf. We were dreadfully alarmed, and made the woods echo with our cries ; the brutes, how r ever, foon deprived us of thefe means of calling afliftance, by gaging our mouths. Having done this, they next fecured our hands, binding them firmly behind us. The one who had firft fpoken, now took my beloved lady in his arms, and lifted her upon the horfe ; after which he mounted himfelf, and rode off at a fmart pace. The other villain hav- VOL. ?. ? ing,
ing, as he thought, fufficiently fe¬ cured my hands, took another cord from his doublet, and palling it round my waift, bound me to a tree ; " there," cried he, " as you are partial to the woods, I leave you to enjoy the fcene at your leifure;" faying this, he clapped fpurs to his horfe, and fol¬ lowed his comrade. "Grief and terror lent mc, I believe, extraordinary ftrength; for after ftruggîing fome little time, I loofened the knots which faftened my hands, and at length liberated both. I inftantly removed the gag from my mouth, and the rope from my waift, and returned to the caftle with the utmoft expedition, that I might
might communicate the mournful event to your lordihip. Heaven knows whither the ruffians have car¬ ried my unhappy miftrefs î but the road they took was that xvhich leads to Nctlcy caftle." A violent fliower of tears again guihed from the eyes ol Beatrice, and prevented her continuing the melancholy fubjed. Her laft words, however, gave de Villars an idea of the extent of his misfortune. It inftantly occurred to his mind, that fir Hildebrand Warren was the au¬ thor of this violence. The general profligacy of his charader ; his con¬ dud at the tournament ; and the ob- fcure menaces he had then thrown ? 2 out,
out, were circumftances which con¬ firmed his fufpicions beyond a doubt. " Execrable villain," ex¬ claimed he, in a voice choaked with agony, " to tear from my arms the ftaff of my finking years, and rob me of the only folace of my woes! Curfes light upon thee, thou fpoil- er of my peace! May heaven's blacken: vengeance purfue thy fteps, and fpeedy puniihment reward thy hellifli treachery. But let me not," continued de Villars, *· confume the time in ufelefs execrations; myfelf will follow the villain, and fnatch my daughter from diihonor. What tho* my arm has Ion its former vigor; heaven which cannot behold fuch bafenefs with indifference, will perhaps
perhaps nerve it withunufual ftrength, and enable me to regain my Elea¬ nor. But ihould its decree be other- wife, it will itili be fome confidatici to my fpirit, that my heart's blood was fpilt in the attempt. Robert, ' con¬ tinued the baron to his old domeftic, whom the alarm had brought into the hall, cc thou wilt not forfake thy lord in this moment of his an¬ gu i İh ------bring hither my armour, and let us hafte, to the deliverance of my wretched child ; would to God that Edward were here to af¬ fiil our endeavours." Robert bowed obedience to de Villars's commands, and retired to execute them. He would indeed c 3 have
have reprefented the impropriety of attempting the refcue of the lady Eleanor by force, had he not per¬ ceived his lord's grief was too violent to liften to the cool fuggeftions of prudence. He knew that fir Hildebrand Warren's numerous re¬ tainers would render vain all the ex¬ ertions of de Villars and himfelf; and he forefaw the danger of at¬ tempting any thing in a hoftile manner againft fo difproportionate a power. But Robert's had been a fervice of affedion, not of bondage ; he loved his lord, and therefore did not hefitate complying with his or¬ ders, tho' it w r as nearly certain that the execution of them muft prove fatal to them both. In
Ii4 a fliort fpace the baron and his attendant were properly equipped, and fet out towards the caftle of fir Hildebrand. As they rode through the wood, whither de Villars had often wandered with his gentle Elea¬ nor« every tree, every glade brought her '*o his remembrance. The tears rolled down his cheeks, and his bofom fwelled with agonizing emotions, while bufy recolledion painted her to him in each little ad of affedion and duty; foothing him with her own converfation, or liftening with fond attention to his. His foul was ab- forbed by the moft profound grief, and he had imperceptibly reached the extremity of the wood, when his at¬ tention was roufed by the cry of Ro* bert,
bert, who in a tone of exta *y ex¬ claimed, " my lord, my lord, behold the lady Eleanor !" De λ" 11 lars now caff h\, ???? for¬ wards, but what w oris can expiefs the fenfations of h;-» bofom when he perceived at a finali dblance, his daughter and a knight in armour, both on foot, and d .reding their ftcps towards him. In the wildnefs of ex- ceflive joy he threw himfelf from his horfe, and had a!nn» ft reached the object of his fearch, t»eforc flie ob¬ ferved his approach. A ihriek of delight was the firft fymptom which Eleanor gave of recolleding her pa¬ rent ; fne ruilied towards him, and funk fenielefs into his arms. De
De Villars was too much overcome with confliding emotions to be able to aifift in reftoring her fenfes; but the knight, unclafping his helmet, haftened to an adjoining brook, and laving a little of the water from it, foon recalled her to life and recol¬ ledion. The firft few minutes of returning reafon were confumed by de Villars and his daughter, in mutual gratula¬ tions ; and it was fometime before the former could fufficiently colled him¬ felf to pay any attention to Eleanor's companion. At length, however, he turned towards him, and was on the point of enquiring by what extra¬ ordinary means he had refcued his child
child from the danger with which ibe was threatened, when he difco¬ vered, by the color of his armour, the device of his Afield, and the azure fcarf which he wore, that the youth before him was no other than the gallant ftranger who had fo fignaily difplayed his ikill and prowcfs at the tournament of fir Hildebrand War¬ ren.------ u Knight," faid the baron, tr pardon me for having thus long omitted to exprefs my obligations, at being once more put into poflef- fion of Lhe treafure of my foul ; for I cannot doubt but that to your gal¬ lantry, I owe the recovery of my child. My admiration and cfteem you acquiied at Nctlcy cuffie ; ac¬ cept now my gratitude and friend¬ ihip,
fliip, the poor returns for an obli¬ gation that never can be cancelled.— But come fir knight, let us proceed to my manfion, and indulge me, on our ???!?, with the particulars of this unhoped for event." The youth returned his acknow¬ ledgments to de Villars for his kind¬ nefs ; he aflured him that in refcuing the lady Eleanor from violence, and giving her back to her father, he felt the moil lively pleafure ; that, however, as he had now placed her under fecure and proper protedion, it was neceflary for him to depart; he had affairs of a nature the moft important to execute, which would not admit of delay ; but that fliould it
it pleafe heaven to grant him fuccefs in the undertaking which then en¬ gaged his attention, he would fpeedily pay his refpeds in perfon at the caftle of de Villars. ?? e baron faw it would be in vain to prefs the ftranger further, to ac¬ company Eleanor and himfelf to their dwelling; once more therefore he repeated the didates of his gratitude, and fervently prefling his hand, bad him adieu ; the knight taking a graceful leave of his companions, turned about, and walked haftily to~ wards the extremity of the wood. Ön his departure, the firft en¬ quiries of the baron were relative to
to the efcape of his daughter from the villains who had furprifed Bea- tricç and herfelf; he informed her of what particulars he was already apprifed, together with his own fuf¬ picions as to the original author of this piece of perfidy ; and requefted ihe would continue the detail from the moment of her feparation from her attendant. " My lord," replied Eleanor, " I was fo alarmed by the fudden and ferocious appearance of the horfemen, their threatening language, and boif- terous treatment, that for fome mi¬ nutes after one of them had bound, and placed me on his horfe, I loft my recolledion entirely, and funk vol. xi. d into
into infenfibility. On my reco¬ very, I perceived we had already emerged from the wood, and had entered the road which leads to the caftle of fir Hildebrand War¬ ren. My real fituation at once flaihed upon my mind; I faw my¬ felf the vidim of a wretch whofe vicious foul was equal to the un¬ dertaking of any villainy, and whofe power gave him the opportunity of executing it with impunity. I was u nabi e to intereft the companion or attention of my conductor by pray¬ ers, or promifes, as he had tiken care to render me incapable of fpcech by gdg&ng my mouth ; and the rapidity of our motion convin¬ ced me that a fliort time would convey
convey me to the place of defti- nation.—--Great God ! what agony fliook my bofom, what defpair fil¬ led my foul, when I heard the other villain, who had joined us, exclaim to his companion; there was now no danger to be feared ; he had fi- lenced my attendant, and her mif¬ trefs would be foon fafely lodged in Netley caftle."------ " I lifted up my ftreaming eyes to heaven, and filently implored the protedion of the moil high, whofe arm alone I thought could now fave me from deftrudion. The guardian of the wretched heard my petition, and at that moment, a knight appeared on horfeback from d 2 a little
a little covert, to the right of the road. The hope of relief gave me preternatural ftrength; I freed my right arm from the cord which bound it, and fnatching the infiru¬ ment from my mouth, uttered a loud and piercing ftiriek. " This found of diftrefs caught the flranger's attention, and he inftant¬ ly turned his horfe towards us. My condudor, in the mean time, order¬ ed the other horfeman to precede him, and to endeavour to perfuade the knight not to obftrud his pro¬ grefs; but, if he fliould prove ob¬ ftinate, to attack him without fur¬ ther ceremony. At the fame time he affli red me, with the moil hor¬ rible
ribic oaths, that fliould I continue my cries it would be the worfe for me when 1 arrived at his lord'J manfion. "Unmindful however, ofhis me¬ naces, I redoubled my entreaties for the afliftance of the knight, who I now difcovered to be the fame that had overcome fir Hildebrand in the tournament. In a few minutes lie reached the firft horfeman.------Their converfation was but momentan. Almoft inftantly unlheathing their fu ords, they atrackcd each other fiercely; but after a fliort conflict, the ftranger cleft his antagonift to the ground.—------The moment rny conductor perceived the fate of his d j com-
companion, fearing a fimilar one him¬ felf, he loofened the firing which bound me to my faddle, and fpur- ring his horfe with great rage, the animal gave a fudden ftart, that threw me with violence to the ground. I was ftunned ???? the fall ; the attentions, however, of my deliverer, who had difmounted from his palfrey, foon reftored me ; and I had the fatisfadion of find¬ ing when I recovered, 1 that the furviving villain was already out of fight* <c The knight endeavoured to com¬ pofe the evident tumult of my fpirits, which had been greatly agitated with this quick fucceffion of extraordinary events,
events, by every means in his power. He bade me confider myfelf as now perfedly fafe ; that he would proted me at the hazard of his exiftence ; nor would he forfake his charge till he had again reftored me to the arms of my honored parent. This pro¬ mife, my lord, he was performing, when the happy and unexpeded meet¬ ing with yourfelf, made any further trouble on his part unneceifary." De Villars liftened to the detail of his daughter, with mingled emotions of terror, wonder, delight, and gra¬ titude. Calling his eye to heaven, he breathed his pious thanks to the great difpofer of human affairs for the unlooked for deliverance of his child ;
child ; then, after fome minutes paufe, he thus addreíTed her. ,f Eleanor, I have been revolving in my mind, the Angular events which have this day befallen you, and their probable confequences. The former, thanks be to heaven, have terminated hap¬ pily ; but the latter, I fear, are teem¬ ing with danger to us all. Sir Hilde¬ brand Warren, the contriver of this attack on the peace of our family, will not be deterred from further at¬ tempts by this difappointment. I know his rancorous, his relent lefs heart; I know too his power, which we arc utterly unable to refift. E'er this time he is probably acquainted with the ill-fuccefs of bis fcheme, and the means by which it was de¬ feated ;
feated; and may have already formed fomc new plan, more violent, more certain of fucceeding. « Nothing then, my child, is left for us, but fpeedy flight from Eng¬ land. My enquiries relative to the barons who were faid to have con¬ federated together againft the vicious government of the king*s favorite^ have been hitherto without effed; that fafety therefore which I had fecretly looked to from their protec¬ tion, I muft ceafe now to hope for. In my native land, it is probable I ihall ftill find fome connedions, fome friends of the de Villars fa¬ mily remaining, who may extend their afliftance to my fallen branch ; but
but ihould I be unknown or forgot¬ ten there, it will yet be better to fink into quiet and happy poverty in a fpot where our domeftic peace fliall be fecure, than continue here in comparative affluence, expofed to the attempts of a powerful villain. Let tomorrow night then, my child, be the time of our departure ; be it your care to colled together what¬ ever may be of ufe to us in our re¬ tirement ; myfelf and Edward will by that time have prepared a veffel to tranfport us to the coaft of Nor¬ mandy." Eleanor heard her father vvith mingled pleafure and pain,- to fly from the violence of the hateful fir Hilde-
Hildebrand Warren could not but be agreeable to her; yet, when flie refleded that in leaving her coun- try, flie loft, at the fame time, all hope of ever again beholding her deliverer j him to whom flie had furrendered her virgin heart, to whom ihe was bound by the ftrongeft ties of gratitude and love, flie felt that acute fenfation of diftrefs, with which the anticipation of perpetual abfence from the objed of regard, will wring the bofom of difintereftcd affedion. Parental obedience, however, was a leading principle in Eleanor's foul; flie refpeclfully agreed in the pro¬ priety of the baron's plans, and with a wcll-countcrfcited appearance of
of cheerfulnefs, endeavoured to dif-, lipate her father's gloom, during the remainder of their walk to the caftle*
CHAP.
CHAP. XI L IT will now be neceflary for us to return to Edward, and attend him in his expedition to the abbey. That he might be the lefs liable to difeovery, be had determined not* to vifit this religious houfe till to¬ wards evening ; and accordingly a- mufed himfelf the better part of the afternoon, in wandering through the deep woods with which it was fur- rounded. Agitated by hope, fear, expectation, and curiofity, the time pailcd but flowly to the youth; at at length, however, he beheld the voi. n. e mellow
mellow tints of the fetting fim, glit¬ tering through the opening ?!;. ι ·„ and leaving his retirement, ? pio¬ ceed ed to the monafteiy. Twice he lifted the maflive knock¬ er of the gate, without rcfolution to demand admittance. The onfciouf- ncfs of his difguife, and of the dif- fimulative part which he was pre¬ paring to acl:, took from him, in a degree, that confidence which the dignity of ingenuoufncfs will ever infpire. When, however, he reflec¬ ted on the uprightness of his inten¬ tions, and the extraordinary occur¬ rences he had witneflèd, that feemed to call him to the adventure in which he was engaged, his wonted compofure
compofure returned, and raifing his arm a third time, he thundered loud¬ ly at the portal· One of the brethren immediately obeyed the fummons, and, opening the gate, enquired his bufinefs. "Friend," replied the youth, " I am as thou feeft, a travelling minftreL In jour¬ neying to the caftle of fir Hilde¬ brand Warren, I have been bewil¬ dered in the mazes of thefe woods, and am fallen, by accident, on your abbey. As the fliades of night are now defcending, I crave the hofpi¬ tality of your order ; refrefliment for my exhafted frame, and a bed for my repofe." " Brother," faid the e 2 monk,
monk, u my lord abbot will be right glad of your arrival; *tis long fince our retirement has been enlivened by the merry tones of a minftrel' s harp." Saying this he took Edward by the hand, and led him to the refedory where the abbot was feat¬ ed. He received the youth cordial¬ ly; and, without appearing at all to fufped his difguife, bid him hear¬ tily welcome. The occafional relaxation, indeed, of the minftrel, was almoft the only fort of amufement permitted to the monaftics of thefe ages ; and as this varied agreeably the dull monotony of their indolent lives, the temporary vifits of this profeflion, were always received
received with pleafure and fatis¬ fadion. It was not long before Edward was required to give a fpecimen of his art ; a requeft which he readily complied with, to the great delight of his attentive audience. Father Peter was particularly gratified ; he had little that w r as fpiritual about him, his retirement from the world, having been didated entirely by felfiih motives. Profligate and li¬ centious in principle, but without riches to indulge his propenfities, he eafily faw that his means of gratification would incrcafe, by en¬ tering into a profeflion, that pro¬ mifed, from the circumftances of e 3 the
the times, affluence, leifure, and fafety to its members. In fir Hil¬ debrand Warren, he found a patron exadly to his tafte ; and as abbot of Netley, with a fociety of monks devoted to his fervice, had enjoyed ample opportunities of perpetrating almoft every crime, which can ftain human nature. The excefles of the table Λνε^ amongft the abbots vices ; and as the popular ballads which Edward recited had given him an unufual flow of fpirits, the bowls of wine, by his example, circulated very briikly. This cur difguifed youth encou aged as much as poflible, ex- cufmg himfjf, at the fame time, from
from joining in their frequent pota¬ tions ; an abftinence that afforded no little entertainment to the brethren of the convent. Midnight at length approached, and Edward was happy to hear the abbot, in accents fcarcely articulate from intoxication, give diredions to a lay-brother to ihew the minflrel to his chamber. Thither he retired, and feating himfelf upon the bed, refolved to wait patiently till fuch time as the whole convent ihould be wrapt in flumber, before he com- menced his fearch. We may readily fuppofe that this interval of fufpence was not paifed without anxiety. The novelty of his fituation, the uncer¬ tainty
tainty of fuccefs, the danger of de- tedion, all confpired to agitate his mind ; and the bell of the convent tolled one, e're he had fufficiently collected himfelf to proceed to the execution of his plan. At length, however, he ftarted from his feat, and taking the taper in his left hand, and the dagger in his right, he foftly left his chamber. Not knowing to what particular fpot to dired his fteps, he follow¬ ed the windings of a paifage which faced the room he came from. As this led him by the dormitories of the monks, he was obliged to ufe all his aution left the found of his fo* - »?fteps tìiould awaken the fieeping brethren.
brethren. Having pafled thefe, the cloifters next prefented themfelves, through which the wind roared in füllen murmurs. Edward hefitated for a moment, whether he fliould traverfe this dreary pile, or confine his fcrutiny to the body of the building, and had already formed a determina¬ tion to return, when a fudden craih like the burfting open òf a door, at the extremity of the cloifter, exci¬ ted his curiofity, and impelled him to proceed. The wind was fo violent that he could with difficulty prevent his ta¬ per from being extinguifhed ; he walked carefully to the fpot whence the noife feemed to come, and foon perceived
perceived it was oceafioned by the recoil of a fmall door, which not being locked, had been blown open by a fudden guft of air. A long and narrow paifage here difplayed itfelf, but the dimnefs of his taper did not allow him an op¬ portunity of feeing to what it led. He refolved, notwithflanding, to dif¬ cover its termination, and entered it accordingly ; but fcarce had he pro¬ ceeded three paces, before a fecond blaft of wind again clofed the door, extinguifhed the light, and left Ed¬ ward in perfed darknefs. Horror, for a moment, feized him, when, on feeling for the wicket,
wicket, he perceived the fpring of the lock had caught on its return, and that he was irremediably con¬ fined within the paflage.------A con¬ viction of imminent danger, without being able to afcertain its nature or fource, is the moil terrifying of all mental emotions; the imagination, not confined by any definite idea, hurries into the wildeft extravagance, and pidures horrors which can only exiil in the whims of fancy.—Confei¬ ous reditude, however, foon calmed the tumult of Edward's bofom ; he breathed an ejaculation to heaven, and determined to proceed. Pla¬ cing his hand thcrefoie againft the wall, he walked cautioufly on, re¬ gre t ing now the misfor Lime which had
had occurred, only as it threat¬ ened to deprive him of all fur¬ ther opportunity of profecuting his fearch. He continued pacing the paflage in this deliberate manner fome time, when his ear was fuddenly furprifed by the fiiint found of inffrumcntal harmony. The youth liftened atten¬ tively ; in ? few moments the notes were repeated, accompanied by a female voice, which died away in a cadence ravifhinelv fweet. Astonishment and delight fixed him to the fpot on which he flood; again he called up his attention, and a third time the united melody thril¬ led
led on his car, and gradually funk into filence as before. The dream, with all its circumftances, now mill¬ ed on Edward's mind ; he doubted not that the myftery which had fo long perplexed him, was about to be unfolded, and panting with ex¬ pectation, he again proceeded. All, once more, was filence and darknefs; he moved on however, till his progrefs was impeded by fomething againft which his foot ftruck, with a íhock that nearly overthrew him. Stooping down to afcertain what it might be, he found it was a muflí ve trapdoor, fo warped by time or wea¬ ther, as to render it incapable of being clofely ihut. This he endca- OL. n. f voured
voured to lift up, though for fome time without effed. Summoning at length all his power into one exertion, he raifed the ponderous flab, and immediately difcovered, by a faint gleam of light which ftreamed thro* the aperture, a flight of ftone flairs, terminating in another paifage. Thefe he de- fccnded without hefitation; and fcarcely had reached the bottom, e're he was again raviihcd with the harmonious founds he had before heard, which now burft more rich, full, and clearly on his ear. A small door with an iron grat¬ ing in it, (whicii emitted the im¬ per f ed
perfed light that had enabled Ed¬ ward to defcend the flairs) appear¬ ed at the end of the paifage. Fie advanced foftly towards it, his heart palpitating with unutterable emo¬ tions. But what was his aftoniih¬ ment and rapture, w l hen, on looking through the grate, he beheld the real form of the inchanting female, whofe portrait his fancy had prefented to him in the virions of the night. For a moment he doubted the evidence of his eyes, and could not avoid believing himfelf the dupe of a fervent imagination. A ihort time, however, reftored his recolledion, and enabled him to obferve minute¬ ly the fcene before him. f 2 The
The room or cell into which the grated door afforded entrance, ap¬ peared to be a fquare of about twelve feet, vaulted above, but with¬ out any opening to admit the light of day. In one corner of it might be fecn another wicket, communi¬ cating apparently with an inner a- partment. The furniture confifted merely of a table and chair; both of the moil homely vvorkmanfliip ; on the former of vvhieh flood an ivory crucifix, and a lighted waxen taper. In ihort the appearance of the whole together, indicated the a- partment to be a fubterraneous pri¬ fon. But what attraded Edward's attention moil particularly, was, the intereft)ng figure who feemed to be the
the only inhabitant of this gloomy abode. She was feated at the table, and held a lute in her hand ; the firings of which ihe f wept in the moil graceful manner, warbling at the fame time an evening hymn to the blefled virgin. Her age appear¬ ed to be about nineteen; ihe was of the middle fize, but fafliioned with the niceft fymmetry. Her coun¬ tenance was open, ingenuous and lovely; her complexion clear, daz¬ zling, and tranfparent ; her eye dark, animated, and intelligent. Luxuri¬ ant ringlets of auburne hair fell carelefsly over her flioulders, and ferved as a beautiful contrail to the fnowy whitcncfs of a bofom whicii nature had modelled with all her care. r 3 E tuv A r i>
Edward gazed on this image of perfedion without the power of ut¬ terance ; his bofom foon acknow¬ ledged an emotion hitherto unknown to him, that indefcribablc paffion produced by a combination of ail the finer fenfibilities in our nature.— Totally abforbed in rapturous con¬ templation, he would perhaps, have continued fome time thus ufeiefsly filent, had he not been roufed by a ihriek whicii came from the lady, who had accidentally lifted up her eyes, and been terrified hy the ap¬ pearance of a ftrange face at the grate. Edward, hurt at the alarm which he thus involuntarily excited, immedi¬ ately endeavoured to diffipate it ; " lovely pattern of excellence," faid he,
he, " let not your bofom entertain a fear on my account. In me you behold the fon of baron de Villars, the protedor of innocence, the re¬ liever of diftrefs.— Heaven has fent me hither to be the infirument of your deliverance, and my blood ihall gladly be fpilt in the glonous ad¬ venture/* These words he uttered with all the warmth and energy of truth, nor did the fair ftranger hefitate at giving immediate credit to them. Guilt alone can entertain fufpicion; but as the former had not ftained her ioni, the latter could meet with no reception there. "Generous youth," returned the lady, <c pardon the in- volun-
voluntary expreflion of furprife which your unexpeded appearance drew from me.—Long lìnee alàs ! have I beheld that grating only with horror and affright, fince every face which it prefented to my view was that of a deadly foe. Your benevolent offer of afliftance I receive with gratitude unfpeakable -, nor will the fon of de Villars find that I am an objed al¬ together unworthy of his notice or compaflion.-----But," continued ihe, after a moment's paufe, <f your at¬ tempt muft be, I fear, in vain, fince the door which confines me within this horrible dungeon, is fiiftened by a lock too ftrong for our united ftrength to break."
Edward
Edward, for the firft time, ex¬ amined the faftening, which, to his mortification, he found was a pon¬ derous lock, that threw its bolt into the ftone lintel of the door-way. For fome time he endeavoured, by various artifices, to force it back, but without effed. At length the dagger occurred to his recolledion. This he introduced into the cavity which received the bolt, and prefling it hard upon the end of the latter, it flew back, and the door grated on its hinges. Edward now entered the chamber, and approaching the lady, he again aflured her, in the moil refpedful terms, of his real character, and determined
determined refolution to deliver her at the hazard of his life. " But come," continued he, " fair maid, let us efcape without delay from thefe gloomy regions ; the convent is ftill wrapt in flumber, and we may now retire unobferved from its walls." Mingled emotions agitated the mind of the lady, and difabled her from replying ι ihe gave her hand, how¬ ever, to the fon of de Villars with all the confidence of virtue, and quitted the fcene of her confine¬ ment. Taking the taper from the table, Edward retraced his road, till they came to the door which had been clofed by the violence of the wind. With
With the afliftance of the light and dagger, he foon managed to open this alfo; and repafling the cloifters, quickly arrived at the great gate of the monaftery.—But here a difficulty occurred, of which he had not been aware, the faftenings of this were fo maflive, that he in vain en¬ deavoured to remove them by the means he had employed in his two fimilar attempts—and all violence was precluded, by the fear of dif- turbing the fleepîng monks. In this dilemma, his fair companion acci¬ dentally eafting her eye to the wall at the right of the gate, difcover¬ ed a fmall niche, and looking into it, beheld the keys, which were accuftomed to be depoiited there for
for the convenience of the porter. She inftantly communicated the im¬ portant difeovery to Edward, who fnatching them down, applied them to the locks, and foftly opening the convent gate, led his charge without the walls. He then once more turned the keys, and hid them under a ftone, that, in cafe of an alarm, the monks might not be able to make an im¬ mediate purfuit. The agitation of the lady du¬ ring thefe critical moments was ex¬ treme; the fear of being difcovered e'er they could effect a retreat, and being again immured in the dreadful dungeon flie had left fliook her with alarm; and the idea of the
the danger to which young de Vil¬ lars would be expofed, in cafe of a furprife, (whofe figure and man¬ ners had already made the moil pleafing impreffions on her mind,) added to the generous girl's diftrefs« Edward, however, as foon as he had relocked the gate, endeavoured to diffipate her alarm, with every af¬ furance of fafety and protedion. The baron's manfion, he obferved, was but at a fmall diftance from the abbey; thither he would lead her in a ihort time, and prefent her to thofe who fliould make her future happinefs their care.—■" But let me i n t r eat y ou , " laid he " fahr fu fíe rc r, to indulge me with a detail of the circumftances that placed you in the vol. ii. g terrible
terrible abode from which I have had the happinefs to deliver you. What obdurate villany, what mon- fterous cruelty, could e'er treat fuch excellence fo undefervedly?" " Par¬ don me, gallant youth," returned the lady, " if I do not now com¬ ply with your requeft.—My ftory is long, and melancholy; nor do I find myfelf equal, in the prefent tumult of my fpirits, to relate its mourn¬ ful particulars.—On the morrow I will willingly unfold it; when the baron, your father, Λν?ιο I full well know will be interefted in the nar¬ rative, may have an opportunity of hearing it." Edward, of eourfe, immediately waved
waved his wiih; and turning the difcourfe to indifferent fubjecls, a- greeably whiled away the time till he brought his charge to the caftle of de Villars. —On his arrival, he called up the domeflics, and having defired Beatrice to awaken her mif- trefs, had foon an opportunity of recommending the fair ftranger to Eleanor. He then bad them both adieu, and retired to his chamber·
β 2 CHAP.
CHAP. XIII. X HE occurrences of the night oc¬ cupied entirely the mind of Edward, and effedually prevented him from taking repofe.—Hopes and feare al¬ ternately arofe in his bofom, with refped to the lady whom he had delivered from the abbey; and on whom he now found his future hap¬ pinefs muff depend. Agitated with thefe emotions he quitted his pillow early in the morning, and went to the chamber of the baron, to ac¬ quaint him with the events which had happened. De
De Villars, full of the refolution to retire Immediately to the conti¬ nent, and anxious for the return of his fon, was already rifen. He felt therefore greatly relieved, when he faw him approach with a counte¬ nance that befpoke fuccefs and fatis¬ fadion. The detail which he gave the baron, filled him with aftoniih¬ ment; nor was Edward lefs fur¬ prifed, when he underftood the dar¬ ing attempt that had been made on the honor of his family by fir Hilde¬ brand Warren, and the confequent determination of de Villars to depart that night from England.------For a moment he entertained the raih idea of inftantly feeking the caftle of the knight, and challenging him to fingle g 3 combat,
combat, that he might puniih his reiterated infults. The baron, how¬ ever, foon pointed out the danger¬ ous folly of this plan; and aflured him that a temporary abfence at leaft from -their prefent fituation, would be the moil certain means of future fafety and quiet. Edward bowed an aflent to his father's opi¬ nions, and accompanied him to the breakfafting room. It was late before Eleanor and her fair charge appeared. The door at length opened, and the ftranger entered covered with a veil that con¬ cealed her whole face. De Villars xofe to receive her, to offer his pro¬ tection, and the hofpitality of his caftle.
caftle. As he approached her, the lady threw back her veil, and falling on her knee, burft into tears ; " fave me, fave me, de Villars," cried flie, "from the machinations of fir Hilde¬ brand Warren, that enemy of my peace. Already has your generous daughter acquainted me with his bafe condud towards her, and your refolution of immediately retiring beyond the reach of his infernal malice.—Oh ! fuffer then an unpro¬ teded fuppliant to be the companion of your flight, nor leave the unfortu¬ nate Agnes Warren to the mercilefs fury of her unnatural coufin." "Gracious heaven!" exclaimed the baron, u art thou the daughter of
of my much-regretted friend the good fir Raymond? Yes—full weli I trace his foftned likenefs in that face, which beams with all his gen¬ erous virtues.------But rife fair maid, and reft aflured that while de Vil¬ lars breathes, Agnes Warren ihall not want a father.—Pardon, however, my curiofity, if I requeft to know by wltat ftrange events I have the pleafure of feeing the daughter of my friend, after rumour had announ¬ ced her death upwards of two years ago ? The report which notified your father's deceafe, added, that you fell a facrifice at the fame time to the fame malignant complaint." " Alas," replied Agnes, with a deep
deep figh, u the public ear was cheat¬ ed with a perfidious lie fabricated by the unnatural fir Hildebrand. — Would to God my honored parent had fallen a vidim to the ftroke of quick diforder ; he had not then experienced thefe bitter pains which a tedious lingering, and horrible diffolution by famine, muft produce.------Great God ! how do I live to tell the fear^ ful tale? to fay thefe eyes beheld my parent pale, wan, emaciated, ftar- 4'ing; "myfelf without the ability to afford him fuftenance.——-Even now his laft fad look is prefent to my mind; his laft, weak figh, ftill vi¬ brates on my ear.------And thou too Raymond, my friend, my brother, my protedor j long e'er this, has the
the remorfelefs ufurper of your rights, compleated his vengeance with thy blood!" A torrent of tears fell from Ag¬ nes on this retrofped of her diftref- fes; fhe continued filent for a few moments, and then proceeded.—— " But pardon, my lord, this tribute to affedion.-—-I have promifed to the generous youth who refcued me from confinement, that I would re¬ late the circumftances of my ftory. Should your lordihip feel inclined to hear a tale of wretchednefs, I will endeavour to perform the ungrate¬ ful talk." The baron, his fon, and daughter, whofe curiofity was equal¬ ly excited, all preifed their gueft to begin
begin, which ihe did in the follow¬ ing manner. " My father, you may recollect, baron, retired from court to his caftle in Hampfliire feveral years fince, on the deceafc of his lady, my mother, whofe lofs he never ceafed to deplore.—Thither he car¬ ried me, and his nephew Hilde¬ brand, (the only remaining fon of an elder brother) to whom he en¬ trufted the chief management of his extenfive property, being himfelf un¬ equal to the tranfadion of bufinefs, from the violence of his grief.—I, at that time, was fcarcely ten years old, my brother Raymond, (the el¬ der by eight or nine years) had, a ihort
ihort time before our removal, been fent for to the continent, by Guy earl of Flanders (a prince diftantiy allied to my deceafed mother) who had engaged to take charge of his future fortunes. " As my father indulged very much in folitary forrow, it neceflarily hap¬ pened that Hildebrand and myfelf were frequently together.------1 had, however, early taken a diflike to him, and, young as I was, had fa- gacity to perceive his charader dif¬ played a contemptible combination of villany and hypocrify, which fil¬ led me with difguft and contempt; nor could all his endeavours to con¬ ciliate my efteem, ever infpire me with a fentiment in his favor.
" As I grew up his attentions to me redoubled, and, not fufped- ing that he was aduated by intereft¬ ed motives, I thought common gra¬ titude demanded a return of civili¬ ty at leaft on my part.------1 there¬ fore relaxed, in fome meafure, the referve and diftance I had hitherto obferved towards him, and behaved with more opennefs and freedom than ufual.—It was not long, how¬ ever, before I had reafon to regret this alteration in my condud.—What I intended as mere expreffions of friendly poUtenefs, Hildebrand mif- conftrued into tokens of regard ; and adually began to fancy I was deep¬ ly enamoured of him.-----This mif¬ taken convidion of his foon pro- voL. 11, ? duced
¿need a confidence İn hb manner that difguiled me extremely.----- -But my indignation was raifed to the higheft pitch, by his at length de¬ claring in the moil unequivocal terms, that he had long perceived the par¬ tiality with which I had honored him; that he felt a reciprocal at¬ tachment; was ready to blend his fortune with mine, whenever I would permit him to poifefs my hand* ^"His effrontry and conceit filled me with aftoniihment, and prévenu ed my replying for fome moments.— Indeed, notwithflanding the know¬ ledge I had of his charader, it had never once occurred to me, that he could ever entertain the abfurd idea of
of a matrimonial alliance taking place between us.------1 had juft at¬ tained my fixteenth year; he was nearly forty .—Our confanguinity too precluded all poífibility of marriage; and as he depended entirely on the bounty of my father, he had not the means of procuring a feparate ,eftabiiihment. "As foon as I recovered my fur¬ prife, " coufin," faid I, ** your inju¬ rious notions with regard to myfelf, and your ingratitude towards fir Raymond, render you at once both contemptible and hateful to me.-— You have abufed my franknefs, and his generofity.—It is time, however, he fhould be informed that he has h 2 nourished
nouriíhed a viper in his bofom, whø repays the kindnefs by an attempt to wound him in the tenderen: part." I waited not for any reply from Hildebrand, who, I obferved, was very much agitated by what I had faid, but inftantly went to my father's apartment, determined to inform him of all that had paifed. "Sir Raymond liftened to my ac¬ count with very great difpleafure and aftoniihment, and immediately ordered his nephew to attend him. They continued ihut up together for fome time ; at length a domeftic came to acquaint mc, my prefence was defired in the hall.—I went thither and
tnd found both my coufm and fa¬ ther; the one with a countenance of much humiliation; the other ap¬ parently lefs difturbed than when I left him· ff I have fent for you my child," faid iir Raymond, "that you may receive the apologies of Hildebrand for the infulting propofals he had the audacity to make to you.—His injury to myfelf I have forgiven, in consideration of the affection I en¬ tertained for his father, and his fo- Iemn promife of never repeating it again.—Whether, however, you can. pardon his infolence, mufl entirely be left to yourfelf, the perfon prin¬ cipally concerned.—If you feel fa- H 3 t is fied
tisfied with his afiurances of future refped and propriety of condud, I ihall again confider him as a mem¬ ber of our family; if not, it« will be neceflary for him to depart im¬ mediately from Netley caftle." " Tho' I fliould gladly have heard Hildebrand's difmiffion pronounced by my father, for he had become now doubly obnoxious to me, yet when î found his fate depended on my¬ felf, my heart funk at the idea of a relation and fellow-creature being doomed to poverty and perhaps wretchednefs by the fentence of my own mouth.------1 therefore replied without hefitation, that as I doubt¬ ed not the fincerity of my coufin's promifes ;
promifes ; I was willing alfo to for¬ get what had pafled, and to receive him on the fame terms of friendihip as before.— Hildebrand returned me the moil fervile thanks for my lenity and condefeenfion ; and mingled them with many hypocritical tears, which, tho* they ferved to deceive my father into an opinion of his forrow for the offence he had been guilty of, were to me only confirming proofs of his bafe, mean, and degenerate foul. cc The behaviour of my coufin, from this period, was entirely chan¬ ged ; to me he conduded himfelf, with the moil refpedful attention ; to my father with the moft aflìdu- ous regard.------My mind I confefs, often
often mifgave me,- I diftrufted his fincerity, and feared this fpecious out- fide, only covered fome evil and interefted defigns.—Little, however, did I dream fuch enormous wicked¬ nefs lay concealed beneath it. —- » « Sir Raymond, on the other hand, greatly pleafed with what appeared in Hildebrand to be the refult of a proper refledion on his folly, in¬ creafed his confidence in him, and, being himfelf averfe to adion from infirmity and habitual forrow, com¬ mitted to him the unlimited direc¬ tion of his affairs.——But oh! how fatally did he abufe his truft t * c In a ihort time, under pretence of having difcovered a combination amongft
amongft the domeftics to defraud their mafter, Hildebrand, by one ftroke of power, gave them a ge¬ neral difmiffion.——My own confi¬ dential maid was amongft this de¬ voted number, and Gilbert Nowil the faithful fteward of the family.— Shocked and alarmed at this ftep, I ventured to remonftrate with my coufin on the fubjed; but could not avert his purpofe.—He told mc the proofs of their guilt were in- conteftible, that fir Raymond was convinced of it, and had ordered them to be difmiflfed his fervice. " It was not without tears that I parted with trufty Frances, and the venerable Gilbert.------The faithful creatures
creatures were equally affeded at our feparation ; my maid hung round mc in an agony of grief; and the ile ward refpedful ly prefling my hand, gave me his blefling, and added, prophetically ; " lady, take heed to yourfelf; dangers furround you;— beware of fir Raymond's nephew— and God grant that my young lord may fpeedily return to England to prevent thofe evils to you and your father, which my mind tells me are approaching.*' Saying this, he left me, the tears chacing each other down his furrowed cheeks. **The places of thefe domeftics were immediately fupplied by hil¬ debrand, who introduced a train of ill-
ι' , ill-looking ruffians in their room.—· If their countenances ihocked me, I was ftill more difturbed, when I obferved from their manners, that they were void of all humanity and good breeding. It was to my cou·» fm alone they feemed to pay any refped ; nor did it efcape me that they appeared to have been very well acquainted with him before they became the domeftics of Netley caftle» Without knowing exadly what to fear, I began to be filled with a- Iarm; and gloomy forebodings of impending evils agitated my foul.— My father, a prey to grief that feemed rather to encreafe than di¬ miniih, ihut himfelf up as much as poflible from human converfe; fo that
that I had no opportunity of dif¬ elofing any obfervations and alarms to him. A long time alfo had e- lapfed without any tidings from my brother.—I doubted not that he had fallen in battle, an apprehenfion which Hildebrand took great pains to ftengthen. Thus I found myfelf without a friend or protedor as it were, and fu rrounded by people, whom I could not ceafe to look up¬ on with deteftation and difmay. " Whilst I remained in this unpleafant predicament, Hildebrand pretended to have difcovered very improper pradices amongft the in¬ habitants of Netley Abbey; a mo¬ naftery you know my lord, under the
the protedion of my father. Ofwald the abbot, he faid, had fuffered many dilapidations in the buildings, and numbcrlefs relaxations amongft the monks ; he therefore defired that fir Raymond would authorife him to difmifs them, and fill the abbey with lefs exceptionable tenants. His ftory was implicitly believed, and the neceffary power delegated to him ; by an exertion of which he immedi¬ ately removed Ofwald and his in- oftenfive fociety from Netley, and brought thither the prefent infamous abbot, father Peter, and twelve monks of a fimilar character. At the fame time he employed a number of work¬ men within the walls of the build¬ ing, to make as he aflertcd, the ne- r celia ry
ccflary reparations; though, in fad, they were buffed in preparing thofe fubterraneous abodes, which were def¬ tined to be the fcene of torture to my wretched parent and myfelf. ff In proportion as Hildebrand's influence with fir Raymond increa¬ fed, his diftance and refped towards myfelf diminiihed; and he would, at times, throw out hints on the fub* jed which had before given me fuch great offence. Tho' I now felt my¬ felf more in the power of the wretch than I was when he had infulted me with his former propofals, yet I could not brook a repetition of them.—I therefore gave him to un¬ derftand, that ihould he dare to re- fume
fume the topic any more, I would inftantly inform my father of his breach of promife, and thus effec¬ tually prevent his further perfec¬ tions.------Indeed, I had fecretly de¬ termined to adopt the plan which I threatned, and cnly waited for a proper opportunity of doing it.------ Heaven, however, was pleafed to ordain, doubtlefs for the wifeft rea* fons, that my intentions ihould be fruftrated in the following manner. " I had retired early to my cham¬ ber one evening, and was mufing in filence and folitude on the un- pleafantnefs, nay danger of my fitu¬ ation. ------Tired at length with dif- agreeable refledions, I took up my 1 2 lute,
lute, in order to while away the tedious hours, as I felt no inclina¬ tion to clofe my eyes in fleep, I had played for fome time, when the found of a bufile or tumult, in a diftant part of the caftle, caught my attention.------1 diftindly heard a cry of diftrefs, uttered (as it ap¬ peared to me) by my father.—— Opening the door, I liftened at¬ tentively; but nothing now was to be heard, fave an indiftind mur¬ mur of voices that gradually died away.^— I traverfed the paflage, and called loudly to the fervants ; no one however, anfwered my fummons* " As I returned to my chamber, my eye involuntarily fixed itfelf on a large
a large portrait of fir Raymond, which hung oppofite to the door.— The countenance methought was al¬ tered ; the florid appearance of health it had heretofore worn, was changed to an emaciated and melancholy vi- vage.—Trembling with apprehenfion- I approached it ; the eye appeared to be fuffiifed with tears, and a deep figh feemed to iflue from the canvas.—. Unufual terror feized me ; I ran to- ???^? the door, and endeavoured to open it------but all my efforts were vain; it was faftened without. "Distracted with the dread of I knew not what, I fhrieked aloud, and fell upon the floor.------After a few moments the door was opened, 1 3 and
and two men entered, whofe faces were covered by vizors.·------" Rife lady," faid the foremoft of them, "it is neceflary you ihould go with us."·------Saying this he feifed me rudely, and threw over my head a long veil, in which he endeavoured to muffle me up.—I ftruggled vio¬ lently, and made the caftle echo with my fcreams.------" Save me ? ! my father," cried I, "preferve your child from violation and murder." " Do not trouble yourfelf about the old gentleman," returned the infulting wretch, with an ironical fneer, "he is already taken care of; and by this time is eflfeduaily out of hear¬ ing·"
"Th*
"The horrible image of a butch¬ ered parent flaihed inftantly upon my fancy—nature was unequal to the ihock.—The ihades of death feemed to encompafs me, and I funk into a ftate of infenfibility.
CHAP.
CHAP· XIV· U A CONSIDERABLE time muft have elapfed e'er my recolledion re¬ turned, fince, on recovering, I found myfelf in a fubterraneous cell, to which I had been removed during the in¬ terval of ftupifadion. A man habit¬ ed like an ecclefiaftic, was ftanding before me, holding a goblet of water, with which he had been en¬ deavouring to revive me. "For fome moments, a confufed idea of the events that had occurred, and the novelty of the fcene around, left me in doubt whether my fancy were not
not under the influence of fome ill-omened dream; the voice of the monk, however, foon brought me to a fenfe of my real fituation.------- -*- "Lady," faid he, "I rejoice that you have recovered the effeds of your unreafonable fears.——Be not alarmed ; happy in the regard and protedion of my lord Hildebrand, you will foon be reconciled to the feclufion of your abode, nor wiih to leave the quiet of Netley Abbey."— Saying this he quitted the apartments locked the door, and departed. "The words of horror which he uttered, even now feem to vibrate on my ear; what then muft have been my fenfations at the time when they were fpoken! The treacher-
ous villany of my coufin, was dif* played; his myfterious condud un-* riddled; and his diabolical inten¬ tions but too clearly manifefted.—* I doubted not that my father had already been facrificed and I found myfelf eompkatly in his power.—« The thought was maddening.- ---- In the firft wild moments of difpair, I ruihed towards the door, and in- cffedually ftrove to burft the lock.—. I made the caverns echo with my cries, yet no one came to my af- fiilance» *' The violence of paffion deftroy s its duration; my ftrength foon fail¬ ed ; and I funk exhaufted into a chair. It was now that I caft my thoughts towards
Cowards heaven, and fought comfort at the hands of that being who alone can afford it in the hour of dif- trefs.—My mind received confidence* affurance, and ftrength from this appeal to the father of his crea¬ tures.—-The gloom of the cavern gradually died away; and a gleam of hope, an emanation from the fountain of mercy, ihot through my foul. " ?? this moment, the found of footfteps caught my ear; the lock of the door flew back ; and Hilde¬ brand entered the room.—I was now however prepared for the deteftable vifion ; and the holy fupport of re¬ ligion enabled me to preferve my calmnefs
calmncfs and compofure. — "Coufin," faid he, "your aftoniihment, and alarm muft have been excited, by the abrupt and forcible manner in which you were removed from Net- ley caftle to this place. Believe me, however, nothing would have tempt-? ed Hildebrand to adopt fo harfti a condud had he not been convinced it was the only method of fecuring to himfelf the idol of his bofom. " Yes, fair maid, I have long loved you to diftradion, and lived under the tortures of diifcmbling a paffion which abforbed my whole fouk------ You remember full well Agnes, how I difclofed the emotions of my bofom to you; and that I was rewarded for my
my aftedionate attachment by the fcorn of yourfelf, and the anger of your lather.—The haughty rebukes of fir Raymond, demanded from my injured feelings immediate vengance, and nothing fecured the fiifety of your indignant parent, but the hope of making him one day the means of my pofleffing his daughter.— That period is now arrived; both him and you are within the walls of Netley Abbey, and entirely at the difpofal of myfelf.—The fecu¬ rity and happinefs of both reft with you.—If Agnes will liften to the vow r s of Hildebrand, all ihall yet be well; but ihould flie defpife his regard, let the fatal confequences of her unmerited fcorn be placed to vol. 11. ? her
her own account.------Three days, lady, will I abfent myfelf from the monaftery, that you may confider maturely what I have faid, and at the end of that period, I ihall re¬ turn to receive your determination. In the interim, I truft you will re¬ concile yourfelf to thefe apartments, which are ftored with every means of comfort and convenience. The adjoining room contains a couch for your repofe and the lute with which you have fo often foothèd my filent forrows; and father Peter has ftrid orders to provide every ne¬ ceflary that you may wiih to be accommodated with." u Hildebrand waited not formy reply,
reply, but inftantly left the room, taking care to fecure the door when he retiredt ff You may imagine my lord, the fcene I had juft encountered, was not calculated to raife my fpirits; in truth it threw me into an agita¬ tion that eflfeduaily prevented any repofe during the remainder of the night,—I employed therefore thefe ileeplefs hours, in confidering what my coufin had faid, and determi¬ ning how I ihould receive him at the expiration of the three days.— Sometimes I refolved o diflemble with him, and by pretending a re¬ gard which I did not feel, endea¬ vour by thefe means to gain at ? 2 leaft
jvùft a little time. But I dropped this idea on recolleding the fub- tlety of Hildebrand, who was too deeply ikilled in the arts of diflem- bl'mg himfelf, to be impofed upon by the like pradifes in another.— Befides, my foul revolted at the thought of diflimulation; and falfe- hood, in every ihape I had been taught from my earlieft youth to deteft. For myfelf, indeed, I had now cea- fed to be greatly alarmed, becaufe, 1 hoped, that my hardeft trial would be a confinement for life; but >rhe thought of my dear parent, whofe fituation and fate I was ignorant of, rilled me with pain and apprehen- fion.—I was, however, without the means of fatisfy ing my curiofity or doing
doing away my fears on this fub¬ jed; earneft petitions to heaven were all I could offer for his protedion, and my own confolation. ■"During thefe three days of Hil¬ debrande abfence, I repeatedly en¬ deavoured to gain forne imformation refpeding fir Raymond, from father Peter, my only attendant; but he preferved an obftinate filence on this topic, and was only eloquent in the praifes of my coufin, which he perpetually founded in my ears. "The fourth day at length arri¬ ved, and in the evening, Hildebrand entered my apartment. He appear¬ ed to be fomewhat gayer than ufual, ? 3 (which
(which I foon perceived proceeded from intoxication,} and approaching me with a libertine and confident air, he feized my hand. fC Well my fair coufin," cried he, <( ihall Hilde¬ brand be happy? Will Agnes, de- fpifing the abfurd prejudices of that fancied good which mufty grey¬ beards have denominated virtue, con¬ fent to blefs the arms of her faith¬ ful and adoring flave? —Speak deli¬ cious angel ; or let me interpret the beautiful fuffufion that glows upon your cheek, as the filent aílent of baíhful modefty» "All the fpirit of my father animated my bofom at this infufler- able infult.—I forgot that I was un¬ proteded
proteded and alone, but ftarting up, and fpurning Hildebrand from mc, (for he had fallen on one knee at my feet,) I exclaimed; "Perfidious monfter, avaunt! and know to thy confufion, that my foul both loa^hs and defpifes thee.—Doft thou think that Agnes Warren can feel one fentiment of regard for a wretch, bafe, remorfelefs, and unnatural like thyfelf? No, fooner would I pcrifh, than give thee reafon for a moment to entertain a thought fo derogatory to my dignity and virtue ! "Surprise prevented Hildebrand's immediate reply ; his brow, how¬ ever, contraded into a frown, and his eyes gleamed with fury.—It is enough
enough, faid he, at length in the voice of a dæmon, " thy words have fixed my wavering refolution.—But my vengance ihall be compleat.— Proud, infulting girl, both fir Ray¬ mond and yourfelf ihall fully expi¬ ate the affronts caft on Hildebrand. That fooliih affedion which I once entertained for thee I from hence¬ forth difcard; but revenge will find thee a pleafing objed to fate itfelf upon." With this dreadful threat he departed; leaving me to refled on words that but too well difclofed the plans of horror with which his imagination teemed. " Upwards of a fortnight elapfed, without another vifit from my cou¬ fin;
fin; I gradually refumed my tran¬ quillity, and began to flatter myfelf he might have refleded on the in- juftice of his condud, or at leaft have laid afide all his fanguinary purpofes. ------Vain fuppofition! Oh! that I had never lived to be unde¬ ceived ! "One evening, father Peter, as ufual, had brought me fome refrefli¬ ment.—When he retired, I obferved the door of the apartment did not return its ufual terrifying found on being ihut. As foon, therefore, as he was compleatly out of hearing, I approached it, and, on examina¬ tion, found that it remained open.— I looked into the paflage; liftened attentively ;
attentively; and hearing no noife, took the taper, and refolved to at¬ tempt regaining my liberty· "I turned into a narrow paflage which prefented itfelf on my left hand,—It was long and dark.—My heart palpitated, as I entered it, and a certain fearful foreboding of evil, almoft deterred me from proceeding. Leaning, however, againft the wall for a few moments, and recom¬ mending myfelf to the protedion of the Almighty, my refolution return¬ ed.—I now obferved a door grated with iron; as I approached it, a deep and hollow grown reached my car.—Again I hefitated ; but fate im¬ pelled me forward.—A few inarti¬ culate
culate words uttered in a feeble tone, iffued from the cell.—My heart in a moment vibrated to the found, and acknowledged the well known accents of my father's voice.——I fprang to the grating; but merciful god! what language can defcribe the accumulated horrors that feized my foul, when I beheld by the reflec¬ tion of the taper, my much loved pa¬ rent, ftretched on the damp pave¬ ment of a noifome dungeon, pale, emaciated, and expiring !—^-The ihriek of diftradion which I utter¬ ed on beholding this terrible vifion, rekindled in him for a moment the [dying embers of departing ex¬ iftence, and called back his fleeting fenfes. He raifed his dim eye to the
the grating ; " Oh ! cried he," in heart-piercing accents, " will ye not in pity fpare me one fmall morfei of bread to quell the pain of hunger ; one drop of water to quench this raging thirft ?—Cruel Hildebrand, let mercy find its way, for once, into thy bofom ; plunge thy dagger to my heart, and fave me from the agonies of lingering torment." " The torture of my foul on hearing thefe words, prevented an immedi¬ ate reply; the taper in the mean time threw a gleam of light on my face, and fir Raymoud for a moment, knew his child.—"Agnes! my dar¬ ling, my beloved," exclaimed he, " art thou then ftill in being?------ Haft
Haft thou efeaped the bloody fangs of thy unnatural coufin ?—Gracious father of the wretched, I thank thee for this unexpeded bleffing! this fweetner of my bitter cup!------But alas ! what avails the mournful meet¬ ing?—The ihades of death encom- pafs me, and a few moments muft number thy parent with the depart¬ ed.—Seven days have now elapfed fince my parched mouth has known the tafte of aliment or drink.— Hil¬ debrand, the ferpent which I nour- iihed in my bofom, with more than favage cruelty, has thus revenged the rebukes he received on thy account, and which he never could forget.— Oh ! my darling, would I could breath my laft expiring fign upon thy bo- voL. 11. L fom—
fom—but thefe poor feeble limbs re¬ fufe their office.—Farewel then my child, farewel forever!------may the Almighty guardian of innocence pre¬ ferve thee from the fury ofthy coufin, and lead thee to fafety and to peace. And if it permit thee ever to behold my gallant Raymond again, give him rhe parting bleffing of his murdered father." " I have a confufed recollection of the deep and lengthened groan that put a period to my parent's pangs, but my fenfes could not long fup¬ port the tumult of my foul.-—My heart was burfting; my brain was fired.—Diftraclion at length produced a temporary oblivion of the horrors of my fituation.
ÍC I know not how long I con¬ tinued in a ftate of phrenzy; but I apprehend many weeks muft have elapfed before I recovered my reafon perfectly.—I then found that I had ftruggled through a dreadful delirious fever, which youth alone, and a good conftitution enabled me to overcome. —This diforder left me reduced and emaciated, but at the fame time com¬ pofed and refigned. It had blunted the poignancy of affliction ; and tho* it had not removed my woes, it en¬ abled me to bear them with pious fortitude. Ci In the mean time I continued to be fupplied with every neceffary by father Peter, whofe attentions were t 2 confiant
confiant and regular. He obferved, however, an obftinate filence with regard to the horrible fcene which had oceafioned my ilinefs; and I could fcarcely get him to exchange a word with me on any fubjed. I was, notwithflanding, fatisfied with this gloomy taciturnity, fo long as the hateful Hildebrand forebore to torture me with his prefence. It was indeed, a matter of furprife to me that I had not feen him fince my in- difpofition ; tho' I afterwards learned his abfence was oceafioned by a vifit which he made at that time to the young king, with whom he had been formerly very intimate. But my quiet was of no long dumtion; fur¬ ther and greater trials were prepar¬ ing for me. "One
**One morning the abbot came in at his ufual hour, with provi¬ fion for the day ; u lady," faid he, " fir Hildebrand Warren has or¬ dered me to notify to you, that he this evening intends to viut the miftrefs of his affedions." My foul was chilled at the information, and the approach of night filled me with unutterable horror. I con¬ tinued in dreadful expedation till nearly twelve o'clock when the fall of the trap-door, which was clo¬ fed with great violence, announced the coming of the murderer of my father.------1 heard his hateful ftep along the ecchoing paflage ; a moment after the door of my pri- L 3 fon
fon flew open, and Hildebrand en¬ tered. "A conflict of contending paf¬ fions kept me filent, and I could only look horror and deteftation. The monfter, however, approached me confidently, his eyes gleaming with de¬ termined villany. Seizing my hand with a force which I could not refift, he exclaimed, "Behold me not Agnes, thus indignantly; nor oblige me to adopt thofe meafures which I would willingly avoid.—I am come hither once more to offer thee the hand of fir Hildebrand Warren. If thou art wife, and doft liften to my vows, I will ftrait condud thee to liberty and fplcndor; Netley caftle ihall again * receive
receive thee, and of that and its mailer thou ihalt have fole com¬ mand." ft Inhuman villain! returned I, murderer of my parent, and bafe ufurper of my brother's rights, how dareft thou to approach the daugh¬ ter of the good fir Raymond, whofe only fault was taking fuch a viper as thee to his bofom?—No—rather would I pafs the gates of death, than ever think of thee but with hate, contempt, and horror." " Simple girl," cried Hildebrand with the countenance of a ñend, f( how I fmile at thy indignation, which only ferves to lighten up thy beauties,
beauties, and make thee more at- tradive in my eye.—I would wil¬ lingly have made thee partner of my fortunes ; but fmce thou haft thought fit to fcorn my favor, know that Hil¬ debrand will poifefs by force, what he has petitioned for in vain." Say¬ ing this, he caught me in his arms. Unutterable anguiih pierced my bo¬ fom ; I ihricked aloud, but there was none to hear me ; I ftruggled to free myfelf from his grafp, but all my ftruggles were in vain. Breathlefs and exhaufted I raifed my ftreaming eyes to heaven.—" Spirit of my fa¬ ther," cried I, "preferve thy child from pollution."—Nor did provi¬ dence difregard my petition. A fud¬ den blaft of wind that ihook the building
building, ruined along the paflage; and a hollow groan ecchoed through the vaults. The countenance of Hil¬ debrand became pale with terror ; he ftarted and retreated from me feveral fteps. " I was myfelf aftoniihed at tht; founds ; but the idea of availing my¬ felf of his amazement, was the firft which arofe in my mind.— f< Wretch¬ ed man," faid I, Cf mark how the hand of heaven has interpofed to proted my injured innocence.—Ceafe then to tempt its lingering ven¬ geance ; but haften from thefe fub- terranean abodes, which thou haft already ftained with murder, left they íhould alfo become the fcene of thy deferved
deferved and terrible puniihment." For a moment he continued filent, but at length fiercely replyed— ri No, infolent girl, think not I will be difappointed of my revenge.—Away all idle fears, all fuperftitious terrors ; though hell itfelf ihould gape before me, I ftill would execute my medi¬ tated purpofe." * f Ma d with rage he again approach¬ ed me, and defpair again ihook my feeble frame.—But Omnipotence was my fuccour. The blaft once more roared with tenfold violence ; the ca¬ verns trembled to their foundations ; the maífive door of the cell was burft open ; and the awful ihade of my father, clad in compleat armour, ap¬ peared» " The
" The vifion was but moment¬ ary, for ere I could addrefs the well- known form, it had vaniihed into air—but the benevolent purpofes of heaven were fully anfwered.—Horror and diftradion overfpread the livid countenance of my coufln ; he utter¬ ed fome incoherent words, and funk upon the ground. " The uncommon iioİfcs which had been heard, alarmed, in the mean time, the flumbering eclefiaftics, and father Peter with two or three of the brethren, ruihed into my apartment. —Their aftoniihment may be eafily imagined, when they beheld the fitua¬ tion of Flildebrand, who appeared entirely void of fenfe or motion,— Confulting
Confulting together a moment, how¬ ever, on the proper fteps to be taken for his recovery, they agreed it would be better to remove him into the air, and accordingly departed from the room, and left me to my medita¬ tions; the abbot having firft taken care to fecure the door. "A variety of emotions agitated my foul.—I bent my grateful knee to that beneficent Being, who by an unexpeded exertion of kindnefs, had thus refcued me from the horrors of defpair.—My bofom received confi¬ dence and comfort in the idea of my being under the protedion of the father of mercy ; and a deep de¬ fire to be accounted worthy of this favor fettled in my heart.
"Thus fupported by the congéla¬ tions of religion, my fears and tu¬ mults fubfided ; and tho* I could not but wiih for deliverance from the gloomy regions to which I was confined, yet I did not fuffer myfelf to be unhappy becaufe no immedi¬ ate profpect of relief appeared.—What I chiefly dreaded was the prefence of my deteftable coufin ; but from this trial I was unaccountably pre¬ ferred, fince weeks and months elapfed without his ν ifi ting my pri¬ fon.—For fome time I imagined he had never recovered from the ftate of infenfibility into which the fu- pernatural vifion had thrown him; but father Peter did not fuffer me to continue long in this error, VOL· II. m lince
fince he aifurcd me fir Hildebrand was ftill alive, and had received a confirmation from the crown of all my father's honors and demefnes, in confequence of certain intelligence having been received of my bro¬ thers aflaffination on the continent. "This news, as may be fuppo¬ fed, funk deeply into my heart; I now faw myfelf deprived of every earthly ftay; heaven was my only hope, thither alone could I look for comfort and for peace,—Still how¬ ever, the days rolled on, and fir Hil¬ debrand did not appear ; nor indeed has he ever diftreifed me with his prefence, fince the night I have juft defcribed ; a circumftance which I can
can only account for on the fuppo- fition, that his guilty conference was too much terrified to allow him to vific thofe abodes again, which had been the fcene of his cruelties, and where his terrors had been fo much excited» " But I fear, my lord, my ftory becomes tedious; allow me then to bring it to a conclufion. A few evenings fince, finding myfelf rather indifpofed, I retired to my couch for re^ *4 When I awoke, and re¬ turned into the outer chamber, I perceived the door was, by acci¬ dent, left open.—I proceeded imme¬ diately into the narrow paflage, and afeended a flight of ftcps that m ? caught
caught my eye.—»Thefe I had paf- fed, and had penetrated to the cloif¬ ters, vvhen a monk difcovered me by the refledion of the moon on my white drefs.—He alarmed the convent, and two of the brethren immediately feized, and rudely for¬ ced me again down the flairs. Twice, however, I fcreamed with all my ftrength, in the hope that thefe cries of diftrefs might excite the attention and curiofity of fome way-faring traveller* Nor was my hope un¬ founded; your fon my lord, (as he informed me) heard the ihrieks, which firft raifed his fufpicion, and led to the inquiry, that has termi* nated in his delivering the unfor¬ tunate Agnes Warren from Netley Abbey.
"Such baron is the melancholy ftory of a friendlefs orphan, deprived in early youth, of all that flie held dear; robbed by perfidious cruelty of thofe who fliould have been her guides and guardians thro* life.—— But thanks be to heaven, which in its kindnefs has thus unexpededly thrown me under the protedion of the baron de Villars, whofe honor and generofity are fufficient fecuri- tics to me, that he will fupply the place of father and of brother."
m j CHAP.
CHAP. XV. ÍJÉ Villars and his children were deeply affeded at the melancholy tale of Agnes Warren.—The baron heard with horror and aftoniihment the inhuman perfidy of Hildebrand towards his old and valued friend; Eleanor fympathifed with the fair fufferer in each fituation of her alarm and diftrefs; whilft Edward's bofom experienced a rapid fuccef- fion of emotions according to the various circumftances of the ftory. The impreffions which the daugh¬ ter of fir Raymond had before made on
on him, were comfirmed and exal¬ ted.—His heart whifpered to him he could only hope for happinefs from her; but doubts and anxieties perplexed him. The diffidence that generally ac¬ companies intelledual worth, pre¬ vented him from entertaining the idea of his having already made any particular progrefs in her favor; and even could he have perfuaded himfelf that he poífeífed her good opinion, yet the broken fortunes of his family would have cruihed every hope of binding her to him by the ties of marriage. "What," faid he to himfelf, " ihall
"fliall a ruined, and forlorn fugi¬ tive from his country, without friends without poifeffions, lift his thoughts to Agnes Warren, and bafely en¬ deavour to involve in ruin and dif¬ trefs fuch excellence as her's?—No, perifli the thought; Edward de Vil¬ lars ihall never be diihonorable.— Rather let all his felfiih hopes be extinguiihed forever, than the bofom of unfufpeding innocence be pier¬ ced with one pang on his account." While thefe refledions were paf- fmg in the mind of Edward, his father and fifter had mingled their tears with thefe of Agnes, and foothed her forrows by participating them* "But come," faid the baron, let us not
not fink into defpondency,'and loofe the precious moments in unavailing woe, but look to brighter feenes, and happier days.—Heaven, Agnes, will ftill reward your piety and fuf¬ fèrings ; and the unnatural difturber of your peace ihall ihortly meet the juft reward of his complicated villany. —In the mean time, behold in me your father and your friend; fuch protedion as my lhattcred ftate affords, ihall never be refufed to the daughter of fir Raymond War¬ ren." De Villars had fcarcely finiihed his fpeech, when Robert came into room to acquaint his lord, that the knight, who had refcued the lady Eleanon
Eleanor, was at the gate of the caftlc, and defired admittance. " Run quick¬ ly," faid the baron, "and open our doors to rhe deliverer of my child. —Heaven! I thank thee, that thou haft permitted me e're I quit my country, to behold him once again, to whom I owe my poor remains of earthly happinefs." The faithful domeftic flew to obey his lord, and ihortly returned, fol¬ lowed by the knight, who wore the fame black armour in which de Villars had before feen him. A sudden biuíh overfpread the countenance of Eleanor on his en¬ trance ; an univerfal agitation ihook her
her frame, and it was with difficulty ihe could fupport herfelf. Fortu¬ nately, however, her confufion was not noticed, for a more furprifing fcene immediately occupied the at¬ tention of de Villars and his fon. The knight had advanced towards the former in order to pay his re¬ fpeds, when his eye by accident fixed itfelf on the countenance of Agnes Warren, whole face was difplayed by the veil being thrown back. For a moment he gazed on her with the utmoft earneilnefs; then fuddenly unclafping his helmet, he fprang forwards, and embracing her, exclaimed, " Great God ! 'tis flie, 'tis ihe herfelf, 'tis Agnes my beloved!" As-
? Astonishment overwhelmed the daughter of fir Raymond ; but it foon gave way to more pleafing e- motions, on her recolleding in the features of the young knight, the countenance of her brother. Ex- ceffive tranfport rendered her inca¬ pable of expreffing the workings of her foul ; ihe fell upon his neck, and wept aloud. Nor could the fpedators behold the interefting fcene unmoved.-----A meeting thus unexpeded, between thofe bound to each other by the ftrongeft ties of fraternal affedion, when they had mutually relinquiih¬ ed the idea of each other being in exiftence; produced a furprife fo new,
new, a delight fo tumultuous in the principal parties, as powerfully cal¬ led forth the feelings of de Villars and his children. incoherent ex¬ preffions of joy and congratulation, formed the only language that paf- fed for a few minutes. The knight, however, recovering himfelf, turned to de Villars faying, " Excufe, my lord, the indulgence of thofe tranfports which were excited by a rencounter thus happy and un¬ hoped for.—Ten years have now e- iapfed fince the feparation of Agnes and myfelf.—A feparation, alas! fa¬ tal to the life of my father, and the peace of his unfortunate offspring ! —But let me forget the wretchednefs vol ii» n of
of the pail, in gratitude for the prefent boon—that heaven has been pleafed to beftow, the recovery of my fifter, the friend of my youth, in the mo¬ ment when defpair bade me ceafe to look for her on this fide the grave." " Knight" returned the baron, " attempt not to apologife for emo¬ tions which do honor to our nature; de Villars, believe me, fympathi- fes in your extacy from his very foul.—The ties with which grati¬ tude had before bound him to you, are now ftill clofer drawn, fince he difcovers in the deliverer of his daughter the gallant fon of fir Raymond Warren.—But come, my children,
children, welcome to our caftlc, the reprefentative of my ancient friend; whofe countenance impreffes on my recolledion thofe manly graces, that vigorous beauty, which adorned his father in the firft period of our ac¬ quaintance." Edward inftantly ruihed forward, and fnatching the hand of the knight with fervor to his bofom, exprefled, in animated terms, the happinefs he experienced at being able to thank him for the infinite obligations he had conferred on his family, and to offer him at the fame time his v/arra and undivided friendihip.—Eleanor alfo approached, her countenance deeply fu ft ufed with bluihes —She n 2 attempted
attempted to congratulate him on the unexpeded interview with his fifter, and to bid him welcome to the baron's refidence ; but her words were unconnefted, and her manner embarraflcd. De Villars faw the diftrefs under which ihe laboured, and inftantly divined the caufe; but willing to relieve it, he requefted Raymond to favor them with a detail of his ad¬ ventures- ------ i{ Doubtlefs," faid he, " you muft have witneifed many inter¬ cfting feenes, fince your departure from your native country.—Inform us then, of the events that have oc¬ curred ; and the reafons whiich in¬ duced you thus to conceal your real charades
charader, and to affume this myf¬ terious appearance, fince your return to England." The knight bowed an aflent to de Villars's requeft, and began as follows. "It is needlefs for me to enter in¬ to the hiftory of the domeftic con¬ cerns of our family, previous to my de¬ parture for the continent, becaufe little intereftinsl to others occurred in them.—No accident or difafter broke in upon our peace, or varied the uniform and happy routine of our mode of li vine-, till the deceafe of my beloved mother.—From that mo¬ ment felicity forfook our dwelling; n 3 the
the difeonfolate fir Raymond funk into the deepeft melancholy, and de¬ termined to abftrad himfelf imme¬ diately, in his country refidence, from ail fociety. "I probably ihouid have accom¬ panied him to his retreat in Hamp- ihire, had not Guy, count of Flan¬ ders (a relation of my mother) juft at this period, given me an invita¬ tion to his court.—He had formed an alliance with the late king, and lindertaken to invade the territories of Philip the fair of France, vvith whom Edward was then at war. "The call of glory to the youth¬ ful mind, is irrefiftibie; I panted for military
military fame, and thought this a favorable opportunity of acquiring unfading laurels in the field of battle. Without hefitation therefore I accep¬ ted the offer, and in an evil hour, deferted my parent and my filler.— Sacred ihade of my fire, forgive this breach of filial duty, and let the frequent tears of vain regret which I have flied, propitiate thy pardon ! "The tumults of war employed my mind fo effectually, for fix or feven years, that aitho' I rarely received any tidings from my native land, I was not anxious on this account.— A little relaxation however, in mi¬ litary toil, allowed me to turn my thoughts towards thofe connedions, who
who ftill pofleflèd my warm, my undivided regard.—A twelvemonth elapfed without hearing from them. A fpecial meflenger whom I difpatch- ed from the army, which ivas then in Brabant, did not return, I became ferioufly uneafy about them, and fo¬ licited permiflion to vifit England myfelf, and fatisfy my anxieties. " The count of Flanders had gran¬ ted my requeft, and I was prepared to fet out, when a fudden mifunderftand- ing took place between him and John duke of Brabant, and inftantly burft into mutual hoftilities. The com¬ mand I held in Guy's army, was an high and important one, from which I could not abfent myfelf without
without danger to the fervice.—Pri¬ vate confiderations therefore were obliged to give way to public du¬ ties. I relinquiihed the idea of leav¬ ing the continent as yet, and bent my whole attention to the bufinefs of the war. " One evening after a fuccefsful rencounter with the enemy, I retired to my tent, opprefled with fatigue, to enjoy an hour's repofe.------ 1 fiept undifturbed till midnight, when I awoke.—The door of the tent was unclofed, and the full moon threw her placid refledion on my couch. Immediately in the front, a vene¬ rable wood reared its afpiring head; and by its " brown horrors" formed afine
142 : a fine contrail to the rich radiance of the planet of the night.—All was huflied around ; and not even a breeze difturbed the folemn quiet of the hour. " I was ftruck with the awful beauty of the fcene; and naturally fell into meditations of a ferious nature.------ Bufy fancy began to prefent her fic¬ tions to my mind, my thoughts turned to England, and fears for the fafety of thofe dear connedions which I had left there arofe. "I reflected with pain on the length of time that had elapfed, fince any tidings of them had reached my knowledge.—The ftate of diftrefs to which
which my father had been reduced by the death of his lady, and the unproteded fituation in which Agnes would be left in cafe of any acci¬ dent happening to him, next oc- cured to my recolledion.—Imagina¬ tion conjured up a thoufand diftreffing chimeras; I reproached myfelf for having thus long abfentedmyfelf from thofe of whom I ought to have been the protedor; and refolved to re¬ turn to fir Raymond as foon as I could abfent myfelf from the army without diihonor. "Whilst thefe refledions pafled in my mind, my eye was bent on the ikirting of the wood, through which the beams of the moon dart¬ ed
ed an intercepted radiance.—On a fudden the form of an armed war¬ rior appeared, pacing flowly between the trees.—He foon however left the wood, and direded his fteps towards me.—-Surprifed at the unufual fight, I ftarted from my couch, and fprang to the door of my tent—the knight approached ; his helmet was open ; the moon played upon his face, and difcovered to my aftoniihed vifion, a pale and forrowful countenance in which I traced the features of my father. " Wonder rivetted me to the fpot whereon I ftood ; and prevented me from either approaching or queftion- ing the phantom; which heaving a deep
deep figh, exclaimed in mournful accents, "Raymond, beware of Hil¬ debrand!" A fpreading cedar tree, hid, at this moment, the appearance from my view, and I faw it no more. "The apprehenfions which I had before entertained, were now con« firmed; and the folemn monition pronounced by the iliade of my fa¬ ther, afforded me a clue, by which I could difcover the author of all the dreaded evils.—What they might be I was at a lofs to conclude ; but I could not doubt they were of an extraordinary nature, as it had pica- fed providence to prepare me for them, in a manner out of the com¬ mon eourfe of its operations. vol. ?. o "Reilcc-
"Reflections of this nature 00 cupicd my mind till morning; when I left my tent, fully rcfolvcd to take an early opportunity of quitting the army, and departing for England. if A few days elapfed without any particular circumftance occurring; the enemy having been beaten in va¬ rious ík irmi flies, did not ili e w thcm¬ felves ?\ ithout their encampment, and left our forces to a temporary repofe. During this interval of in¬ action, I gave myfelf up entirely to rcflcdion on the ungular fcene I had witneflèd; and indulged my melan¬ choly, by frequenting the wood, from whence the fpirit of my pa¬ rent had appeared to proceed, flat¬ tering
tering myfelf that I might be in¬ du I «red once more with the awful vifion. "I had repeated thefe folitary walks for feveral evenings, but ufual- ly returned to the encampment be¬ fore midnight.—I remained, how¬ ever, in the felemn ihades, one night, later than ufual, and the diftant village clock beat the hour of uvei ve, be¬ fore I thought of leaving them. I had fcarcely turned to retrace ??? road, when I diftindly heard a whif¬ per at a few paces from mc.------1 liftened, but the founds had ceaiul. The fupcrnatural warning I had lately received, occurred to my re¬ colledion ; I uniheached my trully ? 2 f wo rd,
f wo rd, and proceeded.—There wás a fmall brake on my right hand, which I muft ncceflarily pafs, from Λν hence, indeed, the whifper appear¬ ed to me to come.------Nor was I miftaken ; for as foon as I had reached it, two people in military habits and armed with dawers, ftarted up from behind it, and ruih¬ ed upon me. "I was, however, prepared for their reception, and in a moment laid the foremoft of them dead at my feet.—The furviving villain, had in the mean time, grazed my left ihoulder with his weapon; and was preparing a blow at my heart—but I prevented his intention by bury- inp; mv fword in his fide.
?? ?? fell to the ground; and I had lifted my arm to put him in¬ ftantly to death ; when he exclaimed, f< Spare for a moment lir knight, a wretch who has already received his death at your hands—A few mi¬ nutes muft clofe my exiftence; and I look Avith horror on the crime which I have been induced to at¬ tempt committing. But e'er I quit the world, I would willingly make all the amends in my power to in¬ jured innocence, by unfolding the rcafons which aduated me to this bloody deed." ft Hildebrand your kinfman, is the author of this villany. His cur- fed gold corrupted the honcfty of ? 3 myfelf,
myfelf, ahd brother, who now lies dead before vou ; and cngaçed us J oc? to undertake your aflaffination.—— Í4ir this purpofe, we came, a few- days fmce to the army as volunteers ; and ever fince our arrival, have care¬ fully watched an opportunity of exe¬ cuting our fcheme.—To-night appear¬ ed a favourable one ; but mark how Heaven has fruftratcd the fançui- nary defign.—I die however without regret, becaulc 1 truft my untimely fall will atone, in fonic degree, for my atrocious gilt.—But think not youth, that this is the only evil you may exped from the hands of Hildebrand. —By him your father is murdered ; your rights are ufurped ; and your lifter—." Death prevented him from concluding
concluding the fentence ; he fell back, and groaned out his miferable foul. " He had uttered, however, fu fiie i- cnt to fill mc with horror and difmay. All my fears were now realized,—· Part of his terrible detail, the death of fir Raymond, had been confirm¬ ed by the previous adventure which befel me, and the remainder, told in the moment of diflblution, I could not diibelievc. "??? the uncertainty in which he left me, refpeding Agnes, was intolerable. Every poflible fituation of diftrefs, arofe to nry a {frighted imagination, and nearly deprived me of reafon. I hurried to my tent, and waited
waited impatiently for the morning, determined, whatever might be the confequence to haften immediately to England. The dawn at length appeared ; I changed my ufual cofi¬ ly armour for the black fuit which I at prefent wear ; mounted my pal¬ frey, and left the army. I ufed all the expedition in my power ; pafled into Normandy, then took ftiipping, and foon arrived on the coaft of Suffex. "It now behoved me to ad with the greateft caution, fmce I found by my enquiries, that it was uni¬ verfal î y believed throughout the country, .fir Raymond Warren and his daughter had died feveral months before, of a contagious fever, and Raymond
Raymond the fon been carried off" by aflaffination, on the continent.— Part of thL· infernal fabrication I could have immediately difproved, by declaring myfelf to be the fon of the deceafed knight; but this difclofure prudence forbid me to make, becaufe I alfo underftood that Hildebrand had received an ample confirmation of the young king, with whom he was a great favorite, of ail the pofTeffions of my late fa¬ ther; and had eftabliihed himfelf in the demefne, by colleding around him a band of retainers more numerous than any baron in thofe parts. "These circumftmces therefore made mc rcfolve to keep myfelf concealed
concealed for the prefent, and wait patiently for an opportunity of re¬ venging the death of my father, vindicating my rights, and refcuing my fifter from the power of Hilde¬ brand, if, happily flie yet furvived his bloody machinations. That I might be the better able to make every proper obfervation, and to take advantage of each favorable circum¬ ftance as it arofe, I refolved to ap¬ proach as near to the caftle of Netley as I could without danger of difeovery, and accordingly pro¬ ceeded by nodurnal journies to that neighbourhood. " I had already reached the woods which furround the rr infion, and faw
faw its ftately turrets tower above the trees, when I was agreeably fur¬ prifed by the appearance of our old domeftic Gilbert Nowil, who ero fled the path down which I rode. I called to him by name; the faithful creature knew my voice, and in an extacy of joy threw himfelf at my feet. " And is it poflible," cried he, "that my aged eyes ihould again be blefled with a fight of my young lord, when every hope of his being yet alive had left mc ? But fly," continued he, after a fliort paufe, "fly from this abode of death and hor¬ ror.—The bloody Hildebrand poflef- fes thefe demefnes, and fliould his numerous followers difcover you, reft aflured that all the violence of power.
power, and arts of cunning would be e,\haufted to deftroy you. Your faithful fervan t has a fmall cottage at three miles diftance from hence î thither will I condud you, my lord, and there may you continue quietly concealed, till it pleafe heaven (which will not fuffer villany long to tri¬ umph) to point out fome method for the recovery of your ufurped rights." " I suffered myfelf to be pcrfu- aded by Gilbert, and accompanied him to his refidence, where I alfo found the old domeftic of my fifter, to whom he had afforded protedion, ever fmce the:r difmiffion from the fervice of my father. On our way to
to the cottage, I learned each cir¬ cumftance that had tranfpired fince I departed from England, to the time of the fudden difappearan.ee of fir Raymond and my finer. What had befallen them after that period he w ? as unable to inform me, tho' he fufpeded from certain circum¬ ftances which he had both heard and obferved, that Netley Abbey was in fome manner concerned with their fate. From him alfo I learn¬ ed the arrival of your family, baron, in the neighbourhood of my father's territories, and the partiality which my deteftable kinfman had ven¬ tured to declare for your amiable daughter. vol. u. p "Gilbert's
f ' Gilbert's detail filled me with afloniihment and rage ; and 1 fliould immediately have ridden to the caf¬ tlc, and difcovered myfelf to be the rightful owner of the demefne, had not my impctuofity been reftrained by the prudent fuggeftions of my aged counfellor, who endeavoured to footh my bofom with the hope of future opportunities more favor¬ able to my purpofe than the pre¬ fent one. ff I therefore continued quiet in my retreat for a few days, until I was roufed by the intelligence of fir Hildebrand Warren's intended tour¬ nament held in honor of the baron de Villars daughter. No confideration could
could now prevent my vifiting the caftle, and attending the entertain¬ ment. I could not endure the idea of the infernal deftroyer of my fa¬ mily making my ufurped poffeffions the theatre of his own glory; and the thought of fo much beauty and worth as the lady Eleanor was re¬ ported to poffefs, being facrificed to fuch a wretch, was equally intolera- f bie. I therefore, on the morning appointed for the jufting, mounted my palfrey, and rode towards the caftle, fully determined to execute my plans of vengeance, by putting fir Hilde¬ brand to death during the tournament. " You baron were witnefs to the fcene that paifed. My intention was
was fruftrated, as I found afterwards ; or I ihould not have quitted the lift without fulfilling my purpofe, had not I apprehended that our third meeting had been fatal to him—when however, I returned, and was aifur¬ cd that Hildebrand furvived the ren¬ counter, my chagrin became extreme; and I refolved by fome means or other, to try my own arm with him once more in fingle combat. " For this purpofe I caufed his mo¬ tions to be obferved, and learned that he ufually vifited the abbey, unattended, every day about noon —Yefterday it was my intention to intercept him ; when in my way towards the fpot that I had pitched
pitched on as my place of ambufli, I beheld your fair daughter my lord, in the fituation of diftrefs from which it was my happy lot to deliver her. After rendering her fafe into your hands, I continued my route, and waited, without feeing any perfon, till night made it neceflìiry for me to return to Gilbert's cottage. "This morning, however, I again fet out for the fame place, and had been there fome hours, when I was informed by a menial domeftic of Hildebrand's* that his mailer had yefterday gone with a large party of his retainers into the New Foreft, for the purpofe of hunting, and in¬ tended to continue there feveral days. ρ 3 For
For a fliort time therefore, I was obliged to lay afide my fcheme ; and on my return from the retreat took this opportunity of paying my re- fpee^s at your lordihip's caftle; where however, I little expeded to find that dear connedion, whom my fears had long fmce numbered with the dead. if For my father's fate I dread al¬ moft to afli, but melancholy, cer¬ tainty is not fo painful as fufpcnfe ; unfold therefore Agnes the fad truth whatever it may be, and tell me by what blefled providence I find you thus in health and fafety." "The baron's family united in re¬ quefting that Agnes would again re¬ late
late her ftory—^Ray mo nd liftened to the recital vvith filent forrow—the tear of affedion rolled down his manly cheek, and fympathetic ten¬ demefs moiftened the eye of every one prefent. His fifter having con¬ cluded her ftory, the baron impart¬ ed to him the refolution he had form¬ ed of immediately quitting England, together with his reafons for fo do¬ ing, and preifed his accompanying the party to the continent. "Raymond returned his grateful thanks for the intereft which de Villars thus kindly took in his concerns, and gladly availed him¬ felf of the propofition ; but," faid he, " my lord, it will not be neceflfaiy
neceflìiry to execute your defign fo immediately as you propofed. — Hildebrand has left his caftle for fome days ; and it is certain nothing can be attempted by him till he returns. Let us therefore remain two days longer e'er we depart, that every neceflary arrange¬ ment may be made for the expedi¬ tion; and proper diredions left with the faithful Gilbert, in cafe it ihould pleafe provide ? to order events in fuch a m. ??? as may enable us once more to return to Eng¬ land." The baron immediately acceeded to the propofal of fir Raymond, (who now aílumed his legal title) and with the
the greater pleafure, as it allowed Agnes and his daughter to make more comfortable preparations than the fliortnefs of the time would other- ways have allowed them»
CHAP,
CHAP. XVI. JL HE intercfting occurences of the day had awakened all the fenfibili- ties of the parties concerned in them, and the penetration of de Villars eafily difcovered that a reciprocal attachment had taken place between Edward and Agnes Warren, as well as between fir Raymond and his daughter.—It was with the fincereft es ^ pleafure he beheld this mutual par¬ tiality, the difinterefted affedion of generous and congenial fouls, but as he ftill confidered his family with¬ in the power of Hildebrand, he de¬ termined to drop no hint of his being
being confeious of the fituation of their hearts till fuch time as he had entirely efeaped the reach of his machinations.—He therefore ftimu- lated them to exert thcmfelves in providing for their departure on the evening of the fecond day. Sir Raymond and Edw r ard in the interim, had entered into the firmeft bonds of friendfliip, mutually un¬ folded their fentiments, and engaged to afllft each other in their differ¬ ent fuits; w*hile Agnes and Eleanor, with equal candour had aded in the fame confidential manner; and dif¬ clofed without referve, the predi- ledion which they felt for their re-' fpedivc deliverers. The
t The baron having obtained from fir Raymond the information of Gilbert's retreat, difpatched Robert to his cottage, that he might con¬ dud both him and Frances to the caftle; the latter of whom, Agnes Warren was dcfirous of taking into exile with her ; the faithful creatures foon arrived, but language is unable to paint their unaffedcd joy, in once more beholding a miftrefs, whofe kindnefs and gcneroftty had ever deprived fcrvitude of its pain, and engaged them to her by the ftrongeft bonds of affedion. Frances heard with the moil unfeigned delight the arrange¬ ments which had been made, and declared that nothing fliould again feparate her from her beloved mif¬ trefs.
trefs, ------Gilbert alfo promifed to watxh the motions of Hildebrand with the ftricìeft vigilance; to un¬ fold gradually through the country, his complicated villainies^ as well as the means by which young Warren and his filler had been enabled to efcape them; and to deliver into the hands of de Villars' friends the Earls of Hereford, Pembroke, and Lancaf- ¿er, letters containing α full detail of all the occurrences which had happened. Every thing was now prepared for the departure of the baron and his family. The fecond evening had arrived ; the bark which ihould con¬ vey them to the continent floated in vol. ii* o^ the
the river ; and the party only waited for the quiet and darknefs of mid¬ night that they might get on board their veffel without obfervation.---- The clock at length ftruck eleven; the domeftic s were laden with provi- fions and neceflaries for the expedition; and de Villars led Agnes Warren to the gate of the caftle« He was on the point of open» ing it, when a violent knocking a- larmed the party.—For a moment furprife kept them filent ; the baron, however, foon exclaimed, " Robert unbar the gate ; if it be a friend who knocks thus loudly, we need not be concerned, and ihould it be our foe, our number and the goodnefs of our caufe
caufe will enable us to defy his malice."—On thefe words; Robert opened the gate, (the ladies having firft retired) and difcovered a man in the habit of a monk, whofe look befpoke terror, difmay and aftoniihment. As foon as he beheld de Villars, " haften my lord," exclaimed he, in interrupted accents, " to Netley Abbey, which teems with blood and horror."—The baron defired the ecclefiaftic to compofe himfelf, and to be more explicit with regard to the what had oceafioned his a- larm. —" My lord," replied he, " it is now vain to endeavour to keep that from your knowledge, which muft ihortly be fully unfolded. I 0^3 will
will therefore be candid, and hope that my confcfilon may be received as the price of pardon. 4t Many months fince, the daugh¬ ter of fir Raymond Warren was com¬ mitted by fir Hildebrand to the care of father Peter, and confined in a fubterrancous apartment in our ab¬ bey, which had been prepared un¬ der the immediate infpedion of fir Hildebrand, in the life time of his uncle.—Here fhe continued nearly two years; during which time, akho' fir Hildebrand had only three or four interviews with her, yet he generally paid a vifit to the monaf- tery every day, to make enquiries relative to his prifoncr, whom he had determined to confine for life.
fC A few evenings pail, a youth difguifed as a minftrel, found means to introduce himfelf to our monaf¬ tery.—He impofed upon the abbot, and gained his permiflion to remain there one night; during the eourfe of which, he difcovered the apart¬ ment of fir Raymond's daughter, and refcued her from her confine¬ ment.—On the morning when the circumftance was known, father Pe¬ ter, half dead with conflernation, caufed immediate fearch and enqui¬ ry to be made for the fugitives; but without effed.—He dreaded to fee fir Hildebrand, as he had given him the ftrideft charges for the fafe cuf- tody of the lady; the cafe how¬ ever was remedilefs, and he could Q~ 3 only
only unfold to him what had hap¬ pened. "This evening the knight re· turned from a hunting match in the New Foreft and an hour fince, reached the abbey, much intoxicated with wine, a pradice to which he has of Lite been confiderably addided. His firft inquiry was for Agnes War¬ ren; whofe flight he learnt with rage that bordered on phrenzy.------ He loaded the abbot with every exe¬ cration that paffion fuggefted, and fvvore he would put him to death unlefs he immediately difcovered the place of her retreat.—Thefe invec¬ tives, and menaces roufed father Pe¬ ter's indignation; he made a iharp reply
reply.—Sir Hildebrand was enflamed to madnefs; and plucking a dagger from his fide, he ruihed upon the abbot, and plunged it in his bofom. The blow was mortal; but e're he fell, he feifed the weapon from the hand of fir Hildebrand and inflic¬ ted a deep and fatal wound in his groin, which brought him alfo to the ground. " Father Peter, my lord, imme¬ diately expired ; but his antagonift, after a ihort time, recovered both his fenfe and reafon. He foon faw that a few hours muft terminate his exiftence, and a confcioufnefs of the many crimes he had committed inftantly arofe to his difturbed mind. His
His penitence is, however, deep, and his wiihes are to employ the remain¬ ing portion of life, in endeavouring to make atonement for his offences* For this purpofe he difpatched mef- fengers for feveral of his retainers and domeffics, and ordered me to fly to the caftle of baron de Villars, and requeft the immediate attendance, of you my lord, your fon and daugh¬ ter at the abbey." The detail of the monk filled his audience with aftoniihment and awe* The baron lifted his eye to hea¬ ven, and breathed an ejaculation of grateful wonder to that being, who thus unexpededly illumines the dark¬ nefs of defpair j raifes the drooping fpirits
fpirits of fuffering virtue; and hum¬ bles in the duft the towering fehemes of daring profligacy. "Monk" faid the baron, "return to the abbey, and announce our im¬ mediate approach. We will follow thee with ail fpeed." As foon as he was departed, "children," continu¬ ed de Villars, " mark how the hand of heaven is at length manifefted in our favor, at the moment when hope had ceafed to chear us,——Such is the reward of a pious refignation to its decrees.---------Let not man then, impioufly arraign the moft high, if in the eourfe of his moral government of his creatures, ini¬ quity appears to triumph, and piety to
to be depreíled; but let him learn from our adventures, that the time will come when patient fuffering ihall be recompenfed with its re¬ ward, and infulting vice be defervedly punifhed." The party now proceeded to the abbey, which they foon reached.— All here was confufion and alarm ; the monks, confeious of their ini¬ quities, were trembling with appre- henfion, and feveral of fir Hilde¬ brande retainers ftood in the cloifters, whofe countenances exprefled the defpair they entertained of their patron's recovery. At length the baron and his fon entered
entered the refectory, the theatre of the bloody tragedy ????? had beert aded; fir Raymond remaining with the ladies, in the cloifters without.— Here they beheld a fcene dreadful beyond defcription. In one corner of the room lay the abbot, deprived of life, and weltering in his blood.— But his features had not loft the diftortions with which rage and pain had ftamped them. In another part appeared Hildebrand, ftretched upon a couch in a ftate of horror next to madnefs.—^-Four attendants en¬ deavoured to fecure his hands, and to prevent him from tearing away the bandages that had been applied to his wound.----Lamentations for his enormities, mingled with ihrieks, and execrations,
execrations, burft occafionly from him; while his blood-ihot eyes that roiled with fearful rapidity, too well befpoke the defpair which harrowed his fouL Exhausted at length with ftrug¬ gîing and exertion, he grew more compofed ; and returning recolledion enabled him to perceive and know de Villars and his fon· The fight of them had nearly reduced him a- gain to diftradion. For a few mi¬ nutes he was filent, but at length ex¬ claimed, " Pardon, pardon de Villars, a wretch who is now going to ex¬ piate his enormous crimes—one who had fecretly doomed your daughter to diihonor, and yourfelf and fon to
to aifaiTmation. But heaven has pre¬ vented this accumulation of infer¬ nal wickednefs. Would that its light¬ nings had blafted me, e're I com¬ mitted thofe other crimes which ftain my polluted foul—the murder of my friend, my patron, my rela¬ tion; and his gallant fon." " Hildebrand," returned the ba¬ ron, "let not the evils you intend¬ ed to inflid on me, which it has pleafed heaven thus wonderfully to avert, grieve your departing fpiriu 1 from my foul forgive thee all thy meditated injuries. For thy treat¬ ment of the good fir Raymond, which I have heard from the lips of Agnes who is now under my protedion, vol. u, r may
may heaven accept thy deep contri¬ tion; and give thee to be thankful that it fpared one tranfgreflion to thy finful foul, the death of his fon, who has wonderfully efeaped thy ma¬ lice, and now attends thee that thou mayeft in the prefence of us all, make reftitution to him of his u- furped rights." "And does he live?" cried Hil¬ debrand, "oh bring him hither, to blefs my burning eyes, and hear my laft weak fighs of penitence." Ray¬ mond immediately entered the a- partment, having laid afide his ihield and helmet. The ftrong refemblanee, however, between the youth and his murdered father, inftantly flaihed up¬ on
on Hildebrand; the dreadful viiìon occurred to his imagination, and threw him into a paroxyfm of hor¬ ror and defpair. ft Save me, fave me," exclaimed he, ibrting from the couch into tbe arms of his atten¬ dants, <r from him, whofe look withers my foul. Hell itfelf with all its horrors is lefs terrible, than the blaft¬ ing eye of that fearful fpe&re.** The agitation of his mind became too violent for his exhaufted frame to contend with. The blood guíhed again from his wound. The cold dews of death overfpread his face— and his agonifed foul took her flight, in a groan of defpair that filled the bye-ftanders with aftomfliment and awe. r 2 As
As foon as the monks, and the attendants of Hildebrand were fully convinced of their patron's diflblu¬ tion, they began to think of pro¬ viding for their own fafety. They had been privy to all his enor¬ mities, and dreaded the puniih¬ ment they fo juftly deferved. Each therefore immediately endeavoured to fix the whole odium of them on the two principals, Hildebrand and the abbot; and officioufly proffered his fervices to fir Raymond, whom the former had declared to be the right heir of Netley demefne. The youth rebuked them feverely for their bafenefs and fervility, af- furing them that guilt ihould never find
find an afylum under his protedion. His father's wrongs were not to be forgotten, and he refolved as foon as he was firmly fettled in his rights, that public inquiry fliould be made into the circumftances of fir Raymond's death, and the fevereft puniihment inflided on thofe who were concern¬ ed in the foul deed. As the morning had now dawned, fir Raymond, accompanied by de Villars and his fon, proceeded to Netley caftle in order to take pof- feffion of his parental eftates. From thence a meffage was difpatched to all the barons and knights in the neigh¬ bourhood, begging their attendance. Before this numerous body, de Vil- R 3 lars
lars made a full detail of the vari¬ ous circumftances which had occur¬ red, both with regard to fir Raymond's family and his owrn His narrative was confirmed by the teftimony of Gilbert, feveral of Hildebrand's own domeftics, and the monk who had firft carried the tidings to de Villars of the tragical fcene at the abbey. The w ; hole aifembly exprefled their aftoniflimcnt at the ftory, and their hearty congratulations to iir Ray¬ mond on his efcaping the malevo¬ lence of Hildebrand, and retrieving his property and honors-, and united in fwearing to fupport him in both, with their fwords and fortunes.. Mef- fengers were alfo inftantly fent off" to court, with an account of what had
had paifed, and to folicit a confir¬ mation of the eftates to the legal heir. This extraordinary and unexpec¬ ted change in the affairs of fir Ray¬ mond, filled the whole party with the fincereft fatisfadion; but no one experienced a more heartfelt joy, than the youth himfelf, as it ena¬ bled him to difplay the difintereft- ednefs of his regard for Eleanor, a.nd the warmth of his friendihip for her father and brother. No fooner therefore had he received the con¬ firmation of his rights from the king (who was prevailed upon at the fame time to withdraw his dif- plcafure from de Villars and his fa¬ mily)
mily) than he prefented his fifter to Edward, giving her in dower, a very considerable trad of land im¬ mediately in the neighbourhood of de Villars's caftle. Sir Raymond then folicited the hand of Eleanor, who fuperior to the little aiti fices and affedation of falfe delicacy, inftantly bellowed it, where her affedions were already fixed. It was now that he thought it ne¬ ceflary to do jufticc to the memo¬ ry of his father by puniffiing the inftruments of his death, and pro¬ perly interring his remains, lhe cul¬ prits were therefore brought to trial, and
and fuch as had been immediate. ly concerned in the murder, con¬ demned to execution. The bones of the late fir Raymond were col« lefted, and placed with all the pomp of burial in the cemetery of the ab¬ bey; which after undergoing a luf- tration, and being confecrated afreih, was filled with its compliment of monks, taken from neighbouring monafteries, all men of age and piety. Nothing was now wanting to compleat the felicity of thofe, on whom adverfity had fo long and dark¬ ly frowned.—Sir Raymond Warren and his lady took poíleífion of Net- ley caftle, where they lived with all the
the generous hofpitality of feudal magnificence. Edward and Agnes refided with the baron at his manfion; adding the venerable Gilbert, and faithful Frances to their family. Whilft de Villars, whom age and grief had been gradually bending to the grave, once more regained his health and cheerfulnefs, and blefled, for feveral years, with his fociety, the happy group, who tranfmitted to their pofterity thefe facred truths; that THERE IS NO SITUATION TO WHICH PERSECUTED VIRTUE CAN BE REDU¬ CED, SO LOW, AS TO AUTHORISE DES¬ PAIR ; THAT THERE ARE NO CIR¬ CUMSTANCES TO WHICH HARDENED IMPIETY
IMPIETY CAN BE RAISED, SO ELEVA¬ TED, AND SECURE, AS TO PRECLUDE THE FEAR OF DOWNFAL AND DIS¬ GRACE.
FINIS.
