Z56 THE FIRST cnrnrcs 1 THE FIRST GDTHICS 267
m@"t °f the59 t@"0T5- man, are matched at last, the political statement of Lady Mor-
' gan's Gothic is completed and the ghosts of revolutionary Irish
313. Owenson, Sydney. THE HILD IRISH GIRL: A NATIONAL TALE. London : turmoil along with English tyranny are laid in their graves.
Richard Phillips, I806. ' There are some obvious parallels of plotting and purpose with
Modern Reeditions: None Maturin's HILD IRISH BOY (see #266) and THE MILESIAN CHIEF (see
Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (didactic and nationalistic #267). ,
elements) . ,
Biographical and Research Data: Stevenson, Lionel. THE HILD ' 314. F.H.P. THE CASTLE OF CAITHNESS: A ROMANCE OF THE THIRTEENTH
IRISH GIRL. London : Chapman and Hall, 1936; Garver, Joseph. i CENTURY. London : Minerva-Press for Lane. Ne“m°", 1302
"Gothic Ireland: Lady Caroline Lamb's GLENARVON," IRISH UNI- Modern Reeditions: None
VERSITY REVIEH, 1O (1980): 213-228; O'Neill, Patrick. "Image Gothic Type: Gothified history (terror mode, Macbethian over-
and Reception: The German Fortunes of Maria Edgeworth, Lady tones)
Morgan, Thomas Moore, and Charles Maturin," CANADIAN JOURNAL Biographical and Research Data: Summers, GOTHIC QUEST, p.
OF IRISH STUDIES, 6, Number 1 (1930); 35-49, 174_
Critical Synopsis: The reader who expected Lady Morgan's HILD Critical Syh0Dsi$= A Hl9"l3"d 5°t"lc i" f°“' Vnlumes "high
IRISH GIRL to be another ardent plea for Irish nationalism cen- ‘ combines the themes and situations of terror, usurpation, and
tering on the sentimental reeducation of a young lady must have ‘ genealogical revelation found in THE CASTLE OF OTRANTO (see
been taken aback in two senses by careful Gothic craftsmanship ; #466) and THE OLD ENGLISH BARON (see #355). Caledonian my5t§Fl@5
of the novel itself. First, the highly Gothic story belongs less “ and lengthy refahricetiuhs of the MACBETH story comprise e
to the wild Irish girl, Glorvina, than to the narrator, an ex- subform of the historical Gothic novel. C.F. Barrett's DOUGLAS
iled English aristocrat named Horatio. Second, the novel is as i CASTLE: or, THE CELL OF MYSTERY, A 5c0TT!5H TALE (599 ‘O24,
much a high Gothic romance as it is a political fantasy or ' appears to be a rewriting of THE CASTLE OF CAITHNESS. The tyrant
Gaelic polemic. To cure him of youthful indiscretions, Horatio's , ' of Caithness Castle is Macmillan, ferocious Scottish cousin of
stern father has banished him to his Connaught estates in § Halpole's Manfred; Bl50 6 dlreﬁt 9°t"l€ de5CB"d3"t Of "B5593",
Ireland. Here, Horatio comes upon the solemn castle of Bryan of he is driven to crime by B bl°°d l"$t a"d 5" a1m°5t "e'°'c 5e"5e
Inismore, a last bitter survivor of the ravages of the Cromwel- of evil destiny. The Castle has all of the usual Gothic hardware
lian occupation of the previous century when the castle was including an adjoining grotto where the hero-villain makes con-
almost pulled down and the lord of Inismore slain in reprisal by tact with the supernatural. THE CRITICAL REVIEH for December,
Cromwell's men. The ruined fortress and symbol of Irish resist- . 1802, dismissed the romance with the sneering °b5@'Vat‘°" that
ance is magnificently described by Lady Morgan as “grand even in it was "the shadow of a shade--in it are contained more ghosts
desolation, and magnificent in decay.‘ Prince Bryan's only child and dreams of 9h°5i$» lhﬂ" eve" the Thlrteehth C@"t"'! ¢°"ld
and the ingediate source of Horatio's affections is the Irish have borne."
princess, orvina, wild in the sense that her romantic i ulses
express themselves in outbursts of strange Gaelic song an:prodo- 3 315. Palmer, John, Jr. THE HAUNTED CAVERN: A CALEDONIAN TALE. London
montades on Irish glories. The major Gothic scene in the novel : B. Crosby. 1795-
occurs when Glorvina is forced into the castle chapel and con- Modern Reeditions: None
fronted with a sinister bridegroom who insists that the ceremony ‘ E0lhl¢ T3991 5'°tt° 9°t"iC ("°"°' “°de' e]eme"ts °f G°th1'
of marriage proceed. But Horatio is on hand to intrude upon the fied history)
compulsory wedding. Also in duly Gothic fashion, the mysterious k siogranhisel ehd Research Date: Summers. GOTHIC QUEST.
bridegroom is revealed to be Horatio's own father. Unknown to PD-192, 365-366; Tarr, CATHOLICISM IN GOTHIC FICTION, pp.2,
the denizens of the castle, he has been lurking about the 31, 38-39, 59, 6O, 107; LéVY- LE ROMAN 'GOTHIOUE" ANGLAIS,
Premises and has been hiding in the castle for the better part . PP-394. 399. 400. 491, 419, 437. 449. 559-
°f _ﬂ year benlgnly spying on Glorvina and waiting for an oppor- \~ _
tunity to tame the wild Irish girl by marrying her. Athough his Critical Synopsis: Palmer's Highland Gothic offered the dur-
methods are sinister, his motives are laudable. Just as he had ‘ able combination of a castle adj0i"l"9 5 "a""t@d caver" l" “h°5e
hoped to cure his son's wildness by an Irish sojourn, so his K darkness and depths the young hero finds a skeleton, comes upon
P"FD0se in forcing Glorvina to become his wife is to temper her a rusty dagger which once belonged to his murdered father, and
emotional natri0tisn- Thus. he had intended to restore a kind of is assailed by the usual Gothic acoustics. The CRITICAL REVIEW
rational and racial harmony to the historical breach between the for December; 1795. lhdlciied hi5 fﬂliﬂue With, the vogue of
.E"qlish and the Irish. As Horatio states it, his father's i grotto-Gothics in se"eral= ‘The isle °I §"'lek‘“9 ‘°°°t'°‘ ‘"d
strange charade had ‘the salutary purpose of awakening her to a bloody murder has been repeated until it palls upon the sense.
train of ideas more liberal than the prejudices of education had It requires the 9ehiu$ Of i'RadCllff@ I0 hﬂrhﬂh "P °"' §°"l5
hitherto suffered it to cherish.‘ when Glorivina, the Catholic with these visionary horrors-" Although he is no Mrs- Radcliffe.
Gaelic princess, and Horatio, the Protestant Anglo-Saxon gentle- P Palmer's Gothic stands out as a better-than-average example of

268 '
THE FIRST GUTHICS TIE FIRST GOTHICS 269
the Go ' -
the mﬁh;Er£:tt§;nh?: ;§g3;:eg ?agern1ty,s_the 5°"-S Search for Gothic romance also contains enough historical lore of the
during the reign of Henry VI (T42; the main 6Ctl0N; Events occur monarchy of Edward III (13@7-1377) to appeal to the followers of
iace, a tota]]y fictional d ‘$471), with Sir ‘Jame; ya], historical Gothic as practiced by Sophia LEE_ and Clara Reeve.
the previous Century Sir Hillesces ??t of the Scottish rebel of Evidence of the hook's_1mpact and the spiraling demand for Goth_
fu1’ Crue], designing" mast am fa ace,_cast as the uaeceit- ics with towers in their titles may be seen in Hilliam Harrison
and barren count of Ab d e_ o ua Gothic castle "in the uiid Ainsworth's TONER OF LONDON (1840), an early Victorian histori-
Of Glencairn heYenro]]sFh9eﬂshire. Detesting his wife, natiida , cal Gothic which owes much of its antiquarian spirit to Palmer's
their daughtér Jan f er in a French convent while retaining work. The hero is the lowborn Leonard who gains the favor of the
None of his viéiouseéotozegaltreatment and Persecution at home. King in Edward's ceaseless wars against the Scots. Leonard's
Strong nationa‘ bias on Pa] islexplained although one Suspects a close comrade-in-arms is Edgar de Couci. Through Edgar and his
tish with things barbarous M?" : part WhlCh equates things Seat- betrothed Julia, Leonard gains the acquaintance of Emma, soon to
ity’ we have ca‘edo"ia" Cr; Ita is, instead of Catholic brutal- become the obJect of Leonard's love as well as a series of res-
misery for the good characte Y 65 the source of despotism and cue attempts from her incarceration in the Black Tower_ by Lord
however, Since her com assiegsi Jane is not completely wretched, Edmund Fitzallan. Leonard's double task is a familiar one to
castle to declare hﬁs 10 a efcousin,_Eldred, come; to the devotees of the Gothic novel; he must rise in life by verifying
scheme to force her to marroveh or her in the face of wa]]a¢ei5 the nobility of his parentage and he must release Emma from her
Isles, a creature so Say E Crude and boorish Donald of the torments within the gruesome Tower. Yet, extricating Emma is but
caricature of the Highlandevagﬁ ago disfigured he aimost seems a one of a series of heroic tasks Leonard must perform as he makes
ident in Gothic caSt1es fur ie . Young heroes are seldom res- his way through the genealogical maze toward his noble identity.
tion of the dungeon In Eldr 5?’! i0"9 before learning the loca- The need to establish identity, a task which faces scores of
is the haunted cavérn of the t? 5e58, his place of confinement heroes and heroines_in the pages of Gothic fiction, may be seen
had made a Successful esc ef itle. Although the pair of lovers as an effort to impose order upon chaos in a confirmation of
friend in the vociferous hpe -rem Hﬂilace's fortress and found a adulthood. The establishing of identity is one of the few forms
by Ha1]ace and Donald and ifmlt, Ambrose, they have been retaken of psychological salvation which the Gothic romance permits to
undergo the full pro ra ':"5Dorted back to the castle to its lost characters. On his way to the liberation of Emma,
Special preserve of thg fm 0 _horrors. The haunted cavern is the Leonard 15 taken by an evil baroness and locked up to serve her
the usual Gothic enterirocious Donald and is furnished with Sadistic amusements. Leonard's imprisonment allows Palmer to
Contains the answer to th ainments. but the haunted cavern 5150 parallel the Gothic situations of heroine and hero, Emma in the
ther,s "death ” The déﬁ yﬂung hero S questions about his fa- Black Tower and Leonard in the dark dungeon. It also allows Pal-
Mati]da,s _deaa" brother Avuzmeﬂt is effected by the arrival of mer, who was a man of the theatre, to introduce a_dramatic
garb and accuses Hal] rc ibald who casts off his pilgrimlg contraption for the miraculous deliverance of Leonard. Groping
C°up]ed with his return gce 0 usurpation and murder, a charge about in the darkness, Leonard experiences one of those "for-
the evi] Hallace to ex _F0m the dead which is enough to cause tunate falls“ when the floor of the cell collapses and he dis-
vi]]ai", Eldred is freeplre ob a stroke. Hith the removal of the Covers a passageway beneath his place of confinement which
Claim both Jane and tho em race his recovered father and to connects eventually (and incredibly) with the Black Tower
Ambrose is accommodated : igstle as his own. Even the talkative itself. Fighting Fitzallan, the grim sentinel who blocks his way
iiberated Lady Ha1]acea P $ 9"? by being matched with the \ to the tower, is an easy enough feat for Leonard since he has
formula; yet the tenebr- 3 mer s routine Gothic is written to been schooled in the martial arts by a mad soldier named
with al] of gts ]oathS0m:"§_ 95¢'lDtl0nS of the haunted cavern Hildebrand, a wild and barbaric man who had joined Edward's army
possible to speculate that acgr are exquisitely done and make it after accidentally killing his son. Fitzallan's death at
worthy Gothic mode] for tha grin found Palmerlg underground a Leonard's hands is the occasion for the unraveliﬂ9 of the
MELMOTH THE NANDERER ( 6 ark places of "Stanton's Yale“ in genealogical knot as the dying villain‘s last words serve to
see ’253)- identify the young quester, Leonard, as a Fitzallan. Hilde-
315_ p brand's victim (but not his own son, as he believed) was
alfsgipgzgg,fg;-Hiiﬁiuvszsnv or THE BLACK TOHER. London = Hin- Leonard's father, the vile Edn\und's brother, Lord Reginald rm-
Madern ReeditiD"s_ Nam “"9, 1795- i allan, a noble knight in the service of King Edward. Other
Gothic Type: Tuwe; Gﬁgﬁi ( I _ _ pieces of the genealogical puzzle then fall into place. Julia,
Biographica] and Re E e ements of Gothified history) the sweetheart of Edgar de Couci turns out to be Leonard's
365’ 366_367_ Tarr C§$a6Eh Data: Sunners, GOTHIC QUEST, pp_ sister who also had served time in the Black Tower before
LévyI LE Rénku =GoTHI U EISM IN GOTHIC FICTION, pp,3, 11; Leonard was given as a child to be raised by local peasants. To
. 434, 461 626 Q E ANGLAIS, DP.394, 395, 395, 397, make sure that_the Black Tower will never again be-used as jail
’ ' for the children of the family Leonard commands that it he
gri ' - _ . converted into a monastery on the day of his wedding to Emna.
a redggﬁ;]o§Y::?;g:: Thﬁé textbook tower-Gothic is essentially The popularity of Palmer's formulaic Gothic can scarcely be
5 "'i""TEll WERN (see #315). His second overestimated. Together with s.n. H€TnO|l'S LOUISA: on, THE BLACK

318. PARENTAL MURDER: OR, THE BROTHERS, AN INTERESTING ROMANCE IN
270 THE FIRST GUTHICS
TONER (see #175), the facsimiles of this type of Gothic were of
such volume as to constitute a Gothic sub-genre of their own. t ’44»—-44~ *'r**r‘*'**‘“
317. Palmer, John Jr. THE MYSTIC SEPULCHRE: OR, SUCH THINGS HAVE
BEEN, A SPANISH ROMANCE. London : J.F. Hughes, 180%
Modern Reeditions: None
Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (terror mode) 1
Biographical and Research Data: Sunmers, GOTHIC QUEST,
pp.365, 367; Lévy, LE ROMAN "GOTHIQUE" ANGLAIS, p.519.
Critical Synopsis: This well-crafted Gothic reuses elements
from Palmer's previous romances, THE HAUNTED CAVERN (see #315)
and THE MVSTERV OF THE BLACK TONER (see #316) and builds its
suspense around the device of the sealed tomb which gives off
strange sounds. In this respect, the Gothic plotting resembles
that of the anonymous Gothic, CORRELIA: OR, THE MYSTIC TOMB (see
#071), so much so that it is possible that Palmer might have
been the author of that Minerva-Press offering of 1802. Palmer's
dramatic training and sense of the theatrical prompted him to
follow the histrionic horrors of Monk Lewis rather than practice
the quieter terrors of Mrs. Radcliffe. THE MYSTIC SEPULCHRE was
quickly translated into French by R.J. Durdent under the title
LE TOMBIEUX MYSTERIEUX: OU, LES FAMILLES DE HENARES ET
D'ALMANZA. '
WHICH VIRTUE AND VILLAINY ARE CONTRASTED, AND FOLLOWED BY RE-
WARD AND RETRIBUTION. London : T. and R. Hughes, 1807.
Modern Reeditions: None
Gothic Type: Gothic bluebook
Biographical and Research Data: None
Critical Synopsis: A Gothic character study in fraternal op-
posites, the bluebook's announced purpose is "to draw two char-
acters who were as essentially different in principle as they
were in practice." The Goth's strategy for making this point is
to deliver one horror per page, either natural or supernatural,
over the 312 pages alloted to him by the publisher. The central
brutal event occurring exactly midway through the novel is the
parricidal assault promised in the title. The antagonistic
brother is Duke Rabano, holder of vast territories and a
thorough scoundrel. The primary object of his cruel schemes and
avaricious ambitions is his half-brother, Romano. In the
personality of Duke Baretti, the father of these two sons, the
opposite qualities of viciousness and nobility are fused. Rabano
>
il
=1
l l
has enlisted the services of a professional assassin Zalor I '*' ‘ " T/S ST
, F6, " ‘ “‘“""T"'“T WWi}.'14.l_v 4Y004I A--t 1» 0!!) ‘by ow,-
and is using him to perform the secretive murder of the father
Just as the novel begins. Duke Rabano is also engaged in open
warfare with the forces of his father. Incidental to these
.= W DL-ALBElO‘\§'l;
schemes and hostilities, a monstrous messenger appears to 1I‘DEFo‘ z( T‘
Baretti in his tent to utter the dire warning, “Thy blood is the
purchase of peace." The monster then returns to its subterranean . ,
lair by way of an engulfing chasm. By means of a ruse, Zalorra Zuni"! P"! '/b!"""’~""
lures Baretti to Rabaho's camp, then slaughters him during a
violent storm. Under the supervision of his lifelong friend, Ar-

Tl-E FIRST GOTHICS 271
dini, Baretti is buried with all honors thus initiating the
bluebook's most Gothic scene. To desecrate the body and to strip
the father of rings and jewels, Robano and Zalorra attempt to
rob the grave by midnight but find it corpseless. The theme of
the mislaid body is well sustained throughout the remainder of
the bluebook. Robano and Zalorra deftly turn the missing body of
I the father into difficulties for Romano who becomes a fugitive
accused of "parental murder." His sole support in all of this
mistreatment is Miranda, Ardini's daughter. After a host of pur-
suits, combats, and extravagant sufferings, the monstrous spec-
tre which had warned the father takes up the cause of the good
son. Duke Rabano and Zalorra are taken, tortured, and inpris-
oned. Awaiting his execution, the tower in which Rabano is being
held collapses (perhaps the work of the monster) crushing and
burying the villain alive. The good son ‘is now the duke and
united at last with Miranda. All of these horrors roll over the
reader in rapid waves, theoretically permitting no chance for
recovery of reason from shock to successive shock.
319. Parsons, Eliza. THE CASTLE OF HOLFENBACH: A GERMAN STORY. Lon-
don : Minerva-Press for Hilliam Lane, 1793.
Modern Reeditions: Folio Press, 1968, ed. Devendra P. Varma.
Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (Germanic and Schauer-
romantik elements, sham translation)
Biographical and Research Data: Sadleir, Michael. THE
NORTHANGER NOVELS: A FOOTNOTE T0 JANE AUSTEN, English Associ-
ation Panphlet Number 68, November, 1927, pp.l3-14; Tarr,
CATHOLICISM IN GOTHIC FICTION, pp.1, 30, 76, 101, 106; Lévy,
LE ROMAN "GOTHIl]UE' ANGLAIS, pp.43s, 507, 550.
Critical Synopsis: Michael Sadleir regarded the phony German-
ism of Hrs. Parsons's THE CASTLE OF HOLFENBACH as only one of
her several unforgivable flaws as a Gothic fictionist. He
conpares her mechanical Gothic with her ‘much more talented
fellow NORTHANGER novelist, Regina Maria Roche. "Regina Roche,"
notes Sadleir, "though she did not tolerate actual ghosts, un-
doubtedly thrilled with her own heroines; but Mrs. Parsons
--coldly violent in scenes of almost sadistic cruelty--seems to
mock even at herself. Not surprisingly, her habit of giving
deliberately trivial interpretations of pseudo-ghostly phenomena
robs her romances of their power to terrify, and while she was
undoubtedly in herself a woman of much more humour and of better
sense than Mrs. Roche, she was very inferior as a Gothic novel-
ist." Sadleir‘s judgement is borne out by the complicated web of
Germanic horridness and artificial suspense crowded into THE
CASTLE OF HULFENBACH. Jane Austen's decision to include the
novel among the NORTHANGER titles was dictated by her desire for
satiric variety among the delicious Gothics consumed by Cather-
ine Morland. Hrs. Parsons's fake Teutonic thriller is different
in kind as well as degree from the other six_ Gothics and so
callously mechanical in its handling of Gothic material that
even Catherine Horland must have sighed in relief over the
book's concluding sentence: '"Thus, after a variety of strange
and melancholy incidents, Matilda received the reward of her
steadiness, fortitude, and virtuous self-denial.“ If flight by a

Z7? THE FIRST GUTHICS ; Tl£ FIRST camrcs 273
maiden from the wicked designs of a lecherous relative defines HARNING, exhibits the same feeble and lifeless handling of Goth-
one central pattern of the Gothic experience, this novel is a ic materials as THE CASTLE OF HOLFENBACH. The novel takes its
model of that pattern. Matilda Heimar is literally on the run title from the Gothic acoustic of the preternatural voice, usu-
throughout most of the episodes, an international victim extra- ‘ ally bodiless, which delivers stern instructions in the night.
ordinaire. She lives less in fear of the haunted Castle of More compact and perhaps less confusing than the deviously told
Holfenbach where she has taken shelter from her parricidal uncle ' CASTLE OF HOLFENBACH (see #319), the novel uses the same fake
than her all~consuming dread of rape at his hands. Befriended by , Germanism to establish and maintain its terror. The conflict is
Victoria, the mistress of Holfenbach Castle, she barely has an built around the opposite natures of the two half-brothers, the
opportunity to relate her peril to her benefactress before young counts Ferdinand and Rhodophil Renaud. The hypocritical
Victoria _vanishes from the castle leaving only her dead butler L Rhodophil is unspeakably bad and very clever in enacting his
to be buried by Matilda. Matilda's verbose hysteria seems to evil schemes; the pure-hearted Ferdinand is unbearably good and
JH§t1fy $adleir‘s complaint about Mrs. Parsons as a Gothic nov- very slow at recognizing evil in any form and particularly inept
elist: "Good heavens! Hhat scenes of murder and atrocious crimes \‘ at recognizing it in a half-brother. Ferdinand therefore re-
must have been perpetrated in this castle; how great is my curi- ceives supernatural aid from the disembodied voice whispering to
°5l§y to know more of the unhappy Victoria." The scene shifts ‘ him from the dark void and warning him to guard against his
rapidly (and unaccountably) from the darkened chambers of Castle brother and to have nothing more to do with his new wife,
Holfenbach to Paris and then London with the shadow of Matilda's Claudina, on pain of death. Heeding this mysterious warning,
uncle _hovering always just behind her. In London, the missing Ferdinand takes up the wanderer's life and has dozens of exotic
Victoria reappears to narrate her own horrid biography of how i adventures and narrow escapes all designed to improve his moral
the Count of Holfenbach tortured her lover to death before her eyesight so that he will be able to see through false innocence
@185. then locked her in a windowless chamber with his headless ‘ i or sham sincerity when he returns home a man. The main Gothic
body. The inset tale is not integrated with the sufferings of event in this phase of the story finds Ferdinand rescuing young
Matilda; it is sinply inserted for sanguinary and sadistic fil- i Count M-- from a foul dungeon and performing other heroics which
ler by Mrs. Parsons. So cynical is the novelist about a brusque ' finally produce an explanation for the mysterious voice's
dl§Posal of her characters that the final incidents lack even , “ condemnation of his wife, Claudina. A Turkish sojourn for the
the smooth genealogical rapprochement of most successful Goth- i two young wanderers (Ferdinand has been joined in his travels by
ics. Uncle Heimar catches Matilda at last and carries her off to Count M--) enables Mrs. Parsons to introduce the weird Turk,
5e'm3QY- But the iﬂurney of the rapist relative aborts when the P Heli and his sly concubine, Fatima. It is Fatima who holds the
boat is seized by Turks. The assault brings on an unexplained key to Ferdinand's incestuous marriage to Claudina since she
and unmotivated attack of conscience and Heimar explodes into a turns out to be the half-sister of both. Knowing of Rhodophil's
fit of guilt, confesses all, and names himself as the novel's A nefariousness and Claudina's seduction by Rhodophil as well as
chief malefactor. The fate of Matilda defies comprehension. her blood relationship to the guileless Ferdinand, the old stew-
After béiﬂq pursued through more European capitals by Count de T ard Ernest had uttered the mysterious warning heard U! Ferdl"
B°"Vlll9 ""0 Dicki "P where Heimar has left off, she is eventu- 5 nand so many volumes ago. He had used his ventriloquial skills
ally delivered back to the normal world of mothers, marriage to save Ferdinand from disgrace. Like the endinq 07 THE CASTLE
W1 steady |wra1s- The endins is so vniﬂrelliqihie that it i; or HOLFENBACH the extrication of the good characters aha the
almost as if Mrs. Parsons had indulged in a defiant hoax or a > punishment of the bad in THE MYSTERIOUS HARNING is so heavy-
burlesque of the systematic sorting out of relationships which Y handed that Mrs. Parsons's final solutions seem almost a blunt
typlfles the usual G°thic rl"l5h- ' caricature of the typical Gothic ending. The strange Turk, Heli,
. is used to rid the plot of Count Holfran, the victimizer of two
320. Parsons, Eliza. THE MVSTERIOUS HARNING: A GERMAN TALE. London : beautiful women, Louisa and Theresa D'Allenberg, both scheduled
Minerva-Press for Hilliam Lane, 1796, I to marry the two deserving young wanderers, Ferdinand and Count
M°dE'" Reedltl°"5= R°bert H°ld@", 1923, ed- H°"ta9He Sunners; M--. For no particular reason that the reader can deduce, the
Fﬂllo Press, 1968, ed. Devendra P. Varma. mischievous Fatima takes poison. Claudina, who has been absent
Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (terror mode, explained su- from Parsons's Gothic stage for most of the novel, suddenly
p?r"at"r?l) M reenters to perish of grief over her deception of Ferdinand in
Bl°9F5Phl¢3l 3"d R95E6TC" Data? Summers, GOTHIC QUE5l. luring him into an incestuous marriage. Hith the villainous
pp.100, 101, 138, 170. 397; Torr. CATHULICISM IN GOTHIC FIC- i ‘- characters all eradicated, Ferdinand and Count M-- emerge from
Tl°"- PP-47. 60. 106; Lévy. LE ROMAN '$0THIQUE“ ANGLAIS ‘ ‘ the Gothic world to their nuptials with Louisa aha Theresa. Mrs.
PP-435, 455, 597. 559; Rﬂbertsi Bette B. ‘Marital Fears and > Parsons's almost mordant disregard for feeling in her Gothic
_ Polygamous Fantasies in Eliza Parsons‘ MVSTERIOUS HARNING," fiction was hardly a unique attitude among makers of Gothic
JOURNAL OF POPULAR CULTURE, 12 (1978); 42-51. ‘ novels ih the 1790's. Books such as THE MYSTERIOUS_HARNING jus-
. . . , , tify Lionel Stevenson's concern for the very survival of the
_ Critical Synopsis: The second item by Mrs. Parsons on Cather- -1 novel as a genre. He has Mrs. Parsons's work in mind when he
ine Morland's NORTHANGER reading list (see #012), THE MVSTERIOUS ‘_i? concludes, ‘The mediocrity of the English novel in the decade

274 rm: FIRST GDTHICS me FIRST GUTHICS 275
1790-1800 was due mainly to ineffectual characterization. In the burlesquing of Gothic business; then, brusquely and unexplain-
Gothic novels the characters were puppets adopting-attitudes of ably, the book reverts to orthodox Gothic confi9"'at‘°"5 °"d
terror and nobility. . . . After a bare sixty years the novel characteristics.
itself seemed to be on the brink of extinction.» - T VALLEV OF ST GOTHARD Breutford Eng1a"d
. 2. Parsons Eliza. HE - - ~ -
321. Parsons, Eliza. ANECDOTES OF THU HELL-KNOHN FAMILIES. London : 32 P. Notbury, 1799. .
T.N. Longman, 1798. 1 Modern Reeditions: None
Modern Reeditions: None Gothic Type: Domestic Gothic (terror mode)
Gothic Type: Gothic parody (some serious motifs mixed with L Biographical and Research Data: None
satire on the Gothic heroine) _
Biographical and Research Data: Jacobs, Maureen S. "Beyond Critical Synopsis: A not-very-Gothic Gothic novel._ the "°fk
the Castle: The Development of the Paradigmatic Female Sto- is dedicated to M.G. Lewis in recognition of "his splendid
ry," DISSERTATION ABSTRACTS INTERNATIONAL, 41 (1980): 679A- talents" and “personal merit.“ Most of the three voiuiies qreiih
680A (American University). ' the ascent of a man of toolmzch Eeeging, Mp; Magpersénggow -#22
madness of sensibility" to ‘t e 19 Er PB, 5 -_
Critical Synopsis: After flirting with Gothic satire in her gdugatiun of Manners is framed in the Swiss Alps when, in the
previous Gothic endeavors, mock Gothicism now becomes the CUﬂ- year 1782, he suffers a fall from his horse while es0iPl"9 f'°m
trolling mode in this novel. The heroine, Elinor, studies ro~ I bandits. His recuperation With the Herve! family 1" the Va"9Y
mances and moves to a castle hoping to transform her prosaic of St. Gothard, Christina and her father, permits Manners rto
life into a series of exciting Gothic experiences. Her deport- deliver a leisurely and lengthy 'eC°l]ECt‘°" °f P15 ear!‘e'
ment within the castle has much in common with the self-induced ' life, a saga of emotional indiscretions. He relates his f00li$h-
panics of Catherine Morland in NORTHANGER ABBEY (see $012) as ness at Eton and his errors of passion later on when he tel
she explores its interior for forbidden chambers, bloodstained i under the influence of the dandy, Alexis De Bude, His indiscreet
documents, and other signs that she has come to the right place. ' elopement with Maria R. fails to teach him self-CdhtF0l
Elinor further indulges her imagination in two fantasies, one of | i There is nothing of a tru y 50th1C hﬂturﬂ 1" 6"! _°f these
persecution and the other of amorous fulfillment. The two wish- . escapades which take us through volume two. Each episode con-
projections tell us much about the Gothic novel as a vehicle of cludes with the regretful aside. "P°?' Manners! His impetuous
what one critic calls “the paradigmatic female story," that type passions were again the masters of his reason. Not until volume
of mythic narrative which ‘celebrated woman's role as victim. ‘ three does a suitably vicious character appear upon P§F$0"$ 5
Paradoxically, women writers seem to need to retell this story stage. He is Lord Dunford, a sadistic wretch who maintains cas-
of flight and fright even as they seek to move beyond it." ' tle; and becomes Mr. Manners's mentor in "the vile harvests _of
Elinor fantasizes a set of parents Mho have rejected her, and the fleshly appetites.“ The slow P'°5e55 °f d‘5e“ta"9!‘n9
what is even more terrifying, have had her confined to the cas- ‘ himself from the sexual webs of Lord Dunford fills the finaé
tle for their own dark purposes. To counter this fantasy of yglume_ Manners's enslavement to vice by Lord Dunford is splice
domestic persecution she has also imagined a sexual savior in ,, with the frame story by way of Christina Hervey, who had once
the figure of young Edmund whose secret correspondence to her ‘ been one of Dunford's sexual victims. After such extensive
she expects to discover in one of the castle's sealed rooms or documentation of the corrosion of moral balance by the Pﬂ55‘°"5
locked chests. Hhen a servant accidentally uncovers Edmund's via Manners's lengthy recitation, it hardly seems necessary for
miniature while going through the disordered contents of a the author to append a stout moral. Nevertheless, if the reader
cabinet in search of pills to relieve stomach gas, Elinor's has missed the edifying point of Manners's testimony, 1t_l5
Gothic hopes for herself soar. The discovery of the miniature this: "The inpetuosity of youthful experience, corrected by mis-
among the pills is the closing event of volume two of the three . fortunes and turned into salutary lessons, by the 5§"5‘b]9
volume romance. In an unaccountable shift of tone, the fatuities remonstrances and prudent counsels of his PT95e'Y9'_ I" the
of the heroine become in volume three the genuinely serious Valley of St. Gothard had taught Manners a JU5t ahd
predicaments of an endangered Gothic maiden. For reasons known discriminating knowledge of the world; the fallacy of hove t°
only to herself, Mrs. Parsons had apparently decided to turn » derive pleasure from dissipation and _an inﬂﬂlqehte °f the
satire abruptly into melodrama. Elinor does indeed find love passions; and a conviction that true happiness is only _attEin-
letters and their devoted correspondent is a real Edmund. Her , able by the practice of virtue in the bosom of our families-
parents (she was adopted but did not know it) have been uilty
of foul play too. Rescued by Edmund who has been hiding ?n the , 323, Parsons, Eliza. THE MYSTERIOUS VISIT: A NOVEL.FOUNDED ON FACT5-
castle to protect her from further parental villainy, her social Brentford, England : P. Norbury, 1802-
'status is now made connensurate with Edmund's rank when he ‘ Modern Reeditions: None
produces proof that Elinor is the natural daughter of a baron.
ANECDOTES OF THO HELL-KNOHN FAMILIES is curio of the Gothic
period. It commences as satire and gives free rein to the
1 Gothic Type: Domestic novel (only Slightly Gdthlti
f Biographical and Research Data: None
a

276 rue FIRST con-ucs i THE FIRST GOTHICS 277
Critical Synopsis: The place and purpose of the mysterious flirtatious ordeal occurs in and around an ancient abbey in
visit seem to be permanently withheld in a novel-that is com- Yorkshire, a ‘venerable pile‘ well-stocked with the furniture of
pletely domestic except for a single Gothic motif, the strange ‘ Gothic romance including, of course, the omnipresent ghost of a
journey. The critical summary of the novel can therefore be wronged relative. The flippant description of the abbey has a
accordingly brief. The characters live in York in the early ' much sharper edge than Jane Austeﬂ'S SD00fl"9 Of 3 _Y@q"l5'te
Eighteenth Century. They are Henry Clifford, an apothecary, , Gothic passage in NORTHANGER ABBEY (See #012), the maiden's mo-
Sarah Dawson, a milliner, their daughter after their marriage, 1 ment before the awesome Gothic building. In Mrs. Patrick's
Georgina, and Dr. Mac Lean, a physician and student of the ‘ 1 treatment of the moment, the shudder becomes an extended smirk
occult. Or. Mac Lean gives Henry Clifford mysterious instruc- QL made up entirely of Gothic cliches. "Nor in the account of thi5
tions which require him to make a northern journey to terminate ' ‘ Gothic structure should be omitted the spacious and awful
in a "mysterious visit.“ From York, the Clifford family proceed ‘ cemetery, where many an abbot and many a nun had mouldered into
north by way of Carlisle and Edinburgh. All we know of this , } dust; but who yet, as thousands will affirm, appear in the same
Quest and its Purposes is carried in Henry's cryptic statement, state as that in which they were buried, and are seen as regular
"I was compelled to take a solemn oath never to reveal the as the owners themselves, together with many other strange ap-
secret instructed to me, to any human being, until liberated pearances, too tedious to enumerate, and unnecessary to men-
fY°m my VOW by the Person to whom I Qave it." This, in essence, tion." Betsey Bolton, the vicar's naughty daughter, will stoﬂ at
is the Gothic core of an otherwise un-Gothic novel. The novel 1 nothing to catch Thomas Grey for herself‘ To deP'lV9 he’ 'lVal-
ends without revealing the place or purpose of the mysterious Mary Morney, of gaining Thomas as her husband Betsey stages
visit and with a series of abstract admonitions to Georgina on \ fainting fits and delivers hysterical reports of seeing the
parental duty. This novel also gives every indication of indif- , ghost of Th0mas's mother gliding through the abbey corridors ﬂﬂd
ference and exhaustion and falls far beneath Mrs. Parsons's best H mumbling admonitions‘against incest. The prospect of marriage
"°'k- ' with his sister is so devastating to Thomas that he departs for
London to take up the life of a rake. Betsey follows him, and
324. Patrick, Mrs. F.C. MORE GHOSTS! London : Minerva-Press for Hil- ’ since she is carrying a child, she is able to further her
llim Li"e, 1798- I ‘ schemes until Mary's brother, Charles Morney, intervenes to as-
Modern Reeditions: None * sert that he too has slept with Betsey and that the child is
Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (artificial terror, nunerous ‘ his. Back at the abbey, a queer tut" Of eVe"t5 "B5 bee" “"f°ld'
@leme"t5 °f 50thiC parody) , ing. Betsey's fiction about an incest-shrieking maternal ghost
Biographical and Research Data: Shepperson, Archibald. ‘Goth- » has become a fact. The figure of Mother Grey l5 l"d9ed @°""tl"9
ic Nonsense,‘ in THE NOVEL IN MOTLEV: A HISTORY OF THE the abbey, but instead of warning$ Of l"€95t» her "a'"l"95 3'9
BURLESOUE NOVEL IN ENGLISH. Cambrid e, MA : Harvard UP, 1936, directed against the conniving Betsey. Nor is she a ghost after
pp.154-I81; Tarr, CATHOLICISM IN GOTHIC FICTION, pp.5O, 51, ‘ all, but an escaped nun come back to shield her son from a match
52, 59, 69, 106; Lévy, LE ROMAN 'GOTNIQUE“ AHGLAIS, pp.449, with the wrong woman. Rewards and punishments are distributed,
450, 456, 473, 487-488, 516. ‘ spectral appearances and 9h°5tlY 5°""d$'9XPlil"Ed,_a"d TOQWB5
, Grey's future happiness assured in the bosom of the right wife.
Critical Synopsis: Although the novel bears a mock-Gothic ti- A plethora of swoons, quivers, fainting 5D@ll5, i"d l"te'Vl§"5
tle followed by a satiric forewarning in the preface that her with apparitions punctuates the plot and reaffirms the promise
book is 'a burlesque upon the multitude of ghosts and mysteries ‘ of the title of ‘more §h°5t5-“ B"! "°t EVE" 5 Steady B¢C"@"la"
which have excited public curiosity in plays and novels for some tion of overdone Gothic horrors all undercut by _"F$- Pit"Ck'5
years past," the text itself was accepted as highly Gothic. The ‘ mordant tone could preV9"t "Br Vﬂ'°dY 7'0" BEING dEV0"tlY BC-
Philadelphia publisher, Caritat, quickly brought out an American - cepted as pure Gothic by the dedicated Minerva clientele.
edition. Apparently, MORE GHOSTS! was marketed as both a genuine
Gothic and as a lanpoon, and since the characters, events, and ‘ 325. Peacock, Thomai L0v€- HEADLUNG "ALL- L°"d°" I T- Hﬂﬂkhﬂms 13-
settings of the novel closely approximate the qualities of ser- 16.
ious Gothicism, Hrs. Patrick's burlesque of the conventions ' Modern Reeditions: E.P. Button. 1951, Ed- P-"- Y3'k°'-
could be mistaken for authentic terror. Both young women in the ' Gothic Type: Gothic parody (also satirizes other romantic at-
story have pretensions to Gothic heroineship, while the young , titudes toward nature and architecture)
man, Thomas Grey, seems to have designed his character in ac- ‘ Biographical and Research Data: Read, 5lll~ "T"°ma5 L°'e Pea‘
cordance with the hereditary discouragements and alarms of young ‘ cock: An Enumerative Bibliography," BULLETIN OF_BIBLIOGRAPHV,
Edmund Twyford in Clara Reeve's OLD ENGLISH BARON (see #355). 24 (1963-1964): 32-34, 70-72, 88-91; Plnkuﬁ, Phl]lP- ‘The 5°-
The burlesque cleverly reverses the standard conditions of - tiric Novels of Thomas Love Peacock," KANSAS QUARTERLY, 1
G°t"l¢ misery ﬂ"d mﬂtTim0"y- Instead of one young woman being Q (1969): 64-76; Garside, Peter. "HEADLONG HALL Revisited,‘
sought after by two men of contrasting moral character, young ' Q TRIVIUM, 1 (1979)1 107'125- I
Grey is sought after by two women of opposite natures, the self- Iii _
less Mary Morney and the selfish Betsey Bolton. The young man's ~§j Critical Synopsis: Nearly devoid of plot, Peacock s novels

79 THE FIRST ooruzcs _ THE FIRST GOTHICS 27’
are crazy forums of disconnected conversation. Much of the other. Peacock's expertise in exposing Gothic sham is evident
torrent of inane talk debunks the attitudes of his Romantic con- ' throughout the novel. Noticing a darkclad $tFB"9e' §E3Ped 1"
tenporaries toward nature, architecture, and self. Peacock also 1 menacing posture at H table, 5CYthF°P 15 ab°"t t° 'e°°‘1 1" tea]
singles out various prominent literary personalities of the day , ror in the prescribed Gothic manner when the terror Isl oh
for specific raillery. Thus, among the talkers we find the unin- ‘ undercut: "The eyes Of the 5t'e"9e' a1°"e ?e'e "5'b]e' A ft e
telligible metaphysician, Mr. Panscope (Coleridge), and Mr. rest of the figure was muffled_and mantled in the folds g ?
Cranium, the notable ossuarian (or bone expert), "seated, in a 5 I black cloak, "tit" "35 ralsedv by the "9ht h?"d’ to the eve
pensive attitude, at a large table, decorated with a copious i i of the eyeS- The 5tFi"9eT 'eVea1ed t° the aSt°"'Shed Scythr°p~tﬁ
variety of skulls.“ These intellectual maniacs are joined by ‘ female form and countenance of dazzlinﬂ 9'eCe a"d bea“tY~ W‘ f
other lunatic talkers, among them the genius in the lost art of ‘ long flowing hair of raven blackness, and large black eyesh 0
turkey-stuffing, Hr. Gaster, and two demented figures of exce5- almost oppressive brilliancy.f 0n another pdge, 35 the metep {§'
sive sensibility whose very nanes conjure up Gothic gloom, Mr. l’ ical lunatic, Mr. Flosky» Wedltetes el°"d»_ the dg°' 5' e"it%
Nightshade aha Miss Philomela Poppyseed. These Quests are gath- opened, and a ghastly figure. shr°"de9 1" "hlte '°P°'Ya “ nd
ered for a Christmas holiday of uninterrupted nonsense at Head- the semblance of a bloody turbo" 0" its head, _entere 4 E r
long Hall, the eccentric country seat of an equally eccentric stalked slowly up the ePartme"t-" Peac°Ck 5 moit dlrectssneﬁ e
host, Harry Headlong, esq. Everyone engages in his or her own V at the Gothic is reserved fﬂr the nevi?‘ hablts of they trig
mad monologue with the preposterous extremes of Gothic language t Glowry himielf Whe" he '5 5"°"" *etlT1"Q 5° the 5°: “E5 ESE
and landscape frequently heard either above or below the general * t0WeF, Which W35 '"l"""§ §"d full 07 "W15, there |° _ag§RID
chaos of voices. Hr. Milestone's nebulous commentary on the restlessly With 5" ed‘t‘°"_°f the Marquls V0" Gross? S b1e
sublimity of medieval ruins is a good exanple of the shafts of MVSTERIES (see #153) under his pillow, ﬂ"d t? d'e§m 9 venera
wit which Peacock delivers against the Gothic fashion: "Here is ' eleutherarchs and 9"e5tlY °°"fede'aEe5 h°1q'"9 m'd"'ght Cogvegg
Littlebrain Castle, a Gothic, moss-grown structure, half-bosomed tions in subterranean caves.“ Glowry S readlng tastes N?EiTMARE
in trees. Near a casement of that turret is an owl peeping from further description. Hit" 51] °€ ‘ti Sat'r1c gusto’ d ~ n_
that ivy.‘ Mr. Milestone's morbid outburst seems a precise ‘ ' ABBEY had the §eFl0"5 elm °f Cheeklnﬂ the dark"e55 an mlsa
caricature of the starting sentence of a thousand Gothic opening t t thrﬂpy Of m°d@T" llte“°t“'e“ a"d Stopping the further Spread of
paragraphs. Peacockian comedy is critical and educative comedy.
He obviously regarded the growth of the Gothic as one of the
the Gothic virus.
Romantic imagination's most ridiculous by-products. He uses ‘ii 327. Peacock, Thomas Love. CROTCHET CASTLE. London : T. Hookham,
le"9hter as a derisive therapy to expose what he calls "the - » 1331- .
bidities of modern literature, and to let in a little dayl?3ht ,* Modern Reeditions: Holt, Rinehart, Hinston, 1971, ed--Ch6Fle5
on its atrabilarious complexion." | 7 B. D0d50"-
Gothic Type: Gothic parody
ceeg»~€§
326. Peacock, Thomas Love. NIGHTMARE ABBEY. London 1 T. Hookham Jr. 35 Biosravhi¢al and Research Data: Hewitt. Dvvula$- "E"t@'tei"'
and Baldwin, crad0¢k, and J9 1315_ ’ ‘ E ing Ideas: A Critique of CROTCHET CASTLE," ESSAYS IN CRITIT
Modern Reeditions: E.P. Dutton, 1961, ed. P.M. Yarker; Holt, §= CISM. 20 (1970): 200'2125 But]er' Mar1]y“‘ PE:CocKKDIS:L2:E?'
Rinehart, Hinston, 1971, ed. Charles B. Dodson. l Tl A SATIRIST IN HIS CONTEXT London = Routle ge, ego ,
Gothic Type: Gothic Parody l ;i 1979.
Biographical and Research Data: Dra er, John H. "The Social t i _ .
Satire of Thomas Love Peacock,"pMODERN LANGUAGE NOTES, as ’ ﬂritical Synopsis: As in the previous novels, "Eh Peicgﬁfé
(1918): 456-463; 34 (1919): 23-28; Strauss, P. “Escape from there is no discernible Pl°t- Instead, the story is $ Pge ire
NIGHTMARE ABBEY?" THEORIA, so (1968): ss-as of eccentric peP50"elltle5 9"t@'¢e1"ed it ‘"6 °a$t‘°. Q "“( r
crotchet, an equally peculiar and crotchety host. Dia gaues ‘gt
Critical Synopsis: Hith its mockery of bombastic shocker ti- more accurately, l"teT5Pe'5ed mad_m9"°199“e5).p§rmea e 1 E1 pth
tles, stampeding rhetoric of horror, and absurd emotions, and allow each character to exhibit his oddities. By 33 , h 3
NIGHTMARE ABBEV is a more eXplicit burlesque of Gothic tenden- year of CR0T¢HET CASTLE's publication, the °9‘"‘° d's:§Si the
cies than its forerunner, HEADLONG HALL (see #325). The corro- subsided as social normality and C0Ck"eY_Fe3l‘5m Teizf" d° its
siveness of its satire also calls to mind the aggressive flaying house Of fietl°"- He"Ce- te"e' b?'b? a9a‘"$t th? $° QC gqitica]
of the Gothic seen in Barrett's THE HERUINE (see I026). The defects may be meoti0ﬂed- Principally a SOC13f anh o it is
slight plot is framed as a talkative gala at country home and Father the" 6 llteTiT¥ §et1Te, the M310? thrust o f E iess as
features inane fragments of frantic conversation by characters a9el"5t mlddleclass m‘5§°“ce°t'°"§ °€ the cult at pang] ica1
jntended to represent the leading Romantic intellectuals of Pea- reflected in the worship Qt, 5cle"t'f1C §"d d- ac “°‘°%i°nS
cock's era. The son of the party's host, Hr. Scythrop Glowry, is gadgetry ﬂﬂd Be"t"emlte “tl“ta"a“‘§m as ‘mne Iatetao ud at
Shelley; the morbid Hr. Cypress is Byron; the incomprehensible for all social problems. Nnong the terminal talkeT$ 95 areoued
Mr. Flosky is Coleridge. Each of these characters indulges in Cretthet castle "9 fi"d Mr- S¥‘°"3' (C°1?r‘d9e)‘ Mr‘ igorul!
his own bizarre monologue as everyone tries to out-talk each (ﬂ"! P'°§'e55iVe 5E°tt‘5“ e°°"°m‘5t)’ Mr’ F1redamp (a me

280 '
THE FIRST GUTHICS 1 THE FIRST GOTHIES 281
°9lSt), Sir Simon Steel r
h°;tMai,ect1y recalls thg §:;,:c:9:;; fzggzcféi::@°§":;:¢tE;t:hg ; 329._ Picker59ill, Joshua, Jr. THE THREE BROTHERS: A nonnucc. London
is r. Chainmail f ' ' : John Stockdale, 1803.
medieval romance. T": ygﬁ:g1::€;A “Egg; Edgggsée ang gefender of Modern Reeditions: None
Bﬂdgo, generate ggme iaughter ’at the ex 3 anf '55 T°Ych‘ Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (elements of THE MONK, mon-
Gothic heroine's overdone emotions Cha ter Eiile ST the typlcal star story’ transformation motif)
Ruin: and chapter XIV, “The Dingie h srovide i tfhe Like--The Biographical and Research Data: Sunners, GOTHIC QUEST,
€hainmail‘s Gothic contemplations and dark reveﬁigs orgzrggy "bf I pp'276-277'
in s Gothic r ' I
mai]?S recital E? thgseggwﬁg €g];§§ 5n?hgeS$Of?c“sf'“ Mr‘ ChaT"' , ‘ Critical Synopsis: Acknowledged by Lord Byron to be the
Friar," Peacnck's funny gihe at’ a standard O tve D'V'"9 > ' source for his unfinished dramatic fragment, THE DEFDRHED TRANS-
iengthy Gothic romahce_ the interpolated ho: PTECIICQ of the l . FORMED (1822), Pickersgill‘s four volume Gothic is a PerDlexin9
friar looked pale when his error he knew- thergr, a%‘ad- The I ' pastiche of fraternal betrayal, fratricide, Satanic contracts,
and the friar looked biue; anh heels Overhead fr'a't °°ke§ '94- seduction, torture, incarceration, deformity, depravity, and
a rock, he plunged without stoppin to ii }f '9“ he 9°;"t °f nauseous contact with the charnel_ world. Pickersgill also
g Du 0 his fr°ck' occasionally introduces the malignant supernatural as if his
‘ bloated ar osy of Gothic contrivances and effects were not
328. Picard, Mary. THE CASTLE OF R - 9
QVIEGU. OR, RETRIBUTION. London : i already overfull The plot is multiple and a formidable chal-
J. Barfield for J. Booth 1805 .
godern Reeditiuns, "one ’ ' V lenge even to the experienced Gothic reader. Trying to follow
othic Type; gengimeht - v the story, the rea er of then or now might find himself resort-
Biographical and ReSea:lhG3§:;? §:;::l;ffE3QH}°"d§¢@P@§l * ing to Parolles's complaint in ALL‘S HELL THAT ENDS HELL, "Hho
' ’ C QUEST» P-35- cannot be crush'd ‘with a plot?" The stories of the three
Critical Synopsis; ph Sicaii 5 - brothers are not narrated separately but in convergent-divergent
gughic romahce in fohg vo]umgs §$€:g:gh ta: aﬁlzqghtly made segments which often begin in the middle. abort without warnin9-
prlﬂted yariu“S]y as -piCkah- oh geverah of the t_t]0 S nane is I and resume just as suddenly. If there is such a thing as the
castie of Roviego,s gloomy Charms "the r 1‘ E pages. The l peerless anti-structure in the field of the Gothic novel,
hithih its wa]]s." give this Radclifféan imitai ue vscenes acted 1 i Pickersgill has certainly achieved it in THE THREE BROTHERS. But
Actign commences aboard the galley of Don Anto";°"dlt5 grandeur. 1 J‘ in spite of the frustratingly entangled Plot, the book is full
of Rialves, during the reign of Philip II or S 9 E L°"ﬂ, Count of astonishingly good Gothic moments and effects, some of these
the Count'5 Qniy SD", is th1d by a mysteriUuga'"_"he" Alf°"$°, i . on a par with the pornographic atrocities of Pickersgill's model
to Rosalia, do not quit her-H Heedihg the voice Vance t° 'et"'" and master, Monk Lewis. The three brothers comprise:a sort of
lands near paiermo ahd hastens to the ﬁastle of=Ro ? Y°":9 ma" unholy trinity of hatred, debaucherJ= and warned ﬂmbli10"- _TheY
tique, ha1f_des°]ated mansion whose heavy ates "V eg°, B" §"- are the natural (or Perhabs unnatural) sons of the Harquis de
d,ffich1ty Oh the rusty hgnges to recgive thbw urned with Souvricour and are named Arnaud (alias _Julian), Louis (alias
gueSts_h The usual mysteries and Shrprises accum ]e€r unexﬂected / Claudio), and Henri. The brothers have aPParently been separated
¢0mh5 the ruins and finds or is give" clues thgtahe a: Alfonso at birth and kept apart by their father for secret reasons ex-
50mEhow responsible for Rosalials disappearance ‘5Thathe'_‘5 I cept for Arnaud who is retained by the Marquis as a family pet.
Angela, the matroniy Sighora Tnrahci and Father An; I 9 mild. r Because Arnaud's tale is the central story. any understandin9 of
q,St,hct]y Gothic peuple in their wigdom and Su erstetmo are all , the careers of Claudio and Henri must be obtained by way of
Its. Although there are 5°"! shperhatura‘ e isog €h'°“5, "ab" 1 Arnaud's adventures. This is not easy, however, since Arnaud's
MUCH villainy or active evil ih this hove] gar mssh fe;: '5 "ot , story is not where the novel starts, but is placed inside the
§PPears to be an exercise in grand and gloomy Gbthi l ed buck » wanderings of Claudio who has been captured by his other brother
lng. And instead of nnnkish fiehdishhess and deceit C an 5“aP- I ‘ Henri during a battle and made a prisoner. Throughout the novel,
priest whose ingeiiectuai fhhctioh throu bout S * “E ave B Q brother will incarcerate brother until we finally come to that
utterance of grand dgigtic sentiments At tag r gems t° be the f familiar place of murder and satanic conclave, the remote cave.
and Rosalia, Father Anselmo praises the coura eeuhigh og Alfonso 3 To straighten out this twisted plot, Arnaud's life will be
P90ple and draw; 3 deistic m°ra]_- ht Rovie ogcagtl e "° Y°""9 E; sunned up as a unit, although it should be understood that these
learned by persistehce "to tread this tgeatr :1 Y°?t@ has tf> details must be accumulated by the reader in fragmentary form
grandeur, and view it with calm and philosophic ego a":L""°t°d 1”} from within the plot-perplex. As as handsome young man, Arnaud
Paﬂdlng the heart and naturally turnin it to yea Us ex‘ ;"l had been taken by brigands, injured, and is now a physical mon-
ﬂrthitect, whose wisdom piahhed this vohdegful m "3? 5 the 9'§5t ,1 strosity ' "deformed by a crooked back. and _an excrescent
lions of other worlds far beyond the reach 3? Que §“d $11‘ E' shoulder." Spurned by all, the hunchbacked Arnaud determines to
ken." A true Gothic, however, should probabiy not be“; ]Tp§r ect = 5 trade his soul to Satan in return for restored physical beauty.
ly or so devoted to a beneficently divine ow b ' 0 e1sure_ '? The devil obliges, presents Arnaud with a beautiful new body and
ations of the universe. P er eh1nd the °pe" " new name (Julian), but demands that his old deformed body be
- left in the cave where Arnaud had made contact with Satan. In

292 THE FIRST GDTHICS ' THE FIRST GOTHIC5 293
the shape of Julian, Arnaud is now at liberty to infiltrate the tague Summers in A GOTHIC BIBLIOGRAPHY, but some bibliographical
lives of his brothers and produce whatever sadistic-mischief he confusion remains. The fact that THE NOVICE bears the signature,
can. Both Claudio and Henri are "entertained" by their erstwhile "Matthew Moral, esq." suggests the soberly didactic direction
brother now become a "son of Satan" within a gruesome mansion. which Mrs. Pilkington gave to her rewriting of Mrs. Radcliffe's
Henri is forced to occupy a torture chair, then teased to the J THE ITALIAN (see #350). Another transparent borrowing for her
Point of sexual exhaustion by Lady Laurina, Julian's own private story is Owenson's THE NOVICE OF ST. DOMINICK (see #312). Her
diable amoureux. The explicit salaciousness of this scene 1 Gothic is a very stagnant and moralized version of the misfor-
strongly suggests that Pickersgill was not just responding to tunes of Mrs. Radcliffe's Ellena di Rosalba. The villainous
Matilda's seduction of Ambrosio in THE MONK (see #244), but also 1 monk Father Lentonini, is Schedoni deprived of most of his
that he was consciously using techniques of erotic excitation ‘ power to frighten Simply by "13 PF959"Ce in the 5°e"e- 5°thiC
discovered in De Sade's JUSTINE (1791) and JULIETTE (1794). The novels with a moral intent could succeed if the novelist was
Gothic motifs of the novel finally converge in a grandiose skilled at balancing terrors against the ethical education of
finale during the rendezvous of the three brothers within Jul- ' the maiden entrapped by her own misconceptions and many good
ian's diabolic cave. Before the Inquisition can overtake him Gothics exploited this combination. But where the moralistic
Julia" "55 Planned to return to the cavern and retrieve his old motive dominates as it does in THE NOVICE, the "Gothic" portions
bodily identity if Satan will permit him to become Arnaud again. of the novel lose all of their force.
The fee that Satan exacts for this transfer is the blood of a
blood brother. It is now Claudio's turn to experience Julian's 3 G 331. Pilkington, Miss. THE SUBTERRANEAN CAVERN: OR, THE MEMOIRS OF
'i1@0@$$- Claudio is seized and taken to the cave far the l ANTOINETTE 05 MONFLORANCE. London ; Minerva-Press for Hilliam
sacrifice, but Julian has been detected in the act by the pursu- ‘ I Lane, 1798.
ing ‘HEHTT who follows his brothers to the cave intent on Modern Reeditionsr None
committing a double fratricide. But Henri bungles the plan and Gothic Type: Sentimental and Grotto Gothic
is soon in Julian's grip as he prepares to stab Henri instead of Biographical and Research Data: Tarr, CATNOLICISM IN GOTHIC
claudie for the blood payment. Hhile Julian is engaged in forc- FICTION, po.2O, 24, 44. 47, 48, 105; Lévy, LE ROMA"
ing Henri to desecrate God before his death so that he will go ‘ “GOTHIOUE" ANGLAIS, 462, 610, 623.
directly to Hell and while stabbing him gradually to let the . .
blood out slowly, Claudio wounds Julian with a pistol shot, The Critical Synopsis: The novel bears some comparison nil" La-
wounded Julian has failed to complete the transfer back to his ‘ thom's MIDNIGHT BELL (See #227) published in the same year. In
old body, the officers of the Inquisition enter with a portable Lathom's Gothic, the Reign of TETFOF fi9UTE$ 1"!" the D10t 1" B"
rack, and the date for Julian's public burning is announced. The anecdotal and episodic way. In THE SUBTERRANEAN CAVERN, the
surviving brother, Claudio, is still a bad man but is also the I Gothic subject is the Revolution itself and its effect on those
best of the three brothers. He decides to redeem himself and his i sensitive young minds caught up i" if5 fUFy- The aCti°" Com‘
family by rededicating his love to Camilla, a persecuted young » § mences in the late sumner of 1789 and ends just before the
woman who has been enduring her own series of travails during “ bloodiest events of the Revolution with the heroine's arrival in
the novel. Raped by a moor, she now wanders alone having been i Qgyer an May 3, 1792. However, the historical chronology is
made to watch as her illegitimate black child was dashed to pretty badly snarled since the memoirist is an eye witness to
pieces. against a wall by peasants. The cruel death of her baby the September Massacres, the Ninth of Thermidor, and the events
has driven her mad, but the reformed Claudio promises to care of the Reign of Terror. Three of the four volumes of the novel
for her anyway. Pickersgill's lengthy and confusing Gothic de- consist of letters from Antoinette de Monflorance to her en-
monstrates the tendency of Gothic imitators to pack or crowd lightened English friend, Louisa Clarence. Each letter is a
their works with all of the diablerie and erotic sensationalism reflection on the Revolution in France with accompanying polit-
that had made THE MONK such a shocking success. Adherents of the ical observations on the futility of violent social change and
Gothic desired and expected complicated plots, but even the most the monstrosities of Republicanism. In a late letter, Antoinette
demanding Gothic reader must often have lost the way through cries out: "Robespierre, Marat, and their accursed coadi"t°'5
Pi¢k9'59i11'5 miZE- Q and disciples,--Unhappy France! Deluded, devoted country, thus
to chafe with impolitic cruelty the best and loveliest of her
330. Pilkington, Mary, THE NOVICE: OR, THE HEIR OF MONTGOMERY CAS- children." Yet, the novel is no conservative defense of monarchy
TLE. London : Minerva-Press for A.K. Newman, 1814. -v and aristocracy since the revolutionary point of view is treated
M°der" Reed‘t'°"51 N°"e it with equal sympathy. Rather, the work is a fascinating experi-
5°thiC TYPE: Sentinental Gothic (Radcliffean imitation) »3' ment in adapting the machinery of Gothic fiction to the fatal
5i°QTﬂPhical and Research Data: Sunners, GOTHIC BIBLIOGRAPHY 9' ideological crosscurrents of the 1790's. Charaéteri ﬂ$5Ume
I p'120' I , -1 strong political positions and speak their minds on a variety of
Ye~ revolutionary issues. For example, the radical democrat, La
Critical Synopsis: The two Pilkingtons, “Miss Pilkington" and 9“ Favriere in a debate with an abbé delivers this indictment: "In
'M'5- Mir! Pilkington" are regarded as separate authors by Mon- if the name of cannon Sense, did you Ch"TC"m9" 5"PPO$9 that Y0"

284 me FIRST curnrcs ‘ me FIRST GDTHICS 295
C°"ld il"aY$ KEEP the human mind in leading-strings? Away; im_ ' of Calvin had made considerable progress in France." Calvin
pose on the credulity of beings, whose understandings are at '(1509-1564) was not even born until the Sixteenth Century, but
least on a level with your own, by your ridiculous mume,y~,.. The k the average Gothic reader discounted such glaring anachronisms.
enlightened aristocrat, Saint-Salaire, eloquently goimters the l The Protestant-Catholic conflict is reflected in the personali-
opinions of La Favriere. Antoinette is part Gothic heroine and ties of the Protestant free—thinking De Courcy and the naive and
part moral philosopher. She is the victim of monastic inprison_ superstitious Catholic piety of Eglantirle. The utterly wicked
ment ("Ah, Louisa! What have I seen except the thick gloomy , monastic characters of the sadistic abbess and the dissolute
walls of this abominable convent“), but she is also the 'spokes- . prelate Father Ignatius, derive directly from Ireland's ABBESS
man for evolutionary social change against the anarchic momentum ‘ (See #158) and Lewis's MONK (see #244). Both of these characters
of the age. Cloister and cavern function throughout the romance T are exposed for their hypocrisies and brought to justice by the
a5 Symbols of ignorance and entrapment by superstition A victim accusing spirit, later revealed as the resourceful rationalist,
of these dark strongholds, the dying nun, Sister Angeline warn; De Courcy in an ingenious Gothic disguise. In run-of-the-mill
the heroine that she must use her intellect if she would avoid I Gothics of‘maidenly persecution by monastic rapists and $911116-
falling into the pit of superstition and ignorance herself ers the young champion silrply frees his inprisoned beloved from
Antoinette is urged to "let the pure flame of rational devotion l the,horrible confines of the monastery or abbey where She has
burn on the altar of a breast unpolluted by guilt and unde- been taken against her will. But here, the Protestant charlpion
praved by superstition." The heroine is no mere reproduction of ‘ of Calvinistic principles which do not yet exist, liberates the
the quaking Radcliffean maiden of the 1790's. The conventional ‘ mind of his beloved Eglantine from its prison of Citlwllc be-
Gothic heroine experiences danger when she explores gloomy cas- liefs_ The Gothic was beginning to show that it Could be 3
tles and desolate abbeys; Pilkington's heroine is caught up in ‘ medium for ideas as well as horrors and thrills, a course of
the dangerous flux of revolutionary ideas and is called upon to I intellectual development which would see its deepest expression
de'"°"5t'ate "er l'9"0l5"l by l"V8StigﬂlZing all of the violent T in the work of the American school of Gothic romance.
Possibilities released by the revolution. Even though the life l .
of Antoinette's aristocratic father has been claimed by the 5 333. Polidori, John Hilliam. THE VAMPYRE. London : Sherwood, Neely,
revolution and despite the fact that she is a hunted fugitive in E ' and Jones, 1819. ,
what has become a haunted or a Gothic society she persists in ‘ Modern Reeditions: Dover Publications, 1955, 94- E-F- Blel‘
her quest for rational answers. In the orthodox Gothic walls ler. Tapﬁngery 1972, ed. Peter Haining; New American
sometimes crumble around the fleeing victims burying them,alive ~ Libtary 1981, eds. Patricia L. Skarda, Nora Crow Jaffe.
In the new political Gothic of this novel, the disintegrative Gothic lype: Prototypical Valmire Tale (GOIMC ¢hi"6°'-e"l1°'
forces of a collapsing society inueril young minds caught in the tion and scenery) ‘
turmoil of revolution. Situated beneath an ancient Parisian c0n- Biﬂgtﬂlllllllial i"d Research Data: Sunlners, Montague. THE VAM-
‘/e"tv the subterranean cavern is both S literal zone of danger PIRE HIS KITH AND KIN. London : Trench and Trubner, 1928;
and_ a metaphor for the obsolete values underlying a decayed ‘ Rpt.,New Hyde Park, NV : University Books. 1955; Vie“, "9""!
social structure. The novel is one of the longest of the Gothics R- ‘The l-°"'1°" Ellltl°"5 °f P°llll°"l'5 THE VMPYRE,‘ PAPERS OF
and must have demanded stout persistence from its first readers THE BIBLIOGRAPHICAL SOCIETV OF NERICA, 63 (1969): 83-103;
In the copy in the New York Society Library's Hamnond Collecl Astle Richard S. "0ntological Ambiguity and Historical Pes-
tion, _ Volume One is 228 pages, Volume Two is 251 pages volume ‘ S'lTIl'lSlll in Polidori's ‘The Vanoyre," THE SPHINX: A MAGAZINE
Three is 252 oases, and volume Four is 303 pages yielding a or LITERATURE AND SOCIETY, 2, number 4, (1977): 8-16-
stunendous total of 1034 pages. ’ I Twitchell James B. THE LIVING DEAD: A STUDY or THE VAMPIRE
2 Hm" t H, . IN Romullic LITERATURE. Durham, NC 1 Duke UP, 1981.
- nNEg on, lss. THE ACCUSING SPIRIT: OR, DE COURCV AND EGLAN- , _ _ _ . .
. London : Hlnerva-Press for Lane, Newman, 1802. 1 Critical Synopsis: The prototypical vanulre Story "I English
Modern Reeditions: None l literature has many points in conlnon with its horrific pre-
Gnhic T-Wei Pm"? °' M9" G°“'l¢ (terror and sentimental ele- decessor the Gothic novel. The Fred"-°'¥ Villlllre BM the Para‘
"'e"t§) sitic Gothic villain are similar demonic creatures; they live in
Bl°9PﬂDhical and Research Data: Tarr, CATHOLICISM IN GOTHIC ' society only in order to live off it and both are what one
FICTION, Pp.9, 26, 39, 46, 64, 68, 108 109' Lévy LE ROMAN ' " critic has called ‘supernatural rapists.‘ But while the Gothic
"GOTHIQUE" ANGLAIS, 404, 410, 413, 417: 418: 553., " villain may still have a soul to lose, his direct descendant,
. . .5 the vanpire is a soulless incarnation of an evil will oP9Y‘ﬂt]"9
Cmlcal Synopsis: A more conventional Gothic than the pre- ~; beyond mortal limits. Most of the classic elements of vampire
ceding SUBTERRANEAN CAVERN (see #331), the romance still mana es i literature in - its Victorian manifestations are already PT@55"t
'3" l""'e'"§e "5 .Y°""9 characters in a web of dangerous idgas in THE VAHPVRE including the vampire 5’¢°Fl!'5 "ipetltlve 5-Y"'b°l5
°b°“t "ell9l°" i"d 5°¢ieY.Y. Here, the controversial background 1 of sexual violence and domestic perversion. Later vampire tales
ls CilVl"l§IIl, eve" "'°"9h the author disregarded historical ' such as Joseph Sheridan Le Fanu's short novel, CARMILLA (1871)
dﬂle§- The Period is "the Fifteenth Century when the doctrines .' and Bram Stoker's DRACULA (1897) would reflect one of Polidori's
ll»

286 i THE FIRST can-ucs THE FIRST GOTHICS 287
most fascinatihg 'h'-'t§t'°"5 of the vanpire superstition. In its to feast on Aubrey's Sister, while Aubrey. hullhd by hi5 Fish
folklore form; Vh"P“’9 '3$Sault is a physical attack in quest of oath, must watch helplessly as the vannire works his will.
the victim's llfe hl°°h~ Literary vamoires, beginning with Poli- Polidori chose the most potent type of ending for his tale of
d0ri'$ Lord R“th"?"= 3'9 not satisfied merely to drain off the terror, the victory of evil, when Aubrey's unbearable oath of
life-supportin9 fh“h§ they must attach themselves to the wills silence causes him to burst a blood vessel and bleed to death.
minds, and s0"l5 _°f their victims to render them spiritually In Polidori's THE VAMPVRE, the .psycho-sexual themes later to
helpless again“ e"fl‘_Th9 llotif of psychological vampirism is 1 emerge as dominant features of this subgenre of Gothic litera-
perhaps more h°"";fY"'9_ than cruder versions of the vampire ture are latently present. These, along with class anxieties and
legend of the 5°“ °u'_'d 1" the Victorian "bloods" such as the social fears over the decadence of aristocratic authority, make
infamous 900-Page "°rkmg"'a"'5 thriller 0'” "Denny dreadful" nov- Polidori's small novel a large and lasting influence among the
El, VARNEV THE vhhpvhh (1847), by Thomas Peckett Prest. Polidor- Gothics of the Regency period.
i‘s short novel ehhh-“ts the theme of psychological vanpirism to
express his feﬂr hhd hohtehlﬂt for his former friend, Lord Byron. 334. Polidori, John Hilliam. ERNESTUS BERCHTOLD: OR, THE MODERN
In this respehtv Th? VAHPVRE resembles Lady Caroline Lamb's - OEDIPUS. London : Longman, Hurst, Rees, Orme, and Brown, 18-
GLENARVON (see #220) since both books were written as acts of 19.
literary revenﬂe agalhit the cold egotist who had paralyzed Modern Reeditions; None
their wills and Sedhced their spirits. That Byron himself angri- Gothic Type: Natural Gothic horror (uses incest motif)
ly denied hi5 hresehce in Polidori's tale ("Damn the 'Vam- Biographical and Research Data: Kaufman, Pamela M. "Oedipus
l_>1re'—-what do I k"°"‘ °f "wires? It must be some bookselling and the Gothic Drama: A Psychologic Study of the Gothic Drama
"'D0$lIure!") Was °f "° “Count. All readers quickly recognized in Eighteenth-Century England," DISSERTATION ABSTRACTS, 31
Lord Ruthven a5 Wd Byrg" and the young man. Aubrey, as the (1970); 2348A (uc1_A>; Skarda, Patricia 1.. and Jaffe. Nora
injured Polidori (hr P°lly Dolly" as Byron had renamed him). Crow. THE EVIL IMAGE. New York : New American Library, 1981,
The events of THE YAMPYRE "hive briskly, suggesting that Polidori p 92.
had studied th¢ 5'11“ "'1""itive methods of the Gothic chapbooks i
The handsome nohlemah °"d_lion of the salons of London Lord Critical Synopsis: Polidori had shovm a marked talent for the
Ruthven, is th°"9h7- at fl"§t to be irresistibly charming,by the short horror tale relying on gory, supernatural incident for its
young man, Aubrey“ he 5t"lk!S up a passionate friendship with shock in THE VAMPYRE (see #333). Thus, when he resorted to nat-
hhthveh ""1 adore? the older "la"- Only Rl|th\/en's "dead grey eye" ural horror rooted in the theme of incest, the result was tur-
disturbs Aubrey Slhhe the Qlltic marks his new friend as aggres- gidity rather than terror. Mary Shelley had subtitled her FRANK-
Sively sinister and "‘-Ystehlﬁus. Aubrey has heard of valrpires but ENSTEIN (see #399) "The Modern Prometheus." Polidori, who had
remains skepticﬂl ahmlh their existence and he fails to perceive resided with the Byrons and Shelleys during the rainy suinner of
ehtlrely the "aura of tn? htldchment that is developing between | ' 1816 at Diodati in Switzerland, probably acquired both his sub-
himself and Ruthveh-_vhhV"lZed without being aware of it, the title and theme of unnatural or monstrous _creation from Mary
young man accihhhhhles l~°"d Ruthven to the continent, quarrels Shelley's monster novel. The "modern Oedipus‘ is the soldier-of-
violently with hm" falls °"l with Ruthven and continues his fortune, Ernestus Berchtold, a basically noble and upright young
travels to Greece» I" Greece, a country where vampires have a man, but subject to attacks of Byronic egotism and destructive
special strengthv hhhhe! fills in love with Ianthe, but before passion. Hith his twin sister, Julia, he has been raised in
the Pair can I"a""-Y- she hevomes the victim of a vanpire: "Upon isolation by the old priest Father Berchtold. His sheltered or
her "e¢|< and breast has MUM» ind upon her throat were the repressed life renders him vulnerable to rapid moral C0"‘uPtiB"
marks of teeth hh"‘"!l °F'@"Ed the vein,‘ with suave solicitude (especially sexual indiscretion) once he has entered the world
Lord Ruthven sudliehly W-‘appears to comfort Aubrey in his despair by joining the army. ln the army, where dangerous friendships
and Aubrey is helpless ti! fend off Ruthven's presence. After are a literary rule in Gothic fiction, Ernestus meets and is
they resume their travels t°9ether, Ruthven is shot mortally by deeply impressed by the Byronic and freeliving Olivieri Doni,
bandits. but attracts h hledge from Aubrey before he dies He whose sister Louisa, is already Ernestus's erotic cormianion.
confesses his cf""e5 ahd "hikes Aubrey swear to keep the secret The Doni family have a reputation for ihl/°lVe"'@"t l" the black
of his dissolule Care?’ ﬁll‘ a year and a day. Following the ex- arts, especially the family Datriarﬂl. Old Filb9"t° h°"l~ "h°5e
Dosure of Lord Rhthveh 5 c°'"9§E T-0 "Kwnlight, a scene in which dealings with the devil are widely rumored. Morally unprepared
Gothic resuscitanhh 5ee"‘§,l10 occur, the body vanishes. Soon re- to resist the blandishments of the evil life represented by the
turning to Londﬂhv Ahhhey ls appalled to notice the dashing Donis, Ernestus marries Louisa and becomes part of the house-
high" Bf l-urd Ruthie" agam "'°Vl"9 thmllgh the driving rooms of hold. Hhen old Filberto Doni gazes upon a portr-ait of 5"I9$tl1$'5
London society. h'“""9 hes‘) unable previously to believe in mother he falls back in horrifieddismay for he sees his former
‘vampires, Auhrey'5 "hash" 15 badly shaken by this cadaverous re- wife. ‘His new son-in-law isactually hi5 bi0l09iCBl. 5°" °" 5
surrection, but fl? nevertheless hides his terror at the prospect "modern Oedipus" morally blind to his incestuous situation. The
of his sister's "hl7'ehdlh9 "Iirriage. His sister's bridegr0om-to- conclusion is clumsy and weak, lacking the cold terror of the
be is, of course- the "aVeh°"§ Ruthven who exults as he prepares mad Aubrey's realization that his rash oath has brought his

l
THE FIRST GUTHICS . me FIRST GDTHICS zas
Elite" tovo velnolre's deadly enhrooe- Following the unexplained Critical Synopsis: The Gothic has retreated well into the
Iegth of his incestuous partner, Louisa, Ernestus -takes up a background to become an effect of scenery and a component of
hi E0 3. desphhdeht Solfthde t° try t0 0VErC0m€ his disgust over aunosphere in this historical tale of the fated Roche-Blanche
hls <1e_;ool who but finds no esoelge from the living hell of family. The decline of the family is caused in part by the vani-
dis .1 9' The death y°t hhhrey lh THE VAMPYRE ahd the Qhiity ties of Eustache de la Marot de Roche-Blanche. Roche-Blanche is
espair hf Erhestus .'h th'5 hovel he'haP5 retieﬁt the i ‘ a weakling who permits his strong-willed and self-centered wife
ﬁsychological lacerations _in APolidori's own personality which I to persecute his stepdaughter and the tale's heroine, Aigline.
lggge “gm to take his °"h ilfe 1“ the Year °t their Dhhilﬁﬂtiﬂﬂ, Aigline's sole comfort in life is the fortifying friendship she
' .RhESTUS BERCHTOLD lacks b°th 3 5tr°h9 Gothic villain and 1 has with Clarence Hilloughby, a locai lad who wishes to become a
6 brooding atmosphhre of 1rrati°ha] fea'- ]t5 dirkE5t Passions n cavalier in the army of Queen Elizabeth I and to serve under the
are °°"cehF'ated ‘h ? "eat °"d $°meWhit Possive Character. Con- gallant soldier, Adhemar de Bourbon. Along with the cruel and
5eh“?ht]y* ‘ts G9th‘c‘$m 15 “"5“¢¢@5$fully blended with the imposing Lady Roche-Blanche, de Bourbon is the novel's most le-
trag1C theme of incest’ l gitimately Gothic character. He is a somewhat sinister mixture
. f kni htl valor and selfishness as his peculiar sexual attrac-
335- P°§teri Anna Maria. THE FAST OF ST. MAGDALEN: London : A. < tion tg Aigline's feebleminded sister, Lolotte, shows. The poli-
Mtgahah f°'_L?"9"a"= Hurst, R995, Orme. and Brow". 1818- tics of the novel revolve around Clarence's use of his compan-
GO eh" Reedltiohsi hhhe . 1 ionship with Adhemar to obtain noble recognition for himself
hthic TYPE: h°th'f'eh h'5t°'Y i from Queen Elizabeth, a ploy which infuriates the Queen and com-
B1°9'aph‘c°] ahd Researth Data! Torr, CATHULICISN IN GOTHIC h promises his friendship with Adhemar. Numerous adversities
FICTION, pp.37, 75, 80. plague Clarence and Aigline after Clarence's unsuccessful at-
- - . . in r nk for himself. Sorrow death, and the dissolu-
"ltlto! 5ynoosls= This well-written historical Gothic has ‘ ‘   wfriehdship darken their livés until Adhemar de Bourbon
Shme s“her‘°r ha’ 5Ce"e§ a"d "$95 the riV51ry °t the Itoiioﬂ V rescues Clarence in battle at the cost of his own life. This
city‘ states of the Sixteenth Century as a field of blood. Ap- ‘ generous act by a none-too-generous knight reconciles the two
ggaqihg as member? hf the G°thiC c§5t are Cesare 5°r9i6 and ‘ men and so inpresses Queen Elizabeth that she grants Clarence
t;:e:|"'l'° Ffe "'@‘!'¢l- I" 1508. e Plson town in the Ilvennines is 4 Hilloughby's petition. Lady Roche-Blanche, who has insisted upon
. 7 °:eht'hE5 and Sacked ""t'] "the Streets are Slippery Aigline's celibacy, defers to Clarence's new rank and allows
with b]°°d' .Appa]]ed at the carhage Ca"59d hY hit 0"" me". the i Aigline to marry him. Anna Maria Porter was the less-gifted sis-
iouhg F]°'e"t'"e ieadera v3]°mhf°5a~ 5h°"§ mercy t0 IPp0lita and I ter of the great historical novelist, Jane Porter. The senti-
her .fathe'* h3'te]7°~ h¥ h9]Pl"9 them to Qolh 5i"Ct"@ry it the mental-historical romances of the Porter sisters are embellished
ermitag? of Sahta h""a' Bht 1" 5 G°t£i¢ "OVB1, o r@1l9i°"5 with Gothic trappings and scenery. Their tense situations and
?g1f1Ce éi seghom a safe Place F°'.th? aide" t° he ahd IDPo1ita \ conflicts, like the tactics of suspense in many of Scott's nov-
Milzggge $r?"gEctAof various Gothic intrigues of the villainous els, derive from the Gothics. _
gelo. From this religious house she is con-
"e-Yed ‘° h'°_"?"~‘5t<'-‘r¥ "F h°"te Wlshono near Milan. a Place ' 331 Porter Jane THADDEUS 0F HARSAH. London : T.H. Longman and 0.
"here ivporitions seem to outnumber the human members of the ‘ l Rees‘ 1302'
3:;{]§?¢:::ltz. Ippolita‘s instincts are those of the standard nodehn Reeditions: None
- er°‘"e' She haikeh as 1" 5 tra"°°1 Thcked "P from H Gothic Type: Historical fiction (periodic Gothic elements)
e'9rYth'"9_9X¢eFt the C°"tEmP1at'°" °t her "V" imiqihitiﬂhi ﬂhd Biographical and Research Data: Sumners, GOTHIC QUEST, pp.66,
retrospections." The novel ends in her release and return to her 99- Hook, A.D. “Jane Porter, Sir Halter Scott, and the His-
home city and to Valombrosa's protection as the Papal armies torical Novel ' CLIO: AN INTERDISCIPLINARV JOURNAL, 5 (1976)
move north ln August, 1512. This romance would be quite an ordi- 131 192 !
nary Gothic without its noteworthy scenes of war and civil 1 - '
butch?r¥ lhheh the C'im5°h 5t°h95 they trod on were lined with Critical Synopsis: Jane Porter's historical fiction remained
the 1‘V‘d h@5P5_°t the $161"-" But its friqhtful scenes of continuously in print throughout the Nineteenth Century. Her
"°"9"t°' '"°'<@ "= Whehhet exceptional as e Gothified history. l Y rnnootus or HARSAH was published in the midst of the Gothic
. - ' nd r ceded Sir Halter Scott's first novel, HAVERLEV
336. Porter, Anna Maria. ROCHE-BLANCHE: OR, THE HUNTERS OF THE PVR- Thgig) aby apdﬁlen years, Like the later HAVERLEY, THADDEU5 OF
EhEE$' L°"d9".= L°"9ha"- h"r5t- R995, Qrmis ind Brown, 1822. , HARSAH’ is a Bildungsroman or novel of a young man's education
M°dei" Reed't‘°"s§ h°"e . ~‘ and growth. Hhat makes her novel unusual is its resistance to
- Gqthic Tine: G°th'f‘ed h‘5t°'Y Gothic terror for its own sake and its usage of the Gothic as a
Blouroohloel and Research Deter Stevenson. Lionel- THE EN6- vehicle rather than a theme. The result is an excellent histori-
LISH NOVEL: A PANORAMA. Boston, MA : Houghton-Mifflin, 1960, i cal novel with subordinated Gothic properties which stress the
p'183' issue of historical forces which the book raises. Passing
‘ through a dangerous series of hardships and exiles, the young
288 i

29" me rmsr GOTHICS mi rum GOTHICS 291
soldier, Thaddeus Sobieski, grandson of the great Polish warrior Critical Synopsis: A bibliographical example of an English
king, John Sobieski, joins the forces of the Count Palatine and free translation and adaptation of a German terror tale of Veit
King Stanislaus to repulse the Russian invader. But instead of , Heber (G.P.L.L. H‘chter)- Veit UBb8T'5 5A9E" DER VQRZEIT (LEG-
"l""l"9 liberty for beleaguered Poland, Thaddeus is nearly cap- ENDS OF ANCIENT TIMES) was frequently mined by Gothic source-
tured at the destruction of Sobieski Castle and witnesses a hunters. Like Grosse's HORRID MVSTERIES (see #153) which it re-
crushing Polish defeat. Retiring to England, the young man dis- sembles in points of tone and action, HOLF graphs the dark ac-
covers a lost English legacy and applies his Polish patriotism I tivities of the secret Fehmic Court and a young man's desperate
in vother spheres. The self-education of Thaddeus is etched V entan9l@m9"t I" its l"te'"ati°"a] “eb'
against a background of national violence and conquest with the ;
Polish material recalling the Slavonic Gothic of Mary Charle- - 340. POHIS CASTLE: 9R, ANECUOTES OF A“ ANTIENT [sic] FAM1Lv' L°"d°"
ton's PHEDORA: OR, THE FOREST OF MINSKI (see I063). But Porter's : H. Lane, 1788.
work provided the new historical branch of Gothic fiction with Modern Reeditions: None
the impetus needed to assert itself as an independent genre. Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (terror mode, satiric ele-
nents in the early chapters)
338. Porter, Jane. THE SCOTTISH CHIEFS. London : T.N. Longman, Biographical and Research Data: None
Hurst, Rees, and Orme, 1810. ’
Mudern Re9dltl°"5I "ﬁne Critical Synopsis: The novel begins as a burlesque of absurd
G . , , _ _ _ _ V _ v _
othic Type: Historical novel (intemittent Gothic elements) Gothic building conventions and aims some clever shafts of wit
Biographical and Research Data: Stevenson, Lionel. THE ENG- at the berserk characters and architectural oddities of the
LISH NOVEL: A PANORAMA. Boston, MA : Houghton-Mifflin, 1960 emergent Gothic craze. There are also some strong reminders in
p.183; Hook, A.D. "Jane Porter, Sir Halter Scott, and the the early chapters of the delightful lunacies of Sterne's TRIS-
Historical Novel," cue; AN INTERDISCIPLINARY JOURNAL, 5 (19- ’ TRAM SHANDY (1762) in the illogical banter and behevivr 0‘ "ls
75): 181'192- impoverished baronet, Sir Halter Powis, whose father, Sir God-
_ _ , ' frey, rode after hounds and women and dissipated the family for-
Critical Synopsis: The work of Jane Porter seems to be the tune in attaching sham medieval wings to Powis Castle. Sir
transitional link between the Gothified histories of Clara Reeve Halter is preserving the his father's love for graceless archi-
and Sophia Lee and the flowering of the historical novel in the tectural fads by restoring the castle to a sufficient degree of
fiction of Sir Halter Scott. As in THADDEUS OF HARSAH (see ruination and shamble, a vocation which annoys his neighbOT$.
#337). He begin to see the pure historical novel detach itself for "now the castle, which by the best judges was esteemed the
from cumbersome Gothic machinery to become a form in its own finest piece of Gothic architecture extant in England was gone
right. The historical romance is set in medieval Scotland and v terribly into decay." Hithin his “snug villa,‘ the modern
follows the career of the Scottish patriot, Hilliam Hallace ‘ upstart, Mr. Fleming sneers at Sir Halter's shabby medievalism.
from the murder of his wife by the English governor, Heselrigge: Complementing the eccentricity of Sir Halter and providing some
at Lanark in 1296 to Hallace's own execution in 1305 in the Shandyesque humor in the early chapters is his Gothic uncle-in-
cause of Scottish independence. Porter's revolutionary chronicle residence. 5 C°nstituti°"allY m°rbld °b5@FVeF i"d Vﬂ"deFeTi L°'d
also bears some comparison with the political themes of Matu- I Hentworth. As if gathering material for a Gothic novel, ‘he
rin's ~MlLESIAN CHIEF (see #267) of 1812 and Sidney owenson-S wQu]d wander for hours in the ivy-covered recesses which
HILO IRISH GIRL (see #313). Porter ends the novel with a patri- i surrounded the castle listening to the pensive note of a soli-
otic description of the defeat of the English by Robert Bruce at tary owl." The novel turns suddenly and irreversibly Gothic
the Battle of Bannockburn in 1314, a decisive victory for the dropping lt5 Sﬂllrlc I0"E E"tlTElY "P0" the arrival °f the
Scots. Lionel Stevenson's judgement of the transitional Gothi- malicious Count Parmeni. He plots to dbdutt Lady Julia 3"d
cism of the Porter sisters and their inportant impact on Scott's resorts to all of the approved Gothic machinations to enact his
novels seems balanced enough. "The best romantic novels of the plans. The collision of virtue and vice takes place in the
decade preceding Scott were those by two sisters, Anna Maria and castle garden where Sir Halter discovers Parmeni threatening
Jane Porter. They tried to give genuine historical accuracy and Julia with assault. Satan is expelled from the Powis paradise
local background to their fiction, and avoided excessive use of ' with a crash of rhetorical thunder from Sir Halter. "The monster
te"°'-" of iniquity, unable to stand the keen reproaches of the injured
‘ pair, slunk away like the guilty fiend from paradise.“ Although
339. Powell, James. HOLE: OR, THE TRIBUNAL OF BLOOD. London : John- marred by artistic uncertainty over whether to revert to the
5°"~ 1805- ‘ satiric view of human foibles or to become Gothic fiction, POHIS
- "°de'" Reedltl°"5¢ "°"E , CASTLE stands as curious amalgam of types on the'verge of the
9°thl¢ TyPe: Pure or high Gothic (Schauerromantik elements, ultra-Gothic 1790's.
free translation from Veit Heber) ' '
Biographical and Research Data: Sunners, GOTHIC QUEST pp.86 341. THE PRIORY OF ALBA AND THE CASTLE ON THE CLIFFS: A ROMANCE OF
130- ’ ’ ANCIENT TIMES IN HHICH IS DESCRIBED THE AFFECTING HISTORY or

29? TI-E FIRST GDTHICS ‘ me Fmsi cornzcs 293
HORATIA, THE ONLY DAUGHTER OF THE COUNT OTTAGIA, AND THE AD- i maiden or young chanpion in search of some terrible secret of
VENTURES OF THE BRAVE LEANDER. London : J. Bailey, n_d_ heritage eventually comes. Proby's manipulation of the device is
"°der" Reediti0"$1 "one , not distinguished. In separate episodes within the triple-decker
Gothic Type: Gothic chapbook romance, Theodore and Adele come upon the sealed entrance to the
Biographical and Research Data: None h tomb of an ancestor. The breaking of the seal or the penetration
_ of the forbidden door has some explicit sexual connotations in
Critical Synopsis: The reader of this 24-page chapbook priced ' idter Gethie tieti°"- it i5 ""9 °f th°5e G°thic acce55°'i95
at six pence could hardly complain of lack of violent action or which possesses such powerful symbolic qualities that it out-
outrageous happenings for there seems to be at least one Gothic ia$t$ the 9e"re t° beeeme e uiefhi PFOP i" Virtﬂridh "°Vei$ 0‘
death per page. Frequently, the characters expire from no visi- mystery and works of modern horror. But Proby's handling of the
ble cause and for no visible reason as does the Countess Justi- dreadful deer d°e5 "Qt EVE" Ceme "P te the ievei et deiiCi°"9
na's companion, Corinna, upon noticing ‘a lifeless female, well- shudder or trembling anticipation which it normally reaches in
bled.“ "She gasped,--gave a piercing shriek, and expired," SQmQ_ the routine Bothics of the period. Hhere a Gothic mechanism is
times, the news of one death instantly precipitates another as merely reduplicated without some enthusiastic twist or varia-
when Countess Justina hears the will of the murdered Count '. tion, it usually fails to alarm and delight.
Ottagia read aloud. Having served her role in the plot, the Goth
sinply blots her out with another sudden death: "She sprang from - 343. Proby, William Charles. THE SPIRIT OF THE CASTLE. London : J.H.
the couch with an energy inspired by the occasion; but the i Myers for Crosby and Letterman, 1800.
exertion was fatal to her." The plot is connnnplace and hardly Mederh Reediti°"5= "°"e
matters among all of these dozens of deaths. The daughter of the Gethiﬁ TYPEI Pure Or hi9h G°thi¢ iterr°r “°de- Radci‘ffea"
dead Count and Countess is Horatia, “a second Helen." Her pur- , imitation) '
suer is the Marquis Ernestus of Villa del Terra who is assisted Biegrdphiedi dhd Resedrﬂh Ddtdi LeV¥= LE Rouhh "GDTHIQUE"
in his villainy by a detachnent of thirty-six Greyfriars operat- ANGLAISU PP-404, 493» 411- 412, 413, 452, 457, 557-
i"9 out of the Priory of Alba. At one point, the Marquis appears . .
to burglarize and burn his own castle. Despite her desperate critical 5¥"°P$i91 uiiiidm Charie5 Pr°b¥ "55 d" dhtiqhdridh
situation, Horatia can depend upon the young man, Leander, to and classical scholar of good reputation. He had edited Pope's
hasten to her rescue on page 23. This Leander swims no Helles- ‘ translation of the ODYSSEY and Dryden's translations of _Vergil.
pont; he does, however, save Prior ﬂatholdi from an overturned Hi5 dbiiitie5 d5 d iiterdry $¢h°idr 9iVe t0 hi5 Gethityihq d
gondola, an unfortunate beau geste as it turns out since the certain stylistic polish not often seen in the loose flowing
Prior survives to become a thoroughly nasty brand of Gothic 5Y"tdX er 5° md"¥ Gethie "°Vei5 at the e"d °f the ce"t?'Y' A
m°"k- Hi5 detivitiés against Horatia and other helpless maidens respectable if conventional Gothic in the Radcliffean tradition,
Seen to justify the chapbooker's crude moral as stated on the THE SPIRIT OF THE CASTLE allows the heroine, “the amiable Cecil-
title page: ‘The sacred walls of a monastic seclusion are too i3»“ her quetd Of h¥5teriCdi ¢h6"eE$ before hri"9i"9 her te her
often the repositories of other hearts and minds of those de- 5e"$e§ ﬂhd re""iti"9 her With her i°$t i°Ver, Henri, Vh° "DEX-
voted to religion and its exercises. Ambition and revenge are , plainably wanders around Normandy for much of the novel. The
often to be found in them in their most luxuriant growth." Chap- ‘ tale begins in the Ardennes Forest in 1572 when Cecilia is
book readers cared neither for the moral nor for the little forced to leave the mansion of her benefactor. the Count
Gothic's flaws, but they simply devoured each death aha revelled ‘ Wnceroche to undertake a Gothic Journey to solve the riddle of
in the string of shocks. her identity. Innediately seiled and carried into a gloomy man-
sion by bandits, she encounters the mysterious young man,
342. Proby, Hilliam Charles. THE HVSTERIOUS SEAL. London = Hestley I Bertrand. "a nan in whose rnind avarice and benevolence oreiion—
1799- ' derated." Most of the novel consists of just such seizures and
Modern Reeditions: None ~ mysteries, so many in fact, that after several hundred pages the
Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (terror mode) ' reader is hard pressed to tell which castle houses the spirit of
Biographical and Research Data: Lévy, LE ROMAN “GOTHIQUE“ the ti’=i@- "hcrcvcr She is ioeked "P- Cecilio $@°'@“Y °"J'°Y5
ANGLAIS, p.482. ' 4 all of the Gothic perils and always "plainly distinguishes
_ _ _ footsteps in the superior part of the castle" or hdetermines to
Critical Synopsis: A Minerva-Press novel of I799 by Mary explore the mansion to which she was now confined, hoping to
Charleton, ROSELLA: on, noozan occunmzucts (see #064) has among i discover the moans of effecting her escape-" Proby sets cred"
its occurrences the heroine's arrival before a sealed portal for one new acoustical gadget which seems to enter the repertory
"hlth she has been told to avoid. Proby's work appears to Qgpy » of shocks with this novel. In every castle Cecilia visits, she
and repeat this standard Gothic moment. The invitation to terror ' is victimized by the self-closing or self-opening door. Finally
posed by the forbidden portal that has been closed forever found reunited with Henri, the pair are startled to hear a great iron
its way Into the furnishings of many Gothics early in the his- door clang Shut behihd them 35 they descend i"t° the mertﬂdry
tory of the genre. It is always to such a door that the Curious crypts of the last of the novel's castles. Knowing that there IS

294 rm: FIRST can-ucs TI-E FIRST comrcs 295
no way back, they go deeper "examining several dark dungeons and terror sources, C.R.'s plot is an amalgam of the Germanized
9l°°mY CﬂV9*"5= Where frequently instruments of torture made Gothics of the mid-1790's. Mrs. Parsons's CASTLE OF HOLFENBACH:
them shudder with horror, and where Cecilia often perceived what A GERMAN STORY (see #319) of the previous year and Kahlert's
appeared to be human bones.“ Prone to fainting fits, yet full of NECROMANCER: OR, TALE OF THE BLACK FOREST (see #209) of 1794
GOCNIC‘ curiosity,_ she has had the mandatory encounter with a give C.R. his incidents, settings, and characters. The unre-
portrait come-to-life before taking the requisite subterranean strained supernaturalism appeacs to be the anonymous Goth's way
stroll through _the crypts of the castle to come face to face I of asserting his originality.
with the spirit itself. Hithin this sane castle, Cecilia has
bee" *‘""‘°“‘ *° e"‘°" "W "ester" ﬂvﬂrtrlient. but a door that has is 345. Radcliffe, Ann. THE CASTLES OF ATHLIN AND DUNBAVNE: A HIGHLAND
been forever sealed bars her way. Hhat lies beyond the awful i STORY. London : T. Hookham, 1789.
door is precisely what lies behind the black veil in Mrs. Rad- Modern Reeditions: Arno Press, 1972, ed. Frederick Shroyer.
cliffe s MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO (see #349), an illusion of things Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (terror mode)
5NDeFQBtuPil- "05t Of the ghostly occurrences are clever hallu- A Biographical and Research Data: Summers, GOTHIC QUEST, pp.47,
cinations perpetrated by Bertrand who is revealed to be Cecil- 99 101; Tarr, CATHOLICISM IN GOTHIC FICTION, pp.1, 18, 105;
ia's brother. A fatherly cavalier, the Chevalier de Molette, Foster, HISTORY OF THE PRE-ROMANTIC NOVEL IN ENGLAND, p.266;
also enters the plot wherever it is necessary to guide Cecilia Lévy, LE ROMAN “GOTHIQUE" ANGLAIS, pp.232-237; Murray, E.B.
to safety and restore her reason. Gothic readers demanded this ANN RADCLIFFE. New Vork : Twayne, 1972; Smith, Nelson C.
stoch character who always turned out to be the heroine's "Sense, Sensibility, and Ann Radcliffe,“ STUDIES IN ENGLISH
missing father-_If there is "Ming new in Proby's facsimile of ' LITERATURE, 1500-1900, 13 (1913): 511-590.
Radcliffean Gothic, the formula is still smoothly administered
1" th‘5 e"te'ta‘"‘"9 a"d tidy Gothic. Critical Synopsisi Even in her first novel, Mrs. Radcliffe
began to realize that the great Gothic castle with its hidden
344. THE PROPHETIC HARNING: OR, THE CASTLE OF LINOENDORFF. London : chambers and eerie aliveness would become her most inportant
J’ Ker’ 1800' S I character. The sublime obscurity and remote horrors concealed in
Moder“ Reeditiunsz N°"e the dark terrain surrounding the two castles of Athlyn and Dun-
Gothic Type: Gothic chapbook (terror mode) bayne also take precedence over the characters and become Gothic
B1°graphica] and Research Data: "°"9 personalities in their own right in Mrs. Radcliffe's first
. . _ _ _ Gothic. All of her subsequent Gothic romances are lyric rather
cr't‘ca] 5Y"°P5‘51 Thirty-fﬁur Bf the thlrty-Eight P6995 Of than dramatic in their mounting evocations of terror. They Db-
the chapbook are THE PROPHETIC HARNING. A filler story RINALOO tain their effects by a gradual heightening of a mood, a sublime
Ano ADELXNE: on, THE GHOST or ST. CYRIl,, follows the main story sense of the awful and the awesone that is armed by GQWC
which is a patchwork of plagiarized Gothic nanes and events. At architecture and a shadow-filled landscape. The topographical
Lindendorff Castle on the upper Rhine "an affrighted peasantry ' and picturesque Gothic which depends upon terror (what might
shrinks with terror.‘ The spectre of the Marchioness has once happen) rather than horror (what does happen) as well as the
more been reported to the Marquis and his two children, Matilda evolution of a suggestively evil mise en scene originate with
§"d Alfred. as it roams about the Castle and murmurs "a prophet- Mrs Radcliffe's first experiment with the Gothic. The tale is a
ic_warning.' To the Castle comes Count Passaw. He has been story of late medieval Scotland, the two castles of the title
inJured in a hunting accident, or so he says, and would find a referring to the two rival, feuding families of the piece. Mrs.
Plaﬁe to recover. During a lengthy sojourn, the Count manages to Radcliffe had read and admired the extravagantly Romantic odes
corrupt A1f'ed ?"d te"°'lZe Matilda, ""0 finally married Edwin, of Hilliam Collins, a poet who moved her to concentrate on land-
tve Ear] °f K°"‘tla t° Evade the C°""t'5 d95i9"5- The Marquis scape as a source of terror as she began her apprenticeship to
dl?5 ""der m!$t9'l0"5 CiFC"M5tanceS' The Spectre of the Mar~ the Gothic. The moods, if not the actual lines, of Collins‘s
chioness continues to make regular appearances and now warns "Ode on the Popular Superstitions of the Highlands" (1749) and
Matilda to_ beware of her brother, Alfred. In a muddled climax, “Ode to Fear‘ (1746) energize Mrs. Radcliffe's dark descriptions
the ghost discloses that Alfred is really the evil son of an of lonely places throughout her first Gothic. In fact, the open-
evil father, the Count, and that Matilda's mother had been ing lines of the ‘Ode to Fear‘ stand as an excellent précis to
driven to suicide by the Count's cruelties many years before. Radeiiffean Gothic romance in general: "Thou to Whom the "°'ld
ith all its shadow sha es, is shown;/Hho seest aﬂ-
345. C.R. CASTLE ZITTAH: A GERMAN TALE. London : Minerva-Press for :::?::"{‘: unreai gggne,/Hhi¥g fazey lifts the veil between--/Ah
H‘]"am La"ei 1794- Fear‘ ah frantic Fear!/I see I see thee near!” The Bl@m9"t5 °f
- "°“°T" Reeditionsz N°"e - the ‘plot remind us immediately of Clara Reeve's material in THE
Gothic Type: Sham translation (Schauerromantik elements) OLD ENGLISH BARON (see #355) as well as Halpole's mythologizing
Biographical and Research Data: None of the miaaie age; in THE cA$TLE 0F OTRANTO (see #466). The
Critical S . _ _ _ novel is a fable of intrigue, usurpation, t¥'§""¥» and clan _re-
y"°P51$- P'°t°"dl"9 to be a translation from German venge in which a young man.finally secures his noble birthright

295 me FIRST con-ucs
following some terrif in adven r --
The old Earl of Athlin hasg been taufdered S§;"d§;icﬁi;h'c p]0t'
B°'°" °f D""bB¥"e Castle. Malcolm is two parts Macbeth 3naSi§°“e
parts Nalpole-s Manfred, 3 mysterious and mystifying f ree
despot who quickly fixes himself as the Gothic villain $uda1
story. Like Mrs. Radcliffe's later villains he seems to Z the
extension of the Gothic structure over which he presides 5 Tn
less a dramatic character than the absolute embodiment of E IS
5"“ ""5Deakable horror itself. The Earl Osbert of Uunbayne :3;
of the slain earl, embarks upon a campaign to avenge his fa-
ther s murder and is assisted by the young peasant Alleyn ﬂh
is much too chivalrous and refined to be lowborn An assault 0:
Castle Dunbayne is repulsed Osbert and Alleyn are taken '
' , , , _ Prison-
Er, andfhalcolm exults as he applies ﬁlS merciless grip over the
wo un ortunate youn m G th ,
   ;2. :.;z.:i: .2‘:l§l’-¢2i‘°2‘§.?:"
0sbert's life. while imprisoned in Dunbayne Castle Osbeﬁt h 9
located a fellow sufferer, Laura, another Gothic guest of the
g:20?aa1Am;gs£ thesetmelodramatic developments, Mrs. Radcliffe‘;
devgtes ( e 9e g ° 9'°"5_b1""¥ i"d "early disappears as she
E _ 0' DEF 60$. lavishes) her narrative attention to the
vocation of suspenseful moods and rhapsodies of anxiety based
"P0" $Pectral encounters with the terrors of the castle interi_
°'- A119!" eventually does find and kill Malcolm a righteous
. . . -
giﬁd {£163 brings him to the knowledge of his noble birthright,
I ﬁe 9 ¥‘"9 villain traces the lad's genealogy with a long,
_55 935D. A tell-tale birthmark also helps to verify the nobil-
lty of Alleyn. with the father avenged and the castle cleansed,
ans double maTTlﬂ9e closes out the plot with the nuptials of
s ert and Laura and Alleyn and Mary. Neither the wicked nor the
v;rtuous characters achieve much stature in this incipient
e fort in the Gothic field by Mrs. Radcliffe. Hhat is impres-
5lVe,_ however, and what will become Mrs. Radcliffe's permanent
contribution to the growth of Gothic romance, is her sensitivity
to the value of landscape and scenery as a poetic generator of
error which pleases the terror-seeking mind. J.M.S. Tompkins
has vsummarized this achievement which may be seen even in her
earliest Gothic gropings in THE CASTLES OF ATHLIN AND DUNBAYNE:
The raison-d'etre of her books is not a story, nor a character,
"°' 3 m°'il_tFﬂth, but a mood, the mood of a sensitive dreamer
before Gothic buildings and picturesque scenery."
347. Radcliffe, Ann. A SICILIAN ROMANCE. London z T. Hookham, 1790.
Modern Reeditions: Arno Press, 1972, ed. Devendra P, Varma
G?th1¢ T¥Pe: Pure or high Gothic (terror mode)
Biographical and Research Data: Sumners, GOTHIC QUEST, pp.56,
225, 40s; Tarr, CATHOLICISM IN comic FICTION, pp.39-40; Fos-
ter, HISTORY OF THE PRE-ROMRNTIC NOVEL IN ENGLAND, DD.266-
267; Vanna, GOTHIC FLAME, pp.as-91; Lévy, LE ROMAN "GOTHIQUE"
ANGLAIS. mi-Z37-240; Murray, E.B. ANN RADCLIFFE. New York =
- Tvayne. 1972; Nelle», Elizabeth. “Ann Radcliffe‘s A SICILIAN
ROMANCE: A New Source of Jane Austen's SENSE AND SENSIB1L-
ITY, ENGLISH LANGUAGE NOTES, 22 (1984): 30-37.
critical 5¥"°D$is: Mrs. Radcliffe's second Gothic romance
fifth
GUTHICS
she
SEEIIIS
characters,
quaking in delicious
to the
and
W
3
and the n
her
he
an
the
297
progressive improvement in her developing craft of sug-
terror. Not only does she show a sharpened awareness of
power of the ruined castle in her fiction to fill the role
dominant
but the maiden-centered Gothic plot
the sublime fears of a pursued heroine
to solidify as her central story. Her
and intensifying suspense also assumes
The method of Radcliffean Gothic calls
coaxing of the reader into the anxious and
orld of sublime panics and supernatural
breathless series of adventures filled with
and insoluble mysteries which produce
other kinds of delicious delirium in the
finally reduces all causes of terror to
ormal by means of deferred rational explan-
Gothic environments offer no genuine spec-
roines believe enthusiastically in a malign
often willingly embrace the terror
and threaten them. Radcliffean Gothic
one of its most permanent, stock
silhouette of the menaced maiden
she repeatedly subjects herself to
dismal journeys downward or appalling confrontations with the
lurking shadows toward which she is drawn even as she shrinks
from them in dread. Placed in the year 1580, the primary loca-
tion of A SICILIAN ROMANCE is the remote palazzo of the Mazzini
family on
and
the nort
and his
Unkno
by the
father
hern coast of Sicily. Here, Ferdinand, the
of Mazzini, resides with his two daughters, Emilia
second wife, a Machiavellian matron who is
and dangerous especially in matters involving her
of whose physical and moral beauty she is vio-
wn to Emilia and Julia who believe their
to have died, the first Marchioness is a nuptial
Marquis in a secret wing of Mazzini Castle.
his new marchioness, Julia is singled out for har-
who would force her to marry the Duke de
with the persecuting schemes of their father
, Julia and Emilia have been disturbed nightly by
sounds and strange cries coming from somewhere within
depths of the castle. Growing alarmed, they investi-
are accompanied by their inquisitive and protective
Ferdinand. Ferdinand too is a target of his father and
especially despised since he has tried to advance the love
match between Julia and his friend, Hippolytus. All of the in-
gredients of the Radcliffean plot quickly coagulate when Julia
escapes from the castle and is vigorously pursued by her father
while leaving behind her brother to languish in the family dun-
geon. Before taking up the pursuit the Marquis has stabbed
Mlvbolytus and left him for dead. Young Ferdinand eventually
95¢iDE$, locates Julia who has been locked away in a nunnery,
and nurses Hippolytus back to health. These young pebple now re-
turn to Mazzini Castle to exact justice from their father, to
punish the evil marchioness, and most importantly, to resune
their investigation to determine the source of the mysterious
moans and wild lights. In one of best danger scenes in Gothic

298 THE F_[R5]' ggf;-.1155 ' THE FIRST GUTHICS 299
literature, Ferdinand descends a rotten aha Sgaying Staircase gitive guardian. The Gothic aesthetic of pleasure in terror is
while inmersed in total darknegg as he tries ta tface the myS_ evoked by Adeline's nocturnal experiences within the abbey which
terious sighs and strange lights. The staircase itself ,termi_ - is itself enclosed by the forest. The abbey further contains
nates lﬂ mldair. Ferdinand's bravery is rewarded by a flickering clues to Adeline's heredity together with various heroic oppor-
qlimnse of the dungeon cell below the abortive 5tai,ea5e where a tunities for La Motte to rise above his reprobate reputation.
CBVE h0lds the nuptial prisoner, his mother, Her cries of heip The owners of castles and abbeys in Gothic fiction are always
yield a natural explanation for the supernatural acoustics that , nefarious. Hence, the reader is not surprised when the proprie-
her daughters thought that they heard. Her homicidal schemes now tbr bf this abbey arrives by night and initiates a vigorous Pro-
thwarted, the bad marchioness retaliates for her failures i gram "T P9F5E¢Utl0"- he l5 the Mirqhls 49 M°htdlla 3 th°t°h9hly
against her bungling husband by poisoning the equally wieked depraved character and "a votary of vice.‘ Montalt brings with
Marquis de Mazzini. The customary nuptial reunion can then take him a young cavalier named Theodore and he busies himself in
Plﬂﬁe Without delay (Julia weds Hippglytus) and the power of the transforming Adeline‘s abbey sojourn into an abbey confinement
h0U5EhDld Can now pass safely to the decent San, Fe¢d;nand_ fraught with the usual perils to chastity and spectral charades.
After A SICILIAN ROMANCE, Mrs. Radcliffe's terrific scenography Sleeping within her small room, Adeline has a prophetic night-
would undergo some elaborate further development; but her sense mare, a dream in which a darkly clad figure ascends from a cof-
Of what the Gothic should do and should be appears to have ai_ fin and sunmons her to follow it through the tapestry to another
ready achieved its mature condition in her second novel. E.B_ ' hidden chamber. The dream instantaneously becomes reality when
Murray-S observation Sums up the esseuce of Radcliffe," Gothic: Adeline awakens, rises, finds a secret hatchway and penetrates
"The psychology of anticipated rather than executed horrors is t° the Very Same Chamber °f he“ hl9htmdTe- here 5h9 lEa'"5 5°me'
necessarily her forte." thing of her paternity and of her imnediate danger from a half
legible manuscript near a mouldering casket. Her abbey situation
342. Radcliffe, Ann. THE ROMANCE or THE FOREST, INTERSPERSED HTTH is tbmviibated by the fact that she is desired by three differ-
SOME PIECES OF P0ETRl- L°"d°" 1 T- Hﬂvkham and J. Carpenter ent men. Theodore seeks her highest love and would be her rescu-
1791. ' ' er; La Motte's son, Louis, wants her passionately; and the des-
"Oder" Reeditionsz Scribner's, 1971, in THREE 5[gHTE5NTH_ picable Montalt (with mounting hints of incest) lusts after her
CENTURV ROMANCES, ed. Harrison R, Steeveg; Arne press, 1974 1 with the customary brutish urges of the Gothic villain toward
ed. Devendra P. Varma. l homicidal rape. To make matters worse, Adeline is also imperiled
G°thl¢ Type: Pure or high Gothic (terror mode) by Madame de la Motte who is wrongly convinced that her husband
Biographical and Research Data: Foster, HISTORY OF THE PR5- has been enticed into an affair by the innocent maiden. Beset by
ROMANTIC uovct IN ENGLAND, pp.199, 242, 263, 2&4, 267; Smith every type bf natural and supernatural crisis. it nbuld seen
Nelson C. "The Art of the Gothic: Ann Radcliffe's Major Nov: time for the Radcliffean heroine to make her escape from the
Eli," DI55ERTATION ABSTRACTS, 29 (1953); g4oA_g41A (washing- abbey. But before she can do so, Montalt abducts her and she is
ton State University); Wright, Eugene P. "A Divine Analysis borne to his chateau where he intends to consunmate his lusts
Of THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST," D[SCOUR$E, 13 (1970); 37g_3g7- privately and nearly succeeds until his plans are diverted by
Heller, Lynne Epstein. ANN RADCLIFFE'$ Gothic LANDQQAPE oi the vigilant Theodore. Characters named Theodore had been as-
Flcllou AND THE VARIOUS INFLUENCES ueou IT. New York 1 Arno signed the duty bf retrieving nenabed maidens from Gbtnib bas-
Press, 1980 tles ever since Halpole had used the figure for this purpose in
I
THE CASTLE OF OTRANTO (see #466). Throughout Adeline's ordeals,
5FltlCﬂl Synopsis: The novel opens with a drastic emergency La Motte has remained helpless since Montalt seems to exert some
for the heroine, Adeline, a girl recently kidnapped from a Paris unknown power over him. For two thirds of the novel, vice, dis-
convent. According to the Radcliffean prescription, the causes aster, dhd the d9°"le5 °f the 4l$t@mP9Ted lma9l"dtl°" h5V9 buf-
of her distress are not explained. Her parentage is also left feted the h9r°l"@ and d@P'lVEd her 07 all hﬂPPl"B$5- The flhal
ambiguous. Just as Adeline is suffering her removal from the ' third of the novel reverses her fate and fortunes and restores
convent by a gang of ruffians, another fugitive from justice, order to a disorderly world. The manuscript perused by Adeline
Pierre de la Motte, is fleeing Paris. Suddenly, he is threatened during her EXPl°Fit°Ty 9XC"'5l°" l5 "0" hr°"9ht t° full light
by a tough looking figure who pushes the weeping Adeline into and turns out to have held the incriminating revelation (with-
his arms as he snarls a warning: “If you wish to save your life, held from the reader until the end) that her uncle, Montalt, had
$WEar that you will convey this girl where 1 may never see her murdered her father to gain his estates but he had not realized
more. If you return within an hour you will die." Already wanted that Adellhe "35 hl5 "lei? "hill he "°tl¢@d 3 5eﬂl l" her KEEP‘
by the Parisian police for gambling debts and other crimes, La -Y lh9- Alarmed by l"¢95t, he had altered hl5 Dlﬂ"5 TOF her $0
'Motte and his strangely acquired new ward secretly install them- 1 5lmPlE m"'deF- his villainy etposed, “ls web bf tEYF0r ﬂhd tyr-
selves lﬂ a conveniently situated Gothic abbey which lies deep hi ﬂhhy Fdﬂldly U"'dV9l$- Mﬂhtilt P°l50"5 hlm5@lf 35 r9ttlb"tl°"
within a nearly innenetrable and therefore hi hl romantic for- ii for his misdeeds, the degenerate De la Motte who has missed his
est. But what appears to be a safe hideout‘ qgichly becomes a
Place of danger and supernatural menace for Adeline and her fu-
uerwoeodeh

chance at regalnlng integrity resumes his exlle, and the wedding
march rings through the forest for Adeline and Theodore. Some

300 THE FIRST GUTHICS
critics have thought that in her third novel, Mrs. Radcliffe at-
tained the apogee of her Gothic art and that THE ROMANCE OF THE
FOREST rather than THE MVSTERIES OF UDOLPHO should be designated
her Gothic highpoint. Certainly, the structural tension between
poetic moments of sublime dread and dramatic moments of authen-
tic peril for the heroine are given a balance not found in ear-
lier or later Radcliffe. The work's "Gothic decor is blended
into the sensibility of the reader rather than imposed upon it,
and the plot is an intricate and often dramatic series of con-
gruent incidents.“
349. Radcliffe, Ann. THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO: A ROMANCE INTER-
SPERSED HITH SOME PIECES OF POETRY. London : G.G. AND J.
Robinson, 1794.
Modern Reeditions: Everyman's; Dent & Dutton, 1959, ed. R.
Austin Freeman; Oxford UP, 1966, ed. Bonamy Dobrée.
Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (terror mode)
Biographical and Research Data: Sypher, Wylie. "Social Ambi-
guity in the Gothic Novel,“ PARTISAN REVIEW, 12 (1945): 50-
60; Lévy, LE ROMAN “GOTHIOUE" ANGLAIS, Dp.246-251; Frank,
Frederick S. "A Bibliography of writings About Ann Rad-
cliffe,“ EXTRAPOLATION, 17 (1975)! 54-62; Kelly, Gary. "‘A
Constant Vicissitude of Interesting Passions’: Ann Rad-
cliffe's Perplexed Narratives,“ ARIEL, 10, number 2 (1979):
45-64; Poovey, Mary. "Ideology and THE MVSTERIES OF UDOLPHO,“
CRITICISM, 21 (1979): 307-330; Fawcett, Mary L. "UDOLPHO‘s
Primal Mystery," STUDIES IN ENGLISH LITERATURE, 1500-I900, 23
(1983): 481-494
Critical Synopsis: Radcliffean Gothic, which sets up a perva-
sive emotional tension between the terrible and the tantalizing,
reaches its maximum point of development in THE MYSTERIES OF
UDOLPHO. This novel is usually regarded as the seminal, maiden-
centered Gothic romance of the Eighteenth Century, a book so
rich in Gothic ideas and techniques that its farreaching influ-
ence can scarcely be overstated. It is also a Bildungsroman or
novel of education set in Gothic form. The nervously sensitive
heroine, Emily St. Aubert, undergoes an education from excessive
sensibility to right reason as she passes through three contras-
tive environments which strain her capacities for fantasy. Her
life begins in the beautiful, safe, and pastoral setting of La
Vallée "on the banks of the Garonne in the province of Gascony
in the year I584." After the mysterious death of her father, she
is conveyed to Castle di Udolpho in the remote Apennines after a
brief sojourn in the vitiating atmosphere of Venice. Her third
locale finds her still a prisoner of her own passions in Chateau I 7 ,MMﬂ_ _ ’
Villefort where her unsentimental education is at last com-
pleted. Emily St. Aubert is a natural extension of earlier Goth-
ic heroines going all the way back to the victimized Isabella of
THE CASTLE OF OTRANTO (see 8466), a castle dweller whose primary
function had been to scream as she groped her way through the
underground darkness and into the rescuing arms of young Theo-
dore. To the indigenous screaming, weeping, and fainting of the
Gothic heroine, Mrs. Radcliffe added the psychological dimension
of Emily St. Aubert's unregulated fancy which often causes her
sec Page 2 7
Pu bliihed 1607 by '1‘ ER Hughes 36 Ludg-ale Stre 6 I

THE FIRST GOTHICS 301
to convert natural danger into supernatural horror. The Gothic
pleasure principle which stimulates both the heroine and the
reader to enjoy menacing Gothic locales and supernatural
experiences is also much in evidence throughout the novel.
Although there are some complicated appearances and disappear-
ances and some deaths that are not deaths according to Mrs.
, Radcliffe's doctrine of delayed'natural explanation, the journey
made by Emily toward self-wisdom and self-control is quite
straightforward. Her life is filled with men who are moral and
aesthetic opposites. There is her expiring father, St. Aubert, a
man who is something of a prisoner of too much sensibility him-
self. He cautions Emily against allowing passion to rule reason
at his death. There are the two inpeccable young men, Valancourt
and Dupont, but they enter the plot only at points where Emily
requires a rescue or is ready for proper mating and are other-
wise shunted out of the action. The dominant male in Emily St.
Aubert's life and her master in the academy of terror is the
Venetian villain Montoni, one of the Gothic novel's most durable
criminals. For much of the time, he is an obscure and sinister
presence rather than a visible character, prowling about the
penumbra of the story and seen only in shadowy outline or in dim
mirrors. Hhen Emily is taken from La Vallée to Castle di Udolpho
by Montoni and Emily's despicable aunt, Madame Cheron, it is
' Montoni who sneers at the orphaned victim of his guiles, "You
speak like a heroine. He will see if you can suffer like one.‘
This transfer of the nervous maiden from her secure world of
parents and light to the insecure world of Gothic passions and
threatening males becomes almost a structural requisite for the
Gothic plot after Emily's journey in this novel. At the jour-
ney's climax, the heroine undergoes a moment of rhapsodic_terror
as she gazes up at the facade of the haunted castle that will
shortly be her residence. This is another mandatory moment to
emerge from Emily's voyage from light to darkness,--the moment
before the castle which marks a thousand Gothics. Pleasing ter-
ror fills her eye and soul as she beholds the castle ‘lighted up
by the setting sun, the Gothic greatness of its features, and
its mouldering walls of dark grey stone, rendering it a gloomy
and sublime object." Once confined within these massive walls,
Emily's imagination runs away with her as she delves hysteri-
cally into the many mysteries of Udolpho, not seeking to clear
up these mysteries, but seeking instead to enjoy their Gothic
content. Central mystery of all is the undisclosed thing con-
cealed behind a black-veiled portrait in one of the darkest of
the castle's chambers. Exploring the chamber and then drawing
_ back the shroud, Emily stares, then faints. In a modern edition
of THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO, the black veil is drawn aside on
page 248, but what Emily saw is not disclosed until page 662.
wondering what Montoni has planned next for her, she visits
other sections of the castle secretly hoping for further Gothic
thrills. with her maid, Annette, she finds rea] blood on a tur-
ret stairway and.begins to assemble clues about the'missing Lady
Laurentini, former mistress of the castle. Udolpho's mysteries
are nearly equalled by the horrible enigmas which await Emily at
Chateau Villefort, the site of her second Gothic ordeal after
her escape and shipwreck. Here, Emily soars into an exquisite

302 %
THE FIRST GUTHICS ;.l.l£ FIRST sol-H165 303
Pﬂnlc at the sight of a hideous face staring at her from beneath
oi k l t . >5» her previous fiction. Instead of slow turning screws of suspense
face 3Z,e;§¥§; §,,°§,§T°l:§§ §;°::§n°“?§§?:;§t°§°d'fn‘t'°?:- The aha apprehension as in THE MVSTERIES or UDOLPHO (see #349). this
f tn ' a 9 age Er *1 h a1‘ novel achieves its horrific effects by nnmentum of incident and
B _ 6 PFBVIONS mysteries including the unnamed thing behind the
veil are eventually clarified when Emily learns the truth about
high dramatic concentration of character rather than by gloomy
Lad Laurenglni_ gef n - . 1 portraiture and terrifying topographies. The shift from the
phof Emily had observed heihﬁyihg fgtheidwegfino §aS“1§n“‘ ?"?‘- poetics of terror to the dramatics of horror may seem a peculiar
tore of o beautiful lady Emily ls the ngecg O¥e€h 9 m;"‘a& I alteration of method for Mrs. Radcliffe, but she was now con-
mi5tre5§ of ylllofort costle' lne moral sno k f tn. e mur efe sciously competing with M.G. Lewis's villain-centered Gothic
' C 0 15 reve1at‘°" r sensationalism of THE MONK (see #244). Devendra P. Varma
along with the disclosure that her senses have been abused whil
she nos o nlsoner t - . . 9 . stresses the new direction of her Gothicism in THE ITALIAN, a
gne hoo ?,ln,ed snegdolﬁgo llgglgy %Egn§l§:ﬂ]{e§? gar se“5ea' book which is more a masculine than feminine Gothic in her psy-
gnouoht she son a norm_lnfested corpse But tne eca“Se 5 e chological character emphasis. "Her pictures are more individual
nothing more than a waxwork effigy Notnln she h d Corpse dwas V and distinct, her figures more terrible, and her situations more
be supernatural turns out to be truly so Fartnermgr P eg“me t° thrilling and vivid. The story develops in a series of dramatic»
sunpgions oooot goodness and evil alga turn out te’n gr tas‘ .' haunting scenes, which stand out in bold relief.‘ Naming the
tions resulting from hen nndlsclnllned feelin S n 0. e .15 9" ;r novel for the generically evil monk who controls the action
nan misguided her into a Series of errogs-anﬁr lmtqlngtnﬁ" fl marks an additional movement away from her more sedate castle or
abiiitios to roooonlze and nerd Off moral evil AS n"€a inin fr ‘~ forest titles in earlier books. Nor are there any interpolated
deception; and Montonl-s nlokedness nun lndic't e.l .3 er 5 P in verses in the text of this Gothic. The role of the persecuted
Supernatural phenomenon or a source of aesthetioeilevl isbnot a l maiden is reduced and she is moved into the background formerly
product of nonon self_lntenest and vice nnlcn C 2 ea§“'€ “ 3 occupied by the villain, while the villain emerges from the
gored by o reasoned self_cdntr°l lnls leSgUn°"ly e §°“"' ‘ shadows to dominate this novel's structure in a way that none of
de_gotnifleo Enlly St Aubert netnrns to tn r t. e?'"e » 3 Hrs. Radcliffe's penumbral villains previously had done. The
nomon and a onlde nltn Qalanconrt b her Sid en a 1°"? _“°r1d a ' ' third crucial member of the Gothic cast, the young rescuer, is
noted the damaging effect of nrsy Radcllf§;.s‘§Yt°"‘}°‘f"='@ I l Permitted a larger function than was the case with Valancourt in
highest Gothic ends at the close of THE MVSTERIESe 5?’°uh3 pﬁ3* THE "YSTERIES “F UDOLPHU °' L‘ "°tt° i" THE R°MA"cE OF THE FOR"
Her ethical conservatism caused ner to den or und . in ‘ EST (see #348). "The Italian‘ of the title is the pallid, gigan-
ygry some Gothic effects nnlcn lnsplre Fear ynd zrmlng ose 5 tic, gaunt-framed and vulture-eyed Father Schedoni, a figure of
herQine5_ gne oonoloslon about Mrs nan€llff'?" e't.‘E hi’ unrelieved mystery and one of the most memorable villains in a
Gothic is non inescapable. -“er place amen G tn.e S a"li' °th'C ' long Gothic gallery of Satanic heroes. Schedoni insinuates his
been consistent], misunderstood necgns gn 0 Ic "ova ‘sts has A way into the confidence of the vindictive Marquesa di Vivaldi,
writer in nnat ls non consldered a re ulet? e “as a conservatlve mother of the young rescuer, Vincentio di Vivaldi. Hith the Mar-
novols picture the strength of tnevlrﬁ l9"ar¥ b"€'eme"t- He’ r ' quesa's cooperation, Father Schedoni schemes to prevent Vival-
viewing it as one needed connective fora Iﬂna " '?the'.th?" di's betrothal to the innocent, hapless, helpless maiden, Ellena
age, she Son it as monstrous u a °verrat1°"a]1st1c ‘ di Rosalba. Ellena is no mere reproduction of earlier trembling
_ ' V Radcliffean heroines although she does go through the usual nusy
, - , i schedule of confinements and incarcerations. Unlike the ear ier
350 Ragélllgﬁls AcgndZ:E.l¥ALég:él?R’dTHE cgNFESSIo¥AL OF THE BLACK ' 2 heroines, most of her perils are authentic and she is menaced
' .' ' ’ r‘ an H‘ Danes’ 1797' ‘. with something much worse than homicide or rape. The swift plot
Modern Reeditions. Russell G Russell, 1968, ed. Devendra P.
Virmi; 0Xf0rd UP, 1968, ed. Frederick Garber
RF?‘
removes Ellena di Rosalba to the cruellest of convents where she
Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (terror and horror o i undergoes those persecutions associated with her breed. Threat-
. _ mo es)
Biographical and Research Data: Varma, GOTHIC FLAME pp 93-
. n ’ '
ened with the veil by the coldhearted abbess, she finds an unex-
pected friend in the nun, Olivia, whose facial resemblance to
1 onnn . '
,g?i Lééllzgﬁezn P G9¥:gQu5;llA?GLAIS! :p‘251'26¥' ?r°ad' 1 * Ellena foreshadows the necessary mother-daughter recognition
1lnLlnn - Soul" nlLnnTlc BnLLETIn mgge ncmbgr §ad€{;;g§ 5 $25 scene at the end of the novel. Ellena's removal to the convent
37; Todd Janet -Posture nd I‘ Q ' ' l had been preceded by the appearance of a crepuscular and cowled
. i 3 6 mpos ure: The Gothic Hanser- - - - - - d n lnls eoto losmlc
vant lﬂ Ann Radcliffe's THE ITALIAN,‘ women T "°"k“" f‘9"'° °“tl‘"ed.‘? a '“‘“° °'° "“Y' F
(1933); 25-33; go gotoono, Paul d_ -Ann Radcllf%iTER?;u2§iTI€ , shape had warned Vivaldi in hollow tones that awful consequences
CAL 5URyEy 0; Long Flcylon_ Englenood cliffs nn _ Salem f nould stalk him unless he abandoned Ellena. But Vivaldi persists
p,oss_ 1983, VI, on 2lo5_22o4 ’ ‘ l in_ his rescue mission as a good Gothic hero shoold, and with
. , Olivia's help, he eventually liberates Ellena from her monastic
critical Synopsis: Mrs_ Radcliffe n l . _ l’ jail of vSan Stefano and prepares to marry hers But the wedding
phasis from terror to horror in the wsitihgozflTH§h}T;EgA:ert:ms ‘ cerewony 15 ‘nvaded by a gangaof cutthroats under Sched9n].S*d1_
' ' - > 9 Y‘ rection and hero and heroine are separated when Vivaldi is
attaining a powerful new octave on the Gothic scale not heard in
arrested by the Inquisition, Schedoni can exult since Ellena has

304 THE F1R$T 5"T”1P$ ‘ THE FIRST GUTHICS 305
396i" fallen unreservedly into his ower. He trans orts Elle - r - - -
to the lonely shores of the Adriatic Share she is plzced in ta: T??y_t5P°:et ﬂghoncedto tie imaginatgog, "lg" t:et;9rC?.:nd»S}w-
sadistic care of Schedoni‘s private gremlin, Spalatro. Her new p mi Y‘: 1;" . an not ‘igbess §" lren y: iih t 8- ' e
prison is a gruesomely discolored marble mansion near the sea- noéeth I Se- < grows Du 1°t ﬁr "‘“§~d““°°“" er :1 1 hi-ru1"S
shore and one of Mrs. Radcliffe's best Gothic interiors. In one ?u i1r v1§1o"?ry °§”e§ 2“ er mgr 1 tSEnS§1 0 t °¥et1neSS'
of the tensest scenes in all of Gothic fiction, Schedoni slips €< S cry 1: r?me a 8-arr‘va a d euarwnr h-O he two
into the mansion by night and almost murders the sleeping El- , 2" {qu§r1anth rave-ers' f ri ginusgz tan ' H“]u“ghtOn'
lena. He only stays his poised dagger upon noticing Ellena's ' é? °"Q§ E1 ru1?S utt en] "or ~ t ey megt an old man W“?
locket which contains a miniature of himself. At his trial €h EES 1e? af Dug °r?o den m%"uscr1p c9"ta]n1"g»"arrat‘vES 0
before the Inquisition, Vivaldi has turned the tables on Sche- i - e ast E Sf 0€mEr-Sp.e"f°r'- hi maquacr1pt Contains the aTCh?_
doni by exposing him as an ecclesiatical imposter. He is reaiiy it acgount 0" t €lKlﬂg s $St1vaf whic in turn ho_d§ the Gothic
the fratricidal Count di Harinella, slayer of Ellena's noble fa- Bﬁgeg -$1 gnryh? Ch1v? r1ct aK°r&Fe’ tge Bq1gdt §?it°"hde
ther. The nun Olivia now comes forward to establish her identity b on evi E'thur 1: SerY1§gS Ofttﬁ 1ng’tr eh $9 ev1the L gs
as Ellena's true mother. His schemes dashed, Schedoni retires to Bee: gjviq] e mUs- rav1S Tgg O1 d?dC°urthS eaut1eS’ e 2 y
his cell to poison himself. Readers who had grown accustomed to ar arai 1 Seem§dq°youS]a: 2? en Q ‘as dde §our prepargs or
the genteel terrors of Mrs. Radcliffe must have been thrilled by a Sgec ac: Sr ze ‘Hg 9e e ra ‘D"' “E Sue gn-y an-inrage mar‘
the colossal evil and omnicompetent villainy practiced by Sche- chant! Hugth 00 geeve’ gntgarugts-iqe heSt&Y}%1:S !] h Fhe]dag_
doni, a character who could lay good claim to the defiant motto éuia-1?" - atd aston eh- on eyl 1e asd 1 eh Sir Regina the
of Milton's Satan, “To do ought good never will be our task, But ' ’ kc-vat E 12 or iq ‘edge? 1SBmag1ca HS'gr ' a Q arge "h1ch h-e
ever to do ill our soul delight.“ Among a host of lesser Gothic :19 ‘veteme: dy en1e§§ eiauset oghreeve es 3 CGFno"§r' 13
Satans, the stature and influence of Hrs. Radcliffe's Schedoni I Cfgrge 15 reg]? a€ an-? Zonairyd °>]]e Cour a e as ragge
falls over the entire Gothic tradition making this character one 0 ta th? 0“ Iette vh‘ e e Dq ev‘- g’ who as ma e counter_
of the Gothic nDvE],S 1OngeSt shadowS_ charges, is left at liberty. The inequities based on class posi-
r V tion carry a reminder of the Falkland-Caleb Hilliams conflict in
351. Radcliffe, Ann. GASTON oz BLONDEVILLE: on, THE COURT or ncnnv l \ °°°Y}"'5 §§§EB §IkL1“"5 gsee i139). and singetde Blgndeviélg 125
III KEEPING FESTIVAL IN anutuuts. London = Henry Colburn, 18- iea .y 9"‘ y ° - he “"' er’ he °°'° ° 5 ° '°°" ‘m ‘“. “- '
26_ L and s seirettauilt become even stzongeri After goodreevets im-
Modern Reeditions: Arno Press 1972, ed. Devendra P. r . pr‘s°"men ‘ e Orces 0 superna-Uri Jus ‘Ce ecome-ac ‘Va In
Gothic Type: Gothified history (authentic supernatu¥:lmgle- ghe wrqnged ma" 5 behalf‘ A Caba1‘St'C. $tra"9er. °°z1"9 b]9°d
we F '2“ “‘:.‘:;*:“ii:t° :1? “iii: ‘:2:"‘:.:°":t1:""*a:"%*1"2
Bio ra hical and R - ' al CD“ . " y '8 . r . '7' r!°
up g6_g8; SummerS?SE8¥5¥cD3ﬁEéT,Bggfgiadéo TQEE 2E5_Tg§:2:> . himself is apprehended when a chain and medallion once belonging
Aline, "Kenilworth Castle and GASTON uE'aLoﬁozviELc,"’in Ari . ‘ §° §"° m"'qe'§? dedF°1§‘1]°g“'e §°¥“d 3: his-°°§§:ss{§“'p 59312’
RADCLIFFE. Denver, co = Alan Swallow, 1951, pp.104-117; Lévy °° 'ee¥et;S tame “"h 9°" :ﬂ"e G “Z 1 °§'m'§§ ‘dg -1? "°7 y
LE ROMAN "GOTHIQUE' ANGLAIS, pp.262-256; Price, F.H. "Ann @:°"S Z - 8-: §a"9e °t°‘§1 de". I: “" de .°"t°"h in :e"eS
Radcliffe, Mrs. Siddons, and the Character of Hamlet " NOTES f-e ‘C a‘n’d‘ e?1“s O ge é he mur erer S gucth u C9"-
& QUERIES, 23 (1975): 164_167' ’ irming Hoo reeve s accusation in t e presence o _ e entire
court. Hhen the royal court assembles for the execution of Hood-
critica1 Sync sis: com Used in 1802 nd bli _ ’ reeve, a visored knight rides betneen the gallows and the_ spec-
ly in 1826, Mrs.pRadcliff:'s final novel legges b::?ng°:h:u:g:i- 1 tatozs azdthsummons de dB]o:deQ1]é? ts Jq?§1c$'tF?§Ed Vi?“ the
ficial supernatural which had been the leading trait of her I §pechre D edma" v?tmu¥her:~’ E 1 Q" gza e 1? at yhcot 32555
Gothicism in earlier books. GASTON DE BLONDEVILLE admits a genu- l‘ en‘ -?¥Tor dant %:1 -‘ t-e ‘?gusadu es . e ga an 3 osd O the
ine ghost and ushers the spectre into the royal presence itself. fo :1 ?’ba m‘1S -e JuSd1ce 0 d-0° Eﬁeve S C6552’ 3: in Z he
Mrs. Radcliffe was romantically stirred by viewing the remains ' he; !vaTHEy1;:L?g;1": an Rr:“?rf;"gh de Hrggge Tera an ' Est;-e
of Kenilworth Castle in Harwickshire. Furthermore, she wished to ' fa 1? 5h 1' 2 Z53 bath éh e a 'aga‘ ‘dev1Sed ti’ h? it
attempt her own version of Gothified history as her predeces- arm“ a‘ E E ;m1na E Dd e-'°eﬁ'"g m?‘ echaq i C Iva -
sors, Thomas Leland and Clara Reeve, had done in LONGSHORD (see nous y°“"9 ma" 1 ? igvea 3? “a";ﬁ5 erg “ H ?1' Z a€e' dwe
0243) and THE oto ENGLISH BARON (see #355). For the creation of 1 . ave Z ;'°;‘ QLQ "d° '5 °'§r h'°:"th¥ a ge1"'"§1g °S Z" i
a truthfu] nedieva] atmosphere, She studied the Suurces and r monarc tw 01 as te 9001 sense 3 dee_ff is in? aca e agen ho"
chronicles relating to the reign of Henry III (1216-1272) and izperaa Ur? Jug 192' " ear Yd 3 E l i, 9V1 AS overcome w E
.she made an excursion to the ruins of Kenilworth and to Brougham R S %-g;ac erg-§ega1n reason an] refzrn 0 cu““n¢ §enSe} th a e
Castle to acquire some Gothic sensations at first hand As she ‘ a C 1 E’ Ev] 15 overcome on y a er an accep ante O e S“-
gazed upon the fallen grandeur of Kenilworth, she recorded in ‘ ‘. pernatura" ' ' -
her diary that "this view of the r in as e t 'k' - th 1 - .
three Chief masses are great and solemz wizhou: Egiz ’;E;:§;fu]@ ‘; 352. Radcliffe, Mary Ann. nanrnons. on, THE one-nannso noun. London
l L
9 _ ' ‘Q: : J.F. Hughes, 1809. .

THE FIRST GUTHICS TI-E FIRST GOTHICS 307
~
Modern Reeditions: Arno Press, I972, ed. Coral Ann Howells. ; at any moment. There is no single climactic incident of terror,
Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (imitation of the "first" , since every instant of Rosalina's existence is a crisis of some
Mrs. Radcliffe) ~ sort. The second Mrs. Radcliffe, unlike her mentor, was not in-
Biographical and Research Data: Sunners, GOTHIC QUEST, pp.29, ‘ terested in suspense or anticipation, but devoted her Gothic
66, 73, 98; Tarr, CATHOLICISM IN GOTHIC FICTION, pp.25, 50, talents to a relentless succession of atrocities. Hence, the
59, 70; Adams, Donald K. ‘The Second Mrs. Radcliffe," MYSTERV \ final sexual peril for Rosalina is not much different from her
AND DETECTION ANNUAL, I (1962): 48-64; Howells, Coral Ann. . 4 preceding entrapments. Hith her maid, Carletta, the two women
LOVE, MVSTERV, AND MISERY: FEELING IN GOTHIC FICTION. Atlan- ' _J make an exploratory probe into the forbidden section of the
tic Highlands, NJ : Humanities Press, 1979. 1‘b castle and find a tell-tale sable mask in the apartment of Fa-
ther Grimaldi Before she can flee with the evidence, she is
Critical Synopsis: The "other" Mrs. Radcliffe among the Goth- '1 embraced by a cowled figure, hurried out of the castle, and
ics, Mary Ann Radcliffe, was frequently miscontrued with her l :- taken across the Lake of Abbruzzio to a secret hut. During her
more famous namesake,--and to her commercial advantage. Reprint- l coerced journey, she has had tine to study her vile captor.
ings of her four-decker Gothic, MANFRONE: OR, THE ONE-HANDED “ “What was her horror upon perceiving he had but one hand!“ Her
MONK reach well into Victorian times. In her imitation of the v‘ assailant throws back his monastic hood in a gesture of revela-
first Mrs. Radcliffe, the second Mrs. Radcliffe has vigorously '. tion which changes the one-handed monk, Grimaldi, into the ugly
applied the criterion of all imitative Gothic fiction by doub- _ suitor, Prince di Manfroné. This melodramatic scene almost works
ling and tripling the gory events and maidenly miseries of her ; : because Mrs. Radcliffe believes in what she is doing and the
originals. Thus, as this novel's extreme assortment of alarms, ff’ reader begins to share her vision of horror. But before the
mutilations, attempted rapes, spectral intrusions, imprison- ‘ lecherous prince can finish the rape that he began in volume
ments, midnight abductions interrupted weddings, and vicious fa- one, the righteous hand of Montalto intercedes and gives him the
thers demonstrates, nothing succeeds like excess in the Gothic
marketplace. Vet, the second Mrs. Radcliffe certainly knew who
the Gothic was for and what it was all about as her management
death blow. "Here, the pen pauses,‘ sighs the second Mrs. Rad-
cliffe, almost as if she were sorry that she had had to save her
maiden from the fiend and return her to the virtuous champion.
of unrelieved crises and an atmosphere of constant dread indi- F Although her final climax is spoiled by the conventionality of
cates. Nor are there any concessions to the reformation of the 1 = the ending, her feast of blood and violence is exactly what the
maiden's errant sensibilities. The function of the heroine, Ro- I Gothic experience had come to mean to a majority of readers in
salina, is to be victimized on a grand scale in as many unnatur- . the nineteenth Century's first decade of unrestricted Gothicism.
al and supernatural ways as Mrs. Radcliffe can devise before she ' The popularity of the novel shows that it could stand a favor-
is permitted to emerge from the Gothic world to marry Montalto, , able comparison with THE ITALIAN, and the twitching,.severed
her rescuer. The novel commences with an electrifying jolt to ‘ F hand lying on the castle pavement is an unforgettable effect.
all maidenly security when Rosalini di Rodolpho is sexually 1. '
besieged in her barricaded bedchamber by a sable-mantled figure Q 353. Ratcliffe, Eliza. THE MYSTERIOUS BARON. London : Minerva-Press
whose severed hand will shortly be found lying outside the cham- ' for Lane, Newman, 1808. '
her door on the castle gallery floor. The identity of the maimed Modern Reeditions: None
monk who has attacked her as well as her father's part in the , Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (Radcliffean imitation)
plot guite naturally obsess Rosalina who wonders when, where, l " Biographical and Research Data: None
and how she will encounter the one-handed fiend again. Her _ _ _
truculent father has been playing host to the equally truculent , Critical Synopsis: A one-volume, C°"Ve"tl°"i1 5°t"l¢_‘de"t‘tY
Prince di Manfroné at Castello di Coleredo. Manfroné's physiog- i fable which sees the heroine come to grips with the wickedness
nomy is a study in Gothic handsomeness: "His brows pretended of a member of her family, the "mysterious baron" who arranges
over his scowling eyes, whose gaze were bent on the ground; his , , for her persecution and bondage to a dark castle. The author
lips were of livid hue and closely pressed together." To join sometimes deliberately spelled her name "Radcliffe" to promote
his unwilling daughter to this creature, Rosalina's father em- connercial confusion with her more famous namesake. The novel
barks upon a campaign of persecution incorporating all of the itself is filled with echoes of THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO (see
best Gothic tactics. He brings to his castle a specialist in the Y, #349) and THE ITALIAN (see #350).
craft of menacing maidens, the ferocious Padre Grimaldi, who 1
harasses Rosalina in various ways but is always careful to 1‘ 354. THE RECLUSE OF THE HOODS: OR, THE GENEROUS WARRIOR, A_ GOTHIC
conceal his hands beneath his black robes. The cryptic Father ROMANCE. London : T. Maiden for J. Roe and Ann Lemoine, 18-
Grimaldi, who dresses and moves like Schedoni in THE ITALIAN I O9. ' .
(see #350) and speaks like Montoni in THE MVSTERIES OF UDOLPHO 1 Modern Reeditions: None » '
(see #349) is one of the Gothic novel's most capable monsters- Y Gothic Type: Gothic chapbook
in-residence. Throughout the remainder of the romance, he lurks ‘ ». Biographical and Research Data: None ‘ '
about the castle performing dark deeds in even darker corridors I
and generally maintaining Rosalina's well-founded fear of rape >- A Critical Synopsis: A diminutive 36- page bluebook measuring
l
A

sue rnc FIRST GUTHICS .2 rnt FIRST GUTHICS 309
four by six inches and sold at four oence- The romance begins |[§ Bantam Books, 1963, ed. Robert o. Spector; Oxford up, 1957,
with a ritualistic sentence for this kind of fiction, "Montville f‘ d. J mes Tr iner.
castle reared its proud head in the most salubrious and romantic ‘ ' Eothig Tyoe=aGothified history (subdued Supernatural and dq-
part of the county of Sussex.“ Five or six sentences beyond the . t‘ t a Qathic)
reader must have recogniled that he was being given yet another = gigglgzhical and Research Data: Tompkins, POPULAR novct IN
plgglarized abgiggemint of R:eve's OLDIENGLISH BARON (see #355) ENGLAND, pp.2Z9-231; Foster, HISTORY OF THE PRE-ROMANTiC
hi minor no i ica ions ha e in the ost heir olot- The anony- 7 novtt IN ENGLAND pp.l99-Z06; Varma, GOTHIC FLAME, pp.75-8 ;
nous Goth excised the terrifying night vigil within the haunted Ehlers, Leigh A. in Striking Lesson to Posterity: Providence
apdrtmehts "Qt b°thE'i"9 to Teplaﬁe it With ahotheh 5“P9r"it"'dl 1 and Character in Clara Reeve's OLD ENGLISH BARON," ENLIGHT-
situation for the young heir. Therefore the tiny chapbook is 3 ENMENT ESSAYS, 9 (1978): 62-76; Mac Andrew, Elizabeth. THE
never Gothic in the savage supernatural sense, but only Gothic ‘ GOTHIC TRADITION IN FICTION. New York = columbia up, 1979,
in its exotic placement of events in a dark and remote period 7 pp.121-122 127-129 1B8-189- English Sarah Harder. "The
and in its fantastic working out of genealogical mysteries. The Hunger of the Imagination; A’Study of the Prose Style of Four
master of Mont "ll C tl S h
vi e as e. ten en de Raymond. the Earl of cothic Novels,‘ DISSERTATION ABSTRACTS INTERNATIONAL, 39
Blancy, is a man with a past. He seems to have caused the death (1979); 5773A_5774A (university of North Carolina).
of his brother, Henry, while the two were on a crusade in the
Holyland- his daughter, Elila. finds her father strange, fear- r critical Synopsis: Originally published in 1777 under the
ful. and norose.-—always behaving less like a father than a i i, didactic rubric, THE CHAMPION OF VIRTUE, Reeve's otn ENGLISH
keeoer- Standing beneath the shadow of the castle is that other 5 BARON is the Gothic tradition's linking corridor between the
domicile so vital to the smooth operation of this kind of Gothic r supernatural medievalism of walpole's The CASTLE or OTRANTO and
"°V9li the Cﬁttage 07 i Ped5d"t "ho is "Qt 3 PEd5d"t- Here Fe‘ ‘ Mrs. Radcliffe's romances. To Clara Reeve must also go the
sides Ambrose Phillips. a solitary man whose choice of the credit for the installation of Gothic literature's primal haunt-
lonely life has earned him his name as the recluse of the woods. . ad chamber or forbidden compartment, a mandatory fixture of the
H9 l5 Phll05°Phl¢3l, VlFt"0U5i ﬂhd P05595595 the 5klll5 "T the _ haunted castle‘s interior forever after. Her characters also
warrior. qualities which he constantly seeks to instill in his , dream terrible dreams which presage their Gothic situations
nominal son, Edgar. "You may have no opportunities of being Thug, in Spite hf her rational reservations, her influence upon
9l°rl°"5 5"‘ the m9a"5 °f belhg Qredt 6'9 Still l" YOU? POWET; l the development of the Gothic romance after Halpole must be
the secret to being great is everywhere the sane; it is to be ' weighed carefully. THE oto ENGLISH BARON was intended to be her
virtuous." Edgar often visits Montville Castle because he feels l reaction ta the rampant supernaturalism of OTRANTO in which. as
°d¢lY drdhh 9° it 70' reﬂ$0"$ he Cahhbt @XPlal"- he 6150 T9915 she wrote, the Gothic "machinery is so violent, that it destroys
drawn to Elila who is well above his social reach. or seemingly the effect that it is intended to excite.” She would use the
so. His continuous curiosity makes the Earl nervous and wrath- gnthic hnt as an end in itself but as a means to edify the
ful- Eventually an old oilgrin arrives in search of Ambrose and reader without offending his emotional tolerance. Her inclusion
read to di l d " ' ' '
Y 5 ° Q9 ma"! 59¢'9t$ 5° ddrh that I hdV@ "0! bee" of the haunted chamber and one solitary spectral episode within
5519 t0 $PEah them th@$6 mdhy Years-" The EaTl'5 fhdtriclddl the chamber were, from her conservative point of view, “a suffi-
past now overtakes him in the shape of this figure of conscience cient degree of the marvellous to excite attention.“ Vet, her
dhd 5E5tl"!- The déhﬂuemeht l5 quite regular 9XCept for one donations to the art of Mrs. Radcliffe become innediately appar-
peculiar twist. At the time when the brothers made their crusade ant when the contents of Lovel Castle and its environs are
t°9ehh9'r they hid bee" accvmﬂdhied by 5lF EVeYhaTd de LU¢lE- H9 examined. All is ready and waiting for the arrival of the anx-
is now identified as Ambrose Phillips, the generous warrior who inns maiden by the time Clara Reeve has completed the erection
knew the truth of the Earl's homicidal removal of his brother. of her haunted castle on the literary landscape. The story is a
H9 hd$ h9Ph quiet TOT ma"! y95T$ t0 P'0tECt the life 07 hi5 "dt- standard Gothic plot involving paternal murder detection
, .
ural daughter. Elila. who had been adopted by the Earl when it divine retribution, and reinstatement of the heir to his right-
was thought that her father had erished with H d R d '
P E"?! 9 aymon ~ ful place. It returns the reader to the time of Henry VI's ml-
Henry de Raymond, the murdered brother, is of course the natural nority (1422-1471). Upon returning from the wars, the noble
father of Edgar. a fact established in the Prescribed manner by knight, Sir Philip Harclay, learns that his dearest companion,
the arrow scar on Eugene de Raymond's arm. with these genea- Lord Lovel, has been murdered and his estate forfeited to Baron
logical formalities out of the way, the generous warrior is free Fitz-Owen. Living under Fitz-Owen's patronage is the Pedsdht
to give his daughter to the restored Eugene- The young nan is lad, young Edmund Twyford. The cordiality between their titled
now ready for rule having had the benefit of the generous war- father and such a lowborn youth arouses the mean envy of Fitz-
Ti°"5 Chi'a1'°"5 t"t9l59e in the de9P V°°d5- Owen's sons. Edmund attracts their hatred, but he also wins Sir
Philip Harclay's respect and Harclay pledges .to assist young
355. Reeve, Clara. THE OLD ENGLISH BARON: A GOTHIC STORY. London : Enmund in solving the riddle of his parentage. He also hopes of
Edhdrd 3"d Cha'lE5 Dilly, 1773- finding a way to avenge the murder of his friend, Lord Lovel. As
Modern Reeditions: in SEVEN MASTERPIECES OF GOTHIC HORROR, a test of cnnrage and worthiness, Edmund consents to spend three

i .l
110 THE FIRST GOTHIC; 1 ' ms rmsr GOTHICS 111
<
nights keeping a steadfast watch within the forbidden eastern 5 confederate, Lord C. It is a Fieldingesque trial of Saville's
apartment of Lovel Castle. The night vigil of the young hero or » ‘Virtue Willi?" P"@5E"VE$ "l5 Purity dild §tiffE"5 M5 Qlldrd dQal"5t
the heroine's occupancy of a room which has been sealed forever }. Lady Belmour's contrivances. when another of her rakish compan-
is one bf the most adaptable and reusable scenes in Gothic l ions. Lord 5-. abducts Sophia Helcumbe and holds her alens with
flftivfh During EdInund'S nightwatch, the novel's sole phantom * her friend, Miss Freewill, as objects of his sexual designs,
(attended by its phantom wife) enters the apartment in full “ Saville and his friend. l‘lr- Eliot. accomplish the timely rescue
armor and with visor closed bringing Edmund information about l ' Of the W0 ¥°""9 ld°"l9ll fmill the 5"a"e5 °f |-°"d 5- The Piﬂt 5EE"l5
his high lineage and naming his murderer. A sequel to this to be a regression to the ways of Richardson's novels; neverthe-
interview with the ghost will also prove useful to scores of ‘gt less, both the situations (kidnappings, moral heroics, erotic
later Gothic novelists. Having learned that he is the son of ‘ debasements) and the characters (maidenly victims, aristocrats
Lord Lovel and that Fitz-Owen is a murdering usurper, he presses l bent on rape, heroic rescuers) suggest the proximity of senti-
the search within the Castle for the unburied bones of his fa- mental fiction and the novel of seduction to the typical events
ther, an investigation which brings him to a subterranean com- , of the Gothic vogue. A Gothic novel is a type of sentimental
partment beneath the forbidden chamber. Harclay now fulfills his i novel written in cxtrcmis in which supernatural disaster is sub-
pledge to Edmund by calling the villainous Fitz-Owen to account ﬁliiuted 701‘ 9thlC6l dEiliEd"0l”-
and forcing a confession from him. But as J.M.S. Tompkins notes, ‘ r‘
Clara Reeve's villain is "a rather unusual villain, who neither l _ 357. Reeve, Clara. THE EXILES: OR, THE MEMOIRS 0F THE COUNT DE (IRON-
repents nor expires in agonies." with ownership of the castle i ‘ 5TADT- |-M40" 1 T- Houkhaiih 1783-
restored and identity regained, Edmund's marriage to Enlna may 5 "Oder" R@Edlti0"5! N0"!
proceed. For adding to the Gothic novel's inventory of devices, Gothic Type: Sentimental fiction (intermittent Gothic ele-
Clara Reeve deserves to be recognized as a major contributor to _ Inents) ‘
the technology of the form. Along with the chamber of horrors, '1 Bi°9"dPhl¢dl and Reseirﬁll Dita! 5<1"lil@"5, GOTHIC QUEST,
her introduction of the indefinite Gothic acoustic, the rustle, 1 PP-133, 300; F°5te", HISTORY OF THE PR5-RWANTIC NOVEL 1"
rattle, shriek, or groan in a dark corner, inspired Mrs. Rad- ' ENGLAND, PP-394-29$
cliffe to follow her lead.
i,‘ Critical Synopsis: The novel derives from a heavily senti-
356. Reeve, Clara. THE THO MENTORS: A MDERN STORY. London : Charles 4., mental tale by Baculard D'Arnaud, D'AU\W\"ZI= MECDOTE FRANCAISE
Dilly, 1783. 1 (1776). The structure is epistolary with a three-way flow of
Modern Reeditions: None I; correspondence among three disappointed and disinherited exiles,
Gothic Type: Sentimental fiction (intermittent Gothic ele- J.S. Berkeley, Monsieur de Courville, and the principal exile,
limits) | . Count Frederick De Cronstadt. He is a bigamist as a result of
Bl°9'”dPhiC3i dild RESEBFCVI Dita: 5l|nI11erS, GOTHIC QUEST, . chance and fate rather than by choice since he maintains a se-
pp.188, 300; Foster, HISTORY OF THE PRE-ROMANTIC NOVEL IN cret marriage with a lowborn German girl, Jacqueline Volker, who
ENGLAND, pp.202-204. l he had saved from being raped while canpaigning in Germany. De
’ Cronstadt's official and approved wife is Mesulina, the daughter
Critical S_ynOp5i5; An outline of the events of THE Two |4En_ of the general under whom he serves. The secret of his marriage
TORS suggests that Clara Reeve might have written another nov- ff '50 Jdcqlleilile i5 P95593911 dllll tile" eXlll°lii€d by D9 Cl'°"$tddt'5
el of terror had she been so disposed, but she opted for a tale Vile 59"V-illt. 5C"i"Eld9l‘s ill"! Wllld hdl/9 Jdiililelllle 35 M5 0""
of the delicate conscience instead. The book verges here and ' Sexual plaything. Schneider victimizes Jacqueline augmenting his
there on the Gothic, but finally settles its tone in conformity i f relentless amorous advances with the constant reminder that her
with Richardson's SIR CHARLES GRANDISON (1753) and MaCkey1lie'5 l  beloved Cronstadt has taken another wife and abandoned her for-
THE nan OF FEELING (see #260). The story centers on the moral ‘ ever- Gothic harassment of this sort usually comes from a bad
education of young Edward Saville, ward of Richard Munden. For l E-"’>'-. 53'0" 0' flE"\‘“5'l P"ie5t» hilt "Ere the l3l""ll"9 5e'Vd"t is ¢il5i5
perverted reasons, Munden intends to transform Saville from a  in the villaiiiﬂus i‘0l6- Drive" t0 ii\5a"ltY by 5Cll"@ld@'”'5 "l@"tdl
man of high principle into a man of base pleasure. He carries V .‘ . dill! Pllyilcﬂl Cruelty, JaC<lUeii"9'5 Slllrit l5 ﬁllﬂiiy broke" dild
forth his plan by introducing the young man into the cgmpany of . ;' she dies in a fainting fit. For De Cronstadt, the only remaining
the sophisticated and morally lax Lady Belmour, a character who ' ‘ course is vengeance. He pursues Schneider and kills him, but is
is almost a revival of the adulterous women of the Restoration in still tortured by his conscience over what has befallen Jacque-
comedies of Congreve and Hycherley. Saville's integrity is sore- ‘l il"9- 1" 5 dream, he Vlslts her 9'3‘/9 Vile"! She $"ddE"U' b"'5t5
ly tested in an episode that is slightly reminiscent of Edmund from the tomb to embrace and forgive himr This 55 B Hile €XalilPi@
Twyford's trial of courage within the forbidden chamber of Lovel ‘ of a ﬁethic scene heavily sentircntalized- Having ‘failed to find
Castle in THE OLD ENGLISH BARON (see #355). To taint his virtue, " love with Jacqueline in life, De Cronstadt wills his own rapid
the clever Lady Belmour arranges to have him shut up for an , death in order to seek reunion with her. As in THE'THO MENTORS
evening of pleasure with her flirtatious godchild, sdtey Jones, (see #356). Clara Reeve centrcls her Gothic and Inurliid tends"-
a fallen woman who has been deflowered by Lady Belmour's rakish  ﬁles T-0 Heal/E 6 tale Of the $l1ff9l'i'l95 07 "'9 l‘ll°l‘dl “fe-
1

112 THE FIRST GOTHICS . » 11-45 rmsr GUTHIC5 313
358. Reeve, Clara. THE SCHOOL FOR HIDOHS. London : T. Hookham, i titles were not uncommon in the period. Readers were often
1791' - . deceived by counterfeit Gothic titles. This work is cited as a
M°d9'" Reeditl°"5= "°"e specimen of such deception. The mysterious wanderer is a dis-
Gothic Type: Sentimental fiction (intermittent Gothic ele- placed and disinherited young man, Sir Henry Corbet. He is
m?"t5) ‘ trying to escape his savage mother's schemes to have him killed
Bl°9CiP"l¢ﬂl 3"¢ R9596TC" Dita! T°m0kl"5» PUPULAR NOVEL 1" j since she wants his birthright. She has already tried having him
ENGLAND. PD-154-155; 5"Mner$, GOTHIC QUEST. np.18B-300; . , committed to a madhouse and' she has unleashed her repulsive
Fozter, HISTORY OF THE PRE-ROMANTIC NOVEL IN ENGLAND, pp.2OI- ' steward on his trail to track him down. He finds refuge from his
Z0.
.L .
wanderings aboard the ship Argo, captained by Captain Howard, a
basically good man but with a chequered past which includes a
Critical Synopsis: The impulse to Gothicize a sentimental ~ bigamous marriage. The novel's action slows to a sluggish pace
plot and characters is evident throughout THE SCHOOL FOR HIDOHS. i ~ in the relationship between the curious Captain Howard and the
A "°""t@d "°"5E, 3 mad"°ma". monastic victimization, and con- lad he has rescued. The faulty construction of the novel shows
nubial cruelty hamper the lives and try the fortitude of the two ‘ that Gothic violence and intrigue, in order to be effective,
Vld°"5- Mrs. Strictland and Mrs. Darnford. In their exchange of must be shown and not called up from memory by the victim.
letters, the widows share with each other their marital dis- i Before disappearing, the wanderer relates his past history of
tresses, struggles, and eventual moral successes. The more Goth- maternal persecution to the attendant Captain Howard who feels a
ically situated of the two widows is Mrs. Darnford. Reduced to peculiar bond with the boy. He suspects that the wanderer might
poverty by her extravagant husband, she is finally located by be his lost son by the bigamous marriage. In a mismanaged cli-
her friend living in a haunted house and caring for a madwoman max, the wanderer returns to his mother's household where he is
named Isabella. Isabella herself is a fugitive from the Gothic I ' nearly killed by the steward, Mr. Mallett. But the attempt fails
world since she has fled the barbarities of the convent to seek and the mother expires in a feverish rage over the return of her
the protection of Captain Maurice, the single honorable and ' despised son, another of those convenient Gothic demises which
sensible male in the widows‘ lives. Before his death Mr. Darn- ' clears the way for the wanderer to be reunited with his heritage
ford attempted to sell his wife to Lord A. This gesture prompted
Mrs. Darnford to assert her independence and leave him. Mrs.
and a virtuous girl named Louisa. Although the capacity for ter-
ror and horror is present, all of the potential Gothicism of the
Strictland's story is similar although less potentially Gothic. tale is badly handled in this inept example of the form.
She married a miser and soon found herself shut up and severely
treated in a gloomy country house called Hoodlands. As an outlet ‘ " 360. Robinson, Mary. VANCENZA: OR, THE DAHGERS OF CREUULITV. London
for her benevolent nature, she takes in the needy child, Regi-
: Printed for the Authoress, 1792. -
nald Marney, who has been begging and yas driven off the estate I Modern Reeditions: None
by Mr. Strictland. The character-paralleling indicates Clara Gothic Type: Sentimentalized Gothic (uses the motif of the
Reeve‘s sense of proportionate structure. He have an insane girl mysterious key)
succored by one widow and a destitute child succored by the Biographical and Research Data: Sumners; GOTHIC QUEST, pp.84,
other widow in two purportedly haunted settings. At the end of 391; Tarr, CATHOLICISM IN GOTHIC FICTION, p.44; Foster, HIS-
the novel, the two widows have been thoroughly schooled in the TORY OF THE PRE-ROMANTIC NOVEL IN ENGLAND, pp.253-Z54.
miseries of loveless marriage. But because of their tenacious
kindness to the two unfortunates, they are enlarged by their 1 Critical Synopsis: This literary lady chose the sobriquet,
moral trials, the didactic reward for patient suffering. Isabel- "Perdita," or the "lost one" and was rumored to be the II1i5i-P955
la regains her sanity and Reginald comes into a proper patrimony of the Prince of Hales, a report which she apparently did
because of each widow's persistent kindness. Although each widow nothing to discourage. She wrote both sentimental and Gothic
is a victim, the emphasis is on feminine self-reliance in the » fiction, often using her own personal relationships to chronicle
case of adversity, not panic or tears as would be the case in an the emotions of her distressed maidens. In several respects, her
orthodox Gothic. But it is still obvious that Gothic locales and Gothicism bears a comparison with the work of Lady Caroline Lamb
conditions form the basis for Clara Reeve‘s moral testing of her in GLENARVON (see #220). Her temperamental fitness for Gothic
widowed heroines. - - ~ - ' " "
fiction is reflected in her character. She was,_ according to
James R Foster, 'a born romantic- she was emotionally unre-
359. Reeve, Sophia. THE MVSTERIOUS HANDERER. London 1 Printed for i strained and reveled in self-dramatization and self-revelation.
the Author by C. Spilsbury, 1807. Reynolds, Romney, and Gainsborough painted portraits of her."
M°de'" Reedltl°"51 N°"e The Gothicism of VANCENZA is very muted, misery and melancholy
_ Gothic Type: Domestic fiction (has Gothic elements and bears and not terror being the main moods of the piece} The novel
a Gothic title) ' bears a castle title and uses a castle locale. The delicate and
5l°9'3PhiCBl iﬂd R€S€8TCh natal "One romantic Elvira lives at Vancenza Castle where she is the 0FPhﬂ"
ward of Count Vancenza and the close companion of his daughter,
Critical Synopsis: Slightly Gothic novels with highly Gothic Carline. Their friendship is disturbed when a royal hunter, the

314 THE FIRST GUTHICS l THE FIRST GUTHICS 315
Prince Almanza and his hunting companion the Duke Del Ver
. . 0, gloom, poisonings, and thrilling escapes in a darkly ltalianate
enter the Castle to seek assistance for the Prince who has been eeuhgryside deriving totally from the scenery of Mrs. Radcliffe
"°""ded l" 3 huhtlhﬂ ee¢lde"t- hlViY$ lh l0V9 with l°'e» ,Elvira are all called upon in repetitive doses to captivate the reader.
forms an instant attachment to the Prince as she cares for him. The rimar victim is Marianna de S r c a beautif l f ‘ti
p y ev a u ugi ve
B"! ¢l"e5 ehd 5‘9"5 heqi" t° 3eC"m"lite that there may he 3" condemned to death because of her aristocratic lineage. Her
min s ti b t h
o on e e ween erself and the orinee who has stirred her function is to flee and to suffer as effusively and lyrically as
passions. Furthermore, the idyllic life of her friend, Carline, , 1 po551h]e_ gvii ih the hove] is generated by the aimesg super-
dissolves into Gothic trouble when the lustful Marquis Petrozi ' human presence of her father‘; accuser and pursuer Citizen
l"5l""ite5 hlm5elf lhto the Viheehli family ﬂhd Seeks he Cehry Ravillon, a bloodthirsty and ambitious son of the Reiolution.
her off for the usual ur oses. He is t d b C l‘ ' ' ' ' ' '
P P Pheveh e J er lhe 5 His darkest motives turn out to be sexual. Conspiring with a
fetheha the Cehht Vehtehles 35 Ceuht ﬂhd Marquis cancel out each - sensual abbot to seize Marianna and imprison her within the same
ether lh 5 fight fetal he h°th- hs he eXPlFe5» the Ceuht Veheeh- I convent where her mother had been sent to die, his machinations
la hequedthe 3 $tre"9e hey he ElVlFis dylhq hefehe he ea" make ‘ very nearly succeed. Thus, the maiden‘s life in exile is relent-
k"°"" t° he’ the l°¢k it flt5- lhli l"t'°d°Ce5 4" l"te'e$tl"9 lessly melodramatic and crowded with Gothic perils. But in con-
Gethle metlf Vhleh "lll fhhetleh heth literally and 5¥mh°llCell¥ formity with Radcliffean practices, Gothic crisis finally gives
thr°"9h°"t the remelhder hf the rﬁmﬂhee I0 Uhlﬂek the mY5teFy Of I way to security and rationality as the maiden is delivered from
the he'°lhe'5 lde"tltY- ElViTe must "0" l"Ve5ti95te eVer¥ "lehes ' the Gothic world by the powers of goodness. In this instance,
chamber, vestibule, and corridor of Vancenza Castle as she seeks goodness triumphs through the timely intervention of a hermit
to match key with lock in a series of Gothic excursions. She who turns out to be Marianna's father.
even persists in her search on her own wedding day, an ill-fated
I
oeenrrente as it tnrns ont- "hile arranqins for the Ceremony of 1 362. Roche, John Hamilton. A SUFFOLK TALE: OR, THE PERFIDIOUS GUARD-
her marriage to Prince Almanza, she discovers the key's lock at I 1aN_ London ; Printed for the Author by T. Hookham, Jr. and
last in that most Gothic of interiors, the family portrait ‘ [_T_ Hookham, 1810,
gallery. Behind a great portrait is a small panel whose bolt the Modern Reeditiong; None
key turns; behind the small panel is a golden chest- within th
. e i Gothic Type: Domestic fiction (various Gothic elements)
golden chest is a velvet pouch; and within the pouch, the secret Bihgraphicai and Research Data: None
of Elvira's identity in that most Gothic of objects, the lost
manuscript. Penned by the hand of Elvira's mother. the parchment Critical Synopsis: Captain Hamilton Roche was a professiona
contains the revelation that Elvira is the half-sister of Prince miiitary man Thus the taut and eestruegive relationships he-
Alnanza and she herself of royal blood- For most Gothic hero— tween soldiers are reflected in this subdued version of- Gothic
ines this ld be f
. won a nonent o trinnuhiand the dispersion of deceit. For the traditional maiden-villain antagonism of the
Gothic sloon- For Elvira. however. the shock of incest narrowly standard Gothic novel, Hamilton's Roche's story substitutes two
iVerted h'l"95 e" her death! 3 itreke Which mhet have a$t°""ded \ young soldiers, one intelligent and evil and the other naive and
many readers acclimated to the optimistic Gothic ending.
good. Young Alfred Duroc (or De Claridge) is the son of the
French political fugitive, Marshal Duroc. At an English military
361. Robinson Mary. HUBERT DE SEVRAC: A ROMANCE OF THE EIGHT T '
9 E5" H , academy, Alfred falls under the control of a sinister and ambi-
CE"TURY- London = Hookhan and Carpenter. 1796. l tious cadet, uiiiiam o'connor. For the darkest of motives,
Modern Reeditions: None O'Connor decides to devote himself to the destruction of Al-
Gethle Type: Phre °r hl9h Gothic (Radcliffean imitation) fred's life and the overthrow of the Duroc family and to these
Biographical and Research Data: Tarr, CATHOLICISM IN GOTHIC . ends, he Dian; he become his feiioe cadet‘; Iperfioious guard.
FICTION .39 65 66 ' '
, pp , , , 96, 107, 109, Foster, HISTORY OF THE ian.' To acquire power over Alfred, O'Connor sends fraudulent
PRE-ROMANTIC NOVEL IN ENGLAND, p.254; Levy, LE ROMAN . cgrregpgndence to Marshal Duroc. Through these incriminating
"69THIQUE‘ lNGLAl5s PD-438. 45?. 43?, 490. 491. 493. 493- letters, he works his way into Duroc's confidence, undermines
Critical Synopsis: Mrs Robinson's capable imitation of Mrs
Alfred's desire to marry Louisa and obstructs his military
- - career b ainin control of all money allotted to Alfred by his
Radeliffe has been described by Foster as beins "as seed as any q father. gogted tg duty in Canada, Alfred manages to take Louisa
of Perdita's novels. yet it is little better than the averaee abroad with him as his wife but she soon dies. Meanwhile,
elreuletlhg llhhary "iFFhtlVe- PeFhltB'5 heme" ere effeeted Vie‘ 3 O'Connor has completely chivied Alfred out of his inheritance
time 07 fete ahd tlresemely VlFh"°"5- lh trylhﬂ t° reflhe "P0" , and plots to have him jailed for debt when he comes home from
some of the old sentimental themes and distresses, she has ‘ Canadian duty. In an odd departure from the cannon ending which
produced novels that are artificial, theatrical, and often ‘ ' usuaiiy render;-the villain pQygr1e5$ and brings him to justice,
nandlin-" But these are the very qualities of Gothic authorship I the broken Alfred kills himself while languishing in _the debt-
that made Mary Rohinson a darling of the eirenlatinu libraries i‘ ors' prison. O'Connor then gloatingly assumes all of the wealth
ehd 9eVe he’ fake hi5t°T¥ Of the emiﬂhe family °f Hubert de I and prestige of the once proud Duroc family, a dark triunnh for
Sevrac its considerable success. Castles full of ictur s ue
D e q i an Irish renegade. .

316 THE FIRST GOTHICS THE FIRST GOTHICS 317
363. Roche, Regina Maria. THE MAID OF THE HAMLET. London : Long, NOVEL IN ENGLAND, pp.27O-271; Levy, LE ROMAN “GOTHIQUE"
1793- ~ ' ANGLAIS, pp.462, 475, 476; Noel-Bentley, E.R. ‘Jane Austen
Modern Reeditions: None , and Regina Maria Roche,‘ NOTES & QUERIES, 220 (1975): 390-
Gothic Type: Sentimentalized Gothic (numerous Radcliffean 391; 5ChT0ed9', Natalie 5- "R99i"i Marie R°Ch9a Pﬂhular NOV-
eohoes and elements) elist, 1789-1334; The Rochean Canon,‘ PAPERS or THE
Biographical and Research Data: Tarr, CATHOLICISM IN GOTHIC BIBLIOGRAPHICAL SOCIETY OF AMERICA, 73 (1979): 462-468;
FICTION, p.95; Foster, HISTORY or THE PRE-ROMANTIC novtt IN r Schroeder. Natalie E- "Rosina Maria Roche and the Early
ENGLAND. p-270; Schroeder, Natalie E. “Regina Maria Roche; Nineteenth-Century Irish Novel," EIRE-IRELAND: A JOURNAL or
Popular Novelist," DISSERTATION ABSTRACTS INTERNATIONAL, 39 IRISH STUDIES, 19 (1984l= 166-130-
(l979): 4962A-4963A (Northwestern University).
Critical Synopsis: The novel treads a fine line between the
Critical Synopsis: Although the title of Mrs. Roche's second plot of domestic distress and the saga of Gothic desperation. A
novel is pastoral, its content and tone are distinctly Gothic, convent, a Helsh mansion, an Irish castle, and the "haunted"
Hhen the heroine, Matilda, visits the great abbey, she experi- Abbey of Dunreath are familiar stations on the heroine's Gothic
E"C@s every Ohe Of the Radcliffean emotions: "The chapel was itinerary toward marriage and inheritance. The ‘children of the
disunited from the body of the structure by decay. The great abbey" are the brother and sister, Oscar and Amanda. The father,
altar was yet entire: Matilda gazed upon it with a reverential the Irish soldier, Fitzalan, married Malvina, daughter of the
awe: she felt a sacred terror, a severe delight creep through Earl of Dunreath, a deed which infuriated the Earl who then
her mortal frame.“ Most of the Gothic tension of the story disinherited her thus bringing about Malvina's death and the
arises out of Matilda's involvement with two morally opposite children's loss of name. The thwarted search for identity and
men. Her ability to see and judge each man for what he truly is various crises to chastity mar the lives of the children of the
has been hampered by her sentimental naivete toward the world abbey for the remainder of the novel. Amanda's major difficulty
and her inexperience. After the death of her parents she had is Gothic enou9h' She is stalked by C°l°"el Belgravei B"
been taken in by the kindly but stern Mr. Belmore and raised in enteTPFi5i"9 sedooer who also holds power over her brother and
rural seclusion. Matilda shows some of the emotional flaws of father thT°"9h hi5 military T3"k- 59l9roV9'$ Villaihy i5 abetted
the Radcliffean heroine and may even have given Mrs. Radcliffe by Amohda'5 a""t» h“9"5tia ohd her dl59"5ti"9 ¢°"5i", E"PhTa5ia-
an idea or two for the portrayal of her hedonist-hysteric or Meeting Lord Mortimer of Cherbury, Amanda falls in love with
woman of terrible pleasure, Emily St. Aubert, in THE MVSTERIES him. but theit Plﬂhs t° mohhy are d9frﬂY@d by Yet i"°thET
OF UDOLPHO (see #349). Matilda is pursued and even vaguely nefarious father, the Earl of Cherbury. Oscar's position is not
threatened by the young profligate, Mr. Bromley. She is also much better than his sister's. Falling in love with Adela
befriended by the misogynistic Charles Howard, a relationship h°"9JW°°d- the daughter °f Gehehﬂl h°"9YW0°d. he m"5t "itch
that is more intellectual than passionate. If we read the three helplessly as the general presents her to the savage Colonel
characters allegorically, we get a very cannon moral triangle of 5Ei9riV9- These ihtfiques ohd 5"tt9Ti"95_'9aCh 3 9@""ih9l¥ 50th-
Gothic characterization: innocence (Matilda); Corruption (Br0m- ic pitch when Amanda returns to Dunreath Abbey in an effort to
ley); salvation (Howard). Hhile the novel has its Gothic mo- establish her heritage and name so as to be worthy of Mortimer.
ments, it lacks that necessary piece of stupendous machinery, Here, While EXPl°ri"9 he’ dead m°th9"5 hedﬁhamheri 5h@ his "hat
the horrific or terrific climax and genealogical dénouement. ' seems a spectral oonfrontationr "The moonbeams. as if to aid her
Impulsively, Matilda marries a Mr. Hartland even though her wish of examining it. 5"dde"l¥ darted th'°"9h the Ca$em9"t5~
deepest feelings are for Charles Howard, himself the victim of a Cheered by the ""eXP@Ct9d light, 5h9 Bdvahced i"t° the '°°mi at
bad marital choice. Hhen Mr. Hartland dies and Howard's wife is the upper end of it something in white attracted "ET "°ii¢@- She
lost in a shipwreck all barriers are removed for the matching of concluded it to be the portrait of Lady Malvina‘s mother, which
Matilda and Howard, the proper couple. Had Mrs. Roche not prema- she had been informed hung i" thl5 '°°m- 5h9 heht "P to @Xami"e
turely removed the repulsive Bromley from the plot, THE MAID OF it; but her horror may be better conceived than described when
THE HAMLET would he more Gothic than it is. However her work she found herself faced not by 6 Picture hut the real f°'m ht 3
had taken a distinctly Gothic direction at the outset of her woman, with a death—like countenance-“ The abbey is full of
career and would become more purely Gothic as her canon grew to supernatural surprises of just this sort, all eventually ex-
a total of sixteen novels between 1789 and 1828. plained away according to Mrs. Radcliffe's formula of coaxing
and hoaxing the heroine and the reader. In reality, the animated
364. Roche, Regina Maria. THE CHILDREN OF THE ABBEV. London : Min- portrait which terrified Amanda is her living 5tePQFﬂ"dm0th9T-
erva-Press for Hilliam Lane, 1796. The old woman produces the will which contains proof of the le-
. Modern Reeditions: Folio Press, 1968, ed. Devendra P. Varma. ultimate claims of Amanda and Oscar and exposes the fraudulent
Gothic Type: Sentimentalized Gothic fiction (intermittent claims of the wicked aunt and c0u$i"- 5i"C9 CQl0"9i P@l9T§VE hi5
Redﬁliffeah Elements) already accommodated the forces of goodness by perishing of
Biographical and Research Data: Birkhead, TALE OF TERROR, delirium tremens, bliss and long life await the children of the
no-22, 59, 129. 130, 134; Foster, HISTORY or THE PRE_ROMANT1c abbey. For Mrs. Roche, the Gothic remains a vehicle and set of

, i :19
118 THE FIRST curnrcs . THE FIR5T BUTHIC5
- stle
effects as well as a platform for the display of her heroine‘s i ggcret passageway to freedom‘ E¥'Fs f;°mh:t:i:au2:edacaiOSt
effulgent sensibilities. In her next novel, CLERMONT (see #365), ' H5"°11Y °°""ect “Ith a grottu contaln1:g but Madeline's way out
she would make sensibility her effect and vehicle and the Goth- i l°V9' °' $029 S“€hh?;:°;:g1r§::C :3 y§ariS where D-Aiembert
‘C’ her farm‘ ?:§§§i§i§iy'"r§§:§§s the chase. But also waiting f°' he" beY°"d
‘ . - e ' r ired
*“~ "":"@'.'*ii@""  " T“  =  * tr 2:::1:.‘:.2%?ii;i:':is::i2:.;'2l.‘t:.:L:f .i:::'...::"....
or i iam ane, . I _ . < r_
Modern Reeditions: Folio Press, 1968, ed. Devendra P. Varma. i _ lP"litl°" °f 5"c°e55've °i'$eS’ Hrsi Rouge E§Q:§§e,:?§g Zgﬁelzru
Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (terror mode) ‘ ated R°d§1‘ffea" "arrat've tofadc osiicyfeiicity after thgir
Biographical and Research Data: Sadleir, Michael. THE NORTH- i and vi‘]a1n hack to the world O amid f terror Hhat the crit-
ANGER NOVELS: A FOOTNOTE T0 JANE AUSTEN, English Association =, s@n§atl°"°l Passage t“'°“g“ tn? Z2’ Gothic romance were wel-
Panphlet Number 68, November, 1927, pp.10-13; Summers, GOTHIC ‘ ’ ics saw as the absurd defects 9:5 of the form In the morbid ex-
QUEST. no.29. 96; Tarr, CATHOLICISM IN GOTHIC FICTION, nv.23. i cuned by '%°¢@'S is t"e Qi".d.i of iii ;hei°,ic and the
27, 32, 47, 68, 73, 79. 97. 105, 117; Schroeder, Natalie E. ‘ citement of its style, the _ori ihghhohi has a comhhgihe of ai
"THE MYSTERIES or uuotrno and CLERMONT: The Radcliffean En- horrific_ pace Of its "=§'a*"i~_ i Gothic fiction iruiy a
croachment on the Art of Regina Maria Roche," STUDIES IN THE ‘ the 'm9rlt5' 9' a‘1 the defec S 0 1
nova, 12 (1930): 131-143. ﬁvtnivs Whic-
T . . . : inerva-
Critical Synopsis: CLERMONT is one of the seven "all horrid“ I 366. Roche, R99'"i_Maf‘a- N0cTuRggh VISIT‘ A TALE‘ London M
titles Qiven to Catherine Morland by Isabella Thorpe in NORTH- Press far :ihi;z:_Lg::5 éhesh 1977, Edi F_G_ Atkinson‘
AMGER ABBEY (see f0i2) for the continuation of her Gothic educa- l l "°deT" ea _ D gtic Gothic znumerous Sentimental elementS)
tion. As a sensibility novel, it is a Gothic's Gothic written in BQIHTC 7109- °:eR h h Uaia_ iarr CATHOLICISM IN GQTHIC
the Radcliffean vogue but departing from that vogue in some i Bl°9'iPh'Ca‘ 3" eseg C ‘ ‘
significant ways. "A sunmary of the incidental features of CLER- i F1cTIo"- 99-45’ 61' 6 '
MONT," says Michael Sadleir, "is a sunmary of the compulsory _ _ . _ . - - 5 under its
qualities of Gothic fiction,~ One of these mandatory features is i i CT1t;Cﬂlh zynggsiaéhlsizhiihgargiieﬁohghcsﬁggéggiﬁi mahihuia_
the "Gothistic super~heroine" fixed supremely in the personage ' 0!" ﬂea "E13 chic in CLERMONT (see 1365), Mrs. Roche apparently
of the ruin-loving and fragile doll, Madeline Clermont, a porce- i l tion of the 0 _ G hhic and domeshic fiction with chaotic
lain damsel with ‘eyes, large and of the darkest hazel, ever h tried to Synthe5lZ8 ha hour vhihmes Three of these voiumes are
true to the varying emotions of her soul." By the mid-1790's, i C0"5eQ"E"CE5 °Verh the heroine Jacintha from genuine truubles
both the virgin and the villain had become more props than char- needed to transpor e ahd idehhihy ho the hhheshoid of Duhsahe
acters in the pages of the Gothic novel. Directly adjacent to “ over marriage,h mo:ey,hdizes in the prescribed Gothic manner
Madeline Clermont's rustic cottage where she lives in solitude l Castlei where s ehr_apsfahai hhhiii_ “But if her imagination has
with her reclusive father is a spectacular ruin which tempts the “"d Y‘th a dceitﬁ12err°r her mini was not less affected with
heroine with "horrid noises and still more_ horrid sights." here izphesseh hehoidihg hhh mohhhfhi dhsoiahioh of the buiiding
Exploring the ruin by night (as the good Gothic maiden should), "e1a"c ° g Q to enter, for over the ruius of what was once a
she encounters the melancholy stranger, De Sevignie,_but hefore she was adou hi iié the heart of Sehsibiiiiy invoiuntariiy
an attachment can be formed, the Countess de Merville, inter- i Qreat ac B goth: "gyel‘is very slow in arriving at this junc-
venes to disrupt the love Plot. Off Madeline goes to a remote ' laments. hu it is aimosh as if Mrs‘ Roche had consciuusiy
chateau where her apprenticeship to Gothic ruins equips her for ture of error.d he had Shaun in prior works. The Gothic
the series of terrifying experiences she must now endure. The ‘ reversed the speeh sihhha and her hhiovedi Egbert oshaidh are
Countess's vile son-in-law D'Alembert, the head of a vicious CF9qe"t‘515 °Sh it h or haned chiid of Sorrowi “area hy her
sort of committee of rakes and heliionsi sets about pursuing her i valid enough. G ehlzhg hgutaiized by her adoptive mother’ MrS_
within the dark chateau, but Madeline finds an unexpected friend , step§S1St8T,d sehiechea to the sehhai caprices of the seduceri
in Viola, the mistreated wife of D'Alembert. The many emergen- Grev1]]ea B" _ " JV h aii of these Standard distresses are han_
cies and chase sequences of this section of the novel show Lord Gwythef\n- _:_s S rather than as heiodramatic events
Rochean Gothic breaking away from the milder Radcliffean mode. i dled as stghic Posihiozhhii Jahihhhais chhsignhhht to the castie
The horrific Pace of the story comes closer to the frenzied hothin9PGo ic ogc the countess of Dhhsahei Since the very Sight
momentum of the Schauerroman than to the slow turning of the - l" the .¥'e"ee§ y - t her First within the gastle and then
Radcliffean screws of suspense. After the Countess's removal and 07 _Ja¢‘"th° ‘"f";‘a es nvenii aii of the i°ng;deiayed goghic
murder by D'Alembert's ruffians, Madeline and Viola are left i 40'1"? he'_e5ia£? ° zhco .“°C{urnai visit" Suddenly expl0deS.
hith the Gothic maiden's classic problem: egress frun the cas- L bu§l"e§5 Inc-u Ingd e n biuseg 3 frigid ’hand touches hers
tle. Fleeing through a pitch-black corridor, Madeline tears her ‘ “h‘]? ‘"5peCi'"9 a Ruggiiffean a;iC. but the Cola Contact turns
dress on an iron spike (a scene more worthy of Sade than Rad- , sending her IHEO a a ci i itog h héhhi a hefabhication of the
cliffe) and after further wretched gropings stumbles upon a ~ out to he the nocturna _v s , s

320 . THE FIRST GUTHICS TIE FIRST GUTHICS J21
Theodore character of THE CASTLE OF OTRANTO (see #466) who the guiles of 0'Sinister, 0smond's adventures parallel those of
promptly escorts her to light and freedom. Her next stop is a - his sister. He is taken prisoner by brigands. hunted down by
convent confinement where her discoveries include the cell of 0'Sinister's scoundrels, and has the bad fortune to fall in love
her own mother (unrecognized at the time) in the eastern tower. with Cordelia Raymond, the very daughter of his enemy, U'Sinis-
After a second deliverance by Henri, the heroine is rewarded for i ter. Osmond makes this discovery while fighting a duel with
her persistence by acquiring a surname, a mother, a father, and 0'Sinister, Nothing ever goes right for the young characters in
a husband. The woman Jacintha found in the eastern tower turns a Gothic novel until the final volume. Then, all is set right
out to be Lady Eglantine Endermay, her natural mother. Egbert " with incredible rapidity. But the same pattern of accelerated
"0" reappears with welcome news of Gertrude's death from small- disaster also holds true for the youthful characters in the
pox and claims Jacintha as his bride. After three turgid vol- books of Sir Halter Scott and Robert Louis Stevenson. Always
umes, Mrs. Roche produced a turbulent, if trite, Gothic story in sweet are the uses of Gothic adversity. The expected culmination
volume four. Before dismissing the novel as a failure, it should - of joy in v°luM@ Five $995 the dYl"9 0'5l"l5t@"5 5trBtﬂ9Bm$
be "°ted that 9'9" mi$mi"B9ed Gothics were purchased and liter- exposed and Captain Munro restored to freedom from a debtors‘
ally read to pieces by the faithful. The first edition of THE Prison well in time to preside over the double marriage of his
NDCTURNAL VISIT in the Sadleir-Black Gothic Collection children, Osmond and Elizabeth, to Cordelia‘ and Delacour.
(PZ2.R63n) exhibits the bookplate of Richard Brinsley Sheridan Strictly speaking, Mrs. Roche should not be dismissed as Just
thus indicating that Gothic novels were owned and enjoyed by another follower of Mrs. Radcliffe's Gothic formulations. Mrs.
authors of taste and talent as well as by neurotic young women Radcliffe's Gothic is distanced fantasy with some historical, or
conditioned only to tears and sighs. Mrs. Malaprop's wonderful pseudo-historical, past used to buffer the reader from improb-
solecism, "a derangement of epitaphs," might make a fine chapter able occurrences. Mrs. Roche eliminated historical removal in an
title for hundreds of Gothics. effort to contemporize her pictures of Gothic v10l@"C@-
Y i
7. Roche, Regina Maria. THE DISCARDED SON: OR, HAUNT DF THE BAN- 368. Roche, Regina Maria. THE HOUSES OF DSMA AND ALMERIA: OR, CON-
DITTI. London : Minerva-Press for Hilliam Lane, 1807. ' VENT 0F ST. ILDEFONSO. London : Minerva-Press for A.K-
Modern Reeditions: None Newman, 1810.
Gothic Type: Domestic Gothic (various terror elements) Modern Reeditions: None
Biggraphical and Research Data: Sumners, GOTHIC QUEST, Gothic Type: Sentimentalized Gothic (some components of the
pi 00' €?g;ﬁ§phi§:Tck:hd Research Data: Tarr, CATHOLICISM IN GOTHIC
‘ Critical Synopsis: The plot evolves from the arrival of a FICTION, PD-26- 32- h
disreputable stranger who disrupts the lives and delays the mar-
ital felicity of two young people. The victimized young people Critical Synopsis: The three-volume romance overflows with
are Elizabeth and Osmund Munro, offspring of Captain Robert Gothic scenes in forests, castles, and monasteries, The trans-
Munro. Captain Munro is the "discarded son" mentioned in the parent source for the characters and their predicame"lS 15
title. Having married a foreigner, he has been disowned by his Lewis's THE MONK (see #244). The two SPa"l5h f°mli'e5 °f °$m=
vengeance-swearing father, the master of Castle Glengary, who and Almeria have long been at deadly odds. The feud now mani-
may or may not have something to do with the villainous course fests itself in Gothic terms with the victimization of the
of events that ensues. Captain Munro and his children find them- novice, Elvira of Osma, by the haughty Rodolph of AlmEr‘@- 57"‘-
selves the objects of a stranger's mischief and intrigue. The ra, who is “the loveliest daughter who ever heaved a breast of
insidious intriguer is Lord 0'Sinister, a protean villain capa- snow," is currently held prisoner in an obscure cloister of_ the
ble of slipping in and out of a variety of roles during the Convent of Ildefonso where the abbot, Father Anselm, who 15 T"
story. His appearances are also ambivalent, for he sometimes the pay of Rodolph, sees to her terrOr§ ﬂﬂd DEF5°¢"t‘°"5- T"e'e
saves or releases the Hunros from trouble and on other occasions are numerous mistaken identities, misconstruances of good for
entraps them or causes the trouble. As a Gothic character, evil, danger for safety, male for female, a"d 5°_f°'th °"d 59"
0'Sinister seems the very personification of perversity. Eliza- eral scenes in the convent catacombs are take" dirﬁﬁtly ffvm the
beth is pursued by two men, Captain Delacour and Mr. Eaton. One text of THE MONK. During one of these night scenes, Elvira 15
of these men will prove to be 0'Sinister in one of his numerous ' greeted in an underground pdSSa9e_by 6 y0""9 m°"k- He th'°"5
disguises. The other will become her proper husband. Her experi- aside his cowl and the Castilian warrior, Eustace St. Valery of
ences consist of several familiar and a few novel Gothic predic- , the House of Almeria steps forth. Ne is the brother of Don Ferd-
aments. She is abducted by masked thugs, coerced to marry a inand St. Valery, with whom Elvira had fallen-in love; thus, her
repulsive suitor in a crumbling chapel (the wedding is stopped * banishment to -the convent. After many C0mPl1¢°tEd °d“°"t“':§-
by 5 Phi"t6$miC figure), imprisoned in Black Crag Manor by a both natural and supernatural in content, EUSIQCE d9$t*°!5 I5
determined rapist, Mr. Ruthven, (see #333) and is nearly burned bad brother, Rodolph, and reunites his good brother, Don :erd1-
alive when the chamber in which she is sleeping is put to the nand, with the desired Elvira. Roche cannot be accused_ 2 re-
torch by unknown hands. After his separation from his sister by writing THE MONK, since her storyliﬂﬁ 1$ appreclabiy d'f ere" '

:22 '
But she was obviously attempting to duplicate Lewis's t h
me FIRST GDTHICS  n-£ FIRST con-ucs 323
3 m°5P EYE scribed as lunatic-Shandyesque. O'Shaugnessy O'Neill is wear! °f
of atrocity and shock. when she arranges for Elvira and Don modern living and anxious to repurchase 6 Collapsed castle once
Ferdinand to fall through a rotten floor into a crypt filled owned by his family. Having acquired this crumbling piece of
with decaying bodies, she approaches the Lewisite Gothi iid l
c ea . Gothic real estate, he moves in with his two children, Eugene
, and Grace, accompanied by their maniacal aunt, MISS RQHQS Flﬂri
ass. Roche, Regina Maria. THE MONASTERV or ST. COLUMB: on THE ATONE- K Judith, The aunt's chief eccentricity is her dedicﬂm" W
MENT. London : Minerva-Press for Hilliam Lane, 1813. ' I phrennlogicai science, the theory that the contours of the head
Modern Reeditions: None > (or its lumps, grooves, and bunps) determine the personalit¥-
Gothic Type: Sentimentalized Gothic (some terror elements)
Biographical and Research Data: None
Critical Synopsis- The edition of the novel in th
She also believes in phrenological alteration which causes her
to try to shape the personalities of her _charges, Eugene and
Grace, by means of metallic hoods containing the desired curva-
- 6 sﬂdleir ,‘ tures for producing the best personality. TV°_9'°te5R"e P"Te§°-
Black Collection is elegantly bound and bears the bookplate of ' logical headpieces are made to order and fitted to both chil-
"A. Towlerton Leather.‘ The five volumes are ample. Volume one dren, Growing up in a crazy castle and forced to wear Cfﬂly
is 273 pages; volune two is 244 pages; volume three is 208 caps, both children may be forgiven certain lunatic tendencies.
pages~ volume four is 203 ' l ' '
. P6995, V0 "me TTVB T5 Z15 Pﬂ9eS. The _ The novel suddenly becomes Gothic when Eugene and_ Grace reach
romance is largely a book of mighty landscapes and gloomily pic- - adulthood and the villain, Mr. Mordaunt, CFBEP5 l"t° the P1°t-
turesque moods. It begins at St. Cuthbert‘s Abbey on the banks Mordaunt is the former owner of the castle. the ef"el father °f
of the Tees in Yorkshire and culminates beneath “the mouldering Grace's friend, Rose, and the murderer of his wife, whose body
arches“ of the Monastery of St. Columb in Ireland, with many I he deposited in a trunk hidden beneath the flooring of one of
abbeys and monasteries in between these two architectural poles. the castle chambers.‘The Gothic incidents that occur after Mor-
The plot follows the interaction of two families, the Ponte- daunt's return to the castle are inEPt1y "i"dled a"d 9*‘5t
fracts, whose “sons are noble and intrepid and daughters beauti~ solely to allow for the Radcliffean escapades of Grace and Rose
ful and accomplished," and Lord Hexham, his sister, Rosamund, ‘ as they secretly "ate" Whlie three he"°"“E" °f "°'da“"t retrieve
and his daughter, Angeline Gothic dela s se ar ti n
- y , p a o s, and en- a box of human bones. Having begun in hilarity. the "°Ve1 al“°§t
trapments interfere with the union of the children of the two ends in melancholy. Rose is shocked to learn that her father is
families, but the dramatic Gothicism is secondary to the lyric her mother's murderer and that she was suPP°5ed t" "eve bee"
Gothicism of the romance. Vast stretches of the work sound like killed with her mother. Carried off to a dark_ cottage by Mor-
Burkean essays on the art of the sublime as in this example from daunt, she soon dies of horror. The ending of the story is
chapter seven of the first volume: "Ruinated structures, it has \ happy, but totally unrelated to these solemn events. Grace is
bee" °b5erVed, appear to derive their chief power of pleasing delivered from her lunatic life at the crdly famlly ea$tlE by B
from the train of thought they excite, by the latitude they af- u local lad, Hilliam Delamﬂrei "h° "55 returned fr?“ the. East
ford the imagination." » Indies with a fortune in hand and an eye for a wife. Prior to
oche, Regina Haria. THE CASTLE CHAPEL: A ROMANTIC TAL
Grace's "escape from the castle." E"9e"e "ed departed t° fight
370- R ' '
E. London for Greek independence. Showing some weariness with her Own
: A.K. Newman, 1825. l storytelling, Mrs. Roche apparently f°"9°t_ $0 d\5D0§E °f t"e
Modern Reeditions: None villainous Mordaunt in the prescribed Gothic manner.
Gothic Type: Semi-Domestic Gothic (Radcliffean scenery and
elements) } 371, Roche, Regina Maria. CONTRAST. London : A.K. Newman, 1828.
Biographical and Research Data: Schroeder, Natalie E. "Regina Modern Reeditions: None _
Maria Roche and the Early Nineteenth-Century Irish Novel,“ Gothic Type: Sentimental fiction (residual or secondary Goth-
E§gE-IRELAND: A JOURNAL OF IRISH STUDIES, 19 (1984): 116- ic elements)
Biographical and Research Data: Schroeder. Nate]ie- "Re9l"ﬂ
Maria Roche, Popular Novelist, 1789-1834: The Rochean Canon,“
Critical Synopsis: The novel begins less as a romantic than . PAPERS or THE BIBLIOGRAPHICAL SOCIETY or Ai4cRiCA.' 73 <!979l=
as a comic tale and gradually becomes Gothic with the belated ' 462-468; Schroeder, Natalie. "The Anti-Feminist Reception of
entry of the villain. The cast is nearly an exact duplication of ; Regina Maria Rﬂche,“ E55AV5 1" LITERATURE, 9 (193Z)1 55'55-
the Rochean actors on the Gothic stage of her previous fiction. b - .
He find a brother and sister whose marital difficulties will ( Critical Synopsis: Nearly every Gothic tendency has dlSiP-
become Gothic distresses once the villain sets to work; a father R‘ peared or 'receded far into the back9F°""d I"-t"‘5 date R°°“ea"
who is a retired soldier and who has been somewhat careless i fiction. The 'contrast' is drawn- between the successful and
about the rearing of his children; and a bizarre governess-aunt, happy marriage of Horatio de Montville and Adelaide and the
almost a forerunner of one of Dickens's crazy old ladies such as ' unsuccessful and unhappy marriage of Montflorence and Helena.’ A
Mn aw wninUWﬁDMMTﬂ%D.Memwwﬂdﬂwuhn fa mum Mmﬂs mwnme®mnkp@LA®hwmf"‘m
at the outset of the hook is not yet Gothic, but is best de- f stance, had once been held P'l5°"e' i“ 3 d‘5ma1 Cauntry house

JZ4 rue FIRST GUTHIC5 T THE FIRST GOTHICS J25
where she passed the time in reading Richardson's CLARISSA until conpressed the tortured throat of his fallen foe." Other monster
her release by Horatio. Having been previously married to a fights show a marked originality as when Sir Eltram tries to
9h0fli95t@, Helena leaves Monflorence out of shame when her ford a stream and is attacked by an innmnse frogman. The de-
first husband reappears to claim her. Because of further compli- scription of this troll is exquisite: "Green were the fins which
cations, the two are never reunited and Helena dies in miserable webbed his brawny arms to his gigantic waste. His right hand was
self-exile. In her last novels, Mrs. Roche retained a bit of armed with a massy club of coral." Past the Cave of Despair and
Gothic emotion to accompany the conventional didacticism, but I toward a great iron portal Sir Eltram rides. The portal swings
She made t@5h5» not terror, the primary response. Natalie back, revealing a panorama of hell at the base of the Rock of
Schroeder's assessment of her achievement over the sixteen Modrec and another barrier to be crossed by the hero. The Temple
novels is sound: "Although Mrs. Roche is a minor novelist now of Tortures with its "walls of burning sulphur and floors of
at one time she rivaled the best in her field." I burning sand,“ is littered with the corpses of unsuccessfu
knights who had preceded Sir Eltram. Here, in a scene reminis-
372. THE ROCK or MODREC: on, THE LEGEND or SIR ELTRAM, AN ETHICAL cent of the Hall of Eblis in Beckford's VATHEK (see #030), sir
ROMANCE TRANSLATED FROM AN ANCIENT BRITISH MANUSCRIPT LATELY Eltram beholds Matilda's brother, Pharimond, in a burning pos-
DISCOVERED AMONG THE RUINS OF AN ABBEY. London : Thomas ture of living death. This fiery trial and many more stand
B“r"5ide f°' h- Bent, 1792- between Sir Eltram and his quest's end. He narrowly evades a
M°de'" R°edltl°"$= "One boiling cauldron, falls afoul of the enchantress, Urgandﬂ, de-
Gothic Type: Medieval Quest Romance (Spenserian Gothic) feats the seducer of virgins, Sir Paradel the Gay, overcomes
Biographical and Research Data: Lévy, LE ROMAN "GOTHIOUE" Gondibert the Strong and Gothmond the Fierce and his "apostate
ANGLAIS, pp.245, 434. troop," but loses the protective bough of amaranth. Urganda
overtakes him, removing him to her voluptuous dome where
Critical Synopsis: One of the most Gothic of all the novels "powerless sunk Sir Eltram amid his exulting foes." But in the
Of the Periﬂd, thi$ ﬂ"0"Ym°"5 259"Pd§e medieval quest romance is manner of Circe, Urganda relents to help Sir Eltram on his way.
organized not into chapters but into twenty-seven prose cantos. ' Arriving at the Rock of Modrec, he slays Oswald and his "demon-
Both the language and the heroic clashes with monsters show the iac train," then completes the quest by scaling the cliffs to
influence of Spenser's FAERIE QUEENE (1596) together with many reach "the suffering fair one's side." The reunion atop the Rock
reminders of Macpherson's Ossian poems (1760) and Malory's MORTE of Modrec becomes the saint's legend of the locale as the saga
U'ARTNUR (1485). The novel may also have been one source of of Sir Eltram's courﬂqe the" leads t° the f°""dl"9 07 the Abbey
5t9Ph@" C"llE"'$ HAUNTED PRIORYZ UR, THE FORTUNES OF THE HOUSE of Guelflin beneath the conquered Rock. For sheer indulgence in
OF RAVO (see #086). Sir Eltram, his scabbard empty of sword is the marvellous for its own sake, it would be difficult to.find a
seen "pricking on the plain" as he makes his dark voyage over more satisfying Gothic example to emerge frOM the P9Tl°d the"
the_ wasted land toward the dreadful Rock of Modrec, prison of thiS T0mi"CE-
Matilda, the daughter of King Offa. She is held there by Oswald,
the_ magician, son of Modrec and "servant of the damned.“ Paral- , 373. THE ROMANCE OF THE APENNINES. London : Henry Colburn, 1808.
leling the main story is the inset legend, "The Adventure of Sir Modern Reeditions: None
Gutheline," in which Spenser's wizard, Archimago, figures as the Gothic Type: Rauberroman (Radcliffean and Shakespearean ele-
villain. The opening lines of the romance resonate with impend- ments) _
ing horror: "Dark as the silent recesses of the tomb, was the 5l°9FaPhlCal ahd R95E5r¢h Datai Rill°i HAUNTED CA5TLE.
starless throne of night: bleak was the blast that howled PP-53'55; LéVy, M5"'l¢9- '5h5ke5Peare at 1° r°m°"
through the forest of Grodolphon, whose oaks were coeval with 'Q0thlq"9,'" CALIBANI 1 (1955)1 47-53-
the reign of Brute--the fugitive from blazing Troy." The way to
the Rock is blocked by monsters extraordinaire and fabulous Critical 5yh°P5i51 The title ca"i95 St'°"9 remi"der5 of Mr?‘
beasts of every description, but the weaponless Sir Eltram has Radcliffe‘s imaginary Italy» The Stﬂhlllne l5 5 G°thl° rEfab"'
the protection of the spirit, Ariel, and the promise of finding cation of two Shakespearean comedies, THELFTH NIGHT and A5 '9“
the charmed branch of amaranth which can free the maiden. He LIKE IT with Gothic embellishments from several other plays
battle5 fI'°'h'9@thl"9 SETPEHIS, ‘innumerable wolves," and the plundered liberally in order to Shakespeareanize the terror and
giant, Grufflan, and overwhelms them all with the aid of Ariel suffering‘ Action muvas fT°m 5l"l$hEh "6PI9$ "here v‘°l° has
his own strong faith, and a magic helmet given to him by Sevina‘ landed disguised as a boy to the stronghold in the Apennines of
the daughter of Triton. The anonymous Goth's imitations of the the benevolent outlaw, RI"°1d°- vi°lB l5 Persetuted by her un-
ordeals of the Red Crosse Knyght in Book One of the FAERIE cle, Roberto. vhﬂ thought that he had removed heﬂ permanently
QUEENE are excellent mimicries of Spenserian fight scenes. .ln when he had her father. H€"FlC0, @55i55l"3tEd- She 15 1°Ved ,by
the Hood of Errour, the Red Crosse Knight had strangled the ser- Lorenzo, Duke of Urbino. Hence, her dowry is going to be consid-
Peht» EYYOHP. F0? hi5 first victory over monsters. Sir Eltram's erable once her Gothic troubles are over and she finds‘ her way
first fight is with this same creature from Spenserian allegory back to her still-living father. One member of Rinaldo's band is
and the method of destruction is the same. "The prudent knight the Gothic Jacques of this curious group 07 APe""i"9 Exiles-

326 rr-is FIRST ourmcs l rm: FIRST GUTHICS 327
Going under the name Vincentio he bro ds r ' ' l ich has Gothic otential, but the man is neither a concu-
and philosophizes on the sadness of lige Gngiiaiiéiiolliiggizeié 1 giscent baron ngr a sexually starved monk nor is the woman who
boost his spirits. Vincentio is her father, Henrico not mur- pulls him den" into corruption and death very much like any of
dered after all as Roberto thinks, but now the philosopher-in- the wicked women of the Gothic world, a Matilda in THE MQNK (See
residence of Rinaldo‘s romantic band. High up in the Apennines #244) or a Vittoria Bracciano in THE ABBESS (SE9 #1?9)t "hat the
there are many entrances and exits, each Gothic character i reader found behind the title was an almost naturalistic tale of
Playing many parts. Eventually, Lorenzo joins the anonymous ~ 1 family decline and sordid death. The _main character, Lionel
Goth's Shakespearean ensemble and guides Viola to freedom ‘i S0uthamPt°"» b@9l"5 as a dl5tl@9"lShed. gentleman’ caring
although she has been under no threat from the banditti who have v hH$ba"d, i"d admirable fith@F- E"t@'l"9 Y@'l‘amE"t- he °tt'act5
treated her compassionately. Lorenzo is also instrumental in ’ the attention Of the ""$CFHDHl0“5 Ui*¢"]°"E5$ “"9 P'°°eed5 5Y5‘
bringing the villainous Roberto to justice, but instead of a tematitally to destroy him by tempting him to v§'l°"$ Stages. °f
reconciliation with his wronged brother, Lorenzo is forced to ‘ vice. As his wife and son helplessly watch his moral dE°ll@e'
answer to the Inquisition for his crimes. Accused, exposed, and Southampton sinks into a Pltlful State °f_de$e“e'°°y' A5 hi dies
vanquished, he bursts a blood vessel and dies in a frothing abject, al0"e. and $iFiPDed Of all dl9"lt¥» the "a'°"l°?°55
rage. The nuptial pairing of Lorenzo and Viola in a sylvan set- bE9l"5 '10 l°°k 5'°""d for 6 "9" Victim til PEPE“ her "lC‘;°:5
ting may now take place right on schedule. Not only do all of amusements on. Her motives are purely predatory and her nee do
the author's characters bear Shakespearean names, but they also be and to do evil 9°95 ""P""l$hed- Hid M'5- R°55 ch°5e" t° me '
speak in pseudo-Shakespearean flourishes. Shakespearean language ievalize and supernaturallle t"@§9 Ch°'°°te'5 a"d ?ve"t5' her
had been present in the Gothic atmosphere since THE CASTLE OF hovel night have attained Pure Gothic status. But as it _stands,
OTRANTO. In the hands of Hrs. Radcliffe's followers, artificial the novel is another hihiiuqranhical eianvle °* 9"m $°°‘°‘ f‘°'
Shakespearean diction was frequently blended with situation; tion passed off under a false Gothic title.
adapted from Shakespearean lots es eciall th ' '
and tragedies. In THE nAﬁni£n’cAsiLs, tn: critictrgihguxgilzs 376. Ross, Mr§- THE 5TRA"$ER5 °F L‘"DE"FEL°l‘ °R- “"0 I5 "V FATHER?
designates Shakespeare to be "the most obvious and’ influential ‘ ‘ London : Minerva-Press for A.K. Newman. 1313-
source" for both supernatural machinery and evil characteriza- , Modern Reeditions: None
tion for the Gothic novelists. - Gothic Type: Domestic Gothic
374 ROSALIE OR THE CAST E OF Biographical and Research Data: None
- 1 , L MONTALABRETT . :
Hurst, Rees, and orne, 1811. I London Longman’ Critical SyndvSi§= Throughout the three volumes. the novel
Modern Reeditions: None mixes domestic and Gothic motifs. A young woman who believei She
Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (terror and sentimental ele- is an orphan is consigned to a remote rnanslﬂil by her l"dlffE'e"t
"E"t$) ' 1 guardians. She is received by the terrifyl"9 Waite‘ °f L‘"de“‘
Biographical and Research Data: Summers, GOTHIC QUEST p.29 feldt Wh° treats he“ "lth alte'"ate kl"dPeS5 and abusi and who
’ l ‘ seems to be concealing some terrible secret about_ their_ rela-
Critical Synopsis: The motto adorning the frontispiece of the ‘ tl0"5l\lP- Her 515" “lull” the f°"blddl"9.i'?“Se ‘S to find her
four volumes--‘Led through a sad variety of woes"--designates familial ideiltli-.Y Vlllle P"@59"l"9 llel’ Vl"9l"ll5J» the stmdard
til! 'I0vel as Gothic according to the pattern of the young woman “ties °f the Gothic heroine‘ For the alder ordeal of l:he.e“cl°'
lost and harassed within a medieval landscape. The innediate , sure of body, the newer Gothic novelists Here bE9l¥"‘"9 t°
source for Rosalie's infinite woes seems to be Mrs. Radcliffe's ' substitute an enclosure of the spirit as it tested iii Mﬂral
ROMANCE 0F THE FOREST (see I348), although there are plenty of will against the closed world of towering_ male egos and
woeful reverberations of Charlotte Smith's heroines Enneline ‘ subjugating roles. The Gothic narrative situation of THE STRAN-
ahd Ethelihde. heard throughout. ' " otas or LINDENFELDT would become a useful plot patter" for the
Victorian novel of domestic distress and enlightenment. For ex-
375. Ross, Mrs. THE MARCHIONESS!!! OR, ‘THE MATURED ENCHANTRESS" ' ample. Charlotte Br0nte's heroine, Jane Eyre, is a stranger to
London : Minerva-Press for A.K. Newman, 1813. . herself as well as a stranger of ThornflEl<1 Hall-
Modern Reeditions: None 5 ' _
Gothic Type: Fake Gothic (a sentimental and social novel un- 377. Rouviere, Henrietta. LUSSINGTON H5BEV- L°"d°" 1 Ml"9"°‘P'e5S
ger a Gﬁthic title) 3 for Lane, Newman, 1804.
iograp ica and Research Data: Su r rn R editions: None .
241. "me S, GOTHIC QUEST, pl zﬁﬁic Type: Gothified history (imitation of Ro_chean Gothi-
' Critical Synopsis: The deliberate deceptive titling suggests ' gibglaphical and Research Data‘ 5"Mmers, GOTHIC QUEST, pp.85.
ﬁongvegoﬁfasorceryhandkother possible Gothic activities. But the ‘ 177.
v rls no ac magic or su ern t l l h t . i _ -
It does contain a corrupt relationship getcgen aomin Zng §°:§;§n ' Critical Synopsis: An imaginary thirteenth century, frowning
i-

328 ms FIRST GUTHICS TI-E FIRST GUTHICS 329
gE:t]:§du°:§ 5i"l5te' ihbeys, Several perpetually pursued maid. ‘ > Gothic Type: Romance of the ruin (terror mode)
C TOIIS, ESCBPES, , _
  ..:“:::@::::: ..:;::.:::":r:..”::::r:i
Biographical and Research Data. Sunnnrs, GOTHIC QUEST, pp.87,
404; Macaulay, Rose. PLEASURE OF RUINS. London : Heidenfeld
terror fill the two volumes of the romance. One probable model ‘ and Nicolson, 1953; Rpt. London : Thames and Hudson, 1966.
f . _
or most of the author's places and people is Regina Maria
Roche s THE CHILDREN OF THE ABBEY (see #364). The followers of Critical Synopsis: Although the Gothic was in sharp decline
Rochean Gothic came closer to ideal horror than the imitators qr I by the third decade of the movement, a demand for titles con-
Ann Radcliffe and the tone here is distinctly Rochean Hhere taining the word "ruin" persisted into the 1820's. Francis
Mrs. Radcliffe general] l' ‘t d h '
haunted castles, Mrs. Roch!‘ :ref::r::nt:g "33?" ﬁﬁronﬁeggigzg
th'°"9h a series of architectural crises a plan followed in
Clifford's THE RUINS OF TIYOLI (see #068) set the standard for a
vigorous subcategory of the Gothic romance, the romance of the
ruin. Nearly plotless but full of sublime thrill at the sight of
LUSSINGT0" ABBEY- I ‘ Roman devastation, THE RUINS OF SELINUNTI is more emotional
7 . " r
3 8 Rouviere, Henrietta. CRAIG HELROSE ABBEY. London : Chapple
travelogue than novel. The book tahes its characters on a senti-
mental journey of the Gothic type in a ramble by ﬂD0"ll9"t Pﬂ5t
1816' ' the mouldering reminders of ‘the grandeur that was Greece, and
Muder" Reedlti°"55 N0"6 ' the glory that was Rome.‘ The Gothic imagination continually
goshic Type; Gothified history (terror elements)
1779 an ica and Research Data: Sunmers, GOTHIC QUEST, p.
Critical Synopsis‘ A fami]Y 569a of the Mont Lint
- - ' ‘ ons done in
?gTl:§gw];fbu?§§€" Meeke and Mrs. Radcliffe. The overall concern
_ _ 9 $"5PEhSe along with the lengthy landscape
craved architectural metaphors of dark beauty and found these in
the power of time over human works. The Roman ruins near Seli-
nunti in southern Sicily served as a type of visual elegy on the
dark power of time. It had been an anti-classical desire for
spectacles of architectural disfigurement and decay which had
ushered in the early Gothic novel in the 1760's and 1770fs. The
emotional gratification arising from the awesome view of a
descriptions and fondness for the ict h ' lla sed building surrounded by a dim landscape is one indica-
d@P@"d@"¢¥ on the Radcliffean Gothig model?qTheSr$TnshEfa:é?g;;: ‘ tion gf how Gothic literature discovered a peculiar aesthetic in
Abbey on the River Tweed were a Favorite Gothic Spectacle and the dark and violent forces in control of the physical and spir-
natural 5°“rCe °f ]E9e"d~ I itual world as expressed through the symbol of the ruin.
379. Rowson, Susanna Haswell. THE INQUISITOR: OR INVISIBLE RAMBLER 381. THE RUINS OF ST. OSHALD. London : Vernor and Hood, 1800.
L°"d°" 1 wllllﬂm Line. 1788- ' ' V Modern Reeditions: None .
Mudef“ Reeditl°"$5 "°"@ | Q Gothic Type: Romance of the Ruin (horror mode)
G°th‘C TYPE: Picaresque fantasy (intermittent Gothic ele- iv Biographical and Research Data: Sunners, GOTHIC BIBLIOGRAPHY,
'“°"t5) 1 p.490; Lévy, LE ROMAN "GClTHIQUE" ANGLAIS, p.462.
Bl°9raDhical and Research Data: Petter Henri THE EARLY
AMERICAN NOVEL. Columbus, OH : Oh' St t ‘ . - C 't' l S o ‘s: The author is identified only as the “Au-
¥?;7:5 Ela¢$"E?"0. Edward J. 'Susagna Ragwgql Rg5gon?pA26a€€: thorr10fcaBR0H:E$S1MELH0T," a five-part sentimental Gothic pub-
Q HP y 0 irst Editions of Primary Horks and of Secondary
Sources, BULLETIN OF BIBLIOGRAPHY, 43 (1935); 13_15_
lished in THE LADY'S MONTHLY MUSEUM from February through _June,
1799. The RUINS OF ST. OSHALD appears to be an adaptation of
incidents from the novel to the Gothic setting of the ruined ab-
C'""i¢el 5y"0Psis: The writer and act s - b rce' a throu h the maidenly eye hopeful of the thrill
best remembered for her novel of seductidhsghd gghggiigoziﬁgiols “ ogyteijoef Thatesort ofgpicturesque gloom so appealing to read-
CHARLOTTE TEMPLE (17 ' ' ' ' ers with Radcliffean tastes abounds, but the action is minimal
81). Some Gothic elements mixed
1 - _ with the
$3352“ TﬁEmT%UIgITORteTn? @150 52°" “".‘" '.'e' ab§"""§i Pica-
, , n» . his is an exercise in Sternean sensib_
and almost static. The author's 0bj§CtlY9 "55 $9 °ff°' the
reader a series of pictorialized Gothic moments designed to stir
lllty and a novel of sentimental fragments with Gothic tendeh_ _ the poetic soul with anticipatory terror.
cies rather than a pure 9qthi¢_ The motifs of Seduction adu]_
TEFY. 50Cial prejudice and victimization h ’ ‘ 382 R ll John THE HUN OF ARROUCA' A TALE London : John Murray,
th , - _ s ow up strongly in _ - "$59 - " '
f e novel s webwork of stories. The characters of the long §uf- 1322-
M .
@'l"9 ariana and the ruthless seducer, Codgie are taken
Modern Reeditions: None
‘"‘“9"* "‘°'" the Gothic tradition. ’ < Gothic Type: Sentimental Gothic
380. ' . F
THE RUINS or SELINUNTI. on, THE vat at MAZZARA, SICILIAN, GALA
Biographital.and Research Data: '
RIAN, AND NEAPOLITAN SCENERIES BY A LATE RAMBLER IN THOSE Critical Synopsis: Michael Sadleir noted that "the novel was
    
suppressed after publication, only a few copies escaping." The
suppression may have been because of the sexual suggestiveness

330 THE FIRST BUTHIC5
of its central situation, a love affair between a nun and an T T
army officer. Also, novel writing in the Gothic vein might not
have been regarded as quite proper for a statesman and parlia-
mentarian of Lord Russell's standing. He would later rise to the
highest governmental posts and live to be an eminent Victorian,
dying in 1878. The events of the novel are contemporary using
the penisular campaign of the English against Napoleon as the
background. In 1810, the young English army officer, Edward
Pembroke, needing a rest from the savageries of the war, visits
the Portuguese convent of Arrouca. There he is received by
Sister Justina and her beautiful younger sister, Catherine, the
nun of Arrouca. A forbidden love affair swiftly develops and
Pembroke is soon wearing her white ribbon in the form of a cross
over his heart by the time he is sunmoned to the next campaign
against the French. All of the scenery within and around the
Convent of Arrouca is intensely Gothic. A lugubrious climate of
emotional oppressiveness hangs over all, punctuated by the rou-
tine severity of the monastic day. In Pembroke's absence, the
eruption of all the passions including the most intense sexua
longings well up in Sister Catherine. Thus, when the sisterhood
has to evacuate the convent to flee to Oporto when the enemy
threatens, all of her repressed sexual desire comes to an un-
bearable focus when the nuns find Pembroke and several other
officers lying wounded in the roadway. "On taking off his waist-
coat a little cross of ribbon was pinned on his shirt just over
his heart. This sign changed in an instant her whole being."
Although he loves her, Pembroke is deeply ashamed for setting
Catherine adrift "on a sea of passion" and he resolves not to
see her ever again in order to remove further temptation. But
all of these resolutions are useless as "the spark of desire"
enlarges to a fatal passion. Aware that desire is destroying her
sister, Justina takes Catherine off to her brother's home at the
seacoast town of Viana. Years pass as Pembroke searches for
Catherine, finally finding her but barely recognizing her
because of her self-inflicted penances. She has undergone a
mortifying change for her figure is now reduced and emaciated
and there is an "otherworldly look" in her eye. Unable to with-
stand this spectacle of loss and the defeat of love by religious
passion, Pembroke falls ill and dies. The contrast of Cather-
ine's last appearance with her former lovely being is just as
shockingly powerful as any encounter with a bleeding nun in the
pages of the high Gothic thriller, and perhaps more so, since
the scene seems to be a conment on the needless and pointless
wastage of spirit.
383. R.S , esq THE NEH MONK London Minerva-Press f U ll
. . . : or i iam T_j es _ .. - -~ ~ "c ~
—~-—%» - ,-,,,,,, 1-_<~,aIm4.1 .
Lane, 1798. I-~.v-"1 ""”"'J""" """\ ' ‘ ' ""'
Modern Reeditions' Non
. e , _ / '7 _
Gothic Type: Gothic parody / / » 
Biographical and Research Data: Shepperson, Archibald B.  ‘I . " (I/I .  /071.4%!/I61/Id .
"Gothic Nonsense," in THE NOVEL IN MOTLEY: A HISTORY OF THE "' '
' BURLESQUE NOVEL IN ENGLISH. Cambridge, MA 1 Harvard UP, 1936,
pp.l54-181; Sunmers, GOTHIC QUEST, pp.245-246, 302 391.
, .
Critical Synopsis: This is satire in an ultra-caustic key.
,”_n_;,,,, r,,1.1,',;;.iA 1;» ‘I‘._q_.; 1- Int!/rnnln .V0|-'1- '
=EY$;m

THE FIRST GUTHICS 331
The authorship remains a mystery, although Montague Sunners pro-
poses the Gothic novelist, Richard Sickelmore, as a candidate.
R.S. systematically excoriates every overblown aspect of Lewis's
THE MONK (see #244) with a precise, almost paragraph-by-
paragraph burlesque of style, characterization, scenery, and
lewd and loud climaxes. The method and purpose of R.S., observes
, Shepperson, "is to turn Lewis's own words and book against him,"
and thus abruptly eradicate the inane popularity of this single
horror Gothic. In this sense, THE NEH MONK differs significantly
from the Gothic satires to follow. Unlike Barrett's THE HEROINE
(see #026) or Jane Austen's NORTHANGER ABBEY (see #012), R.S.
sets out to debunk and demolish a single book rather than the
Gothic tradition as a whole. The parodist's art also shows how
vulnerable the more extreme sorts of Gothic fiction were to this
inevitable type of attack. The novel's publication by Hilliam
Lane's Minerva-Press indicates the willingness of the chief
purveyor of Gothic fiction during the period to merchandise
lanpoons of its own bestselling product, the Gothic novel. R.S.
wields the satirist's scalpel with a deft and speedy alacrity as
he dissects the most famous or infamous horror novel of the
1790's. The Capuchin-abbot, Ambrosio, is cleverly Protestantized
into the fanatical and ranting preacher, the Reverend Joshua
Pentateuch, a Methodist zealot and a "Boanerges of the pulpit.“
Lewis's seductive novice, Rosario (Matilda), glides impishly
into Pentateuch's life as the smug and sexless Peter, later
unveiled to be the froward and sexy Betsey. The odious convent
of St. Clare in whose slimy catacombs the pregnant nun, Agnes,
had undergone her unspeakable Gothic ordeal is modernized into
Mrs. Rod's boarding school. It is here that Alice Clottleberry
(Lewis's Agnes) is dragged by the punishment porter into a flog-
ging apartment and there introduced to several unmentionable
curricular delights. For Ambrosio's savage erotic raid on his
sister's virginity and the murder of his mother, R.S. presents
Pentateuch invading the bedchamber of Ann Maria Augusta (Lewis's
Antonia) looking for loose banknotes instead of sexual quarry. A
primary target of R.S.'s sneer is the coarse sensationalism of
Lewis's undisciplined style. Thus, the satiric parallel for Am-
brosio's spectacular celestial fall and horrifying death is one
of the book's most damaging pieces of corrosive wit. The garru-
lous Pentateuch is brought to the gibbet, his pockets overflow-
ing with pilfered banknotes and his mouth overflowing with hypo-
critical sermonizing. So much raucous and exaggerative detail
occurs at the climax that R.S.'s parody nearly becomes a genu-
inely gruesome Gothic scene if read out of context. At book's
end, nothing of the old MONK is left standing, but one dismant-
ling parody did not disable the march of the Gothic in its vari-
ous absurd and excessive forms on into the next decade.
384. Saint Victor, Helen. THE RUINS OF RIGONDA: OR, THE HOMICIDAL
FATHER. London : Chapple, 1808.
Modern Reeditions: None . '
Gothic Type: Romance of the Ruin (terror mode)
Biographical and Research Data: Sunmers, Montague.-"Architec-
ture and the Gothic Novel," ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN AND CON-
STRUCTION, 2 (I931): 78-81; Summers, GOTHIC QUEST, pp.B7,

ass. scunannco, A ROMANCE. LADY'S MONTHLY nuscun on POLITE REP
332 ' THE FIRST corracs ‘E me rmsr conucs 3”
404; Lévy LE ROMAN "GOTHIQUE" ANGLAIS, pp.405, 411 416 ‘ d t bl d th , convent persecution
425, 427: 465. N01] H E]_ th _ -_ 1 society, sudden an unaccoun a e ea s _,
9 I llﬂbe M- "The Gﬂthlﬁ 5XDerience. awful bursts of thunder, the constant threat of rape and live
Female Imprisonment. Madness. and Escape in Selected Texts by burial and every other aspect of Gothic apparatus associated
Women Writers,‘ DISSERTATION ABSTRACTS INTERNATIONAL, 46 with the form. Schabraco di Mendozi assumes three selves in the
(1985): 159A (Indiana University), 3 wildly twisting narrative, when first spied by young Rinaldo at
_ _ “ a masquerade in Messina, he is a figure of irresistible mystery,
CTltlCii 5!"°P5i$1 The ima9i"itiVE PQWEY Of the rui" t° ""lt@ h I a man of "solemn step and uncouth appearance whose smile was the
terror a"d 5"biimit¥ i"t° B $i"9ie 'E5P0"5e l5 Evldeﬁt @V@Fy- E smile of spleen.‘ When encountered again in the character of the
where throughout this four volume Gothic. Although its situa- Y diabolical monk, Father Stephano, he flﬂ$hE$ "the biﬂli"9 e¥e~
tions are the stereotypical Gothic distresses, its lurid Gothic ‘ pallid cheek, and trembling lip‘ of the Gothic face “working
title made the romance thoroughly irresistible to the circulat- nith a variety of contending passions." Just how fatal this mix-
ing library clientele. The prisoner of Rigonda is Adeliza. Both ture of passions is will be brought home by the villain's sudden
her name and her harrowing experiences within the devastated death a demise apparently caused by a fury over the Failure 0f
walls _of Rigonda suggest that Saint Victor wrote her Gothic by <' hi; évil which brings on a terminal convulsion. When fiﬂdliy
expanding noon o oeriodical Gothic, EIJELIZA: A GOTHIC TALE, ser- ‘ exposed through the contents of the manuscript as the hoiiiicioai
ialized in the LADV'S MAGAZINE (1802). Adeliza contemplates each I Hernando Piozzi, he is further named the leader of the "vile
successive incarceration with the typical blend of horror and i fraternity“ of assassins who conduct their murderous affairs
deii9ht- l0PT°ﬂC"i"9 the fiF5t 07 ""m@'°"5 59q"E5tFﬂil°"5, Adel- from the gloomy mansion on the Calabrian shores. The storyline
iza overflows with fearful pleasure "as the massy but almost ‘ is quite simple since it is not the plotting but the perilous
crumbling gates closed behind her and she heaved a sigh and moment piayed out at fever pitch which interests the anonymous
seemed as it were to have entered her tomb." This grim cycle Goth. His curiosity aroused, Rinaldo follows Schabraco to his
c°"tl""€5 "P to the mandatory moment of disclosure when her Qalabrian hideout. Schabraco turns his mesmeric eye on the young
keeper and persecutor is revealed to be her "homicidal father." 1 man gains control over him, and swears him to secresy. Anxious
The use of ruins here reenforces the peculiar Gothic notion that i ' ahaht his absence Rinaldo's uncle comes to the Calabrian coast
mouldering masonry or walls that have fallen are always somehow nd loom mansion,to investigate In one of the novella's most
more self-containing, attractive, and stron th h't t I a g - y h 5 t P7 ‘ b lieves he is witnessing
that is intact In THE GOTHIC REVIVAL 1 ger an M I EC we Stam"'g Scenes’ t e 0"“ mm e
- ( 923). Sir Kenneth Clark Rinaldo committing the act of matricide upon his sister! the
refers to this phenomenon of inverse strength as the cause be— i Lady Sabrina Schabraco's-Father Stephano's-Hernando's prisoner
hind Ché "dramatized decay’ of architecture which abounds in the i in the crypts,of the house for some eleven ¥9a'5- Actually,
Gothic nuvei‘ i Rinaldo is trying to save Sabrina (later disclosed to.be his
i mother) from lethal rape by Schabraco who malicioHSl¥ Eluits 1"
. 051- ‘ i the Count's near murder of his nephew. Still controlled by
TORY OF AMUSEMENT AND INSTRUCTION, 1 (August, 1798-November ‘ 9 Schabraco Rinaldo cannot inform his uncle about the terrible
1798): 4 parts‘ ’ I situation’ at the Calabrian house. Huch of the remainder OF the
Modern Reeditions: in THE CANDLE AND THE TOWER, Warner Paper- i L 1 " g ti g an the sufferin s of the gentle Sabrina
. - ta e is a re rospec v 9 -
back Library 1974, ed. Rob t D. S t .15 -1 U. i ‘I "th h h t‘ red most effectually in
Gothic Type:'Serialized Gothi (t rgec ord pp 8 9 i i at the hands of one whom e C urc S ‘r
_ C 8 BF M0 9- Rodﬁliffei" 919- i that dark business.“ The account of Sabrina's torments contains
ments) ‘ that supremely satisfying moment for the Gothic audience, the
Biographical and Research Data: Mayo, ENGLISH NOVEL IN THE ~ vivid fantasy of subterranean rape. This occurs when Father
MAGAZINES‘ pp'264’ 35o'361' 588' I Stephano "seizes her arm with a violence she could not withstand
- . . , _ _ _ " while his eyes gleamed with vindictive ra9e .fr°m beneath his
critical 5y"opsis: In 12,500 words, this typical, serialized » ru ed brow He forcibly drew her to a flight of stairs that
Gothic managed to address the entire range of Gothic taste from ,r‘ deggehaed beneath the pavement of the great hall. He pointed to
the trembling sensibilities and rational reassurances of the ; 5 the dark and ruined steps as if to warn her Of $°m@ 5h°¢ki"9
Radcliffeans to the sadistic appetites of Monk Lewis's brood of “‘ '1 t " Th shorter version of the Gothic romance
Gothic pleasure-seekers The work offers literally over! sinslo ii gakegeitsoeﬁiﬁence in just this sort of sadomasochistic noiiieiit
motif of horror and terror o er ‘ts f ' r - ' "
_ _ v i our installments and must dern critic G.R- ThomPS°"i 33 the fa"t°5Y °f
be given its due as a compelling and well-written Gothic no- i’ §:ghg1"ﬁgr:ied mgremblingly ’to subterranean spaces below the
V°iia- It feﬂt"'@5 5 ¢"Fiﬂ§ity—dPiVE" Y°""9 mi", Rl"ﬂld°, 6 m@"- t stle there to have unspeakable erotic and sadistic acts com-
aced and incarcerated heroine, Sabrina, a monastic fiend Who "? hitted upon her thus transvorting the Gothic heroine Psychosex-
operates in the tale under a triple identity, a terrible build- i. "311 into a subconscious realm where the id desires' to invert
-ing and headquarters for terror on the remote Calabrian coast /‘ the ymaraiicy forced upon the ego by society." Such a reading
°PP°5lt9 Sicily! B "l9"t Journey, a misapprehending observer in Q m keg a Gothic novel of SCHABRACO's category a tale of horror on
the person of the a'“"c“]°r fi9“'e* c°""t Pi°zzi- 5 chest C°"' th surface and fable of sexual mystery on its symb°ii¢ l"f'a'
taining incriminating memoirs and dire manuscripts, a secret .1‘ §[:u¢ture After the exposure and death of Schabraco and the
M
~st
it

114 - 
r
mod t_ HE FIRST GUTHICS rm: FIRST comrcs 335
ram '
a ‘C 'e""'°" 0? mother and son the Calabrian h r
k my
horrors is also "brought to justice whenithe mansion _::se o making a picture walk, a statue talk, and a forbidden vault
EzﬁedIgtraggtﬁursubtirransan apartments was totally de:;royeg1l swing open to receive the trembling maiden.
. , l°5l Y an awarded a ' * » - '
inherits the Pioizi title and Sabringasgesaregefgltgéat:1n%Aqo 388. Scott, Sir Halter. THE BLACK DHARF. London : Blackwood, 1816.
igmpletes and fulfills the Gothic success myth which re d l 15 Moder" Reeditionsz "one
98 §mbFa¢@d Vlfh an inuassioned aiacrity again as the egg 0‘ ‘ Gothic Type: Historical fiction (elements of Gothic charac-
many times before. ey ad so l ' terization and scenery)
386 T ‘ Biographical and Research Data: Boatwright, Mody C. "Scott's
. HE SCHOOL FOR FATHERS: OR, THE VICTIM 0F A CURSE L d . 1 Theory and Practice Concerning the Use of the Supernatural in
G.G. and J. Robinson, 1788. ' on on ' Prose Fiction in Relation to the Chronology of the HAVERLEY
gggﬁgg R$EdltlOﬂS1 None Novels," PUBLICATIONS OF THE MODERN LANGUAGE ASSOCIATION, 50
M4" OF FEgp§iG)Sentimental fiction (features from MackenZie,s (1935). 23-261.
Bl°9'dDhical and Research Data: None Critical Synopsis: Dwarfism had appeared as a grotesque motif
critica] Synopsis A previo;;;%)in Ehe Goghic gavel‘ ngﬁably in Beikfordgsf VATHEK
_ I n epistolar novel ‘ See . oup e wi t e eme o mons rous e ormi y,
éubtitled "Authentic Memoirs and Anecdo€e§hr:?thvo&?miS -and dwarfism would continue to surface in the fiction of later writ-
a¢tS_' The "curse" Seems to be an afterthought and b r S °r;§a] ers who display Gothic tendencies. Mary Shelley‘S short story,
ures into the story at all. The letters chart tha E y > 19' "Transformation" (1831), Poe's "Hop-Frog" (1849), Dickens‘s
histories of the soldier, Alfred Harley and the inteil?mot1°"a1 Daniel Quilp in THE OLD CURIOSITV SHOP (1841) and Miss Mowcher
:lﬂd.| Much of the novel takes place in,America durin Egan; Ed‘ in DAVID COPPERFIELD (1850), and Hilde's "The Birthday of the
ears .Har before "the insurrection of the colonies "gLike even Infanta“ (1891) all develop the dwarf character in a direction
kenzie s Harley in THE MAN OF FEELING (see #260) Alf deh MaC- that Scott had initiated in his interesting failure, THE BLACK
is an enthusiastic exponent of every noble human ugiit argey DHARF. The plot elements of the novel argue strongly that Scott
59°" perceives that he lives in a world lackin i: ll yf ut had undertaken an experiment in pure Gothic in the writing of
finer feelings. HE is either gifted or cursed with Zn q the THE BLACK DHARF. He find various Gothic necessities of plot and
moral sense which motivates him to the most extrava ant Innate locale throughout, such as the ominous scenery in and around the
sions of virtue, boundless comvassion, and extreme agfectix:rES- dwarfls lair of boulders’ the dwarfls reputation for Super-
gature. The central interest of the story of his travels i tar natural strength, the abduction of Grace Armstrong by masked
tmericas is not the narrative of these events but their insnir e brigands, the persecution of Isabella Vere by her despotic fa-
lggnal effect on_ the sensibility df the sentimental herop H?‘ ther, the Laird of Ellieslaw, and the final revelation of the
thee egg E?:lﬂ? animates and heightens this sensibility, but ii Black Dwarf's high name and lineage as Sir Edward Manley. De-
f 1, , a so consumes him Just as the original Mr_ Harie IS spite the title's abundant Gothic _promise, Scott shows great
ee ings had destroyed him. Both men of feeling finall b y uncertainty of narrative purpose in the handling of this mater-
Zlﬁllms of the vicious worldliness of the greate{ einme ial. Thus, the novel becomes either a piece of sentimental-
umankind. In constantly leaning over the p§y¢hO]Qgicai pa: 9‘ historical fiction struggling to declare its Gothic theme or a
g'cS °f “'5 em°tl°"Bl Chasms, the sgntimenta] hero ,5 a f D 6E1‘ piece of Gothic fiction marred by Scott's own natural disinclin-
?W1"$ of the 5t'a"99 and fatal pasgigng of the Gothi Gris a' ation to the sinister supernatural and the sensationally gro-
v1]‘a1" °f the 1790'5- C er°' tesque. Recognizing that the book was a failure, Scott curtailed
his plans for a lengthy novel, finished THE BLACK DWARF rapidly,
387. Scott, Honoria. THE CASTLE OF STRATHMAY: A TALE. L d > and moved on to OLD MORTQLITY (1816). Scott's shortening of the
;8§4' _ _ an on ' Tegg’ novel perhaps explains its tenuous plotting. The Black Dwarf IS
G0 crn Reeditions: None a figure out of fairytale named Elshender the Recluse or Elshie
B?t"l¢ Type: Pure or high Gothic (Radcliffean imitati n) of Mucklestanes. Disgusted by his own deformity, he has taken up
l°9'ﬂPhical and Research Data: None O his solitary residence in a hermitage of huge stones from whence
. . _ he emerges from time to time to perform anonymous deeds of kind-
§"t‘E31 5yQ0PSlS: Slightly above chapbook qualit Sc tt. ness for the local inhabitants who all despise his odious shape
ﬁﬂllté and tidy Gothic approximates the scenes and, 2 S and fear his supposed supernatural powers. Hhile his outward
rs. Radcliffe's MVSTERIES OF UDOLPHO (see #349) A t%Y@: s of appearance is unbearably ugly, his soul is beautiful, sensitive,
century Cornish castle, a quivering maiden on the run (vi? e§"th and longing for love. Hithout realizing the theme‘s potential,
‘and the regular quota of supernatural shocks and enealer!a)' Scott, like Mary Shelley two years later in FRANKENSTEIN (see
P“Z¥]eme"t5 _9ﬂV€ the book the proper Gothic look gt -a Dqlcal #399), had hit upon the figure of the gentle monster who wishes
ishing that in the same year as Sir waiter 5Cntt.S‘ HAvg;LESton- only for love and acceptance from a world which condemns him as
Penny-6-line Gothic novelist could still stimulate I’ a a freak of nature. The Black Dwarf's mysterious disappearance at
a Sa e by the end of the narrative has the true Gothic touch. "Many be-

i
316 - l 1
THE FIRST GOTHICS , THE FIRST GOTHICS 337
lieved that h ‘ ‘ - f
contrary to his ;Zl:i,n'§?§:'§:etg ehter a consecrated building, i h sone conmon Gothic tactics, Lucy is driven insane. Forced by the
V1 One he had been b d'l ' sadistic Lady Ashton to marry a boorish suitor, she eventually
carried off; b t t - . ' ‘ 0 l y
for a season, and coﬁginu§€etgfbgp;n1onfthat he °"7y dliappeared 3 stabs the Laird of Bucklaw on the eve of her wedding day and
n 99" TOM time to time among dies shortly thereafter in sorrow and agony. Her death precipi-
d d his horse
the hills. u'th
minated all direct at?ili§:id:r:it:ftgHE BLATK DHARF, Scott ter- 4‘ tates Scott's best Gothic Climax when Ravenswoo an
his later higgoricai fiction h e.G°th'° r°m5"¢E; but in I are swallowed up in the quicksand of the Kelpie Flow as he gal-
- e continued to reserve l i b 1 lops furiously toward a duel with Lucy's tormentors. Shunning
albeit a suhord' t ’ - , a p ace
389 S ‘"5 9 One, for Gothic tonality and machinery. , I F f‘ the domesticity of the Radcliffean ending, Scott brings down a
. cott Sir Halt . TH 1'; black curtain of gloom on his Gothic melodrama of madness dark
hie: 1819- er E BRIDE OF LAMMERMODR. London : A. Consta- ' P fate, and violent death. with its unrelieved sense of doom and
Modern Reeditions: E P Dutt E i ¢ the inescapable terrors of life, THE BRIDE OF LRJMERHOOR repre-
Parker, ' ' 0"‘ veryman 5, 1963, ed. H,M i ' sents the tragic synthesis of horror and destiny after which so
Gothic Type; H’ 1 ' ~ - . _ V many of the Gothic novelists had been reaching and yet had
Biographical an; gegggﬂchlsgtg? éﬁgieeni Ttthlclhtaits) ‘ failed to attain‘
OF "GOTHIC" LITERATURE ' ’ a 8" ["FLUE"CE i ~
: H. Hinterberg, 19o2~ nggagik :ALTER S°°TT- R°§'°¢k. Germany 390. Scott, Sir Halter. THE ABBDT. London = A. Constable, 1819.
Gothic Romance in thelﬂineteenthages H" J'- "The Survival of i Modern Reeditions: E.P. Dutton-Everyman's, 1969, ed, Arthur
AB$TRAcT5 INTERNATIONAL 32 (1g7i)§"t"ry Wvvel," DISSERTATION i ‘Y Melville Clark.
s . 442A (Vale University), Gothic Type: Historical fiction (varieties of Gothic charac-
Critical S ‘ ~ ' . _ terization and monastic locale)
"ovel, Edwargnoﬁjdénkgzéhtnatfd by the ﬁl$torian of the English ~ Biographical and Research Data: Birkhead, "Scott and the Nov-
THE BRIDE OF LAMMERMOOR is 'une:u?5z€:¥?;EC:hof Gothic romance," el of Terror,“ in TALE OF TERROR, pp.145-156.
Scott's th' t _t u E m0St Gothic of
ties, and ehli¥°n:§,t2°§§;‘;n,§°f:;°d"°9d§- c°"f]l¢t, Dersonali- Critical Synopsis: Both of Scott's historical fictions of
p°etic t'599dy to yield a storg uh? hut!" _a Sﬂmber sense of “ 1820 complement one another and bear Gothic titles. THE MONAS-
horror of an ancient Scottish bgrd icb is filled with the solemn \ TERV (see #391) treats incidents during the reign of Elizabeth
er allad. The theme of f t d and introduces characters who are completed in the sequel novel,
love the forest - a e
Laira of Ravensvoggegﬁjshshetgjazhgngtﬁ characters of the doomed THE ABBOT. The abbot of the title is no matricidal maniac al-
e °l°'°d- Lucy Ashton aha though his name, Father Ambrose, suggests Monk Lewis's Ambrosio.
h f Sir Hal-
the ruined tow r i - . 4
family, along withohuxzlguz gt:;E’ot¥ﬁ-f°]l@",§ymbol of a fallen U3 He first appears as Edward Glendinning, the brot er o
Scott's familiarity with Gothic Q hic detalls "°t_ 0"]! Show ’jf bert Glendinning, the Knight of Avenel in THE MONASTERY. By
respect for the artistic Dropertima ef1a]5 b"t also indicate his ji, using some exciting events, some real and others fictive, taken
plot is sinple, stark and markegsbo the Gﬂthic novel. The ? from the fugitive life of Mary Stuart, Queen of Scots, Scott
abiiity that Thomas Hagdy would 1 t Y the sort of morbid inexor- Q; affiliated himself with the tradition of Gothified history going
dl$Pla€ed young hero Ravenshood ac$T de'lV@ from Scott. The y}, back to Sophia Lee's THE RECESS (see #240), a novel which had
remains of his rami1;.s name ,"d'hDn‘"9$f°°§P@ra§ely to all that 5_ also Gothified the life of the Queen without a kingdom. THE AB-
the Civil Har of 1689 b m i t ' 9r a Fer their disgrace in /l BOT centers on the escape of Queen Mary from her imprisonment in
Y a n a1n'" h‘ if Lochleven Castle the defeat of her forces at the battle of
fortress of wolf‘ C ' 9 "lie in the reclusive V ,
5 'al9 Tuner, the last stronghold of the once- 4 Langside (Nay 13, 1568), and her subsequent withdrawal to
d for nineteen years by her
powerful lords of _
woodls phySica1 and p:;g:g§:§?g;IThEt?orhse and brooding Ravens- ? England where she would be inprisone
tower 5"99@5t Scott's adaptation of thc ment. t° the decaying g~ cousin, Elizabeth, until her execution in 1587. The action of
ment or possession by a dark past thr 9 Gothic motif of entrap- E the novel concentrates on the year, 1568, when the Scottish
D“ h th b l E" Catholics rallied to her standard in an uprising intended to put
devastated build‘ R , 9 _9 sym 0 of the _
ing. avenswood s adversary in East Lothian and ‘i her on the throne. The Queen is assisted first in her escape and
d G eme of the
Scott's e uiv - - . . h
ligent lazyerflthe €£rdh€eg;::1cSi;]&?}?.'5 the $7! and intel- Q _ then in her raising of an army by young Rolan ra
--and the novel has many suth r'1 ‘am A§ht°"- By accident, 5, House of Avenel. Delegated to spy upon the Queen, his chivalric
saves the life of his foe and th 3 1m c°'"¢'dences--Ravenswood 4 character and Scottish loyalties cause him to take up her cause
e estro r f h 4 ' instead and incidentally to fall in love with Catherine Seyton,
a hunt and in d ' Ye 0 IS family during
’ Ding 5°’ ear"s the 1°'° °f L"¢! Aihton, daughter one of the Queen's ladies-in-waiting. Young Graeme would be
l h the oung champion's
of his enem . Lu
of the immurgd an§Yag32:3"m:?§eslmo$t every trait and experience quite at home in any Gothic nove w ere_ Y
~there is a secret betrothal to R0 G°thlc fiction. Although ‘ mysterious parentage is part of the narrative scheme. The book
desires are constantly frustr t d avenS“°°§» Lucy's feelings and retains but moderates other Gothic characteristics and charac-
a e by her "'1 t ters and is perhaps most notable for the nay in which Scott con-
a domineerin ' 9 3"" LadY A5ht0ﬂ
, 9 "‘e" a"d 5 Clear descendant of one of Hrs Rad: verts the themes of Gothic horror into sinister and inexorable
‘ f his reat characters
cliffe s debased a t $1 _ -
un 5' °”1y °"d methudlcallys and by means of historical forces which haunt the lives o g
we

JJ8
rue FIRST curnrcs I 5 rns FIRST corurcs 339
and small. In Gothic fiction, no one can find a way out of the V one of her phantasmagoric entrances to restore the Englishman t0
haunted castle; in Gothified historical fiction the characters “ life But this miracle, and the other supernatural interventions
are confined to the castle of history or their national past id? of the benign spectre, are simply detached G0thiC evE"t5 l" 3
from which any escape is arduous and temporary. ' Ki meandering plot. The novel ends in great uncertaint¥ "he" Mary
, "Y nvengl chooses Halbert Glendinning and Edward, disappointed by
391. Scott, Sir Halter. THE MONASTERY. London ; A. Constable 1820 E? the ea rices of the worldly life, enters the monastery as a
Modern Reeditionsz E.P. Dutton-Everyman's, ed. Arthur Mel- Q I monk pScott's relationship to Gothic fiction has never been
Ville Clark, 1959- F adequately evaluated. Historians of the novel have generally as-
Gothic Type: Historical flCtl°" (prominent Gothic influences §‘ sumed that his use of Gothic properties, $°e"e'¥, i"d C"ﬂFa¢t?'
in scenery and characterization) §: defaced his historical art. Hhile such an assumption seems valid
Bl°9Faphical and Research Data: Cameron Donald "History 2? for a failure such as THE MONASTERV, Scott's modifications of
$@ll9l0". and the Supernatural: The Eailure of THE MONAS: I, 35 Gothic techniques may actually account for the artistic excel-
ER ,» _ _ % ~ .
Fumnmmmnmwmwmmweiewhm
- e 0 ic: e cot ish Exanple " in
RACISM IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY, ed Harold E Pa liaro.
-Yhhmid
lence of some of his best novels such as KENILHORTH (See #392)
392 Scott, Sir Halter. KENILHORTH. London : A. Constable, 1821.
clevelﬂﬁd, UH : Case Hestern Reserve NP, 1973, pp:137-%53 -~ Modern Reeditions: Airmont Publishing, 1969, ed. Beryl R°"'
. . _ _ land; E.P. Dutton-Everyman'$, 1979, Ed- “gM- Pa'k?"
_ Cr1tg$al Synopsis: The debris of a vanishing Gothic tradition Gothic Type: Historical fiction (substantial Gothic residue,
is visi y scattered about thro h t THE MONASTERY. ‘ ¥* ' t d 'd )
THE BLACK DWARF (see #3aa), Scot? ﬂzwisely decided toH:m§$u;$hi: 3 §?§°§l3lli.§"°.E§'§§§Z.$.l“3L.§T Sandy. Stephen M- THE R“VEL-
historical themes in the cumbersome equipage of the Gothic F INGQOF THE NOVEL:'STUDIES IN ROMANTIC FICTION FROM HALPQLE T0
especially in the visitations of the spectral Hhite Lady of ,1 SCOTT. New Vork : Arno Press, 1980.
A"e"°l- But "9" iﬂparitloﬂﬂl Presence in the novel runs at
crosspurposes to Scott's presentation of history and her func- Critical Synopsis~ In KENILHORTH, Scott found the perfect
tion of haunting the main characters becomes little more than an T uilibrium of Gothic‘ contraption and historical conception.
irksome supernatural redundancy throughout the book The remain- Eq tt's own source for the story is the deeply Gothic ballad,
der of the novel's baronial and monastic cast displays none of "gdmnor Hall " where we read, "Full many a traveller oft hath
those lecherous or sinister traits which would be appropriate si hed And’ pensive wePt the C°“"te5$' f°‘l* A"d "a"d'r1ng
for the monks and barons of a true Gothic. Hence THE MONASTERY naards the 've espied The Haunted towers of Cumnor Hall." The
is a disharmoniously imagined and constructed,book as well as Dear is 1g75 Robert.Dudley the Earl Bf Leicester “"4 the fa"
the “eaker C°""t9TP6rt to the much more controlled and plotted iorite of Queen Elizabeth, has secretly married Amy R°b5a't §"d
sequel, THE ABBOT (see #390). Except'for the natural Gothicism hidden her away in Cumnor Hall in order not to incur the dis-
f°“"d later i" THE FAIR "AID OF PERTH (1828), the novel marks leasure of the Queen. Hatching over Amy and harboring some evil
Scott's_ final experiment with the grotesque supernatural in the gesigns against her is Leicester's diabolical master-of-horse,
fa"ta5tlC PeT99Fl"itl°"5 °f the “bile Lady of Avenel The Sir Richard Varney. Only the lack of a demonic eye K9995 Va'"eY
monastery of the title is no crumbling Gothic pile but the‘reli- from qualifying as a high Gothic villain, for he has all of the
Qious house of Kennaquhair, its details based upon Scott's tours Qther evil assets and stands out as one of the most accurate
of Melrose Abbey on the River Tweed. The period is midwa r incarnations of the Gothic villain among Scott's evil char-
through the reign of Elizabeth (the 1580's) with the fires og et rs His name incidentally was later bestowed "D0" the
Catholic-Protestant controversy inflaming the passions of the iinﬁiré protagonist in the ’famous Victorian blood by Thomas
English supporters of the Queen and the Scottish backers of her Peckett Prest VARNEV THE VAMPVRE (1847). Varney's vi]1al“y l5
rival cousin, Mary Stuart. English arrogance, bigotry and vani- an excitingly dramatic villainy as the servant soon becomes the
ty are represented in the novel by Sir Piercie Shafton who might master of his master and the persecutor of Leicester's clandes-
have evolved into a Gothic villain had Scott chosen to darken tine bride. At Queen Elizabeth's castle of Kenilworth where Amy
his motives and shade his features. Shafton has taken refu e R bsart has been summoned to appear before the Queen, Leices-
from his subversive activities in the north in the monastegy t:r's infidelity is exposed. He finally acknowledges his secret
which is under the jurisdiction of the Abbot of Kennaguhair wife thus risking the fury of Elizabeth and disrupting Varneyfs
whose sons, Halbert and Edward Glendinning are fraternal scheme to have Amy for himself. But Varney's ingenuity in evil
opposites. These lads are rivals for the love o-f Mary Avenel is literally boundless. Adopting the resilient strate9.Y °f 159°-
thelr fﬂther's ward. Although the outline of the Gothic maiden h la s upon Leicester's jealousy by tElll"9 "l@ that Amy has
survives in Mary Avenel, she is no mere fainting hysteric like be :2 {he mistress of Edmund Tressilian. The scene shifts from
her chaste and chased predecessors in the work of Mrs Rad Kehilworth Castle back to Amy's prison at Cumnor Hall where
cliffe, but a high-spirited and intelligent young woman . when eents reach a tragic climax. Enraged by his’ wife‘s r@P0Tt9d
the i"Det“°“5 Halbert Gle"dl""l"9 Qoads Sir Piercie Shafton into gdulter Leicester despatches Varney to torment and murder her
a duel and seemingly wounds him fatally, the Hhite Lady makes within the gloomy corridors of Cumnor Hall. Thus, at lt5 @"dl"9.

340
THE FIRST GOTHICS i >1 THE FIRST GDTHICS 341
the no i h'h- I . _
for: a ¥ﬁah:?c1fg;:ig]3ig€_t?e 'eq"15lte features of Gothic hor- I secret?" Most of the events are pirated in muddled form from
with hidden rooms secret‘m' a da'k» medieval building crammed - ‘Grosse's HORRID MVSTERIES (see #153) and other Gothics featuring
' ’ pa55a9e“aY5» °"d t'ﬂP-doors- a fiend- - j the secret Fehmic court and the Illuminati. The setting is the
'5" Pursueri a ghastly death Finall c d ' '
vault f a tn ' Y °"'ey° by v°'"°Y ‘° ‘he
- .° 8'? - "*8 helvless Amy falls through atrap-door
coarse and brutal court of the Bohemian Emperor, Hincelaus, dur-
ing the time when “the new preacher, Huss" was inveighing
in eniousl ri d ‘ - ' . . .
dagkness §ei°a?e hhgnd Szzihpigmpgis gag"?! dinto the abysmal against religious corruption: Here, the Duke of Ormsherq busily
see the disfiguhed corpse of Amy Robsarteaher ho peer down to ¢ torments Mira Lindolm and a brutish Knight named Lipstolf of
clothes, like 3 sn°wdrift.__he attains hi;- a t eﬂP of white Badeh is_ encouraged by the gross Hincelaus in the torments of
ﬁmofmewwnhnhmenwk mm wmsﬁmfm wwuihumWaBdﬁmsh@,mumamowwmmqtoam
' noy Mira. One of his more sinister pranks apparently involves
393, THE 5 . the formation of a local chapter of the secret tribunal at the
02 ECRET OATH. OR, BLOOD-STAINED DAGGER. London : Hurst, 18- r ‘ court of Hincelaus, and to further this scheme, he sends for a
Moder" Reeditiohsz hone , particularly odious official of this international network _of
gothic Type: Gothic chapbook i' vice and torture, Victor of Milan: Out of sheer perversity, hira
Biographicai and Research Data_ hath SHILLING S 3 is dragged to trial before the tribunal which meets at midnight
THE GOTHIC SCHOOL D 37_ Summers -GOTHIE HOCKERS OF in a deep underground den illuminated by a single. black candle.
’ ' - 0UE5T. D-83. : The nature of her crime gives some sense of the raucous absurd-
criticai S D sis: . _ , _ i; ities of the chapbookerfs artless scribblings, for it seems that
iod screams Ygug itslhezthygicsgrghiihlgz ihoﬁker of the per- .3 she is accused of "fascinating the empress with her harp." Sud-
tit1e_ Title and Shbtitie aiso cumbin 9 th s doublefpronged xi denly whished away from the tribunal by Everhard, Mira becomes
Radciiffean Suspense eiemehti with the ho:rif_e terrific _ (or i ah international fugitive from the court and its horrible func-
supernaturai element of Monk Lewis)‘ The text 1? (the sanguinary i tionaries. This pattgrn of pursuit from city to city and country
fean maiden in several horrifying Situati h PdaC?$_a Radclif- 1 to country is Grosse s own design for terror in HORRID MYSTER-
MONK (See #244). The young hero who fre uenzls eriving from THE , IES. infuriated at the escape of hira and further enraged be-
the dagger thrhsts hf the viiiain ?S aisy égvis her _frun . I cause Sophia is hot available for trial and torture,_the tribu-
Secret Society devoted to international murdeg a dl iated with a I ; nal turns upon Lipstolf and condemns him to death. Hincelaus now
the third Gothic ingredient of the cha bu k _ an mayhem. Thus, ii gloats and exults in the mutilation of Lipstolf and the _two
Gothic; deaiihg with the Cabaiistic doih o flS taken from those heroines, having mercifully_escaped from this twisted narrative,
such as Grosseis HORRID MVSTERIES (segs#h53)se%h%tSEéh§ieSh$; mercifully never return to it.
ears out Hatt's obs ' '- . . = . ‘
in the Gothic chapbozhgaghgﬂbigixsothe ghgiihhation of villainy 1 395. Selden, Catherine. THE COUNT DE SANTERRE: A ROMANCE. London :
wastes no time over hora‘ Subtieties hf char 3 shohker villainy ; C. Dilly. 119].
of the better Gothic hoveis in spite of h?§ Z2; The _villain Modern Reeditions: None _ _ _ _
to passion, bears himself in so inpressive a m er resignation i - Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (Radcliffean imitation)
that he is never without the Sympath of th anner throughout i ii Biographical and Research Data; Tarr, CATHDLICISM IN GOTHIC
duced counterpart in the shilling Shockgr h e reader. "HTS re- EICTION, “pp.27, 47, 54, 68, 98, 105; Lévy, LE ROMAN
corrigible monster of depravity_" - owever, is an in- GOTHIOUE ANGLAIS, p.442.
Critical Synopsis: The Gothic novelist, Catherine Selden,
394. THE SECRET -
TRIBUNAL. OR, THE COURT OF HINCELAUS A HYSTERIOUS I Specialized in simulations of Mrs. Radcliffe's romances. THE
T . - Q ,
M:::rhL3:::itihI;_Phgﬁzer f°r T999 ﬁnd C65tlemﬂ", 1803. \ COUNT DE SANTERRE is a synthesis of events and characters found
gothic Typei Gothic bihehooh ( i _ _ V in THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST (see #348) and THE ITALIAN (see
eral novels of the Secret F h P a9'ar‘Zed ibrldgément of sev- “ #350). Monastic gloom rather than monastic shock is the dominant
Biographicai ahd R h E WIC Court) r mood of the novel which, like Mrs. Radcliffe's books, consists
esearc Data: N°"e J" largely of a series of eerie pictures and awful moments gener-
critica] 5 - _ . _ _ 5 ated by the imagination of a heroine under self-induced, psycho-
a fine ironiiggigzéiiiisgihnierly incoherent Goth1C chapbook has K7 logical stress. The slight plot takes the heroine, Elinor, in
it‘ it is cited as a bibiinirloh, but little else to reconmend hr' quest of her abducted mother, Olivia De Santerre, a mission
giarism in the field The g aptftai @X8"Dle of incompetent pla- l which brings her to an abbey confinement herself. A typical
desperate heroine -Sn hi rah lSgl€CE engraving depicts the ’. scene is Elinor's first view of the ruined Abbey of St. Austin
c}°SS by moonlight’ a Sgehgr h_eh' "11! @mbTiCl"9 3 huge, black i by moonlight -as she prepares to enter the forbidden Gothic
pages which foiiah Uhder:cic_ cannot be found in the 72 .,“' world. Mrs. Selden demonstrates a facile management of the
from Blair's Gothic poem "Th DEIHQ EPenengraV1ng ‘S 3" Epigraph .ht approved Gothic rhetoric. The abbey “was entirely unroofed, and
hone of you in it at e rave . Tell us, ye dead, will h, in many places of the mouldering walls wide chasms had already
P y O th°5e y°“ left b°"l"¢. disclose the h opened, and the mantling ivy alone prevented the tottering fab-
- i

. 343
342 ‘ THE FIRST GOTHICS . ﬂf FIRST EUTHICS
i
= . . D CASTLE. London :
ric from yielding to the force of the blasts that descended from ' 397. Selden. 5ath9r‘"e' vILLA"NovA' 0§éo;HE RUINE
the mountains and waved the lonely heads of those plants that A V‘ ‘ Connor, Cork fﬂr La"e- e"ma"' '
thrive in old buildings." Halls so dilapidated that they are
supported only by the creeping overgrowth of moss and ivy is
something of a new detail in the standard description of the
desolated building which holds the maiden in awe and terror.
‘M}:‘q-n. ., W...
    
Biographical and Research Data: None
_ . . . - _ d_
, , Critical $.Y"0DSiS: Allvears topag  ;n;§:;;o:om\;§ne§r:ithR;°_
396. Selden, Catherine. THE ENGLISH NUN. London : Minerva-Press for cl;‘ffet'_Sc {:E‘i:V2'E§‘I>EStﬁe:D2';Om THEEITALIAN (See B50) and
Hilliam Lane 1797. l ti 5 0 5 ° . < ' in rave
Modern Reeditions: None B elsewhere. The narrative placesfghﬁdmigﬁgi Aggggme. ahne
Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (elements of the monastic .' danger f*°m Which she extrgcts P§°ar: rea] the her0ine‘s super-
shocker, influence of Diderot's LA RELIGIEUSEJ . g the ruins and vicious re a lveb ha‘]uc;natory mistakes ac_
Biographical and Research Data: Tarr, CATHOLICISM IN GOTHIC ‘ natural eXPEFl9"¢95 tum Wt ° ‘swan theme of the overwrought
FICTION. DP-52, 109; Kievitt, Frank David. --Attitudes Toward cording _to the standard Radi :“ ﬁling of the naturﬂ H0Hd_
Roman Catholicism in the Late Eighteenth-Century English ‘, sensibilit.Y'5 ""P"ude"t Swema “ a
Novel,‘ DISSERTATION ABSTRACTS INTERNATIONAL, 36 (1975): < A. London :
14a1A-14a2A (Columbia University); Josephs, Herbert. < \ 398. SEYMOUR CASTLE: OR, THE HISTORI °F M“ “"0 Cm“
"Diderot's LA RELIGIEUSE: Libertinism and the Dark Cave of . H.D. $wn"d§-_1789-
the Souk“ MODERN LANGUAGE NOTES’ 91 (1976): 734_755' E02?" Rie:et‘og:;itiS::tai Gothic (imitation of Reeve's OLD
o ic y :
Critical s nopsis: Diderot's LA RELIGIEUSE or THE uuu (1795), L ENG!-15" W10") ' .
the tale of the sufferings of the involuntary novice, Simone ‘ . 5i09"aPh'CaI Md Research Data’ Nana
Sinionin, appeared in an En lish translation b G.G. and J. . > ' vel radually
Robinson in 1797 and inlnediatelly produced Gothic imitations such Critical Synopsis: An exaflilli $353 $:|:e:isT:ern:eroings livl"9
as Selden's ENGLISH NUN. Diderot's story is fraught with I ’ becoming Gothic as the story En vile %" the north of England Come
elements of the novel of terror in its monastic shocker form. ~ in Fift9e"tI' Eenury Semour as and aisu eventually come upon
Sentenced by her unloving parents to a series of barbaric c0n- "P0" a ¢I°5Ed and f°rb'dde"U';°‘?';' miss“ parents_ Adhering to
finements in three nunneries, Suzanne Simonin describes in the ~1"$"'e' P7’ the mystery OE E‘ ematurgi as found in The OLD
detail some Physical and Psychological tortures worthy of the ‘ ; the restrained use of %he 2:5 Us author of SEVHOUR CASTLE
most tormented of Gothic heroines. For her recalcitrance, _ ENGLISH BARON (see #355): E ? eY":'°perm°5t in mind thmughout_
Suzanne is punished by being incarcerated in the penitential A seems to have kept Reeve 5 gr: azomiﬁate and must remain an ad-
cell or given in the parlance of the nilns the ordeal of in pace . T@"‘°' must "ever be inn“? :2 1 educaﬁom No; only do we have
requiescat, figuratively buried alive for her lack of sexual 60- - jllllﬁli Of the Cnaracters fir? ghic times and manners,“ but the
operation. Because of her natural beauty, she also finds herself 1‘ the author-5 own picturelo ore done S°]e1y for the purpose of
the object of the lesbian lusts of a mother superior, clearly a Gﬂlhlﬁ ad'e"P"'e5 t"EmSe Keg a had been a Stern advocate of the
Gothic motif as shown in the careers of many wicked abbesses. ’ 5@V@'°_m°’“I ‘"5t'"ct‘°"a ieve Gothic r°manCiﬂg_ "The busineS§
Diderot's gloomy chapels, interior ecclesiastical darkness, and didi¢t"3 5§ the.tr“e in ociggythe attention; and, secondly, £0
luqubrious atmosphere of religious terror all have strong Gothic of romance 15, first. °f°§ or at ‘east innocent end_ Happy the
tones while his graphic description of the mother superior's direct it to _some uset: , oiutsﬂuke Richardsom,
self-induced orgasm at the sight of the innocent Simonin has all writer who attains both ese p on
of the fierce eroticism of such moments in THE MONK. Selden who ' STEIN: OR THE M -
may Possibly have been the translator of LA RELIGIEU5E’ ’5uT- ‘ 399. Shelley. Mary Hollstonecraft Eoﬁ:::.t::AN:§:es Hardiag, Mayor!
rounds her heroine, Louisa, with the same lurid threats to vir- F ER: JP:0:E“Ig‘i'§‘ London ' a 9 ' ’
ginity and life and uses Diderot's lurid ictures of the reli- 5" ° 9 ’ . . ‘ - - 1 5 ed. Harold
gious cmnmunity to intensify the Gothigism of the love story. ' Modern Reeditions: New Amgrlaaz 5;:LgE¥,pengﬁiR Books, 1968,
Adhering to traditions of rescue for the confined maiden. Selden -‘ Bloom; Oxford UP, 19ﬁ9,nE hargo. Praz_ .B°bbs_Merri]]’ 1974,
finally has Louisa freed from the terror of the convent by the  935-Jpetiraggﬁluug a '
chivalric youn man, Edmund Lumle . Diderot's ex licit sexual- ‘<5 9 - _a'“e '. ~ - ti 5 Cate orized as
ity, however,g is not to be seen in Selden'spversion of the H, G°Eh‘_c‘,Type§ Ph‘]9s€Ph:Sa] Goth“: (Some me g
dreadful agonies of the enforced monastic life since her English ' Pflmltlv? Smence hc ‘Uh nata. Lund y4ar_y'[;raha'm. "Mary God-
mentor in the art of religious terror is Mrs. Radcliffe and not Bio9T6PI"¢aI"a"d Re5earCM ta} -- UNIVERSITY 0F KANSAS CITY
Monk Lewis. In Gothic fiction, as in LA RELIGIEUSE, the restric- .1“ siieiley a"d_ "‘§ 25g§'SBi°<',m Harold. "FRANKENSTEIN: on.
tive environment of the religious life operates as a situational ’ REvIEH' 28 (1962). 25': PARTISAN ‘REVIEW 32 (1965): 611-618;
metaphor for sexual repression and the unnatural warping of the ’ THE _NEH ERWETHEUSMRY SHELL“ New vsrk ; Twayne; TEA5
passions by outmoded systems of belief. i Hﬂll1"9, ulIIl°m *- -
1

THE" FIRST GUTHICS ‘ , TIE FIRST GUTHICS 345
#128, 1972; Small, Christopher. MARY SHELLEY'S FRANKENSTEIN: I entific violation of the natural boundaries of life and death.
TRACING THE MYTH. Pittsburgh, PA : Pittsburgh UP, 1973; Dunn The tale which Frankenstein narrates is a warning to Halton to
Richard J. ‘Narrative Distance in FRANKENSTEIN,“ STUDIES IN turn back before it is too late and to abandon his arrogant
THE NOVEL, 6 (I974): 408-417; Moers, Ellen. ‘Female ’Gothic: search. “You seek for knowledge and wisdom, as I once did,"
The Monster's Mother,‘ NEH YORK REVIEW OF BOOKS, March 21, Frankenstein tells Walton. "I ardently hope that the gratifica-
1974, pp.24-28; Levine Geor e and U.C. K
9 9 noepflmacher. THE tion of your wishes may not be a serpent to sting you, as mine
ENDURANCE OF FRANKENSTEIN: ESSAYS ON MARY SHELLEY'S NOVEL. l r has been." Like a previous pale student of the unhallowed se-
Berkeley, CA : California UP, I979; Sherwin, Paul. "FRANKEN- Y‘ crets of nature, Dr. Faustus, Victor Frankenstein had determined
STEIN: Creation as Catastrophe,’ PUBLICATIONS OF THE MODERN H to exert his Faustian energies to acquire the power of creation
LANGUAGE ASSOCIATION, 95 (1981): 883-902; Frank, Frederick S. itself. The brilliant, young scientist probes deeply and secret-
“Mary Shelley's FRANKENSTEIN: A Register of Research,“ BUL- ly into the arcana of existence ignoring family and friends to
LETIN OF BIBLIOGRAPHY, 40 (1983): 163-188; Tillotson, Marcia. . I devote himself to the making of life. Through occult genetic and
"'A Forced Solitude‘: Mary Shelley and the Creation of Frank- ‘, galvanic experinents, he discovers the means of imparting life
enstein's Monster,‘ in THE FEMALE GOTHIC, ed. Julian E. in to dead tissue. However, there is no descrlﬂtlﬂﬂ I" detail °f
Fleenor. Montreal : Eden Press, 1983, pp.I67-175' Twitchell l these experiments nor any laboratory melodrama as would be the
James B. “FRANKENSTEIN and th A t f , ' 1
e na omy o Horror, GEORGIA :. case in a work of Gothic science fiction. Horking intensely, he
REVIEW. 37 (1983): 41-78; Veeder, Hilliam. MARY SHELLEY & I constructs and animates a huge man whose figure is not the new
FRANKENSTEIN: THE FATE OF ANDROGYNY. Chicago, IL : Chicago ’ Adam Frankenstein had aspired to create but a hideous parody of
Upi 1955- l the normal human body,--a monster with sickly flesh, yellowish
, K eyes, and bulky misshapen limbs. Allegorically, science has fa-
Crltlcal 5y"°Psis: The most celebrated and critically engag- » thered an unwanted child; or symbolically, the noblest research
ing monster tale to emerge from the Gothic tradition, FRANKEN- ' and empirical inquiry has led to the most detestable results.
STEIN can claim affinities with many other genres of the novel. i Looking in horror and disgust upon the thing he has engendered,
Modern critics have collectively agreed that the complexity of ‘ Frankenstein is so revolted by his biological error that he
tn mnlbumm mﬁwsnswnnomaﬁmmsmchnﬁy - ﬁmtmpdsmemmmrmdmw wwstoramea mmm
it. Published anonynnusly in 1818, it is fundamentally Gothic in domestic life of love, friendship, courtship, and marriage. But
its atmosphere of terror and its persistent motifs of eradicated every single one of Frankenstein's human bonds will be broken as
identity, destructive metaphysical quest, and spiritual loneli- a consequence of his unacknowledged crime against God and na-
ness. But the book can also be read as a philosophical novel, a l ture. His child brother, Nilliam, will be murdered by Franken-
cosmic dialogue between an irresponsible creator and a bungled stein‘s nameless child of perverted science, the monster; his
creation; or as a piece of humanitariap propaganda exploring the fiance, Elizabeth Lavenza, will be strangled by the creature on
tensions and breakdowns between parent and child; or as a prose . the eve of their wedding day; his intellectual companion, Henry
poem on the archetype of all loneliness, the monstrous outcast. Q Clerval, will also be killed. These brutal events are preceded
The figure of the repulsive giant engendered by amoral science
and reJected by the "normal" human cunnunity extends the dimen-
.l
by the pitiful and pitiable monster‘s attempts to become a part
of the human conmunity, only to be taught that society can be
sions of the Gothic to new zones of horror and unmerited suffer- 1 far more monstrous to the strangers and freaks in its midst than
ing. The scientist who makes the monster is also a special ver- any artificial Gothic ghost. This variation on the monster theme
sion of the ego-driven overreacher of older Gothic fiction. i ' is the central irony of Mary Shelley's novel, for the DFl"ClPal
F°'meTl!. this character had been a psychopathic abbot or mania- monstrosity of the book is society itself. The monster resides
cal baron in search of sexual or political power over a maiden secretly for a time with the De Lacey family and is accepted
or a castle. Now, the new Gothic villain seeks to unlock the until interrupted and viewed close up. Beaten, repudiated,
secrets of the universe itself and to replace the function of ‘I driven out of the family, and cut off from love, the fatherless
God. If the abusive extension and application of power may be 1 and lonely brute who did not ask to be ‘born’ finally comes to
termed the central Gothic crime, Mary Shelley has established loath both the creator and creation. The child then punishes the
the standard for the Gothic villains to follow in her mutation j father by killing everyone whom the father holds dear, and the
of the character. The o res of castl nd bb
9 e a a ey had been com- , father in turn swears to exterminate his murderous offspring.
pelled by colossal sexual appetites; Victor Frankenstein is I The pursuit of the monster by Victor Frankenstein follows _a
driven by his intellectual vanity to displace God hinself in the H second experiment in monster-making. Eager for comPe"i°"5hlP
art of creation. The main story of Victor Frankenstein and the J with a creature of its own kind, the m°"5l9T P6T5"id95 F'a"k9"'
“°"5t9' is framed by the @Pl5t°laTy narrative of Captain Halton, ‘- stein to build a female mate, but midway thP°H9" thl5 '9P"l$i'e
a polar explorer On a dangerous ex edition in u t f J task, the scientist destroys his work when he realiies that he
. - _ _ p q es of the
norshwest passage, Halton's ship picks up Victor Frankenstein
may be unleashing a race of dangerous beings who will reproduce
ami st the arctic wastes. There is a strong parallel between ..; and then destroy humankind. Enraged by Frankenstein's "abortion"
Captain Nalton's inordinate desire to break through the last V} of his future wife, the monster retaliates by killing Elizabeth
geographical frontier and Victor Frankenstein's insatiable sci- “ and Henry, then departs for the polar regions with Frankenstein
i

345 THE rznsr cnrnrcs L THE FIRST GUTHICS 347
in vengeful pursuit. The novel's climax offers the familiar ] ioration from a potentially worthy young man to CFHEI despot a"d
Gothic pattern of fli ht nd 't b ' ' ‘ '
_ ‘ g a pursui , ut done with the roles _ betrayer of his country for the sake of personal power. The ig-
l"VeTt9d, 5'"¢@ it I5 the h"mﬂ" 9hﬂ'a¢te' ""0 5tﬂik5 F"@.i"hHmaﬂ noble decline of Castruccio is interwoven with his love affairs
thing through the desolate darkness. Having failed to overtake ’ with two opposite women: the ethereal Euthanasia, at whose home
the monster, the dying Frankenstein is paid a final mocking ' in the Castle of Val er a in the A ennines Castr io f' ds
_ _ p q p ucc in
visit by the thing just before the pathetic creature is "borne political sanctuary; and the earthy Beatrice of Ferrara, a
away by the waves and lost i th d k "
n e ar ness and distance on a i crafty countess and religious hysteric who claims the gift of
receding ice floe,--only to reappear in Hollywood 115 years prophecy. In her carnal guile and erotic strategies, Beatrice
iate'- Hhile "Er "°V9l 'E9i$¢@T5 deep traces of the Gothic presents some traits of character which link her to the amorous
tradition, Mary Shelley must be seen as a revisionist of that female demons of Gothic fiction such as Matilda in THE MONK (see
tradition. Her aims in FRANKENSTEIN were clearly more mythic and #244). She is only interested in domination of others and she
philosophical than horrific or sensational and she placed the visits the sorceress, Fior de Mandragola, to gain the means for
Gothic fable of identity in a new context, the perilous world of controlling Castruccio. Her moral opposite, Euthanasia, is a
theoretical science. Dramatized, cinematized, and finally en- Promethean heroine devoted to political freedom and the rights
Shrined in the popular imagination as the ultimate tale of * of humankind, but even so, her love of liberty cannot forestall
terror for modern times, FRANKENSTEIN is also at its deepest Castruccio's steady degradation and eventual betrayal of the
level a revelation of the darkest haunted castle of them all in Florentine Republic. Leaving Tuscany, he travels first to the
its depictiv" of the tragedy of the misspent intellect. England of Edward II (1307-1327) with its vitiated court life
. characterized by the homosexual Piers Gaveston. Castruccio's
400. Shelley, Mary Nollstonecraft Godwin. VALPERGA: OR THE LIFE AND brief friendshi with Gaveston in olves him in an a t f
, v c o
ADVENTURES OF CASTRUCCIO, PRINCE OF LUCCA. London : G. and homicide. Havingpmurdered his first man, Castruccio flees across
N.B. Nhittaker I823. '
, the channel to Flanders. In Flanders, he soon falls under the
"°d9'" Re9diti°"55 "°"E ‘ Machiavellian influence of the mercenary, Alberto Scoto, who
Gothlﬁ TJPQI Gothified history ("SE5 the Castle tYrant as its ' teaches him how to practice deception and dishonor to his own
Mai" Chﬂfﬂﬁter) advantage. Hhen he returns to Italy in 1313, he is fully
Biographical and Research Data: Birkhead, TALE OF TERROR, schooled in the art of power politics and fully convinced that
pp.165-166; walling, Hilliam A. "Valperga,' in MARY SHELLEY. power is worth having for its own sake. Euthanasia is now forced
New Vork : Twayne, 1972, pp.51-71; Spector, Robert D. THE to choose between her love for Castruccio and her patriotic af-
ENGLISH GOTHIC: A BIBLIOGRAPHIC GUIDE TO WRITERS FROM HORACE , fection for a divided Florence threatened by foreign tyranny.
HALPOLE TO MARY SHELLEY. Hestport, CT : Greenwood Press, when she places liberty ahead of love, She makes the fatally
1934» DP-325-Z27- I heroic choice that brings her to her death at sea in a_ storm
after Castruccio turns against her and inurisons her. Having now
Critical Synopsis: In Mary Shelley's second novel there can become an absolute tyrant, Castruccio also conspires against
be found several of the components of Gothified history: war, ~ Beatrice. After sexually enjoying her, he then denounces her to
assassination, witchcraft, seduction, religious delusion, polit- ‘ the Inquisition, a Machiavellian tactic which drives her to poi-
lcal 5"d 5eX"i1 mﬂChi"ﬂtl0"$. Wi"d@'l"95» 6 high‘! ACFIVE I"qUi- ‘ son herself. The novel ends with a totally dehumanized Castruc-
sition, and Italianate villainy. As a political Gothic, VALPERGA cio now become one of the most powerful men in Tuscany, but
engaged the reader in a critique of Machiavellian ideas and an - hated and feared by all. As in FRANKENSTEIN (see #399), Mar!
indictment of the Napoleonic personality which made power not Shelley sought to portray a degraded vision of goodness within 3
only a means but an end. Material for the novel was thoroughly strongly passionate character who applies himself to the quest
gathered and researched by her close study of Florentine annals for power. The terror which this type of personality arouses
during the age of Dante. Castruccio himself was an authentic i goes beyond the sort of physical fright experienced in encoun-
historical personage, the noble son of the once-powerful ters with the earlier Gothic villain because it exposes_ the
Ghibelline family of Lucca. In the year 1290, the family is ’ darkest depths of human nature. For Castruccio, as for Victor
driven from its estates in the city of Lucca to the west of Frankenstein, the price of gaining power is the forfeiture of
Florence in an internecine struggle with the victorious Guelph their own souls and capacity to love.
faction. At the age of eleven, Castruccio is an exile; by age
fourteen, he has met Dante and been much taken by the poet's l 401. Shelley, Mary Hollstonecraft Godwin. THE LAST MAN. London
depictions of hell. By the tine he is seventeen he has become an Henry Colburn, I826.
ambitious, impetuous, slightly sadistic and somewhat vain young ‘ ‘ Modern Reeditions: Nebraska UP, I965, ed. Hugh J. Luke, or.
-man whose central motive is to restore his family's prominence i Gothic Type: Apocalyptic Gothic (futuristic science fiction)
while obtaining fame and power for hinself. At this point in his ‘ T Biographical and Research Data: Spark, Muriel, "Mary shelieyi
life he is an intense and humane young man whose humanitarian " A Prophetic Novelist,“ THE LISTENER, 45 (February 22, 1951)!
potential is remarkably promising. The novel is a chronicle of 305-306; W6lll"9, HiI1l5m- “The L35‘ "5"," I" M“RY 5HELLE'-
his corruptive idealism, or more precisely, of his moral deter- , New York : Twayne, 1972, 00.72-100; Spatt, "art1eY- "M6?!

THE FIRST GUTHICS I Y‘ THE FIRST GDTHICS 349
Shelley's Last Men: The Truth of Dreams,‘ STUDIES IN THE NOV- , surround Lionel Verney. The peripheral Gothicism of THE LAST MAN
EL, 7 (1975): 526-537; Sterrenburg, Lee. “THE LAST MAN: Anat- ' is most noticeable after the outbreak of the plague midway
omy of Failed Revolutions," NINETEENTH-CENTURY FICTION, 33 g‘ through the second volume. The survivors flee before its deadly
(1978): 324-347; Snyder, Robert Lance. "Apocalypse and Inde- 3 march down through southern France, into the Jura Mountains,
terminacy in Mary Shelley's THE LAST MAN,“ STUDIES IN ROMAN- ‘ across the Arveiron River to the lonely shores of Lake Como, all
TICISM, 17 (1978): 435-452. X territory traversed by the Shelleys in their romantic travels.
Hhen the victims of the universal death reach Lake Como, only
< 7 .
Critical Synopsis: Mary Shelley's third novel, published af- ' three last human beings remain, Adrian, Clara, the little daugh-
ter Shelley's death, takes up a politically conservative theme ter of Raymond and Perdita, and Lionel Verney. Enroute to Italy,
which stands in contrast to the political liberalism of YALPERGA ‘ they have witnessed the demise of civilization and seen all the
(see #400). However, only the third volume of the novel contains _ world become a morgue. These descriDti°"5 °f “B55 death ahd
definite Gothic characteristics in its pessimistic vision of the decay bear some comparison with the Dlﬂ§"@ 5¢e"@5 a"d the"
extermination of the human race by plague. The romantic image of ‘ ‘ Gothic overtones in the American Gothic novelist, Charles Brock~
civilization's last survivor, an idea that would later appeal to 1 den Brown's, ARTHUR MERVYN (1799). Embarking for Greece by boat,
the writers of science fiction, is presented through the hope- , Adrian and Clara drown when a storm capsizes them. Swimming to
less fate of the ruined world's last man, Lionel Verney. Ver- shore, Lionel now wanders through a deserted Italy,-jemply Cli-
ney's fragmented narrative is found inscribed on pieces of bark ies, depopulated villages, a greet Svtiﬂl Y°i¢ With Qhiy the
in the Cave of the Cunmaean Sybil at Baiae‘s Bay near Naples. ‘ unburied corpses as any remaining sign of former habitation. The
Mary Shelley never explains who the reader of Verney's apocalyp- ' plague is over, but so is civilization. In these closing scenes
tic account is supposed to he, since he is the final living
human being. The destruction of the world by pestilence origin-
of almost unbearable solitude, Mary Shelley projected a forebod-
ing nothingness under a “black sun“ which anticipates in its own
ating in Constantinople occurs in the last decade of the twenty- I right the lengthening Atomic shadow of modern doomsday science
first century (the 2090‘s). England has abolished the monarchy , fiction.
and become an enlightened republic, scientific advancements have . ‘
swept away superstition and ignorance, and libertarian progress I 402. Shelley, Mary Hollstonecraft Godwin. THE FORTUNES OF PERKIN
is everywhere evident. Nevertheless, these utopian conditions I 1 HARBECK. London : Henry Colburn and Richard Bentley, 1830.
fail to yield heaven on earth and paradoxically lead humankind , Modern Reeditions: Norwood Editions, 1976, ed. Betty T. Ben-
to an irreversible devastation and extinction. The plague which I nett.
eventually wipes out humanity is Mary Shelley's instrument for ‘ Gothic Type: Gothified history
symbolizing the disease of dangerous ideas and licentious polit- Biographical and Research Data: Mc Intyre, Clara. "The Later
ical thinking that had come to threaten the institutions of Career of the Elizabethan Villain Hero," PUBLICATIONS OF THE
ordered society in the revolutionary decade of the 1830's. A i . MODERN LANGUAGE ASSOCIATION, 40 (1925): 874-880; Dunleavy,
political interpretation of the novel suggests that the work “ Gareth H. "Two New Mary Shelley Letters and the 'Irish'
ought to be read as a prophecy and a warning against unchecked ‘ Chapters of PERKIN HARBECK,“ KEATS-SHELLEY JOURNAL, 13
libertarianism. "The true subject of THE LAST MAN,“ argues Hil- (1964): 6-ll; Ozolins, Aija. “The Novels of Mary Shelley:
liam A. Malling, ‘is ‘the plague of liberty‘ and its egalitarian From FRANKENSTEIN to FALKNER,' DISSERTATION ABSTRACTS INTER-
consequences. As the novel progresses through its second and , NATIONAL, 33 (1972): 2398A (University °f Maryland); “i11‘"9.
third volume, we are presented with the horrified vision of a ‘ ‘Q Hilliam A. MARY SHELLEY. New York : Twayne, I972, pp.IOI-
world from which all social distinctions have vanished and where 104.
every man is reduced to the lowest connmn denominator--that of
his most primitive animal interests.‘ The principal characters Critical Synopsis: Mary Shelley was, of course, not the first
in Mary Shelley's not-so-brave new world are all pen portraits , to write a work supporting the historical theﬂry that the '°¥i‘
from the Byron-Shelley circle. ln his skepticism, helplessness, , pretender, Perkin Harbeck, was the rightful Duke of York as well
and ultimate isolation, Lionel Verney reflects elements of Mary I as the legitimate claimant to the crown after the defeat ﬂhd
Shelley's own relationship with her husband, the ultra-liberal death of Richard III at the Battle of Bosworth field in_ August,
Shelley, and her father, the anarchic, free-thinking Hilliam 1485. The Jacobean playwright, J°h" F°Td, hid d'i"it‘l°d "a"
Godwin. Verney's sister, Perdita, who can be identified with “ beck's career in the chronicle play, PERKIN HARBECK (163§). Mary
Byron's mistress, Claire Clairmont, Mary Shelley's stepsister, ‘* Shelley not only romanticized the figure of the royal impostor
finds herself in an emotional relationship that is so intense as t while advocating Marbeck's legitimﬂﬁy, but She 315° $"'T°¥"d?d
to be destructive. The man who loves Perdita at first is the * his life with a pervasive atmosphere of Gothic 919°" °"d ‘"m"
recklessly romantic soldier of liberty, Lord Raymond, a clear ‘ nent death. In fact, much of the tone and crepuscular scenery of
duplication of Lord Byron. The Shelley figure in the novel is the novel carry reminders of the dark mannerism of the Jacobean
the idealistic and sensitive Adrian, son of England's last king. dramatists, themselves a source for the settings of many Gothic
Adrian's sister, Idris, and his beloved, the Greek princess, novels. Hhile Mary Shelley is sympathetic to Harbeck's cause,
Evadne, complete the circle of passionate individuals who she is critical of his character. He is not Dresehted as 3" ‘M’
I
I

350 THE FIRST BOTHICS 1 THE FIR$T GUTHIC5 351
postor, but as a generous, talented, and intrepid young man who all. They are simply sentimentalized reminiscences and stiT
might rule England far more capably than the calculating Henry life studies of the Shelley who caused the suicide of Harriet
VII were he not himself so corrupted by the dream of power. Like Hestbrook (Edward Villiers), Byron's estranged wife, Annabella
Castruccio in VALPERGA (see #400) or Victor Frankenstein, his is Milbanke (Cornelia Santerre), Byron's suffering daughter, Augus-
a passionate nature flawed by the lust for power which even- ta Ada Byron (Ethel), and the eloping Shelley who took up life
tually erodes his humanity. By the tine she came to write PERKIN with Mary (Horatio Saville). Many of the repressed feelings of
HARBECK, Mary Shelley had resolved the conflict conservatively , self-doubt, isolation, and ihadequacy of Mary Shelley herself
between overreaching ambition and the regard for the human heart are no doubt disPEF$ed thY0"9h°"l theie ¢"iTi¢t@T5- "aVi"9
in her characters. Harbeck is doomed no less than Victor Frank- launched her writing career as a Gothic novelist in FRANKENSTEIN
enstein because he is an agent of chaos and personal aggrandize- i (see #399), Mary Shelley steadily dissociated herself from Goth-
ment in a world desperately in need of order. The novel is lﬂ PFﬂ€tl¢95 i" "er l°"9 fl¢ti°"- I" 5°me "7 "Er 5h°'t9' Tic‘
carefully structured, if somewhat rigid, and done in the style tion, howevﬂr. (€-9- "Transformation" (1831) and "The Heir of
of a dramatic pageant. Emerging from hiding after Bosworth Mondolfo,“ first published in APPLETON'S JOURNAL in 1877), the
Field, Perkin Harbeck (or Richard IV) asserts his claim to the Gothic inpulse remains an insistent and strong, if not a para-
throne. He spurns the true love of Monina de Faro in order to mount, m93"5 °f ﬁ¢hl9Vl"9 effects-
make a political marriage with Lady Catherine Gordon of Scot-
land. Even after the collapse of his rebellion and his betrayal ' 404. Shelley, Percy Bysshe. ZASTROZZI: A ROMANCE. London : G. Hilkie
by his friend, Robin Clifford, this man who would be king per- “ and J. Robinson, 1310-
SiStS in his futile cause against a far-too-crafty adversary_ ~ Modern Reeditions: Arno Press, 1977, ed. Frederick S. Frank.
Sold out by Clifford and seized by the King's men as he is about Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (Schauerromantik features
to escape from England to raise a new army, he is executed as a and characters) '
traitor in 1499. The novel's Gothicism is slight and minimal, 1 Biographical and Ref-earsh Data: Hughes, »'\-M-ll "Shelley's
having now become almost entirely an atmospheric rather than a ZASTROZZI and ST. IRVYNE,“ MODERN LANGUAGE REVIEW, 7 (191ZH
dramatic effect. Sir Halter Scott had often treated historical 54-53; Hi11lb"Tt°"i DaVld 9- “5"e119¥'5 'G°thl¢' "°VE1$,'
forces as sinister and alienating, also presenting in Gothic KEATS-SHELLEY JOURNAL, ls (1957): 39~49; I-évy. LE ROMAN
terms the illusory role of the individual in the shaping of . "59THIQUE' ANGLAIS. PD-422, 425. 443, 559, 583, 551; limin-
history. Mary Shelley, like Scott, was interested in the darker SKY, C""t- 'ZA5TR0ZZI a"d THE BRAVO OF VENICE: A"°U'e' 9'91‘
forces of history which overwhelm the best qualities of the ley Borrowing." KEAT5-3H5LLEY JUURNAL, 30 (1981): 15-17;
individual. , Seed, David. "Mystery and Monodrama in Shelley's ZASTROZZI,"
DUTCH QUARTERLY REVIEH, 14 (1984): 1-17. »
3. Shelley, Mary Hollstonecraft Godwin, LODURE. London : Richard
Bentley, 1835. Critical Synopsis: Often considered puerile and unimportant
Modern Reeditions: None by admirers of Shelley's poetry, his two Gothic novels deserve
Gothic Type: Domestic fiction (recessive Gothic traits) to be studied from a developmental perspective as ‘laboratories
Biographical and Research Data: walling, william A. MARY of language in vhiﬂh the novice met experiments with Certain
SHELLEY. New York : Twayne, 1972, pp.105-106. ‘ types of images and categories of metaphor which later give some
i of the great verse of the mature poet their unique power." The
Critical Synopsis: In LODORE, Mary Shelley's Gothic novelis- ‘ precocious Gothicism of ZASTROZZI reflects Shelley's respect for
tic talents dissipated into mordant sentimentalizing over the the higher possibilities of the Gothic mode, ii type of popular
memories of her connections with Shelley and Byron. By common literature which he knew well and read avidly B5 6 y0""9 ma"-
critical consensus, the novel is a strained autobiographical ' The book is also Shelley's private allegory of the mind‘s self-
group portrait of the Byron-Shelley circle. Most of the work's destructive extremes. All of the cannon trappings of the novel
Gothic residue may be seen in the theme of the fated family and 1 of horror or the Schauerroman such as nocturnal pursuit, demonic
its dissolute patriarch, Henry Lord Lodore, hastening the ruin love, fraternal animosity, incestuous nightmare, charnel detail,
of the Lodore house. The vain and egotistical Lord Lodore is and sexual murder find their way into the novel, but even in his
Lord Byron. Leaving England forever with his daughter, Ethel, he juvenile phase, Shelley seeks to combine the standard Gothic
wanders the wildernesses of America and dies ignominiously in a events and personalities with deeper philosophical speculations.
duel at the end of the first volume. Disposing of her Byronic Thus, Shelley used the Gothic at a very early stage of his
hero after a single volume in a three volume work was clearly an writing life to construct and explore a mythology of the self.
artistic error, for the remaining two volumes of the novel Four Gothic sources are highly visible throughout ZASTROZZI.
evaporate into trivial sentimentalism. In GLENARVON (see #220), ’ These are: Godwin‘s ST. LEON (see-#140), Dacre's ZOFLOYA (see
Lady Caroline Lamb had exploited autobiography for Gothic suc- #102), Radcliffe's THE ITALIAN (see #350), and Lewis's THE MONK
cess and she had made certain that her Byronic wrecker of women, (see #244). The youthful Shelley was also attracted to Gothicism
reputations and lives dominated the story from beginning to end. in its shorter and wilder variation as found in the shilling
The last two volumes of LODORE can hardly be called a story at shockers. In his LIFE OF PERCY BYSSHE SHELLEY (1847), Th0mi§

J52 i TI'E FIRST GDTHICS
FIRST GUTHICS
Eedwin mentions Shelley's voracious taste for the numerous _and characters)
uebooks and chapbooks crowding the circulating-libraries. Of , Biograpnicai and Research Data; Angippag, Anay_ "The gtruc-
the tV° G°thiC '°m3"C@5, ZA5TR0ZZi i5 the more replete with ture of Shelley's ST. IRVYNE: Parallelism and the Gothic Mode
natural horror while in ST. IRVVNE the outrageous supernatural of Evil," TULANE STUDIES IN ENGLISH, 18 (1970): 59-71; Mur-
presides. The titular villain, Zastrozzi, is an enormous, brood- ' phy, John V. THE DARK ANGEL: GOTHIC ELEMENTS IN SHELLEY'S
ing, scowling, and tormented protagonist with a stained destiny. HORKS, Lewisburg, PA : Bucknell UP, 1975; Hogle, Jerrold E
His psychological and physical features derive compositely from s ( vgheliey-S Fiction; Ilhe Stream of Fate,'" KEATS-SHEELEV
Mrs. Radcliffe's Schedoni, Lewis's Ambrosio, and the Handering JOURNAL, 30 (1931); 78-99; Seed, David. “Shelley's 'Gothick'
Jew character in Godwin's St. Leon and elsewhere. Also worth i in 5T, IRVYNE and After," in ESSAYS ON SHELLEV, ed. Miriam
noting as a possible influence on Mary Shelley's monster in Allott_ Totowa, NJ ; Barnes & Noble, 1982, DD-39-70-
FRANKENSTEIN (see I399) is the gigantic stature of Zastrozzi. '
Za§tr0zzi's Satanic nature (the ewisravh for the novel--"That , Critical Synopsis: Shelley's second Gothic novel, ST. IRVVNE,
their 5°" may Prvve their foe"--is taken from Satan's words in is linked by tradition and theme to Godwin's Rosicrucian novel,
PARADISE LOST) is motivated by "pale ire, envy, and despair" as 5T, LEON (see #140), to the German Rﬁhherromihei ahd t° V5'i°"5
he plots against his normal half-brother, Verezzi, whom he , incarnations of the Handering Jew figure as a Gothic hero. The
biames 7°’ his °h" "retched C°"diti°" ﬂhd iii@9itimiCy- he ¢0"- ' novel is also a technically successful application of the tene-
5PiF95 With the hi¢ked Whmah» Matilda, Y0 Phi" Vetelli ﬂhd hi5 brous apparatus of the Schauerromantik Gothics which Shelley had
beloved Julia, a task of destruction much relished by the pair. eagerly read. In his "Hymn to Intellectual Beauty" (1816), he
Verelli i5 PaFtiChii'iy Susteptible prey for Zastrozzi since he recalled his Gothic experiences: "Hhile yet a boy I sought for
is prone to narcoleptic trances and somnambulistic states which ,‘ ghosts, and sped/Through many a listening chamber, cave and ru-
render him completely helpless. Since Matilda wants Verezzi for in,/And starlight wood, with fearful steps pursuing/Hopes _of
herself, she is most anxious to assist in Zastrozzi's colossal < high talk with the departed dead.‘ Gothic villainy and commit-
revenge. She falsely reports the death of Julia, then removes ‘ ment to evil are shared by the novel's two male CharaCt€'$
Verezzi from the dungeon where Zastrozzi has been starving and " ‘ Holfstein and Ginotti (alias Nempere). Like ZastrozzisiGi"°tti
torturin him H d t' f
g . er se uc ion 0 Verezzi owes most of its lurid 1 is a colossal and enigmatic figure with an air of the fallen
vigor to Matilda's tactics against Ambrosio and Victoria de I archangel about him. His inordinate curiosity and Rosicrutliﬂ
Lorendani's cunning example in ZOFLOYA. The novel has a bloody v affiliations have led him to possess the secret formula of ever-
finale as it climaxes in a rondo of stabbings after the Inquisi- lasting life but such knowledge has failed Y0 yield Eterhﬂi
tion traces and tracks down the wanted pair, Zastrozzi and bliss and power as Ginotti's ravaged condition of mind and eye
Matilda, in their Venetian lair. Having been tricked into ' quickly 5hQn_ The sglf-exiled and self-indulgent young hero-
marrying Matilda, Verezzi stabs himsetf when he sees his beloved villain of the tale is Holfstein, a type Of Gﬂthified "e'the'
Julia aiive a9Bih- Mitiidi "595 the 5i"E diqﬂer t° kiii Jhiia who screams his defiance at God from Alpine mountain peaks dur-
just before she is apprehended and held for torture by the in he est; while he invites the divinity to prove his exist-
9 "D
Ihﬂhi$ih10h- EX"itl"9 amidst the Carhige he has °a"5ed Bhd ’ ence by delivering an Olympian thunderbolt. These characters are
satisfied that he has ' h d h' f
Phhls 9 15 Ether ihd half-brother he not only Gothic profiles in their own right but expressions as
new madly enjoys a necuiiar moment of freedom frﬂm all human well of Shelley's own ideological divisions and struggles be-
bonds~as he is hoisted upon the rack in the hall of torture. An eneen belief and atheism. The tale's three "Omen B150 @Xhih!t
Uhrﬁpehtiht 50¥hi€ h9T0 I0 the ehd and defiiht Of God ahd mi", sound Gothic credentials while at the same time indicating vari-
Zastrozzi dies in anguish and scorn. ‘Even while writhing under Qug conflicting notions of love. The COTFﬂDt ihd C°'r“Pti"9
the agony of almost ins t bl ' * ' '
"P00" 6 9 IOFIUFQ hi5 hETV95 "EYE Italian beauty, Megalena de Metastasio, is a carnal and earthly
stretched, Zastr0zzi's firmness failed him not; but upon his temptress. At first a victim while in the hands of a bandit
soul-illumined countenance, played a smile of most disdainful ' chief, she becomes the aggressor herself after heih9_tE$¢"ed hY
scorn,--and with a wild, convulsive laugh of exulting revenge, ’ wolfstein, The super-virtuous Ulynpia stands for a higher love
he died." Here, in its nihilistic or negatively romantic form, ' than that of the senses. Holfstein's sister, Eloise St. Irvynﬁi
is the Promethean rebel of Shelley's later poetry. In Gothic is something of a reconciling figure between the two extremes,
terms, ZASTROZZI is a revolutionary fantasy on the self's crav- although she is forced to occupy the subplot where the previous-
ing for liberty seen in the hero's violent plan “to abolish the iy inginerated Ginotti mysteriously reappears under‘ the name,
supernatural authority in God the father“ and to sever all \ Nempere. Each female knows how to speak and suffer like a Gothic
reliance on earthly truth in the removal of Verezzi whose name heroine and each woman appears to have bee" l°¢h°d_ "P l" 5
5"999Sts "veracity." haunted castle on some prior occasion. Hhile Holfstein involves
. . ' himself with Megaiena and her rival, Ulyhviii 5°"? 5°i“t‘°" t°
405. Shelley, Percy Bysshe. ST. IRVYNE: UR, THE ROSICRUCIAN, A R0- ' the problem of the never-ending life is feverishly sought by
MANCE. London : J.J. Stockdale, 1811. Ginotti. He can achieve the solace of death only by conyeylhg
Modern Reeditions: Arno Press, 1977, ed. Frederick S. Frank. \ the secret he has learned to some future suvB'h°" "ii‘"Q t°
Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (Schauerromantik features risk his soul for evil. He has singled out Holfstein to take the

354 THE FIRST GDTHICS l' FTR5T G°T“1£5 J55
burden of the secret from him thus enabling him to reclaim his torment known to the Gothic imﬂ§l"5'5l°"- "'9 despot": culpnt
mortal soul and to this end he stalks Holfstein to his castle behl"d their i"°a'°e'ati°" is the p'e5e"t.Bar°" S"re"tZer' Heel’
lair, the ruined fortress of St. Irvyne. The novel's Gothic cli- lem. Joanna's °DPre55lVe tether. Lord 5"‘tle' °f Ka°"°“- ‘S ‘"
max is well-conceived and serves up quite a spectacular double K 1939"‘? ‘ﬁlth Haerleilh “"15 rePldl.Y» ell 0f P"? Staples 9f the
death. Hhen Holfstein refuses to accept the secret of inInortali_ Gﬂtllit Pl°l- are C°H9ct9'§' Frederﬂfws ‘.5°mc‘de"ta1 a"!vaI ‘S
ty from Ginotti, Ginotti is instantaneously combusted by a beam ' most timely, since Joanna is to be give" '" e"f°'°ed m§rr'a9e to
of lightning flashing through the vaults of the chateau. The P I Haerlem On the very next morning. A compulsory ueddin9,a“'ay5
coup de gothique transforms Ginotti into an animated Skeleton: Qu makes an excellent occasion for the erposure and _subduing of
"On a sudden Ginotti's frame mouldered to a gigantic skeleton  Villain! “'1 Frederick is “"31 75° “"5 "'e]°d'a"'auc E"?-Y‘ The
yet two pale and ghastly flames glared in its eyeless sockets.3 9 Castle is soon back in virtuous hands and _another wedding--the
Still alive in death, the skeletal Ginotti is condemned to wan- : right °"e--takes Pl°°@- “S f°’ ‘"e Pe'f‘d‘°"§ b'°‘le';
der down the corridors of time and to bear forever the ironic --Haerlem admits to beinq 59°b3ld'5 °theY 5°" and Fredgnck S
punishment of life eternal. Obtaining the notion of mechanized ‘ Hieked C'Jll"terPert- 0" P399 72: Phe 5?th'c "°ﬂd gm“ quiet arm
genes from the numerous shockers he had read, Shelley's varia- - reverts t° 3 ¢°"dltl°" °f d°m°5t‘° b]‘55'
ion on the conliionplace device of THE ANIMATED SK "
#007) goes beyond sinple physical terror to symbolizi?-EI(li: (Z: 407. Sickelmore, Ri°ha"d- EDGAR:_0R{ THE PHANTOM OF THE cAS“'E' Lon‘
itructizﬁfforées at war within the self. In the writing of these don : Hinegva-Pressufor Hilliam Lane, 1798.
wo you u othics, Shelle contributed to the con r ' Modern Ree itions: one _ _ _ _
the Gothic novel from simple tale of terrur intleaslgﬂplgi ‘ Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (imitation of OTRANTO and
allegory of the mind which engaged the reader in such abstract other first Gothics)
problems as the role of the imagination in the sensory world and Bi°9"ePlIl¢al am‘ Research Data: S“"'"ers' GOTHIC QUEST’ p'
the perils of pursuing the ideal life in a universe ruled by 353-
dark chance. _ _ _
Critical Synopsis: Sickelmore's first Gothic novel is a
406. SHREHTZER CASTLE: on, THE PERFIDIOUS BROTHER, A GERMAN ROMANCE i more-than-satisfactory @Xte"§i°" "F "r§- R°d°“ffe'? "°t“°d‘ ‘"d
INCLUDING THE PATHETIC TALE OF EDHUND'S GHOST. London : A Halpole's déC0r- Sickelmore's own influence on Gothic styles was
Neil, 1302- l considerable and may be traced through many later Gothic titles
Modern Reeditions: None such as Ann Ker‘s popular EDRIC THE_FORESTER: OR, THE MVSTERIES
Gothic Type: Gothic chapbook (composite plagiarism) OF THE HAUNTED CHAMBER (see I218). Sickelmore's EDGAR ru"5 Over
5l°9rﬂPhicaI and Research Data: None with the sort of Gothified Hamletism which never seems to have
disturbed the Gothic readership. After being located in his
Critical Synopsis: The 72-page chapbook is a sham translation almost inaccessible underground cell, the Ph§"t°"'_°f ﬁfe “sue
from German sources. Literally every single aspect of its Gothic initiates young Edgar int!) the "11/5ter\e5 °f_|'"5 _bl"'t|'l"‘9|:'- alld
plot is extracted from prior Gothics, particularly Reeve's OLD I 9lVe5 3 dark acC°“"t °f the deeds surmundmg ms faFher S mm?
ENGLISH BARON (See #355). Events are as predictable and stereo- der. Ed9arlS °mi9atl°" eXte"d5 be)'°"d "Ere “e"e"9§ Sm“ ‘Fe ‘S
typical as the names and behavior of the characters. Yet, the i 6150 required W letate ﬂ"d ‘Jive l‘°"°"°ble b“"‘a1 '5“ '“5.f°‘
frayed condition of the chapbook verifies that it was eagerly tller'5 b°¢)'- The wise 9h°5t is permuted "0 make Several -emf?
read and passed through many hands. The young soldier, Frederick i"9 ﬂDPeﬂre"¢e5 thr°"9l' the W0 V°l"l"e5 before the l°"9-Ylthljeld
Siobald, is returning from service in the Thirty Years‘ Har when ‘ "etllrﬂi eXPle"3ti°" fer the 9l"°5t'5 5\lPer"ﬂtl"‘al P9re9"‘"at‘°"5
he is caught in a storm. Hhen this event occurs in Gothic fic- » 4l$5iPite$ the Plea5l"9 at'"°5Pl'9fe °f "9"de' am terror’ THE
tion, there is always a ruined castle nearby to receive such MDNlllLV MIRROR, B reVle"l"9 Perlvdltﬂl which normally showed
wanderers. The chambers of Shrelrtzer Castle echo and groan with nothing but '°tl°"al c°"te"‘pt fur the hows poms of the Gaunt
all of the usual cadaverous surprises. Investigating one of r0II1ﬂ"Ce, Praised 5l¢k9l'"°"e 7°“ 3 bnsk am artful st°ry'
t ese sounds, Frederick enters a dark chamb r to b .
"weltering in his own blood." The bloody mane is, 5201:0333" ' $08. Sickelmore, Richard. MARY--]ANE._London : Printed for the Author
Fredel;ick's father, old Siobald, who was wounded by an unseen ' ‘ at the Minerva-Press for William Lane, 1800.
assai ant as he searched the Castle for the cell holdin "Oder" Reedltl°"51 "°"° ,
Frederick's beloved. A hidden spring trips a hatchway lgadivignga Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (elements of THE MONK's
a subterranean apartlnent where the two men discover a prostrate loathsome descriPtl°"5) T
and runconscious Joanna. Thus, vie have a more-or-less typical Bl°9rePhi'cal am Research Data: Sumers’ G°THIc- QUES ’ p'
,Goth;c IIOIIEEOIIIHIQ and family reunion in the depths. Hhile .his ' 353- ' '
noun s are ein tended Old Siobald fills in h ' ' _ . . -
tale of horror ?ntended’to stir Frederick's cliuﬁagztaand "1335: Critical Synopsis: The adept Gothic novelist and dramatist,
him to revenge. Both Joanna and Siobald have been locked up Rl¢Tlir'3 Sickehnorea “V95 am! "°"'ked 1" B"9ht°"‘ He thorough 3
within the Castle for many months and subjected to every horrid mastered the various Gothic types, scenes, and charattere 5"

J56 THE FIRST GUTHICS - |-pf rmsr GOTHICS 357
may also have included Gothic parody among his talents as the »5 the ghostly voice issuing from ruined surroundings. But when the
possible author of the scathing satire, THE NEH MONK (see #383). T‘ supernatural world speaks to the anxious heroine or invades her
Behind the deoentiveiy innocuous title. MARY-JANE, is an outra- » .3 night thoughts, the reader knew that such ghostly voices were in
geously horrid adventure sometimes rising (or sinking) to the ; &' fact a product of her delusions. In this Gothic novel and else-
degree of loathsome detail and cadaverous exhibitionism associ- i -f “here throughout his work, Sickelmore shows an interest in the
ated with the craft of Monk Lewis. The heroine for whom the nov- poetics of Gothicism. How might these solitary moments of terror
9] is "amed Ieads 3 m°de] Gothic e*i5te"¢@- She T5 3" °TPhan who ‘ I as apprehended through the excited sensibility of the hysterical
is curious about her parentage and vulnerable to male guile. ' . heroine be made delightful? Sickelmore's stylistic solution to
Suddenly drawn into a dangerous metropolitan world of rakes and EL the problem of evoking beauty in terror is to expose the reader
seducers, she is victimized in multiple ways before a release is “T to metaphors of awful and sublime power as filtered through the
effected and a legitimate family name is bestowed. As a female i imagination of the overwrought observer. That commonplace of ‘he
prisoner, she undergoes all of the traumas of the castle before a. form, the heroine's escape from the Abbey, might be read as the
her liberation by her husband-to-be. Sickelmore's absolute mas- mind's return to reason after its imaginative indulgence in
tery of the formulas of maidenly distress made him one the ,- strange fits of passion.
Minerva-Press's bestselling purveyors of Gothic. Brought by her
foster father. Mr- Radmill, to Brighton to finish her eduootion. 3 410. Sickelmore, Richard. OSRICK: on, noocnu nonnons, A ROMANCE IN-
iiery--Jone soon heroines the kidnovned prey of e ferocious young " TERSPERSED WITH A FEW ANECDOTES, ETC. THAT HAVE THEIR FOUNDA-
man who is a mixture of Richardson's Lovelace and one of the f TIONS IN TRUTH, AND HHICH ARE OCCASIONALLY POINTED OUT T0 THE
Marquis de Sade's geniuses of lust and depravity. Seized by , READER. London z Minerva-Press for Lane, Newman, 1809.
young Barville during a fire in a theatre (probably set by Bar- Modern Reeditions: None
ville), she is carried to his Helsh castle and incarcerated for , Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (journalistic format)
his sexual amusement. Seeking safety in the darkness, she en- Biggraphicﬂi and Research Data: Sumners, GOTHIC UUE5T»
counters horror upon horror instead. Tripping over something in p_353_
d dim Po§$i9@"ﬂ¥ ond losing her lanp, she retrieves a mass of
P"tTTf¥i"9 T195" "he" she 9F°P@5 after "Er T°5t TT9ht- J"5t 65 T P Critical Synopsis: Sickelmore used an unconventional and ec-
Barville T5 ab°"t t° FBPE ﬂ"d murder "dry-Jﬂ"9, "ET idﬂPtTV9 centric structure for OSRICK which is radical even by Gothic
brother, Henry Radvill, interrupts the sadist at work, saves - ‘ glandards. The novel's chapters are built around headline
her, directs her escape from the castle, then temporarily disap- captions which anticipate the sensational methods of yellow
Pears hovino fulfilled his Function of keenins the heroine alive l journalism or the modern tabloid. Each boldface headline is de-
ond s<1'eonIin9- While imprisoned in the castle, Harv-Jone had ’ signed to catch the eye and jar the soul by advertising .a re-
discovered a diamond ring. Sensing thpt the ring might yield the , ientiess Series of Gothic agonies, entrapments, escapes, ai5_
secret of her heritage, she had taken it with her as an identity i? tresgeg and triumphs, In their gory bluntness, the viVdCi°u5
token. In Brighton, the ring proves to be the means of estab- ‘ Caption; read like a journeyman's inventory of the Gothic work-
lishing her true parentage. She is the natural child of Bar- 1 ghap such Stark blurbs as "A Frightful Abyss," "The €iV@T"s" "A
ville's elder brother and therefore socially suitable for mar- ' {Y coffin n -The Re5¢ne,- "A corpse," "Horrors," "Surprise." and
riage to Henry Radmill. Discovering that he had been the - Q "agony: have a catalngic effect and propel the redder t"F°d9h
persecute? and near murderer of his ﬂhn niece, Bdrviile IHKES 5 every known chamber of the haunted castle toward a conclusive
his own life. Sickelmore's slick and satisfying Gothic furnished r chapter Significantiy iaheied -3iisS_- If the structure is hi-
an exelwle for such Minerva-Press regulars es "dry iioeke (see I zarre it is matched by Sickelmore's unusual location for the
#271). § Gothic plot. The action of the novel is situated in South Ameri-
ca between Montivideo and Buenos Aires. The well-endowed hero,
409. Sickelmore, Richard. RASHLEIGH ABBEV: OR, THE RUIN ON THE ROCK. Lieutenant Qsrick Somerton of Brighton, is called upon to rescue
London : Minerva-Press for Lane, Newman, I805. ‘ and guard the young heroine, Clara, who is prone to getting her-
M°der" ReedTti°"5: N°"e -in self into the sorts of Gothic difficulty advertised in the chap-
Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (romance of the ruin, num- ’{g tar tit]es_ [n addition to the usual ordeals of the Gothic
erous Radcliffean elements) ﬁt world, Clara has to be saved from a pack of wild dogs and recov-
gggsronhieei and Research Bate: Suinhers. GOTHIC QUEST. on-86. Q ered from a bloodthirstyhorde of Palrpas Indians. After being
s
the recipient of so much tlmely_ gallantry,_ 0"B "°QTd elﬁeﬁl
Clara to marry the brave Brighton soldier, Osrlck, lﬂ t e
critlcii 5¥"°P5T51 THE LITERARY JOURNAL TUT December, 1905, l 'Bliss" chapter. But Sickelmore's resolution is just as unortho-
_ departed _from its customary contempt for Gothic fiction to sin- ” dax as the prigr Gothic business. In a departure from the roman-
Qle out Sickelmore's revival of Radcliffean suspense for artis- 'r tic formula, clara declares her preference for the formidable
tic DFﬂT5E- The ¢°"V@"tT°"iT PT°t bTT"95 the ¥°""9 herﬂiﬂﬁ t0 i military conservative, Captain Dreadnought. Although the novel
the devastated Abbey of Rashleigh. The true power of the romance
lies in S1ckelmore's descriptive development of the device of
§%%§@i,
§§
unleashes plenty of Gothic nightmare, _there is a Pr°"°""C@g
element of satiric comedy in the naming of the characters an

158 THE FIRST GUTHICS ' TPE FIRST GOTHICS 359
the $Deeches of its heroes and victims In fact the exa era K seems to be a Radcliffean title but t '
. , _ . , , ypical of Siddons, the
Qrotgsquerie of incident and odd mannerisms of Sickelmnr2?$ C22? work turns out to have no direct relationship with Mrs. Rad-
Ef?NK€RC3(17;g)mlﬂU the comic techniques of Smollett. In HUMPHRV cliffe‘s SICILIAN ROMANCE (see #347). The same misdirective ti-
in another i v, hi find Sickelmore's probable source for Osrick 1 tling attaches to REGINALD DE TORBT, S1ddOﬂS‘S“ conversion of
Americ L ﬂvlﬂtl le comic soldier who has seen service in gne German robber sagas such as Schiller's DIE RAUBER (I751) and
feStin55;tsl$$tenanZ Obadiah Lishmahago. New world Gothic, mani. Vulpius‘s RINALDO RINALDINI (1800) to his own ends. The
den BED n e_ in the Indian-infested forests of Charles Brock- ' stereotype of the admirable outlaw or Promethean rebel with a
rumancesw f ln EDGAR HUNTLV (I799? and James Fenimore cooper-5 just cause against a criminal society appears in the character
risi Z, he f°'e5§, was also being tried out by the enter. of Reginald de Torby, a noble criminal who turns against socie-
P Q9 ickelmore _in ‘what must be ranked as one of the most ty's hollow values and allies himself with the twelve bandits.
experimental of Gothic fictions. i‘ There is plenty of Gothic action in the melodramatic opposition
of individual against his former class and in the forest se-
411' 5‘gg3:3EDH9"TY. HILLIAM HALLACE: OR, THE HIGHLAND HERO, A TALE quences, but the reviewer for THE LITERARY JOURNAL for August,
91 ON HISTORICAL FACTS. London : G. and T. Hiikie, 17- 1803, was quick to condemn the novel as another composite theft
M 8 R _ _ from German sources. Siddons's name did not appear on the title
° er" eed‘t‘°"5= "°"@ , page until the Minerva-Press catalogue of 1814.
Gothic Type: Gothified history
Biographical and Research Data" Sunmers GOTHIC if ' ‘
. QUEST. .172; 413. Siddons, Henry. THE SON OF THE STORM. London . G.A. Hall for
Eoster£E HISTOR! OF THE PRE-ROMANTIC NOEEL IN ENGLAND, 5.220; I Longman, Hurst, Rees, and Orme, 1809.
Evy’ ROMA" GOTHIQUE' ANGLAIS, p.482. K ‘ Modern Reeditions: None
Gothic Type: Domestic Gothic (apparitional visitations)
_ Critical Synopsis: Hritten in the spirit of Sophia Lee's fic- i ‘ Biographical and Research Data: None
tive history, THE RECESS (see #240) Hilli
nf d d - . H 9 V _ am Wallace is hardly
veg:?Oﬁ $2 h;a;0r;:zl‘facts although it is a highly snghified
e ious career of the Scottish renegade who
W65 captured and executed by Edward I in 1305. Siddons portrays
Critical Synopsis: Domestic melodrama pervades the novel's
action although Siddons provides a strong supernatural episode
with the appearance of the annual apparition in the guilt-
the national hero as an exciting outlaw figure movin thr i i stricken life of Lord John Oceanus O'€arroll the novel's
th°Tg"9hly Gothic world of foreboding fortresses, gorewﬁgﬁing ‘ tempest-tossed father. As his middle name implies, O'Carroll is
SP3? '95. and villainous English barons. History itself is Sub- a lover of the sea. His maritime passion has brought him a pair
:2 Agatgdhto nationalistic and Gothic fantasy by having the of twin wards who have been cast up from the sea on one of
ang egge hero triumph Qver his base English adversaries at Perth ‘ . 0'Carrull'5 nautical adventures. Because they are found in a
carried "tire éq the Hlghlands where the English had originally typhoon, he gives Henry and Laura the surname, "Tempest," and he
S t Am, 9 ‘aid 3gﬂlHSt Hallace in Edward's war against the { regards them with adoring awe as the son and daughter of the
co s. id supernatural theatrics and majestically gloomy land- - storm given to him by the powers of the sea for some secret pur-
556095, the Scottish patriot forces the English to capitulatg pose. Although O‘Carroll is a good man, he is bothered by a
each time the armies clash. Such Gothified history earned the E hidden sin, a manic condition of spirit which causes temporary
yﬁgngRI%iddons (1774-181A) the angry censure of the reviewer in states of madness. Against his father's wishes, he had made an
f ICAL REVIEH ""0 dl5m1SSEd this first nova] as "the work i inmulsive marriage below his station, then deserted the woman
Se Sgv 5C?°°ib°X, ""0 Ought to have been better employed, and to ‘ during her pregnancy to go to sea. O'Carroll's conscience ex-
this er: y reprehended for such idle engagements." Ignoring tracts a payment for this cruel act by despatching a ghost each
fi ce sure, the‘ son of the famous actress went on to write year at midnight on the anniversary of his matrimonial deser-
ve more romances in the Gothic vein. " tion. This is the primary Gothic occurrence of the novel and the
phantom's appearances are handled with Siddons's special theat-
412- siddvns. Henry. REGINALD us TORBY AND THE THELVE ROBBERS. Lon rical aptitude for the weird effect. To atone for his betrayal
3°: I Minerva-Press for Lane, Newman, 1803. of fatherly trust, O'Carroll raises the orphans kindly and
G°t:T" Reed‘t'Q"53 "°"9 embarks on other altruistic deeds including the reformation of a
B9 ‘C Tlpei R°"b@"T0man (various Radcliffean elements) .~ dissolute young woman named Susan Montcastle. In due time,
iographical and Research Data: Lévy LE ROMAN "GOTHIQUE" f 0'Carroll's moral debt to his conscience is cleared and through
ANELAIS, p.469. ’
-mm.-'~
the customary revelation scene he learns that the son of the
storm he had rescued from the sea many years before was in
- Critical 5Y"0PSis: Siddons specialized in robber romances and i actuality the unborn child he had abandoned when he.deserted his
zveras based on popular Gothics, making sure that ail of his wife. Once more, we see the older ways and means of the Gothic
eroes and heroines "were menaced in all the favorite horror romance merging with the pious themes and filial morality of
e"Vl'°"5,--castle, convent, and cavern." His opera of I794 THE domestic fiction in THE SON OF THE STORM.
SICILIAN ROMANCE: on, THE APPARITION or THE CLIFFS bears '~nat

