 i
TIE FIRST GOTHICS J1
37. THE BLOODY HAHD: OR, THE FATAL CUP, A TALE OF HORROR! London :
Stevens Circulating Library, n.d.
Modern Reeditions: Hone
Gothic Type: Gothic chapbook
, Biographical and Research Data: Hatt, SHILLIHG SHOCKERS OF
THE GOTHIC SCHOOL, pp.11-12.
Critical Synopsis: Consisting of twenty-four lurid and pulp-
ish pages, THE BLOODY HAHD is an utterly typical bibliographical
specimen of a chapbook Gothic romance of the period. Hordes of
' these macabre titles packed the shelves of the numerous circu-
lating libraries of the day. Usually, a shilling shocker proved
to be a plagiarized redaction of one or several Gothic novels
issued by the Hinerva-Press or other such houses specializing in
Gothic goods. The rapacious shilling shocker author simply
plundered everything but the verbosity of the Gothic original
often favoring the Radcliffean plot of the maiden menaced by an
aristocratic monster, telling it in the Lewisite style of san-
guinary incident and spontaneous supernatural horror. The cheap
and gaudy appearance of the Gothic chapbooks is itself an object
of historical interest. A shabby frontispiece might depict a
gloomy spectre looming before the distracted heroine in the re-
motest wing of the castle, although there was no guarantee that
the fearsome event shown in the cover drawing would occur in the
text. According to H.H. Hatt, the best authority on Gothic
chapbooks, these diminutive Gothics ‘were about four by seven
inches in size, and their closely printed pages were poorly
stitched into a cover of flimsy blue paper. The stories varied
in length from mere anecdotes to thirty thousand words, but many
of the publishers specialized in two definite lengths, dealing
out thirty-six pages for six pence and seventy-two for a shil-
ling.‘ These primitive harbingers of the horror pulp magazine
were nearly always unsigned although an occasional pseudonym
does now and then turn up on a title page. The plot of THE
BLOODY HAND is nothing more than a pirated amalgam of longer
Gothic tales. It deals with the terrors aroused by the secret
society of Illuminati whose conspiracies had been the basis for
Grosse's lengthy Gothic romance, HORRID HYSTERIES'1see I153).
The tale is cast in the form of a memoir by Reginald O'Hara
whose life is desired by the Catholic Church because of the
heresies of his grandfather. Hot only was Reginald's relative
guilty of dangerous deistic beliefs, but he had also assisted
the Illuminati in freeing a young woman from a convent where she
was being held against her will. Hhoever the bluebooker was, his
handling of these Gothic larcenies shows a crude skill as well
as a thoroughgoing acquaintance with the most marketable Gothic
plots of the 1790's. During the rescuing of the maiden, D'Hara's
grandfather had literally detached her from the clutches of the
Catholic Church by severing the hand of the abbot who was re-
: straining her. But the bloody hand of Catholic tyranny is a long
one and it now reaches down through the generations to threaten
O'Hara. In a rapid and ridiculous resolution, the one-handed
monk who menaces O'Hara is neatly and nastily removed to enable
the story to end at exactly the prescribed page qupta. The death
scene underscores the gross ingenuity of the shilling shocker.

 i
32 TIE FIRST GOTHICS ‘- TIE FIRST GOTHICS 33
Hhile the one-handed monk is engaged in poisoning the unwilling be defended against the charge of sorcery by Stephen Langton
conmmnicant by administering a fatal cup, the defiant victim himself. At her trial, her true father, the Earl of Pembroke
snits the stoxic liouid hack intu the face and eyes of his makes himself khowh. Ella is acquitted, aha Pembroke becomes the
monkish tormentor blinding and killing him. Hith the toxifier I champion who might well put an end to King John's corruptiohg,
toxified. °'"dFl Ge" leave the perils of Catholic France for the ‘This novel is too full of cryptic entanglements and unnecessary
safety of Protestant England where he is now composing his I complexities to be judged a successful historical Gothic. Yet
strange family history. Hild. crude. incredible. sensational. the fact that it was published by A.K. Newman, Hilliam Lane's
THE BLOOOY HAHO is an averaoe sannle of what the Gothic public successor at the hiherva-Press, indicates that the harket for
bought and devoured in 100. unintelligible Gothics had not yet died out.
38. Bolen O-A- THE HYSTERIOOS HOHK= OR. THE HIlARO'$ lOHER- London r 39. Bonhote, Elizabeth. auusav CASTLE: A NOVEL. Minerva-Press for
: A'K Newman 1826.
uiiiiah tahe, 119$.
Noderri Reeditions: Hone 1 Nodern Reeditions: None
Gothic Type: Gothified History (terror mode)
Bio raphical and Research Data: Summers, GOTHIC QUEST,
9
pp.374-379.
Critical Synopsis: The motto for this late and intricate his
Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (terror mode)
Biographical and Research Data: Scarborough, SUPERNATURAL IN
NDDERN ENGLISH FICTION. 99.20, 45; Tompkins, POPULAR NOVEL IN
_ ENGLAND, pp.51, Z25; Tarr, CATHOLICISI IN GOTHIC FICTION,
pp.45o 46, 50, 51, 86; Levy, LE RONAN 'GOTHIOUE‘ ANGLAIS,
torical Gothic might be taken from the Elizabethan dramatist, I pp,403_ 410, 411, 413. 414. 559. 510. 534_
Cyril Tourneur's, definition of tragedy: 'Hhen the bad bleed,
the tragedy is good.‘ The bad eventually do bleed in THE NYS- Critical Synopsis: BUNGAY CASTLE was an extremely popular
TERIOOS HOHK. hut the process of Justice is very slusoish in - Gothic's Gothic by an author who cah be regarded as the first
order to allow the Persecuted heroine plenty of oppOFt""l¢¥ ¥O . mistress of that special effect found throughout the tradition
suffer, starve, weep, scream, swoon, and palpitate in a frustra- " the subterranean squeeze. The contractive predicament is the
ted search for patriarchy and identity. The era is the reign of main surprise found'in her haunted ruin where the heroine
King John (1199-1216). The regal libertine appears in the novel ~n ﬂgsglfne. her ¢°.p,ni°n' "a¢e1,"e, and he, irresp°nsib]é
as one of the heroine's oursuers- Other actual historical oer- brother, Edwin, lose their way but find their destinies. These
$°"d995 dit¢'¢4 by 5°19" ‘O Pie! 5Ot"l¢ Pl't$ l"¢iO4e P'l"¢e 5- three form a trio of Gothic investigators whose exploration of
Arthur, Philip de Clairville, the royal bastard, Faulconbridge,
and Pope Innocent III. The Gothic travails of the heroine, the
fictional Ella de Nortimer, are played out against the backdrop
of John's struggle with Innocent over the papal appointment of
Stephen Langton as Archbishop of Canterbury, a political quarrel
in which the mysterious monk of the title is deeply involved. He
is Father Adolphe, one of Ella's first protectors and later un-
frocked as her maternal uncle. The heroine's dilemma throughout
the novel and the classic problem of the Gothic virgin in gener-
al is to find her heritage by learning to distinguish false fa-
thers from true in the totally deceptive Gothic world. She is
victimized in the standard Gothic ways by being locked up in the
various castles held by the lewd followers of a bad king. The
most nefarious of these barons is the Count Volquessen to whose
Castle of Dsmanville in Normandy Ella is taken to be raped.
Saved from Volquessen by Father Adolphe, she makes her way to
the Convent of St. Margaret where she comes under the protection
of the Queen Mother, Elinor of Provence. But more castles and
more incarcerations await her. At Longholm Castle, she is struck
by the spectacle of a solitary tower said to be the keep of a
wizard. Her curiosity makes her vulnerable and she is suddenly
seized by an Italian monster, Giovanni di Nontimar, and carried
to the wizard's tower. More entrapments and escapes eventually
bring the heroine to the castles of the Alps and to a set of
distresses copied from the heroines of Hrs. Radcliffe. Accused
_ of witchcraft and befriended by strangers including the ever
watchful mysterious monk, she makes her way back to England to
the forbidden recesses of Bungay Castle exposes them frequently
to the subterranean squeeze. The novel is cluttered with Gothic
gadgetry but thinly plotted because 8onhote's sole object is to
subject the trio to as many claustrophobic situations as pos-
sible and to cause as many shudders as she can. Bonhote thought
of Gothic fiction as a medium for pure sensation and nothing
else, certainly not for the dissemination of politics or morals.
In her preface to DUNGAY CASTLE, she delivered a rejoinder
against the Gothic ideologues of the I79Dfs such as Godwin and
Nolcroft who were perverting the pleasures of terror in their
novels of ideas. ‘A novel was never intended as a vehicle for
politics,‘ she insisted. The sole business of the Gothic novel
is demonstrated by the subterranean gropings of Roseline. Her
father, Sir Philip de Norney, shows his Gothic breeding early in
the novel when he threatens Roseline with a convent confinement
unless she agrees to marry an old and foolish baron. This cruel-
ty causes Roseline to wonder if her father is indeed her father
and subsequently to discover whether the answer to this question
Idght be found somewhere within the secret chambers of Bungay
Castle. Her preliminary gropings lead her to an encounter with
the handsome young stranger, Halter, whom we instantly recognize
as Nalpole‘s proper heir, Theodore, on loan from THE CASTLE OF
'0IRANTD (see 0466). This character is useful to the Gothic nov-
elist for the interruption of the heroine's enforced wedding
Vols, a function Halter performs when called upon to save Rosel-
“ilo by Roseline's clever servant, Albert. Anxious to aid his
llﬂstress in her search for the true father, Albert'has employed

 j
hi entril uial talents to project a supernatural voice from
un e g
passageways traversed in “The Cask of Amontillado.“
ou ,
Ninerva-Press for Lane, Newman, 1808.
Nodern Reeditions: None
Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (moralized mystery fiction)
Biographical and Research Data: None
l arable Lecas's life and death is a portfolio of evidence
gins with small acts of brutality toward animals and soon
becomes psychologically addicted to the pleasures of cruelty
toward human unfortunates. His "fall" bears some comparison with
an earlier study in the progress of depravity, John Noore's
ZELUCO (see I297). Both Bounden and Noore wrote Gothic literary
versions of Hogarth's series of engravings, THE FOUR STAGES OF
CRUELTY.
41. Brewer, George. THE HITCH OF RAVENSHORTH: A RGIANCE. London :
J.F. Hughes, I808. i
Nodern eeditions: None
Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (terror mode)
Biographical and Research Data: Lévy, LE RDNAN 'GDTHIOUE'
ANGLAIS, pp.4I5, 426, 429, 430.
Critical Synopsis: Brewer's novel of witchcraft is the sort
of Gothic that might have stirred the imagination of Hawthorne.
At least three of Hawthorne's stories contain echoes of THE
HITCH DF RAVENSNORTH: ‘The Hollow of the Three Hills,‘ ‘Alice
Doane's Appeal,‘ and the tale of devastation by a vision of
evil, “Young Goodman Brown.‘ Brewer's witch is Ann Ramsey, a hag
who seems to have learned the black arts under the tutelage of
NACBETH's weird sisters. She drinks blood and diets on infant
flesh. Her ways are so wicked and her hovel so overrun with
serpents and toads that she almost becomes a caricature of the
stage sorceress. The fact that the unspeakably foul hag who
hatches dozens of evil schemes against her neighbor, Baron De le
Braunch, suddenly turns into the good Gertrude on the final
, pages of the novel did not seem to disturb the Gothic reader who
was tolerant of such identity change. Baron De le Braunch. is a
34 TIE FIRST GDTHICS . 115 F1351 ggmggg J5
local tyrant whose Nacbethian dreams of power make him look for
s v on
within a sealed casket and distributed other supernatural illu- ,1 5 of riwin M
sions throughout the castle. These happenings take a second pans, he appearg to Z?.5l‘.i3Z..2‘§i!.1f.§.3"3t“»il'Z'..$§I‘..§.'* ﬁfe]
place to Hrs. Bonhote's compulsion for describing narrowing Now desiring to do away with his sons he visits the Hitch ef
tunnels. As they escape from an unidentified shape coining down a Ravenslofth in he, 1“, to he". propheﬂe; and Sm h d °
corridor, Roseline and Edwin and come to a cul-de-sac. This is a‘ payment of one child per prophecy the Baron is lgdste °'°i'.“
Hrs. Bonhote's favorite Gothic moment and she lingers over it: fee with the blood of his sons Eager to re lace h?s loin” 1:’
‘Here they met with many difficulties; in some places, huge with the exciting and seductive Alwena thepliaron rt‘: i at U ie
stones had fallen from the walls,--in others the archway was so a demonic ceremony during which the hag requires hi: tc "ti; n
low they were almost obliged to crawl,--while toads, snakes, and corpse and swear allegiance to Askar lord of hell N 0 S 8
various kinds of reptiles impeded their progress." Such an v satan, the BQrQ|'|'5 criggg ma Qurdgrs. accuqulate .nt‘inl' S?" to
d r round of no return connects directly with Poe's dismal realizing that he had too many unburied bodies sgatteredrrbﬁut
his contorted plot, resorts to incredible coincidence to wrench
the story back into line. The romance goes to pieces when Alwena
40- 5 "de" J°5¢P'\- "*5 "URD5RER= OR» “*5 “LL if '-5U\5- L°"“5°" 1 ’ Iid the Baron appear to kill each other and the Hitch unveils
herself as the righteous Gertrude, the Baron's wronged wife His
'"¢|‘94"¢$$ 9190584. the remorseful Baron who did not die after
all, retires to a monastery. lihile it begins powerfully and en-
J°.Y$ Some high Gothic moments in the witchcraft scenes, Brewer's
novel deteriorates when an equally powerful ending qugt he
Critical Synopsis: Bounden also wrote two widely-read Gothic ,-ewe,-e¢_ "my Got,“ in M f
poeIiS, mu CURIOSITY: on, THE VISION or sztvssm uaos) aha o ,,,,,,,,g Witt," tmf. :[,m:{er';'°‘§m :"h:§;te:":st§:‘:r :§:¢:§-
THE DESERTEO CITY (1824). iiritten in the manner of a horrifying " eavern, they lacked a way of getting them out C S
mora p ,
against self-indulgence. Lecas is a congenital criminal who be- 4g_ 3,-“er, Jams N°,.,.i$_ A umfims “LL London : mneﬂbpress
for Hilliam Lane, 1799.
Modern Reeditions: None
gothic  Gothified History
°9"lP C6 and Research Data: Tarr CATHOLICISN IN GOTHIC
FICTION. no-69. 103. 104. 105. 111: Lev}, ts now: -eonuouv
ANGLAIS. 00.390. 399. 410. 454. 620. 631.
¢"i“¢l1 5.Y"0P$l$= The Gothifying of the medieval past began
with Le:and's LONGSNORD, EARL G’ SALISBURY (see 9243) aha rexheq
s ‘em nence in Sophia Lee's inventive history of the secret
:3,“ children, THE RECESS (see I240). Brewer's A liINTER'S TALE
ﬂthgthihé ‘Pattern by embellishing an imagined medieval period
sh“ c.e ements. Title and plot recall the mixed moods of
“l'§,3fg"$A:£ Play in which a sad tale's best for winter‘
hr i i . :I.i.25). Accurately gauging the public appetite
M‘ ‘om "lay ll Story interspersed with horror, Brewer justified
Nd" dc c aracters and usages in the preface on ground; of
‘Md f Hf? Respecting the liberty 1 have taken with the
-' aotmso r ts, I think public taste a sufficient sanction for
“gr ‘: b" "5 "9 my fair means to interest the passions." The
an .7 5‘ I596 "lion an imaginary secret episode in the career of
_“”9:‘a medieval warrior, Edward, the Black Prince (13304375),
v nf"°=9h the dark glass of the Gothic, his affair with Selina
vi or‘ becomes a series of persecutions, wanderings, in-
‘ugilie l"'l$0ﬂIB"l5. ""1 Sillnrnatural encounters. The favorite
ex machina of the Gothic novelists, the phantom of the
Tithe’. enters on cue to restore his daughter to noble
at the end of the romance. But prior to this altogether
fle salvation, the heroine finds her way to the sgcurg
0 name -and marriage blocked by two volumes of continuous

3
i J6
‘J.
ya a.-4-4-an a..¢=~;_-4A-’4_- ..;.
1: 1
I
ITIE FIRST GOTHICS
Gothic emergency. As would later be Scott's habit in the
colposition of. historical fiction, Brewer's narrative focus falls
on the pseudo-historical rather than the historical characters.
The Black Prince's story is secondary to Selina's harrowing saga
_ secret chaxber by an uncle, the Earl of llford, who regards her
as his private sexual property and has his own plans for her. The
because Edward's character was traditionally worthy and heroic,
Brewer could not portray him as a mere lecher. He therefore plans
to marry Selina in a secret ceremony which is pronptly
interrupted by the offended ghost of her mother. The spectre at
the wedding is a device of the Gothic which never seemed to wear
out with either writers or readers. The Prince had received an
earlier warning of heaven's disapproval of his secret match in
the form of a Gothic nightmare. ln his dream, Edward is led by an
the romance. Deliverance from Gothic distress for Selina comes
hostage by a vile knight named Sir Emric with the complicity of
her uncle, the Earl of Ilford. Precisely on schedule, the missing
father appears to set right all wrongs and subdue all villainy.
Hoved by a sense of honor, the Black Prince admits his dishonest
lovemaking, acknowledges Selina's child as his own, and resumes
his exciting military career. Brewe('s formulaic blend of the
adventures of an actual English hero with the plights and flights
of a female Gothic fugitive anticipates the historical novel in
purer form.
43. Bromley, Elizabeth Hugent. THE CAVE if COSEHZA: A RGIAHCE if THE
EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. London : H. Calvert for G. and J.
Robinson, 1803.
Hodern Reeditions: Hone
Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (terror mode)
Biographical and Research Data: Sumaers, GOTHIC QUEST, pp.93,
366; Levy, LE ROHAH "GOTHlnUE" AHGLAIS, p.461.
Critical Synopsis: The fact that this grotto Gothic was ad-
vertised as ‘altered from the Italian‘ provides the only clue
needed for spotting the subterranean source in Hrs. Radcliffe's
dim and gloomy glades and caves. The author attempted to
conteworize the woes of the heroine by placing the action in the
early Eighteenth Century and by introducing a fake ltalianate
countryside that is as formal in its rustic values as Shake-
'speare's Arden. The cave becomes the refuge Ild trysting place of
the seventeen-year- old heroine and her married lover of fifty.
TIE FIRST GOTHICS 37
The supporting cast contains dukes, duchesses, counts,
countesses, and assorted courtiers out of the royal favor who
have apparently followed the lovers into their troglodyte exile.
Here, subterranean melodrama approaches the limits of the
of subterranean escapes and harassment by lecherous- relatives. , ludicrous in an unintelligibly plotted Gothic. Even a fugitive
I Stirred by her beauty, the Black Prince comes to llford Castle to chancellor of the exchequer with all of his ledgers and heavy
fulfill his wanton desires. Here, Selina has been confined‘ to a I records is included among the congregation of refugees who seek
safety within the Cave of Cosenza, but the danger is so obscure
and the peril so vague that the reader is at a loss to discover
Earl's son and Selina's depraved cousin, Lord Desmond, attemts ' why. Even the most uncritical of Gothic fanatics must have been
to violate her while drunk and the colmaotion brings the Black baffled by this strange romance. Farfetched and outrageous
Prince who rescues her, then possesses her sexually himself. But ' circumstances can certainly be tolerated and enjoyed in the best
Gothic novels; indeed, such situations are the very essence of
the high Gothic itself as established by any gliqase of
beckford's fantastic underworld in VATHEK (see 0030). But in the
case of THE CAVE if COSENZA, the fine line between the surreal
and the silly is obliterated and even Gothic readers accustomed
to all kinds of flunmery must finally have come to a threshold of
ipatience with such ineptitude in the field.
“I
piled one above the other; loathsome insects bred in f- Hinerva-Press for A.K. Newman, 1819.
putrefaction; and scattered chapless skulls. iihile looking on 5, Modern Reeditions: Hone
these with shuddering and disgust, he perceived a coffin-lid T Gothic Type: Sentimental Gothic
slowly lifting up.‘ Stock Gothic interludes of this type adorn ‘ Biographical and Research Data: hone
armored phantom to a charnel house where he is shown ‘coffins Brown, Elizabeth Cullen. THE SISTERS if ST. GOTHARD. London :
when she follows Edward to the battlefield of Poitiers. Here, she . Critical Synopsis: The novel is a mildly Gothic variation on
plays out her assigned role as Gothic fugitive when she is held , -V the theme of sense versus sensibility. instead of virtue in dis-
tress, the novel depicts sensibility in distress. Although there
are no authentic supernatural circumstances nor very many locales
that can qualify as genuinely horrendous, the novel does offer a
satisfactory Gothic pairing in the person of the capable villain
F and profligate, Hontalvo, and the adequately persecuted maiden,
_ Rosette Blanchard. Brown's Gothic-sounding title was ‘probably
,- intended to lure readers expecting yet another grim tale of
, ecclesiastical anguish. But St. Gothard's sisters are not in
orders at all, but two English ladies living in Switzerland and
undergoing training by their enlightened father in the‘ gaining of
the benevolent moral life. Switzerland, not England, seems the
best natural classroom for such an education. Rosette's pragmatic
and sensible sister, Adelaide, heeds her father's rational
ahonitions about the perils of feeling and sensibility, but
Rosette remains defiantly carefree, romantic, and overflowing
with sentiment. Governed totally by imagination and emotional
caprice, she is much like Hrs. Radcliffe's Emily St. Aubert, the
-hypersensitive heroine of THE HYSTERIES if UDOLPHO (see I349).
Thus, she is soon inveigled by Hontalvo's inviting wickedness
Ihen he feigns a proposal to her in order to carry forward his
scheme of seduction. while Rosetta finds herself intimidated by
bmtalvo, Adelaide is wooed and won by Clementine who is as
Wfight, pure, and dull as Hontalvo is lowdown, bad, and
interesting. For the denouement, Hrs. Brown arranges a sort of
Ural minuet. Rosette's unwise sensibility is brought to account
'5! heriwise sister who positions her to receive freedom through
recognition of‘ her emotional errors. Hontalvo is challenged and

it!
,.
I
I
4
I
I
I
TrE FIRST GDTHICS T!-£ FIRST GOTHICS 39
permanently maimed in a duel with Clementine. Already a moral falters and fails as a result of an abrupt reversal of character
cripple, he is now a physical cripple who literally limps out the that is inconsistent with the facts. Suddenly ravished by
story at the end. Sense triumphs over sensibility and the remorse, the vile master of Le Forester relinquishes his claim to
once-separated sisters of St. Gothard are again fellow citizens power and nominates Godfrey as legitimate heir. A more melo-
in their father's rational utopia. Enriched by coach accidents, dramatic resolution might have served the author's purposes
midnight weddings, and sexual deceptions, THE SISTERS OF ST. better than such an insipid repentance. Hhen the new master of Le
GOTHARD mixes sentimental and Gothic motifs thus demonstrating ‘ Forester assumes his intelligent authority over the family,
the tendency of late Gothic fiction to revert to the material of Brydges's political position is made clear. He hopes that a
the pre-Gothic novel of seduction. similarly wise reversion to aristocratic leadership would be the
' eventual destiny of the ruling class when the wave of revolution
A5. Brydges, Sir Samuel Egerton. LE FORESTER, A NOVEL. London : J. has subsided. Normally, the polemical Gothic of the late
Hhite, 102. Eighteenth Century accommodates radical ideas, but in LE
Hodern Reeditions: None FORESTER, the aristocratic argument found a supportive voice.
Gothic Type: Philosophical Gothic (domestic elements) ~
Biographical and Research Data: Tompkins, POPULAR NOVEL IN 46. Burke, Ann. THE SORROHS OF EDITH: OR, THE HERHITAGE OF THE
ENGLAND, pp.Z13, 327, 355; Foster, HISTORY OF THE PRE-ROMANTIC “. CLIFFS. London : B. Crosby, 1796.
NOVEL IN ENGLAND, p.239; Lévy, LE ROMAN 'GOTHIOUE' ANGLAIS, _¢ Nodern Reeditiong; None
5 p.453, -I Gothic Type: Sentimental Gothic (imitation of Charlotte
Smith)
Critical Synopsis: LE FORESTER is a chronicle of domestic Biographical and Research Data: Foster, HISTORY OF THE
decadence and gradual repurification of an aristocratic house- PRE-ROHANTIC NOVEL IN ENGLAND, p.199.
hold. Indirectly, and almost to an allegorical degree, the novel
is a defense of aristocratic principles in an age of democratic Critical Synopsis: The novel's ultra-sensitive and suicidal
change and volatile reform. Brydges (1762-1837) was a scholar of heroine takes the emotional predicaments of the woman of feeling
merit and an antiquarian bibliographer. His novel is an apology to an extreme. The intense emotional contours are all highly
for the rightness of rank, privilege, and rigid social dis- reminiscent of Charlotte Smith's pathetic narratives, especially
tinction as a counter to the rising tide of anarchy. By using the ETHELINDE: OR, THE RECLUSE OF THE LAKE (see I422) which appears
current Gothic devices as vehicles for his ideas, Brydges replied to be Anne Burke's most pervasive source. The morbid French ro-
to the radicalism of the Jacobin novelists in their fulminations mances of Prévost and Baculard d'Arnaud along with Nackenzie's
against class authority and social inequality. Described as ‘a HAN OF FEELING (see 0260) are additional influences upon Burke's
melancholy, refined, and stubborn Tory,‘ he saw in the Gothic a tale. An obstinate and class-conscious father forbids his son,
means of propagating the conservative point of view and he found Francois, to have anything further to do with the lowborn daugh-
in the use of Gothic contraptions and ordeals a way of warning ter of nature, Edith. Following the course mapped out by Goethe's
against the libertarian.zealotry of Bagb, Holcroft, and Godwin. Herther, she takes her life. The novel has plenty of sublime
The character configurations in the novel are plainly Gothic. The melancholy, magnificent suffering, and emotional sensationalism.
affairs of the House of Le Forester have long been dominated by The scenery itself is a rich source of pathos for the reclusive
the dissolute Hugh Le Forester, a ruthless squire who has removed heroine who has retired to the hermitage of the cliffs to embrace
(he believes) his nephew, Eustace, as rightful heir. Naking his death. There are some hints of the supernatural and the landscape
way back to England after the ship in which he was being around the hermitage is endowed with the power to terrify after
transported as a bondservant has shipwrecked, he pledges his life the true Radcliffean fashion, but these pure Gothic aspects are
to restoring the decency of the Le Foresters. The struggles of confined to a few episodes and are of atmospheric importance on-
Eustace constitute the novel's prologue, a biography of the ly.
disinherited sufferer. Duty for the moral rejuvenation of the
family rests upon Eustace's son, Godfrey, Brydges's propagandized 47. Burke, Anne. THE SECRET OF THE CAVERN. London : Ninerva-Press
portrait of the enlightened aristocrat of the future. Persecuted for Lane, Newman, 1805.
by his uncle, Hugh, he becomes the victim of an assassination Hodern Reeditions: None
plot while a student at Cambridge and reluctantly resorts to Gothic Type: Grotto Gothic (terror mode)
violence to protect his own life. The main story, then, derives Biographical and Research Data: Summers, GOTHIC OUEST, pp.85,
from the conflict in CALEB HILLIAHS (see Il39) and has to do with 366; Lévy, LE ROHAN 'GOTHIOUE‘ ANGLAIS, p.623.
the pursuit of a young man by a powerful squire who will stop at
nothing to see him eliminated. Befriended by Emily Nason with Critical Synopsis: Keeper of the secret throughout the two
whom he holds a number of political dialogues on ‘things as they volumes of the romance is the maternal spectre of the heroine's
-are,‘ Godfrey is falsely accused of murder by his uncle but ac- mother. Along with the various moods of Gothified history (the
quitted when Hugh's purchased witnesses fail to perjure Period is the reign of Edward III), there are some familiar
themselves effectively. Following the trial of Godfrey, the novel . touches of the novel of terror: a twin theme, abundant subter-
I 

40 THE FIRST GOTHICS
ranean activity, a family enigma, a dangerous uncle, and assorted
Gothic perils, with the cavern itself acting as the central re-
ceptacle for pursuit, confinement, and ghostly revelations.
THE FIRST GOTHICS 41
repulsive episode will serve to suggest the disparity between
Hrs. Radcliffe's gradual frissons and Hrs. Carver's blunt shocks.
Entering one of 0akendale's dim apartments, Laura is imediately
enveloped by a cadaverous stench, then shoved against the smell's
48. Carey, David. THE SECRETS if THE CASTLE. London : B. Crosby, source by an unseen force: ‘The dead body of a woman hung against
1505, -' the wall opposite to the door she had entered, with a coarse
Nodern Reeditions: None ' °‘°"l Pinned over all but the face; the ghastly and putrified
Gothic Type; Pure or high Gothic (horror mode) appearance bespoke her to have been sometime dead.‘ The rotted,
Biographical and Research Data: None dangling body is no wax effigy as Hrs. Radcliffe would have con-
ceived the scene, but the real. object and just one of many pieces
critics] syngpgigg of blugbggk quality, the ngygl is a ' of decomposed human merchandise stored throughout the Abbey by a
confused imitation of the Halpole-Reeve brand of Gothicism. It ring of body snatchers who are using the Abbey as a dissection
uses various Otrantoesque props such as the ancestral curse and center. The better part of the novel is devoted to the unraveling
the paternal apparition and the haunted wing of the castle taken of this mystery to which Laura eventually penetrates with the
from THE OLD ENGLISH BARON (see I355) to bring the disinherited assistance of Eugene Rayneer. A standard palladin, he also
hero, young Halter, to his destiny. The persistence of the ordeal functions as the revealer of secret genealogies when he discloses
or test of the forbidden chamber in which the young hero learns to the Lord of Oakendale that he is Laura's uncle. Grateful for
the secret of the castle is remarkable. In a sense, the Gothic this loforlltion, he abandons his campaign of rape in order to a-
audience insisted on FE-rga¢ing the plots of Halpole and Reeve void incest and Laura is free at last to marry the legitimate
over and over again and the Gothic authors simply traded on this Lord of Oakendale Abbey, Eugene. Some critics of the Gothic
insatiable need. Carey may or may not have been aware of his believe that after the fall of the Bastille in 1789, all haunted
sources in Halpole and Reeve. Hhat we have in the second decade fortresses throughout Gothic fiction took on connotations of a
of rampant Gothicism (1800-1810) are hordes of authors practicing doomed social structure symbolically suggested in the storming
an official Gothic group style and imitating the plots, char- 2 and fall of the ancient emblem of privilege and injustice. Dark,
acters, and settings of the Gothic novelists of the 1790's who unitlble. and haunted buildings symbolized sinking, obsolete, and
9. Carver, Hrs. THE HORRORS OF OAKENDALE ABBEY. London .
Hinerva-Press for llilliam Lane, I797.
HORRORS OF OAKENDALE ABBEY, although written purely for enter-
tainment, could reflect the contradictory fears and desires of a
revolutionary age when a good part of western civilization's
had themselves taken what they needed from Halpole and Reeve. weakened societies. Even an orthodox Gothic such as Hrs. Carver's
l
1 ~ ~ A
modern Reeditigngg hone “; traditional value systems seemed about to dissolve in a sea of
Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (terror mode) .' blood.
Biographical and Research Data: Sunmers, GOTHIC QUEST
m>.1as-138. 240. 397; Levy. LE RONAN -somouv moms:  so. mt cnsnc 0: HARREINIE: A aoiumcs. LADY'S noumu nuszun, on
pp.403-405, 410-412, 502, 609. . 1 POLITE atvosnoav or museum mo INSTRUCTION, s
(July-December, 1800): 6 parts
Critical Synopsis: Unsigned at publication but attributed to Modern Reeditions: THE CANDLE AND THE TONER. Warner Paperback
Hrs. Carver in Ninerva-Press Catalogue Nudaer 128 for 1814, this , Ubrlry. 1974. 99-19147?» ¢<1- R°\>¢"'t 9- 5l>¢¢t0r-
technically sound Gothic romance draws its dangerous atmosphere “ Sam‘ T.YD¢= Pure or high Gothic (horror mode) ‘
from the Reign of Terror ‘when Paris was deluged with human 5l09"lP'\l¢l1 40¢ RQSBIFCD 9!!“ "U0. 5'51-15" NOVEL ll TNE
gore."" In a long discussion of the work in THE GOTHIC QUEST, ' "$519455. D-455-
Sulmers regarded it as an excellent modification of Hrs. Rad-
cliffe's theories of the artificial supernatural, "a romance in
which mysteries and hauntings are not too iprobably if dis-
Critical Synopsis: The Gothic novella in six parts and
- eighteen chapters is a fine replica of the Radcliffean novels f
‘ 0
appointingly explained.‘ The novel's international movements < !- Iwrehension and slow wlbined with iialnolesque supernatural no-
between London and Paris make it a sort of Gothic tale of two
cities sixty years before Dickens's adventure. The emigre
heroine, the fatherless Laura De Frene, manages to escape
1
' \
.~v
\.
-<1
, tifs and subterranean emergencies. All of the machinery of
Ualpole's original Gothic castle is distributed throughout the
- several haunted castles and abbeys occupied by the several
Robggpigrr-3'5 tgrrorg in thg gtrggtg qf Paris only £9 g|'|¢0untgr  DOPOTIIQS QIITOIIIE CO their OQSUMQS. TMS GOUHC 0ffQl‘¢d I CO0-
worse horrors within the massive walls of Oakendale Abbey in a  1,; “"9 °7 P¢"$¢¢\ItEd 80¢ PQPDYQXBO h%"'0l"8$ "I Fltlldl. L811!
rite district of cuwey-13nd. The  J5 Q grand  of Q ‘ 7” “mg cQ"§tU'|til| lnd OITVTC. The 'li§tOriCC] bCCkgTO\l'|d TS thC
building owned and operated by Lord Dakendale as a private Bas-
tille for errant French virgins and is lavishly furnished with
the most up-to-date Gothic equipage. There are no slow turnings
.of the screw of suspense in Hrs. Carver's methods of horror as
she prefers to endow her Gothic with a hideous momentum." One
troubled reign of King John, a perfect time period for baronial
intrigue and betrayal. By 1800, almost every Gothic novel was
W 941090804 to begin with an ominous bell tolling from a distant
. tower. Thus, CASTLE DE HARRENNE opens with the required Gothic a-
coustic: ‘Slowly and heavily thebell in the great clock tolled

42 TI-E FIRST GOTHICS
out three; the gloomy mists of night were gradually dispersing,
while a faint yellow, tinging the eastern hemisphere, already
indicated the approach of day.‘ As the great bell tolls, ‘Matilda
t t from her couch yet wet with tears and which had that
THE FIRST GDTHICS 43
Critical Synopsis: Orthodox Gothic romance set in the minority
of Henry VI and centering its terrific affairs on the efforts of
the fictional Earl to regain proprietorship of Begston cast]; in
s ar s
f d h b t brﬂkeﬂ ind inperfect slumbers ' This Yorkshire. The romance moves very slowly with many interruptive
night af or ed er u .
elevated pitch of anxiety sums up her emotional state throughout
the romance as well as the unabating hysteria of her fellow
heroines. Despite or perhaps because of the ominous note heard in
the tolling of the bell, Matilda is drawn to Castle De Harrenne,
seat of the proud avaricious and ambitious supporter of King
subplots. It also employs familiar Radcliffean tactics of sus-
pense and suggestive supernaturalism to surround the central
episode of the Earl's rendezvous with his assassinated ancestor
within the recesses of the Castle's forbidden wing.
i A an De w rrenne ‘mu ht to the Castle to serve as a ~ 52. ms cxsm or FDMTALBERT: on, ms ram PREDICTION. mt-rats:
John, S r r ur a . g
companion for Lady De Harrenne, Matilda is soon the object of the
Lord Arthur De Harrenne's lusts, just as her daughter,
Constantia, will become the victim of a relative of De Harrenne
several abbeys and castles later on. Gothic readers were thor-
oughly acquainted with Matilda's peril and knew that a fortunate
faint was coming when ‘she screamed with affright, and with a
sudden spring disengaged herself from his grasp.‘ Her virginity,
her identity, and her safety are all in constant jeopardy as
Matilda escapes from one castle only to be ensnared in the
corridors of another. At the suggestion of old Maud, she becomes
the companion of a mad woman, Lady Darome, and discovers that her
charge is less insane than the victim of ‘the most corroding
melancholy.‘ Her own destiny and identity seem mysteriously bound
up with the fate of the madwoman and the De Lacy family. At
Castle De Lacy she roams the portrait gallery and is attracted
0R, UNIVERSAL MUSEUM, CONSISTING OF A SERIES OF INTERESTING
ADVENTURES, VOYAGES, HISTORIES, LIVES, TALES, AND ROMANCES, 3
(104): I92-278.
Modern Reeditions: None
Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (terror-horror modes)
Biographical and Research Data: Mayo, ENGLISH NOVEL IN THE
MAGAZINES, p.465. .
Critical Synopsis: This short, single-installment Gothic
novelette (11,000 words) incorporates all the methods of Halpole
and Mrs. Radcliffe. The fatal prediction is uttered by that
now-standard device of terror, prophecy, and retribution, the
speaking portrait of the slain ancestor. Magazine publishers of
short Gothics of this type pretended to no originality, but were
in business, as Mayo remarks, ‘to exploit the corpus of existing
t th ortrait of young Valtimond De Lacy, who courteously ma- . fiction under prevailing copyright conditions.‘ Pilfering peri-
o e p
terializes as Matilda gazes fondly upon his image. Escape from
the second castle with the assistance of Valtimond brings Matilda
and Lady Barome to Ireland and to Harrenne Abbey where they are
greeted by a full quota of Gothic mysteries including a one-eyed
odicals such as TELL-TALE employed what would be called today a
stable of anonymous stringer-authors whose sole and busy task was
to reduce, abridge, and dilute the audience's favorite long Goth-
ics. Another typical example of the practice of redaction is to
porter. cryptic and vwishins stairwes. shadwy "sures. and . be seen in the magazine, mavmous, for December, 1802, where
"sly nortents about the death of Lady 8twhe'§ sister. Lights are ms wvsmucs or uooumo (see 0349) becomes ms vmso PICTURE:
i i bed screw are hwd mteries multiply. The second ' on, ms nvsmuss or eoneouo, ms APENNINE cxsnc or SIGNOR AN-
a o
ordeals of Matilda in the predicaments and distresses of her
li i . Alth h menaced
by Roderique, Constantia finds time to investigate her sma
confinement in the manner of all Gothic heroines. ‘She arose from
her damp seat, and perceiving, at the further end of the cave, a
narrow vaulted passage she determined to explore its recesses.‘
All of these Gothic explorations eventually terminate at Castle
De Harrenne where Matilda's ordeal began. Identities are con-
ferred, characters are recompensed for their constancy, and the
moral pollution caused by the old Lord De Harrenne is erased by
the virtuous children of Matilda and De Lacy. This serialized
Gothic exhibits terror, but it is terror of the politest sort in
which much violence is threatened but almost none occurs.
51. THE CASTLE OF BEESTON: OR, RANDOLPH, EARL OF CHESTER, AN
HISTORICAL ROMANCE. London : R. Faulder, 1798.
Modern Reeditions: None
Gothic Type: Gothified history, imitation of Reeve's OLD
- ENGLISH BARON)
Biographical and Research Data: None '
ext ngu s
h If f the novel (chapters 9'to 18) repeats the adventures and I DROSSI. Here, the Gothic stringer managed to squeeze Mrs.
Radcliffe's novel into a mere 30,000 words (see Mayo, p.613).
daughter, Constantia, and her companion, 0 v a oug '. _
di l 03. THE CASTLE OF SANTA FE. London : Minerva-Press for Lahe, Newman,
805
Modern Reeditions: None
Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (terror mode, revival of
Udolphoesque Gothic)
f Diographical and Research Data: Lévy, LE ROMAN 'GOTHIOUE'
¢ ANGLAIS. DD-404, 409, 442, 446.
Critical Synopsis: A highly satisfactory Radcliffean
replication and revival, most of the events and characters
torrespond with the self-frights of Emily St. Aubert in THE MYS-
5 TERIES OF UDOLPHO (see I399). By signing her work ‘A Clergyman's
Ulughter,' the anonymous Goth hoped to give assurance of the
didactic propriety of her Gothicizing, her purpose being, as she
llﬂlained in the preface, ‘an attempt to entertain without mis-
y loading.‘ Once the fatherless and motherless heroine, Adeliza, is
.confined to the_Pyrenean Castle Aof Santa Fe, she begins to
Hﬂdergo supernatural shocks of all the usual types. Having

 
44 THE FIRST GUTHICS
studied Nrs. Radcliffe's fine art of creating the hallucinatory
moment from .the imagination of the entrapped heroine, author
reproduces this central Radcliffean event repeatedly and with
id rabl success Soon after her arrival at the Castle,
ne rmsr oomzcs 45
béri. whose face repels the villain because of its ‘innocent
countenance.“ He schemes with the whore, Leonora, and plans other
revenges against Albertina for her ‘crime‘ of giving him a decent
child. It seems he wanted a monster like himself to carry on the
cons e e .
Adeliza stares into a darkened chamber reached by a precarious 3 ¢"‘ 'l"@- A rapid and ragged dlnouement restores the castle of
spiral staircase and at first glance sees nothing. But staring , 5t- 5¢'l1¢ $0 young Frederic and Lady Jemima, companions and
1 111 moral props of Albertina. Disgusted with his failures as a vil-
again and harder, the shadowy void is converted into a s gha ng
figure ‘dressed in complete armour, standing in a fixed attitude,
a few paces from the window.‘ Behind each of these supernatural
lain, Baron Tivoli, ‘whose villainy could no longer be hid -
falls on his sword as Albert and Adela, the daughter of Frederle
encounters there is, of course, a natural cause and an in- ' l"¢ J¢l‘Il. repeat their marriage vows. Many supernatural jolts
structive motive. Host of the obstacles to the heroine's identity IO4 t'l"$i8nt Snectres punctuate the narrative.
and heritage are erected by her own illusory errors or her
ll i t r
55 ms casns or ST. VALLERY: AN ANCIENT sroav. LOI'ldOll = e. aha .1.
alacrity of imagination. Yet, it is Just these ha uc na o y -
moments which seem so real to the maiden which make the Gothic . R°b'"$°"- 1792-
Nodern Reeditions: None
novel suspenseful and entertaining despite its last-chapter
insistence upon the indiscretions of a runaway imagination. There
is always a persistent ambiguity or conflict between intent and
content in a Radcliffean Gothic. The heroine's nervous imag-
ination is depicted as morally irresponsible but aesthetically
gggglgplygii Ggﬁgifagd hisﬁorg éimittzion of OTRANTD)
searc a a: vy, LE RONAN ‘GOTHI U ‘
Aiiwiis. 00.245. 394-391. . ° E
attractive and diverting. Thus the novel is morally directed ‘ c'*ti¢61 5yn0psis: The novel synthesizes th it ti f THE
h i ll ¢A$TI-E OF OTRANTO (see ms) aha Hrs. aaaciirzrgariggi Books.
toward caution and enlightened self-control, but aest et ca y
directed toward exactly the opposite responses to the mind's
contact with the Gothic world of supernatural danger. The Gothic
world is allowed to exist in excess through the heroine's eyes in
order that it can be disposed of the more forcibly and per-
manently in the novel's closing episodes.
54. THE CASTLE OF ST. GERALD. London : J. Ker, n.d.
Nodern Reeditions: None
Gothic Type: Gothic chapbook (uses Reeve's OLD ENGLISH BARON
as principal source)
Biographical and Research Data: None
Critical Synopsis: The 34-page chapgook is an inferior and
confused reduction of Clara Reeve's 0L ENGLISH BARON (see I355).
The anonymous Goth hoped to market his horrid wares by means of a
multicolored illustration at the front which shows the villain in
reds, blues, and yellows with poised and dripping dagger, a scene
which, is difficult to find in the chapbook's text. Also appended
to the main story to achieve the publisher's page quota is a
second diminutive Gothic, ‘The Loves and Adventures of Sir
Gerard, the Valiant Knight, and the Enchanted Emma.‘ The villain
of the main piece is Henri, Baron Tivoli, in whose nefarious
character the reader was invited to behold ‘the malicious
workings of a vicious heart under the specious mask of candor.‘
He is dozens of Gothic villains compacted into one Just as his
victim, Albertina Conway, and her panicky maid, Florella, are
appropriated by the chapbooker from Hrs. Radcliffe's castle en-
semble. The fire in the south tower of the Castle of St. Gerald
where Tivoli has placed Albertina in order that she may ponder
his vile demands, however, is too real and too violent to be a
Radcliffean crisis. The fire was naturally the work of Tivoli,
who then pretends to save Albertina and guide her to safety.
' Maidens in Gothic fiction always seem to be taken in by this
ploy. She marries Tivoli and soon presents him with a son, Al-
The usual ancestral curse hangs over the lord of the Castle of
I 5*- "W"! Wired) for his om ih keeping the Castle which he
 "IS illeoiiinmiy inherited through the murder of Halconi De Mor-
ney. Among the portents signalling an end to the villain's power
are several restless portraits which descend from their frames
and a harrowing scene during which the young avenger
(Fitzwilliam) descends a swaying staircase that terminates in
midair. This effect is just one of several horror moment; gage"
from Hrs. Radcliffe's SICILIAN ROMANCE (see 0347). The accu-
liming terrors. however. are ho: rationalized ih the final
gcgﬁita as would be done if the anonymous Goth were following
. adcliffe s methods scrupulously. As in Halpole's earlier
llllvic, the terrors are not simply terrifying, but real.
mt CASTLE or viu.A-rum: A Poaiueuess ms FR
LATELY rouno av A BRITISH omcea o= RANK in ANMIITD 
ignzgﬁlkéekgtdggsi ngagrva-Press for A.K. Newman, T819.
“this Tm: Pure or high Gothic (Sllal mhsiamh)
Oiographical and Research Data: None
¢""i<=¢l 5¥"0Dsis: This fairly well-made Gothic romance
combines the three traditional locales of wonder and ter-
,--castle, convent, and cave--to yield a satisfying imitation
Nrs. Radcliffe's sagas. The Castle is situated in Alviero,
in a desolate area recently deserted by the
Peisantry. its sole occupants are the young
daughter of the deceased master of Villa-Flora, Leontio,
¢"J°!$ i"$P€cting the recesses of the vast ruin, but has
'l'"¢4 by "9? l""l. Donna Lucia, never to visit the castle
by herself. This is a hard promise to keep for Amelina
she is constantly afflicted with all of the curious
of the Gothic maiden and also because a solemn bell
chapel tolled by an unseen hand seems to summon her every

 i
46 T)-E FIRST GOTHICS . TAE FIRST GOTHICS 47
evening. From this basic situation, every experienced reader of
Gothic fiction knew by heart the next stage of Amelina's drama.
She enters "the forbidden chapel, discovers the crypt of her
never-known father, is herself apprehended in the forbidden act
by Donna Lucia, and conveyed to the nearest convent to purge her
of all curiosity about her strange family. The second phase of
Ame i ‘s
young fugitive is conveyed to the nearby Castles of Montreuil and
Barre, where he might further his quest for restored name and
heritage. The anonymous Goth's descriptions of both castles is in
the vein of the Radcliffean sublime and done uniformly. Each is
‘a large, dreary Gothic pile, heavily and irregularly built; the
massive gates, tesselated pavement, and high casements, struck a
pleasing awe on the mind of Margaretta, who was a child of ro-
the romance is a monastic shocker in milder orm. na
compulsory novitiate is marked by encounters with other unwilling mance.' Margaretta is the chapbook's second heroine, a fitting
sisters who sywathize with her predicament and conspire toward i mate for the questing Edmund once the awful mysteries of both
her escape from the convent. One young nun in particular, Sister castles have been endured and explored. Both castles are replete
Fidelia, is so outstandingly aniiabie that Amelina finally notices 1 ' with the tuhtravtiuhs of Mthic shock tlthuush this chapbook
excludes the horrific to deal only in the terrific. Entering the
in Fidelia a strong physical resemblance to her own person. Hhen
the two novices visit a nearby cave together, Fidelia feigns a
swoon, and, in a rather titillating scene within the cavern, Ame-
lina loosens Fidelia's habit to expose a young man beneath the
monastic garments. Fidelia is really Florello, a young Spaniard
who had seen Amelina at the Castle of Villa-Flora, fallen in love
with her, and followed her to the iwprisoning convent to procure
her release. But after the exposure scene, this tightly made
Gothic wavers and wanders. The couple does get back to the Castle
f Villa Flora and Amelina does find out why her father had
great library of the Castle of Barre, Edmund, Margaretta and Ella
now accompanied by Theodore, feel the spectral presences all
about them: 'Hhat surprised them most, was, that the whole air of
the room, although evidently falling into decay, seemed to dis-
cover sighs and signs of recent habitation.‘ But never do the
castle explorers come directly into contact with the supernatual
realm as the chapbooker quite carefully generates his effects by
exposing them only to the unseen and the uncanny. Natural thrills
and perils are another matter as in the exciting scene in which
d b th black clad bandit Oda
0 -
expelled her from the Castle when she was born,--but only after a , the fleeing Margaretta, pursue y e - , ,
i i t ha plunges over a cliff to land squarely in Edmund's grasp. Through
series of complicated and redundant incarcerat ons n om ,
the two characters, Theodosia and Father Francis, who act as
caverns, secret chambers, and monastic cellars. The anonymous i
genealogists and family historians, Edmund discovers that his fa-
Goth falls prey to what might be called the paralysis of the
third volume, a failing very symptomatic of the Gothic novel in
general. The narrative limps, staggers, loses all focus, forgets
ther, the Marquis Le Brun, had been detested and probably
murdered by his tyrannic neighbor and battle companion, the Baron
La Marche He also hears of the sufferings of Margaretta, who had
the opening incidents, becomes circular and tedious. Hhat had i .
been a good Gothic novel through two volumes sinks into prolixity once been 'compell'd to kneel and take an oath of the most horrid
- t , nature‘ by the depraved Baron, an event which is graphically
and never recovers its first volume momen um
57. THE CASTLES OF MONTREUIL AND BARRE: OR, THE HISTORIES OF THE
MARQUIS LE BRUH AND THE BARON LA MARCHE, THE LATE INHABITANTS
AND PROPRIETORS OF THE THO CASTLES, A GOTHIC STORY. London :
S. Fisher, 1799.
Modern Reeditions: None
Gothic Type: Gothic chapbook (prominent Radcliffean elements)
Biographical and Research Data: None
Critical Synopsis: The 5O-page chapbook offered the reader two
heroines as well as the two castles of the title. Other details
of the structure reflect the Goth's attention to symmetry,
pairing, and doubling. Both the Castles and the heroines have
solid foundations in the work of Mrs. Radcliffe, particularly her
CASTLES OF ATHLYN AND DUHOAYHE (see I346) and ROMANCE OF THE
FOREST (see I348). Bibliographically, the work is an example of
the Gothic chapbook in a milder and softer key, a departure from
the customary methods of the shilling shocker. There is little
violent shock and no overt supernatural activity,--only off-stage
hints of both. The chapbooker wastes no time at the outset. At
O the ‘half-decayed cottage‘ of the peasant, Pierre De La Motte and
T his wife, Jaqueline, there is the report of a pistol in the dark,
followed by the entrance of a blood-covered youth and stranger
- (Edmund) on the run from something or someone through the dark
forest. Immediately befriended by Pierre's daughter, Ella, the
depicted by the chapbook's frontispiece engraving. All of this
genealogical business derives from the pattern laid down by Clara
Reeve's OLD ENGLISH BARON (see I355) and Halpole's CASTLE OF
OTRANTO (see I466). But here, the chapbooker opted not _to bring
Edmund to a showdown with the wicked Baron, resulting in a weak
ending. Margaretta, of course, eventually proves to be the good
daughter of the bad baron. Her wedding to Edmund and Ella's match
with Theodore heal the breach between the two great ,houses, as
the two families become one. The closing sentence is certainly
automatic and formulaic; yet, every reader of the Gothic wanted
and anticipated this closing line: ‘And thus, by inscrutable
degrees of providence, once more has happiness revisited the re-
spective possessors of the two castles.‘
58. THE CAVERN OF DEATH: A MORAL TALE. London : J. Bell, 1794.
Modern Reeditions: None
Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (terror mode)
Biographical and Research Data: Lévy, LE ROMAN 'GOTHIQUE'
ANGLAIS, pp.394-397, 462, 620, 634.
Critical Synopsis: Oeceptively subtitled ‘A Moral Tale,‘ the
sole business of the Gothic is the evocation of terror. Yet, the
novel's central horror episode--the hero's descent to the cavern
of death--has interesting implications for the enclosure sym-
bolism of the Gothic. The author was thoroughly grounded in the

“ "'5 FIR“ °°"*1¢$ ~- TIE Fmsr cornzcs
operation of Halpole's ‘engine’ of terror in THE CASTLE OF
49
' father and deposited in a slimy cave until she can be sold to the
OTRAHTO (see V0466) and did not hesitate to take what apparatus he Moors as a harem slave. In a quick and crude reversal of fate,
needed from Gothicism s inventor. A heavy element of Hamletism M, “the, is detected. Sm, is re‘e.sed from he, tmghdyte
'1” 5°t:"'€¢5h:"°E91‘1':- me "°"°- -V°""9 5" “be"ti "'9t‘"""5 f"°"' ordeal, and matched with the reformed and contrite Mapolo who has
a crusa e o s ng sh castle to find his father slain and his M i t |, h q ‘ti _
birthright usurped. Opposing English heroism is Germanic villainy abiuredl sﬁcarﬁer as a street 1'? st o ecome a ar y c zen
t i .
in the person of the usurper, Baron Dornheim, a rough rein- a u a y‘ an a can on y ‘cap or Joy at hese pass "gs
carnation of llalpole's pretender Manfred. In the , _ cm,‘-,2 1 1 |: d 1 k_ |_|_|(;p5~||A.
revenge-demanding phantom of Sir Albert's father. we discern the ‘T ‘O ,,,R¢§,,§,,:';°RE§1f'L§,,d,,, ; J_ Lee.
familiar outline of Alfonso the Good coimounded with Old Hamlet. ‘ "we,-n peedgtions; "one _
The tale's pseudo-historical medievalism also corres onds with '
PS
‘Q0
THE RMBERS (F THE
. P Gothic Type: Gothic chapbook (Rauberromantik elements)
Halpole s conception of a savage or "Gothic" past. Despite these 31 r M“; and R ,. h D t N
borrowed Halpolesque fixtures, THE CAVERH if DEATH has touches of W up es“ C a G: one
originality especially in the handling of the central episode
where Albert is sumoned to the dark cave for the interview with
the ghost of his father. Most Gothic ghosts demand blood but
proclaim their innocence to their children, but the guilty spirit
of the cavern (again reminiscent of Hamlet's father) confesses to
Albert how he had won control of the castle by ‘foul crimes done
in my days of nature.‘ In coming to this dark knowledge about the
father, Sir Albert comes to the same dark knowledge about him-
self. The anonymous Goth does not concentrate on the morality of
the cavernous experience, merely the sheer horror of it. The
first Gothic writers were seldom if ever aware of the syumiolic
potency of caverns, crypts, and other dark enclosures. Yet, the
conpulsory episode of bringing the hero or heroine to self-
knowledge in a dark place has imortant imilications for the
moral and psychological enlargement of Gothic sy|m>olis|n.
9. THE CAVERM (F HGIRORS: (R, THE MISERIES if MIRANDA, A NEAPDLITAM
TALE. London : T. Hurst, 1802.
Modern Reeditions: Hone
Gothic Type: Gothic chapbook
Biographical and Research Data: Hatt, SHILLIMG SHOCKERS OF THE
GOTHIC SCHOOL, p.34. '
Critical Synopsis: Miranda ranks near the top of the list of
Gothic heroines in her ‘ability to totter into a state of utter
oblivion whenever anything horrid occurs.‘ From its first issue
by the chapbook manufacturer, T. Hurst in I802, to its shortened
reissue by Dean and Munday in 1813, something horrid occurs on
every one of the seventy-two pages. A census of Miranda's
miseries reveals that ‘she successfully negotiates eleven swoons'
to accompany her tears in the 1802 version. The chapbook heroine
is nothing more than the Radcliffean maiden writ large in lach-
rymose letters and deprived of all suspense. Miranda is uprooted
from her idyllic convent life, thrust into the streets of Maples
by a rude vendor of fruit, and quickly made the sexual target of
the lustful cavalieri. The most enterprising of her corps of
would-be seducers is the Cavalier Mapolo di Logano who seems well
read in principles laid down by Casanova, Sade, and the Gothic
novelists for the ruination of innocent maidens. As Miranda weeps
and faints, he schemes and seduces until the patience of even the
. most avid Gothic reader must have been severely stretched.
Miranda's main misery occurs when she is kidnapped by her own
I Critical Synopsis: A routine 36-page chapbook romance of the
forest which aploys Teutonic terror and the familiar elements of
the Rauberroman. Lucretia herself is an object of elaborate ab-
ductions and persecutions rather than a character. Her function
throughout is to shriek, tremble, swoon, and weep as she submits
to literally dozens of assaults by banditti or her own relatives
pretending to be banditti. The slick plot speeds up the methods
of Mrs. Radcliffe and reverts to Kahlert's popular Germanic Goth-
ic, THE HECROMAHCER: (R, THE TALE if THE BLACK FOREST (see I209)
for many of its episodes. The plot is a murky webwork of mazy
motions and so filled with emergencies and climaxes that the
moods of terror so necessary to a good Radcliffean Gothic are
totally eliminated by a steady stream of shocks. The details of
Lucretia's history show Chadierlain adroitly if crudely turning
all of the screws of the Gothic plot. Dut sketching one day in
the depths of the Hyrcanean forest, Lucretia is seized by a mask-
ed figure and taken by force to an ancient castle where she is
placed in a huge Gothic room whose walls are lined with
bloodstained armorial trappings. Her father, the Duke and his
servant Osmin, distressed by her absence, undertake the mandatory
expedition to the haunted castle, falling afoul of the bandits,
Rufanus and Dupardo, along the way. So far, we have a medley of
Gothic themes and situations but no really bold iumiersonations of
evil. Rufanus and Dupardo bring the Duke to the castle and in-
stall him in a subterranean apartment which coincidentally is
located directly beneath Lucretia's "chad>er of many agonies.‘ In
the best Gothic scene in the story, she trips, finds the ringbolt
of a trapdoor, pries it back, and descends hysterically to her
father. Meanwhile, the hard hearts of Rufanus and Dupardo have
grown soft at the sight of the helpless Lucretia. The romancer no
doubt remembered that he needed a rescuing chawion to free the
maiden and make his plot work its way along to marriage on the
last page. Dsmin helps the Duke and Lucretia to safety by re-
turning to the castle to lead Lucretia mid her father to a safe
villa nearby. In rustic guise, Rufanus infiltrates the villa to
be near Lucretia. The robbers‘ castle contains that most inor-
tllt and usually effective Gothic utility, the locked chawer of
one thousand horrors, now opened to the Duke by Dsmin and several
Soldiers. Hhen the portals swing back, they behold an ossuary
Ilere the skeletons of ‘twenty females‘ are on exhibit. The
collection of bones might include Lucretia were, it not for the
lmterprising Dsmin and the noble captain. These are the trophies

50 ns FIRST OOTHICS ' ms FIRST OOTHICS s1
of Rufanus, truly a man with skeletons in his family closet. composite of chapbook Gothics and monastic shockers. Two prom-
‘They had not yielded to the insatiate monster, Rufanus.' A vital inent objects of plunder are: CORRELIA: OR, THE MYSTIC TOMB (see
principle of Gothic effect is the skillful withholding of such an I071) and THE RUINS OF AVONOALE PRIORV (see I212).
exposure until the last moment. Here, Chamberlain excels and the
effect is rather good, although borrowed from the legends of 63. Charlton, Mary. PHEDORA: OR, THE FOREST OF MINSKI. London :
Bluebeard's horrible room. The ending of the romance is appro- ‘ Minerva-Press for Hilliam Lane, 1798.
priately melodramatic as Lucretia swoons into the arms of the Modern Reeditions: None
soldier captain. The Duke, of course, receives the robbers‘ Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (terror-horror modes)
castle as a reward for fidelity and Lucretia receives the mar- Biographical and Research Data: Summers, GOTHIC OUEST, p.368;
riage pledge of the rescuing soldier. Since ten pages remain to . Lévy, LE ROMAN 'GOTHlOUE' ANGLAIS, p.489.
be fleshed out by the chapbooker, a tale entitled THE LIBERTINE
is appended to LUCRETIA to bring the work up to the publisher's Critical Synopsis: For centuries the crossroads of conquerors
prescribed page specifications. and marauding armies, Poland and the Livonian provinces made an
attractive setting for Gothic novels. Mary Charleton's PHEDORA
61. THE CHAPEL OF ST. BENEDICT: A ROMANCE OF THE FIFTEENTH CENTURY. did not initiate the fashion for Polish Gothics but her well-
I
BELLE ASSEMBLEE, OR BELL'S COURT AND FASHIONABLE MAGAZINE, received romance did popularize Poland's Gothic possibilities.
B-IO (September, 1813-July, 1814): 11 parts. Jane Porter's historical romance, THAODEUS OF HARSAH (see 0337)
Modern Reeditions: None and Thomas Pike Lathy's THE MINES OF HIELITSKA: A POLISH
Gothic Type: Serialized Gothic history (terror mode) LEGENDARY ROMANCE (see I237) profited from the example of
Biographical and Research Data: Mayo, ENGLISH NOVEL IN THE PHEDORA. Reaching 1,459 pages in the four volume first edition,
MAGAZINES, p.466. PHEDORA appears to be Gothicism's Mount Everest, but we know from
the records of circulating libraries that it enjoyed a huge
Critical Synopsis: This dignified and genteel Gothic tale readership and was quickly exported to France by way of the 1799
moved slowly through eleven installments in the magazine. Of translation of André Morellet. Despite forbidding length and
BELLE ASSEMBLEE, Mayo has observed that it held some status as a proliferation of subplots, the novel's storyline is easily fol-
high society periodical allegedly appealing to more refined lowed. Those characters who would commonly have Germanic or
tastes than those of the average shilling shocker devourer. ‘It 7 ' Italian names in an English Gothic novel are given Slavic
was addressed to older women who sought a more intimate acquaint- epithets; those settings which would normally take us down the
ance with London society, with new fashions, travel, polite Rhine or into the Alps or Apennines are still the same sites of
literature, the theater, and chic chat of the bon ton.‘ These terror but converted to Slavic locales. Seventeenth century
pretensions to elegance are reflected in the types and styles of Livonia is ravaged by the armies of Russia and Sweden who turn
Gothic fiction printed in the magazine. It was less amateurish the peaceful forest of Minski into a corridor of blood in their
60¢ Ovérlly P\@9ll'i$tl¢ ‘"3" the ¢'"¢¢ 5°¥hl¢ '¢PF04v¢ll0"$ ' ceaseless wars. Charleton's forest is as replete with sudden hor-
found across the magazine Gothic industry and its staff of Gothic ror as any dismal shade or grove entered b a Spenserian wanderer
Y
suppliers more carefully professional. THE CHAPEL OF ST. or strayed into by any lost Gothic heroine in a Radcliffean
BENEDICT a ver muted monastic sho k r id ll l
» V C E . lY° 5 4 Hﬂstrupu ous romance of the forest. The forest is the home of the widow,
effusions of horror to consentrate on the slow and pleasing Eudocia Rubenski, a mother of all courage, and, fatherless
evocation of terror through suspense. The models are Charlotte Phedora, who represents bleeding but unbroken Poland herself.
Smith and Mrs. Radcliffe with numerous passages carefully carved Both characters are hardly human beings at all but rather the
out of the somber scenes of THE ITALIAN (see I350). It is symbols of two generations of the indestructible spirit of Polish
difficult, however, to point out a single source for the novel's liberty. Phedora's wilderness misfortunes and terrors are
incarcerated and unwilling nun. This predicament for the Gothic numerous. Her chastity and her life are constantly threatened by
heroine had simply become universal by the third decade of the vile landowner, Ulric Stenau. Her beloved cedar tree is
Gothicism (1810-1820). brutally hacked to pieces before her eyes in a horrifying scene
suggestive of the deflowering of nature. Other adversities
62. Chapman, M. MARLETON ABBEY: OR, THE MYSTIC TOMB OF ST. ANGELO. include her seizure by a band of cossacks when she is forced to
TELL-TALE: OR, UNIVERSAL MUSEUM, CONSISTING OF A SERIES OF become the private victim of a Russian monster of all depravity
INTERESTING ADVENTURES, VOYAGES, HISTORIES, LIVES, TALES, AND who can compete with any degenerate monk, Captain Matheowitz,
ROMANCES, 5 (1805): 912-1106. whose one hand is nothing more than a "mutilated paw.‘ Against
Modern Reeditions: None these Gothic perils and scores of other hazards to innocence,
5°¢"1¢ T399: Monastic shocker Phedora resists, persists, and eventually survives, as she
Biographical and Research Data: Mayo, ENGLISH NOVEL IN THE constantly draws strength from the forest surroundings. Mrs.
_ MAGAZINES, p.550. Charleton alternates scenes of cruelty with scenes of lavish
sentiment. One such sentimental interlude has Phedora find in the
Critical Synopsis: The Gothic novella is a plagiarized depths of the forest the wild and lost child, Alexy, whom she

r
52 Ti-E FIRST GOTHICS , ‘ TIE FIRST GOTHICS 53
comforts, tames, and rears. Emerging miraculously from her last Critical Synopsis: The title page of this long Gothic says
imprisonment in the fortress of Konigstein, Phedora returns to , that the tale is taken from a comedy by Goldoni, but the play is
the forest to find herself declared the new Countess of Czerkowi, not named. The epigraph from Shakespeare's RICHARD ll seems
a position that allows her to become the rallying point to expel closer to the wild moods and indecipherable occurrences of the
the invaders in the continuing struggle for Polish liberty. book: ‘Hith Cain, go wander through the shade of night.‘ And
Charlton's northern Gothic satisfied all of the requirements of * indeed, both the characters and Mary Charlton's readers do have
the genre while at the same time it added a dimension of l to wander through a very murky narrative in this confusing and
patriotic allegory to the standard adventure of the pitiable badly made Gothic which is so notably inferior to the equally
heroine lost in the forests of the night. ' long, but coherent, PHEDORA: OR, THE FOREST OF MINSKI (see 0063)
that it scarcely seems to be by the same author. After a success-
64. Charlton, Mary. ROSELLA: OR, MODERN OCCURRENCES. London : ’ ful career in turning out sound Gothic novels, what we may have
Minerva-Press for Lane, Newman, I799. in THE HOMICIDE is a case of narrative exhaustion and in-
Modern Reeditions: None . difference or perhaps even a gloomy joke on Gothic readers.
Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (terror mode, many satiric Having surrounded her heroine, Rosaura Di Viralva, with
elements) innumerable Italian villains, the author has great difficulty in
Biographical and Research Data: Tarr, CATHOLICISM IN GOTHIC setting her in motion. The result is a very static, and hence
FICTION, p.6; Varma, GOTHIC FLAME, p.181; Lévy, LE ROMAN sluggish, Gothic. Her cruel keeper, the ‘gloomy, silent, and
‘GOTHIOUE‘ ANGLAIS, p.489. morose‘ Signor Astolfo di Boschero, never really achieves the bad
eminence of the good Gothic villain. The same is true of the
Critical Synopsis: Miss Beauclerc's overwrought pertévtion of ' monastic fiend-figure, Father Mavido, ‘the sour-faced Cartha-
her surroundings early in the novel suggests her kinship with sian,' who attains his limit of perversity in his ugly grimacing.
other foolhardy heroines of the mock-Gothic category. Her eye The young rescuer, Signor Rovello, is a wooden effigy of this
converts a plain evening's walk into a delectable nightmare of a standard Gothic character; he does not even seem aware of his
Gothic escapade containing ‘all the sublimity of pale moons, blue required function tp free the maiden for much of the novel. At a
nists, gliding figures, hollow sighs, shaking tapestry, rever- loss over how to bring hero and heroine together, Charlton simply
berating voices, nodding pictures, long corridors, deserted west , erased him from volume two by the blunt remark that young Ruvello
towers, north towers and south towers, ruined chapels, suspicious ‘was believed to be sought for on the Papal territory as a spy.‘
vaults, damp charnel-houses, great clocks striking twelve, wood Even those scenes of the greatest Gothic potential are poorly
embers expiring, dying lamps, and total darkness.‘ Like Barrett's handled. Nearly a dozen chapters begin with the same tedious
Cherubina in THE HEROINE (see I026) and Jane Austen's Catherine ' wording when Rosaura is ‘found traversing with slow, yet agitated
Morland in NORTHANGER ABBEY (see I012), the would-be heroine steps, one of the desolate apartments of her solitary mansion.‘
primes herself for the horrid ecstasies of Gothic living by Incidents of violent assault which had been presented with such
reading the right Gothic novels which teach her how to transform furious and persuasive energy in PHEOORA are mechanically recited
the ordinary into the odious and the trivial into the terrifying. without any enthusiasm for gore as in this entry in volume two
She then establishes Gothic residency ih a nearby hermitage which when Rosaura, descending a staircase, slips on a pool of blood:
has all the brightness and rustic charm of an eighteenth-century ‘The sanguine current froze in her own veins, on beholding near
villa. Her task is to make it as Gothic as possible,--and l the entrance, a stream of blood newly shed.‘ But the main narra-
quickly. All of the heroine's hopes and expectations of medieval . tive miscue in this misbegotten Gothic is Charlton's treatment of
confinement in a spectre-filled abbey are undercut by having each the titular crime, the homicide. The deed seems to occur on page
successive ‘terror‘ dissolve into a ‘modern occurrence.‘ Ordinary Z40 or volp-e two, but it seemg to he a suicide, if indeed
gentlemen at the breakfast table become cadavers: fiends lurk in anything violent occurred at all. we have the curious situation
the library; guest lists turn into horrible manuscripts. Even- of a Gothic in which the central horrid event is indistin-
tually, the heroine is embarrassed back into common sense and " guishable and where the victim cannot be identified. It is
wakes up from her Gothic dreams. Charleton's skillful drollery is perfectly acceptable for a Gothic novelist to startle and baffle
be$¢¢ 1" Dirt H00" her OH" serious Gothic novel writing. Few the reader via bewildering events; but the Gothic writer is also
Gothic writers who took themselves seriously were also capable of , bound by the normal laws of composition to baffle the reader
satirizing their own sensational products, but Charleton proves plainly and clearly. Mary Charlton could and did write solid
to be a delightful exception to the rule. Gothic fiction, but in THE HOMlCIDE's perverse obscurities it al-
» most appears that her secret design was to write the worst Gothic
65. Charlton, Mary. THE HOMICIDE London : Minerva-Press for Lane, , book that she could,--and she did.
Newman, 1805. ,-
Modern Reeditions: None ;~ 66. Chilcot, Harriet. MORETDN ABBEY: OR, THE FATAL MYSTERY, A
Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (terror mode) A POSTHUMOUS ROMANCE. Southhampton : T. Baker; London : J. Brew,
, Biographical and Research Data: None = IOO -
Modern Reeditions: None ' '

$4 Ti-E FIRST GOTHICS ‘TIE FIRST GOTHICS 55
Gothic Type:- Pure or high Gothic (terror mode) ville to his rightful place of power. Under questioning, Albert's
Biosraphical and Research Data: Sunners. GOTHIC BIBLIOGRAPHY. foster father admits that he had concealed his identity from him
ll-3°; l-éV.Y.' L5 RWW4 “59T"10UE" "GU15. ll-197- out of fondness and because he wished to protect him from the
foul motives of his uncle, Baron de Horenzi. The brigands who
Critical Synopsis: Harriet Chilcot (also called Hrs. Hezieres) butchered his mother ivere acting under the Baron's orders. He had
Publish“ 6 9'00” "lrrllive P08" eiltilled EUMR MD ETHELINUN A been hidden by an old servant and is now entitled to the Castle
LEGENDARY TALE (1783). She professed her admiration for l|alpole's because he has come of a as th I iti t B H d
i ge e eg ma e aron enry e
CASTLE if OTRAHTO (see 0466) by writing KJRETOH ABBEY. In this Clairville. From these familiar revelations, the chapbook hurries
ob Go i i
scure th c, she s imily relocated the action from haunted to its standard climax. Albert returns to Clairville Castle and
"5"? 1° hlililleil eillleyi Peﬂllltil \'|I\ll0l¢'$ ¢lll"il¢!¢"$. 6""! to Elna and Bernard who are being harassed by de Horenzi's men.
embellished the supernatural plot with some Radcliffean circum- ' Just as he locates then at gi inn (an all-purpose stage in the
locutions and delavs- The ronance is represented as 'posthunous' eighteenth-century novel for bringing the story's principals to-
since the account of the abhev's invasion by the spirits of a gether for the finale), de Horenzi also overtakes the good
wronged family and its eventual reordering by divine intercession characters. In the mandatory swordfight that ensues, Baron de
are presented in the fore of recently recovered docueents iron Horenzi pistols himself through the head when he realizes that he
"ii il0$tllilI0il$ Pipers of the house's proper heir. In his GOTHIC is about to lose. Castle and family name are cleansed of pol-
5l3U°9RA9"Y. '4°"!l9iI9 $iIlI9i‘$ illitillidhs the title and gives a lution and the lowborn Eiinia is elevated to the status of Baroness
conjectured date, but no further data. The later Gothicist, hy her carriage to Albert, A four-page oriental tale, "0gus and
Haurice Lévy finally located and examined this rare Gothic con- cara Khan: gr, The Force of Love‘ is added to bring the chapbook
necting its characteristics with other Gothic romances built upon up to the page quota,
the literary ruins of llalpole's original haunted castle.
58. Clifford, Francis THE RUINS (F TIVOLI: A RGIAHCE. London : J.F.
7. CLAIRVILLE CASTLE: ill, THE HISTORY Cf ALBERT AND ElliA. London : Hughes, 1804. '
J Ker n d -
. , . . Hodern Reeditions._Hone
Hodern Reeditions: Hone Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (romance of the ruin)
Gothic Type: Gothic chapbook (sentimental Gothic abridgement) Biographical and Research Data: Suimaers, GOTHIC QUEST, pp.87,
Biographical and Research Data: Hone 404,
Critical $vnopsis= Built along the suherlv conservative lines Critical Synopsis: piles of toppled columns, leaning pillars
of Clara Reeve's OLD EIGLISH BARON (see I355), CLAIRVILLE CASTLE festooned with moss, dismantled porticos, crudiling towers, over-
is a tidy little parable of heritage lost and regained. There is grown courtyards deserted by all life except for the invasion of
no supernatural terror here. as the chaphooker perhaps unviselv weeds, fragments of archways, and other architectural vestiges of
decided to eliminate the informing phantom and chalber of . ruins contributed powerful effects to the fallen world depicted
parental mystery, but there are plenty of family secrets, bad in the high Gothic novel. The ruin itself was a sign to -both the
passions, and sexual suffering. The‘ eighteen year old peasant eye ma the mind of a sublime disorder, the triuiiph of nature
girl, Elna, and her adoring father, Bernard, serve the noble i over the teeporal monuments of the human mind. The universal
Harquis of Clairville until his mysterious and unexpected death. occurrence of ruins throughout Gothic _fiction became the
At the funeral of the Harquis, a stranger named Albert attends mandatory setting for Gothic terror and served as a visual
out of pure curiosity, sees Emma, loves her, and decides to re- iconography for the victory of evil aid barbarism over goodness,
main at the Castle to conduct a sort of private board of inquiry order, and civilization. The presence of the word "ruin" in a
into the enigmatic circumstances of his birth aid identity. Gothic title did not always insure its prominence in the
Bernard tells him of a family tragedy which may have caused the narrative, however. By 1800, experienced Gothic writers knew the
Harquis's premature death. The Harquis's wife had been slaugh- ‘ excitement that could be generated simply by the word's placement
tered hv robbers and his infant son taken captive nanv vears in a title and they traded on its cliche-value as a password for
before. Since the heir is missing, the estates of the Harquis the amiience of decay. The Gothic heroine's strident passion for
must revert to Clairville's repulsive brother, the haughty and ruins, her comulsion to tour them by night or to make herself
lustful Baron de Horenzi whose carnal appetites will soon be available to seizure by creatures materializing from the shadows
directed tomard Ema. The Baron has converted Clairville Castle of collapsed archways, is fully exploited by Clifford in THE
into a private brothel. but Elma nanases to escape without - RUINS or TIVOLI. The central arena of terror is the ruined Temple
Albert's aid because he has returned to Switzerland to question of Vesta, a setting quite appropriate to the sojourns of a Gothic
his foster father about some startling personal discoveries. All ‘ virgin (Hyra) who risks all of the ‘sacred terrors‘ imbuing the
of this typical Gothic business is accolmlished in the space of place to seek out answers to the mystery of her mother's strange
fifteen pases. thus reservins the renainins fifteen pases of the death. Enclosed by the stone reminders of lost civilizations, the
-Clllllilililli 70" l’¢iI¢llti0"5 Of iilelltilys li"l¢ii\°"5 "¢i'¢"$l1$ °f heroine is able to indulge her imagination in all_ the pleasures
fortune, and the return of the true son of the House of Clair- of glanchcly by "¢xa||i|'|ing this slow time-decaying pile of

venerable sanctity, which seemed to inspire the mind with solemn
thoughts.‘ The novel exists for just such morbid reveries. The
two leading historians of the Gothic novel, Montague Summers and
Michael Sadleir, disagree sharply over the symbolic function of
the ruin in high Gothic fiction. To Sadleir, ruins indicate re-
volt against classical decorum and restraint, a "freedom of
emotion and release of the imagination leading to an ecstatic '
condition of sensibility marked by ‘disequilibrium of the '
spirit.‘ But to Summers, the collapsed architecture of the Gothic
world found in THE RUINS OF TIVOLI and so man novels like it
55 TIE FIRST GOTHICS 'Ti'E FIRST GOTHICS 57
flowing from her head, closing the door after her with such vio-
lence as to extinguish Magdalena's taper.‘ Here is a stock
audiovisual event of the Gothic which will grip the imagination
of Gothic readers through two centuries,--the guttering candle
and the crashing door. The chapbook is decorated with many such
tremulous little episodes Just like it. The incidents reach a
menacing apex when a letter comes saying that Count Ottagro is
returning to his castle to eradicate Magdalena's virginity in
some unusual way. But since this is a Gothic chapbook, the blunt
Y removal of this evil is hardly .a surprise. Carriage accidents
5"99e5t5 tgﬁ h‘§t°"c'1 ""°2‘55]?f " ce't"" "* ‘"6 '"°‘e"t ' seem to be the all-Purpose implements of extrication for many of
re er n .
v e ce e ru n was a sacre re c, a memorial, a symbol of
infinite sadness.‘ The correctness of both interpretations
suggests the rich symbolic ambiguity of ruins in the Gothic.
69. THE CONVEMT OF ST. URSULA: OR, INCIDEMTS KT OTTAGRO. London :
John Arliss, 1809.
Modern Reeditions: Hone '
Gothic Type: Gothic chapbook
Biographical and Research Data: None
Critical Synopsis: The 40 -page chapbook appears to be a
strident counterfeit of Mrs. Radcliffe's SICILXAH ROMANCE (see
I347) with incidental events and characters taken from a variety
of Gothic sources The chapbooker's style however is the
the Gothic novelists who must get rid of an omnipotent villain on
the final pages. Count Ottagro is run down by a runaway carriage
within sight of the spires of his castle with the nice twist that
the carriage belongs to the son of a rival whom the Count had or-
dered to be tortured and beheaded years before. Ernestus and
Magdalena marry when she abandons her plan to enter the Convent
of St. Ursula while the peripatetic woman in white, apparently
content with the Count's death, retires to the crypts to be heard
end seen no more, Magdalena's original defender, Horace, never
does arrive and simply vanishes from the plot when the Goth
decides to allow Ernestus to perform the rescue of the maiden
instead.
' ' . TH T SP TH : OR THE UMFORTUNATE DAUGHTER. L do : T.
opposite of Mrs. Radcliffe's slow stately prose since he prefers T 7° E CONVEN EC E ' on n
' and R. Hughes, 1808.
to work ih'gaudy splashes of anguished expostulation or purple _ hoderh heedtttehse hehe
threat. Innocence! repeated the Count with a malignant sneer Gothic Type: Gothic ehehheeh
as he brandishes a dagger over Countess Magdalena, the heroine.
On her way to the Convent of St. Ursula, she has been detained at
Count 0ttagro's castle, the fortress Di Gaui, above Verona. This
detention puts the heroine in a position to experience all of the '
terrors of the castle according to the Radcliffean guest plan as
Magdalena awaits the arrival of the wandering hero, Horace. The ~
chapbooker devotes most of his indelicate craft to the heroine's
interior nocturnal gropings after her approach to the terrible
castle, a prerequisite scene in the Radcliffean Gothic. Catching
sight of the walls at sunset, ‘She had a fair view of that Gothic
fabric. Up the ponderous buttresses that supported the pile, the
ivy twined its fond embrace, and half-shaded the arched
easements, whose heavy framework seemed of itself to half exclude
the cheering light of day.‘ Once within, Magdalena takes up the
search for a mysterious woman in white who seems to be trying to
communicate some awful family secret by her various spectral vis-
itations to the Count's involuntary guests. She is Clementina De
Biographical and Research Data: Summers, GOTHIC OUEST, p.83.
Critical Synopsis: Two ghastly biographies neatly spliced by
the dual appearance of the unfortunate apparition of Emilia, the
convent spectre, comprise this charmingly written 72-page chap-
book. Details are skillfully narrated, and for once, we seem to
have a miniature Gothic which bothers to invent its own plot
instead of burglarizing a lengthy Gothic novel, an unusual depar-
ture from the normal practice. The opening_terror scene serves as
a framing device. A fugitive Mantuan with bloodstained hands
rushes into the Church of St. Michaels and prostrates himself
before the high altar which immediately blazes up with divine
light. Brother Theodore comes forward to offer comfort and after
Don Pedro regains his composure, the two men exchange the
histories of their lives. Don Pedro had fallen in love with his
married cousin, the Marchioness of Palmyrin, and had been driven
from the household by the irate Marquis who consequently turned
Lusini the heroine's prisoner-predecessor in Ottagro Castle and hts er th hthst his errhht spouse: heheerihe the streets of
a prior victim of the woman-hungry Count. The chief horrid ‘ h ht Th e :9 tr geh pee 1 t e h n 1
incident at Ottagro occurs when Magdalena is led down through a
hatchway into the crypts by Ernestus De Lusini, Clementina's
brother, who gives Magdalena a short course of instruction on how
to pry up a Gothic trap-door which lacks ringbolts and hinges.
She must penetrate the door because in the scene just before this ~
a ua e pa , ro s accos e y a young woma n
black who implores him to ‘save her.‘ Don Pedro hides her in his
rooms, but upon returning with food and wine, finds only her
cadaver in his bed. The anonymous Goth's handling of the motif of
the inconvenient corpse is skillful and nearly coy. Secretly, the
corpse is boxed up sent to Maples and deposited in a cavern in
she had seen the woman in white pass through the hatchway. This the depths of e heea which eejeths the very ghureh of 5t_ "1-
incident made her ‘start from her chair and turn round to behold Y ehee1e hhere ooh pedrh 1eter thhes ref e__ph11e the ear Se of
the retreat of a female figure in white, with a long muslin veil
ug _ P
the lady in black is on its way to the Neapolitan cave, Don Pedro

58 TIE FIRST GOTHICS i TPE FIRST GOTHICS 59
is on his way back to the Marchioness to declare his love and to and these misgivings are intensified by servants‘ reports of
have it out with the Marquis. Hith that true sense of Gothic ominous noises from the mystic tomb. The cryptic clamor reaches
timing, he arrives just as the Marquis is emerging from his an almost unbearable volume on the very evening when Lady
wife's bedchamber with his bloodstained dagger. Don Pedro enters, Frederica is about to solemnize her wedding vows with Baron
then falls across the bleeding body of the dead Marchioness; i-ieildestheim, an austere nobleman who is rightly feared by Lady
thus, his crimson hands at the Church. Listening to this account, Frederica's niece aid ward (also named Correlia). In a familiar
Father Theodore grows more animated, then supplies his own grue- I Gothic stroke, an eerie scream arises from the mystic tomb and
some story to console Don Pedro. Theodore is really the Count of the lights of the chapel are suddenly extinguished in the midst
Arco. lie had married Emilia, daughter of the Countess Matilda, of the wedding ceremony. Sensing divine disapproval of his matri-
and was forcibly separated from his beloved daughter (also named monial plans, the Baron slink; back to Germany leaving Lady
Emilia) when the girl was confined to a convent. Conpleting his ' Frederica to ponder the sounds that now flow regularly from the
story, he tells Don Pedro of his longing to see his lost daughter mystic tomb. Hhen Correlia grows up, she is attracted to the
again. Retiring for the night, Don Pedro is assailed by the "con- vocal tomb since she feels that the talkative vault knows the se-
vent spectre,‘ the ghost of Emilia, who has risen from the grave cret of her mother's death and her own precarious destiny.
to be near her father, Theodore. A few nights later, Don Pedro is Mysteries mount. Has her mother perhaps prematurely buried by her
visited by the figure of an elegant woman dressed in black and atmiitious aunt, Lady Frederica, with the connivance of her
heavily veiled; the second ‘convent spectre‘ is presumably the uncouth friend and superspy, Benvilini? lihat obligations must she
deceased Marchioness of Palmyrin, Don Pedro's beloved. The final now fulfill to silence the dreadful voice and give her mother's
two pages of the chapbook neatly tie up the histories of the two spirit rest? The swoon, that first resort of the Gothic heroine,
men. The ghost of Emilia is actual, a genuine convent spectre. becomes her only means of relief as ‘her eyes filled with sacred
Theodore's Emilia was also the desperate young lady in black who horror penetrated the solemn darkness that every minute deepened
had "died" in Don Pedro's rooms after being saved from the and heated her fancy.‘ Correlia's faints and investigations are
streets of Mantua. The second ghost is no ghost at all, but the offset by several lengthy inset stories, each one containing
Marchioness recovered from her wounds and come to rejoin her oblique clues to the main mystery of the loquacious masoleum.
beloved. At this revelation, ‘Don Pedro's pious resolutions of Gothic readers lov‘ed to find hints and clues to the enigmas of
dedicating himself to the church were in an instant vanished," the main plot distributed throughout the insets. Mrs. Radcliffe‘s
iiith its pleasing and synlnetrical ending and its ingenious device _ readers were led tn expect a natural er scientific explanation
of having the spectres of the two "dead' women appear to the for the vocal activities of the mystic tomb, but the anonymous
hero, this chapbook achieved a degree of finesse that is indeed Goth opted for an explosively supernatural climax. lihen Lady
rare in the plagiarized craftsmanship of these little Gothics. Frederica attennts to quiet the accusative tcnb before it can an-
. nounce the murderer of her sister, the sounds reach such an
1. CMRELIA: OR, THE MYSTIC TOMB. London : Minerva-Press for Lane, Yf unbearable volume that she is driven from the chapel, from the
Newman, 1802. - castle, and from the country in a state of oral agony to confess
Modern Reeditions: Mone  her murderous deeds before dying in miserable exile. Jiith her
Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (terror mode)  guilty death, the mystic tomb grows silent and the new Correlia
Biographical and Research Data: sunners, some QUEST, p.368;  cunes inta her nanny nainrity as the new cuuntess- The absurd
TIFF» C5T"°Uci5" 1" 597"": FICTION» PP-Z. 39. 60. 70, 108.  Jolt of this new sort of Gothic retribution was enthusiastically
' received by the Gothic audience which had'already seen too many
Critical Synopsis: This unsigned Gothic is built around the . nicked characters annihilated by lishtnins er carried uff by
sound -effect of the cryptic acoustic or supernatural sigh $ItlIl. Ill flCT., DUIHSIQIII of the criminal by a stentorian sound
emanating from a casket or mortuary vault within the mystic tomb. effect would become Poe's means of dispensing terrible justice in
The novel is also an exanple of the high quality to be seen in "id li"b¢Il‘ili>l.Y W14 i>¢e¥l"95 0' "T"! T8"-TIN """t-'
some of the more elegant Gothics from the house of Minerva.
Minerva-Press catalogues connect the author of CORRELIA with 73- CW" RWERIV5 CA5“-E! We 507""; "'55. 5 715- i-°"40l" I
another anonyqpus earn, ‘mg |=0a£51' if uoiiguuccgg (gge a130)_ the Minerva-Press for liilliam Lane, 1794; Philadelphia : iiilliam
gloomy cadence of CORRELlA's opening sentence foreshadows the 3l"¥l7°l‘ils 1795-
sombre tone of the romance as a whole: ‘The clock from the ele- "Oder" R¢€illti0ll$= "bile
vated turret of Hheinhausen Castle had with slow, majestic stroke 3°""¢ T.YP¢= Pill‘? 0" high Gothic (horror mode)
tolled the hour of ten, and was followed by the deep and no less Biusraohical and Research Data: larr. CATHOLICISM ill BOTHIC
solemn bell of the chapel.‘ Castle Hheinhausen on the banks of H5719", PD-69. 195; FPSIQH "1570" if THE PR5-Rawinc "WEI-
the Danube is the abode of Lady Frederica, her niece, and the 1" EWLMD. P-Z51; |-€V.Ys I-E R915" "5°T"1W5" NW-I15. PP-414.
girl's stern guardian, Madame Martili. Lady Frederica's sister, 436: Rinse. ilunaid- ‘Early Gothic Inverts." in AKRICAN
Correlia, perished from unexplained causes years ago and is GOTHIC: IMAGIMATIOM AND REASOM IM MIMETEEMTM-CEMTURY FICTIOM.
_supposedly interred in the castle chapel within the vaults of the L¢iil"9t°"» KY 1 KQIIWCKY UP. 193?. PP-13-35-
ancestors. But there are doubts about her actual place of burial ~ - '

THE FIRST GDTHICS
Critical Synopsis: The copy of the novel in the Sadleir-Black
Gothic Collection is by the Philadelphia publisher, Thomas Brad-
ford, thus indicating the dissemination of popular Gothics to
American shores. Americans read all of the major and many of the L
minor English Gothic novelists. Thus, Gothicism in a variety of
forms entered the bloodstream of American literary culture at a
nascent stage of that culture. To convert the English Gothic to
the American Gothic, the enterprising terrorist needed only to
change medieval barbarians into skulking lndians and castle
labyrinths into wilderness caverns. The “Gothic Times" here refer
to eleventh-century Lombardy, a dark age and place ideally suited ' ‘
to the collision of barbarian savagery with emergent chilvary. ‘
The novel's cast, as a matter of fact, is precisely divided into t
just these two historical factions: heathens and barbarians ver- T
sus Christian warriors. Threads of treachery, disloyalty, royal ‘
murder, usurpation, sexual ruthlessness, and the bloody contest
for possession of Count Roderic‘s Castle are woven into a ‘
familiar Gothic tapestry. Deprived of power by his barbarian
rival, Astolpho, Count Roderic prepares for old age by f
withdrawing to "a castle of his own near the frontiers of a
lately conquered province--a retreat where the bolts of Astol-
pho‘s wrath were but little likely to reach him." Accompanying
him into his sanctuary is his courtly son, Rhinaldo, an Arthurian .
young man whose regal potential is unmistakable. Their complex §
adventures within and around the Castle show that the Gothic
writer knew the prerequisites of his audience, whether English or
American. The benevolent eremite, Father Anthony, the noble pris-
oner, Count Tancred, the garrulous servants, Ruggiero and Fabian, '
and the abominable Lombard strongman, Count de St. Armand, are a
familiar ensemble while the Abbey of St. Julien whose "Gothic
spires hung over the brow of the rock with an awful eminence“
completes the landscape of terror around Count Roderic‘s Castle.
One of the prisoners of the castle is the desolate Isabel,
daughter of the supposedly dead ruler of the land, King Emmanuel, i
but when characters of authority are pronounced deceased in a ‘
Gothic novel, they are most certainly alive and waiting to come
on in the final chapter. Arch-villain of the story is the
barbarian Astolpho. He despatches the monstrous Rhodolpho to the
Castle to mishandle Isabel and to cause problems for Roderic and
Rhinaldo with marauders and raiders. Separated from his father,
Rhinaldo runs afoul of a gang of pillagers who delight in tor-
menting him with lies of his father's death. Just at that point
when barbarian savagery appears to have won control, the
righteous King Emmanuel returns from the dead with an army behind |
him to overthrow and drive out Astolpho. He has been forewarned
of this defeat when Roderic, masquerading as a corpse, appears at
his bedside in bloody attire. Hith barbarism checked and civi-
lization, humanity, and Christianity restored, Emmanuel consigns ”,_
his throne to the wise knight, Rhinaldo, who then claims Isabel 1,,
as his queen. This sunmary omits many important events doubtless ,"‘>1 ' , .\ \
noticedc bylaspirﬁnt American‘Gothiiiists.fFortﬁxaiiple,tCountt Rod; 0 ///I’//.0/j/1///;///,¢ ”-(// , /,;)),,,.
eric s as e con ains an ear y ana ogue or e prema ure uria _ . , _
1:22: .i:*s;..i:i2‘:':..':*..€::.22: °‘2ﬁ;.2'"°2l‘;°".i3Z?;‘% ";;.::;i- \  //~"~~'~/y //~~ 7'"/~= W1 //~'
' ' - - ~ - - - I I . ' .
ranean cells reserved for the victims of living burial and ./Z}/,.,.,/y _ I/'47,/ll.’/’y /,_”.”/YA./H,’
I
Av

THE FIRST GOTHICS 61
containing bricked-up niches and chained skeletons.
73. Cowley, Hannah Parkhouse. THE ITALIAN HARAUDERS. London : J.
Dean for George Hughes, 1810.
Hodern Reeditions: None
' Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (terror mode)
Biographical and Research Data: None
Critical Synopsis: Cowley wrote as ‘Anna Hatilda,' model-
ing her romances on Radcliffe and Dacre. ITALIAN NARAUDERS
derives from UOOLPHO (see 0349) in scenes of poetic terror. The
eerie opening scene at St. Hark in Venice shows Angela di Hon-
galfi, attending the burial of Father Anselmo. Angela travels
from Venice to the chateau of an uncle she has never seen, Chev-
alier Nanfredino, a Hontoni reincarnated. Under the eye of the
monk, Pietro de Cronco, Angela has a dream of being seized by
ruffians and heaved from a cliff, a nightmare about to become a
fact when she is seized by de Cronco's fiendish brethren. How-
ever, all is prevented by the timely entrance of young Valerio
who has only now caught up with her. Valerio has been held by
Italian Harauders, led by their chief, Almeric, son of a Vene-
tian senator. There are more alarms before Angela is released
from the web spun by her uncle. After retribution is done upon
Hanfredino the moral is proclaimed. ‘It is only in contemplating
scenes like this that the mind becomes sufficiently enlarged to
entertain a due sense of the greatness of that power which
rescued the world from chaos.‘
74. Craik, Helen. HENRY OF NORTHUHBERLAND: OR, THE HERNlT'S CELL, A
TALE OF THE FIFTEENTH CENTURY. London : Hinerva-Press for
Hilliam Lane, I800.
Hodern Reeditions: None
Gothic Type: Gothified history
Biographical and Research Data: Tarr, CATHOLICISN IN GOTHIC
FICTION, pp.2, 30, 43, 49, 59, 70, I05, 119.
Critical Synopsis: Henry Percy of Northumberland, has
Just won the Battle of Holmedon Hill against the -Scots. The
Percy family challenges the king's shaky authority. Against
these historical facts, Helen Craik spins a fantastic plot
darkening the picture with action confined almost exclusively to
dungeons where prophetic spectres of Henry's betrayed victims
lurk in ‘pensive melancholy, yet pleasing gloom.‘ History is
rearranged to accommodate a secret Percy claimant to the English
throne and an ignominious death in battle for the usurping Henry
IV. Fantasized history in Gothic trappings remained one of the
vogues of horror fiction persisting in the work of Scott and
Ainsworth in the 1820's and 1830's.
75. Crandolph, Augustus. THE HYSTERIOUS HAND: OR, SUBTERRANEAN HOR-
RDURS, A ROMANCE. London : Hinerva-Press for A.K. Newman, 18-
1.
Modern Reeditions: None
Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (terror lode)
Biographical and Research Data: None '

X .
62 TIE FIRST GOTHICS . rm FIRST Gomrcs 3
6
Critical S opsis: The exquisitely Gothic title promised three """sp°s°d we '°‘“e""l l¢9°"¢".Y ""0 l\O"‘O" liirlliles of
volumes of unzrerqround titillation. but the title is countered by gztzmysicy guilt ‘M 5pi"‘t"‘l 'l$9"-Y- I" "'9 f°"‘l°"@- the
the disappointingly slow-paced plot which is conplex, sluggish, cart  9" 5999'" "M9" W"! O]lO$¢$.--l\OI"lO$- lhl$hO¢"O5.
and uncertain. Many details appear to be inspired by Mary Anne "M ‘:9 r '3" '2"! 5°l‘t"'¢]- c"°l-Y 5 "¢"4lllOO Of the legend was
Radcliffe's nmraouu on. rue (DIE-HANDED worm of 1so9. In Cran- M" Ynf M" is °'" "IE M Ieinteineii its literary hold well
dolph's Gothic the single, terrible hand reaches after too many k f Ge nlteenth century. its inﬂuence N, be seen M the
maidens in the subterranean darkness of Mortmain Castle but "°'_ ° "9" L" “°“"°- ll°"l¢O" WUIOF‘ Of the famous BEH
r The ll u bel s to a defrocked Cavuchin who """- * mi “" “'5 °"'"$T i188°)- "Q resarded ¢roly's Salathiel
grasps too ew. an ong
hides in a cave near his former monastery and avenges himself by ‘ska "'?J°" i"59l"°tl°"‘l $°""¢¢ 7°’ M5 Bllllltll Fdlance. lihile
extending the mysterious hand toward those who wander into his 0 :c "°']' ed9i"9 “S lW°"t'"“- ""9 l-"9"tl9"l-COOIIIIZY 5Olhi€ crit-
precincts. A Gothic novel is certainly entitled to have an absurd cs 9 ace the b°°" aft" ll"""l"'5 lil-ml" THE UANDERER (see
0268) as an influential source. Edith Birkhead estimated that
or outrageous premise as the basis for terror. But atruly
gripping Gothic is also required, even within the bounds of a l €.;‘3ly'§t;':°;:"°:9"tf5§-'l:l¢d °lg""5¢"°5 ill? "'69 lll SALATHIEL.
fantastic premise of action, to offer some artistic consistency ' f 9“ ° °' 9 " £55 J9" 5 OP! IO be lost ulid the
by developing its characters logically (howsoever mad) and making “Rs ° the '“t"°' 5 "mt°"l¢- I" ‘ts °""'°d°X f°""'- "'9 1999“
its plot coherent (howsoever strange). MAMFRDNE and THE MONK do 3”” ‘Mt c"'t°P"“"5 "'°¢l‘¢4 c'"'l5t l" M5 O90"! as Christ bore
Just this, but THE MYSTERIDUS mum does not. ° °'°“- """‘"‘9 Jew‘ ""1 "Psi"! hie to '90 faster." Christ's
reply contains the origin of the Jew's eternal punishment of the
deathless life' "l indeed, am going but thou shalt tarry till l
76. Croffts, Mrs. AMKERMTCK CASTLE: A NOVEL. London : Minerva-Press ' ' .
"'9 °"‘5° '"°"9-" c"°l.Y‘s retelling of the legend cowences on the
for Hilliam Lane 18(1).
"ode", Reediﬂong: "one gorning after the Crucifixion and traces the wandering; of
Gothic Type: Gothified history (combines didactic and horrific , ,° '§" §‘ T1" ‘° "ls Jsvish rebellion and the destruction of the
8192"“) slide t! W5 in 70 A.ll. Numerous narrow escapes and violent
Dioﬂraphical aid Research om: Sunmerso some oucsi. 0.190. ,"° "" s P"""""°-"'= J" 5 life es he becomes an avid patriot
n the struggle to eliminate Roman rule. There are dungeon epi-
Critical Synopsis: I-iistorical fiction with a strong Gothic
overlay, AMKERHICK CASTLE occupies four hefty volumes. Against
the corruptions of the Court of Henry Vll, the novel paints a
vivid, if totally spurious chronicle of the love affair of the
young Countess of Middleton and Sir llilliam Beaumont, a fictional
soldier of fortune. Conscious of the psychological value of the
epistolary structure, many Gothic novelists like Mrs. Croffts
resorted to this format. Mrs. Croffts applies Richardson's
methods of introspection with some skill as she probes the inner
lives of her characters erlneshed in a web of dark politics. By
the turn of the Century, the word "castle" or some equivalent
architectural epithet such as "abbey," "priory," "tower," or
"cell" had become almost iwerative for any piece of historical
fiction, even if the novel was, like AMKERHICK CASTLE, only
marginally Gothic.
77. Croly, George. SALATHIEL: A STORY if THE PAST, PRESENT, AND THE
FUTURE. London : lienry Colburn, 1828.
Modern Reeditions: Hone
Gothic Type: Gothified history (liandering Jew legend)
Biographical and Research Data: Scarborough, SUPERMATURAL IM
KJDERH EIGLISH FICTION, p.179; Birkhead, TALE if TERROR,
p.118; Railo, HAUNTED CASTLE, pp.191-217.
Critical Synopsis: The legendary figure of the Handering Jew
and the ironic damation of his never-ending life provided a
strong theme for the Gothic novelists and their successors, the
- Romantic poets. Southey, Shelley, Coleridge, and Medwin, along
with their Gothic conteqaoraries, Lewis, Godwin, and Maturin,
sodes, shipwrecks, tortures, and at one point, a hideous fantasy
Of Pfelilture burial graphic enough to satisfy any Gothic mag-
ination. Salathiel is in Rome during the per$e¢utio|\§ of were as
he wanders to the corners of the Ewpire seeking to rid himself of
?;a$t;s curse. Returning to take part in the Jewish war of
he ra on; he hopes that his deeds have exonerated I|iQ ma that
can nd death at last. But as the Teqale walls are pulled
down by the legions of Titus, a voice from the ruins is heard
Sounding again the awful admonition, "Tarry thou till 1 gm;
Wain. Realizing that his must be a sin without hope of re-
OQNOO and recognizing to his great horror that with the fall
of the Teamle walls he has become a man ,of thirty-three Qngg
1°", Salathiel wanders bravely but hopelessly into the next time
cycle. Although they lack a coherent expression in Croly's novel,
Ulzullandering Jew legend's themes of metaphysical isolation and
Oh og ca displacement soon exerted a strong influence on the
Fﬁﬂllzzlt iliulses of the Romantic consciousness. Entrapment
I ll e eterna prison of ti l fi
Gothic sequestration. R a so gm-ed as a new type of
CRDMSTADT CASTLE: OR, THE MYSTERIOUS VISITOR. London : A.
Kxish for J. Ker, 1803,
Modern Reeditions: None
_ Type: Gothic chapbook (imitation of THE CASTLE OF
Biographical and Research Data: Mone A
Critical Synopsis: The 33-page chapbook selling at six pence
gestlldard Gothic fare. in the Sadleir-Blaclr Gothic Collection
short novel is part of an anthology called THE EMTERTAIMER

54 we rmsr GOTHICS -"E FIRST mm“ 65
cont inin thr oth r cha bo k-si e tales which are much lik
ciiohgnioig cnsits. These Jnei arezTME MAGICIAM: on, THE MYSTICAE c'"'°" 5y"°"““ * ""“°' °" "" ""5" °'"°'>°°" in
ADVENTURES GISERAPHIMA; oontsnc MISERY: on, THE VICTIM or §',‘1""“‘ ' "“9° '“°""°"“- ‘5'°°"°"“" "'""*¢¢ "is Euihic
SEDUCTIOM; and OSUICK: THE aoto OUTLAH. The cast and events are °"{Y,‘°°"° ‘°" "‘°"° "‘°" “'° "*“"°‘- °§§°"“'"¥ "Wins the
stereotyllical. The plot is a coinnon Gothic scenario. The curious  5' e “er ‘M °'°" '9'“ ‘M '°"‘°“"9 it "Me" ""l°"5 lu-
¥oun9 knight. iienry viiieroy. Comes to Cronstadt Castle seeking § ‘Q "°"Y °"° °‘ "ls “'°'"¥-"°"" 1° thiﬂy-si» nose short
an answer to the mystery of his father's supposed death. The an- . i °§t§"s °'°"°i t° be 9“9‘°"‘"d °h"l°9°"°"" °f ‘¢"9"'.Y ""1
swer seems to lie within Count Cronstadt's eastern turret which ‘ 189 “ate 25°“ cs °' c°""t°'fen 'i"i“""¢5 °f 5¢"°"°""°""¢"‘
stands in the wing of the Castle that is closed forever to all t'°°:ts' “H S "°th°d ne'er """d' "e '1"-Y5 M93559“ 51°" ""0"
visitors. The master of the Castle, Count Cronstadt, “appeared to ° give t % run" the inaﬂne ‘"5 "°“°"5 "°""°" "9 "5
have condemned his family to eternal exile‘ when he withdrew r ‘ﬁe t"9'f '“'5- "'9 91°‘ 07-6 C"00k¢I\d¢II Chapbook always has
behind the walls of Cronstadt to seek terminal seclusion. Mrs. 2 en 5,0 ‘right red b‘°°d ‘"4 5"pe""“""‘ °‘*°“°" 5"‘ V9"-Y
Radcliffe inight require several chapters or even a whole volume tuk i ST; sh°d°"S ‘"4 9“‘“"9 5""°"¢“°5- c"°°|‘¢"¢9" "E91!
to paint this situation. but the chapbooker was able to embody it 2:‘ "5 3:“ ‘"2 °Ms°“s f"°' "'5' R“°““°'5 "°Ye15 but
in one or two blunt sentences at the opening: ‘The rude storm z Wei 9"‘ °. '1‘ Sllbllety. The rapid piling of horror upon
howled through the forest that surrounded the solitary Castle of grngredn mrena S “p°'ﬂ"ed 'd"e"t""° is t-Ypiul °f M5 ""9-
the Count Frederick de Cronstadt. a nobleman who had long retired S rs 3 ‘$e"s°ti°“"!$"' me c°"c"9‘“°"“ °f 5¢°"Pl"° is "°¢ 5°
from the splendour of the court, and sought in this gloomy edi- Tm“ ale °p°d]'s,“ '5 u""'st "M" the "'49" i“ 1"¢l4°"t 1""
ficea a retreat in which he could indulge a inisanthropy that had "° f" - "°'° 1' S Muslin" unu suffering. $¢uroino's countless
taken ossession of his s l.“ Like his ancestor Hal ole's 5"“ crass’ ‘M the pumic e"*c"u°" °f "'9 "““l" b-Y "la
Manfred‘: Frederick de Cronstag: is humane enough when his geason }::';l:;‘;g"th¥is:.u bah: page quota of twenty-foun One special
i in t 1 b t h be we i b St h M i e c ap o nee s to be mentioned. The heroine's
diininatefgfanz hisupasgiong doaintenilleofezhe ‘ti: instgiespagei ' Mm’ "Oren" is '"'c'”°" i" s°tMc """]s' 0” “QM specuute
of the chapbook. His wife, Antonia, and his daughter, Joanna, -T: °"' the 9°ssib““-Y tn“ he" "W “"9"t the QY9 °f I ¥°u"9 Eu-
spend most of their days and nights hiding and running from the V 2: “la: Pg‘: "P "'9" "594 it 7°’ M5 "¢"°l"9'5 MI! l" lhé 1835
deranged Count whose favorite diversion is the persecution of his ., e’ re "
r il . v Vill r ill t ll t d .
2"“ ta‘: Yd “"3 d °"°{; ° §°"§‘°-t" f °"" “MY P" 2"  _ ao. Crookenden, Isaac. me SKELETON: oa, THE nvsiziuous DISCOVERY, A
egsternstowgeindcrecgisgngsghe ziinrdgtogy glzgtrralevigitcgt olllldf   L°"g°" = 5' "ﬁne 13°5-
night to point his way Villeroy is informed by ‘an aerial form ‘I _ ‘ms: °"'
in white-flowing robe that ‘Your father lives!--here, in this I  ﬁghagsﬁhﬁpmkt _ N
castle." Hhen Villeroy confronts Count Cronstadt with this .5 ' C ' " °"e
astonishing revelation the Count obliges the inlnediate needs of _
Gothic justice by pr-owtly coiiniitting suicide (page 30 of the A chagagxcggg-;':°2:i:é Iggrfoggf  "'lia:":g;:3:ta:::@
P\b0K.A ‘I ffth d llll I I tl 7 pop" '
c ap rial) tn iéeun onio g er an soil lg‘ iéheli 93'“ "'i"'§ t 5 , ic, THE AMIMATEO SKELETON (see I007). Crookenden's crude but
nowa a remans oraquc ns o sinnaure __
OTRAMTO. Guided to the forbidden tower by the Count's odious k §:,§§°'e§°n?'i§:;°?iigfregﬁtmgnsgshthetgesthe tstirt shocterf 2"“
r tur R l Villr i d fin nt st sinl - "°° °"$°°""¢'H¢'
:ri:one:'but°::n‘;h?>f the eC?>:nt§sm:i:ti:ig awgitgnqjuliberatigni ‘ gfitcf 5°"‘i¢ "39- 5"! here. the mobile skeleton is nd‘ mechanicis
including his benefactors, the Marquis Mont Aubin and the Chev- . J, C ’ ‘"3" the ‘Muted bones ‘re the re“ '°'"'9 "¢"1"5 °f
alier Albert Lannoy. Enptied froni their Gothic jail, they are  C Q $55“ 5 """'de"¢d 3uF0fI- The character pairings deployed by
happy to become nenihers of the weddin9 troupe. This repetitive _ r °[g°E§2 if’; ""1 bee" uruuuu in Buthis fistion since Clara Reeve's
plot exhibits all of the Gothic themes initiated by Halpole: the ' 1! ,, t § " m°" (‘°° '355)' "“’ 5"" °* "ls °°""° "file Cu"-
endication of fun“ av“ b a __ terious “s“°r__ the r‘ R s s o the highborn Rotaldo and his attractive sister, Eleanora
Y Y Y‘ . ( i th
exposure and removal of an unnamed crime which has driven the i ta‘ ggsntiZuggaéloargfbgfttnggo3'23‘ "'3? t"'° ﬂcths °f
criminal into terrible isolation, and restoration of power to the 1 and Mo] h S h Y 9 " e 9"5'"t5- Mil"
ygungegvgeneration who succeed in breaking the chain of hered- xx be prol:t.:ria:.°s:'h:a:ll::n :ivd3‘g‘{h:oi]ighoi1i€ ::°M‘:ig'iT:2?ethg
2;. mg" °"b;¢l": re‘). 8 I0" Of furelgn origins and therefore ir-
7 _ r R nd n . TH T M A 0 T : T R ms  ‘ P2 r eva y a in all the prescribed Gothic ways. At issue, as
9 C 8: §C(;PlM0l3E:EL0PEE.SL2ndo(rf:K:uE‘isheE,Mi8((;4.°R' “E C I fl‘ '1'?‘ is ”‘° °'°"°' °""°"""’ °f "'° “‘“° "“' "‘° ‘1"°“ "°'
Modem “editions: "one ,_,__: as‘ ce by a displaced Gothic family. In a confused climax, the
Gothic Tm: Gothic cmpbook  X _ we eton of the dead Baron frightens Maurice into a virtuous
' Bioqraphical and Research Data: Mone <1‘-i “Se and prwuces the """s°""'t *'“"'°' "*°'$“"-V ‘° """"
 peasants into nobility. Because Alnira now becomes Jlotoldo's no-
-  51¢ equal. they are free to marry, while the new Baron, Adolphus,
V

as ne rmsr cornrcs 1 - "5 F1"-‘T ¢°T"1¢$ 67
can be fitly matched with the yet attractive Eleanora. The haste c°"95e‘5t'¢"" ‘"'d*"9"°“"d 1" THE "om (see '3“)- ""i°"5 "91!
end euﬂessness of tne snneke, nne evident in one of c,.nek_ passages in both stories are thinly disguised compressions of the
endenls lenses nf nenn,.y_ Having described tne eon, nnnden of nauseous ordeel of Agnes in the cellars of the Abbey of St.
Rnumn by nnnniee early in tne ‘ﬁe. tne ynnnn nan non“ not \ Clare. Lewis s emetic Gothic interested Crookenden as a further
then have been available for the matrimony scene on page thirty- l '_“"5 °f q"i°" 5"°c"- I" ‘M 71"“ 5t°"'¥~ the "°"°"'@ '"""‘°\'1.Y
einnh avoids marriage with her own father. In the second story, prob-
ably the better of the two small Gothics, a wicked uncle plots
a1. Crookenden, Isaac. ram seems; on, zmsnunoa oz SALKJNI, A *9""" "ls "¢P"¢" I" We" to P'<>¢"'= his '\evh=v'= bel0ved- In
slclunn Smnt Lennon : J_ Lee, 18o6_ X both cases, the victims are released from their filial perse-
kdern Reed-itionse "one CUEOFS O0 EHO final DlQQ- _
Gothi T = Gothi n book W ’
8n,g,.§n,,{:§, M R§,§,f.§,, om, non, k as. Crookenden, Isaac. noaams REVENGE: oa, ms nousm or mum
London : R. Harrild, I808.
Critical Synopsis: Crookenden often plundered his Sicilian ~ "°°°"" "°°°"‘°"$= "°"¢
villainies from Hrs. Radcliffe's SICILIAN aowmcz (see mn and I §<:""¢ T{P°= °°""¢ ¢"'P'>°°K _ _
ms mtum (see 0350) replacing the slinkings of the villain T °9"P" "l W‘ R¢§w¢" °m= Levis» _Pwl- THE ATHEIST 5
with blunt horrors. The Gothic Iago of rxm SECRETS is Ricardo “A55”! ="° "*5 "ST" °F °TR""°- "°TE$ 1- "W155. Z5
Beraldi, lecher supreme aid perpetrator of most of the official (1978): 52'5‘- _
Gothic crimes,--kidnapping, adultery, incarceration of violated
in n n ni ‘ f i , e 1 ti _ M ted ' Critical Synopsis: The sensational chapbook's title and story
:3  anmmgﬁeaicarzgobasieg ni:§§'1'¥e:1§: the‘ sgzctiogp of “9i““1“ °" "'9 '°9"° °f 1t'“'"°t° ""°¢“-Y "M59 "°°t5 "9""
Countess Theodora, turning upon his benefactor to work his will.
Iago's motto for evil suits him well: ‘Pleasure and action make
the hours seem short.‘ Theodora is soon towered, the Count is
soon dungeoned, and Ricardo expands his lecherous activities by
plucking the chastity of Alicia de Salmoni. The product of Ri-
cardo's lechery is the chapbook's heroine, Etherlinda de Salmoni,
a creature as extravagantly lovely as her father is extravagantly
evil. Ricardo is eventually confronted by the terrible fact that
Etherlinda's mother, Alicia, is his sister, but since he is al-
ready a poisoner, a rapist, and a ruthless sadist, the revelation
of his ‘fatal secret‘ of incest hardly seems to matter. In one of
those last page frenzies of remorse, he removes himself by sui-
cide. Her father's incestuous crime is kept from Etherlinda, who
now marries young Ormando, the decent sbn of the generous Count
whom Ricardo had treated so badly. Although the narrative pattern
is crude, what can be discerned is the Gothic's preoccupation
with the process of how uoral beauty arises from sexual evil. In
crude and primitive outline, Crookenden's Etherlinda is Haw-
thorne‘s Pearl in THE SCARLET LETTER. ’
82. Crookenden, Isaac. THE HYSTERIOUS IRRDER: OR, THE USURPER if
NAPLES, AN IIIIGINAL R(liANCE T0 HHICH IS PREFIXED THE NOCTURNAL
ASSASSIN, (ll SPANISH JEALWSY. London : J. Lee, 1806.
Hodern Reeditions: None
Gothic Type: Gothic chapbook
Biographical and Research Data: None
Critical Synopsis: The two stories in the thirty-six-page
chapbook offered the reader a little Gothic duet intended to ex-
cite and appall the natural detestation of incest. The title and
some of the content of the first tale, THE NYSTERIOUS IIRDER,
seem to derive from Horace ilalpole's drua of incest, THE
-HYSTERIOUS HOTHER (1768). The second story, THE NOCTURNAL ASSAS-
SIN, reeks heavily of the cadaverous fumes of Honk Lewis's
back to the Elizabethan Drama. Edward Hontague's popular DEION OF
SICILY (see 0291) had extracted its horror plot from THE HDNK
(see I244) and its terror plot from the Radcliffean romances.
Crookenden roughly ‘pulled his characters and situations from
Lewis, Radcliffe, Dacre, and Hontague, then contracted his plagi-
arisms to fit the required thirty-six pages. Horror is
concentrated on incest as a despicable nan named Julien pursues
his spotless sister, Amanda. Julien has tried marriage, but has
found that no woman except a sister can satisfy his peculiar
lusts. After iaprisoning her briefly, Julien eliminates his wife
for good in order to devote full energies to ravishing his sis-
ter. Hhen a good priest (the long-missing father of Julien and
Amanda) tries to intercede in Amanda's behalf, Julien stabs him
to death thus adding parricide to an already full catalogue of
depravity. Julien's suicide is a foregone conclusion. By the
rules of the shilling shocker, all monsters of Italy must be gone
from the story by the thirty-sixth page ‘of the chapbook to permit
the heroine her moment of unblemished bliss. Behind Crookenden's
crude Gothicizing, there lies the Gothic imagination's obsession
with the incest theme. The Gothic novelists were aware of and
frequently drew from the Elizabethan-Jacobean dramatic literature
on the subject. Two plays, Cyril Tourneur's THE ATHEIST'S TRAGEDY
(1611) and John Ford's 'TIS PITY SHE'S A HIDRE (1633), with their
Qhasis on ‘incest, violence, madness, monsters, prison, mortal-
ity, and gore,‘ were especially influential as Gothic sources.
Crookenden, Isaac. THE ITALIAN BANDITTI: OR, THE SECRET HISTORY
W IEHRY AND HATILDA, A RUIAHCE. London : R. Harrild, 1811.
Hodern Reeditions: None
Gothic Type: Gothic chapbook
Biographical and Research Data: Harshall, Roderick. ITALY IN
EIGLISH LITERATURE, 1755-I815. New York : Coluabia UP, 1934;
Gaunt, ililliam. BAHDITS IN A LAHDSCAPE:_A STUDY If RIIIAHTIC
PAINTING FRO! CARAYAGGIO T0 DE-LACROIX. London : ‘Studio, 1937.

68 Tff FIRST QOTHICS _¢=  fIR$f 60rHIc$
Critical Synopsis: A sojourn with bandits is often beneficial r Shekespelre remeihs the reiuetaht Qedfather of the genre. As is
to the Gothic hero or heroine since it usually produces some 5° efteh true in the Plays. iest Parents in these abbreviated
striking genealogical revelation. The outlaws of Gothic fiction eothics are replaced by nefarious uncles. The spirits of dead
generally fall into the Romantic stereotype of noble criminals; Pere"t$ are di5° repeatedly Called uP°h te Serve O5 9e"eei°9i¢ei
alﬂtgugh cwable of gruelty and duplicity’ they are 1355 prone {Q V XSSGDQQFS. ll] I8llUfdCtUTEl‘S Of th€ 6OU\lC C0ﬂSid8Y‘Ed
vice than the so-called upper classes against whom they strive. Shakespearean naterial a free and indispensable repository of
Crookenden's hero, Henry, is taken captive by bandits soon after appliances as well as a touch of poetic oenius that even Gothic
he has left his family to follow a military career. He carries readers appreciated. Crookenden anticipated these Shakespearean
with hi. intg captivity 3 ¢]Q5§ic problem of young Ggthic he- cravings in one of the prime scenes of the chapbook wherein the
roes,--the burden of the unburied father and the detection of his , bloody matron melodramatically interposes herself between the e-
slayer. Hints of incest also play a role in the hero's efforts to Vii uheie ahd Fi°riiI°'$ heieved. hshasiai Just as the uncle is
right a family wrong as they do in Crookenden's other shockers. coercing her to the altar. Her name too is a borrowing from Eliz-
Henry left home because of his uncontrollable sexual infatuation ehethe" uremia A5Pe$ia heihﬂ take" uireetiy frel Thi "KID'S
with his sister, natilda. Residing with the banditti opens his TRAGEDY (1619) et Beaunont and Fletcher- Heddinss interrupted by
eyes to oppression and also brings him the startling but welcome a supernatural visitant or intruded upon by a spectral Quest of
disclosure that Matilda is not his biological sister after all, euurse Dre-date 5Othi¢ fietiuh as a study Of the hi$t°r¥ °f the
but the daughter of the bandit chieftain. In a longer Rauberroman drum! "iii 5h°V- The lest lihute rel°Vii °f Viehee ehardtteri by
or robber romance there would be time for moral philosophizing voluntary suicide. however. seens to be an awkward dramatic pre-
and humanitarian sentiment, but the demands of the chapbook rogative of the Gothics. For no good reason, Florilmo's bad uncle
eliminated these elaborations. uithin his alloted thirty-two does Just this. clearing his nephew's pathway to the altar with
pages, Crookenden has time only for the expected sequence of the beautiful A§Oasia- hdlittediy. the rude and eyhieai eOﬂIer-
Gothic jolts. Frightful situations, weird encounters, sexual cialilino of Crookenden and the host of other Gothic chapbookers
suspense, and bloodcurdling justice convey Henry to the discovery cheapened the already-Preearieus reOutatiOn Of the Gothic novel.
of his father's murderer. Crookenden°s curious notoreity shows 0" the °ther hehu. it has ilperative that 5Othic fiction become
that the making of Gothic chapbooks was a subliterary industry briefer if it was to survive at all in either the popular or so-
dominated by profiteers who knew how to see these shortened Goth- Rhistiteted f°r"§- 5! uiiutih9 ahu conpressino the iOh9 Gethiesi
ic novels as a lucrative trade, not as an art. Regarded in their ' the chapbook hdeks uheehseieusiy treated the eehuitiehs heeessary
own era as throwaway titles, the Gothic chapbooks have now become t°r the 5u¢¢e§$ °t the Gethie in its hOst Donerful form as the
the rarest of bibliographical rarities. 5h°rt tile °t terr°r-
as. Crookenden, lsaac. THE spams or THE TURRET: on, GUOLTO CASTLE, 86- Cullen. Stephen. THE HAUNTED PRl0RY= OR. THE FORTIINES OF THE
A Rgmpl¢[_ Lqndon ; R_ Harrilg, n_¢_ HOUSE OF RAYO, A ROMANCE FOUNOED PARTLY OH HISTORICAL FACT.
Modern Reeditions: Hone t°"¢°" 1 J- Beii. 1794-
Gothic Type: Gothic chapbook (Schauérromantik elements) "°uer" Reeuitlons= "one
Biographical and Research Data: Lévy, Maurice. “Shakespeare et G°thi° T!Pe= Pure °r hi9h 5°thie (terrOr IOde)
19 r0.an -g°ghique,-- ¢AL15Ag' 1 (1955); 47_53_ Biographical and Research Data: Tompkins, POPULAR NOVEL TN
ENGLAND, 99.273, 293; Summers, GOTHIC. QUEST, p.397; Tarr,
Critical Synopsis: The phantom figure of the bleeding nun chihoticish 1" Goihic Ficiiuh. OD-1. Z3. 69. 74-75; Levy. L5
which had hovered at the bedside of non Raymond in THE noun (see Renal '6OThlOuE' ANGLAIS. pp-394-398. 462. 481. 620. 626-
0244) was often reincarnated by plagiarizing chapbookers. In this
chapbook, Crookenden determined not only to pillage THE MONK, but Critical Synopsis: Uniquely powerful in its surrealistic dream
also to raid the tragicomedies of Shakespeare in addition to his '9i5°4e§ the eerie Vasteianus. the fantastic landscapes of THE
normal thefts from the standard Gothic authors. The supernatural hhuhito PRIQRY eali tO hind $Denser's terrains or one of the
parent or ancestor whose shade enters to set right all wrongs in 5h'd°"¥ ieeaies Of a Medieval quest romance such as SIR GAHAIH
Crookenden's thirty-two- page thriller is the gore-clotted ghost Ah" Thi GREEN KNIGHT. The Oneirie eneroy Of this Guthie runance
of Florilmo's mother. Her visitations give solace to a true son ‘"5 the strahﬂe ﬂue$t Of its Iahderihq here. hifuhsei have
of the Gothic who is being tormented and deprived of heritage by Rrulhted One student of the Gothic (J.H.S. Tompkins) to rate
yet another vile uncle. The name Florilmo suggests Florizel in Cullen's novel as one of the lost artistic expressions of Goth-
Shakespeare's A HlNTER'S TALE, a play that became particularly icism to be found in the entire tradition, ‘a book which in spite
inviting to the Gothic novelists because it contained a scene in °t ll"! and serieus fiavs. has real Puetie feree in its super-
which a statue came to life. lndeed, without the horror plots of natural scenes-' Its flaws are the 9enre's flaws: tendentious
luutcl and IACBETH and the astonishments and coincidences of the P‘°tti"9 and a heaping up of oenealocical densities to the point
.tragicomedies as models, the Gothic novel could not have begun at 'h"9 °'e" the steutest reader Of 6Othics lust frequently have
all, and its proliferation could scarcely have been contemplated. i°$t hi‘ "I! diOh9 With the heree Unless the Obscuhe clues relat-
inc to birthmarks, twins, misplaced relatives, and infant
1'-
69

70 nc rmsr cornrcs - "E “R57 °°'”1¢$ 71
id Ii
exchanging are carefully noted and remembered, the reader is apt gore’ goebveramethpreee efiehet vememe ‘rude’ "we" "9 "3
to be overcome by the intertwinings of the story. The central “reg vols‘; as "$3235?"e-¥tgfc?:_g:$:‘:';'gs”'g B“: :e°"-V i"
"i9M"""e eM5°d°' "°"e'e"' e"""9 "Me" “f°“5° ""de"“keS e timents or style that renders it worth of critical ft? 5'3?“-
dark and dangerous journey alone to avenge the death of his fa- reviewelhs use reﬂects the men] frzstution of th° rce; 9
ther is a brilliant Gothic tour de force. Like a knight errant ~ over the unccounume success of the Gothics But E r" "9?
t"Y""9 t° “I” ' '“d*°"5 "ewe °" f“°d "it" '" e"i9""“° “sh hostile reviewers and caustic condemnation of the Gothi: 5::-lite!
he leaves the Castilian court of Don lsidor de Haro to keep his
appointment at the haunted priory of Rayo. Left behind by the ;';,,§{,'* we  '§mR°':;dI"E] 55"TL5'“"'5 "*°m"5- ""1 ""1
i r n h one t C ti] espec e per ca s did not deter profiteering Goths
igllgnqkaighﬁisgn9t:§n.°T;1|eB:wg med: ::e°r:'l‘:te:i tut tge ‘aloof! who knee their eueieneve testes end ‘mes’ The “ct the the
tie is not made known until the finale within the tomb of Gon- ' revieeers ‘ere correct eboue -the t"ee"ess' eeei"" '"e t'"'p'
salvo at the end. A villain named Punalada in the pay of Pedro ’ er, of the everege eeehie "°'e1 eeee "°e the s"9ht°$t differ‘
the Cruel of Spain is thought to have murdered Alfonso's father, e“e:’t {he egehie 'e°ee"ee'te] "nee" c°"t'°‘1ed the ‘it""Y
Gonsalvo. The most effective passages of the romance are Cullen's neg e p eee e the 179° S geve its h°'e9e '"e its °°i"'9° t°
descriptions of the questing hero making the dark journey across » cu ‘en’ c'°°ke“ee"' e"reies' es eel‘ '5 "'5' R'd°‘iff*' “'9"°'
the wasteland toward something like a Gothified grail castle. On ggeﬁe heuﬁee sue“ :5 J‘ eel] e°"cee°d_t° 9"bl‘c t'5t° “Y 9"b'
Christmas eve, he is guided across the Sierra Morena by a huge, i 29 he eeth es‘ Hi]1ie' Lene 5 "i"e""P'°55 b°c"‘ ‘"9
speechless, cowled figure. Traversing a darkling plain where , pr "e De‘ eise'ib“e°' °f e°ehie ‘ere’ but e'e" L'"° c°"1d "°t
nothing grows he comes in sight of the ruined and deserted pri- corner the market. Cullen's CASTLE OF INCHVALLY is a made-
ory. Entering {he eipty chape]. he is greeted by ghostly voices to-order monastic shocker which might have pleased any publisher
chanting the mass in some stranqe tongue. Odd liqhts rise and ::°g:f""eeee ‘Q7 :e'ie'e" S°‘e'" °"'°e] b°“5 ‘°" 'd°‘¢f“"¥~'
fall, wings brush past the ruined archways, and low sighs of uel- tedruge " r"" ees f'°' "t" t° 'i5‘e' c"t""5i'" f'*"d5 di'
come issue from dark niches. Exhausted from his night Journey, reed g 1: ee?e'°"s 'bb°t c°"e"ct 5ec'°t "t°$ ‘"4 t¢"if¥
Alfonso falls into a trancelike slumber. In a nightmare,--a Goth- ee ens‘ “ en D“ It his '°""c° "°""d '" "°°'t'"t 5°t“‘¢
ic dream within the Gothic dream--he sees the visored figure of eeeeet‘e' the ee'°"ie "“9"' '"ich '°"'b°"t°5 t"'°“9" the
the slain Eonsalvo who h°1ds forth a key in the shape Of an corridors of lnchvally Castle and freezes its victims. Even-
hourglass. Then as he is about to grasp the key Alfonso's dream tue“y' the horrid sound rises ee ne 1°"9' 1°“e "“9h' 5"ch ‘s '
disso1ves and h; returns to the c.st“ian c°urt' to report his t giant in malignant mirth might be supposed to utter.“ It would be
i 1 1 h f - unwise to join the critics in dismissing this cheap sound effect
zigazgﬁragéfehgafc:heae:t?repeggtngcezﬁbtﬁiestsﬁi; ‘ﬁne :r°ge{ugn of the eethie e°° 9]ib]7' The t°"e"t°d ]'"9" °f "'t“""'5 n91‘
moth (see I268) finds its source in Cullen's manipulation of the
ﬁggzglﬁgﬂg d:ga.e:ﬁd :g":::g ap£g2:§1 :8 ¥::b:h:hek::f"‘n?dg: ‘:5 - effect. Mysterious cachinnation soon becomes one of the most
the Baron de Rayo, the party tracks Gonsalvo's phantom to a hid- ::;:°E"°re:y e:“"e efieegi i" the e°t“ic '°'1d' It is h¢"d bY
den crypt whose doorway is blocked by tons of rubbish. Cullen's tho yre e1e" S e gees ° ve ee 9‘°°-Y Th°'"fie1d "'J" ""‘
handling of the conventional Gothic episode of the disinterment rue eep eye the device ef h°"ib1e ]'"9"ee' t° s7'b°]ile t"e
of the lost relative is done in the vein of pure nightmare and fe‘1 tree inneeeeee in ehe,ee:l7 e"e' -My K‘"5""' "'J°' "°‘i'
has the same undeniable power as the chapel scene. Clawing away ::::an %" :‘}'i" F:?‘k"ﬁ: 5‘ QT! September,‘ a story of erupting
the debris to secure an entrance to the vault, they pry back the tn. ° 1' ° ¢"¢¢-i SS nn e s hysterical laughtera implicates
door of death to come first upon Gonsalvo's armor and a few slimy 5‘ who e tee“ n the ‘ie thee precipitates the 'Y"¢h‘"9 °f ‘
paces beyond the armor, the riven skull itself. The best Gothics eek eee‘ “bet ‘S eerely ' se"t]‘"9 s°""e effect i" the '°'k °f
were Iritte“ by authors who ‘ere swept up in their can grotesque In early Gothic novelist will later assume thematic or metaphoric
fantasies to the point of awestruck belief. The artistry and sus- fglgi 'he= the Gothic becomes e" ineginative too] of ‘Titers of
penseful horror of this stock Gothic scene demonstrates that re“ '
Cullen was one such Gothic author.
Curties, 1..1. liorsley. ETHELHINA: on, ms nous: or FITZ-AUBERNE,
a1. Cullen, Stephen. me casnz or mcnvntm A me ms: too mus. ‘ f.:2"*'{§§9°" ‘°""" ""5- '-°""°" = """°""""°“ f°" """"'
London : J. Bell 1796. node‘ ' ,
"°d"" R"d‘ti°";‘ "°"e Gothig §§§::t;§::'a:°§?g» Gothic (horror-terror modes)
§?§21§.J.i2§i "iii °§.';l2?.§°"6l‘é.§“‘%Z$3f Eﬁiﬁitmsi IN GOTHIC "°°"°"‘“‘ ““' "°‘"'°" °'"= 5°"b°'°"9"- 5""5'"'*T"'W
"¢"<>"- »-=- =°- 34- 1"» 10* W» LE ‘W '°°""°"E' £22“ ‘3J'°°§'§3 "$5" §§§"°'§si""3é §“"CE'§ﬂ"1é313‘{S3E=
' v 0 0 ; V
moms. |>p.4oo. 402. 410. 452. 4a2. sea. Mews. po.s9a, 40a. 515. 456. saz, 634.’
' : i d i t -
disﬁi;g§efro:y'ta:slevie5el‘a.eHEsE§?'TeCALs°:!:V§EH:rs:he:nwe go: e'm°" sy"°°““ T” 'F°"""" “""" °' "'° “W °"° "'°

"6 FIRST 60THI¢$ - ms FIRST cornzcs
days of Edward Ill (1327-1377). Hhile the King makes a brief and doeeeerd three h r
appearance in the historical Gothic, Curties's purpose is to a- megure burial is geehhhghzhhihghghhghz hhh hghghheshhhzhhh hhhh
maze, astound, and startle through a collection of Gothic events fa‘ end the pair ‘ill short; ret en Q eh "C e19 e " s"cce55'
and revisions of history where necessary. The pseudo-historical route to rescue Au ustiney fro: th° e as ee E Y the 5°"*
method is stated in the preface: 'Ny intent is to fascinate the leseivious erase of tae villain L rd ee "e‘e'"i “" f'°" the
senses with a delusive picture of times forever past." Gothified 51a," by the heirs of Fitz'e 8 rn °°pﬂ fs c°'"e'ed 5"“
history mid Originated with nidwas Leland's LONGSHORD (see 0243). ,,,,,,s,,,.ed ,, K," Eduard Mes 1; ‘gr? ° b"‘k ° °“""'" """"°9°
evolved in the direction of an unexplained supernatural in Clara the “,0” ea fag,‘ curtieseh d f'"9§ ‘C £?Y '"d 9°5‘ti°" t°
"""°" °L° "GUS" °""°" is“ '355)- °"" '“°"°“ ' °""‘°°‘° °f ‘ G0thifiCa%ion of hiitor from hi nhhih h hhh hg hhhhhhh for his
fine delusion with Curties. Hithin an eight-year period from 1799 the five romances that how ra hdlh f hlhhhdhhTh€hhhh hh hhhhhh hh
to 1807, he manufactuged six highly accepteble, quite formulaic r 9 7 ° °“° L“I"A~
Gothic novels wh ch a tered or ignored ng ish history to meet _
the ends of the terrorist. Drawing upon but competing against the \ 89' cu8§$$§§E Tigedogofsmiﬁervgnglhgl faicgﬁgi; °R£ TNE ABBEY OF ST-
rictidds of nrs. Radcliffe, Curties's six sounds admitted d Mm ,',eedmon;_ me ' ° °' °"' °"¢- 13°1-
large element of the authentic supernatural. From the atrocities spthie Type- Pure or hi h Gothic (t mod
of ms noux (see 0244). he grasped the mud of uiddd, sadism, mereemcei and Resegr h D t _ °§:°"b °)
Satanism, and torture. Terrible pleasure and pleasurable terror HORROR IN MODERN ENGLIEH FIET:6e "9°'gg§"§ 5UPER"ATuRAL
can be felt everywhere is Curties's very raw but sometimes qu£$T pp,32 58 73 100 170 179' hgi '334h33hmh§;i: hhhhlh
powerful Gothicizing. For example, the features of the hero- cetnoilclsn ‘IN 'GoTgIc ilctlae ' 3 ' 18 '70 '7‘ 56 2";
villain, Leopold Lord St. lvor, have the studied Levy LE Ruueu ,G0THI°Ue_ Aeeeelg pp'3e9 ea‘ 305 iel i 05-
repulsive-attractive characteristics of the Gothic face. Hhen 414 ‘e16 418 429 ‘es eee eeev £86 eeo - . 2. 413.
Ethelwina gazes upon the face, she sees Ambrosio and Nontoni be- ' ‘ ’ ' ' ' ' ' '
come one: ‘His eyes were almost terrible from their piercing crit, _
             
by a pair of extended eyebrows, black and nearly meeting, which, gggry nor a character nor a moral truth but a mood hth .3
when he frowned, the scowl of his eyes, as they rolled in their of e gensitive dreamer before Gothic b “d; e i e m°
orbits, were objects of affright.' Nothing very benign can be scenery Story and eherecters ere 0] "d i "Q?! '2 2 ct"'°5q“e
expected from such a face but the Gothic maiden is inevitabl ; ' ' eh '9 " "5 rat °" °f t“i5
drawn to it IIOHQUIQIQSS: The riddiriai ward df Edward I11, midi’: r zﬂﬁgez {:s“"c}§'" "Ec°':‘f5-,c""“°‘ "°"¢"°¢ ‘° "me R=¢¢""w'
_ q P . e nove s mysteries, its terrific illusions, its
:e"'h::°Qe::§°:ﬁ: t::gg1ge:eg'€g'r:§ :::eg:§tL$ ::ee§:::e::b:L?:e g; very errors must be attributed to a love of romance caught from
and inconvenient offspring. The legitimate master, Godfred Fitz- h ‘E hhhhhsiashic admhhation of Uo°LhH°'s ""'i'°11°d f°“"d'°ss'
Auberne. has been lost on one of Edward's military ventures and V %p:hhRaaAhcEhh5:hhhC hhh hihhhlh hf hhhh hhhhhhhhhhh hhhhh hhvh]'
the legal heir, Arthur Fitz-Auberne, has been taken by renegades h f 1 id ORES (see '34s) °‘5° became ' m‘J°' 5°"'°°
in Leepe‘e_e eeeley Tee eeeee of eeefree eeeeetine end Emma o nc ent and mood for ANCIENT RECORDS. Curties's Rosaline is a
ere e‘ee the ebeeeee ef Lee e1e|e eeeieeiea eeheeeee The fee; reanimation of Nrs. Radcliffe's nervous heroine, Adeline. His
9 lurkin bri ands s titi t i i
young characters fall dutifully in love while imprisoned by Leo- gngigng r.¢§rds ;r hhihhn i hhh hhhhhh S. h hhhhhh hhhhhhhhh hhh
e e n act rom the Radcliffean roman noir.
mashha:;::th=:hh::th3i:ih'drhzzidhghihe himhzirzhhdihhhhhrihihg P,“ °t"°" ‘"""°"‘"'9 °""“°‘°"‘- "‘* ""‘°“'° "'"'°"- "W
Leopold's subversions and strategies for keeping them locked up hhhhe’ the gross abuser of '°me"' G°"de"°r' ‘"6 the ‘°"9"b5e"t
in various sections of the Castle. These predicaments and their ¥:uhg heh°’,c°"st'"ti"' are take" f'°“ "'5' R'dc]iff9'5 casts-
accﬂlvanying horrors occupy much of the novel. Ethelwina's im- fetehehgini 3 sihgular fu"cti°" t"'°“9h°"t the '°"'"°° is t° 9°"
prisonment allows for an exchange of messages with Arthur since he -h he e shoohs when cohfhonhed by terrors "hit" °'e"he‘“
their dungeon cells are adjacent. To save Arthur from Leopold's i 1 5¢"$e5- 1" the 59$! 50th1¢ Scene in the novel, the inquis-
heedeeen ehe eereee to eebeie to the e1‘]ein_e eeeee1 eeeeneeee et ve zosaline experiences a variation of the black veil episode
but the Gothic novelist provides for the couple's underground ‘ah. "E "YSTER‘ES oh UDOLPNO (se* '3‘9)' E"te'i"9 ° chamber
elopement from the Castle by means of the customary coincidences. C tr: hhe has been exp‘icht1y "r"°d "°t t° 9°’ she disc°'°'5 ‘
The flight requires Arthur and Ethelwina to make a subterranean ahwg 2 hhﬁveghhrrhhhhhhbhhhhthhh hhh hhhhhhh h hhhhhh hhhhhhhhhhh
walk through the Castle's pitchy underworld. Curties's descrip- R°se{1np dit thh.s -D h ? the Gothic ihveshigat°r' Thus’
tions of claustrophobic entrapment are better-than-average. As horrifih hﬁfi g-es’, are raise the 'yster‘°"s lid °f that
they qrope their way through the darkness. ‘it seemed as if they ‘Dell hthhtheh - no 2? so ihgings on the enhaptured f'i"t‘"9
were walking or gradually sinking to some other world, for the sk l t h hh y S h h hh hhh hhhhhhhh hhhhhhh hh hhhhh
passage, though it had no steps, was a continual descent, whilst .15 °,§:§u§§°°t:§§,Y:§: hhhlhhhihhh hhhhhhhhy hf hhh hhhhhhhh hhh
.the roof of the vault became every moment lower and lower.‘ A object that bed 0 r E h is S hsh -'9' "sh the hpph]‘hng
basic dynamic of high Gothic fiction, the vertical journey inward is nothing '°revet:::eh: egg‘e?:"::iE3;ve;":h:°X:le?n2'Q::§e'§
73

74 T!-E FIRST GOTHICS
chain of Gothic_ panics of this sort. The historical veneer--the I b,.°ﬂ,e,.is piece of m,,,.is°m,e"t_ m,.“,. inedhtﬂy obnges by
i>@"i°4 *5 "'9 "*9" °f 5""-Y V1 4"“ M5 5"'°"9"'in¢d ‘1"°¢“» """ . conducting Sigislilorn to the great hall of torture, a place
94"" °f A"-1°""i5 '5“ t° ¢""t¢ °"' 3"" °f “"9” ‘"4 "e“"' cralmled with the apparatus of pain. The mutilated products of
choly. But the tale's most dramatic entity is the Abbey itself, "om rt M di 1
d r then
an ancient building with an intelligence, memory, and will of its to D: ,§e”:§,gQ:§ 22:92: °,‘:d:{b§:§'{{t°§§ ::,,§:§,° ,1, rigif‘
°""- but drugged and smeared with blood, not dead). lihen any brave
‘ G "ll ll t Pl T I f 1 d Si l
0- Curves. T-~1- "<lr=1=r- "ii WC"-T°"ER= °*- "ii $°"$ °F """°"*- ages Chire:'§h§'n§§:§t§§e'a'i3a§s §ee:s“t:"§nr:"3§§n itselfgtomgff
M “lsrmlul RMMCL 5"¢"tf°"d 1 P- "°'b""-Y- 18°"'18°5' fect the distraction of the villain from the ipediate victim or
Modern Reeditions: hone
t r il hi i th . and t to eed ith th t t
Gothic Type: Gothified history iterror mode) _ \ I ,§,c,§., ey,",s Qakgn §' {:§‘v,r ‘gal be:'2¢ fv I e ordure,
3l°9;:g"'l::\‘32d ':3;°':‘ig 2;:"63zé'Y* LE mm‘ momlout 4 pauses to pursue herf Meanwhile. iior:a':'s°virt::su:"da:ghte:f
 I ' I I I '
» Etheline, delivers Sigislllorn from the torture chadier. Events
lﬂll th f C d I ll I C Hit t
 $r"<>l>=*== new we or ni;   3 -»¢=  :..2l.:i*:::';."a':..:: 2...: 2:2"  at 8:.:i.,::::.:
°f the 5°“ f°""d'Me "' is ° the  f° :""°" "r as S (1314) against the forces of Edward ll, Imogen, Sigismorn, and
 C3221: ::"t:n:5 2:23 i2ﬂ°‘i§';:]:$:::'n"e';ge"§{é Adelbert win their struggle against Horcar. The Gothic plot and
Goﬁic imagination. T: quote Jgne Aug%en's Catherine liorland, the ggethmsioncal “plot are me" sﬂiced "M" Inge" is revealed to
ll Y‘ I" , -
novel is ‘all horrid,‘ and despite its forbidding length and the ' “sh euniﬁe av ,'§§§,§..;"§i:1:§§rr.S:§a°h:§sth:a:n‘§§::ar‘$ra:c2he
'"*I°§‘*¥ °* ‘"¢ ""='*'§- ‘"5 “*T¢"'T°“5“ '°‘ °°'°"'°° "Y ‘"° battlements without benefit of his derrick. immensely complicated
Gothic public. The two stories woven together are followed easily _ and fﬂgmeﬂngu “mg. 1-“E u"c"_-min renins an utter], Up“
*"°"9" °"¢° we ""4" Ms 1“"“°d t° Sm" ‘M "can the de' ' cal Gothic novel in its three-part plot pattern. lie have the agon
tails of the many subplots when these are needed to elucidate the ' or conﬂict precipitated by the dun, of the father; pathos or
"J" 5°tM¢ 5¢9"¢$- "'9 Sm"-Y “us nu‘ the t"""‘“5 °f the \ struggle of the ancestors presented in extravagantly Gothic
7""°"‘°55 b"°"'e"5 °f "'9 mu” °f un"°"'~ 5i9i$"°"" ‘M Ma‘ terms; and the anagnorisis or discovery and reconciliation which
bert, and the motherless Imogen whose naiie hinted to readers to _ "stores order and Mppiness_
remewer the heroine of Shakespeare‘s CYIBELINE. Imogen's chief '
tormentor, Uglio, is also modelled after the "°"=*'°"$ °‘°‘°" °‘ k 91. Curties, T.J. Horsley. ST. BOTOLPH'S PRTORY: oa, THE SABLE nhsk,
Shakespeare's tragicomedy. The historical backdrop is medieval ‘ A" HISTOMCM “mung London : D_"_ SM" for J_;_ Hughes
Scotland during the wars of Robert the Bruce against Edward II. 18o6_ ’
But the historic CYl:l'\ﬁ?;S age relegated to tge background to "ode", Reedinons: "Me
perm t the sons o na o occupy owers, ungeons, caverllia ",1 1» ; p r ,- 1 i, 1 ,-,- ,-
and ruined castles. The crudlling watchtower of Ulthona becomes a I :?°9,.§ph{'::‘ ;d°R§,,:,,§,, §§§'§,°5,§:,§,,§, Qgﬁlc QUEST,‘ pp.86,
sanctuary for the sons of the murdered earl, tortured to death by mo, 179, 335-335; 1'3,-r, (;ATii0L1cl$ll Ill GOTHIC FICTION, p.49;
%I'ClI'a Tlklllg f'¢fIl§Q "GTE Ild "I8" lfl "I8 ChlTl"Qd I‘il'|I\S Of Ul- 3‘ Lévy. LE 33%“ mmT"IouEm ANGLAIS. "uge" ‘O5. ‘O8. ‘O9, ‘I2’
thona Castle, the sons encounter a stranger and his daughter, 1 “M us 432 336' 520 569 6u_ _
Imogen, also fleeing from iiorcar and a traitorous laird called l' ' ' ' ' -
Etheldart of Dunbeth. goontgargted from each otha, t:el900<l1¢M"- ,-' Critical Synopsis: Although the novel is set late in the reign
acters-w ll be reun te a n vo ume ve. anw e, mogen ,~ _ r
“cues one of the busiest of Gothic heroines. she is forced into ofliiihiiirles I (1625 1649) and makes extensive use of C omnellian
f H b Ethel‘ rt "nub , po t cs, the character names sound less like Cavaliers and
8 ¢°"'¢'i't W "9; l"'¢'r 5"" -Yb"'"::°d r -Y M 1:6 5 U Ho Roundheads than like parts in an Elizabethan blood or revenge
vered "to S" isrraﬂsaﬂ revs I '¢= - I °9 Y 9 - ~ tragedy. The guilt-ridden father of the inin h r i R l
e ne ose ina,
"90"! in 5°"“¢ V"‘li"$ di5l:"£°5°:‘° :""'t5 °f :h°2"5°‘§"iﬁ; is the royalist defector, Odovico St. hubssping. Taking Roselma
gut llorcar is a unique case n‘ th c hgegezacyied sh" °Hff 1 and his household. he has withdrawn to St. Botolph's Priory on
vrlress of $l'°I=- an iIv'¢9"=° Q =¥'°"9 ° '" I ° i 5 l the Isle of wight. The Priory, like st. Aubuspine's political
and pr-ecipices, he has arranged to have his vigtimsdlowﬁtg '5" l fortunes, is in a state of terminal devastation and said to be
the <15“! K999 5-Y ‘"5 °f 3 smciﬂ d9""‘¢"- M 9“ f hi‘ { haunted by the victims of Henry VlIl's destruction of the
5¢'iP"°" °f ""5 "¢"‘"'$' i‘ """"'°‘¢d i" "'9 ‘°'* ° 5°‘ "C I -7 monasteries. St. Aubuspine seems to harbor some dark secret and
2:d?l°t"{.-‘ €°"_:"h:" '1": "ct" ";"“‘95 'tuF°'$";¢55 st§°”'h e T "i‘~ -,_.'_ is once seen during a storm to be muttering over the death of a
n s a on y access 0 he cas e ve was y a uge  f n C H tn t M] B] _ At the h i M
crane affixed to the magazine of pullies, at the end of which was V  _ 0: ti: ava ter. he Counk o pho De andemonde e 9
teqie ed t i t th h
fastened a small latticed seat, in which the adventurous aerial ' V, . ‘,4 soon ,,,Z,;,§ §,.,§"{I§°.e tL'3:?§ry.$r§:§e :‘:!'C°l.£StIl:Q$stg;:
,traveller was lowered.‘ One ‘aerial traveller‘ is Sigismorn who _, 1 up the better portion of two you-es of the ﬁn vol.’ ,.o”nce_
"I5 W" "° 5"“! '°°“"9 7°" M5 f'm‘9"'5 "“"“"9" ‘M M5  The Gothic promise of the subtitle, the sable mask that conceals
‘ - . ‘ - .
1
F
' TIE FIRST GOTHICS 75

76 TPE FIRST GOTHICS Tlf FIRST GOTHICS 77
a ‘secret unknown,‘ is withheld until very late in the work when in the potential of the genre for probing moral evil and psy-
a melodramatic unveiling of true daughters and true fathers must chological dread. Nithout discarding sensationalism, Curties
occur along with the sorting out of genealogical confusions. Hith shows such an interest in his portrayal of evil in this novel.
St. Aubuspine's approval, Roselma is forced to wed the derelict Like Lewis's Ambrosio, Curties's malicious monk is a study of
stranger who turns out to be the libidinous Count Adolphe De progressive depravity fostered by Satanic will and pride. The
Rochemonde, not dead after all. He has switched sides in the Monk of Udolpho (finally disclosed to be Sanguedoni at the end)
civil war and has been despatched by Cromwell to ferret out St. is ‘like nothing earthly. . . bold in guilt, triumphant in the
Aubuspine in his island retreat. St. Aubuspine apparently hopes success of his dark projects, cruel, bloodthirsty, insidious,
to purchase his safety by using his daughter. The central Gothic remorseless and deceitful, formed to delude, and self-trained
scene of the novel occurs during the coercive wedding which is l from boyhood to manhood in eve?y vice. Hypocrisy was in him
triply forestalled by an incredible series of events. After a ' personified.‘ The villains o the American Gothic tradition,
party of Ironsides lands with a warrant for St. Aubuspine's ar- Carwin in Brockden Brown's NIELAND (1798), Hawthorne's Dr.
rest, he hastens to finish the ceremony. But just as the vows are Rappaccini (1846), and Melville's Claggart in BILLY BUDD (1891).
being spoken, a mighty voice freezes the guests in terror. A are all creatures of evil cast in the same mould, each one ‘able
colossal figure in black with face covered by a sable mask to apprehend the good, but powerless to be it.‘ Each of these
strides melodramatically to the altar of St. Botolph, then ges- Gothic villains engages in more than mere bodily assault for they
tures forcefully at a bundle of documents pulled from beneath his all seek to penetrate and possess the souls of their victims. The
robe. Nhen the sable mask is removed a volume or two later, the innocent target of the monk's wicked gambits is Hersilia de
countenance of the good Gondolpho De Rochemonde, the treacherous Placenza, the pure daughter of a dissolute father who has gambled
Adolpho's brother, is divulged. The documents he brings contain away his dukedom leaving her destitute except for the family
proof that he, not St. Aubuspine, is Roselma's true father. His home, Castello di Alberi. Hhen her father tries to poison him-
timely interruption of the wedding prevented incest since Roselma self, the family confessor, Father Udolpho, speeds up the process
was about to be forced to the marriage bed of her uncle. St. by pretending to administer an antidote while secretly giving the
Aubuspine's guilty secret was (he thought) the murder of Gon- dying Duke more poison. Hith the Duke eliminated, he insinuates
dolpho, but with the father's return from the dead in the person himself into Hersilia‘s lonely life, intending to gain total
of the sable mask, Roselma is disabused of her false father's control over her, but his scheme is temporarily stymied by
deceit. She now marries her true father's choice, the Marquis of , Lorenzo Val-Ambrosio, a consoling courtier and sympathetic pro-
Valmont. The novel is notable for its descriptions of storms and tector. To confuse and separate these young lovers, Father
monastic ruins, but perhaps more important for its donation of a Udolpho sets in motion his repulsive agent Sanguedoni, seemingly
Gothic type-scene--the appearance of the masked spectre of a professional tormentor and scoundrel of all scoundrels.
justice--which becomes a very useful bit of stagecraft. In Poe's Hersilia soon finds herself confined to a black carriage and
hands, for example, the masked spectre becomes the universal conveyed to Sanguedoni's castle, where all of the Gothic
agent of decay in “The Masque of the Red Death.‘ In Hawthorne's surprises await her. Confident now that his brutish power over
hands, the paternal figure of masked justice becomes a ghostly the maiden is secure from Lorenzo's interference, Father, Udolpho
champion in gray as the very spirit of liberty in ‘The Gray reveals his double existence as Sanguedoni when he attacks
Champion.‘ Nersilia in a drugged sleep. But a vigilant phantom named Eloise
now enters the chamber to bar the rape and send Hersilia scur-
2. Curties, T.J. Horsley. THE MONK OF UDOLPHO, A ROMANCE. London : rying toward the dungeon to answer the 'summons oﬂ Lorenzo's
D.N. Shury for J.F. Hughes, 1807. ‘ father while Sanguedoni follows her into the labyrinth in
Modern Reeditions: Arno Press, 1977, ed. Sister Mary Muriel vigorous pursuit. The chase scene meets all of the conditions of
Tarr. terror set forth by Halpole in his prefaces to THE CASTLE Of
Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (terror mode) OTRANTO (see 0466). Nith perilous conditions at their maximum for
Biographical and Research Data: Summers, GOTHIC QUEST, pp.29, the fleeing maiden, fate suddenly reverses itself according to
100, 333, 336-341, 30; Tarr, CATHOLICISM IN GOTHIC FICTION, the inexorable rules of the Gothic to turn distress into
pp.65, 66; Levy, LE ROMAN 'GOTHlOUE' ANGLAIS, pp.404, 405, salvation. The monkish henchmen on the chase with Sanguedoni
411, 415, 413, 435, 500, 519, throw off their robes to disclose the livery of Lorenzo's loyal
soldiery. Ensnared and exposed, Sanguedoni stabs himself before
Critical Synopsis: A beautiful orphan menaced by a fiend in he can be delivered over to the lnquisition's flames. For all of
holy orders continued to be a highly ain-clile formula for Gothic , its wildness and iwrellebility. Ciirtievs bold llleqierlse of the
success. By synthesizing the erotic criminality of Ambrosio in prime Gothics of his day demonstrated the capacity of the Gothic
ms wolik (see 0244) with the inexplicable ferocity of tiie death's novel for exploring internal es well as externel evil-
head monk, Schedoni, in THE ITALIAN (see I350), Curties carved
_out his carefully stolen Gothic masterpiece, THE nolix or UDOLPHO. ' 93- Curties. T--L Herslew THE RUINS OF THE ABBEY 0" F1Tl-'W"l"-
Hhile most Gothic writers strove to portray physical horror for "5" GLEANERI 9* 5"T5RTll""E"T F9“ THE FlR5-5l9E- Z (131°)=
sensational purposes, a few Gothicists began to take an interest 211-226. ~ - '

78 TIE FIRST GOTHICS i - TIE FIRST GOTHICS 79
wager" peegitions; gene calizing of the castle by its "nodding watch-towers‘ and Poe's
Gothic Type; Pure or high Gothic (terror mode) organic description of the ‘vacant eye-like windows‘ on the
gieerehhieel ehe heseereh gate: "eye, 5hGL;5h h0yEL Ih The facade of the House of Usher is not vast. A good Gothic writer
nggazlhgs, p,5g3_ must know how to biologize his or her buildings. The grotesque
. sentience of Gothic architecture, portals with labial conno-
Critical Synopsis: This periodical Gothic novella in a single tations, walls and hattlelnents with optical and oral qualities,
insgellheng of gggg horde bore the sigheture. -¢ur¢is.- ehe hes towers which bow to the guest in mock welcome, windows which can
been attributed to T.J. Horsley Curties by Robert 0. nayo. The $ee- "Re a "Re of llevelewent which can be traced hack to the
gale is e eeeley of extreme sqeuetiohs end goehge eeteetrehhes aliveness of Ualpole's first castle straight down through the
exgrehelegee by gurties from his eh" hiegierilee Gothic; and tradition. Rosalie's main Gothic experience in Del Vechii's
reduced for an hour's reading. Magazine Gothicism naturally ' ' underground is a horrific encounter with the odious monk, Father
required a brisker handling of horrors and terrors. it also paved Ellllls ""° 9TV9$ "9" I" l¢¢°""t °T "T5 OT"99l"9 ""4 'iPl"9 07 I
the way for the rapid ascendancy of the Gothic novel's iwportant forwler inmate, viletta. in reaction to the gentler terrors of
literary descendant, the short tale of terror, as found in abund- hrs- Radcliffe. sexual asoression was heceeins an acceotahle node
angg in gLA¢gug0p~5 355511"; ehe e1§eehere_ gespjte his peheheht of Gothicism even with women writers. Although Rosalie is never
for huge Qoghigg. curties hes epperehtly hell ebie g0 eejuet to actually violated while imprisoned at Del Vechii, she constantly
sgengergs of brevity in his perleqieel 5°gh1e_ The hie; ehheers has to endure the inminent threat of rape preceded by torture.
tq he en 35319;‘ of gurgles-5 oh" pg“; gp ugoLpHo (see 9°93) end Her most horrifying experience cones when she makes a chance
Anclgnt pgggppg; cg, Tug A3351 9; 51_ Q5311“; (see go3g)_ discovery of the fortress's hidden torture suite where Elzili is
waiting for her. Moving through a dim passageway, she cones up
94. Curtis, Julia Ann xelnole. SICILIAN HYSTERIES: OR, THE FORTRESS aoainst a sable curtain concealing an inner chamber. As the
95L v£¢u11_ Lehgon ; gene; ¢°1burh_ 1g13_ curtain is raised by some invisible hand, "A heavy bell tolled
wogerh Reegitiohs; For an eeehple of her wofk, see; -The and the black curtain being drawn aside, discovered a machine
Uhhhehh; er. 1he Kheeht of the 51°04 Red p]ume'm in Goyhlc thickly studded with small spikes, which had a number of wheels
TALES OF TERROR, Taplinger, 1972, ed. Peter Haining, and chains annexed to it.‘ Clearly, the Gothic virgin has arrived
pp,300-zz5, at the horror or horrors and can penetrate no further into the
Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (terror node) _ Gothic world. Ann of Swansea knew the expectations of her Gothic
giographicel ‘he peseereh gete; gumhere, ggfhlc 318L|0GRAp"y. readers and she did not delay in inverting Rosalie's fate and de-
pp.2-3; Levy, LE llolwl "GOTliIOUE" ANGLAIS, oo.4os, 425, 42a. liverins her free the castle.
Critical Synopsis: Close friend and possible mistress of the ‘ 95- c"'Tl$- J"1ll 5"" K¢lhT¢- Th5 55ORET RVER95R$= OR. TRE ROCK OF
great tragedian, Edmund Kean, and sister of the actress, Sarah 9L°Tl°5"- "l"9'V!-PTQSS 7°? R-R- Reﬁll". 1815-
Siddons, Julia Ann Kellble Curtis authored fourteen highly Gothic ' lleilern Ree<iltlons= hone
romances under the pseudonym, Ann of Swansea. in his biographical } 5°T"l¢ T¥P¢= ROTQ 0' "T9" 9°T"l¢ (Te'P0' I069) -
remarks on her, Montague Summers describes the Gothic romancer as 11 5l°Q'lPhT¢lT 8"" ReSelFCh Oates hone
an eccentrically Gothic personality in her own right. She had en- H
gaged in bigamy, had witnessed the yellow fever epidemic in  ﬁrltlcal $ynonsis= Substitutino Scandanavia for Italy. the
Philadelphia in 1793, end heg ¢r¢;g;¢ e minor Seeneel by l '| novel is a revival of the themes and situations of Hrs. Radclif-
sygllmrlng poigqn gurirlg g 5gp-yi¢g in ﬂggmingter A|;be_y_ Her 3 fQ'S SICILINC RQTMCE (SQG I347). NIOUIQI‘ novel Of the 1790'S,
novels‘ are solid and artful imitations of the work of hrs. Rad- ., THE ROCK OF HODREC (see 0372). appears to be an additional source
cliff; egbelligheg high her own 9,151, geheuerrehehtik 3; for the conventional terrors. The novel bears Mrs. Curtis's
paraphernalia. Although usually preferring shadowy terror, she ‘h PS¢"¢0"!I. Rh" OT 5Vl"S¢I. i"¢ TS 4¢4l¢lt¢O I0 "T55 sllih Of the
occasionally introduced genuine supernatural happenings or T Theitre-R°¥il. OTOTY Ll"B-
voluptuous abominations into her scenes. SICILIAN HYSTERIES, her
second novel, duplicates many of the Gothic predicanents of Julia “ 95- O"'¥l$. J"Tli 5"" K¢Ihle- OE5RR1O RO$RL5A= OR. Thi OATH OF
de iiazzini, the heroine of A SICILIAII lloluulct (see 9347). in ‘ ’ VERBEARCE. A ROMANCE. Minerva-Press for A-K. hewhan. 1819-
maiden-centered or Radcliffean Gothic, the author is required to l l "Oder" ReeOlil0"S= hone
linger over the heroine's ecstatic anguish as she approaches the ' 5°thT¢ TYP¢= POPE "T hlﬂh 5°Thl¢ (h0PF0P IOOQ)
haunted castle where she is being taken involuntarily. when Ann iliosraphlcal and Research Data: Levy. LE ROMAN "G0lhl0il£"
of Swansea's Rosalie first views the spiked turrets of Fortress . RROLRT5. 90.409. 411. 414, 417, 425, 620.
del Vechii, she inmediately lapses into the regulation rhapsody, ,3
‘gazing on its mouldering walls and nodding watch-towers with :0 c'lTT¢3T 5¥"0P§lS= The Gothic hovel elltted S0"! Ye?! TOOO
sensations of horror. its dilapidated state struck the dreadful V’ 5O'TRR$ 9'9" T" ‘T5 Oelth l9°"l¢$- It IOOTO he OlTTl¢"Ti. hoi-
suspicion on her heart that she was brought there to suffer.‘ The -F ever. to naee a last outcry of the dyins Gothic quite as shrill
literary distance between this minor Gothic novelist's physi- . u R '5 CESRRIO R°5RL5R'5 Tl"! V°T""!$ °T '!‘¢"T1¢5§ 9°'¢- R"" °f
v

80 TI-E FIRST GOTHICS ; - T|'£ FIRST GUTHICS 81
Swansea set much of her Gothic work in Hales, but here, she chose ll"! $¢lf'¢¢"l-"OO l>OO|i$EllO". 5OO"9O 5l"Ol"O". "OP first l¢d""l"9
medieval Spai_n or a Spain fantastically conceived by the imagi- OlPO"l¢"¢¢$ O¢¢iIi‘ l" the liOiI$8llOlO Of the ilivoliii. I-oily 9eloI\O"O.
nation of the Gothic novelist. There are many reminders of the ‘Who ranked high along the nost amiable of the British veer-
raucous craft of Lewis's THE NONK (see 0244) throughout, although 95595-" ll" "O"'lOl>lllt¥" l"¢l"dO5 $"¢li "dbl" O5 tO"l'-\i'l"9
the author's reuse of the trappings of the monastic shocker is ‘,"l'"l§ $¢¢"9l'»l.Y- l>\lll.Ylii9 Servdiits. oi"! OPO'ii"9 liei’ "Ole to
much broader than a single book. If Lewis's presentation of the .YOi"'9 ION" ‘O TOOO her le$bian urges. All of Julia's travels
supernatural is brazen and brash, Ann of Swansea's flamboyant ""'°lI9l\ d ¢O"i'\ll>l \rOr‘lO are Sillilal’ ill liifiO- "hOOOteO" by the
sty]e is so c]°tted  gore  she c°u]d Q aistﬂen foy U"$CTUPll]O\l§ "T5. Ste cIliT, Jlllil 15 §hOCked t0 dl§COVel" thﬂt
Lewis himself. Temests, torture chadiers, inquisitorial trials 5"? is "O" l" "IO |iOOPl"9 Oi’ O Clever "Odell Of a brothel, a fact
in gloomy cells, cadaverous appearances of every description, grasped when she is loaned to the monastic staff of Santo Sebast-
religious violence, flights and pursuits too numerous to I iano for the monks‘ ‘relaxations.’ Gradually, Julia realizes the
document, slow entombment in the underground, and the entrances """"¢ °f the "°"ld ‘"4 she 315° OOOOFO5 ""9 "lot "OP POVei't.Y
and exits of a murdered woman's ghost (Seraphina) would describe l5 the lle"li¢iOO5 lIOr|< Of relatiVe$ Illo have ¢OO§Dii‘eO ¢O O9"!
the action of almost any page of the romance selected at random. "9" O" l"li¢""O"¢¢- "O5! O7 VOlO'iiB§ TOW‘ oi"! five Creell toward
A '|t‘p]icity of 910;; accwanies ; 'i]d hag“,-ii of whey mh- the disclosure that Julia is the natural daughter of Lord and
finaents and castle enclosures that are supposed to astound the LOO! UORIOFO. the i"¢e$luOu$ invalid She llad Oilﬁe bee" ¢OIllal‘liOll
reader without letup. whenever characters look downward, they to- "er oeh Parents had arranged to have her kidnaoned as a baby
behold graveworms triuqihing over the flesh of the fallen; when- to stop her inheritance. Niser at last, Julia exerts her claim
ever characters look upward, they see spectacles such as the and is now an heiress. It is possible that Cuthbertson had read
figure of the murdered Seraphina, "her transparent robes silver- and was HOV using ideas about how to get on in the world in the
ing in the moonbeams, her features pale and fixed, and her right Iarouis de Sade's success story. JuLIETTE= OR. THE FORTUNES OF
hand pointing to a deep gash on her bosom, from which the hiood VICE (1797). Sade's sexual Gothic is also philosophical fiction
app",-ea to gush ih h ¢|-iqchh ggreghe this is the rhgggriggl and a novel of education in its attack on the benevolent doc-
pitch that the novel maintains throughout its five volumes. trines of Rousseau and a oungent cartooning of Richardson's iron
Before dismissing Ann of Swansea's gigantic Gothic as Just anoth- - maidens. In the success fables of Sade's Juliette and Cuthbert-
er instance of the horror mode at its very worst, some attention $OIl'$ Julia. a young woman develops a practical set of values
should be paid to the spectral-sexual quality of the imagery. If based on an acceptance of the natural law of vice and selfish
looked at carefully, we have a very likely source for Edgar Allan huean aooetites- As a young nan. Macaulay read and re-read SANTO
Poe at his gruesome zenith in a tale such as "8erenice" (I835). 553*5Tl"l°- 0" "'9 ll“ PO99 Of M5 COW. lie OOiillll¢O all inven-
tory of the fainting fits occurring over the five volumes. Julia
7. Cuthbertson, Catherine. SANTO SEBASTIANO: OR, Tl-IE YOUNG 90 Clifford faints eleven times; Lady Oelamore and Lady Theodosia
PROTECTOR. London : George Robinson, 1306. four times each; others, a lesser nunber; even the men swooned.
Nodern Reeditions: None Lord Glenbrook and Lord Oelainore, twice each.
Gothic Type: Sentimental mid Oomestic Gothic ,
Biographical aid Research Data: Suders, GOTHIC OUEST, p.29. Q. Cuthbertson, Catherine. THE FOREST (I KINTALBANO. London :
George Robinson, 1810.
Critical Synopsis: In five volumes, each volume containing 1 Nodern Reeditions: None
more than 400 pages, SANTO SEBASTIANO must rank as a dinosaur a- * Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (terror mode, imitation of
mong the Gothics, certainly a plodding and convoluted tale of Nrs. Radcliffe's THE ITALIAN)
domestic distress and inheritance problems and a severe test for Biographical and Research Data: Suilmers, GOTHIC QUEST, pp.29,
even the most tolerant Gothic reader. Yet, the plot is silple. 368; Lévy, LE RONAN "GOTliIOUE" ANGLAIS, p.462.
The insufferable verbosity of the novel is largely the product of
the author's celebration and investigation of the passions, espe- Crllliill $.Y'iOP5i$= This lulti-tiilhelisional Gothic rollance in
cially the destructive Gothic passions, in every bizarre and 7°11" VOW!" l5 l"!e"<lOO. l" We liltllO"'$ IOFOS. tO be ‘ll little
perverse shape as they coagulate in the life of her heroine, tale of the Forest of Nontalbano." Its aim is ‘to portray virtue
Ju'|fa 9; c]{ff°|rd. sh; is the chiig of Qfschance. 1;“ i‘. in its fascinations, meriting its rewards--vice in its deform-
poverished by her father's death aid naively believing in the ‘"95. “Serving its Ouiiiﬂllleili-5-' The little tale bloats to
natural goodness of her fellow human beings. Two-thousand pages 1,689 pages in the 1810 edition and proves to be an enlargement
of emotional trial-and-error line her path toward maturity and a Of W'$- RoO¢llffe'$ Tlii lllllllli 09. THE ¢°'lFE$$l0lW- OF Tlii
slowly-acquired cynicism about so-called virtue in any form. Nhat BUCK PENITENTS (see I350). By lO"9"'O"l"9 O" Oli"¢lO.V lO"9 NO!-
we have is a familiar type of eighteenth-century Bildungsroman, Outhbertson weakened its suspense. but her novel really exists
or hove] of e¢|u¢;gi9h, g higgory of gm fo|-"him of a young 1;- less for melodraatic tension than for its Gothic acoustics. The
dy's character for success in the world, drawn with a Gothic pen. 5'-°".Y llO9i_ns in Naples in the late Seventeenth Century. The hero-
- Julia constantly misjudges the motives of her supposed benefac- llle. Angelina Oe Balermo, pauses to listen to the great bell of
tors in her quest for adulthood, name, and fortune. Befriended by the Convent of Santo Valentino sunoning her to'her doom as an

8; 1+: rmsr oornzcs
' THE FIRST GOTHICS
unwilling sister. ‘A loud and lengthened peal of the portal bell T
reverbenting ﬂung the muweﬂng roofs of the ancient c‘°is_ tion of fathers in Gothic fiction is to frustrate the marital
t d u it d tn u _ m ediﬂc to it happiness of their daughters and General Dela liarr acts the
ers an roc ng as seeme e me wo e s , I _ f _
very, foundations,‘ is the introductory sound effect. Under the I235 Segméated rm Mew"? "be" "nuns °" t'"'°"9" "'9 “P
I‘
cruel charge of Cardinal Gulielmo and his confederate, the Abbess Mgher gm zoggzreiagztghgttzgtns :°§g:,c:::‘::7v:::t':?:h"":°::
Dlinda, Angelina is menaced by the customary Gothic tra- vails, tinually produces trouble with his superiors Returning at last
some natural and others apparently supernatural. Radcliffean to Enghnd Mb", sees Ms buoyed Mew“ ﬂung in her up
Gothic heroines usually start their perilous journey from Venice, ’
Naples, or Palermo and Angelina does not deviate from this pre-
scribed route through the landscape of terror and toward her
internment within the Castle of Hontalbano in the Apennines.
Following at a judicious and ineffectual distance is the young
hero md rescuer-to-be, Frederico di Alviano, who will catch up
with his beloved when his presence is required for the resolution
of the plot. Her ushers are the ruffians, Salidaini and Scalatro
(cf. Hrs. Radcliffe's Spalatro) and her hostess at the Castle is
the sinister Lady Bertha who seems well-trained in the art of
tormenting maidens. She already has the suffering virgin, Zar-
ina, stashed away in a crypt for the villainous Lorenzago's pe-
culiar ausements. The putative villain, Count Hi- castro, is too
shadowy a figure to be truly terrifying and lurks on the edges of
the story without ever accowlishing anything truly wicked. Yet,
there are some excellent interior terror scenes and moments of
high fright for the exploratory Angelina, who somewhat belatedly
undertakes a search for her missing father. The climax is clumsy
and too drawn out, thus spoiling what had been an enjoyable if
somewhat languid Gothic in the leisurely Radcliffean manner.
99. Cuthbertson, Catherine. THE HIT AND THE CASTLE. London : Hurst,
Robinson, 1823; Edinburgh : Archibald Constable, 1823.
Hodern Reeditions: Hone
Gothic Type: Picaresque-Sentimental Fiction (a few Gothic
characters, episodes, and locations)
Biographical and Research Data: lion.e
Critical Synopsis: There are several other novelistic elements
other than the Gothic present in the romance,--picaresque travels
and exploits, satiric characterizations, and colloquial comedy
with gibes at Irish speech patterns and dialects. A study of
Cuthbertson's work shows that her Gothicism was always incidental
to other forms of popular fiction and that she wrote only one
romance that can be considered a pure Gothic, THE FOREST (F mill-
ALBAHO (see 0098). The hero, or anti-hero, of THE WT AND THE
CASTLE is the vociferous soldier, Albert Fauconberg, a revival of
the ancient stage type of the miles glorious or bra99art war-
rior. He descends from ‘an Irish family of the first class,‘ and
descends on London where he has comic encounters with Hr. Pun-
gent, a landlord, Hrs. Dolfuss, a shopkeeper, and the wily
lawyer, Seymour. As the four volumes churn on, Albert is posted
to Spain where something Gothic should certainly transpire. He is
stationed in the garrison of II ancient Moorish castle under the
colnand of General de la liarr, but prefers to take up quarters in
a nearby hut,--hence the title of the book. lihile poking about
. the castle's chadaers and corridors with the general's daughter,
Adeline, he realizes that he is in love with her. One major func-
sion of a hut at Rosindale Cottage. She has defied her father to
take up Albert's views and is now an invalid. As Albert ap-
proaches her hut, the miraculous recovery occurs: ‘Hope and joy
soon mantled the cheek of Adeline de la Harr with the roses of
health and reillumined the lustre of her beautiful eyes. She was
betrothed to the happy Albert.‘ From this sentimental climax as
well as previous events, it can be inferred that there is too
much of the spirit of Fielding, Sterne, and Rousseau in the body
02° this novel to allow it to be designated as predominantly
' th c.‘
Cuthbertson, Catherine. SIR ETHELBERT: DR, THE DISSOLUTION OF
THE IQHASTERIES, A RDHAHCE. London : Lonpan, Rees, Drme,
Brown, and Green, 1830.
Hodern Reeditions: Hone
' Gothic Type: Domestic fiction (counterfeit Gothified His-
tory) _
Biographical and Research Data: None
Critical Synopsis: The destruction of the monasteries
directed
by Thomas Cromwell during Henry Vlll's reign figures prominently
in the novel's subtitle but hardly at all in the narrative. Ac-
tion opens in 1516, several decades before Henry's divorce from
Catherine of Aragon which precipitated the seizure of monastic
properties. On the Eve of St. John the Baptist (June 24th), the
Helsh priest, Kenrick Blundel, rescues Lord St. Oswald from
drowning near the Priory of Dunraven. The relevance of the res-
cue to the rest of the story is tenuous, but it does provide a
melodramatic beginning for the tale of domestic distress. The
principals of the tale are the relatives of the rescued Lord St.
Dswald, his daughter, the Lady Adela de Handeville, his son-in-
law, the calculating De Rhone, and their spirited child, Mary de
lmdeville. The guile and selfishness of her father place Hary
in precarious circumstances. First, her mother is carried by
force to a convent by some nuns who intend to comel her do men-
ial labor for them. Disregarding the kidnapping of his wife, De
lbone iworts a mistress, Rosamund, who brings with her to the
fhily mansion her illegitimate daughter, Rhona, a cunning bully
fllf a girl who enjoys making Hary's life in the motherless nurs-
ﬂy as miserable as possible. Thusfar, the titular character,
Sir Ethelbert has failed to appear. In fact, Cuthbertson seems
drop the fake Elizabethanism almost entirely to write a tale
of child abuse and domestic adversity. Growing up under the
of her stepmother and stepsister, Hary de Handeville is
ly. liberated from the household by the gentleman, Al-
Fitzrivers. Because he is presented -as lowborn and a
Gothic readers knew imediately that his true nobil-
83

 i
84 Y TI-E FIRST GOTHICS Tl-E FIRST GOTHICS 85
ity of birth and high social stature would not remain in count retires to the Convent of St. Omer to write her memoirs. Hriting
for very long. Keeping to formula, the author manipulates the l"liie" the Dell "lilies ‘R058 iiatiiiidf Charlotte Dacre launched her
situation to bring about the downfall of the father, the release iitefify Cdfeef liith d hovel that was Gothic in form but serious
of the mother, the humiliation of Mary's despicable keepers, and ill tileIe- Ritil°"9il ilel‘ liilfii i'i°Yeii quietly illii Steiliiiiy tellilfii
the elevation of Algernon Fitzrivers to proper rank. By 180, as nainstrean Gothic. she remained at least oartly cohnitted to the
Bothicism was dying out, novels of domestic distress were being 5°liiii'liall ilroposition that fiction could be a forum for ideas.
offered under the guise of Gothic titles. Such is the case with Her interest in drawing characters to portray intellectual posi-
SIR ETHELBERT, a domestic novel masquerading as a Gothic. tions or to represent various social theories links her with the
I Jacobin novelists of 6odwin's group, Robert Bage, and Thomas
101. Dacre, Charlotte. CONFESSIONS if THE NUN if ST. (HER. London : ii°i¢l'0i‘t-
D.N. Shury for J.F. Hughes, 1805.
Hodern Reeditions: Arno Press, 1972, ed. Devendra P. Varma. 102- Dltfee clld"iette- l°i’i-(Wilt OR. THE mm. A RWRRCE OF THE
got)“; Type;5eng1mng;lg°gy,i¢(¢i¢;¢gi¢ glegengg) FIFTEENTH CENTURY. London : Longlan, Hurst, Rees, Orme,
Biographical and Research Data: Sumllers, Hontague. ‘Byron's 13°5-
‘Lovely Rosa," in essays IN PETTO. London = Fortune Press, "Oder" Reeditions= Fortune Press. 1927. ed- Hontasue Sunaersa
1928; Rpt. Freeport, NY : Books for Libraries, 1967. R"'l° "asst 197% 94- 5- "lite" K'li9llt-
Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (terror-horror modes)
Critical Synopsis: There is less Gothic content in 0acre's tiooraohical and Research Data: Scarborouoh. SUPERNATURAL IN
first novel than might be anticipated from the title. The con- m9ER'i 5'R5i-15" Ficlioli. PP-1°. 17. Z3. 33. 37. 33. 53. 154.
fession takes the form of posthumous papers, a uemoir by Cazire 251; Biriihedii. “L5 W TERROR. PD-123-123. 124; 5ulIllel'5.
de Arieni cowosed explicitly for the guidance of her wayward Golliic W557. 90- Z9. 84. Z34-Z36. Z39; Varlla. i59Tiiii3 Fl-"5-
son, Dorvil Lindorf. She has been involved with three very dif- DD-27. 153. 166. 193; Lev!» i-E RUM" '50Tl'iiQiiE" lliiil-U5.
ferent men over her lifetime and has finally entered the convent PD-420-422. 427. .423. 447. 538. 540-
as an act of expiation after the death in a duel of her original
mentor and guardian, St. Elmer. The other two men in her life cfitiedi 5¥l‘l°P$i$= "life 9eil\ii'lei.Y iiethiii tilall THE CORFE$$ION$
are the Byronic radical, Fribourg, and the philanthropic con- if THE NUN if ST. (HER (see I100). ZOFLO“ "fries the illiriflt
servative, Count Lindorf. Each represents an intellectual of Lewis's THE IQIK (see 0244) and transmitted its own influence
position which Cazire finds attractive and her sexual affairs til 5lleiie.Y'$ tire Gothic novels. ZASTROZZI (see I404) and ST.
with them stand for her passionate entanglement in two con- IRVYNE (see M05). The story centers on the lurid criminal
tradictory political codes. Fribourg's freethinking attitudes tafeel‘ Oi Vieterie lie Ulrelliidfli. a ieile fataie of eltraordinary
make him an exponent of open marriage and atheistic anarchism. ' liiiiiieiilless ailii Olle of the lost lnelnorable evil women of Gothic
Lindorf, on the other hand, advocates stability through tradi- literature- To sohe extent. she is a femininized version of Lew-
tional authority and believes in the hierarchy of the sexes and “'5 5°iii'$eiiill9 iielliio lllilfesio. for she is goaded by her own
classes as opposed to Rousseauistic theories of equality. .- iilitie$$ iiJ$t$ illt° a iiialleiie lﬂfeellellt liith I 5°" 07 satilil.
Cazire's ersatz father, st. Elmer, secretly tries to counsel her zofioya ‘"° '°°r' vi°‘°ria's brother. Leonardo. is nearly her
in these dilenlas by despatching moral caveats to her unger the twin in extravagant inorality. Paired with his brutal mistress,
curious alias, ‘Ariel,’ but Cazire's undisciplined emotional hasalena Strozzi. he shows Victoria the pleasures of vice. con-
nature soon causes a series of difficulties for herself and Pietill9 the ie$$°fl liitll tile 1°! t0 be attailiee ill Murder-
others. Carrying Fribourg's child, she takes residence with the Vittoria travels to Venice ostensibly to harry Berenla. but she
Lindorfs but is ejected by Lindorf's sister, Olivia, when the soon wearies of this (or any) legitimate relationship and plans
pregnancy becomes obvious. Quite unaccountably, Count Lindorf instead to seduce Beren1a's brother. Henriouez- The caaoaion of
now vanishes from the story just as Cazire's child (Dorvil rave noraally reserved for the hale nursuer in the Gothic novel
Lindorf, the recipient of the nun's confessions) is born in is cleverly deleoated by Charlotte eacre to her vicked beauty-
debtors jail. Having played father to Cazire, st. Elmer now Victoria is fearless. crafty. unpredictable. iron-willed. and
takes on the role of husband and lover. He sees to her release t°tlii.Y iieiiitdteii til liilateliel‘ Iletheiis afe ile¢e$$ill‘¥ t° Dfeeilfe
and establishes an enlightened household of his own. The new . "enrioue1- To reaove any and all obstacles to her lust. she
life is briefly tranquil until Fribourg reappears, temting $°ii¢it$ the aid of Henric|uez's devilish servant. l°n°.Ya-
Cazire to another sexual fall. The most painful confession is l°ti°.YI M5 lifeeiiy elltefeli Vi¢t°"id'$ iirellliife ll! ildtel'i-
the nun's disclosure to her son of her uncontrollable sexual allzing before her in one of her conculliseeilt falltasies arid
desire for Fribourg, a drive which caused the duel between suearino to serve her desires- After voisonino Berenza. lofloya
Fribourg and St. Elmer after her promiscuity was discovered. St. l"l‘l9e$ t0 have Victoria assassinate Henriquez's beloved,
Elmer dies fighting Fribourg and Fribourg conlits suicide when Lilla. in a truly shocking scene best described as a surrogate
' Cazire identifies him as her seducer. These remorsefulacts "llllli ltte¢il- Filliillle i-iii! llefie llii iillqiilfiieiie. ‘Vittoria. lie
drive her mad for several years, but she finally realizes that lonoer Iistress of her actions. nor desirino to he so. seized by
her life might be held up as a moral warning to her son, She her streaing tresses the fragile Lilla, and held her back. iiith

8‘ "5 ‘IRS’ °°""c5 ' ‘TIE rmsr cornrcs 8,
her poignard, she stabbed her in the bosom in the shoulder and
ill x ' ll u s Victoria °"°" "'°"9" "°"“ ”°"°“'- "‘°" °“°"°°"°¢ "@'- She disguises
other parts;_ the expiring L a san upon er nee . h If 1
pursued her blows. She covered her fair body with innumerable aﬁriitemgi :n"niE ???§ L" $2: c°""€'5f:°"$eh01d in order to foil
wounds, then dashed her headlong over thﬁiedge of theh:teep.' ‘ pressed with such ,°y§‘ty Ef:‘;gni m;3:':$$.t Urizno.‘ gm-
The murder's copu at ve magery s qu e n ca ve o nov- . a s o ac now e ge
el's style as a whole. As the forces of justice (the §?::g:‘]§a:§i:;‘ :;§°ae:::tZ5G5gg? ?€X":11¥ diverted by 0riano's
Inquisition) begin to collect, Victoria consigns her~ soul ‘ ruined'by Pau1iaa,s dissi at‘ G 5 9 0' 6 Setond time. Almost
utterly to the cunning Zofloya whose personality and appearance and S b P °"s' he c°""t is G931" given love
become increasingly diabolic. The end of Victoria and the ending ' te"der:g§°'f 7 tn‘ P'ti@"t 5lb'l¢11¢- "ef Pity. Tﬂve. Ind
f h 1 h Id be d it“ tn t 1 d th f s or the worthless Count render her a sort f f l f
o t e nove s ou compare w e spec acu ar ea 0- } ’ quality in ‘Ora, contrast ‘O the other passionot loo lo-
Ambrosio at the climax of THE MONK (see 0244). High on a preci a e y se
pice with lofloya at her side, Victoria pledges body and soul to E?:%§:ﬁ? fggls °f t?“ "19- At "QT 591$". Gebrielle Obtains from
the moor in return for deliverance from the persistent lnquis- ch1]d,en e pro: §° that he will Search f°' the" 4*$enoeare¢
ition. As she sneaks the words. Zofloya is transformed into the characte; :9:°s £2 i°“*» ‘"5 P'°Vl¢e for then. But the Count'§
Devil himself, ‘the sworn enemy of all created nature, by men Paris tn a ﬁibe mi "¢°P'b'e °f $"¢" 6 Iiision of atonement, 1n
called--SATAN!‘ Victoria now is granted her salvation from the Agnes‘ d :1 rt "e 'ccide"t'1‘Y °"c°“"t°'5 his 4l"9"¥e'.
fires of the Inquisition,--but in hideous fora, as Zofloya- incesi 1: E"9 °"° °f his sed“°ti°" 'tt°'9t5 ‘"4 "l"°V1¥ lvefts
~ fi 1 the n u of the wretched ' "9‘°"“- "‘° ‘"’¢"""¢ *¢‘¢e"te"¥ wees the can-
become-Satan grasped more rm y ec
Victoria--and with one Push he whirled her headlong down the ﬁggzvagagn ::§¢:§:::s ﬁst ::: fzggér ielixih who ‘has become a
fearful abyss.‘ Admired and imitated by the maJor Romantics, on e ga ows. Finally
Dacre's ZDFLDYA had both a heroine and a climax that attained S$::g:;?9f°§?'t :15 ¥'s$i°"5 h°'¢ b'°"9"t "ll t° l"fI"ll¢l¢e.
one of the ideal moods of absolute Gothic horror: the projection h,-self S $'5 § V 79 l"4 °ff$P'l"9 ‘Die eelth by $¢lbbi"9
of a universe under Satan's control and where evil was always a acre °'e's ' d"k °"""" "9°" the t'l9¢4¥ Of Se-
th ood duction. Some of the more serious usages of Gothic fiction may
stronger an g .
:€c:e3:;V§g iaeﬂgirzés saga of the passions. Unlike the rational
103. Dacre, Charlotte. ms ua:anus= nova. London =1. Cadell “mm S M9 with Century. the Gothic IIOVQI and its
°"9 it the ¢eeDer level to expose the natural
and H. Davies 1807.
Hodern Reeditions: Arno Press. 1974. ed. John Garrett. ' :l??:ger1:f E:n“e:::€:ae"c:d‘“dbt° '?'" i9l'"$¥ any Conolacent
Gothic Type: Sentimental Gothic (terror mode) prob," uncons i de 19 ° 9' Y "D el$"l"9 hull" Pl$$l0"5. 5!
Bi raphical and Research Data: Summers GOTHIC QUEST, , 9 C °“$ 5 '95 @"d 5! eXP°$ln9 the sadistic and
D 331. ' masochistic impulses that we seek to repr¢;5_-
Critical Synopsis: In THE LIBERTIHE, Dacre retreated from the 1°" D'S;$;esc";g{gtt*' T"E PA55l°"5- London : T. Cadell and u,
blatant supernaturalism of ZDFCDYA toéwrite what might beicalled , "°dern'Reedi£i°ns_ Arno Press 1974 ed S d K i ht R
Gothic novel of manners. he nov s a rag c c ron c e o g _ - v . - an ra n g - oth.
' _ Gothic Type. Sentimental Gothic (terror mode)
./ 3l09raohical and Research Data: Hone
misspent passions and emotional betrayals. The longstanding ex
ample of Richardson along with one of his finest French imita-
tors, Choderlos de Laclos (author of LES LIAISOHS DANGEREUSES).
is evident in the seduction theme and the psychological probing
of the characters. The cast is small, and the action intense and
intimate. Dacre's Gothic subject is the grotesque nature of hu-
man behavior when under the stress of darker emotions. The main
characters are: Gabrielle Hontmorency, a child of nature kept
apart from society by her father, an ardent follower of Rous-
seau's ideas; Count Angelo D'Albani, Gabrielle's seducer and a
reproduction of Richardson's ruthless erotic criminal, Robert
Lovelace, in CLARISSA; Agnes, the illegitimate daughter of
D'Albani and Gabrielle; Oriano, the jealous mistress of Count
D'Albani; Felix, the illegitimate son of D'Albani and Gabrielle.
The storyline is minimal in comparison with the circumlocutions
of the typical Gothic plot. The novel is constructed as a series
of tableaux depicting the suffering and fear of those enmeshed
by their own half-understood passions. Certain Gothic emotions
' are brought to bear in the tense and sordid character relation-
ships. Count D'Albani receives Gabrielle's continuous fidelity
°'"i¢el $ynovsis- The epistolary format of Dacr'e's mu
ggvegeoggerzgrenzuggests the model of Richardson The ‘passions’
found in thpo ‘en s a so reflect the polarizations of feeling
e otters of Robert Lovelace and Clarissa Marlowe,
Pinging from prurient desire to destroy the sexual partner to
izgelic forgiveness for such cruelty In her final work, Rosa
t lda had also rejected supernatural horror, rQp1Q¢ing its
ghee» effects with a psychological realism which drew its ef.
ects from the horrors of the unknown self By doing so, sh;
gave the Gothic novel an interior dimension wherein the new
ﬁh::::;e:f hﬂgnﬁzsdis the1darK. Psyﬁhological interior of human
.'nta] ‘con r he feast zobegins to become haunted mind as the
th..se]ves °ge::.: oth he thic evolves . The buried pgsgiong
recuur‘e to ‘n 1 it e Sveetres of Dacre s last Gothic. Hithout
‘or-.ti°ns SE" 5 g:$. walking portraits, or Satanic trans-
the the‘: sf e-gtiaﬁ leved a remarkable level of horror through
h've their d° : Feoression The character dispersions
own ar and fearful synmetry. At the outset, Count

T!£ FIRST GOTHICS -Ti-E FIRST GOTHICS 89
uiehar 15 happ|1y harried ta Jaiia; goaht gar1°gitz is eqaaiiy nowhere, menace the hero or heroine briefly, then vanish just as
happy with his wife, Amelia. Lurking on the periphery of this unaccountably into the maw of Dallas's chaotic fantasy. The en-
blissful circle are two free or detached characters, one ration- ¢heht'e$5» stflqllllhe. 5ahO9eh. the Cfhel. ahO $l' POi"¢i'OO.
al and good and the other passionate and evil. The good the h"l9ht °f 5l"ttO"¥. ehtef and elit frem the unintelligible
character is Baron Rozendorf, a benevolent deist who believes in nlot- in nid-story. Dallas interruots one nystifyino narrative
the perfect efficacy of reason. His adversary and the wrecker of to insert the inset nasoue. ‘Pleasure--an alleoory-' The lesend
the two marriages is the fierce-willed and vindicative Countess °f the K"l9ht °f TO"'$ Silply aborts when Sir E9'eﬁOht cruises
Apollonia Zulmer, a domestic reincarnation of l0FLOYA's (see the Devil's bridoe and finds the head of Daoobert. The second
0102) victoria de Loredani. As befits a Gothic novel, her evil leoend is addressed to all ‘novices in the nature of agony.‘ and
is far more effectual than Rozendorf's ineffectual benevolence. f°ll°'5 tht 'dV°"t"'¢5 °f 9° J9l"Vllle end the Dee"tlf"l "lOOI.
It is the passions that finally prevail and destroy the marital ' Felicia De Bellont. A fragment of a conversation with a monster
paradises. Hotivated by pride and anger, Apollonia directs her will indicate the incoherence of this marvellous tale in gener-
energies against Count Hiemar because he once made love to her el- At the PO'tal$ Of the telble Of the dead. 6 heihOD$ creature
before marrying Julia. To retaliate, she pretends friendship heMeO Dlalse Shuuts out at Felicia: "Babet! sbobs! I will
with Julia in order to arouse Julia's sexual passion for Count ""¢h'l$tle" he’ 45 YO" hive 4O"e D! he!‘ ht the cOhclu$iOn of
Darlowitz. Baron Rotzendorf fully comprehends Apollonia's this sueech. Dlaise. netanorphosed into Tinanes. crept into the
insidious scheming against the Hiemars, but is unable to com- house-' Dr take this bafflino outburst by Squire Fabio to Feli-
municate their peril or the process of corruption to them. tie °"'l"9 De J°l"Vllle'5 ¢OIhet With the tyrahti Gerahtev SO"
Symbolically, the voice of reason is helpless. Encouraged by °f RlPl'O5= "Dh! "Y deer leO¥. ¢'leO he- l he9 YO"? Pefeehi but
Apollonia, Julia gives in to her passion for Darlowitz, while I took you for the Devil. on account of your sword- Oh! I shall
Darlowitz betrays his wife, Amelia, to enjoy Julia. Both marital die--9'6! l°°k 7°’ !O"' h°ttle °f h"h9e'¥ Vatef- What a Shocking
paradises are now lost and a chain of disaster follows. Amelia place to be in at nisht!‘ ho natter where the reader turns. his
perishes of grief and shame, Darlowitz apologizes for his weak- conorehension is blocked by sone of the lost infernal prose of
ness by committing suicide, the formerly decent Count Hiemar the Gothic oeriod- in this inarticulate oddity of a book. we
turns coldhearted and scorns Julia, and Julia dies an orphan's see" t° heVe 'ee¢he¢ the 5Othl¢ "OVel It I POiht Of no return.
death as she wanders in a storm. In the psychological terror Dalla$'§ eDi9raph. taken from the witches in HACBETH, is the
generated by the novel's relationships, Dacre gave expression to sole clear utterance in the three volumes of THE KNIGHTS: ‘I'll
an important theme of Regency Gothic: the vulnerability of the do. I'll do. I'll do-' In all that follows. he doesn't. he does-
mind to its own repressed forces. h't. he OOe$D't-
s. Dallas, Robert charles. THE KNIGHTS: TALES ILLUSTRATIVE of THE " lO6- Dallas. Robert Charles. SIR FRhNOi$ DARRELL: OR. THE VORTEX.
HARVELLOUS. London : Longman, Hurst, Rees, and Orme, 1808. t°"4°" 1 t°"9"d". "Bret. Rees. ahh Dries 1810-
Hodern Reeditions: None ' "O4eT" ReeOltiOhs= "One
Gothic Type: Gothified history (pseudo-medieval romances) Gothic Type: Sentimental Gothic (terror mode) .
Biographical and Research Data: None 3lO9'dPhl¢al and Research Data: None
Critical Synopsis: The work consists of the two sagas, ‘The Cfltiedl $¥hOD5l$= The eehtral Gothic event of this
Knight of Tours‘ and ‘The Knights Errant' and compares nega- epistolary novel is the mysterious and unexplained stabbing of
tively against the far more successful pseudo-medieval Gothic ‘ the heFO. the 'efOFﬂeO ha" Of Pleliufe. 5l' Ffaheii Darrell. In
romance, THE ROCK OF HODREC (see 0372). Dallas's commotion of his letters which read more like moral treatises than polite
characters, inarticulate dialogue, and impenetrable style yield le$5e9e5 Of f'lehO$hlP. the eX-$OCialite and rake Darrell gives
a example of the Gothic romance at its very worst. After several r hl$ YOOOQ celpaniun. Hr. Vernon, some austere advice based on
attaapts to “aha some shat of sense hat of the tahgieq prose, his dissolute past. If Vernon wants to avoid corrupting him-
the bibliographer host admit defeat. Neither of the two legends '.,, self. he lust shun the 'vortea.' Darrell's fioure of soeech for
can be decoded even by the most vigilant reader. The period is i_V the $l"$ Of ﬁet'OP°litdh 5O¢let¥- heVl"9 JD$t barely e$¢ePeO
the  of the  crusade and the  Qf ‘|'°u|e§' ‘the _ "X thQ VO|'tQX himself, DQTl'Q]l "DI dQV°te§ his  t0 U18
amiable Egremont, the paragon of lovers and mirror of chivalry,- ;».; study of reliqious ouestions- Before he renounced the vortex.
is embarked on some type of quest which is never explained, or -f‘ however, he had been involved with Augusta Saville, a free-
if it is explained, certainly never communicated to the reader. thi"h°' Vh° "°" De¢°le5 De"ell'$ Oehetihq Pdfther in his
References to Saladin, Richard III, and the sieges of Antioch , theOlO9ical inquiries. Up to this point, the story lacks much
and Damascus locate the action, but have nothing to do with the ‘ Gothic eacitenent; hence. Dallas oerhaos chose to insert the
marvels of the story. The heroine, Hippolita, seems to be under W ePi$Ode Of the unKhOwh hahO Tel¢hl"9 O"t tO tteh Darrell YO?
threat by the monstrous Dagobert, son of the hag, Sybilla, but _ r reasons never quite made clear. The crime has a beneficial
- her gitaatiah 1a¢hg ah, y1§\b]e 11hg "it" the berg‘; gig- 5 1' effect, however, since the previously distant Augusta Saville
sion,--if indeed he has one. one characters appear out of it "Oh rushes to harry the dyino nan- Out when he recovers. she is

90 THE FIRST GOTHICS
glad to retract her religious skepticism and they become married BLACKVALLIY
lovers having already been intellectual cohorts in the weighty _
realm of religious philosophy. Confusion of intent mars the
novel. Although it contains several Gothic scenes and episodes
and uses the Gothic image of the maelstrom, these elements are
incongruous with the didactic and philosophic moods of the
book.
107. Davenport, Selina. AN ANGEL'S FORM AND A DEVIL'S HEART. London
: Minerva-Press for A.K. Newman, I818.
Modern Reeditions: None
Gothic Type: Domestic Gothic (terror mode)
Biographical and Research Data: None
Critical Synopsis: Uncertainties of theme, style, and char
acterization deface this faltering Gothic. Utilitarian liter-
ature was coming back into vogue even as the Gothic flame was
growing dim. In novels such as AN ANGEL'S FORM AND A DEVIL'S
HEART, the line between domestic fiction and horror fiction
grows blurred. As a result, the book's pictures of domestic vice
seem untruthful and its horror episodes are not coherently re-
lated to the rest of the plot. Consequently, the novel is an odd
crossbreed, half Gothic and half didactic in tone and condemning
those very passions which its characters indulge in so
enthusiastically. Female devil figures in fiction can be traced
back to Biondetta in Jacques Cazotte‘s LE DIABLE AMOUREUX
(I772). Matilda in THE MONK (see 0244) and Victoria Lorendani in
ZOFLOYA (see 0102) are other ancestors of the devil lady of !
Davenport's novel, the Marchioness of A. This character is an '
accomplished shape-shifter, can grow young or old at will, and
perform similar feats. She is often angelic in form, but always
devilish in temperament. The chief victim of the Marchioness's
guiles is young Edward, a wastrel but a wastrel with promise.
After many adventures with his amorou devil made even more .
fantastic by the erotic advances of 3 young woman named Clara,
Edward, who has no surname yet, finds his father and achieves
success as an artist in London. As he matureS and earns his
nane, the devil lady fades from the plot, finally killing her-
self after losing her hold on the young man. A host of subplots
further obscure the young man's involvement with his demonic
mother figure in this poorly made initiation story.
London : A.K. Newman, 1828.
Modern Reeditions: None
Gothic Type: Domestic Gothic (didactic elements) .vc___,
Biographical and Research Data: None
2'
Critical Synopsis- ltalianate villainy is such a common - ' I -
//w ya//n4rrr /@121/1: ﬁgzf
property of Gothic. novels after Mrs. Radcliffe‘s THE ITALIAN u , qt ' ' , ,
(see i350) that no tale of terror dared to offer itself to the (,;?'
public without at least one Venetian poisoner, Neapolitan seduc-  / I;  y
f lUﬁf » 172614;!-.
er, or Sicilian revenger. There was some tendency among the I 01'! (/¢( , ,
-later Gothic novelists to alter the gender of Italian evil. An (
example is Davenport's fatal lady, Hippolita, a Gothic i - '
'l‘ul.Lnh-d I1.-r l.F_ior_L$ Jan-' 100;
108. Davenport, Selina. ITALIAN VENGEANCE AND ENGLISH FOREBEARANCE.

.u¢4~,‘v ~‘_q‘_ -1
ITEYFIRST GOTHICS 91
novelist's reworking of the Hedea stereotype. Hippolita's ambi-
tious program of vengeance illustrates with Gothic trappings
that hell hath no greater fury than a woman scorned. Seduced,
then spurned by the rake, Lord Belgrave, Hippolita determines to
punish and destroy him by undermining his respectable marriage
to Evelina. Belgrave sought Hippolita for purely carnal motives;
now he has turned to Evelina to acquire a large dowry. As the
Italian Hippolita extends her vengeance, the English Evelina (no
connection with Fanny Burney's heroine except in name) continues
to forbear. The usual Gothic collision between vice and virtue
I seen in the maiden-villain relationship is reassigned to the two
women. 8y childstealing and threats of torture, Hippolita lures
Lord Belgrave into her Italian lair where he tries to retrieve
his kidnapped son. There, he is mutilated and murdered by Hippo-
lita's accomplices and his disfigured body returned to the
forbearing Evelina. interspersed with the gruesome tale of
Italian vengeance are two stories of marital felicity. Supposed-
ly, the two insets stand to emphasize_ English forbearance in
still other moral forms but their structural connection with the
Gothic story of Hippolita's revenge is decidedly weak. The first
of these happy marriages belongs to Harlan, the sensitive
companion to Evelina. The other moral example of marital happi-
ness belongs to the gentle Rose Deleval, Evelina's witty friend.
The disharmonious plotting of ITALIAN VENGEANCE AND ENGLISH
FOREBEARANCE shows the late Gothic approaching terminal exhaus-
tion. By the mid-1820's, Gothic fiction in maiden-centered and
villain-centered forms had lost nearly all of its infernal
vision as well as used up all available conventions of horror,
terror, and dread. The Gothic novel was dead, but its carcass
had not yet been removed from the literary landscape.
109. DE LA NARK AND CONSTANTIA: OR, ANCIENT HEROISH, A GOTHIC TALE.
London : Tegg and Castleman, I803.
Nodern Reeditions: None -
Gothic Type: Gothic chapbook
Biographical and Research Data: None
Critical Synopsis: The 36-page chapbook is 'Gothfc' only in
the sense that its time period is twelfth century England. Oth-
erwise, the work is a sentimental love story without
supernatural events and devoid of terror and horror. The two
introductory engravings are maudlin but not terrifying. The plot
is both slight and trite, but quite satisfying fare to a reader-
ship fond of sensibility. Left without father and mother, the
I young knight, Hubert De La Hark, becomes the military pupil of
the Earl of Shrewsbury and receives a martial education that
will fit him for deeds of “ancient heroism.“ But before he can
:- embark on a glorious military career, love intervenes when
Shrewsbury's lovely ward, Constantia, diverts Hubert's knightly
1. career. Knighthood should not be given without adventures and
es tests and Hubert, temporarily separated from Constantia has
-1
several. At the end of the novel, a great celebration for the
marriage of Hubert and Constantia is planned and is apparently
to take place on a small island in the River Nye. Enroute by
boat to their wedding, the craft capsizes and the bride drowns.

92 1;-5 H5151 5073155 . TIE FIRST GOTHICS
I
Crestfallen, "Hubert dies three days later. The novel's tearful mi" °f "'9 ¢i"5iVe iiasque, but is stymied. There is oiso 3
tone is heard in the concluding sentence: ‘The bodies were em- Dersetuted heroine directly on loan from the Gothic novel the
balmed and borne in solemn poimi to Tintern Abbey, where they Pei"? Prisoner, Paulina, who has been arrested by the [eno-
were both buried in the same grave.‘ Drove s ruffian mercenaries. As fear grips the city over the
whereabouts and activities of the Masque, Sorrow grips pwjgna
110. DELLINGBOROUGH CASTLE: OR, THE NYSTERIOUS RECLUSE. London ; iieoeilse her beloved Naximilian has vanished and appears to have
Ninerva-Press for Lane, Newman, 1806. ~ died in the endless war. Sexuall threatened and -
Nodern Reeditions: None rounded by brutal soldiers, Piulina has one frigzdtsiizhinszhe
Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (terror mode) ""5 °f the imiiie City. the Landgrave's daughter. The power
Biographical and Research Data: Summers, GOTHIC QUEST, p.86. liilliiedilasque intensifies until he holds a dominion of fear over
I a ‘I1 s in effect the city‘s ruler. By some elaborate polit-
Critical Synopsis: The romance appears to combine the common Ci """9V¢"$- tile Masque traps the Landgrave and brings him to
elements sought by readers of Radcliffean and Rochean Gothics. P"bii¢ "iii for war crimes. The trial develops into the f|°ve]ls
Roche's THE CHILIREN if THE ABBEY (see 0364) and CLERIDNT (see his Gothic scene since it enables De Ouincey to stage an unveil-
0365) furnish models for the castle setting and the character of i"9- Tile Masque unmasked is none other than Paulina's lost
the recluse. The anonymous Goth also extracted the sentimental ‘ "'"i"“ii"- Before his capture, the Landgrave had ordered his
tone from Charlotte Smith's ETHELINDE: OR, THE RECLUSE OF THE 9"I"¢$ 0" tile City walls to execute Paulina, but in obgying the
LAKE (see M22). The plot is the ordinary Gothic formula. The °"‘i"' "'9! Uiieii his daughter instead. iihen he learns the truth
orphaned heroine (Ada) is told by a mysterious voice to trace ""1 is f°\"'d Qlliitys the Land9rave's wickedness dissolves into a
the crimes of her ancestors and thus collie to her knowledge of 76181 spasm of remorse. lihile the war rages on outside Kloster-
self by going to Dellingborough Castle. As in so much Radclif- 'l¢il'$ veils. Maximilian and Paulina marry md see" to Minn",
fean fiction, the standard plot is of little intrinsic import- the Justice and security of the city. Although De Ouincey's 1.-
ance aid serves merely as a platform for the heroine's spell- 32:40:: Sale works against the intended climate of terror, his
, ‘ conv nt n
bound Gothic moments vival of Gothified lligﬂa):-y?°UliC motifs yielded a successful re-
111. De Ouincey, Thomas. KLOSTERHEIN: OR, THE NASOUE. London : T. ;
Cadell, 1832: Edinburgh : ililliam Blackwood, 1832. , .u2' °°"¢".Y. Ann. THE CASTLES (F \iOLFN(RTH AND IDNTEAGLE. London -
Nodern Reeditions: lioodbridge Press, 1982, ed. John Heeks. 3 iiooiliial. 1812. '
Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (terror mode, Gothified . Nodern Reeditions: None
history) Gothic Type Pure or high Gothic (terror mode)
Biographical and Research Data: Birkhead, TALE Of TERROR, Biographical and Research Data Summers, comm aliiuogggpnv
pp.l73-174; Snyder, Robert L. “KLOSTERHEIN: De Ouincey's D 269 '
Gothic Nasque,' RESEARCH STUDIES, 49 (1981): 129-142. C
ritical Synopsis The novel appears to be an imitation of
Critical Synopsis: Remembered ior his CONFESSIONS OF AN ks Radcliffe's first Gothic THE CASTLES
ENGLISH OPIUN EATER (1822), De Ouincey also wrote a novel of the IAYNE (see I346) The novel is described in 
Thirty Years‘ liar (1618-1648) which must be regarded as heavily "Bi-IOGRAPHY as ‘full of perturbed spirits and mysterious
Gothic. Throughout his literary life, De Ouincey maintained l°l\|K$
strong ties with the Gothic romance. ii: essay, ‘On Nurder as ooh t M T E
One of the Fine Arts‘ (1827) might have m e a chapter t t e n er y. n ii KNIGHT if THE GLEN AN IRI
any novel of unabashed horror. KLOSTERHEIN is a Gothified his- 5 “IWQF. 1815 S“ Runes’ London
tory of the wars of religion when the soldiery of the Lutheran Nodern Reeditions None
princes freely ravaged the Catholic cities along the Rhine. 50")"; Type Gothified history
Klosterheim (literally, cloister home or monastery) s an imag- lioqraohical and Research Data None
inary city groaning under the despotic occupation of a
Protestant Landgrave who is determined to crush the religious Critical Synopsis The work verges on the ooh; fidg
rights of the citizens. A sordid atmosphere of religious terror iii"-orioal novel with the surviving Gothic elements recedin
and persecution like that found in the monaster shockers of the into the background as scenic and atmospheric effects (Jog
period hangs sullenly over the story. The ‘masque’ of the title Traditional Gothic character survives. however, in the person of
refers to a mysterious being, half renegade and half chmion of "'9 “Sue tyrant The monster of the castle in this romance is
the people, who resides secretly in the city. The Masque makes "W "'15" notional hero. the Earl of Tyrone, whose character is
timely appearances, performing bold and occasionally supernat- litered to suit the requirements of Gothic villainy Tyrone is
ural deeds in behalf of the oppressed. He is also adept at '1” ‘"4 f"°' "'9 5iXt¢¢""l Cent"?! to the Fourteenth Century
' unmasking and liquidating traitors, spies, and other political '0" the sake of the tale's chivalrous values The perseeuteo
undesirables. The Landgrave conducts a manhunt to rid l(‘loster- "M9" 0" prototypical Gothic heroine has come of’ age in the
9}

94 TIE FIRST GOTHICS - TIE FIRST GOTHICS 95
figure of Adelais, daughter of the exiled uriei. 10'“ °¢ Llsy. by different hands. whiie touring the deserted wing of a haunted
and ward of the calculating Prince O'Nial. a to-conspirator in castle, the young hero comes upon the miniature of a loveiy lady
Tyrone's schemes of power. Adelais does some escaping and is gng in t ti ¢ i
s an y ec des to devote his life to finding her. The
locked up in fortresses on several oesasions. but she is no usurping proprietor of the castle, non Algonah, has other plans
weeping and fainting snecilen of fresile. virsinﬂl b¢euty- Her p ‘for the young man. The character of the villain is thrust upon
character is closer to the sort of heroine to be found in Sir the rea¢er in 3 singie suggestive sent," -Th .
0 ce: e Don s favorite
Halter Scott's fiction.--det¢FIi"¢4s $¢1f-8V!'¢- I"¢ 9'9" passion has always been to have an heir, for which purpose I be-
intelligent. The most fantastic character is Voltimorne Ade‘- lieve he would have sacrificed a hundred wives.‘ The tyrant of
ais's lover and Tyrone's nemesis. Because of his forest retreats the castle is, of course, Halpole's Manfred under a Spanish ali-
and contemplations and frequent ¢i$iPP¢l'l"¢¢$ 7'0" 5°¢*¢t¥» "Q as. In quest of the woman shown in the miniature the young man
is known as the Knight Of the 51¢"- The P1°t *5 °°“'e"ti°"" '"d ' encounters Baron Ardulph, Oon Algonah's skillful confederate. He
moves steadil toward three Gothic oals: the restitution of the
y g also finds the beautiful lady on a second excursion to the cas-
heroine's father to his title and estates; the 8XP0$"'B ind 'l"- tle's supposedly deserted wing. Althou h there i thi
g s no ng ex-
quishment of the villain, and the hereditary Peveiltin" thi‘ ‘:9 ceptional in the plotting, it is interesting to note that Poe
hero is much nobler than everyone thought. The scene is Cast e began his tale, ‘The Oval Portrait,‘ with the wounded herd db-
Rothglen in Connaught. Hith the help of Prince O Hial. the sessed by the miniature portrait of a young woman that he finds
tyrannical Tyrone has betrayed Adelais's father to the English upon gt,‘ in into t d
i y g a s range an ruined castle which Poe de-
and is about to enjoy his foul reward by tlkins hsr *0’ his ' is scribes directly in the idiom of the Gothic novelists as ‘one of
those piles of commingled gloom and grandeur which have so long
when the mysterious champion, the Knight of the Glen, rescues
and removes Adelais. Temporarily forestalled. T!T°"¢ Cltthﬁi uP frowned among the Apennines not less in fact than in the fancy
with her and installs her in a dungeon Celi e$Pe¢il11¥ P'¢Pﬂ'@¢ of Hrs. Radcliffe.‘
to break the spirits of reluctant maidens. He also tells her
(neiodranatically. of course) that "¢' "‘"" ‘ "'° " f°'f° " 115. ooh sancuo= on, THE MONK or hinhnnis, A SPANISH aownnct. London
ed unless she submits and he sends for 0 Priest to P¢'f°'" the : D.H. Shury for J.F. Hughes. 103.
wedding ceremon¥- But tne 7'*!' "Q ¢h°°5°5 is v°‘t"°'" i" Hodern Reeditions: Hone
disguise and the couple again e$¢lP¢. this ti"? t° cistie Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (horror mode, bluebook)
Ossary. seat of Clanvilll@n- This is tbs vlttern t"¢ '¢n="¢s' biographical and Research Data: Tarr, CATHOLICISH in GOTHIC
holds to throu hout: castle to castle dis uise to dis uise. FIC ION, p.37,
9 9
escape to escape. In one of her prisons, Adelais finds the manu-
script which holds the truth of her father's betrayal by Tyrone
and O'Hial. It is a handy document to have and is carefully
tucked away to be produced at the dénouement, at which timﬁa the
villainous Tyrone will be humiliated but not killed by war
Plantagenet, another historical character who changes centur es
for the sake of the romantic plot.!Revealed to be the os son
Critical Synopsis: Loosely indebted to the horror scenes and
vile characterizations of THE MONK (see I244), this two-volume
- Gothic bound between pale blue covers overflows with ‘anti-
Christian Spaniards,‘ lecherous nobleman dressed as friars,
sanguinary phantoms, infant poisonings, and very noisy subter-
ranean settings. The good characters are the cottagers, Don
of the Countess of Clanwilliam and named the Earl of Ulster, the Jaymos Pachelo, and his companion, Donna Theresa, and their
Knight 0f the 51¢" is "0" e §"*t¢P‘¢ ""§°@"4 *°' *“¢““ '"° “°' wards, Henry and Rosa, who have been exiled from Valentia. Their
exonerated father. Reviewing this plot. it 15 085! t° 4‘5°e'" exile and the poverty of Don Jaymos is the design'of his bro-
ghgg gs the Gothic novel was absorbed by the hi$t0"¢l\ '°"@"¢¢ ther, Diego, who wanted Theresa and the Pachelo estate for
it modified its machinery while retaining most of its earliest
i i himself and is now getting even. Don Jaymos has also been linked
traits, particularly the resolution of 9enel\°9i¢l1 Quest °"5 " to the intrigues of the Emperor Charles of Austria in his work
favor of a displaced young hero.
to undermine the Spanish monarchy by the scheming Diego. He
operates under the holy disguise of Father Juan, the Honk of
114. 00" ALG0NlN= UR» T"5 5°R¢5R555 °F "°"T1LL°- L°"4°" 1 7- “"'5t~ Hennares, a prelate like Lewis's Ambrosio admired for his sanc-
102; London : Barnard and Sultzer for Tegg and Castleman, eigy gn4 en¢°|e¢ “qt” specil] po.,,s_ The bluebookls episodes
1gg3_ Ire composed in an especially florid style that exceeds the
Hodern Reeditions: Hone garish melodrama of Honk Lewis by virtue of the bluebooker's
Gothic Type: Gothic chapbook (shilling shocker) -
ll advised attempt to duplicate Lewis's lurid prose. Here, f
Biographical and Research Data: watt, SHILLIHG snocxsas or g;,.,1, ,, the , 1 °'
, way n wh ch Don Jaymos describes the impover-
THE GOTHIC SCHOOL, pp.25, 28, 40, 45. ishment of his family; instead of "He are poor,‘ we get: ‘He
have experienced a fall from the vortex of prosperity into the
Criti¢I1 5¥"°P$15= c"l"¢t°"5t‘¢ °f t“¢ 5°th‘c °h'9b°°k' the 15355 of calamity.‘ All characters express themselves in this
title bears onl the flimsiest reference to the the events and Q]’h‘ntfne nanner throughout. even in that sectinn of the story
that‘ sends the brothers to Hexico. The plot isgbrotherly per-
sacution with infanticide, incest, and institutional depravity
.Y
. characters of the story. There are three variant versions of the
chapbook in the Sadleir-Black Gothic Collection, all seemingly

,6 nc rmsr can-ucs
' TIE FIRST GOTHICS 97
owd' th b k r nd. Hidway through the novel the Goth's
Sgveruzg teﬁmhafleg Ste“ strangely when he coaverts Ms stimulant to aesthetic pleasure than supernatural horror. Thus,
straightforward narrative into an episolary forinat. Violence and """-Y H°"'5 ‘re $peci"'*"5 °f R'd‘3““"" 5°tM¢ i" 5"°"t f°"'"
supernatural occurrences in letter form always evoke less thrill ‘M "9 new "9 as "Nels 7°’ p"°59°°t"° 5°tM¢ "'it¢"5 ""° MY
than when presented in directly dramatic ways. Thus, the at- zgiilfligﬁ vl§il’l.:t.i‘ngLbetween thﬁ higher tadcliffeag mode of the
, id t. M . an n ew s s au ac ous orrors, even of the
§m:edt':“:'d§';u:£“":""{hr2{] F::h'&tﬂ“'€"h;i:'$e in 3'18 M13; "Hours" have been singled out for bibliographical attention.
forms Hith its overloaded plot and cunbrous rhetoric, the These ‘re: '0" Game s“p°'5ﬂt‘°"' ("“"“" 6)? '“°'""-Y Ht!"
muebaok ends by collapsing into confusion. when the Honk of Owen, A Gothic Tale‘ (numbers 7-9); ‘On Objects of Terror‘ and
Henn r fronts Theresa with the demand ‘You must yield. Hontmorenci ("umber 15); 'n'°.Abb°-Y °f c'“"ed“e' ("“"‘be" 2°);
*\"°°" ' , "OntheS tii r -
Consent to become my wife, or death awaits you! an Olynpian . 28 29) “lg?” Etbg": ° "'9 "lqmdcds Of $¢0!1&ﬂd“ (numbers
d U‘ f_ - ; "_ r g r , A Gothic Tale (nuubers 45-47 in the I804
2:3‘? :?‘::t"i"9 '"te""°"°s t° keep her W“ m rem“ e 0 edition); The Spectre, A Legendary Tale‘ (number S9 in the 1804
9 ' edition). In explaining the Gothic's satisfaction of the human
116 Drake Nathan LHERARY HoURS_ (R. SKETCH“ CRITICAL need for inhuman things in the essay ‘On Gothic Superstition,"
, . , O 0
_ Drake notes the inpulse to react against the restraints of rea-
. : . Nit h ll 1798; L d .
:m:£gE'£:°“'_’°gRE::. E332?" J C e ' °" °" Sonigm: siéqgests 'tha:iGothicisn wa: the necessary counterforce
' , .. 1 a i GREAT “LE5 aga s oo muc sc p ne an contro . n quest oning the
 Iggibgﬁy 3:¢£lu:§?§s§§- 2Hem-y Fin- authorityfof reason, the mind ‘involuntarily acknowledges the
s a - I
owen,‘ in ms cam: AND ms rowan, Harner Paperback Library, 221°’ ° ‘°"“° °9¢['°¥-“ 5"" PM’ *5 *""$"@¥¢d by
tz Owen AGothic Tale which contains a medieval ruin a
I974, ed. Robert D. Spector. nndeﬂn ‘K i M H '
_ M th ' g n g ( enry Fitz-Owen) a capable villain who is
gtagmemcn3peGot‘ii?chp$os:n?:‘d‘3gse§essUs on Got C eory allied with Satan (Earl llalleran of Heullant). a beautiful
Bi rwmén and Research Data: Birkhud TMEOFKRRM. chatelaine l@|"lSOfI¢d by the villain's ruffians (Adeline de
pp°%2_37 up Town“ POPULAR "WEE I" ammo‘ . Nontfort). and assorted hags_and denioniac beings. llhile he was
pp:z1a-z§o, 2§5; Summers: GOTHIC QUEST, pp.47, 49-55, 241; aﬁertin “no hunt, kzienry i;1tz;(i>4en;s castle has been raided by
Levy, Lzaomu -eonuoue-meuus, pp.1e1. 233, 293. 291, f ‘"' ‘ ° "° °' ""° - §'"='=° ‘° "'"="" 5
_ ortress by a witch Fitz-Owen must endure a series of tests
gg4z5_%7, 649, Hac Andrew, GOTHIC TRADITION IN LITERATURE, before he can finally enter the chamer where Adeline lies in a
death sleep. Hhen he revives her with a kiss the ghostly setting
critic“ synopsis: Together with “kin and Barmuld (see I instantly dissolves and the lovers find themselves ‘seated on
0021), Dr. Nathan Drake (I766-1836) must be credited with ex-
pounding the aesthetic theory for producing pleasure in Gothic
terror. His collection of LITERARY I-NIURS was published in sever-
-‘$2.9
some mossy turf, and around them the sweet and tranquil scenery
of a sumer's moon-light night.‘ This miraculous deliverance
from the castle of death is not explained. "Hontmorenci' is
’ » perhaps artistically superior to all of the other ‘H or ‘ It
d o4 ; O S. S
gazgccgzsway :J""::‘:t°‘:t:°:?_itgzneﬁgiagggf anothigafictﬁga "-‘; yr stimulating danger of the victim struggling on the precipice or
and poetry. The individual ‘Hours’ vary from erudite essays on
Gothic theory and the psychology of the sublimely dreadful, to
Gothic tales and fragments demonstrating the application of
Drake!s aesthetic ideas, to several highly analytic treatises on
the inner dynamics of the Gothic. The most significant of these
- ..- ,_;-4 iaé
<:,
-4 Y: .
3
abyss has become a standard fatal predicament of the naturalized
thriller. The Gothic hero dangling helplessly over_ the void or
slipping downward at the pit's edge is the basis for prolonged
terror in Poe's ‘The Pit and the Pendulum‘ and Stephen King's
‘The Ledge.‘ The primary objects of terror in Drake's tale are a
.. _- precipice and a tree overhanging the chasm. Riding through a
::::;*::°::..1:. :2 .*:::¥..:":;‘1:: 2:.3‘::%"z.::iI*':2:..:2i   ~-M-~ M     mm.
_"°nt_°renci._ and is Dnkvs precise], argued defense of the bylthe sound of armor banging against distant cliffs, these met-
“sthetic nexus between terror and gnﬂficauon. Here. he first A a creverliaﬁratzons being punctuated by shrieks of agony.
identifies the Gothic pleasure principle. Natural objects of  "r" "9 '5 e "'°" "'6' "°""t'i" "°“t° t° ‘"'"“9"°- "IQ!
terror of the kind filling a Radcliffean landscape or lurking in
her dim castle crypts must be ‘appalling, yet delighting to the
1
come upon a mangled and expiring knight who seems to have been
hurled from a great height. Before he can tend to the knight's
_ ,, i 1 ”_ ii» wounds, Nontlnorenci is seized, lashed to a tree, then suspended
gﬁﬁs ggﬂsgtﬁr, ezﬁge etgﬁtnéegizgacgegzizsshzsgif too ii.‘ over a dark void. He can hear but cannot see his unknown captors
much indulgence in supernatural phenomena, terror degenerates "5 tn” D“-Y t"'e'5°1"es "it" "es °" the t""'5 "°°‘5- "9": the
mm horror and the fursouly “Mme “co.” ‘crew the pan“ narrative aborts,--a true cliffhanger. ‘The Abbey of Clunedale‘
fun, '_epu‘s"e_ may of the um." wows. in the first edition is a Radcliffean set piece. The terror rests entirely on the
of ma and the sixty ‘Hours‘ in the mm edition of 1so4 veri- __ §°"‘¢ t""°*P'"="§ °; ="99¢$“°" "'"¢'\ "H" "W1! builds to
' fy the critical premise that natural terror is a stronger _;=~’§f,; 9°“ "Q "'9 S" "1 5"bH".- Ed‘""d 5° c°""t°"l-V- 5"‘ °f
4~ '. ' '
Clifford, has returned from the wars and now makes nightly vis

Tl-E rmsr GOTHICS .1 - he ‘ms’ °°T"1¢5 99
its of eystertees hehehee to the meutderthe Abbey of cluhedete, 2 cause he is to Gothicism what Edmund Burke is to the whole phil-
prostrating himself in remorseful silence before the tomb of his 3 °5°9h¥ °f the Suhiime i" lrti it$ MOSt acute critical
father. Both his crimes and his character are kept in complete “A sp°ke5“°"'
obscurit b the narrator. His devotions are interru ted when he
,5 tetenytef e ehentee by the “Ste, of his deaf, me who  111. A DURSTON ensue: on, THE GHOST or ELEONORA, A some STORY.
persuades the guiltridden man to reveal his crime and seek for- ', L°"d°" 1 "°_P"h1i5he' Ihdieetedi 13°4-
giveness. The effectiveness of the story as a tale of terror "°de'" Reee't‘°"5= h°"e _
resides in the descriptions of the murky interior of the Abbey 7' G°thic TYpe= P“'e °' hi9h G°th‘e (te"°' "°4e)
of Clunedale; against this terrifying backdrop, the characters i Bi°9"9hiee1 "he Reseeheh Dita? 5""Ie'5i $°T"1€ 0UE$T. D-85;
are no more than vague props and the plot is extraneous. Drake's " GOTNXC BIBLIOGRAPHY» 9-3°11
critical essay, ‘On the Superstitions of the Highlands of Scot- 1“ '
land,‘ stresses the manipulation of Gothic, Celtic, and Ossianic § c"tiee] 5¥h°P5‘5= The "°'e1 is I C859 study Of I lost
material in the making of truly terrifying prose and poetry. The 3 6°thic' ""599" '"d “"‘°c°ted hY the hih‘i°9'ePhe'- Li$tee With-
Scottish ballad tradition and the somber odes of villian Col- -.7 °"‘ """“"‘e" hi’ "°""9"° 5"""'e"= i" "*5 e°T"1¢ WEST and A
lins, particularly his ‘Ode on the Popular Superstitions of the »f G°T"lc Bl8LI°GRePhY- the h°Ve1 'eP'e5e"t5 Just °"e Of Mi"!
Hiehiehes cehstde,ed es the Subject of Poetry. (1749). ere throwaway titles of the period which was literally "read to
classified as sources worthy of study in creating Gothic pieces‘ "°t “e"ti°"ed by 0°'°th¥ e‘ehe¥ i" he’ $"'Ve¥ Of the
ee]ehehe1y_ The odes of cetlihs are rich in Gothic feetihg and ' Minerva-Press or found in the catalogue of the Sadleir-Black
heteehere shoe heve I t,emh1ed' when et Tehered-S stroke. Its f Gothic Collection, the novel's very existence rests on the au-
eushihe bleed end eehthe cypress peered! hheh eeeh Itve hteht thority of Summers's citation. Based upon the Summers reference
with mortal accents spoke, and the wild blast upheaved the van- t° the '°'k- "e""ee Le‘! "e"tl°"$ Due5T°h ch5Tl5 ‘O his
ished sword!‘ -sir Egbert, A Gothic Tale“ is an excellent ¢"'°"°‘°9*"‘ "SW9 T" 1804» but does not Smify the loca-
example of tower or turret Gothic in which Gundolph's tower ti°" °f 5""i'i"9 editi°h5- sihee P"h1i$he'5 "ere "Ot Oiviyt
becomes the principal ‘object of terror.‘ The sinister tower has give" on the titpe peges °f b]"eh°°k5 ‘"4 ehOPbOOKS, we might
cteieed the ‘tees of severe] hhtehts erreht “hen they tried to speculate that this lost Gothic still exists somewhere and was
rescue the inmates, Conrad and Bertha. Conrad and Sir Egbert 9e'he9$ e P!e9ie"5" °f °"e °' 5e'e'e1 et h'$- Rl¢¢1lff9'5 "Ov-
have previously been brothers-in-arms in the Order of the Oak of . 915' But “"t“ e e°P¥ *5 ehhehed ehe eleﬁihees 9UR$T°N €A5TL€
Navarre. Hhen Conrad mysteriously vanishes, Egbert takes it as a '“st remei" e" ""'e'ified 5°thi¢ ‘he e h‘h‘i°9'ePhiee1 I¥$te'¥-
fraternal dut to find and free him from death or dan er. U on
mtvme in ’t,,e,e,,d' 5,, Egbert is tote by the mghﬂs Te,e‘,’e, . us. Enwuuo AND ALBINA: OR, some mes. London = .1. xer, 1ao1.
that one Robert de Heldon, Constable of Gundolph's Tower, is "°de'" Reedit'°"5= h°"e
suspected of drugging Conrad and Bertha and confining them in G°thic TYPe* 5°thie ehePh°°k
one of the tower's secret cells. Undertaking their rescue, Eg- Bi°9'e9hiee‘ ‘he Re$e"¢h Dete= h°"e
bert is assisted by Matilda, a woman hhoroughly acquainted with *
the tower's terrible contents. After s rviving a near premature critic‘! S7"°9si5= The ehePh°°k e9Pe°'5 t° teke its P1°t TFOM
burial within an airless vault, an almost fatal fall into a 25”“? §"°Lh:fs§:';°"c($§§ :§55%h|Efm:i"gR@  ogeéms
sli cistern and a heroic assa e throu h a wall of blue ' ° "' e 5 =. - '
fla::, Sir Eebert attains the inner sanctua where the couple is Auaakuil h Rohehci OF Foeheh Tlhhs (see '°e)- h°VeVe'i the
discovered in a narcotic sleep. The trance is broken when Sir s“bte"°"ee" e1°Pe"eht °f the e°"P‘e t° fheedel *5 $"¢h I $tOCk
Egbert, in the best Arthurian manner, unsheathes a mighty sword escape f'°" the castle ih e 5°thie hehehee thee "° illeeilte
which no other knight has been able to draw from the scabbard. s°“'c° ca" bf desi9"‘ted' 'G°thie Ti"e$' °f the ehePh°°h e°"e-
Conrad and Bertha are revived and released, de Heldon is exposed 5p°"d t° the F°'"e' Ti"e5' °f c"'tie5'5 '°leh¢e- the '@i9" Of
as a villain, and a double wedding celebrates the restoring of Ed'e'd 111- eeeih 5"99e$ti"9 c"'tie$'$ 5Othlfi¢¢ history is the
the tewer to hogle gwnership. All of the apparently supernatural "‘" "°de"
exper ences 0 ir bert are ex lained as the in enious illu-
sions of the warloca, de Ueldon? The final 'Hour'gto merit bib, 119. Eldridge, Rebecca. THE HIGHEST CASTLE AND THE LOHEST CAVE: OR,
liographical comment is the verse tale, ‘The Spectre.‘ Composed EvEhTs oh The DAYS which ARE 9°h5- L°"¢O" 1 GQOPQO B-
in ballad form in several hundred quatrains, it uses the popular “h'tteke" 1825-
motif of the demon lover and tells the story of a passionate "°de'" Reediti°"5* h°"e
encounter between a living woman and a dead man. Drake did not e°"“° T-VP" e°t""i¢4 "MOP! iwltieentll and terror
identify his immediate source as one of the poems interpolated '°de5)
into THE wont (see I244, ‘Alonzo the Brave and the Fair lmo- e*°9"P"*¢°‘ ""1 R°$""¢" °@t== "One
gine'), but the resemblance is obvious enough. Drake's place as
a theoretician of the Gothic no doubt exceeds his talent as a criticel SY"°P$‘5= h"tte" ‘h "*t°ti°h °f 5" Halter 5¢°tt'5
hreetittehe, of Gothic te1es_ But his work reeeths ihherteht he_ historical romances and exhibiting several direct parallels with
\

100 TI'E FIRST MTHICS '
rue FIRST cornzcs 101
Scott's THE HEART if MIDLOTHIAH (1818), the novel calls upon
sane hen“, scenic nnnnenues to create background and wnn_ the heroine. Rosalind must learn to distinguish Gothic delusions
sphere. But the book's Gothic elements are only one of several ""5 '99“"""¢°5 f"°"' the" ""1 ""595 "id "i9"¢i>¥ i"'i"9 ii"
techniques used to evoke a distant and superstitious past. The i"“9i"'“°" ""d¢' "°“°"*1 $"P9"Vl5i°"-
period is the late Fifteenth Centur when the values of chivalr .
were beginning to decline. The knight, Richard de St. Evremondf 121' Emu: mi mi "U1 Pmmsie A "WTHER" 7515- I-OM00 1 T-
weary of war and the enptiness of courtly life marries Matilda ‘“"‘i"5~ 1792-
de Montgomery and retires to what he hopes will be a life of "°d°"" R'*‘“ti°"5= "°"e
privacy. But troubles soon arise over Matilda's inheritance and 5°"‘i° T-Y9" Pi"? °" "'9" 5°"‘i¢ (""0" 004%)
are compounded when her brother, Jocelyn, is proposed as the M°9"‘°"'°°i 3'" R°5""'¢" 9"" 'i°"¢
rightful claimant to the estates. The previously benign Matilda '
nee enedneny sinks into e neneiens Metenness nnien 15 n Critical Synopsis: Two-volume, sentimental Gothic romance
inmediately recognized as a preparatory condition for the evil c°'*"""9 "'9 fa“ "i5t°"i"i "'9i°¢"l" °f 509'"! |-¢¢'5 Tiii RE-
actions of Gothic villainesses. Her bitterness is fanned int0 “S5 (‘*9 '2“) "it" ""3 dﬂiclte ¢"°ti°"$ °f drew ind Joy
netnee for ne, nnetnen by tne fen“! eenfessnn. Austin‘ "no is experienced by the heroines of Charlotte Smith, Ethelinde and
Mese" e Msinnenieee nen1e,nen_ Austin nee inseneu cane en Enmeline. Sole extant copy is in the Yale University Library.
believe that the St. Evremond lands are his by ancient right and , T” ﬁt" 9"°"i5° °f ti‘? $"bti‘i9 f°"@5iWi°V$ I C000" Ordeal
that he deserves to possess everything from the ‘highest castle‘ f°' the "”°‘“* i" 5°"‘i¢ f'c“°"- °" i"¢°5t"°"5 ""l""'il9¢ ﬁve"-
ee tne -quest eeve_- Fnen, Austin cones tne suggestion tn“ J°_ ed only at the last moment by supernatural intervention.
cel must die a notion e erl acc ted b Matilda. The lan
, g§,,,, ee,;n ,0, ,,,;%,, yin ,§§ niteny eentns of aycefern 122. English, John. THE easv FRIAR AND rue BLACK SPIRIT or THE uve.
beneath the St. Evremond Castle. However, since Matilda had once L°"d°" i m"¢'"'P"°55 f°" A-L iieiliiliis 131°-
been a caring mother, she backs away from the infanticide at the "°d°"" R*°‘““°"'5= "°"°
last minute in another of those curious character reversals fav- Sam‘: T-79°‘ 9"" °" M9" 5°"'i¢ idi¢l¢ti¢ ¢i¢'l9"i5)
ored by Gothic writers. In the matter of a few pages, Matilda 8i°9"‘9"i"i "iii R9$¢l"¢i\ Dltdi Lévy, LE ROW! "GOTHlQUE"
relents, exposes Austin, confers the title on Jocelyn, and I m5L“5- 99-430» 435» 519'
apparently dies of a relieved conscience. The weakness of the ~
novel's ending is offset by Eldridge's general successful fusion ’ cﬂﬂai 5Y"°P5i5= i" “Elma! 0*» "ii TiWi$FiWiATi0ii (1798)
of historical materials with Gothic settings and emotions. By by the ”°"‘“" G°"‘i¢ "°"¢“5i-» ci""i!$ 3"'0¢i"i¢" 3'0"". the
1825' tne sturdy exunnes of Sh, hue, Sen“ and Jnsenn Seen“. ventriloquist-villain, Carwin, who has systematically destroyed
author of oueenuoo watt (1808), had set new standards for Goth- ‘"¢ "island fnnily. beasts at one point. ‘Hy only crime was
ified history. Such trends are seen in Eldridge's adaptation of a c'"'i°s“7' 5"9“5" P"°“M-Y °°"i"¢'3 "'9 ¢!"¢"ii 50U\i¢ idea
the Gothic as a vehicle for expression of the historical theme. f°" M5 "‘n°i"'5 P¢¢"iil" "biloquial" powers from Brown's
supervoiced character who had applied his oral strengths indis-
20. Elson, Jane. RIMAMCE if THE CASTLE. London : Minerva-Press for ; c""‘""-9‘-Y f°' 5°“ 9°°d ""1 "ii "'55- "ii 5°tili¢ 7¢lt\I"e$ I
liilliam Lane. 1800. - ventriloquist outlaw who is accomplished at feats of identity
node,-n Rggdiﬂgngg wane ' ¢i""9¢ W1 Supernatural voice projection. Playing multiple
seen“: tyne: pure on Men Gntnee (terror node) \i roles--some of these angelic in the pious personage of the Grey
81°97-epmce] ad Research Beta: Levy. LE Rue“ waonuouin  Friar MU SUB dilb0l'|C ill the pQI'IllCl0l|S SVIQPG Of the BIGCR
Mauls. nn_e°e. ens. en. en, 4“. "6. ee5_ i Spirit of the lye--he warns one of his credulous victims about
his deceptive voice powers, telling her that ‘the principles of
Critical Synopsis: The novel is a Bildungsroman or novel of "'t""" 9"“°5°9"-V "9 ‘"‘°""' bi" t° '9'! 7°"; the lliiﬂiﬂlﬂiil Oi‘
education as well as a high quality Gothic derivative of Mrs. . "'t"" "1' "'°"¢f°"*- °fte" "°°"°"°d "i"¢"i°"$» 590050 T-"9!
Radcnffens RMANCE w THE FWEST (see '3“). Appaning GT2 IIOI U|ldQTSt00d." Intellectual DQl"VQl‘Sit_Y COUDIM1 ll"! D1285
colmllications beset the orphaned heroine, Rosalind, when she is ' ﬁr "' *"H9"t¢"'d 5"°9“¢‘5" '3" "'9 i"'9"'9"t$ °f "W Wile!
uprooted and unexpectedly transported to the Castle of Llange- . '°"t'“°q"‘5t 5°""d 3 9°“ “"1 7""! °"¢ °f 3"°¢|“i9" 3"0V"'5
wellein deep in the welsh countryside. Llangewellein Castle is ' "‘9""'""°° Is" of ¢'il- Histerieelly. the Personality of the
not euneut eennine eystenies end dangers. but ene newenls . Gothic villain was changing as it shifted away from the monastic
fears will all finally be allayed according to the conservative y - '°"5t°" ‘"4 H9"‘“5" b"'°" °f "'9 ""ii¢$t 5°"\i¢ loll" 8
patterns of Radcliffean Gothic. Elson made it clear in her . N‘ twisted superman of occult scientific knowledge such as victor
preface to the novel that she intended to Join terror with moral '»r=? 1" F"“"°"5t¢i" is" 7399) °" "'9 ¢9°Il"i6¢ ii°¢t0"$ 07 iiIlIti\0I'ne-
ne,.neSe_ -1-nenen it My nee “Sn,” e snneﬂen nninieney of ,_>‘.‘,_n Instead of a deadly eye, the new Gothic villain would use vocal
genius, nor abound in strokes of wit and humour, the excellence 13-‘.'f_, "i"$i°"5 0" Superior psychological knowledge of human weak-
.°f the mre] -ey atone for other deficiencies” The mre] is -nu IIQSSQS £0 Sllbdllé the Hill Of MS Vilitll. Finally, the llltelliiit
related to the Radcliffean theme of rational enlightenment ‘for "  nfge g:*'$:i':?"m"':iiJii :g:i4t$!l"tti0 i>€C0I8'II\ liien force
'- w c_ es asse s.
9 .
.‘ _
|

