’ Appendix One
GLOSSARV OF GOTHIC TERMS
ALGOLAGNIA: A distorted attitude toward sexuality whereby the nor-
mal act of love can only be enjoyed when it is preceded or accom-
panied by pain or the threat of pain. Masculine algolagnia usually
manifests itself in the Gothic by the motif of sadistic pursuit and
assault carried out ruthlessly by an all-powerful male. Female algo-
lagnia is expressed by the metaphoric pattern of the maiden's flight
through enclosed darkness together with the masochistic fear of being
caught and sexually victimized. Many of the violent sexual events and
brutal erotic crimes depicted in Gothic fiction have a strong algo-
lagnic content which contributes to the intensification of Gothic
pleasure. Both the villain and the maiden of high Gothic fiction are
often algolagnically motivated in thought and deed.
BLUEBODK GOTHIC: Low quality Gothic fiction denoted by its garish
blue coverings or wrappers. The Gothic bluebook is a primitive paper-
back or ur-pulp publication, cheaply manufactured, sometines garishly
illustrated, and meant to be thrown away after being "read to
pieces.‘ Unlike Gothic chapbooks which were normally assigned page
quotas by the publishers, bluebooks varied greatly in numbers of
pages and narrative quality. Also, unlike the chapbooks, bluebooks
F usually did not ‘stack’ their tales or append story riders. The read-
er of the bluebook received a single dose of Gothicism between the
blue covers. Almost all of the hundreds of bluebooks published during
the period are pirated abridgements of full-length Gothic novels.
- BURGVERLIESS GOTHIC: From the German, Burg=Castle; Verliess=
Dungeon. Term originally applied to Gothic fiction by Eino Railo in
THE HAUNTED CASTLE (1927) to designate a horrible place, typically
subterranean, “from which there was not the remotest possibility of
escape, a place without an exit." “No exit" Gothic permitted no sal-
vation for victims thus entrapped.
CHAPBOUK GOTHIC: Hhen the Gothic was cheaply marketed in short,
thirty-six-page form throughout the 1790's and early eighteen
- hundreds, it reached the mass audience by way of the chapbook, the
cheap predecessor of the Gothic bluebook. Frequently illustrated with
crude woodcuts or tawdry engravings and often containing fragments
stolen from the most horrendous scenes in the legitimate Gothics, the
typical chapbook was priced at under a shilling and was written to
fill a specified page quota seldom longer than the prescribed thirty-
six or seventy-two pages. Titles advertised nothing but calamity and
supernatural shock as in THE BLOODY HAND: OR, THE FATAL CUP, A TALE
A 4;:

434 ' GLOSSARY or GOTHIC TEIWS ‘ APPENDIX um: 435
OF HORROR (circa 1300) and THE MIDNIGHT GROAN: OR, THE SPECTRE OF THE in THE CASTLE or OTRANTO. THE RECE$$. T"E HONK. etc-
CHAPEL, INVOLVING AN EXPOSURE OF THE HORRIBLE SECRETS OF-THE NOCTUR- '
NAL ASSEMBLY; A GOTHIC ROMANCE (1800). Hell-known purveyors of this DOPPELGRNGER: From the German “double-goer." A second Self Or
most profitable Gothic by-product were the London publishers, T. and alternate identity, sometimes but not always, a physical twin. The
R. Hughes, Ludgate Street, Langley G Belch, High Street, and the i Doppelganger in demonic form can be a reciprocal or a lower, bestial
little house of horror, R. Harrild, Eastcheap. , self or a Mr. Hyde. Gothic Ooppelgangers often haunt and threaten the
rational psyche of the victim to whom they become attached. The mon-
EIRCULATING LIBRARV: At the end of the Eighteenth Century, novels Ii ster in Mary SP-elley‘§ FRANKENSTEIN is often viewed as a Doiinelsanser
of all sorts including the adored Gothics were made available for l of the irrational shadow lurking on the hero's darker side. The most
rental or sale by the numerous circulating libraries which flourished J extensive development of the theme in the Gothic novel is Hogg's PRI-
in London and the countryside with prominent libraries at such - VATE MEMOIRS AND CONFESSIONS OF A JUSTIFIED SINNER.
provincial centers of bookish fashion as Bath, Brighton, and Abing- ,
don. Patrons paid a subscription fee and made their selections ‘, FRENETlQUE= FPDM the FF8h¢h TOT 'fFi"ti¢»' 0' 'r@Vl"9-" I" fréhé'
th'°"9h the library Catalogues while the libraries themselves main- tique Gothic, the behavior of the characters is overtly 5'51?“ Yhlle
tained a continuous stock of Gothics from the Minerva-Press, J. Bell, ‘ the narrative abounds in unrestrained and violent supernatural inci-
and other established houses catering to the insatiable demand for dent. Irrational climaxes follow in rapid succession and no return to
the Gothic novel. In 1322, the annual first class subscription to the ‘ rationality '1" d°'“eSm felicity occurs at the s"d Bf the tale-
Minerva Public Library in Leadenhall Street cost five pounds and five \‘ . , 4 . H
shillings and entitled the reader to "twenty-four volumes in town, or W FRISSON: From the French, meaning "€hill1ng‘ or "shuddering. In
thirty-six in the country.‘ In Chapter Two of THE GOTHIC QUEST (pp. , many forms of the high Gothic, the effect of frisson is evoked by
60-I05), Montague Sunmers provides a detailed account of the opera- , some contact with an agency of the malign supernatural. The eminent
tion of the circulating libraries which dispensed so many Gothics to supernaturalist, H.P. Lovecraft, designated frisson as the source of
such an avid readership. Dorothy Blakey's chapter on "The Circulating "cosmic dread." Frisson wrenches the mind from a protective skepti-
Library" in THE MINERVA PRESS, 1790-1820 (pp.111-124) is an equally ‘ cism to the vulnerability that accompanies an awestruck belief in the
useful mine of information. The names and addresses of the principal , demonic and uncontrollable universe.
circulating libraries of the Gothic period are listed by Summers at ' ,
the rear of his GOTHIC BIBLIOGRAPHY (DD-619-620). 5 GOTHIC AESTHETIC: Defined as ecstasy in horror and pleasure arising
out of terror. Baudelaire's phrase, ‘esthetique du mal" or beauty _of
CRYPTAMNESIA: A process of repressive memory whereby the Gothic ' evil describes the paradox inherent in the horrid beauty Uhderlylhg
writer subconsciously introduces recollections of real sites of fear Gothic pleasure. The allurement of death, the adulation of decay, the
and alarm into the architectural fantasies of the tale. Places of ' desire to experience supernatural horror at firsthand, and the drive
real dread or anxiety are remembered untonsciously and rendered ‘ to elevate the rehulsive into the suhllme are the W539? C0mP0"e"t5 07
through the cryptic imagery of haunted castles and subterranean com- j l the Gothic aesthetic. The theory of the Pleishre de"'9d f'°m h°rr°r
partments. An exanple of cryptannesia may be found in Horace Hal- i and fear was first analyzed by Edmund Burke in his PHILOSOPHICAL EN-
pole's correspondence in a letter in which he reminisces about a re- QUIRV INTO THE ORIGINS OF OUR IDEAS OF THE SUBLINE AND BEAUTIFUL
turn to one of the colleges of the University of Cambridge (Trini- (1757). The Gothic generates its maximum P°i"t °f Dl@ﬂ51"9 6W9 "he"
ty) many years after the publication of THE CASTLE OF OTRANTO. Hal- “the mind is so entirely filled with its object that it cannot enter-
pole is suddenly struck by his own use in the first Gothic novel of a I tain any other, nor by consequence reason on that object lfhlch
buried architectural remembrance: "In entering one of the colleges, employs it.“ Out of such rational displacement comes the condition
which I had entirely forgotten, I found myself exactly in the court " conducive to the Gothic aesthetic since, according to Burkean theory,
of my castle. In fine, the idea of this college had remained in my "no passion so effectively robs the mind of all its powers of acting
head without my thinking of it and I had used it as the plan of my i and reasoning as fear." The best modern consideration of the opera-
Castle without being conscious of it myself." (Letter to Madame Du tion of the Gothic aesthetic is: Praz, Mario. THE ROMANTIC ABORT-
Deffand, January 27, 1775)
GOTHIC FRAGMENT: An unfinished Gothic novel, novella, or tale.
CRYRTOROMVI Literally. the Priﬁtlce "T 5EC'et "aml"9- "he" ipplléd l ‘. '0ccasionally, the fragmentation seems intentional on the part of the
to Gothic fiction, the term refers to the signs, symbols, and semiot- : author as in the case of Ann Letitia Aikin Barbauld's SIR BERTRAND: A
ic values indicated by the crypt in its various architectural forms | FRAGMENT (1792).
such as the enclosure, recess, niche, subterranean chamber or forest a l"_‘-'_'_“‘\ ,
pit. Cryptonomy is the systematic analysis of the symbolic signifi- 1 GOTHIC NOVEL) Superficially» B tile °f te"°' °' ."°"°T "It" _the
cance of the crypt to the theme, structure, and atmosphere of a spe- action restricted or enclosed by a haunted and partially ruined
cific Gothic work. For this analytic usage of the term, see: Hogle, building. In its earliest stages, the building was a Gothic castle or
Jerrold E. "The Restless Labyrinth: Cryptonomy in the Gothic Novel,“ ‘ abbey. In the high Gothic novel. bowerful Superhuman forces. either
ARIZONA QUARTERLY, 36 (1980): 330-358, which considers the cultural actual or imagined, control the human world and disruht "§t"'al la"~
and psychological symbolism suggested by diminishing cryptic spaces Characters are extravagantly virtuous or extravagantly wicked. Moon-
T

436 ctossnnv or corurc rcnws . APPENDIX "NE 437
less nights, sunless days and subterranean shocks predominate. The inpact of a falling helmet, by being hurled from a great height,
period and place of the action are indefinitely remote,-isolated, and or by being buried alive when walls collapse all place Gothic
desolate. Evil seems stronger than good. Traditionally, the Gothic characters in “extraordihﬂry P05ltl0"§-" 1" ChﬂTle$ Brhﬁkdeh
novel has been defined by enumerating certain formal characteristics 5r0Wh'5 Amerlﬁﬂh Gethlt "°Vel, HIELANDI OR, THE lRAN5F9R"ATI0N
which must be present to render a given work "Gothic." But recently, (1798), the elder Hieland occupies an "extraordinary position"
definition by content has been challenged by more intrinsic defini- when he dies by spontaneous combustion.
tions based on the intent or the psychodynamic repercussions of a , 6. ABEYANCE OF RATIONALITY. ParticularlY l" G°thlC "0V@l5 EX-
given Gothic work. Therefore, the best working definition of the nloitihq religious or Pﬁlltlﬁﬂl terror. there must be an over-
Gothic novel should combine the two approaches. To be called Gothic, riding sense of rational helplessness or a feeling of no defense
a novel must contain some of the apparatus of horror in some form and against dark p0wer5- Ratlﬂhﬂl $eC"Flt¥ ihd filth l" the he"efl-
must create and sustain an atmosphere of terrible dread. The Gothic ” CehCe Of SOCidl iﬂititutions are subverted by an overwhelming
novel possesses both definite technical properties deriving from the Seﬂie Of Ceimiﬁ dread-
first Gothic novel, Halpole's CASTLE OF OTRANTO (1764), and unique 7- P035lBLE VICTORY OF EVlL- "0 Gvthle hevel Ci" terrify Or
psychological qualities as well which set Gothic fantasy apart from horrify its readers unless they are made to feel the possibility
other forms of fantasy or grotesque literature. In its most effective or better yet the probability that demons are in control of the
state, the Gothic novel is a violently destructive or sadomasochistic World ihd the Self ahd that 9Vll l5 9°l"§ t° defeat 9°°d- Al-
fantasy of the multiple self in which various hypothetical personal- thouqh the vict°ry °t 9Vll "eed "°t ﬂﬁtually °¢¢"' as it ¢°e5 at
ities or repressed and unwanted identities are released into an the terminus of Lewis's THE MONK. the ippﬂlllhq P'°5PeCt thﬂt lt
architectural dream collage where anything can happen and usually might triunph l5 integral t0 the ﬂtmesphere Of hlgh terr°T-
does. Under such nightmare conditions, the force of evil is both ex- 8. SUPERNATURAL GADGETRY, CONTRAPTIONS, MACHINERY, AND DEMONIC
ceptional and occasionally heroic. All identities are in abeyance. APPLll"CE5- The high 9othi¢'$ lexicon of equipment is lar9e- Some
Escape from the Gothic nightmare or redemption from the fallen world FeDFe5eht8tiVe eXBm0le$ 0t Fudlmehtﬂry Gﬂthlc hrﬂps 3'91 V°Cil
is purely providential and coincidental. The objective of the Satanic Bhd mehlle P0TtTilt5; Veiled §t3t"e5 Come t0 lite; ihlmated 5kel-
hero is the pursuit and Seizure of the maiden preferably in an ~ etons; doors, gates, portals, hatchways, and other means of
underground of no return; the objective of the maiden is escape from e9re55 Which Opeh 0' C1059 lhdepehdehtly ihd lh0PP0YtU"ely;
the haunted building, i.e., deliverance from the nightmare. The nine secret messages or manuscripts delivered by spectres; forbidden
most important formal characteristics and imperative motifs of the chambers or sealed compartments; and casket lids seen in the act
Gothic novel are: of rising. In mature forms of the Gothic, this apparatus can sym-
bolize uncontrollable psychic forces breaking loose and asserting
1. CLAUSTROPHOBIC CONTAINMENT. All of the characters must feel themselves.
enclosed by buildings, by compartne ts within those buildingg, 9. "A CONSTANT VICISSITUDE OF INTERESTING PASSIONS." Phrase
and by compartments within compartmedts such as coffins and taken from Nalpole's Preface to the First Edition of THE CASTLE
cells. Edgar Allan Poe's phrase "a close circumscription of OF 0TRANTU- Aﬁﬂte em0tl°"5i ma"! Of these 5eXuBl Bhﬁ P5y¢h°Pith-
space,’ is the first law of Gothic motion. ic, must drive the characters to extremes -of behavior in the
Z. SUBTERRANEAN PURSUIT. The most frequent pattern of action in Gothic ﬂ0v9l- Pﬂwerful feellhgi are "Qt limited to the humﬁh
Gothic fiction is the stalking of an angelic heroine by a Satanic i ChBTﬂCteT5, but C5" m°tlVat@ the demehlﬁ and Shectrﬂl PeF$0"ﬂl-
villain by night and typically through a "long labyrinth of E ities of the Gothic novel as well. Traditionally, the victimized
darkness." heroine expresses her excessive sensibilities through weeping,
3. SUPERNATURAL ENCRDACHMENT. Unless a Gothic uses only natural fainting, and hysterical palpitﬂtie"§- Bvthie villains may Seem
means of terror, supernatural figures enter the lives of the cold and remorseless, but are actually creatures of titanic and
characters and constantly inpinge upon and disturb the order of destructive passion and surfeited with "pale ire, envy, and
the natural world. These phantoms and apparitions are frequently despair-" The DT0t0—90thlC Vlllal", "ﬂlP0le'$ Mihtreda ""35
ancestral and often engage the heroine during a night journey. naturally humane; and his virtues were always ready t0 °Per6te.
4. ALIVENESS OF ARCHITECTURE AND OBJECTS or ART. In many forms . when his P6$5l0"5 did not Obscure his reason-'
of high Gothic fiction inanimate matter possesses a life and
mentality of its own. Halls and corridors possess auditory pow- i ' GOTHIC REVIVAL: A movement in architecture and building styles
ers, windows and turrets have optical abilities, objects of art, preceding and concurrent with the rise of the Gothic novel in the
furniture. and Weaponry function with a vile intelligence of last half of the Eighteenth Century. A reaction to Palladian, Geor-
their own. In fact, the entire haunted castle, or its equivalent, i gian, and classical styles resulting in a decorative and picturesque
is hyper-organic in all its aspects, "revival" of the Gothic edifices of the high middle ages. Gothic
,5. "EXTRAORDINARY POSITIONS" AND LETHAL PREo1cAM£uT$_ Hﬂlpole , ’ revival architecture was not an accurate duplication of-the medieval
had specified that the characters of the Gothic were to he Found cathedral but instead a whimsical manifestation of a romantic impulse
in "extraordinary positions." In nearly all instances, such and a mode of self-dramatization. Sham ruins, counterfeit battle-
positions were lethal or at the very least carried the threat of ments, artificial devastation, cryptic grottos, and a passion for
death or incestuous sex. Instantaneous death by lightning, by the towers and spires were characteristic of the new taste for things

438 ' GLOSSARY UF GOTHIC TERVS L APPENDIX ONE 439
Gothic. Originally a term of reprobation meaning savage, barbaric,
uncivilized, and irregular, the adjective "Gothic" assumed a new re-
spectability. Two creators of the Gothic novel were also leaders of
the Gothic revival. At Strawberry Hill in 1752, Halpole playfully
mixture of human and animal shapes, or in the larger sense any un-
natural arrangement emphasizing the ugly, the bilarré and the
fantastic. In its variant literary forms, the grotesque is repre-
sented by exaggerated abnormalities of characterization d l
an
constructed a Gothic castle. At Fonthill in Hiltshire, the architect, > and by an outrageous intermingling of genres and moods. Thugnguggﬁ
John Hyatt, designed a fantastic abbey for the eccentric Hilliam i ludicrous merges with the loathsome in a work such as BeckfordIs VA-
Beckford, author of VATHEK. Thus, when the first Gothics were pub- £ rTHEK~ The 9'0!9Sque has evident associations with the deliberate
lished, the architectural fantasies of the Gothic Revival already j absurdities of Gothic literature and is one of the primary means
adorned the landscape, giving inpetus to the new genre. For a major ' whereby the Gothic novelist achieves delightful horror. For gggd
history of the movement and its literary influence, see: Clark, Sir , general discussions which relate the grotesque to the Gothic, see:
Kenneth. THE GOTHIC REVIVAL: AN ESSAY IN THE HISTORY OF TASTE , Clayborough, Arthur. THE GROTESQUE IN ENGLISH LITERATURE; Todorov,
(1923), ,, Tzvetan. THE FANTASTIC: A STRUCTURAL APPROACH T0 A LITERARY GENRE"
Kayser, Holfgang. DAS GROTESKE: SEINE GESTALTUNG IN MALEREI unﬁ
GOTHIFIED HISTORY: A type of Gothic novel presenting an imaginary ' DICHTUNG.
middle ages or an invented Renaissance to startle and excite its
audience. Violent historical epochs such as the Thirty Years‘ war
(1618-I648) or the Barons‘ Hars (1264-1267) are used to provoke an
GROTTO GOTHIC: A Gothic novel which restricts most of its action to
a single cavernous or natural, subterranean environment. Many Gothic
atmosphere of terror, danger, and suffering. Complex plots, super- novels offer titles which designate the cave, grotto, or interior
natural events, grandly gloomy architecture, and the opposition of Q enclosure where the main scenes are located as in THE CAVERN OF DEATH
chivalry and cruelty are conmon features of Gothified history. His- ‘ (1794) and THE LADY OF THE CAVE: OR, THE MVSTERIES OF THE FOURTEENTH
torical Gothics also often contain royal or aristocratic figures who I CENTURY (1802).
actually lived. These serve as a supporting cast to the central trio
of maiden, hero-villain, and young rescuer. Two widely imitated mod- ﬁv GROTTOPHILIA: A conscious or unconscious preference on the part of
els of Gothified history are Leland's LONGSHORD (1762) and Sophia Q heroes and heroines for an adventure within a contractive enclosure
Lee's THE RECESS (1785), Q hidden somewhere beneath the haunted castle or abbey. Symbolically,
GRAVEVARD POETRV: Verse produced by a group of poets writing in the
1740's and 1750's. Graveyard poetry favors charnel settings, macabre
moods, pleasure in melancholy, and broodings on suicide and the hor-
the conuulsion to seek out and investigate diminishing space suggests
a return to the darkness of the womb, an attempt to recover primal
identity, and a terrifying fall into another order of being. In its
American Gothic form, grottophilia is frequently depicted by the
rors of the grave. Meditations on mortality and an obsession with ; hero's experiences in a forest pit as in Charles Brockden Brown's
ruin and decay imbue much of the Graveyard poetry with an unmistak- EDGAR HUNTLV: OR, THE MEMOIRS OF A SLEEP-WALKER (1799)
ably Gothic tone. For exanple, these lines from Thomas Harton's "The
Pleasures of Melancholy‘ (1745):
As on a tread, religious horror wraps
My soul in dread repose. But when the world
Is clad in Midnight's raven-colored robe,
In hollow charnel let me watch the flame
HERO-VILLAIN: The main perpetrator of evil in the Gothic novel, a
tormented tormentor and sometines a lacerated being ‘who can appre-
hend the good, but is powerless to be it." The evil or half-evil vil-
lains of high Gothic fiction are figures of colossal contradictions.
They are heroic in depraved ways and they possess divine gifts and
great intellectual strengths which they use to demonic ends. The mys-
Of taper dim, while airy voices talk . terious villain of the high Gothic novel is never a creature of pure
Along the glimmering walls, or ghostly shape
At distance seen, invites with beckoning hand
My lonesome steps, through far-winding vaults.
evil. He is a fallen angel figure flawed by strange passions he only
dimly understands and driven by desires which he knows to be evil but
cannot overcome. Of necessity, the hero-villains of Gothic romance
are figures of religious or political authority similar in some re-
Graveyard poetry was probably initiated by Thomas Parnell's “Night 1 spects to the "men of high estate“ in ancient tragedy. Finally, the
Piece on Death" (1722). Its chief practitioners just prior to the age Gothic hero-villains despise virtue sinply because it is virtue, but
of the Gothic novel were Thomas Gray (“Elegy Hritten in a Country ‘their natures remain paradoxical. Halpole's Manfred murders his
Churchyard“), Robert Blair ("The Grave"), Edward Young ("Night
Thoughts on Life, Death, and Immortality"), Thomas Harton the Younger
("The Pleasures of Melancholy“), and Hilliam Collins ("Ode to Fear‘).
The Gothic novelists frequently echo the themes and language of the
daughter, Matilda, and attempts to violate Isabella, but he is also
"a man of many sorrows." Lewis's Ambrosio is disgusted by his own
atrocious deeds of matricide and sepulchral rape of his sister.
Maturin's Melmoth despairs of his own salvation even as he ruins the
Graveyard poets. Some of the longer more elegiac Gothic novels in the i salvation of others. Always a character divided against himself, the
Radcliffean vein might even be described as Graveyard prose-poems. ' most memorable hero-villains turn to crime to counter an internal
GROTESQUE: Derives from the Italian "grottesca," referring to Roman
grottos and their strange decorations. Grotesque means a distorted
conflict which Lewis identified in Ambrosio as "a contest for superi-
ority between his real and acquired character."

440 I GLOSSARY UF GOTHIC TERMS Appgyglx ONE
s TERROR‘ he terms horror and terror are sometimes
441
 ) _ form, monastic shockers featured a villainous abbot or abbess menac-
  i~     :        in he  
betarane Exghligenhsﬁrgc aﬁdpgothic terror was Mrs Ann Radcliffe an ols wt?“ adETSt?red rap]d]y'and'm both natural and Supernatural
a§v§§§te of terror over horror as the preferred effecf- In an cgidy §59s‘°§s§§?§éa apgrglvesogn §l§S'?§t;:i§§tZ¥yt§§ m::a:2::Sticbbshock_
lo" the S:Ee'";t:'?lf;" P°et'{“dp:2]Z5n$drl:rT:§dN::rr2§T:t: M2gAZ%:E convent there must be: “one cell for solitary confinementg’oHe ﬁﬁdegr
in 18@6, s. a c i ‘e asser ed a e] d k th f Iti S 1 ground vault for slow'starvation; one large nave for taking the vgﬂ
opposite, that the first expan s t e sou ,tanf awa ens d e adu e and for funerals1 one dismal bell to ring upon such occasions to
t? d hi9" de9'cE Of life, the Qthﬁr Coﬂtrai §_f€9EZ95 as t"EaY K d"- inform approaching relatives of the nun's fate; a congregation of
nihilates them._ And where lies the grea 1 i e¥:nie e ween ortgr nuns to sfand about 1O°k]ng pa1e and chant1"g .Nu"c D1m!ttiS| and |De
add terrﬂrs but l" ""CeTtdl"i! d"d ‘$B§¢U;lt¥, tn 3ﬁC°mPd"Y 9 Profundis : and a generous assortment of Madonnas, crucifixes, coarse
fiF5P» T95Pe¢tl"9 the dreader 9V1 - EYTOT, eh, B5 d" dPPT:' l food, and human skulls and bones, preferably female." Monastic shock-
h§"$lVE dnd 5"9QE5tlV9 POWEF to EV°ke the _5"bllm9 Which I i er titles are easy to identify and raucously proclaim their gory bin
directness of horror lacks. however. hurrdr had its advocates as nel of fare as In ALMAGRO AND CLAUDE: on, MONASTIC MURDER EXEMPLIFIED IN
as illustrated by the sensational success df_THE MONK and bdbks like THE DREADFUL DOOM OF AN UNFORTUNATE NUN (1803). A good, late version
it. Characters in Gothic fictldn are terrified by thﬁlr aﬂtlclpdtlﬂ" of the monastic shocker is to be found among the tales in MELMOTH THE
of what n1qh; hagpen "he: thg l;9h€:_pd date hzt they dareSthd€:if1ed HANDERER in "The Tale of the Spaniard."
when the ig ts 0 go ou an e ing a ey orea mo a ua y
bc¢"T5- Terrbr l5 99"ETdt5d bY a" dWf"l d"d ""'9]l9Ved 5"5Pc"5E, but RKUBERROMAN: From the German meaning "Robber Romance." Schiller's
horror _is created by the shack of fulfillment by means pf_suparnat— 1 Drama of 1782, DIE uKuBEn (THE ROBBERS) was the romantic prototype,
Ural ClimaXE5 dhd F9PUl5lVE $ltHdllb"5-_ 0bJe¢tlV@ly defined, thc but a more inmediate influence on the savage banditti and romantic
difference between the two responses is One Of degree Father thd" outlaws of the English Gothic novel came from Christian August Vulpi-
kind: There are terror~elements in the best hprrdr—ndvels pf the us's RINALDO RINALDINI, CAPTAIN or BANDITTI (1798). Survivals of the
G0thiC_tFadltl°", dlth0"9h the Rdd¢llffEd" 5°Phl¢5 5""""ed H°'f°r P9‘ < German robber romances may be seen in the lurking banditti of Mrs.
cause it was Seen as detrimental £0 $ubllmlty- The ?l§tl"¢tl°" Radcliffe's landscapes and in the pyrotechnics of Shelley's ST.
between terror and horror ls well-stated by the modern critic of the IRVYNE; QR, THE R051CRUc1AN_ The herdis or herd‘ne-5 Sdjouru among
Gothic, Deyehdra P. Varma- The dlff9F€"Ce Pethee" T§"°r_d"d H°f'°' outlaws became an almost mandatory episode in the lengthier Gothics.
is the difference between awful apprehension and sickening realiza- There are some specimens of Gothic Raubberromane among the English
tioni between the Bmell bf death ‘and $tUmbli"9 d9dlQ5P 5 C°'P5§- Gothics, but in most cases the encounter with banditti was a single
Terrbr thus createi ah _l"ta"§lblB atmosﬂhere Of 5PlFlt“dl P$¥Chl¢ episode among many terrifying experiences for the wanderers between
dread, a certain superstitious shudder at the other "brld- "°Y'°" castles. Robber captains could be as ferocious as Gothic villains,
resorts to a cruder presentation of the macabre: by exact portrayal but ndrma11y these brigands were dis 1a ed as adm- d1 - ~ 1 h
ira e crimina s w o
of the physically horrible and revolting. against 5 far m°FE tE'“lblE were at odds with the artificial codts it society. One roaring Gothic
baCk9'°""d °f $Pl'ltudl 9l00m d"d d@$PdlT-" notable for its exploitation of the outlawry theme is Mrs. Sykes's
_ MARGIANA: OR, HIDDRINGTON TUNER (1808).
INSET TALEZ Conmon structural device in longer Gothic fiction.
Gothic narrative has tendencies toward the digressive, particularly RITTERRQMAN; From the German for "Knight" or 'HQr§eman," hence R0-
in its Radcliffean subform. The Gothic inset or tale within the larg- mance of ch1ya1ry_ Eiements adapted by the End11Sh Gdthicists
er tale often deals with a dead or missing relative of the heroine 1nC1“ded feuda1 t nu C th 1- h
yra y, a o ic treac ery, supernatural encounters,
and relates in some obscure dr ingenious nay to the_riddle pf the and gigantism. Two typical Ritterromantik titles are the anonymous
h roin 's identit or t rnit . In G th f t n t t
e e y pa e y O IC lﬁ 10 , _l"5e_ 5 97195 BEZAUBERTE HELM: ODER, DER RITTER VOM RIESENSRBEL (THE ENCHANTED HEL-
resularly cane intd the narrative by way bf manuscript discbverics MET: on, THE KNIGHT or THE GIANT SABRE) and Karl Gottlob Cramer's
and are sometines so cabalistic as to require decipherin9- The‘ ndst HASPAR A SPADA; EINE SAGA AUS DEM DREIZEHNTE JAHRHUNDERT (HASPAR A
elaborate exanple of the inset story as a Gothic structural device is gphgh; A 5AGA OF THE THIRTEENTH CEhTURy)_
probably Maturin's MELMOTH THE HANDERER where the various tales are
arranged cpncentrically and the Handerer’s chronicle pf despair is - ROMANCE or THE RUIN: Type of Gothic novel which locates almost the
recited by narrators within narrators within narrators. The inset whd1e of its action in and around a devastated $1te_ hat on1y 15 the
tale was also used extensively by the Gothic novelists to produce a ruin a1day5 haunted; it 3150 hd1d5 some secret of the heroineis ah_
mood of mystery or exotic medievalism as in “The Provencal Tale“ of csstry and identit _ passi h for - - th 1 t
y 0 ruins in e a e Eighteenth Century
51? BEVY5 bf Ld"¢a5teF l" Chapter 44 °f THE MYSTERIES OF UD0LPH0- as places of romantic retreat and as archeological symbols of a fal-
_ _ _ 1 len world was an aspect of the climate of emotionalism out of which
MONASTIC SHOCKER: Term originated by Hilliam Hhyte Watt in SHILLING the gothic noye] wd“1d sprih (See GOTHIC REy1yAL h ve) 1h th
_ _ g 1 a o ._ e emes
SHOCKERS 0F THE GOTHIC 5CHO0L (1932) £0 d@5cFlbE that Sﬂeﬁldl 5"b- of the romance of the ruin can first be detected in the Graveyard
type °f 5°thlC "°V9l d9FlVl"9 f*°m THE MONK and THE ITALIAN "whose Poets (see GRAVEYARD POETRY above), notably in Hilliam Shenstone's
principal background was a ndnastery pr convent-" In short. chapbppk “Inscription: on the Back of a_Gothic Seat" (1745) and others. Gothic

442 GLOSSARY OF GOTHIC TEIWS ‘ APPENDIX ONE 443
romances of the ruin bear some delectable titles as with Helen Saint
pears in one of its more sinister forms in Scott's BRIDE OF LAMMER-
Victor's THE RUINS OF RIGONDA: OR, THE HOMICIDAL FATHER (1808). MOOR (1819) with Ravenswood'S mysterious attachment to Holf's Craig
ROMAN NOIR: Literally, "black" or "dark novel," the French version
of the Gothic romance. Often sinply translated as "Gothic novel as
Tower.
,“ TRIPLE-DECKER GOTHIC: Large Gothic or Gothic novel deluxe running
in Alice M. Killen's history of the English Gothic, LE ROMAN TERRIF- to three volumes, each volume numbering at least four hundred pages.
IANT OU ROMAN NOIR DE HALPOLE A ANN RADCLIFFE. I ' ' '
The multi-volumed Gothic romance bound between expensive and elegant
boards could still successfully compete with flimsy chapbooks printed
SCHAUERROMAN: Shudder or quiver novel. The term is sometimes used on graying paper and enclosed in gaudy wrappings. Sturdily made, the
£0 T979“ t° the Germa" G°t"l¢ "°VeI T" 9e"9Ti1, b"t 5h0"]d Prﬁbibly triple-decker Gothics are the books that survived to become today's
be reserved to characterize a special variety of German Gothicism. bibliographical rarities in various Gothic collections. The first
The true Schauerroman is a bloodbath of exaggerated horrors, chaotit edition of Mrs. Radcliffe's THE ITALIAN in the author's private col-
terrors, sadistic incidents, and supernatural excesses. Subject mat- lection is a sterling example of the triple-decker Gothic at its most
ter is always ghastly and the emotions of the characters are a cul- elegant. It has leather bindings with gold inlaid lettering and hand-
minating exanple of algolagnic release. No concessions are made to some print face. Volume one has 336 pages, volume two has 360 pages,
reason, mercy, justice, or the restoration of order. Cadavers are am- and volune three has 444 pages.
b l t d ' ‘ '
u a ory an conversations with Satan are frequent in the pages of
the typical Schauerroman. The master of the Schauerromantik form ; TURRET GOTHIC: Type of Gothic novel whose principal confined space
appears to have been Joseph Alois Gleich (1772-1841) who wrote under if is the turret of a castle or abbey. Similar in some respects to GROT-
the pseudonym, "Dellarosa." His thunderous titles, DIE TOTENFACKEL: T0 GOTHIC (see above), Turret Gothics are composed around one site of
995R. DIE HOHLE DER 5[E3EN5C"LAFER (THE TORCH OF DEATHI OR, THE CAVE architectural terror and concentrate their action in a tower or tur-
OF THE SEVEN SLEEPERS) and UDO DER STAHLERNE: ODER, DIE RUINEN VON ' ret hgneycombed with chambers of horror and d€liQht- T-J- H9f5l9¥
DRUDENSTEIN (uuo ms mm or STEEL: 0R. T"E "Um 0‘ "R““E"5T5I"), are . Curties's THE HATCH TONER: on, THE sons or ULTHONA (1804) exemplifies
unsurpassed. Q ' _ ,
SERIALIZED GOTHIC: Gothic novels, novellas, and tales appearing in
installments in the magazines. Periodicals that were prominent in the
publication of serialized Gothic fiction were TELL-TALE: DR, UNIVER-
SAL MUSEUM, NEH GLEANER: OR, ENTERTAINMENT FOR THE FIRE-SIDE, LADY'S
MONTHLY MUSEUM, and LADY'S MAGAZINE: OR, ENTERTAINING COMPANION FOR
THE FAIR SEX.
I \
SHILLING SHOCKER. Gothic chapbook usually consisting of thirty-six
roughly stitched pages and sold for a shilling or less (see CHAPBOOK
GOTHIC above). The shilling shocker is clearly the ancestor of the
Victorian penny dreadful and the dime novel. Shoddy in physical ap-
pearance and even shoddier in plagiarized content, the shilling
shockers nevertheless spread like little flowers of evil planted by
rapacious publishers across the literary scene and numbered into the
4g~aH*'
1
K
thousands.
TERROR: See HORROR versus TERROR above
TOHEROMANIA. Peculiar compulsion to ascend, construct, or reside in
towers. Toweromania is evident in the strange behavior of Beckford's
VATHEK and the activities of certain other tower dwellers. The Gothic
villain often equates the tower with some insidious form of power. To
the extent that he connects his ownership of a tower with evil power,
he is a version of Milton's Satan, who is connected with the tower in
PARADISE LOST, Book I, lines 589-591: "He, above the rest/In shape
and gesture proudly eminent,/Stood like a tower." Vathek's retirement
to his tower and his isolated seclusion at its pinnacle is a gesture
of supreme power and the renunciation of all human limits. Building
and climbing the infernal tower challenges the authority of God him-
self. Toweromania persists throughout the Gothic tradition and ap-
- ii
8
4
the type as does G D Hernon's LOUISA: OR, THE BLACK TOHER (1805).

