IIIII IF!
i  
I
r
v
I
i
1 ' I
i
I
.- __-
._, .-
-4
2
1 _ .
\ 1
i -
.&r
, .
‘ ._.
i.
,}-_- '3
. -.
-.9:
'1'
I
i
i
‘r
THE FIRST GOTHICS
Acton, Eugenia de. THE MUMS if TME DESERT: (ll, THE HOOOLAND
HITCHES. London : Minerva-Press for llilliam Lane, 1805.
Modern Reeditions: hone
Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (terror mode)
Biographical and Research Data: Sunmers, GOTHIC QUEST, p.85;
Levy, LE ROMAN "GOTHlQUE" ANGLAIS, p.446.
Critical Synopsis: liith its odd title and even more
eccentric plot and cast, Acton's coqilex tale of ecclesiastical
persecution, ventriloquism, and necromantic horror is a highly
appropriate introductory specimen of the Gothic romance at its
wildest extremes. The novel opens with an extended Gothic
signature, the unmistakable prologue to the novel of terror:
‘Deep in the bosom of a wood, almost imervious to the rays of
the sun, skirting a desert of considerable extent, which was
bounded by the shores of the eastern ocean, stood a monastery
that for ages had been in vain buffeted by the rough hand of
time, to which its sturdy base and gigantic battlements seemed to
bid defiance.“ The narrative is disjointed, chaotic, and pulsates
with irrational and violent transitions which confound the reader
at every turn. The rommcer's method is summed up by the opening
sentence of chapter 23 in the first volume when she asks: "To
which point of our literary cowpass shall we now turn the vane?‘
The literary coqiass wobbles insanely between the strange
monastery in the desert and the even stranger English country
estate of Ivy Tower near which lies the grotto of three
fortune-tellers or the lioodland Hitches, Margaret, Rachel, and
Anna. The Nuns of the Desert are eighteen victims of the cloister
who have been transported to suffer in the monastery somewhere in
a wasteland whose exact location is iqiossible to determine. Yet,
the geographic location of the monastery hardly matters since the
agonies of the unwilling nuns, Eliza Hayes, Beatrice Milford,
Sophia lid Emily Selwyn and the others, occur within the dark and
very Gothic interior of the monastery which is presided over by a
good priest (Father Overton). a bad priest (Father Clement), and
an enigmatic abbess (Marion Elvyns) whose morally capricious
character makes her a blend of kindness and cruelty. Each novice
sister must accept the veil or she will be °i|mured within four
brick walls and there left to perish.‘ while the nuns of the
desert are thus tormented and terrified, the two young owners of
Ivy Tower, Ferdinand and lioratio Congreve, are gulled and
deceived by the Macbethian prophecies of the woodland Hitches.
Into the two bizarre tales of cabalistic deceit and monastic
persecution Acton ushers two talking beasts, a vocal ape named
. I

TIE FIRST GOTHICS \t . pf [.1351 Gmwfcs 5
Hindo and the speaking dog named Brimﬂ. lhiﬂli ¢°"fldi"t¢$ °f I which no borrowed tints can imitate; fine dark eyes, and a look
the witches. The two stories and the two sites are linked by the k ehieh expressed every emotion of her seei_a The erieihei ieeehe
va"¢¢'i"9 ¢"e'o¢¥@'$- LeVi"ll i"¢ 5ell"e R°5°"°"t- V"° t'°'°‘ '3 had stressed the pathos of the royal waif; the Gothic chapbook
between the lades of the Hoodland Hitches near Ivy Tower and h - -
9 _ i 1 shifted the emphasis from pity to violence, horror, and mad-
the foreboding monastery in the wasteland. Acton s chapter _ti- s hess __eshih chi six eh f -t i
. g y p ce or i s ent re argosy of emotions.
ties give an indication of the romance's relentless Gothicism.
They include: ‘The Monastery--The Ninth Tower--The _Cavity--The 3_ hL5hhi: OR ihg huhoiheh 0; his
_ _ , CHILD, CONTAINING THE DIFFERENT
Lady Abbess--and the Contrasted Priests; Preparations f°'_t"° VIEHS OF HIS CHARACTER, AS A LIBERTINE IN PALERNO, AN OFFICER
Sacred Vow Interru ted b N stic Sounds'- 'Subterraneous Music'-
p y y -_ v IN THE SPANISH SERVICE, A PLANTER IN THE ISLAND OF CUBA, ETC.
"E l ri th Ninth T r'- ‘The H rrible Res lt'- and other ‘
xp o ng e Owe . ° “ - , _ London : T. Plummer for Tegg and Castleman, 1803.
such allurements. In a postscript, Acton appended a scientific . heeerh Reeditiehs. hehe
@556! 0" V¢"t'l1°Q"l$m °' 'E"9°5t'l"Yt“"5' b3 '3! °f 3“5tifYi"9 Gothic Type: Gothic Chapbook (imitation of John Hoore's ZELU-
the mysterious vocal miracles of the novel, but this bungling co)
attempt to explain away the supernatural extravagances of the Bieerehhieei end Research nets: hehe
story is of little account. The novel itself remains a piece of
madness and absurdity. No trait is more typical of the Gothic in critieei Synopsis: ihe 72_heee ehehheeh is e eeii_exeeutee
its extremer forms than the $D0"!a"¢°u5 d¢ll'l"" °f ,t"° "‘9ht; and occasionally creative plagiarism of John Hoore's novel of
mare in which the irrational demonic defies all logical contro the eehee, of e seeist ZELUCO (
, see I297). The epigraph from
o"¢ 9°¢$ ‘I5 °*" P'eP°5t°'°"5 '°Y~ I",t"‘5 'e59e°t~ T"E “UNS OF Dryden delivers a stern and fearful moral against yielding to
THE DESERT is a paradigm of the Gothic romance and well deserv- er i i i . -hi
ue mpu ses. m shall the furious passions tear, The vul-
‘"9 °f its Piece at t"e "Q54 °f ° blb‘l°9'°P“Y °f first G°th' tures of the mind.‘ Albani launches his career like Zeluco by
ic '
s. torturing and killing a pet bird. Some of his sadism can be
_ traced to his bestial mother who sees all of her son's faults as
2. THE AFFECTING HISTORY OF LOUISA, THE HANDERING HANIAC: OR, THE virtues and si f i
gns o man y prowess. In his childhood, she en-
LADY OF THE HAY-STACK.‘ London 1 A- Nell. 1304- courages his tendency to 'tyrannize over boys whom his strength,
Modern Reeditions: None '
or their inferior situation, placed under his juvenile power.‘
Gothio Types G0l"l¢ ¢"6Pb°°k As Albani comes to adulthood, he excels at most of the sexual
3l09TlDhical and Research Data: None crimes associated with Gothic villains. In Hadrid, he seduces
_ _ and ruins the Spanish beauty, Signora Felicia, but tiring of
Critical Synopsis: This typical 38 page Gothic chapbook of "eerie he goes to the "est indies to i f
, _ exp ore new orms of in-
the period is introduced by a Dotheliﬁ f'°"tl5P‘¢¢° d¢Pl°t‘"9 trigue and torture. Simply to exhibit his power, he commands the
Louisa seeking refuge beneath one of her innumerable haystach hiech sieve, ire,’ to iesh his eeh hhother to deeth_ These
anodes. The caption. 'Dishevelleo Lo! Her beauteous iresses flyd ihciqchts parallel the crimes of Zeluco as does the Culllnatin9
suggests a familiar posture of the Gothic heroine n harasse h I
a omination, Albani s murder of his child. Returning to Palermo
flight and complements the subtitle which sums up the loeel for further sadistic pursuits, he falls in with a gang of rakes
legend of Louisa of the Haystack, ‘so called from having taken severei of the hers; of ‘hon ere the Eheiish-eh hh ohhium
I ' I
"P her '@$ld9"¢¢ ""de' that Shelter» i" the Viliage °f B°""°"- Oglethorpe, and Spendlove. An equally depraved member of this
near Bristol in a state of MBla"¢h0ly d@'e"9e"9"ti 5"“ 5"PE°5°d gang of 'Nohacs' is Baron Friborg, a man so debauched that he
to be a natural dau9hieY of F'o"¢l$ 1. EMPQFOP °f 5°'"°"7' The offers his own sister, Almina, to be Albani's next sexual vic-
enterprising chapbooker obtained the story of the royal exile tih 1 hih -
. o ani, as to so many Gothic supermen before and after
from the correspondence of the Bristol philanthropist, Hannah him. eii femeie ehysieei heeety reeresehts eerei and shirituei
More (1145-1333). '"° "'d °°°“"e“t°d the °°t"°“° ease of he" rectitude, qualities which he detests. Both Albani aha Zeluco
Louisa had bee" b'°"9"t *0 5"9ll"d- D'lV¢" f'°" the °°“'t by the are also antecedents of the Byronic mis ist before th f t
ogyn e ac .
cruel empress in August. 1169. she was then ‘cruelly abandoned Nhenever he considers Almina's purity aha helplessness, Albani
by 50MB Vile $@¢"¢¢' 'hi¢h Coused the Calamity l"t° Nhich she dissolves into a Byronic rage: ‘He vented a thousand curses on
fell.‘ After TBf"$l"9 ill $h@lt@' °"d ¢hi'll¥ i"¢ ¢h°°5l"9 f° the folly and pride of virtuous women; and when the ebullition
live "Oder hiJ5tl¢k5 l"5!¢6¢- She died miserably in Guy s had subsided, his disappointment settled in a gloomy reserve,
Hospital in the Borouoh of Southvark on Deeeoher 19. 1801- The during which he avoided society aha meditated schemes of getting
anonymous Goth has turned the pathetic details of the story to _ hieihe ihte his eeeers es ehee he setisfy his revenge she ee_
his own horrific purposes. Louisa becomes ihs!aﬂ¢a"e0"51¥ "l"*A' sires.‘ Pretending to rescue Almina from bandits on an excursion
cal every tine she hears Berpan spoken. is nenaoeo with the "°'- ' to Vesuvius, he then alternately abuses and hares love to her.
rors of a Bohemian convent. displays ‘the ml'k$ °f 9 '9'! 1°'9° ;- Once Almina is pregnant, Albani takes up with Rosalia to humili-
wound on the lower part of her head and a large scar uD0" "8? - ate h q
er, an at the sight of his newborn son, he falls into a
. breast ' and offers all of the inviting physical fragility of ~ m
, 9- murderous fury ( ‘Silence, thou incestuous bastard," exclaimed
the standard Gothic heroine: ‘She had that freshness of colour ith hihehi, seizing the ihfeht hy the th,°et_-i hhiie ehieyihe Rese_

.-_>@~.. an -ga A4;-r-— dud
IIIIII I‘!
l
l l
l
6 THE FIRST GOTHICS ‘ - THE FIRST cornzcs 7
lia in her bedchamber, Albani's pleasure is cut short by the ' ef 5g giere is ereeeiy but effective] sh rt nee t f
. y o e o a ew
deadly stiletto of a rival rake- While the maker of the chaobook pages, while the central sensational Gothic event of the novel
followed the outline Of "00re'$ ZELUCO. he Il$0 lt!¢M0!¢¢ $0 --the sexual fall, steady damnation, and aerial death of Ambros-
carry every incident of melodramatic suffering found in the io--is truncated by the enterprising bluebooker into a four-page
original to a sensational easess and to give the reader a oor- .seguei loosely appended to the miseries of Almagro and Claude.
trait of thrilling evil. Despite the moral evigraoh and sohnons . Dy such brusque methods, the piratical bluebooker achieved the
to conscience from Dryden, the Goth's single objective -is to pege quote fixee by the repeeioeg peh1ighe¢_
tease and titillate, not to teach and warn.
6. Andrews, Charles. THE SPECTRE London - John Stockdale 1789.
y 4. ALEXENA: on, THE CASTLE or SANTA wanco. London = Minerva-Press , Modern Reeditions: None . ' ' '
for A.K. Newman, 1817. .1 ' Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (some burlesque elements)
i Modern Reeditions- None Bio ra hical nd R h D '
, . g p a esearc ata: Levy, LE ROMAN GDTHl0UE'
i Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (Radcliffean imitation) An5LA15, 9,199,
Biographical and Research Data: Levy, LE RDMAN 'GOTHIQUE'
‘ ANGLAIS, po.4o4-405, 415 411, 436
written in legible characters.‘ The anonymous Goth took some
care with the subterranean decor and lugubrious interior of the
castle thus effectively transforming a place of security into a
place of horror. The underworld of Santa Marco is reached
ror, the maiden's dismal journey through the twisting and nar-
,.
I\.~-.1-3;
, . Critical Synopsis: An epistolary Gothic consisting of fifty-
two letters, THE SPECTRE is an amusing love story wearing a
Critical Synopsis: Drawing noon the Radcliffean Gethlt "°¢@‘ Gothic disguise. Young Mr. Hilmot finds himself haunted, pes-
Of the Ialdeﬂ Ieﬂaﬁeﬂ Illhi" lhﬁ ¢°"fl"B5 07 6 9'lIs f9"¢ll 000- , tered, and bedeviled by an insistent female ghost. The spectre
onent. the anonynoos Gothic writer offers three hysterical haid- . is amorous, determined, and witty in her demands for the young
ens whose names are taken from earlier Gothics. Ellena, EV¢l¢"@. ‘, man's attention and affection. In the well-timed revelation
and Alexena must each take a turn as victim within the 9l00ﬂ¥ ‘ " scene the ‘s ectre' di t h lf f
, - , p ves s erse o ghostly properties to
chapels and dark crypts of Santa Marco. Their Venetia: PerSe¢ﬂ- ,'4. emerge as the young woman Hilmot should marry. The bloodcurdling
t th C t B tt i di d - »
OF. 8 0"" 0'9 0. 5 I '¢¢t ¢$¢¢"¢l"! 0 "'$- R86 _ encounter with the female demon is thereby transformed into a
Cl1ffe'§ "°ﬂl°"l. th¢ Vlllﬂi" 07 THE "Y$T5Rl5$ 9‘ UDOLPHO (599 §' superb little comic skit. This sort of Gothic courtship had its
T I349). Nothing Dr0Pl!l°"5 ¢l" 5? ¢lP¢¢l¢¢ 7'0" I ¢'¢l1"'¢ '0" ;; precedent in the novel by the French writer, Jacques Cazotte, LE
\ - whose brow every vice that disgraces man appears to have been 5:‘; p1A3L5 enoungux (rug Anggoug p5y1L_ 1773)_
l
7. THE ANIMATED SKELETON. London : Minerva-Press for Hilliam Lane,
1798.
it Modern Reeditions: None
‘through innumerable windings and dreary passages, the floors of Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (horror mode)
which were covered with sawdust, while clammy sweats covered the H giegrephieei ene negeereh pege; Leyy_ LE Rome“ aggruiquga
cold, damp walls.‘ According to the Radcliffean formula of ter- i"¢ angLa1$_ p_4g3_
rowing corridors of the haunted dastle or cathedral should Q2); Critical Synopsis: Published one year after Mrs. Radcliffe's
T forebode something far worse than rape or death. Apprehension inf THE ITALIAN (see I350), this Gothic romance is a well-
for and anticipation of the horror of horrors are the founda- g,~ constructed imitation of the Radcliffe n l f th l i
g a_ nove 0 e exp a ned
tions of Radcliffeaﬂ $0thl¢- 1" I"! CF87! 07 5"99¢5tlVe te"°'. 5'9‘ supernatural. Convinced that he has disposed of his‘bristocratic
ALEXENA: OR THE CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO T h 1 ll - F "
, s a tec n ca y compe r‘, rival by having him assassinated, the Count Albert is now
tent Radcliffean reproduction. Q1; unchallenged proprietor of Count Richard's castle. But his rev-
els are constantly disturbed by eerie noises and scarlet flick-
5. ALNGERO IND Clluoii UR. "°"l$T1c "U395" 5X5"PL1F1E° i" THE _,; ers which seem to come from an abandoned wing of the great fort-
DREADFUL DOOM DF AN UNFDRTUNATE NUN. London : Dean and Nuh- ;@¢ ress. The servants are full of strange legends about the burial
day, 1803. ff vault of Richard's ancestors, also housed in the same deserted
Modern Reeditions: None 1; suite of the chateau. Unable to curb his curiosity, Albert pries
Gothic Type: Chapbook or Pulp Gothic (monastic shocker) peek the eneieng rt 1 ¢ e -
‘ , po a an procee s to explore the inner sanc
5l°9'lPh1Cal and Research Data: Nit!» 5"1LL1"5 5"°cK5R$ OF jf“, tum with an eagerness frequently seen in the curious maiden
THE GOTHIC SCHOOL .18-1 ' S THIC E T . ~
, pp 9, ullers. G0 0U 5 . D 34- »i. hysterics of Radcliffean romance. Except in this case, it is the
1
villain instead of the maiden who will stumble upon the unspeak
Critical Synopsis: The forty-page shilling shocker Dr0ve$ 0" iii‘ able on the other side of the Gothic door. Following what he
not very close inspection to be a cleverly plagiarized abridge- id‘ takes to be an inviting ‘red incandescence,' Albert peers
ment of M.G. Lewis's TNE MONK (see I244). Don RayI0"¢ 3"“ A9"¢5. ijg, through a hatchway into a dimly lighted subterranean compart-
the obiects of the nonk. Ahhrosio's. arrogant hat'=4 l" l¢"§'$ if ’ ment. Uhile attempting to discover the origins of the red light,
- novel, are rechristened Almagro and Claude and their stories ~,; he fine; hieeeif §udden]y in the grasp of e.gge1e;,1 hen¢_ 510'-
reduced. Agnes's hideous sojourn in the catacombs of the Abbey _ 4“ - -
ly turning, he gazes upon his skeleton host nd feels the bony

TIE FIRST GOTHICS " ' TIE FIRST GOTHICS 9
handshake gradually tightening. Consumed by terror, Albert of Gothic excitement if it is not an accurate recital of histor-
screams out his guilt to the ambulant skeleton. The confession ical facts. Ghosts, raiders, marauders, ancestral spirits,
satisfies the concealed Count Richard who now reveals himself as strange ceremonies, and the savage rivalry of Ethelwulph's
the master of the castle as well as its special Gothic effects. neighboring monarchs yield a fascinating piece of pseudo-
He had only pretended to swallow the poisoned cup in order to history. The historical mission of St. Augustine in 597 con-
precipitate this moment of Justice. The animated skeleton is, of verted the Saxon kings to Christianity; but Armstrong's monks,
course, a mechanical ruse made to terrify Albert into an» admis- in traditional Gothic fashion, are treated as invaders and
sion of his crimes. Up to and throughout the rendezvous with the intriguers when they come to Ethelwulph's court. This is not
animated skeleton, the anonymous Gothic sustains an atmosphere history, but it is, of course. Precisely the type of ecclesias-
of impending horror and true supernatural. But in the subsequent tical treachery that Gothic readers expected and enjoyed.
rational explanation for the walking skeleton, we detect the '
principal artistic flaw in this type of Gothic. Hhen the writer 1O. ARVILLE CASTLE: AN HISTORICAL ROMANCE. London : Crosby and T.
undermines his own horrific effects by returning the reader to a Hhite, 1795.
safe and controllable world, he denies to the the Gothic its Modern Reeditions: None
main source of fear. Hhen the supernatural itself, whether in ' Gothic Type: Gothified history
malign or benign form, is permitted to remain in control at the Biographical and Research Data: Summers, GOTHIC OUEST,
climax of the narrative, the Gothic achieves its maximum ef- 9.174.
fect.
Critical Synopsis: This anonymous historical Gothic is anoth-
B. THE APPARITION. London : Hookham, 1788. er fantasized reconstruction of Roman Britain during the reign
Modern Reeditions: None °f ‘"9 "e'0lC queen, Boadicea or Bonduca, wife of Prasutagus,
Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (terror mode with elements King of the lceni. The dramatist, John Fletcher's tragic play of
of p§eu4°-h1§g°ry) 1619, BONDUCA, furnished the Gothic romancer with emotional data
Biographical and Research Data: Lévy, LE ROMAN ‘GOTHIOUE' as well as historicaj coloring. Until her death in 62 A.D.,
AggLA|5_ p_ggg_ Boadicea had led a rebellion against Roman rule proving herself
to be a worthy adversary. The Gothic writer, aware of the appeal
Critical Synopsis: As a duplication and redaction of Hal- of the virago and the wicked woman character to the Gothic audi-
pole's CASTLE OF OTRANTO (see I466), the novel exhibits the ence, converts the noble pagan Queen into a ferocious vil-
growing influence of Ualpole's invention on the writers of the lainess. The famous historical incidents of Boadicea's scourging
last two decades of the Eighteenth Century. The ‘apparition’ \ at the hands of the Romans and the violation of her daughters
resembles in shape and movement the wronged ghost of Alfonso the V are deprived of all pathos by the Gothic writer and presented as
Good, the omnipresent phantom of Otranto, whose supernatural @"- 5!"9Uinary melodrama. But the atmosphere of Celtic gloom hanging
ergies eventually displace the usurper, Manfred, from his posi- over the landscape is one of the better Gothic aspects of the
tion of illegitimate power. The anonymous Gothic author of THE book as the writer has expended some artistry in maintaining the
APPARITION freely selects his implements of terror from Hal- illusion of a ‘Gothic’ Britain in his topographies. Arville Cas-
pole's arsenal of effects by borrowing the mighty armored hand tle. certainly an architectural anachronism for Roman times, is
seen over the balustrade and the titanic sabre carried into I an outgrowth of the dark terrain and looms large as a sanctuary
Otranto's courtyard by one hundred knights. But this imitation or refuge against the barbarous behavior of the Roman ‘civiliz-
of OTRANTO makes the mistake of merely repeating rather than , ers.' The novel's management of inventive history and its suc-
modifying the gadgetry of fantastic shock originally installed ' cessful collation of imaginary historical facts should be
by Nalpole. The result is a banal condensation of Halpole's vig- compared with Sophia Lee's technique of historicized Gothic in
orous proto-Gothicism. 5 THE RECESS: A TALE OF OTHER TIMES (see 0240).
9. Armstrong, Leslie. THE ANGLO-SAXONS: OR, THE COURT OF ETHEL- 1 11. ASHTON PRIORY. London : Law, 1793.
HULPN, A ROMANCE. London : Minerva-Press for Lane. Newman. ' Modern Reeditions: None
I 1806. Gothic me= Pure or high Gothic (Radcliffean imitation ter-
Modern Reeditions: None ror mode) '
Gothic Type: Gothified history Biographical and Research Data: Levy, LE ROMAN 'GOTHIOUE'
Biographical and Research Data: Summers, GOTHIC QUEST. . ANGLAIS, p.245.
l D-175-
Critical Synopsis. The novel resembles the work of Mrs. Rad-
Critical Synopsis: Fabricated ancient histories or sham cliffe in its engagement of the reader in a game of seemingly
chronicles of Celtic, Roman, and Anglo-Saxon Britain soon became suspenseful and supernatural events belatedly clarified by natu-
_ fashionable with Gothic authors. Flourishing in the late Sixth 1 ral explanation. The heroine, Laura, resembles the heroine of
century, the realm of King Ethelwulph is true to the atmosphere Mrs. Radcliffe's'ROMANCE OF THE FOREST (see I348), Adeline, and
A

10 TFE FIRST GOTHICS . Tl-E FIRST GOTHICS 11
there are situational parallels with Hrs. Radcliffe's novel as transmutes every person, place, and event into a Gothic crisis
“E11, for herself. Because every haunted castle has one. she even
converts the ordinary General Tilney into a wife-murderer. Hhile
12. Austen, Jane. NORTHANGER ABBEY. London : John Hurray, 1818. exploring the abbey by candlelight in search of the obligatory
Nodern Reeditions: Penguin Books, I978, ed. Anne H. Ehren- 4 forbidden chamber she at last unearths a mysterious manuscript,
preis; Oxford UP, I980, eds. James Kinsley and John Davie. but cold daylight evaporates her high Gothic panic. Instead of a
Gothic Type: Gothic Parody (caricature of various heroines) bloodstained parchment dripping with ancient deeds of darkness
Biographical and Research Data: Nc Killop, Alan D. ‘Jane Aus- her eye scans someone's old laundry list. Gradually de-Gothified
ten's Gothic Titles,‘ NOTES G QUERIES, 9 (1921): 361-362; by this error and others, Catherine eventually is educated out
Sadleir, Nichael. "All Horrid?': Jane Austen and the Gothic ' of sensibility and into sense. The satire is never vitriolic or
Romance,‘ in THINGS PAST. London : Constable, I944, pp.167- I blunt. Jane Austen's management of the phobic excesses of stan-
ZOO; Emden, Cecil S. ‘The Composition of NORTHANGER ABBEY," dard Gothic moments indicates her familiarity with all of the
REVIEN OF ENGLISH STUDIES, I9 (1968): 279-287; Kiely, 'NORTH- Gothic types in circulation in the 1790's. Although the parody
ANGER ABBEY,‘ in THE RONANTIC NOVEL IN ENGLAND. Cambridge, NA is cheerful and forgiving of the heroine's naiveté, the artistic
: Harvard UP, I972, pp.I18-135; Glock, Haldo S. ‘Catherine moral advanced is stern enough. As Anne Ehrenpreis puts it,
Norland's Gothic Delusions: A Defense of NORTHANGER ABBEY," ‘Behind the criticism of Gothic novels lies a keener criticism
ROCKY NOUNTAIN REVIEH OF LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE, 32 (1978): of silly novel readers. Hhat is significant in her characters is
33-76; Hopkins, Robert. ‘General Tilney and Affairs of State: ~ not so much their choice of books as the way they read them.
The Political Gothic of NORTHANGER ABBEY,‘ PHILDLOGICAL Catherine's folly lies not in indulging a taste for melodramatic
QUARTERLY, 57 (I978): 213-224; Levine. George. ‘Translating fiction but in imposing its values on the life around her.‘
the Monstrous: NORTHANGER ABBEY,‘ NINETEENTH-CENTURY FICTION,
39 (1975); 335-350; Q 13. AUSTENGURN CASTLE. London : Ninerva-Press for Hilliam Lane
I796; Dublin : P. Hogan, P. Byrne. J. Rice, J. Boyce and H:
Critical Synopsis: Hritten in the 1790's at the apex of the Porter, 1796. ’
Gothic mania but not published until 1818, Jane Austen's expert Nodern Reeditions: None
spoof of the terror craze also mocks the ridiculous habits of I Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (terror mode)
the Gothic audience in its depictions of the self-induced hys- , Biographical and Research Data: Levy, LE RONAN 'GOTHIOUE'
terics and manufactured panics of the novel's would-be Radclif- ANGLAIS, pp.437, 442, 462.
fean heroine, Catherine Horland. It is noteworthy that Jane ,
Austen's ridicule is aimed more at the defective sensibilities K Critical Synopsis: Signed by ‘An Unpatronized Female,‘ the
of the naive Gothic readership than at the art of Hrs. Radcliffe novel is practically a verbatim imitation of Nrs. Radcliffe's
herself. In fact, several of the scenes and episodes as well as NYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO (see 0349). Like the terrors on the inte-
the emotive dialogue suggest that Jane Austen might have written rior of Udolpho, all of the horrors of Austenburn turn out to be
an excellent Gothic herself had she been so disposed imagina- figments of the heroine's neurasthenic imagination. Reviewers
tively. Both structurally and episodically, NORTHANGER ABBEY is were quick to spot Radliffean forgeries of which there were
a systematic, satiric dismantling of the mental attitudes and many. In the CRITICAL REVIEN for I796, the reviewer found so
Gothic misadventures of the inordinately curious maiden. Jane ‘ little variation between Udolpho and Austenburn as Gothic cas-
Austen's Catherine Norland is severely infected with the disease tles go that he simply informed the 'unpatronited female's'
of Gothicism while on holiday in Bath when she is exposed to a readers that he had nothing to say about such Gothic redundancy,
list of Gothic bestsellers in the pump room by the terror nov- ' ‘that criticism is at a loss to vary its remarks.‘
el's expert-in-residence, the redoubtable Isabella Thorpe. (for
summaries of the seven NORTHANGER novels. see 0153, I209, 0227, V? I4. THE AVENGER: OR, SICILIAN VESPERS, A RONANCE OF THE THIRTEENTH
I319, 0320, I365, 0415) Craving a castle confinement herself, CENTURY, NOT INAPPLICABLE TO THE NINETEENTH. London : J.J.
envying the delicious distresses of Nrs. Radcliffe's confined Stockdale, 1810.
beauties, lured by the predicaments of sundry orphans of the Nodern Reeditions: None
Rhine, and longing to quiver to the sound of midnight bells and l Gothic Type: Chapbook Gothic (short Schauerroman)
the sight of horrid mysteries, she abandons her own dull person- "f Biographical and Research Data: Levy, LE RONAN 'GOTHIOUE'
ality to take up the role of Gothic heroine. Deciding to rear-
range her drab life into an exciting Gothic fiction, she accom-
panies the handsome and attractive Tilney family to Northanger
Abbey, a modern, elegant, fashionable, country seat without a
single toppled turret or creaking portal. Despite the Abbey's
lack of Gothic promise, Catherine insists upon behaving like the
_ distressed prisoners she has read about in the Gothic novels on
Niss Thorpe's syllabus for maidens in training. Thus, her eye
“,-.5
ANGLAIS, pp.441, 451, 462.
Critical Synopsis: In the preface to his harvest of horror,
the aggressive chapbooker asserts his monetary motives for the
shocker: 'Latterly, the demand for ghosts, necromancy, and mur-
ders, has so much increased, that the romance has become by far
the most profitable line of business, and enables,me to maintain
myself, my wife, and four children.‘ His Gothic potboiler is

i
h 1
1
Tlf FIRST CUTHICS . ni Fnzsr G01-Hlcs 13
Just that.--I reqoot of '9hosts. heeromehev. and murders‘ with dreadful night where the soul is easily lost. The metropolitan
every sight, sound. lhﬁ sinister P¢'5°"l\lt¥ eX"4¢t°d f'°" the debauchery of Paradyne anticipates a thematic cycle of Victorian
archives of Honk Lewis, Hrs. Radcliffe, and their numerous fol- fi¢ti°n in ghigh Q ynung man of vulnerable principles falls to
lowers in the more recent short novels of ltalianate monstrosity eisehece to he redeemed by e ‘emeh of petteht vtrtue_ 8eee.s
lhe 5DI"l$h ¢'"e1t¥- T"° °f t"¢ '°'° 9'°”i"e"t e*tr'cti°ns or .pictures of the horrors of society encouraged his more genuinely
‘borrowings’ by the 5°@hl¢ P'°flt¢¢' 9'9 the lt°‘l°"°t° 5°t"ic Gothic contemporaries to unite the novel of ideology with the
fantasies, Edward Hontague's THE OEHOH OF SICILY (see 0291) and detetts et the hove] et te,,er_
lsaac Crookenden's sensational chapbook, HORRIBLE REVENGE: OR,
THE MONSTER OF ITALY! (see l083)- 16. Bage, Robert. HERHSPROHG: on, nan AS as ls nor. London = Hin-
erva-Press for william Lane 1796.
5- Beqe. R0be'l- "ll K5 "5 15- l°"¢°" 1 "l"e"°'P'°55 7°’ “l"‘°" ’ Hodern Reeditions: Turnstile Press, 1951; Garland Publishing,
Lane, 1792 1 7
- 9 8.
Modern Reeditl0nS= 5lT16"¢ P"b1l$hl"9e 1973- Gothic Type: Marginal Gothic (didactic, philosophical fic-
Gothic Type: Harginal Gothic (polemical fiction) ti
on)
gioqreohieelh oheiResge;e3_a€§e= Gzatge 5"‘ "i ;§°f*'3t§‘§°: Biographical and Research Data: Tompkins, THE POPULAR wovct
Forootteh ove st 0" L 5 ( 9 l 2 Z 5- [H zwstauo. on.197-199; Foster, HISTORY or THE PRE-ROHAHTIC
Tompkins, POPULAR wovct IN swetauo, oo.1§o-191; Foster, HlS- NOVEL lh Ehethhe _e25_239. S th 1 d .
, pp , u er n , J.H. R b t B :
TORY or THE PRE-ROMANTIC NOVEL IR ENGLAND. no-Z25-239; Fe"lh- Novelist of Ideas,‘ PHILOLOGICAL QUARTERLY, as (1gs§§= gil-
ner. Peter. ROBERT BR6E- Boston = Tvovhe- 1979; F°=te'- 220; Faulkner, Peter. ROBERT sass. Boston = Twayne, 1979;
Dorothy R. ‘A Critical Edition of Robert Bage's HAN AS HE "Oren Hi h 1 G -R h _ .
, c ae . t B (1728 1801). A Bibli h ,'
ls,- DISSERTATION ABSTRACTS INTERNATIONAL, 32 (1912): aa7aA- QULLETIN 0; B;§L;0GRA§H$: 3a°%§981), 1;3_178_ °9'°” Y
6374A (University of Oklahoma).
Critical Synopsis: Less intensely psychological in its por-
Critical Synopsis: Although radical ideas supersede moments t,eye1 of the ihtehie, of ehereeter then "Ah hs he I5 (see
and elements of terror in 8age's novels, his methods of charac- I015), HERHSPROHG is a yarigtion eh Reussee .5 t f h
u conce o te
terization nevertheless bear a relationship to the Gothic7 ftc- .°re1 exee11ehee of the hehte seveee_ h hreheeehde hgeee for
tion being Ifltteh l" 90¢" ¢"°'l°"$ q"9"tltle$ l" the 1 9°i5- , Rousseau's view, the story brings into contrast and conflict the
Bose was certainly the lost ilnortoht and nrohehiv the Rest h- noble natural man, Hermsprong, who has been raised and educated
tellectually serious novelist to be published by Hilliam Lane s by hehth “hehteeh lhdtehst ehe the tehebte hen of ete eertd etv_
hinerve-tress°gd2a29d::gn::::;¢°2¢;:?gt°:c:t:: ggcggtgsia Lgaggg ilization, Lord Grondale, a character of despotic and selfish
ng p c ure
notions. if given ltalianate names and released into a medieval
and Paris. l tile 07 tI° Cities 7'0" 9 '¢Y°‘"tl°""¥'P°‘°"‘¢" setting, both of these characters could instantaneously be con-
noiht of viev- The lath ehoreeter is e voohs Eholish erist°e'et- verted into Gothic personages as could the deli at l i t
, c e y v r uous
the 008"-Il"¢¢¢ 5"‘ V¢"l1 l"d 5°"9""9t dl$5°1"t¢ 5*’ 5°°'9° ' Caroline Capinet, victim of a father's grotesque prejudices. The
Paradyne. Because he is a character of mixed passions, a man who sgeryline is slight in HERHSPRONG although it may seem compli-
combines serious ethical concerns with a rakish sensuality, his eetee because of the teree number ef episodes the euther uses to
morally divided nature suggests the same clash of opposites . e tet th 111 t f t t t
ep e co s on o pr m t ve virtue_and the vices of privi-
often found in the supermen of the Gothic cast. Falling in love . teeee etet|tzetteh_ Returning to Ehetehe by hey of Fheheet herm_
with "i$5‘C°‘¢'ll"- he l§i""¢*P§¢t°d1¥ Call?“ “9°"b:° ::°'° “ls sprong is determined to reform English society beginning with
l id i
mora ea sm by test ng t aga nst the corrupt an shments
of the two metropolitan societies. Because Hiss Colerain will
not accept Paradyne until he does so, he travels to various cen-
ters of dissipation in London and on the Continent to demon-
strate his ethical worthiness by action as well as by thought.
To win the woman and to rise to his better self from the man
that he is, he is required to face and acknowledge a baser self,
but his attempt to ascend from his socially depraved condition
to a nobler nature is a failure. Paradyne remains ‘man as he
is,‘ a self-blinded prisoner to his oun brutish desires and
class conditioning. lll, despairing, and thoroughly vitiated by
his contact with bad society and class pretension, Paradyne is
finally succored by Hiss Colerain whose radiant nature, somewhat
like the moral efficacy of a Richardson heroine, brings about
_ his recovery. The Gothicism of the novel lurks mainly in Bage's
keen consciousness of the city as a moral hell and place of
the social vices of Lord Grondale in whose character he encoun-
ters the baseness, avarice, and class consciousness which ruin
natural goodness. In a passionate and polemical exchange, Herm-
sprong denounces the society that Grondale represents: ‘As to
rank--1 have been taught to distinguish men by virtue." He pur-
chases an estate in Cornwall adjoining the lands of his rival,
Lord Grondale, in order to demonstrate the effects of natural
virtue, to debate Grondale at every opportunity, and to win his
daughter from her father's corrupt control. ln a genealogical
denouement which anticipates the sorting out of family
relationships in both Gothic and Victorian fiction, Hermsprong's
father and Lord Grondale are revealed to be brothers thus making
the natural man the legal heir of Lord Grondale's estates. In-
stead of fleeing from the vices of English civilization and
returning to nature following Grondale's death, Hermsprong
decides to remain in England and apply his theories of natural

F
4
\
I
A l
I
l
l _ .1
\
TPE FIRST GOTHICS TIE FIRST GOTHICS 15
virtue to the ulelioration of a corrupt society. In Gothic fic- rape and kill her when the vigilant spectre of her father in-
tion, characters frequently represent extreme or destructive trudes in one of the novel's numerous theatrical encroachment;
passions in a type of dark allegory of the mind. In philosophi- The final third of the novel is dominated by a feminine counter:
cal-radical fiction of the type written by Bage, the characters part to Oswald, the villainous Rodolpha. Her malice is on a par
allegorize intellectual positions or coweting ideologies. J.H. _with any of the wicked male characters as her uncontrollable
S. Toqikins connects HERNSPRONG with Gothic methods of charac- l passion for Ulric drives her to murder her own husband to get
terization by calling the novel "diagr$atic. The mental pro- ‘ him. Unable to have him, she schemes to have Ulric and Valentine
cess behind it is akin to that behind allegory; the characters put to death. Ulric is reprieved at the last moment but his son
stand in synetrical relations to one another, as represent- is not. Ball's violent tale comes to a unrciless end with Ul-
atives of this or the other system of ideas, and they pass ric's death from despair. Gothic novels of this type have some
through the action as through a formal dance. They are ingredi- I parallels with the morbid qualities of Jacobean tragedy. Good
ents in a pattern rather than individuals, and they are stripped and bad characters bleed and die together without moral compen-
of all complexities of character in order that the pattern may sations or any dramatic relief at the final curtain. In its ear-
not be disturbed.‘ liest phase from Halpole to Clara Reeve, the Gothic novel was
I always careful to restore the decent characters to 3 y°r]d
I7. Ball, Edward. THE BLACK ROBBER: A RGIANCE. London : Booth and protected by a_ sensible moral order and where goodness was
Ball for A.K. Newman, 1819. clearly stronger than evil. But as the Gothic matured, it also
Nodern Reeditions: None darkened and many Gothic writers came to prefer the cataclysmic
Gothic Type: Gothic R'a'uberroman (elements of the monastic
\ i
I
IL
='l<"lls- Ball's BLACK ROBBER is notable for just such a comfort-
shocker) l less climax.
Biographical and Research Data: None
Critical Synopsis. Sometimes writing under the pseudonym,
\ "Fitzball," Edward Ball (1792-1873) became famous in London as
the creator of crepuscular melodramas based on popular Gothic
novels. The unhappy ending became his remorseless dramatic
8. Ballin, Rossetta. THE STATUE ROON: AN HISTORICAL RGAANCE. Lon-
don : H.D. Symonds, 1790.
Nodern Reeditions: None
Gothic Type: Gothified history (terror mode)
Biographical and Research Data: Tompkins, POPULAR NOVEL IN
trademark. The same pessimism and gloom are evident throughout . ENGLAND, pp.237-238; Sunmers, GOTHIC QUEST, p.17z- Foster
his single Gothic romance, ms BLACK Roam. A melodramatic m- f‘ HISTORY or ms ms-aommc nova IN snsumo, p.220-levy LE
ture of several standard Gothic plots, the novel derives its I ROIAN "GOTHIOUE" ANGLAIS, pp.201-202; ' '
characterization from the popular stage stereotype of the noble
outlaw imported from German literature by way of Schiller's THE f Critical Synopsis: Although not unique to Gothic fiction
ROBBERS (1781) and Vulpius's RINALDO RINALDINI (1798). Ball's
living statues had been among the properties of the haunted cas-
robber chief, Ulric St. Julien, also exhibits the ambiguous mor- * tle since the bleeding col ssus of Alfonso the Good in Halpole's
al traits of the Byronic hero, particularly Byron's Corsair
whose being is a strange coqiound df ‘one virtue and a thousand
crimes.‘ Two similar villains share the Gothic plot with Ulric:
Ulric's brother, Reginald, who abuses Ulric's son, Valentine. a
child assigned to Reginald's care while Ulric follows his
CASTLE If OTRANTO (see 046$). This conventional Gothic prop is a
minor feature of this romance. A statue-filled chamber of state
at Shrewsbury Castle furnishes the romance's title, but is not
iqiortant to the plot. Exploiting the theme of the hidden royal
“"4. "'8 "W93 attempts to reproduce the mystery‘ of Sophia
calling as a bandit; aid Oswald, a name that turns up repeatedly _ Lee's successful historical Gothic, THE RECESS (see 0240). There
throughout Gothic fiction as a synonym for nefariousness. Ul-
ric's criminal career is motivated by his having been forced to
the monastic life by his parents. ilhile confined to the monas-
tery, he falls in love with the novice, Julia, an ulotional
indiscretion which enrages the monks who promptly put her to
death. Ulric escapes to become the Black Robber, his sable ap-
pearance an emblem of mourning and revenge for the lost Julia.
The virulent ulti-Catholic expectations of the Gothic readership
are fully satisfied when Ulric leads the robbers in an assault
on the monastery, slaughters the abbot, and puts his former
place of confinement to the torch. The sufferings of the child,
Valentine, Ulric's son by Julia, make the link to the elongated
subplot, the avuncular cruelty of Reginald. Valentine's mere
presence also stimulates the hatred of Oswald, a character whose
need to be and to do evil is a physiological appetite. ilishing
to possess the maiden, Issena, Oswald seizes her and is about to
are moderate incursions of the supernatural in this legendary
history. The reader follows the strange and pgthgtig ¢;|-eer of
the royal refugee. Adelfrida, a Gothic child of extravagant mis-
chance. She is the fictitious daughter of Henry VIII and Cather-
ine of Aragon. Born after Henry's divorce, Adelfrida is denied
c@anionship with Nary, disinherited, concealed, confined, and
ht" Vi9°"°"$1¥ lR"'$ll¢d by I Dover-mad Elizabeth. Character and
:f-ory are examples of the Gothic novelist's common practice of
using the situation of the Gothic victim and the peril of the
imaginary royal exile. After Adelfrida's death by poisoning,
‘@1110. Del‘ owll daughter by the Duke of Alencon attemts to
""55""?-8 Queen Elizabeth during a masquerade. In this final
ﬁzolle of pseudo-history, Ballin's romance surpassed its model,
RECESS, in fantasies of historical violence. Hhat readers of
_ :arly historical fiction in the Gothic mode desired was not
actual accuracy or political verity but a thrilling falsifica-

16 rrc rmsr GOTHICS -.15 rmsr mrnzcs 17
tion pr the past. In the miserable life of the fictional Adel- 1 T not Foiiisl. for we min find a sojourn in a haunted mile. a
frida and the near murder of Elizabeth, THE STATUE R004 supplied pissing brother. a murdered father. an implicating dagger, sev-
just such fabrications. eral hairbreath escapes from Italian villains. '"d Other Dl'¢l¢-
ulars of her longer romances. their OI" D1015 i" tur" ¢°Pl°d
19. THE BANDIT CHIEF: OR, THE LORDS OF URVINO. London : Minerva from Mrs. Radcliffe and Charlotte $ﬂlth-
Press for A.K. Newman, I818.
Hodefn Reeqitions; pone I i 21_ g'rb;u1¢, Ann kgggtia Aikin. SIR BERTRAND: A FRAGMENT. London :
Eggagﬁygypez Gothic Rauberroman (elements of Radcliffean I‘ gadgpanaggaitiong: In these anth°1°gies: GOTHIC TALES OF Tia-
Biographical and Research Data: Suilners, GOTHIC QUEST, pp.2a, - non, iapiinger. 1972. em Peter Hainino: THE CANDLE "40 "E
98. I’ 0 o
R H P b k Library 1974 ed Robert D Spector;
i3‘§‘.in‘i3i£e“°i33 CENTURIES oi? comic SHORT FICTION nun ro-
Critical Synopsis: A bandit novel centering on the abduction, I ETRY, New Alerlﬂln Llb'6T¥. 1931. 845- Plt'l¢lA L- 5“"d‘ ‘"4
conveyance, and confinement of the Neapolitan heroine, Ariadne,
Nora Crow Jaffe
the book resembles an immense romantic paintin of a robber- » . Gothic Type: Pure or hi9" 9°t"l¢ ("°"°"t°"°' '°d°5)
haunted Italy of the imagination. All of the bagditti, including , Biographical and Research Data: Birlhead. TALE OF T5R$°R.
the bandit chief, are full of humanitarian sentiments and speak i pp.28-31; $"II¢'5. GQTNIC QUEST. DD-48-49; VIFI6. 92A2g5
in extended and libertarian periods about the oppression of , FLME. no-130. Z25. 229; Mayo. ENGI-I5" "°V5\- 1" "'5 '
humankind and their devotion to nature. Yet, Ariadne is severely ' ZINES, pp.224, 258, 349. 367. 409-419-
threatened with violation and death unless she submits to the
bandit chief and she spends much of the novel pining away in a ~ Critical Syn°n§i$= °'l9l"lll¥ P"b1l5"°d i" 1773 l" "1sc§LL?'
cavernous imprisonment. The settin of the novel derive t t ll IEOUS PIECES IN PROSE by J. and A L. Aikin. the" ¢Xt¢"$ Ye I
g s o a y
from Mrs. Radcliffe's imaginary Italy which was itself an exotic
visualization inspired by the paintings of Salvator Rosa rather
than any firsthand observation. The Italy through which Ariadne
moves is a brigand-infested landscape complete with gloomy, par-
tially visible castles and struck through with shadowy figures.
The Minerva-Press contingent of Gothic authors borrowed freely
from each other and seized what they wanted for this sort of
Gothic fiction from the torrent of terrifying titles flooding
the literary marketplace. Thus, one undisguised source for this
unsigned Gothic is probably an earlier popular bandit-Gothic
published by Henry Colburn from the busy pen of Catherine Smith,
THE )CASTLE OF ARAGON: OR, THE BANOITTI OF THE FOREST (see
4 9
20. THE BANDITTI If THE FIIIEST: OR, THE MYSTERIOUS OAGGER. LAOY'S
MONTHLY MUSEUM, OR POLITE REPOSITORY OF AMUSEMENT ANO IN-
STRUCTION, 9-10 (July, 1811-February, 1812): 248-267, 311-
336; 415-434; 563-588; 640-661; 697-722; 31-SO; 102-142.
Modern Reeditions: None
Egghic Type: Serialized Gothic (sentimental and terror
es)
Biographical and Research Data: Mayo, Robert O. ‘The Gothic
Story in the Magazines,‘ MOOERN LANGUAGE REVIEH, 37 (1942):
448-454; Mayo, ENGLISH NOVEL IN THE MAGAZINES, p.459.
Critical Synopsis: The eight-part magazine Gothic bears the
signature, 'C.' This initial suggests the authorship of a Gothic
novelist who frequently published in the magazines, Catherine
Cuthbertson (see 0098, I099, I100). In 1804, THE LAOY'S MAGAZINE
had serialized her ROMANCE OF THE PYRENEES, and in 1810, she had
published THE FOREST OF MONTALBANO (see I098). She appears to
have transferred intact the Radcliffean material of her bandit
' and forest fiction to the eight installments of THE BANOITTI OF
reprinted in many eighteenth-century P6'l04l¢Al$. ‘"9 “Sir
lertrand Fragment‘ was preceded by an IIDOFIIOI $llt@l¢"‘ °f
Gothic theory, the essay ‘On the Pleasure Oerived from Objects
of Terror.‘ Authored jointly by Letitia Barbauld and her hus-
band, the Reverend Rochemont Barbauld, the treatise advanced an
aesthetic strategy for the production of Gothic horror and ter-
ror and went on to explain the psychological analogousness be-
tween moments of religious awe and moments of unbearable fear.
Ioth experiences are confrontations with an overwhelming unknown
capable of displacing all capacity to reason so that the m nd
becomes filled solely and entirely with the fearful object of
pleasure. According to the Barbaulds, the goal of Gothic art is
‘to feed the appetite for wonder by a quick succession of
marvellous events.‘ The effective tale of terror or horror.
then, must annihilate the power to reason through stupendous
objects and events that are innately mysterious and .dreadfull¥
pleasurable. ‘Solitude, darkness. low-whispered swim» °i>§¢"'=
glimpses of objects, and flitting forms tend to raise in the
mind that thrilling, mysterious terror which has for its object
‘powers unseen and mightier than we." The ‘Sir BertFI"¢
is a practical illustration of these Gothic theories.
Browning's Childe Roland a century later. 3l'bl"l4 5 5*’
makes a dark journey through nightmare terrain. lander-
through this gloomy landscave. "¢ "e°'5 ' 5°l*“" bell
somewhere in the distance. Turning aside to investigate
an ‘antique mansion‘ suddenly looms up out of the
darkness before him. He wonders whether he has come to the 9'All
or to the house of death. Entering the fearful fortress.
Bertrand is instantly endangered by "°"ld 5"°¢*5 ‘"4
contraptions of all sorts. Here, we have Mrs. Bar-
catalogue of instances of the best objects of terror for
'a quick succession of marvellous events.‘ Sir Bertrand
cold touch of what must be a cadaverous hand when an

 i
13 Hi FIRST 60TH1C$ . - me rmsr GDTHICS 19
invisible host welcomes him by ‘thrusting forward the bleed! 24. Barrett, C.F. oousus cams: on, THE csu. or MYSTERY, A scor-
stump of an arm.‘ Blue flames point Sir Bertrand's way toward a
sinister chamber in the depths of the castle. Here, a shrouded
lady, the forerunner of Poe's Ligeia and a legion of 'D05$""W0"$
TISH TALE. London : A. Neil at the Somers-town Printing Of-
fice, 1803.
Nodern Reeditions: None
heroines," stirs hopefully in her sarcophagus at Sir Bertrand's 4 Gothic Type: Gothic Chapbook
approach. Hhen this Gothic version of Sleeping beauty bestows
her cold kiss upon Sir Bertrand, the scene instantaneously
shifts as chamber and castle collapse. Niraculously, Sir Ber-
Biographical and Research Data: None
Critical Synopsis: A conventional Gothic chapbook of 72 pages
trand finds that he has changed worlds. Somehow, the dark lady's with a stereotypical Gothic plot, DOUGLAS CASTLE is a dilution
kiss of death transports hie ta a say and resplendent feast of Clara Reeve's ow Encusii. more (see 0355). A prominent
where he is welcomed by a beautiful man and her rell""e- at ' Gothic motif is seen in the didactic phantom who guides the the
this point, the fragment breaks off at what Hrs. Barbauld hoped
would be the maximum point of astonishment. Every necessary ele-
ment of the Gothic quest story is present in the ‘Sir Bertrand
Fragment.‘ The four stages of Gothic are: the approach to the
terrible castle; anxious entry and immediate supernatural in-
volvement; a climactic encounter with the resident spectre or
with the living dead as in the cadaverous resurrection of the
dark lady; an astounding delivery from the Gothic world.
hero to the tomb of his murdered parent, a stock scene that re-
curs throughout hundreds of chapbooks based on Reeve's novel.
The little Gothic is set in medieval Scotland. The motherless
heroine, Alicia Nelrose, loves Osmund (Reeve's Edmund Twyford),
but is compelled to marry the Nacbethian Baron Douglas, a loose
and sinister man who spends his time with courtesans and main-
tains an iron tower for the immurement of his victims. Hhen
Alicia bears the Baron a daughter, Julia, she is transported to
a convent for producing an heir of the wrong sex and Julia grows
22- 5aP"bY. "T5- KERVALD Cl5TL5= 09. T"5 "5"°1R5 99 TH5 "ARQUI5 955 1 up in the shadow of her father's fury. Young Percy, son of the
SDLANGES. London = Nald$t0"¢; PFlﬂ!¢¢ 70' ihé DUTDOF by 9- murdered Baron Dunbar, brother to Baron Douglas, enters her life
Chalmers and Sold by Hilkie, Symonds, and Hunt, 1803.
Modern Reeditions: None
Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (reworked from French senti-
mental fiction)
and since this is a Gothic novel, their destined happiness is
complexly delayed by Douglas's hateful schemes. Douglas would
have his daughter matched with Donald Nackensie, the Lord of the
Isles, and he would have his nephew, Percy, permanently removed
Blaoravhieal and Research llata= Silvers. GOTHIC BIBLIOGRAPHY. , to the iron tower. The events that rapidly follow are all pm
pp.6, 379.
Critical Synopsis: The story is a Gothification of the senti-
of the routine Gothic machinery grinding inexorably toward gen-
ealogical justice and the punishment of villainy. He have a sub-
terranean elopement as Julia leads Percy from the iron tower
mental French novel by J.A. Jullien des Boulmiers, NENOIRS DU I through a secret passageway. He have Percy's interview with
NAROUIS oes SDLANGES (ms). English translators with F-ethic Osmond, living as a hermit outside the castle walls. He have the
aspirations often transformed non-Gothic sources into high Goth-
ic works by appending castles and curses and darkening the orig-
return to the castle by Percy and Osmond for the purpose of
freeing Julia who has been taken to the iron tower after the
lﬂal FPEDCD D10! Of l¢¥1ll¢ ¢°U"t'§ 1lYl"9 lit" Yl'l°"5 5°@Dl¢ A lovers become separated. Exploring the cell of mystery for clues
surprises. A sorrowing maiden was usually already on hand a"¢ ' about his father's death, Percy is assisted by a cooperative
F¢Q"l'¢d °"1y 0 Suitably 5"D¢'"6¥"'ll ltI°$Dh6'¢- 1" the 5"9‘l5" * castle spectre who brings Percy to the_armory and presents him
version of the French story, there is a chamber within Kerwald n with the tool of Justice, the great‘ broadsword which had be-
Castle which is forbidden to all. H longed to his father. The wicked Douglas falls before the blade
of Percy, the Lord of the Isles is despatched by Osmond, and the
23.    k  London I "‘nerYQ-PTQSS f°r LQWQ. 1‘! |]°'-|\ubi]e "they and daughter, A]icia '|d Ju]]a. prepafe the
Newman, 1806. : chapel of the purified Douglas Castle for a double wedding.
Modern Reeditions: None
Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (terror mode)
Biographical and Research Data: Blakey, MINERVA PRE5$.
p.219.
Critical Synopsis: At issue in the romance is proper owner-
ship of Falkenheim Castle on the Rhine. The novel contains hor-
rid or Schauerromantik elements to go with a D10! FD!‘ 4lt¢5
back to Reeve's OLD ENGLISH BARON (see 0355). The title PQTQT5
to both the villain and to his wronged heir, who is subjected to
the usual trials by terror. There are manuscripts, forbidden
- chambers, and vocal spectres of ancestors. These and the under-
ground locales make the book an ordinary and formulaic Gothic.
Naking no pretensions to originality, Barrett's chapbook is
nevertheless a well-oiled and highly satisfactory example of
turret Gothic in brief form.
Barrett, C.F. THE ROUND TONER: OR, THE NYSTERIOUS NITNESS, AN
IRISH LEGENDARY TALE OF THE SIXTH CENTURY. London : J.H. Hart
for Tegg and Castleman, 1803.
Nodern Reeditions: None
Gothic Type: Gothic Chapbook (shilling shocker qualities)
Biographical and Research Data: None
Critical Synopsis: The 36-page chapbook--a distinct type of
Gaelic Gothic--draws its sanguinary action and violent atmos-

phere from HACBETH. In fact, the frontispiece depicts a Duncan-
esque spectre in a hovering approach toward the two Hacbethean
tyrants of the story, the monstrous Cobthatch who is ‘sensible
of the unjustness of his title to the throne of Hunster,‘ and
his fellow usurper, the Danish chief, Sitric. Sitric's vindic-
tive wife, Connora, is a Gothified transcription of Lady Hac-
beth, while the wronged young man and rightful heir to the king-
dom, Haon, is easily recognized as Shakespeare's Halcolm. To
yield atrocious thrill, the chapbooker even adds a blood-smeared
infant in the character of Laughair who is draped with chains
20 inf Emsf 601'HIcs -Tlf FIRST GUTHICS Z1
COS] lﬂ Barrett's THE HEROINE,' ENGLISH LANGUAGE NOTE$, Z1
(1983): 44-52.
Critical Synopsis: Inevitably, the ludicrous excesses of
Gothic fiction invited satire. In contrast to Jane Austen's sub-
tle ridicule of Gothic readers and Radcliffean heroines in
NORTHANGER ABBEY (see I012), Barrett's THE HEROINE is a merci-
less frontal assault on every form of Gothic nonsense from the
delicate palpitations of Hrs. Radcliffe and her school to the
crude sensationalism of the Gothic bluebookers and horror hacks.
when first seen in one of the dungeons of Cobthatch's castle. ' “h't "e"'Y Fle‘di“9 "ad “¢b°"9“5"°d 1" deb""ki"9 the "°"‘
The characters all speak in a kind of glucose pseudo-
Shakespearean style intended by the chapbooker to rend the heart
of the reader. ‘Say, Sitric,‘ expostulates the guilt-ridden Cob-
thatch early in the tale, ‘hast thou not marked the gloomy dis-
content which haunts my soul, and makes my very being irksome to
myself?‘ Gothic weather enshrouds the characters: ‘The northern
wind with chilling blasts echoed through the dreary labyrinth
with hideous howl, and the sun with gloomy radiance illumined
the wintry sky.‘ Plot is of little importance and seems subordi-
nate to the various Gothic effects. Sitric and Cobthatch have
waded through blood to come to power together taking the kingdom
from ‘the afflicted Noriat.‘ Now Sitric instigates the murder of
Cobthatch and uses the round tower at his castle in the Hicklow
seriousness of Richardson, Barrett would do to the supernumerary
horrors of the Gothic novelists. Barrett's sense of farce is
vitriolic, his narrative method, brutal and corrosive mockery,
his avowed purpose, the extermination of the Gothic virus it-
self. Yet, THE HEROINE is more than simply an extended sneer at
‘the Salinas, Evelinas, and Halvinas who faint and blush and
weep through four half-bound octaves.‘ This is coherent parody
in the best Aristophanic tradition. It sets out to laugh an
audience back into its senses and the burlesque Gothic is so
good as to be almost indistinguishable from the real Gothic
itself at many points. Hot a single feature of Gothic absurdity
evades Barrett's irate eye from wild rhetoric to place and
character names. The fatuous heroine, Cherry Uilkinson, embarks
mountains to dispose of ri hteous rivals and bloody babes. The ' °" 3 9°t"l¢ ¢°'°¢'-'5"° lPP'°9'l°t°‘¥ ¢"l"9°5 "¢' "3"? t° c"¢'"'
chapbook's final scene is a aasterwork of rude heavenly justice i biha de iiiiievshby after catching the Bethie disease by readihsi
and violent retribution. when Horiat's son, Haon, is brought ; several deleh nebular remahces- Cherry's sbiiieiiiiy an the inade-
from the round tower to the scaffold for his beheading, we get 1 q"‘¢¥ °f her "°"* 7°’ t"? "°l9ht§ ""5 d°Pt"5 °f 5°t"‘¢ life
this amazing reversal: ‘The ponderous axe was on the point of . su99e5ts Barrett's 'e"°"°"$ l¢¢"'d¢¥= ‘Whit d "I"!--c"¢F'¥! It
inflicting the fatal blow, when the gates of the courtyard were 5' '°'l"d5 °"° 5° ""°" °f P1""P"°$5 °"¢ '"¢d¥ "°3‘th- c"¢"¥
burst open, and O'Brian accolivanied by Kildare, rushed in at the ='- --better be sailed Pine-apple at ehce- There is a sreeh and rei-
head of a nu'er°u§ band of pe,sant,y_ k biuish vapour arose at r low melancholy in Pine-apple, that is infinitely preferable. I
the bottom of the hall, which, advancing slowly toward the va- - render if Cherry wild nassibiy be ah abbreviation bf Cheru-
cant seat of royalty, became stationary.“ And out of the bin; ~ bina?' Barrett also systematically dismantles the preposterous
cloud flashes the bolt of heavenly lightning which incinerates
Sitric. Characteristically, the Gothic chapbook strips away all
of the complications of the immense Gothic plot in order to Jar
the reader with supernatural shocks. These little Gothics are
apparatus of Gothic plotting and here again he attains the lim-
its of parody. On her grotesque adventures, Cherubina can only
acknowledge thunder when it rolls in ‘the Ossianly manner‘ and
she anxiously gazes into every male countenance seeking signs of
shortened and plagiarized novels devoted not to the story or to ‘ 'R"iVePi"9 lid and Schedoniac contour‘ (see 0350). Her life be-
the moral but to spectacular special effects. They are the natu-
ral literary link between the unreadable four-volume Gothics of
the Eighteenth Century and the brief tale of terror of the later
Nineteenth Century with its uncanny climaxes and terminal
twists.
26. Barrett, Eaton Stannard. THE HEROINE: OR, THE ADVENTURES OF A
FAIR ROMANCE READER. London : Henry Colburn, 1813.
Hodern Reeditions: Natthews and Narrot, 1927, ed. Hichael
Sadleir.
Gothic Type: Gothic Parody
Biographical and Research Data: Birkhead, TALE OF TERROR,
pp.133-137; Lewis, Paul. ‘Two Versions of Hock Gothic,‘ STUD-
IES IN SHORT FICTION, 15 (1978): 411-415; Hay, Leland C. RAR-
OOIES OF THE GOTHIC NOVEL. New York : Arno Press, 1980;
Lewis, Paul. ‘Gothic and Nock Gothic: The Repudiation of Fan-
comes a breathless conglomeration of stock shocks and frantic
phrases. She deserts her real father in order to attach herself
to a mean and aristocratic sire with a bad reputation and secret
habits. She mistakes the stalls of Covent Garden Theatre for the
gallery of a haunted abbey nd is indulged by Lady Gwyn who
consents to take the part of Cherubina's malicious aunt in the
Gothic charade. Her encounter with Lady Gwyn permits Barrett to
caricature one of the structural requirements of the triple-
decker Gothic, the inset story. Lady Hysterica Belamour's suita-
bly gruesome and totally irrelevant memoir, the story of Il
Castello de Grimogothico, does the Job. Now determined to reside
in a real haunted building, Cherubina travels with her entourage
to Nonckton Castle, where she proceeds to redecorate the place
to Gothic specifications. Undulating tapestry, untraceable sighs
and groans, immured uncles, dim passageways leading to forbidden
chambers, draped portraits, ‘flags stained with the best old

,:
I
5 22
I
\ I
I 1
I
I
1
\ ‘ i
\
Tr£ FIRST GOTHICS ‘-11E FIRST GOTHICS
blood, feudal if possible,‘ and all the other trappings of hor- ; perior, intercepts the letters and confines Eliza to a peniten-
ror fit into her redecorating scheme. To coimlete the decor, tial cell whose walls seem to be upholstered with human blood
Cherubina outfits herself in "spangled muslin," then heightens and clotted hair and the floor to be paved with the bones of
her chances for becoming a Gothic victim by "tripping, gliding, iqaenitent nuns. A dagger is provided for Eliza's suicide, and
flitting, and tottering with great success.‘ lihen Cherubina fi- she finally obliges while the gloating abbess watches from the
nally emerges from her delusions to become Cherry again, Barrett tiny window above. These abominations are reminiscent of the
charges the reader with a moral that scarcely needs stating. Re- horrid decor of Agnes's monastic prison in THE HONK (see I244)
alistic novels can be valuably instructive, but the Gothic novel and further register the purposes of the chapbooker to present
is ‘so seductive that it tends to incapacitate us from the tur- ' the goriest distresses of convent life without any Possibility
moils of active life.‘ Barrett's antidote to the Gothic epidemic \ of escape as the ultimate in morbid thrill. Comenting on this
was read and appreciated by an intelligent minority of novel ' variety of Burgverliess Gothic, the leading student of how Cath-
readers who yearned to see a return to normalcy in fiction. Yet, olic materials are emloyed in Gothic fiction, Sister Hary
the rough gusts of satire raised by THE HEROINE were not yet lhriel Tarr, concludes: "Hhen Catholic materials are apprehended
strong enough by themselves to topple the fortress of Gothic I Qotionally, as, for the most part, they are in Gothic fiction,
taste. the resultant attitude is expressed in terms of a melodramatic
$¢"tIl9"tl“l.Y that revels in melancholy pleasure divine hor-
Z7. Barrington, George. ELIZA: OR, THE UNHAPPY HUN. London : Tegg ror, and religious awe.‘ '
and Castleman, 1803. -I
Modern Reeditions: None pl. Beauclerc, Amelia. EVA if CAIBRIA: DR, THE FUGITIVE DAUGHTER.
Gothic Type: Gothic Chapbook (monastic shocker variety) I; London : Ninerva-Press for A.K. Newman, 1810,
Biographical and Research Data: Hone -. liodern Reeditions: None
Gothic Type: Domestic Gothic
Critical Synopsis: The heavily sentimental monastic shocker, 14 Biographical and Research Data: Summers, GOTHIC BIBLIOGRAPHY,
ELIZA: ill, THE UNHAPPY NUN is subdivided into a conuilation of -. p.8.
23
four lugubrious tales‘ A REHARKABLE SUICIDE SUICIDE THROUGH '
\ . V
C I OPPRESSIOH, SUICIDE THROUGH DISTRESS: HENRI DE’ FRAHCOEUR, and
THE SUICIDE OF HILLIAH L. Eliza's own story of the horrors of
the convent is the third tale and serves as a type of spliced
sequel to the persecutions of Clementina, victim of a vicious
abbess who is held up to the reader as ‘a dreadful examle of
monastic cruelty.‘ Absurd deaths are the order of the day in all
of these stories. Clementina's aggrieved lover, Jeronymo, is so
overcome at her funeral that he falls from a turret window onto
her passing coffin and is fatally injured. The lurid ecclesias-
tical propaganda of the chapbookér is best viewed through the
horrific title used to advertise ELIZA: "The Unhappy Nun, Ex-
eqalifying the Unlimited Tyranny Exercised by the Abbots and
Abbesses Over the Ill Fated Victims of Their Halice in the
Gloomy Recesses of a Convent Including the Adventures of Clemen-
tina, or the Constant Lovers, A True and Affecting Tale.‘ The
foundations for this type of sensational expose of the barbari-
ties of the religious life were laid by Diderot in LA RELIGIEUSE
(1796) and eagerly seized upon by the English Gothic novelists
because of their strong lurid appeal. Catherine Selden's THE
EIGLISH NUN (see I396) is a principal source for ELIZA. Some-
times the monastic shocker was overrun with chapel spectres and
bloody shapes from the catacombs beneath the abbey, but Eliza's
terrors are all natural. Like Diderot's heroine, Simone Simonin,
Eliza is packed off to a convent by her indifferent father.
After reading the pathetic history of ‘Eloisa and Abelard," she
seeks the secret love and comanionship of the young officer,
Charles, whom she meets and loves on the high holy day of the
Feast of St. Phillip on the sixth of June. The lovers secretly
exchange letters using the nun, liadeline, as an intercessor. The
ferocious abbess, a direct copy of Diderot's lesbian mother su-
Critical Synopsis: At issue in the romance is the proper
ownership of the lielsh Castle of Caelaon. The novel contains a
modicum of horrid or Schauerromantik incidents to ornament a
agalogical plot that dates back to Clara Reeve's OLD ENGLISH
N (see I355). The wronged heir is Eva's brother who is im-
prisoned by his own relatives. There are strange manuscripts,
""1 $l>¢¢lr8$ Md chanbers, and several scenes in the under-
goilild. all of which give the novel an ordinary and forpulgﬂ;
thic look. .
Deauclerc, Amelia. THE CASTLE if TARIFFA: OR, THE SELF-BANISHED
HAN. London : B. Cr b I81
os y, 2. _
Modern Reeditions: None -
Gothic Type: Sentimental Gothic
gggrgphical aid Research Data: Sunmers, GOTHIC OUEST, pp.96,
Critical Synopsis: Of bluebook quality, THE CASTLE if TARIFFA
offers a few terror scenes and a few mild shudders, but is
chiefly a novel of domestic manners pretending to be a Gothic by
the alluring term, ‘castle,’ in its title. This practice of
false Gothic titling of domestic or sentimntal fiction was
widespread as shown by many other misleading titles of the
 such as Charles Lucas's THE CASTLE if ST. DONATS (see
Beckford, iiilliam. VATHEK: Ali ARABIAN TALE FRIII All UNPUBLISHED
MANUSCRIPT, UITH NOTES CRITICAL AND EXPLANATMY. London : J.
Johnson I786
liodern ‘Reeditions: Dover Publications, 19b6, ed. E.F. Blei-

IIIIIIIIIIIIII__————————————————————-—-~
24 T!-E FIRST GOTHICS ‘TIE FIRST MTHICS 25
ler: unford UP. 1970. ed- Rooer Lonsdale: Penguin Books. 19- reached by 1500 steps. Atop his tower, Vathek finds an arrogant
73, eds. Peter Fairclough and Mario Praz. seclusion from humanity and escapes the pettiness and boredom
Biographical and Research Data: Parreaux, André. UILLIAH hgloy in his oity of sahspai-ah, he also sinuses himself with the
BECKFORD: AUTEUR DE 'iIATliEK" (1760-1844): ETUDE DE LA Iiass strangulation of his subjects. Following his desires along
CREATION LITTERAIRE. Paris : Nizet, I960; lleiioiidei‘. B0yil- an axis of Gothic action which takes him froill celestial to
ENGLANO'S HEALTHIEST SON: A STUDY if HILLIAH GECKFORO. London infernal limits, Vathek decides to leave his capital city to
1 Ceiitoui‘ "855. 1952; 701500. Jeilﬁs K- "3¢¢|if°"i1'$ VATHEK penetrate downward to the center of hell itself. Heavenly ascent
and the Tradition of Oriental Satire,‘ CRITICISM, 6 (I964): and infernal descent syﬂlolize the Gothic hero's inoveinent from
53-59: erahan. *°""°‘“ "' 'B‘°“f°'°'$ VhT"EK= A Study in wish-fulfillment to frustration. Before departing, Vathek and
Ironic Dissonance,‘ CRITICISM, 14 (1972): 243-252; Gemett, his court delight in kicking a. rolling Indian who has obligingly
Robert J. HILLIAH BECKFORD. Boston : Twayne, I977; Garber, ' transformed himself into a humanoid soccer ball for their sadis-
Frederick. "8eckford, Delacroix, and Byronic Orientalisll.‘ tic amusement. This event is quite normal within the context of
CGPKRKTIVE LITERATURE 5TU°1E$. 18 (1981): 321-332; "I19. Beckford's fantasy. At the bidding of his sorceress mother,
Randall. "Beckford's Inversion of Roinance in ilATiiEK,' ORBIS Carathis, Vathek renounces Allah and iimlerses himself in occult
LITTERARUII, 39 (1984): 95-106. and hedonistic pursuits. Froin a chuckling Giaour who guards a
pit's mouth Vathek learns the way to hell after paying an en-
Critical Synopsis: A Iulti-oeneric work. Beckford's orientai- trance fee of fifty children. here he might find the subterra-
lled 50tlil¢ fli'ito$.Y 56¢!!! 6 Will! Odillty 1" I P¢i‘l°¢ °V9"‘iIil nean palace of eternal fire and behold the lord of the under-
with literary oddities. VATliEK's curious mixture of hilarity and world, Eblis. Enroute to hell, Vathek pauses in the Happy Valley
NOYFOT IGKQS the IOTK difficult C0 classify DQCGUSE Of EH8 £0081 to fol] in loyg yith ﬂouronihor ond to gourpondizg on dglloqoigs
dissonances. Scenes can shift from high Gothic sei’l0ii§'l¢55 1-° that include vulture a la daube and roasted wolf. The final
sardonic C026]. Beckford's S2058 Of humor in VATHEK lS often stoges of the journey toyard Ehlis tokg us through 3 surrgal
riotously sadistic and his absurd sequences can remind readers landscape unmatched elsewhere in Gothic literature for its sheer
of the buffoonery of another lunatic masterpiece of the Eigh- weirdness. Crossing plains of black sand, Vathek and his train
teenth Century, Sterne°s TRISTRNI SHKNDY (1752). BOCII Sterne and behold such marvels as 3 pyropid of humon skulls nearly gs high
Beckford are masters of irrational narrative in which a lunatic as the Gizeh monument, amorous reptiles with feminine faces,
109"! l>l’¢Vdl1$ lild "litre "it llillrre Giutloli will always take staircases and vestibules illuminated by blue fire, battalions
precedence over the sensible thought. A twentieth-century admir- of dyorfs oho oripplgs, on gsoort of o|1g-gygd hggressgs for
er of 8eckford's unorthodox Gothicisw. H-P- Lovecraft. sunna- carathis, nauseous banquets of thorns and thistles, wild lights,
Filed the Cullioileiits 07 M5 04¢ "'1! "5¢¢lif°i'i1. V811 F964 1" strange beasts and birds including an omnipresent squadron of
Eastern Rooance. cauqht the atnosnhere with unusual receotivity: vultures overhead, an ebony underground, and finally the Hall of
and in his fantastic volume reflected very ootently the hauohty Eblis. one of the great scenes in Gothic literature is the in-
luxury. sly disiilusion. bland cruelty. urbane treachery and fernal climax in the Hall of Eblis. Gazing upon the throne of
shadowy soectral horror of the Saracjn soirit- The tale narches Eblis and realizing that his quest has brought him to damnation,
onward with a nhantasnaooric none i which the lauohter is that Vathek's breast suddenly becomes transparent and his heart
of skeletons feasting under arabesque domes.“ VATHEK reaches haloeo yith hell flags, he oust nay yonder for-over with heart
Sullliits 07 llltosilrlllle ""'ltl°lil1lt¥ 1" W5 519'"! °f "I9 1°69“ ablaze through the endless hallways of his own burning desires.
some and the ludicrous. Its stranqe orotaoonist. the Calinh Beckford's VATHEK influenced the tone and direction of the
Vathek. is a soecial tyne of sadistic ouester whose lust for the eothie novel in four ways. First, it offered to the Gothic imag-
ultimate infernal experience drives him to pursue daiination it- ination the pattern of the demonic or perverse quest, a Gothic
self. Deliberately choosing evil as his good, the demonic hero version of the hero's long voyage; second, it made available a
makes a fantastic journey to the core of hell, or the Hall of psychology aid a physignomy for the Gothic villain, the superman
Eblis as it is called in the liohainedan tradition. Teqlted to who risks all for evil; third, it opened up the possibilities of
seek hell by comic monster ghouls and Giaours and enticed to - the Gothic imagery of diminishing enclosures, contracting into-
descend through fiery doorways into the lower depths. Vltlitii V‘ riors, and an underground of no return; and last, it penetrated
"¢¢'ll¢t$ "it slilfiil 5096 01’ Faust in his “insolent curiosity °f 1* to the vision of the high Gothic in its evocation of a malignant
penetrating the secrets of heaven.‘ The character's Gothic face ‘ or Satmically controlled universe in which all moral norms are
is noteworthy. In it is inscribed Vathek's abhorrence of all inverted or twisted and where disorder is far more likely than
limits while his devotion to evil comes to a focal point in his order.
single, terrible eye which can maim or slay as Vathek wills. The 4
fatal optic is one of Beckford's major contributions to the 31. Geckford, ililliam. THE EPISODES if VATHEK. London : Stephen
evolution of the Gothic villain. Vathek's voyages throughout the 1' Swift, 1912.
novel usually take a vertical form of clidling or descending. In Modern Reeditions: Stephen Swift, 1912, ed. and trans. Sir
- a perverse effort to touch heaven itself, Vathek first builds a ' Frank T. ltarzials; Constable, I929, ed. Guy Chapman.
private tower, its pinnacle topped by a private observatory Gothic Types‘ Orientalind Gothic fantasy

d
SI”!
l
l
THE FIRST GOTHICS
Biographical and Research Data: Chapman, Guy. BECKFORD. Lon-
don : Rupert Hart-Davis, 1952; Alexander, Boyd. 'VATHEK and
its Episodes,‘ in ENGLAND'S HEALTHIEST SON: A STUDY OF HIL-
LIAN BECKFORD. London : Centaur Press, 1962. 90.91-I02; Gid-
THE FIRST GOTHICS 27
reserved for the liaison of lulkais and Kalilah in hell is a
good index to the sexual symbolism of Beckfordian Gothic for it
is a transparent genital fantasy of illicit sexual attainment.
Looking about her, lulkais sees ‘a chamber square and immensely
dey, Ernest. VATHEK ET LES EPISODES. Lausanne, Switzerland : ' spacious, and paved with a marble that was of flesh colour, a"d
Recontre, 1962; Parreaux, Andre. 'Beckford: Bibliographie marked as with veins and arteries of the human body. The walls
selective et critique,‘ BQLLETIN 05 LA SOCIETE O'ETUDES of the place af terror were hidden by lwse piles of carpets of a
ANGLO-AHERICAINES DES XVII ET XVIII SIECLES, 3 (1976); 45- thousand kinds and a thousand hues, and these moved slowly to
S5. and fro, as if painfully stirred by human creatures stifling
beneath their weight.‘ In such. moods of horror, wonder, and
Critical Synopsis: Not translated until the Twentieth Centu- ' secret pleasure, the three EPISODES constitute a remarkable
ry, the three EPISODES make up a thematic sequel to VATHEK. The triad Of Gﬂlhlt $ltuaIl0n$ and effecti-
same crafty Gothic spirit is joined with explicit homoerotic
subject matter in the three tales. Some Beckford biographers \ 32. Bennett, Agnes Maria. ELLEN, COUNTESS OF CASTLE HOHEL. London :
maintain that the episodes are self-dramatizations on Beckford's Minerva-Press for lllllian Lane. 1794-
part. The symbols and images used by Beckford in the EPISODES Modern Reeditions: None
certainly make it clear that he had in mind three private fables Gothic Type: Sentimental Gothic
of sexual anguish. The titles of the episodes are: ‘The Story of Biographical and Research Data: Tompkins, POPULAR NOVEL IN
Prince Alasi and the Princess Firouz-kah,' "The Story of Prince ENGLAND, p.173; Foster, HISTORY OF THE PRE-RONANTIC NOVEL IN
Barkiarokh,' and ‘The Story of Princess Zulkais and Prince Ka- ENGLAND, p.44.
lilah.' The same sort of grotesque comedy present in VATHEK also
suffuses the EPISODES. Beckford's personal peculiarities coupled Critical Syn0P5l$= A 5°thi¢ '¢'5‘°" °f the 5'l5¢1¢l 53°F! 07
with his notorious homosexual attachment to Hilliam ‘Kitty’ the patient and forbearing woman who endures a cruel husband's
Courtenay are much closer to the surface of the narrative in the trials and persecutions, the novel won great acclaim from the
EPISODES than in VATHEK which perhaps accounts for their being readers of sentimental Gothic fiction. In the rise of the Gothic
withheld from publication during Beckford's lifetime. In its novel, this sort of book is best regarded as transitional fic-
French version, the introductory episode originally had a sug- , tion in which the emphasis is beginning to shift from the real-
gestively homosexual title, 'Histoire des deux princes,‘ but istic scene to the nightmare fantasies of a constrictive and
Beckford later defrayed scandal by feminizing prince Firouz into internal Gothic universe as the action turns from the world
Princess Firouz-kah. This tale has some obvious links with the without to the world within. The character of the distressed
Caliph Vathek's longings for perdition. To make their love su- countess falls somewhere between the domestic sufferings of
preme, Princess Firouz-kah, acting as a Gothic succubus, per- Richardson's Clarissa Harlowe and the morbid Gothic panics of
suades Prince Alasi to defy Allah and seek Eblis as the lord of the tormented maidens of the 1790's. Howel Castle in wales is
the world. The same allurement of divine hellfire which drew not yet equipped for supernatural horrification and there are no
Vathek downward into the Halls of Eblis brings the couple to ‘ injured apparitions stalking its corridors; it is merely a
fiery living death. The temptress who lures her lover on to his ’ menacing prison of the body and spirit ruled over by a ruthless
damnation has ties with the wicked women of Gothic fiction such male who asserts his lust for power through his new marriage.
as Hatilda in THE MONK (see I244). The urge for perdition is For the innocent and spirited young woman who has been forcibly
reflected in the other two episodes as well. ‘The Story of brought to Castle Howel to play the role of decorative new coun-
Prince Barkiarokh' contains some daring necrophiliac content in tess, there seems to be no escape. But in the face of her new
the graphic descriptions of the Prince's necroerotic violence husband's campaign of persecution she displays a saintly
and is perhaps the most horrifying story that Beckford ever ' fortitude and patience expected of the heroine of sensibility, a
wrote. The Prince revels in evil throughout and when he discov- moral posture which leads to her triumph over male cruelty in a
ers his female victim, Gazahide, in a deathlike trance, his de- satisfaction of the Richardsonian maxim of ‘virtue rewarded.‘
generacy breaks loose in repeated assaults on her ‘corpse.’ But Rather than a bein a finished Gothic novel, what we have in
like so many Gothic madmen who violate a beautiful corpse, Bar- ~ ELLEN, COUNTESS D? CASTLE HOHEL is the domestic novel of seduc-
kiarokh is repelled by his act: ‘Ashamed and despairing, I tion and maidenly suffering moving inward and becoming Gothic.
issued from the apartment, hiding my head with the skirt of my I
robe. The woman I sought to embrace was always inert and seem- ; 33. Bennett, Agnes Naria. VICISSITUDES ABROAD: OR, THE GHOST OF HY
ingly dead, and I always quitted her with horror.‘ In the unfin- FATHER. London : Ninerva-Press for Lane, Newman, 1806.
ished third tale, the theme of sexual perversion is again Nodern Reeditions: None
strong. The story explores the unconquerable attraction of the Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (intermittent didactic ele-
Princess lulkais for her twin brother, Kalilah. The story re- ments)
peats the climax of VATHEK by having lulkais descend to hell in , Biographical and Research Data: None . _
hopes of being reunited with her forbidden lover. The" room ' '

20 ms FIRST cornzcs -"*5 "R57 °°T"1¢$ 29
Critical Synopsis: A Goliath among the Gothics, the six vol- '°')
unles of VICISSITUDES mono show by their sheer weight and bulk Biewvhieel end Research om: Lévy. LE Rom "GOTHIQUE"
the reasons why the Gothic novel died out or gave way to the ANGLAISQ DD-406. 569. 631.
shorter tales of terror. The page count taken from the edition
in the Sadleir-Black Gothic Collection is informative for it c'lTl¢eT 5!hoD$l5= The hovel attempts to harmonize the oppo-
shows the Gothic spirit sinking into the quagmire of its own site G°t"l¢ "°°d5 '"d T°¢h"lq"@§ f°""¢ l" the Work of "PS- Rid-
verbiage. The page contents of the six volumes are as follows: cllffev ‘"5 "er "9" Tlvel °" The 9°thl¢ 5¢e"e, "ooh LeIl$- The
1_3a4 pages; n_3‘0 pages; In_323 pages; Iv_355 pages; v_316 fUSl0Il Of 'l@llClI tQI'I‘OY‘ Ild Qlplllill HOPTOT lll THE CKSTLE OF
peees; v1_3o8 heees_ Ereh iheefetiethte reeders of the teheer HARDAYNE yielded a successful crossbreeding of the two strains
Gothics must have quaked before the prospect of navigating a °T 3°thl¢l5"- “"119 Rldcllffel" "lrritlve olVl¥$ Cohlllheo fore-
2'026,page see of ink. Md after reading around in the six vo]_ , bOdlflgS Of UllIlgS IIOFG l\ldQOUS Chill actually occurred, Bird I85
umes, the reader is quickly aware that length is only one of 351° T° "°¢lT¥ hi5 forlﬂll by "Slog horrid suggestion and premo-
many flaws to be found in this deeply flawed example of the form "ltl°" t° build "P t° h°"lbT¢ 7"lflllle"¢- We Il$o See 6 con-
in its lengthiest state. An unintelligible narrative written in tl""'tl°" °T the 5°thl¢ "°'¢ll5t'5 P'°¢tl¢9 °f T'i"5f°Fll"9 the
e tu1seee end f1erid sty]e hers the readerls eey teeerd ehy dilapidated castle from place into personality, thus satisfying
understanding of or pleasure in the events surrounding the ‘"9 'e°de"5 ¢¢5l'¢ T0 hive l"°'9o"l¢ 0hJe¢t5 P$¥¢h°lo9lle¢ lhlo
search for the tether that is hhderteteh by severe; ter1erh objects of animated and inexplicable horror. Hith its ‘shattered
young ladies during eghe 1est eeys of touts the |est_- ested he walls stained with a variety of beautiful mosses, or shadowed
Lady N. early in the story whether or not she believes in "it" the b'°¢d "@5595 °T l'Yi ¢h'°"9h Ihleh the Qrey tint of
ghosts, the first narrator, later identified as Helena St. Her- 5°t"l¢k °'"'"*"t5 "°"ld 5°"@tlIe$ Deep.‘ the ol$tle of Gothic
hen reseehds with e heh seehtter: Ilnercifu‘ heaven’! sete It fiction has moved a step closer toward becoming a cranial icon
-vnaz fearful enigma is this! Have 1 then met the barbarian, the °' $¥"'°°l 0' ‘he him" heed within which there must lurk a sin-
cruel uncle, who left the only child of his brother to perish in ‘Ste’ l"T°lll9e"¢e d9V°t9¢ t° evil-
a hospital?‘ Other persecuted ladies (Henrietta Somervine, Ninon ‘
and Charlotte Chevereux), when shown the same portrait which 35- T“: 8L*c* c°"v5"T= 09' A Thli OT Fiunhl TT"€$- Lohdoﬂ 1
evokes this outburst from Helena, respond with equal irrelevance 1 "l"°""P'°55 7°’ A-K- "¢""°"» 1319-
to the query about paternal ghosts. The Gothicist apparently had "°d*'" R¢°dltl°"5= "°"°
in mind a group memoir portraying each young woman on a journey ' 5°thlc TYP¢= 9"’? °' "T9" 5°thl¢ (h°'P°F lode)
of discovery after beholding the miniature of her missing fa- 8l°9"9“l°" *"d Reselrch oat‘: "°"¢
ther, but the writing is so clumsy and so overloaded with com-
plexities that even the most diligent reader cannot be sure of c'ltic'l 5Y"°P5l5= This "l"9'Vl'P'¢55 Gothle lh ﬁlo VOTUIES
the storyline. The decision to organize the novel into packets e '99°"5 t° be ' '¢'lY9d lb'l¢9!Ie"t of "T$- Red¢llffe'$ THE
of documents instead of chapters is an additional hindrance to \ lTALlA": one T"E c°“FE55|°"AL OF Th5 5LA¢K P5h1T5hT5 ($ee 9350)-
comprehension, although the device might have worked in more ~ T"* ‘"°"Y'°"5 G°T" ¢h°"9e¢ ‘"9 "eles l"¢ the T°¢ole\ hut Te-
eeeheteht hehds_ There ere e tee sueeesstu] eethte seehes, hut tained the twin threats of the Inquisition and priestly disguise
these ere net very eeeerfet or frequent eheeeh to reeeem the as well as the murky atmosphere of Hrs. Radcliffe's novel. An
eehere1 mediocrity of the eert ehtte hrs_ Behhettis rheterte is unusual feature of this Radcliffean imitation is its Scottish-
hhheerehyy seedeh_ vetehe tour eteses etth eh thtervtee heteeeh English border country setting. The novel of monastic menace or
one of the maidens and the ghost of her father--or is it her '*]i9i°"5 t¢"°' "'°5t e‘°l“5l'°l¥ c“°5¢ '¢dl¢'ll 5Pll"- flT-
heshehdt -I eeehed my eyes to hehetet ehet__ehet' thdeeet A see_ ' teenth-century France, or Renaissance Italy for its arenas of
ond spectre!  was the very face, in advanced years.  had ‘ Suffering Qnd horror. But    Tocdted HS attloﬂ
heeh the curse of ht youthtm A 1ttt]e vtttethy ts furnished in medieval England during the reign of Edward I (1272-1307).
throu h the schemes of the Jewish banker Israel Detite; a ,
littlg moral ambiguity is provided through the suspicious noble- - 35' T"E 8L*cK v*LLEY= one THE c*5TLE OF R°5E"3ER5- L°"d°" 1 T-
man, Lord Castlebank; and a little comedy is assigned to Captain ‘ "'id*" T°' 5"" L°“°l"@» 13°3-
Honkwell, Swigg, and Hrs. Kinghorne in the travels of the "°d°'" R*°ditl°"5= "°"e
ladies. But these features are not sufficient to rescue this e°t“i° 739*: G°t"ic c”‘9b°°k (5"ll1l"9 5"°¢k°' q"°lltl°5l
elliptical and topheavy Gothic from oblivion. To observe the 5‘°9"°P"‘“‘ "'4 R¢§""°" °"°= "°'"=
d ath throe of th En li h thi n v l rn t thi l tit - .
dinous speclmen and gugteiingotorﬁh gfethetgothig traditloz; the critical S7"°9$‘5‘ The ‘3'9'9° G°t"'° c"'Pb°°k ¢*"lblt5 Ill
hoot ts the eethte hove‘ in the hey of e_ftet_ t of the ornaments of the shillingeshocker: an epigraph from the
. Elizabethan blood tragedy, IRDEN FEVERSHIH (‘Hy Slldlng feet
34. Bird, JOMI. me usm or moms. London = Kearsley, 1195. " "W "'°'¢ "¢"'°""9 f°"""¢=- "Q ¢"e"¢he¢ in bleed‘) eho eh
t hederh Reeetttehs: hehe exquisitely lurid frontispiece depicting ‘The murderer placing
Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (fusion of terror and hor- the b‘°°dY hgid b°T°'¢ Al¢ll'-7 °bTlq"¢ "l"t5 °T'The K155 L553

1
1 l
l
g.__
THE FIRST GOTHICS
story also infiltrate the plot. The decrepit knight of the Black
Forest, old Baron Castlebrow, is sordid, avaricious, and "like _ __
the figure of famine." He dies mysteriously, leaving three
daughters by two wives and bequeaths to all three his haunted
Castle of Rosenberg which adjoins the Black Valley, a forbidding
cleft that lives up to its name as a corridor of all horror. The
Baron's eldest daughter is Isabella, inheritor of her father's
vile nature. The middle daughter is Louisa, a woman who is
capriciously charitable and selfish. The Cinderella-Cordelia
figure is the youngest daughter, Amelia, an orthodox miniaturi-
zation of the Gothic maiden and clearly made to suffer. "Nature
was arrayed in her fairest form in Amelia who was all innocence
and all beauties." Amelia has been persuaded by Friar Henzel to
become a religious recluse and is about to do so when the young
T
I
l
I
crusader, Lindorf, rides into her life. His mission is the loca- ,
tion of his lost brother, Egbert of Rosenberg, and the recovery
of Rosenberg Castle which has fallen under the control of Isa-
bella through the dead Baron's usurpation. Lindorf, whose real
name is Orlathal of Rosenberg, fulfills his quest, taking time
to fall in love with the youngest daughter of his family's ene-
my, Amelia of Castlebrow. The details of this Gothic plot are
utterly ordinary and formulaic; what gives the little Gothic its
special appeal is its special subterranean effects. Isabella and
.-s-ae-1 -gm:-5'
I
|"
Friar Henzel connive to have Lindorf murdered as he passes
through the Black Valley enroute to Rosenberg Castle. In
transit, he suddenly plunges through a chasm, landing in "an old
ruinous vault, empty and unfrequented, as it was believed to be
haunted by a spirit, that destroyed with fire and sulphur, who- '
ever ventured to enter its dark and unwholesome circumference. -
He tore the scarf from his face and found himself in a glinner- -
ing vault surrounded by coffins.“ But this place of death and i
darkness becomes the site of rejuvenation and life for Lindorf. '
Reversals of this type are characteristic of the Gothic mode. 1
Hearing a rattling sound along the damp walls, he extends his ‘
hand and--presto--he catches a falling skull. Lindorf's speech 1
to the skull a la Hamlet and Yorick brings to his side a guard- {
ian dwarf who guides him to safety and informs him of Isabella's i
villainy. She has displayed a fake severed head of Lindorf (the
subject of the frontispiece illustration) to drive Amelia mad ‘
with grief. Exposure and justice are always swift (never more
than a paragraph or two) in the pages of the shilling shocker. 3
Lindorf and Egbert join forces, Amelia is reunited with her
champion, the Castle of Rosenberg reverts to its rightful heirs,
and the Goneril-figure of the piece, the “marble-hearted fiend,"
Isabella, is stoned to death by a jubilant peasantry. As usual
in the chapbook industry, the Goth was under pressure by the
publisher to end the tale after 42 pages whether or not he and
his characters were ready to do so. Yet, the narrative maintains ﬁ_____;;ff4"i___,, _ A___ _ _ g_ _ ,_; ;V___M_ _
its horror and suspense with considerable skill and the hero's _ “_ - ‘L7-;;v;JQﬁ»lAwp1--1 /»--u-al~¢‘~1o.
catching of the falling skull is a novel effect. The Goth even ' '
attempted an imitation Shakespearean exit-couplet in the final , “ ,, , , _ V _ _
sentence of the chapbook: “Thus, long they liv'd in joy and \ I] F: r} F1!‘ 1R F1'\' _l |{ 1 ]3 l :3 ,§_j,,
peace, Hhich but with death alone did cease."
[mu-/nu HJJI I/u.l I".V¢_v M1-.1  '/114)}; I IT“

