PREFACE
The First Gothic; is a primary bibliography and a highly selective
survey of the English Gothic novel in its major phase. It makes
no claims whatsoever to completeness in its pursuit of that dark
and monstrous literary child of the Enlightenment, the Gothic
romance. The book’s objective is to make accessible to the re-
searcher a representative cross-section of the entire Gothic
canon from the publication of the ﬁrst Gothic novel by Horace
Walpole in l764 to the stubborn decline and dissolution of the
Gothic genre in the late l820’s. To this day, scholars and students
of the Gothic movement remain divided and uncertain about the
exact number of Gothic novels published between Walpole’s The
Castle of Otranlo (I764) and Maturin’s Melmoth the Wanderer (I820),
the two works usually cited by literary historians to demarcate
the forty-year Gothic period in English literature. However, an
educated guess would be that a ﬁgure in the area of 4,500 to
5,000 novels of the Gothic variety spewed from the presses dur~
ing this four decade reign of terror in English letters. Due in
part to the ravages of time, Laste, and fashion, numerous titles
have disappeared forever into bibliographical oblivion while
many others must be recorded as lost or extinct Gothics although
a copy or two may still exist. There is today no comprehensive
bibliographical census of the English Gothic novel and it is safe
to presume that there probably never will be. A signiﬁcant
number of the ﬁve hundred peculiar and elusive titles described
for the ﬁrst time in The F irsl Gothics must be obtained in a single,
surviving edition or not had at all. Yet, in an astonishing number
Of cases, these rarities of Gothic ﬁction merit a better fate than
live burial in rare book collections where they-have-been left to
moulder as the worthless relics of English literature’s deviation
from the “proper” norms of social realism and didactic se»
fiousness. The First Gothics endeavors to put general readers and
ZX

I Prefue i Preface xi
exacting literary specialists in touch with those artifacts of Q 1 items. A sixth resource, Dorothy Blakey’s portrait of William
Gothicism which once deserved their original popularity and  Lane‘s Minerva-Press at work, TheMinervo—P1esS, 1790-1820, is a
which still retain their intrinsic power to delight through terror  specialized study of the greatest manufacturer and distributor of
and l10"0f-  Gothic novels of that age and has a helpful bibliographical em-
Assembling a core of titles for inclusion in The First Gothics 7: , phasis.
proves to be a precarious excursion in literary archeology for Each of these primary bibliographies has its own value for
several reasons. As a consequence of the critical rediscovery of those in search of the earliest Gothic novels. Although Brauchlis
the Gothic, there is now an extensive body of criticism and inter- account is defective in many areas, it is also a bold ﬁrst effort to
pretation of the form, but at the same time there is no c0rre- chart the ﬁrst Gothics and to arrange them under special head-
sponding volume of scholarly inquiry about the primary source. ings. Equally ambitious and far more directive, Tracy’s extremely
Primary bibliographies of the Gothic are nearly as scarce as some cogent bibliographical survey offers the researcher 208 lucid
of the novels themselves, and not very directive or categorical. summaries and succinct rereadings of Gothic novels published
Hence, the need for a reliable primary bibliography is acute. between 1790 and 1830. Each summary is detailed and incisive,
The formation of a viable primary bibliography of the Gothic but makes no critical commentary on the w0rk’s place in intellec-
novel in its pristine smte is made further difﬁcult by the scarcity tual history or its worth as a piece of Gothic literature. Enumerat-
of the earliest romances. Almost no attempt was made at collect- ing approximately 1,100 titles, The Sadleir-Black Collection Cata-
ing, cataloguing or preserving the Gothic novel throughout the » logue is a trustworthy archival guide to the best collection of
Nineteenth Century, while the shelf life of Gothic novels in chap- Gothic ﬁction in the world although it is in no sense an instru-
book and bluebook form was practically nil. In fact, with the ment of criticism.
exception of famous examples of the form such as The Monk, But the imperative point of entry for the primary bibli-
Frankemtein, and Melmoth the Wanderer, most of the Gothics were ographer of English Gothic ﬁction remains Montague Summers’
regarded as the embarrassing debris of a mediocre literary tradi- A Gothic Bibliography, a formidable and expansive reference tool
tion and therefore not worth saving or studying. and a massive tabulation of forgotten ﬁction of all types. Having
Foundational research in the ﬁeld of primary bibliography censured Brauchli for his indiscriminate listings, calling
amounts to ﬁve efforts in the Twentieth Century to bring the Brauchli's conglomerate of horror titles “not merely incomplete,
Gothic beast under some bibliographical control. ln chronologi- but muddled in their arrangement," Summers himself forged a
cal order, the ﬁve prior primary compilations are: jakob huge bibliography which suffers from the same eccentric com-
Brauchli, Der Englische Schauerroman um I800; Unter pulsion to comprehensiveness in a ﬁeld where completeness is
Blrnicluichtigung der Unbekannlen B1irher;Ein Beitragzur Gesrhichte ruled out by historical conditions. Historically, many of the
der Volhslitemtur (1928); Montague Summers, A Gothic Bibliogrw Gothic novels appearing on Summers’ ledgers are permanently
phy (1941); Maurice Levy, “Bibliographic Chronologique du Ro~ lost or defy location as Michael Sadleir learned in his quest to
man ‘G0thique,' 1764-1824" (1968); Ann B. Tracy, The Gothic retrieve the missing Northanger novel, Eleanor Sleath’s The O1-
Novel, I790—183O (1981); F. S. Frank, “The Gothic Romance, ‘ plum of the Rhimz (see item 415). ln his passion for total scope,
1762-1820" (I981). Refer to Appendix Two for full publication Summers habitually listed the entire output of individual au-
dam on these primary studies. The catalogue of The Sadleir- thors with the Gothic titles not segregated from the sentimental
Black Collection—the peerless repository for the rarest of the and didactic work of these writers. Nor did he provide a focal
rare Gothics—housed in the Alderman Library of the University sampling of important ﬁrst Gothics that could be extrapolated by
of Virginia also deserves mention as a primary bibliography of the explorer from the bibliographys imposing rosters‘ of novels.
the Gothic novel by virtue of the very nature of the majority of its Intended to "served as a sequel to his monumental history, The

R
\
Pre ace Preface xiii
Goth” QW“ (1938), I119 3llmm€fS bibliography iS BS f2lSCimlting  under the slightest bibliographical scrutiny. Therefore, where
and frustrating as the interior of a Gothic castle itself with its . the degree of derivation from an earlier Gothic is high or where
labyrinthine inventories, false leads, mysterious asides, and bibli- 3 given Gothic novel is clearly a refabrication of a previous
ographical ephemera and arcana. Sparsely and randomly anno- shocker or chiller, the critical synopsis of the title is correspond-
tated and marred by its very thoroughness and minuteness, A ' ingly brief and usually directs the user back to the book's chief
Gothie Bibliography must nonetheless be acknowledged as an in~ _ Gothic source. Because a successful Gothic title frequently reap-
dispensable wedge for prying open the sealed door of the eigh- Pear-ed under many guises, some broad sampling of the phe-
teenth-centuiy Gothic novel. But it was Summers himself who nomenon of the derivati\'e Gothics had to be included to render
cautioned future bibliographers of the early Gothics of the perils a satisfactory chronicle of Gothic activity during the period.
inherent in such a vast undertaking. In The Gothic Quest (1938), One additional consideration underlies the ﬁve hundred ti-
Summers Wafllﬁdi tles ﬁnally chosen for inclusion in The First Gothics. To present a
So vast are their numbers, so rare have the romances usable mxmiomy of the Several vanepes. of bfnhlf experience
- - - and to classifv and deﬁne the multifarious Gothic types, the
become, that a Bibliography of the Gothic novel must be 1 . .
, - ~ . - overall method of selection has been to gather clusters of Gothics
an undertaking of extraordinary difﬁculty and perplexity. . . . . . .
D-I _ that would reﬂect all discernible subcategories and hybridiza-
i emmas and problems confront one at everv step. The . _ . .
- - - ’ tions of the (_x0ll'llC romance. Thus, there is a strong represen-
question continually arises whether such and such a novel . . I. b .1] h. hl l. . d 1. . f h h. h
is sufﬁciently Gothic to be included or whether it is to be wave samp mg ut a S“ lg y ‘mm: ‘sung O t 6 lg or
» - ’ . pure Gothic novel in both its terror and horror modes together
regarded as a social or domestic novel. One is bound to be . . . . . ,
- - _ - - with the many modiﬁcations and variations of Walpoles pro-
elastic in every direction. . .
totype, The Castle of Otmnta. Experimental alterations of the
In assembling The First Gothics, Summers’ admonition against Gothic after Walpole resulted in some bizarre subspecies such as
an exhaustive treatment of the subject has been heeded while those Gothics which restrict their action and setting to a single
some arbitrary criteria of title selection also have been applied to portion of the haunted castle. Cavern or grotto Gothic. tower or
ﬁx reasonable limits and to prevent selectivity from becoming turret Gothic, crypt or vault Gothic, and the romance of the ruin
elasticity “in every direction.” Three principles of selection have are clearly delineated subforms. Abundant examples of
dictated the title choices in arriving at what should be thought of Gothiﬁed histories, or historical novels written in the key of high
as a “core” or “specimen” bibliography, and not a compendium terror or horror, establish the importance of this branch of
of all Gothicism. The three tests of inclusion are: contemporary Gothicism. Emergent trends of the genre may also be traced in
availability of the Gothic title; the artistic uniqueness, historical the numerous specimens of the didactic or sentimental novels
importance, and documented popularity of the Gothic title with veering toward or drawing directly upon the Gothic to make
the Gothic audience and with later scholars of Gothicism; the their philosophical point or to intensify their revolutionary mes-
appropriateness or value of the Gothic title to the comprehen- y sage. The practice of fusing Gothic means with ideolvgical 6I\d$
sion of the development of the Gothic movement as a whole. cannot be ignored, since this tendency suggests a deﬁnite line of
In collecting and then systematizing these Gothic titles, it development from the Gothic novel of imaginary and super-
soon becomes apparent that the Gothic in all its stages and muta- natural horrors to the Victorian novel of real social horrors,
_tions is a highly parasitic form; Gothics shamelessly feed off the aroused conscience and moral purpose. That tawdry and sensa-
literary remains of previous Gothics, theft of material is a univer- lional strain of Gothicism characterized by the spread of chap-
sal law of composition, and the line between crafty imitation and books and bluebooks as these items were mass-produced by pub-
overt plagiarism is often so weak that it breaks down entirely lishers eager to proﬁt from the Gothic mania could not properly

xm Preface f preface xv
be denied a prominent place among The First Gothics. The im-  are furnished. Where there are modern reeditions or reprint-
moderate quantity of shilling shockers contained in The F irst jv ings, that fact is so registered by the designation of the modern
Gothics intentionally suggests the shape in which the Gothic im-  publisher and editor. Although the remark, “None,” frequently
pulse would perpetuate and reproduce itself far into the Nine- ; appears here, the user will also find a quite remarkable number
teenth Century in the form of penny dreadfuls and Victorian ’of obscure Gothics back in print. Under the heading, “Gothic
bloods. Hence, the Bibliography attempts to be typologically Type," an attempt has been made to classify the work even in
comprehensive with respect to this proliﬁc subform and to all of those many cases where the book is an obvious overlay or pal-
the other identiﬁable Gothic types that were active in the period. impsest of several Gothic styles. Where there are several Gothic
Finally, the bibliographer has sought to devote full coverage to traits, these are listed in their order of dominance in the work.
those major Gothic novelists such as Francis Lathom, William Full descriptions of the various prototypes may be found in Ap-
Henry Ireland, Mary Meeke, Louisa Stanhope and many other pendix One, the “Glossary of Gothic Terms.” Under the head-
ﬁgures with a large following in their own day who now seem to ing, “Biographical and Research Data," a highly selective listing
fall outside the ofﬁcial circle of critically acceptable Goths cre- of secondary materials about the author and the book is given if
ated by literary historians,—-the Gothic constellation of Walpole, such critical sources exist. Again, the remark, “None,” after so
Reeve, Beckford, Radcliffe, Lewis, Maturin, and Mary Shelley. many of these entries might indicate to prospective researchers
The entry format for each of the ﬁrst Gothics is uniform those subject areas in Gothic studies which are still in need of
throughout the bibliography. Unless otherwise noted, place, ‘critical exploration. Full bibliographical citations are given in this
publisher, and year for each Gothic title refer to the ﬁrst edition section only when the secondary source itself is not Cited in AP-
of the work. Where simultaneous publication by two different pendix Two, the “Selected Bibliography of Critical Sources." To
houses has occurred, that fact is also noted. The construction of avoid redundancy of citation, the major histories of the Gothic by
the bibliography is alphabetical by author with the numerous Dorothy Scarborough, Edith Birkhead, Eino Railo, William
unsigned Gothics also alphabetically integrated into the compila- Whyte Watt, _].M.S. Tompkins, Monmgue Summers, Sister Mary
tion by title. Pseudonymous authorship is common and is fre- Muriel Tarr, _]ames R. Foster, Devendra P. Varma, Robert D.
quently the sole form of attribution. Therefore, pseudonyms are Mayo, Maurice Lévy, Coral Ann Howells, Elizabeth Mac Andrew,
used as the basis for alphabetization in cases where this is the and David Punter are referred to by surname and shortened
only kind of signature afﬁxed by the author (e.g., item 197, title. Single page references to their criticism followed by com-
“Ircastrensis”) and have been treated as authors’ surnames for mas indicate passing allusions to the Gothic title or author; page
purposes of organization. Gothic novelists who signed their work references coupled by hyphens indicate extended critical discus-
solely by initials (e.g., item 155, “l.H.") are placed at the begin— sions of the Gothic title or author. To facilimte consultation, all
ning of the letter sequence of the last letter used in the signature. doctoral dissertations appearing under the criticism are cited as
For example, the initialized author of The Phantoms of the Cloister: journal items by references to their abstracts in Dissertation Ab-
or, the Mystenhus Manuscript (see item 155), “l.H.," becomes the stracts or Dissertation Abstracts International. This procedure gives
FITSI 6"lTY ufldﬂ" lﬁllef “H-“ In H1059 iI15l3I1C@5 Where lbﬁfﬁ KY6 i the researcher instantaneous access to the vital contents of the
several books by the same Gothic novelist, the several novels are dissertation and the means of acquiring the entire dissertation as
arranged chronologically by dates of publication thus enabling well should the user wish to examine it.
the user to follow an author's canon or to detect a pattern in Tho annotations under the section called “Critical Synopsis"
preferred Gothic types. vary in length and detail throughout and are systematically
To support the vital data and the critical annotations within Cross-indexed to permit the researcher to move rapidly from a
the individual entries, three sorts of supplementary information highly derivative Gothic to its immediate model or models or to

7
xvi Prefme Preﬁwe xvii
compare differing treatments of a similar theme or character. user who is concerned only with locating the pure or high-
Each critical synopsis is a combination of analytic and synoptic Gothics of the period can shun these counterfeits by means of
substance with observations about the particular Gothic's influ- the summaries. Elizabeth Cullen Brown's The Sisters of St. Gathard
ence, historical importance, and artistic worth where appropri- (see item 044) indeed sounds ‘Gothic, but upon inspection,
ate.‘ The complex, multi-leveled Gothic plot with its stories su- ' proves to be a sentimental tale of contemporary life which decoys
Perlmposed 0" 5l0ri€S, its murky appearances and disap- the reader with a fake Gothic title. The counterpart in the bibli-
pearances, and its characters entering and exiting under multi- ography to the non-Gothic novel with a Gothic title is the pure
ple identities is almost a structural requirement of the genre. Gothic which camouﬂages its horrid contents by an innocently
Such a craving for complication is thematically related to the banal rubric. No user W01-lld hesllalc to recognize Isaac
Gothic’s central effect of reversal and deception whereby appar- Crookendens The Spectre of the Turret: zrr, Guoltn Castle (see item
ent safety is suddenly revealed to be illusory, the beautiful to be 085) as twenty-four carat Gothic; but what about such a title as
grotesque, and good to be evil. The intricate and serpentine plot Elizabeth Helme’s The Farmer of Inglewood Forest (see item 173) or
also reenforces the many crises and resolutions of identity and Henry Mackenzie’s julia de Raubigné (see item 261), two novels
the arduous search for one’s origins and family connections supersaturated with Gothic elements beneath their pastoral or
upon which Gothic narrative normally hinges. To articulate the neutral titles? The aim of each critical synopsis is to allow the
main story line and to give a coherent view of the principal user to estimate the relative Gothicality of a given IBXI and lhen
Gothic events and places, a few of the longest Gothics such as ‘pursue or abandon further inquiry as the case may be.
Pickersgill‘s four-volume skyscraper, The Three Brothers (see item The end matter of The First Gothic: consists of three appen-
329), have been deprived of their embellishments, digressions, dixes and three indexes and is designed to guide and enhance
and subplots. As a rule, none of the triple-decker Gothics found the investigators passage through the Gothic maze. All refer-
in The First Gothic: has been summarized page-bv-page. Rather, ences to the Gothic novels themselves are by entry number,
the user can expect to obtain the crucial bones ofithe novel from never by page number. Appendix One, the Glossary of Gothic
the critical synopsis in the case of the longest Gothics. The bibli- Terms, explains points of nomenclature and typology recurrent
ographer openly confesses that in writing the annotations he throughout the critical synopses. In order that the user may be
might somewhere have been the unwitting victim of a Gothic clear about what is meant by the term, Gothic novel, as it is used
authors guile or ruse and wandered down the wrong narrative throughout The F irs! Gothics, the glossary offers a generic deﬁni-
corridor into a ludicrous cul-de-sue. In those cases where the tion based on both content and intent and clariﬁes the speciﬁc
book is marginally Gothic or where the principal characters and characteristics of the various subtypes of Gothic ﬁction such as
episodes reﬂect the sentimental, polemical, or domestic tenden- the Monastic Shocker and the Rii"1"?TTl1"W"- APP€ndlX TWO ls 3
cies in ﬁction, the critical synopsis duly registers this fact. four-part bibliography of selected secondary sources and is un-
Marginal Gothic specimens have been included in the survey derstood to be limited to the best and most pertinent criticism of
for  reasons: to provide a historical overview of the novel in the English Gothic novel amassed in the Twentieth Century.
transition, ﬁrst toward the psychological or inner realism accom- i Appendix Three, an Annual Chronology of the First Gothics,
modated by Gothic excess in the last decades of the Eighteenth arranges the 500 titles by year of publication, thus yielding a
Century, and then back to “normality” and social realism again foupdecade calendar of vigorous Gothicism as well as a graphic
in narrative ﬁction as the Gothic ﬂame ﬁnally ﬂickered out in the picture of the rise and fall of the Gothic novel. Perhaps a statis-
late l82O’s; and second, because a certain number of non-Gothic tically minded researcher in the ﬁeld will undertake an explana-
or anti-Gothic novels produced in the period disguise their do- tion for the particularly G0lhi(§ Y@3T51 1800 and 1802"
mestic or realistic contents behind provocative Gothic titles, the The ﬁrst two indexes of Gothic authors and titles embrace

X’-'1" Preface
not only the 500 ﬁrst Gothics but every other author or title
mentioned in the entries as well. Thus, the name of anywriter
alluded to anywhere in the annotations may be located in the
Index of Gothic Authors, but anonymous Gothic novels must be
located via the Index of Gothic Titles. The two indexes also serve 4  '  
as a rapid ﬁnding ﬁle for data on any Gothic novel or novelist.
Because they may be so applied, these two indexes now stand in
llFP_°f 3 lC_ngthY ‘able of C°m5m5~ The ﬁnal l‘fl7l§Xi ll“? l"(l€X 0f  The Gothic cycle in English literature commences prior to the
critics, guidesthe user to all of the items of criticism cited in the  ﬁrst goihic novel’ The Cam, of Oimmo, and coincidgs wim me
entries including the editors of the plentiful reeditions of the  emergence of other modes of Romanticism iii the early and mid.
ﬁrst Gothlc novels‘ _  dle Eighteenth Century. A craving for the darker emotions, an
I
The task of any selective reference work coverin a com lex
1. _ i g _ P 3;, imaginative attraction to decay, ruin, disorder, and death, a fear
“¢rarY_m°"em‘3m '5 ‘O bnng ‘he readffr as dose 3? Posslble K0 ‘ of the false order imposed upon the mind and society by the
the °P“c31 cent" of 3 vast bod)’ of Pnm3rY matenali ‘hen en‘ ﬁxed value systems of a rigid neoclassicism all contributed to the
courage the reader to follow the spokes as they radiate outward
to the boundaries of the movement. If it succeeds at all, The First
outbreak of a Gothic impulse before Walpole erected the ﬁrst
Gothic castle on the literary landscape in 1764. Subtle and sub-
Comm will have a‘5C°mPll5hed l"5t lhal~ ' dued at ﬁrst, eighteenth-century Gothicism was one tributary of
Note: Prior to reading the “Historical Introduction," the user is
urged to study Appendix One, “Glossary of Gothic Terms."
I
the general revolt against rational structures that would later
coalesce into the mighty stream of Romanticism at the end of the
century. Gothic feelings and moods as well as a new enthusiasm
not simply for the unknown but for the unknowable precede the
Gothic novels and clear the way for what has recently been called
“the syntax of hysteria," a new expression of sublimity in the ans.
Gothic voices can be heard quite distinctly in the morbid lines
of the Graveyard poets of the 1740's and l75O’s, but the emo-
tional tremors of a buried Gothicism may be detected even ear-
lier in the century in some unexpected places. The Gothic before
the appearance of the Gothic novel itself, for example, is a minor
feature in the verse of Alexander Pope, a writer not normally
associated with Gothic chaos, darkness, and dread. But in at least
two poems, all of the human need for inhuman things and the
uncontrolled ecstasy inherent in the irrational pleasures af-
forded by the Gothic come to the surface. Here is Pope in pas-
sages from two poems, “Elegy: To the Memory of an Unfortu-
nate Lady" (1717) and “Eloisa to Abelard" (1717). The ﬁrst repre-
sents that commonest of Gothic events, a spectral encounter
when the thing from the other side of the self which has been
XIX

xx I ntraduction I ntrazluailm xxi
d@{\1€d _lIS VETY €XiSI€nCe by rationality advances to meet the , ical analysis by Edmund Burke in his important and influential
mnonalmi » l treatise on the aesthetics of fear, A Philosophical Enquiry into the
whm beckoning ghost, along the moonlight Shade Origin ofOur Idem ofthe Sublime and Beautiful (1757), published in
Invites my stcps’ and points to yondcr glade? the same year as Smolletts Thetmiventures of .F8Tdl‘I'Lﬂ7lti Count
,-1-is she!_but why that bleeding bosom gored? Fathom, a picaresque novel in which the mounting Gothic shad-
why dimly gleams the visionary Sword? ows fall athwart thelightheartedness of the older form and mate-
ln lines lo?» to I70 of ‘:Eloisa to Abelard," the Gothic voice is once
more plainly heard in the crossover from a safe and orderly
deistic universe into a strange and fearful dimension beyond the
rational. Forty-seven years before the publication of The Castle of
—_¥vrm#1.**-wq
rial. Burke’s exposition of the psychological foundations of the
Gothic stressed the necessity for rational displacement in order
fully to apprehend the sublime and beautiful qualities of the
fearful, the horrible, the chaotic, the demonic, and the painful.
For Burke, moments of terror and horror were tantamount to
Otranto, we have entered the domain of the Gothic where “uni-  moments of religious possession or mystic seizure wherein the
versal darklmss burl“ 311,5 ' mind is elevated to a peak of pleasure arising out of its contact
But 0-er the twilight groves and dusky caves’ with and immersion in the ineffably gruesome. ln his treatment
L0ng_s0unding aisles’ and intermingled graves, of Gothic fear/pleasure, Burke ‘was not predicting a Gothic
Black Mclanchol), sits, and round her throws movement in the arts‘ of the periodi He was simply describing
A dﬁnhiike silence, and a dead mposez the overwhelming rationale for a Gothic aesthetic which would
Her gloomy Presenm saddcns all the scene‘ shortly lead ‘to the horror-for-hor_ror’s-sake climate of emo-
Shades even, ﬂower, and darkens every green, tionalism which spawned the Gothic novel in such enormous
Deepens the murmur of the falling ﬂoods, quanmy' wrote Burke:
And bremhes 3 brown“ horror 0" ll“? W00ClS- Astonishment is that state of the soul in which all its mo-
Pope‘s night thoughts anticipate tlfe odd fusion of natural tions are stlspellded with some d€gre.e of honiot In this
opposites which lies at the core of the Gothic experience, espe- Casg the mmd_ ls so emlrely ﬁlled wllh “S Object that It
cially _a combination of awful beauty, joyful gloom, and pleasing Cannot ,Cmen2lm any Other,’ nor by c0n.Sequence reason on
paintfhe Gothic originates in a desire to displace reason and to that Object hlch employs IL Helice anses the great pOwe.r
surrender one’s self-control to something larger and rationally of [,hl: subhme‘ mm‘ far from bemg Produced by theln’ It
inmmprehensibkv In an age grown mo dependent upon mg anticipates our reasonings and hurries us on by an irre-
force of reason, the Gothic counterforces that we see gathering Slsnblc force‘ Indeed’ terror ls m all (law? w_ha[s0e‘ler’
in Popeg lines could be expected to erupt with great powen either more openly or latently, the ruling principle of the
Walpole explained the inevitability of a Gothic upheaval in the Subhme'
Preface to the second edition of The Castle of Otmnto as a torrent Burke also described [he anii-rational format of many Gothic
of repressed feelings bursting through the barriers of reason i novels [0 come when he 5P()k3 of the imagery best guited to the
wherever “the great resources of fancy have been dammed up by creation of fear. To achieve the apex of terror, the mind, he pos-
a strict adherence to the common life?) tulated, must be “hurried out of itself by a crowd of great and
_ jljhat horror should yield pleasure or that terror should be a confused images, which affect because they are crowded and
legitimate source of the sublime are responses which the Gothic confused)’ Thus, Hufke had Slated [he basis for [he Gothic plea-
novels would accommodate and exploit to the fullest. Such a sure principle of a gratifying disorder which Walpole would
Gothic aesthetic was recognized and given its ﬁrst full philos0ph- adapt to the events of his first Gothic novel where we witness the

xxzz Introduction - Introduction XXI"
Burkean theory put into narrative practice in the readers total i Hill was that “Horrie had already outlived four sets of battle-
immersion in what Walpole called “a constant vicissitude of in- V ments." But despite itS ﬂl35LlTdlll\?5 (DY P9ThaP5 became of lhem),
teresting passions" which were so startling, bizarre, rapid, and _ the peculiar energies of the Gothic caught on, causing two of the
cumulative that no rational relaxation was possible. Y leaders of the Gothic Revival, Horace Walpole and William
Neither Burlw "OT POPKT had employed the adjective, Beckford, to become the master builders of ﬁrst Gothic novels.
“Gothic,” to characterize these strange spasms of passion, al- Having constructed a phony medieval shell around the ele-
though Burke’s reference to the “great power" that “hurries us 1‘ gant country house he had purchased at Strawberry Hill, Horace
on by an irresistible force” is a precise foreshadowing of the ' Walpole then dreamt into existence a new kind of novel to nour-
pattern of action of most successful Gothic novels. Until Walpole I ish his architectural fantasies. The book he wrote founded the
appended the adjective, “Gothic,” to his experimental novel, the Gothic tradition while the title he gave to the book, “A Gothic
term had had only abusive or pejorative connotations and was 3 Story," accurately captured the quintessence of the unruly new
used less in an architectural context than as a label of disap- V genre in a single word. If persistent application by all varieties of
proval for any rude deviation from the classical norms of sym-  readers, writers, and critics over the last two centuries may be
metry, clarity, balance, and discipline. When Pope, Addison, ~“ considered any test of value, then it must be concluded that
Fielding and other Augustan artists used the word Gothic they ‘A. Walpole made both a correct and a brilliant choice when he
meant it as a synonym for uncivilized, crude, barbaric, formless  decided to entice his audience by attaching the forbidden adjec-
and from the viewpoint of neoclassic taste and design, coarsely  tive, “Gothic,” to the castellated title.
offensive to the aesthetic ideal. An all-purpose epithet of appro- ,. From Walpole’s ﬁrst Gothic novel to the manifold expressions
bation, the word “Gothic” denoted attitudes founded on T of Gothicism in modern literature, the conditions of the Gothic
superstition and ignorance rather than enlightened study and conform with amazing regularity to the speciﬁcations laid down
reﬂection as seen in a sneer by Addison in Spectator number 70 in Walpole’s blueprint. We ﬁnd a set of frantic characters re-
for Monday, May 21, l7ll. For his lapse in taste, one author is strained and enclosed by some version of a mighty and mysteri-
censured by Addison for descending into “the Gothic manner in Ous building beneath which there is a sort of hell or “long, laby-
writing which only delights those who have formed to them- i rinth of darkness," to use Walpole’s own phrase. The Gothic
selves a wrong artiﬁcial taste upon little fanciful authors and castle or its equivalent is plumbed and wired with intricate
writers of epigram." “Gothic” was less associated with a style of supernatural contrivanc s installed to shock, amaze, and delude
medieval cathedral building which prevailed in the Twelfth Cen- the buildings inmatesﬁlne Gothic castle itself becomes the
tuiy than with the Germanic barbarians who had sacked Rome novel‘s principal character, a superhuman personality possessing
under the leadership of the Visigothic chieftain, Alaric, in 410 3 psychic potency out of all proportion to its feeble, crazed, and
A-D- helpless human owners. In fact, one of the indispensable condi-
But the negative implications of the word were changing in tions of the novel of terror is architectural insularity; the GothiC
the l750’s helped along by the new mania for ruins and the con- building possesses the human characters, surrounds them with
struction of counterfeit medieval buildings as the picturesque I ﬁlial secrets, identity crises, and lethal predicaments within its
data of a Gothic Revival which sometimes reached absurd ex~ Walls, and ﬁnally determines their salvation or destruction by
tremes in architectural self-indulgence. In Garrick’s comedy, The Spectacular means. When the walls are burst and the turrets are
Qlandestine Marnlzge, produced in 1766, Mr. Sterling remarks exploded by the colossal phantom of Alphonso. at the climax of
that “It has just cost me one hundred ﬁfty pounds to put my The Castle of Otmntb, the Gothic novel acquires its central meta-
ruins in thorough repair," and in London’s circles of fashion the phor and most durable prop,—the haunted ruin. Following Wal-
quip about Walpole’s plaster-of-paris Gothic castle at Strawberry poles lead, the ﬁrst Gothic novels made the devastated castle or

xxiv Introductiim Inmdmtinn 1*"
d@5@Tl¢d abbey in") 3 Iilﬁliipllﬁfiﬁ €mb0dim¢Ill Oi the Pr<?Cari0U5 , Gothic novelists obtained their sense of tense sexological melo-
structures of the mind and society. > » drama and psychological persecution from Richardson's maidens
The evolution of the Gothic novel after the establishment of in distress, Pamela (1740) and Clarissa (1749). Amatory criminality
the prototype by Walpole shows a division or split into two deﬁ- in many Gothic novels is actually Richardsonian sentiment medi-
nite factions. The moderate group, exempliﬁed by Clara Reeve’s .. évalized and supernaturalized, then reset in a Gothic context.
Old English Baron (1777), wished to retain Walpole’s medieval Following Walpole’s invention and the differing innovations
atmosphere, but attempted at the same time t0 Withdraw ir0iTl made by Beckford and Reeve the Gothic grew in the l790’s into
an)’ headlong Plunge lmo the unmitigated 5uP9T"all1T3l and 1 the dominant literary genre of the decade. Even those serious
sought to set up a rapprochement between the terriﬁc and the g Political novelists such as Bage and Godwin, Who W0Llld I10
dld3CllC- The more exltemﬁ C'0thiC5- @X@mPliﬁ€d by William ‘ doubt have preferred to dissociate their polemical art from
Beckford’s Vathek (1786), refused such an Augustan c0mpromiS€, ‘ l Gothic methods, found themselves bound to the contraptions
and sought to go beyond Walpole by extending the Gothic spirit 5' and situations of the novel of terror both because of its vast
to its sensational limits and to fulﬁll the Gothics capacity to ex- i readership and popularity and because the Gothic pr0v€d 10 be
press the irrational demonic. Rather than edifying the reader i such 3 potent memphoric tool for delivering an indictment Or
with a conservative version of the Gothic that eventually restored arousing the social conscience. C-odWin'S Caleb William, i0T
order and acknowledged the propriety of Common 561156. thﬁ example, converted the haunted castle into the haunted society
radical Goths tried to electrify the reader by transporting him with the monsters of injustice roaming its corridors. The pur-
into a zone of ultimate fantasy where the power of the Burkean sued victim is no longer a hysterical maiden scurrying from a
sublime could be felt at its strangest and most intense. baronial villain but a young man of principles ﬂeeing from the
As the two conceptions of Gothicism diverged and matured terrors of the law. Yet, all of the inward and outward trappings of
throughout the l770’s and l78()‘s, they also polarized into ﬁve the smndard Gothic novel of the 1790's are present as if to assert
broad tendencies of Gothic romance. Visible in abundance that there really is no difference between the irrational violence
throughout The First Gothics, these ﬁve modes of Gothic per- of Gothic fantasy and the gruesome social realities of the age or
vaded the Gothic movement and determined the tendencies of “Things As They Are.” '
Gothic ﬁction in its Victorian and modern versions. The ﬁve While Godwin and his fellow ideologues were using G0llli'
permanent modes of Gothic ﬁction are: supernatural or inscrut- eism for propagandislic purposes, the conﬂict hetW<f€I1 C0n5@T\'?1"
ablﬁ G0tl1iC; natural Or 6XPlaiIl€Cl G0tl1iC; hiSt01‘iCal Gollliﬁ Or Live and radical brands of horror and terror came to a focus in
Gothic mixed with the violent values of a remote and usually the work of the two principal ﬁgures of the entire Gothic move-
imaginary past; equivocal or ambiguous Gothic in which the ment, Ann' Radcliffe and Matthew Gregory “Monk” Lewis.
degree of horror or terror engendered depends upon the percep- Their novels became the authoritative models for many later
lions Of P1 flaTrat0l'; id@0l0giCai or philosophical Gothic in which forms of high Gothic ﬁction with Mrs. Radcliffe’s moderate and
Gothic effects are used to revolutionize or to radicalize the moral _ plausible Gothic reﬁning the theories of Clara R66“? and l-€Wi5
and political thinking of the reader. These ﬁve categories are p1'()[ra(j[i|'\g the audacious sadism and bold €r0tiCi5m Oi Balli-
given in a descending order of Gothic purity and during the ford. Rejecting the vague thrills of Mrs. Radcliffe’s Emily St.
l79O’s, as the Gothic novel approached its zenith, they are often Aubert before the black veiled portrait within CaStl€ di Ud0lPl10,
seen to overlap. Nor did the Gothic novel sever its connections Lewis offers the reader the sepulchral rape of -Antonia atop a
with its predecessor, the sentimental novel, as it developed. mattress of cadavers in the foetid vaults of the monastery of St.
Rather, we see a blurring of the norms of proper sentiment as the Clare, doing so with such vivid putridity that one modern critic
\‘=ﬂF’4l1l

xxui Introduction I1tl10dWli0" xvii
has concluded that his intention must have been not merely the the Gothic types ﬂooding the literary marketplace during the
countering of Radcliffean terror-Gothic but the attainment Qf ‘ opening decades of the Nineteenth Century reveals the decline
“some ideal of absolute atrocity.” of the long Gothic as it was displaced by these shilling shockers.
Before the arrival of Lewis and Radcliffe on the scene, terror The high tide of these pulp Gothics Sent Wave Hflﬂ" Wave Of I116
had hes?" quite Cmﬂpﬂlible with horror in the same works, but most phantasmic titles rolling through the circulating libraries.
after their contributions to the growth of the genre, the two  Every title shrieked its wares as loudly as possible and tried to
responses to the supernatural experience seem antithetical. The - guarantee the ultimate in ghastly gratiﬁcation as exhibited in
Gothic breaks down into two mutually disharmonious types and , three chapbook reductions of The Monk: The Bloody Hand: or, The
redeﬁnes itself along the rigid lines of sex, ethicality, and aesthe- Fatal Cup, A Tale of Horror (1800); Almagm and Claude: or, Monastic
tic goals. In Mrs. Radcliffe‘s Gothic, a feminized version of the Murder Exempliﬁed in the Dreadful Doom of an Unfortunate Nun
myth of escape from the world of sexual danger, the narrative is (1803); and The Midnight Groan: or, The Spectre of the Chapel, In-
maiden-centered and a victory of evil is averted when the female valuing an Exposure of the Horrible Secrets of the Nocturnal Assembly;
victims eventually gain their freedom from the castle or abbey. A Gothic Romance (1808). Glancing at these typical titles, we un-
ln Monk Lewis’ Gothic, a masculinized version of the same myth i derstand immediately the grounds, if not the justification, for
of deliverance from the lower world of sexual passion, the story ,- Wordsworth’s famous complaint against the hordes of “frantic
is villain-centered and the triumph of evil is appallingly com- novels“ that pandered to “the degrading thirst after outrageous
plete. In Mrs. Radcliffe’s Gothic, the supernatural never made 3;, stimulation.”
any direct appearances and its workings were eventually ex-  The chapbooks represent Gothicism in its most decadent and
plained away as delusive,—the disillusionment occurring only  rampant phase, bringing down upon the Gothic novel wide-
after the maiden had endured a series of terrible and tantalizing  spread critical denunciation and ridicule. Dissenting reviewers in
moments of horrid shock. Radcliffean Gothic is designed to coax -I The Critical Review, The Monthly Review and many other
and then hoax the reader while it supplies a good deal of soul_ periodicals had already admonished the public taste for Gothic
expanding terror in the process, but Lewis‘ Gothic granted n0 ﬁction by delivering a host of harsh verdicts against Gothic non-
such rational amnesty to its anxious maidens and gave no mercy Sense throughout the 1790’s. Disgusted reviewers were now
to its Satanic heroes. What the opposition of Radcliffe and Lewis joined by both the “serious” Romantic poets and several talented
shows in the Gothic of the l790’s is that, far from being comple- parodists who were determined to laugh the delinquent read-
mentary, terror and horror were contradictory effects just as ership back into its senses. The range of anti-Gothic satire ex-
Mrs. Radcliffe herself had maintained. tends all the way from _]ane Austen’s subtle burlesque of Gothic
Although Ml"$- Radcliffe Cﬁmlinued to be widely read, ad- readers and their misplaced enthusiasm in Northanger Abbey
mir6dI and imitated as the Nineteenth Century began, the route (1818; see item 12), to the acerbic lampooning of Eaton Stannard
of development taken by the Gothic novel after 1800 was down Barrett in The Heroine (18131 5% item 25), and ﬁ"3“Y lo the
the corridor of an unrestrained supernatural and toward the venomous excoriation of the Gothic by that mysterious de-
absolute horror of horrors. Hasty and relentless horror became ' bunker, lrcastrensis, author of what must rank as the most sav-
the stock-in-trade of the Gothic chapbooks and bluebooks after age of all Gothic parodies, Laue and Horror: An Imitation for the
1800 when the main path for Gothic ﬁction was mapped out by Present and a Model for All Future Romances (1815; see item 197).
_Monk Lewis, not Ann Radcliffe. These hundreds of small Yet, despite its vulnerability to satiric atmck and,in the face of its
Gothics were the cheap and tawdry offspring of the St.‘hau,err0- Own deterioration into the efﬁuvia of the chapbook industry, the
"Wntik energies released by Lewis’ The Monk. While lengthy and Gothic romance persisted and even proliferated like some stub-
elegant Gothics were still being written and published, a study of 50111 Subliteraty fungus in the forest of Romanticism, remaining

X11555 Introduction Introduction xxix
a coveted literary commodity until at least the mid-l820‘s while social warpings- Even the crudest popular C-othics of the period
its inﬂuence lingered on far into the Nineteenth Century, I? in their nearly automatic repetition of the motifs of emergency-
The slow eclipse of the Gothic after 1800 also did not prevent it ﬂight and pursuit, unabated darkness, supernatural encroach-
several writers of exceptional imagination from lifting the genre fﬂem» gT11€50m<? m€Iﬁm0l'Pl'l0Si5, Cl8lJ5lf0Ph0l1l€ C0l'lﬁIl€"\¢\'ll,
to new artistic heights. The non-traditional Gothic of Mary and displacement of identity—partake of the general fear of a
Shelley’s F rankemtein; or, The Modem Prgmgtheuj (1818; see item dissolving society and a fragmenting self that the Gothic expres-
399) pointed ominously ahead to the terrors of the scientiﬁc ses at its deepest levels. This is not to say that every Gothic novel
future rather than back to the horrors of an imaginary middle Pﬂbllﬁhﬁd lJ6lWe€l'l 1764 and l324 Sh011ld b6 Iiiltﬁﬂ 85 H Pl'0l)iI1g
ages. Maturin’s Gothic masterpiece, Mglmplh the Wanderer (1820; statement of cultural anxiety and decay since many of the books
see item 268), explored the metaphysics and psychology of suf- fall beneath even minimal artistic standards and were written for
fering in an epic voyage through time thus creating some strong purely monetary motives. But even so, the Gothic movement as a
parallels between the Gothic and tragic visions, 1-[ogg's Private phenomenon of cultural and spiritual uncertainty and psycho-
Memoirs and Confessions of a justiﬁed Sinner (I824; see item 178) logical self-revelation deserves to be rediscovered, restudied and
propelled the Gothic inward toward the forbidden chambers of Tﬁvﬁlllﬂlﬂi
the mind and indicated the direction that the Gothic would as- As a rule, most forms of Romantic art reach outward and
sume in its most sophisticated mutations later on. It is certainly a upward toward some transcendental unity of vision. some Eu~
misreading of literary history to conclude that the Gothic died of Tﬁkﬂn ITIOIHCHI Of P6l‘fBCt lflllh. but Ihﬁ G0lhiC fl'0lI1 ll5 begin-
verbal exhaustion, stylistic monotony, and artistic mediocrity at nings, d€SC€l"ldS and disintegrates The dynamics Of thﬁ Gothlﬁ
the end of the 1820‘s. Instead, the Gothic impulse went under- always reach downward toward permanent darkness and perpet-
ground where it would continue to ﬂourish in submerged ways ual enclosure within the hell of the castle or an underworld that
while energizing the darker dreams of many novelists of ﬁrst_ affords no return to light. At its most skeptically intense, Gothic
rank who found in the Gothic traditiqn the conceptions, if not _ ﬁction hypothesizes the existence of a malign cosmos. an'onto—
the explicit models, for their own metaphors of conﬁnement and logically unreliable and all-deceiving universe where spiritual
dﬁstruction. The three Brontés, Dickens, Collins, Hardy, Con- norms are inverted or twisted, where the moral will is rendered
rad, and Wells, to name only a few post-Gothic writers, were all helpless, and where terminal disorder is far more likely than
touched by and responsive to the Gothic spirit, while the redoub- ("Clef-
table Sir Walter Scott must be regarded as a major contributing The Gothic, then, is the literature of collapsing structures
ﬁgure to the progress of the Gothic movement. Where even the narrative context itself is in a constant state of fall
The legacy of the ﬁrst Gothics to modern literature is pro_ with no possibility of a visionary reordering. The high Gothic’s
found and farreaching As diverting as their shock tactics may insistence upon the fall from dream into nightmare is its most
have been to the ﬁrst readers of Gothic ﬁction, the mass outbreak disturbing and appealing quality throughout an unbroken liter-
of horror and terror displayed by the ﬁrst Gothic novels also BTY tradition. As the critic, G.R. Thompson has noted, the col-
indicated a loss of faith in traditional value systems and smble ' lapsed structures of the Gothic universe ﬁx the perennial role of
notions of the self. Apparently, the more advanced and civilized the Gothic as “the dark counterforce to optimistic Romanticism,"
the society, the greater its need for apocalyptic outlets in the because the Gothic “begins with irreconcilable dualities, and, asa
form of horror art. The Gothic became at the close of the Eigh- form» acknowledges the [ri“mPh of Pamdox and a_mbiguity—
teenth Century both a consolidated genre and 3 new mode of the impossibility of ultimate synthesis.” From Pope's anguished
perception, a way of envisioning unwanted psychic realities and Pﬂﬁﬁptlon Of the “browner h0rr0r Of the W00dS" l0 the PTOS~

xxx I ntrodmtion
pects of the modern doom glimpsed from beneath the atomic
5h8d0W, the ghosts of the early Gothic rise from their literary
ILLUSTRATIONS
graves to invade and challenge our brightest fables of security, Engravings and woodcuts face the page numbers indicated
success, and human striving.
' 8.
THE SECRET TRIBUNAL: OR, THE COURT OF
WINCELAUS 30
ROMANO CASTLE: OR, THE HORRORS OF
THE FOREST 60
THE BLACK VALLEY: OR, THE CASTLE OF
ROSENBERG 90
THE CASTLE OF MONTABINO: OR,
THE ORPHAN SISTERS 120
THE SKELETON: OR, THE MYSTERIOUS
DISCOVERY 150
THE MIDNIGHT ASSASSIN: OR, THE
CONFESSIONS OF THE MONK RINALDI 180
THE CAVERN OF HORRORS: OR, THE
MISERIES OF MIRANDA 210
MAXIMILIAN AND SELINA: OR, THE
MYSTERIOUS ABBOT 24
ILDEFONZO AND ALBERONI: I
OR, TALES OF HORROR 270
THE HORRORS OF THE SECLUDED CASTLE:
OR, VIRTUE TRIUMPHANT 30
DE LA MARK AND CONSTANTIA: OR,
ANCIENT HEROISM 530
ZITTAW THE CRUEL: OR, THE WOODSMAN'S
DAUGHTER 360
THE PROPHETIC WARNING: OR, THE CASTLE
OF LINDEN DORFF . _ 390
THE MYSTERIOUS MURDER: OR, THE
USURPER OF NAPLES 410
xxxi
0
O

