102 THE FIRST GUTHICS -THE FIRST GOTHICS 11)}
. renegades of Fernando dressed as monks. Locked within a light-
123. E.F. THE CAVE OF ST. SIDHELL: A ROMANCE. LADV'S MONTHLY MUSEUM, less cell, the "hapless Rosa“ can only await "the violation of
OR PDLITE REPOSITORV OF AMUSEMENT AND INSTRUCTION, 2-3 her tender person" which is almost certain to come at any moment
(January, 1807-August, 1807): 6 parts. (but never does). She is guarded by a fearsome hag who wiH
Modern Reeditions: THE CANDLE AND THE TONER, Harner Paperback eventually be unmasked as the guilty Julia made ugly over the
Library, 1974, ed. Robert D. Spector. years by her incestuous past. The description of the unveiling
Gothic Type: Serialized Gothic novella (terror and senti- of Julia as the incest-stained mother of the heroine and the
mental modes) deserting wife of Reginald presents a fair sample of the Goth's
Biographical and Research Data: Mayo, ENGLISH NOVEL IN THE superemotional style throughout. Stepping back and casting off
MAGAZINES, p.465; Griffith, Clark. "Caves and Cave Dwellers: her hood, she declaims: "Providence has brought us this once to-
The Study of a Romantic Image," JOURNAL OF ENGLISH AND GER- ' gether, to prevent a most dreadful event--an union of sin and
MANIC PHTLOLOGY, 62 (1963): 551-568. horror. Rosa, R056, fall On your knees and adore that mysterious
power which has disclosed to you the secret of your birth.--That
Critical Synopsis: An ultra-sentimental Gothic novella Reginald is your father!" Old Julia is not the only character
published in six parts and using the standard locales for its who speaks in such orphic flourishes throughout the romance. In
Gothic arenas. The story cmnnences within the Cave of St. Sid- Gothic fiction, the cave or cavern is a natural image for the
well, "abode" of the misanthropic hermit, Reginald Count St. recesses of the mind, the dark past, or the concealed self. Even
Osbert, who detests hinself and all humankind and is pretending in ultra-sentimental Gothics of the sort of THE CAVE OF ST.
to be rude and savage in his retirement from society although he SIDHELL, the cave‘s figurative worth as a symbolic womb of time
is really tender and refined. The second Gothic site is the and providence is apparent enough.
ruined Abbey of St. Sidwell, the lair of a "ruffian band" all U
disguised as monks and under the command of the sinister outlaw, ‘ 124. FATAL VOHS: OR, THE FALSE MONK, A ROMANCE. London : Thomas
Fernando. In pastoral contrast to the horrors of the cave and Tegg, 1810.
abbey, stands the "rustic cottage“ of the peasant, Arnold, a Modern Reeditions: None
place where virtue, benevolence and nobility converge in a life Gothic Type: Gothic chapbook (based on THE MONK)
of natural bliss. But the tranquil values represented by the _ Biographical and Research Data: None
cottage are overshadowed by the Gothic values permeating the
cave and abbey,--the shadows of despair, guilt, crime, pride, Critical Synopsis: The twenty-eight page chapbook's title is
and betrayal of trust. Throughout the tale there runs a powerful deceptive since the villainous activities of the false monk,
undercurrent of incest which is first suggested when the gloomy Roderigo, are marginal to the main story of the two brothers,
Reginald discovers the six-year old Rosa abandoned outside the Montavole and Alberto Savani. The brothers are physical twins
mouth of the cave and senses some deep biological tie with the but moral opposites. At first merely prodigal and lazy but
foundling. Except for violent seizure by the robbers who occupy swiftly becoming vicious, Montavole murders (or thinks he mur-
the Abbey of St. Sidwell, there is little direct terror in this ders) his son, Alonzo. The good brother, Alberto, vanishes from
sentimental Gothic. Most of the plotting involves the slow and T the tale on the opening pages leaving behind a bloodstained
mysterious clarification of the heroine's parentage, for she has cloak. Hhen the resolution scene requires his presence, however,
been found by her father who then falls in love with her as she Alberto will suddenly resurface from nowhere to reclaim the her-
comes to womanhood. Rosa's mother, Lady Julia, (also called Mad- itage lost to his scheming brother. The supporting characters in
am Hindenbourn) had grossly betrayed Reginald for an incestuous . this little genealogical melodrama are all stylized Gothic
relationship with her vile brother, Julian de Zoresti. Thus, the types: an orphan named Miranda who acts as stage victim for the
incest wish operates as a sort of heriditary curse which the lecherous monk, Roderigo; the temporarily insane peasant lad,
virtuous characters must finally face and subdue. The details of , Alonzo, who is Montavole's son not murdered after all; and Al-
Julia's incestuous affair with her brother and the killing of phonso, the righteous son of the upright brother, Alberto, whose
Julian by Reginald come to the reader by way of epistolary union with Miranda is assured after the quota of adversities is
insets and confessional retrospections, a standard procedure for fulfilled. The shadow of Shakespeare falls very plainly across
building up to the genealogical revelation in Gothic narrative. the copied plots of these miniature Gothics. But before
A young stranger, Alphonso, is provided for Rosa midway through dismissing such chapbooks as worthless, we should consider their
the tale so that conjugal purity may be maintained after the grip over every variety of reader as well as their clever manip-
alarming discovery that Rosa is about to marry her father. These ulation of some of the Gothic's enduring themes: the quest for
melodramatic complexities are accompanied by a steady rhetorical self-origin and the struggle for domestic stability in an
cascade of fine sentiments and weeping protestations of moral infected family. Hhen well-crafted, as is the case with THE
virtue by the novella's men and women of feeling. Journeying FATAL VOHS, the Gothic chapbook was capable of producing a
toward a chateau which they never reach, Reginald, Rosa, and Al- totality of effect that Poe found most essential in the short
phonso take shelter from a storm at the Abbey of St. Sidwell tale of terror. - _
only to be separated and confined by two evil cavaliers and ‘the ' ‘

7
104 THE FIRST GOTHICS i . THE FIRST BUTHICS 105
125. FATHER XNNOCENT, ABBOT or CAPUCHINS: OR, THE CRIMES or THE I Xi"°*" tamed v°“°"a ‘° the 9‘°°m¥ °‘°“‘e' °‘ Fi'""iid with its
CLOISTERS. MARVELLOUS MAGAZINE AND COMPENDIUM or PRODIGIES, 2 “°“‘dE"?9 °'°“°S ‘"4 T°°f‘°“ a‘§‘@$-" the" irihiierred to his
(Aprii’ i803): 316_356_ i fortress in the Carpathians. Ne know what is in store for her
Modern Reeditions: None "he". vedova ?heeh5' “hark me: haughty fair °"°= am°"9 the Cir-
Gothic Type: Gothic novelette (based on THE MONK) Piihla" h°""iii"5 Siahds 6 solitary castle. inaccessible but to
Biographical and Research Data: None th°5e hh° khhh the maZY def‘]e5 1°°h‘"9 t° it-" Crhihed by the
death °f Ehhestihe. Count Faulconstein sets forth to rescue
I
Critical Synopsis: Outright plagiarisms and poorly disguised Queen Fhedehlca to make amehdS.f°h his Crihgs ahd is j°i"9d by
abridgements of Lewis's THE noun (see #244) were so plentiful Y°¥:9 Le°P°‘° !"°‘e °"‘Y °°°"Pi1'°" Seems tv be the relief of
during the Gothic period that the illegitimate children of his ﬂa‘ e"$ ‘" d‘$i'@§§- "he" he pauses at the tomb of Ernestine,
romance might constitute and independent bibliographical cate- ' uﬁgeghadﬁdahhearstto Leoholhi hh°m'51h9 't° h°'9r "9§T Y0"
9ory- In nearly every instance, THE MONK's triPle plot was troubqeg b 5“hh°h ky°nh 5'hk'h9 "'t"e- vEd°'°'5 Eashie 15 B150
selectively plundered. A typical abbreviated forgery might con- ‘ h { 5 Sh°° Y ‘ch ‘°°m§ "P ihefﬂre Cﬂhht ‘Faulc0nstein
centrate on a single horrid theme or scene excluding the entire : erehhhh 5 c°1d 9h‘Ve""9 $e‘led him it the Cvhﬁﬂiﬁusﬂess that
storyline leading up to it. The Agnes-Raymond story, the ti h?5d‘h the Presehce °f 5 5"Pe’"it"'ﬂl POWEFI hi5 ears
Ambrosio-Matilda affair, the nocturnal visit of the Bleedihg NH" e h‘"g e 1 Thxs ha1h hose hp’ ahd eVe'Y faC“]tY "55 $"5PE"d@d With
to Don Raymond's bedside, the ordeal in the catacombs of st. f?rrﬁr- he spook is no so9ok_after ail. but Ernestine in the
Clare, and the spectacular aerial death of Ambrosio remained the R es . c°h1h9 ,f°'th t° ""d‘°at9 all "'°"9$_i"d Overthrﬂw the
favorite choices of Gothic counterfeiters. FATHER INNOCENT takes g ““‘"‘a" "“'°‘"- "°°°'i- Qhﬂricters ire Certainly permitted to
the hypocritical pride of Rmbrosio's character as its starting Eiahhh. fr?“ the gfave ‘" the 9°th1C "°V@l, but the return of
point, then brings the monk to disaster in forty brusque pages. I E5 ‘he 15 "°h m°t‘V5t9d 0' EVE" necessary; it 15 $ihPi¥ B
This periodical reduction of THE MONK entirely eliminates the i C "h$Y meahs 'e5°'ted £0 hY 6" hhikilled Both for getting out
woes of Agnes and speeds up the sexual damnation of Ambrosio
while toning down the explicit eroticism of Lewis's passages.
6. FAULCONSTEIN FOREST: A ROMANTIC TALE. London : T. Hookham and
of the story. Although there are a few genuinely chilling
scenes, the work as a whole is one of the most inarticulate
Gothics to emerge from the period.
E.T_ Hookham’ 1310. 3 i27. Fenwick, Eliza. SEQRESY: OR, THE RUIN ON THE ROCK. London
Modern Reeditions: None Z h‘]“am La"?i_K"‘9ht- 1795-
Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (based on Radcliffe's ih h°dehh Reed‘t‘°hS§ hahlahd hhblishihge 1973-
ROHANCE Q; 1“; FgRE5T) ; Gothic Type: Sentimental Gothic (romance of the ruin)
Biographicai and Research Data: None 1 Biographical and Research Data: None
Critical Synopsis: This 176-page Gothic novel is set in the , C"t'°a! 5Y"°P$'§= A tehie ahd C°mDﬂCt novel of ideas, the
Hungarian court, a dark arena of greed and intrigue where ‘bu$- . work emh°d]eS the p1'$ht_°f hhmhh ahd the 5°Tdid tyranny Of fa-
mspﬂwnm ﬂu ﬁn“) me"&H mswewywhﬁm J waspmrmﬂﬂmimnsmﬂws%mtsHuHm&TmnmM
Petrarch and is dedicated by the anonymous Goth ‘to the Reverend n 15 9Pl§t°iﬂry and written ﬁlth‘ the kind of passionate
H_B__ his sincere friend_- Naturai and supernaturai e"ta"gie_ i ideological fervor associated with the protest literature of
ments make the story a Gordian knot of intricate mysteries and I Mary Wollstonecraft and Godwin. Eliza Fenﬁick was a close friend
complex sufferings for both the reader and the virtuous char- hf hary h°115t°"9°'?ft 3"“ Shared her id6aS- It is not surpris-
actersl The scenes have an abundance of terror, but the ‘ ‘"3’ thehefhrei h° f'hd that 5EcRE5v dhﬂmatiles many Of the
storyline remains almost incomprehensible. There seem to be two p°‘ht5 made hY h°'Y h°ii5t°"@Crﬂft ih her VINUICATION OF THE
heroines, Queen Frederica, a Hungarian patriot, and Ernestine, §1GhTS OF hohhh (1792) ahd 5 5@C°"d Set °f *9V°l"hi°"ﬂh! E5$i¥5a
sister of Count Casimir Faulconstein, the warden of the forest. 5 HOUGHTS oh THE Ehuchhloh OF DAUGHTERS3 HIT" REFLECTIUN5 ON FE-
The first third of the romance is devoted to the wanderings and i hhhh CONDUCT’ xh Thh hhhh Ihh0hThhT hUTIES OF LIFE (1737)- The
sufferings of Ernestine who is being victimized by her brother Y H h°ve1, has much t° argue abohh the h]9h¢5 Of HOME" and children,
for reasons that are unclear. She is ‘threatened by a she-wolf H eShec1a11y the Draper cahe ahd hphrihgihg °f °ff5PTi"9- Eﬂﬁh
at the base of the Carpathian mountains,’ desperately sought by " letter f°hhS a chapter h'th the hhlk °f the °°"e5P°hde"°e 9°i"9
her beiuved Leopoid, and finaiiy froze" to death in a mountain i between Sibella Valmont and Caroline Ashburn, two female victims
snowstorm: -Ernestine sank on the earth, bereft of animatian; i of the code of masculine supremacy and unlimited privilege over
the Show Swept over her iike a foaming "ave, and buried her i wives and children. The two have known each other and have known
beneath it.- In the final two thirds of the romance, the victim- g the h"i"ii ¢srr9r Of despotic parents since childhood. netested
ized heroine becomes Queen Frederica who seems to be attempting h¥_he' P6TE"I§ Siﬂvly BECBHSE $h6 W35 6 Shifited ﬂhd bﬂisterous
to return to the Hungarian court after the defeat of the Turks ch11d’ cah°]‘he hah bee" hphhoteh frhm her °"" family ﬂhd $9"t
-at Buda, but again, her motives and movements are unclear. She i t° 1earh deh°htm°ht 'h the h°"5eh°]h “F L°'d- veimqni. B Cruel
suffers a number of Gothic delays when she is carried off by a , Stepfathi" ""Eh an °f the Bﬁthic habits. The surname of the

105 TIE FIRST GDTHICS THE FIRST BDTHICS 1g7
villain is the same as the persecutor of the young Cécile in Bryam continues his journey but he cannot rid himself of the
Choderlos de Laclos's widely read epistolary novel of corruption image of the persecuted Joan. He decides to investigate his
and seduction, LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES (1782). Harshly raised intuition that Joan is more than the poor servant she seems to
by Lord Valmont, she meets and becomes intimate with Sybilla, be and he further dedicates himself to her protection. The
Valmont's delicate niece. Sybilla is a "strange, unformed, beau- remainder of the story is devoted to finding and confirming
tiful child," a fact which infuriates her uncle. Angered by the Joan's real identity, a proper social status to go with her high
friendship between the two young women, Valmont confines Sybilla spiritual and moral being. Bryam eventually discovers that Joan
to a castle, the ruin on the rock designated in the novel's is actually Joanna Doveridge, discarded daughter of Lord Dover-
highly Gothic title, from which her letters to Caroline become idge, who had suffered her mother's indifference and banishment
inspired polemics on the servitude of women. "Cold, and demand- after the death of her father. Bryam and Joan marry and have a
ing complete obedience," Lord Valmont is depicted as the brutal I daughter, Elizabeth, who is thrust into a miserable domestic
product of a warped society. In several letters, she daringly situation similar to Joan's after the death of Bryam and the
protests her slavery and is answered by Caroline with her own onslaught of poverty. Elizabeth renames herself "Peregrina," or
vindications of the rights of woman: "I am born to the exercise the “wandering one," in commemoration of her mother's distresses
of no will, to the exercise of no duties but submission. Wisdom now apparently repeated in her own situation. All ends sadly for
owns me not, knows me not, could not find in me a resting Joan and her daughter with the darkness of their lives sunmar-
place." Driven nearly mad by her solitary state, Sibella later ized in the severe moral epilogue at the end of volume four:
dies in childbirth, the victim of a seductive assault by the “Thus ended the machinations of malignity in the happiness of
unscrupulous Murden who also has professed to be the lover of those they were intended to ruin." There is Gothicism in this
Caroline Ashburn. Lord Valmont's belated repentance at the end novel, but it is a psychological Gothicism of the kind felt much
is an artificial and empty gesture and quite insufficient to re- later in one of Thomas Hardy's grim satires of circumstance, Did
compense the despair and loneliness of the dejected Caroline. ’ Hardy remember the somber Guthicism of Fitz John's JOAN!!! when
Along with its Gothic themes, this well-written novel can claim he wrote at the end of TESS OF THE D'URBERVTLLES, “The President
real tragic power in its portrayal of the dismal social truth of the Innnrtals, in the Aeschylean phrase, had ended his sport
about the desperate condition of women and children. with Tess?"
128. Fitz John, Matilda. JOAN!!! London : Hookham and Carpenter, 123. Fletcher, Grenville. ROSALVIVA: OR, THE DEMON DWARF, A ROMANCE.
1796_ London : Longman, 1824.
Modern Reeditions: None Modern Reeditions: None
Gothic Type: Donestic Gothic Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (terror mode)
Biographical and Research Data: Scott, James Frazier. “Thomas Biographical and Research Data: None
Hardy's Use of the Gothic: An Examination of Five
Representative Norks," NINETEENTH-CENTURY FICTION, 17 (1963): Critical Synopsis: From Rumplestilskin in the fairytale to
363-380. the comic evil of Dickens's Daniel Quilp in THE OLD CURIOSITV
' $HOP (1841), the figure of the dwarf was often called upon to
Critical Synopsis: Each of the four volumes of this perform such demonic services as vengeance, prophecy, child
well-written but complicated novel contains more than 250 pages. possession, and transformation. Hhen the Gothic novelists in-
The reader's full attention is required to follow the rising and clude dwarfs in their casts they preserve these functions of the
falling tide of Gothic passion and domestic oppression running character and often use the dwarf as a resolver of dilmnnas of
just beneath the social niceties of the plot. Joan's story is identity. Dead or missing husbands reappear at the climax of the
told via a sensitive male character, the university student story in dwarfish guise or pursued heroes adapt a dwarfish mas-
Lambert Bryam, who comes to love and marry her although she ap- querade to confound the villain and exact poetic justice. In
pears to be several social classes beneath him. Having received Mary Shelley's Gothic tale, "Transformation" (1831), the narra-
news of his father's impending death, Bryam travels to London tor finds his own normal body taken over by a demonic dwarf with
via Bath where he pauses at the well-to-do house of the Ruf- "squinting eyes, distorted features, and body deformed until it
fords. Their chambermaid, Joan, is roughly treated by the coarse became horrid to behold." Fletcher's demon dwarf is the wronged
Ruffords and there is something about her appearance which and betrayed hero in a transformational disguise. Having been
attracts Bryam to a possible secret identity behind the costume refused by Viola di Morini, Leontini becomes infatuated with the
and demeanor of the pathetic drudge. "There was something 1ncon- cunning Rosalviva whose character repels and fascinates the many
gruous," the observant Bryam notes, ‘in the appearance of Joan men who are drawn to her. Growing quickly weary of Leontini,
and the manner in which she was considered by the family. She Rosalviva makes herself available to his friend, Conte Golfieri,
was called, she was blamed, but she looked like a being infin- ‘ a man able to tutor her in the mysteries of deeper wickedness.
itely superior to the rest of the household." Her quiet beauty The love-hate-love triangle grows into a quadrilateral when Gol-
‘is particularly annoying to the Rufford's vulgar daughter who fieri flouts Rosalviva's passionate advances and takes up with
regards Joan as Cinderella was regarded by her older sisters. the more lucrative Francesca. Rosalviva's fury is made doubly

I08 THE
13
FIRST GUTHICS THE FIIGT GOTHICS 109
intense by her knowledge that Golfieri is the murderer of her » _ ,
father, a fact whieh ghe had been miiiing to overieek hhiie G°i_ and pastoral compensations. Hohenhelbe's forest is such a region
fieri loved her, For the yolumes, the anfni cnmniexities accnm_ of infernal dread and perpetual night. Josephina, the heroine of
uiate and Rosaivive-S hatred rises nntii She Seems about to go ' the tale, is forced by circumstance to seek her identity and
mad. Haiting in the hing; ta appiaud her damnation is the demon ‘ destiny in its depths. Her protector and adoptive father, Baron
dwarf, actually the jiited Leehtihi in his homnncnier diSguiSe_ , Miltitz, is torn between his humane responsibilities to Josephi-
Dwarfs in fairytale; gpin goid cut of Stran for needy maidens. 1 na, his child ward, and Josephina, the sexually attractive young
dwarfs in Gothic novel; Spin webs of murderous intrigue for die: woman. Because this is a Gothic novel, the Baron's lechery pre-
b0liC ladies. The demon dwarf pretends to kiii Gnifieriis dominates over his humanity, thus creating a sexually perilous
Francesca, then displays her Corpse for Roseivivaie Satisfaction situation for her at home. Her danger is further complicated the
and Goifieri-5 engniSh_ A5 a gruesome embeiiisnmente RD5a]viva ' machinations of the Baron's crafty steward, Muller. Josephina
arranges to have Golfieri permanently locked up with his belov- I withdraws tu the f°re5t' huping to fi"d 3 refuge but finds
ed's corpse. Suddenly, the demon dwarf restores Francesca to instead a variety of new terrors. It is, after all, a Gothic
life and health, accuses Rosaiviva of a mnititnde of crimes and > forest. Championed at last by a young bandit named Albert, she
somehow resumes the Shape and farm of the missing Lenntini a , makes her way back to the Baron's castle where she finds that he
metamorphosis which causes Rosalviva's suicide. After sustaining . has °°"q"e'ed his 5e‘“a1 Pa5Si°" a"d is "°“ able t“ be the fa‘
its horrid Situationg with good energy, tnie fantastic nenene_ ther she needs. Albert follows, appearing at the castle disguis-
ment does not seem inconsistent hith prior event5_ vet one of ed as Count Zoremberg. He is there to monitor Josephine's wel-
the persistent flaw; of the Gothic romance in ion; er Shert fare, to come to her rescue again if necessary, and to marry her
forms is the trite remgya] of evii characters by inedenneteiy if he can. All might end happily for Albert, Josephine, and the
motivated suicides. The better Gothics resist the conScience- f Ba'°" "ere it "°‘ f°r the p'e5e"°e °f Muller’ the 5e'pe"t 1"
Stricken death of the viiiaih or viiieiness, or at the very < their paradise. He denounces Albert, reveals his bandit career,
least, they depict the death at eyi] characters es acts of ees_ and has him delivered to the authorities for trial and punish-
mic defiance ihtehaed to reenfnree wthe triumph of meiigh ment. Rather than face a public death, Albert commits suicide in
mystery over the rational world." his cell, leaving behind the lamentable proof that he is Baron
: Miltitz‘s natural son. The Baron and his adoptive daughter are
0. THE FOREST 0F HQHENHELBE; A TALE_ tondun i Minerve_PreSs for . er left to meditate on the darkness of life. This abject ending is
Lane and Newman, 1303_ ‘. . unusual and something of a violation of Gothic prescriptions. In
Modern Reeditions: None _l this connection, the morbidity of the ending can be compared
Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (terror-horror modes) ' ‘l with the pessimism of Hawthorne's ‘Young Goodman Brown" where
Biographical and Research Data: Summers, GOTHIC QUEST, ii the pr°ta9°"iSt'5 “dyi"9 wurd is 9I°°m'"
DP-368-369. .
i_ 131. Fox, Joseph Jr. TANCRED: A TALE OF ANCIENT TIMES. London 2
critieai gyhopsisi Unsigned Gothies eceesieneiiy prove to be fem Minerva-Press for Hilliam Lane, 1791.
DﬂFﬂdl9m5 "7 the genre. Such is the case with THE FOREST OF H0- ’§§d M°der" Reediti°"5= "°"e ‘
HENHELBE, ah aht5tehding_ anonynmue Specimen of e iarge fgi Gothic Type: Gothified history (terror mode)
subcategory of Gothic fiction, the romance of the forest. The .i#‘ Bl°9'°P“i°al a"d Research Data: 5""“*r5= GOTHXC QUE5T- P-3599
title page mentions that the author also wrote CORRELIA: OR, THE if Lévy. LE ROMAN "GDTHIOUE" ANGLAIS, p.245..
MYSTIC TOMB (see #021), a well-crafted Gothic built around a f" . . . . , . . .
supernatural acoustic. This novel takes maximum advantage of the Eh cr‘t‘ca] Synopslsz FD‘ Invented 3 flctltlous Golhlc ch1‘d"°°d
haunted forest as both a hathrai miiieu of terror and e ieeeie ,3 for the Norman leader of the First Crusade and besieger of Jeru-
for the moral trials of hero aha heroine, e piece where they i salem, Tancred (1078-1112). But his trials, adversities, and
might frequently lose their way. Forests often substitute for i eventual ennobiement all pale when placed beside the energetic
castles in the iconography cf Gothic fiCtiOn_ The image erieih_ wickedness of his mother? the Lady Marguerita de Rochdale, a
ates in Smollett's FERDINAND COUNT FATHOM (see #427) and extends G°‘"‘° ‘l9'°‘*- T"e ‘°l"t5 °‘ Seveli‘ °‘ 5"“k°‘Pe°’e" best bid
to the symbolism of the haunted mind in its American mutations wome" animate Fox 5 conception of a mother's enthusiastlc
gharies grocknen Brnhn.s novei of the miiderheesi EDGAR HUNTLV; evil,--Tamora the Goth in TITUS ANDRONICUS and Goneril in KING
OR, THE MEMOIRS OF A 5LE£P_hAtKER (1799) and Hawthornels Puritan LEAR. Harguerita‘s malevolence toward her own family is both an
Gothic remahees of the deep forest, “young Goodman Brown. (1835) appetite and a political program as well as an incurable case of
and vpoger Meivinis Bnriein (1832) use the forest to indicate - evil for evil's sake. Directly after Tancred's birth, she in-
the self's interior darkhe55_ Ehgiish Gothic versions of the structs her ugly steward, Lawrence, to take the infant to the
forest °rdea] 9'e5e"t the "i|d9r"955 ﬂ$ 6 Physical Cﬂunterpart forest where she hopes it will die of exposure. But with incred-
of the dark and dangerous castle. Just as the castles of Gothic ible oedipal pe'5i5te"ce a"d luck’ Ta"c'ed survives t° be
fiction are unsafe, unstable, and possessed by maiigh agencies rescued by old Fitz-Halter, a man who knows abandoned greatness
so the forests surrounding these easties ieck aii Edenic beent; when he finds it. Hhile Tancred secretly grows to manhood in the
' protective depths of the forest, his mother occupies herself

l
l .
110 THE FIRST BDTHICS THE—FIR$T GDTHICS Ill
with the elimination of inconvenient husbands, disposing first Marie. she nysteribnsly reqeins consciousness. then discloses to
Of the Biro" de Rbﬁhdﬂle, ﬂBX£ Of the Baron de Rothsay. But her fiancé, the Prince Rinaldo, that she is now awakening from a
Baron Murcia, her third prospective victim, disrupts these homi- viblent dream bf being raped while in e trance by his Prbfiioate
cidal diversions by falling in love with Tancred's sister, the ki"5m5"s C°"ti'I"I- "he" 5EVeTﬂl m°"th5 liter, 53"ta MBFiﬂ'5
Lady Helen. Meanwhile, the forces of righteous heredity have \ "n1ysi;eribus Pregnancy" becomes Obvious re all. the fvriebs
been gathering around the stronghold of the fiendish mother as Ri"ﬂ1d° d°"bt5 her fidelity 65 W911 35 her 5t'ﬁ"9e aCC°""t Of
Tancred, now grown to noble manhood, organizes a siege on her being violated in a dream. Faced with a father's ire and a be-
castle. The castle falls to Tancred, Lawrence is thrown from the 1°Ved'5 dl5b@1iEf, 5a"ta "aria Sets f°rt" I" the garb Of 6 Pi1~
battlements, but before Marguerita can be taken alive and made grim seeking to establish her innocence. During her subsequent
to answer for her vile crimes, she puts a dagger to her breast wanderings, she poses as a man and,vows never to reveal her true
and calls out defiantly to Tancred from atop the castle keep; isex until her violator is identified and her name cleared of
“Look upon me still, young hero, and looking, view thy mother adultery. In her travels, she succors a dying monk who rewards
and author of thy woes!" Having set this "marble hearted fiend" her kindness by sivino her a secret manuscript whose contents
in motion, Fox was wise enough not to permit her a last moment might throw light on her ‘mysterious pregnancy." The paper con-
repentance. Parental villainy in Gothic novels is almost invari- tains a full and lurid account (but not a confession) of how
ably paternal or avuncular; mothers are customarily dead, Father Conrad had vicariously satisfied his odious desires by
dungeoned, or long-missing rather than purely evil. But Fox's dY"99l"9 5a"t3 "aria, the" d95Pat¢hi"9 C°"“t Phi1iP C°"tﬂTI"I to
mother figure is a curious and welcome departure from the normal ' her chamber "to fully and grossly satisfy his impious lusts."
character assignments in a Gothic. Awkwardly written or over- For once in a Gothic novel, this ta"9IE °f 5eX"aI ¢'ImE5 by B
written, melodramatically staged or overstaged, and cluttered hypocritical priest is punished without the intervention of the
with odd historical debris, Fox's first Gothic endeavor never- 1nq"iSmun' Santa Maria's brother, Ferdinand, enters the story
theless established him as a major purveyor of the novel of very late but well in time to perform his duties as nemesis. He
terror in the highly Gothic 1790's. sunmons Father Conrad's sexual agent, Contarini, to account,
effects a reconciliation between Santa Maria and her father, and
I32. Fox, Joseph Jr. SANTA MARIA: OR, THE MYSTERIOUS PREGNANCY. uses the revelations or the secret manuscript as proof of his
London : G. Kearsley, 1797. sister's purity. Having refused a happy ending in his first
Modern Reeditions: None ‘Gothic effort, TANCRED (see #131), Fox goes to the opposite ex-
Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (horror mode) treme in concluding SANTA MARIA. The father is reunited with his
Biographical and Research Data: Tompkins, POPULAR NOVEL IN daughter; the daughter is exonerated and her pregnancy demys-
ENGLAND, PD-Z22, Z27, 346; Summers, GOTHIC QUEST, pp.7I, I96, tified; and the rapists are put to death with due solemnity just
360-363; Tarr, CATHOLICISM IN GOTHIC FICTION, pp.4O, 65, 76, prior to Santa Maria's wedding with Prince Rinaldo who has
79, 108, IO9; Lévy, LE ROMAN “GOTHIQUE" anglais, pp_39Q_ 410, forgiven her everything. Published in the same year as Mrs.
428, 451, 467, 481, 632; Herner, Stephen. "Diderot, Sade, and Radcliffe's THE ITALIAN (see #350), Fox's peculiar Gothic novel
the Gothic Novel," STUDIES ON VOLTAIRE AND THE EIGHTEENTH mixed themes, materials, and characters of the various proto-
CENTURY, 114 (1973): 273-290. I types crowding the Gothic field in the late 1790's: the monastic
shocker with its scenes of explicit sexual violence; the castle
Critical Synopsis: Complex Gothic gears, erotic sensa- thriller with its repertory of cadaverous surprises; and the
tionalism, monastic villainy, and a bizarre title insured the romance of the forest with its disﬂiaced e"d deﬁberete heYbl"e-
inmediate acceptance of Fox's thunderous Gothic romance, In his
preface, Fox himself forewarned the reader of the "complicated I33. Frances, Sophia L. VIVONIO: OR, THE HOUR OF RETRIBUTION. London
paths“ that lay ahead. Sunwers characterized these paths as I Minerva-Press for Le"e, Newman. 1506-
leading the reader into "a tornado of circumstance and event Modern Reeditions: None
curiously reminiscent of De Sade's JUSTINE and JULIETTE." Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (terror mode)
Sadistic action is maintained throughout by several characters, Biographical and Research Data: Sunners, GOTHIC QUEST, p.86;
but reaches a high focus of brutality in the predatory activ- Sunnnrs. GOTHIC BIBLIOGRAPHY, D-46-
ities of the Carthusian monk, Father Conrad. He is Friar Law- _
rence from ROMEO AND JULIET now thoroughly debauched and ‘ Critical 5ynbPsis= The rbnianee appears be be a elese initi-
G0thified- His medicinal skills, for example, are directed to '*i tion of Picard's THE CASTLE OF ROVIEGO: OR, THE RETRIBUTION (see
gross ends: "Hhen any of the virtuous females of our convent " - #328). Additional detailing could also have been obtained from
held out too rigidly against my lustful purposes,“ he sneers, "I P Lathom's MIDNIGHT BELL (see #227). In A GOTHIC BIBLIOGRAPHY,
did administer this same sleeping potion, and when dead to every 5 ' Sunmers notes that Vivonio is erroneously listed by the
sense, enjoyed my will upon them." Principal victim of these f catalogue of the Bibliotheque Nationale as the work of Francis
assaults has been the maiden, Santa Maria, daughter of Count Lathom. The entry also mentions "Sophie Frances“ as a nom de
Rodolph. Early in the novel, she is discovered on her wedding plume used by Lathom (unverified). -
morning "in the arms of death." During the last rites for Santa- ' ‘

cor Ics 113
11; THE FIRST cornzcs . IHE FIRST H
V HISTORY OF THE PRE-ROMANTIC NOVEL IN ENGLAND, p.218; Lévy, LE
134. Frances, Sophia L. THE NUN OF MISERICORDIA: OR THE EVE OF ALL
’ ROMAN "GOTHIQUE" ANGLAIS, pp.199, 535, 626.
SAINTS. London : Minerva-Press for Lane, Newman, 1807.
mder" Reedit1°"55 NW"? Critical Synopsis: The irrational i"IJi"9e$ "P0" the
Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (terror mode) historical in horrid shape in Fuller's Gothified history. The
Bi°9'aPh1Ca] a"d Research Data: Birkhead~ TALE OF TERROR» work can also be connected with Clara Reeve's OLD ENGLISH BARON
p.76; Tarr. EATHOLICISM IN GOTHIC FICTION, PP-9. 31. 49. 108: (see #355) and Sophia Lee's THE RECESS (see #240). Fuller's pre-
Lévy, LE ROMAN "GOTHIQUE" ANGLAIS, pp.410, 411, 412, 429, face to the novel makes clear her intention of subordinating the
436; Josephs, Herbert. "Diderot's LA RELIGIEUSE: Libertinism historical to the norrifi¢ to achieve her ghostly effects:'W
a"d the Da'k Cave °f the s°"1-" MODERN LANGUAGE NOTES» 91 mean not to offend the majesty of sacred truth by giving her but
(1976): 734'755‘ I a secondary place in the following pages. Necessity, stronger
, _ _ _ _ , , than prudence, obliged me to give fiction the preeminence. The
Critical Synopsis: This novel exploits the various subplots roa] horrors of the Bar0n$' wars during the reign of Henry III
of Lewis-5 THE MONK (see #244), drawing many of its Gothic sit- (1215_1272) reoede inch the background to allow the spectre _0f
"iti°"5 f'°m the 5"ffe*i"95 07 the ""Vil1i"9 """, A9"e5. in the the slain Matilda, Fuller's "posthumous heroine," to make its
dismal underground of the Abbey of St. Clare. A second source ’ appearance at the bed5ide of her murderer brother-in-law. Waller
for this t e of Gothic ' D'd t' '
YP 15 ‘ e'° 5 "‘de]¥"ead "°"e]- LA Fitz-Osborne. In fact, this Gothic type-scene of the bloody
RELIGIEUSE (THE NUN) of 1796 which had graphically depicted the ' ‘ ' '
h d d t the bedside and spilling nodules of blood over
sexual horrors of convent confinement and chronicled in detail ing eqﬁglzging offender is the novellg who1o reason for be1ng_
the physical and psychological persecutions of a young WOMBH The political fortunes of the murdered Matilda's husband, Alan
forced to take the veil Diderot's THE NUN 'l b
. was avai a le to the Fit1.05borne, hardly seem to matter and pale into unimportance
Gothic readership in the English translation published by G.G. D "d ch 5 h t'k l' f the ritiﬂh lit T T
_ esi e e c auerroman 1 c imax o HOPE E a_ Y
and J. Robinson in 1797. Hith its gloomy chapels haunted by raining blood on her killer. All Gothic novelists who used his-
lecherous prioresses, lugubrious cells of penance, and unremit- gory also modified or ignored it whenever an opportunity. for
ting atmosphere of sexual threat, THE NUN OF MISERICORDIA pre- terror, horror, or~a genealogical miracle dictated such disre-
sents the religious life as a sit t’ l t f ' ' '
ua iona me aphor or the warp- ‘ oard_ gut Anne Fuller was particularly inclined to substitute
ing of the natural passions. The repressive environment is moved * f t f ' 1 ' l f t
, , _ Gothic an asy or his orica ac
from the Madrid of THE MONK to early eighteenth-century Lisbon. I
I" this "°¥» the a"t"°' f°""° i" l"9e"i°"$ "@ﬂ"$ °f b'l"9i"9 l" ' 13s. GABRIELLE pt VERGV: AN HISTORICAL TALE. London = T. Hookham and
the great earthquake of 1755 as one more Gothic catastrophe in a . J_ Bro", 17gg_
book laden with catastrophes. The monastic prisoner is altered Modern Reeditigngg Nona
from Agnes to Adelaide. Her experiences suggest not only the Q ch‘ T : G th f' d h' i
0 ic ype o i ie is ory
subterranean agony of Agnes but also the pathetic predicaments Biographical and Research Data; Sunwwrs, GOTHIC QUEST.
of Ambrosio's sister Antonia. In an additi n l k l d
, o a ac now e gement ;. pp_172, 391; Foster, HISTORY OF THE PRE-ROMANTIC NQVEL IN
of Lewis, blood flows freely as Mrs. Frances opted for explicit ENGLAND, p.197; Grieder, Josephine. "The Prose Fiction of
horror rather than suggestive terrot in the tribulations of * gacuiaro d-Arnand in Late Eighteenth-Century England," FRENCH
Adelaide. After one attack, "Streams of blood still seemed to 5Tup1E$, 2 (1970); 113-126; Dawson, Robert L. 'Baculard
flow from her bosom, and stain her long white garments, and her d'Arnaud (1718-1805): Life and Prose Fiction,‘ DISSERTATION
cheeks were deadly pale, her eyes fixed, and her whole lovely AB5TRAQT$ INTERRATIDNAL, 33 (1972): 2367A (Vale University).
face marked with death." Such sanguinary imagery envelopes the
unfortunate maiden throughout the romance. Hhy do Catholic critical synopsis; The prolific author of more than forty
settings and materials retain such powerful thematic appeal in L seria]izoo novois and "onerous oramas_ the French romancor, gag-
Gothic fiction? The leading student of Catholicism's function in 3 nlard d'Arnand left a strong mark on the English Gothic. His
Gothic works, Sister Mary Muriel Tarr, has given this answer: mooievaiizeg and ggntimgntalized horror plots became a magor
"Catholic materials are used mainly for their effect upon the source for the “ricer; of the 1790's who read him BVTQIY _a"d
imagination. Catholicism functions in Gothic fiction chiefly as ' plundered him freely. For the Gothicists of the nineties,
a source of melancholy pleasure, divine horror, and religious ' d'Arnaud's impact may be gauged in the historical-Sentiment?
“"9-" tendencies of the Gothic romances. The anonymous GABRIELLE DE
VERGY is just one bibliographical specimen of a reset d Arhdﬂd
135. Fuller, Anne. ALAN FITZ-OSBORNE: AN HISTORICAL TALE. London : ‘ ta]a’ in this case’ a morbid romance ontltied FpyEa_ The Set-
R°bi"5°". 1735- tings are totally funereal, the characters are EXqUl5lt91Y 59"‘-
Modern Reeditions: None imental and exhaustingly victimized, and the emotions at the
Gothic Type: Gothified history ‘ same pitch as the intensities of Gothic pathos in the maiden-
Biographical and Research Data: Tonukins, POPULAR NOVEL IN centered novels of the period. It is little wonder that the Eng-
ENGLAND, p.237; Sumners GOTHIC QUEST .32 1 - - ' ' ' '
- s PP . 71» 15"» . R lish Gothics were so admiring of .his lugubrious V1SIOnS| 7°“
' CATHOLICISM IN GOTHIC FICTION, pp.2, 49, 103, 105; Foster, ,.ri r

ll
‘ THE FIRST GUTHICS ‘THE FIRST cornzcs 115
the contain ever c onent of the hi h Gothic. ‘T t l f . . .
darhauaerie'»- °hSe§vegmpFoSter_ his “gray, deciamgioiyy eahd attempts to enlist the Scottish bandit, Glenwar, in the ranks of
Simiiar in many ways ta that of hehry Maekehziais MAN OF FEELING his traitors, but Glenwar remains steadfastly loyal to Scotland
(see #260). The author is all for high passion, intense emo- and to Angus eve".th°ugh ‘F has Ahgusls father who had drive"
tions, gloom, fate, and death. His forte is the somber setting: hlehhar to a .]1fe of hr‘gahdage' hahdur ghes forward hith his
he loves to paint the lugubrious scene, the sinister landscape Schemes’ ?mb“5h1hg Angus and D°ha]d ‘h a Sk"mi5h ahd huldihg
the graveyard, the catacombs, or the hideous cavern fuii of ca: Angus prisoner in Cawdor Castle to await execution ("Is justice
daverS_h This Shmhary is a good dascrihtioh of the contents Dr done on Angus?" one of Cawdor's ruffians mutters). Hhen Glenwar
GABRIELLE oz VERGY. The heroine is the daughter of a knight in °°P°“'§ ?t C“"d°T castie “‘?9“‘$ed °§ a m‘"‘t'e‘ “"° $l"9i"9 °
the service of Richard Coeur de Lion. Her love for a lowborn ha“ad hh1ch end? 1" the harh1"9 refrain‘ "Bhhare’" this Shay
We    In   of  i !::::::;:" @i:::;& i:s':::: .::::"::.i;‘: :::;i: :5 :'2:;i"i.‘::;;
0 ic a ers e as the s ir x u r ' -
extracted heaht to his daughhereih Ecggigehhgobighhnzahhiehig'2 °f Peril’ .a"d* f°“°“i"9 the “"155 °f chivairya the p'i5°"Er
suicide at this sight causes her father's belated repentance. bl°hS 3 mhS1ca] reply to G]e"hah'S harnihg‘ Back to his vast
Drawing upon this tearful and terrific plot, the Goth concocted have rushes hlehhar tn Prepare the bahdit hand for a patriotic
a ramahce teeming with hiaed, tears‘ crueity ahd iheredihie stroke against Cawdor Castle and the liberation of Angus. It is
devotion, locating the majority of the action in caverns, tombs at this poiht that Glehhar pays his dip1°matic viiit to Lord
and sunless landscapes. D'Arnaud's fictions always had a heavy DachaS' a fhti1e gesture as it turns out‘ The c'a5h1“9 c1imax
didactic overlay, but the Gothicists who reworked his material 5?e5 Cahgﬂg bmﬂrtally woungeg by an arrowdinAt:e cheit, Eachhs
aim St aih - - a so noun e y an arrow, an ngus re ease . n w a o e
0 ays omhtted or d‘]uted the Mora‘ content‘ fate of Glenwar, the noble outlaw? Hhen he examines the bodies
131. THE GHOST or HARCOURT: A ROMANCE. Lahaoh = Minerva-Press for °f C°"°°' °"° °a°"“ "‘° ‘1°t°"'""° if "em" is dead-" "9 is
13
Lane’ Newman, 13o3_ T killed when Lord Dacras yanks the arrow from his own chest and
Modern Reeditiohsz hone glunges is ihho Ggen:a€‘s :eart.bA_threeh verie tlahentgtign by
Gothic T e: Pure or hi h Gothic t rr r m h9“5 5" e ah 1 C °'“5 r‘h95 e a 9 ° e ° °m °
Biagraphigai aha Researgh Data: héh: 0 Ode) ' page 72. The student should note the year of publication (1828)
of this inferior and poorly made chapbook. The Gothic chapbook
gritieai Synopsis; The one vaiume Gothic appears to derive trade would continue to flourish in its crudest form so long as
from several Radcliffean romances. Udolphoesque trappings and ' ‘he reader market hhuld t°]erate and support ‘F’ EYE" as Iate hs
giguationa together with an anxious heroine tcaroiiheit cathoiie 1 1828, there were still many such readers, and ironically, their
treachery, aha spectra] eheeuhters with a haterhai ghost yieid numbers were probably increasing. A generation or two iater, the
an average Gothic thriiier_ same kinds of readers would eagerly devour the Victorian penny
dreadfuls and trashy "bloods," the subliterary progeny of Gothic
B. GLENHAR: THE SCOTTISH BANDIT. London : Dean and Munday, 1828. chapbooks of GLENHAR's type. .
Modern Reeditions: None i _ _ _
Gothic Type: Gothic chapbook (Rauberroman) = 139. Godwin, Hilliam. THINGS AS THEY ARE: OR, THE ADVENTURES 0F
Biugrahhicai aha Research Data: None CALEB HILLIANSi London : B. Crosby, 1T94.
Modern Reeditions: Holt, Rinehart, Hinston, 1960, ed. George
Critical Synopsis: Accordin to its frontis iece this Sherhurh; h’h‘ h°rt°h’.1977’ ed'.Uavid.Mc chhckeh‘
amateurish 72_page ehahhoak is uh; ah Etohiah- and Hgntergpersed * Gothic Type; Contemporized Gothic (didactic and polemical
with original poetry." A multi-colored illustration shows two of eiemehtsi
the priheipais of the taie, the hhhie outiaa’ Giehiart and the , Biographical and Research Data: Cruttwell, Patrick. "On CALEB
treacherous English general, Lord Dacras, in a melodramatic con- hILLIhhS'" huhsoh Rhvlhhi 11 (1958): 87°95; ha1t°"' James’
frontation. The caption spells out the event: ‘The astonishment ‘MAD FEARV FATHER": CALEB hILhIAhS. hhh Thh hovhL FoRM’“
of Lord Dacras at finding Glenwar, the Scottish bandit, in his Sallbhrg’ Ah5tr1a Z 5a‘Zhurg Sthd‘e§ 1" h"g]'Sh L‘terathre
tent." This actually occurs on page 53 when Glenwar beseeches Number 41’ 1975; Harvey‘ h'D' The h1ghtmare of CALEB
the English general to turn back his army and refuse to aid the l hILLIhMS' ESSAVS IN CRITICISM’ 26 (1976): g35'?49; Ty5dae1’
villainous Thane of Cawdor in his rebellion against the right- B'J' .h!LLIhM GODHIN hs h0vELIST' ht1a"t‘c h‘9h‘ahds’ N9 Z
eous Thane of Angus. Obviously, the callow chapbooker bluntly hhman‘t1eS Press’ lhhli Graham’ Kehheth h’ "The G°th'c U"‘ty
plundered Shakespeare's MACBETH to obtain his names, although of CALEB hILLIhMS‘ PAPERS oh Lhhhhhhh AND LITERATURE’ 20
the plot is a aggregate of Gothic bandit stories. Now and then, ~ (1984): 47'59'
the Goth lances at the text of MACBETH and extracts a lin r Y . .
speech fgr his own uses. The Thane of Cawdor schemes to ﬁve2- ~ ch‘t‘ca] Syhopslsz h]th°u9h.the h°ve] of thrror ah? the hove]
throw the Thane of Angus and he is not at all reticent about his gm Ihias hguld seem Shherf1c‘a11y ftiibe g;g?mp:t‘b1:hf°rm5'
- - - - - ese wo mo es were some imes success u y c ine as ey are
p]°m"g as he S°'°“"'s °“‘ ms °‘°"S d“'"'° “ t°""""e “°'"" he in G0dVliIl'S CALEB WILLIAMS. Ah intellectualized and psycholo-

ms FIRST can-arcs » ~T”e FIRST comics 1”
ized Gothic that ains to make the reader th.nk as well named Hawkins and his son to be accused, tried, and executed for
gringe is not necessarily Iess power“, tharnthe Supematurgi , his act. As he intrigues to save his reputation, Falkland grows
‘ _ _ . . 1 . . . . .
thriller. A societ or a mind can be more haunted than a castle ‘nereaeang y "F‘“‘ed and °@‘P°“°- d1ee°ver1n9 that the la“ 95"
and far more dangerous to its occupants. A modern judgement of be nee? as a Sh1e1d by.theSe In peaer‘ The .1°ya] bu? eteaally
Godwin's Gothic stresses its intrinsic nature: "In CALEB HIL- 5FSp'e'auS . ea1eh w'1]1am§ eples °n hla master 5 Strange
LIAMS, Godwin's fearful Gothic reality is almost entirely gener- ‘L a“?'““°" '" §"“'a°te'» haplng ta Prabe the ea“ee5 af _h'$
ated internally. He demonstrates his creative grasp of the psy- S°1‘tary behav‘°r ?"° "?°°'@' the m°t‘YeS ?‘.F?‘*‘°"“'5 phy5'ea1
chological Gothic by founding a series of motifs and images on _ and m€"‘a1 °@t@"°'°t‘°?- ea1eb'5 l"q“1S‘?‘veneeS over the
the swarming thoughts and impressions of his characters. He find ‘°°T°‘!'e °°"d9°‘ °f "'5 emp]°yef '5 at f'ret anly “T ameral
the hauntings the demonic villains the fearful threatenings e“r?°S't¥' but It 9f°d"a“Y deepens ‘nee a d%'k neee5S1Fy .f°r
the assion ana the Vi0‘ence that we ax ect in a Goth, no 1’ , prying into the innermost soul of the SUbJECt. Uhen Hilliams
but pall are psychologically generated?" Responding toCGodwiﬁ‘s , f1"g]1y dogs pe"e§rate to the dark truth that his master is a
. t t- 1 h f th d t . . f. - f t mur erer e fin s‘ at the sane tine that he is helpless to do
12;.,i:° :,::.:::'"“.:.; "2::..:.. ..:.i.";.:;i:;:: ..‘::;::. 2.. .2?   »    ii? 1°"   
cial conscience. Many Gothic novels themselves incorporate God- °? hle. S1de' Ha'1"9 °°F@°F@“ t"? er‘mT"a]' the “E‘?°“'@ no"
winian discourse or rmit their characters to en a E in olemi finds himself hounded by him in an inversion of what will later
De Q Q P ' L . .
cal outbursts on revolutionary ideas or allow them to inveigh a- became the ."°rma] Patter“ °f the 4e‘@°t‘"e Story‘ Llke the
. t . 1 t C 1 b ".11. d t tn d f G d_ tormented maiden running from the villain through the corridors
gegqz "o::€‘aForyg3::gnasth: :ent:a]1g::higeZrgea1 90$" CEnfiﬁe_ of the haunted castle, Caleb Hilliams is now relentlessly stalk-
ment or enelosure proved an adaptible vehicle for expression of - ed Py hls master thr°“gh.the t"‘SF‘"9‘ a“? turnings °f a ha""ted
moral revulsion social horrors and the psychological entrap- §°€‘e‘¥- A" °“F°°‘t “Ith a pr1ee °" hle head’ he ‘S p“r5"ea'
ment of the self within imprisoning ideologies. All of the Jaco- . Ja‘]ed’ a]m°St k1l]ed for the b°“nty money’ captured’ a"a fi"a1'
bin novelists of the 1790's contemporized the devices of Gothic ' gy returned to endure F°‘k‘a"?'§ zragh .beeked by tge Ia!‘
fiction, using horror, terror, incarceration, pursuit, harass- Fuqgeen aeenes’ a seere ma““?er'p . e 1“ a Strang 9* 1“
ment nightmares and intellectual villainy to expose a decadent a k ?"d S eha"her" F?‘*‘a¥“ S amb'dextr°“S °9@"F- the h1ae°uS
society's victimization of the individual The novels of Godwin Mr‘ G1nes’ and a aramat‘c erla‘ See"e a1] e°"tr'b“te ta the
Bage, Wollstonecraft and Holcroft sought to terrify the reade; Gothic eenteat of f1ight and pursuit‘ At the end’ Caleb ui1]iamS
on a deeper and much more serious level through an attack on '\ ?"d Falﬁéand beﬁame odd iiereg ::a'er5.aqddare $F'“"9§}Y ugleia
class structure, legal corruption, and the uncivilized ordering ‘ 1" deul ' eae a °“%"°. Y D .e Saela epra'1ty' ter. a '
of civilization itself. "Things As They Are" need not remain an S death? ca]eb H1]11am5 ae1'verS a Sort ef revelutlanary
"things as they are" if the Synpathies uf the audience for re_ ‘ eulogy, asking: ‘But of what use are the talents and sentiments
volutionary change could be ignited and directed The central \ in the earrupt wilderness af human e°eiety7 It is a ra"k a"d
symbol of the haunted castle had already assumed some social and X rattea Sail’ frem "hieh every finer shrub ara"5 p°i5°" as it
psychological connotations in the work of Halpole and Radcliffe 3 gr°“S'“ If this philosophical brand of Gathie fietie" -debased
, \ . . .
coming to represent a decayed social structure once strong and ‘ the .°Y‘g'"a]. ends of the. ?°'°‘ Of. "°T'°'= it also gave to
reliable but now obsolete and dangerous to its inhabitants. In .' °°‘l‘°‘§m ‘A 1"te1]eet“a] “t']1ty “"9 v1ta!1ty ¥"‘°“ encouraged
CALEB HILLIAHS Godwin renders society itself as his version of e Serleus "r‘ters to turn ta the e°th'e to ']]“m1"ate the darkest
a haunted castle a stifling environment from which the enlight- ‘ ‘>1 corridors of Society and the soul‘
. , . ’ . . ‘it
ened individual craves release but can find no way out. Godwin's Q,’ . . . _
transformation of haunted caSt]e into haunted Society a"tici_ Ewi 140. Godwin, Hilliam. ST. LEON. A TALE OF THE SIXTEENTH CENTURY.
pates the sociological Gothicism of such writers as Dickens .§; L°"a°" 2 e'et ?"° a‘ R°bi"5°"' 1799' . _
later on and also shows the elasticity of the Gothic medium for '?§ Moder" Reedlt19“5' Ar“° Press‘ 1972’ ed‘ Ju]1et Beckett’
accommodating new conceptions of horror. In CALEB HILLIAMS life ‘§- “a"?“° Pub11Sh‘“5’.197e2 .
in society assumes the life-threatening conditions of castle- la’ e°th‘e Type: eathlflea h'St°ry (d'aaet‘e e1eme"e5)
interior for it is filled everywhere with the dark spirits of $9 Biographical and Research Data: Birkhead’ TALE OF TERROR‘
= _ ,3, _ i . ' _ .
legalized violence, of internecine class warfare, of institu- ‘ =§@ gfiaél 1'6i37§§;ge’F?:::£§2 ccggkeéeppkzolnégg’izarmga Ggg:§c
tionally sanctioned brutality, of the lawlessness of the law, Q: . . j 5%‘ L 0 "’TEX S ST = E 5 TE‘ “ a '
and all of the other terrible paradoxes of civilization as God- gV. ‘£15m’, ‘ E Hf A UB1 S IN LI RATURE AND LANGUAGE’ 8
win perceived them. The story's subject is the tension and f‘ §EgE§gé 5as'5:€£L?:aheZ6Daez?ST&ov:EgANﬁE cuuk eSZCH0LgeIcAL
conflict that develops between the aristocratic Squire Falkland " _ H _ '. e" or ' .'P° Hes?’
and his proletarian servant and secretary, Caleb Hilliams. Falk- ” 1980’ Ty5dae]’ B‘a' ST’ LEON‘ R°°“‘¢“Ta"‘ .G°eh‘e15m’ If
land has lost control of himself in a fit of anger over the e :1LL15f. egoulu lee‘ N0vE§;ST' At‘a"t‘e H19h]a"as' Na ’
abuse and death of his cousin, Emily Melville, at the hands of Q “meal lea regs’ 98 ' pp‘ '96‘
_his dissolute neighbor, Squire Barnabas Tyrrel. Having murdered
the despicable Tyrrel, he conceals his deed, allowing a peasant 1?, e'iti°a1 SY"°p5iS‘ 1"fe'i°' 'e° CALEB QILLIAMS i" bath
if ' '


THE FIRST curnrcs THE FIRST GUTHICS 119
psychodrama and internalized Gothic effects, ST. LEON represents Mary 3helley, 5eVE'5l ldeas 7°“ hef FRANKENSTEIN (See F399)‘ B"t
Godwin's ill-advised attempt to write a more traditional type of the book's value as fiction is decidedly lower than CALEB HIE-
Gothic novel, “A Tale of the Sixteenth Century." He was "at- LIAMS as Godwin's inquiry lﬂte the T"l"°"5 etteet Of POWEF l5
tempting to unite the manner of Gothic fiction with a serious obscured by his decision to write a literal Gothic rather than
comment on man's moral life." In Godwin's own words, he intended transforming G°thic c°"traPtl°"5 l"t° P°WeTf"l "€tiPh0'5 f°' the
"to mix human feelings and passions with incredible situations, inner life B5 he had l" CALEB “lLLlAM5-
and thus render them impressive and interestin ." To accom lish '
these sensational results while maintaining thegideologicalpdig- 1&1. THE GOTHIC STORY OF COURVILLE CASTLE: OR, THE ILLEGITIMATE SON,
nity of his fiction, Godwin abandoned the contemporary setting ' A VICTIM OF PREJUDICE AND PA5$l0N- L0ﬂd0h I 5~ Fliher. 1304-
he had used so successfully in CALEB WILLIAMS, placing the tale Modern Reeditienei Nﬂne
in a time when alchemy, the quest for the philosopher's stone, Gvthle Type! G°thlC bl"eb°°k
fear of the Inquisition, and a desire to find the elixir of Biographical and Research Data: None
eternal life could excite the imagination. The romance's hero is
the wandering knight, Reginald St. Leon. He begins well as a Critical Synopsis: The subtitle of the bluebook also acts as
chivalrous member of the court of Francis I, but his soldierly a sunmary 0f the PYl"ClPil 9°thl¢ eVe"t9- The Suhtltle. het §'V'
qualities are soon sullied by his compulsive gambling. His urge en in the data above, reads: "Owing to the Early Impressions In-
has no cure and the disease of gaming brings St. Leon to ruin. culcated with Unremitting Assiduity by an Implacable Mother,
with his wife, Marguerita Louise Isabeau de Damville, he with- Hhose Resentment to her Husband Excited her Son to Envy, U$uT'
draws to the pure air of a Swiss canton, and amidst poverty and pation and Murder; But Retributive Justice at Length Restores
near starvation, he struggles to overcome his vice. In their the Right Heir to his Lawful Possessions. To which is Added the
misery, St. Leon and Marguerita are visited by a mysterious old English Earl: or, The History of Fitzwalter." The appendage to
Jew, Zampieri, who seems to be a fugitive from the Inquisition. COURVILLE CASTLE turns out to be a crude condensation of Clara
In return for St. Leon's charity, Zampieri bestows the secret Reeve's OLD ENGLISH BARON (see #355). Of the synoptic title page
gift of inmortality upon him, but the secret only stirs up the - which catalogues the ingredients of the romance, H.H. Watt re-
Faustian ambitions of the knight for unlimited power. The pos- marks: "The EXDl0lteF5 Qt the 5hllll"9 5h°¢kEr5 dld “°F fall t°
session of the philosopher's stone enables St. Leon to regain recognize the Commercial Value Of the Captivatine title Dege-
fortune and position, but like other Fausts, he loses his soul The Petehtlﬂl Buetemeri “"C0"Vl"Ced by the lhrld tT0"tl$Dle¢e
in the process. His innersion in alchemy cuts him off from human that the story was horrid enough, could still be won over.“
fellowship and love and brings about Marguerita's death. A mob ,
burns his estate, and in full view of St. Leon, dismembers the 142. Green, Sarah. THE FESTIVAL OF ST. JAGO: A SPANISH ROMANCE.
black servant, Hector. "They killed hi , joint by joint and limb London : Minerva-Press for A.K. Newman, 1810.
by limb." St. Leon's alchemical experizknts have attracted the Q Modern Reeditions: None
attention of the Inquisition and he is arrested on charges of he Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (elements of THE MONK)
sorcery, but escapes by using the elixir to eliminate thirty i Biographical and Research Data: Lévy, -LE ROMAN "GOTHIOUE“
years from his life. But before he eludes the Inquisition, he is % ANGLAI5, DP-435, 452-
forced to witness an auto-da-fé or public burning of heretics. § _
This gruesome event allows Godwin to dwell on the brutal par- ' Critical 5ynon§i§= The two vvluﬂes in the New York Svciety
ticulars of institutionalized barbarity. Making his way to Hun- Library bear the advertisement of James Hanmond‘s Circulating
gary, he encounters the strange giant, Bethlem Gabor, with whom Library, NEWPOFt, Rhﬂde lelﬂhe. "PUTVe¥°" °f d'¥
he feels an innediate kinship in "the sublime desolation of a goods--books--stationary and paper hanging store, also a zephyr,
mighty soul." The Hungarian colossus is the novel's most tradi- worsted and D"'5e t"l5t '00“-" Althﬂugh the Preface declares
tleﬂal Gethic Character. He has the lethal eye, the weird "that the fire of heroic valour is not extinct in the breast of
presence, and other Gothic traits. The two men fall out when st. the Spaniard." most of the novel's wicked Characters are badly
Leon refuses to accept Gabor's gloomy view of humankind. Thrown faded copies of Lewis's portrayals of the evil Spanish character
into a subterranean vault by the irate giant, St. Leon is re- in THE MONK (see 0244). The 0Pe"l"9 5C9"e l5 5 tfihihareht fe-
leased by his son, Charles, now a conmander in the Austrian army i doing of the first chapter of THE MONK as a lecherous cavalier
that has invaded Hungary. But his release brings no relief to attending mass on St. Jago's day in order to flirt with the
the despairing St. Leon, for he now has become a type of Hander- women of the congreqatloh l5 5eX"illY 6T0H5ed _b¥. B mY5t@fl°"$
ing Jew figure himself and is caught in a cycle of time renew- veiled lady. "At the crowded and solemn mass in the magnificent
als. The influence of Godwin's stilted and tedious tale of the church of the Santo Spirito, at Valladolid, then the favorite
philosopher's stone and the Handering Jew can be seen in Shel- ' residence of the King of 5Pﬂl"».Derf0Tmed on the high festival
ley's ST. IRVVNE: OR, THE ROSICRUCIAN (see I405), Maturin's MEL- of St. Jago, the Cavaliero Don Lopez de Benvoglio beheld, with
MOTH THE HANDERER (see #268), and Bulwer Lytton's ZANONI (1842). an extraordinary degree of- interest and curiosity, a female
The relationship between a huge man and a man absorbed in scien- figure, kneeling near the altar, so closely wrapped in a large
tific pursuits may further have given Godwin's daughter, mezzaro, or black Veil, that her f°rm as Hell 55 he’ face- "as

THE FIRST EUTHICS 121
Critical Synopsis: This historical romance of the Sixteenth
Century has four bluebound volumes and is headed by an epigraph
from Thomas Gray: "Ambition this shall tempt to rise, then whirl
the wretch from high." There are some fine portraits of Henry
V111, his wives, his court, and his connubial intrigues accom-
panied by many excellent Gothic effects. Green adhered to the
, formula of Sophia Lee's THE RECESS (see #240), a type of
mysterious child plot which continued to grip Gothic readers.
The tine is October, I542. A muffled stranger assails the Count
D'Amaile with the injunction to "follow ne to the Convent of St.
Hilaire," a resting place apparently for royal fugitives and re-
gal illegitimates which is described Gothically as "a place
where superstition prevents most mortals from entering.‘ The
Convent and its surroundings are well-stocked with Gothic
surprises. The voyagers find a female skeleton spreadeagled over
a cleft of rocks with the picture of a strange knight dangling
in tatters from one of the rib bones. Nearby lie a shroud and an
empty coffin in this makeshift masoleum outside the convent
walls. Once inside the Convent, the Count picks up the trail of
the heroine, Elwina, a secret daughter of Henry VIII and Anne
Boleyn (executed in 1536). The royal exile is called somewhat
sarcastically the Marchioness of Pembroke by the nuns and she
wears a hieroglyphic bracelet bearing an inscription by her
' beheaded mother. Hill she be able to survive to vindicate her
mother? Hill she avoid the vigilant pursuit of Henry's agents
and spies? As this plot unfolds, it is interspersed with a great
deal of straight historical chronicling of Henry's long and
wife-filled reign. There are also several orthodox Gothic
characters who make Elvina's states of panic as excitingly
miserable as any other Gothic heroine's predicaments. These in-
clude the mad governess, Ursuline, the cunning Father Jerome and
a firstrate castle tyrant in the villainous personage of the
horrifying Baron Ompeda, master of the Castle of Villebois. A
young man named Theodore is often helpful to Elwina in her
distresses. A fellow victim of Henry's marital indiscretions,
Claudine Lirancourt, is on hand to console Elwina or to join her
in various Gothic enterprises. Volume three consists entirely of
Elwina's inprisonment within Castle Nillebois and could be read
as a separate tale, a Gothic novel within a Gothic novel. Al-
though it is a fearful place in which the royal exiles are
enclosed, it remains important for them to look around the Cas-
tle: “Not a nook, not a cranny, of the ponderous extent of the
whole castle's Gothic ruin, was now left unexplored." Their
specific Gothic experiences are all predictable as when "the
sudden closure of the door extinguished Elwina's lanp, and left
her in total darkness." The escape from Villebois Castle is by
supernatural means as the phantom of Anne Boleyn, carrying her
severed head, ushers her daughter to an invisible door that
leads to the labyrinth. And in a marvellous little touch, the
royal exile's freedom is made to coincide _with the day of
Henry's death.- The novel ends with a historical verdict on
Henry's character consistent with the portrait of the king
developed throughout the romance: “To sum up fairly the char-
acter of Henry VIII: had less cruelty been conspicuous in his
conduct, he might have merited the warmest eulogium of poster-

122 THE FIRST GUTHICS  FIRST EOTHIES 123
M, 1 . - ..
angel s face is one of those countenances whose lineaments ap-
pear to be stamped with crimes, deep and definite, while shrewd-
144. Green, Sarah. DECEPTION: A FASHIONABLE NOVEL. London ; Sher- ‘ "Q55, piqtting, and hypocrisy, forcibly inpressed the idea of a
V°°d, N991!’ ahd J°"9$i 1313- ‘ ‘ mind not cast in the conmon mould.“ This figure conspires
Modern Reeditions: None
Gothic Type: Domestic Gothic (various Richardsonian fea-
against the innocent Matilda with his partner in evil, a
despicable abbess who becomes Matilda‘s keeper and tormentor. At
tures) ‘ I Montanville Priory, the heroine narrowly averts the rape at-
Biographical and Research Data: Frank, Frederick. "From l , tempts of both the Friar and the Abbess in what must be a novel
Boudoir to Castle Crypt: Richardson and the Gothic Novel," 1 renditiOn of the stereotyped theme of sexual peril. Although
REVUE D55 LANGUES V1VANTE5= 41 (1975)1 49-59- ' there are too many tempests, ruins, loathsome dungeons, and mir-
aculous deliveries, this Gothic romance can claim several
Crltlcdl 5J"0D$l$1 A §t°'¥ °f d°m95tl¢ l"t'l9"E "5l"9 5@VEFa1 i chilling scenes. Matilda awakens from a terrifying nightmare
5°¢hl¢ 9Pl$°d@$ 5"d P€Tll°“5 5lt"itl°"$ t° e"llVeh the PeF99tl"- 4 only to open her eyes to something even more dreadful than the
ations of the heroine, Haisuna Cleveland. Often betrayed by her v dream She has heen having, for her ga1e is met by "a dark figure
0"" ml5PldC9¢ hehevﬂlehceo $he l$ h°th 0bj9¢t and P9TP9t'3t°F 0f taller by three times than any man. It lifted up a face as white
various deeelitions which bring excitement to her otherwise , as ashes, and extended a long, withered hand, all bones, with
ordinary life- Involvement with an impoverished gambler. Mr- ~ which it seemed to beckon." This type-scene extracted from the
Jﬂﬁmm,mdaﬁswamfmﬂemmuw,mnMumHmmae 3 wmMbwkﬂnm_m“HHepmma mmMuysmﬁh,bM
financial difficulties for the heroine when she lets her altru- fail; to harrify when the author tries to prolong it. The flaw
ism ovei;come sﬁlf-iilltgrest .i1n'her wishsto save Sthet tzo 'r:or:- » in thisftypeof G2t|'llC  its overgreliance on the lastigg ef-
B E5 TOM elf 6 l 5- ol5""d l5 9°" 5 U P95 l 5 9 m 9 ; ects o an lCl a ion; e error o icis s on y promise some-
seandal after Paying liiss Meredith's debts and secretly , thing hideous; the horror Gothicists both promised and pro-
diverting Mr. Jefferson's creditors with ten thousand pounds. yided_
Maisuna's major Gothic experience occurs when she rejects the
wealthy l4r- Berresford's llrooosal of marria9e- Resortino to the '14s. Green, williani child. THE ABBOT OF IIKJNTSERRAT: on, THE POOL or
methods of the sadistic seducer, Berresford seizes Maisuna_ and if 5L9go_ London ; A_K_ Newman, 1325,
oreoares to violate her with the encouragement of the villainous - Modern Reeditions: New York ; Arno Press, 1977, ed. Frederick
priest, Father Jocelyn. A final deception has the heroine R $hreyer_
frighten off her rapist captors just as they are about to spring 1 goghie Type: Pure er high gnthie (terror mode)
their lustful trail by a supernatural masquerade when she aooears . Biographical and Research Data: Sunlners, GOTHIC QUEST,-pp.29,
as a sheeted phantom brandishing a dagger and crying for death. 3 369-370; Levy, LE ROMAN "GOTHIQUE' ANGLAIS, p.597.
7- l
She escapes a certain rape, then dec ares herself to be M
Jefferson's benefactress, a disclosure which prunmts him to ab- , gritieei synopsis; green kept the dying Gothic tradition
Jure saminsl and request Maisuna's hand- DECEPTION is one more ‘ alive with his potent, thunderous, and stylishly written ABBOT
noteworthy example of the residue of Richardson in the novel- It , or MONTSERRAT. His Gothic sources, acknowledged by Green himself
l5 3150 3" EXJBDTE Of the "°V9l beginning to Shﬁd lt5 G0thl¢ = in the preface to the novel, are Lewis's MONK (see #244) and
oostume- Hhile displaying many of the standard Gothic emer9en- Haturin's MELMOTH THE HANDERER (see #268). The hero-villain's
cies such as sexual attack in a dark and loathsome building, its forfeiture of gnu] one; suggested to me by a purely accidenta
plot reverts to the earlier novel of domestic tension and seduc- pQru$a] of Mr, Maturin'5 elegant and powerful work." The lustful
tion. w ' '
career and spectacular Gothic death of Green s power-craged
monk, Obando, is derived from Lewis's Faust of sex, Ambrosio,
145. Green, Sarah. THE GARTHUSIAN FRIAR: OR, THE MYSTERIES OF MONT- u hut nniike Ambr°5ie_ Green-5 Obandg receives a iasg moment re-
ANV1LLE- L0"d0" 1 $h6TV00d, Neely, ihd J°"95; 9- chﬂPDlE, prieve from damnation. "I have chosen,“ Green explained, “to
#254. R d_t_ N ‘ rescue my hero from the snaredoffdarkniss." The dgmosic super-
ern ee 1 ions: one ’ natural which Green inherite rom a urin an ewis is
5°thl¢ T¥P@= Pure OF hlqh Gﬂthlﬁ (comblhed lmltitl°" °F THE u presented with a persuasive skill that is quite rare in late
ITALIAN and Ireland's ABBESS) T Gothic fiction. The single exception is his mishandling of the
Biographical and Research Data: Levy. LE ROMAN 'GOTHIQUE" , pool of blood, a Radcliffean prop which is ineptly explained
ANGLAIS, pp.404, 409, 414, 415, 416. 442, 569, 583. _¢ away as a chemical trick. The monk, Dbando, craves the maiden,
Isabel and also wants to be abbot of Montserrat To obtain
' Critical 5¥h°P5l51 APPEET5 tﬂ be 3 5!"th9$l$ 0f l"Cld9ht$ ﬂhd ..Qﬁ " these goals of pleasure and power he is willing to pay the in-
characterizations drawn from Mrs. Radcliffe's THE ITALIAN (see 1 T fernal fee of his own soul. He enters into a diabolic pact with
#350) and H.H. Ireland's THE ABBESS (see 0198). Green exhibits ‘V the suave demon, Zatanai, a refined Satan whose' manifestations
5°m9 mister! Bf 5°thlE meihdhlﬁs l" her T¢l"CdT"itl°" Of Father f within a sulfureous and incandescent cloud demonstrate Green's
Schedoni as Father Scoriani, the Carthusian Friar. His fallen skill with the standard Gothic scene of Satanic visitation.

124
14
THE F1R$T 5°T"1¢$ ‘ i rue FIRST cornrcs 125
Taunted and tempted by Zatanai, Obandv barters away bi$_$vvl him to set forth in the spirit of Tennyson's Ulysses to "drink
only to find that the devil's tontract always brings the Signer life to the lees." But like two earlier Gothic pilgrims, Vathek
$0 d@5D5lT- 0h5hd° dues ihdeed hEt°me the Ahhht °t M°"t5?"at bY i who left his pleasure domes to descend to hell and Melmoth the
5tTa"91i"9 Ahh°t Amh'°5e hut Zatahai the" refuses, t° de]'v§' i Handerer who was condemned to roam eternally through the cor-
Isabel over to 0bando's lusts. Furthermore, Zatanai informs him ridurs cf time. Aihamec Scum iearns that he cud hears the brand
that the ferocious bandit, Roldan, the ravager of his monastic ef caim_ The deemed namdereric traveis take him phycicaiiy
landS and the PT°P'let°' ht 5 Qhastly 9°°I ht b]°°d~ 15 hls i I everywhere but metaphysically nowhere. Alhamet experiences six
brother. Obando now finds himself under double attack as the
_ _ l adventures in quest of his desires as he voyages to Sicily,
Abbey of Montserrat is threatened by Roldan‘s marauders while Patagonia Russia Cornwall Circassi and f‘ ll h' b d
_ , a, ina y is a an on-
charges of demonic practices are brought against him by the ed deSeri'home_ in each piace, he assumes a new name and iden_
omnipresent Inquisition. The dénouement is rapid although not so city but he brings pain and catastrophe with him uherever he
satisfying as the victory for evil depicted in the celestial dce5_ in Siciiy, Aihamec becomes Giaidini’ then faiis in iove
fall Of L9"i5'5 Amh'°5i°- while the rival t°hte5 °f the with Seraphina who is exterminated by a cunning bolt of light-
Inquisition and Roldan's robber band fight each other vafter niﬂg_ In Patagonia, Alhamet becomes Ozembo, then falls in love
storming the Abbey of Montserrat, the urbane fiend, Zatanai, of- with Ora who drowns before ozembols eyec_ in Russia‘ Aihamec
feri t0 T95C"@ 0ha"d° h! hearing him Skyhahd thr°"9h the becomes Lovinski, then falls in love with Agatha who takes her
dEm0li5h@d T007 °f the hhhhihg ahheY- Galihg d°“h "Pu" the c°"' , own life after misconstruing Lovinski's motives. In Cornwall,
fla9ratl0" and destruﬁtivh he has h'°"9ht "P°" h°"t5e"°t- Alhamet becomes Edward Penrose, then falls in love with Amelia,
Obando suddenly renounces his evil while soaring to freedom in a ieveiy human who is then murdered by her dun hrdther anpar_
the devil's claws. Innediately, Zatanai's clutch relaxes and the , enhiy out of sheer annoyance huh actuaiiy because uf the fatai
monk's body Plummets to a fiery death While "l5 '@°°ve'@d §°“‘ ~ presence of Alhamet in her life. In Circassia, Alhamet becomes
(the reader must assume) flies up $0 Etehhal ‘ite' A!th°“9h .the Cassimir, and briefly enjoys married life until the vicious Tar-
m0F81iZ@d C1lmaX ii 6 Vl°13tl°h °t hhe °t the h‘9h Gothlcis tar, Hassaraic, massacres Cassimir's wife and children. The
inflexible laws--that unswervingly evil characters should remain ' deaniy patter" of A‘hametlS wanderings cannot be broken, for
defiantly Evil it their d9ath5"THE ABBOT OF MONTSERRAT Stahds ~ whenever and wherever he falls in love his love becomes fatal to
out in the late 1820's as a potent final flash of Gothic _light- the meme" who return ic_ Resuminc his identity as Aihamet and
"i"9 EVE" 65 the Gﬂthlc 5t°hm "55 Passihg t“°m the ]‘terarY ' returning to the desert, he is welcomed by his sister who tells
lﬂ"d5C5D6- him that his years of wandering have caused the deaths of his
parents. Overcome with guilt and despair, Alhamet sets adrift
7. Green, Hilliam Child. ALIBEG THE TEMPTER: A TALE HILD AND HON- upon the Red Sea in a rudderiess hnat_ Nature Soon obiiues his
DERFUL. Lﬂndbn I A-K- Newman, 1331r deathwish by sending a powerful storm which drowns him. Although
M0dEF" R@9dltl°"5¢ N°"e the novel is tediously overlong, Green did achieve a fusion of
G°thl¢ TYPE: G°thiC Quest ]e9e"d telemehts °t MELMOTH THE t Byronic heroism and Gothic effects. The exposure of Seraphina's
UANDERER) E incinerated corpse to the shocked Gialdini, the somber Russian
Biographical a"d Research Dita: Shhhmhsv GOTHIC QUEsT> , landscapes, and the desolate Cornish seascapes have undeniable
PP-359, 370-371- ' power. The claustrophobic condition of the typical Gothic vil-
_ 1 lain frequently involves his attachment to a decaying building
Critiﬁal 5Y"°D§l5¥ The Patter" °t the Pe'V@h§9 °r '"ter"a] } t‘ from which he cannot escape. He is fixed and contained despite
quest $89" 1" 5E5kf°rd'5 VATHEK (595 #930) a1°h9 "lth ehtrapheht id; his seeming freedom to evil. Green inverts the situation of the
within the cycles of misery and disaster found in Maturin's Jc. Gethie viiiein by having him wander in torment without any
Mtthoth THE HANDERER (see tzﬁs) Serve as maj°r. §°th'° ehampies i* boundaries to his desires. His tormented status is that of the
for Green's ALIBEG THE TEMPTER. Additional visible sources in- '§m univercai outcast whose Search for idve, Seif, and hdme end; in
clude Byron's CHILDE HAROLD'S PILGRIMAGE (1812) together with lg? homeiecsness and death_
his oriental tales LARA (1814) and THE GIAOUR (1813). Byronic 1
orientalism's grotesque sense of characterization and its theme _ 14g_ Green’ hiiiiam Chiid_ The ALuERihE5; OR, THE {hing OF "APL[S_
of ontological frustration contribute both atmosphere and epi- London 2 A_K_ Newman, 1832_
sode to Green's six-part odyssey to disaster. The wandering nude," Reeuitians: none
hero, Alhamet, is a kind of Gothic Odysseus whose travels bring Gothic Type: umientaiized Gothic
him and others to pain and catastrophe. Death often befalls Bieeraphicei and Research Data: Mane
those whose lives cross the path of Alhamet. At the story's out- ' _ I
‘ set, the Wanderlﬂit Of Alhamet i5 $tlFT9d h! 3 Vi5lt f*Q@ the t Critical Synopsis: Consisting" of several Gothic plots in
evil genius, Alibeg, an easternized version of the wandering Jew progress cimuitaneuusiy, The ALGERINE3 is a cumpiieated var-
fl9"'@ "h° temhti Alhamet With the §°T99°U5 _P'°$F§¢t5 °t the iation on the ancient theatrical situation of the exchanged
wandering life- The pact he Sub" makes with Alibes releases twins The twin theme had appeared previousl in the Gothic
‘ _ . Y
Alhamet from the boring security of his desert home and allows dramas of the period, Particularly noteworthy is Monk Lewis's

v
Z6 THE FIRST GlJTHIC$ .> TIE FIRST GOTHICS 127
combination of identity farce with genealogical imbroglio in his thr0e$1 m"itiDli¢ity ahd mi$md"ﬂ9eme"t hf suhhiotii t00 much
play of 1799, THE TWINS; OR, IS IT HE OR HIS BROTHER? The cast supernaturalism often misplaced and overdone; failure to main-
is an odd blend of traditional Gothic personnel from the tain an atmosphere pf invincible evil-
monastic thriller, haunted castle melodrama, the robber romance,
and eastern adventure story. After the success of ALIBEG THE ' 149- Griffith, 5°Dhia- SHE HOULD BE A hER°IhE- L°"d°" I Bﬂidhihv
TEMPTER (see #147), Green apparently felt compelled to include Cradock, a"d J°y, 1315-
Saracen demons and Moslem heroes in his troupe. Extremely com- v "Oder" R€editi0"$1 "One '
plicated and often changing direction without warning, the ' Gothic Type= Gnthic P3r°dy ireverberatiﬂhi Of Barrett's THE
narrative cannot be accused of lacking high Gothic moments. HEROINE)
There are so many climaxes and reversals of fortune, however, 5i°9rdPhi¢ﬂi dhd Re5earCh Detal "One
that the reader's capacity to be moved by Gothic emotions is “
rapidly expended. In the decay of Green's Gothic art in THE -Q Critical Synopsis: The three-volume work fluctuates between
ALGERINES the student of the period may observe the Gothic ‘J the novel pf manners and the satirizins df the events. places,
tradition itself in approaching a state of exhaustion. The  and characters pf the pppular Gothic rpInance- The parody of
principal action occurs in sixteenth-century Naples where the Gﬁthiﬁ m0me"t5 dhd attitudes i5 Sﬂmewhﬂt meehdhicil dhd
twins girls, Alphonsine and Victoria, are sporadically adored Y ' Uhihshired Causing the h°°k t° meve t°° 5l°Wiy dhd the ridicuie
and despised by their sometimes kind but more often crnei fa- 3‘ of the Gothic to fall far short of its comic Gothic predecessors
ther, Vicenza. Both twins undergo harsh childhoods of sorts. J in the field. Barrett's THE HEROINE (see #026) and Ircas-
Alphonsine is coerced to the religious seclusion of the convent .t tre"5i§'5 LOVE AND HORROR (599 t197)- The h°°k'5 epigrihh tr°m
while Victoria is brought up in a closed and protected ‘h' Sterne's TRISTRAM SHANDY (1762) forewarned the reader of the
circumstances by her suspicious and haughty father. Victoria is s ,- nonsense to fpllpvh An drdinary ydunsl banker with drdinary
loved by Caesario, the son of a man who had once made advances ‘(Qt bourgeois dﬂbiti0"$, Charle$ Beverley, marries the high-Spirited
to Vicenza‘s wife. To thwart the romance, Vicenza secretly ft and imaginatively extravagant daughter of the Earl of Mont-
places Victoria in the convent and returns Alphonsine to his  serrel. Georgina Pdrtiwre- Te allay her tedious. respectable.
well-guarded fortress of a house. Also residing in Naples is the ‘Y. middie'¢1°55 eXi5te"Ce, Georgina "nﬂuid he d heroihei" PerhaP5
Algerine, Abdallah, a mysterious man who consort; with Moorish _¢i even a Gothic heroine if that is what it takes to shock dull and
demons and would acquire a Christian wife. His chief demonic ac- it? P°iite 5°¢iety- 9e°r9i"ﬂ re¢eiVe$ the "°t°reity 5he "e"t$ but
quaintance is a Gothic genii named Himmalay because most of his >3‘ She 515° receives the Cehtumeiy ehd 5"°hhery 0t L0"d°" 50¢iety
manifestations occur on mountain peaks during raging storms. >1; for her eccentric behavior and for her flaunting of male clothes
Himmalay bestows upon Abdallah a supernatural gift when he hf ihd habit$- The5e P3556995 are thhhyv hut lath the §ti"9i"9
empowers Abdallah to extend the lives of any three persons he 4‘ hilarity of the accomplished parodist. In fact, most of the wit
chooses merely by pronouncing the words, "You are saved." Two of hie the Qehtie ah$"'ditie5 °t 5terhe'5 ¢°medy as "he" Lady
the salvational wishes are quickly spent when Abdallah saves 5e°r9i"e'5 hiete i5 9iVe" the heme 'Be55' i" h°"°r 07 her
Caesario from a fatai wound received from the bandit, grandfather's favorite mount. The would-be heroine gives dinner
Zacherelli, and when he fittingly saves himself when the furious parties and musicales and finally leads excursions tu ldcal
Zacherelli dangles Abdallah over the edge of a cliff. Zacherelli ruins hoping fpr ghostly encdunters- The best piece pf Gothic
continues to precipitate trouble when he seizes Vincenza and comedy ¢0me$ "ear the e"d "he" 5he 9et5 i°$t i" the family
Alphonsine as they make their way to Palermo. Caesario is al- burial vault. perhaps deliI>erately- "Alene. surrounded by her
ready a prisoner of Zacherelli's robber band. One twin sister hihdred dust! at the dread h0"r 07 midhiﬂhta midst 5k"ii$,
now pines away miserably in the convent while the other twin ¢0tfih$ and Wermi W55 Lady Ge0r9i"i! Here W55 fut] emﬂlﬂy f°r 5
sister faces the possibility of bandit rape. with all of the superstitious fancy; yet dur penitent herpine felt nu ether
principals of the novel now ihperiled, Abdallah arrives on the sensations than sincere contrition for the part she had acted on
scene in the role of rescuer. Zacherelli is stymied in his the stage °t lite-" haVi"9 admitted her t°°ii5h err0r5v She
villainy since his original attempt to kill the Algerine had einerses frdni the tdnib pf the Beverleys a reformed lady- llhile
been prevented by Abdallah's mysterious life-giving power. All there i5 5°me edditi°"ii mockery Bf the Phrhie raPt"re$ Of the
is resolved when Caesario is freed and in turn frees Victoria Suhterriheﬂﬂ hervihe iﬂ the "°V@l- the Parody 55 3 Vheie i5 h°t
from her convent immurement with the assistance of Abdallah. A m°tiVBted by e"°"Qh di59“5t t°r the G°thit t° he Very ettettive
triple reunion of long-separated sons and lovers closes the °r im"5i"9- -
action as Victoria is reunited with Caesario, Alphonsine is
married to Lioni, and the charmed Ahdaiiah’ who retains his 150. Grosett, Emilia. THE SPIRIT OF THE GROTTO: OR, THE CASTLE OF
‘third chance to grant a new life, discovers that the abbess is I 57- GE0R5E- L°"d°" I M350", 1799- '
his missing Christian mother. In his final work, Green attempted Mﬂderh Reediti°"51 hﬁhe
to combine all of the Gothic plot patterns which he had kept Gothic Typei G°thified hiitory (Radcliffean'imitat1pn)
separate in ALTBEG THE TEHPTER. The perplexing result under- Biographical ihd Research Datai h°"e
scores many of the cannon flaws of the Gothic novel in its death

128 THE FIRST GUTHICS THE F1R51' [;gT1-113$ 129
Critical Synopsis: Of ehapbook onality. this subterranean , Critical Synopsis: one of the most fascinating Gothic ro-
fantas offers situations t ' l f th
_ Y _ _ YPi¢3 ° 9 ma"y_9r°tt° °r Caverh mancers of the late 1790's is Karl Grosse, an eccentric creator
9°thiC5 Pdbllshed ddrihg the P9ri°d- The hl9hly active ""d9r- of several wild and mystifying tales of terror. His bizarre
"Qrld he"§5th the tﬂitle Bf 5t- 5E°rQ9 i5 said t° he the hdhe °t personality caused him to create a noble title for himself which
a pathetic phantom who resembles the person of the heroine's he thought might appea] to the aye of the Gothic reader, Thus,
vanished father The ‘spirit’ of the rotto t ll t
- 9 eve" ha y "r"5 °"t he sometimes signed his work under the counterfeit sobriquets,
to he the 5tilT~liVi"9 Pitriirhh Playihg the rdle °t 9h°5t i" l ' the "Marquis of Pharnusa‘ or the ‘Marquis of Grosse." Hriting in
drder t° hrl"9 hi5 “5"rPi"9 br°th9r t° J"5titE- The 5t°¢k Pl°t both German and English and occasionally translating his own
is used to convey the heroine thronoh a series of shilling eon- work for the English Gothic market, Grosse authored DER ootcu
frontations with mobile portraits and other supernatural (THE DAGGER), QHLQRINDE; Aug DEN PAPIEREn DON JUAN5 VON B.
contrivances, all of which are accounted for scientifically when (CHLQRINDE; FROM THE PAP[R§ gr pg" JUAN By 3_), Hgpkig Mv5_
the spirit finally becomes her father in the fie§h~ TERIES, pen otuncuxnnnz (THE HREATH), and others. THE DAGGER is
a murky Gothic romance of the dangers of courtly life. Because
151. Grosett, Emilia. THE MONASTERV OF ST. MARV: DR, THE WHITE MAID the event; gf the novel often mix the lurid with the ludicrous
OF AVE"EL- Lﬂhdoh I J- Bailey, "-d- and because the characters often behave with violent absurdity,
Mhderh R9editi°"51 h°"e it can be said that the primary elements of Grosse's unique
G°thlc TYPE: Gdthlt Chapbddk Gothic style in HORRID MYSTERIES are already present in force in
Bi09r3Phi¢al 3"d Research Data: h°"e his first Gothic. The narrative is ostensibly a love story, but
embellished with grotesque oddities, violent reversals of feel-
Critiﬁﬂl 5yh°P5i$1 The Chiphﬂﬂk i5 B Dlidiariled C°"dE"$3ti°" ing, strange and volatile passions, and a brooding atmosphere of
of plots, characters, and incidents taken from Scott's double intrigue, betrayal, and death. The characters‘ deeds often con-
"OVET 0t the ﬁlendinninq family» Tht A539T (599 #390) ihd THE tradict their expressed goals and they never act with consistent
MONASTERV (see #391). Additional details are taken from a good or evi1_ where lave is expected, hatred erupts. Hhere a
variety of available Gothic sources. Simon Glendenning has been kiss gggiq Seam like] a stroke of the da er falls instead.
Yo gg
killed it the Battle of Pihkie (September, 1547) While fightihg ” Hhere remorse would seem an emotion quite inappropriate to the
the English and has left th To r f Gl d ‘
9 he ° 9" eir9 t° his Wld°W, machinations of the character, tears begin to flow instead of
Elspeth, who becomes the prisoner of the advaneino ihvaders- El- blood. Grosse's Gothic methods in THE DAGGER and elsewhere in
5Deth i5 jﬂihed by her 5i$ter-ih-la“, tidy Avehels Wh°59 e his fiction can only be described as anticipating in detail the
h"$bﬂhds "ﬁlter Glehdehhihga ha$ 3l5° tell?" l" battle i95i"5t J intentional incoherencies of surreal art. The scene of action in
the Enolish- 5he brings with heriher child of six, Mary hvenel- E THE onootn is the dissipated court of one of the German princes
Julian Avenel. the villain of the piece. Collaborates with the ‘" during the late Eighteenth century. Due to the French Revolu-
E"9li5h ihd tek95 3dVa"ta99 °t these times °t “"r95t t° 5eiZE tion, the prince and his circle are uneasy although they persist
the la"d$ Of h°th W0m9h- The my5tBri°"5 White lady 0t Avehﬂls h in their murderous intrigues and pursuit of pleasure. There ar-
5C°tt'$ hrigihal $"P9r"ﬂt"rel figure) COWQ5 i"t0 the Story ﬁtter rive at the court an attractive and cultivated couple, the Baron
Lady hvenel's confession and death- Little Mary's protector, st. and his intelligent wife, Albertina of F. . Both are
Father Philip has a harrowin encount r with th l d '
_ 1 9 E e a y in white rapid y pulled into the maelstrom of deadly erotic politics of
as he rides toward the Monastery of 5t- Mary- This event is the court. The various factions compete for the attention and
hihdled With 5°m9 5°thiC torce, bht Qeherilly the tale licks the allegiance of the Baron and Albertina who soon come to view each
C0he5i0" required tdr 3 §°°d 5h°9ker a"d W5"d9r5 t°Ward 5" db“ other with suspicion, distrust, and growing detestation. The La-
5¢"re e"di"9- The ¢haPh°°k@r il5° te@r5 Qreat 9695 i" 5C°tt'5 dy Julia, an adept fenne fatale, is determined to corrupt the
Stﬂrylihe moki"9 it Blm0$t i"D6retiVe t0 k"°" the Pl°t ht THE Baron but as soon as he yields to her sexual guile she rejects
MONASTERVto ndrtdht'h " ' " - ‘
U E 5 B" W 6 15 6PPe"ih9 l" thl5 5h°'te"ed d'5' him. Enraged and frustrated, he decides to be revenged on al
t°rti°"- A5 the 5"rViVih9 Mary Cdmes °f 699, 5h9 marriei H"h9rt- womanhood by poisoning the innocent Albertina. The authentic
Their youth and courtship are marked by many appearances of the Grosse touch is well-defined when the Baron wrestles the poi-
ghostly lady in white who warns of English treachery and encour- d f h’ ‘f ‘ t h ' b t t ff it
sone cup away rom is wi e JUS as s e is a ou o_ qua _
ages the Scots to oppose their oppressors. Only the vapid Feeling ignored because the Baron is now occupied in trying to
outlines of Scott's ch t '
Brit ers remolhs hUWEVErs 55 the Chiﬂe kill his wife and because her foe at court, the Princess, has
booker diluted Scott's two novels to a confused miXture Of expressed a sexual interest in the Baron, the Lady Julia decides
5EVE"ty-tho Pﬂ995- to win the Baron's attention again by attempting to stab him
_ with a special dagger awarded to her by a previous lover later
152-‘ 5r05$e- Kﬂrl- THE DAG9ER- L0"d0" 1 Ver"°r add H004. 1795. disclosed to be the Prince. The stabbing attempt fails but the
Modern Reeditions: None Baron is so moved by Julia's_lethal passion that he retains the
Gothic Type: Roman noir (horror-terror elements) dagger as a memento of her ardor. Action then moves from the le-
Biographical and Research Data: Levy. LE ROMAN "GOTHIQUE" thal to the ludicrous when th Baron is att ked p J lia‘s do
8 3C Y u Q
Ahhthls, D-315- while attempting to return the dagger to her. As he bends down

130 THE mm GUTHICS _ ms FIRST canoes 1:1
to push away the beast the hidden dagger Shmehew wounds the enraptured fleshliness." The expected narrative pattern of
Baron, a freak accident which sends Julia swooning into the Bar- 'flight-and-pursuit through darkness takes place on an enlarged
onls embrace_ Beiieving that She must once more possess the l scale in HORRID MYSTERIES since the novel's movement, innensely
Baron or die, she forces him at dagger point into her waiting conplex with plots superimposed upon plots, is from country to
Carriage. Now she is again his migtrggg and Dnee more her h°re_ ‘ country rather than from corridor to corridor within a haunted
dom unaccountably turns into a homicidal passion. Just as she is ca5tl9- l"5t9a¢ 0f ""9 ""d§F9T°u"d l°¢5lEs the Chﬂhﬂﬁtehs are
wwtmumtmdqwrm mrhwﬂ@mdlwU_tm Mm” ‘ I wwﬂwdmmwhamﬁﬁmlw®NmM.HvwmdMmm MB
stroke is diverted by the lgyal Aihertina who has fhiiohed the international labyrinth of conspiracy, accusation, betrayal,
pair and who always is on hand to shield the Baron from harm. Vlle 5@C'95¥- 3"d lhmlheht death are 5eV9'al Y°""9 ahd hlgh
After Julia uses the dagger an herself, the Baron and Aibertina ll minded heroes, each man the victim of the unexplained machina-
renounce the debauched life of the court for the pure life or g tions of the secret brotherhood. whether the society is called
the countryside. No summary of the novel can do justice to its the brotherhood, the Confederates, the Illuminati, or the Vehm-
baffling convolutions, its extremities of rhetoric, or its vol- ~ Qerlcht (°' Sechet Fehmlc C°"'t)» lts 55Va§9 ahd caballstlc
uptuous oddities. with HORRID Mv5TER[55’ the hook remains a activities seem aimed at world revolution through the Systematic
strange literary monument to one of the strangest or Gothic F assassination of all heads of state. One of Grosse's heroes, the
talents. ' Marquis of G. (also called Count S. ), falls under the
domination of the Brotherhood, swears the irrevocable oath of
153. Grosse, Karl. HDRRID MYSTERIES. London 1 Minerva-Press for 4 l>l°°d and finds himself Ehiiieslied i" ii Career ‘if a"i"¢lli$* deeds
Hilliam Lane, 1796. . against his own social class. Desperately trying to evade the
Modern Reeditions: London ; R, Holden, 1937, ed_ Montague influence of the evil tribunal, he travels the courts and coun-
Sumners; London : Folio Press, 1953, ed_ Devendra p_ yarma_ tries of Spain, Switzerland, France and Austria seeking release
Gothic Type: Pure or high gethie (yehmgerieht or Secret from the grip of the society. Portions of his shadowed life and
Fehmic tribunal) fragments of his eerie involvements are related to his friend,
Biographical and Research Data: Sadleir, Michael. THE NORTH- Carlos. who Such finds hirreelf mysteriously drawn into the web
ANGER novzts. A FOOTNOTE T0 JANE AUSTEN, English Association l hf the l=r<>iherh=><>d- The relationship between Carlos and the
Pannhlet Number 68, November, 1927, pp.18-19; Tompkins, POPU_ Count becomes strained, irrational, and eventually violent. Ap-
LAR NOVEL IN ENGLAND, pp.z31_ 394; gnnners, GOTHIC QUEST parently acting as the mindless automaton of the secret brother-
pp.29, 120, 131-132, 133, 297; Lévy, LE ROMAN "GOTHIQUE; hood, the Count attacks Carlos and nearly kills him. The Count
ANGLAIS, pp.315, 313, 320, 321, 597, 512_ has no recollection of this assault and he seeks to revive their
. friendship by aiding Carlos in winning and marrying Elmira, a
crltlcal 5Y"°P5l5= The 90th0Phllﬂ, MiChﬂel Sadleir, con- >e;i beautiful woman who is somehow obscurely connected with the
sidered HORRID MYSTERIES to be the hast fascinating of the sep- in hrotherhoows Swish l>riiu¢h- The Count has also hes" involved
tet of NORTHANGER novels. But if the hark is fascinating, it is  with a beautiful when, Franciscii. whose , life had been take"
also frustrating to read and to follow as any attempt to sumnar- ‘ii °V9' a"d ma"lP"lat9d by the Seﬁret §°ClEt¥- "he" Ci'l°5'5 "9"
ize its baffling network of plots will show. Taking its shape ﬁﬁ‘ Vlfei Elmira» l5 a$$3$5l"6tEda ciCl°5 £00 tak95 the bl°°d_ °§th
and materiel {rem Sueh work; as Christiane Naubertls Inquisition jg; in hopes of gaining the services of the brotherhood in finding
Gothic, HERMANN or unna (ms), HORRID MYSTERIES deserves to be  and Punishing Elnirrs murderer. one of Grosse's Gothic special-
classified as a separate type of Gothic fietioh that began to gr ties are scenes of incredible resurrection; hence, Elmira's mur-
emerge in the late 1790's; the Euthie novel that deait with the $5 der is the first of three deaths which she will suffer in the
occult conspiracies of various secret societies. In addition to }§ "°V@l- A¢¢°mPi"led hy 6 ¢°l°$5al PT°t@¢t°T= B Phahtismlﬁ figure
the Inquisition itself, these malign fraternities appeared in %= With F"Fl0uS and paralyzing eyes named Genius Amanuel, Carlos
Gothic fiction as sects of Freemasons, the Illuminati of Ingol- ’i FED9ﬂt$ ‘hi "a"d9Fl"95 °f hl$ fhlehd ahd al5° Seeks Val"l¥ t°
stadt, the members of a cabalistie tribunal called the yehmge_ 1‘ elude the long grasp that the society holds over his life.
richt, and sometimes as revolutionary or anarchist brotherhoods. 5"d¢@h Bud Supernatural appearances, abrupt assassination at-
5adleir estimated Grosse's four volumes of Gothic mystery to he tempts, fatal encounters with the phantom agents of the society
"a strange, wild work, dealing unashamedly in the supernatural, ihd B V3Tlet¥ °f Other G°thl¢ di"9eT5 mark Ca'l°5'5 fll9ht 7'0"
Vrltteh With 6 lurid. if inconsequent power. There is life-story the evil tribunal. Arriving in Paris just as the Reign of Terror
within life-story; the reader seems to assist at a series of ls 'e°°hl"9 lts full f“'Y~ he l5 °b°"t t° disappear l"t° the
apocalyptic visions, which by their Sheer epnienee of iahguage maelstrom of the Revolution when he is unaccountably rejoined by
crush him into gibbering acquiescence. HORRID MVSTERIES is sure- . c°""t 5- "h° effeCt5 hls '°5C“e- But the c°"ht maY Stlll be
ﬂy the most potent schauerrdmen of them ail; certainiy i".it5 the unwil lng agent of the brotherhood and Carlos's rescue may
English version it is the most defiantly fantastic of any hove] have been maliciously designed by Genius Amanuel for some later
of the period. The love scenes are lucious and detailed beyond u"dl5Cl°59d ahd $l"l5teh P"rP°59- Cehtﬂlhlya h° "°Vel t° 5"'VlY9
even the aspirations of Monk Lewis himself, and I am aware of no frﬂm the Gothic period is stranger, darker, or more precipi-
Gothistic novel issued during the period that can rival it for tously irrational than Grosse's HORRID MYSTERIES. Its convolu-

112 THE FIRST GOTHICS THE FIRST GUTHICS 131
tions of plot are matched by a grim potency of style as found in 155. I.H. THE PHANTOMS OF THE CLOISTER: OR, THE MYSTERIOUS MANU-
the memorable descriptions of “the cracking of half-decayed ' SCRIPT. London : Minerva-Press for Hilliam Lane, 1795.
crosses on the graves‘ or Elmira's enforced containment within a
Modern Reeditions- None
coffin during one of her three deaths. "I awoke, at length, from Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (terror mode)
that long swoon and found myself stretched out in a coffin." Biographical and Research Data: Tarr, CATHDLICISM IN GOTHIC
Illustrative of the extreme Schauerromantik strain of Gothic
f. .
FICTION pp.8, 105; Lévy, LE ROMAN "GDTHIQUE" ANGLAIS,
iction, HORRID MYSTERIES foreshadows the nightmares of Poe even I pp_4QQ.,4QZ,
as it attains the nether limits of Gothic fantasy.
154. Gunning, Susan Minifie. BARFDRD ABBEV: A NOVEL IN A SERIES OF
LETTERS. London : T. Cadell and J. Payne, 1768.
Modern Reeditions: Garland Publishing, 1974.
Gothic Type: Sentimental fiction (emergent Gothic elements)
Biographical Research Data: Foster, HISTORY OF THE PRE-
ROMANTIC NOVEL IN ENGLAND, pp.i5o-151.
Critical Synopsis: A clearcut bibliographical example of the
sentimental novel in a transitional phase and moving in the
direction of the novel of sensibility in its extremest form, the
Gothic romance. The format is epistolary, but the letters them-
selves describe inner feelings of a stranger kind than the
emotional spectrum found in Richardson and Sterne. The French
sentimental influence is also strongly exerted by way of the
widely read novels of the Abbé Prévost, particularly his MANON
LESCAUT (1731), in which the inner lives of the characters verge
on the emotions of the Gothic in their depiction of menta
states of great tension and pathos. The tone of the letters in
BARFORD ABBEY is accented toward the kinds of destructive feel-
ing so characteristic of Gothic victims and victimizers in the
next decade. The metaphor of disease runs through the corre-
spondence of Darcy and his beloved Jul‘ . E h h t
Critical Synopsis: The novel bears the curious signature of
I.H. and follows the formulas of Radcliffean Gothic. There are
two heroines, Henrietta, a victim of maternal detestation and
Eliza, who suffers at the hands of the depraved steward, Oswald.
The two heroines seem related but their genealogical link re-
mains one of I.H.'s numerous loose ends, The opening sentence of
the romance thrusts the Gothic reader headlong into the
uncontrollable Gothic world. “In a part of Northumberland still
remain the mouldering ruins of a castle, standing on the sumnit
of a precipice, and cmnnanding a beautiful prospect of the adja-
cent country." The action of the first volume concentrates on
Henrietta‘s inmurement within this menacing fortress on the
River Tyne. The narrative intimates that Henrietta‘s father,
Lord Somerville, is the cause of her confinement. Having served
Henry V and fallen out of favor with the_ warrior king, Somer-
ville has become unbalanced and sadistic. At the moment of his
strange death, he charges his daughter to beware of "Tancred's
heirs‘ and to marry no man but Ulster. He then devours a myster-
ious manuscript in a mad rage and dies before anyone can reach
him to read the contents of the parchment. hwaiting her father's
funeral, Henrietta makes the usual exploration of the castle's
interior and shortly "discovers the headless trunk of her fa-
ia ac c arac er carries ther, mangled in a shocking manner." Hith characteristic obfus-
0" 6" 6Pl$l°laT¥ @XChi"99 "it" 3 ¢°"fld°"te and there I5 "0 ¢°"- i cation, this ghastly revelation is never explained and the story
tact between the two lovers until the reunion at the end. Thus, shifts abruptly and illogically to the misadventures of the
each character winds his or her lonely way down strange corri-
dors of distressed feeling for much of the narrative. Darcy has
learned that Julia has been l t t '
second heroine, Eliza. After overtaking and raping her in_a
robbers‘ den, Dswald places a task upon the miserable Eliza if
os a sea in a shipwreck, but ' she would regain her honor and birthright. For much of the
refuses to accept the "fact" of her death. He struggles with all g second volume of the romance, Eliza _has been kept by_ Oswald
sorts of dishonorable impulses,--suicidal defiance of God, 6 @; within Maitland Cloister where she is guarded, terrified, and
career of sexual exploitation similar to Richardson's Lovelace £5 occasionally threatened by a resident corps of phantoms,--the
that might allow him to take a measure of revenge against a Z Phantoms of the Cloister. But her miseries do not blunt her
cruel cosmos and finally a refusal to acce t her d th H
, p ea . e pur- 1 inquisitiveness about her P'i5°" a"d her k@§PEF5- I" Particular,
sues Julia, but not in the manner of the Gothic villain. Her own ‘ she wants to unravel the mystery of a peripatetic skeletﬂn She
1 . . . . . .
etters alternate between suicidal despair and stubborn refusal
to relinquish hope of rescue by Darcy. She escaped drowning, but
not smallpox. During the reunion scene, Darcy's embracing of the
diseased Julia results in her miraculous recovery as her disfig-
urement from the pox vanishes at her beloved's touch. Having
overcome all baser feelings and had their virtue rewarded, the
pair return to Barford Abbey and to happiness. The sentimental
has encountered lurking within the cloister. Thus, Oswald's
charge to her relates somehow to her true identity and might
provide the means of escape from the Gothic world should she
solve the Gothic mystery. "Search for the skeleton which terri-
fied you and learn the mysteries of the Tower of Harcourt: These
only can explain the Phantoms of the Gloister,f"0swald informs
her Returning secretly to Maitland Cloister, Eliza interrupts a
"°V9l l5 "Oi yet B fully developed vehicle of evil Gothic pas- _ conclave of phantoms who turn out to be brigands in ghostly
sions, but the shadows are gathering. when the extravagant devo-
tion of these characters for one another turns into hatred and
fear and when they can no longer express their feelings through
tears, we then enter the Gothic phase of sentimental fiction.
disguises. Swearing her to preserve their secret, she is granted
release and given a heritage by the robber band. I;H._mad€ "0
attenpt to finish the Gothic adventures of Henrietta which the
anonymous Goth had aborted in volume one. Clearly, I.H. was a
thoroughly typical Gothic amateur of the 1790's. The duPll¢atl°"

134 THE FIRST GUTHICS THE FIRST GUTHICS 135
of Radcliffean methods, artificially supernatural situations,
and the presentation of the maiden's emergencies produced some
_ 100.
satisfactory Gothic scenes and moments, but the narrative as a - Critical Synopsis: This novel commences as domestic fiction
whole lacks the aesthetic cohesion and structural unity of Mrs. but gradually becomes Gothic over the course of its four vol-
Radcliffe's best work. umes. The domestic plot centers on the persecution of Emma
Roberts by her own father. Because she stubbornly refuses to wed
156. Hales, J.M.H. THE ASTROLOGER: OR, THE EVE OF SAN SEBASTIAN. K , the man chosen by her father, 5ir uilliam Maynard, She is ean-
L°"d°" 1 Vllllam Feirmahs 1329- veyed to a convent until she Submits to her father's will. The
"Oder" R@9dl!l0"$1 Nﬂhe benevolent Sir Hilliam Maynard, however, intercedes with her
9°thlC TJV91 SOTCETET 9°$hl¢ (lmltﬁt95 Rad¢llffEB" Gﬂthlﬁ) father and she is eventually released to marry the man of her
Biographical and Research Data: None choice, Henry Millward. These painful experiences and reconcil-
iations constitute the novel's long domestic prologue to the
Critical Synopsis: A weak and lethargic ﬁothia whioh claims Gothic experiences of their children, Edward, Matilda, and
to imitate the terrors of Mrs. Radcliffe and the horrors of T.J. Juliana (an adopted daughter). By volume three, the novel be-
Horsley Curties. ln the preface, Hales salutes both of these ‘ comes thoroughly Gothic by focusing on the distresses of Juliana
writers as his Gothic mentors. "I have read, with avidity and and her mysterious patron, Alonza Vaena. Alonza is the single
delight, the fa5ci"ati"9 productions of a Radcliffe and a virtuous branch on an otherwise depraved family tree. In league
c"rtie5- Fe" are hhe Phenomena which are not tolerated in ro- . against him is his malicious cousin, Gusman, who is assisted by
mance. I have introduced that inuortant auxiliary to the marvel- a iady named TriphOSﬂ~ F°rme'1Y j“5t an °rdi"a'i]Y had person,
l°“5 ﬂhd m¥5h9Tl°"5'-3" 5FPiTltl°"-" The 5t°'Yll"e 70* hrlhglhg Triphosa has blossomed into an arch-villainess as a result being
the astrologer, the monk Osmia. into the Plot and placing him in jilted by Alonza. This pair moves swiftly to destroy the friend-
the role of "aooarition‘ is highly Perfoo¢iory- The Marqhesa ship of Juliana and Alonza by having Juliana seized and
della Victoria dies after giving birth to a son, Sebastian, on transported to the familiar academy of Gothic maidens, the
the eve of 5t- 5ebas¢ian- The Marquis's court astrologer. Osmia, ~ ' forbidding castle. Here, she is subjected to threats of rape,
dra"5 the b°J'$ 9l"°m¥ h°T°5¢°P@1 “"i"Y trials. many ml5f0Fthh@5 y murder, Roman Catholicism, and marriage to her captors‘ ugly
ﬂ"alt him 9'9 he Ca" ottalh haDDl"955 l" thii 5"hl"h5T¥ Wﬁrldv l son. Exploring the castle and its grounds, Juliana finds clues
and strange to say, T am fated to be the important agent who which point to the murder of her father. In this case, the Goth-
shall bestow it." Coming to manhood, Sebastian joins the army of u ic maiden operates as a primitive detective in a primitive
Charles 111 a"d falls l" 1°V9 "lth ElVlri- 5eha5tli" Goes to 3 detective story. Her investigations eventually disclose the
Gibraltar Carrllhg the 35tr°1°9er'5 "i*"l"95 With him l" letter , unburied corpse of her father as well as the villainy of Gusman
form h0Plh9 to be able 5° Shh" the D9Fll5 Predlﬁted thereihv and Triphosa. The castle is raided by virtuous confederates of
while Osmia mysteriously disappears to the nernlexity of his %.d Alonza, the maiden is delivered, and the Gusman and Triphosa are
brother monks. A long section now follows on the horrors of the h held for execution, Although there is nothing especially novel
Ihooisilioh with elaborate deseriotiohs of the fate of many . 11 in either the domestic plot or the Gothic plot, the amalgam of
victins. While confined to a monastery because they are sus- the the modes of fiction is unusual.
pected of heresy, Sebastian and Elvira, hear a mysterious voice
‘¥!!!%~”
ihd 599 B" aPPiFl9l0h Virhlhg them of doom and offering to give E{' 158. Hamilton, Ann Mary. MONTALVA: OR, THE ANNALS OF GUILT. London :
them guidance. In what must pass for a delayed Radcliffean ex- “ N_L. Pannier, 1811.
planation of these seemingly supernatural events, the voice and Mgdgrn Reeditions; None
$Pe¢tT9 are 5h0Wh $0 he lll"5°FY CFBatl°"$ 0f the aitﬂlﬂger who Gothic Type: Mixed Gothic (domestic fiction becoming Gothic
has had to go into hiding to escape arrest by the Inquisition. in horror mode)
These circumlocutions are sinnly awkward, never scary. Voung Biographical and Research Data: None
Sebastian is now able to repay the astrologer (now named
Rosario) for his watchful protection. Sebastian convinces the Critical Synopsis: Stephano Montalva is a totally dissolute
klhq iv Dardﬂh the a5tF°1°9EY and to Felhstate him to the character. His literary ancestry goes back to Samuel Richard-
monastery of San Sebastian. The customary marriage closes the son's seducing roué, Robert Lovelace, and John Moore's
romance. Hales's weak Gothic proves once more that adulation for extrayagant sadist, Zeluco (see #297). Montalva violates the
"T$- Radﬂllffe did "Oi hecessarily assure a satisfactory lmlta— innocent Valeria, then condemns her to a convent and disposes of
tlh" of her suspenseful art. the illegitimate daughter (Isobel) to feed his coarse appetites.
Needing further sadistic outlets, Montalva's natural degeneracy
157. -Hamilton, Ann Mary. THE FOREST OF ST. BERNARDO. London : J.F. I is drawn toward ruining the marital happiness of hi5 frlehd
h"9h95, 1996- Ferdinando D'Rosorio. He arranges to have D'Rosorio poisoned in
Modern Reeditions: None order to possess his wife and child. Hith his nefarious schemes
G°thlC TYPEI Mixed 5°thl° (d°me$tiE fiitlﬁh heC°ml"9 Gothic) all successful, Montalva begins to undergo an altruistic conver-
5l°9'iPhl5il ahd Re59ir¢h Datai Shhmmhsv GOTHIC QUE5T, PP-35, sion. His natural vice turns to almost unnatural benevolence in

135 THE FIRST GOTHICS THE FIRST GUTHIES 137
one of the most astonishing personality reversals in Gothic "Though called a castle, it was in fact a modern-built mansion,
literature. Going in search of more dissipation Montalva without anything castellated about it.“ The journey to and
travels in Spain where the Spanish experience begins ‘to trans- sojourn with Mr. Haverill at his crazy home is the plot. Rhan-
form the coldhearted rake into a man of feeling whose pity for vellyn Caitle l5 3 9atherl"9 P°l"t T0“ la"! P@0Ple- A Partlal
the sufferings of humanity is on a par with Harley, the roll call of characters will suggest the madcap proceedings and
lachrymose hero of Mackenzie's MAN OF FEELING (see #250), Iran. odd talk. The guests and incidental maniacs include: Mr. Diggle,
ically, when he acted maliciously toward others he was happy and I MT» llmﬂthy 5laDda5h, the Reverehd Ella5 5l°°d, °ld J"5§l¢9
powerful. But when he begins to act toward others with compas- Hellb°T°"9h, Dﬂatﬂr Kill, Lawyer E"lP—aP—G"lP, MT$- Shahks {ha
slon and care, his life becomes a saga of anguish and failure. DUKE 0? l'lml"9ham- DOCIOT Uhhliei Ml55 F"1ma" ""h°$9 4eV°tl°"
The novel's most Gothic occurrence takes place during one of to fossils had, she flattered herself, placed her name on the
Montalva's compassionate excursions when he discovers a young li$t5 Of Science,“ Mr- FOFCEPS, the ReV9TE"d "'- Tllt» 3'°ad-
nun in a convent whom he believes to be the murdered daughter of head, the butler, Mrs. Ginpshort, Lady Diana Gormonthwaite, Miss
D'Rosorio. His former evil self is aroused when a demon envelop- lahblﬁki "C°mP05EF 07 lmPr0mPt" ballad$s" the R9V@'a"d Glle5
ed in blue fire appears to him and commands Montalva to take the Skutt. Hill heapforall, the Dullkils. Lard Jeremy Brihwell, Sir
life of the girl or forfeit his own to the Inquisition. Entering Crawl Cowcur, the Fullhattan family. Miss Hahtohlay. $ir Gaspar
the bedchamber, Montalva raises his dagger above the sleeping Scoone, Gregory Griffinhoof, Dr. Socket, and many more in a huge
child only to be interrupted by the attending phantom of Valer_ congregation of crazies. The chapter headings look back to Fiel-
ia. "The child,“ the ghostly Valeria sighs, "is our own," Mar- ding and Smollett but also have a strong Peacockian quality.
tally ashamed by his newly acquired conscience, Muntalva Among them are; "A Chapter on Fools--Hith an Example“; “The Hero
perishes in tears of regret, a decent death which the Gothic Being Asleep, the History Returns to the Ladies"; "Observations
novelist eulogizes as among the most moving in the "annals of 0" 0*th°9raVhy"; "A" Aaﬁauht Of the 0'l§l" 07 the Haltl“; ahd "A
guilt." Although the convent scenes and spectral manifestations lreatlse °" the C"'l"9 Of Bladder Allme"t$ l" Mice-" "°"e °f
generate some excitement, the novel relinquishes its Gothic ef- these absurdities is iwulied by "hat must have seemed a"°the'
fects_ by shifting the emotional emphasis to a belated ' 5tral9htf°rVa'd 5°t"l¢ tltle-
humanitarian character development which is difficult to justify
in a personage so initially vicious and interestingly wicked, I60. Harley, Mrs. THE PRIORY OF ST. BERNARD: AN OLD ENGLISH TALE.
All of Hamilton's novels contain this same defect. She attempts London : Nilliam Lane. 1739-
to blend horror and sexual aggressiveness in her villains with Modern Reeditions: None
suddenly overwhelming impulses to pity and mercy, a practice Gothic Type: Gothified history (terror mode)
which renders the character sterile instead of startling. Biographical and Research Data: Sumners, GOTHIC QUEST, p.171;
| Tarr, CATHOLICISM IN GOTHIC FICTION, pp.2, 32, 106; Lévy, LE
9. HARDENBRASS AND HAVERILL: OR, THE SECRET OF THE CASTLE. London ROMAN "GOTHIQUE" ANGLAIS, pp.198, 236, 469-
: Barnard and Farley for Sherwood, Neely, and Jones, 1817. _
Modern Reedltions: None Critical Synopsis: A chapbook version of the two-volume Goth-
Gothic Type: Comic Gothic ic romance by Mrs. Harley was printed ‘for the authoress, and
Biographical and Research Data: None sold at Swift's Circulating Library" in 1786. In both versions,
the novel is an inferior imitation and very nearly a plagiarism
Crltlcal Synopsis: A large comic novel in four ample volumes of Sophia Lee's THE RECESS (see #240). Mrs. Harley's derivative
(1,830 pages), HARDENBRASS AND HAVERILL is a lunatic medley of and amateurish Gothic also reflects heavy borrowings from "al-
many literary fashions including the Gothic. To the main novel pole's CASTLE OF OTRANTO (see #466) and Clara Reeve's OLD ENG-
is appended "A Madman and No Madman." Although the pair of LISH BARON (see #355). Halpolesque apparatus is especially
heroes named in the title suggests a saga of two medieval visible in Mrs. Harley‘s introduction of animate statuary. As
knights, they are actually modern maniacs who would be quite at Lord Raby roams the hallways of the Priory his gaze falls upon
h°m@ at La"F€hC€ 5tErnE's Shandy Hall or at one of Thomas Love ‘a high pedestal where arrayed in armour, a waving plume of
Peacock's crazy country house debates. In the preface the » feathers on his casque, and in his hand a pointed spear, stood
"Author to his Book," the novelist archly nncks the inordinate the q"lV9'l"9 lmage °f L°'d Rab¥'5 father-" The 9E"9al°9l¢al
le"9th 07 ma"! Sentimental and Gothic novels by this eoy relationships among the characters are inmensely and needlessly
apostrophe, "Go, little book--though indeed thou art not little Complicated and the usual Gothic dénouements, recognitions, and
of thine age, seeing thy bulk is four fat volumes," The novel is restoration of birthrights show little of the literary skill of
essentially unplotted and consists of a picaresque skein of zany Mrs. Harley‘s sources and models. Gothic characters are expected
‘incidents and mad chatter. The nonsense begins in the village of ' to have several_aliases, but Mrs, Harley gives many of her char-
Pont-y-V___ in Hales at the Cheesetoaster Inn, whose proprie_ ‘ acters two or three names simply because she had seen other
tors, Sergeant and Mrs. Puffin, are ministering to the needs of Gothic writers engaging in‘ the practice. Thus, the avuncular
the Marquis of Hardenbrass who is about to embark on a visit to Vlllal" "ha °PeTat9$ l" ahd ahauhd the PTl°Ty af 5t- Bernard l5
Rhanvellyn Castle, the country home of Mr. Arthur Haverill. called Manston, b"t "he" he t"'"$ "P l" the Hal! Lahd as a

138 THE FIRST GDTHICS l " rm: FIRST GUTHICS 13’
soldier in the crusading army of Richard I, he has become the phony nedievalized atmosPheTe- The 5eVeFeI¥f“5ed melee", Elhlhﬂi
Norman knight, De Coucy. The chief target of Hanston's/De Cou- is relentlessly Vurshed 3"? the" 1°¢kee UP l" the ce5t1e °f M°"'
cy's villainy is his relative, Lord Raby whose sisters, _Laura bray by the Prefilqete EdT'¢- The 5°5t1e ef M°"hF3y had °"¢e
and Maud, have been consigned to the Priory by Raby's profligate belonged t° E1V‘§a'5 father "h°5e qeath was *‘T°"9°' sudden;
and deserting father. Manston wants Raby's estates and also H"eXPeeted, ihe Stlil "heXP1a'"ed- E§'lC '5 5 $‘]ke" S9" °
desires to possess his sister, Laura. Hence, he joins King pleasure whose equally bed father, F't1'§‘"Y"> has 91'9" “'5 5°"
Richard's forces at the Battle of Joppa hoping that the King I lessons in how to be a successful Lothario and who now draws
will reward his service with these gifts. Another virtuous young vicarious 1°! frem heIPI"9 Ed"c ‘?catE 3"? deflower var1°“§
man, Edmund, and his gentle sister, Julia, are separated by the maidens. Fitz-Alwy" also 5e'Ve$ 6 D°etl¢ f""¢tI°“ ‘" the "°'e
cunning of Manston. Edmund believes hinnelf to be Manston's son by heihq fheqhehtly f°""d I" t'e"5fl*e§ ett‘t"de5 as he Qeles
and is appalled by the abominations of his father. As the genea- out over the sublime 91°°m of the Y°'k5hlCe Iehd§eﬂPe- Geﬁhlc
logical confusion multiplies, strangers enter and exit from the terrain arouses in him raptures of dark sensibility as he de-
story without warning or purpose. In the Palestinian segment of li9ht5 5" the terrible 3"? I" the_9re"d, mere than 1" the Softer
the novel, De Coucy's villainy is finally exposed and mastery of landscape; and in the bright visions of fancy, "°¥Id °fte" 1°55
the Priory returned to Raby. But before justice is served upon ‘ himself in awful solitudes." The mayor Gothic episode of_ the
the villain more genealogical perplexities accumulate. There is novel is the supernatura‘ dg]‘vera"ce 5°e"e I" "hleh the IlYl"9
an enforced wedding between King Seofrid of Cyprus and a l statue of a P'°tecti“e reiﬂtlve eI1e¥5 the fears 9f the gg‘QE"
Christian girl named Elmira which begins a second series of and repels the advances °f her it¢eeke'- FIy1"9 f'°m E15»
genealogical entanglements and bewildering identity changes Elwina is shielded from harm when the colossus of her fat er,
involving a boy named Lucius who turns out to be Edmund'5 the Earl of Mowbray, descends from its pedestal in full armor to
sister, Julia. Julia has also used the name Eleonora for no par- interuose i¢$elf betheeh the §W°9hl"9 El"l"e e"d the 5a!°°T°95
ticular reason. Raby's noble conduct finally convinces King Edric. But the HalP01e$qUe TePetltl°"5 afe Perhaps less 5‘9"'f:'
Richard that De Coucy's scheming must be stopped. De Coucyl cant than the Radcliffean foreshadowings in Mrs. Harleyhs
Manston is stripped of rank and returned to England to face attraction to horrid t0P09'§Ph¥ and qreaqful pruspects ° t e
trial and death while Edmund marries Laura and Raby marries countryside through which heroine and villain wander to reach
Julia before returning to England to reclaim the Priory of St. the seclusion of the awesune castle. One year before the publi-
Bernard. No event, character, place, or scene in Mrs. Harley's “ cation of Mrs. Radcliffe's first Gothic, THE CASTLES 0F ATHLIN
novel can lay any claim to originality. But the Gothic reader- GNU UUNBAYNE. ehli 1e55eF Gethle "°VeIl5¢ hid_ﬂ1Teedy be9"" t°
ship received Mrs. Harley's work enthusiastically thus explore the D°5$IbiIitie5 °f te'r‘b]e 9ra"de"r In d‘m a"d ba1e'
demonstrating once again that it would eagerly read a plagia- ful landscaDe5- ‘
rized or rewritten Gothic so lon as th tale rovided the com-
mon formulas of horror. g Q p 162. HARTLEBOURN CASTLE: A DESCRIPTIVE ENGLISH TALE. London : J.
‘ Bell, 1794.
1. Harley, Mrs. THE CASTLE OF MOHBRAV: AN ENGLISH ROMANCE. Lon- ' Modern Reeditions: None
don : C. Stalker and H. Setchell, 1788. ‘ Gothic Type: Gothified History
Modern Reeditions: None Biographical and Research Data: "One
Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (terror mode) _ _ _
Biographical and Research Data: Suinners, GOTHIC QUEST, p.171; , Critical Sxnvnsisi Set 1" the "19" °f “°'_">' "L “‘eIS§°'§§§3§
Tarr, CATHOLICISM IN GOTHIC FICTION, pp.1, 49, 50, 105; Lévy, Q is a fairly close imitation of Clara Reeve s OLD ENGL __
LE ROMAN 'GOTHIQUE" ANGLAIS, pp.198, 236. , (see #355). A forbidden apartment, a ghostly ancestor, a trio
ff for the young heir similar to that of Edmund, ehd 3 9'3"? 9e"e°;
Critical Synopsis: Mrs. Harley's second Gothic effort pro- , {L logical resolution make the novel a satisfactory revival o
voked an outraged stricture from the reviewer in THE CRITICAL ‘s. Reeve's domesticated Gothic.
REVIEH. The critic conplains that in THE CASTLE OF MOHBRAV Mrs. "Qh . f L
Harley “has mutilated history, is unacquainted with the human ,}; .163. Harvey. Jehe- MINERVA CASTLE‘ L°"d°" 1 M'"erva'PreSS or ane
heart, and deficient in judgement. Yet, with these defects, she g‘ and Newman, 1302-
enters the lists as a rival of Horace Halpole and Miss Lee.“ Al- it Modern Reeditions: None _ ,.ff
though the work is a novice Gothic in most respects, not every ﬁl Gothic Type: P"'e 0' hlgh Geihle (terrvr mode. Ride l ea"
one of the supernatural effects is mismanaged and Mrs. Harley ii imitation) EST 86
exhibits an improved technical command over Halpole's mechanisms " Biographical and Research Data: S“mmers' GQTHIC Pu ' D’
of chaos and retribution be ond what she had done with borrowed ' _ ‘ . .
Gothic props in THE PRIORY oi ST. BERNARD. The period is the Critical syvwv§i§= A_hw!'l¥ ""t"le""*“1_°°.‘ G°"“.°,'°'“"§f'°
reign of Edward I although the monarch himself makes no appear- offered to the Gothit audlenee Under 6 Prﬂreeetlve t‘ttef THE
ance. As usual, the historical overlay of the Gothic story is heroine‘$ 6dV€ntUTe5 Periiiei th°5e °f Emlly St“ A“ber 1"
entirely fabricated by the Gothic novelist in order to furnish a MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO (see #349). Sumners tells us that Jane

140 THE F1R5r ggrH1¢5 ‘ s rue FIRST GUTHICS 141
Harvey “specialized in castles." She also specialized in nearly Modern Reeditions: None
Verbatim reproductions of Mrs. Radcliffe‘; p]Qt5_ ' ' Gothic Type: Political Gothic and Grotto Gothic (sentimenta
elements)
154. Harvey, Jane. HARKFIELD CASTLE. London = Minerva-Press for Lane Biographical and Research Data: Levy. LE ROMAN “BOTHIQUE"
and Newman, 1802. ANGLAIS, p.623.
Modern Reeditions: None
Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (terror mode, Radcliffean r Critical Synopsis: This hluefire Gothic romance is set in “an
imitation) ‘ age of bigotry“ just following the French defeat at the Battle
Biographical and Research Data: Sunmers, GOTHIC QUEST, p.86. of Poitiers (1356). The three volumes are headed by H" ePl9'BPh
from Dryden, ‘Think on the slippery state of human things." The
Critical Synopsis: The three volume romance recreates the state of human things is not just slippery in this Gothic novel
moods and settings of Mrs. Radcliffe's MYSTERIES or UDOLPHO (see but almost unintellisibly comolicated- Sinmly calling the roll
#349). but uses fifteenth-century English pseudo-history rather of the novel's characters would fill several Pages and since
than Italian and French backgrounds to display the sufferings of thete are jU$t 65 many dire 6"d 5UPeF"dt“ral eVe"t5 B5 there aFe
the her0lne- Price per volume is typical of the Minerye_Prg55 characters, this Gothic is almost impossible to summarize. The
rates at four pounds six shillings per volume. contents, however, can be highlighted. The Lady of the Cave ap-
pears under multiple aliases throughout the three volumes. She
165. Harvey, Jane. THE CASTLE or TVNEMOUTH. London : Vernor and Hood, is the guardian of a "subterraneous temple“ aolou with "gloomy
1806. and bluish light." Finally identified to be Valentina, she is
Modern Reeditions: None also the keeper of the symbol of French recovery from humilia-
Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (terror mode, Radcliffean tion at the hands of"the English, the Sword of Ismael. At the
imitation) end, the reader is informed that the Lady of the Cave is meant
Biographical and Research Data: Summers, GOTHIC QUEST, p.86. to be the heart and mind of France herself. a figure mystical
and allegorical in nature and strong enough to survive political
Critical Synopsis: Vet another anglicized version of Mrs. shocks from the right or the left. "In fine, Valentina was suc-
Radcliffe's MVSTERIES or UDOLPHO (see #349). Having found cessively the oenius directino an indispensable war. and the
success in writing facsimiles of Mrs. Radcliffe, Mrs. Harvey was i"9el 0f Peeeei Wh° "ill 59°" re5t°'e te FTe"¢e t'd"Q"lllltY dnd
naturally reluctant to attempt anything else in her castle nov- hﬂPDl"e$$-" T'dCkl"9 Dﬂlltlcdl ¢"*re"t$ $"l*ll"9 ebeut l" the
el5- plot is a perplexing task since there are so many narrative
intrusions, genealogical details, and unfinished substonies. One
166. Harwood, Caroline. THE CASTLE OF VIVALDI: OR, THE MVSTERIOUS IN- of the several inset tales, the legend of the hermit of the
JUNCTION. London : Minerva-Press for A.K. Newman, 1810. mountain, Onufre, is more than 200 pages long and has no dis-
Modern Reeditions: None cernible bearing on the direction of the main plot. Dozens of
Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (terror mode) characters, some of these actual historical personages, rotate
Biographical and Research Data: None ' in and out of the main story. Two of these, Charles D'Evreux de
Valois, the King of Navarre, and Etienne Marcel, provost of mer-
Critical Synopsis: Reprinted in 1840 by the publisher, Davis, . chants and fiery leader of the Paris uprising of the Jacquerie,
under the revised title, THE CASTLE OF VIVALDI: OR, THE MVSTER- l I were real historical opponents in the volatile oolitics of
IOUS CASKET, this four-volume Gothic continued to attract read- .. fourteenth-century France. The cave of the romance's title is
ers well beyond the Gothic period. In Hrs. Radcliffe's THE ‘§ part of the "ruins of a sort of grotto which terminated on the
ITALIAN (see #350), the principal source for this novel, Vincen- i grounds of Marcel" and serves as a subterranean headquarters for
tio di Vivaldi is the chivalric rescuer of the persecuted Ellena § revolutionary activity- Tuo fictional youno men. the Count de
di Rosalba. Caroline Harwood simply retained the name for its Nevers and Sire de Joinville, are drawn out of their scholarly
Radcliffean appeal, then reassigned it to the castle villain. retirement to the Chateau de Granselve and into the political
Castle Vivaldi is furnished with every known Gothic prop and maelstrom. For much of the novel, they struggle with the equally
pitfall. The 1s40 title more accurately catches the central dangerous sets of ideas represented by the radical Marcel and
Gothic terror scene since it refers to the main object of terror the reactionary King of Navarre. Intermittently, they also fal
within Vivaldi Castle's forbidden gallery. A shackled casket in love and become sePa'ated frum the ladies, Adelaide e"d El-
that is never to be opened again is bound to attract even the lihor, in the murky “"deTW°Tld Of Gethle P°lltlC$ "here "the eye
most timid Gothic heroine. It may even appear to open by itself closed with horror at the general picture which presented it-
when the heroine gazes upon it through a black tapestry. , self." The twisting corridor of athe narrative is lined with
familiar Gothic events,--ancestral portraits with humanoid eyes,
167. Hasworth, H.H. THE LADY OF THE CAVE: OR, THE MVSTERIES OF THE nefarious abbesses, and architectural snares. ‘More interesting
FOURTEENTH CENTURY, AN HISTORICAL ROMANCE. London 1 Minerva- than the conventional anParat"§ are the conversions made by
Press for Lane and Newman, 1802. Hasworth. The troubled streets of Paris, for example, are sub-

me FIRST comrcs  1 ms FIRST GOTHICS 143
stituted for the traditional castle labyrinth and a Political 3 it with his message in this story vf famil¥_d@¢@vti°"- The *1-‘*'"'
spy named Vaudois ("a mixture of scientific vanity and religious \ aged text is a further barrier to c0II1P"9he"5‘°"-
prejudice") performs many of the deeds of the traditional Gothic 1
villain. It is perhaps risky to generalize about the conser- ' 169. Haynes, Miss C.D. AUGUSTUS AND ADELINA: OR, THE mm; 10F ST.
vative politics of the English Gothic. Vet, in novels such as - BARNADINE. tondon : Minerva-Press for A.K. Newman, B 9.
THE LADY OF THE CAVE which clearly have the cataclysmic conse- Modern Reeditions: None , v _ d d d t d
quences of the French Revolution in mind, revolutionary forces i I Gothic Type: Monastic shocker (sentimentalize an mo era e
on the loose in society are presented nearly as darkly as the - terrors)
evil control over individual lives exerted by Catholicism in the i ' Biographical and Research Data: Surrlners, GOTHIC QUEST,
monastic shockers of the Gothic period. » p.104.
HATRED: OR, THE VINDICTIVE FATHER, A TALE OF SORROH. London : Critical Synopsis: The novel is essentially 3 St°')' Of l°V9
Minerva-Press for Lane and Newman 1802 and separation with Gothic embellishments. One also Sees thﬁ
Modern Reeditions~ None , . sentimental influence of Pope's POEM. "El°i5a t° M’e1a‘”d"
Gothic Type~ Sentimental Gothic (terror mode) (1717) Hiy"E$'5 attempt ill ¢°'"e5tl¢i*te 3"“ t°"e d°"'" the
Biographical and Research Data“ None monastic shocker results in ineffectual villain! 5"d the ""91
- fails on two counts: there is too much confinanent and suffering
Critical Synopsis“ Not only is the plot highly convoluted i to allow the more delicate sentiments to find expression; but
but the story is doubly difficult to grasp because the two vol: its Gothicism is too reluctant to PTQVWE the twins a"d 5h°ck5
umes of the romance in the Haimiond Collection of the New York _ of the school of THE MONK (see #244).
iii‘§‘i.§l?i§'X.ZZ§.§2'"§2§?n3?S,‘"?i‘.?;‘?l"i1‘@.Z‘?§;;.Jiiaiilil _ 170 Haynes ms. 0.0. ELEANOR: OR, ins same or ST. MICHAELS, A
plation ofhnature and the joys of solitude in the first volume i I 52:ANTI§ Tglriaoblgﬂdggng A-K- Nﬂvllﬂiﬂ, 1321-
' ' ' ' ' e l :
$22; gvtythenaonagterycgt ‘§:.vi=::::ai: Egfarizhgciiiige T3: T1]: . Gotivic‘ Tjpez Pure or high Gmhic madcnffea" revivan UEST
deve outside Paris. The narrator, Altamont, a sensitive admirer Biographical and Research Data: Sunmers. GOTWC Q .
of nature and literature, visits his old friend, Father Antonio, p.l04.
ii'18uai¥‘§i'Z.‘JZt.§'mii§..'5“§"?ii°$§a.§l§§I',“3"§Jei;ﬁeii.'°“?.E.}‘ $5511 i Critical Synovsiﬁ nus -ormous whit We v<>1-“W ‘S a"
over the mysteries of his heritage since he wgs left a found- elongation of Mrs. Radcliffe's THE ITALIAN (see #350). -BY the
ling at the Monastery's door some thirty years before Altamont third decade of the Nineteenth Century the 9°t"i° "°"e‘ had
shows Father Antonio some miniatures of a lovely woman and her reached its decadent and lﬂﬂlgiblllid phaae."'|g:::,o:T:;|eH;g:§H§::::
- - - - . ' e
?S'£;.Z§‘Z“"l3i "?}ﬁ!iia“’§‘ Lliiﬁchﬁi ‘“§?‘ii'.¢"‘°3n2 f‘Z§.'i‘l¥.Z E.y§3‘2$ie‘§..‘iﬁ';"l§3l .ZiZa§'if ‘law Missing. Her Hie-mi
usually coirposed prelaiie. His alarmedyrecognition gt‘ the minia- ‘ is a retabrication of His. RadcHffe'Se§lle:\ﬁ- T:;SI€2':\i!:Qtl°';s
- - - - ' r we -ver
theeieadgtmneaiethetgﬁdefggtiggaii331321$|i\ema:iie:ag€|iea"(i:w:r‘r':igFi ‘4 gghgaiiggicavﬂenigmazpeis edone with mechanical correctness, but
retire to a kind of contemplation cave to dwell on the mysteries  lacks the Gothic artist's own belief in her superiiatual crea-
of life, death, and the strange portraits. From elaborate clues . .1 tions and the romance palls.
stationed about the narrative the reader discerns that Father  _
Antonio and the vindictive Father, the dissolute aristocrat, r 171. Haynes, Miss C.lJ. THE RUIN5 9? RUTH‘/Al-E ABBEL '—°"d°" ~ A'K'
Valmont are one in the same. Volume t o is devoted to the dis- . Newman, 1827.
sipated’career of Valmont and his vindictive hatreds. If volume ' Modern Reeditioﬂil "M9
one is pastoral, contemplative, and consoling, then volume two j. Gothic Type: Romance of the Ruin (terror mode) UEST B7
is a violent Gothic retrospective. Father Antonio, alias Val-  , Biographical and Research Data; Sunmers, GOTHIC Q s PP- 1
mont, was able to pursue two lives and may still be doing so. As 1- _'"i 404.
master of the Monastery he denies the flesh and seems to serve » . . .
. - ' Y ‘ ' ' ; I t, s c'al novel with an enticing
2zﬁa::.:"::::."§.: 2:":.'::":::" ":@::.*"e.2*"*.": “l"""" "E » . .::;‘;%:l. $z::"::,:.   .,.   
Gradually Altamnnt beggimes a\varesgf1thecdoubTgriife ‘of higmf; i dgawing room witticisms of the novel of manners. Vet, the story
ther Father Antonio and a alled b his own evil aternit he '1 becomes increasi-ngly Gothic with the passage of several volumes.
‘decides to retire to a monggtery toyatone for the ‘crimes olfbhis I Action conniences in the‘ fﬂShi.°"ibl@ t°:2yh?‘;5?h°;r:;:éS:“r;:'5°:
vindictive father. The novel is marked by the thematic uncer-  in Bloomsbury Square, H ere 6 $11099?‘ Pa
> - - j\s_rs ' _ A bl d re Lady Charlotte Sunlners
tainty of other_ Gothics of its tyne. The anonymous Goth could  dreary November evening hszem He ghaﬂes Horace Mr‘ Va]:
not make up his mind about the tenor of terror or how to temper  Monimia Beauville, Miss BS J. - '

144 TI-E FIRST canoes I THE FIRST GOTHICS 145
entine Lorimer, and the heroine-in-training, Rosa Sedley. The THE FOREST (see #348) by the father of C.D. Haynes, the novel
company wwlains of the tediun of modern city life and decide; also has overtones of Roche's THE CHILDREN or THE ABBEY (see
to counter boredom by fabricating a series of Gothic adventures #364). Haynes reduced the terror properties, substituting senti-
with Rosa Sedley assigned to the role of victimized heroine. The mental and Pastvril Eff€Ct5 f0? 5¢9"E$ Of 9l°°m B"4 dﬂ"9e'-
lﬂvresario for these Gothic sports is Monimia Beauville, whose Orphaned children who bear the birthmarks of greatness and
very name sounds like it comes from the pages of some Gothic living in a cottage near a dark castle ruled over by a tyrant
novel. A ruin and a rakish male are, of course, required to make T I whose name has some mY5te'{°"5 ¢°""eCtl°" "Ere their °"" is
the Gothic plan operative. Part of her instruction necessitates certainly B 5te'9°tYUlCil G°t"lC Pl°t- The 6djﬂCE"¢Y Of f°F95t
Rosa's learning how to speak as a Gothic heroine should. Thus \ and castle and the relationship of the children to the local
when Mr. Horace inquires whether or not she is married, "The tyrant implied a clash of values later to be resolved by the re-
Cheek °f R056 UECBWE Dale as death--‘Oh! Do not ask me that storation of the "natural" heir to the rightful ownership of the
question,’ she replied. ‘I must not, dare not, answer you; a fa- castle. The influence of the French romancer, Ducray-Duminil,
tal mystery attends my steps, and involves me in continual and his widely read c°tta99-Y0-555919 "°V@l. ALEX15I 0U, LE
sorrow and disgrace!'" The ruins of the abbey on the River Dee MAISONETTE DANS LE 5015 (1739) i5 315° e'ide"t' PIERRE AND
are not reached until well into the third volume. Delays are ADELINE is also one of those Gothics which survived the Gothic
apparently caused by legal difficulties in renting these ruins craze. It was reprinted by Hazlitt in his ROMANTICIST AND NOVEL-
for the season. It seems that ruins like Ruthvale are in keen I$T'5 LIBRARY l" 1341-
demand by other devotees of Gothic games and there are sinply
not enough toppled fortresses and moss-covered piles to go I73. Helme, Elizabeth. THE FARMER OF INGLEHOOD FOREST. London
around. However, finding and then contracting for a ruined abbey Minerva-Press for Hilliam Lane, I796.
allows the company time to recruit and train a suitable villain, Modern Reeditions: None
Lord Darlington. Taking enthusiastically to her part, Rosa Gothic Type: Sentimental fiction (Radcliffean terror ele-
quickly masters all of the maiden's distressful postures, espe- ments)
cially the attitudes of panic. Regaining her senses after a mock i Biographical ﬂﬂd R9596T¢h natal 5"mmET§, 59THlC QUE5T,
faint, she finds herself "reclining on a broken column among the pp.100, 101; Foster, HISTORY OF THE PRE-ROMANTIC NOVEL IN
ruins, on the outside of the abbey. She raised her head expec- ENGLAND, P-270
ting to encounter some terrific object,"~-and she does. Problems _ .
arise when Darlington begins to take his role as pursuer and Critical Synopsis: Numerous reprintings throughout the Nine-
violator of Rosa Sedley a bit too seriously and the comic Gothic teenth Century kept the novel in the public eye long after‘ the
tone of the novel abruptly turns into high Gothic crisis. Rosa's Gothic mania had subsided. Montague Sunmers connents extensively
father, Captain Sedley, had been killed in a duel by Lord Dar- ~ on the publication history in A GOTHIC BIBLIOGRAPHY, stating
lington. In an unscheduled appearance the phantom of the slain that THE FARMER OF INGLEHOOD FOREST was “reprinted, generally in
father now intervenes to save his menaced daughter just as cheap and widely disseminated editions" in such series as New
Darlington is about to seize her after a long chase through the * Popular Library (1851) and The Cottage Library (I875). The work
abbey's devastated maze. He now get a genuine Gothic scene sans is mar9l"ﬂllY 5°1"l¢ With ml"9l9d Pﬂ5t°T@l e‘eme"t5 a"d m°'bid
satire: “Lord Darlington pursued her; again his arm was raised, rhapsodies which recall the moods of the Graveyard poets of the
when a figure stood between him and his victim. It extended its '1 1750's,--the Hartons, Akenside, Blair, and even Thomas Gray. In
arms and completely shielded Rosa from the grasp of her its early stages, the novel features several elegies in several
persecutor." Lord Darlington is exposed, Captain Sedley has come country churchyards and its stern moral content echoes Gray's
back to life after recovering secretly from his wounds, and the admonition that "The paths of glory lead but to the grave." The
company decide to resume their normal lives and play no more } melancholy charm of rural solitude and tearful blisses of ‘coun-
Gothic games. A poetic epilogue from Hannah More, "And woes §5 try llfe are Played °ff i9al"5t the depravity Bf the Qlty 65
remember'd, heighten present joy,“ restores the cozy pleasant- £1 Farmer Godwin of Inglewood Forest struggles to retain the
ries of Mrs. Harrison's Bloomsbury hearth. Could the mock Gothic  pastoral unity of his family according to "nature's holy plan-"
be successfully blended with serious Gothic? The clever balance -L But the Yurﬂl PaFadl$e l5 C°"5ti"¢l¥ th'95t€"9d by the mirltai
9f Ha¥"9S's work gives evidence that it could. crises and steadily mounting dissipations of his children as
they are tempted to the city and its corrupt pleasures. The
172. Haynes, D.F. PIERRE AND ADELINE: on, THE ROMANCE of THE CASTLE. novelist cannot be accused of mm plotting in her portrayal
London : B. Crosby, 1814. of the Godwin family's decline. The four volumes are crowded
"Oder" Reedltlﬂﬁst NONE with catastrophic happenings, many of these taken from the_9r°"'
' Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (terror mode, Radcliffean ing encyclopedia of Gothic events available to Mrs; Helme in the
imitation) work of Mrs. Radcliffe and her contemporaries. Farmer Godwin's
Biographical and Research Data: None three children, Edwin, Hilliam, and Emma, are lured to the city
by a worldly brother and sister naned Mr. Hhitmore and Mrs.
Critical Synopsis: A reworking of Mrs. Radcliffe's ROMANCE OF Delmar. A coaching accident brings this vile pair into Farmer

4s T!-E FIRST GUTHICS I  mg FIRST GOTHICS 147
G°dWl"'$ C°"te"ted h°"5eh°ld- Ed"l" had °Fl9l"ill¥ bee" Dledged I by the Baroness De Harminstroct for safekeeping. The time of the
tAB '  ' " ~ ~-
o gnes ernard but his contact with city life has stirred up events reported in the manuscript is shortly after the defeat of
his lusts while his reeducation as a libertine has been thor- Richard iii at gagharth Fieia (1435). One series of adventures
oughly seen to by his wicked mentor, Hhitmore. They read Rich- k l ' d d C tl Fit w It r in North mberland.
_ ta es p ace in an aroun as e z a e u _
a§d5g“'5 CLARI55A iegether 3"d are much m°Ve¢ b¥ the Strﬂteglei i Situated near the Castle and reached only by a narrow, winding
o r ' t ' ' ' r ‘ '
e apls vl alha Rehert L°velaCe- ehhlh returhs t° - passageway is St. Margaret's Cave. The Cave itself is connected
Ihgleaeed r°re5t- savagely vl°late5 Aghes Berhard» ahd Pr°ml5e5 , ' to both Castle Fitzwalter and to a fallen Gothic chapel where
his sister all of the rewards of vice if she will accompany him i ghostly monastic chants are heard by night. These props and
back to the city. Such is the basic moral pattern of the four d f th f r th b fit f the disinher-
. . . . - back rops are, 0 course, ere o e ene 0
volume novel: an initially innocent and naturally humane charac- ited heroine, Margaret, The cave also provides a dark stage for
ter in Godwin's f 'l f ll t ' ' ' ' ‘ ' '
am‘ Y e 5 ° metrepellhah vlce ahd l" thrh the muttered prophecies of the Gothic novel's hermit-in-
corrupts another member of the family. The Farmer of Inglewood residence, a Strange, haif.naa Franciscan named Austin who knows
F°re5t remaihs C°"5ta"t= but l5 r°rred t° hlthess the moral the family secrets and befriends Margaret after the death of her
deterioration of every one of his children. Tainted by the vices father_ Margaret need; friends since her nasty stepmother,
of city life, Enma becomes a prostitute and the incestuous con- Edith, eentrives to cheat her of name and birthright with the
sort of her own brother. Returning to her father's cottage to i edmniicity of the eqhaiiy nasty Lord De Launcy. Much of the
die’ She reveals that Edvlh remains i" the cltv and that his I final two volumes of the four volume romance is concerned with
diughteri Editha» l5 5 Child Of SDFFQV de5erVl"9 t0 be resched Margaret's genealogical tribulations as she attempts to reassert
frem the vitlated Ed“l"' The third Child» hllllam- he“ travels her birthright. The reclusive Austin is occasionally present but
to the city to locate his brother and save both Editha and a more often absent during Margaret's struggle to reclaim the
girl called Anna Palmer (the raped Agnes's daughter) from the Fitzhaiter name and egtate_ in the iate yoluﬂega Austin-5 pro-
monstrous Edwin. Edwin is apprehended in the very act of abduct- , teetive roie is assumed by a German rustic named Lennaid 5tern_
ing Anna for his seaual amusement and shoots himself before he heim_ Because he appears lowborn, he is instantaneously
can be arrested for kidnapping and lechery. The sad remnants of ' recognized as the lost noble heir. Leopold knows something of
Farmer Godwin's family return to Inglewood Forest hoping to re- the cave of St’ Margaret aha he prnduces at an opportune moment
cover some small fragment of idyllic contentment. Summarizing the iegai documents needed to estabiish Margaretls ieditimaey_
this long and complicated novel hardly does justice to Mrs. ‘ Faced with evidence which they canngt confute, the sullen Lord
Helme's best Gothic touches. Much of her appeal lies in the and Lady De Launcy restore Margaret's ownership of castie Fitz-
manipulation of prurient, morbid, or violent material. The leer- 1 waiter and are eemneiied in witness her marriage to the com-
ing Edwin's near rave of his unrecognized, illegitimate dau9h- moner, Leopold. But Leopold is worthy of Lady Margaret Fitzwal-
ter’ Ahha» is a Srehe that is far meﬁe Sehsatiehal tha" dldae‘ > ter since he is disclosed to be both the son of Austin and the
tic‘ Edvihls peer i"t° Aghesls casket “here he heh°ld5 a . rightful heir of the De Hoffmanns, a German noble house whose
cadaverous infant smiling skeletally is another high Gothic I head Ferdinand he Haffmanh_ had been Fitznatcr's old battle
memeht ahd quite characteristic °r Mrs’ he]me'5 °°"5lderahle companion at Bosworth Field. Although the novel contains some
skill in presenting hideous material strictly for effect and not acceptahie Radciiffaan Scenery, nathing very frightening
for the edification of the reader. The line of artistic demarca- ij Starties er menace; the heroine while her virginity in thi5
tion between teaching the reader and terrifying the reader in '= Gothic hovei is especiaiiy ihta¢t_ A good Gothic requires more
the novels of the period often grows blurred. In the more morbid 1 tn n ~ St a machahicai raorderin of the standard machinery and
_ _ ’ a JU 9
paisages er THE FARMER or INGLEHOOD FOREST» the ll"e dlsappears .~ cast. Furthermore, Mrs. Helme seems not to know how to make good
u er . * - '
Y ' dramatic use either of the ruin or the cavernous compartment
T. t h d t ‘t. T b nd red truly terrifying in Gothic fic-
114. Helme Elizabeth. ST. MARGAREPS cave - “F “C e ° ‘ ° e re- E "
* - 0h= THE huh S Slohv» Ah w tion such subterranean sites need to take on a strange allVEﬂES$
ANCIENT LEGEND. London : Earle and Hemet, 1801. fa of their oh"_ But MrS_ Heine anparehtiy became so preoccupied
Modern Reeditions: Arno Press, 1977, ed. Devendra P. Varma. if‘ with the eanpiicated Crisgcrossiﬂgg of genealogy that she
Gothic Type: Gothified history (Radcliffean imitation) {#1 nveriaoked far forgot the dramatic inportance of the cave it-
Biographical and Research Data: Sunners, GOTHIC QUEST, pp.8O, hi 5eif_
170; Tarr, CATHOLICISH IN GOTHIC FICTION, pp.23, 47, 107' 1
F°§t"- “15T°R' °F "'5 PR5-R°"A""° "°"EL I" E"@'-A"°= P-27°; -‘*3 175. Hernon, a.n. LOUISA: OR, THE BLACK TOHER. London = H. Gordon,
Lévy, LE ROMAN "GOTHIQUE" ANGLAIS, p.462. iah5_ _
. Modern Reeditions: None -
' critical Svhupslsi A shmehhat purer Gothic achlevemeht hha" Gothic Type: Tower Gothic (terror mode with elements of the
THE FARMER OF INGLEHOOD FOREST, the novel uses a cannon framing Rauherrdman) _ _ a
device of Gothic and sentimental fiction, the recovered ancient Bidarahhieai and Research Data; Sunmers, GOTHIC QUEST, pp.86,
manuscript, to give the story a proper antique distancing. "The 357_
Nun's Story‘ is among the papers given to the abbess of St. Mary

149
THE F,-IR$y Gm-H165 THE FIRST GUTHICS
. . - ~ ' _ h
Critical Synopsis: After 1800, tower or turret Gothic f°Ta“ce'5 t"° prime Goth1c mystereest ?:s;if?:.SCé2t;§;::d La:
gradually emerged as an important subcategory of Gothic fiction. “Fite p"5"t°m ['5 'EYeS1ed as . agiﬁatt opened to a cu;iQ“§
Not only was the tower a natural architectural Symbol of contem- "‘fe2 The tnwer $.f°f”“ en rg°Th1S reservgd corpse of Gerrard-S
plation and retirement; as treated by Gothic writers it became pQbI'c and thereln 15 e‘i°se sag uif the necrophiliac sug_
an above-the—9round counterpart of the domain of horror wife: Hernon does not Pr? °Q9h°r doze 6% the C]imax But Herno"
signified in earlier versions of the Gothic by the castle's t 995t‘°" §5 M°"k_Le“‘5 m‘?h R§¥?f 1] delayed revetgtion of the
subterranean zones of fear. The Gothic imagination's fascination ' ' m"5t 'e°e‘Ve "°t‘ce for "Is ?h1 gifyﬂf the betoved corpse Hi]
with towers begins with the toweromania of Beckford's VATHEK - theme of cadaverous set. e moter Gothic writers as it does
(see #030) and later surfaces in writers with Gothic tendencies tur" "P 1" I“? c]‘ma*e5 D ma:¥h auhite old Maid, and Fautknerls
working with Gothic materials after 1820. Sir Halter Scott makes 1" Ha”th°r"e § Shﬁrt §‘°TY» B e rs of tower Gothicism may of
HIJlf'S Craig Tower in THE saws or LAWIERMOOR (see #389) the "A "°Se T" E'““Y- F'Te“‘?‘“§‘-°  of the revetation gcqne too
dark abode of the mysterious Ravenswood. Browning's nightmare c°u'$e f‘"q the pha111c ‘mp ‘ca
poem, "Childe Roland to the Dark Tower Came" (1355) allegorizes strong t” ‘9"°'e'
the Gothic s bol of the tower into a subconscious nest. Poe _ . . -
and Melvillem were drawn to the tower as an alterngte for the 176. Hitchener, Hilliam Henry. ThEc$0HE§§ ?g14RAVENSH0LD. OR, THE
Gothic dungeon or chamber of horrors in their stories, "The gA::r2FRg:g?€§g§;_L:2"Zn ' app ’ '
Devil in the Belfry" and ‘The Bell Tower.‘ Thomas Hard was ° _ Z . . _
still finding symbolic uses for the tower in his novel, THOy0N A Gothic Type: Gothified H1stEryD(:0rro§u;;;:gT mggtagc QUEST,
TOHER (1882). Hith John Palmer's earlier nvsmzv or THE BLACK B1°9"P"‘°“‘ °"‘* R°‘“'° “ " ‘
TOHER (see #316), Hernon's Louisa is a superb specimen of this P-178'
Gothic type and singled out for special mention by Monta ue _ , . _ - gurre
Sumners as "a romance of the very first order.“ The Black Toger . cr't‘Ca1 S¥"°p51?' The]‘§t°"t?;H‘S:Iiigezirihgfwrizing of ah
which stands "in the thickest part of an extensive and gloomy Theatr? aPP1ieq “'5 me.” Eama Cr ettian intgrregnum. Like
forest in Lancashire" literally dominates the romance. In de- historical Gothic placed.inwAvERLEY0m:1S° pub‘ished in 1814 the
signing all action around it, Hernon never forgets the inport of the Y°""9 "GT9 °f 5c°tt 5 , Ha o]itica] toyatties ’ The
his architectural title as so many inferior Gothic novelists hero of the tale chan9e5 azwleé ?ish_gc0ttiSh border is a th°r_
seem to do. Nor does he clutter the landscape with castles, f°rtresS °f.Rav§nSw°1g 0" E tggs bqlize crumbling royal power
dungeons, and caverns or muddy the story with DerPleXiﬂg °“9§1y G°t"‘9 iite an BS:rvei'tica{mevents remain less important
genealogical enigmas. The Black Tower is the focal locale for d"r‘"9 th§ c‘v1‘ ““f- "qt no ‘r,s metodrama an exact _revet5ai
mystery and terror throughout the book and like previous tha" G°tq‘C eve"t5 1“ .1 T enef the Gothic and the historica] in
buildings in Gothic fiction it assumes|a personality of its own. of $Cott_s own proportioning o
The proprietor of the Black Tower is Mr. Gerrard, the father of his fiction.
Louisa. He is known to make ni htl excursions to the sealed " . ~ Eu Ann
compartment at the towervs Pinnaclg and often descends in the 177. H099, James. THE THRgERPEg;kﬁcE0FLo:Qg& _0Eang:::, H:2:t,,ReeS’
morning in an entranced condition. The contents of the upper HITCHCRAFT, A B0? 2 - - 1
chamber and the reason why Gerrard secludes hinself are not re- 0'me* and “f°Y"- _8§ '
vealed‘until the final pages of the romance after the distresses I "°°@f" Reed1t1°“;Zf.°:eHiStor (a witchcraft Segment)
of Louisa have been resolved. These two Gothic plots--the mys- , G?th‘c T¥pe' Got Q ‘e r h Data, Riese Teut_ "Janet H099 und
terious activities of the father and the sufferings of the $ B‘°9raph1ca1 a"d esﬁé Ch n r0&antik L ARCHIV FUR DA5 5TuD1uM
daughter--are carefully interworked. A local gang of outlaws led der ruma" deg :23 $33 EITERATUREN’ 198 (1951); 145-154;
by Captain Rifle makes trouble for Louisa each time she leaves DEB NEUEREN SP Ac S H055 B t n . fwayne (TEA5 Number 311),
the sanctuary of her father's tower. They seize her for the Sm‘th’ Nelsun’ JANE ' OS 0
usual sexual purposes, but Captain Rifle proves himself to be of 1977'
the beni n brigand t e when he rescues Louisa from his own men _ , . _ , - their
and retgrns her unhzrmed to father and tower. Denied access to CritiC§1 S¥"°ps‘§' ﬁoggiz bi225:2‘3¥SiOn:vglSevi?YeHi5 View
Louisa, Rifle's confederates capture and injure Sir Frederick psychological lHC€ﬂStt] 0 ted h Gothic and Faustia" motifs‘
Orion, a stellar young man who has declared his love for her. of SC°t§‘5h hiSt°r¥ ‘S ggrmez ttery Scott and his awareness of
The scenes showing Louisa tending the wounded Frederick in her His friendshlp Vlth ‘E Gathic exanules in his historicat
tower refuge furnish a sentimental counterpoint to the coarser Scott s OW" Iqdebteqngﬁs 0 do Ho ,5 writing Two distinct but
Gothic action. Meanwhile, a female aDDarition in white, a sort @°'e‘S certa1n1y. 1" uencg thggstructuré O} THE THREE pERIL$
of Spectre without a turret, roams the forests in the vicinity mtegrated "a”‘?twe§ cwpglie of rival women and border warfare
of the Black Tower. Mutilated bodies are found leading all to OF MAN‘ The h15tqr1cg ti.°-{tor of Sata"ic.co"trattS, devi]_
suSDect that the ghostly woman in white is the supernatural Precedes th€ Fa“St'a"' ° 1c b n gets The Hove] ape"; in media;
resident of Gerrard's locked chamber at the too of the tower. In ‘Sh ?@*@"“‘°"‘» and dem°21ctt§Sﬁ Kin‘ Robert It (1371_139o)
order that the happiness of Louisa and Frederick may ensue, the res “'th the army of the co I g’

150 THE FIRST GUTHICS
besieging the English before Roxburgh Castle. Hogg resorts to a ' ‘”"’
piece of inventive history by having the Scottish commander,
Douglas, dress his soldiers as cows to trick the hungry English
garrison and thereby gain entrance to the castle. The story of
the Scottish ruse is accompanied by an anecdote of internecine
rivalry between the Scottish princess Margaret and the English
Lady Jane Howard. Hogg's ardent nationalism is asserted by his ‘
arranging for the resourceful Margaret to entrap and then
deliver the rather inept Lady Jane Howard to Douglas. The witch-
craft story is an offshoot of the Roxburgh siege. Desiring a
token of military success, one of the Scottish besiegers sug-
gests that they solicit a favorable prophecy from the wizard,
Michael Scott. In drawing this devil-figure, Hogg probably
referred to Scott's correspondence with J.G. Lockhart on the
subject in LETTERS ON DEMONOLOGY AND HITCHCRAFT. Michael Scott
is a hero-villain of Marlovian proportions. For the delegation
of besiegers from Roxburgh Castle, he holds a demonic banquet
where food vanishes when touched and where the seneschal of
Scott's own castle is detonated by gunpowder for the diversion
of the guests. These acts of demonic mischief are so entertain-
ing to the Scottish soldiery that another feast is called for.
Their original purpose in seeking out the sorcerer is now
entirely diverted as they become willing victims of Michael
Scott's manifold illusions. Finally, Scott transforms his guests
into beasts in mimicry of Circe and plans to establish himself
as the Antichrist by challenging Lucifer to a contest of power.
Having at last overreached himself, the victorious Satan col-
lects the soul of the wizard. Having failed in their attempt to
extract an omen of victory from the cunning wizard, the soldiers
(who have been restored to manhood by a friar in their ranks)
return to resume the Roxburgh siege. Hogg's odd book is never-
theless a coherent and synthesized presentation of the histori-
cal and the satanic as well as a preparation for the Gothic
qualities of Hogg's psychological masterpiece, THE PRIVATE MEM-
OIRS AND CONFESSIONS OF A JUSTIFIED SINNER (see #178).
178. Hogg, James. THE PRIVATE MEMOIRS AND CONFESSIONS OF A JUSTIFIED
SINNER. London : Longman, Hurst, Rees, Orme, Brown and Green,
1824.
Modern Reeditions: Grove Press, 1959, ed. Andre Gide; Oxford
UP, ed. John Carey.
Gothic Type: Doppelganger or Double Story (terror-horror
modes)
Biographical and Research Data: Lee, L.L. "The Devil’s Fig-
ure: James Hogg'$ JUSTIFIED SINNER,“ STUDIES IN SCOTTISH
LITERATURE, 3 (1966): 230-239; Bloedé, Barbara R. “James
Hogg's PRIVATE MEMOIRS AND CONFESSIONS OF A JUSTIFIED SINNER: Ti’
The Genesis of the Double," ETUDES ANGLAISES 26 (1973)
_ . = ' . _ ’_ I //‘
174-186; Chianese, Robert L. "James Hogg's CONFESSIONS OF A . 14.11‘ I L; /%i e /1'/I /
JUSTIFIED SINNER: An Anatomy of Terror" MYSTERY AND C444}//1£"’ ”"’ - ,
_ DETECTION ANNUAL, (1973); 97-112; Kearns, Michael s. "Intui- J ) '  ’- /
tion and Narration in James Hogg's CONFESSIONS," STUDIES IN f2€h171»/1 //Q . , 1-Z (z(4- - -
SCOTTISH LITERATURE, 13 (1978): 81-91; Mason, Michael York. __‘
"The Three Burials in Hogg's JUSTIFIED SINNER,“ STUDIES IN '
SCOTTISH LITERATURE, 13 (1978): 15-23.
Allydpd um A. .4.,\',.1,.---W». n»-Q.

FIRST GUTHICS 151
Critical Synopsis: No psychological narrative to emerge from
the Gothic tradition is darker or more convoluted than Hogg's
tale of the Satanic double. His powerful and peculiar novel of
the lacerations of the inner life also investigates the degener-
ate effects of religious fanaticism (in this case, a sadistic
and self-indulgent sect of Scottish Presbyterianism), on the
possessed sinner, Robert Hringham. The tale not only deals with
the agonies of the double life; the story itself is told twice,
first in objective form by an editor somewhat in the manner of a
report and case study of the amnesiac and schizophrenic Hring-
ham's stalking and assaulting of his half-brother, George
Colwan. The tale then is retold in the form of a second,
subjective narrative or "confession" written by Hringham him-
self. The memoirs have been deposited in Hringham's casket and
come to light when Hogg locates the suicide's grave and exhunes
the body. The eccentric structure of the novel contributes
forcefully to its Gothic themes and scenes: Hringham's mad
interruption of his half-brother's game of tennis and his
relentless stalking of Colwan; Colwan's confrontation with his
brother's apparitional face "dilated to twenty tines the natural
size"; George's Colwen's mysterious murder with suspicion fall-
ing on his tormenting twin, Hringham, whose desire to spill his
brother's blood has seemingly been instigated by the perverted
Calvinism of the nmther. Of the mother's warped faith, the
editor remarks: "She was the most severe and gloomy of all big-
ots to the principles of the Reformation. Hers were not the
tenets of the great reformers, but theirs mightily overstrained
and deformed.“ The inside narrative repeats the brutal slaying
of Colwan from the possessed Hringham's point of view. It is
less a confession than an anguished endeavor to separate and
rectify his own identity from the vicious hegemony of the mother
and the demonic presence of a dark stranger named Gil-Hartin in
Hringham's life. Gil-Martin is Hringham's physical double al-
though he may be the sinner's moral opposite. Hringham's confes-
sion is nightmarish, intermittently irrational, and full of
unexplained contortions of fact. Furthermore, the editor's
framing narrative is of no value in determining the true moral
nature of Hringham's character. Encouraged by the perversity of
Gil-Martin who lures Hringham into a series of hideous crimes
against innocent people, the sinner undergoes one of the darkest
of Gothic fates: total disintegration of self. Did he or did he
not kill his own brother? Are the atrocities which mark his life
his own doing or the work of his fiendish double? Is the diabol-
ic Gil-Martin real or some hallucinated monster dwelling in
Hringham's subconscious mind? Hogg carries the solipsistic cri-
sis to its limits when Hringham expresses the most profound of
Gothic terrors, the terror of self: ‘I was," admits Hringham, "a
being incomprehensible to myself. Either I had a second self,
who transacted business in my likeness, or else my body was at
tines possessed by a spirit over which it had_no control, and of
whose actions my own soul was wholly unconscious.’ Finding no
exit from the haunted castle of the mind, Hringham completes his
dannation by yielding to Gil-Martin's temptations to suicide.
Clearly, a new and deeper vein of the Gothic had been exposed by
Hogg in THE CONFESSIONS, a Gothic in which the primal monster

152 ‘ me FIRST oomzcs
ms FIRST BOTHICS 153
becomes "the self behind the self con l  - _ 1
ledges that the confrontation with 2:: egnknlcﬁ ‘Z27?’ ?§“"$le ‘ b@¢°"'e$ the "l°‘1l"' °‘ C“"°"'§ i"f‘°"ed ie°‘°"§-Y- A"'"“'5 '6‘
supreme Gothic experience when he confesses just before his sui_ ‘ formist enterprise swiftly deteriorates into a drama of lecher-
clde, “I not only looked around me with terror at everyone that ous fli9ht ahd Phhiult B5 cIift°"'5 "°ti°"5 °f "hat "°me" are
approached, but I was become a terror to myself, I dared not for clash with her plans for his philosophical education. Henley
look at my face in a glass, for I shuddered at my own image and » is repaid for his highminded humanitarianism by being thrown by
likeness.“ If Mrs. Radcliffe's older style of rationalized 5°tn_ Clifton into a madhouse. Anna‘s»ardor for humanity's rational
it 5t°'!teIIi"9 Clarifies and explicates the mysteries and ' promise wins for her the violent onslaughts of Clifton who is
confusions as the narrative progresses, Hogg's new Gothic re- °"Ce f°'e5t5IIed TF0" '5Pi"9 Ahhﬂ 0"]! "he" 5he f°rCe5 5 d°°'
verses this process by its cumulative distortions and p&rp]exi- shut against his hand. He have in this scene a good exannle of
ties to the point where psychological reality is shaken to it; ‘ domestic Gothic excitement displacing the novel's didactic pur-
very foundations. Both Hogg's theme of the inrninent disintegra- l><>ses- with the bruised and palvitatihu maiden O" one side of e
ti°" °f the Self ﬂﬂd his procedure of demolishing all rational door and the infuriated beast on the other side, the situation
categories would reappear in the mature Gothics of Poe and ‘ is thoroughly Gothic. As Anna protests her virtue, the bloody
Hi"‘h°'"e- * claw of Clifton's entrapped hand grasps after her. Her efforts
to elevate the rakish Clifton to her own philosophic level have
179- H°I¢r°ft» Th°mi$- ANNA ST. IVES. London ; Shgpperggn and instead unleashed a sexual monster. Holcroft's manner of extri-
ReyhbId$s 1792- ' cating his heroine and restoring rational virtue to its high
Modern Reeditions: None f place is to revert to the idealogical victory of reason over
Gothic Type: Novel of Seduction and Radical Ideas (terror ‘ passion. Shamed by the virtuous resistance of his victim and her
elements) persistent charity toward him, Clifton grows to reason and self-
B‘°9'aPhI¢ﬂI ﬂhd Research Data: Colby, EIbridgg_ "A Bibli_ control. Having eluded a final rape attempt, Anna climbs a wal
ography of Thomas Holcroft," BULLETIN OF THE NEH YORK PUBLIC and inmediately reorganizes her canpaign to win Clifton's trust
LIBRARY (1922); Tompkins, POPULAR NOVEL In ENGLAND pp_Z11 » . and belief in a better self. Faced with the exemplary behavior
300» 303-305, 335; Foster, HISTORY OF THE PRE-ROMANTic NQVEE of Anna and the revolutionary endurance of Frank Henley, Clifton
IN ENGLAND, pp.225-272; Kelly, Gary. THE ENGLISH JACOBIN Nov- recants his life of energetic vice by wedding himself (ideolog-
EL (1780-1805). London : Oxford UP, 1976. * ically) to the liberal ideas of the two reformers. Anna's fina
_ _ letter to Henley celebrates the triumph of revolutionary reason
Critical Synopsis: Thomas Holcroft (1745-1809) is remembered . over aristocratic passion. It proclaims the coming of "that
for his Gothic melodramas, THE INQUISITOR (1798) and A TALE OF bi state of society, when personal property shall no longer exist,
MYSTERY (1892), but it Has as a revolutionary novelist that he J when the whole torrent of mind shall unite in inquiry after the
found a way of joining the popular appeal of Gotnicism with the 1 beautiful and the true, when it shall no longer be diverted by
intellectual seriousness of the ideological fiction of the it th°5e i"5i9"If1¢i"t P"h5"1t5» tb hhiﬁh the abshrd 7011195, Which
1790's. Although Holcroft is usually categorized with Godwin and I ori9i"ate in our false “ahtss 9iVe birth»-"he" I"diVid"ﬂ1 551'
Bi9e,ﬂ$ B “JaC0bin' novelist, his modes of storytelling and G fishness shall he unknown, and when all shall labour for the
probings of the emotional lives and consciences of his T good of all.“ But the arrival of Anna's intellect at this com-
characters are closer to Richardson than to his fellow literary 3' mﬂﬂiii hiﬂbiﬂ has bee" Severely delayed by her 5°bhi¢ idYe"t"Te5
radicals. ANNA ST. IVES combines plenty of dark passion with the ehrwte to the revvlutieharrs paradise-
lofty and liberal aspirations of its main characters as it en-
velops its characters in a webwork of dangerous ideas and even ? 180. Holford, Margaret. HARBECK OF HOLFSTEIN. London : Rodwell and
more lethal emotions. The heroine, Anna St. Ives, an ardent ex- Martin. 1329-
ponent of the life of reason, travels to revolutionary France Z M°der" Reediti°"5: N°"e
from reactionary England where she hopes to achieve two goals. I} Gethic Type: Gethifieﬂ hi5t°'¥ (haturil h°r'°T)
First, she will witness firsthand the remaking of a society ;~ 51°9'6DhiCaI ahd Re5ea'5h Data: N°"E
founded on the tenets of rational liberalism to bring liberty, '?$' _ _ _ .
9q"aIltY. ihd fraternity for all. Second, she will meet and 5ub_ 55 Critical Synopsis: The character names in Holford s novel are
sequently reform the young wastrel and aristocratic libertine h; taken directly from Shelley's Gothic principals in ST. IRVYNE:
C°ke 5Iift0h- But Anna's dedication to these cause; is divertea §» . OR, THE ROSICRUCIAN (see #405). Presiding over this Gothic ro-
by her romantic interest in another young man, Frank Henley the 25 mince is the resourceful sadist, Harbeck of Holfstein, battle
5?" °f her fitheT'§ bailiff. Henley's Jacobin Qpiniqng along 3 companion to Baron Hilhelm of Marchfeldt and avowed enemy of the
with his disregard of their class differences make Henley nearly Baron's other wartime friend, Casimir Vallenstein. Between wars,
'35 att'i¢tiVe T0 Anna as the proposed object of her refafmist the sinister Nolfstein comes to the attention of the Baron's nu-
zeal. In the letter exchanges among the three (the novel is bile sister, Louisa, who has found a domineering-portrait of the
epistolary), tensions mount as clifton lusts after Anna's h0d_y ferocious Helfslein among her dead brother's heleh9inss- I" the
and attempts a series of rapist attacks while Henley soon true Gothic manner, the eyes of the portrait transfix and pos-
sess Louisa until she becomes delirious with desire to meet and

154 THE FIRST ournrcs rue FIRST GUTHICS 155
be owned by the man himself. Yet, her brother and others have I the parents she had never known. She also comes into contact
warned Louisa against any involvement with the Byronic destroyer with the world of dangerous and deluding males in the 99'5"" °f
of women. Nhen Nolfstein retires to his castle near Vienna, Sir Francis Errol, a suave seducer who is "adept in the Chester-
Louisa follows with the intent of giving herself to her broth- fieldian plan of administering flattery, under every form but
er's wicked friend. Events at Uolfstein's castle follow all of its genuine garb.“ The miserable phase of her quest for identity
the Gothic prescriptions. After marrying Louisa, Holfstein makes begins when she is cast into prison on some undeclared charge.
her into his suffering prisoner alternately subjecting her to . I Just previously, she has received a letter from a French lady,
abuse or negligence. He orders Vallenstein brought to the castle Madane de Saussure, telling her that she is Rosalia's real
for the brutal amusement of his troops and he enjoys every tear mother. Since there is a large inheritance it Stake, R°5illﬂ
which Louisa sheds as Holfstein forces her to watch suspects that this disclosure has something to do with her
Vallenstein's torments. Having exhausted all of his cruel unexplained incarceration in a Gothic castle and dungeon where
amusements, Holfstein turns to opium and is inspired to destroy the spectre nentioned oD0l°9eti¢3llY I" H0l5YeID'5 Preface
the castle and all its occupants during one of his crazed opium finally glides into her life. Also coming in on cue is the young
trances. The novel concludes with the enactment of Holfstein's rescuer, Arthur Lester, who assists Rosalia in gaining her free-
9U"P0Wd€F Plot as he arranges to blow up his own castle, but as dom and inheritance. Although the novel has some powerful terror
the castle walls explode and as the turrets topple upon Holf- scenes, the reviewers judged that H°l5tei"'5 t'“9 f°rte was
stein and his cohorts, Louisa and Vallenstein are liberated by horror.
the blast. The miraculous deliverance of the victims at the
climax coupled with the downfall of the villain satisfied the ‘ 182. Holstein, Anthony Frederick. THE ASSASSIN OF ST. GLENROY: OR,
conditions of good Gothic dénouement and had been a standard THE AXIS OF LIFE. London : Minerva-Press for A.K. Newman,
feature of the Gothic formula since Halpole's CASTLE OF OTRANTO. I810. '
Hhat is unusual and even astonishing in the literary development Modern Reeditions: None
of the Gothic is the durability of the fall of the castle as a . Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (domestic elements)
means of restoring justice well into the Nineteenth Century. Biographical and Research Data: Blakey- MINERVA PRE55,
.67-68.
1. Holstein, Anthony Frederick. LOVE, MYSTERY, AND MISERY! London pp .
: Minerva-Press for A.K. Newman, 1810. Critical Synopsis: The pseudonymous Anthony Frederick
Modern Reeditions: None Holstein supplied the Minerva-Press with a dozen highly
Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (horror-terror modes) marketable titles between I808 and I815. Several of these books
Bl°9r6Phical and Research Data: Blakey, MINERVA PRESS, p.68; were sentimental novels with some Gothic elemenl$, but FY" "ere
Howells, LOVE, MYSTERY, AND MISERV: FEELING IN GOTHIC FIC- genuine Gothic shockers of considerable merit. The Gothic genre
TION, pp.I5, 23, s1. a did not generally receive much praise frqn the ¢'1F'°$» b"t
Holstein's ASSASSIN OF GLENRDY is a prominent exception to the
Critical Synopsis: The pseudonymous Gothic prodigy, Anthony general animosity toward Gothic fiction found in the influential
Frederick Holstein, supplied the Minerva-Press of Lane and New- ‘ CRITICAL REVIEH. As his reputation increased, even the most
man with a dozen variegated Gothics from 1809 to 1815. The sex Gothic of his novels brought favorable notices. In November,
and the identity of the novelist remain unknown. Holstein's , 1813, the reviewer sunmed up the career of this Gothic craftsman
technical cunmand of the opposite methods of Radcliffean terror , T writing that "He know of no horror-monger of this present age
and Lewisite horror won praise from the reviewers. The title of .§§ like Hr. Anthony Frederick Holstein; he has the faculty of
the romance enumerates the three necessary components of the § whisking us from a murder to a ball, from a gloomy dingle
Radcliffean myth of the young woman removed from her family, § haunted by a frightful nun to a concert room, and this with so
then castellated, menaced and made miserable, and finally (also 3 much agreeable facility that we hardly know where we ﬂrE- In
improbably) released from the Gothic depths by the timely " fact he carries off the palm for murderous writing from all his
arrival of a long-missing lover. Some of this Radcliffean pat- brother quill-drivers of the day." Holstein's ability to dis-
tern of action must be inferred from the edition of LOVE, cover and extend that point where the Gothic world of nightmare
MYSTERY, AND MISERY! contained in the Sadleir-Black Collection, inpinges upon the social world of high fashion and passionate
for the novel is incorrectly bound. Page and chapter numbers are intrigue is evident in the craftsmanship of THE ASSASSIN OF
severely out of order. Volume one, for example, has two chapters GLENROV. The plot of the novel is perhaP5 ‘b@5t _de5¢"b°d_ 35
XIV and different titles for the two chapters. The romance is Gothic a la nnde, but its sordidly pessimistic ending makes it a
introduced by the author's "Apology for the Appearance of a rare entrée on the Minerva-Press Gothic menu which tyviﬁﬂlly
,Spectre," followed by some Udolphoesque preliminaries. The hero- served up only-happy endings. Here, TETTOT i"d tragedl aT°_"°t
ine, Rosalia Sutherland, loses her guardian, Mrs. Haveland, to assuaged by virtue and cannon sense nor is the_ Gothic nlght
death and is sent to live with Lord and Lady Falconer where she finally driven off by rational dawnings_ as in the ordinary
is to acquire the social graces. Here, she meets the Falconers' Radcliffean thriller. Holstein's other Gothic title of ‘IBID,
somewhat bohemian daughter, Agatha, and begins to wonder about LOVE, MYSTERY, AND MISERY1 (see #181), can stand as an episodic

i .
156 fH£ FIRST comics i _ me FIRST conacs 157
deSCription of the phases of the characters! iives in THE ASSAS_ i Critical Synopsis: The 24-page chapbook has a lurid colored
SIN OF GLENROY. The novel begins as a love story rapidl engraving showing the villain in the vaults. The tale takes the
transforms itself into a sequence of horrid mysteries ahd Gothig form Of B" eight-year retrospective by Count S. who recalls
events, and terminates in agony, gloom, and the Extinction of in detail how he had been compelled to marry Eugenia. Thus, he
rational bliss. Lady Augusta Cameron, a woman of fashion 7 imprisoned her in his solitary castle in Swabia "whose turrets,
breeding, and intelligence, secretly inves Percy Lennox a ma; 1 had not the moon shone full upon them, might never had attracted
Of mueh charm but no social standing_ A5 the ciandestine’ reia_ i 5 , the notice of any traveller."‘The narrator broods constantly on
tionship deepens, Lady Augusta discovers that Percy is a master i. Q revenge, presumably the "horrible revenge" of the chapbook‘s
of infinite disguises and seems to be leading several mysterious ii tit19- Hhiie he begins by hating Eugenia, he ends by lusting
llVe5 quite apart from his romantic aiiegianre to her His , after her. Strange shifts of passion do not take very long in a
elaborate masquerade is rudely exposed one morning during a park chapb°°k' "I retired to my Dun apartment overwhelmed "it" VExa'
Strﬂll when Lady Augusta find; penny bending over a mutiiated ’ tion and resentment. Love, pride, and resentment took ful
body, the first of several inconvenient corpses strewn about the p°55e55i°“ of my S°“]' and I resolved ta urge a quick cumpletion
"0Vel- Percy attempts to explain the sitnatinn by informin her ‘ of the nuptial rites." At the time of his secret memoir, Count
that his is a life ‘enveloped in mystery overwhelmed in Sgame ‘ S. has fed all of these base feelings by imprisoning his
and covered in ignominy," but the appalled Augusta names Perci wif€_a5d children and menacing each with various forms of
"the assassin of G]E“r°y’H spurns his iove’ and uplunges into g ‘ premature burial. But the Count has apparently made the mistake
V0TteX Of dissipation" beggming a iead figure in London-S cir_ of reading his memoirs aloud for his own satisfaction and is
Cleﬁ of vice. The guilty Percy pur5u95 assuming many benevoient I overheard by Arnulph, brother of Eugenia‘: father, Count Zim-
identities to recover Augusta's respect and to curb her more] i chaw, who immediately slays the narrator and liberates his
deCliﬂe- T0 humiliate him, she marrigg an eideriy nobieman cho_ ' sister from the solitary castle. This novel twist seems to ful-
Sen by her parents and take; up nith the rake_ Sir Feiix The i fill in grisly ironic terms the wish expressed in the final
novel moves toward a dark climax amid a tangle of Gothic ‘pa$- paragraph of the Count's memoir: "Time has not extinguished my
sions and ghastly events. Unable to reverse Lady Augusta's vol- ' hatred, nor qlutted my vengeance; my death must forerun theirs;
untary degradation or to win back her love even though he proves then, and not till then, will their sufferings end. How strong
his innocence and noble birth, Percy kills himself. By eschewing h i5 the Pi55i°" 07 i°Ve. b"t hﬂh mhch 5tT0"9E' the Pa55l°" _°f
the standard fairytale ending so typical of the sentimentalized V revenge!" Cast in the shape of a revenger's memoir and contain-
guthic romance, Hoistein-S ASSASSIN OF GLENR0i distinguished ing the Gothic punishment of live burial, this late chapbook
1t5elf as one of the darker Specimgng of the gothic Spirit_ might have served as the ideal model for Poe's famous story,
183 HORATIO AND CA ‘ ‘The Cask of Amontillado."
- HILLA: OR THE NUNS F . _ -
Lemoine, 1804. , 0 ST MARY London i Ann 185. THE HORRORS OF THE SECLUDED CASTLE: OR, VIRTUE TRIUMPHRNT.
Modern Reeditions: None London : T. and R. Hughes, 1807.
Gothic Type: Gothic chapbook (Radcliffean imitation with some Q M°dE'" Reediti°"5i N°"e
Eewisite horror) , Gothic Type: Gothic chapbook
iographical and Research Data; Ha I Bio ra hical and Research Data: None
THEWTHIC SCHOOL’ DI“. rt, SHILLING SHOCKERS or i, 9 P
-_‘ Critical Synopsis: The 72> page chapbook is an extremely
Critical Synopsis: Dozens of standard Gnthic events are i- complex imitation of Clara Reeve's OLD ENGLISH BARON (see #355).
Drﬂeessed into the making of the thirty-5ix_page shiiiing Sh0ck_ ~.‘ The genealogical gears do eventually mesh, but the process is
eP- Horatio is the typical young herd of Gothic fiction and his "\ complicated and probably detrimental to the moments of
beiﬂved Camilla does not differ in emotions or experiences from .1 supernatural thrill since the reader is forced to concentrate
the hefﬂihe Of sensibility found thrdughdut the ionger Gothic; ;,. hard on the multiple clues to identity and secret relationships
She is visited by the ghost of her father, pursued by monks bent iii woven ihto every scene. The principal characters, places, and
0" sexual violence through the underground of 5t_ Mary and 3%. events have their equivalents in the chapbooker's longer _Gothic
rescued by Horatio who brings her from convent catacomb to’ the ‘d€ i sources. The period is the Sixteenth Century at the height of
altar on the thirty-sixth page. The publisher Lemoine traded §7 its civil commotion during the widespread devastation of the
i" C0"de"SotiDhS of the plots of Lani; and Rndciiffe bat aiso ‘Q monasteries. The border Castle of Glendenen. seat of Lord Don-
occasionally issued full-length Gothics. ’ ‘§' ald, is one of the few edifices to escape the King's canpaign of
' destruction until the guileful Lord Antley proposes a siege of
134- -THE HORRIBLE REVENGE: OR, THE A$$h551n or {Hg SQL[TARy CASTLE Glendenen. Antley overruns the Castle and Donald and his infant
London : J. Fairburn, 1828. ' son are assumed dead in the assault. Antley now moves to occupy
Modern Reeditions: None the stronghold with the assistance of his brother, Count Horti-
Gothic Type: Gothic chapbook mer. These preliminaries set the stage for the Gothic novel's
Biographical and Regeargh Data; hone gradual grinding out of justice and retribution. Mortimer's

158 THE FIRST BOTHICS ll , TH; FIRST gon-ucs 159
daughter and Antley's niece is the lovely Anna soon to be in-
v , ‘ l ‘ , Critical Synopsis: Hith embellishments taken from the knovel;
stalled by her powermad uncle in a secluded castle to deprive ‘ of Mr; Radcliffe the romance appears to be a rewor inq °
her of the inheritance after th d t f
e ea h o her father, Count 1 ti; 5 'th's OLD MANOR HOUSE (see #423). An ancient estate,
Mortimer. The secluded castle is the usual Gothic warehouse, a char 0 E ml d t d lt secret
_ _ , a fated family, ghastly sounds, an en rance an ex_ via
place of ‘strange doings, of lost lives, and of strange noises. passageways are among the ostensible Gothic properties.
Doors are heard to open and shut of themselves." The Gothic
reader has been here before Anna is guarded b th n
- y e you 9 l V " R b t. THE MYSTERIES or FERNEV CASTLE: A ROMANCE or THE
shepherd Lewis ‘who looks in r ' - T - 188. Huish, 0 er
, , appea ance something above his . - FIFTEENTH g5nTuRv_ London ; Henry Colburn, 1810.
situation,‘ but the young pair are quickly separated since this > '
_ , _ _ _ _ _ Modern Reeditions: None
is a mandatory condition of this type of Gothic. Lewis is quite Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (terror mode)
accustomed to being lost or misplaced since he was found as an Biographical and Research Data: None
infant in a drifting basket by the old cottager who has raised
him, Mr Gordon From here the ch b k
. . , ap oo tests the credulity of C ‘g’ l S n psis: The novel is an instance of disP"19d
the reader by having Anna locked away in the deserted wing of auth;;5h§E_ Th: Edition of THE MVSTERIES OF FERNEV CASTLE in the
the secluded castle while Lewis incredibly sails for Madrid only 5ad]eir-Black Gothic Collection is signed by "G. Lambe, esq.
to have his ship seized by Algerian pirates when it is driven
_ _ _ For the critical synopsis, see entry #222 under Lambe-
ashore on the Barbary Coast It is now time to Jolt the read r
. e
with an equally incredible reuni n f l f
o o overs ollowed by a dis- 189 Hugs“ Robert, THE BROTHERS: OR, THE CASTLE OF NIELO, A
pensation of rewards and punishments. Living with the Algerian t ' ' - '
_ ROMANCE. London . Hilliam Emans, 1820.
leader, Soliman, is a beautiful young woman,--Anna as it turns I Moder" Reeditiong; None
out. One is not suppose to ask how she relocated from the haunt- G°thi¢ Type; Pure or high Gothic (no supernatural elements) ‘
ed wing of the secluded castle to a Moslem harem, but she has, BiggraphlC6l and Research Data: Summers, GOTHIC QUE5T, D-195-
and the Goth offers an elaborate explanation and itinerary. Re- Askew Leonard_ "Robert Huigh," NOTES & QUERIES, 176 (Feb-
turning to England, Lewis tells Anna about her family and ruary’ 1939); 445; Sunnmrs, GOTHIC BIBLIOGRAPHY, pp.69-71.
destiny and she responds by explaining to Lewis that he is not a '
shepherd's son but the son of Lord Donald supposedly murdered b
. - hip
Y 't' l S nopsis: A violent fraternal contest for owners
her uncle. As the ship docks, Lord Antley dies conveniently of 2;; Eggtle if Nielo on the shores of Lake Geneva 1S the_ cen-
erasing all perils and clearin the titl t Gl d ‘ '
g e o en enen Castle. trai situation of Huish‘s Gothic romance. The castle is ghe
Hhy did this overworked plot and these repetitious characters ' l t ° 3
r ' f the Lindamores. The Lindamore ine consis s _
continue to attract the Gothic readership? One answer may lie in 3?§éﬁ:ﬁ5Se:hd° chivalrous father and two extremely dissimilar
the pleasure that arises out of repetition. Like an obsessive Son; The Abel and Cain scions of the House of Lindamore are the
melody or musical cadence, this sort of little Gothic myth of brother; Frederic and Leopold. Frederic is extremely "i"d5°me-
family success had iven l ' ’
g p easure when heard before and the I good and favored by the father; Leopold is extremely uﬂly, bid.
audience sinply desired to hear it again. '
and feared by the father_ Leopold is so totally nefarious in
almost seems a parody °f the 'G°th1c 'novel S Test
ms. HUMQMIOII, Mary. THE MYSTERIES or THE FOREST. London 1 ' :?§§,§::§,h§.omype, the half-evil man-_His favor"? d“'°'$‘°"‘
Minerva-Press for A.K. Newman, 1810. include burning down cathedrals, decimating monasteries and cgna
Modern Reeditions: None , vents raping nuns, and slaughtering priests. Everyone is_g a
Gothic Type: Sentimental Gothic (imitation of Mrs. Radclif- “ when Leopold leaves Nielo Castle to practice his atrog; ieS
fe's ROMANCE OF THE FOREST) _5 e1Sewhere in Europe and everyone is frightened when Leopo re-
Biographical and Research Data: None =' ' ' '
Critical Synopsis: A close imitation of Mrs. Radcliffe‘s
?e5
h t Ortano who seems to
turns to Nielo wzthda g§p%gé1:$a§Ob§TLéDpo]d asaa Sort of u"der_
givg Eﬁege jgeit e Frederic who has stayed at Nielo Castle to
u
I 0 s -
ROMANCE or THE FOREST (see #348), the novel has the Gothic  Suppgrt hisprathel-l, is himself the father of the lovely “deli??-
mechanics but lacks much Gothic artistry. The adventures of Mrs. id Adeiine-5 lgquacious and unreliable governess, Mademoiset e
Radcliffe‘s heroine, Adeline, are preserved without alteration, i Sch]affe"hau5en, is 3 more-than-satisfactory comic charaﬁ ET
but La Motte's bandit career is unaccountably shifted to a sub- whose time on the gtage of the English novel is yet t° §°me-
plot.
h
Before very Tong, Leopold goes to work to destroy the aVD'"e55
. ' ' brother
1' , d s rp the castle s ownership fF°“ “ls ‘
187. THE HOUSE OF MARLEY. Minerva-Press for Hilliam Lane, 1797. g£egg€ic?e 5:1»; uortano as his ambidexter. Leopold threaten:
' Moder" Reeditl°"s: N°"e - Adeline's virginity and has Frederic removed §0 3" adJa§e"s
Gothic Type: Sentimental Gothic (imitation of Smith's OLD ruined fortress. Hith Frederic and Adeline occupied._;?: Vggzﬁgr
MANOR HOUSE) d te his full attention to annoying
Biographical and Research Data: None Leopold can evo
. - h- b ther‘s birthright. uith Leopold
gggacgntlgeiﬁbfulloco2:l3l,l:her;¥5t9'l°“5 f°'ce5 °f good begln

1 . 151
160 me FIRST cnnucs , , THE FIRST GNHICS
19
l - - ~ s traced, a prehended, con-
to assert themselves according to the true Gothic pattern of ‘ of "ﬁr Iéanzﬁnzd "h§?5ﬁ?;d::e:2;e:€ expectedlyp Gothifies and
such works as THE CASTLE or OTRANTO. Adolphus Rosenheim, a “met! 1",, esg these ram as he offers the case of Maria
chivalric young Austrian who has met and fallen in love with nenia iosaa norrible Caveat for young women who wuu]d misplace
Adeline, is the chief agent of justice. He secretly infiltrates tar-an gffeetiohs and betray their parents‘ care. In the early
the Castle of Nielo, then begins a campaign of investigation to I e‘? f the nave] Corderls emotionai exploitation of
ascertain the whereabouts of Frederic and the fate of old Linda- i p°rt'?nS oi e devotion’ to him is rehaered with great veriSi-
more. In a timely appearance, Adolphus prevents the enforced ' ME??? Se ggdva brooding concentration of dark passion of the
marriage of Adeline to the disgusting Ortano. Aided by Villano, ‘ Q‘ ‘ gee" later in the iehhei iove gtories of Thomas Hardy-
Adolphus pulls coffins out of the family vault thinking that ' ype
Leopold has had the old man buried alive. Leopold's power is now - Robert_ F[TZhLLaN_ London ; Thomas Kelly, 1832
weakening, but _he has a few hideous tricks in reserve. Knowing V 191. Hunggéru Reeditionsz None
that his father is being held prisoner in a nearby convent where Gothic Type, Denestic Gothic (terrgr elements)
Adeline also has sought refuge after her interrupted marriage, Bio ra hicai and Research gate; hone
Leopold and Ortano descend on the abbey with their torches. 9 p
During the confusion surrounding the confla ration and while - a - - ' ‘ decline or at the very least an
Leopold is busy raping more nuns he is accidentally stabbed in €r't1§?ltS€:Oﬁ3}:n-2 g§ih?gt:rti;try is visible in FITZALLAN~
the dark by his compatriot, Ortano, who takes him for Aldolphus. un“‘Se S 1 contains some occasional horrid incident and ftantlc
Swift vindication and reunion for the good Lindamores follows as The "ave but it is not near1y so pnre]y Gothic as Huishls
Leopold's corpse is quickly consigned to an unmarked grave. atmosp erﬁ’ ere The qeheaiogicai problem for the young hero,
Familial sadism, internecine anti-Catholicism, erotic excite- P'l°r $Tte:¥]an' iS_a commcn one: he must Solve the question of
nent, lurid descriptions of burial places, and the colossal HECt°' t‘r§it Qy seeking out the misging father in some very
cruelties of Leopold made Huish's Gothic romance one of the H h1S P? T a1gS Ennente to the discovery of the true father»
boldest and most pitiless experiments in terror of the late > unusual Dc in‘ of age is cﬂnDliCﬂted by em°tl°“a] err°r5
Gothic periud' ’ tjgighlSofcgighteenth-century men of feeli"9= misplaced 1°¥e
' - ~ ~ ' nd faux as. Amons t e
0. Huish, Robert. THE RED mu; A nu: FOUNDED on FACT. London = »' °““"‘*..-‘°"¥°§;Z2Z'  manhoog are Hector's
Knight and Lacey, 1828. r mqre Gog It 3 his ogn uncle and his hazardous affair with Ade-
Modern Reeditions: None n §tdnagp1:gn i femeie iihergine who specializes in corrupting
Gothic Type: Documentary Gothic (natural horror based on an lne or 2 ’ Adeiihe-5 a5;o¢iate, Hilliam Monckton, is also her
actual incident) t {oung hminstructor in the craft of seduction. These two charac-
Biographical and Research Data: suimers, GOTHIC BIBLIOGRAPHY, t"§‘;‘SlnS W the We mm in evil needed for a suw1§§f“l
pp.400-401; Tracy, Ann B. THE GOTHIC NOVEL, 1790-1830. Lex- Ggthic cagt Along with attempting to engineer Hector Fitz-
ington, KY : Kentucky UP, 1981, pp.78-79. a1]an.s faii from virtue, their primary vichiﬁ ii Amegig Zeniﬁfg
j - th ob'ect o ec or 1 Z_
Critical Synopsis: This non-fiction Gothic novel was attrib- i ﬁve’ §“°,§§§§n;S°“'$n:§§°"riigtiuﬁshiﬂs suggest that ""13" "ad
uted by Montague Sumners in A GOTHIC BIBLIOGRAPHY to Hilliam defﬁﬁthiried his gtyle and was reverting to the milder novel of
Maginn under the title, MARIA MARTEN: OR, THE MURDER IN THE RED Sentiment eh¢ gedugtiﬂn,--certaiﬂly an artistic mistake in his
BARN, London : Bennett, 1831. Huish's authorship is established i ase nectar has been told by Ame1ia|s father to evo‘d the. mah_
by Ann B. Tracy in THE GOTHIC NOVEL, 1790-1830. Summers informs ‘ §q°h'and dgmains of Lord Dufresne where his daughter, Anelia, is
us that the Red Barn murder case was a frequent subject for ' b - k t in virtual confinement. Instinctively, the young hero
melodrama in the 1830's and 1840's and had also been converted ' eing Egnat if he acts to free the maiden the deed itielt "ill
into a Victorian "penny dreadful," the cheap panphlet successor f se?siZ hh gegret of his paternity. Lord Dufresne himself bears
to the Gothic chapbook. Tracy informs us that Huish read of the un D ' S resemblance to the uncle who had kidnapped him. Sta-
case under the account of the Polstead murder reported in the g- ﬁ?g1°%im5e1f in the Dufregne household, Hectﬂr i5 9Ve"t"°liY
LONDON TIMES for April 22, 1828, and quickly saw in its sensa- I 1° g 3 his enealogical reward for his persistence. The seduc-
tional details the potential for a non-fiction Gothic. The i gran"; kt n gig exposed and killed by Dufresne's confederate,
victim, Maria Marten, had apparently had a series of liaisons ‘ ﬁr! nﬁrngeie nniie Lard Dufresne finally emerqe5 B5 "eCt°"5
with one, Hilliam Corder, and a final, fatal rendezvous with him ‘ faﬁgr He firm‘ maintains the moral necessity for hi5 l9"9th¥
in the Red Barn. After getting her with child, Corder had prom- .11 a er’ der h gointing out the uses of adversity in the forma-
ised to marry her but the girl vanished before any wedding could ,1: T§5q“e?aStr°"y and decent eheratter in a son. Even the °"¢e-
take place. In a vivid nightmare which Huish expands into- a ‘S. tog 3 Adeiiﬂe is moved and generously retires to a French
frightful Gothic fantasy the mother of Maria Marten witnesses ii W1C e t The reader fee]; thrbugh0Ut that Huish ""d°'ml"9d "ls
the murder in her dream and the subsequent burial of her daugh- ET c°"veae;t ta1ents as a Gothic noveiish by eliminating the trap-
ter beneath the floor of the Red Barn. Upon investigation, I} °!" f terror and v°]uptn°ns vioienee from e pint so potent-
Maria's skeleton is found together with incriminating evidence ‘f p‘ngs O
w

15? ‘ THE FIRST oornrcs l THE FIRST GUTHICS 163
I .
ially grotesque. The result is a book which seems an insipid ‘ not easy te tell 5l"¢e there are refere"°e5 to buth earlier and
debasement of Huish's formerly high Gothic accomplishments. later events.
192. HUMBERT CASTLE: OR, THE ROMANCE or THE RHONE. London :'Minerva- 194. Hunter, Rachel. LETITIA: on, THE CASTLE WITHOUT A SPECTRE. Lon-
Press for Hilliam Lane, 1800. don : Longman and Rees, I801; Norwich : H. Robberds. 1301-
Modern Reeditions: None y Modern Reeditions: None A
Gothic Tyne: Pure or high Gothic (Radcliffean imitation) l I Gothic Type: Domestic fiction
Biographical and Research Data: Sunmers, GOTHIC QUEST . Biosfavhlﬁol ﬂ"d Research Data‘ Lé'Y' LE ROMAN "GOTHIQUE"
on-190. 368- ’ ANGLAIS, p.489.
Critical Synopsis: An extremely dense and complex four~volume Critical Sy"°P$l$1 The title °f this le"9thY "°'el (f°“' '°]'
Gothic which uses several generations of villains to harass HMQS Of ﬂDPrBXlmitel¥ 350 Pa9e5 Per Volume) rebukes C°"temp°raly
Several 9e"e'atl°"$ of heroines. One of the heroines Maria is notions of what a novel must have to be successful. LETITIA is
B Permanently missing person; she is never seen at all but’0nly without apparitions and almost without_castles in its conscious
heard of through the letters and fragmentary manuscripts which rebuttal of the Gothic paraphernalia. A sober preface asserts
she leaves behind. Humbert Castle is the horrible home of the ‘ the book's high purpose: “To give purity to the mind which is
5t- Ledger family, 6 clan of reprobates and libertines but the thus tainted, to rectify that which is amiss, and to guide the
Castle barely figures into the romance at all untilywell into young in the devious paths of inconsideration and vanity. In
the second volume when its interior is beheld through the eyes perusing the f0ll°Wl"9 P6995 the 'eade' “ill fl"d "°
of Lord Mortimer: "He stood for some minutes with his faculties extraordinary events or appearances." But the author's effort to
nearly in a state of suspension, and his eyes fixed on the be as unGothic as possible in carrying out these ethical aims
bloody ha"d- "hie" Still Cﬂﬂtiﬂuéd to wave toward the room he leads her into terminal dullness. One or two spectres might have
had first entered." All of the St. Ledgers are bad but the enlivened this very flat domestic chronicle of the Marchmount
baddest of the bad is the professional soldier ’George St family. There are three Letitias, 986" Oﬂe 6 m0TBl l"5Pirﬂtl°"
Ledger, recently returned from India and full of the’ savageries ' to a Marchmount male's tendency 10 dl$5lPatl°"- The first Leti‘
of the East. He fully realizes his obligation to villainy and tia enters the story after the Patrlarﬁhi Thﬂmai MaT¢"m0""t,
"“ith the e*emPle Bf cruelty and oppression constantly before l runs through his inheritance and is forced to take a position as
his youthful eyes, it was not likely his disposition should in- a government clerk. His son, George Marchmount, meets, courts,
cline to virtue and generosity." The on-stage heroine-victim and marries the “wax doll," Letitia Dashmore, even though her
appears to be Lady Anna Castlenorth whose entrapments within . social position displeases the father. Their dﬂH9"¢E'» the
Humbert Castle usually climax in the same martyred outburst- tale's second Letitia, improves the fortunes of the Marchmounts
"0h God!‘ exclaimed the Countess,'falling on her knees and by following her mothor'§ injunction and marrying wisely and
raising her clasped hands to heaven, ‘is such villainy to well in her union with the solid and respectable hlfred
triunph? And wilt thou, for one slight error, abandon me to the Ruthmore. Their daughter, the third Letitia, excels socially,
vile power of this monster, this disgrace to manhood and to intellectually, and morally, thus reviving the lost moral
nature?" There are so many of these interjections that her grandeur of the Marchmounts through the married line. The novel
e'e"t“al releaee fT0m Humbert Castle is almost a hidden is freighted with lessons on behavior and sentimental diatribes
anti-climax. In all respects, this is a subpar Gothic and not in the P0"d8T0U5 Richard$°"lo" mﬂ""@r, but lt l5 "°t G°th‘° 5""
deserving of Montague Sumners's praise as "a well-written . not readable because of the absence of action. Nothing happens
cleverly-sustained romance." ' . to the characters.
193. Hunt, J.P. THE _IRON MASK: OR, THE ADVENTURES OF A FATHER AND 195. THE IDIOT HEIRESS. London : Minerva-Press for Lane, Newman,
SON. London : Minerva-Press for A.K. Newman, 1809, 1805.
"°de'" Ree¢ltl°"5= "0"E Modern Reeditions: None
Gothic Type: Gothified history (terror mode) Gothic Type: Domestic Gothic
Biographical and Research Data: None Biographical and Research Data: Sumners, GOTHIC QUEST, p.86.
Critical Synopsis: A Gothified history whose plot and char- Critical Synopsis: There is little G0f"lC ter'°' in this
acters appear to be taken from Ann Yearsley's THE ROYAL CAP- Bildungsroman or novel of education although there is a surplus
TIVES: A FRAGMENT 0F SECRET HISTORY (1795). The Reverend J P ' of genealogical consternation, hereditary oernleXity. and domes-
ﬂunt's handling of the motif of the visored relative results -in l tic Cruelty. As in so much ~Victorian fiction to follow,
a bulky and slow-moving romance. Hhen the mask is finally re- endurance by the l"VOVErl$hed.her°l"e “ill earn her class posl‘
moved at the end of three volumes, all suspense over the identi- ﬁlo", m0"ey. ind 8 "omE- The 5t'"99ll"9 "Er°l"E,_AZ@lle "ever"
ty of the parent behind it has long since dissipated. The his- ford. ls not feeb1e-mi"ded a1th°“9h 5hE q"illflE$ l" every
torical period seems to be the age of Louis XIV, although it is Tesﬂeet 55 3" l"9e""e- Her 'l4l°¢¥' l5 her l""°¢e"t and t'"5tl"9

nature. Her sinplicity of mind is the consequence of an enforced
164 THE FIRST GUTHIC5 i THE Fihsi GUTHIES 155
, order "to behold the apparition which terrifies the wretched in-
lgooroooe of self and the world imposed upon her by a harsh fom- ‘ habitants.“ During the Gothic journey, they tell each other the
ily wishing to deprive Azelia of her legacy by making hersappeﬂl‘ l various horror stories which fill the little anthology. Several
t° be l"5i"E 3'14 retarded l" the EYES Of the "°r]d- I" this Sit" of the tales turn out to be gleanings and plagiarisms from other
uation, we have the altered Victorian version of the maiden in i Gothic ehahhoek§_ The best of the taies is iidefehmis first
distress with Azelia's castle now become domestic persecution l » Stork which he insists is about one of his ancestors. It is a
arid D$.YCh0l09lCﬂl llIDrl50""l@rlt- The Eliltheli, "ldl0t," l5 the i ' version of the legend of the demon huntsman and allegorically,
dEr096t°r.Y dE5l'J"ﬂﬁ°" gill?" t° her bl! the ""19" Vl5C°""t ‘ it becomes a version of the errant soul's encounter with good
Hoverford. a cousin who would marry her to acquire the alleged and evil. on a stag hunt one day, the cruel Spaniard, Don Almag-
fortune. Before she is totally ruined by the scheming Haverford, he he i4ehdez_ is suddenly beset by two horsemen. Don Mmagro
Mr- |-e°"ard "lllmt Sﬂlﬁithlles "lth her f°'l°'“" Ci"C"'"5ta"¢e5 doesn't know it, but he has met God and the devil in the persons
and enters her life as self-appointed moral pedagogue. He will . of the two huntsmen, for the first rider is young, fair, and
instruct the poor creature in the ways of the world and thus i nahgeiimiiy hahdsimeg while his conganion is gigantic “with
equip her with enough moral intelligence to survive its snares , the Swarthy hue of hell," They join Don Almagro on the hunt, the
as well as the guile of her mm family. Leonard's pro ram works
_ _ S _ handsome horseman urging him to spare the stag when it takes
superbly but it also has the effect of making the girl fall in refuge amidst a gehtie Shepherd-S herd of 5heep_ The ugly horse-
love with him, a development which accelerates Haverford's de- me", however, urges Don Almagro ‘to perish everything but
signs against her. Now conscious of her danger as a result of T piea5ure_ 1 abhor aii |']appiI|$§§, Let them starve and die.“ Don
Leonard's instruction, the idiot heiress flees from her family hihiagi-0 heed; gagah and kills the shepherd and scatters the
after learning that they plan to have her placed in a madhouse
' herd; but the stag escapes, while the fiendish horseman smiles
at HaVerf°rd'§ i"5tl9il5l°"- "mi"! in |-°"d°" and h°Pl"Sl t° 1°’ . knowingly. Don Almagro renews the chase when the earth suddenly
cate Leonard Hillmot, she undergoes an almost Dickensian series opens before him and an awful voice pronounces doom upon him.
Of e5¢ilJﬂ'1|E$ ﬂhd Qrlhl @XP9rl9"¢@5i"i*n hi9hl.V 9d"CatlVE- She For his cruel and merciless life, he is doomed to ride eternally
hi5 5 brief Career B5 3 trallenlhg actress iihd 9"ter5 d°"le5ﬁ¢ ' ' without ever overtakin the sta which will now lead him forever
. § Q
5@rVlCE- Ellehlillill)‘, her Pllr5"l"9 family discovers her Where’ in a futile pursuit. The stag, of course, is the enblem of Don
abouts throu h th s ' f f 'l ' ' ' ' ' ‘ '
9 9 9 Pwllige 0 the ﬂlhl Y 5 Vllﬁ Ch-10161", i Almagro lost soul. The motif of invnortal punishment was avail-
Skeffi"9t°"' A" ‘mks bleak as She is Carried °ff t° the able to the Gothic writers through ballad literature as well as
threatened madhouse by Skeffington. But this last humiliation is ‘ the iegehdry of the “angering Jew, Here, the adaptation is done
a stroke of good luck since the madhouse incarceration leads di- ‘ with Stark ha"-ative 5ki]]_ other Stories follmv after the two
rectly to a disclosure of her heritage money and name Sir
_ Q i - companions arrive at the demolished Castle of Mancanarez §Ilde-
|-"CW5 A'"a"'°r9= *3 decerlt 3'", h°"'Jriblei99"ﬂe"'a" "hi? has bee" fonzo unearths a manuscript containing several terrifying
attracted to Azelia in the theatre, completes her ascendancy to pieces), but these horror tales never quite match the power of
adultmod a"d mm‘ ide"tit-Y b-Y P"'°P°5i"9 '“a""i°99- X" P"e"l°“5 , Don Almagro's encounter with the demonic huntsman who claims his
Gothic versions of this myth of success, the function of the
_ ‘ _ _ , _ v _ soul.
heroine is to shriek, faint, and exercise her delicate sensibil-
‘ties i" t°°'f"' recitals b°"l"d the "@115 °f the he"a°l"9 ' 197. Ircastrensis. LOVE AND HORROR: AN IMITATION FOR THE PRESENT AND
castle} But the transformation of the heroine from screaming _‘ A mDE|_ FOR ALL FUTURE R()p|hh(;E5_ London 1 J,.]_ Stockdale,
victim to a determined woman armed with intellect and conscience I} 1815_
and ready to cope with a treacherous world has begun with THE ,; Modem Reeditiohsi None
IDIOT HEIRESS. Several decades later, Charlotte and Emily Bronte W G h- T 5 7_h' ii
. . _ ,  ot ic ype: o ic paro y _
would ground their parables of the moral life in maiden-centered  Biographicai and Research Data; shopperson, Archibald B.
Gothic ficti b t't t‘ l ' ' ' > '
0" 5" 5 1 “ ‘"9 9"‘: °5""'e5 °f $P""‘t am demals °f  “Gothic Nonsense" in THE NOVEL IN MDTLEY. Cambridge, MA :
feminine identity for the original physical forms of the maid-  Harvard Up’ 1935, pp,154_131; Levy, LE ROMAN "GOTliIQUE"
@"'5 G°t"'¢ °'d@ol- if ANGLAIS, pp.510—51l, 516.
6. ILDEFONZO AND ALBERDNI: OR TALES (F HORROR. London : T d
“M89?
C H 1803 , 999 ii"  Critical Synopsis. This neat excoriation of the hridiculoug
as eman .  ' ' f th l f t b Ircastrensis s ows a goo
Modern Reeditions: Non * quahpes O e "ova -0 error y ' - '
_ _ 9  technical conlnand of Gothic themes, devices, and dialogue. _The
Gothic Type: Gothic chapbook (horror-terror modes) he paredist-S puuiihg pseudonym may he a Latin compound of -ire.-
Biographical and Research Data: None - < ' ' '
or "ire" and the word for a military encanpment, 'fcastrensis."
’ , _ , _ _ _ - Ircastrensis will surround all purveyors of Gothic nonsense with
Critical Synopsis: The 72-page chapliook is a compilation Of his satiric fury and thereby vindicate the weary victims of this
small tales of horror framed by an opening incident in a horrid l iiterary eutrage_ Like Mary Charlgtgn (see #064), IrcastrerISlS
storm as Alberoni comes upon Ildefonzo. The two men have Inet for might aish have been a "titer of iegigiihate gothics who had
the specific purpose of making an expedition to a castle in ‘ '
turned to parody for some comic relief. where Barrett's THE

155 THE FIRST corwrcs i , rue FIRST GUTHICS 157
HERUINE (see #026) and Jane Austen's NORTHANGER ABBEY (see #012) ' feature of Ireland's style. Here, for example, is a typical DB5-
$i"9l@ ﬂut the hysterical heroine as a target of satire Ircas- sage from THE ABBESS and one of numerous sexual emergencies
trensis concentrates the mockery on the inane young hero and which punctuate the convent day: ‘Already they began to tear the
rescuer. HE h°hm5llY bears some chivalric sounding name in garments from her tender limbs; already the barbarians had rent
Gothic novels such as Valancourt or Vivaldi, but here he is giv- the veil that had concealed her alabastrine bosom. Now her long
en_ a name notable only for its mercantile plainess, Thomas auburn hair escaped the fillet which had negligently bound it
Baily. Dissatisfied with the dull pleasures of normality Baily I One hand was raised, to cover her naked breast; the other up-
sets out to reshape his life into a Gothic novel. He has been ‘ lifted seemed to supplicate heaven's protection." As for
Smitte" by the Plcthre °f 6 Y°""9 woman who has been deceased absolute evil in a female Catholic character, Sister Mary Muriel
for more than two hundred years, but the deader the beloved the Tarr conmmnts that "the worst of all Gothic abbesses is Madre
greater the degree of affection for the Gothic lover. He must Vittoria Bracciano, the feminine counterpart of Ambrosio" in THE
somehow reincarnate the beautiful and lost lady the lovely MONK (see #244). “Pride, Cruelty, Millie, ihd 'eV@"9@; 5"¢h "ere
Ethelinda Tit, even at the price of his own sanity and safety the passions that reigned triunphant o'er her mind. Her desires
He locates Ethelinda's last surviving relative, Annabella and too were licentious, and with difficulty bridled, eve" by the
ﬂpparently persuades her to impersonate the helpless heroine in situation she held." The plot adheres to the orthodox
a number of desperate circumstances and high Gothic predica- ‘ requirements of the monastic shocker. Count Marcello Porta de-
ments. This arrangement enables Baily to rise to the role of sires Maddalena Rosa, an unwilling inmate of the convent of
Gothic h9r°- Mi"! of the events of the novel are exact traves- Santa Maria del Nova in Florence. The young man has cast a
ties of serious scenes and situations in famous Gothics. Ircas- lustful eye over the conmunity of nuns and singled her out for
trensis knew his material thoroughly, perhaps because he had his carnal amusements. Penetrating the cloisters with the as-
been responsible for writing some of it. Mysterious Armenian sistance of Father Ubaldo, himself a lecher supreme, the Count
§553$5l"5, Wild hihditii, conclaves of the secret tribunal so- is guided to an inner cell inhabited by a promiscuous veiled
Journs in castles, convents, and caverns, double and thiple i _ beauty whom he takes to be the desired Maddalena. In a scene
deaths, and rendezvous with amorous phantoms suggest that much i V ' whose sexual candor is explicitly intended to outdo Ambrosio's
of the burlesque originated with the wildest Gothics of the erotic seizures in THE MONK, Porta consumnates his lusts with
1790'5, novels on the lunatic fringe of the Gothic movement such i the monastic temptress only to learn after the fact that he has
as Grosse's HORRID MYSTERIES (see #153). Although not as accom- made love to the abbess, Mother Vittoria Bracciano, truly the
Pl'5hed 65 Barrett or Jane Austen nor as witty as his contem- i ~ seducer-superior of all Gothic women. Leaving the chamber of de-
P°'5rY» Thﬂmas Love Peacock, in his demolition of Gothic fash- ‘ lights Count Porta loses his way in the darkness and blunders
ions, Ircastrensis shows an acute ear for the preposterousness i - into 3 chamber of horrors, a room containing the dead nun, Mar-
of Gothic characters’ conversations with spectres. Hhen the "aw- i i“ ietta and her attendant mourner, Maddalena herself. Father
ful and sainted shade of Ethelinda Tit, her great ancestor " i Ubaldo and the abbess now concoct plans to rid themselves
glides slowly toward Annabella, she maintains a vigorous level ~ ‘ forever of the Count and Maddalena. The best means for doing so
of discourse with the ghost even after she has fainted. involves moving the entire company from the convent to a nearby
i castle well-staffed with the Abbess's henchmen. Here, the threat
I98. Ireland, Hilliam Henry. THE ABBESS: A ROMANCE. London : Earle K of torture and actual torture occur on an hourly schedule that
and‘Hemet, 1799; Baltimore, MD : S. Sower and J.H. Butler might have pleased the Marquis de Sade until the Inquisition,
1801' , that omnipresent vindicator in Gothic novels, detects the new
Modern Reeditions: Arno Press, I974, ed. B.F. Fisher IV. headquarters of Ubaldo and his vile abbess. Now taking their
Gothic TYPE: Phhe °' hl9h G0thiC (monastic shocker in horror- turn as victims Vittoria and Ubaldo scream out their guilt as
terror modes; imitation of THE MONK) the screws turn ahd the rack tightens on their limbs. The nov-
Bl°9FﬂPhical and Research Data: Sunmers, GOTHIC QUEST el's spectacular auto-da-fé or public ceremony of burning is one
up 344-345. 380; Tarr, CATHOLICISM IN GOTHIC FICTION pp 25' pr the most abominable descriptions pf agony and death i" all of
30' 37* 46- 51- 51» 53- 74» 77, 31. 86, 101 104 I0§ I09’ Gothic literature. Ireland sensed that in order for the Profit-
113» 119, 120; Lévy, LE ROMAN "GOTHIQUE" ANGLAIS 42S 426, able muse of the Gothic to survive, each successive expression
427’ 432* 433* 436' 461’ 452- i l l of the same story form would necessarily have to go beyond its
. . _ _ , predecessors in violent and repulsive stimuli. For all its ex-
Critical Synopsis: Hilliam Henry Ireland (1777-1835), the travagant faults, THE ABBESS does just this by unleashing some
"°t°'l°"5 Shakeipeireﬂn forger and author of the fake tragedy, ‘ new categories of the hideous.
YORTIGERN, was also a master practitioner of the Gothic novel in _ '
Jts m?5t V°l"Pt"°U5 and Sdlacious form. Seeking to equal.the 199. Ireland, Hilliam Henry. RIMUALDO:-OR, THE CASTLE OF BADAJOS.
m°“a5t'° at'°¢ltl9§ ahd 5"DeF"ﬂt"Fﬂl gore of his chief rival London : T.N. Longman and 0. Rees, I800.
among the Goths, Monk Lewis, he frequently excels Lewis in sheer Modern Reeditions: None '
9he'9Y °f repulsive situation and garish supernatural horror. Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (terror mode)
The eruptive sexuality of the monastic shocker is also a strong Biographical and Research Data: Sunmers, GOTHIC QUEST,

159
THE FIRST BDTHICS ‘ "'5 FIRST HOMES
i ' n el attains its maximum D0l"t °f "°Pe‘eS5"e5§ for
pp.19O, 345-346, 380, 397; Tarr, CATHOLICISM IN GOTHIC £2: gggshéharagiers, it is always a proper moment for_ a Imiriﬁe
FICTION, pp.26, 45, 69, 74, 84-85, 108. ' ninus entrance or an astounding reversal ofafgﬁﬁhaégcliyzesahich
, f hakes earean tragicﬂme Y»
Critical Synopsis: RIMUALDD is a well-made but routine Gothic §l§§ngi§te;:p:ai:a toplreland. Rimualdots friend and protectora
novel not as sanguinary as THE ABBESS nor as drastic in its I 3 cesarin has already rescued him twice from ass?séi:gt;E_
Gothic paraphernalia and effects as Ireland's masterpiece, GON- ' attempt; on the road and at court; t""5= the release ° goutine
DEZ THE MONK (see #201). The characters fall neatly into the ‘ ' la and the establishing of her noble _bloodline are tion by
prescribed Gothic stereotypes, a fact innediately noticed by the niraeies for the impeccable peasant. During her ingﬂgﬁegzhin the
reviewer in THE MONTHLY REVIEH for February, 1801. The review- _ Rimuaino-5 father, Cesario himself had been impoun e w n ‘E 3]
er's inventory of the novel's Gothic gadgetry recites the stan- * castie nf Badajos. It was here, however, that he c;met“g°an gS_
dard formula for Gothic fiction. According to the reviewer, the I proof of his noble lineage and claim to the vast_ Ondilv father
book features "unnatural parents, persecuted lovers, murders, i tates, Fearing the power of the Montalvans, Rimua :h5u h he
haunted apartments, winding sheets and winding staircases, ‘ yelentg and allows his son to wed Constanza even dv ﬁance
subterranean passages, lamps that are dim and perverse and that f remains a thoroughly despicable father-in-law at t e en . let;
always go out when they should not, monasteries, caves monks ’ h‘ f il is left somewhat incomp
, . 'f' tion of a Got ic am Y _ _ _
tall, thin, and withered with lank abstemious cheeks, dreams: ’ £23 Egzgrhgl evil is not ultimately Ellml"3ted- 1r9]a"d had mud
roans d t "
. . . . - ' ‘ f evil from
g an spec res. Even a minimal literary talent might brew ‘ * 4 tn traditional Gothic ending of an eXP"1§l°" °
a palatable Gothic by simply following the critic's recipe as ghéelives of the newly married couple who lﬂh€Tlt ¢h9 Castle a"d
extracted from RIMUALDO. By listing “unnatural parents" as the ‘ its CurSes_
first Gothic ingredient, the critic identified the plot's prin-
cipal source of terror. The sensitive young hero, the Condé Don f zoo Ireiand, Hiiiiam Henry, BRUNO: OR, THE SEPULCHRAL SUMMON5- L0"
Rimualdo, loves nature and his fellow creatures so much that he '_ ' do" : garie and Hemet, 1804-
becomes at first an object of annoyance and then an object of i - Reeditions: None _ . _
aversion to his bellicose father, the master of Castillio del Egiﬁig Type; Pure or high Gothic (Schauerromantii t9"d@"
Lara. To safeguard the family reputation against any taint of T ties) [C UEST 346,
humanity, the father sends the son to court hoping that the ' Biographical and Research Data: Sunmers- GOT" Q ’ P‘
experience will debase his morals while sharpening his baser ap- ’ Levy LE ROMAN "GOTHIQUE" ANGLAIS, p.560.
petites. On the way to court, Rimualdo is befriended and joined ' ’ I S Stalks
by the virtuous peasant, Cesario, a lad who is curious about his 1 Critical Synopsis: Through four Cr8P"$¢"1°f V° uwiributiun
mysterious parentage and whose very name evinces Ireland's ha- , the immense figure of the brutish Bruno, Ireland s in ized b
bitual Shakespearean plagiarisms. The court itself is all and * to the mgngtgr novel later to be refined and even gmagus (Seg
more that Rimualdols father had hoped for his son's progress in h Mary Sheiiey in her FRANKENSTEIN: OR, THE MODERN PROM fre uents
vice since it is a place of unsurpassed iniquity, foul intrigue, ;3g9)_ ant Ireland's brute is no Prometheus; he simp g S gcia]_
and delicious corruption. Its dominantly bad model of deportment , graveyards, lurks in charnel cellars and morgues, an €o "the
is the Marquis Diego de Badajos, a sinister wretch who reminds » izes in "gQrQphillﬂC assaults, and all in respogse him to
Rimualdo of the father he left behind. The Marquis also owns a 1 sepulchral Sumnonsn or eadavernns voice which comma: s r roman-
castle.which is just as dark and foreboding as his own ancestral these unspeakable deeds. Except for its extreme Sc agguno the
home. Badajos's evil strategies are carried out by the lane and tigigm and its possible influence on Mary Shelley-Id r a midst
gaunt Monk, Sebastiano (another name theft from Shakespeare’: book and Bruno the character ought to be left to mou e
THELFTH NIGHT). At the moment of Rimualdo's arrival, the two are Other negiigibie Gothic debris.
engaged in the Gothic pastime of harassing a maiden, Constanza, ‘
. . . . E THIR-
a fair and fainting weeper for all seasons. In extreme Gothic ' 4 w'ii‘ Henry, GONDEZ THE MONK. A ROMANCE OF TH
form, Constanza is a near relative of Perdita in Shakespeare's ‘ 201' Ir$%E:Tﬂ EEn}ﬁ§v_ London : H. Earle and J.H. Hucklebridge,
HINTER'S TALE, for her constant role is to play ‘the lost one." ﬂ 1805
Their immediate problem is to decide how and where next to lock , ' R n't‘ s; None _ _
her up. Hhen Rimualdo sees Constanza, he loves her, but she I Eﬁgﬁlg Tjﬁez ;3:e or high Gothic/Gothified history (h0rr0r-
promptly disappears leaving behind a bloodstain d ff'
e e igy of d )
herself in one of Rimualdo's bad dreams. The removal of Constan- tgrror :9 el and Research Data: TomDk‘"5- POPULAR NOVEL IN
za is of course the work of Badajos and his bad monkish assist- ‘ B1°grap"ca ; Summers GOTHIC QUEST, PR.29. 75, 80, 85.
ant. They have also recruited Rimualdo's father in their plans i §g§LA§25-§5if6391; Lévy: LE ROMAN 'G0THIQUE' AE:k:%3&kEp'g€g:
by eventually arranging for the Castillio de Lara to be one .of ‘ 436' 490, 520; gieiler, E,F. THE GUIDE T0 §UP >
Constanza's Gothic detentions. Returning home after a futile . TiQi_ Kent, OH ; Kent State UP, 1983, D-259-
search for the lost Constanza, Rimualdo is ushered to her cell ~ _ d, f ur vo1ume
by his father, shown the pining prisoner in various postures of :1‘ critical Synopsis: Any full résume of Irelan S 0
suffering, then expelled from the castle to think about it. Hhen J‘

Y 171
170 THE FIRST GUTHICS THE FIR5T BUTHIE5
_ . - r rel felt to his unmasking of this
magnum opus and historical Gothic novel deluxe would require b'F“95 3 t':? Ggtzagrggﬁrgaitﬁ Hugetto-S name resgareu (he IS
many Pages esﬂecially since the romance is two Gothics in one. 5°me"§at te lguk f Gohgati) pairing and punishments may 055"“
E.F. Bleiler's critical assessment of the novel if we measure the rightful ube g is rsistence “ins him the precious Runiida
its Gothic value by plotting alone is severe but essentially on schedule. 2" ittqe a2eLord of the Scottish isies while Gondez
accurate. Bleiler calls Gondez ‘an undisciplined and aggressive a"d 3 Sebond dg b ha S10“ fire_u Even though the structure
Gothic novel, so complex in plot as to be nearly unintelligi- Pays f°' "15 ieg m ﬁred by it5'dts,hptive Italian subplot, Ire-
ble." To the English plot is appended an Italian subplot spliced ’ °f Ehe 0:32; Th; MSNK has every ohe of the components whiﬁh the
by the misfortunes of the young warrior and foundling, Huberto la"d.S G d~ nce ex Eeted and anticipated. It does not P"TP0Tt t°
Avinco. Huberto has been brought from Italy to Scotland by 9°th'c 3“ 18. i ii h Gothic entertainment and in this re5PECt
Alzarro (called Count Ferdinando Ozimo in the subplot), raised PE §rt Tut slmp y g
to manhood in an English dungeon. escaped to a ruined castle in ' it is without peer. S OF THE
Scotland, and enlisted in the service of Kin Robert Bruce < - : ARTS AND DEED
(1306-1329). Gothic action connnnces just after tge defeat of _ 202. Ireland, Hiﬂaéﬁm :e¥;{é g2EE§2E¥ghIﬁIS2s§Y' London i Earie aha
the Bruce at the Battle of Methven on June I9, 1306. In the com- POPl€H €g07 , -
pany of the King, Huberto escapes from the field taking sanctu- negzra Reeditionsi "Que
ary in the Gothic monastery of St. Columba on the Isle of 0ron- ° h. T e_ Monastic Shocker (pSeudQ_hi5tQriCil title)
zo. Much of the subsequent story concerns itself with the trials Gqt It ¥p i and Researeh Data; Summers, GOTHIC QUEST,
of Huberto as he seeks to uncover his identity and parentage, an BlOgraphlC?~ Lé LE ROMAN HGOTHIQUE" ANGLAIS’ pp_425’ 435,
all-too-familiar Gothic quest. The ghastly Abbot of st. Columba PP-177- 35 - ‘Y’
is Gondez, as loathsome a monastic monster as is to be found 519. _ _ 1
anywhere in the pages of the Gothic novel. This singular phantom . . - . r tends to be an historica
of the cloisters is a study in high Gothic portraiture with his . °"t'°"! 5Y';°‘;;“;nS{?i,,{?'§§'§§e gas-barities of the Church
malicious eyes and twisted frame enhanced by "the cadaverous i documihtaglﬂgcﬂ of innucent iii in the Thirteenth Century to the
complexion of his countenance and the falling in of his cheeks, from e ah yt enth century_ it is Ireland's attempt to write
added to which his mouth was hideously wide round the falling end of the OQTIE _ncor Grating aii of the terrors associated in
extremities of which forever seemed to play the smile of mingled 6 fake °hr°"1°de lth tie activities of the lnquisition. The
conceit and ineffable contempt.‘ His monastery is stocked and the popular min wi n of public burning which ends the career
staffed with all of the usual Gothic surprises including a cru- aut°'da-féi or §ereT: yﬂgnk (see #201) is a scene repeated
cifix which bleeds and a disgusting version of the resident of Ireland ihG0:o;€nce9and aiternated with interrogation by tor.
spectre in the personage of the "Little Red Woman" who pets poi- ( t"F°"9h?“t i 9 bterranean imurisonmenti and -mnhkish ingenuity"
sonous snakes and hides them throughoutithe building. Huberto's turei dlimat Siread expioited in GONDEZ THE MohK_ ireiahdis eX_
eye is also drawn to a mysterious beauty whose predicament he of the sor a F ca{h°iic materialS for Gothic ends does not
vows to remedy as soon as he can help the Bruce evade the aqsereted “Se 9 bi from that of his feiiah Gothic writers. $15-
English and renew the war. This English plot is frequently in- dlffer appr§CiaT ﬁr writes that uthe dogma underlying Qatholi-
terrupted by di9ressions taking the reader to the Italian ter Mary MUTIE 3 ii nderstood by writers of Gothic fiCti°n_u
subplot where we meet and follow the reproachful career of Gon- ' cism was not genera_ty H" be added that writers like ireiahd
dez under his secular identity as Giovanni Maldachini, illegiti- To this statement, 1 dC3Stand it but to use what they perceived
mate son of the ambitious Cardinal Nicolo Gonzari and a loose were not trying t° :9 i ricai ieéacy of catho]iCi5m to heighten
abbess. Among his other vicious projects, the Cardinal is . to be the sini§t@' ;§ °"taiity of the Gothic and thereby arouse
scheming to disinherit his nephew, Duca Martini Gonzari, Huber- , §hE mel°dram§t‘c 5e"h1me r For the Gothic hgveiists, Cath0li-
to's true father. These belated details explain how and why intense feelings Of grins; the pniitics of terror but enabled a
Huberto was secreted as a child to Scotland. The English plot Cl?“ accommodated no J" ieasure and pain of the sublime degree
draws to its climax when Huberto returns to the monastery to union to be made bettieg Pfor in his definition of the necessary
free the mysterious woman and to bring Gondez to justice. In the that Burke hadthtﬂ Sﬁbiime THE CATHOLIC iiiusttates the
depths of the monastery, Huberto finds and releases a starving 5 _ - c°mP?"e"t5 0 f Berkets ideas concerning terrible beauty or the
monk, John of Dunbar, who in turn directs Huberto to the endan- - fulfillment o 2 h had described as "the ideas of pain and
Qered Ronilda, Gondez‘s most recent sexual plaything. Once to- culminationfog wha [shichl are so very affecting that whiist we
gether, the couple decide to call upon the Inquisition to subdue r ab°'§ al ° ea ’nce of whatever is supposed to have the power
the terrible Gondez. The Holy Office eagerly obliges since it tr remain l" F“? pfese -t is im assible to be perfectly free from
has been after Gondez for some time. Put to the rack, Gondez not i _ Of lﬂfllﬁtlnq eliherv ‘ P a '
only spews forth his catalogue of crimes but also declares that terror.
he is not a monk at all but the fugitive from Italian justice, ~ ' E MONITOR. London‘: Minerva
Giovanni Maldachini. The device of the fugitive nobleman posing 203~ I5gE;:; ?;:*H?§i§:a 3§aeTHE85?YlSIBL
as a priest had been used in HTS. Radcliffe s ITALIAN (see #350) d R ditionsi None t
and elsewhere in the monastic shocker but at least Ireland M0 Er" 99

172
TIE FIRS T GUTHICS
Gothic Type: Sentimentalized and naturalized Gothic (Radclif
7
'Tf£ FIRST GOTHICS 1 3
_ ‘ . - - ' i;h ' ‘led life of the heroine El-
fean methods and Drops) . Snuahons agam dommate e "men ' "
Biographical and Research Data: Surrlners, GOTHIC QUEST, pp.29, i
170; Tarr, CATHOLICISM IN GOTHIC FICTION, pp.18, 44, 51, 69,
I07.
Critical Synopsis: This Gothic romance makes use of the tele-
Pﬂﬂllﬁ and P0551511 Sllliernatural voice to generate its t '
- _ h k f ther be classified as
‘en’ 11" °5§"?ﬁ§§at?§iEZf in: Z?§ii§§Z Ggthic of Mrs. Radcliffe
HrS'h Saagirst novel THE CASTLES OF ATHLIN AND DUNDAYNE (see
E45)“ The Highland, Fortress of Castle Macruther Pérched
  -3  ~* *"'s"*a'"%¢:’.*::1:“E:‘i::: 2::
' another to a height equal to the cast e i Se
m s e i - - ' 1 h sodies of feeling. Ellen's
and effect its escapes. The preternatural voice that dirgctsr Z? I hermmmq’ tﬁgegggsiifggg 3|a?g2:.; gags“: Gothic di]ema_ what
controls the behavior of a Gothic character is also to be fo d pro -em ‘S ' ' ‘
un
in Charles Brockden Brown's HIELAND (1798) and in such English
Gothic novels as Eliza Parsons's THE MVSTERIOUS WARNING
d th t beckonin forbidden door 0'
 .f  
(5 t b bterranean corridors with Glen-
#320) and E]'zabeth B°nh°te'5 BUNGAY CASTLE (See #039)" ii ‘ castlﬁbbnacrgigiin chgceiife insmaking the requisite underground
altered form, the device of the heavenly voice survives in the more 8?} ¢a5%le to abbey by ‘tunnels seldom travelled in
blind Rochester's suiimons to Jane Eyre in Charlotte Bronte's ' Journeiv (ghies-i takes E115" from ignorance to knowledge, from
novel. In ARIEL, the voice takes the role of divine r nt d Save‘-‘T Te" ' ' '
. l ht. In h s amusing
spiritual mentor to the foundling heroine Rosaline lga el' ac‘ S?"S1mhty to Sense? and from dérkness toll 19 I
_ , _ _ _ , _ . osa ine s
naivete, sentimental mis_]udgements, and obliviousness toward the
evils of th ' ' *
e world create an urgent need for such an "invisible
monitor." Her life abounds in the usual Gothic stresses. Sh h
ll T. Peterson
hale essay, "Spotting the_Gothic_ Novel, C19 _ _
enumerates sixteen contraPt‘°"5 "hlch m?ke a "°'ei G°th;§‘o$%E:s
MORE ABBEY can claim some form of all sixteen devices a
- - ' ' bl t ls of the Radcliffean
to fend off the insistent advances of her foster brother, xdoif ‘ lg ?i§‘L?“1§§,§:§S§1§h§e§@l:giSg§:§§9e? cigious female eXPT°'EY5
phus, and is no sooner finished defending her virginity against ’: "I31 56,06" at the 1351; moment; inexplicable but apparently
his demands when she becomes the quarry of a trio of Sexual "atura1/supernatura] incidents."
predators. Pursued, locked up, and menaced by a count a »
A . . ’
marquis, and a baron, Rosaline's existence despite the re ular
, 1 . N MEMOIRS OF THO LADIES, LATE
intervention of the voice, becomes one long, gloomy corridgr of ‘ 205' IVEY  London : Owen, I794.
victimization. In each of her confinements the Gothic decor is l "UN R ditions. None
lavish: mortuarial furniture in her cells; funereal sounds and 1 Modern Tee . comyﬁned M0na$t‘lC Shocker and Roman Noir (terror
sights wherever she looks; doors suddenly banging shut and seal- so§:;c yPe' _
ing themselves; and, of course, the ubiquitous voice of her mon- f $20 ,3 hica] and Resear¢h Data: Sunmers. GOTHIC QUE5T» P-1?oi
itor which can penetrate thick walls and ascend to the t t g p '
_ remo es
turret to be heard above the Gothic ichaos Event ll
v ‘ . ua y, the man
behind the voice, Bertrand St. Alvars, reveals himself to
Rosaline id '
, gui es her to a secret door that allows her to exit
from the Baron's dungeon, and confers her identity upon her. He
also_ explains scientifically just how, when where and wh he
LE nonnn "GOTHIQUE" ANGLAIS, 9.452, Rogers, Katherlnﬂ
'|f"{§aMa5y and Reality in the Fictional Convegi%'sDIiE§ ti;
Eighteenth Century," COMPARATIVE LITERATURE =
(1985): 297-316.
I ' ' S ' : Th nonymous Goth attemﬂted t° (“Se the
applied his extraordinary vocal powers to the, moral, management ' terﬁglzwgl tf,':°K§:,§,ed Zagtie with the horrorg of enfgrged con-
of her life. The rational explanation of an a tl - ~ < ' '
_ pparen y super
rational phenomenon is a Radcliffean procedure. While it solves
nt lif in this counterfeit confession or EXP°5é The “"5”
ve e . ‘ -
. - d, f st erson narrative by an
the Gothic novelist's perennial problem of how to elevate the T mom] iivoguﬁtiofesﬁgzedtaﬁaziacihe repregsions and emotional
heroine from quivering sensibility to self-controlled sense, the :§;:::eSre§$ agave"; life gained wide currency with readers of
Radcliffean ending proved too conser t‘ f (; th' K ' - - ' t d M n el's lurid melo-
readersi va ive or many o ic Goth“: ﬁche" m the 179O|s_ Bouts 9 Q v
drama tzs VICTIMES CLOITREES (1792) and 0ider°¢'§ "°"@‘i§“°
.
. , ,
V RELIGIEUSE (1795) naturally 1"‘
204. Isaacs, Mrs. etznnone ABBEY: on, THE LADV or THE ROCK. London = . 3;:§g:§,°‘,§2:'@2§."ZZ2?i: hgtifs associatﬁd with the r@li9i°"$
Minerva-Press for Lane Newman, 1805. “ . - - a - - h t tic and secondhand
Modem Reeditions: Non; life in English Gothic fiction. T e au oma _
Gothic Type: Sentinientalized terror Gothic (R d l'ff ' '
convent Gothicism of IVEV CASTLE provoked the following 5"?"
a i - ' ' ' REVIEH f N vember, 1794: "1!
tatw") C ea" "M 3: i from the CHEW difixlguiitlalicglonstruct aomacﬁine for making such
Biographical and Research Data: Surmiers, GOTHIC QUEST, p.8; i ‘ would notlvlii CASTLE A romantic Arkwright may find the mater-
Peterson, Clell T. ‘Spotting the Gothic Novel " GRADUATE STU ' ' ‘ "°'°15 as ' '
, - ,- . _ - - < -b ' _" P t nding to 9'5Phl¢
' BENT OF ENGLISH. 1 (I957)' 14-I5; Levy ts ROMAN 'GOTHI'uE~ ¢~ ials In ever! =ir¢"1=*‘"9 “ '““Y '° °
.  . . I _ ' th Gothic. novelist
ANGLAIS, pp_404, 405’ 407, 436_ ’ Q _ authenticity and firsthand observation, e , _ _
allows the two sisters, one French and one EngTi$h '1° rehve 1"
E! - ‘ l ' t‘ l s fferings and sexual cri-
Critical Synopsis: Radcliffean sublimities and subterranean  loathsoqe detail-thew etc E5135 ma u '
ses while confined to the convent. In the Gothic novel, the

1” me FIRST cur/ucs THE FIRST GDTHICS 175
restrictive environment of the religious life (as perceived by a Modern Reeditions: None
militantly Pr°te5ta"t Teddershlﬂl soon became a metaphori ’Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (all modes)
milieu for a political and moral condition --the twistin 2 I Biographical and Research Data: None
h“@5"9_Passions by outmoded and exclusive sosial systems ang is
$t't“t‘°"s- _ 1 Critical Synopsis: This loud and busy Gothic is introduced by
206 . j an appropriate epigraph from Pope's translation of THE ODYSSEY:
- J5m‘Es°", Frances. THE HOUSE OF RAVENSPUR: A ROMANCE London - I "If Scenes of misery can entertain, Hoes I unfold, of woes a
G. and H.B. Hhittaker, 1822. l ' mighty train. Prepare to hear of murder, and of blood." Murder
"°“°F" Reediti°"s5 N9"? ‘ ‘ and blood are but two of many sensational ingredients packed
G?th'¢ TXPQI Gﬁfhified hiSt0ry (naturalized terror) into this Gothic argosy. In the preface, the author maintains
5l°9r6Phical and Research Data: None that “a romance writer should not be censured for occasionally
. . . inspiring horror and colouring her pages with scenes of blood.
Critical Synopsis: Deadly fraternal gqnflirg in this Gothi The present romance will prove that the first crime leads to a
romance is somewhat reminiscent of Huish's THE BROTHERS ( C i commission of a greater." At issue throughout the romance is the
#189). The rival brothers are the Earl of Ravens ur and L583 Baronage of Montault and the ownership 'of Belford Castle in
H9"T¥._C°"FtiEF$ T0 the POWerful Edward III. A rosal wedd?r Hales. The rival claimants are Ontario de Santraile, supposed
precipitates Lord Henry's animosity toward Ravenspur when tng mad but pretending madness, and "the young and haughty" Montreal
rival women, Victorine and Angelina, express their desires fwg de Santraile, his villainous cousin. "Nameless passions agitated
Ravenspur. Envious and annoyed by his older brother's hands O i his breast." The curious method of geographical names for the
Standing with King Edward and his attractiveness to women LETE characters persists in Lady Adelisa Clifford, the daughter of
Henry decides E0 9ive all his energies to displacin his br th St Lawrence and Lady Romania de Santraile, the persecuted
as head of the H°"sE °f RaV9"$Pur. Harned by the ﬂy?" victo "er heiress of ’the piece. Even several of the corps of spooks and
that Lord Henry is planning his destruction Raven? up "0r‘"e spectres have Canadian place names. The characters never speak,
theless goes ahead with his life by marrying Lad pGeraié€r_ ' they shriek in the most bloodcurdling and earsplitting Gothic
Fltl""9" Only to find himself strangely fallen rro§ the Kin1?: style. Hhen she is captured by bandits set upon her by Montreal,
fav°r and exi]9d- Lad! Geraldine appears to die in childbirgh Lady Romania shouts: ‘Ontario lives;'-a"d shall live. to redress
The essentials of one type of Gothic plot are evident in th ' his wrongs and those of his much-injured family. The heir of
that a usurping sibling tries and temporarily succeeds in iﬁtway ‘ Santraile ‘shall blast your designs, and the arm of retributive
Y“Dt1"9 the noble lineage of a worthy house The second se art justice will shortly hurl you to destruction." From this
°f the "°VEl. the misfortunes and confinements of the cgiig crescendo the novel's speeches never descend. Hunted and har-
gertrudef c°"tai"5 most °f the f9V@Fi$ﬁ Gothic action Gertrude assed by his cousin, Ontario eventually reaches the hereditary
ls "a¢q"1red“ as the ward of Lord Henry and Angelina ‘in Qrd prize of Belford Castle at the end of volume one. Even the
‘Eat the¥ Ti! keeﬂ her in ignorance about her parents and "Z: ’ sinule act of knocking at the Castle door is bloated into a
h'9hb°'" h9'lti9e» FOP Gertrude is the legitimate heir to the gigantically appalling event: "Lifting up the ponderous knocker,
H°“$e °f RiV@"5Pﬂ'- Cﬁnveyed to a convent Gertrude under he let it fall with force. A momentary Chill T3" th'°"9h his
supernatural visitation by Geraldine and Ravenspur but is gogsla veins The awful silence that pervaded the interior of the
moved ‘to a secret C911 by Father Rupert before she can m ku E y building made him almost wish to decline breaking in upon it."
use of the information about the House of Ravenspur brouahi agy Ontario is accompanied by Lady Romania, certainly a curious
her bY the Parental apparitions. The ensemble climax 3 d O geographical alliance. Lurking within the castle are Montreal
the usual revelations and dispensations of justice Geatg dcgs and his confederates Valmont and Delgarno. "“°5e "°"-9@°9'ﬂP"i¢
phantoms turn out to be her father and mother Ravens u: e Z \ names must signify sbmething. The remainder of the novel is re-
Gefaldlﬂﬁ, now restored to lands and authority by,a wi5erpEd and i stricted to the interior of Belford Castle where the characters
¥I1' Lord H9"TY i5 Stripped of rank and banished and Gertwag ' continue to shriek rather than speak while undergoing all of the
insures the perpetuity of the Ravenspur line by marryin win; ' 3: conventional Gothic agitations. Hhen cornered and accused by the
capable warrior, Lord Edward Saltoun. Given the mechgnic l 1 Phantom of Ontario's slain mother, the wrongful heir, Montreal,
nature of the plot, the formulaic artificiality of the h a » bellows in defiance: "Rail on, my Amazonian! Attest your cour-
i¢tef5, and its Dﬁrpetuation of the aristocratic m th of clar— ' age while yet you have the ability to do so; for hither I came
stability, it is easy to understand why Sir Halter Sgott had as: to ’divest you of it." Certainly, there is no wilder exanple of
ff" _"'°ls am°"9 the surviving Goths in the field of historical E ' the excesses of the Gothic form than this bizarre romance. Every
fiction. Scott's adaptations of Gothic method character d ii‘ outburst and every horrid situation is louder than the last one,
setting would see him transform ancestral,curses and éupg: ii D and the cliche-ridden Gothic group style is pushed to new ex-
"at"ra] V']ia‘"¥ into dark but credible historical forces. ‘ii tremities. _ _
207. Jones, Harriet. THE FAMILY OF SANTRAILE' OR THE HEIR % Z08 J his THE CASTLE ON THE CLIFT [sic]. LADY'S MAGAZINE OR,
TAULT. London : G. Sidney for J. Cawthorn: 1809. OF HON‘ ' uE:TERTAINING COMPANION FOR THE FAIR SEX, 29-30 (November,

176 me FIRST can-1105 ~ THE FIRST GDTHIC5 177
1798-March, 1799): 3 arts. ~ ' ' i little erformance are
Moder" Editions: Nonep - I mystirdous eiegtz wzhzhagthghtigityhoi which canpbe warranted by
Gothic Type: Serialized Gothic nouvella (aborted) zﬁuntiansigtai who has lived many years not far from the
Biographical and Research Data: Mayo, ENGLISH NOVEL IN THE principal place of action." The principal place of action is the
    '"-"* §‘Z'“*.°i.°°'l§3l;.E-‘Z'Z.“22l “‘;§EA2.§§;';§§££.i'3:?§ﬁ.t?l§2
Critical Synopsis: A specimen of an unfinished periodical - m1d:1g5 blooﬁ-dripping shadows,’ driverless carriages, trees
Gothic, the three installments convey a Radciiffean heroine | ' cas et’d into ibbets and every other species of Gothic fauna
(Rosemund) from domestic safety to Gothic distress after the °°§'$§,§, known ta the aothie novel's eager clientele. The main
mysterious death of her father. One entire installment is devot- ag of the necrumaneer volkert, is buried deep in the inter-
ed to the generation of suspense via the slow approach to the § cry f the novel's multi-plotted and oblique narratives;
castle. In keeping with the general tenor of the Gothics pub- , ‘or "2" it is itself an ordeal for the reader whose abilities
lished in LADV'S MAGAZINE, the terrors are polite, refined and rea? 119 the labyrinthine infrastruture leﬂdihg t° v°lke't'5
de]i°ate' The h°"ifl¢ ahd the "91! "BYE regarded as unaccept- J to ot T“ are severely tested. Volkert'5 legehd 15 Plﬂﬁed lhslde
able to the clientele and Juvenis was careful to stay within Own f a E Stories of {yo friends Hermann and HElTTiEd- Vh° have
these hounds of propriety’ 2 hgih rags strange nocturnal experiences and whose peregrinat;0"5
- ~ " Gothic remains 0 a
209. Kahlert, Karl Friedrich. THE NECROMANCER: on, THE mt or mt ' ‘" ‘"3 Blmé F°;§§§§:‘;§,;';§’;n,*‘;,,,,§"§,, c_.,Sne.S 1,,,d,,,,k, is
BLACK FOREST. London : Minerva-Press for Hilliam Lane, 1794. :ﬁ1f; Tiageeneg tomb of Godfrey Hausinger (A.D. 1603), the re-
Modern Reeditions: Robert Holden, 1927, ed. Montague Summers- I e‘ a - 2 Ln Volkert papers Volkert's biography "hich exists
Folio Press, 1968, ed. Devendra P. Varma. ’ PoS1t°r{ ed-tiguai gothig fgrm'Of the mysterious manuscript, has
Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (Schauerromantik elements) on thediggated b the necromancer to Hausinger as he awaited
Biographical and Research Data: Sadleir, Michael, THE NORTH- ee" 1' Its repellent contents comprise the major Gothic tale
ANGER NOVELS: A FOOTNOTE T0 JANE AUSTEN, English Association ' e¥:hq Iothe lesser Gothic tales. Apparently, Volkert was so
Pahvhlet Nhmbﬂr 58, November, 1927, pp.17-18; Sunners, GOTHIC W] ‘nd ' necromancy that he was able to exert mysterious
QUEST, pp.29, 133, 134-135; Lévy, LE ROMAN "GOTHIQUE" Steepe 1“ the living as well as raise the dead. Although his
ANGLAIS. PP-315. 317, 318, 320, 321, 344, 507; Conger, Syndy power?‘ onig contorted and disconnected, the Gothic imagery of
M. "A German Ancestor for Mary Shelley's Monster: Kahlert naraa éie r ed outburst; has its own vivid power. No light
Schiller, and the Buried Treasure of NORTHANGER ABBEY -' PHIL: l W er sue ii, y|or'|d except when -a flash of lightning hissed
OLOGICAL QUARTERLY’ 59 (1980): 216-232‘ , Zhdgghlyo t::ough the dreary vault licking the damp walls and a
. - h subterraneous abode of
Critical Synopsis: Regarded by Michdel Sadleir as the most . h°!:?" ;1ap ff.‘::::°3,;:°Z§§tzzrgzgiuges THE NECROMANCER in her
furmless and incoherently plotted of the seven NORTHANGER ti- Chi‘ y orrgi; 1i5t of approved Gothic titles. She "° d°“bt did
tles, THE NECROMANCER has an obscure and puzzling publication ‘ S°t'§'§-§e§ ta? to suggest the extremes in Teutonic absurdity
history. The Minerva-Press frontispiece for the 1794 edition of ‘ so eta E ari as Gothic fashions and factions. But if the novel
the romance asserts that it "is translated from the German of Tmoug e la Eons exanple of Germanic absurdity, it is at the
Lawrence Flmnnenberg by Peter Teuthold," but neither the exist- ‘S a€' cu rgglgndid instance of the Schauerroman at a point of
ence of Flamnenberg nor a German original can be verified. In sane tlmi T .:t,."
é792, the putative author, Karl Friedrich Kahlert, published in nu ra 10 a ' d
erlllall on GEISTERBANNER: EINE HUNDERGESCHICHTE AUS M no - 1 THE CASTLE OF MONTGOMERY. Lon on
uuo SCHRIFTLICHEN TRADITIONEN GESAMMELT (THE SPECTRAL gANhEgl;'E1‘\ 6 210' Keilff ““"°llZ;,'“}'§§Lii'§ii12%.». 1794.
uoumzous TALE COLLECTED FROM ORAL mo HRITTEN TRADITIONS). The ' d'“‘"§°‘d,,,o,,S. No", '
incohezeniiesd of the novel may be the result of Teuthold's in- Egtﬁlg T§§e- Domestic Gothic (more domestic than Gothic, a
consis en an incom etent translatin f i ‘ ' '
was not a novel gt all but an ant? T “ha; n the °r1g]na] fen terrgr elements)
l a b t ii - n pt: s rs. GOTHIC QUEST
Black Forest. This thesis explains Thz °gEC80MA:g§3': abggfline B1°graph1ca1 and Researc a a umme 1
. . . . . 9 .263.
structure, _amorphous incident, and dislntegrative story line. D
Sadleir's view, that ‘THE NECROMANCER would naturally be what it critigal 5ynop5i5- This is a first family romance by ah ac“
is a conglomerate of violent e isod th l d t th - ' ' ld h tl apprentice herself
ana not a1ways achieving eve" Pb] es '°“" ""59 °9e er complished Gothic amateur who wou s or Y
ase an f 1 " 1 -- ' I ~ ll ‘f’ ‘fl-lenw of l-"is
does not detract from what he calTs th§ea3thor?g]E:hee:eg:eTiE- to the master’ Monk Le“1S' But the °rr1 ‘C 1" f h
' - - ' ' NE althou h the strains 0 5 9
tic fervour in the handling of the quasi-supernatural." Eveh 'if > ‘S :0? yet] étsgghiimeat ::gE:émestic malaise are much in evi-
the plot cannot be comprehended (and it cannot), the book 3 gear u Tovgella Kelly began her Gothic career with a mild and
abounds in stunning Gothic effects and Schauerromantik climaxes. egcet f Si] history whose tone reflects the muted Gothicism of
In the preface, the translator avers that "the strange and €?a:§ Regwe-Z OLD ENgL15n Bngqn (see #355). The castle itself is
.%

178 ‘ THE FIRST GOTHICS THE FIRST GOTHICS 179
quite Pleasant and comfortable except for a single alleged] mic reception committee--"totally inclosed her. The head W68
haunted suite of chambers, an obvious derivation from tn: large and almost shapeless; the eyes seemed globes of fire; and
haunted compartment in THE OLD ENGLISH BARON's Lovel Castle The the gaping jaws emitted sulphurous flames." This abominable
daughters of Montgomery Castle, Ellen and Madeline suffer embrace begins a Gothic courtship for Jennet which takes her
various domestic distresses and marital embarrassments but the eventually KO the ""Pl"mbed 'e¢e55e5 °f the ibb9¥- I" the burial
"ﬂ'dly_qualify as Gothic heroines. Each endures several unpleasl vaults of St. Asaph she has a liaison with an animated skeleton
ant ePl$°de5 Mhlch mlght have been rendered in Gothic terms had , and watches in enrapt horror as the skull beckons her to ap-
the author chosen to indulge herself in violent fantasy in her proach This supernatural illusion and all of the others, how-
flrst "°'*' Elle“ makes 5 bad marriage and her sister is sent to ever are tricks created by Lord Belmont who is also disclosed
the keEPl"9 of a selfish aunt when the Montgomery family is to be the cordial fiend who had welcomed Jennet to the Abbey of
threatened with bankruptcy. At points, Mrs. Kelly's landscapes St Asaph. After so much Gothic frenzy, the novel loses (or more
l" the VlCl"ltY of Montgomery Castle take on an eerie Radclif- precisely, relinquishes) all of its supernatural momentum by
Tea" ?Pl@"d°r Suggesting that she had studied the Gothic topo- reverting to the insipid Radcliffean ending. Thus, a promising
9f6Phl9$ of Mrs. Radcliffe's novels. Mrs. Kelly was not the Gothic again is shattered against the rock of solid reason. Even
first young writer to waver between the older novel of weepin the amiable skeleton was moved by an intelligent rat stationed
sentiment and the new novel of terror which coexisted with thg within the skull. The heroine's exit to the world of sweetness
Older type’ and light also sees her marriage to her foster brother, Ll°"9l
211 Ke‘]y Isabella THE ABBEV OF ST A Douglas, a connubial development considezﬁd by Iiﬂbellﬂ K@ll¥ t°
- - - . ~ * _ ' c e.
for wiliiam Lane, 1795' SAPH. London . Minerva Press ~ be mandatory to the conpletion of the Go ic cy
"°d°T" REe“ltl°"5= "°"° 212 Kelly Isabella. THE RUINS or AVONDALE PRIORV. London 1 Minerva
G°t"l¢ lyPe: Pure or high Gothic (in the novel's maiden- l Press for Hilliam Lane, 1796.
§?L'§§§§?.i§§i‘§§§‘iie. an D t S "°“°'" ‘*°°““‘°"“ "°"$ R - (t .1 >
a a a: ummer . - ' - uin error mo e
Tarr, CATHOLICISM IN GOTHIC riciion,S5.i§§lIEn§#i§T't§;§§§a Eiﬁﬁlipliﬁii “°§SZ°EnZse§?§n Data: Sunmers, GOTHIC QUEST,
R. “The Problem of the Gothic Novel in waiesl" NATIGNAL LI- pp.101 104; Lévy. LE ROMAN 'BOTHlQUE" ANGLAIS. on-403. 404.
ERARY OF‘ WALES JOURNAL, 13 (1963): 67-69; Lévy, LE ROMAN 408, 4l1, 413, 414, 415, 416, 418, 436.
GOTHIQUE ANGLAIS, pp.403, 405, 409, 410, 412, 416, 418. ‘ _ _ .
, . _ Critical Synopsis: By the time she had written her third
Crltlial 5y"°P5l51 l$ab9llﬂ Kelly Yeierves a larger portion Minerva-Press novel Mrs. Kelly had dispensed with all domestic
of her story for Gothic activities than was the case in MADE- and sentimental tendencies in order to dedicate herself to Goth-
LINE: OR, THE CASTLE OF MONTGOMERV (seé #210) although the per- ic fiction However she remained disposed toward Radcliffean
sistent domestic and sentimental elements indicate that she had resolutions of the heroine's inmurements relying upon a recon-
"°t Yet totally conmitted herself to Gothicism. The domestic ciliation with the rational world at the terminus of the
plot involves the marital mistakes of Elinor and Lionel Dou las maiden‘s adventures. By 1796, Mrs. Kelly had alS° Perfected her
children of Sir Malcolm Douglas. The Gothic plot occupies ilself imitation of the tinely faint, a necessary ﬂiiet °f all Rad°llf'
"it" t“e ‘“°e'"°t"'al t'a'ﬂll§ and abbey confinements of the fean heroines for dealing with the ultimately terrifyin9- One
orphaned ward of the Douglas family, Jennet Aprieu. She is dili- i typical Gothic panic defines Ethelinde's function in THE RUINS
Qeﬂtly Vlctlmlled by Lord Belmont, an exciting Gothic OF AVONDALE PRIORV: "Motionless with horror, a moment she stood
reincarnation of the Richardsonian roué, Robert Lovelace out aghast when gathering a degree of frantic courage from despera-
whose prurient tactics also owe their inspiration to Monk tion lshe rushed forward, but her strength failing, she gTa$Ped
Le“l§'5 Amb'°5l°- Th5 P6556995 describing Jennet's sexual emer- a hahging bell and sunk lifeless on the floor." Hhat d0 the
gencies are nunerous and closer in their florid style to the Gothic heroine's swoons, incarcerations, and deliriums synbol-
excesses of Lewis than to the restraint of Mrs. Radcliffe when ize? Hhy is her natural habitat a gloomy ruin? As Ann B. Tracy
her attacker goes into action, "he clasps her to his tumultuous has. shrewdly noted ruins occurring in Gothic titles and in
bosom, while his hand, with indecent freedom wanders over her Gothic scenery designate on the symbolic level the remnants of
lovely bosom." The dilapidated Abbey of st. Asaph is directl demolished religious ideals. "a fallen vﬂrld "here dl$°"e"‘e"
adjacent to the pastoral little farm where Jennet has taken uy characters live in fear and alienation, haunted -by images °f
r§$lqence. Thus, we have a Gothic world of enjoyable terrors img i their mythic expulsion, by its reDerCH5$l°"$» a"d bY 3“ a"a'e'
Dlnging upon a bucolic world of boring bliss. In the prescribed la ness of their unavoidable wretchedness-" 5UCh.PT0f0""d 5l9"lfl'
mode of all good Gothic heroines Jennet prefers the darkness of ' cances are aPPi'°"t EVE" l" the m°S¢ Svhﬁrflclil 5°t"l° "°Vel5
the Abbey to the brightness of her cottage and simply cannot and such an iconography of doom is particularly felt in that
stay away from the enticing ruin which accunnodates her Gothic type of Gothic novel labelled the romance of the ruin. The
“'9?5' 5e"°ath lts t°PPlBd archways she has the Gothic maiden‘s entire outcast situation of Ethelinde is eXDr€SS€d l" B $l"9l9
thrill of thrills when a stupendous spectre--a sort of phanta5- sentence early in the novel: “Involved in total darkness, every

180 n-/5 FIRST GUTHICS 
213. Kelly, Isabella. RUTHINGLENNE: on, THE CRITICAL MOMENT. London
terror now redoubled, and loud as her faintness would permit, I l
she shrieked and called, but in vain." Enclosed within the fal-
len world of perpetual darkness, disturbed by prophetic dreams
of doom, wracked with fear, guilt, and almost pleasurable dread, ‘
faced with Startling images of the malignant supernatural, Mrs.
Kelly's heroine dreams desperately of a release from her world's
ruined condition. Because the Radcliffean plot structure dic- '
tates redemption of the maiden by reason, Ethelinde is finally
delivered from the ruins of Avondale Priory, but not before her
delicate sensibilities have been exposed to the primal dread
signified by her ruined surroundings. Interpreted symbolically,
collapsed walls suggest collapsed faith, toppled turrets the
fall of the heavenly father, and yawning vaults the inminence of
chaos. Having served her sentence in the ruined world of Avon-
dale, Ethelinde is restored to the secure if subservient world
of marriage and good sense. But in her development as a Gothic
novelist, Mrs. Kelly would shortly abandon the terrors of Rad-
cliffean innuendo for the explicit horrors of Monk Lewis.
: Minerva-Press for Hilliam Lane, 1801. .
Modern Reeditions: None
Gothic Type: Sentimental Gothic (elements of THE MONK and THE
MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO)
Biographical and Research Data: None
Critical Synopsis: Based on her admiration for Monk Lewis,
the romance is a horrifying saga of the House of Ruthinglenne,
but with the horror considerably muted. With Lewis's literary
assistance, Mrs. Kelly (later Mrs. Hedgeland) exhibited some ‘
talent as a Gothic novelist, a gramnarjan, a poet, and a novel-
ist of manners. By adapting her work to suit the shifting
fashions, she was able to sustain herself on the literary scene ‘
for twenty-five years (1794-1819). Unlike THE BARON'S DAUGHTER
(see #214), RUTHINGLENNE is a novel of landscape and elegiac mo- i
ments with most of the scenery and incident adapted from THE
MVSTERIES OF UDOLPHO (see #349).
l
4. Kelly, Isabella. THE BARON'S DAUGHTER: A GOTHIC ROMANCE. London
: J. Bell, 1802.
Modern Reeditions: None I
Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (horror mode)
Biographical and Research Data: Sunmers, GOTHIC QUEST,
p.265.
-( . i Ian.»/an/;-v I
Critical Synopsis: Reissued by the Minerva-Press in 1812, /’*¥3"g”""/f ' €;q
Mrs. Kelly’s paradigmatic Gothic romance received the literary
endorsement of Monk Lewis himself. The house of John Bell had
published THE MONK. Lewis introduced Bell to Mrs. Kelly and v _ I . - Y
suggested that he consider a romance in the manner of THE MONK THE 1\I(—H'I‘ a<\.'~».\.\§.‘.*}I‘s\,, W
which Mrs. Kelly had in progress. The work was THE BARON'S ' ”¢’*/
DAUGHTER, a Gothic romance in four volumes which Bell undertook ’
to publish on Lewis's recommendation. The novel not only had , _ 1-0.
Lewis's sponsorship; its Gothicism resembled the Burgverliess l"““a°“ L“‘l"}'e(I 1 }[ayv b ‘
(or sealed dungeon) Gothic of THE MONK itself. Mrs. Kelly's sub-
§
1

Tlf FIRST BOTHICS 181
title, "A Gothic Romance," implied something more than the med-
ieval or the savage. The content shows her effort to excel her
master in sensational supernaturalism, graphic gore, and nau-
seous climaxes. Lacking only the libininous indelicacies of THE
MONK, THE BARON'S DAUGHTER is still a very acceptable attempt to
duplicate the sadistic moods of the novel of horror. Magalena,
I the deceased baron's daughter, is conceived along the lines of
Lewis's Agnes and Antonia and her subterranean miseries are
almost commensurate with Lewis's tormented women. Burgverliess
Gothic is the Gothic at its nihilistic extreme where there is no
return and where the characters can expect no rational relief
from their horrible circumstances. Discussed by Eino Railo in
Chapter II of THE HAUNTED CASTLE, the Burgverliess form of Goth-
ic fiction is appropriate to the cul de sac of Monk Lewis and
his followers such as Mrs. Kelly. Fine sensibilities and deli-
cate consciences cannot save the innocent maidens in this kind
of Gothic from the worst of deaths in the Gothic depths.
215. Kendall, A. THE CASTLE ON THE ROCK: OR, THE MEMOIRS OF THE EL-
DERLAND FAMILY. London : H.D. Symonds, 1798; Dublin : John
Rice, 1799. ‘
Modern Reeditions: None
Gothic Type: Gothified history (family saga)
Biographical and Research Data: None
Critical Synopsis: Kendall also wrote the historical Gothics,
TALES OF THE ABBEY: FOUNDED ON HISTORICAL FACTS (1801) and
DERHENT PRIOR! (1798). The French translation of THE CASTLE ON
THE ROCK by L.F. Bertin also appeared in 1798 under the title,
ELIZA: OU, MEMOIRES DE LA FAMILLE ELDERLAND, Paris : Hautin,
1798. The French translation in the Sadleir-Black Gothic Col-
lection (PZ2.K47a) is currently being examined. The novel
appears to have the moderate Gothic qualities of Clara Reeve's
OLD ENGLISH BARON (See #355) although it must be added that the
French translations of many of the English Gothics are creative
and not literal translations. Since the original English version
of the novel remains to be scrutinized, this item must be listed
as unseen by the bibliographer.
216. Ker, Ann. THE HEIRESS OF MONTALDE: OR, THE CASTLE OF BEZANTO.
London : J. and E. Kerhy, 1799.
Modern Reeditions: None
Gothic Type: Gothified history (terror mode)
Biographical and Research Data: Sunners, GOTHIC QUEST, pp.94,
Z00.
Critical Synopsis: The romance is a reworking of the familiar
themes of heredity discovered and mystery explained as found
throughout Mrs. Radcliffe's work and dating back to the
genealogical unravelings of Reeve's OLD ENGLISH BARON (see
' #355). The heiress (Delia Montfort) is kept from her estate by
being locked up in the haunted wing of Bezanto Castle. An avun-
cular villain, a chain of supposedly supernatural events, and
the arrival of a young chanpion in monastic disguise complete
the stock furnishings of‘ the romance. An example of a scarce

1
182 THE FIRST cornrcs ‘ THE FIRST cornzcs 183
Gothic, THE HEIRESS OF MONTALDE survives in a single edition. As tions fill many pages and provoke torrents of tears from the
l5 the Caae Vlth 5° ma"! Of the first G0thlC5» they m"5t he had l distraught Adeline. In cumbersome fashion, the delayed business
in their first edition or not at all. f of Adeline's freedom and birthright is finally rectified, Count
' Victor is punished for driving his wife to her doom, the monas-
ZI7. Ker, Ann. ADELINE ST. JULIAN: OR, THE MIDNIGHT HOUR. London : L tery where Alfonso is being held is raided by the ever_ ready
3- ahd 5- Kerb! fer 3- 5°h$0ra 1399- l Inquisition, and Adeline emerges from her many hours of midnight
Modern Reeditions: None I tribulation to the bright dawn of matrimony with Alfonso.
Ghthle Type; Phre hr hlgh Gﬁthlﬂ/Monastic Sho0k€r (terrer Because Ker apparently believed that each page of her Gothic
mode with sentimental elements) ' romance required its own complex blend of terror, tears, guilt,
5l°9raPhl¢al ahd Research natal 5"hhEr5s GOTHIC QUE5l- PP-94, and grief, her Gothic romance is simply a clumsy shadow of Mrs.
200; Tarr, CATHDLICISM IN GOTHIC FICTION, pp,9, 51, 59, 67, * Radciiffe-S art_
I01, 103, I04, 105. l 1
. - Z18. Ker, Ann. EDRIC THE FORESTER: on, THE MVSTERIES OF THE HAUNTED
Critical Synopsis: The pattern of poetic justice in maiden- 1 cHAM5ER_ Luhduh ; J_F_ Hughes, 1817._
centered Gothic novels coincides with the maiden's ordeal and “ Modern Reeditions; None
release from the haunted castle. But Ann Ker's management of the Gothic Type; Gothified history (terror model
pattern is so laboriously executed and diluted by subplots that Biographical and Research Data: Sunners, GOTHIC QUEST, pp.93,
the maiden's heroic ordeal is not easily traced. The time period 173_
of this very lethargic Gothic is the France of Louis XIII and
Cardinal Richelieu‘(1585-1642). The principal locale is the Cas- l gritieai Syngpgiﬁl After the farrago of ADELINE 5T- JULIAN
tle of St. Julian near the village of St. Amans in Languedoc. ’ (see #217) Ann Ker brought her inherited Gothic materials under
According to Gothic rules. the Castle is linked by underground better control. Her EDRIC THE FORESTER is also indicative of a
passageways to a suspicious monastery where maidens from the ' trend among the Gothic novelists of the early Nineteenth Cen-
dlstrlct have 5°mEtlme5 Qehe "BVer T0 he heard fram agalh, where . ' tury. Hriters who began as pure Gothicists tended later to sub-
strange lights flicker nightly, and where odd shrieks pierce the ‘ ordinate their Gothicism to some historical theme or pseudo-
nisht- The story begins when Boron dc Scmonvillc and his son, historical motif thus producing historical fiction with a
Alfahiaa hear eerle mhilc Camlhq fr°m a dark 9r°Ve a5 they I secondary Gothic residue. The mouldering tower, the haunted
rethrh h°me frum Parl5- HaVlh9 already heard r"m°r5 Of a mY5ter- ’ chamber or the frightful castle which had formerly been the
l°"5 lady Of 3t- Amans Vh0 hauhts the qladcs ahd fills the l dominant arenas of action now became subsidiary devices or
forests near Castle St. Julian with sad music, they turn aside r effects in an otherwise antique story or legend. EDRIC THE FQR-
to invcsti9ote- here. they encounter the lovcly Adeline. o seam- i ESTER can stand as a typical exanple of this shifting emphasis,
strcss ond Porcelain beauty who d vides her Gothic duties for it is an historical novel with transient Gothic episodes and
between serving as victim~in-residence in nearby St. Julian Cas- effe¢¢5_ Faults such as the stylistic density aha E"mbr°"5
tle and playing mournful airs on her guitar in the woods. As an , plotting of Ker's earlier work have not disappeared entirely,
infant, she had been handed over to the harsh care of Madame de .‘ but this book does seem to be better literature perhaps because
Belmont by her dyina mother. Eloize do Beoucloir 5t- Julian, who , it is less consciously Gothic than ADELINE ST. JULIAN. Neverthe-
had been hounded to on corly grove by the very bad.——hencc very less, with the example of Sir Halter Scott before him, the
attractive--Count Victor St. Julian. Count Victor also main- ' rayieuer in THE MONTHLY REVIEH for June, 1818, found nothing_ to
tained some sort of mysterious association with the evil monks l’ admire in Eppig, caiiing it ha paitry performance" whgge mugiia-
and diabolic rituals. Count Victor has other haunted castles in i , tion of English history was matched by “a total Want at
the area too. In fact, he seems to be owner and operator of a .§ grammatical accuracy.“ Vet, the book was eagerly sought and
whole chain of dreadful fortresses including St. Clair Castle in ¢% bought and its success may also be gauged by its inclusion in
R°"5§lll°" "his" is rcscrved for the most compelling cases of bi willian Hazlitt's ROMANTICIST AND NOVELIST'S LIBRARY of revived
maidenly resistance to his dark designs. The usual genealogical i titles in I839. The titular hero of the story is absent for long
mystery perplexes Adeline and drives her to seek her destiny in 1 intervals in order to permit the three Gothic women, Ellen,
these various dark jails furnished by her father. Alfonso's in- r Eigiva, and Lady Jane, to despair, suffer, and flhally Prevall
volvement with Adeline naturally leads to love which naturally over their Norman masters in an unsettled England just after the
leads t° Shlft $eDararl°" ahd Perseﬁhtlbh for the Dalr- hhlle l Norman victory at Hastings. Somewhat in the manner of the royal
Adeline is detained. then Bothically entertained. behind the twins who are confined in Sophia Lee's THE RECESS (see #240),
walls of Count Victor's various establishments, the young man Ellen and Elgiva are locked away in a Norman tower whose vshape
_runs afoul of the outwardly ascetic but inwardly lecherous In- is a replica -of the Tower of L0nd0n- Their release l5 the
ouisitor, Father Donoiere- Adelinc's solo comfort is the regular s product of a ruse by Lady Jane who stations herself within the
opportunity she has to converse with her mother's vigilant l haunted chamber and plays the role of avenginq 30e¢tre- Alth°"9h
ghost, as vociferous o fairy soduother is is to be found this is a genuine Gothic liberation, the majority of the novel's
anywhere in the annals of Gothic fiction. Her tender declama- ‘ events show that the emotional tenperature within the haunted

184 THE FIRST cornrcs THE ;1R5r ggrnlcs 185
castle has started to fall back into the probable range. Instead maiden-centered Gothics of the Radcliffean group and the
of a thunderous Gothic novel with fake historical trimmings, neo-5otnit experinents of the Bronte sisters. Glenarvon himself
what we have in EDRIC is historical fiction with some occasional is "more terrifying and treacherous than any figure who ever
Gothic upholstery. i stepped out of Byron's own pages, 6 PT°t°tYP1C Heithcllff. 6 53'
_ tan with an occasional touch of the angel." _Not only 15 the
219. LADY JANE GREY: AN HISTORICAL TALE. London : Minerva-Press for novel a warning against revolutionary Byronic politics, but on
hilliam Lahei 1791- , tne pergﬂnal level "it partakes of the author's revulsion
Moder" Reeditions: N°"e a ainst the enthusiasm and sensibility which she believed to
Gothic Type: Gothified history (terror elements) have ruined her life." The autobiographical heroine is the en-
Biographical and Research Data: None rupturing Irish heiress, Calantha Deleval, a romantic neuras-
thenic doomed to become the amorous prey of Glenarvon because of
critical Synopsis: The tragic 5t°rY °f the qheeh "h° '919"ed ‘ her uncontrollable romanticism. Her practical father matches and
f°F "1"? dﬂy5i Lady Jane Grey (1537-1554), was a natural subject marries her to a practical man, Henry Mowbray, the Earl of Avon-
for a Gothic romancer to undertake. Historical authenticity, of dale, By doing so he hopes to avert emotional catastrophe for
C°"F5E. is abandoned in favor of Gothic melodrama laden with all his uaugnter_ In a Gothic novel, however, evil must be stronger
°f the tPﬂPPings of the emergent form. Lady Jane's Grey's story ‘ tnan good and fear more likely than joy or hope, even if only
was a dark one, and her character highly suitable to the stand- temporarily, Having visited Regency London and been pulled into
ard 5°thiC T019 Bf PeF5E¢"ted mild?" Cahﬂht 1" 5 5t'"99lE 7°" \ its fashionable dissipations, Calantha returns to her husband's
POWEF Bhd buffeted betieeh l0v6 ﬂhd d6ith- other PIBYQTS 1" the Irish castle suffering from a chronic case of ennui curable only
historical drama of her life are also readily adapted by the by a passionate affair with the wickedest man she can give
novelist to the recognized Gothic roles. The Duke of herself to During ah evening of bad weather, a night meteoro-
Northumberland who had devised the scheme to put her on the iu ioally -suited to the peregrinations of Gothic villains,
th'°"e after the death °f the b°Y k1"9» Edhard VI, 9" Jhly 6, Glgnarvon enters her life and takes control. He has all of those
1553, is easily converted into an operative Gothic villain. murose and proud Byronic talents capable of drawing the purest
Northumberland's son and Lady Jane Grey's husband, Lord Guild- nnmnn to the darkest damnation. He is brutal, deceitful, cun-
ford Dudley, becomes along with his royal wife, the pathetic and ning haughty boastful, and very public about his previous
unconprehending victim of his father's powerful plots. The , Sexual gonquests --a long list of ruined women. Having enslaved
Catholic queen-to-be, Bloody Mary Tudor, required no further galantha and promised to live with her, he goes to London in-
Gothification by the romancer to complete the tale of terror, Stead tn brag about his most recent triumph. Byron himself V35
betrayal, cruel power, and death. Many fictitious characters, a gynically amused over the exaggerated Byronism of this.portrait
royal phantom or two, and the grim setting of the Tower of telling a friend in a letter that Caroline's Glenarvon was a
London contribute to the excellence of this impressive Gothified "poor likeness" since he had not sat still for her long enough
history‘ for an accurate picture to be made. The real Caroline bungled a
Z20 L _ suicide attempt in an effort to regain Byron's attentions. The
- imh. Lady CdF0l\"e- 5LEhhRV0N- L0"d°" I Hehry C°lh"T"- 1315; fictionalized Caroline, Calantha Deleval, follows Glenarvon_ to
republished by colburn 1" 1355 as THE F“TAL PA5SI0h- his London lair, falls ill, and dies in his arms. The retribu-
Modern Reeditions: Scholar's Facsimiles and Reprints, 1972, , tion which overtakes Glenarvon is also fictional revenge. He is
ed. James L. Ruff; Curtis Books, 1973, ed. Anne Fremantle. afflicted with madness, sees his property destroyed, and is
Gothic Type: Gothic roman A clef (terror mode). l sunmoned to his death by the nightmare vision of a ghostly ship
Biographical and Research Data: Clubbe, John. "GLENARVON . manned by a spectral crew sailing into the blackness. Although
Revised--and Revisited,“ HORDSHORTH CIRCLE, 10 (1979): 205- A» tne novel remains a minor chapter in the Byron saga of ruined
Z17; Gﬂfver, JosePh- "Gothic Ireland: Lad Carol‘ L b‘ ‘ ' ' ‘ ' '
i t t t l Gothicism opened some new
GLENARVON,“ IRISH UNIVERSITY REVIEH: A JOURNAL OF IR1§H 2? S if and ~"?SFeq I1veS' I S 'ra"S1 Iona
UD-
IES, 10 (1980): 213-228; Kelsall, Malcolm. "The Byronic Hero
and Revolution in Ireland: The Politics of GLENARVUN," BYRON
JOURNAL, 9 (1981): 4-19.
. wqJ.A
possibilities for the Gothic romancer.
221 Lamb Caroline. ADA REIS: A TALE. London : John Murray, 1823.
Modern Reeditions: None _ \
Gothic Type: Urientalized Gothic/roman a clef
Critical Synopsis: The novel is the literary retaliation of Biographical and Research Data: Thorslev, Peter Jr. THE BY-
Lady Caroline Ponsonby Lamb against the man who had ruined her, RQNIC HERQ- TYPES AND PROTOTYPES. Minneapﬂllii ‘N 1 Hi""e$°ta
Lord Byron. Hith a narrative skill inspired by her humiliating 1 UP 1962- Ehrstine, John H. "Byron and _the MetiPh!$1¢ °f
vexperiences as Byron's rejected mistress, she Gothicizes her i self-Destruction," in THE GOTHIC IMAGINATION: ESSAYS IN DARK
unhappy love affair with a man she had once described as “mad, I R0ﬂANTICI$M_ Pullman, HA : Washington State UP, 1974, pp.94-
bad, and dangerous to know." Recent critical interest in GLEN- ' 1gg_ ' ' '
ARVON_ relates the novel to the Gothic tradition and t
s
that it might be seen as the natural link between theuggldei Critical Synopsis: Caroline Lamb's wild romanticism and her

186
ms FIRST EUTHICS : THE FIRST con-ucs 187
tendencies to fantasized autobiography are everywhere evident in Z22_ Lambe_ George, THE MYSTERIES OF FERNEY CA5TLE! A R9"ANCE OF THE
this exotic piece. In atmosphere, setting, and characterization i ' SEVENTEENTH CENTURY. London : B. Clarke for Henry Colburn,
her personalized Gothic novel shows its debt not only to Byron's 1 1310.
own Turkish and eastern tales--MAZEPPA, LARA, and THE COR- v Modern Reeditions: None _ _
SAIR--but also to the bizarre qualities of Beckford's VATHEK Gothic Type: Gothified history (Radcliffean imitation)
(see #030). Her negative version of the Byronic hero is the Biographical and Research Data: Sumners, GOTHIC BIBLIOGRAPHY,
infernally fascinating freethinker and ladykiller, Ada Reis, a ‘ I p_431. l
reincarnation of Glenarvon in Arabic costume. He is irresistibl
Y l _ , .
handsome, consistently inconsistent in his abusive treatment of I Critical Synopsis“ The romance is sometimes attributed to the
women, and interested like the Caliph Vathek in Satanic experi- _ Gothic novelist, Robert Huish (see #188), but the Sadleir-Black
ences and the whereabouts of hell. He has travelled the world cnllettion's edition (PZ2.L354m) shows "G. Lambe, esq." on the
glutting his appetites and destroying women. A pact with the , title page. Lengthy, but undeniably a Gothic of high quality,
devil and a voyage to the kingdom of darkness seem to be his f THE Mv5TERlE5 of FERNEY cA$TtE is a grisly biography of the bad
innmdiate goals as the story opens. Having murdered his last . haronet, Sir George Ferney. Since his father was an accomplished
mistress in a fit of rage, Ada Reis now finds himself in posses- sadist, punishing George for such infractions as not remembering
sion of their illegitimate child, Fiormonda, Caroline Lamb's the name; of the harses in his stables, George is not _entirely
alterego figure in the novel. The relationship between father » responsible for growing up bad and vicious. To annoy his neigh-
and daughter is similar to the brutal tension which often exists bars and relatives, he courts the HgliE$t H°m3" i" the C°H"tY»
between these two relatives in a Gothic novel. Enthralled by ‘ the daughter of a nearby rich squire whose "eyes sunk like a
Fiormonda's vulnerable innocence, Ada Reis devotes himself to pig's in her head and were accompanied by an uncommon squint.“
"er C°'F"Ptl°"- H9iVlll ¢0"d"¢t B P0l$0"0U$ m°Fal 9XPe'lm@"t , He also occupies ‘himself with the renovation of Eerney Castle
just to discover whether or not her natural virtue can be V into a private preserve of dissipation making especially certain
changed into unnatural vice. Such psychological exploitation that his ruins are up to Gothic specifications. One wing is fit-
might have appealed to Nathaniel Hawthorne whose famous story, X ted out for the worst villainies: "The principal scene of his
"RiPPﬂ¢Cl"1'5 Daughter" echoes the father_da“9hter situation of riotous sports was in the eastern wing of the castle, which had
ADA REIS. To diabolize his own child, he enlists the aid of the , been suffered to go to ruin by its former possessor and which
evil Jew, Kabkarra, a sort of professional demon who can alter the present one showed no inclination to repair. The whole
SHBDE5 (ii 0"e D0l"t, he b9C°m@5 B" 9"°'m°"5 $Dlder) and knows castle was of Gothic structure." There are some wonderfully
the route to the lower world. Along with his equally malicious ariginal touches in Lambe's descriptions of Sir George's Gothic
mother, Shaffou Paca, Kabkarra now presides over Fiormonda's amusement palace as when the reader is told that "A dog can't
life as her tutor in wickedness. The fopr characters form a kind bark without bringing down stones and rubbish," or when Sir
of expedition to go to hell in order to complete Fiormonda's .4 George's surly friend, Sir Henry Hiﬂtﬂﬂ, 3m"$@5_ hlm5§lf _b¥
education and fulfill her father's sharpest desire to go to shooting stone angels off the chapel rooftop. Given his vile
hell. The infernal regions seem to be located somewhere south of Character, it does not take Sir George very long to graduate to
Peru on the South American continent. The four have numerous the role of full-fledged Gothic villain specializing in the ter-
bizarre adventures enroute to their infernal destination, Fi0r- rorification of local maidens He marries the innocent Miss
monda ‘becoming amorously attached to the Count Condulmar. ' uinton, apparently because ‘he wants a maiden to practice his
Condulmar is yet another B ro ‘ ' ’
y nic specimen of the fatal lover sadism on. She soon notices ‘the churlish disposition of her
whose attentions are deadly. The hell of this novel is just as husband as it shnne in its most hideous light." Now prepared for
unsatisfying to the sinners who seek it as the Halls of Ehlis in . ; real needs of darkness, he carries B wretched Qifli M3‘!-_ t° 5
VATHEK. Arriving there at last, Ada Reis beholds Fiormonda and i ' burial vault beneath the chapel shoves her into a coffin, and
Condulmar feasting on poisonous plants and lamenting their it begins to imitate Lewis's Ambrosio by combining sex with murder!
doomed condition. Because the all f l t h ' ‘ " ' ' ' ~
y ee me ap ysically swindled ‘He seized her in his arms, she struggled, and called on heave"
by the hell experience, the perverse Kabkarra arranges for a i'if to save her: and now !h8 limb Vrlthed ""de' the c1§“5 Of the
second life for the characters to teach them the lesson they had *LT' wolf." The first volume of the novel aPPTE"tl¢e5 5!’ Ge°'9e t°
missed while alive,--that where they are, hell is. Bored once ‘Z high Gothic villainy of this sort. The three succeeding_ volumes
again with their second chance at life, Condulmar and Ada Reis Y} constitute the formal Gothic novel segment of this Gothic. There
soon fall backward into the flaming pit as Fiormonda is spared %, is a standard Gothic cast with props consisting of the tormented
the final dannation. By the double death and damnation of the Q' maiden, Eliza, George's lost son, the good Henry Ferney, guardi-
thﬂ Byfvnlﬁ mileii Caroline Lamb fantasized her emotional eman- ' an ghosts; charnel chases, noises from the depths of the castle,
cipation from Byron's deadly control over her life and insured genealogical revelation, retribution, punishment of villainy,
her own recovered innocence and salvation from sexual passion in aha the restoration of Ferney Castle to a decent heir. Henry
fﬂ"Cy if not in fact. cones to Ferney Castle to find and free Eliza having learned
that she has been seized by Sir George Eerney. if Sir George has
learned how to be Lewis's Ambrosio, Eliza has mastered the hys-

1&9
loo rwc FIRST cornzcs THE F1R5T GUTHIES
TLE or OTRANTO Manfred, (see #466) it is possible to char‘ ‘"6
terical outlook of Mrs. Radcliffe's Emily St. Aubert. lvlhen she progress of the’villain‘s name through several highly similar
first sees the spires of Ferney Castle, "she looked on its grey Gothic novels. From Manfred descends Manfroné in Mary Ann
and mossy walls, on the ruinous state of the greater part of it, Radcliffe's MANFRONE: OR, THE ONE-HANDED MONK (see #352). From
and on the desolate appearance of everything around it, instant- Manfroné, we come to Lansdell's Manfredi, a revival of the Hal-
ly recalling to her mind the terrible deeds which were reported polesque villain and a satisfactory facsimile of OTRANTD-Gothic,
to have been conmitted in it; and above all, the disastrous fate , the sort of Gothic in which an ancestral curse on the descend-
of Mary." About to rape Eliza, Sir George notices the birthmark ant; of a usurping family is worked out in supernatural
on her breast which identifies her as his daughter. About to Z manifestations and the collapse of the castle. The Gothics
slay the villain in this same scene (a family reunion, Gothic pubIi5hed by the Minerva-Press seldom offered illustrations.
style), Henry Ferney recognizes his father. "'No,' said Henry, tahsdell's MANFREDI is a curious departure, however, in its
'I will never be a parricide. I have lost my Eliza, but gained a frontispiece depiction of the reclusive and beleﬂ9"9T9d "e'°‘UE
Sister.'" Left to other forms of justice, the fleeing Sir George in her cryptic cell. Her attitude is much like Isabella's in
hides in the eastern wing of Ferney Castle where he is hunted QTRANTO when she is forced to make the journey along the cas-
down and shot by the King's officers, "the walls besprinkled tle'5 "long labyrinth of darkness." In MANFREDI, the subterra-
with his brains." An interesting feature of the conclusion of hean has all of the expected gloomy grandeur. To the maiden'S
the romance is Lambe's use of a vampire motif. Sir George is eye "The appearance of the ruins was extremely grand and the
buried "where four roads meet and with a great stake driven sculptured arches closely entwined by mantling ivy seemed to say
through his body." A final gory touch is provided when Sir Henry that magnificence had once there held its lofty reign." Fearsome
Ferney, who has missed the interment, visits the burial site to yQQdQut5 and horrifying engravings frequently adorned the text
exhunn the body of his father and administer his own massive of Gothic novels in their chapbook or bluebook formats. One of
blow to the stake. If one measure of a Gothic novel's success is the few scholarly treatments of Gothic novel illustrating St¥l95
its mounting series of hideous h k S‘ '
s oc s, ir Henry s last act upon and practices is Summers's CONNOISSEUR eSSay with Plates Cited
his father's corpse guarantees this novel's success. ' ah°ve_
223. Lancaster, Agnes. THE ABBESS or VALTIERA: on THE sonnows or A 225 Lansdeii $arah_ THE rowan: OR, THE ROMANCE OF RUT"'"E- P'i"‘°d
FALSEHOOD London = Minerva-Press r A K ’
- _ _ or . . Newman, 1816. I for the Authoress by Harry Smith, 1798.
Modern Reeditions: None Modern Reeditions: None
Gothic Type: Sentimentalized Gothic (toned-down monastic Gothic Type: Turret Gothic (terror mode and Radcliffean pro-
shocker)
Bivsravhital and Research Data: Summers. GOTHIC QUEST. no-29, §i§§§§Zii¢.i and Research Data: Tarr, CATHOLICISM in GOTHIC
as. I
FICTION, pp.31, 51, 96, 105. 117-
Critical Synopsis: The outlandish Catholic horrors of Ire- Critical Synopsis: Having written a successful Gothic by
land's THE ABBESS (see #198) are reduced to sentimental indis- copying the castle culprit in MANFREDI (see #224),_Lan$d@ll tﬂﬂk
cretions and polite shudders in this very muted version of a Halpole's Matilda, the daughter of Manfred who is murdered by
monastic shocker. In fact, the Gothicism of the novel is clearly her father in the tomb of Alfonso, and relocated the character
a recessive rather than a dominant feature. The amorous abbess ‘ aha her Gothic misfortunes to a German t°"@'- She 315° P°'m‘tted
or prioress of high Gothic fiction can be a terrifying and her heroine, Matilda, eventually to find her wﬂy_ Out °f t"e
delightful character. But deprived of repressive sexual energy 3 Gothic world in the manner of Mrs. Radcliffe‘s deliverances. One
as she is here, she loses all demonic appeal. The Abbess of scene from the romance will suffice to establish its type.
Valtiera resents the convulsions of the religious life, but she Exploring an unused and forbidden level of the tower, Matilda
cunmits no extravagant crimes and makes no pacts with the devil forces a reluctant portal to swing back revealing ‘a room hun9
E: texpressing her sense of entrapment. Thus, the novel lacks ' on all sides with black lighted by one high narrow window, and
a e t' ' ‘ ' '
ssen Ia element of defiant feminine wickedness necessary in the middle a coffin, covered with a black pail.‘ Readers of
to achieve high Gothic status. ' '
‘ Gothic fiction have been in this chamber before.
224. Lansdell, Sarah. MANFREDI, BARON ST. OSMUND: AN OLD ENGLISH R0- L’ Z26 Lathom Francis. THE CASTLE OF OLLADA. Minerva-Press for Hil-
MANCE. London_: Minerva-Press for William Lane, 1796. ; liam Lane, 1795.
Modern Reeditions: None -gm Modern Reeditiohs; hone ,
Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (terror mode) l‘ Gothic Type;.Pure or high Gothic (horror mﬂdﬁl
’ Biographical and Research Data: Sunnnrs, Montague, "The Il- 4- Biographical and Research Data: Sunmers, GOTHIC UUE5T, PP-
lustrations of the Gothick Novels," CONNOISSEUR, 98 (1936): 3 139 310-311; Mc Connochie, Arthur. "Francis tathom, For-
266-271; Sunnnrs, GOTHIC QUEST, pp.100, 404 (Plate XVI). gotien Goth n unpubligheﬂ Doctoral Dissertation, University
. . . _ of Virgina: 1949; varma, @°l"Ic FLAME, P-173; kévy. LE ROMA"
Critical Synopsis: From the usurping tyrant of Halp0le's CAS-
i

9” rue FIRST GOTHICS E THE FIRST cururcs 191
:ggTHé2gE' ANGLAI5, PD.400, 401, 402, 411, 433, 437, 448, purse) of the Schauerromantically avid reader of the late 1790's
’ ' ' whose taste for sham translations from non-existent German
sources had become highly profitable. A special fillip of THE
theﬁ:g::E:lm§g:0g5ii§ "gnogher haunted castle! Surely the misses ' MIDNIGHT BELL was Lathom's insertion of anecdotal material from
ders _ so exc‘ § grih ° 5° mi"Y stories of ghosts and mur- 1 the Reign of Terror in France, a clever Gothic contemporization
GUth%C nova] THg‘g:STLE90EX8iD9Tited reviewer of Lathom's first 1 of the Revolution's darker aspects. The two greatest authorities
October I79; vet th I fLADA, in the CRITICAL REVIEH for I on the Gothic novel, Michael Sadleir and Montague Sunnnrs, dif-
one a"d.somet%meS EH E gag i ic Lathom continued to manufacture fer sharply on the value and success of Lathom's "modern"
years from his fig t° ‘E r°Ta"°e5 °_¥ear_ for almost forty Gothic. Surmising that Gothic novel writing was for Lathom "a
flickerin of his h_ 2 b e"_'] 1" the field in 1795 to the final mere concession to public taste," Sadleir found THE MIDNIGHT
EvENTS_ 03 THE vIS;gN'0:'"l"9 Gothic flame in 1830 with MYSTIC BELL to be “queerly disappointing, clumsy in construction,
the théatré_ er“ h_ THE TAPESTRV. Lathom was also a man of , humourless, and mechanically a novel of suspense (each of the
pi]i"g of ’hgrroﬁp5 '5hC'"d9"G°thfC '"9@"Nil¥ "for the swift \ two first volumes ends with unexplained sensation)." But Summers
drama both as an :p°" grror de'lVE§ f'°m hi? iaste for melo- judged the novel "a first-rate specimen of its kind, a ‘German
Hove‘ is 'eI‘_S:i °'tag is 5 Playwright. This first Gothic ' Story,‘ which might, or might not, have a Teutonic original."
Shock with Lathom_ urg ? ;" bl°°dY _inCident and supernatural Lathom's counterfeit Germanism may be detected in such names as
Monk Lewis's h 5 Shy § C early leaning in rthe direction of ‘ Count Cohenburg, Frederic, Baron Kardsfelt, and Kroonzer as well
ghost as it oozegmzgr HQAHQ $P8CtF€S." Here is a typical Lathom as the Teutonic nomenclature applied to the Gothic locales of
legs were fasten drough an archway: A spectre whose arms and Smaldart Castle and wolf's Hood. But the solemn bell which gives
with wounds from ehiwa th egyy chains with a naked body covered the Gothic romance its inviting title is not very audible until
clotted hai; and W Cd . 9, °°q Still seemed to gush, with ‘ very late in the three volumes when its mournful tolling seem-
flame which burntegﬁ5thrlPPl"9 With bl°"d, Tﬁﬂdéred visible by a I ingly without any human hand is explained as the work of a mad-
gashes Stood bef eh§r°“" °f its head, replete with purple woman "for the purpose of keeping idle visitants from the castle
plot 0% this caSti]QFE G im, and uttered three deep groans.“ The with the idea of its being haunted." Lathom obviously mismanaged
The nave] is Si 116" Oghlt is not remarkable in any respect, i this promising Gothic acoustic. The substance of the story con-
latin Iibr ri mPfYtﬁ mi Ejtﬁ-Order shocker for the busy circu- centrates on the genealogical struggles of Adolphus of Castle
the gomancg $2 0 e :€TlOd. Flaced in late medieval Spain, Cohenburg. He has promised his mother to avenge the murder of
pathetic and h r _§n grt odox maiden-centered Gothic telling the » his father, his mangled corpse having been found in Holf's Hood.
peasant Hen 9 '1 5 OT! 07 the deStitute Eliza and the sturdy l The fraternal culprit seems to be his uncle, Frederic, who now
her fataer tglcgi a"d their 5""d'¥ $Hfferings at the hands of I holds sway over the family castle on the river Elbe in Saxony.
ias Lathoals Z ]a'°P °f 9llad6,_th€ typical Gothic paterfamil- Adolphus flees from the castle thus igniting the rumor that the
to {heir ow“ r9te aim gas to stimulate Gothic readers according son of the house has also been murdered by the mad mother and
pen" _a_1i" E €h§']6 0 hvrror and terror. Nevertheless, as a that "directly after a ghost began to walk, and every night at
tinugd to c:"f° 5¢;it, hl5,P'0dl9l°"5 aﬁd Prolonged career con- twelve o'clock it tolls the great bell in the south turret,
e en he d h oun e critics and gratify his Gothic public because that is the time she killed the young count.“ After some
V ‘yon is death in 1832. r service in the army of Saxony, Adolphus enters the Monastery of
St Helena where his religious life abruptly gives way to his
227. Lathom, Francis. MIDNIGHT BELL: A GERMAN STORY FOUNDED 0N INCI- T love for the young novice, Lauretta. Lathom had arranged to pre-
a:::E"I:eRgA% LIFE. London : H.D. Symonds, 1798. sent a monastic shocker within the larger castle thriller. Lau-
Gothic T eel ;°"$- F°]]° Pre55g 1953, ed. Devendra P. Varma. retta is seized by Ralberg and Kroonzer, but just as the rape is
Bio ra hggai “S9R°' hl9h Gothic (the Supernatural acoustic) about to occur Ralberg (actually, Count Byroff) recognizes the
Auegk PN0vELS§"A Fgéearch Data: Sadleir, Michael. THE uoRTH_ » daughter he lost when he was confined to the Bastille many years
Pamphlet N b. TNOTE T0 JANE AUSTEN. English Association »< before. Reunited with Lauretta, Adolphus returns to the family
um er 53, Nﬂvémber, 1927, pp.l5-I7; Sumners GOTHIC castle to unravel its mysteries and reclaim his heritage. Fol-
I- ,1 ' - ' - ‘
QUEST pp.84, 100 311-313; s ' 1 » ’ -
Jane Austen and the Gothic Romgigeri TACTSTJGS Gigi "E3253:
$?3;¢a:l@i 1g?4.2gv-ﬁg?-200; Tarr, CATHOLICISM 1n GOTHIC FIC-
. - 9- = - - » 75» 76» 78. 107, 120; Lévy, LE ROMAN
'4 .s
lowing numerous complications Adolphus finds that his father had
faked his death in Holf' Hood and that his brother Frederic was
his acconplice in this deception. Taken in by the ruse, Adol-
phus's mother had killed her husband thinking him to be Frederic
GOTHIQUEH ANGLA1Si PP-457» 597. 611. .‘ when her husband came into her darkened bedchamber to disclose
his trickery. Thus, if Adolphus carries out the vow he made to
, Critical Synopsis" Lathom's second Gothic romance is an ii ' ‘ ' ' '
. ' _ _ , other igi his mother he must slay her. Finally the intervention of the
:s:IHANGERdtitle selected for its satiric stereotyping by Jane iE*' church and the mother's retirement to a holy life spare Adolphus
ess in Gaghv entered in Catherine Morland's reading list of nec- ﬁg from his matricidal vow. The curtain then falls on the hero and
R y 0 i¢§- The Germanic realism announced by the subtitle fag. heroine restored to joy in the family castle of Cohenburg.
may be 3 Phﬂﬂy allurement calculated to catch the eye (and
3§i§;

192 THE FIRST GOTHICS / rue FIR$T GDTHICS 193
228. Lathom, Francis. MYSTERY: A NOVEL. London 2 T. Davison for H.D. ements)
S d ' ' -
¥m°" 5- 13Q0; Biographical and Research Data: Sunners, GOTHIC QUEST, pp.93,
Modern Reeditions: None . 317; Lévy, LE ROMAN "GOTHIQUE" ANGLAIS, pp.429, 620.
Gothic Type: Naturalized Gothic (domestic and sentimental el_
eme"t5) Critical Synopsis: One high Gothic passage describing one of
B‘ n" - < -
iograp ical and Research Data. Sunmers, GOTHIC QUEST, the hero's "astonishments' by a spectral dream will serve to de-
pp.316, 391; Lévy, LE ROMAN "GOTHIQUE" ANGLAIS, p.458. ’ fine the Schauerromantik tone of many episodes in _ASTONISH-
_ _ _ _ MENT!!! As Claudio ponders his paternity, "a figure griﬂﬂﬁd "P0"
Critical Synopsis: The novel begins as a story of marital him with a murderous smile, which discovered its horribly fanged
stress, grows mysterious when the hero goes to Italy, and be- J teeth; then dashed the lanp from its hand, and vanishing with a
comes thoroughly Gothic when a twin sister takes revenge on her loud yell, left the astonished Claudio in utter darkness.“ La-
sister and the brother-in-law she wanted to marry herself. "Mys- thom inclined toward that type of Gothic plot which traced the
tery" refers to the astonishment of the hero, young Charles Mel- sexual misadventures of a young man and the young man's hair-
ford, who believes that he has married Laura di Marvaldi but has breath avoidance of incest. To add to_his travails, several of
‘" fact married her Yi"dlCtiV9 TVI", Antonia di Marvaldi. Mel- the characters who complicate his quest for identity have sug-
ford's difficulties begin when he originally falls in love with gestive Shakespearean names and double identities themselves.
Margaretta but relinquishes her when the proposed marriage can- The company includes Claudio (the young man accused of lechery
"°t ﬂbtil" the blessing of the Parents. It is just a case of bad in MEASURE FOR MEASURE), Lodovico (taken from OTHELLO) and vioia
timing since the fathers of Margaretta and Charles expire before (the disguised heroine of THELFTH NIGHT). Lathom knew that the
consent can be given. In Italy, Melford is pursued by the ag- Gothic audience could always be counted upon to appreciate such
gressive Laura, already married to the Marchese di Marvaldi, but a Shakespearean cast'performing in Gothic roles. Lathom also en-
ready to desert him for Melford. He is followed to England by . joyed creating genealogical mazes knowing full well that such
Laura who convinces him that the Marchese has died making her labyrinths were precisely what Gothic readers always craved.
available for a legal marriage. The "mystery" is produced with a ‘ Stripped of its Gothic overlay, however, the tale itself adheres
comic flare as Lathom shows his proclivity for satire, farce, to the picaresque pattern of the likable but foolish foundling
and dramatic fatuity. Hhen Melford returns to Italy with his new getting himself into many predicaments only to be extricated at
and doting wife, Laura, he is welcomed back by none other than a the last moment by the reappearance of misplaced relatives. The
second Laura and a not-so-dead Marchese much to the perplexity Gothic picaro is Claudio, a subterranean Tom Jones who is accom-
"T M@lf0'd- Didn't he just marry Laura? At this point, the tone panied in his adventures by the sometimes loyal but occasionally
of MYSTERY darkens as the farcical becomes the frenetic. Mel- deceitful Lodovico. Claudio has been raised by the Di Bartelma
ford's Laura is actually Antonia, the infuriated twin sister who family, close friends of the Count di Ponta, Lodovico's father.
wanted the man that Laura got by mistake. Antonia swore to get Hhen Claudio was found by the Di Bartelmas, he had only a single
even with both and made sure to disgrace the Marvaldi family by possession,--a bracelet bearing a mysterious inscription. A
producing an illegitimate child in the process. In Gothic nov- cowled pilgrim makes his entrance, seems startled at the sight
els, the bastard child is always the conveyer of the incest of the bracelet, but holds his tongue. The pilgrim will later
theme._ The child of the vengeful Antonia turns out, of course, return when a father for Claudio is needed. Hith this stock
to be Margaretta, Charles's first love and now his daughter-in- situation prepared, Claudio's task is to find out who he is even
law. After these revelations, Gothic resolution follows rapidly i though he has been warned a96l"5t t"l5 Quest h¥ his f°5t9F Par‘
when Antonia kills first the Marchese, then herself leaving ents. The normal picaresque hero would take to the high road at
Melfurd t° Care i" fatherly fashion for the woman he once wanted this point, but in the Gothic version of picaresque narrative,
to marry. Melford generously sees to Margaretta's welfare by ar- he goes underground or he visits haunted and horrible settings.
'i"9l"9 for her marriage to young Hallace, an Englishman not un- ‘ Together with some extremely gruesome nightmares, the central
like Melford himself in manners, morals, and integrity. Lathom's incident of Claudio's search for self and father is his brush
Y9'5@tilit¥ as a writer of romances is once more apparent in his with incest. Guided to the boudoir of a loose woman named Yiola
mixing of Gothic motifs with the novel of domestic feeling. In ‘ by a pandering monk, Claudio is about to surrender his virginity
his preface to MYSTERY, he had candidly stated that his only ' when Viola recoils and faints at the sight of the bracelet, tru-
P"TP059 i" Writing the novel was to provide an hour's diversion ly a horrified whore. Viola's waiting woman, Zelia, picks up
for those sorts of readers who had serious tastes but sometimes where her mistress left off, seizes the astonished Claudio, and
wanted ‘a book of this kind for an hour's relaxation from severe turns him into her sexual factotum. Many other astonishments
study-" ,’ crowd Claudio's life and hinder his search for self. But even-
’ _ - L _ tually (and inexorably in the case of Gothic fiction) identities
229. Lathom, Francis. ASTONISHMENT!!! A ROMANCE 0F A CENTURY AGO. e are sorted out and revelations made. The pilgrim was, of course,
London : T.N. Longman and 0. Rees, 1802. 7‘: Claudio's father; the prostitute, Viola (also Horatia) is his
M°de'" Re9ditl°"5= "°"E ‘$3 mother and also the mistress of the Grand Inquisitor; Claudio's
G°thic TYPE: Pure °' high Gvlhit (quest story, picaresque el- ‘gr female keeper, Zelia, appears to be his stepsister although here
we

19‘ THE FIRST GOTHICS J. rue FIRST GOTHICS 195
Lathom's narrative remains too murky to be certain. ASTDNISH- ’ odd treatment of Averilla. One of the bad characters of the
MENT!!! ends with the domestication of Zelia and the triumphant tale, Rodovina Maritos, had stolen the boy twin from the Di
homecoming of the wiser Claudio. Every single happening and Rosalva household in order to cause inheritance problems for
character in ASTONISHFENT!!! confirms the formulaic nature of Signor Di Rosalva. But Di Rosalva had been equal to the emer-
Gothic fiction. Originality of form and theme was the last qual- gency and had solved it by substituting the girl twin (Rosa-
li-.Y that the Gothic readership desired or expected in its horrid ' bella) for the missing son. It was Rosﬂbellﬂ, "Qt 5llVl°s "I'D
fare. For the first time in literary history, a powerful reader- I refused to return Averilla's love, and it was Silvio, not Rosa-
cartel4had come to dictate that its product be manufactured with bella, who had saved little Flavia. The spiteful Rodovina, per-
a cloying sameness. Thus, made-to-order Gothics such as Lathom's - petrator of all these painful confusions, breaks down under
ASTONISHENT!!! Sllread like flowers of evil planted by rapaciuug questioning and is sent to the scaffold with her accomplice,
publishers across the literary landscape. Iago Zinati. The double nuptials of Silvio and Rosabella to
_ ' Virgilia del Bagua and Felix del Alvaretti givev the novel a
230. Lathom, Francis. THE IMPENETRABLE SECRET, FIND IT 0UT!. London final shakesoeares" m°"@"t which recalls the triple wedding it
: Minerva-Press for Lane, Newman, 1805. ' the end of A MIDSUWIER NIGHT'S DREAM.
Modern Reeditions: None ‘ '
Gothic Type: Domestic Gothic (twin theme, Shakespgarean names -i z31_ Lathom, Francis. THE NYSTERIOUS FREEBOOTER: OR THE DAYS OF
and 5it'"*ti°"5) ' QUEEN BESS. London : Minerva-Press for Lane, Newman, 1806.
Biographical and Research Data: Summers, GOTHIC ouesi, pD.B6 ‘ Modern Re@diti°hs= "One
99, 318-320; Lévy, LE ROMAN "GOTHIQUE" ANGLAIS, p.446, ' Gothic Type: Gothified history (terror mode)
_ _ Biographical and Research Data: SUilll'l9r5a GUTHIC QUE5T, DP-39»
Critical Synopsis: The title issues a good Gothic challenge 32, 35, 100, 329-321; I-é‘/Ya LE ROMAN "GDTHIQUE" RNEL/U5.
to the reader now accustomed to Lathom's genealogical puzzles. D-431-
§""'!l@'5 quotes from three favorable reviews of the novel to ‘ _ . .
indicate Lathom's progressive acceptance by the critical c()n||'|u||- Critical Synopsis: The border wars with Scotland during Eliz-
ity as a Gothic author of developing talent. The reviews in THE abeth's reign (1558-I603) give the Gothic novel its strong
MONTHLY MIRROR alld THE BRXTI5H CRITIC praised the book for its historical coloration. Lathom combines historical saga with some
handling of suspense. THE CRITICAL REVIEN which had often treat- I typical Gothic shsulsh fvr the heroine. Rosalind. and some
ed Gothic novelists very roughly apparently approved of Lathomis , equany t_yplCal Gothic problems of paternity for the young hero,
concessions to a mderated Gothic in which suspense and probab- ' Edward. Lathom himself was careful to announce in his Dl‘efﬂCE
Hit-Y "ere "lad? '3°lllPﬂ'5lblE- ‘From the opening of the story to ‘ that he was writing entertaining or fictive history. Readers who
the discovery of the secret, our curiosity increases " wrote the wanted factual accuracy from their historical fiction were ad-
reviewer, "though we cannot attribute to curiosity alone a sen- ‘ vised to go elsewhere. Overlooking the inordinate length of the
sation which seems as closely allied to synpathy as to astoni5h- novel (four volumes with each volume running more than 300
mellt." The characters are all completely Italianate although pages), the reviewers once more found Lathom to be in command of
very English in mannerism and outlook with the exception of the his Gothic methods and that he now shows a total mastery of
villainous Iago Zinati, a man as wickedly cunning as his Shake- Radcliffean technique. Although there is plenty of outright ter-
spearean namesake. Having enployed Shakespearean casting in ror for the characters, it is balanced against sensibility and a
ASTONISHMENT!!! (see #229), Lathom now adapts the twin theme of ' concession to the larger historical drama. The reviewer's com-
THELFTH NIGHT to the Gothic secret identities of the characters ment in THE ANNUAL REVIEH is reDT959"tatll'91 'Te""°'"i5“' is the
The "ell-kellt secret to be penetrated by the reader centers on predominant inpression; that this is a production of the Rad-
the true identity of the youth, Silvio di Rosalva a young man ‘A cliffe school, and perhaps the best domestic imitation that has
who first declares his love for Averilla del Alvaretti then ~ yet appeared; and that it is full of interest, of invention, and
P"'°"|7ﬂ~Y 5P"'"5 her by dﬂildring that he never declared any € of eloquence." The prologue to the story is sufficiently Gothic.
love. Marrying the available but ordinary Lorenzo Averilla if Rosalind‘s father is being especially cruel to her as the tale
finds herself presented with the child, Flavia the ‘fruit of 5‘ begins since he would have her mi"! Lord Rllflls ""9" She Prefers
Lorenzo's previous indiscretions. Silvio, whose behavior cannot '3 the lowborn Edward. Because his daughter has borne Edward's
be fathomed since it wavers between great cruelty and great I child Mowbray is doubly incensed and has the young man sent to
kindness toward Averilla, rescues little Flavia from drowning i Flanders. He removes Rosalind‘s baby and informs her that it I165
But the deed is doubly puzzling since Silvio had been seen ‘ died. In spite of his coldness to his daughter, Hilliam de Mow-
elsewhere while the rescue was being performed. There are other .» bray is a respected soldier who is charged by the Queen with
.reports of Silvio's multiple whereabouts. The Gothic reader .wh0  defending the border against high-land hrigands and ' freebooters.
could remember THELFTH NIGHT with its twins, Viola who plays a E" The most mysterious of these freebooters is Allenrod, leader of
ma" “'3 5955553", lIIl° Plays himself, gradually realized that ‘ a host of marauders and the character in the tale nearest in
there must be two Silvios, one a boy and the other a girl This type and tenperament to the traditional Gothic villain. Defeat-
is the not-so-impenetrable secret and the reason for giiviu-S . ing and gapturing Mowbray,,Allenrod demands Rosalind for his

95 rns FIRST cornrcs THE FIRST cornrcs 197
own, but in the midst of the compulsory wedding a black knight residence at Woodstock Palace to D"r5"E the r@Ve"9E scheme.
interferes with his despotic plans. Little is known about Allen- Christabelle is apﬂalled t° dl5¢°VEr the “"¢i""y re5@mbl5"t9
rod except that he is adept at disguises. 1t is a shocking re_ between the face of Rosamund de Clifford and the face of a cameo
Velati°", therefore, for Mowbray and Rosalind to learn that her miniature shown to her by her father when she had inquired about
tormentor and his captor is really Lord Rufus, 3 kind Qf doubie her long-missing mother. The wily Glencowell had obtained Chris-
agent for the Scots and the English. It is not so shocking how- tabelle‘s pledge never to reveal her identity to the woman de-
9V?r- t° flhd the fﬂﬂe Of the banished Edward beneath the'b1a¢k , picted in the miniature. Glencowell is interested in Eleanor's
knight's visor. Evil is so often the sire of goodness in Gothic plan of revenge as well since he wishes to see his former wife
flCtl°" that thi5 Strange linkage must be regarded as mandatory dead. Therefore, Christabelle‘s fatal vow involves her in a ma-
to the workings of Gothic justice. Not only is Allenrod really tricidal situation. And indeed, the murder of Christabelle's
Lord Rufus, a villain intent upon the ruination of the Mowbrays mother is carried out while she watches in helpless anguish
but he is also the very bad father of the story's very decent because of her fatal vow. To redeem her character, Christabelle
yﬂung man, Edward. Bad as he might be, he is also titled; hence retires to the Convent of St. Ursula where she had previously
Mowbray can now approve the match between his daughter and Ed: suffered under the close rule of a harsh abbess. The Lion Heart
ward and is equally generous in returning their lost baby as a has been at his wars and was being held by Le0P°ld 0t A"5trl3
wedding gift. And Allenrod or Lord Rufus? Heary of his evil while the matricidal plot was unfolding. Christabelle under _her
career and shaken by an assault of conscience, he observes the new name, Matilda de Clifford, resumes her minstrel disguise,
code of Gothic villains and makes the suicidal exit. In THE locates and liberates the imDri5°"ed Rlrhird, ahd 9XPlr@5 1" hl5
MYSTERIOUS FREEBOOTER, it is possible to discern the outlines of arms. The mournful ending °‘"ibits L°!hum'§ villiusuﬂsé tu de-
the historical novel in the making. In Lathom's work the Gothic Dart from the expected nuptial conclusion. Of further interest
element still determines the tone and motivates the’characters is the name of Lathom's heroine since Coleridge, who was influ-
In the work of Sir Halter Scott and Ainsworth the Gothic element ehced by Gothic nractiﬁes and who had reviewed THE MONK. used
will become episodic rather than thematic. the name for his supernatural creature in the famous poem,
' "Christabel" (1816).
Z32. Lathom, Francis. THE FATAL VOH: OR, ST. MICHAELS MONASTERY
London : B. Crosby, 1807. ' 233, Lathom, Francis. THE UNKNOWN: OR, THE NORTHERN GALLERY. London
Modern Reeditions: None ; Minerva-Press for Lane, Newman, I808.
Gothic Type: Gothified history (monastic shocker elements) M°d@r" Re9dltl°"5= N°"e
Biographical and Research Data: Sunmers, GOTHIC QUEST pp_87 Gothic Type: Gothified history (terror mode)
175-177, 321; Lévy, LE ROMAN "GOTHIOUE" ANGLAIS, p.467: Biographical and Research Data: Sunmers, GOTHIC QUEST, p.321;
Doughty, Oswald. "Coleridge and the ‘Gothic Novel‘ hr’ ‘Tale; Lévy, LE ROMAN "GOTHIQUE“ ANGLAIS, pp.43a-439, 454, 614.
of Terror,'" ENGLISH MISCELLANV, 23 (1972): 125-148. _ , . . .
Critical Synopsis: The murky politics and ecclesiastical in-
Critical Synopsis: Having established himself with the re- t'l9"95 °f the ‘sigh °f Mary l"d°r (1553-1558) f°rm the b§¢hdr0P
viewers as a reliable Gothic fictionist, Lathom again turned his °f thli 5m°0thly Executed hl5t°rltal G°thiE- The, E°th'Clst'5
attention to the synthesis of history and horror in THE FATAL craft of "ﬁshing the complex subplots and integrating the inset
VON. The book is a pretended chronicle of antiquarian events de- 5t°rlE$ "lth the larger tale, the dﬁhhfﬂll Of mﬂhy l"ferl°'
signed to capitalize on the readership Lathom had gathered in Gothic novelists, is expertly managed by Lathom who was rarely
THE MVSTERIOUS FREEBOOTER. The monastic element now replaces the surpassed in this area by writers bent upon turning history l"P°
place he had given to Ritterromantik or robber romance materials horror. The formula for Lathom's Gothification of hiSt0ry 15
in the previous historical Gothic. Events occur in and around succinctly Stated in hi5 Preficei "The tales “hlch at the
the Cornish monastery of St. Michaels during the closing years present day are the most in reqHE5t. ire u"d°"hl@dly th°5@ Vhlch
of the reign of Henry II (1154-1189) in the thirty-fourth year unite with a considerable degree of the marvellous, SOME P°rtlQ"
of his kingship. Henry's difficulties with his rebellious sons of history." As Lathom developed as a novelist, he retained his
particularly Richard who would become King Richard the Lioh 5tr°"9 affinities "lth G°thlt meth°d a"d ma"@er btt at tht .S§me
Heart, form the historical fabric of the novel. Sir Reginald de ‘ time he became increasingly committed to historical verisimil-
Brune is enamoured of Christabelle, a maiden whose true family itude. Thus, the historical portraits of authentic personages
name is withheld from her by her father, Glencowell, After a re- such as Sir Percival Godolphin who supported the nine day
gulation abbey confinement within the harsh convent of St. Ur- queenship of Lady Jane Grey and Bishop Hugh Latimer, burned at
sula and a tangle of romantic distresses and escapes Christa- Oxford in: October, 1555, the crafty Bishop Gardiner 6"" 5l°°dy
_belle is taken to court by Richard who also discloses his royal ' Mary herself are done with scrupulous veracity. The'terror_ plot
identity as Coeur de Lion. At Court, Christabelle finds employ- involves two false biographies, one dealing with Henry Fitzroy
meht "he" She d9r@95 t0 dSSist Queen Eleanor in a game of re- of Framingham Castle in Suffolk and the other following the gen-
venge against Rosamund de Clifford, King Henry's most recent 9al°9lCﬂl °dy55@y °t El@°"°ra. illegedly the da"9ht9' Of Bl$h°P
mistress. But when in the costume of a minstrel she takes up Latimer but really the child of Sir Sigismund. The customary

198
THE FIRST GUTHICS ' TI-E FIRST GOTHICS 199
tangle of relationshi s re uir d b ‘ - - .
reflected in the rumogs that FiizroyyishaztillgaltigothlC ‘S > FICTION’ pp'51’ 69’ 76; Thurslev’ Peter’ nlncest as Romantic
Hgnry viii by Elizabeth Talboyse and that Laiiimgis ”§r:i;°"t‘i:: Syirbol,“ COMPARATIVE LITERATURE STUDIES, 2 (1965): 41-58.
a optive ather of Eleonora. The i ~' <
is assigned to the maternal phantgmswhgzgrtigglgegntighcldentjty critical Synopsis: The novel repeats many of the Sit“ati°"s
Eleonora from an incestuous marriage with Fitzro Th "5 Saves and multiplies the genealogical imhroglio that Lathom had used
Galleryn of the titie is a suite of Secret apartgéntsei ﬁrthern as the basis for the plotgin his earlier novel, MYSTERY (see
her castie reserved in the best Gothic manner for famiin orces- ' #228). The motifs of natural rather than supernatural horror
and ghostly glidings. When Bishop Latimer takes ref y lecrets such as the incestuous triangle in which a brother wants a sis-
Castle, ‘every key was put into his possession savggih en “the \ ter who wants another brother also continued to find a place in
opened the first door of the northern ga]]ery h The B :hlCh Lathom-s catalogue of standard Gothic plots. Hhen Lathom and his
gallery is also the quarters of a mysterious stran 9:0: er: K fellow Gothic novelists use the incest theme, they do so to
whom Eleonora is deeply drahh_ sharh ciahpihg noises gnu °:a' V emphasize “a basically irrational element in the order of
eerie suundg aiarm Eieohura as She Seeks to en tr to her things, or the psychologically dark, the unconscious and
hideout of the man of my§¢ery_ The Stranger is Sir gere. aiestge . unnatural desires in the heart of man.“ The horrors are com-
olphin, a fugitive like Eleonorais father from Qugi:aM o|- i pletely natural in lTAhIAN MVSTERIES and may all be attributed
savage justice, After her father is Seized and Conve ede t ar{ 5 i to_ brutish and irrational aspects of the secret or lower self.
lower, Eleonora is sent to the famiiy of Sir Si is Y d 3 he 5 Hhile there is plenty of Gothic activity, Lathom comes close to
Blunt in order that she might he heeducated in has m:"i.a? LadY E writing in‘ the vein of psychological Gothic in this book, thus
the true church_ hithough hot preciseiy a Gothic conf? ‘Q19: fuf placing it in that emergent category of Gothic fiction being
her, there are tensions and compiicatiuns Sir Si is nsmen or practiced by James Hogg in CONFESSIONS OF A JUSTlFiED SINNER
Sons, Fitzroy, vaientihe, and Hiidehraha are agi mt: 5 three (see #178). Characters are not merely uncertain of their ident-
Eie°ho,a_ ih each Son, we have Lathomls rémake f a racted to ities; their very uncertainty releases their basest passions in
Gothic chara¢ter_ Fitzroy is "Obie nice and aio 3. Sta"da'd an orge of bloodletting. The early chapters of the novel, for
Eieohora is in troubie; vaientine ig ail heart buzays inegt when example, require a Venetian physician, Doctor Urbino, to drain
lQ53"E; Hildebrand is a vile physical Specimen and b£?r1q ‘Cally the blood from an unknown woman in a plot by her vile relatives
with brutal urges ai] directed at EieOhOra,s vir in.t1"ml%9 °Ve' to gain her estate. Hhen the decent doctor refuses, he and his
these three hi1] eyentua]]y iuhh out to he Eieog rliy'b "° °f ' daughter, Valeria, are menaced by the sane bloodseekers and flee
while the mad brother, yaientine is hot mad afteg “ii '°the'5» , to what Urbino hopes will be a rural sanctuary, Castello della
the hioiogicai chiid of Sir Sigismund Lathom kn ah nor is he - Torvida near Padua. with them is the castaway, Paulina. in
about a very slisk and very satisfying" reconciiigziuﬁ“ E“ brine I adoptive daughter who will shortly be abducted by Alberto de
heroine, Needing an heir before the'hirths of Hiid b ord "'5 Valdetti, her vile uncle and the slayer of her mother. Living in
Fitzroy, Sir sigismund had Stoieh vaiehtine fr the '5" ,a"d a hut near Torvida Castle is the melancholy young man, Julio,
family, but when tug legitimate Sons were iah re: e L?tlmer i one of many displaced persons roaming through Lathom's Gothic.
disposed of Vaientine by having him deciared med 05" to hlmg he The story that Julio relates of his troubled past is a familiar
turret. This shuffling of children alS0 w§rk:"ih”l*:ed in a one to Gothic readers. He was found by monks. The single link to
ah°uhd_ih Lath°m,$ weii_°i]ed pint‘ Feeiing some T e o her way I his identity was a cameo brooch, used as a recognition device in
Sigismund had given his only daughter Eleonora t eT§'sf’ -S1r V countless Gothics. Julio had been made to attend an autopsy of a
famiiy to compensate ‘or his theft of iheir Son ,b 2 e atimer beautiful woman called Camilla who had once shown signs of great
he remained an anonymous d°hor_ Ciarification’ futh appa'e"tlY agitation when she noticed Julio's brooch. The dissection is a
is delegated ta Lady Bihnt-5 ghost The vici°uS° H.i§5§ mattefs grisly scene conceived along the same lines as the atrocities of
remﬂved from the pic; hheh he i; kiiied at a Siel E 3a"dd 15 X Monk Lewis. Since the mutilated woman is named Antonia (revealed
phin, the clandestine resident of the northern allgﬁ an .60 DI“ ‘ later), we have still another indication that Lathom had Lewis
posed as a Schemer_ These deveiopments 1eavegEIe0nyI is ex- f in mind. Sickened by the sight of the dissection of a_ woman he
marry her ersthhiie brother, vaientine _<a"d She i Eha dree to K believes to be his mother, Julio kills the man who guided him to
before the Gothic gioum ca" gather Q aih t thq" C Y °e5 5° i the bloody chamber of death. Experienced readers of Lathomite
ple's happine55_ 9 0 reaten the cou- . Gothic knew at this point how to figure out the relationships.
234 L 1 Julio must have a blood tie with the kidnapped Paulina; the
- athom, Francis_ 1TAL1hh My . - bloody corpse of the dissected woman is not going to be Julio's
Minerva-Press for A_K_ ne3;§$IEié2gR' MORE SECRETS THAN 0NE- Z“. mother after all; Julia and Valeria are destined for a lovers
, Modern Reeditions: None ' . lh. reunion unless incestuous fate should intercede. But only two of
Gothic Type; Pure or high Gothic - Q these three anticipated outcomes to the Italian mysteries are
Biographical aha Research Data: Marshaii Rod r. k IT if going to be fulfilled. Paulina is indeed Joliols lost sister;
ENGLISH LITERATURE, 1755_1315_ New York _‘cOiu;bl° hp ALY I" * the dissected woman was Julio's mother's sister, Antonia. But
Sumners, GOTHIC Quggi p_322. Terr éhTHoLIcigM v 19343 Julio and Valeria are not united at the end of the story since
' ’ ’ IN GOTHIC it comes to light that the man Julio murdered at the autopsy was
i

200
THE FIRST GDTHICS . THE FIRST GOTHICS 201
Valeria‘ r
ty for tiebygﬁgggt gzzgsttthi ngtil ends honorably tf not happi- Benedict, then reared to manhood by the crazed hag. Mabellah.
Lathom's plgtg the Student t G tﬁf Feyiewing the similarity of She turns him out to make his own way in the world when he an-
Sort of pstthotogttat stttsto t_o it fiction might now ask what noys her with continuous questions about his heredity- After a
Search for the misting tathaﬁ 1°" t 9 Fiddef derived from the ‘ lucky encounter, he is befriended by Louis of Auvignac, Count of
explanatiun fur this persistﬁntog T$Fhe'- “"" T:i¢y Proposes one t Beaumarchais and known in courtly circles as "the knight of the
and reunion scenes that ptottdeo ictquest. The recognition i saffron plume_u Through Louis-s connections, Leolin secures an
notettt espettatty the mttdet on reso utions to a number of the t I introduction to the Boleyns and is soon smitten by the sight of
genre, but the Search tot n f5. are not peculiar to the Anne while residing at their family seat, Hever Castle. A pre-
tonnttttott is Certain] one otet: origins, identity, and family vious incident in a previous castle, Louis-5 Castle de Montford,
fiction and may be yet" o e commonest quests in Gothic has encouraged young Leolin's romantic hopes. Hhile lodged in
chaotic environment the mamgitan gttempt td lmpdie order upon a the tapestried chamber, Leolin is visited by a supernatural mes-
greatest and indeéd the Ont g b d‘5c°V9Fy Constitutes the senger. The shape of a monk materializes from the arras, ap-
t" the Gothic Hattd perhaps gene a le source of Joy to be found preaches Leolin, and offers him a parchment containing the
the world as the oat nd Ca"5@ it PYOMISES B" e$Cﬂpe from words, "The hour of your fate is arrived; embrace it with
p "3 erer has k"°"" 11-" gratitude.“ Attempting to fulfill this prophecy by his atten-
235_ Lat" - _ 1 tions to Anne at Hever Castle, Leolin incurs the wrath of the
A ;ghA;;€2°£EéE:;5ggC $:ENT3ttgR, THE VISION OF THE TAPESTRV, King and is promptly towered. His benefactor, Louis, has given
Minerva_PretS tot A K Ne OF ANNE BOLEVN. London ; young Leolin a subterranean tour of Hever Castle which contains
Modern Reedtttunst hate wman, 1830. the secret apartment of one of Lathom's most exotic creations,
Gothic Type. Putt or ht h G , the Egyptian alchemist, Abijah Ginnetthon. He possesses the
Gothified htttotyt 9 °t"lC (terror mode, elements of secret of eternal life, "the art of prolonging the existence and
Biographicat and Research D t _ renovating the countenance of man,“ He also possesses Anne
33o_333_ 5 5- 5"m"eT$» GOTHIC QUEST, pp.30, t Boleyn's father, Sir Thomas Boleyn, who had fallen under Gin-
netth0n's power when he was a young man nearly a century before
' - A _ _ in Vienna (his name in that previous incarnation being Sir Ralph
umegfl§;ci;hgS§:§p§Q;5,§:§Q:Q'S last Ggthlt fomance in four vol- de Gastonville). Boleyn's involvement with the sorcerer explains
Montague Summers the tat d rhmance, received the praise of why he now looks younger than his daughter. As the reader can
htttottcat Gothic ttctton Ce athom s success in the field of judge, "mystic events“ accumulate rather thickly in this novel.
Harrison Atntwottt Ont pgparable to the novels of Hilliam To bring Sir Leolin to knowledge of his heritage, Lathom shifts
Gothic fiction from-Atnswgrthourt years separate Lathomis final . the action to an account of Count Louis-5 secret and debauched
Bf pSeudD_htStoty ROOKHOOD stlirst novel, a very Gothic piece past. Under the name of Cecil Fairfax, he had taken a youns wom_
name from titttatyihtstot stt_k 334). The omission of Lathom's an, Eloise de Foix, from the convent where she had been hidden
given the volume of hys iris Summers as a gross_ oversight . by her father and brought her as his wife to England. At first,
transition of the note] from :2 d azd "IS tontributions to the he had loved her passionately, but growing bored and restless,
form to the grim tetttsm at it ah romanticism of the Gothic , he concocts an incest lie by telling Eloise that her father and
sttetat etttter romances and t e est historical fiction. Like his are one in the same. Since they already have a child, Eloise
(see #233), the Dtot at Mtsttg Etthtcular THE NURTHERH EALLERY is horrified by this revelation. In a spasm of quilt, she Qives
ing enigmts of geneato th d t _ S is solidly Gothic involv- the boy away to a kindly priest, retreats to the convent, and
horrific and tttttttgyisubt 6' Journey of the young hero, , changes her name to Mahellah. Thus, the Qenealogical machinery
tncestt and Supetnatuttt h nerranean locales, a suggestion of ' is put in motion or perhaps in conmotion. Hhile the thought of
ttpetttted Chamber Butﬂ shdmeng such as the aliveness of the ‘ incest drives Eloise mad, remorse for his lie causes Count Louis
the jea]ouS passion; at Kin 5 5" Plot of the novel which traces ~ to act as secret protector to his abandoned son who. of course,
Catherine of Atagon the9 t:"tg VIII, the sorrows of Queen is Leolin. Expelled from the convent, the mad Eloise (Mabellah)
cardinal Halsey the aottttc t E ectual diplomacy and fall of takes up witchcraft and is eventually burned at the stake at
the it]_fated ithatactet 0? Running of Thomas Cromwell, and Northampton while Count Louis looks on in guilty horror. All of
deadly gtmet are tendered by tathne _oley" herself, a pawn in a * young Leolinls lucky escapes from Henry-s fury have been the
exattttudet The two ptots at gm with an eye fof historical work of his atoning father. Count Louis had even been the spec-
an tntegrttto" of history and : E so stillfully spliced yielding tral monk who descended from the arras in the initial mystic
V111 in the Gothic segment at :nrot.t he counterpart_ to Henry ' event. ln_ a final gesture of fatherly Vhilanthropyi the 50""!
$ir Leqlint 5 riva] against Hear ef 3 : '5 the “i"d9'l"9 knight, Q sees to his son's marital happiness by arranging for a marriage
This conflict "ever occurred tny 0: one Boley"'s_ attentions. Q‘ with Amabel, fictitious sister-of Anne Boleyn who cannot marry
Lathom as one of the acceptable frﬁa. "‘§t°'y, but is offered by it Leolin because she has an appointment with King Henry and the
his rearrangements of htstot Aa rications and anachronisms of ,," headsman. Although this critical sunmary of MYSTIC EVENTS ap_
his true parents havin be n Y~ 5 "5"d . Leoltn has never known £ pears long, it is actually very reductive. In his last work as
9 e Succ°'ed bY the "159 frlﬂr, Father throughout his productive career, Lathom's Gothic craftsmanship

2°? ms FIRST GUTHICS " ms FIRST GOTHICS 203
. » . r - - ' d
bears out a point made by Edward H k ht ‘ ’ Th cast consists of Leopold Rosomaski, “ls Wlfe. Rh°dl5k°> 3"
developmental debt of the Englishaggceleio h.§°E§ii?l"3.nZ?? thzir invisible enemy. the verve"? L°f""°°- '-““.’°"°° “@"°F°:
Prise: "The Gothic novelists contributed to the plot-development his life to i0FmB"ll"9 @"d "iFﬂ551"5 the R°§0mﬂ$kIs by a seriee
of the English novel, though they failed unfortunately to con- of invisible traps and deadly ¢e°ePt'°"5- cattle 3"? cr9ps ha.
nect plot with character. They set the novel in the presence of d€5t'°¥ed- chlldre" are 5t°le"* c9rpseS are deposited Inf?-e1r
the Unseen, fronting squarely that great. imPenetrable Mystery house, and finally L@°i>gld and R"'°d‘§‘“ "E 5"°‘°"e“ by '“ k“‘"§
which enfolds our little life." I and kept in separate jails by L?f'a"°°- When all]looks zgeafaahs
black for the family, the scurrilous Lafranco s lps i A ‘ater
236. Lathy, Thomas Pike. USURPATION: OR THE INFLEXIBLE UNCLE. London l from a cliff to his death during a seduction a emp .155 R0
: Minerva-Press for Lane, Newman, 1805. 1 Gothic novel by Lathy, L9VE= HkTRED= AND REYENGEZ 5 SH t -
Modern Reeditions: None MANCE (1809), would restage the same material in differen sur-
gqthic Tyne: Pure or high Gothic (domestic terror) roundings.
iographical and Research Data: Sunners, GOTHIC QUEST, P-91. i 238 Layton Mrs Frederick. HULME ABBEY. London : Hilliam Fearman,
tﬁriticag agsggzisé Lathy's sense of the Gothic was ordinarily -' 1820. R d_t_ N l
ex reme an N sharply reflects his tendenc to d Modern ee i ions: one . - - »
supernatural excess and natural cruelty. Hhere we fihd a :?l- Gvfhlc Typei P"'E °' hlgh G°th'c (composlte 'm1tat‘o")
lainous uncle (Baron Rofestein) in a Gothic novel we can pre- Biographical and Research Uatai N°"E
dict that we will also have a suff ' d h t .' 1 ' ‘ .. -
abandgngd chateau (Save for the u"§§;?§ ?:f]e§?b?;1E:eS:;€:§’ ag Critical Synopsis: Layton wrote under the name Jemima Plump-
subterranean arena of action crisscrossed with passageways ’and tre." Her late Gothic"revival, HULME ABBEY, is based on Q: tlghg
5 midnight rescue which foils the u5urp@r_ Laghy doe; not ’va,y sources, The mechanics and theme, however, suggest t a The
the formula here, but this fact does not detract from the splen- relied most directly °" "'5' Badcllffe .f9r "El effec 3' t
did horrors of this three-volume Gothic which quickly sold out ' story itself is placed in a highly fictitious Fifteenth en ury
in the first Minerva edition. ‘ English midlands during the Hars of the Roses.
237. Lathy, Thomas Pike. THE INVISIBLE ENEMY: on THE MINES or u1e- l zae. Lee. "ﬂier and Sophia Lee T"E,¢A"TERB“'“ “LE5 Fm‘ THE YEAR
LITSKA, A POLISH LEGENDARY ROMANCE. Londoh : Minerva-Press 1797. London : G.G. and J. Robinson, 1797-1305
for Lane, Newman, 1806. Modern Reeditions: None _ _ riodic
Modern Reeditions; None Gothic Type: Anthology 1" (‘Ye '°l"me5 (tales have P?
Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (Sqiauerromantik elements) oothicisni) OTHIC QUEST
Biographical and Research Data: Su r Bio ra hical and Research Data: Summers, G i
90. 91. 151. me S’ GOTHIC QUEST’ W29’ pp.g.64‘: 166-161, 200; Foster, HISTORY or THE PRE-ROMANTIC
C Y I S A 4 NOVEL IN ENGLAND, i>ii.208. 214. Z16. 249-
ri ica ¥"°Psis: n ima inar Poland f ' . -
seventeenth centuries oftengengaged the Ggthi2eim:gih:$?d:. lag ‘ critical SY"°D5i5: This is. 3 °°"““°f““'?th°°;‘:§*;°§oz::
result~was a number of curious titles which might be classified tales by the L99 5l5t9'5r H“'r'et and 5°ph1§’ "1 ha Q so hia
as Slavonic Gothics. In PHEDORA: OR, THE FOREST or MINSKI (see ' narratives by the more fﬂ"'°"§ "“.‘d '"‘?"° G°t'“° °f t ° “ii, 2,,-5
#063), Mary Charlton had depicted Polish terrain in the Rad- LE€- The ¢°lle°tl°" appeared 1“ flve Yulumes betwzen e y “b_
cliffean mode. Lathy's cruder Slavonic Gothic draws upon the 1797 and 1805. S0phiﬂ'5 final c°"tr1hutl°"’ PEMBROK ’t"“aS rﬁ of
examples of Monk Lewis and the Schauerromantik modes to achieve ll5h9d i" 1799’ thus maklng the ]ater Selectloas ﬁngidered
its raucous horrors. As the reviewers innediately noticed how- Harriet alone. Although only °"9 °f_th9 tale5 ca"th§ goods use
ever, the subterranean promise of the title was not fulfilled in "l9" °' Pure Gnthlcr "“mEr°“5,St°r1es reflect 9° 1; rdia to
the romance itself since the mines barely figure at all in the Gothic EnVlT0"m9"t5- a"d ¢°"t°l" terror te"de"§‘eSﬂ cc? Goahic
woes of the persecuted characters or the snares of the villain 1 James R, Foster, "LOTHAIRE, A LEGEND (1797) is t e onsgessment
One reviewer de¢iai"Ed peevishly, nThe,e is no Salt i" thesé tale in the collection." But a more comprehensivgukg YALES as
mines,--they are all lead." But Lathy was by no means the first - comes from Sunnwr5i "h° Classlfles THE CANTER d th r we
Gothic writer to employ a title which had no relevance to the ‘ "highly romantic rather than Gothic, @l@"°"9“ h°'ed“"ed f§o;'the
content of the book. Once the book had been rented out by the * hﬂV@ t°"°he5 °f the terr°r'"°ve]'“-AS may be de %c device
circulating library, the title had performed its task. Lathy's " title, the Lee sisters used a Chaucerian format or1‘r:meStra"ded
characters exist solely for the sake of horrendous incident and H to surround the narratives. Seven snowbound trane E re]ati"
have little of that power of evoking sympathy which marks the '”‘ at an inn in Canterbury @9T9@ F“ dlvert °"e a"ut er yh rd Dfig
school of Mrs. Radcliffe. In fact, his entire conception and ex- 5 "the m°5t remarkable 5t°ry he_°r She ever knew or‘ ﬁaiioain
ewﬁm M Mmkeﬂumismwhamhwmhmmlmmlﬂe 7; mﬂwﬂ Mm mehmM[GMmc}mMmL tn nhytﬁ
the sensational stuff of the Gothic chapbook or Victorian blood. 11' Canterbury tales have dl§F‘"°‘ °°"“° ""°°‘ “"° °'°"e ‘
.

204
THE FIRST BUTHIQS
sentimental narratives, PEMBROKE ARUNDEL
g?gitEMILVS; and KRUITZNER: THE GERMAN'S TAEEEETQEY; .§?d. THE passageways and narrow niches leading to various grottos,
exampsesome notable Gothic elements. The titular charactepc ﬁx‘ vaults, and crumbling ruins with the recess itself acting as a
the Ste; la on the verge of genuine Gothic villainy throu hoe? sort of central staging area for the frantic exits and entrances
with thg- Ge also has those lethal optical assets assoc?atud of the royal pursuers and pursued. Both twin daughters have much
features gthic villains and Byronic rebels. "He had powerfe] to fear from the suspicious Elizabeth since Matilda has been
forward . a frow marked with sorrow, and an eye which dartud Secretly married to Lord Leicester, Elizabeth's favorite
world H Kg _t"e that Seemed like "ew_Created light upon t: ’ courtier, and Ellinor poses a definite threat to Elizabeth's
fluenéed gﬂ zner, the character, and KRUITZNER, the Story ine throne. Here, we have a precise parallel with the disastrous
ITANCE (1823? Wzltlﬂg of Byron's tragedy’ WERNER, OR THE iNHER' position of Scott's Amy Robsart in KENILHORTH, Leicester's clan-
typica‘ in t. ruitzner's Gothic face can stand as a fairl_ destine wife in that novel. On a royal visit to Kenilworth Cas-
Characteri 2 ance of the Lee Sisters‘ incorporation of Gothiy tle, the shrewd Elizabeth uncovers Leicester's deception forcing
converted s ics. Several tales were long enough to be easi]c him to flee to the recess with Matilda. Such is the pattern of
publish 3 the "°YEl market as was Harriet-5 THO EMILYS b t Y perpetual flight, persecution, and disaster "at the savage hand
er’ e“ma"= I" 1327- y he of Elizabeth" which gives the novel its Gothic momentum. Left
Z40_ Lee so h. behind to absorb the wrath of the Queen, she is coerced into
, p ia. THE RECESS: A TALE OF OTHER TIMES L d - marriage with a repulsive lackey of Elizabeth's named Arlington,
gig], 1733_i7g5_ - 0" on . T. Ca- then made a virtual prisoner in the precincts of St. Vincent's
GDt:?n Reeditions: Arno Press, 1972, ed. Devendra P Varma Abbey where she is watched and persecuted by night and day. She
mentsg ¥Pe. Gothified history (terror and sentimental el subsequently goes insane. Her sister, Matilda, and Leicester
Biogra hi I 9' have temporarily escaped the anger of Elizabeth by taking refuge
39 P 55a and Research Data: Birkhead, TALE OF TERROR in the recess where one of those timely flashes of Gothic light-
gg; §34 5 T°mPkins, POPULAR NOVEL IN ENGLAND pp 13 135’ ning directs them to an aperture and corridor behind a picture
165» 167»17g4, Sunmers, GOTHIC QUEST, pp_3Q, 101: 1&4 ’ 164’ , through which she and Leicester exit with Elizabeth's man, the
Flcflon - , 171, 172, 173, 391; Tarr, CATHOLICISM IN’G0THIE surly Hilliams, in hot pursuit. Their destination is Rouen where
HISTORV» 8?-2, 3, 15. 18, 34, 49, 53, 59, 99, 105. Foster Elizabeth's agents will overtake them, slay Leicester, and
213 218 1 THE PR5-ROMANTIC NOVEL [N ENGLAND pp’204 208’ transport Matilda to Jamaica where she dreams of being reunited
FLAQE , Z 9, 220, 241, 243, 263, 265, 357; harm; é0THIE with her sister before death. Meanwhile, the miserable Ellinor
1;7PP-74. 81, 86, 101; Lévy, LE ROMAN -5gTH]QUEn'ANGLAIS has managed to escape from the recess by pretending death and
gg;_ R,h179. 180-191, 196, I98, 199, 200, 235 262 303, enduring her own funeral. She has been in love with the Earl of
Ambgv Io erts, Bette B. "Sophia Le ls THE RECES§ (178§)_ Th» Essex, another figure soon to elicit Elizabeth's ire by his
ENGLIgHence of Female Gothicism," §A55AgHU55TT5 Srunlgg Iﬁ failure in Ireland against the Earl of Tyrone. She follows him
Rule Uf.th6, numbers G-4 (1979): 68-82; Engel Leonard "Th to Ireland, but Essex has been recalled to court to answer for
Rom H e Enclosure in the English and American G Eh'e his military failures. His execution causes_an outbreak of her
ance, ESSAYS IN ARTS AND SCIENCES, 11 (1982)' 59 68 O It old insanity. Matilda and Ellinor do have a brief reunion but
Critica, S _ _ ' ' ' Ellinor soon perishes of exposure and advancing madness dying
nized brat t Y"°P$1s: Sophia Lee's landmark novel is the reco - ‘ dutifully in front of a painting of the victorious Essex at the
tradition o {ﬁe for many later historical Gothics. Hithin ta capture of Cadiz. Just prior to her death she breaks free from
L0NGSH0RD.( e romance is also the Gothic link between Leland'e her keepers to make a phantasmic intrusion upon Elizabeth in her
and Mrs 385 #?43)|and Reeve's OLD ENGLISH BARON (see I355? bedchamber. The gruesome spectacle of the accusing spectre
ATHLIN Aﬁo Dﬂugllffe s first Gothic production THE CASTLES OF (since the Queen thinks that she sees a ghost) at a guilty
further b AYNE (see #346). The exanple of THE Rggggg m party's bedside is suggestively Gothic as are many other melan-
thomls THEeUN;:en in the symbiosis of horror and history in Lay choly events and ghastly architectural descriptions in THE RE-
MVSTIC EVENTS OHN: OR, THE NORTHERN GALLERY (see #233) ad CESS. with its caverns, castles, madness, persecution, and
influenc I . OR. THE VISION OF THE TAPESTRY (see #235) an hellish haunts, the novel seems to reflect a stage in Gothi-
HORTH (isgliu 9*t@"d5 $0 Sir Halter scott “hose novels Kéulfr cism's development which cannot be ignored or denied in tracing
clearcut d _, THE HONASTERV (1820), and THE ABBOT (1820) r- the history of the form. Of primary interest to the historian of
Subterran erivations. The "recess" itself is a Compiex a E the Gothic is the device of the recess itself which can be vari-
great mo eag_ chambers beneath the Abbey of St. Vincent a on 0 ously interpreted as literal place or psychological symbol. In
devastatnas ic house still showing all the scars of Hen; VIIT?_ her essay on the novel's Gothicism, Bette B. Roberts maintains
the twi ign of these _monuments. Here, there reside inyse r S that the recess represents the "recessive" situation of eight-
cathO]in aughters, Matilda and Ellinor, of Queen E,izabCt:fY I eenth-century women. "Hhile the‘ overt portrait of woman's
and herc] cousin and dangerous royal rival, Mary Quegn of Z ts virtuous fortitude and delicacy reinforces her sex role in a
und over, the Duke of Norfolk. Their hiding piece - co S patriarchal society, the recurrent pattern of inprisonment and
er9r°""d °f 5t- Vi ' ‘ In the esca e, lus a preoccupation with the recess itself reveals a
ncent s Abbey is t P D
a ne work of GOth1C desire for flight." . 1
TEE FIRS T GOTHICS 205

2°‘ ms FIRST GOTHICS I‘ n-E FIRST GOTHICS 207
241. Legge, F. THE SPECTRE CHIEF: OR, THE BLOOD-STAINED BANNER AN " by romance is meant a work containing exotic and strange set-
ANCIENT ROMANCE. London : J. Bailey, 1800. ' , ' tings inprobable happenings, and in its Gothic form, h°"lble
"°“°T" Reediti°"55 N0"? or supernatural occurrences. Munster Abbey on the River Exe is
9?t"‘¢ TYPE! Eﬂthlﬁ chapbook (Schauerromantik elements) I the clean and comfortable homestead of the Belford family. They
B'°9'ﬂPhical and Research Data: None are idyllically situated and pastorally united in their love of
. , ‘I nature and one another. The daughter of the house, Aurelia,
Critical Synopsis: This is a rapid and lurid Gothic chapbook i i I seems to have memorized the philosophy of Rousseau and Cvmblﬂed
consisting of twenty-four pages plus a frontispiece illustration ' his tenets of natural virtue with the delicate sensibilities of
showing an indeterminate creature of the night with poised dag- I the age's women of feeling. The single shadow falling across the
99F- A second Gothic miniature, BARON FITZALLAN, fleshes out the I Edenic landscape of Munster Abbey is Mr. Belford's Febrﬁbﬂte
chapb°°k t° its '@Q"l5ltE Page quota. The tale concerns paternal ‘ brother Charles who is given to pilfering, gambling, a few
revenge, although the anonymous Goth shunned the insertion of a other city dissipations. But there is nothing majestically evil
Hamlet figure. To obtain his brother's legacy and to enjoy his ~ in Charles's behavior just as there is nothing °ml"°"5 °' °@'le
brother's sweetheart, Rosaiviva Plots the murder of his father in Munster Abbey itself. A Francis Lathom would certainly have
¢@Ill"9 "D0" his ambide‘te'n Barbaro (the barbaric one?) to found room in the character of the bad brother for a touch of
Perform the dark deed. Informed that the father has been removed ' incest or homicidal lust for his niece. But Leigh is not Lathom.
he PF0Ceeds to further villainy by iuplicating his brother Har- The sole crisis for the maidenly Aurelia is marital, not sexual,
cellus, in the parricide. Hith Marcellus under arrest, nothing as it would be in a true Gothic. Because her intended, Lord Al-
seems to impede the rake's progress toward the maidenhead of i tamont, is late for his wedding appointment with her at Dover,
A"9@llﬂa, Marcellus's betrothed. Nothing human, that is. But in Aurelia has a few momentary fears and d0Hbt$- 5"t he arrlves
G°thl° fl¢tl°", J"$tlCEn Vl9lla"¢9, a"¢ revenge take some odd ’ after all having been delayed in an effort to locate a suitable
f°'m5- swiftly and crudely, the chapbooker counters the wicked wife for the errant Charles. All ends in a blissful return of
S¢"?'“@§ Of Rvﬁﬂlviva by bringing the ghost of the father to the ‘ the wedding parties to the bright confines of Munster Abbey. The
TﬂFl5t's bedside. Or at least Rosalviva takes the dark form to ' novel reads almost like a deliberate reversal of various Gothic
be his father's spirit as he relaxes his grip on Angelina and formulae‘ the murderous sibling is redomesticated to become the
tries to get a grip on himself. As it turns out Barbaro had indiscreet Charles Belford; the tormented maiden is restyled as
bungled the assassination and found himself on the receiving end I Aurelia- and most significantly, the site of Gothic nightmare,
°f "15 °W"_ murder weapon, an axe. Rosalviva will quickly find the spook-infested abbey, is relighted and redecorated by
himself reunited with his henchman when he is locked up in the Leigh's didactic hand.
family turret with the cadaver of Barbaro, dangling from a beam . -
just out of Rosalviva's grasp and fillﬂng his nostrils with the L 243. Leland, Thomas. LONGSHORD, EARL OF SALISBURY: AN HISTORICAL RD-
stench of his deed. Hhile Rosalviva ponders his crimes within 7 MANCE. London : U. Johnston, 1762
the tower beneath the swinging corpse of Barbaro, the sounds of -i Modern Regditions; Arno Press, 1972, ed. R.D. Hume; Garland
5 “eddl"9 procession--that of the good Marcellus and the even Publishing, 1974. J
better Angelina--can be heard in the courtyard below. "The Spec- ‘ Gothic Type: Gothified history (historical Gothic prototype,
tre Chief“ of the chapbook's title appears in the title only, “ terror elements)
never~in the tale. The sole aim of the writer of the chapbook Biographical and Research Data: Tompkins, POPULAR NOVEL IN
5§¥$ Montague Summers, "was to give his narrative as exciting Q ENGLAND, pp.225, 235,- 261; $unmer5, GOTHIC QUE5T, DP-30,
“"8 as P°§$"=lE; Secondly. to cram into his limited space as 158-152 179; Tarr, CATHOLICISM IN GOTHIC FICTION, pp.1, 15,
many Shocking, mysterious, and horrid incidents as possible.“ i’ 16 49: 64, 69, 109; F°Ste', HISTORV OF THE PRE'R0MANTIc
2,2 L . h S. i uoict IN ENGLAND, pp.73, 187, 201, 209, 265; Lévy, LE ROMAN
- 919 , lr Samuel Egerton. MUNSTER ABBEY: A ROMANCE, INTER- ‘ "GOTHIQUE" ANGLAIS, pp.105, 589.
SPERSEDHITH REFLECTIONS on VIRTUE AND MORALITY. Edinburgh 1 
John Moir for H. Creech, Cross, 1797. ,i Critical Synopsis: Appearing only two years before HalP°l9'5
"‘°de"" ""‘“ll°"S= "Me = CASTLE or OTRANTO (see ms), Leland's LDNGSHORD seems poised on
Gothic Type: Didactic and domestic novel (Gothic titling) .*~ the threshold of genuine high Gothicism. Only the absence of a
Biographical and Research Data: None i. supernatural dimension prevents the novel from being taken as
. . _ _‘@ the proto-Gothic model and source for most of the other elements
_ c'lt‘¢iI 5¥"°Psis: The work is a bibliographical demonstra- T‘ that readers expected to find in Gothic novels are vigorously
tion of the tendency among sentimental and domestic novelists to vi‘ present J M S Tompkins SUmS up the novel's proto-Gothicism this
_affix Gothic titles to their books during the decades of Goth- Q way~ "LoNGSHORD -which professes to be based on ‘ancient English
icism. Although the words, abbey, castle, or mansion in a nov- 5 historians 4 does indeed make occasional use of the data of
el's title seemed to guarantee its terrific contents a number 1 history- its main attractions, however, are monkish villain! a"d
of books like MUNSTER ABBEY turned out to be disguised, didactic V wifely ’truth war inprisonment and flight, t°9ethe' “ith a
ficti°"- L9l9h'§ MUNSTER ABBEY is not really a romance at all if well-wrought scene bf suspense and terror, which anticipates the

2”” THE FIRST GOTHICS I THE FIR5T GUIHIFS 209
methods of the Gothic romance.“ The character of the hero is Devendra P. Varma.
based on William de Longspée, third Earl of Salisbury and ille- ' Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (horror, terror, and Schau-
Qltimate son of Henry I1. Returning to England from the Gas- erromantik modes, monastic shocker) _
coigne wars after many years of canpaigning and wandering 5a]_ > Biographical and Research Data: Railo, "Matthew Gregory
isbury is welcomed by his old battle companion the Cornish Lewis," in HAUNTED CASTLE, pp.81-133; Sunners, "Matthew
knight and retired crusader, Sir Randolph, who does’ not reco - G'@9°'Y LeVl5," l" 90THi5 QUEST, DP-Z03-303; Peika LOUIS F- G
nize him inmediately since the Earl is clad in the garb ofga , LIFE OF MATTHEH G. LEHIS.~Cambridge, MA : Harvard UP, 1961;
pilgrim. But a very "long sword" protruding from his piigrim-5 Thomas, William. ‘They Called Him 'Honk,'" PERSONALIST,_ 47
cloak identifies Longspée. Longsword wants nothing more than to (1966): 81-90; Fogle, Richard H. "The Passions of Ambrosio,“
retire t° the tF6"quil life and to bring up Jacqueline the in THE CLASSIC BRITISH NOVEL. Athens, GA : Georgia UP, 1972,
daughter of a French knight, Les Roches, as his own child with pp-36-50; Brooks, Peter. "Virtue and Terror: THE MONK," JOOR-
the tender assistance of his wife, Ela. His continental wander_ , NAL OF ENGLISH LITERARY HISTORY, 4O_ (1973): 249-263; Heim,
‘"95 have been made especially distressful by the vindictive uiillam 3- "Matthew G'e9°FY LEWI5-“ I" CRITICAL SURVEY OF
Count Mal-Leon, definitely a Gothic character in his LONG FICTION. Englewood Cliffs, NJ : Salem Press, 1983,
temperamental villainies. Because of Mal-Leon's pursuits Long- PD-1551-1557- '
sword has been forced to assume the pilgrim's disguise Sir
Randolph informs Longsword that his domestic affairs have deter- Critical 5¥"°P$l$1 The El9ht9@"th cE"t"'Y'5 3TCh'G°thlC "°Ve1
iorated badly in his long absence. Raymond a treacherous youn in the mode of supernatural horror, THE MONK officially shocked
man and the courtly favorite of Henry, has usurped the Lﬂngspég and secretly delighted all varieties of readers. Its repulsive
Castle near Canterbury and is currently busying himsaif with the V situations, lewd vulgarity of style, hlasphemous rhapsodies, and
sorrowful Ela (a sort of Gothic Penelope) by insisting that she I erotic candor made it the first Gothic novel to be considered
marry him. Raymond's chief confederate in these gathic apera_ indecent, infamous, and dangerous. One alarmed reviewer (some-
tl°"5 it the Castle is the odious monk, Reginhaid the sire of times alleged to be Coleridge) warned his readers that THE MONK
the whole unholy brood of monastic fiends and barohial tyrants was a veritable vademecum of lust "which if a parent saw in the
who stalk through the pages of the Gothic novel Having peti- hands of a son or daughter, he might reasonably turn pale."
tioned the king to recover his rights and lands Longsword rides Lewis's companion, Lord Byron, tagged the story of Ambrosio "the
toward his castle and toward a showdown with Raymond The nhiltred ideas of a Jaded voluptuary-" Such notoriety led to i"-
coercive wedding to Countess Ela is interrupted by the announce. ‘ stantaneous celebrity for Lewis, who was soon being addressed as
ment of Longsword's approach, a bit of news that causes Raymond "Monk" whenever and wherever he appeared in society. His pecul-
to emote in the same manner as Manfred in THE CASTLE or OTRANTO~ iar face with its buasish eyes and frossisn Smile enhanﬂed his
"The soul of Raymond was harrowed with,consternation. How should Gothic reputation. The book Lewis wrote may not be "literature,"
3 dead ma" return?" Before Longsword is reinstated as rightfu] but it is an encyclopedia of all the Gothic impulses crowding
lord of the castle, he has one final brush with mortality the literary marketplace. Hith its potent intermixture ‘of
Offered a poisoned chalice by Grey, loathsome brother of Regin- satanism, supernaturalism, sexuality, and sadism THE NONK rapid-
"Bid, he i5 about to drink when the portals fiy open and the ly fixed itself in the public mind as the locus classicus of the
i°"91°$t L95 R0ChES, JaCqueline's missing father step; forth ta novel of horror. THE MONK struck its first readers as a deliber-
prevent the poison drink and to preside over the reunion of fa- ate and welcome rebuttal to the non-violent values of Radclif-
th9“5 a"d daughters. Raymond Obligingly cgmmitg Suicide having i " fean Gothic romance. It repudiated all of the subtler ways of
already h9lPEd to rid the plot of bad monks by having had Regin- ‘ terror, offering no mysteries, no prolonged SuSDE"5E» "0 0'9-
hald publicly hanged. Longsword reclaims his wife and castle » tended supernatural, no genealogical reconciliations, and no
Les Roches reclaims his daughter and presents her to the noble pity for its sufferers and sinners. Lewis seemed to be in pur-
Count Chauvigny, and all threats to the family name of Longspée suit of some new ideal of the hideous entailing the most drastic
are dispersed. Composed in a heavy or cumbrous style which might and abominable inventory of effects the Gothic novel had yet
be described as quasi-MORTE D'ARTNUR, LONGSHORD foreshadowg the I seen. Bleeding nuns, Handering Jews, decaying i"fi"t5, '"thl9$$
b?5t “"5 "°'5t 35P@¢tS Of Gothic plotting and charactefization matricide, subterranean fornication, nauseous crypts and vaults,
Historians of the novel may differ about the immediacy of its § charnel house rapes, and a host of other emetic events lead up
influence, but surveying its murderous monks retired crusaders R to the gruesome inmolation of the Monk at the hands of Lucifer.
genealogical complications, and grandly gloomy architectural j The dual plot contains no obscurities or _surprises and hasv a
settings it is difficult to dispute the "avails incipient Guthi_ ?- peculiar unity. Lewis interweaves two lurid stories, introducing
Cl5m- " elements of monastic fiendishness and ecclesiastical torture
. into each. The main plot presents the sordid and sensational
244. Lewis, Matthew Gregory. THE MONK: A ROMANCE. London ~ J Bel] biography of Father Ambrosio, UPTl9ht Abb°t Of the CBP"Chl"5 l"
1796- ' ' ' Madrid. Rn Adonis of Gothic villains, he is-thirty»three years
M059?" Reeditionsz Grove Press, 1959, ed, John 5erryman- 0x, old, admired for his holiness and oratorical powers, and seems a
ford UP, 1973, ed. Howard Anderson; Folio Society, 1934 ' ed figure of unimpeachable sanctity in a city overrun with corruD-

210 THE FIRST GUTHICS
tion. But beneath this saintly exterior, the hypocritical Am- K
brosio’s soul is aflame with pride and lechery. Yet, Ambrosio is
not evil incarnate but a passionate personality with the
capacity for great goodness if only the furious beast of his
unsatisfied desires can be restrained. The beast that breaks
loose is the product of his repressed emotional nature. If he is
twisted, the twisting can be traced directly to his enforced
role in the society,--he is the monk. Unlike previous Gothic
writers who simply describe the villain's psychological profile
from outside the character, Lewis made some effort to portray
the psychomachia or war within the self of his Gothic hero. The
internal conflict takes a classic form. There rages within y
Ambrosio "a contest for superiority between his real and i
acquired character. The different sentiments with which educa- E
tion and nature had inspired him were combating in his bosom: it l
remained for his paSSioﬂS, which as yet no opportunity had
called into play, to decide the victory." An agent of the devil,
Matilda de Villanegas, infiltrates Ambrosio‘s cloister disguised
as the novice, Rosario. Quickly and cunningly, she tempts Am- 4
brosio to a sexual fall and once his libidinous appetite is
activated, it knows no limits. Growing weary of Matilda,
Ambrosio feeds his depravity by killing his mother, Elvira, and g
raping his sister, Antonia, on a mattress of rotting cadavers in _
the slimy vaults of the monastery. The incestuous copulation is
followed by murder. Now wanted by the Inquisition, he is hunted
and seized by that ever-present arm of Gothic justice. But he
eludes the stake by signing away his soul to Satan with the
suave encouragement of Matilda. In a spectacular aeronautic
climax that many Gothic writers would try to imitate but never
duplicate, Lucifer himself sinks his claws into Ambrosio's
skull, soars with his screaming prey until he is high above the
sharp peaks of the Sierra Morena, Rhen releases the Monk to
impalement and lingering death on the rocks below (the death I
takes six days). The subplot tells the parallel story of Don
Raymond and his fated love for the pregnant nun, Agnes, who has
been condemned to the convent by her brutal baroness aunt.
Severely censured and punished by Ambrosio for violating her
vows of chastity, Agnes's ordeal in the putrid depths of the
monastery of St. Clare brings the physical Gothic to a point of
maximum disgust. The sequence of Agnes's childbirth in these
slimy confines and the subsequent death of her baby have a cold
power not found in earlier monastic shockers. After watching her
infant die and feeling her own sanity about to give way, Agnes
is delivered when an enraged mob attacks and burns the convent
and tears the prioress to pieces. As if the Gothic menu were not . ,
already bloated enough Lewis also inter olated ten i
Mgaq
\ﬂ;
, p p eces of
Gothic verse into the text. One of these, “Alonzo the Brave and
Fair Imogine," remains justly famous. The audacious Gothicism of V _ _ q
THE MONK made it an inmediate center of controversy which con- . llll l'..-'l.l¢I< "Y -i"l~" f
tinues to the present day since the book's influence and lit- .
erary merits are still being debated. But THE MONK's impact on . tawdhnlbﬂf/”&y'Ib5
the direction and tone of the Gothic novel can hardly be '
overstated since it remains the supreme example of the horrific
extremity in Gothicism. The critic, R.D. Hume, evaluates the
appeal and achievement of Lewis by suggesting that THE MONK, for

(IE FIRST GOTHICS 21.1
" all its faults, remains capable of throwing open the hell-gates
, within ourselves: "Horror-Gothic assumes that if events have
psychological consistency, even within repulsive situations, the
, reader will find himself involved beyond recall."
‘245. Lewis, Matthew Gregory. THE BRAVO OF VENICE. London : J.F.
A , Hughes, 1805. '
I Modern Reeditions: Arno Press, 1972, ed. Devendra P. Varma.
Gothic Type: Rauberroman (terror mode)
Biographical and Research Data: Birkhead, TALE OF TERROR,
pp.7O, 71, 125; Railo, HAUNTED CASTLE, pp.119-121; Sunners,
GOTHIC QUEST, pp.85, 121, 144, 239, 243, 267, 268, 269, 271,
Z78, Z93; Lévy, LE ROMAN "GOTHIOUE" ANGLAIS, pp.373-375; Con-
ger, Syndy M. MATTHEH G. LEHIS, CHARLES ROBERT MATURIN AND
‘ THE GERMANS: AN INTERPRETIVE STUDY OF THE INFLUENCE OF GERMAN
LITERATURE ON THO GOTHIC NOVELS. New Vork : Arno Press, 1980;
Zimansky, Kurt R. "ZASTROZZI and THE BRAVO OF VENICE: Another
Shelley Borrowing,“ KEATS-SHELLEY JOURNAL, 30 (1981): 15-17.
Critical Synopsis: Lewis's very popular saga of the noble
outlaw is an adaptation from the German robber romance,
ABALLINO, DER GROSSE BANDIT (1794) by J.H.D. Zschokke (1771-
1848). Although not pure Gothic, there are enough Gothic
' tendencies in the novel to justify grouping it with Lewis's
other Schauerromantik endeavors. The work is also notable for
its clever management of the deception theme since the main
character, the Neapolitan Count Rosalvo, appears under two other
guises while performing his self-appointed task to rid the
Venetian state of conspirators and professional assassins or
bravos. In the person of the Venetian bravo, Aballino,_he is a
fierce looking ogre ugly enough to qualify for the horrid staff
of any Gothic castle. In his other identity as Flodoardo, he is
the physical antithesis of the monstrous bravo, handsome, virtu-
ous, and dedicated to civic duty. The niece of the Doge,
Rosabella, who has already been ogled by Aballino, falls
straightaway in love with Flodoardo when he comes to the Doge's
court. Aballino had been assigned to kill Rosabella to prove
himself a worthy bravo to his fellow bravos, but he kissed her
instead of killing her. The drama of disguises turns upon an
awkward task laid upon Flodoardo by the Doge. He can have
Rosabella if he will simply capture and deliver the most
menacing of the bravos of Venice (Aballino) to the authorities
for punishment. In other words, Flodoardo's romantic happiness
depends upon his capturing himself,--and because he is a clever
young man appearing in a Gothic work, he does so. At a state
banquet given by the Doge and senate to lure and entrap all of
the bravos of Venice, a quick change of costune (or is it shape
shifting?) brings off the public exposure of Aballino and the
brilliant coup de main of Flodoardo. All of the other bravos of
Venice are caught in the net when they are pointed out by Flodo-
ardo and the Doge fulfills his promise with a grand-wedding for
Rosabella and Flodoardo, who is proclaimed the savior of the
state. The Gothic strains in the work are evident in the atmos-
phere of murderous intrigue and terrifying countenance of
Aballino when prowling for prey in his assassin's disguise. When

212 THE FIRST GOTHICS " TI-E FIRST GUTHICS 213
Z4
222.522!" .::;@‘:;::z. ":,::::::“.     2": I *2:  sail"?  no "‘  1:? 5"":
, e in ac e c auerroman i wi TS s l u ins a a ion o o TC a ara u ewi
elements. In this respect, Lewis fits the average profile of the also played upon the horrors associated with ta: career of the
English Gothic translator. ’ pedocidal Gilles de Rais, murderer of seven hundred children
6. Lewis, Matthew Gregory. THE HOOD DAEMON: OR, “THE CLOCK HAS 1 ~ 247. Lewis, Matthew Gregory. ROMANTIC TALES. London : D.N. Shury for
STRUCK.“ London : J. Scales, 1807. i Y , Longman, Hurst, Rees, and Orme, 1808.
Modern Reeditions: None ‘ , Modern Reeditions: MISTRUST: OR, BLANCHE AND OSBRIGHT, A FEU-
Gvthic Type: Gothic chapbook (converted from Gothic drama) I om. ROMANCE, in seven MASTERPIECES oF GOTHIC HORROR. New York
Biographical and Research Data: Railo, HAUNTED CASTLE, ‘ ‘L = Bantam Books, 1963. ed- Robert 0- Specter. nu-237-330; THE
pp.123-124; Peck, Louis F. "M.G. Lewis and the Larpent Cata- ‘ ANACONDA, in GOTHIC TALES OF TERROR: CLASSIC HORROR STORIES
logue," HUNTINGTON LIBRARY QUARTERLY, 5 (1942): 382-384. FROM GREAT BRITAIN, EUROPE, AND THE UNITED STATES, I765-1840.
New York : Taplin er, 1972 ed. Peter Hainin , pp.6B-112.
Critical Synopsis: Lewis's Gothic drama was also widely dis- 1 Gothic Type: GothTc anthology (terror, horrog, and Schauer-
tributed in chapbook form (34 pages) as a short Gothic novel. In romantik modes represented with Germanic translations and
both its theatrical and narrative form, the tale has flashes of imitations)
brilliant technique reflecting in its staging and character_ Biographical and Research Data: Railo, HAUNTED CASTLE,
ization some of the more gruesome characteristics of the pp.I22-I23; Summers, GOTHIC QUEST, pp.Z8O-281; Peck, Louis F.
Marchen, a German fairy or folk tale acconnodating the grotesque "An Adaptation of Kleist's DIE FAMILIE SCHROFFENSTEIN,"
and the Supernatural in its events. All of the Gothic's baleful JOURNAL OF ENGLISH AND GERMANIC PHILOLOGY, 44 (1945): 9-ll;
paraphernalia plus some ingenious stage machinery for the pro- ‘ Peck, Louis F. A LIFE OF MATTHEH G. LEHIS. Cambridge, MA
duction of amazing spectacle are here: winding staircases Harvard UP, 1961, pp.14O-145; Lévy, LE ROMAN “GOTHIQUE"
plunneting to an impenetrable darkness in Hardyknute's castle; ANGLAIS, pp.380-382.
warning and avenging parental ghosts; a persecuted and innocent
victim (the little boy, Leolyn, a peasant lad bearing the mark i Critical Synopsis: Published in four volumes and interspersed
of the bloody arrow on his arm); a demonic bargain fulfilled by ' with nightmare and graveyard verse, Lewis's Gothic sampler
a stroke of fiendish justice; a Spenserian heroine (Una) who is I contains examples of oriental, Germanic, medieval, and monastic
saved from death as the clock strikes one. The plot also has a Gothicism in both the terrific and horrific modes. Robert D.
fairytale moral which states that depraved ambition will lead to Spector observes that although these tales are pure Gothic,
a dreadful accounting in the end. The ugly Count Hardyknute ‘ Lewis "had toned down the ghastly, supernatural elements which
gives his pledge to the Hood Daemon to gain handsomeness and had made THE MONK a sensational, although infamous, success.“
military invincibility as well as the woman he wants most. In Vet, Lewis's fondness for an ugly macabre as well as a sadistic
return, he must catch and deliver a child victim to the Hood supernatural is still very clearly in evidence. In fact, Poe's
Daennn on the seventh of August at one o'clock. The Hood Daemon title, "Tales of the Grotesque and Arabesque,“ could serve as a
is famous and feared because everyone knows that he likes to title for the Gothic variety of Lewis's collection. As may be
drink the blood of little children on this date. After the Hood ' judged from the modern reprintings of several stories, each of
Daemon alters his appearance, Una is attracted to the Count. I the prose tales is long enough to qualify as a Gothic novella.
Hardyknute lures Leolyn to his Castle of Holstein and prepares In their order, the tales are: MISTRUST: OR, BLANCHE AND OS-
to pay his fee to the Hood Daemon by conveying the child to a BRIGHT, A FEUDAL ROMANCE (medieval Gothic adapted from a drama
subterranean cell. Access to the cell is gained by standing on a by von Kleist, THE FAMILY OF SCHROFFENSTEIN); THE ANACONDA (an
bed and pulling a rope which opens a hatchway to Hardyknute's East Indian story using the natural horror associated with a
private underworld. In one of his other Gothic dramas, THE CAS- . serpent); THE FOUR FACARDINS (a Gothic Marchen with touches of
TLE SPECTRE (1798), Lewis had required the set builders to the Schauerromantik); MY UNCLE'S GARRET HINDOH (domestic or
produce the illusion of a wall collapsing on stage; hence, the . neighborhood Gothic whose theme bears comparison with
Gothic hatchway was no special feat. The intrepid Una descends ‘ Hawthorne‘s story of connuhial espionage, 'Hakefield‘); AMORAS-
in pursuit through the same tunnel to overtake Hardyknute just SAN: OR, THE SPIRIT OF THE FROZEN OCEAN (orientalized Gothic
as he is about to sacrifice Leolyn. The hideous Hood Daemon containing strong reminders of Beckford's VATHEK). Although THE
hIm$9lf I5 PTE$E"t and eager to receive his bloody remittance. ANACONDA has a quality of cruel horror which might have appealed
Hith the hands of the clock nearly on one, Una distracts Hardy- "u to Ambrose Bierce and THE FOUR FACARDINS is overrun with Schad-
k""tE by beginning to pray. Hhen he moves toward her to stifle r<: erromantik effects, the story which seems the most conventional-
- her praying, L901!" resourcefully moves the hands of the clock ii; ly Gothic and which bears the closest resemblance to repellent
to one and it strikes the hour. As the great clock strikes, so §£' excitement of THE MONK is MISTRUST: OR, BLANCHE AND OSBRIGHT.
does the Hood Daemon and it is the blood of Hardyknute which Ti} Here, for instance, is Count Rudiger of Frankheim, the monk,
pays the demon's price. The awestruck Una, who nearly married 1} Ambrosio's, counterpart standing knee-deep in a grave and
Hardyknute out of her desire for wealth and position, is not F ' glaring up at a funeral escort of friars: ‘Hith involuntary hor-
3i

214 THE FIRST GUTHICS
ror, the friars started back, and then as if changed to stone by
a Gorgon's head, they remained gazing upon the dreadful counte~
nance, which presented itself before them. Count Rudiger's
stature was colossal; the grave in which he stood, scarcely rose
above his knees. His eyes blazed; his mouth foamed; his coal-
black hair stood erect, in which he twisted his hands, and
tearing out whole handsful by the roots, he strewed them on the
coffin which stood beside his feet.“ These sorts of exceptional
Gothic emotions imbue every passage of MISTRUST. It is indeed a
book of climaxes. The scene is the Palitinate of Henry the Lion,
Duke of Saxony. The time is the high middle ages (late 1I00's);
the situation is a Gothic imagination's reconstruction of ROMEO
FIRST GOTHICS 215
Q ‘t‘ 1 5 opsis: The chapbook's title is an astounding
condehsation ygf its seventy-two pages of orthodox Gothic weeP-
ing, fainting, incarceration, distress: and rescue.tHatt igfggmz
us that the heroine, Ella Clifford, ‘f§1ﬂtS four ines i
a es " Her marathon of swoons is sufficiently matched by the
gegertnry of wicked feats enacted upon her by the count whose
degravities are also of the regulation Gothic type-_Th@ ¢"@Pb°°k
is an obvious and blatant pirating of several legitimate Goth-
‘ s but identifying any specific Gothic source becomes
iirtually impossible since the characters and perilous situa-
tions are so stereotypical. Only the rapid and unadorned style
has the zeal for swift and horrible climaxes Practiced by the
AND JULIET. The the "households, both alike in dignity" and ~ bluebookers. The publishing firm pf Tess and Castlgman. gungeq 2
breaking to new mutiny are the great families of Frankheim and *1 Cheapside, London, specialized in tdhdry T9"']t?5 ° 5_°_:
Orrenberg. Blanche of Orrenberg loves Osbright of Frankheim Gothic goods. Thi$ B"bIl5he' 5‘mp]Y 5e‘Zed any ‘“r1d y promisi 9
although both children have been instructed in the art of mis-
trust toward any member of the adversary family. The story
cmnnences with the funeral of Jocelyn of Frankheim, 0sbright's
teenage brother. 0sbright's father, the Count Rudiger, is furi-
ous as he stands snarling in the open grave. One of Jocelyn's
fingers has been severed,--obviously the trademark of the hated
Orrenbergs who must be JoceIyn's murderers. Other atrocities and
mutilations, all highly Gothic, punctuate the action. A friend
of both families, the generous knight, Sir Ottokar, is literally
hacked to pieces while attempting to reconcile the feud. Rudiger
renews the feud by dis atchin hi h l
romance from the unabating swarm of Gothic titles, then con-
verted it for quick sale to the unsuSP@CtlO?]_ma5:e5reg€] ﬁﬁtzag
readers. Thus, the purchaser who Pil%_°d5hlh L"9he° or she had
depravities of Lewis Tyrell _ml9ht I" 3 h t.t] and
already read these hair-raising annals under anot er Pl S: or
I" I°"9e' f°rm i“ 5°me rECe"t.re"t?] from th€hM1:Ts¥inctr€dor of
J. Bell. The more shocking situationa zavih Emore redominant
THE MONK's more erogenous passages, u e _ P h. h E,,a
tone is bogus Radcliffean. One of the chambers In W 16
faints before she makes a geuealpsical ¢i$°°'°'¥ ‘S “°“°“,bY °
. ' OLD
p g s era d to the house of visored figure on loan from the properties room of Reeve S
orrenberq. but the nessenger is a bit too forthright and is ' ENGLISH BARON (see #355). The best and perhapi th@_ 0"‘! PT°Pe'
tl ‘
pronp y executed. The family feud blazes up while 0sbright's
worthless and vile half-brother, Eugene, is making advances to
Blanche. Hhen she spurns him, he resorts to the direct method of
bibiiographicaiv Classification to be made for this rare little
Gothic is that it is a nnitiple plagiarism-
rape instead. Plenty of Gothic action ensues as Count Rudiger, ‘ Z49, Loney, T.C. SEBASTIAN AND ISABEL: OR, THE INVISIBLE SHORD. Lon-
hoping to prevent his son's love for'a despised daughter of the ' don : Henry Colburn, 1811.
Orrenbergs, plans to kidnap and kill Blanche. But Blanche and
Osbright, still trusting each other, exchange outfits thus pre-
cipitating the final tragic twist in this bloody chronicle.
Mistaking Osbright for Blanche, Count Rudiger's men assassinate
his _son. After a rondo of remorse and suicide, the surviving
mothers of the two houses, Magdalena of Frankheim and Ulrica of
Orrenberg, raise a monument to their destroyed children bearing
the epitaph, "Here Rest the Victims of Mistrust." Throughout the
d't’ 1 N .
gggﬁig T322: RN:: oruhigh Gothic (bluebook Qualltlesl
Biographical and Research Data: "0"E
. . . - ' ' ly
Critical Synopsis: Bound in blue covers, this is an utter
formulaic Gothic romance which ‘derives its pseudo-medieval
details from other tales of this type such as Mrs. Manners s
CASTLE NOUVIER: OR, HENRY AND ADELAIDE (see #262). The stage for
romance, Lewis insists upon the horror of the episodes rather conflict is the Castle of Medina to which the hero, Sebastian de
than the moral to be drawn from the act of mistrust. At the out- f , Salonierre, has returned from a lon9_ J°“r"EY and, "It" his
set of his career as a Gothicist, Edgar Allan Poe would satirize ' §. conscience troubled. ‘H15 SIEED W65 disturbed by fTl9htf"] VT‘
the thunderous and ponderous horror of Germanized tales of this T 7 sions and horrid dreams." Seekiﬁg ¢Q"5°1at‘°" 1“ the f°re5t "e?r
type in his "Metzengerstein." $1 the castle, he hears celestial sin9‘"9 a"d C?me$ "P°" tn? gage ;
1' ic Isabel, scantily dressed and reed! I0 ‘filﬂt "P0" $19 _?
248. LEHIS TYRELL: OR, THE DEPRAVED couni, INCLUDING THE PATHETICK e this sad man. Their love is innediateiy interrupted by the Y1 -
ADVENTURES AND TRAGICALL HISTORY or ELLA CLIFFORD AND OSCAR 4‘ lainous intercession of Sebastian's wicked uncle. _Ruq°lP"°- 6
HENRY HAMPDON, AN ENGLISH TALE OF THE FOURTEENTH CENTURY. H "lord of duplicity." HE had 0ﬂCE COV€t€d 5€hﬂ5tI3" 5 mﬁthern
London : Tegg and Castleman, 1804.
_ Modern Reeditions: None
Gothic Type: Gothic chapbook '
Biographical and Research Data: Hatt, SHILLING SHOCKERS OF
THE GOTHIC SCHOOL, pp.14, 34.
. . - ' - - bel. He
Rosaria and now lusts after Sebastian's bride $0 Q93 I53 _
also wants to possess a magic sword believedito ??a:::d9:ré:i§:f
Castle of Medina. Everything in the romance s_ _ F th sword
able. To have access to the Castle and ownership o e 1
Rodolpho has Isabel kidnapped to force Sebastian to embark uaon
a mission of rescue. He travels the familiar path of the Got ic

215 THE FIRST comrcs 11: FIRST conacs Z17
her" th'°"9h a haunted terrain populated by monsters and ances- T Charles Lucas‘s (I769-1854) preface apparently did not forewarn
tral spectres. One of these hideous shades urges Sebastian to readers who accepted the novel as another Gothic thriller. A
return to the Castle of Medina where his uncle now holds sway ' castle unstaffed by ghosts in any novel was unthinkable. Such an
while he ilrperils his beloved Isabel. The return is made, the oversight by the author would make the family fortress far llav
5"°rd l5 Presented to Sebastian by a cooperative spectre, residential. "A Castle without a ghost is fit for nothing
vengeance is done upon Rodolpho, the Castle is made safe again but--to live in," Lucas demurred. “Here it generally the case,
for the reunited Sebastian and Isabel. This patterned type of , the poor novelist might starve and the book-seller publish ser-
Gothic could apparently be repeated an infinite number of times mons. Had not my castle been luckily honoured by a visitor of
without fear of alienating the Gothic audience. ‘ this kind, I had never ventured to transmit these authentic
,‘ memoirs to the eyes of the public, nor had I contaminated their
250. LOVEL CASTLE: on, THE RIGHTFUL HEIR RESTORED, A GOTHIC ms. genuineness by the l""°°“°‘l°" °f a fictitious being-" Hence,
London : Dean and Munday, 1818. the nocturnal interview between the disinherited adventurer,
"Oder" Reeditiohsr Nvhe Jack Smith, and the Duke de Merité gave the Gothic audience its
Gothic Type: Gothic bluebook (shilling shocker) single shudder in an otherwise picaresque and satiric saga of
Biographical and Research Data: watt, SHILLING SHOCKERS or . ywhs Smith's battle to resaih his‘ have and heritage after
THE GOTHIC SCHOOL, pp.16-17; Sunmers, GOTHIC OUEST, p.84. coming back from an Italian holiday. Lucas would be more overtly
_ _ , , solicitous of the Gothic audience three years later in THE
Critical Syﬂ0pSlSZ To produce the shilling shocker, the anon- ' INFERNAL OUIXOTE (see #252).
ymvus Bathicist siiroly expropriated and then abbreviated Clara T
Reeve's OLD ENGLISH BAR9" (see #355). The frontispiece illustra- I 252. Lucas, Charles. THE INFERNAL OUIXOTE: A TALE OF THE DAY. London
tivh _¢@Pl¢t5 the major Gothic scene from THE oto ENGLISH BARON 1 = Minerva-Press for Hilliam Lane, 1801.
wherein the visored phantom of the hero's slain father carrying Modern Reeditions: None
needed genealogical information for the future heir of the cas- ‘ Gothic Type: Political and polemical Gothic (satiric and
tle, Edmund Twyford, makes its stately stroll through the ‘ philosophical elements, attack on Godwin and Jacobin
haunted wing of the fortress. The plot in its totality is ' novelists)
solemnly set forth in the serpentine subtitle of the bluebook. Biographical and Research Data: Tompkins, POPULAR NOVEL IN
Directly following the eyecatching phrase, "A Gothic Tale," the , ENGLAND, pp.31O, 312, 323, 324; Summers, GOTHIC OUEST,
reader might obtain the entire story without bothering to ‘ p.401.
purchase or peruse the bluebook itself. The synoptic subtitle
informs the reader that Lovel Castle is a Gothic tale NARRATING Critical Synopsis: A dark and bitter politico-Gothic_fantasy
HOH A YOUNG MAN, THE SUPPOSED SON O A PEASANT, BY A TRAIN OF and a sharp attack on dangerous, revolutionary ideas in the
UNPARALLELED CIRCUMSTANCES, NOT ontv olscovziis HHO HERE HIS REAL » hands of anarchic liberals, THE INFERNAL OUIXOTE is intended as
PARENTS, BUT THAT THEY CAME TO UNTIMELY DEATHS; HITH HIS ADVEN- an abrasive response and conservative answer to the radical
TURES IN THE HAUNTED APARTMENT, DISCOVERY OF THE FATAL CLOSET ‘ presumptions of William Godwin and the Rousseauistic theories of
AND APPEARANCE OF THE GHOST OF HIS MURDERED FATHER; RELATING’ 1’ his fellow Jacobin novelists of the 1790's Bage and Holcroft.
ALSO, HOH THE MURDERER HAS BROUGHT TO JUSTICE, HITH HIS T. Lucas opposes the revolutionary premise that the natural in-
CONFESSION, AND THE RESTORATION OF THE INJURED ORPHAN TO HIS TI- R stincts of the individual should be regarded as superior to the
TLE “"9 E5TATE5- ii corrupt controls of the state or confining social institutions
. such as traditional marriage. His infernal Quixote, Lord qames
251. Lucas, Charles. THE CASTLE OF ST. DONATS: OR, THE HISTORY OF ' Marauder, is no charming eccentric tilting against windmills,
JACK SMITH. London : Minerva-Press for Hilliam Lane, 1798. r but a diabolic freethinker and a predatory anarchist on the
Modef" R99dltl°"$1 N0"? ‘ Q loose. Marauder is a sloganeering seducer and political egoma-
Gothic Type: Marginal Gothic (intermittent terror episodes, - vi niac who uses the tenets of modern philosophy to hide his real
v§°a'e5que and domestic elements) . '5 motives and to feed his lust for power. Lucas accomplishes the
Bl°9TaPhical and Research Data: Sunmers, GOTHIC QUEST, l l portrait with an acerbic energy motivated by an almost Swiftian
pp.100, 190; Tarr, CATHOLICISM IN GOTHIC FICTION, pp.19, 103, 5 59 contempt for ideological foolishness. To make sure that the
107- §,T‘ reader understands that his culprit is the gruesome product of
_ _ _ :?§‘ dangerous thinking, he provides a preface by the devil hlMSElf=
Critical Synopsis: The novel's title suggests how the pres- 17? Marauder's next of kin. The infernal Ouixote's pernicious ego-
ence of the Gothic fillip, "castle," could sometimes be mis- :‘é‘ tism helps to foment the Irish rebellion of 1798 to which Lucas
.leading since St. Donats Castle is only slightly haunted and not ii“ appends a fictive collapse of the British government itself fol-
in a very dilapidated condition. By the late 1790's, most i?C' lowed by tthe dissolution of social order. Hhen he is not
prospective authors had realized that the insertion of castle §' ""d9'ml"l"9 l@9ﬂl 9°V@T"m9"t5; "3'3"d@T l5 deflll"9 l""°C?"t
ihbels 0' P'l°Py in a title would find automatic favor with the wf women with his Godwinian notions of open marriage- The Chief
Gothically minded readership. The bantering tone of the Reverend ‘£5: victim here is a standard Gothic character, the persecuted Emi-
. ,.
av
0.
5%»

218 rne FIRST GDTHICS , THE FIRST GDTHICS 219
ly. The intellectual counterforce in the novel is represented by Emily is disclosed thus preparing the reader 70' the m°rbld1Y
the stable and decent conservative gentleman, Mr. Hilson, a sentimental climax. “'Ah, heave"5, "Y Emily!’ ETi§d the Duke,
conspicuous spokesman for Lucas's outlook. As the Satanic per- throwing himself on the ground by her; ‘here will I 6150
sonality of Marauder grows progressively more vicious and die!--one tomb shall receive us!'" The anonymous 50¢" Opted 7°“
irrational, Hilson maintains his ideological balance against the pathos rather than horror at the conclusion of the romance,
onslaught of lunatic political theories. The novel uses a suit- l choosing to emphasize at the end what Sister Mary Muriel Tarr
ably wild Gothic climax. Scheming to destroy the honest marriage ‘ I designates as a "melinﬁhﬂiy Pleﬂiute," "dIYl"E "°TF0'=' ﬂ"d "re-
of Hilson and Fanny and thwarted in the attempt by the sensible . ligious awe" achieved through cath°]lC 5ett'"95 a"d effects-
and self-controlled Wilson, the unhinged Marauder goes complete- '1 _
ly mad and joins his spiritual father, Satan, by leaping off a v, 254. Lyttleton, Mr. THE GERMAN SORCERESS. London : Minerva-Press for
nearby cliff. Thus, at the end of the ideological struggle, con- ’ Lane, Newman, 1803.
servative reason has vanquished revolutionary emotion, a most Modern Reeditions: None
infernal form of social madness. Since Marauder is the devil's Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (Schauerromantik elements)
own disciple and a character who lives in society solely in Biographical and Research Data: None
order to live off it, he has some obvious links with the broth- i _
erhood of Gothic villains; and there are many Gothic touches in Critical Synopsis: A confused wizard-Gothic which pretends to
his violent marauding. Yet, the philosophic purpose of THE T be a translation from a German legend, the "OVEI ¢0mPafe5 ""fa'
INFERNAL OUIXOTE is to edify, not to electrify, the reader who ‘ vorably with a better witchcraft Gothic which uses details taken
nqst some to see the perils inherent in mixing strong feelings from THE GERMAN soncsatss, BAROZZI: on, THE VENETIAN SORCERESS
with perverted social doctrines. (gee 3420),
Z53. LUSIGNAN: OR, THE ABBAVE OF LA TRAPPE. London : Minerva-Press t 255. Mac Kenzie, Anna Maria. THE DANISH MASSACRE: AN HISTORICAL
f°' willie“ Li"E, 1391- FACT. London : Minerva-Press for Hilliam Lane, 1791.
Modern Reeditions: None ' Modern Reeditions: None
Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (terror mode, monastic Gothic Type: Gothified history (terror mode)
shocker elements) Biographical and Research Data: Sunnnrs, GOTHIC QUEST,
Biographical and Research Data: Sunmers, GOTHIC QUEST, pp.172-I73; Foster, HISTORY OF THE PRE-ROMANTIC NOVEL IN ENG-
pp.149, 194-195; Tarr, CATHDLICISM IN GOTHIC FICTION, pp.43, LAND, p.219; Lévy, LE ROMAN "GOTHIOUE" ANGLAIS, p.481.
47, 5O, 58, 66, 68, 69, 74, 96. , _
i Critical Synopsis: Anna Maria Mac Kenlie PNb1l$h9d @ Vﬂ'l6tY
Critical Synopsis: “Pious terror,‘ a phrase used several i ,. of novels, not all of them Gothic. Her promise as a writer
times in the novel, is a proper atmospheric description for this clearly lay in historical and sentimental fiction, but unable to
anonymous monastic Gothic. Characters and events are loosely . resist the pull of the Gothic, she turned to terror _instead
based on a somber melodrama by Baculard d‘Arnaud, LES AMANTS é 1 after scoring a reasonable success in historical writing Vlth
MALHEUREUX; OU, LE COMTE DE CDMMINGE (1765), a lugubrious play i i MONMOUTH (1790). Her work thereafter throughout the Gothic dec-
“Sins monastic Persecution and the separation of lovers by ec- Q,‘ ade nf the 1790-5 showed her “succumbing to the vogue of
clesiatical villainy as its major situations. The young Marquis f,“ Radcliffe romance and calling herself Ellen of Exeter." The time
de Lusignan, son of the proud and cunning Duke de Meronville, ~§§ of THE DANISH MASSACRE is the Anglo-Saxon period during the
finds himself cast into a dungeon on the eve of his wedding to F6 reign of Ethelred II or the Redeless (973-I016) and is based re-
Emily de Clarival. Instrumental in destroying the bliss of ? motely on an actual incident of his reign, the King's refusal to
Lusignan is the degenerate Abbé la Haye. while the Abbe and the pay the tribute or Danegeld and his subsequent massacre of the
D“k9 de Me'°"Vi‘1e 9X"1@ i" theif Cﬁmpiicity. the DeFPlEX@d Danes. The novel is very slow-starting due to its cumbersome
Emily is attended by a good monk, Father du Secque, who gives frame story as Mrs. Mac Kenzie seems quite uncertain of her
her $ﬂ"Ct"iTy I" the 5°"Ve"t "T St- Clalfes a rare instance of a Gothic direction at the outset. Action begins in a cave where an
benign and caring religious house in Gothic fiction. Years pass ancient hermit is found attending the dying Duke of ‘MBFCTQ,
and Emily marries the Marquis de Bentivoglio, convinced that her Edrie Streou. The Duke's career has been bloody ﬂ"d C"m‘"a1~ D“
beloved Lusignan is gone forever. The escaped Lusignan also wonder then that he should consign a manuscript to_ the hermit
bellevei Emily dead 5l"¢9 the Abbé hﬁ$ arranged to have him containing his guilt-stricken confession for the wicked life he
conducted to the sepulchre of Emily de Clarival in the Chapel of has led, The manuscript itself contains the Gothic legend of the
St. Jago. Deciding to devote his life to God, he renounces the Danish massacre although the Duke's connection with the event
world and enters the Abbey of La Trappe in Normandy. In the remains obscure; The reader of the novel is often called uD0",t°
community, he meets a paragon of piety in the young novice, Am- supply missing links of information. Infuriated by the leV911"9
b'05@. Whose poignant death on the very day when he is to take of the Danegeld, Mercia enlists King Ethelred in 6 Plﬂt t°
his final vows brings Lusignan to his bedside. Hhen the cowl of annihilate the Danes. But the plot is confounded when Ethelredfs
the expiring Ambrose is thrown back, the countenance of his lost daughter, Princess Elfrida, offers herself as Mercia's bride if
.,.-.-.
.L- ._.

22° me FIRST cor!-ucs V nz FIRST BCITHICS 221
he "ill E611 Off his persecution of the family of the Danish PSyCh0T0gical tensions between a malicious master and an upright
princess Athela, Elfrida's cl s f ' d,
bloody intrigue bring Athela inio §§§Zi,-§'§§§;,t;§§;Q§;{; :’.'d
to slaughter her children before her eyes and in frong 3?
servant suggesting an element of Godwinian psychodrama of the
type found in CALEB WILLIAMS (see #139). Mrs. Mac Kenzie was
also learning how to make bulky, multi-volumed Gothics. The copy
§:"@;;@:'§d=<>:"- This nub!" Pedocide, not the historical kill- ‘ of DUSSELDORF in the Sadleir-Black Collection (PZ2.M322du) runs
Drgven ?ntre s of Danes, is the "Danish massacre" of the novel, to 691 pages. The copy also contains the bookplate of Michael
Merci h n ° 9:119 bY 3" appalled King Ethelred, the Duke of , v Sadleir along with Sadleir's own marginalia recording his be-
b ta ﬂ?d$0ﬂ9 t out the cave where he is dISCOVeTQd moribund mused puzzlement as he tried to decipher the peregrinating plot.
y e o man at the tale s beginning. Although the novel dis- The novel concentrates its Gothic suspense upon the fratricidal
P ays some talent for grim narrative and Ossianic descriptive- family secret of Osmond, Count Dusseldorf, but there are so many
ness, her first Gothic effort exhibits every sign of the groping It emergencies, alarms, crises, captures, and escapes that confu-
amateur and newconer to the trade of terror. Q sion soon supplants suspense as the primary emotion. At the
outset, Godfried Haustein, former chaplain and secretary to the
256. Mag Kenzie, Anna Maria. HVSTERIES ELUCIDATED. London : Minerva- E deceased Count Dusseldorf of Brandenburg, has received an anony-
Mrgss far Hfiilam La"9» 1795- mous letter promising his death. Like Caleb Hilliams, Haustein
Gotﬁfn Te9dTt'°"$§ Hone _ , apparently knows the murderer of his erstwhile master, Count
9 ‘C ¥pe~ 5°t"‘f‘@d hl5t°FY (terror mode) Dusseldorf, “the knowledge that something had been done in this
Blﬂqraphlcal and Research Data: Summers, GOTHIC QUEST, . house that nobody knows." The letter, of course, is the work of
?ﬁ-%2g£A§g2, 173; Foster, HISTORY OF THE PRE-ROMANTIC NOVEL ,‘ Osmond, the surviving wicked brother and the new Count Dussel-
390 601 , D-219; LEVY, LE ROMAN "GOTHIOUE" ANGLAIS, pp_252, dorf. The remainder of the romance is simply an elaboration and
’ ' T enlargement of the fiight-and-pursuit pattern which is normally
restricted to the subterranean wonderworld of one or two haunted
cfitical 5y"0D$i$=_A professed Radcliffean in this historical ‘ castles. with his daughter, Sophia, to fill the necessary role
Gﬂthlc, Mrs. Mac Kenzie shows advancing skill in elucidatin ll ’ of distressed maiden Godfried flees to Norway with the vindic-
mgigﬁziejngn zufggtivefroggl cgrogicle. The period is the ghgi- tive Count 0smond's agents in relentless pursuit. The interna-
O H F _ ‘ ‘ ' ' '
'""w'iw of his son. word in <1sz§1i§hi3”»is§""KZL‘§iH312‘! l Slﬁﬁﬁleﬁiiliwii §';° SZQZZKEZ ‘l§rZ§§.él’ °§Jl?“’§§L2 “"3022?
some use of the det ‘ls f ' - ~ < i ~ ~ ’ __ ’
Miro-er, their aihhiilhéi. 3Z5??r§??§"’ll3$?aiia'§ﬁS ";§E¢§¥?§§ i§§i§iZtZ% 3'l§s2§?§'3la'SlZ§5’hZ§.,ZZ"‘E‘;?‘iI.!“§..$33311 §"“ “°‘"l§
a"d I5ab9]1a'§ imPFi$°"me"t i" RT5i"9 Manor b her Ed “ O nd s ll f th w r f’his aristocratic osition to
Meshed with these ev t ' th - ~ y 50"’ “am 5 Sm “Se a ° ~ - E Po E ° - - D
vaiimiehnes, the :=‘6;dg:tlfl: »12¥5"§Z“J1;‘€ﬁ;¥rZI t§3§E';"?..,Z° , 133$?" iii "Z1303;‘2%"?§lZ3..§i‘?r.ﬂZi'?.JiZZZ.§ZLi §Z°'i"..';§§33§¢§Z
much as he is a secret son of Edward II by Lady Lancaster G th- onl b. the m sterious demise of Haustein's fratricidal persecu-
ic readers must ha e ' d‘ t l ' 0 - l y y - y - -
situation of the imZh°li'Z§gL§ $oi~.T°§i?h§"?h'§§°l?l°E§*-‘° $3? ~ °§'i§"?’i’!l"ii§'§er5ZZ‘3?°b§3'Eeilaﬁetﬁﬁihii °"§§§iZ?§' ?3‘In§“§'iI€
RECESS (see '240)' va'i°"5 9"°$tU charadesp and E sarent govely stran e and disturbin in its topographies of terror but
Supernatural °C°“r'e"ce5 371 9'ﬂd"alTy elucidated acggm n ' VF weak and unsatisfactory in it: Germanic characterizations and in
Raymond's career and Mortimer's designs against his bel pady E ii‘ its awkward resolution of Haustein's ho eless and helpless sit-
Ella Fitzroy. In her preface, Mrs. Mac Kenzie had paid homaoeeto 147$ uation Vet the meretricious Germanism geen in Hrs Mac Kenzie
::?ck:l“§gd€ﬁEd prggﬁggiﬁi gt gas. Rgdcliffez "Let every mygtery »i&' Grosse, Kahlert, and many others would become an inuortant and
. _ 0 ‘B s ory, ‘till the whole is 13 occasionally powerful strain in the development of the Gothic
elucidated, but let it ‘be without the invention of super or ,3? short story in America and England in the 1820's and 1B3O's.
a Q,‘
preternatural appeﬂrancgg _ ‘
258. Mac Kenzie, Anna Maria. SHEOISH MYSTERIES: OR, THE HERO OF THE
257. Mac Kenzie, Anna Maria. OUSSELDORF: OR, THE FRATRICIDE. Minerva f~ MINES OF DELECARLIA. London : Minerva-Press for William Lane,
:;:::Js;e::1Y'“'"+z"e'."”-   _ .
Gothic T _ #°"5' °"?~ g ' Modern Reeditions: None
Bi h¥pe- "Te °' "l9h Gothic (Schauerromantik elements) Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (terror mode)
_°QT5P ical and Research Data: Sunners, GOTHIC QUEST p.172; Biographical and Research Data: None
Levy, LE ROMAN "GOTHIQUE“ ANGLAIS, p.481, ’
Critical Synopsis: The title page of this sham translation
t critgcai 5Y"°P$is: The novel marks Mrs. Mac Kenzie's attempt and subterranean Schauerroman bears the claim that it was
0 Pro uce a Teutonic shocker along the same lines as Kahlert's "translated from a Swedish manuscript by Johanson Kidderslaw."
, 1 phony translator had originally been used by
THE NECRDMANCER: OR THE TALE OF THE BLACK FOREST (see #209) or The device of the '
G'°5§° 5 HORRID "V5TERlES (see #153). There are also violent Halpole in THE CASTLE OF OTRANTO (see #466) and later became a

222 THE FIRST aamzcs
' me rmsr comrcs 223
common ploy with Gothic authors who wished to protect their ‘ 250 Mackenzie, Henry. THE MAN OF FEELING. London : T. Cadell,
anonymity. The novel was not attributed to Anna Maria Mac Kenzie I ’ 1771
until it was offered for sale in one of the Minerva-Press cata- 1 Modern Reeditions: N.N. Norton. 1953» Ed- Ke""Eth 9- 513919?
1°§"§5 for IGI4. The spurious translation may be a revised or ‘ Oxford UP, 1967, ed. B. VickerS; Garland PublT5hi"9, 1974-
¥ﬁ:T1;:$?S{§TSlOﬂ of the original done in imitation of Lathy's 5 Gothic Type: Sentimental fiction (settings and feelings ap-
_LE_ ENEMY: OR, THE MINES OF HIELITSKA (see #237).
Hzrrendous incidents in an underground of no return including
e inminent possibility of live burial in Gothic novels of this
propriate to Gothic romance)
I Biographical and Research Data: T0mPk‘"5. PQPULAR NOVEL IN
ENGLAND, pp.53-54, 102, 104-105; Sunmers, GOTHIC QUEST,
type exerted an influence on the subterranean fantasies of E.T. , pp.68, 121, 170; Foster, HISTORY OF THE PRE-ROMANTIC NOVEL IN
A- Huffman» (see ‘The Mines of Falun‘), Poe (see "The Cask of » ENGLAND, pp.170-172; Lévy, LE ROMAN "GOTHIQUE“ ANGLAI5.
Amontillado'), and Hawthorne (see ‘The Man of Adamant"), . p.310; Mac Andrew, GOTHIC TRADITION IN FICTION, 54-58, 112-
113; Burnham, R. Peter. "The Social Ethos of Mackenzie's THE
259. Mac Kenzie, Anna Maria. ms IRISH GUARDIAN: OR, THE ERRORS or mm or FEELING,“ STUDIES I" SCOTTISH LITERATURE, 18 (1983)=
ECCENTRICITT. London : Longman, Hurst, Rees, and Orme, 1809, 123-137.
Modern Reeditions: None ,
Gothic Type: Domestic fiction (several Gothic elements and Critical Syﬂ°P$T5= "0 bibii°9r5PhiCa1 5"rVeY °f the first
Characters) Gothics can properly overlook the period's primary example of
Biographical and Research Data: Sunmers, GOTHIC QUEST the novel of sensibility at its lachrynnse extreme. Gothic fic-
D'173- I tion is in many ways an extension of sentimental fiction with
_ _ , its exaggerated emotions expressing the extremes of malign
Critical Synopsis: The excessively benevolent personality of rather than benign passions. Elizabeth Mac Andrew sees such
Captain Derrick, the Irish guardian, bears some comparison with Gothic heroes as Ambrosio in THE MONK (see #244) naturally
the extreme and finally fatal altruism of Harley in Mackenzie‘; evolving from sentimental heroes such as Harley in THE MAN OF
MAN OF FEELING (see #260). Much of the novel is set in Portugal FEELING. “The sentimental hero and the Gothic villain begin to
a setting which allows for elements of torture, the Inquisition’ merge into one character torn by terrible conflict, while the
i"d 5aVa9e intrigue in producing the sufferings of the child’ gentle earth-mother figure may reappear as a wicked witch." The
Almeria. Her family has been jailed, tortured, and executed fa; novel has several clear affinities with Gothic characterization,
th§lr Political beliefs before she is found and sheltered by the moods and settings. Moreover, Mackenzie's small book, like
Irish officer. Even when Almeria is taken to Ireland to be Sterne's SENTIMENTAL JOURNEY (I768), would have left a strong
raised as Derrick's niece, her troubles are not over. Falling in imprint upon later writers attuned to the school of sensibility
love with the Portuguese nobleman‘ Frederico de Lima she including the Gothic novelists. S0 strong are Harley's feelings
promptly attracts the odious attention of a Spanish intriguer . for the sufferings of his fellow creatures that they debilitate
k"°“" °"1Y by the strange alias, Polygon. Polygon, a many-sided the moral will and eventually lead to the man of feeling's
man of evil, circulates the incestuous rumor that de Lima is ‘ premature death,--apparently from sheer §0y- The ""¢°"tr°‘]ab]9
4]mer‘a'5 brother, 6 lie which helps to bring the Inquisition benevolence of Harley is as excessive as the Gothic protag-
into the case. Unwittingly, the good Captain Derrick has helped onist's passionate commitment to evil. Gothic villain and senti-
t° “d'a"Ce P°]Y9°"'5 "i¢k@d"9$5 by declaring publicly that Fred- J ~ mental hero are different sides of the same character. Con-
erico and Almeria are as close and loving as brother and sister 'v; fronted by social injustice, institutional evil, and class
This is but one instance of his many errors of benevolence. )»~Q prejudice the man of feeling inhabits a society which lacks all
charity. and love. To resolve all and to humiliate the it compassion. Taking up a career of ineffectual altruism and vul-
treacherous Polygon, Mrs. Mac Kenzie brings on Frederico's own Y nerable to fits of weeping, Harley travels from his country home
P°rt"9"@59 9"6rdii", the Count de Lima. He has already looked g to London and returns to die of bliss. His copious tears are the
after Frederico's affairs by assuming various disguises 2‘ sentimental equivalent of the Gothic villain's rages and ter-
throughout the narrative. In one of these guardian roles he * rors. An additional technical link with Gothic procedures can be
played the part of an inquisitor who attacked Polygon's motives observed in Mackenzie's manipulation of the appliance of the
and questioned his evidence for incest. Here this novel a pure lost manuscript. The novel commences not with a first chapter
Gothic, we might have a defiant outburst of evil from Polygon but with chapter eleven and offers only a few fragments of the
prior to his removal by suicide or extermination by the Inquisi- posthumous biography, a fragmented account of the man of feel-
tion. But in her domestication of the story of the persecuted ing‘s futile Quest f°r TOVB ﬂ"d JUSTICE i" 5 °°]1°"5 "°']d' The
maide"= the Villai" 5T"PYY Evﬂﬂﬂrates giving way to a new famil only reason that the manuscript survives at all is because the
-fur Almeria, a wife for Frederico, and unabated joy for the author has obtained sane shotgun wadding from Harley's curate.
Irish guardian who acknowledges his errors of eccentricity ‘The Hith many pages lost or mutilated, the wadding turns out to be
inpulse to the didactic which had always had a strong appeal for Harley's tearful life story. One object of Harley's romantic ar-
Mrs. Mac Kenzie shares a place with and overcomes her Gothicism dor is the tender, beautiful, and delicately sensitive Miss Hal-
1" °"e of "er fi"a] b°°k5- ton, a socialized version of the beautiful Gothic virgin. All of

224 I THE FIRST curnzcs Y THE FIRST cornzcs 225
Mrs. Radcliffe's highly sensitized maidens derive from Miss (see #260), the manuscript has survived only by the strangest of
Nalton's acute sensibility. Along with his undeclared adoration accidents. Before being B¢q"1'ed b! the "edit°'," the Piﬂeri "ad
of Miss Halton, the short novel abounds in vignettes of misery passed through ma"! l"d1ff@'9"t h3"d5 °"d "e'e “b°“t t° he “Sad
which move the man of feeling to spontaneous spasms of tears on as wrapping paper in a Parisian baker's shop when they were seen
dozens of occasions. These numerous lachrymose crises have an l and saved. The letters reveal two love stories, a sentimental
aesthetic intention somewhat similar to certain stock Gothic and romantic account from Julia to Maria recounting her love for
crises such as the pursuit and violation of the maiden in the I her absent admirer, the Rousseauistic idealist, Savillon, whose
cadaver-strewn underworld: they innbrse the reader in emotions career has taken him to Martinique to inveigh against the slave
so intense as to conpel some painful pleasure in the extreme trade and other barbarities of civilization. The second story is
feelings themselves. Before he dies of joy, Harley visits Bedlam a Gothic love story reported principally by Montauban. a vii-
madhouse to exude his sorrows for the inmates, manages to re- lainous contrast to the virtuous Savillon. Montauban's
""ltE B Prostitute with her father, comforts the old soldier correspondent is the cynical and insidious, Segarva, also meant
EdWﬂF¢$- who had been taken by the press gang, out alwayg to be a moral contrast with Julia's synpathetic correspondent,
remains too modest to translate his passion for Miss Halton into Maria. Julia's situation offers a set of Radcliffean circum-
an open assertion of love. The finale comes when the pathetic ‘ stances before the fact. Misled into believing that Savillon has
Harley lying close to death "lifted his eyes from the 5 married someone else in Martinoue, Julia has strayed into mar-
ground--‘There are,‘ said he in a very low voice, ‘there are ' riage with the corrupt and egotistical Montauban and is inund-
attachments Miss Halton." As she nods in agreement, Harley ex- iately forced by her despotic husband to assume the maiden's
pires of what seems to be the unbearable bliss caused by her 1 routine Gothic position behind the dark walls of a menacing man-
heartfelt assent. If we invert the extravagant virtue and fatal sion. Julia's architectural apprehensions as she approaches her
sensitivity of Mackenzie's odd hero or if we substitute terror confinenent are precisely the same as any Gothic maiden‘s
for tears, we get a Gothic man of feeling on a par with Ambrosio delicious shudders as she nears the castle battlements at sun-
or with the savage Count Rudiger in Lewis's MISTRUST (see #247) set. In fact, it seems very probable that Mrs. Radcliffe kept
as he stands in an open grave tearing out his hair by the , ' certain passages in Mackenzie's JULIA open before her as she
r°°t$- described Emily St. Aubert's arrival at Montoni‘s Castle of
_ Udolpho. Beholding the Montauban family seat, Julia gazes
261. Mackenzie, Henry. JULIA DE ROUBIGNE. London : H. Strahan gloomily upon "a venerable pile, the remains of ancient Gothic
1777- 1 magnificence." Her Gothic nerves are quickly set aquiver, pre-
Modern Reeditions: Garland Publishing, 1978. cisely in the same manner as Mrs. Radcliffe's quaking heroine.
Gothic Type: Epistolary and domestic Gothic (emergent Gothic ' "There was a presaging gloom about this mansion, which filled my
Villai") | approach with terror; and when Montauban's old domestic opened
Biographical and Research Data: Tompkins, POPULAR NOVEL IN the coach door, I looked upon him as a criminal might do on the
ENGLAND, pp.73, 96, I69, 341-342; Foster, HISTORY OF THE messenger of death. My dreams ever since have been full of hor-
PRE-ROMANTIC NOVEL IN ENGLAND, pp.169, 173-174, 176; Lévy LE ' ror; and while I write these lines, the creaking of the Pe"d"l"m
ROMAN "GOTHIQUE' ANGLAIS, pp.197, 198; Mac Andrew GOTHIC ' of the great clock in the hall, sounds like the knell of your
TRADITION IN FICTION, pp.34-35, 58, 60-61, 84, 114-117. devoted Julia." Montauban's calculated mistreatment of Julia is
j _ apparently precipitated by Savillon's return from Martinque, but
Critical Synopsis: It is an odd oversight in the literary ‘ as in the Gothic novels to come, the real motives for his
history of the Gothic that Mackenzie‘s JULIA DE ROUBIGNE is connubial sadism remain enigmatic. Eventually, Montauban's in-
seldom mentioned as part of the history of the form, for the i sane jealousy and possessiveness lead to the double poisoning of
book has many decidedly Gothic features. The transition of the himself and Julia, but she survives to resume her place in the
Gothic villain from Halpole's Manfred to Mrs. Radcliffe's Monto- ' delicate world of letter-writing 59"ti"e“tﬂl15t5- "ﬂ"¥ Gcthiﬁ
ni and Schedoni was certainly assisted by the exanule of Macken- 1 novels retain sentimental endings of this type as both a didac-
zie's Montauban, a clearly delineated perpetrator of Gothic tic concession to the earned salvation of the maiden and a means
deeds in dismal residences. In his monunental history of the S of assurance that virtuous forces are still in control of the
Gothic novel, Maurice Lévy allots proper inportance to Macken- world. But in JULIA DE ROUBIGNE, we have the curious specimen of
zie's JULIA DE ROUBIGNE in the rise of the novel of terror: i a sentimental fiction secretly attempting to become Gothic.
‘Henry Mackenzie, dans JULIA DE ROUBIGNE (1777), donnait pour
cadre aux malheurs de son héroine, une venerable forteresse . 262. Manners, Mrs. CASTLE NOUVIER: OR, HENRY AND ADELAIDE. London
gothique, dont la jeune fille franchissait le seuil avec de ‘ﬂY' B. Crosby, 1806. . _
_s1nistres pressentiments, et on elle devait etre, en effet, em- .7‘ Modern Reeditions: Hone ~
poisonnee par un mari jaloux.' Again using the frame device of {vi Gothic Type: Sentinental Gothic (imitation of Mrs. Radcliffe
the lost and recovered manuscript, the novel is structured as an 3? and Charlotte Smith) I
epistolary quadrangle with many of the letters missing or Biographical and Research Data: None
marred. As with the gun wadding condition of THE MAN OF FEELING
.~.-gage 3:;

226
THE FIRST GUTHICS THE FIRST GDTHICS 227
Critical Synopsis: Adherin ' . .
ing a moderate amount of terrgrtSighGg§hic group style and. mix- Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (terror-horror modes)
Mr5_ Manners (or Lady Stepney) produced gar °:§S of sensibility, Biographical and Research Data: Muller, H. CHARLES ROBERT
tw0_vo‘ume romance of the CaSt1e The amb_ OH lne but ,readable MATURINS ROMANE ‘THE FATAL REVENGE‘ AND ‘MELMOTH THE
heavi‘y infuses her pages. The névells fience of Mrs. Radcliffe HANDERER,- EIN BEITRAG ZUR GOTHIC ROMANCE. Heida, Germany :
line, appears to have been tutored in th 51"tl"9 herqine, Ade- Thomas und Hubert, 1908; Varma, GOTHIC FLAME, pp.161—163;
into ¢.aub1e by Adeline in THE ROMANCE 0?  gt setting herself Levy. LE ROMAN "GOTHIOUE" ANGLAIS, W-534-547; Durkan,
as Adelaide goes through all of the emoti 1 OREST (see #348) I Michael, "A Checklist of Hurks by Charles Robert Maturin,a
aia.-med maid," who Sammy den his in h 0"? gymnastics of the EIRE: A JOURNAL OF IRISH STUDIES, 1 (1977): 133-146;
The chambers of Nouvier CaSt?e offer ﬁg Eﬂrful situations. Henderson, Peter Mills. A NUT BETHEEN THO BLADES: THE NOVELS
customary thri“S: the resident ghost of 81GOthlC eXplorer the OF CHARLES ROBERT MATURTN. New York : Arno Press, 1980;
etal handshakes, and forbidden apartme3t5 agn ancestor, skel- U-Amico, Diane. “Feeling and Conception in the Novels of
ca5t1e is a fearsome tyrant (Lord RoSewa]d)s.h residing over the Charles Robert Maturin,w MASSACHUSETTS STUDIES IN ENGLISH, 9,
to keep the lovers separated and immer dw_o easily manages number 3 (1984): 42-54.
distresses for much of the narrative Tie in their own Gothic
based squarely on the f]o°rp‘an 0% M atR formulaic Gothics Critical Synopsis: From his beginnings as a Gothic novelist.
h;9h1y popu]ar is evidenced by the fact €;.t agcliffe were still Maturin specialized in highly complicated plots and convoluted
pub]iShed by B‘ Crosby’ not a purve or of g 5 STLE NOUVIER was narrative designs. The tangled family tra9edy of the Montorios
reputab]e and prestigious house Y aw ry bluebooks but a has all of the elaborate trappings and mad disguises of an Eliz-
263 M ' abeth:n_ rgxenge playf oa batdacobaanlmelodrgma of bloogk Hell-
. ar;haii_ Tho _ _ verse in e ramas o e s er, ar owe, ourneur, apman,
; A_K_ Newmgﬁf 1;:§_IR1SH NECROMANCER~ OR, DEER PARK. London Ford, and Shirley, Haturin would earn some fame as a Gothic
Modern Reeditions: None playwright with his BERTRAM: OR, THE CASTLE OF ST. ALDOBRAND, A
Gothic Type; pu,e or high Gothic ’ TRAGEDY (1816) and MANUEL: A TRAGEDY (1817), dramas containing
Biagraphicai and Research Data_ None much dark Gothic content. Although Maturin's early Gothicism is
’ awkward and derivative, his sense of what the Gothic ought to do
Criti¢a] 5 n < . and to be ran deeper than the ordinary penny-a-line fiend-
survives in thg ggiizge :o1§gg{iugf0€h; tCTee'v°1“me late Gﬂthic mongers. A churchman himself, Maturin pondered problem of
draws its Characterization and scenau ‘$2 LEVY; The ﬂﬂvel original sin, the loneliness of the soul, the fallen nature of
number of Sorcerer Gothics. one promineﬁzy Pom an indeterminate the world, and the agonies of the inner life. Hence, his Gothic
MANCER (ggg #209) Df Kah]ert Irish é°:;§E '5 THE "ECR0- inclines toward the serious philosophic side in its probings of
ayai]ab]e to Marshal] from the aark and 0, 16 landscapes were the mysteries of good and evil and pictures of the religious
Maturin'5 nave]; and Lady Morgan,S St.]] '19 e"t 5@tf1"9s of terror invading the nightmares of the soul. In fact, a recent
(see 1313). 1 popuiar WILD IRISH GIRL critic of Maturin's work finds that he employs the Gothic as a
264 vehicle for spiritual agony rather than as -an end in itself.
. Matthews, Charl . . Writes Diane D'Amico: “The Gothic novel provided Maturin with a
IA. London ; SS5; aﬁ§IESél?nAB:gg} OR’ THE HEMOIRS OF EU5EN- literary world suitable for the images of evil and suffering
godern Reeditions; None ’ ’ whigh popglated his] own minda a gigd regeatzdly dgawn tg the
othic T 9; 5 n ~ - . . _ ‘ pro lems o man's gui t and his ivi e sou ." ven he c umsy
gmith,S n€ee‘S) 9 tlm9"t6i Gothic (imitation of Charlotte construction of Maturin's first Gothic begins to show his pro-
io ra hic . founder t e of Gothic as well as his abilit to ortra throu h
9 P ai and Research Data‘ Su"mer5- GOTHIC QUE5T, P-87. potent ohgiric (or dreamlike) imagery the horrogs of ihe inngr
Critical 5 o si ; - _ _ self. The novel opens in the year 1690. Most events occur in or
Vofk i5 a novgi sf iaaiii§riagi::iiQ§:teit:"d quiet Gothic, the near the Neapolitan Castle of Muralto, the gloomy feudal retreat
OF two which brings a shudder to thew‘ ﬁn °cca5'°"ai m9m°'y of the Montorios. Here, there reside the current Count of Mon-
Cu"pe]]ed to accept the courtshi of n suq ace. Orphaned _and . torio and his two very oPPOsite sons, the meditative Annibal and
by, Eugenia is eventuaily Savedp fro; "9 Y 5“‘t°r- Mr- 5P1mS- the active Tppolito. Twenty years have passed since the Count
my5terious young man residin near tharital S1aVerY by a cheated his brother, Orazio, out of the castle lordship. The
iandscaping and mo0d_bui‘ding a9 Ears t be Abbey._ Most of the exiled Orazio has wandered the earth muttering curses and swear-
Charlotte gmith-5 EMMELINE #55 0RPgA e take" dlrectly from ' ing vengeance against his brother. His brother had also "done
~ #421). i N OF THE CASTLE (589 , 0razio's office twixt his sheets" when he used the handsome
2 - young officer, .Verdoni, to seduce Orazio‘s wife, Erminia di
65. Maturin, Char] Vivaldi, and thus humiliate Orazio. Orazio had murdered Verdoni,
MONTORIO, Loﬁ:O:o?eEgag;:E Fﬁ$::tRE¥ENGE: Os’ THE FAMILY OF the deed causing Erminia's death and the onset of madness for
Modern Reeditions: Arno Préss 19;‘ BB5. in Orme, 1807. the usurped count. These sexual intrigues form the novel's frat-
’ ' ed‘ Ma“"59 LeVY- ricidal preliminaries and are narrated in a most oblique and

 229
228 ‘ TFE FIRST GUTHICS _ pf FIRST GOTHICS
r _ . . - t-
twisted manner. Having learned the ways of black magic during fathom the mysterleé °f 9°°d a"d ev‘] §‘dd§" ?::p1L?S;°::ti$;_
his wanderings, Drazio has returned to Muralto Castle under the ’mented soul. Social fiction. eve" ""9" t‘@9ﬁ. "forte A Story 0;
disguise of the confessor, Father Schemoli. In name and behavior ‘ alism as is THE HILD IRISH BOY, was no T? the -hero Seems
as well as horrid physical appearance, Schemoli is Mrs. Rad- ’ domestic struggle f@ll°r@? by the Papp1neSS ities for the darker
cliffe's Schedoni in THE ITALIAN (see #350) broadly counterfeit- . totally alien to Maturin's morbid prop€"5
ed by Maturin. Gaining the confidence of his brother's sons, he side of the self. .
sets out to engineer his fatal revenge. By various forms of '_ ; p
supernatural intimidation--he makes several spectral appearances ‘I267. Maturin, Charles Robert. THE MILESIAN CHIEF. London E"'¥
to the sons--Schemoli/Orazio eventually ignites their parricidal l Colburn, 1812. N
passions and they comply by killing their father. But his re- ' Modern Reeditions: one_ _
venge takes a fatal twist. Hhen the genealogical rectifications 3 G thic T e: Pure or high Gothic (terror mode, revolutionary
o YD
are made, it turns out that Schemoli himself is the father of l Irish politiC5)
Ippolito and Annib l ' ' ‘ '
, ' , nd Mc
a and he has unknowingly turned his own Biogranhlﬁil a"d Research Data‘ RatE2fg?d§I;aag£$EE SCSTY AND
Progeny into murderers. Mortified with guilt, Schemoli's former Carthy- William H' THE CORRESPONUENALLIED LETTER5 Austin, TX
mad fury recrudesces aha he literally hemorrhages to death when ' CHARLES ROBERT MATURIN, "IT" ll FE"_ G 1 nd Pubnghing 1930;
a blood vessel bursts. The plot is also abundantly laced with ; Texas UP, 19375 Rpt' New ‘ark l aglg 533 547-555 559,
quantities of monastic and inquisitional fiendishness and sub- K Lévy, LE ROMAN “GOTHIQUE" ANGEAIS, pp’ d ,Maturin- Ni vrai ni
terranean peril together with a shrill style of poetic horror P 569, 593; Fie'°b§' c‘a“de' A Prup°SAI§ES 3 (1§74)' 23-28;
which will later become a central rhetorical characteristic of faux, mais fantastique," ETUDES IRLQND ‘_ , t fantagtique u
MELMDTH THE HANDERER (see #268). i E‘ Fierobe Claude. 'C.R. Maturin: Nationa isme 8 1
l ETUDES IRLANDAISES, 9 (19B4l= 43-55-
266. Haturin, Charles Robert. THE HILD IRISH BOY. London : H t 3
urs , v . I - - ' t “n
Rees, and Orme, I808. ‘ Critical Synopsis: M=E"""_$ "mt P‘?l“‘°“l ‘°"“"§" S 1
Mod R a' " - '
t h-
ern ee itlons. Arno Press, 1977, ed. E.F. Bleiler, _ the cause of Iris? ngﬁiggal;5:°:ﬁgg?SW1§E]::;1D:?tEUt:;€mo:€ty
Gothic Type: Domestic fiction (several touches of terror niques in this nove . e_ BC 9 _ . . 1 th
Gothicism) d th En lish during the Irish HPT‘5l"9 °f 1798' Q . e
t ar e 9 _ .
Biographical and Research Data: Sumners, GOTHIC QUEST, p.400; * ng:el's Preface» M3P“f‘" e‘p]a‘ns h15 reasovs for m‘x1ng
Kraner Dal . CHARLES - " ' ' '
Q ri-
, e ROBERT MATURIN. New York . Twayne; TEAS nationalism with Gothlclsm. The ways of therﬁgtgag ﬂgirgzgg PeX_
number 156' 1973' i ate to "the only country 0l'e?rth,p:litics and manners- the ex-
; : ' tin opposition of re i9l°@» .' ’ ~1d
Critical Synopsis: Maturin's second novel is a radical depar- ‘S 9 f f'nement and barbarlsm are united and the most wi
. tremes o re i _ . ’
ture from the overt Gothicism of THE FATAL REVENGE (see #265). and incredible situations of romantic story are hourly paS$1"§
Maturin ma h b
- - ‘ f l m
y ave een responding to Lady Morgan's social novel, before modern eyes.‘ What Haturln_w§oEet;€caiﬁ::g:;€lEp?acg,°gna
THE HILD IRISH GIRL (see #313) published in the previous year. l. violence and savage"! T111?“ "lt ° . ’
Th l " ~ - - ‘
v . f th
e nove offers a familiar cast. a wild young Irishman, Drmsby ' behavior to yield an interest1"9 Se°9;3phlc§liv:“bg:g;:1yoatm°5€
Bethel, who eventually finds his real father; his irascible but I‘ tale of terror, a Hibernian Gothic. Primi ﬁ_] _ n hief
generous uncle in the person of an old Irish chieftain full of
Gaelic patriotism; a stern father who is not actually the wild
Irish bo ' f th - ' ' '
ld i esla c J
h envelops the ruined retreat Bf. the, ° .
8,i;§ve" who has barricaded himself within his grim turret as a
. - - ll t
_ y s a er after all, a domineering governess (Miss Per- last act’of defiance against the $d9;{5h-aﬁaztsggé oggiesggrsagf
cival) who seems to have some secret relating to his parentage; 3 Patriot, Connal, carries on the lg ggvul ar English officer,
several very different women (Athanasia Montolieu, Lady Montre- ' h l'b t He o oses the bruta an 9
Iris l er y. PQ _ th 1
vors, Lady Delphina) with very different motives who compete for i ' Handesford, VYl"9 "lth hlm for the ‘ave of Ireland and e ave
the young man's affecti n Th
. . h
o s. e major action occurs in London i of Armida Montclare. Armida is at the m@'°yth°fea::i:e:iii:inY 2
where Ormsby Bethe] soon falls into ways of loose living and is displays all of the usual wicked drives of hteserves as Ha"deS_
encouraged in his dissipations by his cousin, Deloraine, and his K haunted castle on the seacoast near Connatg f 5 ectra1 activity
partner in intrigue, Lady Delphina. Lady Delphina would like to f rd's em orium of terror There is plen y o P
o P ' - » ' s-
take the wild Irish boy away from Athanasia and enlists Delor- in these settingi t° °°c"P¥ the ‘mpr‘5°"ed ma1de" and her re.
aine's aid in her scheme Th
~ iffe s
s. roughout his difficulties, a wise ' cuer. The Gothic reader who could app“ei;a:§m?::-iﬁiaglurin,5
stranger has come and gone in Ormsby's life, leaving behind on obscure scenogranhy» C°"1d 315°-f1nd mac Armida and Connal are
each of these occasions a strong sense of consanguinity. He is, interior decoratin9- I" § tYP‘°a] 5ce"e‘Th Radé]iffean maiden
of course, 0rmsby's true father, a man who is anxious to educate l guided by a spectre to a dim comPﬂftmf"t-t ?n,s characters Show
-his son in the degenerate ways of the world and thus cure his ‘J would simply swoon in this situation, Ma_u§1_ hich_ they were
son's wildness in the end. The weaknesses of the novel are many their courage: "The dark, G°t"'c chémber Indothe dim blue lights
and obvious. Maturin was at his best and wrote with real convic~ N? ggnducted, its stillness, its solitude an to each other Iike
tion when in the grip of some Gothic nightmare or when trying to $1 that scarcely burned in it, made them appear
3%???

23" rue FIRST GUTHICS THE FIRST GUTHICS 231
$PlFlt5 meeting in a vault.“ The political theme of the novel is hunt" of Melville's Captain Ahab in MOBY DICK (1851) and the
stated by having Connal kill Handesford, an allegorical depic- cold Satanic ferocity of two of Hawthorne's most Helmothian
tion of Irish hopes. But this assertion of independence is dark- villains, Doctor Rappaccini and Roger Chillingworth in THE
ened by Maturin's moral pessimism and preference for nightmare SCARLET LETTER (1850). Structurally, Melmoth is several Gothic
°VeT B"! dreams of bliss. Connal is seized and condemned to novels under one cover, a composite of the most popular Gothic
death by the English. Armida who is slowly dying of poison forms. Artistically, the book represents a convergence of all of
arrives at the place of Connal's execution too late for a final , those dark or pessimistic forces that comprise the "Romantic
farewell. In a kind of operatic climax, she falls prostrate on agony." In Melmoth, Maturin brought the Gothic to within range
the patriot's bullet-riddled corpse. Like his fellow English ‘L of the tragic in his emphasis on religious and psychological
5°thi¢$, Maturin sinply could not resist a shocking subplot to ‘ suffering. The novel's poetic and tragic elements include
accompany the somber main story. The risque subplot of THE l. Faustian betrayal of soul and loss of self, the moral problem of
MILESIAN CHIEF involves what seems to be a homosexual affair confronting and controlling the darkest facets of self, the
between Armida's brother, Endymion, and Connal's brother, Des- riddle of suffering in an absurd and unheroic universe, the di-
mond. His abberent sexual attraction for another man horrifies lemma of the overreaching personality entrapped by a limited
Desmond since he is unable to control his urges. Hhen Desmond is cosmos, and the metaphysical catastrophe of the never-ending
shot with Connal, Endymion appears in his/her true person as life which becomes the wanderer's ironic damnation. In moods,
Inez thus removing the dangerous suggestion of homosexuality. rhetoric, and events, the texture of MELMOTH throughout suggests
Mat“rl"'5 liteTaT¥ advocate and correspondent, Sir Halter Scott Maturin's impulse to elevate the nearly exhausted genre of
found much to admire in the somber power of THE MILESIAN CHIEF: horror and terror into some higher poetic form. Melmoth's famous
From this Irish Gothic romance, Scott took both inspiration and lethal eyes glisten with a perverted faith in evil as a last
situation for one of the most thoroughly Gothic of his own nov- means of asserting self-identity. Melmoth's condition is a mat-
els, THE BRIDE OF LAMMERMOOR (see #389). ter of willed evil. He has mortgaged his soul to Satan and must
now roam eternally through the corridors of time seeking out any
268. Maturin, Charles Robert. MELMOTH THE HANDERER: A TALE. London : fellow sufferer or sinner whose misery is commensurate with or
H"'5t ﬂ"d R0bl"$0n; Edinburgh : Constable, 1820. greater than his own ironic damnation of inmortality. Some other
Modern Reeditions: Nebraska UP; Bison Book, ed. Hilliam F. creature in terminal anguish might be willing to exchange his
AXt0", 1951; Penguin BUOk$, Ed. Alethea Hayter, 1977. ‘ destiny for Melmoth's, thus granting the wanderer the relief of
Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (actually, a composite of ' death. Thus, the novel is designed as a frustrated odyssey
Gothic types) through time, a perverse pilgrimage for Melmoth which takes the
Biographical and Research Data: Scholten, Willem. CHARLES concentric form of tales within tales. Maturin also places
ROBERT MATURIN: THE TERROR NOVEL1ST.,Amsterdam, Netherlands : narrators within narrators so as to produce a dark tapestry of
H.J. Paris, 1933; Rpt. New York : Garland Publishing, 1981; . five interlocking biographies surrounded by the exterior or
Hanmond, Muriel E. "C.R. Maturin and MELMOTH THE HANDERER " frame Story of Melmoth's futile journey through history. As Mel-
ENGLISH, 11 (1956): 97-101; Dawson, Leven M. “MELMOTH THE moth wanders, he comes upon various abject suffers who neverthe-
HANDERER: Paradox and the Gothic Novel," STUDIES IN ENGLISH less display great endurance and resist his offer to trade
LITERATURE, 1500-1900, 8 (1968): 621-632; Kramer, Dale. fates. The five are: the prisoner, Stanton, confined to a
CHARLES ROBERT MATURIN. New York : Twayne; TEAS Number 156, madhouse where he is hinself going slowly mad; Don Alonzo de
1973; Fierobe, Claude. CHARLES ROBERT MATURIN (1780-1824): . Moncada. a kindly hidalsv in the Clutches of the Spanish Inqui-
L'HOMME ET L'0EUVRE. Lille, France : Presse de l'Université sition; the lovely Immalee, a Miranda without a Prospero living
de Lille III, 1974; Eggenschwiler, David. "MELHOTH THE on a deserted tropical paradise (here, Melmoth plays Satan to
HANDERER: Gothic on Gothic," GENRE, B (1975): 165-181. her Eve in her Adam-less and apparently godless Eden); the
v _ starving Halberg family ("The Tale of Guzman‘s Family"); and the
Critical Synopsis: Often viewed by students of the form as ‘ pathetic Elinor Mortimer (‘The Lover's Tale"). Hhen these
the epitome of the Gothic romance, Maturin's epic and lyric tormented beings are visited by Melmoth, all resist his tempta-
Gothic novel engaged and shaped the tragic vision of many major tion to relinquish their humanity, howsoever painful. They re-
romantics, including Goethe in Germany, Byron and Scott in Eng- tain their human condition despite the cost. Hence, Melmoth's
land, Pushkin in Russia, and Hawthorne and Poe in America. expedition through time brings him neither power nor peace Of
Balzac thought so highly of Maturin's work that he undertook a mind while his pride and love of suffering insure his damnation.
sequel, MELMDTH RECONCILIE A L'EGL1SE (I835). Further into the , In the five stories, the rusty apparatus of the Gothic romance
Nineteenth Century, Baudelaire would reflect the book's night- is called 'upon by Maturin to fuse Gothic modes with tragic
"are °f the 5°"l I" the Perverse imagery of LES FLEURS DU MAL . themes. Each narrative can also be classified as a Gothic novel
(1857) and Oscar Hilde, who claimed to be a relative of Maturin ' in miniature. Moncada's sadistic "Tale of the Spaniard" is an
took the name, ‘Sebastian Melmoth,' to express the insufferable ‘ Inquisition Gothic and monastic shocker. Responding -to Gothic
conditions of his exile. The residual influences of Melmoth's needs, Maturin inserts a graphic ePi5°dE 07 5"bt9"a"e°“ Ca""i'
personality may be traced in the monomaniac quest or "fiery ‘ balism to insure the attentions of the Gothic audience. Both

232 i mi: FIRST GDTHICS ji ms FIRST GOTHICS 233
“Stanton's Tale‘ and the tropical liaison of Melmoth and Immalee i tion Maturin had employed the device of the divergent brothers
("Th Tl "--~ ~ a - - »'
e a e of the Indians ) display Haturin's interest in Gothic in THE FATAL REVENGE (see #265) and THE MILESIAN CHIEF (S68
iﬂ"d5¢ﬂP95 and the lugubrious locales of the monastic shocker ‘ #257) The first brother, Sir Paladour, i$ B Vi9°'°"5 P'°P°"e"t
Maturin's achievement is well-sunned up in in Edith Birkhead's ¢ of the crusade against the Albigensians; the other brother,
pristine but still relevant study of the Gothic romance. Even as Almirald humanely and tolerantly takes thé Sidﬁ Of the
the Gothic genre entered its death throes, Maturin's MELMOTH threatened heretics and underscores this humanitarianism by
9¥a'i"t99d that 3 Gothic 5Dirit would survive into Victorian I falling in love with Genevieve, an Albigensian maid. For most of
literature. Says Birkhead: ‘It is his faculty for describing the novel neither brother is aware of the fraternal blood tie-
l"t9"59. D6$$i0nate feeling, his power of painting wild pictures although ‘both are secret sharers in a connnn bond of suffering
Of horror. his gifts for conveying his thovqhts in rolling K‘ and each possesses qualities of character needed by the other.
rhythmical periods of eloquence, that make MELMOTH a memory: Entering the Castle of Courtenay?’ Piiid°"' e"c°“"te'5 the
h3“"ti"9 b°°k- with iii his fa"it5, Maturin was the greatest as beautiful Isabelle de Courtenaye and her witchlike guardian, the
well as the last of the Goths." ' haggigh Marie de Montemar. The crone, Marie, holds some secret
about the proper lordship of Courtenaye Castle which involves
269. Maturin, Charles Robert. THE ALBIGENSES: A ROMANCE. London : Paladour and she is privy $0 the ‘99@"d that there is a terribie
H"'5t- R°bi"50"Z Edi"h"'9" 1 5°"5@Bbi9. 1324- J strain of werewolfery in the ancestry of the family. For having
Modern Reeditions: Arno Press, I974, ed. Dale Kramer. this dark knowledge, she will later find herself chained in a
Gothic Type: Gothified history (terror-horror modes) pit with a wolf for company. Meanwhile, outside the "B115 °f
Biographical and Research Data: Sunners, GOTHIC QUEST p.193‘ . Courtenaye Castle, Almirald is pursuing his one-man canpaign to
Bostrom, Irene. "The Novel and Catholic Emancipation,‘ STUD: save the Albigenses --and with a military 5"CCe55 that is th°"
IE5 IN ROHANTICISM, Z (1963)! 155-176; Lévy LE ROMAN ou hly unhistoricai‘ the Albigensian forces rally to defeat the
"GOTHIQUE“ ANQLAIS, 09.383, 439, 518, 530, 590-59;, 598 529 ‘ crﬁsaders. The Albigensian victory has three Gothic conse-
638' ’ , ‘ quences: Isabelle becomes the tale'S PET5EC"tEd maiden BY b@}"9
. . ' ' placed by a black knight in a monstrous stronghold overlooking
crltlcai 5¥"°D5i5: Maturin's final Gothic romance portrays the sea" her governess, Marie de Mortemara Bets t° Share 3 '°°m
"it" Qreat sadistic energy if not historical accuracy the with a wolf~ and the captured Sir Paladour 99t5 t° meet the
persecution and systematic extermination of the Albigenses sect lycanthrope, he has been told about when he is bitten by the
in the year 1209, a large group of Manichean heretics living in man-beast who is also perhaps a distant relative. Eventually es-
conmunities in southern France in the Thirteenth Century. The ‘ caping from the castle on the cliff, Paladour and Isabelle MOVE
holocaust was conceived by Pope Innocent III and implemented onward through additional Gothic travails and toward self-
with brutal efficiency by Simon de Hoqtfort. Maturin's preface identity and marriage. Hhen Paladour discovers that Almirald is
to the novel declares his intention of joining historical mate- his brother Gothic gloom begins t0 Qive ii! t° 5eif'355u'a"ce
rials with Gothic moods and characters: “The splendid barbarism at last. In,a sense, he brings the werewolf within himself under
of the feudal ages, with their wild superstitions and dubious control with the aid of his brother's coM9ﬂ55i°" a"d his “E”
Chri5ti@"ity, the Knightly gallantry and baronial oppression K wife's tolerant Catholicism. The novel ends significantly with a
the native fierceness of the Gothic conqueror, offer powerful double wedding which signifies an overcoming Of Feii9l°"5
materials to the painter of manners with the pen." Maturin tried i bigotry through love. The marriages nﬂt 0"‘! ""it@ tUe_t'°
hard to integrate Gothic devices with the historical drama and i long-separated brothers; they also reconcile the religloHS
the two forms do complement each other thematically if not with " hatred of Catholic and Albigensian when Isabelle (the Catholic)
total consistency through the four volumes. Students of Maturin i‘ and Genevieve (the Albigensian) are brought i"t° the fﬂm1iy_ by
have noticed the tendency of the narrative to split into two 5 the brothers. The novel's concluding sentences contain Maturin's
tales, one historical and the other Gothic, with history fre- 3 epitaph for the vicious or lyCﬂ"th'°Pi¢ imP"l595 °f the h“ma"
quently rearranged or subordinated to one of Maturin's master Y spirit: "The difference of birth and creed was never known to
themes, the self's unknown darkness and capacity for evil. If we i disturb the affection that subsisted between the high-bﬂr" Lady
view the role of history in the novel as a netaphor for human ‘ of Courtenaye and the humble bride of Almirald."
cruelty abetted by "dubious Christianity" and warped religious
ideals. the biiwdy Crusade against the Albigenses then comes to  270. MAXIMILIAN AND SELINA: on, THE HVSTERIOUS ABBOT. A FLWI5"
symbolize thev potential depravity of the self. Along with the I I TALE. London : T. Plunmer for Tegg and Castleman, I804.
expected Gothic_ merchandise of castles, curses, and vocal ," Modern Reeditions: None
5P@C§F@5, Maturin's novel also introduced lycanthropy or were- lk Gothic Type: Gothic chapbook . _
_wolfism as a terror motif for the first time in Gothic fiction. 3? Biographical-and Research Data: None
The rmotif was a _natural way of expressing the instantaneous yi i . _ , .
bestiality which might erupt without warning and overthrow ?' Critical Synopsis: The frontisﬂiece 'ii"5t'at‘°" for th‘5,72'
'ea5°" at i"Y mﬂment even in the most civilized human being. The iv page chapbook depicts one of many horrific events, ruffian5
P101 again turns about a fraternal mystery and belated recogni- 5 throwing a screaming boy from the I09 Of i t°"e' “h‘i° the

23‘ - ms FIRST cornrcs ~ ms FIRST camrcs 235
mother looks on with clasped hands. The boy is Godfrey Duke of piece of Gothic work, THE VEILED PROTECTRESS (1818). She
Anjou, who escapes this tower peril as it turns out The launched her Gothic career with a close imitation of an earlier
C"apb°°k itself is 5 °°"f"5l"9 Dﬂtthwork of obscure and opaque Gothic. THE ABBEY 0F CLUGNV mirrors the characters and situa-
plots. A young Spanish knight, Sancho Orlando, pauses for the tions of Mrs. Kelly's Minerva-Press novel of the same year, THE
9Ye"i"9 at 6 monastery Where he is cared for by a monk of mar- ABBEY OF ST. ASAPH (see #211). Nathan Drake's Literary Hour
tial bearing, the mysterious abbot of the title. The knight's "umber 20, THE ABBEY OF CLUNEDALE (see #116), 315° may have
remark, “You have not always been an abbot,‘ provokes the I drawn upon Meeke‘s first book as a source for its Radcliffean
telling of the sad and bloody tale. Maximilian (he is the mys- plotting and effects. In her study of the Minerva-Press, Dorothy
terious abbot) had once attempted to reconcile the hatred for Blakey ranks Mrs. Meeke as a firstrate regular on the Minerva
one another of the two brothers, Godfrey and Edward of Anjou In booklists. She was a formulaic novelist who knew how to aDFe3l
acting as peacemaker, he also became romantically involved with to the sentiments of the reader without demanding the slightest
their sister, Selina. A flirtatious vixen, Elgiva de Valmont intellectual exertion. Her success in the various modes of Goth-
and a hypocritical seducer, Adolphus de Monvel, further qloua ‘ ic fiction was based on the diverting, not the didactic. Blakey
the plot. The anonymous Goth is interested only in creating remarks that Thomas Babington Macaulay (1800-1859) "all but knew
5a"$"i"arY °' 5"PE'"ﬂt"'ﬂl lhtideﬂts; he never bothers to ex- her books by heart, though he quite admitted that they were ‘one
plain where characters have come from, what motivates them or just like another, turning on the fortunes of some young man in
Wh¥ they should change so abruptly from good to evil as Godfrey ‘ a very low rank of life who eventually proves to be the 50" Bf 6
does when he tries to poison Selina's mind against Maximilian duke.‘ There is nothing subtle in Mrs. Meeke's character draw-
All the reader has is Maximilian's admission of his desire to ihq and nothing Particularly P0ll5h@d in her Style; but her
kill Godfrey, one of the men he originally set out to aid- "I lively manner is free of overwrought sensibility, and she
became sensible at length of the inpropriety or rather madness affects no heavy discussions of the moral code. She well knows
of my conduct, in hazarding the idss df Selina by the murder of - how to manipulate her reader's ¢uri<>$ity- At the ehd 0* the We
her brother." Two pages later, Selina is found dead in her poetic justice is scrupulously administered, and the hero, to
chamber and the grieving Maximilian wonders if his wish to see ' the reader's childish satisfaction, turns the tables on those
Godfrey dead was somehow the cause of her death. The reader must who have desPl5E4 hi"-"
struggle very hard to line up these strange detail; into gome ,
sort of logical progression because the Goth explains and con- ' 272. Meeke, Mary. COUNT ST. BLANGHARD: OR, THE PREJUDICED JUDGE.
nects nothing leaving all to the audience. From the maid I London : Minerva-Press for Hilliam Lane, I795.
Nerina, Maximilian learns how Selina was lost "hearing what 3 ’ Moder" R€@ditl0ﬂ$1 AFHD PTE55, 1977, 6d- D9V9"dF° P- va'ma-
'lP9' he l°"9 Cherished in his bosom in the infamous Edward " Gothic Type: Domestic Gothic (search for the father) -
Hers» the myiterivus abbot breaks are his narration ;.a,.di,'.g Biographical and Research om; Tarr, CATHOLICISM IN GOTHIC
Sancho Orlando a tattered bundle of papers which probaaly c0m- FICTION, p.67.
plete his story. Maximilian had set out to end the animosity
between Godfrey and Edward. Instead, he had wound up by wishin Critical Synopsis: Meeke's title refers to the two PFl"C‘Pal5
°"e b'°t"9' dead a"d hid ﬂ¢tudlly killed the other in repa n? of the mildly Gothic story. The eventual Count St. Blanchard is
for Selina's death. These crimes and the stings of conscizice Dubois the supposed son of the old apothecary, Rhubarbin. He
have driven him to the monastery where he tells his story to an spends,much of his time during the plot fleeing from the the
stranger who will listen. Much moved, Sancho Orlando retgllg insidious hatred of his beloved Adelaide's haughty nobleman fa-
the story of the mysterious abbot to another Stranger, Gnigcar- ther. The father is engaged in the typical Gothic business of
do, whose has recently become involved in a deadly ,situation k9EPl"9 tV° IUVET5 apart by "aVl"9 each detal"ed i" 'ari°“5
which seems to parallel Maximilian's devotion to selina , abbeys and dungeons or harassed by his soldiery. The prejudiced
Complexity and lucidity are not necessariliy incompatible ele: . judge, eventually to be revealed as Dubois's true father, is the
me"t5 °f 5t¥le in horror fiction, but in this chapbook the basically decent magistrate De Ransal. Many years before the
style is so dense as to render even the basic facts of the gtory 1 action of the tale, De Ransal's wife (Eugenia) and child had
a matter of hazardous speculation. , been abducted while De Ransal was away on legal busineSS- HE
‘ recovered his wife, but the child is still missing when we come
1- Meeke, "dry. THE ABBEY OF CLUGNY. London : Minerva-Press for in on the action. Although he is an honest and upright Judge, De
Hllllam Lﬂ"9. 1795- ' Ransal's passionate desire to find his missing son if he is
Muder" Reeditl°"51 "ODE still alive has blinded him to legal impartiality in his
Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (Radcliffean imitation) I treatment of young Dubois. Rumors to the effect that Dub0is's
. Biographical and Research Data: None 1 father, old Rhubarbin, had a hand in the kidnapping'inflame the
_ _ T judge's prejudice while Adelaide's father turns the preJudice to
Critical Synopsis: Writing occasionally under the pseodon m 5 his own purposes to separate the couple and make constant
Gabrielli, Mrs. Meeke supplied the Minerva-Press with oneyor L trouble for them. Both are forced to lead the usual Gothic life
sometimes two Gothic titles per year between 1795 and her 1&5; l of pursuit, incarceration, and persecution by close relatives-

1. 217
23$ T!-E FIRST GUTHICS I TI-E FIRST FOTHIC5
' _ > - r . This format
Adelaide is lashed to a tree by a conniving footman and high 5°°‘a‘ 5t°t“s a"d “““"}§§§ii§ll g$tr€:::oi and horror
threatened with the usual sexual perils until Dubois arrives on W35 °fte" ad°'"ed the Stroag crave‘
the scene. Soon parted again, Adelaide is confined to the worst obtained from the high Gﬂt 16 -
convent in Paris and sub'ected to the harsh habits of the 1 - r b and Letterman,
truculent abbess who onceJwanted to marry Adelaide's father. The , 274. Meeke, Ma'Y- THE SICILIAN‘ London ' C OS y
fugitive Dubois becomes the legal prey of the prejudiced judge \ 1798- . . _ N -
who remains unaware that he is being used by the Adelaide's r Modern ReedlIl°"5- °g§ h G thiﬁ (Radc1iffean imitation)
father to molest his own son. In a tense trial scene, Rhubarbin ' Gothic Type: Pure OT 19" D°ta- sunnnrs GOTHIC QUEST, p.89.
breaks down under questioning and blurts out that he had Biogrﬂphlgil a"d Researc a '
acquired the lost child after the kidnapping many years before. ‘ . V ' . ' h o ular reception
The well-worn birthmark device which goes back in the Gothic Critical SynopSi$- {@§£¥gN";BM§:€Ef{g:et*5‘?)pand THE ITALIQN
tradition to the mark of the blue arrow on the person of Theo- ‘ of Mrs, Radcliffe 5 S_C r Gah,iei1i produced with her
dore in THE CASTLE OF OTRANTO (see #466) identifies Dubois as De (see #350} of the_previo:s ye3“,verSio“ of an Ita1ianate Shocker
RwmrswwmwDmymeﬁmwlwuawnﬂbwmsﬁm Ms o umﬂ Hmkrwmny w£hmscamHcmM“,mdfmﬂe
dungeon cell remains to be accomplished. Although languishing of well-stocked with shadowy v THE M6NTHLY MIRROR fur "arch, 1799’
fever in his dark jail, Dubois instantly recuperates when reu- Virtqe pursueq by ma]? VIC? the novel which might be taken as a
nited with his lost father, a now unprejudiced judge. Apparent- ¢ﬂ'Tled_° c“"°“S "°t1Ce as k .5 Iiterary taieog in general. The
1!» the iudge can also dispense noble titles since he creates . final Judg@me"t °" M'5"I I§Neto be "one of those works which
his son the new Count St. Blanchard. The elevation of Dubois to ‘ reviewer though? THE SIC L h to prevent the reader's throwing
his own class rank is so gratifying to Adelaide's father that he P0$595$ J"§t !"teYest teﬂ°§§e Studeut of the gothic period
ceases his Gothic annoyances and offers to provide a dowry for the book aside in disgus E n reviewers of the Gothic harbored
the happy couple. All the typical ingredients of one of Meeke'5 might well suspect than maTye Gothic novel was despised by
plots show up in this formulaic summary: unsubtle good and evil J"5P Such a double att'dq e;it and triteness; yet, many Gothics
in the characterization with the judge himself suspended between , ' F9Vl9“eY5 f°r It? me 1°C thzhiie literature were enjoyable
the two factions; offspring locked away in foreign dungeons and , which did not qualify as :2? e forced to read them_ For once, we
religious houses by vengeful parents; elopement, pursuit, and , and @"9a9‘"9"Teve" to dD§t§ (albeit with some vehemence) hi5
mildly frightening violence; a family reunion in the final chap- 9"C°""te' 3 'e"e“e' “"9 a mgsense
ter featuring the elevation of a young man from persecuted anbivalence toward Gothic no . f
poverty to adulated wealth, title, and marria e. It bears re- “ n : Minerva-Ptess or
peating that successful Gothic romances of this gtype exploited f 275. Meeke,'MBTY- THE HVSTERIOUS HUSBAND‘ Londo
the conservative fears and hopes of the bourgeois Gothic audi- ' william Lane, 180i."
ence. Meeke was not the first Gothic novelist to cater to the M°def" Reed‘t‘°"5' 0“? h G thic (mild terrors, ggnealogical
reader's willingness to associate inprisonment and horror with Ggthlc TYge* P“re °' hlg 0 -
low or uncertain social status and freedom and security with the * P 9a5"'e§
bestowal of name and high class standing. 5l°gTiP"‘951 a"d Research Data’ None
, _ ._ - -ii- " tn novel is clot-
273. Meeke, Mary. THE nvsmuous HIFE. London = Minerva-Press for Critical synon$1$- 519"“ by '°?'°"e 1’ e i n a
t Macau ay 3
lvlilliam Lane, 1797. li ted to please exactly. 1" :"@(Szl‘§‘§71‘)‘fYcU|::§,ed with the gm-
Modern Reeditionsz None 1 described Mrs. Meeke S bgothics Meeke's narrative control is
Gothic Type: Domestic Gothic (genealogical puzzlements) » penelfﬂble 5tY1e °f qther do 5 ecially so in the handling of the
Biographical and Research Data: "one ‘ clear! aqd iu:§5§::§i§eo?"ra§t§n@ A party of noble travellers
. sen“ 091*?“ . ' ' oward the Castle
Critical Synopsis: The Victorian historian, Thomas Babington are seen lﬂ Switzerland asht::yaT:k:h:";;?n“€:a§acters, and‘ to
Macaulay (1800-1859), once confessed his lifelong addiction to 07 9T"9X 9" Lake Ge"eva‘ ‘at "er Gothic cost become too large-
Mrs. Meeke's predictable Gothics. To read one was to read them he‘ °'ed‘t' Meek? never Ea i of Clarancourt, a morose and
all because "every one is just like another, turning on the . Heading Yhe Pa't¥ '5 ‘hi ar " in him are the Countess Clara"-
fortunes of some young man in a very low rank of life who even- domine€Yl"g "°h1?ma“' cC°T2a y5o2i's daughter by his first
tually proves to be the son of a duke." THE MVSTERIOUS HIFE court. I-aqy El"*"‘° °'“"°% E $1.5 S0,, by the pfeseﬂt Countess),
sinply feminizes this success formula. After much family : wife). 5ld"e¥ D“d1e¥ (t e ‘Semi; Forrester. ldamia is con-
adversity, hereditary delay, and a little terror, a young woman - iﬂd the '15“ Y°“"9 he'reSS’ f cad overness 'Madame Du Pré, Whg
eventually proves to be the daughter of a duchess. Gabrielli's ‘ 5ti"tl¥ "Etched by "gr S°u;' gscapg attempi by ldamia. This
"books always consisted of three elements: painful entanglement , appears t9 be exp?ct1ng a ‘the Castle is reached. Elarancourt
or crisis for a classless and moneyless young hero or heroine; ten5i0" '5 e*p1a1"ed Qnce no he has brought ldamia to this
inextricable problems of heredity and identity; one sudden twist §_ wants her money, all of it, of r untix she consents ta marry his
or reversal of fortune which elevated the hero or heroine to —1j Gothic ill] to make her S" e
315$?»

235 me FIRST corwzcs I THE FIRST GUTHICS 239
S°"- va'l°"5 "ﬂit! means are applied to make Idamia yield b in her monetary mistake in denying Octavius, Leonora now makes
She mi"59@$ 1° iliﬂ 6W6! from the castle with the assist , Ht a gsecond attempt at becoming a duchess by coaxing Octavius into
tidy Elmerid ""0 i5 thvroughly appalled at her father's age: of an elopement during a masked ball. In too much of a haste to
ior. Making her way back to England and undergoing a seriesav; eer beneath the mask of her “dear Duke," she marries him as the
Perilous adventures, Idamia also makes a marital alliance witho glock strikes twelve. Of course, her new husband is no duke at
"mysterious husband.“ "'I am,‘ she informs the enra ed Earle all but an ugly substitute whose shape resembled the stature of
‘united to a man who has the means, the wish and the gower t‘ Octavius when viewed at midnight. His father, the King, chooses
rescue me from my oppreSsions.'" She then’goes into seclusi 0 , a beautiful wife for the new Duke and invites the entire court
until she can choose the right moment for the unveilin of ho" to a glittering evening ceremony much to the chagrin of the
my5i@*l0“$ hH5bi"d- C0mPlications and crises follow gs Claraﬁr i frustrated Leonora. There is nothing morally instructive in the
court exerts a stupendous effort to dislodge her secret ah; undoing of Leonora's ambitions or the making of 0ctavius‘s for-
regain her wardship. This must be because he realizes th t tunes and the characters show no development or change whatso-
Idamia's hidden mate bears some relationship to his d a ‘ ever They are merely pieces on her Gothic checkerboard. Hith a
secret that he is the untitled impostor to the Cl:::h¢ art few clever variations, Mrs. Meeke sinply remanipulates her basic
fortune. The Earl's brother, now dead, was a Swiss Baron andoghe lost-and-found, poor-to-rich, orphan-to-duke fairytale of suc-
owner of Castle Ornex. The whole family fortune had been be- cess.
queathed t° his 5°". but the will declaring this had been t
Perﬂd with by the Earl. His fears are well-founded as Sh0wnaE_ i 277. Meeke, Mary. ‘THERE IS A SECRET. FIND IT OUT!" London : Minerva
ENE @XPQsure scene when Idamia melodramatically displays he: ‘ Press for Lane, Newman, 1808.
_mY5t@r1ous husband" in the glittering uniform of a hussar He Modern Reeditions: None
15. of course, the handsome son of the dead and rightful Baron Gothic Type: Domestic fiction (intermittent Gothic @lEm9"t5)
Clarancourt and the astounded villain's nephew Prince Tancred Biographical and Research Data: NORB
°f c]a'a"c°"'t- "9ek9'5 Plots are a regular as ‘clockwork b t
"°t"i"9 "35 m°'e 5°tl5fyl"9 to the Minerva-Press‘ é hq Critical Synopsis: The secret concerns the clandestine nobil-
c]ie"te]e' S at ‘C it of the hero Frank Yates. Finding it out must not have been
muth of a task for readers of Mrs. Meeke's previﬂvi flﬁtloﬂ. T0"
276. Meeke, Mary. MIDNIGHT WEDDINGS. London . Minerva-Press f r “.1 this novel aperates according to all of her formulas. The search
liam La"e* 1802- ‘ 0 1 _ for the father and the success story follow a P'edl¢tﬂbl9 Pat-
Modern Reediti°"5: N°"e tern of difficulty with false relatives, sibling rivalry, and
Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (domestic elements e the dying declaration of a highborn gentleman which establishes
]°9i°al e"tﬂ"9lEm@"1$) ' g nea_ the young man's aristocratic credentials. The hero‘s DT°5P@Flt¥,
Biographical and Research Data: Blakey MINERVA PRESS 61- as usual depends upon his persistence of character coupled with
Lévy, LE ROMAN "GOTHIQUE" ANGLAIS, pp.5ss,4s7. ’ 9' ' a good ‘deal of lucky coincidence. Yates is the adoptive son or
C . . _ the proletarian but socially anbitious Wheeler family- He 15
ritical Synopsis: Mrs. Meeke's unquestioned master of th handsome talented, and seems naturally well-bred when compared
5t°¢k G°t"lC Plot cranmed with jolting little narrativey tr" ke ' to the Wheeler's two rather boorish natural children, John and
and reversals is illustrated in force by this slick M‘ ‘C S Caroline Like Dickens's own Nicholas Nickleby later on, Frank
Press bestseller. The story is a variation of the mis lac1:erva_ ' has a dramatic and musical gift which brings him prominence- He
situation already used in COUNT ST. BLANCHARD (seep#27;l Th" l Comes to the attention of the master of the famous Hestminster
engaging title refers to two weird weddings or near-weddin e Choir school Mr. Corse. Hith Corse's patronage and his own su-
The first strange nuptial involves Leonora M'Dou all d ghi erb voice , he rises quickly to the top of the artistic world
displaced yoH"9 heF°. Octavius. She believes that shg ' an h E ' ﬁhile his foster brother and sister, J°"" a"d ca'°ll"° "hee1°"
t° bec°mE 5 b5'°"e$5 by marrying the son of Edmund B: 1? a out decline Mrs Hheeler is the closest character in the novel to
Baron Vilmore, but the wedding is melodramaticall abg::1gg, hhe the norms of Gothic evil. She has long hated Frank Yates and
Browning admits that his son is not his naturalyson The othen only took him in to keep him from learning of his relationship
Wedding is a genuine midnight affair as well as 5 kind E; with the noble Haslemere family. She also wanted to install H
retribution delivered upon the title-seeking Leonora H° drudge in her household to serve the whims of her own loutish
5PUF"ed fiﬂ"Cé» 0CtiVi"$, has embarked upon a search for hir children. The grim economic fall of the Hheelers is their _Just
true father directly after Edmund Browningis disclosure and L 5 punishment fur interfering with Frank Yatesls pr0Per claim to
nura's subsequent refusal to marry a poor man After the cust€;— the title of Lord Caerleon. EXCEPI for ‘"9 l"5idl°“S a““5eme“t5
?TY 5e'le5 Of Gothic travails and dungeon delays someone n0- ‘ of Mrs. Hheeler and the abusing of Caroline Hheeler by the de-
tices his birthmark. Not only is Octavius of noble ‘linea e I h- bauched Mr Eastwood the novel falls outside most of the Gothic
is of royal descent, turning out to be an ille itimateg ’ 2 categories‘ as Hrs. Meeke has clearly moved in the direction of
Louis XV. In compensation for his sturdy sufferings he isson O that new breed of popular fiction that was threatening to re-
ated Duke de Valentinois and awarded a handsome fgrtune Reali:_ ~ Plﬂ¢e the 5°thl° "°“E" the 5°'°al]ed '°mance of the tea_tab]e'
. ~


H
U THE FIRST GOTHICS 1
278. Meeke, Mary. LAUGHTON PRIORY. London : Minerva-Press for Lane, ‘
Newman, 1809. 1
Modern Reeditions: None
Gothic Type: Gothified history (Radcliffean effects)
Biographical and Research Data: Sunmers, GOTHIC QUEST,
p.100.
24
Critical Synopsis: Gabrielli's plot might derive from any
number of sentimental Gothic sources. The story has the expected
background of vague history during the reign of Henry VIII
during the destruction of the monasteries. The heroine faces
both religious and secular terrors although Mrs. Meeke never
subjects her to any stark horror. Interest in the heroine's
search for her origins is excited and maintained by exposing her
to the Priory‘s various objects of terror. Probably because she
had noticed Mrs. Radcliffe's suspenseful success with tapestries
and curtains that hide the unseen horror of horrors when the
heroine stands transfixed before their strange movements, she
determined to make maximum use of this moment throughout the ro-
mance.
279. Meeke, Mary. THE VEILED PROTECTRESS: UR, THE MVSTERIOUS MOTHER.
London : Minerva-Press for A.K. Newman, 1819.
Modern Reeditions: None
Gothic Type: Domestic fiction (intermittent Gothic effects)
Biographical and Research Data: Sunmers, GOTHIC QUEST,
D.300.
Critical Synopsis: Mrs. Meeke's title might suggest a monas-
tic shocker or a maternal apparition inhabiting a forgotten tur-
ret, but the novel itself is another romance of the missing
parent. A little Gothic brutality may be found in the personal-
ity of the orphaned hero's father, Mr. Pemberton, who abandons
his wife after announcing that their marriage is a bigamist
arrangement. Mrs. Pemberton conceals the bad behavior of his fa-
ther from the little boy, rechristens him Henry Pembroke, and
sends him to reside in the care of Mrs. Hilson while she decides
how best to shield his innocent years from the indiscretions of
the father. To guard him from disgrace and to carry out her pa-
rental duty she takes on the strange role of "veiled protec-
tress." She furthers her peculiar stratagem of guardianship by
feigning death in order to be able to fill the part of "myster-
ious mother" in the growing up of Henry Pembroke, although by
this stage of Mrs. Meeke's writing career even the slowest of
her readers could recognize her ruse of the posthumous parent. =---—-— rﬂ” w1.-ma»y5|ng.
Compared with the adversities endured by other young heroes in '
Mrs. Meeke‘s little sagas of success, Henry Pembroke‘s road to
name, fame, and parentage is relatively smooth. He is looked ,
after not only by his mother from behind her veil but also by V _ _ _ / ( _ .
Mrs. Hilson and another companion of his mother, Jane Meredith. \ 1/’ , 765/1},
The triple godmother arrangement allows Mrs. Meeke to engage the v (!¢I‘///// //I// (Ill/' ' I
reader in some confusions and mysteries of identity as Henry be- '
gins to wonder about the woman behind the veil as well as to
show some curiosity about his missing father. When he is old
enough to be a hero, he becomes the ward of Sir Herbert Charle-
_ - - "‘.l ' 0' V
L.“/.-.. fulbahnl I.-v 1-.1: -‘ "'"'*"""' ‘ ”" ‘J ‘

FIRST GUTHICS 241
ville, a chivalrous gentlemen who ought to be Henry's natural
father. Henry soon displays the effect of his breeding by saving
his future wife, Anna Farnham, from her abusive father. Her
domestic situation is roughly parallel to his previous treatment
by his own false father, Pemberton. Uith minimal difficulties
and no Gothic surprises, the mysterious mother thought to be
dead by Henry completes his happiness and maturity by throwing
back her veil and proving herself to be Charleville's wife.
Anticipating the changing tastes of her audience and aware that
the Gothic fashion was dying out, Mrs. Meeke had gradually
de-Gothified her romances with respect to setting and event.
Five volumes were required to reunite son and mother in THE
VEILED PROTECTRESS, but despite its inordinate length, the nov-
el's genealogical ganes could provoke the interest of a reader-
ship still highly susceptible to Gothic flunnery.
Z80 Melville, Theodore. THE HHITE KNIGHT: OR, THE MONASTERY OF THE
HORNE. London : Crosby and Letterman, 1802.
Modern Reeditions: None
Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (terror mode, chapbook qual-
ity) "
Biographical and Research Data: Sunmers, GOTHIC QUEST, pp.92,
104; Lévy, LE ROMAN "GOTHIQUE" ANGLAIS, pp.394, 395, 412,
415, 620.
Critical Synopsis: THE HHITE KNIGHT is an acceptably made
Gothic romance which mingles pseudo-feudal history with elements
of Otrantoesque terror. The plot is also very similar to Reeve's
OLD ENGLISH BARON (see #355). The disinherited hero, Allan, en-
counters the verbose shade of his revenge-demanding father and
proceeds to the Monastery of the Horne to learn more of his
destiny. The Monastery is already the home of the shrieking her-
oine, Allida, whose main function seems to be to exude all of
the Gothic emotions as she rushes past amorous corpses, beckon-
ing skeletons, and other subterranean hazards prepared by her
gruesome host, the Hhite Knight. Like the hero, Allida is also
engaged in a quest for her missing father who may, or may not,
turn out to be her current tormentor and the master of the
monastery. Melville's best Gothic character is the pallid knight
of death whose control of the destinies of his two Gothic guests
will be abruptly ended by an unscheduled plunge from one of the
towers of his crumbling monastery. Gothic villains always seem
to neglect to check the safety of the masonry when scaling their
turrets. If black knights are frequently assigned the role of
chanpion and rescuer in historical Gothic fiction, their white
counterparts become the bearers of terror and death. Melville's
Hhite Knight is never fully described as he lurks about in the
penumbra of the plot. "His aspect was severe and lowering; his
mind, gloomy and suspicious; his person was the index of his
mind; haughtiness and cruelty, were united to meanness and cow-
ardice; and from an affectation of loftiness, though in reality
from guilty fear, his person was as difficult of access as his
dreary mansion.‘ ' '

242 rue FIRST GOTHICS ‘ "1HE FIRST cornrcs 243
281. Melville, Theodore. THE BENEVOLENT MONK: OR, THE CASTLE OF 0L~ J Repton's "Friar's Tale," a Gothic novelette of about five thou-
ALL*- L°"d°" I 5- c'°5by. 1807. _ I Sand words, enjoyed an even more devious history in the maga-
Modern Reeditions: "°"9 zines although all of these practices were perfectly normal in
Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (t d ' ‘t t‘ I ."
Maturinls THE FATAL REVENGE) error mo e, imi a ion of ; the eighteenth century
Bio ra hical and Research Dat : r % - E THE CHAPEL, INVOLVING AN
92'g1°:- a Somme 5' GOTHIC QUEST‘ up B7’ ' ZI3‘ Y"§x§$§3§§"§r“§3§“h@3§iB[EEs§§§§i§ OEFTHE NOCTURNAL ASSEMBLY. A
. . GOTHIC ROMANCE. London : T. and R. Hughes, 1808.
Critical Synopsis: The portrait of a decent or benevolent ' Modern Reeditions: None
cleric was probably the novelist's effort to revise the standard ‘ Gothic Type: Gothic bluebook (variable plagiarism from many
Gothic image of the lecherous or fiendish priest found univer- ‘ Ggthics)
sélly thF°"9hout horror fiction. Yet, the benevolent monk of the Biographical and Research Data: NOHE
title barely appears at all in the text since the plot pits a 5
bad brother against a good brother in the struggle for ownership ‘ Critical Synopsis: This Gothic rarity is a slim bluebook con-
of Olalla Castle. By the second decade of Gothicism, the tenden- '5 sisting of 36 pages in the Sadleir-Black Gothic Collection's
cy to peculiar and oblique titling of Gothic novels had become a Q copy (PZ2.m534l. The text of THE MIDNIGHT GROAN is supplemented
fl"? art in 't§elf- Here. the subtitle is the major element of l by a morbid love story, THE STORY or KAIS AND LEILA, bringing
action and the title represents the minor element. Readers and the page total up to the publisher's required Q"°ta- The B"°Q¥-
reviewers of the Gothic were accustomed to titling idiosyncra- mods Goth appears to have done much of his audacious Pl""dE""9
cies and may even have welcomed such indirections. The substance . from Gr°5§e‘5 hokklp HYSTERIES (see 9153) and other Gothics
of the novel copies the fraternal fl‘ t f ' i
con ic o Haturin - ' ' imilar secret society B5 3 §°"'C9
TAL REVENGE (see #265) of the same year. The style toosshgﬁs the §§'2§r:g§ v$h:g$gl§?figrti:I: zames only one of the several
same contortions, complications, and morbid extremes of Matu- Gothic acoustics which reverberate throughout the story and
rin's tangled tale of deception, revenge, and retribution. By ‘ ' point; back in its use of the word, “Midnight,” to Francis
accepting Melville's outlandish and complex shockers, the pub- ‘ Lathom'5 MIDNIGHT BELL (see #227) for its sensational appeal
Iisheri c'°5b¥. hid ﬂhpﬁrently decided to challenge Lane and The details of the plot are all entirely stereotypical. The
Newman's Minerva-Press monopoly in the Gothic field. ﬂﬂnderiﬂg hero Horatio, and the nervous heroine, Miranda, are
assionately devoted to each other until a detestable FEIGEIVQ
282. THE MIDNIGHT ASSASSIN: OR, THE CONFESSIONS OF THE MONK RINALDI , ?nt.,auce, the hint of incest. Believing himself t° be l" l°'e
CONTAINING A COMPLETE HISTORY or HIS DIABOLICAL MACHINATIONS d rt in shocked self-dis ust and
' h his sister Horatio wan ers 0 9
AND UNPARALLELED FEROCITV. TOGETHER HITH A CIRCUMSTANTIA - I “It - ’- ‘ th c th' orld when he takes
COUNT OF THAT SCOURGE OF L A5 shortly finds himself a guest in 8 0 It I
MANKIND THE IN UISI ' ‘n id a moulderin castle. In
MANNER OF BRINGING T0 TRIAL THOSE UNFORTUNETE BEI3gS :HgH dag ' Hz::%?ofsoma§seggeng tﬁgpdzserted aid distressed Mgranda becomes
AT ITS DISPOSAL. MARVELLOUS MAGAZINE AND COMPENDIUM OF PRODI- an easily accessible target for men who want to claim her for-
GIES’ X (May’ 1802): “""“mbered' tune and her maidenhead. Inside the haunted castle, the spectre
Modern Reeditions: None . of the chapel plays host to Horatio by enclosing him in a
Gothic Type: Periodical Gothic thriller (chapbook quality) hanber containing the decomposing body of a young woman Whﬂ
Biographical and Research Data: Hatt, SHILLING SHOCKERS OF I Qkg (and perhaps smells) like his forsaken Miranda. Overhear-
THE GOTHIC SCHOOL, p.2 (shows frontispiecel; Mayo, ENGLISH . :29 a midnight groan (actually a chorus of eerie uailings),
NOVEL IN THE "AsAZI"ES' p'555' I Horatio decides to explore thg ogiginthofhethﬁapggftgicaﬂgndiurn
, n a
Critical Synopsis: This 30,000 word periodical Gothic is a d Iggggwtd algidzsomg sight“??? congrﬁgation of black clad Cele-
pirated condensation of Mrs. Radcliffe‘s THE ITALIAN (see #350) I hrants the "nocturnal assembly" of the title. The highpoint of
The m°"k- Riﬂﬂldi, is Mrs. Radcliffe's Schedoni minus three I :3 their obscene ritual is the oath of blood chanted as a compulso-
volumes. Other hasty orthographic changes convert Mrs. Rad- 9 r invitation to Horatio to join their fiendish brotherhood Or
cliffe's persecuted maiden, Ellena di Rosalba, into one of the ii d{e Horatio is further alarmed to notice that the chief ghoul
anonynnus Gothic plagiarist's ‘unfortunate beings." The Gothic I of ‘this houlish band is Miranda's long absent father who has
novel in a short, stolen shape managed to hold its place along ‘I deggrtgd hgr to dedicate his life to the Satanic assembly. In an
side the sentimental and didactic tales in the periodicals. ingi id resolution Miranda's father renounces his devil's bond
c°""E"tl"9 0" the 'Pli9iaTl5¢lC PYBC£lC@§" 07 the ""m9F°"5 ‘7 and informs Horatio’that he need not fear incest, that Miranda
Gothic piracies, Robert D. Mayo writes: ‘He should not be sur- O is his dau hter but he is not Horatio's natural father, Lights
' prised if readers were casual about literary property since 5 of love are geignited Gothic gloom is dispelled» @"d H°'atl°
eﬁmm mmwha mmsomﬂwmtmwtﬂﬁwwhﬁ Mmn ~ d mmmaam mhﬂmndwhhammmmgmmbmwﬂhﬂ
failing to identify borrowed pieces, and permitting translators 2 gqiggful 5i h Having built up an intense Gothic situation for
and adapters to take any liberty with original texts.... Hunphry Q’ both hero aga heroine, the bluebooker was unwilling or unable to
ee€;e>

~ 245
244 THE FIRST GOTHICS " ﬂf FIRST GOTHICS
. THE MERE.
shun the sentimental ending. According to the practices of the Z85. Millikin, AD"a- THE RIVAL cHlEFS'N0R’ :HE1gQgTLE OF
trade, the bluebooker had little choice over the nature or the ' London é Mgnirva-Prﬁzzefvr Line, E"ma » '
abruptness of the ending. He was "obli ed to bring hero and Moder" ee 1 ‘°"S§ .
heroine to the grave or the altar withgsurprising suddenness in Gvthiﬁ T199: G°t"‘f'ed h'St°ry §‘?"§'m::::) GQTHIC QUEST,
order to give the reader his money's worth of thrills." After Biogrdﬂhlcal a"d Research Da a‘ U '
flirting with the grave, the author of THE MIDNIGHT GROAN inju- p.175. .
diciously chose the altar. I Critical Synopsis. This inventive Irish historical tale may
' . - - ' or
284. THE MIDNIGHT MONITOR: OR, SOLEMN HARNINGS FROM THE INVISIBLE have suggested the theme if not the ;§CldE::je"3"?s P:¥;;‘y an
WORLD. London : Chanvante and Hithrow, n.d. ~ Maturin's MILESIAN CHIEF (see #26 . S mb01iling perpetual
Modern Reeditions: None archaism for border or boundary,b&tt%?2e chgefs make war against
Gothic Tyne: Gothic chapbook (comPilation of cases involving strife among the Irish. The gh aendering a picture of
Spectral ippearances) foreign invaders and one another I U5 d Xternally Since a1] of
Bioqraﬂhical and Research Data: None ' medieval Iregan: toga sigtgrggéuioaaisiorica‘ ii is diffiCu]t
the events an c arac er ‘ 2 Gothic
Critical Synopsis: The 40-page chapbook sold for six pence \ to place the exact century of the romangehggdolgdiﬁd £25815 of
and purported to be an authentic record "of horrid aﬂbaritions, reader was exempted from finding ﬂﬂlfrea] mi*es Gaelic ce‘tic‘
tall and ghastly." A stentorian title Page announced the thrill- ‘ this type. The Gothic novelist treelyish materiais with
ing testimonials of real ghosts or midnight monitors to be found Elilabethan, and fantastic ancieg _ h o1itics chrono]°gica1
within and shows what the profiteering chapbooker was up t0. The overtones of contemporary A"9]°' 215" pof Gothified history
cases are advertised as "Authentic Narratives of the Honderful ¢0nfuSlUﬂS were an acceP¢dbl°_°°"'e" Iited was not accuracy but
Interposition of Divine Providence in the Development of Horrid ' . since what the Gothic audience“ Ha i a‘ chiefs S1ade and
Murders; Infliction of Innmdiate and Awful Punishments, and _ thrill. In their deadly feuds, _t e _rsv and the Cause of Irish
Other Remarkable and Truly ASt0niShl"9 Events, by the Invisible - ‘ Morgan, destroy themselves, theirtheir 5]itica1 theme bleakly
Appearance of GHOSTS! SPIRITS! and APPARITIONS!! To which are 1 freedom as well. This pessimis]ic nitics of Maturin_S lrish
Subjoined Instances of Alarming and Portentious DREAMS, VISIONS, 3 I foreshadows the 910°“ a"d feta pm
TRANCES, and other Terrific Sensations, with their Realisation, ‘ Gothic romances.
and other Nocturnal Prodigies. The Whole Collected from Sources _ J F Hu "es 1817_
of Undoubted Veracity and Indisputable Authorities Annexed to ‘= 286. THE MONK OF EEHNARES-"E3249" - ' ‘ 9 ’
each Narrative." This fanfare was then followed by twenty-five ' Modern Ree 1 l0"5§ . . . b ok’ re¢u¢-
short "true accounts" of encounters between mortals and spirits. ‘ Gothic TYPE? G°th‘c b1“eb°°k (‘m‘tat1O" of Chap 0
The narratives are: “The Appearance bf the Laird of Cool to the tions of THE MONK) D t _ None
Reverend Mr. Ogylvie of Innerwick on the 3rd of February, 1722"; é * Biograﬂhlﬁil a"d Research a a‘
H _ , _ _ _ _ -
L??? RﬁgﬁrkxggslApaggsgag€roftoheaGcg3ngoEag; ?§e€n:°v§:rtis§g:e Critical Syn°P§i§= Since it is highlﬂ sim};2rM6:K¢?2Z:':§§zgT
"Forewarning of Death‘; “The Honderful Discovery of Murder by an and content to an earlier ChﬂPb?°k]ba?eLe:?s's plot is an imita-
APParition"; "Realisation of an Awful Dream"; "Account of a what we have in KHTS late reY1V§ g fort _page shocker, ALMA-
Strange Deliverance Occasioned by an Apparition"; "The Dreadful l tion of an imitation. The P1§91ﬂ'é§e aothicyprofiteer a1] of the
Punishment of Murder"; "The Singular Death of Mrs. Daniel"; "The ; GRO AND CLAUDE (see #0U5)- 9‘ves- -e lot to novel length. A
Apparition of Major Sydenham"; "Divine Retribution for Unjust material needed to reeﬂiar9§ L°"‘§1§i§h wrapperS made this Pl'3'
Punishment"; "The Singular Message of Mr. Saltmarsh"; "The lurid woodcut or two and fl\msy,k t 115
Singular Vision of John Taylor, A Notorious Drunkard and Swearer cy of 6 Piracy ready f°' the boo S a '
of Bewdley"; ‘A Honderful Discover of Murder b an Ima inar . London -
Ghost of the Murdered Person"; “The Dreadful Punishment gof 5 i 287. THE MONK OF THE GROTTD: OR, EUGENIg00AND VIRGINIA
Profane Swearer;' "An Awful Dream, with Hhat Followed‘; “Dr. . ‘ MinervaEPr:ss_fog Hagléam Lane, -
Pordage's Account of Several Apparitions Made to him in his Bed- "Oder" 99 1 1°" 1. . - French romance by
chamber"; "The Haunted Girl"; "The Yarmouth Nitch;" “An Account 1 Gothic TYPQE G°th!f‘ed trgqsl3§lgReé$G:m(€753_1g35)
of an Aﬂparition to a Young Lady"; "An Extraordinary Account of . Charles-Antoine-Guillaume Dl%a' Tarr cATHoLlc‘SM ‘N GOTHIC
Corpse Candles in Hales‘; ‘The Earl of Orrery's Account of a '1‘ Biographical “"d Research To€' 109 I Lévy "aurice_ -Engiish
Soldier"; ‘Bishop Hall's Account of a Remarkable Dream"; “Murder if FICTION; DD-9- 50v 50’ 70'. t? "_ ‘A caigﬂdar. of Transia-
Prevented by a Three-Fold Dream‘; “A Remarkable Forewarning of '5i Gothic and the French Im;%lE3Tg?C-IMABINATXONZ ESSAVS IN DARK
' Death"; and "The Singular Discovery of Murder." Several of these $5 ti0"5i ‘1757'1828* 1" T - n puiiman -wA ; -Hashington
ghostly anecdotes turn out to be plagiarized Gothic plots. Ti ROMANTICISM, 94- G-R- Th°mp5° ' ’
 State UP, 1977. m>-15l1-17-


- 247
246 ‘ THE FIRST GUTHICS - THE FIR$T GUTHIC5
»i _ - u d in unrestrained
Critical Synopsis: French sentimental romances and dramas her luXUrl5"t Fressei OE Slgihﬁegriigs adﬁee of the hue Of
could readily be converted into Gothic fiction by-an enterpris- grace “pow her m1‘k-“h1t: “non her cheeks" and her form was 5¥m-
ing translator well-versed in the methods of the monastic snock- ruby; .t'in roses bloom? tin" " This pordelain figurine stand-
er. Thus, Pigault-Lebrun's tearful novel was Gothicizedi into a metry In ‘ts utmost pea ec ters of the standard Gothic novel has
full fledged monastic shocker for the Minerva-Press by the anon- i"9 among the other C araihan a person. Hhen the stranger-
Ymous translator who sinoly augmented the Diet! and tears of the "0" 599°“? a prop ratger 1 ads‘ he, to Safety through the U"d9r-
original with the horrid and supernatural ingredients of the ' ' knight’ young Harul ,5 tﬁic reader of 1807 must have felt as-
Gothic. The good priest of the original, Father Carlo, is left ‘ 9r0""d P355§9e"ay' tbs 0 Ht which "ever ceased to please. After
morally intact by the translator. But the miserable situation of gured by thl§ e¥pecte gxeludinq a fair facsimile of an Old Eng-
tmswuumlwugvﬂgmamdhmmmtamonmewmH- swﬂﬂPwqc“ﬁtsumﬂwnmntmrmﬁmrmmmchws
ing coloration of THE MONK (see #244), THE ITALIAN (see #350), lish ElE9Y> utlfhaae anngalt is deieated with the aid of super-
and THE ABBESS (see #198). If the English translators often to its ¢°"°‘“5‘°"- ,d° S ,8 ,t,mi,ed and matched with Gunetha-
Gothicized their French sources, the opposite process often oc— ‘ natural forcgs’ Haro ‘ exglains how as a young man "9 "ad
curred when an English Gothic novel was rendered into French; and the contrite De Ha£reniS aaroldls mbther‘ The Goth c°u‘d Got
the English Gothic novel rapidly became the French "roman noir." seduced the ‘woman H 2 to it all in the last sentence: "Vir-
The terrors of milder forms of English Gothic fiction were fre- resist attaching 6 ?°rﬂ continued to the end of their days’ the
ﬂuently transformed into a brand of gruesome horror avprobriate - tuéi ‘" ‘ts pqrest arm;
to French translators (many of these aristocratic fugitives) who inmate of their hear s. M‘
had just been eye witnesses to the Rei n of Terror. Althou h it -PDMERUY. London : iﬂervi
is beyond the scope of this study, a bigliographical surve; of , 289. Montaquev Ed"a'd' ;:E C:ST%§02F BERRV
French translations of English Gothic fiction would certainly n Press f0r l§"§- _"w“"; '
verify Maurice Lévy's contention about the popularity of the I Nﬂderﬂ R99dlt‘°"5' “hi h Gothic (terror mode)
English Gothic novel in France throughout the 1790's. Partic- ~ GPth‘c T¥pe: P“reR°r rah Data- Sun“gr5, GOTHIC QUEST, PP-37>
ularly appealing to the French imagination was the monastic Biographlcii a"d esea
shocker with its "fierce anti-Catholicism." In addition, the
r 239.
climate of revolutionary excess encouraged the Gothic fever in - - ' - hic romance belonging to
France. Hrites Lévy, "Everyone had suffered so many real agonies Critical_5Y"°P:‘sQ Q"D?;i:°g§§TE§tgr OTRANTO (see #4662, Mon-
in such a short lapse of time that fiction could no longer T the F'°d!t‘°" ° l arﬁed the accoiaae of the reviewer 1" THE
arouse the slightest interest unless it chose to depict Hell or ( ¢i9"e'5 f‘r5t "ova fee 0 tober 1806. Here, the book is recom-
hellish scenes in complete harmony with the horrors of the L1T§RQR:veﬁ0%:N:%e jgged ;a1ate'°f the Gothic reader b@Ca"5e
day_" | i_ ‘ men e ‘ . . - -
1 t
“Mr Montague has dlV8TSlfi€d his materials so happl Y as °
‘ . _ _ _ . - t _" The principal
2ss. THE MQNKs or CLUGNV: on, CASTLE-ACRE MONASTERY. London = Ann give an Driglﬂﬂl air ?° ‘“e °""°‘°°‘ 5 °'y - t't n
re's search for iden i Y ‘
Lemoine and J. Row, 1807. ‘ Story ‘S a 'e°et1ii°"ai°ih@T:§ig§t is not Berry P°m°'°Y'5
Modern Reeditions: None ' QTRANTO; P°me'°y gas ﬁne iegacy takes him through the usua
Gothic Type: Gothic chapbook ; D°$$?55‘°@' Eargiqg Dives him in the lifting of an ancestrﬂ
Biographical and Research Data: None W G°t"‘¢ trlais a" Inv
. . h the lost history
curse, sequestration in a haunted chamber weeueth an Ita1ia"ate
. - - ru .
critical Synopsis: The 60—page chapbook is interspersed with of the family fa]]:h'"§gct‘ioxﬁaddetzilsggre thorou9"1Y E"91‘5h-
verses and bears a high formulaic similarity to several other w v‘]]a‘" a1thqugh f in trgth by means of a supernatural 39§"°Y-
Gothics. One transparent source raided by the chapbooker is the i, B"? 3 f9Ve1°t'°" ° k Eethic in which Mgntague experiment$ With 3
six-part magazine Gothic CASTLE DE HARRENNE (see #050). The year is‘ This .15 a workboo 0 situations and effectS_ In OTRANTO, the
is 1078. The Count and Countess De Harren, owners of Castle-Acre wh; bl@"d‘"9 °f “3!p° ﬁsqgescends from its frame; the ancestral P°"
Monastery are making a pilgrimage to atone for the Count's harsh Q? Pi¢t“r§ °f R‘car O e ' ' ' h fr me
treatment of his rival for the Countess's hand the Earl of Mon
told by the monks of “the frown of a roachin w r"
iea
, ithin t e 6
trait in Pomervy Castle s dark gallery remains w t t,
. - ,1 " itors with its pens re ‘"9
talt. They have stopped at the hospice of Clugny where they are gﬁ but follows the movements Of ""mi" "ls
pp g a in their
homeland. The remainder of this sedate Gothic deals with the
defense of Castle-Acre against a determined and now evil De
~='§v\&r:
eyes
NNERY: A ROMANTIC LEGEND. Lon-
29o Honta9"ei Edvard LEG5"°5 °F “ "U
Montalt. The Monastery of Castle-Acre is really a castle which I‘ don : JLF. Hughes, 1807- '
connects underground in the usual Gothic manner with the nearby Modern Reeditions: None > tic
. _ - th‘ (elements of the W°““5
Monastery of Hestacre. Also under sexual siege by De Montalt is Gothic Type. Pure or high Go ic _ _
the Count's French ward, Gunetha. She could be any paragon of shocker and Ireland's THE ABBES5) GOTHIC QuE$T pp.B7,
. - D t : S nners 1
Gothic beauty in distress from any of dozens of Gothic novels, Biographical and Re$@ir°h 3 3 “ ‘
for the description is stereotypical: "She was exquisitely fair: 239- 241' '

a 249
24a ‘ THE FIRST GUTHIES THE FIRST GOTHICS
" . - - ' n tum sanctorum, the"
Critical Synopsis: A voluptuous abbess, dangerous cloisters, ?9'"a'd° SeiZeShAng:]]lEg ¥;§?‘§,,§I§ pzhegth the monastePy- 5"‘
erotic brutality and villainy behind the walls of- the convent, a desceqds mihfer 1: narrow], ayertly when Abbot 19716119 i']t9"
setting in Renaissance Spain, and other trappings of, Catholic Crypuc c°p“da,w: E and invite; the Inquisition t0 i"VE5tl9ate
terror suggest Monta9ue's desire to emulate or surpass Hilliam T r“Pt5 Birhal ° Sf gzrnardo and Agatha_ As had Ambrosiv, the
Henry Ireland's THE ABBESS (see #198), the Gothic to which LEG- the activities od and A atha must answer to the Holy Office 59,
ENDS OF A NUHNERY appears to owe most of its lurid qualities. “"EStedt Bern?; 0 ublicgburning of Bernardo (Agatha takes Poi-
The novel is an excellent exaiiple of the survival of the lasting I v their CFHTES-th eggake) is one of the most sensationally revolt-
impact of the Gothic aesthetic upon the imaginations of Gothic son to evade Gethic ,ite,ature the demon having attended Ber-
readers. The conventual house of horror is Santa Maria del mg SEe"eS'ml O onies and announced that his rape victim had
Sierra, a place of ‘vacuity, darkness, solitude, and silence," "arm § fl"? ago mm] or didactic reflection is ﬂtlilihed _t°
according to Burke, the four atmospheric conditions that are bee" "15 ﬁgs e;;u] ant sadism of the novel or the lvﬂthiﬂme V‘°'
i"'pe'°ti'° f°' subnm termr’ ' ' ighceogf tn: iiimag. Nor is there eve; any Aﬂ"::]¥5‘;on‘:§g“§.':
> rdo or is el‘ 95 5- _
291. Montague, Edward. THE DEMON OF SICILV: A ROMANCE. London : J.F. " 3312222822?t,,°:i.aE:fh::unBe;:§ finally paralyze the zeazlier welt]:
H . . ’ - - ii its au s.
      is;   
Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (monastic shocker, excessive b9°k ca" be E°:3NE and Since Montague goes beyond LeIi$. he m"5t
natural and supernatural horror) ‘ nuns of Tldl‘t d with the Gothic's Gothic of the first decade of
Biographical and Research Data: Sunners, GOTHIC QUEST, pp.29, a]5° he “re lhec Ht“,
236-239, 391, 397; Lévy LE ROMAN "GOTHlQUE" ANGLAIS p .415, l I the "‘"°t°e" e -Y‘
v » P
, . . T TE ROSE, AN HISTORI-
        . B. 
Critical Synopsis: Many Gothic novels adapted the horror plot , €';|§6ROMANC
from Lewis's THE MONK (see #244) and took the terror plot from ' ~ - , None
Mrs. Radcliffe's romances. But few of these Gothic derivatives ‘ Motif" q-eegitézﬁified higtgry
could match THE MONK's garish sexual fantasies or The ITALlAN's G9 ‘C xv  and Research Data: Sunlners, GOTHIC QUEST,
gloomy monastic interiors. THE DEMON OF SICILV, however, bids to ‘ Bmgrapmca
exceed in erotic explicitness and supernatural potency its mod- , p.174. d‘ ‘is of
els in Lewis and Radcliffe. Montague Sunners felt that Monta- " ~ - i ; A throwback to the exotic me ieva ilm
gue's Gothic was "infinitely more extravagant than THE MONK." T 1cr;1f]ca|1_Q3();'2:g;pS(see #243), the book is authentically ‘Goth-
Reviewing the primary events of the npvel's triple plot confirms - /~ ‘:e"a'.' in ma‘, sense of the germ, None of the h‘5t°"Y 15
Montague's capacity for delivering a relentlessly horrifying '9 m. i 0 d the pint bears 3 strong likeness to Nalker s
narrative although his ability to splice the several plots is ‘ histurlca ASTfE- A NORMAN ROMANCE (see #461). Saxon-Norman
almost wholly lacking. The equivalent of Lewis's Father Ambrosio ; HAQNTEQ -C f liowin the Qgnquest come to a head in the contest
is Father Bernardo, an arrogant and lustful priest who forms an '4 a"""°S‘t‘eS- 0 f Mogtford pestle, Like Scott's Ivanhoe later,
alliance with a crafty demon in order to satisfy his desires. i rr fur p°§SeSS'?"tz “hits Rose first appear5 as a mystetlﬂhs Eham‘
His concupiscence extends to the 'holy virgin herself and is ‘ ii the K"‘9ht ° "12 Chiva]rouS Skiii in arms to defend the h°"t'
repeatedly satisfied within the precincts of the monastery by  pm" "ho uses
the obligingly amorous nun, sister Agatha, a paradigm of Gothic e‘ fords. 1799
nynphomania. Sister Agatha's salacious history comprises a sec- . R THE QQTHIC RUIN, London : R. Dutton, .
ond Plot as she is an equal to Father Dernardo in her unchecked 293- M°:g§2§:'R2eaitionS: None
voluptuousness. Hhen she is not violating her vows in other G thic T De. Romance of the ruin (terror mode)
ways, she is busy giving herself to any and all men and has been 9 h¥cai and Research Data; gunners, GOTHIC QUEST,
especially generous in this respect to the young cavalier, Ferd- Biograp
inando de Montalino. "The chapel of Santa Catherine beheld the p.404. d fv ‘I U"
guilty pair nantoning in the fulfilment of their wishes till the . . - . d undisciplined, an ina y -
grey dawn made their long untrinnied lanps almost useless.“ Act- _ C“F‘9§}e5§:'§§§lS'MQN'¥,'{ggéei§ a specilnen of ineptitude in the
ing upon a taste for macabre theatrics, she has further enjoyed “me Ia - Cited Q5 an example of a Gothic which _defies all
several passionate liaisons with Father Bernardo inside the f‘eid' 75 v vittie can he said with any Cvhfldehce “h9“t
burial grounds of the monastery. Caught between this vile pair deciph@'me"t. S1"CZf its narrative. its dozens of abortive
is the innocent maiden, Angellina, as pure and desirable as her the mazy m0tl0ﬂS Story ‘ing or its ephemera, charqCter5_ "9"-
‘name. Her pathetic story forms the third plot strand. Hith her scenes, its gpaqgiaims MontrU;e_S mad countess and for no Spa-
beloved, Lorenzo, she has come to the monastery seeking sanctu- ]¥ remember’ Ex have a mother reputed to be insane, and con-
ary from the lecherous designs of Sister Agatha's father. Goaded cia‘ reaS°n’i-in: s artment.' in just this abruPt m°“"e' the
on by his demon of Sicily (actually a demon of sexuality), fined in a so I a y P

250 T!-E FIRST cu nuts
careless and confusing Gothifier adds or subtracts characters
without warning or purpose, while the rhetoric of gloom crowds
practically every page. A passage on page 36 of the first V0lume
is all-too-typical: "The owl (whom the unusual light disturbed)
screaned from the turrets; the terrified bats flitted across the
chancel, and all was gloomy and replete with dismay." After sev-
eral attempts, the bibliographer finally abandoned any further
effort to compile a coherent description of the plot. Hhat can
be determined is that the main figure, Colonel Montrose, is
struggling to preserve the dignity of a dying family and that
the dying family is symbolized by the condition of the slowly
gecaying family castle, the Gothic ruin of Montrose. Other mem-
51
11-E FIRST GDTHICS 2
. " t ‘es of Hungary “ "OW
grin" :ndr:lo0€o:rei::g]ai: Etzatemmzcﬁrhorror. Hhile Albert is
9 aye ~ - ld of
forced to endure these awful sights aggtﬁétez} {:?:g tsgnged and
clausenhurgh Suffers the fate g ls to articipate in a war
arrgstidtﬁg 23:21:: f%hehstan§a:daclimax of the novel bri"95 the
agains - » . - f
I two inprisoned young me" 'F§’9°;:§;"§g “§}‘{f.L midﬁiiggoi talmtiiigd
Justiﬂe =9a‘"§* F ° °" ' Alb t s the vanished
3€gume' :veZ§m:°§:'§9;e:ge;v::§: higtmurdzred father and reclaim
D HO . d Ad ia
the Hermanstadt estates. The double mi€Fli%:b?; g§::eSa"A‘th°ﬁgh
and Leopold and Theodosia unites the w0 -
ers of the orthodox Gothic cast are present but their connec- it is too long and meandering, this Gothic offers some fine de-
ti - . . . .
on with Montrose remains obscure. In the vicinity of Caernar- " scriptions of CarPathia“ t?P°9raphy and Se¥er?1 :§r:?$ Qﬁzsages
von, we neet the travelers, the Marquis of Clarendon, his son, . showing the secret society in conclave are ru y y
Lord Norville d h‘ i
, an is daughters, Caroline and Isabella. Their
sojourn 'th' ' '
I
wi in the ruin of Montrose permits the usual Gothic f 295. Moore, 990'99- GRASVILLE ABBEV: A R0MANgEi LQEVZZ Ta§§€hNEi7gg§
opportunities for the wayfarers. Other members of the company ‘3 ENTERTAINING COMPANION FOR THE Fa1R d, r G G aid J‘
include the talkative cottager, Dame Morris, and the lunatic ' AU9U$t> 1797): 47 ‘"Sta]]me"tS' Lon on ' '
relative of Colonel Montrose Lad Mala a who refers to dress ', Robinson, 1797.
only as the goddesses Venus 0: Diang.,Hith ﬁer entrance, the "Oder" Reeditionsi Af"° Pre§S' 1974’ eg' R?:°':eE;,T?§:3
baffling thread of the plot disappears permanently. From this “ Gothic Type: Pure or high G°th‘C (terror m0 E’
point, the novel sinply disintegrates into total incoherency. , form)
. . _--new
Bio ra hical and Research Data Mayo, Robert D T E 0 ‘C
i 9 P . ' :
294. Moore, Edward. THE MVSTERIES or HUNGARY: A ROMANTIC HISTORY or Story in the Magazines.‘ "°°ER" LWUAGE RE"E“' 37 (1942)
THE FIFTEENTH CENTURV
1 7 . London : Minerva-Press for A.K. New- 448-454;Io:gYg; Tsgbﬁascgﬂ EgﬁEnREERg?ggE?A%q0§he 2gga€13§3§
man, 81 . PUBLICAT ’
Modern Reeditions: None R 762-789; Torr. CATHOLICISM IN G0THICE:éE£§gN' ”';Z§-Fuagig’
Gothic Type: Gothified history (terror mode) ' HISTORY OF THE PRE-ROMANTIC NOVEL IN 501' iévg. Lé RoMAi
Biographical and Research Data: None i ENGLISH NOVEL IN THE MAGAZINESi1 0- i I
I ’ "GOTHIQUE" ANGLAIS, pp.462, 481. 6 .
C ' ‘ ~
t ritical Synopsis. The romance is set in the DRACULA terri-
. - - - ~ ' Y
ory of Transylvania and is thoroughly Gothic. Virtue is pitted Critical 5y"0P§‘$Z I" ‘ts 1"'t'a] Ver§‘°"§n G$:§v§L%gngAZ:§"
against villainy in the characters of Prince Haximillian do ‘ appeared as a serialized Gothic‘romanceiNEun?tS9 Successfu1 run
Clausenburgh and Rodolph de Hermanstadt, vile brother of the of more than four years in LADY S MAGAZ ' Mrs Radcliffe her-
Prince’s best friend, Otho de Hermanstadt. Genealogies of the in 47 Part5 i"d its P°55'b‘e ‘nfluence "P°n- ' -
tw f ' ' ‘ '
_o amilies are inportant to the outcome of the Gothic plot and
highly_ intertwined. The just Maximillian's wife, Adela, died in
childbirth leaving behind two children, Adela and Leopold. The
wife of Otho de Hermanstadt, Theresa, also bears two childr n
9 ,
Otho and Theodosia. The balancing of the two genealogies con-
sunﬁi Eheh entire first volume of the three-volume romance One
ni
. . . - th- hlighing the installment
seH"mtiate:i: "::ii:::'tgven1ggo aitggle studficited am") °‘
G°t"‘c' ' a l in the magazines of the P@Ti°d- R°be't D‘ May”
the Etg‘thatn2t:e magazine literature of Gothicism is considera-
remar _ . . . - 5 from
hie, and in some respects distinctive. Dﬂrlﬂg tn? Yea?" Great
1796 to 1806 at least one third of all novel5 P“b1l5“ed
. = . ~ - i
9 . 0 Uthoi (the father and the son) mysteriously vanish 4 Britain were Gothic in character. Any SRTVEY °ftg'lg;2aln EgEc.§
from the Castle of Hermanstadt. After accusing Maximillian of §' romonﬁe 1" the ma9i¥‘"§5 m"5t,eve"tua1 y cgmihic fiction and a
murdering the father and kidnapping the son, Rodolph prevails E‘ MAGAZINE- "Oi 0"lY dld ‘F F"h1‘5h "nre Te“ lg n but it was the
with the Hungarian authorities and is named Theresa's protector K greater variety 0? ‘t tha" “"Y °ther.m'Scef asg;ia]izi"g fuii-
and husband against her will. These events comprise the second ‘ one monthly t° make a regular practice 0 irculating library
volume and are carried out against a background of Gothic . length G°thi° "°'e]5-' A5 Stated 12 .a .c romance contain-
occurrences and sound effects with intermittent hints and rumors catalogue of the 9°'i°4» GRASVILQE-ABBE-11? ha which the horrors
about a secret society, ‘the hellish brotherhood of Moldawitza,' ing the suff€ri"9$ Of the Maserini fami y, .y]aiﬁed by Father
being used by Rodolph to advance his wicked ends. A time gap .of » of superstition are fully eXP05E¢- as "as ?‘p
ifte n - i
e years occurs between the second and third volumes. A
yﬁung man named Albert, his origins unknown, is imprisoned in
. ii,‘ The story
Peter the hermit who was found concealed in_a ce rations.
traces the distresses of the family th'°"9" t"° 9e"e
.“¢ . . - » - ' l h
e Castle of Hermanstadt and made to witness the obscene =iL Percival Maserini forms a liaison with Clementina and he ps or
practices of the Moldawitza brotherhood. These scenes of abomin-
1 d b her
go escape from the convent where she has been p ace Y

252
odious father. One of their hideouts as the flee from ff’ ‘
253
THE FIRST GOTHICS I l FIRST GUTHIF5
O 1c1a]5 Modern Reeditions: None _ multi 18 Gothic contain_
of the convent is the Maserini family mansion, Grasville Abbey, e Gothic Type: Pure or h;9:ug:g:é§:s(gf G°th?c fiction)
but because this is a Gothic novel, the intended refuge turns l"9 @lem§"t5 of Severa h Data. None
out to be a Place of terror and danger. Most of the Perils and Bl°9'@P"‘°°l a"d Researc
horrors are the machinations of Maserini's vile cousin the
. 1 _ , - _ ' h t hich of several Gothic
Count D'0llifont, who wants the Abbey and its holdings for his ; Critical Syn0D§1$~ U"¢erta'" a 0“ H
own. Spectral events b
. - ' )
» _ _ - 1 tn romance (in four volunei D
a ound as the Abbey comes alive with a 5 ' directlous to g1vewritte:1:t lggstytwo Gothic novels under a
corps de ballet of spooks. yeiiino Portraits. and restless R Moore Seems ‘° ““'E '
cad ' " ' '
avers. Maserini s curiosity about these mysteries of Gras-
ville Abbey are on a par with the nervous habits of the inquisi-
tive maidens of Hrs Radcliffe He ro ‘d
t.
_ . derous munk, Father Theodosius, °P@Fa
single cover with the mﬂF_ , ‘ The separate taies Qf
in as energetic villain in both storiei
n ted throu h the
- - P '1 es we "F “W ~ ~ ‘"2 “‘"-“'°‘“°"' °'L“"°°eZl‘§i°§E.???;£§§.§°'$i°iiean-S“me-
mysteries of the Abbey himself when he disappears one evening ‘ sexual misfortunes an" Dﬁrader is 1iah1e to miss the Spiicing if
during one of his fact-finding missions within the Abbey's tress? Le°“°'“’-butfteﬁ ecpmplicated and bifurcated Pl°t ‘S
darkest and most foreboding suite of chambers. Bloody footprints any 5l"9lE detall 0 ked The twin 50"; qf the dec€a5Ed Alf°"5°
and a mangled miniature are the sole clues he leaves behind f tie" °' °'erl°° e
_ orgo _ < ' b ' ‘ s but they still behave
After Maserini vanishes, Clementina removes their twin offpring de Mellas receive 0PP°5‘te “P rl"g1"g
Alfred and Matilda f '
, re concerned. Orlando re-
. rom the Abbey since she does not wish to l very m"¢h_ allke "sari }§§§e§°§§§§§t?0" from his paiF0"- 9°"
risk losing her children having already lost one husband. Alfred ceives a virtuous a“ sriives in Madrid he goes on a wiid sexual
is obliged by honor to care for his sister, Matilda, after their DlE9°5 he"Ce’ when“ e ﬁe a e abetted by the evil influence_ 07
mother's death, but he discovers London vices instead and begins $Pr@E °“d destructlhe hagp gined a kind of straﬂqe P5Y°"°l°9‘§a1
a career as a man of pleasure. Hhile Alfred is expending both Father Theodosius Q 0 His grother osmundy is thoroughiy in-
his virtue and the Haserini family fortune at the gaming table, mastery over Orlan 0- of the world and is thus much better able
Matilda's unguarded beauty draws the eye of Count D'0llifont who StF"Cted '"_ the wa€S turned 10058 in the metr0D0ll5- B°th
needs further outlets for his villainy having already acquired to control himself W en engouﬂter with the vicious monk enroute
Grasville Abbey. Hhen the Count makes an open attempt at seduc- me" have 3 Chance
y°""9 _ h h l an in an adjacent room at an
ing Matilda, Alfred regains his sense of duty and uses a pistol to Madrid when they SD)’ on t e 0 ym _ _ _
on his vile relative d' ' ' '
ld him or his mirrored reflec-
woun ing but not killing him. Resolution of l""- _I" 3" eerle S$e€:§u;:ﬁ€n2e:?ckedne55 as he bE"d5 °Yer the
all family troubles and recovery of heritage for Alfred and tib" 1" a posture of ounq woman he has concealed in his Chem‘
Matilda will take place when they take up residence in Grasville ' bloodsmeared b9dy 0 Q {S pivotai to the later de9€"9F§?l°" 9‘
Abbey despite the schemes of the Count to prevent their return. her. This Gothic even
I . . .
t h‘ death. Orlando's history l"
nside the Abbey, Alfred resumes the investigation of the mys- Orlando and eventually l&ad5 0 ‘5
teries where his father h d l
. . - n the disastrous effects of a
a eft off. His persistence carries a Madrid is somethinguofhg §gmT:n;X;o5E Father Theodosius, but the
bonus since exploration of one of the Abbey grottoes produces closed €dUCdtlOﬂ.] E anﬁ begins to transform the young man into
the long-missing father, Percival Maserini. D'Ollifont's addi- monk turns the tab igtin as 0r1andoIS djabqlic father, he NEKE5
tional underhandedness is also revealed when the anchorite and 5 m°"5te' of "'68 9
. him
i L fa and Cassandra and tutor$
keeper of the grotto, Father Peter, comes forward with the in- ‘ the y°""9 ma" attempt to rape an
formation that he had b
. ' ' . 0 l do is aware of his satanic en-
een compelled to serve the Count by 1“ the art poi“ §°i§§§lg§ioerb3i he'cannot break the monk's
constructing various supernatural illusions throughout the Abbey slavement to_ a Tie climax to the 0r1a"do Story and the culmina-
each designed to terrify and drive away those who questioned , h0ld °Ve' h'm' . Se ment of the novel OCCHFS ""9" the
D'0llifont's authority. Humiliated, exposed, and dying from his fl°" "f the Gothlc horror g
. - - - has
t b an inquisitive stranger Wh0
wound anyway, D'0llifont asks forgiveness from all of his in- m°"k c°"W3"d5 Orlando to S-a
jured relatives. He is f r ' ' ' '
ble but nevertheless EXClt!ng
O glven but 315° denled hurlal wlthln been hang1"g ab°qt- bgut ghegiiig home the dagger when a_5€Ctl0ﬂ
the Grasville Abbey crypt. Hriting an early brand of what a sce"e- 0r]a"d° ‘She Theodosius's castle collavses 9"‘"9 en’
recent critic has called "female Gothic," Moore scruPul0usly ' of the wall of Fa; 9YThe target of the dagger Has, of course,
avoided any sanguinary detail or sexual allusiveness in his sus- trance to 0$m""G-thic father returned from the dead_ 1" fruS_
penseful tale of family self-purification. Although leisurely Alf°"5°= a"°the' 0 nk uses the dagger on Orlando and then on
and slow moving, the gradual purgation of family evil and the trated rage’ thed mgor __a Second Gothic nBVBl_ "lthl" the
addition of a rationalized or explained Gothic conclusion made hlm59lf- The_05mu" i _f:nct;on5 as a kind of Rad¢l‘ffea“ 5eQ“e]
the serialized Gothic deeply appealing to more delicately in- ' l°'9?' G°Fh1c- "oven; natural explanation of the hvrrlble
clined Gothic readers who limited their Gothic pleasures to the °r 1qterp?]at1on oal ndo and Father Theodosius. lt further per-
LADVIS HAEAZINE‘ ’ re1at1o"Sh‘p qf r ah stery of the forbidden chanber as a
' ' “its “°°'e‘t9 ‘nsert tH:iTg Orlando is being ¢°mi"“ted by F‘t"°'
296. Hoore, George. THEODOSIUS us ZULVIN, THE MONK or MADRID: A second _G°*"'° t§‘:'S taken up resiaenee in the household °‘
SPANISH TALE DELINEATING VARIUUS TRAITS OF THE HUMAN MIND. Theod°s‘uS’ Osman G zmond and begins 6 friendship with Albert d9
London : 6.6. and J. Robinson, 1802. 9°" Everhard e O >

254 THE FIRST cur!-110$
" THE FIRST conucs 255
Gosmond, son the house. Not only is Albert's sister, Cassandra ten by grinding a pet sparrow to bits in his fist. The sort of
one of Orlando's rape victims, but the confessor of the family ineffable pleasure that this deed stimulates leads him to fur-
is none other than Father Theodosius. The Everhard family has a ther creative crimes and quite naturally culminates in sexual
secret which the curious Osmund must penetrate. Hithin the cha- ‘ sadism. In this area, his detestable hedonism is supported and
teau we have a chamber which is sealed forever and must never be directed by a female Zeluco, the vile Nerina, a wicked woman
reopened and a gloomy east wing always reserved in Gothic novels whose zeal for evil equals that of such high Gothic characters
for the ghosts of slain relatives or the incarceration of reluc-
tant maidens. In this case, the miserable prisoner of Father
Theodosius is Leonora, the girl whose bloody body had been seen
I as Matilda in THE MONK (see #?44) and Vittoria in THE ABBESS
(see #198). The principal recipient of Zeluco's barbarity is his
wife Laura, although he occasionally simply ignores her to DUT-
by the spying boys so many volumes ago back at the inn. Leonora .' i sue special sadistic objectives. One of the most hideous scenes
had been free and happy when Osmund arrived in Madrid, but the l in the novel comes when Zeluco's capricious cruelty leads him to
m°"k Put 8" eﬁd t° that by l0Cking her up just as Osmund was - : command that a Nest Indian slave be flogged to death. At the
becoming romantically interested in Leonora. Hhen Father Theodo- F ' instigation of Nerina, Zeluco throttles Laura's infant child on
sius taunts and threatens Osmund, Osmund and Albert pursue the the pretext that the baby bears too close a resemblance to the
monk to his lair where the scheduled stabbing of Alfonso by soldier, Carlostein, Laura's previous lover. Carlostein is a no-
Orlando is about to occur. This brings the two plots into con- ble foil against Zeluco‘s domestic savagery, but he is unable to
vergence and prepares the reader for the fulfillment of Gothic save Laura from madness at the report of her strangled child. As
justice,--the saving of the lost father, the double death of the Zeluco lays plans to duel and slay Carlostein, he decides to
villainous monk and the weaker twin, and the romantic reunion of ' consult Nerina about the best way to kill the good man. But
Osmund and Leonora. The theme of a miseducated young man coming , Nerina is entertaining a rival rake when Zeluco arrives. A fight
under the diabolic control of a strongwilled and sinister older ‘ ensues and the stiletto of the rival rake finally curbs Zeluco‘s
man perhaps keeps this double Gothic from sinking into total ' boundless desire to harm or harass his fellow creatures. The
fai]"r9- death scene contains the outlines of the sorts of ontologica
' frustration later heard in the outcries of the Byronic hero.
7. Moore, John. ZELUCO: VARIOUS VIEHS OF HUMAN NATURE, TAKEN FROM ‘ Having shown a cold indifference to all suffering, Zeluco now
LIFE AND MANNERS, FOREIGN AND DOMESTIC. London : A. Strahan suffers a consciousness of an isolation from humanity that can
a"d T- Cidell» 1789- never be redressed. His death is a morbid prelude for the union
Moder" Reedltl°"55 "°"9 of Laura and Carlostein, lucky survivors of Zeluco'$ P@FVerted
Gothic Type: Novel of domestic sadism (titular character is a will. Many romantic and Gothic authors were impressed by Moore's
prototypical Gothic villain) . forceful study in sadistic passion. One of these was Lord Byron
Biographical and Research Data: Raiﬂo, HAUNTED CASTLE, pp.36- who alluded to Zeluco in the Preface to the first and second
37; Tompkins. POPULAR NOVEL IN ENGLAND, DP-178-179. ’ cantos of CHILDE HAROLD'S PILGRIMAGE (1812), describing his own
_ _ _ strange hero as "a poetical Zeluco."
_ Critical Synopsis: The archetypal personalities of Gothic ‘
Vllld1n (a tormented tormentor) and Byronic hero-villain (a V 298. Morley, G.T. DEEDS OF DARKNESS: OR, THE UNNATURAL UNCLE. London
character who experiences aliveness only during moments of pain) ‘ : Tipper and Richards, 1805.
merge‘in the figure of the Sicilian sadist extraordinaire, Zelu- i Modern Reeditions: None
co. Moore's novel probes the psychological growth of evil within Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (terror mode)
a strongly_ passionate nature which only partially understands Biographical and Research Data: Sunners, GOTHIC QUEST, pp.29,
itself. As it grows from insouciance to pleasure in pain, Zelu- 86, 94.
co s pschological need for cruelty makes him another version of ‘ _ _
the period‘: man of feeling, isolated and eventually destroyed Critical Synopsis: The machinery of Halpole's first Gothic
by ,5tFi"99 Passions no less than his weeping and benevolent castle generates most of the emotional voltage in _th1s
reciprocal, Harley, in Mackenzie's MAN OF FEELING (see #260). , satisfying Gothic thriller whose very title is a magnificent
The novel lacks only the morbid architectural apparatus, eerie i eye-pleaser. The photophobic heroine, Josephina, is Mrs. Rad-
medievalism of setting, and supernatural endowments of the ~ cliffe's Emily St. Aubert renamed and relocated in a sixteenth-
protagonist to qualify as high Gothic, for Zeluco himself is a 'v' century Italian castle. Her panics and predicaments strike her
character so vicious and mysterious that he would be at home in j’ as the manifestations of malign s"PE'"at"Fal f°'°°5 de4l°“‘ed t°
any haunted abbey or frowning castle. His pursuit of ever more ié her rape, ruin, and death. She enters the Gothic labyrinth full
rewulsively Cruel delights and his satanic diligence in §' of expectantly nervous alarm and, of course, "A5 he’ m°5t h°"ld
.penetrating and destroying the lives of others certainly engen- “ F experience in the picture gallery. Hhile staring at‘a picture of
der the same awe over the enigma of evil felt in the portrayal the unnatural uncle and “watching with straining eyes the can-
of various Gothic supermen. To Zeluco, all the world's a torture i vass, her fears were at last confirmed, and, dreadful to behold,
chamber and every person a potential victim. Born into a noble it was slid back, and a man, masked and armed stepped softly
Sicilian family, he initiates his brutal vocation at the age of - through the aperture followed by three others!" Thus does the

2
56 THE FIRST GOTHICS _ THE FIRST GDTHICS 257
unnatural
the eeege""géE jzgzpﬁengeée ggemoi hi? ipectral entrances upon spearean shades as the murdered Banquo and Old Hamlet, wander
crew from behind the picture Jess gen 1eei]Seized-by the masked into the story which is immediately recognized as yet another
swoon and the “Meme Se; es (genie {ea into a Radcliffean reordering of THE CASTLE OF OTRANTO (see 0465) and THE ow
of her fete. By eueh typiee] gise eere" vi eoui any explanation ENGLISH BARON (see #355). Hhen the spectre of Mortimore Cas-
menuever thee ordinary type of egghie tces eor ey was able to tle confronts the heroine. Ann. in the great Qallery of this
genuine euepenee and terror The maid na e ento a long novel of haunted Helsh fortress» it is a Plain fact that the anonymous
depende upon the reederle pereiei etioe iﬁezhered Gothie novel 1 Goth kept the first act of HAMLET (l.ii.19§-212) open before
tractions of horror es they erie: eurin ee Piychological at- him as he wrote, for what we hear is a frail paraphrase of
journey‘ Beeeuee many of these herrigi he heroine s dark Horatio's reporting of the spectre of Hamlet‘s father: ‘Forth
preduete of the heroinels h eteri 1 d e encounters were the issued from a side door a tall figure, armed cap-a-pée; his
and over’ the reader Couid en.ca "e: ft° be frl9ht@"9d_ Over vizer was up, his countenance was of a death-like hue, and
succumbing to the temptations Dela: Sec earful moments without his features were stern and menacing. He led by the hand a
¢ha,acter_ e 'rr“t'°"°] 31°"9 Vlth the lady robed in white, with a black veil on her head and
bearing a lighted torch." The maternal-allegorical figure of
ggg_ MORT CAST i _ _ the dark lady who illuminates is, of course, the Goth's own
Modern kgeditggxgicngggkv‘ London ' J‘ uallisi 1793- special touch, as are the bleeding swords, unreadable manu-
Gothic Type; pure'or hi h G°th< (R d i. . . _ scriﬂts, and sable-draped chambers of the castle of death.
Bieeeephiee] and Research Die _ aLe iffean IMIIBEIOH) ‘ The story itself is utterly conventional although well-told.
ANGLAIS PP-395 396 398 460a a‘ evy’ LE ROMAN GDTHIQUE‘ Pausing on his journey for the night, the melancholy travel-
’ ’ ' ‘ ' ler, Hr. Fitz-Eliott, comes to ‘an ancient Gothic building
- < v _ - which had formerly been a castle fortified against the
cAS$EEf‘°g: i%g°g§;:ieUeg1§:§eg to_tne Duchess of York, MORT Helsh." He is received by Mr. Mortimore, ancestor of the
missiuned Gothic eriteen to ieeemlg P°:S1P]Y have been a com- Edmund Mortimore, the Earl of March. Fearful of the ghost
Gothic admirers The Duehege efek £1 cg 9'19 °f irlitoﬁrﬂtic which resides in the southwest tower as well as other horrid
Melbourne were among the Gothi , t“ Q" §"d the H0"0Yabie Lady happenings, the present owner has built a modern lodge out-
5cr1bers_ The novei beers th C S .":" y'5'X. paF'°"5 a"d Sub" side the castle where he lives with his daughters, Ann and
ciimys romances and fmhee°e:"'"1$e:kab1e ""Pr1nt_of Hrs. Rad- Clementina. along with the waif child, Matilda. Mortimore
the eleerpien of Heipole S fireewg the permanent influence eof Castle desperately needs investigating since it is not only
ee e ehoiee The Orpheus of More C :1 ic castle on the tradition the haven of ghosts but also the repository of secrets about
ievere Hubert and Amanda Th _ :5 e are the pair of Gothic the family going all the way back to Sir Hugh Jennings and
the," ,5 suffer endure Se" r :3“ 35" i'l'!“"" the Castle requires the dissipated Sir Philip Mortiniore. Sir Philip had seduced a
ang co"fruntat}D"S and egg 3 '°qE sur "5 §“P9'¥at"r§‘ SHOCKS woman of lower rank, Annette Rosalie d'Arville, then had her
uaiiy they iearn E0 distinrg? :1 h "9"iY §3'"9d lde"F‘t¥. Grad- locked up in one of the tower apartments. Her ghost may or
keep ‘fear from becomin ghobi apiﬁgrance f'°“ reality or_ to may not have been the veiled lady with ‘the torch. Many of
growth shows that on one geeei ta~ G ;z_P'°Ce55 °f Psychological these secrets are under the care of the Castle‘s old house-
an initiation Story in hi h 9 ° ‘C ca" be 'e¢°9"lled 65 keeper, Mrs. Morland, the character later to become a stock
home and femiiy must ieer" Q C y°“Q9 chafa§t§'5 59Parated from Gothic personage in sagas of this type from Emily Bronte's
fears and endure the terroreo gage with Primitive or adolescent Mrs. Dean in HUTHERING HEIGHTS (1847) to Henry Jamesis Mrs.
in iifee Their entry into d ieh :l"9 ﬂ1°"E _fOF the first time Grose in THE TURN OF THE SCREH (1898). Hr. Fitz-Elliott de-
within the eeetie then ad?e ?" 55 iymeolized by the trials cides to remain a guest at Mortinnre Castle for the hunting
nightmare of growing U Tge S ore brings under control the season and is invited to sleep in the southwestern tower by
inpiications of the Gethge m age C“ ‘Ural _5"d nsyﬂhvlvqical his host, even though he himself "declines to reside in the
Simpiistic form as dis i d ?y e See" eve" ‘" the 98"Fe'S most mansion of my forefathers.“ Nocturnal tours of the castle led
D aye 1“ HURT CASTLE‘ by Matilda and Mrs. Morland furnish the bulk of Gothic action
_ . _ as Fitz-Elliott, now a self-appointed detective, assists the
300 M05iiT?:; E::;LEi7Q3CAMBRIA" TALE‘ L°“d°" 3 M‘"e'Vi-PTE5$ for Mortimore daughters in the tracking down of secrets. There
Mqﬂern ReediQi°ns.‘No"e are some mild Gothic shudders, but the novel's most terrify-
Qgthic Type. pu,e'Dr hi h G tn. 0 ing scene comes outside the Castle walls when Mr. Fitz-
modes) ' 9 0 1C ( traﬂtoesque terror, horror i Elliott falls from a cliff guring a hunt. Thehiqget sﬁorykof
- < . i the drunken rake Llewellin revor Mortimore, o s t e ey
. gigfzwlggleeigd Zgieazgg Data: Levy, ts ROMAN "GOTHIQUE" i, to the Cast-le's crimes and»phantoms. Hith the intelligent
’ ' ’ ' ‘ ‘ help of the noble Mr. De Lancy, thefdegaigs oi the etgry eae
- - - _ . . _ ' used to ex lain the m steries o t e ast e inc u ing e
§i;:|;‘g§lhi:Y"°:5‘:- 5"" "Wei is tvnheavy with Hamleti$m- central mystgry of the ghgst that lives in the southwest
9 °S S E5ce"d‘"9 direct]! from such Shake- tower. Here, the novel grows murky but the explanation seems

258 ' THE FIRST GOTHICS _v mg F1R$T [;0Ti-i1c$ Z59
to he In the Charade.°f Mr" "°'ti"'°'e ""° has bee" Pl='l.Yl"9 the L‘ finds some relief when she is put into service with Sir Robert
V019 Of tower spectre in order to test his dﬂH9hlBF5' COHFBQQ and Lady Beltram at Oakdale Hall, but even in this sanctuary
69¢ I0 Drovoke Mr._Fitz-Elliott's Gothic fancies. The story ends there is ho safety for her. The Gothic acoustics accumulate as
"it" a d°“b]e "edd'"9 (Det°"°Y a"d A""- Flt!-Elliott and Clemen- we hear “the heavy bolt drawn back, and, slowly creaking on
t;na)"Tﬁnd a somewhat comic de-Gothification of Mortimore Castle their rusty hinges, the gates opened." Bouchier is diligently
Bl 6: e‘west tower was repaired and beautified and was chosen after her because Eliza reminds him so much of a former victim,
y rs. Fitz-Elliott for her own residence.‘ , Mich, who had "Suffered 50 grandly under my power." Despite
' ' ' ' nd absurd resurrections of dead heroines,
301. Musgrave, Agnes. EDHUNQ OF THE FOREST: AN HISTORICAL NOVEL. {ii nQ$§i":;§t§:c}§iia:ea to this point. But as B0H¢hl@F'$
::)g::a§:;:?:i£: Hrham Lane‘ 1797'  ' crimes against Eliza conlnence in earnest, everything goes out of
. E _°"e _ ,‘ ‘n r ss. More missin women, perplexing
Gothic Type: Gothified history (imitation of OTRANTO) i $§:?;°|E?e:ecu:da"a‘ gqllgnge among the Mohgwk Indians, together
Eggggaphmal am Research Data: Ta", CATHOLICISM IN GOTHIC with droves of displaced characters straying into and out of the
0" no.1, 18 47 107, Lé - i - - l '
ANGLAIS: pp 390’ agé’ ‘Ii’ 436! 567Vyi tE ROMAN "GOTHIQUE' I K plot,_ cause the novel to dissolve into_irrecoverable confusion.
’ 625 l Hhat is a wounded and one-eyed Mohawk chief doing in the base-
. . _ _ v § f B 't' h bb ? At the end, when Oakdale Hall
P ‘CTltlCal Synopsis: Hlth its compassionate hermits, forbidden I K ?§"§0"§,,,§d :;t;S aa h§§5i§§i"a§na "its concealed apartments
t"°Ty °f. St‘ G°de"¢- “"5 the h9F°'$ Prophetic dreams and in- ‘ l ulled down ' the reader finds out that Bouchier (alias, the
erviews with the vocal portrait f l P ’ . - '
romance multiplies its terrors :ad3ai1al" g"§e$f0'. _th9 l°"9 i infamous Mc_Crae, alias. Kophausenl was an agent of Robespierre
_ 9 y an in the middle zone E l d t d the overthrow of the monarchy.
gixzzg? H:g£€l@;5 “?*€§¢'a;ﬂE? Supernﬂtvrﬂlism and Clara Reeve's I g:§::l;"how1gouch?e:qplanhegrto bring down the throne of England
ro o incre i ' ‘d _ . . - -
Reevels wnceptinn of Gothic a: ;"g]:"ﬁacg: ?§f:"::;:t:° Cggllii by deflowering country maidens is never made clear.
baric era the novel is set i 1 d‘ ’ - , I . d - T,
land with ’the references ton Hehﬁguelllmplgggignoitheix ER; l . 303‘ TH: ngﬁngéggs BRIDE’ OR’ THE STATUE SPECTRL Lu" on I
- . ug .
g:%:ﬁgE?:hR Centurgdand the time of the Barons‘ wars. Musgrave's Moder"’ReeditiQn5; None
ma" of d eeve s mund Twyford and Halpole's Theodore, a yuung l Gothic Type; Gothic biuebook (terror, horror modes)
ille all enied noble birthright who comes from forest to an ‘ Biographical and Research Data: None
y 9 Y Possessed castle to claim his destiny. Once there he
IS met by ghostly uides d "t d b ’ - . . . _ -
his quest for justige Thea" ?j5l$ 9 y Supernatural forces in Critical Synopsis A cleverly constructed bluebook that is
. avoi ance of any reasoned explanation i k th h ‘th ‘t s well as weird horror. The plot is
for the many _supernatural_ occurrences indicates the author's  inarrggugy troubleslome gbscurities and digressions which
:18" I: break with the Radcliffean tenor of the 1790's and re— lead nowhere. The title might suggest that the bluebook is an
urn o a genuine supernatural of the earliest Gothics The ab- ungigned work by Mary Meeke whose MYSTERIOUS HIFE (see #273) had
sence of any demonic supernatural element also Suggests‘ a Q9"-
servative countermovement among the Gothic writers of th l t
appeared in 1797, but there is no resemblance to Meeke's methods
or style whatsoever. The straightforward plot unfolds with brisk
_ _ e a e
1790's ~°9il"5t the ll\0"§l1r0s1ties_of_Schauerromantik Gothic. The ' ease Jeronimo de Beauchanp is descended from an ancient Gallic
‘same ‘novel was rewritten again in Ann Ker's revival of Clara ‘ family ‘in the days of ignorance and superstition when Pepin
T:‘E"?maN?gbd"ed Glltlllﬁi EDRIC THE FDRESTERI UR, THE HVSTERIES OF ruled over the ancient Gauls.“ He is a peerless warrior whose
D CHAMBER (see #218) in 1817. virtuous qualities are even more exalted by the barbaric company
302, Muggraye Ag,,e5_ THE SOLEMN INJUNCUO _ . ' surrounding him. l_\t the Court of Pepin, Louise Dunois, the
' N. London . Minerva-Press h f S R inald Dunois is much taken with Jeronirro and
for William Lane, 179a. “"9 ‘B’ 9 “T e9 4 -
Modern Reeditions: None '§r°""s mm .""th. 11321‘ $2 fl’§Y§u§';;j,a§°"f,§o“y,,‘;§‘°}’,;Q§e',]§§
Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (terror mode) \  airs‘: ;eb?g:gSt_r¥:eoGoth‘Ys Sty“, is coy‘ llshe sunk ﬁfe.
Biographical and Research Data: None less into his arms. He ventured to_i|iprint a léiss gndhz; 
Critical Synopsis: All of the prerequisite Gothic acoustics ’ cheeks. ulth these qugmt ?r:‘Hb|i1iItait§s dalihgs: is, tinged
reverberate U"°"9hout this conventional Gothic romance Th Gqtmc acne" can 9?’: U" erhvmg :‘ bridal rin made ill the M5‘
novel begins with a funeral knell at the village of St Mar. 0 E ""tl_‘ °°'"e¢Y- Jeronimodpgroases Ritumin fro: the ringmaker-IS
as "the "°“" °f l"t9l‘"l@ll! iiliiroached.“ The knell seems to mo if ’ cunous ménner he mu evhse. ~e grou of r'ustics merry-
"le P°$§l"9 Of ‘the lovely but apparently dyin Eliza -uh" Mme In Phelforgg hens “E°€‘i“"‘i¥ i gr igsin the rin9 he
""a¢c°""tabl¥ 55 VET)’ Illllch alive three chaptersglater when tho ‘ mkmg' wshmg ta J03" t emfiu f eal “statue in gnearby grove
reader canes in °" her "M19 she is bel"9 W"$'-led by the "W80": ’ ghgcezniegtovg: ::el2:l:ge;0°f‘E:Fl:'8: the ring from the statue's
Frenchman, Bouchier, -Beauteous, young, and unprotecte,1,- EH“ ﬁnggn but it ‘iii not budge. Resorting to stronger measures,

251
zso THE FIRST BUTHIC5 FIR" 507"!“
. - b ildin endowed
he resolves to break the statue's finger to regain the ring, an tyf of the book is the greeeuﬁgﬁtlecetieézisg plgasinggto Gothic
act which produces “a shock more violent than electricity“ and ,~ thr°"9h°"t "'th the Supe
causes Jeronimo to sink into unconsciousness at the base of the » taste-
statue. The statue keeps the rin and Jeronimo returns to ’ . SPANISH TALE
PePin's Court determined not to reveai his odd adventure or his "305. THE MYSTERY OF THE BL¢ﬁ§Yc0rZ::£e iNAlN;§§iST;?§_
latest engagement. On the wedding night of Jeronimo and Louise _ OF THE ELEVENTH C€NN ne~ , - ' ’
as the couple lie in their nuptial bed they hear very heavy ¢e I M°def“ Reed't‘°"SZ U" hook
footsteps approaching the chamber. It is the statue come to life 59ih‘¢ T¥Pe‘ G°th'c C aph Date. None
or Jeronimo's mysterious marble bride come to claim her be- ‘ Bio9T5Ph‘c°i a“d Researc
trothed and wearing the rin to prove it. Climbin into the bed _ . - _ _ k was riced at six
between the two astonished gnewlyweds, the statae "literally f cr]t1Ca‘ Sy"°pS‘S' The] aiaiirgh ggiigggtion 0? scenes from
Petrifies the astonished pair." Louise decides that she has been r F6"¢9 a"d appears t° be “Hg ager the Chepboﬂker gag, he had some
married long enough to this stony bigamist, and leaves the THE MONK (see f24i)' oiénees of THE "0NK'§ lgve scenes and
Court. The rest of the romance gives an account of Jeronimo's Mﬂ$¢§F¥ °f thE_5§1a°'g"E 5?",s romance The p1ece is the ca5¢1i_
wandering attempts to rid himself of his mysterious bride who erotic suggestivity 0 Ewes and the time the Feast of Epiphany
stalks him constantly and appears to him nightly at bedtime. The » ian monastery °f 5t- La"'e Ciive is in the keeping of aibertq de
statue Spectre-5 name is Gertrude and her story is one of in the year 1140. The na€ra of the virile young man, Leopold
betrayal and murder at the hands of her intended, Baron 0val- Riga and narrates the hastorg " his own Strong sexua] nature by
diros. Hhen she discovered him in the arms of a courtesan, he . 53; Aime: "h° 15 force ¥.f?egtio"s of the flesh demanded of a
had despatched her with a dagger. If Jeronimo wants to be free being_compelled to the mor i liar the good Father Fernando is
of Gertrude's statue spectre (or, if he wants a divorce of l T9i‘91°"5 career‘ HTS suqﬁ "that the youth had been weak
sorts), he must hunt down Ovaldiros and kill him. Otherwise he F0T¢ed t° °°"°1"de 9f Ltognt be enS1eved by the fascinations of
is doomed eternally to see the statue bride at his bedside at enough i° 3"“? ‘"5 "'"‘ °nk.S sexuei pa5§iQﬂ§ are further
bedtime. The Goth manages to subordinate the comic properties of 1 ' Hﬂfidiy b95"tY- The yuqgg T01] Catches Sight Df "the throbbing
this fairytale to the morbid requirements of horror narrative. agitated when he acci enda tern“ h the aperture which he,
Locatinq the murderer is a heavy and drawn out task which bosom of a woman vreveade Casiongd H His SeXua1 fa“ is rapid
Jeronimo finally botches when he kills Guimano, a magician, who ""9"5'd9d °@‘P°T°“‘°" _a 0: he is heving liaigong with this
has disguised himself in the shape of Baron Ovaldiros. But in a and scarcely "0t\C@iPi9»ti°°va“‘tS of the mDnaStery_ There is no
queer way, justice is served by Jeronimo's mistake since it was “°ma" and others 1" d i r'orating effects of pride and ‘Hit
Guimano. the magician, who had created and set in motion the ' lengthy analysis of tte ene gs ‘H Leeisls romance‘ Instead‘ the
statue spectre. Divorced at last fnom his "mechanical and ‘ "P0" the 5°“1 °f_tfe mg the reader "Here, his passions had
marble-hearted bride,‘ Jeronimo is free to court and marry the . ChﬂPb°°k9r bi""t]Y 1" orm r not exierminated and when they
Infanta of Spain who had also been taken with his chivalry when . only slumbered; theyd ze e fur unknow"‘"_A‘S0 in the vaults
she had visited Pepin's Court. The clever bluebooker was able to iwBke"@di they a“ake"e oe? SS Z oak roams freely, the ghost of
wink at the serious claptrap of the Gothic tradition while Of the m9"“5te'Y' a rgsther A"£e1m who iike Le0p0id, had
making use of much of the same stuff at the same time. ’ §“°n'§:§llQ°i§ ghgttgiigiguselife against his will. In a brueque
~ ' , ee . - - - - into Father er-
4. THE MVSTERIOUS PENITENT: OR, THE NORMAN CHATEAU, A ROMANCE. , and hurried climax, Aﬂ:eimiSeS5lF}tSS£:?:;:Zry- He is rea1]y D0"
London : Crosby and Letterman’ 1800‘ E nandois arms and has dohg vdauphter Beatrice, is the woman who
Modern Reeditions: None ‘ Raymond d? 5Paia"za ?:, lsxueigdesirgg, She is a renegade Ursu_
Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (Radcliffean imitation) ffrst 5t"red Leopod .5 iets on freedom for his daughter and
Biographical and Research Data: None ioce E:gpo?§n Egihg: Ahgelm, who is glad to rid the monasterytof
' ' t , soon re en s.
Critical Synopsis: In addition to the overt influence of Mrs. ‘ fai§e Spectres and “"§°;e;:1h]§°,§?§?§ cghgiagign meets the Dub-
Radcliffe, two other popular Gothic titles of the 1790's lie be- ‘ - Aqain’ the rushed anb taf iis in all other respects.
hind the making of this romance: Halker's THE HAUNTED CASTLE: A l\sher'S Page quﬂtar “ 5
NORMAN ROMANCE (see #461) and Narner's NETLEY ABBEY: A GOTHIC - . T MES. London : Minerva
STORY (see ma). False history plays its conventional part in ‘ 306. nvsnznv uron MYSTERY. A TA§§0gF EARLIER I
the novel's tapestry of terror as the reader is conveyed to the Press TOP l§"?- Nf"wa:' '
time of Hilliam the Conqueror and his Norman fiefs. The mysteri- Modern Reed1t‘°ns. Oh? h Gothic (imitation of Lathom's Goth-
ous penitent is the orphaned Annette whose royal identity_is ‘ §°t:a:i§{:$é)E“re or 9
viithheld until the end of the romance. Her function is siirpl to ‘ l? . - . - -
shriek, shudder, suffer, and repeatedly lose her way beiore Biographical and Research Data. None e
bein granted an absurd salvation from the interior darkness. . - - . urned out severa F0-
Likeg so many Gothics before and after it, the major “personali- Critical Synopsis. The anonymous B0!" I

r
262 . i
T!-E FIRST GUTHICS 5 HE FIRST BUTHICS 263
mances for - - < ‘
(See #023) a"Z"$HE"g::§Kv;A:nnerreslneiu:;nqanARou 0: FALhENHElM i Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (Plotting taken from Reeve's
tune and cnnStnncti°n_ MVSTERY UPON "§STERv ae muc t alike _ln ogo ENGLlSH BARON)
material from Several of Francis Lathomls c]ev£neeh:i]eén;aww;€; Biographical and Research Data: None
a romin n ' ' . ‘
p E t ‘nf]uX from "'5 "YSTERv' A NOVEL (See #Z?3)- Critical Synopsis: Attributed in some sources to "The Misses
307. THE |4y51'1 . Purbeck," this four-volume Helsh or Cambrian Gothic relies heav-
13()()_ C T0HER' OR‘ VILLAINV PUNISHEIL L°"d°" 1 K3195“, I ily on Reeve's situation of the young heir and a castle that is
Moder" Reeditiohsz "one not especially haunted save for ‘a single forbidden suite of
Gothic Type; Bgthic chapbonk Eagnieénlgekgﬁrinﬁ also C0l‘;E;DOIldSv\;lUl the time of THE OLD
‘ ' ‘ , e rei n o enr .
ggegraphical and Research Data: Sunners, GOTHIC QUEST, p, zt 9 y
, 309. Nicholson, Mr. THE SOLITARY CASTLE: A ROMANCE OF THE EIGHTEENTH
Criti;ai 5 < . _ . _ _ V CENTURV. London : Hilliam Lane, 1789.
facts by refnrg?:E?;;-thgetgargjgeassggggz: ga;nsTits Gothic ef- Modern Reeditions: None _
OTRANTO (see #466) and The OLD ENGLISH oBAR0:E CASTLE OF Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (horror mode)
Characterization, plotting, and a Central terror (see_#355). I Biographical and Research Data: Lévy, LE ROMAN -IGOTHIQUE-.
inysgc north tower of the castle adhere to the faiiiiliarndesigls ANGLAIS’ W199.
o os ' '
achieves $gg!lCSc‘]'?':|::'( u5§i§"eMgs€PP9§TﬂHCe_0f the lost heir to n Critical Synopsis: Mr. Nicholson was not assigned the auth-
hohy wars, is greeted an a heath bgna Sngxgnl rﬁturning from the orship until the Minerva-Press catalogue of 1814 and even this
phetic welcome followed by the promise that he” ?]ee;s a pro- signature is suspiciously fraudulent. The novel is an unusual
new master Of castle de halvern upon the death : tn ecome the A concoction of Gothicism and lighter fantasy. The isolatoe Pro_
baron and his Son. Ronaldn relates these n r tot_dv e "Present I prietor of the solitary_castle is a Vathekian aesthete who has
wife, Oswena, and his daughter Matilda Shari? ;t'n9s_ to his I carefully constructed an irrational retreat for himself to whieh
chmihg, Baron de Mahler" i; accidenian Herd er his home- he has retired for an_utter seclusion from the boredom of his
mshap and his Son disappears thus creating E _ii_| a hunting own century. Like the main flQUY_‘E in one of the novels of the
the souls part in his fatherjs death The cgsteusllicions about decadence at the end of the Nineteenth Century, he drowns him-
Roha1di, but is has new become nauntéd or at _etnow reverts to self 1" exotic sensations and Painful pleasures. The_ novel has
undetected crime‘ Supernaturﬂ voices ar ain ed with some , no discernible storyline, merely Passagesnof rhapSodic_sensation
hails of vengeance echo through the Cr ts endconstantly heard, 1 and effusions of strange feeling. The solitary Qastle is a Fri-
Baronls armor is hehe]d by Matilda as|¥€ Hank ta suit of the 4 vate amusement Dark of the imagination containing a maJestic,
ber atop the north t°~er_ Matilda has also engo ¥°"9: the Cham- n alabaster arcade "in which seven kings of England who reigned
some hunter named Percy and p‘an"ed a rendezvun ere a_ hand- during the Hevtarchy, frowned in marble: and to render the an-
he my5teninns1y disappears before She can ex r oushwith him, but > pearance of these statues perfectly terrible. the Captain had
!h THE CASTLE OF OTRANTO, the supernaturae ezs er love. As dressed them in suits of real and complete armour. All is
‘hcreasingly more frequent and the castle S ectenrrences become ‘ Drecisely calculated to Promote total historieal escape from the
cious in their visitations. Having cnhcgct d S more auda- I century of reason and to yield a total inmersion in the gloom-
thriller thusfar, the anonymous Goth unfort E I B suspenseful , ness of the situation_he had chosen. No_ queer sensation of
climax by his understated ending An otriﬂg 9 y snoils the l ascent or descent is beyond the attainment of the iso}ated
qh,,es an astounding dénouement’ thé explosicnesnne Gothnc re- , castle dweller either. At his request, he is instantaneously
g,aht through the Cast]e "a115, or some such re est a g ostly visited by a friendly Phantom Pilntinq 6 luminous sphere which
opment_ here’ the wronged heir returns to casglepd ehous devel- i can aPParently breach the time barrier at his command. Horruf,
the eve of "at;]da-S wedding to Sir Eldr d E d_alvern on 2 wonder,_ and spectaeular imaginatiye release are normal condi-
crucifix which She had given him as a token De nan 1l5Dl3yS the } tions within the solitary castle. This tyne of _Gothic fantasy
come with uncharacteristic guilt her cons irer ove. 0ver- l has [no real analogue among _the _darker Gothic novels of the
Morton Ronaldi and Dswena expire affsta E P hlqg parents, Sir :1 1790 s. The_ refuge of the‘ irrational and the triumph of
nTohged son of Baron de halvern) triu hgnE1 w e e Percy (the e buffoonery ‘lﬂ the Bechfordian vein make THE SDLITARV CASTLE a
ahd the daughter of those who mwderedvvvms ,¥(éh61Il’lS the castle \ unique specimen of a literary oddity. Hawthorne s _neglected
otrahtoesque excitements of fort a es tn 5 er._ After the short story, _"The Hall of Fantasy" and Poe's celestial dream-
ciimax is unsatisfying Y P 9 , Q Omesticated anti- h flights in a piece such as "The Colloguy of Honos and Una‘ are
' ' the nearest Gothic equivalents to this eccentric work.
308. NEVILLE ~ ‘
and J Céiltﬁérgg. IQSZGENEROUS CAMBRXANS. London 1 T. Plummer ' 310. Nubilia. THE CASTLE of GLENROICH: A ROMANCE OF THE THELFTH cza-
Mﬂdern Reeditiong, honé TURY. etnssou HAGAZXNE AND CLVDESDALE MONTHLY REGISTER, 3
' ; (January, 1812-June, 1812): 5 parts.

264 E '
THE FIRST GOTHICS THE FIRST GOTHICS 265
Modern Reeditiuns: None
Gothic Type: Gothified history 8. 100-
Bio ra hical and . '
nnnﬂziijgi p_465_ "aims" Dew Mayo. ENE!-I$H NOVEL IN THE Critical Synopsis: An engrossing Gothic by a writer of means
C and strong literary talent, the four-volume work combines Gothic
ritical Synopsis; A §ey‘ia]ized a . . techniques and characterization with the loftier purposes of the
oppasigion to iionnian Engiand as its :;g:g:'i'gaiG::’g:: $51129 the novel of ideas. The ways and means of the Gothic novel, Partic-
lous pen name, Nuhiiia, cnuid refer to the mentai cix  e CW" ' ularly the monastic shocker, become vehicles for radical social
to the marital eligibility of the author Gle r '0: mess or thought. "The liberal cultivation of the female mind," the nar-
the Firth of Forth is shrouded in niysi_er' an: one Ctsﬂe 9" rator asserts, "is the best security for the virtues of the
iangnane reminiscent of Mrs‘ Radciiffeis {ens d escribed in female heart." This theme is stated dramatically through the
CRSTLES OF ATHLIN Am) D[jNBAyNE (See #345) 9 3" “yes ‘" THE mental and physical adventures of the young nun, Imogen, the
inter Scottish Gotnicsi s 3 PYO Otype for many novice of St. Dominick. She comes into contact with the world of
311 0 1 liberal ideas and democratic passions through her position as
. r ando. THE CHAMBER UF DE 1 amanuensis or secretary for Lady Magdelaine de Montlnorell who is
TORICAL nonnnu OF TH?“ S?§iE€:$HFATEE£§ug8$ARI0, AN HIS- very possibly a self-portrait of Sydney Owenson, the writer.
Minerva-Press for a_K_ Newman 1809 ‘ L°"d°" 1 Having witnessed the brutal massacre of St. Bartholomew's Eve
godern Reeditions: None , l (August, 1572), she is engaged in dictating a book concerning
othic T e: Pure or hi ' - - ~ religious prejudice and the dangers of unquestioning theological
Biographigal and ReSe§'Qcﬁ°t',§;§a§‘"‘§:jifi;§Q OEOHECMONK) belief to Imogen. Although Lady Montmorell's subject is the
100. ' ' QUEST’ 9- crusades, she is actually conlnenting on contemporary conflicts
C and idealogical obsolescence. Imogen becomes pupil as well as
ritical S o sis: ' - amanuensis listenin to and wei hin her mistress's historical
mime sequeftg THE :gnE"l(i::1#l;%4ghetmnerxz-Press as a two- I judgenents'and liberal arqu|nents.gI|nogen's restrictive life in
tllﬂlﬁﬂl price of nine 5hi]]ing§_ -Hie’ nanewo noggiismd  the the convent becomes increasingly Gothic for her as she absorbs
recognized as the name taken by the diaboiic M fig’ "T be these new ideas and as she becomes more inquisitive about human
IS disguised as a young inaie novice in nmbms. la Ii ‘F "hlle she exploitation by institutions or outmoded ideas. In addition, her
"OVQT is a pastiche of Severn] monastic Snugt f, C 031st?" The ’ natural goodness infuriates many of her sisters whose artificial
lando exhibits some stylistic disparity tne E §b?'i'. 5‘"°e_0" piety is a constant strain. ‘The younger sisters hated her for
that the pseudonym may neii canionfia é Sevegoisgéflty "1515 her intellectual superiority; the elder cherished her as a saint
instead of a singie author. Incidents Sflmm tn a H ingrent hands in embryo." The little novice is given a direct exanple of the
story are reworked with the pmvucimve eﬁotigig °‘Q'é‘b"°5‘° work of religious persecution when a young minstrel. Theodore-
eXP'"‘9alIEd to confonn to the tastes of the Miner Pm S" ueq °" who seems to be a Huguenot fugitive, takes refuge in Lady Mont-
tele. As the title implies the stor f lib regs c!l?n' morell's household. He brings with him lurid descriptions of the
Matilda's extended career of leading othery r Od 0:; Rosana 8/ extermination of the Huguenots by Catherine de Medici and the
"650", but unlike the rage of Lewis-S Magiig an its t° qa'"' Guises. Thus, he is living evidence of her mistress's social
Rosario to 3 reckoning for nis/nei. "inns Sta! ti and” brings theories. The stifling bigotry of the convent is now all too
Orlando's work is a sequel to THE MONH thlc y Speakmm clear to Imogen. Hith her only friend among the sisterhood, the
plagiarized revival of Lewis's hove] of “nix in thannngrely 5 minor canoness, Sister Parsiphae, she renounces her order and
many in both the bluebook and longer Gothic t "en, an b?e" sets forth to test her newfound ideas in the secular world. The
Qrﬂpher has not been ahie to examine an undatedygein. E lbl10- travel sections of the novel form a sequence of Gothic ordeals
to by Montague Snmersi R0SARm_ OR THE FEMALE M8" IC referred and incidents. Ilnogen passes tremblingly through the terrible
speculate that this crudely illustrated -. enn d K3)“: "9 ‘Pa-V forest of Folembray; she falls briefly into the grasp of the
circniated throughout the Nineteenth cent Ty rea_ ul which sadistic Count de St. Dorval who thinks he has captured "Sappho
Orlando's sequel. Threads and strands of I: J1’ "Iii mlfered from herself“; after a nightmarish pursuit, she is taken and nearly
(See #198) and GONDEZ THE MONK (see Hm) are a'i' S THE ABEESS raped by soldiers of the Guise; she meets Bussy D'Amboise and
tnis pastiche of the monastic shocker e a so stitched into King Henry IV at Fontainbleau; she makes an unwise liaison with
312 0 ' a married man of selfish motives, De Sorville; with Paiisiphae,
. wenson, S dne . THE N0 . she makes a Radcliffean excursion to Vaucluse where t e women
for Richardy PhillipZXcE1g]5§T'pBQ?I:IcK'»Lom?°n Z T‘ G111“ ‘catch an inperfect view of a ruined castle‘; finally, she com-
1807. ’ v l <1 Elphla . T.S. Manning, pletes her cycle of education by returning to Lady_Magdelaine's
' Modern Reeditions: None salon where she 'is received as an‘intellectual equal. Although
Gothic T e: Pur ' ' - . the Gothic arts of the novel are subordinate to its social
tent) -VP e or high Gothic (some phll0SOP|l'ICdl con- message, Owenzon considers an awareness of the terrors of histo-
Biogra hical and R . r to be inte ral to woman's ananci ation and self-possession
D esearch Data. Sunmers, GOTHIC QUEST, pp.40, ahd she applies ‘the traditional Gothicpmachinery to the state-

