J60 THE FIRST GDTHICS
414. Singer, Mr. THE MYSTIC CASTLE: OR, THE ORPHAN HEIR. London :
Minerva-Press for Hilliam Lane, 1796.
Modern Reeditions: None
Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (imitation of OTRANTO)
Biographical and Research Data Lév LE ROMAN " "
: y, GOTHIQUE
ANGLAI5, pp.394, 395, 396, 443, 464, 625, 626.
Critical Synopsis: Although utterly ordinary in the majority
of its Gothic effects, one item of horrific paraphernalia stands
out in Mr. Singer's Otrantoesque reproduction. This is the su-
pernatural spectacle of the main coupée or disembodied hand, an
improvement upon the great arm in armor introduced by Walpole
into OTRANTO's collection of supernatural props. with or without
mighty hands to dispense supernatural justice, novels of this
type never failed to please the patrons of the Minerva-Press and
generally sold out rapidly. The plot calls for the parricidal
tyrant of the castle, Lord Mowbray, to cheat his brother, Al-
bert, out of the inheritance and to confine his own wife to an
obscure, underground cell. But with the assistance of the phan-
tom of the assassinated father, the "orphaned" Albert evades his
brother's murder plot and returns to the Mystic Castle after
many years of exile to work out his rightful claim. At the duel
to the death between the rival brothers, the mysterious hand of
justice intervenes right on schedule to deliver the fatal blow
of retribution against the usurping Mowbray. Since the handiwork
of this unknown Gothic novelist shares some features in common
with another anonymous tale of supernatural retribution, THE
ANIMATED SKELETON (see #007), we might speculate that the same
terror-monger was the perpetrator of both Gothics. Their
construction is very similar. Mr. Singer was not awarded the au-
thorship until the Minerva-Press Library'catalogue of 1814.
415. Sleath,Eleanor. THE ORPHAN OF THE RHINE. London 2 Minerva-Press
for William Lane, 1798.
Modern Reeditions: Folio Press, 1968, ed. Devendra P. Varma.
Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (terror elements, Germanic
elements and sublime topographies)
Biographical and Research Data: Sadleir, Michael. THE NORTH-
ANGER NOVELS: A FOOTNOTE TO JANE AUSTEN, English Association
Pamphlet Number 68, November, 1927, pp.22-23; Sunnnrs, GOTHIC
QUEST, pp.29, 146, 152; Tarr, CATHOLICISM IN GOTHIC FICTION,
pp.40-41.
Critical Synopsis: THE ORPHAN OF THE RHINE is the seventh
NORTHANGER novel. Until 1927, when the romance was literally
exhumed from the crates of books in the Hutchinson collection,
it remained a "lost" Gothic. The fascinating account of how
Michael Sadleir located this missing Gothic only by chance while
sifting through the thousands of books in Hutchinson's private
library is one of the great legends of Gothic research. Sadleir
relates the discovery. "In August, 1927, Hutchinson died, and
during September and October the frenzied struggle to classify
and distribute his library was at its height. One evening in
late October, stultified with fatigue and dust, and feeling I
never wanted to see a book again, I was listlessly unpacking

HE FIRST GUTHICS 361
perhaps the hundreth packing case, when my jaded intelligence
suddenly awoke to the fact that I was holding in my hand the
four volumes of THE ORPHAN 0F THE RHINE. Hutchinson, though he
did not know it, had a copy after all." The Gothic rarity that
Sadleir had found is an elegantly composed anthology of Germanic
terror and gloomy topographical grandeur. The descriptions of
, the scenery between the Rhine 'and Salzburg are specinens of
Gothic landscaping par excellence and done with the eye of the
experienced traveller. Mrs. Sleath's management of violent inci-
dent, genealogical procrastinations and complications, and the
allurement of ruins often equals the finesse of Mrs. Radcliffe
herself. Everything about this Gothic romance seems expertly
designed to excite the palate of Jane Austen's Catherine Morland
(see #012) and the legions of lady readers with similar tastes.
The romance is lengthy, but the plot is plain. Even the triad of
inset stories, frequently the downfall of the Gothic plot,
meshes with the heroine's saga. The period is the early Seven-
teenth Century. The locale is the cottage of the sensitive scion
of nature, Julie de Rubine, on the shores of Lake Geneva. Here,
she abides in poetic solitude with her own child, Enrico, until
a second child, the strange and parentless Laurette is presented
to her by Enrico's father, the Marchese de Montferrat. He had
feigned marriage with Julie, then denounced her when she became
pregnant. When Laurette matures, she embarks upon the requisite
pilgrimage of Gothic heroines as she goes in search of the par-
ticulars of her birth and parentage. Accompanied by Enrico, she
makes the Rhine journey moving ever closer to the central mys-
tery within the recesses of the Castle of Elfinbach. Mrs.
Sleath's art of the Gothic tableau vivant reaches a fine pin-
nacle in her treatment of the castle approach scene. "The cas-
tle, which was seated upon an eminence, about a quarter of a
league from the bed of the river, seemed to have been separated
by nature from the habitable world by deep and impenetrable
woods. Two of the towers, which were all that remained entire,
were half secreted in a forest; the others which were mouldering
into ruins, opened into a narrow, uncultivated plain, terminat-
ing in a rocky declivity at the bottom of which flowed the
Rhine, wide, deep, and silent." Sublime architectural decay
builds slowing to a pitch of terror as Laurette, who has been
warned against the Marchese de Montferrat by a white cowled
monk, continues her journey toward identity by penetrating the
castle itself. Spliced into the excursion of the heroine are the
three insets: Julie's recollection of her own Gothic sufferings
at the instigation of Montferrat and her persecution by a wicked
aunt and her gruesome confederate, Vescolini; the sad chronicle
of the abbess, Sister Cecilia, suspected by Julie of being
another of Montferrat's sexual victims and possibly the mother
of Laurette; and the melancholy tale of La Rogue, kept in a
tower by Montferrat and tormented for his amusement. The three
insets relate thematically to the genealogical progress of the
heroine in the main story by way of their pattern of separation,
suffering, and reunion. Moreover, each inset is a kind of Gothic
novel by itself, and one, the ‘abbess‘s story,’ introduces the
familiar threat of incest should Sister Cecilia turn out to be
Laurette's mother. The character La Roque becomes the instrument

I
J62 THE FIRST GOTHICS , HE FIRST GUTHICS J63
for resolving Laurette's identity. Freed from Montferrat's rational displacement to bring its characters to a free and
various schemes and various castles, the orphan of-the Rhine is stable self, Mrs. Sleath's WHO'S THE MURDERER ranks as a model
given her noble birthright by La Roque. She is not Enrico‘s ‘ Gothic in these symbolic respects.
half-sister, but the descendant of an old and honorable' family.
Hith the stigma of incest removed and Montferrat's wickedness , 417. Sleath, Eleanor. THE NOCTURNAL HINSTREL: OR, THE SPIRIT 0F THE
neutralized, Enrico and Laurette marry, then return to their ' HOOD. London : Minerva-Press for A.K. Newman, 1810.
pastoral bliss. In THE ORPHAN OF THE RHINE, the Gothic romance J , Modern Reeditions: Arno Press, 1972, ed. Devendra P. Varma.
reached the epitome of artificiality, but Sadleir's enthusiasm '§ Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (horrific medievalism,
for the work is a fair appraisal of how the book caught and held § ~ situations from Halpole and Reeve)
the fancy of the Gothic reader of the late 1790's. "It is a 1 — Biographical and Research Data: Noske, Frits. "Sound and
strangely attractive absurdity,‘ Sadleir mused, ‘which excites a , Sentiment: The Function of Music in the Gothic Novel," MUSIC
sort of sugary fascination over the reader." , & LETTERS, 62 (1981): 162-175.
416. Sleath,Eleanor. HHO'S THE MURDERER: OR, THE MYSTERY OF THE FOR- Critical Synopsis: This is a routine and competent Gothic
EST. London : Minerva-Press for Hilliam Lane, 1802. .\ romance without any special merit or flaw. Mrs. Sleath derives
Modern Reeditionsz None r pi her supernatural acoustics from the clattering corridors of THE
Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (terror elements) _ u§ CASTLE OF OTRANTO (see #466) and bases her haunted chamber
Biographical and Research Data: Sunnnrs, GOTHIC QUEST, p.368; T iy' scenes on Lovel Castle's awful compartment in Clara Reeve's OLD
Lévy, LE ROMAN "GOTHIQUE“ ANGLAIS, pp.404, 413, 418, 620. j,h ENGLISH BARON (see #355). The adverse situation of the heroine,
\fQ the Baroness Fitzwalter, makes her a Gothic Penelope resisting
5'ltlCdl 5¥"°P5l51 "T5- sledth Seems $0 be Dldyi"9 077 FTd"- ~l§“ as best she can two persistent suitors in the absence of her
cis Lathom's popular Gothic title of 1800, HYSTERV: A NOVEL (see lqdf supposedly deceased husband. lndiscreetly, the Baron had left
#223), but her b°°k l5 1955 d muTd@T mysterl thd" d "EF°i"B'$ L§§¥ his Scottish castle and wife to follow the cause of the
harassed and interrupted search for her origins. As usual, her fia pretender, Perkin Harbeck (see I402). Now, a vociferous spirit
journey takes her from the world of domestic safety into an un- ﬁh seems to be patrolling the hallways of the castle. This same
known world of Gothic danger although there seems to be no dis- ‘ih restless ghost also seems to be responsible for the mournfu
cernible murder as forewarned in the title. Deliberate phoniness , I forest music heard by the Baroness and her cynical lady-in-
in Gothic titling was a routine trick of publishers and authors '5' waiting, Hinifred, at eventide each day. None of these Gothic
alike durius the Gpthit neri<>d- Ghoulish dreams. prpphetic vis- I~’ acoustics, including the nocturnal minstrelsy, is genuinely
ions, cabalistic manuscripts, hooded friars, and secret sessions I‘ supernatural, however, since the Baron is still alive and incog-
of the Inquisition enmesh the heroine, Cecilia, in a more-than- ,V nito as he takes the role of Gothic Odysseus to his wife's
satisfactory Gothic web. Hrs. Sleath's heroine has a specific '1 Penelope. To assuage her grief, Baroness Fitzwalter has adopted
marital 9°51 i" her 5t'"991e t° attdi" ld9"tit¥ 55 5"9 eXPl°r95 ll two children of the forest, Ethelind and Edgar, but their pres-
the 5°t"lC ddTk"9$$- T0 be Hﬂrthy Bf Y0""9 VdTi"°» 5"e muit 9° , ence in the household only annoys the aggressive and scheming
f°'th °" d h°"ifYl"9 j°"T"9! 9° d dark 535119 id the dEPth$ of \‘ suitor, Sir Reginald Harcland. The benign suitor, the Earl of
the forest. Enroute, Cecilia receives the usual Burkean educa- I gsmghd, p111 himself became 3 victim of 51¢ Reginald-5 maChina_
tion into the pleasing terrors of Gothic landscape. Hrs. Sleath tions when he offers to occupy the haunted chamber on a stormy
is especially edrpit at ppsitipuius eedeverous surprises for her evening in order to test the theory that the Baron's ghost walks
herdihe tp run ihtp- At one ppiut. she stumbles upon a corpse in abroad. Sometime during his vigil within the haunted chamber,
3 SBCK» D°59lbly the remains of her own mother. Inconvenient Osmond disappears and tension mounts as Sir Reginald presses his
corpses are often repositories for family secrets in Gothic suit and plots to eliminate all rivals for the Baroness's for-
fl¢ti°"- ce¢lll3'5 d'eddf"l r9""i°" With 3 d9C0mP°59d PdFE"t tune. There are imnediate supernatural responses to the villainy
furnishes the missing information needed to fix her identity. of Reginald,--peripatetic armor, subterranean knockings, ghostly
Her noble father had held heretical views and had placed love music without, and strange stirrings from within the interior of
ahead of church and position by ahsconding with an abbess. These the late Baron's sealed room. This novel may not be Mrs.
deeds naturally aroused the Curiosity pf the Inquisition, but Sleath's best Gothic work, but it is certainly her noisiest. lrl
Cecilia's father was able to convey his daughter to Hadane the midst of all of these portentous events, a stranger clad in
Villeneuve before being arrested, tried, and burned at the the black garb of a pilgrim asks admission to the castle in re-
stake. For the Varano family, the father's higher integrity and turn for which he promises to rid the premises of the disturbing
Cecilia's inherited purity of character make her an acceptable spectre of the dead baron. Then, in a nelodramatic flourish, he
. mate for the young Harquis. Thus, the corpse encounter and its throws aside his black robe and steps forth as the Baron
attendant horrors eventually work to the benefit of the heroine Fitzwalter himself. He had not died after all in his foolhardy
in her quest for security, name, and propriety. To the extent pursuit of Harbeck's cause but he had been banished. -Hence, he
that high Gothic fiction is a form of the success story which had secretly installed himself as nocturnal minstrel and protec-
relies almost exclusively on metaphors of psychic enclosure and tor of the Baroness taking these duties upon himself as a way of

J64
THE FIRST GUTHICS a V Tl-E FIRST GOTHICS 365
recovering lost honor. The villainous Reginald only seemed to less effectual than Mrs. Radcliffe‘s Valancourt and Vivaldi at
have the upper hand, but it had been the baron, through the su- safeguarding the maiden. Eventually (and by obscure means),
pernatural agency of his own ghost who was always in control. ‘ Adelaide gains her release from the haunted castle, but the
His evil now exposed, Reginald is given the penitential garb . external world to which she returns is no safer than the interi-
recently discarded by the Baron and told to hurry to Rome on a I‘ or of the castle. The Count arranges for her arrest and proposes
pilgrimage if he would save his soul. The virtuous suitor, 05- ‘} that she be tortured until she discloses the significance of a
mond, who has now been released from a subterranean cell where 'L§ , diamond ring she B¢Q"l'ed "lthi" the Ca$t]e- The dé"°"eme"t is
Reginald had placed him to pine and starve, generously comes gY so hasty and artificial that it appears that Mrs. Sleath herself
forward to procure a pardon for the Baron from King Henry VII -5 was disappointed at having to allow her heroine to escape the
and to oversee the reunion of the Baron and Baroness. If the f rack and other Gothic Dl€ﬂ5"FE5- Adelaide i5 5PﬂF9d the Tick
hesitation of the reader's reason in the face of such uncanny j only by the timely arrival of a faithful servant who bears aH
events is a desired Gothic response, Mrs. Sleath's Gothic novel , §? of the incriminating information needed to condemn the count and
must be judged a success by way of its effective use of Gothic %‘ extricate the maiden. The saving servant, Jacques, also acts as
acoustics. Instead of the corpse-strewn corridors of HHO'S THE ~§ a Radcliffean explainer when he points out that all of the spec-
MURDERER (see #416), THE NOCTURNAL MINSTREL secures its uncanny .@“ tral happenings at the haunted castle were the ingenious cha-
effects by reverberations of Gothic music. QR rades of the Count's Pyrenean bandits. For the Gothic novel to
i; attain its maximum point of fear, the reader must be made to
8. Sleath, Eleanor. PYRENEAN BANDITT1: A ROMANCE. London : Z‘ feel that the triumph of evil is probable. Except for its desu-
Minerva-Press for A.K. Newman, 1811. Q pernaturalized ending, Mrs. Sleath's PVRENEAN BANDITTI verges on
Modern Reeditions: None ’ just that maximum point.
Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (Radcliffean imitation) ,$
Biographical and Research Data: None $‘ 419. Smith, Catherine. THE CASTLE OF ARAGON: OR, THE BANDITTI OF THE
Y. FOREST. London : Henry Colburn, 1809.
Critical Synopsis: The novel reproduces with a good deal of " ' Modern Reeditions: None
dexterity the stock Gothic situations of Mrs. Radcliffe's ro- “ Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (terror mode, Radcliffean
mances, but does so without resorting to long periods of imitation)
suspense. The principal target of torment is the maiden, Adel- Biographical and Research Data: None
aide De Launé, niece of the unscrupulous and murderous Count St.
Angouléme. His villainy is hardly innovative by Gothic stan- Critical Synopsis: An intricately plotted imitation of Mrs.
dards, but his bad ways and delight in evil make him Mrs. Radcliffe's work, the romance contains only marginal and minimal
Sleath's most dramatic malefactor. Not only does the Count main- terrors. It is mainly a novel of sensibilitty with occasional
tain Adelaide in a perpetual panic, but he also finds joy in Gothic trappings and streamers. The major events of the tale in-
undermining his brother and in spoiling the happiness of his volve Eugenio de Villeroy's relationship with the peasant, Alon-
nephew, Theodore St. Leon. Unlike other members of the swooning [ zo, and his wife, Eleonora, following the Marquis's injury in a
Gothic sisterhood, Adelaide is allowed very little time for carriage accident. He was being pursued by bandits when he was
sublime rhapsodizing or for the suspenseful terrors of land- helped and hidden by Alonzo. Living with Alonzo and Eleonora is
scape. Hers is a harrowing schedule of unmitigated horror with Margaretta, the Gothic heroine of the piece. Her lover, Constan-
her identity, sanity, virginity, and very life menaced in some tine, is likewise pursued, but not by banditti. He is wanted by
way on nearly every page. Mrs. Sleath had very obviously studied the Inquisition and imprisoned in the Castle of Aragon. The
and borrowed the material of Radcliffean Gothic romance but she - romance inches very slowly with innumerable digressions and sub-
had decided to endow the narrative with the atrocious and ~ plots toward the customary genealogical revelations. Constantine
breathless momentum of one of Monk Lewis's plots. Hhisked away T is the noble son of the noble pair living in forest exile, the
by Pyrenean banditti under the Count's control, Adelaide is not cottagers, Alonzo and Eleonora. Margaretta, their ward, is the
even permitted the lingering poetic pause in front of the natural daughter of Eugenio. Sorting out these relationships
haunted castle's frowning facade before she is immured in the takes up the entirety of the fourth volume. The absence of any
dark fortress. Once within, the turns of the screw are many and sustained sequences of high terror make the book a very mediocre
rapid as Adelaide's mind and body are assailed by natural and facsimile of the Radcliffean Gothic romance.
supernatural crises. In a departure from her Radcliffean model,
Mrs. Sleath permits no time to her heroine for apprehension or 420. Smith, Catherine. BAROZZI: OR, THE VENETIAN SORCERESS, A R0-
anticipation. Adelaide's Gothic experiences are innediate, out- MANCE OF THE SIXTEENTH CENTURY. London : Minerva-Press for
_ rageous, and in some cases, as repulsive as Monk Lewis's slimy A.K. Newman, 1815. . '
cellars. The chief peril, as is proper in a high Gothic, is Modern Reeditions: Arno Press, 1977, ed. Devendra P. Varma.
sexual and comes from a magnificently ugly character named Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (terror-horror modes)
Perouse who alternately wants to rape and to rescue Adelaide. Biﬂgfﬂphlﬁﬂl a"d Re$9a'¢" Ditai "°"e
Perouse's opposite, the insipid young hero, Montroi, is even ‘
}€i

366 . THE FIRST GUTHICS ‘ mg F1351 5911-/1(j$ 367
i
l
Critical $.viioosis: Much of the action of this panoramic i disintegrative fantasies of violence, BAROZZI seems a prime ex-
Gothic occurs in what Catherine Smith calls "the horror of the . ample of the darkest impulses of the Gothic imagination. Accord-
ruin.“ Seizures, infanticide, hellish rituals, malignant 1tali- , ing to a modern critic of the G0thic's psychological properties,
ans, are prominent threads in the tapestry of violence., All of 1 uit addressed those parts of the reader's inner life that were
the necessities of Gothic fantasy--especially the necessity to ¢ disordered or fragmented, giving eXDre$$i0n. "vi £0 their 'd°?i
experience vicariously sexual endangerment and release--are pro- J or their best self, but to their fears and anxieties about théir
vided for in this brisk Gothic which appears to draw many of its {T own fragility and vulnerability."
lurid situations from Mary Ann Radcliffe's MANFRONE: OR, THE ' Pii '
ONE-HANDED MONK (see #352). Catherine Smith was herself an iii 421, Smith, Charlotte. EMMELINE, THE ORPHAN OF THE CASTLE. London
actress at the Haymarket Theatre. Her technical familiarity with ﬁhﬂ T, Cadell, 1788. _
the mechanics of Gothic drama appears evident throughout, for *§i Modern Reeditions: Oxford UP, 1971, ed. Anne H. Ehrenpreis.
he? Cehceptieh 0f Whit B Gethic "°Vei sheﬂid d° ihd be i5 ig Gothic Type: Sentimental Gothic (prominent features of the
founded in theatrics and costuming of the most melodramatic QQ hovei of terror)
sort. The titular character of the Venetian sorceress is an out- 74 Biographical and Research Data: Foster, James R. "Charlotte
standing instance. Garbed as the furious Medea, the murderer of G2 Smith: Pre-Romantic Novelist," PUBLICATIONS OF THE MODERN
her own children, “Her robe was of white, bordered with various gﬂ LANGUAGE ASSOCIATION, 43 (1928): 463-475; Tompkins, POPULAR
mystic figures; round her head was entwined a serpent; her long, _f» N0v£L IN ENGLAND, p.266; Foster, HISTORY OF THE PRE-ROMANTIC
black matted hair hung disgustingly on her shoulders while her ii NOVEL IN ENGLAND, pp.242-243; Levy, LE ROMAN 'GOTHlQUE“
piercing, dark eyes rolled beneath the raven locks which half ii, ANGLAIS, pp.202, 250, 612; Magee, William H. ‘The Happy
¢°"¢eeied her fﬂeee ihd Seemed £0 Feed the hearti Of the $UY- id; Marriage: The Influence of Charlotte Smith on Austen," _STUD-
rounding spectators." Along with such Gothic costuming, Smith "1 IES IN THE NOVEL, 7 (1975): 120-132; Stanton, Judith P.
continuously works in sharp, dramatic scenes to convey her "Charlotte Smith's Prose: A Stylistic Study of Four of Her
heroine, Rosalina. through i series of alarming e"i1Y‘eP"1e"i15 at ' Novels," DISSERTATION ABSTRACTS INTERNATIONAL, 39 (1979):
the hands of Augustino, Marquis de Barozzi. The novel opens 5733A (University of North Carolina)
without any gloomy prologue right in the middle of an assault on ‘
Rosalina. Hhen her father, Ferrand St. Elmo, tries to stop the ‘ Critical Synopsis: Although her books are sometimes grouped
'"ffi5"5 from hePi"9 her, he i5 5h@"e'ed 0" 5ta9e i" the $ﬂ"9"i- with the work of the radical and doctrinaire novelists of the
nary manner of Elizabethan drama, dying with a melodramatic 1790's, Gothic features are plentiful enough throughout Mrs.
‘Spare her! 0 spare her! I implore thee!" as he watches the two Smith's fiction to link her with the Gothic novelists. her
bravos drag off his daughter. The initial incident fixes the novels are sentimental, didactic, and revolutionary in their id-
tone and pace of the remainder of the romance. Rosalina is res- eoiogy, but they are also struck through With dlstlhet 9°th‘C
Cued frem °"e the5e Crude ¢aDt0T5, e Na" "emed Rﬂidﬂh, by huQ"5- overtones and with the impulse to Gothify the distresses of her
tino's son, Rosalva Barozzi. Conveyed to a castle near Pyrano by women characters which Mrs. Smith usually holds in check.
Rosalva in hopes of finding refuge. the pair soon f-ice the c0n- EMMELINE anticipates both the scenery and maidenly Cr"lSeS_ of
Ceritriited vengeance of his father. Ausustinu. who would first Mrs. Radcliffe's novels in both its pictorial and psychological
torture and then slay both. The castle interior is cranned with qualities. The heroine, Emmeline has an almost pathological
every kind of Gothic stage machinery,--floating daggers, amor- craving for fearful situations and is even confined to a castle
phous-or shape-changing chambers, sliding panels, and in one by her miscreant guardian, Montreville. J.M.S. Tompkins Correct-
remote wing of the castle, a female corpse bedecked in white ly credits Charlotte Smith and not Mrs. Radcliffe with the
robes. In yet another hidden apartment of the castle, Augustino perfettioh of the maiden-centered Gothic romance in her observa-
is found in conclave with the Venetian sorceress as the pair tion that "it is Charlotte Smith who first begins to explore in
perform some obscene blood ritual. Suddenly, the floor of the fiction the possibilities of the Gothic castle. Her Enneline is
chamber of horrors gives way and a vindicating figure brandish- the first heroine whose beauty is seen glowing against that grim
ing a bloody scroll accuses the Marquis of his crimes and is background, or who is hunted along the passages at night.“ Em-
aided in this stroke of divine retribution by the sorceress meline's prison, the great C8$1i8 Of Mﬂlhreye Bhhlelpﬂtei the
herself. The novel ends with the trial of Augustino Barozzi. castles of Mrs. Radcliffe's Italy, but ChBFi°§te Smith has ?°t
Swiftly and smoothly, the wheels of justice begin to turn in willing to endow the castle with the properties of terror which
favor of Rosalina and Rosalva, and in the climactic revelation, the building always has in the high Gothic. L1kB_ other aspects
the Venetian Sorceress abjures her magic and her wicked costume of the plot, the castle setting remains marginally Gothic as
to step forth as the mother of Rosalina. The court is told that Charlotte Smith flirts with current Gothic fashions but finally
Rosalina's father was a twin brother to Augustino. Thus, we refuses to permit the story .to become totally Gothic. The
_again find a Gothic writer conforming to one of the horror nov- particulars of the story involve Emneline in a search to estab-
el's most testworthy formulas, the detection and exposure of the lish her heritage in the face of adversary relatives bent upon
homicidal relative. Hdth Augustino on the rack and Rosalina at her ruin, Her persistence eventually wins her the ownership gf
the altar, Mrs. Smith's gore-stained curtain descends. In its Mowbray Castle, an acquisition which symbolizes the heroine S

J68 THE FIRST GUTHICS 1 THE FIRST GBTHIES 359
gaining of a mature self. Enneline is the single daughter of a glass." This setting is highly appropriate to the heroine's
deceased nobleman whose vile and profligate brother has made a passion for ruins and her penchant for mysterious entanglements.
career out of inpeding her heritage and happiness. She is some- Reviewing Ethelinde's Gothic patterns, we know exactly what
times consoled in her trials by her handsome cousin, Delamere, - Wordsworth was inveighing against in his complaint against
who declares his love for her and arouses the wrath of his fa- , "frantic novels“ that indulged in a "degrading thirst after
ther, Montreville, by doing so. Garnished with a little blood, . outrageous stimulation.“ The tale begins with a romantic encoun-
cadaverous activity, and spectral mayhem, these circumstances . I ter between Ethelinde Chesterville and Charles Montgomery be-
C°“ld l"5ia"taneously be transformed into the high Gothic, In '1 heath the shadowy battlements of Castle Newenden on the rustic
due course, Montreville arranges to separate his son and niece K strand of Lake Grasmere. The castle has a gloomily _invitlng
by "aVl"§ E"“E]i"e ‘°cked "P within Mowbray Castle. This is , interior abounding in the paraphernalia of horrid thrill: leg-
treated as one gruesome, yet edifying, episode in the progress “ ends of evil, unaccountable noises, a restless portrait gallery,
of the heroine toward her marital destiny. Mowbray Castle is » ' and an abandoned chapel reputed to be haunted. In addition to
neither haunted nor awfully sublime as would be the case in high these Gothic provocations, Ethelinde and Charles are diverted by
Gothic fiction, although it does have some inexplicable noises j the reclusive lady of the lake, a spectral figure of perplexing
and suspicious comings and goings by night. For Mrs. Smith, the "i 0Fl9l"5 and a m9la"Ch°ly hl$t0ry- T"l$ 5°r*°"f“l °'eat"'e
Gothic castle is still a purely decorative, antique site, not a 3~1 finally turns out to be Charles's alienated mﬂther, a fact
Udolphoesque (see #349) arena of suffering. Emmeline is removed ]5 reserved for the geneal09l¢al 5Ettlem@"t l" the fl"al ChaPt9'5-
from Castle Mowbray by her uncle when he attempts to Cogrgg her fﬁl Having gone off to India, Charles eventually returns to the lake
to marry several unattractive suitors, but she counters Montre- 1' district to reclaim Ethelinde from her Gothic preoccupations and
ville's schemes by escaping with Delamere. But since the two , the two make a marriage founded on common sense at last. Al-
fugitives are cousins, marriage is out of the question. By a v’ though Charlotte Smith gives her readers a prolonged glimpse of
stroke of coincidence, Emmeline is declared the rightful heir of 35, the Gothic world that lies behind the domestic curtain, she also
Mowbray Castle and its riches. She can now assert her authority '¢- sees to it that the virtues of reason and rural retirement
over Montreville by forcing him to relinquish the castle, symbol triumph over the pleasures of Gothic chaos at the end. What is
of selfhood. Now become a lady of wealth and property, she is a A missing, of course, in Charlotte Smith's halfway or borderline
fitting wife for the fine gentleman, Godolphin. The potential »} Gothicism is a well-developed Gothic villain. But all of the
Gothicism of the story scarcely needs emphasis. with the excep- Q, other prerequisites of terror are present.
t10ﬂv of supernatural trappings, Mrs. Smith was writing muted 5
versions of the Radcliffean Gothic romance immediately prior to ’ 423. Smith, char]Dtte' THE OLD MANOR H9U5E- L°"d0" I J- Bell, 1793-
the entrance of Mrs. Radcliffe herself on the literary scene. Modern Reeditions: Oxford UP, 1959- Ed» A""E "- EhFa"P'9l5;
| Garland Publishing, 1974.
422. Smith, Charlotte. ETHELINDE: OR, THE RECLUSE OF THE LAKE. ‘ Gothic Type: Sentimental Gothic (polemical and didactic ele-
London : T. Cadell, 1789. , ments)
Modern Reeditions: None Biographical and Research Data: Ellis, Catherine. “Charlotte
Gothic Type: Sentimental Gothic (anticipates Radcliffean Smith's Subversive Gothic," FEMINIST STUDIES, 3 (1976): 51-
Gothic romance) 55; Fry, Carroll Lee. CHARLOTTE SMITH, POPULAR NOVELIST. New
Biographical and Research Data: Mac Carthy, B.G. THE LATER York I Ar"0 PTe55» 1939-
HOMEN NOVELISTS 1744-1818. Oxford : B.H. Blackwell, 1947;
Rogers, Katherine M. 'Inhibitions on Eighteenth-Century Homen Critical 5y"0P5l51 CTl1i¢5 a"d 9e"9'al 'ead@T5 a9'9@ that THE
Novelists: Elizabeth Inchbald and Charlotte Smith,“ EIGHT- OLD MANOR HOUSE is the best of Charlotte Smith's nine novels.
EENIH-CENTURY STUDIES, 11 (1977): 63-78. Hhile it contains other elements besides an inuressive Gothic
atmosphere and reflects Mrs. Smith's serious social concerns,
Critical Synopsis: If Mrs. Smith's EMMELINE (see ;421) is on its popularity and anneal lie in its "v§¢@"§lbl@ a°thl¢l§m;“
the borderline between sentimental pathos and Gothic mystery, Radﬁllffean aPPafat"5 l5 Pl9"tlf"l a"d lntrlcate. a"d, l"
her next fiction is avowedly Gothic in tone and execution. Each contrast to many l"f@Tl°T 5°thl¢5 °f the 1790's "here the ma‘
of the architectural perspectives has as much Gothic sensibility chinery often has nothing to do with the narrative, lt is
as any of Mrs. Radcliffe's castellated nightmares. The following structurally integral t° the 5t°rie5 °f 9rla"d° a“d M°"lmia- The
passage is from the imagination of Smith's Ethelinde although it ancient estate of Rayla"d Ma"°' i5 Preslded QVET by the Pr°"d
could easily be Radcliffe's Emily st. Aubert in THE MVSTERIES or ddwaser. Mrs- Rayland. a splendidly drawn Character df dld age
UDOLPHO (599 #349)1 'Th9 abbey. Emb0$0med among the hills, and defending its dignity. As the voracious family lawyers and other
-half concealed by old elms which seemed coeval with the build- fortune hunters gather like vultures to await her demise, an
ing, appeared with its Gothic windows, and long pointed roof of honorable but ingenuous young man named Orlando enters the situ-
a pale grey stone, bearing everywhere the marks of great antiq- ation and takes up duties as the informal protector of Mrs. Ray-
uity. In some of the windows the heavy stone work still re- land's family interests. Orlando's major act of generosity seems
malﬂed, and they were totally darkened at the top by stained to be the love bond he forms with Monimia, an orphan befriended
3%%$

370 THE FIRST GUTHICS , T}£ FIRST EOTHICS 371
by the old lady. The name of the heroine, incidentally, is taken 4 event of the era had been expressed in DESHOND (1792), an epis-
dlreitly TTOM lhOm5$ 9tW3¥'5 5eV@"t9@"th'°e"t"'Y'traded! THE \ tolary novel passionately defending the Revolution and attacking
ORPHAN (1680) by way of Smollett's Monimia in THE ADVENTURES OF ~ Burke's conservatism. In D'Alonville, the banished man of the
FERDINAND COUNT FATHOM (595 #437l- 5e¢'Et 9"Emie5 iOO“"d title, we have a sensitive émigré who has seen the revolution
thF°"9h°"t thl$ "OV@l- M'5- Rillohd l5 abused by the 5"l"dll"9 turn upon and devour its own children. In D'Alonville's flight
lanlera RORET, ahd deceived by the hYPOOTltlCBl Ol@'9yma"r DT- ‘l from the mad excesses of the Reign of Terror may be seen Char-
Nollyhourn; Nonimia arouses the sexual aggressiveness of the I lotte's Smith's own retreat from an unqualified support for the
rake. Belgrave; Orlando himself is the unwitting victim of > purifying cataclysm of the Revolution. Through the wanderings,
General Tracy who posts the young man to the American wars in Cw, perils, and disillusionments of D‘Alonville, she conveys her in-
order to have access to Orlando's sister. The chief Gothic j dignation over the betrayal of republican ideals by the dema-
scenes are the nocturnal liaisons of Orlando and Monimia in the ' gogues and powerseekers_ The book, then, is a political Gothic
vast network of rooms in the old manor house overflowing with ‘ 1 with the haunteu ggcigty taking the role of the haunted castle
tremors. creaks. and nearly human sions- In the best Radcliffean “ and the tumbril-filled streets of Paris substituted for the
tTﬂdltlO", $Om9 OT th95E SOOHO5 one EXPl6l"EO BWBY H5 the "OFk ghost-crowded corridors of the dark fortress. The characters too
of a party of smugglers who use the deserted mansion as a hide- L are figures in Mrs. Smith's ideological allegory. Besides
out. The wind roars and the lightning flashes on cue when 0rlan- ijﬁ D'Alonville, there is the freethinking Englishman, Ellesmere,
do makes his way to Monimia's chamber by way of a secret passage l]Vif the Polish spokesman for liberty, Carlowitz, and the fugitive
in the times before he goes off to war in the Americas, there to ii‘? aristocrat, De Tourange, who has seen the work of Robespierre's
be taken orisoner by the Iroquois on the 5t- Lavrence- Escaving l l?i death squads. D'Alonville himself represents an altered liberal
from his Indian captors and returning to the old manor house, l '/ view gf the neeessity for revolution as a proper means of SOClﬂl
Orlando finds all changed and the vanished Monimia in need of a l V, i"pf°yeme"t_ when he'dangeruusly returns to France from England,
ChimPlO"- BETOFE her death» Old MF$- Rﬂylohd hid made 9rlﬂ"dO 5 he is arrested by the revolutionary tribunal at Rennes and is
her beheflﬁlﬂryi but the 5lY l3"¥eTs ROKEF. hid Suhverted the .'§h only saved from the guillotine by the intervention of his broth-
nill- Acting quickly. Orlando liberates Nonimia from a cruel 7iT er. After reuniting De Tourange with his wife and daughter, he
d°m@5tl¢ 5e'Vlt"d9 With 5 mllllhers the" Ol5EOV9F5 the true Will Vlw= returns to a reactionary but far safer England to marry Angelina
with the assistance of the housekeeper, Mrs. Leonard. Thus, the KKK he Tourange and to enjoy domestic tranquillity. The novel is
novel's concluding chapters efficiently rectify all adversity ,‘,h notable for its politicization of Gothic situations and stress-
‘ \
through the Gothic device of the lost will found and the heroine
N.
es. The terror is no longer distant, remote, and historically
freed. Three successful Victorian Gothicists, William Harrison $1 removed; it is contemporary and nearby and it involves the
Ainsworth, Charles Reade, and Hilkie Collins, acknowledged their Us intellect as well as the body, for its chief spectres are the
extensive debt to THE OLD MANOR HOUSE. The book also drew the {Z ideas embodying the Revolution itself now become the new mon-
atte"tl°" °f the Ame'l¢3" 5°thlC "°V9ll5ts l5ﬂﬁ€ Mlt5hell- 1" lh’ sters of humankind. Finally, the title implies a grim irony. The
THE ASILUMI OR» ALONZO AND MELISSA (1811), Mitchell included 6 Fl "banished man“ is not only wanted and under sentence of death by
revolutionary war sequence. 3“ the republican government, he is also ‘banished’ from his former
424. Smith, Charlotte. THE BANISHED MAN. London : T. Cadell and H

ii
lofty ideals of liberty, equality, and fraternity.
°“'l@$~ 1794- Qvl 425. Smith, Charlotte. MARCHHONT. London = Sampson Low, 1196.
“°de'" Reedltl°"5i N°"9 i Modern Reeditions: None
GOthl¢ Type: Political Gothic (terrors of the French RevOlu- " Gothic Type: Sentimentalized Gothic (various Radcliffean de-
t]°") _ vices and effects)
Biographical and Research Data: Foster, HISTORY OF THE PRE- Biographical and Research Data: Foster, HISTORY OF THE PRE-
ROMANTIC ncvst IN ENGLAND, p.247; Fry, carroll Lee. CHARLOTTE ROMANTIC NOVEL IN ENGLAND. no-248-249; Turner, Rufus Paul
SHIT". POPULAR NOVELl$T- New York = Arno Press. 1980; Paul— "Charlotte Smith (1749-1806): Some New Light on Her Life and
son. Ronald- "Gothic Fiction and the French Revolution.“ Literary career," DISSERTATION ABSTRACTS, 27 (1965): 189A
JOURNAL OF ENGLISH LITERARY HISTORY, 48 (1981): 532-554 (University of Southern California); Rogers, Katherine N-
"lnhibitions on Eighteenth-Century Women Novelists: Elizabeth
Critical Synopsis: In 1794. Mrs. Smith published THE NNNOER- lnchbald and Charlotte Smith," EIGHTEENTH-CENTURY STUDIES, 11
INGS or HARHICK, a sequel to THE oto MANOR nous: (see 0423) (1917), 53-78,
which traces the adventures of Orlando's brother-in-law, and THE
BANISHED MAN, a bold critique of the terrors of the French Critical Synopsis: In MARCHMONT, Mrs. Smith achieved a syn-
Revolution. The dark streets of Paris running with blood, the thesis of domestic and Gothic fiction, a convergence of the
crash of the guillotine, and the collapse of revolutionary imaginary horrors of Gothic fantasy and the real_horrors of
‘deals ‘"‘° 3 m°ra55 °f m°b Vl°le"CE were eV9"t5 that "at"'OllY domestic life during an era of revolution and reaction. In one
found their way into Gothic fiction in the late 1790's. Mrs. of the sequences of action, she also included her philosophical
Smith's liberal Vie'5 °f the F'e"¢h ReV°l"tl°" 55 the r@d99"l"9 reservations about the tyrannical direction of the French

372 THE FIRST GOTHICS , ms FIRST GUTHICS 173
Revolution, a didactic strain she had previously introduced in 1 _ Biographical and Research Data: None
THE BANISHED MAN (see #424).The title, "Marchmont" refers to a
family, to a young man who attempts to maintain the decent 1. Critical Synopsis: The nostalgic and slow-moving Gothic lo-
family name against ruthless schemers, and to the decaying 3 cates its story in fifteenth-century France. Even so, there are
family mansion at Eastwoodleigh, the habitat of ghosts and other ‘ “Q overtones throughout of the more recent “times of terror"
unnatural phenomena. To the "haunted" house of Marchmont comes S spawned by the Revolution. Numerous details of plot and atmos-
the heroine, Althea Dacres, sentenced by her angry father to be 1 ‘ ' phere appear to be taken intact from earlier Gothics which used
incarcerated within this foreboding ruin until she consents to § the suggestive horrors of the French Revolution to maintain a
marry her father's monstrous lawyer, the coarse and brutal Mr. 1: climate of terror. The situations of Francis Lathom's MIDNIGHT
Mohun. Unknown to Althea, young Mr. Marchmont has also taken up § BELL (see #227) are brought to bear on Smith's émigré heroine,
secret residence in the ruined home in order to avoid a swarm of HY Laura. Montauban itself is less a medieval jail than a gruesome
avaricious creditors directed by one of Mrs. Smith's most memor- § reflection of the Bastille or one of the Republic's jails
able Gothic demons, the attorney, Mr. Vampyre. The concentration ’@ crowded with condemned aristocrats.
of evil in a diabolically intelligent male character reflects Ef
Mrs. Smith's acceptance of the need for this type of character R 427. Smollett, Tobias. THE ADVENTURES OF FERDINAND COUNT FATHOM,
in making her work marketable for a Gothic readership. Vampyre f London : H. Johnson, I753.
foreshadows Dickens's voracious lawyers and inhuman profession- T ', Modern Reeditions: Greenberg Press, 1926, ed. Ernest Boyd;
als who feed off the monetary misfortunes of good characters, ’“ Oxford UP, 1971, ed. Damian Grant.
--Mr. Tulkinghorn in BLEAK HOUSE (1852) would be an analogous 1 : Gothic Type: Picaresque fiction (several heavily pre-Gothic
personality. Althea experiences an array of supernatural sounds ~ episodes)
and sights, all caused by the hidden fugitive, Mai-cmraiit. Dis- ~ Biographical and Research Data: Foster. HISTORY OF THE PRE-
covered at last, Marchmont and Althea form a lover's alliance, ‘ ROMANTIC NOVEL IN ENGLAND, pp.93, I25, I30; Almirall, Cather-
then flee from the ruined castle together in what must have been ine L. "Smollett's 'Gothic': An Illustration,“ MODERN LAN-
a satisfying sequence of images for Gothic readers, the two wor- GUAGE NOTES, 68 (I953): 408-410; Hart, Francis R. "Scottish
thy victims released from the chamber of horrors. But more sepa- ‘ . Variations of the Gothic Novel,“ in THE SCOTTISH NOVEL FROM
rations and distresses lie ahead for the young lovers, for in SMOLLETT TO SPARK. Cambridge, MA : Harvard UP, 1975, pp.13-
Mrs. Smith's vision, the return from the Gothic world to the ‘ 30.
social world brings no assurance of safety. Marchmont goes to
France just as the Terror is reaching its pinnacle, witnesses ‘ Critical Sy"°P5l5= Sevefﬂl eDi50d@5 in 5m0T1Ett'5_'09"§ "°V-
all the horrors, loses his Rousseauistic idealism, experiments el, COUNT FATHOM, are often mentioned by literary historians of
with country living, and finally reenters repressive English so- ‘ the Gothic as antecedents to the novel of terror. Although the
ciety, even if this means surrendering to Vampyre and his brood ~ novel belongs centrally to the picaresque tradition and is over-
of bill collectors. Meanwhile, Althea's own sufferings continue laid with Smollett's own especially grotesque sense of comedy
upon the death of her father and the abrogation of her inheri- its incipient Gothicism cannot be dismissed. Structurally and
tance by Mohun. But a stroke of sudden wealth for both Marchmont thematically, the novel is picaresque, but stylistically it pre-
and Althea, a ploy used on countless occasions by the Victorian sages the Gothic in many passages. The spooky forest scenery in
novelists to extricate their good characters, transforms a tense Chapter 20 which so alarms the rascally Count, the episode in
and sad tale into a success story. Vanpyre's vicious campaign to the graveyard during which Monimia seems to return to the
ruin Marchmont is blunted when Mr. Desborough, a benevolent despairing Rinaldo from the dead, Fathom's horrified gropings
creditor who despises the methods of Vampyre, comes forward with inside the hut of the robbers, and several of the Count's other
a bequest. Althea also obtains a large inheritance from an misadventures have genuine Gothic possibilities noticed and
equally mysterious source. In this happy conclusion, we can see adapted by the Gothic novelists. Count Fathom himself, however,
Charlotte Smith's concession to a mandatory narrative formula. cannot be considered a Gothic character. He is a typical picaro
Her strongest achievement in MARCHMONT and elsewhere is her or scoundrel. He is the bastard son of an unknown soldier and a
conception of the novel as medium for thinking through and test- harlot. As he grows up, he learns to live by "I5 Tuffia" "'t5
ing the volatile ideas of a dangerous decade. To this end, she and to live off society like all the rest of the predators. He
understood that the most appealing social theories often have a is a womanizer, a seducer, a cheater, a double dealer, and has
darker side that could best be expressed through the various deserted from two armies before the age of twenty-one. Set in
modes of the Gothic. contrast to Count Fathom are the novel's two most Gothic charac-
ters, Monimia and Rinaldo, the virtuous victims pf the scoun-
426.' Smith, Julia. THE PRISON OF MONTAUBAN: OR, TIMES OF TERROR, A drel's callousness. Fathom's bullying and self-indulgence never
REFLECTIVE TALE- L°"d°" 1 CTﬂdd°¢k, 1810. reach the evil proportions of the Gothic hero-yillain, however.
Modern Reeditions: None His hard life has taught him to return bad for good, which he
Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (terror mode, bluebook qual- does by attempting come between Rinaldo and Monimia. Although
It!) the rape attempt fails, Monimia pretends death out of disgrace,

42
374 TIE FIRST GUTHICS l THE FIRST GOTHICS 375
w
thus giving Rinaldo an opportunity to visit her grave on two Q which, though delightful t° °hi9Ct5 07 it, is yet 9@"e'd11¥
successive nights and there encounter her ghost in ‘the book's T553] t° th°5E "h" P055955 it-' Ahd Yet, her C°Pl°"5 tedri are
most Gothic episode, The amorous phantom appears, approaches the matched or exceeded by the weeping males of this very wet senti-
tomb and the weeping Rinaldo, but proves on closer inspection to Q mental Gothic. Mr. Charles Belford, one of her Several Seducersi
be the living and forgiving Monimia. Like the anxious maidens of her father, the Earl of Somerset, her father's tenant, the old
the high Gothic romance later in the century, Rinaldo's cadav- farmer, Norris. and even her Physician. Dr- Willis. cry just as
erous rendezvous had been the deceiving product of his over- l I easily and just as dften- Henry ha¢ken1ie's THE "AN OF FEELING
wrought senses. "The uncunnon darkness of the night, the solemn (see #260) is the chapbook's obvious model but the model itself
silence and lonely situation of the place, conspired with the . is outstripped hY the f1°0d Bf tEdF5 heFBi"- 500d 90thiC ﬂ0V€l5
occasion of his coming and the dismal images of his fancy, to , usual develop ways of drying the tears of their characters with
produce a real rapture of gloomy expectation." All of the appre- a little hell-fire, but SOMERSET CASTLE dries no eyes with
hensive conditions of a Radcliffean corpse revival are put in I “ episodes of terror. Instead, the characters all drown in their
place by Smollett forty years before Mrs. Radcliffe's Gothic li- own sensibilities. There is practically no plot to go with the
aisons. Smollett died in 1771. Had he lived and written later in i exaggerated ueening- Lady Harriet is forced to a beggar's exist-
the Eighteenth century, he might well have become the master of enee by her family after her illegitimate pregnancy is discov-
the Scottish Gothic novel. ‘ ered. Her path leads to the charnel setting depicted in the il-
lustration "where were intermixed heaps of bones and remnants of
8. Soane, George. KNIGHT DAEMON AND ROBBER CHIEF. London : Sher- a EDff,"s_ Death seemea to call MPO" her fr0m ail Sides-" her
wood, Neely, and Jones, 1313, death causes her seducer, Mr. Belford, to dissolve into a tidal
Modern Reeditions: None . wave of tears followed by suicide: "And would you have me,‘
Gothic Type: Rauberroman and Ritterroman (sham translation ‘; replied Belfurd. with a qlddny wildness; ‘would you have he live
from the German) a moment after having deprived you not only of your honour, but
Biographical and Research Data; None 1 your reputation? Ah! Lady Harriet, I am thy murderer--I am.’ A
rivulet of tears streaned from his eyes and he fell senseless at
critical synopsis; Like giddons-5 REGINALD og Toogy (See 4 \ her feet." Clearly, a little hell-fire would have dried out this
#412) or Ball's THE BLACK ROBBER (see #011), this Gothic derives 0 little Gothic and made it almost readahle- Perhaps realiling
its material from German Gothicism. Sources in Goethe, Schiller, l belatedly that he had saturated rather than terrified the read—
Vulpius, and de Motte-Fouqué are all visible. Soane had trans- , d ET. the Chdpboﬂkeh Pdﬁhed Plenty 07 tE'F°T l"t° the fiiiér 5t0-
lated portions of Goethe's FAUST and was fluent in all forms of oi Ty, GHOST AND N0 GHOST-
contennorary German literature from Sturm und Drang sentimental-
ity to the wildest effusions of Gothicvfantasy. His robber ro- ‘ ' 439- 5°mEr59t> H9"F¥- JAQUELINE UF ULZENBERGI OR, FINAL RETRIBUTl0"-
mance is a fusion of the bandit sagas and Schauerromane or Ger- ‘uf L°"¢°" 1 chdPPlE and R- D"tt0", 1390-
manic Gothics. The supernatural theme is carried by the spectral i. "Oder" Reeditivnsi None
huntsman-rider or knight daemon; the natural Gothic terror is . f Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (Schauerromantik features,
assigned to the doings of the bandit chief. The Ritterroman In imitation of THE MONK)
o
I -l
romance of ghostly chivalry and the Rauberroman had not previ ha Bi°9*dPhi¢di d"d Re5ed'Ch Data! LéV¥= LE RQMAN "GOTHIQUE"
ously been combined until Soane's work. if ANGLAI5, PD-419-429, 540-
429. SOMERSET CASTLE: OR, THE FATHER AND DAUGHTER, A TRAGIC TALE To lo’ Critical 5yndvsis= A feniniled version of the Ambrosio story
HHICH [S ADDED GHO$T AND no GHOST; OR, THE DUNGEON, London ; “» derived from Lewis's THE MONK (see I244), the novel is a work of
T, Maiden for Ann Lemoine and J, Row, 1304_ J sheer and unremitting horror. Elements of Matilda's character
Modern Reeditions: None " and activities also figure into the portrait of the demonic
Gothic Type; Gothic chaphook (composite Gothic plagiarigmg) i female. The fall and damnation of Jaqueline after a career of
Biogra hical and Research Data; hone atrocious crimes and lustful rannages has a special energy about
P . . . .
i
it as the lmitator of THE MONK climaxes the romance by offering
Critical Synopsis: Sold at six pence, the Gothic chapbook is I the reader a glinmse through the gates of hell. Like Lewis's
a reduction of many of the sensibility themes of Gothic fiction. i strong G0thlC fihdle ih THE "QNK. the ddmﬂdtiﬂh Of Jdqdellhe i5
The frontispiece illustration is a graveyard vignette showing a . rendered on an Olympian or cosmic scale as she is hurled from
weeping maternal figure seated on a sarcophagus which overflows E the celestial heights to the burning depths in a plunge reminis-
with skulls. There are heaps of bones interlaced with upward- ,h cent uf Satan's expulsion frvn heaven- Levis- shuns hnbrdsie's
-gazing toads at her feet. The Shakespearean epigraph advi5es.the ' Q: slow death on the cliffs of the Sierra Morena. Somerset follows
reader, ‘If you have tears, prepare to shed them now.’ The weep~ Q his female sinner into the maw of hell itself bringing the
ing lady is Harriet Somerset, the ultimate woman of feeling. Her i reader to the same diabolic cul-de-sac as Beckford's Vathek
life and death are lachrymose monuments to "a sensibility which Q reaches when the hero is conveyed before the throne of Eblis.
' ‘k h l f M‘lt ' L "f ‘F thoms and millions of
is more frequently the source of pain than of pleasure, and ﬁ Ll E t E D ""99 ° l 9" 5 "ﬁl er. d
2
r
iii

376
fathoms Jaqueline Fe‘, Sh THE FIRST GUTHICS inc FIRST GDTHICS J77
fi d ' - - - e was r d l ‘
Stfsgsiedﬁxgthbggnef to the portals gfehgllflgﬁg :iri§§"J“"9 Plained supernatural ending suggests the mediocre Quality of the
being driven into thz:S,t::; the gates werg- opened an? :2: chapbook as a whole.
f G ~ - , » ose up h F
o othic finale which leaves Satan angn er forever" Thls type 433 THE SPECTRE MOTHER: OR, THE HAUNTED TOHER. London : Dean and
the ' ' "Gt ‘ -
good ::gV§;3?Du:ndd which depicts the final Eigtoiz o$°"‘Y$‘ °f Munday, 1309*.
Gothic literat 6 vantages over milder farms of retr_beV! °v?r Modern Reeditions: None g
ure' I “t‘°" 1" i Gothic Type: Gothic Chapbook
431. Somerset Henry MARTY" OF FE Biographical and Research Data: None
’ - NROSE:
3:322; kg:g?€_I R: Dutton, 1B01_ OR’ THE WIZARD AND THE Critical Synopsis: The gaudy little 30—page chapbook converts
Gothic Type_ Aggﬁ. None Mrs. Radcliffe's Montoni from THE MY§TERI§S OF UDOLPHQ (see
German Sourée erroman (speculative, sham transiati #349) into the villainous Moresco. His evil appearance is con-
Biugraphi I 5, terror mode) °" f'°m fined to a single sentence: "The long dark cloak which shrouded
ca and Research Data: Sunmers GOTHIC QUE; his gigantic figure and the sable plume of feathers that waved
    .. ' “  1:  "F M: “.f§?eR§f.§l‘l§l¥i;" izisi. :12.  
if' - ' ve 0 hi ' e ar corri or v w mur ere e
cOa?g' 5:: S529]? a]]E9ed edition of the Iiﬁregfzoiot been yer‘ young woman, Julia, while she slept with a child in her arms.
the bibiingra h ocated in the New York Society Librgre r°mance This deed was apparently motivated by a combination of sheer
THE Gorwrc Qugser S search continues. According :0 SJ althouﬂh annoyance at the sight of female beauty and the pleasure attend_
sources was cond, Qmersetls Sham translation from Ge unmers in ant upon assaulting a helpless human being. Pleased with the
1801, for its §m"e°.bY_ THE CRITICAL REVIEW for rgantferror deed, Moresco was just about to add the child to his list of
viewer further ““lt]Pll¢1ty of oath; and biasphemies EpTEmberI victims when the spectre of the freshly-slain Julia interposed
absoiutei t Cumvlained that "The German dramati t ' he re‘ itself. These terrific haPPenings are accomplished in a matter
y ou ~heroded_» S s are here of three paragraphs. Near the end of the chapbook, the reader
432. learns of a third motive for Moresco's murder of Julia. He had
THEo":2gTHE$N HTOHER: OR, CONJUGAL SACRIFICE AND RETRIB been hired by Count Ruvello, brother of Julia's dead husband, to
Moder" éeeaitgrsti 1802. UTI9N- remove her as an obstacle to the inheritance. Quite unexplainab-
Guthic Type_ G°Q5; N°"e ly, Moresco is married to a beautiful, gentle, and compassionate
Biographic i o hic Chapbook (72-page shillin Sh k woman, Angela Modeni. He would not expect such a creature to be
a and Research Data: None g Dc er) married at all, much less to a lady of these qualities, though
critical S no . _ i we would expect him to be a tormentor of the type. She had once
sembiage of tgrrpsis. The chapbook consists of a pla iar‘ d been the ward of Marchioness di Montmorenci and was loved by the
Ciaiiy THE R0MANgE g€tdllS from Mrs. Radcliffe'§ roman ‘ze as‘ March1oness's son before she was abducted and confined to a cave
Siciiian Cast] THE FOREST (see #348). The settiﬁs’ ?Spe_ by Moresco and Ludovico. Angela must have seen every possible
teenth centur eailthe Castle of Farnesi, at the end of gh IS. 3 Gothic site which fifteenth-century Italy had to offer, since
lights whiCh¥écc ‘of the wickedness as well as tn e Fif' Moresco has locked her in turrets, crypts, and a chain of gloomy
be the work of L §s‘°"‘?'Y apﬂﬁdr in the southern tower e welrd castles extending from Milan to Naples. Hhile occupying the
Louisa and Aiteg Y gulia, the stepmother of the two hproye to haunted tower of one of these prisons, Angela is visited by the
Mondart is also €.k he character of the cruel governes Broines, spectre mother who then performs the normal function of guiding
heruinegl enfor a en directly from Mr;_ Radc]iffelS cS'tMad°me the heroine downward "into an immeasurable chasm" which leads to
master, Aiberto ceq seclusion is broken once when Ln as 5' Ire a vault, which leads to a secret door, which leads to the _out.
shudders h . I gives a grind ball. During the b 1] e castle S side world and momentary safety. Enroute through the labyrinth,
effects :"Stgieks, strange movements, and even st? , there ére the spectre mother shows her a bloody dagger bearing Moresco's
baii to meet Zléguthern tower. Count Tivoli, who h::g:gm;'§"t‘"9 name,--as if further confirmation about the dangerous character
Radciiffeis THE l;g£Iand count Vivaldi (the name taken fr 0 the of her husband were needed at this point. Coming to the surface,
remain in resid A“, see #350), who escorts Louisa um Mrs‘ Angela finds that the spectre mother has taken her through a
the Southern toweencg to investigate and solve the m :t vow ta tunnel that connects directly with the grand house of the Mont-
the women disap e ' ut d?'l"9 their stay at the casti: §r1eS of morencis. The heroine is both released and relieved and suppos-
iy puiis all ofﬂtﬁr. Hastily and coarsely, the chapbgokeroth of edly the reader shared in her raptures at this miraculous deliv-
resoiutiun when itese divergent threads into a singie attrouQh- erance. Haiting for Angela at the end of the tunnel is her be-
. to the Marquis b tlS]T9VEilEd that Julia is not onl Enf gr" °f loved Montmorenci. Also waiting for her are sunlight, marriage,
mother‘ Her gctu _a so the Probable murderer of the §lthfU? and the welcome news that Moresco has fallen off a battlement
to have the tﬂ with a local gang of robbers made ‘t Sisters and been killed. Hithin the alloted thirty pages, the‘ Goth met
over appear haunted. The feebleness ; "e§@ssary every criterion of the shilling shocker bringing fast pleasure
0 th'S 9*" to the reader and quick profit to the publisher.

376 _
f U‘ THE FIRST EUTHICS THE FIRST GDTHICS 377
a oms Jaqueline fell. . . . Sh -
flehdss 6"d borne to the pO:t:?: r:gEgg]?e1§:d by _e*“TtT"9 plained supernatural ending suggests the mediocre quality of the
gégﬁggged with her foes, but the gates were '0pé:E:hr1::§d Z2“ chapbouk as a whole’
g riven into them, the f . 9
ggeﬁothic finale which leavgscggtgg :§§"n:§ra§§rei§r'§5::l§itygi 433' THE SPECTRE MOTHER: OR’ THE HAUNTED T0HER' London : Dean and
universe and which d ' - . _ Munday, 800.
good has Obvious advantages9ga::Sm€?§e:igﬁl victory of evil over Modern Reeditions: None
Gothic literature, W5 0 retribution in , Gothic Type: Gothic Chapbook
431 Somerset H M Biographical and Research Data: None
' , enry. ARTVN OF -
5H0Rh- London : R, Dutgqn’ 18g§FRoSE' OR’ THE “IZARD AND THE Critical Synopsis: The gaudy little 30-page chapbook converts
ggdﬁrn Needitions: None MrZé)Radcliffe‘s Mogtoni from THE MVSTERIES OF UDOLPHO (see
IC ype: Ritterroman s e ' . #3 into the vi ainous Moresco. His evil appearance is con-
ggrman ﬁources, terror muse? culative, sham translation from fined to a single sentence: "The long dark cloak which shrouded
‘°9rap ical and Resear - his gigantic figure and the sable plume of feathers that waved
C ‘t_ ch Data" Summers’ GOTHIC QUEST, P-92. in his hat shaded a face of villainy." One of his habitats is
_ _ ri ical Synopsis: This ' ' i the dark corridors of Rovado castle where he once murdered the
lT'9d- The Single alleged e§::?;:eD$otQ;c léﬁm has "°t bee" V@"- young woman, Julia, while she slept with a child in her arms.
¢0u1d not be located in the New York E _ Fee-volume romance This deed was apparently motivated by a combination of sheer
the blbliographer'5 Search continues Accocggty L‘h'5'y ilfhbugh annoyance at the sight of female beauty and the pleasure attend-
THE GOTHIC QUEST, SomerSet,S sham translaggugﬂg to Sumner; in ant upon assaulting a helpless human being. Pleased with the
sources was Cnndemned by THE CRITICAL REVIE rhm German terror deed, Moresco was just about to add the child to his list of
1§01- for its "multiplicity of oaths and bl H for Ssptember! victims when the spectre of the freshly-slain Julia interposed
VTQVQT further Ccmplained that “The Germ d a5ph?m'e5' The F@- itself. These terrific happenings are accomplished in a matter
6bS0lutely gu{_herOdedvu an ramat‘5t5 are here ' of three paragraphs. Near the end of the chapbook, the reader
432 THE SOUTHERN To gearni_ofdabthgrd mo§ive1for :oreico'sfm:Fd$F'ofdJugiﬁ. bhed hid
- HER; OR een ire y oun uve 0, ro er o u ia s ea us an , o
London z T. Hurst, 1802, CONJUGAL SACRIFICE AND RETRIBUTION. remove her as an obstacle to the inheritance. Quite uneXDlainab-
Modern Reeditions: None 4 ly, Moresco is married to a beautiful, gentle, and compassionate
Gothic Type: Gothic Chapbggk (72_pa E shill. woman, Angela Modeni. He would not expect such a creature to be
5,ographica] and Research Data: Nona ing shocker) married at all, much less to a lady of these qualities,-though
C _t_ 1 S , we would expect him to be a tormentor of the type. She had once
ri ica ynopsis; The ch - _ _ been the ward of Marchioness di Montmorenci and was loved by the
Stmblage of terror 4913115 f:g:o::Sc°g:éz:§f€T|° Pliglﬁrlled as- Marchioness's son before she was abducted and confined to a cave
°!°!l¥ THE Ronnnce or THE FOREST (see ms; ins r°'"""?e‘» ?§P@— by Moresco and Ludovico. Angela must have seen every possible
$1C11,an castle’ the Castle of Farnesi E e setting is_ a Gothic site which fifteenth-century Italy had to offer, since
t§e"th Century. All of the wickedness 536 t?$ end °f the F]f- Moresco has locked her in turrets, crypts, and a chain of gloomy
lights~ which occasionally appear in the so ti as the weird castles extending from Milan to Naples. Hhile occupying the
be the work gf Lady Julia, the stepmother g tﬁrh tower Prove to haunted tower of one of these prisons, Angela is visited by the
L°u,5a and A]teSa_ The character of the 3 T e two heroines, spectre mother who then performs the normal function of Guiding
M°hd§'t, is also taken directiy from Mrs cR:§ lgggefhesss Madame the heroine downward ‘into an innmasurable chasm" which leads to
her0]neSI enforced seclusion is broke; C T 9 5 C65t5- The a vault, which leads to a secret door, which leads to the out-
ma5t9F- Alberto, gives 3 grand hi1] Durinonzﬁ “gs? the ¢a5tT9'S side world and momentary safety. Enroute through the labyrinth,
shudders, shrieks, strange movement; and 9 e 5 1- thefe §'e the spectre mother shows her a bloody dagger bearing Moresc0's
eff9Ct$ lﬂ the southern tOwer_ cDu"t'TiV0]?ve"h5tra"9E' Tlghtlhg name,--as if further confirmation about the dangerous character
bay] F0 meet Altesa, and count Vivaldi (th , w o has come to the of her husband were needed at this point. Coming to the surface,
RadC!‘Tf9'5 THE ITALIAN, gee p350) who ass rgme take" T'°m M'5- ' Angela finds that the spectre mother has taken her through a
rema1n in residence to investiggte and S0] S Louisa. vow to tunnel that connects directly with the grand house of the Mont-
the 5°"the'" t°"eT. but during their sta at {E the mysteries of morencis. The heroine is both released and relieved and suppos-
the women di5appear_ Hastily and coarse]! th ehcastle both of edly the reader shared in her raptures at this miraculous deliv-
ly pulls all of these divergent threads ggt e c.apb°°ker '°“9h' erance. Waiting for Angela at the end of the.tunnel is her be-
hesolution when it is revealed that Julia ig a €1ng]e patt?rn of loved Montmorencit Also waiting for her are sunlight, marriage,
to the Marquis, but also the Probable murder no fonly uhfdlthful and the welcome news that Moresco has fallen off a battlement
mother. Her Pact with a local gang of robb er 0 the S1StErs. and been killed. Hithin the alloted thirty pages, the 'Goth met
t° have lﬁe tower appear haunted The feebﬁrs made ‘t "EFESSBFY every criterion of the shilling shocker bringing fast pleasure
' eness °T thls @X- to the reader and quick profit to the publisher.

no THE FIRST carrots , i me FIRST CUTHICS 379
434. THE SPECTRE OF THE MOUNTAIN OF GRENADA. London : John D f
ean or year reign of terror over the circulating libraries, she pro-
GEOFQB Hughes, 1311- ' ’ duced monastic shockers, Udolphoesque romances of the forest.
Modern Reeditions: None , Gothified histories, and routine domestic fiction with Gothic
5°thlC TYPEI Pure 0' high G°thi¢ (h0FF0T mode) l undertones. Her first novel is a vivid specimen of the domestic
Biographical and Research Data: Lévy LE ROMAN "GOTHIQUE"
s _ , verging on the Gothic. It is as if Mrs. Stanhope were uncertain
ANGLAIS, p.462. + ' '
about her proper metler as a writer of novels Should she follow
i i_ l the realistic route set down by Jane Austen and Fanny Burney? Or
C'itl¢a1 5Y"0P5i51 The lhreé-Vﬂlﬂme G0thlC T0md"CE displays > should she retire to the towers, crypts, and spectral portrait
all of the characteristics of crude craftsmanship and uncertain 1' galleries of Mrs. Radcliffe? In writing MDNTBRASIL ABBEY, she
control of the conventional materials. lhe plot is an assortment _; pays homage to Mrs. Radcliffe, although a good deal of this
°f G°thi¢ m°me"t5 d"d P'e¢lCdm@"t5 ¢1"m5l1Y 6Xt9"dl"9 OVET the if epistolary novel reflects her attraction to domestic realism. The
EXD1°'dt°r¥ Q"95t Of the hdrﬂhli D0" FeT"d"d° de Td1dV9Td ind ‘i webwork of letters traces the marital misfortunes and miscalcul-
Count Osma in the mountains of Grenada. It is almost as if the 7, ations of the Elvington sisters, Elenor, Agnes, and Constance,
anonymous bluebooker were teaching hinself how to write a Gothic 1: whose mother, Gertrude Elvington, advocates celibacy and looks
novel by trial and error splashes of haphazard adventure. For T ' ' ' '
reasons known only to the incompetent writer the spectre does
upon marriage as a “maternal trial." Elenor unwisely marries for
, 3 love and winds up in wretched poverty with a good man but a bad
not put in an appearance until ver late ' th '» ' ‘
y in e second volume
and then with n l' “bl ff
provider, Mr. Richmond. Agnes intends to marry for position, but
is unexpectedly seized with a passion for the libertine, Magor
eg lgl e e ect. Meanwhile, the most shopworn of
G0th' 1' '
‘C C ‘Chas aCc"mh1ate~ of the "Either 1" the m°""tdl"5, VB ‘Y Arbuthnot. Constance remains at home under the protection of her
read: “The face hf hahhre Chhvhlsed "ith 5 terrible t@mPE5t-' of iii mother and thus avoids the marital mistakes and consequent suf-
a spectral encounter, we have this description from Don Fernan- '1 ferings of her sisters. Two of the sisters‘ histories are nar-
do= ‘Like that of Ossian. it advances toward us enveloped in a 1 rated is a realistic fashion, but one of the lives, that of Ag-
liobt veil-" 0f a veer into a mountain cave by Count Osna. we l nes, forms a Gothic tale within the novel's larger domestic
have: "He beheld the mihgled h°di9$ 9f Ramihe dhd Edmhhd bathed xi franework. Composing her letters from Melbourne Castle, seat of
in gore." The reader must turn back hundreds of pages to redis- h the rakish Major Arbuthnot, and Montbrasil Abbey, ancestral re-
cover who the murdered pair were. There are avalanches, stories 3' treat of the Marquis of hohthrasii, the practicai Aghesls imag-
Within stories. cballenslns hcrlnits, and nlad lihysicians- Almost  ination is gradually Gothified by its Cﬂllilact with these
hidden amidst this perplexin cast ' th h ' ' ' ' '
9 l5 9 Erolﬂes A1mEd°'l"3, 7 darkened buildings and their owners. Melbourne Castle, for exam-
apparently the object of Don Fernando's mountainous search All '” l i lt th f t “ l f
. l 1 p e, s an a oge er awesome or ress, a g oomy piece o Goth-
of this unintelligible flunmery is compounded at the end when 'i§ ic architecture“ offering the maiden a haunted western -gallery,
the h9'°i"e Smhgly Ch°°5@5 3 chhveht °V@' 5 "599! married 1lf9- 4‘: a sinister legend about the tyrant, Reginald, and periodic ap-
The author seems to have been at a loss over how to match her ‘l pearahces of the paie phantom of the murdered Bertha_ ihve5ti_
since there are no eligible heroes left alive. The narrative gating the Castie’ Aghe; i5 terrified hy_mhvemehg hehihd 5 cur-
plods to a stop with this clumsy statement of Almedorina's re- < tain only to discover a spaniel when she peers behind it. Hhile
tlremehti "hh°11Y 91V?" 10 Virtue, duty! T911910", and relief of \ she loves Arbuthnot, she eventually chooses to marry the Marquis
necessity. liar Pure and celestial mind was inaccessible to the ~ of Montbrasil and in so doing she acquires a harsh master who is
attacks‘ of mundane affections." Beginning in a fog, this Gothic l almost a prototype for the authoritarian husband of Victorian
ehds in the m1'e- fiction. Agnes runs away with Arbuthnot, but the powerful Mar-
" ' th l ‘s trail. Arbuthnot is killed, and
435. Stanhope, Louisa Sidney. MONTBRASIL ABBEY: OR, MATERNAL TRIALS. . “ms ‘S 50°" 9" e coup e
, Agnes slowly expires of shame and a sense that she has wasted
L°"d°" I hlhervd-PPESS. 1806- . her chances. The constant Constance, of course, having obeyed
hhderh Reed1t1°h5: h°"e 1 her mother, marries well and wealthily. It is interesting to
Gothic Type: Sentimental Gothic (epistolary format, . observe that Agnes‘; portrait is quite plain and normal at the
Radciiffeah eiemehts) ‘ outset but gradually takes on the physical and emotional char-
Bioqranhical d"d R959dF¢h Data! 5"""@r5, GUTHIC QUE5Ts P-37- 3 acteristics of the Gothic heroine. Roaming the corridors of the
_ _ _ i castle and the abbey, ‘her figure is tall and elegantly propor-
Crltlcdl 5y"°P§l51 The Minerva-PPQSS authors L°"l5i 5¢d"h0P€, $5 tioned; the contour of her countenance Grecian; a bewitching
began as a novelist of domestic trials with a moderate infusion if gmile playing on her rosy lips discloses a set of teeth white as
of Gothic material and situation as inducements to her clien- ‘i the pglished ivory; her nose, aquiline; her blue eyes are Soft
tclo- Gradually. as she published her fourteen novels, her work 7 and expressive, shadowed by long dark lashes." The Victorian
became liervasively Gothic in tone. incident, and style as she 3 version of this Gothic beauty would be considerably plainer, but
9556164 most of the subcategories of Gothic fiction from the ‘I no less the victim of the imprudent marriage., Louisa Stanhope
mildly Gothic MONTBRASIL ABBEY to the extremely Gothic THE COR- ' has her feet solidly fixed on the Gothic tradition, but it is
5A1R'5 BRIDE: A LEGEND OF THE 51XTEEhT" CENTURY, her last novel also evident that her narrative hand is on the doorknob of the
published in the year of her death, 1830. During her twenty-four 41 novel of domestic crisis..
l

JBD TI-E FIRST GUTHICS ' THE FIRST GOTHICS J81
435. Stanhope, Louisa Sidney. DI MOHTRANZO: on, THE NOVICE OF CORPUS i _ _ Biographical and Research Data: Tarr. EATHl1LICl$N IN GOTHIC
DOMINI. London : Minerva-Press for A.K. Newman, I810.
Modern Reeditions: None
FICTION, pp.Z6, 39, 69.
Gothic Type- Pure or high Gothic (monastic shocker features 1 . Critical Synopsis: In marked contrast to the undisciplined
~ )
Biographical and Research Data: None
Gothicism of DI MUNTRANZO (see #436), Hrs. Stanhope here con-
trols her tendency to overcomplicate the tale. The result is a
Critical Synopsis: Social realism gives way completely to the ' reasonably well-conceived, if not an innovative, monastic shock-
wild extravagances of the monastic shocker in which every event, er and murder mystery. Avuncular villainy had always been an at-
utterance, and sound effect is totally Gothic in the most . tractive form of Gothic crime. Here, the evil uncle masquerades
overdone and self-conscious manner. The opening itself is a as the hero's father until he is exposed by the watchful priest,
shrill and terrible climax as a beautiful woman naned Adelheida Father Betsolin. He can definitely detect the influence of Hrs.
is depicted in a fatal convulsion and screams of agony. Hho is Radcliffe's THE ITALIAN (see #350) and feel the P'9$E"¢€ OF
her poisoner? The remainder of the novel devotes itself to the Schedoni in the somber overture before the portals of the monas-
complex solution to this Gothic question as well as to the work- tery as a muffled stranger "paused at the gate of the convent of
ing out of two other familiar Gothic dilenmas: the innocence and Valombre. The stilly gloom of the hour, the hollow moaning of
happiness of her secret husband, Huberto, who is accused by the the blast, the darkened concave of the heavens, from which no
Inquisition of the poisoning; the exposure of ecclesiastical star, no casual reflection of light was emitted, recalled to
villainy in the personage of the wicked monk, Father Brazilio, Y mind the object of his embassy." The object is the assassination
confessor to Adelheida‘s father, the Conte Alverani. Between the of the abbot and the abandoning of the child, Theodore, who is
$"°¢k °f Adelheldﬂ'5 Pﬁlsvﬂing and the retribution visited upon taken into the monastic community and raised as a brother. The
Father Brazilio, Mrs. Stanhope assembles four volumes of unre- . rest of the novel plays off the identification of the homicidal
mitting Gothic excitement. She prefers natural horror to super- l ; stranger and the discovery of Theodore's patrimony, the familiar
natural terror using banditti, the Inquisition, convent persecu- ‘ \ Gothic patterns. Before he takes his final vows, Theodore is
tion, sexual transformation, torture chambers, and coincidental i encouraged by Father Betsolin to search for his family roots, an
appearances and disappearances. Through all of these vicissi- expedition which takes the young man out of the monastery and
tudes there moves the calm and saving figure of a canon of the ~ i into the world where, since he is a Gothic character in a Gothic
cathedral, a balancing force against the evil of Father Brazil- g .’ novel, he stumbles immediately into a robber's cave. Theodore's
io. This character will eventually reveal himself as Di Montran— . hideous host in the robbers‘ den is the ferocious Montaubon who
zo, Huberto‘s father and the brother to the Conte Alverani. As ~ looks a bit like Theodore despite his twisted features although
usual in a Gothic novel, the Conte thought that he had killed the hero himself never suspects the avuncular relationship.
his brother years before but he was mistaken. Many of these as- After some time, Montaubon announces to Theodore that he is the
tounding revelations occur at Huberto‘s trial for murder by the young man's deserting father, but before the gullible Theodore
Inquisition. He is also accused of concealing a mistress in a can fall under Montaubon's control, Father Betsolin enters the
convent under the curious alias, Sister Hemelfride. To compli- case. He has followed Theodore into the perilous world and has
cate what is already very complicated, this unwilling novice has sworn to guard him from harm and deception. Tricked by the
been living a double life as both a nun and as a pilgrim under priest into returning to the Monastery of Valombrosa, Montaubon
the "ewe. 1§ld0F8- By adding entanglements to entanglements, is made to answer for the murder of the abbot and the slaying of
Mrs. Stanhope was obviously adhering to what she recognized as ~ his brother, the Duke of Vermandois, the true father of Theo-
the requirements of the Gothic plot. It falls to Di Montranzo to dore. Hith avuncular villainy disposed of, Theodore makes a sec-
fill the role of vindicator and restorer. He saves Huberto from ond search for his origins, this time in quest of the burial
the rack, accuses Father Brazilio of the poisoning crime, and place of his mother. As might be expected in a Gothic novel,
unites his son with the novice of Corpus Domini who turns out to Mrs. Stanhope lingers over the details of the disinterment
be the abducted daughter of Huberto‘s friend, the Duca di Monte T scene, then conveys the reader to a solemn reburial ceremony in
Melissario. There is certainly too much connmtion in Mrs. Stan- , the family vaults. Hhen Theodore returns to the Monastery of
"°P9'5 UVQT-mﬂ"lP"lﬂtl0" of Events in the novel. The primary ef- ‘ Valombre, he honors the high character of Father Betsolin, but
fect which a good Gothic must evoke--a fear in the supremacy of accounts himself fit for manhood by marrying Juliette, a spir-
the irrational--is spoiled by her overattention to method, ap- I _, ited young woman who decides to give up the religious life for
paratus, and genealogical enigmas. But in writing her first pure ! secular happiness. Her application of the narrative formula of
Gothic, she was also learning how to Gothicize. menace, monastery, murder, and marriage enabled Mrs. Stanhope to
produce a satisfying and cashworthy Gothic for the palpitating
437.- Stanhope, Louisa Sidney. THE CONFESSIOHAL OF VALOMBRE. London : V patrons of the Minerva-Press's standard fare.
Minerva-Press for A.K. Newman, 1812.
Modern Reeditions: None ' 438. Stanhope, Louisa Sidney. MADELINA: A TALE FOHNDED ‘OH FACTS
Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (imitation of THE ITALIAN, London : Minerva-Press for A.K. Newman, 1814.
elements of the monastic shocker) ' Modern Reeditions: None-

352 THE FIRST GOTHICS ‘i THE FIRST EUTHICS 383
Gothic Type: Sentimental Gothic (numerous speetrai also finds anonymous love poems left for her at the family boat-
components, e5peQially in the subplots) - * house. The device of the rustic postoffice is not unique to the
Biographical and Research Data; Mane t , Gothic novel, but Mrs. Stanhope uses it as a means of bringing
Louis D'Avignon into the plot. Louis and his sister, Gabrielle,
Critical Synopsis; The novel is more a eharaeter study than a i are children of feeling overflowing with inflated sentiment and
tale of terror and in this sense it reverts to the procedures i are heir5 i0 their hermit father's eXq"i5ite meie"Ch°i¥- Their
and themes of MONTBRASIL ABBEY (see #435)_ A gathie residue Sat_ | Q 1 father, Everhard St. Sauverne, formerly loved Corisande's mother
urates the stories of two pairs of women, the sister; naneiina § and is the husband of the dead Antoinette. while in the convent,
and Rosamond, and their lower class counterparts, Janetta and it Corisande learns the terrible truth about this woman's death.
Ellen. To the two lesser women characters are allotted most of I Thr°"9" 3 5erie5 °f eieb°rate deCePti°"5- A"t°i"ette had bee"
the gothie tridis and turmdii_ The Mfactsn of Hadeiinais history y driven to an early grave by Corisande's father, the Marquis de
and those of her sister form the domestie Segment of the har,a_ Roussillon. Instead of admitting his crime, he had buried it and
tive. The stable and optimistic Rosamund makes a pleasant and ; compounded his inhumanity by his vile treatment of ¢0risand@-
profitable marriage with Sir Essex St. Aubin; her inpetuous sis-
ter, Madelina, gives her heart to Captain Glenmorris only to
have him betray her affections. In obedience to her father, she
Out of the concealed evil of the father springs the goodness of
the daughter. She forgives the Marquis on his deathbed, then
marries Antoinette's son, Louis, while her brother, Mortaigne,
then allows herself to be matched with the dull Lord Ormington. teke5 L°"i5'5 5i5ter, Gabrielle, fer his °""- "ﬂ"¥ Pi9e5 07 this
lnterspersed with these marital mistakes and aneeesses are the four volume Gothic are 'Interspersed with Poetry." Many of these
more harrowing experiehees of Janetta, a type of gpheiie figure are morbid ornaments which exult in the trappings of death.
who is driven insane by her lover's drowning and spends much
time shedding tears in mortharial surroundings; and the 5uffe,_ '. 440. Stanhope, Louisa Sidney. THE NUN OF SANTA MARIA DI TINDARO.
ings of the orphaned Ellen. Somewhat awkwardly, drawing rooms I L°"d°" I "i"erVe'Pre55 f°r A-K- Ne"mB"i 1513-
and parlors share a place beside ghostly monks gliding through M°de'“ R9editi°"51 N°"e
chapel ruins at midnight along with other incidental Gothic par- m Gothic Type: Sentimental Gothic (no supernatural elements)
aphernalia. Thus, the novel is a peculiar and artistically un- ‘t Bi°9riP"iCﬂi ﬂ"d Reieereh natal "°"e
sound blend of domestic realism and Gothic thrill. Vet, the nov-
el remains an interesting failure because Hrs. Stanhope chose to i critical SY"°PSi5: The t'°"b]ed life °f the "“"' Sister
tell the same story of misplaced passions twice, first in the = Heie"ea i5 k"°"" P°5¢h"m0"5i¥ thr°"9" B Set ef mem°ir5 f°""d i"
sober key of domestic realism and then in the Shriiier hey of the convent of of Santa Maria di Tindaro by the tale's narrator.
Gothic anguish. Reading the posthumous papers is something of a hagiographic
experience for the anonymous guest The memoirs recount the suf-
439. Stanhope, Louisa Sidney, Tnghcdgpy; QR The GRAVE OF i ferings which caused her to retreat from the world and embrace
ANTOINETTE. London ; Minerva-Press for A_K, ienman, 1g15_ ' the religious life. Instead of the normal Gothic situation which
Modern Reeditions: None depicts the convent as a place of horrors, it is portrayed as a
Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (natural terror) l haven. The nun's story contains some familiar Gothic chapters.
Biographical and Researgh Data; hone ' She had been the daughter of an irate and domineering father who
had promised to confine her to a nunnery if she had anything to
Critical Synopsis; The concealed grine kept from the younger i. do with his enemies, the De Beauforts. Fate made her fall in
members of a family forms the basis for this gethie hdvei_ The l» love with Eugenius De Beaufort. Foolishly, Eugenius entrusts
story line is again defaced by Mrs. Stanhope's principal short-
-.»
Helena to the guardianship of his companion, Angerville, while
coming as a Gothic novelist: multiple twistings and turnings of ‘i he 9°e5 eff t° Perti¢iPete i" the Fre"¢h ReV°i"ti°" 5"d 5°°"
a needlessly prolix genealogy. Restoration of order in the maid- after his departure the expected attempt to seduce and rave her
enls temporariiy disrupted "arid rests upon her uiiiingness to ensues. Acting in league with Helena's infuriated father, Anger-
face the e"il i" i @1058 member Of her household. A temporary ' ville has Eugenius imprisoned as a dangerous aristocrat and sees
suspension of rational restraint is demanded of the maiden in i to his death during an escape attempt. 0verwhelmed_ by Anger-
¢°mi"§ t° 9riP5 With the Evil Of her father, and by extension, ' ville's villainy, her father's brutality, and Eugen1us's death,
her own potential for haseness and erime_ These themes are em_ _ Helena voluntarily retires to Santa Maria Di Tindaro to forswear
bodied in the dark ordeal of the Gothic virgin’ gdrisande de the life of the flesh and to pray for their souls. The narrator,
Roussilloh, which climaxes at the very grave df her inverts , a person of material longings and sceptical about the value of
mother. Corisande is well-equipped for Gothic heroineship. She the 'eii9ib“5 _iife= is_@9iiied a"d decides tn refQrm~ The 919'
~is plagued by a sullen and secretive father who seems to harbor
ments of seduction and filial cruelty are standard components of
some terrible past and who engages in that regular diversion of i Q the G°thi¢ 9i°t~ 5°me"hat e¥t'°°'di"a'Y f°' Q G°thiF "°Vei is
Gothic fathers, the arranging of an unbearable marriage for his iii the ePPr°Vi"9 P°riraYai °f the m°"55tiC i"5tit"ti°" a"d its re‘
daughter. Before sequestering herself in a convent to elude this -f “a“d5-
marriage, she finds solace in her brother, Mortaigne, and she
t

J84 THE FIRST comzcs = -‘pf FIRST GDTHIC5 385
I
441. Stanhope, Louisa Sidney. THE SIEGE DF KENILHORTH: AN HISTORICAL 442_ stanhope, Louisa Sidney. THE CORSAIR'S BRIDE: A LEGEND OF THE
ROMANCE. London : A.K. Newman, 1824. - ’ SIXTEENTH CENTURY. London : A.K. Newman, 1830.
Modern Reeditions: None ' Modern Reeditions: None _ _ _ __
Gothic Type: Gothified history (intermittent terror ele- 1‘ Gothic Type: Drientalized Gothic (Gothic passions but mini-
MEHIS) mal terror and horror)
Biographical and Research Data: None Biographical and Research Data: None
,
Critical Synopsis: There is no specific historical resem- critical Synopsis: East meets west in this exotic blend of
blance between Scott's KENILHORTH (see #392) and Stanhope's . medieval and oriental Gothic settings and material. The arenas
heavily Gothified history of the rebellious events of the reign of action are the England of the Plantagenets and the eastern
of Henry III (1216-1272). This ruler's disastrous reign was Mediterranean of Turkish pirates, with a Suitably 9°thlc 5‘§‘]Y
often selected as a violent backdrop for atmosphere and action ‘ used as a point of departure for the western and eastern trial$
by the Gothic novelists as in Mrs. Radcliffe's GASTON oz BLONDE- of rthe hero and heroine. Unwillin9 bride of the ¢?""!' '5 Rm"
VILLE (see #351). The influence of Scott is also visible in Mrs. lita Della Monti. Hhile she is abducted by the piratical Hayra-
Stanhope's subordination of Gothic trappings to the historical , din Barbarossa, her lover, Arthur de la Pole, has returned_ to
theme of national restabilization. The tale tells of the adven- England to discover that his family has been destroyed in a
tures of the Baron Hanslape and his politically divided family. political purge. In a hurried and confused dénouement, R°5al‘ta
The Baron's natural son, Hilliam, joins the cause of the rebel- ‘ e5CapeS from the seraglio and Arthur recovers the dukedom. The
lious barons against the King and is instigated to do so by a couple meet again in Sicily where they resume the haPP1"95$
bona fide Gothic villainess, the ominous and witchlike Ingelrica which had been interrupted by t"9" e35te'",a"d "ester" °rdea]§‘
Fitzparnel. The Baron's adopted son, Hubert, remains a staunch Only the passions of 'the characters retain the true 5°th'°
royalist like the Baron himself, but sincerely regrets his step- quality in Mrs. Stanhope's final fiCt\°"-_ The ab59"Ce °f a
brother's desertion of his King and father. The culprit, Ingel- strong Gothic villain combined with the tedious and_ stereo-
rica, uses her considerable aptitude for evil to bring about ' ' typical nature of the characters‘ wandeflﬂsi 8"d 5Qffer'"95 9'9‘
Hilliam's death and Hubert's separation from the Baron's vented her last novel from ever achieving the Gothic s necessary
daughter, Isabel, along with further difficulties including im- climate of unrelieved dread.
murement in a Gothic dungeon where he is visited by the blood-
drenched phantom of the Duchess of Kent. Baron Hanslape's own i 443. Stratton, Jemima Maria. THE MAID OF THE CASTLE: A LEGENDARY
life has not been free of Gothic surprises either. Having once TALE. London : Minerva-Press for William Lane, 1794-
shirked a vow to go on a pilgrimage, he is repeatedly disturbed ‘ Modern Reeditions: None _ _ _ _ ’
by an accusing and disembodied voice throughout the story. This Gothic Type: Sentimental Gothic (imitation of Charlotte
instrument of Gothic retribution and supernatural horror could Smith's EHMELINE)
apparently still secure the desired effect in Gothic readers Biographical and Research Data: None _
even beyond the demise of the Gothic novel itself in the late _ H
1820's. The Radcliffean rapprochement with the ghostly voice is Critical Synopsis: Described as a novel ‘in three Cﬂnlﬂss
brought about simultaneously with the establishment of Hubert's 3 the romance is adorned with PBtC"95 Bf 5?"“m?"ta] Verse and
identity in a single scene at the end of the novel where all interludes of melancholy poetry. The innediate and 610591!
parties are gathered for the siege of Kenilworth Castle. The copied model appears to be Charlotte Smith's EMMELTNE: THE_ DR-
voice was not spiritual, but belonged to a battle companion of PHAN 0F THE CASTLE (see #421), a book of flirtatious Gothicism
the Baron, a Knight Templar, who had been acting as the Baron's but no direct violence or phantasmic intrusions. The _maiden 0
agent of conscience throughout the story. Attached to his nat- the castle is Belinda, victim Of a Jealous guardian and her
ural explanation of the voice is the Knight Templar's clarifica- I baronial partner. The level of Gothic is clearly spooky ind 99";
tion of Hubert's parentage. His spectral visitor in the dungeon, teel, designed to stretch but hardly to break the nerves ok
the Duchess of Kent, was his mother. Now declared the rightful reader and heroine. The frequent poetic interludes make the wor
Duke of Kent, he marries Isabel and sees political stability . unre like an elegiac collection of graveyard verse than like H
restored to Henry's kingdom following the successful siege of 1 tale of terror rewarded.
Kenilworth. Gothified history preferred to stage its events in .
an age of disorder, but to climax the threat of anarchy by the 444. Street, Miss. THE RECLUSE OF THE APENNINES. London : Minerva-
emergence of some new order represented by the young hero. In Press for Hilliam Lane, 1792.
the legitimizing of the orphaned hero's bloodline, Mrs. Stanhope Modern Reeditions: None ' -
applied the pattern in The SIEGE OF KENILHORTH to give the as- Gothic Type: Sentimental Gothic (terror mode) _ I E"
suring vision of permanence that historical Gothic fiction Biographical and Research. Data: Levy. L5-ROMA" .G°TH Qu
sought to make available to its readers at its more conservative ANGLAIS, p.245.
level.
i Critical Synopsis: Not attributed to Street until she "55

sac roe FIR$T enru1¢5 -‘1ue FIRST cornrcs 307
listed as the author in the Minerva-Press Library catalogue of 1 common orderings of the twin theme. The Helsh Gothic, OWEN CAS-
1814, the obscure Gothic draws most of its scenes and material ’ TLE. "5e5 "0 Te55 the" three 5et5 Of t"i"5 t° terrlfy ehd tlTTT-
frem 5hﬂrT0ttB Smith's ETHELINDE: OR, THE REcLu5E QF THE LAKE ‘ late the reader before the usual supernatural intervention and
(5ee #422)- The name of the recluse (Etheiinde) is a1,, p,e_ ' resolution of identities. The heroine and anti-heroine (Laura
served. Since Mrs. Radcliffe's heroine, Emily st. Aubert is and Laurette) are perplexinoly similar not ipst in physical
confined to an Apennine castle under similar Cirﬁumgtinéeg . appearance but in their Gothic reeactions to the castle's spec-
thi5 Small G0thic of 1792 may have influenead the choice of "amé . , tres and chambers of horror. In deference to Mrs. Radcliffe, the
and situation for THE MVSTERIES OF UDOLPHO (see #249). heroine will be she who masters her own stampeding fancies and
brings them under control. Other instances of the theme of the
445. Stuart, Augusta Amelia. THE CAVE OF TOLEDO: OR, THE GOTHIC ‘l mind's victory over unregulated passions are found throughout
PRIN€E55, RN HISTORICAL ROMANCE, London ; M1ﬂerya_Pfes5 fur l this Radcliffean revival novel. The motif of the twins is too
A.K. Newman, 1812. universal to permit an identification of a specific Gothic
Modern Reeditions: None ' source. The Gothic usage of the twin theme, however, is well il-
Gothic Type: Grotto Gothic (horror and terror modes) lustrated by the triple set of doubles in OHEN CASTLE. All the
Biographical and Research Data: Summers, GOTHIC QUEST p_356- ‘ twins partake of one another‘s selves. The twinships expresses
Lévy, LE ROMAN “GOTHIQUE" ANGLAIS, p.623. ' ’ ' the two opposing sides of the self, a higher or rational self
and a lower or irrational self. In rationalized Gothic according
Critical Synopsis: A romance in five volumes this huge T to the pattern set forth by Mrs. Radcliffe, the higher or ra-
Gothic perhaps earns Stuart her place as the queen ‘of length f tional self must eventually prevail but only after a long battle
among ‘the Gothic suppliers of the Minerva-Press, none of whom
against the irrationality lurking on the darker side of the
"ere given to brevity. As the Gothic novel ex ired i ‘ Self-
, _ _ P t seemed to
enlarge into multi-volumed dinosaurs of this type. Yet, the work
must be cited as a bibliographical curiosity of the period and
not too atypical if a census of volume sizes is taken. Every-
7. Sykes, Mrs. S. MARGIANA: OR, HIDDRINGTON TOHER, A TALE OF THE
, ' FIFTEENTH CENTURY. London : Minerva-Press for Lane, Newman,
thing that had been installed in a Gothic castle previously is 13°3-
packed tediously into this Gothic macro-tome. The reader was of- Meder" Reedlti°"5= N°"e
fered fabricated medievalism, extravagant persecution, subterra- 1 Gethle TyPe= 5°thiTied histery iterrer m°de)
nean supernaturalism, grotesque transformations, character; 1551 ~ Biographical and Research Data: None
and found in caverns and labyrinths, dead but still active
mothers, evil dukes, a corps de ballet of family phantoms, and ‘ Crltleil 5y"0P$i$= The flr5I 6"“ Ohly edlhiﬁ" Of thl§ five
every other piece of legerdemain assoqiated with the trade of volume Gothic romance was once a part of the private library of
terror. The story is so many stories intertwined and uncompleted M°"ta9u@ $"vnBrs. Sunners reproduced the frontispiece opposite
that it resists any sumnary. The Gothic princess herself soon P599 Z04 l" THE GOTHIC QUE5T ﬂhd ¢Tﬂ55ifled it 65 "6 tyﬂiﬁﬂl
vanishes into these twisting narrative corridors to surface here historical Gothic romance. The illustration depicts the
and there when a victimization scene is required. Many Gothics ihd"¢tl°" 07 the her°i"e, Maroiana. by hired rufflihs-" Mrs-
can claim an eccentricity of narrative structure. But here we Sykes Catered t° the "0h~yet-iided Palate 0‘ the G°hhTC reader
can observe an extreme among such extremes since the titular by filling the "°VeT With the Stihdard eme'9e"¢lE5- 1" firi-
heroine becomes a minor or even non-existent character for long 0‘ M3r9l6"3 T5 inperiled T" Such 6 Variety Of Ways that the reader
stretches of her own tale. The relevance of title to text is 1 must have wondered if all noble Englishnen at the end of the
indeed mystifying. Avid readers of the Gothic would tolerate "; Fourteenth Century were wearing the hoods and masks of outlaws.
three volumes or even four if the novel held the desired stimu- h HOWQVET, if Cahhﬂt he dehled that the r°ma"°e is b“l't t° terfi‘
ii; hht "he" the G0thiC novel bloated to five volumes as in this I fying specifications and meets or even exceeds Halpole‘s origin-
literary curio even its most devoted followers shrunk away from T al criterion that a romance of the Gothic type ought to consist
it i" h0rPOP- T of ‘a constant vicissitude of interesting passions." Hith the
deposed Richard II looming in the background and the usurping
446. Sullivan, Mary Ann. outn CASTLE: on, HHICH IS THE HEROINE? Lun- Henry IV Consolidating his power. the events pf the npvel upfpld
don : Minerva-Press for A.K. Newman, 1816. F as a violent chronicle of Lord Hiddrington and his daughters,
M°der" Reedlhiﬂhii "One F Margiana and Genevieve. Symbol of the family's own decline and
Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (terror mode) {T jeopardy is Hiddrington tower, an emblem of ruined greatness.
Biographical and Research Data: None 1 Lord Hiddrington had remained loyal to Richard II in the
struggle between the King and his cousin, Bolingbroke, and is
Critical Synopsis: Sets of doubles and identity confusions trying to reverse his political mistake as the novel opens. To
held a strong appeal for Gothic writers and readgr§_ Goad in accomplish this, he places ‘his daughters in-the new court of
evil disguise and vice masked as virtue with the haunted castle ' hehry TV, ﬂhd by d0i"9 $0, eXP°5E$ them T0 the TNT] r§Dert0ry Of
acting as an arena for the sorting out of moral identities were - Gothic distress,--sexual harassment, nocturnal seizures, at-
I

i
358 ' THE FIRST GUTHICS 5 1i£ FIRST GOTHICS 389
44
tempted rape, confinement in towers and vaults. Both sisters are i waS, he iiiked 9V9" the f“"dam@"i3] 5klii Fequitﬁd °f the clever
infatuated by the courtier, Ethelred Lord Delancey, and his ec- plagiarist. The prisoner, Harmina, now unaccountable becomes
centric sister, Arlette, who costumes herself as various charac- J Angela Whilé 6 COUDE Frﬂlitl» 5 M555 9aTEmbE'9, B"d the hermlt,
ters out of the medieval romances. Of the two maidens, Margiana . Gerald, further muddy an aireidy m"ddY Di°t- 0" Page 70- after
is the more susceptible to the thrills and tremors of Gothic P€FDEtr3ti"9 5 5@'i95 °f crimes a9ii"5t Ha'mi"a-b9¢°me-A"99ia»
life and in this respect, she is a clear descendant of Mrs. Rad- Albert turns her loose from the Solitary Castle with this con-
cliffe's hypersensitive heroines who are always trying to ex- ‘ fession to his brother, Count Anhalt, who had not died after
tract the maximum of imaginative pleasure from every circum- ' all: "This will, I destroyed and afterwards got Angela to the
stance. She is addicted to medieval romances and often halluci- solitary castle, where, during your absence in the army, I P0‘-
nates hysterical predicaments for herself to go along with the soned her mind a9ﬂi"5t Y0" 3"d di5h°“°"'ed her pe'$°"'" H15 C°"'
actual dangers with which she must cope. Given her temperament fession is an appfﬂprietely muddied c°"¢1"5i°" t° 5 t"°'°¥9hiY
it is not surprising that Margiana vanishes without warning from , muddled chapbook, an example of the dregs of the short Gothic.
t e narrative seemin l the victi r ' ' _ r
tinence. uhiie she glgnguishes Tnofti: n3:;e::?tdg::lie;:c::a i 449. THEODORE AND EMMA: on, THE ITALIAN BANDIT, IN HHICH THE FATAL
Ethelred marry and Genevieve assumes the duties of the Gothic E EFFECTS OF REVENGE ARE PORTRAYEO IN THE CHARACTER OF MARQUI5
heroine during Margiana's absence from the story. Dark compTi¢a- i DE ROYIGNO, HHO, DISAPPOINTED AT THE PREFERENCE GIVEN TO THE
tions, intricate, genealogical twists, and strange digressions COUNT DE VALENZA BY THE DAUGHTER OF THE DUKE OF PARMA, E"-
from the main plot lead up to the proper union of Margiana and ROLLS HIMSELF IN THE COMPANY OF OARING BANDITTI, IN ORDER TO
Ethelr@d- Upon a false report of Ethelred's death, Genevieve ACCOMPLISH HIS IJIABOLICAL SCHEME or ASSASSINATING THE count,
dies. lilhen the still living Ethelred returns, he has in his pos- inni OTHER CRUELTIES PRACTICED av THE MARQUI$ AND H15 $0",
session documents restoring Lord Hiddrington to royal favor and HALDEMAR, HHO, lN.THE ENGAGEMENT HITH THEODORE, ACCIDENTALLV
he also has in his possession the liberated Margian3_ The .0- KILLS HIS own FATHER! ALSO, THE MELANCHOLY CATASTROPHE HHICH
mance ends with the conventional marriage and a vow by the ATTENDS THE COUNTS DE VALENZA AND RAVENNA» IN THE DEATHS OF
couple to rebuild Hiddrington Tower to its former grandeur. In I THEODORE AND E"MA- L°"d°" 1 3- 5aii9¥, 139°-
the historical variety of Gothic romance, marriage is often the R9EdiEi°"5i "°"e .
bourgeois symbol of the maiden's submission to virtuous male au- ' Gothiﬁ TYDB1 5°thi¢ 5"5Pb°°k (C°mP°$it9 Plagiarism f'°m m"]'
thority. After torment, domination, and bondage in the menacing tip‘? 5°thiC 5°"'¢e5)
labyrinth of the Gothic world, the Margianas of Gothic histori- Biographical and Research Data: None
cal fiction find release and freedom in their submission to a .
be"i9" ma5t€F- Critical Synopsis: The anonymous bluebooker is self-described
on the title page as "an Etonian." The chapbook'S synoptic title
8. A TALE OF MYSTERY: OR, THE CASTLE OF SOLITUDE, CONTAINING THE shouts its horrid wares at the reader and can be considered_ a
DREAUFUL IMPRISONMENT OF COUNT L. AND THE c0uNTE$$ HARM1NA ' fair appraisal of the content. THEODORE AND EMMA is a biblio-
HIS LADY. London = T. Pluinner for Thomas Tegg, 1803. ' ’ graphical exahiile of a blﬂebwk Pieced **°9°"“?'. "°'" °““"
Modern Reeditions: None bluebooks and chapbooks as well as many legitimate, l°"9e'
Gothic Type: Gothic chapbook 1 Gothics. A lurid title did not always guarantee lurid_ contents,
5i°9'BPhical and Research Data: None but in the case of THEODORE AND EMMA, the reader looking for ka-
leidoscopic Gothic thrill must have felt satisfied. The Etoni-
Critical Synopsis: Of low quality and nearly inarticulate ' a"'5 G°thiC 5BmPieT 31i°"ed the reader t° choose from all de'
this 72-page chaphook scarcely conceals its direct thefts from I Qrees °f "°"°' f'°m 'em°te~ aPP'ehe"5iVe shudders t° 'a“c°"§*
Reeve's OLD ENGLISH BARON (see #355) and several other Gothics * $"PeF"ﬂf"'al effusions. Hilliam Hhyte Hatt's assessment of this
in which fraternal rivalry leads to murder. The epigraph from tYP9 Of G°thiC 5h°rt fi¢ti°" 5"°"id he Clted "he" ¢°"5ld9T‘"Q
HAMLET, "I could a tale unfold whose lightest word would harroy » the numerous bluebooks and chapbooks as a phenomenon worthy of
"P thy $H“l,' had become a horrific cunnonpiage of this type of - further study: "In the shilling shockers we are enabled to study
chapbook. At the castle of Arzen in Baden, Count Albert inherits the unadorned elements of Engiisﬁ G°Ehl¢‘5m 3"d E? ﬂPPfe¢late
9VBFythi"9 from his brother, Count Anhalt, after Ahhait-5 , , the absurd extent to which the Gothic vogue was carried in the
strange and sudden death. "Everything" includes Anhalt's wife d99ii"i"9 years °f IE5 1if9~'
the Countess Harmina, who must be found and freed from a soli: i
tary castle mentioned in 3 manu5¢ript found among Anhait-S ‘ 45Q_ THERESA: OR, THE HIZARD'S FATE. London : Minerva-Press for A.K.
egfects after his death. Albert is basically a good man, but he Newmﬂ", 1315* _
c anges rapid after his broth r‘ 4 -_ ' ‘ Reeditions: one _ '
zh?:t G0E"iC mugt have a villain. The Eha$E§:E n§:'n§§¢:§§§“S§o§ 5 Gothic Type: Domestic fiction (intermittent Gothic scenes and
a y desultor addin and subtr tin devices)‘ i ' '
which have nothing to dog with earlier Zv§2§§'§'"e§ZZ  T Biographical and Research Data: Lévy. LE ROM" "@°T*"°UE“
aimlessly through several castles. Whoever the anonynnus Goth ANGLAIS, P-44?-

390 THE FIRST GDTHICS i
Critical Synopsis: The author of the four-volume Gothic is
self-described as “A Member of the Inner Temple." Probably for
connercial reasons, the lawyer-become-novelist disguised a do-
mestic chronicle behind a roaring Gothic title. Wizardry is
present, but only as a slight and minor episode in the family
histories of Henry de Montfort, adopted son of Lord Amersville,
and Edward Rivers, the future Lord Ellesmere. As a young man,
Henry has grown up with and fallen in love with Isabel de Mont- T w
fort. The pair have a series of romantic and occasionally Gothic
adventures in and around de Montfort Castle "situated in a wild W,
and lovely part of Derbyshire." An anguished parting of the two -F".
takes place when Isabel becomes eighteen and is "commanded" by
Lord Amersville to marry Edward Halsingham. She is not tormented
or driven into the clutches of a monster by her own father as a
true Gothic heroine would certainly have been,--simply ordered 1
to wed a rather ordinary man. Henry weeps, wanders, philoso- ' l
phizes morbidly, and finally settles in Venice, to return after
many years when he hears that lsabel has become a widow. There
is some incidental Gothicism in the lives of both parties and
even a supernatural occurrence or two. The final voluire deals §
with the happy marriage of Edward Rivers, Henry's protégé, and ”
the young Isabel, daughter of Isabel de Montfort and heir pre-
sumptive to the estates. The novel is a good example of the
Gothic undergoing a resentimentalization.
we ‘ ' I II-
0
451. Thomas, Francis Tracy. MONK-HOOD PRIORY. London 1 Longman and
Rees 1799.
Reeditions: None
Gothic Type: Sentimental Gothic (Radcliffean imitation) Q
Biographical and Research Data: None ' &'
1*
Critical Synopsis: The horror title is a deliberate falsifi-
cation since the novel administers the milder sort of terrors ’
rather than engaging in the sanguinary supernaturalism typical
of Monk Lewis. The novel traces in letters the anti-sentimental
education of a young woman characterized along the lines of Mrs
Radcliffe's heroines, but hardly inhabiting a fantastically
reconstructed fifteenth-century world. Miss Sullivan reads the
right (or the wrong) romances, becomes infected with the Gothic
disease, and can only effect a cure by exposing herself to the
imagined perils of the Priory. Vet, the novel is not satiric but
quite serious in its portrait of a young lady learning to manage
her Gothic tendencies. MONK-HOOD PRIORY is precisely the sort of
Gothic romance read and enjoyed by Jane Austen and her sisters.
Her high-spirited mockery of the ridiculous fictitiousness of
Gothic fiction in NORTHANGER ABBEY (see #012) may well have been
encouraged by amused readings of just this routine kind of
" avy/¢  7)  /01% 7’
452. Thomson, Alexander. THE THREE suosrs or THE FOREST: A TALE OF ' “ ‘ ' V " '
, q . “
HORROR, AN ORIGINAL ROMANCE. London : J. Ker, 1803. "
Reeditions: None
Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (terror mode)
Biographical and Research Data: None
5
5
6.
- ; , - Q ~
' ‘ /1: “IIﬁ“I('I!¢%)l'¢II‘I!!)! 
Gothic which took the reeducation of an overemotional heroine a (9%, '7'!”/¢ H‘ 1‘ ¢ ’
bit too seriously
ta |

THE FIRST GUTHICS 391
' Critical Synopsis: This is an utterly routine Gothic romance
3 wﬁth the author using all of the devices and scenes that had
g become the common property of all Gothicizers. The occurrence of
; the word "Original" in any Gothic subtitle after 1800 was simply
j a commercial cliche not to be taken seriously. The three ghosts
' of the forest are not ghosts at the tale's outset which begins
, in Orleans in the mid-seventeenth century. The plot is about the
three daughters of Baron Arnhault, the upright and cautious
‘ Isabella, the lowdown and malicious Octavia, and the innocent
and otherworldly Adela. Their cousin, Count Orlando Brissac, has
an amorous interests in all three sisters and a marital interest
in the youngest, Adela. Orlando is an intriguer and a sensual-
ist, although his conscience is far too active to permit him to
develop into a fullgrown Gothic villain. Encouraged by the bad
sister, Octavia, he proves quite capable of two standard Gothic
5 activities, abduction and murder. 0ctavia's unwanted husband,
T‘ Honorio, is eliminated by homicide and her rival sister, Isabel-
la, is carried off and locked up by Orlando. Octavia exults in
these crimes and pursues her scheme to have Orlando for herself
until Adela returns to Orleans from her sheltered life in a con-
vent school. Adela's-presence causes some moral consternation in
Orlando. He would now confess his crimes and send Octavia away
to the convent to purge her of evil ways. To get the three
ghosts of the title into the plot, the Gothic novelist summons
expediency and coincidence to his aid. Octavia is murdered by
those assigned to convey her to the monastery. On the very same
night, Isabella is slain during an attempted escape from her
musty cell. Together with the murdered Honorio, they form a
spectral trio or the three ghosts of the forest. For the remain-
der of the narrative, the ghosts of Honorio and Isabella func-
tion as moral tutors to the wavering Adela, who vacillates
between the advances of the tainted Orlando and the taking of
the veil. Her choice of the religious life apparently precipi-
tates Orlando's death. Although the Gothic‘ at this level was
intended primarily to entertain via supernatural titillation, it
could also serve as a means of reaffirming the middleclass
mind's sentimental and moral ideals as expressed through the
"right" decision of the maiden to expend her energies in vir-
tuous seclusion.
453. THE TOMB OR AURORA: OR, THE MVSTERIOUS SUMMONS. London : Ann
Lemoine and J. Roe, 1807.
Reeditions: None
Gothic Type: Gothic chapbook
Biographical and Research Oata: None
Critical Synopsis: Attached to the main tale is THE PRISONER:
OR, THE FORTRESS OF HOHLITZ, A GERMAN TALE, bringing the chap-
book up to 29 pages. AURORA is Z5 pages long. The name of one of
the principal characters, the Marquis de Vere;zi, strongly sug-
gests that the youthful Shelley had perused this little Gothic
at the height of the Gothic rage and remembered this character
when he came to write his first Gothic novel,’ ZASTROZZI (see
#404), in which Verezzi also appears. In his biography of Shel-
ley, Thomas Medwin points out that as early as 1803, Shelley and

39? "'5 FIR“ '5°T"I@5 ms rmsr comes 19:
his SCh?°] friends. at Sion HOUSE “Ere reS°rti“g .t° a 1°“ as remained true of hundreds of horrid Gothics, the sales were
clrculatlng Ilbrary In Brenlforq to °bta'" coleted Gathlc Chap‘ brisk despite the reviewers‘ ire. The initial spectacular event
b2°kS gf :qRoRA;§fty¥°' Thas ;'tt1e,Sh°cke' ‘S built ar9“"d the of the novel finds the heroine in classic Gothic posture,
5]?r 7 at '3 mot‘ bu. the es hirglne “hod €"r2S °"t ta :9 --alone, pursued in the night by someone or something, stumbling
ah'v: :_e"f.er‘ om 1SI°pe"e la" v'Sc°Ye'e °. e e?pty €? t B into the midst of sexual peril in an enclosed locale. The manda-
°.ap °° 5 ‘na page‘ T the “Sh E"Et‘a".Sett'n9.° Pa Szio , tory storm rages and the requisite lightning outlines the boul-
di Revella, the Marquis de Verezzi is being married to Olivia ' ders and cliffs Surrounding Ro$51ind De T,acy.s night journey as
qeila MaSS'"a' a “"10" of good a"d evil as it turns out’ .011"a she moves through bandit infested country. There are no sanctu-
is a schemer lotter m rd r ss l t d " - - -
p , u e e sexua igress an mistress
of infamy.“ The plagiarizing chapbooker had numerous sources of L arlﬁir §?g R°5a]‘?d th'°:9?°“E.thed"°ve‘ aa bog? gimllyahome and
feminine nefariousness to draw upon for Olivia's portrait. Just gig" gréC?p?:§tZdag$ShEr f:§té:gfa€=g:r Sigsaaggnnj Egg??? H23?
Estths marrl?9ehV°:5 gas S°]€m"lzed’ a 5tra"9Er §hr§5t5h.a "ate i ing disposed of his wife, Lady Cecil, by a well-planned acci-
I" ° erezzi S an ‘T e mys erlous 5umm°"S"‘mp Drlng ‘m t° 9° dent, he has turned his attention to harassing Rosalind with
to the Church of San Salvador. The Church and convent are the
home of the beautiful girl Aurora, met and educated by Verezzi
some years ago. He had meant to marry her when her education was
enforced marriage to the ltaliahate monster, Signor Mondovini.
His infamous career as a professional seducer and tormentor of
. . . , . females makes him the perfect selection of mate to drive Rosa-
§§?l1l§‘i; ‘ZZZ 3533?’. Z23‘? l"§Z.§‘éZl2iZ iZZZZ‘bl2Zi§Z"; "$.33? “"" ‘"""@- "W9 “@"@‘° the P'**~="*"‘ Li" °@°“ "="'=‘" *°
erected tomb watched over by a oun monk who informs V r i \ death by_a pet buffalo released for that purpose by Sir_ Raymond
y g , e ezz
that Rurora‘s death has been the result of Olivia's plotting and _ and -hazingd filt t"e]ie§her°us hand of M°"dov‘n1 grasping after
his infidelity. The epitaph reads, "Aurora--The Victim of Per- l ee;a;q hﬁnsgge’ Zgégvgg‘ Cﬁgia 32:02:":5ea"?°0;;";an§?ggug? ta:
fidy‘" In a few quick Strokes’ the Ggth bri"9S the chapbook [D a f Cgcilsy A set of conplex coincidences finalTy returns her to the
Satisfying climax and dispenses rewards and punishments. The ;‘ - ' - ~
death and entombment of Aurora are fabrications of her clever
brother, the guardian monk encounted by Verezzi. To ensnare the
ensnarer, Olivia, and to expose her infamy, the young monk en-
=-arm,
Cecil estate where, of course, her genealogical triumph and the
foiling Mondovini are waiting for her. One of Signior Mondo-
vini's earlier victims had been Charlotte D'Acre, sister of a
. . f woman who had cared for Rosalind after she had escaped from Sir
cguaagei he? advaztis an? e?t'a€S 2e; '"t°.a" 3b€:d°"e€.d‘5p]ay ;‘ Raymond Cecil's grasp. Her sister, the unfortunate Charlotte
O E . exua appe 1 es’ n '0“ ° erezzl an . .2 en ‘re c?"' 1 D'Acre, is Rosalind's mother by Mondovini's sexual treachery. In
gre9at‘°n’ the young m°"k aiso pr°duceS the 1‘v1“9 and nubile l crude and cumbrous form, we recognize the themes of incest nar-
UFDTG. ‘
rowly averted and of goodness born out of evil in the revelation
. . i . of Rosalind's parentage. The novel ends with another enforced
454. Tomlins, Elizabeth Sophia. ROSALIND DE TRACY. London . Charles marriage, this time for the villain’ "hi]e the heroine rekindles
gggQ{;i§g2§‘"one her interest in life at the tomb of her mother. Saturated with
Gothic Type: Pure or hi h Gothic (terr r mode) incestuous and aggressive motifs finally dispelled by the in-
Biugraphical and Researgh Data: "Due 0 credible removal of _the villainous father figure, Rosalind De
l
Tracy takes its place in the Gothic's seemingly endless maze of
Critical Synopsis: An innocuous or sentimental title could i painful p1easure'
1
often conceal a garish Gothic romance. Sickelmore's MARV-JANE
5 THE TRADITION OF THE CASTLE DR SCENES IN THE EMERALD ISLE.
. 45 . : ,
i;.::..§t°2:..i:: :z":;;i:;: ‘f.2:::£:°.£§.:’:“i!.i;:.*i:.**;2i;:%.i: ~ ;:;:<.-*:..;.::“l.,::**"*"* 
of Radcliffean and Rochean Gothic fantasy are here taken to the Gothic Type. 5entimenta1 Gothic
extreme from the violent opening event to the absurd genea- -
Biographical and Research Data: Sunnnrs GOTHIC QUEST, p.29.
logical climax which bequeaths to the victimized heroine the ’
truth about “Er muther and puqlshei the tale‘; vlllaln 1" an l Critical Synopsis: Sometimes attributed to Regina Maria
“n“S“a] fa§h1°" by compelling hlm t9 marry a German mad“°m§"' Roche, the novel is Gothic only in the limited sense that a few
The events 1" het“ee" the v1°1e"t upenlng End crazy §°"c]u5'°" l of its Irish ghost stories told by the D'Brian family around the
“Te equ§!‘y prepqsternqs a"d thefefurg nlghiy appea]1n9 t° the fireside are "at and about Castle Actoir-na-Grewie" and do have
fin de siecle Gothic audience. Havin witnessed the cunmer i l v -
g c a . 1
success of irrational excess elsewhere throughout the Gothic ‘ iﬁfiﬂq §0ihi€ content. Tge castge itsegf is an“ old cast E,
a in 1 s ristine a s ha spawne spectres. The novel is
' flctiqn of the ‘79o|s’ the Strategy f°‘]°Eed by thls .GPth‘C mainly a tale og-Irish politics and wild living with the sons of
n°ve1'5t .5h°uld "Qt be c°"dem"ed tun haSt1]y' Mr?‘ T°m1'“§ “as the O'Brien family, Donaghue and Terence, torn between their
"ot creatlng high literary art; She "3? 'ep'°d9c‘qg a highly service in the ranks of the English army and their loyalty to
marletable .Pr°duct for the hyeeragtlve Gothic ‘"dustry' The their country. Their father, Ulick 0'Brian, has been wounded at
reviewers might scoff at the book s literary worthlessness, but , Hater]0o_ The Suns. patriotjc di‘emma is further c0mp1icated by

394 THE FIRST GUTHICS TI-E FIRST GOTHICS 395
their involvement with two handsome English ladies, Lavinia and Biographical and Research Data: Sunumrs, GOTHIC QUEST, p.
i 170.
Rosetta. Their Irish rival is Lady Jane Boyle. Although it of-
fers some Gothic substories, the novel in the main cannot
properly be called Gothic although the title might have deceived critical 5ynQp5i5; using the Baransi wars as violent aack_
some of Mrs. Roche's readers in that direction. Here Roche's
, ground, the Gothified history extends the connonplace device of
Werk °"e5 mere t° the VlVld Piethhe ht the TeekTe55 ]iVl"9 ef , the recovered ancient manuscript to new extremes. A royal pris-
the Irish landlords in Maria Edgeworth's CASTLE RACKRENT (1801) V oner's freedom is made to rely on an elaborate process of its
the" t° the E"9Tl5h G°thi¢ t'ﬂdltl0"- " location in Spong Castle in Yorkshire. Enploying the gloomy
Yorkshire landscape as its chief Gothic locale the novel slowly
456. Tuckett, T.R. URBINO: OR, THE VAULTS OF LEPANTO: A ROMANCE. dispenses genealogical justice for the royal ’prisoner through
London : Minerva Pr f A K N ‘
- 955 0' - - ehmﬂha 1314- the appearances of the ghost of Spong Castle. Disclosures of
Reedltl°"51 N°"e ~ family evil come in the form of a long-lost history of the pris-
Gethlﬁ Tynal Phre "T hi9h 5°thi¢ (h°'r°r mode! lmltﬂtlﬂh 0f oner's ancestor who has been secluded in a German fortress while
OTRANTO) returning from a crusade. Secret family papers and missing
Biographical and Research Data: None
parchnents of sinister details never seem to lose their Gothic
' currency. Here, the manuscript comes to light by way of a pro-
chltieai 5Y"0P5l51 A" ﬂrthﬂdﬂl ltﬂliﬂhite Gothle T" the ""- 3 tective spirit assigned to the role of revealer in this highly
derground mode, the novel borrows scenery and situation from Qtrangaesque rnman¢e_
numerous sources all the way back to THE CASTLE OF OTRANTO (see
#456) Lepanto perhaps intentionally evokes "Otranto " Subterra-
- - : I 459. HALDECK ABBEY. London : Minerva-Press for Hilliam Lane, 1795.
nean or sepulchral allusiveness in a Gothic title was no assur r ' ' - '
_ ‘- Reeditions. None
ﬂhee that the ﬂ¢tl°" 0f the "UVBT "Ovid take P1669 T" i h°"l- Gothic Type: Marginal Gothic (imitation of Radcliffean land-
fying underworld. But here the trio of standard Gothic char- ’ gcapgg)
acters, the maiden (Hilda), the villain (Henrico), and the vir- Biggraphigal and Research paga; none
tuous rescuer (Alfredo),do engage in their ballet of love and
death in the passageways beneath the Castle of Le anto. Th
p e . Critical Synopsis: An amateurish and not-very-Gothic novel
nvrk'$ underground imagery is unite Powerful and again Suggests with a misleading title, HALDECK ABBEY chronicles the misadven-
thit the 5°thlC'5 Persistent symbﬂlism Of the underground was tures of Mary Magdalena de Tourville and her daughter Mary
designed to be a metaphor for the buried or subconscious aspects " Magdalen, The period is the reign of the Grand Monarque, ‘Louis
of the self. ' ' ' ' '
XIV with the Huguenot persecutions used to furnish the-violent
i i religious background. Haldeck Abbey itself is a pleasant spot in
457- VhL0"3R°$A1 OR, THE VENETIAN NUN~ Lvndnn I Minerva-PFBSS for L Worcestershire on the Severn and is ruined but not haunted. It
Lahei hehmih, 1304- ' 2' is "a place calculated to inspire a romantic fancy with admira-
Reeditions: None Q tion" and is part of the estate of the Arnold family, the Ladies
Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (elements of the monasti
C h” Catherine and Ann, and young Lord York, the Earl of Lavent. The
shocker) .5; '
Biographical and Research Data: Sunmers, GOTHIC QUEST, p.85.
Critical Synopsis: Appears to derive its plot almost entirely
from Mrs. Radcliffe's THE ITALIAN (see #350), but also incorpor-
ates the harsh horror of various monastic shockers. The Venetian
nun is the beautiful and unwilling Sister Ellena, a prisoner of
Abbey ls also a place of refuge for the Huguenot heroine, Magda-
lena, when she escapes to England from the evil designs of her
aunt, the Catholic Countess Veraille. Long sections of the novel
are devoted to poetic rhapsodies on religious freedom or to
romantic travelogues on a variety of historical sites. The
heroines visit the Roman ruins at Chalons, Bath, Bristol, and in
the second volume, we have an extended topographical description
V6T°mhF°5ﬂ'5 di5m3T eh6PeT5, 5ee'et rites. Bhd mE"aCiﬂQ fathers. t of Swiss scenery around Berne. Mid-way through volume two, the
As usual, the pining maiden forced to take the veil can expect first heroine suddenly expires,--apparently dying of relief at
no mercy or assistance from the church, always the agency of ' '
darkness and abuse in Gothic fiction. Radcliffean imitations
such as THE CDNVENT OF THE GREY PEHITENTS: OR, THE APUSTATE HUN
the sight of the spires of Haldeck Abbey,~-her place assumed by
her daughter. Magdalena does not just die; she "retires to the
silent mansions of undisturbed repose in the vaulted sepulchre."
(see #484) could sometimes be nearly 5"9e'i°' $0 THE ITALIAN Having menaced the mother, young Lord Arnold, who has "a tinc-
itself, but most attempts to duplicate the poetic gloom of Mrs.
Radcliffe were pallid and mechanical like VALOMBROSA.
ture of the libertine and murdering execution in his eyes" now
proceeds to endanger the daughter. However, she is befriended by
- _ Miss Huffy, enterprising daughter-of Sir Thomas Huffy, who takes
458. Vanzee, Maria. FATE: OR, SPONG CASTLE. London : Parsons, 1803. ‘ up her cause, foils the seduction campaign, and helps young
Reeditions: None i Magdalen to realize her heritage as the rightful Countess of
Gnthic Tyne= Pure or high Gothic (imitation of THE CASTLE OF , Lavent The necessary Gothic motif of flight and pursuit is
OTRANTO) ‘~- present in the narrative, but only in slight and undeveloped

396 THE FIRST GUTHICS yr‘ Tl£ FIRST GOTHICS 397
TOCW, for the real purpose of the narrative is not to shock or F become violent sexual aggression, relics of the past assume a
thrill but to give the reader long recitals of romantic scenery. L; vile life of their own and refuse to remain in the dead past,
The fact that the novel terminates with a moral which does not ' and the mlion supernatural erupts with sinister f<>r¢e- These
fit the fate of the characters is a final indication of book's F Gothic ideas are to be found in Halpole‘s first Gothic, THE CAS-
disharmonious construction. "Thus we are ever blinded to good . ~ TLE OF OTRANTO (see #466) and are given fuller development by
and evil," runs the moral. "Thus are our best intentions often e .t Walker in his paradigmatic Gothic romance, THE HAUNTED CASTLE.
Productive of the worst misfortunes, and the worst of evils com- kl , without pretending to originality, Halker nevertheless shows
pensated with good." But the moral has little or nothing to do ' ‘Q’ flashes of Gothic genius in his amelioration of Halpole's proto-
with the events of the story in this inferior Gothic. ‘ R type. The preface to the novel reads like a manifesto of high
Gothicism as Walker declares his purposes‘ "In the choice of
460. Halker, George. THE ROMANCE OF THE CAVERN: OR, THE HISTORY OF U; subject, I have fallen in with the times." The plot itself is
FITZ-HENRY AND JAMES. London : Minerva Press for William , fl perhaps best described as a subterranean biography of the or-
Lane, 1792. . _¥ phaned hero, Ignatius, as he makes a dark journey into the inte-
Modern Reeditions: None Wt rior of the building (and symbolically, into the interior of
Gothic Type: Grotto Gothic (Gothified history, imitation of "7 self) seeking clues to his missing heritage in the dark corri-
5°Phi6 Lee's THE RECESS) ' 1» dors of the haunted castle. He has previously proved worthy of
Biographical and Research Data: Sunners, GOTHIC QUEST, p. ‘}‘ this quest by rescuing the maiden, Adelais, from attackers who
366. "' ' Z
%
.
were trying to rape her and murder her uncle, Reginald Lace
Ignatius had been found and educated for just such a Gothic
Critical Synopsis: Appears to be a masculinized version of , K. quest by the bachelor crusader, Pierre du Pin, who had discov-
the royal twin theme as derived from Sophia Lee's THE RECESS E ered the child wEEPl"9 °Ve' 3 l3d¥'5 b°d¥ °" "l5 '@t"T" f'°m the
(see #240). The novel conforms to sentimental patterns of action ‘f, holyland. Walker moves quickly through these Gothic preliminar-
interspersed with episodes of terror, escape, pursuit, menace,
and death. The history of the hidden royal brothers is free and
ies in order to station his characters within the haunted castle
where Ignatius speaks some lines heard repeatedly from heroic
inventive in mimicry of Halker's model. Pronounced Radcliffean - , explorers throughout Gothic fiction: "By what strange fatality
elements also occur, giving the novel a strong tonal resemblance
have I been conducted to this place?--unless indeed--And now for
to Mrs. Radcliffe's ROMANCE OF THE FOREST (see $348) of 1791. 5‘ the first time it occurred to him that it perhaps related to the
Readers of Gothified history soon became aware that caves and l discovery of his birth.‘ Prior owner of the haunted Castle i5
caverns attaching to the grounds of great castles were often ,\ the murdered Manfredi whose relationship to Ignatius is gradual-
reserved for completely fictitious Scottish royal children who ., ly made known. A suggestion of incest is maintained throughout
required supernatural protection from the ire and suspicion of \ 5 by the possibility (eventually proved wrong) that Manfredi is
Queen Elizabeth as she vented her anger on her hated cousin, 1, the father of both Ignatius and Adelais. Once within the Castle
Mary Queen of Scots. ‘ Y‘ of Trone, Ignatius, his talkative servant, Le Moine, and his fu-
' -Q‘ ture mate, Adelais, go about the hazardous business of investi-
461. Halker, George. THE HAUNTED CASTLE: A NORMAN ROMANCE. London : l }hT gating its crypts, vaults, and hidden passageways. Assisting
Minerva-Press for William Lane, 1794. I Q?” them from time to time is a mysterious figure in white armor and
Modern Reeditions: None §'5s luring them ever closer to the secret chamber are the usual aud-
Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (imitation of THE CASTLE OF ii iovisual inducements with the final phase of the quest guided by
QTRANTO) V git the beckoning phantom of the slain Manfredi. In these scenes,
Biographical and Research Data: Tarr, CATHOLICISM IN GOTHIC »§ Halker's descriptive skill attains a certain chilling power not
FICTION, pp.1, 18, 19, SO, 69, 7O, 103, 105; Lévy, LE ROMAN $3 always achieved by the producers of stock Gothic thrills. The
“GOTHIQUE" ANGLAIS, pp.449, 625. ~ Ci scene in which Ignatius penetrates to the secret of self
f‘ indicates that a good Gothic writer could unite horror, wonder,
Critical Synopsis: Gothic fiction's central and most durable eh and pleasure in the casting of this stock moment of self-
symbol is sumned up in Walker's title,--the "haunted castle." $\ understanding. Hith his birthright secure and the threat of
Castles, abbeys, mansions, and great houses traditionally sym- Q‘ incest removed, Ignatius is in a position to inherit the haunted
bolize social order and psychological stability for their h? castle and make it habitable again. The critic, Eino Railo,
occupants. But when the castle or mansion is haunted, as it *1 chose to entitle his history of the Gothic novel, THE HAUNTED
always is in Gothic fiction, what is being imaged is the threat- , CASTLE, in connemoration of Halker's expert replica of Halpole's
ened disintegration of these two forms of order, the firm struc— Z; infernal invention.
ture of family and society and the coherence of the mind. Hithin 1' . - ’
Walker's haunted castle of Trone, the chaotic conditions implied G 462. Halker, George. THE HOUSE OF TYNIAN. London : Minerva-Press for
by such haunting prevail in force. Domestic and psychic orders Hilliam Lane, 1795; Dublin‘: P. Hogan, P. Byrne, H; Jones, J
have broken down, chronology and genealogy are in disarray, ‘ Rice, and G. Folingsby, 1796.
maternal and paternal identities are hideously blurred, love has \- ; Modern Reeditions: None

398
THE FIRST GOTHICS ' THE FIRGT EUTHICS 399
Gothic T - ' ‘ - ~ .
rlons r°yg§nr?:Is°?gs:s§al 5°t"l¢ (ﬂﬂlemlﬁal elements, reac- _climh§ a gibbet tolavoinndesegtion, then slutches the corpse of
Biographical and Resssrcn D _ i i a con emne _crim1na as e o y swings rom the rope is a
Fosters HISTORV OF THE PRE_R8;gnT?E"w§;Er ?3Tgngrg:g$T, P-gli purely Gothic §Pectacle. Vet, Nalker's idea of the novel of pur-
Lévyi LE ROMAN -GOTHIQUE. ANGLAIS pp 419 462 sis , D-2 2, pose charged with Gothic energy was a departure, and in some
' ' = = - respects, a rebuttal of the radical libertarian propaganda of
critic I - _ _ Godwin and Holcroft. Like Godwin and Holcroft, Halker used
ssllsr opsrsrsngﬂgniésinsnesgssrstnntrgnngnrsnnssnnnsnlf a nook- i r Gothic effects and situations to emphasize the evil consequences
Snifrs in the rrrss or Gnrnir ns snsss so nrrsr sns ns_ s rewd s of passion backed by unlimited Dower and he shares with these
distributor of aii sorts of fiction ns nss sris r Pun ic. As_a novelists the sense of the individual entrapped by Class codes
own writing to Contemporary snd'csnririsns lirgrsﬁ J32; :15 ~ and institutional authority. But while Halker used the Gothic
A150 in nigh demand during the lass irgnis nsrs ns i Y r an s. \ format of flight and entrapment to engage readers TH his notions
ca] ldesss the trsrrsrisn rissisn of sns sssssrnss o l rad1- s of reformi he stopped short nf_advocating a _rexolutionar¥ re-
school of Godwin, gages and Hoicroft Snrisl nsrrsr p0 nmical organizatign of society. Liberal as he is, remarks J.M.S.
terrifying climate or snnsrssry nsiissssi snsss rsrssrran sne Tompkins,_ Qalher knows where to stop, and her stops ‘short _of
nnesenten to readers by nsr or Gssnis ssrsrnsrnsiis snn equen iy l perfectibility in_d1rect defiance of the rationalistic Godwin-
in these noveiss uaiker,s Contribution rs rns Gsrnis symio 5 r_ ian solution to social evil. The construction of the novel and
ideass The House of Trnisns misss nnnsnirsrisn ssnrsmsnsnpsesnof i, its ‘interplay of character are thoroughly Gothic. Theodore Cy-
intrigue, and rationalist polemics to Exp05e tns n r , 0 I6 T Dhon s haunted castle is a closed society controlled _by_ his
GOdnin.s anarchic rnsorisss is is s nnvsi Os snsﬁa neszes in power-cfazed_ father with the Support of Theodore s iniquitous
chambers and forbidden snsisl insss ins ssss snsl n nrrndden l uncle (identified only as Lord_ D**) whose SDyl"9 activities
man and snrsrnnmsn snsrssrsrs ss sns. sssssn or snsesn 0 I hu- finally force Theodore to commit the homicide. lhe conflict be-
restricted for the most part to the nannted House of T ?Ve T15 tween father and son arises out of Squire Cyphon s cold deter-
Huuse is -haunted" in two senses: first by snssssrsi ynisn. he i mination _to prevent Theodore from marrying for love rather than
the crime of non sns nnnss ssns rs Ens ssmsi or rgui rover l for position. To keep Theodore and the lower class Eliza Hanson
Seconds it is nsnnrsn by nsnnsrsns nsn snn isrsrsl snsnsan.sand _ aparti Squire Cyphon has him committed to the madhouse, an
power and property as represented through the ours skin na_0nt exper1?nce which provides the authorlwith the opportunity for an
Deimbn,k_ Mncn traditional Gothic ssslrisy sss on D _in_ eis , explosion of moral provaganda. Eliza s father, a poor ClEFlCa lS
HonSe_ Readers could instsnrlr rssssniss9nsirsr. Wlsslﬂ the J bedeviled for marrying the couple after Theodore manages to es-
the inplements of Halpﬂlels CASTLE or oinnnsn rs s F:4idﬂCE on I cape from the asylum. Eliza herself has aroused the lecherous
cnnid aiso deters rns inflnsnss sf rnsrs Rssns snesn n§6) sand n, attention of the vile uncle who then proceeds with a raPe_ Dlan
ghost of the faniiy fonnner_ Bur walker nss inrsnr E lg"; led in that will humiliate his nephew, feed his desires, and ruin the
beyond the nsnai Gothic nsngsrry or rs nss rns sn sgn ge ting =, young woman: These lurid events drive Theodore Cyphon out of
a point_ He honed to instruct and rsrnrm rns rssgsrqnisn r0 ma e , i hiding and into the crime of Justifiable_homic1de. Following the
to the dangerous nrongnsss nr rns snlr or sns s O ni n n espect l 3 murder of his uncle, Theodore is again forced to 90 underground
in Godninis theories of individual rrssdnm 9 W c e ound l V; to_ elude _the pursuers unleashed by his furious father. At this
_ ' point, he lS offered refuge by the benevolent Jew, Shechem Ben-
453_ uaik r i l sadi, a pariah who is at the same time one of the novel's few
i §_’c§$g§$f'1;g§?D0RE c'P“0N- OR» THE BENEVOLENT JEH. London ' compassionate human beings in an otherwise vicious world of
Moder" Reeditionsi None ‘ :0w$rS::k:rs.h_Apnr$hen:ed nann jailennas gnst, nheodore neguses
Gothic T i - - . _ 0 ig or is i e w en e earns a iza as peris e in
Binsrsrnfgsi PgnﬁmlngsssrgnionssnumnggnssEgthnnrsﬂzgennsé 1 the madhouse after being sexually violated by her brutal keep-
ENGLANDs pp 269_270s 321_322_ Snmnsrs nornrs Qnsss L In l 1 ers. His demand for the death P§nalt¥ brings him to the scaffold
Fusgerr HISTORY U; THE PRE_R6"nnTIC navrr In I P-81. for a second time in an episode which parallels the earlier
273_ ENGLAND, DD.272- scene where he had embraced the gibbeted corpse. In his death
speech from the scaffold, he sets forth an eloquent plea for
Crigicai Synopsis: Acknonled in I T obedience to the law and accepts the justice of the death sen-
(see ‘I79, snd Gsnninls cnrrB9nrErs::s¢¥s£s sss2wNR ST. lVES l tence. but those who have gathered to witness the execution know
modeiss nriksr,s nsrrsrirs snsssssrniiy rnssn ssrs la: conscious that evil endures because the many allow power to 90 unchecked
gotnlc terrors Tnsrs is s nrsnonnssn ssrssn or nssar sorrnr and 1 in the hands of the few. From his h€glﬂ"lﬂgS as a Gothic novel-
_ici§m in fheodure cyphDn.S incarceration by his ns: gsize sGsnh- 1st in THE HAUNTED CASTLE (see #461), Halker-had decided to turn
,n a lunatic asyium in nis killing or nis nnsisP sncsn a er . his Gothic talents to the serious ends of dialectical fiction.
pengeful gt ,' » . _- 9 5"5- r In THEODORE CVPHON, he demonstrated that the machinery of horror
Pa ern of flight and pursuit and in tn
‘ f]' - . # _ 9 59lf- was absolutely compatible with an intellectual concern for so-
1" ‘cted psycholuglcal 5"ff9rl"95 of the main character Cer- ' 1
tainly, the horrifying scene in which the fugitive Théodore I °'a wrongs‘
r

400 THE FIRST GUTHICS i THE FIRST GDTHIC5 401
464- Walker. Geor e. THE THREE P - . ‘ - - -
Son Low fog G‘ “aiker an: c:iQ:DSi880R0MANCE. London . SamP- _::l:er'§‘ moss cgn€ou:din9 GO::iCiE:d€3Y0€ and zhﬁothic romagce
Moder" Reeditionsi None - - omp ica e an op eavy wi p o _uis ings a_ e rea e;
Gvthic Type: Pure or high Gothic (imitation of THE homo who entersfﬂthmust :ece:S:hHy']oSe :1: way many t!‘l$S' San? D
Biographical and Research Data: simmers GOTHIC QUEST Z9 ” THE |:3:l:S(o #5435 pg: 1. Tellﬂtgs 2 rrermrnabl ml! elem drigm
82; Ta-r, CATHOLICISM [N GOTHIC FICTION’ pp 21 30 14”p‘52’ . 4 D ,, R ‘ﬁe 1- ' , to eﬁo 8- et 3  {1} wast“ H if ~,’,
57’ 104’ 105’ 118_ Lévy LE ROMAN "GOT i L , 1 , . . an o ap ae s supe na ura_ y anima e as _e.o .7 e mai
» , H QUE ANGLAIS, p.419. f I the Pyrenees are obvious transcriptions of Lewis s Spanish Goth-
critica] S O Sis: S uar i _ _ _ ic ambiance. The persecuted Agnes, Cornelia, the wizard's daugh-
eighth novel dgzoﬁstratesq hi: Yveigatgqeiiﬁothiﬁ veig, Halkezvs i Ker dand hhE€‘ttW1qiSlS%€F, Chziszianai and tce :CCUlt1:t, Cogat
trends and tastes of Gothic fashion This boo: igslng he thn 5": D I all ty p Txs H‘ h‘ret °t‘nvd Tr €m2hs' rlmn the
$"°c"@' and is arguably the most highly éothic of Halker? Super‘ 3 er S] (thug a s £2?‘ ‘lures it 3 ii<m- an e k -min E g iy
romances. Here, Halker devotes no narrative time to r S maay ‘\ ours on at uéyd 9 '°dSh9g°,§ é ea S T°§§’"“ e i > er? is
i"d Pﬂlemics, nor is there one iota of Radcliffean rp gpagén a I nolresplnsg °tholw1n 5? llsth eDg‘th' ere‘ ni "Eve It h1m€hy
tin"; his objective is to horrify Startie dis “Sp ogngs ina- i a oose ea an 0 09! Z a h e 0 dicsrtmea th oi cares thie
Monk Lewis.s OH" audience with a bask caicuigted go oat Monﬁmuse purses fo tn ose treahers w ofweae Es?‘ inq h eks owe“ ok c
MONK (see #244) itself. lnterspersions of horror oetr- f thHE zgvi 3 lzr e as ebl °rTorS ot iii 1 tqght D§aerSP fel TE:
5"99est the construction of THE MONK. The virtuoss charurt er ‘“ fra h? er llsrcapﬁk ebot D3§SRAgHAELgsa msg delibeﬁgtﬁlu he -
are also the most voluptuous and helpless while the most ag Er; l Ar h om d‘? ear ‘e “cl , tu d f G ti? l tt' Th y thpr
characters possess almost totai power and. the evil h Eli e X i dalarltlﬂ esi9n,ha mos ahparohy o 3 ICLP o in9-, ﬁdau to
"e abetted l" their Schemes by various snectres dgvngrac erg I "Li hoes: o “ratio” fesge :1 i ‘S To’ uh amen”, ft“ e ta
many Spaniards that identification of the trio of the titl go “ 0 ?r$t1T1"3ry T1 5' agac e:€ ?re,‘t- 0 "Ce 1%: ,eo:%orted
somewhat hazardous. The Marquis Antonio De los Velos and AIS ‘S 5‘ ' grt e uf'e?a{ dn Xnopene fvhu S, e °d1c asst? la tarie
de Dania lust after Aimira, the noveiis principai maiden _ ert I L u neverL lﬂlS e i zzve o torrors an segsahioza r mgsre es
"h" is b9l"9 kept by her sadistic father Don Tevarro P d!Tl‘m ‘r carrheb orenéoth 0' 5 tas efjzherhor Y ‘C rl? eah? tm:S
i" ° "'°°‘"l"' °“$“°- "E" the "heavy Kivthic 9alleries'e t ta’ » liacth y Mylo‘: lfmseu lkm-'Y O i the Z ﬁlm erf ths 0 
Castle of Montillo is the convent of St Ursula presided 0 be 1 E Elva 1 S3 "S a ?rh§ '§§S¢’o ti‘ at I goo f E CeAt
one of the worst abbesses in Gothic fiction Mother St zveth Y tha gas e eplso E ts D"? od ls l S '0 lchamgrs T watch P
The -taint of putrescencen hangs over aii of th . go a. i t e ark center o this ar p Ste is adc t erio i icbi oi
scenes, for Halker was particularly anxious to riv:TeLewlSm?‘ wo:]d‘Tlve‘ﬁp€rgvegI thﬁompgrblent eﬁgralﬁiseblact Koomnis fuﬁ
“°§°"lP‘1i°"§ 0* deny and vadavernus atmosphere The deli § m ail h :1  a E ‘Y feih a ie ape il s r de dl chair For
heroine is victimized by the three Spaniards uﬁtii the in rious nis e _wi Gﬂt:§FSlOﬂ o the s $98 pea‘ ou od at y ti .h
tic" overtakes them, but the justice brought by the in uiq?i§i- V nn€:_ lﬂta do ichngne a ese_dur2is 1H%; an rcon rap 12:: hgie
Seems a]m°5t °'9'5had°"9d by the EXQHisite horrorsqthzt ‘on "O ‘"2 2 ° H] ' ethero stl ?" bly k iy are Sbzpnytoren 0-;
heﬂﬂed HP and piled on. A novel of lurid malignanc and ‘ fl arg ‘ ror 9 qrrors‘ ‘T e ca? fg S b at E? ?0'§l he d Zhi
tableaux of lust, THE THREE SPANIARDS is an almgst hl" lled V "am? Il wrlthgn tn blteis 0 Ire th'aE 12vDS1kfe da" dug?“ S
exampie of the vicienti hate_driven Sad0_er°ticiSm of uthivah eh . i :rriv:_ Hltdlﬂ ed ac rooms we fin] o_ ec or an i stai-
Gothic at its highest peak. Lewisis THE MONK of 1796 H S Iig onisbingkunherwor . de inci ea s o owing Doreazohs ils o
]and.S THE ABBESS of 1799 and “aikeris THE THREE SpANIARbS re- ii the ac c amber are reary an‘ mec anica .d.on‘ ap ae ts con;
1800 constitute a triangie of noxious horror withi" th G of it finement of his daughter. Corne ia, the wizar s ins a a_;on od
tradition at iarge_ e othic Q supernatural illusions throughout the castle to terri y an
a trick his unwanted guests, and Lorenzo's accidental stabbing of
Y- his sinister host during his escape from the castle are all
465' ualkerv 5e°'9€. DON RAPHAEL: A ROMANCE. London : Exton for C, 3% standard Gothic events. Only the peculiar horror generated by
:g;€€; 3:ddTi.H“'§t> 1803' if . the black room episode saves this novel from deserved mediocri-
Gathic Te l‘lgHS. Nonev v i ‘Q ty. Before the fiasco of DON RAPHAEL, Halker had displayed true
and Scha ype' "T? or h‘9" Gothlc (5t'°‘"5 “T "°FF0F, terror, hi talent in novels of doctrine which explored social problems and
Biographgggqomagtak effetts) j criticized Godwinian radicalism. The prostitution of his own
an esearch Data: 5"""EF5, GOTHIC QUE5T, P-82. i' literary talents in DON RAPHAEL apparently convinced him to
A - . _ _ _ abandon novel writing. He died in 1847.. His_ two literary
é°tﬁigt'?ﬁguS{"°P5'a-iE° 5atl5fY the Omﬂlpresent needs of the careers--that -of serious writer of novels of ideas and that of
G°thic,S GDti.ry= d 3 9' aPpare"t1Y felt Obllﬁed to turn out a ‘K Gothic novelist of sensational thrills--are less contradictory
Lewis Radciigfga Bang” tﬁg E;ﬂ9m9"t$d if dhﬂlpvle, Beckford, Q than one might think. Clearly, he is an author worthy of further
2 1 QQP an aw r G th‘ h b -H‘ ‘ L
flooding the bookstalls. The dubious product aaso DO; cR:gHggtf ‘ leaf Study and reappra1Sa
.r
l >r
l

TIE FIRST GUTHIC5  T!-E FIRST GUTHICS 403
455- olpole Horace. THE CASTLE OF OTRANTO: A GOTHIC STORY. London - internal forces of decay and collapse. And finally, Gothic meant
Thomas Lownds, 1765. - i ‘that a place could become a personality, or in larger terms,
M°dE'" Re9di!l°"$= Collier-Macmillan, 1953 ed Marvin Mud_ that the objective and inanimate could become subjective and
rick; Dover Publications, 1966, ed. E.F. Gleiler-- Pen uin animate, as every corner and murky recess of the Gothic castle
Books, 1968, eds. Peter Fairclough and Mario Praz- oxforagup ' was imbued with the will of its former owners and taking on a
1959- ed. Hilmarth S. Lewis. i ’ remorseless aliveness and a vile intelligence. All later tenants
Gothic TYPEI Pure or high Gothic (first of the first Gothics I of the haunted castle could revert to Halpole for the funda-
g"d teC""lCﬂl PT°t0tYPE) I mental imagery of Gothic crisis, the hysterical subterranean
iographical and Research Data: L n " i nd rer t icall a tremblin maiden) depicted in the act of
ANGLAI5. DP-92-14?; Va'mﬂ, Devendra égf’ tTh:0M2?pp?glHIgg§m I ggnigked ilight thgough an intgicate underground maze. The Goth-
0TRANTO,' FOLIO MAGAZINE (Winter, I976): 10-18- Riel John ic tradition begins in the basement of the Castle of Otranto,
"THE CASTLE OF OTRANTO Revisited," VALE UNIVE§51TY y[[5RARy that "long labyrinth of darkness" that winds its way through the
GAZETTE, 53 (1978): 1-17; Mac Andrew Elizabeth THE GOTHIC i history of the English novel. The floorplan for Gothic chaos is
TRADITION 1" FICTION, PP-9-18; Conger ,Syndy M '"Faith d K entirely complete in the first Gothic novel. As the maiden,
Doubt in THE CASTLE OF OTRANTO,“ GOTHIC; THE REv1Eu gr gupgg Isabella, runs from the villainous Manfred, she finds that "the
NATURAL HORROR FICTION, 1 (1979): 51-59; Ehlers Leigh A- ' lower part of the castle was hollowed into several intricate
"The Gothic world as Stage: Providence and Character in THE Cloisters; and it was not easy for one under so ouch anxiety to
CASTLE OF OTR/i"T0." HASCANA REVIEW, 14, number 2 (19a0)- 17 . ma the door that opened into the cavern. An awful silence
30; Frank, Frederick S. 'Proto-Gothicism: The Infernal Ico: reigned throughout those Subterranean regions, except now and
WW®M0fWhM€sMHH0FMMM0“0MB UUHMW l NH mm Mum M MMsmMtmdwmsMhmpuwLaM
41 (1936): 375'390- i ’ which gratings on the rusty hinges were re-echoed through that
_ _ long labyrinth of darkness." Other details of the Gothic scena-
Critical Synopsis: The blueprint for the technology of terror rio offer the elements and fixtures that would shortly become
was first laid down by the Gothic novel's first architect and the essential gadgetry of supernatural shock. In fact, every
inoresario, Horace Halpole. The prototype for all later novels I item of the castle interior has the potential for becoming a
of horror, terror, and supernatural stimulation THE CASTLE OF useful and mobile prop or symbol for later Gothicists. These
0TRANT0> °'i9i"illy iﬂpﬁared as a phony translation from th l elements include extravagant erotic villainy and exaggerated
Italian by the non-existent thirteenth-century Chronic] re exotic emotions, a crisis of power caused by an ancestral curse
Onuphrio Muralto. Hith the publication of first Gothic novele t which warns that the current lord will lose possession of the
Strawberry Hill on Christmas eve, 1764, all future Gothicisﬁs Castle "whenever the real owner should be grown too large to
and other advocates of the irratiqnal and the odd in art had T inhabit it," and a sequence of "extraordinary positions," many
instantaneous access to a thesaurus of the bizarre in iauhchin i of these absurd or repellent to reason. Halpole activates his
a school of fiction which conducted its ghastly business behinﬂ infernal machine with an initial jolt of high voltage Gothic. On
the walls and beneath the superstructure of a haunted castl l the first page of the novel, an enormous medieval helmet crash-
the amateur medievalist, Halpole had rediscovered the ion -1 ei lands from the sky thus shattering all laws of reason and gravi-
Gothic pleasure principle. To enthrall the reader the d gam?€5 ty. The great headpiece obliterates the sickly young man, Con-
of the Gothic must reach downward toward absolute darkness and Tad» b"'¥l"9 him alive be"eath the ""99 metal Ch99k5 B" the V9?!
'""5'd t°"3rd Perﬂetvral enclosure within the hell of a haunted ‘ eve of his wedding day to the Lady Isabella. Crushed with Conrad
castle. In his two prefaces to OTRANTO Halpole delineated both are the castle tyrant‘s hopes for the perpetuation of his own
the content and intent of future Gothics. The characters must ~ P°V9rf"l ll"9i9e~ c°"red'5 father ii the "$"FD9T. Mi"fFEd, sire
°§¢"D¥ "extraordinary positions." They should be contained b a ’ of the whole line of vile protagonists, bad abb°t5» 55di5ti¢
T‘@"d‘5"lY Sentient piece of Gothic architecture where an thin ’ barons, half evil madmen, and savage figures of rotten authority
C°"ld nﬂDPe" and commonly did. A feverish climate of emgtiong who are themselves prisoners of a castle, monastery, mansion or
Svvported by electrifying jolts of supernatural ener sho ld abbey. Halpole devoted some care to the lacerated nature and
keep_ the characters "in a ¢qn;tahg yigiggitude of ,§{.,,,t?, ‘ divided psychological characteristics of the Gothic's original
passions.‘ Ualpole's labeling of his novel as a "Gothic Star E tormented tormentor. “Manfred was not one of those savage ty-
accurately embodied the quintessence of the new genre inya 3 rants who wanton in cruelty unprovoked. The circumstances of his
5l"9le word. If persistent application by readers and writers fortune had given an asperity to his temper, which was naturally
over the past two centuries is a valid test of the term's value i h“ma"ei 3"“ his vi't“e5 "ere always ready to Dperate’ when his
'§:$ne:alg?ge ggde botgoa correct and a brilliant choice when _he L ( passion did not obscure his reason." A thousand Gﬂthif Villﬂl"$
o y thic. Gothic t f l fter Manfred might claim their descent from Halpole s ‘simple
people caught in claustrophobic predicggggtsaangmpigcgd faﬁnztig Ssychoanalysis. Hith Conrad mangled, Manfred is faced with the
mercy of “""at“'al a"d Supernatural forces within the closed
"°'1d' G°th'§ mea"t §9qPE5tT6ti°" by Sﬂme version of a mighty
Gothic villain‘s classic Drﬂblem "T 'etii"l"§ the '5eX"5i a"d
political power that his ancestors had acquired illegally
and mysterious building which was itself threatened with through betrayal, rape, murder. a"d t°Et"'e- The l°V9lY l5ab9l'

TI-E FIRST GUTHICS ‘ ' TIE FIRST GUTHICS 405
la, a luscious contrast to Manfred's infertile wife, Hippolita, Halnole Shfehdly CT§a§ed t29 G°th‘cfgg“€:i€ ;‘;;:]:;;"§§geS':1:g
and the woman who had been scheduled to wed Conrad until the Nearly every 'eq"‘5‘te eatuae ° t Q. n °¥ otranto in the
untimely arrival of the huge helmet, suddenly finds herself the the figure of Alfonso from the ﬁvas aniz enre A modern editor
quarry of Manfred's repulsive urges. By overtaking and raping gruesome nativity of this new an_ s rat? 1? _ nine Gothic nave‘
Isabella, he might both satisfy his lusts and assure the pre- Of THE CA§TEE_0F 0TRANT0."r‘teS ‘"519 uhigﬁ God or fate is the
servation of the line of power. Hence, despite the pleadings of is a _priml¢1VE d@te¢t‘V° _5t9'Y 1" S" imitators Substituted
Hippolita and the prickings of Manfred's own conscience, he vig- , ' det€Cl1vE-" But "he" Hi\P°l? 56 ::?e,g; of THE CASTLE OF OYRANTO
orously pursues Isabella through the "long labyrinth of dark- Satan for God, the versati e 0 C1
ness" in a chase that extends through "vaults totally dark." The ’ uﬂdEFWE"t ‘Y5 hl9he5t '9f‘"eme"t'
subterranean chase is one of Halpole's major contributions to
. SE OF MORNU.
the genre. Trap-doors that fly open or spring closed at inoppor- , 467. THE HANDERING SPIRIT. OR, THE MEHOIRS OF THE H0“
tune times, baleful noises, hideous shrieks, slimy passageways, 1 . L0nd0n : T. Hurst. 1802-
and an atmosphere of nightmare surround the Gothic virgin (or M0dﬁf" $99d"é°Q:EcN:=§pb°°k
more precisely close in upon her) in her desperate search for 59! ‘¢ ¥P9i ° ' _ OCKER5 QF
light and freedom in the castle's hellish substructure. Isabel- Biograph1Cﬂl 6"d Research Data‘ uatt' SHILLING SH
la's salvation from darkness and the eventual recovery of the “ THE GOTHIC 5CH90L, PP-29» 30-
castle's rightful ownership fall to the noble peasant, Theodore.
. < < ' irt -
Theodore survives Manfred's plots (even several days as a pris~ Critical Syn0P§'$= T"° q"“e var;?nF '§i§l:"§a:;i§h€oii:¢1i§n
oner beneath the huge helmet). guides Isabella to a liberating six-Page chapbook turn up in the S? tiir; oS‘tiO" of page re-
passageway, bears a curious blue tattoo representing a bloody , * (PZ2.M356 and PZ2-"§55)- Be°“"§e ° det Tg r inflicted upon the
arrow of justice, and shows a strong facial resemblance to the quirements, the Dltyi 5"ffe""9= a" 9 9
castle's displaced master, Alfonso the Good. Later Gothicists
would appropriate his character intact and make only slight al-
terations in costume and speech. As the natural victimization
~ 1' d t hi h velocity. An involuntary
sis?tnetgmmthgrehginiegrecaztl3 tugns suddenly and unaccountagly
. t
into a convent confinement concocted by her father. A 90' 5 9
started by Manfred intensifies, the supernatural forces set in 1 ghost or wandering SPITIT fh° Seems t“ ha'e"?:2°€a€e:e§:€n2°v?n
motion by Manfred's crimes and openly released by the landing of ment ﬂ"d 5P§@Ch95 °f Hamlet S father gﬁcngpihic undergrou"d_ En-
the mighty helmet begin to consolidate. Like a mighty human , her iﬂ8XDl1Cibl9 9¥'at‘°§5 th'°"9h e 2 ru car‘D pr0ud1y
body, the huge castle begins to stir with a superior will and ‘ countered on page thirtY'f‘Yei t"9k¥°""9 _m:rk* D‘ graaes at his
biology independently its own. The superstitious servants report l di5PlaY5 the necessary b‘rtPm?r ' ta extricate the maiden.
strange movements of the disjecta membra of an armored figure 1 b5¢k»' the gesture a19ne- Suff!C‘"gd rgscuer bears the tattoo of
residing within the walls of the castle. The good priest, Father - Usually, the lvﬂg-ml55l"9 he"_a“THE CASTLE OF OTRANTO (See
Jerome, feels helpless to counter these ungodly forebodings. the blue arrow worn by T"e°¢°'9 1" _d d to make the reuniou Seem
Isabella-5 father, Duke Frederic De Vicenza, has a bloodcurdling #466), but here the chapbooker deci e F the chapbook eXhib_
encounter with a verbose skeleton in Hippolita‘s private chapel. , more luscious by "5‘"9 f'“lt~ EYe'y £599 OS events and devices
The statue of Alfonso the Good stirs on its pedestal and bleeds its some sort of open confiscation o ngmihé characiers good or
actual blood; the Portrait of Manfred's Qrandsire, Ricardo, \ culled from popular Gothics. But none z r ""i1e the supérnatura]
deserts its frame and strolls the gallery in a guilty reverie; a bad, is _actually QIYB" 6"! Charac Sithout any consequence
titanic foot is seen protruding from the Pavement; an equally , horrors sinply occur in rude seqgegce t hinder the popularity of
colossal armored hand seems to reach over a staircase as it ‘ whatsoever. These glaring flaws di :0]itt1e Gothics 11kg it’
gropes for a great sword. Through these portentous implements THE WANDERING SPIRIT 3"" th°"5a" S °
and others, Halpole gave the Gothic novel its crucial furnish-
' . . _ th t : T.
ings. After the murder of his own daughter, Matilda, (a pedoci- § 468. Harner, RlC:?;g- NETLEV ABBEv' A GOTHIC STORV Sou an” on
dal crime adopted by many Gothicists to follow) at the gloomy 5 5KElt0". _ 3 d p_ V _
shrine of Alfonso, the forces of supernatural retribution which Modern Reeditionsz Arno P£eES€hl97?;n??;e::ge:f'?HE CA2??? OF
have been gathering in the background now converge on Manfred. Gothic Type: Pure'or 31gSuogD)l¢
In what must still be recognized as one of the best cataclysmic ‘ , OTRANTO and Lelgng s Lrhh Data_ Tarr CATHOLICISM I" GOTHIC
moments_ in dothic literature, Manfred is compelled to witness ‘ Biographlcﬂl B" 955° C ' '
the annihilation of his dreams of power when the gigantic frame
of Alfonso the Good, whose torso had apparently been enlarging
.1, 22 so s1, as 101, 103, 104 109; Lévy, LE
:iI15i»iiio:iéoiiiiou:'- Anéuus, pp.asi, 395. 396. 4i1- 449» 46?-
.. - r OTRANTU, " F0-
"to an IIIEHSE magnitude,‘ bursts triumphantly through the cas- 567, 5305 v“'m?' Devend;E)?'10T:§ RIDPIES 'rOm ’
tle walls and explodes the building to its foundations. From the 1 LIO MAGAZINE (Winter, 19 - - -
fall of the House of Otranto to ‘The Fall of the House of Ush-
. . - . ~ - ‘- ‘t' s b super-
er,» this is a scene which stuns and astonishes by virtue of its . Critical Synopsis. Purgf1sztgggrgfothehgegjg:o;?:"Sh¥p of the
insolent irrationality. By having the ghost of the past destroy I natural intervention an] k F this made_t°_f°rmu]a Gnthic
the haunted castle of the first Gothic novel at the climax, T famlly Castle are the ha mir S °

406 THE FIRST GUTHICS THE FIRST cornrcs ‘U7
romance. The book, an amalgam of standard terror and pseudo- the de Villars family. One of the qh°5t5 “ha ggides young Ednard
medieval nntifs, was the author's single Gothic endeavor. Al- is ‘that Of Old Sir Riym°"d- L°"9-delayed J"5t‘C9 ¢°m95 “"9" Fhe
though the novel is slow in starting, Narner's mastery of Rad- wronged natural and 5UPEr"it"ral ¢ha'acte'5_c°°perate t° bring
cliffean descriptive techniques and the gloomy atmosphere of about a fight to the death between Lord Hildebrand and the Ab-
Gothified history deserves praise. The location of the major bot, a struggle terminating in mutual fatality. Murdered fathers
portion of the story in and around Netley Abbey and the adjoin- and abused sisters are vindicated, lands are restored, i"§ Het‘
ing Netley Castle in the Fourteenth Century must have evoked an ' ley Abbey itself is elevated once again lnl0 a great rel\9l°?5
imnediate shudder from the Gothic readership. The Reverend house. Chaos and pain followed by stability and removal of evil
Richard Harner had the good sense to situate his Gothic materi- remained a tempting pattern for any G°th‘C "°'El‘5t- "ETL§v
als in an environment already steeped in Gothic legend. The ABBEY 693i" demonstrates a f""dame"tal $t'e"9th_0f the Gothic
devastated remains of Netley Abbey near Southampton were well genre. ‘He enjoy the Gothic novel because thrﬂﬂgh it H: find a
known to Gothic tourists in the Eighteenth Century and had been way of transforming Pal" i"d 5"ff9Fl"9 l"t° Plea$H'e- a"d_m9St
visited by Thomas Gray and Horace Halpole. Warner knew that his especially a pleasure in defining the good and evil D0l6Fltl@5
readers would be aware of such gruesome legends as that of the of human identity in a free and fantastic_milieu where the rules
inmured nun still said to haunt the premises. Exploiting these of reality are tEmP°Fi'il¥ l9"°'9d °r 5“5pe"ded'
associations, Warner au ented these Gothic memories wit
unique gore of his owgmimaginings in the writing of NETtEYSgg? 469. Hatkins, L"¢Y- ROMANO cA5TLE1 OR» THE HORRORS OF THE FOREST‘
BEV. The main events of the story are preceded by a long over- London : Dean and Mundays "-d-
ture giving Sir Edward de Villars's adventures as a crusader "Oder" RE9dltl°"5i N°"e
before retiring to Netley. He has been followed to the holyland Gothic Type: Gothic chapbook
by a secret admirer, a young man (Bertram) who is actually a Biographical and Research Data: Sunmers, GOTHIC QUEST! P-33-
young woman (Isabel). Hhen he/she saves Sir Edward's life in a . <
most unusual manner, we know that he is destined for further ‘ Critical Synopsis: The 35-page chapbuuk 15 5 T“i"le55 Plﬂ9la'
fantastic deliverances from death. Revealing her true sex, V rism of several lon99T 9°t"l° 5°“'ce5> b“t very §]EYer]y cross
Betram-become-Isabel sucks poison from Sir Edward's wounds. stitched so as to yield B Pe'f9¢tlY iﬁﬁeptible 5h‘ll‘"9 5h9ckEr'
There is something typically Gothic in this form of lovemaking Standard elements of the robber romance are combined with a
or Warner's version of the fatal kiss. Two children are born to story of identity found after the Y°""9 "GT0 "55 @XP@'l9"Ced
the union of Sir Edward and Isabel, Eleanor and the principal several astonishing i"d 5“PeT"3t"'3l e"¢°""teF5- The Y°""9 h$'°
Player on Warner's Otrantoesque stage, young Edward de Villars. is Alph0"5°» 5°" °f A9"e5,a"d B ¢Q3*5@, 515'"; 5"? 9i°°mY 3'
Evil in the novel is furnished by the presence of Netley Cas- ther, Baptiste, an ex-gondolier. Their C0tti9E 1195 1" tHe~f°re‘
tle's wicked proprietor, Lord Hildebrand, homicidal nephew of boding shadow of Romano Castle, 6 5t°QY retreat ‘?'°'°“s? to
Sir Edward's noble neighbor, Sir Raymond Harren. Uncovering his Alphonso as it is to all of the Pea5§"t5 l" the APEnnine r9910"-
misdeeds becomes the imhediate task of young Edward who must Mystified by his m0iheT'$ Cvﬂdﬂﬁt 5\"¢e $"E_mUttE'5 C°"tl""allY
make the conventional excursions through the castle and abbey in and incoherently about the horrors of Romano _Castle: AlPh°"5°
response to weird sunmonses and unexplained lights. Harner never resolves to investigate, i.e.st0 Mike the Gothic hero s orthodox
deviates from the formula. As Lord Hildebrand torments his rela- voyage into the heart °f da'k"955¢ Pa5§l"9 th'°"9h Phe f°re5t Se
tivesiand hides his wickedness by hypocritical courtesies, young sees a light Whlﬁh Partially lll"m‘Qa‘95,a n°"‘d a"d bloo y
Edward explores the castle and abbey, rescues the maiden, and face. Moving closer, he sees that the light is held by a gigan-
reveals the family's dark secrets. Harner exhibits a good com- tic being, a skeletal form with two flaming red eYe$- BEf?'e he
mand of the standard Gothic scenes. Here, for example, is his can reach the Castle he is seized by bi"dlt5 all fﬂﬂtaitlﬂﬂlly
Gothic hero on the verge of following an instructive phantom dressed. They take him to a cavern where he beholds a nymph
downward in quest of dark truth: "Hhen he had arrived a few with golden hair. i"d °f CEl95tlBl_bE3"tY-" She '5 called El'l'
yards from the phantom, it stretched out its lance, and pointed ra. Hithin the cave he also is greeted by the w0F5P °f the
toward the walls. He discovered amongst the brambles a trap- bandits, his own father, 3aPtl5te- Embl§t9'ed °Ye' “'5 dlsmlssal
door, wide open, through which streamed a faint ray of light. A from Venetian society b! the‘ MﬂFq"l§» BiPt‘5te_ha5 take" up
long flight of stairs appeared. These he descended without hes- banditry. assassinated the Marquis. and is ngw holding the "er-
itation, and quickly found himself in a damp and gloomy pas- quiS's daughter, ElVl'ﬂ- He "Q5 315° b"'9la"l9d his °"n §°t§?9e
sage.“ Occurrences of this sort are frequent as young Edward, and thrown his wife, A9"95» lQt° 3 R?ma“° d“"9e°"‘ E'"a] {’
with the guidance of various ghosts, exposes the crimes of Lord 5aPtl5tE is behi"d the various Gothic reports that clrﬁu ghe
Hildebrand and his wicked confederate, the Abbot of Netley about Romano Castle as well as the 9"°5tlY 5PP9ara“c§5 ° . ke
-Abbey. These two have combined their evil talents to incarcerate red-eyed 5kel9t°"~ These c°"tr‘va“°eS are all mechan‘Ca1 tr1§hS
Agnes Harren, Hildebrand's sister, in a dismal cell in the abbey meant t0 K959 3 5"P@'5tltl°"5 P?a$a"try in 6“? ind away frgmth-e
cellars, to starve old Sir Raymond Harren to death, to divert Castle. Having br°"9"t the 5t°'y t° the llmlti of ch? ot-‘C
the claims of young Sir Raymond, and to hatch a scheme for formula. the Goth ends it with the usunl_sen@=l°91¢al E E“: ;°Q
expropriating all of the nearby estates including the lands of of the hero and a natural explanation of all superna u a

408 THE FIRST GUTHICS »' in: FIRST cornrcs 409
events. Midway through his narrative, Baptiste is arrested by
officers of the Doge who bring with them the vital information
that Alphonso (naned in the will of the Marquis) is, really
Modern Reeditions: None ’
gence and spirit are imprisoned and frustrated by her grand-
mother's iuposing notions of right and wrong character, The
fluence has succeeded and Emma herself is not displeased with
I
, i
Critical Synopsis: This is a Gothic novel in verse attributed
to “The Author of THE OLD ENGLISH BARON“ (see #355) On thc iitie
page but actually by T.S. Hhalley. It consists of 174 pages of
Felix, nephew of the deceased nobleman. The Doge's men also stanzaic chapters or "fitts“ each containing approximately ZOO
bring with them the recently liberated Agnes. Hhile Baptiste quatrains in balladic meter. The work is gracefully gloomy with
prepares for a life of inprisonment, Felix prepares for his wed- , many reminders of both Spenser's FAERIE OUEENE and the medieval
d‘"9 with Elvira. I romances such as KING HORN. Among the Gothics, it should be com-
pared with the later ROCK OF MODREC (see #372) whose anonymous
470. Hest, Jane. RINGROVE: OR, OLD FASHIONED NOTIONS. London : T . author may have turned to EDHY AND EDILDA for the Gothic tone.
Longman, Rees, Orme, Brown, and Green, 1827. ' The story is conventional, but well-recited and with a strong
ennhasis on the sinister thread of fate which runs through most
Gothic Type: Domestic fiction (recessant Gothic traits) 1 of the tragic ballads. Demoniac beings and an eerie atmosphere
Biographical and Research Data: None l are prominent in the fabric of the story as well. The noble
peasant, young Edwy, saves the life of Lord Galvan and wins the
Critical Synopsis: Jane Nest, an acquaintance of Bishop Per- ' love of his daughter, Edilda. Galwan is grateful, but not so
cy, flirted with the Gothic throughout her long life (175a- ‘ grateful as to bestow his daughter upon the lowborn Edvy- There
1852), but never wrote a full-fledged Gothic novel. Her face- I is a great tournament at which an unknown knight vanquishes all
tious pseudonym, Prudentia Homespun, is a fair key to the per- challengers including the vile Esbold, a base nobleman who is
sonality of her writing. Her novel, THE REFUSAL (1810), is ‘ Edwy's rival for Edilda's love. The forbidden lovers meet in a
alternately sentimental, satiric, domestic, and Gothic with a * hut, swear mutual love, but are apprehended and betrayed by Es-
cmnnand of irony that is reminiscent of the Augustan satirists. I bold. Edwy flies fr°m the COHFT, Tet"T"5 t° 5aVe Edilda fr°m
A similar blend of tones is present in RINGROVE in which the Esbold'$ gross advances and other adversities. and flies from
sentimental and the Gothic are frequently undercut by the ironic ‘ , the court again until a trial by combat is arranged. There good
and the satiric. Her sense of characterization seems to waver ‘ I neets evil in a last battle between Edwy and Esbold. At his
between the social realism of Henry Fielding and Jane Austen and death, Edwy is revealed to be a son of royal blood done out of
the psychological plight of the heroine as it is first found in I his crown by Esbold's ancestors. In the final struggle, both
Richardson and expanded in Mrs. Radcliffe's maiden victims. Emna - Edwy and Esbold have inflicted mortal wounds upon one another
Herbert, displaced heroine of RINGROVE, is a young woman of and Edilda perishes of grief. The sad tale is ornanented with
temper and forbearance. Expelled from her family by her newly spectral events and other supernatural elements drawn from the
acquired stepmother, she takes up an uneasy residence at the ballad tradition. The quatrains themselves have all of the dark
h°"9 °f her 9'6"dDir€nts, Ringrove House. Mrs. Loveday, the pre- power of medieval ballad poetry as evident in the novel's open-
siding moral dictator of Ringrove, undertakes the rejuvenation 1 ‘ ing: 'Hhen Egbert England's sceptre swayed, For pow'r and arms
of Emma seeking to shape her character according to the wise 1: renown'd, Brave Gavlan liv'd; Hhose deeds of youth by peaceful
dictates of modern feminist ethics. This form of mental persecu- 9 v age were crown'd." It ends on a mournful and fﬂﬂﬂreﬂl "DIE "DIE"
tion is peripherally Gothic in the sense that Emma's intelli- . h brings home the sadness and pointlessness of life: "A thousand
‘ and a thousand times, The body they embrace; A thousand and a
M thousand times, They kiss the pallid face." Gothicism and bal-
Gothic heroine often exchanges a terrifying, albeit exciting, ( ladry are natural coordinates. Many Gothic novels may be consid-
life with the villain for a mundane marriage with a solid pal- ' ered extensions of ballad themes, characters, and tonalities.
ladin of middleclass virtue in the final chapter of a Gothic ' Other Gothics include ballads as a formal aspect of structure.
novel. Emma Herbert escapes from her weary ordeal by the same s In the text of THE MONK, (see #244) Lewis interpolated several
route when she marries the reliable but exceedingly dull citi- i ghastly tales in ballad form, among these, "The Hater-King" in
zen, Dick Smith. Mrs. Loveday is content that her edifying in- chapter VIII.
her rational matrimonial choice. Hhile the summary sounds quite i‘. 472. Hhite, James. EARL STRONGBOH: THE HISTORY OF RICHARD DE CLARE
un-Gothic or even anti-Gothic, Emma Herbert's expulsion and do- ' AND THE BEAUTIFUL GERALDA. London : J. Dodsley, 1789.
i
mestic exile followed by her deprivation of spirit at Ringrove
Manor approach some familiar Gothic procedures.
Modern Reeditions: None
Gothic Type: Gothified history/parody (burlesque and satiric
elements)
471. Hhalley, Thomas Sedgwick. EDHV AND EDILOA: A GOTHIC TALE IN ‘ Biographical and Research Data: Tonukins, d.M.S. “James
- FIVE PARTS. Dublin : S. Colbert, 1783. . Hhite, esq.; a Forgotten Humorist,“ REVIEH OF ENGLISH STUD-
Modern Reeditions: None , IES, 3 (1927): 146-156; Tompkins, POPULAR NOVEL IN ENGLAND,
Gothic Type: Gothified history (verse novel, imitation of ' pp.228, 232, 338; Tompkins, J.M.S. ‘Clio in "0t1€Y." l" THE
Reeve's OLD ENGLISH BARON) , POLITE MARRIAGE. Cambridge : Cambridge UP, 1938, pp.I25-149;
Biographical and Research Data: None Tarr, CATHOLICISM IN GOTHIC FICTION, pp.26, 33, 43, 66, 105;

410 ' THE FIRST GDTHIC5
Levy, LE ROMAN "GOTHIQUE" ANGLAIS, PD-205, 206, 207.
Critical Synopsis: The playful supernatural is a main ingred-
ient in James Hhite's sly burlesque of the emergent Gothic
school of Halpole, Reeve, the Lee sisters, and other writers who
e eeds
and brambles of the forest.“ The narrative takes the form of a
series of witty colloquies between a seventeenth-century gentle-
man (the modern man) and a clever, urbane ghost (spokesman for
the heroic middle ages), Richard de Clare, Earl Strongbow. Their
eighteen nocturnal interviews on the battlements of Chepstow
Castle become risible debates on the merits and defects of the
past versus the present. “He handled the battle ax, you wield
the dice-box,“ chortles the garrulous ghost of Strongbow. In re-
lating the chivalric history of his part in the conquest of
Ireland, the vociferous phantom imparts much comic criticism of
modern men and manners and compares the glorious excitement of
the past with the spiritual torpor of modern life. The baronial
players in Strongbow's pageant all have modern parliamentary
equivalents. Thus, the knights Fitz-Stephen, Fitz-Aldhelm, and
Sir Redmond Cantimere are comic masks for the contem or r l-
were experimenting with the mixture of imaginary history and * _
real horror. One passage will indicate White's aptitude as a l ' _,A ___,______;______
parodist of the Gothic gore then invading historical fiction.
Hhen Earl Strongbow subdues a foe, the moment is rendered as
entirely mock-horrific or as a piece of "sportive Gothic“ almost ‘
in the manner of Hashington Irving. “I severed with one of my
well-directed falchions the head of my assailant from his body, i Q ,
which sunk upon the ensanguined turf, while the head, after 1 *
spinning through the air for some moments, descended at a dis- ‘ Q
tance from the scene of strife, and was lost amidst th w Q {/’/
A
gifted parodist with a strong sense bf the ridiculous when it
came to mocking the extremities of life and death in the typical
Gothic historical novel. One exanple of the deflation of the
high Gothic comes at the end of the novel. After being sought
and won by Earl Strongbow, the beautiful Geralda accommodates
his melacholiac desires by drowning in the River Nye on their
wedding day. Hhite's mock-Gothic ridicule of Gothic tendencies
comes early in the rise of the Gothic. Both as a figure of his-
torical importance in the making of the novel and as a satirist
of nerit, Hhite deserves to be re-studied and re-read. Thusfar,
only the literary historian, J.M.S. Tompkins, has bothered to
re-examine White's contributions and his Peacockian attitudes
(see #325) toward mounting Gothic mania. She concludes: “Under
the ribs of death he created lungs capacious enough. Hhite
should be remembered for hearty gusts of laughter--an unexampled
levity, hardly paralleled until Sir Halter Scott established the
historical novel as a branch of humane letters."
473. White, T.H. BELGROVE CASTLE: OR, THE HORRID SPECTRE. London :
Hhite and Jee, 1803
 \
( .
5‘
5,
,@~:.¢~
if
_
F   
i
9 3 Y P0
iticians, Charles James Fox, Pitt, and Sheridan white was a [
1
T
is
Y0‘! 1TuWﬂ
-_f_
. P-.»1“h_v II--Q 1»-1-"moo
' Modern Reeditions: None ~
Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (imitation of OTRANTO)
Biographical and Research Data: None

\
_ THE FIRST GUTHIDS 411
V _ Critical Synopsis: Orthodox Gothic romance using the refur-
bished apparatus of THE CASTLE OF OTRANTO (see #466), especially
. the absurd idea of the giant body of a murdered ancestor resid-
ing inside the walls of the castle. But the horrid spectre fails
to horrify very much probably because its manifestations are
' spread over four volumes as-opposed to Halpole's dramatic com-
’ pactness. The imitation of Halpole reactivates his machinery,
but fails to reproduce the true Gothic spirit of the anti-
rational and unruly world of the castle interior.
’§ 474. Hilkinson, Sarah. THE SUBTERRANEAN PASSAGE: OR, GOTHIC CELL.
I kondon : Ann Lemoine, Hhite Rose Court, Coleman Street,
‘ 803.
4‘ Modern Reeditions: None -
Gothic Type: Gothic bluebook
Biographical and Research Data: Lévy, LE ROMAN 'GOTHIQUE'
ANGLAIS, p.623.
Critical Synopsis: A first and an apprentice Gothic novel by
' one of the period‘: most prolific manufacturers of terror and
horror. Entrance to and exit from the haunted castle is typi-
§ cally by way of a "subterranean passage." Even in its crudest
form, as many twentieth-century historians of the Gothic have
, noted, subterranean compartments and corridors are explicit
’ symbols of the human body's male and female genitalia. Corridors
l are organically masculine; chambers are female and ovarian and
their terrifying occupancy signifies vaginal and menstrual fear
;l and pain. The villain roaming these corridors is a configuration
of sexual anxiety and the ultimate horror of coitus. The maiden
pining, hiding or trembling in her Gothic cell is another emblem
| of forbidden sexuality. Looked at from an psychoanalytic angle,
' even a crude bluebook of this sort has enough such imagery to
T reenforce the sexual themes of Gothic fiction. Hilkinson's first
_ Gothic consists entirely of vibratory action between the Gothic
h cell and the only means of entrance and egress, the single nar-
‘ rowing passage. All of the apparatus of anguish usually distri-
‘ I huted throughout the entire haunted castle is cranned into these
" two special underground locales. The names of the maiden victim
I (Antoinette) and monastic victimizer (Father Anselmo) are too
close to the personages of Lewis and Mrs. Radcliffe to be acci-
l dental. This is a workbook Gothic in which Hrs. Hilkinson
abridged the horror novels of her superiors while garnishing
these appropriated plots and places with her own distinctive
shades of gore.
‘ 475. Hilkinson, Sarah. THE KNIGHTS OF CALATRAVA: OR, DAYS OF CHIVAL-
1 RY. London : B. Mace, 1804.
; Modern Reeditions: None
1 Gothic Type: Gothic chapbook (compressed Gothified history)
1 Biographical and Research Data; Hone ' -
. .»
H Critical Synopsis: This slightly dreadful diminutive Gothic
‘ chapbook of thirty-six pages is illustrative of Sarah Wilkin-
> son's automatic Gothifying. She reduces three common situations
of the monastic shocker or novel of terror to the publisher's

A12 THE FIRST GOTHICS I THE FIRST GOTHICS 411
prescribed page limit. The three are: deadly fraternal rivalry lish Adam and the American Indian Eve return to their cavern
between a virtuous brother (Alfonso) and a despicable brother paradise. A sentimental moral is attached to the final para-
(Theodore); monastic misery and matrimonial betrayal (the con- graph! "1"klE'5 ihd 'dTiC°'$ "hie" W65 attended With Peculiar
vent incarceration of Clara, a woman abused by Theodore); super- felicity. The mind of our adventures was led to right and humane
natural rectification of the lovers‘ Gothic difficulties (the principles-“ The rdnautic story is accdnnanied by frequent no-
proper union of the good brother, Alfonso, with the worthiest of lemical observations on the slave trade and the superiority of
women, Felicia). All of the elaborate emoting and slow building ’ hdturdi mdtChe5 Of ma" ihd *°md" °Ve' ihtifiﬁiel Piihi"9$- A
of suspense are dispensed with in deference to instantaneous f0"?-Pe9e tag 5t°FY= THE DREAMER AHAKENED, brihge the Chdpboek
shock. Horror in all of the shilling shockers is rapid, crude, UP to 25 P5995-
unadorned, and where Sarah Wilkinson's bloody pen is involved,
--an arrant act of Gothic plundering. ' 477. Hilkinson, Sarah. MONKCLIFFE ABBEV: A TALE OF THE FIFTEENTH
t CENTURY. London : Kaygill, 1805.
6. Hilkinson, Sarah. INKLE AND VARICO: OR, LOVE IN A CAVE, AN IN- Modern Reeditions: None
TERESTING TALE. London : T. Maiden for Ann Lemoine and J. Gothic Tynei Gothic Chapbobk (Gothified history)
Row, 1805. Biographical and Research Data: None
Modern Reeditions: None
Gothic Type: Gothic chapbook (highly sentimental) Critical Synopsis: A 22-page chapbook “To which is added
Biographical and Research Data: None LOPEZ AND URANTHE: OR, THE SUICIDE,‘ the work follows Sarah Hil-
kinson's practice of reducing one of her longer Gothics to chap-
Critical Synopsis: A 26~page highly sentimental chaphook with ‘ book size. The year is 1517. In the north of England, Sir Archi-
e FEW Gothic overtones, INKLE AND VARICO is a tearful and same- bald Burnett lives in'seclusion near Monkcliffe Abbey with his
times polemical tale, but never terrifying. The moods and scen- two daughters, Adeline and Elwina. The old knight had supported
ery recall the lush romanticism of the French sentimental ro- . the Y0rkiSt cause and had been favored by Henry VII and Henry
mances of the period such as Bernadin de Saint-Pierre's PAUL ET . ' VIII, but is now at variance with the powerful Cardinal Holsey.
VIRGINIE (1788). Its characters are shaped on Rouseauistic ' Life it the abbey 9iVe5 the da"9hte'$ ample °PP°TtU"itY 70'
theories and motivated by humanitarian rather than Gothic l Gothic experiences- Eluina is especially drone to shudders and
passions. The appearance of a "Cave" in the subtitle probably frights, often secluding herself for days at a time. "Oft would
acted as an inducement to the Gothic audience, but in the story, she wander through the unfrequcntcd Parts df the building. and
the cave is simply a bower of bliss and a trysting place for the sigh in secret." Her sister, Adeline, is scarcely less inclined
Englishman, Thomas Inkle, and the Indian maiden, Yarico, with toward terror in her frequent adorations of the monumental bur-
whom he falls in love. "Her ornamental feathers and skins be- iei "T" 07 5iT 5tePhd"0 Buthett de hehkeiifte i" the abhel
spoke her of some rank.‘ Thomas Inkle of Threadneadle Street, chapel. Except for these Gothic habits, however, the chapbook is
London, is originally pledged to Narcissa Cherry, daughter of notably static and not very shocking. Halkjng near the abbey
the Governor of Barbados. His uncle, Mr. Medium, has arranged ‘ cloisters one day, the young women come across a fallen knight,
the marriage. The two young people do not dislike each other, Sir Albert de Clerville. He tells them of his forbidden affair
but they have no romantic inclination for one another either and ' With tidy 50Dhid Ciitferd dhd quarrel With Sir Edhard Barr! "he
at first they are resigned to the connubial fate already as- presently sought his life. The ladies offer Monkcliffe Abbey as
signed to them. It is easy to see how this situation might have a refuge and hiding nlace- Also desirdus of Gothic experience,
been presented Gothically, but it is not. Hhen Narcissa returns Sir Albert reﬂuests a tour °f the Abbey's Secret Dd't5- D"'i"9
to Barbados, she meets and loves captain campley, an officer one of these excursions, the sisters are showing Albert one of
aboard the ship. Hhen Thomas Inkle sails for Barbados on June the burial V6Ult$ "he" 6 EONied 5DeCtTe $"dde"i¥ i""9e5 t°rth1
16, 1647, the ship is battered by storms and beset with other ‘ "'Hho calls on that name?’ said B Pile fi9"Te- '"5hi"9 °"t °t
perils. They land among Indians, far from their port of destina- the vault belonqing t° the Chipei-" Albert P"T$"e5a ahd the
tion. It is here that Inkle meets and loves Yarico amidst Edenic ' 5DeCt'e tU'"$ t° defehd it5eif- The 9h05t i9 Betty Ceme t° the
surroundings and with the cave to accommodate their secret Abbey to nay him back for the affair that caused 5dnhia's death-
liaisons. All of this ends abruptly when Yarico is captured and A sindlc paragraph cdnhat in the dark leaves Barry dead and
sold as a slave by a hostile tribe to a brutal planter, the only ~ Elhihﬂ 50 i"PTe55ed With Aibe't'5 t°FthFi9ht C°"Ti9e that, §he
character in this short novel with genuine Gothic possibilities. marries him D" the 5P°t- Aii ef thi5 15 a"t°m3t‘¢ 9°th‘C‘5m
She is whipped, degraded, perhaps sexually abused while Thomas P'°d"Ced and mahketed 7°‘ the 'e5deh'5 fee °f 5lX Pe"Ce-
Inkle frantically searches for her even though plans to marry ‘ - .
Narcissa are proceeding. There is an accidental and melodramatic 478. Wilkinson, Sarah. THE'SORCERER'S PALACE: OR, THE PRINCESS OF
meeting of Inkle and Yarico during one of her public humilia- ‘ 5i"AD0hE- TELL-TALE, OR U"iVER5AL MU5EUM,_c0"5I5iih9 OF A
tions by the planter. Even though varico is pregnant and bat- SERIES OF INTERESTING ADVENTURES, VOYABE$. Hl5T0RIE$. LIVE5.
tered, Inkle purchases her from the planter ("oblivious to the a TALES! AND ROMANCESI 5 (1305)! 43-98-
price, since he would set no rate upon his heart") and the Eng- "Oder" Reeditiehsi hehe

414 THE FIRST GUTHICS  ri-E FIRST con-ncs 415
G°thlG TYPGI Perlﬂdlﬁdl Ghdpbuﬂk (5t'al9"t 5"P9'"dt"Tdl h°'- I Supernatural forces now protect Donald's life and organize
'9') - ‘ themselves against Murchardus's villainy. The vociferous spectre
Biographical and Research Data: Mayo, ENGLISH NOVEL IN THE of the slain Roderic makes its rounds. Murchardus is tempted
MAGAZINE5, P-353 i I into a convocation with the "weird sisters," who have already
‘ taken Donald's side. Prophecies are uttered and protective
Gritical Synopsis: Robert 0- Mayo speculates that along with ' charms are dispensed. Murchardus is informed that he will perish
her outpouring of bluebooks and full-sized Gothics, Mrs. Hilkin- H , in agony when Roderic's spectre appears to him. Donald l5
son was probably employed by several nonthly magazines as a re- H awarded a white banner which will keep off the threat of evil on
dactor of longer Gothic tales. "She was probably the curator of ‘F one and just one occasion only. The white banner shortly proves
the UNIVERSAL MUSEUM-" FT°m 1303 1° 1305, TELL-TALE offered more U useful when Murchardus forces Donald into a boat and attempts to
than eighty stories of short shocker length, most of these l kill him. At this juncture the ghost of Roderic, manifesting
transparent compressions of Gothics published by the Minerva- , itself as "an bratach" or water spirit, rises from the waves to
Press and J. Bell. Several of these such as THE SORCERER'S overwhelm Murchardus. Donald is borne back to shore as the new
PALACE bore Mrs. Wilkinson's signature. Her terror fiction in L Thane of Dungivan and falls happily into the embrace of the
the periodicals divests her Gothic sources of all of their "gen- beautiful Catherine. Hhy were the Gothic writers so often drawn
teel trappings" to concentrate on accelerated horror and copious 5 to the use of fairytale and folktale motifs of the kinds found
bloodletting. The story appears to be an adulteration of several ‘ throughout this chapbook? The answer may be that the grotesque
well-known witchcraft Gothics such as THE HITCHERIES OF CRAIG motifs and violent patterns of action of these primitive stories
ISAF (599 i490) °f 1304- provided the distortions of reality and amoral disorientation
‘ that the Gothic writers depended upon for rendering their power-
9. Hilkinson, Sarah. THE HATER SPECTRE: OR, AN BRATACH. London : i ful effects. The motifs themselves are variations of the malig-
Ann Lemoine and J. Row, 1805. 1 "ant gooling,
Modern Reeditions: None .
Gothic Tyne: Gothic oluebook ,' 480. Hilkinson, Sarah. THE CASTLE SPECTRE1 OR, FAMILY HORRORS, A
5l°9FdPhl¢dl d"d Research Ddtdl "°"G I GOTHIC STORY. London : T. and R. Hughes, 1807.
_ _ 4 Modern Reeditions: M.G. Lewis's THE CASTLE SPECTRE, in THE
Critical Synopsis: The characteristics of the Marchen or ‘ HOUR 0F ONE; SIX GOTHIC MELODRAMAS, London : Gordon Fraser,
folktale containing gruesome supernatural elements and a crude 1975, ed. Stephen Hischhusen.
redaction of the MACBETH story are the basis for this thirty-six ; Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (based on LeWi5'5 $°t"lG
page shilling shocker. Mrs. Hilkinson's little Gothic is also a drama of 1798)
good eXiilllPlE of the Shakesoeareanized ﬁothic ohaol=ook- In longer i Biographical and Research Data: Thorpe, Hillard. "The Stage
forins of Gothic fiction. we sornetiines ithess the 5hal<esoearean- i Adventures of Some Gothic Novels,‘ PUBLICATIONS or THE MODERN
ized Gothic villain struggling against the demands of his own LANGUAGE ASSOCIATION, 43 (1928): 476-486; Sunmmrs, GOTHIC
base nature and falling into depravity. He see him slipping into , QUEST, p.256; Evans, Bertrand. “Lewis and the Gothic Drama,“
depravity like Lewis's Ambrosio in THE MONK (see #244). No such in GOTHIC DRAMA FROM HALPOLE T0 SHELLEY. Berkeley 2 Califor-
progressive struggle or debased moral choice is permitted to oc- nia UP, 1947, pp.132-161.
cur in~the Gothic chapbooks. Evil is swift and unwavering; vir- l“
tue is totally helpless until the thirty-sixth page where coin-
cidence takes over to erase danger and destroy vice. As coarse,
grotesque, and blunt as these abbreviated Gothics were, their
' Critical Synopsis: Attracted by the popularity of Monk Lew-
is‘s Gothic drama of 1798, THE CRSTLE SPECTRE, the enterprising
Sarah Wilkinson turned the play into a sensational Gothic novel.
anneal to the reader's contradictory impulses and desires was ‘ In the history of the Gothic, the reverse is usually the case:
oerhaos stronger in some ways than the rore gradual adininister- ' Gothic novels were converted into Gothic dramas or operas.
ing of terror and horror in full-length Gothic novels. In in- f Lewis's CA$TLE SPECTRE had had its premier performance on
flicting Gothic horror on the soul of the reader. brevity was  December 14, 1197, and enjoyed frequent revivals thereafter all
definitely the main ally of the bluebooker. The charmed child of Q the pay through the Nineteenth Century. Retaining Lewis's plot
Sarah uilkl"5°"'5 5°thlG folktale l5 y°“"9 L°'d D°"Gld. Tl9htfUl 5 ' and augmenting his theatrical diahlerie with some incidental
Thane of Dungivan. Hitches, ogres, and the ghost of his murdered I shocks of her own, the enterprising Hilkinson also kept the
father. Roderic. direct Donald's destiny and shicld hiin from " scene of the ‘family horrors" at Conway castle in an obvious
adversity- The main source of such adversity is his father's \ effort to draw the followers of Lewis's drama to her Gothic nov-
false friend and slayer, Hurchardus, a character reduction of i, 91, Leoigig horrific plot with its Gothic props and 990919 "35
§hdk95P9dF9'5 Macbeth $t'lPD@d Of EV9'¥\hl"9 GXCGPG bl°°dthlT5ty - readily transferable to a novel. The Castle is under'the domina-
ambition. In Donald's infancy, Murchardus killed Roderic, then ' tion of the usurper and fratricidal superman, Earl Osmond. Prin-
arranged to have his infant son cast into the river by a peasant \ cipal victims of his tyranny are his brother, Earl Reginald, the
and his wife. But the couple secretly exchanged Donald for their , legitimate heir, and Reginald's daughter, Angola, Vh° l5 temP°-
"H" dead baby Who was Cast l"t° thé river in Donald's Place. In rarily concealed from Osmund's fury in an adjacent peasant's
V

415 - THE FIRST coruzcs ? THE F1RsT corhrcs 417
Cottage. Reginald occupies one of the Castle's numerous corpse-ridden crypts of Lewis's THE MONK (see #244) have been
oubliettes and awaits the arrival of a ghostly vindicator, a ‘ transported to the dank catacombs of the Convent of St. Ursula.
castle spectre wise and strong enough to displace the wicked
brother. The melodrama is prolonged by the terrors and suffer- 482. Wilkinson, Sarah. THE MVSTERIOUS NOVICE: OR, CONVENT OF THE
ings of Angela at the hands of Osmond as she is confined to the , GREY PENITENTS, INCLUDING THE MEMOIRS OF AUGUSTUS AND WILHEL-
Cedar Room. The young peasant, Edwy, who later turns out to be MINA. London : Arliss, I809.
the Earl of Northumberland, and the kindly priest, Father Modern Reeditions: None '
Philip, indicate how closely Lewis adhered to the cast of ' Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (imitation of MFS- Rid-
Walpole's first Gothic. Thus, the stuff of THE CASTLE OF OTRANTO c]iffe's THE ITALIAN)
(see #466) is transmitted along the literary bloodstream from Biographical and Research Data: Birkhead, TALE OF TERROR,
Walpole to Lewis to Wilkinson in only slightly modified form. pp.77-78.
Lewis's play had been a platform for astounding spectacle and
supernatural coup de theatre. In fact, the technical effects . Critical Synopsis: A loose and ornate imitation of Mrs. Rad-
d d d ' ‘ ' ‘ ‘ ' '
eman e some IHQGHTOUS stagecraft from the set builders who not cliffe's THE ITALIAN (see #350). The mysterious novice is Rosal-
only had to construct a Gothic castle with its awful appendages the, almost a direct transcription of Ellena di Rosalba. The
0" 5t@9@ 6"d make the Castle SPQCITQ Qilde 0" CUE, but were also Augustus-Wilhelmina subplot harks back to the conjugal suffer-
required to arrange for a wall to collapse at one point. Wilkin- ings and separations of Agnes and Lorenzo in THE HUNK (see
5°" 9XPi"d$ this ﬂrchlteﬁfﬁril dénouﬁmeﬁt $0 l"ClUdE 6" 9"tl'9 #244). Wilkinson introduces both secular and ecclesiastical vil-
haunted wing of the Castle during the resolution scene which lains to harass and pursue her heroes and heroines against an
sees the fall of the tyrant and his wrongly possessed house. She murky background of midnight storms, crumbling architecture, and
also adds a Complex of forbidden Chambers to 90 with the 0ri9i— slinking figures with-lethal eyes. The plot Ccﬂsists of both the
"al Cedar Roan of Conway Castle where Lewis's heroine thought tantalizing delays of Mrs. Radcliffe's stories and the horrid
that the "3115 "ere Cl°5l"9 I" 0" hEr- Aith°“9h “likl"5°" shocks so characteristic of Monk Lewis and the Schauerromancers
achieved nothing generically original in her adaptation, she did ~ while the dialogue is unbelievably unctuous even during moments
maximize the dramatic horrors of Lewis's piece of Gothic theatre of nnbearabie danger for the heroine. Vet, this type of wordy
by giving herself over to the same sense of uncontrolled fantasy reincarnation of THE ITALIAN is exactly what the Gothic bluebook
that had made the drama such a success. By giving the audience clientele craved and continued to support.
exactly what it wanted, Sarah Wilkinson had preserved all of the
Gothic play's most satisfying dramatic qualities and reaped a 483. Wilkinson, Sarah. THE CASTLE OF MONTABINO: OR, THE ORPHAN SIS-
profit for herself. TERS. London : Dean and Munday, 1810.
Modern Reeditions: None
481. Wilkinson, Sarah. THE FUGITIVE COUNTESS; 0R, THE CUNVENT 0F ST. Gothic T e: G thic cha book (terror mode)
p o P
URSULA. London : J.F. Hughes, I807. Biographical and Research Data: None
Modern Reeditions: None '
Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (elements of the monastic Critical Synopsis: The as-page chapbook appears to be an ab-
5h°¢kE') breviated rewriting of an earlier short Gothic by Wilkinson, THE
Bivoravhieal and Research Data: Birkhead. TALE OF TERROR. SUBTERRANEAN PASSAGE: DR, GOTHIC CELL (see #474). _Six pence
PP-77-78; $ﬂmm9Fs, GOTHIC QUE5T, P-170- brought the reader rapidly to the banks of "the swift flowing
Arno" near Pisa where the orphan sisters, Emilia and Theresa,
Critical Synopsis: Surveying the numerous Gothic romances of are wending their way to the Castle of Montabino, stronghold of
Sarah Wilkinson, Edith Birkhead discovered that her recurrent Count Rupino. Events both outside and inside the Cestie are
and even obsessive device for rendering menaced maidens uncon- stereotypically Gothic. Upon the arrival of the sisters. We
seiavs is the sleeping potion. ‘one of Wilkinson's favorite overhear the old housekeeper, Dame Judith, mutter that "Death
d9VlEE5, 5"“ @mPi°YEd I" at least three Of her $¢0FlE§-" THE > itself would be preferable to remaining in this castle after the
FUGITIVE COUNTESS may also be included in an inventory of sopo- arrival of the Count.‘ When the sisters spy from_ their vantage
rifics since it is by such means that the vulnerable heroine ' point in the southern turret the two grave-diggers, ""90 3"d
(Adeline) is threatened with rape just prior to a mock burial in Gusmond, excavating two fresh graves in the courtyard below
the slimy vaults of St. Ursula. To go with a grotesque mock their room, they agree that the time has come to abandon their
burial, Wilkinson inserted two other effects well-calculated to investigation into the alleged poisoning of the Count's wife,
raise the emotional temperature inside the terrible convent to a Harmina. As usual, however, getting out of the haunted castle is
b°lll"9 Pviﬂli the ¢0"C€aled wife/mother bursting forth on a much more difficult than getting in although locating the en-
spectral rampage and a runic manuscript that will explain all trance to the labyrinth which connects with the southern tower
mysterious circumstances if a supernatural translator can be only requires a single paragrabh- The e9'@55 _§eR"9"°e ("‘th
found to decipher it. Again in this romance, Sarah Wilkinson count Rupino perhaps in pursuit) is done with better-than-
showed herself to be no meek Radcliffean Gothicist. The putrid, average energy. Wilkinson's frontispiece engraving had pictured

418 THE FIRST GUTHICS ’ l THE FIRST GOTHICS 419
a spectre outlined gigantically in a pointed doorway. For once received all that they expected from her eighth romance.
in a Gothic chapbook, the pictorial event is also present in the '
tale's text. As the sisters grope their way down the turret to 485. Hilkinson, Sarah. TORBOLTON ABBEY: A GOTHIC TALE, NEH GLEANER,
the labyrinth they are startled to see Montabino's resident on ENTERTAINMENT FOR THE FIRE-SIDE, Z (1810>= 30-41-
ghost moving in the opposite direction: ‘A door on the right ( Modern Reeditions: NONE
hand opened, and a tall figure muffled in a dark cloak, with a ‘ Gothic Type: Periodical Gothic (terror mode)
lanthorn in his hand issued from it. The females shrieked most ' , Biographlcai 5"d Re$9arCh Data: "BY", ENGLISH NOVEL IN THE
dreadfully; but the object that had excited their terror heeded MAGAZINES, pp.300, 368.
them not,--but slowly ascended a narrow spiral staircase that
led to a high turret." Such is normal life inside a Gothic < Critical synoPsis= Appears to be a redaction of several of
castle. Sarah Wilkinson's earlier Gothic enterprises reduced to story
Q length for the consumers of magazine Gothics. By subtitling her
484. Hilkinson, Sarah. THE CONVENT OF THE GREY PENITENTS: OR, THE story "A Gothic Tale," Hilkinson echoed a practice originating
APOSTATE NUN. London 1 J.F. Hughes 1810. with Halpole and carried on by Clara Reeve. Plagiaristic ele-
Modern Reeditions: None ments also flesh out the short tale of terror in which we find
Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (elements of the monastic l the usual repertory of characters and occurrences: a broken-down
shocker) abbey drawn with magnificent and eye-appealing pictures of de-
Biographical and Research Data: Lévy, LE ROMAN "GOTHIOUE‘ vastation; an endangered maiden seeking clues to her father's
ANGLAIS, pp.425, 436, 465. l disappearance; an atmosphere of 'monkish gloom.“ There might be
' several sources at work here, but the central pilferage is prob-
Critical Synopsis: Although the title suggests an imitation ably Isabella Kellyls ABBEY OF ST. ASAPH (see #211), a much-
of Mrs. Ann Radcliffe's THE ITALIAN: OR, THE CONFESSIONAL OF THE raided Minerva Gothic of 1795 which frequently reappeared in the
BLACK PENITENTS (see #350), the text of the novel closely magazines in slightly altered form. Once more, the abbreviated
follows many of the events of Mary Ann Radcliffe's MANFRONE: OR, ' tale of terror showed its advantage over its much lengthier
THE ONE-HANDED MONK (See #352) of the previous year. The novel competitor, the four volume Gothic novel. Hord limitations ruled
also has the virtue of being written simply and with a straight- out all stylistic rhapsodies and suspenseful procrastinations.
forward storyline unencumbered by dense subplotting. Hhen Mrs. The screw of supernatural violence is turned innediately and
Hilkinson rewrote MANFRONE, she also made it less cunplicated. hard on page one of the tale thereby never permitting the reader
The romance has only five principal characters. These are the any opportunity for skeptical reflection or rational relapse.
half-wicked Marquis di Zoretti, the entirely wicked Vinardi, and .
the ambitious Victorina di Velastri. The,two virtuous characters l 486. Hilkinson, Sarah. THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY: OR, THE MYSTERY
are the Marchioness Signora Rosalthe— and her faithful son, OF THE BLUE AND SILVER BAG. London : H. Mason, 1820.
Horatio. Persecution begins when the Marchioness overhears her I Modern Reeditions: None
death by poisoning being plotted by her husband and hi5 h8"Ch- f» Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (terror mode)
man, Vinardi. Persuaded of her infidelity and adultery (she is Biographical and Research Data: Lévy, LE ROMAN "GOTHIQUE"
pregnant at the outset), the Marquis of Zoretti is eager to ‘ ANGLAIS, p.vi
follow Yinardi's suggestions for punishment and revenge, espe-
cially that most appealing Gothic torment, sequestration within Q Critical Syn°Psis= Sarah wi1ki"5°"'5 t“° decades Df C°"ti"'
the convent. At his birth, her child, Horatio, is taken from her uous Gothic productivity brought her close to a possible
while Rosalthe is packed off to the Convent of the Grey Peni- self-parody in this amusing revival of Radcliffean Gothicism.
tents with intermittent incarcerations in various castles en- The i°C“]ar vei" uf the Preface 59t5 the t°"@1 'K"°*l"9 "0"
route to her monastic jail. The tale now alternates between the eager the fair sex are for something new and romantic. I deter-
sufferings of the apostate nun and her son's quest to thwart the “ ml"9d 0" 3" attempx £0 P1ei59 my fair $i5t€Th00d, "0Pi"9 t°
schemes of Vinardi aha bring his father to his senses,--which he profit myself therehy- If they meet with ranid sale and fill my
eventually does along with his mother's release. The supernat- pockets, I shall be elated." Mother and daughter share the
uralism of the novel is restrained and finally artificial, con- ‘Y "BFﬂl"E§hiP i" the "0VEl- 5hﬂ'l°tt9 59""et 1i'95 flrst as 3
sisting mainly of modifications of the standard Radcliffean small child in a kind of Dickensian squalor with her mother,
events and acoustics. In one scene, the statue of a monstrous Agnes. who is in reality the spurned Mary Bvdolnhin ﬂf_Lannere.
executioner wielding a bloodstained axe appears to descend from Y Yejﬁﬁtsd Wife Of 5*‘ Everard M@'tim@1- c"a'1°tte ‘S 1§te'
its pedestal and move toward Rosalthe as she recites the novena, ' 5Pﬂ"5°F€d by Lady Ceﬁllia Mﬂrtimel i"d take" t° 11'? at Ma't‘"€i
but the climax is aborted by a swoon. Many pages later the Castle in Hales where she undergoes an apprenticeship to Gothic
supernatural event is explicated and Rosalthe's apparent danger terror. Also at the Castle she finds a friend in the veiled
shown to be a trick of her misguided senses abetted by Vinardi‘s T ‘Edy, Mr5- 5t°¢ki@Yr i¢t"ﬂii¥ "6" m°th9T l"¢°9"‘¢°- A9"@5 ha§ 3
guile. Yet, in spite of its derivative character, Mrs. Hilkin- double motive for her masquerade and her return to Martimel
son's orthodox Gothic captured the fancies of her readers who l castle “"4 the adj°l"i"9 LB"m@T9 Abb9y- She W1$"@$ t0 9"5Td he“

420 THE FIRST GOTHICS THE FIRST GUTHICS 421
daughter and to bring $ir Everard to Justice for his matrimonial Hilkinson's hasty assembly of used Gothic parts. The conflict
detelt and ¢FUelty- Martlmel Ca$tle I5 equipped With a "martyT'$ and supernatural resolution arise out of a fratricidal contest
turret" in which Sir Everard conceals the blue and silver bag between the worthy brother, oswald, and the ignoble brother,
holding some doeunehts of “inealeulable consequence." the papers Francisco. at the opening of the tale, the poisoned Oswald is
holding the sunnressed Proof of his narriase to Agnes Bennetl the castle's chief spook~in-residence when his disinherited son,
Mrs- Stoekley/Mary Godalbhin- Mysteries coagulate and saettres Rudolpho, arrives to spend the night. Francisco had not only
veregrinate as the artificial ghost of Everard's wife aided by , done in his brother, he had'put his unwanted wife, the lovely
the Tea‘ 9h°5t °f her P°l5°"9d hrﬂthers Albert 9°d°IPhl"s haTa55 lady Rosa, into a windowless turret as well, and then ignored
the Keener of the blue and silver bag- Charlotte is seized. her cries for food. wishing to number incest among his foul
nantled. and earriaoed by rude strangers under the direction of deeds, Francisco kept his little daughter, Malvina, apparently
the secondary villain, Alderton, and there are additional dark raising her for the sole purpose of raping her when she became
C0mPllEatl0"$ hefure A9"E$ 5e""et'5 ml55l0" i5 ¢0mPlEt9d ahd her sexually mature. By coincidence, Rudolpho has come to the castle
life and lands recovered and her daughter securely matched. All of his murdered father on that very evening when Malvina has
of the serious Gothic business is undercut, however. by the reached a rapable age. All of these dire facts (together with
intrusive presence in the novel of Charlotte's sensible and cyn- his duty as a family hero) are oonmunicated to Rudolpho by the
Ital Cahfldahhea "I55 Amelia DaF¢¥- He’ f""Ctl°" thT°"9h°Nt I5 talkative spectres, who reenforce the urgency of their cause by
to denounce Gothic experience in a stream of gibes: "I assure a chorus at weird sound; and sights,--incandescent swords,
Y0“ With Sﬂme heat E00," $ha l9Ct"Ta5 Charlotte! "that the’? are walking armor, and so forth. The sensational event promised in
Gothic buildings without spectres or legends of a ghastly nature the subtitle--the inprisonment of a mother by her son--is saved
attached $0 them; "0" What l5 a Caitle 0' ahhay Whrth Wlthﬂht for the crude climax. Released from her cell by Rudolpho, the
5"¢h a" aDP9"da9@- A Cattle, a turhets a Vlhdlhq Stalrcaies ah old marchioness is still alive enough to pronounce the sentence
a55a55lh, a $NlClaEs a 5PE¢tT@, a" l"DTl5°"@d damSe‘I ahd a Var“ of death on her son, Francisco. Hild, inprobable, fantastic,
laht knight; SNPBIY these are i"9Tedle"t5 9"°"9h» a"d I Wa"t cliche-ridden, overwrought, and crudely composed, THE SPECTRES
"°thl"9 bht the P9" 07 M'5- Radiilffa £0 QTVE it 5 d95CTlDtive is nevertheless a highly representative exanple of the cravings
effect.“ Could Amelia Darcy's cynical voice be speaking for the of the Gothic audience after 1600. The publisher, Langley, was
terror-weary Sarah Wilkinson in this late and most anti-Gothic just Una of many rapagipug little firms who were manufacturing
Bf her Gbthiﬁ "0Vel5? short, plagiarized Gothics in quantity. Other brisk suppliers of
penny-a-line horror included the houses of Thomas Tegg, Ann
487. Hilkinson, Sarah. THE SPECTRES: OR, LORD OSHALD AND LADY ROSA, Lemaine, R_ Harrlld, and T, and R, Hughes, whose tawdry Gothic
INCLUDING AN ACCOUNT OF THE MARCHIONESS OF CEVETT1 HHO HAS merchandise may be located throughout the bibliography,
BASELV CONSIGNED TO A DUNGEON BENEATH HER CASTLE BY HER
ELDEST SON, HHOSE CRUEL AVARICE PLHNGED HIM INT0 THE ¢0MM1$— 482. Hilkinson, Sarah. THE RUFFIAN BOY: on, THE CASTLE or HALDEMAR,
SION 0F THE HORST OF CRIMES THAT STAIN THE ANNALS OF THE HU- A VENETIAN TALE. on which 1s FOUNDED THE INTERESTING AND
MAN RACE- AN ORIGINAL ROMANTIC TALE- London = Langley, n.d. rorutnn nctouaann now PERFORMING AT THE SURREY THEATRE, TAKEN
"Oder" REEdlll0"5¥ NONE FROM MRS. OPIE'S CELEBRATED TALE OF THAT NAME. London : J.
Gothic Type: Gothic chapbook (Schauerromantik elements) ’ Bailey, n.d.
Biographical and Research Data: None Modern Reeditions; None
Gothic Type: Gothic bluebook
Critical Synopsis: In THE SPECTRES, we have a bibliographical glographiaal and Research Data; None
ancestor of the twentieth-century horror pulp. The chapbook's
fiamhﬂyaht title m9"tl0"$ jU$t Ohe 5taTtli"9 eveht 07 the Critical Synopsis: A shrewd and Gothified ahridgement of a
thirty-one page shooter's thirty-one startling events- To vro- melodramatic tale by Amelia Opie (1769-1853), a nember of God-
cure the blot and characters. Sarah Hilkihsoh followed the mass win‘s circle, and a prolific author whose materials often border
production practices of other bluebookers: she ruthlessly scaled an the gathi¢_ The Goghig novellstsi imaginary Venice, the Ca-
50"" 1° $lX P@"C@ 5ll9 ah! ""mb9T °f i°"99T G°thlC "°Vei5- H°" nals running with blood, appears repeatedly throughout the blue-
ror, sensibility. shadowy terror. and the raucous equipment of book. The Venetian heiress, Ethelinda, Baroness of waldemar, had
the haunted castle were all crammed into the compressed Gothic, once rejected the pro osal of a violent nd vindictiv oun m n
p a e y g a
the" thFN5t all at ONCE "P0" that IYPQ Of reader "h° had "either who had loved her passionately. The rebuff turned all of hlS
UIEUIIE N0!‘ th I ll f 1' i
E a$ 9 0' a @l$"Ta Y 5°thiC 9XP9TlE"C@- That love into a vengeful aversion. The young man is named Sheraldi,
there were many such readers during the Gothic craze is a well- also called -the ruffian hayu for his prowess as a street-
,documented fact. The claim made by the subtitle that the reader l fighter, bully,_and all-around sadist. He is a kind'uf smalltime
would find "an original Romantic tale“ was simply one of the Zeluco (see #297) whose naturally vicious nature‘ is made
prevaricating trademarks of the chapbook industry; no one be- thoroughly evil by his romantic disappointment. His inltlal as-
llevedr hht EVEFYONB 9XP@¢ted, 5NCh ah aliNT9m@"t- A brief l"- sault on Ethelinda is direct as he plans to stab her to death at
ventory of characters and occurrences innediately discloses Miss I a grand ball, but the scheme backfires when he kills Ethellnda's

422 TI-E FIRST GOTHICS THE FIRST GDTHICS 423
48
cousin, Melinda, by mistake. The two women also made the mistake . bloody stage. In its most absurd form as a chapbook or bluebook,
of wearing similar dresses to the ball. For his deed, Sheraldi , the Gothi 1 t ' d ' - -
' _ c nove re aine its hold over the reading public long
is sentenced to twenty years in prison where he continues to _ after the triple-decker novels of terror had relinquished their
brood on revenge and grow angrier. In prison, he is befriended F ' aPDeal and popularity, It is worth noting as well that the Goth-
by the innocent daughter of the jailer, who soon falls in love g ic spirit survived in the literature of the Nineteenth Century
with Sheraldi despite (or maybe because) of his bad qualities. V not as the laborious three volume romance but as the brief tale
After fifteen years, Sheraldi is on the loose once more and full , of terror, the more sophisticated offshoot of shilling shockers
of vengeance. Only this time, he chooses the indirect method _of of the ilk of 1171A“ THE gRugt_
assault. Affiliating himself with a gang of robbers, he infil-
trates the Castle of Haldemar where the Baron and Ethelinda have 490. Hilliams, William Frederick. THE HITCHERIES OF CRAIG ISAF. Lon-
been residing in happy splendor. Hilkinson gives the Cllmdtlﬁ don ; Minerva-Press for Lane, Newman, 1804,
repulse of the villain’s second attack on Ethelinda a magnifi- Modern Regditigng; "One
cent Gothic twist. Sheraldi disguises himself by putting on one ‘ Gothic Type: Gothified History (terror mode)
of the Baron's cloaks and hats, but fails to realize that he now Biographical and Research Data: Summers, GOTHIC QUEST, p.85,
looks exactly like Baron Haldemar himself,--especially in the 175,
dim hallways of a Gothic castle. 0n his way to Ethelinda‘s cham-
ber he is ambushed and run through by one of his own gang in Critical Synopsis: Hilliams's successful Macbethian Gothic,
fulfillment of his own wmiand to the we members that “the THE HITCHERIE5 OF CRAIG ISAF, began a trend in weird sisters ap-
Baron must die that night.‘ The eradication of the revenger is pearances in Gothic novels. He have Acton's NUHS OF THE DESERT:
slick, satisfying, and W8ll-timEd- Quite wisely, Hilkinson adds OR, THE HOODLAND HITCHES (see #001) in I805 followed by Brewer's
no mral but ends the story on a sentilrental Mite with the HITCH or RAVENSHORTH'(See #041) in 1808. Williams set his ro—
arrival of the rejected Edith who falls senseless across Sheral- - mange in the troubled reign of Hilliam Rufus (1087—1100), the
di's body. In her longer Gﬂthiﬁi, 65 Edith Blrkhead °"Ce CQm- son of the Conqueror. His throne is threatened by a fictitious,
mented, ‘Miss Hilkinson's sentences stagger and lurch uncertain- ‘ ‘ Macbethian usurper who is spurred on to his crimes by the false
ly." But in her chapbook and hluebook endeavors, she achieved a promises and prophecies of the witches. He is also implicated in
chilling economy of style and more frequently than not _got the I the eerie murder of the Kin durin a h t‘ f B
g _ g g un ing oray. ut the
right number of words in JUSE the right order as she did in THE l 3 meeting with the witches is only one episode in a thick C0nglom_
RUFFIAN BOY. ' S ‘
; erate of supernatural surprises as Hilliams also sets in motion
; all of the rest of the panoply belonging to the haunted castle.
9. Hilkinson, Sarah. ZITTAH THE CRUEL: OR, THE HO0DSMAN‘S DAUGH- ‘ There i5 no authentic histor h r - b t th ' 1
y e e, u ere is p enty of
TEN. R POLISH ROMANCE. London ; Harde and Bentham for B. "blasted heath" terror becoming horror. However, Hilliams did
Hace n d
, . . r make fine use of the cruel and profligate character of William
Modern Reeditions: None Rufus whose mysterious and unsolved murder in the New Forest was
Gothic Type: Gothic chapbogk N T a ready-made event for the enterprising Gothic novelist.
Biographical and Research ata: one
_ r 491. Hilliams, Hilliam Frederick. THE WORLD NE LIVE IN. London :
Critical Synopsis: Slavonic horror had been introduced to the . Minerva-Press for Lane, Newman, I804.
Gothic market in such lengthy works as Mary Charlton's PHEDORA: q Modern Reeditions: None
QR, THE FOREST OF MINSKI ($99 9953) i"d T"°ma5 Pike L5th¥'5 THE I Gothic Type: Domestic fiction (digressive Gothic tendencies)
INVISIBLE ENEMY: OR, THE MINES OF HIELITSKA, A POLISH LEGENDARY Biographical and Research Data: Sunmers, GOTHIC QUEST, p.
ROMANCE (see #237). Wilkinson's thirty-Six -page redaction of ' 175_
such longer Polish Gothics retained all of the monsters of a
seventeenth century Polish wilderness fought over by foreign ‘ Critical Synopsis: The main story of recovered aristocratic
armies. The characters are rudely and violently sketched. No . identity is frequently overshadowed by unnatural interruptions
prince could be more cruel than the Zittaw and no Gothic maiden of all sorts in this digressive domestic-Gothic mixture. Al-
more innocently beleaguered than the woodsman's daughter, Ingon- though few of these extraneous occurrences are relevant to the
da. Pursuit is the plot, homicide and attempted rape the recur- hero's fortunes, they are all extremely Gothic. Phantoms patrol
rent episodes. Apparitions of Prince Zittaw's numerous victims the halls of haunted abbeys which the characters occasionally
enter and exit with or without good reason. Ingonda is the in- pause to explore, lunatics shriek from afar and for no particu-
tended bride of Count Timoska, but is abducted on her wedding 1 lar reason, realistic scenes dissolve into nightmare, and hints
- day by Zittaw. After throwing Count Timoska into a dungeon, of the crime of parricide hang over both of the contending
Zittaw tries to murder the woodsman but is somehow Prevented by ‘ brothers in the main story. In a struggle between brothers in
Ingonda who suddenly becomes very adept with the dagger herself. I , the typical Gothic novel, the illegitimate brother is usually
The stabbing removal of the rapist prince leaves her free to wed F portrayed as a figure of evil and the dispossessed legitimate
the virtuous count as the curtain crashes down on Hilkinson's 1 brother is portrayed as good. Here, that normal ordering of the
l 1

424 THE FIRST GDTHICS  THE FIRST GUTHICS
e 425
conflict is reversed, or at least it appears to be reversed \ “ foliage, which, bending before its violence, inclined toward the
uhtll "earl! the ehd hf the "°Vel- Fl9htf"9 t° e5tabll5h hI5 . rocks whereupon they grew; the forked lightning played upon the
Pdtrehdges the "ehle hut ille9ltlmdte 5l9‘5m""d Archdale l5 Q granite's heights, and, with momentary brilliancy, disclosed the
harshly used by his half-brother and legal master, L°'d ‘ y terrific scenery of the Alps; the rain in big drops began to de-
Portcennis. hounded in a duel and driven from the household, gcend, and the thunder peals, with iouder Crash, echoed from
Archdale is taken in by two former members of the h°"5eh°ld- '. cavern to cavern, and died away in indistinct murmurs, amidst
Mrs. Mordent and the Reverend Mr. Hervey, who possess secrets i r the far extended dhain of modntaihg_n
about Lord Portcennis's treachery. They have papers to verify ‘ "
that it is Rrchdale and not Portcennis who is the iegal Lnrd- l i, 493. Hoodfall, Sophia. ROSA: OR, THE CHILD OF THE ABBEV. London‘
Portcennis's secret bastardy has been the cause of his brotherly l Ii J_F_ Hughes’ 1504_
hatred and wickedness. Hith Archdale suddenly become a wealthy g Mgdgrn Reeditidhg; Ndhe
earl and Portcennis suddenly reduced to dependent pauper, the ‘ gothic Type; gehtihehtgi Gothic (terror mode)
novel ends on this note of economic justice. Half-way or adul- Biographical and Research Data: Sunmers, GOTHIC QUEST, p.85
terated Gothics of this type in which a domestic plot was embel-
lished by Gothic devices often succeeded where the novelist_ had Critical Synopsis: Appears to be an expanded version in four
8" ihdlﬁtmeht d9dl"5t 5°¢let¥ t0 mdke- 5"t Hllll5m$'5 G°d"l"la" ‘ volumes of Regina Maria Roche's already voluminous CHILDREN OF
title WhlCh Shﬂﬂld be C0mPeFed With THING5 A5 THEY ARE (see 1 . THE ABBEY (see #364) interspersed with other components of other
#139) failed to yield a powerful Godwinian novel of ideas or a _; gdthie types and Styies of the pe¢iod_
satisfactory Gothic shocker.
494 Yorke Mrs R M P THE VALLEY OF COLLARES OR T E
- . . . . . : , H CRVERN OF
492. HOLFSTEIN: OR, THE MYSTERIDUS BANDIT A TERRIFIC ROMANCE TO ’ 3
, , HORRORS. London . Minerva-Press for the Author, 1800.
WHICH IS ADDED THE BRONZE STATUE, A TERRIFIC TALE. London : Modern Reeditiehs; Ndhe
J. Bailey, n.d. Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (horror, terror modes)
Modern Reeditionss None ‘ _ Bio ra hic l nd R
g p a a esearch Data. Tarr, CATHOLICISM IN GOTHIC
Gothic Type: Gothic chapbook (plagiarism of Shelley's ST. IR- FICTION, pp.59, 105.
VYNE)
Biographical and Research Data: None Critical Synopsis: The three-volume work is a heavily senti-
_ » mental romance laced through with Gothic events and characters.
Critical Synonsis: The undated chanbook is an undisguised Mrs. Yorke particularly favored that Gothic situation where the
Dla9lBTl$m 0t 5helley'$ $e5°"d Gethle "°Vel- 57- IRVYNEI OR, THE floor gives way and characters suddenly "drop into" some eerie
RQ51CRUCIAN (See #405)- The Pluhdehlig 50th dlters d PhTd$e °' chamber beneath the visible portions of the castle or abbey. She
omits a word here and there and renames a character or _tWd- also favored speleological imagery and excursions as a means of
Shelley's "egalena becomes the ‘fainting Serena." while Eloise's heightening the mysterious. Both of these effects are used lib-
story is sinoly drowned. A comparative inspection of the ooening erally to engender and maintain the eerie atmosphere of THE VAL-
oaragraohs of $helley‘s novel and the chanbook demonstrates the f LEV or COLLARES. The setting and characters are Portuguese or
crudity of the chanhooker's larceny- Shelley's thundering over— pseudo-Portuguese. Two citizens of Lisbon, Isabel and Sebastian,
ture ‘reads: "Red thunder clouds born on the in s of th id ‘ - ~ - -
, e H g 8 W - . are leading quite normal lives until their attentions are drawn
night whirlwind, floated, at fits, athwart the crimson-coloured Y one day in the market 5 dare h na h t'f 1
‘ q y eau i u youth with long
orbit of the noon= the rising fierceness of the blast sighed i ‘ flaxen hair, dressed in the English make." For reasons which
through the stunted shrubs, which, bending before its violence, they cannot quite understand themseives, they track this nvi-
inclined towards the rocks whereon they grew: over the blackened sion" through the crowds but lose sight of him. Thereafter, each
expanse of heaven. at intervals. was spread the blue lightning's i market day brings a repetition of this strange experience of
fld$h; it Pl5Yed "P0" the Qhﬂhlte hel9ht$- ihds "lth mﬂmehtdry following the beautiful boy. Their confessor, Father Lawrence,
brilllaheya dl5el°5ed the terrlfle $Ce"eFy of the A198, "h°§e believes Sebastian and Isabel to be possessed or hallucinating
gigantic and nisshaoen summits, reddened by the transitory moon- , and to prove that he is right, he joins the search. The search
beam, were crossed by black fleeting fragments of the t€mPe$t- eventually leads to a deserted monastery in the Valley of Col-
Cl0ud- The Til", l" hi9 d'°P5 be9i" t° deseehda dhd the th""der- lares, a place with a sinister reputation. It is here that Se-
Deelis With louder ehd m°'e dedfe"i"9 CTd$h, t0 Shdke the le- bastian and Father Lawrence are "swallowed up by the earth" as
ﬁlth, till the long-protracted "BF eehﬂlhg from CdVer" t° CdV- v they fall through a dark shaft to land in a strange chapel, the
ern, died, in indistinct murmurs, amidst the far-extended chain hiding p]ace of the visionary hey and a headtifdi_ hdmeh_ his
‘of mountains.“ And here is the chapb00k'§ 0Pe"l"9 5e"te"te-_a _ mother. A corpse awaiting burial is the third member of this
direct theft from $T- IRVVNE like everythihﬂ else l" thls ' ‘ Gothic family. The boy whose name is David proceeds _to relate
nineteen-Page shocker: "Red thunder clouds, borne on the wings ‘ . their tragic history to these startled guests from above. Hhat
of the midnight whirlwind, floated at intervals athwart the sky; . follows is a len th memoir which tot ll '
g y a y ruins the shock scene
the rising fierceness of the blast sighed through the shrubs and ,~_v which has just preceded. The visionary boy's father and mother
' l

l
425 THE FIRST cornrcs l THE FIRST cornxcs
427
are heretics wanted by the Inquisition; thus, the boy's odd garb _ Ventoliene. Somehow released from their terrible bonds with the
and 5"ﬂd0"y m°V9m@"t$- Terrible EV9"t5 Temembefed are "ever B5 l . society, Frederick and Edward leave the haunted palace and marry
strong as terrible events directly experienced. Having .started two perfectly normal women who know nothing of their husbands‘
with a strong aura of mystery and having built up to a suspense- Gothic adventures. And what of Mr. Owen, the original catalyst
ful climax, the novel simply falls apart after the spectacular ~ of the vengeful quest? He had killed himself before either the
falls of Sebastian and Father Lawrence. ~_ society or Fitzallan could»lay hands on him, but the reader is
P _' ' liable to miss or overlook this detail amidst the novel's phan-
5. Yorke, Mrs. R.M.P. THE HAUNTED PALACE: OR, THE HORRORS OF VEN- ‘ 2 tasmagoria of horrors. The hero's reemergence from the haunted
TOLIENE. London : C. Stower for Earle and Hemet, 1801. palace is of no consequence whatever. This is a Gothic novel in
Modern Reeditions: None ‘ g’ which horror for horror's sake is the only reason for its exist-
Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (horror mode) ‘ , ence. It is also an exact dosage of what the typical Gothic
Biographical and Research Data: Sunners, GOTHIC QUEST, pp.8O, l ll reader wanted again and again.
96; Tarr, CATHOLICISM IN GOTHIC FICTION, p.79; Lévy, LE ROMAN
"GOTHIQUE“ ANGLAIS, Dp.429, 431. 496. Yorke, Mrs. R.M.P. THE ROMANCE OF SMVRNA: OR, THE PREDICTION
FULFILLED!l! London : Earle and Hemet, 1801.
Critical Synopsis: This highest of high Gothics is nothing Modern Reeditions: None
more nor less than an encyclopedia of horror. lntricately plot- ‘ Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (horror mode)
ted and full of blue fire effects, it is also defiant of summa- I Biographical and Research Data: Sunners, GOTHIC QUEST, p.80;
ry. Even the physical layout evokes the extremes of the genre, I Levy, LE ROMAN 'GDTHlQUE" ANGLAIS, pp.436, 465.
bound as the novel is in gaudy blue boards and printed in blunt l
faced type. There is no Radcliffean reticence in any of the Critical Synopsis: This is a weak and confused Gothic which
incidents. All is uninhibited violent fantasy done with the same requires four volumes to fulfill the ancestral prophecy hanging
garish zest for the irrational found in a work such as Beck- over the House of Aranjuez. Even the terrible curse is not very
ford's VATHEK (see #030). The story begins with a Gothic roar at ‘ l terrible in the high Gothic sense. The brothers Alphonsus and
the base of an erupting Mount Vesuvius. Old Michael is screaming Xavier are warned that their family line will cease when a moth-
a bloody vow into the ear of young Edward Fitzallan commanding 1 er of their household succeeds in murdering a daughter. The
him "to pursue the wretch to the confines of hell itself!" The f events preceding this homicidal certainty bear no discernible
wretch is shortly disclosed as Edward's vile brother-in-law, a i a relationship to the fulfillment of the curse. To avoid the
Mr. Owen, who is stained with all sorts of crines, sexual and ‘ Q curse, Alphonsus has fled from Portugal to become a wanderer and
social. The pursuit takes Edward Fitzallan to the island of Ven- finally lands in Smyrna in Asia Minor. He had also left home
toliene near Naples, the colossaliheadquarters of a strange, because he had been unable to convince his relatives of his
blood-drinking fraternity which convenes annually in the rulns legitimacy and hoped to acquire proof of identity during his
of the haunted palace under the Satanic tutelage of a mysterious travels and travails. His brother, Xavier, and his wife, Alizra,
character named Vashti and a diabolic host called Count St. remain behind and are soon beset by adversities of all kinds,
Prie. However, this hell-fire club has some members who are not ‘I -.so many in fact that a nurse hard]y seen; necessary to insure
totally depraved, but still "novices" to evil. On the trail of the end of this wretched family. The ordeal of Alizra makes a
Owen. Edward stumbles directly intd the middle of one bf their Gothic novel within a Gothic novel. Violently courted by the
obscene annual ceremonies and witnesses a weird ritual of init1- , sadistic nobleman, Don Joseph, she is drugged, violated, and
ation. A young nobleman named Frederick, one of the non-depraved with the cooperation of the In uisitio d ' t ‘
_ _ q n ma e ln o a sexua
vdstulants df the secret society. befriends Fitzallan and ‘~ bauble for Don Joseph's amusements 1t takes,an unnaturally co-
T
vouches for him. Their lives spared by the 5¢¢l9tY, the tV° incidental natural disaster (the Lisbon earthquake) to extricate
young man nor partake of all of the hdrrdrs bf V@ntdliene- The i her. Had she appraised her materials better instead of simply
pursuit of Mr- Owen was merely a way bf qettlns Edward Fitzallan < filling four volumes, Mrs. Yorke might have built quite a satis-
inside the haunted palace so that this Gothic grand tour could factory Gothic around Alizra's distresses. During his wander-
occur. The novel now abruptly becomes a collage of unique Gothic ,‘ ings, Alphonsus encounters an old man, Dr. Pilgrim, who will, of
PT@diCdmE"t5, ‘E535. and 9ff@¢t$- 0"E °F their EXP@Vl€"C@$ Ca" ' course, turn out to be the father he requires to establish his
fairly represent all of the others. Exploring the palace, they Y, identity. He also meets an intellectual young man named Dick
fall through some rotten flooring at one point into an Egyptian- ; Berry, and something of a wise fool character nicknamed Old
ized burial vault below with Fitzallan saved from a plunge to Muley. Their presence in the romance provides a little joy
his death by landing incredibly ‘astride a marble Sphinx." More amidst the general grief at the end. Probably remembering that
' Gothic debris litters their Pathway tb freedbm- They are sur- I her subtitle called for the prophecy to be "fulfilled!!!" Mrs.
P0H"4Ed ﬂﬂd Sefenided by Phd"t°m5 ""0 $i"9 bl"? fire dlfges a"d l Yorke hastily arranges for the deaths of Alphonsus and Xavier at
cry fbr their bln0d- They find a bne—handed skeleton, apparently ' the end. A young lady loved by Xavier but whose love is not
the victim of live burial, and provide decent interment And returned is pughed down 3 fli nt of 5; ins n n tn in a
_ _- g a y er mo er
they have another annual rendezvous with the secret society of ' rage over her daughtgrts refusal tn marry Xayier_ Hnngnever

E
‘ 428 THE FIRST GUTHICS 4"; THE FIRST EUTHICS 429
obliquely then, the prophecy is fulfilled and both brothers end _ ghosts of her ancestors. One chamber is explicitly forhidgen to
the line by dying shortly thereafter. Excessive length, awkward her by her uncle and so it is to this locked room that Elinor's
handling of Gothic material, and failure to focus on the most exploratory steps incline. This room, like Mrs. Radcliffeis
potentially horrifying episode contribute to the poor quality of chamber containing the veiled portrait that frightened Emily
this Gothic. Mrs. Yorke was one of those Gothic novelists who into a faint, is reserved for Clifford Priory's long withheld
apparently could not resist inserting everything which she horror of horrors. Upon entering, her single candle reveals two
thought the horrific recipe called for. 1 dim and cadavero s sh s t
u ape pros rate upon two velvet-covered cas-
kets. Although they look like the real corpses of Gervas‘s un
7. Young, Mary Julia. ROSE-MOUNT CASTLE: OR, FALSE REPORT. London buried wife and child, they prove to be only waxen effigies when
: Minerva-Press for Hilliam Lane, I798. touched. Sir Gervas was not practicing corpse love after all as
Modern Reeditions: None Elinor at first thinks. Radcliffean escapades of this sort are
Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (Radcliffean elements) 1 permitted to accumulate for several volumes until the surfeited
Biographical and Research Data: None maiden (and by extension, the surfeited reader) tires of Gothic
surprises. Ready now for cannon sense and domestic comfort
Critical Synopsis: A heavily sentimentalized Gothic drawing 5 Elinor welcomes Sir Clement Darnley to the Priory and he wel:
most of its situations from the novels of Mrs. Radcliffe with f comes her to wifehood. Long ago, the critic George Saintsbury
the delicate emotions of the heroine reminiscent of Charlotte ‘ looked out over the period of Gothic fury and composed a criti-
Smith's persevering women. The false report apparently involves cal epitaph for writers such as Regina Maria Roche and Mary
the reputed death of the heroine Myra herself after she has been Julia Young. These writers are “watered-down Richardson, passed
secretly consigned to the haunted darkness of Rose-Mount Castle. f through successive filtering beds of Mackenzie and Mrs. Rad-
Her escape from the castle, then, literally means her return to » cliffe." And yet, their elixirs remained a highly potable mix-
life. Young also wrote a Macbethian Gothic in which she gave ture to the everthirsty Gothic audience.
more attention to the perversities of Gothic villainy in DON-
ALDA: OR, THE HITCHES OF GLENSHIEL (1805). ' 499. Young, Mary Julia. MOSS CLIFF ABBEY: OR, THE SEPULCHRAL HARMON-
IST, A MYSTERIOUS TALE. London - J.F Hughes 1803.
s. Young, Mary Julia. THE EAST INDIAN: OR, CLIFFORD PRIORY. London I nnuehn Reeditions: None ' '
: Earle and Hemet, 1799. Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (terror mode)
Modern Reeditions: None
Gothic Type: Pure or high Gothic (Radcliffean imitation)
Biographical and Research Data: Tarr, CATHOLICISM IN GOTHIC
\=u=v.»,u... 1»
Biographical and Research Data: Sunners, GOTHIC QUEST, p.93;
Spacks, Patricia L. THE INSISTENCE OF HORROR: ASPECTS OF THE
SUPERNATURAL IN EIGHTEENTH-CENTURY Poetry. Cambridge, MA :
‘ FICTION, pp.44, 47, 98, 105. . 3 Harvard UP, 1962; Noske, Frits. "Sound and Sentiment: The
Function of Music in the Gothic Novel,“ MUSIC & LETTERS 62
Critical Synopsis: Lacking the emotional subtlety and narra- (1981): I62-185. - ,
tive craft of Mrs. Radcliffe, the novel is still a satisfactory
facsimile of Udolphoesque Gothic (see #349). Mrs. Young wisely I Critical Synopsis: The novel's manipulation of mysterious and
employs Radcliffean nsyehelesy and situations for her heroine ghostly music is done in imitation of the various Gothic acous-
Tﬂiher thi" Just ¢°Pylﬂg the mistakes and crises of Emily St. tics experienced by Mrs. Radcliffe's Emily St. Aubert in THE
Aubert. Consequently, her Radcliffean imitation contains some MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO (see #349). The Abbey dwellers, George and
innovative thrills and jitters to go with the explained Harriet Newton, are an ultra-sentimental pair who delight in
supernatural. The melancholiac heroine, Elinor Clifford, is a ruins, thrill to the ghostly tones of eerie music, and secretly
devotee of dreadful pleasure. Having lately read THE MYSTERIES , enjoy the morbidity engendered by the terrors and sorrows of
OF UDOLPHO, she comes to Clifford Priory primed for a Gothic their sequestration within the dark world. In this Gothic ro-
escapade. But another part of Elinor's temperament belongs to mance, Mary Julia Young engages in the same moods of sentimental
Jane AH5!€"'5 V0F1d 0? ¢0"'t5hiP. CTQVQT C0"VeT5ati0", tea. a"d melancholy and delicious Gothic terror exhibited in the grave-
matrimonial strategies. Her natural affections incline toward yard poetry of her famous ancestor, the author of THE COMPLAINT:
Sir Clement Darnley and a mild conflict arises when her father OR, NIGHT THOUGHTS ON LIFE, DEATH, AND IFMORTALITY (I742-I746),
insists that she encourage the attentions of the odious hyp0- Edward Young. Hith its broodings on death, decay, and the trans-
crite, Lord Felgrove. Felgrove's exterior demeanor is polite and ience of all worldly joys, MOSS CLIFF ABBEY is the epitome of
civil, but he is actually a murderous fortunehunter of the most the elegiac Gothic novel. It is reflective and darkly meditative
Gothic type as Elinor's father discovers too late. Hhen Felgrove rather than alarming and dramatic with the hero and heroine
ruins Clifford, a deed which causes his death, Elinor hurries operating as lenses to magnify these powerful feelings. Gothic
' off to her last remaining relative at Clifford Priory, her un- music of the the sort which sounds through the halls of Moss
C18, 5i? GeFVﬂ5- Cllffvrd PTl0FY l5 B replica of the Castle of Cliff Abbey gradually elevates the mind to a sublime peak of
Udelvhe. e house ef many mysterie§- It is net lens before Elinor fear where the horrid and the beautiful, according to Burke's
is having spectral experiences and unplanned meetings with the theory of the sublime, become one. Sepulchral melody and similar

430 THE FIRST GOTHICS '
forms of ghostly music from the other side retained a strong \
appeal as a Gothic effect throughout the Nineteenth Century. For 7
example, the eerie strains of the deceased Alice Pyncheon's
harpsichord in Ha\vthorne's THE HOUSE if THE SEVEN GABLES (1851)
may he traced back to the Gothic acoustics of Mrs. Radcliffe and
Mary Julia Young.
_ I
00. Ziegenhirt, Sophia F. THE ORPHAN OF TIHTERN ABBEY. London :
Minerva-Press for A.K. Newman, 1816.
Modern Reeditions: None A d-
Gothic Type: Sentimental Gothic (combined imitation of sever- 3 ppe" ‘X one
al sentimental Gothics) 1 5 OSSAM F T
Biographical and Research Data: None L O G0 Hlc TERMS
Critical Synopsis: Conducting the sentimental and Gothic edu-
cation of its heroine in the romantic shadows of one of Eng-
land's most famous monastic ruins, the novel owes most of its
morbid situations to such recurrently popular Gothic books as
Charlotte Smith's EPIELINE, THE ORPHAN OF THE CASTLE (see #421)
and other orphan-centered Gothics in which the sensibilities of
a frightened maiden are brought to peaks of pleasure by means of H
the nocturnal contemplation of ruins. Hrs. Ziegenhirt's Tintern
Abbey is not Hordsworth's Tintern Abbey, for the emotions which
it evokes in the heroine, Emilia, are hardly recollected in
tranquillity. The sixteenth-century royal fugitive is pursued »
there by murderous relatives bent upon her death. The Abbey is a
site of creeping shadows, vague sublimity, and genealogical sur-
prises. Steeped in gory legend and enclosing the heroine in an
atmosphere of the bitterest gloom, it gradually takes on a su-
pernatural life of its own through the prisoner's anxious imag-
ination. The Gnthic novel as a framing device for the poetics of i -
gloom and the aesthetics of nightmare reaches an ideal condition '
of the form in Ziegenhurt's portrayal of one of dark Romanti-
cism's leading motifs, the divine disorder and chaotic power of
nature and time. '
|
k
r
1

