Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
The black robber: a romance
THJE BLACK ??????.
A ROMANCE
"A beam that was set returns—dreadful king away! Sø to thf troubled dwelling." OSSIAN.
CHAP XXI. "MYgood, my faithful girl/' atlength cried lssena/ f may Heaven reward you for aH tbese attentions ? my distresses. This private meeting with Oswold be¬ gins to alarm mc—I would it were at voi, ?. ? once
[ S J
ence concluded; basten to him there¬ fore, Annette, say I am now in readiness to obey his commands,—Fain would I quit this mansion, in which I have been so unfortunate, and beneath the sacred protection of soirië holy Abbess, bury my sorrows in conventual gloom/' To Annette, the idea of entering a Monastery, was stijl more terrible than that of residing under the influence of Oswold j observing however, the reso¬ lution visible in IssenaV countenance^ •he again descended into the hall, and as speedily returned with the Baron's request for the immediate appearance of Issena ; who throwing over her features a mourping veil^tremblingly repaired to tbe «paiement. ' v * This îs^ell cousin I&na,* f ëxclaim- Oswold, with a smile, at thesamStMe extending
í s 3 extending his hand, and cdnduètirfg het· to a chaír/ r I am charmed wi%your rea*· diness to oblige me, and regret that the violence of my affection should so far have mastered ?? reason, last night, as to banish the respect, which, in momenti of sober reflection, I must ever feel for the orphan daughter of Evlio/' * 1 have long feît a regard for you, Issena,'' continued be/*'as the object, not only of my compassion, but of my protection; be not surprised then, if my esteem has ripened into love ; but hear me, thus at your feet, declare the sincerity ofmy passion/ 1 At these words, sinking on one knee, Oswold continued, " my hand and my heart, beautiful Is¬ sena, are both equally devoted to your service; deigr^ then to make me truly happy by^ccbptirtg tbem;* , fr Rise, roy lord/* interrupted Issena, Bâ deeply
'■■-:" |?- : "y-f : ." ' ! -:s"- deeply ^tíšhmg> f f dtó ? ?????? Bab¬ oii Øswpld to kneel before the object of his piiy, with proposals that her misfor¬ tunes teach her nòtfohear.^ "tîow Issena ? ani I then deeméiíuri- Wortliy your esteem^-is my Iove---— <c Name φ not again, rny Lord ; you distress me beyond measure—permit me I beseech, I implore ypu, instantly to quit this Castle/ amj fo b ury my sorrows in monastic solitude/^ ? Now heáveri forbid, Issena, such charms; shpuld be hidden in obscurity," said Oswold, gently takipg bei* hand; "it^itt not i)e consisted tation fo permit i t---would hot the censo- riòitó w<|rid report, that from the jnhos- pitable njarnsipri of Ösvfpld, the ^ 1<??1?? İ^ for :p^ teetit to foe ??? ?^ ^ ???^ ?? ? ??/* replied Is- » ■ sena
? 5 ] sena, indignantly, *' by vyhat authority do you oppose my inclination!? I insist on leaving this Castle immediately—" "Hold !" cried he detaining her,"can you then quit, for ever, one whose only offence is the declaration of an unfortu¬ nate passion ?'' " Torture me no longer with your pas¬ sion, my Lord—Issena's heart is not at her own disposal." "Then" answered the Baron, bending his angry brow, rí force must make thee mine.'* " Oswold !" returned Issena, " though you exercise unheard-of cruelty, death is still mine to accept—^shall the hand of innocence be united to that of guilt, and not partake its infamy?—though the thorn and the rose flourišfi togethei*, vir^ tue and vice may not mingle—wed Avith thee Oswold—never; I pronounce it, never.'* B3 Weak
? ? 3 " Weak girl ! I have said my will, and is it not enough for thee implicitly to obey?" "O oswold! unjust, designing Os¬ wold ! till I knevv thee I was happy ; the snsls of my mother taught me to wel¬ come returning day—her mild prayers recommended me nightly to heaven— and tiie golden sun, as he renewed his tiackless journey, beamed on Issena's ?????, and witnessed her ardent grati¬ tude. Can I forget such moments of felicity, and love the being that changed my happy calm, to one dark storm of woe?— caini prize the ungenerous hand which thwarts my last sad consolation." i( Sweet reasöner!" cried Oswold, clasping Issena in his arms, and rudely kissing her Hps. "Wretch ! ' shuddered she, struggling, " was it not suffici¬ ent for thee to blast every earthly joy I possess
? 7 ? possess, but that I must submit to this ? by the spirits of my virtuous ancestors, whose name and title you disgrace, I swear never to be thine—sooner shall the spray of ocean beat at l\eaven's gate—sooner shall tLe hills of Yarrow crouch to hail thee." " Proud fool ! like thy haughty kin¬ dred/' thundered the Baron,flinging her from him, "art thou so stubborn?—like them too, shalt thou feel my vengeance, till thy high soul shrink to subjection." "I bend totliee Oswold ! never—thou desolater of the domestic hearth—thou secretand abominable assassin; never, *, Stung with rage, Oswold placed his hand upon his sword, "strike!" cried Issena, " strike deeply—tis not death I fear—send me at once to my murdered parents—" at these words Oswold furi- B 4 ously
Γ s 3 ously raised his poignard to her bosom,. as a peal of thunder shook the vaulted roof of the apartment. "Proceed," continued Issena, "tis but the voice of heaven, which mur¬ murs at thy impiety." "Sorceress'/'vociforated he, mad vvith rage, and was preparing to strike, as the wounded form of Evlin, clad in awful majesty,seemed suddenly frowning upon hira. Oswold, dismayed by the dieadful interposition, abruptly let fall his sword, and staggered to a chair for support. (i Did'st thou not see that? Issena·*' enquired he, after a pause, fearfully ga¬ zing around. <f See what my Lord ?" « The offended ghost of--------- Oh »/> "I saw nothing ; but, if the hand of Providenceliath interposed to check the the darkpurpse of your mind, I rejoice. O!
? 9 ? ? Oswold! beware!—the hour comes, and comes quickly, in which you must render up an account to heaven of your secret offences; and dreadful, I fear, truly dreadful, is the punishment hat awaits you/' So saying, Issena departed; while Oswold, absorbed in gloomy re¬ flection, possessed neither the wish nor the power to detain her. On en¬ tering her own apartment,she discovered Annette busily employed in twisting a ladder of silken ropes, which she had se¬ vered from the heavy ornaments of the tapestry. Almost feinting, Issena sank on the couch r and motioning her atten¬ dant to secure the cfoor, desired to leam the nature of her employment Presenting at the same time a cup of water, <f see, my Lady/' exclaimed she, "by means of this ladder, we may suc¬ ceed in escarping from the balcony at midnight : I have been privately to the porter's lodge, and secured one df the keys ofthe outer gate/' Joy
t io ] * Joy beamed in Isseha^s expressive countenance at thb intelHgence of An¬ nettes stratagem, and readily assisting in the Undertakings the hope of liberty gave new life to hef drooping spirits-, In the course of the day she cautiously repaired to the chamber of her late mo¬ ther, attd securing such gold and jew- êll^aar might prove serviceable to tbeir Wanderings^uickly returned ; when Am ' nette repairing again to the refectory for refreshments, learnt from Mar¬ maduke, an account ofthe Baron's be¬ coming suddenly and severely indisposed and hurried to Isssena with the infor¬ mation. Issena now began to consider what means would be best for them to pur- *.ue*in case their plan of escape should prove succesful, Annette being an, or¬ phan like herself had no friends ?? whom they could fly for safety. It was at
C n j at length however decided, that they »hould disguise themselves in two suites of Donalbaine's scotch apparel, he be¬ ing ata distant mansion of Oswald's, and Annette having the charge of his simple wardrobe. At midnight therefore, attiring them¬ selves in their disguise, and Issena throwing her lute across her shoulder, they prepared to descend from the cor¬ ridor. The night being unusuaUy dark, befriended their designs^and easily rea¬ ching the court,they slowly and fearful¬ ly approached the gate, when a centinél on the adjoining rampart, called out, u who goes there V' Trembling with dread, they returned no reply to the interrogation, but silent* ly unbolting the gatejiastened down the mountain.
BG
C tø 3
In thè tneáh time, Issena was seldotìi or ¿Ver äbsfent from the mind of Valen* tind ; he loved to wander aloneand rumi¬ nate upon the relentless blast of fate, #hich bad thus early separated their mutual loves ; and, as his Father found much relief from his cares, in listening to the fished conversation of Lady Rodolpha, the youth would frequently retire unobserved to the most unfre¬ quented parts bf the estate ; where^ af¬ ter climbing to some lofty and soHtary elevation of the craig, he loved to gaza^ upon the broad expanse of the lake, and indulge his wounded heart in the^ treasured remembrance of his lost Issena. Ulric was truly charmed with the #??1? Of the interesting Lady IHing^ jatïrti ; ?? defined manners and strong mind were congenial fo his own ; titt iiow, from the death of bis ever to be lamented
I is ? Jamented Julia, scarcely had his ear listened to the gentle and assuasive ac¬ cents of female beauty, Rodolpha, though long since united to Lord liiing? laim, seldom as.sociated with the cold and insensible partner of her marriage, for the speculative wanderer preferrec£ the far extending pursuit, occasioned by magic of wealth, and little heeded the actual enjoyment within his power, such as which,that Avealth Avas designed to purchase. Thus neglected, the sensible mind c?f Lady lHinglairn sought other objects to fill up that space in her heart, which the non-existence of genuine love for Donalvin, rendered vacant. In com¬ pliance with the wishes of her parents, and because no opposing object presen¬ ted itself to thé act,she had forfeited her youthful hand, unconscious of any il! which might prove the result of such rashness
E i* J raihnas«. It was true Rodolpha suf¬ fered not the neglect of her Lord to weigh heavily upon her spirits ; for, re¬ gardless of his long and frequent ab¬ sence, she passed her Hfe amid scenes of mirth and gaiety—whenever, unex¬ pectedly, he returned to his home,, she welcomed him with the esteem of a friend, and a smile,which the native vi¬ vacity of her disposition ever prompted ·. he also felt a famiHar satisfaction at be¬ holding her, adding dignity and grace to his house ; his pride too was gratified by the admiration which she universaliy excited among the numerous guests, ever thronging to tiie festive mansion« of lHinglairn. But the bosom of Rodolpha, was not formed for the reception only of such loose enjoyments as the sunny votaries of mirth,andthe endless rounds of plea¬ iure inspire—there were moments,when retiring
L *5 j retiring from the mad throng, in Urn welcome intercourse of one congenial soul, she would have tasted with more exquisite delight, the charms of rational refinement, and the enjoyment of do¬ mestic peace, Pleased with the extent of Ulricas- liberal and enlightened understand* ing, Lady Illinglairn speedily learned to draw fatal comparisons between him and Donalvin, by no means favour¬ able to the latter, " Ah !" would she secretly exclaim, " that fortune had but consigned me such a companion, to shaçe my earthly happiness, as St. Ju¬ lien —but now, alas ! honour, that emp¬ ty and ideal phantom,and the rigid rules which men heartlessly impose upon our feeble sex, forbid me to indulge even tbe visions of futile imagination. Yet, must I submit Avithout a murmur—vvith* Wt entertaining a sense of indignity at the
? '«3 fhe indifference and neglect of Donal¬ vin ?—Am I either his vassal or his slavce, that for him alone, and his capri¬ ces, 1 exist ?—still, with these poor at¬ tentions, I was once amply satisfied—I had no object but the fulfilment of my artless gratifications, and was happy. How f comes it then that those little joys wherein 1 delighted, no longer know to charm my feverish breast?" thus communed Rodolpha, it was evi¬ dent she loved Ulric, while he,innocent- ly unconscious of her latent attachment, continued, by the most dangerons gen¬ tleness, undesignedly to seduce, and rivet her affections entirely on himself. No earthly form, hovvever captivating it might seem, |ield sufficient influence to inspire him With a new passion—Ju¬ lia reigned still potent empress of his soul—his natural disposition, assisted by gratitude, in the present instáncé,táught bim
Γ 17 ] him to respect and honour Rodolpha, not only as his friend, but as his bene¬ factress;-—her elegant conversation di¬ verted his mind from painfully obtru¬ ding thoughts—her hospitable mansion afforded him a delightful and secure asylum,from the malice and pursuits of his enemies. In defiance hoAvever of her more virtuous resolutions, the voluptuous ten¬ dency of Lady Illinglairn'semotions,and the sovereign indignation which she cherished for ihe prejudices of common minds, speedily prevailed over her forti¬ tude, and she was far from Avishing not to infuse into Ulric's bearla fire,conge- nial to the one which internally consu¬ med her own. Every art that invention, aided by expence could produce, to be- Avich or deHght his senses, was resorted to; at one time, in her painted galley wreathed with garlands streaming from swelling
? is ? swelling sails of purple silk, slowly driven along the silvery lake by the languid gale of summer, she delighted him with the sounds of dulcet harmony, whichjn dying cadences, closed with the measured fall of the gilded oar ;—at other times, when the sun had sunk be¬ hind the distant foliage, her galleys, after the Venetian fashion, were convert¬ ed into illuminated Gondolas, in which the merry maskers, with song and lute, haiied each other as they passed ; or fre¬ quently, as Ulric and herself Avandered through the surrounding scenes, lis¬ tening to the voice, vvhich too well she loved to hear, tenderly would Rodolpha gaze upon him, asan involuntary sigh frequently escaped her bosom. On one of these excursions Avhen they were at a considerable distance from the Castle,the sky began to be overcast, and assumed every appearance of a coming storm; in gigantic and majestic forms floated the.
C ia 3 thehigh clouds,over Avhich the red sun's, ardent beams flung a golden verge ; the chill wind blew keenly, and the leaves of the foliage trembled in the blast; while the choristers of the groves, re¬ signed their melody, and fled for shel¬ ter to some neighbouring covert. " See 1 " cried Ulric "the dark clouds over spreading the face of heaven,frown portentous of a coming storm; had we not better return to the Castle?" " Already," repHed Rodolphe " the rain begins to descend; let us rather fol¬ low the example of the feathered tribe, and tarry beneath the friendly branches of some spreading tree, till the shower is past/' i Ulric now conducted Lady Illinglairn to an alcove of mountain ash, when seat- in themselves upon the flower-broider- ed carpet of nature, they anxiously con¬ templated the wild sublimity of the tem¬ pest
C -fö ? pest. The awful thunder now shook the sable canopy of heaven; and, as the blue lightning darted in forked di¬ rections to the earth, tremblmg, Ro¬ dolpha shrieked aloud, while flinging herself on the bosom of Ufric for pro¬ tection, she nearly fainted—raising her tenderly, "be not alarmed* exclaim¬ ed he, "it will soon be pastj see! lady,the sky already begins tore-assume its hue of lovely azure/' At these words Rodolpha ventured to gaze around, when a sudden flash bursting upon them, she again threw herself ?? St Julien's. arms and swooned. Agitated beyond measure at the ef¬ fect of her apprehensions,Ulricanxiousr ly gazed towards the mansion, in hopes either Valentine, or some of the atten¬ dants would speedily appear, but ? vain; wfaeUjOpening bueyes/ lady 11* linglairn, deeply sigfonMsank^er head upon his shoulder and w$m bitterly. *\ 4?»^ X*f Lady
? si. } " Lady 1 ' observed he, " the stérrø has howled itself to rest—the danger which terrified you is no jmore/' But the storm which raged in Rodol- pha's bosom, raged with redoubled vi¬ olence. (f Ah St. Julien V* exclaimed she, languidly, beaming her tear-suftuced eye^ upon him, I blush at the result of my own weakness;—but who alas! is so sufficiently philosophic, as to be at all tiraes master of himself/' ^True* 3 replied St. Julien,/' and if we bend to objects ofa weaker nature, when only the passions prompt us, shall it be deemed singular that the voice of Om¬ nipotence, clad in the terrors of thunder, subdues our fragile fortitude." A deep blush overspread the cheek of Rodolpha, at this undesigned reproach, and silently leaning on his arm she accompanied him back to the Castle. On enquiring for Valentine, whose long
? ss ] iong ahd lonely wandering's began to distress 1 St. Julien, ; he was informed that the youth had just retired to a cover¬ ed terrace which overlooked the lake, and following his soHtary steps,he beheld him at a distance pacing to ahd fro with a disconsolate air. With emotions of infi- nite sorrow, Ulric beheld the change which had taken place, both in the man¬ ners and features of his son ; he dread¬ ed least some rash design, to learn the fete of Issens should again place him in hated Oswolds power. "Valentine l* he exclaimed ' ff am I become so un#el- "come to* your society, that you teasc to indulge me with ît —that you no ltí%er sífäre in thé rumbles of myself and Lady IllìrJglaìrà :—time was when your heart kne^v to expand with admiration at%e áhblimity of nature; but L now fear, * * * some secretly nourished grief,Which I am denied to share, preys eternally upon ?\? ; perhaps the recollection of Iseena-r-
? β» 3 I know, my son, too well,the pang which accompanies blighted love, to reproach thee ;—yet, as for many years I ha\ r e sup¬ ported it with fortitude, let me hope, Val¬ entine, you, by such example taught, will endeavour to be calm/' "Jpain Avould I conceal the torturing anguish that consumes me," sighed the youth, " but the attempt is fruitless— perhaps Issena needs my assistance fo preserve her frora the diabolical proceed¬ ings ofthe monster Oswold; and per- hsyps, bitterly reproaching my neglect, she at length consents, deserted and friendless as she is, to unite her spotless hand with that of her horrible persecu- for—the thought drives me tp , cüstraçti- en---and, but < for. tfiee, ? my Father ! how gladly would I assume sonri£ pilgrini habit and return to foe hills of Yarrow, in quest of her." My
,**?$ spp ly answei^(^ the Earl, y I cáRnpt çpjísent tgt paci with ?? «g^n-t^ must ftcp^rn thy :: ^cr^/s :i :/;/-.: ? : '? r f liever shplit b eiitíiíe> -^thàt after ¿ίί the ^ísjfortunès yyhiçfc häd b|fellen St. ??^ ? ??-' riimdful ?? itiidé (perein heendeaypuredto fôrgei^^ hiš pást ? again in the rüde stream of Hfë'S ad- .■ vetìsity.''. ';■ ;rr-y¿'y, ' ; ;;" ; :, ■■';,.^ ■ : r¿:;JC '■ ' : '- ." - : '■ .-.-■ 'r'" '· Γ ' S '■■ ■' S-' ..-'■' '.'-' ;: '■' '' ■'■"' -■''» ^?????? Bpy l^ edi :|^^ ÏÏM utìpbs^lyed^ I fi^i^ân^ ????1|?? · desigur ?1?? :??|::1???
[ 25 j plead for me I beseech tbee,that I alone may quit this spot, though sacred to my breast, in search of that beauteous form, Avhich from me only can look for aid." "St. Julien/' continued Rodolpha, " is there any thing so unnatural in this request, that you steel your heart against it? —is it not just, and laudable? can my mansion so soon be displeasing to your fancy, that you Avish to desert it ? I hope not, my Lord;—allow me then, tojóin the intreaty of your son for his depar¬ ture ;—in such a cause, so virtuous, so noble, Heaven will best befriend bim ; vvould ypu damp the genuine ar¬ dour of his esteem, which with ¡fucli gallant modesty becomes hyn ; and beams in his enthusiastic love, like a proud coronet on the brow ofhonour." i. " Alas !" éiswere J Ulric. " his years audJnexperience are Ijttls competent ?? vol iu. ? the
? 2δ 3 the undertaking, at best,rash and peril¬ ous ; a thousand daily fears avíU wring my soul during his absence ; why then, should not I attend hnft." Lady Illinglairn resumcd,"lhere rests methinks, the great merit of the request ; filial affection denies to him the enter¬ prise, whilst thou wouldst share the dan¬ ger—-is not this the sov'reign top of vir- tue, and duty the gem that enriches it.'' Tears rushed unbidden to the check of Uiric, " asn I never," sighed he, to be atrest ? will cruel Fate nevercease ty persecute me?—must I consent to past with thee again, tiiou precious relic of a »oble mother?*' and as tl^ty enter-* ed4he portico of the Castle f "we will tsik of tiliche continued," at a more ap^· propriate hour; í *$s\ suddenly indispo- sedanö must for a while retire to my ??????? # ? ^itli these wordsbe disap¬ peared
? Ti ? peared —his soul had seldom felt such depression as novv—Valentine was the obj ect dearest to his heart, and ill could he support the idea of a new and per¬ haps, an eternal separation. To procure tlie absence of Valentine, was an object Avhich Rodolpha fenten tiy Avished for, under the idea that St. Ju¬ lien would then be entirely devoted to herself, and feigning the utmost concern for the fate of Issena, she painted to the glowing mind of the youth, in tlie most forcibfe colours, the sufferings ofhis be* lóvéd, ^anxiously lingering on the* femf hope ofhis return, to snatch her froA death, or worse than death, from tlte arms of Oswold ;—she also inspired fife resoluttons of his affection with nevM ar¬ dour by applauding the nobleness òf ttt design ; " I am ??????^, sbe exekutbt* ed," of tbe fidi extent oryotrr anguish t but not-with words only, do 1 sympa~ ? 2 thise
[ 28 ] thìse in your misfortunes ; my effort« and my wealth are ready to assist yonr plans ; bat, in the affairs of love, love only is ca¬ pable of acting—therefore must you alone on the adventure; 1 have a bark and a guide, equally at your service;— tbese towers shall welcome with sounds of mirth thy return with Issena; which, something whispers to my heart, wilf shortly occur/' " But my father !—'* ejaculated the grateful youth. u Till you have left this place, must bejgnorant of the inteni, otherwise, no intreaties can prevail on him not to ac- company you ; and, surrounded by innu- merable focs, be will again be betrayed into the power of Oswold; while yon, assuming tbe various disguises, and adopting the peculiar stratagems of loye, by heaven assisted, in snch a vir¬ tuous undertaking,shaU preserve from distracting misery, the fair, object of yonr regard." Valentine
[ 29 3 Valentine, transported at the flatter¬ ing picture of such success, threw bim¬ self upon his Inees before Lady Illing¬ lairn, and thanking her, ** yes '* cried he*' thou fair and gentle adviser, I will in secret quit this hdspitable mansion the event shall be unknown to my fa¬ ther—it cannot surely be a breach of duty which filial affeetjbn sanctions ; and therefore, with the earHest beam of day, my anxious breast, pregnant with the sweet anticipation of speedily uniting, ??? returning with my Issena, will I depart. Inwardly exulting,at ffie success of 4ier artifice, **every thing" said Rbdo^ha, shall bfe ready feryour pilgrimage, and may that Being, which presided øver the destinies of faithful lovers, protect and ^aide your wandenngs ? 1? feei^of her you adote/* Valentiner now acknow- 1 C3 Ifedgiug
t SÖ } fej%îî^f s hîs due sense of gratituHe, for Ibe cbfti^rn she^so "Benignly 1 appeared to take ki fiis passion, resorted to theâpart- åait oTİJrric, ? fhey had scarcely eft- iifed inte conversation, eie u'meslàge from Lady Iilingl^irn requested their at- tendéfutìe f n the banquet corridor. An tíatíifmV sadness prevailed over St/ j4- ????????— teii|ibke little durîhgf^he rcpa*t; at length, calling for her ???, Rodolpha endeavoured to divert his^mmd firem the oppression ender which it so vi^ iîbly laboured, by lively asd fascinating measnres, or by accompanying with sil- ver-sounding notes, ???? romantic ballad ofadventorous Knigbt and captive L?tdy; fo which she observed, «ot imly Ulric's attention became interested, but that f ^eiil^, #bositeni!y conitriied Olettoi- ceas of the hero of her lay into such as wonld attend himteif, appeared deeply mfatnaled. *· - v^ - * ^
? * τ Thfe evening was fer advance^}, an,d tbe waning moon, viewed from bpr tow^r of clouds, the majesty of ber sicktø face in the lake, ere separating for foe nigbt Ulrjc pressed the hand of hi« son, antl blessing bim with unusual solemnity, .re¬ commended bim to forget, if possible, tbe fatal object ofhis present in quietude; a thousand emotions agitated Valentinet breast,at a recoUection of the^sfop |^ was about to take ; and, fearful of betraying his agitation, he hurried to tiis couch, but not to rest; with the first blush of morn he arose, and prepared fo quit it- linglairn; ri but first, silently hastening fofoe chiuder in whjch.St J[u|ien je- posed, he drew near the bed, and slowly unclosing the curtsfos, gassed earnestly on his father—as if for the last time. ? rie appeared uneasy in his sleep—-deep sighê escaped hk lips-^-and once he ar¬ ticulated the name of Julia. fOOoal" exclaimed Valentine internally, sinking ? 4 m
? ?? ? bis knees, and raising his eyes, steeped * in tears, io heaven," defend and pre¬ serve my father—grant to him, I be- seecii thee, thou invisible ruler of des- i»y,in my absenec,that peace, that earth¬ ly .peace, which basso long been denied ??." Now, casting a farewell gknce, he quitjed with trembling steps the spot, and resorting to the |lake. Lady Iliin - glaim, ns he passed the covered terrace, wsved her plaid to him from the corri¬ dor, in token of adieu ; Valentine grate¬ fully laying his hand upon his heart, re- returned the salute and darting down tbe avenue,eutered a galley which await¬ ed his early arrival, when silently mo¬ tioning to the boatmen, they instantly gavo liberty to their oars. We shall now leave the adventurous lover for the present, and return to IJl- f ie, who, concerned at the fongcr than usual jtay of Valentíne from tbe Castle,, bega» to express suspicions of his secret and
l ss ? and rasb departure, fo Rodolpha, who having privately commanded ah'attend¬ ant tö announce the intelligence, on its being delivered, affected great surprise and apprehension. With that manly resignation which long adversity had taught him, Ulric received the infor¬ mation; and, confining the torturing pang of paternal regret, to his ovvn be¬ soin, evinced only outward anxiety at the uncertainty of Valentine's intentions. Was it likely the youth designed to visit St Julien's, and make Gregory the com¬ panion of his thoughts and stratagems— or repair alone and disguised to theCas¬ tle of Oswold ?—if the latter, dire was the result to be expected. Lady lHinglairn lost no opportunity of proving ber attachment for Ulric, fey endeavouring to divert his mind from the weight of domestic grief. At Ihe extremity of the estate, in a rock which Co
overhung. Ae lake, was constructed m beautiful grotto, commanding a sublime and extensive prospect of the neighbour¬ ing glens>and cliffs ; in this retreat Ro¬ dolpha Imtá to hearken to the adven¬ tures of Ulric—she took pleasure in listening fo his sad and tender descrip¬ tions of ?? long mourned Julfø —affect¬ ing even her manners and habit ; till Ul¬ ric was almost willing to imagine, that Julia again lived, in Rodolpha, One delightful and serene eveningv having sailed for several hours on the lake, they resorted to the favorite grot¬ to, in order to take some refreshment arranged therein by Lady HHngiairn*s commands; when, after some conver¬ sation on the beauties of the landscape^ Rodolpha observing an involuntary sigh* e&éaped Ulric's breast, took up her lute and sang the following.
iS
'i' w J SONG OJ^THE MERMAID.
On ri come, the morn is fair; Down tbe samphir'd glen let's rove — There I'll braid thy golden hair ý While thou sweetly talk's* of lovei On m come,and we will stray Where the storm-rent billows wav«— Where the foaming surges spray O'er the Sea-boy's lonely grave. There we'll note the frantic maid— There we'll list her crazed lay, Wliere she seeks the rocky shade That shrouds her gallant Sailor's clay. " ? this love!" exclaimed Ulric, ai Lady Illinglairn concluded, "it seems the latent chord on vvhich hangs the sor- i rows of every susceptible bosom/* Sighing deeply, "yes I" replied Ro¬ dolpha, "and the many instances, where* ? 6 m
? ?? j in genuine love goes unrequited, adds materially to its catalogue of calamity." " Let us hope such instances are rare * answered St. Julien, supposing she al¬ luded to the indifference of Donalvin. "Do you think it possible that the confession of regard from one object, is sufiicient to inspire the heart of a second, with a similar passion ?" en¬ quired Rodolpha. Ulric continued " are Ave not daily witnessing the ev r ent—does not the esteem of one, create the gratitude of another ? from gratitude proceeds friend¬ ship ; and,in opposite sexes, this friend¬ ship, generally ripens into Love. " Rodolpha paused,—she appeared Un¬ usually embarrassed,—at length she resumed " unhappy am 1 then, that may not desire even the friendship of him I revere, beyond every earthly bless- ine." At
? 37 ] At a loss to comprehend the meaning ofthis singular remark, Ulric paused for a moment, till, suddenly recollecting himself, " Lady lHinglairn ï ** said he, "thinkstoo deeply of Lord Donalvin*» absence. " C( Ah my Lord f'answered Rodolpha, "it is not that I regret his neglect» but that I lament his being so uni ike thee—I would hold such-a heart as Julia held; but alas ! by adverse fortune am denied it—what if I were to teli thee, St Julien, that my affections were enstranged from Lord lHinglairn, and devoted to another would'st thou condemn,—would'st thou despise me ?'* " Rather would I endeavour to inspire thee with new fortitude, to repel the pernicious influence of unlucky passion; and, by holding to thy view the virtuous examples of other's, teach thee proudly to tower above the humán weakness which disgraced thý nature. '* Ôh
E ss ? " Oh who shall check thepmppfuocs courseof the torrent, or stay the stormy wind upon the hiil ? — wert thoU the object ofmy love St. Julien— ------- ** Half convicted, Ulric interrupted her, * were I so unfortunate, I would in¬ stantly remove for eA T er from youf sights an unlucky being, who in the moment of reflection, most become hateful. True it is, urged by adversity, I adop¬ ted a Hfe for vfhich the justly offended laws ofmy Country demand retribution; but never, never Lady Illinglairn, shall it be said, that I became a violator of domestic happines — a desolater of the hospitable hearth—that my treachery was the cause of connubial woe,and the planter of agonizing thorns in the guilty and repenting bosom of the fallen Wife ; that I taught her to protane the sacred name of honour; and drove her forth in frantic wretchedness, to curse her seducer's name and die, unpited/*
t **- : .J Overwhelmed with confusion at ?& manly reply, Rodolpha raised her sup¬ plicating eyes to Uiric, and beholding stronger expressions of sorrovv thfrn anger in bis features, leaned silently on his shoulder ^nd burst into tears ; atthie instant an attendant appeared iri the avenue leading to the Castle, vvhich Ulric observing, besought Lady "llliti- glainr jo Conceal her agitòttón, when approaching Üîe vassal, tie received im- formation of Donalvin's unexpected ar¬ rival, and hastening back to Rodolpha, requested her to lose no time in wel¬ coming her Lord to the turrets of lUin- Slàfrh.'-.';. ·'■■..^ ' : . ^ *'
? 40 3
?
s. s CHAP XXII.
·* Ere tbe bai hath flown 7 ?? çİ0Îstfr*4 flight î ere to black Hecate*e summous, The shard -???? beetle with bis drowsy boms, Haftí íttog nights yawBmg peal, there will be doet A iena 4f Ueaulf note." SHAKSPßÄRE.
jfjeiug Introduced to Donai vin,Ulric was less surprised at the late conduct of Ro¬ dolpha, Lord Illinglairn, double the age of his wife, from early years had devoted himself to every species of dissipation aud adventure, till the passions and the senses had lost their exquisite refine¬ ment; still, he loved the joyous maze of
41 J
of pleasure for the display of his osten¬ tation—this was his idol—the object for which he toiled, wandered and spe¬ culated ; yeti he loved Rodolpha, though not with the ardour of youth, Avhich had long since been extinct in his breast: he was proud to witness the charms ofher person,—he was proud to boast them bis^—her elegance—her grace and fa¬ scinations were sure in all societies to excite the general tone of admiration; the sound of which was music to his ear, and though the delusive flatterer ever attended on Rodolpha, confident of the rectitude of her heart, he neg¬ lected that beauty, and left it Hke some bright citadel, exposed to fte shafts of surrounding and designing enemieéi It was the eve of the Anniversary of Donalvin's birth ; at an early hour/ the walks and terraces of the Castle," <vere ornamented with splendid and appro¬ priate
? ? J sheltered, bepejilh tufts t of flowering {firida ?1?^(:? the arrival of guests, as they landed frojn their faota^tic §pn- doias,in more fantastic habits, according fo the r wisb-of Lor^ Ilinglairij, who p¿re- ???? pn the ??????? ajp t pgni§cent ?$??? ?< ? and Banquet 3^%^Hl siv f^!lP of tl|e 5 roansion |vas ?*%????$ 1? <? a WÎi decorated with iran JP¥ e »^ s frtP 1 4N designs of able foreigp JSI^tsters^—wreathes of flowers fiWyS ^K í^ t0< ? n ^ «uspended from .???????§?? fof fretted ceilings, hung И^???#9«»8% «wir urns of silver ??.^1 1 ?????· °C th « mos|enchan- fip^pafoi^ ; t bQw#rs of blosspming^myr- tjq, i^ which were arranged coucbes of various recesses; while, at the ???^? end of this apparently magjc palace, ? a throne of greei^ velvet embroi¬ dered
[ 4S Ί dered with jewels and gold, tót Öonaí* mn, áttired as a Druid Prince/ Lord of the Feast ; wearing en his head a costly diadem of brilliants. Ib Rodolpha, in a dress of unrivaUed magnificence, as S^ Cecilia, delighted the company with her soågs tonfile Harp; the lightstome glee and tbe merry Dance went gaily rourid, but St Jålren, contrary té the natural bent of his dis¬ position, as yet appeared not, to offer his congratulations* and respects to the Lord of lHinglairn. Rodolpha gazed anxiously at the guests as they entered f sbe began to dread least^ Ulrica indig¬ nant at her almost proffered affectioif, should have taken this opporturiityllrf retreating from Hhe MansWtf, as ? made bis appea rance in thô habit *c/Mt Mountain Chief. f « -· « Never did form appea*· mòre rioWé or
? 44 ] orcoihroandin^than Ulric's, attired in a costume serving to display it to the greatest advantage—his bonnet, orna¬ mented with plumes of Heron-feathers, confined with a tiara of diamonds, and his loose silken plaid, secured only by the golden hunting horn on his breast, fmng in graceful drapery across his sbóüldëi — hè wore no mask^and his eye beamed with unusual fire on tbe* oc¬ casion, for Ulric scorned to damp the hi¬ larity of ân evenmg, devoted to that being, to whose beneficence he con¬ sidered himself so highly indebted; uni¬ versal applause? followed his footstep?, whieh-did not fail to i fnpart emotions bf secret satisfaction to Rodo! pha, siftce it sanctioned the emotions of her own >* bosom. '* 4 S **? Ulric joined cheerfully in (he feast and the song, proving.by his abilities, that the accomplishments of his mind were
Γ 45 ] were little inferior to the grace^ilucss ofhis person;—he was struck with the additional captivation which Lady ?- linglairn seemed to possess amid the sur¬ rounding witcheries of the scene—her sylph-like form as it floatingly Avound along the mazy îaby rin th -seem i ng dan ce, filled him with admiration ; and, but for the remembrance of Julia, who like some some counteracting, Divinity, seemed ever rising to hii imagination, perhaps had inspired him vvith with live¬ lier emotions. But, although St. Julien endeavour,- ed, aided by attending mirth, to conceal the weight of his almost habitual sorrow on this evening, was it posible for a parent possessing such a mind, to for¬ get, for a moment, the uncertain and mysterious absence of his sou ? perhaps tooy that son, shunning the counsels and experienced aid of the Bandit's Father, blushed
blustediåt tto disgrace which a disclo¬ sure of'past circumstances might event- uadif ι reflect upon bis fame ; and fromr no øth ec- motive, had beeu induced ? abandon the author of his existence. 'UlricLWas aware that Valentine's sen¬ sibility would never permit, if such af he sheeted, vvere tru!y the reason of hk laseret departure, a vestige ο?·ή%4ο escape his lips. Ulric was no stranger either, to the unconquerable impulse of true love ; but, though he endeavoured, in his latent arguments to render tfaa foimer reflection subservient to tbe &t- ter, as aa excuse fo£ t Valentine's. ςοα- duct, ? vvould sometimes rise predom ? nent* aad make htm actually miserable.; Odia jretrospective view of circufuslan-v cesyîieverto be recalled,Ulric frequently^ lamented the impropriety attending that passion, which had aot only heaped care and disgrace upon himself and offspring but
f m y but forfeited the life of Julia to the aven¬ ger's blade ; and, if it be true, that this slate of existence cannot afford sufficient atonement in its afflictions, plugged their immortal souls into eternal pe&Uti- on. It is the too common curse of man not to reflect,till the fatal impulse ivhich hurried him on to deeds of madness be« comes torpid in the breast—hut to outi narrative, Uiric finding it impossible to banish from his mind the gloomy recoliection, which, like the dark clouds of autumn, rushibg between eaith and heaven, overshadowed the sunny bank of his festivity, retired to a distant ub cove, in order to indulge his meditations unobserved. He felt greatly s disposed to embrace the earHest convenient opportunity of privately quitting the turrets of lHinglairn;—it was not con¬ sistent with the correct integrity ei his nature, to reside longer beneath that hos¬ pitable roof in wbich he had become unintentionally
? 48 j intentionally obnoxious : and, as the incessant droppings of the well, wear away the rock on which they fall, so the repeated shaft of adversky, taught Ulric to despise life ;—and he sighed for some obscurity wherein, unknowing and unknown, a sepuestered and melan- ebêíy Hermit, he might hold alone com¬ munion with tlie great God of Nature, and-linger out the remnant of his days at last in peace. Absorbed in such gloomy thoughts, Ulric perceived not Rodolpha standing near, in the Iiabit of a nun,who address¬ ing him in gentle accents, t< how comes it St. Julien." enquired she, " that you suddenly withdraw frow the festivity of of the ball, while laughing pleasure beams in every eye ?" Starting from his reverie, St. Julien apoîfgizecNbr his abstraction andren-* quired, wiíh a look of ????????, 'if iWraivm had deserted the banquet;
? 4« ]. "Cruel St¿ Julien !" exclaimed she, « are not my fetters sufficiently heavy, but you must ever remind me that I wear them ?" - u AJas Lady lHinglairn ! w replied \\$ ? "you mistake me, entirely; the rasbr ness of your avowal, in such a place, fil je me with apprehension ; ???? rep^tajfoa too, in spite of this disguise, migbt.be injured by the disclosure of your.griei* to otbers; let us therefore, hasten imme¬ diately to the hall/' With these words, morder to avoid any explanation which might ensue, Ulric arose from his seat, and, extending his hand to Rodolpha, accompanied her back to the dance, which was kept up till $ late »hour, ere She company began to disperse. JPVJhen Lady lHinglairn retired tp her chamber, ajbri|pt)y dismissing her atten- $anU f jt|e threvy herself ???? a couch voLiii, î> ani
t 50 ] and gave free liberty to her tears*—Ul¬ ric too, had withdrawn for the night, but Donalvin, in a state of obstinate in¬ toxication, angrily commanding his vi¬ gilent domestics to quit the apartment, still slumbered under one ofthe recesses in the halk í" " Âlasî alas t'sobbed Rodolpha e( how miserable is tîie existence I endure— doomed madly to love the man I can¬ not wed, and wedded to the man my heart disdains—agonizing reflection* Ah did Donalvin but inherit half the perfections of Ulric, how enviable were my happiness-but alas ! he posses- sess no soul—no mind, to render life, without love, endurable-*- why is Ulric so indifferent to" my advances— àtìrf I hateful in his sight, or odious in his Vrëalfc— men have pronefünceä tnc lonely, and I believed the tanguáge-i- büt what avail charms which knpw ttot
t 51 3 to captivate one solitary heart—perhaps Ulric loves me, but his high flown notions of honour—his pride—»yet why should I condemn sentiments which first taught me to gaze upon him wife admiration. Wrapt in such horrible reflections half frantic with despair and anguhb, Rodolpha discovered a poignard at her feet, dropped probably by some of the maskers. A dreadful idea rushed to her distracted mind; she remembered her Lord's stern request to remain without intrusion in the hall.—Rodol¬ pha wildly grasped the dagger; it glim- niered in the rays of the lamp, ae she mechanically gazed around—ft t was the still and awful hour of midnight—* the voice of rejoicing had ceased, and buried in deep slumber lay tbe vessala of lHinglairn—T^ie Demon pfjDestrue l tiqp, a* it wandered in quest of its prey, f Dg oa
Γ » 3 on tbe nocturnal blast, poured into Rodolpha's ear, delusive tales of long years of enjoyment with Ulric, and pain¬ tfed to her bewildered mind such worlds of future bliss, that, gazing on the weapon with a savage and exulting smile, sbe, darted from the couch, half ptfren%ied with thefell design of murder; incurable defspair nerved the deadly pur¬ pose of jifcr band, while the form ¿f St. Julien, ever uppermost in her heart, obscured the atrociousness and éruélty ofthe deed she Avas prepared to execute—the weal or perdition of her soul in after worlds, occüired not ; with dauntless, unshrinking foot¬ step, she silently hurried to the recess, in Which Doftal vin yet slumbeted, and, without pausing to bestow aUfiorríents reflection On the diabolical transaction, plunged deeply, with remorseless hand, tbe fatal weapon into the bosom of her Lord. Sinking
E m ι Sinking on the floor, which was crim¬ soned with his blood, Donalvin opened his dying eyes, and fixing tbem re¬ proachfully on Rodolpha, expired; np sooner however, had she witnessed .the last throb that quivered on his lip, than the scorpion tainted current of remorse^ rushed furioitsîy tpher breast ; big drops of, persjpirçu\ipn trembled on her r hag¬ gard cheek, while in a state of torpid delirium, she gazed on the extended corse. ì An unusual inquietude, which prey¬ ed upon Ulric's slumbers, induced him to leave his couch* in order to pace to and fro in an adjoining gallery; but scarcely had he quitted his apartment, ere the sound of approaching footsteps arrested his attention ; and, retirinff behind a pillar, to avoid observation, by . ι ~ H r 'y, . - ' w . ? v* t4í tbc pale ray of the cresset, he behela. Rodolpha, with her hair dishevelle^, D 4 ïier
? 54 j ber hands and raiment bloody, «Jowly ^gscçnduig the stairs—frequent í r ??? paused t to gaze around, as if dreading the pursuit of some supernatural being -pa ghastly hue overspread her coun¬ tenance, and her trembling Hmbs almost refused their wonted support, as feeling for the door of her own chamber, but still averting her eyes fearfully towards the staircase, she vanished. Uiric had witnessed scenes of horror —hehad rushed in between the assassin and his victim—he had contemplated the livid bue of death, when the last convulsion fluttered ; but never had be endured sensations like the present; hislaggard blood seemed suddenly freezing in his veins, and his heart, like a cold Weight, almost ceased beating Irithin him ; the direful business whidh Hâd engaged Rodolpha, broke forcibly tipon bis mind; and he arrraigned him¬ self
? 55 j seifas the murderer of Lord lHinglairn; since he readily imagined the nnlucfiý cause which had urged her desperate arm. He felt at a loss what immediate steps to pursue ; flight would inevitably attach blame to himself; and to remain beneath the same roof with Rodolpha, ^~the murderess Rodolpha, was worse than death ;—he resolved however, to retire, and pass the night in pmyer i not more to the memory of the dead, than for the wretched and offending surviver. Early in the morning, his devotions were røterrapied by the kmd toHing of the alarm bell, and the universal con¬ fusion which reigned throughout the mansion; when, throwing on his morn¬ ing robe,, he hurried towards the ball,in which the terrified donr esties were be¬ wailing the untimely end of their Chief* The agonies of death were yet visible on the cold features of Donalvin—his eyes unclosed, seemed bursting from D é their
? 56 J their sockets, and the dagger, stained with blood, yta» firmly clenched in ?? own hand ! "Whatcould induce my poor Lord to commit this act ? " cried an aged vassal, *'Who shall communicate the in¬ telligence to my Lady?** exclaimed another, weeping, Ulric, sighing to himself as he lis¬ tened to their honest grief, remembered ihe was but too well prepared for the tidings, as Rodolpha, appearing on an opening ¿corridas which iooked into the •hall, enquired with evident marks of Innocent surprise, the cause of the pre¬ vailing tumult ; the servants, unable to form ? repîy> retiring from the body,fuI- ly exposed it to her view; at this* Rodol- jfha uttered ¿a piercing scream, endea¬ vouring at the same time to throw her¬ felf iato the hall* as the attendants» rushing
? 57 i filing tp»the cprrider, received \?? fensejess in their anns, t At spch unaf¬ fected mjurkfof grief, Vivip |>?»4? suspect the |rutb which his recent €fars bad, asserted—be ipagifi^ j^is f blooji^ MP«? P^ F n S^ nc ^Mİ^fSs% strapge and mysterious means^tjie Jjs^ and fprmof Ro^pha ; )^40S^t foe confliction of such wild surmisesari4 emotions, bs commanded foe bo^y of Pon^Jviu to be placed in state. From this period, seyeral days had elapsed, and though he did wt intrude on the solitary grief of Lady Illinglairn, Ulric learnt from hex attendants, that she refused all consolation;—rent her hair in the agonies of woe, breathing bitter invectives of hate, towards the unknown and unsuspected murderer of her Lord. After the funeral however bad taken place, which Ulrie, is cbief Mourner, piously attended to the D 6 sepulchre
? ft 3 ??????, ? vrith heartfelt primer*; Ät^erg^eoffDonaívin'ssotfl, beheld ?????? rafngled for ever with those of MusfM^fofti, Roddipha began to tß$het chamber, und, supported by bér uitendants to walk, attired in deep mourning* through the covered terrace; Ulric frequently beheld herat a dis¬ tance, her altered looks filled bim with compassion, and he hourly reproached bimself for the base suspicion, whSch some diabolical imposter had evidently fêbosed upon ??, ? prejudicial to* her gétítle nature. ?*( At length. Lady lHinglairn cemrais* sionéd her page to inform Ulric, that sne desired his attendance in her apart¬ ment; he lost no time in complying with the request,and discovered her at his entrance, seated ona couch, in an un- dress of white muslin, her hair banging in luxuriant tressess øver her snowy shoulders
i 59 ] shoulders; an orphan child which she reared, from motives of bpnevolence, slumbered at her feet :—with a dejected air, she extended her hand towards Ul¬ ric, as the boy, awaking from his sleep, at the sight of a stranger, wept bitterly. " Poor Babe !*' exclaimed Ulric. At these words, Rodolpha turned her head towards St. Julien, from the child which had diverted her attention ; her features beaming with a pensive smile were pale as death ;—Ulric't heart bled as he contemplated them ; " Ah f ' sighed she, " Donalvin loved this, child, who shall protect him now ?" Tears rushed to Ulric*» eyes; u can such an angelic creature/' thought be, " be guilty—-impossible—couljl she sigh thus at the misfortunes of innocence, heedless ofher own ? could she act thus ? s *s„ - , look thus—impossible. ** Rodolpha no¬ ted
ted tbe emotions which effected him, nnd imagining they proceeded from the -agitation that he endured for her ably éøunterfeited woes, caught up tbe or¬ phan babe, and placing it on his arm, " thou, St. Julien/' —she exclaimed, in supplicating accents, ** thou wilt be his protector/* " Alas !" repHed the Ear! " iR should I fulfil tbat office, when my heart teach¬ es me to abandon the turrets which shel¬ ter him; in quest of another, whose for¬ lorn wanderings distract me/* * t ls this a time to adandón me?" cri¬ ed Rodolpha bursting into tears, " miser¬ able as I mm*—friendless—hapless-«-* lonely? " Ubfic ! that I had but once deemed thee capable of tlm, what pangs,—what reproaches had it spared my lacerated heart—is it manly? is it consistent with the
? 61 ? the dignity of your nature to dese#f me now ? ungrateful Ulric, when áhou wert a wanderer, an exile, and an outlaw, did my relentless hand refuse thee shel¬ ter—did my unfeeHng hsart refuise thee comfort t $ Convicted and abashed, " No ! Ro¬ dolpha, no !" faultered Ulric, but now -----------" " I need not thine excuses" interrup¬ ted she, proudly, " I would still vene- ratethee—thou knowst my heart—thou knowst what 1 would utter/' Horror struck, St. Julien too easily comprehended the dreadful import ofher half expressed sentiments—he wished to reproach the perfidiousness of hcr proceedings, but his voice expired within bim, as wildly fixing bis eyes upon her, he shuddered at the past, " What means this frøwn, this look ef gathering anger?" cried she, tcn- tenderly
? ?? 3 derly taking his listless hand/'wilt thou not answer me ? ? Ulric ! U hie !" with these words, she reclined her head upon his shoiilder, when franticly tossing her hand from him, f ' wretched and deluded woman! 15 he exclaimed, (e heaven, Avith offended eye, looks on your impiety :— sooner than tarry iu thy poisonous coil, the earth's extreme shall hide me from pursuit—with thee ! tarry Avith theer— ? infamy l* Unprepared for such an abrupt dis¬ closure of Ulric's sentiments, Rodol¬ pha sank senseless at his feet. T~i an instant, her crimes Avere forgotten, and supporting her in his arms, Ulric regretted the inhumanity which hehad evinced ; alas ! sighed he, internally, ga¬ zing on her pale cheek/ f since it was for me, she committed the rash and un¬ natural offence, shall I torture her with reproaches—or render the poignancy of her
í ?? 3 her guilty conscience, doubly torturing;. by scorn—no, rather let me trust to the* interposition of heaven for her merited punishment/' Lady lHinglairn now unclosed her eyes—they reproachfully beamed upon Ulric—he leaned his cheek upon the couch to conceal his visible agitation ; at length, " forgive me, Rodolpha, for¬ give me," said he, almost incoherently. u If alas ! my fatal attachment be op¬ posite to thine, why should'st thou con¬ demn it ?" sobbed Lady lHinglairn " O 1 had I never seen thee, Ulric, I had still been happy—fallen as I am then, why should'st thou curse me/* Ulric's tears flowed fast upon Rodql- pha's hand," dost tbou weep for rae St. Julien?'' ejaculated she,, "then am 1 indeed rewarded-— J ' Ulric replied not tO)
f 64 3 to her words, but, wildly beating his Ibreast, a deep, involuntary groan escap¬ ed him—he earnestly Avished death would im mediately put a period to his misfortunes, and unable to support the presence of Rodolpha, during the stor¬ my commotions which rent his soul, rushed suddenly from the chamber. Rodolpha, far from entertaining an idea that Ulric had been a witness to her nocturnal, guilty wandering, attributed the singularity ofhis present conduct, to the effect of his exquisite sensibility ; and nurtured the pleasing hope, that happiness,—unparalleled happiness, would yet attend the consummation of their union ; still, in these moments of anticipation, the accusing spirit of Do¬ nalvin, would ever interpose, to dash the cup of bliss from her lips—it arose before her in hejr nightly visions—re¬ proached her with its mournful, piteous looks
? e» ? looks, and, too late, in the absence of Uiric, the wretched victim of unsubdued passion, awoke to a dreadful sense of her own perfidy. Often did Ulric wander alone to the urn of Donalvin, and twining his arm around it 5 reason with the invisible ghost that he imagined hovered near—he en¬ vied the repose of Illinglairn—he sighed for the mossy tomb of the dead—the thoughts of other worlds Avere on his soul—the light which cheered his gloo¬ my wanderings through existence, uoav quivered in its socket; and he looked forward to eternity, as the house in which the reward of his past miseries awaited him. Each inteniew with Ro¬ dolpha, became more and more painful to his heart, and inspired her's with new tenderness. It was ¡useless that he en¬ deavoured to avoid her society, by re¬ tiring to the most secluded solitudes of the
? ?? j the Castle, she ever intruded herself upon his melancholy reflections. "Ul¬ ric !" said she, one evening, " how have I offended, that you fly from me thus P Iioav comes it thai you quit the Castie and me, for these unfrequented seclusi¬ ons ?—how altered do 1 behold you of late, since I am, alas ! no longer, the de¬ sired compamon ofyourrambks—such however, is the inconsistent nature of man, that he can love only the object unattainable : or that which disdains his affection." " Lady Illinglairn/' replied he, with a sigh," I regret you have occasion for these reproaches." " Are they not just ?*' enquired she,— <f are not you an illustration of their truth ?—as Donalvin's bride,whose com¬ pany was more desirable to you than Rodolpha's?—as the friendless Avidow of Donalvin, you avoid her." Ulric
í 67 1 Uiric felt half disposed to < acquaio* Rodolpha with tbe knowledge he enter¬ tained of her crime ; but, as his deter¬ mination was, to quit Illinglairn as early as possible, he replied, " I regret, and regret deeply, my neglect, at a period, Avhen this heart assures me your cares most demand attention! : but alas ! the absence of Valentine, and the uncertain¬ ty attending him, preys occasionally so heavily upon me, that my converse is rather calculated to inspire gloom than to disperse it. " Who Avould be more pleased to divert your melancholy than I ?" enquired Rodolpha, " have I not proved how dear your happiness is to me ?" I am poor, even in th anks, answered St. Julien u and yet could you search into my heart, you would perceive me neither unfeeling uor ungrateful—time was.
? *8 ? ^as, Rodolpha, I could smile upon mis¬ fortune, but tis past—my fortitude be¬ comes Aveak; and I no longer glance,* with the vivid eye of hope, to joys ae yet unknown." r< Rouse thee St Julien,'* replied Lady lHinglairn, "heaven forbid you yet should fall beneath the rude crush of adversity—teach me how to act that I may render you happy." iC Alas !" internally, sighed Ulrica "how vain were human endeaours to rend from my heart the treasured remembrance of Julia, or her child. v he however accompanied Rodolpha to her apartment,—she endeavoured to cheer him w;ith the dulcet strains of her barp, but the instrument bad lost its me- lody to his ear,, as he gazed on the,wild eye and faded-cheek of its mistress—at anearîy hoarypleadingindisposition, he retired
? 69 ? retired to his chamber. A boat, near the margin of the lake; presented to him the means of escape—he resolved im- mediatly to fly*—rising, therefore, with the earliest ray of morning, and quit- tmg the mansion of IHmgiairn, he launched into the Clyde. As the spires of IHmgiairn faded from his view, his spirits reviving, ad¬ ded double force to his exertions; and, ere the evening sun had sunk behind the distant hills, he arrived in safety at the Cottage of the Fisherman, whose skiff had conveyed himself and Valen- tinetothe dwelling of the unfortunate Donahin ; when commissioning one of his sons to return to IHmgiairn with the boat and a letter, directea* to Rodolpha, in which he apologized for his abrupt departure, he dispatched the Fisher¬ man with another to Gregory, in order to apprize him of his conduct ; and jour¬ neyed
Γ to ] neved towards the town of Lanark: after tarrying therein for a few days, ( in order to relieve his weary mind from the weight which so heavily oppressed it,by the contemplation of novel scenes, and the better to elude Rodolpha's at¬ tempts to overtake him) he commenced his route to the woods of Oswold, in quest of his long lost son. CHAP.
i i
i ?? ι
CHAP XXIII.
t could find in my heart to disgrace my mail's apparel and cry like a ivoman. ROSALIND.
<t $PEEI>, speed Annette !'' cried Is¬ sena, gazing across the exent of their flight, u we must not loiter by the way ; Oswold will immediately pursue our fu¬ gitive steps." "Ah mel" replied Annette,"alrea¬ dy do I begin to faulter—-the idea of the Baron's approach terrifies me beyond measure
I ?? 3 Ifoeas^re^pMhiub, even pow, I descry JN«** galloping furiously after^u#, with Ci iVfìX heaven's sake, Annette, do not conceit such horrible images ; let us en- ïtia tfekrthiCkèts/' f * ?* *> '* r; ,/ί »/t-The foickéts, Lady Issenai #i^ìl J we flotte devoured by some wild ÄiQU- siter, 'pr porse, % taken iby 4t he jgrim Black iiokber, after aH?" .* ¿' líaýe yÖU forgotten, A riflettè; 4lát IBándits atiaék only the rich, áftd^ptóvi- denée wÉ defend us, nò% oÛf Woék theWm, ïtoWm other Bssafentrf. w f M * ?? /, , r ■* li u ,ί· »? í ? * ι* k í ^ è . * "A Ia sjvçrk4fê^i l ^%^^#4g^r#, for, s ^supportable, in ομρ^μς^ΜΡ mm ?? ? ???'? áe»i
[ ?? ? contemplatipgp^unette'sdisguîse, so ? according with the fears she^ evinced, < f thou art too much of a eowaard —bflsv ven defend thepppr lady wbose, knight errant you are destined to become." Ere Annette had time to reply, bar fears were confirmed by a distant viefr of Oswold, accompanied, rtding bastily on the borders of the forest; "Mercifiil Father!" cried she» **i*ho shall pile- serve us—and how are we fo escape ?& Issena hesitated ? moment, at length, taking Annette's hand, who instantly forgot her fiears, they hurried into the woods. The tramp of approaching hor¬ ses filled them alike with dread, till arri¬ ving at the foot ofa hoary oak, the im¬ mense hollow of which was covered wiA mantling underwood, they assisted each other to enter, in a few moments, Os¬ wold rode past the place of t||em con- ??? ? ??1 *^ %? ?? «* Mim- TPtiiL E ers; |4 ì
1[ ? ï] ?????, "I arm convinced,*' ???* ^Wmë pernoin entered M* retreat! ï wbiíld ? cbiåM diacöVêrflbefogithëe, whtím l 'àmVesblved tò overtake; if h bè only fôr the satidtótioit óf tWtfbiphìtt| OA'er Ismena's disdain, and placing hei· base companion, Annette, in a strict and secluded Convent of penitential sie- térs/'^with these^wonlè he disappeared ; Äfteraciartisidérabtetaiise, Antíette,*pale Wrøarbte, broke isilencè, v did you note that, Lady Issena f he talk* of placing ?? in a ^qnsstery— I'm snre ^he, Baron is as weil calçnjl^ed for * Saint as I forji Nun/ r u Let us hope, God, whose benign in- tstfereîicehasjust preserved us from Ös- Wold's malignant efforts, will not dcseit iis now'Replied Issena, preparing to dc»· scend, as sane person ? the IkBittof a f rií¿AoácWn¿fr|m ftelbiiáfet, åit IÍ«iÍl«ÍeÄ 4?? tbá^elHWríâ
? ?? j ???? ???? rheavy^ sjghs^^aaped from his bosom, while the ^???^? ^^t- le^sness ofhis manner, expressed all the outward /appearance of irremediable woe* -For a time, lesena and Annette fearfujlycontinued foobservehis açtfoits; at lengtb,;risia§&briiptly f|-«ni tbe earth, *40ylssena4 '' he exclaimed, in broken accents and hurried ?? the fo^sst. An¬ nette now-east her eyes towards Isseiia, vs^hosecheek assumed t% pallid hue "Holy girgin ! she^cried what could this be'/ ? "'"I kuow not Annette—I think— the vince- 1 - but I may be wrong 5 —there àie other Issena« ** t . Annette, now quitting the tree, and observing no sppea^rance of «ew in¬ truders, assisted the former to descend; when pursuipg their pilgrimage, they )???? jit ψ jHstance a lonely cabin, neartte 4? ^;whi4! !* ? *?»?? <* the shade ? ft woodland canopy»
Γ w 1 Wí What ábällwe &y¿^nq«irealASOíe r to èi&ìè uteiréompttúom^ > ?? '"S /í » 4 δ ζ Λ j-si í < r O Lady !·* answered ?????/????? me to take the lute, these t raet^v^vbo are no judges of imisit wiliibe pleafed by my nideuotés, m they *aeeofp|»åny ä -ballad, which my mothei- tubghti<fa?<fef Xvto swedish Boys,—it is applicable 4p çtur present situation;—-you nmstpre- tend to be dumb, and I shall say that „??? iWtbc?and Mother being dead/I t sm forced ts winder, in prder tosolicjt ^cbarity for your support* f ssena a|- guiesçing; ?????? now took the ? and be^an the following * \ ' ^ è -Li· n'í bíT.«> » *ys..».s .-»., ^ ^??»! 1 *
3?d; l No parents ??^?? «ith Äeirltwe
t w ]- And crown |?^|?^??? ?? *fgfyp c , That we may rest the long· night here, «ïjlÇgr ?4?^*?????? ? ???? a mile* ^ ^WïMt f tM>' i/rë bay tìot tarry tóeg, * s tsf ^fil^^tiîëwwith an tírphan's pray'r- - ¿zã?Ss$bf thy^baäaiy wi^^ioog, v - jAa^le^|h^w«lcarøe wjth Msar*
Ì* íi-x ?
Although the unskilful mVnner im which Annette contnved to accompany this rude ditty, was sufficient to exrctte mïrth, it produced an opposfte effect on the honest'rustics, who after attentively listening to its conclûsîon,txtènded their hands in hospitable welcome to the írná- *'Come in ï^étólitfiïed an old womaa ff my poor Boys! corae ?, and be wel- come, t yon fife indeed unfortunate/ "* ? ^ ? ?? ? 4 · éiøtéå Annett^affec* ting tp ålWt* mr^tíf ÖrÄher
?- » ] here.is both dumb aed distracted f btìt so gentle; that hè would laòt *hÉrtíi the htimbîésl insect." ^ ^^ * ? > í - * *„ »»* c^/ ''Unfortunate little fellow ^'answered thé Hostess/gazing On the beautiftd fea¬ tures or- lesena 1 , u tis a thoo^àîfd^kfëè euch asweetchfld shouldbe soutìluck^*; however, sit ye down and eat— mý Son fsìdorè will soon' räufö— tøff' bë sé gladio sle ýé, ànd hear thè ^melody ýouFíute produces/* ^ ï f í T v íl· Our Adventurers, now aiTanghig tbemseives at a rudf table, fatigued Witb the length èf their journey, which had also given them a hearty appetite^ eheerfidly complied witli tbe invitation of their tiostess, ? «evemljö^ely ^??^ dren, '-«ttrøcrød'- by Annette's -music» Ètróemminginte the cabin. "Ï sup* pose, í¿ said Annette ^thfri^ ???^?^??^* ébildren." 4 ¿{ Q dear
e tø ì belong to a neighbour, who resbJes.ftij- ther down the Valley." jt^iy¿ cçntmued Annette, / ( 1| |illg^tl?i9.%^9g;'' and taking two ?? ??? ????, she amused them wi% suc^ wild trifles as enteredber mind ; Issena could scarcely rs% ii| fjojit laughing, not porc stt the vivacity of her attendant than at the simple deception, which ibe imposed cri the old woman^ who jrofesíM hereelf to be highly pleased frith the sprightly manners and conver* sation of her guest—ai length the door Was thrown open, and Isidore made his appearance; he seemed about eighteen years of Bge, his sun-burnt countenance, expressive of good nature, was enlighU ened by the sprightly beam of hit dark tnd plNîeliatb^#ye#; .a,. .
'í ■* 3 ^ rf Coï)khèrè Uìdòrè, my boy/* cried fhë^anie,pömting to Issena and Annette, "these arc friendless, orphan wander¬ ers—one of them is crazed and dumb, and the other, like a good child, roves about the country, playing on the lute and imploring charity to support hts brother. Isidore Avith a smile of honest wet- come, extended hii hand towards the guests of bis motber, and approaching Annette " perhaps'' said he, "you will favour me with one of your songs." "Certainly replied Annette, for she was ilelighted with the youth, even more than sbe had been with Do nalba in at the.GasUe of Oswold" wliat shall I sing?" **Any thing;—do you know the Legend of Edda, the Baron's daughter, whe
L «ι 3 who was stolen from her father,» castle, by a Bandit Chief,, in the disguise of a Norman MiastreL" "The words lam acquainted with—fo the music a stranger; however, Pll dp as well as my abilities will permit. 1 ' 3SaUaD.
The feast wa· high—the mirth was loud That rent old Humber'« turrets grey> When at the eastern gate Avasjbeard, The mellow note of minstrel lay. " Noav heaven befriend ye gaïïant knights That revel in this courtly hall ; And heaven befriend ye Ladies fair, That deck İn purple* tke, and pall. " Take ye, ? take I a stranger in, Whose hoary brow is white with yeart> Whose heart by woe and toil is sad, Whose aged eye is wet'with tears·.^ *
H Uk ? At tbi. ο«%ψ^ g?Äíose |lig When EddtJ^ft hør ? ????*? seat- That beauteous maid, so good î so fair t »ΛΊΓΑ %C&* ? 1 4- * ?? <*% S J tì , "Come i»,;* she cried, "thp^wmry !???4 The wii>|d J& $iU—tbe stork .is fopgb, *Twere ill thine ancient form should roam, BatjfiHhs^amenot tothchaH, TJiQ^tilliîh^B^dSis dying song, A|j^ sen| her pttge with msisage mild ? To aid his tumbling steps ¿ong. íC For bejt of skiîfiii h^nd the wtyle Oppress'd with years the minstrel dies. H M' i' t f* She^Jfctss^fiT-eet maiéins fçîiow nea^ h gjfiif. ffepåj, ^oo. that mach lov'd pws^ ; They note the Harper bending loW And kindly strive to soothe his pain. But ajyjW*|s$guiti bead %&??? SostüJ-^so calm—sosad is deaths
Τ ψ ¡3 ^ΙΊγ Percy; ÆyP tbe maid exclaim·, . A silT'ry WíR.^ iK'tö'^ ? «? ; 4 That we may nateli Lim back İA life— Or ??? saveídniere'hi'die. '' ? ' The youth is gone—the Minstrel «¿??% And flimgs afide bis tartan gear, His ártó Wild Edda's ifmsi lie twinei, And bea¿ her 5 to bÍ9'war-pteéd neai% Kow ioutilv î loudly shrieks the maid^ But ah V ttioëefhtntîc ????? váitt,^- With fiMous speed bïsèoarsé he winds O'er moor and moss— oler hill and plain* And now they cross flie waters btøie, Thatgtiáe past oíá a Nbrthiímb%rlatia, While ¿ti bîs chaîner Perey r eom$e~¿- His flaming bow spear in his haml. With certain aim his shaft is set, Pierèed tò" the Heart, tbe Bandit dies, * ** -*?? wliile, round Bdda's drèuftífeg, form, The kormy ruthless waters rise. ' That lovelorn youth in fear and woe,. But vainly stems the battling Watéi 4 *Sinéèah! that wave is doomed to be * His bridal couch—Ilis early muv#.
Oft whe« the sullen garb of night, ^tv^fn Tis said that Edda's wand'ring ghost Telle to the Hst'nmg moon her tale» lnd mëèémï; at ttíe twiïi^t grey^ *- Tlie «?uirclffi 9 d4by fitottUffifø «'i ????§;* wMe%toYÍug thrötí|h the gjtota^ ^ Äeríforat upheld by Percy's ??? r^!# 1 í4j,s^ . ? tí b^ 4, «m, η^^ίίΠ'-* *>á ,# Peace to the memory of Perejä pd and Edda ,r exclaimed the Hostess as AiHiette ??*????4?<$ ??> nsyvfor the FİpM aün#i, ???<* that,he^m#t ^e^mp^í^imiritejlifithe^ ¡??? ?0<?????> ^bot^Mg|m*^; imm $?$?*?? tbßoritwt ^th^îJ^ïmïis ????\?*?? àwho ??$?? t|gsç t i^jt- '??????????, ^?&? ?&\ Jtoie whifb:prevail, tis not the.poor u rinltti alone tåkea up lhe lawless profession— there'« |???? ?& :??? Ibft Saron ^Unguardedly, "Mothei?
i
1
'"■'■'■■'. ψί ím må:MCirm '?)1?\1?-??<3 glìsT. : y. wheìa any suädeiiiu^ be i^merrfoersr the name of Baron Os? f*^M-f, : ?: :: ? :¡:r--'rTMM-'<;Mñ^' SiS'ví- ' ? ■
iS 'И »S
laried îssena ¥ ?\? ?0??? ????~ ^lueficrøfo tbettì tiur auhappy sittar ???$. ?? 1 Mpøm we* »hall Mpíy Ät φ% ÍÄÉu^e;foí^í ^ï^sf^but^pixAiJb- .|toït,y-^ %^-m " 3 't- :; '"' ? . ■ :.-*. ?í x ■ /α '^^ ■ ü ^ w ■ ; .i^fHiyví y^í-, ^-jTM M. y: ý t 'φ:| ■ è :|S -t λ > » OÍS; ;1 ' Isidore turned hk empiìatìg ::sÉyndtOn wards Annette, who relating itfcwar^Äe
.vfA.V*-·
,fž^y|iHíti
ttie , y^ih respectfully ^rôse from hit seat abashed and confounded, solicit- ing forgiveness for his familiarity, while the Hostess with innumerable and low; cnrtseys, accused herself of not beinsj able to distinguish the greatness of sucb a miest, by the outward appearance, wirch now presented to her so mudi superiority. With a smile of condescen¬ sion, íssena exten led her hand, * c t beseech you my wortby friends, * J said she ci consider meas noother than some fiïïmble cottager, wbose misfortunes demand youi* pity and assistance ; tiat slíould ever that providence, ???? reads áll tíeàrts, restore me tò'the ho- notirs^ cít my bouse, I shall Wess ?? bour, not more forthe felicity which its greatness will return upon myself, åian Because J it will enable me to re- IrårSr Wè integrity of thobe whose bene- volence afforded me security m advem-
ir \? * *» Ji
? Êf j ^férk^'Lady!^ saíd ,? ficelât ^w^fcí've it ìn our power fo render jpu actual service ; some few leagues from hence, my sister Floranthe in¬ habits a lonely cabin, almosttinknówn, from its solitary staiion, which woiild afford you excellent security and retire¬ ment; and Floranthe, formerly a do¬ mestic iii your family, wiH be proud ef the honour of your presence. "
v. ki *>
'I thank you*' replied Issena^ unusu¬ alİy rejoiced at tiiis intelHgence, " and shall most ioy full y avail myself of this welcome offer, although I possess not the remotest glimpse of ever being able fo repay such kindness." - ' f An name it not, Lady ; we only lament our poverty, when it prevents m from aiding, according tothe wish* .ts ofour hearts,the objects we most € re- jerspce; Floranthe will no let»s study, than
f 6$ ] tftšm myself, by every humble meant in her poWer, to render you comfortable, if not happy ; but see, the moon 4e+ up-—your fatigues demand repose;-^ early in the morning, Isidore will ?*?? dome your guide to Floranthe's habita^ tîon." ì, v ÍS*S"" After some further conversations im which ïsseria continued to express her gratitude, the Höstess taking the lamp,: readily offered tp.shew them the charas ber designed for their reception,, when the cry of horsemen át the door^ejbifed fcir alarms; * Merciful Providence 'ifc faulteréd íé¥en^ ;/ her eheek palfe with ápprehéhsipn/^ tis the voice of Oswold t Ì am fost, forever lost, Unless you 'Ah» vent some means of saving me from Mi presence/* :TheHostesjsrtremMed,witb dismays AnneUe burst info tears, and casting her supplicating
ί 8* J; supplicating eyes towards theryouth^f. he held bis ???? on ibe doop t^pre^cmt any suoden u»truaion,) Heem^d^fo^^ai^ hisdeciÄÍon in dreadful s^neej^far^ moment he paused, at l^ngttt be ý f$m claiiáed, in low accents, //^??^?? thought! the old portrait, in the ??$ chamber, covers a crevice, effected some time-since by lightning—it viliibe no, difficult matter for Lady, lsaesawitl| her attendant to remain tbare conceal* ed, till Oswold journeys oiv" % ? , ? !/' But should he purpose *fo ^????^ the cottager* cried Issena— thf knpfks atthe door now becoming fonder—^ f tq Ihe portrait—to the portrait { " ????'?« ed Isidore t( and leave the rest fo rae/| Issena and Annette, a^pntpanîed ?? the Hostess, now hastily retre^tcetf while Isidore prepared unwillingly, to adriiit the entrance of Oswold and ihis retinue. . <» " - > ? s*r* \ Hov?
? 90 J <t Hoav comes it, peasant, cried the Baron sternly, that you so unwillingly lift your latch to the wandering stranger. " We were retiring to rest" atisvvér- ed Isidore, ard the depredations n ight* Iy committed by the Banditti of'the forest, render us fearful of unclosing our cabins after twilight." <c So poor and yet so careful" ob¬ served Oswold—did I not hear voice* in your habitation ?" €? Tis probable ; my mother, her cus¬ tom ever, bestowed her benediction on me as we parted." rr Ilast thou not seen or heard of cer¬ tain female strangers in these woods-— fugitives, guilty ones/' ff Guilty ones f' responded Isidore. ({ Aye, guilty— -your looks betray, if I aright construe them——*'*. What
í 9Í ] 41 What áhould my looks betray ?" |f We must enter the cottage/* cried Oswold to his followers, dismounting, and fastening his steed to the low pa¬ ling, '*??? î the dark clouds gathering over our heads ? th reaten a furious storm ; is there no hut at hand to shelter the animals in ?'* C{ Endeavouring to suppress his agita¬ tion, Isidore requested his guests to en¬ ter, while he conducted the horses to a place of safety, hoping to secure the es¬ cape of Issena and Annette, by giving them timely notice, and assisting them through the crevice, which opened near the shed into the wood ; but Oswold, re¬ fusing to accept bis invitation, cautiously remained on the outside of the cottage till his return, when entering the lowly mansion, ihe agitated Hostess was de¬ scending from the rude staircase, pale with alarm ; she gazed wildiy on the stranger«
? fl ?. strøf^^-f-sf my mother!" cried Isidore vvitlc greajpresence of mind, to Oswold, '' js agèd---you r unexpected appearances aMpçh ? hoüi> fills her with dismay-^- tbe forest is in fesseci with ßänciitti 1 — iriör y<y./y ?. ■-/:> . ■_■;■; ■■■...•:ì,^ : :.-.^- ; .. ; ■■ - , ■: ,|' :.. ^y çartj Ι persuade hòc that our poverty "jå Ä sufficient safeguard-^-"át these wordsifi% M ?? MMMMÍÍ:Xy try ■ s-.y:^, · , r|r ■ ??* . ?-?^ extended his band, as if to ašštést the ma¬ tron,^ the samé time beating dovrei ?? glsfcripg femp . wtiicti she carried^ "tis unfortunate^ continued he, ζς thatbý this accident, I bave extinguished the light ; thp heavy douds which gather around^ render it unusualİy dark,—the fire loò. js yearly, cp;n§umed--~I will forth, hpw- eyer, und, procure a dryr faggot, which will speedily renew it, aiuladd a íriendly cheer to our humble welcome.'* fie noW fibjnptly glided past the door^ and enuring the Reij^bo brcatii|esS r jtóus fo listek wbé- ther ??? jnquisiUve ^Ét^^ršiíedbis ???? ; when raising áí ladder tö the
crcvtee
■' í & ? çrevice, be silently assfaícd íssetílí aiid Annette to descend, andf dirêcfin^ tbem to a çjayerh at no great distance tii the forest, snatched up a quantity of witberi. ed sticks and hurried back to Oswold and bis, retinue, riot a little Sighted with the success løf His stratagem/ In i ihort period the dying embers begaii tö revive under thf ir adcíitiohäf load, arid jflipging around a yellow glare, added tnateriaily to the comforts of the hospi- tahïecnp which Isidore frçquëntîy re¬ plenished, as Öswold interrogated the Hostess respecting the appearance bf the Fugitives, whose flight from Fftz Alan Castle was the cause of bis present Intrusion. '" ^Listen ! listen I a * exclaîtned fsiAm» starting, and interrupting birn^/ r Mow awfully the thunder rolls across the cîark ■■-5 l. ¿Ä ?. ; .;' ':*? . .ji -l'y '.■ ! -f. · ? ;-'■'-■ t ' y ; r : y ( '\ i ; í : í- .f --·:■. ■},, ¡, iiViiying foliage ; heavens that ? ífasn, so ied t so terrible.^ ^ S γ r { ? ¿. «■ - ■ ■ *
? »* 3 * Wiry youth!" cried Oewöld witb* smile of contempt, "fearest thou tbe glimmer of the tempest—tis but the effort of overcharged nature.-— ------ '* "1," interrupted Isidore, solemly, "have been taught to imagine it the voice of One, wlio speaks in thunder, and Whose invisible arm only, can avert from my guilty head the pitiless shaft." Biting his lip, Oswold gazed t sternly on the youth, and silently leaning onhis hand, sat buried for a while in gloomy meditation; meantime tbe storm continu¬ ed violently to rage without—the rain de- scended in torrents, while the hail pat¬ tering against the casement almost bea¿ it doAvn. A dead «ilence prevailed in thè cabin —Os woid still remained absoç? bed in thought, and Isidore .continued i ! ï - n ?, ,■ firmly to gaze upon, bim, as the, cry or distress near ihe lattice, bupplicatiog ad¬ mission
t í* 3 iniciou; éxcitèd his attention. Oînfrold ètàrted from his reverie, and every eye was turned towards the door, as the Hostess opened it for the wanderer's re- eeption. A tall, spare-built figure, habited m x the grey garb of a palmer—its visage nearly enveloped in a close drawn cowl* now made its appearance, supported by ä rude crosier of blasted wood. Drip- ing witli rain, it paused awhile at the threshold, as if to investigate the dif- ferent features ofthe surrounding stran¬ gers, when fixing its keen eye reproach¬ fully on Oswold, "jMonster! is it thou?'* it exclaimed/and vanished; « vthat idle pbant om—what mockery is this ? ** enquired the Baron in a voice of rage, ·. Ì 5 í » 'li , " í * atthe same time drawing his swotd from its scabbard and rushing furiously sfter the my ? terious visitant—^ in a lew moments he returned, his lip pale aud quivering
t í» 6 3 quif ering with ire " youth" heexclaim¬ ed, " is not this some base imposition some vile forgery to insult me ? ------" '* Is it possible/' replied Isidore, with great firmnes, tf I should adopt secret and almost instant measures to injure or offend a stranger—the Pilgrim, like yourself, is unknown to me, as his word* and manners are singular. Oswold continued rapidly to pace t· and fro in the cottage, at length, fling¬ ing himsetf on a seat in the nt ost retired part thereofjiis hand beat against some¬ thing, which suddenly falling to the ground, returned a melancholy murmur to its distuber, in an instant Oswold, all awake to suspicion, caught up the object of his curosity and bringing* it fbwarda the lamp. V' By .heaven ! " he ejaculated, "4hfe late belong* ίο ls*ena¿' ? *. < Isidore
? 97 ] Isidore's countenance changed at this unexpected occurrence "that lute,'* said he " was left here at sunset, by a wandering peasant boy. '' "That Boy," replied <( Oswold, I doubt not, was the person of whpm I am in quest—is it long since he left this cottage?/ ".Some hours; he spoke of wan¬ dering towards the Yarrow hills in order to enter the service of Baron Oswold." ^Damned artifice !" vociforated Os¬ wold, " but how came he to leave this instrument. ? "1 know not," continued Isidore, "and till this moment was ignorant of its being here—I observed however,on his first appearaee, he was Httle calculated to support ¡ts weightrAie seemed so s&#* fotm F se
[ 98 ] sot weary, our hearts bled for his mis¬ fortunes ; he spoke to us ofhis wrongs 1 — of tbe «iron hand of oppression which o'erwhelmed him—if you are of Fitž Alan Castle, stranger, haply on return¬ ing^ you may find the fugitive beneath its turrets, as he expressed a fervent wish* to reach tbem, in prde? to die therein" iC Why was not this affair mentioned on pur first entering your habitation ;. tis npw too late for pursuit,and ere'm'or- hing'slight ?? object may elude detec¬ tion. ,. / f Youname4 & female as the person Ipst-r-is it possible for me tp conjecture ypuj meaning,qr the cause of tbese sud- jdiÊiniîr^nsit^fi/feplied Isidprp, proudly. Oswold glanced a spepicious eye, tow¬ ards Isidore^—their conversation be- ? ^???? famili— ^iut ?? ^otbçmm^howr eyer
? §9 ] ever, the early dawnr rising from r tbe eastern horizon andtbrovring Hs pink lustre through the Ibw lattice; ι the$ Ba¬ ron abruptly quitting his seat, accom¬ panied by his attendants, proceeded to examine the cottage ; but, discovering* no vestige which might lead to the detection of itt laåeiinhabitant% fthey mounted their horses and departed. Arayof joy illumined Isidore's fea¬ tures as he watched their retiring foot¬ steps, and saw them vanish in tbe dis¬ tant prospect ; when, after relating to' his mother the manner in which he had effected the escape of Issena and An- néfté^he-htìrried towards the cavern, in order to convey them the pleasing intel¬ ligent of Oswald's dep^rtiËre, andeon- duct them speedily to the habitation of thè^peasaht Floran the; vt - * ' fo\ itSelfí^l ì\\ , *? *' *.?.^\? j 1 v ^AtIáitore f s-entrance/lil9eifa, almost F % dead
? ιοθ ] dead, with fetigue and apprehension, wasrerfimngon Annettes bosom; there- collection of having left her lutedn^the cabin, filled her gentle heart witb* terk ror, least it might lead to a j discovery; huteiwiving at the neWs impaMêd#y the youth, írtie gratefully offered" hét! thanks for bis attention and exeition, iw the behalf of herself and Annette; wlfoh cheered by the rosy beams of morn, they eoffnnéïiced their journey, and; in "the course of a few hours, arrived» at the lowly 'dwelling, wherein they hoped to- remain unmolested by" the interruptionl of OsvVoid. It was situated at the foot 1 ofa lofty mountain, and surrounded by wide spreading oak trees,whicbentirely concealed'it from the observation of stengetas."^Floranthé, at her wheel, Mt near 4he door^ beneath a bawer of woodbine; as they approafehed-^^she arose on perceiving Isidore, and hasten-" ing towards the youth, welcorhed iHtm. ? with
L l01 3 with smiles of unfeigned satisfaction;— he lost no time in relating ? her the aceount of Issena's misfortunes, to which sbe listened vrith tears-; and shewing every symptom of respect towards her noble guests invited her into the eottage, presentingat the same time,such simple refreshment as ber humble mean» afforded. During the repast, the conversation naturally turned on their recent escape from Oswold; when Floranthe informed Issena of her having many years since, been an attendant on Lady Matilda, *her mother, with an account of her* own marrying from the Castle, and become * ing an inhabitant of the soHtary ca« bin, which, she now tejoiced, was deemed worthy of sheltering from the storms of adversity, the last remains of the illustrious house, that she so much venerated. ? * F J Tht
f lOS J The rmw ?? already crossed the mountäin*brow— -ere Isidore* , respect¬ fully taking leave of Issena, prepared utìwilimgìy to depart *. Annette «accom- pani^himafew paces dowu the 4 vaU ley-^they separated from each mother wt<ii mutual regret—but not till he had premised frequently to return,, in ørder that he might communicate any. acdU dental intelligence respecting the pro- cepdiugs ofjOsvyold, r and enquire, after the health of Lady Issena. v ^ > ? N " iL 4 ti < * S s-t ,*, True it was, both Floranthe and An^ Uebie, were unceasing iti thei» attentions to Issenaj but the painful remembrance of calamity] weighed heavily npon, her mind, with the recollection of Valen* tine's love; by the long silence which had elapsed since last they met, she feared, death, or some fatal accident mtist have befallen him, or welf she knew* noobstacle, however insurmoun^ able
I ? J] able would have prevented bim from once^gain attempting to hchpld^er* ; „ Labouring under innumerable trou¬ bles, the health of Issena bergan rapidly to declinei and at last, unable to leave the chamber, Avhich Floranthe had kindly appropriated toher use, shege^ nerally, reclined, during the day, on a couch, which cpmmapdedy through the lattice, avie w of the wild^ but pietaresqne landscape. The leaves of the fprcst were now becoming sear and yellow, iu the rays of the auturrinal sunând, de¬ scending at every bre^Cj in trembling showers to. ; the brown earthy left^iar kedly exposed to therathles arctic, storm, the branches, which they had lately attired in fantastic beauty. As the fplb age became 1 ess lu x uriant, Issena pbsery vedoin thedistant scene, the form,of a mdely constructed hermitage, wb"& greatly excited her curipsUy,and enqniri ■ ing
Γ 104 τ quiring of Floranthe the name of its Solitary tenant, (who sometimes appear¬ ed, sadly reclining beneath the exten¬ ding covert of a neighbouring alder) she learnt that it was the resort of a penitential Anchorite, of wild and sin¬ gular manners, who seldom approached the habitations of the surrounding pea¬ santry, except to solicit food ín cases of extremity;—at other periods,hë avoided all human intercourse,and fled from the approaching footsteps of man, as fiom those ofa fierid, vvho came to pry iath the sacred càùae of his sorrow, and wring from Wis desolate Heart, the secret which it nourished ; though, like the un¬ grateful serpent in theadage, it evident¬ ly preyed upon that breast Which con¬ cealed it. An unconquerable curiosity invaded 1 sienas mind, at this account of the mysterious recluse ; she felt anxious to witnes·
? Wb ? witness the peculiarity of pelions insti¬ gated by calamity—and in listening to a recital of his sufferings, thought, haply ??? own might appear less poignapt— this seemed impossible, since he so rigidly avoided society ;—one afterooon however, Annette haatily entering Is¬ sena's apartment, informed her that the Hermit whom she had so often wish¬ ed to behold, was reposing near the brfobof a fountain, in the glen adjoin¬ ing Florantbe's dwelling ; and, that if she thought herself sufficiently strong to ascend, through the overhanging sprays of the mountain, it was essy to gaze upon him, unperceived. Issena, with little hesi tation cpmplied Avith Annette's request, and supported between her two friends,reached the de¬ sired eminence, from yv|iicb she cpuld distinctly notice the form of thepn^own, F 5 which
? we 3 which »she recognized to be the one, that had excited their astonishment, by njttering, her name beneath the oak, which concealed them not only from his observations bat the pursuit of the mon¬ ster Oswold. The stranger was pensively seated on the margin óf the well, apparently buri¬ ed in gloomy reflection ;—his habit was grey as formerly—and his cowl, closely drawn across his features, concealed them from inspection-*-sometimes he ap¬ peared to dash away a falling tear;—at others, murmured forth incoherent sen- tences—^deep^ sighs frequently escaped his labouring breast—at length, uncon¬ scious of observation, in a low and me¬ lancholy murmur,he sang the following. " Stranger, if thou e'er* felt of love, ( Tis what I feet—it fires my brain; Tis that which bids me wildly rove, O'er lonely bill and desert plain/' At
[ 107 3 At these words, a death-like paleness overspread the beautiful features of Is- sena.and rushing franticly to the verge of the precipice—" Valence!" she exclaimed, " best beloved, revive ; thy Issena, thy faithful Issena, calls thee in these deserts ; she comes^with affection- ate heart, to share and soothe the woes that torture thee."" k * ξ Surprized, at the well remember^ voice of his love; Valentin^ gazed wildly aroundj, till perceiving his much, altered Issena, fainting on the bosom of AnneUe, he at once hurried to the spot, and almost equally agitated, joy¬ fully caught her in his arms. In a few moments Issena recovered—a thou¬ sand enquiries escaped her lip, and mu¬ tual pangs of anxiety oppressed them as they witnessed the havoc which sor¬ row had effected on the features of each other. The cheek of Valentine, no lon¬ ger.
[ 108 ] ger glowing with the hue of health, appeared hollow, and woeworn, a!* though his present happy meeting with Issefta had suffused ¿t with a hectic co¬ lour. Floranthe, alarmed for the resuit ofthis unexpected meeting*, on the de¬ licate and declining constitution of her fair guest, tenderly requested her to re¬ turn immediately to the cottage, to which Valentine would be equally weK cohie ;— à smiië of gratitude enlivened Issena^s countenance at this benevolent admonition,and supported by thewatch- ftil attention, of her long-lost, lamented lover,she prepared to descend the cliff. On entering the cabin, Floranthe, aided by Annette, spread before her guestá á desert of such fruits as her simple garden afforded; while Valentine related tó Issena his adventures, since last they parted—After his flight frora UHng^airn, in various disguises, he fre¬ quently
l κ» ] χ* . quëhtiy vvanderedto the hiHsof Yarrow with the hope of obtaining some in¬ telligence respecting Issena, but in vain ; and fearful that Gregory should communicate to Ulric the nature ofhis hazardous proceedings^ he refiained from visiting St. Julicn's, lea., any steps adopted by hisFatber,to avert the malice of O.«wold, might eventually lead to destruction ; assuming therefore tbe habit of an Anchorite, best calculated to conceal him from enquiry, he omitted no opportunity of watching, from his old and favourite retreat, the balcony at which he had so often beheld Issena and her Mother—at other times,he wan¬ dered about the surrounding country, cautiously enquiring into the affairs at the Castle, of such peasants as were in the habit of sometimes resorting toit; in one of these rambles, while resting under the oak, Issena witnessed his despair·—on the eve of which too,it was, that
[ no ? ihat approaching the cottage of Isidore,, to seek shelter from the inclement storm» his presence so disconcerted Oswold.— Issena novv proceeded to unfold the nar¬ rative of her own sufferings since the tournament ;—Valentine heard her. with emotionsof pity, and gratefully uniting their thanks to providence, for rescuing them from their past dangers^ they resolved to avad themselves of the. earliest convenient opportunity of re¬ pairing to Illinglairn,—previously to* which, it was become necessary that Valentine should apply to Gregory for. assistance, as the length of the journey demanded some expensive conveyance, on account of the severe indisposition of Issena. Concealed therefore beneath the disguise of his pilgrim's habit, he repaired towards St Julien's, which stood but a few leagues distant, with the promise of returning ere sunset, to Is¬ sena, Avho, labouring under a thousand wild
wild apprehensions, witnessed his *de~ parture. η While he drew near the venerable pile, from neglect, already assuming a desolate appearance, ( for although the time which had elapsed since the death of Reginald was inconsiderable, the apathetic indifference that ever accom¬ panied his actions, had for years, pre¬ vented bim from beautifying, or even repairing the halls of his ancestors. ) Valentine felt an unusual sensation at his bosom.—As he gazed once again upon the turrets, from which he had. so often admired the delightful pros¬ pect—as he heard the breeze murmur¬ ing through the old elm trees, beneath the brown shade of which, he had stu¬ died his earliest lessons,—and beheld extended to wild tufts,the flowers which his own hands had planted—tears, at the recollection of past eventa, involuntarily gushed
χ ? ? gushed to his eyes, and slowly crossing the draAv bridge, he abruptly entered the presence of Claribel, and enqui* red for Gregory. Half alarmed, the trembHng Dame gazed fearfully upon him, but observ¬ ing the garb of peace, in which he was attired, crossed herself with reverence, and desiring him to rest awhile beneath the shelter of St Julien's towers, in¬ formed him that Gregory, who was now journeying towards some part of Scotland, would not be enabled to re¬ turn till the commencement of the fol¬ lowing month. Chagrined at this in¬ telligence, Valentine heaved a deep sigh, which did not escape the watchful curiosity of Claribel ; it was now the close of November; already had the severity of the season rendered the tra¬ veller's path comfortless, and each suc¬ ceeding day would be adding fresh
t ? J perils. In a very short period, bill and glen might be covered with snöw, and the intended emigration of Valentine and Issena to lHinglairn, impracticable " Rest thee man of care !" exclaimed Claribel, reaching a seat, to Valentine, who, lost in sorrowful reflection, stood leaning on his crosier. u I thank thee, hospitable Dame ! answered the disconsolate youth, "but must instantly depart,—I have many miles to journey,—and the sun sinks early, at this season, to repose." " But not till you have taken some refreshment father,** continued she, pouring forth a cup of wine and pre¬ senting it—" perhaps you bring us news of our absent Lord—III assure you, the Vassals are all much surprised that he comes not to reside among us— sometime
f iu ? eométíibe since* it was reported, that Baron'Oswold intended to take posses** siön of thia'Castle." " Baron Oswold ! M ejaculated' th# astonished youth. " Even so" replied tbe t Dame, en¬ deavouring to catch a glimpse of Va¬ lentine's features, which he cautiously concealed, by drawing the cowl of his cloak over them. " In a short period" resumed Valen¬ tine, " the Chief of St. Julien returns, proudly returns, to take possession of tbese turrets—then Avoe befall the wretch that dare usurp them ;—be H proclaimed abroad, that the Earl of St. Julien yet lives; and to him only shall the Vassals of tbis illustrious house evince their humility." At these words* Valentine suddenly quitted tbe Castle* and
I P5 J. and, while" the good Damp lost no time incpmmnnicatingthejpyfuUntel|igence to the tenantry, of their Lords!s speedy arrival, be returned to* the cottage of of Floranthe, with the painful news of Gregory's absence. Opposing e\ery kind attention, th· indisposition of Issena daily grew more alarming, during which, no entreaties could induce her to consent to Valen¬ tine's leaving the Cottage, and long ere returning health had suffused its balîhy influence overber cheek, it was too late to think of repairing to lHing¬ lairn before the arrival of spring;— for the vestal robe of Winter had enveloped in its flaky folds the slum¬ bering bosom of eartb, and the howl¬ ing blast stripped of their verdant foli¬ age, the moaning branches of the forestv-so deep and trackless too, Avas the drifting gnow, r that save the impres¬ sion
C m ] sion of footsteps from the well, no tmce of human being towards their retreat was discernible.
CHAP XXIV.
í»;
J* , j * *'ti i* "i. «*iA
? ?? 3
CHAP XXIV.
What is (his sublunary world ? a rapou» ; À vapour all if hold»; itself a vapour. Yevtic.*. AFTER quitting the town of Lanerk, Ulric resolved to assume the disguise of a Scottish Bard, the better to insure him¬ self from the persecutions of Oswold and the attacks of Banditti, during his wan¬ derings. Approaching the hills of Yar¬ row, his skill on the harp, and recita¬ tions ofthe popular legends of the coun¬ try, vvitb which he was Avell acquaint¬ ed, insured him evera friendly wel¬ come
[ ?8 J t:ome Bt tbe door ofthe Cottager, #ho loved toHsteuto tiie taks of Warriors, and theachievem*nts of Err.tnt Knights. FiMilless were ail his attempts to disco¬ ver the retreat of his son ; for, though he oft-times described the person ofthe youth, no one could reneier the least in¬ formation respecting him. At last, re¬ pairing to his own mansion, in order to consult with Gregory, on the best means to be adopted for rescuing Valen¬ tine, should he, as suspected by St. Julien, be fallen into the hands of Os¬ wold, he learnt from Claribel the ac¬ couutof his Vassals absence; thus dis¬ concerted, he feared to discover him self to the Dame, but leaving'a letter for Gregory, resolved to enter the Q¿* Je of Fitz Man, disguised; the report of Issena Vescape had already reached his ear, and he doubted not but it Was some base report circulated by the creatures öf the Baron, in order to prevent t>n- puiries
? 119 ] quiries after the unfortunate victims de¬ voted to his guilt. w' The last shades of twilight were stealing beli ; nd the distant hills, as Ulric, approaching tire outer gates of Cast le Fitz Alan, began to play upon his harp, some ancient Ballad, relating to the ex¬ ploits of its olden tenants;—As in those days, the voice of the Pilgrim or th<s Minstrel, was rarely suffered to pass un¬ heeded, a vassal presently appeared with an invitation írom Oswold, desiring Ul¬ ric to enter the banquet igaliery. Feign¬ ing the infirmities of age, St. Julien slowly following his conducter, now en¬ tered the presence of his enemy. Sur¬ rounded by the ministers of his guilt and pleasure, the Baron, for a time lis¬ tened-to the song of the supposed Har¬ per, at length abruptly interrupting hi$ strein, he enquired if ?? his h soHtary ram¬ bles he had not encountered Issena and Annette
? '80 ] Annette, in the disguise of Scottish pea¬ sants ; or whether he had ever beheld a person habited as a palmer, whom he sus¬ pected to be a fugitive, that had long since affected his escape from the dun¬ geons ofthe Castle. Ulric enquired f 'bas my Lord then any remaining, animosity against those that have voluntarily abandoned his pro¬ tection ? or such as, taught by the first law of nature, prefer the wild range of the forest, %p the sorrows of con¬ finement." " Bard !" exclaimed <f Oswold stern¬ ly ·' from whence proceeds this cautious enquiry?" "From the cause/* resumed Ulric, solemnly"wbJch ever forbids me to agra¬ vate the sufferings of others, and haply by confessing- that I had witnessed the wandering*·
? 121 ] wanderings of the persons you mention, I might unconsciously heap on their heads.the vengeance of offended power/ " It is evident then, that you enter¬ tain, at least, some knowledge ofa se¬ cret I wish to acquire," continued Os¬ wold, "the, place in which mine enemies conceal themselves—be brief, at once un¬ fold it—the Castle Almoner, shall amply repay thy service. " « But what, Chief of Fitz Alan, shall teach me to forget, even did I know the secret you require, that I had volun¬ tarily injured, for gain, those that had never offended me. " Oswold resumed <f If you think by this stratagem to increase thy reAvard,the • attempt is fruitless; since to name a re¬ compence for such service, is but to receive it*—if otherwise, our dungeon's gloom shall bring thee to confession.*" f^t* uu G The
? 122 3 ít My proud heart mocks with indig¬ nation the threats of tyranny, as it re¬ jects the overtures of vice/' answered Ulric, haughtily, rising from his seat. *' Old Man! " cried Oswold,abruptly grasping his arm, < ( think not to elude my enquires, but at once proceed to satisfy them, or expect in death only, to wipe away thine offence. " "Tyrant!" exclaimed St. Julien, suddenly throwing off his disguise and drawing his sword, te think not to ter¬ rify me by your threats ; but thus, blade to blade, let ns confide in heaven to defend the right!" he now proceeded to attack Oswold, who furiously repelling his attempt, was speedily disarmed, and he fell,bleeding, into the arms ofhis at¬ tendants, while Ulric, embracing the momentof confusion, bravely defending himself from his opposers, effected his escape from the Castle. On
L 123 3 On recovering from his swoon occa¬ sioned by the loss of blood, and learning that his opposer was no longer beneath the influence of his revenge, Oswold, commanding his wound to be imme¬ diately bound up, and calling for bis charger, prepared to pursue the foot¬ steps of St. Julien, who aware ofhis designs, lost no time in concealing him¬ self beneath the underwood of the forest; from which, he not only perceived the vigilence ofhis pursuers, but heard the Os wolds rançou rous threats as he passed near the spot, and his design to place centinals at the various cottages, ^ for many leagues around, with immense re- Avards for his head : not as that of the disguised Bard, but of the notorious, though almost forgotten, Black Rob¬ ber. Thus, dreading detection,Ulric desert¬ ed not his concealment till night-fall. G 3 Tht
t m ] The rustling öf the leaves, and the moaning ofthe sapless branches, as they complained to the chill breeze, fil¬ led him with apprehension—at a loss what steps to pursue, orin what isola* tèd place to conceal his Avtêtched head, he beheld, with emotiohs of anguish, the glimmer of the distant lamp, as it dar¬ ted forth a friendly invitation tp some benighted peasant. " Alas ! ' f sighed he, for me the band of affection places no cheering beacon in the lattice,—no anx¬ ious heart comes to tfie opened door, to welfeome my return— ? Ulric ! mise¬ rable Ulric! thy wells are desolate around thy tenantless heartb> no crackling fag¬ got flings its cheerful glare, to gladden the smooth countenance of domestic peace—but an outcast, objèctwanderer, tbou art forbidden even to approach the hospitable shelter of poverty; and, driven fi\>m thé society of mankind, to seek refuge with the ravenous vvolf,thou hidest
hidest thyself in sorrow/' Thus sad, he continued to wander through the most unfrequented parts ofthe forest till raidnight,directed only by the Hght of the stars, as they hung in countless numbers in the blue ether ; when, ex¬ hausted with fatigue, he sunk upon the earth and resigned himself to sleep. In his troubled dreams, a hundred wild phantoms danced before his feve¬ rish imagination; he beheld himself again in the power, not only of Oswold» but of Rodolpha, the murderess Rodol¬ pha ! he thought that Valentine vainly endeavoured to extricate him frora their diabolical influence, when Julia, his long lost Julia, accompanied by Agnes, attired in shining apparel, wearing on her brow a golden coronet,whose name¬ less lustre dimmed the eye of mortality, iuddenly arose before him and enclo- G2 úng
C Í26 ? sing his form in clouds of purple mist, conducted him to spheres of never ceas¬ ing transport. On awaking from such illusion, Avhich gladly he Avould have enjoyed for ever, the broad light of day was beaming up¬ on Ulric, and ascending a neighbour¬ ing cliff, in order to take a survey of thè country, he witnessed, with inde¬ scribable^ emotions, the distant ruins, wherein he so long resided after the death of Julia, and in which he had first obtained the title of the Black Robber. Resolved once more to enter the scene of his past sufferings, he proceeded to¬ wards the court, and descending through the private opening to the cavern, ga¬ zed around, as if for the salutation of those features, which long acquaint¬ ance had rendered familiar to his mi.id ; all was still—all deserted—as the gloomy sepulchre of death ; each object conspi¬ red
Γ 127 J red to fill his breast with disagreeable reflections, and impelled by the piercing calls of hunger,he determined to venture towards the happy Valley, and apply at the cottage of Beatrice for food ; but, so enfeebled was his nature, that the hour of evening had arrived, ere he could reach the cabin. Sorrow and absence had so changed hisr features, at first, Beatrice was at a loss to remem¬ ber him ; at length, rendered sensible that it Avas no other than her old and venerated guest, she hospitably spread - before him the choicest viands her means afforded. On the succeeding day, arising ear¬ ly from his humble couch, among some other intelligence, Ulric learnt from Beatrice, tbat the Hermit, who had for¬ merly resided in the valley,havmg reach¬ ed an unusual age, was now no more;— the idea occurred to him,that, by assum- G 3 ing
? 128 ) ing the sober habit and manners of this hoary recluse, he might escape detection, and be permitted to pass the remnant of his days uninterrupted by the world. Adopting therefore, the only mode of security remaining, he daily amused liimself Avith the consolation of alter¬ nately visiting the remains of his once happy dAvelling—the grave of Julia— and sometimes, the ruins in the forest. Frequently, unconscious ofthe descend¬ ing snow, as it fell in innumerable flakes around him, lost in thought, would he Wander, till gathering darkness remind¬ ed him that it was time to return, and shroud his anguish in solitude, and in slumber.—At this period, it should be remembered, during the residence of Gregory, Claribel, and Philip, at St. Ju¬ lien's, the Author, perhaps abruptly, has commenced the narrative of Ulric's sufferings.
Qne
[ 129 J One evening, Issena, Annette, and Floranthe, were silently sitting round a cheerful fire,the tw inkling beams where¬ of, gilded the cabin lattice—through which, the icicle and the boar-frost, re¬ flecting the yellow rays of Hght, be¬ trayed the inclement season to be near the period of our blessed Saviour's Nativity. Restless and uneasy, often did Issena repair to the door and fearfully listen to the howling blast, Valentine, who was absent on a second journey to St. Julien's, in order to obtain tidings of his father came not ; two hours bad elapsed since his appointed time—and night had thrown her silvery mantle of moonlight over surrounding objects. Struggling with appréhension, Issena now heard the approach of foot¬ steps, and hastening to the low wicket, per ceived Valentine acompanied by some stranger, supporting on their arms the apparently lifeless body of an unknown person
L «? ] person. In an instant, at the request of Issena, Floranthe threw open the door, while Annette casting fresh fuel on the embers, endeavoured to re-light lhe lamp, which the wind, as it rushed through the newly opened casement, had suddenly extinguished. Accompanied by the stran ger, Valen¬ tine now entered the cottage, and care¬ fully seating his charge in a chair, at some distance from the fire,"pardon me, beloved Issena " he exclaimed," for thus abruptly entering your presence, since compassion for the fate of this benumb¬ ed wanderer, discovered by Gregory and myself, perishing at some distance amidst the snow, demands the trans¬ gression· " Tenderly extending her hand, Issena welcomed the return of Valentine, and the unexpected arrival of his friend Gre¬ gory
? isi ? gorý; when, suddenly taking the lamp from Annette, and holding it to the fea¬ tures ofthe exhausted sufferer, who by his deep sighs evinced symtoms of retur¬ ning animation, " Gracious God ! " ex¬ claimed Valentine, in an agony of joy and woe, "it is!, it is! my Father î " It was indeed the persecuted Ulric who driven from his secluded retire¬ ment by the spies of Oswold, had sunk exhausted in the adjoining glen. Flo¬ ranthe now hastily preparing a cup of warm Avine; Issena gently administered it to the cold lip of St. Julien, who at length unclosing his eyes,and as his con¬ fused senses returned,observing himself supported on the breast ofhis anxiously sought son, was at a loss to conjecture the cause of such a joyful conviction, as,unfolding his^arms,he rapturously en¬ circled him therein ;—Gregory too, now presenting
t; 133 ? presenting hirnseif, "tell me" cried Ulric, faintly, bis cheek glowing with the hectic flush of joy, te thou faithful follower of my destiny, is it to thee I stand indebted for this unexpected meet¬ ing—but let us fly, Oswold else will pursue us, that remorseless assassin, who thirsts for my blood—and for thine too, blessed relic of Julia. '* " Pear not, my Father," answered Valentine," in this solitary cabin w r e are safe from the eye of persecution; to night retire to rest, I will not long quit thee till morning, when Gregory, who has been seeking you in Scotland, will not only explain the strange nature of our present circumstances, but unfold to you many singular transactions of the past;" at these words Ulric retired to his couch after embracing, and re¬ commending his son to the protection of Heaven. On
? 135 ? On the following morning Uiric left his pallet much amended both in nlind and body—after many hours of anxious conversation, it was arranged that Gre¬ gory should proceed to the Cast!e,in or¬ der to prepare the Tenantry for the re¬ turn of their lost Chief. Two days irom his departure, he appeared again at Floranthe's cabin, with a suitable re¬ tinue fori Ulric, and a litter for the con¬ veyance of Issena. Resolved to repel every attack of Oswold, our wanderers immediately prepared to take possession of their too long deserted home. A train of pea¬ santry crying " health and peace to the Earl of these Domains," met them on the way—and the red cross banner,once again floated proudly over he hoary tur* rets of St. Julien. AH their former perils were now for- gotten*
? ? ? gotten in the present enjoyment ; Ulric, Valentine, Issena, and Gregory, offered up their gratitude to heaven /whtie Cla¬ ribel, Annette, and FloraiUne^rcminded by the present,of the pleasures of olden times, gaily joined in the prevailing mirth of the assembly—nor was Isidore absent on the occasion, who selected Annette as his companion down the mer-» ry dance in the old oak hall.
CHAP
[ ? τ
CHAP XXV.
Seal up bi»e>es and draw the curtains ??«,, Aod let us «11 to meditation. SHAKSPEARE. ?? HEN Lady lHinglairn Avas made acquainted Avith the flight of Ulric, her rage became boundless; and, with pro¬ mises of large revvards she dispatched. spies to all parts of the country, in the hope of discovering his retreat:—for some time her attempts proved abortive ; at last, the retirement which he had se¬ lected in the valley, Avas made known to her, and embracing the earliest op¬ portunity
Γ 136 l portUíiity,ílceompanied by trusty domes¬ tics, she hastened towards England, sand arrived at the Cottage of Beatrice some days after Ulric's departure. The prevalent news however, of the Earl St. Julien's return, shortly reached her ear, and hurrying towards the Castle with the desperation of a maniac, she abruptly entered the hall, regardless of the presence of Valentine and Issena; bathed in tears, she rushed into the arms of St. Julien. —confounded at her sudden and unexpected appearance, Ulric endeavoured to apologize for his abrupt departure from Illinglairn ; when,speedily recovering her fortitude, " Returrç with me St. Julien/* exclaim¬ ed Rodolpha wildly, "the arm of thine enemy pursues thee; at Illinglairn only thou wert safe-^for my sake too, Ulric, quit these towers—'' Turning from her coldly, " no repH¬ ed
t 137 J ed he, " beneath these towers, I hope to terminate my misfortunes.—" " ls it thus, ungrateful man ! that you thi nk to escape my vengeance?"interrup- ted Rodolpha, pale with ire " is it thus I am repaid the numberless sufferings which for your sake 1 have inflicted on myself?-—but know,proud and insensible Earl,the same bold hand,whicb,for thee, became stained with Donalvin's blood, dares to revenge itself; " at this instant, snatching from her girdle a concealed weapon, she was preparing to strike Ulric, as Valentine, who silently obser¬ ved her intention, suddenly darted for¬ ward and arrested her arm. Thus, baffled in her phrenzed attempt, assuming the appearance of some disap- pointed 4 fiend, Rodolpha gazed sternly around ; at Iength,fixing iier eye on Ul¬ ric, * ( knovv/'she exclaimed," this breast which
[ 1S8 ] which thy form önce inspired with thè tenderest sentiments, now burns Avith hate; deadly, implacable hate—nor will many days elapse ere the revenge of au injured, broken heart, shall overwhelm thee! " with these thtvatSj in defiance of Valentine's efforts to detain her, she franticly rushed fror» the halland re-as¬ cending her palfrey, accompanied by her a tiendan ts> hurried over the dra w- bridge· From this event, no particular trans action occurred, till a Courier arriving from Oswold, came to demand the Lady Issena, as the ward of that Baron ; such measures however, being treated by St. Julien with contempt, the messen¬ ger, after announcing his lord's deter¬ mination to storm the Castle, and ob¬ tain her by force, departed. Uncertain of what steps Rodolpha or Oswold might pursue, Ulric gave immediate commanda
í 1S9 ] commands that all t hinge should be pre¬ pared in case of an attack— Warders were therefore stationed on the ram¬ parts—the draw bridge was exalted from its rest, on which it had so long reclined unmolested, and the heavy portcuüis, was once again lowcncd across the outer gates. The sun had long since sunk bebind the distant hills, when Valentine, who had been Avandering to and fro on the battlements,in conA r ersation wilh Issena, prepared to retire, as the night was un¬ usually cold, when tbe gleam of warlike implements, gilding through the under¬ wood of the valley, excited his atten- tention, and conducting Issena to her apartment, he hastened to St. Julien with the intelligence; naturally conclu¬ ding these intruders were the followers of Oswold, Ulric prepared for any at¬ tempt which they might intend to make, ai\4
? 140 3 and repairing to the Donjon in order to observe their motions, discovered Os¬ wold, by the Hght of the mopu, closely shrouded in his hauberk, giving direc¬ tions to his attendants, who were bu- eiiy launching a small bark on the moat, in whîch it was evident they mea,nt to stem the unfrozen current. Ulric now causing the alarm bell to be rung, in order to summon the Vassals to his as¬ sistance, drew his sword for the encoun¬ ter, while Valentine, following bis ?? - ample, turned towards Issena's apart¬ ment, and locking the door, placed the key in tus own bosom ; w hen, witnessing tbe approach of Gregory, who, heavily armed,was conducting the vassals to the battlements, he instantly retired* and re¬ lated to Ulric the cause of his own ab¬ rupt disappearance—at which instant» gassing from the turrets, be beheld that tlie enemy had already succeeded in beat« ing down part ofthe outer wall, through wbich
? ι*« 3 which they rapidly forced their way into the inner court ;—at a sign from Uiric, a volley of arrows, was now discharged upon theni, which so disconcerted iheir movements, that in spite of Oëwold's of¬ fers and menaces, they tvere almost ready to fly, having been taught to ima¬ gine the number of inhabitants at St. Julien's, consisted only of a few indi¬ viduals :—notieihg their confusion, Ul¬ ric ahd Valentiné waved their swords, while Gregory, Isidore and the Vassals, setting up a shout of defiance, followed their heroic leaders into the court, where commencing a furious assault upon the invaderVhey shortly succeededtn putting not only Oswold, but bis whole train to jfbght across the drawbridge, which had recently been let down to fecilitate tbeir designs; at this moment, Annette, pale with terror, rushed towards Valentine, Bnd pointing to tbe aperture through which Oswald's band bad entered, fein¬ ted
? »*« ] ted. Convinced by her unexpected presence, that Issena's chamber must have been broken open Valentine pre¬ cipitately disappeared, and directed by the screams of Issena, which now rea¬ ched his ear,, discovered her insensible, in the arms of Wooldenberg ; vvho, bear¬ ing her into the bark, was preparing to escape across the moat, as the youth, plunging into the water, fought desper¬ au ly Avith his adversary, tillatlength # near ly exhausted, he wag sinking beneath his furious dagger, as Ulric, Avho stood on the shore, an almost, trembling specta¬ tor of his ,soits intrepidity, suddenly snatched a bovv from the handofan at¬ tendant, and discharging the arrow at Y/ookienberg, pierced him to the heart. The boat now sinking with the shock ofthe dying man's fall, Valentine caught Issena in one arm and grasping a rope, which was throAvn to him from the strand, succeeded in conveying her to the
[ i« J the shore, ere, overwhelmed with exer¬ tion, he sunk senseless at Ulric's feet. Alarmed both for issena and Valen¬ tine, St. Julien resigned the former to the faithful attentions of Floranthe and Annette, when assisting Isidore to con¬ vey the latter to his couch, he endea¬ voured to re-animate his dormant facul¬ ties, by the application of cheering restoratives—after some little space had elapsed, his effcrts vvere crowned with success,and gazing around, tr teII me, ? tell me! " highed the youth, " that my Issena yet lives! " affectionately pres¬ sing his ice-cold hand, <c thy Issena, my Valentine/* answered Ulric, is still safe, beneath tliese walls—be comforted. " " Tins intelligence ! " replied the in¬ valid, revives me, can I be otherwise than comforted,while she I prize, beyond all human enjoyment, lives to bless me ? " Annette
? 144 J Annette, now knocking Hghtly at the door, requested lo be apprized of the state of Valentine's health ; " Ah ! that tby Lady, who haply requires that atten¬ tion which is lavished upon me, could approach ; then might I be convinced she still exists;" sighed Valentine—at these words Annette disappeared, and in a few moments returned, supporting Issena, who concealing the effects of her ovvn fatigue and apprehension, of¬ fered the gentlest consolation to her gallant preserver—Avhile,tenderly press¬ ing her unresisting hand to his lips, he offered up a silent prayer ofgratitude, to the great and wonderful disposer of events. The shock, which Valentine's frame had sustained from his late excitions, was rapidly subdued by his youth and excellent constitution. Many days had now elapsed since the appearance of
? 145 3 of Oswold, and they Avere willin^to sup¬ pose that sensible of the force of arms contained in the walls of St Julien, he now resigned aH future pretensions of invadinglhem. Issena in compliance with the earnest entreaties of Valentine, had consented to surrender him her pot tion less, but spotless hand* at the altar ofthe chapel belonging to the Castle. The day which was to light upon his happiness, beamed forth with unusu¬ al lustre—at an early hour, thetransport- ed youth deserted his pillow, and, ac¬ companied by the Minstrels, proceed¬ ed to awaken his beloved with the dulcet chords of harmony;—attired in vestal white, she shortly made her appearance—no costly jewel glittered on her robe,—no coronet added splen¬ dour to her brow—but the enchanting smile of approbation, and the virtuous eminations of her sensitive bosom, as vol m, H thejr
? 146 J they tinged with roseate hue her virgin cheek, were treasures which rendered her far dearer to the breast of Valen¬ tine. Accompanied by Ulric, and the atten¬ dants, they now entered the chapel, but the ceremony which united them for ever, was scarcely concluded, ere the loud blast ofa horn, at the drawbridge echoed through the pile, and the sound of horses, trampling the outer court, filled them with consternation. Ulric desiring Gregory to enquire the cause of such au unusual incident, be pre¬ sently returned with Intelligence, that Lord Edmond Harley, with a long train of Horsemen, attired in ihe livery of tlie King, was dismounting before the fold¬ ing doors of the hall gallery^ St. Julien, instantly hastening to learn the com¬ mands of his goests, Lord Edmond ar¬ rested him in the Kings name, on the accusation
? 1*7 ] accusation of Rodolpha, Lady lHin¬ glairn, who, throwing herself at the Soverein's feet,had supplicated for ven¬ geance on on the assassin of her Lord ; as an outlaw, and a Bandit Chieftain, Ulric was also summoned to account for his conduct before the throne ! Valen¬ tine too. on the accusation of Baron Oswold for the murder of Lady Matilda Fita Alan, was commanded to accom¬ pany his father, in order to undergo a formal trial. With calm and manly resignation> Ulric listened to the decree which the offended laws of his country demanded, respecting himself; but that,which sepa¬ rated his children, and heaped on their devoted heads a complication of un¬ heard of miseries, ill could his fortitude sustain. For the wretched Issena, should Valentine,by the mistaken zeal of Judg¬ es, and the remorseless designs of his H 2 guilty
L ι« 3 guilty accuser, be consigned to the axe, how was «he to escape the persecution« of Oswold ? no effectual means of avoid- ding such direful calamity, save the one of immediately seeking refuge beneath the sacred veil, presented themselves ; and from this she recoiled with horror. Casting herself, therefore from Valen¬ tine's arms, to the feet of Lord Harley, and clasping them in the bitter anguish ofher soul f O my Lord !"exclaimed she, raising her blue eyes bathed with tears to his fece, tf promise me, till that fond heart yviiich bleeds for my woes alone, shall become insensible to sorrow, that thou wilt not suffer us to be rent assun- der—from that horrible period, whicb may draw the dim curtain of early blighted Hfe,over the misfortunes of Va¬ lentine, ι i wiU not sue for protection— Issena knows how to die—and to om¿ Valentine'! ????* Moved
í ?? ] Moved to tears by her lowly posture, Lord Edmond raised Issena from the earth, and restoring her to Valentine, " unhappy Lady "saidhe, " 1 solemnly pledge my word, that your request shall be religiously observed ; when,comman- ding alitter tobe provided for her recep¬ tion, he assured both St Julien and Valentine of his earnest exertions in their behalf ; and desiring them to ac¬ company him to his own Castle, at some leagues distant, in which the trial was .to take place, they took a last farewell rof the weeping domesticks,save Gregory Annette and Isidore, who were resolved to accompany them, till separated by the invisible hand of Fate. As if heaven itself, with an eye of sor¬ row looked down upon their sufferings, the face of nature was clouded with uni¬ versal gloom—no breeze moved the leafless branches of the forest—no sun¬ il S ????
? 150 ] beam, piercing the dark veil of Om¬ nipotence, shone with exulting mockery on their cares ; but heavy drops of rain, slowly descending, seemed, like the tears of hovering angels, to iament their un¬ timely fall ; while, receding throug the valley, they cast their eyes towards the mournful turrets of St. Julien, in order to gaze, haply, for the last time, on its venerable walls. Ún arriving aííSariêy Castle, by íbe active exertions of Lord Edmond, they were not oiiïy petmitfed to sbare the same place bf confinement, but some¬ times, undera proper attendance of ar¬ chery, to pacetîhe'broad ramparts rjf the princely building, The day of trial at length 1 arrived — At an early hour, the hall, the Courte, and BVenifes^èadittg to the osarne, were thronged Ivith spëciatdr^/whoflbdked from
C W« ] from all parts of the nation, to witness the trial of the famous Black Robbkr, and his Son ; not doubting but, the same invisible agency, which, as report circu¬ lated, had so often rescued th,em from the united powers of their enemies, wouldagain interfere, ànd,by some won¬ derful means, snatch them from their present calamity. At the upper end ofthe hall, sat Lord Harley, accompanied by the first Judges and the chief NobiHty of the realm— on the right side appeared Rodolpha, shrouded in sable weeds,—her cheek pale and hollow,—her eye wildly bent on the multitude.—on the left, stood Oswold, upon whose sallow features reigned, triumphant, the malice of his heart. fAn elevation was erected at the extremity of the apartment, hemmed round by Pikemen, for foe reception of the two prisoners^ on Iwhich Ulric, with- H 4 firm
[ m ] firm, unhesitating step, attired in deep mourning,now made hisappearance,and calmly, bowing to the Judges, awaited in awful silence the result of their pro¬ ceedings. Addressing himself to St Julien, c< how shall we term you in our trial? 'enquired Lord Harley, unwilling to distinguish him by the title of Bandit Chief. " By that name, which unsullied frbm roine ancestors, has been by me disgra¬ ced " sighed Ulric— " Earl St. Julien/' tc Earl of St. Julien!" responded the court, " Alas !" continued the former, i( it is even so—the younger brother of Earl Reginald, by my parents' desire, 1 en¬ tered the Monastery of St. Gabriel, at an age so early, that I was even igno¬ rant of the extent of mine own inclina- tions—and for what motive the youn¬ ger
i; iss j ger sons of the nobiHty are thus driven^ into shameful seclusion, is but too well written in the annals ofour present era ; although, I trust, shortly to be eradi¬ cated for ever. Thus, consigned to Conventual gloom, those fetters which were intended to subdue the mind, were far, very far, from enslaving the heart ; and, devoted to the charms of Julia, the deeply wronged, Julia de Courci, I adopted such measures, to promote the weal of my passion, as,though consistent with thejgreat law of Nature,were highly repugnant to the mistaken notions of monkish fanaticism." tf That Ulric, accompanied by the angelic object of his aifection, secretly fled the the dull sameness of Conventual solitude, is well known :—but that tha bloody Ministers of vengeance,, broke ? upon bis ?????, dwelling, and dragged the shrieking,y]ct^m hg ado^ed,with ??%
? 154 1 cd and relentless hands to a death, at the bare idea of which, humanity shud¬ ders, haply, has remained, till now, un¬ folded :—although, the evidence of an injured husband's lasting triumph and tevenge, still remains, in the grassy ruins of St. Gabriel. 0 " When the heart-broken father—the despairing Widower, pressed his fever¬ ish lips to those, which had so fre¬ quently returned the kiss of virtuous affection—when he clasped the cold hand which no longer acknowledged his esteem, and, returning to his ravaged home, beheld his hearth desolate— the rude fragments of his once happy cabin converted to the gaunt wolf's lair; if then, in the Deistical phrenzy of his soul, be cursed the instruments, even of sacred punishment, the heart which kriown only to beat, for the calamities of eikers^ might bleed for him" " Thus
f lob ] "Thus then it was, that severed from all bosoms congenial to bis own—an outcast and forlorn wanderer, unloved and unregarded, still clinging to ex¬ istence, and cherishing the rash wish, of exterminating from the fece of crea¬ tion, the authors of his misery, Ulrie voluntarily consented to become an Outlaw from that society, which to him had appeared universally impious, and share the Bandit's Hfe of freedom and of peril. Aware as I am, that, for this of¬ fence, my head is subject to the axe by the violated laws ofmy Sovereign, I am willing to spare Lady Illinglairn, whoperhaps,but too justly arraigns me •as the cause of her sorrows,as a testimo¬ ny of gratitude for the past, from plun¬ ging her soul into perdition,by accusing me of a crime, of which I am innocent " At this period,Ulric,páusiag, abruptly cast his eyes towards Rodolpha, who affected at [his words, stood trembling for
? 156 ] for support against a pillar; ai length, swooning into her attendants arms, she was hastily carried from the hall.— St. Julien, noAV taking from his bosom a sealed packed, and extending it tow¬ ards- Lord Harley/' these," said he," are the documents ofmy ill-fated marriage, and the narrative of my misfortunes, written, lately, at the cell of the Hermit in the valley, wherein I resided—the former, I trust, may eventually serve to prove the rightful claim of Valentine on the lands of St. Julien, should the lat¬ ter excite sufficient interest in the breast of the king* to whose sight I am willing to hope, the respect due to the venera¬ ble house of my Fathers A will ensue its^ presentation /* €t Aud uoav, my Lord, with many thanks for the indulgance witb which I have already been favoured, one poor request remains for me to make; it k,
? 157 3 that my guiltless son may not be con- demued,til! sufiicient evidence of his ?5- ledged crime, can be obtained from more certain testimony, than Baron Os- wold's/* At these Avords, Oswold, glowing with anger, haughtily prepared to speak,. when Lord Edmond, opposing his de¬ sign, addressing himself to UJric, ex¬ claimed, " it is a melancholy satisfacti¬ on, to me, unfortunate St. Julien ! that you have so far anticipated the decision of justice, as to conceive the tme re¬ sult of her laws upon yourself—1 most •olemnly promise, with mine own hand, to lay your sad story before the Sove¬ reign—with raine own voice, should your son be proved guiltless, will 1 so¬ licit the recovery of his forfeited lands ; and, as nothing on earth is more foreign to our hearts, than to condemn the innocent, we are willing to allow yom
[ 158 J you the painful satisfaction of witnes- inghis trial ; that, as a man upon the awful wrge of eternity, although 1 still entertain great hopes, in your favour, from rojal clemency, you may judge between the accuser and the accused." Overwhelmed with efrati tu de, for such an unexampled mark of feeling and com¬ passion, Ulric incoherently poured forth liis heartfelt thanks, as the centinels were dispatched to conduct Valentine to , the hall. A solemn pause ensued previously to his arrival—during wiiicb, Ulric, forget¬ ful of his own unhappy fate, conjured up the heart-rendibg «cene of his son% separation from Issena^ perhaps for even At last he entered the hall, his cheek pale with sorrow, his eyes red with keeping over the sufferings of his disconsolate and despairing bride, and throwing himself into the arms of his Father
[ m j Father, he enquired, with a look of anguish, whether rigid fate had decided his doom ; endeavouring to deceive him, in order to buoy up his spirits, Ulric ex¬ claimed in a voice of paternal affection, * f for me, heaven has disarmed the ef¬ forts of my principal accuser ; and, for my other offences, there is much to be hoped indeed, in the clemency of the King." ReHeved by these tidings, Valentine summoned up ali his resolution, and prepared with calmness to meet the ef¬ forts of OsAVoid to destroy him. Lord Harley now breaking silence, " young man," said he, " you starfd before this awful tribunal of your country, accised of the most horrid offence in the annals of wickedness—one that steels the heart of |nfý against you, since, pitiless musrbè that heart which could perpe* trate it. Because, in defiance of every tiaturat
[ 160 ] natural tie that exist between man and man, it oversteps the limits of human nature^ and leads us to deprive a fellow creature, contrary to all law«, of that attribute whieh no mortal effort can restore. How then, shall the hands of such an offender presume to raise themselves in supplication for mercy r when they themselves knew it not, as the wretched Victim sank beneath their: bloody and remorseless stroke?" , "1 advance these enquiries not so much to aggravate the tortures, which if guilty, must speak unto you despair— if innocent, wound your bosom beyond the power erf retribution, as forcibly to impress npon the minds ofthe multitude which stands about us, the enormity of the crime laid to your charge^—for which no earthly sacrifice can atone,- no hu¬ man attempt can wipe frbm thç page of infamy.. " Were
I 161 j 4t Were I to judge by the compo¬ sure, and steady sorrow, so unlike guilt* imprinted or your features, or the pe¬ culiar circumstances attending your accusation, I might at once be taught, perhaps unjustly, to pronounce you in¬ nocent : but the deep disguises in which criminality ever attires itself, forbid me to fulfil so desirable an office ; I must, therefore, proceed to the regular admi¬ nistration of the law, and decide accord¬ ing to its conclusions, however repug¬ nant they may prove to my own hopes and wishes. .*' Valentine now underwent a formal examination, in which the perfidious Oswold produced sucli glaring testimo¬ nies and witnesses of his guilt, f hat Lord Harley, with a look which proclaimed at once his disappointment and regret, cohjured him to confess, not only the crime, but the cause, which, at so early an
? 168 3 an age^ could have induced him to commit it 6 "Itis too evident, my Lord'exclaim- ed Oswold, proudly, vvhiie a smiie of malicious triumph gilded his fiendlike features, " that from no other motive but that which led him to seduce from her home, the youdifu! Lady Issena, he was compelled to sacrifice to his infa¬ mous stratagems, the uncomeniing; parent. " "I am innocentas hea ven,of this diabo¬ lical deed, my Lord," cried Valentine, "the Baron Oswold too, knows me inno¬ cent—but, unfortunately, to acquit me, would be, to condemn himself—if tiierefore, 1 must be devoted to his hate, let the heavy hour of punishment for my ^wrongs, be left to thai righteous Judge,0n whom, in my d}in^ noments, I shall call ; but, one effort yet ¿ttmains to
Γ 163 Τ to preserve me ^ Issena is within these turrets, haply her evidence ------ ¿—" "Is it no^snfficient, my Lord, that he thus confesses, as it were, the act, " in¬ terrupted Oswald, rising from his seat, tc but one whose mind is poisoned by the contamination of his own* must be suffered to interpose. * f Nothing is sufficient while a vestige of doubt remains ; " observed Lord Harley, with an air of coldness,—and turning to the guard desired that Issena might immediately be conducted to the ball. With trembling step, and supported by her faithful Annette, Issena, made her appearance ψ the rose no longe* trtaft'rted on hér cheek— ibe fire of youth ?? longer beamed in her lustreless eye ; but cold, and almost senseless as marble, in
[ 164 J in a state bordering upon despair, she mutely listened to the enquiries of Lord Harley, but unable, from excessive ter¬ ror and weakness, to form a reply, her distress became insupportable, and sink¬ ing senseless in the arms of Annette, she was reconducted to her couch. For want of sufficient witnesses, Lord Harley, ???? proposed to dismiss the cause of Valentine, till the ensuing day, when Issena might be capable of produ¬ cing that evidence, on which, it seemed, the unfortunate youth had built his hopes of acquittal. Instead however, of afford¬ ing the good which the benevolent in¬ stigator of the design had expected^— time added materially to the success of Oswold's stratagems ; and,on the follow¬ ing morning, returning with fjesh testi¬ mony of Valentine's guilt; afforded by a pretended Monk, who, unseen on the declivity of the mountain, solemnly avowed
? 165 3 avowedbimself, before heaven, to have witnessed the murder of Lady Matilda, which he pronounced to have been per¬ petrated by, tfie accused person before th£ present fribunal. " Is it not singular»" said Lord Har¬ ley, ,f that, till tidsperiod, you have held the transaction so profound a se¬ cret. " " Owing, I doubt not, to the interpo¬ sition of that High power,which permits not guilt to go unpunished," continued thç diaboHcal monk, "ami now ena¬ bled to make this testimony, which has for a length of time, sorely oppressed my mind. Overcome by the horror of the scene, at the moment of Baron Os¬ wold's attempting to rescue Lady Matil· da,a sudden dizziness invaded my facul¬ ties, and I sank senseless to the earth— on recovering, the persons, strangers to mine
[ 166 J mine eyes, had vanished ; by what title then, could the criminal be accused? or if accused, how discovered?—was it probable, the ear of Justice would hé open to the vague story of a poor and wan dering Monk, that existed on the charity of others—but mark how Provi¬ dence interferes ! happening, this very morning to solicit alms atthe doors of Oswold Castle, the circumstance of the murder, being fresh in my mind, I related it to the Vassal who adminis¬ tered to my wants,—I perceived that his eye beamed with unusal satisfaction as I spoke, and conducting me to his Lord, he bade me again repeat my story, in his presence—the Baron then requested me to attend the trial thit morning—1 have obeyed his cimmand and here, again, solemnly proclaim thii youth to be the murderer. ** "Atas!*** sighed Lord Harley, <é it grieve·
[ 167 J grieves me, deeply, to gather from every Hp, fatal facts, which alike tend to con¬ vince us of Valentine's guilt; I confess tbat, yesterday, I cherished great hopes of seeing him honourably ac¬ quitted, but the evidence of tbis new witness confounds me ; and, dreadful as ihe task is, imposed upon me, 1 am bound to pronounce bim guilty ; how¬ ever, for the honour of his noble house, I shall date seven days from hence, as the dark period, which must resign, not only him, but his father, to the heads¬ man's stroke." ·* But for Issena —my poor broken¬ hearted Issena^—" ejaculated Valentine. " Issena," cried the exulting Oswold* 4< can return to that mansion, which sbe so rashly deserted." " I u Famous accuser " interupted Val¬ entine
[ «β» 3 lentine " never again shall ihy base persecution harrow up her spotles bo¬ som ; sooner shall these hands vvith their dyinsr grasp be steeped in herunoffeu- ding blood—what avails it, proud Athe¬ ist, if at this hour you triumph over ray innocence? with a christian consola^ tion, such as thine iron heart can never feel, I look forward toa day of glorious judgment, when I shall rise supreme, and thou in the presence of that Being, who now witnesses thy malice, shalt sink to irremediable perdition. Fulfil then the measure of thy crimes,; arid ?\? meto the axe; thou canst not cast iky spells about my soul—thou canst not snatch from the icy jaws of Death thy slumbering victims—for tiiis, bear witness invisible God ! 1 am grateful:— Oswold 1 go, the blue thunderbolt, is already steeping in the vengeance of Ounipotence, and die unconquerable baad which forged it, prepares to hurl ií
Γ 169 1 it vvith indignation on thee. " " My l^rd Harley " cried OsAvoid, * r I stand here for justice—not to oppose ihe ran¬ corous tbrcatnigs of a base, detected assassin ; that he is about to meet the reward his wickedness merits, is not sufficient; I demand the restoration of my Ward. ** Valentine sank on the shoulder of an Archer for support;—Lord Harley noted the phrenzied conflict of his con¬ vulsed soul, and casting towards him a look of benign commisseratioa, then turning to OsvvoId,he exc!aimcd,<?oIcmu- ly, " those whom God hath joined together, let no man put asunder; while Valentine exists-, what authority will sanction any claim, but his, on the Lady Issena, to whom he is lawfully united according to the sacred com¬ mands of the Church ; and at his death, sliould he consign her to my charge, rigid indeed must be the mandate whicii vol ? 1 a» ill
? 170 ] '? Wffl cèmpel me tô surrender sher to «néther. *' í . · |( > . ^ <#IHA tben lawful/'contianed Owv^kl, ^fnfiomly^to seduceau Heiress fmm her fí pirot«<^iön? and can such* marriages too, 8 be deeibed legal ? if so,shame upen your laws/*' **??*?? knowledge" replied Lord flarley, tf 1s#ena is tto Heiress, and con¬ sequently, by her mother's death, wn§ at liberty to decide upon her own ac- tltííis— -dreadful recollection ! I know ?? vrhat evils this pecuiiarcírcumstonéc f they have already effected 4 —is it fe, Bterén ©sìvòld, yon have accomplished ffiépu^jïose;for which, wtth ihb feelings ^òTtíh^bdaèteable maiiiyonetote^d ttós hah, end I trust, fmr conselenw will ftévie¥ ccise ? appWid the ítboÖ¥^s ^??1 ÏctttMèd ^ur^ednteetj t>^*«it nié igea» to ???;"1?$?$ ìm»ffh»-
[ m ] ry claim upon Issena, isr absurd, andfif from this moti ve you were induced, ac¬ cording to reports, to attack the Castle of 'SL Julien, tis well for thee its Chief¬ tain was an.Outlaw.; " since, the king sanctions no feud of his Barom, nor defends the infringed rights which pri¬ vate rancour has forfeited. "With these words, Lord Harley waved his hand for Valentine to be reconducted to his pri» *on-*-and turning indignantly from Os¬ wold, qnitted tbe assembly. Ulric, who, from excessive debility, became incapable» on the second day, of eutering the hall, was reclining on bis paUet, as Valentine returned ; Isserà fop, kneeling before the crucifix* sjp- ported by Annette, Avas oíS^rbíg^lent prayers for his preservatipn—ta di*ad «deuce succeeded liis entrance ; ca^liçye ,wa%ifirectea<tø his featurçi^be Mt$S* g\$dk to illumine them \yjtb ? . smile-^but : 1 2 ala»
l 172 ] alas! no sound of acquittal escaped hi» lips, as taking Issena iu his arms, he ad¬ dressed hcr in a strain of cheerful ten¬ derness, and extending his hand ib tJIriCjbesought him to trust in heaven. "Let us die, " cried Issena, in tt tone of hollow miserj^, " let us die to * gether. " <? ? my Issena ! wound me not with impious proposals "exclaimed the youth, f( that Deity who gav;c us existence, has assuredly the best right to dispose of ns as his infinite wisdom directs—let us banish the remembrance of our cares, $nd talk of those immprtal joys, which will speedily exalt us beyond earthly an¬ guish—let us dwell with pious grati¬ tude pn the felicities of past days, and above all rejoice, that, however misfor¬ tune may have attended our earthly ca- rccr, vve have never endeavoured to de¬ serve
? 173 ? ser /e it." In this manner did becs- say to exhilirate the drooping spirits òf his Bride and Father—but in vain ; the hroker.-hearted Ulric, subdued bý the calamitous destiny of his son, refused all consolation, and sinking as it were, into a torpid si rrow,resigned himself to woe ; while Issena, more alive to the acuteness of misery, still cherished vague and fan¬ tastic hopes, which, leading hcr to the terrifying verge of conviction, left her to the nameless torture of dark despair. The midnight clock had toHed, and the unfortunate family of St. Julien were still seated near each other, con¬ versing on the objects of all their pre¬ sent tares, Rodolpha and Oswold, as the door of their prison hastily unclosed, and Lord Harley, enveloped in a dark mantle, suddenly stood before them. Ulric "he exclaimed," by a letter,which ï have just received from Lady fllin- I 3 ghdrn
[ m ] glaîril, shé acknowledges the injustice of hcr conduct towards you; aud avows herself the murdereress of Donalvin-—I shell lose no tinrfe therefore ί» Λ pleading: for your forgiveness before the throne ; bul, for yoar uihappySon, evidences so strongly conspire to prove hiai too guilty of an unpardonable offenbe, that I cannot presume to become his advocate—in compassion however, for his'yonlb, bis contrition, and his suf¬ ferings, 4 í have/ secretly cômrhând'ed one of my fleetest horses to be in rea¬ diness át the castie gate/ his 4 prisbW dooiVàre open, and under cof ert öf ' tfiè inghiaile may escape. ' '" ì^atilnstant UïrïC and Issena Were" atueaëèofîJpM Hkrîey; ??& «0 thVfr ^åtifude', ås to some Dí^ftrity which bad rescued them froni perdition ; wjpt· Vajesi^c, ga^in^ on s ???> in Avildnese
ím.} wildness, regained m iti ί ???? ti^u^ : ·- . · 't fixedto íhCíeartb,,:/sw.' s* ^sšs.vi f 'l>s ^ Fly ¡my Son íf cried ???/ ??^?? İS jUSt ?: f ? Flf,0 íly! my befoved>Vsle^a^,y- exclaimed ????? ?- ?? ? shajl somé Mf r meetagain/ì r, í-ysyr ? .vs ; í · iss I^iie ; as death, he ? gft^ed ???? ber^ apdten^riy raising |ier ip his^rtis, "what avails it Issena ?''s^id he,"whçíher 1 lead,thelifeof an outcast, s^papte f%nji't||e.-dearest o^|çtsyûf esiite^ng^ or die?—by meanly^ seekjpg. ? ??1^? ?, flight, I should pronounce myself the wretch 1 am ; not—pardon m^ my Lord apd ihink - ?? not ¡ undese^ipg J^ur^ goqduess^ ül forbear t^ ^çge^t thf| terms ?? offer.'* ? ». ...l :., '..■.'., ; Vt Üíiacívised Bôy r * cried UÍrié *?? ? " mandate
;. r u 1 I mandate af thei ^w cannot be recalled, and inevitable destruction awaits your stay; fly then, I implore, 1 ??????? ?????." "Shall l foen desert thee,my father î my Issena too—shall 1 think so mean¬ ly of roy f God, that hß buffers the guilty to triumph and the innocent to fall un¬ regarded,?^—torture me no longer with your intreaties and remonstances —I will not hence, though in the event I peribh." ? Peaf fo tbeir intreaties, he flung bim- sejf øn a couch ; Issena's tears, which never, tijl ØU moment, w au ted influence to cpmuvaud his actions, were qf no ? ' * ;iviuï ; at Jengtb, with increasing inter¬ est in ( his behalf, Lord Harley departed from the prison, and dispatching Jiis eldest son with secret accounts fo the ?ί?Γ / J f \ i* * "J *J '- King, looked anxiously forward to the result
C m j result of his embassy. The fatal day however, which Avas to consign TJIric and his innocent Son to the block, arri¬ ved without his return, and Lord Har- ley| imagined that the Sovereign, With* holding his forgiveness, detained bis Son, till the execution should bè con¬ cluded, asa testimony ofhis disappro¬ bation and displeasure, at the interfe¬ rence. ' The earliest dawn of light'Witnessed tbe hall again crouded to ' excess with spectators,—among which appeared Oswold and his retinue, attired in splen- did appaici, as for some bridal ban¬ quet. At the upper end of the apart- mení, a scaffold, covered wittt black velvet, Was erected for tbe victims' f óti Which stood the Headsman.whh the axe in horiid readiness to perform its bloody office. Beneath an elevated cano¬ py, corresponding witb the sable hué øf
{ Ws 5 bt thè ??????, tíhrbviâéd^n 1 félórai "títéeat, appeared thè fetöify öf í[ tmu Hëriey^hiriWélfttfeè piciire ? ???, ^tìkbuÉy Wtólhing^toh iDdittileÄMife aè it èútmm îhe pfecê, 'stffl cherin íi% the^hopè orøoyal párdob. '' lì Tbe ?? lóffitìg örf i^he tah : é« r bdL 'Boit >mclaf^ed : tb^ ?????? öf tìie crinàináis.aríd thè distant shrfek of lise- nay aö^tdiéd áway ambng ?? e^ten- sî^e^àllè^^^f ?? pile, 'blànëhed ^the cheék, and chilled alike tbe blood, of age and youth. ^«??? orii e *v» t * - s , - ,.*</- r * ^IíítóNWthfirm ¥tëp, nøw ascended tøea^fPlAda-Withil^k of calm i«áíí- ????????^?? the ekemiãobè* tôiÔ tí^4«*iMtede ;-^-on<?e, ?? totóié ?? .m^éïtefe^f appearanee of 0$$? ???^????, a smile of 4cork cust «a %1èíUfeiAâf5^ glèam ??!?* hfe features ; wherv,wuddènìy extending his habdjhe ■**' " assisted
f >VP ] psiá^ 1 ?^^?? ????^-?:^ ifa ??? lappeani % çry of ,J|sijes f s s , : ^n|i f pjty¿Jjiirst frqqi, the crpwdj, wbu>, \\ψ $Mm§î g^e rjy^tted towards tfee, dppç, b^Fjfe^ithat, in the suffe.rings.of tss^ na, he hadeptirely forgotten the almost instant fate which awaited himself. At ths sight of Ins woeworn cpnj^tenarice, whi^h &£ firequenpy raised to bcaven in -siletit siipplication-T-and in considera- tipii pf kk nntimely f|dl, all eyes, save those of Oswold and hiß, attendants, * -"■ ■» ι ?. -t'* r*· * ** were utoistene(J with»tea^|, Afters, dreadful panse, thp exepij* tioiipr, being pfeppeg,',9i strsgg% of aj^tiqø çnWed between th|b|st^E m$ tbemy,^) being sdikg, nnwiljinf ts wkn^s^the^ other's death, ^??? ??- l4?níi«e, rushing tow,a|dl th# r tdpcfe, #- sired the Headsman to strike at once; Ji^^pjbrifo c^i%dwiih ^?!,??$<1 tepidly uppri Jiirø* ι^ίί ^t t |ns^ ... ** * the
í iso ] thë^y b^^idld! iw mercy fcMl^cfthöéfl thrb 1 thé*å11,örld a Matron^f ???? ??- p^ëafotor acroihpnttied^y ^peasknto^ Ibrëïqg hfer waý afirföst^fte * hofenrd» threw f bersëlf at Lord Harley '^*et, aiid nitrefttedhim to AVitli-boldtbé'^ieííiittôn. At this, a painful, yet pleasing sus¬ pense,* of ?κφβ kna feal \ rushed »'thf ftigb thè bosom òf spectator afld 4icüirii, While angrily risibg from Jiis seat; ÓWôJd, in a voice of hoarseness, enquired by what kew artifice tfte punishmeht n of the Criminals was delayed; and feommaiuji- ed, Üfâtsibce they had alike be^h cou- demífédto suffer, bý the justl lavrs^of thefr ¿oitftry, no farther fotéWtìptibns might be permitted, " The Mood/* be fcriedL ré offoy tuutderefl telative/ calk Woud'for vengeance/' * ;> Lord Hàiïey interrupted, &? hyl a * iÉofeiëntaî^ delay r of justke^%sbM *e, i»
? ? ] * t in tbc couriø of innumerably isstaf r €£s,vV&eotììd save but ono ????^?^??*· tun, the attempt would l?e^ ??|?!? ¿w* Warded; therefore, let us^ieai&en-to lhe wotds ofthis unknown . petitioner. wbicl), perhapsj may lead to unexpected g°°d." • ( In it not sufficient, that lifcye.costt- pfed, thus long, with these delayi?*' enr- quis?ed Oswold, <c let me have justice." , "If Heayèn be wilHngjthou ahalt ha^e justice,r^lentless Bardu/' criedftbe veil¬ ed lady, proudly rising, and tiirt>wiíbg ^off her disguiseibetrayed to the astonish¬ ed multitude thefcatures of ñfyíüda ƒ. A ghastly hue of dismay, at th isi un¬ expected sight, overspread Oswold's countenance—Lord Harley commanded tb&outer doors to be immediately closed iñ order to prevent hit escape, and tb&t *, of
•. of^Ìi|ii : .^s!tìg. Po i n|<.; > wbHe,^alentii|.fe :^çUvPio^iWîfo., |8§?? :! ????{?8§| .¡íp^h^í/ ???^??^ triumphantly .feearipg^^ef tlirøugti sthe yiei^ingxrpwd, placed.^"f 011 ythg bosom pf her Mother, ; , ^ ?, s> ι AtctWs instant, as if fote> resoIvej(|fo tepaylthe i^jííriessh^ h^ b^ap^^upon the femilj^of ißt, ; ^uiien^ s^ç> vfr #18^" sed herself to scatter manifold hiessings, a< |Coui:ierH#ra ving froni court, piesent¬ ed fo tjyM ? Barley ? ? packet, pu ? ?? w^cb^b^exclajmed^wit^ ; : ^bei^øofiiiiwed, ;;fi^ sjufleîfog^ an d persecujtions. " At sthese flew again to ?|5$ '?^?:- ?$ ??$-, caught fos fiither in his a r neis ; bnt alas ! ;^seiis^less : p| , ,pf ; ; tJJjjjjig ;|f|s ï:i Jej^ ; |;fo * .feiifçon^^ii^on mmm' ;: ■.*'■■ v ■ : ,' : "■ -s ■' '*■ hand ,
[ 183 3 bandito longer returned fbe warm pres¬ sure f óf delighted affection-^-oppressed beyond human endurance ? the ??? ofhissòn, the only child of die tainted J$ia,* just ready to receive the filial stroke of the Executioner, it had rent asunder the cordage of animation, and ???? bereaved of his bodily and liis mental faculties, * he stodd the pale η&ά stiffened image of mute despair. «. 't StiH, Valentine called loudly on his imme—still he tenderly exckinied fo hurried accents, " revive l· tevive^ my Father!**—as slowly the vital »spark ire- kindled—whieh Lord Ikrley observing*, commanded the attendants' ??$?% lo donveybim to his conch, «and fose ^ho tune in hastening to the nearest Monas¬ tery for medical assistance, * Issena, now recovering ftom * bii* swodn^ and perceivings lierself.Jn-ttife arms
arms of her long lost Mother, naturally imagined her own spirit had winged its flight from the realms of mortality, till undectCA^ed by Lady Matilda, she was on the point of relapsing into her former slate, as a violent flood of tears, afforded timely relief to her overcharg¬ ed bosom. In a few moments t^ey were joined by Valentint?, with the in¬ telligence of St Julien's visible amend¬ ment—imagination only can pouitray the meeting of transport between Isse¬ na, Matilda, and Valentine ; but the latter, stiH mindful of his Father's suf¬ ferings, repaired to him again, as Lord Harley reqnesied Lady Matilda to in¬ dulge the assembly with the account of her absence and sudden re-appearance, after being so long thought dead. "All-seeing heaven was merciful ! my Lord/* said Matilda, "in rescuing me from the jaws of horrible destruetym." On
? I8á j " Ön falling from the cliff, to whicb I had been deluded by Oswold, iinder * ' l * χ the plausible pretext of searchiifg for Issena, my garments, arrested by the wild briars, prevented me from being killed, in descending from the immense height. ------ " if " Are you then assured " enquired Ivord Harley, " that Valentine is in no- cent, of even attempting ttrcommit' tlie crime, which has been aiiedgfed against him? " "As I am tbat I still exist, 'my Lord/' continued Matilda, " but to proceed ; severely bruised in my perilous descf»nf 3 and feint with the loss of blood, tho' ndt so deeply wounded, I had scarcely suf¬ ficient strength to secrete myself in a crevice of the rocks, ere I fainted,—on recovering, from my deep swoon, I eonjd diitinctly Itcar the attendants of Oswold
[ lg& ] oswold m quest ofme. At midnight; í fled iniotlie woods, as far my weak state AVouid permit, till almost expiring * Avith hunger, I sank at the door of ä s'^'tarj coitage,the inhabitant of whicli> though a long period of derangement, occasioned by a violent fever, that followed my excessive exertions, has benevolently attended me, and, witb her ovvn hand, administered to my neces¬ sities. Some little time since, reason, A with the bitter reeollectionof my wrongs my child—my woes, returned ¿ atid ï resolved, accompanied by Bandetta, to throw myself at thé feet of the Eing; whenthe news of Valentine's triabbeing communicated to my Hostess, by one of Oswold's creatures, I lost no time ia repairing to this Castle, in order io save him from shameful death, in which í have but timt ly succeeded/* **0» recollection ** exclaimed Lord Harley
I iàrîeyy àéáreléi ng blrñsélf to ????^ Avtó hadfetired from his^seíat, endeavour^ ^ ing fo eseapethe bbssrvatiqnbknd irt^* suHsMtbe peop!e/ t I understood that the body öfLady Pitó Aluiv ??$ discovered among tlie rocks, and\ : coiivey«d'to'^he^ Castlé'-forhitérmeutl" rr ? that chamber ! ? * ejaèttfet&d Iisseet; rc What ciiamber ? *' enquired Lor<Í Harley. '*' ''r.. · : ' < ■·' >■''■' -:.''.'' ' · : ■· ■_■;■"■'■ " '.'■■■'"■■■ ■■*■ .'ƒ■ f 0u# in ^e nprihern,, wing off^ í the C^fle^tny Lotól> through wW^ my^f and'Aitoettesj. 'vendeavonring^ítO/^ap^i : . dippiftered ^«ight of ?????./* ;j ;.s ryiy '".'■' MVVhat šigb^ Lady ? *^ hù ^. w-^-ï fl' l' ïï 1 ?"' ' .f '·* ? ''- .'. í -'-'S : -'S *.'■ ?? 't' \'ïb *■■'· ?.* ?/' ;' ^C|n,s.|ndeçc>ucyu Jay a mu^derçd corse ; n^yer sj^lf ? for¬ get the sensation İ experienced on be¬ holding it; the dreadful recollection st?:.-cbilb'œ^ ■ '?.'" ; :?/' ..■·■' ■ features .'
[ ?? ] features, as I gözed upon tbem, by the ditìi ìit>iit of 'die lamp, are still present in 1 lay ftimd'á eye ; so ghastly í so Hvid ! ,v i r 1 ?~*» * * *" \ "Surely this must have beci, Leqppl^i's body, '* exclaimed Bcndetta. rr WhoAvas Leopold? and who art th ou ? that seemetl* thus faraiiíá ? with the secrets of Oswold ? '' enouirel Lord Harley. t» » · ** Leopold was an unlucky attendant ori 1 the Baron's pleasure " replied Ben* detta ¿-^murdered in some nocturnal revet, by whos§ band it were hard ίο íèH # * Fpr myself, my Lord, I am an linfortunate victim too, of his crimes;^— ldn¿tias my bre^tiiig fieari laboured .?- neath tlie pressure of its burthen; hmt røéUien, Qïbear me relate a dark ¿ui ?? ::u\ ÇMt m r> '»-.V / « ., m ?< ? ^?>%
[ 189 3 to unfold. Some years since, 1 1 lived in a little cabin in the woods, with, mv husband ;—heaven looked kindly on our labours, and we were happy ; filinone fatal day, a gay Cavalier cai Hug at onf cottage, enquired the nearest way to the Castle inhabited by Baron. Fitz Alan." - . *'My husband, poor man !,little ihinking ofthe sorrows that would here¬ after betide himself, offered to conduct the Stranger on bu way ; but, as night "was falling, begged hirh to tarry in the cabin till daybreak—unluckily for üs, he complied—on thé follovving morning however, accompanied by tny husband, the Baron, for it was indeed Oswold, " J r y < , «^» x * > m left the cottage ; in a short tíme Rfieu- ben returned, quite åh altered man; the promises of OsAyøJdf, vvith, the dis¬ play of his wealth, hád entirely changed the latters disposition—the dwélmg tn which
Γ ï190 ì vyhich we bad been so ¿lfippy», ?? tje- comv* hateful, and.hisjal^our ?????- soílif ; he was no bnger^irid te røe^#s usud!^ but loved to si} in t\\t Ayqod| f a f n.d isiiniüate atone—till Oswolj| retiir^e^l ; ??????? welcomed hiai wjth eagsi|qg$s, íjiiid they ^ agam went put v>f togel^^r. From this period, weeks would elapse vvithout my Reuben's coming to his ???? ; I ???? perceíve by*his manners, aH wm not right at the lieert; remou- strances however, were of no avail, ? oue day, suddenly entering ?%?*?, aud saluting me with his former marks of kiradoees· " Bepdettal " said he, « I ^I!l, from Jjm moment, pursue my jac- ciÎStomed labaur »ndquit { you np mpml* IU rqtotîne^l ¡tm to his^ro^fee; .tøyjt ?!??! some* secret grief pre) ed ?? his heart, till at length, taking to bit deatk bed, he informed* me> in hb dy- b^nioiReiila, that deluded by ?? spe¬ cious whiles ef Oswold, he bad assisted -ι! in
? 191 J ? nfe'murdér of ?? Alan, aiid ! poin£- ????????\И on Which 1t* J had tëkèn $??— ? 1? the hollow of a beech tree** éctb&ffîti&Îte," by the tuiiVs of the ok Âbbëy,ypii will find, eveft rïow, ??- wdfffá ßlooÜy dagger and gauntlet, wteVnay "éerVe äs evidences W fiù gutfi "when ï afe nb mote?* ""Manîâc ! '*?????!^??(1, dråvt- iilg his sword and rfehing furitøbfy towards 1?èndetta,"thou liest ! tHe damn¬ ing í êvídéncèè í are not there. " '" It totnu· then ·* replied ?? lliirky, calmly, " that they were there ! let the 1???? ??? be arresta íitlhe «ìngS name—ptóëed, ß'eriäetta, Mth thý ????. ? ' ihi ?*'?? a short period, ?? hma* Rheu- be» braitfeed^ bis last, and I endea- vtmrod to fulfil feis request of accusing *. the
? Î93 ? (İve assassinami thespies of OswoM were uïiconstairtly about me, that it was im¬ possible. In this wanner t became Â 1 daily witness to horrible atroetfies,tiH sh#fï3y after tbe time, in whkh Lady f sfeeua was conducted to my cottage by Woudenberg, 1 sncceeded in affecting mycâcape to tbe deserted habitation m which Lady Fitø Alan also ^oagbt refuge from pruel persecution* Os¬ wold speaks trulli, when he repeats that the evidences of bis guilt are no longer in the beech tree, under foe idea of shortly proclaiming bim to 'the world, I have removed thera / J * ? Lord Harley now desiring Lady Ma¬ lfida, Issena, and Bendetta, to Irith tíraw,commšmded not only Oswoid and the perfiduous Monk io be loaded with chains, buí the whofe retinue to tò rm- prisoned tiU the pleasure* of tííé fân^ could be known; but, as the Guards 1 * wèNt
[ tus ? ^ere^ conducting .them :tL$$sg^ ft» «coife of the enraged maltinte* ,νΑ?φ could scarcely be rest raia ed * fro nqhetip? itig ? HMÍigUêtioo op their b^sd% Oe^o!d*itddeníy drew forth a dagger fronrbb mafUle, and buried it ip>tøp own b^irt t ; 4he pikemøu now ???&? ed him to hm dungeon, on the cold payement bf whiehj ???? groans a^4 execrations, helin^critt^ly eicgired» . 'r Letus now return to Ulric, who, as L$rd^ Ifar ley entered this apartment, vps leaning ??^?? shoulder of his son, attended by the faithful Gregory, am! a venerable Monk, from a neigh bour- ing/Priory, ^drøinstcring coníiolatíon to tjîs.woijinded souh The psllid hue. of díl|fi}}jtip^^at ρ» bis hollow cheek, wljij^ttb^^dîwess of hfe once beaming ey^s, b^foî^ that the emoticms of tjbaf ???1«?!?? 5 «?' w ,r| bgtr ???\\?% the fO%ni. ? latent
C m j latent and invisible fire that nourished them; but that gliding rapidly from its narrow channel, the sand of life was closing the short, yet perilous career, the period of whi determinates alike the woes—the joys—the wanderings of man. As Lord Harley approached .the couch, a faint and melancholy smUe qf grateful acknowledge ment, cast a mo¬ mentary glow over the calm features of the dying Ulric ; but, in an instant, his eyes were again rivetted towards the ex¬ alted Crucifix and Chalice, which the Monk heid in his hand—his senses ap¬ peared in disorder—a hectic flush beam¬ ed upon his cheek—"Julia!'' he ex¬ claimed " the hour is at length arrived— our Son h preserved—I come—haill scenes of brightness ! glorious shadows ! hail l'*—the death rattìe now sounded in hi» throat, wbile, extending his bands towards heaven» he expired with a smile, in the arms of Valentine—so calm
? 195 3 calm, so mild, was the last effort that for some moments they conckded he had only fainted from weakness ; on per¬ ceiving, hovvever, that all hope of re- animation was lost, Valentine threw himself upon the body and, scarcely could the tears and intreaties of his lø¬ sena, induce him to desert it. Thus died, lamented by the tears of affection and compassion, J Ulric the Black Robber —may his virtues be imi¬ tated by those who condemn his vices ; —^and may his misfortunes be deemed m sufficient atonement, at that awful aud certain day of Judgement, vyhen Prin¬ ces and Vassals shall be equally consig¬ ned to punishment, or rewarded, as tbeir merits or crimes deserve, Ulric was interred in the same grave, with Julia at the valley ; the spot is sacred, and cottage Maidens still fove, ip ijs ro¬ mantiek retirement, to listen to the ? enamoured
(y Π» J enamoured tale of Ilié woodland^mití^ who vows therein to be-IaftbfoliasiC/bie ßßVie'J&tia. .'■ '.'r'"' : ■■ ::í - ';:--■'■■; >. t.T ' ; í./' - ; ; - .•■/'■ ; -'·"' ; >■■■'■ : " ■ '· "·: " .¿.? - ■ · 'j.· I *» ' e*·*·« The Vulture hath Imig siwtíe fotìsted on the hearts of Oswold and the false Moniti w bösebeads; ñtéd on the * bat- tlê^bntf Of theCastle which itíinesseÜ iheir^Mndémnatio^ remained for years a- dmadliil cmiv&tlontb impious mhe« lievers ; pronou<icmg,that the vengeance of thè offended bánd bf ProvidrøQe^isai «ÔUtóWabieas tbc bour of ?^?????? ?:'-?? ; -~/? ??, :. . //.s-.-' 1 / [:??? U Valentíne ?? ímena^íkiwards fcil »nd Counters :iöf"" i8t, ■ dvli^b^find^^fiit ??- by a gráut from thè fCtftgf who rcceiviul them on the presentation søf the good Lord Harley, into bis gracious favour, recovered possession of their extensive estates, at wbicb tliey áBIr- natelyresiddl,-—bappy initio éomìèif, of each otiier—bicsficd ?? ¿ ? ????* roas
f 19? 1 lions and lovely offspring, and beloved by all who knew them. Lady Matilda, at a good old age, after becoming a grateful observer of their felicity, ex¬ pired in their arms. Annette and Isidore, being united» M Uie death of Gregory, who did not fong survive his Master^ became steward and housekeeper &t St. Julien's ;— beneath the walls of which, in the presence of Issena, the aged Claribel breathed her last ! Floranthe consented to take charge of Castle Fifa Alan ; and Bcndetta, by ber own request, entered boarder at a Monastery of grey Sisters,—from whick she frequently visited tbe hospitable mansions of Valentine and Issena: ever ?????? receive her. itFhen Rodolpha wa$ informed of SL Jüîîen's death, though secure from the punishment inflicted by tbe laws of the neighbouring
? 198 "] neighbouring kingdom, she could not escape the tortures of her own guilt ν conscience; aud, shutting herself up in her apartment, she refused all conso¬ lation ; tili at length, her mental faculties unable to support the oppression under v/hich they laboured, became deran¬ ged. For hoars would she sit on the iloor of Ulric's chamber, and rending the glossy naglets of hcr hair, reason with tri« arci;· ing spirit; or, shrieking vvitb terror, sHp her ears, and hide her eves from the reproachful ghost of Donalvin ; at last, outstripping the speed of hcr attendants, in a fit of phrenzy, she threw herself from the beetling cliif into the lake, and perished :■—the Mariner cautiously avoids the fatal spot, for barks are wrecked there, and the grey ghost of Rodolpha, tis said, haunting the wave-beat caverns, howls ín the mid¬ night blast, the name of ULRIC,
Thm
? 199 ] Thus ends my unskilful narrative of olden times. It shews that true earthly happiness is not attainable—that guilt can oniy prosper for a time ; and, that there is no path which eventually leads to peace, but the one of rectitude ; by which, through the benign intercession of a blessed REDEEMER, we may hope to attain not only pardon for our offences in this World, but, by true re¬ pentance, an immortal Crown of never- fading glory, in the WORLD TO COME. Conclusion. ■■ M ' - 'l.l ι ii H .I Those who expect to find a variety of unnatural circumetances,recorded in the pages of tliese volumes, will be disap¬ pointed. They contain nothing but vvhat might naturally transpire in the scenes of actual life. N»
