V A T H E K 



AN ARABIAN TALE. 



BY 



WILLIAM BECKFORD, ESQ. 



WITH NOTES, 



CRITICAL AND EXPLANATORY. 



LONDON: 

RICHARD BENTLEY, 8. NEW BURLINGTON STREET 

(SUCCESSOR TO HENRY COLBURN): 

BELL AND BRADFUTE, EDINBURGH} 

GUMMING, DUBLIN; AND 

GALIGNANI, PARIS. 





VAT HER. 



VATHEK, ninth caliph of the race of the Abassides, was 
the son of Motassem, and the grandson of Haroun al 
Raschid. From an early accession to the throne, and the 
talents he possessed to adorn it, his subjects were induced 
to expect that his reign would be long and happy. His 
figure was pleasing and majestic : but when he was angry, 
one of his eyes became so terrible, that no person could 
bear to behold it ; and the wretch upon whom it was 
fixed, instantly fell backward, and sometimes expired. For 
fear, however, of depopulating his dominions, and making 
his palace desolate, he but rarely gave way to his anger. 

Being much addicted to women and the pleasures of the 
table, he sought by his affability to procure agreeable com- 
panions ; and he succeeded the better as his generosity 
was unbounded and his indulgences unrestrained : for he 
did not think, with the Caliph Omar Ben Abdalaziz, that 
it was necessary to make a hell of this world to enjoy pa- 
radise in the next. 

He surpassed in magnificence all his predecessors. The 
palace of Alkoremi, which his father, Motassem, had 
erected on the hill of Pied Horses, and which commanded 
the whole city of Samarah, was, in his idea, far too scanty: 
he added, therefore, five wings, or rather other palaces, 
which he destined for the particular gratification of each 
of the senses. 

In the first of these were tables continually covered with 



2 VATHEK. 

the most exquisite dainties ; which were supplied both by 
night and by day, according to their constant consumption ; 
whilst the most delicious wines and the choicest cordials 
flowed forth from a hundred fountains that were never 
exhausted. This palace was called The Eternal or unsa- 
tiating Banquet. 

The second was styled The Temple of Melody, or The 
Nectar of the SouL It was inhabited by the most skilful 
musicians and admired poets of the time ; who not only 
displayed their talents within, but dispersing in bands 
without, caused every surrounding scene to reverberate 
their songs, which were continually varied in the most 
delightful succession. 

The palace named The Delight of the Eyes, or The Sup- 
port of Memory, was one entire enchantment. Rarities, 
collected from every corner of the earth, were there found 
in such profusion as to dazzle and confound, but for the 
order in which they were arranged. One gallery exhibited 
the pictures of the celebrated Mani, and statues, that 
seemed to be alive. Here a well-managed perspective 
attracted the sight ; there the magic of optics agreeably 
deceived it : whilst the naturalist, on his part, exhibited 
in their several classes the various gifts that Heaven had 
bestowed on our globe. In a word, Vathek omitted nothing 
in this palace that might gratify the curiosity of those 
who resorted to it, although he was not able to satisfy his 
own ; for, of all men, he was the most curious. 

The Palace of Perfumes, which was termed likewise 
The Incentive to Pleasure, consisted of various halls, where 
the different perfumes which the earth produces were kept 
perpetually burning in censers of gold. Flambeaux and 
aromatic lamps were here lighted in open day. But the 
too powerful effects of this agreeable delirium might be 
alleviated by descending into an immense garden, where 
an assemblage of every fragrant flower diffused through 
the air the purest odours. 

The fifth palace, denominated The Retreat of Mirth, or 
the Dangerous, was frequented by troops of young females, 
beautiful as the Houris, and not less seducing ; who never 
failed to receive, with caresses, all whom the caliph al- 



TATHEK. 3 

lowed to approach them, and enjoy a few hours of their 
company. 

Notwithstanding the sensuality in which Vathek in- 
dulged, he experienced no abatement in the love of his 
people, who thought that a sovereign giving himself up to 
pleasure was as able to govern as one who declared him- 
self an enemy to it. But the unquiet and impetuous dis- 
position of the caliph would not allow him to rest there. 
He had studied so much for his amusement in the life- 
time of his father, as to acquire a great deal of knowledge, 
though not a sufficiency to satisfy himself; for he wished 
to know every thing ; even sciences that did not exist. 
He was fond of engaging in disputes with the learned, but 
did not allow them to push their opposition with warmth. 
He stopped with presents the mouths of those whose 
mouths could be stopped ; whilst others, whom his liber- 
ality was unable to subdue, he sent to prison to cool their 
blood, a remedy that often succeeded. 

Vathek discovered also a predilection for theological 
controversy; but it was not with the orthodox that he 
usually held. By this means he induced the zealots to 
oppose him, and then persecuted them in return ; for he 
resolved, at any rate, to have reason on his side. 

The great prophet, Mahomet, whose vicars the caliphs 
are, beheld with indignation from his abode, in the seventh 
heaven, the irreligious conduct of such a vicegerent. cc Let 
us leave him to himself," said he to the Genii, who are 
always ready to receive his commands : " let us see to 
what lengths his folly and impiety will carry him : if he 
run into excess, we shall know how to chastise him. As- 
sist him, therefore, to complete the tower, which, in imi- 
tation of Nimrod, he hath begun ; not, like that great 
warrior, to escape being drowned, but from the insolent 
curiosity of penetrating the secrets of heaven : he will 
not divine the fate that awaits him." 

The Genii obeyed ; and, when the workmen had raised 
their structure a cubit in the daytime, two cubits more 
were added in the night. The expedition, with which 
the fabric arose, was not a little flattering to the vanity of 
Vathek : he fancied, that even insensible matter showed a 
B 2 



4 VATHEK. 

forwardness to subserve his designs ; not considering thai 
the successes of the foolish and wicked form the first rod 
of their chastisement. 

His pride arrived at its height, when having ascended, 
for the first time, the fifteen hundred stairs of his tower, 
he cast his eyes below, and beheld men not larger than 
pismires ; mountains, than shells ; and cities, than bee- 
hives. The idea, which such an elevation inspired of his 
own grandeur, completely bewildered him : he was almost 
ready to adore himself; till, lifting his eyes upward, he 
saw the stars as high above him as they appeared when 
he stood on the surface of the earth. He consoled him- 
self, however, for this intruding and unwelcome percep- 
tion of his littleness, with the thought of being great in 
the eyes of others ; and flattered himself that the light of 
his mind would extend beyond the reach of his sight, and 
extort from the stars the decrees of his destiny. 

With this view, the inquisitive prince passed most of 
his nights on the summit of his tower, till becoming an 
adept in the mysteries of astrology, he imagined that the 
planets had disclosed to him the most marvellous adven- 
tures, which were to be accomplished by an extraordinary 
personage, from a country altogether unknown. Prompted 
by motives of curiosity, he had always been courteous to 
strangers ; but, from this instant, he redoubled his atten- 
tion, and ordered it to be announced, by sound of trumpet, 
through all the streets of Samarah, that no one of his sub- 
jects, on peril of his displeasure, should either lodge or 
detain a traveller, but forthwith bring him to the palace. 

Not long after this proclamation, arrived in his metro- 
polis a man so abominably hideous, that the very guards, 
who arrested him, were forced to shut their eyes as they 
led him along : the caliph himself appeared startled at so 
horrible a visage ; but joy succeeded to this emotion of 
terror, when the stranger displayed to his view such rari- 
ties as he had never before seen, and of which he had no 
conception. 

In reality, nothing was ever so extraordinary as the 
merchandise this stranger produced ; most of his curiosities, 
which were not less admirable for their workmanship than 



VATHEK. 5 

splendour, had, besides, their several virtues described on 
a parchment fastened to each. There were slippers, which, 
by spontaneous springs, enabled the feet to walk ; knives, 
that cut without motion of the hand; sabres, that dealt 
the blow at the person they were wished to strike ; and 
the whole enriched with gems that were hitherto unknown. 

The sabres especially, the blades of which emitted a 
dazzling radiance, fixed, more than all the rest, the caliph's 
attention ; who promised himself to decipher, at his leisure, 
the uncouth characters engraven on their sides. Without, 
therefore, demanding their price, he ordered all the coined 
gold to be brought from his treasury, and commanded the 
merchant to take what he pleased. The stranger obeyed, 
took little, and remained silent. 

Vathek, imagining that the merchant's taciturnity was 
occasioned by the awe which his presence inspired, en- 
couraged him to advance, and asked him, with an air of 
condescension, who he was ? whence he came ? and where 
he obtained such beautiful commodities ? The man, or 
rather monster, instead of making a reply, thrice rubbed 
his forehead, which, as well as his body, was blacker than 
ebony ; four times clapped his paunch, the projection of 
which was enormous ; opened wide his huge eyes, which 
glowed like firebrands ; began to laugh with a hideous 
noise, and discovered his long amber-coloured teeth, be- 
streaked with green. 

The caliph, though a little startled, renewed his en- 
quiries, but without being able to procure a reply. At 
which, beginning to be ruffled, he exclaimed, " Know- 
est thou, wretch, who I am, and at whom thou art aiming 
thy gibes?" Then, addressing his guards, " Have ye 
heard him speak? is he dumb?" cc He hath spoken," 
they replied, " but to no purpose." " Let him speak 
then again," said Vathek, " and tell me who he is, from 
whence he came, and where he procured these singular 
curiosities ; or I swear, by the ass of Balaam, that I will 
make him rue his pertinacity." 

This menace was accompanied by one of the caliph's 
angry and perilous glances, which the stranger sustained 
B 3 



6 VATHEK. 

without the slightest emotion ; although his eyes were fixed 
on the terrible eye of the prince. 

No words can describe the amazement of the courtiers,, 
when they beheld this rude merchant withstand the en- 
counter unshocked. They all fell prostrate with their 
faces on the ground, to avoid the risk of their lives ; and 
would have continued in the same abject posture, had not 
the caliph exclaimed, in a furious tone, " Up, cowards ! 
seize the miscreant ! see that he be committed to prison, 
and guarded by the best of my soldiers ! Let him, how- 
ever, retain the money I gave him ; it is not my intent to 
take from him his property ; I only want him to speak." 

No sooner had he uttered these words, than the stranger 
was surrounded, pinioned, and bound with strong fetters, 
and hurried away to the prison of the great tower, which 
was encompassed by seven empalements of iron bars, and 
armed with spikes in every direction, longer and sharper 
than spits. The caliph, nevertheless, remained in the 
most violent agitation. He sat down indeed to eat ; but, 
of the three hundred dishes that were daily placed before 
him, he could taste of no more than thirty-two. 

A diet, to which he had been so little accustomed, was 
sufficient of itself to prevent him from sleeping j what 
then must be its effect when joined to the anxiety that 
preyed upon his spirits ? At the first glimpse of dawn he 
hastened to the prison, again to importune this intractable 
stranger ; but the rage of Vathek exceeded all bounds on 
finding the prison empty ; the grates burst asunder, and 
his guards lying lifeless around him. In the paroxysm of 
his passion he fell furiously on the poor carcasses, and 
kicked them till evening without intermission. His cour- 
tiers and vizirs exerted their efforts to soothe his extrava- 
gance ; but, finding every expedient ineffectual, they all 
united in one vociferation, " The caliph is gone mad ! 
the caliph is out of his senses ! " 

This outcry, which soon resounded through the streets 
of Samarah, at length reached the ears of Carathis, his 
mother, who flew in the utmost consternation to try her 
ascendency on the mind of her son. Her tears and ca- 



VATHEK. 7 

resses called off his attention ; and he was prevailed upon, 
by her entreaties, to be brought back to the' palace. 

Carathis, apprehensive of leaving Vathek to himself, had 
him put to bed j and, seating herself by him, endeavoured 
by her conversation to appease and compose him. Nor 
could any one have attempted it with better success ; for 
the caliph not only loved her as a mother, but respected 
her as a person of superior genius. It was she who had 
induced him, being a Greek herself, to adopt the sciences 
and systems of her country which all good Mussulmans 
hold in such thorough abhorrence. 

Judiciary astrology was one of those sciences in which 
Carathis was a perfect adept. She began, therefore, with 
reminding her son of the promise which the stars had 
made him ; and intimated an intention of consulting them 
again. " Alas ! " said the caliph as soon as he could 
speak, l( what a fool I have been ! not for having bestowed 
forty thousand kicks on my guards, who so tamely sub- 
mitted to death ; but for never considering that this extra- 
ordinary man was the same that the planets had foretold ; 
whom, instead of ill-treating, I should have conciliated by 
all the arts of persuasion." 

" The past," said Carathis, " cannot be recalled ; buj 
it behoves us to think of the future : perhaps, you may 
again see the object you so much regret: it is possible the 
inscriptions on the sabres will afford information. Eat, 
therefore, and take thy repose, my dear son. We will 
consider, to-morrow, in what manner to act." 

Vathek yielded to her counsel as well as he could, and 
arose in the morning with a mind more at ease. The 
sabres he commanded to be instantly brought ; and, poring 
upon them, through a coloured glass, that their glittering 
might not dazzle, he set himself in earnest to decipher the 
inscriptions ; but his reiterated attempts were all of them 
nugatory : in vain did he beat his head, and bite his nails ; 
not a letter of the whole was he able to ascertain. So un- 
lucky a disappointment would have undone him again, 
had not Carathis, by good fortune, entered the apartment. 

" Have patience, my son!" said she: " you certainly 
are possessed of every important science ; but the know- 
B 4 



8 VATHEK. 

ledge of languages is a trifle at best ; and the accomplish, 
ment of none but a pedant. Issue a proclamation, that 
you will confer such rewards as become your greatness, 
upon any one that shall interpret what you do not under- 
stand, and what is beneath you to learn ; you will soon 
find your curiosity gratified." 

" That may be," said the caliph ; " but, in the mean 
time, I shall be horribly disgusted by a crowd of smatterers, 
who will come to the trial as much for the pleasure of re- 
tailing their jargon, as from the hope of gaining the re- 
ward. To avoid this evil, it will be proper to add, that I 
will put every candidate to death, who shall fail to give 
satisfaction ; for, thank Heaven ! I have skill enough to 
distinguish, whether one translates or invents." 

" Of that I have no doubt,") replied Carathis ; " but 
to put the ignorant to death is somewhat severe, and may 
be productive of dangerous effects. Content yourself with 
commanding their beards to be burnt : beards in a state 
are not quite so essential as men." 

The caliph submitted to the reasons of his mother ; and, 
sending for Morakanabad, his prime vizir, said, " Let 
the common criers proclaim, not only in Samarah, but 
throughout every city in my empire, that whosoever will 
repair hither and decipher certain characters which appear 
to be inexplicable, shall experience that liberality for which 
I am renowned; but that all who fail upon trial shall 
have their beards burnt off to the last hair. Let them add, 
also, that I will bestow fifty beautiful slaves, and as many 
jars of apricots from the Isle of Kirmith, upon any man 
that shall bring me intelligence of the stranger." 

The subjects of the caliph, like their sovereign, being 
great admirers of women and apricots from Kirmith, felt 
their mouths water at these promises, but were totally un- 
able to gratify their hankering ; for no one knew what had 
become of the stranger. 

As to the caliph's other requisition, the result was dif- 
ferent. The learned, the half learned, and those who were 
neither, but fancied themselves equal to both, came boldly 
to hazard their beards, and all shamefully lost them. The 
exaction of these forfeitures, which found sufficient em- 



VATHEK. y 

ployment for the eunuchs, gave them such a smell of 
singed hair, as greatly to disgust the ladies of the seraglio, 
and to make it necessary that this new occupation of their 
guardians should be transferred to other hands. 

At length, however, an old man presented himself, 
whose beard was a cubit and a half longer than any that 
had appeared before him. The officers of the palace whis- 
pered to each other, as they ushered him in, " What a 
pity, oh ! what a great pity that such a beard should be 
burnt ! " even the caliph, when he saw it, concurred with 
them in opinion ; but his concern was entirely needless. 
This venerable personage read the characters with facility, 
and explained them verbatim as follows : " We were made 
where every thing is well made : we are the least of the 
wonders of a place where all is wonderful, and deserving 
the sight of the first potentate on earth." 

"You translate admirably !" cried Vathek ; "I know 
to what these marvellous characters allude. Let him re- 
ceive as many robes of honour and thousands of sequins of 
gold as he hath spoken words. I am in some measure re- 
lieved from the perplexity that embarrassed me !" Vathek 
invited the old man to dine, and even to remain some days 
in the palace. 

Unluckily for him, he accepted the offer ; for the caliph 
having ordered him next morning to be called, said, 
" Read again to me what you have read already ; I cannot 
hear too often the promise that is made me the com- 
pletion of which I languish to obtain." The old man forth- 
with put on his green spectacles, but they instantly dropped 
from his nose, on perceiving that the characters he had 
read the day preceding had given place to others of dif- 
ferent import. <e What ails you ? " asked the caliph ; 
" and why these symptoms of wonder ?" "- Sovereign of 
the world ! " replied the old man, ( ' these sabres hold an- 
other language to-day from that they yesterday held." 
"How say you?" returned Vathek: "but it matters 
not; tell me, if you can, what they mean." " It is this, 
my lord," rejoined the old man : " ' Woe to the rash 
mortal who seeks to know that of which he should remain 
ignorant; and to undertake that which surpasseth his 



10 VATHEK. 

power!'" "And woe to thee!" cried the caliph, in a 
burst of indignation : " to-day thou art void of understand- 
ing : begone from my presence, they shall burn but the 
half of thy beard, because thou wert yesterday fortunate in 
guessing: my gifts I never resume." The old man, 
wise enough to perceive he had luckily escaped, considering 
the folly of disclosing so disgusting a truth, immediately 
withdrew and appeared not again. 

But it was not long before Vathek discovered abundant 
reason to regret his precipitation ; for, though he could not 
decipher the characters himself, yet, by constantly poring 
upon them, he plainly perceived that they every day 
changed ; and, unfortunately, no other candidate offered to 
explain them. This perplexing occupation inflamed his 
blood, dazzled his sight, and brought on such a giddiness 
and debility that he could hardly support himself. He 
failed not, however, though in so reduced a condition, to 
be often carried to his tower, as he flattered himself that 
he might there read in the stars, which he went to consult, 
something more congruous to his wishes : but in this his 
hopes were deluded ; for his eyes, dimmed by the vapours 
of his head, began to subserve his curiosity so ill, that he 
beheld nothing but a thick, dun cloud, which he took for 
the most direful of omens. 

Agitated with so much anxiety, Vathek entirely lost all 
firmness; a fever seized him, and his appetite failed. 
Instead of being one of the greatest eaters, he became as 
distinguished for drinking. So insatiable was the thirst 
which tormented him, that his mouth, like a funnel, was 
always open to receive the various liquors that might be 
poured into it, and especially cold water, which calmed him 
more than any other. 

This unhappy prince, being thus incapacitated for the 
enjoyment of any pleasure, commanded the palaces of the 
five senses to be shut up ; forebore to appear in public, 
either to display his magnificence or administer justice, 
and retired to the inmost apartment of his harem. As he 

id ever been an excellent husband, his wives, overwhelmed 

r ith grief at his deplorable situation, incessantly supplied 

mm with prayers for his health, and water for his thirst. 



VATHEK. 11 

In the mean time the Princess Carathis, whose affliction 
no words can describe, instead of confining herself to sob- 
bing and tears, was closetted daily with the vizir Moraka- 
nabad, to find out some cure, or mitigation, of the caliph's 
disease. Under the persuasion that it was caused by en- 
chantment, they turned over together, leaf by leaf, all the 
books of magic that might point out a remedy ; and caused 
the horrible stranger, whom they accused as the enchanter, 
to be every where sought for, with the strictest diligence. 

At the distance of a few miles from Samarah stood a 
high mountain, whose sides were swarded with wild thyme 
and basil, and its summit overspread with so delightful a 
plain, that it might have been taken for the paradise de- 
stined for the faithful. Upon it grew a hundred thickets 
of eglantine and other fragrant shrubs ; a hundred arbours 
of roses, entwined with jessamine and honeysuckle; as 
many clumps of orange trees, cedar, and citron ; whose 
branches, interwoven with the palm, the pomegranate, and 
the vine, presented every luxury that could regale the eye 
or the taste. The ground was strewed with violets, hare- 
bells, and pansies ; in the midst of which numerous tufts 
of jonquils, hyacinths, and carnations perfumed the air. 
Four fountains, not less clear than deep, and so abundant 
as to slake the thirst of ten armies, seemed purposely 
placed here, to make the scene more resemble the garden 
of Eden watered by four sacred rivers. Here, the night- 
ingale sang the birth of the rose, her well-beloved, and, at 
the same time, lamented its short-lived beauty : whilst the 
dove deplored the loss of more substantial pleasures ; and 
the wakeful lark hailed the rising light that re-animates 
the whole creation. Here, more than any where, the 
mingled melodies of birds expressed the various passions 
which inspired them ; and the exquisite fruits which they 
pecked at pleasure seemed to have given them a double 
energy. 

To this mountain Vathek was sometimes brought, for 
the sake of breathing a purer air ; and, especially, to drink 
at will of the four fountains. His attendants were his 
mother, his wives, and some eunuchs, who assiduously 
employed themselves in filling capacious bowls of rock 



12 VATHEK. 

crystal, and emulously presenting them to him. But it 
frequently happened, that his avidity exceeded their zeal, 
insomuch, that he would prostrate himself upon the ground 
to lap the water, of which he could never have enough. 

One day, when this unhappy prince had been long lying 
in so debasing a posture, a voice, hoarse but strong, thus 
addressed him : " Why dost thou assimilate thyself to a 
dog, O caliph, proud as thou art of thy dignity and power ?" 
At this apostrophe, he raised up his head, and beheld the 
stranger that had caused him so much affliction. Inflamed 
with anger at the sight, he exclaimed, " Accursed Gia- 
our ! what comest thou hither to do ? is it not enough to 
have transformed a prince, remarkable for his agility, into 
a water budget ? Perceivest thou not, that I may perish by 
drinking to excess, as well as by thirst ? " 

" Drink, then, this draught," said the stranger, as he 
presented to him a phial of a red and yellow mixture: 
" and, to satiate the thirst of thy soul, as well as of thy 
body, know, that I am an Indian ; but from a region of 
India which is wholly unknown." 

The caliph, delighted to see his desires accomplished in 
part, and flattering himself with the hope of obtaining their 
entire fulfilment, without a moment's hesitation swallowed 
the potion, and instantaneously found his health restored, 
his thirst appeased, and his limbs as agile as ever. In the 
transports of his joy, Vathek leaped upon the neck of the 
frightful Indian, and kissed his horrid mouth and hollow 
cheeks, as though they had been the coral lips and the 
lilies and roses of his most beautiful wives. 

Nor would these transports have ceased had not the elo- 
quence of Carathis repressed them. Having prevailed 
upon him to return to Samarah, she caused a herald to 
proclaim as loudly as possible, " The wonderful stranger 
hath appeared again ; he hath healed the caliph ; he hath 
spoken ! he hath spoken ! " 

Forthwith, all the inhabitants of this vast city quitted 
their habitations, and ran together in crowds to see the 
procession of Vathek and the Indian, whom they now 
blessed as much as they had before execrated, incessantly 
shouting, "He hath healed our sovereign; he hath 



VATHEX. 13 

spoken ! he hath spoken !" Nor were these words forgotten 
in the public festivals, which were celebrated the same 
evening, to testify the general joy ; for the poets applied 
them as a chorus to all the songs they composed on this 
interesting subject. 

The caliph, in the mean while, caused the palaces of the 
senses to be again set open ; and, as he found himself na- 
turally prompted to visit that of taste in preference to the 
rest, immediately ordered a splendid entertainment, to 
which his great officers and favourite courtiers were all in- 
vited. The Indian, who was placed near the prince, 
seemed to think that, as a proper acknowledgment of so 
distinguished a privilege, he could neither eat, drink, nor 
talk too much. The various dainties were no sooner served 
up than they vanished, to the great mortification of Vathek, 
who piqued himself on being the greatest eater alive ; and 
at this time in particular was blessed with an excellent 
appetite. 

The rest of the company looked round at each other in 
amazement ; but the Indian, without appearing to observe 
it, quaffed large bumpers to the health of each of them ; 
sung in a style altogether extravagant ; related stories, at 
which he laughed immoderately, and poured forth extem- 
poraneous verses, which would not have been thought bad, 
but for the strange grimaces with which they were uttered. 
In a word, his loquacity was equal to that of a hundred 
astrologers ; he ate as much as a hundred porters, and ca- 
roused in proportion. 

The caliph, notwithstanding the table had been thirty- 
two times covered, found himself incommoded by the vo- 
raciousness of his guest, who was now considerably declined 
in the prince's esteem. Vathek, however, being unwilling 
to betray the chagrin he could hardly disguise, said in a 
whisper to Bababalouk, the chief of his eunuchs, " You 
see how enormous his performances are in every way ; 
what would be the consequence should he get at my wives ! 
Go ! redouble your vigilance, and be sure look well to 
my Circassians, who would be more to his taste than all 
of the rest." 

The bird of the morning had thrice renewed his song, 



14, VATHEK. 

when the hour of the divan was announced. Vathek, in 
gratitude to his subjects, having promised to attend, im- 
mediately arose from table, and repaired thither, leaning 
upon his vizir, who could scarcely support him ; so dis- 
ordered was the poor prince by the wine he had drunk, 
and still more by the extravagant vagaries of his boisterous 
guest. 

The vizirs, the officers of the crown and of the law, 
arranged themselves in a semicircle about their sovereign, 
and preserved a respectful silence ; whilst the Indian, who 
looked as cool as if he had been fasting, sat down without 
ceremony on one of the steps of the throne, laughing in 
his sleeve at the indignation with which his temerity had 
filled the spectators. 

The caliph, however, whose ideas were confused, and 
whose head was embarrassed, went on administering jus- 
tice at hap-hazard; till at length the prime vizir, per- 
ceiving his situation, hit upon a sudden expedient to 
interrupt the audience and rescue the honour of his master, 
to whom he said in a whisper, " My lord, the Princess 
Carathis, who hath passed the night in consulting the 
planets, informs you, that they portend you evil, and the 
danger is urgent. Beware, lest this stranger, whom you 
have so lavishly recompensed for his magical gewgaws, 
should make some attempt on your life : his liquor, which 
at first had the appearance of effecting your cure, may be 
no more than a poison, the operation of which will be 
sudden. Slight not this surmise ; ask him, at least, of 
what it was compounded, whence he procured it ; and 
mention the sabres which you seem to have forgotten." 

Vathek, to whom the insolent airs of the stranger be- 
came every moment less supportable, intimated to his vizir, 
by a wink of acquiescence, that he would adopt his advice; 
and, at once turning towards the Indian, said, " Get up, 
and declare in full divan of what drugs was compounded 
the liquor you enjoined me to take, for it is suspected to 
be poison : give also that explanation I have so earnestly 
desired, concerning the sabres you sold me, and thus show 
your gratitude for the favours heaped on you." 

Having pronounced these words, in as moderate a tone 



VATIIEK. 15 

as" he well could, he waited in silent expectation for an 
answer. But the Indian, still keeping his seat, began to 
renew his loud shouts of laughter, and exhibit the same 
horrid grimaces he had shown them before, without vouch- 
safing a word in reply. Vathek, no longer able to brook 
such insolence, immediately kicked him from the steps ; 
instantly descending, repeated his blow; and persisted, 
with such assiduity, as incited all who were present to 
follow his example. Every foot was up and aimed at the 
Indian, and no sooner had any one given him a kick, than 
he felt himself constrained to reiterate the stroke. 

The stranger afforded them no small entertainment ; for, 
being both short and plump, he collected himself into a 
ball, and rolled round on all sides, at the blows of his as- 
sailants, who pressed after him, wherever he turned, with 
an eagerness beyond conception, whilst their numbers were 
every moment increasing. The ball, indeed, in passing 
from one apartment to another, drew every person after it 
that came in its way ; insomuch, that the whole palace 
was thrown into confusion, and resounded with a tremen- 
dous clamour. The women of the harem, amazed at the 
uproar, flew to their blinds to discover the cause ; but no 
sooner did they catch a glimpse of the ball, than, feeling 
themselves unable to refrain, they broke from the clutches 
of their eunuchs, who, to stop their flight, pinched them 
till they bled; but in vain: whilst themselves, though 
trembling with terror at the escape of their charge, were 
asrin capable of resisting the attraction. 

After having traversed the halls, galleries, chambers, 
kitchens, gardens, and stables of the palace, the Indian at 
last took his course through the courts ; whilst the caliph, 
pursuing him closer than the rest, bestowed as many kicks 
as he possibly could ; yet not without receiving now and 
then a few which his competitors, in their eagerness, de- 
signed for the ball. 

Carathis, Morakanabad, and two or three old vizirs, 
whose wisdom had hitherto withstood the attraction, wish- 
ing to prevent Vathek from exposing himself in the pre- 
sence of his subjects, fell down in his way to impede the 
pursuit: but he, regardless of their obstruction, leaped 



16 VATHEK. 

over their heads, and went on as before. They then or- 
dered the Muezins to call the people to prayers ; both for 
the sake of getting them out of the way, and of endeavour, 
ing, by their petitions, to avert the calamity : but neither 
of these expedients was a whit more successful. The sight 
of this fatal ball was alone sufficient to draw after it every 
beholder. The Muezins themselves, though they saw it 
but at a distance, hastened down from their minarets, and 
mixed with the crowd ; which continued to increase in so 
surprising a manner that scarce an inhabitant was left in 
Samarah except the aged ; the sick, confined to their beds; 
and infants at the breast, whose nurses could run more 
nimbly without them. Even Carathis, Morakanabad, and 
the rest, were all become of the party. The shrill screams 
of the females, who had broken from their apartments, and 
were unable to extricate themselves from the pressure of the 
crowd, together with those of the eunuchs jostling after 
them, and terrified lest their charge should escape from 
their sight ; the execrations of husbands, urging forward 
and menacing each other ; kicks given and received ; stum- 
blings and overthrows at every step ; in a word, the con- 
fusion that universally prevailed, rendered Samarah like a 
city taken by storm, and devoted to absolute plunder. At 
last, the cursed Indian, who still preserved his rotundity 
of figure, after passing through all the streets and public 
places, and leaving them empty, rolled onwards to the 
plain of Catoul, and entered the valley at the foot of the 
mountain of the four fountains. 

As a continual fall of water had excavated an immense 
gulf in the valley, whose opposite side was closed in by 
a steep acclivity, the caliph and his attendants were appre- 
hensive lest the ball should bound into the chasm, and, to 
prevent it, redoubled their efforts, but in vain. The In- 
dian persevered in his onward direction ; and, as had been 
apprehended, glancing from the precipice with the rapidity 
of lightning, was lost in the gulf below. 

Vathek would have followed the perfidious Giaour, had 
not an invisible agency arrested his progress. The mul- 
titude that pressed after him were at once checked in the 
same manner, and a calm instantaneously ensued. They 



VATHEK. 17 

all gazed at each other with an air of astonishment ; and 
notwithstanding that the loss of veils and turbans, together 
with torn habits, and dust blended with sweat, presented 
a most laughable spectacle, yet there was not one smile to 
be seen. On the contrary, all with looks of confusion and 
sadness returned in silence to Samarah, and retired to 
their inmost apartments, without ever reflecting, that they 
had been impelled by an invisible power into the extrava- 
gance for which they reproached themselves ; for it is but 
just that men, who so often arrogate to their own merit 
the good of which they are but instruments, should also 
attribute to themselves absurdities which they could not 
prevent. 

The caliph was the only person who refused to leave 
the valley. He commanded his tents to be pitched there, 
and stationed himself on the very edge of the precipice, 
in spite of the representations of Carathis and Morakana- 
bad, who pointed out the hazard of its brink giving way, 
and the vicinity to the magician, that had so cruelly tor- 
mented him. Vathek derided all their remonstrances; 
and having ordered a thousand flambeaux to be lighted, 
and directed his attendants to proceed in lighting more, 
lay down on the slippery margin, and attempted, by the 
help of this artificial splendour, to look through that gloom, 
which all the fires of the empyrean had been insufficient 
to pervade. One while he fancied to himself voices arising 
from the depth of the gulf; at another, he seemed to dis- 
tinguish the accents of the Indian ; but all was no more 
than the hollow murmur of waters, and the din of the 
cataracts that rushed from steep to steep down the sides of 
the mountain. 

Having passed the night in this cruel perturbation, the 
caliph, at daybreak, retired to his tent ; where, without 
taking the least sustenance, he continued to doze till the 
dusk of evening began again to come on. He then re- 
sumed his vigils as before, and persevered in observing 
them for many nights together. At length, fatigued with 
so fruitless an employment, he sought relief from change. 
To this end, he sometimes paced with hasty strides across 
the plain ; and as he wildly gazed at the stars, reproached 
o 



18 VATHEK. 

them with having deceived him ; hut, lo ! on a sudden, 
the clear blue sky appeared streaked over with streams of 
blood, which reached from the valley even to the city of 
Samarah. As this awful phenomenon seemed to touch his 
tower, Vathek at first thought of repairing thither to view 
it more distinctly ; but, feeling himself unable to advance, 
and being overcome with apprehension, he muffled up his 
face in the folds of his robe. 

Terrifying as these prodigies were, this impression upon 
him was no more than momentary, and served only to 
stimulate his love of the marvellous. Instead, therefore, 
of returning to his palace, he persisted in the resolution of 
abiding where the Indian had vanished from his view. 
One night, however, while he was walking as usual on the 
plain, the moon and stars were eclipsed at once, and a 
total darkness ensued. The earth trembled beneath him, 
and a voice came forth, the voice of the Giaour, who, in 
accents more sonorous than thunder, thus addressed him : 
" Wouldest thou devote thyself to me ? adore the terres- 
trial influences, and abjure Mahomet ? On these condi- 
tions I will bring thee to the Palace of Subterranean Fire. 
There shalt thou behold, in immense depositories, the 
treasures which the stars have promised thee ; and which 
will be conferred by those intelligences, whom thou shalt 
thus render propitious. It was from thence I brought my 
sabres, and it is there that Soliman Ben Daoud reposes, 
surrounded by the talismans that control the world." 

The astonished caliph trembled as he answered, yet he 
answered in a style that showed him to be no novice in 
preternatural adventures : " Where art thou ? be present 
to my eyes ; dissipate the gloom that perplexes me, and 
of which I deem thee the cause. After the many flam- 
beaux I have burnt to discover thee, thou mayest, at least, 
grant a glimpse of thy horrible visage." " Abjure then 
Mahomet!" replied the Indian, " and promise me full 
proofs of thy sincerity : otherwise, thou shalt never behold 
me again." 

The unhappy caliph, instigated by insatiable curiosity, 
lavished his promises in the utmost profusion. The sky 
mmediately brightened ; and, by the light of the planets, 



VATHEK. 19 

which seemed almost to blaze, Vathek beheld the earth 
open ; and, at the extremity of a vast black chasm, a portal 
of ebony, before which stood the Indian, holding in his 
hand a golden key, which he sounded against the lock. 

" How," cried Vathek, " can I descend to thee ? 
Come, take me, and instantly open the portal." " Not 
so fast," replied the Indian, " impatient caliph ! Know 
that I am parched with thirst, and cannot open this door, 
till my thirst be thoroughly appeased ; I require the blood 
of fifty children. Take them from among the most beau- 
tiful sons of thy vizirs and great men ; or, neither can my 
thirst nor thy curiosity be satisfied. Return to Samarah ; 
procure for me this necessary libation ; come back hither ; 
throw it thyself into this chasm, and then shalt thou see !" 

Having thus spoken, the Indian turned his back on the 
caliph, who, incited by the suggestions of demons, resolved 
on the direful sacrifice. He now pretended to have re- 
gained his tranquillity, and set out for Samarah amidst 
the acclamations of a people who still loved him, and 
forebore not to rejoice, when they believed him to have 
recovered his reason. So successfully did he conceal the 
emotion of his heart, that even Carathis and Morakanabad 
were equally deceived with the rest. Nothing was heard 
of but festivals and rejoicings. The fatal ball, which no 
tongue had hitherto ventured to mention, was brought on 
the tapis. A general laugh went round, though many, 
still smarting under the hands of the surgeon, from the 
hurts received in that memorable adventure, had no great 
reason for mirth. 

The prevalence of this gay humour was not a little 
grateful to Vathek, who perceived how much it conduced 
to his project. He put on the appearance of affability to 
every one ; but especially to his vizirs, and the grandees 
of his court, whom he failed not to regale with a sump- 
tuous banquet ; during which, he insensibly directed the 
conversation to the children of his guests. Having asked, 
with a good-natured air, which of them were blessed with 
the handsomest boys, every father at once asserted the 
pretensions of his own; and the contest imperceptibly 
grew so warm, that nothing could have withholden them 
o 2 



20 VATIIEK. 

from coming to blows but their profound reverence for 
the person of the caliph. Under the pretence, therefore, 
of reconciling the disputants, Vathek took upon him to 
decide ; and, with this view, commanded the boys to be 
brought. 

It was not long before a troop of these poor children 
made their appearance, all equipped by their fond mothers 
with such ornaments as might give the greatest relief to 
their beauty, or most advantageously display the graces of 
their age. But, whilst this brilliant assemblage attracted 
the eyes and hearts of every one besides, the caliph scru- 
tinised each, in his turn, with a malignant avidity that 
passed for attention, and selected from their number the 
fifty whom he judged the Giaour would prefer. 

With an equal show of kindness as before, he pro- 
posed to celebrate a festival on the plain, for the enter- 
tainment of his young favourites, who, he said, ought to 
rejoice still more than all, at the restoration of his health, 
on account of the favours he intended for them. 

The caliph's proposal was received with the greatest 
delight, and soon published through Samarah. Litters, 
camels, and horses were prepared. Women and children, 
old men and young, every one placed himself as he chose. 
The cavalcade set forward, attended by all the confec- 
tioners in the city and its precincts ; the populace, follow- 
ing on foot, composed an amazing crowd, and occasioned 
no little noise. All was joy ; nor did any one call to mind, 
what most of them had suffered, when they lately tra- 
velled the road they were now passing so gaily. 

The evening was serene, the air refreshing, the sky clear, 
and the flowers exhaled their fragrance. The beams of 
the declining sun, whose mild splendour reposed on the 
summit of the mountain, shed a glow of ruddy light over 
its green declivity, and the white flocks sporting upon it. 
No sounds were heard, save the murmurs of the four foun- 
tains; and the reeds and voices of shepherds, calling to 
each other from different eminences. 

The lovely innocents, destined for the sacrifice, added 
not a little to the hilarity of the scene. They approached 
the plain full of sportiveness, some coursing butterflies, 



VATHEK. 21 

others culling flowers, or picking up the shining little 
pebbles that attracted their notice. At intervals they 
nimbly started from each other for the sake of being caught 
again, and mutually imparting a thousand caresses. 

The dreadful chasm, at whose bottom the portal of 
ebony was placed, began to appear at a distance. It looked 
like a black streak that divided the plain. Morakanabad 
and his companions took it for some work which the 
caliph had ordered. Unhappy men ! little did they sur- 
mise for what it was destined. Vathek, unwilling that they 
should examine it too nearly, stopped the procession, and 
ordered a spacious circle to be formed on this side, at some 
distance from the accursed chasm. The body-guard of 
eunuchs was detached, to measure out the lists intended 
for the games, and prepare the rings for the arrows of the 
young archers. The fifty competitors were soon stripped, 
and presented to the admiration of the spectators the sup- 
pleness and grace of their delicate limbs. Their eyes spark- 
led with a joy, which those of their fond parents reflected. 
Every one offered wishes for the little candidate nearest his 
heart, and doubted not of his being victorious. A breath- 
less suspense awaited the contests of these amiable and in- 
nocent victims. 

The caliph, availing himself of the first moment to 
retire from the crowd, advanced towards the chasm ; and 
there heard, yet not without shuddering, the voice of the 
Indian ; who, gnashing his teeth, eagerly demanded, 
" Where are they ? Where are they ? perceivest thou 
not how my mouth waters ? " " Relentless Giaour ! " 
answered Vathek, with emotion ; " can nothing content 
thee but the massacre of these lovely victims ? Ah ! wert 
thou to behold their beauty, it must certainly move thy 
compassion." "Perdition on thy compassion, babbler!" 
cried the Indian : " give them me ; instantly give them, or, 
my portal shall be closed against thee for ever !" " Not 
so loudly," replied the caliph, blushing. " I understand 
thee," returned the Giaour with the grin of an ogre; 
" thou wantest no presence of mind : I will, for a mo- 
ment, forbear." 

During this exquisite dialogue, the games went forward 
o 3 



22 VATHEK. 

with all alacrity, and at length concluded, just as the 
twilight began to overcast the mountains. Vathek, who 
was still standing on the edge of the chasm, called out, 
with all his might, "Let my fifty little favourites approach 
me, separately ; and let them come in the order of their 
success. To the first, I will give my diamond bracelet ; 
to the second, my collar of emeralds ; to the third, my 
aigret of rubies ; to the fourth, my girdle of topazes ; and 
to the rest, each a part of my dress, even down to my 
slippers." 

This declaration was received with reiterated acclam- 
ations ; and all extolled the liberality of a prince, who 
would thus strip himself, for the amusement of his subjects, 
and the encouragement of the rising generation. The 
caliph, in the mean while, undressed himself by degrees ; 
and, raising his arm as high as he was able, made each of 
the prizes glitter in the air j but, whilst he delivered it, 
with one hand, to the child, who sprung forward to receive 
it, he, with the other, pushed the poor innocent into the 
gulf; where the Giaour, with a sullen muttering, in- 
cessantly repeated, " More ! more ! " 

This dreadful device was executed with so much dex- 
terity, that the boy who was approaching him remained 
unconscious of the fate of his forerunner ; and, as to the 
spectators, the shades of evening, together with their 
distance, precluded them from perceiving any object dis- 
tinctly. Vathek, having in this manner thrown in the last 
of the fifty, and, expecting that the Giaour, on receiving 
him, would have presented the key, already fancied him- 
self as great as Soliman, and, consequently, above being 
amenable for what he had done; when, to his utter 
amazement, the chasm closed,, and the ground became as 
entire as the rest of the plain. 

No language could express his rage and despair. He 
execrated the perfidy of the Indian ; loaded him with the 
most infamous invectives ; and stamped with his foot, as 
resolving to be heard. He persisted in this till his strength 
failed him, and then fell on the earth like one void of 
sense. His vizirs and grandees, who were nearer than the 
rest, supposed him, at first, to be sitting' on the grass, at 



VATHEK. 

play with their amiable children ; but, at length, prompted 
by doubt, they advanced towards the spot, and found the 
caliph alone, who wildly demanded what they wanted? 
" Our children ! our children ! " cried they. ' ' It is, as- 
suredly, pleasant," said he, " to make me accountable for 
accidents. Your children, while at play, fell from the 
precipice, and I should have experienced their fate, had I 
not suddenly started back." 

At these words, the fathers of the fifty boys cried out 
aloud ; the mothers repeated their exclamations an octave 
higher ; whilst the rest, without knowing the cause, soon 
drowned the voices of both, with still louder lamentations 
of their own. " Our caliph," said they, and the report 
soon circulated, <{ our caliph has played us this trick, to 
gratify his accursed Giaour. Let us punish him for 
perfidy ! let us avenge ourselves ! let us avenge the blood 
of the innocent ! let us throw this cruel prince into the 
gulf that is near, and let his name be mentioned no 
more ! " 

At this rumour and these menaces, Carathis, full of 
consternation, hastened to Morakanabad, and said, " Vizir, 
you have lost two beautiful boys, and must necessarily be 
the most afflicted of fathers ; but you are virtuous, save 
your master." ' ( I will brave every hazard," replied the 
vizir, ' c to rescue him from his present danger ; but, after- 
wards, will abandon him to his fate. Bababalouk," con- 
tinued he, ' ' put yourself at the head of your eunuchs : 
disperse the mob, and, if possible, bring back this unhappy 
prince to his palace." Bababalouk and his fraternity, feli- 
citating each other in a low voice on their having been 
spared the cares as well as the honour of paternity, obeyed 
the mandate of the vizir ; who, seconding their exertions 
to the utmost of his power, at Jength accomplished his 
generous enterprise ; and retired, as he resolved, to lament 
at his leisure. 

No sooner had the caliph re-entered his palace than 
Carathis commanded the doors to be fastened ; but per- 
ceiving the tumult to be still violent, and hearing the im- 
precations which resounded from all quarters, she said to 
her son, " Whether the populace be right or wrong, it 
c 4 



24 VATHEK. 

behoves you to provide for your safety ; let us retire to 
your own apartment, and, from thence, through the sub- 
terranean passage, known only to ourselves, into your tower: 
there, with the assistance of the mutes who never leave it, 
we may be able to make a powerful resistance. Bababalouk, 
supposing us to be still in the palace, will guard its 
avenues, for his own sake ; and we shall soon find, without 
the counsels of that blubberer Morakanabad, what expedient 
may be the best to adopt." 

Vathek, without making the least reply, acquiesced in 
his mother's proposal, and repeated as he went, " Ne- 
farious Giaour ! where art thou? hast thou not yet de- 
voured those poor children? where are thy sabres? thy 
golden key ? thy talismans ? " Carathis, who guessed 
from these interrogations a part of the truth, had no diffi- 
culty to apprehend in getting at the whole as soon as he 
should be a little composed in his tower. This princess was 
so far from being influenced by scruples, that she was as 
wicked as woman could be, which is not saying a little ; for 
the sex pique themselves on their superiority in every com- 
petition. The recital of the caliph, therefore, occasioned 
neither terror nor surprise to his mother : she felt no emo- 
tion but from the promises of the Giaour, and said to her 
son, " This Giaour, it must be confessed, is somewhat san- 
guinary in his taste ; but the terrestrial powers are always 
terrible ; nevertheless, what the one hath promised, and the 
others can confer, will prove a sufficient indemnification. 
No crimes should be thought too dear for such a reward : 
forbear, then, to revile the Indian ; you have not fulfilled 
the conditions to which his services are annexed : for in- 
stance; is not a sacrifice to the subterranean Genii required? 
and should we not be prepared to offer it as soon as the 
tumult is subsided ? This charge I will take on myself, 
and have no doubt of succeeding, by means of your trea- 
sures, which, as there are now so many others in store, may 
without fear be exhausted." Accordingly, the princess, 
who possessed the most consummate skill in the art of per- 
suasion, went immediately back through the subterranean 
passage ; and, presenting herself to the populace from a 
window of the palace, began to harangue them with all the 



VATHEK. 25 

address of which she was mistress; whilst Bahabalouk 
showered money from both hands amongst the crowd, who 
by these united means were soon appeased. Every person 
retired to his home, and Carathis returned to the tower. 

Prayer at break of day was announced, when Carathis 
and Vathek ascended the steps which led to the summit of 
the tower, where they remained for some time, though the 
weather was lowering and wet. This impending gloom 
corresponded with their malignant dispositions ; but when 
the sun began to break through the clouds, they ordered a 
pavilion to be raised, as a screen against the intrusion of 
his beams. The caliph, overcome with fatigue, sought re- 
freshment from repose ; at the same time, hoping that 
significant dreams might attend on his slumbers; whilst 
the indefatigable Carathis, followed by a party of her mutes, 
descended to prepare whatever she judged proper, for the 
oblation of the approaching night. 

By secret stairs, contrived within the thickness of the 
wall, and known only to herself and her son, she first re- 
paired to the mysterious recesses in which were deposited 
the mummies that had been wrested from the catacombs 
of the ancient Pharaohs. Of these she ordered several to 
be taken. From thence she resorted to a gallery, where, 
under the guard of fifty female negroes mute and blind of 
the right eye, were preserved the oil of the most venomous 
serpents ; rhinoceros' horns ; and woods of a subtile and 
penetrating odour, procured from the interior of the Indies, 
together with a thousand other horrible rarities. This 
collection had been formed for a purpose like the present, 
by Carathis herself; from a presentiment, that she might, 
one day, enjoy some intercourse with the infernal powers, 
to whom she had ever been passionately attached, and to 
whose taste she was no stranger. 

To familiarise herself the better with the horrors in view, 
the princess remained in the company of her negresses, who 
squinted in the most amiable manner from the only eye 
they had ; and leered, with exquisite delight, at the skulls 
and skeletons which Carathis had drawn forth from her 
cabinets; all of them making the most frightful contortions, 
and uttering such shrill chatterings, that the princess, 



26 VATHEK. 

stunned by them and 'suffocated by the potency of the ex- 
halations, was forced to quit the gallery, after stripping it 
of a part of its abominable treasures. 

Whilst she was thus occupied, the caliph, who, instead 
of the visions he expected, had acquired in these unsub- 
stantial regions a voracious appetite, was greatly provoked 
at the mutes. For having totally forgotten their deafness, 
he had impatiently asked them for food ; and seeing them 
regardless of his demand, he began to cuff, pinch, and bite 
them, till Carathis arrived to terminate a scene so indecent, 
to the great content of these miserable creatures : " Son ! 
what means all this ? " said she, panting for breath. " I 
thought I heard as I came up the shrieks of a thousand 
bats, torn from their crannies in the recesses of a cavern ; 
and it was the outcry only of these poor mutes, whom you 
were so unmercifully abusing. In truth, you but ill de- 
serve the admirable provision I have brought you." 
11 Give it me instantly," exclaimed the caliph ; " I am 
perishing for hunger ! " "As to that," answered she, " you 
must have an excellent stomach if it can digest what I have 
brought." " Be quick," replied the caliph ; " but, oh 
heavens ! what horrors ! what do you intend ? " ' c Come, 
come," returned Carathis, "be not so squeamish; but help 
me to arrange every thing properly ; and you shall see that, 
what you reject with such symptoms of disgust, will soon 
complete your felicity. Let us get ready the pile for the 
sacrifice of to-night ; and think not of eating till that is 
performed : know you not, that all solemn rites ought to 
be preceded by a rigorous abstinence ? " 

The caliph, not daring to object, abandoned himself to 
grief and the wind that ravaged his entrails, whilst his mo- 
ther went forward with the requisite operations. Phials of 
serpents' oil, mummies, and bones, were soon set in order 
on the balustrade of the tower. The pile began to rise ; 
and in three hours was twenty cubits high. At length 
darkness approached; and Carathis, having stripped herself 
to her inmost garment, clapped her hands in an impulse of 
ecstasy; the mutes followed her example; but Vathek, 
extenuated with hunger and impatience, was unable to sup- 
port himself, and fell down in a swoon. The sparks had 



VATHEK. 2? 

already kindled the dry wood ; the venomous oil burst into 
a thousand blue flames ; the mummies, dissolving, emitted 
a thick dun vapour ; and the rhinoceros' horns, beginning 
to consume, all together diffused such a stench, that the 
caliph, recovering, started from his trance, and gazed wildly 
on the scene in full blaze around him. The oil gushed 
forth in a plenitude of streams ; and the negresses, who 
supplied it without intermission, united their cries to those 
of the princess. At last the fire became so violent, and the 
flames reflected from the polished marble so dazzling, that 
the caliph, unable to withstand the heat and the blaze, 
effected his escape, and took shelter under the imperial 
standard. 

In the mean time, the inhabitants of Samarah, scared at the 
light which shone over the city, arose in haste, ascended their 
roofs, beheld the tower on fire, and hurried, half naked, to the 
square. Their love for their sovereign immediately awoke; 
and, apprehending him in danger of perishing in his tower, 
their whole thoughts were occupied with the means of his 
safety. Morakanabad flew from his retirement, wiped away 
his tears, and cried out for water like the rest. Bababalouk, 
whose olfactory nerves were more familiarised to magical 
odours, readily conjecturing that Carathis was engaged in 
her favourite amusements, strenuously exhorted them not 
to be alarmed. Him, however, they treated as an old pol- 
troon, and styled him a rascally traitor. The camels and 
dromedaries were advancing with water ; but no one knew 
by which way to enter the tower. Whilst the populace was 
obstinate in forcing the doors, a violent north-east wind 
drove an immense volume of flame against them. At first 
they recoiled, but soon came back with redoubled zeal. At 
the same time, the stench of the horns and mummies in- 
creasing, most of the crowd fell backward in a state of suf- 
focation. Those that kept their feet mutually wondered 
at the cause of the smell, and admonished each other to 
retire. Morakanabad, more sick than the rest, remained 
in a piteous condition. Holding his nose with one hand, 
every one persisted in his efforts with the other to burst 
open the doors and obtain admission. A hundred and forty 
of the strongest and most resolute at length accomplished 



28 VATHEK. 

their purpose. Having gained the staircase, by their 
violent exertions, they attained a great height in a quarter 
of an hour. 

Carathis, alarmed at the signs of her mutes, advanced to 
the staircase ; went down a few steps, and heard several 
voices calling out from below, " You shall in a moment 
have water I " Being rather alert, considering her age, she 
presently regained the top of the tower, and bade her son 
suspend the sacrifice for some minutes ; adding, " We 
shall soon be enabled to render it more grateful. Certain 
dolts of your subjects, imagining, no doubt, that we were 
on fire, have been rash enough to break through those doors 
which had hitherto remained inviolate, for the sake of 
bringing up water. They are very kind, you must allow, 
so soon to forget the wrongs you have done them ; but that 
is of little moment. Let us offer them to the Giaour, 
let them come up ; our mutes, who neither want strength 
nor experience, will soon despatch them, exhausted as they 
are with fatigue." " Be it so/' answered the caliph, 
" provided we finish, and I dine." In fact, these good 
people, out of breath from ascending fifteen hundred stairs 
in such haste, and chagrined at having spilt by the way 
the water they had taken, were no sooner arrived at the 
top, than the blaze of the flames, and the fumes of the 
mummies, at once overpowered their senses. It was a 
pity ! for they beheld not the agreeable smile with which 
the mutes and negresses adjusted the cord to their necks : 
these amiable personages rejoiced, however, no less at the 
scene. Never before had the ceremony of strangling been 
performed with so much facility. They all fell, without 
the least resistance or struggle : so that Vathek, in the 
space of a few moments, found himself surrounded by the 
dead bodies of the most faithful of his subjects ; all which 
were thrown on the top of the pile. Carathis, whose pre- 
sence of mind never forsook her, perceiving that she had 
carcasses sufficient to complete her oblation, commanded 
the chains to be stretched across the stair case, and the iron 
doors barricadoed, that no more might come up. 

No sooner were these orders obeyed, than the tower 
shook ; the dead bodies vanished in the flames ; which, at 



VATHEK. 29 

once, changed from a swarthy crimson to a bright rose 
colour; an ambient vapour emitted the most exquisite 
fragrance ; the marble columns rang with harmonious 
sounds, and the liquified horns diffused a delicious per- 
fume. Carathis, in transports, anticipated the success of 
her enterprise ; whilst her mutes and negresses, to whom 
these sweets had given the cholic, retired grumbling to 
their cells. 

Scarcely were they gone, when, instead of the pile, horns, 
mummies, and ashes, the caliph both saw and felt, with a 
degree of pleasure which he could not express, a table co- 
vered with the most magnificent repast : flagons of wine 
and vases of exquisite sherbet reposing on snow. He availed 
himself, without scruple, of such an entertainment ; and 
had already laid hands on a lamb stuffed with pistachios, 
whilst Carathis was privately drawing from a filigreen 
urn a parchment that seemed to be endless, and which 
had escaped the notice of her son. Totally occupied in 
gratifying an importunate appetite, he left her to peruse it 
without interruption ; which having finished, she said to 
him, in an authoritative tone, " Put an end to your glut- 
tony, and hear the splendid promises with which you are 
favoured ! " She then read as follows : ' ' Vathek, my 
well-beloved, thou hast surpassed my hopes : my nostrils 
have been regaled by the savour of thy mummies, thy 
horns, and, still more, by the lives devoted on the pile. At 
the full of the moon, cause the bands of thy musicians, and 
thy tymbals, to be heard ; depart from thy palace, sur- 
rounded by all the pageants of majesty ; thy most faithful 
slaves; thy best beloved wives; thy most magnificent lit- 
ters ; thy richest loaden camels ; and set forward on thy 
way to Istakhar. There I await thy coming : that is the 
region of wonders : there shalt thou receive the diadem of 
Gian Ben Gian ; the talismans of Soliman ; and the trea- 
sures of the pre-adamite sultans : there shalt thou be so- 
laced with all kinds of delight. But beware how thou 
enterest any dwelling on thy route ; or thou shalt feel the 
effects of my anger." 

The caliph, notwithstanding his habitual luxury, had 
never before dined with so much satisfaction. He gave 



SO VATHEK. 

full scope to the joy of these golden tidings ; and betook 
himself to drinking anew. Carathis, whose antipathy to 
wine was by no means insuperable, failed not to pledge 
him at every bumper he ironically quaffed to the health of 
Mahomet. This infernal liquor completed their impious 
temerity, and prompted them to utter a profusion of blas- 
phemies. They gave a loose to their wit, at the expense 
of the ass of Balaam, the dog of the seven sleepers, and 
the other animals admitted into the paradise of Mahomet. 
In this sprightly humour, they descended the fifteen hun- 
dred stairs, diverting themselves, as they went, at the 
anxious faces they saw on the square, through the bar- 
bacans and loopholes of the tower ; and at length arrived 
at the royal apartments, by the subterranean passage. 
Bababalouk was parading to and fro, and issuing his man- 
dates with great pomp to the eunuchs, who were snuffing 
the lights and painting the eyes of the Circassians. No 
sooner did he catch sight of the caliph and his mother, 
than he exclaimed, " Hah ! you have then, I perceive, 
escaped from the flames ; I was not, however, altogether 
out of doubt." " Of what moment is it to us what you 
thought or think ? " cried Carathis : " go, speed, tell 
Morakanabad that we immediately want him ; and take 
care not to stop by the way to make your insipid re- 
flections." 

Morakanabad delayed not to obey the summons, and 
was received by Vathek and his mother with great so- 
lemnity. They told him, with an air of composure and 
commiseration, that the fire at the top of the tower was 
extinguished ; but that it had cost the lives of the brave 
people who sought to assist them. 

" Still more misfortunes ! " cried Morakanabad, with a 
sigh. " Ah, commander of the faithful, our holy prophet 
is certainly irritated against us ! it behoves you to appease 
him." " We will appease him, hereafter," replied the 
caliph, with a smile that augured nothing of good. " You 
will have leisure sufficient for your supplications during my 
absence, for this country is the bane of my health. I am 
disgusted with the mountain of the four fountains, and am 
resolved to go and drink of the stream of Rocnabad. I 



VATHEK. 31 

long to refresh myself in the delightful valleys which it 
waters. Do you, with the advice of my mother, govern 
my dominions, and take care to supply whatever her ex- 
periments may demand; for you well know that our 
tower abounds in materials for the advancement of 
science." 

The tower but ill suited Morakanabad's taste. Immense 
treasures had been lavished upon it ; and nothing had he 
ever seen carried thither but female negroes, mutes, and 
abominable drugs. Nor did he know well what to think 
of Carathis, who, like a chameleon, could assume all pos- 
sible colours. Her cursed eloquence had often driven the 
poor Mussulman to his last shifts. He considered, how- 
ever, that if she possessed but few good qualities, her son 
had still fewer ; and that the alternative, on the whole, 
would be in her favour. Consoled, therefore, with this 
reflection, he went, in good spirits, to soothe the populace, 
and make the proper arrangements for his master's 
journey. 

Vathek, to conciliate the spirits of the subterranean 
palace, resolved that his expedition should be uncommonly 
splendid. With this view he confiscated, on all sides, the 
property of his subjects ; whilst his worthy mother stripped 
the seraglios she visited of the gems they contained. She 
collected all the sempstresses and embroiderers of Samarah 
and other cities, to the distance of sixty leagues, to pre- 
pare pavilions, palanquins, sofas, canopies, and litters for 
the train of the monarch. There was not left, in Masuli- 
patan, a single piece of chintz ; and so much muslin had 
been brought up to dress out Bababalouk and the other 
black eunuchs, that there remained not an ell of it in the 
whole Irak of Babylon. 

During these preparations, Carathis, who never lost 
sight of her great object, which was to obtain favour with 
the powers of darkness, made select parties of the fairest 
and most delicate ladies of the city ; but in the midst of 
their gaiety, she contrived to introduce vipers amongst 
them, and to break pots of scorpions under the table. 
They all bit to a wonder ; and Carathis would have left her 
friends to die, were it not that, to fill up the time, she 



32 VATHEK. 

now and then amused herself in curing their wounds, with 
an excellent anodyne of her own invention ; for this good 
princess abhorred being indolent. 

Vathek, who was not altogether so active as his mother, 
devoted his time to the sole gratification of his senses, in 
the palaces which were severally dedicated to them. He 
disgusted himself no more with the divan, or the mosque. 
One half of Samarah followed his example, whilst the 
other lamented the progress of corruption. 

In the midst of these transactions, the embassy returned, 
which had been sent, in pious times, to Mecca. It con- 
sisted of the most reverend moullahs who had fulfilled their 
commission, and brought back one of those precious besoms 
which are used to sweep the sacred Cahaba ; a present 
truly worthy of the greatest potentate on earth ! 

The caliph happened at this instant to be engaged in an 
apartment by no means adapted to the reception of em- 
bassies. He heard the voice of Bababalouk, calling out 
from between the door and the tapestry that hung before 
it, " Here are the excellent Edris al Shafei, and the 
seraphic Al Mouhateddin, who have brought the besom 
from Mecca, and, with tears of joy, entreat they may 
present it to your majesty in person." " Let them bring 
the besom hither, it may be of use," said Vathek. 
' ' How ! " answered Bababalouk, half aloud and amazed. 
" Obey," replied the caliph, " for it is my sovereign 
will ; go instantly, vanish ! for here will I receive the 
good folk who have thus filled thee with joy." 

The eunuch departed muttering, and bade the venerable 
train attend him. A sacred rapture was diffused amongst 
these reverend old men. Though fatigued with the length 
of their expedition, they followed Bababalouk with an 
alertness almost miraculous, and felt themselves highly 
flattered, as they swept along the stately porticoes, that the 
caliph would not receive them like ambassadors in ordinary 
in his hall of audience. Soon reaching the interior of the 
harem, (where, through blinds of Persian, they perceived 
large soft eyes, dark and blue, that came and went like 
lightning,) penetrated with respect and wonder, and full 
of their celestial mission, they advanced in procession 



VATHEK. S3 

towards the small corridors that appeared to terminate in 
nothing, but, nevertheless, led to the cell where the caliph 
expected their coming, 

" What ! is the commander of the faithful -sick ? " said 
Edris al Shafei, in a low voice to his companion. " I 
rather think he is in his oratory," answered Al Mouha- 
teddin. Vathek, who heard the dialogue, cried out, 
" What imports it you, how I am employed ? approach 
without delay." They advanced, whilst the caliph, without 
showing himself, put forth his hand from behind the 
tapestry that hung before the door, and demanded of them 
the besom. Having prostrated themselves as well as the 
corridor would permit, and even in a tolerable semicircle, 
the venerable Al Shafei, drawing forth the besom from the 
embroidered and perfumed scarves, in which it had been 
enveloped, and secured from the profane gaze of vulgar 
eyes, arose from his associates, and advanced, with an air 
of the most av/ful solemnity, towards the supposed oratory ; 
but with what astonishment ! with what horror was he 
seized! Vathek, bursting out into a villanous laugh, 
snatched the besom from his trembling hand, and, fixing 
upon some cobwebs, that hung from the ceiling, gravely 
brushed them away till not a single one remained. The 
old men, overpowered with amazement, were unable to 
lift their beards from the ground ; for, as Vathek had 
carelessly left the tapestry between them half drawn, they 
were witnesses of the whole transaction. Their tears be- 
dewed the marble. Al Mouhateddin swooned through 
mortification and fatigue, whilst the caliph, throwing him- 
self backward on his seat, shouted, and clapped his. hands 
without mercy. At last, addressing himself to Bababalouk, 
" My dear black," said he, " go, regale these pious poor 
souls with my good wine from Shiraz, since they can 
boast of having seen more of my palace than any one 
besides." Having said this, he threw the besom in their 
face, and went to enjoy the laugh with Carathis. Baba- 
balouk did all in his power to console the ambassadors ; 
but the two most infirm expired on the spot : the rest 
were carried to their beds, from whence, being heart- 
broken with sorrow and shame, they never arose. 

D 



34" VATHEK. 

The succeeding night, Vathek, attended by his mother, 
:ascended the tower to see if every thing were ready for his 
journey; for he had great faith in the influence of the 
stars. The planets appeared in their most favourable 
aspects. The caliph, to enjoy so flattering a sight, supped 
gaily on the roof; and fancied that he heard, during his 
repast, loud shouts of laughter resound through the sky, in 
<a manner that inspired the fullest assurance. 

All was in motion at the palace; lights were kept 
burning through the whole of the night: the sound of 
implements, and of artisans finishing their work; the 
voices of women, and their guardians, who sung at their 
embroidery ; all conspired to interrupt the stillness of na- 
ture, and infinitely delighted the heart of Vathek, who 
imagined himself going in triumph to sit upon the throne 
of Soliman. The people were not less satisfied than him- 
self : all assisted to accelerate the moment, which should 
rescue them from the wayward caprices of so extravagant 
a master. 

The day preceding the departure of this infatuated 
prince was employed by Carathis in repeating to him the 
decrees of the mysterious parchment, which she had tho- 
roughly gotten by heart ; and in recommending him not 
to enter the habitation of any one by the way : " For well 
thou knowest," added she, " how liquorish thy taste is 
after good dishes and young damsels : let me, therefore, 
enjoin thee to be content with thy old cooks, who are the 
best in the world ; and not to forget that, in thy ambula- 
tory seraglio, there are at least three dozen of pretty faces 
which Bababalouk had not yet unveiled. I myself have 
a great desire to watch over thy conduct, and visit the 
subterranean palace, which, no doubt, contains whatever 
can interest persons like us. There is nothing so pleasing 
as retiring to caverns : my taste for dead bodies, and every 
thing like mummy, is decided ; and, I am confident, thou 
wilt see the most exquisite of their kind. Forget me not 
then, but the moment thou art in possession of the talis- 
mans which are to open the way to the mineral kingdoms 
and the centre of the earth itself, fail not to despatch some 
trusty genius to take me and my cabinet ; for the oil of 



VATHEK. 35 

the serpents I have pinched to death will be a pretty pre- 
sent to the Giaour, who cannot but be charmed with such 
dainties. 

Scarcely had Carathis ended this edifying discourse, 
when the sun, setting behind the mountain of the four 
fountains, gave place to the rising moon. This planet, 
being that evening at full, appeared of unusual beauty and 
magnitude in the eyes of the women, the eunuchs, and the 
pages, who were all impatient to set forward. The city 
re-echoed with shouts of joy, and flourishing of trumpets. 
Nothing was visible but plumes nodding on pavilions, and 
aigrets shining in the mild lustre of the moon. The spa- 
cious square resembled an immense parterre variegated 
with the most stately tulips of the East. 

Arrayed in the robes which were only worn at the most 
distinguished ceremonials, and supported by his vizir and 
Bafoabalouk, the caliph descended the great staircase of the 
tower in the sight of all his people. He could not forbear 
pausing, at intervals, to admire the superb appearance 
which every where courted his view ; whilst the whole 
multitude, even to the camels with their sumptuous bur- 
dens, knelt down before him. For some time a general 
stillness prevailed, which nothing happened to disturb, but 
the shrill screams of some eunuchs in the rear. These 
vigilant guards, having remarked certain cages of the 
ladies swagging somewhat awry, and discovered that a few 
adventurous gallants had contrived to get in, soon dis- 
lodged the enraptured culprits, and consigned them, with 
good commendations, to the surgeons of the serail. The 
majesty of so magnificent a spectacle was not, however, 
violated by incidents like these. Vathek, meanwhile, sa- 
luted the moon with an idolatrous air, that neither pleased 
Morakanabad, nor the doctors of the law, any more than 
the vizirs and grandees of his court, who were all assem- 
bled to enjoy the last view of their sovereign. 

At length, the clarions and trumpets from the top of the 
tower announced the prelude of departure. Though the 
instruments were in unison with each other, yet a singular 
dissonance was blended with their sounds. This proceeded 
from Carathis, who was singing her direful orisons to the 
D 2 



S6 VATHEK. 

Giaour, whilst the negresses and mutes supplied thorough 
bass, without articulating a word. The good Mussulmans 
fancied that they heard the sullen hum of those nocturnal 
insects, which presage evil ; and importuned Vathek to 
beware how he ventured his sacred person. 

On a given signal, the great standard of the Califat was 
displayed : twenty thousand lances shone around it ; and 
the caliph, treading royally on the cloth of gold, which 
had been spread for his feet, ascended his litter amidst the 
general acclamations of his subjects. 

1 The expedition commenced with the utmost order, and 
so entire a silence, that even the locusts were heard from 
the thickets on the plain of Catoul. Gaiety and good hu- 
mour prevailing, they made full six leagues before the 
dawn ; and the morning star was still glittering in the fir- 
mament, when the whole of this numerous train had halted 
on the banks of the Tigris, where they encamped to repose 
for the rest of the day. 

The three days that followed were spent in the same 
manner ; but on the fourth the heavens looked angry : 
lightnings broke forth in frequent flashes; re-echoing 
peals of thunder succeeded ; and the trembling Circassians 
clung with all their might to their ugly guardians. The 
caliph himself was greatly inclined to take shelter in the 
large town of Ghulchissar, the governor of which came 
forth to meet him, and tendered every kind of refreshment 
the place could supply. But, having examined his tablets, 
he suffered the rain to soak him almost to the bone, not- 
withstanding the importunity of his first favourites. 
Though he began to regret the palace of the senses, yet he 
lost not sight of his enterprise, and his sanguine expect- 
ation confirmed his resolution. His geographers were or- 
dered to attend him ; but the weather proved so terrible 
that these poor people exhibited a lamentable appearance : 
and their maps of the different countries, spoiled by the 
rain, were in a still worse plight than themselves. As no 
long journey had been undertaken since the time of Ha- 
roun al Raschid, every one was ignorant which way to 
turn ; and Vathek, though well versed in the course of 
the heavens, no longer knew his situation on earth. He 



VATHEK. 

thundered even louder than the elements ; and muttered 
forth certain hints of the bow-string, -which were not very 
soothing to literary ears. Disgusted at the toilsome wea- 
riness of the way, he determined to cross over the craggy 
heights, and follow the guidance of a peasant, who under- 
took to bring him, in four days, to Rocnabad. Re- 
monstrances were all to no purpose : his resolution was 
fixed. 

. The females and eunuchs uttered shrill wailings at the 
sight of the precipices below them, and the dreary pros- 
pects that opened in the vast gorges of the mountains. 
Before they could reach the ascent of the steepest rock, 
night overtook them, and a boisterous tempest arose, 
which, having rent the awnings of the palanquins and 
cages, exposed to the raw gusts the poor ladies within, 
who had never before felt so piercing a cold. The dark 
clouds that overcast the face of the sky deepened the hor- 
rors of this disastrous night, insomuch that nothing could 
be heard distinctly but the mewling of pages and lament- 
ations of sultanas. 

To increase the general misfortune, the frightful uproar 
of wild beasts resounded at a distance ; and there were 
soon perceived in the forest they were skirting the glaring 
of eyes, which could belong only to devils or tigers. The 
pioneers, who, as well as they could, had marked out a 
track, and a part of the advanced guard, were devoured 
before they had been in the least apprised of their danger. 
The confusion that prevailed was extreme. Wolves, tigers, 
and other carnivorous animals, invited by the howling of 
their companions, flocked together from every quarter. 
The crashing of bones was heard on all sides, and a fearful 
rush of wings over head ; for now vultures also began to 
be of the party. 

The terror at length reached the main body of the troops 
which surrounded the monarch and his harem at the dis- 
tance of two leagues from the scene. Vathek (voluptu- 
ously reposed in his capacious litter upon cushions of silk, 
with two little pages beside him of complexions more fair 
than the enamel of Franguistan, who were occupied in 
keeping off flies), was soundly asleep, and contemplating in 
D 3 



38 VATHEK. 

his dreams the treasures of Soliman. The shrieks, how- 
ever, of his wives awoke him with a start ; and, instead of 
the Giaour with his key of gold, he heheld Bababalouk full 
of consternation. " Sire," exclaimed this good servant of 
the most potent of monarchs, " misfortune is arrived at 
its height ; wild beasts, who entertain no more reverence 
for your sacred person than for a dead ass, have beset your 
camels and their drivers ; thirty of the most richly laden 
are already become their prey, as well as your confectioners, 
your cooks, and purveyors ; and unless our holy Prophet 
should protect us, we shall have all eaten our last meal." 
At the mention of eating, the caliph lost all patience. He 
began to bellow, and even beat himself (for there was no 
seeing in the dark). The rumour every instant increased ; 
and Bababalouk, finding no good could be done with his 
master, stopped both his ears against the hurlyburly of the 
harem, and called out aloud, " Come, ladies and bro- 
thers ! all hands to work : strike light in a moment ! never 
shall it be said, that the commander of the faithful served 
to regale these infidel brutes." Though there wanted 
not, in this bevy of beauties, a sufficient number of capri- 
cious and wayward, yet, on the present occasion, they 
were all compliance. Fires were visible, in a twinkling, in 
all their cages. Ten thousand torches were lighted at 
once. The caliph, himself, seized a large one of wax : 
every person followed his example ; and by kindling ropes' 
ends, dipped in oil, and fastened on poles, an amazing 
blaze was spread. The rocks were covered with the splen- 
dour of sunshine. The trails of sparks, wafted by the 
wind, communicated to the dry fern, of which there was 
plenty. Serpents were observed to crawl forth from their 
retreats, with amazement and hissings ; whilst the horses 
snorted, stamped the ground, tossed their noses in the air, 
and plunged about without mercy. 

One of the forests of cedar that bordered their way 
took fire ; and the branches that overhung the path, ex- 
tending their flames to the muslins and chintzes which 
covered the cages of the ladies, obliged them to jump out, 
at the peril of their necks. Vathek, who vented on the 

. 



VATHEK. 

occasion a thousand blasphemies, was himself compelled to 
touch, with his sacred feet, the naked earth. 

Never had such an incident happened before. Full of 
mortification, shame, and despondence, and not knowing 
how to walk, the ladies fell into the dirt. " Must I go 
on foot ? " said one. ' ' Must I wet my feet ? " cried an- 
other. " Must I soil my dress?" asked a third, "j^" Exe- 
crable Bababalouk ! " exclaimed aU. " Outcast of hell ! 
what hast thou to do with torches ? Better were it to be 
eaten by tigers, than to fall into our present condition! 
we are for ever undone ! Not a porter is there in the 
army, nor a currier of camels, but hath seen some part of 
our bodies ; and, what is worse, our very faces ! " On 
saying this the most bashful amongst them hid their fore- 
heads on the ground, whilst such as had more boldness 
flew at Bababalouk ; but he, well apprised of their humour, 
and not wanting in shrewdness, betook himself to his heels 
along with his comrades, all dropping their torches and 
striking their tymbals. 

It was not less light than in the brightest of the dog- 
days, and the weather was hot in proportion ; but how 
degrading was the spectacle, to behold the caliph bespat- 
tered, like an ordinary mortal ! As the exercise of his 
faculties seemed to be suspended, one of his Ethiopian 
wives (for he delighted in variety) clasped him in her arms, 
threw him upon her shoulder like a sack of dates, and, 
finding that the fire was hemming them in, set off with no 
small expedition, considering the weight of her burden* 
The other ladies, who had just learned the use of their 
feet, followed her : their guards galloped after ; and the 
camel-drivers brought up the rear, as fast as their charge 
would permit. 

They soon reached the spot where the wild beasts had 
commenced the carnage, but which they had too much 
good sense not to leave at the approaching of the tumult, 
having made besides a most luxurious supper. Bababa- 
louk, nevertheless, seized on a few of the plumpest, which 
were unable to budge from the place, and began to flea 
them with admirable adroitness. The cavalcade having 
proceeded so far from the conflagration, that the heat felt 

D 4 



4Q VATHEK. 

rather grateful than violent,, it was immediately resolved on 
to halt. The tattered chintzes were picked up: the scraps, 
left by the wolves and tigers, interred ; and vengeance was 
taken on some dozens of vultures, that were too much 
glutted to rise on the wing. The camels,, which had been 
left unmolested to make sal ammoniac, being numbered, 
and the ladies once more enclosed in their cages, the im- 
perial tent was pitched on the levellest ground they could 
find. 

Vathek, reposing upon a mattress of down, and toler- 
ably recovered from the jolting of the Ethiopian, who, to 
his feelings, seemed the roughest trotting jade he had 
hitherto mounted, called out for something to eat. But, 
alas ! those delicate cakes which had been baked in silver 
ovens for his royal mouth, those rich manchets, amber 
comfits, flagons of Schiraz wine, porcelain vases of snow, 
and grapes from the banks of the Tigris, were all irreme- 
diably lost ! And nothing had Bababalouk to present in 
their stead but a roasted wolf, vultures a la daube ; aro- 
matic herbs of the most acrid poignancy ; rotten truffles, 
boiled thistles, and such other wild plants as must ulce- 
rate the throat and parch up the tongue. Nor was he 
better provided in the article of drink ; for he could pro- 
cure nothing to accompany these irritating viands but a few 
phials of abominable brandy which had been secreted by 
the scullions in their slippers. Vathek made wry faces at 
so savage a repast ; and Bababalouk answered them with 
shrugs and contortions. The caliph, however, eat with 
tolerable appetite; and fell into a nap that lasted six 
hours. 

The splendour of the sun, reflected from the white cliffs 
of the mountains, in spite of the curtains that enclosed 
Vathek, at length disturbed his repose. He awoke terri- 
fied, and stung to the quick by wormwood-colour flies, 
which emitted from their wings a suffocating stench. The 
miserable monarch was perplexed how to act, though his 
wits were not idle in seeking expedients ; whilst Bababa- 
louk lay snoring amidst a swarm of those insects that 
busily thronged to pay court to his nose. The little pages, 
famished with hunger, had dropped their fans on the 



VATHEK. 41 

ground, and exerted their dying voices in bitter reproaches 
on the caliph, who now, for the first time, heard the lan- 
guage of truth. 

Thus stimulated, he renewed his imprecations against 
the Giaour ; and bestowed upon Mahomet some soothing 
expressions. " Where am I?" cried he: "what are 
these dreadful rocks these valleys of darkness? Are we 
arrived at the horrible Kaf ? Is the Simurgh coming to 
pluck out my eyes, as a punishment for undertaking this 
impious enterprise ? " Having said this he turned him- 
self towards an outlet in the side of his pavilion ; but, 
alas ! what objects occurred to his view ? on one side, a 
plain of black sand that appeared to be unbounded ; and, 
on the other, perpendicular crags, bristled over with those 
abominable thistles, which had so severely lacerated his 
tongue. He fancied, however, that he perceived amongst 
the brambles and briars some gigantic flowers, but was 
mistaken ; for these were only the dangling palampores 
and variegated tatters of his gay retinue. As there were 
several clefts in the rock from whence water seemed to 
have flowed, Vathek applied his ear with the hope of 
catching the sound of some latent torrent ; but could only 
distinguish the low murmurs of his people, who were re- 
pining at their journey, and complaining for the want of 
water. " To what purpose," asked they, <( have we been 
brought hither ? hath our caliph another tower to build ? 
or have the relentless afrits, whom Carathis so much loves, 
fixed their abode in this place ? " 

At the name of Carathis, Vathek recollected the tablets 
he had received from his mother ; who assured him they 
were fraught with preternatural qualities, and advised him 
to consult them as emergencies might require. Whilst he 
was engaged in turning them over, he heard a shout of 
joy, and a loud clapping of hands. The curtains of his 
pavilion were soon drawn back, and he beheld Bababalouk, 
followed by a troop of his favourities, conducting two 
dwarfs, each a cubit high ; who brought between them a 
large basket of melons, oranges, and pomegranates. They 
were singing in the sweetest tones the words that follow : 
" We dwell on the top of these rocks, in a cabin of 



VATHEK. 



rushes and canes ; the eagles envy us our nest : a small 
spring supplies us with water for the Abdest, and we daily 
repeat prayers, which the Prophet approves. We love you, 
O commander of the faithful ! our master, the good Emir 
Fakreddin, loves you also : he reveres, in your person, the 
vicegerent of Mahomet. Little as we are, in us he con- 
fides : he knows our hearts to be as good as our bodies 
are contemptible ; and hath placed us here to aid those 
who are bewildered on these dreary mountains. Last 
night, whilst we were occupied within our cell in reading 
the holy Koran, a sudden hurricane blew out our lights, 
and rocked our habitation. For two whole hours, a pal- 
pable darkness prevailed ; but we heard sounds at a dis- 
tance, which we conjectured to proceed from the bells of a 
cafila, passing over the rocks. Our ears were soon filled 
with deplorable shrieks, frightful roarings, and the sound 
of tymbals. Chilled with terror, we concluded that the 
Deggial, with his exterminating angels, had sent forth his 
plagues on the earth. In the midst of these melancholy 
reflections, we perceived flames of the deepest red glow in 
the horizon ; and found ourselves, in a few moments, co- 
vered with flakes of fire. Amazed at so strange an ap- 
pearance, we took up the volume dictated by the blessed 
Intelligence, and, kneeling, by the light of the fire that 
surrounded us, we recited the verse which says, ' Put no 
trust in any thing but the mercy of Heaven : there is no 
help, save in the holy Prophet : the mountain of Kaf, 
itself, may tremble; it is the power of Alia only that 
cannot be moved.' After having pronounced these words, 
we felt consolation, and our minds were hushed into a 
sacred repose. Silence ensued, and our ears clearly dis- 
tinguished a voice in the air, saying, < Servants of my 
faithful servant! go down to the happy valley of Fak- 
reddin : tell him that an illustrious opportunity now offers 
to satiate the thirst of his hospitable heart. The com- 
mander of true believers is, this day, bewildered amongst 
these mountains, and stands in need of thy aid.' We 
obeyed, with joy, the angelic mission ; and our master, 
nlled with pious zeal, hath culled, with his own hands, 
these melons, oranges, and pomegranates. He is following 



VATHEK. 43 

us, with a hundred dromedaries, laden with the purest 
waters of his fountains ; and is coming to kiss the fringe 
of your consecrated robe, and implore you to enter his 
humble habitation, which, placed amidst these barren 
wilds, resembles an emerald set in lead." The dwarfs, 
having ended their address, remained still standing, and, 
with hands crossed upon their bosoms, preserved a respect- 
ful silence. 

Vathek, in the midst of this curious harangue, seized 
the basket ; and, long before it was finished, the fruits had 
dissolved in his mouth. As he continued to eat, his piety 
increased ; and, in the same breath, he recited his prayers 
and called for the Koran and sugar. 

Such was the state of his mind when the tablets, which 
were thrown by at the approach of the dwarfs, again at- 
tracted his eye. He took them up ; but was ready to drop 
on the ground when he beheld, in large red characters, 
inscribed by Carathis, these words, which were, indeed, 
enough to make him tremble, " Beware of old doctors 
and their puny messengers of but one cubit high : distrust 
their pious frauds ; and, instead of eating their melons, 
empale on a spit the bearers of them. Shouldest thou be 
such a fool as to visit them, the portal of the subterranean 
palace will shut in thy face, with such force as shall shake 
thee asunder : thy body shall be spit upon, and bats will 
nestle in thy belly." 

<( To what tends this ominous rhapsody ? " cries the 
caliph ; " and must I, then, perish in these deserts with 
thirst, whilst I may refresh myself in the delicious valley 
of melons and cucumbers ? Accursed be the Giaour with 
his portal of ebony ! he hath made me dance attendance 
too long already. Besides, who shall prescribe laws to 
me ? I, forsooth, must not enter any one's habitation ! 
Be it so ; but what one can I enter that is not my own ?" 
Bababalouk, who lost not a syllable of this soliloquy, ap- 
plauded it with all his heart ; and the ladies, for the first 
time, agreed with him in opinion. 

The dwarfs were entertained, caressed, and seated, with 
great ceremony, on little cushions of satin. The symmetry 
of their persons was a subject of admiration ; not an inch 



44 VATHEK. 

of them was suffered to pass unexamined. Knick-knacks 
and dainties were offered in profusion ; but all were de- 
clined with respectful gravity. They climbed up the sides 
of the caliph's seat ; and, placing themselves each on one 
of his shoulders, began to whisper prayers in his ears. 
Their tongues quivered like aspen leaves ; and the patience 
of Vathek was almost exhausted, when the acclamations of 
the troops announced the approach of Fakreddin, who was 
come with a hundred old grey-beards, and as many Korans 
and dromedaries. They instantly set about their ablutions, 
and began to repeat the Bismillah. Vathek, to get rid of 
these officious monitors, followed their example, for his 
hands were burning. 

The good emir, who was punctiliously religious, and 
likewise a great dealer in compliments, made an harangue 
five times more prolix and insipid than his little harbingers 
had already delivered. The caliph, unable any longer to 
refrain, exclaimed, "For the love of Mahomet, my 
dear Fakreddin, have done ! let us proceed to your valley, 
and enjoy the fruits that Heaven hath vouchsafed you." 
The hint of proceeding put all into motion. The venerable 
attendants of the emir set forward somewhat slowly, but 
Vathek having ordered his little pages, in private, to goad 
on the dromedaries, loud fits of laughter broke forth from 
the cages j for the unwieldy curvetting of these poor beasts, 
and tl)Q ridiculous distress of their superannuated riders, 
afforded the ladies no small entertainment. 

They descended, however, unhurt into the valley, by the 
easy slopes which the emir had ordered to be cut in the 
rock; and already the murmuring of streams and the 
rustling of leaves began to catch their attention. The 
cavalcade soon entered a path, which was skirted by flower- 
ing shrubs, and extended to a vast wood of palm trees, 
whose branches overspread a vast building of freestone. 
This edifice was crowned with nine domes, and adorned 
with as many portals of bronze, on which was engraven 
the following inscription : " This is the asylum of pil- 
grims, the refuge of travellers, and the depositary of secrets 
from all parts of the world." 

Nine pages, beautiful as the day, and decently clothed 



VATHEK. 45 

in robes of Egyptian linen, were standing at each door. 
They received the whole retinue with an easy and inviting 
air. Four of the most amiable placed the caliph on a 
magnificent tecthtrevan ; four others, somewhat less grace- 
ful, took charge of Bababalouk, who capered for joy at the 
snug little cabin that fell to his share : the pages that re- 
mained waited on the rest of the train. 

Every man being gone out of sight, the gate of a large 
enclosure on the right turned on its harmonious hinges ; 
and a young female, of a slender form, came forth. Her 
light brown hair floated in the hazy breeze of the twilight. 
A troop of young maidens, like the Pleiades, attended her 
on tiptoe. They hastened to the pavilions that contained 
the sultanas ; and the young lady, gracefully bending, said 
to them, " Charming princesses ! every thing is ready ; 
we have prepared beds for your repose, and strewed your 
apartments with jasmine. No insects will keep off slumber 
from visiting your eyelids ; we will dispel them with a 
thousand plumes. Come, then, amiable ladies ! refresh 
your delicate feet, and your ivory limbs, in baths of rose- 
water ; and, by the light of perfumed lamps, your servants 
will amuse you with tales." The sultanas accepted with 
pleasure these obliging offers, and followed the young 
lady to the emir's harem ; where we must, for a moment, 
leave them, and return to the caliph. 

Vathek found himself beneath a vast dome, illuminated 
by a thousand lamps of rock crystal : as many vases of the 
same material, filled with excellent sherbet, sparkled on a 
large table, where a profusion of viands were spread. 
Amongst others, were rice boiled in milk of almonds, 
saffron soups, and lamb a la creme ; of all which the 
caliph was amazingly fond. He took of each as much as 
he was able ; testified his sense of the emir's friendship by 
the gaiety of his heart ; and made the dwarfs dance against 
their will, for these little devotees durst not refuse the 
commander of the faithful. At last, he spread himself on 
the sofa, and slept sounder than he ever had before. 

Beneath this dome a general silence prevailed ; for there 
was nothing to disturb it but the jaws of Bababalouk, who 
had untrussed himself to eat with greater advantage, being 



46 VATHEK. 

anxious to make amends for his fast in the mountains. As 
his spirits were too high to admit of his sleeping, and 
hating to be idle,, he proposed with himself to visit, the 
harem, and repair to his charge of the ladies : to examine 
if they had been properly lubricated with the balm of 
Mecca ; if their eyebrows and tresses were in order ; and, 
in a word, to perform all the little offices they might need. 
He sought for a long time together, but without being able 
to find out the door. He durst not speak aloud, for fear 
of disturbing the caliph ; and not a soul was stirring in 
the precincts of the palace. He almost despaired of ef- 
fecting his purpose, when a low whispering just reached 
his ear. It came from the dwarfs, who were returned to 
their old occupation, and, for the nine hundred and ninety- 
ninth time in their lives, were reading over the Koran. 
They very politely invited Bababalouk to be of their party ; 
but his head was full of other concerns. The dwarfs, 
though not a little scandalised at his dissolute morals, 
directed him to the apartments he wanted to find. His 
way thither lay through a hundred dark corridors, -along 
which he groped as he went ; and at last began to catch, 
from the extremity of a passage, the charming gossiping of 
the women, which not a little delighted his heart. (< Ah, 
ha ! what not yet asleep ? " cried he ; and, taking long 
strides as he spoke, " did you not suspect me of abjuring 
my charge ? " Two of the black eunuchs, on hearing a 
voice so loud, left their party in haste, sabre in hand, to 
discover the cause; but presently was repeated on all 
sides, " ' T is only Bababalouk ! no one but Bababalouk ! " 
This circumspect guardian, having gone up to a thin veil 
of carnation-colour silk that hung before the doorway, dis- 
tinguished, by means of the softened splendour that shone 
through it, an oval bath of dark porphyry, surrounded by 
curtains, festooned in large folds. Through the apertures 
between them, as they were not drawn close, groups of 
young slaves were visible; amongst whom, Bababalouk 
perceived his pupils, indulgingly expanding their arms, as 
if to embrace the perfumed water, and refresh themselves 
after their fatigues. The looks of tender languor ; their 
confidential whispers; and the enchanting smiles with 



VATHEK. 47 

which they were imparted ; the exquisite fragrance of the 
roses : all combined to inspire a voluptuousness, which 
even Babahalouk himself was scarce able to withstand. 

He summoned up, however, his usual solemnity; and, 
in the peremptory tone of authority, commanded the la- 
dies, instantly, to leave the bath. Whilst he was issuing 
these mandates, the young Nouronihar, daughter of the 
emir, who was as sprightly as an antelope, and full of 
wanton gaiety, beckoned one of her slaves to let down the 
great swing which was suspended to the ceiling by cords 
of silk ; and whilst this was doing, winked to her com- 
panions in the bath, who, chagrined to be forced from so 
soothing a state of indolence, began to twist and entangle 
their hair to plague and detain Bababalouk, and teased 
him, besides, with a thousand vagaries. 

Nouronihar, perceiving that he was nearly out of pa- 
tience, accosted him, with an arch air of respectful con- 
cern, and said, " My lord ! it is not by any means 
decent that the chief eunuch of the caliph, our sovereign, 
should thus continue standing ; deign but to recline your 
graceful person upon this sofa, which will burst with 
vexation if it have not the honour to receive you." Caught 
by these flattering accents, Bababalouk gallantly replied, 
" Delight of the apple of my eye ! I accept the invitation 
of your honied lips ; and, to say truth, my senses are 
dazzled with the radiance that beams from your charms." 
" Repose, then, at your ease," replied the beauty ; as 
she placed him on the pretended sofa, which, quicker than 
lightning, flew up all at once. The rest of the women, 
having aptly conceived her design, sprang naked from the 
bath, and plied the swing with such unmerciful jerks that 
it swept through the whole compass of a very lofty dome, 
and took from the poor victim all power of respiration. 
Sometimes his feet rased the surface of the water ; and, 
at others, the skylight almost flattened his nose. In vain 
did he fill the air with the cries OL' a voice that resembled 
the ringing of a cracked jar ; their peals of laughter were 
still predominant. 

Nouronihar, in the inebriety of youthful spirits, being 
used only to eunuchs of ordinary harems, and having never 



48 VATHEK. 

seen any thing so eminently disgusting, was far more 
diverted than all of the rest. She hegan to parody some 
Persian verses, and sang, with an accent most demurely 
piquant, " Oh, gentle white dove! as thou soar'st 
through the air, vouchsafe one kind glance on the mate of 
thy love: melodious* Philomel, I am thy rose; warhle 
some couplet to ravish my heart ! " 

The sultanas and their slaves, stimulated by these plea- 
santries, persevered at the swing with such unremitted 
assiduity, that at length the cord, which had secured it, 
snapped suddenly asunder ; and Bababalouk fell, flounder- 
ing like a turtle, to the bottom of the bath. This accident 
occasioned an universal shout. Twelve little doors, till 
now unobserved, flew open at once ; and the ladies, in an 
instant, made their escape ; but not before having neaped 
all the towels on his head, and put out the lights that re- 
mained. 

The deplorable animal, in water to the chin, over- 
whelmed with darkness, and unable to extricate himself 
from the wrappers that embarrassed him, was still doomed 
to hear, for his further consolation, the fresh bursts of 
merriment his disaster occasioned. He bustled, but in 
vain, to get from the bath ; for the margin was become so 
slippery with the oil spilt in breaking the lamps, that, at 
every effort, he slid back with a plunge which resounded 
aloud through the hollow of the doom. These cursed peals 
of laughter were redoubled at every relapse, and he, who 
thought the place infested rather by devils than women, 
resolved to cease groping, and abide in the bath ; where he 
amused himself with soliloquies, interspersed with impre- 
cations, of which his malicious neighbours, reclining on 
down, suffered not an accent to escape. In this delectable 
plight the morning surprised him. The caliph, wonder- 
ing at his absence, had caused him to be sought for every 
where. At last, he was drawn forth almost smothered 
from under the wisp of linen, and wet even to the marrow. 
Limping, and his teeth chattering with cold, he approached 
his master ; who enquired what was the matter, and how 
he came soused in so sitrange a pickle ? " And why did 
you enter this curseit lodge?" answered Bababalouk, 



VATHEK. 49 

gruffly. " Ought a monarch like you to visit with his 
harem the abode of a grey-bearded emir, who knows no- 
thing of life ? And with what gracious damsels doth the 
place too abound ! Fancy to yourself how they have soaked 
me like a burnt crust ; and made me dance like a jack- 
pudding, the livelong night through, on their damnable 
swing. What an excellent lesson for your sultanas, into 
whom I had instilled such reserve and decorum ! " Va- 
thek, comprehending not a syllable of all this invective, 
obliged him to relate minutely the transaction : but, in- 
stead of sympathising with the miserable sufferer, he 
laughed immoderately at the device of the swing and the 
figure of Bababalouk mounted upon it. The stung 
eunuch could scarcely preserve the semblance of respect. 
" Ay, laugh, my lord ! laugh," said he ; " but I wish 
this Nouronihar would play some trick on you ; she is too 
wicked to spare even majesty itself." These words made, 
for the present, but a slight impression on the caliph ; but 
they, not long after, recurred to his mind. 

This conversation was cut short by Fakreddin, who came 
to request that Vathek would join in the prayers and ab- 
lutions, to be solemnised on a spacious meadow watered by 
innumerable streams. The caliph found the waters re- 
freshing, but the prayers abominably irksome. He diverted 
himself, however, with the multitude of calenders, santons, 
and derviches, who were continually coming and going; 
but especially with the bramins, faquirs, and other enthu- 
siasts, who had travelled from the heart of India, and 
halted on their way with the emir. These latter had each 
of them some mummery peculiar to himself. One dragged 
a huge chain wherever he went ; another an ouran-outang; 
whilst a third was furnished with scourges ; and all per- 
formed to a charm. Some would climb up trees, holding 
one foot in the air ; others poise themselves over a fire, and 
without mercy fillip their noses. There were some amongst 
them that cherished vermin, which were not ungrateful in 
requiting their caresses. These rambling fanatics revolted 
the hearts of the derviches, the calenders, and santons ; 
however, the vehemence of their aversion soon subsided, 
under the hope that the presence of the caliph would cure 





50 VATHEK, 

their folly, and convert them to the Mussulman faith. 
But, alas ! how great was their disappointment ! for Va- 
thek, instead of preaching to them, treated them as buffoons, 
bade them present his compliments to Visnow and Ixhora, 
and discovered a predilection for a squat old man from the 
Isle of Serendib, who was more ridiculous than any of the 
rest. " Come !" said he, " for the love of your gods, be- 
stow a few slaps on your chops to amuse me." The old 
fellow, offended at such an address, began loudly to weep ; 
but, as he betrayed a villanous drivelling in shedding tears, 
the caliph turned his back and listened to Bababalouk, 
who whispered, whilst he held the umbrella over him, 
"Your majesty should be cautious of this odd assembly ; 
which hath been collected, I know not for what. Is it 
necessary to exhibit such spectacles to a mighty potentate, 
with interludes of talapoins more mangy than dogs ? Were 
I you, I would command a fire to be kindled, and at once 
rid the estates of the emir, of his harem, and all his me- 
nagerie." " Tush, dolt,'' answered Vathek, " and know 
that all this infinitely charms me. Nor shall I leave the 
meadow, till I have visited every hive of these pious men- 
dicants." 

Wherever the caliph directed his course, objects of pity 
were sure to swarm round him ; the blind, the purblind, 
smarts without noses, damsels without ears, each to extol 
the munificence of Fakreddin, who, as well as his attend- 
ant grey-beards, dealt about, gratis, plasters and cataplasms 
to all that applied. At noon, a superb corps of cripples 
made its appearance ; and soon after advanced, by platoons, 
on the plain, the completest association of invalids that had 
ever been embodied till then. The blind went groping 
with the blind, the lame limped on together, and the 
maimed made gestures to each other with the only arm 
that remained. The sides of a considerable waterfall were 
crowded by the deaf; amongst whom were some from 
Pegu, with ears uncommonly handsome and large, but who 
were still less able to hear than the rest. Nor were there 
wanting others in abundance with hump-backs, wenny 
fiecks, and even horns of an exquisite polish. 

The emir, to aggrandise the solemnity of the festival, in 



VATHEK. 51 ' 

honour of his illustrious visitant, ordered the turf to be 
spread, on all sides, with skins and table-cloths; upon 
which were served up for the good Mussulmans pilaus of 
every hue, with other orthodox dishes ; and, by the ex- 
press order of Vathek, who was shamefully tolerant, small 
plates of abominations were prepared, to the great scandal 
of the faithful. The holy assembly began to fall to. The 
caliph, in spite of every remonstrance from the chief of 
his eunuchs, resolved to have a dinner dressed on the spot. 
The complaisant emir immediately gave orders for a table 
to be placed in the shade of the willows. The first service 
consisted of fish, which they drew from a river, flowing 
over sands of gold at the foot of a lofty hill. These were 
broiled as fast as taken, and served up with a sauce of 
vinegar, and small herbs that grew on Mount Sinai ; for 
every thing with the emir was excellent and pious. 

The dessert was not quite set on, when the sound of 
lutes, from the hill, was repeated by the echoes of the 
neighbouring mountains. The caliph, with an emotion of 
pleasure and surprise, had no sooner raised up his head, 
than a handful of jasmine dropped on his face. An abun- 
dance of tittering succeeded the frolic, and instantly ap- 
peared, through the bushes, the elegant forms of several 
young females, skipping and bounding like roes. The 
fragrance diffused from their hair struck the sense of 
Vathek, who, in an ecstasy, suspending his repast, said to 
Bababalouk, " Are the peries come down from their 
spheres ? Note her, in particular, whose form is so per- 
fect ; venturously running on the brink of the precipice, 
and turning back her head, as regardless of nothing but the 
graceful flow of her robe. With what captivating im- 
patience doth she contend with the bushes for her veil ? 
could it be her who threw the jasmine at me?" " Ay ! 
she it was ; and you too would she throw, from the top of 
the rock," answered Bababalouk, " for that is my good 
friend Nouronihar, who so kindly lent me her swing. My 
dear lord and master," added he, wresting a twig from a 
willow, " let me correct her for her want of respect : the 
emir will have no reason to complain ; since (bating what 
I owe to his piety) he is much to be blamed for keeping a 
E 2 



52 VATHEK. 

troop of girls on the mountains, where the sharpness of the 
air gives their blood too brisk a circulation." 

" Peace ! blasphemer/' said the caliph; "speak not thus 
of her, who, over these mountains, leads my heart a willing 
captive. Contrive, rather, that my eyes may be fixed upon 
hers ; that I may respire her sweet breath as she bounds 
panting along these delightful wilds ! " On saying these 
words, Vathek extended his arms towards the hill ; and di- 
recting his eyes, with an anxiety unknown to him before, 
endeavoured to keep within view the object that enthralled 
his soul ; but her course was as difficult to follow, as the 
flight of one of those beautiful blue butterflies of Cache- 
mire, which are, at once, so volatile and rare. 

The caliph, not satisfied with seeing, wished also to 
hear Nouronihar, and eagerly turned to catch the sound of 
her voice. At last, he distinguished her whispering to one 
of her companions behind the thicket from whence she had 
thrown the jasmine, " A caliph, it must be owned, is 
a fine thing to see ; but my little Gulchenrouz is much 
more amiable : one lock of his hair is of more value to me 
than the richest embroidery of the Indies. I had rather 
that his teeth should mischievously press my finger, than 
the richest ring of the imperial treasure. Where have you 
left him, Sutlememe ? and why is he not here ? " 

The agitated caliph still wished to hear more ; but she 
immediately retired with all her attendants. The fond 
monarch pursued her with his eyes till she was gone out of 
sight ; and then continued like a bewildered and benighted 
traveller,, from whom the clouds had obscured the constel- 
lation that guided his way. The curtain of night seemed 
dropped before him : every thing appeared discoloured. 
The falling waters filled his soul with dejection, and his 
tears trickled down the jasmines he had caught from Nou- 
ronihar, and placed in his inflamed bosom. He snatched 
up a few shining pebbles, to remind him of the scene 
where he felt the first tumults of love. Two hours were 
elapsed, and evening drew on, before he could resolve to 
depart from the place. He often, but in vain, attempted 
to go : a soft languor enervated the powers of his mind. 
Extending himself on the brink of the stream, he turned 



VATHEK:. 53 

his eyes towards the blue summits of the mountain, and 

exclaimed, " What concealest thou behind thee, pitiless 

rock ? what is passing in thy solitudes ? Whither is she 
gone ? O heaven ! perhaps she is now wandering in thy 
grottoes with her happy Gulchenrouz !" 

In the mean time, the damps began to descend ; and the 
emir, solicitous for the health of the caliph, ordered the 
imperial litter to be brought. Vathek, absorbed in his 
reveries, was imperceptibly removed and conveyed back to 
the saloon, that received him the evening before. But let 
us leave the caliph immersed in his new passion, and 
attend Nouronihar beyond the rocks where she had again 
joined her beloved Gulchenrouz. 

This Gulchenrouz was the son of Ali Hassan, brother to 
the emir ; and the most delicate and lovely creature in the 
world. Ali Hassan, who had been absent ten years on a 
voyage to the unknown seas, committed, at his departure, 
this child, the only survivor of many, to the care and pro- 
tection of his brother. Gulchenrouz could write in various 
characters with precision, and paint upon vellum the most 
elegant arabesques that fancy could devise. His sweet 
voice accompanied the lute in the most enchanting manner ; 
and when he sang the loves of Megnoun and Leilah, or 
some unfortunate lovers of ancient days, tears insensibly 
overflowed the cheeks of his auditors. The verses he com- 
posed (for, like Megnoun, he, too, was a poet,) inspired 
that unresisting languor, so frequently fatal to the female 
heart. The women all doted upon him ; and, though he 
had passed his thirteenth year, they still detained him in 
the harem. His dancing was light as the gossamer waved 
by the zephyrs of spring ; but his arms, which twined so 
gracefully with those of the young girls in the dance, could 
neither dart the lance in the chase, nor curb the steeds 
that pastured in his uncle's domains. The bow, however, 
he drew with a certain aim, and would have excelled his 
competitors in the race, could he have broken the ties that 
bound him to Nouronihar. 

The two brothers had mutually engaged their children 
to each other ; and Nouronihar loved her cousin more than 
her own beautiful eyes. Both had the same tastes and 
E 3 



54 VATHEK. 

amusements ; the same long, languishing looks ; the same 
tresses ; the same fair complexions ; and, when Gulchen- 
rouz appeared in the dress of his cousin, he seemed to be 
more feminine than even herself. If, at any time, he left 
the harem to visit Fakreddin, it was with all the bash- 
fulness of a fawn, that consciously ventures from the lair 
of its dam : he was, however, wanton enough to mock the 
solemn old grey-beards, though sure to be rated without 
mercy in return. Whenever this happened, he would 
hastily plunge into the recesses of the harem ; and, sobbing, 
take refuge in the fond arms of Nouronihar, who loved even 
his faults beyond the virtues of others. 

It fell out this evening, that, after leaving the caliph in 
the meadow, she ran with Gulchenrouz over the green sward 
of the mountain, that sheltered the vale where Fakreddin 
had chosen to reside. The sun was dilated on the edge of 
the horizon ; and the young people, whose fancies were 
lively and inventive, imagined they beheld, in the gorgeous 
clouds of the west, the domes of Shaddukian and Ambrea- 
bad, where the peries have fixed their abode. Nouronihar, 
sitting on the slope of the hill, supported on her knees 
the perfumed head of Gulchenrouz. The unexpected 
arrival of the caliph, and the splendour that marked his 
appearance, had already filled with emotion the ardent soul 
of Nouronihar. Her vanity irresistibly prompted her to 
pique the prince's attention ; and this she before took good 
care to effect, whilst he picked up the jasmine she had 
thrown upon him. But when Gulchenrouz asked after 
the flowers he had culled for her bosom, Nouronihar was 
all in confusion. She hastily kissed his forehead, arose in 
a flutter, and walked with unequal steps on the border of 
the precipice. Night advanced, and the pure gold of the 
setting sun had yielded to a sanguine red ; the glow of 
which, like the reflection of a burning furnace, flushed 
Nouronihar's animated countenance. Gulchenrouz, alarmed 
at the agitation of his cousin, said to her, with a suppli- 
cating accent, " Let us begone ; the sky looks portentous, 
the tamarisks tremble more than common, and the raw 
wind chills my very heart. Come ! let us begone j 'tis a 
melancholy night!" Then taking hold of her hand, he 



VATHEK. 55 

drew it towards the path he besought her to go. Nouroni- 
har unconsciously followed the attraction ; for a thousand 
strange imaginations occupied her spirits. She passed the 
large round of honeysuckles, her favourite resort, without 
ever vouchsafing it a glance ; yet Gulchenrouz could not 
help snatching off a few shoots in his way, though he ran 
as if a wild beast were behind. 

The young females seeing them approach in such haste, 
and, according to custom, expecting a dance, instantly 
assembled in a circle and took each other by the hand ; 
but Gulchenrouz, coming up out of breath, fell down at 
once on the grass. This accident struck with consterna- 
tion the whole of this frolicsome party ; whilst Nouroni- 
har, half distracted and overcome, both by the violence of 
her exercise, and the tumult of her thoughts, sunk feebly 
down at his side, cherished his cold hands in her bosom, 
and chafed his temples with a fragrant perfume. At length 
he came to himself, and wrapping up his head in the robe 
of his cousin, entreated that she would not return to the 
harem. He was afraid of being snapped at by Shaban his 
tutor, a wrinkled old eunuch of a surly disposition ; for, 
having interrupted the wonted walk of Nouronihar, he 
dreaded lest the churl should take it amiss. The whole 
of this sprightly group, sitting round upon a mossy knoll, 
began to entertain themselves with various pastimes, whilst 
their superintendents, the eunuchs, were gravely conversing 
at a distance. The nurse of the emir's daughter, observing 
her pupil sit ruminating with her eyes on the ground, en- 
deavoured to amuse her with diverting tales ; to which 
Gulchenrouz, who had already forgotten his inquietudes, 
listened with a breathless attention. He laughed, he clap- 
ped his hands, and passed a hundred little tricks on the 
whole of the company, without omitting the eunuchs, whom 
he provoked to run after him, in spite of their age and 
decrepitude. 

During these occurrences, the moon arose, the wind 
subsided, and the evening became so serene and inviting, 
that a resolution was taken to sup on the spot. One of 
the eunuchs ran to fetch melons, whilst others were em- 
ployed in showering down almonds from the branches that 
K 4 



56 VATHEK. 

overhung this amiable party. Sutlememe, who excelled in 
dressing a salad, having filled large bowls of porcelain 
with eggs of small birds, curds turned with citron juice, 
slices of cucumber, and the inmost leaves of delicate herbs, 
handed it round from one to another, and gave each their 
shares with a large spoon of cocknos. Gulchenrouz, nest- 
ling, as usual, in the bosom of Nouronihar, pouted out his 
vermilion little lips against the offer of Sutlememe ; and 
would take it only from the hand of his cousin, on whose 
mouth he hung, like a bee inebriated with the nectar of 
flowers. 

In the midst of this festive scene, there appeared a light 
on the top of the highest mountain, which attracted the 
notice of every eye. This light was not less bright than 
the moon when at full, and might have been taken for her, 
had not the moon already risen. The phenomenon occa- 
sioned a general surprise, and no one could conjecture the 
cause. It could not be a fire, for the light was clear and 
bluish ; nor had meteors ever been seen of that magnitude 
or splendour. This strange light faded for a moment, 
and immediately renewed its brightness. It first appeared 
motionless, at the foot of the rock ; whence it darted in an 
instant, to sparkle in a thicket of palm-trees : from thence 
it glided along the torrent ; and at last fixed in a glen that 
was narrow and dark. The moment it had taken its 
direction, Gulchenrouz, whose heart always trembled at 
any thing sudden or rare, drew Nouronihar by the robe, 
and anxiously requested her to return to the harem. The 
women were importunate in seconding the entreaty ; but 
the curiosity of the emir's daughter prevailed. She not 
only refused to go back, but resolved, at all hazards, to 
pursue the appearance. 

Whilst they were debating what was best to be done, 
the light shot forth so dazzling a blaze that they all fled 
away shrieking. Nouronihar followed them a few steps ; 
but, coming to the turn of a little by-path, stopped, and 
went back alone. As she ran with an alertness peculiar 
to herself, it was not long before she came to the place, 
where they had just been supping. The globe of fire now 
appeared stationary in the glen, and burned in majestic 



VATHEK. 57 

stillness. Nouronihar, pressing her hands upon her bosom, 
hesitated, for some moments, to advance. The solitude 
of her situation was new ; the silence of the night awful ; 
and every object inspired sensations which, till then, she 
never had felt. The affright of Gulchenrouz recurred to 
her mind, and she a thousand times turned to go back ; 
but this luminous appearance was always before her. 
Urged on by an irresistible impulse, she continued to ap- 
proach it, in defiance of every obstacle that opposed her 
progress. 

At length she arrived at the opening of the glen ; but, 
instead of coming up to the light, she found herself sur- 
rounded by darkness ; excepting that, at a considerable 
distance, a faint spark glimmered by fits. She stopped a 
second time : the sound of waterfalls mingling their mur- 
murs, the hollow rustlings among the palm-branches, 
and the funereal screams of the birds from their rifted 
trunks, all conspired to fill her soul with terror. She 
imagined, every moment, that she trod on some venomous 
reptile. All the stories of malignant dives and dismal 
goules thronged into her memory ; but her curiosity was, 
notwithstanding, more predominant than her fears. She 
therefore firmly entered a winding track that led towards 
the spark ; but, being a stranger to the path, she had not 
gone far, till she began to repent of her rashness. " Alas ! " 
said she, " that I were but in those secure and illuminated 
apartments, where my evenings glided on with Gulchen- 
rouz ! Dear child ! how would thy heart flutter with 
terror, wert thou wandering in these wild solitudes, like 
me!" Thus speaking, she advanced, and coming up to 
steps hewn in the rock ascended them undismayed. The 
light, which was now gradually enlarging, appeared above 
her on the summit of the mountain, and as if proceeding 
from a cavern. At length, she distinguished a plaintive 
and melodious union of voices, that resembled the dirges 
which are sung over tombs. A sound like that which 
arises from the filling of baths struck her ear at the same 
time. She continued ascending, and discovered large wax 
torches in full blaze, planted here and there in the fissures 
of the rock. This appearance filled her with fear, whilst 



58 VATHEK. 

the subtile and potent odour, which the torches exhaled, 
caused her to sink., almost lifeless, at the entrance of the 
grot. 

Casting her eyes within, in this kind of trance, she be- 
held a large cistern of gold, filled with a water, the vapour 
of which distilled on her face a dew of the essence of 
roses. A soft symphony resounded through the grot. On 
the sides of the cistern she noticed appendages of royalty, 
diadems and feathers of the heron, all sparkling with car- 
buncles. Whilst her attention was fixed on this display 
of magnificence, the music ceased, and a voice instantly 
demanded, " For what monarch are these torches kindled, 
this bath prepared, and these habiliments which belong 
not only to the sovereigns of the earth, but even to the 
talismanic powers ? " To which a second voice answered, 
tc They are for the charming daughter of the Emir Fak- 
reddin." " What," replied the first, " for that trifler, 
who consumes her time with a giddy child, immersed in 
softness, and who, at best, can make but a pitiful hus- 
band? " " And can she," rejoined the other voice, " be 
amused with such empty toys, whilst the caliph, the 
sovereign of the world, he who is destined to enjoy the 
treasures of the pre-adamite sultans, a prince six feet 
high, and whose eyes pervade the inmost soul of a female, 
is inflamed with love for her ? No ! she will be wise 
enough to answer that passion alone that can aggrandise 
her glory. No doubt she will, and despise the puppet of 
her fancy. Then all the riches this place contains, as well 
as the carbuncle of Giamschid, shall be hers." " You 
judge right," returned the first voice; "and I haste to 
Istakhar to prepare the palace of subterranean fire for the 
reception of the bridal pair." 

The voices ceased ; the torches were extinguished ; the 
most entire darkness succeeded ; and Nouronihar recover- 
ing, with a start, found herself reclined on a sofa in the 
harem of her father. She clapped her hands, and im- 
mediately came together Gulchenrouz and her women; 
who, in despair at having lost her, had despatched eunuchs 
to seek her in every direction. Shaban appeared with the 
rest, and began to reprimand her, with an air of conse*. 



VATHEK. 59 

quence : " Little impertinent/' said he, " have you false 
keys, or are you beloved of some genius that hath given 
you a picklock ? I will try the extent of your power : 
come to the dark chamber, and expect not the company of 
Gulchenrouz : be expeditious ! I will shut you up, 
and turn the key twice upon you !" At these menaces, 
Nouronihar indignantly raised her head, opened on Shaban 
her black eyes, which, since the important dialogue of the 
enchanted grot, were considerably enlarged, and said, 
" Go, speak thus to slaves ; but learn to reverence her 
who is born to give laws, and subject all to her power." 

Proceeding in the same style, she was interrupted by a 
sudden exclamation of " The caliph ! the caliph ! " All 
the curtains were thrown open, the slaves prostrated them- 
selves in double rows, and poor little Gulchenrouz went to 
hide beneath the couch of a sofa. At first appeared a file 
of black eunuchs trailing after them long trains of muslin 
embroidered with gold, and holding in their hands censers, 
which dispensed, as they passed, the grateful perfume of 
the wood of aloes. Next marched Bababalouk with a 
solemn strut, and tossing his head, as not overpleased at 
the visit. Vathek came close after, superbly robed : his 
gait was unembarrassed and noble ; and his presence 
would have engaged admiration, though he had not been 
the sovereign of the world. He approached Nouronihar 
with a throbbing heart, and seemed enraptured at the full 
effulgence of her radiant eyes, of which he had before 
caught but a few glimpses : but she instantly depressed 
them, and her confusion augmented her beauty. 

Bababalouk, who was a thorough adept in coincidences 
of this nature, and knew that the worst game should be 
played with the best face, immediately made a signal for 
all to retire ; and no sooner did he perceive beneath the 
sofa the little one's feet, than he drew him forth without 
ceremony, set him upon his shoulders, and lavished on 
him, as he went off, a thousand unwelcome caresses. 
Gulchenrouz cried out, and resisted till his cheeks became 
the colour of the blossom of pomegranates, and his tearful 
eyes sparkled with indignation. He cast a significant 
glance at Nouronihar, which the caliph noticing, asked, 



60 VATHEK. 

" Is that, then., your Gulch enrouz ?" " Sovereign of the 
world ! " answered she, " spare my cousin, whose inno- 
cence and gentleness deserve not your anger!" " Take 
comfort," said Vathek, with a smile : " he is in good 
hands. Bababalouk is fond of children, and] never goes 
without sweetmeats and comfits." The daughter of Fak- 
reddin was abashed, and suffered Gulchenrouz to be borne 
away without adding a word. The tumult of her bosom 
betrayed her confusion, and Vathek becoming still more 
impassioned, gave a loose to his frenzy ; which had only 
not subdued the last faint strugglings of reluctance, when 
the emir suddenly bursting in, threw his face upon the 
ground at the feet of the caliph, and said, " Commander 
of the faithful ! abase not yourself to the meanness of your 
slave." "No, emir," replied Vathek, " I raise her to 
an equality with myself : I declare her my wife ; and the 
glory of your race shall extend , from one generation to 
another." " Alas ! my lord," said Fakreddin, as he 
plucked off a few grey hairs of his beard, ee cut short the 
days of your faithful servant, rather than force him to de- 
part from his word. Nouronihar is solemnly promised to 
Gulchenrouz, the son of my brother Ali Hassan : they are 
united, also, in heart ; their faith is mutually plighted ; 
and affiances, so sacred, cannot be broken." " What 
then ! " replied the caliph bluntly ; " would you surrender 
this divine beauty to a husband more womanish than her- 
self ; and can you imagine, that I will suffer her charms 
to decay in hands so inefficient and nerveless ? No ! she 
is destined to live out her life within my embraces : such 
is my will ; retire, and disturb not the night I devote to 
the worship of her charms." 

The irritated emir drew forth his sabre, presented it to 
Vathek, and stretching out his neck, said, in a firm tone 
of voice, " Strike your unhappy host, my lord: he has 
lived long enough, since he hath seen the Prophet's vice- 
gerent violate the rights of hospitality." At his uttering 
these words, Nouronihar, unable to support any longer the 
conflict of her passions, sunk down in a swoon. Vathek, 
both terrified for her life and furious at an opposition to 
his will, bade Fakreddin assist his daughter, and withdrew ; 



VATHEK. Cl 

darting his terrible look at the unfortunate emir, who sud- 
denly fell backward, bathed in a sweat as cold as the 
damp of death. 

Gulchenrouz, who had escaped from the hands of Baba- 
balouk, and was, at that instant, returned, called out for 
help, as loudly as he could, not having strength to afford it 
himself. Pale and panting, the poor child attempted to re- 
vive Nouronihar by caresses ; and it happened, that the 
thrilling warmth of his lips restored her to life. Fakreddin 
beginning also to recover from the look of the caliph, with 
difficulty tottered to a seat ; and, after warily casting round 
his eye, to see if this dangerous prince were gone, sent for 
Shaban and Sutlememe ; and said to them apart, " My 
friends ! violent evils require violent remedies ; the caliph 
has brought desolation and horror into my family ; and 
how shall we resist his power ? Another of his looks will 
send me to the grave. Fetch, then, that narcotic powder 
which a dervish brought me from Aracan. A dose of it, 
the effect of which will continue three days, must be ad- 
ministered to each of these children. The caliph will be- 
lieve them to be dead ; for they will have all the appearance 
of death. We shall go, as if to inter them in the cave of 
Meimoune, at the entrance of the great desert of sand, and 
near the bower of my dwarfs. When all the spectators 
shall be withdrawn, you, Shaban, and four select eunuchs, 
shall convey them to the lake ; where provision shall be 
ready to support them a month : for, one day allotted to 
the surprise this event will occasion ; five, to the tears ; a 
fortnight, to reflection ; and the rest, to prepare for re- 
newing his progress ; will, according to my calculation, fill 
up the whole time that Vathek will tarry ; and I shall, 
then, be freed from his intrusion." 

" Your plan is good," said Sutlememe, " if it can but 
be effected. I have remarked, that Nouronihar is well 
able to support the glances of the caliph, and that he is 
far from being sparing of them to her ; be assured, there- 
fore, that, notwithstanding her fondness for Gulchenrouz, 
she will never remain quiet, while she knows him to be 
here. Let us persuade her, that both herself and Gulchen- 
rouz are really dead ; and, that they were conveyed to those 



6'2 VATHEK. 

rocks, for a limited season, to expiate the little faults, of 
which their love was the cause. We will add, that we 
killed ourselves in despair; and that your dwarfs, whom 
they never yet saw, will preach to them delectable sermons. 
I will engage that every thing shall succeed to the bent of 
your wishes." " Be it so ! " said Fakreddin : ' ' I approve 
your proposal : let us lose not a moment to give it effect." 
They hastened to seek for the powder, which, being 
mixed in a sherbet, was immediately administered to Gul- 
chenrouz and Nouronihar. Within the space of an hour, 
both were seized with violent palpitations ; and a general 
numbness gradually ensued. They arose from the floor 
where they had remained ever since the caliph's departure ; 
and, ascending to the sofa, reclined themselves upon it, 
clasped in each other's embraces. (C Cherish me, my 
dear Nouronihar ! " said Gulchenrouz : " put thy hand upon 
my heart ; it feels as if it were frozen. Alas ! thou art as 
cold as myself! hath the caliph murdered us both, with 
his terrible look ? " ' ' I am dying ! " cried she, in a falter- 
ing voice : " press me closer ; I am ready to expire ! " 
" Let us die, then, together/' answered the little Gulchen- 
rouz ; whilst his breast laboured with a convulsive sigh : 
" let me, at least, breathe forth my soul on thy lips ! " 
They spoke no more and became as dead. 

Immediately, the most piercing cries were heard through 
the harem ; whilst Shaban and Sutlememe personated, with 
great adroitness, the parts of persons in despair. The emir, 
who was sufficiently mortified, to be forced into such un- 
toward expedients, and had now, for the first time, made 
a trial of his powder, was under no necessity of counter- 
feiting grief. The slaves, who had flocked together from 
all quarters, stood motionless, at the spectacle before them. 
All lights were extinguished, save two lamps, which shed 
a wan glimmering over the faces of these lovely flowers, 
that seemed to be faded in the spring-time of life. Funeral 
vestments were prepared ; their bodies were washed with 
rose-water; their beautiful tresses were braided and in- 
censed ; and they were wrapped in symars whiter than ala- 
baster. 

At the moment that their attendants were placing two 



VATHEK. 63 

wreaths of their favourite jasmines on their brows, the 
iliph, who had just heard the tragical catastrophe, arrived. 
de looked not less pale and haggard than the goules that 
wander at night among the graves. Forgetful of himself 
and every one else, he broke through the midst of the 
slaves ; fell prostrate at the foot of the sofa ; beat his bo- 
som ; called himself ' ( atrocious murderer ! " and invoked 
upon his head a thousand imprecations. With a trembling 
hand he raised the veil that covered the countenance of 
Nouronihar, and uttering a loud shriek, fell lifeless on the 
floor. The chief of the eunuchs dragged him off", with 
horrible grimaces, and repeated as he went, <l Ay, I fore- 
saw she would play you some ungracious turn ! " 

No sooner was the caliph gone, than the emir com- 
manded biers to be brought, and forbade that any one should 
enter the harem. Every window was fastened ; all instru- 
ments of music were broken ; and the imans began to re- 
cite their prayers. Towards the close of this melancholy 
day, Vathek sobbed in silence ; for they had been forced to 
compose with anodynes his convulsions of rage and des- 
peration. 

W At the dawn of the succeeding morning, the wide folding 
doors of the palace were set open, and the funeral proces- 
sion moved forward for the mountain. The wailful cries 
of " La Ilah ilia Alia ! " reached the caliph, who was 
eager to cicatrise himself, and attend the ceremonial ; nor 
could he have been dissuaded, had not his excessive weak- 
ness disabled him from walking. At the few first steps he 
fell on the ground, and his people were obliged to lay him 
on a bed, where he remained many days in such a state of 
insensibility as excited compassion in the emir himself. 

When the procession was arrived at the grot of Mei- 
moune, Shaban and Sutlememe dismissed the whole of the 
train, excepting the four confidential eunuchs who were 
appointed to remain. After resting some moments near 
the biers, which had been left in the open air ; they caused 
them to be carried to the brink of a small lake, whose banks 
where overgrown with a hoary moss. This was the great 
resort of herons and storks, which preyed continually on 
little blue fishes. The dwarfs, instructed by the emir, 



64> VATHEK. 

soon repaired thither ; and, with the help of the eunuchs, 
began to construct cabins of rushes and reeds, a work in 
which they had admirable skill. A magazine also was 
contrived for provisions, with a small oratory for them- 
selves, and a pyramid of wood, neatly piled, to furnish the 
necessary fuel : for the air was bleak in the hollows of the 
mountains. 

At evening two fires were kindled on the brink of the 
lake, and the two lovely bodies, taken from their biers, 
were carefully deposited upon a bed of dried leaves, within 
the same cabin. The dwarfs began to recite the Koran, 
with their clear shrill voices ; and Shaban and Sutlememe 
stood at some distance, anxiously waiting the effects of the 
powder. At length Nouronihar and Gulchenrouz faintly 
stretched out their arms; and, gradually opening their 
eyes, began to survey, with looks of increasing amazement, 
every object around them. They even attempted to rise ; 
but, for want of strength, fell back again. Sutlememe, on 
this, administered a cordial, which the emir had taken care 
to provide. 

Gulchenrouz, thoroughly aroused, sneezed out aloud; 
and, raising himself with an effort that expressed his sur- 
prise, left the cabin and inhaled the fresh air with the 
greatest avidity. " Yes," said he, " I breathe again ! again 
do I exist ! I hear sounds ! I behold a firmament, spangled 
over with stars ! " Nouronihar, catching these beloved ac- 
cents, extricated herself from the leaves and ran to clasp 
Gulchenrouz to her bosom. The first objects she remarked 
were their long simars, their garlands of flowers, and their 
naked feet : she hid her face in her hands to reflect. The 
vision of the enchanted bath, the despair of her father, and, 
more vividly than both, the majestic figure of Vathek, re- 
curred to her memory. She recollected, also, that herself 
and Gulchenrouz had been sick and dying ; but all these 
images bewildered her mind. Not knowing where she was, 
she turned her eyes on all sides, as if to recognise the sur- 
rounding scene. This singular lake, those flames reflected 
from its glassy surface, the pale hues of its banks, the 
romantic cabins, the bulrushes, that sadly waved their 
drooping heads, the storks, whose melancholy cries blended 



VATHEK. 66 

with the shrill voices of the dwarfs, every thing conspired 
to persuade her that the angel of death had opened the 
portal of some other world. 

Gulchenrouz, on his part, lost in wonder, clung to the 
neck of his cousin. He believed himself in the region of 
phantoms ; and was terrified at the silence she preserved. 
At length addressing her ; " Speak," said he ; " where are 
we ? Do you not see those spectres that are stirring the 
burning coals ? Are they Monker and Nekir who are 
come to throw us into them ? Does the fatal bridge cross 
this lake, whose solemn stillness, perhaps, conceals from us 
an abyss, in which, for whole ages, we shall be doomed in- 
cessantly to sink ? " 

" No, my children," said Sutlememe, going towards 
them ; " take comfort ! the exterminating angel, who con- 
ducted our souls hither after yours, hath assured us, that 
the chastisement of your indolent and voluptuous life shall 
be restricted to a certain series of years, which you must 
pass in this dreary abode; where the sun is scarcely 
visible, and where the soil yields neither fruits nor flowers. 
These," continued she, pointing to the dwarfs, " will pro- 
vide for our wants ; for souls so mundane as ours retain 
too strong a tincture of their earthly extraction. Instead 
of meats, your food will be nothing but rice ; and your 
bread shall be moistened in the fogs that brood over the 
surface of the lake." 

At this desolating prospect, the poor children burst into 
tears, and prostrated themselves before the dwarfs; who 
perfectly supported their characters, and delivered an ex- 
cellent discourse, of a customary length, upon the sacred 
camel ; which, after a thousand years, was to convey them 
to the paradise of the faithful. 

The sermon being ended, and ablutions performed, 
they praised Alia and the Prophet; supped very indif- 
ferently ; and retired to their withered leaves. Nouronihar 
and her little cousin consoled themselves on finding that the 
dead might lie in one cabin. Having slept well before, 
the remainder of the night was spent in conversation on 
what had befallen them ; and both, from a dread of ap- 
p 



66 VATHEK. 

paritions, betook themselves for protection to one another's 
arms. 

In the morning, which was lowering and rainy, the 
dwarfs mounted high poles, like minarets, and called them 
to prayers. The whole congregation, which consisted of 
Sutlememe, Shaban, the four eunuchs, and a few storks 
that were tired of fishing, was already assembled. The 
two children came forth from their cabin with a slow and 
dejected pace. As their minds were in a tender and me- 
lancholy mood, their devotions were performed with fer- 
vour. No sooner were they finished than Gulchenrouz 
demanded of Sutlememe, and the rest, how they happened 
to die so opportunely for his cousin and himself?" "We 
killed ourselves," returned Sutlememe, tf in despair at your 
death." On this, Nouronihar, who, notwithstanding what 
had passed, had not yet forgotten her vision, said, " And 
the caliph ! is he also dead of his grief ? and will he like- 
wise come hither?" The dwarfs, who were prepared 
with an answer, most demurely replied, " Vathek is 
damned beyond all redemption ! " "I readily believe so/' 
said Gulchenrouz ; " and am glad, from my heart, to hear 
it ; for I am convinced it was his horrible look that sent 
us hither, to listen to sermons, and mess upon rice." One 
week passed away, on the side of the lake, unmarked by 
any variety : Nouronihar ruminating on the grandeur of 
which death had deprived her ; and Gulchenrouz applying 
to prayers and basket-making with the dwarfs, who in- 
finitely pleased him. 

Whilst this scene of innocence was exhibiting in the 
mountains, the caliph presented himself to the emir in a 
new light. The instant he recovered the use of his senses, 
with a voice that made Bababalouk quake, he thundered 
out, " Perfidious Giaour ! I renounce thee for ever ! it is 
thou who hast slain my beloved Nouronihar ! and I sup- 
plicate the pardon of Mahomet ; who would have preserved 
her to me had I been more wise. Let water be brought 
to perform my ablutions, and let the pious Fakreddin be 
called to offer up his prayers with mine, and reconcile me 
to him. Afterwards, we will go together and visit the 
sepulchre of the unfortunate Nouronihar. I am resolved 



VATHEK. 67 

to become a hermit, and consume the residue of my days 
on this mountain, in hope of expiating my crimes." 
<f And what do you intend to live upon there?" .enquired 
Bababalouk. " I hardly know/ 1 replied Vathek ; " but I 
will tell you when I feel hungry which, I believe, 
will not soon be the case." 

The arrival of Fakreddin put a stop to this conversation. 
As soon as Vathek saw him, he threw his arms around his 
neck, bedewed his face with a torrent of tears, and uttered 
things so affecting, so pious, that the emir, crying for joy, 
congratulated himself, in his heart, upon having performed 
so admirable and unexpected a conversion. As for the 
pilgrimage to the mountain, Fakreddin had his reasons not 
to oppose it; therefore, each ascending his own litter, they 
started. 

Notwithstanding the vigilance with which his attendants 
watched the caliph, they could not prevent his harrowing 
his cheeks with a few scratches, when on the place where he 
was told Nouronihar had been buried; they were even obliged 
to drag him away, by force of hands, from the melancholy 
spot. However, he swore, with a solemn oath, that he 
would return thither every day. This resolution did not 
exactly please the emir yet he flattered himself that the 
caliph might not proceed farther, and would merely per- 
form his devotions in the cavern of Meimoune'. Besides, 
the lake was so completely concealed within the solitary 
bosom of those tremendous rocks, that he thought it utterly 
impossible any one could ever find it. This security of 
Fakreddin was also considerably strengthened by the con- 
duct of Vathek, who performed his vow most scrupulously, 
and returned daily from the hill so devout, and so contrite, 
that all the grey-beards were in a state of ecstasy on ac- 
count of it. 

Nouronihar was not altogether so content ; for though 
she felt a fondness for Gulchenrouz, who, to augment the 
attachment, had been left at full liberty with her, yet she 
still regarded him as but a bauble that bore no competition 
with the carbuncle of Giamschid. At times, she indulged 
doubts on the mode of her being ; and scarcely could be- 
lieve that the dead had all the wants and the whims of the 
F 2 



58 VATHEK. 

living. To gain satisfaction, however, on so perplexing a 
topic, one morning, whilst all were asleep, she arose with 
a breathless caution from the side of Gulchenrouz ; and, 
after having given him a soft kiss, began to follow the 
windings of the lake, till it terminated with a rock, the top 
of which was accessible, though lofty. This she climbed 
with considerable toil; and having reached the summit, 
set forward in a run, like a doe before the hunter. Though 
she skipped with the alertness of an antelope, yet, at in- 
tervals, she was forced to desist, and rest beneath the tam- 
arisks to recover her breath. Whilst she, thus reclined, 
was occupied with her little reflections on the apprehension 
that she had some knowledge of the place, Vathek, who, 
finding himself that morning but ill at ease, had gone forth 
before the dawn, presented himself, on a sudden, to her 
view. Motionless with surprise, he durst not approach the 
figure before him trembling and pale, but yet lovely to be- 
hold. At length, Nouronihar, with a mixture of pleasure 
and affliction, raising her fine eyes to him, said, " My 
lord ! are you then come hither to eat rice and hear sermons 
with me ? " ec Beloved phantom ! " cried Vathek, ' ' thou 
dost speak ; thou hast the same graceful form ; the same 
radiant features ; art thou palpable likewise ? " and, eagerly 
embracing her, added, " Here are limbs and a bosom 
animated with a gentle warmth ! What can such a pro- 
digy mean ? " 

Nouronihar, with indifference, answered, " You know, 
my lord, that I died on the very night you honoured me with 
your visit. My cousin maintains it was from one of your 
glances ; but I cannot believe him ; for to me they seem not 
so dreadful. Gulchenrouz died with me, and we were both 
brought into a region of desolation, where we are fed with 
a wretched diet. If you be dead also, and are come hither 
to join us, I pity your lot ; for you will be stunned with 
the clang of the dwarfs and the storks. Besides, it is mor- 
tifying in the extreme, that you, as well as myself, should 
have lost the treasures of the subterranean palace." 

At the mention of the subterranean palace, the caliph 
suspended, his caresses, (which, indeed, had proceeded 
pretty far,) to seek from Nouronihar an explanation of her 



VATHEK. 69 

meaning. She then recapitulated her vision ; what imme- 
diately followed ; and the history of her pretended death ; 
adding, also, a description of the place of expiation, from 
whence she had fled ; and all in a manner that would 
have extorted his laughter, had not the thoughts of 
Vathek been too deeply engaged. No sooner, however, 
had she ended, than he again clasped her to his bosom and 
said, " Light of my eyes, the mystery is unravelled ; we 
both are alive! Your father is a cheat, who, for the sake 
of dividing us, hath deluded us both; and the Giaour, 
whose design, as far as I can discover, is, that we shall pro- 
ceed together, seems scarce a whit better. It shall be some 
time at least before he finds us in his palace of fire. Your 
lovely little person, in my estimation, is far more precious 
than all the treasures of the pre-adamite sultans ; and I wish 
to possess it at pleasure, and in open day, for many a moon., 
before I go to burrow under ground, like a mole. Forget 

this little trifler, Gulchenrouz ; and " " Ah, my 

lord !" interposed Nouronihar, " let me entreat that you do 
him no evil." " No, no !" replied Vathek; "I have already 
bid you forbear to alarm yourself for him. He has been 
brought up too much on milk and sugar to stimulate my 
jealousy. We will leave him with the dwarfs : who, by 
the by, are my old acquaintances: their company will 
suit him far better than yours. As to other matters, I 
will return no more to your father's. I want not to have 
my ears dinned by him and his dotards with the violation 
of the rights of hospitality, as if it were less an honour 
for you to espouse the sovereign of the world than a girl 
dressed up like a boy." 

Nouronihar could find nothing to oppose in a discourse 
so eloquent. She only wished the amorous monarch had 
discovered more ardour for the carbuncle of Giamschid : 
but flattered herself it would gradually increase; and, 
therefore, yielded to his will, with the most bewitching 
submission. 

When the caliph judged it proper, he called for Baba- 

balouk, who was asleep in the cave of Meimoune, and 

dreaming that the phantom of Nouronihar, having mounted 

him once more on her swing, had just given him such a 

F 3 



70 VATHEK. 

jerk, that he, one moment, soared above the mountains, 
and the next, sunk into the abyss. Starting from his sleep 
at the sound of his master, he ran, gasping for breath, and 
had nearly fallen backward at the sight, as he believed, of 
the spectre by whom he had so lately been haunted in his 
dream. " Ah, my lord !" cried he, recoiling ten steps, and 
covering his eyes with both hands, " do you then perform 
the office of a goul ? have you dug up the dead ? Yet 
hope not to make her your prey ; for, after all she hath 
caused me to suffer, she is wicked enough to prey even 
upon you." 

" Cease to play the fool," said Vathek, " and thou shalt 
soon be convinced that it is Nouronihar herself, alive and 
well, whom I clasp to my breast. Go and pitch my tents 
in the neighbouring valley. There will I fix my abode, 
with this beautiful tulip, whose colours I soon shall restore." 
There exert thy best endeavours to procure whatever can 
augment the enjoyments of life, till I shall disclose to thee 
more of my will." 

The news of so unlucky an event soon reached the ears 
of the emir, who abandoned himself to grief and despair, 
and began, as did his old greybeards, to begrime his visage 
with ashes. A total supineness ensued ; travellers were no 
longer entertained; no more plasters were spread; and, 
instead of the charitable activity that had distinguished this 
asylum, the whole of its inhabitants exhibited only faces 
of half a cubit long, and uttered groans that accorded with 
their forlorn situation. 

Though Fakreddin bewailed his daughter, as lost to him 
for ever, yet Gulchenrouz was not forgotten. He de- 
spatched immediate instructions to Sutlememe, Shaban, 
and the dwarfs, enjoining them not to undeceive the child 
in respect to his state ; but, under some pretence, to con- 
vey him far from the lofty rock at the extremity of the 
lake, to a place which he should appoint, as safer from 
danger, for he suspected that Vathek intended him evil. 

Gulchenrouz, in the mean while, was filled with amaze- 
ment at not finding his cousin; nor were the dwarfs less 
surprised: but Sutlememe, who had more penetration, 
immediately guessed what had happened. Gulchenrouz was 



VATHEK. 71 

amused with the delusive hope of once more embracing 
Nouronihar, in the interior recesses of the mountains, where 
the ground, strewed over with orange blossoms and jas- 
mines, offered beds much more inviting than the withered 
leaves in their cabin ; where they might accompany with 
their voices the sounds of their lutes, and chase butterflies. 
Sutlememe was far gone in this sort of description, when 
one of the four eunuchs beckoned her aside, to apprise her 
of the arrival of a messenger from their fraternity, who 
had explained the secret of the flight of Nouronihar, and 
brought the commands of the emir. A council with Shaban 
and the dwarfs was immediately held. Their baggage 
being stowed in consequence of it, they embarked in a 
shallop, and quietly sailed with the little one, who acqui- 
esced in ah 1 their proposals. Their voyage proceeded in 
the same manner, till they came to the place where the 
lake sinks beneath the hollow of a rock : but as soon as 
the bark had entered it, and Gulchenrouz found himself 
surrounded with darkness, he was seized with a dreadful 
consternation, and incessantly uttered the most piercing 
outcries ; for he now was persuaded he should actually be 
damned for having taken too many little freedoms in his 
lifetime with his cousin. 

But let us return to the caliph, and her who ruled over 
his heart. Bababalouk had pitched the tents, and closed 
up the extremities of the valley, with magnificent screens 
of India cloth, which were guarded by Ethiopian slaves 
with their drawn sabres. To preserve the verdure of this 
beautiful enclosure in its natural freshness, white eunuchs 
went continually round it with gilt water vessels. The 
waving of fans was heard near the imperial pavilion; where, 
by the voluptuous light that glowed through the muslins, 
the caliph enjoyed, at full view, ah 1 the attractions of 
Nouronihar. Inebriated with delight, he was all ear to 
her charming voice, which accompanied the lute ; while 
she was not less captivated with his descriptions of Sa- 
marah, and the tower full of wonders ; but especially with 
his relation of the adventure of the ball, and the chasm of 
the Giaour, with its ebony portal. 

In this manner they conversed the whole day, and at 
F 4 



72 VATHEK. 

night they bathed together in a basin of black marble, which 
admirably set off the fairness of Nouronihar. Bababalouk, 
whose good graces this beauty had regained, spared no 
attention, that their repasts might be served up with the 
minutest exactness : some exquisite rarity was ever placed 
before them ; and he sent even to Schiraz, for that fragrant 
and delicious wine which had been hoarded up in bottles, 
prior to the birth of Mahomet. He had excavated little 
ovens in the rock, to bake the nice manchets which were 
prepared by the hands of Nouronihar, from whence they 
had derived a flavour so grateful to Vathek, that he re- 
garded the ragouts of his other wives as entirely mawkish : 
whilst they would have died of chagrin at the emir's, at 
finding themselves so neglected, if Fakreddin, notwith- 
standing his resentment, had not taken pity upon them. 

The Sultana Dilara, who, till then, had been the fa- 
vourite, took this dereliction of the caliph to heart, with a 
vehemence natural to her character ; for, during her con- 
tinuance in favour, she had imbibed from Vathek many of 
his extravagant fancies, and was fired with impatience to 
behold the superb tombs of Istakar, and the palace of forty 
columns; besides, having been brought up amongst the 
magi, she had fondly cherished the idea of the caliph's 
devoting himself to the worship of fire: thus his voluptuous 
and desultory life with her rival was to her a double source 
of affliction. The transient piety of Vathek had occasioned 
her some serious alarms ; but the present was an evil of 
far greater magnitude. She resolved, therefore, without 
hesitation, to write to Carathis, and acquaint her that all 
things went ill; that they had eaten, slept, and revelled at 
an old emir's, whose sanctity was very formidable ; and 
that, after all, the prospect of possessing the treasures of 
the pre-adamite sultans was no less remote than before. 
This letter was intrusted to the care of two woodmen, who 
were at work in one of the great forests of the mountains ; 
and who, being acquainted with the shortest cuts, arrived 
in ten days at Samarah. 

The Princess Carathis was engaged at chess with Mo. 
rakanabad, when the arrival of these woodfellers was an- 
nounced. She, after some weeks of Vathek's absence, had 



VATHEK. 73 

forsaken the upper regions of her tower, because every 
thing appeared in confusion among the stars, which she 
consulted relative to the fate of her son. In vain did she 
renew her fumigations, and extend herself on the roof, to 
obtain mystic visions ; nothing more could she see in her 
dreams, than pieces of brocade, nosegays of flowers, and 
other unmeaning gewgaws. These disappointments had 
thrown her into a state of dejection, which no drug in her 
power was sufficient to remove. Her only resource was in 
Morakanabad, who was a good man, and endowed with a 
decent share of confidence ; yet whilst in her company he 
never thought himself on roses. 

No person knew aught of Vathek, and, of course, a 
thousand ridiculous stories were propagated at his expense. 
The eagerness of Carathis may be easily guessed at re- 
ceiving the letter, as well as her rage at reading the disso- 
lute conduct of her son. " Is it so ? " said she : " either 
I will perish, or Vathek shall enter the palace of fire. Let 
me expire in flames, provided he may reign on the throne 
of Soliman !" Having said this, and whirled herself round 
in a magical manner, which struck Morakanabad with such 
terror as caused him to recoil, she ordered her great camel 
Alboufaki to be brought, and the hideous Nerkes, with the 
unrelenting Cafour, to attend. " I require no other re- 
tinue," said she to Morakanabad ; " I am going on affairs 
of emergency ; a truce, therefore, to parade ! Take you 
care of the people : fleece them well in my absence ; for we 
shall expend large sums, and one knows not what may 
betide." 

The night was uncommonly dark, and a pestilential blast 
blew from the plain of Catoul, that would have deterred 
any other traveller, however urgent the call : but Carathis 
enjoyed most whatever filled others with dread. Nerkes 
concurred in opinion with her ; and Cafour had a particular 
predilection for a pestilence. In the morning this accom- 
plished caravan, with the woodfellers, who directed their 
route, halted on the edge of an extensive marsh, from 
whence so noxious a vapour arose as would have destroyed 
any animal but Alboufaki, who naturally inhaled these 
malignant fogs with delight. The peasants entreated their 



74 VATHEK. 

convoy not to sleep in this place. " To sleep/' cried 
Carathis, " what an excellent thought ! I never sleep, but 
for visions ; and, as to my attendants, their occupations are 
too many to close the only eye they have." The poor 
peasants, who were not overpleased with their party, re- 
mained open-mouthed with surprise. 

Carathis alighted, as well as her negresses ; and, seve- 
rally stripping off their outer garments, they all ran to cull 
from those spots where the sun shone fiercest, the venomous 
plants that grew on the marsh. This provision was made 
for the family of the emir ; and whoever might retard the 
expedition to Istakar. The woodmen were overcome with 
fear, when they beheld these three horrible phantoms run ; 
and, not much relishing the company of Alboufaki, stood 
aghast at the command of Carathis to set forward ; not- 
withstanding it was noon, and the heat fierce enough to 
calcine even rocks. In spite, however, of every remon- 
strance, they were forced implicitly to submit. 

Alboufaki, who delighted in solitude, constantly snorted 
whenever he perceived himself near a habitation; and 
Carathis, who was apt to spoil him with indulgence, as 
constantly turned him aside: so that the peasants were 
precluded from procuring subsistence ; for the milch goats 
and ewes, which Providence had sent towards the district 
they traversed to refresh travellers with their milk, all fled 
at the sight of the hideous animal and his strange riders. 
As to Carathis, she needed no common aliment : for her 
invention had previously furnished her with an opiate to 
stay her stomach; some of which she imparted to her 
mutes. 

At dusk, Alboufaki making a sudden stop, stamped with 
his foot ; which, to Carathis, who knew his ways, was a 
certain indication that she was near the confines of some 
cemetery. The moon shed a bright light on the spot, 
which served to discover a long wall with a large door in 
it, standing ajar ; and so high that Alboufaki might easily 
enter. The miserable guides, who perceived their end 
approaching, humbly implored Carathis, as she had now 
so good an opportunity, to inter them, and immediately 
gave up the ghost. Nerkes and Cafour, whose wit was of 



VATHEK. 75 

a style peculiar to themselves, were by no means parsi- 
monious of it on the folly of these poor people ; nor could 
any thing have been found more suited to their taste, than 
the site of the burying-ground, and the sepulchres which 
its precincts contained. There were at least 2000 of 
them on the declivity of a hill. Carathis was too eager to 
execute her plan, to stop at the view, charming as it ap- 
peared in her eyes. Pondering the advantages that might 
accrue from her present situation, she said to herself, " So 
beautiful a cemetery must be haunted by gouls ! they never 
want for intelligence : having heedlessly suffered my stupid 
guides to expire, I will apply for directions to them ; and, 
as an inducement, will invite them to regale on these fresh 
corpses." After this wise soliloquy, she beckoned to 
Nerkes and Cafour, and made signs with her fingers, as 
much as to say, " Go; knock against the sides of the tombs, 
and strike up your delightful warblings." 

The negresses, full of joy at the behests of their mis- 
tress, and promising themselves much pleasure from the 
society of the gouls, went with an air of conquest, and 
began their knockings at the tombs. As their strokes were 
repeated, a hollow noise was made in the earth : the sur- 
face hove up into heaps ; and the gouls, on all sides, pro- 
truded their noses to inhale the effluvia which the carcasses 
of the woodmen began to emit. They assembled before a 
sarcophagus of white marble, where Carathis was seated 
between the bodies of her miserable guides. The princess 
received her visitants with distinguished politeness ; and, 
supper being ended, they talked of business. Carathis soon 
learned from them every thing she wanted to discover ; 
and, without loss of time, prepared to set forward on her 
journey. Her negresses, who were forming tender con- 
nections with the gouls, importuned her, with all their 
fingers, to wait at least till the dawn. But Carathis, being 
chastity in the abstract, and an implacable enemy to love 
intrigues and sloth, at once rejected their prayer ; mounted 
Alboufaki, and commanded them to take their seats in- 
stantly. Four days and four nights she continued her 
route without interruption. On the fifth, she traversed 
craggy mountains, and half-burnt forests ; and arrived on 



76 VATHEK. 

the sixth, before the beautiful screens which concealed 
from all eyes the voluptuous wanderings of her son. 

It was daybreak, and the guards were snoring on their 
posts in careless security, when the rough trot of Alboufaki 
awoke them in consternation. Imagining that a group of 
spectres, ascended from the abyss, was approaching, they 
all, without ceremony, took to their heels. Vathek was, at 
that instant, with Nouronihar in the bath, hearing tales, 
and laughing at Bababalouk, who related them ; but, no 
sooner did the outcry of his guards reach him, than he 
flounced from the water like a carp, and as soon threw 
himself back at the sight of Carathis ; who, advancing 
with her negresses upon Alboufaki, broke through the 
muslin awnings and veils of the pavilion. At this sudden 
apparition, Nouronihar (for she was not, at all times, free 
from remorse) fancied that the moment of celestial ven- 
geance was come, and clung about the caliph in amorous 
despondence. 

Carathis, still seated on her camel, foamed with indig- 
nation at the spectacle which obtruded itself on her chaste 
view. She thundered forth without check or mercy, " Thou 
double-headed and four-legged monster ! what means all 
this winding and writhing ? Art thou not ashamed to be 
seen grasping this limber sapling, in preference to the 
sceptre of the pre-adamite sultans ? Is it then for this 
paltry doxy that thou hast violated the conditions in the 
parchment of our Giaour ? Is it on her thou hast lavished 
thy precious moments ? Is this the fruit of the knowledge 
I have taught thee ? Is this the end of thy journey ? 
Tear thyself from the arms of this little simpleton ; drown 
her in the water before me, and instantly follow my 
guidance." 

In the first ebullition of his fury, Vathek had resolved 
to rip open the body of Alboufaki, and to stuff it with those 
of the negresses and of Carathis herself; but the remem- 
brance of the Giaour, the palace of Istakar, the sabres, and 
the talismans, flashing before his imagination with the 
simultaneousness of lightning, he became more moderate, 
and said to his mother in a civil, but decisive tone, ' ( Dread 
lady, you shall be obeyed ; but I will not drown Nou- 



VATHEK. 77 

ronihar. She is sweeter to me than a Myrabolan comfit ; 
and is enamoured of carbuncles, especially that of Giam- 
schid, which hath also been promised to be conferred upon 
her : she, therefore, shall go along with us ; for I intend 
to repose with her upon the sofas of Soliman : I can sleep 
no more without her." " Be it so," replied Carathis, 
alighting ; and, at the same time, committing Alboufaki to 
the charge of her black women. 

Nouronihar, who had not yet quitted her hold, began to 
take courage ; and said, with an accent of fondness to the 
caliph, " Dear sovereign of my soul ! I will follow thee, 
if it be thy will, beyond the Kaf, in the land of the afrits. 
I will not hesitate to climb, for thee, the nest of the Si- 
murgh ; who, this lady excepted, is the most awful of 
created beings." " We have here, then," subjoined Ca- 
rathis, " a girl both of courage and science ! " Nouronihar 
had certainly both ; but, notwithstanding all her firmness, 
she could not help casting back a thought of regret upon 
the graces of her little Gulchenrouz, and the days of tender 
endearments she had participated with him. She even 
dropped a few tears, which the caliph observed ; and in- 
advertently breathed out with a sigh, " Alas ! my gentle 
cousin, what will become of thee ? " Vathek, at this 
apostrophe, knitted up his brows, and Carathis enquired 
what it could mean. <( She is preposterously sighing after 
a stripling with languishing eyes and soft hair, who loves 
her," said the caliph. " Where is he ? " asked Carathis. 
fc I must be acquainted with this pretty child ; for," added 
she, lowering her voice, " I design, before I depart, to 
regain the favour of the Giaour. There is nothing so de- 
licious, in his estimation, as the heart of a delicate boy 
palpitating with the first tumults of love." 

Vathek, as he came from the bath, commanded Baba- 
balouk to collect the women, and other movables of his 
harem, embody his troops, and hold himself in readiness 
to march within three days ; whilst Carathis retired alone 
to a tent, where the Giaour solaced her with encouraging 
visions : but at length waking, she found at her feet Nerkes 
and Cafour, who informed her, by their signs, that having 
led Alboufaki to the borders of a lake, to browse on some 



78 TATHEK. 

grey moss that looked tolerably venomous, they had dis- 
covered certain blue fishes, of the same kind with those in 
the reservoir on the top of the tower. " Ah ! ha ! " said 
she, (< I will go thither . to them. These fish are, past 
doubt, of a species that, by a small operation, I can render 
oracular. They may tell me where this little Gulchenrouz 
is, whom I am bent upon sacrificing." Having thus spoken, 
she immediately set out with her swarthy retinue. 

It being but seldom that time is lost, in the accomplish- 
ment of a wicked enterprise, Carathis and her negresses 
soon arrived at the lake ; where, after burning the magical 
drugs with which they were always provided, they strip- 
ped themselves naked, and waded to their chins ; Nerkes 
and Cafour waving torches around them, and Carathis 
pronouncing her barbarous incantations. The fishes, with 
one accord, thrust forth their heads from the water ; which 
was violently rippled by the flutter of their fins : and, at 
length, finding themselves constrained, by the potency of 
the charm, they opened their piteous mouths, and said, 
" From gills to tail, we are yours ; what seek ye to know ? " 
" Fishes," answered she, " I conjure you, by your glit- 
tering scales, tell me where now is Gulchenrouz ? " 
" Beyond the rock," replied the shoal, in full chorus : 
" will this content you ? for we do not delight in expand- 
ing our mouths." " It will," returned the princess : " I 
am not to learn, that you are not used to long convers- 
ations : I will leave you therefore to repose, though I had 
other questions to propound." The instant she had spoken, 
the water became smooth, and the fishes at once disap- 
peared. 

Carathis, inflated with the venom of her projects, strode 
hastily over the rock; and found the amiable Gulchen- 
rouz asleep in an arbour; whilst the two dwarfs were 
watching at his side, and ruminating their accustomed 
prayers. These diminutive personages possessed the gift 
of divining, whenever an enemy to good Mussulmans ap- 
proached : thus they anticipated the arrival of Carathis, 
who, stopping short, said to herself, " How placidly doth 
he recline his lovely little head ! how pale and languish- 
ing are his looks ! it is just the very child of my wishes \" 



VATHEK. 79 

The dwarfs interrupted this delectable soliloquy, hy leap- 
ing instantly upon her ; and scratching her face with their 
utmost zeal. But Nerkes and Cafour, hetaking them- 
selves to the succour of their mistress, pinched the dwarfs 
so severely in return, that they both gave up the ghost, 
imploring Mahomet to inflict his sorest vengeance upon 
this wicked woman, and all her household. 

At the noise which this strange conflict occasioned in 
the valley, Gulchenrouz awoke, and, bewildered with terror, 
sprung impetuously and climbed an old rig-tree that rose 
against the acclivity of the rocks ; from thence he gained 
their summits, and ran for two hours without once looking 
back. At last, exhausted with fatigue, he fell senseless 
into the arms of a good old genius, whose fondness for the 
company of children had made it his sole occupation to 
protect them. "Whilst performing his wonted rounds 
through the air, he had pounced on the cruel Giaour, at 
the instant of his growling in the horrible chasm, and had 
rescued the fifty little victims which the impiety of Vathek 
had devoted to his voracity. These the genius brought up 
in nests still higher than the clouds, and himself fixed his 
abode in a nest more capacious than the rest, from which 
he had expelled the Rocs that had built it. 

These inviolable asylums were defended against the 
dives and the afrits, by waving streamers ; on which were 
inscribed in characters of gold, that flashed like lightning, 
the names of Alia and the Prophet. It was there that 
Gulchenrouz, who as yet remained undeceived with 
respect to his pretended death, thought himself in the 
mansions of eternal peace. He admitted without fear the 
congratulations of his little friends, who were all assem- 
bled in the nest of the venerable genius, and vied with 
each other in kissing his serene forehead and beautiful eye- 
lids. Remote from the inquietudes of the world, the 
impertinence of harems, the brutality of eunuchs, and the 
inconstancy of women, there he found a place truly con- 
genial to the delights of his soul. In this peaceable society 
his days, months, and years glided on; nor was he less happy 
than the rest of his companions : for the genius, instead 
of burdening his pupils with perishable riches and vain 



80 VATHEK. 

sciences, conferred upon them the boon of perpetual child- 
hood. 

Carathis, unaccustomed to the loss of her prey,, vented a 
thousand execrations on her negresses, for not seizing the 
child, instead of amusing themselves with pinching to 
death two insignificant dwarfs from which they gain no 
advantage. She returned into the valley murmuring ; and, 
finding that her son was not risen from the arms of 
Nouronihar, discharged her ill-humour upon both. The 
idea, however, of departing next day for Istakar, and of 
cultivating, through the good offices of the Giaour, an in- 
timacy with Eblis himself, at length consoled her chagrin. 
But fate had ordained it otherwise. 

In the evening, as Carathis was conversing with Dilara, 
who through her contrivance had become of the party, 
and whose taste resembled her own, Bababalouk came to 
acquaint her that the sky towards Samarah looked of a 
fiery red, and seemed to portend some alarming disaster. 
Immediately recurring to her astrolabes and instruments of 
magic, she took the altitude of the planets, and discovered, 
by her calculations, to her great mortification, that a 
formidable revolt had taken place at Samarah, that Mota- 
vakel, availing himself of the disgust, which was invete- 
rate against his brother, had incited commotions amongst 
the populace, made himself master of the palace, and 
actually invested the great tower, to which Morakanabad 
had retired, with a handful of the few that still remained 
faithful to Vathek. 

" What!" exclaimed she; "must I lose, then, my 
tower! my mutes! my negresses ! my mummies! and, 
worse than all, the laboratory, the favourite resort of my 
nightly lucubrations, without knowing, at least, if my hair- 
brained son will complete his adventure ? No ! I will not 
be dupe ! immediately will I speed to support Morakana- 
bad. By my formidable art, the clouds shall pour grape- 
shot in the faces of the assailants, and shafts of red-hot iron 
on their heads. I will let loose my stores of hungry ser- 
pents and torpedos from beneath them ; and we shall soon 
see the stand they will make against such an explosion ! " 

Having thus spoken, Carathis hasted to her son, who was 



VATHEK. 81 

tranquilly banqueting with Nouronihar, in his superb car- 
nation-coloured tent. f Glutton that thou art ! " cried 
she ; <c were it not for me, thou wouldst soxm find thyself 
the mere commander of savoury pies. Thy faithful sub- 
jects have abjured the faith they swore to thee. Motavakel, 
thy brother, now reigns, on the hill of Pied Horses ; and, 
had I not some slight resources in the tower, would not be 
easily persuaded to abdicate. But, that time may not be 
lost, I shall only add a few words : Strike tent to-night ; 
set forward ; and beware how thou loiterest again by the 
way. Though thou hast forfeited the conditions of the 
parchment, I am not yet without hope ; for it cannot be 
denied that thou hast violated, to admiration, the laws of 
hospitality by seducing the daughter of the emir, after hav- 
ing partaken of his bread and his salt. Such a conduct 
cannot but be delightful to the Giaour; and if, on thy 
march, thou canst signalise thyself by an additional crime, 
all will still go well, and thou shalt enter the palace of Soli- 
man in triumph. Adieu ! Alboufaki and my negresses are 
waiting at the door." 

The caliph had nothing to offer in reply : he wished his 
mother a prosperous journey, and ate on till he had finished 
his supper. At midnight, the camp broke up, amidst the 
flourishing of trumpets and other martial instruments ; but 
loud indeed must have been the sound of the tymbals, to 
overpower the blubbering of the emir and his grey- 
beards ; who, by an excessive profusion of tears, had so far 
exhausted the radical moisture, that their eyes shrivelled 
up in their sockets, and their hairs dropped off by the 
roots. Nouronihar, to whom such a symphony was pain- 
ful, did not grieve to get out of hearing. She accompanied 
the caliph in the imperial litter ; where they amused them- 
selves with imagining the splendour which was soon to 
surround them. The other women, overcome with dejec- 
tion, were dolefully rocked in their cages ; whilst Dilara 
consoled herself with anticipating the joy of celebrating 
the rites of fire on the stately terraces of Istakar. 

In four days they reached the spacious valley of Roc- 
nabad. The season of spring was in all its vigour; and the 
grotesque branches of the almond trees in full blossom, 
Q 



82 VATHEK. 

fantastically checkered with hyacinths and jonquils, 
breathed forth a delightful fragrance. Myriads of bees, 
and scarce fewer of santons, had there taken up their abode. 
On the banks of the stream, hives and oratories were al- 
ternately ranged ; and their neatness and whiteness were 
set off by the deep green of the cypresses that spired up 
amongst them. These pious personages amused them- 
selves with cultivating little gardens, that abounded with 
flowers and fruits ; especially musk-melons of the best 
flavour that Persia could boast. Sometimes dispersed over 
the meadow, they entertained themselves with feeding pea- 
cocks whiter than snow, and turtles more blue than 
the sapphire. In this manner were they occupied when 
the harbingers of the imperial procession began to proclaim, 
" Inhabitants of Rocnabad ! prostrate yourselves on the 
brink of your pure waters ; and tender your thanksgivings 
to Heaven, that vouchsafeth to show you a ray of its glory : 
for, lo ! the commander of the faithful draws near." 

The poor santons, filled with holy energy, having bustled 
to light up wax torches in their oratories, and expand 
the Koran on their ebony desks, went forth to meet the 
caliph with baskets of honeycomb, dates, and melons. 
But, whilst they were advancing in solemn procession and 
with measured steps, the horses, camels, and guards, 
wantoned over their tulips and other flowers, and made a 
terrible havoc amongst them. The santons could not help 
casting from one eye a look of pity on the ravages com- 
mitting around them ; whilst the other was fixed upon the 
caliph and heaven. Nouronihar, enraptured with the 
scenery of a place which brought back to her remembrance 
the pleasing solitudes where her infancy had passed, en- 
treated Vathek to stop: but he, suspecting that these 
oratories might be deemed, by the Giaour, an habitation, 
commanded his pioneers to level them all. The santons 
stood motionless with horror at the barbarous mandate, 
and at last broke out into lamentations ; but these were 
uttered with so ill a grace, that Vathek bade his eunuchs to 
kick them from his presence. He then descended from 
the litter with Nouronihar. They sauntered together in the 
meadow ; and amused themselves with culling flowers, and 



VATHEK. 83 

passing a thousand pleasantries on each other. But the 
bees, who were staunch Mussulmans, thinking it their duty 
to revenge the insult offered to their dear masters, the 
santons, assembled so zealously to do it with good effect, 
that the caliph and Nouronihar were glad to find their 
tents prepared to receive them. 

Bababalouk, who, in capacity of purveyor, had acquitted 
himself with applause as to peacocks and turtles, lost no 
time in consigning some dozens to the spit, and as many 
more to be fricasseed. Whilst they were feasting, laughing, 
carousing, and blaspheming at pleasure, on the banquet so 
liberally furnished, the moullahs, the sheiks, the cadis, 
and imans of Schiraz (who seemed not to have met the 
santons) arrived ; leading by bridles of riband, inscribed 
from the Koran, a train of asses which were loaded with the 
choicest fruits the country could boast. Having presented 
their offerings to the caliph, they petitioned him to 
honour their city and mosques with his presence. " Fancy 
not," said Vathek, " that you can detain me. Your pre- 
sence I condescend to accept, but beg you will let me be 
quiet, for I am not over-fond of resisting temptation. 
Retire, then ; yet, as it is not decent for personages so 
reverend to return on foot, and as you have not the ap- 
pearance of expert riders, my eunuchs shall tie you on your 
asses, with the precaution that your backs be not turned 
towards me; for they understand etiquette." In this de- 
putation were some high-stomached sheiks, who, taking 
Vathek for a fool, scrupled not to speak their opinion. These 
Bababalouk girded with double cords ; and having well 
disciplined their asses with nettles behind, they all started, 
with a preternatural alertness, plunging, kicking, and run- 
ning foul of one another, in the most ludicrous manner 
imaginable. 

Nouronihar and the caliph mutually contended who 
should most enjoy so degrading a sight. They burst out 
in peals of laughter, to see the old men and their asses fall 
into the stream. The leg of one was fractured ; the 
shoulder of another dislocated ; the teeth of a third dashed 
out ; and the rest suffered still worse. 

Two days more, undisturbed by fresh embassies, having 
o 2 



84 VATHEK. 

been devoted to the pleasures of Rocnabad, the expedition 
proceeded ; leaving Schiraz on the right, and verging to- 
wards a large plain; from whence were discernible, on the 
edge of the horizon, the dark summits of the mountains of 
Istakar. 

At this prospect the caliph and Nouronihar were un- 
able to repress their transports. They bounded from their 
litter to the ground, and broke forth into such wild exclam- 
mations, as amazed all within hearing. Interrogating each 
other, they shouted, " Are we not approaching the radiant 
palace of light ? or gardens, more delightful than those of 
Sheddad? " Infatuated mortals ! they thus indulged de- 
lusive conjecture, unable to fathom the decrees of the Most 
High ! 

The good genii, who had not totally relinquished the 
superintendence of Vathek, repairing to Mahomet, in the 
seventh heaven, said, " Merciful Prophet ! stretch forth 
thy propitious arms towards thy vicegerent ; who is ready 
to fall, irretrievably, into the snare which his enemies, the 
dives, have prepared to destroy him. The Giaour is await- 
ing his arrival, in the abominable palace of fire ; where, if 
he once set his foot, his perdition will be inevitable." Ma- 
homet answered, with an air of indignation, " He hath 
too well deserved to be resigned to himself; but I permit 
you to try if one effort more will be effectual to divert him 
from pursuing his ruin." 

One of these beneficent genii, assuming, without delay, 
the exterior of a shepherd, more renowned for his piety 
than all the derviches and santons of the region, took his 
station near a flock of white sheep, -on the slope of a hill ; 
and began to pour forth, from his flute, such airs of pa- 
thetic melody, as subdued the very soul, and, wakening 
remorse, drove, far from it, every frivolous fancy. At 
these energetic sounds, the sun hid himself beneath a 
gloomy cloud ; and the waters of two little lakes, that 
were naturally clearer then crystal, became of a colour like 
blood. The whole of this superb assembly was involun- 
tarily drawn towards the declivity of the hill. With 
downcast eyes, they all stood abashed ; each upbraiding 
himself with the evil he had done. The heart of Dilara 



VATHEK. 85 

palpitated ; and the chief of the eunuchs, with a sigh of 
contrition, implored pardon of the women, whom, for his 
own satisfaction, he had so often tormented. 

Vathek and Nouronihar turned pale in their litter ; and, 
regarding each other with haggard looks, reproached them- 
selves the one with a thousand of the blackest crimes, a 
thousand projects of impious ambition, the other, with 
the desolation of her family, and the perdition of the 
amiable Gulchenrouz. Nouronihar persuaded herself that 
she heard, in the fatal music, the groans of her dying fa- 
ther ; and Vathek, the sobs of the fifty children he had 
sacrificed to the Giaour. Amidst these complicated pangs 
of anguish, they perceived themselves impelled towards the 
shepherd, whose countenance was so commanding that 
Vathek, for the first time, felt overawed ; whilst Nouro- 
nihar concealed her face with her hands. The music 
paused; and the genius, addressing the caliph, said, 
" Deluded prince ! to whom Providence hath confided the 
care of innumerable subjects, is it thus that thou fulfillest 
thy mission ? Thy crimes are already completed ; and art 
thou now hastening towards thy punishment ? Thou know- 
est that, beyond these mountains, Eblis and his accursed 
dives hold their infernal empire; and, seduced by a malig- 
nant phantom, thou art proceeding to surrender thyself to 
them ! This moment is the last of grace allowed thee : 
abandon thy atrocious purpose : return : give back Nouro- 
nihar to her father, who still retains a few sparks of life : 
destroy thy tower with all its abominations : drive Carathis 
from thy councils : be just to thy subjects : respect the 
ministers of the Prophet : compensate for thy impieties 
by an exemplary life; and, instead of squandering thy 
days in voluptuous indulgence, lament thy crimes on the 
sepulchres of thy ancestors. Thou beholdest the clouds that 
obscure the sun: at the instant he recovers his splendour, if 
thy heart be not changed, the time of mercy assigned thee 
will be past for ever." 

Vathek, depressed with fear, was on the point of pro- 
strating himself at the feet of the shepherd, whom he 
perceived to be of a nature superior to man : but, his pride 
prevailing, he audaciously lifted lu's head, and, glancing at 
o 3 



86 VATHEK. 

him one of his terrible looks, said, " Whoever thou art, 
withhold thy useless admonitions : thou wouldst either de- 
lude me, or art thyself deceived. If what I have done be 
so criminal as thou pretendest, there remains not for me a 
moment of grace. I have traversed a sea of blood to ac- 
quire a power which will make thy equals tremble : deem 
not that I shall retire when in view of the port ; or that 
I will relinquish her who is dearer to me than either my 
life or thy mercy. Let the sun appear ! let him illume 
my career ! it matters not where it may end." On uttering 
these words, which made even the genius shudder, Vathek 
threw himself into the arms of Nouronihar, and com- 
manded that his horses should be forced back to the road. 

There was no difficulty in obeying these orders, for the 
attraction had ceased : the sun shone forth in all his glory, 
and the shepherd vanished with a lamentable scream. 

The fatal impression of the music of the genius re- 
mained, notwithstanding, in the heart of Vathek's attend- 
ants. They viewed each other with looks of consternation. 
At the approach of night almost all of them escaped ; 
and of this numerous assemblage there only remained 
the chief of the eunuchs, some idolatrous slaves, Dilara, 
and a few other women, who, like herself, were votaries of 
the religion of the Magi. 

The caliph, fired with the ambition of prescribing laws 
to the powers of darkness, was but little embarrassed at 
this dereliction. The impetuosity of his blood prevented 
him from sleeping ; nor did he encamp any more, as be- 
fore. Nouronihar, whose impatience, if possible, exceeded 
his own, importuned him to hasten his march, and lavished 
on him a thousand caresses, to beguile all reflection. She 
fancied herself already more potent than Balkis, and pic- 
tured to her imagination the genii falling prostrate at the 
foot of her throne. In this manner they advanced by 
moonlight till they came within view of the two towering 
rocks that form a kind of portal to the valley, at the ex- 
tremity of which rose the vast ruins of Istakar. Aloft on 
the mountain glimmered the fronts of various royal mau- 
soleums, the horror of which was deepened by the shadows 
of night. They passed through two villages almost de- 



VATHEK. 87 

serted, the only inhabitants remaining being a few feeble 
old men, who, at the sight of horses and Utters, fell upon 
their knees, and cried out, " O Heaven ! is it then by 
these phantoms that we have been for six months tor- 
mented ? Alas ! it was from the terror of these spectres, 
and the noise beneath the mountains, that our people have 
fled, and left us at the mercy of the rnalificent spirits !" 
The caliph, to whom these complaints were but unpromis- 
ing auguries, drove over the bodies of these wretched old 
men, and at length arrived at the foot of the terrace of 
black marble. There he descended from his litter, hand- 
ing down Nouronihar. Both with beating hearts stared 
wildly around them, and expected, with an apprehensive 
shudder, the approach of the Giaour ; but nothing as yet 
announced his appearance. 

A death-like stillness reigned over the mountain and 
through the air ; the moon dilated on a vast platform the 
shades of the lofty columns, which reached from the terrace 
almost to the clouds ; the gloomy watch-towers, whose 
number could not be counted, were covered by no roof; 
and their capitals, of an architecture unknown in the 
records of the earth, served as an asylum for the birds of 
night, which, alarmed at the approach of such visitants, 
fled away croaking. 

The chief of the eunuchs, trembling with fear, besought 
Vathek that a fire might be kindled. "No," replied he, 
" there is no time left to think of such trifles. Abide 
where thou art, and expect my commands." Having thus 
spoken, he presented his hand to Nouronihar; and ascend- 
ing the steps of a vast staircase, reached the terrace, which 
was flagged with squares of marble, and resembled a 
smooth expanse of water, upon whose surface not a blade 
of grass ever dared to vegetate. On the right rose the 
watch-towers, ranged before the ruins of an immense 
palace, whose walls were embossed with various figures. 
In front stood forth the colossal forms of four creatures, 
composed of the leopard and the griffin, and though but 
of stone, inspired emotions of terror. Near these were 
distinguished, by the splendour of the moon, which 
streamed full on the place, characters like those on the 
o 4 



88 VATHEK. 

gabres of the Giaour, and which possessed the same virtue 
of changing every moment. These, after vacillating for 
some time, fixed at last in Arabic letters, and prescribed to 
the caliph the following words : " Vathek, thou hast vio- 
lated the conditions of my parchment, and deserveth to be 
sent back ; but in favour to thy companion, and as the meed 
for what thou hast done to obtain it, Eblis permitteth that 
the portal of his palace shah 1 be opened, and the subterra- 
nean fire will receive thee into the number of its adorers." 

He scarcely had read these words before the mountain, 
against which the terrace was reared, trembled, and the 
watch-towers were ready to topple headlong upon them ; 
the rock yawned, and disclosed within it a staircase of po- 
lished marble, that seemed to approach the abyss. Upon 
each stair were planted two large torches, like those Nou- 
ronihar had seen in her vision, the camphorated vapour of 
which ascended and gathered itself into a cloud under the 
hollow of the vault. 

This appearance, instead of terrifying, gave new cou- 
rage to the daughter of Fakreddin. Scarcely deigning to 
bid adieu to the moon and the firmament, she abandoned, 
without hesitation, the pure atmosphere, to plunge into 
these infernal exhalations. The gait of those impious per- 
sonages was haughty and determined. As they descended, 
by the effulgence of the torches, they gazed on each other 
with mutual admiration, and both appeared so resplendent 
that they already esteemed themselves spiritual intelli- 
gences. The only circumstance that perplexed them was 
their not arriving at the bottom of the stairs : on hasten- 
ing their descent, with an ardent impetuosity, they felt 
their steps accelerated to such a degree, that they seemed 
not walking but falling from a precipice. Their progress., 
however, was at length impeded by a vast portal of ebony., 
which the caliph without difficulty recognised. Here the 
Giaour awaited them with the key in his hand. ' Ye are 
welcome !" said he to them, with a ghastly smile, " in spite 
of Mahomet and all his dependents. I will now usher yoi* 
into that palace where you have so highly merited a place." 
Whilst he was uttering these words he touched the ena- 
melled lock with his key, and the doors at once flew opeu 



VATHEK. 89 

with a noise still louder than the thunder of the dog days, 
and as suddenly recoiled the moment they had entered. 

The caliph and Nouronihar beheld each other with 
amazement at finding themselves in a place which, though 
roofed with a vaulted ceiling, was so spacious and lofty, that 
at first they took it for an immeasurable plain. But their 
eyes at length growing familiar to the grandeur of the sur- 
rounding objects, they extended their view to those at a 
distance, and discovered rows of columns and arcades, 
which gradually diminished, till they terminated in a point 
radiant as the sun when he darts his last beams athwart 
the ocean. The pavement, strewed over with gold dust 
and saffron, exhaled so subtile an odour as almost over- 
powered them. They, however, went on, and observed 
an infinity of censers, in which ambergris and the wood 
of aloes were continually burning. Between the several 
columns were placed tables, each spread with a profusion 
of viands, and wines of every species sparkling in vases of 
crystal. A throng of genii, and other fantastic spirits, of 
either sex, danced lasciviously at the sound of music which 
issued from beneath. 

In the midst of this immense hall, a vast multitude was 
incessantly passing, who severally kept their right hands 
on their hearts, without once regarding any thing around 
them : they had all the livid paleness of death. Their 
eyes, deep sunk in their sockets, resembled those phos- 
phoric meteors that glimmer by night in places of inter- 
ment. Some stalked slowly on, absorbed in profound 
reverie ; some, shrieking with agony, ran furiously about 
like tigers wounded with poisoned arrows ; whilst others, 
grinding their teeth in rage, foamed along more frantic 
than the wildest maniac. They all avoided each other ; 
and, though surrounded by a multitude that no one could 
number, each wandered at random unheedful of the rest, 
as if alone on a desert where no foot had trodden. 

Vathek and Nouronihar, frozen with terror at a sight 
so baleful, demanded of the Giaour what these appearances 
might mean, and why these ambulating spectres never 
withdrew their hands from their hearts ? " Perplex not 
yourselves with so much at once," replied he bluntly ; " you 



90 VATHEK. 

will soon be acquainted with all : let us haste, and present 
you to Eblis." They continued their way through the 
multitude : but, notwithstanding their confidence at first, 
they were not sufficiently composed to examine with at- 
tention the various prospective of halls and of galleries, 
that opened on the right hand and left; which were all 
illuminated by torches and braziers, whose flames rose in 
pyramids to the centre of the vault. At length they came 
to a place, where long curtains, brocaded with crimson and 
gold, fell from all parts in solemn confusion. Here the 
choirs and dances were heard no longer. The light which 
glimmered came from afar. 

After some time, Vathek and Nouronihar perceived a 
gleam brightening through the drapery, and entered a vast 
tabernacle hung round with the skins of leopards. An in- 
finity of elders with streaming beards, and afrits in com- 
plete armour, had prostrated themselves before the ascent 
of a lofty eminence ; on the top of which, upon a globe of 
fire, sat the formidable Eblis. His person was that of a 
young man, whose noble and regular features seemed to 
have teen tarnished by malignant vapours. In his large 
eyes appeared both pride and despair : his flowing hair re- 
tained some resemblance to that of an angel of light. In 
his hand, which thunder had blasted, he swayed the iron 
sceptre, that causes the monster Ouranbad, the afrits, and 
all the powers of the abyss to tremble. At his presence, 
the heart of the caliph sunk within him ; and he fell pros- 
trate on his face. Nouronihar, however, though greatly 
dismayed, could not help admiring the person of Eblis; 
for she expected to have seen some stupendous giant. Eblis, 
with a voice more mild than might be imagined, but such 
as penetrated the soul and filled it with the deepest me- 
lancholy, said, " Creatures of clay, I receive you into 
mine empire : ye are numbered amongst my adorers : enjoy 
whatever this palace affords : the treasures of the pre-adamite 
sultans : their fulminating sabres ; and those talismans, that 
compel the dives to open the subterranean expanses of the 
mountain of Kaf, which communicate with these. There, 
insatiable as your curiosity may be, shall you find sufficient 
objects to gratify it. You shall possess the exclusive pri- 



VATHEK. 91 

vilege of entering the fortresses of Aherman, and the halls 
of Argenk, where are portrayed all creatures endowed with 
intelligence ; and the various animals that inhabited the 
earth prior to the creation of that contemptible being whom 
ye denominate the father of mankind." 

Vathek and Nouronihar, feeling themselves revived and 
encouraged by this harangue, eagerly said to the Giaour, 
" Bring us instantly to the place which contains these pre- 
cious talismans." " Come," answered this wicked dive, 
with his malignant grin, " come and possess all that my 
sovereign hath promised, and more." He then conducted 
them into a long aisle adjoining the tabernacle ; preceding 
them with hasty steps, and followed by his disciples with 
the utmost alacrity. They reached, at length, a hall of 
great extent, and covered with a lofty dome ; around which 
appeared fifty portals of bronze, secured with as many fast- 
enings of iron. A funereal gloom prevailed over the whole 
scene. Here, upon two beds of incorruptible cedar, lay re- 
cumbent the fleshless forms of the pre-adamite kings, who 
had been monarchs of the whole earth. They still pos- 
sessed enough of life to be conscious of their deplorable 
condition. Their eyes retained a melancholy motion : they 
regarded one another with looks of the deepest dejection ; 
each holding his right hand, motionless, on his heart. At 
their feet were inscribed the events of their several reigns, 
their power, their pride, and their crimes ; Soliman Daki ; 
and Soliman, called Gian Ben Gian, who, after having 
chained up the dives in the dark caverns of Kaf, became 
so presumptuous as to doubt of the Supreme Power. All 
these maintained great state ; though not to be compared 
with the eminence of Soliman Ben Daoud. 

This king, so renowned for his wisdom, was on the 
loftiest elevation, and placed immediately under the dome. 
He appeared to possess more animation than the rest. 
Though, from time to time, he laboured with profound 
sighs ; and, like his companions, kept his right hand on 
his heart, yet his countenance was more composed, and he 
seemed to be listening to the sullen roar of a cataract visible 
in part through one of the grated portals. This was the 
only sound that intruded on the silence of these doleful 



92 VATHEK. 

mansions. A range of brazen vases surrounded the ele- 
vation. (f Remove the covers from these cabalistic deposi- 
taries/' said the Giaour to Vathek ; " and avail thyself of 
the talismans which will break asunder all these gates of 
bronze ; and not only render thee master of the treasures 
contained within them, but also of the spirits by which 
they are guarded." 

The caliph, whom this omnious preliminary had entirely 
disconcerted, approached the vases with faltering footsteps ; 
and was ready to sink with terror when he heard the groans 
of Soliman. As he proceeded, a voice from the livid lips 
of the prophet articulated these words : " In my lifetime 
I filled a magnificent throne ; having, on my right hand, 
twelve thousand seats of gold, where the patriarchs and the 
prophets heard my doctrines : on my left, the sages and 
doctors, upon as many thrones of silver, were present at all 
my decisions. Whilst I thus administered justice to in- 
numerable multitudes, the birds of the air, hovering over 
me, served as a canopy against the rays of the sun. My 
people flourished ; and my palace rose to the clouds. I 
erected a temple to the Most High, which was the wonder 
of the universe : but I basely suffered myself to be seduced 
by the love of women, and a curiosity that could not be 
restrained by sublunary things. I listened to the counsels 
of Aherman, and the daughter of Pharaoh; and adored 
fire, and the hosts of heaven. I forsook the holy city, and 
commanded the genii to rear the stupendous palace of 
Istakar, and the terrace of the watch-towers ; each of which 
was consecrated to a star. There, for a while, I enjoyed 
myself in the zenith of glory and pleasure. Not only men 
but supernatural beings were subject also to my will. I 
began to think, as these unhappy monarchs around had 
already thought, that the vengeance of Heaven was asleep ; 
when, at once, the thunder burst my structures asunder, 
and precipitated me hither: where, however, I do not 
remain, like the other inhabitants, totally destitute of hope ; 
for an angel of light hath revealed that in consideration of 
the piety of my early youth my woes shall come to an end, 
when this cataract shall for ever cease to flow. Till then 



VATHEK. 93 

I am in torments, ineffable torments ! an unrelenting fire 
preys on my heart." 

Having uttered this exclamation, Soliman raised his 
hands towards heaven, in token of supplication ; and the 
caliph discerned through his bosom, which was transparent 
as crystal, his heart enveloped in flames. At a sight so full 
of horror, Nouronihar fell back, like one petrified, into the 
arms of Vathek, who cried out with a convulsive sob, " O 
Giaour ! whither hast thou brought us ! Allow us to depart, 
and I will relinquish all thou hast promised. O Mahomet ! 
remains there no more mercy ? " " None ! none ! " replied 
the malicious dive. " Know, miserable prince ! thou art 
now in the abode of vengeance and despair. Thy heart, also, 
will be kindled like those of the other votaries of Eblis. A 
few days are allotted thee previous to this fatal period : 
employ them as thou wilt ; recline on these heaps of gold ; 
command the infernal potentates ; range, at thy pleasure, 
through these immense subterranean domains : no barrier 
shall be shut against thee. As for me, I have fulfilled my 
mission : I now leave thee to thyself." At these words he 
vanished. 

The caliph and Nouronihar remained in the most abject 
affliction. Their tears were unable to flow, and scarcely 
could they support themselves. At length, taking each 
other, despondingly, by the hand, they went faltering from 
this fatal hall, indifferent which way they turned their 
steps. Every portal opened at their approach. The dives 
fell prostrate before them. Every reservoir of riches was 
disclosed to their view ; but they no longer felt the incen- 
tives of curiosity, of pride, or avarice. With like apathy 
they heard the chorus of genii, and saw the stately ban- 
quets prepared to regale them. They went wandering on, 
from chamber to chamber, hall to hall, and gallery to gal- 
lery ; all without bounds or limit ; all distinguishable by 
the same lowering gloom ; all adorned with the same awful 
grandeur ; all traversed by persons in search of repose and 
consolation ; but who sought them in vain ; for every one 
carried within him a heart tormented in flames. Shunned 
by these various sufferers, who seemed by their looks to be 



94 VATHEK. 

upbraiding the partners of their guilt, they withdrew from 
them to wait, in direful suspense, the moment which should 
render them to each other the like objects of terror. 

" What !" exclaimed Nouronihar; " will the time come 
when I shall snatch my hand from thine?" Ah !" said 
Vathek, " and shall my eyes ever cease to drink from 
thine long draughts of enjoyment? Shall the moments 
of our reciprocal ecstasies be reflected on with horror? 
It was not thou that broughtest me hither ; the principles 
by which Carathis perverted my youth have been the sole 
cause of my perdition ! it is but right she should have her 
share of it." Having given vent to these painful expres- 
sions, he called to an afrit, who was stirring up one of the 
braziers, and bade him fetch the Princess Carathis from 
the palace of Samarah. 

After issuing these orders, the caliph and Nouronihar 
continued walking amidst the silent crowd, till they heard 
voices at the end of the gallery. Presuming them to pro- 
ceed from some unhappy beings, who, like themselves, were 
awaiting their final doom, they followed the sound, and 
found it to come from a small square chamber, where they 
discovered, sitting on sofas, four young men, of goodly 
figure, and a lovely female, who were holding a melancholy 
conversation by the glimmering of a lonely lamp. Each 
had a gloomy and forlorn air ; and two of them were em- 
bracing each other with great tenderness. On seeing the 
caliph and the daughter of Fakreddin enter, they arose, 
saluted, and made room for them. Then he who appeared 
the most considerable of the group, addressed himself thus 
to Vathek : " Strangers ! who doubtless are in the same 
state of suspense with ourselves, as you do not yet bear 
your hand on your heart, if you are come hither to pass the 
interval allotted, previous to the infliction of our common 
punishment, condescend to relate the adventures that have 
brought you to this fatal place ; and we, in return, will ac- 
quaint you with ours, which deserve but too well to be 
heard. To trace back our crimes to their source, though 
we are not permitted to repent, is the only employment 
suited to wretches like us !" 

The caliph and Nouronihar assented to the proposal ; 



VAT11EK. 95 

and Vathek began, not without tears and lamentations, a 
sincere recital of every circumstance that had passed. When 
the afflicting narrative was closed, the young man entered 
on his own. Each person proceeded in order ; and, when 
the third prince had reached the midst of his adventures, 
a sudden noise interrupted him, which caused the vault to 
tremble and to open. 

Immediately a cloud descended, which gradually dis- 
sipating, discovered Carathis on the back of an afrit, who 
grievously complained of his burden. She, instantly springing 
to the ground, advanced towards her son, and said, " What 
dost thou here, in this little square chamber ? As the dives 
are become subject to thy beck, I expected to have found 
thee on the throne of the pre-adamite kings." 

" Execrable woman ! " answered the caliph ; ec cursed be 
the day thou gavest me birth ! Go, follow this afrit ; let 
him conduct thee to the hall of the prophet Soliman : there 
thou wilt learn to what these palaces are destined, and how 
much I ought to abhor the impious knowledge thou hast 
taught me." 

" Has the height of power, to which thou art arrived, 
turned thy brain?" answered Carathis: <f but I ask no 
more than permission to show my respect for Soliman the 
prophet. It is, however, proper thou shouldst know that 
(as the afrit has informed me neither of us shall return to 
Samarah) I requested his permission to arrange my affairs, 
and he politely consented. Availing myself, therefore, of 
the few moments allowed me, I set fire to the tower, and 
consumed in it the mutes, negresses, and serpents, which 
have rendered me so much good service; nor should I 
have been less kind to Morakanabad, had he not prevented 
me, by deserting at last to thy brother. As for Bababalouk, 
who had the folly to return to Samarah, to provide hus- 
bands for thy wives, I undoubtedly would have put him 
to the torture ; but being in a hurry, I only hung him, 
after having decoyed him in a snare, with thy wives, whom 
I buried alive by the help of my negresses, who thus spent 
their last moments greatly to their satisfaction. With 
respect to Dilara, who ever stood high in my favour, she 
hath evinced the greatness of her mind, by fixing herself 



96 VATHEK. 

near, in the service of one of the magi ; and, I think, will 
soon be one of our society." 

Vathek, too much cast down to express the indignation 
excited by such a discourse, ordered the afrit to remove 
Carathis from his presence, and continued immersed in 
thoughts which his companions durst not disturb. 

Carathis, however, eagerly entered the dome of Soliman, 
and without regarding in the least the groans of the pro- 
phet, undauntedly removed the covers of the vases and 
violently seized on the talismans. Then, with a voice more 
loud than had hitherto been heard within these mansions, 
she compelled the dives to disclose to her the most secret 
treasures, the most profound stores, which the afrit himself 
had not seen. She passed, by rapid descents, known only 
to Eblis and his most favoured potentates ; and thus pene- 
trated the very entrails of the earth, where breathes the 
sansar, or the icy wind of death. Nothing appalled her 
dauntless soul. She perceived, however, in all the inmates 
who bore their hands on their heart, a little singularity, 
not much to her taste. 

As she was emerging from one of the abysses, Eblis 
stood forth to her view ; but notwithstanding he displayed 
the full effulgence of his infernal majesty, she preserved 
her countenance unaltered, and even paid her compliments 
with considerable firmness. 

This superb monarch thus answered : " Princess, whose 
knowledge and whose crimes have merited a conspicuous 
rank in my empire ; thou dost well to avail thyself of the 
leisure that remains : for the flames and torments, which 
are ready to seize on thy heart, will not fail to provide thee 
soon with full employment." He said, and was lost in the 
curtains of his tabernacle. 

Carathis paused for a moment with surprise ; but re- 
solved to follow the advice of Eblis, she assembled all the 
choirs of genii, and all the dives, to pay her homage. Thus 
inarched she, in triumph, through a vapour of perfumes, 
amidst the acclamations of all the malignant spirits, with 
most of whom she had formed a previous acquaintance. 
She even attempted to dethrone one of the Solimans, for 



VATHEK. 



97 



the purpose of usurping his place ; when a voice, proceed- 
ing from the abyss of death, proclaimed, " All is accom- 
plished ! " Instantaneously the haughty forehead of the 
intrepid princess became corrugated with agony : she ut- 
tered a tremendous yell ; and fixed, no more to be with- 
drawn, her right hand upon her heart, which was become 
a receptacle of eternal fire. 

In this delirium, forgetting all ambitious projects, and 
her thirst for that knowledge which should ever be hidden 
from mortals, she overturned the offerings of the genii ; and, 
having execrated the hour she was begotten and the womb 
that had borne her, glanced off in a rapid whirl that ren- 
dered her invisible, and continued to revolve without inter- 
mission. 

Almost at the same instant, the same voice announced 
to the caliph, Nouronihar, the four princes, and the prin- 
cess, the awful and irrevocable decree. Their hearts 
immediately took fire, and they, at once, lost the most 
precious gift of heaven, HOPE. These unhappy beings 
recoiled, with looks of the most furious distraction. Vathek 
beheld in the eyes of Nouronihar nothing but rage and 
vengeance ; nor could she discern aught in his, but aver- 
sion and despair. The two princes who were friends, and, 
till that moment, had preserved their attachment, shrunk 
back, gnashing their teeth with mutual and unchangeable 
hatred. Kalilah and his sister made reciprocal gestures of 
imprecation ; all testified their horror for each other by 
the most ghastly convulsions, and screams that could not 
be smothered. All severally plunged themselves into the 
accursed multitude, there to wander in an eternity of un- 
abating anguish. 

Such was, and such should be, the punishment of un- 
restrained passions and atrocious deeds ! Such shall be the 
chastisement of that blind curiosity, which would trans- 
gress those bounds the wisdom of the Creator has pre- 
scribed to human knowledge ; and such the dreadful dis- 
appointment of that restless ambition, which, aiming at 
discoveries reserved for beings of a supernatural order 
perceives not, through its infatuated pride, that the con- 



9 VATHEK. 

dition of man upon earth is to be humble and igno- 
rant. 

Thus the caliph Vathek, who, for the sake of empty 
pomp and forbidden power, had sullied himself with a thou- 
sand crimes, became a prey to grief without end, and re- 
morse without mitigation ; whilst the humble, the despised 
Gulchenrouz passed whole ages in undisturbed tranquillity., 
and in the pure happiness of childhood. 



NOTES. 



PAGE I. Caliph. 

THIS title, amongst the Mahometans, comprehends the concrete character of 
Prophet, Priest, and King, and is used to signify the Vicar of God on Earth. 
It is, at this day, one of the titles of the Grand Signior, as successor of Ma- 
homet ; and of the Sophi of Persia, as successor of Ali. Habesci's State of 
the Ottoman Empire, p. 9. D'Herbelot, p. 985. 

PAGE 1. one of his eyes became so terrible. 

The author of Nighiaristan hath preserved a fact that supports this account ; 
and there is no history of Vathek in which his terrible eye is not mentioned. 

PAGE 1. Omar Ben Abdalazix. 

This caliph was eminent above all others for temperance and self-denial, in- 
somuch that he is believed to have been raised to Mahomet's bosom, as a re- 
ward for his abstinence in an age of corruption. D'Herbelot, p. 690. 

PAGE 1.. Samarah. 

A city of the Babylonian Irak ; supposed to have stood on the site where 
Nimrod erected his tower. Khondemir relates, in his life of Motassem, that 
this prince, to terminate the disputes which were perpetually happening be- 
tween the inhabitants ofBagdat and his Turkish slaves, withdrew from thence, 
and having fixed on a situation in the plain of Catoul, there founded Samarah. 
He is said to have had, in the stables of this city, a hundred and thirty thou- 
sand pied horses, each of which carried, by his order, a sack of earth to a place 
he had chosen. By this accumulation an elevation was formed that commanded 
a view of all Samarah, and served for the foundation of his magnificent pa- 
lace. D'Herbelot, pp. 752. 808. S85. Anecdotes Arabes, p. 413. 

PAGE 2. in the most delightful succession. 

The great men of the East have been always fond of music. Though for- 
bidden by the Mahometan religion, it commonly makes a part of every enter- 
tainment. Nitimur in vetitum semper. Female slaves are generally kept to 
amuse them and the ladies of their harems. The Persian Khanyagere seems 
nearly to have resembled our old English minstrel ; as he usually accompanied 
his barbut, or lute, with heroic songs. Their musicians appear to have known 
the art of moving the passions, and to have generally directed their music to 
the heart. Al Farabi, a philosopher, who died about the middle of the tenth 
century, on his return from the pilgrimage of Mecca, introduced himself, 
though a stranger, at the court of Seifeddoula, Sultan of Syria. Musicians 
H 2 



100 VATHEK. 

were accidentally performing, and he joined them. The prince admired him, 
and wished to hear something of his own. He drew a composition from his 
pocket, and distributing the parts amongst the band, the first movement threw 
the prince and his courtiers into violent laughter, the next melted all into 
tears, and the last lulled even the performers asleep. Richardson's Dissert- 
ation on the Languages, $c. of Eastern Nations, p. 211. 

PAGE 2. Mani. 

This artist, whom Inatulla of Delhi styles the far-famed, lived in the reign 
of Schabur, or Sapor, the son of Ardschir Babegan, was founder of the sect of 
Manicha?ans, and was, by profession, a painter and sculptor. His pretensions, 
supported by an uncommon skill in mechanical contrivances, induced the 
ignorant to believe that his powers were more than human. After having 
secluded himself from his followers, under the pretence of passing a year in 
Heaven, he produced a wonderful volume, which he affirmed to have brought 
from thence; containing images and figures of a marvellous nature. D'Her- 
belot, p. 518. It appears, from the Arabian Nights, that Haroun al Raschid, 
Vathek's grandfather, had adorned his palace and furnished his magnificent 
pavilion with the most capital performances of the Persian artists. 

PAGE 2. Houris. 

The virgins of Paradise, called, from their large black eyes *, Hur al oyun. 
An intercourse with these, according to the institution of Mahomet, is to con- 
stitute the principal felicity of the faithful. Not formed of clay, like mortal 
women, they are deemed in the highest degree beautiful, and exempt from 
every inconvenience incident to the sex. Al Koran ; passim. 

' * Might not Akenside's expression, 

" In the dark Heaven of Mira's eye," 

have been suggested by the eyes of the virgins of paradise ? 

The enthusiam of the acute Wincklemann for the statuary of the ancients 
was apt to mislead both his judgment and taste. What, but such a bias could 
induce him to maintain after asserting that Homer meant by the word (jowi; 
to characterise the beauty of Juno's eyes, and citing with approbation MEAA 
NO*0AAM02' KA AH TO nP02nOON- as theglossof the scholiast upon it" 
that the epithet the poet had selected was designed by him to express, not what 
it naturally imports, but a sense independent of it ; and which it could only be 
supposed to imply, from being placed in an absurd connection ? The eye of the 
animal to which the term belongs is, no doubt, large, if referred to the human 
countenance ; but not properly so, in its own situation. Had Homer applied 
j8? to the statue of Juno, Qouxi? (as the Abb contends) must have been 
interpreted large.eyed ; because in this relation no idea, except that of magni- 
tude [unless we add prominence], could possibly be extorted from it : but it 
must be allowed, on the same principle, that an epithet taken from the eye of 
the ass, or any other creature's of equal size, whatever were its colour would 
have become the statue of the goddess as well, and signified precisely the 
same. On such commentators a poet might justly exclaim, 

" Pol, me occidistis, amici, 

Non servastis ! " 

In their descriptions of female beauty, the poets of the East frequently use 
ebetd 1 - 6 image Wlth Homer ' and exactl y in his 8en se. Tims, in particular, 

A company of maidens were seated in their vehicles, with black eyes and 
graceful motions, like the wild heifers of Tudah.' 



NOTES. 101 

PAGE 3. it teas not with the orthodox that he usually held. 

Vathek persecuted, with extreme rigour, all who defended the eternity of 
the Koran ; which the Sonnites, or orthodox, maintained to be uncreated, and 
the Motazalites and Schiites as strenuously denied. D'Herbelot, p. 85, &c. 

PAGE 3. Mahomet in the seventh heaven. 

In this heaven, the paradise of Mahomet is supposed to be placed, contiguous 
to the throne of Alia. Hagi Khalfah relates, that Ben latmaiah, a celebrated 
doctor of Damascus, had the temerity to assert that, when the Most High 
erected his throne, he reserved a vacant place for Mahomet upon it 

PAGE 3. Genii. 

Genn, or Ginn, in the Arabic, signifies a Genius or Demon, a being of a 
higher order, and formed of more subtile matter than man. According to 
Oriental mythology, the Genii governed the world long before the creation of 
Adam. The Mahometans regarded them as an intermediate race between 
angels and men, and capable of salvation ; whence Mahomet pretended a com- 
mission to convert them. Consonant to this, we read that, when the Servant 
of God stood up to invoke him, it wanted little but that the Genii had pressed on 
him in crowds, to hear him rehearse the Koran. D'Herbelot, p. 375. Al Koran, 
ch. 72. It is asserted, and not without plausible reasons, that the words Genn, 
Ginn Genius, Genie, Gian, Gigas, Giant, Geant proceed from the same themes, 
viz. F^, the earth, and Ytiti, to produce ; as if these supernatural agents had 
been an early production of the earth, long before Adam was modelled out 
from a lump of it. The flan; and Emns of Plato bear a close analogy to these 
supposed intermediate creatures between God and man. From these premises 
arose the consequence that, boasting a higher order, formed of more subtile 
matter, and possessed of much greater knowledge, than man, they lorded over 
this planet, and invisibly governed it with superior intellect. From this last 
circumstance they obtained in Greece the title of Actiftovx, Demons, from 
Aa.*if*&n, Sciens, knowing. The Hebrew word, D'b03, Nephilim (Gen. vi. 
4.), translated by Gigantes, giants, claiming the same etymon with Ne$&j, a 
cloud, seems also to indicate that these intellectual beings inhabited the void 
expanse of the terrestrial atmosphere. Hence the very ancient fable of men 
of enormous strength and size revolting against the gods, and all the mytholo- 
gical lore relating to that mighty conflict ; unless we trace the origin of this 
important event to the ambition of Satan, his revolt against the Almighty, and 
his fall with the angels, 

PAGE 3. Assist him to complete the tower. 

" The genii, who were styled by the Persians Peries and Dives, were famous 
for their architectural skill. The pyramids of Egypt have been ascribed to 
them; and we are told of a strange fortress which they constructed in the 
remote mountains of Spain, whose frontal presented the following inscrip. 
tion : 

" It is no light task to disclose the portal of this asylum : 
The bolt, rash Passenger, is not of iron ; but the tooth of a furious Dragon : 
Know thou that no one can break this charm. 

Till Destiny shall have consigned the key to his adventurous hand " 
H 3 



102 VATHEK. 

The Koran relates, that the Genii were employed by Solomon in the erection 
of his magnificent temple. BaillysurVAtlantide, p. 146. D'Herbelot, p. 8. Al 
Koran, ch. 34. 

The reign of Gian Ben Gian, over the Peris, is said to have continued for 
two thousand years; after which EBLIS was sent by the Deity to exile them, 
on account of their disorders, and confine them in the remotest region of the 
earth. D'Herbelot, p. 396. Bailly sur V Atlantide, p. 147. 

PAGE 4. the stranger displayed such rarities as he had never before seen. 

In the Tales of Inatulla, we meet with a traveller who, like this, was fur- 
nished with trinkets and curiosities of an extraordinary kind. That such 
were much sought after in the days of Vathek, may be concluded from the 
encouragement which Haroun al Raschid gave to the mechanic arts, and the 
present he sent by his ambassadors to Charlemagne. This consisted of a clock, 
which, when put into motion, by means of a clcpsydrum, not only pointed out the 
hours in their round, but also, by dropping small balls on a bell, struck them, 
and, at the same instant, threw open as many little doors, to let out an equal 
number of horsemen. Besides these, the clock displayed various other con- 
trivances. Ann. Reg. Franc. Pip. Caroli, fyc. ad ann. 807. Weidler, p. 205. 

PAGE 5. characters on the sabres. 

such inscriptions often occur in eastern romances. We find, in the Arabian 
Nights, a cornelian, on which unknown characters were engraven ; and, also, 
a sabre, like those here described. In the French king's library is a curious 
treatise, intitled Sefat Alaclam ; containing a variety of alphabets, arranged 
under different heads ; such as the prophetic, the mystical, the philosophic, the 
magical, the talismanic, &c. which seems to have escaped the research of the 
indefatigable Mr. Astle. Arabian Nights, vol. ii. p. 246. vol. i. p. 143. D'Her. 
belot, p. 797. 

PAGE 7. endeavoured, by her conversation, to appease and compose him. 

The same sanative quality is ascribed to soothing conversation, both by 
JEschylus and Milton : 

Opyris voffovfftis eurtv lalpoi \oyoi. 

Promefh. v. 378. 

" Apt words have power to swage 
The tumours of a troubled mind ; 
And areas balm to fester 'd wounds." 

Samson Agon. v. 184. 

PAGE 8. beards burnt off. 

The loss of the beard, from the earliest ages, was accounted highly dis- 
graceful. An instance occurs, in the Tales of Inatulla, of one being singed off 1 , 
as a mulct on the owner, for having failed to explain a question propounded ; 
and, in the Arabian Nights, a proclamation may be seen similar to this of Va. 
thek. Vol. i. p. 268. vol. ii. p. 228. 

PAGE 9. robes of honour, and sequins of gold. 

Such rewards were common in the East, See particularly Arabian Nights, 
voL ii. pp. 72. 125. vol. iii. p. 64. 



NOTES. IDS 

PAGE 9. The old man put on his green spectacles. 

This is an apparent anachronism ; but such frequently occur in reading the 
Arabian writers. It should be remembered, the difficulty of ascertaining facts 
and fixing the dates of inventions, must be considerable in a vast extent of 
country, where books are comparatively few, and the art of printing unprac- 
tised. Though the origin of spectacles can be traced back, with certainty, no 
higher than the thirteenth century, yet the observation of Seneca, that letters 
appeared of an increased magnitude when viewed through the medium of 
convex glass might have been noted also by others, and a sort of spectacles 
contrived, in consequence of it. But, however this might have been, the art 
of staining glass is sufficiently ancient, to have suggested in the days of Vathek 
the use of green, as a protection to the eye from a glare of light. 

PAGE 10. The stars, which he went to consult. 

The phrase of the original corresponds with the Greek expression, 
BIAZE28AI' which, in another view, will illustrate St. Matthew, xi. 12. 



PAGE 11. to drink at will of the Four Fountains. 

Agathocles (cited by Athenaeus, 1. xi. p, 515.) relates that " there were 
certain fountains in these regions, to the number of seventy, whose WATERS were 
denominated GOLDEN ; and of which it was death for any one to drink, save the 
KING and his eldest son." In this number, the Four Fountains were for- 
merly reckoned ; whose waters, as Vathek had no son, were sacred to his own 
use. 

The citation from Agathocles may likewise explain the wish of King David, 
" for water from the well of Bethlehem , " unless we suppose it to have arisen 
from a predilection, like that of the Parthian monarchs, for the water of 
Choaspes, which was carried with them wherever they went, and, from that 
circumstance, styled by Tibullus, regia lympha, and by Milton, 

*' The drink of none but kings.'' 

PAGE 11. Bowls of rock crystal. 

In the Arabian Nights, Schemselnihar and Ebn Thaher were served by three 
of their attendants, each bringing them a goblet of rock crystal, filled with 
curious wine 

PAGE 12. Accursed Giaour. 

Dives of this kind are frequently mentioned by Eastern writers. Consult 
their tales in general ; and especially those of the Fishermen, Aladdin, and 
the Princess of China. 



PAGE 12. Drink this draught, said the stranger, as he presented a phial. 

A phial of a similar potion is ordered to be instantaneously drank off, in 
one of the Tales of Inatulla. " These brewed inchantments" have been used 
in the East from the days of Homer. Milton, in his Comus, describes one of 
them, which greatly resembles the Indian's : 
H 4 



104 VATHEK. 

" And first behold this cordial julep here, 

That flames, and dances in his crystal bounds, 
With spirits of balm, and fragrant syrups mixed. 
Not that Nepenthes, which the wife of Thone 
In Egypt gave to Jove-born Helena, 
Is of such power to stir up joy as this : 
To life so friendly, or so cool to thirst." 

PAGE 13. The poets applied them as a chorus to all the songs they composed. 

Sir John Chardin, describing a public entertainment and rejoicing, observes, 
that the most ingenious poets in Persia (as is related of Homer) sung their 
own works; which, for the most part, are in praise of the king; whom they 
fail not to extol, let him be never so worthy of blame and oblivion. The 
songs of this day were adapted to the occasion of the festival ; which was the 
restoration of the prime minister to his office : he adds, I saw one that abounded 
in fine and witty turns, the burden of which was this : 

" Him set aside, all men but equals are ; 
E'n Sol survey'd the spacious realms of air, 
To see if he could find another star : 
A star, that like the polar star could reign ; 
And long he sought it, but he sought in vain."* 

The ingenuity of the poet seems to consist in an allusion to the prime minis- 
ter's title, Ivon Medave, or the Pole of Persia. 

PAGE 13. Bababalouk, the chief of his eunuchs. 

As it was the employment of the black eunuchs to wait upon and guard the 
sultanas ; so the general superintendence of the harem was particularly com- 
mitted to their chief. Habesci's State of the Ottoman Umpire, pp. 155, 156. 

PAGE 14. the divan. 

This was both the supreme council and court of justice, at which the caliphs 
of the race of the Abassides assisted in person, to redress the injuries of every 
appellant D'Herbetot, p. 298. 

i PAGE 14. The officers arranged themselves in a semicircle. 

Such was the etiquette, constantly observed, on entering the Divan. Arab. 
Nights, vol. iv. p. 36. D'Herbelot, p. 912. 

PAGE 14 the prime vizir. 

Vazir, vezir, or, as we express it, vizir, literally signifies a porter; and, by 
metaphor, the minister who bears the principal burden of the state, generally 
called the Sublime Porte. 



* See Lloyd's Introduction to a Collection of Voyages and Travels, never 
before published in English, p. 21. 



NOTES. 105 

PAGE 15. The Indian, being short and plump, collected himself into, a 

ball, Sfc. 

Happy as Horace has been in his description of the Wise Man, the figurative 
expressions which finish the character, are literally applicable to our author's 
Indian : 

" In seipso totus, teres atque rotundus ; 
Extern! ne quid valeat per leve morari : 
In quern manca ruit semper fortuna." 

PAGE 16. The Muezins and their minarets. 

' Valid, the son of Abdalmalek, was the first who erected a minaret, or turret ; 
and this he placed on the grand mosque at Damascus, for the muezin, or crier, 
to announce from it the hour of prayer. This practice has constantly been 
kept to this day. D'Herbelot, p. 576. 

PAGE 18. The palace of subterranean fire. 

Of this palace, which is frequently mentioned in Eastern romance, a full de- 
scription will be found in the sequel. 

PAGE 18. Soliman Ben Daoud. 

The name of David in Hebrew is composed of the letter 1 Vau between two 
T Daleths "111 ; and, according to the Masoretic points, ought to be pro- 
nounced David. Having no u consonant in their tongue, the Septuagint sub- 
stituted the letter B for v, and wrote A/3*S, Dabid. The Syriac reads Dad or 
Dod i and the Arabs articulate Daoud. 

PAGE 19. I require the blood of fifty of the most beautiful sons of the vizirs. 

Amongst the infatuated votaries of the powers of darkness, the most accept- 
able offering was the blood of their children. If the parents were not at hand 
to make an immediate offer, the magistrates did not fail to select those who were 
most fair and promising, that the demon might not be defrauded of his dues. 
On one occasion, two hundred of the prime nobility were sacrificed together. 
Bryanfs Observations, p. 279, &c. 

PAGE 21. Give them me, cried the Indian. 

In the story of Codadad and his brother, we read of a Black, like this, viho 
fed upon human blood. Arab. Nights, voL iii. p. 199. 

PAGE 21. with the grin of an ogre. 

' Thus, in the history of the punished vizir : " The prince heard enough to 
convince him of his danger, and then perceived that the lady, who called her- 
self the daughter of an Indian king, was an ogress i wife to one of those 
savage demons called an ogre, who stay in remote places, and make use of a thou- 
sand wiles to surprise and devour passengers." Arab. Nights, vol. i. p. 5tx 

PAGE 22. bracelet. 

The bracelet, in the East, was an emblem of royalty. D'Herbelot, p. 541. 
For want of a more proper term to denominate the ornament serkhooj, the 
word aigret is here used. 

PAGE 24. mutes. 

It has been usual, in Eastern courts, from time immemorial, to retain a num- 
ber of mutes. These are not only employed to amuse the monarch, but also to 



106 VATHEK. 

instruct his pages, in an art to us little known, of communicating every 
thing by signs, lest the sounds of their voices should disturb the sovereign. 
Habesci's State of the Ottoman Empire, p. 164. The mutes are also the 
secret instruments of his private vengeance, in carrying the fatal string. 

PAGE 25. Prayer announced at break of day. 

The stated seasons of public prayer, in the twenty-four hours, were five : 
daybreak, noon, midtime between noon and sunset, immediately as the sun 
leaves the horizon, and an hour and a half after it is down. 

PAGE 25. mummies. 

Moumia (from mourn, wax and tallow), signifies the flesh of the human body 
preserved in the sand, after having been embalmed and wrapt in cerements. 
They are frequently found in the sepulchres of Egypt j but most of the Orien- 
tal mummies are brought from a cavern near Abin, in Persia. D'Herbelot, 
p. 647. 

PAGE 25. rhinoceros' horns. 

Of their extraordinary qualities and application, a curious account may be 
seen in the Bibliotheque Orientale, and the Supplement to it. 

PAGE 25. Skulls and skeletons. 

Both were usually added to the ingredients already 'mentioned. These 
magic rites sufficiently resemble the witch scenes of Middleton, Shakspeare, 
&c. to show their Oriental origin. Nor is it to be wondered if, amongst the 
many systems adopted from the East, this should have been in the number. 
It may be seen, from the Arabian Tales, that magic was an art publicly 
taught ; and Father Angelo relates of a rich enchanter, whom he knew at 
Bassora, that his pupils were so numerous, as to occupy an entire quarter of 
the city. 

PAGE 29 Flagons of wine, and vases of sherbet reposing on snow. 
Sir John Chardin speaks of a wine much admired in the East, and particu- 
larly in Persia, called roubnar ; which is made from the juice of the pome- 
granate, and sent abroad in large quantities. The Oriental sherbets, styled 
by St. Jerom,sorbittuncul<e delicate, consisted of various syrups (such as lemon, 
1 iquorice, capillaire, &c.) mixed with water. To these, Hasselquist adds seve- 
ral others, and observes, that the sweet-scented violet is a flower greatly 
esteemed, not only for its smell and colour, but, especially, for its use in sherbets 
which, when the Easterns intend to entertain their guests in an elegant manner, 
is made of a solution of violet-sugar. Snow, in the rinfrescos of a hot climate, 
is almost a constant ingredient Thus, in the Arabian Nights, Bedreddin 
Hassan, having filled a large porcelain bowl with sherbet of roses, put snow 
into it. 

PAGE 29. a lamb stuffed with pistachios. 
The same dish is mentioned in the Tale of the Barber's sixth brother. 

PAGE 29. a parchment. 

Parchments of the like mysterious import are frequent in the writings of 
the Easterns. One in particular, amongst the Arabians, is held in high vener- 
ation. It was written by Ali, and Giafar Sadek, in mystic characters, and is 



NOTES. 10? 

said to contain the destiny of the Mahometan religion, and the great events 
which are to happen previous to the end of the world. This parchment is 
of earners skin ; but it was usual with Catherine of Medicis to carry about 
her person, a legend, in cabalistic characters, inscribed on the skin of a dead, 
born infant. D'Herbelot, p. 3G6. Wraxall's House of Valois. 

PAGE 29. Istakhar. 

This city was the ancient Persepolis, and capital of Persia, under the kings 
of the three first races. The author of Lebtarikh writes, that Kischtab there 
established his abode, erected several temples to the clement of fire, and 
hewed out, for himself and his successors, sepulchres in the rocks of the 
mountain contiguous to the city. The ruins of columns and broken figures 
which still remain, defaced as they were by Alexander, and mutilated by time, 
plainly evince that those ancient potentates had chosen it for the place of their 
interment. Their monuments, however, must not be confounded with the 
superb palace reared by queen Homai, in the midst of Istakhar ; which the 
Persians distinguish by the name of Tchilminar, or the forty watch-towers. 
The origin of this city is ascribed by some to Giamschid, and others carry it 
higher; but the Persian tradition is, that it was built by the Peris, or Faeries, 
when the world was governed by Gian Ben Gian. D' Herbelot, p. 327. 

PAGE 29. Gian Ben Gian. 

By this appellation was distinguished the monarch of that species of beings, 
whom the Arabians denominate Gian or Ginn ; that is, Genii j and the Tarikh 
Thabari, Peris, Feex, or Faeries. He was renowned for his warlike expeditions 
and stupendous structures. According to Oriental writers, the pyramids of 
Egypt were amongst the monuments of his power. The buckler of this mighty 
sovereign, no less famous than that of Achilles, was employed by three suc- 
cessive Solimans, to achieve their marvellous exploits. From them, it de. 
scended to Tahamurath, surnamed Divbend, or Conqueror of the GIANTS. 
This buckler was endowed with most wonderful qualities, having been fabri- 
cated by talismanic art ; and was alone sufficient to destroy all the charms and 
enchantments of demons or giants ; which, on the contrary, were wrought by 
magic. Hence we are no longer at a loss for the origin of the wonderful 
shield of Atlante. 

The reign of Gian Ben Gian over the Peris is said to have continued for 
two thousand years; after which, EBLIS was sent by the Deity to exile them, 
on account of their disorders, and confine them in the remotest region of the 
earth. D'Herbelot, p. 396. Bailly sur I'Atlantide, p. H7. 

PAGE 29. the talismans of Soliman. 

The most famous talisman of the East, and which could control even the 
arms and magic of the dives or giants, was Mohur Solimani, the seal or ring of 
Soliman Jarcd, fifth monarch of the world after Adam. By means of it the 
possessor had the entire command, not only of the elements, but also of de- 
mons and every created being. Richardson's Dissertat. p. 272. D'Herbelot, 



PAGE 29. pre-adamite sultans. 

These monarchs, which were seventy-two in number, are said to have go- 
verned each a distinct species of rational beings, prior to the existence of 
Adam. Amongst the most renowned of them were SOLIMAN KAAD, SOLIMAN 
DAKI, and SOLIMAN Di GIAN BEN GIAN. D'Herbelot, p. 820. 



108 VATHEK. 

PAGE 29. beware how thou enteresl any dwelling. ^ 

Strange as this injunction may seem, it is by no means incongruous to the 
customs of the country. Dr. Pocock mentions his travelling with the train of 
the governor of Faiume, who, instead of lodging in a village that was near, 
passed the night in a grove of palm-trees. Travels, vol. i, p. 56. 

PAGE 30. every bumper he ironically quaffed to the health of Mahomet. 

There are innumerable proofs that the Grecian custom, trvfAtnuv nvatit^o- 
pivov;, prevailed amongst the Arabs j but, had these been wanted, Carathis 
could not be supposed a stranger to it The practice was, to hail the gods in the 
first place, and then those who were held in the highest veneration. This they 
repeated as often as they drank. Thus St. Ambrose : " Quid obtestationes po- 
tantium loquar ? quid memorem sacramenta, qua? violare nefas arbitrantur ? 
Bibamus, inquiunt, pro salute imperatorum ; et qui non biberit, sit reus inde- 
votionis. 

PAGE 30. the ass of Balaam, the dog of the seven sleepers, and the other ani- 
mals admitted Mo the paradise of Mahomet. 

It was a tenet of the Mussulman creed, that all animals would be raised 
again, and many of them honoured with admission to paradise. The story of 
the seven sleepers, borrowed from Christian legends, was this: In the days 
of the Emperor Deci us, there were certain Ephesian youths of a good family, 
who, to avoid the flames of persecution, fled to a secret cavern, and there slept 
for a number of years. In their flight towards the cave, they were followed by 
a dog, which, when they attempted to drive back, said, " / love those who 
are dear unto God; go sleep, therefore, and I will guard you." For this dog 
the Mahometans retain so profound a reverence, that their harshest sarcasm 
against a covetous person is, " He would not throw a bone to the dog of the 
seven sleepers." It is even said that their superstition induces them to write 
his name upon the letters they send to a distance, as a kind of talisman, to se- 
cure them a safe conveyance. Religious Ceremonies, voL vii. p. 74. n. Sale's 
Koran, chap, xviii. and notes. 

PAGE 30. painting the eyes of the Circassians. 

It was an ancient custom in the East, and still continues, to tinge the 
eyes of women, particularly those of a fair complexion, with an impalpable 
powder, prepared chiefly from crude antimony, and called surmeh. Ebni'l 
Motezz, in a passage translated by Sir W. Jones, hath not only ascertained its 
purple colour, but also likened the violet to it : 
" Viola collegit folia sua, similia 

Collyrio nigro, quod bibit lachrymas die discessus, 
Velut si esset super vasa in quibus fulgent 
Primae ignis flammulaa in sulphuris extremis partibus." 

This pigment, when applied to the inner surface of the lids, communicates 
to the eye (especially if seen by the light of lamps) so tender and fascinating a 
languor as no language is competent to express.* Hence the epithet leS/t^o?, 

* When Tasso represents love, as ambushed 

sotto all ' ombra 

Delle paJpebre 

he allegorically alludes to that appearance in nature, which the artifice here 
described was meant to counterfeit. 



NOTES. 109 

violet-colour eyelids, attributed by the Greeks * to the goddess of beauty ; and 
the Arabian comparison of " the eyelids of a fine woman bathed in tears, to 
viotets dropping with dew." Perhaps, also, Shakspeare's 

- violets dim, 
But sweeter than the lids of Juno's eyes 

should be ultimately referred to the same origin. But, however this may be, 
it is obvious (though his commentators have overlooked it) that Anacreon 
alluded to the same cosmetic, when he required of the painter that the eyelids 
of his mistress's portrait should, like her own, exhibit this appearance : 

Exe7 8', diros fK(in), 

BAE*APflN ITTN KEAAINHN- 

and her eye, both the bright citron f of Minerva's, and the dewy radiance J of 
Cytherea'B : 



To 8e BAEMMA vvv 
ATTO rov -urvpyos -uronqaov 
A/JLU FAATKON, us A*HNH2- 
Apa 5' 'YFPON, us KT0HPH2. 



PAGE 30. Rocnabad. 

The stream thus denominated flows near the city of Schiraz. Its waters are 
uncommonly pire and limpid, and their banks swarded with the finest verdure. 
Its praises are celebrated by Hafez, in an animated song, which Sir \V. Jones 
has admirably translated: 

M Boy, let yon liquid ruby flow, 
And bid thy pensive heart be glad, 

* Both Homer and Hesiod have applied 'EAIKOBAE*APO2 to Venus, in a 
synonymous sense, as is evident from Pliny, who, amongst other properties 
of the Helix, minutely specifies its purplish flowers. This virtty '?.$* O^O.^.UMV 
will likewise explain 'EAIKnniS. 

Winkelmann and Graevius have each given different interpretations ; but, 
let them both speak for themselves : 'E)<.ixote$<x.*ot caracterise des yeux dont 
les paupitres ont un mouvement ondoyant que le Potte compare au jeune ceps 

de la vigne. Hist, del' Art del'Antiq., torn. II. p. 135. 'EXixo^fpufoi et 

ifaxu-ribis puellic Graecis dicuntur, qui sunt mobili oculorum petulantia, ut Pe- 
tron. loquitur, sive qua habent, ut idem dicit, 

blandos oculos et inquietos, 

Et quadam propria nota loquaces. 

Qui hinc Ovidio dicuntur arguti. Aliter plerique sentiunt, et exponunt : 
nieros oculos habentes. Sed ea vera est quam dixi hujus vocis notio, quam fa- 
cile pluribus confirmarem, nisi res ipsa loqueretur. Lectiones Hcsiodete, cap. xx. 
f " Eyen, bright citrin." Chaucer. No expression can be less exact than 
blue-eyed, when used as the characteristic of Minerva ; nor any, perhaps, more 
so, than Chaucer's : unless -y^oMxtofi; be literally rendered. 

| TrPOS' 6 fVKaladtopos, ets ras fjSovas pfvftaligo/jiej'os. 

Gloss. Bibl. Coislin. Tasso, in his Jerusalem, has well paraphrased the import 
of this epithet : 

Qual raggio in onda, le scintilla un riso 
Negli umidi occhj tremulo e lascivo. 

^ Odexxviii. 18. 2 Kings ix. 30. Ezek. xxiii. 40. D'Herbelot, p. 832. Lad? 
M. W. Montagu's Letters, Let. xxix. 



110 VATHEK. 

Whate'er the frowning zealots say : 
Tell them, their Eden cannot show 
A stream so clear as Rocnabad, 
A bower so sweet as Mosellay."* 

PAGE 31. Do you, with the advice of my mother, govern. 

Females in the East were not anciently excluded from power. In the story 

of Zeyn Alasnam and the King of the Genii, the mother of Zeyn undertakes, 

with the aid of his vizirs, to govern Bassora during his absence on a similar 

expedition. 

PAGE 31. Chintz and muslin. 

For many curious particulars relative to these articles, consult Mr. DelavaPs 
Inquiry concerning the Changes of Colours, &c. ; to which may be added, 
Lucret. lib. iv. 5. Petron. c. 37. Martial, viii. Ep. 28. 17. xiv. Ep. 150. Plu- 
tarch, in Vita Catonis. Plin. viii. 48. 

PAGE 31. Serpents and scorpions. 

Various accounts are given of the magical applications of these animals, and 
the power of sorcerers over them, to which even Solomon referred. Sir John 
Chardin relates, that at Surat an Armenian, having seen some of these crea- 
tures crawl and twine over the naked bodies of children belonging to the 
charmers, daringly hazarded the same experiment ; but it soon proved fatal to 
him, for he was bitten, and died in the space of two hours. 



PAGE 32. she amused herself in curing their wounds. 
Clorin, in the Faithful Shepherdess of Fletcher, possessed the like skill : 

" Of all green wounds I know the remedies, 
In men or cattle ; be they stung with snakes, 
Or charm 'd with powerful words of wicked art ; 
* * * 

These I can cure." 

PAGE 32. Moullahs. 

Those amongst the Mahometans who were bred to the law had this title ; and 
from their order the judges of cities and provinces were taken. 

PAGE 32. the sacred Cahaba. 

That part of the temple at Mecca which is chiefly revered, and, indeed, gives 
a sanctity to the rest, is a square stone building called ;the Caaba, probably 
from its quadrangular form. The length of this edifice, from north to south, 
is twenty-four cubits, and its breadth, from east to west, twenty.three. The 
door is on the east side, and stands about four cubits from the ground, the 
floor being level with the threshold. The Caaba has a double roof, sup- 
ported internally by three octangular pillars of aloes wood, between which, 
on a bar of iron, hangs a row of silver lamps. The outside is covered with 
rich black damask, adorned with an embroidered band of gold. This hanging, 

* Mosella was an oratory on the banks of Rocnabad. 



NOTES. Ill 

which is changed every year, was formerly sent by the caliphs. Sale's Pre- 
liminary Discourse, p. 152. 



PAGE 33. the tapestry that hung before the door. 

This kind of curtain, at first restricted to the serail, or palace, was afterwards 
adopted by the great, and gradually became of general use. The author of 
Leb Tarikh relates, that Lohorashb, King of Persia, having granted to the 
great officers of his household and army the privilege of giving audience on 
seats of gold, reserved to himself the right of iheseraperdeh, or curtain; which 
was hung before the throne to conceal him from the eyes of his subjects, and 
thereby preserve their reverence for his person. In later times, the daughter 
of a law professor, who occasionally, in her father's absence, filled his chair, 
had recourse to the same expedient, lest the charms of her face should distract 
her pupil's attention. Abbt de Sade's Me'moires de Pe'trarquc, torn. i. p. 42. 



PAGE 33. the supposed oratory. 

The dishonouring such places as had an appearance of being devoted to 
religious purposes, by converting them to the most abject offices of nature, was 
an Oriental method of expressing contempt, and hath continued from remote 
antiquity. Harmer's Observations, voL ii. p. 493. 



PAGE 33. regale these pious poor souls with my good wine from Schirax. 

The prohibition of wine in the Koran is so rigidly observed by the consci- 
entious, especially if they have performed the pilgrimage to Mecca, that they 
deem it sinful to press grapes for the purpose of making it, and even to use the 
money arising from its sale. Chardin, Voy. de Perse, torn. ii. p. 212. Schiraz 
was famous in the East for its wines of different sorts, but particularly for its 
red, which was esteemed more highly than even the white wine of Kismische. 



PAGE 34. The Caliph, to enjoy so flattering a sight, supped gaily on the roof. 

Dr. Pococke relates, that he was entertained at Galilee by the steward of the 
Sheik, with whom he supped on the top of the house. From a similar motive to 
Vathek's, Nebuchadnezzar is represented by Daniel as contemplating his 
capital_from the summit of his palace, when he uttered that exulting apo- 
strophe. Is not this great Babylon, that 1 have built? 

'. PAGE 35. the most stately tulips of the' East. < 

The tulip is a flower of Eastern growth, and there held in great estimation. 
Thus, in an ode of Mesihi : " The edge of the bower is filled with the light 
of Ahmed : among the plants the fortunate tulips represent his com. 
panions." 

PAGE 35. eunuchs in (he rear. 

As the black eunuchs were the inseparable attendants of the ladies, the rear 
was, consequently, their post. So, in the argument to the poem of Amriolkais : 
" One day, when her tribe had struck their tents, and were changing their 



112 VATHEK. 

station, the women, as usual, came behind the rest, with the servants and 
baggage, in carriages fixed on the backs of camels." 

PAGE 35. certain cages of ladies. 

There are many passages of the Moallakat in which these cages are fully de- 
scribed. Thus, in the poem of Lebeid : 

" How were thy tender affections raised, when the damsels of the tribe de- 
parted ; when they hid themselves in carriages of cotton, like antelopes in 
their lair, and the tents as they were struck gave a piercing sound! 

" They were concealed in vehicles, whose sides were well covered with 
awnings and carpets, with fine-spun curtains and pictured veils." 

Again, Zohair : 

" - Look, my friend ! dost thou not discern a company of maidens 
seated on camels, and advancing over the high ground above the streams of 
Jortham ? 

" They leave on their right the mountains and rocky plains of Kenaan. Oh ! 
how many of my bitter foe?, and how many of my firm allies, does Kenaatt 
contain f 

" They are mounted in carriages covered with costly awnings, and with rose. 
coloured veils, the lining of which have the hue of crimson andem-wood. 

" They now appear by the valley of Subaan, and now they pass through it ; 
the trappings of all their camels are new and large. 

" When they ascend from the bosom of the vale, they sit forward on the 
saddle-cloths, with every mark of a voluptuous gaiety." Moallakat, by Sir W. 
Jones, pp. 46. 35. See also Lady M. W. Montagu, Let. xxvi. 

PAGE 35. swagging somewhat awry. 

Amriolkais, in the first poem of the Moallakat, hath related a similar ad- 
venture : 

" On that happy day I entered the carriage, the carriage of Onaiza, who 
said, ' Woe to thee t thou wilt compel me to travel on foot.' 

" She added, while the vehicle was bent aside with our weight, ' O Amri- 
olkais, descend, or my beast also will be killed f ' 

" I answered, ' Proceed, and loosen his rein ; nor withhold from me the 
fruits of thy love, which again and again may be tasted with rapture. 

" Many a fair one, like thee, though not like thee a virgin, have I visited 
by night.' " 

PAGE 35. dislodged. 

Our language wants a verb, equivalent to the French denicher, to convey, 
in this instance, the precise sense of the author. 

PAGE 36. those nocturnal insects which presage eml. 

It is observable that, in the fifth verse of the 91st Psalm, the terror by night, 
is rendered, in the old English version, the bugge by night.* In the first 



thP iT 8 T " Ot wanted ' both in the English and Greek versions, where 

le translators have modified the sense of the original by their own precon- 

ceived opinions. To this source may be ascribed the T5 gffe of our old Bible 



NOTES. 113 

settled parts of North America, every nocturnal fly of a noxious quality is still 
generically named a bug ; whence the term bugbear signifies one that carries 
terror wherever he goes. Beelzebub, or the Lord of Flies, was an Eastern ap- 
pellative given to the Devil ; and the nocturnal sound called by the Arabians 
azif, was believed to be the howling of demons. Analogous to this is a pas- 
sage in Comus, as it stood in the original copy : 

"But for that damn'd magician, let him be girt 

With all the grisly legions that troop 

Under the sooty flag of Acheron, 

Harpies and Hydras, or all the monstrous buggs 

'Twixt Africa and Inde, I'll find him out." 

PAGE 36. the locusts were heard from the thickets on the plain of Catoul. 

The insects, here mentioned, are of the same species with the TT-< of the 
Greeks, and the cicada of the Latins. The locusts are mentioned in Pliny, 
b. xi. 29. They were so called, from loco usto, because the havoc they made 
wherever they passed left behind the appearance of a place desolated by fire. 
How could then the commentators of Vathek say that they are called locusts, 
from their having been so denominated by the first English settlers in Ame- 
rica? 

PACK 36.; halted on the banks of the Tigris. 

It is a practice in the East, and especially when large parties journey 
together, to halt, if possible, in the vicinity of a stream. Thus Zohair : 

" They rose at daybreak : they proceeded at early dawn ; they are 
advancing towards the valley of Has directly and surely, as the hand to the 
mouth. 

" Now, when they have reached the brink of yon blue gushing rivulet, 
they fix the poles of their tents, like the Arab, in a settled mansion." 

PAGE 36. the heavens looked angry, Sfc. 

This tempest may be deemed somewhat the more violent, ' from a sup- 
position that Mahomet jinterfered ; which will appear the more probable, 
if the circumstance of its obliterating the road* be considered. William 
of Tyre hath recorded one of a similar kind, that visited Baldwin in his 
expedition against Damascus: He, against whose will all projects are 
vain, suddenly overspread the sky with darkness; poured down such tor- 
rents of rain, and so entirely effaced the roads, that scarce any hope of escaping 



ay demon of the Seventy, unless the copies 
of the latter be supposed to have read, not TIC' but Id. If the terror 
by night be taken in connection with the pestilence that walketh'in darkness, 
and both opposed to the arrow that flieth by day, and the destruction that 
wasteth at noon, it will seem to imply the dread of real evil only, which may 
be explained, in the language of the poet, by 

" Night and all her sickly dews " 

but, if the rendering of our old version, adopting that of the Seventy, be found- 
ed, it will, also, include the imaginary evils that follow : 

" Her spectres wan, and birds of boding cry." 

* Exclusive, however, of preternatural interference, it frequently happens, 
that a sudden blast will arise on the vast deserts of the East, and sweep away, 
in its eddies, the tracks of the last passenger ; whose camel, therefore, in vain, 
for the wanderer that follows, 

Liiujuit humi pedibus vestigia prcssa bisulcis. 

w 



114 VATHEK. 

remained. Those disasters were indeed portended by a gloominess in the air, 
lowering clouds, irregular gusts of wind, increasing thunders, and incessant 
lightnings : but, as the mind of man knows not what may befall him, these 
admonitions of Heaven were slighted and opposed. Gesta Dei per Francos, 
p. 849. 

PAGE 37. He determined to cross over the craggy heights, Sjc. to Rocnabad. 

Oriental travellers have sometimes recourse to these expedients, for the sake 
of abridging the toils of their journies. Hence, Amgrad, in the Arabian Nights, 
who had himself been about six weeks in travelling from the Isle of Ebene, 
could not comprehend the possibility of coming in less time ; unless by enchant- 
ment, or crossing the mountains, which from the difficulty of the pass, were 
but seldom traversed. 

PAGE 37. tigers and vultures. 

The ravages of these animals in the East are almost incredible. 
" Before them, Death with shrieks directs their way, 

Fills the wild yell, and leads them to their prey." 

From the earliest days, they have been the constant attendants on scenes of 
carnage. 

In the Sacred Writings, David threatens " to give the host of the Philistines 
to the fowls of the air and the wild beasts of the earth." Antara boasts, at the 
close of a conflict, of " having left the father of his foes, like a victim, to be 
mangled by the lions of the wood, and the eagles * advanced in years." And, 
in the narrative of the prisoners taken at Bendore, the author relates, that 
many of them were devoured by tigers and vultures. 

PAGE 37. Vathek with two little pages. 

" All the pages of the seraglio are sons of Christians made slaves in time of 
war, in their most tender age. The incursions of robbers in the confines of 
Circassia afford the means of supplying the seraglio, even in times of peace." 
Habesci's State of the Ottoman Empire, p. 157. That the pages here men- 
tioned were Circassians, appears from the description of their complexion 
more fair than the enamel of Franguestan. ___, 

PAGE 38. confectioners and cooks. 

What their precise number might have been in Vathek's establishment it is 
not now easy to determine; but in the household of the present Grand 
Seignor there are not fewer than a hundred and ^ninety Habesci's State, 
p. 145. 

PAGE 38. torches were lighted, ftc. 

Mr. Marsden relates, in his History of Sumatra, that tigers prove most fatal 
and destructive enemies to the inhabitants, particularly in their journeys ; and 
adds, that the numbers annually slain by those rapacious tyrants of the woods 

* Finely as Gray conceived the idea of the eagle, awe-struck at the corses of 
the bards, there is a langour in his expression, that wants to be removed. 
Milton, as his best editor judiciously remarks, applied (he might have said con- 
fined) the verb hurry, to preternatural motion or imaginary beings : adopting 
it, therefore, in a kindred sense, might we not (for passes) advantageously 
read. 

. Tnefamish'd eagle screams, and hurries by ? 



NOTES. H5 

are almost incredible. As these tremendous enemies are alarmed at the appear- 
ance of fire, it is usual for the natives to carry a splendid kind of torch, chiefly 
to frighten them, and also to make a blaze with wood in different parts round 
their villages, P. 149. 

PAGE 38. One of the forests of cedar that bwdered their way took fire. 
Accidents of this kind, in Persia, are not unfrequent " It was an ancient 
practice with the kings and great men to set fire to large bunches of dry com- 
bustibles, fastened round wild beasts a.nd birds, which being then let loose, the 
air and earth appeared one great illumination : and as those terrified creatures 
naturally fled to the woods for shelter, it is easy to conceive that conflagrations, 
which would often happen, must have been peculiarly destructive." Richard- 
son's Dissertation, p 185. In the 83d Psalm, v. 14., there is a reference to one 
of those fires, though arising from another cause ; and Homer, likewise, has 
taken a simile from thence : 

Hu7e -orup AlAHAON eirtyXcyei aairelov l\T]v t 
Ovpeos fv Kopv<ptis' /ca0ej> 8e re (paivflai 011777- 

//. /3. 455. 

PAGE 39. hath seen some part of our bodies ; and, what is worse, our very 

faces. 

" I was informed," writes Dr. Cooke, " that the Persian women, in general, 
would sooner expose to public view any part of their bodies than their faces." 
Voyages and Travels, voL ii. p. 443. 

PAGE 40. cakes baked in silver ovens for his royal mouth. 
Protable ovens were a part of the furniture of Eastern travellers. St. Jerome 
(on Lament, v. 10.) hath particularly described them. The caliph's were of 
the same kind, only substituting silver for brass. Dr. Pocock mentions his 
having been entertained in an Arabian camp with cakes baked for him. In 
what the peculiarity of the royal bread consisted, it is not easy to determine; 
but, in one of the Arabian Tales, a woman, to gratify her utmost desire, wishes 
to become the wife of the sultan's baker, assigning for the reason, that she 
might have her fill of that bread which is called the sultan's. Vol. iv. p. 269. 

PAGE 40. vases of snow, and grapes from the banks of the Tigris. 
It was customary in Eastern climates, and especially in the sultry season, to 
carry, when journeying, supplies of snow. These <estiv<c nives (as Mamertinus 
styles them) being put into separate vases, were, by that means, better kept 
from the air, as no more was opened at once than might suffice for immediate 
use. To preserve the whole from solution, the vessels that contained it were 
secured in packages of straw. _ Gesta Dei, p. 1098. Vathek's ancestor, the 
CALIPH MAIIADI, in the pilgrimage to Mecca, which he undertook from osten- 
tation rather than devotion, loaded upon camels so prodigious a quantity, as was 
not only sufficient for himself and his attendants amidst the burning sands of 
Arabia, but also to preserve, in their natural freshness, the various fruits he 
took with him, and to ice all their drink whilst he staid at Mecca, the greater 

part of whose inhabitants had never seen snow till then Anecdotes Arabes, 

p. 326. 

PAGE 40. roasted wolf, Sfc. 

In the poem of Amriolkais, a repast is described, which, in manner of pre- 
paration, resembles the present ; 

[H] 2 



116 VATHEK. 

" He soon brings us up to the foremost of the beasts, and leaves the rest far 
behind : nor has the herd time to disperse itself. 

" He runs from wild bulls to wild heifers, and overpowers them in a single 
heat, without being bathed, or even moistened with sweat 

" Then the busy cook dresses the game, roasting part, baking part on hot 
stones, and quickly boiling the rest in a vessel of iron." 

Disgusting as this refection of Vathek may be thought, Atlante boasts to 
Ruggiero of having fed him, from his infancy, on a similar diet : 
" Di midolle gia d' orsi e di leoni 

Ti porsi io dunque li primi alimenti." 

and we read, that lion's flesh was prescribed to Vathek, but on a different occa- 
sion. Ancct/ot. Arab. p. 419. 

The vegetables that made part of this entertainment were such as the 
Koran had ordained to be food for the damned. 

PAGE 40. dropped their fans on the ground. 

Attendants for the same purpose are mentioned in the story of the King of 
the Black Isles : " One day, while she was at bath, I found myself sleepy after 
dinner, and lay down upon a sofa. Two of her ladies, who were then in my 
chamber, came and sat down, one at my head and the other at my feet, with 
fans in their hands to moderate the heat, and to hinder the flies from disturbing 
my slumber." The comfort of such an attendant in the hour of repose can be 
known only in the climes of intolerable day. 

PAGE 41. horrible Kaf. 

This mountain, which, in reality, is no other than Caucasus, was supposed to 
surround the earth, like a ring encompassing a finger. The sun was believed 
to rise from one of its eminences (as over Oeta, by the Latin poets), and to set on 
the opposite ; whence, from Kaf to Kaf, signified, from one extremity of the 
earth to the other. The fabulous historians of the East affirm, that this moun- 
tain was founded upon a stone, called sakhrat, one grain of which, according to 
Lokman, would enable the possessor to work wonders. This stone is further 
described as the pivot of the earth, and said to be one vast emerald, from 
the refraction of whose beams the heavens derive their azure. It is added, 
that whenever God would excite an earthquake, he commands the stone to 
move one of its fibres (which supply in it the office of nerves), and, that being 
moved, the part of the earth connected with it quakes, is convulsed, and some- 
times expands. Such is the philosophy of the Koran ! 

The Tarikh Tabari, written in Persian, analogous to the same tradition, 
relates, that, were it not for this emerald, the earth would be liable to perpetual 
commotions, and unfit for the abode of mankind. 
t*^To arrive at the Kaf, a vast region, 

" Far from the sun and summer gale," 

must be traversed. Over this dark and cheerless desert, the way is inextri- 
cable without the direction of supernatural guidance. Here the dives or giants 
were confined, after their defeat by the first heroes of the human race; and 
here, also, the peries, or faeries, are supposed in ordinary to reside. Sukrage, 
the giant, was king of Kaf, and had Rucail, one of the children of Adam, for 
his prime minister. The giant Argenk, likewise, from the time that Taha- 
murath made war upon him, reigned here, and reared a superb palace in the 
city of Aherman, with galleries, on whose walls were painted the creatures 
that inhabited the world prior to the formation of Adam. D'Herbelot, p. 230, 
&C.&C. 



NOTES. 117 

PAGE 41. the Simurgh. 

This is that wonderful bird of the East, concerning which so many marvels 
are told : it was not only endowed with reason, but possessed also the know- 
ledge of every language. Hence it may be concluded to have been a dive in a 
borrowed form. This creature relates of itself that it had seen the great revolu- 
tion of seven thousand years twelve times commence and close j and that, in 
its duration, the world had been seven times void of inhabitants, and as often 
replenished. The Simurgh is represented as a great friend to the race of 
Adam, and not less inimical to the dives. Tahamurath and Aherman were 
apprised by its predictions of all that was destined to befall them, and from it 
they obtained the promise of assistance in every undertaking. Armed with 
the buckler of Gian Ben Gian, Tahamurath was borne by it through the air, 
over the dark desert, to Kaf. From its bosom his helmet was crested with 
plumes, which the most renowned warriors have ever since worn. In every 
conflict the Simurgh was invulnerable, and the heroes it favoured never failed 
of success. Though possessed of power sufficient to exterminate its foes, yet 
the exertion of that power was supposed to be forbidden. Sadi, a serious 
author, gives it as an instance of the universality of Providence, that the Si- 
murgh, notwithstanding its immense bulk, i? at no loss for sustenance on the 
mountain of Kaf. Inatulla hath described Getiafrose, queen of the Genii, as 
seated on a golden chariot, drawn by ten simurghs; whose wings extended 
wide as the earth-shading bir *, and whose talons resembled the proboscis of 

* or Banian, to which the epithet of Inatulla most emphatically belongs 
Milton hath accurately described this extraordinary tree, though by another 
name: 

" The fig-tree not that kind for fruit renown'd ; 
But such as at this day to Indians known, 
In Malabar or Decan, spreads her arms, 
Branching so broad and long, that in the ground 
The bended twigs take root, and daughters grow 
About the mother tree : a pillar'd shade 
High over-arch'd, and echoing walks between." 

Was it not from hence that Warburton framed his hypothesis on the origin 
of Gothic architecture? At least, here were materials sufficient, for a fancy 
less forgetive than his. Mr. Ives, in his journey from Persia, thus speaks of 
this vegetable wonder : " This is the Indians' sacred tree. It grows to a pro. 
digious height, and its branches spread a great way. The limbs drojr down 
fibres, which take root and become another tree, united by its branches to the 
first ; and so continue to do, until the trees cover a great extent of ground : the 
arches which those different stocks make are Gothic, like those we see in West- 
minster Abbey ; the stocks not being single, but appearing as if composed of 
many stocks, are of a great circumference. There is a certain solemnity accom- 
panying those trees ; nor do I remember that I was ever under the cover of 
any of them, but that my mind was at the time impressed with a reverential 
awe ! " Page 460. From the 

pillar'd shade 
High over-arch'd, and echoing walks between ; 

as well as the 

highest woods, impenetrable 
To star, or sun-light 

just before mentioned, and the name given to the tree, it is probable that the 
poet's description was principally founded on the account of Duret, who, in the 
Chapter Du Figuier d'lnde, of his singular book (entitled Histo're admirable 
des plantes et herbes esmerueillables et miraculeuses en nature, &c. a Paris, 
16H5), thus writes : " Sa grosseur est quelquefois telle, que trois hommes ne le 
scamoient embrasser : quelquefois vn ou deux de ces figuiers font un BOIS avez 
grand, toffu, $ ombraguex, dans lequel les rayons du Soleil nepcuuent aucune- 



[H] 3 



118 VATHEK. 

mighty elephants : but it does not appear from any other writer, that there 
ever was more than one, which is frequently called the marvellous gryphon, 
and said to be like that imaginary monster. D'Herbelot, p. 1017. 810, &c. 
Tales of Inatulla, vol. ii. pp. 71, 72. 

As the magic shield of Atlante resembles the buckler of Gtan Ben Gian, so 
his Ippogrif apparently came from the Simurgh, notwithstanding the reference 
of Ariosto to the veridical Archbishop : 

'" Non ho veduto mai, ne letto altrove, 
Fuor che in Turpin, d'un si fatto animale. 

PAGE 41. palampores, fyc. 

These elegant productions, which abound in all parts of the East, were of 
very remote antiquity. Not only are trirfwa.; ETAN0EI2, finely flowered 
linens, noticed by Strabo ; but Herodotus relates, that the nations ef Caucasus 
adorned their garments with figures of various creatures, by means of the sap 
of certain vegetables ; which, when macerated and diluted with water, com- 
municate colours that cannot be washed out, and are no less permanent than 
the texture itself. Strabo, 1. xv. p. 709. Herodot. 1. i. p. 93. The Arabian 
Tales repeatedly describe these "fine linens of India, painted in the most lively 
colours, and representing beasts, trees, flowers, &c." Arab. Nights, vol. iv. 
p. 217, &c. 

PAGE 41 afrits. 

These were a kind of Medusae, or Lamia, supposed to be the most terrible 
and cruel of all the orders of the dives. D'Herbelot, p. G6. 

PAGE 41. tablets fraught with preternatural qualities. 

Mr. Richardson observes, "that in the East men of rank in general 
carried with them pocket astronomical tables, which they consulted on 
every affair of moment." These tablets, however, were of the magical kind, and 
such as often occur in works of romance. Thus, in Boiardo, Orlando receives, 
from the father of the youth he had rescued, " a book that would solve all 
doubts ; " and, in Ariosto, Logistilla bestows upon Astolpho a similar direc- 
tory. The books which Carathis turned over with Morakanabad were im- 
agined to have possessed the like virtues. 

ment penetrer, durant les chaleurs d'Este, & font ces figuiers infinies tonnes tjf 
cabinets si concaues 8; couuerts de feuilles 8f de sinuositez .'[ailes and recesses, so 
arched over with foliage and embowed ramifications], qu'il s'y forme des Echos 
ou reuerberafions de voix Sf sons, jusques a trots fois ; & est telle la moindre 
d'vn seul ombre de ses arbres, qu'elle pent contenir soubs soy a couuert huict 
cens ou mil personnes, 8f la plus grande ombre, trois mil fiommes," p. 124. 
This tree might well be styled the Earth-shading.* 

Though the early architecture of our island be confessedly of a doubtful 
origin, it nevertheless deserves to be noted, that the resemblance between the 
columns of the ruined chancel at Orford, and those of Tank Kesserah on the 
banks of the Tigris, is much too strict to be merely casual. It may be added, 
that the arches of this edifice, and their ornaments, are of the style we call 
the early Norman. 



* The following is an account of the dimensions of a remarkable Banyan 
tree, near Manjee, twenty miles west of Patna, in Bengal. Diameter 363 to 375 
feet. Circumference of its shadow at noon, 1116 feet. Circumference of the 
several stems (in number 50 or 60) 921 feet. Marsden's History of Sumatra,?. 131, 






NOTES. 119 

PAGE 41. dwarfs. 

Such unfortunate beings, as are thus "curtailed of fair proportion," have 
been, for ages, an appendage of Eastern grandeur. One part of their office 
consists in the instruction of the pages j but their principal duty is the amuse- 
ment of their master. If a dwarf happen to be a mute, he is much esteemed ; 
but if he be also an eunuch, he is regarded as a prodigy, and no pains or ex- 
pense are spared to obtain him. Habesci's State of the Ottoman Empire, 
p. 164, &c. 

PAGE 41. a cabin of rushes and canes. 

Huts of this sort are mentioned by Ludeke, in his Expositio brevis'Loc. 
Script p. 51. Tuguriola seu palis, fruticibus viridibus, vel juncis circumdatis 
et tectis, amboque quidem facillimfe construuntur. 

PAGE 42. a small spring supplies us with water for the Abdest, and we daily 

repeat prayers, Sfc. 

Amongst the indispensable rules of the Mahometan faith, ablution is one of 
the chief. This rite is divided into three kinds. The first, performed before 
prayers, is called Abdest. It begins with washing both hands, and repeating 
these words : " Praised be Alia, who created clean water, and gave it the 
virtue to purify : he also hath rendered our faith conspicuous." This done, 
water is taken in the right hand thrice, and the mouth being washed, the wor- 
shipper subjoins: " I pray thee, O Lord, to let me taste of that water which 
thouhast given to thy prophet Mahomet in paradise, more fragrant than musk, 
whiter than milk, sweeter than honey ; and which has the power to quench 
for ever the thirst of him that drinks it." This petition is accompanied with 
sniffing a little water into the nose. The face is then three times washed, and 
behind the ears ; after which water is taken with both hands, beginning with 
the right, and thrown to the elbow. The washing of the crown next follows, 
and the apertures of the ear with the thumbs; afterward the neck with all the 
fingers, and, finally, the feet. In this last operation, it is held sufficient to wet 
the sandal only. At each ceremonial a suitable petition is offered, and the 
whole concludes with this: "Hold me up firmly, OLord! and suffer not 
my foot to slip, that I may not fall from the bridge into hell." Nothing can be 
more exemplary than the attention with which these rites are performed. If an 
involuntary cough or sneeze interrupt them, the whole service is begun anew, 
and that as often as it happens. Habesci, p. 91, &c. 

PAGE 42. reading the holy Koran. 

The Mahometans have a book of stops or pauses in reading the Koran, 
which divides it into seventeen sections, and allows of no more. D'Herbelot, 
p. 915. 

PAGE 42. the bells of a cafila. 

A cafila, or caravan, according to Pitts, is divided into distinct companies, 
at the head of which an officer, or person of distinction, is carried in a kind 
of horse litter, and followed by a sumpter camel, loaded with his treasure. 
This camel hath a bell fastened to either side, the sound of which may be 
heard at a considerable distance. Others have bells on their necks and their legs, 
to solace them when drooping with heat and fatigue. Inatulla also, in his 
tales, hath a similar reference : " The bells of the cafila may be rung in the 
thirsty desert." Vol. ii. p. 15. These small bells were known at Rome from 
the earliest times, and called from their sounds tintinnabulum. Phaedrus gives 

[H] 4 



120 VATHEK. 

us a lively description of the mule carrying the fiscal monies : clarumque collo 
jactans tintinnabulum. Book ii. fabl. vii. 

PAGE 42. Deggial. 

This word signifies properly a liar and impostor, but is applied by Mahome- 
tan writers to their Antichrist. He is described as having but one eye and 
eyebrow, and on his forehead the radicals of cafer or infidel are said to be im- 
pressed. According to the traditions of the faithful, his first appearance will 
be between Irak and Syria, mounted on an ass. Seventy thousand Jews from 
Ispahan are expected to follow him. His continuance on earth is to be forty 
days. All places are to be destroyed by him and his emissaries, except Mecca 
or Medina, which will be protected by angels from the general overthrow. At 
last, however, he will be slain by Jesus, who is to encounter him at the gate 
of Lud. D'Herbelot, p. 282. Sale's Prelim. Disc. p. 106. 

PAGE 42. dictated by the blessed Intelligence. 

That is, the angel Gabriel. The Mahometans deny that the Koran was 
composed by their prophet ; it being their general and orthodox belief, that it 
is of divine original ; nay, even eternal and uncreated, remaining in the very 
essence of God : that the first transcript has been from everlasting by his 
throne, written on a table of immense size, called the preserved tables on 
which are also recorded the divine decrees, past and future : that a copy was 
by the ministry of the angel Gabriel sent down to the lowest heaven, in the 
month of Ramadan, on the night of power ; from whence Gabriel revealed it 
to Mahomet by parcels, some at Mecca, and some at Medina, Al Koran, 
ch. ii. &c. Sale's Prelim. Disc. p. 85. 

PAGE 42. hath culled with his own hands these melons, tyc. 

The great men of the East have ever been, what Herodotus shrewdly styled 

them, Ita^a.yai, >r gift-eaters: for no visiter can approach them with 

empty hands. In such a climate and situation, what present could be more 

acceptable to Vathek than this refreshing collation ? 

PAGE 43. to kiss the fringe of your consecrated robe. 

This observance was an act of the most profound reverence. Arabian 
Nights, vol. iv. p. 236, &c. 

PAGE 43. and implore you to enter his humble habitation. 

It has long been customary for the Arabs to change their habitations with 
the seasons. Thus Antara : 

" Thou hast possessed thyself of my heart; thou hast fixed thy abode, and 
art settled there, as a beloved and cherished inhabitant. 

".Yet how can I visit my fair one, whilst her family have their vernal man- 
sion in Oneizatain, and mine are stationed in Ghaileiri ? " 

Xenophon relates, in his Anabasis, that it was customary for the kings of 
Persia 3-e*je/y < iy&, to pass the summer and spring in Susa and Ecbatana ; 
and Plutarch observes further, that their winters were spent in Babylon, their 
summers in Media (that is, Ecbatana}, and the pleasantest part of spring in 
Susa : Ka/Vw nva-yt ILg<ray /3;uj ipa.x.*iov t> BayA<wv/ ra xt.ip.tnix, ^ee.'yov 
Itu-iv %t Bftfe* TO 3- 8 js- iv fc Zov/roif, TO fttfiov rev EAPO2. -De Exil. p. 604. 
This TO 'HAI2TON of the vernal season, is exquisitely described by Solo- 



NOTES. 121 

" Lo, the winter is past, the rain is over ; it is gone. The flowers appear 
on the earth, the season of singing is come, and the voice of the turtle is heard 
in our land. The fig-tree putteth forth her green figs, and the vines with the 
tender grape give a good smell Arise, my love", my fair one, and come away." 

PAGE 43. an emerald set in lead. 

As nothing, at the opening of spring, can exceed the luxuriant vegetation of 
these irriguous valleys, so, no term could be chosen more expressive of their 
verdure. The prophet Ezekiel, emblematising Tyre under the symbol of 
Paradise, hath described, by the different gems of the East, the flowers that 
variegate its surface ; and particularly, by the emerald, its green : " Thou 
hast been in Eden, the garden of God : TrODQ nip' pN~bD thy carpet was 
an assemblage of every precious stone ; the ruby, the topaz, and the diamond ; 
the chrysolite, the onyx, and the jasper ; the sapphire, the emerald." * 
Ch. xx viii. 13. It hath not.'perhaps, been hitherto observed, that the Paradise 
of Ariosto was copied from hence : 

" Zaffir, rubini, oro, topazj, e perle, 
E diamanti, e chrysoliti, e giacinti 
Potriano i fiori assimigliar, cheper le 
Liete piagge v' avea 1* aura dipinti. 
Si verdi I' erbe, che potendo averle 
Qua giu, ne fbran gli smeraldi vinti." 

Canto xxxiv. st. 49. 

When Gray, in his description of Grasmere, spoke of its " meadows green 
as an emerald" he might have added, also, the circumstance noted by our 
author, beset with mountains of the hue of lead. Shakspeare, in a similar 
comparison, hath denominated our green England, 

" This precious stone set in the silver sea." 

PAGE 43. sugar. 

Dr. Pocock mentions the sugar-cane as a great dessert in Egypt ; and adds, 
that, besides coarse loaf sugar and sugar candy, it yields a third [sort, re- 
markably fine, which is sent to the Grand Seignor, and prepared only for him. 
self. Travels, vol. i. pp. 183. 204. The jeweller's son, in the Story of the 
Third Calender, desires the prince to fetch some melon and sugar, that he 
might refresh himself with them. Arab. Nights, vol. i. p. 159. 

PAGE 43. red characters. 

The laws of Draco are recorded by Plutarch, in his Life of Solon, to have 
been written in blood. If more were meant by this expression, than that those 
laws were of a sanguinary nature, they will furnish the earliest instance of the 
use of red characters, which were afterwards considered as appropriate to su- 

* The same kind of imagery abounds in the Oriental poets. Thus, Abu 
Nawas :_ 

" Behold the gardens of the earth, and consider the emblems of those things 
which Divine power hath formed : eyes of silver (daisies) every where disclosed, 
with pupils like molten gold, united to an emerald stalk : these avouch that no 
one is equal to God." 

So, likewise, Sadi : 

" He hath planted rubies and emeralds on the hard rock : the ruby rose on 
its emerald stem." 

And Ebn Rumi/.of the violet : " It is not a flower, but an emerald bearing a 
purple gem." - 



122 VATHEK. 

preme authority, and employed to denounce some requisition or threatening 
design to strike terror. According to Suidas, this manner of writing was, 
likewise, practised in magic rites. Hence their application in the- instance 
here mentioned. Trotz in Herm. Hugonem, pp. 106. 307. Suidas sub voc. 



PAGE 43. thy body shall be spit upon. 

There was no mark of contempt amongst the Easterns so ignominious as this. 
Arab. Nights, vol. i. p. 115. vol. iv. p. 275. It was the same in the days of 
Job. Herodotus relates of the Medes, nTTEIN #< AI2XPON tfli, and Xe- 
nophon relates, AI2XPON itrh Ui^a-tx.is rt> AnOIITTEIN. Hence the reason 
is evident for spitting on our Saviour. 

PAGE 43. bats will nestle in thy belly. ' 

' Bats in these countries were very abundant, and, both from their numbers 
and nature, held in abhorrence. See what is related of them by Thevenot, 
part i. pp. 132, 133., Egmont and Hayman, vol. ii. p. 87., and other travellers 
in the East. 

PAGE 44. the Bismittah. 

This word (which is prefixed to every chapter of the Koran except the 
ninth) signifies, " in the name of the most merciful God." It became not the 
initiatory formula of prayer till the time of Moez the Fatimite. D'Herbelot, 
p. 326. 

Ablution is of an origin long prior to Mahomet. It is mentioned in Homer, 
and alluded to by the Psalmist : 

" I will wash my hands in innocency, and so will I compass thine altar, O 
Lord" 

Again : "Verily have I cleansed my heart in. vain, and washed my hands in 



PAGE 44. a vast wood of palm trees. 

r Perhaps the palm is nowhere more abundant than in this region, that only 
excepted to which Virgil refers, in a passage as yet not explained : 

" Primus Idumasas referam tibi, Mantua, palmas." 

If the ingenuousness and delicacy of a right reverend critic (who is said to have 
owed his present dignity to a note on the context) had not been long known*, 
an ordinary reader might be startled at the resemblance between his lordship's 
critique and Catrou's ; whilst a fastidious one, in a splenetic mood, might apply, 
like another Edwards, the marks of imitation, as so many canons to annoy their 
founder. The hypothesis, however, of Hartley, Priestly, and those other 
physiologists, who have so clearly deduced the phenomena of mind from organ- 
isation, and traced back the coincidences of thought to predisposing motives 
and similar associations, will enable us, on the idea of an internal conformity 
between the critics, to account for their congruity of writing, without leaving 
room to surmise, that the one ever heard of the other. Not a breath then of 
Achan, and his wedge of gold! 

Catrou, supposing that Virgil meditated the improvement of his writings, 
after an excursion to Greece and Asia, translates e%o in patriam rediens, by d, 

* See the Tract entitled " On the Delicacy of Friendship, a seventh disser- 
tation, addressed to the author c,i the sixth." 



NOTES. 123 

man relour en ITALIE"; but the restricted sense in which the poet delights to 
apply patria (as in his first Eclogue : 

" NospatriiE fines, et dulcia linquimus arva, 

Nos patriam fugimus" ) 

as well as the mention of Mantua and the Hindus, precludes this more ex- 
tended construction. If, therefore, ego in patriam rediens be literally taken, 
it will rather mark the design of Virgil to retire from Rome to the sequestered 
scenes of his native Mantua ; where he was first smitten with the love of 
song, and whither he purposes to bring the sisterhood of the muses. But, the 
clause least understood, is that which immediately follows : 

" Primus Idunueas referam tibi, Mantua, palmas." 

Catrou hath inferred from it, that Virgil actually projected a voyage to the 
Levant to fetch palms, no doubt! The bishop, however, after remarking 
that the poet, having held himself forth as a conqueror, and declared the object 
of his conquest to have been bringing the Muses captive from Greece, subjoins 
" The palmy triumphal entry, which was usual to victors on their return from 
foreign successes, follows . 

" Primus Idumzeas referam tibi, Mantua, palmas." 

But, with the deference due to so venerable a critic, will this explication suf- 
fice? for, may it not be asked, If to celebrate a triumph for foreign successes, 
palms from Idumxa were requisite? if victors were accustomed to go thither 
for them, previous to their triumphal entry? or, (allowing Idumasas to be, 
sine monte sonum, a word without meaning*) how it could happen that the 
palmy triumphal entry should have been usual to victors, and yet Virgil the 
first, whose success was to be graced with it ? 

" Primus Idumseas referam palmas.'' 

It is observable that this book of the Georgics opens with proposing its subject, 
the novelty of which induces the author to remark that, as the usual themes 
of the Roman poets were all become trite, it would be his aim to seek fame 
from foreign acquisitions, and his purpose to aggrandise the glory of his coun- 
try by subjecting to its language the poetical beauties of Greece and Judea. 

If it be admitted that, under the allegory of leading the Muses (who were 
peculiar to Greece) from the summit of the Aonian mount, the poet intended 
to characterise the loftiest flights of Grecian poetry, or the Epic f ; it follows 
from parity of reason, that, under the symbol of their country f, he equally de- 
signed the prophetic strains of the Hebrews : 

* Thus, also, Martyn, because Idumaea was famous for 'palms,' interprets 
Idunueas palmas, " palms, in general ; " and Heyne : Idunueas autem palmas 
poetico plane epitheto appellabat, a nobili aliquo genere;" yet, he immediately 
adds : " Idiimen poeta? pro Idumaja ac tola Judtsa dicunt, quam quidem palmis 
frequentem fuisse notum est : arbusto palmarum dives Idume. Lucan. 
iii.aia" 

t It was in this light that the JEneis was regarded by Propertius, who ex- 
claims in reference to it (B. II. El. xxxiv. v. 65.) 

Cedite Graii, 

Nescio quid majus nascitur Iliade ! 

The author of an elegant and masterly pamphlet, entitled Critical Observa- 
tions on the SiM Book of the JEneid (published by Elmsly, 1770), supposes Pro- 
pertius, in the context, to have had his eye on the shield of /Eneas ; but, from 
comparing the passage itself with the sixth elegy of the fourth book, it ap- 
pears .more likely that he alluded to the battle of Actium, as described in 
JEn. viii. 704. 

t It was by this emblem that the Romans, on their coins, represented Judea; 
and particularly on the medal, to signalise its reduction : 

".Beneath her Palm here sad Judea weeps." 



124 VATHEK. 

" Primus ego in patriam mecuin, modo vita supersit, 
Aonio rediens deducain vertice Musas : 
Primus Idurmeas referam tibi, Mantua, palmas. ; 

The verb referam in connection with tibi Mantua, implies that Virgil had 
already brought Idumaean palms to his natal soil ; and what these meant is 
abundantly plain. For, whoever will compare the Fourth Eclogue with the 
prophecy of Isaiah, must perceive too close an agreement to suppose that the 
same images, under similar combinations, and both new to a Roman poet, 
should have occurred to Virgil rather from^chance, than a previous perusal of 
the prophet * in Greek. 

It only remains, then, to be enquired, whether Virgil, after having intro- 
duced in his pastorals some of the prophetic traits of Hebrew poetry, any fur- 
ther availed himself of it in the Epic here projected ? For a satisfactory answer 
to this question, it might suffice to reply, that if there be any characteristic 
which discriminates the JEneid more than another, it is the prophetic 

" In medio mihi Caesar erit, templumque tenebit." 

As in the Pollio, the images employed by the prophet to prefigure the birth of 
the Messiah, and the blessings of his reign, were applied by the Roman poet 
to the birth of the expected son of Augustus f, and the return of the golden 
age [under his auspices ; so, in the JEneid, he resumes the prediction, and 
applies it to Augustus himself: 

" Hie vir, hie est, tibi quern promitti szepius audis 
Augustus Caesar, divi genus ; aurea condet , 
Saecula qui rursus Latio, regnata per arva 
Saturno quondam ; super et Garamantas et Indos 
Proferet Imperium. Jacet extra sidera tellus 
Extra anni solisque vias," &c. 

JEn. vi.792. \ 

PAGE 44. inscription. 

Inscriptions of this sort are still retained. Thus Ludeke Interni non 
solum Divani pluriumque conclavium parietes, sed etiam frontispicia super 
portas inscriptiones habent. Expositio, p. 54. In the history of Amine, we 
find an inscription over a gate, in letters of gold, analogous to this 1 of Fakreddin : 
" Here is the abode of everlasting pleasures and content." Arab. Nights, 
vol. i. p. 193. 

PAGE 45. a magnificent tectktrevan. 

This kind of moving throne, though more common at present than in the 
days of Vathek, is still confined to persons of the highest rank. 

' PAGE 45. her light brown hair floated in the Tia%y breeze of the twilight. ' 

Literally, hyacinthine. The metaphor taken from this flower, expressed by 
the word Sunbul, is familiar to the Arabians. Thus, in Sir William Jones's 
Solima, an eclogue made up of Eastern images, 

* Tacitus mentions the ancient scriptures of the Jewish priests, as containing 
the prediction which Virgil is here supposed to have adopted. Hist. \. v. \ 13. 

t By Scribonia, then pregnant of the infamous Julia. See Bishop Chandler's 
Vindication, and Masson's Dissertation subjoined. 



NOTES. 125 

" The fragrant hyacinths of Azza's hair, 

That wanton with the laughing summer air." 

Nor was it less common to the Greeks. Perhaps, Milton, in the following 
lines, 

" Hyacinthin locks 

Round from his parted forelock manly hung 
('lustring, but not beneath his shoulders broad" 

adopted it from Lucian. The term manly, with the restriction at the close, 
gives full scope for this conjecture ; as in Lucian, the descriptions relate only 
to women. The poet may be further traced upon the snow of the classics, in 
the use of the term clustering ; an equivalent expression being appropriated 
by the ancients to that disposition of the curls which resembles the growth of 
grapes, and may be observed on gems, coins, and statues. Plutarch Consol. 
ApoU. p. 196. 

It is singular that both Lexicographers and critics should have considered 
/3a7?f;t<7i? and ftolzuoxoffAo;, as synonymous. This confusion, however, 
appears to have arisen from both being attributes of Bacchus ; whose hair 
was not only adorned with clusters from the vine, but, like the locks of 
Apollo (-srXoxpoi BOTPTOENTE2. Apollon, Ajye, B. 677.), was itself clus- 
tering.* 

Sir William Jones acutely conjectures, that Solomon alluded to the hair, in 
that elliptical speech of the Shulamite, Song, i. 14. 






" A cluster of grapes, &c." 

The like epithet, though adopted from a different fruit, occurs in the poem of 
Amriolkais : 

" Her long coal-black hair decorated her back, thick and diffused, like 
bunches of dates, clustering on the palm tree." 

The diffusion of hair here noticed, and its floating as described by our author, 
are circumstances so frequent in the works of Hafez and Jami, that there is 
scarce a page of them in which the idea of the breeze playing with the tresses 
of a beautiful girl, is not agreeably and variouslylexpressed. f An instance 
from Petrarch, resembling their manner, may be seen in the lines that follow : 
" Aura, che quelle chiome bionde c crespe 
Circondi, e movi, e se' mossa da loro 
Soavemente, e spargi quel dolce oro, 
E poi'l raccogli, e'n bei nodi'l rincrespe." 

Son. cxci. 

FACE 45. your iuory limbs. 

The Arabians" compare the skin of a beautiful woman to the egg of the 
ostrich, when preserved unsullied. J Thus; Amriolkais : 

Winckelmann hath strangely fixed upon the reverse of this character, as an 
exclusive property of these divinities ; and so infallible a criterion does he 
make it, as even from it alone to ascertain their mutilated statues. Hist, de 
VArt d'Antiq. torn. ii. p. 146. However, in another part of his work, he refers 
to Plutarch, as cited above. 
f Preface to Jones's Poems, p. xii. 

1 A fair skin is likened by the Italian poets to curd : thus, Bracciolini : 
, - i suoi tencri membri un latte sieno 
Che tremolante, ma non rotto ancora, 
Pose accorto Pastor su i verdi giunchi. 

Amoroso Sdegno, iii. 2. 



126 VATIIEK. 

" Delicate was her shape; fair her skin ; and her body well proportioned : 
her bosom was as smooth as a mirror, 

" Or like the pure egg of an ostrich, of a yellowish tint blended with 
white." 

Also the Koran : " Near them shall lie the virgins of Paradise, refraining 
their looks from beholding any besides their spouses, having large black eyes, 
and resembling the eggs of an ostrich, covered with feathers from dust." 
Moallakat, p. 8. Al Koran, ch. 27. 

But though the Arabian epithet be taken from thence, yet the word ivory ig 
substituted, as more analogous to European ideas, and not foreign from the 
Eastern. Thus Amru : 

" And two sweet breasts, smooth and white as vessels of ivory, modestly de- 
fended from the hand of those who presume to touch them." Moallakat, 
p. 77. 

PAGE 45. baths of rose-water. 

The use of perfumed waters for the purpose of bathing is of an early origin 
in the East, where every odoriferous plant sheds a richer fragrance than is 
known to our more humid climates. The rose which yields this lotion is, ac- 
cording to Hasselquist, of a beautiful pale blush colour, double, large as a 
man's fist, and more exquisite in scent than any other species. The quantities 
of this water distilled annually at Fajhum, and carried to distant countries, is 
immense. The mode of conveying it is in vessels of copper coated with wax. 
Voyag. p. 248. Ben Jonson makes Volpone say to Celia, 

" Their bath shall be the juyce of gillyflowres, 
Spirit of roses, and of violets." 

PAGE 45. amuse you with tales. 

Thus, in the story of Alraoui : " There was an emir of Grand Cairo, whose 
company was no less coveted for his genius than his rank. Being one day in a 
melancholy mood, he turned towards a courtier, and said : ' Alraoui, my heart 
is dejected, and I know not the cause ; relate to me some pleasant story, to dis- 
pel my chagrin. Alraoui replied : ' The great have with reason regarded tales 
as the best antidote to care ; if you will allow me, I will tell you my own.' " 
Translated from one of the unpublished MSS. mentioned in the Preface. " The 
Arabian Nights," saith Colonel Capper, in his Observations on the Passage to In- 
dia through Egypt and across the great Desert, " are by many people supposed 
to be a spurious production, and are therefore slighted in a manner they do not 
deserve. They are written by an Arabian, and are universally read and ad- 
mired throughout Asia, by persons of all ranks, both old and young. Consi- 
dered, therefore, as an original work, descriptive as^ they are of the manners 
and customs of the East in general, and also of the genius and character of 
the Arabians in particular, they surely must be thought to merit the attention 
of the curious ; nor are they, in my opinion, entirely destitute of merit in other 
respects ; for although the extravagance of some of the stories is carried too 
far, yet, on the whole, one cannot help admiring the fancy and invention of 

Likewise, Tasso: 

egli rivolse 

I cupidi occhi in quelle membra belle, 
Che, come suole tremolare, il latte 
Ne giunchi, si parean moruide, e bianche. 

Aminta, iii. I. 



NOtES. 127 

the author, in" striking "out such a variety of pleasing incidents. Pleasing, I 
call them, because they have frequently afforded me "much amusement ; nor 
do I envy any man his feelings who is above being pleased with them ; but, 
before any person decides on the merit of these books, he should be eye-witness 
of the effects they produce on those who best understand them. I have, more 
than once, seen the Arabians on the Desert, sitting round a fire, listening to 
these stories with such attention and pleasure, as totally to forget the fatigue 
and hardship with which, an instant before, they were totally overcome. In 
short, they are held in the same estimation all over Asia, as the adventures of 
Don Quixote are in Spain." 

If the observation of the Knight of la Mancha, respecting translation in 
general, be just, " me parece, que el traducir de una lengua en otra, es como 
quien miralos tapices' flamencos por el reves, que aunque seven las figures, son 
llenas de hilos que las escurecen, y no se ven con la lisura y tez de la haz," 
the wrong side of tapestry will represent more truly the figures on the right, 
notwithstanding the floss that blurs them, than any version, the precision and 
smoothness of the Arabian surface. The prospect of a rich country in all the 
glories of summer, is not more different from its November appearance, than 
the original of those tales when opposed to the French translation, of which, 
it may be added, our version is, at best, but a moonlight view : 

" pallida la luna 
Tingea d' un lume scolorito e incerto 
La vasta solitudine terrena. 

PAGE 45. lamb a la crime. 

' No dish among the Easterns was more generally admired. The caliph Ab- 
dolmelek, at a splendid entertainment, to which whoever came was welcome, 
asked Amrou, the son of Hareth, what kind of meat he preferred to all others. 
The old man answered, " An ass's neck, well seasoned and roasted." "But 
what say you," replied the caliph, " to the leg or shoulder of a LAMB d la 
crime?" and added, 

" How sweetly we live if a shadow would last! " 
M. S. Laud. Numb. 161. A. OckUy's Hist, of the Saracens, vol. ii. p. 277. 

PAGE 45. made the dwarfs dance against their will. 

Ali Chelebi al Moufti, in a treatise on the subject, held that dancing, after 
the example of the derviches, who made it a part of their devotion, was allow- 
able. But in this opinion he was deemed to be heterodox ; for Mahometans, 
in general, place dancing amongst the things that are forbidden D'Herbelot, 
p. 98. 

PACE 45. durst not refuse the commander of the faithful. 

The mandates of Oriental potentates have ever been accounted irresistible. 
Hence the submission of these devotees to the will of the caliph. Esther t 
1 19. Daniel, vi. 8. Ludeke Expos, brevis, p. 60. 

PAGE 45. he spread himself on the sofa. 

The idiom of the original occurs in Euripides, and is from him adopted by 
Milton . 



128 VATHEK. 

ISe7e TOV repair' o- 
{jt-ahov eiri weSw 
XTMENON- GtTa\as. 

Heraclidce, v. 75. 

" See how he lies at random, carelessly diffus'd, 
With languished head unpropt, 
As one past hope, abandon'd 
And by himself given over." 

Sampson, v. 118. 

PAGE 46. properly lubricated with the balm of Mecca. 

' Unguents, for reasons sufficiently obvious, have been of general use in hot 
climates. According to Pliny, " at the time of the Trojan war, they consisted 
of oils perfumed with the odours of flowers, and chiefly of ROSES," whence 
the 'POAOEN sA<ov of Homer. Hasselquist speaks of oil impregnated with 
the tuberose and jessamine ; but the unguent here mentioned was preferred 
to every other. Lady M. W. Montagu, desirous to try its effects, seems to have 
suffered materially from having improperly applied it. 

PAGE 46. if their eyebrows and tresses were in order. 

As perfuming and decorating the hair of the sultanas was an essential duty 
of their attendants, the translator hath ventured to substitute the term tresses, 
for another more exact to the original. In Don Quixote, indeed, a waiting 
woman of the duchess mentions the same services with our author, but as 
performed by persons of her own sex : , " Hay en Candaya mugeres que 
andan de casa en casa a quitar el vello, y 5 pulir las cejas, y hacer otros men- 
jurges tocantes a mugeres, nosotras las duefias de mi senorapor jamas quisimos 
admit irlas, porque las mas oliscan & tarceras." Tom. iv. cap. xl. p. 42. 

Other offices of the dressing-room and toilet may be seen in Lucian, vol. ii. 
Amor. 39. p. 441. The Arabians had a preparation of antimony and galls, with 
which they tinged the eyebrows of a beautiful black ; and great pains were 
taken to shape them into regular arches. In combing the hair, it was cus- 
tomary to sprinkle it with perfumes, and to dispose it in a variety of becoming 
forms. Richardson's Dissertat. p. 481. Lady M. W. Montagu's Letters. 

PAGE 46. the nine hundred and ninety -ninth time. 

The Mahometans boast of a doctor who is reported to have read over the 
Koran not fewer than twenty thousand times. D'Herbelot, p. 75. 

PAGE 46. black eunuchs, sabre in hand. 

In this manner the apartments of the ladies were constantly guarded. Thus, 
in the Story of the Enchanted Horse, Firouz Schah, traversing a strange palace 
by night, entered a room, " and by the light of a lantern saw that the persons 
he had heard snoring were black eunuchs with naked sabres by them, which 
was enough to inform him that this was the guard-chamber of some queen or 
princess." Arabian Nights, vol. iv. p. 189. 

PAGE 47 Nouronihar, daughter of the Emir, was sprightly as an antelope, and 

full of wanton gaiety. 

Solomon has compared his bride to " a company of horses in Pharaoh's 
chariots ; " Horace, a sportive young female to an untamed filly ; Sophocles, a 



NOTES. *97 

delicate virgin to a wild heifer ; Ariosto, Angelica to a fawn or kid ; and Tasso, 
Erminia to a hind ; but the object of resemblance adopted by our author, is of 
superior beauty to them all 

PAGE 47. to let down the great swing. 

The swing was an exercise much used in the apartments of the Eastern 
ladies, and not only contributed to their health, but also to their amusement. 
Tales of InatuUa, voL L p. 259. 

PAGE 47. I accept the invitation of your honied lips. 

Uncommon as this idiom may appear in our language, it was not so, either 
to the Hebrew or the Greek. Compare Proverbs xvi. 24 . 

OH 'ION Wavrps 
with Homer, Iliad *. 24a 

Tou KCU OTTO y\ci>ffffi)S MEAITOS yXvtiuav fffv avSi). 
Theocritus, Idyl. xx. 26. 

- EK 2TOMATHN Se 
Epfff /tot <W1NA y\vKpulepa r) MEAIKHPfi. 

And Solomon's Song, iv. 11. 



with Moschus, Idyl. i. 9. 

- - &5v AAAHMA- 

- - ws MEAI, (ptova. 

An Arabian fabulist, enumerating the charms of a consummate beauty, hath 
used the identical expression of our author ; but, probably, in an extended 
sense, as, 

- " from her lip 
Not words alone pleased him." 

PAGE 47. my senses are dazzled with the radiance that beams from your 
charms. 

Or (to express an idiom for which we have no substitute), thy countenance, 
rayonnante de beautes et de graces. Descriptions of this kind are frequent in 
Arabian writers ; thus, Tarafa : 

" Her face appears to be wrapped in a veil of sun- beams." 

And, in the Arabian Nights : " Schemselnihar came forward amongst her 
attendants with a majesty resembling the sun amidst the clouds ; which re- 
ceive his splendour, without concealing his lustre." To account for this com- 
pliment in the mouth of Bababalouk, we should remember that he was, ex 
officio, elegant formarum Spectator. 

PAGE 48. melodious Philomel, I am thy rote. 

The passion of the nightingale for the rose is celebrated over all the East . 
Thus Mesihi, as translated by Sir W. Jones : 
I 



98* VATHEK. 

" Come, charming maid, and hear thy poet sing, 
Thyself the rose, and he the bird of spring: 
Love bids him sing, and love will be obey'd, 
Be gay : too soon the flowers of spring will fade." 

PACE 48. oil spilt in breaking the lamps. 

It appears from Thevenot that illuminations were usual on the arrival of a 
stranger, and he mentions, on an occasion of this sort, two hundred lamps be- 
ing lighted. The quantity of oil, therefore, spilt by Bababalouk may be easily 
accounted for from this custom. 

;PAGE 48. reclining on down. 
See Lady M. W. Montagu. Let. xxvi. 

PAGE 49. calenders. 

These were a sort of men amongst the Mahometans who abandoned father 
and mother, wife and children, relations and possessions, to wander through 
the world, under a pretence of religion, entirely subsisting on the fortuitous 
bounty of those they had the address to dupe. D'Herbelot, Suppl. p. 204. 

PAGE 49. santons. 

A body of religionists, who were also called abdals, and pretended to be inspired 
with the most enthusiastic raptures of divine love. They were regarded by 
the vulgar as saints. Olearius, torn. i. p. 971. D'Herbelot, p. 5. 

PAGE 49. derviches. 

The term dervich signifies a poor man, and is the general appellation by 
which a religious amongst the Mahometans is named. There are, how- 
ever, discriminations that distinguish this class from the others already 
mentioned. They are bound by no vow of poverty, they abstain not from mar- 
riage, and, whenever disposed, they may relinquish both their blue shirt and 
profession. D'Herbelot, Suppl. 214. It is observable, that these different 
orders, though not established till the reign of Nasser al Samani, are notwith- 
standing mentioned by our author as coeval with Vathek, and by the author 
of the Arabian Nights, as existing in the days of Haroun al Raschid ; so 
that the Arabian fabulists appear as inattentive to chronological exactness in 
points of this sort as our immortal dramatist himself. 

PAGE 49. Bramins. 

' These constituted the principal caste of the Indians, according to whose doc- 
trine Brahma, from whom they are called, is the first of the three created 
beings by whom the world was made. This Brahma is said to have communi- 
cated to the Indians four books, in which all the sciences and ceremonies of 
their religion are comprised. The word Brahma, in the Indian language, sig- 
nifies pervading all things. The Brahmins lead a life of most rigid abstinence, 
refraining not only from the use, but even the touch, of animal food ; and are 
equally exemplary for their contempt of pleasures and devotion to philosophy 
and religion. D'Herbelot, p. 212. Bruckeri Hist. Philosoph. torn. i. p. 194. 



NOTES. I *99 

PAGE 49. faquirs. 

This sect were a kind of religious anchorets, who spent their whole lives in 
the severest austerities and mortification. It is almost impossible for the ima- 
gination to form an extravagance that hae not been practised by some of them, 
to torment themselves. As their reputation for sanctity rises in proportion to 
their sufferings, those amongst them are reverenced the most, who are most in. 
genious in the invention of tortures, and persevering in enduring them. Hence 
some have persisted in sitting or standing for years together in one unvaried 
posture, supporting an almost intolerable burden, dragging the most cumbrous 
chains, exposing their naked bodies to the scorching sun, and hanging with 
the head downward before the fiercest fires. Relig. Ceremon. voi iii. p. 264, 
&<x White's Sermons, p. 504. 

PAGE 49. some that cherished vermin. 

In this attachment they were not singular. The Emperor Julian not only 
discovered the same partiality, but celebrated, with visible complacency, the 
shaggy and populous beard which he fondly cherished; and even "The His- 
torian of the Roman Empire " affirms, " that the little animal is a beast fa- 
miliar to man, and signifies love" VoL ii. p. 343. __ 

PAGE 50. Visnow and Ixhora. 

Two deities of the East Indians, concerning whose history and adventures 
more nonsense is related than can be found in the whole compass of mythology 
besides. The traditions of their votaries are, no doubt, allegorical ; but with- 
out a key to disclose their mystic import, they are little better than senseless 
jargon. 

PAGE 50. talapoira. 

This order, which abounds in Siam, Laos, Pegu, and other countries, con- 
sists of different classes, and both sexes, but chiefly of men. Relig. Ceremon. 
voL iv. p. 62, &c. 

PAGE 50. objects of pity were sure to swarm round him, 
Ludeke mentions the practice of bringing those who were suffering under 
any calamity, or had lost the use of their limbs, &c. into public, for the pur- 
pose of exciting compassion. On an occasion, therefore, of this sort, when 
Fakreddin, like a pious Mussulman, was publicly to distribute his alms, and the 
commander of the faithful to make his appearance, such an assemblage might 
well be expected. The Eastern custom of regaling a convention of this kind is 
of great antiquity, as is evident from the parable of the king in the Gospels, 
who entertained the maimed, the lame, and the blind ; nor was it discontinued 
when Dr. Pocock visited the East. Vol. i. p. 182. 

PAGE 50. horns of an exquisite polish. 

Jacinto Polode Medina, in one of his epigrams, has as unexpected a turn on 
the same topic : 

" Cavando un sepulcro tin hombre 
Sacd largo, corvo y grueso, 
Entre otros muchos, un hueso, 
Que tiene cuerno por noinbre : 

i 2 



100* VATHEK. 

Volv&lo al sepulchro al punto : 
Y viendolo un cortesano. 
Dijo : bien haceis, hermano, 
Que es hueso de ese defunto." 

PAGE 51. small plates of abominations. 

The Koran hath established several distinctions relative to different kinds 
of food, in imitation of the Jewish prescriptions; and many Mahometans are 
so scrupulous as not to touch the flesh of any animal over which, in articulo 
mortis, the butcher had omitted to pronounce the Bismillah. Relig. Cerem. 
vol. vii. p. 110. 

PAGE 51. fish which they drew from a river. 

According to Le Bruyn, the Oriental method of fishing with a line, is by 
winding it round the finger, and when the fisherman feels that the bait is taken, 
he draws in the string with alternate hands : in this way, he adds, a good dish 
offish is soon caught. Tom. i. p. 564 It appears, from a circumstance re- 
lated by Galand, that Vathek was fond of this amusement. D'Herbelot, Suppl- 
p. 210. 

PAGE 51 Sinai. 

This mountain is deemed by Mahometans the noblest of all others, and even 
regarded with the highest veneration, because the divine law was promulgated 
from it. D'Herbelot, p. 812L . 

PAGE 51. Peries. 

The word Peri, in the Persian language, signifies that beautiful race of 
creatures which constitutes the link between angels and men. The Arabians 
call them Ginn, or genii, and we (from the Persian, perhaps) Faeries : at least, 
the peries of the Persian romance correspond to that imaginary class of beings 
in our poetical system. The Italians denominate them Fata, in allusion to 
their power of charming and inchanting ; thus the Mania Fatidica of Virgil is 
rendered in Orlando, La Fato Manto. The term ginn being common to both 
peries and dives, some have erroneously fancied that the peries were female dives. 
This appellation, however, served only to discriminate their common nature 
from the angelic and human, without respect to their qualities, moral or per- 
sonal. Thus, the dives are hideous and wicked, whilst the peries are beautiful 
and good. Amongst the Persian poets, the beauty of the peries is proverbial ; 
insomuch that a woman superlatively handsome, is styled by them, the offspring 
of a Peri. 

PAGE 52. butterflies of Cachemire. 

The same insects are celebrated in an unpublished poem of Mesihi, an- 
other of the MSS. mentioned in the Preface. Sir Anthony Shirley relates, that 
it was customary in Persia " to hawke after butterflies with sparrows, made 
to that use, and stares." It is, perhaps, to this amusement that our author 
alludes in the context. 

; PAGE 52. / had rather that his teeth should mischievously press my finger. 
These molles morsiunculx remind one of Lesbia and her sparrow : 



NOTES. 



101 



" Passer, deliciae meae puellas, 

Quicum ludere, quern in sinu tenere, 

Quoi primum digitum dare adpetenti, 

Et acres solet incitare morsus."..^ 

In the Story of the Sleeper Awakened (which the induction to the Taming ol 
the Shrew greatly resembles), Abon Hassan thus addresses the lady that was 
brought him : " Come hither, fair one, and bite the end of my finger*, that 
I may feel whether I am asleep or awake." Arab. Nightt, vol. Hi. p. 137. 
Lady Percy, with all the fondness of insinuation, practises on her wayward 
Hotspur a blandishment similar to that here instanced by Nouronihar : 

" Come, come, you paraquito, answer me 
Directly' to this question that,! ask. [ 
In faith, I'll break thy little finger, Harry, 
An if thou wilt not tell me all things true." 

PAGE 53. Mcgnoun and LeilaA. 

' These personages are esteemed amongst the Arabians as the most beautiful, 
chaste, and impassioned of lovers ; and their amours have been celebrated with 
all the charms of verse, in every Oriental language. The Mahometans regard 
them, and the poetical records of their love, in the same light as the Bride, 
groom and Spouse, and the Song of Songs, are regarded by the Jews. D'Her 
helot, p. 573. 

PAGE 53. They still detained him in the harem. 

Noureddin, who was as old as Gulchenrouz, had a similar indulgence o. 
resorting to the harem, and no less availed himself of it Arab. Nightt, 
voL iii. pp. 9, 10. 

PACE 53. dart the lance in the chase. 

Throwing the lance was a favourite pastime with the young Arabians ; and 
so expert were they in this practice (which prepared them for the mightier 
conflicts, both of the chase and of war), that they could bear off a ring on th 
points of their javelins. Richardson's Dissertat. pp. 198. 281. Though the 
ancients had various methods of hunting, yet the two which chiefly prevailed 
weie those described by Virgil f, and alluded to by Solomon. % Pro*, vii. 22. 

* AAA' firi \fK\pov uav } aitpov $OKlv\ov KoilaSaKvo). 

Homer. Batrach. v. 45. 
f Dum trepidant ALJ2, saltusque indagine cingunt 

-En. iv. 121. 

Notwithstanding the explanations of alae, which have been given by Ser- 
vius, Burman, and others, there can scarce be a doubt, but that Virgil referred 
to the custom of scaring deer into holts, with feathers fastened on lines : a 
practice so effectual to the purpose, that Linnaeus characterised the Dama, or 
Fallow Deer, from it : arceturfilo horizontali. The same stratagem is men- 
tioned in the Georgics (iii. 371.) 

Puniceajve agitant pavidos formidine Pinna? : 
and again, in the /Eneid (xii. 749.) 

Inclusum veluti si quando flumine nactus 
Cervum, aut Puniceae septum formidine Pinna?. 

It is observable, however, that the poet, in these instances, hath studiously, 
varied his mode of expression. The sportsmen of Italy used pinion feathers , 

i 3 



102* VATHEK. 

PAGE 53. nor curb the steeds. 

Though Gulchenrouz was too young to excel in horsemanship, it never- 
theless was an essential accomplishment amongst the Arabians. Hence the 
boast of Amriolkais : 

which, the better to answer their purpose, they dyed of a Lybian red a ; but, 
as Africa abounded in birds whose wings were impregnated with the spontane- 
ous and glossy tincture of nature, such an expedient in that country must have 
been needless. If we advert, then, to the scene of Dido's chase, the reason 
will be obvious why Virgil omitted punicea:, and for pinna substituted alee. 
t There is a passage in Nemesianus, which will at once confirm the interpret. 
ation here given, and illustrate the judgment of the poet in the choice of his 
terms : 

" Hinc (sc, ex Africa) mage Puniceas native munere sumes : 
Namque illic sine fine, greges florentibus alis 
Invenies avium, suavique rubescere luto." 

Cynegeticon, v. 317. 

' % The wide region of conjectural emendation cannot produce a happier in- 
stance of cr.tical skill than was discovered by that accurate and judicious scho- 
lar, the late Dr. Hunt b ; who when the sense of the passage referred, to, had, 
for ages, been lost, sagaciously restored it, by curtailing a letter. Proverbs., 
vii.22. 

As an hart (V"N for ^m) boundeth into the toils, till a dart strike 
through his liver : - 

When the game driven together, were either circumvented, as described by 
Virgil ; or ensnared by the foot (:wW/g6jj) as alluded to by Solomon, the 
hunters despatched them with their missile weapons. Thus Xenophon, (as 
cited in Dr. Hunt's Dissertation) Xju S' tv NM sAij ev /uzv j |pu w re6w 
vyyuf' roif yct^ xtgctfi #<Kia, xeu TOI; mtrn' ctKolitt out AKONTIZEIN. 
" When the animal is thus caught ; you must not, if it be a male, advance with- 
in his reach, for they are apt to strike with their horns and their heels; it 
will be proper therefore to pierce him at a distance." 

* Lybice fucanlur sandyce pinnae. 

Gratii Cyneg. v. 86. 
b The correction with the context is this : 

22 He goeth after her straightway, 
As an ox goeth to the slaughter ; 
3. Or as an hart boundeth into the toils, 
Till a dart strike through his liver : 
24. As a bird hasteth to the snare, 
And knoweth not that it is for his life. 

Dr. Jubb well imagined (though he hath ill rendered inTDTT in the 21st 
verse, Irretivit Hlum) that the heedless haste of the bird towards the snare, 
might be caused by the lure of a female's call ; and adduced from Oppian, an 
apposite example : 

'ilj e TIS oiuvouri popov 8oAoev7a ^vlevuv 
rjXetaf ^afjivoiffi KalaKpwlei \curiouriv 
Opviv, 6noy\iaffffoio ffvvepnopov r)6a$a frrj/w/s* 
'H 8e \iya K\agi ov6ov /zeAos, ol 8'cuoj/7es 
Ilavles emsirepxovffi, /cat es ftpoKov avlov tevlcu 



Halieut. iv. 120. 
As when the fowler to the fields resorts, 
His caged domestic partner of his sports 
Behind some shade-projecting bush he lays, 
And wreaths the wiry cell with blooming sprays. 
The pretty captive to the groves around 
Warbles her practised care-deluding sound. 
The attentive flocks pursue with ravish 'd ear 
The female music of the feather'd fair, 
Forget to see, and rush upon the snare, JONES. 



NOTES. *103 



" Often have I risen at early dawn, while the birds were yet in their nests, 
and mounted a hunter with smooch short hair, of a full height; and so fleet as 
to make captive the beasts of the forests. 

" Ready in turning, quick in pursuing, bold in advancing, firm in backing ; 
and performing the whole with the strength and swiftness of a vast rock 
which a torrent has pushed from its lofty base. 

" A bright bay steed, from whose polished back the trappings slide, as drops 
of rain slide hastily down the slippery marble. 

***** 

" He makes the light youth slide from his seat, and violently shakes the 
skirts of a heavier and more stubborn rider." Moallakat, p. 10. 

The stud of Fakreddin consisted, no doubt, of as noble a breed ; though 
sprung neither from " the mighty Tartar horse," (whose gigantic rider was 
slain by Codadad), nor the size of Clavileflo, " and the wondrous horse of 
brass." Milton's allusion to the last having occasioned much fruitless en- 
quiry concerning his pedigree*, it shall here be made out, with that of his 
brother: 

The principal qualities of " the The particulars of Clavileflo are, 

Horse of Brass " were, that he was that he was. the production of an 
brought before the Tartar king, after enchanter ; was capable of rising 
the third course of a feast, which was into the air with the velocity of an 
solemnised at the commencement of arrow, and carrying his rider to any 
spring : that he was able, within the distance ; was put into motion by the 
compass of a natural day, to carry turning of a pin on his neck ; and 
his rider wherever he might choose ; directed in his course by another in 
that he could mount into the air, as his forehead : that he fleeted so stea- 
high as an eagle, and with as equable dily through the air as not to spill a 
and easy a motion ; that by turning drop from a cup full of water in the 
one pin, fixed in his ear, his course hand of his rider; that, being lent by 
might be directed to a destined spot, his owner, Pierres made a long voyage 
and, by means of another, he might upon him, and brought off the fair 
be made to alight, or return to the Magalona, who alighted to become a 
place from whence he set out. queen ; that Don Quixote, when 

high in the air, knew not the ma- 
nagement of the pin, to prevent his 
rising; and that he, at last, va- 
nished amidst rockets and crackers. 

The resemblances here specified are evidently too strong to have resulted 
from accident ; and it will appear, on further enquiry, that " the Enchanted 
Horse," in the Arabian Nights, was not only possessed of those qualities which 
were common to them both, but also of such as were peculiar to each. Thus, 

He was presented to the king of Persia at the close of a festival, which was 
celebrated on the opening of spring: could transport his rider, and in the 
space of a day, wherever he listed ; moved so smoothly as to cause no shock, 
even on coming on the ground; could soar above the ken pf every beholder; 

* " Among the MSS. at Oriel College in Oxford, is an old Latin treatise, en- 
titled Fabula de ameo caballo. Here I imagined I had discovered the origin of 
Chaucer's Squier's Tale, so rrplete with marvellous imagery, and evidently 
an Arabian fiction of the middle ages. But I was disappointed ; for, on ex- 
amination, it appeared to have not even a distant connection with Chaucer's 
story. I mention this, that others, on seeing such a title in the catalogue, 
might not be flattered with specious expectations of so curious a discovery, and 
mi^ed, like myself, by a fruitless enquiry." Warton's edit, of Milton's Poems, 

i 4 



1.04* VATHEK. 

might be guided, by turning a pin in the hollow of his neck, to any point his 
rider should choose 5 and by means of another behind his right ear, be made to 
descend, or return whence he came; was the production of an enchanter; 
passed through the air with the speed of an arrow ; having been lent by his 
owner to Firouz Schah, carried him a considerable distance, and brought back 
behind him the Princess of Bengal, to whom the prince was afterwards married j 
that Firouz Schah, when high in the air, was unable to manage the pin, so as to 
prevent him from rising; and, finally, that he made his last exit in an explosion 
of fire-works and smoke.* 

PAGE 53. the bow, however, he drew with a certain aim. 
This, as well as the other accomplishments mentioned before, was a consti- 
tuent part of an Eastern education. Thus, in the Story of the Sisters, who 
envied their Sister : " When the princes were learning to mount the managed 
horse and to ride, the princess could not permit them to have that advantage 
over her, but went through all their exercises with them, learning to ride the 
great horse, dart the javelin, and bend the bow." Arab. Nights, vol. iv- 
p. 276. 

PAGE 53. The two brothers had mutually engaged their children to each 

other. 

Contracts of this nature were frequent amongst the Arabians. Another in. 
stance occurs in the Story of Noureddin Ali and Bedreddin Hassan. 

PAGE 53. Nouronihar loved her cousin, more than her own beautiful eyes. 
This mode of expression not only occurs in the sacred writers, but also in the 
Greek and Roman. Thus, Moschus : 

Tot ^v ey<o TIEK2ON 12ON SAEE22IN EMOI2IN. 
and Catullus says : 

" Quern plus ilia oculis suis amabat." 

PAGE 54. the same long, languishing looks. 
So Ariosto : 

' - negri occhi, - 
Pietosi a riguardare, a mover parchi. 

The lines which follow, from Shakspeare and Spenser, may serve as a com- 
ment upon the brief but beautiful description of our Author. 
Winter's Tale: 

" - never gaz'd the moon 
Upon the water as he '11 stand, and read, 
As 'twere, my daughter's eyes." 
Faerie Queenf : 

" . Her eyes, sweet smiling in delight, 

Moystened their fierie beames, with which she thrild 

* It may not be impertinent to subjoin, on a kindred subject, as no mention 
has been hitherto made of him, that the author of " the Touchstone, or para- 
doxes brought to the test of a rigorous and fair examination, printed for Noon, 
1732," appears to have been the original projector of sailing through the air, in 
a boat appended to a balL 

t Spenser seems to have copied this simile from Tasso ; 



Qual raggio in onda, le scintilla un ri 
Negli umidi occhi tremulo e lascivo. 



NOTES. *105 

Fraile hearts', yet quenched not; like starry light, 

Which sparkling on the silent waves does seeme more bright." 

PAGE 54. with all the bashf illness of a fawn. 

The fawn, as better known, is here substituted for the gazal of the Arabians, 
an animal uncommonly beautiful and shy. 

PAGE 54. take refuge in the fond arms of Nouronihar. 
Ample scope is here left to the imagination of the reader, and Tasso will 
assist him to fill up the picture. 

" Sovra lui pende : ed ei nel grembo molle 
Le posa il capo, e' 1 volto al votto attolle." La Gems. xvi. 18. 

PAGE 54. Shaddulcian and Ambreabad. 

These were two cities of the peries, in the imaginary region of Gfnnistan : 
the former signifies pleasure and desire, the latter, the city of Ambergris. See 
Richardson's Dissertat. p. 169. 

PAGE 56. a spoon of cocknos. 

The cocknos is a bird whose beak is much esteemed for its beautiful polish, 
and sometimes used as a spoon. Thus, in the History of Atalinulck and 
Zelica Begum, it was employed for a similar purpose : " Zelica having called 
for refreshment, six old slaves instantly brought in and distributed Mahramas, 
and then served about in a great basin of Martabam, a salad made of herbs of 
various kinds, citron juice, and the pith of cucumbers. They served it first to the 
Princess in a cocknos beak : she took a beak of the salad, eat it, and gave another 
to the next slave that sat by her on her right hand ; which slave did as her 
mistress had done." 

PAGE 57. Goules. 

' Goul, or ghul, in Arabic, signifies any terrifying object, which deprives 
people of the use of their senses. Hence it became the appellative of that 
species of monster which was supposed to haunt forests, cemeteries, and other 
lonely places ; and believed not only to tear in pieces the living, but to dig up 
and devour the dead. Richardson's Dissert, pp. 174. 274. 

That kind of insanity called by the Arabians Kutrub (a word signifying not 
only a wo//, but likewise a male Goul}, which incites such as are afflicted with 
it to roam howling amidst those melancholy haunts, may cast some light on 
the nature of the possession recorded by St. Mark, ch. v. 1, &c. 

PAGE 58. feathers of the heron, all sparkling with carbuncles. 
Panaches of this kind are amongst the attributes of Eastern royalty. Tales. 
ofInatulla,voli\.p.2Q5. 

PAGE 58. whose eyes pervade the inmost soul of a female. 
The original in this instance, as in the others already noticed, is more ana- 
logous to the French than the English idiom : " Dont fceilp^n^trejusqu'u la 
moelle desjeunesfilles." 

PAGE 58. the carbuncle of Giamtchid. 

This mighty potentate was the fourth sovereign of the dynasty of the Pischa. 
dians, and brother or nephew to Tahamurath. His proper name was Giam or 



106* VATHEK. 

Gem, and Schid, which in the language of the ancient Persians denominated 
the sun : an addition ascribed by some to the majesty of his person, and by 
others to the splendour of his actions. One of the most magnificent monu- 
ments of his reign was the city of Istakhar, of which Tahamurath had laid the 
foundations. This city, at present called Gihil-, or Tchil-minar, from the forty 
columns reared in it by Homai, or (according to our author and others *) by 
Soliman Ben Daoud, was known to the Greeks by the name of Persepolis ; and 
there is still extant in the East a tradition, that, when Alexander burnt the 
edifices of the Persian kings, seven stupendous structures of Giamschid were 
consumed with his palace. This prince, after having subjected to his empire 
seven vast provinces of Upper Asia, and enjoyed in peace a long reign (which 
some authors have protracted to 700 years), became intoxicated with his great- 
ness; and, foolishly fancying it would have no end, arrogated to himself 
divine honours. But the Almighty raised up, even in his own house, a terrible 
instrument to abase his pride, by whom he was easily overcome, and driven 
into exile. 

r The author of Giame al tavatikh mentions the cup, or concave mirror of 
Giamschid, formed of a gem, and called the cup of the sun. To this vessel the 
Persian poets often refer, and allegorise it in different ways. They attribute 
to it the property of exhibiting every thing in the compass of nature, and even 
some things that are preternatural. The gem it consisted of appears to be the 
carbuncle, or oriental ruby ; which, from its resemblance to a burning coal, 
and the splendour it was supposed to emit in the dark, was called Schebgerag, 
or, the torch of the night. According to Strabo, it obtained its high estimation 
amongst the Persians, who were worshippers of fire, from its igneous qualities ; 
and perhaps those virtues for which it hath been styled " the first of stones." 

Milton had a learned retrospect to its fabulous powers, in describing the Old 
Serpent : 

his head 

Crested aloft, and carbuncle his eyes 

Herbelot, p. 392. 395. 780. &c. Brighte on L Melancholie, p. 321. Paradise 
Lost, IX. 499. 

PAGE 58 the torches were extinguished. 

From the emblems of royalty in the vision, and the closing declaration of 
the last voice, it is evident that these torches, Xa^raS f ANTI TflN NTM*I- 
KflN rou A AIMONOS St-fyetflos, were lighted by the dive to prognosticate f the 
destined union of which the water in the bath was a further omen. Thus 
Lactantius : " A veteribus institutmn est, ut Sacramento ignis et aquae nup- 
tiarum foedera sanciantur, quod foetus animantium calore et humore corporentur 
atque animentur ad vitam. Unde aqua et igne uxorem accipere dicitur." 
Ovid. Fast. iv. 792. ., Far. de Ling. Lat. iv. 10. Serv. ad Virg. Mn. iv. 167. 
Of the union here prefigured, the sequel will allow to be added. ., 

Non Ht/merueus adest illi, non gratia lecto; 
Eumenides tenuere faces, de funere raptas : 
Eumenides stravere torum.| 

PAGE 58. She clapped her hands. 

This was the ordinary method in the East of calling the attendants in waiting. 
See Arabian Nights, vol. i. pp. 5. 106. 193, &c. 

* Examen Critique des Anciens Historiens d'Alexandre le Grand, p. 287. 
f Mihi deductae fax omen prtetulit 

Propert. IV. iii. 13. 
f See the History of Vathek, p. 148. 165. 



NOTES. *107 

PAGE 59. have you false keys? Come, to the dark chamber. 
It was the office of Shaban, as chief eunuch, to keep the key of the ladies' 
apartment In the story of Ganem, Haroun al Raschid commands Mefrour, 
the chief of the eunuchs, " to take the perfidious Fetnah, and shut her up in 
the dark tower." That tower was within the inclosure of the palace, and 
commonly served as a prison for the favourites who might chance to disgust 
the caliph. 

PAGE 59. set him upon his shoulders. 

The same mode of carrying boys is noted by Sandys ; and Ludeke has a 
passage still more to the purpose:" Liberos dominorum suorum grandf- 
usculos ita humeris portant servi, ut illi lacertis suis horum collum, pedibus 
verolatera amplectantur, sicque illorum facies super horum caput emineat" 
Etpositia Brevis, p. 37. 

PAGE 59. his cheeks became the colour of the blossom of pomegranates. 

The modest blush of an ingenuous youth (which a Grecian lady of admired 
taste averred to be the finest colour in nature;, is denominated by the Arabians 
from this very flower. Solomon, in his exquisite Idyllium, hath adopted the 
same comparison. Ch. IV. v. 3. 

" "JDpI pmn n"?DD. Thy cheeks are like the opening bloom * of the 
pomegranate." 

But a more apposite use of this similitude occurs in an ode by a poet of 
Damascus : 

" The blossom of the pomegranate brings back to my mind the blushes of 
my beloved, when her cheeks are coloured with a modest resentment." 

PAGE 60. their faith is mutually plighted. 

When females in the East are betrothed, their palms and fingers are tinged 
of a crimson colour, with the herb hinnah. This is called " the crimson of 
consent." Tales of Inatulla, voL it; p. 15. 

PAGE 60. violate the rights of hospitality. 

So high an idea of these rights prevails amongst the Arabians, that " a bread 
and salt traitor," is the most opprobrious invective with which one person can 
reproach another Richardson's Dissert, p. 219. See also the story of Alt Baba 
and The Forty Thieves, in the Arabian Nights, vol. iv. p. 166. 

* Simon interprets n^D by eruptiofloris, & Guarini by balaustium, senses, 
which the following passage from Pliny will support: Primus pomi hujus 
partus flore incipientis, Cytinus vocatur Gracis. In hoc ipso cytino flosculi 
sunt, anteqnam scilicet nialuin ipsum prodeat, erumpentes, quos balaustium 
vocari diximus. Nat. Hist. Lib. XXIII. 59, 60. [According to Dioscorides, 
I. 132, the balaustium was the blossom of the wild, and the citynus of the culti- 
vated, pomegranate.] 

Dr. Durell, justly dissatisfied with the versions before him, hath rendered 
the hemistich thus : "Thy cheeks are like a piece of pomegranate ;" and adds, 
" The cheeks are compared to a piece of this fruit, because the pomegranate, 
when whole, is of a dull colour ; but when cut up of a lively beautiful vermi- 
lion." But, if this interpretation and reasoning be allowed, Solomon was less 
pat at a simile than Sancho : for, whether the cheeks of a blooming bride or 
the inwards of a man, " just cleft from noddle down to nock," be more like a 
split pomegranate ? " let the forest judge." DurelTs Critical Remarks, p. 293. 
Don Quixote, torn iii. p. 282. 



108* VATHEK. 

PAGE 61. narcotic powder. 

A drug of the same quality, mixed in lemonade, is given to Zobeide, in the 
story of Ganem. 

' PAGE 62. Funeral vestments were prepared ; their bodies washed, 8(C.\ 
The rites here practised had obtained from the earliest ages. Most of them 
may be found in Homer and the other poets of Greece. Lucian describes the 
dead in his time as washed, perfumed, vested, and crowned, cogcuois v0<>, 
with the flowers most in season ; or, according to other writers, those in par- 
ticular which the deceased were wont to prefer. The elegant editor of the 
Ruins of Palmyra mentions the fragments of a mummy found there, the hair 
of which was plaited exactly in the manner as worn at present by the women 
of Arabia. 

The burial dress from the days of Homer hath been commonly white, and 
amongst Mahometans is made without a seam, that it may not impede the 
ceremonial of kneeling in the grave, when the dead person undergoes examin- 
ation. Homer, Euripides, fyc. passim. Lucian, torn. ii. p. 927. Paschal de 
Coron. p. 225. Ruins of Palmyra, p. 22, 23. Iliad <r, 352. Relig. Cerem. vol. vii. 
p. 117. 

PAGE 63. all instruments of music were broken. 

Thus, in the Arabian Nights : " Haroun al Raschid wept over Schemselni- 
har, and, before he left the room, ordered all the musical instruments to be 
broken." Vol. iL p. 196. 

PAGE 63. imans began to recite their prayers. 

An iman is the principal priest of a mosque. It was the office of the imans 
to precede the bier, praying as the procession moved on. Relig. Cerem. 
vol. vii. p. 117. 

PAGE 63. The wailful cries of La Ilah ilia Alia! 

This exclamation, which contains the leading principle of Mahometan belief, 
and signifies there is no God but God, was commonly uttered under some vio- 
lent emotion of mind. The Spaniards adopted it from their Moorish neigh- 
bours, and Cervantes hath used it in Don Quixote : " En esto Ileg&ron 
corriendocon grita, LILILIES (literally professions of faith in Alia), y algazara los 
de las libreas, adonde Don Quixote suspense y at6nito estava. Parte Segunda, 
cap. Ixi. torn. iv. p. 241. 

The same expression is sometimes written by the Spaniards, Lilaila, and Hila 
hilahaila. 

PAGE 65. the angel of death had opened the portal of some other world. 

The name of this exterminating angel is Azrael, and his office is to conduct 
the dead to the abode assigned them ; which is said by some to be near the 
place of their interment. Such was the office of Mercury in the Grecian My- 
thology. Sale's Prelim. Disc. p. 101. Hyde in notis ad Bobov. p. IS. R. Elias, 
in Tishbi. Buxforf Synag. Jud. et Lexic. Talmud. Homer. Odyss. 

PAGE 65. Honker and Nakir. 

These are two black angels of a tremendous appearance, who examine the 
departed on the subject of his faith : by whom, if he give not a satisfactory ac- 
count, he is sure to be cudgelled with maces of red-hot iron, and tormentec 



NOTES. *109 

more variously than words can describe. Relig. Ceremon. vol. vii. pp. 59. 68. 
118. vol. v. p. 290., .Sale's Prelim. Disc. p. 101., and one of the MSS. specified 
in the Preface. 

PAGE 65. the fatal bridge. 

This bridge, called in Arabic al Sirat, and said to extend over the infernal 
gulf, is represented as narrower than a spider's web, and sharper than the 
edge of a sword. Though the attempt to cross it be 
" More full of peril, and advent'rous spirit, 
Than to o'erwalk a current, roaring loud, 
On the unsteadfast footing of a spear ;" 

yet the paradise of Mahomet can be entered by no other avenue. Those, in- 
deed, who have behaved well need not be alarmed ; mixed characters will find 
it difficult; but the wicked soon miss their standing, and plunge headlong into 
the abyss. Pocock in Port. Mos. p. 282, &c. Milton' apparently copied from 
this well-known fiction, and not, as Dr. Warton conjectured, from the poet 
Sadi ; his way 

" Over the dark abyss, whose boiling gulf 
Tamely endured a bridge of wond'rous length, 
From hell continued, reaching the utmost orb 
Of this frail world." 

PAGE 65. a certain series of years. 

' According to the tradition from the prophet, not less than nine hundred, nor 
more than seven thousand. 

PAGE 65. the sacred camel. 

It was an article of the Mahometan creed, that all animals would be raised 
again, and some of them admitted into paradise. The animal here mentioned 
appears to have been one of those white-winged CAMELS * caparisoned with gold, 
which AH affirmed had been provided to convey the faithful. Relig. Cer. 
voL vii. p. 70. Sale's Prelim. Disc. p. 112. Al Jauheri. Ebno'l Athir, &c. 

PAGE 66. basket-making. 

This sort of basket work hajh been long used in the East, and consists of the 
leaves of the date-bearing palm. Panniers of this texture are of great utility 
in conveying fruits, bread, &c., whilst heavier articles, or such as require a 
more compact covering, are carried in bags of leather, or skin. Hasselqnist's 
Voyage, p. 261. 

PAGE 66. the caliph presented himself to the emir in a new light. 
The propensity of a vicious person, in affliction, to seek consolation from the 
ceremonies of religion, is an exquisite trait in the character of Vathek. 

PAGE 71 the waving of fans. 

These fans consisted of the trains of peacocks or ostriches.'whose quills were 
set in a long stem, so as to imbricate the plumes in the gradations of their 

* Tarafa, amongst other circumstances in the description of his camel, notices 
her " bushy tail, which appears as if the two wings of a large white eagle were 
transfixed by an awl to the bone, and hung waving round both her sides." 
Moallakat, p. 19. 



1 10* VATHEK. 

natural growth. Fans of this fashion were formerly used in England. That, 
here subjoined, from a portrait of Elizabeth, was probably the same noticed by 
Mr. Warton in the Sidney papers, as " presented to her for a new year's gift, 
the handle of which was studded with diamonds." 




To judge from the language of Burton (" if he get any remnant of hers, a 
buske-point, a feather of her fanne, a shoo-tye, a lace,") these fans soon after 
became common.* It was, however, to this kind that Milton alluded in a 




passage of Paradise Lost, the collocation of which, though disjointed through 
the mistake of his amanuensis, may, by transposing a word, be restored : 
" his sleep 

Was aery light, from pure digestion bred, 

And temperate vapours bland, which th' only sound 

Of fuming rills, and leaves, Aurora's fan, 

Lightly dispers'd, and the shrill matin song, 

Of birds on ev'ry bough." 

* Some of them are here copied, of different forms. 



NOTES. *111 

Trees, whose branches are well covered with leaves, may be not improperly 
styled feathering *, and, in the language of Milton, form the fan of Aurora, 
which, when waved by the breeze of the morning, occasions the rustling that 
constitutes a third in the complex sound referred to. 

PAGE 72. wine hoarded up in bottles, prior to the birth of Mahomet. 

The prohibition of wine by the prophet materially diminished its consump- 
tion within the limits of his own dominions. Hence a reserve of it might be 
expected of the age here specified. The custom of hoarding wine was not un- 
known to the Persians, though not so often practised by them as by the Greeks 
and the Romans. 

" I purchase " (says Lebeid) " the old liquor, at a dear rate, in dark leathern 
bottles, long reposited ; or in casks black with pitch, whose seals I break, and 
then fill the cheerful goblet." MoaUakat, p. 53. 

PAGE 72. excavated ovens in the rock. 
As substitutes for the portable ovens, which were lost 

PAGE 72. manchets prepared by Nouronihar. 

Herodotus mentions a lady of equal rank, performing a similar office : % ?s 
TTNH TOU BA2IAHO2 Jfo TO. 2ITI A tr$t 6;n<rt : and the cakes which Ta- 
mar made for Amnon are well known. 

PAGE 73. her great camel Alboufaki. 

There is a singular and laboured description of a camel in the poem of Tarafa ; 
but Alboufaki possessed qualities appropriate to himself, and which rcn.lered 
him but little less conspicuous than the deformed dun camel of Aad. 

PAGE 74. to set forward, notwithstanding it was noon. 
The employment of wood-fellers was accounted of all others the most toil- 
some, as those occupied in it were compelled to forego that mid-day cessation 
with which other labourers were indulged. Inatulla speaks proverbially of 
" woodmen in the meridian hour, scarce able to raise the arms of languor." 
The guides of Carathis being of this occupation, she adroitly availed herself 
of it to urge them forward, without allowing them that repose during the mid- 
day fervour which travellers in these climates always enjoyed J, and which 
was deemed so essential to the preservation of their health. 

PAGE 74. the confines of some cemetery. 

Places of interment in the East were commonly situated in scenes of solitude. 
We read of one in the History of the First Calender, abounding with so many 

* Thus, Mr. Whateley, the first authority in the language of picturesque 
description : " Large boughs, feathering down, often intercept the sight" 

t Lib. Till p. 685. That trtrnx. is to be understood in the sense above given, 
is certain from what immediately follows 

J Psalm xci. 5. The explanatory iteration of the subsequent verse, points 
out a congruity between the Hebrew poet and Homer. As the contagion 
amongst the Greeks produced by the excessive heat of the sun, was assigned in 
the Iliad to the arrows of the God of light ; so, the destruction that wasteth at 
noon, is attributed in the Psalm to the arrow that flieth by day. It has been 
observed by a nobleman of many accomplishments, that this verse should be 
added to the other passages of scripture, which have been noted in t lie writings 
-scribed to Zoroaster. 



112* VATHEK. 

monuments, that four days were successively spent in it without the enquirer 
being able to find the tomb he looked for ; and, from the Story of Ganem, it 
appears that the doors of these cemeteries were often left open. Arabian 
Nights, vol. ii. p. 112. vol. iii. p. 135. 

PAGE 77. a Myrdbolan comfit. 

The invention of this confection is attributed by M. Cardonne to Avicenna, 
but there is abundant reason, exclusive of our author's authority, to suppose it 
of a much earlier origin. Both the Latins and Greeks were acquainted with 
the balsam, and the tree that produced it was indigenous in various parts of 
Arabia. 

PAGE 78. blue fishes. 

Fishes of the same colour are mentioned in the Arabian Nights j and, like 
these, were endowed with the gift of speech. 

PAGE 79. nests still higher than the clouds. 

The metaphor of a nest for a secure habitation, occurs in the sacred writings. 
Thus Habakkuk : " Wo to him that coveteth an evil covetousness to his 
house, that he may set his nest on high, that he may be delivered from the 
power of evil." And Obadiah : "Though thou exalt thyself as the eagle, 
and though thou set thy nest among the stars," &c. The genius here men- 
tioned seems to have been adopted from the Jewish notion of Guardian Angels, 
to whom the superintendence of children is supposed to be committed, and to 
which our Saviour himself hath referred (Matt, xviii. 10.) ; whilst the original 
possessors of the nest may be presumed to have been some of those marvellous 
birds so frequently mentioned in Eastern romance. 

PAGE 79. -waving streamers on which were inscribed the names of Allah and the 
Prophet. 

The position that " there is no God but God, and Mahomet is his Prophet," 
pervades every part of the Mahometan religion. Banners, like those here de- 
scribed, are preserved in the several mosques ; and, on the death of extra- 
ordinary persons, are borne before the bier in solemn state Relig. Cerem- 
vol. vii. pp. 119, 120. 

: PAGE 80. astrolabes. 

The mention of the astrolabe may be deemed incompatible, at first view, with 
chronological exactness, as there is no instance of any being constructed by a 
Mussulman, till after the time of Vathek. It may, however, be remarked, to 
go no higher, that Sinesius, bishop of Ptolemais, invented one in the fifth cen- 
tury ; and that Carathis was not only herself a Greek, but also cultivated 
those sciences which the good Mussulmans of her time all held in abhorrence. 
Bailly, Hist, de I'Astronom. Modeme, torn. i. pp. 563. 573. 

PAGE 82. On the banks of the stream, hives and oratories. 
The bee is an insect held in high veneration amongst the Mahometans, it 
being pointed out in the Koran, " for a sign unto the people that understand." 
It has been said, in the same sense, " Go to the ant, thou sluggard." Prov. 
vi. 6. The santons, therefore, who inhabit the fertile banks of Rocnabad, are 
not less famous for their hives than their oratories. D'Herbelot, p. 717. 



NOTES. *113 

PAGE 82. harbingers of the imperial procession began to proclaim. 
This circumstance of sending heralds to announce the approach of a sove- 
reign, reminds us of " the voice of one crying in the wilderness." 

i 

PAGE 83. sheiks, cadis. 

Sheiks are the chiefs of the societies of derviches ; cadis are the magistrates 
of a town or city. 

PAGE 83. Asses in bridles of riband inscribed from the Koran. 
As the judges of Israel in ancient days rode on white asses, so, amongst the 
Mahometans, those that affect an extraordinary sanctity, use the same animal 
in preference to the horse. Sir John Chardin observed, in various parts of the 
East, that their reins, as here represented, were of silk, with the name of God, 
or other inscriptions, upon them. Ludeke, Expos, brevis, p. 49. Chardin's MS. 
cited by Harmer. 

PAGE 84. One of these beneficent Genii, assuming the exterior of a shepherd, 

8(c. began to pour from his flute, $c. 

The flute was considered as a sacred instrument, which Jacob and other holy 
shepherds had sanctified by using. Relig. Cerem. vol. vii. p. 110. 

PAGE 84. involuntarily drawn towards the declivity of the hill. 

A similar instance of attraction may be seen in the Story of Prince Ahmed 
and the Peri Parabanon. Arabian Nights, vol. iv. p. 243. 

PAGE 85. Eblis. 

D'Herbclot supposes this title to have been a corruption of the Greek A/a- 
3*9?, diabolos. It was the appellation conferred by the Arabians upon the 
prince of the apostate angels, whom they represent as exiled to the infernal 
regions, for refusing to worship Adam at the command of the Supreme, and 
appears more likely to originate from the Hebrew 13H, hebel, vanity, pride. 
See below, the note p. 90., " creatures of clay." 

PACE 85. compensate for thy impieties by an exemplary life. 

It is an established article of the Mussulman creed, that the actions of man- 
kind are all weighed in a vast unerring balance, -nd the future condition of 
the agents determined according to the preponderance of evil or good. This 
fiction, which seems to have been borrowed from the Jews, had probably its 

origin in the figurative language of Scripture. Thus, Psalm Ixii. 9 " Surely 

men of low degree are vanity, and men of high degree are a lie : to be laid in 
the balance, they are altogether lighter than vanity;" and, in Daniel, the 
sentence against the King of Babylon, inscribed on the wall, " Thou art weighed 
in the balance, and found wanting," 

PAGE 86. Balkis. 

This was the Arabian name of the Queen of Sheba,who went from the south 
to hear the wisdom and admire the glory of Solomon. The Koran represents 
her as a worshipper of fire. Solomon is said not only to have entertained her 
with the greatest magnificence, but also to have raised her to his bed and liu 
throne U Koran, ch. xxvii. and Sale's notes. D'Herbelot, p. 182. 

M 



114* VATHEK. 

PAGES?. of an architecture unknown in the records of the earth an im- 
mense palace, whose walls were embossed with various figures, fyc. 
Thus Pellegrino Gaudenzi, in his description of the palace of sin : 
" Enorme pondo al suolo, immensa mole 
D' aspri macigni intesta e negri marmi 
^ Per cui serpeggian di sanguigna tinta 

Lugubri vene : 1'atterito sguardo 
Muto s'erresta sull' altera fronte 
Ch' entro le nubi si sospinge, e s' alza 
Superbamente a minacciar le stelle. 
Sotto grand' archi su marmoree basi 
Fan di s mostra simulacri orrcndi 
Che in sacciaad essa i Demon fabbri alzaro." 

La Nascita di Cristo, c. i . 

PAGE 87. The chief of the eunuchs trembling with fear, besought Vathek that 
I afire might be kindled. ". 

HT I1AXNOYTAI, the very heart of Bababalouk is congealed with appre- 
hension. Where can a more exquisite trait, both of nature and character, be 
found, than this request of the eunuch presents ? 

PAGE 88. they seemed not walking, but falling. 
A similar kind of progression is described by Milton : 

" by the hand he took me raised ; 

And over fields and waters, as in air, 
Smooth-sliding without step last led me. 

PAGE 89. The pavement, strewed over with saffron. 

There are several circumstances in the Story of the Third Calender, that 
resemble those here mentioned ; particularly a pavement strewed with saffron, 
and the burning of ambergris and aloes. wood. 

PAGE 89. A throng of genii and other fantastic spirits , danced, $c. 
A dance of the same kind, and by similar performers, occurs in the History 
of Ahmed and the Peri Parabanon. 

PAGE 90. let us haste, and present you to Eblis. 

If our author's description of the arch-apostate be examined by the criterion 
of Arabian faith, and in reference to the circumstances of the story, there can 
be no difficulty in appreciating its merit. Gaudenzi, in the poem already cited, 
hath described the appearance of Satan previous to the birth of Christ 
in a manner that deserves to be noticed, though the poem itself were less 
scarce : 

" Fra questo orror da sue radici scosso 

Trema repente il suolo, e all' Oriente 

Ardua montagna con rimbombo estremo 

S' apre per mezzo : immensa foce oscura 

Mugghia dal fondo, e fumo, e fiamme, e lampi 

Sboccano a un tratto ; i sfracellati massi 

Rotando ardenti nel sulfureo flutto 

Stampan la piaggia di profonda traccia. 

Dai neri gorghi del dolente regno 



NOTES. *115 

Con furibondo orribile muggito 

Rimonta per 1'aperta ampia vorago 

L' Angiol d' abisso a funestar la terra. 

Come dell' ocean sola tiranna 

Sconcia Balena per gli ondosi campi 

Move animosa, e coll' enorme petto 

L' ampia spezzando rimugghiante massa 

Alzasi al giorno, e nel turbato fondo 

II muto armento di sua mole adombra 

Tale Satan per vasto mar di fiamme 

Ergesi a nuoto : immense all protese 

Alto flagellan con sonoro scroscio 

L' onda infernal, che in rosseggianti righe 

Sbalza stridente, e il ciel veste dl foco. 

Sotto grand' archi di vellute ciglia, 

Quasi comete sanguinose erranti 

Per tenebrose vie, di rabbia pregni 

Volvonsi gli occhi, e in cavernoso speco 

Orrida s' apre 1' infiammata bocca 

Aure spirante di veleno infette. * 

Egli s' avanza, e il suol guatando e il cielo, 

Impaziente con le negre braccia 

Le rupi affera, e d' un immenso slancio 

Balza al confin della frapposta arena 

Mille del suo furor seguaci Spivti 

Ch' erangli sotto per gl igniti gorghi 

Sfilangi dictro, e coll' intento sguardo 

In lui rivolti gli si fanno al fianco. 

In sua possanza alteramente fiera 

Stassi 1' oste d'Averno, e adombra il piano, 

Siccome mille e mille annose quercie 

Che a' pife d' un' alta ferruginea rupe 

Aride e negre al cielo ergon le teste. 

S' addopian 1' ombre della notte, e sola 

Al folgorar degP infernali sguardi 

Arde da lungi la solinga piaggia, 

Come spezzata da funeste vampe 

Massa di nembi." 

PAGE 90. Ouranbad. 

This monster is represented as a fierce flying hydra, and belongs to the same 
class with the raks/ic, whose ordinary food was serpents and dragons; the soham, 
which had the head of ahorse, with four eyes, and the body of aflame-coloured 
dragon; the syl, a basilisk with a face resembling the human, but so tremen- 

* Several expressions in this passage appear to have been imitated from the 
following, of Tasso : 

Orrida maestd nel fero aspetto 
Terrore accresce, e ptti superbo U rende : 
Rossegian gli occhj.'e c!i venono infetto. 
Come intausta cometa, il guardo splende : 
Gl" involve il mento, e su 1' irsuto petto 
Ispida e folta la gran barba scende : 
E in guisa di voragine profonda, 
S' apre la bocca d' atro sangue immonda. 

La Gerun. c. iv. t. 7. 

[i] 2 



11 6* VATHEK. 

dous that no mortal could bear to behold it ; the ejder, and others. See these 
respective titles in Richardson's Persian, Arabic, and English^Dictionary. 

PAGE 90. she expected to have seen some stupendous giant. 
Such is the representation which Dante hath given of this infernal sove- 
reign : 

" Lo 'mperador del doloroso regno 

Da mezzo '1 petto uscia fuor della ghiaccia : 
E piu con un gigante i' mi convegno, 
Che i giganti non fan con le sue braccia." 

_It is more than probable (though it has not been noticed), that Don Quixote's 
mistake of the windmills for giants was suggested to Cervantes by the follow- 
ing simile, in which the tremendous personage above-mentioned is so com- 
pared : 

" per?) dinanzi mira 

Disse '1 maestro mio, se tu '1 discerni. 

, Come quando una grossa nebbia spira, 

O quando I' emisperio nostro annotta 

Par da lungi un mulin che '1 vento gira, 

Vender mi parve un tal dificio allotta." 

What confirms this conjecture is the reply to Sancho's question "What 
Giants?" made by Don Quixote, in reference to the two last lines of the 
preceding citation : 

" And nearer to a giant's is my size 

Than giants are when to his arms compar'd." 

" Those thou seest yonder, with their vast arms ; and some of them there 
are, that reach nearly two leagues." Don Quixote, parte prim, capit. viii. 
p. 52. Dante dell' Inferno, Canto xxxiv. It may be added, that a rising wind 
is mentioned in both. 

PAGE 90. Creatures of clay. 

Nothing could have^been more appositely imagined than this compilation. 
Eblis, according to Arabian mythology, had suffered a degradation from his 
primeval rank, and was consigned to these regions, for having refused to wor- 
ship Adam in obedience to the supreme command j alleging, in justification of 
his refusal, that himself had been formed of ethereal fire, whilst Adam was 
only a creature of clay. Al Koran, c. Iv. &c. 

PAGE 91. the fortress of Aherman. 

In the mythology of the Easterns, Aherman was accounted the Demon of 
Discord. The ancient Persian romances abound in descriptions of this fortress, 
in which the inferior demons assemble, to receive the behests of their prince 
and from whom they proceed to exercise their malice in every part of the world, 
D'Herbelot, p. 71. 

PAGE 91. _ the halls of Argenk. 

The halls of this mighty dive, who reigned in the mountains of Kaf, con- 
tained the statues of the seventy-two Solimans, and the portraits of the various 
creatures subject to them; not one of which bore the slightest similitude to 
man. Some had many heads, others many arms, and some consisted of many 
bodies. Their heads were all very extraordinary, some resembling the ele- 
phant's, the buffalo's, and the boar's ; whilst others were still more monstrous. 
D'Herbelot, p. 8^0. Some of the idols worshipped to this day in Hindostan 
answer to this description. 



NOTES. *117 

Ariosto, who owes more to Arabian fable than his commentators have 
hitherto supposed, seems to have been no stranger to the halls of Argenk, 
when he described one of the fountains of Merlin : 
Era una delle fonti di Merlino 

Delle quattro di Francia da lui fatte ; 

D' intorno cinta di bel marmo fino, 

Lucido, e terso, e bianco piti che latte. 

Quivi d' intaglio con lavor divino 

Avea Merlino immagini ritratte. 

Direste che spiravano, e se prive 

Non fossero di voce, ch' eran vive. 
Quivi una Bestia uscir della foresta 

Parea di crudel vista, odiosa, e brutta, 

Che avea le orecchie d' asino, e la testa 

Di lupo, e i denti, e per gran fame asciutta ; 

Branche avea di leon j Paltro, che resta, 

Tutto era volpe. 

PAGE 91. holding his right hand, motionless, on his heart. 
Sandys observes that the application of the right hand to the heart is the 
customary mode of Eastern salutation ; but the perseverance of the votaries of 
Eblis in this attitude was intended to express their devotion to him both heart 
and hand. 

PAGE 92. In my lifetime I filled, Sgc. 

This recital agrees perfectly with those in the Koran, and other Arabian 
legends. 

PACE 93. an unrelenting fire preys on my heart. 

Hariri, to convey the most forcible idea of extreme anxiety, represents the 
heart as tormented by fierce burning coals. This form of speech, it is observed, 
is proverbial ; but do we not see whence the proverb arose ? Chappelow'n 
Six Assemblies, p. 106. 

PACE 93. in the abode of vengeance and despair. 
Thus, Dante's inscription over the gate of hell : 
" Per me si va nella citta dolente : 
Per me si va nell' eterno dolore": 
Per me si va tra la perduta gente. 
Giustizia mosse '1 mio alto fattore : 
Ffccmi la divina potestate, 
La somma sapienza, e '1 primo amore. 
Dinanzi a me non fur cose create, 
Sc non eterne, ed io eterno duro : 
Lasciate ogne speranza, voi che 'ntrate. 

Canto iii. 

" Through me you pass to Mourning's dark domain ; 
Through me to scenes where Grief must ever pine; 
Through me, to Misery's devoted train. 
Justice and power in my Great Founder join, 
And love and wisdom all his fabrics rear; 
Wisdom above control, and love divine ! 

[i] 3 



118* VATHEK. 

Before me Nature saw no works appear, 
Save works eternal : such was I ordained. 
Quit every hope, all ye who enter here." 
* * * * * 

[How much have the public to regret, after the specimen given, that Mr. 
Hayley did not complete the Inferno I] 

PAGE 95. Carathis on the back of an afrit. 

The expedition of the afrit in fetching Carathis is characteristic of this 
order of dives. We read in the Koran that another of the fraternity offered to 
bring the Queen of Saba's throne to Solomon before he could rise from his 
place, ch. xxvii. 

PAGE 97. glanced off in a rapid whirl that rendered her invisible. 

It was not ill conceived to punish Carathis by a rite, and one of the principal 
characteristics of that science in which she so much delighted, and which was 
the primary cause of Vathek's perdition and of her own. The circle, the em- 
blem of eternity, and the symbol of the sun, was held sacred in the most an- 
cient ceremonies of incantations ; and the whirling round deemed as a neces- 
sary operation in magical mysteries. Was not the name of the greatest en- 
chantress in fabulous antiquity. Circe, derived from Ki^xo;, a circle, on 
account of her magical revolutions, and of the circular appearance and motion 
of the sun, her father ? The fairies and elves used to arrange themselves in a 
ring on the grass ; and even the augur, in the liturgy of the Romans, whirled 
round to encompass the four cardinal points of the world. It is remarkable, 
that a derivative of the verb, rendered, to whirl in a magical manner (see 
page 73, which corresponds to the Hebrew "IHD, and is interpreted scin- 
dere, secure se in orbem, inde notio circinandi, mox gyrandi, et hinc a motu 
versatili, fascinavit, incantavit, signifies, in the Koran, the glimmering of 
twilight : a sense deducible from .the shapeless glimpses of objects when 
hurried round with the velocity here described, and very applicable to the 
sudden disappearance of Carathis, who, like the stone in a sling, by the pro- 
gressive and rapid increase of the circular motion, soon ceased to be per- 
ceptible. Nothing can impress a greater awe upon the mind than does this 
passage in the original. 

PAGE 97. they at once lost the most precious gift of heaven Hope. 

It is a soothing reflection to the bulk of mankind, that the commonness of 
any blessing is the true test of its value. Hence, Hope is justly styled " the 

most precious of the gifts of heaven," because, as Thales long since observed 

01; XX jtMjSsv, otwr-/] trctgitrriy it abides with those who are destitute of every 
other. Dante's inscription over the gate of hell was written in the same sense, 
and perhaps in allusion.to the saying of the Grecian sage. 

Strongly impressed with this idea, and in order to complete his description 
of the infernal dungeon, Milton says, 

hope never comes 

That comes to all. 

Paradise L. i. 66, 