Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
A winter's tale
A WINTER'S TALE. CHAP. I. " Art thou fome god, fome angel, or fome devil, « Thai irfft my blood cold, andmy hair to Rare ? " Speak to me what art thou ■?** SHAKESPIARE. As the Prince paffed with cautious fteps the way which led to his Selina's retreat, all appeared gloomy and difconfolate! The whittling wind found way from every adjoin¬ ing paffage, and ruftling along, feemed to fpend itfelf in pretiiftivc whifpers. The groan ofthe agitated forefts was borne through the caftle-courts on the violent gale that caufed it; and the heavy claps of thunder appeared to fliake even the caftle to its foundation. vol, ji. a He
Fie groped his way to the gallery's cud ; and, aided by the pale ftream of the light- nino\ foon difcovered the faflening he fought. Selina's fituation was, in the meantime, full as painful as his moft lively fears pictured it. On divefling herfelf of that drefs which the fcftivity ihe had mixf*d in required, fne had repaired to tlie little room adjoining her own, in which Ihe permitted t } -e vifits of the Prince. The rifing ftorm \\a: marked by faint iTafnei* of lightning: thefe, at lenfjh, were fucceeded by the long "-rum- bh:" of the diftant thunder. Her fpirits were eafily aLrmrd j but (he endeavoured to nnme away her apprehenfiors, and taking d<nvn Ux lute, ftrove to beguile the time witli its notes. For awhile ihe fiica-eded; but the in- civafin:; fury of the ftorm then overcame licr f -uxd tianquillity. Tiie thunder clouds, n w 'h-* ii%iy peodingover the caftle top, in dieauiul concuflion emitted fuch fliocks as caufed
caufed the tower her apartment was in to tremble beneath their force j while the far- ftretched lightning, in almoft every other inftant, made her eyes glimmer in its infiaious brightnefs. ****** Between the loud fhocks of thunder, her ear caught only the groans of the temped througii the open buildings c*" the caftle, or die confufed noifes brought by the heavy wind from the country round It*. Some¬ times flie fancied fne diftinguiihed a found like the crying of a human voice 5 then Tiftened more attentively, but heard nothing except the beating of the rain againft her window, or the hollow murmur of impending thunder. Wearied by long watching, her refolution entirely fled. She arofe, and walked with an hurried ftep acrofs her little room ; then entered her chamber, where every thing appeared ftill more difmai, fat down on die bed, quickly grew tired of her fituation, b 2 returned
returned to the anti-chamber, and refumed her melancholy walk, with her hands before her eyes, to fhield her,if pofiible, from force of the. terrors flic was furrounded by. Iler agitated mind imagined more dangers ihr.n reafon fenftioned tlic fear of. She thought of the Piince, and was in defpair left the tempefl fliould render his way to her hazardous. In thefe moments her depreffed fpirits partly removed the veil that inexperience. had iuflcred her judgment to be blinded by. She afked herfelf if it could be proper for lier to hold correfpondence with a friend, however tender and amiable, of another fex, in privacy and night ? Her confcience told her it v/as not j nnd then fhe bewailed the feverity of her lot, fince even to liften to the endearing confolation of difin terefted friendfliip was in her criminal. She allowed the feeming impropriety of her conduft, yet thouoht. if her mother's fpirii knew every feeling of her heart, it could fcarcely dif¬ approve
approve that tranfient intercourfe which was the fingle foftener of fo many troubles. The fears of difcovery now arofe to her imagi¬ nation, and, fhuddering as flie viewed them, fht again reproached herfelf with doing wrong in allowing clandeftine meetings ot however innocent a nature. Overcome by her various fenfations, fhe fell on a chair, where fhe had not long fit, when a foft fummons at the anti-chamber door brought her fome relief, in the ailura«ce of the Prince's fecure arrival. In eager hafte he ftepped into the room. t( Mv fweet Selina I" cried he, as he entered, <f gracious Heaven, what has been my anxiety on your account! My folicitude is unfpeak- able. Tell me, deareft of girls, are you fafe and well ?" " She was both," fhe faltered t though as flie fpoke, her faded cheek contradicted the aflertion, and, fick and pale, flie iank on the chair that fupported her, while tears, long b 3 repreffed,
repreffed, giuhed from her eyes. The Prince foothed and fupported her, till recolk-fting v/hat flic owed to his tendernefs, fhe looked up, and forcing to her lip a fmile, fuid—" I am a very foolifh girl! but I am quite reco¬ vered .now." Alarmed and anxious, the Prince upbraided himfelf with expofing her to fuch difquiet and dangers. He looked on her widi aching fondnefs •, and when he beheld her vain ftruggles to appear cheerful and at eafe, he cinicd the thouditleffntfs of his heart for fu Oc ring him to facrifice to felf-gratification that ferenity and fafety which, but for him, flie might enjoy. It then became Selina's tafk to confole, nnd this flie did in "the fweeteft way, by ■ifturing him flie was no longer fubjeft to apprehenfions, but, free from every fear in his proteftion, happy to havc the pleafure of his converfation, though fo many painful circumftances attended the poffefiion of it.
The Prince's delicacy of affeftion pre¬ vented his replying to fuch unconfcious expreflions of fondnefs. At firft he thought of taking a hafty kave, that Selina might retire to repofe, and avoid the horrors of the hour; but, afterward, believed her fituation would but be more diftreffing if flie were left with no friend's voice to calm her imagi¬ nation, and relieve her by difcourfe. Vvith her acquiefcence, therefore, he de- termincd to abide with her till the ftorm fubf'dcd. He drew his chair clofe to her's, On rhe back of her chair he leaned his arm, and talked to her of the happinefs the day had afforded him in her fociety. Selina ftrove to appear unconcerned, and anfwered, though frequently in trembling accents, to all he laid with nearly equal tendernefs. And now the furious wind howled through the copies of the Park, and round the un¬ protected tower Selina's chamber flood in. At intervals it iwept before ic vdiehi-in^ B 4 ikowcrs
fliowcrs of rain, 'that clattered againft the arched window of her room, and fell on tlie court-yards in torrents from oft' the caftle- top. Frightful burfts of thunder fucceed-d, attended by forked fh flies of lightning ! On a fudden the ftorm paufed, and only could be diftinguifhed a murmur, as of the fall of water, or collecting of winds. Selina now thought flie heard a il ranee noife in the paffage that wound through the caftle-wall. In a voice, low through terror, fhe commu¬ nicated her imagining to the Prince. He liftened, but notning founded, fave the,rattle of loofened window cafements, and tlie threatening hum of die contending elements. He perfuaded her that her raifed fancy gave birth to her alarm, and renewed his endeavours to render her confident of fecu¬ rity > but wiiile he fpoke, the fame noiie was repeated, and was too much like faint footfteps to be difregarded. He put his hand to his fword. He made one ftep toward tht found. Ali was huih.
He again ridiculed the apprehenfion, and refumed his tranquillity ; but, on looking to the hidden door, both he and Selina fuv, through that fifiure in it that the Prince had firft beheld Selina from, a human eye gazing intently on ihem. Bereft of life and fenfe, Selina fell back in her chair. The Prince ruflied to the fpot with his fword unfheathed ; he flung open the door, but the narrow paffage was vacant. The wind, from its farther end, brufhed by him as he flood, and brought with it the flight echo of quick footfteps. At the fame inftant fomewhat like a fhout founded as if from beneath the internal parts of the caftle. He turned his look back on Selina : fiie lay pale and extended on her feat. He ftood an inftant irrefolute : then fliut to the door of her room, and darted forward, prepared to facrifice to his vengeance the mifcreant who had ftolen on his privacy. b 5 Not
Not contented wirh the fuperfiuities afforded by the day's feftivities, four of the caftle domeftics agreed to fteal, after the family and vifiters had retired for the night, to a room adjoining the wine cellars ; where had been placed fome butts of excellent wine, and of which one of them had gained a key. Accordingly, when Lord Ilford fellowed the laft of his guefts, thefe honeft fellows groped their way, with the aid of a dark lanthorn, to what was caiied the vaulted apartment. With all the caution of con¬ fcious turpitude, they opened the heavy door. They placed on two fmall barrels a board to fupply che want of a table. On the fame Ibrt of fupporters thev fet themfelves round it. A fhuiGon was immediauly filled with c^ w * l the bePi wine -, and Robert, tlic under butler, who was mailer of the ceremonies, placed idivdelf at tlie head of the board. " Come,
« Come, my hearts," faid he, « now that we are met to be jolly, let us make a night of it. There is fuch a ft oop of wine as you will feldom mve a kifs to. Let me alone for finding out the beft ; you know I takes care of my Lord's wine." " Yes, you do/' anfwered Thomas, who ferved under the fteward, " and we will lend you a hand in your office ; as a proof of which, here goes !" « Well faid, my tight one," cried the mafter of the revel; " but ftop, let us luve a toaft. Name yourlafs, my man 1" u Black-eyed Mary !" < ( Withall my heart; but do not hang over your liquor: down with your toaft quickly, that we may have another." Thomas was not flow to obey this order ; the cann was pafled merrily round, and thefe faithful, v/orthy fellows warmed, with the help of their Lord's Canary and Rhenifh, apace in good fellow fliip. b 6 cc Now
t{ Now this/* cried Robert, " is what I call fnug. Here we are, fliut up, where the old-one himfelf could hardly find us, with a mort of liquor, and liberty to take as much as we like. Egad ! we will do juftice to my Lord's tafle ! We will prove our relifh agrees with his, hev Richard !" "That—that—we will," fluttered Richard, who had made very near approaches to the happy ftate of utter intoxication. " We will drink, Mafter Robert, as long as we can flick to our chairs, or can make our fills carry wine to our mouths. Oh whata pleafure it is to »et drunk ! When I am fober, I be always thinking if this fliould happen, and tlu:;: fliould happen -, but when I am nailed by the head a little, faith I cares for nothing : and as fer the laffes, the pretty little laffes, I never know how charming they are till I am half feas over. Oh your wine aru! ale are pure pivers of good humour. Jn my mind, a LrWe, now a Tud^c fhould alwavs be drunk, becaufe then he would always be merciful." " Well
tc Well faid, Dicky," cried every voice at once j li a very monftrous truth, upon my word ! What a pity it is the whole world is not of your way of thinking! The beadle and hangman might then go ftarve; and, rot them, fo much the better. I wonder why nature ever made fuch varmant -, or, if it did, I wonder they were made like other men." To the extirpation of all fuch unntcelTdrv knaves as were found troublefome in the execution of their office, the worthy party drank a very cordial bumper. Several toafts of equally pleafant tendency fucceeded, and they grew boifterous and noify in their mirth. The fnouts of their jollity, however, could not fhut from their hearing the roar of the tempeft. The violent wind (breed its way- through every aperture of the caftle ; and in thofe vaulted pailages that led to and from the room they regaled in, it paffed in a loud and melancholy howl. " Od's
« Od's me," faid one of the party, tf it is a fearful night , I am glad I am not out on a heath. "So am I," fiid another;" aye, many a poor devil's wandering now where there is only furze-bufi-.es and fern 1 Think of that, Mailer Stephen, think of that, ?sid be ■*- i*. happy !" " It is a horrible night, indeed !" cried a third ; "but we need not be afraid, I dare lay. There is fomething though very terrible in the cry of thai wind. I wonder where it can come from." « Come from," replied Robert, " why from the ftone pafiage chat leads to the north tower, to be fure; ic vrinds up tothe flew- ard's room, you know, at the tnd -, and there there are feveral fpike-holes for it to get through." ° tf So there are indeed 1" find the man, who began to feel fears ; ;< and I dare fey you areright; but, Lords have mercy upon me, if there fliould be any thing eife ! St. Paul keep us from ghofts l" " I Iold
" Hold your .tongue, pray !" ejaculated the trembling lip of his neighbour on the left hand; " do not frighten us by talking of fuch things as they ; do not let us men¬ tion them for the world. Dear, how (hock¬ ing it is to think about them ! Whata horrid one was that Utn by good man Browning' Oh, it was the ghoil of Tomkins that was hanged ! I have not a doubt of it. Brown¬ ing's wife fvvears flie fee rhe mark ofthe rope round his neck, i would rather fee any other apparition than a hanged man's. Oh how ghaftly it mud be ! Though 1 have heard dreadful tales of others too. Goody Jenkins there v/as a (hocking bufinefs ! Mercy ofme! fhe cut her throat, you koo-v, while ihe wns in the act of making a fli^t piukuno- - nnd fhe appeared to thac unhappy man, her huf¬ band, with her throat p;auing iike a mouth and her hands covered with doiudi !" The faces of the company were confidera¬ bly lengthened by thefe inftances of prefer-- natural vifitation. One itrove to huHi, but his
his attempt only produced a ghaftly grin ; another took a very deep draught of Rhenifti, which he thought the better way of defying any wandering fpright; and a third indulged his fear by the recital of more tales of the fame nature. « What Stephen tells you of," faid he, *< is verv true j and among us, ycu know, we have more whohave been vifited. There was Ralph Bonny—ftupid Ralph as we ufed tocail him—God forgive us 1—he that is dead and sone—why, Sir, he was coming one night (it was of a Wednefday, which I have been told is a grand day among the demons and fuch iike) he was coming from the copfe on the hill, whiffling along, poor foul ' to cheer him, when out from among the trees—it v. as growing darkifh, I muft tell you, and every body had left work but Ralph—out from among the trees popped a oheft, with a log of wood upon liis fhoulders inftead of a head ! Ralph could not fpeak a wordi lie trembled every limb of him. Y\ hat
Wliat a bleffing would have been the Pater- nofter fpoke backwards! The ghoft faid neither good nor bad •* it ftalked, Ralph faid (I have often heard him repeat it) along, with its monftrous wooden head moving backward and forward till it got to the thickeft part of the grove. It then looked round, made a ftrange noiie, not very much unlike a Chriftian fneeze, and vanifhed. Whether Ralph got home on his head or his heels, is not known to this day!—-I do not wonder at his.not knowing himfelf, poor fellow ! The fright fixed him : it nailed him : he never looked up after; and, per¬ haps, at this very hour he pradttfes as a «hoft himfelf!" ° " Nothing more likely," cried one. « Heaven keep me from Ralph !" faltered a fecond. " If I muft tell you my mind," faid Thomas, « r havCj for fome £ . .^ he walks."
Tht company groaned.
<* No
" N T o longer than two nig - "^o," con¬ tinued he, "1 was coming, .■; - ftrapping pace (it being uncom von da ; \ • acroh the railed gardens, when, in thai -.'..'.f.de-i fhed that poor Ralphy lent .1 handto ^uiild, knock went fomething, for ^11 the urld like a hammer againft a board. Jul: ... -n it ftruck me that Ralph, during his fife, h : been feen hankering about that fpot very ■'■: n. lf you will believe me, my knees knocked fo I could fcarcely keep from Ke ground! Thump went the noife again, an ! into my mouth feemed to go my heart! On aib fours I crept away as faft I could, vowing never to be there again at night j but, as ill fortune would have it, yeflerday-even Steward lays to me, c Tommy, do you go down to blue- fhed, and get me two keys that 1 left there.' \\ nat was 1 to do ? I doubted for fome rime; but, at laft, I managed the matter well, for I perfuaded one of the chambermaids to go along with me !" si And
tc And pray, friend Thomas," faid Robert, " had nbt you then caufe to be afraid of fome other tempter than the fpirit r" " Do not be profane," cried Thomas; "I ftiall die with fright if you are. When we are in fome place where it is daylight, and where we do not hear thefe ftrange noifes, I will joke about the maids with you wich <rii my heart; but do not let a word of that fort efcape your lips now." On one fide ofthe vaulted room, in vvhich thefe honeft lads met, there ftood an arched door;—it was about the height of a well- proportioned man •* it was made of oak, and lined with plites of iron. There was no vifible key-hole to it; nor, indeed, did one feem neceffary, for no apparent ufe was made of the door-way. On this door Thomas chanced to caft his eye, <f Blefs us!" faid he, " where does that lead to ? It is not where we came in at, is it r" ' "No,"
< f No," replied Robert, " thatis— do not be alarmed, for here are four of us together— that is the haunted door V t€ The hauited door /" echoed every tongue, in a faint accent. " Oh, the feints have mercy upon us !" ft Nay, nay," cried Robert, ff do not let us give way to fear. Do not look fo, Stephen, or I fliall drop from my feat! You look as if ycu faw fomewhat." « Oh Robert, Robert," feid Stephen, ff why did you bring us to this horrid piace ? Fleaven fend we may get out of it in fafety ! Perhaps we do wrong in darinoi to look on the door the very worthy gentlefolks make ufe of, I have heard of a poor wretch who pried into a haunted chamber, and had his head turned round for his pains; fo that he walked one way, and looked another !" Here every man drew his breath with difficulty, and fhook his head on his fhoulders, as if to affure himfelf that it ftood in the right way. " Pooh,
-Mt.
cc P*.)"!i, p )■>', ;" r.rirmd Robert, "do not let u> tiu.ik of any thi:m of tlie iort of
v e uo not want co rroubie the ['hoi 1 :, if fne does nrt want to tn.uole us. We only alfemblc here juft to drisk our Loral's wine in a k.nnh ':» manner! Come, my boys, I will fia^ you a meiry font';
that, and a frefh draught of lie,nor. will mak us foig.t all the ghofts in Chriilcndom."
e
A f
iircer a preparatory wet, he fang ;
Wo-: .! w . i.L^r u siie? iv ^u;
- i * i » l .;.,.. * .id' tv
as liii-j /'>vri ^u i *r«is nvu: ;
^ j
Tu iho wo. i I *.h*l ilcjh K;^ p^iu 1
l J ^- : ddii;, ^;ayi!v;j ^^a J ;hcF^h^J j v.x'a hiin wuh a iouie dciifc.
StOLc
Sfone wns he to maids, \\ hod dimples Si'cmM to fay j " Oh Friiir, luve !'* Stoiie to \vint~—content with hm;Jt^, *< Water, peace, and hopes ahuvt/' ho ! it happenM thar ;l:c Prior, On the twenty-firfl of M'iv, To *hu eel I of our cvood I ( "n;.r At trndniidit (Wd chiancc to (Iriy, Thu hour wa-^ (till*—no murmur bre.iklnc On tiic warm, luxuriant ni j ht. Said the Prior-j u Good fou! ! he's v,a-kir.^; «—-Alwavs watchful!—There's a li'-h.t/* Throo'h a crevice did the Prior Sto-oj") to eye the wafchhd n.i.n j Thr.^:i;h a ciwicc was the Friar Stvii—Oh lack !— -with filter Ann*. \ On tho tabic flood a chalice Briannin^ fud or' richcli: *\ Inc. Wiiich tin Ffiar ilcnrd to reiiih, Siting uftj " ' I'w-jis woiuuouk fiiie !" On 5
On his kiv.e the blooming fair one Sa', wiih many a blnlhintr iuiiJe: AnJ oft \\u Fiiar kif^M ruaarone, WhirjiYingtenJidi lovd the while. » Great St. F.tcr !" faid the Prior, " What a hoi rid fecue i^ heiv I «•? G-jd-a-mei-cy/ 1 thought the Prior, " Would to Heaven I were there ! n * Saul the Sirter to her lover, As Ik fl.;fc a warmer kiis, " PmiIkc* now, ihy fait give over ' it «__LL.ive my heart to Heaven's bias P (t Nonfenlo, nonfenfe! What, forget vou* ** Ail \ny h ,-uoty, ad my power ? " S : n a.vay ■—I well can let you, " And forgive you :u an houi !*' I i( So tlvis ---- **«- When Robert had proceeded fo far, iTudeuJcad irop ; f<y% cither in fancy reality, he heard more nodes than thoie
bad weather. Mis alarm was inliantly com¬ municated to his companions, who grazed fiift on hiin, arid thcu in the fame direction that lie did, with Iwiu checks and eyes of terror. One, at Icjujrth, trained ftrength to afk v/hr.t was the matter ? Every perion immediately pv-p 'fed die lame queftion, fo that each, in h's turn., had to profcfs entire ignorance ; for Robert, whofe alarm was now diillpated, liad wit enough to avoid men¬ tioning what he hoped had exifted only in his imagination. He refumed not, however, his fong.—The haunted door ilill engaged the attention of his companions. " Pray,'' faid one of them, if what made that door be called haunted ?" " Ave, tio tell us, Robert/' cried the reft, w drawing their teats nearer to his. tf Why, there is a ftrange tale told of it," laid he.—" None of you remember any thing about it, I dare fay, do you ?'' " Nor
* : Not a word," replied they. <( Oh yes, it was before you were taken into the caftle, I know," continued he.-- c - Why, where thac door leads to nobody can tell. 1 f you obferve, there is no key¬ hole to it ; yet no man, it is faid, can get it open, either by force or charm. This room always ufed to be kept locked. Indeed, I was furprifed when my Lord fuffered wine cafks to be placed here ; buc I fuppofe it was becaufe there is no room fo handy, and he little thought I had a key of it. Many years ago, there was, it is reported, a won¬ derful ladder behind that door, by the help of which the former Baron's grandfather ufed to get to a lady whom he confined there in a final!, fquare, ftone room • though he loved her dearly notwithftanding. Now, one night, as he was going to vifit this ftrange lady, it is laid he found her at the foot of the ladder with a handfome young Knight! You underftand me ? So lie makes no moie to do, but, drawing a mpnftrotifi long fword, he whips me the lady tiirough vol. ii. c the
the body ! Down the falls, as de^d as a door¬ nail. The lover cfcapes, but the poor lady, od'sbobs—I wifli 1 had lived in her time— fhe groaned a little, and died on the fpot. Now the Baron grew melancholy, moped about for ibmc time, and then murdered Iiimfelf i and he, Stephen, it is who haunts die jjallery-chamber j his armour it is that I acob, who is dead and gone, heard fail down fo long ago 1—But the lady, Thomas, ill >> tne laely -----~ Here he bent forward, and talked low and earnefily. cc She remains, it is faid, on the place flic was treated fo barbaroufly in. Wrapped in a winding-fheet, fhe (lands behind that there verv door! and he who is hardy enough ** to open it, will have her ftalk out upon hnn. A loud groan of horror broke from the aftoniihed drunkards.—" Behind that door!" thtv *i
they cried, fixing their ftarting eyes on it as they fpoke : cc Oh Lord ! the ghoft in a wind- in ^-flieet behind that door!" They paufed a minute in horror; and while all was ftill, a heavy foot-fall was heard behind the very place they were gazing on. Down from the hand of Robert, wlio was in the aft of lifting it to his mouth, dropped a mii" full of wine. The fice of Thorn:'* was extended to fome inches beyond ics natural length j Stephen's teeth chattered with fo much violence, that when he ftrove to fpeak, he bit a piece off from the end of his tongue ; while the other ejaculated to himfelf, {< Aflift me now, holy Paul, or I am loft for ev er! Dear St. Paul! preferve me but this time, and never more vvili I vifit Mafter Simkin's wife when Mafler Simkin is obliged to be from home. I will fay no more to her, St. Paul, than you would yourfelf, if you will but keep me from the horrible lady in the winding-flieet." c 2 j Ie
He had time for no more; the heavy footfiep approached. Hie drunkards ceafed to break the fiillnefs of their apartment even by breathing. Their finjrie light threw but a few feint rays on the darknefs of night. On a fudden the haunted door flowly opened, md there appeared the figure of a man, nartly in armour. After one unanimous groan, the aftoniihed party fat fixed on their feats, deprived of power to fpeak, and almoft of power to fee. Tlie ft range abearance, the moment after its becoming vifible, glided back, fliuttins; hafl ily the door. All again was ftill, except the confined growling of the ftorm. The door remained clofe ; and, by degrees, the fenfes of Robert and his honeft companions, in fome meafure, returned. Tiie firft uie they made of whaj. underftanding they pof¬ feffed, was creeping each clofe tothe odicr in infinite lovingncft. An hideous ejacula¬ tion then broke from the lip of one, and a call
call on his favourite faint from that of another. ff Let us," ftammered Robert, when he attained power of utterance, " let us leave the room while we have lifel If we*can get to any place inhabited by the family before the ghoft overtakes us, we fliall be fafe j bnt if he gets at us in this dark hole, finners that we are, the Lord have mercy upon us! This wiih he had no need to repeat: the - only contention was which fliould efcape firft. He who was unlucky enough to be laft in the room, followed his companions with fuch velocity, that he (tumbled over the threfliold, and in faving himfelf from falling, ftruck with his clenched fift his next man ib hearty u falutation, that the fellow roared with neculiar enersv, imagining, no X vJ.' ' O <*.J J doubt, fome ghaftly fpeftrc peeping over his fhoulder.. C 7 x 1US
This roar had fo inftantaneous an (fleet on thofe before, that they applied themfelves to their heels with all the agility in their power, never flopping till they reached a part of the csflle divided into principal chambers, where they bellowed for affiftance with all their might. Outcries of fo ftentorian a nature very fliortly brought a confiderable number of half-dreffed people co the fpot ; and among; the firfl of thefe arrived the Earl. <K In the name of all the faints," cried he, u what means this noife ?" " Oh my Lord/' cried Robert, " we have feen hirn, upon my foul we have.'* " Seen whom ?" returned the Earl, fternly. *» Ci Why the lady, my Lord," articulated Stephen, from whom terror had taken the effect of liquor, <{ No, no;" faid Robert, tf it was not the lady, it was the lady's lover 5 he that the old Baron killed fo long ago—die it was tliat we law i" "Oh
(( Oh dear me 1" faid every domeftic pre¬ fent. " You have feen a ghoft, then, I dare hy, have not you ?" ff Aye, that we have," cried Robert, f{ and as dreadful a one as ever I came near in my life !" ft Ridiculous!" cried the Earl; "your fenfes are bewildered, vou fot! Hence to ** bed !—But ftay, where did this ghoft appear to you, and how came you in fo perfeft attire ?" " Why, my Lord," faid Robert, " you fhall hear." " Yes, my Lord, you fliall hear," re¬ fponded Stephen. " Fleaven and your Lordfliip forgive us!" refumed Robert] "but the truth is, we, that is, I and Stephen, and Thomas, and one unhappy man whom I do not fee, and who, too likely, is in the ghoft's power, refolved to meet at midnight to drink your Lord¬ ftiip's health in a cup of your Lordfhip's wine." c 4 « You
" You did," faid Lord Ilford, » faithlefs fcoundrels ! but proceed———" u Of all other places in this monftrous caftle, to be fure we fixed on the vaulted apartment." <f The vaulted apartment," cried Lord Ilford j " villain, how got you there ?" " Oh I will tell your Lordfliip all," cried tht terrified butler, " if you will but hear and pardon me. Ycu muft know—to be fure the devil put it into my head—I muft needs try among all my keys for one to open the lock of that doer : I do not know what befide tht devil could lead me to it, without it was yonr Lordfhip's faying the wine fhould remain there untouched for feveral years. However, as ill-luck would have it, 1 found a key, and there, my Lord, we went. Little dreaming, poor fouls, of what was coming, we drank and talked how good your Lordfhip was, and never thought of it bring between twelve and one o'clock! Prefently ftamp comes a monftrous foot from behind the haunted door. Open goes the
the door, and the lady in the winding iheet looks out on .us, and fhukes her head, as much as to fey, < you arc fad clogs / then ibe rroes back, and fends out her lover. He was\i'.-ht feet high at leaft, and as bulky as the brown oak in the Paik ; he was armour from "head to foot ; in hia hand was an enormous fword ; on hia arm a lhield. The ihicki had two Death's he-d, drawn on it, and was wliat your armourers call a'l a lozenge* t£ It wasn«.H./' interrupted Steplien ; " it was fyiare, an! looked as bri^iit as if juft cleaned with emery.''" <> No, no, vou are miftaken," returned Rv.'herf, Ci it w:.s alia /toc'.-^v." « I know what I fiy, I warrant you/* critd Stephen, ' ( and 1 was nearer to the ghoft- than you.''* « Mv Lor:*," fiid Robert, "rhe lady's ** lover, with the fliield oil a lozenge -------" " Yes, my L'.r-./ fu • --cpnui, ff the. o-hofl witli rhe fe-u.arc lhield.'* t; Peace, dviiaid^!" cried the Earl j Ci Ste¬ phen, be iiic n I:!" c x c< Silence/'
" Silence," cried every voice at the fame . time, " filence !'* When the general tumuk fubfided, Robert continued to tell that the fpectrc, ftepping to the middle of the room, cried with a loud voice— <{ Away, you mifcreants, or I will crumble you to duft ! Away, you one- coated good-for-nothings, or I will fpit you on my falchion!" and then, widi an horrible howl, returned to the ladv he guarded. ** O The Earl on moft parts of this tale looked with utter difdain j but there were others that he imagined not deferving of fimilar contempt. He ordered the under buder from his fight, never to re-enter it; then difmified all the domeftics but two, and with them he* repaired ro the vaulted wine- room. He found the door, termed by the fervants hnunred, perfectly fecure. Me iocked the principal door of the room, taking its key into his poffeffion ; and, com¬ manding his attendants to kave him, retired, ^ * l **, ■ K
with uneafinefs on his brow, to his own chamber.------ On the paffmg breath of wind, the Prince heard faint footfteps. He ruflied' impctu- oufly after the found, but foon loft it in the Ion? paffage he trod in. At length, he fan- cied it a^ain brought on the guft that mur- mured along the vaulted way. He paufeil to liften, but heard only the cheerlefs groan of the diftant tempefl. He wandered where he had imagined the footfteps firft founded, but all was dark and ftill. On a fudden, a noife, like the fhutting of a heavy door, caught his ear, and at the fame moment the buz of many voices. To thefe founds he haftened, but came to no door, and met not the enemy he fought. His heart was torn by indignation and anxiety; he con¬ fidered that on the event of his fearch de¬ pended, not only his own happinefs in a ■preat decree, but entirely that of Selina. With his fword before him he ranged through tlie various windings of the fecret paffage ; e 6 and,
and, after exploring what he fancied all its receffes, he was conftrained to abandon lr-pes of fecuring the myfterious obferver of his intercourfe w'uh Selina, and to return to the wretched girl whom he had ouitted in *j.j A a ftate fo did rc fling. On regaining the. chamber, he feund Selina ftill breathlefs, and extended on her feat. He flew to her, and caught her to his bofom. 1 n dcfpaii ing fondnefs he hung over tier drno-fn;/ form. He called on her name ; he bade her live ior happinefs and him ; he loofened the cove; in a; of her iuck, and by dcOTcia Ihe reii-mc:; to life ana Jbrrow. As \n:i- recollection dawi^d, the terror ar.d con- fin-on fi:c had cxperk-uced, occurred mdii- tind.iy to i-.fr weakene.'i muid. Wlien fix b:camc enrirelv feufihlc of al) that lud hap- pened, Ihe feiik hack in k.rfeat, and caft \\':r eyes to flutven in Ipeechiefs agony. who coidd not Wtep, but her heart feetntd ovrth'.rerd 'Airii '^riefarvd tea.'a.— { * Ol; my <Jod!"-fiV ar h ngth iaiur.d, " fer whac mile ties
miferies am I born ? But I myfelf am the caufe of theni, wretched that I am ! f ly, my Lord, fiy from the contagion of my forrows !—vou may be yet undillinmiilhed ; Let me fuffer alone ; let me know you are happy, and I can look on my fit without many fkd is." " Angelic girl!" cried the Prince, "and think you, my Selina, that I could abandun you to fuffering? No, taus fondly to my heart will I hold you in fpite of. worlds! The power of thoufands fhall not dare to give you a fingle pjng ! Thrice happy fhould 1 have been to continue in unfufpefted friendihip with you j but fince that is denied mc, I will boaft my aifeftion in the face of my fiuher's kingdom. If it dare to dif- approve my choice, kt it fhudder at my vengeance ! Should even that fail, we ftill may hnd feme flicker in the worid, where love and happinefs refide, unenvied. Thi¬ ther, my Selina, would we go, and learn to defpife rhat glittering pre-eminence of rank, that needs not fer its balls pre-eminence of merit.
merit. My fond love fliould learn you to foro-et what you had fuffered for my fake j and your virtue and your beauties fhould learn me to foiget the crown I had forfeited for your's." The anguifh of Selina's bofom was, for a time, allayed by the profe (Tion of fuch gene¬ rous tendernefs; but all her fears then recurred, and fhe fank again into tears and defpondency. The agitation of the Prince, on beholding her in fuch an agony of grief and terror, broke through every bound of prudence. He vented curfes on the head of the wretch who had occafioned her diftrefs ; then execrated himfelf as the origi¬ nal caufe of it; and then forgot all but her immediate forrow, and falling at her feet, preffed her hands to his lips, and befought her to recolleft that, beneath the guard of his fondnefs, (lie muft be fife from every harm, and fecure from all perfecution.
The warmth of affeftion he now difplayed rendered him dearer to the aching heart of Selina than he had been before. Amid all her terrors, ftie dwelt particularly on the evils the difcovery of their ill-fated attach¬ ment would bring on him. In the firft moments of fear, fhe doubted not Lord Ilford was the difturber of their interview; and that the confequence of his difcovery would be his immediately informing the Kino- of the Prince's imprudent affeftion. What mortifications that would afford the Prince, flie could form no idea of j but her alarmed imagination prefaged their being of the moft calamitous nature. Meantime the Prince thought but ofher, and the forrows he vvas likely to brino- on her. His racked heart drew all thofe ibr- rows in the darkeft hues. He alfo fup¬ pofed the interloper to be Lord Ilford, or at leaft fome pei fon neaily attached to him. That accident Ihould \t.id hhn, be he whom he might, to look into Selina's anti-chamber a room
a room that it was moft probable w-iuld at that time be untenanted and in darknefs, he could fcarcely believe ; and if not by acci- dent, in what way could fufpicion have been engendered ? I le thought of Lord Defmond,; he had never ceafed to imagine that young Nobleman entertaining a paflion for Selina, This fuppofition was heightened by the appearance of the miniature pifture, which the Prince's jealoufy perfuaded him was that of Selina. He recollefted the door he had heard move in the pifture gallery on the nicrht before, and felt inclined to conclude that Lord Defmond had watched his aftions, and traced him to Selina's room. Indigna¬ tion prompted him, while he retained that belief, to iacritice, on the return of light, his rival to tlie injury Selina had fuftained ; then he thought on the greater probability of Earl liford himfelf, who, he now fancied, ap¬ peared to have fufpefted his attachment in confining Selina to her room on his arrival, having been led by fome unfortunate inci- dent to apprehend his nightly vifits; and, in
in confequence, having, either in his own perfon, or that of a confidante, ftole to the confirmation of his conjecture. Should any circumftanee prove that to be the cafe, he refolved on claiming an interview with him, declaring the purity of his intentions, and commanding fecrecy as he valued the hopes of his houfe. But, in either of thefe circumftances, how painful a wound had the peace of Selina received ! How difficult, fliould fecrecy be unattainable, would it be to convince the world that her innocence was ftill unble- mifhed ! New troubles occurred to his difturbed mind in each moment of refieftion, and too late he perceived the fad imprudence of thofe nocturnal meetings, that even ftiil he wanted refolution to deny himfelf. The neceflity there exifted for his imme¬ diately leaving Selina, he could but acknow¬ ledge ; though, as he looked on her weeping face, he knew not how to tear himfelf from her—r
her—knew not how to leave her to waking folitude, and unheard, unparticipated grief. As he whifpered his parting words of con¬ folation, and kiffed her hand, wet with tears, it feemed as if he were ddin£ thefe for the laft time, as if he quitted her never to fee her more ! Selina hung on him as fhe ftiflcd the convulfed rifing of her forrow, and ftrove in vain to bid him adieu. The Prince endeavoured to hide what he felt, that Selina's diftrefs might not entirely overcome her. He repeated every affurance ot his fond protection; and, after obtaining her confent to his making enquiries, at leaft, after her on the next night, he forced himfelf from her, leaving her to pafs the long hours in tears of agony and heart-rending pre¬ fentiments. He bent his difordered ftep back to his own chamber. As lie trod along the fecret paffage, he liftened frequently for a repetition of thofe founds that had produced him fo much
much pain ; but heard only the hollow echo of his own footftep, dying at a diftance in the arched cavity, Unoppofed, he reached that door which opened to the gallery. As he clofed ic after him, a fudden ftreak of lio-ht ftole from the neareft window : it dif- played to him the features of the Countefs. He fhrank from the glance that her eyes appeared to caft on him, for it feemed a glance of reproach : it called him the de¬ ftroyer of her child's peace j it upbraided him as cruel and unjuft, and bade him retire within himfelf, and blufli. He haftened from the fpot, and threw himfelf on his bed. His foul was torn by a thoufand anxieties on Selina's account; his brain was agitated and confufed. Fatigued nature at length prevailed over the inquietude of his thoughts, and he fank to fleep j but even then his imagination wandered to fcenes of woe and pain. Frightful dreams haunted his pillow, and took all its power of refrefh- ment from repofe. Sometimes
Sometimes he was carried to delblate woods, where robbers and affaffins ranged in freedom, and where he beheld Selina the prey of tiieir brutality. Th?n he fancied himfelf placed, in the darknefs of night, in that burial-vault to v/hich he had ftrayed when he firft explored the windings of the fecret way. Lie was alone, and ail was hufh **> as death. On a fudden a loud groan founded from the adjoining chapel,' as if the building were parting in twain. It was followed by a pale ftream of light, that difclofed to him all the horrors of the vault he ftood in ! the coffins piled one above the other •* loathfome infefts, bred in putrefaction $ and feattered chaplefs fculls. While looking on thefe, with fhudderings and difguft, he perceived a cofEn-lid flowly lifting up. He ftarted in furprife and apprehenfion. A human body gradually became perceptible : it was pale in death, and wrapped in 'its burial-fhcet ; it turned toward the dubious light received from the chapel, and he few it to be the dwd mother of Selina. She defcended to his
* *jf his fide ; il;e motioned with her ftiflT hand, and he involuntarily followed whither flie Ud. Through long and fubterranean paflagcs he followed the apparition to a larp-e and antiquely-furniflicd bed-chamber: it led to the bed j it placed itfelf on one fide, and he flood on the other. The curtains fell back, and he perceived, lying } n the bed, locked in fofc {lumbers, Selina. Pier face was health, peace, innocence, and beauty. A vermilion biufii glowed on her cheek; a fweet fmile played on her lip : one hand fupported her harmlefs head, tlie other lay on her foftly- heaving bofom. The Prince looked with fondnefs and delight. The fpirit leaned over the fleeping girl, and feemed to fined angelic wiflies on her head. Then it extended one arm to the Prince, and pointed with the other to Selina. it looked on him vvith teariul indignation, as though to fay__ " And can you, cruel mortal ! can you facri¬ fice tliis fweet maid's guiielefs heart to little and
and unworthy gratification ? Leave, leave her to fleep in peace, in purity, inhappinels ! Teach her not the feelings unworthy of Heaven, but fuffer her to pals, unfunded, to the fainted fpiiic of her mother." He ftrove to fpeak, but reply was for¬ bidden, and on a fcddcn all vanifhed ftom his eyes. Anon, he found himfelf in one of the aiflcs of the lonely chapel. The moon¬ beams fhone round the pillars and along the aides, and ftrains of melody founded as if ftom beneath the chapel pavement. Two foldino- doors were at the end of the aide in which he walked. In an inftant theie flew open, and, brilliant in a blaze of hght, appeared again the fpirit of Selina's mother. Her face was altered and fevere ; in her eyes were grief to madnefs, and refentment to abhorreiTcc. He followed her as before, but ihe led not to the fame place. Where the Prince was taken to, feemed an immenfe and
and uninhabited old caftle. He faw many courts, and now and then heard moanin^ noifes; but he met no cheering firm of population. At length he entered a range of fpacious rooms, furniflied in the utmoft magnificence of the -Md tafte, but gloomy and time-worn. In one of thefe the fpeftre paufed, and fixed its eyes y irh a wildnefs of expreffion on the Prince, that he was unable to (land before. On looking round, he perceived, in one corner of the room, a fmall bed, wretched tliough rich. To it he advanced. The apparition ftood as in the former room. The curtains flowly were withdrawn, and his trembling eyeballs be¬ held, extended, Selina, frill as afleep, but no longer as befoie. Her face was haggard and pale ; htr lips white, and flightly con¬ vulfed as flie flept. On her bofo.n lay a dead child, round whofe clofed eyes 'tlie greennefs of corruption was advancing quickly. The Prince's blood curdled in hor- roii he would have fnatched from Selina her horrible burthen, but his limbs were congealed
congealed and motionlefs. He endeavoured to fpeak, but his tongue cleaved to his mouth, and he could not give utterance to a word. While he gazed in horror and anguifh, the fpeclr# fuddenly leaned over the narrow bed, till ins face was clofe to die Piince's. Its vifionary eyes liad a glare in them that could not be borne ; it lifted its arms, and then the Prince flarted violently, and awoke. It v/as forne minutes before he collected Iiimfelf. Cold drops trickled from his fore¬ head, and his heart beat violently againft his fide. He left his bed, and paced the room in a haft v ftep. The fury of the ftorm had now fubfided ; tranfient mills of wind, and far-diftant and faint breakings of thunder were its only re¬ mains; but the Prince's mind knew no foothing feafon of tranquillity. Diftreffed and bewildered, he waited impatiently the approach of morning i but, alas! waited it only as the confirmation of his worft conjedures!
CHAP IL « Ohulls» from the loosVing pavement rais'd tiieir head, " And vawiiinff graves diiclofo thcir fhronded dead/* *£ *^J ****** HILL, JL HE Prince rofe with a mind haraffed and perturbed. His fhort fleep had been rendered, by his fearful vifions, rather ex- haufting than refrefhing j and his refleftions were ill calculated to calm his imagination, P'or Selina he felt anxiety the moft torment¬ ing. From the ftate in which he had left her, he had every thing to dread. Her dif¬ ordered looks were impreffed firmly on his mind : in every inftant was prefent to him her livid cheek, funk eye, and whitened lip. Her look of grief, as flie caft up her vol. ir. d eyes
< v;;s i:i fdcnt ar;or.v, was continually aft inn ;::•• a reproach to his heart. He could hut compaie the cxpivftion of her features at r!iat inihinr, to tva.ir 'expreffion when., in f.ncy, he beheld her ftretched on a miferable hi\ ! , witli the corrupted bo:;v of an \nl\i\t c!;i;x\l to her hoiu;n^ though that ohjc^^ \-\\- vuid ef !^;:I-ty, it wns flill deeply en- 'MTw/n on li;:i iiniQinauoru I lis dreain If %* * ** f i ,-t ^< r .* v t , : L 1 t v) t ■ j ' 11 iy i 1» ' .* * *■. c. >*- « 1 I * iU u i cull i ■ U -; * v. v -J vv^hki^ i 'tc/; , L i, L i C ( t.' i\ •* , ■ » . f - . ♦ ^ ( / : I A - *. i : J i S i ^ i J I ^i i i U I i 11 V V L J l !/. m f .ul fhial.Vr. In nloomv r-'.;i. ' j • r ! anticipated the prftlble con-
! 1 Oi
i--\«:ei:
J .
f i
'.■.mer
Ci
of his heart, that led him to perfevere in iceklnp- the beauty it, too likely, would ruin in admiring. He looked to what fine was whom hia love endangered. She was poor andt defencelefs, an orphan, forfaken by almoft all ! a deferted maid, vvhofe only treafure was her innocence, whofe utmoft hope ob¬ fcurity and Heaven!—Ve:*, luck fihe v.v,\ ; and while his hearc hied in pity znd kn\^nti^ he turned in difguft from the pifturc of what he himfelf would be, fho;-!d he pro: : \.a:e his affeftion to her injury. In the command he fancied himfelf ro poffefs over his feelings, he however illii retained forne confidence j and thought he . could have been happy in enjoying Selina':; frLndlhip, and fecuring to \v:v thoie advan • ta^es tliat Fortune had hitherto denied lier : tiiat any accident fnouid thrcaien his fe> doing wiih interruption, difticifed him ; and tnat it fhould be of fuck a nature as th.xc of tive preceding nut! 1 1, rendered hi-did rets of w the moft poignant kind. Of ail hi- cu-pic- •> •**
hcnflons, thofe of Selina's terrors aft'edinG; her health w*ere the moft painful. He con¬ lidered how lono it orobablv would be ere V...J X. *t fie could fee or hear of her, and imagined it impoflible to exift through fo many hours ( f ignorance and fear. On mature refledion, he moll fervently hoped it miglit be the Pari who had furprifed him in Selina's cham¬ ber. In his hands her honour wouid be u.v.'ueflioned • in thofe of any other ocrfon, ic mii>ht be liable ro tiie bittereft miirecrc- fentauon. Bold in confcious. reditude, of the Pari he had nothing to fear. Of him, fhould appearanas juftify the belhf of his heir.? the ii'.ves \opvr, would he defire an interview, avow the purity of his wiihes, and cldm Ins afliftance toward carr) ing into execution thofe generous indentions he had f rn:etl refptdingthe future dilpolalof Selina. Should Lord Defmond [..-rove the un worchy fpy on his odious, and jealouly appear th.c * ■* i-imulative, he plea'ed himfelf with the rh.-iuoht of reveiii-i -,% on hh head tne pains uud inquietude Selina had been expofed to. , At
At the accuftomed hour he defcended to the breakfaft-room. Lord Ilford and his party were affembled there. After the ufual falutations, the Prince fixed his eyes fted- faftly on the face of th? Earl. No frown clouded his brow ; his f\ct feemed unruffled by thought; his manner tothe Prince;w.is precifely as cuftomary, nor more attentive, nor left. The Prince could fcarcely believe it poffible for hirn fo totally to difguife his feelings, did he imagine his gueft had feduced to difhonour the female protefted beneath his roof. He ftill, however, could not Think ic probable * that any per fon, except Lord Ilford, or his cmiffary,had ventured, througii the dangerous night, to obferve his motions, or thofe of Selina, and yet retained the. intention of demanding of him an audience, Lord Defmond condufted lumfelf coward the Prince with more than general attach¬ ment. Every word was refpeft and affeftion, and accompanied wich fmiles. The truth of this fuavity tlie Prince much doubted; but waited farther proof of duplicity than v 3 that
that of over!"!rained pollienefs, before he charged him with mean intrufion. lib it.jXUtv Via dLL^>iu*\* \ji Oi iniJ 5 lu^Tiii'* time, ir.crc; fed. He ibmc time:*; frneied l.cr ftretched, oak: and neodefted, on a bed of I'.j'-cnt -ir. j at others, he a.uticip.iu^J tnc uiicrets ti*-c future would bring to h:-r, fnouid the difcovcrer of his trudni^ht communication v/ith her ctrcubte iiis knowledge to herdif- r/h'antiigc. He faw her, in folitude, the viftim of calumny and forrow, and felt him¬ felf the caufe of every pang flie Mfertd, j .ed to a view of his conduft, he could noc avoid blaming hi mil If for weaknefs and in- confiftency. He perceived plainly, that to havc made Lr.dv Ilford the confidante of his */ admiration, woidd have been to aft with can¬ dour, and to avoid the poffibility of fuch painful circumftances as now threatened to deftroy what little peace Fate had left Selina to call her own. Even now vvas it pofiible, in fome meafure, to repair that impropriety ■* but there is a weaknefs infeparable from love,
love, when any immediate facrifice is required, that made him refrain to hazard the trifling intercourfe at prefent attainable with Sehna, by making her protector acquainted with the affeftion he felt for her, The day paffed, marked only by his anxious inquietude. No circumftanee occurred in any (hape elucidative of the night's event; and his eager wiihes beheld the hour rapidly* approach in which he could fly to blefs his hopes, or confl:*m his fears. The perfonal danger there a p. peared to exit in his ven¬ turing on the Secret paftage, he deemed undeferving of a fingle thought j but the poffibility there was of his agiin repeating his vifit giving tardier proof to the former obferver of his aftions, afforded him fome pain. His fufpenfe, however, would admit of n) delay j and, be the confequei.ee what it would, he determined on embracing the . firft inftant of retirement to fee again Selina, and fondly ftrive to leffen what ihe felt. d 4 . ^°
No fooner was the caftle buried in the ftillnefs of advanced night, than, with fteps cautious and flow, he croffed the gailerv, and entered the hidden paffage. He hell before him his fword, and J'ilened with fh-:cd attention to the leaft hint of noife. For a time nothing founded j but, as he defcended the ftairs near to Selina's room, he thought he heard a faint ruftling motion in the long paflagcjic v/as about fo enter. He paufed to affure himfelf. It was not repeated, and he believed that his fancy had deceived him. He trod firmly on, and arrived, fecure from interruption, on the fpot lie fought. Again he paufed j all was entirely quiet, and he gently tapped on the door of Selina's anti-chamber. V/ith a palpitating heart he awaited the anfwer to his fignal: but he awaited it in vain. He repeated the fummons , flightly throngh the vaulted path founded the echo *\
w
echo of each knock, and that mournful re- fponfc was all he received. In an under-voice he called on Selina's n,me He knocked on the door with more force, waited, then called again. Stul all is fallen and eomfortlefs. Through the \r- n, V no Ycr)v ; from within was not crevices lU'it no ..&•- > »»"»** the leaft found of exiftence. Wearied bv anxkny and folicitude, what c d nnefs a bvcT s breaft pofleffes, now entirely forfaok hin. Perhaps, he thought, ihe was iU—too ill to be able to anfwer him ! — Madnefs was in the idea. If it were not lo, die poiubly was removed by 1 ord Ilford's order, who, in the quality of guardian, placed her where Hie would be inacccfliblc to the Teeming danger o< his focitty. The generofity of his heart hefitated not to hope the Later conjecture neareft to truth ; but the lover rofe in his breaft, and he felt that, were it Io, he ftill fliould be moft miferable. He now, more iWmi before, curled the hour d 5 t '» at
that had interrupted his ftolen happinefs; and looked back to the minutes in which he couhl effeft his hazardous interviews with Selina, as a feafon of perfeft felicity. Hresthlefs in fufpenfe, he lonp; liftened at the door of her room; and often, with tremulous fondnefs, aruculated her name. In utter dejeftion he then prepared to re¬ turn, but ftill lingered about th:-: fpot her prefence was wont to blefs. It feemed, as if loj faking it, was fbrfaking every hope of liippinefs. lie thou.de: lie (houid never \.k \\o\d Selina more; Lis fears re^rciented i.i r removed by Lord ihoi\!, and piftured th;L Xobleman refufn:!.-; to difclofe to hi;n e J ihe place in whicli Ihc wns oncealed. His ;.:. y, al;li was not leffened by Ivs beincr unable I ■ d .■*;*, iii his heisrt, the propriety of fuch e'j::da^u i.i the Larl. Ve-:/ in*-?::: era:: rre f) tr-dy bitter as tliofe f ■" -.nf' uje)int>:,. si" it \,a:*. y.ct the inttntion < v l .- I iHlC',. t,».; U>,:ft»iU, Liu ;jl* ■ Ui y HI* 1 cLj i ']**>
widi
wirh Selina in her anti-chamber, but to confult with run* if it were not poffible, Ihould ihe difcovery of their communication produce no apparent confequence, for them to fnatch intervals of correfpondence, as on the preceding evening; but now every poffi¬ bility of meeting her again feemed levelled vvith the ground. In torcuring fufpenfe he full was to pafs long hours, ignorant even t of whether Selina lived toanfwer his afiec¬ tion. With mingled foliations of difap¬ pointment, apprehenfion, and fclf reproach, that mock dcfcripiiion, he at length bent his fle;>5 to his own apartment, where he p.vTed the m<--ht in bewildered conjecture and futile dv-termifiation. Tlie morning inmd him ilill fubject to thefe tormenting ider.s. Toward noon, weary of hitnfclf and of all aro-und him, lie itrayed, per.five and ai tc, into the caflle- o- : ;rdens. Tlie monfi-i::; iim fhed cheerful- nelb tiiroughout the iluie. Rcfrcihcd by hue fho v/e rs, from the Mowcr-Ved^ rofe a d 6 ilrcam
ftream of fragrance moft inviting ; each cay parterre expanded its beauties to the morn. Buried in refledion, the Prince wandered, imheedingly, along ihe winding patSis. He noted not the fimpie attractions that fur¬ rounded him ; or if he did, it was to think how fweet the fcene. would be were Selina hanging on his arm as he walked, and pointing to his notice its moft captivating features. At a fmall difiance w--:s a man employed in rtftoring to it? fiaiation an efpalier that the tempell had beaten to the ground. On approaching him, the Prince perceived it to be Ofborne. 'fhe old ma:i made a low reverence, and would have ftood afide till he had paffed • but the Prince defired him co continue his employment, and entered inco converiation vvith him :— tc So you fo;ne- tirnes find little duties to pay at Ilford Caftle, do you, O/borne ?" faid ihe Prince. i( Yes, my Lord/' replied h", i( the cauie b, as it were, a hon]e to me ; ir hn been r ••■
familiar to me from childhood, and I am never fo happy as when I am here ; for then I think of paft fcenes, and of companions in them that have lon£ fince been no more ! You fee that tree, my Lord—that with the forked branch pointing to the eaft ? It was planted by my late Lord's own hand ! I well remember the day ! My Lady too—fiie was with him.—'Henrietta,' laid he, c you and I, let us hope, fliall fee a happy family of our own encircling this little ftern, when its branches will fliield them from the noon-day fun P—My dear Lady fmiled, but methought theit was melancholy in her fniie. Poor dear Lady ! it may be, her heart foreboded ihe fnouid never live to the days he talked of. Very foon after, my ' Lord was driven from hij> home, and my Lady, alaj i broke her heart, and died." i{ My honeft Olborne !" faid the Prince, " I value you for the refpeft you bear your Lord's memory. You ihall not be a lofer by it, Olborne. 1 promife vou my patronage. and it ii a promife 1 never vet for^ )t." Gratitude,
Gratitude, tendernefs, and joy fwelled in the old man's heart wiiile he attempted to renly. ThePrincc,who knew how to venerate in others what his own bofom wns capable of feeling inftantly changed the fubjeft of dif- courfe, and remarked the peculiar beauty ot an honev-fucklc that entvvbed the item of a l.u-o-e tree on the oppofite fide of the path. « Y"s mv Lord/' fiiid Ofborne, "tint v: y indeed, the fulleft, iwceteft plant in the crude Garden ; it is fo great a favourite of
' 4 i'o Lady Scima:'' cried toa Pnnce, cc my .worth.y (»ld fr.end, have yo-:—havc you fo lately f^n die Lady Scliui ?" *« Yes, my Lord," anfwered Ofborne, " I kit lier prefence even now/' il A iui wai ihc wed /' <' Ind ifie ren dy
cc Indifferently fo, my Lord." €( And wdiere—tell me—where was fiie r" " She was in my Lady's parlour," faid Ofoorne, tc and my Lady was with lier." tc And are you fure fhe was well ? Did fne look well, Ofoorne ? ,J " Why, my Lord," anfwered tht old man, {f I have, to fay truth, fe^n her look better. I thought her cheeks were paler than they were wont to be. Her eyes too * ** looked heavy, and oftentimes Ike fighed, as though from the bottom of'her heart! —• Heavens blefs her ! ilie never wv.n-io a kind word for the old and iielpleia ; fiie fpoke to me in her fweet, fofi way, but her tone was more forrowful than ufinl, andthe I'm iie t\ii - fne. fpoke with, died away ere it had tat an inftant on her i o.<— f My Ladv,' iat'! j, < T fear you are not quite well ?'— ; I Lave only a flight head-ache, Olborne, 7 a;if.vered flie ; c it i.s frequent with me : 1 doubt nut it wiil foon wear ofi,'— { God ferbid it ihouid nut!'
faid I.~- c And God forbid V I faid, from my inmoft heart, may it pleafe ycur Highnefs/* u Ofborne !" find the Prince, wlien the old mm flopped. He paufed ere he proceeded, and confidered, lie reflefted on the impoffibility of his meeting again Selina on the fpot where they had been fo unexpectedly broken on. To refign com¬ munication with her, he felt himfelf unable. Ileaflved in what way a future correfpondence could be preferved, and fuv none ib defirable as that afforded by this old man, who was dearly attached to Selina's intereft, and to whofe advantage it would be, in every view, to pay perfeft obedience to his wiihes.— Prompted by the impetuofity of love, he hefitated not a minute before he renewed freaking. Had he taken farther time, he, probably, would have feen the imprudence of making any perfon privy to his attach¬ ment, and, perhaps, would have been fenfible to the raliinefii he was guilty of, and tlie thoufand dangers lie incuired, both to his own peace and that of Selina. Obedient
Obedient to his firft feelings, "Olborne," he repeated, " draw nearer, my worthy friend; your fidelity is fuch, I believe, as may be depended on." Ofborne bowed. « I do not doubt it. Where the daughter of that Lord who protefted your youth is concerned, 1 am well fure it may. Ofborne, for the Lady Selina I have friendfliip and efleem. Her converfauon is dear to me. I intend to take the guard of her future life into mv own hand. . Peculiar circumftances forbid my publicly fliewing what I feel for her. I would have fome faithful friend, through the medium of whom I might, when opportunity permitted, enjoy her fociety. 1 fee that fervitor in you. At thofe fesv times that I find it poffible, I fhall meet Lady Selina at your cottage, whofe clofe vicinitv to the caftle renders it for that pur- pofe moft defirable. I would not have the world acquainted with this friendihip of mine, fer
ior mifreprefentation and calumny are ever attached to what ic talks of. Speak, Ofborne, and affure me that I may place reliance on Vour honefty." t( Tour Ilighnefs knows," cried the ckl man, <* that 1 am the fbve of your will.— What your Highncfs commands, ic is my duty to obey. But Oh my Lord ! pardon an old man's boldnefs. The daughter of my kind, good, long-loft Earl!—the daughter over whom he, with his dvinar breath, had I watched his pillow, would havc bid me guard, and facrifice my life where her fervice called for it!—the fweeteft, beft, and faireft Lady that ever breathed life ! Oh, take pity to your heart, my dread Lord ! Render not tlie daughter of my honoured mafter miferable for ever!—or, if it muft be fo, fpare me the pain of being acceffary to it. Chufe out fome other fervant. There are many who will value more your High- nef»*s approvance than that of their own confcience.' , « Rife,
" Rife, Ofborne," faid the Prince; "I underftand you not." " Pardon, I befeech your Highnefs/' returned Ofborne, " the feelings ot an old man** heart. If you ftrike me to dea:h for my hardinefs, I have but to fuller, for you are a Prince/* u It is true," faid he, " I am a Prince, and as fuch will never act unworthily. Rife, honeft old man, nor believe that when your cottage door opens to receive your Lord's daughter accompanied by me, it opens to afford flielter to any other than the pro¬ testor of her honour." In trembling joy, Ofborne fpoke his thanks for his Prince's condeicenfion and affurances, The Prince fealed lus forgivenefs of what the old man's honefty had urged, with an earneft of future -favours j and defired him to be, fliould no forbidding cir¬ cumftanee intervene, in the caftle-g.'.rd^n at the fame hour on the following day. AVith
With a heart much lightened he returned to the caftle, where he had not long been when he was furprifed with the appearance of a Nobleman from Court. On being in¬ troduced, Lord Chandos prefented letters from the King. The Prince haftily broke them open, and read a requeft Br his return within three days, With difficulty he con¬ cealed the emotion this requeft created. At no moment could it have given him greater pain. To leave Selina, even in tranquillity and happi ne ft, wouid have been a painful taflc; but to leave her the prey of forrow and danger, tore his heart to agony infupportable. He fliortly returned to his own chamber, to hide the perturbation of his mind, and ar¬ range his thoughts refpeding Selina, and his fituation with regard to her. In the reftleffnefs of folitary folicitude he foon left his room, and ei tered the pidure gallery. With folded amis and a melancholy heart, he paced its length in an unequal itep. He
He looked to tht fliort delights he had known with Selina, to the long pain thofe tranfient pleafures would, too likely, occafion her ; and reproached himfelf with cruelty in gratifying the di ftates of his own affeftion, in preference to that forbearance that would havc effefted the defigns of efteem without endangering Selina's prefent peace. After what had already taken place, he, however, could not perfuade himfelf to re- linquiih entirely a farther profecution of his connexion. For the prefent, a farewel inter¬ view, fid in every light, was all that con¬ nexion could produce. To this interview he, however, looked as to a foothing folace, and to effeft it fecurely, direfted his thoughts. Denied the little privilege of a meetino- in the caftle, Ofborne's cotcage afforded an opportunity of correfpondence the moft defirable. On the good old man's fidelity, reliance, he was alfured, might be placed. Could he but make Selina acquainted with the arrangement, he doubted not Ihe would find
find it very poffible to meet him there at an appointed hour. Secure from interruption, he might, fo fituated, repeat the ncver- endimr efteem of his Iieart, liften to that fweet voice, whofe found wa:;, in fancy, ever prefent to his mind, and ftrive to foften the forrows of a fepai ation in circumftances fo affiftive. Loft in meditation, he perceived not that he had paffed through a door on one fide of the gallery, by accident left open, till he had made fome fteps on a paffige, not wide, but Ibhted by many pointed windows. Ima¬ gining it led to another ftaircafe terminating inthe gnat hall, he proceeded. The paf- fa<?c was long, and, contrary to his expefta- tion, wound round the northern iu'e ol tnc caille. He purfued ids way, and prefently entered a fuite of rooms, in waich he had never been before. 'I'he furniture, though not ib rich as that of the other parts of the caille, was elegant, a.nd tho rooms fpacious, theirm it apparently was l'-g fince they nad
had been ufed. On the walls were fome few family paintings, but they wore the face of negleft. The figures were covered with duft, and feemed as if no eye deemed them worth a perufal. After paffing through feveral rooms, tiie Prince would have returned - t but %ddenly a foft fwell of mufic caught his ear. |P|ttBipted by curiofity, he walked toward the fpot from which it founded ; it led him through feveral fmaller apartments. At length he arrived in the room adjoining that from whence it iffued. Between the two rooms was a door, and that door ftood half open. The Prince paufed and lifhned • the ftrain was fweet and plaintive ; the note was prefently varied, and a foft, low voice chanted— ' Sr.h UKw thu breeze o'er Mary's cot, c And gently bjist each hawthorn fpny ; ' V> I.i !». thus, fhe j^-nfive mourn**.! her lot, * AnJ i'.ui r of William fa' u\v.i..
W.Yj
* Willi mingled thoughts il\Q viewM her child-— c A mother's love, a mother's fear; * And now, in hop?, fo fweet! flieljfmiPd, * And now, deipairing, dropped a tear! The fongftrefs paufed. She feemed to move from her fituation, and as flie moved, to figh deeply. The Prince liftened in breath 14is..fufpenfe* He had not waited long when ilie voice refumed :— * How fair the tender lily grows * In native vale, in nntive bed ! * St rene it buds, ferene it blows, « _—- Then breathes the fweets itfelf hath (lied I < But if iome hand, unkind, bereaves < It of the fiKltt-r where it lies j < Tiie trembling lily folds its leaves, < Veils ail its charms, aud fadly dies ! < So I, alas ! a low-bom maid, - Once grew in virtue, hope, and peace ; « So, fmiling in niy nntive (hade, « I faw each morn my joys increafe. « But, 5
* But, ah ! the hour apace drew nigh j < The fpoiler came, my virtues ilew ; * S^y s then, IhaU/bemoan and die ? « ^— Say, William, for the fpoiler's you ! * In pUy o'er me when I*m gone, « When vi'Iets grow my grave around, * In pity of an heart your own, * With tears bedeck my fun'ral mound ! « And fl>ield my child from ev'ry wrong, « From ev'ry hand, in Iome lone glade j < That flie may ne'er repeat this fong, « Nor, like her mother, bloom to fade !' It was—he could not be miftaken—it was the voice of Selina ! He had caution fuffi¬ cient to avoid rufliing inftantly into the apartment. With trembling anxiety he liftened, if, by unbroken filence, he might conclude flie was alone. A minute, to his fancy the length of an hour, paffed, and all was ftill. The fongftrefs then arofe, and walked from her feat. The Prince heard the lieht fall of her feet -, flie was leaving the vol, ii. £ toon*!
room ! A few minutes, and fhe would be loft to his fight! Carelefs of confequence, he darted for¬ ward j and, in the lapfe ofa moment, was at the feet of Selina, who fank on a chair, pale in furprife and alarm. fC I have ftartled you, dear Selina," cried • the Prince; " compofe yourfelf, fweeteft girl! I fancied you going, or I would have been lefs precipitate. You are'faint and pale! Recover yourfelf, Selina." Selina's beating heart for a time denied reply.—"How, my dear Lord," flie at length faltered, " for Heaven's fake, how found you me here ? Does Lord Ilford ?— But he does not, cannot allow me to fee you ?" " He knows not, indeed, of our meeting," fad the Prince ; " by chance I wandered into thefe apartments. I heard your angel voice j and, to eafe my fears for your health, and blefs
blefs myfelf by beholding you again, I ven¬ tured to intrude thus boldly on your retire¬ ment/' " Oh my Lord !" cried Selina, whofe collefted mind was now alive to the hazards of their fituation, " let me intreat you ftay not here another inftant. Lady Ilford's apartment is clofely contiguous to this 1—Even now, fhe may be but a few paces diftant from us. Oh, I fliall die with terror if you do not leave me ! c{ Let her come," faid the Prince. <{ From every evil confequence of fuch a difcovery I will fhield you -, and for myfelf, I am indifferent to it.—But tell me, Selina, how is your health ? You were not in your own room laft night! I have known a thoufand fears on your account. Your terrors on the night before I dreaded had overcome you. Tell me, how has all been with you ? Why were you not in your room laft night ?" cc Oh, I am not worthy of your Highnefs's cares !" replied Selina : cc I was fick, very fick, and Lady Ilford infifted on my fleeping e a nearer
nearer to her chamber. I am to continue my new room, fb we can meet no more.—Fare¬ wel, my Lord !" "Stay, Selina," cried the Prince, " you would not leave me ? Sure you would not! I can afk indulgence of you but for a fliort time : Two days, and I am divided from Ilford, from you, from happinefs !" <( Two days!" refponded Selina, fur¬ prifed, and overcome by tendernefs ■; " Oh, go vou fo foon as that ?" " I do," faid he,—" Then do not deny me what little I afk, and you can grant. I have feen blborne, your faithful old fervant; I have appointed his cottage to meet you at. Nothing, if you but give confent, will be more eafy than for you to fee me there- Lady Ilford will not deny your walking, when the vifrers will be fuppofed regaling in the hall I will feign fudden indifpofition, and retire to my apartment. The Nobleman whom 1 dike to watch my chamber, I will inftruct to my purpofe; andin the peaiant's "attire
attire that I ftill retain, I will haften acrofs the park—haften to the hut that holds Selina, the brighteft jewel that ever added luftre to a palace 1" In the breaft of Selina was now a moft painful ftruggle. Timidity, apprehenfion, and female delicacy all prompted her to give a negative to fo bold a propofition ; but when fhe beheld the fine and anxious eyes of the Prince caft, with an air of fuppliance, up to her own, faw love, and pity, and a thoufand tender paffions expreffed in them ; and remembered that but for two little days ftiould fhe have the power of obliging and of liftening to him, her objections melted, and fhe falteringly cried — " Leave ine but now, and I will promife any thing !— pro¬ mife even to fee you then, fhould I find it poffible." " Take my thanks, my heart P* exclaimed tht Prince, preffing to her hand his lips.— «< Till fun-fet then farewel!" t e 3 " Farewel,
" Farewel, for Heaven's fake !" fhe cried. ** You forget this place. We may be over¬ heard—we—Oh my Lord ! fpare me, leave me !" Fully convinced of the neceflity there was for his ftaying no longer in an apart¬ ment fo liable to intrufion, he again bade her adieu, and tore himfelf from her fight. Slowly and heavily paffed the hours till that ofthe afternoon, at which the Prince thought lie might with prudence feign illnefs, and prepare for his difguifed excurfion. At length that hour arrived. He, in the leaft obtrufive way, pleaded violent pains in the head, and requefted Lord Ilford's permiffion to calm them in a few hours* repofe. With many expreflions of folicitude, his Lordfhip immediately waited on him to his apartment. The Prince was left with but one companion. That companion perfeftly underftood his office; and the Prince, in the habit of a pea¬ fant, paffed unnoticed through the caftle. In
In joyful hafte he bounded acrofs the park. Very foon he attained Ofborne's cottage. The old man ftood with the door's latch m his hand. " The Lady Selina------ ?" cried the Prince eagerly as he entered. » Is in the garden-room, my Lord/* anfwered Ofborne. " Yes, may it pleafe yonr Highnefs/' echoed Rachel, « my Lady Selina is in the garden-room, as we call it, may it plcaie your Highnefs.'' The Prince palled quickly on, and on . opening an inner door of the cottage, entered a fmall room with a folding door at the end, which, thrown back, difclofed Ofborne's garden, overfliadowed by the tall trees that fkirted the park. Here he beheld Selina, who had heard his voice, and, trembling in pleafure at the found, had mechanically arifen, though ftie had not motioned a ftep toward the door.-— » Thanks to you, deareft of friends," cried e 4 nc >
he, " this is kind. Let me hope you met with no more obftacles in gratifying my wifhes, than my wifhes themfelves would have you/* <c She had not encountered any but her fears/' fhe faltered. « Then, I truft/' faid he, « you have had none but dangers fb inconfequential, that, fhould you venture to do thus again, not a fingle impediment wiil oppofe you. Come, my fweet friend, let us improve thefe mo¬ ments, fo precious and fo fhort! Let us draw to the window. Wrapped by this recefs from every eye, let us, in the fweets of converfation, beguile the forrow that hangs heavy a* the heart of each." He placed the only two chairs the room poffeffed clofe to the fkirt of the garden. Adown the door-way that opened to it, fell embowering fprays of jeffamine, and the air was fweetly fcented by large contiguous lilacs. He refted his arm on Selina's chair, and leaned fondly over her as fhe fat. /'This make?
makes me happy!" faid he.—"Oh Selina! you know not how long and joylefs are the hours I pafs away from you, and the rapture of my heart when we meet!" " Ah, my Lord !" replied Selina, " your friendihip makes me too happy ; buc you do not remerftber the thoufand dangers that furround us. Perhaps, the dreadful fcene, from which I am even now fcarce recovered, contains terrors that hang at this inftant over our heads, and in the next will overwhelm me. " Be not fo fearful,** cried the Prince- " Our alarm might be but the effed of fancy j or, from his filence, let m truft, if we really were broken on, that the intruder failed to recognize its. Imagine any thing that will render you fearlefs j doubt not, my kind friend, that we may often, very often, meet thus uniulpe&edly." <( Alas! my Lord," faid Ihe, ff you for¬ get that you leave me in two days j that we fee each other, now, only to bid farewel!" e 5 " Curfes
" Curfes on it!" cried the Prince; « I do, indeed; but, though compelled to part at prefent, through the medium of this worthy old man, we could meet oftentimes in future. In fecret, I could gain his cottage; and, full well, as you experience no reftraint in rny abfence, could you blefs me for a time with your prefence. I, however, have other fchemes in my mind : My mother—bleflings on her! for fhe is of all mothers the beft— never ytt refufed to acl as my will requefted her. She remembers you, Selina, though fhe faw you but tranfiently. With eafe I can perfuade her to fend for you to Court, to take you beneath her own protedion •* fo fhall I have full opportunity of foftering that friendfhip that would confult your good alone, and you gain a powerful friend—a friend who muft love you, and whofe love will fecure for you wealth and rank. All that admiration and efteem can do, fhall be done. Your heart fhall not have a wifli un- gratified. If—yes, if—but, perhaps, my Selina would not yet chufe io marry?" " Marry I"
"Marry!" replied fhe faintly, "Oh, Heaven ! my Lord, no !" *< Well then," faid the Prince, with a dejefted fmile; " we cafn live tngerher—the Queen, and I,, and you, in fiiendihip and affeftion. We may, fweet girl ! however unkind Fate has been in difpofing of our births, we may ftill know happinefs. We will be one inftance that a tender friendfliip may exift where to love is denied. You fay we meet only to bid,a, long adieu; I cannot, cannot part from you this night, Selina! Do you contrive to walk on the next morning as you did on this, and leavr to me the means of my meeting you i then, indeed, we muft, for a time, fee each other no more, but it fhall be only for a fhort time. My plan of having you to Court, as the Queen's chofen friend, fires my fancy as I confider of it. Expeft very flioitly to fee the effefts of my interceilions with my mother. Oh 1 what will be my delight when I fee you placed where Nature intended you to fliine !—when every head bows to ?, 6 the
the favourite of her Sovereign, and every eye is lifted in admiration to thofe beauties that know no rival!—Then will niy bofom feel peace; when I refled that the heart that animates thofe beauties, in fecret heeds no admiration but mine, Oh ! peace will be too weak a name for the fenfations my bofom will glow with!" To thefe fond expreffions the blufhing Selina liftened with pleafure ihe had only lately learned to feel The Prince encou¬ raged her to converfation, and every frefli fentiment ihe uttered, or remark fhe made, bound his heart more faftly to her, by teach¬ ing hini to admire the perfedions of her mind in preference to thofe of her perfon.- As no lover has yet been able to meafure time according to the common rules, the Prince and Selina were wrapped in the grey mift of twilight before each imagined a fingle hour had glided away. Selina was (hit to obferve the near approach of night. Anxious
Anxious for her fafe return to the caftle, though unwilling to part from her, the Prince rofe to fee, by the fituation of the letting - fun, what probably was the hour. The fun was loft in the horizon, and only rtmaintd of its influence a few golden ftreaks that hovered about the Weft, and fringed thofe clouds of evening that thickened the fky. In tendernefs the Prince could not perfuade Selina to (lay longer; though contrary to his firft intention, he determined on accompa¬ nying her through the park. With a thoufand proteftations of attach¬ ment and refpeft, Ofborne and Rachel at¬ tended their illuftrious vifiters to the door of their cottage. An entrance to the park was near at hand, through which the Prince and his fweet companion immediately palled, and proceeded on their way through thofe parts of Lord Ilford's domain that were moft concealed by entwining trees.
Sweet
Sweet to the true lover is the twilight Ihade, when 11 Not abrorau illferhs the reed-bc.i <iank* ** Oi- moves ?hc piim «pan the mm .tsun .s height." Slowly did Selina and the Prince ftray through the windings of the park wood¬ lands. Ere they reached uie caftle, the gentle and foothing founds of evening fattk to that flience through which the loweft murmur of wind, or ftmlkft tall oi diftant waters, comes to the car, md gives the imagination melancholy pleafure. Selina feft unufually penfive * whtk die Prince was filent, and Ihe liftened to the faint flow of the ftream that ran tnrough a diftant part of the park, and the moaning, or feemingly predictive figh of the bittern on its mores*, a tear burft from her eye, '*xnd fhe was unable **» furmrefs the riling fv^a.
0 — ^ Xi'•'--'ht
Night gained quickly on their How pace ? nor waa the night mild nor fo favourable as might, from the feafon and tht late ftorm, have been expected. A chill bkft arofe as the darknefs increafed, that fhook the leaves to a difconfolate murmur j the t leavens were gloomy, and not a ftar lent ?*•$ Hght to aii them on thrr way tnrough rectus to which both were alike unaccuftomed. Selina could not conceal from tht Prince the trembling of che hand that was entwined in his arm; and his utmoft attempts tore-affure her, failed to remove the extreme depreffion of her fpirits. As they approached the caftle, they per¬ ceived lights in many of the windows, and one moving along the rampart; which, how¬ ever, while thty noted it, palled to the inner court, and was loft among the buildings. Convinced of the impropriety of her bem" ken returning at fo late an hour, Selina pro¬ pofed entering the caftle through the garden, and by a private door that kd> acroi* fome 4 unfrequented
unfrequented rooms, to the ftaircafe ihe wifhed to attain. Equally anxious to fee Selina reftored to the protection ofthe caftle, and defirous of efcaping obfervation in his own entrance of it, the Prince refolved to accompany her through that obfcure way. In filence, and a quick and light ftep, they trod acrofs the garden. The door opened to thcir hand, and they proceeded along the pai&ge it ds&lofed. After walking for fome minutes in entire darknefs, Selina expreffed apprehenfion of having miftaken the path. A door, however, was near to them, which the Prince opened, and from the ftream of wind received from within, and the kint light admitted at the Gothic windows, concluded it kd to a room lofty and fpacious. They entered. As they advanced, the dim reae&ion of the windows difcovered to them, at a diftance, many feeming figures in
in armour. Selina ftarted as Ihe perceived them, and uttered a tot cry of terror.— " It is th<v fecret armoury!" ihe exclaimed. ** This way leads to my chamber, but we netd not have paffed through it. Oh great God ! what tongue can fpeak the terrors of rhis place at fuch an hour ! By report, fc h the refort of fheeted fpe&res. Here is yet preferved the mail of my anceftors—ftrange noffts have been heard ! Midnight fpirits, it is laid, wander amid tixfe memoriais of their murderers." *< Be not alarmed thus, my Selina/* laid the Prince, throwing his arms round her waift, <( fpirits of Heaven alone have power over yott, and from heavenly fpirits you have nothing to apprehend. Let us tread on. This way, I imagine, lies our path. Wc ihall foon pafs this gloomy place* Tremble not thus; be not fo fearful, I befeech you i" Wiih difficulty fhe dragged **fter her her heavy footfteps. The melancholy dimnefs thrown on the room by the high windows,
ga%^e a disbious vifibility to the objeds it contained, that rendered her .wakened ima- gination fubject to a thoufand terrors, A tall tree, riw„ bordered on the ;aftlt-fide, bent beneath a fudden fweep of wind, and brufbH along the window with mo, rnfel flownefis. At the r aine intlint the b:rd of night flapped its wings, and uttered iu euf- rrul und ominous wad, The? had now named thit pzrt of the arn-j-an .^t w-huh i\' oj t\e ^ttcd coati of Tr,4i\i. huch u\) erect n£ ir*^\ to the frighted fancy of Sehna, fetmrd as if enclcfing a re animated corfe, anu fiie fhaddered t^fce, pafted through th; ciu.uirts^ thofe fwords tliat had been ivcctcu in c*ie o'*>Ju o^fo many boionis, directed by JiaijQa Lng iince r^tied in dtatb. Wi h d;Tc-...ty the drew her breath, and as fhe piace^,.e i t > the eats of the oifmal iooUi. her a. r it./. n increafed. 1 he anxious Pnnce enqui-cd tiie caufe*— f: That armour," f<±A ihe taindy, Ci that :mo r M-^ aimour, with the helmet and feathers
feathers—ir was my father's ! In what gloomy folemnity, methinks, it feems en¬ wrapped 1 Alas! in iome cold tomb lias thar dear form, :!ur it once protected, long btrnlain! IVrh^p^ disfigured Ln death, ;t Uy an hiJeotis Hght to all around, till fome winJe-er or; the beach gave ita. fcanry grave to hux it from the eyes of the diigufted tra\eh* r, Methinks tins dreary place kerns lucii an one as lus oppreilbi ipint miglit h.ve to rev'fit! Haply, e'en now it iteps j*-i;*jnd Uj, and regards me with JitpLaJure and iCj^roach !' s '* Yau tnink too fadly, my facet fend," idid the Prince, ia an encouragiag voice, '■ if the ghoil of your father be with us T it is to fmile over, blefs, and guard you* But, hufh, what none !" It wai the large bed uf tlie caftlc-tower ktavih tolling t:ie hour of tite evening. Its wrigliry note echoed gloomily through the talile courts, and died, reverberated, in Jul- hn murmurs. There was an awful mebm- CilOlV
choly in the found that chilled Selina's blood as fhe liftened to it. Every ponderous toll ftruck coldly to her heart. " Oh my Lord !" ftie whifpered, " let us haften hence, er ? fhall fink beneath my rerrurs, n r in reality or hm;, I fee ftrange things! Are there not eyes beneath th-t beaver ? Heavens, hti\r I not fomewhat coming V" ** Noihip?, Selina, nothing 1 " cried he. " Conquer your tears, ^t are nearly at tfit room's cndS J Somewhat encouraged, (fee ftepped timidly on. A whifper of vind ftole along the fides of the room ; it buzsec* among tiie armour znd the arms with a folemn mudmrfk that ieemed predictive of »oe and horrors ! In th& inftant of that noife expiring, from the centre of the room founded a clafh like thn of arms. Both vbrttd round, and Seima beheld the arm of htr father's coat of mail Ilowly lifted up, and then rttumtd to m fituation. Faintly mucking, fhe tii re w her¬ felf on tht neck of the Piince, iaft for an interval
interval to Mt and a fenfe of danger. Ig¬ norant of the fuil caufe fhe had for terror, he fbothed her alarm, and ftrove to re-animate her by careflfes. While yet he hung over her, he heard a voice from a diftant part of the armoury, as if of a perfon in dttp diftrefs. In aftonifliment he liftened, but it was gone. A pale and tranfient moon- ray at rhat inftant pafted along the archtd windows ', and, while its influence lafted, he perceived fomething in motion toward the centre of the room. He uniheathed his fword* and held k, with his difengaged irm, before Senna. €s Meet thus," groaned a voice from the tall armour of Selina's father-—** meet thu$ again, and you meet in death !" An involuntary fhudder ran through the heart of die Prince.—** Approach," he crfed - $ < s if that thou beeft the fpirit of tht dead, approach! My guikkfs bodom fears thee not." " My
" My gi'ilelefs bofom fears thee not !** refounded from the farther tnd of the room, ^hat feemed more than an ufual echo, and all was filent as the tomb. A fec-jnd moon- ray ftre&med through the wide apartment, but difplayed only objefts in nature—the ftiflT, motionlefs fuics of armour, Urge fulpended fhkids, and fome few banners of former days. The affrighted Selina now difcovered figns of life; and, as ftie regained recollec¬ tion, ch.r.i to the Prince fur fhelter and protection. Trembling in pallid terror, fne hid her het \n his bofom, f£ Fly!" flie cried, in x low but wild voice, u Oh fly, and fave me from it! Good Heaven, forgive and guard me 1" Her agitation increafed. When fhe ftrove to fpeak, her bofom heaved in a convulfive moaning; and, with juft caufe, the Prince ftared her finking to a worfe fit than one of i nieniibikty. I le bore her in his arms to the fpot
fpot where fhe had told him was the door they were to pafs through. He readily found ir, and entered a wide paftage lightened by many windows. Againft the wall ftood a irnall fofa, on which he placed his dearly- valued burthen, and fupported, comforted, and encouraged her. A burft of tears relieved the fulnefs ofher ht?.a. It was long ere fhe had power to fpeak, and when fhe had, her bewildered fancy, for a rime, murmured only incoherent fentences. The adoring Prince forbore to menrion wliat himfelf had witneffed, and ftrove to perfuade her that the noife fhe had heard was accidental, and what fhe hadieen, the creature of imagination. «No/* flic cried, " k is not fo ! The voice of Heaven itfelf upbraids me with imprudence. I aft wrongly, and fupcrnatural thrtatenings are the confequence. Good angels that dwell in Heaven—my fweet mother!—dread fpirit of my father !— you know each wiih of this wretched bofom, and you know it has no wiih
wifh impure or unfitting! Spare me, then- Ob, fpare me! Frown not on an haplefs creature, who has ftrayed but once, and will never ftray again V t( Rack not your heart, my Selina, my love/' cried the Prince, " by fuch thoughts as thefe ! Good angels will never ceafe to guard you, for you are their own. Call not, dear girl, the indulging of my friendfhip, my pure friendfhip, deviation meriting cenfure. Friendfhip is all I afk for; to grant it to me, is to do rightly, and to pur¬ chafe for yourfelf, I truft, welfare and hap¬ pinefs/* As he fpoke, he looked on her face; it was pale, and expreffive of anguifh ; her lips were white and motionlefs, and her foft blue ryes hollow and fixed. His heart upbraided him with the cruel falfenefs of his latter aflertion; and while he clafped her cold hand, in whofe pulfe was fcarcely perceptible the fy.rsptom of life, felf-reproach gave to his bofom as bitter pain, as it would, had
he leaned over her tht dead viftim of his attachment. The firft .moments of terror over, dread of r*c dangers that delay would produce her in £*raininij her chamber, again occurred to *zz? w **** th e poor ha ra ft! d S e!i r a. Of th e: e' d ange rs the Ihince hade*much fear as iKrltlfj and his inquietude was increafed by knowing it impoflV^le for him to aflurc himfelf of her fdit return to her room by accomp 1 ying her thirhe**. Soon as fhe rccovertd, in fbme decree, from her agi rati >n, ioc begged hira to pert from, and fuffer her to proceed. To the commencement of a paffoge, how¬ ever, running along a range of rooms occu¬ pied by the fuperior fein-les of che family, he affifted her tottering fteps. He then kiffed . ^r hands, znd mournfully bade her adieu. In feeble hafte flie fought her chamber ; unfeen, fhe gained ir. She flung hei fclf on the bed, fo overcome by terror and appre- vol. ii. f henfion,
henfion, that flie long lay in a melancholy ftupor. When flie awoke from it, fhe tried to weep, and found eafe in fhedding tears over her forrows. Her weakened mind imagined, in folitude and darknefs, new horrors -, but yet could fhe lift her heart to Heaven, and with confidence beg good angels to watch round her innocence. At length, tn fleep Hie buried awhile the memory of her woes, and of that fcene which was, alas! but the forerunner to many of ftrange tciror.
CHAP.
^♦wftge ^iMi^
CHAP. III. *■" There*> matter in thtii- »ghs, theft *uoi\>u-na h:.t\es r ** *T;*fit^et!}V(]cn"i3ii(*tKei7:." SHAKJ- ?£ASE, COMPELLED to abandon fortht pre* fent Selina, and fecnes endeared to his heart by being connected with her, the Prince, in melancholy fiownefs, prepared for his return to Court. The ftrange accidents diat had attended the profecution of his iove under the hcc of frkndfhip, rendered another in¬ terview with Selina, if he adhered to that fyftem of fecrecy he had hitherto preferved, nearly impoffibk. At the beft it could be purchafed only by endangering the peace * a and
and health of Selina. Tendernefs for her welfare overcame every more felfifh feeling ; and whatever increafe it might be to his anguifh, he refolved on tearing himfelffrom Ilford without expofing her to the pain and hazard of an exchanged adieu. Through the means of old Olborne he conveyed to htr, on the morning after the myfteriou- adventure of the armoury, a letter rqricte with f nil expreffions^ of folicitude, and rt prated avowaU of endlefs friendfhip. By the fane channel he received an anfwer, in which Selina gave too favourable an ac¬ count of her deranged health, and ftrove, in vain, to hide the confufion of her mind. In thefe letters was pafled a fad farewel—a fkre- ■«*£* that Selina wept over hi agony, and ftill fe-mf. *" *""ht t^ -veep over again, and which Coft the I ri.ice'a youthful heart the fevereft p.m-;^ it had ever experienced* Tl:< Frince, attended by Lord Defmond, who was to accompany him to Court, and a larger
larger retinue than even when he firft entered Lord Ilford's domains, left the caftle on the appointed morning. From one of the caftle windows the unfufpefted Sehna was a witnefs of his departure. She law him gracefully vault on the capari foned ftecd, whofe ftirrup was held by a Knight of diftinguiihed bear¬ ing ; and while fhe proudly viewed the beauty of iiis perfon, and dwelt with delight on the captivating eafe of his movements, her heart tank within her as fiie reflefted he was never, perhaps, to blefs her fight again; or, if he were, was to be admired, to be loved, only at a diftance. His fteed, vaia it would feem of its royal rider, pawed the air in impatience, and was reftrained only oy the manly ikill of the Prince frona bounding acrofs the plain. She faw Lord Defmond ride to his fide, and then the Prince waved his hand, and fuffered his eager horfe to proceed. As the cavalcade pafied the fide of the caftle at which Ihe was fttuated, Ihe obferved f 3 the
tht Prince to look toward the towers with a mournful air. He put his hand drje&edly to his forehead, then took it away, and looked on them again 5 in which direction his eyes remained until he was entirely paft the caftle, when he feemed to fnatch a iaft glance, and ftghingly abandon himfelf to reflection. Amid all her pain there arofe in Selina's breaft fome of the foothing feelings of gra- tifted pride: ftie was looking, perhaps, on the firft and greateft Being in the world. Though furrounded by glory and tributary thoufands, his hearc was loft in defpondency ; of that defpondency Ihe, humble ahd un¬ heeded* was the caufe ! A blufh of pleafure overfpread her cheek 5 but it glowed not an snftant ere it was fupplanted by a tear of forrow. She gazed, with aching eyes, on her loft Prince till the laft of his attendants fank in diftance from the fight. Her heart, that had
had been long overcharged, then burft in defpair, and throwing herfelf on a feat, ihe gave loofe to tears of mifery. Through feveral hours fhe indulged her grief, and°wept without reftraint; nor knew ' her breaft one permanent fofcener of its anguifh. The Prince's tendernefs, to winch ftie fometimes looked for confolation, it ad¬ ded to her wretchednefs to think fhe had known only to be deprived ofi and to look back to her meetings with him, fo fweet, though fo befet with dangers, was but to <dve an additional tint of darknefs to the pifture of that folitude ftie was about to re¬ enter, no longer, fhe feared, pofTeffcd of the difpofition to take pleafure in it. From the folitary indulgence of forrow fhe was called by a meffage from the Earl, who requefted to fee her in his private audi¬ ence room. Striving to wafh from her eyes the effeds of long weeping, fhe prepared in hafte to comply with his defire. To give to
her face its ufual appearance of ferenity ihe, however, found impoflible. Ready tears flill ftood in her eyes, and Jpread over every feature was an immoveable air of dejeftion. Confidence pcrfuad d her the Earl would dif- cover the orifc of her grirfi and that belief added to her confufion as fhe repaired to him. T.k door of the room appointed was open when fiie arrived at it, and fhe entered unperceived. The Earl was ftanding at an oppofue window, leaning againft the ftone partition of it in a meditative pofture. She forbore to difturb him, but ftood near to the centre of the room till he might be at leifure to inform her of his will. He re¬ mained as he was for many moments. He rhen preffed his hand to his forehead, as if to exprefs pain of thought, and heaved a figh that feemed to fliake the whole heart to agony. By a glance of his eye he now dif¬ covered Selina. Pie ftarted in fome diforder. Selina
Selina curtfied :—" You wifhed, my Lord, to fee me?" Ihe faid, in a trembling voice. « Yes, Selina/' he anfwered, <c I did. I wanted to enquire after your health. You have long been eftranged to us. How have you been ? And how, Selina, do you do ?" « I thank your Lordfhip humbly/' fhe anfwered, " I have been indifferently well, and am fo now." " And have you, indeed ?" faid he.— « Methinks you look pale. I no longer fee, fo foftly tinting vour cheek, that bluih of medefty, of maiden beauty ! Your eyes are di.n, and, ufually, a fmile graces your lip ; buc now* you look fad, and your lips have loft e'en their hue of corah Ah, Selina I upbraid me not with your long feclufion : 'twas for your good, for your happinefs alone, 1 infifted on it. The worth lc is followers of Princes are not fit companions for lovelinefs and innocence iike your's. Once more may we uijoy the pleafure of retirement, and again is Sehna miftrefs of her own felicity. Exert the privilege of exercifing your will
to the utmoft, and let me fee that you" are happy." " I thank you, my Lord," flie replied, with a blufh of gratitude on her cheek, " I thank you truly for your kindnefs, Alas! T fear it is unmerited." " Never, Selina'/* cried Lord Ilford; c< you merit more—Oh, how much more than I have to beftow on you! Would to God I had more in my power to give, or you were deferving of lefs! Would to God it were fo ! But this is idle talk. TeU me, how have you paffed the hours of feclufion ? They have hung heavily, I fear ?" "Not much fo, my Lord/' faltered Selina, throwing fearfully on him a look, in which was betrayed her apprehenfion of his know¬ ing in what way the forrows of her folitude had been foftened. " I am accuftomed to the company of my own thoughts." (t Yes, you are!" exclaimed he, haftily j *' and fweet is their fociety, for they are the thoughts °f innocence! Serene and cheerful, you contemplate the morning fun; with * thoughts
thoughts bent to Heaven, and by Fleaven foftered, you lay you down to flumber at the evening, and no torturing confiifts keep you from foothing fleep 1 and no horrible dreams of death and vengeance haunt your repofe, and turn it to mifery, to agony !" - He paufed, with eyes caft to the ground in gloomy meditation. Selina was filent alfo? At length the Earl lifted up his look : " Yes/' faid he, (C you are good, you are bleffed ! Long, long may you be fo I But -what fee I ? A tear! Whence comes it, my ____ ? Oh, whence comes it, Selina? It is the tear of anguifh, and is given by long con¬ finement. Curfes on the hardnefs of my heart, that could bear the thought of your being hidden from every friend for fo many long, long days! But do not weep," faid he, tenderly, and taking her hand, which he prefied by degrees till the preffure arofe to painfulnefe, "do no, weep; for were you my fifter, my daughter—nay, were you—my wife, I could not feel more fervent wiihes f 6 ior
for your happinefs than I do now, than I ever have done." When he paufed, he drew his breath with hardnefs, and his eyes wtre fixed on Selina's with an expreffion of mingled thoughts, from which fhe fhrank in terror.—" I truft," faid fhe, " I fliall never ceafe to think of your Lordfhip's paternal friendfhip—fliall never forget the fond refpeft I owe to you and Lady Ilford." He let fall her hand as fhe finifhed fpeak¬ ing : —n I am perfuaded," anfwered he coldly, "you never will. I fhould grieve to think you capable of forgetting me." " No, never ihall I, my Lord !" cried flie with fervour; " but for you I had been defo- late and friendlefs. Robbed of every hope of inheritance, I had been an outcaft on a world for whofe pains I was not fitted.— You have been to me a father, and I owe 3 ou a child's duty. Lady ilford has been all bui a mother, I venerate her, I adore a her.
her. Words cannot fpeak the efteem of my foul. Her wifh is to me a law—** (Lord Ilford rofe, and walked to the win¬ dow) " her fmile a bleffing; the thoufand virtues of her heart are my pride: I would rather die than give her pain j when I fail to love her as fhe merits, may Heaven fail to love me P* " Enough!" interrupted the Earl, " 'tis enough." He again feated himfelf befide her, and took her hand. "Selina!" (aid he, " you think too highly of Lady Ilford, too humbly of yourfelf." " Your pardon, my Lord; fhe is great and good ,- I am abject in eftate, though—" cc You are not," cried he; "or, if you are, you will not be io always.—Selina!" and he looked earnefliy on her, while his face was pale in agitation, " Selina," he faid, <f be prepared for great events ! The fucure may produce what will give you delight perpetual—delight equal to your aftonifh- nunt. I muft not now fay more—I mull not fay what 1 would. Time will prove what
what I cannot now difclofe. You wonder- but cannot, cannot that heart imagine what I would fay ? Surely it can." Selina's agitation almoft overpowered her. She was perfuaded the Earl alluded to her connexion with the Prince, and that his dark words portended defigns of future happinefs. She imagined that the Prince had difclofed to Lord Hford, before he left the caftle, the paffion of his bofom ; and that, together, they' had formed plans likely to produce felicity to all. Perhaps, though her reafon forbade her thinking fo, they had conceived hopes of effecting between the Prince and her an union 1 The thought was too fweet and too flattering ; buta moment's refieftion effaced it from her fancy. In trembling dif¬ fidence fhe lifted her eyes to the Earl: " I know not what to fay," flie articulated.— « Oh, your Lordfhip is too good to give my fate a moment's thought. In all things I am obedient to you, my Lord." « Good,
« Good, good girl!" he cried, with joy j « be but io* and all will be well. Very fhortly ——'* A knock was heard at the room-door. The Earl muttered an execration: 'twas his attendant come to fay Lady Ilford begged to be admitted. « Shall I tell her Ladyfliip you are at leifure, my Lord ?" faid he. " Noi" replied the Earl, in fullen indig¬ nation. " Stay," refumed he, paufing. " Inform her I wait her will/' He folded his arms, and walked, in gloomy filence, along the room. " I will not detain you, Selina/' faid he. She arofe. " What I have fpoken," continued he, ct will have a place in your heart. You will think of it when you feel you are not happy. I need not fay, you will think of it in filence." He grafped both her hands -, he looked on her
her fervently. * f Perhaps though you had better not think of it at all! Yes, yes, v* ipe it from your memory! Hark! (lie is coming! Yes, yes, wipe it from your memory. And yet, I am a fool for faying fo !— it is what I would not have you do for worlds. Fare¬ wel !" He trembled as he touched her, and his hands, rhat clafped her's, burned in fever. c< Farewel! Let me fee yoj again foon," She curtfied and withdrew, while he flung to the door, and walked from it m an hafty ftep. On leaving the Earl, flie retired to her own chamber, buried in mediiarion on what he had faid co her. In hi* looks there v. .s an heated wildncfs which fae had never before beheld there, though for fome time Ihe had obferved hiin gloomily thoughtful or paffionately impatient. Tht words he had uttered, requefting her to be in expec¬ tation of important incidents, her Bartering imagination
imagination tranflated predictions of her experiencing advancement in poffeffing the favour of the Prince. Her heart palpitated in that hope, though, in advancement, fhe chiefly looked to the happinefs refulting from a connexion with him who had her tendereft love. The influence of thoughts fo fweet was, however, but fhort-lived, and flie returned to tears of pain and regret. From the indulgence of forrow fhe was taken by the prefence of Lady Ilford, whofe aflfe&ion had ill-brooked the long feparation infifted on by the Earl. In fond friendfliip fhe welcomed her young companion to the renewal of what few delights unreftrained inclination could afford her; and when Selina, to whom love, and the diftrefs of parting from its objefl*, had given more than ufual tendernefs, anfwered her only by tears, fhe preffed her to her bofom, and kiffing her forehead, bade her think only of future com¬ fort and happinefs. The grateful heart of Selina
Selina felt ready to burft with excefs of fond¬ nefs ; and fhe almoft refolved to divulge to this, the dear friend of her early years, the fecret of that love which, while it formed her moft precious joy, formed her moft poignant pain ; but fhe recollefted that without the permiflion of the Prince fhe muft do wrong in communicating to any perfon his ftooping to profefs affeftion for her. Maidenly mo¬ defty alfo interfered, and made blufhes forbid her betraying her weaknefs in fo readily acknowledging a partiality where her prof¬ fered heart could not openly be accepted* In the company of the Countefs Ihe returned to thofe fcenes of domeftic magnifi¬ cence that ihe had been in the habit of parti¬ cipating in j but they were now flat and taftekfs. The caftle, reinftated in its ufual ceconomy, appeared a fpace, dreary and for¬ faken. She no longer heard thofe fuil flows of mufic to which flie had cf late been a diftant liftener -, or it) for an interval, the rniaftrels'
minftrels' notes did breathe through the vaft halls, the found no more foftened her foul to tender ecftacy ; it polTeffed not the power of that ftrain which came faintened to her ear, yet was a ftrain of delight in being alfo liftened to by the Prince. If the family were alone, fhe thought the tedium of feclufion infupportable i and if it received company, the buftie offociety was tormenting to her. Never did fhe know fuch pleafure as when fhe ftole, free from obfervation, to fome of the park fhades. There, wrapped ^ in filence, broken on only by thofe fweet, rural founds fo congenial to the mind of feeling, (he wept, in pleafing tears, over the image of the Prince. Every foft word he had fpoken was then recollefted by her. In fancy, Ihe dwelt on the beauty of his countenance, and the command, yet tender fenfibility of his eye. In the path he had trodden with her, fhe ftrayed for hours. Where Ihe had then paufed for an inftant to reftj Ihe now accuftomed herfelf to fit whenever
whenever Ihe walked in its neighbourhood -, and her penfive imagination almoft believed the abfent Prince occupied the fpace left by her fide. Sometimes, the delufivenefs of a lover's rnind made her, in thefe minutes, anticipate a future of felicity -, but, oftener, the fuggeftions of reafon forced her to weep over the probability of trial and mifery.
CHAP.
CHAP. IV. " I fpy'd a wrinkled bag with age grown double, 4 * * " Her eves with fcakting rlieum were gal I'd and tvtl; *' Cold pjlley fliook htr head, her hands. fc;n;M wither'd, *« Ar-d on her crooked fhoulders fhe had wi ap|»M « The tatier'd remnant cf an oldlhi^M himging, « Which iervM to keep her cai cafe from the cold ; «' So ihcr . was nothing of a piuce about her i *< Her lower weeds were all o'er coa> lely patrhM, " And ieein'd to fpeak variety of wrctciitdnU's." OTWAY. AHOUGH the friendfhip of Lady Ilford fofeened, through fome hours, the anguifh. Selina was fubjeft to, ftill time ro'A d moft heavily on. A few, days auev the departure of the Prince, in the courfe of a 1 amble througii her favourite rccefs, Selina met Ofborne,
Olborne. The old man, with the mofl profound refpeft, " affured her he had been conftantly on the watch for her ever fince my Lord the Prince left the caftle. He would have gone to Lord Ilford's, and re¬ quefted to fee her; but he felt afraid that it would be expefted he meant more than he faid, though he could but confefs he had felt grief in withholding fo long what," put¬ ting his hand in his doublet pocket, " he thought would give his dear Lady Selina a o-ood deal of fatisfaftion." As he finifiied fpeaking, he extended his hand, and in it Selina beheld a letter. With eagernefs fhe caught it from him. The old man retired fome paces. She broke the feal, and read. It was fome time ere Selina could diftin- guifhably read the laft communication of her beloved Prince. When, at length, acquainted with its exaft contents, the fenfations flie held it with, are indefcribable. Tears of tendernefs and joy trickled down her cheek* and, unconfcious ofthe prefence of Ofborne, flie prefted itto her bofoiti, and then to her lips. The
The old man, in flow fteps, drew nigh. He mournfully fliook his head, and lifted his eyes filently to Heaven; then caft them, in a look the moft exprefiive in nature of blended refpeft and pity, on the face of his lovely Lady, In a few moments Selina perceived him. She bin fhed for the emotion fhe had betrayed. " Ofborne !" fhe faid. Ofborne drew nigher. " Ofborne 1" repeated ihe, " did the Prince himfelf give you this letter ?" " He did, my Lady, and withal bade me, at an humble diftance, watch over whatever befel you ; and if, before he again vifits thefe parts, you fliould be affailed by ficknefs or by ill-fortune, ordered me to try my utmoft fpeed, and carry the news of your mifhap ro him. Bleflings on you, my Lady ! I wanted no fpur to do what I thought was for your good. Thefe locks, that were brown when firft I learned to love your femily, fliall ftrew the ground on the day that fees you harmed." « Thank
" Thank you, worthicfl old man," re¬ plied Selina. < c Was it on the day in which the Prince feft Ilford, that he gave to you this writing ?" *•*■ When Ofborne anfwered her on that point, flie had numberlefs queftions, as to the Prince's manners and expreffions, to pro¬ pofe : before all of which were refolved, fhe found herfelf near to the caftle, and under the neceflity of parting with Ofborne. She haftily fought her own apartment, where ihe read the Prince's letter again and again, and ftill read it with new intereft. In hei bofom fhe wore it by day, till retire¬ ment enabled her to trace with fecurity its charafters; and, folded to her heart, it was the companion of her fleep: when, if her dream* w*nd red to him whofe name graced it, thef were fuch as purity might fmile over widiout blufhing. The en 1 of a month broMght back Lord Defmondi and with him cure Sir Emeric Arville,
Arville— v. mar. lately arilv**d from the army en rhe Continent. Any change gives mo¬ mentary pleafure to the uneafy mind ; and in Lord Pef/n'ir.d Selina beheld an objeel of joy in buwk'.ng him who had fo lately been the companion of the Prince. Unfjf- pecle.i of beari: 1 .^ inru'efc in what was dif- cou:fedof, flie Ihiened to converfations irt which fcenes were defeiibed where the Prince of Wales was the cliief aftor. In his praife Lord Defmond was cold ; but Sir Emeric fpoke highly. He noted the ele¬ gance of his perfon, mentioned rapturously his prowefs in the field; but, aoove all, celebrated his generofity. To this Selina liftened wirh an -emotion threatening to dif¬ cover her feelings. She ble fled tlie lip that talked, hi. praife; and, though there was that in Sir Emcric's face that forbade her likin r him, fiie, in her heart, gave him every p-oou widi her innocence could devife. o In the couife of one of her folitary walks, ftie ftrayed to th.c moft lonely fpot in tht vol, n. o park.
park. Her th(.i:g!.fs were far frt-m v.her-: fne wandcjed ; iv..d ihe heeded not the ap¬ proach of evening tiii the inn, in faded magnificence, retired to tiie brow of the diftant wc ftern hills. Starring haflily from the bank on which ihe h;\d feated heriehj ihe prepared to rciwrn to the cattle, and then firft fliuddered to fir.d iiow dreary a rtcefs ihe had outitaycvt her li.nc i.j. Long and winding walk,, rendered obfcure by over-hanging trees, led to the fpot fiie was on. In the centre was a negleded \ ond ; and round it were pfentcd thickly large trees, among whpfe rugged branches the evening breeze murmured cold and chcerlefsly. Selina threw a trembling glance around her, and wirh a beadng heart ftepped quickly on her way homeward. She had not got many paces, when Ihe heard, in the bullies behind her a ruftling noife, as of fome per¬ fon forcing his way through them. Terror deprived her of j ower„to proceed, and flie ftood,
ftood, tixzd in wild apprehenfion, gazing on the fpot the found came from. A man inliantly became apparent, and in him flie beheld Lord Defmond. Joyed to meet a friend, on whofe protection ihe relied, where ihe dreaded a foe of ihe knew not what ahrmimr kind, ilie advanced to his Lordfhip ; and, in a voice faint in the agita¬ tion ilie had known, tol J lr:n her fears, and begecd him to ffuard her home. <f What! my little Goddefs of the m3des t is it you ?'* cried Defmond, " Guard you ? Yes, niy angel! Affure yourielf 1 will t;ke care of you/' Selina Darted nt his fpeech, and more at the action \\iih which he accompanied it 5 for he threw his iwm round her wai ft, and feized her haiuj with his dilcnj-jaged one. " My Lord!" cried (he, " for the fake of Heaven !" wlien, on looking in his fac?, g 2 ilie
fhe perceived her enquiry was unneceffary, in difcovering h e was intoxicated. Shrinking from him in diftrefs and difmay, flie would, in rhe firft moment of apprehenfion, have fied ; but he maintained his hold, and, with the heat of inebriety, exclaimed, " \\ hither fo faft, my little blooming beauty ? Why, I know you not hard-hearted enough to leave a Knight, v. ho has youth on his fide, to wandcralone inthe dark. Come, my pretty, pretty little nymph, there is no hafte ! Be¬ neath this fliade we can enjoy the cool of tlie evening, better than wiiere the impertinent eye of travellers moleft us. Come, come, Selina, you wane no teaching on this fcore." When he finifhed fpesking, he ftrained the form of Selina clofe to his own, and at¬ tempted to prefs to her fece his lips. With ftrength lent to her by affright, fhe glided through his arms, and darted forward ; but, in a few inftants, the ruffian overtook, and again enclofed her in his arms. Wild
Wild in defpair, flie flirieked aloud ; but her fcreams were anfwered only by the echoes of diftance, and the woeful night-birds that fheltered in the gloom of the adjacent foreft. She turned to her rude perfecutor : ct " What mean you, my Lord ?" fhe cried ; " the fon of my protector, of my father, would not, furely, defcend to brutality ? As you would be fhieided by good, angels in the hour of danger, let me leave you! Hurt not, my Lord, a poor defencelefs maid who owes her all to the bounty of you and your's. For¬ get not yourfelf, Lord Defmond, nor violate the innocence that looks up to you for fhelter!" " Very fine and very pretty, by my honour!" returned he : "really, a ftranger would be tempted to believe you in earneft. Why, Lord, my dear, I underftand italk I took my probation long ago ; and fo it would not be the thing to drop, unrefifting, to the lover's arms ? The fex have taught you that ftruggling, ere you grant, enhances the favour, and binds the lover to you—have g 3 they ?
they ? Why, then, ftruggle on, my fweet girl; and if gentle force, on my part, will be beft feeming to you, gentle force you fliall have." In delirious agony Selina threw herfelf at his feet, cc On my knees," flie cried, u I implore for pity ! As you hope for Heaven's blifs, Lord Defmond, let me pafs! Lord Defmond, 1 have ever thought of you as of a brother:—is it for you to trample on my helplefihefs ? Oh no, my Lord •* i: is your's to be the guardian of my weaknefs. But you know not now, my brother, what you do. See mc again to-morrow. Mark your thoughts then. My brother, you would not touch me to-morrow for worlds !" " Selina J" cried Defmond, throwing himfelf on a bank clofe by, and dragging befide him the trembling objeft of his defires, 41 Selina, furely 'tis impoffible we can mif¬ take each other ? You pray me take pity on » a maid—vm make me laugh ! Selina, know you
you the beechen walk in the park? Know you a certain convenient old domeftic ?" He paufed, and fixed on her his eyes. t « My Lord !" fhe faltered. « You do, Selina! and, in that domeftic's cottage, you alfo know the arms of—- of a friend, Selina l" She turned from him her face in momen¬ tary indignadon :■—« Away, my Lord 1" fhe faid j " I underftand you not 1" « No!" returned he; "that is rather fiirprifing too ! It may be, I could mention what would much affift your comprehenfion. But you are coy, my fweet girl! you are coy; 1 cannot be deceived. You do not wifh me to obey what you fay. Poor and humble as you are, had you retained what you have given to him who will make you no recom¬ pence, I would have ftooped to take you for a wife 5 but now you fliall be mine on eafier terms—now you fhail blefs me as 04 y° u
you havc thought fit to do your hero, there!
His aftions now became more violent. He clafped the defpairing Sdina in his arms, and forced from her trembling lips an hun¬ dred kiffes. In vain flic ftrove to urter fcreams of diftrefs. His hated endearments ftiflcd her cries; and, incapable of longer refiftance, flie was on the point of being facrificed to his bafe paflion, when a fudden found of voices from clofe behind where he fat, caufed her infulter to paufe in his at¬ tempts. <f Help, paflengers! help, for the love of Heaven!" cried Selina, in a laft exertion of her ftrength. " Stop !** feid the voice that had before fpoken, " did I not hear a noife ?" " Oh, yes! help, friends!" repeated Selina; and Lord Defmond had but juft releafed her when the Eari himfelf appeared before him- "My
" My fon," cried he "and—gracious God! and Selina? Villain! hcw's this?" He put his hand to his fword. " Nothing, my Lord," faid Selina faintly; " nothing, I affure you. A long walk ex¬ haufted me. My Lord Defmond met, and kindly offeied to affift me in reaching the caftle. That was all, be affiled, my Lord." " Yes, my father," faid Defmond, from whom furprife and terror had taken partly the effects of wine, and who had gained time to praftifc diffimulation, " yes, my father, fiie fays truly, that was all." 'Hie Earl was filent for fome moments.—■ " If I thought otherwife," he at length ut¬ tered, (i thU aliment fliould be your dying one. Away, Sir! Lady *Bradkigh is under my pro'eftion, not your's^ Leave me, and remember I fjrbid you attending on her thus for tnc future." Defmond feemed with difficulty to fupprefs the vku k paffions that tore his fouh He mut- c 5 tered
tc red fome words, however, that wore the fice of fubmifllon, and retired j while the Earl and Sir Kmcric Arville, who was in his company, efcorted Selina, uho was unable to walk without afliftance, to the caftle. *. Though Selina fancied herfelf never to have given duc thanks to the Being whofe proteftion flie had experienced, ftill this in¬ cident was to her a continual fource of pain. She few herfelf by it bereft of a friend on whofe pure aifeftion and honour fhe thought ihe might have placed the moft entire reli¬ ance, and imagined that the expreffions Defmond had ufed, could only be underftood as conveying knowledge of her connexion with the Prince. Tortured by that belief, all her hours were fpent in alarm and appre¬ henfion. Though flie placed much of Defmond's violence to the account of ine¬ briety, fhe did not think herfelf entirely fecure from fimilar attempts in the future, and trembled in fear, whenever remote and alon£ % By avoiding fuch fituations as fhe had
A *vVTKTER had already experienced danger in, flie, how¬ ever, hoped to leffen the probability of her awain iuffering the like, or worfe infults. But her fenfe of danger was not yet fuffici¬ ently ftrong to prevent her vifiting, in the mofl open hours of day, that fpot valued for having been trodden over by the Prince. There fhe took the only token of his friend¬ fliip, his farewel letter, and read and wept over its contents. Jn them fhe fuv pictured ail fhe knew of his foul—its noble gene¬ rofity, its fenfibility, and its love for her, When fhe contrafted the tender delicacy with which he woo'd her heart, even when he knew it to be his ov.'n, to the felfifh violence of Defmond, fhe joined to her love thac rapturous efteem wnich alone can render affe-ftion endlefs. Nearly in every day fhe faw Ofborne; but ftom him flie did not yet receive any intelligence of the Prince. In greater anxi- t;y-than ihc would acknowledge, even to herfelf, her feeling, fhe waited fome fort of c 6 tidings
, tidings of liim. His propofed intention of introducng her to the Court was the fubjeft on which her fancy conftantly delighted itfelf. Each imervening minute, while fhe indulged herfelf in pifturiig the happinefs jhe iuppoft'd tint e/ent would afford her ? feemed a lnverintr hour, and the caille ■w ****** * daily became more gloomy and irkfome to her. Lord Dc m ton i flie itudioufly avoided j and he, in public, firmed as careful to fliun her. Tlie Earl, ih- thought, took little notice of her ; .md h's temper appeared fo entirely akeied, thac die rather looked on him wich terror than that affeftion which her givtitude prompted her to regard him with. The caftle was feldom open to vifiters. Sir Eme:lc Arviiie Has the fole gueft where lately fo many had. flailed in luxuriance.— Thii Sir Emeiic, Selina beiield with fenfa¬ tions for which flie could in no ihape account. She trembled when*, ver hu* eyes dwelt on his face, and when he fpoke, his words feemed to chill her very foul. His
Ills appearance was, it is true, dark and forbidding. He was above the middle fize. His features were lar^e and ftroncdv marked. His lip was ever curled to the expreffion of difilain, and his large eye-brows were contrafted to that of fanguinary hatred. He fpoke little, and what he did, was harfh and offenfive. He v. as reported to have been unfortunate in the earlier part or" life; fince which he h.\d devoted hL» time to thofe bloody wars to which the Continent was fub¬ jeft in the fourteenth century. To this man Lord Ilford appeared mvxih attached. They frequently, toward the clofe of diy, walked together, nobody knew whither, and fome¬ times were fliut for hours in the EaTsaptrt- ment. Of Selina Sir Emeric took little nodce; but to Lady Ilford he was fcrupu¬ loufly attentive. The amiable Countefs appeared to hold Selina in increafing efteem. In her abfence flic wai never fenfible of happir.cfej and while flic fondly called lier c daughter/ flie felt
felt for htr all a mothcPs love. SelinTs tender mind n turned this fhnd.iefs with a d.w Irir'satfefti n, and found a (oftener of hei bof t^ ;> jn^ui.h in pav»:ig to her kind 4 protecirel's e■.'«.'y fiiid duty. A thoufand time'*, v.f.ife w dkt.i.; thiough the patk (hades, htr heait panted to ope* itfelf where its weakneffes were fure of in'ulgenccj but ftill au unw llingnefs, a reluftance which fhe fancied rectitude urged, made her forbear to do what would iiave eafed the pain that too often oppreff.d her thoughts. Should, however, the Prince find himfelf able to aft as he intended, and fhe be fummoned to attend the Queen's perfon, fiie determined no obftacle, but dut of the Prince's pofitive defire to the contrary, fhould prevent her difclofing to her beloved, nuternal friend every particular oi her fituation. It was cne day, not long after the attempt of Lord Defmond to take th t advantage of Selina's beauties which foh;u le and twiihmt gave to him, that Lady liford and Sehna walked;
walked, in deep conversion, along a retired path of the park. The fun had fhone with intenfe power i and, a-^ night advanced, his beams mt Ilowed to a luxuriant warmth that gave to the fpin'ts a lulling languor. Both ladies, by degrees, became fo fer fuhj^ft to this penfivenefs, that they ftrayed, in a filence neither had power to break, through thofe woodlands that led to the moft remote parts of the park. At length Lady Ilford faid, after a deep figh, ce Selina, methinks it muft be a charm¬ ing thincr to be in Heaven !" (i Of all ftates, doubtlefs, the moft blifsful," returned Selina ;— il but, dear Madam, how came fuch a thought in your boiom ? h'or yoa there is, i truft, a world of happinefs on earth." Lady Ilford fighed again. ff I know not, in truth," laid ihe; <( but I have hdd many fad thoughts of late. I remember, vhtn I was your age, my fweet friend, I ufed to 6 think
think it pleafant to be melancholy ; but thofe days," and again ihe fighed, (i thofe days are paft now 1 * f How ftveet," continued flie, after a paufe, tc to dwell, wichout the anguifh of an improper wiih, m yonder ikies!—To be fur¬ rounded by pure fpirits ; to be pure yourfelf! To dare to look your Maker in the face, and know yourfelf the objeft of his love ! In one ftrain of hve and harmony to live for ever ! —Oh Selina ' who would not die for this V* 4 ( W ho, indeed?" refpond e d S d 1 n a, who fc heart w:.s exalted by the p'.fture ; l< but, my dear motlier, you are too melancholy. I low deep a figh was Cher.; 1 and you: eyes i f:.n in tears V « I cannot help it/' faid I.rdj* U"./rJ ; U I am, indeed, too lad j but I K.ver no^ a-n otherwife/' Selina preffed ner ft iend'i. hand ro her lips and fondled it to her bofom as rhey walked flowly on, bueuee
Silence again took place. « 'Tis ftrange," faid Lady Ilford, at length, muHngly, and without addreffing her difcourfe to Selina, £t 'rib moft ftrange ! but I muft be fanciful. Yes, yes, Pll think no more of it." << Think no more of what, dear Madam ?" faid Sehna. " Oh a trifle, a mere trifle, my love !— You'll call me whimfical if I tell you ; and yet, if I can be confcious of exiftence, I was awake, and in my fenfes; buc it might only be imagination notwithftanding." " What might, my mother?" afked Selina, whofe feelings began to be much interefted. (f A foolifh thought of mine. I would fein believe it was no more; yr t many believe in fuch warnings. Moft people do think thefe things real " " What mean yen, Madam ?" cri.-d Selina, trembling. " Hath your melancholy lhaped anv ftran»e fight ?" "■ Yes,
" Yes, merely fo. 'Twas two nights ago, my love. I found myfelf unable to fleep. I was re ftk* Is, with >ut knowing the caufe. I railed myfelf on my couch, and looked around in,- to afiiuc myfelf that ail was fafe. The lamp bu.r.t glimmering!;/ by my bed- ftnt. 1 co-iid not righdy difcern objefts by ib feeini;j£iy/.,- t ;c\/ li^ht. Prcie.uly i heaid fomewhat Jn-;e deep breathing, I turned my eyes ro the fpot, wlien I beheld——* but you look pale, my child ! Dear giri ! I was foolifh to tell you my ftrange fancies—'twas but the wandering ofa weak mind.7 They were now in tlie deepeft rccefs of the covert. A bank, covered with foft grafs, on which grew, gaily,-a little world of wild flowers, was hard by, and they fat them down there. No fpot could be more entirely lonely. The large old trees that overhung them, for many a furlong, created a gloom, ftill and profound. The grafs feemed as if no foot had trodden on it for years. Not a murmur told the neighbour¬ hood
hood of exiftence, fave the cawing of one melancholy rook, that was perched on an high tree top. The place kemtd the very abqde of Mehncholy. The Countefs looked on what furrounded her, in iiiencej and, though fhe knew not the ieelhig rh:it give them birth, big tears roiled ilowly down her face. Selina bent on one knee to her languid fiiend. She laid the Counter's pale hand on her own whiter netkj and cafli, g her fweet tjJue eyes up to her face, begged her to lay what in her midnight chamber fancy had made appear to her. The Countefs was about to fpeak, when, from the thicket before tiiem, fuddenly iflued an human figure. It w.is tall beyond the credence of reafon, though its garments led you to fuppofe it female. Round it was wrapped the miferable remnant of a difco- loured blanket. Over its purfy cheft was thrown a kerchief, black in filth, and which ill concealed the more fikhy fkin that, either from nature, or the accidents of ex¬ pofure,
pofure, feemed hardened to greater than animal coarfenefs. Its hair was loofe and wild, and its face fuch as beggars defcrip¬ tion ! The cheeks were funk below the bones -, the lips were large, black, and flabby, and loathfome in foamy moifture. The eyes feemed ftarting from their fockets, and at once cxprefled favage rage and arch malig¬ nity. This figure no fooner faw Lady Ilford than it ftarted back a pace in feeming dif¬ may i tlien, it fixed on her face its glaring eyes, and uttered a long fcream. Its face became fwelled wirh inward emotion j it held out its arms, and its finews vvere con¬ trafted in convulfion. It remained fo for many moments, when it let feh its arm, and burft into a dreadful fardonic laugh. The terrified Selina threw herieif befide her proteftrefs, and clung to her, equally anxious to receive and afford flicker i while Lady Ilford felt the blood curdle within her veins,
veins, and awaited, incapable of motion, what farther the horrible ftranger had to pra6life. For more than a minute tke difguft ful female ftood with her eyes fixed on Lady Ilford's; then fhe advanced till fiie was clofe to her. She pointed with one extended finger to the fkies; the fore-finger cf her other hand ihe held iu a line with Lady Ilford's heart. Her whole foul feemed fo big with fome ghaftly fecret, that it threatened to burft through her bofom, or to frenzy her brain. At length her features relaxed to a frightful grin ; but her hands ftiil retained their ftrange pofition. After a fpace of recolleftion, Lady Ilford commanded courage to addrefs the unufual intruder.—"For the lake of Hea¬ ven, good woman, what mean you ?" cried flie, falteringly. Mercy of the Divinity, what a voice anfwered her ! The pen wants power to give it charader. If words ftrove to defcribe it, they
14^ they would fey it feemed not the utterance of aught fuperluimnn, but of an earthly creature pojjrjjcd. The rumbling tongue feid, (< Tell mc not of Heaven ! Heaven heeds you not! You are gone ; Heaven heeds you noE p*—U Hopped. The figure moved away thac hand which pointed to the Iky; it direfted the Countefs's look to an huge raven. The r.iven flapped its wings, and croaked/—. " Hear you that ?" cried ihe, "hear you that ? Moves your blood througii your body while that hoarfe fong is fung? Can you liften with unchilled fenfes, while the bird of the bad fi/nd makes the wood groan with fore¬ bodings of derah ? And, again, mark you that hootr In the murky grove day is as nirht and tlv.: cry is the cry of the fereech- owl. Woe aad death be to the ear that liften* to the difmil note ! Look you there ! -ioa fee it nor; but it touches you now.— Oh whac an heart-appalling figure ! Its hand is locked in your's. Ah '/' fcreaming wildly, *< its lip is joined in your own ; Lady, lady, now it will never kave you V* " What
<f What will never leave ine r M cried Lady Ilford } i( for God's fake what ? I fee not aught I" " No !" Cl.l the fi- : -irc ; « but," in a (low and nt ;re fokvnn tone, <{ have you never frn atighc ? You \iv;, you have! Tis that wh.c.j f *.' ! , \ u i.i Its enibnce, and you \\*!1 ihoniy ice ic agvin. When you do, Oh when you d j !" i-:.»e the figure rtopped, oiki groaned as if ts.untd with inward pain. 1'hrn it wnc.hed 1:5 luredil bjdy, and rub¬ bed quickiy ks fiJes v ith its hands, mum- bdiv> tht- whiie, cm il* and blafphemies the moti' uuir'd and unnaiural. It r Y n:iMeti it& teoii, and irom ic^ eyco f-enicd to iilue fparks of nuli t >nant fne. «« The/ won't Lc mc," ilie ciied uildi) , li they won't let mc ! They haverne by the len,:; '•.hey dry my throat till 1 can't j]e;ik. But [ know them now; and here's for tiiem, and herc , f,> So faying, flie took, f-om underneath her garment, an human bone, and waved it thrice round her head ; then ihc approached the
s tale. the Countefs witli the air ofa creature frantic. Slie g.-zed on her, as if glutting her eyes over a viftim. After doing which for a time, fnt howled— (< \Vi:cn ihc corpfe begins to gieni, '< Thut yifteniight its gi'sv-t fiiftksicwj " W!n.n you ken tl»e fpeftre's mien, « ( WU-t-fc iidihh eye-beams row ken you ; <( When, ,n windiiig-flicet niray'd, *' l-'io'.n tk'dlli & t'j/.-jco-i, cistaiy, low, " To diiil the faul of lh.it left m-iki, t( IKr buried kindrci flitting jo ; ** Wlien the cable's gloomy walls, <* A-it! li.e table's long-toii'd Ixl!, <* Cfi'j w'th usiw-jjldly c:J!s, <■ /\iul, uuioiii,i-;J, the hoiii" U-I!; '* Th:n bcwire, beware, bevvaie! «' Think ot' blood, ot* fion ori drc-mi! ** Thtii then* arms divide ihu i-ir ! «' And tltLir d^gei'S o'er you gleam !'*
In
In her look, her manner, and her voice, there was fomething of infpiration fo horrid, that, as flie finifiied the laft ftanza, Lady Ilford fell back, loft to life. Unable to affift her, Selina threw herfelf by her fide. At length, however, flie, in defpair, affumed courage, and chafed the Countefs's temples, and called on her name. On regaining life, Lady Ilford flirank back on the feat: " Oh fave me, fave me V* fhe cried. ct Spirits of Heaven, I pray your protection!" <c Look up, dear mother!" faid Selina, e< here is no one but me." By fearful degrees fhe lifted her eyes, and beheld, indeed, only Selina; for die terrific ftranger was gone. When affured they were alone, flie fell on Selina's neck, and eafed her heart by tears:—" My God, my God!'* fhe whifpered faintly, " forlake me not> or I perifh ! It is thou alone, Oh Father! that canft fave me !" vol. n. h «Be
" Be compofed, my dear Madam," faid Selinaj <f let me beg you be compofed!" " I am, my love," returned flie.* " I am quite, quite compofed. Hoping in Heaven's love, I have nothing to fear. But, Oh my child ! though my foul is ferene, it fhudders. Such is the weaknefs of mortality 1" She was filent; but her eyes, that were caft upward with a faint-like expreffion of trembling adoration, were ftiil full of tears. Selina, while fhe fupported and tended on her, threw around many a timid glance for the objed that had fo ftrangeiy obtiuded itfelf; but her eye met it not. A breath of air crept among the bullies, and then the bell of the diftant caftle named fRf hour •* its heavy notes died y faintly echoed by the hills afar off, and all was again ftill. She befought Lady Ilford to arife, and feek the proteftion of home. " Yes, my daughter," fighed flie, " we will go ; but, alas! no home will flielter me ! No caftle fliields the devoted head !" " Talk
tf Talk not fo, my mother/' cried Selina $ " your words affright me, You will nor, my beft, my deareft friend, let what a wicked woman could fay, if a woman fhe were, throw you into defpondence ? It may be, flie was delirious P" Lady Ilford fliook her head, "Ah no!" flie fighed. « What the form, of which I cannot think without fhuddering as at the fight of death, uttered, favoured more of what contains infinitely greater horror than delirium. You are young, my child; you are (bleffed be the Virgin !) ignorant of the world: but there are horrible arts, dark fciences, pradifed by thofe vvho want prin¬ ciples of purity ; of thefe the frenzied eye of preternatural knowledge, the dire fore¬ bodings of malignity, are certain marks Too furely this ghaftly image poflefled them! But let us think of it no more. Although the worldly part of thofe who ferve Heaven fondly, may ftart appalled at worldly horror ftill, within, they rife fuperior to all its power- within they commune with good fpirits, and H z know
know the confolation of Heaven's approving fmile," In fteps, flow through faintnefs, 'Lady Ilford reached the caftle, where fiie re'apfed to a ftate of infenfibility. The Earl, whom the terrified domeftics fetched to her prefence with frantic hafte, eagerly demanded ihe caufe of her illnefs, and was by Selina, in part, informed of it. His countenance in¬ ftantly became, diftorted with rage. He could not at once give utterance to the emo¬ tions of his foul ; but when he could, he broke into mingled execrations, and orders for the menials to fearch the paik, and bring to him the offending hag. The Countefs was conveyed to her apart- rrent, where Selina performed the kind office of nurfe j and, reclined by her friend's couch, with her hands enclcfing one of her p:uient\% fnn ftrove, by cheering and en~ dealing converiation, to ciiipel the trouble of her foul. The
The fervants, after along fearch,returned, unable to difcover the retreat of the pre¬ fumed witch, much to the vexation of the Earl, and the difappointment of their own vengeance: they, in the courfe of thetr perambulation, having agreed to beg their Lord's permiflion to pradife the humane method of tying the old woman hand and foot, and throwing her into a deep pond; when, if flie fwam, without farther trial, they would refign her to be burnt for a forcerefs ; but if fhe behaved in the courfe of nature, and fank, they would releafe her of the im¬ putation of witchcraft. Lady Ilford, at length, fell into a calm fleep. Selina tlien placed her hand by her fide, imprinted one foft kifs on her forehead, and ftole gently from the chamber. Without meeting any of the family, fhe pafled through the long galleries that led to her own room. She opened die cafement, and fat her down at the window. The laft h 3 glittering
glittering beams of the fun ftill hung on the high hills that firft caught her eye. Ere flie had fat many minutes, they fell, in flow grandeur, below the horizon 5 and all the beauties ofthe hills, wrapped in a tranfparent mift that foftened their effeft, became open to the eye. Jn a penfive humour ilie con¬ templated the fctnt before her, while her heart now wandered to where it firft dared to love, and now dwelt in apprehenfion and pain on the bodings of the frightful ftranger. Beneath her window was the paved terrace ofthe caftle rampart. From thence fhe heard a flow footftep, and then a deep figh. She boked down, and beheld a figure, in which die prefently recognized the Earl. He was walk¬ ing, with his arms folded on his bofom, and his eyes bent to the ground. His pace was irregu - !ar j fometimeshe fcarcely moved bis feet along, and feemed too much loft in refieftion to be confcious of motion j at others, he trod the terrace in long and hafty ftrides, wifhing, it would
would feem, to leave even himfelf behind. Surprifed by his manner, Selina defcended to the flight impropriety of marking his motions, and filently maintained her pofture for that purpofe^ After walking, for a time, backward and forward, he ftopped nearly oppofite to her window. He drew his hat over his face, and looked cautioufty round him. Then he took flowly from his pocket a paper/and with care examined its contents; but what they were Selina could not difcover. Pic looked on them in filence fome moments; then he put afide the hand that held them, and turned in an oppofite diredion his face. Pie folded the paper, flung it from him, and walked from the fpot as if in the hafte df horror. Shortly he returned. Pie leaned on the breaft-work of tht rampart, and his eyes vvere caft to that part of the Heavens in which he had ma,ked the glomes of the fettng fun. He long contemi Lrod the fky in profound meditation. Suddenly he ftarted h 4 from
from his pofture, ftr-mped his foot on the ground, and violently ftruck his forehead with his clencf ed hand. He looked for a minute on the paper he had before flung from hitn; then ftooped, grafped it in *his hand, and, with the fpeed of newly-formed refolution, left the terrace, and returned no more. He had not been gone many minutes, when a figure, wrapped clofely in his cloak, approached from the further end of ttte ter¬ race. He feemed to regard none of the objeds that were around him, but to keep his eyes fteadily bent on his path. His pace was unaltered and flow ; but twice he ftarted, and looked fufpicioufly behind him. As he drew nearer, Selina difcovered, though his military hat and feather were pulled over his brow, the face of Sir Emeric Arville.— Awakened as was her imagination by the incident of the afternoon, and thofe manners of the Earl that fhe had juft witneffed, a chill *, pang paffed through her blood at the fight of this man, which, though ftie blamed her weaknefs
weaknefs in being fubjeft to it, was too in¬ voluntary to be avoided. She was unable to withdraw her eyes from the objeft that offended them. A ray of light fell on Sir Emeric's face. His features were fixed in fullen malignity. His eyes wore the fcowl of pampered revenge. In their expreffion there was fomewhat terrible -, and Selina Ihrank timidly back as fhe fancied their glance direfted to her. He pafled fteadily on. When he attained the extreme of the rampart, he turned and looked over the path along which he had walked: it was vacant, and he flowly difappeared. Selina then fhut the cafement of the window, and entered her anti-chamber, where her lute andthe Prince's treafured letter afforded her means of amufe¬ ment till night entirely clofed in., So loft was fhe in penfive thought, that ftie fat with her head refted on her hand long after the room was buried in utter dark¬ nefs. A bat, that winged its way acrofs the caftle courts, ftruck itfelf againft the arched h 5 window
window of the room, and its noife awakened her from her trance of refieftion. -j Startled at the latenefs of the hour, and the diftance fhe mull go to procure a lio-ht, Ihe ftepped direftly to the door ofher apart¬ ment, and opening it, entered on the paffage that led from it. With an heart not free from terror, flie fought her way to thofe parts of the caftle inhabited by the upper domeftics. The faint ftreaks of light, admitted at the high pointed windows, were not fufficient to ■difclofe to her the .path flie trod on. Half fufpicious of having miftaken her way, fhe wandered from the end of one long gallery to the windings of another. At intervals a wider opening difcovered to her the fringed tapeftry-cornice folemnly waving backward and forward, or the ereft, depiftured figures on the galkry-fides; but neither of thefe could ftie fee diftinftiy enough to inform herfelf what part of the caftle flie was ih.
$
She
She now fliuddered to find her fituation really alarming. Difturbed by the demeanor ofthe frightful female, and terrified at finding herfelf alone in night and darknefs, a fuper¬ ftitious dread came over her. She trembled in apprehenfion of fhe knew not what ; and, as fhe gazed on the mafs of darknefs before her, and fometimes caught a glimpfe of one or other of the objefts enwrapped in it, Ihe in every moment feared to fee fome pale and dreary being iffue forth to " chill her foul." Thoughts of a more afBifted nature alfo entered her bofom. Should £Iord Defmond find her thus helplefsly fituated, fhe fliud¬ dered to thiuk of the too probable confe¬ quences. Remote from the poffibility of anfwer to her cries, alone, defolate, and in darknefs, too likely flie would fink the vie* tim of his impetuous, illicit paflion. Op- preffed by thefe fad imaginings, her trembling knees almoft refufed to bear her fainting form; flie had fcarcely power to draw her breath. Unable to diftinguifh her way, flie h 6 paufed
paufed for a moment, and fupported herfelf by a projecting part of the wall. She rea¬ foned with herfelf on the neceffity for exerting all the courage (he poffeffed. She ftrove to fupprefs the beatings of her heart, and cheered her with the hope of the long gallery fhe was in being that which led to the ftairs fhe fought. When fhe had, in forne meafure, re-affured herfelf, fhe proceeded with what hafte flie could exert. She gained die end of the gallery, and then found herfelf in what feemed the interfe&ion of different pailages. She paufed, and ftrove to recoiled where the fpot could be -* but fo bewildered was htr mind by the terrors of htr fituation, that fhe was unable to form aught but con- jecture. Senfible fhe incurred equal danger by hefitating or proceeding, flie ftepped on where there appeared moft light to guide her way. Of the paftage fhe was in, fhe thought herfelfentirely ignorant. In it there were but few windows, and thofe few were fmall, and incumbered
incumbered with maffy ftone frame-work. Sometimes fhe thought of calling aloud for lights and guidance ; then fearful of her cry producing the prefence of thofe whom (he moft: wifhed to avoid, fhe groped on in trembling filence. She had not proceeded far, when tht open¬ ing of a diftant door met her ear. The door was fhut, and the jarring found ran along the gallery walls, and died in a hollow mur¬ mur. Suddenly, from the part whence the found came, appeared light like that of a taper. Her eager eye was fixed to the fpot in joy and hope. For an inftant was feen the form of a man wrapped clofely in his cloak. He turned the corner of the paffage, and difappeared. In palpitating hafte Selina made toward that part ofthe gallery in which fhe had per¬ ceived him. When fhe reached that fpot, all was dark as where flie came from. In no direction
direftion could be traced the fainteft beam of the light fhe had feen borne. In difappoint¬ ment her alarm increafed, Clofe by her was a large arched window ; flie ftrove to look on the profpeft it opened to, that thence fhe might know to what part of the caftle fhe had wandered ; but the night was too gloomy to admit her difcovering any ofthe objefts with¬ out. She heard the brufli of the wind by the caftle's rugged fide ; and while flie liftened, a diftant owl cried drearily. Ofthe vicinity of human exiftence flie heard not aught, Uncertain which of the ways that layjbefore her was right, fhe determined on taking the path through which fhe fancied the form flie had tranfiently feen, had paffed. She there had more light to aflift her in proceeding; the windows were more numerous and better calculated to convey light than were thofe of the galleries flie had left. As ihe ftepped quick, though timidly, on, flie ftarted, ap¬ palled to behold before her a figure feem¬ ingly
ingly clad ih white. Terror deprived her of all power of voice, .and a feat clofe by, on which fhe dropped, alone faved her from falling to the ground. Her eyes were rivetted to the objed; it ftood motionlefs and erecfh Recollection prevented dread and imagination overpower¬ ing her faculties ; for ic darted to her mind that flie had ftrayed to the eaftern range of chambers, and that what ihe beheld was a ftatue of fome dead perfonage, which had long ftood there difregarded. Though much relieved by having the immediate fubjed of her apprehenfion removed, her terrors were not leffened by iinding herfelf to be in a part of the caftle remote and unfrequented. The eaftern part of tht building was altogether untenanted -. and, concerning it, many ftran»e and fuperftitious tales were current among the caftle menials, Selina was now particularly fubjed to thofe weakneffes, which, in a greater or lefs degree, either from education or nature, are in tvtry perfon's bofom ; and
and while fiie looked on the dreary fpace before her, and the long way flic muft go before flie could reach a fpot more fre¬ quented, a religious dread came over her, and fhe was the prey of a thoufand horrible imaginings. She a*v-fe, and, fcarcely daring to lift her eyes from the ground, flowly returned the way fhe came. She had not gone Qr ere words were fpoken, in a low voice, clofe by her. She ftarted in difmay; but on looking fearfully round, could not difeover any perfon in the gallery. Again flie heard the voice, and then fhe firft perceived a line of light acrofs the floor, like that ftealing through a door-crevice. Surprifcd at fuch a circum¬ ftanee, where fhe believed no room to be inhabited, fhe doubted whether to fiy, or to conclude fhe had found the flielter flie fought. She had not deliberated long, when there founded from within the room a figh fo deep and long, that it had all the cadence ofa groan. At firft fhe would have haftened from
from the place; but after a few moments* thought, the feelings of humanity, joined to thofe of curiofity, induced her to ftay and liften to what farthe* founds might come from the folitary chamber. There feemed to be more perfons there than one j and prefently fhe difcovered the converfation to be carried on between two men. The voices were hollow, and fufpici¬ oufly low ; one man appeared expoftulating w'/i the other : Selina could catch only the leading features of their difcourfe. Shortly flie diftinguifhed one fentence that occafioned her to liften, if poffible, more clofely. Gra¬ cious God ! of how horrid import were the words that came to her hearing! They froze her very heart's blood. " For a minute her fenfes paufed, and life hung doubtfully in her bofom. When recolleftion returned, fhe panted for breath. Her limbs forfook their duty when flie ftrove to move ; and,, had fhe been poffefTed of power, flie would have betrayed herfelf by fcreaming aloud. As
As foon as fhe regained, in fome ihape, thv ufe of reafon, fhe ftarted from tht horrid neighbourhood flie had ftrayed to, and fought protedion in the obfcurity of darknefs. Her movement was partly diftinguifhable from within the room. Some perfon feemed to ftart on his feet, and a noife was heard like that of fomething falling to tht ground. Before flie had fled far ftom the dreadful chamber, fhe heard its door haftily opened, Footfteps founded in the gallery; defpair lent her ftrength, and ftie ran precipitately forward, ftie knew not whither. At length, exhaufted and faint, fhe ftopped for an in¬ ftant. Al! behind her was dark and quiet, and flie gained courage to proceed with more leifure. How grateful to her heart was the appearance of a large palmed window, from which flie with eafe could find the rooms occupied by the family! With an heart beating in joy, flie defcended the fpiral ftairs that led to the fervants' hall, and procured a female companion and the comfort ofa light. She
She fliortly repaired to the apartment ofLady Ilford. The Countefs was awake. She felt refrefhed, ihe faid, by the repofe flie had taken, and begged Selina to fit down befide her bed, and amufe her awhile by difcourfe. For fuch a foothing duty Selina was well fitted. Her gentle voice, the foft comfort it breathed, the tender confolation of her looks-—all confpired to give reft to the aching heart, and make even ficknefs forget for a little feafon its pains. Her endearments caufed an hour to pafs fmoothly over the head ofLady liford, when it was in the power of little elfe to do fo. At length, concern for her young friend's health would not fuffer her to detain her any longer. Selina was not eafily perfuaded to relinquifh her office ; and when fhe did bring herfelf to conform to the Countefs's requeft, fhe twice returned, and repeated her kifs and farewel before fhe left the chamber.
A female
A female fervant bore before her a lighted taper, into converfation with whom Selina entered, ro difpel the terror that came over her, heart as flie pafled the gallery's end, in which words of fo uncommon and dreadful a fort had fhocked her nearly beyond bearance. In fpite of her endeavours to divert her fancy, a chill ran through her blood that made her fhudder and turn pale as fhe, involuntarily, looked up the gallery - toward where the chamber flood. The taper carried by the fervant, only in part difclofed the long fpace on which flie looked. Her imagination fhaped ftrange objeds where her eye but half dilcerned real ones; and flie drew clofe to the fervant, and faintly bade her haften her pace. When in her own apartment, flie difmiffed tht attendant, and having fecured the door, fat down to recover her fpirits, and compofe her mind before fhe retired to repofe. In vain fhe ftrove to do either ; a more than ordinary depreflion prevailed over ail her endeavours
endeavours to be cheerful; and when fhe fought to calm her mind, it the more obfti- nately recurred to a retrofpeft of the fearful incidents of the evening. Sometimes fhe fliuddered over the image her recolleftion prefented of the prophefying hug in the foreft ; at others, the myfterious manners of the Earl were before her eyes, accompanied by the threatening looks of the gloomy Sir Emeric. Then flie bethought her of tht horrid words flie had overheard in the un¬ tenanted eaftern chamber; and on this latter fubjeft her mind dwelt iongeft, and with moft pain. She frequently blamed herfelf for not informing the Countefs of what flie had liftened to; then hoped ihe tranflated the fpeeches wrongly, and rejoiced in not adding to Lady Ilford's diftrefs on inconfequential grounds. By emotion and difturbed thought her brain, at length, became burning and con¬ fufed ; and confident in Heaven's protec¬ tion,
tion, and her own innocence, flie left her table for her bed. She knelt before her crucifix, and opened her heart to God. She addreffed him as a child does a parent, and received, from the communication, that comfort which the fon does from the flielter of the father. Then (he refigned herfelf to fleep—the fweeteft form to incur earthly trials, the faireft mind to obtain, through them, the utmoft of hea¬ venly affiftance.
CHAP.
,
CHAP. V. ** Strange legends would ilie read, and figments dire." HOUSE OF SUPERSTITION,
^ V V HEN Selina, on the following morn¬ ing, entered the apartment of Lady Ilford, fhe found her rifen, and profeffedly better for her night's fleep; but with forrow flie ob¬ ferved the free of her friend to contradict her flattering account of improved health. Her whole form appeared wafted and faded •, her cheeks had fpread over them a fickly hue, the moft alarming •*_ a fpiritlefs languor pervaded her manner; and a forrow thac was rooted in the heart, though foftened by the heart's reditude, was fixed in her dim eyes, " I
« I take breakfaft, my love," faid ffic, " in my own room ; come, fit with me, and chafe away this foolifh weaknefs and depreffion." Selina drew a chair to the fide of the Countefs, and far there. « I have been thinking, Selina," faid the Countefs, taking her hand as fhe fpoke, " what would probably be your lot if 1 fliould die." Selina would have interrupted her. « Nay,'.* faid fhe, cc do not deride, nor" more ferioufly, " think me trifling when I talk thus. I may have long to live. In common with humanity, I hope I have j but J have that within that fays it may alfo be otherwife. What then, deareft, beft of chil¬ dren, would become of you ? Lord Ilford is certainly your friend: he certainly is very much fo •. but, I fear, you never will be happy with him. His manners, alas! my child.
child, you muft have perceived it, are not as they were wont to be. He now is fretful and violent. When alone, whatever I fay feemsoffenfivetohim. He is awhile the flave of paflion ; but no fooner does his rage bring tears from my eyes, than he falls at my feet, calls me * injured angel! Heaven's beft favourite !' and folds me in a momentary em¬ brace. Scarce does he feel my preffure on his bofom, when he ftarts away, pretends fudden hafte, and leaves me for the remainder of the day. With you, my Selina, he is not as he wiis ufed to be. He feems not happy in your prefence. What difficulty had I in taking you to Court! and when the arrival of the Prince plunged us all in an excefs of gaiety, you alone, were excluded from the fcene of joy ! You alone were fuffered to remain in ellrangementand folitude I It may be, my death may difpofe him more kindly to you; for then you will, fweeteft of giris ! be utterly an orphan 5 but 1 can hardly hope it. The wide world then is to receive you. Oh my child! what unthought-of vol.. 11, 1 foriows
forrows will you there meet 1 How many eyes will look on you with pretended pity, and, like the bafilifk, murder as they look ! How many tongues will talk to you oflove, and bafeiy plot, the while, the rum of y.,ur innocence ! Dreadful 1 Methinks I fee you without a prote&or; finking beneath the arts of fome pretended friend—fome wretch who talks to you of pute afl'eftion, and martyrs you to a grofs paflion/' Herc flie ftopped, ^nd refted her head on Selina's bofom, where fhe flied tears of weaknefs and love. Selina, to whom fome ofher words had given pain tiiat thty were not intended to inflift, while fhe paid a tear of gratitude to the emotion fhe caufed, be fought, in a trembling voice, Lady ilford not to give way to mi Iancholy thoughts, and not to fuffer tendernefs for her to add to the invo- '■mtary agitation of her mind. Lady Ilford lifted her head, and fupported it on the fide cf the chair. She preffed Selina's
Selina's hand, and again fpoke:— " I had hopes," faid flie, " that when I took my daughter to the prefence of the Queen, her perfedions (blufh not, my love, you have too much fenfe to be vain of lovelinefs) I had hopes that her perfedions, and the elegant modefty of her manners, would at- trad obfervation which might be beneficial to her. Your ftay, in what is called the world, was fo fhort, that my hopes were not anfwered. Accident nearly effeded what I wiflied : it introduced you to the notice of the Queen i but, it would feem, flie, in the hurry ofher Court, thought of you no more. Would to Heaven, my child, I could fee you under her protedion ! My heart would then be at eafe." The emotion of Selina's bofom now rofe over all controul. The fecret of her> foul could be iio longer concealed. She forgot what flie owed to the Prince, and couid nor live and conceal from- the friend whofe deareft J wifh appeared to be that of feeing i a her
her happv, the too probably blameabie con¬ nexion flie had formed. She flung herfelf at Lady Ilford's feet, and hid her blufhing face in her lap:—" Oh Madam !*' fhe cried. The feeling's of both prevented their being fenflbic that the Earl had entered the room, and vvas now clofe to his Lady. " Your Ladyfhip h engaged ?" faid he, ff No," replied the Countefs : u let me beg youi ftay ; I have not feen you fince firft I was ill. Let me beg you not to leave me." i( How is this ?" faid he, pointing to Scli.ia, who vvas in the ad of rifing from her knees. She looked lovely in confufion. Though flic trembled, her cheeks were covered with the glow of beauty; and her downraft eyes had in them that graceful timidity thar never fails to intereft—becaufe it owns inferiority., and looks for protedion. The Countefs readily accounted for the fitu¬ ation
ation of Selina. The Earl afked no farther, and Selina, curtfeying, withdrew. When alone, fhe knew not whether to rejoice or lament at the interruption. In Lady Ilford*s manner there was fomewhat fo folemn, yet tender and aflefting, that fhe had felt herfelf unable to hide from her what, moft likely, would fliape every future event of her life ; but, when flie coolly confidered that fhe was divulging the Prince's fecret with her own, fhe faw rather caufe for fitif- faftion in being preven'ed difclofing that which fhe refolved fhould not proceed fur- ther,without her obtaining permiffion to make her fecond mother the confidante of ic. In the afternoon, Selina felt-herfelf in that penfive temper, that flie always embraced to pay a duty at once produftive of pleafure ofthe fineft degree, and of melancholy patn— that of vifiting her mother's tomb.
13
The
The body of the late innippy Countefs was buried in that dieary vaulc which the Prince urd.nowin.gly entered when firft he found Selina's chamber in th<j caftle, A monument had been crtfted in the chapel, iu confequence of the prefent Lady Ilford's carndt wiih. It was formed of marble •; an entablature mentioned the name, rank, and fome few of the many virtues, together with ihe misfoitunes of the deceafed \ and, on ihe upper part of the tomb, was a figure of the Countefs, dead, ftretched on her maurefs, and her head fupported by a burial pillow. This cenotaph was reared in the moft/acred, but moft gloomy part of the chapel. Near it were many monuments of a fimilar nature. A long aifle, paved with flat black ftone, led to it -, and, beyond it, the eye loft itfelf in windings between heavy columns and railed- in monuments. A ferenity, grateful though gloomy, reignfed around. The light ftole, luftrelefs, on the aiftes^
aides, through windows decorated with fret¬ work, and obfcured by paint. A refrefhing coolnefs was in the air a3 Selina now entered the chapel, it was her luxury to fteal to her mother's monument in folitude. There was an awful pleafure in weeping there,while death and death's records alone were her companions, that gave her, when more melancholy thin ufual, fenfations that feemed a degree above mortality. »ver was her mind more fuited to receive im¬ preffions of fuch a nature than at this time. The fcenes die had recently witnefled, left thoughts of horror in her boiom, which were ever ready to aid the wanderings of imagi¬ nation ; and her feelings were worn down to excefiive tendernefs. She paffed, without hearing aught of foot¬ fteps, fave the echo of her own, along the aides to the facred fpot fhe fought. She threw herfelf on her knees, and, hiding her face in her hands, remained fome time in 1 4. fenfations
fenfations inexpreflible. 1 Ier foul feemed exalted to the pure heavens. Her heart beat with the name of mother. No tears came to her eyes, for her feelings were above them. She believed herfelf in the prefence of her motheris fpirit; flic breathed the inmoft wi files of her thoughts, and perfuaded herfelf fiie breathed them to a prefent and confcious being. While wrapped in adoration, a trifling and diftant noife caught her hearing. She would have fied, but the ncife came from that part of the chapel flie muft pafs througii, pre¬ fer.;})' fi:e diftinguiihed a flow and light foot¬ fiep; and then there appeared a female figure, ovei' whom was thrown a long veil. Again flic though: of flying; but tht figure advancing from behind a monument that had half con¬ cealed it, difcovered to her the manner of the Countefs. Afiiamed of her terror, fhe approached Lady Ilford, whofe furprife at meeting her was great, and whofe pleafure gre aie", Selina
Selina too did not fee her friend without aftonifliment. The melancholy of Lady Ilford had induced her, flie faid, to wander through the penfive fiillnefs of the chapek To her frame of mind, the-folemn gloom of the aifles was congenial and foothing. From each objeft flie derived melancholy pleafure. " Come, my Selina," feid flie, taking her arm, u let us wander amid thefe fau memo¬ rials of thofe who once lived, and were as we are j but who now are dead and forgotten! Look yonder, thatis the monument of an hero. Mark you the helmet and the fword ? A proftrate figure too 1 It is an enemy, and the viftoris fword is fufpended o'er his head. Alas! couid not the fculptor find a more apt fubjeft for an eulogium on his dead patron than that ? To boaft of blood and murder on what ftands between a man and Heaven 1 Surely, itillaccords with the Crofs, and that angelic form of our .blefled Virgin that is defigned on the upper part of tlie tomb !" 1 5 ' She
%
She was filent, and Selina anfwered not. They walked toward a group of tombs that flood in a narrow part of the chapel, and hard by which had been built a fmall chantry, in which, however, it was very long fince mafs had been fung. 'Twas on this fpot that feveral of Selina's anceftors had been buried -, and sn efRgy they lay, each on his refpedive monument, clad in fuch armour as they had worn in life. Lady Ilford looked round her with placid delight. She pointed to a fpot more peculiarly retired, and bade Selina, if fhe mould furvive her, fee that it was there thty placed her poor forfaken form. Selina argued that it was wrong to think fo often, and fo fadly, of death and dying, ** Ah, no, my love!" replied Lady Ilford; " when to think of death is to feei fatisfac¬ tion, why can it be wrong ? Of dying, we cannot think too much -, for do not all tht pale forms that arc ftretched around us, plainly tell how certam 'tis our lot, and each of their 4 epitaphs^
epitaphs, that we are hourly liable to it ?— We are, my Selina, merely the creatures of a morning funfhine. In this day I moralize over the beings of a paft age; in the next I am moralized over myfelf!'* They paffed between the tombs, and ap¬ proached the chancel On the firft ftep the Countefs paufed. She eyed wifhfuliy the holy things within i but feemed fearful of profaning the place, fhould (he enter. As *her eyes were fixed on the pifture of tlv crucifix tha* ftood over the table, fo much of Jove, of harmony, and peace beamed in the face, that ail fear forfook her, and flie ad¬ vanced, knelt, and looked up with adoration. Selina knelt befide her. They had not remained long, when a bud burft of mufic, fo fofc, fo fweet, that no words can defcribe it, iffued from the fpot on whieh they bent,— C£ Jefu, preferve me I" ened the Countcfe, " hear you that ?" i 6 Selina
Selina jfell proftrate on the pavement. The heavenly ftrain rofe mildly fublime to the very fummit of the chapel. The found lowered, was heard oniy in trembling echoes, was gone, and heard no more. The Countefs croffed her hands on her bof im; ftie bowed her head to the ground :—■" My God! 1 thank you," fne cried, and remained long with her eyes caft up to heaven in fpeechlefs admiration. By degrees Selina lifted herfelf from the ground, and clung round her friend. Lady Ilford looked on her with the fmile of an angel:—" You are not terrified, my child ?'* fhe faid j i{ 'twas what bleffed fpirits hear— fpirits that are your kindred." Selina could only anfwer deep-drawn fighs. " We wiil leave the chapel," faid the Countefs. Slie looked fmilingly round her: (( Wc will leave it for a time," and they withdrew* The
The Countefs* immediately retired to the oratory of her own chamber, Selina in vain begged permiffion to accompany her. She wiflied for entire retirement j and, to her temper of mind, the prefence even of her adopted daughter would have been a bur¬ then. On leaving Lady Ilford, Selina repaired to her own room. To her uneafy mind feclufion, however, at this period afforded no compofure. She left her chamber, and ftrolled along the ftill galleries of the caftle. The heat of day had funk to the refrefhing coolnefs of evening j but the galleries retained a luxuriant warmth that inftilled a languor, enervating, but not unpleafing. As ihe flowjy ftrayed on, with her eyes caft to tht ftoor> Ilie pondered on the celeftial ftrain (for fuch ihe believed it) that her fenfes iiad b^n aftoniihed by. So giand yet fo foft y fo majeftic yet tender, was the note, that never from earthly inftrument, flie felt affured, had iffued fuch delightful founds. T'he fwell with
with which it afcended, the gentle harmony, « more melancholy than the /over's lute P* with which its iaft burfts were echoed, ^ere fb firmly impreffed on her mind, that, in imagi¬ nation ftiil was flie liftening to them. While Ihc thought on what fhe had heard, flie' trem¬ bled, though fhe felt pleafure to enthufiafm } for fhe thought it fuch a ftrain as in heaven God is worfhipped by ! When fhe dared afk herfelf for what fuch harmony vifited earth, (he fliuddered, and haftened from refieftion. In the weftern tower, to which /he had walked, was a fmall room dedicated to the prefervation of fome books, curioufly tran- fcribed, and many of them illuminated, hy< which the Earl fee much ftore, and to which he had frequent recourfe. Of this little library Lord liford had given Selina a key, and to ufe it was her deareft prerogative. Often, while the Earl was engaged in that alorious war, in which were fought the fields of Creffy and Poiftiers, would fhe and Lady Ilford retire to one of the caftle's moft plea¬ fant
fant rooms, and either wander, delighted with Chaucer, over thofe of his early pro¬ dudions that they were polTefTed of > affright their fancies for a little interval with one of our ancient novelifts, or return with the chronicles to ages far paft. She now unlocked the library, and entered. Some Latin treatifes on theological points, inconfequential in thetfifelves, but rendered worfe than inconfequential bythe way in which thofe authors treated of them, were ranged on one (helf. On another were Chaucer, his com* peer poetafters, and thofe (ancient romances, The Book of Troilus, Saint Valentines Day y ^he Parliament af Brides, and many others of equal note and merit. The title of one among thefe was fo lingular and curious, that Selina, though fhe had intended to perufe a work of a more ferious nature, could noc refrain from feleding it. She retired with it to her room ; and, opening the cafement, fat down, and endeavoured to bring her mind to calmncis enough to examine its contents. Sht
She had not f^t long when a perfon arrived from Lady Ilford to requeft her attendance. She haftened to her accordingly. When fhe opened the chamber door, the Countefs was fitting. She rofe on Selina's entrance, and received her with a penfive fmile. Selina enquired concerning her health, i( Thank you, my love," cried ihe, « I feel better than 1 have for feveral days; my head-ache is entirely gone, and my mind, Oh my dear friend ! you know not how tranquil it is! I am refolved to meet my family at fupper: 1 think 1 can eat with them, and I feel my temper fit for their fociety." So faying, fhe took Selina's arm, and together they repaired to the fupper room. There they found the Earl, Lord Defmond, 'and Sir Emeric. Lord Ilford was in un¬ ufually high fpirits j but the Countefs, with pain, perceived his elevation owing to wine. He continued, during the repaft, to circulate the gobiet with mirth bordering on licenti¬ oufnefs.
oufnefs. He drank repeated healths to Sir Emeric, who was to end his vifit to the caftle on the enfuing morning; but all his challenges couli not induce Sir Emeric to pledge him in the intoxicating draught. His brow, however, v/as fomewhat relaxed, and at times a fmile appeared on his face ; but it was fuch a fmile as fpoke more of horror than fuavity. He regarded Selina with a fupercilious filence; to the Countefs he fpoke frequently, and in the moft refpeftful terms. Refrefliment had not been long taken,when Lady Ilforrf rofe to retire,, and Selina to ac¬ company her. The Earl ftarted as he few the motion, and was about to fpeak, when $ir Emeric touched his hand. The Earl faltered a farewel to his Lady, and haftily re¬ flated himfelf. Lady Ilford's bofom now no longer retained that tranquillity it had lately poffeffed j the. converfation of her family had not that foothing effeft flie imagined it would pro¬ duce.
duce. Her fp'rits were difturbed, and her frequent and deep fighs as fhe, leaning on Selina, fought her chamber, too plainly (po'ce htr pain and inquietude. At the extreme of the chief gallery was a window, opening over the parade of the rampart, ^nd commanding a view, beautiful though not extenfive. This window was open. The breath of air received at it was Cool and refrefhing ; it revived the drooping fpirits of Lady Ilford, nnd gave her a few moments'vivacity. St. were nigh. The fervant withdrew wich the lights, and the Countefs and Selifta fat down> and enjoyed the frefhnefs oPthe evening. Shortly Selina arofe, and leaning on the ftone bafe ofthe window, looked down on the terrace and the little fcene beyond it. The Countefs foon followed her, and taking that of Selina's hands which lay on the window frame, between her own, leaned by her fide* The moon was jufl: riftng, in mellow beauty, above
a winter's tale* 187" above the horizon, A clump of fir-trees ftood between her fight and the Countefs; but her glittering b.-aias ftuk among the fir- branches, and produced an effect grand and fublime. Every full tree was imprinted on tht clear fky in folemn beauty. Not a breath diftuibed the general tranquillity, nor ftole from tiie iccne aught of its refrefhing fragrance. The fenfations of Lady Ilford and Selina were not fuch as love communication • the pleafures arifing from the contemplation of fuch a fcene are nearly the only ones generous minds feel themfelves unable to divide.— While wrapped in fuch meditations as the fttuation infpired, they heard a footftep break on the quiet of the night from the terrace * below. By tht found, it was approaching j but the rampart was fo entirely fhaded by the overhanging parapets of the caftle, that no object couid be diftinguiihed moving there, « ShaU
" Shall we go?' 1 afl^ed Selina. ff No/' whifpered the Countefs; "be ftill i we will remain.*' They continued quiet accordingly. The found approached till it came fo nigh, that more fteps than one could be plainly difcovered. The perfons appeared in iow converfation, for fometimes arofe a murmur like the buz of voices. The difcourfe paufed. The perfons feemed clofe beneath tht win¬ dow. One again fpoke. Selina's blood forfook her cheek as Ihe heard it; for it was the, fame tone, the fame hollow articulation, that fihe had liftened to when it talked of horrors in the eaftern chamber! She was incapable of motion, " The third night then ?" faid a voice. After a moment's paufe—" Be it fo," an¬ fwered another. " What
" What was that ?" faid the Countefs to Selina. " Nothing," replied flie. " Deac my Lady, 1 did not hear it; it was nothing !" (f I think I never heard fo deep-toned a voice/* rejoined Lady Ilford. <( It feemed more than natural. But you tremble, mv dear: what has alarmed you? Either the faint moon-beams deceive my eyes, or you look very pale. Let us leave the window 5 the air chills you/' She called the fervant, and bade her fliut the cafement; which done, they proceeded on their way to the chamber. When Selina left the Countefs, fhe imme¬ diately went to her own room, where fhe made faft the door, fat down, and loofened theornamen: of her neck* for the fliock given to her by again hearing a voice fo dreadful as that iu the eaftern room, threat¬ ened to deprive life of power to move through hsr veins. Freedom
Freedom of breath., and a glafs of water, fomewhat reftored her fpirit:.; but ftill, fo forcible was the impreflion of what (he had heard, that flic fancied ihc diftinguifhed a diftant and hollow voice j then ftarted at the appearance of what was only the fiiadow of her own uplifted arm. After a lapfe of time had, in fome degree, compofed her, flie thought of retiring to fleep- but an unwillingnefs hung about her that the was unable to conquer, and flic walked a few turns backward and forward in / the room. On her toilet-table lay the book flie had begun to perufe when Lady Ilford's wifh called her to the fupper parlour. By chance it caught her eye ; and the fubject it treated of war, not ill-fuited to her frame of mind ; for fo natural to us is the love of what is horrible and ftrange, tiiat, while we are moft alarmed, we moft anxioufly feek frefli matter of aftonifliment.
This
This book was fairly copied on vellum, and illuminated in the moft coftly manner. It was adapted to the age it was written for, and entitled— " The Exiftence of Spirits and * Svvarths proved by the difmai Book of Sir Walter WalOngJiam." By fueh a : title the curiofity of Selina was interefted in no mean degree. Pier imagina¬ tion vvas already kindled to fire over un¬ common events. What htde fne had feen of the book was of a nature to induce her to examine it farther. She had been by fome taught to believe the fouls of dead men refted, till called to rcfurredion, in the grave with their bodies ; by others, her weaker moments had been perfuaded they, in many a dreary feafon, re vifited earth ; that they were often prefent, though not always vifible j and that, in token of death, they full fre¬ quently undrew the midnight curtains ofthe fick bed. Sht was ;t this time more than
ever
ever inclined to accord with this latter opinion, at this time that fhe fuppofed her¬ felf the witnefs of fupcrnatural tokens. Drawing her chair clofe to ;he table, flie unfolded the book, and read again the title- page. She fliuddered as flie read, and once laid the book down; but involuntarily took it up again in the fame inftant. She looked to her taper; it'was low, and burnt dim. Its beams were not fufficient to enlighten the farther part of the chamber. Shc°thrcwan half glance toward the barely , re vealed objefts there contained. Something ' moved. Her heart leaped in her bofom. 'Twas but a wave of the bed-curtain. She blamed her folly, while flie leaned back on her chair to recover breath, and foon ob¬ tained courage enough to open anew « the difmai book of Sir Walter Waliingham." « That the fpirits of the dead," fays the author, " have power to appear, as once ■ they were on earth, to the creatures of this world,
worid, might be eafily proved from letter of Holy W ric; but I have proofs that will be enow without going fo far. Who that be¬ lieves in the blefled Trinity, will doubt tht power of Heaven to give tokens of danger, and death to its children on earth ? What mercy is it in the Father of our Religion, to fuffer the foul of the dying to appear, in warning to thofe it loved in life ! Bad fpirits, and daemons of night, are in the power of wizards; but I am talking only of fuch as leave their graves in friendihip to man, not of thofe ghaftly fights that moleft the mid¬ night traveller, and draw afide the curtains of the lone flumberer, to fhock his eyeballs with their grifly vifage*. " The foes of our Religion would fain per¬ fuade the world there are no fuch things as violations. Let me mention an inftance or two of the reality of their exiftence. " 'Twas in 1279 t - iat $ ir Walter Walfing- ham, a true and loyal Knight, went on his vol. 11. k travels,
travels, accompanied by his faithful vaffel, Godwin. Sir Walter vifited many parts beyond fea, with great improvement to hi in felf, and pleafure to thofe who knew his friendfhip; for he was a Knight of very courtly manners, and greatly fldlltd withal iu the art of winning the hearts of thofe he fojourned with. 'Tis faid that m?ny fair damfels proffered their love to him during his wanderings to and fro ; but Sir Walter had offered his vows before he quitted his native country ; and, in de fpite of all allure¬ ments, he remained conftant to the miftrefs of his foul. * e He returned, attended by his honeft Godwin, acrofs'Italy, which is a country beautiful and fertile. In tht courfe of liis journey he entered, toward tht clofe of day, a very large and thick wood. At a great diftance appeared a brake, feemingly at the wood's end, through which entered tht glit¬ tering light of the fetting fun. Toward it Sir Waiter travelled. While he was yet very
very far from it, he faw the laft rays of the fun fink before him, A mift wrapped the wood in deeper gloom. I'he fhades of night fucceeded, and Sir Walter found himfelf in a country he did not know, wandering in a wood which poflibly was the haunt of mur¬ derers, and, too likely, remote from the poffibility of afliftance and fhelter. " He rode as faft as the frequent flumps of trees would fuffer him, and Godwin followed in his fteps. A clear road at length prefented itfelf, and Sir Walter giving fpur to his iked, proceeded more featly. <{ After long riding, he gained the fkirt of tht wood. He turned to fpeak to his at¬ tendant ; but, lo ! Godwin was gone. Per¬ plexed at this circumftanee, Sir Walter knew not for a time whac to do. He halloo'd till the wood echoed with the name of Godwin, and that echo was Sir Walter's only anfwer. k 2 « Tht
" The night grew alarmingly bad. The •long roll of diftant thunder was heard •* and then, through the clouds afar off, burft darts of lightning. A fweep of rain broke from the fky, and Sir Walter faw himfelf robbed of his ./an, and deftitute of proteftion from the ftorm. ■ *' While riding along the edge of die wood, and crying aloud to his fervant, he dcfcried a lighr, but miles away on the heath. De¬ fpairing of fpeedily finding Godwin, and fenfible that the light was equally likely to attract his man with himfelf, he refolved to make toward the flielter, poffibly exifting where he faw at leaft a fign of human re¬ fidence. (c Ide goaded his horfe to fpeed, though he met frequent checks in pits, which he bi t barely avoided, and incumbrances that ap¬ peared the ruins of fbme building. The thunder now rolled its horrors over his head, and acrofs his path glimmered . the light¬ ning.
ning. The rain fell round him in torrents, and the high wind roared over the defolate heath. He wrapped his furcoat clofely round him, and buried his fpurs in the horfe's fides. The light he ftrove for ftill was diftant; but it feemed fixed, and enlarged to his eye. "After much riding, he drew near to the ipot toward which he had looked with fuch an eager eye. He reined in his horfe, and looked round the place he had determined on begging a night's flielter at. The heath ftood wide about it. To the left rofe fome dark mafs, that ever and anon waved in the ftorm, and wore the face ofa gloomy foreft. To the right appeared, through the darknefs of the night, only the chill plain, among whofe feattered bufhes the north wind whiftled. The building itfelf was large and maflive ; it was compofed of ftone, and enclofed by an high wall. The light which had attraded the Englifh Knight thither, ftill remained in a window j it was the light of a lamp, and ftione through an iron grate. k* 3 « Even
" Even now that Sir Walter had proceeded fo far, he felt unwilling to afk admittance at this unknown dwelling. A fort of fear pof¬ feffed him.—' By my Knighthood/ faid he, loofe ning his furcoat fo that he could readiiy get his fword, f I take fhame to me for the coldnefs that runs through my heart.* rf He leaped from his horfe, and founded a bell that hung at the poftern. No perfon came. Fie rang again. The found was flung from rhe bell in long hollownefs, and he ftood a fecond fpace unanfwered. At length, a flow and heavy footftep was heard from within, and a voice afked, ( who wiflied to commune with the reclufe and de¬ voted at fo lonely a (enfon ?* * A Knight,' anfwered Sir Walter, c of England; who, wandering in this dreary part, has loft his way, and who is expofed, without any one to attend him, to all the daggers of this tempeftuous night/
<If
f If fo/ faid the voice, 'we will admit thee. The dedicated to God know not to be uncharitable/ <f The lock was turned, and the heavy door flowly opened. * Heaven help thee, my fon!' cried a venerable figure in the drefs ofa Friar; £ thou art fadlv drenched indeed. Follow me in; we will ftir for thee the iire, and revive thy fpirits with fimpie food/ IC Sir Walter followed Ins benign guide. They paffed through a long arched paffage, ana acrofs a pi ved court. They entered a fmall room, on rhe fide of which hung a cowl and a pilgrim's ftaff. The Friar bade Sir Walter fit; and he himfelf made the fae^ot blaze on the hearth, and haftened to fpread a litde meal. " While he was fo doing, a fecond Friar entered the room, to whom Sir Walter paid k 4 his
his wonted courtly reverence. He ate and drank, and feh himfelf cheered by his repaft. He then mixed in convtrft with his enter¬ tainers, who before had tended on his wants, now furnifhing him with drink, and now fordng fruits to his relifh. * I am indebted,' faid Sir Walter, * to the hofpitality of a facred houfe ?' * You are, my fon.* <c Now Sir Walter marvelled that he had not been carried, as is the cuftom with ftrangers, to the prefence of the Father Abbot. u His companions faw his furprife, and , rightly gueffing the caufe, faid, f Thou art aftonifhed at our not conducting thee to the Principal of our Order? But, my fon, we are under ftrange and afflifting circumftances. We can give thee our company but for a Ihort time, and when we leave thee, can offer thee no better a chamber than this. Son,
Son, thou lookeft to be no common man: I will tell thee our fituation/ "Here the Friars both drew their ftools nearer to Sir Walter, and looked at each other, and then to the door, which -was clofely fhut. * Son/ continued the Friar, c the room in which we fit, and fbme above it, are be¬ tween our Abbey and the Nunnery dedicated to St. Frances. Two days back there died in the Convent a fifter charged with fuch crimes, fuch dreadful crimes! that my foul fhudders to think on them. No words can pidure the remorfe, the wild horror of her laft moments; nor rhe ghaftly convulfions that diftorted her vifage in them, and made her, in death, an objed fit to appal and dif¬ guft the coldeft heart. She was placed in her coffin, and a proper female appointed to watch her poor body during the night. Alas! my fon, I tremble while I fay that, when the clock ftruck two, the domeftic fwcars K S by
by the Virgin fhe heard a groan within the coffin, and faw the pall on it in agitation.* < Heaven keep us!' cried the fecond Friar, firft looking to the door, and then fixing his eves on the crofs that hune; from his bofom. < Well, Father/ kid Sir Walter, f pro¬ ceed/ * The Sifters, my fon, were fliocked by the ftcry to fuch a degree, that they could not fleep near the poor troubled corfe. It v/as removed to this fituation, and brother Jerome and I were chofen by the Abbot to fit in the room with it through this dreary night, I'he Saints guard us 1 but the weak¬ nefs of our nature fuits not fuch trials.' ( Father !' cried Sir Walter, who was a true Knight, and knew no ihir } ' Father ! Ut mc watch befide the coffin ofthe unhappy Sifter. Li)tie reck I evil fpirits, for I deal v* irh nought but what's good. If tlie wretched dead one is dilluibed, I truft to my pure confeknee and Catholic faith for means to quiet her. If the domtftic oniy indulged 6 the
the fancies of her brain, I fhall reftore con¬ fidence to the terrified Sifters.* 1 Now, by my troth,' exclaimed the reverend Father, " it is fpoken like a valiant and true eentleman ! But confider well, my fon, whar it is you undertake. Be prepared for frjiediing more tlun common; be cou¬ rageous, but be not rafti.' c I have confidered on what I fay, holy Father,* returned Sir Wakes c and efteem myfeif prepared for whatever I may behold/ ( Then, as God is my guard/ faid the Friar, ' I fee not why wc ihouid not yield to tny willi/ "With this opinion his holy brother ac¬ corded, and Sir Walter bethought him of what would be necefiary for the enterprise. Meantime in focial converfe the pious brorhers wore away the firft evening hours, deicribing therein to Sir Walter the efficacy of P.uth, and the healing powers of Grace. k 6 « And
" And now the faggot on the hearth fank to dying embers; the beetle ftole from out his little corner ; and, for the third time, the glafs was counted empty. The Englifh Knight arofe, and the Fathers followed his motion. f£ Before Sir Walter they bore the lamp intended to be left with him through the night. In flow fteps they afcended a flight of ftairs. When they attained the fummit, € Now, my fon!' fiiid the Friar, f yonder is the door of the room*' € Be it fo/ anfwered Sir Walter. "They proceeded. Arrived at the entrance, the Father made a dead ftop.— c Young man,' faid he, 5 you are now clofe to the dreadful chamber ; you hear all is ftill within.'—He here opened the door.— e You fee how gloomy and awful is the apartment!'—He held up the lamp.-—* You may, I believe, difcern the coffin; it ftands at the farther end. If you feel your refolution fail, retraft. In the
the hope of Heaven's love, my brother and I, without fear, will perform our duty.* * I have fignified my intention,' replied Sir Walter, * and fhould ill merit my Knighthood if I flirank from my word/ " The Father flightly bowed his head. He put into Sir Walter's hand the lamp ; he beftowed on him the benediftion of the Church, gave him the kifs of peace, and left him to his taflc. ce Tin* Knight ftood a moment or two where he was. He heard the leffening found of the Friars' footfteps, and faw the laft ftreak of the light they carried, retire from the fides of the ftaircafe. lie was alone in an obfcure part ofa difmai, old building,"— Herc Selina laid the book on her lap, and looked round the chamber. She was alone alfo. She doubted whether to proceed; but fo ftrong was her curiofity, that it over¬ came every fuggeftion of apprehemion, and trimming
trimning her light, the burned unufually dull, fhe again took up uer book, and read as follows— " Slightly di-1 Sir Walters heart make two bc^ts .-.gVuift hh ude j but he called to mind the honour of his Order, and curled his brow till it bore the courageous look it was wont to have. lt He uVp;ied into the chamber j in the middle of ii v.a*, a tabic and two chairs: no other fun hure was in thv room. At the more difhiit pirt flood on creltles the coffin, over wiiich was thrown a pal). Sir W.dtcr placed hio lamp on the table ; he u .buckled his fword, and laid it befide the lamp; he then killed the crofs, and profound!;'opened hindlli tothe Trinity. After fo doi >£, in meafured fteps he approached the co»nn. JIc put his hand to the pall; he thought that fome diflant cry foun led j he looked to his fword i Lut it was nothing.
A TALE, 20J (C He lifted gradually the pall. The coffin was covered vvith black.— c ITa!' thought he, c guilty, indeed, muft be the foul, fince fo dreary a colour is given to the coflin I' Cf He thought of lifting; the lid, and looking on what the Friar had pidurcd as fo horrid to behold. PJe chilled as he touched it. He caft a glance around him. f lis blood cooled as does felie blood in fome diiagreeable fen¬ fations. *Pfhaw!' faid he, c what weaknefs is this unnerves mine arm ? Away with it P Cf He lifted the lid, but beheld fuch a Mit as made him throw ft down, and flv involun¬ tarily from the fpot. He fit down on one ofthe cr.airs, and at that inftant tht monaftery bell tolled twelve. " It was now that Sir Walter regretted the want ofa book to fhorten his long and dif¬ mai hours. Sometimes he paced the room ; at others conned the burden of what metrical romances his mind was ftored with. "So
" So came the hour of one, * Another hour,' thought Sir Walter, * and we fhall fee the truth of this faid old domeftic's ftory/ " Sir Walter's mind was not fo cheery as this faying indicated. As the time approached, he fat down by the table. He looked at his lamp.—* Never/ faid he, ' faw I a lamp burn fo ftrangeiy !' " He trimmed it, and opened the wick ; but all he did had no effed. * Blefs me!' cried he, ftarting, 'did I place that chair by the fide ofme ? I thought it had been on the oppofite fide of the table; but I muft have moved it, I fuppofe, and forgotten it/ cc His fenfes felt drowfy.—' I will indulge fleep,* thought he, and he clofed his eyes. lie fank to a flumber •> but in ic he fancied himfelf
himfelf lured by a dsmon to a precipice, down which he was falling, Difturbed by this phantafy, he ftarted up. His nerves fluttered ; drops of fear lay on his brow. He wiped them off, and contemplated the obje&s around him. u The coffin was as he Ith it. The pall he had thrown back when he lifted the lid, and fo it now lay. He looked to the hour- glafs. The fand was meafured out to within a very fmall quantity.—' Ha ! is it fo\ ? ' cried he i < then the hour is at hand V " He fat himfelf firmly on his chair, with his eyes on the glafs. But little fand was left j that little decreafed, difappeared. « The monaftery bell tolled two. a What did Sir Walter hear ?—a groan! a deep one, and from the coffin ! *Twas re¬ peated. Heavens! the lid moved fiowly up. Again it flowly rofe, and again ! Then an
an hand appeared from it; the lid rofe higher, and Sir Walter beheld—the horribk face of the corpie 1 " He Ivid not power to move j he was ftill as Is a flattie. The Jid fell, but Sir Walter thought fome one was neai him. He turned, and faw fitting in the chair that was by his fide, that dreadful creature whofe body he had beheld in the coffin. " Her face was the face of death, diftorted by pauing convulfions. Ail the blood ofthe body feemed brought by agony into the checks. The lower jaw was fallen on the bofom ; the eyes were wide open, though cxpreflion left, and were much beyond the fockets. On the head was a burial cap, and round tiie body a winding-meet:, Iler ihiibs, horrid to relate ! were overgrown with long hair, as are thofe of bodies that lay long dead in the damp ground. Her arms were motioniefc by her fide. "Sir
" Sir Walter flirank back in difmay from the dreadful fpeftre. He ftrove to afk its will. His tongue moved, buthe fpoke not. A minute had not pafled, when from the apparition's mouth iflued thtft words, though its form was ftill immoveable like that of a corpfe,"------ Here Selina felt herfelf fo faint that flie could proceed no farther. The book fell from her hand, and in trembling hafte flie took off her clothes, and threw herfelf in her bed, where, whifpering a prayer, fhe fliortly loft her terrors in fleep.
CHAP.
CHAP. VI. ** Now, all at once, tremendous fcenes unfold I** HOMER'S ODYSSEY.^ JL HE night was dark and dreary to the extreme. From the high hills and the wide heath that faced Ofborne's cottage, blew hollow blafts of wind, that now howled, now whiftled round the ftraw-thatched roof of the hut. Heavy clouds rolled along the fky, from which the gale flung fiequent ftiowers of rain. Though the feafon was fuch as forbids the ufe of fires, the air of this evening was fo cold and chilling that Rachel lighted a faggot on the hearth. They had taken
taken their homely fupper, and Ofborne was feated by his wife's fide before the fire, with a mug of ale in his hand, when he thought he heard a voice without doors. Rachel would have perfuaded him 'twas but a noife of night—the wind through a channel of trees, or the tree-branches groaning in the galei but Ofborne thought differently. How¬ ever, he did not move. They were ftill; " There !" cried Ofborne, " I heard it again ! I tell you, Rachael, 'tis a voice." " Well," anfwered fhe, " open the door, and anfwer it; mayhap it is one of the caftle fervants who can't find his path this dark night." To the door Ofborne accordingly went. He halloo'd, " Who are you ? What do you do out this dark night ? Have you loft your way, friend?" Pie liftened, but diftinguifhed no anfwer. Indeed, among the various howls of the tempefl, 'twas nearly impoffible to particu¬ larize
larize any found whatever. Again he hai- loo'd,and, on being flill unanfwered, believed he had been miftaken ; and, fliutting his door, returned to his fire-fide, his mug of ale, and his good-humoured wife, " Mercy on me !" faid he, fliaking him¬ felf, and holding his hands to the blaze of the faggot, -'what a boifterous night it is ! I think, for my part, the feafons alter as often ?s they full. When I was.a young man, we did not know what it was to have luch a night as this at this time ofthe year; but eveiy thing changes now 1 Our young people arc- profligate, and our old ones fonder of tilts and tournaments than thcir Church and the Saints. What the world will get co be in a few more years, Heaven knows! I am flue man cannct ttll." rf Sad times indeed !" replied Rachel. (< It is not the times," faid Ofborne, " it is ------but hark !—Well, I could tiave fvorn that was a human voice; bur I muft be miftaken, I give you my word for't, 1 fhan't open
open the door again. It may be it's fome thing of night trying to tempt the traveller a ftray. You have heard me tell how I was milled by a wilh-o'thc-wifp ?" *'An hundred times/'faid Rachel; "but I can hear it once more without tiring." " Well tlien, you know, 'twas when I had been to Northbrake, to help'em againft the lads of Suabourn in wte/I ling for a ram** 1 v*s late \ znd in crofting South Common, d among the buihes------ " Here Olborne was interrupted by a violent knocking at the door. Ht ftarted up. Rachel followed as clofe to him as ftie con¬ veniently could. Ofborne flowly opened tiit door, and beheld a perfon of no mean appearance wrapped clofely in a furcoat, from whicli the rain ran fo as to prove he had been long expofed to tht ftorm. This perfon had juft difmounted, and held his horfe's bridle in his hand. He threw it
over
aio* a winter's tale. over a tree ftump at the cottage-door, and haftily ftepped in. Ofborne was about to afk the ftranger's bufinefs, when the Knight threw afide his large coat, lifted his hat, and difcovered to the hoft—the Prince of Wales! Ofbirne dropped on his knees, as did Rachel befide him. « Rife, my honeft friend," faid the Prince j " this vifit furprifes you. You lit¬ tle thought of feeing me at fuch an hour, and in fuch a night ?" « c Very little indeed, my dread Lord," cried Rachel; "God fend your Royalty may not have taken cold !" f< Never fear that, worthy Rachel," faid the Prince fmiling; <c I am ufed to brave the •worft of weathers.—But tell me, how do your Lord's family ? Is the Lady Selina well ?" " As well as can be, may it pleafe your Highnefs," cried Ofborne, rifing from his knees. « She
" She never looked better in her life, my Lord," echoed Rachel. c< Then I am content 1" faid the Prince; cc and now, my worthy friends, help me to get rid of this drenched coat," Ofborne flew to one arm, and Rachel to tht other. The Prince went toward the fire. Rachel dropped her curtfey, and aiked ifhe would be pleafed to honour them by taking fupper ? " I thank you," faid the Prince, "I do not feel inclined to eat; a draught of this ale will fuffice." But this denial was not enough for Rachel. She fpread, in her beft ftyle, all the contents of her cupboard i which done, flie placed herfelf at the Prince's elbow, while Ofborne ftood behind his chair, and both joined in entreaties that he would eac of their humble fare. To avoid paining them by refufal, the Prince *?te flightly of what was fpread vol. n. 1 before
before him.— <f Ofborne," faid he, <e I am come to ufe your cottage for fbme days." Ofborne bowed, and faid " the cottage was the Prince's, not his own." Inen re¬ collecting himfelf, he added, that " he begged pardon for the queftion, but would his cottage be larp-e enoucrh to hold thofe attendants of th.c Prince, whom he fuppofed to be at hand V The Prince fmiled, and told him that in fuch a vifit as this he difpenfed with all at¬ tendance whatever.—" My horfe," faid he, " I will thank you to find Jftabling for;—he now j,s Iheltcred by the trees that fliade your door-way." When he had concluded his repaft, Rachel removed the articles of fupper; but his defire, and even his command, that flie and her hufband would ftdt themfelves, proved unable to conquer the profound reverence that both felt for thcir noble gueft. " Pray,
« Pray, Ofborne/* faid he, " does the Lady Selina often walk in the path that leads to your cot ?" " Yes, very often, my Lord. In the beechen walk, as it is called, where the feat is that overlooks that fine valley in the weft, I have met her of late very much indeed." " Flave you fo ?" cried the Prince, while his heart leaped with delight; for he remem¬ bered that to be the walk, and that the feat where himfelf had been with Selina for the laft time. cf My Lady will be here, an't pleafe your Highnefs, to-morrow," faid Olborne. " She will?" cried the Prince; "but, my friend, I ihall not truft to that. Jn the morning I intend you to carry from me a letter to her, requefting her to meet, me here at what time fhe can with moft conveni¬ ence. I would to Heaven, Ofborne, I had thought, while I vifited Lord Ilford, to take fome ftep toward gaining accefs to the caftle l 2 at
at my will 1 At fuch an hour as this I miglit do fo, 1 think, fecure from interruption." " My dread Lord," faid Ofborne, "after what you have faid to me, I confider my Lady's honour as your own ; and I likewife am, in all honeft duty, devoted to your Highnefs: I fay honeft, though I well know your Highnefs too rioble a r'rince to employ me in other fervice." " Well!" faid th^ Prince, fomewhat fur¬ prifed at this preamble. " My Lord," continued Ofborne, "when I, many a year ago, was retained at the caftle myfelf, I had given to me, by my late Lord, a key that unlocks the private door leading through the fecret armoury to the main part of the caftle." " You had?" interrupted the Prince, " and have you it ftill ?" " My Lord, I have." " Brin<* it me this inftant!" exclaimed the Prince. " Let me have it this moment. My horfe is ready ; I will fly to the caftle." Ofborne
Ofborne retired, and prefently returned with the key. He bent to the ground. The key was in his hand. He looked up to the Prince's face. His few white locks fell on his forehead, and his eyes were full of tears. "My Lord," he faltered as he gave the Prince the key, " I am your fiave, it is true ; but, Oh, the fweeteft Lady !—the daughter of my kind, good mafter!" He pur his hands acrofs on his breaft, and down his honeft cheek fell, what never comes but from the true heart—an old man's tear 1 " I underftand you, old man," faid the Prince. " Queftion not my honour!" " Pardon me, my Prince!" articulated Ofborne, bending his aged head tothe floor. " Nay," faid the Prince, €t lift yourfelf from the ground: I am far from being of¬ fended by what you have faid. Ofborne, I venerate you for it; I efteemryour age, and will defcend to tell you, that at this hour I am convinced the Lady Selina is retired to a room feparate from her chamber. She will there fee me as a friend—a brother." h 3 Ofborne
Ofborne bowed low in filence. Rachel applied her attention to the fur- coat of the Prince, which fhe pronounced too wet to be worn, and in the fame inftant reached the ftout one ufed by her " good man." Ot this the Prince accepted; and after receiving what few directions he deemed necefiary, relative to the way by which he was to enter the caftle, he wrapped himfelf in his thick garment, and Olborne opened the cotcage door. No rain now fell. The wind too had yn fome meafure fubfided 3 though, at intervals, it ftill fwept the plain in cheerlefs and chilling gufts. The Prince fprang on his horfe, and Ofborne condufted him to the entrance of the park, in which he no fooner found himfelf, than he fpurred his horfe to its utmoft fpeed, re¬ gardlefs of what obftruftions the unevennefs of the turf might produce, of the dreary fadnefs
fadnefs of the weather, of every thing but Selina, and the joy of an interview with her. On the third day after the departure of Sir Emeric, Lord Ilford commanded his fon to repair, with letters of military import, to the feat of a Nobleman twenty miles diftant. On the fame day, Lord Ilford propofed giving a feaft to his tenantry. For this purpofe thofe tables were placed in the hall which, in times of peace, were ufed to be ftationary there, and which then were daily covered with a feaft, and open to every vaflal of the Earldom. The war, by taking Lord Ilford from his eftate, had put a temporary ftop to this excefs of hofpitality ; and his Lordfhip had been among the firft to take advantage of precedent, and ceafe at once to keep the caftle conftantly open to all comers, and to dine himfelf vvith his family and friends at the head of the numerous party in the hall. At the ufual hour the banquet was on this day ferved. The Earl repeatedly exhorted
his tenants to be feftive. He drank, to their merriment, large goblets of wine; buc he ftaid iio longer with them than the end ofthe dinner. He retired to fome private apart¬ ment, and was feen no more throughout the day. Lady Ilford continued languid and unwell. I'he Earl requefted her to be prefent in the hall on this day-. She pleaded indifpofition. The Earl feemed deeply offended. He muttered indignantly fome few words, and quitted the prefence of his Lady abruptly. While the vaftals caroufed in the hall, fhe, accompanied by Selina, ate of a light dinner in her own apartment. After dinner fhe lay on her couch, and flept; while Selina ■watched hy htr C\tk> mt\ufing htr fancy by working ffowm fer tapdlry. On hearing the CouMe& draw a deep figh* Selina turned t® tee if ft* had awoke. Lady Ilford ftill flept; fhe feemed in the fweeteft flun ber that ever relieved the tired fenfes,
fenfes. On her lip was a faint fmile. In her countenance was expreffed more than peace— a gentle tranfport; Once flie lifted flightly her hand ■* then let it fall, and fighed again. A ftill more animated fmile fpread itfelf over her features. Her lips moved as if ftriving to mve utterance, but no found iffued from iJ ** them. Suddenly flie ftarted, and looking round, cried, iC Good Heaven ! where nrn I ? Who are you ?" " Selina, Madam—your daughter Selina; and this is your own apartment.'' " Is it fo ?" faid flie ; " then I fee I did but dream! Oh my friend!" leaning' on Selina's neck, who knelt befide her couch, * c fuch vifions, fuch heavenly vifions, have bleffed my fleep, that would to God I had never awoke from it! Methought the laft hour of my life was come. I faw you and my fon kneeling by my bedfide. You wept, and I wept too ; but they were tears of tranfient forrow. I looked for my Lord, my hufband •> but he was not near me. Of a fudden there diftufed itfelf fuch a ftrahi of h 5 harmony
harmony as we heard in the chancel of the chapel ; but, if poffible, it was ftill fofter, ftill fweeter. Then a bright angel, round whofe fair face was a radiance of glory, ap¬ peared at the foot of my bed. " Come, pure fpirit 1" methought it faid, " thy hour is at hand P 1 —With that I looked again for my hufband :— <f Heed not his abfence," faid the angel, " but haften to the prefence of the Lord!»» Two angels, bright as the firft, then took me in their arms. I faw no more of earth. They bore me through regions of delight. By degrees, a fenfation I cannot defcribe, poffeffed my foul. It was not fear: I think it was not awe ; but reverence of the moft aofolute kind. Of this feeling I foon learned the nature. I was in the upper hea¬ ven, in the prefence of my God! His glory, Oh, it cannot be told ! Angels chanted hymns of joy. as I approached the throne. I knelt to my Creator j I knelt in awe.—" Rife," faid the Father of all, " well haft thou ferved 4 mc*
me. Come then to my bofom ! Thine is joy everlafting 1 Thou art a part of myfeif 1" A myriad of angels received me to their arms. Strains feraphic, fongs of adoration, occupied the air. I was blefled ! In this fulnefs of felicity I awoke. How can you wonder that I regretted waking at all ?" Selina liftened reverentially to this defcrip¬ tion of the Countefs's vifion. When Lady Ilford ceafed to fpeak, fhe prefied her in her arms. Selina fpoke not <c Such, my child/' faid the Countefs, after a time, " fuch are the dreams of thofe whofe lives are pure. Oh my child I whatever may be your lot, to wnatever trials you may be expofed, never forfeit what will be a folace for all your troubles—reftitude of heart. We are all fubjeft to improper wifhes -, 'tis in nature for us to be fubjeft to them ; but in re¬ fraining to gratify thofe defires, lays that virtue which is to entitle us to Heaven." " Never/* whifpered Selina, " wiU I aft unworthy of my mother and you." l6 « I
" I believe, it is my joy to believe it, that you will not/' faid Lady Ilford; " but, my daughter, nature is frail; the nobleft minds are liable to deviation. We cannot too frequently remind virtue of itfelf and how weak are the fibres that uphold its exiftence ! Come, my love, let us walk ; my fpirits are thin as air; I think I fhall take pleafure from ftroiling with you along the galleries of the caftle." They had not, however, walked long before the Countefs tired. They fat down. She foon grew weary of fitting, and they re¬ turned to her own room. Selina fetched her Jute, and to Lady Ilford's tone of mind, the founds it breathed were moft touching and grateful. She liftened to its notes till all her melancholy returned. When Selina per¬ ceived the tears ftanding in her eyes, and her whole heart bent to penfivenefs, fhe laid down her inftrument, and ftrove to divert the melancholy fhe had infpired, by converfing with innocent gaiety. As
As night drew near, Lady Ilford's depref¬ fion returned in full force ; though fhe endeavoured to conceal it, to avoid giving pain to Selina. She kept her young attendant to rather a later hour than ufual. Selina would fain have ftaid till the Countefs retired for the night j but Lady Ilford faid it was poffible fhe might fit late, and ; infifted on her not breaking through her cuftom of going early to repofe. " Good night then, dear mother!" find Selina, " Good night, fweet girl !'* replied Lady Ilford, kiffing her cheek: "God blefs you!" Selina, attended by a fervant, went to the chamber door. She returned to bid Lady liford farewel again. A fecond time the chamber door was opened; and ftill did Selina feel reluftant to go. She would have returned, but fhe thought herfelfcliildifh, #nd ftepped on. At
At the door of her anti-chamber fhe took the light from the fervant, and difmiffed her from farther attendance. She entered her chamber. A melancholy languor relaxed her nerves. She blushed, without knowing why, and oftentimes her bofom heaved in fighs. She looked at her bed. She thought of going to it; then blufhed at the thought, and left her room. Sht walked backward and forward in her anti-chamber. Thoughts that fhe would have had ftrangers to her bofom, haunted her refledions. She took up her pen. She fancied herfelf writing to the Prince, and fpoke, in innocent fondnefs, the feelings of her heart. When ihe had extended her performance to fueh a length as a lover's thoughts eafily fpin to, fhe grew afhamed of her employment, though fhe little imagined what flie wrote would be feen by him to whom it was addreffed. She took the Prince's letter from its envied ftation, and preffed it, warm from her beating heart, to her lips. She read its lines, and breathed a trembling figh as fhe replaced it in
in her bofom. She took her lute, and ex¬ preffed with it the penfive feelings of Jove, a thoufand times more tenderly than the poet's words can do. When flie laid down her lute, flie knelt, and offered her evening prayer to Heaven ; and then fang, to the Bleffed Virgin, this her accuftomed hymn : '* Oli Vir^m ^ui-e, t'iat guides the way ,( Ot" ihoil whu wander, loft in caie I <* Oil Virgin pure, acctpt my lay, " My fimpie long, my humble piay'i ! *• For ev'ry error of the paft, " Oli tleign thy fwdet eac.vx io give ! ** Aj*i t Icti-he fiuh, commitieJ lair, « In recoJltitbn's ping flill live : *' That, confcious of my wav'iing heart, « I ne'er may cenfe to watchful be i * ( AnJ that regret's continued fmart 41 May keep me true to Heaven and Thet* ■»'* Shfdon my ejelids tr.inquil reft; * l That guardian angels round my bed, ** May note the pure beats of my breaft, « Ami beg foi: mercies en my head. " Oh
" Oh let no thoughts, unfit"and wild, " Steal lo mme heart, antl niifc the Hgh I " But f.inc : es pure, and vifions mild, t( IogentUi pleafure clofe mine tye. " If fpirits, blefs'J in hc^v'nly blifs, '* Can mix with clay-dad fpirit.* here* ** And give the fond nmernal kifs, * ( And fhed the fond maternal tear : ** Oh let my mother's fainted fltade, " Fi'om Heav'n to earth in pity fiy ! *' Be ftic my,guardian angel nude, "* I.ct her hand guide mc to the fky V While fhe was chanting thefe verfes, it was that the Prince arrived at the door of her anti-chamber, through the fecret paffage. Not without difficulty he had gallopped in darknefs acrofs the park. With the direc¬ tions of Ofborne, he eafily found the door in tne garden that led tothe private armoury. From thence he knew the path to the fecret way, along which he trod with a lover's hafte, As.
As he approached the door of his wifhes, he heard the fofc rifings of Selina's voice. The found made a pulfe beat in every vein that gave him life. He ftopped, and liftened. Each word iank deep in his heart. She ended, and he lifted his trembling hand to knock agdinft the partition ; but hefitated to think whether fome gentler method of fig- nifying his being there could not be difco¬ vered. He looked through a break in the door. She fat before the toilet-table. Her night* gown of white was thrown loofely round her, and her neck-kerchief was but too carelefsly difpofed. Her hair fell luxuriantly down her back, unconfined and unconcealed by my cap* Her beautiful aims were unco¬ vered* and lay <^ htr lap as flie leaned back cm her chair $ while a blufh of virgin love- Hneik was on her cheek, und m expreffion of fenfibility in her eyes, that would have been fuppreffed had the neighbourhood of the Prince a or that of any perfon, been imagined. She
She lifted her eyes, and heaved a deep figh, that feemed to come from the heart, and burft with difficulty through the bofom. So deep an one efcaped the Prince as he heard it, and faw the emotion it created, that it met the hearing of the lovely girl. She flarted, and in a moment altering the difcompofure of her drefs, looked with terror round her *, then, feeming perfuaded of what ihe had heard being only a wandering fancy, fhe refumed her pofture. The Prince fighed again. She ftarted from her chair, end fnatching the light, fled to her chamber. Fearful of the alarm he created, for an inftant the Prince refrained from farther fig- nification of his prefence. Imagining his voice might difpel her terrors, and make him known, "he gently knocked, as he had httn ufed to do on former nights, and in a low voice repeated her name. On no anfwer being given, he again called on her name, and
and faid, " J Tis I, Selina 1 your friend, your Edward 1" Every tone of his voice was known to Selina. She recognized the founds, and, though fhe fcarcely could credit the con¬ viction, was affured the Prince himfelf was there, and requeftecj admittance. Pale and trembling, fhe held up her light, though fhe moved not from her fituation, and falteringly cried, " Good Heavens, my Lord I is it you ? Are you at the door ?" " I am," anfwered he. " May I hope io rude an intruder will receive pardon, and leave to enter ?" < c If I thought," fhe cried, ftill trembling and dubious, " if you think—I was about to retire—Oh! what can I do ?" cc Surely," faid the Prince, " my fweet friend does not now fear to rely on him fhe once placed fo much confidence in ? You will not be fo cruel, dear girl, as to refufe me admittance ? I beg but for a fliort inter- . view:
view: once to fee you, and fpeak but a few words/' In fome fort recovered from her fears, and affured of it being the Prince who had furprifed her, Selina left her chamber, and, timidly entering the anti-room, withdrew the door's fattening. With joy, corrected by delicacy and a fenfe of the refpeft due to her fituation, the Prince ftepping into the room, ftood before her. Her eyes were downcaft, and her cheeks blufhing. He took her hand, bowed on it, and held it to his lips. For many moments neither fpoke. A crowd of thoughts occu¬ pied Selina's breaft; the Prince's look was riratcd to her features* Ne?er, perhaps, did fhe look fo lovely as at that moment. Timid and trembling was her manner*. Confcious that within her modeft bofom had paffed fome thoughts l^hich of every one elfe fhe would wifh to hide
hide from the Prince, a glow tinted her cheek, that fpoke eloquently to the lover's heart. A faint fmile of joy was on her lip, and her hair lay in beautiful ringlets on her neck, " My Selina/' the Prince at length ex¬ claimed, " what ecftacy do I feek in again beholding you! Whac joy is it to k>ok on that face, to touch this hand ! Often have I done fo in my dreams : Oh Heaven, I now do fo in reality !" Selina's eyes were ftill bent to the ground, and fhe made no reply to what the Prince fpoke.—" I have furprifed my fweet friend," continued he, " by a vifit fo ftrangeiy timed! But how could I be near, and refrain from haftening to her ? Through the friendfhip of Ofborne, I gained admittance to the caftle. In darknefs and fecrecy I have reached your rooms; fuffer me then, deareft friend, to pafs one Jittle hour here, as I have fo often done before. Let me afk you fome of the hundreri
hundred queftions fancy has been urging mc to propofe. I have much to fay, much to tell you of. You will not objed, Selina, to my ftay ?" « Do," faltered Selina, " as you think proper : I place myfelf in your protedion.*' " Beitfo, angel girl! When I take ad~ vantage of the innocence that places itfelf with fo much confidence in my power, do you ceafe to think of me, and may Heaven do fo too 1" He led Selina to a feat, and placed his own clofe by the fide of her's. He threw himfelf om it, and took her half-relu&ant hand between his own. He looked with tranfported fondnefs on her face; but Selina's eyes were averted; blufhes covered her face. Her hand, and every nerve in unifon with it, trembled at the Prince's touch. To ftay was delight 5 yet Selina felt defirous of flying from the chamber, either to where no eye faw her, or to Lady Ilford, who was to her thoughts as a mother. « You
<f You exprefs no joy at feeing me, my Selina!" faid the Prince, with that quick jealoufy that is infeparable from fervent love: " you had forgotten me 1 I was far from your thoughts; and, it may be, my btrufi^ is deemed arrogance, and gives parol?* * , " Oh my Lord!" returned Selina, throw¬ ing on him the fofteft and moft expreffive look her blue eyes could beam with. It was a look that fpoke fuch tendernefs, fuch fenfibility, fuch timid and injured love, that volumes of words could not have con¬ veyed to the Prince's bofom fuch a feeling as it infpired. Beneath its impulfe, he would have preffed her to his bofom, and joined his lips to her's; but to his heart ftruck the words, " I am in your protedion !"— He let fall his raifed arm, and placed her hand on his heart, whofe beats fpoke what lips could not. After one of thofe intervals of filence, fo delicious in interviews of love, where looks communicate
24° communicate femiment Aat langiuge would in vain ftrive to exprefs, the Prince nonced the languor fpread over Selina's face, the palenefs°of her cheeks where tranfient plea¬ fure d< modefty did not call up a Ihort-hved „l«#4i«rt4ipoke his tendereft hopes that no circumftanee of forrow had preyed on her fpirits while he was abfent and remote from her. Selina would have afked how (he could fail to know forrow when feparated from bun, and fometimes without an hope of havmg him reftored to her, had not timidity tup- preffed the power. - « Ah, Selina!" faid he, " you know not -*hat 1 fuffered in being torn away, without even feeing you to bid farewel, and gain for¬ titude to leave you in hearing you repeat that V ou would never forget me ! Often dtd I believe myfelf incapable to do fo,_ and re¬ folved to feek, through all hazards, a laft interview : but my love overcame thefe fug¬ geftions
geftions of weaknefs. 1 forced myfelf to prefer your fecurity to my own gratification; ai. :ft the fpot where my heart lay, without feeing, without bidding adieu to you, in whofe bofom I left it. As a laft interchange, as fome fhadow of confolation, I gave to Ofborne a letter for you. What melancholy delight was mine while writing it! I fancied myfelf fpeaking to you, and thought I was wiping from your cheek rh* parting tear ! My Selina received thar letter V fi I did," te^ied fhc ; •- often did I read ir, and as often did I wrf-p over L\" fc Dear girl! was ir indeed hor/ur/c I with a tear from your tye ? Oh 1 am too h.'ppv !'' " Ah, my Loid, It has been v\y co.nf^rc through many an heavy hour! vVi.en : -lvinii d is ceprefll-d, then J uki: i: out, iv.A readi ir* Mt thinks it removes, at \a\l il-ih-r^^ Pr/ melancholy. I a:k .*n\ felrj as I con i:,'i.M- tencei, Jiow 1 c;n b^ ;m]-.ii py while 1 hav-r fuch a fiiend ? Bar, ah ! :hen I thiuk hew far from me that fiiend L, replace mv !;.tcr in my bofom, and weep i 1 forrow/' VOL. 12. m a j n
ec In your bofom !'' cried the Prince, <( Oh Selina!"—He looked, with foftnefs inexpreflible, in her face— <; and does my k-ticr then, does aught tlm knows mc, know fuch an Heaven ? Ihus, thus, lume thank you V and by a feclh g, nor :o be controlled, he clafped her to his b;eail. ' Biufidnf; end trembling, fac flirank fiom him. — '* \\\.M hi'Vf 1 fad ?" ihc cried -, (t I did not mcap. —I kmrw not whatl fpoke.'* " Dear ange'. 1" f'ii tht ihincc, "may your bofom never know nn inmate whole defigns are lefs pu:e than mine 1 Oh Selina, you aie my only joy ! "i hiough all rhe parade of glory, all die tirefome buhneiL of >,leyfure, on you my thoughts are conr-nu.dly fixed. I take pride in looking among the ladies of the Court; fome poffefs one- excellence, fome another *, but to one beauty, one virtue, each poffeffes a crowd of oppofites. You alone aie good in all—you only are per¬ feft !" " Yuu
cr You think too fav.,drably of me," fud Selin-j's filtering tongue ; ct you afcribc to me what I-do not pofiefs." " Never/' cried he; cc you are more lovely than even my voice can cxpref> you, and your virtues are dearer than your beau¬ ties. Oh why was I not permitted to take you, proudly to take you from all the world, for my wife—my (>ueen ! How precious would it be to throw mvfelf before vou, to fpeak the raptures of my love, to place you above admiring nations ! Cuife on tht little¬ nefs of rank that prevents my doing thefe ! What is my birth 10 me, if I am denied the little privilege of marrying where I love ? Contempt on fuch paltry and unjuft ties ! I will defpife them ! They, vvhofe iu'tr I am deftined to be, fliall not inflift bands but fuch as common juftice warrants; yer, my father!—my mother!—tlie empire!—the good of thoufands !—Oh, it muft not be ! — No, never, never can you be my wife 1" ( * Can I not, then," faid Selina, in a trembling accent, while a tear ran down her ai 2 cheek
cheek at beholding the painful emotion of the Prince; "can I not, then, be your fiicnd ? In innocence and fi hnd !hip we may be happy." " My fiiend !" repeated he, mournfully; tc yes, Selini, ym may. But, Oh ! while I look on "he. tyts of ten dern!. fs, ti.uV lips of innfcence and love, the ic ch.vtis fo beautifui, fofArttj f.ovv cold a '*.«ii h-cms frlrd f Diilracll n and wrtt»-hedneli n.ua be rny lot l'* He was fih-nt; ' eyes wtre fixed, in the deepeft agony, on \-r (ace. Si.eh was the violence of his emotion, th,*t a tenr rolled dow each of his "heeks. The fond ;*nd in¬ nocent Selina wept ,;s ihc IvJkUI iu's trouble. She lay her head on ids (houkler, and en wined her hand in his. There w*:s fome¬ what in her innocent confi ence rat Calmed the Prince's bolbro. He rofe above his tr:-rfitnt weaknefs, and prefling her hand, fro a a, and faid, "Well, my Selina, in the i\vuto of friend a: ip we muit, if it be pof¬ fible,
fible, forget the dearer ones of love. I think 'tis your happinefs my thoughts ^ould fe¬ cure, not my own. Let us enjoy what blifs the prefent provides, not damp it by gloomy anticipation ofthe future. Dear girl! now am I about to put your friendfliip to the trial: 1 have taken fuch fteps wich the Queen, that flie is fliortly to aflc you of Lady liford. She will be to my Selina as much a mother as the friend flie leaves, and I will be —the tendereft brother ! Oh Selina, I anticipate ten thoufand joys in this fcheme ! I have fo contrived (forgive my defcending to fecrecy and intrigue) that our attachment, nay knowledge of each other, remain unfuf- pefted. I may be perpetually with you— fee you, hear you, difcourfe wich you daily. Aie you rejoiced, my Selina, that I have fo perfectly fueceeded ? Wifl you obey the Queen's mandate, anu make me happy ?" <c How can you afk me, my Loid ?" cried fhe i u you know every wiih of my heart: there is not a moie fervent one there, than m 3 thac
that ofi devoting myfelf to my Queen, and ____ jt {f And what, Selina r" tf Being where 1 may fee you." " "Tis enough," faid he, " I am happy." lie, with all the warmth of youth and love, piftured to her the delights that awaited her. He defcribed, in enthufiaftic terms, the amiable virtues of his mother, and fondly foretold'the love and admiration Selina would create in her breaft op intimate connexion with lier. He talked of the pleafures of the Court—pleafures that, he faid, he fhould firLl learn to prize when they conveyed farif- fadtion to the friend of his heart. To this Selina liftened with fmiles cf delight. Her bofom throbbed in joy at the profpeft of bein? ever near the Vrince. She fpoke the gaiety of her heart in an hundred little ways that fondncfscaufed, and innocence authorized. The Prince forgot the melancholy impoffi¬ bility ofher ever becoming his, and indulged the tunfports that fwelled in Ids fouh He renewed
renewed his proteftations of eternal affeftion, and fealed his vows with burning kiffes 0:1 her hand. Of the work), of every thing bnt themfelves, thty ceafed to think. To the Prince's care Sehna, in the pure fimpli¬ city of her heart, had refigned her fafety ; and the Prince, confcious of virtue and honour, felt full confident of his own ability to undertake the charge. Fatal is confidence ! 'Tis in itfelf,a crime, and is the fource of a world of others. While fondlv defcribing the future bleffings to be derived from fuch friendihip as their's, the Prince's eye caught that iheet of paper on which Scluuhad written, with an intention to deftroy it v. hen complete. I le took it up. Thus ftood the beginning:— «< Dear friend ! dear Edward ! Lord of my wifhes ! to you each of my thoughts, to you mv foul flies as toa home. Wherever I am, ficre to me are you; for in my ima- m 4. gination
gination you are ever prefent. Each line of your countenance is engraven in my bofom. Your fmile is never from my eyes. Dear my Lord, I—why (hould I blufli to fay ic r— I love you !—to myfelf i may fay it, and by no perfon elfe is this to be feen. "I'o my inmoft heart then 1 love you ! for you are beauuful, generous, noble, brave, good, kind------" Here the Prince laid down the paper, and turned im eyes on Sthu.i, who had hidden her blufhing fece in iiis* bofom. A tranfport of love was m his look. He preffed her mote clofely to him, and drew her breath ia kiffes. iiis lips, meanwhile, murmured words of love. While he held her in his arms, he heard rife between them'^for it came from neither the one nor the other) a deep and trembling figh. He ftarted. He looked round:—" It muft be fancy," thought he.—-He took Selina's hand, and was about to lift it to his lips, v/hen .another
another figh, louder than the firft, afcended from between them; and, an inftant after, a brufh of found like a loudly whifpered " hufh !" ran round the room. The Prince heard thefe, but Selina's agitation at having her paper difcovered, and emotion at the endearments of the Prince, prevented her hearing them alfo ! "A noife ofthe wind this," **^j thought the Prince ; and, not relinquifhing his hold of Selina, he in tender accents thanked her for thinking of him, when far away, wich unabated fondnefs. With her beautiful face turned from him, flie whifpered "it hid not been written, had he been expefted to be there." tc And why not, my Sehna?" cried he; " we love each other, and we love with in¬ nocence. Can we do wrong in talking of it ■? Oh ! believe tne not. Your bluihes would have prevented your frying to you:-Edward whr.t you have written there. J b.u:h not to- declare how tenderly I love you— to tell you my whole foul is your's l" m 5 As-
As he fpoke, he fnatched her ro him. Every preffure he made was anfwered. Her lips were joined to his. Htr arms fnut round hiin. He felt her heart beat on his fide. Words were lofi. Both fell into a delicious dream ; and vvhen Selina awoke from it, her innocence uas no more ) But half fenfible of life, Selina, after a time;, lay motionlcf> in the Prince's r.rms.— (l My Selina, my wife /'* faid he foftly. His voice brought a t >ouknd feelings to Selina's bofom. She ftarted from him. She fi II on her knees. Her eyes were caft up to Hea¬ ven in tearlefs, fpeechlefs agony. From her pale lips at length ftole—- (< My God, my Father, I am loft!—I am Eft, my God ! f> flie repeated wildly, and a ftream of tears gullied from her eyes. The Prince advanced toher. lie: threw himfelf on his knee by her fide, and tendt riy took
took her hand. She wich forrow, not anger, drew it bacic, and with the other covered her eyes.—" Leave me," fhe whifpered faintly ; <* let me not fee you ! Let me not fee any body ! I cannot look as I was ufed to do. I fliall die if yon meet my eyes." " Leave yon 1" exclaimed he, " never ! You are my wife." ff Oh no, no, no !" fne cried in an agony of tears ; (f I am a ruined, loft crea¬ ture I I am not your wife !'* The Prince prayed her to ceafe weeping, and to receive comfort. He knelt at her feet: « \\ ill you forgive me ?" he cried.— <c Oh Selina! will v-hi pardon the wretch who, do*in-*-<n v^u to dhuaCtion, fella facrifice t'> paff-t)n, arA violated the iionour he valued de .ier than life :" te St rah to me not !" fhe ciied, in broken acccuis j <c piiy mc, hue fpeak to me not 1" i: Injured angel !" exchime\l the Prince, (( Oh, if yon knew the agony of remorfe, the deteftation of myfelf, that tortures my m 6 verv
very foul, you would not withhold the blef¬ fmg of your pardon ! You would let me wipe the rears from your eyes—you would forgive me !" " Forgive you!" returned Selina, turning to, and giving him her hand ; t( that I for¬ give you. Heaven is my witnefs ! I, I only am to blame ! Wretched mrl that I am !" She fell on his neck, and fhed of all tears the moft bitter. Suddenly flic ftarted up, and kneeling with cl.dped hands, uttered incoherent prayeis that Heaven would par¬ don her fin, and fnatch her to the protefting fpirit of her mother. Diftrafted by the frenzied look ofher eye, tiie Prince renewed his endeavours to compofe and folace her. To all he feid fhe, ho,wevcr, paid no atten* lion -, but continued her difordered Implica¬ tion that Heaven would fnatch her from herfelf. At length exhaulled, flie fank i.gain on the neck of the Prince as he knelt bvfide her, and there lay for feme minutes inani¬ mate thio tgh exe/tion. 6 Wheiv
When flie recovered ftrength and perfect confcioufnefe, the Prince t<iok b ,th her hantis. ITe looked, widi all che fi.rrow in !; :■> com- tenance thar fo noble a tnind mufe f A when it has firil heavily tranfgieffed, and is con¬ templating the object whom h has re ]\ic^d to mifery's Lwtft depth, on the pale fice of Selina, fo lately blooming in beauty an i in¬ nocence. With folemn earneftnefs in Ids manner, he feid, "Selina! in the intempe¬ rance of youth and che excefs of lo.e, I have robbed you of whac, in the woridfs opinion, canno: be reftored. My Stlina, Heaven thinks diderently ; and, i'i 1 Lavui's eye, you are ftill fpotlefs. I, h nvevcr, am deeply your offender. I know but one wav pofiible to expiate my crin IL-ar what ic is, Selina. Not aU the pouer on c?.nh ihad prevent my taking ic. Even. M an hour fb fad, fo iolemu as tliis, will we go together to the altar of the chapel. Tnere, in the prefence of Iler.ven, will I vow to God's Majefty to make you my wukkd wife; or, ihould the fed accidents of iny birth, the ftrong
ftrong ties of my rank, prevent my doing fo, never to be married to another!" In his eyes there was fuch a gleam of feverity, that Selina trembled as flie beheld him. That gleam, however, was tranfient. All the bitter dejefted nefs of compunction returned to his features. He looked on her with mingled fondnefs and diftrefs.—" Will you accompany me, my Selina r" he faid :— " attend me, and hear me make what repa¬ ration is in my power." « Do with me," anfwered fhe, " what you wfd. Nothing can reftore my happinefs, for the peace of virtue is fied from my heart !" " We vrilLgo then, my wife," he cried ; « tremble not at the melancholy and awful fcene we have*'to go through. 1 repeat, to Heaven you are fpotlefs, fpotlefs as my wifhes. Come, my love, colleft your cou¬ rage : let us go." Selina's
Selina's mind was worked by horror to the refolutenefs of defpair. A cold fhud¬ dering ran through her blood, but her in¬ clination led her not to refufe accompanying the Prince on his awful errand. C( What hour of the night is it ?" faid the Vrinct?. " Ere long," replied Stlina, "it will ftrike one j the ghifi, is aim >ft 1 ),vn." Atthein A ant flie finifhed iVakhn:?, the rnaflive bell toiled t\it hour, fn th^ found there wm a loudnefs and hokow fulicnneis never pofleffed by its note bahre -. its echo was long <\:\\ rc vei berated. Tht o, li feemed like the paffing bell of the dying. (t Gracious God !" exclaimed Selina, "whac means thac? the bell ftrikes before its hour!" The Prince, if his difordered mind thought at ull, wondered at Selina^ remarking with emotion
emotion fo trivial an incident ■ for he knew not that ftrange prediction of the witch in the foreft, wnat was now prefent to the ima¬ gination of the wretched Selina. Scarcely had the echoes of the bell retired, in mournful hummings, from the courts and (lone pailages, when at intervals ftrange noifes were heard, like the gibberings of unnatural beings, or the fcreams of the tortured. The horrible noifes mn along the outfide of the caille, though it did not feem that the creatures h\,ni v»hom tiny iffued,were on the ground. Then tlicy were: in the in¬ terior part of the building, aud they dew with the rapidity of lighting. Anon th-y were in the fecitt paife'/e. A fcramblirg was heard along the wad, antl then rhe voices came full on the ear. The Prince rufhed out, but nothing vifible was there, though the wild gibberings were round him. lie had not flood an inftant ere the uproar increafed ; it ran along the walls-, and fank from the car.
He returned to Selina. She had fallen on a chair.—*' We will not go," fiid ihe faintly : (f This h an horrid horn*! God guard us, if we yet merit iiis proteftion !" " We do, my Selina, we do!" cried he 5 " Heaven has pity on the weak j ftiil are Saints our friends. Let not your timidity overpower you. Haften to the dtar, my wife, and Ut God hear our vows." <e 1 gol" faid Selinaj and her look of horror returned to her face, i( We muft not take a light," faid the Prince: " ir may caufe our being difcovered. We can find our way in darknefs to the chapel." With his arm round Selina's waift, who needed all his affiftance, he proceeded on the paffage winding through the caftle. Their flow fteps echoed through the ftillnefs all was wrapped in. After long walking, the Prince's extended hand was encountered by a door. This door he opened. He looked on the fpace it difclofed. The darknefs was profound;
profound; but he difcovered, or thought he difcovered, the light of large arched windows, lie was certain, however, ic was not the chapel. He was about to retire, when, in the farther part of the room, which from the found he imagined to be very fpacious, he heard footfteps. Fearful that the wanderer might obferve him, and following, moleft his facred purpofe, he drew the door nearly to j and ftopped to mirk whither the perfon went, if it were a perfon lie perceived. While he ftood fo fi tinted, the fteps drew nigher, and were evidently more than thofe of one perfon. l At laft they were within a few yards ofthe door:—" She comes this way !" whifpered an hollow voice. « e I think I fee the light flow of her gar¬ ments by yonder window !" faid another. Ali was filent. "She
« She is there ! >J ciied a voice again ; " I hear her foot 1° " Then ftrike home P* replied the other: <e Bring her down at once, or her cries will fpread!" There was time for no more. The Prince barely diftinguiihed thefe fpeeches; but, by what he heard, he imagined their tenor ,„_« Selina/* faid he, " I leave you for an inftant. Sit down; you are fafe here/* While he fpoke, a loud fcream rent the air, and a female voice cried dreadfully— " Oh I am ftain ! murder, murder I" The Prince rufhed to the fpot. Groans condufted him. No affafiins appeared, but on the floor lay extended fomewhat white. He ftooped i it v/as tlie body of a woman, whofe white robes were bathed in blood.— The Prince, fliocked at the fpectacle, raifed the female in his arms; but life appeared go.ic
gone from her for ever. He lifted up her hund, and it fell di\id by her fide-. Di ftrayed in all perts, he knew not what to do, but looked bewildered round him ; now wift \-ir for afliftance, r.nd now fearful of that interpnution which would probably^ deteft the hipkfi. Sciin?.. Convinced, at length, that the poor female wns dead, he flew with delirious hafte to the living objeft cf his cares. Selira v/as laying, neaily bereft of breath, on the floor of the p,:fiV^e. A wild vacancy poflefled her rnind, When the Prince raifed ner, flie laid, (C What, fiie is murdered !'' *•■ Some wretched objeft has, indeed, fellen beneath an affaflin !'" anfwered the Prince ; ** I would have ftaid, but ilie is certainly a corpft*. and for you my fears tortured me. Come, my wife, however horrid is the path, thougii through murder and death, ftill will 1 not quit the prrpofe of my foui! Let me haften to the chapel to fwear my oath." As
As they proceeded, Sdina's blood, in feme meafure, refumed its quick courfe th!'oiy,h her veins. Recollection returned to her. As it did fo, flie teemed to lode on the iight of" day after a long night of daik- nef. 'i'o her o,vn ficiu'i >n ihe recurred -.vith del iri jus 'd^ony. i he -n..r ier toa frcze her blood in i.oiior. Tais feemed the hour to bereave her of every .»,[e, to fpiXAd death amv..^ her only r.icn/.-, to fc^ic her eyes wit.i usance iiorrora. A I'u- paffing thiougli a long vaulted ];r.th, thc v f>u;id them'elve at the pointed door tfia: ied--*€ft*ftr» the chapel, byway ofthe noic'i -.dflc. 'ine Prince turned it on its rufly hing.s. S.hna ihrank back, as the cii.iptl, ihrotided in black daiknefs, was difclofed to h.T. "Why flu hfer you thus?" ciied the Prince i ec you do not fear to enter ?"
" My
cf My heart fails me 1" fhe replied, " and I am funt to death ! Hark ! what noife is that ?" " 'Ti* but the bird of night's melancholy cry." « And that? 1 ' " Onlv rhe wind among the tombs con¬ veyed by this opened door/' " But that figure ! See, it flares on us through the gloom of this horrid place !" " Have courage; it is only the marble fiVure on a monument/' He hurried her on. Their footfteps, on the cold pavement of the aides, founded througii the large and dreary chapel. They paffed along the tombs : they paffed by that of Selina's mother. As they came even with it, a pale beam of light fhone over the monument, and difplayed to them thcfculp- tured figure of the dead Countefs. The fice was a model of her's. The burial cap that fhe was figured in, was drawn back on the forehead.
forehead. Her hands were clafped before her as in prayer. There was fomething dreadful to the Prince and Selina, fofitua-ed, in the fight of tins extended figure, liozh fliuddered. The Frince 1-oked back. The light was gone, and the tomb loft in tiie fame daiknefs that the others were. " My mother," faid Selina faintly, "my mother lies hardby. Iler fpirit is "in Hea¬ ven, where 1 fliall never meet it. Now I am no longer innocent, 1 think myfelf no longer fecurc : I tremble to ftep anions thefe monuments. The thought of btin^ near the dead terrifies me." tf Do not give way to imagination,''whif¬ pered the Prince. " To fuch a fcene as this 1 would not have called you, did not juftice demand it. Tremble notj our tafk will foon be ended." With difficulty flie drew herfelf alono-. As her eye ftole a glance around her, her fenfes chilled at the awful gloom of die place. The
The dufky light that fpread itfelf through the chapel windows, difplayed fo partially the melancholy objefts of the aiQes, that imagination had ample fcope for forming, from natural beings, preternatural and horri¬ ble appearance;*. As they approached the holy neighbour¬ hood of the ahar, a vivid gleam rat. acrofs their path. Seli'.a clung to the Prince.— « 'Tis only a fi.iih of lightning," faid. he : <c we Irani foon be fcreened irom it in the made of tlie chancel." Then burft on them the hollow rumbling of a bieak of thunder. Selina's terror took from her the po^cr of fpeaking.-—" This pieafes mc will,'* cried the Wince, eyeing the lofty wi dows of the chapel; et let the elements, contending round us, make this a jb;fon of facred horror ! Kneeling, while God's thunders roll, and his lightniitgs gleam around me, my oath will be doubly folemn/' And
And now they reached the footftool of the holy chancel. Above was a pi&ure of that Being who gave birth to our religion. It fmiled, in peacefulnefs, on all who there proftrated themfelves. In niches on each fide were carved figures, clad in the habit of paft days, kneeling before a book, as if eternally befeeching for the tranquillity of the interred bodies thut lay mouldering in contiguous graves. " Oh Heaven!'* faid Selina, (C I cannot bear the (hocking awfulnefs of this place ! What a deathlike ftillnefs all is in, and how dim and cheerlefs is the little l ; ght that reveals the horrors which furround us ! Let me leave the dreary haunts ofthe dead while I have ftrength.'* " Stay," cried the Prince, in a firm and folemn voice, te ftay but a little time, and we will go !" He knelt on the ftair of the altar.— " Kneel with me, my wife !" faid he. Selina VOL* li, n fell
fell by his fide. He took her hand in his. He imprinted on it a pure kifs. He Kfted his eyes to the pifture of his Saviour.— " Now/' faid he, ci thou, that lookeft in pity on the feeble virtue of thy creatures, hear me fwear 1—By all the Majefty that fur- rounds the head of him whofe vaffds are the Kings of the earth !—by thy Godhead, who defcendeft from the Heavens in mercy to mankind—by my deareft hope of eternal blifs, I vow ------" Merciful Father 1 From that fide of the chapel where ftood the tombs, iffued a long, but low groan! Selina fell, more dead than alive, on her lover's neck. The Prince turned his head, and looked widi a ftarting eye toward the fpot. His glance was not encountered by any other than natural objefts. "By
< f By thefe," he refumed, " and by all elfe that is dear to me, and facred to thee, I vow ------" From that place whence had iflued the groan, was heard a clafh, like the rent of marble. The Prince's blood forfook his cheek j hi* hand trembled, and his hair moved on his head. What fucceeded, 1 tremble but to relate. A form in white was feen, through the dark¬ nefs of the aifle, coming toward them ! Motionlefs was the Prince. Selina looked on the approaching being with maddened imagination. The form advanced. The grave had given up its dead, for it wore the face of Selina's mother. Like to the figure on lier monument* ic had on its burial drefs. Its winding-fhcec was wrapped round it. Its n % funeral
funeral cap was on its head. The face was pale, paler than aught that has life. The hands were motionlefs on the fides, as we place thofe of a corpfe. The tyts were open, though over them vvas a film, a dead- nefs, that cannot be defcribed, Panting for breath, the Prince gazed, with fixed and hnggard eyes, on the apparition. Selina threw hrrfelf on the pavement, and hid her face with her hands. " Dreadful being !" at length uttered the Prince, " what would you ?" The fpe&re's dead eyes were fixed on him an'inftant 5 then, they were removed tothe proftrate Selina. As die Prince gazed on that which was before him, and recollefted on what account he ftood there, and why he had caiied to witnefs what he did, the prefence of Heaven, his brain grew diftrafted in horror, and he madly
madly cried t— <f Thou fpeakeft not, but well / know thy will. Comeft not thou to damn the deftroyer of thy innocent, thy harmlefs child ? Bringeft noc thou curfes from Heaven to hurl upon his devoted head ? Art not thou the avenger of betrayed virtue—the avenger fent from the fkies ? Thou art, thou art! I read it in thy dreadful eye 1 I fee it in thy cold, motionlefs lip! Strike then quickly ! Blight my youth with thy touch ! Drag the feducer with thee to thy grave! Fulfil thy miffion : I ftand curfed by my own confcience !" The apparition thrice fhook its head ; its eyes were turned to Selina, and its featufes bent to a look of pity. It raifed its withered arm, and pointed to the chapel door. " I," cried the Prince, feebly—" I un¬ derftand you. You upbraid me charitably, and blame my fiownefs. Thus then I vow—'* Oh God! what a voice uttered—" Forbear! *' 6 Every
Every nerve of the Prince trembled. A cold dew overfpread his brow. In a voice hollow through mentaL exertion, and low in the expreffion of foftened temper, he exclaimed—" Bleffed Spirit! what wouldft thou ?" <f Forbear!" repeated the apparition :— u Swear not! God will not ha\e ic fo \ The maid is a facrifice I Hence, and fin no more!" Soft mufic, the mufic ofthe fpheres, floated on the air. A glorious brightnefs fhone throughout the chapel. The notes of mufic fwelled to founds too great for mortal hear¬ ing. The Prince's fenfes were loft in ravifh- ment. When he was again fenfible of life, he was extended on the pavement befide Selina. His nerves trembled, but his mind was compofed. He lifted up Selina. She breathed only in deep fighs.—" Heaven is fatisfied !" he whifpered j " we may go." Of
Of the Prince, and of every object round her, Selina was ignorant. Her feattered fenfes in no meafure returned till fhe was reftored to her own chamber, where the comfort of Hght, and the affiftance of the Prince, fliortly made her once more fen¬ fible of herfelf. While the Frince, in fuch a ftate of mind as defies defcription, fought retirement through the dark avenues of the caftle, fhe flung herfelf on her bed. Her difordered mind did not preclude the poffibility of fleep, but her flumber was heating and iure¬ frefhing. Sometimes (he murmured—"No, never, my Lord, never! My hand, no more than my hand !"—At others flie moaned and wept, and whifpered that (lie « was loft and wretched !" Then her lips worked in con¬ vulfions, and her eyes were open, though her mind was dozing, while (he cried, in broken fentences—" Save me, .ave me, my Lord! 'Tis her ghoft 1 Shield me from it! Gracious God, 'tis an apparition I"
So paffed the wretched night. At lengui the taper's fad light fank, and died away, while the firft peep of morning, ftealing, through the crevices ofthe chamber window, reftored to the caftle's gloomy rooms what fecurity and ferenity the cheering influence of light can beftow.
end of VOL. II.
IANE, WlWieUVA PHE9S-. :LIADBNHALL-5TR£*T.
