Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
The witch of Ravensworth: a romance
THE
V 1 T C II
OF
KAVEXSWORTII.
CHAPTER I.
The Baron rtheirs Ids Visits to the Ha**,
Many years had elapsed, since the ba¬ ron had taken any notice of the Hag: he had obtained his object, through her diabolical Machinations, and, having had no further occasion for her services, had VOL. II. B
forgot his agent; the witch, however, now came to his recollection, as the best pergon he could consult, in his present difficulty. The baron, therefore, resolved to pay a visif to his old acquaintance, and to engage her, by means of new promises, in his service. It was one evening, as soon as the $\m had sunk beneath the horizon, that the baron set out, alone, to visit the wretch, on whose wickedness he hoped I to depend for success*
i
3 The baron found the Hag, as usual* seated on her joint-stool, mumbling her incantations by the fire-side. The witch selected not to know the baron : she inquired who he was, and why he disturbed her ? :i I am," cried he, " thy friend, the baron de La Braunch.** " Oh, oh 1 M answered the witch; " how kind, to call and see the poor old woman, and how grateful too, to come so soon! I dare say, now, that it is from pure allection that thou hast B 2
4 come. Thou dost not want my assist¬ ance ! no, no; it would be wronging the noble nature of the baron de La Braunch, to think so!" Nothing could be more malicious than the looks of the witch, as she spoke these words, and uttered her re¬ proaches. It was some time before the baron could appease the Hag, sufficiently to explain the state of his mind; which task he had no sooner performed, than she raised herself up. " Oh, ohl'* cried the witch; " there is business to be
5 done, and therefore thou art come* Truly now I suppose that thou dost think, that the powers whom I serve have nothing to do, but to wish for the accomplishment of thy wishes; but the matter is not so easy as thou mayst think; Askar the fiend, my master, must be courted to this; thou must see the demon thyself." The baron started* " Yes, thou must see him in all his horrors; thou must visit the illuminated castle, and at midnight thou must be- b3
6 come <the associate of devils* Why, did not the baron promise that h£ would come to our feast ? how well he kept his word ! i€ Ha!** cried the baron, " what dost thou ask ? why must I visit those in¬ fernal orgies } is not thy power sufV fici<mt to obtain my wishes ? it is thy it^eucy alone I want; nor will 1 have any other,** " Then," cried the Hag, " I cannot do thee service/* iC How! dost thou refuse me then?**
1 H t hate not the power, baron, t# liid thy wishes*** K Not the power i" u No/ 1 returned the Hag; ** my do¬ minion is over infants, innocent in¬ fers." The haron started. " My power is over the plants, the herbage, md the cattle and flocks of the Md; but to oppress or destroy the suffering yirtuocr, : n man or \vc- ifran* is a strong work, and *k:^ Lhe B 4
aid of the, greater spirits : but despair not, baron; shew thyself fearless, and fond of bloody and the mighty Askar will s-hew thee means of success; he will give thee his power, his protec¬ tion. 1 ' " I wih serve thy master, then," cried the baron, " Charming!*' replied the witch. ** Tell me,** cried the haron, " when shall I witness these horrid mysteries?*' " This day se'nnight," returned the
ft witch, <f is one of our grand meetings. Thou must not visit us before darkness shall have added its dooms to the face of the black heath, nor until the screech- owl shall have besun to hoot; then visit the Hag, and she will lead thee to the enjoyment of delightful horrors, and games and gambols of devils, where thou shalt see them sup, and sup with them too : be punctual; thou knowest my desire to serve thee! n The baron took his leave of the witch, big with apprehensions of the events which were to follow, ill pleased ii 5
10 with the injunction of the witch, and yet well pleased at the prospect it pre* «?nted, of obtaining the full gratification of his wishes.
11
CHAPTER II. The Baron changes his Behaviour to the Lady Bertha. The baron had no sooner begun to entertain hope* of the accomplishment of his desires, and to rind himself at liberty to act towards his lady as he pleased, than he began to show her h 6
1 Itt
indifference, and the most mortifying neglect; he wished, indeed, to wean her from him ; and though it was no easy task, from her natural goodness of heart, for her to understand so cruel an experiment, yet she began to fear that, with the death of her child, she had lost the affections of her lord. This idea preyed upon her mind, and her melancholy the artful baron took occasion to interpret as ill temper; an accusation as unjust, as it was un¬ generous. The lady Bertha little knew, how- over, the dangers which awaited her,
13 or the wicked connexion the baron had formed with the abandoned Al¬ wena. This conduct of the baron relieved him considerably from the ta>k of du¬ plicity ; yet v-.»i entuvh, as he na> aware that he mast prc&crve vsm*' ap¬ pearance* of respect and attention for his ladv, a.s s otherwise the contpleSoii oi his plans imght create suspicions among his vassals
14
ffasmmsmmmm
CHAPTER III. The Baron is presented, hy the I/a^ i to the Fiend,
Thb night had arrived for the baron** visit to the witch. An utter darkness was spread over the scenery of the heath. It promised to be a night of horrors.
15 The baron stepped forward, aa un¬ willing to encounter new objects of terror. Scarcely could he discern the path. At every instant he heard voices of dUtre^ ; he saw, too, lights at a dis¬ tance, whicli presently vanished, and were seen no more- The owl hooted, the ravens croaked, as disturbed horn their roost^ and airy substances flitted across his path. Not a human creature was to foe seen. At length the baron arrived at the door of the Hag* dwelling. He lifted u^ the latch; tha witch was not there*
t6 He surveyed the room. The large grey cat walked round him three times, and snuffed the air. The Hag entered ; her lamp was it* her hand. She desired the baron to follow her. She enjoined him not to utter a syl¬ lable. The glimmering of the lamp dis¬ covered only a long, vaulted, passage, closely covered.
17
Presently they' came to an open space. The witch threw a mantle over the face of the baron, They proceeded. The baron heard strange sounds, like loud music; a chorus of singing voices, mingled with groans and shrieks In an instant the witch withdrew the mantle from before the face of the baron.
18 A sudden light appeared, His eyes were dazzled with innume* rable burning tapers. For an instant ; he could discern no other object* Presently his ears were stunned with a horrid laugh, and yell. It wag th& nocturnal inhabitants per¬ forming their midnight mysteries and revels. The baron, accompanied by the Hag,
19 ascended a flight of broad steps, into a spacious apartment* from whence the noise of the voices was heard. The Hag stooped to the floor, from whence she took two large, mounding, brass cymbals, laid at the entrance* These she struck forcibly together, ut¬ tering the words (t Calama^ calama/* immediately a horrid &cr&*m &\\d laugh was heard, from the inner part of the saloon, which was instantly suc¬ ceeded by a perfect stillness. The baron now first discovered a
20 throne, covered with black, on which was sitting a figure, the face of which- was pale, and smeared with bloods It was fantastically drest, in a party-co¬ loured habit, red and black. It had a silver crown upon its head* The head and arms of a skeleton lay at its feet; and before the throne stood a email al¬ tar of granate, on whieh was placed a bowl, filled with a liquid that resembled human blood. Presently, six fantastic figures ap^ peared. They were drest in black, and had girdles around them, of a red co¬ lour. Each one of them had a tinkling
bell in their hand, which they rung f violently as they danced, and practised various gambols. The six figures led in with them a milk-white lamb, dressed with ribands and flowers, which they tied, by one of its feet, to the altar, and which they had no sooner performed, than they ran furiously round the saloon, with the most frantic gestures. In the midst of the hall was a pure flame, burning in a large censer. The six figures arranged themselves,
22 three on each side of the fiend who wa» seated on the throne. The Hag approached before the ba¬ ron. She knelt at the foot of the throne. She repeated the words, u (Jalama, ca- lama" at which the devils shouted a ^ry of joy. The baron stood dismayed. The witch beckoned to htm to ap¬ proach. She whispered him, lC Fie, fie; * be assured, noble baron!" He was offended at the bare sugges¬ tion of his being afraid*
«3 He frowned on the witch, and walked boldly forward. His steps echoed as he trod through the halj. The witch whispered again in his earj " Attend, and silently observe our my* eteries." The fiend ordered the Hag to with¬ draw. The barer* was left among the de¬ mons* w Thou wouldst enjoy,'* cried the
24 fiend, " wealth and beauty both; thou wouldst have honours, md pamper thyself with the richest treats of vo¬ luptuous nature. thou wouldst have all that Mammon and Lucifer can be¬ stow, and thou shalt have them; but thou must first prove thyself worthy of these gifts; thou must be initiated in our mysteries/ 1 The baron bowed his head. " Approach,*' cried the fiend, u to the altar/' The baron approached the altar, *
25 He was directed to draw the dagger from his side; he was desired to dip its point in the bowl of blood ; he wav to pronounce the words " Calama, en- lama," The fiend who was on the throne desired the baron to look stedfastly on the western entrance, The baron was undismayed. He- looked stedfastly on the door, lie be¬ held a female form enter, It was the same that he had seen at his second visit to the Hag; but it approached
26 nearer. It held a cup in one hand ; it waved the other to the baron. The baron was appalled ; a cold perspiration ran down his limbs; the spectre glided away; all was still; the baron remained in suspense, Presently the blast of a trumpet was heard. The Hag entered at the sound. She dragged at her heels a loathsome carcase.
27 It was the same female form that had just appeared. It was no longer a spirit; it was a body, but without life. The baron shuddered. "Jt is now/' cried the Hag, u that thou must prove thyself worthy of the friendship of the mighty Askar, the prince of. mischief, of disease, of death, and of horror. Now thou must prove thy soul undaunted; and then thou mayst go and sleep securely in the bed of the beautiful Ahveua. C 2
(( What is it more," cried the baron, u that thou wouldst I should perform to please thee?" " I prepare to tell thee," cried the witc , with looks of frightful exulta¬ tion, (C Thou must plunge thy dagger, embrued as it is with blood, in the bosom of this body." " Of that body?" cried the baron, viewing it with horror. " Obey," cried the Hag; Ci thy hopes depend on thy obedience: 'tis the will of Askar."
2.9 The baron looked again on the form of the female at his feet; he trembled ; he looked in its face; he turned from it with aversion ; he lifted up the dag¬ ger i he hesitated \ his nervous arm trembled. " Strike! * cried the Hag, The baron made an effort; he turned his face, and plunged the dagger in the breast of the corpse. In an instant a horrid and incessant yell was heard. c $
SO The pure flame* which was burning in the censer, became a thick* black, vnioke, A malignant vapour filled the sa¬ loon. The fiend on the throne handed the baron a scroll, on which was written— " The Promise of Ashar to the Baron de La Braunch x~the Death of Lady Bertha, and the Possession of Alwena'* The scroll was instantly closed. The Hag was told to withdraw.
3i
Th(* bnfArt withdrew >vilh the Hag, They pursued the same passage ; they arrived at the hovel. " Well, baron/* cried the witch, " thine is a noble career; thou art in high favour ; all will be as thou couldst wish, to-morrow night. To-morrow night, at twelve, leave the subterra¬ neous passage to the castle free, that the Hag may enter without being seen. Give me but admittance to the chamber of lady Bertha ; then leave me to my work ; but no mortal being must be nigh; the Hag must be undisturbed. c 4
35 I have a knife -will clo ihp business speedily. Her hotly must be given an offering to the fkncL 'Ihen thou «halt see it breathless ; and, v.hen the re¬ volving months hhall iiave produced a vear, from this time, then thou wilt have a festival to keep; thou wilt have the same d^ity to perform, that thou hast done this night/* " Why is it/' cried ihe baron, " that I must be tormented with these hor* rors i" u Because/* replied the Hag, " w is THE PKICE OF PLEASUKE. ThoU WOUldst
33 have riches, and the charms of woman, and honou *s, and enjoyment." " Enjoyment! 1 * repeated the baron. Ci Yes," cried the Hag; u ere the convent bel! shall have rung to vespers, to-morrow evening, thou shalt be freed from all the obstacles that prevent thy happiness." u Tis well/' cried the baron; « then this night rids me of my restraints." "Thou wilt be free to dalliance, Askar has promised jt." c 5
34
CHAFFER IV. The Fate of Lady Bertha.
The baron, with his excellent du¬ plicity, on the next morning, ap¬ peared to his lady unusually gay and cheerfuh He inquired kindly how she had slept; and was so courteous, that
35 her heart was rejoiced, in the hope that the baron had renewed his affec¬ tions towards her : her innocent mind little suspected the danger that awaited her at night. At length the hour arrived. The baron waited, in anxious ex¬ pectation, for the witch, The baron had ordered the attend¬ ants of lady Bertha to withdraw; she did not want them. The barom, himself, pleaded an ex- c 6
36 cuse for leaving her; he had letters to write. The convent bell had rung. The baron retired to his study, where he remained an hour, in hopes that the husiness was going oik At length, he descended a few steps j he heard a groan. He proceeded no further. He listened: all was still*
He stepped gently down,
37 The word " Calama ,f was writterx against the wall; it was the sign that the Work was completed. The baron, with that composure, and daring eflrontery, which he possessed in so eminent a degree, instantly called one of the female attendants, and de¬ sired her to seek the lady Bertha: he wished to sup with her, in her apart¬ ment. The attendant went on this errand; but could not find her lady, in any part of the castle.
3$ She called Raw' rude. Ranetrude had not seen her for more than an hour. She went in search of her: hut in vain, She trembled at some conclusion* \\hi<h rushed on her mind; *he \\iw shorkul at this new circum¬ stance of terror. Th** attendant was afrnid to return to the* barou with the tidings. At length he called Ranetrude by name. She obeved the summons, and in-
30 formed the haron, that her search after her lady had been fruitless. The baron affected a surprise and anger, that made the domestic* tremble for the consequences. The ladv Bertha had never leit the castle, to go abroad, without her at¬ tendants. There was no circumstance, within the reach of probability, unthought of, or unattended to. The baron dispatched his attendants
4# different ways, in search of the lady Bertha. He went, himself, to every avenue of the castle, and through the extensive galleries. Hathbrand suggested, that perhaps the Hag had had some hand in this nevv catastrophe. The baro~i listened with attention. Truly/' cried he, with perfect cool¬ ness, u we have, as you know, before, accused the witch, when the little Ed-
Hi v*ard had disappeared irom amonjj us i yet we were nut uhU j to suhrtaiitJ.»t»-: any charge a^iin^t her; v\e had \\u proof of her^uiH/ 1 The barou kvpt UttlUbrai*d u c-oti^ Biderable time in conversation, on the subject of what was best to be done. There were hopes, that she had walked to enjoy the reiWshing air ; she might have chosen to he alone ; she might luve wished to be free from restraint; she was fond of contempla¬ tion. The evening arrived; lady Bertha
43 had not returned : the darkness of night cainc oti, L Jy Bertha had not arrived. The dr^w-bridges wcrte not raiicd &• u»uaL A fresh guard were mounted on the battlements* Orders were given to admit any strangers who might bring intelli¬ gence. The next morning arrived, and brought no news of lady Bertha,
43 A week elapsed % lady Bertha \\m not found. At bftgth, th« haron «cnt for the obsemuoui Ilathbmnd* He represented the propriety of spreading a report, without the walls of the castle, that ladv Bertha had died suddenly : he considered it the best way to prevent the inquiries of idle curiosity. The submissive Hathbrand acqui¬ esced. By the instructions of the baron,
44 he acquainted the other domestical that the body of lady Bertha wa^ found. She had wandered from the castle, near the river; by accident, she had fallen into the stream ; she was drowned, md hud hmu fcatei to tlt« convent.
The baron confined himself, for some i days, to the castle. !
The domestics were given mourn- 1 ° ' i ing. j 3 ! i ] A burial of one of the sisters of the j convent was said to be lady Bertha's; i I I i
15 the report gained ground : the gra¬ tifications of curiosity are soon satis¬ fied; it swallows a bait witiiout dif¬ ficulty, and is pleased with any thing- like news.
4b'
CHAPTER V, Tlvt Baron visits the Palace of Askar; views the Corpse of Lady Bertha*
The baron had now a task to perform: he had to make his promised visit to the fiend; a duty which, depraved as lie was, he could not think of without disgust.
"7 The night arrived; he fo-jid iVc H^g ready to receive him,a*id t« ^oxtaacthim to the chamber of horrors. The witch led the haron, covered with his mantle, in the way she had i>efore done, to the palace of Askar, It was empty of its dreadful jn- i habitants. There was not any thing to be seen, but the altar, and throne, with a bier, placed in the middle of the room. On the bier was laid the body of lady Bertha*
is&tau
48 The Hag led the baron to the altar, She required from him an horrid in¬ junction ; his hair stood on end, as she pronounced the sentence: he was to plunge his dagger in the bosom. The baron shuddered, and obeyed. "Behold, now," cried the witch, « the reward of all thy hardihood, and labour ; thy fears and difficulties are at a „ end : thou mayst. visit the lovely Alwena, and pass the hours in volup¬ tuous dalliance. Thou art arrived to
49 that desired point, when every thing is accomplished. Away, then, and en- joy 1 . Even now the lady Alwena ex¬ pects thee; she smiles, and courts thee to her bed* Thou knowest not the delights which await thee ; but, first, take a farewell salute of thy sweet lady here. 0 ""Accursed Hag!" cried the baron, *< hold thy tongue; all is abomination here; torment me no further." " Nay, now, this childishness will offend the mighty Askar, Do not be vol. n. »
50 ungrateful, baron. Como, jcome, I see that thou art not j*et a num.*' The Hag now conducted the baron to her hovel, lie seated him^.lf on the chair; he K jned against the wail. Not even the la>eivious images he had painted to his mind, of the p«s- sosion of «uch charms an lady Alwcna's, could prevent the horrors of reproach, ^tnd die^mt, uliich the dreiuiful injunc¬ tions he had oheyed brought to his re¬ collection.
31 The Hag observed these changes In the mind of the baron. " Come," cried she, i4 thou hast no more ill acts to perform ; thou need&t not let thy conscience perplex thee thus; avvav, and he merry."' The baron took his leave of the I lag, and, after arriving at the castle, drest to pay a visit to the lady Alwena; it was the first time that he had seen her, since the death of ladv Beitha. She received him with her usual complacency and dignity ; but, seeing n 2
52 him out of spirits, made use of those soft, winning airs, which an artful wo¬ man knows too well how to practise: she leaned towards him ; she pressed her bosom against him; she invited him, as it were, to soothe the anguish of a disturbed mind, in that luxurious mansion of loveliness and beauty. The baron, as she reclined towards him, viewed the perfect excellence of her form ; he was fired with passion, und, in the eagerness of desire, laid his riches and honours at her feet. The ambitions Alwena, who not any
53 knight would have chosen to wed, felt a secret triumph : she, however, ma¬ naged artfully to govern her feelings ; the affected a reserve and dignity; she desired a week to consider of his pro* posal; but, at the same time, she tem¬ pered her reserve wi-h such wanton and bewitching glances, as gave him no rea¬ son to doubt his success. The lady Alwena gave the baron her hand, at parting, with a promise, not to keep him longer in suspense, than the time she had fixed. The baron retired to the castle, with
D o
his mind filled with the most delight¬ ful images of his approaching happi- iicss, and, so sensual and depraved was his imagination, that lie thought of no¬ thing but the possesion of her person, and passed the whole of his time in the contemplation of h?r charms. At length the week expired, and the baron was punctual* to obtain the an¬ swer of the haughty Alwena. He waited on her himself. She re¬ ceived him, however, in a way that gave him no reason to hope $>r success : her countenance was lofty and stern ;
55 she smiled, 'tis true; but it appeared the smile of scorn. The baron was assiduous, and ab¬ ject. An opportunity offered : her attend¬ ants had retired. The barou entreated her to pronounce his sentence. The lady Alwena, with an air of ar¬ rogance, placed a scroll of parchment in his hands. The baron received it with a low bow ; he unfurled the scroll. n 4
56 On the scroll were written the words-— 41 The Lady Alwena consents to become ihe Bride of the Baron de La Braunch.**
■ J!g!!J.. l . l .B.'il«Bai' .......!Jia«l8 * JJ!BiBHIif-,'!fg'[gfff-B^^^ CHAPTER VI. The Marriage of Lady Alwena and the Baron.
The day of the nuptials arrived, and the sun shone forth in its full radiance, as it were, to add its brilliancy to the occasion. l> 5
68 The domestics were occupied in the like preparations, as for the marriage of lady Bertha ; they were not, however, so happy, and satisfied^ on the occasion: they regretted the mysterious death of their dear lady. Old Doric could not reconcile that event ; he wanted de¬ monstration of the fact of her having been drowned by accident,; he had his suspicions, but dared not even to hint. Jonas was versed in no science, but the doctrine of fluids, and in that he had dipt pretty deeply. It was all the same to Jonas- who was mistress, so that he kept the place of butler.
The marriage ceremony was to be performed at the palace of Alwena. A tournament wa« to be had on the occasion. Numerous of Uie domestics, and te¬ nantry, were seen busily employed, in placing spears and shields at each end of the ground, for the tilters. A superb stand, hung with crim¬ son, and decorated with streamers and banners, was erected for the lady Al¬ wena.
6o Under the stand hung, by chains, two massy shields, one silver, and the other red. The ceremony of the marriage took place at the chapel of the palace. The bride was drest in white silk raiment, ornamented with gold-work. She wore, over her dress, a mantle of crimson. The baron was in armour, and bore, on his head, the helmet which he had taken from a Saracen, at Palestine*
61 The holy rites were performed by father Velaschi. No Hag appeared, to interrupt the ceremony. The company invited were the most distinguished barons and knights, within twenty miles round. The marriage ceremony having been concluded, the company took their seats in the stands, to see the tournament.
ta
CHAITElt YU. The Tournament.
The tilts were now about to com¬ mence. The trumpets sounded from each $ide ; and the heralds took their re¬ spective stations.
6:\ The baron, and the lady Alwena, entered their gallery, and all the people present were astonished at the beauty, and sumptuous apparel, of the bnde. The coustable of the castle, Ilath¬ brand, descended the steps, and, after making his obeisance to the crowd, placed himself on the chair of stale, at the foot of the steps of the gallery, where was the throne. Six knights appeared, on each side, attended by their page?, who began, already, to gird on their masters' swords.
64 The knights ranged themselves in order, their spears placed upright on their thighs, and their pages standing at their horses* heads, holding the bridles. The knights, previous to engaging, made, each of them, an obeisance, first to the lady Alwena, then to the haron, and then to the ladies who were in the gallery, spectators of the tournay; which salutation was returned, by the ladies waving their handkerchiefs. A knight of considerable prowess, in black armour, with a red plume in
6'd hit helmet, now stepped forward, andj with the point of hi* $pmr, touched the silver shield, in token of challenge to the tournay, and then returned to his place. A knight from the opposite side, performed the same ceremony. Pfesently the lists became full. The constable then rose, and, turn¬ ing himself to the lady Alwena, made a low obeisance, which she returned, with the most gracious condescension, and courtesy.
66 The t\KWab!e tlK*n uavcd his rhdit- hand, a^ a *. : ^nal to th** trumpet.-,. Aj.ouii- knight now 'Mine fot \urd. lie \sa> dn-t in uhite fisiuour, which iU'jm hke silver; h;^ helmet wan blue, adorned with a green feather. lie op¬ posed himself to the kni-ht of the blacl; armour. Ev^ry one R-It solicitous for the sue- <c-*v of the brave and gallant youth, thu* unequally matched. Thev knew the prowess, and gigantic strength, of the knight of the black annoar, and trc»ud>k'd tor the fate of the young knight.
«7 | lhe .-yes of the- lady Alwena were i^, the whole lin.e, on: 0;nk;ht ,f j the white arnH.u-. i'h«- ^cJalncs .-f j b , ; forul) the ( .!. r .««- of Ins manners, ,„d his R alluit a;H'"" ra,u ' c '> lKl(l> ttl " rLW ly, attracted livr att.uliou; already she admired, and loved him: nor could slie disguise her sentiments : those who ] knew lady Alwena, discovered, by Uer 1 !„oks, the state of her mind; the baron d(> La Kraunch was, alone, ignorant of the regards she paid the stranger; he could not have imngincl such depravity on the day ef her marriage.
'i'hp tnn»p'-t' liow sev.udcd a ehar-e.
68 »»<* two «f the knights engaged despe- »te1y j one of them was unhorsed. Two othere now eutered the lists 5 and one of them shared the like fate. Again the trumpets gave a flourish; which was the summons for the young knight, in the white armour, to come to tournay. He advances, on his milk-white courser. The knight in the black armour awaits him.
09 They engage. The knight in the black armour ?>eems as he would fall like a thunder¬ bolt on the youthful knight. The young knight is, however, dexterous and agile in arms. The knight of the black armour is dismounted ; and shouts and accclama- tions of joy rend the sky. They retire for a time. The tournay on foot begins, and other knights engage.
lYe^tntlv, the kni< hts in the blac 1 , and ^hite armour are refreshed. I'lu v engage anew. They engage with their swords ; their falchions strike fire ; and they contend for the victory, foot to foot, and hand to hand. At length, the knight in the hlaek anuour is beaten to the ground, lie fights for some time; he is overpowered. Sow the combatants, once more, mount their steeds; the trumpet sounds again ; and the three knights together, i n< f atre the other three. Again the knight in the white armour is success¬ ful : he is declared conqueror,
71 The lady Alwena p:x .n'.s him, with her own hand, the neh t uord, the prize of the touruav. lie receiver it with tho most graceful atidre^^. The constable of the ton may de¬ mands hid title. He is called Alarie, the Kuitrht oi' theWhih* Armour. The name of Alarie resounds through the ranks of the t-pectators. The lady Alwena now rises from her seat; the justs end. She honours the youthful knight, Alarie, with the most distinguishing glances of approbation : he returns them, with a courtesy and ■
72 expression, and with such polished manners, as astonish even the lady Ah wenaj educated, as she had been, in foreign courts; but Alarie was of the court of France, where were the flower of chivalry. The young Alarie became the talk, the admiration, of all the ladies present at the tournament; but his gallantry had made a more considerable progress in the heart of lady Alwena. The lady Alwena, forgetful of the delicacy and chastity of her sex, was enamoured with the young knight, and
7^ honoured him with such distinguishing glances of preference, as would have made any man of gallantry vain ; nor were they lost on the accomplished chevalier of the court of France.
VOL. II.
E
7*
CHAPTER VIII. The Ball.
The first d&y of the next week was fixed for the splendid ball, to be given by the baron de La Braunch, on the occasion of his marriage with the lady Alwena.
75 The palace of Alwena was the scene of all these sumptuous preparations. At length the evening arrives. The grand saloon alreaily begins to fill. The illuminated porticos, the wax-tapers, ranged in order, through the entrance?, the burning censers, filled with frank¬ incense, all presented an air of magic, and fascination, that engaged the mind to pleasure. The tables were spread with the most exquisite viands, served to the guests by little boys, naked, but furnished with wings, and with bows, and quivers full jfif &
TO of arrows; others, as young Bacchanals, presented, in golden cups, the richest Bhenish and Burgundy. Each knight led his lady into the saloon, drest in the most elegant fa¬ shion. Each lady had her hair bound, and ornaments 1 with a fillet, studded with precious stones. Their drapery was of the finest silk, or linens; and their bosoms exposed, as far as modest ta^te would permit. They bore, on their dresses, the escutcheons of their different lords< and bracelets of pearl, and jewels of many sorts, decorated their hands and feet*
i
i i 1 c
The lady Alwena was seated near th baron de La Braunch, on a throne, to receive her guests. She was, when standing, the finest figure in the room, and considerably talk- than any of the other ladies; her face was a peitect oval; her eyes bine, and filled with a fascinating sweeties and voluptuous¬ ness, not unmixed, howe\er, with the sparkling glances of pride, and scorn ; her elegant arched rjebroww gave a «randeur to her connU'nance; and her forehead seemed properly defined to bear a diadem ; her nose was oi^ the " Grecian model ; her checks soft, and e 3
7$ of a transparent bloom ; her mouth of the colour of the ruby ; and her teeth of the rmrest white enamel* from the face, downward, it was im¬ possible to view the perfect form of Al¬ wena with Platonic regard. Her neck was united, insensibly, to her shoul¬ ders; and her alabaster bosom, swell- i ig ss ith every movement, displayed the richest treasures of voluptuous na¬ ture ; her arms were of the most ex¬ quisite form, and her limbs so perfectly in symmetry, that her majestic height gave no uneasiness to her action, which was as graceful as could be imagined.
79 The only knight who was without a lady, was the young Alarie ; but Alwena sufficiently made up this de¬ ficiency to him, by the most particular attentions. The ball had now begun, and Alarie ted the beautiful Alwena to the dance. The baron sought the honour of an¬ other lady's hand. All was gaiety and pleasure. The music played the most enchanting measures; and the feet of the dancers E 4
80 moved to the sprightly sounds of love and rapture. On a sudden the dancers stopt ; an alarm uas ^iven : a foul figure pre¬ sented itself among the company. It rtood on the left of lady Alwena ; it took her hand; it whispered her. It was the Hag. The baron stood aghast; he did not dare to interfere. At length lady Alwena spoke-—
81 "Poor old woman!" said she; "she comas with courtesy and good wishes towards us. It is the celebration of ouv nuptials : she comes to wish us joy-" The baron bowed. With an ah of dignity, lady AKvena ordered hor attendants to shmv the Hag to an apartment, and that she should be sewed with the most exquisite dain¬ ties, and with the most delicious of ll.« wines. The Hag retired, without uttering a syllable. E 5
82 She looked in the face of the baron, as she withdrew j she smiled; a con¬ vulsive laugh was on her face. The baron could not help being con¬ founded at the behaviour of lady Al¬ wena to the witch : he knew her to be more proud and arrogant than himself; he could not reconcile the complacency of her conduct to the Hag.—" Surely,'* cried the baron, " the lady Alwena is not acquainted with the Hag!" The baron took an opportunity to ask his lady, in a careless and in-
83 seen
different manner, if she had ever that troublesome old woman before? The lady Alwena replied, without the least hesitation--" Never." The mind of the baron de La Braunch was relieved ; he was happy that the af¬ fair had ended in the way it had. The doors of the saloon were now thrown open. The tables in the supper-rooms were prepared. The ladies, attended by their knights, took their places.
$4 Alarie was placed, by Alwena, next herself. The board was spread with the most delicious meats and fruits; and the wines were contained in the richest golden vases, of Ho man model. The most enchanting sounds, that the skill of the minstrels could pro- duce, were heard, during supper; many healths were drunk,, and all the com¬ pany seemed delighted with the enter- t-iinment afforded them by the baron. Lady Alwena presented her guests
85 with the choicest delicacies, and amused them with the most witty and enchant¬ ing conversation. Every eye was en¬ gaged in contemplating her beauty, and every ear occupied in listening to her discourse. Presently her bright eyes began to sparkle, with the intoxicating draughts she had taken, of wine and pleasure. Her looks were now no longer di¬ rected to the baron ; her attentions were paid elsewhere . hei eyes were now soft and languishing, when she
$6 fixed them on Alarie ; they view the baron de La Braunch with scorn. The lady Alwena was unguarded in the expressions she used to Alarie, Presently, in the madness of wine and lust, she took the red feather which was in the helmet ,>f Alarie, that stood on the board, and placed it in her own hair. The baron could no longer dis¬ semble ; he reddened with anger; he whispered to her ; she disdained to answer.
87 The whole company observed the conduct of lady Alwena. The young knight Alarie, himself, blushed at her behaviour, and was con¬ founded. The festivity of the scene was at an end; every one seemed to wish that they were away, and at length the party withdrew. No sooner had the ladies, attended by their knights, withdrawn from the hall, than the baron gave the lady Al- weua some glances of his disapproba-
88 tion; Ids countenance lowered, and he did not deign to shew her the slightest attentions. The lady Alwena smiled at the gloominess of his temper ; she in¬ quired, with a sarcastic sneer, if any thing had ofiended him ? He reminded her of her behaviour to the young Alarie. " Truly!'* returned the lady Alwena, $i are my looks and actions to be exa¬ mined with so much jealous scrutiny? am I to be watched ? *
89 " There was no occasion for that,' replied the baron: u all were witnesses of your particular attention" The lady Alwena spurned at this re¬ proach, and, in the heat of her resent¬ ment, replied to the baron—" Knight, it is not for thee to controul the actions, much less the looks, of lady Alwena ; her high pretensions must not yield to slavery; be satisfied, mighty sir, if, at times, she condescends to favour thee with those smiles she can bestow on her favourites; thou dost not know Al¬ wena ; but thou mightst have heard, that the most illustrious and gallant
90 kneel at her feet, and court her to be kind." " Yes/* replied the baron > in a haughty tone; " the haron has heard, and knows enough, already, to make him think it prudent to forbid the ap¬ proaches of the presumptuous Akrie." " And is that thy design, most noble haron ?" cried the lady Alwena; <c truly, then, thou wilt find thyself mistaken/* " Lady,' 1 returned the baron," I com mand, that thou shalt never see him more!**
91 ** Indeed!" cried the Udy Alwena. " It is my will/' ** Is it? then thus, baron, does the lady Alwena show her contempt for her new alliance:" with the»e words, she tore the escutcheon of her lord from the right shoulder of her robe; she trampled it under foot; it was with an air of sovereign contempt and de¬ fiance, " Lady Alwena/' cried the baron, " thou art mad! away to thy cham¬ ber/'
B'2 J he iady Alwena disdained to move. At length the baron, with a stern look, quitted the rhamber ; he retired to his own room ; he ruminated on the events of the day : he was uneasy, and disturbed in mind ; he b<*gan to fear, that the lady Ahvena's proud, impe¬ rious temper, would prove a torment to him: he had obtained possession of the charms he lusted after, and, though his appitite was not palled, he did not feel the like adoration which he had done. 'i he baron could not be said to re-
93 •ire to rt^t : his jealousy, his pride, were both alarmed; hi* hopes of future happinc^ were considerably damped ; *very thing conspired to disturb and vex him.
Jf**
CHAPTER IX. The Misery of the Wicked.—A Rt~ conciliation, followed hy anotket Quarrel,
The lady AKvena, on reflection, began, on her side, to think that she had gone too far: she did not wish for an ab¬ solute quarrel with the baron; but surli v%as h^r impetuous and ungovern-
9* able temper, that ^ue found it difficult, and, at times, impossible, to curb : she had been used to an entire sovereignty over men ; and her iavourites, even, were her vassals; those who paid her the highest homage, and who flattered her most, in the presence of others were permitted* The next morning, as both parties were inclined to peace, they met with n mutual complacency ; they knew, that each of them were depraved and wretched beings; and they considered, that it was their mutual interest to agree:
9$ the baron, therefore, behaved as if nothing had happened ; and lady Alwena, >vith consummate art, touched delicately on the cause of their quarrel: she hinted, that the baron, by his injurious su¬ spicions, had excited a little desire of revenge in her breast, as, she said, it would in the breast of any woman ; and, that her attentions to the young knight, Alarie, had been solely on that account. The baron politely accepted this in¬ terpretation of his lady's conduct; and a reconciliation took place, attended
97 -villi all those flattering expressions of regard, which :-re so frequently the language of im-i'iecrity. The haron, whose mind was relieved considerably by this discourse, and who was flattered by the condescension, as he thought it, of the lady Alwena, pro* jnised himself a source of enjoyment in that alliance ; he sought, therefore, to pay every attention to her inclinations and, while he left her perfect mi&trcN* of her conduct, lie amu>cd hiiu>elf, when absent from her, as ho was for¬ merly ace us to mod to do, at the hunt, \ oh. n.
9$ or in the exercise of arms with hi$ brother knights. One d^y, having returned early from the chase, being unwell, the baron re¬ tired to his apartment, when he heard some music playing in the gallery, near the apartment of lady Alwena; which circumstance attracted his attention; he walked, therefore, along the gal¬ lery, and entered the room which ad» joined hers, unnoticed by any one 5 which room was an anti-chamber, with a window that overlooked her apart¬ ment.
S9 The baron heard that lady Alwena Vas in conversation with some one within, and, his pride and jealousy being awakened, he looked through the window of the anti-chamber, from whence he beheld the young knight, Alarie, in gentle dalliance with the lady Alwena. The baron would, at first, have called the knight to account for this discovery ; but he prudently checked his emotions of anger for the moment ; he considered, that such a woman as lady Alwena would have her favourites. if lord Alarie was disposed of, and that F 2
10* to quarrel on her account, would be endless, if not fatal. The baron waited, therefore, in his chamber, until the accustomed hour of his return, by which time, he knew the knight, Alarie, would be dismissed; it uas then that he visited the chamber of lady Alwena, and accused her, bluntly, of having received a visit from the knidht. * At first, the lady Alwena seemed deposed to contradict this assertion; but being wise enough to think that that would not avail, ^ic summoned
101 arrogance sufficient to say—-"Well, sir, what then ? n ** Then," replied,the baron, " I com¬ mand, that, henceforth, thou shalt never receive the knight within the castle." "Thou dost command!" returned the lady Alwena, smiling. " Yes, lady ; I command." " And who/* returned the lady Al¬ wena, in a haughty tone of de^ . \ " who will obey the commands ,. murderer?" V 3
JOS *"•* Ila!" cried the baron* gtifliug hiss emotion* Jle would have* answered something; but he knew not what to say: he did not apprehend that lady Alwena could be in possession of proofed but he was mortified to hear from her lips, for whom, too, he had sacriiked the lady Bertha, the sentence of crimination. The lady Alwena, with a stem and scornful look, quitted the apartment; and the baron retired to his roorm, to contemplate the unpleasant occurrences which had passed. i( And is it," cried the baron (as fte
103 laid himself on the couch) " is it for these miseries, that I have performed such acts of guilt and enormity 1 are these the promised enjoyments! these the pleasures, set at so high a value by the witch! deceitful Hag! but I will reproach her severely, for the agonies J have sutfered."
F 4
104
CHAPTER X. Y'/'C flarotfs Expostulation with the Hag. i A month elapsed, at the palace of Al¬ wena, before the baron made up his mind to visit the witch of Ravens- worth : he hoped, that the conduct of lady Alwena would be altered, and that
10,5 she would not choose to expose herself, and him, to the world ; they lived, however, in a state of daily warfare: both equally haughty and imperious, they became the most dreadful scourges to each other; the keenest reproaches, the suggestions of growing hatred, were uttered, reciprocally, from their lips, and contempt and scorn were the feel¬ ings they entertained one for the other. It is true, that, at times, as is the case with the wicked, pleasure inter¬ vened, and, for a few hours, they agreed tolerably well together; but it was never unmixed with alloy. The harou had now become perfectly well acquainted r 5
with the former amour| of lady Al- »^ena; he knew, that she was more depraved m her appetites, than the most common strumpet; it was im¬ possible, therefore, for him ever to ex¬ pect the least happiness with such a woman. In spite of all his wealth, the baron de La Braunch was wretched, and forlorn. Tired and disgusted with the lady Alwena, the haron sought for teposfc at the castle of La Braunch, and by his absence from the very woman ih whosf charms he had hoped to have revejled, and in whose conversation,
107 artd esteem, he had hoped a continual source of enjoyment. One fine evening, wretched in his aiittd, and disapp6inted of his hopes, the baron wandered abroad, to take the fresh air, and to contemplate oft the events that had lately passed. The night was beautiful; the horizon, co¬ loured with the splendor of the set¬ ting sua, invited him to Watider further than he intended. The baron, in his walls, came, «n- efcpeetitfty, ck»« ep«n the dwelling of the Hag, Mid, feeling a Kve*y ***** of t6
10$ resentment, for the plagues she had permitted him to suffer, entered her hut. The witch, although it was summer, was seated on her three-legged stool, at the fire. The baron viewed her sternly— ** Hag," cried he, <( 'tis now some years since my first visit to this place. I sought, from your power, the power of the devils whom you serve, and the -power of witchcraft, the riches and pleasures of the world. Riches, 'tis true, I have obtained; but what are
too, riches, without happiness! J am still miserable, Hag!" " Miserable! " returned the witch. Ci Mis^able! w " The baron de La Brauiich mise¬ rable! what, with riches, and honours, and the possession of the most beautiful of women too!'* ^ Yes." « The lady Alwena." «Ha!" a Come, come, thou art ungrateful/' ** Thou hast deceived me, Hag!"
ilo ** B6 not be SO mgry, baron; geMly^ gently.** w I say> witch^ I fear that Ihou hast deceived me.** *' How, pray ? * " Didst thoii inot promise me enjoy* ment of my riches ?" " I did;—and hast thoa not enjoy¬ ment t H> "Of what kind?** H Sensual enjoyment.** «Ha!" ** All that the wicked tm expects
lit "The wicked P '*Ay, baron*, be not ofiended; we know each other: purer pleasures thou didst mt think worth the seeking; thou didst wish for the delights of pride, of passion, of ambition, of wealth, of luxury; thou hast them/* * Something still is wanting.'* ** Thou didst bargain for no more/* * f Deceitful Hag!" « What, wouldst thou have peace and joy?" H Ay, Hag." « They are not in the gift of ltetl/ ?
112 «Ah!" i f The fiend, thy master, has them not, himself/* " What, then, have J sacrificed for torments ?" " Ungrateful man! but 'tis ever so. Canst thou not to thy palace? hast thou not seats of velvet, and of down, rich repasts, exquisite wines, music, minstrels, the possession of beauty, and the full power of gratifying all thy lusts? away, and be satisfied." a Satisfied! and is this all the com¬ fort that thou canst give ?" " Be reasonable, most noble baron*
1U>
Dost thou desire to murder? wouldst thou kill another infant? woukht thou act more mischief r perpetrate more hor¬ rid deeds? I am thy servant still: but do not ask me, baron, for the rewards of virtue 5 they are not within my reach." " I have had enough of horrors. 1 * " What, then, is thy wish with the Hag ? is she to soothe thee ? to offer comfort to thee? to sing thee hymns and requiems ? fie, fie! thou best cho¬ sen to trample down the innocent; to disfigure the face of nature; to stnke at virtue ; thou hast succeeded wonder fully; and now wouldst thou whimper, like a child, because thou art become
114 fretrVl, and tired of thy sport J away, away j go home 5 the lady Alwena waits; she will nurse thee in her bosom/ 1 *'Devil, say no mo^!' 1 u Nay j be not angry/* * f Thou hast buoyed me up in blood, md now theu wouldst le&vs me to rink in the disgustful stream, without help, or pity/' <* Pity! that is an attribute of Hea¬ ven; we, baron, do not know it; we enjoy, not pity, the miseries of our fellow creatures" The baron shrank at the reproach? he said no more; he left the hut.
Oppressed, and sick at heart, th*; baron pursued the firct path he came to, regardless whither he went: lie began, mm, to abhor the crimes, that had produced only torment; he began to hate himself! he began to hate the fair promise of vke, that he had (bund to be a Itei
no
t .. I M I II.I1 !■—■■ I l ul l .l l ^ —ll l I ■■W^J)Wp WMJ^»nMW t l l l» llW lll , IW M . M.ai l. l | i.. l , n . . i j i U t CHAPTER XL Of Gerrard, the If ood~etitter, and his WlfCy Dehor ah.
In the south part of the forest, about nine miles from the castle of La Braunch, lived a poor honest wood-cutter, named Gerrard. Gerrard was not more than thirty years of age, lusty aud strong, but of
ii7 a handsome figure ; he was rough, and sturdy, as an oak ; hut bent as ten¬ derly, to the tale of distress, as the gourd to the wind : he was apt, 'tis true, to be a little ill-tempered, at times, and somewhat sour, besides being a little vxxde and unfashioncd in his maimers; but, somehow or other, so finely delineated were the characters of nature and truth in his mind, that he was always kind and courteous, whenever humanitv '■laimed his protection. Gerrard had a wife, named Deborah. Deborah was, naturally, a good wo¬ man, and very industrious and careful ; 'mt apt to fret and scold, v. honevu* (icr- r ard was out of work, for thev had no-
thing but hard labour to support them, and it was not unfrequently that they were in want sven of a meal. Deborah had no children; but it had happened, unluckily for her arid her husband, that they had to support a boy, who was not their own, but vibe was now of an age to begin to work. Gerrard was not an ignorant man, although a poor one, for it had hap¬ pened, that an old friar had taken the pains to teach him to read; but, un¬ fortunately, bio wife, Deborah, was the daughter of a once wealthy yeoman, but who had been ruined by a murrain , among his cattle; Deborah, therefore, ! who recollected the plentiful and ho-
11$ spitable board her father kept, was a little discontented at her condition in life: she was not only often repining at her lot, but longing for riches, which, indeed, appeared to her the greatest blessing in life. It was towards the cottage of these poor people, that the baron, finding himself likely to be overtaken by a sudden tempest, bent his steps. The most beautiful and assure sky, studded .with the appearance of many brilliant stars, had become overcast. The light from the cottage of Gerrard, the wood¬ cutter, was the first notice that the ba¬ ron received, of a shelter near at hand, in case of a storm.
As the baron approached the door ot the cottage, he heard voices; it seemed to him, as if it were people scolding at each other. The bubjeet of their quarrel \\a> lichee, poveily. li My dear/' said onj of them, " what a passion you are in!" tc 1 may \>ell be in a passion," an «wered the other ; fi this is the last meal we shall have for the^c three days/' " That's more than you know.'*
I am almost famished : 1 am/*
12) " Look at ihe poor cat, and be thank¬ ful.—Well, there's your &upper." u Supper! do you call it? why, there isn't enough to bait a mousetrap; I shaVt touch a morsel " " Well, now, there's the difference i whilst pride is choking itself with ill* temper, humility sits down, and falls to : with a thankful heart " " You'd see me starve; you would; you'll make me mad ; you will " " No, my dear; truly you are brought too low for that/* u You brute, ycu! but it serves me VOL. II. «
XV2 right: I might have married a rich yeo¬ man, that I might, and have Hved on the latoftheland^ « Shu!" " To throw myself on a chopper of wood 1" tc A cho])per of wood! what do you mean by that ?" " A lazy, idle follow " K Truly, I will show my activity forthwith/* The baron knocked at the door^ the storm had begun.
\25 <f There's some one knocks/* " I am glad of it; tlwm I shall havo a witness to your ill-usage." One of them opened the door. The baron entered. He addressed himself to a poor labouring man, and to-a woman :—" Good people/' said he^ " will you afford a stranger a few mi- tiutes shelter from the storm ?" *' Willingly, sir," cried Gerrard, who was a good deal amazed, to see a guest $o attired, at his humble cottage. u Very willingly, sir/* cried Deborah; ** w f c*n*t you be pleased to sit down, sir? 4 * e 3
124 A little boy, who had just awaked from sleep, in a corner of the hut, and who was apprentice to Gerrard, brought a chair, " Well, Gerrard/* cried the baron, " how is the world wont to use thee * roughly, or passing smooth ?'* " Roughly enough, sir, Heaven knows!* 5 cried Deborah. C( Who told you to speak ?—My wife, sir, is always grumbling; she must needs be longing for riches; and though I don't remember, by the good¬ ness of Providence, that we have ever wanted a meal, yet she cant be con¬ tent"
"Ah! 'tis fine talking," replied De¬ borah ; i( but nobody knows, but the poor, what poor people suffer." " Come, come, he better tempered with each other," cried the baron ; « and do you think, good woman, that riches make their owners happy J" " I am sure I don't know, sir," an¬ swered Deborah, " why they should not; for rich folks can take their plea¬ sure, and can eat and drink whatever they I ave a fancy for; and then ihf caa feed ever so many poor people, and make such a po^er of folks happy." "Aye, aye, wife; so they might/' q 3
126 replied Gerrard, " and yet not be happy^ themselves, after all.'* " Well, now, I can't *ce that, for the soul of me," returned Deborah. te Why," answered Gerrard, H *up- pose th«y did not come honestly by their riches ?" The baron shrank at this unmeant reproach. u Aye, that I don*t understand,' 1 said Deborah; a I would not keep any ihing a moment that I hadn't come by ho¬ nestly, as soon as I found who was the Tight owner; but, to be sure, I should like dearly to be rich, *ad to naye %
castle, and forests, and deer, of my own, and plenty of servants.*' " And are you sure," cried the baron> " that, ii you were rich, you would b* happy 5" « Happy! aye; that I should, sir;- and I would never scold my poor Ger- *ard again; for he b as^good a creature as ever was born, though I was scolding him just now; and, to speak the truth, I don't believe that he could have got any work yesterday, though I did throw it in his teeth, that he did not; but, sir, when one is poor, and when x>ne has no meat in the pot, it puts one o?at of temper s*dlyJ' 6 4
*2& Getfar4 wiped his eyes, at thb kind offer of atonement, and the baron went into a deep reverie* The storm was over: the baron arose? he pulled out a heavy purse h&m his pocket; he gave it to Deborah j he wished them both a good night. Gerrard offered to «ee tfoe baron through the forest; which fee declined to accept. The instant the baron had left the cottage, Deborah ran to the light, to examine the purse; it was futiof §old. " Blessed saint," cried Deborah, " what is this ? all gold! Gerrard, look here; see what Providence has done for us!"
ef Aye; I told you ao/' said Gerrard, " and you are always grumbling" " Nay, now; don't be cross* Gerrard, with so much good luck; look at it cgftifl, Gerrard ; it is all gold, every bit of it! 111 have a'uew dress, and poor Henry shall have a new coat," « And what am I to have?" cried Gerrard,. « You shall see us all clean, and happy" ♦'•Thank'es well, that will do for me/' « And we will ha^e a g$&d pieoe of pleat in the pot to-anonnow^ o 5
130 * And Tm suse yon woVt sleep to* " That I shan't. Welly who know* what luck^s to follow?" ^Peac^Deborah! mm mayn't t% %e a temptation?" « May it, Gerrard ^ u Who knows ?" '* If I thought so, I would nog touch it." * f Coaie,come/' cried Gerrardlj "while it don't make us covetous after more, and lead us to do wrong, we have nothing to
in fear, Deborah; it will then be a bless¬ ing* in spite of the devil; for my part, I shall work the same as ever, only don't grumble, Deborah." « You shall never hear a cros* word from me, Gerrard." Thus did the cottagers end their discourse, and retire to rest, pleased,, and happy with each other. Very different was the situation of the baron de La Braunclv; he returned tathe palace of Alwena, just in time to witness a stranger, on horseback, co¬ vered with a cloa!^ and accompanied by two attendants^ leave that mansion of pleasure; he had no doubt, but that <*6
132 it was the knight, Alarie; hut, as they rode past at Ml speed, he could not ascertain who they were. The baron fupped with lady Alwena, and then retired, on the score of ill- health, to his own apartfnent; here- tired to suffer the* bitterness of remorse: he had now seen himself at the pinnacle of his ambition; he was one of the rich¬ est knights in the kingdom ; enjoyed a good fame, and the favour of his prince; but he was a wretch, for he had bar¬ tered, for those acquisitions, the ho¬ nesty and chgnity of a man: he might have been nappy, hy the consent of the world, of riches, and of fame ; but, the consent of his own heart, to the enjoy¬ ment of them, was wanting; he%egan
1&3 to find himself so restless and dis¬ turbed in the possession of wealth, that he would gladly have parted with it all again, to have been innocent: he had sacrificed the life of lady Bertha, for the possession of a cruel and wanton woman, who tortured and defied him, who reigned sole mistress over his in¬ clinations, and who made of a tyrant, a slave and vassal ; the baron had now no home, no resting-place; to wander the face of the earth, like the murderer, Cain, would, to him, have been a solace.
134:
*^^^+4**^*mm** " fw+ - **^
CHAPTER XIL The Baron sends for Father Velasclii.
The misery of the baron de La Braunch had now become so complete, smd his conscience so disturbed, that not any thing could be more pitiable than hi$ situation; day followed day, and hour succeeded hour y without hb gainin b the smallest portion of rest or repose,.
^
The arrogance of lady Alwena grew, at this time, more and more insup¬ portable ; and her intrigues had become so barefaced and public, that the baron was continually disgraced by her enor¬ mities*. The baron's holy confessor was the monk Velaschi, apparently the most devout, though suspected, at the same time, of being the greatest hypocrite of his order. The monk Velaschi was, however, sent for by the baron, and was too great an adept in the knowledge of human nature, not to" discover, pre¬ sently, d\e state of the baron*s mind. He would have brought him to the
136 sacrament of penitence, or, as it u commonly called* confession ; but the baron constantly avoided the fulfilment of the monk Velaschi s purpose; every endeavour was vain. Although* the baron had, himsel sent for the friar, it was not with a desire to attend the confessional; his crimes were of so liorrid, and so black m die, that they would not allow him to be explicit; nevertheless, be wished in some way to ease his mind, and to compound with his religion, if possible; he desired, therefore, to souiad the monk, on the subject oi' repentance. The good father had received the awrunofts, to atte&d a pen&teat, with
\ '
becoming joy ; he hastened to the castle of La Braunch, whither the ba¬ ron had retired, on pretence of having to arrange some concerns of business. The monk found his penitent a prey to all the horrors of remorse, a»d nearly hi ft state of horrid desperation. The holy confessor administered the comfortable promises of religion : he recited to him the prayer of Jngelus, both at noon, and in the evening, to the tolling of the convent clock; he repeated, too, many times, the Pater> *rad the Ave; he ^ung the anthem Regina CmU, the psalm De Pmftm&s, and the Reqzilem wtemam*
138 The baron, however, took no delight in these seraphic strains; he was sen¬ sible that he was an hypocrite to him- self, and that he was insincere to his confessor: he would willingly have ex¬ plained the true state of his mind; but his pride was alarmed; he could not bear the thought of avowing such enor¬ mous guilt; and thus he continued to bear the burthen of his sin. Father Velaschi read all the horror of the baron's mind, in his agitated and distracted looks, in his quick roll¬ ing eye, and in the sudden incoherent starts he gave, at certain questions put to him, in their proper order, by the monk.
139 Father Velaschi waited patiently,. courted mildly, and reproved forcibly* to engage the baron to unfold the •ftuies of ht« affliction, but in vain.
I4tt
CHAPTER XIII.
The Western Turret.
In the western turret of the castle of La Braunch, was an apartment which had not been entered but once, within the recollection of the oldest domestics of the baron.
i4i Various traditions had been handed down, of murders which had been per* petrated in this place, which was at the further end of the gallery. It had an iron door, fastened with & massy bar. To this place the baron was now sometimes seen to retire for hours, uhen every domestic was forbid to approach that part of the gallery ; an injunction which might have been ea¬ sily spared, as it would have been with great reluctance, if they could have been prevailed upon at all to visit the western turret. It could not be conjectured, why
142 the baron had chosen this apartment for his meditations; but thither, how¬ ever, he not only retired^ but remained for hours together. There was not any thing that couki have a more gloomy appearance, than the castle of La Braunch; scarcely a female remained within its walls. )Ra~ netrude would have left, soon after her mistress had been missed, and have sought a situation, most likely, where such dismal events might not be ex¬ pected ; she had already given warning. No company now visited the place ; and Doric, and Jona^s, had scarcely any other employment, than to take care of themselves*
143 The palace of Alwena was, all this time, the gay resort of the young ac¬ complished knights of the court of Ed¬ ward, particularly of Alarie, who was received by its abandoned mistress with the most distinguished favour, and in open defiance of the orders of the baron de La Braunch. It might have been expected, that the baron would have challenged this young lord to single combat, after the flagrant proofs he had had of his in¬ trigue with the lady Alwena; but the truth was, that he had become almost indifferent, as to the conduct of that infamous woman, nor did he care much, to wage war with one who knew, but too well, the secrets of his guilt; he
144 contrived, therefore, to treat her with a show of courtesy, in which abomi¬ nable species of dissimulation she did not allow herself to be outdone.
\4;y
.m , 1 ' n Bi ^mn I i.i i i
CHAPTER XIV. The Baron's Dinner with the Lady Alwena, and the Consequences,
Things were in this situation with the baron de La Braunch, and the lady Al¬ wena, when, one day, the baron made a formal visit to that lady, with an in¬ tention to dine with her at the palace, more to divert his mind from the dread- VOL. iU H
14$ ful recollections with which it was fre¬ quently occupied, than from any re¬ spect for the gay mistress of that gay mansion. The baron went rather earlier than usual, and found that his lady was dress¬ ing in her room ; he ;*ent, however, a message, by one of her women, to say that he would do himself the honour to dine with her; which was rather un¬ acceptable tidings to her, as the young Alarie had been already invited, and it was necessary that he should receive a pripcr notice of the disappointment. Indeed the lady Alwena, who had ob¬ tained all that her ambition desired, from the proud alliance she had \m\dv with the rich baron de La Braunch,
147 began, notwithstanding, to find him, in the way in which they lived, a severe incumbrance; nor could she, at times, in the wickedness of her heart, help wishing him dewiU that she might en¬ joy, unmolested, the vast wealth of which he was possessed. During the time of lady Ahvena's dressing for dinner, the baron wan¬ dered across the forest, until h" came to the cottage of Gerard and Deborah : he entered, and found them both at dinner, with the fine healthy boy, the apprentice of Gerrard, who had returned with his master, from cutting wood in the forest. The repast of the&e poor people was u 2
frugal; but they seemed to enjoy their humble meal excetdm^lv as he had heard them hu^hnm Inartdy as he approa^hrd the d<»or. *' Well," ciRtl the baton to Deborah, "' do^t thou still continue to long f<»r riches ?" *'() yes, sir!'' rep!ie<l the poor wo¬ man, ( * as much as ever; 1 should like to be rich, of all things; every body should be the better for it, and thife poor orphan too." " I tell my wife," interrupted Ot**- rard, " tlmt riches would only be a burthen to us ; but she wo"n't believe me.'*
" So ; that t wo'n't, Gerrard/' an- dvvered Deborah : ** because it would be our own fault.*, if we could not * njov them/' The baron could not help feeling the seventy of these unintentional re¬ proaches; but he was in a disposition to desire to suffer, and the misery he endured, was to him a luxury, he kuew that he ought not to be blest with peace; and the mortifying dismiss-J he had re¬ ceived from the Hag, had operated to Esake him hate and detest himself, and all the world. The baron, astonished at the avidity of the cottager's wife after wealth, and pleased to find the curse of ambition in u 3
one so poor, rp';ned Ins puise to hei, riiid put the con ten f>. of H in her hand, wh. *a were received with an ec<;a*v c*f ), y. 'Ihe baron bent fon steps toward■» the jxifaee of Alwena, rmrtnating, all the way he went, on crimes that were pa?t atonement, a*jd on misery likely to endure thougli hfe. (t Whi¬ ther/" cried he, " am I going? to a gilded palace, wherein resides a corrupt and hateful harlot, whose beauty and wantonness may invite me to dalliance, but whose embraces are death! A las! it was my sensual and depraved ap~ petite^ that were the first catme of my forsaking the principles of virtue and honour, and the cause of my first crime;
151 d was ambition, and the inordinate de¬ sire of wcal'.h, that made me sacrifice a pure and spolL.* breast, that Vould have loved me for ever. Well, well! pleasure awaits me, and I will enjoy the hour: lady Ahvetu. is beautiful; &nd to revel in her charms, is a banquet for a king!" An elegant repast was prepared, against the return of the baron, and the most delicious wines were poured into the rich golden vases which orna¬ mented the table. The lady Alwena v\*as adonW in the most superb attire, and her charms were set forth tc the greatest advantage; il 4
which display was in truth, however, intended for Alarie* Never ttae a lady mote engaging and attentive, than wa$ the lady Alwena to her lord. The baron forgot, for a while, the hateful retrospect of her i»iacon~ duct; he thought only of the lovely form seated next him. She drank his health, with the most fascinating smile; which he returned, with all the courtesy of a true-bred knight. The baron had not taken his wine many minutes, before he found his head begin to swim ; a new and dread¬ ful sensation made him shudder, from head to foot;—he perceived that he was poisoned
153 " Lady Alwena," cried the baron, dissembling with his usual address, " you had better taste of this Bur¬ gundy; the flavour of it is excellent." The lady Alwena declined, with con summate art. He pressed her again. She still re- Fused. The baron looked her full in the face, and insisted on her compliance. She persisted in her refusal. At length the baron, with a counts nance marked with rage, presented the cup to her, ti f;
The haughty Alwena arose from her seat, and 5 with an indignant glance, and stately air, was about to quit the chamber. " Hold," cried the baron, *' thou fiend of Hell!" drawing his sword from the scabbard. The lady Alwena endeavoured to pass. He plunged the weapon in &er bosom* She fell back; the blood streamed from faer milk-white breasts, and their beauty was overspread with the tor¬ rent*
155 « Wretch!" cried the lady Alwena, as she sank on the earth, « it is one comfort to me, that thou must die also." The baron leaned his head on his hand. The lady Alwena lay prostrate, at his feet. « Now," cried the baron, " it is over; and the life ends, for the fancied en¬ joyments of which, I have forfeited every thing that leads to happiness!" The baron looked down on Alwena, She was dead. Her face was distorted with the rage of her dying hour; her beauty was gone already.
156 Hathbrand entered; 1 had come to wait on his lord : he viewed the scene of horror, and would have retired from a spectacle so dreadful, but his leg* would not obey the impulse; he was fixed to the spot. The baron desired to be removed to fehe castle of La Braunch. He had no sooner reached it, than the signs of death came on. The baron ordered Hathbrand to bring a parchment scroll from out of his library. The attendant obeyed ; the scroll was brought in, " This scroll," said the baron, fixing
16? his eyes stedfastly upon it, " is my will; I have only to seal it. " Hathbrand/' continued the baron, " thou wilt find, iathe forest, a solitary cottage, inhabited by a wood-cutter and his wife.—The name of the wood-cutter is Gerrard. These people are poor; they wish to be rich^ and they shall be rich; they shall be the heirs of the baron de La Braunch. Who knows? perhaps,, to them, riches may be a blessing : to me, power and riches have been misery and horror/' The baron signed hu name at the foot of the parchment scroll, and affixed his seal. It was done in the presence of father Velaschi, and of Hathbrand >
15$ The baron wished to receive the sacrament of extreme unction. All, but the father Velaschi, retired. It was, however, too late to ad¬ minister to the penitent: the mind, as well as the body, was dreadfully convulsed. At length, the sleep of death came on i the haughty baron de La Braunch sunk clown towards everlasting misery. His voice grew faint and tremulous. He spoke :—" The scroll; the western turret; the Hag; the flag! * After the holy father Velaschi had given orders, that the body of the baron
no should be deposited, for three days, in the room of state, he left the castle, giving strict injunctions to Hathbrand^ to seek out, without delay, the wood¬ cutter, Gerrard, and his wife, to inform them of their good fortune.
16*0
S B . ' l l ' ^S"J"" rr 3H
CHAPTER XV. The Wood-eutter, and his Boy.
Hathbrand crossed the forest, on his errand. Gerrard was in the woods, at his la¬ bour, with his boy, and Deborah di¬ rected the esquire to the spot. On approaching the place, Hath
j
brand heard voices : one saidj m a tone as if scolding— b " c You little hzy monkey I do you think that I am to keep you for doing nothing? why don't you get (mother withy, and bind up those faggots ? n i( I am at work, as fast as I can/' answered the other; " but you are &o cross, Gerrard 1" " Cross 1 I am not cross/' " If you are tired of keeping me, I'll seek for support elsewhere; Pli leave you to-morrow." " Leave me! that you sha'nt. I found vou at my door, one bitter cold night, wrapped up in flannel, a poor helpless brat! It was humanity made me take you in; and though I am apt to be
t6s soniewhat sour at times^ 1 have a little of the same humanitv left, that will never suffer me to turn you out," " You have been very kind to me ; but I am not ungrateful ; indeed, I am not; 1 am a!«*ays ready to work, when you bid me" " Truly, so thou art; but I am wont, sometimes, to be ill-tempered, when things run cross in the grain, or a knot comes in my way. Here, you little rogue! give me your hand, and we will have a drop of beer together." The woodman and his boy sat down, on the trunk of a tree they had just felled, and were seeking their refresh¬ ment from out of a wallet, when the stranger came into the close.
\()3 Hathbrand saluV'i them; and the\ returned the greeting in the best man - r they were able. Hathbrand took particular noticed the boy: he was handsome, and well- made j he was, however, ragged as a col*, Hathbrand spoke s~" Come, Ger¬ rard," said he, « thou must leave off work, and return home." " Truly not yet," answered the ho* nest wood-cutter; ** 1 have notyetqu ; te done work." * c No matter ; thou must go with me to the cottage; I have good news to tell thee " « Good news! but I must know what it is, before I budge; is it worth half a day's work?"
164 u Truly it is; and a twelvemonth** work too/* " Nay, if that be the case, I'm yout man *, so here's pack up. M The boy follows I. On their arrival at the cottage, they found Deborah at home, who prepared a place for the stranger. Ilathbrand prefaced v,hat he had to say, with some remarks on the extra¬ ordinary changes and vicissitudes of hu¬ man life; and then inquired of them, if they recollects the circumstance of a stranger, of more than ordinary appear¬ ance, having visited them some time before. Gerrard and Deborah, by turns, re¬ counted the adventures of that evening.
t6*5 md related the munificence the strange; displayed. u Now then/* cried Hathbrand, fi I know that you are truly th people whom I seek. Prepare to go with me to the castie of La Braunch, thou, and thy wife, and all thy family/' i( Indeed, sir, you will excuse me there," cried Gerrard; " I shall n<>t stir out any more to day/ 1 * ( Foolibh man! *' returned Hath¬ brand ; (t know, then, that the stran¬ ger, who visited thte, was the baron de La Braunch ; he is dead; and, more, thou art the heir to all his rich do uiesnes/* " I don't rightly understand you, sir/* cried the wood-cutte*. (b The castle, the lands, all the real
166 and personal estate of the late baron de La Braunch, are thine." i( My dear, you don't seem to under¬ stand the gentleman," cried Deborah. (: Not 1, in good faith." a Why, bless me! don't you hear that you have got to be a rich man ? and that the baron, who came here, one tempestuous night, has left you all that he was worth in the world } " Well! and what will become of me ? what am 1 to do with so much riches ?" vi Do with it, husband! give it to me, if you don't know what to do with it; 1 warrant I'll find a way to lay it out." " I don't want to be put out of my way," replied Gerrard. Poor Deborah, in the simplicity of
167 her heart, stopped her husband's mouth. " Lord! Gerrard, don t affront the gen¬ tleman ; 1 am sure that I should like to be a lady very much ; and to be sure, I did think that there was something very odd in the stranger's behaviour to us, and that he meant to do something for us; though to be sure, I did not think that he would die, and leave us all his wealth ; but this gentleman would not sav so, if it were not true; so, Gerrard, if you needs must be a rich man after all, why, you know that you must not mind a little trouble." " Well! " replied Gerrard, " if it must he so, there's no help for it " Hathbrand had provided a cloak, with a hot and sword, with which he accou-
tb'S ired the wood-cutter; and a decent robe, which he threw over the shoulders of Deborah. The boy was to stay at home, to take care of the cottage ; but the poor lad seemed very much disconcerted at first, at being left: he was, however, a good- hearted youth; and, when he recol¬ lected that it was owing to his master's good fortune, he forgot every thing else,
*
169
CHAPTER XVh Gerrard and Deborah's Arrival at the Castle.
It was late in the evening, when Ger* rard, and his wife, Deborah, arrived at the castle of La Braunch. The strangers were conducted to an elegant room, prepared for their recep¬ tion by the careful Hathbrand, who, in vol. ir i
1?0 hopes of being retained in office, was as courteous and polite to t,hein, as he had been to his deceased lord. Hathbrand immediately caused one of the wardrobes of the deceased baron to be opened, from whence he selected some of the plainest attire, such as he thought would, at first, best become their sudden and unexpected change of circumstances. Deborah, however, was extremely desirous of being fine; she loved to be drest, and could not be prevailed on, to put on any thing but the most gaudy apparel in the wardrobe. She was ex¬ tremely pleaded with the attentions of her waiting-woman, Ranetrude, who had otlcred her services, and, except the novelty of having nothing to do for her-
i;i seh, she was less under restraint than could have been expected. The inhabitants of the castle were all alive with the news of the arrival of their new lord and lady; and v ere im¬ patient to pay their respects; in this, however, they were disappointed, for that night. Doric, the old steward, and Jonas, the butler, received orders to attend, with the rest of the servants, the next morning, in the hall, to hear their late master the baron's will read, and to recoive their new lord and ladv. The story had already got wind, that the baron dc La Braunch had left his immense possessions to a poor wood¬ cutter, and many- and numerous were the remarks and low witticisms on the
I *4
1?2 occasion, from old Doric, Jonas the but¬ ler, and the other servants. The next day, the numerous tenantry of the baron, who had also been sum¬ moned to attend, met at the hall; and, with the domestics, waited in eager expectation, to see their new master, Gerrard, and their lady, Deborah. At length the folding doors, leading from the staircase, were thrown open, and Gerrard and Deborah, attended by Hathbrand and Ranetrude, entered the hall. Gerrard bowed his head without awkwardness, and stept forward without 'JUnay. Deborah assumed an air of vast consequence ; yet she did not look un¬ kind on any : she was filled with no¬ tions of her situation; but was naturally
social and kind ; and, if she had not considered that it would be improper, she would gladly have been familiar. Hathbrand held the parchment scroll in his hand ; he spoke :—" My good friends, peace be with you all! I here produce the willof your late master, the baron de La Braunch. Attend.— < Know all men, that I, the baron de La Braunch, lord of all the demesnes in and about Ravensworth, do hereby give and bequeath to Gerrard Le Blanc, of the forest, wood-cutter, all the real and personal estate of which I now stand possessed, upon condition that he shall, on the seventh day after my de¬ cease, take possession of the castle, and that, when the clock shall have struck twelve, at midnight of that day, he shall I 3
*T4 go. alone, into the chamber of the western turret, where he will find the title-deeds to such estates/ *' The instant that the western turret was named, a rumour was immediately heard among the domestics. Gerrard took little notice of the sen¬ sation which had been expicssed among the servant . he was firm, and uncon- sciou* t thing to fear. Deborah, however, n u a litle uneasiness; her cu¬ riosity, and her fears for Gerrard, were brth excited. Gerrard addressed the tenantry:— ** Friends and neighbours, Providence has so ordered it, that a poor wood¬ cutter should become your lord. There he many who would find it difficult to do their duty in a station so much above
17^ them : I shall not; JKshall be just and honest, and it must go hard indeed, if things turn out amiss. You shall ,<d be rich in the best comforts of life, and the poor man shall never want bread. I am now, as it were, the great oak of the forest, and the unfortunate shall al¬ ways find a shelter beneath the wide- spreading branches of English hospi¬ tality. I shall give judgment among you fairly. I have not had much learn¬ ing, 'tis true, yet, I know that there is but the right and the wrong, and that it is not so easy to mistake one for the other, as many people would try to make us believe. Keep in your own stations; don't dispute the rights of your great neighbours, and they shall not trample on yours. Gerrard, your new master I 4
will, as far as in him lies, protect the weak, strike at the root of corruption, and fell oppression to the ground. 11 Three mccemiv^ shout* succeeded this noble harangue of Gerrard, the honest wood-cutter* After the ceremoi / of taking pos¬ session was over, Gerrard, whose heart was too good to let him enjoy the good things prepared at his sumptuous board, while disturbed with the reflection, that one of his family, whom he loved too, was left in a state of anxiety and un¬ easiness—it was his poor boy, Henrv » and he now dispatched a domestic to the cottage, with orders to bring him to the castle, that he might also partake of the promised festivity. The do¬ mestic returned, in about three hours,
177 but it was without the boy: the 7 boy had left the cottage; the cottage was empty. Gerrard h*?d never felt any thing that bad given him so much uneasiness before. "My poor boy gone!" cried Ger¬ rard; " my poor foundling! what shall I do? I'll go and seek him, myself; I'll search through the forest; poor fel¬ low! but I'll go and see for him, my¬ self. He was the kindest child! but hold ; perhaps he is gone to father Ve¬ laschi ; the good old monk was always fond of him ; I dare say he is there; I'll go and see. Hathbrand represented to the honest wood-cutter, the impropriety of his leav- I 5
1J-8 in*4 the castle at such a time; besides, that the hour approached tor him to pav his vhit to the rhamber in the western turret, in conformity with the injunctions of the will of the baron de La Braunch. Deborah also endeavoured to per¬ suade her husband that the ho\ - was safe The good father \ elaschi was expected; the boy would come with him, lie had taught him to read, and was never >o happy, as when he was rtivtiu» him instruction. (■errard was ill satisned with these I'onjcctures ; he was a^urcd that some accident had happened to him ; the poor boy had thought that they had deserted him; he had left the cottage a wanderer; he would never return.
179 Gerrard gave orders, that two of the domestics should go different ways, in search of the vouth. He was obeyed with alacrity.
l >
1M0
^Kgfttt l rj,"?"m i ff vh '," ; ..... ,' ..... ij„ JSi.iaeg | .,"- l «ff • &Jsa. ' L~. -il^uill- ■ l.ljs. ' CHAPTER XYU. The Supper. — -Get rard*s f'isit to the Western Turret.
Doric, the honest old steward, and his friend, Jonas, the butler, had taken most especial care, to be as superb and expensive, in the preparations for his new masters suppen as if the baron had been alive, Their sentiments, too, had been all at once changed about their
18! nevv master: he was a tine, brave, noble fellow ; and they were sure, that he would take care, that they should be, all of them, happy and comfortable; txnd it was but proper, that they should show him all the respect and homage in their power. The waiting-lady, Mrs, Ranetrude, and the women servants, were not less delighted with their new mistress. The fact was, that, though she was some¬ what vulgar, she was naturally of a kind disposition ; and, though she was, as might have been expected, extremely proud of her new situation, and line dress, yet she was not arrogant, and her wenerositv blunted the shafts of ridicule. They found that they had a true friend in their mistress, and were
182 wise and grateful enough, to think that she was every thing to them. The supper was * ready ; the table was spread with such delicacies as had never before been seen by the honest Gerrard, or his wife, Deborah. They sat down to the entertainment, Ilathbrand was with them. Doric and Jonas waited. A minstrel had also been invited, to play to them the most favourite ballads. Gerrard appeared thoughtful and low- spirited. Hath brand, to do him justice, used every means in his power, to keep up the spirits of his new master. i( Truly/' cried Gerrard, " I was ne¬ ver much given to superstition ; but, somehow or other, whenever the west-
183 em turret is mentioned, my blood chills at once " *' Doubtless" returned Hathbrand, some mystery hangs about the circum¬ stances of that place, which the extra- ordinary injunction in the baron s will confirms; such, however, are the terms on which the tenure of your larg" de¬ mesnes depends.* "Well, then, be it so," returned Gerrard. Poor Deborah was so much delighted with the sumptuous repast, which had been prepared for her, that she had not heard a syllable of what had passed between her husband and Hathbrand ; her eyes were the organs most engaged, and her taste was the sense next grati
1S4 fled ; no time was allowed for attention to the conversation. A silent moment ensued: the hour began to approach fast, for Gerrard to visit the western turret. The domestics were engaged in one corner of the hall, talking the matter over. tc Vd be shot :f I'd go," cried Doric, as he tossed off a cup of Burgundy. " He must be drunk, if he attempts it," returned Jonas, scarcely able to stand. Gerrard started from a reverie :— (i Well, I am poor, and the tempta¬ tion's strong. I have often worked alone in the woods; but then, viewing the cheerful sun, and the flowers, and the
Bii
trees, and the green shrubs, my heart was always glad, and rejoiced. I don't know- how it is, that 1 am so much depressed about going to s room *Uw»fi. * H * vcr injured any body ; what have I to fear ? Good Providence, shield me from harm!" " Lord! Gerrard," interrupted De¬ borah, a do not go, if you think that any harm will happen to you; let us go back again to our humble cottage: what would be the use of all the riches in the world, if we were not happy? and what would be all the wealth of this castle, if I were to lose my Ger¬ rard ?" " Never fear, Deborah ; never fear* my girl/' replied Gerrard.
18 (if The hour drew nigh : it wanted but half an hour. Hathbrand filled a goblet of wine ; he drank to Gerrard, Gerrard returned a health to Hath¬ brand, and to alb It wanted a quarter only. Gerrard looked at the clock; a silence ensued. It wanted but ten minutes of the time; no one spoke. The clock struck twelve. Gerrard started from his seat:— " Give me the light," cried he; Til go instantly: he took the taper in his hand. " Deborah," cried he, « farewell! in a few minutes, I shall return."
IB
« God bless yoit, Gerrard » " « Aye % God bless you, indeed 1 1? repeated Doric. « We shall never me him any more " cried Jonas. Deborah did not hear the words; her heart was full: she returned to the supper-table. A pause succeeded the departure of Gerrard; all was still and silent.
IHH
^^^emmmsmmmj^^
CHAPTER XVIII. The Western Turret. Gerrard explored his way; for the single taper in his hand gave but a feeble light, the whole length of the gallery, and of the winding stair-case of the castle. A high wind had sprung up, followed
189 by a tempest; the rain beat against the windows ; the thunder rolled at a dis¬ tance, and lightnings began to flash. The figures of the tapestry, in the rooms through which he passed, seemed to move. Gerrard was undaunted, At length he ascended the steps which led to the western turret, and, following the directions which had been given him, arrived at the iron door. The massy key, which he held in his hand, fitted the lock ; it was in vain, however, that he attempted to open it. He made several unsuccessful efforts ; at length, by main strength only, he turned the key, and the door fell open. There was a light in the room; it was one solitary lamp. In the midst of the chamber was a
1.90 bier; a figure of a woman was laid on it. A cradle stood next the bier ; the fi¬ gure of &n infant also was placed in ■Jo the cradle. Gerrard started back with terror. He took, however, the taper in his hand, and approached nearer to the objects he had beheld. There appeared no life in the bodies. Gerrard was exploring the room, to find the chest, in which, he supposed, were kept the deeds containing the title of the baron, when he discovered a parchment scroll, suspended from one tod of the bier. There was inscribed on it, in large letters—" The Title of the Baron de La Braunch to the De¬ mesnes of Ravemworth."
191 Gerrard snatched the scroll from the bier, and read— " Know, unhappy ivretch who longest after riches! that the title to these demesnes is mur¬ der" i( Murder!" repeated Gerrard, He trembled from head to foot, as he re¬ peated the word murder; he cast his eyes involuntarily on the dead bodies; he staggered against the wall. The high win.I rushed alone: the floor of the chamber; the taper was nearly extinguished with the gusts from the arras ; the liirht burnt dim ; the flame tapered, and the point vi¬ brated with the motion. Gerrard felt a chill of horror. He cast his eves atrain on the bodv of the
19$ female on the bier: the face was pale, and blood appeared on the bosom. He looked at the infant: the face of the child, too, was pale; but there was no blood. Gerrard retired from the chamber
&
CHAFfER XIX
The Return of Gerrard to the Sapper- ta Ue.—The Scroll.— The last Ap pearance of the Hag,
Deborah wai leaning her cheek upon her hand, listening, in the most anxious Suspense. Ilathbrand was wrapt up in thought, VOL. II. K
194 ;* What a stormy night! " exclaimed Doric. a It blows a whirlwind/' answered Jonas. Deborah broke silence:— " I thought that I heard him coming. Alas! it is not him." " Be comforted, rny dear lady/' re¬ plied Ranetrude ; " my master will re¬ turn presently." Deborah fetched a heavy sigh. Footsteps were heard in the gahery ; it was some one descending the stairs. They were the footsteps of Gerrard. He entered. He spoke;—"Deborah!" was all th at he could utter* He fell into a chair^and chopped the scroll.
195 " Heavens! what ails you, Gerrard?" exclaimed Deborah. ff Spea|c, speak to me, Gerrard" « Let us to our cottage, Deborah , let us to our cottage, my girl; read, read, read!** Hathbrand took up the scroll of parchment; he read u The Confessions of the Saron de La Braunch, u Know> unhappy wretch, who long¬ est after riches! that the title to these estates is murder•" cc Murder! 1 * was reverberated through the hall. Hathbrand cotuinued :-*~ u The in¬ fant Edward, the rightful heir to the demesnes of Ravenswort*h, was mur¬ dered by the Hag, at the instance of
196 the baron de La Braunch, The lady Bertha, too, was afterwards made away with, at his instigation, and by means of the same accursed instrument. But the crimes of the baron were of a much earlier date ; for, after seducing lady Gertrude, the child of lord Hubert, he destroyed the object of his seduction by means of poison, throngh the aid of the monk, his confessor." "Horrible!'* cried Gerrard. " Horrible, indeed!" repeated De¬ borah. It is now just eleven years," cried Hathbrand, (( since the child, Edward, was missed from the castle." " The Hag was always suspected,** interrupted Ranetrude. " The Hag is still alive," cried Ger-
197 rard; " let her be brought instantly to justice." It was the first command that Ger¬ rard had given in the castle, with anger on his brow, Hathbrand was preparing to obey the order of his new master, when, on a sudden, the folding-doors of the inner hall opened with a dreadful crash. Three figures, entirely covered with black mantles, appeared at the en¬ trance. The middle one was the Hag* She uncovered her face. The other two remained covered. A sudden dread overcame all who were present. The Hag advanced forward. " Accursed witch!" cried Gerrard,
Ip ,ts the wicked instrument of the baron's enormities, answer, me." * £ I will,** replied the witch. " Thou art accused of the murder of the lady Bertha's child, lord Edward : nay, more—of the murder of lady Bertha.'* " One thing at a time/* replied the Hag, u Say, wretch! art thou guilty, or not?" " As you please.** <c Nay, answer me, or the most dreadful torture shall extort a confes¬ sion from thee?* "Who is my accuser?" replied the Hag, " Thy master, wretch! the baron himself.**
199 Hathbrand held up the scroll. " Now then," continued Gerrard, iS what hast thou to say ? M r >H Peace a little," cried the witch : " thou hast made thy speech ; it is my turn now to speak. Thou hast no- power to harm the Hag; but I will answer thee; I am prepared; here are my witnesses/ The "figures in the black mantles came forward : they were still covered. u Now then to thy questions/' c° n ~ tinued the Hag; " and first, for the infant. The Hag received the child a present from the baron—a sacrifice* " A sacrifice! " exclaimed Deborah, ** A sacrifice!" repeated Gerrard. * c A sacrifice/' returned the witch. K 4
200 " Was it not mine then, to do with it as J pleased ? to destroy, or save it ?" " Save it!" cried Gerrard. " Aye, save it. Suppose the child lves. M Lives 1" . " Aye; lives. Suppose the Hag, the wicked, the accursed Hag, laid it down, Covered in flannel, at the door of a poor wood-cutter, in the forest." " A wood-cutter!" " Suppose she saw it taken in to shelter" " Taken in!" ' " <( Aye ; but you'll doubt my story ; you'll say, that------" "When did this happen?" inter¬ rupted Gerrard.
201 " Eleven years ago," returned the witch; " one cold night, the twenty- seventh of March/* " Good Heavens 1 ** cried Gerrard ; " it was one night in March that I found my poor boy, whom I named Henry, wrapped up in flannel—but this story is well known to some in the forest, and the Hag would fain use it to her purpose." " I have a witness," returned the Hag. " Produce him." The Hag withdrew the mantle from one of the figures. A youth, sump¬ tuously attired, presented himself. (< Now then," cried the Hag, " do you know him ? behold the heir to the demesnes of Ravensworth!" k 5
202 Gerrard answered not a word; he was petrified with astonishment. J>eborah knew the child. Henry, now lord Edward, spoke to his old master. Jfc was convinced. " Now then./' cried the Hag, a go on. I am accused ©f the murder of ladv Bertha. I have ~a witness here too; a witness that none can deny." She drew the mantle from the next figure. It was the lady Bertha. " Behold,"' said the witch} " your mistress! restored to you safe.** Hathbrand knelt down; the servants knelt at her feet t they were transported with joy. ** This, too,** cried the Hag, " is my wort."
*
-4
203 " It is wonderful," replied Gerrard ; " it is the hand of Providence!" " Prepare for more wonders yet," in¬ terrupted the witch. All were silent, and in suspense. " The baron lives." * " Lives! " repeated Hathbrand. At this moment father Velaschi en¬ tered. " And here comes my witness, to prove it." continued the Hag. ** It is true/* cried the monk, " the baron lives; but is dead to the world : he hus taken to a religious hfe, and hopes, by prayer and penance, to ob¬ tain pardon for his intended crimes. * The baron was not poisoned ; for the mixture given by lady Alwena, had K 6*
204 been presented to her by the Hag, on the night of the ball, and was composed of a powder, alarming in its effects, but not fatal. After the holy sacrament had been administered, I relieved the wretched mind of the penitent by— * The child and and lady Bertha are yet alive/ " " Fom two horrid murders, then/* cried Gerrard^ " he is freed. And, even yet, of another is he guilty—the lady Gertrude." " He is not guilty even of that/' in¬ terrupted the Hag. " He has confessed it; it is in the scroll /* " He is not guilty/' " Not guilty 1" €C The lady Gertrude lives/*
205
At these words, the Hag threw from her the black mantle with which she Was covered ; a foul and ugly mask also, at the same instant, fell from her face. A female of the most lovely feature, „d angelic fornv stood u F4 ght, attired in white and sumptuous apparel. No¬ thing more of deformity was seen. The figure spoke;—" I am lady Ger¬ trude/* A pause of wonder ensued. " Yes," continued the figure; "the Hag was lady Gertrude. Under the foul and tattered raiment of a witch, lady Gertrude has avenged her wrongs; she has preserved the innocent. In this good work, the ever to be revered father Velaschi has had his share.
2oB " Deceived by specious pretences, 8 nd by a false ceremony of the mar- riage ritual, in Normaudy, lady Ger¬ trude suffered all the agony of insulted honour. " As soon as she discovered, from the baron's lips, that she had been im¬ posed on, she fled to England. " The baron, too, came to the same shore, " She was about to appeal to the king for redress* " The baron laid a plan to poison her. " It was the monk, Velasehi, who was entrusted with tfie plot u He, the |*ood father Velaschi re¬ vealed the horrible design*
20? i( It was given out, that the poison had done its work. " It was by his contrivance that it was averted. u Lady Gertrude left the world alive, u It was in the deserted castle, that the monk, Velaschi, furnished her a retreat. u It was visited only at night, by a few of the brotherhood. " The lights sometimes seen at mid¬ night, gave rise to the belief of its being frequented by devils. " The castle had a subterraneous passage to the hut, where lady Ger¬ trude always appeared the Hag. But * her deformity was only in her mask,, her gloves, and mantle. At night she retired to the castle.
208 " It was the monk Velaschi, who, with the assistance of the brother¬ hood, contrived all the supernatural appearances, and visions, shown to the baron ; the horrid images of wax; the loathsome figure of lady Gertrude, a corpse. " The fiend, too, was father Ve¬ laschi." Every tongue was silent, during this wonderful discourse , every eye was fixed on lady Gertrude. She continued:—> " In this retreat she watched the wayward actions of the cruel baron, assisted to prevent his designs, and, by means of aiding the impulse of vice, retarded crime. " The Hag acquired an ascendancy
over the baron, which gave to her all his secrets.. " She knew that he would attempt the murder of the infant, and seconded the design, that she might save its life. She did so; she gave it life, and liberty. Labour bestowed health and strength; and the good monk, Velaschi, watched over the progress of his mind. " The Hag, too, was the kindest friend of lady Bertha, by appearing her greatest enemy. " It was the Hag who plunged her in misery, to save and bless her. " It was the Hag who concealed her in the deserted castle. <c It was the Hag who presented the powder to the wretched lady Alwena. " Thus has she, by assisting to ravish
$10 the infant from its mother, saved that infant's life. " The Hag watched it* rising years, while a wood-cutter's boy. ** Father Velaschi, who ever noticed the children of the poor, gave the child the rudiments of learning. " It was thus the Hag, as a second means in the hands of Providence, pre¬ vented evil, and brought forth good. " The purpose is effected. « The wretched lady Alwena only has sufiered. " The wicked baron was not gui&y. " But a *tiil greater work is yet per¬ formed :—It was the Hag who turned the heart of the baron de La Braunch, by showing him the contempt and de- * rision of the fiend whom he wor-
^sW A. *
shipped, for the miseries he endured, and the mortifying disappointment which ever attends the completion of a crime. " It was the Hag, too, who, lastly, revenged lady Gertrude's wrongs, and who made that revenge a blessing to her seducer" Ludy Bertha, Edward, Gerrrard, De¬ borah, Hathbrand, Ranetrude, all knelt, and kissed the hand of lady Gertrude. Father Velaschi laid his hands on them; he blessed them with the bene¬ diction of Heaven. Gerrard gave up instant possession of the castle of La Braunch for the young lord Edward. The child Edward took hold of Gerrard^ hand.—" Thou shalt labour
( 2['2 no more in the woods, Gerrard: thou didat always spare me a handful, from thy little means ; and ought I not to help thee plentifully from so rich a store!" Lady Bertha embraced her young lord. The domestics gave way to festivity ; in which they were joined by the good father Velaschh The lady Gertrude, after the won¬ ders she had performed, retired to a convent* The good were not hurt: the bad repented, FINIS. Printed by K. Juign^, 17, Margaset-streci, Cavcndish-squart.
