Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
The sisters of St. Gothard: a tale
Tilit
Sisters of St. Gothard. *t* ****** ******* **-*т*.+*-*г+*+г#+~*ф*#**+**++**Ч1+».* #·#■
CHAPTER 1. HEN Adelaide entered her apart¬ ment, she sunk upon a sofa, overcome by the alternate feelings that lacerated lier gentle bosom. The count had shock¬ ed—had insulted her; out he was un¬ happy. Her heart was tenderly alive to all his sufferings : she wept for him— she prayed for him—she loved him ; but she determined to see him no more. In this perturbed state of mind, she east her eyes upon a portrait of the eoun- voi«. п. и tess,
tess, which had been placed there at her request. The intelligence that »sparkled from the h autiľul eye, the irresistible »sweetness that benevolence threw over the features, marked the striking like¬ ness, seemed to give life to the canvas, and ri vetted her distracted attention.·— " Ah ! dear departed object of my ten¬ der affection Г she exclaimed, "bright pattern of all that was virtuous and ami¬ able in woman! could you know the con¬ flict that rends the bosom of your Ade¬ laide, your celestial felicity would be disturbed. Yet no guilty recollections are mine : I have endeavoured to dis¬ charge the last duties you rested upon me, and 1o watch over and sooth your Clementine Blessed spirit! continue to influence Iiis conduct, and restore peace to his distracted anel insulated breast." She gazed for some minutes upon the picture; it seemed to smile upon her; and as she turned from it, she felt it fol¬ lowed
lowed her with a look of tender solici¬ tude and approbation. She now exerted herself to compose her feelings. She de* termined to avoid another interview with the count ; her resolution was fixed, and there was no time to be lost She rang her bell, and madame Arbino at¬ tended the summons. This good and respectable woman had been the favourite attendant of the coun¬ tess before her marriage, and had conti¬ nued »so ever since. Her lady placed un¬ bounded confidence in her; and upon the birth of the count, she committed him entirely to her superintendency. The countess never travelled without her; she had accompanied her to Swit¬ zerland, and, upon her return, »she had requested her particularly to wait upon Adelaide. The amiable manners of the latter had conciliated her tender regard, and she attended her vvith equal aíťec·* tion and respect. The count was tendei ly R 2 attached
attached to her, and she always retained the endearing appellation of his " dear nurse." The countess, on her deathbed, had entreated her never to leave him, but, as far as she could, supply a mo¬ ther's loss. The good woman required no entreaty ; she loved him as if he had been her son, and, after the death of her dear mistress, her affection and hopes in him employed her whole care. " I must leave you, my good Arbino: I am under the necessity of setting off immediately for Switzerland." ** Immediately!" said the good wo¬ man, bursting into tears. " Ah, dear madam î what will become of the count ?** ·' That Providence, from whose pro- tection no one is excluded who relies upon it, will support him ; and I trust ) ou will ever watch over him with that solicitude and affection whieh have en- clcated you to him. Iiis present state of mind requires great care. He knows I am
îim going; but 1 wish to leave the castle without his knowledge, as a formal part¬ ing is more than his feelings are equal to. I request you to give orders for a travelling chaise to be at the door for me by ñve in the morning, and that you will pack up my clothes'with all the ex¬ pedition you are capable of/' " Ah, my dear young lady !" «said the distressed Arbino, taking her kindly by the hand, " you cannot go to Switzer¬ land alone. Consider your youtii and beauty : you cannot travel without pro¬ tection/' " And that, my kind friend, I shalt find at Florence. Give yourself no un¬ easiness on my account—-my plan is fixed. I entreat you again to give no¬ tice immediately for my journey; and when supper is announced, let the count be informed I am not disposed to partake of it. I trust to you, my good Arbino. to prevent his knowing what time Ige>; and call me at an early hour/' в 3 The
The good woman promised to execute her orders, implored Heaven to guide her safe, and, drowned in tears, quitted the room. Left to her own refieetiems, the dis¬ consolate Adelaide traversed the cham¬ ber in an agony of sorrow—sometimes with slow unconscious step, or with a melden impulse of painful recollection, start with anguish, and quicken her pace, as if to fly from the persecutions of me¬ mory. False estimate of her powers ! it is then, for what purpose Heaven best knows, that she is most active in dis¬ playing before us, in lively colours, the scenes past that torture our sensibility. ч She opened the window, and looked out. The wind, in hollow murmurs, re¬ sponded her woes ; the bending branches, in rustling cadence, echoed her sighs: silence reigned, and darkness prevailed. —" Gloomy scene," she said, in a plain¬ tive tone, *' you accord with the feelings of my soul ; this night will be the last I shall
shall ever raise m ν eyes towards your «V *f * aspiring tops. How often, liefore I com¬ mitted myself to the protection of the Deity, have you aided my devotions, by the contemplation of з^онг sublime grandeur!" Then, shutting the win¬ dow, she sat down to her desk, and en¬ deavoured to calm hejr mind, to address the count. It was a cruel task : what would not her heart have dictated! every thing that refined attachment suggested, in¬ spired by the most amiable and generous of men ; now, sunk in sorrow, the lustre of his virtues obscured, deprived of a mother he adored, and a prey to a hope¬ less passion« After much agitation, and dropping tears upon the paper, she wrote the following letter ;— ** Before you receive this, I shall be on my way to Switzerland. R 4 Accuse
Accuse me not of ingratitude or cold¬ ness; my heart is incapable of either. The interest I take in your peace has urged me to the step. Your conduct last night determined me to avoid an¬ other meeting: but resentment mingles not with my feelings—there is no place for it in my breast. You must be aware of the necessity of my quitting you ; and that to have remained longer autho¬ rized the conclusions the world is ever ready to deduce from appearances. Ah, my lord ! you condescended to be my preceptor in polite learning; we have tasted together the enjoyments arising from the cultivation of reason, and the refinements of sentiment. You taught me first to admire, to esteem your many virtues—would you now seek to efface the lessons you gave? No, you cannot; they are too deeply impressed. " You have shocked, insulted my feelings, and madly attempted to shake my
my principles; but you have not been able to weaken my conviction that the amiable qualities of your heart are un¬ corrupted, and the brilliant advantages of mental superiority darkened only by the clouds of passion which pass over the lustre of your virtues. " Be yourself again, my lord, I en¬ treat you: shake off the dangerous ıh lusion of indulging an affection that is beneath you, and can never be realized. Reason is equal to the exertion, and will afford you solid joys, and ensure placid recollections, when the ardour of youth will have passed away. It is needless to repeat the interest my heart takes in your happiness—I prefer it to my own. Bear in mind, my lord, that adverse winds may blow against us ; for¬ tune may sport vvith our feelings—she may rob us of the objects of our tender¬ est affectum, and deprive us of her un¬ et rtain gifts ; but she cannot make us В 5 wretched.
wretched. The suppression of errors, the discharge of duties, conscious recti¬ tude, and reflections unembittered with i'emorse, will bear us up against the tide of misfortune, and assuage the pains of disappointed hopes. Let us remember the countess: may her exalted virtues be our rule, and her illustrious example influence our conduct ! Look forwarel to yonr approaching union with less hor¬ ror. It is religion to make the best of what we cannot avert ; and be assured, my lord, it is in your own power to sof¬ ten the asperity of your fate. Though destiny has severed us for ever, your feappiness will ever be an object of my prayers. Your filial conduct bus ñxea my esteem, and your amiable and gene¬ rous attentions demand my everlasting gratitude. Adieu, my lord ! and if for ever in this world, we shall meet, I trust, in beaven. Adelaide."
Altet
After finishing her letter, and arran¬ ging matters for her early departure, she went to bed ; but her mind was too much agitated to enjoy the balmy eomforts of sleep. Worn out with conflicting feel¬ ings, she fell into uneasy slumbers, from which she w r as awakened by madame Arbino. She was soon ready lor her journey.— " My good Arbino, to you I entrust this letter; give it to the count yourself, when he inquires for me. X hope Heaven will preserve you to him, and bless you, for your long and faithful services." Then thanking her for all her kind attentkms, «she put a purse .vitli money into her hand, and accompanied it with a present of value. Tbe gooel woman refused the money, but retained the present, as a token, «she said, of her dear young lady's regard. " My kind Arbino, I insist upon your acceptance of it; it is all your own—) ou well deserve it." в 0 She
She was positive, and declined the money. Adelaide entreated in vain ; then throwing her lovely arms round her neck, as the worthy woman wept bitterly, she tenderly embraced her, and assured her she should be informed when she arrived at Uri. A servant came to inform her the chaise was at the door. As «she passed through the antichamber, she was ar¬ rested by the portrait. She still fancied it smiled upon her.—-" My lamented, my beloved benefactress, adieu for ever !" she said, while the tears fell upon the arm of madame Arbino, vvho supported her. They entered the main gallery that ran through the body of the castle. A range of apartments were on both sides. They came to the counťs: an involun¬ tary impulse stopped the light foot of Adelaide ; her heart throbbed—the chill of death seized lier frame·—she trembled ; but
but all was silent there.—" May Hea¬ ven ble\ss your slumbers!" she se>ftly r said, as she passed his door; and cling¬ ing to the arm of her kind attendant, she made a hasty efibrt to leave the gal¬ lery. She again embraced madame Arbino, anel taking leave of the faithful domes¬ tics vvho surrounded her, she got into the carriage, with a command of feelings that might have equalled the strength of our best philosophers, conld the exer tion have been estimated.
CHAP
CHAPTER IL
Tke chaise drove off, and left not a dry eye amongst those vvho had witnessed ber departure. It was a e'hilly grey morn ; the autumnal leaves strewed the paths ; the half-naked trees, stripped of their luxuriant foliage, bespoke the ap- pro.'ich of a generai decay ; the lofty mountains were veiled in mists, and slowly discovered then· extended bases ; all was silence round the castle 1 , and «still í л í 1-е цга^е hìie had left the avenue, and reached the gate that opened into the high road; as it closed upon her, she had the last view
view of the front of the castle, though its prouel battlements pressed upon the eye of the distant traveller. The chaise turned and wound round an eminence 1 , which, when gained, commanded a com¬ plete prospect of the back of this noble edifice. What wero now the sensations that tortured her sensibility î The windows pf tlie counťs apartments vvere directly in sight; in a piazzaed balcony before them there was a collection of the finest plants, selected and arranged by her at bis particular request.—** Do you sleep in peace," she thought to herself, " while yon have obliged the friendless Adelaide to fly your presence, and seek amongst strange is that protection which you ought to have aiforded her? Ah no! 1 will not reproach you. Perhaps at this moment your benev olen t breast, the seat of inherent honour and principle, is wrung by a painful survey of the influ¬ ence
ence of a hopeless passion, the loss of a beloved mother, anei the anticipation of ties repugnant to your heart." A plentiful «shower of tears accompa¬ nied these reflections, which filled her mind till she reached I^lorenee, She ordered the postillion to drive to tbe abate Sells, and having arrived, she alighted there: she sent tbe servant to inform him she particularly wisheel to see him. Before we proceed farther, it is neces¬ sary to introduce the abate Sells to the reader, with all the favourable attributes that marked his character. He was ac- e'ounted one of the most learned men in Italy. His profound knowledge, his theo¬ logical eminence, bis active benevolence, his private virtues, and amiable manners, had gained him universal admiration and esteem. Added to these pre-emi¬ nent qualifications, he led a life of ex¬ emplary piety and simplicity: he was at
at all times accessible to the highest or humblest of the community, who either desired his spiritual blessings, or solicitei his pious and unostentatiems charity. He nad been the preceptor of the young count Rimini from earliest youth, and still continued to direct his studies and influence his literary taste. Tlie worthy man loved him vvith tbe feelings of a father highly interested in the son of his hopes. The indefatigable exertions of the preceptor were amply rewarded by the virtues and talents of the pupil : the young plant, under his fostering care, had gained strength, expanded its blossoms, attained mature beauty, and stood dis¬ played tbe most flourishing tree in the garden of his labours. Yet with pain he perceived in his disposition an arden¬ cy of feelings, an excess of tenderness, vvhich, if indulged, might involve him in error and remorse. Hitherto nothing had occurred to excite these propensities beyond
beyond tlie channel of domestic aifee- tions; headeired his mother, he tenderly loved his preceptor, and he thought not of Valetta, gueli worth as the abate SehVs de¬ served the friendship of the countess Kimini. Bhe admired his talents, ve¬ nerated his virtues, and placed unlimited confidence in liim as a friend, and the approved preceptor of her son, Add¬ ed to the acquisition whieh she con¬ sidered bina in these capacities, he was the spiritual father of her devotions, the enlightened priest who administered to her the sacraments of the church, and the soother of her mind in the hour of affliction. As Adelaide had been educated in tbe Homan Catholic faith, he attended her in those solemn duties which his sacked function directed. Her naturally fine un¬ derstanding, simple edueation, and cul¬ tivated mind, had given her a strength and
and firmness of character whieh asto- niöhed and delighted the abate. He had taken a particular interest in her studies, and esteemed her as the daughter of his venerated and noble friend ; and in her present exigence she flew to him, as to a father, for succour and advice. The worthy man, fearing something was the matter at the castle by her early visit, hastily got up, anxious to leam the particulars. As he entered the room, she appeared much agitated. He took her kindly by the hand, and entreated to know what affected her ? She faithfully detailed the count's con¬ duct, and the disorder and violence of Jiis feelings when she left: him, and sig¬ nified her intention to set off immedi¬ ately for Switzerland.*—'* Ah, my dear, my honoured abate ! I need not palliate the count's behaviour to you ; you know him too well—you are too deeply inte¬ rested in his happiness. Eagerly would 1 attempt
Ì attempt to remove from yonr mind an unfavourable thought of him—but you never harboured one." The abate she>ok his head, and sighed. ~— u Ah Γ he «said, " I foresaw that fatal contract woidd destroy his peace. While the fulfilment of it was distant, and his affections tree, he saw not its horrors, í know, anei have lamented, the nature of his affections—they admit of no me¬ diocrity. His heart is fixed, and on one whom, hael I seen him united to, my solicitude for Ins future life vvould have been at rest." He looked earnestly at her as he fi- nibhe-d thc^se words. To the sweet and pensive countenance of Adelaide a deep blush added something like a celestial charm The abate saw it—he must have felt it; no one could be indifferent to it who bad a beart ; it created an interest never to be forgotton. —*' My dear child, í know it all. The countess loved you, and
and on her deathbed expressed the satis¬ faction it would have given her to have claimed your affection by a near tie." *' Ah, my dear abate ! no such pre¬ sumptive thought was mine. The poor and humble Adelaide is ill fitted to sup¬ port the honours, and less deserving of the worth, of count Rimini." ** Virtue only ennobles us. In hea¬ ven there: is no elisti nction of persons and nations; anel they who approach nearest the Godhead in perfection will enjoy the highest degree of beatitude." He wished her to remain some days with him, to calm her mind and enable her to undertake her journey ; but she declined his kindness, and expressed her wish to set e>ff immediately.—" Vou know, my dear father, the count will fly to you, and 1 am determined to see him no more." " If you vv ill have it «so, I shall pro¬ vide for your ease and safety. lather Anselm
Anselm shall accompany you, and place you again vvith those virtuous friends of whom I have heard our dear countess speak with rapture. He is a good and pious man, and a relation of mine ; his intelligence will amuse you, and his worth will be your safeguard. Amongst my domestics I bave a Swiss, whose tried «md faithful services justify me in pla¬ cing unlimited confidence in him. I shall hend him with you : he is well ac¬ quainted vvitli the roads; he possesses all the virtues of Ins little country, and is so much attachée! to it, that I would be answerable he would sacrifice his life in the defence of his fair country¬ woman." Then ringing the bell, he requested to юе father Anselm. The holy man quickly attended the summons.—" My worthy friend, 1 request you to conduct signora ulanchard to Uri in Switzerland —.it is only to your protoiition I woukl commit her," The
The good man smiietl, and declared his willingness to attend her. " There is no time to be lost," said the abate. ** Signora wishes to depart the moment you are ready : how long will that be?" " In an hour," he replied, " I shall be at her service." The abate ordered breakfast, and dur¬ ing the time he soothed the mind of his young friend by that perniasi Ve elo¬ quence which never failed to impress his divine precepts. Ile assured her of the interest he should always feel in her temporal and eternal happiness, and re¬ quested to hear from her frequently. Father Anselm being ready, and every thing adjusted for her accommodation, she turned to the worthy priest, and with tears expressed her veneration anei grati¬ tude He tenderly embraced her, and be¬ stowed his benediction ; and placing her in the carriage by the side of her con¬ ductor.
ductor, gave special injunctions to her Swiss guide ; and pressing her hand with an ejaculation for her safety, the chaise set off. Nothing worthy of notice* occurred on the way. Her kind protector pointed out the striking objects of the scenery as they passed along. His general know¬ ledge easily shifted from one topic to another; her mind was beguiled of its sorrows, and her attention was excited by his moral and philosophical reflections. Her faithful Swiss guide had consulted every road and path that t>rømi$ed ease and security; and now the stupendous mountains of St Gothard were at hand. Her heart bounded, sunk/and palpi¬ tated, with an association of ideas acutem ly felt, but undefinable. A short time brought her tojhe well-known cottage, A group of friends anxiously waited her arrival, and she was instantly clasped in the arras of her paternal friend. It
' It is unnecessary to detail the tender scene that took place between these vir¬ tuous and early friends, and the joy the worthy man discovered in holding to his heart again the child of his departed friend. He expressed his gratitude to father Anselm for the care he had taken of his dear daughter, and detained him a week at the cottage, bestowing upon him every mark of attention and hospi¬ tality; the faithful guide also received ample testimony of his countryman's thanks «and kindness. Adelaide took a grateful leave of the good father, and put a ring of value up¬ on his finger. " Charming signora ! M he said, " father Anselm has no occasion for these extrin¬ sic ornaments; he sets no estimate upon them, but he will prize this—it is the gift of esteem, from goodness and im- maculate innocence/' She handsomely rewarded the Swiss Ypr,, ii. с for
for his zealous services, and with some difficulty prevailed upon his enthusiastic spirit to receive her acknowledgment
CHAP-
CHAPTER IIL
We shall now leave Adelaide to calm the perturbation of her mind in the bo¬ .som of friendship, and return to llimiiti Castle. After tbe tumult of passion and de¬ spair, which led the count to insult tbe respected object of his affection, reason displayed in painful imagery the enor¬ mity of his conduct towards the most virtuous of her sex. Let not the reader view the count Ri¬ mini in tbe detestable light of a seducer; to such a crime he was a stranger, and his soul would have revolted with horror at tbe premeditation of an act so hreeem- с 2 cileable
cileable with his principles. It has been observed, his affections were ardent, and his sensibility ever subject to extremes. He had generously offered to sacrifice fortune, and bestow his hand ; but the steady sense of honour in Adelaide could not be subdued. The death of a beloved motlier, the approach of an unhappy marriage, the influence of an attachment that knew no bounds, and the immedi¬ ate separtion from the object of it, had deprived him of every degree of self-coub mand. When she left him, the dignity, firm¬ ness;, yet mÛdriess of Adelaide's manner, were impressed upon him, recalled his banished reason, and if possible raised Iris estimation òf her character. After a feverish night, occasioned by the mental agonies he suffered, he en¬ deavoured to caíra his feelings to meet her, and to implore that forgiveness from her that he could not grant to himself. He entered the breakfast-room, ex· pecting
... ·- * pecting to find her : it was her usual custom to be ready to receive him. He waited a considerable time, anxiously wishing, yet fearing her appearance. At length suspense was insufferable; he rung the bell, and madame Arbino en¬ tered the room. « My good nurse, does signora Blan¬ chard know that breakfast waits for her?" ·* Signora is not at home— n She paused. *' My lord, you must be prepared—she has left the castle." " Left the castle i w he wildly echoed. 44 Signora, you know, my lord, was obliged to go-^ ---- * '" Go where ?" he impatiently de¬ manded. u To her friends, my lord, to Switzer¬ land; and here is a letter she desired ine to give to you when you inquired for her. n He held out his hand, but did not re- c $ ceive
ceive it. The paleness of death over¬ spread his countenance, the big drops stood upon his forehead, a deep-fetched sigh escaped him, and he fainted in the arms of his terrified nurse. Every means being quickly used to restore him, the suspended faeidties re¬ sumed their powers, but only to inflict fresh tortures upon his feelings. He a»sked for the letter ; he read it, and detested himself. Madame Arbino exerted her tenderness to sooth his mind, but it admitted of no alleviation. His having obliged her to fly from him, and the terrors he felt for her safety on tbe journey, distracted his peace and health. He was seized with a fever, anel during the first stages of it, the frenzy of his mind produced violent symptoms. Tired nature was at last unable for the conflict, and he sunk into that state in which it was sometimes doubtful whe¬ ther life or death prevailed. ín
In this criticai situation he remained nearly three weeks; the soul, suspended, as it were, between time and eternity, and loth to quit its beautiful mansion, still lingered on its earthly confines. At length the natural strength of a good constitution, unimpaired by any mode of excess, the best medical aid, and the un¬ wearied attentions of his worthy precep¬ tor and nurse, contributed to support him through the malady, and restore him to the prospect of returning health. The divine exhortations of his dear abate had calmed his mind, and the as¬ surance that Adelaide had been protect¬ ed on her journey, and was safe with her friends, chiefly produced this dispo¬ sition. During his illness, his uncle, the car¬ dinal, frequently visited him—but from motives of interest, more than the ties of consanguinity or affection. His nephew was the wealthiest nobleman in Italy, с 4 and
and in the event of his death, or the non- fulfilment of his engagement, the bulk of his fortune, as has been stated, fell by will to his cousin's possession : at the same time, a clause was inserted by the lute count, that should signora Valetta fail to abide by the contract, liis son was then absolved of all obligation vi mlever, and that he «should possess and bequeath his fortune to whom and in what manner be should be disposed, While convalescence was slowly es- ť-blbhing its influence through his de¬ biliti* ted system, and tbe sorrows of a hopeless passion bad sunk into indiffer- ence for life and calm despair, he was reclining upon a couch, with his eye fixed upon a beautiful prospect of the Apennines, drawn by the hand of Ade¬ laide, under his masterly instructions. To him the performance was invalu¬ able ; he had it framed, and it was now suspended before him. The painful and melancholy
melancholy reflections which the con¬ templation of the piece excited were suddenly disturbed by the announcement of his uncle. A more than usual gloom sat upon hh naturally saturnine features, and to a so¬ lemn and unbending deportment were added an austerity of maimers more cal¬ culated to confirm the terrors of the des¬ ponding sinner, than to communicate hope by a Christian-like aspect. · After his iuquiries.as to the health of his nephew, he sat for some minutes in gloomy silence.—** I have received let¬ ters from Naples/* He paused. A sudden chillness.seiz¬ ed the languiel frame of the count.— " How is my cousin ?" he fbintly said, dreading to learn the time of her expect¬ ed arrival. " Your cousin has forfeited my affec¬ tion—she has offended me beyond re¬ conciliation ! 1 shall no more cherish с 5 her
her as a daughter; I abandon her from this moment, and my pardon I withhold for ever !" " Dreadful anathema!" said the count ** It is well for my cousin it reaches not beyond the narrow precincts of this world: but there is an appeal to be made for pardon, and to timi tribunal whose decisions are guided by mercy, justice, ший wisdom." The cardinal threw a look of sullen displeasure at his nephew. " What then is the nature of my cou¬ sin's offence ?" *' She has been guilty in swerving from tiiat obedienee which is Ute first duty of a child towards a parent ; she lias set at defiance that authority which it was my right to exercise over her. She has broken an engagement she ought te) have considered sacred : she lias mar¬ ried without my knowledge—disap- poinfod me in the object of my wishes, and
and frustrated that alliance my brother and I projected for the advantage of yoa both. You are therefore tree, and most probably you rejoice in an event that re¬ leases you from an obligation, in which ï questioned your disposition to fulfil it with that inclination duty demanded of you." ** You are therefore free f' itili vibrat¬ ed upon the counťs ear, and excited a tumult of indescribable sensations. Sud¬ den joy agitated his frame, and quick¬ ened the languid pulsation ; the blood rushed through its channels, rested for a moment upon his glowing cheek, and «as instantly was succeeded by the pale¬ as of death. Magic words!—they were like pardon to the wretch whose neck already felt the fatal cord. It was life to his expiring hopes—it was light fremi heaven to his benighted happiness. He combated his emotions, and col- c (i lected
lected the powers of his mind,—" Yes, sir, you judge right," replied the count. * k I am incapable of dissimulation : I heartily rejoice at being released from a bond in wliich my affections and my will had no share, and which excluded every hope of domestic happiness. I rejoice also that Yaletta lias emancipated herself from the chains which you would have imposed upon her; they would have been equally heavy and uneasy. She has act¬ ed against your will, because you did not consult her wishes ; she has set aside your authority, because she questioned your right to extend it, as caprice or am¬ bition prompted you to sport with her desLiny ; she has broken an engagement in which she had no interest, formed in her infancy, and confirmed by parental riifour; anei she bas entered into a ma- «Г» trimonial alliance without your know¬ ledge and consent, because she was a- ware, that though her happiness might rest
rest upon it, she should never obtain it." The cardinal, influenced by his bigot- ted principles, his favour with the pope, and his haughty and inflexible temper, was little calculated to brook any oppo¬ sition to his will, and even to dissent in opinion from him was considered an in¬ sult to his dignity, vvhich this prouel pre¬ late never forgave. * ť Are you aware/' be said, with a stern countenances '* of the nature of those sa¬ cred eluties elue to parents, and the male¬ diction vvhich awaits those who fail to fulfil them ?—witli such there is no hope of mercy/' *' Your highness's gloomy doctrines are incompatible with my reason and better instruction. Von may deal out your anathemas em earth; but in heaven I believe there i'·* mercy anel parelon for thesinner wh«) with contrition and tho¬ rough repentance humbly re»>ts upon its unlimited
unlimited goodneiss. I am too well aware of all the moral and religious du¬ ties, to be ignorant of those especial ones, the indisputable claims of the authors of our being. I have in no instance of my life violated or ceased to acquit myself of them ; and this reflection is my best consolation fo? the loss of her who first cultivated my neason, and implanted my principles. My beloved mother was my friend ; to her I expressed every wish and eveiy sentiment ; she studied my ultimate happiness, eiireeted my judg¬ ment, cautiemed, counselled, and admo¬ nished me ; but İt never occurred to her that she had a right to sport with my feeling«*?, e>r cramp my intellect by exact¬ ing a blind obedienee to her authority. Her divine precepts are engraven upon my heart: they will influence me till the latest period of ivy existence, and her bright example shall be my criterion for all that is truly noble, virtuous, and right/' " You
" You have drawn a fine euloginm upon your mother," said the cardinal, with a forbidding smile, " beeause she cherished your romantic propensities. But where is the remembrance of your fatheťs virtues? have you consigned them to the vault with him ?" ** No," replied the eoum, with digni¬ ty, '* they can never cease to innuenee røe, while they have a monument in my breast ! I loved, I venerated mv father ! He had but one failing, that threw a «hade over his illustrious character, and to that failing he would have sacrificed the real happine-ss of his son : but Pro¬ vidence has interdicted the deed." The cardinal w«as chagr..ied—it was a heavy stroke upon him : his daughter had annulled her claims to her cousin's immense fortune—he was elisappointeei in her aggrandisement, aud frustrated in the long-ee>nct^ted union. Mortifice! at the independence of sentiment and free¬ dom
dorn of speech which the count had di¬ rected against him, he rose, and with a haughty air and cold heart took his leave, determined for the future to be very sparing in his civilities towards him. His daughter Valetta, tenacious of her influence in the world of fashion; and conscious of her beauty, and the slavery t)f praise she exacted around her, had been much admired and distinguished at the court of Naples. A young Neapolitan nobleman was at¬ tracted by her charms, her exterior ac¬ complishments, and fashionable 'levity. He had found the way to her preference by similarity of manners, a very hand¬ some figure, dissipated habits, and un¬ qualified flattery. She had bestowed herself upon this gay meteor of fashion, after a short intimacy, and in defiance of whatever might be the result Fortunately for her, she was left an ample provision by an aunt, independ¬ ent
ent of control. She had added the title of countess to her consequence, and her pride was pleased. Her vanity was daily fed by eulogies to her beauty r , and the voice of adulation proclaimed her fame. Thus giddy with praise, and hur¬ ried away by r the vortex of folly, she w r as callous to every feeling but the gratifica¬ tion she sought in her own fluctuating and irrational pursuits.
CHAP-
CHAPTER IV.
It would be in vain to attempt to de¬ scribe tbe agitation of feelings produced in the count by his uncle's unexpected and welcome intelligence A few mo¬ ments before he was lost in sorrow, ru¬ minating on the miseries of an inevitable union—the affections of his heart crush¬ ed—the refinements of his mind unshar¬ ed—-his hopes destroyed, and the charm of reciprocal tenderness and domestic joy annihilated for ever. Now the clouds of despair were broken, and as they dis¬ persed, gleams of hope opened before liim, and presented a scene of terrestrial happiness. 'The
The moment he was released, his heart flew vvith his wishes to the loved object who bounded them. As these transporting thoughts rilled his mind, the worthy abate was announced. Ever anxious for the health and welfare of his dear count, he perceived an unusual glow upon his cheek, and a sparkling joy dif¬ fused over his still-languid features. The abate inquired into the cause of this favourable appearance, and the count detailed the import and particulars of his uncle's visit. He declared his intention of going to Switzerland to solicit the hand of Adelaide.—" It is an attach¬ ment," he added, " founded upon her virtues, entwined with my destiny, and is inseparable from hers." The abate warmly approved of his choice; he was tenderly attached to her, and conceived her to possess all the ami¬ able and essential qualities congenial to the feelings and Uste of his pupil. He had
had deeply regretted the necessity that severed them, anel now he as heartily rejoiced in an event which removed the barrier that obstructed their happiness. A week had passed, anel the count was able to undertake the journey : joy dif¬ fused itself through his »system, and in¬ vigorated all the springs of health and motion. He informed madame Arbino of his intention to set off for Switzerland the following day. " Ah, niy lord !" «she saiel, with tears in her eyes, " vvhat will become of me? For twenty-five years I was never sepa¬ rated a day from your dear and noble mother, anel when you leave the castle I shall be lost." " You shall not be lost, my dear minse," said the count, taking her kindly by the hand ; ťí I »shall never part with you ; and if you are willing to accom¬ pany me, 1 shall consider you an acqui¬ sition on my journey. Can you make it
ît convenient to be ready to go to-mor¬ row ?" " Oh yes, my lord," said the good woman, overjoyed at the prospect of ac¬ companying him, " I shall be ready to attaid you at the time you name" Tiiey left the castle at an early hour. They conn n t need their journey under favourable auspices: the weather was mild, clear, and constant. It was the close of autumn, that solení η season of reflection, when travelling through the richest and most beautiful countries in Fiiirope, the scenery presents to the mind a sublime subject of contemplation. It was the death of vegetation: nature was disrobed of her luxuriant livery— the lifeless foliage сед ered the ground, and was agitated bv' the blast—the rust¬ ling cadence phut el upon ihe ear, and whispered the pensive truth, that man iu all bis glory must peristi too. The exteiuicd amphitheatre of the Л İps
Alps now displayed their elevated gran¬ deur. As they drove along the basis of a mountain, they were obscured by the thick forests of pine, fir, and oak, that threw their gloomy shades below. Sud¬ denly a vista opened upon the astonish- ^il eye, whieh exhibited lofty buildings, romantic cottages, rural industry, and cultivated nature, mingling with objects of impervious wildness. The count was provided with the best guides and faithful servants : every road had been pursued that could render his journey easy or expeditious. The na¬ tive mountains were near n hieb enclosed the valley where stood the humble and happy cot ; as they gained the last hill, and were descending the brow of it, it stood revealed in simple beauty. What were now the sensations that agitated the count ! As they entered the valley, he got out of the carriage, left madame Arbino in it, and desired the servants
servants to drive after. With a strength he had not felt since his illness, he crossed the valley, and was close to the cottage. No one appeared in front of it: he passed on, and walked round the orchard that was at the back of it. In the circuit he came to the other side, and had a full view î a glass door opened into a little lawn, and Adelaide was seated in the parlour-window. She was playing with, and fondly ca¬ ressing a lovely baby some months old, her namesake, and the first child of Agnes. He stood for some minutes and viewed her» Her golden hair, in rich profusion, carelessly fastened up, had partly fallen over her left shoulder. She kissed the baby, and raising her voice, she sung an Italian air with that pathos vvhich reach¬ ed the heart of the count. It was enough —he could command himself no longer, and hastily opening the little wicket, he entered the house. The
The glimpse of a stranger caught the ey r e of some one, and the parlour-door was instantly opened. Adelaide raised her head, and perceived the count ; an involuntary shriek escaped her. He darted towards her, and caught her and the infant together, whilst the faintness of death seized her, and she swooned in his arms. He w r as alarmed ; her friends flew to her assistance, and by their aid nature revived. She opened her eyes, and beheld the counťs anxious attentions.—" Ah, my lord !" she faintly said, " do you come to disturb the tranquillity which reason has established over my mind? Why do you haimt me ?—why do you forget what is due to yourself? It is in vain— it is fruitless; you know me too well, my lord. I need hardly repeat that my principles and my resolution are fixed— beyond your power to change them." " No, my adored Adelaide! I come not
not to molest your peace, nor madly attempt to shake your principles—prin¬ ciples on whicli I have founded my es¬ teem, my admiration, and unchangeable «affection ; I come to offer you my hand —a hand free, released from all ties, un¬ deserving of yours, but unstained with dishonour, and devoted to you/ 1 Then taking the hand of Glandolph, he informed him of his cousin's marriage, and that by the event he had hoped the obstacle to his wishes was removed. He added—" In the madness of an af¬ fection that had no bounds, my mind consumed with sorrow for the death of my mother, and driven to despair bj r se¬ paration from her who could best supjîly her loss, I must confess that reason was overpowered in the conflict of passion. I shocked her whose virtues are exem¬ plary—whose refined sense of honour is exalted, and whose intellectual excellence is beyond her years. I apply to you, sir, VOL. II. D for
for your approbation to a union which, from the knowledge I have of myself, I find all my happiness depends upon. »She holds my heart; I offer all I have to 1 es to w —my hand, wealth, and title; and if I held the empire of the worid, she shtmld share it vvith me," 44 From a person of your rank, my lord, your offer to my humble daughter consequently involves on your side many sacrifices ; it is great, generous, and con¬ descending. Yet, my lord, title, wealth, and power, however elevated and con- spicuous, are not the steps by w hich we rise to heaven, or substantiate happiness on earth. Adelaide Blanchard, the daugh¬ ter of the friend of my life, is as ill cal¬ culated, from lier simple education, to move in the circles of rank and fashion, as her v irtues and purity of mind are in¬ capable· of mingling with their vices anei absurdities, 1 am no cynic: virtue is confined to no class; but I look for it where
where it is most frequently to be found. I am disposed to judge charitably—I am mistrustful from necessity, and conclude from truth. From your late conduct, winch obliged my Adelaide to tly the noble roof where she liad been so gene¬ rously, so tenderly cherished, I infer no¬ thing to decide upon your character ; my estimate was made, and I have not sub¬ tracted from its value. He who cannot »spare something for the ardour of youth» the ascendancy of passion, the nature of circumstances, and the extent of tempta¬ tion, is poorly qualified to do justice to his kind, or establish his own reputation for «sagacity and knowledge. You have, my lord, offered your noble hand, in de¬ fiance of the contumely of a world, te> the daughter of a cottager in Switzer¬ land : your generosity, disinterestedness, and contempt for the mutual advan¬ tages of birth and fortune*, are seldom pre- eedented: but that cottagei, my depart- n 3 ed
ed friend, was rich in virtues, inflexible in the soundness of his principles, enlighten¬ ed in his mind, and independent of all differences of rank, save that which en¬ titles ns only to pre-eminence, superio¬ rity of virtue ; and sooner would he have «seen tbe fair blossom of his hopes drudge for the bread of life beyond the strength of feminine delicacy, than ascend the bed of grandeur, when the authority of the husband was to be perverted by a tyrant or sensualist into a source of her future; misery. I give you my consent when you obtain my daughter's : but re¬ member, my lord, her real happiness is my object. Should this important event take place, it is not in your high des¬ tiny, the title that gilds your name, your ample fortune, nor the pomp and page¬ antry' of state, that I rest her felicity; no, my r lord, it is on a surer basi.s—the many and eminent qualities which adorn your character. I am no stranger to iti it
it has been justly portrayed by a band highly capable of tracing every linea¬ ment. Your filial affection, and the dis¬ charge of all the tender and sacred du¬ ties it implies, have ensured your lasting praise; and that man who on the the- atre of life has played well his part as a good son, is sure to shine in all others, where the moral and religious obligations rest upon/' " Would to God, sir, I could per¬ suade myself I deserve the high calcula¬ tion you have made of my character! but, íulas í I feel that all my duties have ex¬ acted no more from me than the gratifi¬ cation of my own feelings. I was an af¬ fectionate son, because my all-channing mother was the object that constituted my happiness; I love virtue, because I find my profit in it ; I have attached myself to the wise and .good, from the associated pleasure they have ever afford¬ ed me; I have endeavoured to discharge D 3 the
the religious and relative dutie.s which the Catholic spirit of Christianity en- f brees-—liad 1 neglected them, I felt I should be ill at ease with myself; I love your charming daughter because she is amiable and virtuous, and I offer her my hand, as I find death vvould be more welcome than life without her, I leave you then, sir, to decide upon the nature of that excellence on which you ce>nde- scend to erect your approbation ; 1 feel that it is narrow, and the principle self- interest—without tebi, and without merit." " And he who vvould subvert, his rea¬ son by the wild hypothesis that he can act upon any other principle than that of self-love, is leading himself into a laby¬ rinth frou ι which he will not be able to extricate himself. Tho good and the bad seek alike that gratification which is in unison to their virtues and vices; and as virtue and v'<"e are not monemolies,. ali
all ranks may t hoose and act from the decision. There seem certain propensi¬ ties inherent in the disposition of man, which, with a due portion of reason, may be turned to the advantage or in¬ jury of his kind, in proportion to the unprescribed will and latitude for action. Let us, шу lord, avoid the dangerous influence of predestination : om* actions ought to arise from the conviction of what is right, and not to madly attempt to shekel nor defend ourselves from the punishment elue to crime underneath the doctrine of tbe irresistible decree of Omnipotent will." " But, sir, if our actions are the result of inherent propensities that strengthen in time into those passions which form the leading features of our characters, there mu í be a bidelen and irresistible impube, thai amounts to a predestinated fate/* " Whether the prominent events of D 4 our
onr lives are predetermined or not, my lonkappears to me more a matter of learn¬ ed disquisition than profitable inquiry. Inherent nrcdilections do not always form the character. The page of history and of private biography exhibit precedenta of the human heart having been entwin¬ ed with the fibres of every vicious pro¬ pensity, yet the influence of reason has enabled such characters to subdue the radical depravity of their natures, and arrive at the highest degree of perfection that mortality admits of. My hur/. ble degree in the scale of lire has placed me beyond tlie pale of learning-^-tbe schisms of the speculative—the politics and the objects of ambition which render the lives of the higher orders of the commu¬ nity a scene of turbulent action, eager expectation, frustrated schemes, disap¬ pointed views, and fallacious enjoyment. Life is a short term—its business virtue, and the effect universal good. For vvhat purpose»,
purpose, my lord, are we to fritter away the few, the ι η certain years of existence in vain speculations, empty theories, and undeterminable conclusions, in attempt¬ ing to maintain or disprove an invisible impulv that propels us to the perpetra¬ tion of guilt, or urges to acts of benevo¬ lence, heroic virtue, anel deeds of im¬ mortal praise ? That doctrine surely is most orthodox that teaches us to live virtuousìv, to contribute to the general good, and to en »su re us, at the end of onr mortal career, that happiness vvhich sur¬ passes all conception, and when the shades of death encompass us, opens a prospect of streaming glories and unfad¬ ing beatitude. The transcendant virtues of your illustrious mother are engraven in deep characters upon my mind ; anel while memorv exercises her function, they can never be erased. No abstract¬ ed reasoning can determine whether the countess was innate pcrfeetiuii, or l) 5 that
that she arriveel at eminence by the strong powers of her mind and the in¬ fallible light of reason : it is enough to know she re>se upon tbe horizon like the mild and resplendent orb of night, emer¬ ging from darkness to enlighten the be¬ nighted soul, to rouse the sensual slave of custom to emulative virtue, and in de¬ scribing her glorious orbit, convince an infatuated world that the beginning, the aim, and the end of our Hves, ought to be virtue, and consequently ultimate happiness. " Whether virtues and vices are here¬ ditary, I leave to the pen of genius to confute or exemplify: my humble sphere of observation inclines me to expect from virtuous parents virtuous progeny ; yet in many striking instances this has failed. Notwithstanding, my lord, I am strongly induced to believe that the rare qualities anel virtues of the countess are transmit¬ ted to her -son. Could I have selected the ■> ι
the virtues congenial to her own, and those essentially necessary to form the happiness of my Adelaide, like the bee, which instinctively culls the best, I should have extracted from your cha¬ racter. Judge then, my lord, of the extent of my approbation. In bestow¬ ing upon you this amiable maid, I have a higher duty to discharge than that of a parent only : she is tbe sacred pledge of my revered friend's indissoluble friendship. In his last moments be committed her to me», and I toe>k upon дпе to fulfil the duties that ceased with his life. Thus, my lord, I have commu¬ nicated my sentiments vvith candour and confidence, and must refer you to my beloved child for the - confirmation of that happiness whicli has been the object of your journey."
υ 6 CHAP-
CHAPTER V.
Whilst Glandolph had been speaking, the count hael listened with pleasure to the wisdom which, untaught, flowed from the mouth of this virtuous cotta¬ ger. In his euloginm upon his mother, drawn in terms particularly calculated to strike upon his wounded affections, bis feelings had become too painful te) suppress: he held his handkerchief to his face, and remained .silent for «senne time. The last words of the worthy man tended to calm his emotions, and revise him to the object nearest bis heart. He advanced towards her with a grace- fid
ful and modest air, and taking her band, anxiously solicited her consent to deter¬ mine his happiness.—" Say, shall this lovely hand be mine?" be softly said. " Too well you know the soul of Kimini is inseparable from yours; they are united by the purest, the meist exalted, and the tenderest of human affections. My beloved mother, in lier last hours, joined our hands, anel a kind Providence seems to sanction the deed." The blush of painful «sensibility suf¬ fused her cheek.—" Ah, my lord Í" she said, with a pensive air, " I will not at¬ tempt to disguise my heart—you are too well aware of the interest you have created in it; but such is ihe nature of the ехаНеч! esteem I feel for you, that I would gladly aelduce any argument ίο convince you that, in your generous of¬ fer of marriage to me, you are regardless of all obligation and duty towards your¬ self. My attachment is presumptive. but
but not selfish. The affections of the heart are beyond all cold and subtle con¬ troversy—not to be repelled ; but duty is voluntary, and vvith me it has ever kept pace with my most acute feelings. Could I induce you to relinquish the sa¬ crifice you are willing to make, believe me, my lord, I should feel supported by a consciousness of that duty which my gratitude tells me I particularly owe to you. Let me remind you, the effer¬ vescence of youthful passions dies away, and tlie fervid season is succeeded by the eool and sober one of reflection. How dear-bought then must appear the tran¬ sient joys, and how unavailing the re¬ gret excited by the many sacrifices they have involved! Consider your rank and fortune, and all the splendid advantages they encircle Weigh the merits of your character, the brilliant accomplish¬ ments of your mind, and all the amiable and conspicuous attributes of your heart. Would
Would you lavish such rarely-associated endowments upon the daughter of a cot¬ tager ? Ah, my lord ! what has the bumble Adelaide to bestow as equiva¬ lence? Nothing but a heart involunta¬ rily devoted to you, but te>o tenderly alive to your interest to have ever aspi¬ red to yours." " Ah! it is useless reasoning, my ami¬ able Adelaide; as soon may you hope- to succeed to divert the course of the Nile, arrest the planetary bodies in their revolving harmony, elarken the gioì ions source of their light and influence, and still the boisterous billows of the fluctu¬ ating ocean, as to attempt to annihilate', weaken, or alienate, that fixed ailection •my beart cherishes for you. Sav\ will you be mine? All my hopes—all my wishes—my future happiness, rest with you/* " Ask my dear father, 11 she faintly said. ί ï landol ph
Glandolph ro.se, and taking her trem¬ bling hand, put it within the counťs. — " She is yours, my lord, with the appro¬ bation of Heaven. In the confidence I repose in your virtues, I commit to your future protection the elearest pledge of a friendship that commenced from the cradle and was unvioiatcd through life. Her beauty might adorn a court, but her virtues would add splendour to a throne. Simplicity anel modesty are her characteristics. She has led her father's flocks to the mountains, anel mingled in the labours of the orchard and garden, and the fcstivit} r of the vintage; but her »strong and cultivated understanding, anei her sound and inflexible principles, render her an object of esteem and ad· l.ii ration." * k Happy, propitious moment!" ex¬ claimed the count ; " my fate is blessed! Tiiere is but one barrier between me anel decided happiness. Name that happy day tiiat shall unite ib ibr ever." Adelaide
Adelaiele vvas agitated, and remained silent, and the count, delicately alive to her feelings, aelelressed himself to the worthy patriarch of the family. The 1 count informed him his aunt, madame De Stallburg, vvas recovering from a dangerous illness, generated by sorrow for the death of his mother; and, «sine- that fatal event, she hael requested him to join her at Bern, as soon as the dis¬ ordered state of his mind woukl allow him to travel.—" She is no stranger to my late sufferings/* he added, " anel to the attachment that destroyed my peace. Your amiable daughter was dear to my mother, and, in her correspondence with my aunt, her charming Adelaide was of¬ ten the subject of her tenderness, and the theme of her praise, lender the» in¬ fluence of a friendship so tender ami sin¬ cere as that which e^xisteel between them, reciprocal joys and sorrows, anticipations and participations, were inseparable from it«
it. Madame De Stallburg is strongly impressed with all the amiable attributes that distinguish my Aelelaiele, and that she is the decided choice of .лу heart 1 have written to her the srep my cou¬ sin has taken, and that it has enabled me to hope to obtain the accomplishment of my wishes. My aunt will anxiously expect аь, and I am unwilling to expose my Adelaide to travel, when the weather assumes the asperous gloom of the ap¬ proaching winter. 1 must entreat you, dear sir, to fix the day that will bind us by the sacred rites of our holy church. I must tear myself from you in a fort night—but you will not delay my hap¬ piness till then? 1 ' " What do you say, niy Adelaide, to this day week?' »saiel r rlandolph: "shall it b" so? ' The mantling blood tinged the native rose vvith a deeper dye ; «she spoke not, but she blushed acquiescence. " Must
*' Must I then be your oracle, my dear chilei?" said the ge>od man, smiling, aw taking her in bis arms, pressed her to liis heart. " Ah î my beloved friend, my father, you have given me to the most amiable and generous of men ; but you are still my father, my protector, and my claims upon you can only end with my life." Glandolph felt his feelings painfully excited, anel the tears of pious friendship stole over his face. The faithful ma- dame Arbino was affectionate] ν wel- «/ coined by her dear signora, and all the kind family. * c Now, my lord," said the blooming Agnes, advancing towards him with mo¬ dest grace, " all preliminaries to happi¬ ness are «setlied, allow me to remind you to take refreshment." " Charming Agues," «said the count, " I feel little disposed for any thing but the society of my amiable fricmls, but I cannot resist your engaging attentions/' Ml
All the delicacies the cottage pro¬ duced were set before him. The hospi¬ table master entreated him to forget the sumptuous splendour of his palace, and, with the jocund humour that blended with genuine good-breeding, recom¬ mended to him Utopian felicity as bis only alternative. u Conceive yourself, my lord, a sim¬ ple swain, on the mountains of Uri, tending your goats, ploughing your fields, bending the bow, wrestling with strength, climbing the precipice, and re¬ turning to your cot after the labours of the day, to claim the recompence of all your toik—domestic enjoyment." " Happy state !" exclaimed the count;. " surely he is blessed who, disengaged from all the modes and forms of slavish grandeur, is actuated from the sympa¬ thies of his nature, the guidance of rea¬ son, and the dictates of conscience. Amidst the pomp and splendour of courts, the subtlety of politics, the fac¬ tion
lion of party, and the revelry of pleasure, the essence of true felicity is lost, mental reflection is annihilated, and life passes on without knowing ourselves, or inquir¬ ing into our motives of .action. All play their parts in masquerade, and artificial hearts and manners are all we have for genuine worth and virtue. How easily could I relinquish title, wealth, extended domains, and train of attendants, to en¬ joy that uninterrupted repose, rational jdelight, reciprocity of tender affections, and tliat heartfelt satisfaction which is your happy lot—the result of a life of reason, virtue, and purity ! I have vi¬ sited with my father and mother the most enlightened countries in Europe ; but I have found virtue in her fairest form in Switzerland, and wisdom and happiness in that cottage where first I learned to love." As he concluded with these words, hiá expressive eye rested upon Ade¬ laide ;
laide; she blushed what she felt, arid Glandolph smiled with pleasure at the romantic virtue of the count. The week previous to the nuptials was occupied by the kind landlord in consulting the amusement of his guest The achievements of the undaunted William Tell are ever to his brave coun¬ trymen a theme of exulting pride and glory. Every relic of the hero is pre¬ served with religious veneration, and shewn with enthusiastic praise. Glan¬ dolph proposed an excursion upon the lake which was the scene of his escape, and the means of his accomplishing the destruction of the Austrian tyrant. The count eagerly subscribed to the proposal. He took a lively interest in every thing that related to a country from which he dated his future happi¬ ness. The party set off in harmony. Ko¬ dolphus had left his darling boy with¬ out
out a mother's careful eye, and Agnes was induced to leave the baby that re¬ ceived from her its chief nourishment : yet no groundless fears, nor anticipation of evils that might happen, clouded á brow nor shaded the sunshine of their enjoyment. " This lake, my lord," said the hand¬ some and generous Rosmond, smiling, " we consider sacred to the manes of our immortal defender. His surprising agi¬ lity, like the native bouquetin, in climb¬ ing the steep and craggy rocks, and fear¬ lessly leaping the precipices where the foot of man liad never been, secured him against pursuit ; and, like the blood of that animal,* every drop that flowed in his patriotic veins was medicinal to the
the drooping spirits of his enslaved conn* tiy men." As he concluded, his fine countenance glowed with the love of country and the spii it of freedom. The count sur¬ veyed him whilst he hael been speaking, and thought he perceived the fonn and noble soul of a Hector.—" Could 1 he induced to believe in the transmigration of our immollai part," he saiel to himself, " I should conduele that the spirit of the Trojan hero had found its way to Switzerland, and animated the breast of Rosmond.—-I have feen his bow in the arsenal of Zurich," said the count ; " and whether it is identically so or not, I must confess, while I held it, I believed I felt a magic influence peiwade my boyish frame : ч\е\\ h the ardour vvhich heroic virtue ever inspires in the youth¬ ful and incon upted mind. I recollect iwy father said, v. ith an aich smile, ť He>lel it vvith faith, Cienieimne, and like the electrictd
electrical subtilty, its virtual spark will be conveyed by contact." " If we are to credit the many thing« related of him," said the naturally silent Anatte, but whose beautiful black eye flashed intelligence. " Jfr said Rodolphus, with feigned displeasure, whilst the smile of love be¬ trayed him. " I do not like that if; with the Spartans it implied much, and to their glory—with you, a Swiss matron, it indicates a want of faith and zeal in the chief article of your political creed/* So saying, he dipped his fingers in the water, and letting them fly, sprinkled the face of his blooming wife. " Give us your story, my dear Anatte," said the happy father-in-law. She bergan — ŕť If," but a sportive laugh arrested her, and she put her handker¬ chief before her tace, to avoid another christening. " What, again !" said Rodolphus, " I vol. η. к must
must punish you as a rebel ? and snatch¬ ing her to his breast, he imprinted an ardent kiss upon her smiling lips. " I long much for the recital," said tlie count. " You »shall have it from me, my lord," said Rodolphu»s, laughing; "I prohibit my wife, as a disaftecteel person, to name the deliverer of her country." " Ne>, no," said the count, stretching across tbe boat, and gentry pressing the hand of Anatte, i( we must have it from the lovely mouth thut began it. I am sure the cause of the hero will be best served, when his virtues are detailed by so charming and interesting a votaress." " I must be judicious in the use of my conjunctions,*' said Anatte, " lest I should draw upon myself thepunishment of another kiss." She cast her eye upon ber husband, who acknowledged its influence by an enraptured smile. " You
" You shall have one from me, as a reward? said the rural patriarch, smil¬ ing, '* if you tell a tale to the credit of our champion/' " Ah, my dear father ! your approba- tiem is the meed I crave/* she tenelerly said, anel resumed the thread of her little narrative :—■ '* The soul of Tell was particularly alive to all the moral anel social «sympa¬ thies, and the «sacred tie of friendship was probably the spur to instant venge¬ ance, if not the foundation of his heroic virtue. One day, as he sat at the door of his cottage, with the happy partner of Ins bosom, the venerable friend of his father's youth approached, led by his blooming granddi'iighter. Ah ' what was the dreadful spectacle as he drew near ! The man, who now supplied the place of a departed father, bleeding, in agony, his eyes destroyed, the sockets ex¬ hibiting a sight calculated to move even L 2 the
the heart of the tyrant who was the source of his misery. The crime of this unfortunate man was, that he would not disclose the place where his son was con¬ cealed, who, roused by the cruelties that were perpetrated upon his suffering countrymen, hael determined to join his friend Tell in opposing the yoke of ty¬ ranny, when the moment arrived that was favourable to their purpose. " The «satellites of the bru till governor were in ambush to crush and detect every effort of expiring liberty, and this virtu¬ ous old man was dragged before this minion of delegated cruelty, to glut his depraved soul with Swiss suñerings. — * Where is your son ?* he sternly de¬ manded.—' I know not ; and if I did, do you expect me to deliver him to you? Xo! I defy death f -—«Then we »shall try torture, or reveal your son's hiding* place/ He observed an invincible si¬ lence. * As one active in conspiring against
against legitimate power, I consign you to the punishment due to yonr crime.*—* * He, over whose head seventy years have rolled, and the infirmities of age bend to the earth, is little capable of active good or active evil ; but if they are crimes to have the feelings of a father, anxious in tiie preservation of his son—to have the peace and independence of his country at heart, and to wish to see it freed from oppression—then I am criminal, and de¬ serve all the tortures which the black soul of Gresler is so ingenious in devis¬ ing/—·* Away with him !' said the ty¬ rant : * he shall not die, but"deprive him of the means of seeing that son, whom his illegal measures conceal and stimulate to conspiracy/ ** The executors of his barbarity were at hand ; he was instantly despoiled of vi^n, and turned adrift to all the an¬ guish of his fate. " At the deplorable condition of his n 3 aged
aged friend, the feelings of Tell burst forth vvith vengeful but virtuous energy ; and grasping his bow, he exclaimeel—*By the skill that guided this—by the arrow that never missed its aim—by all the lufľerings of aged worth—-and by the love í bear my injured country! I swear to avenge its wrongs—to crush the tyrant —to live to establish its glory and inde¬ pendence, or perish with Helvetic li¬ berty !' So saying, he embraced his son, took an affectionate leave of his wife, and recommending the venerable sufferer to her particular care, hastily left his cot¬ tage. He was joined by his friends, and by his valour and wisdom liberated his country, and accomplisheel that frec¬ ci л it has enjoyed for ages, and has so highly distinguished it amongst the na¬ tions of Europe/' " The story is interesting, like the beautiful narrator," said the count. " It is related vvitli so much of the spi¬ rit
rit and ardour of a Spartan matron," said llodolphus, laughing, " that I be¬ lieve I must takeoff the embargo/' ** Your recital is correct ; you have an excellent memory, my dear Anatte," said Glandolph : " where did you learn it Г " When a child, my dear father, Blan¬ chard conveyed the aftecting tale, to be¬ guile the languor which a serious illness had occasioned me. But I have been unguarded/' she said, observing a tear steal over Adelaide's cheek; and Ros- mond, who sat on her right hand, ten¬ derly kissed it off. The boat now entered a little cove, over which the projecting cliñs nearly met, and formed a kind of arch. A chain of dark rocks on each side of the water terminated in a subterraneous cave, and precluded the possibility, or indeed the inclination, to proceed farther, as the black and still element, the chilling damp, к 4 and
and «striking gloom that prevailed, exhi¬ bited to th'· mental eye all the horrors of those regions so elegantly and inge¬ niously described in classic fiction. The e elio was loud and clear. i? You ought to hdV e hael vour flageo¬ le t, Rodolphus," »said his fatlier. ** lam gbd, sir, I have anticipated yonr wishes ; I have it here, and shall w ilhngly attempt to afford a little grati¬ ficatie n." He played several beautiful wild airs, expressive of the love of liberty, of Swiss virtue and simplicity. The echo, like magic, reverberated the sounds, and as the shadow faithful to tbe substance, fol¬ lowed inseparably true. They left the gloomy cavern, and row¬ ing by the bai dis of the lake, the encir¬ cling mountains of St. Gothard display¬ ed their striking grandeur. Here were m in »led the sublime scenes of nature with the lively prospects of cultivation and
and art. On one hill was seen from the basis progressive industry, till tbe top was crowned with cottages, garde ш, corn-fields, vegetation, and rural beauty, A lofty eminence exhibited its impend¬ ing, dark, impenetrable, and gloomy fo¬ rests; and the paths below, from the pro¬ jecting horrors, seemed to leael to ban¬ ditti and death. Next rose a huge and barren rock, from whose rugged sules rushed the impetuous cataract, anel dash¬ ing fremi cliff to cliff İn foaming and sparkling grandeur, fell purified by its violence into the soft murmuring stream below. The hot-blooded chatnoi.*. »scour¬ ing the precipices—the hare no sooneT seen than lost—the white fox slyly marking its prey—and the distant Alps obscuring the horizon, formed this granel and interesting see-nery. The count was delighted with the aquatic excursion— 4k Ah !" In 1 sighetl to himself, " such vvere the happy scenes i L 5 eir\<ì\t\l
enjoyed with my beloved mother, on the soft waters of the Arno." The wisdom, independence, and bene¬ volent manners of the men, and tbe mo¬ dest and artless graces of the females, calleil forth the energy of that romantic virtue which marked his character ; and turning to madame Arbino, whom every one respected for her worth, he exclaim¬ eel—■'* My good nurse, if there is a sub¬ ject more worthy than another of the sublime pencil of Kubens, it is tbe pic* ttircsque and striking object»» that sur¬ round us. All the social and moral vir¬ tues dwell here ; and if there is a heaven on earth, it is in Switzerland." " True 1 , my lord : ever)' thing that is gooel and happy seems to be found in thibi'harimng л alley; but in every conn- try there is a heaven on earth for the good." " You are right ; you remind me we < reate our own heaven here.*' In
tn good spirits they arrived at the cottage, and with good appetites tö par¬ take of tbe plenty it presented.
E α CHAP-
CHAPTER VL
The auspicious hour arrived that was to unite the virtuous lovers. The family of Glandolph and the esteemed friends of Blanchard were assembled to witness the ceremony. The count waited, and Adelaide appeared with Agnes and Anatte. Though title, wealth, and ho¬ nours were to be hers, no distinguishing false ornament intruded upon her native beauties. A muslin robe was her dress; her golden hair, in luxuriant beauty, was her coronet ; anei though jewels in variety, and habits of rich and modish splendour filled her wardrobe, they were not
not exhibited. One ornament, and that only she considered such, gave lustre to her appearance—the miniature of her beloved countess rested upon her bosom, The count surveyed her with internal delight ; never, when dressed in the cos¬ tume of fashion—when accompanying his mother in the brilliant circles of rank, did she appear so natively charming. The sacred rites were performed, and the humble Adelaide was now a coun¬ tess. The count had sacrificed himself for a shepherdess, but he was tbe happi¬ est of men. They returned to the cottage 1 , that now was all bustle and joy. No slavish magnificence was there, ne>r studied re¬ finements of luxury : the table of Glan¬ dolph presented plenty, variety, delicacy, and taste. The day was spent in happy participations, anel the evening closed with enjoyment and mutual breathings for each other s happiness. The
The following week was dedicated to the pleasures of friendship and domestic enjoyment. The count felt strongly at¬ tached to this virtuous family, and the lovely little Kodolphus, now about six¬ teen months old, had fondly engaged his affection. The countess felt all that felicity wliich a union with the beloved object of a virtuous passion can bestow. Rank, wealth, and power, were advantages whieh she considered were chiefly täube employed for the good of others; but her dear count was exclusively her own, con*- .stituted her happiness, and bounded her wishes. Unalloyed felicity is incompatible with the frailties of our nature ; the insuffi¬ ciency of enjoyments, or the imperfect capacity for enjoying, precludes the pos¬ sibility of unmingled delight Amidst Iter joys and elevation of fortune, the besom of Adelaide had its alloy ; her be¬ loved
loved father did ne>t witness her felicity, and her sister was lost to her for ever. Tbe morn arrived that was fixed for their departure ; the carriage was at the dex>r, and the servants in waiting. The feelings excited on such occasions filled every be)som. The count informed his worthy friend, he should spend the win¬ ter witìi his aunt in Bern, anil in the spring he should again visit his happy cottage. " But, my dear sir, you must promise to accompany me to my estate on the lake of Geneva ; it was the favourite residence of my mother, and I hope to enjoy vvith my Aelelaiele that pure and tender felicity that was the happy lot of my revereel parents." Adelaide threw her arms round his neck, and shed a torrent of tears. u My eiear child, under all the changes of this probationary state 1 , you vv ill al¬ ways be the same to the heart of your father
father. Dry up your tears: nothing could induce me to leave my children ; but as you are one of them, I promise yo« to aeeept of tlie eounťs invite- Ιιαιι/' This soothed the weeping countess; she embraced her dear friends, and tak¬ ing her little name-daughter in her arms, kissed it, pressed it to her bo.som, and mt its sweet face with her tears. Madame Arbino was in the carriage. The countess still lingered with the friends of her youth. The count saw her struggle, and taking the baby that clung to her neck, he kissed it, and gave it te> the sorrowful mother. He saluted her and her charming sister, shook hands with his v aided friends, and taking the t tm ntc^s İn hh arms, lifted her into the e*-rri. ¿¿i. 'i h« 1 postillions were mount* td, and all vvere riady ibr instant depar¬ ture,—-" Adieu, mv beloved father!" ft-dd the counter·.; she could utter no more-—her emotion·» ovei came her, and they
they rapidly commenced their jour¬ ney. Neither elevation of rank, nor acqui¬ sition of fortune, nor distance of place, nor length of time, could effect a change in the principles and affections of Ade¬ laide. Her mind was superior to the fri¬ volous and perishable objects of female ambition ; her attachments were the only source of her enjoyments, and when she once loved, she loved for ever. Ko won¬ der then her heart was wrung when she left the friends of her earliest years— friends, whose virtues cemented the ties that bound them together, and such as are never met with in tbe gay and un¬ feeling circles of folly and fashion. But Adelaide is not the accomplished heroine of a moelern novel—she is delineated only the child of reason, firmness, and true dignity. For some time her feelings were poig¬ nant. The count oifered no reasoning that militated against the affections of the
the heart; his own were too ardent to be reduced to the sober measure of nhleg- matic natures, and he conceived it im¬ possible to limit tbe affections, or love by rule. He was anxiously alive to the emotions that agitated her, though heat- tempted no argument to depreciate them. He encircled her in his arms f and kissed the soft cheek that was moisten¬ ed with the tears of friendship. The charm of an exalted attachment can only lie felt by those refined natures eapacitated for it. The counťs tender embrace effected more than all the speci¬ ous logic could have done in detailing the unprofitableness of sorrow, and the too-often fatal consequences of unre¬ st *· med feelings. As they travelled not in quest of ad·* ventures, their journey was productive of no incident, and they arrived in Bern, at the «splendid mansion of madame De Stallburg. When .she appeared, every bosom was agitated.
agitated. The count saw again his he- loved mother; Adelaide lamented her ever dear countess ; and madame De Stallburg wept to the memory of the friend of her youth. When the conflict of feelings had sub¬ sided, the count introduced his bride.— " Here is my Adelaide ; to her charac¬ ter you are no stranger/' " No," saitl his aunt, viewing her with ά mixture of wonder and delight ; " and if any thing can augment my admira¬ tion and esteem, it must be a familiar acquaintance with those virtues which so strongly engaged the affection of my illustrious and lamented sister." Tears filled the eyes of the countess ; and madame De Stall burg, no less affect¬ ed, tenderly embraced her. They were introduced to the general. He had bee»n a brave and active officer, and highly distinguished for his zeal and eminent services. The good of hi.s country
country had been his ambition, and, both in a military and civil capacity, he had gained universal approbation and es¬ teem. At different periods of his life he had been abroad, had endured the fatigues of campaigns, the changes of climates, and all the hardships of his un¬ settled profession. His constitution was now broken ; he yielded to the necessity, and declined the weight of those public appointments which he had filled with so much credit and honour. He had a numerous and lovely family; his for¬ tune was ample; he adored his wife; and he gave himself up to all the charms of domestic enjoyment. As an invalid» he seldom vidted; but madame De Stallburg frequented the first circles in Bern, and her spacious and well-con* ducted mansion was at stated times the receptacle of elegance, taste, and selec¬ tion. The death of her angelic sister had stabbed her peace ; and with all her strong
strong powers of mind, she feit the wound, if not mortal, eould never close. Grief had preyed upon her heart, and hael affected her health. During that seasem of affliction, all company had been declined ; but the arrival of her n·. phew anei his bride ope¬ rated powerfully to revive her, and sti¬ mulate her to the necessity of entering again those circles where she shone so bright an ornament. Бу degrees she ventured to learn the particulars of the death of her sister. The painful detail was deprived of its poignancy, by the interesting and pathe¬ tic manner in which the countess re¬ lated it. On these occasions they mingled their tears together. Reciprocal sejrrows ge¬ nerate friendship, when tlie gay liours spent in convivial enjoy uu nt pass away and leave scarcely a trace on the me¬ mory. Every day disclosed the modest virtues
virtues of the countess. A charm ac- companieel her that found the way to all hearts, and fastened upon the amiable madame De Stallburg's. Visiting and parties now occupied more of her time than the generally al¬ lowed. Her avocations were many and important; but there are duties that militate against cur habits, which, never¬ theless, must be complied with. Sacri¬ fices of inclination are taxes levied upon our philanthropy, to be paid towards the general fund of accommodation and mutual dependence. Madame De Stall- burg discharged the claims. Visits and invitations poured in from all quarters. Fortune, fashion, and curi¬ osity, were excited ; every one was eager to see the beautiful countess, and every one was gratified when they beheld her. Her modesty anel native ease, the calm philosophy with vvhich she viewed the fluttering scenes around her, the sweet¬ ness
ness of her manners, and the charms of her person, vvere the theme of praise and admiration. But the voice of 4 adulation had no music for Adelaide. Frequently, when ail eyes were upon her, she saw no one—the gentle pressure of the counťs hand, or a soft glance from his expres¬ sive eye 1 , rive tted her whole soul. Madame De Stallburg and the count and countess vvere present at a splendid assembly, held by one of tbe first fami¬ lies in Bern. Two elegant ycung men entered the crowded saloon. Their air and appearance announced their rank and fashion ; and the buzz of female ad- miration instantly spread through the room, and was evidently directed to¬ wards one of them in particular. " Come/' said one of them, *' eome and see this beautiful countess, whom all tongues praise, and all eyes devour. Look at that bewitching meidest air, the blushing cheek, the losy mouth, the k)V ely
lovely eyes ! By Heaven. Alphonso ! such a woman as this would half recon¬ cile one to the yoke of matrimony/' *' For a month perhaps/' said his gay- associate, laughing. ♦* But I must see her ; vvho is she ?" " The countess Rimini/' replied the other. Her face had been averted from the one vvho had not seen her before, and who eagerly wished to obtain a view of her. She was approaching, leaning upon the counťs arm, and was listening with an air of delight to his conversation. As she drew near, " the countess Ri¬ mini" struck upon her ear, though utter¬ ed in a suppressed voice. She raised her head, and her eyes encountered hb \\ ho bad been so anxious to see her. The· blood rushed to his cheek, mount¬ ed to his eye, v ' suddenly receded, and left the paleness of death. 4i What, caught already? and so deep- iy
ly too?" said his companion, observing the transitions of his complexion. " Faith, Montalvo, thh h no game for you, spoils¬ man as ) on are ; and though leagued vvith success as you generally boast, by my »semi ' 1 defy you, with all your »sys¬ tem of ait and -stratagem, to gain an inch of ground here. The countess is never seen without the count—he is her sun ; and as his beautiful »satellite she adheres inseparably faithlul/ The gay sally of his comrade was lost. He vva*» nothing aware of tbe different reflections that occupied him at the mo¬ ment ; and for the first time shame, if nut conscience, flushed the cheek, and dibconeerted the habitual depravity of Montalvo, when he recognized in the person of the countess, the beautiful col tager of the mountains of »St. Go¬ thard. With the oblique eye that steals fiom detection, and a hasty eilbit, be eluded the obsi nation he had menimi But vol. Π Γ what
what language can define the feelings of Adelaide, when 1кг eye unconsci¬ ously resteel upon the man whom she was induced to believe had been the ruin of her sister, and had brought her father with sorrow to the grave! The blood rapidly Mowed, апед chilled through her frame in one instant. The count felt her agitation, and anxi- oiihly inquired what was the matter with her ? " Oh, ï am faint, my lord ; e'onvey nie hence." He was luckily joined by his aunt; and supporting her on both sides, they reached a private anti-chamber, when she fainted away. The count, ignorant of the shock she had Mittaillee!, was alarmed at her indis- position; and madame De Stallburg eontluding it vvas owing to the heat of the* rooms, got her home with all the haste her languor admitted of. A^ the count vvas no stranger to the melancholv
melancholy circumstances that hael sepa¬ rated her from her sister, she disclosed to him what occasioned her sudden ill¬ ness. In the cause of virtue the benevo¬ lence of the count was ever ready to in¬ duce him to take an enthusiastic inte¬ rest : how much more so would he be disposed, where the peace and affré¬ tions of his beloved Aelelaiele were in¬ volved ! But here was a case that pro¬ mised no redress, nor the means of ob¬ taining the certitude and extent of the evil : the count had not observed him, anel tho countess knew not his name?. " Ah ! would to God," she exclaim¬ ed, " I could find my loved Itosette ! Under any circumstances how gladly would I snatch her to my heart, pour the bahu of a sisters love into her wounded bosom, soften her sorrovv.s, anei baniŕdi the rccedloctions of error from her breast!" In the midst of her felicity, a train of f 2 melane-holy
melancholy reflections fastened upon her mind by the rencounter with Montalvo. But her love for the count was the sti¬ mulant that raised her above her private sorrows ; she concealed her uneasiness, and was happy in his presence. The eye of love is gifted with keen and pe¬ culiar powers of vision : the count saw through this medium, and nothing es- caped his vigilance. For some time he determined to avoid those brilliant circles where it was most likely she would be exposed again to meet vvith this enemy to her repose. Madame De Stallburg, ever alive to ihe sympathies of friendship and benevo¬ lence, participated in her feelings, and anxiously se>!H>-ht to divert them. As the countess had gone through the rou¬ tine of introduction anel public com¬ pany, sne selected for her parties at home those persons most congenial to the taste and manners of her niece. On
On these occasions the gallant general presided. His fund of intelligence, mar¬ tial graces, and sportive humour, though advanced in years, and oppressed vvith infirmities, delighted, and gained the ad¬ miration anel esteem of Adelaide. The noble old soldier had not lost bis gallan¬ try : youth and beauty charmed him ; but still more the attractions of a culti¬ vated and accomplisheel mind. Foi such a mental treasure in her who was to be the choice partner of his joys, the general sought in two sections of the globe, but found it not till he ar¬ rived at Florence, There the beauty of the lovely Victoria attracted him ; but her intellectual superiority, the graces of her mind, and the qualities of her heart, were the charms that fixed him. She became the happy wife of his bosom, and the mother of ten blooming child- ren. Ile vvas charmed with the coun¬ tess ; her beauty, her unconsciousness F 3 of
of it, her modesty, sweetness of disposi¬ tion, simplicity of manners, and sound sense, rendered her an object of his high¬ est admiration. He distinguished her by his attentions, and selected her on all occasions ; whilst she was no less gratified iu listening with pleasure to the varying attributes that marked him tbe soldier, the philanthropist, and the accomplished gentleman. Thus, in the happy circle of domestic and selected society, the time passed sweetly and swiftly on ; and the bosom of Aelelaide, if not without a wound, was assuaged by the endearing attentions of the count, and her kind friends.
CHAP-
CHAPTER VII. +* ^vf «v*sr #■*■ »Г ** ФЯГ *t ■# *#■# ***r
The rigour of the winter solstice vv as closed, and the vernal season was pre¬ paring its enlivening blessings to greet the revolving hemisphere. The count intended leaving Бегп the following week : in tbe mean time, madame De Stallburg was anxious that the countess shoulel be amused ; she had seen every thing that splendour and fashion, nature and art, could exhibit. On the borders of the Aar, in a gloomy and unfrequented forest, stood an old eastle, famous through the cenmtry for the legends attached to it. According г 4 to
to tradition, the lady of it had been mur¬ dered, and í ver after, dressed in all the coatti m e of her day, she haunted the re¬ cesses, und announced her visionary pre¬ sence bj the rust ling sound of her silken attire. Such are the tabs the ignorance of supeistition fiunishís us vvith, and Mich the tales vvhkh credulity and unenlight- entel reason are ever disposed to credit. Tlu* castle and its demiains were suifeied to fall to ruin and wîldne^s, as no one wab billing to purchase the property. As a matter of curiosity, madame De Stallburg proposed a party to visit this extraordinary mansion. They satisfied themselves the lady did not appear while then were present, and only lamented that the noble edifice and valuable pre¬ miste should moulder to decay, anel be swept away by the tide of time anel for¬ get fui ness. The party returned highly gratified, and
and as they entered Bern, their carriages separatee!. Madame De Stallburg ac¬ companied an olei friend, and the count and countess followed in her chariot. As they turned the corner of a street, min- «ide-el screams of terror vvere heard, and the coachman suddenly drew in his hordes, and stopped. The count inquired what was the matter, and he was'in¬ formed that a female vvith a child in her arms, in imprudently attempting to cross the street, had nearly been rode over. The countess, alarmed, eagerly asked if they were hurt ? The servants assurée! her they vvere not, anel pointed out the young woman to her. She percei v ed a mrl, agitated vvith the danger she hael О ' О " «.J escaped, and who helel a child, seeming¬ ly seven or eight months old, in her arms. She beckoned to her to approach, and as she elid ьо, the infant held out its arms, to be taken into the carnage. It vvas beautiful. The counter fixed hen* ι 5 v\ es
eyes upon it—" Ah ! what do I see? my Rosette !" " No, madam," said the simple girl, ** her name is Adelaide ; but her mam¬ ma is called Rosette." * 6 My Goei! merciful and inscrutable in thy ways!" exclaimed the agitated countess, " direct and guide me to my sister," The count supported, and entreated lier to he calm.—" My affections are in- terwoven with yours-*—I anticipate your hopes, your fears ; but be collected, my Adelaide, and we shall follow the clue that premises to lead to discovery." He asked the girl where her mistress lived? and she replied—■" Only two streets fartlier ; but she is ill, and I am afraid, sir, you cannot see her." " Direct my servants, nevertheless, to the house." They stopped before tlie door of a bouse of mean description. The girl had
had preceded, and a res*pectable-looking elderly lady made her appearance. The count alighted, and supporting the trem¬ bling Adelaide, they were conducted in. He related the circumstance that had alarmed them, and requested to kr»ow if tbe lady, the mother of the infant, coniò be seen ? " I am afraid not, sir ; she is indis¬ posed, and sees no company." " Oh, my God ! am I misleading my¬ self?" said tbe countess, whose agitation was too great to conceal : " will you fa¬ vour me with her name." " Her name !" saiel the lady, and hesi¬ tated ; ** her name is— -Blanchard." " Blanchard !"' she wildly said, " bless¬ ed be the name of my father ! Ob, lead me to my sister— mv Bosette !" " Ah, madam! her health is very bad —we must be cautious." At that moment the door opened, and the girl ruque, ι eel the lady te> follow her F fi to
to the apartment of her mistress. The half-fainting Adelaide was supported by the count, and they entered the room. On a couch, half reclining, rested the: lovely and graceful form of the once- blooming Rosette. The plumpness öf beauty was gone, but the beautiful fi¬ gure still retained that symmetry and striking elegance that might have served as a model for the unrivalled chisel of Cleomenes. For the damask rose that in health richly glowed upon her spark¬ ling features, was seen the hectic fire which slowly but fatally undermines and consumes the principle of existence ; the large brilliant black eye, formerly ani¬ mated with joy, hope, and innocence, was lighted up with a treacherous en¬ ergy that foreboded decay ; a wild and feverish agitation sat upon her coun¬ tenance. The moment the door opened, her eye eagerly sought and fastened upon hex
her sister.—" Ah, merciful Providence ! I am right !" she exclaimed, in a wild tone; " it is my sister—my Adelaide.'" and in an instant they were locked in each other's arms. The sinking countess ivas supported by her apprehensions for her sister ; but the convulsed feelings and debilitated frame of Rosette sunk into temporary death. The restoratives promptly meû by her kind attendant revived the lan¬ guid powers of life ; and the anxious and soothing kindness of her sister re¬ called ber to all the conflict of sudden joy and fixed sorrow. Observing the count with steadfast attention, as he hung over her with ten¬ der solicitude, she took his hand, and •with a look in which were blended the amiable feelings of her heart with the anguish and fever of mental sufferings, she eagerly said—" Are you the hus¬ band of my Adelaide ?" " I am
" I am tlie happy, happy husband of your Adelaide, and tbe brother of her Rosette." " Ah ! I thought so. It is pnly a be¬ ing of superior mould, such as every tone and look bespeak you, that is cal¬ culated to mingle with the virtues of røy Adelaide. Happy, thrice happy sis¬ ter! ------ But my father—oh, my father? that is the question on which hangs my distracted peace ! Say that he lives, and that oa his paternal bosom the unhappy Rosette may expiate her errors, and find that rest and consolation which have fled from her wounded heart." As she ceased, she fixed her eyes upon her sister, with a look of indescribable terror and impatience. The agitated Adelaide could suppress her emotions no longer ; her face was drowned in tears, and her bosom rent with convulsive sighs. 44 What, then, is my beloved father dead Г
dead?" ehe said, in a frenzied tone. " Oh ! hide not the fatal truth—remove the torture of suspense from my dis¬ tracted «soul—Say, oh say, my sister, is my venerated father ------" " He is blessed—he is in heaven, my Rosette Y' At tliis «fetal confirmation of her fears, she clasped her hands in convulsive de¬ spair, and raising her eyes to heaven, ex¬ claimed— " Merciful God! pity, pardon me ! I have occasioned the death of my father Г As she uttered these words, she sunk again, without sense or motion, into the arms of her sister. For some days high fever and delirium prevailed. The best medical advice was procured: tlie countess never left her bed-side, but when dragged away by the count to take a short interval of rest, and he anxiously filled her place, joined by the unwearied attentions of her faith¬ ful
ful friend. The skill, the care, and un¬ remitting attendance with which she was suœunded, produced a favourable change. She revived, and her drooping soul seemed renovated by the affection and endearing attentions her sister stu¬ died to bestow. When she was thus so far recovered, madame De Stallburg requested the countess to remove her sister and her at¬ tendants to her house.—" You know, my dear niece," added this charming woman, " I grudge to lose a day of your society : my house is spacious, and can afford ample accommodation for your sis¬ ter's family, and we shall all be united." Under the roof of the benevolent ma- dame De Stallburg every means were sought to alleviate the malady, and di¬ vert the mental sufferings of the unfor¬ tunate Rosette : but the company of her belov.ed sister was the stimulant that supported the sinking system, and dif¬ fused
fused a tranquillizing opiate over her tortured mind. By imperceptible gra¬ dations she was enabled to bear the par¬ ticulars of her fatheťs death ; but the event sunk to her heart, and undermined the principle of health and peace. She listened with pleasure to the circum¬ stances that brought about her sister's exalted union, and dwelt upon it as the subject that beguiled her sorrows. In detached accounts, as her disordered feel¬ ings allowed her to proceed, she commu¬ nicated to her the fatal combination that had seided her ruin. The reader will please to advert to the foregoing history of Rosette, and unite the chain which carries on the accom¬ plishment of her misfortunes. It will be remembered, Montalvo, exulting in the success of his plans, carried off* his unsuspecting and devoted victim. He conveyed her to a beautiful villa, situated on a rising ground, and commanding all the
the picturesque beauty of the winding Aar and its enamelled banks. Here every thing conspired to bind the fillet of delusion over her eyes. The splendour of the mansion, the numerous domestics reaely to anticipate her looks and wishes, the rich dresses and costly -ornaments that were immediately pro- curtid for her, and, above all, the ardent passion, yet delicate and respectful de¬ portment of her artful betrayer, intoxi- eated lier senses, lulletl her reason ; and the ill-fated Rosette fell a sacrifice to her own weakness, and to the enchantment which perfidy had drawn around her. After her arrival, Montalvo informed her his mother was taken suddenly ill, and that he had just left her with symp¬ toms, which her physician affirmed pre¬ cluded the hope of her being abroad for a considerable time. He added, that she was too much interested to wish to de¬ lay their happiness, and requested that an
an immediate union might take place.— " In the event of my mothers recovery. be assured, my charming Recette, her first visit will be to the len ely wife of her delighted Alphonse), and to receive her to her friendship, who is the source of all his felicity," Deceitful language í treacherously adopted to impose upon her credulous youth, and her total ignorance of that subtle vice, whose machinations elude discovery, anel the practice of it hardly gains credit vvith the virtuous mind. A clergyman was procured to unite them, the ceremony was duly performed. Ro¬ lette was now secured in all she desired —the bewitching object of her ardent heart, and the means of raising her fa¬ mily from obscurity ; and Montalvo en¬ sured his prey in the betrayed and lost Rosette. Months glided on, and all was ecstacy and vistas of increasing and durable fe¬ licity.
hcity Time jirtnnised soon to proclaim her a mother. Montalvo aelored and anxiously attendee! hh beauteous spouse, and the best attendance was appointed ior her approaching confinement. The progress of vice consequently at¬ taches to it the miseries of the result. Soon were the phantoms of delight to vanish from the- eyes of Kosette —soon was she to be convinced, when too late, that the intoxicatiem of the senses, and the* internal testimony of virtue, are two «species of gratification, diametrically op¬ posite and irreconcileable. The period was drawing near that was to place before li' *, in striking charac¬ ters, the dreadful consequences of yield¬ ing to propensity. Reason, virtue, and religion, hand-in-hand and inseparable, were ready to flash their «sacred light up¬ on her slumbering prudence, and to wake her to all the pangs ol* remorse and a vir¬ tuous father's neglected precepts. Mark
Mark the means that vvere employ eel to effect tlie completion of villany, anel to allure the fateel object of sacrifice to security and confidence. The Protestant clergyman vvho had united them, vvith all the seeming «sanctity of his function¬ ary character, was one hackuiui m i very species of vice, anel versatile in 'пич liions expedients to promote it. He was the depraved minion of his master's tiecn- tiousnessalready mentioned. This worth¬ less emissary, under the mask uf the* sa¬ cred garb, had imposed upon the .sim¬ plicity of youth, the vanity of aspiring females, and the ignorance of unculti¬ vated intellect. Amply was he paid by his mas'er ibr his ministrv. not oidy in his servile, hut divine capacity : anel so vigilant hael he been in the course of his agency, that in no instance hael he failed te> procure for him the destined prey. The exqui¬ site beauty, sprightliness, and ппюсепсе. remlered
rendered the lovely shepherdess of St. Got hard no common victim, and double was to be the recompence of this active agent, when success crowned the wishes of the dissolute master. Both played their parts with equal talenti?, and the strata¬ gem of a clerical disguise, assumed by this sacrilegious wretch, concluded the melancholy piecc\ Nearly ten months had elapsed, when Rosette brought into the world the fruit of this unhallowed intercourse. It was a girl, and its baby-features were stamp¬ ed vvith every lineament of the beauty and exact resemblance to its mother, Tho flashing eye, the Grecian nose, the smiling mouth, and vivacious air, so strikingly characteristic in the bewitch¬ ing countenance of Rosette, vvere con¬ spicuous in her infant, Montalvo fondly caressed the sweet innocent.·*—Cruel author of its being! It will not rest the stigma of its birth upon
upon thy fame, when tiie fi/ď and deli¬ cate flower who brought it forth with anguish will be marked with e>bloquy, and, surcharged with another's crime, droop its beauteous head, and perish in the day spring of existence ! The nurse who attended her was the widow of a gentleman. Λ particular fate had brought two persons together, whose only faults, and ultimate misfor¬ tunes, were the ungen ernable benevo¬ lence of their hearts. Monsieur Le Sage was a Frenchman of high connexions, and once-ample fortune; but his gene¬ rosity and charity were the rocks on vvhich he had been wrecked. He was deserted by his relations as a man unde¬ serving of the gifts of fortune, because he had not the spirit te> appropriate them for his own use. He chose for his wife a native of Switzerland·—a young lady brought up in obscurity, but possessing all the amiable attributes of the heart, and
and the advantages of a strong, enlight¬ ened, and philosophic mind. They had no children, but they served as a prece¬ dent of conjugal felicity. Kothing pained their bosoms like the wants of the wretched, and no prudence could restrain their disposition to relieve them. Thus their property became daily involved, anel the worthy man died of a broken beart, when he perceived his finances exhausted, and that he had no provision to leave the amiable partner of his life. Madame Le Sage determined to submit to any degradation sooner than apply to her husband's relatives. She sought employment to attend ladies dur¬ ing their confinement. As her manners were genteel and amiable, and her bene¬ volent ν haractcr well known, she was fully employed and much esteemed. This respectable woman was engaged tor Rosette by the medical gentleman who was to attend her. The youth, beauty,
beauty, sweetness, and artless manner« of madame Mon tal vo, excited an inte¬ rest in the benevolent heart of her at¬ tendant, that prompted her to observa¬ tion and inquiry. She had been told that Montai vo had privately married her: but a sound judgment exercises its own faculties—gives credit in propor¬ tion to reason, and trusts not the fallacy of human appearances. She had heard repeatedly, that the son of the chief magis* rrte was profli¬ gate in his conduct, and a libertine with¬ out ! straint. Her suspicions vvere roused, and she gained sufficient intelligence to establish the fact that the unfortunate madame Mon tai vo was betrayed, and she deeply regretted the fatal security under which she reposed. However painful and ungrateful the task, this good woman considered it a duty to re¬ move the fillet that charmed her senses and shut out the infallible light of truth. vol. и. g Supportai
»Supported by youth and a fine con¬ stitution, Rosette rose from her ac- eauehimcnt with fresh and dazzling beauty. Montalvo was all transport and tenderness; and nothing was wanting to erown her felicity, but the pardon and presence of her beloved father and sister» By degrees the cautious and friendly hand of madame Le Sage removed the enchanted veil, and ail the evils of a stigmatized name, the pangs ofremor.se, and the horrors of despair, were exhi¬ bited before her, without one beam oí hope to cheer her drooping souk From that hour, all the enormity of her error flashed upon her mind: the tender love, the pious precepts, the anxious care, of an exemplary father, pressed upon her tortured memory. In this state of mental suffering «she sat, with the infant at her breast, when Montalvo entered the room. She re» proached him with his perfidy. He at¬ tempted,
tempted, with the ease and effrontery of habitual dissimulation, to persuade her that she listened to tales fabricated to destroy tbe happiness she might enjoy ; that her marriage was legal, and when a favourable crisis offered, his father »should be made acquainted with it. " Ah, treacherous man! think not ίο aeìd erime to crime, by a shameless sup¬ port of the villany you have practised upon me. Think of tbe sacrilegious imposture you basely employed against nie —think that the all-piercing eye of Heaven witnessed tlie black and perfi¬ dious deed—think and believe, also, that its equity will not let thy crime escape its vengeance any more than it will mine. Where are all thy protestations of love and honour?—the gay scenes yem gilded to draw me from duty? Where the ease and independence of my beloved father, with which you lured ine to destruction ? Fled for ever, with g 2 the
the deceitful breath that uttered them ! ЛЬ, Montalvo! dost thou not fear the awful voice of retribution ? Thou canst not ñy from it, nor stifle its dreadful threatenings ; an accusing spirit will pursue thee to thy haunts of vice—it will arrest thy gaiety in the tumultuous scenes of pleasure; and mark--all thy advantages of birth and fortune will not he able to procure -thee one* hour of peace. Thy -vices will be thy punish¬ ment, and the unhappy fate of the in¬ jured Rosette will visit thy bosom vvith a sting vvhich will baffle all thy powers to alleviate. Cruel and ungrateful man! ï loved thee dearly*—-ah, madly ! Coward like, thou hast taken advantage of my weakness, my youth, and my affection. Fatal passion, what has it co.st me? All tliat is truly estimable·—the unfailing satisfaction of an approving conscience. Ob, my send', where is thy hope? Where are the sacred duties I owed a pious
pious father, an exemplary sister, and myself? Sacrificed on the altar of un¬ hallowed passion/' As she uttered these last words, ex¬ hausted by the violence* of her feelings, she fell into a convulsed swoon. The dissipated Montalvo was too much accustomed to scenes of reproach, to he much affected by the distress in which he had involved his hapless victim. But there is a dignity, even in fallen virtue, that will rally rounel its frail votary, and strike the vicious soul with awe. For the first time he felt disconcerted, and unable, vvith all his powers of deception, to collect arguments to support his arti¬ fices, or lull the fatal truth to which «Rosette had been awakened. He snatch¬ ed the infant from her breast, and, ring¬ ing the bell for assistance, delivered it and its unfortunate mother to the care of her attendants, glael to be relieved from a scene in which his conscience had so little a part. G 3 This
Tliis was the last time reproach felţ from tlie mouth of Rosette; her gentle temper was unequal to suoli exertion. A peculiar pliability «had marked her disposition from infancy. Fatal pliabi* lity! a weakness that militates against reason, strength of intellect» and firm¬ ness of character. How mistakenly has it been construed into one of the amiable attributes of tlie female composition ! From the hour that disclosed her real «•situation, peace forsook her breast. When Montalvo appeared, she was drowned in tears; her lovely eyes no longer »sparkled with joy; tbe damask rose fled her cheek, and the canker- worm of sorrow substituted its pallid hua The luxuriance of beauty declined;, and the vivacious air, to captivating in Rosette, no longer animated her lovely form. Reduced to this state» what alterna·» tive was left her? The author of her ruin, though she now beheld him with horror,
horror, still clung to her heart : he was the father of her infant, and the source of her support. To live with him in a state of criminal intercourse was repug¬ nant to the purity of her mind. A hundred times she thought of returning to her beloved father, Rnd craving, on his tender bosom, pardon and consola¬ tion. Shame deterred her. She feared to enter her paternal cot—that happy cot, the asylum of virtue only. While this conflict passed in her mind, Montalvo took lodgings for her in Bern. He removed her to them, under the pre¬ tence that his father, with a party of gentlemen, were coming to spend some time at the villa, but, in fact, to facili¬ tate the desertion he meditated. The charms of her person, the sweet¬ ness of her manners» liad procured her attention which the satiated senses of Montalvo seldom bestowed; and his constancy was no small matter of wonder ci 4 amongst
amongst liis associates. But those beau* t\es which had excited his sensual pas- frwn were now blasted by him. The graceful form, the brilliant eye, the spor¬ tive air, no longer met him-—-tears, sighs, and silence, bespoke her «sufferings ; the speil was broken, and the ill-starred Ro¬ sette had now no charms for her faith¬ less betrayer. He paid off her lodgings, left а small лит of money for her, and withdrew (ami lier company. F< ľ some weeks she lived under all the pressure of despondency and bad health. Destitute of the means of sup¬ port, she was under the dreadful neces¬ sity of applying to him who liad robbed her of everv blessing and comfort. Surrounded with profuse and vark d píe, sures* the unprincipled Montai vo buon forgot her whom fourteen months before his criminal passion rendered the obiect of his ardent pursuit. In her application
application to him, it recalled her to his reflections ; and in spite of his depravity, something like conscience whispered her wrongs. To silence this unwelcome monitor, be determined to deter her from writing to him again : he sent her a trifling supply—demanded the child, and said he should look to its future support. He knew that she would sooner die than relinquish her infant Agonized witìi terror that it would be snatched from her breast, she sent for madame Le Sage, and communicated her appro» hensions. This worthy woman calmed her fears, and took measures to remove them. The lodgings were given up, and she received to her humble dwelling tbe destitute Rosette. A few weeks back she presided the mistress of a splendid mansion, an elegant equipage, anel nu¬ merous servants; now, friendless anel £>Лога, slie was cast upon the bounty о 5 of
of a stranger, who had to earn her own livelihood. Buch ever are the vieissi- tueles attending misconduct—elevation »and depression, splendour and ultimate misery. Her health fast declined, and this ex¬ cellent woman attended her, and ex¬ hausted her little means to procure every thing likely to promote her reco¬ very. But the root of the malady lay in her mind, and no medicine could reach it. Nothing alleviateel her sorrows but the presence of her amiable friend ; and when under the necessity of being absent, she found her worse upon her return. She determined to relinquish her own advantage—-to dedicate her time te) her ease—-assured her of her tender interest and affection, and declared nei¬ ther time nor circumstance »should ever part them. A young woman was their only at¬ tendant. She had been left a friendless orphan,
orphan, and the good madame Le Sage had brought her up from infancy. This faithful girl loved her mistress with the affection of a daughter, studied her ease, and was devoted to her service. She was fond, to excess, of tbe little Ade¬ laide—speedily accomplished her work, and claimetl her reward, to nurse her the rest of the dav. She walked out with her; and it was in the course of this daily habit that an accident that threatened them with danger, by a par¬ ticular Providence, brought the countess to the bosom of her unfortunate sister.
i;0 CHAP-
CHAPTER VIII. ^■ŕ *р-&ф+ л ****** é *·■-* * JT-f *ψ-φ
The fate of the young and beautiful Rosette made a deep impression upon the count Having learned, in detail, the treacherous snare the wily hand of consummate villany had spread for her destruction, his breast, the seilt of prin¬ ciple and humanity, execrated the deli¬ berate deed. He felt it a duty to resent «nd expose the perfidy that had been practised against fier. She was the ten¬ der-loved sister of his wife—-the child of misled virtue— ekar to respectable and valued friends, and now imperiously claimed his protection. He
He bad gained suilicient knowledge of the character of Montalvo to confirm his belief that he was habitually de¬ praved, anel that there was no hope of redress for the injured Itosette. Yet he was determined to make an appeal to bis honour, \f be had no conscience—to his pride, if he had no principie. He called upon him, anel found him at home. His midnight revels bad de¬ tained him till a late hour, and, just risen, he was supinely attempting to partake of a profuse breakfast, which, nevertheless, had no inducements for him, as he had no appetite. The count 11 imini was announced. However depraved a human character may be, it has still decency enough left it, to shrink from the observation of vir¬ tue and honour. This was the case witli Montalvo. Ko sound eould have been more unwelcome to his ear than that which still vibrated upon it—" the count Kimini.'*
Mimini." He rose, anel politely re- questetl him to be seated. An associa¬ tion of unpleasant feelings rendered him somewhat embarrassed. His eye glanced towards, and reeedeel from, the researcli of the counťs. His penetrating eye, the genuine case of inborn virtue, the elegant figure, and the unconscious dig¬ nity which blended vvith the sweetness of his* countenance, struck Montalvo with reluctant admiration and awe. u \ have neit the honour of a personal ncepiaintanec vvith you, sir, anel I parti¬ cularly regret the nature of the business vvhich is tlie motive of this interview." * ť And vvhat is this business, sir?" «said Montalvo, with a conscious and fal¬ tering lip. The count fixed his eyes upon him.— ** Do you recollect Rosette —tfie young, the innocent, and beautiful Rosette, whom you carried away from the arms of a fond and happy father ? She is the object
object of my appeal, and the subject of your defence." He was disconcerted, but assumed an affected air of ease.«—" 'f hese are points of delicacy, which it is understood no gentleman would presume to interfere vvith. I should have expected that the 1 count Rimini was better acquainted with etiquette/' " The count Rimini has to learn from you, sir, what the best preceptors in morality have never taught him, and what his own subsequent code of ethics has not suggested—that is, that the sacred calls of duty which rest upon every man of principle are te> be cir¬ cumscribed by the depravity of custom, intimidated by the specious effigy of honour, anel confined to forms. If these are your opinions, I beg leave to assure you, I am invulnerable in every point te> the influence of such false and dange¬ rous doctrine. I have been early intro¬ duced
duced to the court of my own country, and have visited those most distinguish¬ ed in Europe. All the modes, forms, and ceremonials in rank and title, the sphere in vvhich I move has necessa¬ rily made me acquainted with, but to the etiquette of virtue I am a stranger; nor have ï ever heard, in any country, that its influence, the moral ties that rest upon ns, and the dictates of con¬ science, are to be cramped in their exer¬ cise by any fashion or language." " Anel vvhat particular duty do you romantically conceive urges you to take cognizance of this affair?" said Montalvo, with a sarcastic smile, while his avert¬ ed eye sought any object to avoid the counťs. " The particular duty of her relation —of her protector." íť And vvliat do you propose, my lord, hy such interference ?" 4t I require redress, to tbe utmost that can
can begiven; but the enormity of the erime no «sacrifice can о ч pi ate," "And what redress do jou expect me to afford Г " To marry Aer vvho has been the un¬ suspecting victim of > our duplicít) , ' "Mait у Г »said Montalvo, with a contemptuous sneer- " that is out of the question—the disparity of but h and for¬ tune precludes that." *' The disparity of birth and fortune are trifles vv inch soon mingle in a union, and are forgotten, but the difference of virtue and vice can never be assimilated ; that, I believe, in this case, would be the surest distinction." The count cast a significant and im¬ pressive look at him. Montalvo reddened, and haughtily re- plied-—" My father h a man of rank and political influence in the republie He has rejected the alliance e>f »some of the bebt familie» in Switzeilund, from that
that lofty spirit w hich governs his cha¬ racter. As that is the case, do you think it probable I bhould ever gain his con¬ sent to a uniem vvith one who sinks so much below hif> expecUttions, and, in hh opinuni, woukl emly entail disgrace upon the exalted ancestry of his hou^c?" '' Vour father 1 !*} rank and consequence is a subject of perfect indifférence to mc, and the frailties of his character I can only hear vvith that emotion which pity excitei?. There is no probability, you say, of obtaining his consent to so dis¬ proportionable a marriage. I conclude I need not point out the alternative you ought to pursue; a man of conscience uiid honour knows it—-marry without it. I am among the last, sir, who would insúmate against the sacred authority of a parent—-my own conduct never justs fled the inference; but of evils that fall in our way we must choose the least, imd of duties prefer the greatest, should the
the smaller ones necessarily be sacrificed in the discharge. The disgrace you con¬ ceive your father vvuuld attach to híí» fa¬ mily, by your espousing a person of «sub¬ ordinate condition, h contemptible, and proves how egregiousiy mistaken heis in the deii aition of the tenn. If dis¬ grace, in the real acceptation of tlstí word, is likely to be entailed upon his noble ancesti y« I am afraid it will be in¬ dependent of any matrimonial con¬ nexion/' The count paused, and surveyed him witli that placid firmness which is ono of the strongest attributes of virtue. Montalvo directed a fiery look at him.— ** Your insinuations, sir, «as a man of ho¬ nour I cannot overlook/' ** I am glael vou think so, sir ; but, to continue my observation upon the diffe¬ rent points of view in winch we consider mi alliance vvith this humble and virtu¬ ous family, 1 beg leave to intrude upon you my sentiments upon the subject. The
The countess Tiimini you have seen in ber native sphere. Since I knew кеч*, she has been the object of my affection— my esteem. I married her; anel had »she been the first princess in Christendom, I should not have been so proud of the alliance, as I am of the rare qualities that enrich her character. Virtue requires no badge of distinction—it shines by no borrowed beams, and its native splen¬ dour sheds a divine lustre alike upon the cottage and tlie throne. With re¬ gard to the pride of ancestry, there also allow me to «shew we have it in opposite perspective. The noble blood of the Riminis that flows in my veins, the il¬ lustrious house from which they are de¬ scended, and the hereditary title and honours that have been supported with credit from generation to generation, can receive no additional splendour from any alliance, however exalted. I blush not ίο publish I took my wife from a cot¬ tage
tage in Switzerland—I preferred her to rank and fortune ; and the glories of my forefathers and the honours of my house will not be tarnish y1, though wealth and title blazoned ne>t her name : on the con¬ trary, if any thing can adei splendour to the count Kimini, it is the lustre vvhich her transcendant virtues will diffuse ground him. Crime only constitutes disgrace, and fastens that stigma upem a character vvhkh no quality nor artifice can cover." "-Then ï must infer yon conceive your opinions anel conduct ought to in¬ fluence and determine others in such a choice?" " Far be it from me such presump¬ tion: but recollect with you it is no choice—it is atonement. I »seek not to justify my opinio! s to any man, to erect thein into a staiiuard for others, nor im¬ pertinently interfere whore my honour and duty elo not call me·. I come to de¬ mand
mand redress. The man who is not ashamed to stoop to the commission of crime can never think it disgraceful to aelopt the ordy means left to retreive hh character, anel atone, in some degree, for the evils he has produced." ' Your language is bedel, insulting, and such as I am not accustomed to Iirt«V i5 " So much the worse for you. sir, that truth so seldom approaches your ear." '· As my conduct is not subject to your investigation, I beg leave to close ìbis discussion, by my decision upon the aifair in wbicb yoa have thought proper ι-) interest yourself. The redress- which veni so peremptorily demand to the ut¬ most shall be given : I shall make a pro* vi, ion ibr the motlier, and the ehildi .viali Ы ennder ı-vy own disposal." 1 ,fc \ our conduct, sir, in this criminal ca>(\ is my immediate concern. The provision yon would make t //w I de¬ spise,
«s-pise, and «so would the humblest of her friends, as the pension of your in¬ famy, and the stain of her once imma¬ culate name : the child you shall never have." " By vvhat right then, let me question you, sir, do you attempt to detain a child from the father?" " Legally, I suppose, hy no better a right than you acted upon when you rob¬ bed a worthy parent of his daughter : but certainly 1 proceed upon a more defensi¬ ble principie Your child will be pro¬ tected as my own, and, under the im¬ mediate eye of my virtuous wife, it mav learn to copy so fair an example. Hut to the point. All the restitution you are resolved to make is a provision now for her whom before you left to all the mi s'eri es of want--and had it not been ibr tlie benevolenti* of a poor but exem¬ plary female, she must have pi rished: .md to complete your inhumanity to¬ wards
wards your victim, you would tear from her bosom the infant of her sorrows, whom, nevertheless, nature has destined lier to love with all a mother's feelings. Lastly, sir, I feel it my duty to lay be¬ fore you tlie extent of those calamities your conduct has generated.·* " I am determined, 4 sir, to prolong. this conversation no longer," «said Mont¬ alvo, rising from his ch.air. The count walked up to him, and, with a commanding firmness, exclaimed —"Jam determined you shall listen to me, else I will report you,to the world." " I defy, your report, sir." 4t You may defy me as you please, but the report that falls from the mouth of Kimini will carry conviction «with, it." * Montalvo was silenced, «and the count. resumed bis subject.—■" That happy fa¬ ther from whom you decoyed Jus dear-. est treasure broke his heart, and in a few months was*, brought with sorrow. to
to-the grave. You basely allured his daughter by-* a promised marriage, and the gilded bait of raising her family to consequence. You brought her to the verge of your wishes, and you treache¬ rously realized them by the mockery of the sacred rites of the church. The lovely flower, arrayed in fragrant purity, which you cruelly snatched from the parent stem that cherished its tender growth, is now withered, and its unfold¬ ing beauties blasted by you. These are the evils your proceedings have effected. This happy family flourished the de¬ light of all who knew them, and in the fiul enjoyment of domestic and virtuous felicity. Mark the deeds that will be found in your account—the death of this good man, and the ruin of his daughter! Thé slumber of reason, the transport of passion, the effervescence of youth, even momentary crime, admit of some abate¬ ment of censure ; but planned, delibe- VOL. ιι. h rate,
rate, and systematic villany, I contemn. If I told you, sir, I considerai you des¬ titute of principle and genuine honour, how would you receive it?" " With tliat indignation and resent¬ ment which the insult demanded." " Then let me inform you this single crime, though no other blot stained your character, justifies me in declaring you totally deficient in principle, honour, and that integrity of conduct which is indispensably essential to constitute a gentleman. Securely for a while you may riot in the success and subtlety öf your vices. You are supported by w.ealth, and shielded by the influence of your father's magistracy ; but when that hour arrives that delivers you over to tlie torments of self-reproach—when «con¬ science rouses from her opiated slumbers and proclaims her fatal powers, and tiie avenging arm of Heaven is raised-against you—it is then you will thmk of Hie in- jured
juried Rosette, when it is too late for expiation." As he closed his sentence, his counte¬ nance glowed with the enthusiasm of virtue, and with zeal for the cause which so strongly interested his feelings. " The liberty of this intrusion," said the overawed Montalvo, " the freedom of your language, »and the scope you have given to your observations on my conduct, will render it necessary that we should meet again." M I should think so, sir, if you wish to support even the disguise c r ho¬ nour. I am disposed to make no apolo¬ gy, I feel I have done my duty as a map—as a gentleman; that implies every thing.*' He bowed and retired. 1д the evening of the same day, the count was seated by the countess, and was listening to her reading a humour¬ ous story, which she had selected for the h 2 purpose
purpose of amusing her sister; the ge¬ neral and madame Le Sage were enjoy¬ ing a philosophical tête-à-tête by the fire¬ side; madame De Stallburg had the little Adelaide on her knee, and was fondly caressing it; at her foot sat one of her children, a lovely girl, about six years of age, dressing a doll, and dis¬ playing it to tlie delighted baby ; on a sofa reclined the weak «and pensive Ro¬ sette. A servant entered, and informed the count a gentleman wished to speak to him. He attended the request, and received from him a challenge, sent by Montalvo, to meet him at .seven o'clock next moming. The count of course ac¬ cepted it, and all preliminaries being settled, the gentleman who. w.as com- missioned to act in the »affair took his leave. Ever attentive to the tenderness: and sensibility of fernale feelings, the count had concealed from his wife »and her sis¬ ter
ter his having had an interview with Montalvo. The circumstance therefore of a stranger requiring to see him excited no alarm nor suspicion of his danger. He immediately wrote to a friend in whom he placed particular confidence. and requested him to attend him. The servant soon returned, with an answer to his satisfaction. All things being ad¬ justed, he prepared his mind for tho event that, ere to-morrow's meridian sun, might snatch him from all the joys of a happy destiny, and close his eyes in death. He returned to the dear domes¬ tic circle he had been called from, and his countenance retained that sweetness* of which no internal feeling, liowever uneasy, could deprive it.
π 3 СИЛ P-
CHAPTER IX.
The morning of decision dawned. The count awoke at an early hour. At his side lay his beauteous wife, sunk in slumbers as light as the conscience that never broke in upon them. Hb soul was honour and manly courage; no sense of personal danger could affect him: but he fixed his eyes upon his sleeping Adelaide, and the pain and re¬ gret that swelled his breast did credit to his feelings as a man. Her lovely arm was thrown across him ; he gently dis¬ engaged it, and, softly pressing her ro¬ sy mouth—" Bless your slumbers, my angel!"
angel!" he said, in a low voice; and steal¬ ing from her, with a sigh that seemed to leave his soul with her, he hurried to his dressing-room. Both parties arrived at the same time at the place of assignation. The ground was measured, the aims were taken, and the signal was given. Both fired at the same instant. The count was safe, but the guilty Montalvo fell. At that criti¬ cal moment, humanity alone actuated the count. He anxiously approached him, and was relieved to find the wound was not in a mortal part. The ball had entered his right knee, and lodged there. He was supported to, and placed in the carriage that was in waiting for the result of the event. ' The humane interest the count took in the fate of his combatant excited the esteem of the gentlemen engaged in the affair, and the surgeon, to ease his anx¬ iety, undertook to convey to him daily the exact state of his patient's wound. h 4 He
He immediately returned home, and, on entering the breakfast-room, found the countess seriously alarmed. As she found he had quitted the house at an early hour, without intimating his in¬ tention to any one, her fears were natu¬ rally 7 , excited. His aunt was endeavour¬ ing to calm her agitation, but tbe pale¬ ness of her own countenance betrayed she had her apprehensions also. <c What is the matter, charming la¬ dies'?" said the count, with an air of gaiety ; " here is your truant again." ~ The sudden joy on seeing bim well bjended with Jier fe.ars, and produced a jarring sensation jn the bosom of the countess.—**Ah f my lord Γ she ex- claimed, with emotion, " for once you have been unkind to me." She could røy no more, and burst into a flood of tears. " Unkind, my angel !'' he »said, lock¬ ing her in his arms in a tender embrace: "no,
" no, that is impossible. If you knew the extent of my love—the agonies of my feelings when I left you slumbering in peace, you would be instantly con¬ vinced that nothing but my unwilling¬ ness to give a moment of pain to that amiable and lovely bosom could have induced me to conceal any of my pro¬ ceedings from you." He disclosed to them the particulars that had passed between him and Mont- alvo, and that the result of the inter¬ view was the cause of his leaving the house at an early hour.— u Heaven and myself only knew my sensations," he added, " when^l stole from you : but you know, my beloved Adelaide, inde¬ pendent of my own conviction of the truth, how often you have impressed upon me that duty must be paramount to self-consideration. My feelings would have inclined me to shun an event which might have snatched me from all I loved; h 5 but
but duty led me to resent, if I could not obtain redress for your sisteťs wrongs. But, alas ! it is a bad cause ; he is habi¬ tually, I will not say physically, deprav¬ ed ; and, in my opinion, she is less un¬ fortunate in being the victim of his trea¬ chery, than in being the wife of a man whose heart is incapable of an honour¬ able and virtuous attachment" The countess and madame De Stall¬ burg, with tears of gratitude, thanked Providence for his safety ; and it was agreed amongst them, that Rosette should remain ignorant of what had hap¬ pened. He who had ceaæd to think of her was still fatally dear to her remem¬ brance; and though she detested his character, she yet loved the man who had been the object of her ardent and ill- fated love ; and her impaired health and dejection of mind rendered it necessary that every thing likely to agitate her should be suppressed The
The surgeon waited upon the count, and informed him he had extracted the bail, but that his patient was very fever¬ ish, and the wound much inflamed ; and added, that if the inflammation increased, it would be necessary to amputate the limb. This gave the count serious uneasiness. The essence of his character was bene¬ volence and Christianity. He was shock¬ ed that his arm should have been the in¬ strument of punishments and regretted the probable event of his being cut off in the flower of life, in the possession of every human advantage, and in the ca¬ reer of vices that never called up a day's reflection or repentance. From this anxiety, howev», he was relieved by the surgeon in his next visit affirming that the inflammationhad.great- ly subsided, «and he apprehended there would be no necessity for amputation. A short time, however, decided the fatal h 6 effects
effects of the immoral conduct of this gay and unthinking young man. His health recovered ; the limb w.as saved ; but the sinews were contracted, which caused a limp, .and he was rendered lame for life. Fatal price for transient «and guilty pleasures! No longer the handsome Montalvo w f as the prince of dance, of active sports, and restless gracefulness. The figure, which for grace and elegant proportion might have served for the finest model to the statuary, was now blemished. His gallantry towards the ladies was the theme of their admiration, and to become the object of it the study of their ambition ; but it was often call¬ ed forth to display the unrivalled beau¬ ties of his person. Alas ! now he shrunk from the female eye that seemed to mark his defect, and rather than exhibit that figure which before had charmed all eyes and won all hearts, he declined the •minútke
minutiae of those fashionable and frivo¬ lous attentions which had rendered him the distinguished object of female ap¬ probation. Even his countenance, beau¬ tiful in every feature, received an im¬ pression from his personal defect, that robbed it of the confidence of beauty. Conscious, too, that no honourable cause had called him out as its champion, his pride felt an internal shock, which his unchecked habits hitherto had prevent¬ ed him conceiving he should ever feel Imprudent, but basely-injured Ro¬ sette! too surely did you predict his fate when you pronounced his vices would be his punishment, and that his breast would feel the sting of your wrongs, without being able to find a specific or a balm to assuage the smart Though stifled conscience feebly urged your fall, the justice that overtook him fastened upon his remembrance, till the latest hour of life, your sorrows and misfor¬ tunes. CHAP-
Jf * * *ŕ Ψ -g- # #■# Jh*r *Ψ 4Г Φ JT
The month of April was arrived, and the count and countess had necessarily been detained at Bern by the unexpect¬ ed meeting with Ro.sette, and the conse¬ quences attached to it A few revolv¬ ing weeks had produced events that overwhelmed her. The full disclosure of the perfidy of him she loved, the joy at clasping to her lacerated bosom the sister of her heart, and the fatal truth that confirmed the death of a Moved fa¬ ther, had shocked her frame nearly to elissolution ; but she was now so far re¬ covered as to be able to undertake the journey to Urî. The
The countess was strongly impressed with the virtues of madame Le Sage, and the attachment she had proved to her unfortunate sister; and the count had conceived the highest veneration for her ciiaracter. Rosette revered and loved her, and it was apprehended sepa¬ ration from her would iikely be fatal to her repose. The countess requested her to accompany them, and the count ear¬ nestly supported her proposal. " Your benevolence, madam/* he add¬ ed, *' has ensured you our esteem, and your exemplary kindness to the unfor¬ tunate sister of my wife excites our last¬ ing gratitude. You kindly determined never to leave her; the countess will ne¬ ver separate from her sister, and in that case we shall have the a'. Ivan tage of your «society. Let me entreat you to accept of my protection, and the asylum of my house for life. Your faithful Anine shall accompany you ; her service will be confined
confined to you, and her only study to deserve so invaluable a friend." Madame Le Sage was penetrated with this «kind offer. The affection she had for Rosette, and anxiety for her health, interested her too deeply to be able to leave her. She expressed her gratitude to the count, and her willingness to ac¬ cede to his generous wishes. The morning came that was to de¬ prive madame De Stallburg of her guests. She met them drowned in tears, and la¬ mented the painful. parting. Her ne¬ phew tenderly consoled her. He in¬ formed her he had determined to spend six months of the year in Switzerland, divided with her, his worthy friends at Uri, and on his estate at Geneva ; and that every spring, while it pleased Hea¬ ven, should bring them to the arms of his dear aunt and uncle. The general regretted parting with his dear countess; and when embracing her,
her, said, he should live in thè hope of stealing many a kiss from her sweet cheek before he surrendered. A couple of tra¬ velling carriages waited at the door. The distressing adieus were exchanged, and mingled blessings and wishes for the health and safety of all rendered the scene painfully interesting. They commenced their journey at that season of the year which seems to invigorate «all nature with hope and re¬ generated felicity. The vegetable world, gradually unfolding its enlivening beau¬ ties, cheers the animal creation, and har¬ monizes the soul of man. The weather was pure and serene—tho scenery strik¬ ing and beautiful ; but aumentai heavi¬ ness hung over our travellers, which veiled the springing loveliness, like a dense atmosphere, that invidiously ob¬ scures the glories of the central luminary. Rosette saw only the evils past, and the approaching trials that were to rend her
her bosom with agony; the counters was absorbed in her sisters «sorrow·?, and watched her emotions with unceasing anxiety ; the count was deadened to all joy, whilst his beloved Adelaide par¬ took not of it ; and the amiable madame Le Sage was too tenderly interested not to participate in their feelings. They arrived at the end of their jour¬ ney. They were passing a field that be¬ longed to the departed Blanchard ; a hedge only »separated it from tiie road. Every tree, every inch of ground, were well known there : the countess instant¬ ly perceived where they were, and en¬ deavoured to prevent her sisteťs know¬ ing it. She sat opposite to her, and reclined back, but a sudden jolt of the carriage threw her forward, and her eye caught her father's cottage— ť * Support me, Heaven !" she exclaimeel, and her head sunk upon the count's shoulder. Ten minutes more brought them to the
the door of the anxious Glandolph. He w«as waiting at the gate with eager looks, and the moment they appeared, all his fkmüy flew to meet them. Every voice hailed their welcome, and all hands were extended to receive them. The count got out of the coach, and taking Rosette in his arms, delivered her to the paternal bosom that throbbed to press her to it " My child î my Rosette ! thrice wel¬ come to the heart of your father Glan¬ dolph Γ said the good man, while a flood of tears fell warm upon her faded cheek. " My father ! my dear father Γ she faintly uttered, and a deathlike swoon deprived her of all motion. The friends of her infancy thronged round her with tender assiduity and «af¬ fection. The languid state of her health, the fatigue of the journey, and the con¬ flict of her feelings, for some days con¬ fined her to bed. Every means were used, and every thing procured likely to renovate
renovate the declining sy r stem. She re¬ vived a little, and was able to walk out. She requested Glandolph to take her to her father's grave. He assured her he would, when her strength and spirits were more able to support the scene. He endeavoured to sooth her mind by declaring her father left his heartfelt blessing for her, and that he begged him to assure her his parental love for her was undiminished till the latest moments of his life. But, alas ! these testimonies of her father's af¬ fection only aggravated her sorrows. In vain the tender attentions of her amiable friends, Agnes andAjiatte, were exerted to raise her drooping spirits. Their vir¬ tues, their unsullied names, their sweet children, and their pure joys, arising from happy unions, contrasted more acutely to her feelings her fallen state. In vain the anxious look, the encir¬ cling arms, the tender embrace, and the f - soothing
soothing reasoning of her beloved Ade¬ laide, could remove the malady that cor¬ roded her mind.—" Ah, my sister !" she replied one åay to the consolations she was offering, " I love you dearly ! If hu¬ man effort could save me, it would be the influence you hold over my affec¬ tions. But cau all your tenderness re¬ store to me my beloved father?—can you divest my conscience of the fatal truth that I have brought him to the grave?—can you remove the stain that stigmatizes my name?—and can you bring back peace and innocence to the bosom of Rosette ? Ah no, my Ade¬ laide ! No reasoning, however specious, can lessen the crime with which I am arraigned in heaven, nor silence the in¬ ternal monitor, that unceasingly displays before me the fatal consequences of my guilt" Her sister, in energetic language, por¬ trayed the profligate character of Mont¬ alvo,
alvo, ond the systematic art he had prac¬ tised against her youth and inexperience. * r True, my sister, Montalvo was guil¬ ty ; but I v?as more so. The habits of vice in which he indulged, without be¬ ing taught to consider them criraes, plead some mitigation of censure for him ; but lenity itself can ofix r nothing for me. Ah I where were all those les¬ sons of virtue and wisdom early impress¬ ed upon me by a pious parent ? I was young, but pur minds were cultivated from the dawn of геаяоп ; I was unex¬ perienced, but my beloved father pre¬ pared us against the vices wc were igno¬ rant of, and the temptations we might encounter in our way. Casualty threw r in my way a stranger whom my ardent heart admired ana loved. He made use of every argument the subtlety of art suggested, to allure me to his wishes and draw me from duty. The fatal powers of persuasion hung upon his lips. At that
that crisis of futuro peace ел* misery, where was the firmness of virtue, the prudence and principles of Rosette? Shaken, subdued, and sacrificed for a pas¬ sion cherished for a person I knew not, and forbidden by my father ! With all his depravity, I cannot plead Montalvo forced me from paternal protection. No î it rested with me to accompany him ; and there rests my crime, my shame, and sorrow. Ah, my beloved Adelaide ! if you knew the corroding reflections that prey upon my hetďt, embitter every hour of my existence, and hasten the short time I have to live, you would think it charity to wish me emancipated from the burden of a being that exhibits no ray of joy or hope to eheer my desponding soul." Adelaide reminded her of her infant, of the tender ties whieh bound her as a mother, and that nothing could supply that loss. * Live for her sake—for mine, my
my Rosette , said her amiable .si4.tr ■ íŕ life, and all the advantages of fortune. will be shaded with a gloom, unless »shared with you. No, my beloved Ro¬ sette ! never while I breathe will 1 sepa¬ rate from you—death only shall part us '*' " Ah ! Ialk not of my darling child' Every time I press her to niy fond head, »she sends a dagger to it. I bedew hei lovely face with my tears ; but if 1 wept for ages, can I wash the stain away that rests upon her sweet innocence, and an¬ nounces her to the world tbe child oi shame? Ko, my Adelaide ! you will be her mother—her exalted, ber exemplar) mother ; to your tender bosom í re sign her. Your unparalleled affection for her imprudent mother will endear her to you ; your virtuous precepts will teach her to copy your transcendant vii tues, anel cover the blot that falls upon her birth. Let no human power, if it can be combated, force her from you— not
not even that father, who cruelly v*. ould have torn the unfortunate but dear trea¬ sure from a mother's distracted breast." Her sister, pressing her İn her arms vvith sorrowful tenderness, again assured her nothing should disunite them. She exhorted her to bear with fortitude the evils she had never sought, and had fallen upon her from another's crime. She en¬ deavoured to cem vince her, her errors had been those incidental to youth, and had arisen from no propensity to err ; and she attempted to sooth her by hold¬ ing out the blessings she still possessed in her paternal friend Glandolph—in a sister anxious to remove her sorrows, or share them with her—in the count as an affectionate brother and protector, and in the tender friends of her earliest years. The countess added—" Peace will succeed to sorrow—hope will break and disperse the gathered clouds of despon¬ dency—thy guileless breast, conscious of vol. и. ι a thou-
, thousand virtues, will bear thee up, and happiness again will «seek her native seat in the'bosom of my Rosette." " Ah ! would to God, my dear sister," she replied, with a deep sigh, " I could profit from your consolations ! You are elorpient, energetic, and liberal—but your angelic nature is excited by your aifection for me. The crime which you so tenderly extenuate in me, your pure essence vvould never forgive in yourself. Happy, happy sister! you have smooth¬ ed the pillow of death for me ; 1 can lay my head upon it, and die easier, when I leave you in the protecting arms of a husband, whose tender affection, exalt¬ ed virtues, and illustrious character, can appreciate your merits, and the pure fe¬ licity you bring to his bosom. Dear, virtuouft, anel exemplary pair ! long may you live to enjoy the highest state of happiness on earth—a union of soul, of sentiment, approved of by Heaven, and
and authe)rizcd by the sacred institutes of men! But, ah, my Adelaide! vvhat can your tender affection ingenuously devise to dress up for me, as the phan¬ tom of that happiness which is annihi¬ lated for ever ? " Call to mind those halcyon days, when, arm in arm with our beloved pa¬ rent, we gaily trod the flowery plains. explored the operations of nature, the wonderful beauties of the vegetable king¬ dom, anei climbed the craggy precipice, fearless of danger. Happy, healthy, in¬ nocent, the protecting arm of a tender father ever ready to guard us, we feared no evil—we knew no vice ; our joys were pure, cultivated, and reasonable, and our bosoms only pained for the pains or troubles of those we loved. Blessed state of my early days ! how quickly you have glided past ! Alas ' how contrasted vvith those tumultuous and fatal pleasures which succeeded, en- ï 2 chanted.
chanted, and misled my giddy heart! Prophetic spirit, that impelled me to ext^laim, in a moment of sensibility— s Never, but in my fathers cottage, shall I know happiness !' why did you not support me in the fated hour of trial ? Ah no! influenced by passion, reason was obscured, principle grew feeble, duty was forgotten—I forsook my father, and Heaven, unimplored, abandoned me ! Ah, my Adelaide ! to the dispensations of an unerring Providence my soul could have humbly submitted: had its inscrut¬ able wisdom deprived me of the blessing of a beloved parent, the consciousness of having discharged the sacred duties of a daughter, and of acting up to the divine precepts he taught me, would have been the buoyant stimulant under the heavy blow. But I have brought the evils that weigh me down upon myself— Dreadful reflection ! but it ends not there. Have I not clouded the felicity of
of your days, my sister, by prematurely depriving you of a father whom yon loved with devoted affection—whose pa¬ ternal bosom you often soothed, but never pained? But for me, the child equally of his tender love, what is left ? —the scorpion sting that incessantly wounds and consumes me—the voie;e that unceasingly proclaims—* I have murdered my father !" Thus, in the bitter language of self- reproach, or sunk iu melancholy reflec¬ tions, did the once gay and happy Ro¬ sette spend joyless days and restless nights. If a transient smile brightened her features, alas ! like the faint and »sick¬ ly beam of a wintry sky, it suddenly faded, and was lost in the prevailing gloom. Fatal infelicity ! the certain ef¬ fect of error ! The cultivated mind— the heart susceptible of all the tender r—Kathies, and the once immaculate ό, can newer survive that guiltless ι 3 state
btate vvhich constitutes true happiness- happiness tliat will outlive the fleeting enjoyments of life, the wreck of time, and is imperishable.
CHAP-
CHAPTER XL
The birthday of the worthy C/indolph arrived. It was considered by his son and daughter sacred, and the joyous oc¬ casion for pouring upon his paternal breast their tender affections. The vir¬ tuous friends of his early years were col¬ lected at bis board ; all hailed the happy day that, in the révolu« ion of time, again assembled them together. The good man participated in then feelings, and piously thanked that in¬ dulgent Providence that spared him to enjoy the tenderness of his children!, and the blessings of friemkship. A heartfelt ι 4 happiness
happiness «sat upon his countenance : he had recovered his lost, his favourite Ro¬ sette ; his encircling arm, his tender at¬ tentions, be»spoke the love she equally shared with his children. She sat close to him : an unusual joy was diffu»sed over her features—the dark¬ ness of despair was fled—her lovely eyes emitted a fire scarcely earthly—her cheek exhibited a flush which the most delicate tints of art cerulei only imitate; the pen¬ cil of genius might delineate it, but na¬ ture's healthy glow had no share there. A quick and tenacious energy marked her actions, and her form and manner excited an interest in tho.se who beheld her, lasting on tbe liearts, and never to be forgotten while the powers of memo¬ ry vvere unimpaired. Tbe count sat beside her, anel vvas contemplating, in pensive reflection, that exquisite beauty which, even in wreck, dazzled and enchanted the beholder.— " Fatal
** Fatal charms !" he said to himself: " is there to be found, in the catalogue of crimes, one to equal his, who could, for the .short-lived gratification of a guilty passion, allure thy youth, betra) diy in¬ nocence, and abandon that lovely form to want and misery ? The gracious pur¬ pose of thy being was to confer happi¬ ness ; richly wert thou gifted by Pro¬ vidence with all that is lovely in wo¬ man. Alas ! how are those gifts blasted and perverted by the villany of one whose depraved mind estimated thee only as the object of his illicit pursuit !" The best wine of the vintage circula¬ ted in ample measure to the health of the virtuous and venerated landlord. The count filled Kosette's glass, and rais¬ ed it to her. She hastily took it from him, and said, with a fervency that struck every one—" My father, my dear father ! may Heaven grant you yet, for many years, as the kind blessing of all ι 5 vvho
who know ) ou ' and may the evening of your days be closed with that felicity which .* life of virtue, piety, and charity, entitles \ou to' This happy day is the (ml) one that for many months my soul has felt a gleam of ¡oy—from this hour it sets for ever ' Remember my tender iffection foi you—forget my errors-— anel let the unfortunate 1 Rosette find a mo¬ ndine n t πι your virtuous and paternal biCnSt' She drank on* her wine, and vvith »sup¬ pressed feelings the worthy man pressed her to liis breast with a tender embrace. A pleasing joy was diffused amongst this secciai circle. The occasion of their meet- nig was heartfelt friendship, and as Rei- sette appeared better that day than she hpd done since hei arm al at Uri, every А>.г anticipated with pleasure her reco- veiy A week of the month of June hael passed. The sun, approaching its nor¬ thern
them limits, distributed the blessings and splendour of its nearest influence. Tlu afternoon of this memorable day wa.s warm, and the radiant beauties of a west¬ ern sky inviteel the party to walk out " Do you feel able, my darling Ho- »sette, to accompany your friends ?" said Glandolph : " if so, the arm of your ra¬ ther is ready to support you/' " I feel equal to any exertion ;" *md pressing his hand, she saiel—" Do you re¬ member your promise ? If you love mt with undiminished affection, lead me to the grave of my father." " Another time, my Rosette : when you are better, I will take you to if' ť ' I cannot be better, my dear father '" «she said, with an animated air. " í shall not detain you long there—-and 1 pr* · mise never again to pain your tendt ч bľeast bya repetition of this request; " As a pious duty, which, when you have discharged it, may restore peace î 6 and
anei satisfaction to your wounded bosom, I «shall impose upon myself the painful task to conduct you there : but remem¬ ber, my child, the indulgence of fruitless ■sorrow is ungracious in the eye of Hea¬ ven, anel argues no symptom of true re¬ pentance for error : abide by what you have- promised, and a merciful Provi¬ dence will bless your piety, and support you in the trial." All the party left the house. Anine vvas standing at the gate with her sweet charge. Rosette took it in her arms, and in a transport of tenderness kisseel it igain and again, pressed it te) her bosom, and, with a deep «sigh, resigned it to its faithful nurse. They had walked a little way, when, looking back, she perceiveel the infant helel out its arms towards her. She in¬ stantly returned, and snatching it vvith frenzied affection to her beart, shed a torrent of tears over it Her sister forced
forced it from her, and they again walk¬ ed on. In turning the angle of the garden, her eye once more caught her little Adelaide, with extended arms, and crying to fol¬ low her. She stopped. Anine perceiv¬ ed her agitation, and carried the child from her sight. They entered the burying-ground.— Glandolph, the countess, and madame Le Sage, attended Rosette, and their friends, with painful anxiety, kept in view. They were now at the rising turf* that marked the spot where lay the mouldering remains of the most virtuous of men. A shivering seized Rosette.—" My God ! my God !" she exclaimed, with a frantic look, " is this the narrow beel that confines my beloved father ? Bless¬ ed spirit," she said, kneeling on the grave, " hear the voice of your distract¬ ed child ! pity the horrors of my e'rime ' —ah»
—ah ' that fatal crime that bowed a pa¬ rent's head with sorrow, anei laiel him in tho dust ! Oh, my father ! my adored father ' hovering on the brink e)f disso¬ lution, my weary «soul would fondly fly to thee, Ык dreading the presence of an offended Goei, it lingers in this vale of misery ! Receive me again to thy dear, thy paternal breast ! though cold in death, it will soften the pains, and heal the bleeding heart of your affectionate though guilty Rosette ! Equitable and Omnipotent Author of my being !" she said, clasping her hands, and raising her eyes to heaven, " thou knowest the ex¬ tent of my crime—I plead only repent¬ ance. Thou knowest the sufferings I have endured—the remorse that has pur¬ sued me ! On the bosom of thy mercy my trembling soul throws itself, and in fearful hope humbly awaits thy awful decision !" She threw herself on tbe grave, and, vvith
with extended arms, grasped the sod, as if the parent it covered had been the ob¬ ject of her embrace, and that he could sooth her agonized bosom by a tender return of parental love. Glandolph raised her up, to remove her from the scene of sorrow. He press¬ ed her in his arms. She appeared to be in a deathlike faint; but, alas! the ha¬ rassed soul, worn out with the strong af¬ fections and efforts ornature, was loosen¬ ed from its mortal tie, and sought its kindred dement above. The lifeless and loveiy form, now re¬ leased from the tortures of self-reproach, and the infelicity of its being, was car¬ ried home in the arms of Rodolphus. Painful burden ! how often, in the spor¬ tive hour of infantile play, had he pressed her to his heart, with all the ardour of fond and boyish aifection! Melancholy event ■ Amiable, infatu¬ ated, beautiful Rosette f who could be¬ hold
bold thee, in the morning of life, in the flower of beauty, breathe thy last prayer and heave thy last sigh over a father's grave, without being penetrated with sorrow, and lamenting thy untimely fall í Tt would be in vain to attempt to de¬ fine the feelings that rent the bosoms of those who witnessed this tragical scene. Suffice it to say, every tear that dropped to her memory—her inherent virtue— her amiable affections—her beauty and misfortunes, were excited by virtuous sincerity, the tenderest love, and pious charity. The grave of her father was opened, and her youthful relics deposited by his side—by the side of a once-happy and fond father, who considered the wealth of princes light in the scale of estimation, when counterbalanced by the treasure he possessed in his daughters. Mysterious work of fate ! Her errors were atoned. Conscience,
Conscience, after its painful mission was fulfilled, led her to her father—kindly united them in death, and to mingle in dust their kindred natures. Such was the premature fall of Ro¬ sette, whose short term of existence had not reached eighteen years. In the blos¬ som of youtii and exquisite beauty, pe¬ rished the fairest and sweetest flower that ever enhanced the works of Provi¬ dence Endowed with an understand¬ ing capable of the highest cultivation— with a heart formed for all the tender, social, generous, and ardent affections of our nature, that could exist—ah, what could be wanting in the composition of such a being, to frustrate the indulgent purposes of Heaven?—a want of firmness of character. This fatal foible led to er¬ ror, and counteracted the many virtues in the opposite scale. It may be objected to, that at the ear¬ ly period of seventeen, a command over the
the propensities, anel an unshaken fide¬ lity to principle in the crisis of tempta¬ tion, is an extravagant calculation of self- control. I humbly beg leave to think differently. There is a vigorous and joyous energy in the bosom of youth, capable of sustaining the most heroic virtues, and achieving deeds such as the annals of time have furnished, and the records of history have transmitted to an astonished, and almost incredulous world. A certain pride, and tenacity of what is strictly correct, is peculiarly ex¬ istent, to a sensitive degree, in the juve¬ nile breast. This sensation, that fills their bosoms, is genuine, subtile, and unalloy¬ ed with the grosser perceptions of esta¬ blished right anel principle, which fix the conduct of those advancing in life. If the human mind is tutored with wisdom, the earlier stages of our being are best fitted for whatever is generous, noble,
noble, and enterprising. If the seeds of sound principles are timely sown, they will take deep root in a genial soil ; and more or less, in a commensurate degree, to the strength of reason or the ascend¬ ancy of propensity, they will guide and determine the complexion of our lives. Youth is tlie season of hope, joy, antici¬ pation, anti virtue. If reason, from its twilight approach, is sedulously cultivated, there is every chance that a rational and useful mem¬ ber of the community will be produced. R .ason, our only guide to heaven, and stamped with the all-glorious image of the Godhead, has to maintain a steady, unrelaxing, and inflexible supremacy over the frailties of our nature. Eut, alas í how often is her divine command usurped by some ruling propensity—ob¬ scured, weakened, and her blesseel in¬ fluence finally destroyed by the intoxi¬ cation of the senses, and the baneful prevalence
prevalence of turbulent and guilty pas¬ sions ! The culture of the heart requires a constant, a vigilant, a penetrating, and discriminating observer. How few, even oi those endowed with strong powers of discernment, and sagely aware of all the varying attributes that distinguish the human character, can dive into the sub¬ tilty of propensity—-perceive the deli¬ cate cords, fine to the touch as the spi¬ der's web, on which hang the sensibili¬ ties—the feelings that admit of no de¬ finition, and the apparent inconsistencies and caprices arising from them—the ge¬ nerous motive which led to a bad ac¬ tion, and the bad motive that produced an act that gained esteem and general approbation ! The inexplicable feelings and impulses of the heart—the irreconcileable differ¬ ence of motive and action—and the hid¬ den springs which set the machinery of our
our beings in motion, will ever be to the philosopher vain and endless sources of inquiry, speculation, and presumptive conclusion. To return to my narrative. Let us take a farewell view of the character of the lovely victim consigned to the dust.-— It has been stated, in the early part of her lűstory, she was giddy, easily caught with whatever pleased the senses, and, imperceptibly to herself, loosened from the ties of prudence and duty. Yet no guilty thought ever sullied the bosom of Rosette—her intentions never erred— no one had a greater horror at vice, nor would have been sooner alarmed at any thing that wore its appearance. Ill-fated maid ! One weakness render¬ ed her accessible to villany-— one error brought her to an early grave. From the hour that summed up the evils of her imprudence, joy, hope, and health, for¬ sook her. In vain the tender affection of
of an amiable sister was exerted to save her. The worthy man, who had ever felt for her the tenderness, and discharged the duties of a parent, strove fruitlessly to dissipate the sorrow that consumed her. His wisdom and piety soothed her, but nothing could lessen with herself the enormity of her misconduct, nor re¬ move the malady it had engendered. Her soul, inherently pure, was dead to every thing but the strong conviction of its errors—and, this fatal truth establish- ed, peace, with the purity of virtue, had fled from the bosom of Bosette for ever !
CHAP-
CHAPTER XII.
The sudden and affecting circumstances attending tbe death of her sister over¬ whelmed tbe countess with a sorrow that all her strength of mind was unable to bear up against. Her health sunk under the shock, and she was attacked with a dangerous illness. She was far advanced in a state of pregnancy, which rendered her situation the more critical, and in¬ creased the anxiety of those around her. The count, distracted with grief and apprehension, hung over her night and day, and watched, with unceasing atten¬ tion, every turn and symptom of the disorder.
disorder. The best medical aid that could be procured was in constant at¬ tendance ; the amiable friends who sur¬ rounded her couch were unwearied in their assiduities, and, from the tenderest ties of friendship, were devoted to her ease and recovery. The counťs ardent affections, ever ready to overleap the bounds of self-control when likely to be deprived of the object that excited them, were almost frantic. The consolatory language of his worthy friend, and the reasoning he offered to compose him, were thrown away. He cast his eyes to Heaven, with an impassioned confi¬ dence in its power to save him from dis¬ traction. Though the humblest and most faith¬ ful of the votaries of true religion, he seemed at this crisis to wrest from Om¬ nipotence the being he felt indispensable, and entwined with his own existence—to deraign its immutable decrees, and to im¬ portune
portune its mere) vvith supplication*-*, for her recovery. But the Supreme R ulei, whose pervading eye marks the embryo thought in the inmost recesses of the heart, and vvith a beam of his emana¬ tion reads the hielden motives of men. saw in the afflicted count no impious principle that mistrusted his unbounded beneficence, arraigned his equity, nor daringly murmured at the inscrutable wisdom which fixes his decisions. From his throne on high be beheld the tu¬ mult of his affections, and pitied. His benevolence and virtues were register¬ ed in the archives of eternity, and his filial piety rose, and odoured to Heaven, as its softest, sweetest, and most grateful incense. The almighty plan of universal gooel favoured the fervent prayers of the count. The Creator extended his saving arm over the threatened victim of death. The arrow fled, but was intercepted; anel vol. п. к the
the beauteous countess, on whose life vvere engrafted all his joys, was reserved to bless the arms e)f her happy husband. The count, vvith unbounded gratitude, saw his beloved Adelaide leave her bed —that bed of anguish over which his agonized heart had hung with suspended hope and approaching despair. From this resurrection sprung anew his bud¬ ding hopes of earthly felicity. Felicity! yes, such only as the virtuous bosom of a Rimini can know. Love, exalted, re¬ fined, and independent of the distinc¬ tions of name, title, and gold, filled his soul—love, such as the Godhead first implanted in the breast of man, before the genuine light of reason and virtue was confounded with the glare of mad ambition, the corruption of false refine¬ ments, the insolence of pride founded in property, the omnipotence of fashion, and the baneful prejudice,^ arising from t he present enervating system of educa¬ tion-*-
tion —a system calculated to debilitate the powers of intellect, and finally de¬ stroy all the noble energies of the human mind. These are the evils which a co¬ alition of the times has produced—evils that have arisen in battle-array to extir¬ pate from the face of the earth all the kindly, the genuine, and generous affec¬ tions of our nature—evils that have driven from the pale of society depressed merit, the unportioned daughter, the enlightened and noble-spirited youth without patrimony, and the accomplish¬ ed and cultivated female, doomed to fill a situation at once the most honourable and the most likely to ensure her neglect. From a short sketch of the general decline of rational happiness, let us re¬ turn to those whose virtues fitted them to taste in particular her vivifying influ¬ ence. The countess, lately hovering on the verge of the grave, recollected, even in delirium, the anguish her illness had к 2 occasioned
occasioned the count.-—*' (inef is selfish,' 1 .-»he sakl; *'but my heart cannot repel ii—I will make a tomb for it in my own breast, but the benevolent bosom of my Kimini shall not be pained*—shall not be annoyed.'" She marked his anxious looks, and lepaid him with a cheering smile; his boul seemed renovated with her health. Love, the purest that ever animated the human bosom, beamed in lier eye, glow¬ ed on her cheek, anel breathed in fra¬ grance from her mouth. The count hael given up his intention of visiting, for the season, his estate on the lake of Geneva. The castle was des¬ tined for the approaching confinement of the countess, as it afforded the best medical attendance, and the accommoda¬ tion of a complete establishment. A few weeks would determine the event, to which the count looked forward with fond yet anxious hope. The
The countess was now able to under¬ take the journey, and she pre pure I for the painful task of dragging lier¬ seif from the most «sincere, the most Vir¬ tuous, and the most rerpectcd friend ·« that .should ever lay claim to her affec¬ tions. The little Rodolphus, vvith lu- rosy anel dimpled e'he v eks, his blue eye*:. anel flaxen curled head, seized the count by the coat, and loudly «shouted he should never go. The infantile fondness of this lovely boy hael rivetteel his affection; he bad entreateel bis mother to consign him to the care of the countess, anel declared he would educate him as his own.—·" "No, my lord," said Anatte-, with grateful acknowledgment, " he is too young yet to leave a mother's anxious bosom ; but 1 ρ lise you, when yem return next yeai, my dear Rodolphus slue 1 leliver him to )ou, upem the condition you al¬ ternately share liim as a son." κ í ΤΙ τ
The count was obliged to rest satisfied with the promised stipulation. The hour was come that was to sever them ; the carriages waited. Madame Le Sage, vvith a heart of sorrowful reflection, took a tender leave of this charming family. The good Arbino, from a retrospect of a similar parting, was not less affected. The faithful Anine wept to the memory of her youthful mistress, and her darling Adelaide in her arms was almost smo¬ thered with parting embraces. The countess was alternately pressed in the arms of the affectionate sisters of her in¬ fancy, and their tears mingled together. " Here is nothing but bright eyes ob¬ scured by tears," »said the count, with a gay tone and smiling aspect, whilst his heart was pained with recollections.— ť Adieu, my worthy, my esteemed friend !" he said, pressing the hand of the good man : '* you and I «shall smile, in the hope of enjoying many a fraternal greeting.
greeting. May the Father of Mercies bless you and yours! and believe that the friendship of Rimini for yem can only expire vvith the breath that animates him/' Every one received a gracious token of his esteem. The last struggle de¬ tained the countess ; she was encircleel in the arms of her father. He blessed her, soothed her, and assured her of his unchangeable paternal love. The count disengaged her from his neck, and placeel her in the carriage.—" Äly father ! my ever dear father ! I entreat you forget not in the countess your humble Ade¬ laide, whose faithful heart, while life pal¬ pitates there, will entwine with its fibres its love for you." She grasped his hand till the carriage moving disunited them, rolled swiftly away, and was speedily out of sight: its distant noise grumbled on the ear—died away—and was heard no longer. к 4 The
Tiie amiable family entered the house to give vent to their feelings, anei in pensive reflection regretted the unsub- stantialness of human enjoyments, the shifting scenes of life, and the evanes¬ cent happiness we place in the posses¬ sion of those we love. Like the scene just faded away, all shortly before was life, soul, and communication : now, silence, stillness, and sorrow, vvere left behind; anel Üke the visions of creative fancy, or the quick succession of the objects of slumber, it left no more ma¬ terial trace of its having existed. Our travelling party, as the clouds of parting sorrow dissipated, enjoyed the luscious season, and the beautibs which everywhere pressed upon their delight¬ ed senses. Madame Le Sage, who bad never travelled towards Italy, was struck vvith the stupendous grandeur of the chain of Alps which separates tlftit coun¬ try from Switzerland, Nature «seemed to
to her to have partially distributee! her treasures, anel to have rendered this beautiful division of Europe another paradise The alternately wild and cultivated scenery, the noble structures which tow¬ ered to view, and marked the wonder¬ ful and sublime works of architecture were sources of her admiration and in¬ quiry. The count, deeply intelligent on all subjects, interested and gratified her feel¬ ings, by the information he afforded oí the objects that excited her curiosity and attention. Thus, after a journey pursued leisure¬ ly, rendered delightful by a diversity of exquisite landscape, and enjoyed with congenial tastes, sentiments, and intel¬ lectual interchange, they arrived at Flo¬ rence The count, impatient to see the worthy abate, sent his family forward tt» the castle, and proceeded with the coun¬ tess to the abbey. К 5 He
He was instantly with them.—" My dear children," said the holy man, as he entered, " the earnest wish of my heart is now accomplished : I prayed for your union, and to live to see you. I have now no partial prayer to make to Heaven." He pressed the countess in his arms with pious affection, and marked her situation with mingled pleasure and so¬ licitude. He took their hands, united them, and his benediction followed.— " My dear count," said the abate, " from infancy you have been the child of my tenderest affection, my proudest labours, and my fairest hopes ; but, like the gold which requires it, I bad my alloy. I knew your heart—-I read your feelings, and I predicted you would be the hap¬ piest or the most unhappy of your kind. Reason with you served not as a coun- terpoisc, and the balance of your affec¬ tions was ever subject to extreme. These errors, my dear son, militate against ra- tbnal felicity, and rational felicity only can
can lead to ultimate happiness. Unsta¬ ble is that happiness we rest upon the possession of earthly objects, and fugaci¬ ous and deceitful the pleasures which the giddy multitude pursue. We erect the fair fabric in the morning of life; gilded by youthful fancy, it towers with our ardent hopes, and in proud security bids defiance to the storm. Frail securi¬ ty! unthought-of reverse!—the clouds of adversity gather over it—the tempest increases, rages, and levels our prospects in the dust. Your errors spring from the mere exuberance of your virtues ; no vicious propensity ever marked your character. Take reason for your guide, my dear son, and virtue and religion will follow in her train. You are now in possession of the only female I ever knew formed fe>r your particular class of virtues—the only female I ever knew whose angelic qualities approximate in resemblance to those of your sainted mo- K 6 titer.
lhei. All that Heaven can bestow, and шаг- enjoy, is your favoured destiny. l T .se these prcciou-s gifts with discretion while \ou hold them, and murmur not when the inscrutable Wisdom who bo¬ rrowed them thinks it best to take them au av · He took a hand of* each of them» .-■nd pressing them between his own, said —"' I ,ong may you both live to bless each other ' may your virtues mingle together, and form a union as exemplary to others as it will be productive to yourselves of sOİıd enjoyment on earth, and le*ad to im¬ perishable happiness hereafter'" The count hung upon his words with ν* neratiou and devoted affection. This worthy inan had gained a complete as~ cendaney over him, which bis pupil ne- \ er conk! attain in himself. In the most tumultuous state of his feelings, he could booth, he could calm, and charm him to reason. Alter the death of his ino- ŕher. and the departure of Adelaide, his influence
influence »saved him from distraction. and as it began with his infancy, it en¬ twined with his growth, anel was inse¬ parable from his existence. In short. he venerated, he loveel, anel had he nc*t been a Christian, he would instinctively have aelored as his idol his preceptor. Father Anselm vvas summoned to »see them. Tbe worthy man congratula¬ ted them upon their union ; and taking the hand of the countess, pressed it to his heart, anel in pious fervour ejaculated his blessing. The faithful Swiss guide 1 was not forgotten, anel he was compel· led, by his lovely countrywoman, to re¬ ceive another token of her liberality, They partook of refreshment, and af¬ ter spending some delightful hours with their dear abate, they set off for the beau¬ tiful banks of the Arno. Arrivée! at the castle, it was all life and motion. Every face wore a happy aspect, The noble ane! beloved master
w a***
was within its walls, and joy resouneled and reached its most distant recesses. As they entered the «saloon where last they parted — " Welcome, thrice wel¬ come to my castle, my angel !" said the count, and pressed her to his beart with all the fervency of love. " I hail thee as its dearest and richest treasure !" " Ah ! indeed, my lord," she replied, in the softest tone, " I enter it with widely different sensations to those I felt when I quitted it." " Ah, my Adelaide !" he exclaimed, vvith emotion, " «spare my feelings ! Teach me to subdue my errors, but do not re¬ proach me with them." " Reproach, my lord ! Ah ! why make use of that cruel word? No, not for kingdoms would I give a momentary pang to the generous and honourable bosom of my Rimini. I alluded only to the unhap¬ py state of my mind, my affections, and to those imperative principles which obliged
obliged me to fly from the beloved ob¬ ject of my heart, and leave him aban¬ doned to sorrow and despair." As she uttered these words, a tear tilled her lovely eye, anel trickled to her cheek ; but the pearly drop was arrested there—the counťs warm embrace dried it up, and a soft smile instantly bright¬ ened every feature.
CHAP-
CHAPTER XIII.
The count paid a visit to his cousin Va¬ letta, now countess Palmoni. He in¬ quired for the count. She said she believed he was well, but that she had not seen him since they met at the last grand masquerade. " Not seen him !" said her cousin, with surprise : " what then, do the Alps sepa¬ rate you, or an ocean cruelly keep you apart ?" <( Cruelly !" she echoed, with a giddy laugh. " I see you are returned with your wild notions, your Swiss rusticity, and your inherent distaste for the ele¬ gance
ganoe and polish of fashionable life. Do you think the count and I, like Adam and Eve in the garden of Eden, for want of other society, wander hand in hand over flowery lawns, through spicy groves, and gather daisies for lack of bet¬ ter amusement? I should conceive my¬ self an old spelldame culling simples to cure love-sick swains, and preparing my abracadabra for ague and fever." *' I do not think it possible you could employ your time better," said the count, with a serious face ; " your life would then be useful, and your motives decid¬ edly those of charity and humanity to¬ wards your species. What can be more distressing than to see a person suffering all the anguish of an unhappy attach¬ ment ?—what more pleasing than to be able to restore health to the diseased mind? Who could behold a fellow mortal shivering under the potent influ¬ ence of the ague, and alternately scorch¬ ed
ed vvith its burning heat, without feeling with joy the ability to relieve him ?" She burst into a loud laugh.—" And what drudgery, father, do you allot to a woman of fashion ?" saiel the countess, with levity, " The worst state of it. A servile imitation and conformity to the follies of others—a slavish dependence upon their countenance, and an enchained freedom of the mind, which keep her in the beaten track, meanly afraid to step out of it, though reason offers to leael the way to true enjoyment." " What then," she said, with a gay air, " shall I turn shepherdess to please you ?—lead my flock to pasture—listen to the warbling of birds—the tinkling of sheep-bells?—and, reclining by a purl¬ ing stream, dream my »senses away till I find myself in the vale of Tempe, sur¬ rounded by blooming shepherds, con¬ tending who shall dress my crook ? Or would
would you inhumanly drag me from my proper orbit, and, like the bird deprived of its element, cage me up till I moped myself to death ?" Ci No," said the count, laughing, " I would do you more justice : I would cage you with your mate till you had learned to see no plumage so beautiful as his, to hear no note so sweet ; and you »should exert your powers to please, and charm him to love." " Forbid it, Heaven !" she exclaimed ; " I would not be shut up vvith the count a week, to be an empress at the end of it ; the bare idea kills me—I should cer¬ tainly die of the spleen." " Is yours then the life an affection¬ ate, a rational, a virtuous couple could lead ? It is melancholy—it is unnatural —it is voluntary divorce." " It is the mode a fashionable couple adopt ; we each independently follow our own pursuits. Your odd-fashioned opinions
opinions co ie not within the pale of po¬ lite fife. But, my dear Clementine, why did you leave your proper element, the vurly bleak mountains of St. Gotliard ? Have I not told you you would make an excellent, and indeed, amongst the polished nymphs of the valley, an inte¬ resting goatherd? Why diel yon re¬ move your spouse from her native orb ?" she said, with an invidious sneer ; " I am afraid «she will be lost in the blaze of high life." " My fears are only for y mi? saiel the count, calmly. " My dear Valetta, your wit or your malice cannot affect, cannot offend me. My Adelaide soars above* the reach of such impotent aims; her sublime virtues move in a sphere of their own, and they emit so peculiar a lustre, that if the world of fashion was in con¬ flagration around her, ƒ shemld be able to distinguish 1ft pure and steady light. I am interested in your happiness You are
are in »search of it indubitably ; but, like thousands more, you pursue it as the chimera of the philosopher's stone, not as a rational attainment Ah ! be assur¬ ed, my dear Valetta, you will never find it; you have mistaken the path, and every step you take, you deviate more widely from it. You are young ; but it is more than probable tbe third of your mortili gbss is run. You are beau¬ tiful ; but beauty Is a mere flower—short is the term of its duration ; it blooms, it charms the senses, we snatch it eager¬ ly, and it perishes as we enjoy it. You have health, and yuu are equal to pur¬ suit and exertion ; but with youth, as it declines, declines tbe vigour of the mind and body—the infirmities of age over¬ take you, and you are compelled to re¬ linquish the giddy round you formerl) frequented. Where then are your pros¬ pects, your resources ? None—on all sides is a cheerless blank—no happy recollections
recollections to recall the scenes of youth and warm the bosom of age. Memory, blushing at being debased in registering follies and trifles, had written with a careless hand, and her characters are erased. No mental reserve, no treasur¬ ed store of knowledge, no intellectual grace, which renders even age bewitch¬ ing, no acts of genuine benevolence, no remembrance of endearing attachments, no conscious virtues to cheer, to ani¬ mate, and render happy the closing hours of existence,'* " Oh, in mercy to my nerves," ex¬ claimed the countess, " forbear your gloomy doctrines! I am engaged to¬ day for a party upon the water, and I would not be out of spirits for all the world." * € Why, my dear Valetta, / live up to my doctrines, and I am the least gloomy creature alive. My Adelaide and I are the gayest of the human race—-we dance, we
we sing, we laugh, we chat; and tbe castle or die cottage·—they make no dif¬ ference to us—echo with our felicity." " Defend me from such felicity ! Oh, what a brilliant party we shall make! Our boats are prepared for the occasion— new painted, richly ornamented, with silk awnings—they are beautiful ! The marchioness has exquisite taste : she has just eome from Paris, Will you accom¬ pany us ?" " No, I cannot leave my wife." " Preposterous! are you her physi¬ cian ?" " I am every thing, she says ; her father-confessor, too ; and when she is op¬ pressed, she unburthens her conscience to me." " You absolve her, no doubt ?" " I do absolve her of all tbe frailties and follies of lier чех." " Oh, charming prodigy ! I wouid ad¬ vise you to exhibit her as a matter of physical curiosity/' ťť I mean
" I mean it," said the count, kugiring heartily, íť as a wild woman newly caught amongst the mountains of St. Gothard, and with this strong inducement to the spectators to view her, that she is per¬ fectly harmless." ** You wo*n*t go then ? The duke of p ------a is to be with us. He is a charm¬ ing creature ! the star of fashion—the grace of the court—the finest figure you ever beheld—*a perfect statue." " Does it breathe ? J ' said the count. '* How ridiculous!" replied the countess. " In short, he is the soul of compliment, the spirit of gallantry, and the fascina¬ tion of every party." " And what is his fine figure, his gal¬ lantry and fascinations, to a married woman ? They can avail you nothing. Agreeable objects are pleasing to the senses, and we naturally turn our eyes upon them ; but the duke's assemblage of graces and his rare endowments can form no part of your substantial happi¬ ness.
ness. Do you recollect, my dear coun¬ tess, the sacred entrenchment which your marriage vows have drawn around you ?" " Heavens ! spare my patience about marriage vows : what have we got to do with them f Clementine, I always thought my aunt's romantic lessons had made you crazy ; now I believe, since you have got your Swiss spouse, you are downrightly mad/ " And if my bite would communicate reason, like the canine animal its poison, I certainly would snap at the cheek of the countess Palmoni." " Why my cheek ?" she said, laugh¬ ing; " you might spare that." " No, in charity I would not. You are beautiful, and it makes you vain ; you are vain, and it renders you unami¬ able ; you are unamiable, and you can never be happy, nor promote the happi¬ ness of others." " You are a strange mortal, Clemen- voL. п. L tine;
tine; the fashionable world will laugh at you/ 1 " I know it, but I do not grudge it ; let it be merry at my expence. Believe me, Valetta, I have too much in store not to indemnify me for its ridicule." " Is this then the woman," »said the count to himself, as he left her presence, i4 whom my father destined me to spend my existence with ? Happy escape !-— Oh, Valetta, what galling chains would those have been that bound us together ! What do I not owe thee for abolishing the contract ! But for that kind act of thine/1 should never have po«ssessed the treasure that constitutes my felicity. I will ever consider myself thy debtor. Bountiful Providence ! richly hast thou gifted me ; every hour enhances the bless¬ ings I enjoy. Teach me to deserve them, or rather let me say, teach me a language to express my unbounded gratitude to thee." -He
He waited upon his uncle. He had never seen his daughter since her mar¬ riage, and the count, with that be¬ nevolent spirit which ever actuated him, endeavoured to mediate, and bring about a reconciliation between them : but the gloomy inexorable temper of the cardinal was not to be relaxed. Un¬ mixed with the milk of human kinei- ness, and incapable of the tender affee*- tions of the heart, he was proof against eveiy effort to excite them, and their inspiring influence in others. The prohibition annexed by the church of Rome to its priesthood, with the spirit of forbearance, he had, Christian like, overlooked in himself, but he could not be induced to pardon his daughter for marrying contrary to his unnatural stipulation and ambitious views. The count strenuously defended her, eloquently pleaded for her, and urged her claims as his child. But his language, his e 2 manner,
manner, his graces, calculated to conciti¬ ate the affections and impress the cause he pleaded, were lost upon this inflexible prelate. He took his leave disgusted, ind internally rejecting tbe consangui¬ nity that stood between + hem. As he rode towards the castle, the character of the cardinal was the subject of his soliloquy : he inquired if his uncle and his preceptor were of tbe same pro¬ fession.—" The same vocation/' he said, " they belong to the church; but their professions, their principles, their doc¬ trines, are as opposite as the Antipodes. The benign countenance of my dear abate would cheer and reclaim a sinner: the sullen aspect of the cardinal would render him hopeless, and drive him to deeper acts of sin. No, I cannot think it—it is impossible ; I cannot have them of the same species—they are materially and immaterially irreconcileable." Thus argued the count, when he ar¬ rived
rived at the portico of the castle. He looked up, and in an open balcony were seated madame Le Sage and his lovely countess. She smiled sweetly upon him as he raiseel his delighted eyes towards her. She was fondly caressing the little Ade¬ laide, and teaching it to call the count papa. He held up hi^ arms, and called the cherub by her name : she gave a spring, stretched her little hands to fly to him, and in an infantine tone cried—" Pa— pa !" " Bless thee, my babe ! I will be thy papa indeed. In that balcony," he saiel to himself, " is seated the source of all my joys and earthly felicity. As I view thee, my Adelaide, my enraptured senses forget thou art a being of mortality, and thy influence over my soul would in¬ stantly dissipate all the chagrin which the world united could occasion me." Through the long gallery resounded L 3 his
his quick and eager step, impatient to be by the side of her he loved. In an in¬ stant he pressed her to his heart, and the delighted baby sprung to his soliciting arms. Thus glideei the hours with the count, enjoying the purest state of happiness himself, anei communicating it to every one within the verge of his influence. To crown his felicity, in less than a month after her arrival, the countess was blessed with a lovely Ьеэу, Heaven seemed to walk with the count—his cup of joy was full. His son was health and beauty—his beloved Adelaide recovering rapidly the powers of health and strength, and he had now an heir to bis titles and splendid possessions. The happy event over, the eastle ex¬ ulted with suppressed joy: but when the countess appeared again, her devoted do¬ mestics gave full latitude to their feelings; mirth, music, and illumination, pervad¬ ed
ed every comer of the castle. The ne>ble master, extravagant in his own joy, had no wish to check it in others ; he issued a special licence for a month's festivity at the castle, and the poorest and most elistant upon his domains were invited te> partake of his open bounty and his pri¬ vate benevolence.
L 4 CHAP-
CHAPTER XIV.
The countess, now a happy mother, was able to receive company. The fashion¬ able world pressed their visits : curiosity, envy, and slander, assembled to see her. But the countess, indifferent as to the motives which led them to visit her, could not be affected ; she was affable, * open, and gracious to all, but she was incapable of intimacy where her affec¬ tions could not be interested. The noblemen and knights who ap¬ proached her were struck with her beauty, «* her unaffected graces, and bewitching modesty : compliment, gallantry, and re¬ partee,
partee, were excited and exerted to at¬ tract, to please, and court her favour. She smiled sweetly—she spoke compas¬ sionately—she bowed gracefully, and she e'harmed all ; but her heart, true as the needle to the pe>le, invariably turned to her dear count, and her lovely eye wan¬ dered incessantly till it encountered his, and there resteel in the sunshine of his smile. " Heavens!" exclaimed the duke oí Ρ* ------a, as he left her presence, and was escorting the countess Palmoni to her carriage, " what a bewitching creature is this ! She is an angel—a divinity ! She must have dropped from a celestial sphere." " Where do you read her apotheosis ?" said tbe countess, vvith an invidious smile. " In her eyes—in her lovely eyes," exclaimed the duke. " In what region did the happy count light upon this pre¬ cious gem ?" L 5 fi I do
** i do not know what sphere she dropped from/' repliée! the countess; " but the one »she has dropped into is a very new one: the count found her amongst the mountains of Uri tending goats and sheep* Iteally, my cousin has ({uite disgraced himself by such a mean ».nd ridiculous match." £> Disgraced !" repeated the duke, with emphasis. " iîy the »soul that inhabits me, 1 would relinquish my ducal corei- net to call her mine, and think the sa¬ crifice would be a trifling one to obtain such л prize: her beauty and native graces would adorn a throne, but her modesty—ah ! there is the charm would riv et my heart for ever." This impassioned eulogy, bestowed by the duke upon her fair relative, was grating and new language to the ear of the countess Palmoni: accustomed to the unmeaning but corruptive voice of flattery, vainly proud of her beauty and artificial
artificial graces, adulation she considereel her due, and the praise of another fe¬ male she conceived to be insult to her¬ self. The charms, the graces, and fascinations of the duke, which hitherto had been the theme of her extravagant commendation. now vanished as he rapturously express¬ ed his admiration for the unconscious. unambitious, anel artless Adelaide. She flung herself into her carriage without deigning to notice his civilities, irritated and at a loss to account to herself for hh having been the object of her unqualified approbation and insatiable vanity. The countess Rimini had now appeared everywhere in that high circle she wav doomed to fill: one ceremony remaineei for her to go through—her introductie«) at court. Nothing could be more fo¬ reign to her feelings and taste than the slavery of fashion and the splendid irksomeness of elevated station ; but ne- e 6 cessare
cessary compliance and accommodation to the sphere she moved in she felt a duty, however it militated against her own inclination ; and she considered sa¬ crifices were to be made in whatever state of existence Providence was pleas¬ ed to place her : in short, reason enabled her to act her part with equal ease, if ne)t vvith equal inclination, in the hum¬ ble cottage or the lofty mansion of wealth and grandeur. The count presented her at the palace of Pitti with a pride conscious of tbe trea¬ sure he possessed in her. The grand duke L ------ d then held his court. This wise and exemplary prince, on her being introduced to him, was attracted by her beauty and modest gracv. .> ; he bestowed upon her gracious marks of his distin¬ guishing favour, and was heard to ex» claim, in speaking of the ladies of his court·—" Ah! the countess Rimini is its brightest
brightest jewel, though she shines with the mildest lustre." One day, as they left the presence- chamber, the count was saluted by the chevalier Chavini. They were much about an age, and had been educated at the same time by the abate Sells : a con¬ geniality of boyish feelings, and an ami¬ able accommodation to each other's wants and wishes, had bound them together in juvenile friendship. The count loved him tenderly; but as they grew to man¬ hood, their different habits and pursuits separated them, though it had never dis- .solved or lessened their affection. Chavini was honourable, generous, and benevolent. He was allied to the first families in Florence, was captivating in his appearance, and enchanting in his manners : he had appeared at the most brilliant courts in Europe, both in a pri¬ vate character, and in the train of diplo¬ matic capacity. His father's ambition
was
was that his son's name should flourish amongst the princes of Christendom, and he had been educated in the persuasion that 1 'ippiness w r as only to be found in wealth, title, and splendid alliance. According to his father's creed, Cha- vini, upon first setting out, pursued with ardour the fleeting phantom : he extend¬ ed his range of expensive pleasures ; he met with iavour in every smile; the most beautiful princesses distinguished him by their condescensions, and ladies of high rank encouraged him to offer his hand ; felicity courted him in every form, and promised an increase in every change But in the midst of these flattering se li "ctions, the heart of Chavini sighed for what it had never yet found. Happi¬ ness appeared to him like the meteor which allures to follow, but unceasingly vanishes as it is pursued. After the splendid ceremonies of the court, the magic
magic of the ball, and the revelry of pleasure, the evening of the day dis¬ closed the unsubstantialness of its en¬ joyments, and left no trace but as a vi¬ sion that cheated his senses, and frittered away the short span of existence. Thus satiated with grandeur, anel dis¬ appointed in internal felicity, a careless interest and a pleasing melancholy »stole over him, mingled with bis natural vi¬ vacity, and rendei ed bim an interesting being. He had been absent from Tus¬ cany a considerable time, and when they met, the count and he felt a revival of their early friendship, and a tender re¬ newal of the happy recollections of their boyish days. The count presented his wife to him. Chavini was struck vvith her appearance. —" Where did you find this lewely flower?" he saiel to the count, fixing his eyes upon the countess. " It grew wild, by a mountain side," he
he replied, " and its modest beauties caught my enraptured eye. I attempted to Miatch it too rudely—it drooped its beauteous head; I gently raised it up, and placed it in my bosom ; there it blooms, ever new, and its fragrance fills* my soul." Tlie countess raised her melting eyes co the count, with a look that conveyed all the feelings of her heart, and a deep blush rendered her beauty brilliant and irresistible. " I will arrest that captivating blush ; it shall not be fugitive!" lie exclaimed, while he pressed her with transport to his breast, and imprinted an ardent kiss upon her glowing cheek. " Ah, Chavini !" he said, pressing his hand with the earnestness of his feelings, *' if you knew the happiness I enjoy with my Adelaide, you would think a crown no sacrifice to purchase it. What were the titles, the honours, the wealth oí
of a princess to me? They vvere not essential to my felicity. Am I censur¬ able, then, because I chose not to be miserable, by bestowing my hand where my heart had no interest? or because I selected for the object of its tenderest af¬ fections a daughter of lowly birth, but of exalted virtue ? Look at my beauti¬ ful shepherdess : does the diamond spar¬ kle less brilliantly upon her bosom ?— does she grace the court less, because she led her fatheťs flocks to pasture, min¬ gled in the sports of the harvest, and the innocent joys of the vintage? Ah, Chavini î be assured true enjoyment in the marriage state consists in a recipro¬ cal and ardent attachment, congeniality of taste and unison of feelings, the union of virtues and the exercise of reason. Crowns, principalities,honours, and splen¬ dour, are the objects of ambition ; and when they are attained, vvhat more can they confer, than the transmitting to posterity
posterity a name that may be doomed, in time, te> perish vvith the records that bear it?'* Chavini sighed deeply to his friend's position; and turning his admiring eyes to the countess, regretted the time he hael dissipated at courts. Thus 1 have, in my narrative of the -.i.sters, portray eel the fatal consequences of error in eme, and the satisfaction aris¬ ing to the other from a strict and unde¬ viating adherence to principle, anel the »sacrifice of inclination. Ilosette, with inherent virtues, perished in youth, from a single weakness that shaded her cha¬ racter, whilst her sister arrived at rank and honours, by a firmness which the strong incentive of attachment could not conquer. And now in tbe full possession erf every earthly blessing, the virtuous Ade¬ laide breathed her gratitude in devout prayers to that beneficent Being who had
had showered his richest gifts upon her. In the arms of a devoted husband, she experienced all the felicity arising from an attachment founded upon esteem, cemented by sacreel ties, and rendered permanent by virtue and reason. She brought him a numerous and lovely fa¬ mily, trained to every virtue by her precepts anei illustrious example. They were educated under her vigilant eye, and madame he Sage was their gover¬ ness. Her profound wisdom, her ac¬ complished mind, and her benevolent character, eminently epialified her for the important task ; and in the bosom of the family she was loved, respected, and found a happy asylum for the evening of her days. The worthy and faithful Arbino pre¬ sided over the nursery, and the count and his children were alike the objects of her tender solicitude. The beautiful little Adelaide was form¬ ed
ed to every virtue, by the unremitting pains of lier aunt, and the tender care of madame Le Sage, vv ho dearly loved her. The beauties, the graces, the vivacity and warm affections, which distinguished the lovely and unfortunate mother, vvere strongly conspicuous in her child; and the countess judiciously threw into the amiable composition, to serve as a coun¬ terpoise against a tendency to weakness, her own unconquerable firmness. The blooming Rodolphus was edu¬ cated by the count, with all the care, expence, and affection, which he bestow¬ ed upon his own children ; and under the superintendency of so accomplished a character, he attained all the advan¬ tages of liberal instruction, fashionable acquirements, exalted example, and was generally acknowledged as the most ele¬ gant and amiable с valier in Florence. He loved the beautiful Adelaide vvith an affection founded in infantile inter¬ course
course. It unfolded with their years— strengthened with their growth—and terminated in a happy marriage. Thus were united, in the third generation, the virtuous names of Blanchard and Glan¬ dolph, and that pure and sacred friend¬ ship which had commenced from the cradle was perpetuated in their children, flourished beyond the grave, and was registered by a gracious and approving God. The count and countess, still blessed with their dear relativ s at Bern, and their worthy friends at Uri, regularly spent one half of the year vvith them. At his beautiful villa on the Lake of Geneva, the count passed the most pre¬ cious hours of his existence. It was the happy retreat that gave his dear Ade¬ laide all to himself; it was the favourite spot of his beloved mother, and the scene where her youth partook of the purest joys, and fleeted away amidst un¬ interrupted
interrupted felicity. He raised there, upon a rising ground, a beautiful monu¬ ment to her adored memory. The polished marble, in pompous pa¬ negyric, blazoned not her illustrious vir¬ tues; ne) —but, in indelible characters, they were recorded by filial love in the ho»som of her son. There the first flowers of the spring were offered by his child¬ ren—there his Adelaide and he breathed their morning orisons, and in the evening invoked her pure spirit to look down upon them—guide, and continue to influence their lives till their latest moments. Like the bird of fable, from whose ashes arises another to perpetuate its kind, the transcendant virtues of the il¬ lustrious mother sprung anew in her be- loved son, and rendered him a star of lustre to his high station—an ornament to his species, and a precedent of ra¬ tional and extended benevolence. His lovely partner invariably followed her
her track, and she was held up by the admirers of reason and virtue, a second countess Rimini, whose bright example was calculated to form, eemduet, and lead from error a mistaken world. Her transition from obscurity to grandeur ef¬ fected no revolution in the native sim¬ plicity of her character; and the artless countess was the same in the splendid court or the humble ce)t. The death of her beloved father, and the sorrows of her Rosette, were ever fresh in her me¬ mory, and blended a bewitching melan¬ choly with her sweet and placid temper. Thus, inseparable from her dear count, united in the discbarge of private duties, and in the exercise of benevolence and public good, they enjoyed the fruits of active virtue, and the unfailing satisfac¬ tion of having fulfilled tbe purposes of their being. The meridian of life attained, they looked forward to a happy decline and a blessed
blessed immortality. No retrospect pained their recollections : faithful me¬ mory religiously preserved the dear images of departed friends; and fair hope, with radiant prospects, promised a glorious reunion with those they loved. Conscious rectitude, etherial fire, that never dies, animated their bosoms. Men¬ tal resource afforded its inexhaustible treasures. Love, exalted and undimi¬ nished, was the charm that never failed, and virtue crowned them with her un¬ fading wreath ; and her divine influence communicated to their souls a feliejitous repose. , .
FINIS.
Printed by J. Darling, Leadenhall-Strect, London.
