Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Le Forester: a novel
LE FORESTER. A NOVEL.
CHAPTER I. After a pause of some months; t take'the pen to resume my melanclioly tale. Worn by anxieties о ' my own, wearied and distracted in the conduct of an intricate property too important to be neglected, how eould I feel the inclination or the power to relate the history of another ? Yet it is when we have occasion to fly from ourselves, to lose our own griefs in sympathy for vol. иг. в
1 the sufferings of more interesting be¬ ings, that such occupations find their apology, and their use. And it is to be regretted, that when we have most occasion for these exertions, our powers seem least fitted for tbem. Tlie indolence and la-iguor, into which a mind of sensibility is too apt ito sink, must not be indulged. The disgust and despondence, which follow perpetual treacheries, perpetualattempts to injure, defame, extort, and rob, should be shaken off. Nay, enen deeper proofs of malice, the plots to which life itself has been maliciously exposed, should eicite scorn rather than indig¬ nation.
3 But when every day brings with it some new difficulty to encounter, some legal sophistry to detect, some moie open and daring attack to oppose, how can tlie weary and distracted spirits puisue the illusions of fancy, and deli¬ neate the scenes of which " youthful poets dream ?" How constantly, when I resign myself to a sleepless bed, do I endeavour to regulate the painful ideas that haunt my brain ! How do I strive to div ert my thoughts from all selfish concerns, on which it is useless to dwell, and lead the'm into those fairy visions which my early imagination used to form ! Pei baps there are both sorrows and obstacles which call forth the encrgits »Í
4 of the mind. Uniform prosperity and case suffer the powei s to stagnate, and encourage a dull antl sleepy existence. But the head that is assailed by reiter¬ ated blows, the heart that is never for a moment free from agitation, must eithei grow callous, or sink beneath uninterrupted suffering.-. Dark clouds overpower the radiance of hope; the brilliant images, that were wont to play in the sunshine of the soul, are blotted out; all is dicary; and a few dim figuics of grief and mourning are alone at command. Whcrcfoie is it, then, that we thus perpetually struggle against tbe ride? Weie it not better to yield with calm resignation to the current ? The voyage
5 of life, in every direction, is short; and whatever be our course, we must quickly be ingulphcd in the same ocean. Eut nature has implanted in us de¬ sires, which no reasoning, no sorrows, no disappointments, will entirely sup¬ press. The " ill-smothered flames may »leep under the thin ashes" of apparent extinction, yet new conflagrations will continually break out. The love of fame; in thosç who have early cherished it, and who have cultivated arts by which it is sometimes attained, will never die. Even in hours of the most chilling gloom, when such an one looks back on yeais spent without a single в 3
б
expedition -iccomplishcd, or design fulfilled, h itiiiembtrs Ιιυιν " Like Гчпсу i il ^ld 1 e oft m s leiice umt O cr Ihc m x il tr surts of I s ¡ regna it brc-ist Wttli consÎio ı»pr te Trom thejn he oftreiolv d To fram« he knew not what excelling thing». And win he hnew not what lubhmc reward Of рш» and wonder, * * and still he will not abandon the aim. Feebly as the fire noiv glimmers in his bosom, and faint as are the images thit appear round its dim light, he jet re¬ solves toperseieie The hour of in¬ spiration may return, what he has lost in brilliance he may have gııncd m strength, and ti'· may iieit the doom of descending in obscunt) to his grave.
r Alas 1 Yvlnt delusile consolations are these to me· 1 he non tlnms, which bind mt to the ground, are ηογν too stiong for me to burst ScYenteen long jeais aie clapstd since I made ray first effort*, with hopes hoYV different 1 Yet scarpe a step lsadnnrad, while all my phns have vanished like the aerial figures of the clouds, and not a ivrecL of them is left · How many, then m their boyhood, have since oi^unme in the race ' Hoyv many " boobies have mounted over" my » head I" What strange cftects hai e I seen not only fiom perseverance, but from servility and hard unfeeling issrmption I The glorious γ ι ions tint came un¬ ii 4
β bidden, and were cbirisbcd by youthful enthusiasm, are gone to return no more Sorrow and disgust, and languor and indolence, hive fiozen and annihilated them for tvei The season is pist, they can no longer be recalled, and I must content myself with an humbler reputation. Still there aie moments when my bosom heÄes with its imperfect con¬ ceptions , and as I attempt to embody them in words, the occupation aids me in escaping a little while from my own anxieties Would tint I could always thiow ideal sh ipcs and colom s ovei the reali¬ ties around mo ' Rtgiulliss of thi
9 scorn with which romantic habits areţ often treated, I would be content to live among the airy castles of my own creation. But how constantly does cruel fate, by giving effect to the perplexities of intrigue, avarice, and peifidy, recall me to the hate¬ ful attentions of practical manage¬ ment. Then fly in an instant the fond images, whieh have begun to come forth at my c-all, and the golden glo- ues, which my half-shut eyes had seen dawning in the heavens, fade away. Cold chilling blasts rise, and demons alone with, heait-withering shrieks ridp m the air. A trembling sinking sen- satipn epizes my bpsom> apd runs thropghjpvei'y part of my frame ; and, as if by the wand of the necromancer, instead of " reposing byelysian water- B 5
10 fills," Iseem to sit shivering amidscencs of wretchedness, and shapes of hoiror. Would that I couľd hide fiom my¬ self the pictures of oppression and in¬ justice, the increasing instances of the mutability of fortune, winch are pei¬ petually forcing thcmstlves on my ob«· servatton' The dreadful exhibitions of the continent I will not touch upon Even at home, I see new men insolent and tyunmcal in their prosperity, without birth, and without personal pre eminence, holding ci ery rank, and filling eviry depigment I know no principii on which this tan be deft nded An aristocracy of birth stands upon many laring foundations, it is not only an ancient establishment to wluih
π we are bound to submit, but it may rely on abstract reasoning for its advantages. Any other kind of aristocracy is «dious and irnnting, except that cau¬ tious and sparing intermixture ivhich arises from great personal qualities, the extitions of great valour, or splendid intellect, in stations of rank and com¬ mand. These are the sources from whence alone the c\hansted streams of our ancient nobility ought to be re¬ cruited. Yet it is in general found that success seldom attends those who are most qualified either by nature ou honom ibly-dnected industry, and that advancement in the world " Stoops to the forward tnd the bold. Affects tlie naughty »id tbe proud, The gay, the frolic and the loud *
12 The counteraction which birth gives to these evils is the best defence of aristocracy, for " there is rarely any Tismg," sijs Lord Bacon, " but by a commixture of good and evil arts, but it is reason the memory of then values remain to their postent), and their fiults die with themselves Ceitamly kings that have able men of then no¬ bility, shall find iis>e in eniplojing them, ind ι better slide into then bu- biiiess, for people naturally bend to them as born in some sort to cora¬ ni md * " When I see these things, I im some¬ times on the veige of losing my admir¬ ation for that gloiious conslitu'ion, tint
13 gradually ameliorated fabric, that won¬ derful combination of human wisdom, wliich seems to have ariived at its acme with the accession of the Prince of Orange. From that standard of prac¬ tical excellence my opinions will nei er depart, nor will they cease to regret the smallest deviation of others from it. Far be it fiom me to wish to stifle the reivards of mei it. And little do I think that the mobt splendid or the most vir¬ tuous qualities are confined, or even moie ficquently bestowed, to illustrious descent *, But arc coronets and high
и high offices the only rewards ? Klevar tion should bc gradual. In the middle mind surmounted all impediments. No coarse employments, no deadening labours, could de¬ press his sensibility, or his fire. His whole brain seems to have been nothing but q fountain of poetry. He could not even turn down a mountain- daisy with his plough, but bis fancy became lighted.up with я constellation of exquisite images, and he vented himself in an enchanting ode; and all this mider the pressure of the most mel-.ncholy prospecis, when he could see no refuge ¿ut across the Atlantic. How finely he touches on it in his close I " E'en thou, who mourn'st the daisy's fate, That fate is thine—no distant date ; Stern fluin's ploughshare drives elate, Full on thy bloom, ■ ТШ crush' d beneath the furrow's weight Shall be thy doom!"
15 rants of society a small advancement will gue an opportunity for the display of all the abilities that fall to the lot of the generality of mankind He, who neilhei from extraordinary gifts of na¬ ture, nor from his early occupations ind connexions has had pretensions for forming habitual hopes of high rank, his no reason to be disronttnted at not attuning it To him the want
l6 af it ıs nt> rnjurj. But to those whep «re born in different circumstances, в id who possess at the same time acute sensib lity alid aspiring and predomi¬ nant tal-nts, who look up to thui in¬ cesters, and see most of them in a situation so fai above themselves, to those the deprivation is cruel and in¬ sulting, while it is stu' aggravated by the facility with which thty, w ho hive had no claim«, are mounted over then heads Would that I could hide fiom my¬ self pictures still mon disgusting thin unmented honours—tbe false ind in j soient splindor of new and ill got opu¬ lence! It is a radical defect n the financial system, established for more
17 than a century, winch g ves such vast advantages to the monied ovei the landed intereist Swift saw it very long ago and strongly predicted its conse¬ quences * Of all the odious sources
18 of sudden YVeillli the ginibling tric).s of tht Stock cxclnnge aie tht most odious, ind tlit qiulmts, by yyIuUi every kind of dcilci in money -icquiKs a laige fortune, tlie most mean and tht most offensive lo otheis. Theie is something comparatively less lepulsivc even m the prosperity of Indian extor- tioneis, for there is at least some spirit in separating themselves from all their early habits and connexions by the broad Atlantic, and encountering the danger of seas and climates for their objtct Though " animated with all " the avarice of age, and all the impe-
'У 1 tiiosit) of j oulh, the} roll in, one iftei " mollici, Yvive after wave and there ' is nothing befoie the ejes of the na- " tn es but in eiidless, hopeless prospect " of nev\ flights of birds of prey anil я pa«sagt, with appetites continually " renewing for a food, that is contimi- " illy vrastmg,—and though, when " then prej is lodged m England, the " cries of India are given to seas and I " winds, to be blown about in every " breaking up ot the monsoon, over л " remoteandunheanngocein,—though " in India all the vices operate by vv hich, " sudden foi tune is acquired,—)et in " England are often dtsplajed, by the " same pci sons, ι e virtues which dis- " pense hereditaiy Yvealth * "
20 Overwhelmed with the gloomy pro¬ spect óf public affairs and the weight of private injuries, my broken spirits are dl able to perfoitn the task which Occasional flashes of hope have imposed Are then the bright figures of youthful imagination indeed depai ted fur ever ? Can no efforts brmg them batk ? Will they always be deaf to the call of mag¬ nanimity end elevation of soiţi î The basenest of the bustling sons of men, the darkness of the political hemi¬ sphere, the wrongs of malice and ca¬ lumny, cannot efface or alter the chaims of nature When we behold the golden oib of evening, as he de¬ scends behind the waves of the west, ihiowmgnpliisiays, ..nd tmging the skirts of tlie clouds with a crimson
21 flame, ought not tbe well-regulated bo¬ som to forget its groveling troubles, and catch inspiration at the picture? When the first beams of the morning de¬ scend into the valley, and as they pierce the grey mists, discover to us the flocks and herds eagerly enjoying the fresh¬ ness of the earth's increase, how can the soul refuse to be in unison with this state of existence ? Away, then, with this despondence, this pusillanimous submission to the tyranny of the vvoikll Servile mußt be the spirit capable of metttal exertions-, in which the insolence of vulgar gran¬ deur excites any other sensation than a smile. He who can look on the scenery of nature with an eye of sensibility, OT
122 Tetire ť3 the creations of his own fancy, will liud little in the artificial enjoy¬ ments of society Yvoith his seeking He, who degiading the intellectual ■gifts with which nature has endowed him*; he, who forgetting the less lig¬ nined and valuable, but still not чтт-
23 portant, possession of bitli from a line of illustrious ancestois, shrinks before coarse and stupid, or upstait power, is a renegade unworthy of the bounties he lias received! Far be from me suoli imbecility and meanness ! With Пгау let me learn
•-—to mountj and keep my distant way Beyond the limits of я vulgar fate, | Beneath the good how far, but far above the great!
24
CHAPTER If. Ат length, then, I resume my confi¬ dence, and again take up the story of Le Forester. If I have had the good fortune to interest tb ; reader in any de¬ gree about hirr, some anxiety must have arisen from the uncertainty of his fate. Le Forester had for many days been suspicious that some mischief was in¬ tent':d, and that there were people lurking in the neighbourhood of his walks whose designs were fixed upon him. The luxury of a twilight ramble, and a bold and almost rash hardiness, 3
Sä perhaps a little increased by the gloomy despondence of his mind, prompted him, in spite of these observations, to continue his solitary wanderings. In one of those dark warm spring days, which at every short interval are refreshed by fertilizing showers, he thought he often saw from the win¬ dows, in the course of the afternoon, two or three strange figures sitting or skulking about a stile that opens, from one of the most obscure pathways of the wood, upon the extiemity of the lawn. A painful curiosity seized his mind, and he could not keep his eyes from watching tbem. As soon after dinner as the family had left him in the eating-room alone, he again went VOL. III, С
«6 to the window, and though there was β very thick mist, he imagined he still saw the same figures. His uneasiness increased, and he took his hát, and di¬ rected his course to the spot. But be¬ fore he had risen half way up the hill the shapes disappeared. He still hastened forward. The fresh¬ ness, the fragrance, the feel of al! na- •ture reviving around him, drew him On. He -ascended to the wood, and turned his searching eyes in every di¬ rection, but saw no living fdrm. He sWw rettled some time 4m the style it- «elf; but »11 was quiet. He began to think that what he had seen were the tricks 'of his fancy playing on' the indistirJctae¿s of » misty atmosphere.
ft? He then tesolved to extend his walk at an hour so congenial to his taste. He crossed the stile, and pursued the footpath of the wood, till he reached the other end. Not a sound had he heard, except the drops of rain that pattered among tbe new, half-opened, leaves, or here and there the closing, tremulous, notes of some of the earliest birds, who were, most of them, retired to their rest; or perhaps the momentary rusfle of some hare, that darted across the footway. In the exquisite sensations of this walk he had forgotten his anx¬ iety, and, loci in his musings, was in¬ sensible of time. At last, when he found himself at C2
2β ■íbc wood s most distant boundary, he recollected the lingth of his absence, and the fear lest his mother should be alarmed made him hasten back. He rather ran than walked, so that on Ins return to the stile he found himself almost breathless. He was now within reach of the house, he ventured therefore for a few mmutes to take his former seat, to recover himself His bosom panted, but his spiuts were re- freshed " I see the lights, ' said he to himself, " glani tng along the windows, it is later than I thought—but this ramble has done me good, and I shall be with my mother m a moment!" At that instant he heard a loud whistle, he felt his arms pinioned, and two fellows jumped out from opposite
eg bushes, and seized him by the collar. "We have got you at last, then, my mastei'I" cried a boaise voice with a volley of oaths —" Ah ! blast him, have wc," cried another; "and we'll keep hira too, Jack Tigerface!"— " We'll squeeze him for it," ci ied a third in a shriller tone, pulling him by the shoulder from the stile—" we'll squeeze him, damme boys, for all the trouble and dodgings he has gi'n us !" The amazement, which Le Forester felt at the first instant of this attack, was succeeded by а cold agony at the thought of the desperate hands into which he knew he had fallen. It was in vain that, as soon as he recollected himself, he demanded their authority; C3
they told bim he snould see that soon enough. They now foiced him away with them a walk of several miles acros» the country, till they came to a bne alehouse, where they had left a one-horse chaise. In this carriage, after they had taken some refreshment, they placed Le Forester, still pinioned, be¬ tween two of them, while the third sat behind. The sufferings of his mind cannot be described. No fortitude could render him calm in a situation so very terrific. At first he gnashed; his teeth, and writhed with the torment of hie feel¬ ings. But at last he sunk into a stupor. Tbe night was dark; the road was rough and narrow. They continued
SI to travel till the mo-'ning began W gleam upon them. Just as the first rays of the snn began to discover some of the scenery around them, he observed that they were within the enclosures of some neighbouring house, and imme¬ diately aftertţţaţţjs saw/ through the re¬ tiring fogs a cluster of cbimnies. Th* ruffians droye into the yard, ordered him to get out, and opening the back¬ door by « key, in theie possessüpa, led him into the house. It appeared the remnant of a larger mansion. The kitchen was large, and on the hearth were the dying embers of a wood-fire. They gathered round the fiie, perfectly at their ease, and collecting a supper from the provision») C4
за of the house, solicited Le Forester, with rude and coarse familiarity, to partake of it. The unhappy young man turned sick at the offer, the tears came inta his eyes, and, fearing he should faint, he requested a glass of water. They obtruded upen him a dram in its stead, with a new velley ef paths ; but he re¬ fused it, and still urging his request, they brought bim what he asked fer. He drank it, and felt his nerves firmer.' They new carried him up a circular stone staircase to a lonely room, which seemed to be placed in a tower. An ancient couch stood in a corner of the apartment, covered with some coarse rugs. Here he was told lie might re¬ fresh himselt' As they left him the
33 heavy -studded door grated on its hinges, and he heard, with a kind of horror, the rusty bolts shoved violently into their sockets. He looked around him, but all was dim ; and the morn¬ ing light pierced but faintly through the narrow-grated window. His heart sunk, despondence seized him, and fatigue and stupor soon brought on a profound sleep. When he awoke it was mjd-day, For a few moments he could not re¬ collect where he. was; but as soon as he recalled his thoughts, the horror of his situation came with double foroe upon him. He listened, but not a sound was to be heard ; all was fearful silence; he would hW risen, but his strength C5
34 failed him. The shocking idea now came across him that he was to be left in this situation to stane. Weakened as his firame and spirits were, thi» thought appeared insupportable, and he sunk senseless on his hard pillow. As soon as he recovered, despair gave him strength to rise, and he tra¬ versed crew part of the room to examine if it afforded any opportunity for an escape. His steps were htard ; a per¬ son soon ascended the stairs, unbarred lhe door, and one of the ruffians ap¬ peared with a plate of humble food *' There, my master," cried he, " make ycurself content ibr a few hocus, and you will soon be moved from this d—d hole t" Le Forester cast a look
35 ef horror and indignation at him, but could not speak a word. When the wretch was gone, tlie cravings of hun¬ ger, and a deşire to obtain itrength for the trials he had to undergo, made him. devour what was brought him. Hf then with difficulty climbed the wm· Cow, in the feeble hope of discoveiing somt means of liberation. H? saw bt¬ low him an old-fashioned garden, not I totally neglected ; and in a few minute» ι he thought he saw the figure pf an ţk- I gant female, whose approach h« witçhetb with trembling solicitude. ι The figure came slowly down the walk, and seemed hke that of a beau¬ tiful girl of sixteen, vybo appeared wrapt in meditation, and totally r«~ *6
зб girdless of all around hci She turned, and ascended the walk agam, and placed herself on α bench at the uppei end He then heard a low soft voice, as if singing in a melancholy tone He listened, some of the notes came float¬ ing towards him on a gentle bieeze, and he thought them the most exqui¬ site that had ever met his ear She rose, and again mov ed dovv n the walk, still repeating her song It absorbed his whole attention, and at last he distin¬ guished the foliou mg words. SONG I nee the bud open, 11 ear the bud sing, The flutter of joy s on the tree ; The 1 mbb in the valley all frisit in a ring, 1\\c lowing herds greet the arrival of spring ; All nature is laughing save me '
37 I have no one to whom I can pleasure impart } I have no one my converse to shartj This solitude chills all the flow of ny heart; And my breart with regrets of more venomousdarfi These figures of checrfulnesi tear! О why am I thus in seclusion immur'd} In secrecy why was I nurst f О wherefore so anxiously am I secur'd í * Tliis dull lonely Ufe can no more be endur'd j The bonds of my prison I'll burst' I have heard the owl hoot, I have heard the gl.osţ shriek, And the storm shake tlie tower and the tree ¡ I have cower'd round the fire, when my lips djr'd not speak j But like these sure no trials my spirits could breáis. When dll arc delighted save me 1
38 CHAPTER Ш.
The figure, the voice, the expressioni!, the sentiments, produced such a stranger mixture of feelings on Le Forester, that fcr a few momepts his senses, were sus¬ pended. As soon as he recollected him¬ self, a 6udden ray of hope darted into his mind. His eyes, which had re¬ mained fixed' on tlie lae'.y, still behekl her traversing the garden. He thought he heard her, though more faint and low, still dwelling on the same notes. As soon as she again approached
39 within hearing of his grate,, he dis¬ tinctly, in a weak and melancholy tone, repeated β stanza of the song. She started; looked round and above her ; stopped again ; hurried forward a fevy paces, then again stopped, and listened, Fcai seized her; her whole frame he- came agitated; a thousand supersti¬ tious ideas crowded on her mejnory; it could not be echo; *' Sweet Echo, seeeetcst nymph, that lives unseen.'" She then seemed more composed, and again listened ; and he again repeated the stanza. She perceived the direc¬ tion whence the voice came, and fixed her eyes on the tower. Le Forester had unhasped the nar-
row casement, and sat with a wan countenance and dishevelled locks at the opening. The instant she saiv bis figure she started, and ran to the top of the garden. In a fewr minutes she returned, as if impelled by curiosity, and slowly, and with much hesitation, 'at last came under the window. He then dropped a note written with a pen¬ cil on a fragment of paper in the fol¬ lowing words : " ANQEL OF 1IEAVENİ , , " Let me intreat you to exert yourself towards the liberation of one ivho is in danger of being muidered or starved to death. He is nc criminal, but tie Victim of lawless and' blood-
41 thirsty power and revenge. You may depend uppn his honour; and if you have the slightest emotion of pity in jjour bosom, you will not fall to give him yeur assistance without loss of time. To-morrow may bc too late. G. L." Le Forester saw the'paper safe in her hands, and observed her retire with ap¬ parent agitation. ' As she hurried away, she cast back one glance lovvärds him, in which he flattered himself be per¬ ceived sensations of pity. As tbc last glimpse of her figure withdrew, he felt a pang of acute privation, and retiring from the window threw himself in an agony on the couch.
42 In that situation he lay for some hours in inexpressible solicitude, watch¬ ing every sound, and sometimes flat¬ tering himself that he heard the soft tread of a female step on the staircase. These hopes a fevy moments always dissipated ; the sound died away, and all vvas chilling and fearful »ilence. He rose and again climbed the win ■ dow; but no enchanting form was now wandering in the garden ; no melting notes came undulating upon the air. A dreary stillness sat over every walk and shrub; the birds were retired to their rest, and the shades of twilight were hastening ovci every object. His heart swelled, tlie tears cam,e into his eyes, and leaning liis feverish fortjhead
43 jgainst the cold and liuavy stone-mul- lions, he yielded to the pressure of mo» incntary despondence. The horrible shape of despair now expanded into л figure still more ter¬ rifie; the remembrance of bis mother, of his home, of Emily Mason, rushed upon his mmd, and be was roused into phrenzy. He hurried across the room | with frantic motions ; he beat his head . against the door, and raved to the un- 1 hearing walls. At last exhausted, he I sunk once mere upon his comfortless bed, where he lay for an hour or two, sometimes ip distressing and interrupter! sleep, and sometimes tort» by agonising thoughts,
a Tn this state he saw a gleam of light flash along the wall and disappear. After a moment's interval it again seemed to dart fiom behind a fiagment of tapestry, which covered one end of the apartment, and again it disap¬ peared. His curiosity was now awaken¬ ed ; he listened, but heard nothing. A third time the light came, and streamed írom beneath the tapestry across the floor. Presently he heard a soft step, Which he thought approached in the same direction ; and his heart beat, and his hair stood on end. In an instant a bolt was pushed gently back, the tapestiy shook, and the form of the lady, whom he had sec» in the gaulen, etood before him.
For a moment Le Fprester was; speechless with astonishment ; he then sprung fiom his couch, and fell at her feet. Her figure, her face, her expres¬ sion, were such, that at first sight he had almost doubted if Emily Mason had not found her way to his relief. As he looked again, she appeared still 5 ounger, and not so tall. " Angel of mercy," he cried, " have jou indeed heard my prayer ; and are you come, to my assistance?"—" Hush!" said the gill in a tremulous whisper, " vve shall be evei heard, and then I am ruined ; but what can I do for you ?''— Her beauty, the tenderness of her voice, her likeness to Emily, overcame hurí with new sensations. He seized her hand, and pressed it to his lips, She
«б trembled and drew back, and the tears came into her eyes. He was still upon his knees, but could not part with her hand ; nor could he utter a word for the convulsive sensations that rose in his throat. " What can all this mean ?" she continued ; " who are you? why are you here?" At this in¬ stant a fear struck her that he might be a maniac; and she uttered a half- suppressed shriek. He recovered his utterance ; " О do not fly me," he ex¬ claimed, " thou angel of light, do not fly me. I am not an ohjeet of terror, hut of pity. Help to liberate me from these ruffians, and I and all my family will worship you !"—" О heaven!" she answered, " cen the old man and wo¬ man, to whom I am entrusted, be in
47
league with ruffians'"—" They are, they must be," he replied ; " the ruf¬ fians òf Lord Forestei !" At the name of Loi d Forester she stai ted and grew pale, and seemed al¬ most ready to drop the light she held, and to faint in his arms. Some half- formed words died on her tongue ; but she recollected herself, and stood for a moment silentand flıöııg'litfül. <¿ Speak," she then continued, " for there is some¬ thing about you which I cannot refuse to trust, 'however Impruderit ; speak ; no time is to be lost ; wteit can I do for you'f"—" 'Release me from this prisdn," he anáwereti ; " you can do it by the way, whiíteVèr it may be, by vihich you ettmfc nftKerl" He looked
4S up on her divine countenance, and saw the struggles of doubt and fear yielding to the emotions of pity and generosity. " And what will become of me?" she faintly sighed ; "ibut come, follow me, and we will trust to the protection of Heaven!" She drew back the tapestiy; and when they liad passed thiough the secret door behind it, which she desired him to shu f after them without noise, she led the way along a narrow irregulai passage thiough several small dtseitcd aparbnente, till lliey airived at her own cliarmber. But hence there seemed no şale exit but through the window. This was not veiy high ; but the night was now very dark, so that he could
49 not see the distance fioin the ground His d liieicr scimed veiy fciitul of luí hizaiding such a desce it A thousand mingled feelings ex¬ pressed thtm both The gnl, who, all simplicity as she vvab, had now had mejre oppoitumty to notice his peison and mannets, vtas fully convinced he deserved her pity and confidence But her delicacy began tobe alarmed; the awkwardness of the situation, his wild looks, and the profusion of gratitude and admiration which in the overflow¬ ings of bis heart he poured foi tb, ilmost overwhelmed hei, and totally took in ay her self possession A steun was using it lamed hard, VOL III D
so and the wind blew loudlj at inleivals. It was too hazardous to lose any time. He might be missed before he was safe. " Good beavtns 1 " she cried, " what is to be done ? You cannot run the risk of that high window, noi can you venture out in this tempest. You had better go back to yom prison to night, and to-morrow peihaps we can con¬ trive something bettei."—" No, my angel," he replied firmly, " I can bear the pelting of the temptst, 01 any dan¬ ger, but the cruelty of theie ruffians and then employer. I go, then is a cord fastened round yondei box ; let me take it, and I will easily descend " He untied the cord, and, fixing one end of it within the room, he ap- 7
51 proached to take leave of her. She was leaning with her elbow on a piece of furniture in deep meditation. He looked on her countenance; it was agi¬ tated and unhappy; and the likeness tn Emily Maspn struck him still mprc strongly than before. He seized the band which hung by her side, and pressing it to his lips and his bosom, he sighed forth his fervent thanks and good wishes. The tears streamed down her cheeks, but she could not speak a w ord. He rose and kissed those cheeks and those precious tears ; but still her bent seemed too big for expression.' " You go, then, at last," she said, " and may good angels protect you I I am left here to dreary solitude, or perhaps to more dreadful horrors ; to these ruf¬ fians from whom ypu are flying!" d2
52 These woids darted Iile Ij^htaimţ upon Le Foreäter's soul. In the fiţst enthusiasm of gratitude and tenderness be was about to preas her to accompany his flight. Honour, clchcicy, the image of Emily Masoi., the danger, the tem¬ pest, whieh now grew louder, all in¬ stantly overcame this /dea. The tuai bréame too severe to be continued. " If I am soi fortunate as to escape," said-he, " my incessant efforts shall be directed to the wishes and happiness of my deliverer!" He pressed his lips to hers; they sighed a farewell; and tearing himself away, he opened the window, and in a bold despair de¬ scended by the rope í о the ground. The melancholy contriver of his «,cape heard him reach the bottom in
safety ; but her heart sunk, as the rain now increasing to torrents beat against the house. After some time she closed the sash, and retired to bed, over¬ whelmed with tsndefneMand anxiety.
и
CHAPTER IV.
Le FoRESTEn found himself in a lane, the track of which was the only one he could follow ; for it was too dark to attempt a bye-path. When his eyes had been a little while inuied to this gloom he saw better ; here and there he could indistinctly mark some ob¬ ject ; and he hurried along in defiance of the wind and iáin. The tempest at last became tremen¬ dous. Torrents poured on his head, and inundated the road; trees groaned be-
55 neath the eddying blasts, and seemed as if they would fall and overwhelm h ; m. Fatigue at last rendered him Incapable of proceeding. He took shel¬ ter under a crazy ledge fpr cattle, and threw himself dripping with wet en some dirty straw at tbe farther end of it. But cold shivering pains seized his limbs, and, combining with the uneasi¬ ness of his mind, would not suffer him to sleep. After passing two hours in this com¬ fortless place the storm abated, and he resolved to proceed on his way. At fiist he had almost lost the use of his legs ; he moved therefore slowly, and with pain. It was still very dark, and d 4
í6 «be could not venture out of the beaten ■track of the public road. As the tedi- (Ousness of jhis pace gave bini tinte j,o íRifteot, he }iegan to dqspak ï for jtt jţouldnot, he,cooqcrved, bejorigiiiefsre ^|e jinçrning wpuld dawn, and (then he f^WÍÍ %УГ>»Ь1.у be puisued. Frtţgse, fllfteşs, and distraction of wind, again pycrearne him; ancj again he found the necessity of resting himr self. The clouds began to break, and i, фуг i>ys of Ijgbt appeared in the f^sţ. £ţe peroejved a stile that opened into the fields, and pchincj the hedge on Ще Qtber s^dc lay some bats of nevv- ^ejled limber. On these he threw him- ¿¡elf along, an4 repaserj ¡lis aching limbs.
»7 A very short time had elapsed, when, through the stillnesa of the air, he heard the echo of horses feet along the lane, and the faint murmur of human voice·; The sounds came nearer and nearer ; the travellers moved at a rapid pace, and Le Forester instantly suspected them to be his pursuers. He resolved to continue in his position, and trusted that, while he lay still, the dimness of the light would protect him from a discovery. They approached, and every step now beat like death upon his heart. They had scarcely passed him, when one of the horses tripping violently over a rolling stone, his rider uttered a volley of oaths, which, by the well- D5
98 known, tone of the voice, convinced him his fears were tcvo true. They hur¬ ried on; and soon after the last sound of their tread died on his ear he rose, grateful to Providence for his escape, and determined to explore his way across the fields, in which the increas¬ ing rays of the morning now induced him to hope he might be successful- He fixed on a path, which, he thought, led in an opposite direction from that which his pursuers had taken, and reached the top of an high hill at the moment when the fogs were, receding before the kindling rays of the sun. As the expanded view of fields, and woods, and cottages, and hamlcls, opened before him, he turned.
«g sick at the idea that all this cheerful scene weuld probably afford bim less protectien than desert heaths or solitary forests, the haunts of wild beasts, to him less cruel than human beings I Hunger and thirst began to press upon him ; but he dared not enter a human habitation. He avoided the sight of " base mankind," and skulked along the most unfrequented paths, The fields and hedges afforded him a harsh and scanty sustenance; and аз the day advanced he found some re¬ pose, not totally ungrateful, on sunny banks. Towards the afternopn ho ventured through a village or twp; but fpund »6
(¡α his heart beat with fear, as the eyes pf the Yillagets seemed fixed upon hini with no common curiosity. He now hurried along the road, which seemed the most obscure, till it opened upon a common, where, on a .hand-post, a newly-written paper, in very large let¬ ters, met his eye. But what was his astonishment and horror when he read on it the word ESCAPE, and under¬ neath it a description of his own per¬ son, who was there described to have been guilty of murder, and to have fliel from those who had him in custody I A reward of five hundred guineas was offered for retaking him. He became for a few moments stu- pificd; his senses were gone; and be
g» stood motionless upon the spot. Whea he recollected himself, he ian he knew net whither, till his breath failing him he Buhk upon the ground- Here hit ]ay fpr some hours among the broom and furze of the heath, in a state of frantic and indescribable suffering. When he could think at all, he per¬ ceived too plainly that the diabolical revenge of Lord Forester was about to enjoy its full swing, and that it had been kept off but to " deal at last the mightier bfoyv." On truth and innocence he could not rely against the unbounded wickedness and power of such a man, And be foresaw that he should at length go out pf life in the character of 9 hoţ T πι} criminal. Such complicated misery
.62 as this it was impossible for human fop titude to endure. Fits of madness seized his brain, and an hundied times he de¬ tei mined to end his wretchedness by his own hand. But an over-ruling Providence aneated the lifted instru¬ ment ; his recollection returned. " Shall I," said he, " be so cowardly, and so false to my Maker, as to incur the pu¬ nishments of eternity for the sake of avoiding evils which, however great, must have a short termination ?" The storm of his bosom at last ex¬ hausted itself; he grew calmer; and seeing a long track of woodlands in the horizon,', he made his way towards them, hoping he might find a retreat there for the approaching night, Still
I
бз it was impossible to divest his- mind of terror at the sight of every unman be¬ ing who came near him. As he lingered along, wrak and weaiy, he every mo¬ ment imagined he heard the footstep» of his pursuers at his back. Still is he mov d, he look d behind, And heard a voice m every wind. The cheering warmth of the чип was now hastily departing ; the gay mists of evening weie gathering upon his retreat, and viat flocks of rooles were pointing the direction of Ins own flight, when be reached the outskirts of the coverts, which he had chosen for his biding place. He entered a nanow and half-overgrown path, and for a
θ* tong while pursued it in defiance of th<i obstacles Q f boughs and brambles. Once he heard the sudden shouts of riot and merriment so near him, that he believed himself lost. In a few mo¬ ments his path led across a more public truck ; where, by the light of a blazing fire, he saw a band of gipsies collected round their kettle. He passed on, without being perceived, but was long uneasy lest he should be met by some stragglers in his progress. All, how¬ ever, was solitary and silent. The clouds of night grew more thick,, and the very obscurity and loneliness, which he had so anxiously prayed for during the day, became tctrific.
05
At length he heard the roaring of a torrent, which made him fearful how to proceed. He soon came to the edge of a high precipice, overhanging a ra¬ pid stream- ï'he mçon, vVbicb during the storm of the preceding night had been totally hid, began to break thrçugh the gloom W.Ub rome faint gleams of hjw silvery ray«.. The following ode røtjeayoure to de¬ scribe h>Ş situation and feelings at this time. In such an agitation of mind it cannot be supposed that he was aţ lei¬ sure for composition ; but a friend, to whom he afterwards imparted his de¬ spair, made it the subject of his rash attempt.
бб ODE. , ΤμΖ VICTIM OF DESPAIR. Wan Moon, behind that cloud Why dost thou h de thy silvery raye ï О do nut thus thy beami enshroud From the lorn wretch who for thy guidance prayal While now I tread the precipice, ' And hear tlie roar of torrents rise, Break forth, and lead my stept, my spirits calm» And on my bursting heart shed e'en a transient balm 1 To thee'the maniac bends, > To thee he pours the mournful sigh [ f But not thy moody light attends One 'mid the frantic v tnbe so sad as I ! О save me from the fiend Despair, Who in this darkness seems to wear A giant shape of more terrific-mien. While by the mists of night his form is dimly seen. Perch'd on some giddy height Behind me oft the demon sits ; The elements combine their spite ; BcUows the wave, and howls the blast by fits*
67
ITrg'd by the fiend « revengeful hand Upon the trembling edge I stând ----- —» ¿ut lav'd by heaven recall my erring feet, tnd from the y n wiling gulpli with iHuddcrlng дне retreat. And oft m dreary della With midnight s sable mantle Clad,* He tills the air with piercing yells». And brings to Fancy s \iew the wretch with tor- Then when the sufferer wild with woe ■Would arm ag-imst himself the blow, Strives to strike home the instrument of death, And from the gasping wound let out the vital breath. Fair orb, Bend forth thy rayj Binieh the phrenzied phantom crew, Who round about the demon play, And give the fiend a more distracting hue 1 Thou hist, Boft beam, no fairy spell The ruthless Power hinself to quell j But gloom less horrible thou canst bestow, And on his woe etmek rage г rümeı influence throw!
US
Wild Fury's bcadjong etarts* The laugh «nvulťd, the frantic Идя, The aereara, that through tlie weütin darti* And threats of withering nou. id that ¿hake tlie affrighted air, ■prom rat, О Utaven, in mercy chase) Mine bc De»paìr*i more miten face t, And lee no traaiient elupei of Hope appear. To mikt tbe buei tf Woe by cøatrut moro uveret
CHAPTER V.
Afteii the lapse of an hour or two, during which Le Forester's distraction and sufferings were indescribab!e, the wind abated, and the clouds dispersed. He heard the sound of a village clock undulate along the water, and ascend the woody precipice, on which he was wandering. The cheering signals of human habitation ν ibrated with sensa¬ tions of comfort over a heart already sick with such solitude; and lie re¬ solved to follow the track whence it came.
70 The moon slipne pn a path by wlueli ho descended from the precipice, and pursuing a foetway which he found along the edge ef the i iver, he soon entered a village, where the light ,fiom the windows pf a house at the farthei extremity attiacted his netice He heard, with α mixture ef fear and pleasure, the echo of human voices, and immediately obseiving it to be an alehouse, he ventured into it with the boldness of despaii Several rustic figures were still ca¬ rousing there, and, m the eagerness cf their clamorous altercations, had suf¬ fered him almost to approach the fiie before he engaged their notice His dishevelled hair, his wet and neglected
71 dress, his wild looks, all in a moment drew their eyes upon him; they be¬ came fiightened and silent; it struck tliem that he was a maniac escaped from bis keepen ι but when, almost fainting with fatigue, he dropped upon a vacant chair, and with a languid feeble voice intreated some refreshment, it was such a tone of sorrow and dis¬ tress mixed with the dignity of a su¬ perior station, that it affected every one round liim. He sat with his head leaning on his hand, while the suspended conversa¬ tion of the room was only renewed in murmurs and whispers. A glass, of warm brandy and water was brought him, with which, eagerly as he drank
72 it after long exhausture, he bct'ainc almost strangled. Iw a few moments, howevei, he felt himself revived ; hi* spirits roso, and observing, as he looked up, a stput, fieice-visaged man, who seemed to be viewing lum With fixed attention, he addressed him by remark¬ ing the storminess of tile night, and the fatiguing walk he had had. The man caught at the opportunity, ahd endeavoured, by a succession of cross- questions, to discover whence he came, and what was his destination. Le Forester's reserve on these points in¬ flamed his curiosity; and in a little while it was plain that a suspicion rose in the man's mind that he was a footpad.
I ;з As tins suspicion grew stronger, and seemed to spread among the company, it was not impciccned by Le Foiester. He piefciicd it to tlieir discovery pf the truth, and said nothing fo unde¬ ceive them. Then fears, their WPnder, and their hopes of rewaid, became evi¬ dent in their countenances and lan¬ guage ; 1 1!, uneasy and worn out, he solicited a bed, to which he might re¬ tire, hazardous as it vvas, rather than again encounter the hoirois of the night. The host appeared for some time veiy unwilling to accommodate him, till, by the inteifcicnce of some of tlie company, he offered a small apartment within his own, pii ^wliich he under- voe, nr. Ц p Λ f
74 look to spread some blankets on the 'floor for him. Luxury and ease are so much the creatures of comparison, that he accepted with pleasure and gra¬ titude even this humble and comfortless 'asylum for the night. No sqoner did he rise to take possession of this resting-place, than a man, who had but lately joined 'his companions, but had appeared particularly attentive to the conver¬ sation which was going forward, and to the person of Le Forester, followed the host when he lighted him up to his apartment, and eagerly ťhut the door as soon as he had entered it. This man, returning to the room with a grin of diabolical satisfaction, cried,
75 " Od rounds, my boys, I have ken- nillidhim, d—me, if I han't 1 and a pietty job vve hav e made on't to night, that's sartainl" robbing his hands.— " Ah, Jan Jovvlerl" exclaimed anothei, "what's all dis yow be's humming on us with now ? '—" No humming at all, by G — d," answered the first,it',don't you know who that fellow was I have been caging there ?" The whole room opened-their mouths upon lum at once. " Is he a footpad ?" they asked " No, no," replied Jowler, " better than áil that, I pramise you h( be the mur¬ derer that such a vast grand reward is offered for nrøprehending , and soil shall get more money, boys, than 1 1 , in count 1 " A clamour, and aimosta shout, rose through the room, and it б 2
76 was with difficulty that Jowler pre¬ vented his auditors from going up stairs, and tearing the wretched Le Forester from his bed, while the tri¬ umphant informer told his story with a thousand putrageous exaggerations. Jovvler endeavoured to convince them that he had secured his victim beyond the possibility of escape ; but it was not witliPut many rcmpnstrances that the host could, at a very late hour, disperse hiscompany to their own homes. Meanwhile Le Forester, worn out by four-and-twenty hours of fatigue and distraction, lay in a profound sleep, perfectly unconscious of the fate that awaited him.
77 But the merning had scarce began to å tvvn vvTien he was awaked by the tread ef several foptsteps, and the mur¬ murs pf several voices, in the adjoining apartment. Instantly the deor was un¬ barred, and Jowler, defended by a rusty musket, and fellpwed by several other figures ef a similar appearance, stood at his feet, and, in a savage but yet half-fiightened voice, erdered him to surrender himself as his ргь spner. ι ' Le Foiester knew resistance to be vain ; his voice was almost stifled by his feelings, but he mildly said, " You are mistaken ; if you were acquainted with my story, ypu would not think me deserving of this treatment; but I e 4
78 submit'" Jowl r, whose thirst toi the nwardtalone, of whu h he »had heard by the advertisement, had oveicqiut his cowardice, fe't triumphant instead of softened by I his mildness, and began to bluster with tlie most ungeneious ferocity " You need noti give )Oiir.\ s,elf-tlie-tití>uhie of these jneulte," cued) the- unhappy prisoner, "I am ready to stibimt to my fate' But whither will, you tarry me ?"—■* To the justice, sure, master," replied the fellow, " who will send you to the gallows, where all such-a» you be ought to go that s my minţi) mas|u, >f you will have it, OV-me if taut'" ) To provoke farther taunts from stich brutal wrc tthes as he vv as novi in the
79 ρογγ er of, wis only to add stings lo a condition already too afflicting to be en¬ dured He hurried on his clothes, there¬ fore, in silence, and was,soon ready to set off with his captor, who, accompanied by a posse of the village, bent his course to a distant magistrate, to whom the advertisement bid given a reference Duimg tbis walk the horrors of bis mind totally overwhi Imed his powers of utterance, and when he appeared before the magistrate, who seemed al¬ ready instructed m the part he had to act, be oftired no obstiuction to the oidei to convey him to a neighbouring pusor Bllt when be at length arrived at 14
80 that dreadful receptacle of misfortune and crime, and was delivered into the custody of a grim-looking turnkey; vyhen he heard the massy door locked uppn him, and was assailed from within by the clanking ef chains and the curses of despair; the instantaneeus agony pf the shock roused him from his torpor, and the pangs which darted through his mind deprived him at once of his reason ; so that, for the remain¬ der of that day and the succeeding night, he remained entirely insensible to his situation. "II . / On the next morning, when his re¬ collection began tp return, he found himself in a gloomy cell, with some accommodations, indeed, better than
81 tljose allotted to ordinary prisoners, but sufficiently dreadful to Jiave plunged him back into insanity. The horrpr t however, of the first impression was exhausted ; some portion of his natural magnanimity returned; and he felt, even from the excess of his affliction, some rebound of patience and fortitude. When, therefore, the gaoler paid him a visit, he conversed w¡'h hım calmly and with self-possession. , The. man, who had seen bini the preceding evening a poor convulsed object bereft of his faculties and regardless pt all around him, could scarcely believe; his eyes or ears. But the mannerin which he made his request for a more conve¬ nient apartment, the terms he offered, к 5
fø Ms nahïé, the< acrioıtat Of hi» con- riexltihs',! and'the referenci* he'gave to ftmilies yVeli known tb the· man him¬ self; sdon induced the fellow to pro- mìtó'à compliance. .: л '"Thaf'afterribon he was condtrcted to a' clikmbcr ivithin the part of the building which was inhabited by the ğaMer" himself, Here he found him- éelf comparatively well lodged, and hád leisiire for that reflection which enabled him to collect his distracted thoughts, to consider his· situation, and flêviSè the means proper to beipursued ifrideï tawumstanceS' of sin-h horrible anü'úriekampleő persecution. ·' 'He could riot hesitate to whom to
83, atribute, this mest infernal plojj uppp his reputation and his life; not dj¡| il, appear less frightful, because hç knevyi the author. He foresaw he was to be tried for tbe death of a man vyhqm he had killed in his own defence ; but he foresaw also that he ought not tco ( much to rely on his own iunoeencej to protect him from the intrigues of the power, the wealth, and the perjuries, of Lord Forester and his agents and minions. Indignation at this new instance of base malice and revenge in some mea¬ sure contributed to rouse and support his spirits. He wrote to HuntingţSeld ond other friends, but he topk precau¬ tions to have the extent of his misfortune sd
84 concealed from his mother, while he was anxieus she simuld be informed of his safety. Having thus unloaded his mind of softie portion of its anxiety, he sum¬ moned all his courage, and resolved to submit 10 his fate.
85 f CHAPTER VI.
The precautions which Le Forester had taken to have his miserable situ¬ ation concealed from his mother were, alasi unnecessary. That unhappy pa¬ rent, overcome with grief at his sudden disappearance, and at the dreadful pre¬ sentiment that some ill accident had befallen him, fell an immediate victim to her affliction. Convulsions seized her as soon as she missed him, from which, in a few days, she was released by death. Her niece, Harriot Actonj too, between the poignancy of her
«Ρ own feelings, and the distress of be- hpldmg a mpther's sufferings, was brought to the brink; of thç grave It was in vain that Huntmgfiild, who, when he first received the intelligence that his friend was lost, had no tom- fort to impart, now brought moje con- spliDg news, j The yypndfrful ule, me^uvvhile, spremi through the neigbbeurhood,and Oţţţ fd\ the adjpmmg r cou.rţţicîs. The ţnussjţries of,Lpţd Forjs^er were actiye, ^nd exerted evpiy art to Ыаркец the character of ţps unhappy pephew, and inflam,%ithei)Butøhe resentrnçnt; aıjaınşt himaSjfiiTipnşter pf fierce jind. înordi- ţţattf pass)onsi practised inicrimes, and 8ΐί)|ηεο\ w;tţi human bli^od. B,ut there
W'
was| a )a.rgo ; ipatfy, whq,bnewtoo weH the character of the uncle, and рЦсзрсД this prosecution to its genuine source. Eiriily Ma.spn, whose anxiety about Ιψ Forester many coriourrmg çırçuniT stances continued to, lricfeasp, di^ 4Pt entirely espape ţk e mflueqce çf these repqrts. She had imperfectly overheard roanyi conversations between her father and jMrş, Barker, wl^cli ¡at once j-aısed her curiosity, qnd her fears. How hei. father could llave known hup,, or vyhaf was the ground of Jus prejudmes, she was unable to, discover His kindness td hţir oto other points tommindetl all her rigwttitude. On this «iţbjeo)) ,bis jpegsi^s seemed to и«е «jmtastiíOiiniid-
ее ness. Yet he never directly entered On it before her. ' , In truth, the whole character and conduct of her father appeared myste¬ rious to her. It was but lately he WI taken notice of her, and there was al¬ ways sornethihg of concealment in his visits and manner to her. He told her he had been many years abroad ; yet things were often dropt in ' conversa¬ tion Very inconsistent with the truth of this assertion. She observed in limi a quick and vigorous mind, but his sen¬ timente seemeţl far from delicate or vir¬ tuous. In whitever he wifhedj he nevet expressed any' doubts from the restraint' of prmeipfe Or feeling ; and
89 always ridiculed it in others. He dis¬ covered familiarity with rank and power; but had introduced her to none of that station. It seemed as if he considered Le Forester beneath her, and that the alliance would be dis¬ graceful. Yet, as she in vain endea¬ voured to extort from him any hints about her own descent, and the name of Mason certainly conveyed no ideas of high birth, she could not at all guess the source of the superiority at¬ tributed to herself. Not that if she had been the daughter of the most il¬ lustrious family in the kingdom she would have thought herself at all de- giaded by Le Forester. AH the young men she had lately
о» scen, all the incense of attention ind fiattery which had beni paid to liti, had bepn, so fn fiom obUtcrating Le roresl,er from lier heart, that the imiğe every day took stronger possession there Her father had takpn a small house for her at the edge of a villige in Wiltshire, not twçnty miles, fiom Bath The diminutive чие of the rooms, thç little lawn bifore the front, the neat garden, the shrubbery and shady walks, vveţie not ill smfjsd for retirement Shepijojed the qmet, and the opportunity for those musings winch she loved The return of spring, the lucid cheerfulness of a sunny day, the fra¬ grance of the hedges and fiildb, ind
91 thi songs of buds, filled her bosom with delight, but the delight was mixed with the most tender melancholy. As she wandered up and down the wialk,s, or made more distant excursions from) the house, she said tt» herself, " Where ι» he who rules with? snob despotici sway over my bosom i Dötfcifle enjoy these bnlbant and reviving scenes? Do thcy sollen his beart, and melt it yy ith tenderness, as they do mine Ì ¡Ov is ho a prêy to grief and neiv misfor¬ tunes ι Alas ' what mystery hangs ova 1 Ids fat¿ > Is he to be for ever the vitlim of persecution from cruel and unnatural relations ? And how can the suspicion of in) affection ïnireasèj as it seems to doj the malne of his ene-t mies ? What cah my father meaii by
92 his strange prejudices î Scmctimcs I have almost imagined he is plotting with those who are said to bc contriv¬ ing the ruin of Le Forester 1 But why does he not speak to me ? Why does he nev.er mention his name before me î Why dees he not explain it tp rae, if he has any real tause of ppjeeticn to him î He tells me he iş anxious fpr my happiness : it wpuld not be diffi¬ cult for him to discover that my only happiness is placed in Le Forester. If my life be of consequence to him, he will sepn sacrifice lbat about which he affects tp feel cpneern, to his own unac¬ countable dislikes. But from the very day that Le Fprester fiist spoke with civility tome, all our intcrceuvse seems to have been watched, and attended
93 wiih fatality to us both Ytt he ap¬ pears to have been unknown to those to whose cire I was tommitttd Lady Cirlmgford had no previous ac quaintance with him But Mrs Oleary, her friend, was certainly some way connected with that wretched Lord Foi ester, and the woids I overheard, and the secret manner in which I saw tint odious woman once talk to the dreidful Irishmen, convmied me she was an accomplice in the schemes of the blood thirsty and usurping old eir!, and that theie was at that time some attempt to b- made on his nephew s life But how could I be implicated in it' How could his attentions to me be eonnected with the ráncom. which raged against him i Le Foreeter,
'9* who 'is ţferfeeitly master of the most minuto particulars of his own family, Seems to be aware óf no previous com¬ munity of blood, or friendship, or ac¬ quaintance with the name of Mason ! Sometimes I grow sick with thinking of these Üiings; my brain becomes confused,· and not all this balmy air, and these 6oothing images around me, can calm my mind, and soothe my spirits I" Her father visited her at this retreat ; bubhe was oftemabsent from her. His spirits seemed at this time particularly hurried ; one day Overflowing and ob¬ streperous ; another full of thought and anxiety. He could not observe the tremulous state of his daughter's health
95 without alarm ; yet his prejudices ap¬ peared to gi ow every day more inve¬ terate and violent. Mrs. Barker pos¬ sessed a haidness and habit of artifice vvhiih nothing could soften or put to sleep; but her inferiority of under¬ standing could not always disguise things from the penetration of Emily. The secret conversations between that lady and her father were always fol¬ lowed by looks and expressions of which Emily could too well interpret the general design. What would she have given, at this ciitical period, to I have had one short interview, one half- hom's conversation, with Le Forèsta'? Perhaps he coultl explain some of lite strange expressions which she ον<Ί' heard ! At all events, such an interview
96 would relieve her from much ef the anxious uncertainty which now almost distracted her ! As her mind grew every day mere a prey to uneasiness, she eveiy day more assiduously shunned the company of Mrs. Barker. As her own apartment was not always a retreat sufficiently sa¬ cred, she spent more hours in her seli- tary rambles, in which the inactivity of her gevcracss protected her from being equally intruded upon. On the distant downs the pure and unobstructed air seemed to revive her, and give a more free seppe to her thoughts. The silence, little broken except by the bleating of the young flocks, and the octasional voice of the shepherd, calmed the
Ö7 tumults of her mind. She often sighed and wept ; but there was a mixture of luxury in her sighs and tears. It vy as in one of these rambles that the warmth of the sun had tempted her to rest herself on a turfy bank, and in¬ dulge in her own musings, when she suddenly heard tnc trampling of a horse. She looked up, and saw a gen¬ tleman approaching her whom, with great agitation, she instantly recognised to be Dispenser; and who was almost equally surprised ai thus unexpectedly encountering her. She could hardly answer his embarrassed salutation, but, rising from the bank, seemed scarcely to know whith way to direct her course. Despenser, though he could voi. m. r
08 command little more self-possession than she could, yet addressed her with a politeness .which, in some degree, revived her recollection. Despenser. " This is a very unex¬ pected pleasure, Miss Mason." Emily. " It is indeed unexpected." Despenser. " I did not know you was in this neighbourhood." Emily. " I suppose we shall not be here long." Dqsfenser. " Arc you visiting, then ?" Emily. " I am here with Mrs. Barker —and"— Despenscr. " Your father ï" Emily (alarmed, and more eager). " Why do you inquire about my fa¬ ther ? You do not want to see him ?"
99 Despenser. " I—I—no—oh—no— certainly—I have no business with him.—But why do )ou look so alarmed and unhappy, Mias Mason ?" Emily (hunting into tears). " If I am unhappy, m.iy I not have sufficient reason ?" Despenser. " Undoubtedly you may; and I would sympathise with you, and not insult you." Emily (again alarmed, and looking up until eyes of inquity thiough lier tears). " Sympathise! On what would you sympathise?" Dcspenser. " On any sorrows which afflict so delightful a being as you are !" Emily. " It were better, Mr. De- apeiiser, would you leave me tu myself,· ri
too I have sorrows, but thcy cannot be told; and they are such as you can never sympathise with!" Despenser. " Miss Mason, I do not mean to persecute you. When I lately loved you, my love was mixed with hope; that hope is nov/ gone; but, as I cannot conquer my admiration, I would now have your friendship. I would soothe and pity rather than ag¬ gravate your sufferings." Emily (in an agonizing struggle between her gratitude and ihe new fears which these words gave rise to). " Sufferings ! Do you guess, dien, what they are ?" Despe'nser, 1' Perhaps I may know something mc|re of the unfortunate " (he hesitated, as he observed Emilys countenance change to a dreadful paleness) ; " but he is yet----------"
10) Emily, interi upting him, repeated the word " unfortunate," and then crying out, almost in a shriek, " What ! some new misfortune ?" fainted in his arms. They, by this time, had nearly reached the gate which opened into the shrubbery of her cottage. As he supported her for many minutes in this state, he became almost stupified with his alarm. At length she opened her eyes, but seemed insensible of her situation. The colour at last came into her cheeks, and she appeared to be recovering very fast; when the voice of her fathei roused her. She sprung out of Despenser's arms, rushed across the walk into tht house, and springing up into her chamber, fell lifeless on her bed. F,3
102 Pespenscr, as soon as he had reco¬ vered fiom his own amazement, en- deavqured to give her father some .account of this accidental and extia- ordinary interview. He was, however, too generous to hint at tbe subject which seemed most to have affected her. After watting about an hour in the house, be departed with a heavy heart, still sympathising with the sor¬ rows of Emily, of whom though he hşd cow eradicated all hope, he could not cease to feel th^ most tender and disinterested attachment to her. Emily continued to exhibit the most alarming symptoms from this additional shock upon her Spirits.
юз
CHAPTER VII.
Whill these things were passing, Le Forester remained in lus gloomy prison. The bitter cup of his afflic¬ tions had been now filled to the brim. His very despair gave him a frightful kind of calmness. The tender eooth- ing,the good-natured disguise,of friends, he would not admit. He loved to tear the veil from his situation, and lay it bare with all its horrors. He knew the full extent of that man's wickednesSj under whose persecutions bis whole life had been a series of misfortunes. VA
104 He knew that he had " a heart to conceive, and a hand to execute," any crime. He knew his power; and he did not dpubt that a deep and wcll- airanged attempt would bc made to sacrifice his life to false evidence. He almost as little doubted that the attempt would be successful. The ccunty assizes were approach¬ ing ; and he now obtained regular in¬ formation that he was to be tried capitally for putting te death, on slight and insufficient provocation, an inno¬ cent man ; who, in truth, was an atro¬ cious robber, whom he had been obliged to kill in his own defence, after the most gallant foibeaiance. To a man of feelings so exquisitely acute, of
105 a sense of honour so tremblingly alive, it would seem, that such a complication of evils, such 'inexpressible malignity of usage, would be beyond the strength of human magnanimity to bear. But " God tempels the wind to the shorn lamb." His gradual experience of the severest worldly sufferings bad braced bis nerves and exalted bis mmd to meet with firmness even this storm. He himself knew of no witnesses to the unhappy transaction; and all on which his friends could depend was his character, and a variety of circum¬ stantial evidence. But, on the part of the prosecution, it was reported that there were three or four witnesses who, though unnoticed by Le Forester, were, »5
юб or pretended to have been, within sufficient distance to have observed what passed. If the characters of these men could net bc impeached, Le Fo¬ rester's friends, at, well as himself, felt the danger he would incur. The wretch, who was the secret, though not the ostensible, attorney to conduct the prosecution, was а noto¬ rious agent of Loi d Forester's iniquities. Bııll-faceÎl, thick limbed, insolent where he dared, obsequious where his interest was concerned, heavy, stupid, and in- comprehensive in common affaiis; acute only in wickedness ; a mixture of bard impiety and methodistlc cant; bloodthirsty; a cold-blooded, smiling villain, without one weak vibratipn pf
107 the feelings of humanity ! Le Forester's friends found this horrid demon, who wore the shape of man, the most in¬ tractable of all the agents nf crime whom they had ever met with, er heard pr read of. He prpceeded with such cool and biazen professions of pure motives and publie good, as would, for a moment, almost have staggered an ordinary sagacity. His obdurate and relentless conduct, so unlike the effect of the mingled ingredients of wliich our nature is generally com¬ posed, while it deranged the usual guides to the movements of a rascal, rendered him, in an emment degree, ------ " Fit for treason», stratagem», and spoils." In contending with such enemies as ľ G
108 these what hope was there for Le Forester? How heroic must be the spinW that v could endure to be thrown so undeservedly on the brink of a grave, not only painful, but ignomi¬ nious ! But in the school of advcisity he had long learned a great command over hii thoughts and feelings. Had he suffered his mind often to dwell on painful subjects, his musings must soon have led to madness. But, even linde r the pressure of these unequalled misfortunes, he often exercised such a regulation of his thoughts that he could exclaim, " My mind tp mc a kingdom i» I" and sometimes he would repeat those exquisite lines of Lovelace ;
tog Stone walls do not a pruon make, Nor iron ban a cage, Minds innocent and quiet take That for an hermitage If I have freedom in my love, And ir my soul am free, Angele alone that soar above Enjoy such liberty I *
310
СНАРТЕН VIII,
Lóim Fokester was scaicely less oppressed with anxiety than his perse¬ cuted nephew, and there was a poig¬ nancy m his anxnty fiora which the other was free, for it was the anxiety of guilt and cruelty Restless and im¬ patient he wandered from place to place, but found no quiet and enjoy¬ ment whithersoever he went His splendid house in Grosvenor Squire, the ancient giandeur of Hedmdon, eould not soothe lus troubled spirit
m
See the hoary haired monster enter the most distant gateway of his park I Observe the pangs of hts countenance, as he casts his eyes on those noble fo¬ rests, the spoils of bis guilt ! To his sophisticated heart their natural gran deur ıs a reproach Convulstd by the contention of opposite fears, he feels that to retain them is full of torrnent, but to have them torn from him is а tonnent still more severe He mrses them as they frown upon him, and hui nes on to the house to escape from their gloom The towers already rise above the sunoundmg shades, tlie gateway opens its massy doors, and he enters Ye weighty piles, erected in days of greater glory and virtue, be¬ ware ye do not fill, and crush the
112 degenerate descendant of j our founder I How he trembles as he crosses the awful silence of the comts! Lit the dreary hall be lighted up, prepare the feast, and call the music Tbey are soon ready But nothing will avail See those gnm-visaged portraits, how they scowl upon bim, and seem about to walk out of their fraims' The mu¬ sic pleases for a moment ; but soon hi imaginen all these luxuries wasted from his possession, or sees himself the moik of .nfamy, or hears the groans of a murdered nephew ' —What hell can be equal to the agonies of a guilty t mscience ' Unfortunate Hedindon! Had thy lawful owner possessed thee, how dif-
113 ferent would have been the scenes to which thou wouldst have been a wit¬ ness I Godfrey Le Forester would have enlivened thy walls with the genuine charms of refined hospitality. Thy courts would hatte echoed with the sublime tones of ancient minstrelsy. Thy forests would have been deco¬ rated by his taste, enlivened by his presence, and protected by his fond¬ ness. What different goddesses would have haunted thy wood walks ; what different rites would have hallowed thy shades 1 The polluted nymphs and satyrs, that now profane thy groves, would have fled from them with hor¬ ror ; and Innocence and Contemplation would have shared with Solitude the empire over them !
114 How far from innocence, as well as from happiness, are the schemes now plotting under thy roof i The wretched attorney, Hoggart, hastens to meet his emplojer. The very towers seem to tiemble as he relates the infernal steps he has Liken to rid the blasphemous old man of his troublesome npphew. He relates hqvv he tampered with and misled the coroner's jury; he tells, wifh grinning triumph, the list which, in ¡incapacity of under-sheriff, he has had an opportunity of attempting to pack together to form the jury on the trial ; he boasts of the witnesses whom he has procured and instructed ; and, as he continues to unfold the tale of growing iniquity, interrupted by his client's eager observations, each almost
115 itarts at the seund pf his own volee, and glances fearfully round, lest the demon of all mischief should bfe already at his back. Miserable .old man! How little a while can these deceitful enjoyments, thus retained by new and aggravated crimes, bo preserved from the tor- rnentoiv who is,already «boui to fit his grjpe upon thy shoulders! Then how will the fresh debts thou hast contracted to the fiend serve to increase thy sufferings I Thou canst not be allowed more than a very few fleeting years at the utmost. Go, and atone for, rather than augment, those crying sins wliich ought to fill thee with in¬ describable ronsternatiorj. ^^ Ί
11б But these hopes are vain He, who has passed more than seventy years m habitu of wickedness, finds it too late for repentance —■ —facili» doeeneui Aventi, Seď rcvooire graduni luperaique evadere ad aurul. Hfl labor, hoc opu» e»t The villainous Heggart spurs him on He thinks there is now no ropm fpr α retreat, and evei y thing must be ven¬ tured Incessant intrigue, malignity, daring defiance, obstiepeious conviviality, and restless travelling, filled up the time till the day appointed for Li Foresters trial On the mght preceding that
117 awful day Hoggart was seen marshal¬ ling his witnesses dt the county town witl a blondlhtrsty eagerness which shocked the most indiffèrent people who obsei ed it 1 he affair attracted the intimt of almost all the multitude collected there, and fiili d them with gloom Not all the base falsehoods disseminated by the agents of Lord Forester to prejudice and poison their minds, could toun er iet the sympathy they ftlt for an unfortunate and per¬ secuted j oung man Hoggart himself, hardened m crimes as he was, felt ahimed, and was ftarful of encounter¬ ing the hoolmgs of tht mob, whp shewed a disposition to treat him with deserved rudeness
ne Lord Forester himself did not venture into tbe town, but waited incog, at the inn of a neighbouring village.
ufi
CHAPTER IX.
The awful hour at length armed Le Foiester, dressed in black, entered the court with ι solemn but firm step, and a collected countenante A gtneral gioin of sympathy ian through the hall as he approached the bar This give bis heai t a convulsed sensation, which for a moment he could not sup¬ press but mstintly he recovered him¬ self, and wiping offa smglt tear which tnckled down his cheek, he bowed with a digmfiid and inexpressible mignammity to the couit, A second
no murmur then ran like lightning through the spectators, and some of the ladies (for the ball was crowded with ladies) wept aloud Le Forester's countenance was now obsei ved to betray much agi- t ition, and his whole fíame trembled, but he again recovered himself A most affecting silence ensued, a dead ρ utse of many mmutts The counsel on the put of the piosecution caught the infection and foi in in stant losing his voice, felt unable to open bis cise At length he began in alow, tremulous, and scaicely audible tone, but as he went foi waid he grew bolder, and stated the rase according to his instructions, with a virjely of cruel aggravations, winch, if pioved, would
121 indeed fix onLeForestertheguiItofhard- heartcd murder This counsel, how¬ ever, continued to perceive the stream of the public mmd against him, and the-efoie intermixed ms statement with much candid cbservation, and much regret at the painful task imposed on him He paid some compliments to the eharactei he had beard of Le Forester, and 1 imtnted the occasional inconsist¬ ency of human conduct in a manner which foi a moment flushed the pale chtek of the unhappy man at the bar with indignation When the first witness was called, and came forward, it was with diffi culty that a loud hiss was suppressed by the interference of the court He vol. in, β
122 related bis story with a circumstantiality which no cross-examination could de- ( range. He said, that he and bis com- ι panions saw the prisoner pass along I the road from a field in which they were at work; and that he had not ad¬ vanced out of their sight and hearing before he overtook a man on foot, whom he nearly rode over. This man having remonstrated in a tone of civility ¡ end mildness at the prisoner's careless¬ ness, the prisoner, with many curses Und threats, aimed a blow with hie whip at the man's hqad, which felled bim to the ground; and not content with this, continued to repeat his blows, till the approach of the witness ţnd his comrades induced him to set spurs to bis horse and fly. They found
.123 the man already insensible, »nďbcfore í!}cy could remove ,him, or get ase.is.l- ance, he died· , ?uch was the account in which thi» ■witness persisted with an hardiness which no questions could discompose. Three more witnesses were called, who persevered in the same story with an undeviating accuracy, which was in it¬ self almost suspicious. The attorney Hoggart, lifting his brazen face, be¬ trayed his diabolical -delight, and the whole court sunk into anxious doubt and mournful suspence. Le .Forester, ■who had already prepared himself as a victim to perjury and false evidence, exhibited less surprise and emotion than diose who were not equally ao 02
114 íjnaintéd with the bold wickedness of Lord Forester and his agents. His countenance sometimes changed; дпй at one moment was flushed with in¬ dignation, and at another pale with horror ; but the elevation .of his spirit prevailed, and he soon resumed his firmness. At last it came to the turn of his counsel to enter upon his defence. Every thing "was said that ingenuity ■could suggest, or eloquence enfoice. His ehaiacter was dwelt upon; the improbability of the cruel conduct im¬ puted to him was placed in the strongest colours ; the obscurity of the witnesses, whom no one knew; the suspicion of umister motives for the prosecution;
125- the villainous character of Hoggart* and his supposed connexion with Lord Foresten, were all displayed to the jury. But he felt how doubtful and dangerous ,a pioteetion were these con¬ siderations against positive evidence. He appealed, therefore, to the pity of the jury; he implored their mercy;. and while he dwelt upon the unhappy fate of Le Forester and his father, and the unexampled series of persecutions they had endured, he melted the whole court into tears. Lc Forester himself was at last called upon to answer if he had any thing to say in his defence. Exhausted, and almost sinking beneath the weight of his inexpressible afflictions, he remained с 3
12θ for a moment silent, and half-stupe¬ fied; but, after a short interval, dur¬ ing which a solemn and breathless Stillness prevailed through the hall, he recalled his exertion and fertitude. At first his tongue failed him ; the wprds died on his lips, while every ear and eye were bent towards him •With eager and trembling sensibility. His attempts át last succeeded; and, with a slow and mournful dignity, hd found tbe power to utter the rdlovriıiğ sentences. " I am the mpst unfortunate of hu- " man beings. The complication of " niy misfoi tunes is unutterable. Pro- " vidence has permitted every appear 1 -
ία; " ance to combine against me, and " every miehin itton of my persecutors '* to be successful Life, therefore, ι» " no longer worth mj care, and to me " the terrors of death have lost their " sung But to descend to an lgno- " minious giave, innocent as I am, I " ought not to Bubmit without a " struggle. " My ρίοβοειτίοηΐ, by means toe» " obvious, hâve contrived to bring Wit- H nesses on an affair to which, unfpr- " tonately fof me, there was no witness *' but one, who was too deeply en- " gaged m the guilt of him whose life " I am accused of having maliciously " taken away, to render it possible for " me to disccver and bung him fbr- G 4
128 " ward The wretched man, who is " dead, wis a robber, and it was in « the last entiemity of self defence that " I aimed the fatal stroke, for which I " now stand here to be tried as a " murderer " Search my chiiactei, examine my " friends if I am of a blpodthirsty dis» " position I Have not many months " elapsed since this unlucky affair oc- " curred ? and have I fled ? have I be- " trayed the marks of guilt ' I have " mourned, but I have meurned that " I was the insti umen t of sending а " wretch, with all his crimes upen lus " head, to the grave before his time ' * And was the account, Which these " perjured witnesses now give, whis
129 " pered, or even suspected, at the time " of the event ? If, in truth, they were " so near as to see and hear what they " assert, why did they not raise the " hue-and-cry of immediate pursuit ? " Why did they lay no information " before a magistrate ? Why did they " suffer me to proceed quietly to the " place of my destination, and from " thence to lhe house of my mother, " and there remain unmolested for " weeks, and even months ? " But (with hoiror I speak it) ft " was not till this lamented accident " met the ears of Lord Forester, that *' it began to assume the turn it has " taken in this prosecution. On that " painful subject I will say no more- о 5
130 *· The contests not only of myself, but " of my father before me, with that " unhappy-----, I will call him un- " happy, m spite of the fulfilment of " all his worldly schemes—with that " unhappy old man, are too well known " fo the countiy for me to dwell upon «· them I" He paused—" I feel that strength, " which I ought not to exhaust, al- " ready begin to fail me A few more " words, then, and I have done That " existence, which has been a scries of " misery to me here, I yet owe to lum " who gave it me, not wantonly tp " suirendei I throw myself, there- " fore, on the candoui and mercy of " this honourable court, solemnly pro-
131 »testing that I am innocent, »nd have "* told the whole truth without disguise, " as I hope for mercy at the last day. w But if falsehood must prevail, and* " this bitter cup cannot be turned from " me, Γ trust, in the assistance of Prd* " vidence, to meet my fate with а manly " resignation, with a firm assurance " that I shall receive a recompense in i " better world for my unexampled sufr " fenngs here !" The last words died on Le Forester's- tongue, his bosom heaved, his coun¬ tenance became ednvulsed; but, after an instantaneous struggle, his magna¬ nimous spirit conquered, and he re«*· vered his composure. A deep silence followed ; the eyes of all were turned oej
132 on the unhappy pri-oner; and presently there broke forth from every quarter the sobs of long-suppressed tears. The judge at last, whpse recollecticn had for spme moments been absorbed in his feelings, began, in a tremulous tone, his address to the jury. He reca¬ pitulated, with admirable candour, the evidence on bcth sides; he related the persevering consistency and positive assertions with which the witnesses for the prosecution told their tale ; and be thpught himself bound to state, that no doubt could be entertained pf the prisoner's guilt, if those witnesses were werthy pf belief. But he put, in a 'strong light, the observations which affected the credit of their testimony;
l?jS
end he concluded with conjuring the· jury, if they had any doubt, to lean to the side of mercy. , Who can describe the awful pause which intet vencd afler the judge's last words? Tbe jury looked on each other ; and tbe infamous Hoggart cast a glance on one oi t^o of them which would have appalled the heart of the stoutest sagacity which felt interested for the fate of Le Forester. The ifl-fated young man controlled, in a wonderful manner, the appearance in nis countenance of the agonies which tore his heart. He looked pale, but moderately composed ; and suppressed the tremors wh ; ch occasionally attacked his whole frame.
'134 The jury had now Ьйеп retired for »early half an hour, when their re¬ entry gave a new sensation to tbe whole court. When the clerk put the question to them, " Guilty, or not guilty ?" trie heart of almost every one beat as if it ■would bursu Again a pause ensued more affecting than any that had preceded it. The audience scarcely dared look at each other; and the women covered their ¿ces with their handkerchiefs. The clerk repeated the question. The foreman of the jury came forward, and was about to deliver tlie verdict;
18S but he had scarcely opened hi« lips, when a loud clamour burst from the bottom- of the hall, and a voice wa« heard crying out, " I will be heard—» my lord—my lord— I" The judge had scarcely had time to inquire the cause of the interruption,. when a man had made his way to the bar, who earnestly entreated to be heard before the jury gave their verdict, as he bad most important matter to communicate in favour of the prisoner. The triumph of tbe audienceover- eame their respect, and " Hear him ! hear him!" resounded from every part.
13*5
The objections on the part of the prosecution were over-ruled ; and the judge permitted the witoess to be sworn, and to tell his story. " I come bere," he began, " to con- " fesa myself a robber; but to purge " my conscience from the guilt of be- "ìng accessary to the murder of my ·* benefactor, the generous preserver of " my ble ! The noble-hcarlcd gentle- " man, who stands here on trial, ¡iv " stead ol being a murderer, generously " gave me that life, winch he had in " his ppwer in con-equence of the base " attack I had made on his : but, while " he was lifting me from the giound, " my blood-thirsty accomplice returned
137 " to tlie attack, and nothing but the " quick and well-directed blow which " killed his adversary, could have pre- " served Mr. Le Forester. I was poor " and starving ; but I had never before " been a criminal. The wretch, who " is gone, topk advantage of my ne- *· cessities to seduce me into a partner- *' ship with his future depredations. " My heart melted with gratitude at " the conduct of this good and gallant " gentleman. I told him my story ; he " not only forgave, but relieved me— " relieved the wretch who had just at- " templed his life ;—he clothed and fed " my children, and brought us all back " into the paths of honesty I"—He burst into tears ; and then cried inarti¬ culately, " If I now die to save htm, I
ISS " trust I shall have washed out my guill " in the eyes of Heaven!" Be paused, and after fixing his eye» on Hoggart, whose agitation was now apparent to the whole court, lie went on. " To be sure I have had a world " of trouble and danger in getting here ι " but Providence is just ; and thanh " Heaven that I am not too late! That " gentleman," fixing his eyes again on Hoggait, " knows whither 1 have been " carried; and what bribes Γ have with- " stood ; and what confinements I have " broken through ; and I will venture " to say, he little thought it possible " for me to be here now I But where " aro those witnesses whom I have just ♦' heard have sworn so boldly to having
iss " seen the murder? My lord, no (me " was within sight, no one came near " us, though Mr Le Forester stayed " more than an hour with mc assisting " me m the endeavour to revive roy " unhappy accomplice I then made " the best of my way to the place he " had appointed to meet me at; and я there, in pity to my poverty and sor- ** raw, he took «ер» to screen nie front ' r the constìtratnees of my own gtfilt " The witness having then inquireí the liames of those Wnose evidence Waï produfced on the párt of the prosecu¬ tion, related, from conversations foi which he hid beeri privy, the mődé ill which they bad bfeen suborned by Hoggarty
140 The counsel on the part of the pro¬ secution in vain endeavoured to invali¬ date- the testimony of this man by cross-examination. He was so minute' and circumstantial that this cross!· examination only tended to strengthen' his evidence. The face of the court was changer from anxiety and grief to satisfaction 1 and joy; all but the vile party of,Lorď Forester, who would willingly have shrunk into annihilation. 1 lie judge again addressed the jury, and, in a strain of indignant eloquence, held out to execration and to future punishment this most horrible conspuacy against the reputation and life pf an innocent, a geneious, and gallant young man.
141 The jury instantly pronounced their verdict, " Not Guilty, ' and the shouts of the court were heard to the utmost parts of the town, while Hoggart and his myrmidons were hissed, pelted, and nearly demolished by the mob.
a<iø
CHAPTER Χ. ι Le FoBESTEal it would require a writer of eloquence far different fiom the weak powers which Natme has afforded thy humble mimoriahst, to describe the violence of thy mingled feeling 1 · at the happy veidict which so miraculously saved thy reputation and thy life ' Even thou wast lost in the confusion of thy emotions The tiais which streamed down thy chetks, choked the gratitude of thy tongue, and thou wast rained away amid the embraces of thy fi-nnds, and the huzzas
из pf the .streets, overwhelmed, with ti» tumults of thy heart I Let me drop the veil, then, and leave to the reader's imaguvation to form a picture of Le Forester jt the present awful moment!—But even now his joy was not unmixed wiih bitterness- There were many anxietiee recurring to his heart whicb had not yet bcea relieved. In the first delirium he ¡knew not whither to bend his course; but he expressed an eager impiitience ίο .escape from the painful scene of his late.hor-> rors. His friends persuaded him against too sudden a return .home, lest tbe sur-» prise of,those who wereito ¡recewejiin»
144 might be too «udden for their feelings.' They did not yet break to him the loss he had still to endure. He now promised to meet Hunting- field at the house of a common friend the next day; but insisted on being left alone for the journey, that he might have an opportunity of collecting his scattered thoughts, and composing hie mind. A chaise was therefore orde ed for the first stage, in which he was per¬ mitted to go unaccompanied. ¡As he passed the last suburbs of the town, and arrived on the long heath, across which the road ran for many miles, he cast a look of satisfaction over the solitary scene which spread before
14S him, and letting down the glasses, of the carriage, put forth hia head; and» hailed the free air, which seemed to revive his shattered frame. " О happy solitude," he said to himself, « О blessed scenes of inanimate nature, with what delight do I again salute you!"—But his heart heaved again ; 3. deep sigh burst from his bosom, and the tears rolled down his cheeks.—" I am ungrateful," he went on—"What reason have I to be sick of humanity ì If, in the bustle of crowded life, 1 hare suffered by the machinations of the bad, I bave also experienced sym¬ pathy, and seen the final triumph of mercy and justice ¡"—The tears, which. now continued to flow, relieved the fulnea» of his heart, and he was liur- VOL. III. H
ried on 'for many miles, insensible of every thing around him. The noise of the driver's whip, and the sight of the inn, at length reused him frpm his reveries. The carriage in a moment was whirled within the gateway; the dpor of the chaise was opened ; and Le Forester springing out hastened up the stairs by strides rather than steps, when, as he passed a door which stood half open, he heard' a piercing female shriek, and casting his eyes to the spot whence the sound issued, beheld a female figure'whom he instantly recognized to be—Emily Mason herself! He darted into the room, and clasp-
147 ing her, almost fainting ai she was, m his aims, he found himself for some moments utterly incapable of articula¬ tion He fixed his lips on her pale cheek, and, bursting into floods of teais, became convulsed with the ago¬ nies of lus sensations Emily, at first nearly insensible, mide no efforts to disengage hcrseff, till at last, turning her blue eyes upon lum, she murmured out, " Art you then, indeed, safı ?" and then, dropping on bis shoulder, relapsed into a state of long and perfect insensibility Le Forester placed her in a chair, and ringing the beb violently for assist¬ ance, hung with the most fnntic ges¬ tures over her Lfeltss foi m The people h2
1-Й <jf the heuse, who came to the sum¬ mons, conceiving him to be a near relation, did not interrupt his attend¬ ance on her, but followed his direc¬ tions, and supplied the hartshorn and water lie called for, without making any comments on his behaviour More than a quartel of an hour had elapsed when Emily began to revive. As the mist receded fiom her eyes, and «he began faintly to see, she beheld Le Porester at her feet, bathing her hand with his tears « Where am I ?" she cried faindy *' Is this a dream ? Sure it is too good to be true—or may I, indeed,believe my sight ? '—"Angel of light," he said, " it is Le Forester himself who is at your feet I '—" Gra-
14Ö cious Heaven!" she answered, lifting up her streaming eyes, " how little had I hoped this a few hours ago!—But hark I" she went oo—" did yon hear that footstep ? perhaps it was my fa¬ ther. My father, cruel mani hte is- leagued with your enemies,, Le Fo¬ rester! He came here to« Watch the progress of ydur trial, whence he is not yet returned ; and he brought me vvith him, because he would not trust me far away frum him." " О Emily!" Le Ferester ansvvered, " do the fates, then, yet cembine against me? Accident has again thrown me at your feet, and nothing but death or your cruelty shall again separate me from you!" He put her trembling нз
150 hand to lus lips, and kissed it with a frantic fervor " Do net talk of »iv cruelty, Le Fo¬ rester But what can I do in opposi¬ tion to my father? If you knew what h?rsh usage I have borne fer jour sake, you would npt call me cruel 1 But why shculd I conceal it ? My fa¬ ther s prejudices against you are vio¬ lent and inconceivable He swears by all that is sacred, that he would sooner destroy me with his own hand, than see me jour wife Alas! Le Forester, I have too much reason to belicvt him. Yet it is not death that I dread Wil¬ lingly would I sacrifice my life for Le Foiester, but how can I answer it, if I do that which will induce my father
151 Jo imbrue his hands in the blood of his child?" Le Forester put his hand to hii burning forehead, and gasped for breath. He rose, and hurrying with a wild step across the roomi beat hi» head against the wallt и Merciful Heaven I" he exclaimed, " what is there m this unhappy being ef mine, 'that I am thus to be persecuted wiv hout end ? That those, whom I have never seen or heard of, thus take their preju¬ dices, and form their plots, against me ? I know not Mr. Mason, Emily; I know not a Mr. Mason in the world. Had I met with him, I would, if nh had permitted me, have almost wore shipped the being who gave you e#- H4
15£ âitencel But I know him not. Hi- is surely under some mistake. Let me speak to him ; and perhaps I shall be able do remove his prejudices 1" ** О I* Forester 1" she replied, " you »blow not my father, indeed 1 But, ulas I he is much better acquainted •With you than you are aware of. He has long been watching yon ; no step jou have taken, for many months, has •escaped him,; and I fear he has been hut too closely leagued with your Mood-thirsty iperseoutpi 1" At this information Le Forester lost the little remaining control over him- 3clf. He fell into agonies too affecting for Emily to beür; he implored her
153 pity, he appealed to her love with * force which she found it scarcely pos¬ sible to resist. Encouiagement seemed dangerous; but, if she opposed his entreaties, he became frantic with de¬ spair, and threatened to leave her for ever in a tone of anger, which she could' not endure. In one of these fits of mingled re¬ sentment and despondence he had or¬ dered a chaise with four horses to the door. As the carnage was announced^. he threw his arms round her neck, and sobbing on her bosom was about to¬ tear himself away. He murmured out a few heart-breaking words, which Emily, recollecting the character of her father, knew were too well foundedl H5
154 She weuld. hav c det mied hım a few mements longer, tint they might at least not separate in anger " And is it thus, she faintly said, " Le Fo¬ rester, that v. e part for cv ei ? —\t that instant a footstep and loud voice was heard on the stans Emily cued, m a suppressed shriek, ' It is my father I Now, indeed, it is all over with us' ' A new thought darted into Le Fo¬ resters irinei, despair gave him cou¬ rage "No bj Hin en ! he ansvverc d eagerly, " it is not thus that I will sur render all mj happ печ» exei t j ourself, and you are mini lor ever' At these words he took her ıound the wust, and, hurrying along the passage down an epposite staircase, vvhiih opened into the gateway, where the chaise stood
ISS ready for hım, lifted her info the car». nage, almost insensible of what was passing and told die postboys to duvc on It wis almost dark, but the lıtüe ret· roaming senses which surprise and ter*· ror Ind left to Ľmil), whom Le Fo* restu still held clasped m his arms as they moved fiom the door, were occu¬ pied in the expectation of her father stopping the carnage, ind putting both herself and Le loresttr to death She trembled, and grew cold, and supported hn faint head on his shoulder, as these terufic ideas assailed hei But stdl, аз he pressed her trembling hand, she thought, " If such а miseiable death .a to be my lot, it will be some consolation. n G
156
«that I end my life ш die arms of my beloved Le Forester'" A» thcy went forwaid with all the rapidity that the hope of rewaid could induce the diivers to »îrge, every sound alarmed tliem, for thcy imagined it the sound of pursuit But their fears w ere all unnecessary, for it was not Mr Ma- eon whose voice had alarmed them on the staircase of the inn, Mr Mason uvas not yet returned from those occu¬ pations at the neighboui ing town which Em ly had too mudi leaeon to fear were «hreeted against Le Forester
157
CHAPTER Xr.
Emily now began to grow calmer. The professioni and kindness of Le Forester, her unbounded attachment to him, and the furious and unjust con¬ duct of her father, all tended to recon¬ cile her to a slep which, though it had been taken even without her consent, she could not now entirely regret. Even if she had repented, it could not now be recalled; and she therefore did not object to bend their course immediately to Scotland.
ISS They could have no doubt, that tbe instant her flight beiamo known to her father, no means of pursuit would be left untried. The virulence of Mr. Mason against Le Forester amounted to madness; and he would sacrifice fortune, reputation, ¡md life, to defeat him. At the next stage, therefore, "they took a circuitous antl dangerous comse, by wliich they avoided the usual northern track. This, howevei-, would have availed them little, had Mr. Mason happened to have returned to the inn that evert¬ ing. Most fortunately for them he did not return till the middle of the fol¬ lowing day.
169 , As soon as he became acquainted with the occurrence of the preceding night, his rage exceeded all controul. His horrible imprécations made those, who heard him, shudder, and expect the instant vengeance of Heaven on his head. The description of the person of the young man, with whom his daughter had gone away, left no гоощ for him to doubt that it was Le Fo¬ rester. And the punishments which he blasphemously imprcc,ited from above upon bim arc too dicadful to be rcjated. Some hours were lost in the tempest of his passions before he could fixi on any plan of folloiviiig them. A* last ' he recollected the time he had lost, and
With » ttgaeîty, which, whenever his naseions did not interfere, was suffi¬ ciently acute, determined not to lose another moment in making his way directly to Gretna Green. Emily meanwhile, as the increasing distance augmented her hopes, that they should conclude their journey without intei ruption, became Itss un¬ easy at the awful step she had taken. Le Forester hung upon her with grow¬ ing fondness. As he gently touched on the cruel persecutions he had un¬ dergone, and his providential escape from a conspiracy on his reputation and his life unparalleled in its malig¬ nity and extent, her soothing tones, the unaffected tenderness of her heart,
161
and the elevation of her sentiments and expressions, added a thousand new and indescribable powers to her beauty. The horrors with which she thought of the persecutors of Le Forester she could not entirely prevent from ex¬ tending itself to her father, whpm she had too much reason to believe not e№ tirely free from the stain of having been leagued with 'them. This idee added something to the consolation she now began to feel in her new and •un¬ expected situation. While the whirling carriage still те- moved them at a greater distance from the object of their dread, and their minds became sufficiently easy occa* sionally to notice the objects which
irto presented themselves from without, each had an opportunity of admiring the accomplished mind of the other, beyond what cither of them ever before possessed. While Emily heard from j Le Forester instances of that vigorous, ' eloquent, and feeling mind, with which her fond imagination had endowed him, Le Forester listened to the in- »pired tones of her soft voice, and seemed to idolize her as an angel, in¬ habiting the most perfect of human forms. Emily wai indeed beautiful; even tbe paleness of long anxiety and lan¬ guor had added to the delicate hues of her enchi uting peison Her brilliant complexion, her daik blue eyes, shaded
1бз
by the brown auburn colour pf her silken hair, and the exquisite shape nf her figure, were well adapted to the charms of her heavenly mind. Le Ferester gazed upon her till the tears of rapture streamed down his cheeks, and he became lest in the delirium'pf his adoration. Pallid, and worn as he had been with the cares and distresses he had undergone, the |inhoped-fbt happiness pf the present moment almost repaid him for all his sufferings ; and an unusual fire animated his cpunte- nance, and inspirited all his frame. Except at those intervals, when the idea of her fathei's rage, or soine doubt of the impropi icty or immorality of the conduct into which she had been
idd
drawn, crossed her, Emily began to feel herself too happy almost for hu¬ manity. Her love and admiration of Le Forester wm almost aa violent, li not at unconstrained, ai hi· for lies. "Olí Förester ľ* «he said, " if yOu knew all,I have suffered foi* yon, linee liait we met, you would indeed think I had done something to deserve yoiorlore! From the moment that 1 firet saw you, my heart has been dedi¬ cated to you. Would that my attach¬ ment had brought you that good which I have prayed for you 1' But, alas 1 I fear that your persecutions have been too often, aggravated by it. To my partiality for you I suspect you owe the violence which had nearly drowned
16»
us both itt the harbqur pf * * * *. On my account those dreadful Irish ruf. flans— with horror I relate my suspi. cions—seemed sent to watch you, und take vengeance upon yeu. Mrs.O'Leary wm surely implicated in that cruel outrage; «he was the person whose prejudices were principally directed against уоц ; and I have reason ţo be¬ lieve she had a oprrespondcnpe not only with my father, but with Lore] Forester ! I overheard some dark hints of the conspiracies which were still carrying on against your life, while уоц lay insensible with the wound; your head had already received in that struggle. I called, whenever I coulcjl escape unnoticed, to warn you of y pur 1 danger. How cas vvordş describe what
166
I felt at yeur servant's'account of your 'sufferings ?" As jou was top ill to be seen, I at last lefťa note, Which I trust you received I" « Yes, my angel!" cried Le Fo¬ rester, clasping her in his aims, " to you I oWc my life; and if it has hi¬ therto Ьеед prolonged to misery, 1 the present hours of happiness would over¬ balance ages of tortine!" ' *< Frort that hour, Le Forester/' she went on, " every thought has been fixed on you. It would be impossible to de¬ scribe the misery I felt on ydur first re- rnoval, when, uncertain of your fate,' I imagined that every day might be your last. I shut myself up, and am con-
1б7 Vincéd that had the affecting intelli¬ gence, which I expected, reached me, grief would have soon (made me follow ypu to the grave But the solicitude of my inquiries soon brought me mort welcome news I heaitl of your reco¬ very But little did I expect so early a meeting as occurred at Willmgton Perhaps you thought me told and un¬ grateful at that meeting But it is im¬ possible to give you a picture of the mingled feelings and difficulties iwitb which I was then overwhelmed 7 I was' grateful that we had met, aild I Was unwilling to lose the exquisite delight of your company But I knew thaP Mrs Barker was a spy upon my actions, I was sure that a discovery of yoür name weuld produce a separation, and
lös I feared thaţ your lift might he exposed even tn more violence than that which you had already, experienoid on my account. " The variety of contending emo¬ tions which at that time raged in my bosom, overwhelmed my faculties, and created a confusion which, though I «»uld not he happy away from you, almost deprived me of my senses in your presence. Yet methinks, Le Fo- restf r, I would not lose from my me¬ mory the images of those few days! ïîle recollection of them now thrills ще whh a pleasure unmixed with pain. Every object is cjad in hues more vivid than it bore in reality. I remember the very look of the skies ; the garden, 3
i6q the walks, the tints of the leav.es. As I caft my eyes back upon it, it. seems like a scene of fairy-land. But, .atjove all, Le Forester, I remember every look of yours; every expression, every tone of your voice 1 " To recai the scenes of this visit to my imagination, confused and mixed with agonies as it appeared at the time, has been the chief source of my future consolations. And much consolation, my beloved Le Forester, havq I wanted 1 My attachment to you could only end with my existence ; but if it had been' possible to tear it fronv my heart, my father and those he set about me would have torn it! Often have they brought me to the brink of the grave; but vol. m. ι
170 never, while this agitated bosom had a pulse to beat, Le Forester, would it cease to beat for you! The vile ca¬ lumnies, with which they attempted to poisou my mind, I rejected with indig¬ nation, and saw only the heroic virtue and sublime abilities of youthful ge¬ nius struggling with unmerited perse¬ cution and bloodthirsty power, ambi- iion, and revenge ! " How many arts', how many threats, were used to force me into the arms of another! But she who has loved Le Forester, must be base indeed to suffer any other tp usurp his place. Yet little could I have hoped that my Le Forester's heart was equally faithful to ine I Little did I hope ever to have 3
171 talked to hiin thus confidentially! to have seen a day like this, which, though I would not have anticipated, I must cease to regret! For in his honour I am sure I can repose with safety; and into his arms I now commit my happi¬ ness without a pang!" Emily's eyes filled with tears as she pronounced these last words.and thrtľiv-· ing herself on the bosom of Le Forester, she for a few moments gave vent to the full emotions of her heart. He pressed her still closer to him, and felt, in ad¬ dition to the love and adoration which had been raging within him, a new spe¬ cies of tenderness—that of the compa¬ nion and friend—which added to the ingredients of his bliss. 1 2
172 CHAPTLR XII | г ...... The fugitives bad already gone a long journey with little refreshment Le Forester hoped they were now beyond the reach of their pursueis, and thought thcy might venture to lose a short time in rest They stopped therefore at a great inn, which lies far advanced on the northern roa J. Tlie dusk of evening was rapidly drawing on Emily, scarcely capable any longer of supporting the fatigue, soon retired to enjoy the relief of a
173 short sleep. Le Forester mcanwhile sat lost in musings on his unexpected happiness, or in the midst pf imperfect slumbers continued to utter the name of his beloved cpmpanipn. Stillness came on with night, and no sound of travelleis echoed frem the road. At length the roll of distant wheels seemed to gather upen the wind. It grew stronger, and then it died away agam. He listened, and the rattle again became more distinct The steps of a single horse at speed were then heard to approach, and in a few mi¬ nutes a courier rode into the yard. Horses were loudly called foi, and Le Torestcr's heart began to quake; but he thought it piudent to sit still. 13
174 Not many moments had elapsed, when the carriage itself arrived. Le Forester could not suppress his curi¬ osity; he opened the door of the room In which he sat, and almost sunk with agony as he saw an earl's coronet on the pannel of the chaise. An old man rushed out, and Le Forester too well recognized the voice of Lord Forester as he spoke to the waiter. Trembling with eagerness and pas¬ sion the vile old usurper endeavoured to hasten up stairs. Le Forester was struck with an indistinct horror of he knew not what; and he sprang for¬ ward to encounter him. A scuffle en¬ sued; the aged wretch, daring though feeble, darted upon him with the
17S fierceness of a tiger, and presenting ai loaded pistei, which he held, to hi» temple, was endeavouring to draw the trigger, when Le Forester calmly seiz¬ ing his tremulous band, and turning the pistol back on himself, bade him ask fpr mercy. But mercy was a boem which," in the transport of his passion. Lord Forester refused to accept fiom such hands. He raved, and, defying the vengeance of heaven with his blas¬ phemous tongue, called on him t» £re. " Peor, unhappy wretch !" cried Le Forester, " you are in my power; and never will I stain my hands with your blood !" At these words the old man, in the madness of his fury, flew again 14
17(3 upon his opponent, but in tbe effort fill prostritt himself, md, giving a loud jell, sunk ilmost lifeless on the flooi, while bl iod streaming fiom his mouth and nostrils, give him а most terrifying aspect While Lc Forester was attempting to lift him up, the noise drew a crowd from every pai t of the house, and among the rest Emily herself, having distinguished her lover's voice, sallied forth from her room, and made her way among thos~ who surrounded him. She had no sooner seized his arm, than, easting her eyes on the dying figu e ■who lay beneath him, she uttered a pieicing scream, and ciying out, " My father, my father 1 " she fell senseless bj lus side
177 All now staied on each other, umble to comprehend the confusion which they saw, and Le Foiester, as little able to comprehend it is the rest, seem¬ ed lost in the agony of his complicited feelings He spoke to bmily in vain, she heard him not, lie took her in his arms, and cai ned her to ber apartment, wheie he mourned over her with a vvildness vvhiih, if she had been sensi¬ bil, would have increased liei suffering, Meanwhile Lord Forester was removed to a bed, where he continued in an alaimmg stupor.
ι 5
CHAPTER XIII.
As soon as Emily began to breathe, Le Forester sent for medical assistance. Nor was Lord Forester neglected. But there' was yet no opportunity to have this mystery unfolded. Emily conti¬ nued insensible, and in her ravings still called upon her "falhei !" Whence the mistake had arisen, Le Forester, driven almost to insanity himself, was little fit to conjecture. But liei father's pursuit haunted her mind, and it might be natili .il that, in a scene of such con¬ fusion, she should imagine she saw big
щ figure. The effects might perhaps be as calamitous upon her, as if he had really been theie ι and all Le Fo¬ rester's prospects seemed again blasted for ever. Some days passed, ditring which nei¬ ther Emily nor Lord lorester appeared to grow much bettei. Emily at length betiayed some faint gleams of under¬ standing. Le Foi ester was standing by her bedside She cast her eyes upon him with a look of aflecting melan¬ choly. " My father!" she erieel·— ** where is my father ' You have not killed my father ?" Le Forestei's heart sunk, he could not aiticulate, for hs thought that her mmd must still be wandering. She faintly, yet a little 16
180 more reproachfully, repeated her words. " Compose yourself, my angel !" he pnsvvered ; " you are under some mis¬ take ; I have not seen your father." " О fye, Le Forester ! You cannot deceive me. He is dead then—dead by -----!" She paused. " What can you mean, Emily? You have been dreaming. I entreat you to compose yourself 1" " It is not a dieam, Le Forester ! I saw him lie bleeding on the floor !"— She pavibed again, and then she went on more faintly—" Not, I trust, by the hand of Le Forester !" " By all that is sacred, you are mis-
181 taken, Emily I It was net ypur father, but Lurd Forester, whom ) ou saw !" " I cannot be Wrong' it was my fathet '" Le Forester, now perceiving that she had recovered her understand¬ ing, and that the error arose not from any delirium, proposed, as soon as she was able to use, to carry her into the room where Lord Forester lay, that he might convince her of her mistake. This proposal gave a temporary ease to her mmd, and she again cpmppsed heiself to sleep Meanwhile Lord Forestei continued in a state of insensible languor, or fe¬ verish delirium He seemed to have tost the powers of articulatien, pnd
182 when he raved, no one could under* stand what he would say He had n» confidential servant about him, nor any one who knew the object of his- journey, or whither to send for his re¬ lations or fiiends The courier, who attended him, had been hired for the occasion, and scarcely was acquainted with his name There seemed an hourly probability of his death, and Le Forester felt all the horror of the unlucky combination of circumstances in which he agam was placed. The ill starred j oung man found the clouds of despau once more gathering upon his mmd. His temples throbbed with a restless anxiety, and his brain felt as if it was about to be on fire.
1 83
He watched the sleep of Emily, and expenenced a momentary consolation ns it seemed to sink into calmness; but when he moved to the chamber of Lord Forester, he thought he perceived him verging towaids his last gasp, and a mingled sensation of pity, self- reproach, and horror, rose at seeing him about to descend thus unprepaied into the awful gulf of eternity. lie wandered from room to room, but could find no ease, he tried the effect of the open air, but nothing could rebeve his solicitude He came back, and listened at Emily s door, he thought he heard her voice She had waked suddenly, calling out for her father. He enteied " My Emily,'
184 he cned, " I am present to protect you, but indeed, my angel, j our father is not hire ; eome now, if you feil youi strength equal to it, and be convinc¬ ed 1 "—" Let me use, and go instantly then, ' she answered eagerly, " foi I am suie I cannot be mistaken." She leaned, trembling, upon Ins arm-, and they approached Loi d Forester's apartment A loud gioan was heard from within She shrunk back with a suppressed sline к " It is the tone of his voice, ' sht cried, " indeed it is ' * He pressed htr hand -J 1 Be calm but foi a moment," he said, " and you will be convinced of your error I ' The depr was gently eper ed, and he
18 5 led her with breathless steps to the side of the bed. As fhe curtain was softly diawn away, there lay, almost speechless and with wild and ghastly looks, the wretched old man. In an instant the eyes of Emily and Lord Forester met, and each uttered a piercing tone of distress. The latter seemed alarmingly convulsed, and after endeavouring in vain to articulate, hid the agonies of his countenance with his hand ; while Emily, on whom the truth now flashed like lightning, sunk back with a mixture of fear, pity, and demand of protection, into the arms of her lover, and, as she tried to pronounce the words, " My father—it is indeed
18β
my father 1" lost at once the conflict of emotions, which beset her heart, in breathless insensibility But what were the sufferings of him who held her in his embraces ? To bim, too, the dreadful fact became equally developed His Emily, the idol of his fond adorations, and the expected reward ot his sorrows, wae- the daughter of his persecutor, the persecutor of his family, the ebjeci of his imprecations, the robber of his property, the usurper of his honours, the relentless puisuer of his blood! As if the cup of lus misery bad not yet been sufficiently afflicting, what an addition of complicated borcors seemed.
187 about to close the inexpressible unhap- piness of bis tale 1 While Emily lay pale, and cold and motionless as death, m his arms, this new blow stunned his faculties. He cast his eyes upon hei, and then he cast them upon Lord Forester, but his thoughts were indistinct and dis¬ tracted The old man's groans were dreadful, and it was apparent that he was not insensible of the discovtry which had taken place, and partook of the confusion ind distress which it caused Le Torestcr at list roused himself. As he looked upon liei dying coun¬ tenance, all other thoughts vanished
188 before anxiety for her. He rang the bell violently for assistance, and she* was conveyed again to her own apart¬ ment, where he for some time hung. over her with unavailing prayers.
189
CHAPTER XIV.
When misfortunes thus continue to thicken at every step, there is a point at which fortitude itself must cease to hope. The clouds of despair now came over the mind of Le Forester witli a blackness so impenetrable, that existence seemed no longer capable of being en¬ dured. A sudden phrenzy seized him ; and he darted fiom tbe house, and ran he knew not whither, till he sunk ex¬ hausted and breathless on the ground. The form of Emily in the last languid efforts of death ; of Emily imploring
igo his last pity, and still feebly clinging to him for protection, glanced across his recollection, and he spiung up again to reseek her apartment. His trembling legs could scarcely carry him back the long path he had traced ; but at length he reached the inn again, and began to ascend the staircase. He was met there by an at¬ tendant of the house, who had already been in search of him. Emily was re¬ vived, and had inquired for him with an eainestness, and expressions of anxiety at his absence, which made them fear a relapse. He hastened to her, and found her in teais; but she smiled as he ap-
191 proached, and held out her hand to him. He seized it with fondness, but could not speak. She paused—" Le Forester," she then said in a faint and tremulous voice, " I feel that I have but a little while to live ; and strange as are the discoveries which have now taken place, I cannot bear to die un¬ der a diminution of your affection! It is true, tli— t the unhappy sufferer in the other room, whom I had always hitherto been taught to call Mason, is my father ! But do not hate me ; and, for my sake, (dare I ask it ?) do not hate him ! Call down no more curses on his posterity; for I would not die Under curses from youl Oh no, Lc Forester ! Ebbing to its close, as I be¬ lieve my life to be, I am as anxious as
iga ever for your love ; for I am willing to hope that attachments pure as ours, thwarted as tbey have been here, will not be confined to this state of narrow and imperfect existencel" The tears of Emily would not suffer her,to proceed; and Le Fqrester, still overwhelmed with his feelings, could not utter a word. He kissed her hand, and pressed it to bis bosom ; but Stall he could not speak. Emily seemed anxious to go on. " When' ursit I re¬ vived," »be said, " J could not believe tha.t the strange events, which have happened, were .more than a dream. О wauldthat they were, Le Forester I But though no dieam, it is possible there may yet be a mistake, and dying, б
193 as I now feel myself, it would yet be some consolation to me to know the truth. In the casket that lies on that table, there is a paper, given me «ome months ago, with a most solemn In¬ junction never to open it but at, the last extremity, It has some relation to my birth; and the occasion, I think, is now arrived which will justify me in unfojding iti To you I commit it, if you have the fortitude to abide its contents," Le Forester revived at these words ι a gleam of hope irradiated his mind ; he paused ; he bathed her 'cheek with his tears; and then, springing across the roqm, seized the casket, and opened it with trembling and impatient hands. VOL. III, К
104 Riper was folded within paper; and every one was sealed. When he came tb the last encldsure a mist came before his eyes, and his hands trembled too rfrach to pcrfpriri their taslt. He laid it dn*wn, and took it up again,' and again' he laid rt down. At last he read the superscription — « Certificate of Emily's Birth." О miserable Le Forestei ' they are momentary and delusive lights alone, which break through thy clouds I Maik the words. " Extract from the Regate/- ofjlfje Parisji " ofBarrowthorpe m the County of,.., " Emily, daughter of Hugh Earl " Forester and Barbara bis Countess, , n .» '
195 " (late Barbara Mason), was baptized " 18th Nov. 17... " A true Copy. " Henry Carlisle, Minister." Le Forester shrunk back in his chair as he read it ; his voice attempted in vain to articulate the words ; nor was it till after a lapse of many minutes that he could communicate the con¬ tents to Emily. Emily, who already could have no doubt that Lord Forester was her fa¬ ther, felt some consolation at this proof of her legitimacy, while the explana¬ tion of a thousand circumstances, for which she had never been able hitherto K2
19б to account, flashed at once upon her mind. Her satisfaction, however, was soon destroyed when she observed the effect this discovery had upon Le Fo¬ rester. He sat almost motionless, and with a deeper gloom upon bis counte¬ nance than she had ever yet beheld. Again she burst into tears, and sobbed aloud, while he seemed still to remain lost, and unconscious of every thing round him, till she endeavoured to rouse him by the following broken sentences. " Le Forester, I entreat you, speak to me! Is it so high a crime to have drawn my blood from the same ancestors as yourself? Or will you force me to look back with horror on the particular source from
197 whence 1 derived my being, and cuise the father who gavfc me existence ?— My heart sinks more dreadfully than ever; I feel as if its pulses were beating for the last time,—I shall not bs long in your way ; but let us at least part ία peace 1" These words roused Le Forester; he rose from his seat, and, falling on his knees before her, hid his face upon her hand. His burning temples filled her with new alarm. He still for some mements continued silent; at last he lifted his wild and dejected eyes, and cried, " It is the loss of your love, Emily, which I dread! Will you in¬ herit no portipn of your father'« ha-, tied ? Will the powerful daughter of КЗ
Ifj8 Lord Forester feel compassion for the objeet pf lui itcinal pei secution ? Will she not be taught to join -----—'' " Forbear," she interrupted him, " for¬ bear, cruel Le Forester, these unge¬ nerous taunts I Are you seeking some pretence to desert me, and td deseit me in angtr? Rather, boldly and openly -----" At that instant a loud rap at the door sumilioned them to the bedside of Lord Foiester, who appeared to be m the last agonies of death Emilj, rtgaťd- less ot hci PWn vv e ikntss, sprang from heir bcilj and, with the aid of Le Fo¬ rester's arm, hastened to the apartment of hti filhei II!
399
What an afflicting scene now pre¬ sented itself I Tbe old man's senses were returned, but his rage and vio¬ lence weie all past; he seemed to be m the last extremity of weakness, and the breith of life appeared to be gently expiring from hmi. He cast a feeble look on Emd), but it was the look of unmmgled softness and affection. Le Foresttr's noble heart melted, all rep sentment ¡pid remembrance of past in¬ juries instantaneously vanished from Ъщ bpsoiTi, anjl the tears coursed each other down his qhctks, ¡ Emily hung цроп, hım, half Iifjeţetjş, und, ¡|)most stupified vyıth -the |Ç(.cess of ber emp- Uan?, ı ¡The j dying^spffprcr stretched forth lu^jtpeniblmg hands J ta¡ í Ins печ piiew^arjd hıs„çlauglıtpı, tief drew tjjiţijş K.4
200
ficbly together, and pressed them both in his, while thcy looked with silent astonishment both on him and on each other " Thus, he cried faintly, " let me rnake the only reparation in my poweť for my unbounded wickedness! Be vtmted—be harlp^ Forgive me, and! perhaps, While Γ thus repent, I may, guilty as I have been, find forgiveness from the mercy of He iv en ! I feel the approaches of death stealing fåät upon fué , let me therefore, while my little remaining strength enables me, make the concessions which iare yom due! Emily, my love, I miy perhaps appease the spirit Of your injured arid angehe mother, by mformirig you rjf tnfe legi*
201 timacy Of your birth, of nvhieh I had long kept the certificate in a recess of my library, till,' within these few months, it was, by the treachery, I fear, of the woman whom I have made my' companion, stolen from me ! If the original register of your baptism be destroyed, you will find the names in my pocket-book of living witnesses to your birth. And as to you, Godfrey, forbear to demand from me the detail of my injustice to you and to your fa¬ ther. Your claims are just; I am the usurper you have called me; and you are the grandson of my poor abused brother 1 Sure I may indulge the hope that I am not totally deserted by Hea¬ ven, while I feel more consolation fiom this confession than I ever cxpe- K5
'2012 'webbed ifrorrîothé success of all my crimes! In the same rccers, in which wore once deposited the documents of my Emily's birth, I hid the pioofs (for, by some mysterious fear, I never could destroy them) of your father's title! Mystrcngth fails; my hour appioaclics. Go, my children, be united ; be happy; and by yonr virtue and your piayers redeem tne soul of' your wicked, but repentant, father!" He sunk on his pillow; his eyes closed; ¡i hollow rattle issued from bib throat; and, after two or three convul¬ sive straggles, his bieath ceased, anil he passed into eternity.'
sos
CHAPTER XV.
ΒονιΊι Le Foiester and Emily were so overcome with this unexpected scene, that neither of them, for the ìemainder of that day, could utter a word. But he clasped Ilei in his arms, and while her continued teais unbuithened the weight of her beai t, each saw in the fond eyes of tbe other those gleams of future happiness wluih had for some lime been coveied by the unpencliable clouds of despair кб
304 This sudden and wonderful reverse of fortune remained for some days too great to contemplate with clearness. Letters were written to Hedindon, and to the attorney and steward who ma¬ naged Lord Forester's affairs; and, while erders were given for the funeral, some days were occupied in the new arrangements which the late discoveries necessarily demanded. A respect fer her father's memery made Emily resolve to wait at the inn, Inwever painful, till his body could be moved. But, even during these dis¬ tressing days, her health rapidly re¬ vived ; a new kind of hope sprung up in her bospm ; human existence seemed to array itself in new colours ; and her
30» heart, overflowed μι gratitude tol tlie» beqigmty of JrVoypdençe, The head and heart of Le Forester underwent a similar change; The glpomy disconti?nt with which disanr poin.tnient tind misfortupes had long taught him to view this state pf beimg, vanished at once, the morning rose, and the evening descended, in new and more brilliant hues, and the contrast Of his former sufferings served only tó brighten the colours of Ins present bliss ι The, steward and attorney al length airiyeáj and the funeral procession set off fcr the family burial place at Hc- dmdftn. As they were already near
røe the. borders of Scotland, te ForcStet 1 proposed, to prevent' ffltVdfchy'of mahyV tiresome formalities, that the maniage ceremony should be performed at the plade whithei they were 01 igmally fly- nig, nol' could'Emily object tò it Í' she bad now not onlj ber fathei s consent,! but hife dying injunction ' It took tbem but a few hours joui ney to reach this ıenpvvncd spdt Some momenta!) pei tm bâtions yet attacked die bosom of Emily, as the humble' chapel was shewn to her fiom α dis¬ tance The new ehaiacter, the new duties she was to assume, tempered her joy with some awful reflections, arid even fid smiles were mingled with a few rising tears, which she found it impossible to suppress
S07 The'ceremony was ehrkt ¡ Äie 'indis¬ soluble knot was tied ; Und Emily be¬ came Le Forester's for life. /ΪΊιόν/ travelled back without haste ; for .they had yet no home. They had imparted the discpvcries which bad been made to Lord Forester's agents, who wore sufficiently willing to pay their atten¬ tion to the rising sun.' But much re¬ mained lo bc done before they could obtain possession of the estates. More documents of the births of both, to Yvh'ich they had now obtained clues, became necessary; and perhaps some suits at law must bc resorted tó, before Mrs. Bellenden, ' who'had btcn Lord Forester's mistress, and' called herself bis countess, would surrender' the claims of herself and her son.
-aos It luckily happened that Mrs Bel¬ lenden Wás not now at HedlnuQu. With the aid of the attorney, there¬ fore, Le Forester found an easy access tq the house, and to the papers depo 6lfed therei The first search to which he paid attention was directed to the rficesş in the bbniy A few writings were discovered there, but nothing which he wanted In this place Tt| appeared, by Lord Foresters confession, that the certifi ctjtp of Xtofly s baptism bad been lately pieserved L,ç Forestes therefore, was anxious if} know from Emily whence фе piocured it Fioip all injunctions of бесгесу she was now of course absolved And she willingly told
209 him, that it had been committed to her by an old servant, whpm she named. This persen was easily fpund, and confessed, that having been formerly л servant to Lord Fprester (which, how* ever, Wa* always concealed from Emily), he knew well all that was passing at Hedindon; and being suspicious that Mrs. Bellenden was dbtaining too great influence, and that the ťertificáte of Emily's birth, vvhich her father had' often "shewn him where to find, wasl too much m that woman's power, he had rescued it from a custody which he believed so unsafe, and withoul disU édVériHg a secret tö Emily which hd bd been bound by Oath to conceaLj
210 had some months ago cpmnuttcd the paper into her hands, with injunctions not to open it but at the last cytitnuty As soon as be was asked, if there were not other papers which he took away as Well as that certificate, be readily owned there were, about which, after haying selected the paper he wanted, hb felt no farther curiosity, but, ¿having, no opportunity to return them without suspicion to their place, he had kept them safely locked up in his hpusei where theynstill .remained. , The impatience with wlncli, he was desired to produce tbem, датгу bp easily) gqcsşedi ,The rqa^sppn^Qiislit ¡"torn, liis -bureau »ijsmallj paner msipqb '«
sii
which, when untied, there appeared a few loose family papers, and a small quarto parchment· covered intmoivin- dum book. The book was eagerly opened, and appeared to contain, all in one old fe¬ male hand, · a sort of cpmmon-place, consisting of a diaiy, household notes, prayers, and meditations. On turning to the other end, there was found the name of Jane, Countess Forester, the mother of the late earl·; and in the next page was an entry of the birth of all her children. Le .Forester read this with a btţating heart ; but when he found these «ptei regarding her children continued for
212 many yeare afterwards, mentioning their early death or marriages, and even issue, he became so agitated, that he laid down the book for some minutes before he could collect courage to. proceed. He had arrived at the bottom of я page of marriages and births, without meeting any thing which had reference to himself, when, on turning it over, the name of his grandfather át once met his eye. The vvords Were these t " April 24,1 1... My unhappy son " Hedindon" [the second title to the earldom of Forester] " Was this day « privately marritd in the sniall church » of-Cliffe, next the sea, tb Jane, the
213 " daughtei of Mr. James Fineux. Maj " he deserve hei ! And may his lather " forgive him 1 " Le Forester dropt the book, and sunk back in his chair, He put his hand before his face, but could not speak. Emily endeavoured to soothe him, she picked up the book, and searched her¬ self. Her eyes ran through a page or two of uninteresting notes, but she started when the name of HEDINDON again met her, and in an instant she exclaimed, " Here it is, my dear God¬ frey; indeed, indeed it isl' 1 —"What is there '" be answered hastily. " Why your father's birth, my love I"—" Mer¬ ciful Heaven 1 " he exclaimed, " how wonderful are thy ways! Read it,
214 Emily, for I have a mist before my eyes !" ' Emily lead— ''· б Nov. 17... My '' daughter Hedindon was this day de- " livered of a son. May he be the means " of his gì andfathei's forgiveness to his " unhappy parents Ι" ι She paused, and read the following article in tears. " Τ Nov. 17... This " day, my virtuous but unfortunate " daughter Hedindon died. The child " lives, anJ, by my desire, has been " baptized by the name of Eustace." Le Forester's tears now burst forth, and he sobbed, ajoud; while Emily still continued to turn over the pages of this
215 interesting volume. In other parts were prayers for her son's restoration to his father's favour, and afterwards lamen¬ tations on his relapses into profligacy, and neglect of' hie child, after the death of his virtuous and ill-used wife. But it vyas unncccssaiy that Le Fo¬ rester's feelings should continue to be agitated by a farther pursuit of the sub¬ ject at present. The search was suc¬ cessful, and the evidence was complete; and thcy brought away the book with feelings whieh it is easier to imagine than describe.
CHAPTER XVI.
When the lovers looked back to the late strange and rapid series of events, it seemed almost to be a dream. In the first delirium of their happiness, months passedawayuncounted,andtheyappear- ed scarcely to'know the lapse of time. In the mean while their agents were busy to obtain full possession of their estates for them. Mrs. Bellenden, a woman of strong understanding, could not resist the proofs of right, which were communicated to her, and very 3
2)7 pıttütafruy acquiesced in an annuity for herself, anil i competent provision íòr her sdn Hedindon therefore, with the large surrounding estates, was surrendered to Le Forester Accompanied by his beloved Emily, he left his residence at thi; watering place, where he had spent pari! of the summer, to take possession of the did family mansion Jt' Wás now 1 autumn The wild and säeiife splendour of the skies, lhe yellow fields, and thé groves and woods, whose leaves began to bé tipped With! gold, increased the beauty of the scenery, and added to the delight of their jodrneý VOL III L
218 Towards the tvcning pf die tJijijiHi day the distant forests of Heduidoii began to appear in tht horizon A few miles brought them to the outei lodge of the park Where ψφ the wnrds Which can paint their present mmglee^ sensations? The very sound pf the lpck, as the porter turns the masey key,, thrills flie«- hearts with a thousand in-; dcsenbablß emotions. ! Through the, gloom of ancippt trees, wţiich; b,ave f % often witnessed the passage of so many of their ancestor«, şndfijorn wlţiph tbsy had been so prueljy disinherited, they¿ ascend at length tbp lastbre\Y) andjeapb, the vçnerabje tower pf ertţrţnce ¡ As the great gates are throve back, a train of old semuO and retainers, of
210 the family Qrowd the court to congras- tulate their arrival. A village-band, prepared to expect tbem, strike up théit notes of triumph, make thé roofs' of the old hall ring, and all the chcuit of buildings echo back the salutatipn. " My Emily, my enchanting, my hrore than ever belpved Emily," cried Le Fprester, as soon as they were left alone in the venerable pld parlour pf dark oak-wainscot, beyond the half, over which a blazing fire pf wopd threw its'cheeruilradlancej" could our fondest visions have hoped that the mercy of Heaven would thus have repaid us for our sufferings î Methinks I feel inspired In this magnificent abode pf our anees-· tors! See hew the old portraits Smile
2,20 upon це 1 Behold that exquisite figufp in the dress of Charles the Second's court) It risenibles niy Emily, but it falls short of h,er beauty I I " The morning will »¿pen to u,s аЦ the romantic scenery of the park, and ^ye will wander, in als wildnessţ where the oaks have ¡grown broader, tnd. the shjideş Jia^ve thıckeıtçd, fot us, Wje vfill şeçk out every cpftagpr in these cxttmsive tţomams, a,nd çndeaypur tç феи ıfhem with, s,pme poıtıep qf pur orospenty I ¡LVţy Emilys ovei flowing bea: t will find some yent of her grati¬ tude for the blessings we have received çurselves, ιη the constant employment of communicating blessings to those .around beri"
2ÜI 3 Emily thárikeà hım with her tears; he* bosom was too full for language. Nor was her future conduct less grate¬ ful and benevolent than her present feelings She seemed, indeed, a di¬ vinity sent from heaven to bless every one within her power She blessèff them by her goodness, her care, and her charity, and the kindness of her soft and seductive manner doubled the blessing Le Forester had now full room foj the display of those vigorous and com¬ manding abilities, which, however? clouded, had still lighted him amidsť the dark tempests of his former life The occasional ferocity, which had! been pioduced by sorrow and injuries, Ь 3
at»
melted away; prosperity filled his,h.eart with new sensibilities, and he expe¬ rienced no sensations but those of over-r flowing benevolence. ~He was now in possession of a large estate; but it became a duty to his posterity as well as himself to assert the claims of his rank. He petitioned, therefore, the Lord Chancellor for a writ of summons ίο the House of Lords, in right of the Earldom of Forester ¡ to which he stated his pretensions, with the proofs to support them. Aa affair so extraordinary and intricate as this of course required a long discus¬ sion, and a reference to the Lords themselves.
323 In (he mean 'time Le ; Forester w« not fprgetful of the amiable, t girl tt» whom he owed his first delivçrajıpç frem the ruffians who cairied ¡him away fiom his mother's house. > The house had been Lord Forester's, and was now his own ; he soon, therefqre, traced her history. The history, in¬ deed, was sufficlintly obyious; she was a natural daughter of Lord Fo¬ rester, to whom he had given a school education, and then cruelly placed her, to avoid the discovery of Mrs. Bellenden, in this solitude, with twp pid servants, his creatures. , It may easily be imagined < with what delight this poor deserted girl 3
m
«sei«* hit* ;' wifli/itfhat gmtiilMe ihe acknowledged in him a deliverer ; anet with what ecstasy she accepted his pro- fttsal to aceompaöy him home to hef nar-disÎovered sísíèr. ' Emily 1 met her with the fondest and most rapturouVaffection; while she at Once won the Heart of Le Forester by her likeness to his beloved wife. Her liveliness and artless simplicity filled the house at Hedindon with cheerful¬ ness ; and sometimes dispelled the mo¬ mentary gloom which, even in the midst of all his happiness, clouded the countenance of Le Forester at the re¬ collection of his mothers' death; an event wliich had been''communicated
ι aas tp hun, sifter Itis^tturn^frpm^ScetUnd, b.yHpntingfiek|, , „ii »- lo 1-.I 'Л ι , , , , ľ o,(, vlb.tew n- 1 lo AnjPna'be ÎOT* /fffiffieirt visitqrs §t Hedindon was this sineeit^ul amifiblç friend. Nor will it appear wonderful that the playful charms of Gertrude (for that was her name, to which she now joined that pflbp,, family) soon won his heart, and added to his attach¬ ment to the society. At length the House of Lordi de¬ termined the long-ditputcd point of bis father's birth in his favour ι tnd he took his seat as Earl Forester. Thus this ancient family was esta¬ blished in a reputation greater than it
-sìa ЫЛ enjoyed ¡to" èéhtttríeá ¡ Ί and thè lustre of genius and vittua aàrifctrdned their worldly prosperity, and entitled «ietti to all that could! be éryoyeá ef humait haripínesí. !l v
tr» í»ö.
< ι ' I e i 1 1 \Mftte4 by Τ Baiflcj Bult Court Vietx Street, Imim
