Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Clarentine: a novel
CLARENTINE. BOOK ï.
CHAPTER I. ÍN the county of Devon, diilant fow miles even from the marcii town, and fiirrouoded only by woods, шша a few îbiniy-fcattered cottages s flood the an. cient family manfion of Sir fames Del· mington, Bart, lately deccafed. This habitation, at once gloomy, ftately, and extenfìve, was now the conftant refidence of Lady Delmington his widow, her chil¬ dren, an orphan niece, and a confidérable eftabtifhment of domeftics. Married extremely young, Lady DeU mington, though the mother of fo large a family, was ftill in the prime of life, hand- fome, elegant, and admired. Her birth, ¥OL, Ι, H
тр^^ -ì mn nokien was гсГрсЙаЫе; feer •г * » v ;п had neer aticïided to with care; «v î "^.îiou п г ш$ benextdent ana ¿mi» ** í berma mers n^Jifb^cL esin and ncoiiie íbicv /де dea*h of Sır a« f levi confi Lrŕldy djrmnifhed; , i . « ν ι icv * * ífce fy iu re ad% T aiitag€ к - J »^τ children, fhe wiíhed to „ ^ . * ' * » u.ïuitctiLtry eipe nec, íhe Ыа v ť non i cnt thai event шок place / *ejm ïn cd upon rending wholly ar Del^ - * un·» I 1 jufa. llic^e, cdu^îuııg her ц* li eiiíireĽ άί ho.nc. ирод the moft teo- j4 л::сл!, ytt r«tiontíÍ plan, íhe lived re- ï Ted, a*id almoil ui/*.n«>wn; contentedly ilc\yivii hcifaif ю the dati *з of her iitu- ut K.i', and unrepııungî) dedicating the b ft paa oí hej ufe to fohmde, tender -Tuteli d évii >, yi^iLtLí attention, and m- lie* ι ld. α fan, Edgar, who inherited ♦ .ii iidiei s t.vfa, and his iathcr*s excellence of h^att япи cdpofiaon, was at this period about fifteen. Го d countenance open, intelhgeat 9 and animated, he united a fianknefi. a genciufity oí character ζηά íiUccUefsof temper, raiely to bc fur- pafïcd. Though wild, thoughtki , ^nd íí i/etUOUS,
ψ -Æeå, Though wild, ίηοηςΙ.ιΚΓ-. ¿ni uiìpetuou·», he \%as new г unfa* İm*:- n vv mik voh nî сл didibe! vt dy it icM'i! -— His palli ms weie vľd j pi, but Ь\ ά lutîr nun?;: „-mı nt ec*bl\ curbe I , <*îmÎ L»v ι η ld rimo»iflrai4C *ind íupphcď.irg ! vk с. Ш el) í u bd ue d, Firdcru'k-t the iccond fon, ^ 4 s r.er yjupjger, and ю c v r) lvi ív ui ti с ч.<п1 mented the apprHuim yi a «wnjut ƒ t 4 r ;—C'iZfdels, ijarcntıvı. ut. uv е. void of f yyyas application· alî be ь s ıîvf, hv leatnt ! \ с har¿cv% and the help oí > як к parts, anda retuutvt memory. It. тч;- ftiri he was h^ht and attive, m uu'Jci- ífaruiing penetrating and acute; to â blunt nadusefs at ί.ν,τ /.ŕ, that ionu tunes κ fam' k d wit, he ?dded an im?gma*K)n m*>ie than commonly ferule in ci^vii: *g iuheinci. of miithicf; and a boiane fs fal¬ dom etjuiikd m ι uiting ineni .η evv vu- Hitherto educated at home* Ь\ л nCigibounng clerg)man, Mr. Aukland, under the eye of their mother, the time was now arrived when thcv weie hi ft to emerge into the world, and quit ihe fhtl- tering roof that had fa long bet η the В 2 boun-
re е i n e;- re о i' ¿li the i г tîıou^ht^ — lhe Гсе ле ^ i ve ;>eeí' ) eeev.'vi е ери ; ее. Λί tee p,y :.,■■.! е ге:ее ïh;> Levere с e гглт* с η с e s 1. 1 -су "eeìe ìì-'-vì tev ρ ■ ~> ï /": t eť ice ing ulH к>Г ..'■'.· еч, е.-, e: eve ;ν" ■ ^e-evreev] ее \- T r. Лек- 'eni. e.v/ 'v: ĺ 4 ; -с* ^ ееге л -yd s to pr^cved t>.» Oe e t. ле:ееее;е ,.·■{ a beautiful аиШШй«! d .ί se ť .-y eee.. e,- hv e v- гее. k ìa íhe ς r te.* t Ьес.акеел. е,е^^7-; л í í ean. t:,e arrival ei те. e с hü ι -'k 'eu WťSí.·*· eoe vv v treen aw i y. Τ г., if oeve-:ree erv,, -.ν,ν^ in her own te heemeen ï ferir de p rt- uke «и ^ и i ^'<-*^е ■ y f-r- L.:-e í-eí ev7 eer?« t;b.>egí': ¿he. ak v dedke, .ve-e ufieve-e w-r h e ev;j veeeeeke w cv, ry eee r v] t. hur ..eve-eicu fV^rn brh>w. i h e .ir íikveíe r-e-vtvevcr« rantı Ichs deeply ¿í!eci> cd, Oľ h.-.í; } ¡jHiíť ik ıh -с ir «wn w v al ík. Ь ? p reiend v* v;u'i <it>wn îu them, feko^eü by i'-.íj;.í dik οοϋίη% once τη о re то repeat the " k;e.e;- ' rf the preceding night, and £') k.. e tk. :e -j parí. V/:¿h ie; vv v hearer they now heard the с be lie a ρ er ■ ее; h. hår. Ли k keel whom îl levi ib en,-e ved Cai d.d ϊυΐ ы its way nom '¡yit ve íhe пыгка îown al which it had tv;.cii lined., rvfuild lo alight; the two fcoys 3 therefore^ farcing an air of gaiety then
tr" r ŕ ν,^ί " fv fr f- *n- u v!ı n ç, haf 1 ! 1 / veij^ d r ,Ln-bo )( fiJ ţi " г* ι th fľ f " t ι ь , *'\ t i j n τ h „r S
s í « .. „J «. í · 4 «
^ Ì u í. t Γ '-
r - í ľ
t
TV
í t ϊ Im í » m« í ^ ţv i i í í ' -i t - - 'l I.'J' S< 1 í * " t r r í ,
I v ·*,-
r-
a" ιτ ι- ϊ ** ·" d "*- t 1 y * ,* í ,] í^ r ,c í :d ,/í .m « ч tó ^ h ϊ hef ^. -ir" i . , h , ' ' ч ч ι I V Ν ( * . - ' , r - t \ ». %. ν . / ч w* í ι e Ι¬ ί { » L i ι î * j , , , * V * * ' ϊ * ^ * ' - κι 1 . ι ^ n ι » ! .и t, t tí ' ^ tl s * . J— tl vvr ' « : и vt van j r» v »n^ h id î^aıîyr- c'. Ill c . » í., and τ ·ΐ^ childi a L ¿ \% . .4.
f v.
£t > t *« *νί*θ , Г , 'κ IV4İ1 t » s t \ π* e¡ * uit К 1 -
! h ι
tr
, Ι , ι Ì * i * г h ^ f I е ч hi ÌT \ K j oí « ■* , \ýí ii l í "μ! i. τ ^ , r ι Ьм . * ι ^ч. u eî . ^ 4 i f ? ι i ι il e Τ α! 1 Ι -4
4
'ι .,. ί
r ι
h_
г f svp
I t
i «, «. í ¿
ι í
I V '* \
Sí î í'i'Vsn - vi. Su» д« Ι,ί r name,*" an» ív »< 1 i ad\ î>ı 1ηιϊΐ"' , ,ι>η- ν " for îîic kind" η * "î nr ii vi u! ! t pe in a few mi* I í' Vo'ifd i í . I ν í * s * ' VVÍäl ί^Ο*^ ■ . .> { 'У ( \ « ν ι Μ i " , ι ν > τ ' 4 e , « ^ ι ' * . ' , 1 1 » " ι ι ..ui ι ν 'ti', 3 τ i. ., , 'tí ( » \ ' _ ( ' * 'i . i ' ' '' *' ' , * .. I < i « « . ' s ι . ! » У' и 'i [ у- ; · v ; >iìu ť г ¡У и ι * ν Ί, ' '- ί с . · * d* u u ' i ' > 'и t j -,ι , η j r t' 1 ' ί « : ι ' ί ιν ■ i JwH Lud U' vn ' * ffľi' j ι d l I d ' s O' í i h c * i VvJ\ » ¡: -v íl í í e r * \ >l, tV * f ■ \t \ Г. ¡ 1д1 ι ] · , | r i - M, , ;
'í ' 4 .' kM ^ .. í. : ' k ' -v ¡ i ^ u íl t. * У 1у ù ï< V ^ 1 . ' \ „t M- V, . ■ I li, í^v t -.д. L.. L ..I i.t.í ь ¿ n v> « ι ,·,. h* t ___ iiikíL*-*c*
CLAREN TI Ν к/"* paffible* as he had a fsiend waiting for Ь -b'ïî aí Ly ft αα, with whom he was that THgtK to travai ícvtr^l ¡rubis further. ** İ y*y^. Ъу hí voar neighbourhood, l 1: ..^ A , : ., :ar ^* ;u) liC n he* 4 - ihme weeks, and n }·-ϊϊι Lehíiep у üi ptrnnï ηκι, fh,>U ecíi¿v¿ihy do rrnevu'íhc r 7>?iOur of calling e.^ ·..:.' \ ,..' г '■.' e ■ .■■ e , i: I on ¡v uh/ Ы>ге s ya Y.iW" dica : .-i ev 1 î ;.h α·- Ì ■ v: y y -e, ς ' vece«, net onle ι ht ef;eev:H' eee eve ^ »i our ¿¡íhe CL.rcnîme, Lee îhe hn/,ee.h< <^ftles viiit.* calls loudly ur-'íi-: V'-iU Γ- e' ^eenberh' : ev í hers гае=; ihe bell. ^nd Mf. Somer ili:; сагппде bei^g r^aay* he bowed 3 and ¿r e ihe b vee, íeeehf'-.i and conrcrned at the c;.í ra- eríleee-\* ved üee, ahnoít a 1er n 't i n g dif- :e v ;v ; aie!c:.e.)í'iei w.:rd, I ady Deimin^ton ver:. <·· :, ί -es ïee 1а 1 л π as heei as her % ve y evei·, ». -e:.ee e> eeeeire oí'hcr chil- ν, ve, vde.iV; ν ..e ť = ve iheeg ! e iì probable he: e: f i:- : eìe ; ee ! e;7 ]ve- the lied quitted £:еея. he dvv e; 't oí iheív q s ie liions they v. v re пгееее У'" ee/v ;::е/ ,e>bvrf; to tec Uh- ih".· ie pevLh tiet iieiihcr (he nor íeevM e^.i heen ehdi ti-.ee iur near two İİ77UİS, Lady
Lady Delmin^on's uneafinefs, encreaf¬ ed by this intelligence, now prompted her to fand a fervant into the village fa fearch of Ciarentine; but at the very moment fhe was giving dire fiions to that effect, one of die little gii îs came run* ning towaniá bet, ro fay Mr. Svime ríeis carnale wa> coming back again î At this unespe/ted return Lady Del» mington went out. and waited near the entrance of í!¡e hall the approach of the carriage, which flowly drove up, and at kmg'h (topped· Th' 4 forvant who attend¬ ed rt fprung off his horfa, and opening the door, the firft object Lady Delming¬ ton beheld wis the young Ciarentine« pale and fenfalefîj fupported in the arms of Mr. Somerfet. * Terrified beyond ail meafure, and al¬ moft dreading to enquire what had hap¬ pened, Lady Lkdmuumm had orűv ν<>κν> to utter an hicohervnt exclamation, be¬ fore Mr. Somerfet. alightm^ and hiring Ciarentine out of the carriage, carried 1ч r himfelf into the houfe, and placed her on a fopha in tbe nea reft room. There, whilft Lad* Dehnington's wo¬ man, who had been fummoned, was bu- íicd m uling every means far her reco- В 5 very«,
тегу, and the reft of the children were all ¡binding round her, with looks ofcoiv ticrnation and difmay, Mr. Somerfet gave a brief account of the accident that threw fier into that fituation. uf ï was driving extremely quick through the village, when, from a cottage hy the road fide, I law a young perfon rufh for* vard almoft under the horfes' £еец and %vith an agonizing fhriek call out repeat¬ edly to the driver to ftop. Providen« t i all у he did fa in time to fave lier; and when 1 jumped out, I found herftretched upon the ground, grafping firmly with one hand the cloaths of a child, to fecure whom, к was f in all probability, fhe en» ¿angered herfelf fo much- î raifed her up inftantly, and attempted to comfort and reftore her; but her fright, and the fall that fucceeded it, had iotally deprived her tif fpeech and motion, and had not the child directed me whither to convey her, i ftiould have been compelled to have left her with the people of the cottage." áS That child," cried Lady Delmington, failing her eyes in thankfulncfs to heaven* * that child was mine—my little Emma! Where! where is ¡he now> Sir !" « In
âc ïn регСев fafety. Madam, *ith а woman who appeared juft as I was coming away, and faid ftie was your Ladyihip's home-keeper." Clarentme at that moment beginning to ft ir, Lady Dclrrington*s whole attention was directed towards her. In a few mo¬ ments her recollection feemed to be re¬ turning, and looking with fui prife around her, like a perfon juft waking írom a heavy ftupor, flie uttered in a low voice the name of Emma—aiked if ftie was fafe ; aiidj on being anfwered in the affirmative, fixed her eyes with an air of wild aitoni fh- ment on young Somerfet, and ídid to her aunt** ---— 4i Who is that ?" Somerfet fmiled; and Lady Delming¬ ton anfwered— tc An old friend of youris, my love, though a forgotten o e ; Mr. William Somerfet, your coufin." ΰί Mr. William Somerfet!" repeated Ciarentine, a Taint glow of pleafure ting¬ ing her pale cheeks. ςί Oh, î ought ne¬ ver to have forgotten him! His farmer kindnefs to mc—" 66 Huili, buih, my dear Ciarentine/' interrupted young Somerfet, affcÉtionately В б taking
taking her hand. * й this is mol a tíme to (bvb voin m enin ry for inftances oí pai f rii nd íhip; we fîıall meet again vtiy foon, í hopj; when* if too are beteer, we will idik over former dais, and renew our ently acqiwintan;o Keft and quiet are* at ψ ciem, what you moft require ; there* fue. adieu— î lîieîl wait upon Lady Deb min-Tfoii 3» Friday, at furtheft/* Then congratulating- her Ladyihip up¬ ori the happy teïinination of this alarming evi*nt, lie once more took leave, and de» pai ted, When he was gone, Ciarentine was in¬ terrogated by her aunt upon the fubjeci of JEmmi : and aiked hov/ it happened, that, •without having obtained permiffion, ilie I"ad been fo imprudent as to venture out %uh her f υ far í This wajs a queftion flie found It no discuit matter to mí we г fatiafacWiiy.— The houfe-keeper, ilie faid, having told ber in the morning that Edgar's poor old nurfe was very ill, íhe had defired to ac« company her on a vifit to her cottage, as foon as dinner was over. Emma, ihe zadede being with her at that moment, the houfe-kcepei* herfelf had propofed talcing her with them; and it was whilft they
thev were talking to tlie nurfe the found of the carriage firft alarmed her, and in¬ duced her, on finding Emma had inn out into íhe road, to ruih after her in ilut frantic marnier Tins fimple recital perfectly fuisfied Lady Delmington, who e^prefhd ihe tu¬ rno ft gr ¿titude ro ber young waid tor the Courage ami goodnefs of heart that had made her the means of prcfarvmg lier hclplefs imle charge.
CHAP. IL CLARENTINE Delmington was the daughter of Sir jarne? Delmington s only brother, who, whilft abroad on his r ravels had married a young foreigner of diftinc¬ tion, whofe iamily, one of the proud_ íl in France, had, on the difcovery of the match, utterly renounced hor, anu thrown her wholly on th mercy of her h u {band's friends far fupport and countenance- Young Delmington'^ father was ftill living, and received the firft account of this un¬ happy affair^ and of the arrival of his fan irt
in England, at the very time he was dif- pofmg himfelf to make his will ; and the ronkqucncc of this intelligence %vm^ that, ïü a moment of paffion and refentment, hc totally difmhcnted this unfortunate young man, and died fhortly afterwards, without cithei feeing him, or altering his emu determination. Puimlefs, hopclefs, and deprived of c\Tf other rcfourcc, young Delmington wrote to his brother^ Sir James, the** m Italy, to ïïàw his fituation, and implore his councii and affîilance. Before any tììiFeer could arrive however, defparr and indigence prompted him, forfaking his wife and infant child, to enlift inta ihe military fervice of the Eaft India Company f and to embark with the troops that were then letting fail for Bengal. He had been gone nearly a week; and his ill-fated wife, ignorant of the language of the countrv, dcfolate, a ad almoil re- duced to her la íl guinea, was weeping over her unconfeious babe, when a lady in a very elegant carriage (lopped at her door, and, without fending up her name. entered lhe houfe 3 and defired to be ihewe to
îo Mrs Delmington's apartment. This friendly vifitor was Mrs* Somerfet, fifter to Sir James and young Delmington, wdth whofe recent embarkation and unhappy ftory ihe was already acquainted. To her at his departure, the melancholy manderer had, by letter^ recommended thefe innocent and pitiable fufferers* u I am come, Madam," faid ihe, in a voice of the iv.oft foothing kindnefs, as fhe advanced towards the lovely and aftoniihed ftranger, α to take you from this lonely and melancholy abode, and to offer you every confolation, and per¬ form every feivice for you in ray power» My name," added ftie» taking her hand, " is Somerfet; I am fifter to your hui- band—and already in anticipation fifter^ and friend to you/* " Ah! Madam," cried the \oung fo¬ reigner, preffing to her bofam the hand that held hers,— ςί i battered not m ν felf, with the hopes of exciting this generous feniibility in any Englifh heart—I have forfeited all claim to Englifh kindnefs! — But this infant, 3 ' continued ilie, looking at the child ftie held in her aims—" this infant may perhaps better merit your goodnefs} Ше was born in your land, ihe is
Is your country-woman, and furely ought нос, in juftice, to Ih are the ρ on ¡foment due toher mother's errors!" That mother, not yet eighteen, born to aril· ence· lon«; inured to fplcndotir, a ftranger till now alike to care and ad- verfity, furvived but a fhort time the de¬ parture of her h υ (band; flie went intoa deep declin*, and expired fome months afk r in the houle, almoft in the arms of ÎVI r % So ' e r fet. Ί hus early deprived of both her parents^ the little Ciarentine was now committed entirely iq, the proteUion of her father's- family. Mr. Somerfet for fome time fuf¬ fered bis wife's compaifion far her to exert itfclf without reftraint^ but fhortly growing weary ofa preference he felt not himfelf inclined to beftow; meanly jea« loos of the attachment his wife and fori had conceived for lier, he firft murmured at, then openly oppofed every new ad of benevolence Mrs« Somerfeťs kindnefs of heart prompted her to perform. Anxious for the fate of her interefting little ward, on the firft appearance of this illiberal difcontent, Mrs. Somerfet applied to Sir James far advice and affittane e, and on his return to England, heard with gra¬ titude
timde and delight, that he now meant to lake the charge of his rtiece wholly on himfelf. She was accordingly, when juft enter¬ ing ber fixth year, removed to Delming¬ ton Houfe, and received by Sir James and his wife with equal pity and affec- tiçjn. From that hour flie hód conftantly rciided with them, and fince ihr death of her firft patront fs .Mrs. So nerfrt, known no other protector?, fio other friends. To fave apte irances Mr. Somerfet, it is true, had written twice or thrice in the courfe of feven ycats to afte after her; he hád once even, u hen on a vilit in the fame county, honoured her with a perfonal enquiry ; but never had rtftified the levd! intention of affuiing her a provifion, o/, wealthy as he wws, of participating with the Delmmgtons in the expencts of her board and ι dncation. Not ίο young W ¿diam ; though feven years older than the little Ciarentine, and but ι a rely at borne w hüll ihe inhabited his father's houfe, his mothers expiv f- fions of fondnefs towards lier, the falici- tudc and tendernefs with w hieb ihe always ípoke of her, lud made a deep and lafting impreftion on his generous heart. He pitied
pi ríetl her for her own, and loved her for the fake of his mother; (he had been her favourite, her nuriling, the ohjeä for many years of all her thoughts ; and W il¬ ham, л\1ь> chctiíhed Mrs. Stíinerfct's me¬ mori vaûi cntluiíiafni, transferred to the с! ύά of lier adoption a fhare of thai arftťiii'ii, he had, when living, fek for herk π; As often therefore as he had an op¬ portunity lie had ariften to Ciarentine, ar.d tent ber, in token of his lcmembrance, Inch little pnTcnts as her age made . c- ceptahîc, and hib finances would allow > ana when, after a iilcnce of nine years t the news aîrivtd of the death of bei father, who wa* tailed in an engagement between th.e rnghfli and Mahrattas, then at war with eat ii other, hc dictated to his tutor from a Ink bed, and iigncd afterwards a foîemn promile, by which be bound him- ícií, whenever hb aqe w onld permit, and hc came into poJkihon of the fortune be muft one day inherit, to fettle upon her an independent competency for life. This pape!, drawn up ал he hoped v iih all due formality, and written by a clergyman, the old and faithful friend of his mother, who had feen and often noticed Ciaren¬ tine
line 'm her infancy, he fent to Sir James the moment it was fealed, and from that hour had invariably looked upon as a fac red and irrevocable engagement, which he meant religion fl ν to fulfil. On receiving this extraordinary deeé from ά youth not yet faventcen. Sir James was affected by the excellence of difpofition it denoted, yet by no means flattered into a hope, that fuch promifes were likely ever to be realized. The €Ìiffìpatton of that world into which his nephew was juft entering, the temptations he might have to put his money to lefs benevolent purpofes, or at leaft, the ver- fatilityand various purfuits of his age—« al!, all, he feared, would contribute to erafe from his remembrance this act of youthful generofity; to truft to it there¬ fore as certain, would bc cruelty to its ob¬ ject ; and Sir James felt too forcibly the helpleifnefs of her fituation, to harbour for a moment the idea of configning her for future fupport to the emergency offa unliable a dependence. With fo large a family as he bad, it was not to be fuppofed he could do much for her : a limited provifion however, nearly equal to what he left his own daughters, be meant
meant to bequeath her, but was taken iuddenly ill before he could put this be¬ nevolent defign inexécution, and breathed his lait a few days after, leaving her as abfolutcly dependent upon his wife> as flie had been upon him. From motives of regard to her huf- band s memory , as well as from ignorance where to place her, Lady Delmington ftill continued to take charge ef her, and to treat her with undeviating kindnefs and affection. She was brought up with her own children, more as if born of the fame parents, than as if ftationed amongft them by accidental circumftances, and during the firit feven years of her refidence with them, fcarcely far a moment had had caufe to regret her fituation. Since the birth of little Emma, who was now three years old, and the death of Sir James, many of the fervants of Delming¬ ton Houfe had been difcharged. Ciaren¬ tine then undertook the fole care of Emma, flept with her dreft her, and was her conftant companion*· Lady Del¬ mington felt the lefs reluctance to this, as flie knew the child was uncommonly fond of her young Governcfs, and as ihe perceived, that though of an age, when
moft girls require conftant obferv ance themfelves, í larentine had prudence enough to preferve her little charge from danger, and penetration enough to dif- cover, and check with mildnefs, all her infantine caprices and follies. , The partiality of Edgar for his little coufin, who had long been his diftin¬ guiihed favourite, made him at firft view this new office in the light ofa degrada¬ tion, and he often exprc' ed to his brother his difcontent on the fub'ect. Frederick, •ρ though far ¡eh intcrefted in the caufe, far fame time joined in declaring the fame fentiments, and both conceived a ftrong, but ihortdived aveifion to the innocent child Ciarentine, however, at hve-ih ' J 1 ) reafoned the 1 ·, out o r this ahfurd preju¬ dice; protefted (he h (l d he» f If folia:* 1 the truft and ftr from feeling inclined to murmur at, confidered it as the only means flie had of tcftifying her gratitude to their mother, for her kindnefs to her¬ felf. This explanation fame what appealed £dgar> and totally fatisficd Frederick i yet as often as they could they fought to draw her from the nurfery, and engage ' her to partake in their own amufements. To pacify them, ihe fometimes complied, though
portunity of eluding their vigilance, in order to flip from them, By degrees, however, their conftant readinefs to oblige her fand even Frede¬ rick loved to oblige her); their good¬ nature in defining from whatever feemed to give her pain; their warmth in fup- porting her caufe whenever any difference arofe between her and their filters, won her little heart, and taught her to prefer their fociety to almoft every other. Not how· ever in their boiftcrous and turbulent hours did flie fo much love them, as when fitting on a bench at the end ι f the garden, with Edgar on one fide, and Fre¬ derick on the other, ilie could pere over with them fome of the delightful adven¬ tures in the Arabian JSighn; or wonder, laugh, and cry by turns, at the miraculous eícapes of Ribinjon Cru/oe^ and the affec¬ tionate fimplicity of his man Fuday. fvľany alfo were the opportunities ihe had of rewarding them for their friendly zeal on different occafions in her behalf. If by fomc wild and boyiíh trick they had excited Lady Delmington's difpleafur% Ciarentine apologized, Ciarentine plead¬ ed for them, and obtained a quicker pardon ι
pardon ; if, after running about the whole afternoon, they returned at evening heat¬ ed and alarmed, to recount fome pickle- exploit, or fearful mifadventure, Cla« rentine hurried them to their room, foft¬ cned the intelligence in her difclofure of it to their mother, and carried them in fecret whatever ihe could beg from the houfe-kecper, or lave unfufpected from hei own fupper. Once, too, poor Edgar had been ex¬ tremely ill. A fever, the conféquence of having over heated hi in iel f rendered him delirious near a week, and threw linn into imminent danger. Ciarentine, then about eleven years 4 old, fcarcely Jcit his room a moment, ihared inali his mothers fatigue, helped to beguile the long hours of her confinement aed attendance ; read, talked to him by h s bed fide when he got better, and fuffered no one but her¬ fclf to adminiiler to him the medicines that were preíçribcd; neither from any one clie would Edgar, when fenfible, ie~ cei ve them ; and upon no one elfe would he lean for fupport, when firft beginning flowly to pace his chamber· Thus, in reciprocal ads of kindnefs, were fpent their eariieft years ; and thus began
began an attachment equally delightful to both parties, equally fincere f and equally undifguifed. CHAP. III. THE time of Edgar's abfence was tü Ciarentine the moft melancholy ftie had ever known She had now no gay and partial companion conftantly to partake in her amufements; to walk out with her öfter Emma was in bed ; to rejoice with when any particular indulgence was grant¬ ed her: with Edgar her chief fource of happinefs was gone, and all that remained proportionably dimini ihed in value. Yet í larentine had с heart difpofed to love with fondnefs all around her. Lady Delmington ihe honoured and refpeded like a fecond mother. Harriet, her eldcft daughter, fhe regarded in the light of a lifter and feit inclined to beftow on her all a fifters tendernefs; but Harrietwas unfteady and capricious; one day mildly affectionate, the next rude and imperious«, Sophia, the feond filter, with a heart that did her honour, and a difpofition 2 the
the moft friendly and generous, wás how¬ ever fo extremely %rild and thoughtlefs 1 that notwithftanding the warmth and fin- txrity of her attachment for Ciarentine, it was not in her nature to forbear tor* menting her four-and-twenty hours toge¬ ther. She had too much of her brother Frederick about her, indeed, to ryfpeft any hody % fo long, except her mother, and even her 9 ilie often caught herfelf invo¬ luntarily endeavouring to perplex and furprife* By every other poft, letters either from Edgar or Frederick regularly arrived, and lightened up every face at Delmington Houfe with fmiles of gladnefs. ' Ciaren¬ tine treafu red hers from Edgareven with romantic fondnefs; read them all till ftie had learnt them by heart, and valued them above every other thing in her pof*' fe Шоп. Meanwhile, Lady Delmington, though fhe was herfelf in moft refpecìs qualified to educate her daughters, could not but be fenfible there were many little elegant accomplishments proper for girls of family^ ftie was by no means adequate to teaching thera. Dancing, mufic, and drawing were of this number; and, as at Lyfton, the vol. i. С ncarcil
пса reft town, there was ď large boarding- fchool, Hie foon learnt alfo there were mailers, fuch as íhe required, who taught op very reafonable terms« Twice a week, therefore, they were fummoned to Del¬ mington Houfe; and Ciarentine, though nothing was abfoiutely paid for ¿nftrucling her, by being fuffered to affift at the leifons, reaped nearly as much benefit from them as the fcholars themfelves. In dancing and drawing, particularly, flie made great progrefs ; but mufic, though her fpeaking voice was foft and touching, £he foon found would require far more time and application, than ihe had leifure to bellow upon it* Theje being bufrone * initrument in ihe houfe, and that being almoft always in ufe, ihe had few or no opportunities of praôifing; and there¬ fore, as far as related to the fcientific part of the art, in a very fhort time gave it up wholly ; itili, however,4vhen alone, or with Emma, for her " foie auditrefs, 5 * ihe delighted to fing in wild, and not un* pleaiing tones, the fimple ballads thai had words flic loved. Every'day Lady Delmington, in a large gothic chamber ihe called the /chool-room* affembled her little family to repeat to her_ their"
their leffons, receive their taflcs for the following morning, read to her, and prac» tiie either mufic or drawing. When this was over, fhe made them fit down to work, and till two o'clock kept them ferioufly employed. The reft of the day, at leaft as much of it as they could fpare from the bufinefs of learning their feveral leffons for the moHfow, was their own, and might be fpent in the garden, or the houfe, as they pleafed. The few families that had vifited Lady Delmington fince the death of Sir James, chiefly called in ofa morning and return¬ ed before dinner, as it was well known fhe had given up all eating company the mo¬ ment ihe became a widow. Sometimes, indeed, two or three of her neareft neigh« bours, during the long evenings of fum¬ mer, came to her to tea. Neither Ciaren¬ tine, nor her little coufins, however, ap¬ peared on thefe founal occafions for more than a quarter of an hour«, during which, they drank their tea ftanding, cat their dry bread in utter filence, and then, mak¬ ing a profound curtfy, joyfully retired ; Ciarentine, to undrefs her little Emm:., th e M i ís D e 1 m i n gion s , t o t h e i r o w л o m u fe - ments, С 2 OiìC
One evening, about a fortnight after the departure of Edgar and Fredericks Lady Delmington received a fecond vifit from Mr. Somerfet, Ис came on horfe- backs and perceiving, as he approached the hcáďe, a group of children walking and converfing together near the avenue, difmountcd, and giving his horfe io his fervant, drew near them, Ciarentine in¬ ftantly recollected him, and running up to Ыдц her eyes fparkling with pleafurcf offered to conduct him to her aunt. Gratified by a reception fo cordial, he accepted the 'propofa!, took her by the hand, and walked with her into the hui $ followed by the oilier children. Lady Delmington, rejoicing again to fee him, welcomed him with diftinguiihed, politenefs; and the evening afterwards turning out extremely lainy, preffed him«, with inch unfeigned earneftnefs to accept a bed at her houfe, that fhe foon fucceeded in her application, and prevailed upon him to fend a note to his friend to inform him of the reafon of his ftay. During the following day, the whole of which he fpent at Delmington, Ciarentine^ enchanted with the mixture of vivacity 3 and
and foftnefs in his character, with the ex¬ treme refpečt he paid to Lady Delmington 7 the pleafantry with which he treated her children, and, above ail, the afteftionate intereft he feemed to feel for her, never- but when indifpenfably obliged to it by her attendance on Emma, left the room he fat in. The familiarity with which he addrefľed her could not have been humi« Hating,even had ihe been older ; it feemed to be the effect of brotherly kindnefs and partiality; was never ill-bred, but always gemle, friendly^ and indulgent» Lady Delmington beheld with pleafure the regard he fhewed her, and hoped much benefit might be derived from it to her young ward* William Somerfet, an only fon; heir to immenfe poífeffions; fo nearly allied to her; and, with a heart fo bene¬ ficent and companionate, could not, fhe thought, now he beheld her, reflect upon Clarentine's deftitute eircumftauces, with¬ out feeling all tfiofe noble intentions he had formerly avowed for her revived, in their fuileft force. At all events, his countenance and friendfhip could not but be defirable to her; and as fuch, was ftrengthened to the utmoft of her Lady¬ ihip's power, by the well-merited praife* C q aud
and encomiums ihe beftowed on tbc heart and difpofition of her niece. At parting, Mr, Somerfet, after taking leave of Ciarentine, with a degree of ten¬ dernefs that deeply touched her, put into her band five guineas, and promifed to fend her a watch, and fame books he had before mentioned to her, the moment be got to town. She faw him fat off with tears—walked with him to the end of die avenue, and when he there mounted bis horfe«, and again bade her farewel, called out to him repeatedly to come again 5 and followed him with her eyes till he was out of fight, CHAP. IV. THE firft year of the two Delmingtons abfence from home was almoft expired, and their approaching holidays w^re drawing near, when, at once to celebrate their return, and the birth-day of her eldcft daughter, who had now entered her fourteenth year. Lady Delmington an¬ nounced her intention of giving a ball to all
all the little gentry in the neighbourhood. The girls cheeks glowed at this intelli¬ gence; they rapturouily embraced their indulgent mother, and fpringing towards the door, flew up to Clarentine's room to impart to her the tranfporting tidings. Faithful to her promife. Lady Del¬ mington, on the fecond day after her fon's return, i ffued her cards of invitation; gave orders to have the drawing-room prepared, and fent to Lyfton to be fpeak the beft band of mufic the town would afford. The happy day at length arrived, and the little family was juft fitting down to dinner, every heart beating with expecta¬ tion of approaching pleafure, when, with a flow and meafured pace, they faw driv« ing up the avenue an old-faihioncd poft? chaife, attended by a grey-headed foot¬ man, wdio alighting at the hall door, rang, and announced Mrs. Margaret Har¬ rington. Frederick, on hearing the name, ilartcd in an cxtacy of delight, from his chair, and cutting two or three mad capers, held out his hand to Sophia, who fat next him, and fhaking it till hc abfolutcly compelled her to cry out for mercy, eagerly ex- С 4 claimed
«lairned— í¥ 1 give you aH joy, good faiks! lor if the old Lady is not driven to dîftraftıon by the news of aur intended Βαΐί,ηιν name is not Frederick ! She could not have come at a better time 1—Lord ! how ihe will rave 1" This idea fo fully poffefled, and fo highly entertained him, that it was with much difficulty his mother could perfuadé him to be quiet, or prevent his running out himfelf to announce the news to her unexpected gueil. Meanwhile, Mrs. Margaret, who feemed bent upon putting the whole houfe into confufion, was iffuing forth her com¬ mands concerning her baggage at the entrance òf the hall, from whence^ with the fame ftateîy pornpofity, flie afterwards proceeded to the dining parlour. Lady Delmington politely advanced to¬ wards the door to receive her ; there was nothing cordial in her countenance, how¬ ever, when ihe addreffed her, nothing af¬ fectionate in her voice; for Mrs. Mar¬ garet had the misfortune of having been, time out of mind, her Ladyihip's decided averfion. To account in fame mea fure for this antipathy, it is neceffary to trace a faint iketch
iketch of Mrs. Margaret's perfon and cha- račter. She was firft coufin to the late Sir James, and at this period confiderabiy turned of fifty. Tall, thin, and mafculine, in height and figure fhe was truly formidable! Her face was long and narrow-, but compofed of features, which though large had once been handfomc. Her voice was extremely loud and harfti —her manners blunts re* pulfive, and characlcriftic of the mind within—a mind at once haughty, uncul¬ tivated, and filled with prejudices the moft: vulgar and illiberal. The marriage of her relation, Sir James Delmington, Bart, with the daughter ofa needy fpendthrift, an untitled Commoner, had excited her ire to a degree almoft of rnadnefs ! The girl's beauty, ihe averredj ^was no excufe; a thoufand beauties cried matches in the ftreets—fold apples at a flail, yet were not therefore fuppofed to be qualified to fill a diftinguiflicd rank in fociety. It was fetting his brother a per¬ nicious and dangerous example—would bring ruin upon his family, and difgrace îâpon himfelf! Yet this fair beggar\ this needy fpendthrift s «teughterj bad been well received' by the
reft of herhufband's relations; was known to poife fs an excellent underftanding, un¬ common elegance of manners, and a feel¬ ing and generous heart. At her father's - death alfa flic came into a fortune of ten thoufand pound», though, till after that event, it is true fiic added nothing to Sir James s income. The afperity and unauthorized refent¬ ment fhewn by Mrs. Margaret on this oc¬ cafion was yet more inflamed, on her firft bearing of the imprudent connection Sir James's brother had formed abroad. She imputed it folely'to the precedent he had given him—raved publicly againft them both; and for many years avoided all in¬ tercourfe, as w r ell with Mrs. Somerfet as Sir James, becaufe the former had given míuge to her brother's orphan—and the latter dared to be happy with a woman fhe had not feleéted. An unfuccefsfui attempt to get into Parliament at a general election, the clofe of which faw him entirely thrown out, firft prompted Sir James, terrified on account of his children at the temporary derange- mem of his affairs, to make overtures of reconciliation with the much exafperated Mrs. Harrington» She was rich, had ησ % lineal
lineal heirs, and had long declared her irrevocable determination of remaining fingle for life«, Fortunately for Sir James, Airs. Mar* garet's invincible, curiofity, united to a love of rambling neither age nor infir¬ mities could conquer, facilitated the en¬ deavours of their mutual friends, and once more brought her to his houfe. She had never feen Lady Delmington, and, uncharitable as nie had been in her cen« fures, longed moft ardently to behold her. Lady Delmington, naturally inclined to fatire, by no means favourably prcpoífeíicd towards Mrs. Margaret, and at that period young, gay, and inconüderate, faw her not for the firft time, without feeling ftrongly tempted to retaliate her own ri¬ dicule with intereft. She compelled her¬ felf however, in Sir ¡ames's préfence, to behave to her with the moft exact de- corum ; but, in his abfence, though flic never commenced, always readily fup- ported that aigre-doux fort of converfation, which two people, hating each other, yet willing to keep up appearances, fo well know how to render intelligible and mor¬ tifying. Their difcourfe was profufely С 6 inter-
intermixed with all thofe ceremonies ana unmeaning phrafes, habitual good breed¬ ing on one fide, and a defire of conceal¬ ing her fecret fentiments on the other, ren- elered к neceffary for them to utter. No opportunity was fuffered to efcape, after a fentence of more than ufual bitternefs had been fpoken, of begging each other's pardo% and hoping what had been faid gave no offence 1 All which was uttered in a tone of voice, and an expreffion of countenance fo diametrically oppofite to the politenefs of the words themfelves, that neilher could for a moment be tíáľ- Ыкеп as ίο their rea! meaning* Such, during the fix weeks of Mrs« Margaret's firft vifit, was the way in which the two ladies f^ent their tête-a*t§te hours: and, fuch was the encreafed difiiké, not to ufe a ftronger term, with which they parted, that but once had they ever met lince. Lady Delmington, whofe character was now mellowed by time, whofe fpirits were deprcíľed by the cares of fo large a fa^ mily, and who, from regard to the intereft cf her children, faw thf neceffity of treat· * mg Mrs* Margaret with greater deference r received her^ as has already been faid,. with
with infinite good breeding, but without any addition of attachment. Being alî feated at table, the iweet and innocent countenance of the young Ciarentine placed next her little Emma, attending to, and farving her with the affiduity ofa fond mother, attracted die notice, and called forth all the penetrat¬ ing powers of Mrs* Harrington. She had never feen her fince ftie »was amere child г feut now, at almoft thirteen, tall, light and graceful, with a face in which foftnefs was blended with intelligence, archnefs with good-humour, and animation with fenii¬ bility, fhe feemed to be an object worthy greater attention«, Mrs. Margaret beheld her with involuntary admiration—with mingled diftruft and furprife ; diftruft on account of the danger that might foon accrue to Sir Edgar from a refidence with fo fafcinatîng a creature, and furprife at the aftonifhing improvement, fhe could not but internally allow, a few years had made in her whole appearance. Dinner over, the children, but in particular Ciarentine, who had been cîuclly diftreft by her unfeeling fcrutiny, gladly withdrew to communicate to each other
other the feveral opinions they had formed of their new gueft, « Will fhe ftay long with us, Edgar, do you think r" faid Sophia, - u I am fare I hope not," faid her fifter. u You hope not, filly girl V' faid Fre¬ derick, " Why I expect more amufement in one week, from the diftmbance fhe will create among us,, than we could pof» fibly obtain in a month without· her. It ш reckoned high-treafon to plague any of /ou; but ï flatter myfelf, /¿//good lady will be left entirely to my management*" u Indeed!" cried .Harriet—** Do you think then mama would have received her fo civilly, if ihe had defigned to make her over to you far a play-thing, and an amufement ?" . - Frederick laughed, bat made no anfwer; and after fame further converfation on the fame fubjeft, they feparateci-^-Edgar - and his brother to ramble down to the village, and their fifters to drefs for the evening. An hour before the company w r as ex¬ pected to arrive, Lady Delmington hav¬ ing fame neceffary orders to give, apolo¬ gized to Mrs Harrington for leaving her^ and propofed with a laugh fending for her children to fit with her.
«β Aye," cried Mrs Harrington, " do fo/' Accordingly they were fummoned, but not being all ready, Ciarentine and Har¬ riet went down firft. If in her plain morning frock, Ciarentine had excited fo much obfervation, how did ihe in h v.»- prefent fimple, yet elegant drefs aftoniih the already too apprehcnfive Mrs. Harrington ? Confounded and dif¬ mayed, ftie looked at her with fo jealous and fufpicious an eye, that the timid girl ihrunk aba İh ed from the furvey, and blufhing deeply, with a mixed fenfation of refentment and mortification, was pre- - cipitately retiring. Mrs» Harrington, however, called her back — « Come hither child,"—faid íhe. Ciarentine flowly, and reluctantly ad¬ vanced— 6£ Pray are you to dance this evening/' In a voice fcarcely audible, Ciarentine anfwercd, yes, flic believed fo. ui C, you do ì and who with, may í afle/' l The fe verity of tone and afpect with which thie queftion was uttered, fa totally difconccrted Ciarentine, that trembling, and almoft in tcars ? ftie faintly replied,
и with my coufin Edgar, Madam,* 9 « With your coufm Edgar?'* difdain- fully repeated Mrs. Harrington,— êè No, во, child, you muft not expect it ; I fhall fpeak to his mother upon the fubject, it fliall not be." Then perceiving through the tranfpa¬ rent muflin of her frock к gold watch, fufpended to her fide by a very elegant chain, fhe added, u How came you by that watch î Who gave it you ì your coufin Edgar ľ' fc/ No s Madam, 5 * anfwered Ciarentine^ unable any longer ίο refrain from tears~~» « Mr. William Somerfet/ 9 Cé О, he did ? there would be no harm if Mr, William Somerfet would do fome¬ thing more ufeful for you. Such trinkets as thefe are not at all fitted to your feua- tion/* At that moment Edgar and Frederick, unconfeious of what was pafting, entered' the room together. The former feeing Ciarentine ftanding before Mrs Harring¬ ton, confufed, humbled, her head funk upon her bo fom, her cheek wet with tears r caft a look of indignation at her unmer¬ ciful pcrfecutor, and fl}ing up tø heiy took
took her hand, and faid in a voice of the moft affectionate concern™ " Wh?.t is the matter, my deareft Cia¬ rentine? Who has diftreffed you thus? Come, come wdth me/* As he fpoke he drew her towards the door, and before Mrs. Harrington could oppofe it, led her away followed by Fre¬ derick, who with a loud laugh, fnapping diis fingers the moment he got into the hall, exclaimed— 46 And this is the old crab we are all to be fo civil to§ is it ? She fets out oddly 'for one who is to exact fucfe univerfal re- Terence 1" " Hufh, huflij Fredericks for heaven ¿fake !" cried the terrified Ciarentine—» *« Suppofe ihe ihould hear you !" u О for that matter/* anfwered Ere- dériek, u î ihould not much care if ilie did ; it would fave me the trouble of de» claring war againft her to her face/' Ciarentine, trembling left this conver¬ fation ihould be overheard, could now be prevailed upon to ftay no longer: but haftening through the hall, ftie was run¬ ning up flairs, when Edgar following her* begged her to flop and tell him where fhe was going ? δί To
u To my own rooï% 9î anfw r ered flic— w ï am determined rot to come down, nor to fee her again this evening." Edgar in vain befought, entreated her to alter her réfolution. She was inflexible; her pride was hurt, and a fpirit of obiti" пасу awakened in her breaft that no argu¬ ments could fubdue. Edgar therefore was compelled to give up the attempt, and to fuffer iier s however reluctantly, to proceed. The chamber that Ciarentine inhabited was fituated in a remote part of the houfe, at the end ofa long gallery s that detached it from all the other rooms upon that floor» Juli under it was the ball-room ; and íhe liad not been feated halfan hour, when from below the foimdof røufic afcendeå through her cafements. For a moment fhe was tempted to forget her anget, and run down ; but the w T ords of Mrs. Har¬ rington« her dreadful looks, and the ab¬ folute prohibition fhe had received to dance with the only partner by whom (lie could have felt any pleafure in being fe* icčted ; alî thefe circumftances recurring to her memory, (he peril fled in lemaining w here fhe was, Saddened, however, by the gloomy ftillnefsofhcr own apartment, when
when compared to the mirth and gaiety that reigned below s fhe rofe with an in¬ tention of going into the gallery loeall far a light : but before ihe reached the door, the houfemaid entered with little Emma whom fhe was coming to put to bed. Cia¬ rentine, glad of any thing to do, undertook the office herfelf; the maid fet down the candle and went away. When the child was undreíľed, and laid down, all Clarentine's reftlefsnefs re¬ turned. She endeavoured^ however, to amufe herfelf with a book, but found it irøpoftible. Diftant voices, the noife of opening and ftiutting doors, and above all the cruel found of the mufic, perpetually interrupted her. Without well knowing why, flie now began to feel fomething like refentment againft Edgar : he ought not, ihe thought, to have remained fa long wdthout again attempting to pei fuade her down—neither was it kind in his fifters to neglect her fo entirely—" í am fare/' cried fhe— íž I could not have borne their abfence upon fach an occafion, with fa much indifference ! ,? Whilft flie was thus ineffectually tor¬ menting herfelf, a light ftep approaching through the gallery reached her ear. She liftened,
li&cned, andprefeııtly heard herfelf called. ît was the voice of Sophia, who ignorant of the caufe of 'her feclufìon, came to haften her down. u Ciarentine," cried Ihe, « come and fee who is j uil arrived; you will be fo re¬ joiced ! Who do you think it is}" α Indeed," anfwercd Ciarentine rather previihly-—« I filali not attempt to guefs, — Nobody, I dare fay, that takes the leaft intercft in any thing that relates to me." α О well, if you are fo indifferent about the matter, I do not wiih to force my intelligence upon you; and fo adieu." Then humming the air of a country dance, ihe gaily tripped away. , Ciarentine, though grateful for ihm vili t, felt but the more irritated agamft Edgar for his negîeÖ, and determined, coll her what it would, not to quit her chamber. Sophia had been gone about ten mi¬ nutes, when a new fiep was heard in the gallery ; and thé next moment her door was opened by young Somerfet! The book fhe held dropped from hei* hand, and ihe eagerly ran to him» " Why you pooi little folitary crea¬ tine !" cried he, advancing towards her§ « What
ác What is the reafon you fliut yourfelf up in this ftrange manner? i won't fuffer it any longer, my Ciarentine; you ihali go down with me this inftant/ 1 Ciarentine fmiled; and glad to be at length overcome^ fufíered herfelf without much oppofkion to, be drawn out of the room. In their way down Hairs, he told her he had been in the houfe about halfan hour; had heard nothing before his arrival of the i n tended /i?/¡?, but on alighting w r as ex¬ tremely furprifed to obferve the number of carriages and buftle of fervants at the door. Lady Delmington, however, when fhe faw him, had in a moment explained to him the whole bufínefs, and conduced him into the ball-room, " where,** con¬ tinued he, u after remaining fome time and not perciving you, I enquired after you of one of the young ladies, who re« * iatcd to me all that had pafľed between you and Mrs. Harrington. Determined, notwkhftanding, to bring you down, I fent up Sophia to call you ; but as ihe came back unfuccefsfui, I ventured to a fli the way to your room myfelf, and was (hewn to it by Sir Edgar 3 who left me at the
tlie head of the ftairs upon hearing bis mother call to him from the hall/' Ciarentine reconciled to herfelf by this proof of her own importance, enchanted by the kindnefs of young Somerfet, and exhilarated by her nearer approach to the lights and mufic, entered the ball-room with glowing cheeks«? and eyes that beamed with pleafure, Her conductor, declaring nie fhould be his partner for the evening, led her towards a fat that was forming for country dances, and ftationed her next to Harriet, who, as well as her fifter, feemed rejoiced ίο fee her, and was laviih in her expref¬ fions of difguft towards Mrs, Harrington«, lhe reft of the evening, Ciarentine fpent with undifturbed fatisfačtion* Her confiderete partner, who faemed bent upon making her amends for the little mortification fhe had fuftai ned, by the chearfulnefs and good-humour he exerted himfelf, and infufed into all around her, fcarcely left her a moment, and evinced fo fincere and benevolent a defire of ren¬ dering her happy, that her whole heart faks and gratefully acknowledged the obligation, Once
Once however, in the courfe of the evening, her gaiety w T as for a faw moments clouded, by obferving a degree of gloom on the brow of Edgar as unufual as it was evident. She was tempted at firft to go up to him and enquire the caufe, but loft fight of him before ilie could crofs the room, and afterwards faw him no more. At fupper ftie afked Sophia what was become of him, and learned with great concern that he had complained of not being well, and was gone to bed. " To tell you the truth/' continued Sophia, áí I think that was the beft place for him; he is fo horrid crofs, and ap¬ peared fo difcontented with every thing the whole time he ftaid, that ï was vaftly glad to fee him walk off/' " And I," faid Ciarentine, finding— am vaftly glad to hear he was croJs¿ as that convinces me he was notili, fince nobody ever bore illnefs wdth fo much fweetnefs and patience." At half paft eleven the whole party fe¬ parated : and foon after twelve 3 every inhabitant of Delmington Houfe was in bed»
\.; ί'ϊ ihX e
CHAP. V· THE next morning, before the reft of the family affembled to breakfaft, young Somerfet and Ciarentine met in the great parlour. She approached him with the fame alacrity, the fame fmiling countenance fhe had worn on the preceding evening« and praifing him for his early rifing, in¬ vited hira to walk with her in the garden. He agreed to it readily, drew her hand under his arm, and as they proceeded acrofs the lawn faid—~ " I wiih to have fame ferions conver¬ fation with you, my dear Ciarentine ; hut may 1 rely upon your fincerity? %nll you fpeak to me wdth opennefs ? confider me as your friend, and difguife nothing from me?" Ciarentine, ftartled at this preface, looked anxioufly at him$ and half befa» tating faid— " Dear Mr, Somerfet, what do yon mean ? You really frighten me"— " Believe me 9 my love/' cried he f " that was far from being my intention; I will
vill afk nothing you ought to conceal- nothing but what it may be for your benefit to difclofe. Tell metherefore 3 and tell me truly—are you happy in your pre« fent fituation ì Are you treated with kind- Befs? I have important reafons for wish¬ ing to know ; and truft me you ihali never repent the confidence you place in mcd' 66 Oh !" cried Ciarentine earncflly, sfi you could not have queílioncd me upon afubječt I could more readily have an¬ fwercd ; and I rejoice that you have given me fuch an opportunity of expreffing my gratitude to Lady Delmington, my love forali her family ! Had í been her child, her only child, ihe could not have treated me with more tendcrnefs ; the very fer¬ vants arc taught by her lo behave to mc with refpeft and attention, and not a crea¬ ture in the houfe but fcems to Lei a mix¬ ture of pity and affeflion for med' The warmth with which flic fpoke brought a colour into her cheeks, an ani¬ mation into her countenance- that gave ample teflimony to tlie truth of cvi-iv word ihe had uttered. Youiv Someriet, perfectly convinced, prelíed her hand, and faid, » Enough, my Garantine ; I im i v °r. b i) huisù-d
fatisficd, and earneftly hope you will never have caufe .to fpeak. with lefs enthu¬ iiafm; if, however,-that fliould unhappily one day be the cafe, remember you have in me a friend, whom no time, no cir¬ cumftances can ever change; one who loves you tenderly, who will act in your behalf with the zeal of a brother, and upon every occafion take the deepeft in¬ tereft in your welfare. Write to me there* fare, whenever any difficulty or embar¬ raftment occurs : make mc your confi» dant; truft to me implicitly; and be af« fared, that whether diftajit or near you, it fhall always be my firft ftudy ίο aftbrd you the beft advice and affiftance in my power. We are related too clofely not to love each other ; ihe fame mother cheriflied, the fame houfe contained, the fame kindnefs faftered us; then, Jet us not, as we advance in life, neglect .to cul¬ tivate that affection which fprung up in our infancy, and was beheld with fo much pleafure by our mutual hcneíactrefsľ* Ciarentine, foftened even to tears by the kindnefs of this fpeech, had no voice to articulate her thanks: ihe could only ex¬ prefs them by her looks, and the fervent gratitude
gratitude with which fiic raifed the hand of the generous fpeaker to her lips : So« merfet haftily withdrew it, " This is too much, my Ciarentine/* cried hc, tc you owe me nothing, but, on the contrary, will confer a very eften- tial obligation upon me by conforming to the direãions I have to give you. Per¬ haps you wonder at the ferioufnefs with which I have fpoken; let me explain to you its caufe. I am upon the point of leaving you, of leaving England, proba¬ bly for a cor fiderable time/*—Here Cia¬ rentine ftaaed, and fixed her fine blue eyes fearfully on bis face-—Somerfet went on— u In my abfence many altera¬ tions may take place. You may be diftrcft, unhapny, and have no one near you to whom you can apply for relief and affif- tanre. Take then this pocktt-book, pre- lerve it carefully, and before i go, í will explain myfelf more fully as to the ufe to which its contents are meant to be af- figned." Ciarentine, deeply affecìed as flie bad been before, was now quite overpowered. She fobbed audibly as he put the pocket- book into her band, and biding her face 5 D 2 funk 5
funk, unable to fpeak, upon a bench near her, Somerfet, at firft, endeavoured to compofe, and reflore her to greater calm- nek; but foon finding the attempt vain« lie ceafed fpeaking, andina few minutes left lier. At breakfaft, he publicly announced his intended departure ; faid his Ihip was to fail in a fhort time, and that therefore he muft be on board within three days at furtheft. Lady Delmington preíľed him earneftly to fpend thofe three days at her houfe; but he excufed himfelf on account of his father, who would, he added, ex¬ pect to fee him in town before he went. tó I ihali be happy, however," continued he, u to remain here till to-morrow morn¬ ing, when, by five o'clock ï muft be gone." Lady Delmington, grateful for this fliort delay, thanked him for granting it, and foon after retired with her daughters and Ciarentine to their ufual morning avocations, whilft Mrs. Harrington went out alone to walk, Frederick during their abfence attached himfelf wholly to young Somerfet; pre¬ vailed upon him lo enter into a minute de¬ tail of his way of life on board a íhip ι afked
aiked how lon« he had been in the fervice? о who was his captain ? and a multitude of other queftions, which, though wearifomc to Somerfet, he good humouredly an¬ fwered, frequently laughing at the boy's curiofity« and wondering to what it could poffibly tend. Meanwhile Edgar leaning back in his chair near the window, and pretending to read, neither joined in the convellanoli, nor appeared at all to hear it. His eyes were occasionally «lanced towards vou 112 Somerfet with an air of fallen difcontent, then haftily withdrawn as if fearful of ob¬ fervation; and aliali* iuddenly rifing, he flung away his book, fnatched up his hat, and abruptly quitted the room. After dinner the whole family walked out; and Somerfet, detaching himfelf from the reft of the party, engaged Cia¬ rentine to accompany him, and renewed the converfation of the morning. " Since í have the pleafure/' faid he, " my dear Ciarentine, of finding you more in a fituation to liften to me than when 1 laft talked with vou, fuifar mc now to enter upon the explanation I promifed you. Before my return from fa a you will D 3 ' be
be grown up, you will hc of an age to cxpcci tliat the tranquil and childifh plcaíurcs you have hitherto known will be changed for a life of far lei's fere nity, nay, I fear contentment. Should any cir- cumflances then occur to make you rea» íonably defi rous of changing your abode, allow me to advifc you in your choice of an afylum, and depend not upon your own judgment wholly in an affair of fo much confequenced* Too much confounded to interrupt him, Ciarentine liftened with an air of profound attention, impatient for what was to follow, and fcarcely comprehend¬ ing what fhe had heard. Somerfet faw her altonifhment ; but noticed it not, and thus proceeded. 4; Far he it from m с unfeelingly to alarm you with diftreffing predictions; and iiiil further, by hinting to you what are my own diftant appréhenfions, to wiih to iuftil into your mind a rcftlefs defire of change, or a jealous petulance and quick- ne is in taking oifence, that might involve you in appréhenfions and diftruft too pain¬ ful to be fupported by yourfelf, and too injurious to be forgiven 'by your friends» Ail
All 1 defign is to caution you againft fu¬ ture poifibilitics; and to entreat you never to fuffer your fpirits to be depreíľed by imagining that, when an outcaft from hence, you have no other eligible place of r с fu ore." о " An outcaft from hence?" repeated Cia¬ rentine, turning pale-— 46 Good God î Mr, Somerfet, can that ever happen ?" t¿ í hope" anfweicd he, taking her hand, " it never w : -ll~yei remember, it is not impoífible; and even againft the moft diftant cafuaft ies, as I faid before, it is my wifli to warn you. The term outcaft was perhaps too harfu— my Cia¬ rentine can never find hearts hard enough to treat her with fach undeferved cruelty. Were Lady Delmington alone in queftion, I would without hefitation undertake to anfwer far the continuation of her favour; but her prefent inmate, Mrs. Harrington may be lefs benevolently inclined. She is rich, and therefore will have power ■—is malevolent, and therefore to be dreaded/' " Butfcfchy by me ľ' cried the aftoniih¬ ed Ciarentine— u I mean not, i defign H 4 not
not to offend her; then, wherefore fliould ¡he injure me ?" With equal pity and afFeOion, Somer¬ fet, when ihe paufed, looked at her anxious face, fighed, and half overcome by her earneftnefs, was almoft tempted in anfwer to her enquiries to pronounce the name of Edgar I He checked himfelf however, in time, and waving the fubject, laid— " We may be interrupted ; and I have yet much to fay to you. You have pro¬ bably often heard me mention a Clergy¬ man named Lenham who was my tutor, and refidcd at my father's till I determined on my prefent profeffion. He now lives ina \illagc near London called Hamp- ftcsd, with his wife and two young pupils who have juft been fent over from the Well indies, Y\ hen you was a child he knew and loved you molt affectionately; and to this day enquires after you with a degree of intet eit that plainly ihews he füll retains the fame tendernefs and regard f)X you To him it is, therefore, my Ciarentine, 1 would have you go, ihould the face of affairs here ever take the turn 1 have ventured to hint to you, í thought they
they mígfiL Lady Delmington^ when conľulted, can never oppofe it : ihe knOWs too well the excellence and bene¬ volence of his charaÖer to apprehend any thing from trufting you to his care. His heart, his houfe will be alike open to you ; and be aifured that at all times he will be equally rejoiced to afford you iheker, confolation, and protection, Ί he notes contained in the pocket-book 1 have left in your hands, will bc of ufe in enabling you to prepare for fuch a journey, as well as in paying whatever expences you may incur after your removal. The two Mifs Delmingtons, at that moment, approaching and joining them, Somerfet gave a different turn to the corv- verfation ; and ihortly after they all re¬ turned to the houfe. The impreffion made upon the mind of Ciarentine, by the alarming cautions that had been given her, was deep and painful. Hitherto, without conlidering its liability, * " Content, and careiefs of to-morrow's fate," ihe had been fatisfied to enjoy the
D 5 advantages
advantages of her fituation with chearful¬ nefs and gratitude, thoughtfefs of the future, and delighted wdth the prefent«, Not fuch, not equally ferene was the picture that had now been traced to her« She diftinguiihed in it, as one of its moft prominent features, the horrors of banifh- ment— perhaps of total defertion ! Saw hertelf an alien without any natural friends, and ail'ured fupport! The idea, to a mind fo tender and aife cti о ла te, was lénifie! It wrung her heart with agony; and when alone, drewtears of the bittereit angui fli from her eyes ! u Oh! why/' cried fhe, " why did hc paint to me fo horrible a perfpe8tvc? Wiio, I exiled from this dear houfe ? I fe¬ parated from Lady Delmington, from her children, from ali î moft love, moft value upon earth ì Would no one plead, no one fupplicate for me > Could Edgar, who has fa lon£ called me his fifter, his friend, —could he endVire to have his Ciarentine to unkindly treated? But alas! what could Edgar do ! He is too young to have any authority, any weight; and all I can expect from the oppofition hc would make, ib to be fant away in his abfence, never
never to be heard of, never tobe leen Ъу him again ? " 1 his re il e Bio n was fo affi i Bing, that ftie fcarcely knew how to fupport it, and al¬ moft hated Mr. Somerfet far having ftarted it to her imagination. When ihe met him at fupper, the red- nefs of her eves told the effect, their late converfation had had upon her. He looked at her with the moft benevolent concern, preifed ber band as ihe feated beried f next him, and half repented the diftrefs his well-meant caution had given· her. No one elfe, hov/ever, appeared to notice her dejeÜion, the fettled gloom and determined filence of Edgar render¬ ing it lefs confpicuous; and the kindnefs of Somerfet fuccefsfully exerting itfelf to draw off the general attention to foreign fu bj efts. Atan early hour they feparated far the night—Somerfet, beiore ftie went, affec¬ tionately embracing Ciarentine, and re¬ commending to ber in- the moft earneft manner to write to him as often as it was in her power.
Ľ6
СИЛР.
Ľ о Л 1 ι VL ÏT was long before the fpirits of Cia¬ rentine recovered their ufual tone, and an event which happened within a fort¬ night of young Somerfeťs departure tend¬ ed but the more ievercly to aggravate their dep re fiion, Frederick Delmington, charmed with the manlinefs of chara fter, the franknefs of difpofition, fo confpicuous in their late gueft, felt an invincible defire, by em¬ bracing the fame profeffion, to unite his own fate'to that of a man, who was fo bright an ornament to the way of life he had chofen. Refileis, enterprizing and dauntlcfs, the viciffitudes of a failor's career had no terrors for him, but on the contrary, feemed to promife far greater happinefs than the fedentary occupations ofa fcholar, or the inglorious drudgery of' a man of bufinefs. After a ihort deliberation he made knou i\ his purpofe to his mother, befought her
her acquiefcencc to it, and protefted that to no other would he now, or ever fub- faribe. Lady Delmington, equally fur- prized and difpleafed at his reíòlute tone § and firmly perfuaded this new paflion was but the boyifh whim of a moment, coldly, but fteadily anfwered, fhe had other views for hin,, and confequently requeued him to mention his owui no more. Frederick fcrupuîoufly obeyed this laft injunction, and was filent-— but not there¬ fore difcomfited. Oppofition feemed but the more to ftimulate his purpofe, and from that hour his imagination was wholly bufied in finding means to facilitate its fuccefs. One morning, about a week after, he was miffed at the ufual hour of breakfaft, and though the moft diftant fufpicion of the truth never occurred, diligently, yet vainly fought throughout the whole houfe. Lady Delmington concluding he was gone upon fame wild expedition to Lyftbn, loon calmed her mind about him, and gave np all expe&ation of his return till dinner. Dinner,
Dinner, however, came—in fliort, the entire day paffed, and ftill he did not ap¬ pear. His mother, almoft diftra&ed by her appréhenfions, difpatcbed all the fer¬ vants different ways in pur fuit of him· Edgar likewifc affifted iu the fearch; his fifters weeping bitterly, terrified each other with the moft dreadful conjectures, and the whole houfe was thrown into alarm and confufion ; not a creature in it, Emma excepted, chu fing to go to bed, even for an inftant, during the night! Had Lady Delmington been in a ftate of mind tranquil enough to have attend¬ ed to her, the remarks, and unfeeling farca fms of Mrs. Harrington on this oc» cafion had alone been fufficient to have deitroyed her. With the moft inveterate malignity ihe was perpetually talking of the conféquences to be inevitably ex¬ pected from the unlimited indulgence of parents to their children—of the weakneis of fuppofing that where all command was reiigned, authority could be maintained, and of the folly of grieving at that which a little firmnefs, and better regulations might have totally prevente d* ι Once
Once in the midft of thefe cruel obfer¬ vations, Lady Delmington gained fpirit to interrupt her— é * Ohî Madam," cried fhe " you never were a mother, elfe you could not, at a time like this, have the courage, the in¬ humanity, let me rather call it, to wring a mother's heart by fuch reproaches !" 6S Well, well," faid Mrs. Harrington, ζζ go on as you .have begun, continue this ab furd forbearance, and depend upon it what you now fuffer will be but the com¬ mencement of far heavier afflictions. I forfee much mifchief from your blind par« tiality to that infinuating little ferpent Ciarentine." Lady Delmington looked offended and amazed. u She is preparing eternal regret for you;" continued Mrs. Harrington,— 6i worming herfelf into the confidence of your whole family; artfully gaining ground in your hearts ; and fooner or later will end, by undermining your peace, and blafting your fai re ft hopes !" " Who ? Ciarentine r" cried the indig¬ nant Lady Delmington, . 4i our guilelefs and
and innocent Ciarentine? How? by what means ? a By enflaving the affe8kms of your fon/ 9 abruptly anfwered Mrs. Harrington? u by exciting and nourifhingin his breaft a degrading paffion ? caufed by your owb Liiprudence. confirmed by habits and ren¬ dered unconquerable by her feduEIve wiles!" u impoífible !" exclaimed Lady Del¬ mington, u Ciarentine isa mere child,at- void of deceit, as ingenuous and artlefs as a new born infant 1 She cannot at her age have formed fo deep-laid a plan ; can¬ not be capable of /educing any human being!" The entrance of one of Lady Delming¬ ton's unfuccefsfui meffengers here put an end to the converfation. She could Hiten to no more, her agony was un- fpcakable, and ihe haftily left the room» The morning came ? and brought with it no confolation—no intelligence; but faw the unhappy family in encreafed af¬ fliction—pale, harraifed, and hopelcfs, feated round Lady Delmington, and fear¬ fully liftening to every found—ftarting at every whifper ! On
On the evening of the fecond day of this terrifying fufpenfe, it occurred to the wretched mother far thefirft time, that her fan was perhaps gone to join young So¬ mei fet. She remembered his earncft peti« tion to her on that fubjeci; and was yet more confirmed in her fufpicions by the account Edgar gave of the converfation Frederick had held with Somerfet the day before his departure. This idea was joy, compared to the horrible uncertainty flic had hitherto endured; and fhe in¬ ftantly determined to write to Mr. So¬ merfet for confirmation of its truth. Ciarentine, who was prefent whilft this fubjccl Wus debated, immediately on hear¬ ing her aunt's réfolution, drew frons her pocket-book young Somerfeťs addrefs. " There, my dear Madam," faid ihe, prefenting it to Lady" Delmington, " there is Mr. Somerfeťs direction. He left it with me, that whilft he remained in port, 1 might write to him as often as I chofe." " I am glad to find," faid Lady Del¬ mington, u he propofed fuch a corres¬ pondence; it proves his regard far you, my Ciarentine, and you cannot too fedu- loufly cultivate Ins favour. Do not you think
think with me, Edgar," added flie, turn¬ ing to her fon who was ftanding at the window, « it is fortunate for her to have acquired in fo near a relation, fo partial a iriend ?" Edgar changed colour—was filent a moment, and then in a hefitating voice, anfwered—« '* Yes, certainly, î believe fo." " You believe fo ľ* repeated his mo¬ ther. " My dear boy, did you hear what I faid r s ' " Edgar hears nothing that is faid to him now;" cried Ciarentine, a he fcarcely an fwers any body," íS Tou have no reafon to complain," cried Edgar, reddening—" I have fpoken to you of late, quite as often as you have to me." Then flinging open a glafs door that led from the parlour into the garden, he awgrily left the room. Lady Delmington, furprifed at the un¬ ufual acrimony fhewn upon this occafion by her fon, now raifed her eyes towards Ciarentine, and faw, with encreafed afto¬ niihment; that hers were filled with tears! 66 What
ç; What am 1 to believe from all this?" cried flie, with forne fevcrity—Have you, Ciarentine, and Edgar been quarrelling?" " Indeed, Madam," anfwered Ciaren¬ tine, " we have not ; it is true Edgar, for fome time paft, has appeared to ihun me ; nay, hc has ev*en appeared defirous to avoid every opportunity of fpeaking to me; but why he fliould, ox how I have offended him, believe me, deareft Madam, I know no more than yourfelf." " And how long," faid Lady Delming. ton, iC has this fhynefs on his part fub- fifted?" " Ever fince the night of our ball," anfwered Ciarentine. « I wiih, deareft Madam, you would fpeak to him upon the fubjeft; perhaps he would explain himfelf to you ^ though he di fdains doing İt to me*" 44 Well," faid Lacy Delmington, 4i do not make yourfelf uneafy, my Ciarentine, I will fpeak to him upon the fubjeft, fince between brothers and fifters (and yovi ought always to confider each other in that light) fuch caufelefs referve and un- kindnefs fliould never, for a moment, take- placed' Ciarentine
Ciarentine thanked her, and foon after retired; whilft Lady Delmington, but too apprehcnfive of the juftice of Mrs. Har¬ rington's fufpicions, with regard to her fan, lent immediately for him, in order to» begin her interrogation. With an air of mixed fullenncfs and melancholy, hc obeyed the fummons. His mother, ftruck wdth fecret dread, had fcarcely prcfence of mind fufficient to difguife her alarm—he obferved it notj however, and flic thus began-— " What is the matter, my dear Edgar? Why are you fo thoughtful and grave ?" Edgar endeavoured to a fiume a more unconcerned look; and anfwered with affected careleffnefs, he did not know. " You are a filly boy," refumed Lady Delmington, £β to excite fo much uneafi¬ nefs in poor little Ciarentine for nothing. She thinks you are ferioufly offended with her, yet feels perfectly unconfeious of ever having given you caufe. I am fare you have too much good fenfe to be capable of diftreffing her long by fach conduct. What has ihe done ? tell me, my fan, and I will try to bring you to an accommodation* it is beneath your age to
t5 keep up any thing like an abfolute quarrel with her—remember, Edgar, you are (txteen, and ftie is filili a mere child." During this fpeech, Edgar's counte¬ nance underwent a variety of changes f and when his mother paufed, he haftily and with much emotion faid— fiê Ciarentine cannot be called fuch an abfolute cbild 9 I think, with any juftice | íhe is only three years younger than ï 6ί It is very little to the purpofe," cried Lady Delmington, " whether in your opi¬ nion Ciarentine is a child or not ; by all reafonable people ihe will yet be long confidered as fuch; though I own, in the prefent inftance, ihe has ihewn far more underftanding than you have done, and therefore lefs deferves to be treated like one." u 1 don't perceive the good fenfe f however,* 1 cried Edgar, with a forced fmile, " of complaining to you of what paffes between ourfelves." 65 You mull allow for her age," again refumed Lady Delmington; 6S íhe meant no harm ? but merely fpoke to me with a view
view of learning, through my mediation how ftie might beft appeafe you/' '* Appeafe me!" repeated Edgar in a foftened voice, " what a word! I have not had any difpute with her—have not told her î was angry—then how came fhe ever to imagine I was fa ?" Äg Perhaps/' faid Lady Delmington, fmiling, s; if you had had a literal quarrel with her, ftie might have been lefs hurt, fince one of her chief complaints is, that you never fpeak to her/* Edgar could not bear an imputation like this. His own pride was wounded in that of Ciarentine, and colouring deeply he replied—* " Good God! Madam—you fpeak of her, as if ftie was an idiot 9 as well as a ehilde ifi Indeed Edgar/' cried Lady Del¬ mington, " you miftakc me—I think for her time of life ihe is as fenfible as one can reafonably expect : all I wiiji is, to perfuadc you to make proper allowances for her age, and to treat her with lef 0 neglect, left ihe ihould be led by your eoldnefs and difregard to imagine you difdain
difdain her for her povety, and wiih to give h-er a di fguft to this houfe." " Who I ľ* cried Edgar, with a look that proved how diftant from his heart was fach a thought, "/difdain her? / wiih to give her a difguft to this houfe? Ah! I know not whether I fliould not conceive a lafting one to it myfelf, weie fhe ever to quit it 1" Lady Delmington, difmayed at the un- reftrained warmth with which this was ut¬ tered, could with difficulty diffemble her difplcafure. She fat fame time meditat¬ ing upon what ftie had heard; and at length, with as much calmnefs as ihe could command, faid— α At prefent I fee ло probability of her being feparated from us; yet I am by no means certain I fhall always have it in my power to retain her with mc. It will give me great concern to part with her,let the day bc as diftant as it may; but ftill, fhould any eligible fituation offer for ber when ihe is a little older, I fhould think myfelf her enemy not to accept it/' Edgar petrified by the whole tenor of this fpeech—a fpeech fo cold, fa unlike every other his mother had ever uttered concerning
concerning Ciarentine, felt himfelf for a moment deprived of all power to anfwer it. Soon, however, recovering (his appré¬ henfions for Ciarentine made him bold) with refpeñj yet with firmnefs and cou« rage, he faid--» 16 It appears fo evident, that no fitua¬ tion can be eligible far her that removes her from beneath your roof, that î am far from believing it poffible you fliould ever place her under any other ι the or¬ phan daughter of my father's only brother muft always be fecure of an afylum with his children ι they are bound, in honour to his memory, for ever to protect and cherifh her." « They are fo, Edgar/* replied his mother s u as long as that daughter re¬ quires fach protection ; but Ciarentine is not now fo wholly deftitute of other friends as file was at her father's death. William Somerfet/* added ihe, ftedfaftly regarding her fan whilft ihe fpoke, " feems not only willing* but anxious to ferve her. He loves her affectionately—will have much ât his difpofal—is generous and friendly, smd therefore it would certainly be in¬ juring
juring her very effentialiy to oppofe any plan he might propofa for her advantage/* Edgar cafting down his eyes, and at once îofmg all that fteadinefs of look and voice he had juft before affumed, fighed deeply, and anfwered— 66 if Ciarentine prefers Mr. Somerfet s protection, values more highly his friend- fhip than ours, it would, í allow, be cruel to' withhold her from it. I could not f however, have imagined that ihe would fa cafilv have learnt to forget us. She has (comparatively, at leaft; known this So¬ merfet fa fliort a time—has hitherto ap¬ peared to loVe us all fo much!" " Your iurprife at this kudden attach¬ ment," faid Lady Delmington, u would ceafe, my fan, were you to confider the extreme vcrfatility of children's difpofi¬ tions ; whoever lait íhe ws them moft kind¬ nefs; whoever, by greater attention than ufual, flatters their little vanity, is fure of becoming an exclu five favourite. Claren* tine is tender and open-hearted—fufecp- tible of the finccreft gratitude, gentle, icn~ fiblc, and good ; but Ciarentine is no pro¬ digy, She has her failings as well as other folks of her age, and perhaps at this mo« vol. i, E ment
* ment prefers young Somei fet to every other friend; it is very probable, how- i ver, that in another fortnight fhe may io; get him, and attach herfclf again to us " Then rifing í j leave the room. Lady DJ.mington faid flic had letters to write, ňi\á begged not to be difturbed till fupper, The cruel policy of his mother's artful nímuaíions left on the mind of Edgar a depicifion he knew not how to conquer, ЛН fiic had faid at the beginning of their converfation had but flightly affecìed him, ι ornparcd to the real mifery its conclufion had inflicted: Ciarentine void of natural dífeÖion- wavering, unfteady, capricious m her attachments ! Ciarentine capable for a moment of forgetting a family ihe had fo long rciided uith, of preferring to that iamily a man, whom fo many years abiencc had rendered almoft a ftranger to ht - !—Oh ! there was fomcthing in the idea ib oppieiïivc iu hib heart, that, fora time, if drove all other reflections from his mind, and filled him with the deepeft fad- jnefs and regret ! Pride, jealoufy, and re- knttnent, however, foon came to his rc* не г 2
lief, and gave him ftrength to conceal his inward fufferings, and to determine, dur-* ing the remainder of his ilay at home, feduloufiy to avoid her« Ciarentine, hoping much from the in¬ terference of Lady Delmington, vasmoíL grievoufly difappointcd when fhcobfer\ cd the encreafed eoldnefs and neglecì with which Edgar treated her afier their con- Jerenco—afcidun^ a part of his tacititi - nity and gloom, however, to his an\ic:y rtipethn·; Ercdvricl:. fhe foihoie utteiipt« <iii\ conmlaint. oi ieeking any exjilan 1- tion, (piittly Wtutiii^'ili lie fhould hhiifclf ίοΐκ it one. Luí Ivdvvir wa*4 tuo inu. piiani even to wiíh ior an\ ) and ioon convinced her thai, whatever mielit be his uneafineL ttmcerning lus biothcr, it was but the h c ond 4 y cauíe oí' thv chan·;. 1 íhe ίο miu. h Lu4hted. The v, ччЬ of youru; Sjï.k rivt 011 this painini drLovcuv ам!1 ocniu.d !о her. Çi I/this indif- fc.tme ы r.Jy,\r: ciied (ле. ki iiu>uUl \У'<^ l л the bcithinin^ of liivi geneial d "'ution lvv tau i''n i me to cxned— il the hd . oí lu" > a fil ciion fliould be but the foie- buui·, ι of my total renunciation, by the
у CL ARENT Г N К.' reft of his family! What is ίο become of me ? How am I to fupport their un- kindnefs ? How have I deferved it? Oh ! preferve me, heaven! from ever living to fee the day which is to alienate me fo cruelly from the hearts of thofe, whofe happinefs i would purchafe at the price of шу own!"
CHAP, VIL j' REDER ICK had been gone a week, vihen Lady Delmington received the fol¬ lowing letter from young Somerfet in an» fwer to the enquiries ihe had made re¬ lating to her fon :—- TO LADY DELMINGTON. DEAR MADAM, u î am deeply concerned that my late л ifit at your houfe ihould have been pro* ductivc of fo much diftrefs and alarm to your whoie family ; need I add how much pleafure it would give me were I able to fend
fend you any certain intelligence of your young fugitive ? Hitherto I have had it in my power to obtain no fatisfa&ory infor¬ mation concerning him; yet I have great hopes of foon being more fucccfidhl. The laft time I went on fhore, that is to iay, yefterday morning, í was told I had been enquired for repeatedly by a young failor, who had fince had a private conference with our Captain ; no one, however, could inform me where he lodged, or what was his name; but by the deicription given mc of his perfon, I could have uo doubt of its being your fon. 4í ln the evening, when ï again went on hoard, I requeued the Captain to tell me who the youth wa>, he had di fcourfed vrith the preceding dyy, and what his rea¬ fons were for enquiring fo anxioufly after me. lie апЬлспч! ihat he knew nothina: more of bun ihm v. hat bis appearance de¬ noted, \shuh was that ofa younq; adven¬ turer recently eloped fiom his friends; that all his bufinefs with him v, as to requeft lie might be taken on board our velici in any capacity whatever. 6 The boy,' con¬ tinued he, é looks aftive and fpirited, and I own í felt ftrongly tempted to fecure E 3 him )
him; but not knowing what anxiety I might occafion to his family by fach a ftep, I limply told him 1 ihould let him know my deteimination in a few days; but at that moment could give him no pofitive tt'ifwer/ u J then afked where this interview had taken place, and where tbey were to meet again : He named one of the prin¬ cipal inns on fhore, and thither, at the л] pointed time, I am to carry the Cap¬ tain's anfwer. " If the youth in queftion, Madam, fhould prove to be your fan, you may depend upon my exerting all my influence over him in order to induce him to return to you immediately. Ì will write again the moment I have feen him, to acquaint you with my fuccefs, hĞ I beg to bc remembered to Sir Edgar, arri the young ladies; and with kindeft 1сл e to Ciarentine, remain, a Dear Madam, *' With great refpect and regard, ** Your Ladyihip's moft obedient^ « Humble Servant, J« William Somerset/ 3 After
After reading this letter, it feemed fa evident to Lady Delmington that any far¬ ther oppofition to her fon's wifhes would but drive him to extremities, and induce him at any rifk to engage with fome other Captain lefs fcrupulous than Somer¬ feťs, that flie inftantly determined to write again to the latter, granting Frederick full permiffion to go on board, recommending him to his care, and entreating him to be¬ come her agent, and provide for her fon every thing nec e flar) for the voyage. Ciarentine wrote a ihort letter to So¬ merfet at the fime ti ne, and both were immediate] v inni oif. By re t in n of p о fi, Somerfeťs anfwer arrived ;—* TO LADY BMMUsGTON. nr ι r mad '· :;, c: The receipt e í vour Ladyihip's laft letter gave me invxpieffible fathdačtion. I had feen your ion in the morning, and had ineffectually attempted to reafon him from his purpofed enterpri/e; he was immovable in adhering to it, allured me, that if I oppofed his admiffion into my own fhip, he would apply to the officers E 4 of
oí fame other; and, in fhort, was unalter·· ably determined, neither to return home nor abandon his original defign. We parted, in conféquence of this unavailing contention, mutually difcontented with each other ; but with a promife, however^ of meeting again the nex°t day. H ir our Ladyihip will be curious to learn how, during all the time that pre¬ ceded his admiifion on board, hc con¬ trived to fupport himfelf to procure a lodging, and other nccefiaries. The Tol* lowing is the account 1 gathered from him upon the fubjeft. «v When he left Delmington Houfe, which he fays was at four o'clock in the morning, he carried with him half-a-crowji m his purfe, two fliirts in his pocket, a gobi watch, and a pair of filvcr buckles ; the watch 'nc fold as well as the buckles, on the fecond da\ of his elopement ; and, far /'£'/. f «'U onb' five [mineas, 6 I knew/ faid he, 6 the rogues cheated me, for ï had often heaul my mother lay the watch, which was the <;ift of my god-father, was ahne VvOrth four times that fum: what could I do however? î wanted the mo¬ ney, and they faon difcovered it; fo, for fear
fear they fliould make a ftill better bar¬ gain with me, and offer me yci lefs, I was glad to let both watch and к les go for what they firft offered.' a On his arrival at the ρ ,rc are now anchored at, he immédiat'' hanged his coat and waifì coat for a coi η fea-boy s jacket and trow fers. ' money lie brought wdth him has ίάΐϊ ν ever fince; though, I believe by this tane, it is very nearly exhaufted. ¿í The intelligence your Ladyihip's fé¬ cond letter enabled mc to communicate to him, when next we met, filled him with the molt extravagant ddight. Hc was received the fame evening о « board, and κ, at this moment, w ri ti η his brother at my fide. ¿í Your Ladyfhip imi; 'vi fectly af. lured, that 1 fhall ncgleo leans in my power to render the м eafy and < omforiable to him; 1 cn ι и you there- foie to difcard all anxiet) nn Ins accounts, and to believe that the Jhii - attention I fhould pay to a brother ol own, t fluii always be happy to fhe w , We fhall equip him immediately v \ hatever the Captain may think ncc v; and are,
t if а так, extremely rejoiced to have gained fa fpirited and chearful a compa¬ nion. ζς I have the honour to be, u Your Ladyihip's moil obliged, α And very humble Servant, 64 William Somerset." E n clo fed was a letter - то SÍR EDGAR DELMINGTON, BART. DEAR EDGAR, u I dare not write to my mother, though î long to do it too, to thank her for what Mr. Somerfet tells mc ihe fays about me in her lafl letter to him. I fuppofe you were all famoufly aito ni ihed when you firft discovered I was gone? What did our friend Crab fay upon the fubject ? I hope flie was in a glorious rage ! î am forry I had not time before í went to give ber fame little amicable token of remem * b ran ce! 45 Love to Ciarentine and my fifters, Take care of our poney, and believe me 5 dear Edgar, ¿ fi Your affciiionate brother, u Frederick Uíílmíngton." Xi V? s
c; p. S.^Mr. Somerfet is very kind to me— î knew he would. Our Captain h a good fart of a man enough.*' This curious cpi file, all fears for the fafety of the writer being at an end, amufed ihe liitle family extremely.-' Edgai immediately anfwered it, and Harriet and Sonbia each wiote a few words in the cover. Lady Delmingion tire lame day fent oil' a letter filled with the molt grateful acknowledgments to young So¬ merfet, entreating him to tranlmit to hci an exact account of all the expences,that would be incurred for her ion, and to let her hear from him a.» often as polii - ble. The time wa> now drawing near fa* Edgaris depaiiure. Mís. Harrington w;.s to let oil'the fame morning, and might in Ьш.· measure bi faid, by the joy her re moval occafioned, tí) allay the concern felt by die whole famil) on accoimi of the fais of Edgar. The day before he Cet out., ( larevv.me, ol late unufually grave and melancholy lek ftill more than ever depreifed. He had faartely fpoken to her« with am de. E 6 ucee
£гсе of cordiality, for near a month; and the idea of his leaving home in fach a temper of mind, diftreifcd her beyond meafure. Determined, however, not to make the firft advances, flic fmothered her concern, and flrugglcd to appear eafy and contented. After fupper, and when the whole fa¬ mily had left the parlour, Ciarentine, while ihe was und re ifin g Emma , who, that night, on account of her brother's departure, had been allowed to fit up an hour or two later than ufual, recollected ά bird flie had left hanging out in his cage, at the fchool-room window, and as foon as the child was in bed, haftened thither to take it in. On opening the door her candle blew outş and flic cxpefcted to have been left in total darkneis; but what was her fur¬ prife to find Edgar there before her, with a light be bad himfelf brought {landing near a defk arranging fame papers! They both ftarted on perceiving each other; and Ciarentine, forgetting her er« land, was, far a moment, tempted to turn back; Edgar, however, prevented her, and hy aiking her in a more friendly ac¬ cent
cent than ilie expected, what fhe саше for? brought her to her recollection, and determined her to proceed. She accordingly went toward.s the cafe- ment, opened it, took in the cage, and after hanging it up in its ufual place was leaving the room in utter filence, when Edgar again ftopped her— 6ž Won't you light your candle, Cia¬ rentine," faid he, " before you go ?" Ciarentine turned back, and he brought the light towards her—-they then, for the firft time looked in each other's faces, and Edgať faw that hcris was bathed in tears! All the tendereit emotions of his heart were awakened at this fight; he took her paffive hand, and drawing her gently to¬ wards him, faid in a voice that was kind¬ nefs itfelf— ui Why, my Ciarentine, arc we no longer the friends we uíed to be? Why were we going to part with fo much eold¬ nefs Г u Alas! n cried Ciarentine, " I ought to afk that of you, Edgar!" 46 Well," cried he, taking the candle ftoin her, α come back, and let us have a few minutes converfation. ,J A$
As he fpoke, hc led her towards the table, and they both fat down. The explanation Го long, and ίο vainly defired by Ciarentine, then took place, Edgar communicated to her his fears re- fpcčiing Frederick Somerfet, reminded her of the firmnefs with which on the night of the ball ihe had re fu fed to come down till Somerfet interfered; afked her how ihe could, after engaging herfclf to dance with Ыпц iland up with another the whole evening ? and, in fhort, recapitu¬ lated frankly and ho»eilly every circum- fiance that had given him alarm, and befought her, if flie could, at once to ex* cúlpate herfelf. Ciarentine flattered herfelf this would bc no difficult taik. Her heart was fa pure, her intentions fa innocent ; ihe was fa remote from any wiill of concealment. or y.ny fufpicion of the real nature oí Edgar': jealoufy, that, joy to find his late eoldnefs originated not from more ferions cauícs obliterated the remembrance of all his paft injuftice. u h]y dear Edgar," cried fhe, a you little know my heart, if you imagine, tbat when ï appeared to give way to Mr. So¬ merfeťs
mcrfet's folicitations with greater readinefs than I did to your's, I meant to fhew him any marked preference, or regard. í confider you both as rny brothers, my beft friends; but to him, as being my eldeft brother—as being totally beyond the reach of Mrs. Harrington's ill-humour, I more quietly fubmitted, becaufe f forefaw fais reafon to fuppofe he could be re¬ proached for the kindnefs he fliewcd me. Never, therefore, again, dear Edgar, re¬ lent the fifterly aifaction ï feel fa muc\ pleafure in letting Mr. Somerfet perceive I have for him. He has merited it by fa many acts of friendfhip, by fa much bene¬ volence and goodnefs, that I fliould hate myfelf and by no means have a better opi¬ nion of you, if you could ftill love me, were 1 not at all times, and upon all oc¬ cafions, to treat him with the attention and gratitude that are his due. 1 ' Edgar, incapable of defining the mixed fenfation of approbation anil envy¿ excited by this fpeech,afhamed to fuffer ihe latter to appear, and yet too cruelly opprefled to be capable of giving utterance to the farmer, hung his head in fi ient dejection, a filmed tacitly to the hope flic expreiied
that they were nov/ perfectly reconciled ; and lhe next moment fuffered her, after bidding him good-night, with all her wonted cordiality, to quit the room, with¬ out attempting to detain her. The next morning, at fix o'clock, he fet orí, leaving Ciarentine, guiltlefs of a thought to his difadvantage, firmly per¬ fuaded fhe had fucceeded in eradicating from his breaft every fhadow of anitnofify, and confequently difpofed again to bc the gay eft and happieft creature in the houfe. Lady Delmington, ignorant of the caufe of this fuckhn alteration, attributed it folely to the departure of Edgar, and fondly Háttered herfelf his late eoldnefs to her had effectually damped an attach- ment íhe had begun to obferve with io much diftruft. Pleafed with this idea. though by no means defirous their mutual indifiercnce fliould amount to abfolute diflikc, ihe redou h led all her kindnefs to Ciarentine in fecret atonement for the wrong fne had done her, in fecking to alienate from her the heart of her fon. Mrs. Harrington rejoicing that, at leaft for the prefent, all danger was precluded by the temporary féparation of the fufpect¬ ed
td lovers, left Delmington Houfe in a far more tranquil ilate of mind than fhe had enjoyed during her whole vifit. 'Ì he fa¬ mily faw her depart with pleafure, and all refumed its former fere nity and calm¬ uc fs.
С I-I A P. VIIL NEAR two years had elapfed, unmarked by any ftriking incident, and undifturbed by any domeftic evil. Lady Delmington reiigned to the deprivation of her young- eft fan, felt all her tendcrnefs encreafed for the eldcft, whole early talent;·, and many excellencies of heart and under¬ ftanding, feemed to juftify her unnoft par¬ tialit}', and to promife the fuileft realiza¬ tion of her moil fanguine hopes. The díífention, however, ihe bad fuc- cceded far a time in exciting between Inni and Ciarentine he had never forgotten, and quick-fighted as to her real motives, badlikewife learned, but too well, to un¬ derftand, He perceived clearly what were her
her fears, and confcious of their juftice, fought by every method in his power to cheek their progrefs, and mifiead her penetration. Whenever, in her prcfence, therefore (larentine and hc w r cre together, he com¬ pelled himfelf to treat her with as much neglect, as when they were alone he evinced attention and kindnefs; faldom fpoke to her; never, when flie was abfent, fpoke of her; and fo completely lulled his mother's appréhenfions, that fhe almoft began ίο wonder how flie could ever en¬ tertain any* Ciarentine, inexperienced and artlefs, was long before flie obferved, and when ihe did obferve, utterly incapable of com¬ prehending the reafons of thefe fudden viciflitudes of temper. One hour all warmth, all animation, he converfed with an eafe, a gaiety that delighted her; the next, if his mother appeared, he became negligent and carelcfs, abfent when fpoken to, guarded in his looks, grave, referved, and fpiritlefs. Struck at length, by the fingularity of this behaviour, Ciarentine one day, half laughing,
laughing, queftioned him upon the fub« ject <·- Are you not," cried ftie, " the moft capricious of human beings, Edgar?--* You are never the fame two hours to¬ gether, but in the midft of the moft chear¬ ful conveifation often aflumc, from one minute to another, the moil diftant and aftonifhing folcmnity I ever beheld, What can bc the reaion ?" " My deareft Ciarentine," anfwered he, 44 J do not at prefent wľfljyou to un¬ derftand the motives of my conduci, inno¬ cent and juftifiable as they arc. This, however, I am anxious you ihould be¬ lieve; that Ì am influenced in what I do neither by caprice nor chance, but by reafons the moii iudifpenfible. Aik mc for no further explanation ; but truft to the purity of my intentions, and com¬ municate your furprize upon this fubject to no one elfe." Towards the latter end of the autumn Frederick returned to England, and with his friend Somerfet, haftened to Delming¬ ton Houfe. Their arrival was hailed as a fignai for feftivity throughout every part of the family; a ball was given on the
the occafion; a quantity of beer dif- tributcd among the fervants and neigh¬ bouring peafantry ; and to compleat the general iatisfaction, three emire bolydays granted the children, during which no mafters came, no leffons were given, no tafks impofed ! By indulgencies fuch as thefe, by a re¬ ception the moft tender and affectionate, and by every amufement it was in her power to procure him, Lady Delming¬ ton flattered herfelf ihe ftiould wean the heart of her fon from a profeffion he had ? fo infinitely againft her choice, embraced —attach him once again to his native home, and infpire him with a lafting difiiké to his late way of life. But this fhe foon found it was hopeîefs to expect. The firft three or four davs of his return elapfed—the firft tranfpoits excited by the fight of hib family abated, he became" reftlefs. difcontented and imoaticnt: made eternal comparisons between the languid uniformity of hu prefent fitu<ttion, and the fpirit, buftle, and animation that reigned on board a man of war; protefted he knew not how to employ a fingle hour of his time; hated the dead-calm of every thing
thing around him ; and longed for no¬ thing fo much as to be reftored to his ihip, his mcfs-matcs, and his for eco file jokes. Far different were the fentiments of young Somerfet. Though partial to his profeffion, becaufe well veríi. d in 'us duties and perfuaded of its utility, though fidi of courage, jealous of the honour of Ids country, and zealous in its defence in time of aciuai fervice, he was yet not P> wholly bigottcd to the charms of a failur s life as to be infenfible to the pleafure of a temporary change, or incapable of en¬ joying the elegancies of poli ihed fociety. Naturally fond of literature, and ¿uided in his choice of books by tafte and dis¬ cernment, be loved ftudy, and was in¬ defatigable in the fearch of knowledge. Whoever would join with him in this pur- fuit, he fought after, and courted; de¬ lighted in facial converfation; and never experienced fuch perfect fatisfačtion, as when reading fame interefting work, by the fire-fide on a winter evening, with a chearful family circle around him. The fccurity he then enjoyed rccompenfed him έ; for the dangers he had pafled f ' ι and
and as the loud blafts howled without the houfe and lie * c Sat at the fbcial fire, and happy heard si The excluded temperi idly rave along,"* he hugged himfelf in his prefent fafety; and grieved for all, who were expofed to their fury. At the end of a fortnight, to the deep regret of Frederick, and the general con¬ cern of the whole family, he was fum¬ moned to town by his father, and obliged to terminate his vifit. Hc took an op¬ portunity, however, before he went, of privately interrogating Ciarentine. a Have you," faid he, u as much rea¬ fon to be fatisfied with your fituation as when ï washerelaft? Does Lady Delming¬ ton ftill continue kind to you? Are her chil¬ dren aife ciionate? Tell me,my Ciarentine; and bc not afraid to own to me the truth." α indeed" faid Ciarentine, u I have no cr«ufe, fince I can but repeat what f have already told you ; that î am perfectly happy ; truly grateful, and defirous of no¬ lhing fo much as to remain always as I am."' Then requeuing him to wait for her a moment, flie went up to her room, and
brought
brought down the pocket-book 3 hc had two years before given her— 4 · There," cried ihe, prefenting it to him, 6i take that back, Mr. Somerfet; í know not exactly its contents, for î never could bring myfelf, recollecting for what purpofe it was beftowed, to look at it without ihuddcring ; but that it is of value î have no doubt, Be that as it will, however, I entreat you will take it back. It would be unpardonable in me to re¬ tain it now, convinced as I am, I never fliall have occafion to put it to the ufe in¬ tended. I truft implicitly in Lady Del¬ mington's affection, and think I ihould bc a hateful wretch fecretly to hoard with fufpicious ingratitude the means of quit¬ ting her, at the very time ihe is moit ge¬ neroufly loading mc with favours, and iupporting mc by her bounty, u< Dear, and amiable giri!" cried So¬ merfet, ftruck with admiiation at this dif- intcicited fpeech— 4i fuch peried con¬ fidence in 1.<л1у Delmington docs honour to your excellent heait, and will, I hope, be nobly rewaidcd! Still, however, ir¬ tain the pocket-book, if not for the ufe originally
originally defigned, at leaft, for any other you may like to put it to/' They then feparated, and the follow« ing day Somerfet went up to London,
L H А г β IX, SOME weeks after, Lady Delmington received a very extraordinary vifit from a near neighbour of hers, the Karl of Wel¬ wyn, a man of the moft rcfpečtablc cha» ratter, but of a retired, fhy difpofition, •who, though he had been fettled fome years in the country, had fcarcely vifited anv other family, or admitted any other Gucfts than herfelf and her children. He brought with h : m his daughter, L?dy Julia Leyburne, a very pretty, de¬ licate girl, not yet fifteen. When the¬ firft compliments were over, and they had taken their feats, hc made known the purport of his vifit. He had a fan, he faid, who was then at Oxfords in a very declining nate of health;
health, owing it was apprehended to the wonderful rapidity of his growth, united to a delicacy of conftitution, that ren¬ dered it advifeable, according to the opinion of tbe beft phy fi cians, to fend him, as the winter was approaching, to a warmer climate. Unwilling, at fo early an age, to commit him wholly to his own guidances and not poffeffmg any connec¬ tions abroad to whom hc could, with im- ^plicit confidence, entruft hi 1, his Lord¬ ihip added, that he was determined to accompany him to Lifbon in perfon. u Now, Madam/' continued he, with a good-humoured fmile, u while I am per¬ forming my duty towards one of my chil¬ dren, 1 leave another^ who is equally dear to me, unprotected, helplefs, and inex¬ perienced. She has no mother, no female relations whofe habits and way of life I yet wiih her to be inured to, no gover nefs í can wholly confide in, but ilands there, a poor deferted little being, de¬ pendant upon your benevolence for thut care and attention, her age ^ 'M demands." Laay Delmington fookcu cxtremely furprized; his Lordihip however, without giving her time to fpeak, went on·— - vol. u Y «í I înv-
§Ğ Γ have witneíTed the eiïecls, andlóng fecretly applauded the excellence, of your utiaternal characier. As a wife your con¬ duci was exemplary—as a mother it ex» cecds all praife. Now whether my ad¬ miration will appear to your Ladyihip of any vauie, when you hear to how bold a requeft it prompts me, is yet to be deter¬ mined ; a higher proof of its fincerity, however, 1 could not give, and my mo¬ tive will at all events, with fo good a mother., plead my excufe. Your children,"' continued he, " the moil lovely, the moil promifing I ever bcheid ; your wife fyftem of domeftic education; your re** fired manner of living* all confpiré to ex¬ cite in me the moft ardent defire, during my uncertain- abfence, to intrude my daughter into your family· Cou i d you, Lady Delmington, to oblige an anxious father, could you gcneroully undertake fuch a charge ? Could vou, relieving me from the painful neceffity of placing herin a fchool, burden yourfelf with fuch an incumbrance a few fliort months ? She is mild, docile, and tractable; has been ufed to proper controul ; is of a very affectionate nature, and would faoa learn to love you as her mother, jmuxL·
your children as her fifters. What they are taught, I would wiih the fame mailers to continue teaching her ; what rules they are prefcribed, I would wiih her to follow* The i r fchool hours 9 their morning tafis¿ let her conform to them all. Make her in every refpeci: your own child, and treat 1er, while fhe merits it, with the fame tendernefs a mother feels. Here ihe ftauds, look at her well, and let her youth, ker innocence, plead for herd' Lady Delmington, won by the charac- teriftic franknefs, the paternal folicitude of this fpeech, found all her rifing ob¬ jections give way to its blunt, but affect¬ ing earneilnefs. She rofe up, and ring¬ ing the bell^ faid, α Let me at once, -y Lord, put an end to your anxiety on this fubject, by afluring you that, feeling my¬ felf highly honoured by fo diftinguiihed a mark of your good opinion, 1 moil readily accept the precious tndt you configli to mt, and Пот this moment look upon г onr daughter as mv cílabliíhcd inmated' r ' J * ^ Heaven bic is you î dear Madam," Ciied the enraptured father, ieizing her hand. ^ y ou have given me new life, given mc happincfs unfpcakablc! Julia/' eon- Y a ti n ucci
tinucd hc ? turning to his daughter, u ap¬ proach and thank your benevolent pro« îeârefs/' The lovely girl timidly advanced, and ftammered out her grateful acknowledge- ments; whilft Lady Delmington, affec¬ tionately embracing her, ordered the fervant who now entered to cali her chil¬ dren» In a few moments the door opened, and the Mifs Delmingtons, Ciarentine, and Frederick, whom curiofity brought with them, entered the room. Lord Welwyn, taking his daughter by the hand; led her towards them*-» * 6 I have brought you," faid he l€ my dear young ladies, a new fifter ? a play¬ mate, whom I hope you will Sove asmuch as ihe is already difpofed to love you«» Your excellent mother has confented to her admiifion^ and in a few days J İhalî leave her, faarlefs and happy, among you/* The girls, enchanted by this fpeech, all gathered round their promifed companion,, with looks of mixed pleafure and fur« prize; and whilft each attempted to ex¬ prefs in her own way tbe fatisfañion that ftie
fhe felt, Lady Delmington turned to Lord Welwvn, and faid, 4i When may we flatter ouvfclvcs, my Loid, you will permit your daughter to come to us :" b ' I cannot part with her" anfwered he, ** ι ill I fet out for Oxfoid, to join my fan-, which will not be till towards the end of the week." 4i On Friday, or Saturday next, then," faid Lady Delmington, 44 we may expect her ?" The laft menüoned day being fixed upon, his Lordihip foon after, all grati¬ tude and delight, took his leave. The rapidity with which this arrange« ment had been made, though upon re¬ flection it appeared to Lady Delmington aftonifhing, was calculated at the fame time to rejoice and flatter her extremely. It evinced in Lord Welwyn fuch an un* bounded reliance in her principles and character—promifed fuch a valuable con¬ nection to her children, and elated her with fuch hopes of patronage for Fre¬ derick, that ihe was led to hail the paft hour as one of the moft fortunate of her life. All flie feared, and the firft idea F 3 that
that ftarted into her mind on hearing the propofai, was, that Lady Julia Leyburne, accuftomed ficm\ her infancy to fa much fplcndour, and in her father's houfe to fo much affluence, ihould teach her children lo lament their own inferiority, to defpife the plain and fimple habits they had been brought up in, and to pant after luxuries and indulgencie^ unfit for the mediocrity of their fortunes. Thus dread, however, was in fome meafure removed by the un¬ limited authority Lord Welwyn had given her over his daughter, an authority which, № cafe of neceffity s íhe was refalutely de¬ termined to exert. A room, the moft chearful and pleafant in the houfe, was prepared for the ex¬ pected vifitor, and a bed put up in a light clofat next it for her maid, No attention was fpared in rendering this apartment convenient—and at the appointed time it was ready to receive its deftined inha¬ bitant. Loi d Wclwyn when the day arrived bought her himfelf to the houfe; fai about a quarter of an hour with Lady Delmington to give the fervants time to lake her things out of the carriage; then tenderly
tenderly embracing, and recommending her moft anxioufly to the whole family, he departed, and purfued his road to Ox* fard. The firft two-days of her removal, Lady julia, though ihe appeared perfectly falis- fied with her new abode, and extremely thankful for every attention fhe received* was grave and filent. By degrees, how¬ ever, her fpirits, never very high, regained their ufual tone, and if fhe was not gay, flie at leaft was placid and contented. Ciarentine, who fince her explanation with Edgar had been all animation and vivacity—·whofe difpofition, when un¬ clouded by tbc accidental and temporary diftreftes infeparable from her fituation, was always eafy, ferene and chearful; Ciarentine faw not without extreme fur- prize in a }oung perfon, within a few months, exactly her own age, fo much lier fuperior in birth and expectations, and fa laviihl) endowed by nature with с very charm that could attach and pleafe, fach a total indifference to thofe advantages, and fuch an incapacity to enjoy them w itli ihe fpirit and gratitude they ought to in¬ fpirc. Gentle, tender, and diihdcnt, there 1' 4 \>"ά$
ή as yet a languid fupinenefs about her thai rendered her life lefs and infipid. Devoid ol that fportive ailivity, thai playful care- leisneis of temper ¡'o natural to youth, ihe fare fa w danger, difficulty, or trouble, in every thing flie undertook; hefitated whether to quit her içai? iet out on a walk, or run the iiighteft riik of fatigue, till w cam d heríeď id" being folicited, and completely wearii'ome to every body elfe --in ilion, was flow io a degree that was abfolutcly tormenting in all ihe did, and quick in nothing but in difcovering, or fancying ftie difcovered, eoldnefs in the looks or voice of thofe flie loved. Fears, filent lamentations, fighs, and an air of mifery at once the moft profound and ihe moft unaccountable, fucceeded to thefe fancied flights; fora time ftie abandoned herfclf to the deepeft defpondency— grieved bitterly over her own fate; and only fhookoif the gloom that preyed upon her fpirits, by efforts the moft painful^ and ftruggles the moft inceflant. To counterbalance thefe little foibles, however, which reafon and experience it was believed would effectually eradicate, íhe had many real excellencies, and among the
the reft, her ftrong attachment, her vene« ration for her father was the moft con- fpicuo is. Next to him, ftie foon, as he had predicted, learnt to reverence and love Lady Delmington. For her daugh¬ ters, Harriet in particular, fhe fait no¬ thing but indifference : they had not any thing fufficiently ftriking in their charac- ters to touch a heart ίο flow to imbibe affefction, though fo warm, fo fincere, fo entirely devoted, when once attached. Great, or very amiable qualities could alone excite her attention—animate ha¬ nno refpečt— or furpiize her into admira¬ tion. Lady Delmington appeared to her to p offe f s the former; íhe therefore obeyed her with deference, and confu hed her with humility: Ciarentine, flie thought, poffefled the latter; fhe therefore loved, courted, and diftinguiihed her wdth un¬ bounded partiality : fpent the greateft part of her time in her room, or in walk¬ ing with her over the grounds : wondered at her conftant activity, and almoft en¬ vied her unobtrufive gaiety, Ciarentine on her part, intcrefted by fhe mild virtues of her new friend, yet pitying the liillefs indolence that fo un- Γ 5 hap pi!)
happily enfeebled thofe virtues, endea¬ voured by every art, every effort, to in- fufe into her mind greater energy and vigour. Neither gentle rcmonftrances ? example nor entreaties were left untried ; now gaily, now ferioufly, ftie reafoned with her upon her total want of firmnefs, her inattention and fpiritlefs indifference concerning every thing that required real application; and at length awakened her to a fenfation bordering upon emula¬ tion ; fucceeded by repeated folicitations in prevailing upon her, rather than be always dependant upon others, fometimes to aftift herfelf; and convinced her of the neceffity, if ftie wiihed to be happy, of employing her time, if not ufefully, at 5 leaft rationally. Four months fpent in daily obferving ' thefe îeffons put in practice by her young and lovely monitrefs, had a moft aftoniíh- ing effect upon Lady Julia, and almoft compleated her reformation. Happier than flie had ever been in her life, occu¬ pied in acquiring talents, and in obtain¬ ing information, her attachment to Ciaren¬ tine feemed hourly to encreafe, her own improvement
improvement to advance, and her un¬ derftanding to enlarge.
С II A P. X. ABOUT this time Frederick Delmington was fummoned to Portfmouth again t® embark with his friend Somerfet. Re¬ joiced by fuch a call, though concerned by the affliction it feemed to give hi» family, half melancholy and half de¬ lighted, he bade adieu to his mother and filters, forgot nol^to recommend to them his povey 3 and at an early hour fat out on his journey. He was replaced within a week by his bi other, whofe holidays were now con' menccd, and whole return was hailed with the ufual fatisfaciion. Lady Julia had never íden hne. and» notwithftanding the piaiies ilie hua hcaid beftowed on him, almoft dreaded his ai ■ rival, fa infinitely bad flie been difueiled by Frederick's boiilerous ecaietv, and id I' 6 ее eat К
greatly did ftie apprehend a repetition of the fame faenes. His firft appearance however inftantly difpclled all her fears, and left her only fenfible to feelings of admiration and fur¬ prife. Sir Edgar Delmington, now turned of nineteen, tall, manly, and elegant, united to a face, glowing with feniibility and good-humour, an eafe and even dignity of manners and addrefs, rarely, at any age, to be excelled. Confcious of no fuperiority, or if confcious, diligent in concealing it, his converfation was as pleafing as his form; animated without turbulence, fenfible without conceit, and gentle without effeminacy. The little graceful fi gure of Lady Julia, her foft and interefting countenance, feemed, from the moment of his intro* d u etion to her, to charm him extremely. Ile congratulated his mother upon hav¬ ing obtained fach an v acquifition to her family, and evidently addreffed himfelf more willingly, and alfa more frequently to her, than to a mere ftranger, he had ever been known todo before. At dinner, however, the object of his attention*
attention was wholly changed. Claren¬ dne, who when he arrived was out with Emma, then firft entered the room, her cheeks tinged with the ιν Λ glow of excrcife and pleafure, s fine eyes fparkling with undiffemblef , >y, and her leady hand eagerly extended to welcome home with fmiles of cordi d fatisfačtion her long abfent favorite. dmunately for Edgar, Lady Delmin; щ not yet defcended into the dining parlour, ef- caped being witnefs to their firft meeting ; had ihe beheld it, his countenance would infallibly have betrayed him, fince, moil evidently imprinted on it, for a moment, were all the affectionate emotions of his heart, the tranfport with which he agairj furveyed her, and the admiration with which he viewed her improvement in beauty and in ftature. The caution, however, he had obferved when at home before, he ftill after this interview refoluteîy, andas if uponfyftem adhered to. The préfence of Lady Julia facilitated to him the performance of this taik, as flie and Ciarentine were infepara¬ ble companions, and therefore effectually relieved him from all apprehenfion of [ ¡¿ ever
ever being .furprizcd a moment by \m mother alone with the latter. The walks, the amufements, the con¬ verfations of the two young friends now became more pleaiing than ever : Edgar was continually of their parties; divided his attention equally between them, and to all appearance divided likewifc his îe- gard. A melancholy event occurred about this time, which heightened the intereft felt by the whoie family for their amiable inmate. Accounts arrived from Lord Welwyn of the death of his fan at Naples, and Julia, tenderly attached to her bro¬ ther, heard the intelligence, though com¬ municated in the moil cautious manner, with a degree of affliction, that almoft overwhelmed her. Lady Delmington, condemning, as ir¬ rational, an excels of farrow flic yet could not but companionate; and believing that when this firft paroxyfm of grief was pail, the hclplefs little fu ifa rer would gladly feek a refuge from her own melan¬ choly thoughts in the fympathy of her friends, forbore aggravating her diftrefs, by auftere remonftrances, or an unfeei- £ i |l S
ing exertion of her authority, and pa- tiently awaited the moment when réfigna¬ tion would take the place of defpair, and her heart would bc open to the ioothings of kindnefs, and the voice of confolation. Ciarentine, who in feniibility was Lady Julia's equal, but in underftanding in» finitely her fuperior, was too generous to take offence at being for fame days, in common with the reft of the family, ex¬ cluded her apartment; and too af¬ fectionate, ¿hough in the fame circum¬ ftances certain ftie ftiould have fhewn more fortitude, to mingle any reproaches with the tears and careffes that attended their firit meeting. A fadnefs, a dejection ilie attempted not even to conquer or conceal, now took entire poffefiion of Lady Julia's mind. She fatigued no one with complaints, but her countenance loft all traces of that animation fine had been fa long acquiring; chcarlcfs, filent, and incapable of excit¬ ing the ftighteit degree of felf-controul, fhe wandeied,as Lady Delmington termed it, with r efl lefs inactivity about the houfe, a de folate, unfacial being, unfit for con- vcríívtíon, and unwilling to be amufed. C uren í í mi
- Ciarentine at length, difcouraged from making any further efforts to remove her deprcffion, reluctantly gave up the at¬ tempt ; watched her with looks of pity wherever ilie went, but never offered tø follow her, and never intruded upon her retirement. it was now happy for Edgar, that the term of his abfence from Eton was again nearly expired. Ciarentine left to hcr- ielf, or only fitting with Emma, was a far more dangerous objeÖ, than Ciarentine conftantly attended by a friend fo affidu* ous as Lady Julia. He dreaded his own want of réfolution; feared to betray the emotions of his heart, and living in per-. petual reftraint, biefíed the hour that once more tore him from her. This was to be the laft time of his going to Eton, from whence on the next vaca¬ tion he was to be entered at Oxford. Lord Welwyn, in lefs than fix weeks after the news arrived of his fons death» came back to England himfelf. The firft interview between him and Lady Julia was truly affeBing, though the father in his grief preferved a mmly compofure, a firm nefs $
íirmncfs, very unlike the boundlefs far¬ row of his weeping daughter. Defirous of taking her home imme¬ diately, yet anxious to fpare her the paia of too abrupt a féparation from her late companions, hc drew her afide, and afked which of the Mils Delmingtoids ihe moil wdihed to invite with her to Welwyn park ? Julia, gratefully fenfible of this kind- nefs, immediately anfwered— 64 Though I have feemed for fame time to neglect and fhun her; and though íhe has caufe perhaps to accufe me of want of affection—yet, if I may make a choice, Ciarentine, Lady Delmington's niece, is the one I fliould fix upon in preference to any of her confins." < c Enough, my Julia,** faid her father, êc before we go, 1 will make the propofal." Accordingly, after dining and upend¬ ing the greateft part of the evening with Lady Delmington, having ordered his horfes to be put to, he faid— ** The longer your Ladyihip knows me, the more reafon you will have, 1 fear, to accufe me of ι с roach in g upon your indulgence, My daughter^ for near three months
months, habituated to the fociety of young people of her own age, who, without any other company 5 have it always in their power to form an agreeable and chearful family circle among themfelves, will feci moil painfully, I have no doubt, the haid- ihip of a féparation, fa fudden and fo emire, as that flie is now about to fuffer. The folitude and gloom of a large and almoil uninhabited manfion, to herin the prefent difpoíition of her mind, muft ap¬ pear dreadful. Might I then, deareft Madam, fali ci t îor her the confolation of having with her, at leaft during the firit week or two of her removal, one of your young folks as a companion ? 1 aik not for either of your daughters, fince it might be inconvenient or difagreeable to you to part with them; but fpare me, far the fhort time 1 mention, your charming little niece. She looks the picture of inno· cence, aitleifnefs, and good-humour. Her fociety will by degrees reconcile Julia to her change ofabodc ; and teach her, per¬ haps, to give lefs indulgence to her own melancholy reflections." Lady Delmington, fully fenfible of the advantages Ciarentine might derive from this
this ν ints hefitatcd not a moment, but in¬ ftantly fent to bid her prepare for her de¬ parture. Julia herfelf entreated to be the bearer of the meffage, and at the head of the flairs, meeting Ciarentine coming down with little L mma, flie flopped her, and affedionately taking her hand, faid— 6i Do you ftill love me enough, dear Ciarentine, to wiih to oblige me ?" is Do 1 ?" cried CLuentine, earneftly ; w can } ou doubt it r 3 ' Lady julia then made her acquainted with what had juft pafled, and begged her to haften back toher room to pack up her cloatbs; at the fame time calling far her own maid to affi ft her. ín a quarter of an hour Ciarentine was ready; the carriage came to the door 9 and Lord Welwyn, penetrated with the deepeft gratitude towards Lady Defining"- ton, took leave of her and her daughters«, and departed with his young companions. Welwyn pari; was about feven miles f ioni Delmington 1 ionie, and before the day ihm in, the carriage drove through the great iron gates that led up to the houle, Ciarentine had vet never feen it; never travelled fo far in her life! ihe gazed
gazed around her with aftoniihment and admiration ! the piciurefque and extenfìve park they had driven through, the ftately magnificence of the building, the elegance of the decorations within, and the luxuri» ancy of the profpect without, all con¬ tributed to enchant and amaze her í " Good Heaven!" cried fhe, addreffing Lady Julia, 6δ how unlike this fuperb houfe is, to the old and gloomy habitation we have juft left! How light, fpacious, and lofty are thefe rooms! How beautiful thofe immenfe mirrors 1 How vivid the glow of thefe pictures 1 Oh, what a para* dife you have brought me to Γ* Lady Julia, furprifed, yet pleafed at the warmth of her friend's admiration, fmiled, and taking her by the hand, conducted her to the upper part of the houfe to ihew her the room íhe was to ileep in. 44 This," faid fhe, throwing open the door ofa large bed- chamber, after afcend- ing a noble ilair-cafe, u is my room; if you like to ihare it with me, dear Claren· tine, you know how happy you will make me; there is one beyond it, however, equally pleafant which, if you prefer, ihali
íhail be immediately prepared for you· Will you come and look at it ?" < 6 О no ;" cried Ciarentine, ihrinking back, a let me ileep with you in this. I, who have been ufed to fa fmall a room, and that too, in partnerihip with my little Emma, ihould feel quite deferted and comfortle fs by myfelf in ïo large a one as this/· u Then,** faid Julia, turning back, fi€ we will go no further. Tea will be ready by this time j ihali we go down ?" Ciarentine eonfented 3 and they again joined Lord Welwyn· In the courfe of the evening, as his Lordfhip never left the room, and con- verfed freely and kindly witk his young gueft j he gave her an opportunity, by fiarting the íübjeci himfelf, to defcant warmly in praife of the family flie lived with. At laft, Frederick was mentioned, and Lord Wclwyn, but imperfectly ac¬ quainted with the particulars of his flight, drew from Ciarentine a more detailed ac* count of it ! When íhe paufed— u In what capacity," faid his Lordfhip f fmiìing, fiC is this enterprizing youth now gone out ?" * ç In
" în thai of mid/hipman, î believe, m^ Lord/' aii fwered Ciarentine, " And what is your friend Somerfeťs rank Г a That, î underftand, of lieutenants my Loid. lie has hopes of promotion on his return home/" Loid Welwyn then changed the fub- Ciarentine, accuftomed to rife almoft the firft in the houfe at Delmington, wa«? up and dreffed, the morning after her ar« rival, before fix o'clock. Lady Julia was Itili afleep, and Ciarentine, neither per» fectly knowing her way about the houfe, nor being aifured that in going down ihe Blight riot diilurb Lord Welwyn, feated herfelf at a window in tbe next τούτα with her drawing materials, till the fervants arofe, when flie determined to find her way out, and wander into the park. in lefs than an hour fhe heard the {but¬ ters below ftairs unbarred, and, on look¬ ing out, faw the gardener and his afliftants already at work. This gave her courage, and flie ftcppcd faftly down. At the foot of the ftairs? ihe applied to a maid-fervant, who was crofting the hall* for
fcr the key of the houfe door. The wo¬ man faid it had been unlocked fome time* Ciarentine waited for no more; but, light and a£livc, fprung forward, and too eager to confider which way flie ihould go, guided her fteps as chance directed^ to» wards a beautiful and ílouriíliing planta« tion to the left of the houfe. ït w r as now the beginning of June; the morning was mild, ferene, and unclouded. Every ftirub was in the fuileft bloom— every leaf fpangled with dew—-the air, fof с and pure as Clarentine's own heart, glad¬ dened and rcfrcihed her, and infufed into her innocent mind the warmeft fentiments of gratitude and devotion ! Аз /he purfued her walk, fhe came to a little winding path, that conducled her at length to the palings of the park next the road fide. There was a gate at no great diftance, which ihe obferved was open ; flic went towards it ; and faw a venerable old man, who was Lord Wcl- wvn's butler, cornimi out of a miférable cottage on the oppofite fide of the road, immediately fronting the gate. He feem¬ ed furprifed when he perceived her; but paffed
pafìed îıer without ípeaking, and by the fame path which had guided her thither 3 walked back to the houfe. Clarentine, after he was gone, ftood fome time motionlefs at the gate, con« templating with forro wing eyes the wretch¬ ed habitation before her e If now, on one of the fineft days in fummer, furrounded with verdure, cheared by the bright rays ofa glowing fun—if mwy it looked ïo comfortlefs and forlorn, what, though Clarendne fighing, muil be its afpe& r when the bleak winds of winter, the chil¬ ling rains, and foggy atmofphere ofa De¬ cember day, penetrate.through its decayed lhatch, and damp and moulder its thin tottering walls ! Well might fhe then, in the words of Slmkefpear, have exclaimed—» Si Poor naked wretches, whofo'cr you are, '* Tlmí bide the pelting of the pitilefs norm ! ii How (hall your houfelefs heads- c and unfed fide*, et Yourloop'd and window'd ragged ne is, defend you u From feafons fuch as thofe ? ε« » ------n^mwwrn, q^ake pîıyfick, pomp ; ec Expofe thyfelf to feel what wretches feel, £i Then wilt thou /hake thy fuperflux to them* 6i And (hew the Heavens more juft."
n Can
^ Can it be poffible," thought 'fte, *< that Lord Welwyn, a good, a benevo¬ lent, and humane man, poffeffing fo much power, and bleft with fuch affluence, fliould fuffer, at his very gate\ an abode like this— fa defolate, fa dreary, to fall into ruin, merely from a cruel indifference to the diftrefs of its inhabitants?" Whilil flie was engaged in thefe re¬ flections, a young woman of a very deli¬ cate appearance, flim, perfectly well- formed, and dreffed in a light-coloured cotton gown, without any thing upon her head but a band of muflin, carelefsly tied round her hair, came out of the cottage, with a low wooden ilooî in her hand, and an embroidering frame under her arm. She placed the itool in the fhadc before the door; fat down, and taking the frame upon her knees, began to work with great alacrity; at the fame moment, finging with a gay and chearful countenance a welK known French air, Ciarentine remembered to have l -~d William Somerfet, in de¬ tached parts, often hum about the houfe. ïn a few minutes, a very pretty little girl, of about их years old, fallowed by a gentleman in a fliabby uniform, Hkewife vol. u G appeared
арреагеа at the door· The trees that fur» rounded Ciarentine prevented her being ■perceivedş yet allowed her plainly to diftinguiflî every thing that paffed. She heard the gentleman, after ftanding fome lime before the cottage, looking at the unclouded (ley with admiration, turn to his induftrious companion, apd fay to her in French«— " Ma bonne amie, voule^vous que je tous life quelque chofe pendant que vous travaillez ?" íf Ouiş je le veut bien;" anfwered fhe f 4& allez chercher les Lettres Péruviennes ; ■elles fonts fur ma table."* In an inftant the book was brought. The officer threw himfelf down upon the grafs hy the fide of the young foreigner, and began reading aloud; whilft the cbiï4t leaning againft its mother's Ihoulder^ ftood quietly watching the progrefs of her work, Ciarentine beheld this interefting fcene w iih the tendcreft concern and pity. She * ' My good friend, ihali ï read ίο von whilil you work r % ' é Yesjdo; bring hither the Peruvian Leners', they are upon ray table. 1 * bad
β fead heard much of the difaftrous effeñs ofi the late French Revolution; knew to what direful lengths the cruelty of its promoters had extended ; and had often fighed witk compaifion at the dreadful recital of thofe calamities many of its innocent victims had fuffered, even at the beginning of the dif* turbances. This was the firft time, how« ever, tbat in her peaceful retirement any of the a8ual fufferers themfelves had ap¬ peared; and the impneffion made upon her by fach a fight was therefore „pro¬ portioned to its novelty. Who the ob¬ jects were, then before her, it v/äs im¬ poffible to guefs; but from their language and manners, it was evident they were people of education and refinemenu Ciarentine longed to fpeak to them, to queftion them, hut had not courage; and after remaining to obfeive them till fhe dared remain no longer, turned away with reluctance, and walked flowly home. Ön entering the houfe ftie was informed that Lady Julia was waiting breakfaft far her; but that my Lord had already fini fil¬ ed his, and was gone out on horfeback. Eager to communicate the difcovery of the mot ning, ihe haftened into the break- G 2 faft
flie found Lady Julia reading. Ciarentine immediately-began her rela¬ tion, and ^ave fo animated, yet faithful a detail of all íhe had feen, that Lady Julia expreffed the utmoft impatience to hear from the butler what further particulars be might have to recount. Accordingly, Ihe rang the bell· and defired he might be called; but was told he had been out the greateft part of the morning, and had not left word whither he was gone. и why then, Ciarentine," cried Lady Julia, rifing as ihe fpoke with uncommon alacrity, w we will walk down to the cot¬ tage otirfelves, and make acquaintance with thefe poor foreigners this very morn¬ ing. Shall you have courage enough ^when there are two of us io venture to fpeak ?" Ciarentine, with great readinefs s an¬ fwered in the affirmative ; and Lady Julia, tying on her hat, took her friend under the arm, and fallied forth without delay. On their arrival at thedittle gate oppo¬ fite the cottage, they perceived that the fpot where Ciarentine had firft difcovered 4he ftrangers was defertect The fun, which
Which had now rifen to a confidérable height, had driven them in ; and the two friends, therefore, after croffing the road, were obliged to fummon all their réfo¬ lution, and knock at the cottage door for admittance. A little girl, about a year older than the one Ciarentine had feen in the morn¬ ing, immediately opened it. The fight of two fuch entire flrangers filled her with difmay. She almoft fcreamed the inftant fhe beheld them, and ran away with a fwiftnefs which nothing but terror could have lent her. Upon this, the young female, whom Ciarentine fuppofed to be her mother* ílarted from her feat and fprung forward, ^ anxioufly enquiring what was the matter? The unexpected appearance of Lady Julia and Ciarentine nearly aftoniihed her as much as it had alarmed the child. She blufhed— curtfied very politely—invited them to walk in; and, when they were feated, aiked in a hefitating voice, to what caufe ftie was to attribute the honour of fach a vifit ? Lady Julia, with a delicacy, a cautious fear of offending, that added to the wonted G 3 fweetnefs
fwcetnefs of her countenance, and gave to it ¡m expreffion of benevolence the mof! angelic, apologized for the abrupt- fiefs with which flie had ventured to i¡ troduce herfelf; befceching the young ftranger not to impute it to any motives of jmperiinent curiofiîy, but folely to the carneii defire Ihe felt, as being her moil immediate neighbour, to öfter her fuch comforts or affi fiance, as the inconve¬ nience of her prefent fituation might rea¬ der neceflary. The young ftranger, penetrated with gratitude for an attention fo flattering and unexpected, bowed her thanks, and lighing deep, faid, pointing to her children*— fe4 For myfelf, dear Madam, i require ììnìe; my wants, î thank Heaven î í have learnt to comrafl within a very narrow «ompafs; but whilft my children, thus helplefs and dependent, lean wholly upon rne for í uppo rt, I feel myfelf bound to embrace with eagcrnefs any offer which benevolence may dictate towards allevi¬ ating their neceiïicies." Ciarentine, much affected by this fpeech, touched by the patient humility of the meek
with which fhe regarded her infants whilft acknowledging their diftrefs; now afked whether fhe had any other children than the two fweet girls then prefent ? ^ I have one moie," anfwered the ftranger, u a boy in arms, who is at this time afieep in the next room. I have a brother-in-law with me likewife: but my hufband is with General ——'s army, as well as moft of my other connections and friends." " May we afk. Madam," iaid Lady Julia, u how long you have been in this part of the country ?"—* 66 About ten days. í wa& led hither by the hope of finding the neceffaries of life cheaper than in the capital; and alfo with a view of benefit to my brother, uho is much out of health, and with whom the air of London difagreed ex¬ tremely. " α I fear you have yet made no ac* quaintance here ?" " Helas! Mademoifelle," faid the ftran¬ ger, mournfully— 44 Eft ce dans une po¬ fidon comme le miene qu'on fait des con- G 4 noifances^
α Boifarıce^? je fens bien que îe malheur n'eft pas en droit de fi attendre!"* " I am grieved to hear you think fof —cried Lady Julia—« We had flattered ourfdves'k might have been in our power to have infpired you with better hopes - s fince it. is our moft ardent wife to ferve уощ and to obtain, your confidence zná good- opinion."— The unhappy foreigner, overcome by die kindnefs of this fpeech s burft into tears, and preffing Lady Julia's hand to her bofom with a look of fenfifeility the moft impaffioned, lobbed oul, in· brøkers and fcarce intelligible fentences^the grate* fyl effufions- of her heart— u Ange du- ciel P exclaimed íhe~ u Quel être bienfaifant et généreux, a pu vous conduire dans cette trille .de« meure? Si jeune encore, eft-il poffible qu'on puife avoir autant de prévenance, de bonté, de délicatefTe ? Ah ! dite moi —qui êtes-vous i d'ou venez vous ? s, t " My
? u is Leyburneo I live at the great houfe^ (chateau) you fee yonder behind that plantation. W ho you are, I venture not to enquire ; but of this be affured—you have a friend in me the moft fincere, the moft deeply interefted in all your con¬ cerns." u Your name is Leyburne ?" cried the young ftranger with a look of furprife-- u You live at the great houfe I have fo often beheld with a wLj to know its owners f Ah ! you have then beneath your roof an inhabitant, whofe virtues, whofe excellence you dreatn not of! Bertrand, an old domeftic in your family, who, in happier times ferved my father abroad^ in grateful remembrance of what he owed his former matter, has fuc cou red, aftlfted, and befriended me and mine, from the hour of our arrival, with a zeal and ac¬ tivity that does honour to his heart ! He brings me daily fuch little prefents as his circumftances and fituation will permit- provides proper nouriihment for my chil-
^5
dren,.
dren— loves therj, cheri lhes îhem,— and in Ilı orí j has hitherto been our only fup¬ port and comforter I й Lady Julia ьпа Ciarentine during this recital felt their eyes fill with tears. They both in the fame breath exclaimed, the inftant the ftranger p^ifed— u Worthy, excellent old Bertrand ! Mow I fliall love him from this moment^ But tell me, dear Madam/* continued Lady Julias " did he ever talk to you of my father?—-of mei" &ь Yes, often. He reprefented you to pic, fuch as I find you—amiable, gentle, kind ! And your father^ he faid, was the beftş the firft of human beings !" ** Ah f believe me," cried Lady Julia, m uh warmth, " when you know him, when you -fee Ilia, yois will find all that Ber¬ trand fáid was nothing more than ftrift juftice Г She then rofe to take leave, when the young foreigner eagerly fei zing her hand, and that of Ciarentine, who at the fame moment approached her, joined them in her own, &nå with the moil affecting ear¬ neilnefs exclaimed— 6i Adieu 5
ç * Adieu, aimables et douces amies ! Soyez toujours unies, toujours com¬ pagnes! et faíľe le ciel, <]iie poífedant les mêmes vertus, vous jouïfficz du mê¬ me bonheur! 5 * Unable only pref that held > Sage,
Lady \ houle w л He came anxious : the morn be ufeful f ,ady |»il' t u into whom the benevolent fenfatioiib awakened by all that had palled, feemed to have infufed a Ipirir, an energy unknown to her before, ran to him the
fpeak, the two friends could vh fließt emotion the hand v 5 and hurry out of tiie cot-
H A P. XL 's firft care on entering ílu fend for the old butler. in İhın t he w a .s fummoned, pologize for his abfence in and to learn how he could his young mi íi reís.
G (i tuomeni
moment he appeared, and taking hig liando fald, és My kind, and honeft Bertrand ! you ïnuft teach me to become good, and ge¬ nerous like you ! î have heard Jmh åo- ries of you as have won my very heart ! Oh ! why did I not fooner hear how I might affili you in ail you did ?"«— Bertrand, who although he had lived 1 5 year? in England^ poíTelíed every merit to a higher degree of perfection than that of talking or even underilanding the lan¬ guage of the country, looked aghaft at ibis fpeech, and with an air of aftoniih- ment the moft profounds faid, in a mixed dialeft, half French, half Engliíh— u What, pour ľamour di Dku I you talk about, my dear young Lady ì 1 not com¬ prend von vord dat you fay V s Lady Julia then, in French, explained to him more methodically her meanings told him where nie had been; what ihe had heard concerning him; and finally befought him to inform her of all the particulars he was acquainted with relat¬ ing to her new friend, 44 Ah l Pardi ! I know vat you fay ver vell now v> cried the delighted Bertrand, recovering
recovering from his late amazement— m You talk of von poor lady at the chau¬ mière? Bon! I underftand ver velL Qu'en faut il direr* a Nay, Bertrand, 9 * anfwered Lady Ju¬ lia—" You know beft what you can fay of her ! You arc acquainted with her name and family, are you not ? And you like- wife muft have heard her reafons for com¬ ing to England." u Sûrement^ I have heard them ! Ah ! poor lady ! î knew her in her own coun¬ try, when ihe was pas plus haute que mon ponce:* O, fhe was pretty, pretty! and/ő good! Her father he was von grand Seigy neur? and he had but this child— c*eft-à* dire? but this von alive* ЕЬ Ыещ as he was always at Verfailles, at the Court, he aid marry her to von great man alfo, M. İc Compte d'Arzele, who was a vieux papa compared to her, for ihe was but fifteen, and he was forty. Mais Dame! maigre that, ihe did make von ver good wife—- At leaf!, fo I always heard, for 1 left .Par{is when íhe was only ten years old. Mai- heureufement when la pauvre France was
turned
turned /am dejfu dejfous* her fathers mon bon vieux maitre, was in high ' fa¬ vour at the court,- ша Helas! died 9 - it was faid, of grief at the beginning of the lîorror-âî His poor daughter ihen 9 with her cbiidrenş got over to England ; her huíband was with the army, her beau/ren /$ mourant de con/omption ;* enfin every thing. went fo bad, that after Haying two or three months in London, n*aiant prefque fas le /ous^ Ihe came down here, where, un beau maiin^ about a week ago 1 found her out in that miférable cabane t" Here Bertrand paufed 3 fli nigged his fiìoulders with a moft piteous iook, heaved a deep figh^ &ηά then proceeded thus— 44 Mi lor was not come home, when I did firft difcover.her; ainß I could do but liitle towards ih'ewing my gratitude io th® daughter of my late mailer : but now dat be is here, and dat you, шу good ladi Julie have feen her^ I hope her fituation will be no longer fo trifte* ϊ did mean th?s meriting to have told ali her ñory to my mailer^ but before î got back from the cottage he was gone out ; and fo, ilfaut garder cela pour une autrefois.'^
»* jPUI
te But teil me, my good Bertrand, 0 cried Ciarentine u how comes it about, that this unfortunate Madame d ! Arzcle ? whofe fate fo juftly deferves compaffion, ihould, this very mornings foon after you pafľed me at the park gate, be finging and talking with a chearfulnefs that was quite aftoniihing ?" " Dame ! c'eft qu'elle eft naturellement vive, enjoucé, folâtre ! un rien la fait pleurer, un rien le fait rire. Voiez donc ? Ce n'eft pas avec un tel carac¬ tere qu*on devient fombre et trifte tout de fuite ; auffi 9 foutient-eîîe fes chagrins avec un courage vraiment étonant ; travaillant toujours, brodant, faifant de îa dentelle—enfin de tout~»et chantants caufant, badinant, tant qu'elle peut."* At that moment the "entrance of Lord Welwyn put an end to the fubjeci. Ber«
t ranü
trand immediately withdrew ι hni not before he had recommended to Lady Julia hy a fignificant glance, the caufe of his ill-fated miftrefs. Meanwhile Lord Welwyn, whofe mind feemed to be aş much preoccupied as was that of his daughter, feated hirøfclf near the window, and after a few moments filence, faid, * 4 1 have been engaged in converfation this morning with a perfon whofe dif¬ courfe has left fach an impreffion of me¬ lancholy on my mind, that î feel myfelf quite opprefled, and faddened/* a Who then, my Lord," faid Lady Julia, u was this perfon ?" u His name," anfwered her father, ίδ I did not hear; he was a young French¬ man however, and an Emigrant. I met him walking flowly by the road-fide, in a narrow lane at the diftance of about two miles from hence; he ftopped to let my horfe go by, and as I paffed, looked up at me, and flightly touched his hat. Struck hy the dejection and languor vifiblc in his countenance, and by a cer¬ tain air of diftinction obfervable about him, notwithftanding the meannefs of his drcfsş 4
árefs, î returned his bow, and reining in my horfe, faid fomething about the fine- nefs of the day, and aiked him whether he had walked far that morning ? He an¬ fwered me in French, with great polite¬ nefs, apologizing for not being able to underftand me. 1 then addreifed him in his own language ; and, to be ihort, wc foon entered into clofer converfation, during the courfe of which, î difmounted and fent home the groom with my horfe, that I might more conveniently purfue a difcourfe, which now began to intereft me moft deeply. What he faid of himfelf was flight } he feemed ihy of communicat¬ ing his own aifairs; but gave me, in anfwer to my interrogatories inch an account of many of the recent tranfaciions abroad f to which he had unhappily been witnefs, as made my blood run cold. ï underftand he refides very near us, with his fifter-in¬ law, and her children ; and I have given him a preffing invitation to come and fee me. His manners arc well-bred, but plain, and unaff'e&ed ; his language per« fečtly correct; and his countenance fen¬ fiblc, intelligentj and extremely plcaf- ing." Lady
Lady Julias delighted with this account and not questioning but к related to the officer Ciarentine had feen at the cottage, now began her hi ftory, omkting none of the circumftances which ihe thought moft likely to intereft her father; and conclud¬ ing hy an earneit petition for leave to look out immediately in the neighbour¬ hood for a more convenient habitación for Madame d'Arzele^ and he,¥ unfortu¬ nate little family. Lord Welwyn beard her with the pv&~ foundeft attention, rød the moa evident fatisfačtion; applauded her berøevolent intentions^ and readily promifed to affiit her liberally 'm their execution. Accordingly, the carriage wasordered 9 and the inåant dinner was- over Lady Julia, her Governed, and Ciarentine, (éï out on their interefting re fearch. ït had been agreed by the two friends, tbat a houfe half-way between Welwyn park and Delmington would, on every account, be preferable as to fituation and vicinity, to any other. They there¬ fore gave proper orders to the poftiliorr, and proceeded gently forward; gazing with envy at every neat or chearful habi¬ tation
talion they paffed, and forming plans of future happinefs and comfort for thek amiable friend. At the end ofa drive of near four miles, they came to a little village, beautifully fituated at the foot of a hill which com¬ manded one of the fineft views in nature. Here Lady Julia and her companions ftopped; and, whilft the former fent the fervant who had attended them to enquire of fome of the inhabitants whether there were any houfes near there to be let, got our and walked, ordering the poftiiion to follow them at a diftance. ïn a few minutes the fervant returned to inform his lady that, about a quarter of a mile further up the hill there was a fmall houfe then unoccupied, which the peo s pie he had queftioned believed was either to be let or fold. Thither accord¬ ingly they immediately drove, and foon came to one of the moft romantic fairy dwellings imagination can conceive! It was fituated near a little gothic church fo entirely furrounded and concealed by trees, that, at any diftance, its antique fpire alone was to be feen. Before the door was a green flope 3 ihaded by thick branching
branching elms, and encircled by a gravef walk whofe border» were planted with flowering fhrubs. Behind it was a neat, шШс garden, enclofed by a high hedge, and abundantly f applied with all the com¬ mon fruit-trees and vegetables that the climate affords. The profpe£l from the front windows particularly was enchant¬ ing ; the furniture in all the rooms clean and good, and, in ihort, the whob habi¬ tation remarkable for its chearfulnefs, order, and perfeB tranquillity„ Lady Julia", tranfported with delights could with difficulty eoñtai» her raptures-, even before the шап who was deputed to conduci them. She acquired fufficient Jang'froid at laft, however, to aik the ne- ceffary and ufual queftion« concerning rent, taxes, Sec, and then, telling him fhe would fend a perfon the next day to make fame final agreement with him, íhe re¬ luctantly got into the chaife and drove away. Nothing could equal the gaiety and animation with which ihe made the journey home. Benevolence, that pureil of all fenfatîons, warms, invigorates, ex¬ pands ïhe coldeft heart! ît gives joy and
and happinefs of the moft exquifìte na¬ ture; adds luftre to the eye of youth, bloom to the cheek, fmiles of gladnefs to the countenance; and diffufes ferenity, internal fatisfačtion, and content where- ever it takes root!" Lord Welwyn welcomed the fair wan¬ derers, with looks of the moft cordial affection ; congratulated them upon the fuccefs of their expedition; and promifed to ride over himfelf the next morning in order to adj uft all pecuniary matters with the proprietors of the houfe, previous to carrying its deftined tenants to furvey it. This point fettled, Lady Julia, inde¬ fatigable and zealous, fent for the houfe- keeper to her own room, to confuk with her about the domeftics, with which it would be proper to furnifli the new eftabliíhment. After a long conference it was agreed, that one maid would be all that at prefent could be required, as Madame d*Arzele, according to Ber¬ trando account, had brought a Femme-de^ Chambre with her from France, who had followed her to the cottage. This ad· ditional fervant the houfe-keepcr pro¬ mifed
Hiifed to procure: and Lady Julia* nudei- took to pay. Clareııtineş who in all thefe arrange¬ ments took lhe ftrongeft intereft ; who re« joiced ш behold her friend thus aftive in ihe caufe of humanity; and who obferved her with wonder and de!%ht 2 whilft filcRtly plannings or diligently executing fre ih afts of kindnefs ; Ciarentine, the inftant they retired to their room for the nights threw her arms around her, and embracing her tenderly««« a О my deaVeft Lady Julia !" exclaimed ihe, " how happy you muft at this mo¬ ment feel ! What pleafure muft the reco!» leftion of fuch a day fo fpent afford you J" a Ah ! believe røe, my Ciarentine, 1 ' an- fwered Lady Julia affečiiortately, " the idea of having merited your praife con« ili tutes the fweeteft portion of my fe¬ licity ! My father too, with what gentle- nefs did he fpeak to, what kindnefs look at his happy Julia this whole evening ! Oh Ciarentine, fupport, encourage me in the wiih of doing good, that I may long continue to âcicfve two bicfimgs fo pre¬ cious to my heart, as the approbation of inch a father, the love of fach а friend ľ" ι A few
A few days now funked to conclude every preparation neceffary to be made, before Madame dVirzele could be put in pofleflion of her charming little abode. Lady Julia, anxious to procure her the additional gratification of furprize as well as comfort, rcfalutely preferved the ílričteít filence upon the fubjeft, although flie faw her every day, and every day gave her frefli inftances of an attachment the moil flattering and fincere, till the impatiently expected moment arrived, when, all things being in readinefs, ihe attended her herfclf, with her friend Cia¬ rentine, to the houie. Madame d'Arzeie, believing, accord¬ ing to the account flie had heard, that this little manfion belonged to Lord Wel¬ wyn, and had merely been fitted up during the fummer months to receive a friend he expected from London, appeared en¬ chanted with it, but paid infinitely lefs attention to the charms of its fituation than flie would have done, had ihe been informed oí the real truth. After walking over the garden, vifiting the different rooms, and taftmg fame of the
the beft fruit the former afforded, Ma¬ dame d'Arzele, fomewhat impatient at fo long au abfence from her little family, gently reminded Lady Julia of the late¬ ne fs of the hour— 6; My dear Madam," faid the latter fmiling, a you muft not grow weary of this place yet, for we mean to dine and fpend the day here." ^ Spend the day here?" repeated Madame d'Arzele with a look of con¬ fternation— " Et mes pauvres enfans— que deviendront-ils fi longtems fans leur mere ?"* " Vous enfans, Madame," anfwered Lady Julia, enjoying her perplexity— efi arriveront dans un moment et din- neront ici avec nous/'f Madame d'Arzele, more and more fuprized, now gazed by turns at Lady Julia, and Ciarentine, with looks of the moft earneft curiofity ; their countenances however, though beaming with the pureil delight, told her nothing, yet encreafed
her
her wiíh to be informed. At length, therefore, taking Lady Julia's hand, and attentively fixing her eyes on Iter's— " Tell me, tell me," ilie cried, " what this myflerious filence,' thefe fignificant looks, this inexplicable delay, tell me what it all means!" Lady Julia, too generous to keep her longer İn fufpence, now threw her arms round her, and embracing her affec¬ tionately, anfwered with much emotion: €fc ît means, deareft Madam, that if the fituation fuit you, and you can pardon a friend for making fuch an oiler, this houfe, and every thing it contains— is yours 1" Who can defcribe the raptures and amazement of the delighted Forcigper ζ , She hung round her lovely bencfaclrcfs with fenfatîons of gratitude too fervent to be uttered; wept upon her jfhouldcr; called her by every endearing epithet that the moil ardent gıatîtude could diciate; and then, fuddcnly laifing her head, and liftcning attentively a moment, flie fpnmg to the window exclaiming— ίς Ah Dieu 1 *-oici mes enfatu/'* and quicker t!k«n
lightning flew down &шт tø meet шпй welcome them. în a íhorí time, the children, attended hy their French maid, appeared. The two eldeft, who had, at length, fami¬ liarised themfelves to the fight of Lady Julia and her friend, ran to the former the moment they beheld her, to thank her for the charming ride they had had, and to tell her their urtde was coming immediately with Lord Welwyn, who had promifed that they ihould be allowed to âme there—» Лг tfaefe worás, their mother Tearing herfelf* and caîîsng them both to her, threw an arm round each, and faid— u Eugenie, Pauline— Regardez toufc- eequi vous entoure-—cette charmante maifon, ce beau jardin, ce coup ďouil délicieux !-~Ehbie», voies aprefant votre jeune et généreufe bienfaitrice! Cľeíl elle gui vous comble de tout ces dons- vons accorde tant de bonheur a la fois — ^ous ttmtts en poifeffion de tout ce que vous appefcevejg? Que ferez vous, О mes chers enfans pour meriter tant de bienfaits,, pour exprimer ia reconnoi fance que dokvvous infpirer un excts de bonté ii touchant !
fi touchant ! Ah ! tombez a fes pieds, et remiercieæ4a pour vous, et votre heureufe mere !" # As file uttered this injunHion, the tears, which íhe vainiy had endeavoured to dif¬ perfe, forced their way in torrents down her cheeks, and compelled her to paufe· The children, alarmed at this fight, and but imperfectly comprehending the tenour of her fpeech to them, looked fearfully at Lady julia and at Ciarentine, as if to penetrate the caufe of their mother's ap¬ parent grief; and then throwing them¬ felves into her arms, fought by their in¬ nocent carrefles to footh and calm her agitation. In the midit of this fcene, Lord Web wyn 9 and Madame d'Arzele's brother-in-
H %
«aw <ţ
law, the Chcvalier de Valcour, arrived^ For fome time fhe was incapable of fpeak* ing to them, but by degrees her emotion fubíiding, fhe regained ail her wonted chearfulnefs and vivacity ; ran over her new habitation to ihew it to the Cheva¬ lier, with the fame alacrity as if fhe had not vifited it before; played with her chil¬ dren; embraced her two friends; con¬ verfed with Lord Welwyn ; and till the hour of féparation drew near, was in øne perpetual tranfport of wild jøy and en- thuiiaftic gratitude ! Lady Julia, willing to give her friend leifure ш fettle herfelf in her tranquil little manfion, forebore calling upon her the three foliowing days: butonthe morning of the fourth ftill accompanied by Ciarentine, *and crowded in the chaife by a thoufand different prefents intended equally for the mother and her children, the determined to vifit her, Madame d'Arzele, when they arrived, was fitting in the garden with her chil¬ dren, the youngeft of whom Ше held upon her knees, whilft the eldeft, ftanding be* fore her, was repeating to her her morn¬ ing leffom At a little diftance, the Che¬ valier
valier de Valcour, mounted upon a lad¬ der, was gathering cherries, and throwing them down to the fecond girl, Pauline, Who with her frock held out ftood ready to receive them. Lady Julia and Ciarentine remained fame time at the garden door to enjoy this fcene of domeftic happinefs, a fcene fo different to that Ciarentine had witneffed , the firft day this little family had at¬ tracted her notice ! At length, however, Pauline turned her head and faw them; in an inftant, forgetting her cherries, ihe dropped them all upon the grafs, jumped nimbly over them, and uttering an ex¬ clamation of delight, fprang towards the fmiling friends with open anns, and led them to her mother, whofe joy on behold¬ ing them was fcarcely lefs rapturous than that of her lovely little daughter, W r hen calmnefs was reftored, and the whole party had adjourned to the ufual fitting room, Ciarentine and Lady Julia had an opportunity, for the firft time, of judging, from their own obfervation, of the converfation and character of the Chevalier. The referve ufuaîly felt by perfons of a retired difpofition when they PI 3 are
are firft introduced to each otier, had bow given place io greater emfe and coe- fideiice—and as he fpoke with lefs re«> ftraint, they anfwered with lefs embarraf- fileni* îf by the little they had hitherto feen of him, they had been prejudiced in Ыз favour by the gen tiene fs of hie manners and the elegance of his addrefs, how much more on this interview were they charmed hy the information, the liberality ©f mind, and the kindnefs of heart they found he pofleffed. Attentive only to the wifhes of others^ be forgot his own in his delire to gratify theirs; without officioufnefi^ or affectation, he was the moi friendly, the moft active of human beings in the fervice of thofe he loved· Silent, and grave before llrangers, yet in the fociety of people he could put confidence in, he was opeo, chearful, and communicative. Detefting from principle, and airerfe by nature to that fpecies of unmeaning gab Imtry^ fo often attributed, with reafon, to the natives of his country as a charac-» teriftic blemilh, he was as little difpofed 10 flatter, as he waa to woond. Qukt f fimple, and rational, his expreffions were diftated
Ufåaieå by fincerity, his conduct guided hy nnderftrøding and judgment. îl may well be imagined that fach a man as %Ьщ endowed, in addition to all thefe advantages, with a deportment at once dignifica and refpe£tful, and a coun¬ tenance the moil interefting and expref- five, could not fail, as he became more intimately knowi>, to become alfo more particularly approved. The two friends were enchanted with him ; and as they muraed home, forgot their ufual fubjects of converfation, Madame d'Arzele aud her children, to fpeak only of the Che - valier de Valcour*
С Η Α Ρ β XÏL jDURING the remaining three weeks that Ciarentine fpent with Lady Julia* fcarcely three days were fuffered to elapfe without vifiting Madame d'Arzele, or fending for her to Welvyn park. In the courfe of that time Lady Julia had fuc- H 4 ceeded
ceeded m fu rnifhing her houfe completely not only* with neceffaries, bm with what * to people of cultivation are abfolute luxuries, fuch as books; a well chofen -•coUeflion of which, in French, fhe had fent for from town ; an excellent harp that had been purchafed for her by her ' father fome time before, but which, as flic found fhe made no progrefs, ihe readily gave up, Madame d'Arzele being an uncommonly fine player; a conipleat fet of'rnaps for the children, and all the mufic, for their mother, that had been hofght for herfeîf. Ciarentine, who fince her arrival at Welwyn had kept up a regular corref- pondence with Sophia Delmington, chiefly for the pleafure of talking to her of her French friend, had likewife excited in her and her mother the moft ardent wifli to become acquainted with fo interefting a creature. Accordingly foon after Cla¬ rentine's return home a day was fixed, diña her aunt, herfelf, Harriet and Sophia all rode over to Mont-Repos* the name Madame d'Arzele had given to her peace¬ ful habitation* She
She received them with that diftin¬ guiihed elegance and good breeding, for which the women of high birth and fa íh i on were formerly fo remarkable in Fra nce e Her converfation, in which gaiety was blended mai foftnefs, finefs and plea- fantry with the moft delicate fear of offending ; her countenance, which for ever varying, was far ever attractive; her cultivation, her talents and enter¬ tainment, all gave rife, in her enchanted viiitors, to the moft unbounded aftoniih¬ ment and admiration. When the firft compliments were over, and they had all taken their feats, Sophia, who had heard much of the Chevalier and was impatient to fee him, befought Ciarentine in a low voice, to aik why he did not appear? " He is gone to dine at Welwyn Park/' anfwered Madame d'Arzele, u where í believe he will fpend the evening/' This intelligence feemed by no means to delight Sophia, though ihe had the good ïcni'e to difguife her vexation, and oecahonally to join in the converfation with all her accuftomed fpirit and vi¬ vacity. II 5 About
About an hour before they tooklea¥e f Madame d'Arzele s two little girls, aimom to Oiew Clareiuìfìe what a delightful Efcar*· polette* the Che¥alier had tbat moraing ptît up for ehem in the garden, preíľed her fo much to go down and look at it, that at kft lhe confented^ and aceom^ ponied by Sophia left the room· Shortly after the Chevalier returned. Tlie found øf voices in ihe garden^ the iaughter жша the gaiety that feemed to reign thmtf attraöeå him immediately to the fpot, where f feated in the Efeatpoltttt with her Ъщк turned towards hira, he beheld Sophia .holding one of his utile jueces on each knee, whilil Ciarentine was exerting her utmoft ftrength in ihe agreeable office af fwinging them» Advancing cautiouíly forward, he wai at Clarentine's elbow before ihe even fuf- peüed he was returned. Her furprife ой feeing biro would have led her to utter fome fudden exclamation : bui a lign he made the moment Ihe turned her head withheld her frøm fpeaking, and indeed
her
her quietly to refígn her fatiguing poft, and retire to a greater diftance. The Chevalier, whofe health and ftrengih rendered him fcarcely more adequate to the taík, than was the per foo he had jult relieved, had purfued hb occupation but a few minutes, when Sophia, looking back to urge her friend to greater fpeed, faw him, and almoil fcreamlng with aftonilhrøent, fpnmg from her feat with the two children in her arms, left them both upon the ground, and ran as quick as lightning towards the houfe 5 and up- åairs in an inftant ! Extremely amufed by this brujqm re» treat, the Chevalier and Ciarentine ftood fome time laughing at the caufelefs terror her looks had difplayed ? and then pro* ceeded towards the drawing-room toge¬ ther, Sophia heard their voices upon the Hairs, and moving her chair bac*¿ аз much as poffible, fought to conceal her« felf behind her mother and üñer^ in the vain hope that as the evening was begin¬ ning to fhut in, ihe ftiould efcape, at leaft for that oiice, meeting the eyes of him H б whom
whom but a fhort time before ñ\t had fo earneftly wiihed to behold, Ciarentine now entered with the two children, and the Chevalier the next moment followed her. Madam d Λ r zele no fooner law him, than íhe с: .aimed, « Ah, voila notre bon Chevalier!"* and then immediately re¬ queued pci miffion io introduce him to Lady Delmington and her daughters« Sophia trembling at the word daughters, would have flipped unperceived out of the room till the formidable prefentation was over, but was prevented by the two little girls, who perceiving her defign, put thernielves herween her and the door, and laughing called out, " Ah, Mademoifelle, vous n'échapperez pas comme cela ! Re¬ mercier auparavant mon oncle de vous avoir ii bien balance !"f Sophia finding that this fpeech drew upon her the attention of the whole party, but particularly that of the Chevalier, flopped irrefolute·—coloured violently 3
anu
and to his refpcčtfui bow, remrned a flight, embarraffed curtfey, and without daring to look up, retreated haftily to her former feat. Ciarentine followed her, and leaning over the back of her chair was beginning to fpeak, when Madame d'Arzele, ex« trernely defirous of knowing to what her children had alluded, called the eldeft to her, Mid &iktå far an explanation* ^ O mama/' cried Eugene, diftreffed at the confufion fhe had already occafion-» ed, ^ Mademoifelle Sophie may not like s perhaps, that ï ihould tell/* This anfwer, though bonnement intended for that purpofe, was but little calculated to filence farther enquiries* Lady Del- mington, now as anxious to be informed as Madame d'Arzele herfelf, queftioned Ciarentine fo clofely, that at laft the whole important fecret w T as revealed. ^ Ah, mon dieu ! n'eft-ce que cela ?" cried Madame d'Arzele, with a Jaugh—- 66 En vérité, Mademoifelle Sophie, il n'y avoit pas de quoi rouger ñ cruellement. Le Chevalier m a balancé ce matin, dans cette щете efcarpolette, une demi heure de
cle fuite, et jarøais je ne юе ferez^avifir d'en a¥oirhoîî£e„ w * ^ Ыт Sophia neither, in ül probabi¬ lity/ 8 aiifwgľea lady DelmingtoiSş fmil¬ ing, 4 * had lhe not been fo m^ch taken by forprife* The Chevalier, î think, ¡$ entitled, houwen lo ber bei thanks for àis politene!« ia undertaking fach an of- £ce§ efpeciallj ts be was áifinlereied enough-to dö it €¥€B mknftwatøtbe pci« fo» whom he obliged." The Chevalier bugjh^d and fenwêdi but .forebore dwelling «poa the febjefti frøra motivei of geöå-mnttre^ m Ы ftill plainly fâw is difcofìcerted ^ipfeia extremely· After ìbis iri iiiir©d^ôios f Ae Del· tøingtons foon Ьссаюе as intimate whb Madame d'Araeîe as Lord Welwyirtum- fel£ Tbe plemfure et to¥ing f m fe wear a aeigbb©tìr s fo agreeable шт жщтШштсе^ ât a feafon wben wi§t»g was fo praotca Ые $ the Ьерс alfo $ by fbewifig ber all the i^ierei and affetøon lie iiifpifcdj of fof«
tenmg
terning the remembrance of her recent for¬ ro ws, and of fupplying ш her, in fome me&fure, the place of thofe friends Ihe had fo unhappily loft—ail thefe motives com¬ bined occalioned an intercourfe far more frequent, than, had ihe been in more 'profperons circiimåances, would perhaps have taken place* Lady Öelmington 5 though ihe rarely walked fo far herfeif, mw€w denied bef daughters or Ciarentine the permiffion ©f doing h$ and confa- quently their vifiis at Mont-Ripos whilft the weather alloweé ii s were almod daily« As the winter approachedj however^ they were neccffiiated, of courfe, to retrench them ; уец €wem then 9 Clarentine's warmth oi ut&ekmem há her danntlefsly to brave fisc fcverell tcraperatwre of a December day, шпе with fteps ш light as her heart to ialty gaily forth, wrapt round in a long PøiiJ^v for lhe habitation of her friend. ål thofè eirøe% whm the weather was too botfterous t© allow of her return home the fame evenings fome íhepherďs boy from the adjacent village ufed tc be difpatcbed wiib a note to Delmington, to reqneit leave for her to Hay till morning. This, Iter aunt, father than fend the fêlants and horfes
horfes out at fuch a feafon, always cori- fented to ; and the more readily, from being perfuaded that Ciarentine, whilft with Madame d'Arzele, could reap nothing but benefit, and enjoy nothing but fatif- faction. It was, during one of thefe bleak and ftormy evenings, towards the latter end of January, that whilft Madame d'Arzele and Ciarentine,' who was that night "to Ileep there, were engaged in converfation before a chearful fire, the former iuddenly turning to her young friend, with more than ufual tendernefs, faid— '* My Ciarentine, for you now allow me to call you by that endearing name, explain-to me''by what ft range-circum- fiance it could happen, that you, an ^Eri¬ gi ifh woman, born in a province fad re¬ mote from our coaft, and where les ti/ages of our country are fa little known, ihould have been baptized by a name, which to Englifh ears mutt found fo romantic; and which, though abfolutcly French, is by no means common, even among us, fince I never knew more than one perion before, tbat was ίο called ?" ' - » 2 - - elefantine,
Ciarentine, ftruck by tbc ione of voice with which Madam d'Arzele fpoke thefe lalt words, took her hand the moment íhe paufed, and faid—» u That perfon, whom you mention with fo melancholy a look—was flic dear to you ?'* 46 Oh ! dearer than any being upon earth ! She was my fifter," δδ Ah, tell me," cried Ciarentine, with an earneftnefs fhe could neither reprefs, nor account for ; " tell me, what was her ftory ? Why do you fpeak of her with fuch emotion and fad nefs ?" 66 Aias !" anfwered Madame d'Arzele, έε in afli ing for her ftory, you demand more than I have power to grant, î never heard the exact particulars of it myfelf. Probably they were concealed from me from motives of prudence, it bein? well- known that whatever might have been her errors, í ihould bc the laft to fee them with that indignation they feemed to have excited in every other individual of my family. I loved her too tenderly not to pity and forgive her faults; and the know¬ ledge of them, therefore, was deemed the more dangerous." é s Was
u Was it by an imprudent marriage Übe thus forfeited her.parents favour? s * u It was—fte formed a fecret con¬ nection with a young foreigner whom ac- cident introduced ш her acquaintance at the Englifh Ambaffador's, during the ab¬ fence of my father, who had confided her to the care ofa diftant relation, and from the hour of its being difcovered, ihe was cai off by the whole offended family/' " Good Heaven ! and was that foreigner an Eîîglifiıman? ÎS " indeed/* replied Madame d'Arzele, a I know not. His name was held ¿a fach deteßation in our houfe that it was never mentioned before me, and when this lamented ewtnt took place, I was yet only feven years old, and confequently too forøg to be admitted into company, or entrufted with family affairs* As I grew op the mention of poor Claren- cine was equally forbià û— an impene¬ trable veil was thrown wer her åory™ feer fate was never enquired into-»«4ier exiftence, to all appearance* no more re¬ membered!" Ciarentine, inexpreffibly agitated during this whale ewiverfatioiii acquainted with all
her mother's marriage, and petrified with arøa^erøeiit at a conformity of coinciden¬ do fo ftriking and fo lingular, now } al¬ moil gaŕpíng for breath, faid with the ut- moft emotion—» u I cannot be miftakeii««~that filler^ whom yo*i fo tenderly lament—»you fo fondly loved, Ciarentine de Céìigni was— my mother ľ* Madame d'Arzele, ftarting at thefe words, with a look of wild ailonimment ; of mixed doubt, irrefolution, and extacy t gazed fame moments at the weeping Cia¬ rentine, without having power to fpeak f and then exclaimed—- 44 Are you then—Oh, God! is it pof¬ fible? Are you 9 deareft girl, the daughter of Ciarentine de Ccligni? of that fiiler t that friend, whom no difparity of age, no time, no abfence could ever erafe from my remembrance, or my heart ? Can it be true? Oh fpeak; haften to affure me once again, that I may, indeed, gire credit to fuch a tale of joy!" Ciarentine, too deeply affeöed to fee capable of making any anfwer, threw her¬ felf mm her arms with a look that fo еж- preffively
preffively feemed to implore her beliefs her acknowledgment and love^ that giv¬ ing way to all the fui nefs of her hearts ]M adame d'Arzele pre lied her with tranf¬ port to her bofom 9 and bathed her fac© ?i dth tears of the moft affectionate fenfi- bility and rapture. The relation now followed of Claren- tine's whole hiftory 9 from the hour of her arrival in England, to the prefent moment* The premature death of her unhappy filter^ which till this explanation, Madame d'Ar- zele had buta vague apprehenfion of, filled them both during its recital with grief and fadnefs, and moft painfully embittered the firft fenfatîons of delight, occafioned by a difcovery fo interefting and fa un- expeled. The fequel of Clarentme's re¬ cital, however, by degrees effaced thefe melancholy impreffions, and left at its conclufion no traces upon the mind 9 but thofe of gratitude towards the friends, who, from her infancy, had fo generoufly protcfted her. Madame d'Arzele, when Ciarentine had ended, embiacéd and thanked her re¬ peatedly for her limpie little narrative. Then adverting to the calamitiesahathad •driven her and her children from France^ « Till
^ Till now," cried ilie, " I could only la» ment them with bitterne fs and farrow« Methinks, however, this moment recom» pences me for every fuffering I have en¬ dured ! Oh, that my poor father, extin- guiíhing his refentment againft the mo¬ ther, in his love far her daughter, my fweet, and amiable Ciarentine, could have fliared in my prefent tranfports!" At that moment the Chevalier de Val¬ cour, who had heen reading in another room, entered. Madame d'Arzele affured of the intereft he would take in fuch a communication, inftantly made him ac« quaintcd with the caufe of that emotion their countenances ftill fo vifibly betray* ed.- He heard her with a degree of fur» prifc fcarcely inferior to that ihe had her¬ felf experienced; and when fhe ccafcd exprcifcd with the utmoit warmth the joy he felt upon the occafion, and congratu¬ lated them both upon a confanguinity that would now add a ftronger tie than ever to íhe fiiendíhip they had already formed.
/
BOOK
BOOK II.
С И A P T E R I. áá Ä la ж famcfiife, aux gœces de ľf nfance Sile joint de I® 1&птШ Ш îêimi$ s ľlimoeencu i Belie hm k Îmmr L· plm døiiee candeur» Regne «fans fes гецдаЦ alti fi que ешт (an соерг в ' э SEVERAL montbs now elapfeá in fo calm aad peaieeiul a manner« ihat nothing of any iropøFtaisee feerøed lø mark their progrefs* All that occurred during that period was ibe promotion of Frederick Delmington» at tbe age of nineteen to a lieutenancy« by ihe intereft and inter¬ ference of Lord Welwyn and the rife of William Sømerfci to tht rank of poft- captain· Meanwliifeg Sir Edgar f removed to Ox¬ fords and more rarely feen at home than 3 ever.
ever, was become^ during the vacations^ a diftinguiihed favorite with, and a fre¬ quent vifitor at Lord Welwyn's, Alarmed at the progrefs of his attachment, and afraid to truft himfelf in the fociety of Ciarentine, whofe powers of attraction every day encreafed, he refoluteîy denied himfelf fo dangerous an indulgence, and glad of any excufe to íhun her, always eagerly accepted the invitations Lord Welwyß honoured him with. Lady Julia commonly chofe the time of his refidence at her father's to pay ж vilit at Delmington Hoofc, Lord Wclwyn then having a companion, and being lefb reluöantly induced to part with her« Osice s however, on the very day of Sir Edgar's arrival at the park, being feisecS with lome flight illnefs, ihe fent an apo« logy to 1 ady Delmington for deferring her promifed viik s and ended her note with ш requeft to fee Ciarentine imme¬ diately, for whom ihe fent «he carriage. Lady Delmington on this occafion was extremely perplexed how lo ačh To deny Ciarentine the permiffion of going, at the time of all others, when her friend's in- difpoíition rendered her company moft defirabìe
defirable to her, flie thought might appear capricious and unkind, efpecially, as flie had been in habits of fo readily and fre¬ quently allowing her that indulgence. Yet, when after an abfence of three months, when Edgar was at the houfe, to fend her to it, without any companion, Lady Julia illj and no other woman in the family, feemed to be abfalutely throwing her in his way, and voluntarily reviving all the terrors flie had formerly endured on their account, Mrs, Harrington too was hourly expected. What would b¿ her indignation, when ftie heard that fuch was the imprudent confidence with which fhe trailed them together, fcarlcfs of ob¬ fervation, and relieved from all con- ftraint? ζ& No, ,s cried Lady Delmington, 4fi î muft not fuffer it; Ciarentine muft re¬ main, and, in her Head, one of my own girls fhall haften to Lady Julia/* She then inftantly wrote to her JLady- Ihip, to inform her that Emma, not being quite well (and fuch, in fact, was the cafe) Ciarentine, who was more ufed to her than any body, could not at that moment be fpared ; but that if flic wifhcd it, either Harriet,
Harriet or Sophia ihould bc fent to her in tbe evening. Lady Julia, to whom it was almoft in¬ different which flie received, fent hack a verbal meffage to fay flie fliould be happy to fee either or both the Mifs Dclmingtons as foon as it was convenient. Accordingly, Sophia, who of the two flattered herfelf, and with reafon, that ihe was preferred, went to her that very even¬ ing. Shu ftaid about a week, and then came back with her convalefcent friend. Anxious to communicate all fhe had obferved during her vifit, and habitually inclined to bc more confidential with Cia¬ rentine than wdth any one elfe, Sophia ran into her room the moment ihe arrived, and throwing herfelf into a chair, thus began— fi6 My dear Ciarentine, I have a million of things to teli you ; come, fit down, and hear me attentively." €C I will," cried Ciarentine, laughing— f * Now, therefore, fpeak." ^ Well then, let me begin by inform¬ ing you; that I have made three extraor¬ dinary difcoveries, one relating to Lady Julia, the pcnfive and pathetic ; the other VOL. 1, I Vk
to Edgar, the ci-devant fpirited and gay ; and the third to my felf^ the madcap and the g id dyd' H Admirably characterized all three !" faid Ciarentine—" pray go ond* " You muil know then, that with re¬ gard to Lady julia," refumed Sophia, " whom, of courfe, I ihali fpeak of firft, I have found out ihe is in loved' " In love !-— and with whom ? 9 ' gc With that identical ci-devani 1 juft mentioned. Whilft ï was with her, ihe betrayed herfelf a thoufand different ways. To enumerate all the various fymptoms, would be never ending : fymptom the firft however'was, that ihe blufhed when¬ ever he looked at her; yet. Heaven knows! his looks were not very figni¬ ficant ? Symptom the fecond, flie fighed whenever he left her, if but for a moment : fymptom the third, ihe faltered when¬ ever he addrelfed her, and yet hated to be addreffed by any other. Now, all thefe intelligible fymptoms were fo vifible, that I ihould by no means be furprifed, if Edgar underftood them as well as I do, and had clearly penetrated her fenti- mentsd' « If
5ë If they are fach as he wifîied to ex¬ cite," anfwered Ciarentine, éí it is moft. probable hc has. But now Sophia, tell me what difcovery you have made con¬ cerning yourfelf:' Sophia laughed, hefitated a moments looked very arch, and then faid—~ c& You have a thoufand times more common feňfe than I have, Ciarentine, and therefore ï intruft you with this important fecret; but you muft promife me not to put on yon r grand Jerìeux, not to Jer m où ze nie.. I allow you to laugh as much as you pleafe; all I require is, that you do not fcold me." " I flail fcold you, indeed," cried Ciarentine, u ií' vou keep me thus lonu in fufpence. Confefs your fins at once, good girl, and if I can, 1 will give you immediate absolution," Sophia Jliil remained irrefolute fome minutes—changed colour·—\saiked about. the room with an air of the moft comic perplexity, and then, fummoning all her courage, and fpeaking wry quick, flie faid—-" During my iate vifit, it happened, for my fins, that your odious Chevalier de Valcour found fame pretext to conic to the houfe almoft every day. At erne time 1 2 it
к was with a book he had borrowed ;*at another, with a note from his fifter; the day after, with thanks, for fome little pre¬ fent that had been fent them; ефц he had always the art of being well received when he arrived, and the pleafure of being vifibly regretted when he departeds 'Mean- while* what was to become ofmeì Often left whole hours tete-h tete with him; whilft; JLady Julia was playing the Phillis with her Corydon, and my Lord was fhut up in his ftudy, how was I to refift the preva¬ lence of example, and ihew myfelf wifer than my neighbour? ín good truth, I know Bot, for—I did not even try ; but trufting to chance for its efcape from infection, I e'en left my heart to its own guidance, and before the week was al an end, found ï had irrecoverably loft it V 9 Here C!arentinc, who had with difficulty preferveá her gravity fo long, gave way to all the nubility this account was cal¬ culated to excite· á « Ah, my poor Sophia !*' exclaimed ihe, ш this odious Chevalier, I am afraid, was mucb more fignificant in his glance ц than your infenfible brother !' г « Not
« Not at all," anfwered Sophia, eager- ly^ ie the worft of the bufinefs is, that the wretch, though he feemed diverted by the Itrange things I faid to him, by my bruj* queries ι and caprices, never loft his infup¬ portable good-humour a moment, but ultd to laugh at me as people do at an enter¬ taining, fpoilt child; call me always, la jolie Sauvage-, and treat me with fach an humiliating fort of indulgence, that more than once, í fait tempted to fly ел his fi-tee, and demand fatisfa&ion far fuch infults " u O, còme," cried Ciarentine, u if you can talk thus gaily of your lover's in¬ difference, I begin to have fame hopes of your fpeedy recovery." ** Ao far that," retained Sophia, ui I put but а feeble dépendance _ upon my gaiety, for í do not believe it will ever be in the power of any fentiment of this kind to bereave me of it far an inilaut — yet the ientiment may iliil exift, and thon^h not with the lame falemnity it would in a ientimental Lady Julia, may ftill, at times, torment me. If 1 could, however, but far one moment,' fuccccd in putting the Chevalier into & ferions paffon-, make him very fretful, very cumfartlefs, I j 1 think
1 think I ihould be happy; fince the next beft thing to being beloveds in my opinion, is being feared:" " Being ¿¿fø/ you mean. But my dear girl, as 1 forefee this fubjeci might prove inexhauftibie if purfued, and we' may foon be fummoned to dinner, try whetner for a moment you cannot forget your ingrate^ to acquaint me with the third difcovery you talked of." " Ah, true; î was very near forgetting it. Know then, my dear Clarentine 9 that î have one concern that afTe8s me in¬ finitely more than all the indiifcrence of my provoking favorite. Poor Edgar, I fufpeci, has got into debt at Oxford; the terror he fhews whenever any letters are brought to him; the agitation with which he reads them ; the difappearance, in Fre* deríck's ftyle, of his watch, which, during the whole time í was at Welwyn Park, İ never faw him wear ; and more than all, the continual anxiety obfervable in his countenance, incline me to think I cannot be miftaken. Yefterday, I queftioned him about the w r atch; at firft, he anfwered me with embarra ifment and confufion, but on my prefimg him ftill clofcr ? became quite
quite angry, and haftily left the room. He is new to all this yet; but if hc begins fa early, habit, I fear, will foon fami¬ liarize him to the uneafinefs he now feels." 46 O, be more merciful, Sophia!" cried Ciarentine, warmly. "Tf he is in debt* this, I am fare, is the firft time, and that very agitation you remarked in him, ought to convince you it will be the laft. I pity him, with my whole heart, and wiíh molt fincerely that ï knew how to aftift him. Conceal your fufpicions from your mo¬ ther, and let us queftion Mr. Aukland upon the fubject; hc muft know fomething of the truth/' ** We will walk down to his houfe this evening/' faid Sophia, ** and if he is at home, I will undertake to draw the whole fecret from him. That this debt is for¬ midable, I can have but little doubt, fince ample as is Edgar's allowance, it is not a trifling fum that could diftrefs him thus." Being now called to dinner, the fub« jeŞ: was dropped, and they both hurried down. ï 4 Their
Their meal over, Ciarentine, whilft preparing to fet out for Mr. Aukland's, iuddenly recollccied the pocket-book, Vi nham Somerfet, near four years before^ had pur into her hands. Though fo con¬ fidérablc an interval had clapfed fince ihe had received it, fo adequate to all her limpie wants was the little allowance fúr¬ ni filed her by Lady Delrnington, that fhe had almo|t forgot ihe poffefled it, and had hot once applied to its contents. " Now is the time," cried íhe s as ihe opened her defk, t4 to have recourfe to this fum. Mr. Somerfet will applaud fach a ufe of his bounty, and poor Edgar, per¬ haps, may be benefited by it materially." She now took out the pocket bock 9 and unclafping it with a beating heart, began to examine the notes it encjofed» They were three in number of 10L each* Ciarentine, delighted and furprifed at her own riches, determined inftantly to ap- propiiate the whole to Edgar's ufe, if ihe found him fufficiently involved to re¬ quire it. This to her who fo little knew the yalue of money; who had never till this fflo- ment a
тепц though now arrived at the age of feventeen, experienced ihe want of k t cither f@r herfelf or her friends, Madame d'Arzele being, by the liberality of Lord Welwyn, amply provided with every ne¬ ceffary and comfort? was no very great facrifice. 'Sie Inred te» mach out of the world to be 1еШ|^еа to fpend much in the vanity øf drefå; lhe fmw too little of that extreme poverty in the neighbouring vii« bges, which krge towns continually ex¬ hibit, to feci any femple in fpending it as her friendfhip for Edgar, and her gratitude to his family aowdirdäed; and ihe thought 100 nobly of Lady Del mi ngton to imagine that ihe could ever be taught, by being exiled from her roof, to regrei having made fach a difpofal of it· Impatient, to announce her refources and her deci fion to Sophia, fhe fkfety de- pouted her pocket-book in its ufual re«» cefs, and haftened down to the parlour in fearch of her. She found her in the halt, already pre¬ pared for their walk, and waiting anx- soufly for her. Ciarentine, excufing herfelf for having detained her ? took her under the arrru and 1 5 *ey
they left the hov fe together. After pro»- ceeding fome % y a very quick pace f with· out allowing themfelves breath to fpeak^ they both, by mutual confent, paufed a moment, and infenfibly renewed the con¬ verfation of the morning. u You have not, î hope s mentioned your appréhenfions to Harriet yet?" faid Ciarentine« " No," anfwered Sophia, *' fior do.I intend acquainting her wiih .them at ail* Harriet is a very'good girl y but fhe is not extremely fubje£i to compaffionating the weaknefles ofaher fellow -creature s ι and though- Edgar might not care much for her remonftrances, 1 don't chufe to lender him liable td hearing them/* Ciarentine then fpoke of the treafure fhe poffefled i'äis d was proceeding to de¬ clare the ufe íhe had refolved to apply it to, when, haftily interrupting her with a look of mixed incredulity ma amazement, Sophia exclaimed, a Is к pof» fible, Ciarentine, you ihould really have fuch a fum? Thirty pounds i Good Hea» ven ! when did Mr. Somerfet give itjo% and for what ?'*
Ciarentine
Ciarentine hefftated—the motive that had prompted the donation, the caufelefs fears that had occafioned it, flie was un¬ willing to own, fince thofe fears had* in the event, proved fo totally unfounded^ and might lead Sophia on hearing them fo juftly to accufe Somerfet of illibera- lity and diftruft. After a moments're* flection, ihe therefore anfwered— ** He gave it me to difpofe of when-'I grew older either in acts of charity, or "in a any other Way I chofe. Hitherto thceb- jeéb that have fallen under my notice' have been fo few, your excellent mother fo generoufly relieves ail fhe heaW of, and fo abundantly fuppiies me with evety neceffary, that I have had no temptation- to break into the original fum," "and fhall therefore give it up, Without one mo^ ment's regret, to your poor brother, if Γ find he requires it. Never, my dear Sophia, muft he fufpeit the hand, how¬ ever, that offers it ; never muft the reft of your family hear of the tranfacìion. Pro* mife rne· on you r word of honour, falcmnly promue me, never to mention it." " í will make no fuch promife," cried Sophia 5 " it would ihock mc to think that I б money
money you can fo generoufty ршп with fliould be laviihed on an unthinking pro« digal like Edgar!" " О talk not thus unkindly of him! 81 cried Ciarentine ι ** fay not that you ia· roe n t fach a difpofal of this fom, fince, if in thus bellowing It, I can pre^rve bini frøm the neceffity of revealing bb dtf* trèfles to his mother, 1 fhall think it hut an rft of duty, a retri btick>% due in juftice from me to his family. 86 They were now airived at Mr· Auk¬ land's gate ; Sophia rang« and the maid who aetsattied iherø fîtewed îhem into e parlous, where alone, anel şaciag the гемии with great agÍEatk»% they perceived 'Sir Edgar™ Ciarentine extremely faipri^eá— dif- concerted im all 1er mie&fitres f шва u m lois how t© account for her vifit, fiarted 'back with a look of cQnjcioufnefs, and crøbafraffmeni, and then ftood fileotly re¬ garding Sophia, without knowing whether lo aávaiicc or retreat» Meanwhile Sir Edgar, eagerly ap- proachingi feked her hand, and in a voice that betrayed the utmoft emotion faid— m Whence
u Whence comes my deareft Ciaren« tine i To whom this onufual vifiC' Ciarentine changed colour, and faintly replied, " We came to confuk with Mr P Aukland, to aik him fome queftions» Fray is he at home ? s * , u No, but he is expeled every mo¬ ment. Sit down my Ciarentine, yoa look hurried, you are out of breath ι what is it that has difturbed you thus ?" âl How apt we are,'* faid Sophia archly» u to attribute to others the fame fenfa¬ tîons we are confcious of feeling our fel ves. Ciarentine looks the image of tranquillity, Edgar, compared to you!" Edgar, extremely difconccrted, turned away without fpeaking and walked to the window* A lilence of fame minutes fuc- ctededt during which Ciarentine obferved bim with concern, Sophia with curiofity* At length the former rifing and follow¬ ing him, faid with that innocent fami¬ liarity, and undifguifed affection flie was wont from her infancy to addrefs him, u yon are unhappy, my dear Edgar; you feem depreifed and melancholy ; tell me 3 as to one of your oideft 3 and your true it
tru e it friends, telí me what occafions Ibis. Are you ill ?" In anfwer to this enquiry, Edgar fliook his head,, and without venturing to look round, leaned his forehead againft the frame of the window* and waved his hand for her to leave him. Ciarentine, diftreffed and hurt by this behaviour^ now refumed, in a tone of mixed far¬ row and reproach-—^ Js this kind, Ed- - gar? ís this friendly ? Why will you not anfwer me? What is it you faar? Re¬ mon (trance ? I have neither difpofition nor authority to utter any. Breach of truft ? I pledge to you my honour never to betray you. Then be fincere, dear Edgar f and convince me by repofing fome confidence in me, that I have not wholly forfeited the affection you for« merly profeifed for me." « Oh, what is it you afk ?" at length exclaimed he abruptly turning to her, u what is it you would know ? 1 cannot, Ciarentine, I cannot make the humiliating cònfeffion ì Spare mc, deareft gir!, and queftion me no more." áf Blefs me, Edgar/ 9 exclaimed Sophia, K if you are fa tragical^ you'll lead us to fufpeft
füfpect î know not what ! Come let me help you out, and by gueffmg at your fecret, endeavouring to fpare you the mortifica¬ tion of revealing it. Look at me a mo¬ ment; look at mc well, and then tell me, whether all thefe qualms and agitations do not arife from your having contracted fame fooliih debt ?— See Ciarentine, he colours ! my life for it, ï am right V* Edgar was filent a moment, and then in a low voice anfwered, u you are in«» deed, Sophia !" u Ceft ce qu'on appelk parler ', cela Γ cried íhe» " you are a good creature now, and I feel half inclined to forgive you ; but you muft tell us firft, how you incurred this debt, and to what it amounts/' u It amounts," anfwered he, fpeaking very quick, and averting his eye$ 9 éi to âool. and I incurred it at play ľ' At the mention of fach a fum Claren^ tine and Sophia turning pale, ftarted, and in filent confternation gazed at each other a confidérable time. At length Sophia re¬ covering firft, faid— * ς And what Sir, may î аАц is your plan ? Whom do you mean to apply to ?" « Not
** Not to my mother?" anfwered he, &é for I have already drawn upon her to a large amount, and far exceeded the fti« pend íhe allotted me. Not to Mrs» Har¬ rington, for to hope from her any thing but reproacl and infult would be mad - ве fs, Not to my college friends for with Aem my. credit is exhaufted." « Good Godi" interrupted Sophľs with qnkknefsş " are your debts then fo fsErøerosis Ì Do you owe even raore than this 200İ r'* ** I owe/' faid Ье э with afFeHed calm« mtí& 3 m more than the whole amount of юу-веж! half- year's allowasice 9 that is to by^ mmt than 250I· will pay ľ* w Indépendant øf this p!ay~deb% e ?w № Ye^ t utterly? 98 <* Fealen amé earth ! ,B exclaimed the тащтш Sofhm f u wfeat unheaťd«of ex« tta¥agane€l 450le in lefs ihan a year f I €Buia mm have believed yon capable of fuch folly 9 ta call it by no werfe an appellation F ·« Huili, höftb Sophia 1" eried Claren* йж mildly^ ** this was not the eondi- á&m upen which we fought his confidence^ 4he
the evil îs paft; and fmce we cannot re¬ medy, our part is not to blame.' 1 44 Ah ! deareft Ciarentine !" exclaimed Edgar, extremely foftened, 44 little as f deferve it, how grateful do 1 feel for this lenity ! you are the fweeteft, as you have ever been the moft beloved of friends! How is it, that although thinking and acting uniformly right yourfelf, you re¬ tain an indulgence fo confideratc, a pity fo confolitary for the errors of otheis. I was almoft in a ftate of defperation idi you arrived; but your voice, your look-* have calmed, have foo the d me, and once more reftored me to reafon." u If fuch is her power over you,' 1 cried Sophi j, aííc&ing a tone of farcafm, though her countenance bore vifible teilnnony to the gentler emotions this fpeech had exciud, " it had been fortunate for you, had ihe rather been at hand to prevent the lo/s of your reafon, than to halten its reftoration ι but tell me, 'which of thefe horrible debts is moft preffing f'* 64 That I incurred at play," anfwercd he, 44 there my honour is at ft^ke—my word the only bond f and not, to pay it imme»
immediately, would be to difgrace myfelf с tern all yd* a y er y likely; but how an to pay it? Had you any purpofe ut coming hither? Any hopes from Mr. Auk- land?" « Yes— í meant to confefs to him the whole affair; to entreat his advice and aflîftance, and to perfuadé him, if poffi¬ ble, to lend me half the fum 1 have the moil immediate neceffity for." a And the other half? How is that to be procured ?" " Do not aik me," replied Edgar, co¬ louring, " be content to know I have re- lources that will enable me to raife—- u I underftand you/' interrupted So¬ phias " refources, Edgar, you ought to blu fli at being driven to have recourfe to, Your watch î know is gone;—fo I fup¬ pofe are your books ?" Edgar was beginning to anfwer, when, driving paft the door ia her way to Del¬ mington Houfe, where ihe had been fome days expected, hc faw Mrs. Harring¬ ton, and inftantly retreating from the window, drawing Ciarentine away at the fame moment™
βί O, go, go," he exclaimed, u let her not íee you here with me—let her not tell my mother where you have been! Go home immediately, í conjure you." ςί Lady Delmington," faid Ciarentine, amazed at his earneftnefs, u knows where w T e are ; we have nothing to fear/ 1 ^ She knew not that / ihould bc here, 4 returned Edgar with encreafed perturbation. " She muft not hear of it! Go, I befecch you, and as foon as 1 have fpoke η to Mr. Auckland 1 will haften back to Wclwyn." He then opened the parlour door, ihook hands with them as they paffed, and hurried them away«
С H A P. IL CLARENTINE and Sophia arrived at iheir own door about a quarter of an hour after Mrs. Harrington had alighted^ having, more from a vague idea of com¬ plying with Edgars injunctions than from any
tremely the whole way. ín the hall they debated fame time between themfelves whether immediately to join the family in the parlour, or wait till they were fum¬ moned r о tea. At length, however, they agi eed to go in, and compofing their features as well as they could, opened the door and advanced. Lady Julia, biightening up at their ap^ proach, nodded good-humouredly to Cla- ι emine, and holding out her hand to her, laid— " Where have you been all this after¬ noon, my dear girl ?" ^ At Mr. Aukland 's," anfwered Cla«. rentine, curtefying as flie fpoke to Mr*· Harrington, wdro, without rifing, only re¬ turned her civility by a ftiff bow. " Was hc at home ?'' faid Lady Del¬ mington. " No, madam; but hearing he was ex¬ pected in every moment, we fat down and waited for him, in vain, till now." u Did not Id' faid Mrs. Harrington* " fec you ftanding at the window as î drove byr" u Yes ? madam, I believe you did." " And
u Ånd who was there with you ?' s Ciarentine, innocent as ihe was, and ready as ihe would have been, but far Edgar's myfteriöus caution, to anfwer unhefitatingly this enquiry, blufhed deeply as it was uttered, and crofting the room as ilie fpoke, upon pretence of putting away her cloak, replied in an ill affured voice— " It was Sir Edgar Delmington you faw, I fancy, madam." 4& My fan ?" cried Lady Delmington, with quicknefs— *» u and what led him to Mr. Aukland's at fa unufual an hour?" Ciarentine, ilLverfcd iu diffimulation, yët but too well aware of its neceffity ia this cafe, affected to be ftill bufied in folding up her gloves and cloak at the other end of the room, the better to con¬ ceal her embarraftment, and keeping as. clofe to the truth as ilie conici, an¬ fwered— u He told us hc had fame bufinefs hc wifiied to confali Mr Auckland upon." " And you ladies itaid," faid Mrs. Harrington drily л u during the confulta- lion, to aftlft them by your wifdom, and experience ?" ** No,
« No Madam/* cried Sophia^ attempt- ing to fpeak with gaiety, " we were obliged unfortunately to hailen away before Mr. Aukland returned 1" " In my opinion," faid Mrs. Harring¬ ton, affuming a graver look, u you had no bufinefs to remain a moment, after you found Mr. Aukland was out," 46 Dear Ma'am," cried Sophia, " what harm could there be in our fitting to talk a few minutes with Edgar ì We had not —tbat is, Ciarentine had not feen him, thefe ten days," To this Mrs. Harrington, though fhe looked extremely discontented, did not think proper before Lady Julia to make any reply, and therefore to the great joy of the two friends, the fubjeci was drop» ped 4 Juft ast y were fitting down to fup¬ per, a fervant entered with a note for Sophia. Her mother aiking who it came ironic ihe faid from Edgar, and put it into her pocket, *' Don't you read it direftly ?" faid Lady Julia—- u Mo," anfwered Sophia, " it can con¬ tain jî'othing of any moment/ 3 « s Read
u Read it notwithftanding," faid Lady Delmington, 6í perhaps be wiíhes to have fomething fent to him." Sophia drew a candle near her, opened it, and found in it thefe words— TO MISS S. DELMINGTON. u All is well my dear Sophia. Mr« Aukland made no difficulty in fupplying me. He has promifed inviolable fecrccy, Do not you, by any imprudence, betray me. Adieu, love to dear Ciarentine, and am yours in great hafte, E. D« u No queftions, I hope, were afked after you got home ? I ihali brcakfait with you to morrow." 66 Well," faid Lady Delmington, when ihe had done reading, H what docs he fay to you ?" sc That he ihali breakfaft here in the morning," anfwered Sophia. 66 He was not wont," faid Lady Del¬ mington fmiling, H to he fo formal as to give notice of fuch an intention the day befare," " Neither," faid Sophia, anxious, by giving fame pîauiible reafon far his con¬ ducís to preclude all further enquiries»
« was he wont to be fo great a ftranger in his own family. ît is now many months, î believe^ fince he partook any meal with us." « î fliould be loth to imagine/' faid Lady Delmington, ** that he therefore «confiderai, and meant in future to treat m f as abfolute ftrangers·** " I am*fuie," faid Lady Julia, «< at the houfe he is now 1щ he will not 9 at leaft s be encouraged in fuch fenuments.'* a I am apt confequently to fufpeñ," faid Mrs, Harrington ? ftedfaftly regard¬ ing Sophia, whilft (he fpoke, u that Sir Edgar's note contained intelligence far more interefting than was imparted to Sophia turned pale at this infinuation, and for a few minutes, a general filence enfued. Lady Delmington was the firft to break it. " Secrecy, î have often heard," cried íhe, " always implies fome wrong. This perhaps, at times may be true : but, as I have never been in the habit of extorting my children's confidence by authoritative means, and as I am perfuaded there may frequently! between an айеШошш bro¬ ther
я
nications interefting only to themfelves, and in their own nature perfectly harm- lefs, î have made it a rule never to inter¬ fere upon thefe occafions, when by any a£l of indifcretion they put themfeivcs in danger of being betrayed." There was a liberality, a kindnefs in this fpeech that immediately, and almoft unconfcioufiy impofed filence upon Mrs· Harrington, reftored Sophia to her ufuai chearfulnefs, and afforded a moil wel¬ come relief to poor Ciarentine, who from the beginning of the converfation had fat the pi clu re of terror, not daring to raifc her eyes 3 changing colour every minute* and trembling left Sophia, by any un¬ guarded expreftion, ihould excite in the mind of her mother a fufpicion of the real truth. Early the next morning, Sophia, with Edgar's note in her hand, was at Claren¬ tine's door : after reading it to her— 6fi I am come," cried ilie, " todiifuade you finally, my dear girl, from the ge¬ nerous defign you yefterday mentioned to me. The gift, yoa propofed bellowing upon this prodigal brother of mine, enor- VOL. 1, К mous
mous as, from fo young a giver, it would feem, could in faci prove of very little, if туч ufe to him. He acknowledges t in addition to this play debt, to have others of a yet more confidérable amount· Can you difcharge them ? And if you could, would it not be encouraging his extravagance ? O Ciarentine, retain this money for fame nobler ufe, and beftow it not as a récompenfe for mifconduct. iS No, 9 ' cried Ciarentine, * s I had a better purpofe to anfwer when ï talked of beftowdng it on 'your brother : î Tvifhed to fave him from public ihame, to ρ re¬ ferve him from the hardening effects of open difgrace. Should^ he once over¬ come the dread he now feels of reproach and difcovery, hc is loft for ever! This debt paid, the others, î thought, he might difeharge by degrees ; he fays himfelf they are not fo preffing ·, a little firmnefo, economy, and felf-dcnial, would foon exuicate him whollvd' " I wiih it might prove fa," faid So¬ phia; 4i though I greatly fear, the more eafy he finds it to gain credit, the lefs fcrupulous he will become." Ciarentine
Ciarentine haftily interrupted her: u I have no fears," cried ihe with earneft¬ nefs; " Edgar's principles are well known to me; they are naturally thofe of rec¬ titude and honour; he has a feeling and generous difpofition; and though his paf¬ fions may be ftrong, and his conduct may for a while have been faulty, his head 9 and not his heart has been to blame. As a proof of this you find how fenfible he is to the paft kindnefs of your mother; how unwdlling to take further advantage ofthat kindnefs; and how ready, fooner than diftrefs her by frefli applications, to part with all his valuables even at the rifk of immediate detection. My deareft Sophia, fu fte r me then ftill to indulge the hope that I may be ufeful to him; and fince you will not lend me that aflîftance 1 had ventured to expeB from you, at leali, give me your W4>rd, not. to reveal to any other the converfations we have had upon the fubjceV " I told you before, my beft Ciaren¬ tine," cried Sophia, " and i now repeat what I then faid, ï would not for the uni- verfe make-any fuch promife, The mo¬ ment I have reafon to fufped you of К â luw ing
having been guilty of fo great a piece of folly, I openly confefs the whoie affair to my mother, and involve Edgar, as well as you, in a general difcovery. Do not therefore accufe me of unkindnefs to him, or breach of truft with regard to you» To do him a real fervice, to oblige you in a rational w Ay ^ I would fcarcely he fitate at any thing : but mad as í fometimes am, ï will never contribute towards carrying on an affair, for which I ihould ïo de- fervedty merit a cell in Bedlam for life* To prevent all poffibility confequently of your perfifling in this defign, I now fo- lemnly declare to you, that unlefs you give me your word of honour to drop the whole fcheme, I will this very morning make Edgar acquainted with it, on pur¬ pofe to put him upon his guard againft receiving any money that may come to him through an unknown channel," The ferioufnefs and earneftnefs with which this was uttered terrified Claren- üne, who, after vainly endeavouring to make Sophia retract her alarming threat, promifed to think no more of the bufi» nefs, but to let matters take their own courfe^
courfe, without interfering in their ar· rangement in any way whatever* At nine o'clock Sir Edgar, according to his appointment, arrived* He looked Sfnore chearful than he had done for fome time, yet ftill at intervals appeared ab¬ fent and thoughtful. Ciarentine almoft rejoiced to obferve it, fince it at once evinced feniibility, and contrition. She fought not however to fpeak to him in private, and advifed Sophia to obferve the fame caution. At an early hour he ordered his horfe, and rode back to Welwyn. Lady Julia, as foon as he was gone, threw afide her work, and invited Cia¬ rentine to walk with her in the garden. After converting fomc time upon ge¬ neral fubjecis, Ciarentine obferving that Lady Julia liftened to, and anfwered her with an air of inattention that proved ihe fcarcely knew one fyllable fhe had been fa) ing, fuddcnly ftopped, and looking at her with a fmile, faid— " Fray Lady, Julia, why did you wifli for a companion during your walk r'' &i Why?" repeated Julia, furprifed at the enquiry, " Becaufe I hate to wander K j about
about alone, and always rejoice when ľ can find an opportunity of converfmg with you without reftraint." a Of meditating with me, you mean," cried Ciarentine, u fince furely where there are only two, and where one only of thofe two utters a flngle word 3 the term converfation cannot withe any pro<^ pricty be- applied to the trifle^ and un- fuppoited efforts of that folitary fpeakerľ 9 Lady Julia coloured, and preffing Cla· remine 's hand, replied— a I acknowledge, dear girl 5 thejtiftice of your reproof« My filence ада ftu« pidity well deferved it, and 1 aik ш t hou fand pardons for having called it forth. The trath is/* continued ihe, not I u fieri n g Ciarentine, who, hurt at her ferioufnefs would have interrupted her* «t rny i7îind is wholly employed in reflect¬ ing upon tile contents of a letter I re¬ ceived this morning from my father. Can you keep a fecret Ciarentine ? If you can, 1 will tell you what hc fays to me." " Try me," faid Ciarentine, fmiling, u and I hope you will have no caufe to accufe mc of indifciction." Lady
u Lady Julia ftood fafpendcd a mo« ment, looked confufed, and irrefolute : but on Clarentine's urging her to pro¬ ceed, at length went on—· u My father,™! would he had fpared me fa dangerous a confidence,~~-charmed with the rectitude of principles, the ele¬ gance of manners, the noble generofity of character fo confpicuous in Sir Eclgai Delmington, has, he informs me, after confulting his mother and family, en¬ tered into engagements with the former, which, when he comes of age, are to con¬ firm me his forever! The narrownefs of Sir Edgar's fortune was with him no im¬ pediment, mine being by the death my poor brother confidérable; and Mrs. Harrington having, ï underftand, in con¬ fidération of this alliance, declared flic will leave us, at her death, all flie pof- feffas." Ciarentine, who had attended to this communication with fparkling eyes, and looks that denoted the moft fenfible de - light, now affectionately embraced Lady Julia, and exclaimed— " You have long permitted me, deareft Lsãdy Julia, to call you by the name of К 4 friend.
friend, to treat you with the freedom and familiarity of an equal. Our Edgar, you know« is as dear to me as a brother«, This union, the moft defirable in every rcfpcct that could take place, gives me through him an additional title to your regard; makes me your fifter, as well as his, and leaves me without a wiih, except for your mutual and lafting happinefs/* " Alas ! my Ciarentine/* cried Lady |ulia ş fhaking her head, " you little fuf- pe£t how much reafon I have to be averfc to this, apparently, unobjectionable mar¬ riage; to dread it even, and lament it ever was propofed« Sir Edgar has been informed of my father's future intentions in his behalf, yet far from appearing de¬ firous of profiting by them, or of making himfelf any intereft in my heart, he be» haves to me with a degree of indifferences of negligence, the moil mortifying, and the molt offen five/' Ciarentine, fincerely grieved at this fpeech, attempted however to difguife the concern it gave her under an appearance of incredulity. With a look of aifumed gaiety fhe therefaie replied— «« How
ffC How difficult all thefe lovers are to pleafe! I really believe there is no paf¬ fion makes the human heart fo fufpicious, ίο perverfe! Poor Edgar little imagines he can have merited fuch a reproach; yet were he to hear it, how flattering to him would it be! But tell me, Lady Julia, and tell me honeftly, is it your fride ^ or your affé fiion his fuppofed indifference wounds the deepeft," 66 You afk me," replied Lady Julia, le more than I know how to anfwer. When he is prefent, all refentment I find loft in farrow; when abfent, rei em¬ ment, nearly unmixed with farrow, takes the lead." ξί I underftand this diftinciion," cried Ciarentine, iC and am now convinced you love him with all the tendernefs that his thoufand excellent qualities deferve, This conviclion gives me more pleafure than I can well exprefs. Jubnir was formed ι о for facial happinefs, for domeftic enjoy¬ ments. He loves reading, 'delights in female fociety, and is naturally of fo af¬ fectionate a difpoíition, that to have known him married to a woman who was К 5 not
not truly fenfible of all his worth, would have made mc wretched." u And yet Ciarentine," refumed Lady Julia, « 6 whilft he perfe veres in Ыв pre¬ fent conduct; whilft coldly fub feri bing to Lis mother's plans without being anxious far their fuccefs, he continues to treat me with fach careleffnefs and apathy, my fixed determination is, never to become his wife. The renunciation, though it may perhaps be painful to my heart, will hc grateful to my infulted pride. î am fure of my father's indulgent acquiefcence to this refufai, when once he is convin¬ ced lam ferious in dcfiring it; and almoft íccure likewife of poffeffing, through your early leifans, my deareft Ciarentine, fuf¬ ficient fpirit to enable me to conquer my own regret, fliould I feel any after the rvjcOion becomes public. You firft taught rae to overcome the habitual in. dolcnce of my character, and infufed into my mind that réfolution and firmnefs by which ï hope to be fupported." 6f I fliould be forry to believe," faid Ciarentine gravely, " that I had been fa wholly miilaken in my notions oiflrmnefsj and rcclu::o# 9 as to influì irritability and pvulmct
petulance in their place. Affure yourfelf, Lady Julia, I never meant to recommend fach fubftitutes; and grieved indeed ihoutd I be, could I imagine that the fentiments by which you arc now actuated had originally been implanted by mc. f am convinced you do Sir Edgar the greateft injuftice, when yoa conceive him capable of affenting to the views of his family upon motives fo mercenary as thofe of mere intereft and ambition. He may not perhaps, I cannot bring myfelf, even when pleading for him, to flatter )Ou, feel far you that romantic egree of paf¬ fion you feem defirous ofinfpiring: but of this î am certain, he admires you ex¬ tremely ; he appeared fanfibly touched by the relation that was given him of your kindnefs and benevolence towards Kla» dame d'Arzele, and her little iamily; he reveres and loves your father more than any man he knows, and has the finccreft value far you. What more, in reafon, dear, dear Lady Julia, would you wiih/ 1 éÊ Well, my deareft Ciarentine," an¬ fwered Lady Julia, who although ftie h .cl been a little hurt at the beginning of this fpeech^ could not forbear fmiling at its К б conclufion*
conclufion, " î may have been wrong, 1 may have been unj uit; in expiation there¬ fore of thefe errors, accept my promife not to act with precipitation in this affair^ not to fuffer myielf in future to be guided by pique, or irritability ; but to wait pa¬ tiently, without taking any fteps in it whatever, the moment when Sir Edgar comes of age^ and chufes frankly to de- «siare himfelf/ 9 Ciarentine, tranquillized by this af¬ furance, then quitted her friend to fet out on one of her accuftomed morning vifits to the family at Mont Repos. Madame d'Arzele was at this time in¬ volved in much domeftic uneafinefs* Her children, in the courfe of the win¬ ter, had all three been fei zed with the meafles. The two youngeft, at tbc end of a few weeks, happily recovered; but Eugenie, the cldeft, had never, from that time, wholly regained her former llrength, and within the laft month, particularly, had fa cruelly alarmed her mother, by lhe languor and feverifhnefs which con¬ ftantly preyed upon her, and gradually undermined her whole conftitution, that alter confulting vriih the phyfician to whom
Whom Lord Welwyn, at the beginning of their illnefs, had recommended them, ilie had, at laft, determined, far a fliort time, to try change of air, and remove to fame little village nearer the fea-coaft. At the fame moment, however, ftie acknow- leged with a forced imiîe, that her finan¬ ces not being in a very ílouriíliing con¬ dition, having re'oïutely and conftantly rejected all fucn donations from Lord Welwyn as were wholly pecuniary, ilie was under fame difficulty with regard to the expences this little journey would unavoidably involve her in; " 1 expect a fmall fupply, however, ' continued ihe more gaily, " next week from a friend in town, to whom / lately fent fame draw¬ ings of the ( hevalier's, and fame work of my own to difpofe of, and the inftant that arrives, î hope to fet out. He is now actually gone to Sidmouth, to look about in its vicinity far fome cheap and eligible lodging far us ; and when you en¬ tered, my deareft С larentine, î was writ» ing to ! ady Julia an account of my in¬ tention, and its motive." Ciarentine, affected by this candid ftatemem of her friend's embarrafsments, aud
and extremely defirous of exempting her from the painful neceffity of deferring a plan, her maternal folicitude rendered her fo anxious to accompliili ? now be« fought her moft earneftly to receive from her, in confidération of their near rela- tionfhip, that affiftance ilie had rejeBed from Lord Welwyn. A friend, fheadded 3 had enabled her by his liberality to make íhe offer; an offer«, which, if upon con¬ dition Madame d'Arzele would ho* nour her by accepting., flie would ac¬ company with a promife of attending her to Sidmouth, or if fhe could not imme¬ diately be fpared, of following hei thither, as foon as Lady Delmington gave her permiffion,— " You will want, deareft Madam," continued ihe, u fome one to fupport, to chcar, to affift you in the taik of at¬ tending upon your fick child; and who ought you fooner to chufe than her, who loving you with fuch affection, and feel¬ ing fo deeply intcrefted in all that con¬ cerns you, will take fo much pleafure in the office ?" Madame d'Arzele liftened to this truly friendly propofai with ftreaming eyes 5 and
and upon Clarentine's renewing her en¬ treaties, at length, in part., accepted it. Rejoicing in her fuccefs, and as prompt in executing, as in planning any purpofe of benevolence, Ciarentine then took leave, in order to haften home, and folicit that approbation fhe was fo anxious to obtains
CHAP. Ш. IT was fo late when Ciarentine reached home, that on her entering the dining« room, íhe found the whole family ready to fit down to table. It was not, therefore, till evening ihe had an opportunity of fpeaking to her aunt upon the fubject that now wholly cngrofted her. Lady Delmington, but too fenfiblc of the inveterate and hourly cncrcafing pre¬ judices Mrs. Harrington had conceived againft her unoffending niece, and, con- fequenth, by no means fan y to embrace fa
lo good an opportunity of removing them from each other, made no difficulty in complying with Clarentine's requeft.·»« She offered to furnifli her with a fuffi¬ cient fupply of money for the journey, and propofed paying regularly far her board during her abfence. To this, how¬ ever, Ciarentine, iverfe to hoarding her little treafure in iecrecy any longer, warmly, but gratefully objected, acquaint¬ ing her aunt, at the fame time, with the generofity of young Somerfet, and the ufe his noble gift was now deftined to anfwer« Lady Delmington applauded her friendly purpofe; expreiied the kindeft anxiety refpecting the recovery of her little fa« vourite, and encouraging her to haften as much as poffible fo defirable an expe¬ ditions left her, to rejoin Mrs. Harring¬ ton and Lady Julia« At ten, a note arrived from Lord Welwyn, faliciting the pleafure of feeing the whole family to dinner the next day. Lady Delmington, with the approbation of Mrs, Harrington, accepted the invita¬ tion, and wrote an anfwer to that effect, which íhe fant back by his Lordihip's fne flenger. The
The next day, however. Mrs. Har« rington complaining of indifpofition, and feeling by no means inclined, either from habitual civility, or natural good-humour, to facrifice the ilighteft perfonal indub gence to the gratification of others, very bluntly declared—» notwithflanding ihe therefore reduced her polite holléis to the neceffity of ftaying at home herfelf, or of leaving one of her daughters behind—-fhe was determined to give up her engage¬ ment. The young people, upon this, well knowing how difagreeable to Lady Delmington would be a whole day fpent tete-a-tete with fuch a companion, all offered to fupply her place. She was too indulgent, however, to liften to their en« treaties ; and confequently, at the ap¬ pointed hour, Lady Julia, Ciarentine, and her two couims, iat out for Welwya Fark. Among thofe who formed a part of the company they were introduced to, was a Mr. Eltham, a nephew of Lord Welwyn's, juft arrived from London. This young man, born to a fplendid fortune, already emancipated from every fpecies of con« troul ? and now rendered by circum- llanccsj
ftance\ foie heir ίο all his uncle's landed property, was as remarkable for the ele¬ gance of his figure as the fire and anima« lion of his ever-dauntlefs countenance. Poffeffing all the boldncfs and intrepidity that confcious independence and impunity can confer, he could vie, though yet fcarcely more than two and twenty, with the oldeft practitioners in extravagance, folly, and diflîpation. His manners were eafy, gay, and carelefs; his converfation, when he wiflied to pleafe, fpirited, and entertaining ¡ and his underftanding, how* ever wild, and flighty, naturally quicks penetrating, and brilliant, Frøm the rime Ciarentine, who, un- forianaîely, was placed oppofite to him f took her feat at table, he fcarcely, for a moments fixed his eyes on any other ob¬ jeti. Her beauty, it was evident, had ex« cited his utmoft admiration; and the un¬ affected modefty of her countenance, where no ihame-faccd baíhfulnefs ap¬ peared to deform the native ingenuouf- riefs of its expreffion; the elegant fim- plicity of her manners, and the graceful iyrnmetry of her farm—his utmoft aito» iiiíhmcnt. Who
Who ftie could be—or how, in fuch a fecluded fituation, ftie had acquired ίο diftinguiihed a fuperiority., it was not eafy to imagine. When fhe entered, being engaged in converfation with another gentleman, he had not heard her name, and therefore was yet doubtful whether fhe formed a part of the Delmington fa¬ mily, or was only an occafional vifitor at their houfe. impatient to obtain fulle ι information, he fei zed the firft opportu¬ nity, after ihe had left the room with thtî ©ther ladies, of queftionmg Sir Edgar upon the fubjeâc « Allow me to aik, Sir," faid he, " whe¬ ther that lady whom you fat next at din¬ ner was ary relation of уоигз?" Sir Edgar anfwered, that Ilie was. - u Is her name Delmington ?'*—« Yes 5 Sir.'*—** Does flie live with you ?"—- ^ Yes, Sir-"—" Pray then is ihe an or¬ phan ?" Edgar never very tolerant of any thing that in the ilighteft degree bordered upon impei tinence, and particularly provoked at being fo freely interrogated rc (petting Ciarentine, airccicd not to hear this lait quidtiuiij
queftion, but turned away, and addreffed himfelf to his next neighbour, £hham, however, wás not of a temper to be fo eafily difcouraged. He now therefore openly applied to Lord Wel¬ wyn himfelf, and fpeaking to him acrofs the table— u I muft beg, my Lord," cried he, u that you would indulge me with fame account of the young lady who went laft out of the room. Is it true, that ihe has be*m buried ali hex life in the difmai fo¬ litude of an old country manfion, unfeeıiş unknown, and doomed to pine in ob» fcurity and ncgie£l?" Lord Welwyn laughed, <« The difmai folitude," anfwered he, " of that оЦ country manfion, you would, I believe, with fuch a companion, be very happy to find yourfelf condemned to. You are miilaken, however, if you fuppofe ihe is either negyeded, or unhwzan. i 1er good- nefs, her accomphihments and beauty, bave all rendered her an objeci of uni- verfai admiration ; and I meet with no one who has ever convcrfed with her, who does not equally rcfpetl and love lier." f Ah,
€& Ah, my Lord !" cried Eltham, " be¬ ware left you praife her with too much enthuiiafm ! that captivating, that be¬ witching face, requires not the aid of fo eloquent a panegyrift!" " Her face/' returned Lord Welwyn, 46 conftitutes one of her leaft perfections^ She is chiefly to be valued for the quali¬ ties of her heart, the undeviating truth and rectitude of her character. She has fpent much of her time here with my daughter, and given me the faireft op¬ portunity of ftudying her difpofition, and appreciating her real worth ! Invariably, and conftantly has ftie proved herfelf Upright, and pure of intention; affection¬ ate, and gentle of mind; fixed, and fteady of principle !" u Dear my lord," exclaimed Eltham, u that you would but take my eulogium in hand ! You paint in fuch glowing co¬ lours, that the vilcft fubject might gain beauty from yottr touch." " Wait/' replied his Lordihip, fmiling, u till we arc called to tea, and Li pré¬ fence of the fair Ciarentine, I will under¬ take the taik/* m I diftruft
6t ï diftruft you a little, my Lord ; и cried Eltham, " but wil!, howeverj abide by ihe conféquences, and accept fhe propo«» fal." Soon after, the expected fummons ar¬ rived, and the gentlemen ali readily re¬ paired to the drawing-room. Ciarentine on their entrance, was fitting with Sophia at a window, in earneft con¬ verfation Lord Welwyn, followed by his nephew, went up to her, and addref- ÍLig her with a good humoured fmile— ^ My dear young lady," faid he, " I am commi ifioned by this gentleman to re¬ new his introduction to you; he fears that during the buftle of the general prefen- tation that took place before dinner, you may have over-looked him, and much wifhes to be more particularly made known to you. Are you, at this mo¬ ment, at leifure to attend to me ?" Ciarentine half-laughing, bowed, and anfwercd— u Certainly, my lord.*' α Why then," refumed his Lordihip, " George Eltham, Efq. approach and hear your binli, parentage^ and educa¬ tion
tion minutely difcuffed. He was born, Mifs Delmington, in the year 17—, ofa father who, dying when he was only five years old, left him heir to an immenfe eftate; at nine, he was fent to Weftmin- fter fchool; at 17 to Oxford ; three years after to the continent; and here he now ilands, juft returned from Italy, as finiflied a coxcomb, and as compleat a man of the worlds as 1 ever had the honour of being acquainted with. Moreover, till within this lait twel vernom h, he was my wa.d, and claims the privilege of calling me uncle." Eltham, at the conclufion of this ani¬ mated encomium, felt, notwithftanding all his effrontery, fomething like emban aff¬ inent. He attempted however to dif¬ guife it under a forced laugh; and turn¬ ing upon his heel, fauntered towards the tea table, and threw himfelf into a chaii next Lady Julia. Meanwhile, Ciarentine and Sophia, exticmelv amufed, both exclaimed the moment Lord Welw) n paufed — ¿4 A ve r y inviting character indeed !" 4i O, >ou know not vet,'' cried Lis Lordihip, iw half its merits 1 . Ile can drink
drink hardş play high, fight defperately* Every new face he fees turns his head ι every artful defigner preys upon his for¬ tune, ïu love and friendfhip he is equally a dupe ! yet^ with the fame folly, few, perhaps, are pofleffed of fo much opcnnefs and undifguifed extravagance as my gracelcfs nephew. No hypo- crify, no diffimulation covers »the mul¬ titude of his fins. They are all plain as the day, and public as the fun !" « My Lord/' faid Sophia, « 6 if he takes fo little pains to conceal his faults, you have at leaft the comfort of knowing he will feduce no one elfe into their prac¬ tice, A character fo thoughtlcfs, muft be incapable of employing any artifices in order to mi'fguide others." &e The contagion of example, my dear Sophia," replied his Lordihip, " is per¬ haps quite as dangerous as the force of precept« Where there is youthful gaiety, fpirits generofity, and courage, much will be overlooked, much pardoned, and I fear, much imitated. Thoufands are at firft fight dazzled by the brilliant exte¬ rior of an agreeable profligate, who never would have lifte ned? for an inftant, to б the
the fallacious logic of premeditated fa- dučtion. Eltham, fatting afide his morals, is the pleafanteft creature I ever knew, and has ¿fund of humour, originality and goodnature, rarely to be equalled. Can you imagine then, he wants either fubtlety, or argument to niiilcad ?'* Fiere Ciarentine being called upon by Lady Julia to affift her in making tea, the converfation was interrupted, and Lord Welwyn rejoined his other gucfts. c; Mr. Eltham/' faid Lady Julia, as Ciarentine advanced, " is extremely de¬ firous of knowing what you and my father have been t.d.xing about. He iniiihs upon it, be was the fole íubieü of your Ion»· co nfa rence/' ** Could Mr. Eltham/' cried Ciaren¬ tine, u indeed fu (pect this, and yet want courage to liflen to what was faid nf him." ίζ 1 fultained the//// ihock fo ill, « re* plied he, i; that, to my fiiamé he it ac¬ knowledged, I had not réfolution fuf¬ ficient to iland a fecond/' u Vou were then taken bv fururi fe," cried Lady Julia, laughing. 4 - lince other- wife, it would not have been found aa eafy matter to have difconceitcd joy fo u); " l * i j foon
faon. A few animadvei fions upon your conduct, or a brief recital of two or three of the charming anecdotes that have reached my father's ears refpecting you, are not things of fach conféquence as to confound, or abaffa a man of fo much intrepidity. They are rather cal¬ culated to excite your vanity, as fo many proofs of your gallantry and fpirit." <c Et ttt 9 Brute ľ' cried Eltham reproach¬ fully, f ' upon my foul, this is not fair! Be content, my gentle Coz, with the in¬ human mortifications I have already en- durcd, and rather feek to re-cftabliih, than to fink me yet lower, in your friend's good opinion." Then turning to Ciarentine, after a fliort pau fe, ζζ Will Mifs Delmington/ 5 laid he fmiling, ζζ permit me to aik what ihe conceives to be the actual meditations of the gentleman now ftanding at that fartheft window ? Ilis eyes feem to have found a pleafant refting place, but where may his rbwghts be wandering ?" Ciarentine, ftarting at this fpeech, idifed her head, and looked towards the fpot hc had alluded to. There flie beheld Sir Edgai Delmington, leaning over the * back
back ofa chair, and ftedfaftly obferving her with a ilern and angry countenance; whilft Sophia, unconfeious of the total difregard with which he heard her, was gaily repeating the converfation that had juft palfed between Lord Welwyn and Ciarentine. Shocked, and aftonifhed, at being made an object of fuch gloomy contem- plation, Ciarentine inftantly arofe, and haftening towards him with the moil anxi¬ ous folicitude, beiought him to tell her what was the matter; why hc looked fo difturbed; and why» when every onè elfe j> ' j was engaged in converfation, and feemed chearful and happy, bc alone preferved an air of fuch thoughtfulncis and difcon- tent ? " You are not offended with an}' body, dear Edgar?" continued ihe, tc are your" 4; О ratified, and ioothed by the kind¬ nefs of her enquiries, yet aihamed of ac¬ knowledging the ical caufe of his unea- fineis, Sir Edgar's countenance imme¬ diately aifumed a gentler cxpieiiion, and with a fori of fai ious fmile, he anfwered, ťí \ T o, in) deareft Ciarentine, not now» ^ ou lune reftored me to good-humour." L 2 « But
^ Buí what," cried ilie, looking ear« neftly at him, " originally difturbed you? Without anfwering this queftion, he extended to her his hand with an air, that feemed to folicit her forgivenefs, but upon her reproachfully rcfufingto accept it, affecìed an appearance of careiefs in¬ difference, and leaving her with Sophia, walked up to Lord Wclwyn, and the other gentlemen. Ciarentine looked after him as he crof- fed the room, and fhrugging her fhoul- dcrs, exclaimed, 6; You have a itrange brotlier, my poor Sophia ! He really be¬ comes, more umcafonablo and more irri¬ table every day ! It is impoffible to de¬ pend upon him a moment, for whether grave or gay, his mirth and his fadnefs feem equally to refult from whim and ca- pnce í у* 1 cannot difpute it," faid Sophia, 46 though 1 mult honeftly confefs I un¬ derftood not one word that either^ of vou uttered. How came you to know he was angry ? I did not even fufpeci it." ς · You did not look at him then," faid Ciarentine. " No,
u No, î was too bufily engaged in telling my own ftory, to watch, very nar« rowly, every change oí his countenance Befides, I always think it time enough to know that people are angry when they tell mc fa, and never take pains to find it out by their looks. What they Jay is all that concerns mc; what they think it is faldom worth our while to inveftigate/' Ciarentine agreed to the truth of this, bui to account for her too-apparent readi¬ nefs in making fach difcoveries, repeated to her Mr. Elthan/s farcaftic obfervation^ as having firft directed her attention to¬ wards Sir Edgar ; and ended, by declar¬ ing with fame warmth, that ihe was fin¬ cerely rejoiced at the profpect ihe had of quitting Delmington for a ihort time, fince, whilft Mrs Harrington refided there, and Edgar was fo inexplicably gloomy, and unlike his former felf, flic had loft all hope of enjoying any degree of happinefs or comfort. Before Sophia, who feemed much hurt by this fpeech, had time to anfwer it, Lady Julia fant Mr. Lltham to fummon them both to the card table. Ciarentine, very little ufed to playing, and at all times parti» L 3 čuku ly
Lu-ly averle to it, immediately excufed herfelf upon the plea of ignorance, and entreated Sophia, who was rifing, to fol¬ low Mr. Eltham, to apologize to Lady Julia for her. As loon as they were gone, taking up a candle that was placed near the door, flic itole unperceived out of the room, and knowing perfectly the difpofition of every apartment in the houfe, haftened down to the library. Theie, faating herfclf at the lidde, fhe fe levied from a number of books which were fcattered over it the charming poem, entitled u the Pleafares of Memory," and foon forgot, in the de¬ light with which íhe perufed it, the mo¬ mentary chagrin fhe had experienced. From this interefting employment flie was prefently difturbed by the found of approaching footfteps in the adjoining loom; ihe liftened attentively, when, tqually to her furprife and vexation, the door was iuddenly thrown open, and Mr. Eltham appeared. Affecting an air of aftoniihment as he approached her, " Good God, Mifs Del¬ mington/' exclaimed hc, " how long Lave you been here? I left every body iu
in the drawing-room wondering at your abfencc, and in pain for you left you ihould be ill." 4e It is time then," faid Ciarentine, who from the moment of his entrance had rifen, and now advanced towards the door, " I fliould, by returning, put au end to their conjectures." Firft," cried hc, attempting to take her hand, Éí tell me you forgive this intrufion, 'and fliew me what book you were read- ing u You will find it upon the table,"* faid ihe, again advancing forward, tfi and as you do not play this evening, 1 would recommend it to your perufald' 54 But flay with me then, Mifs Del¬ mington," cried he, 6i and whilft they are all fo earneftly engaged above, let us read it together." ii What ? and leave every body in fuch pain about my health?" cried Cia¬ rentine fmiling ; Cí О no, Mr. Eltham, you cannot wiih it, I am fare." So faying, as he had no farther pre¬ tence to withhold her, flie immediately left the room, and foon found herfclf L 4 beyond*
beyond his reach, and quietly fisated by the fide of Lady Julia. To the numerous queftions that were now afked her, concerning her fudden difappearance, ilie made fuch flight an» fwers, as in a very ihort time prevented further enquiries; and finding foon after that Eltham, who was already returned, and it was plain had merely left the room in purfuit oí her, fat the only difengaged perfon prefent except herfelf, and anxi¬ oufly fought to draw her into converfa· tiouj fhe determined, in order to free herfelf from his attentions, to propofe playing alfo, when it would be impoffi¬ ble for him to attach himfelf to her, more particularly than to any one elfe. For this purpofe, at the beginning of a new deal, ihe begged Harriet and So¬ phia would make room for her between them, and rc uicflcd permiffion tojóin in the game. Clad to encreafe their num¬ ber, as at what they were playing, they were at liberty to admit as many as they thofe, they immediately confented, and accordingly fhe took her place, fully re¬ folved not to quit it till the whole party broke up, Eltham,
Eltham, by this manoeuvre, left totally to his own inventions, and but ill-fkillcd apparently in the happy art of abltraCl¬ ing his thoughts in a large company from furrounding objects, to direct them folely towards fuch points as were likely to af¬ ford him amufement from within, foon grew weary of the comparative folitude of his fituation, and once more abruptly rifing, went back to the library, where he remained till Lady Dclmington's carriage drove to the door. Haftily pairing Lady Julia, whom on his return to the drawing-room he met going down flairs, conducted by Sir Ed¬ gar, be advanced eagerly towards Cia¬ rentine, and aflifting her in putting on her cloak, took her hand, and leading her forward, faid, cf Well, Mifs Delmington, 1 have been looking into the charming poem you recommended to me, and am extremely plcafcd with it. If, as 1 ima¬ gine, you have not yet concluded it, 1 will do m\ felf the honour of bringing it to you to-morrow morning.'' ťí I beg you would not give yourfelf fa much trouble, Sir," faid Ciarentine, E 5 a Lady
í£ Lady Julia ».ill perhaps fend for it her« felf, and then— " My clear Madam," interrupted he laughing, 4C it were vain for you to at» tempt oppofing myintruflon at your houfe, fince, independent of the pleafure I ihali have in paying my refpecìs to Lady Del¬ mington and yourfelf, î have yet ano¬ ther apology for my viiits, in the perfon oí í ady Julia, to whom my near rela- tionfliip entitles me, in fome meafure, to become an occaiional tormentor as long as my refidence in her vicinity admits it, You find, the ic fore, that your cafe is def- peratc. Aim уош felf then with patience «nd réfignation.'* Then putting her into the carriage, and billing her good-night, he made a gene- idl bow to the reft of the party, and ran ha f к into the houfe« During their ride home, Ciarentine, ->ho could not forbear laughing at the v pilaiity of his lait fpeech, repeated it to Lad) Julia, and at the fame time gave ht. ι iomc account of what had paffed be» ľ.Kiithun in the library. This recital ut once explained to them all his reafon foi ufafim' to play; and led them after- wards
wards, in a ftrain of good-humoured raillery, to congratulate Ciarentine upon the conqucft fhe had made. i£ A conqueftj however," cried Sophia, 4e not to be very confidently relied upon, I fear, if Lord Wclwyn's report, at leaft, is to be credited. I am really forry for it; his vivacity delights me, and I fliould bc extremely plcafed with fach a relation. Try whether you cannot i\x him, Ciaren¬ tine; it would be laying us all under the higheft obligations; for, if he itaid in the country, how enchantingly would he en¬ liven our winter parties !" u With fuch favourable difpofitions to¬ wards him/' anfwered Ciarentine, " you are more likely than any other to fuc- ceed yourfelf. By all means therefore, let me advife you to make the experi - ment." (i О- me ? why, my dear girl, he paid me no more attention than if í had not been in the room, and fcarcely looked at me the whole day." " So much the better/* faid Ciarentine, ** you may conclude therefore that his neglect was accidental, and arofe rather L 6 f r otu
. 'om his own want of penetration than /our want of attraclions." l{ Very true," cried Sophia, affecting great fatisfaciion at this encouraging fpeech, 4C ï did not think of that before. Vou are a clever girl, Ciarentine; and I give you infinite credit for the juftice of flie remark. To-morrow then, if this un- courteous knight defigns to honour os with a vint, I may hope, (you abfent however, and m/jif fet off, to the belt advantage) . ^ m di ? a grener impreffion upon him !— aye. tl;a; will do extremely well : and I fhall be a.m -ft as well pleafed as if any other ha;d won the dav." Thus did this light-hearted and happy girl run on till the carriage flopped, when bidding her companions compofe their countenances, that Mrs. Harrington might not be flu)c ked by too great an appear- awe of gaiety, they alighted, and gravely pi о veedvd towards the fupper room. L idy Delmington, who was reading idonei u hen tbey entered, received them with, her ac, uíiomcd cordiality and kind¬ nefs; but Mrs. Harrington, an adept in the illiberal ги of miflonftruing appear- ¿mces, iníta'ith obferving* notwithftand. 6 ing
ing her endeavours to conceal it, an un¬ common tendency to riiibility in Sophia's face, drily remarked as foon a. they fat down, that fhe was glad to perceive their concern for thofe they had left at home did not feem at all to have affected their fpirits, at leaft, if fhe might judge by the happy unconcern that ih owed itfelf in their countenances. " Dear ma'am," faid Sophia giddily, €fi î am fure that did not contribute to enliven us; I dare fay we none of us ever thought of the matter. I hope how¬ ever," added fhe, " you find yourfelf better this evening?" Though uttered haftily, without rc* flection, and without defign, this unfor¬ tunate fpeech put the finifhing ftrokc to poor Sophia's difgrace. Mrs. Harring¬ ton's rcmonftrances upon it were pointed and fevere; even Ciarentine and Harriet were not exempted from her difplcafure: but, though the) r had both obferved the ftricleft filence from the moment of tht ir entrance, found themfelves unexpectedly involved in it,merely for hadım omutcd. when they came, in, the ceremonious ami infignilicant etiquette of enquiring how file
ili c did before they ventured to feat them* felvés. So long, and fo tedious were her re¬ proaches upon this fubjeft, that Lady julia ? utterly unaccuilomed to fuch lec¬ tures, and wearied beyond meafure at its duran ^ ning for her woman before it was Ik , over, and curtfying in filence to Lady Delmington, haftened to her own room« Not daring to follow her example, the jil-fated trio, now oppreflfed and 1 fad« dened, fat down to fupper as foon as íhe was gone, and though all appetite was loft, and to eat was out of the queftion, preferved a tolerable good countenance till the cloth was removed, and they were releafed by the welcome found of the great houfe clock, which at length ftruck the hour at which they were wont to retire,
С ÏI А У.
CHAP, IV. THE next morning, Ciarentine, by no means thinking herfclf under any obliga¬ tion to remain at home on Mr« Eltbam's account, and feeling indeed far from anxious to appropriate to herfelf any part of the honour his vifit might be in¬ tended to confer, walked to Mont- Repos as foon as breakfaft was over, to enquire whether the Chcvalier de Valcour was re¬ turned, and what had been the fuccefs of his expedition. He met her at the door with his hat on, upon the very point of letting out for Delmington himfelf. They both en¬ tered the parlour together, where, in pré¬ fence of Madame d'Arzele, he gave her the detail for which ihe w r as fa anxious. In the firft place he told her, that, at the diftance of about half a mile from Sidmouth, he had difcovcred a farm- houfe very pleafantly fituated, in which were two ready-furniihed bed-chambers and a parlour, that might immediately be hired upon the moil reafonable terms (including
{including the ufe of the kitchen) eithci by the week or month, which ever faited beft He next informed ber that the lit- de fupply for which Mada uie d'Arzele iad waited, ar*'\ d the preceding even- Ing, and that con^qufntly, nothing now •cmaincd but for Ciarentine to fix the ime when it would be moft convenient Tor her to let out, a О let it not reft upon that," cried lie earneftly, α my time is Madame i'Arzclc's. Whenever, therefore, her iear little girl is able to bear the remo¬ val, î am at her command." u Then my beft Ciarentine," faid that tady 2 u as I am now extremely anxious to avoid all further delay, we will begin our journey, if you pleafe, the day after to mor» row. The Chcvalier will fee us fafe to our place of deftination; and then returns to fpend the period of my abfence at Lord Wclwyn's, who, this morning, fent him the moft preffing and cordial invitation to that purpofe. My femme de chambre will go with us ; the other maid remains here to take care of the houfe," This point being fettled, Ciarentine embraced die three children^ and bidding Madame
Madame d'Arzele an affectionate farewel, left the houfe, and cfaorted by the Che¬ valier, directed her fteps homewards. As their road lay directly between Welwyn Park and Delmington, it ap¬ peared extremely probable to Ciarentine that either in his way to, or from the laft- mentioned place, ihe might meet Mr, Eltham. Neither anxious, however, to avoid fuch a meeting, nor to promote it, fhe walked quietly on, preparing herfclf to expect it, yet perfectly indifferent whe¬ ther it took place or not. In this difpofition of mind, fhe reached home wdthout any moleftation, fecretly congratulating herfelf upon that, which, notwithftanding all her philofophy, fhe could not help regarding as an efcape; and followed by the Chevalier, joined the ufual party in the great parlour. She had fcarcely had time to deliver Madame d'Arzele's compliments, and apologies for not calling beíoic ihe went, and to announce to Lady Delmington the plan that had been agreed upon, when the door opened, and Mr. Eltham was an¬ nounced. lie
He was accompanied by Sir Edgar r who came, he faid, to beg his room might be prepared for him to fleep in the fol¬ lowing night, as, the next day, he was going with Mr. Eltham to dine at a gen¬ tleman's houfe in the neighbourhood, at which he expeBcd to be detained fo late, that, fearful of difturbing Lord Welwyn by returning at fuch an hour, he meant not to go back to his houfe till the morn¬ ing after, (ζ A very prudent plan indeed!" cried- I ady Delmington, " and why, my dear 3£dgar, fliould you confent to ftay fo late?" £f O, the nights are very light now,** cried Eltham, ci and ľll engage, fhould Sir Edgar find himfelf at all embarraffed, to guide him home in perfeít fafety." * c Why you don't propofe to fleep here too ?" faid Lady Julia, i{ do you ?" # fit Certainly not," anfwered he, " I have not the preíumption to imagine I ihould be admitted : but to quiet Lady Delminjg- ton's apprehcnhons, 1 would gladly efcort „мг Edgar hither, even at the rifle of being fhut out of my own refting-place." fi£ And*
%t And, where, may I afle, will be your refting-place, Sir ?" faid Lady Delmington fmiling. tc Ki the inn at Lyfton, Madam,'* an· fwered he. 16 Why then Edgar," refumed her Lady¬ ihip, Ci I think tbat had better be yours alfa. I am not at all more defirous of having my houfe difluí bed in the middle of the night than Loi d Welwyn carı be; and fince you both feem difpofed to con¬ form to the fame hours, you may furely both conform to the fame accommoda¬ tions." " Alas! Madam," cried Eltham, " I fear, reafonable as this plan is, it cannot be put in execution. My hopes of fecur- ing a bed for myfelf were at one time fa forlorn, that I was very near coming to fupplicate for one here, as well as Sir Ed¬ gar. I ihould have had Lady Julias, in¬ tereft, I am fure ; and was per fuaded I might rely upon her feconding my petition rooft earncflly." Lady Julia fliook ber head, and laughed, but made no anfwer; and -Sir Edgar ad- dreffing his mother, faid, " What Mi. Eltham tells you ? madam, is really the caie
cafe. We have been to Lyñon this very morning; but found the town fo amaz¬ ingly filled^ owing to the fair, which is now held thercj that it was impoffible ίο pro¬ cure morc than one bed." " Weil then," faid Lady Delmington, " your room Πι all be prepared: but 1 hope, my dear Edgar ş you will not make it a practice to keep fuch intolerable hours, for they are extremely difagrcc- able to me," u Blame Mr» Eltham, madam/' cried Lady Julia ? 6i fince 1 have not any doubt but that it was he who fed need Sir Edgar into forming this horrid engagement. Confefs the truth honeilly," continued íhe, áé and tell us whether it is not fo ?" Eltham was beginning an anfwer, when fhe entrance of Mrs. Harrington, whom be had never before feen, put a flop to it · I nd going round to Ciarentine, who fat 4 work at a little table near the window, æ leaned over the back of her chair, and iid in a low voice 4; Who is that petri- » ing memento oí' mortality ? that fearful eprefentative of every evil propenfity onccntcreJ :'* Ciarentine
Ciarentine ftarted, and afked whom he meant? " O, truft me, ,; cried he, 5í I don't know her name, and I almoft wonder I ihould ivifh to know it: but tell me, the antique perfonage who juft came in—who is ihe ?" Sá Do you wifli to be introduced to her?" 4i If that is a neceffary ceremony, ye5 5 certainly. I wiih to be well with every member of this family." Ciarentine then beckoned to Sophia, and in the fame low voice faid, u Mr. Eltham w i flics to bc prefented to Mrs«, Harrington, will you undertake the of¬ fice Г 4& With all my heart," anfwercd So¬ phia, " í have an excellent memory, and remember the whole of what Lord Wel¬ wyn laid yefterday upon a finiilar occa¬ fion, not one word of which I will omit." c; Oh, the D— II м exclaimed Eltham«, ¿í you'll ruin me! 'kalk of prodigality and diflîpation to fuch a ftem old lady as that? You'll undo me ľ' ct Surely/' faid 4 'ophia, ;i you cannot expect me to be more lenient than your uncle !"
^ And why not? ÎS cried he Iaughìng f Së Lord Welwyn himfelf believed not one word he uttered ; he faw I was captivated by the fight of fo much beauty; 1 ' bowing to them both, u and fearful of the con¬ féquences, defcribed me in fuch uncha¬ ritable terms merely to preferve you from being too much fafcinatcd by my extraor¬ dinary merit/' " Lord Welwyn was very good," faid Sophia, íé but really I don't think we were in any danger." " Ah, believe me, you deceive your- felves. 1 never met wit 1 a woman y€t^ (fuch only as that good lady," looking at Mrs. Harrington, " excepted) who did not think me irrcfiftible ľ' « Cr, at leaft," faid Sophia drily, a the quinteffence of modefly Γ çc Aye," cried he, cf that is one of my principal excellencies. I carry it even to an excefs, and am accu fed by many people of abfolute bafhfulnejs. But/' con¬ tinued he, " if I am not mi Haken i had beft depart, for your friend there,'* again looking at Mrs. Harrington, ίς iccms to regard me uith no friendly afpect. It ik aftoniflnng how all theie ancient ladies tremble,
to a pretty v/oman !" So faying, he looked round for his hat, and was upon the point of taking leave, when Lady Julia called him back. « Mr. Eltham/* cried ihe findings €t wdll you undertake to obtain rny fa¬ ther's leave for me to go to Lyfton fair this evening ? Tell him Lady Delming¬ ton has given her daughters permiflion to go with Sir Edgar, and intreat him to allow me to accompany them.'* Eltham promifed to perform this com« miffion, and bowing icfpeclfully to Lady Delmington, took Sir Edgar under the arm, and left the room. The Chevalier rofe at the fame time, and followed diem out. " Who is that bold looking young man?" faid Mrs. Harrington, the moment he was gone. ťí My coufin, Madam/' anfwered Lady julia gravely. Mi*. Harrington, a little difconccrted, changed the fubject, and foon after, tel¬ ling Lady Delmington fhe wifhcd to ípeak to her, they went together into another loom. On
On their return, a long contention en- fucd between Mrs. Harrington, Harriet, and Sophia^ concerning the projected party to Lyfton. Not chu fing to attack Lady Julia upon that fubjeft, yet ex¬ tremely averie to the fcheme's taking place, ihe had called Lady Delmington out of the room for the fole purpofe of urging her to counteract it; her Ladyihip having given her pofitive fa n Шоп to it, however, faid ihe could not now recall il; bitt contented herfelf with promifing, at Mrs Harrington's carneft perfuafion, to oppofe С larentine's going with them. it was on this prohibition's being pro¬ nounced, the two fifters, but Sophia in particular, gaining courage from her mo¬ ther's paffi\e filenee, ventured to plead warmly in Clarentine's behalf; Lady Ju¬ lia alfo joined to theirs her own entrea¬ ties, but m vain. Mrs. Harrington faid, it might he very proper for her Ladyihip, who was related to Mr. Eltham, and the two Mils Dchningtous, who would he accompanied by their brother, to engage in fuch an expedition: but, thai for Cki- ren'ine, as diete wa* wo married lady with tlum. as Mi. Eltham was almoil a Uranger to
ίο her, and Sir Edgar by no means an eligible guardian for her, ihe thought ir. would be highly blameablc in Lady Del¬ mington to fuffer her to go. Clarcmine, though flie was by no means the dupe of this a fleeted tendernefs far ber reputation, was at once too gentle, and too rational, to think it woith while to enter into any argument upon the fub¬ jeft; but thanking Lady Julia, and her two confins, for their kindnefs in wi ili ing her to be of their party, faid ihe fliould return to Mon t-Repos before the gentle men came back, that no quei! ions might be afked, and fpend the evening quietly with Madame cľArzele. Lady Delmington, upon this, give lier a look of aíícüionate approbation - dnd Mrs. ilairington, with an air of tri¬ umph, told her ihe could not do better, A little before fix, the two gentlemen arrived on horfeback, attended by a fer¬ vant driving Lord Wclwyn's fociabk^ which had been fent for the accommoda¬ tion of the young ladies» Sophia, the 1 nilani they reached the door, ran out to Ivy they were all ready; and the next v ^ '-· 1. M minute.
minute, Lady Julia, Harriet, and the lif¬ tle Emma appeared. Eltham, as he handed them ¡n^ whilft. Sir Edgar was talking at the window to his mother, enquired eageriy after Cia¬ rentine, She had been gone near half an hour : but Lady Julia thinking it beft to prevent the exclamations this intelli¬ gence \\ould give rife to, till they were beyond the hearing of Mrs. Harrington, afte 8 ed for fome time not to hear him; and at length, on being ur^ed with re¬ doubled earneftnefs. carelefsly anfwered, fit ihe is gone on before, but v, e may per¬ haps overtake her at the end of the ave- nue. Drive on, Francis," fpeaking to the fervant« 6t> No, no. flop!" exclaimed Eltham, ^ \ ou deceive u v , Lady Julia. Had fhe been in the avenue we fliould have met her а о we rode up. Where is fhe ? You cannot poílibly mean to fet ofl' with out her Y' u I afliire you," cried î ady Julia, ra¬ ther impatiently, " flic is not in the houfe. Suffer us to go oii; and I will tell you moie/' k kb a m
γ Eltham reluctantly acquiefced, and bc fore Sir Edgar had fini fh ed his converfa¬ tion, or had had leifure to remark that Ciarentine was not of their party, the car¬ riage moved on. The firft moment Lady Julia feemed difpofed to liften to him, Eltham renewed his interrogations. « Why fa much myftery upon this fubject?" cried he, " why were you fa averfc to anfwering me fooner?'' ¿£ Becaufe," replied Lady Julia, 6i be¬ fore Mrs. Harrington, who was obferv· ing u< from the windows, it would have been highly impiuper, fince as it was ihe who prevented Clarentine's going with us, your animadveriions would have ex- ufperated her extremely." This aceount brought on an innumer¬ able train of further inquiries, as well ÍVoiľi Mr. Eltham, as Sir Ed^ar, whofe aftoniihment at fuch an act of authority could only be exceeded by his concern far the uniupported Ciarentine, and lu\ indignation againft ihe arbitran' proceed¬ ings of Mrs, Harrington. éí Buteily ílull we all iu\ e caule io lanurn," cri.d he, " the hour ihat firft ^ í 2 introduced
:niroduccd that woman into our family! v rom its having been one of the moft united and happy upon earth, flie will lender it the moft turbulent and wretch¬ ed ; my mother fuíľcrs herfelf to bc made her tool, and ever at variance with fome individual or other amongft us¿ nothing in future can he expecled but an inccifant repetition of paltry wranglings in public, or of determined Iţrauny in private." u W ell, my dear Edgar," cried Sophia, furprifed at the unufual acrimony with which hc fpoke, iv however true all this may bc, vou have left reafon to complain than any of us, fince, rarely as you arc now at home, your fufferings muft bc trifling indeed compared to ours." 6; Ah ľ' thought Edgar, " neither is it for mvfelf I feel ! My concern is wholly lor the deidieelvft, and too fubmiffivc Lİaıcmhıe, who being the chief object againft whom all Mrs, Harrington's malice is 1 v veiled, muil, confequently, he hald· to far greater mortifications than any one clic ľ* Dìiìidhng to him as was tins idea, he fírutel) ι allicci fpirits fufficient to fpeak л g vi n during the w hole evening. Eltham and б Sophia
Sophia occaíioiiallv addreiied caíh other, and attempted to animate the converfa¬ tion, but unaííiíted as they were, their endeavours failed; and this, as moil other conceited parties of plea /иге do, ended in laifitude, iniipidity, and difappoiiumcnt. As they were returning, a icheme oc¬ curred to Eltham which was unanimouíly ayreed to, the moment he mentioned it. This was, to call, in their way to Del¬ mington, at Mont-Repos^ and there to take up Ciarentine, and carry her on with them Sir Edgar was fo revived by this propofai, which the unplcafant train of reflections he had been thrown into had effectually prevented his thinking of, that he no fooner heard it ílarted, than, gal¬ loping forward, without itoppinq to utter a iingie word, he left thi m to prépaie Ciarentine for their approach. Ou his entrance into the ыот w hei с ili с vas fitting, he íoimd her alone, and to hi> inexpreflible aítoniílimenu piaüií- 1пд upon the harp а verv bıauîifuî com- pídiíKui, which (атош; many cih, rs Мп- damvd'Ai/vlv had piivately iau';ht ha in the cou ríe oí the \\ inter) ílu Lui lately begun Ivaniin^, líe paufed α moment «ι Λί J tb:
the door, in filent amazement; and then eagerly advancing, at the very time fhe firft looked up and perceived him, he exclaimed, 6i My deareft Ciarentine! how do î honour that aclivity of mind, which thus leads you, though in fecrecy and filence, to cultivate thofe talents you are endowed with. Well might you, who fo well know how to employ every hour, he reiigned to the harfli prohibition you received : but tell me, how are we to ac¬ quire equal fubmiffion ? You know not with what fincerity we have lamented a deprivation we had fo little reafon to ex¬ pect" Ciarentine, though furprized at the earneftnefs of this addrefs i chofe not to difclaim the compliment it conveyed, well knowing that was always looked upon as a challenge to continue in the fame ftrain. She therefore, with her accuftomed mo- deft fimplicity, anfwered, <ς You were all very good to think fo much about me, and I can affure you I was extremely concerned myielf not to be of your party. But pray Edgar, where have you left Lady Julia and your fifters? What biings vou here alone?" Sii
Sir Edgar had fcarcely time to acquaint her with the motive of her vifit, before Etham, Lady Julia, and her companions appeared. The buftle their arrival occa¬ fioned foon brought down Madame d'Arzele from her nurfery; and then be¬ ing extremely picffed to fit down a few minutes, Lady Julia, fent home the fo- ciabky every body declaring with one voice that as the evening was fa beautiful, it would be much pleafanter to walk than ride the remainder of the way. Chairs being now placed round the table, the three ladies, who lait came in, produced, to the great amufement of the whole company, a number of little toys they had purchafcd as fairings for Madame d'Arzele's children. Then turn¬ ing to Ciarentine, Lady Julia with a fmile faid, as ilie prcfcnted to her a fmall iilvcr anchor, " This, my dear girl, is the only thing I could meet with that feemed to me to be fo well adapted to you. Know¬ ing your palfion far faiiors, 1 thought an anchor, as well becaufe it is the emblem of hope, as the representative of that, on which depends the fafvty of your fa- M 4 v o urite s,
voiiritcs, might appear of fame value to you. Tell me, did I judge right?" íŕ Yes, pcrfedly," anfwered Claren- tine, receiving it with a grateful fmile; ίζ you could not have beftowed upon me any thing, which, far the reafons you mention, i ihould have thought more precious. In remembrance of you, and of Mi. Somerfet, for whofe fake chiefly I am fa partial to faiiors., I will prefcrvc it molt carefully/' i£ Oh, how do I lament/' cried Sophia, u fince imagination can give fo much to whatever reminds us in the remoteft degree of an abfent friend, my ftupidity in not looking out for fomething tha„ might, during your ftay at Sidmouth, have brought to your recollefìion the inhabi¬ tants of Delmington. A whirligigs for in¬ ftance, could never have failed having that effefct with regard to Edgar, and— ts How/' interrupted Lady Julia, i; a *:httL-ji's ! and why fo V 1 " Blefs me ! don't you know ? Why Lcfaar, as Ciarentine has juftly remarked, has a mutability of difpofition, and an uncertainty of temper that cannot be fo properly
properly reprefented by any other fyub bol." Ciarentine looking up at that moment, and obferving in Sir Edgar's countenance, notwithftanding the faint attempt lie mad·* to fmile, an cxpieiiion of embarra ifmciu and confeioufnefs, inftantly liar ted a new fubjeci, and gave a different tiu n to the converfation. Having fat wiih Madame d'Arzele about half an hour, and beim', frai ful of exciting Mrs. Hairington's ever ready ceníme by a longer (lav, they uov* «dl rofe to depart. Lady julia and the t" о Mils Delminfftons took a veiv affectionate О j leave of Madame d'Arzele; the former entreated fhe might often hear from her, and repeatedly urged her to make her abfence as fliort as poftible. Tht n leav¬ ing a thouiand kind iucifa<u\s for th-" childivn, íhe led the way and hnnkd ,ί,,,,,,, /t .:. ,-, \UMU1 Itili i Ь. in the entrance ibev were aceoíled bv the Cheyaher, \\\\o having ipent the evening with Lord Welw\ n, \sas juft re¬ turned, lie infilled upon t feorting the ladies home, though already ib well at- Mj tended;
tended; and accordingly fet out with them. ĽK ' ling themfelves into fcparate par- ties, each of the gentlemen, either accord¬ ing to inclination or necefiity, attached himfelf to a different lady. Sir Edgar, wholly influenced in his choice, by the latter motive, walked by the fide of Lady ¡ulia, who, at intcrvaL*, with much dif* íiculiy, ílarted a momentary converfation; but more generally, fuffered him quietly to indulge the taciturn gravity, into which he had once more relapfed. Immediate« ¡γ behind them followed Ciarentine and Eltham, the direcl contrails of their two leaders; all the converfation between them, proceeding from the gentleman, and all the defire of filence from the lady. Harriet and Emma, both fpirit- lefb and fatigued, walked near them ; and laft of all, came Sophia, who with un- abated animation was gaily flirting with the Chevalier, and feemed to be the only one prek nt* that was, perfectly fatisfted with the partner who had fallen to her lot. Herfclf excepted therefore, nobody appealed, vdun Lt length, the moment of feparating
feparating drew near, to lament it. The gentlemen, after feeing them to the end of the avenue, turned back, and left their companions, trembling at the idea of meeting Mrs. Harrington, (for it was now near ten o'clock) to frame the beft exeufes they could for the length of their abfence, Though in her expreffions of open dif- approbation, that lady, when they ap¬ peared, was not fo feverc as ihe had been the preceding night, yet her reception of them, upon the whole, was very little pleafanter: that ihe did not indeed break out into abfolute reproaches, could alone be attributed to the expectation fhe had, that Lady Delmington would do it her¬ felf, on account of little Emma, whofe ufual hour of going to reft being now catifiderably paft, had confequently ren¬ dered her extremely uneafy at their de¬ lay. Lady Julia, anxious to fave her friends, took the whole blame upon herfelf, the moment Lady Delmington's mild, but ferious, rebuke began. She iaid nothing of their vifit to Mont-Repos, leaving it to be fuppofed, they met with Ciarentine, Μ β bv
by accident : but accufcd herfclf of hav¬ ing been the fole caufe of detaining them fo long at Lyfton, and interceded moil earncflly for a general pardon. Such a pleader, even Mrs, Harrington chofe not to with iland. All anger there¬ fore was foon forgotten, and an un¬ wonted degree of fercnity and chearful- nefs prevailed during the remainder of ihe evening»
С Ιϊ Л Р. VL TílE following day, till near dinner time, Ciarentine was bufily employed in picparing far her jouincy. that ihe might be Rady the next morning, when Ma¬ dame d'Arzclc, who nuiil neceifarily drive pail the door, called to take her up. As this occupation, therefore, had kept her in her own room fo many hours, Lady Julia, who was defirous of having a little quiet converfation with her before íhe wentj
went, took the firft opportunity, after they arofe from table, of propofing to her a fliort walk in the garden. Claren« tine willingly agreed to it, and they quit¬ ted the room together. The extreme heat of the weather, how¬ ever, foon drove them in, and compel¬ led them once more to return to the parlour; where whilft flarnet read aloud, the reft fat down to work, or draw, near the window 7 . The clock had juft ftruck tcn^ and tncy were upon the point of fitting down to fupper, when a tremendous clap of thun¬ der, preceded by feveral vivid flafhes of lightning, ffartled the whole рану, and almoft ihook the gothic manfion to its foundation. Lady Delmington, though the uncommon fultnncfs of the day had taught lur to expect it, was filled, not- wnhitanding, wiih c onílernation and ler¬ ror, whin flic reíledíd upon the danger io which her fon might be cxpolcd, ic- í tuning through a wood}· country on horfeback, in the midft oí fuch a ii orm. Eor near thbv hours, during which it continued at intervals lo ì.'ge with un¬ abated violente, neither Lady Delming¬ ton
ton nor her two daughters, quitted the parlour. Ciarentine would gladly have remained with them, but her aunt, appre¬ hending that if Emma awoke ihe would be frightened, begged ftie would go up, and fit with her. Lady Julia fallowed, and for fome time continued with her; but at length, growing extremely ileepy, and not being infected with any fears her¬ fclf, íhe bade her good night, and re¬ tired to her own room. It was near two o'clock before Sir Edgar came home; he feemed extremely furprifed to find his mother and fifters up at fach an hour; but when he heard the caufe, though he derided their alarm, he alfo thanked them for their anxiety, and befought them earneftly not to remain below a moment longer I ady Delming- ÍOÍI5 fatigued and harrafted as flie was, in mind, as well as body, readily fallowed his advice, and rejoicing in his fafety, called to her daughters, and left the room. Harriet immediately joined her: but juft as Sophia leached the door, her brother brought her back by a motion of his head, and leading her to the table, faid— " Sophia^
" Sophia, i am the happieft felloe upon earth î Behold/' taking out his purfe, and fhaking it as he fpoke, " what propitious Fortune has fent me. I have been play¬ ing to-night, and in lefs than two hoars, won near an hundred guineas ! to-mor¬ row ï redeem my watch, my books, and every thing I had parted with/' &Ğ A very honourable method/' faid So¬ phia, dril}', u of acquiring money far fuch a purpofe!" " Nay, do not chide mc," cried he; " ï refilled playing, till being the o.dy one that fat out, I could re lift no long», r. Some guardian angel, at length, prompted me to the deed—»fame ble fled fpirit, that faw, and pitied my diftrefs!" " I ihould have thought," cried Sophia, α that angels and fpirits had been wifer ! This lowers my opinion of their under¬ ftanding extremely; í am glad, however, far your fake, they have fo little biains; and heartily wiih you good night." u Stop one minute, ' cried he, laugh¬ ing, " you muft inform Ciarentine of this event. Why did ihe not in up with you ?" 44 Becaufe
u Becaufe perhaps, flic had a prefetti·* tuent of ali the exti ava gandes íhe might li ear, if She is really gone to bed, then ?" Ê4 I imagine fo; but am not fure." Sir Edgar faid no more, and the next minute Sophia left him. As foon as hc concluded fhe had reached her own room, he cautiouíly di» rcfted his ileps towards the gallery, at the end tď which Ciarentine flept, and certain of not being heard, as no one elfe oc¬ cupied that part of the houfe, knocked at ihe door. Mo anfwer being iciurned, and no found, fave that of the thunder ftill rolling at a diftance, reaching his ears, he began to fear fhe was aftintlly gone to bed. Determined to make one more trial, however, he waited a few minutes, and then knorking again, heard her, at length, in a tone of terror and affı i glu, afk who u as í lie re ? 6£ Xíe," anfwered Edgar—" aie you ♦ bailed г Will you come down - ' žs Come down r' repeated ihe, u at fhb lim^ oí night ľ' u íi i\ not ίο late as you imagine," an« •Vacci he« "I will not detain you five minutes:
minute.,: but I muft fee, I muft fpeak to vou/* ŕí Indeed, Edgar, you cannot—what will your mother fay to me for leaving Em ina ?" βί hemna is aíleep, ib flic not .'* - Vei.." 4i Then you muft come. My mother is in the parlour, and fant me lo call )0U." In any other fituation of mind, Sir Edgar would have ftarted at the bare idea of uttering fuch a falfehood: but his head was not at that time entirely his own. Flufhed with drinking, and elevated with fuccefs, his powers of reflection were totally fufpended, and hc fcarcely felt confcious himfelf of what hc w¿.s do- Ciarentine, in the innocence it her heart, fufpected no deceit, but <t.i\ious it) obey lady Deimingiou\s fupptd^d fum nions, foiih opened her door, and hud file was read\ to follow him. He eageily ieized her extended hand, andas they proceeded, aiked lur, how long fhe had been fitting there alone? t; Not
46 Not fo long, pei haps/' au fwered íhe, €; as the horrors of the night made me fuppofe : but yet a fufficient time to have rendered mc quite chill and comfoit- lefs/' <ς Did you beftow a thought upon we" faid he, " whilft you fat there ? Did you participate in my mothei's appréhenfions for ny fafety ? 'i cil me, deareft Ciaren¬ tine—for your pity, )'£W anxiety would more than récompenfe me far any dan¬ gers ľ' a I often wifiied you were at home," anfwered flie, a ììttìe ftartlcd at the ear¬ neftnefs of his manner, " but did not imagine that to be expofed to any danger of this fort could, far a moment, appal fuch a fpirit as yours/' They had by this time reached the par¬ lour, chicli ( larcnîinc perceiving to be empty« ihrunk back from, and fearfully exi Lume d — u What is it you have done, S:r Edgdi ?—where is Lady Defining- t L д . 4í Бе not alaniìed/' cried he, ftill cu¬ civa \ ou ring to di aw her forward, u indeed you have nothing to apprehend. í have deceived
deceived you, it is true, with regard to my mother's being here ; but when you hear my reafons, 1 am fure you will for¬ give me. Come in then—if, as I faid he« fore, only for five minutes/' " O, no, no, no !" cried ftie," ftruggling to get írom him, α not foran inflt.ntî I would not flay, í would not liflen to you to-night for the world !" " You muft hear me," returned hc, compelling her to advance, u to-moriow you will be gone; this, therefore, is my only time/' Then, ieizing the key of the door, and turning it wdth precipitation in the lock, he drew it out and put it in his pocket, Ciarentine, aghaft at this fight, and looking at him a moment, with mingled aftoniihment and indignation, forcibly hiatchcd awav her hand, and burft into tears. ¿ * Oh! my Ciarentine !'* exclaimed he, dropping on one knee before lier, " w liat is it you fear? Why thi.s di lire fs:* Am ï grown hateful to you ? Am I no longer the hd^av you formerly trailed with fach implicit confidence—you called your bro¬ ther, \our friend ΐ Ohi have \on forgot the
the happy time when mutually pleafed to be together— ,? " O rife, rife, Sir Edgar!" interrupted Ciarentine angrily, " this is not a mo¬ ment to talk to mc in fuch language; neither would you expofe me to the afper- lions this ill timed interview will bring upon me, were you indeed the friend you would Lc thought! Releafe me inftantly tncreforo, or )ou will drive me to defpe- ration !" So fayingj flic fuddcnly difengaged her¬ fclf, and flew towards the bell which flie was going to pull with violence, when he ran to her, again fei zed both her hands» and called out— 44 Forbear, dear Ciarentine, I befeech you, and patiently confent to hear me ; your eflbits to efcape would all be vain, h ne e no one in the houie could hear that bell, wie jou even to rim» it. Its found и aches no further íhan the kitchen, and that ha.s hmg been clefcHed." ** Well, then, Sir," faid Ciarentine, with a dignified calmnefs that totally over¬ awed him, " ibi tii. Uft time, í hope, that î (Lall ever be compelled ίο liften to you again—-fpeak—'' Then
Then moving towaids the table, ihe coldly feated herfclf before it, and lean¬ ing her head upon her hands, prepared to hear him without intciruption. Difconccrted, and irre (biute, he paufed a (c\\* moments, and then drawing the key from lr's pocket, p re fented it to her. and faid— 6i I commit myfelf, dcarcíl Ciarentine, to jour generofity. Take this ke}', and —-if you can have the cruelty, leave ni v this moment ľ* Ciarentine, much foftcned, received h influence, and for fome time u tained it in her hand, without havin« the courage to rile« At length, however, flic w c nt towards the door, and laid— 4ft You muft b с fenfible you riel Г, Sir Edgar, of the impropriei) of a mí etim: fo clandcítino as this, 1 c ann' t ıh н ¡ ne Па у ; but if jou will tell Sopbi» w h t \ cm have to impaii to me, ihev.dL altei í get to Sidniouth, write to—'* " Ciuci, inhuman ςπίί' inunupttd he impetuouflv, k * Is lì :s all \сч will grant me ? Are }ou ddeunined, by living me (o precipitately, to mahe me u'pc"U my folly in giving \ ou tlie pouer r Oh Cldifjunu î
Ciarentine ! ï thought better of the foft¬ nefs of your difpofition, or î had never truiled you with the means of quitting mc, till I had compelled you to hear me!" u Good God !" exclaimed Ciarentine, holding the door half open in her hand, u what is it you would fay lo me ?" " What ï cannot, any longer, perfuadc myielf to conceal; what you muft already, in part, fufpeci; what I am irrevocably determined fhortly to publifli to the whole world!" " Heavens!" exclaimed Ciarentine, trembling, and almoft breathlefs, " what is it vou mean ?" u To confecrate my future life to you," anfwered he, with vehemence, " to pro¬ claim aloud my fervent adoration of you, to reverence, to love, to cherifh yon to mv tatcft breath." 66 ííuíh, for fiiamé, Sír î cried Claren tine, colouring wdth refentment, eí re¬ ferve thefe proteftations for Lady Judia Leyburne !" And then with a look expreflive of all the coniempt fhe felt, fhe would have hurried out of the room. éí Thi.
Edgar, in a voice rendered almoft inar¬ ticulate by his own emotion. α Dear Ciarentine! lovely, yet proud, unmerciful Ciarentine ! I cannot endure fach con¬ temptuous difdain í Talk not to me of Lady Julia Leyburne— -By heaven, I fwear—'* ťí Fie, fie, Sir Edgar !" interrupted Cia¬ rentine, α this is unmanly, di ¿honourable, worthlefs ! Lady Julia, it is no fecret, is deftined to be yours; fhe is amiable, file is good, and, above aH, fhe is my friend! Imagine nor then, 1 will quietly fubnut to the infult you would do m> both, hy pledging your perjured faith to mc, at the very time, (and, with your own confent) your marriage is negotiating with her!—. You wrong us equally—you degrade vour- ielf for ever in my opinion, and make me bluffi to remember the levvrd 1 once falt for you !" 6£ Oh, my Ciarentine, condemn mc not unheard !" ciied he, a;; un withholding her, u the cruelty of my fituation is fuch, as, far a time, to reader diflhuuhufan ah- foluielv necvihny. 1 never ewe any but a tacit confent to tbe union propofed; I never
never attempted to feduce Lady Julia's affection; î have made no promifes; figncd no articles; in fliort, have preferved myfelf as free, as, till I am of age, í have any hopes of being. My mother, had ftie fufpefted my attachment to you, would have removed you from my fight; would, perhaps for ever, have torn you from me ľ' Here, while the door ftood open, the fudden appearance of a light in the hall difmayed the ttembling Ciarentine, who looking towards it, uttered the name of cc Mrs, Harrington/' yith a faint feream, and gafping for breath, caught hold of the back of a chair for fupport. Meanwhile, Sir Edgar, who during the latter part of this converfation had again funk upon his knee before her, abruptly ftarted up, though not in time to efcape the notice of Mrs. Harrington. She now eiiteıcdş pale with rage, her tidl figure wrapt in a long white droíTing-gov.m. and her feeble lamp, fi afhing an unlleady light. at intervals acrofs her face. a I have proof then now," cried flie, л s foon a^ fhe was able to fpeak, in a voice that made poor Ciarentine ihuddcr^ ίβ ocular
£¿ ocular proof of what I have fa long apprehended! Thy arts, vile wretch/' addrcifing Ciarentine, 4i have fully fuc¬ ceeded, and that infatuated boy, feduced by their infernal influence, has fallen into the ibare thou hait prepared for him ! Gq!" continued ihe v furiotdly iiamping as ftie fpoke, u Uo, deceitful by ren ! and never may" I be blafted by thy fight again !" AH the i rafe ible paffions in Edgar's na¬ ture were rouied by this unwomanly at¬ tack* Trembling with indignation; faar¬ lefs of conféquences, and rendered deipc- ratc by oppofition, he iiercely addreiied Mrs» líarnuíJton, and faid—- £i Hy what right, by what authority Madam, do you ufurp the privilege of fpeaking to any of this family in fach op¬ probrious terms? Ciarentine is under my mother's protêt lion, is undt r mi,.e; and neither /».j//, nor d, f' ves to be infulted bv language fo outi\igeou.> !" 6i Giant me patience, heaven!" cried Mrs. Ilairington, \s\\\\ cncrcafing vehe¬ mence ! wC Grant me patience to bear this dauutlef* affurance ! Mad boy ! be blent, and inftantly remove that creature from ìoLt ι* N m\
Ci CLAR Г N Tí N Г, «ny fight, or I will not anfwer for the ex¬ tremities to which my abhorrence of her ma> drive me ľ" Ciarentine, who lo*ig fince had crept towaids the door with a'view of making her efcape, but bad hitherto been pre¬ vented by Sir Edgar, now, in a low and faltering voice, laid, u For mercy, for pit\\> fake! Sir Ľdgar, let me pafs!" , " Fear nothing, my love," с lied he jfndcrly, "are you not with mc r then, w] о will dare mole ft you г* Бе comforted, my own Ciarentine! be leaífuicd) and г! uil me, what I bave fa falcmnly fworn, I never will re traci— the faith 1 have fo voluntarily pledged, I never will recall !" €e Alas l' 5 cried íhe mournfully, *'that faith ï w i fli not to accept—that oath í wiih «ot ihould bc binding ! You have ruined, vou have dcftioyed me ! My reputation is "ont; for evei, and I care not now what becomes ot me, 01 hoy great the ihame ti j Л av, ait s me !" Dutiny this time, Miv, Ilairington, f ndtnç bei power Ь> no means equal to ïhe ufk íhv. liad undertaken, had preci- ííitíiuly b. ft the room, almoil unnoticed by
hy the two miférable beings flic left be» hind her. fež You renounce me then ľ' cried Ed~ gar reproachfully; " now, at the very moment I wiih to make my devotion to you public, \ou coldly, unfeelingly re¬ nounce nv", and rejcu my pioffctcd failli! Oh, Ciarentine í í had a right to expect more ivnfibility from you! î had a light, when willing m\ icM to hazard eveiy thing in order to obtain } ou, to expelí lome formou fi om your own firmnefs i" t; The moment yon have chofaiij Sìr Edgar/' retunud Chuenrinc, ťí to make } ош pai í i ility known to me; the lie ■ that already, in lion >ur, bind you—the o],po¬ fition of your famil) 5 and a th miaud othc ι ıcafoib, aH combine, to determine me at once to put an end to your hopes. Nei« thci lepiouhe^ impfuumiu, mu pwfa- verance, ihadc\ei nû iv w,uii>; uoi ihali any ^ iicum· 1 u , v-, nor any lime, induce me to aí í my leíofatum, íiVcc the lemeinbi une oí lheícuie \ ai fau с im ol vc t me m uin neve r be clhKcd Lom my mındj mu the uitiíice <uul dupìuity ımput'Mİ to me cmï be v.ıpcd un fioni n») LhaKUi.ı ! id,/. e тн /t, titulou, eny - ч « »ittempt
attempt to change your mother's plain deny not your engagement, infult not Lady Julia, nor offend her father; for i bere firmly protei! to you, that were they to-morrow to releafe you; were you pri¬ vileged to-morrow to offer me your hand, after what has paffed, nothing on earth ihould prevail upon me to accept it ! juftify my conduci, as far as it will bear juftification, in this affair: you may do it with truth and honour, and 1 will thank you for the deed : but when that is over, think ofmc no more!'' Sir Edgar, thunderftruckat this fpeech, with an air of mingled pride and for- row, inftantly dropped her hand ; and turning filently from her, began walking about the room, in great agitation, with¬ out once looking up, or trufting himfelf to fpeak to her again. Ciaventine paufed a moment at the door to obferve him. Her heart almoft leproached her for the fuilcrings fhe had inflicted ; ilie fighed, and ftill im'olunta- rily lingered, till hearing a noife above, file foftly whifpered a parting benediction, and haftened away. She
She had not been gone three minutes, when, accompanied by Mrs. Harrington, who had been up ftairs on purpofe to call her, Lady Delmington entered the room. Sir Edgar ftarted at their fight, and would have ruflied pait them without fpeaking, but his mother gently, yet half- icpiodchfully calling him back, faid— u Ldgar, why fhould you avoid me ? If )ou have done no wrong, you can fear no rcmonftrances; and if you havc^ you are too candid not to hear them with pa¬ tience !" Soothed, and calmed, by the mildnefs €>f this addrefii, Sir Edgar refpeetfully approached her, took her hand, and pi effing it to hiù lips, faid—» 46 Ah ! dear Madam, fpare me to¬ night! my heart lias aheady been touured bey«md endurance! I am id, I am ex- tiL.nJ; di ftu ι bed. buffar me then to hvnv you m>w, and in the niornin·»· I will att 'nd you t v tarK as uni pleaíe." * ¿ Lp ni that (ondítií)u, my íon," an¬ fwered Lady Delii'fagron, u I willingly refaaie uu. Lo, my dear boy, and may hentú reftoie you ю happincls and lianquilluv. * ^ 3 Su
So faying, flic put inlojiis handa light ; remarked with grief the emotion füll de* pi β ed in his countenance, and after ac¬ companying him to his own door, tool; leave of Mrs, Harrington and went back to her room.
C H A P, VIL BEFORE fix o'clock the next morning, Mrh. Man ington rang for her woman, and Ι- ι л L c r to imnmon Harriet and Sophia lo in i bed-íidc. Tile inftant this meflage was delivered, Sophia, cxLemdy provoked at being thin diíiurhtd, exdaimed, fc · Has your uui- lo L no confcience, Mrs. Sutton? Dola ìh( i'Villy ln heve, that after going to bed at eaft tvo o'clock we can rife agai îi at ίϊ\ İ ľiu\ tell her it ib impofïible to think <Á ıi; clofe the cui min and leave the ι oor;. i ! ел turning round again, fhs de« daivd fee would fend no other anfwer. Applying
Appl\ ing next to Hai riet-— " Wcl3 ľsí»Í^" faid the maid, u \\ill you attend my rmfiiehs'* Mic told me fhe had fame- thing \ vi) particular to ¡лу to you, and unlcfs ycni go to her, ihe will moil likely come to \ ou."— " \'/v > c\.r an) thing fo tormenting! ,J cried Harriet, lubbing her сусь— - vi Vv hai Can ¡he w ant with us? Sophy, do get up, and ftep to hera moment; \ou can come back and Ly doss n again afterwards, yon- know/' 4W Wiv much obwed to >όιι !" an- fwcreci Ь.фЬ' м fe * the pro]>oíal L· particu- lariy friendly ! Av, ao>>d Mı г» Sulto. ц pray go away and dont diítraòt us any longer." ίς So then./' cried Mrs. Simon, ίζ neİtlıcı of you \\\\ nie i 3 " ži Yes, yes !" anfwered Harriet, ptcvifiilv, " ƒ will.-—Go, and tell hi» ! i, diei\k/ie; and for heaven lake, don't kî ! ».r coire to ud ' '* Xn," W) id Sophia, ·* í L g jou won't; far bad habits aie not fa foon 'jot ud oí/' > In a \uv fav, minutes. Hai net, m h^r night-tap and da ifin g gowiij wa^ at Mis, Harrington s bed fide. N 4 Railing
Railing herfclf up the moment ilie faw her, ^ Fine doings, child," cried flie, " in the houfe laft night ! Γ ray iid you hear no noife about three o'clock V' " I\0; Madam/' anfwered Harriet, much furprifed at this beginning, 6i what i as the matter r'" Mrs. Harrington then entered into an exaggerated detail of all that had paifed; fpoke of Ciarentine in terms of oppro¬ brium the moil illiberal; coarfely and ш feelingly accufed Lady Delmington oi iving the indírečl caufe of her ion's ruin, and ended by psotefting ihe would never ceafe urging her, till Ciarentine was finally baniíhcd the houfe. Harriet, amazed at this recital» was, for fome minutes after the loquacious ipcaker paufed, incapable of uttering a word. At length hov. ever, feeling fome concern far her brother, ihe laid—- £i And what became of poor Edgar when lie faw you ť !> ¿t What became of him ? Why, he be¬ haved with a degree of infolence, I never ihali forgive; openly efpoufed the caufe oí the wretch who has mifguided him i and iet my rcmonitrances completely at defiance.
defiance. Your mother, however, has given mc grear hopes, ihe will no more permit her henceforward to rcfide here; {he leaves the houie in two hours, de¬ cidedly, I flatter myfelf, for life. Go not near her, before ihe fets off; and give the fame caution to Sophia." Harriet, without making any com¬ ment upon what fhe had heard, was then leaving the room; butat the door Mrs· Harrington called her back. €έ Stop, child«, ftop!" cried fhe, 4C you have been told of the projected marriage between your worthlefs brother and Lady Julia Leyburne? í do not defpair yet of feeing it accompliíhcd : but for that pur¬ pofe ihe muft be kept in profaund igno¬ rance of all that has paft. That wretched girl cannot infatuate him for ever! If we can but remove her entirely from his fight, place her totally beyond his reach, î have not the leaft doubt of bringing him to his fen lbs. Go then, and he care¬ ful you fay nothing before lady Julia that can lead to a difcovery !" Harriet promifed obedience, and was at length fuíTered to depart," N 5 When
\\ r hcn flic got back to her own roora f flic found Sophia afleep. Her eagernefs- to impart the wonders fhe had heard al¬ lowed her not, however, to let her reft undiilurbcd; the inftant flic reached the bed- lide, throwing the curtains wide open*. fhv exclaimed- fc1, Oy So]>h\ *'y huh ík »7 s «о tidl you I " News!" faid Sophia, yawning, u ís the dear old Harrington going ?*' <* Хо, no—but Edgar—you'll nevet believe what ï have to fay about him !" &i lías he fold his coat ť'* cried Sophia — u pawned his ihirt?'' έέ Non fenfe ! what an ahfurd queftion!" fe5 Not fo abfurd, perhaps, as you may imagine ! but tell me, what to he done ? J> " Why laft night," faid Harriet, fitting down upon the bed, and affuming all the fignificant importance of an old villagc- goifip, " wiicn every body elfc in the houie was aíleep, he and Ciarentine were vv* owred togethei in the parlour." 4e What r ,J interrupted Sophia, eagerly ilutia'j» up, " What did you fayľ' - Ihdt m the middle of the night," i vrai ned Пап iot, « Mrs. Harrington fur¬ prifed
prifad Edgar at Claremine/s faet! that in conféquence of this, Ciarentine is no more to be permitted to return here, nor even befaie fhe goes, to be icon or fpoken to by any bod) ľ* " What abominable faandal have you been picking up ľ' cried Sophia, glowiuv, with indii.Mb'lion - ςΐ for iliamt , ϊ Loiu ι I iow can you lepeal, with an app^ íívuv ν offa muc') glee, fuch pafay tinle í,u;!c .' i doíi'c believe a iìnglc wortl oi il·.e ,viìoie fior) - ; and notwilhítanding Miv. 1Ь : гпи<^ ton, fhall get up and go to poor Ciaiui- tine diletti)'. í¿ You had belter not," hud Паше; drily, *· íhe ittklly forbade iy and or¬ dered me to come and tell you in.*' α Till mama forbids iu" iaid Sopma. beginning in haile to rife, 4i I think my¬ felf at libcity to do a- 1 jileaiv. ifa .7 can ίο eafily renounce a mi« ν ı-'iaiîon. л friend, У canno!, nav, I ; ,;..ov. ' 4i So thv η,*' i,ud Hai ικ u 4ţ v «m к-. ч h«. ., e this is entiivìv шу iiivt utuni ' 1 ' u \'o, 1 donh, Chue.ìì«ne v,,d · «h; ц may h tve İken hen together; mv hi tu iniddfa of the night, diílui4d \· e l'y· lhundcr 5 lua y met m the p;u lotti ; b'n 1
never perfuadé myfelf it was any thing except chance that occafioned it. She is a modelt, an excellent girl; and would no more confent to a private affignation with him, at fuch improper hours, than ihe would fly !" During this little dialogue, having dref» fed hei i< Ι! ν ¡ıh ifa ηη^,ί >. щ dfthu,, frm was moving towaids d¡e. door, when ii was fuddcnly opened, and Lady Del¬ mington, pale and breathlefs } appeared--» * 6 My dear girls/' cried fhe, throwing herfelf into a chair, " your brother—my unhappy Edgar, is ill—very ill !" The two girls ftarted, and flew to her. u Dear Madam/' cried Sophia, u have you fent for 2.ny body ? Oh, let me go to him!" âs No, no, my love ľ* exclaimed her mother, alarmed at this propofai, ' f his diforder may be infectious! go not near his room till the phyfician has feen him ; î have fant far one from Lyfton/* " How did you know he was ill, Ma¬ dam ? faid Harriet, " have you been to him ?" éc Yes, I fent my woman up, a quarter of ao hour ago } to defire hc would let me fpeak
me word down he was unable to rife, and to ail appearance was extremely ill. I inftantly haftened to him, and found him in a binning fever, motionlefs, and quite infenfible ! The houfekecper is fitting by him during my abfence, and í am now impatiently expecting the arrival of the phyfician." 66 Alas! dear Madam," cried Sophia in a voice of fupplication, " andare we, in addition to our concern on Edgar's ac¬ count, to be fo utterly forbidden the fight of Ciarentine before flie goes ? is it true ihe has fo deeply offended you ?" ét My Sophia," anfwered Lady Del¬ mington, u flic has lefs offended than grieved mc. î know not how io aci with regard to her, how to difpofe of, how to behave to her. She has involved us all in the cruelleft perplexity; made your brotlier miícrablc ; and fullied her own charaQer. Yet, ftill 1 cannot forget ihe was your father's niece ; cannot forget her youth, her inexperience; nor the blame 1 myfelf deferve, for having ex- pofed her to a trial íhe was İo unequal to. Where I can place her« heaven onlv know* !
knows! If you very much wifh it, how-» ever, you may fee, and take leave of her* though ï cannot/* Sophia, in token of gratitude for this permiffion, fiin.tly kiifed her mother's hand, and ran out of the room. On en' ering that of Ciarentine, ihe was fuprifed to find it already deferted, and with much vexation was turning back, when, as fhe paffed the drefhng table, a fealcd note, direcled to her, caught hei eye. She took it up, and breaking it open, found in it thefe words: MISS SOPHIA DELMINGTCN. &i Before my deareft Sophia reads this note, í fliall have left the houfe. î can¬ not encounter difgrace, nor am ï fnílL ciently hardened to defy contempt. Of all î leave behind mc, you alone do ï dai с addı с ft, for you ali »nc will credit mc perhaps when í folemniy plead, n)t gud'y ! Appearances may bc againft me: but the heart of ıny Sophia, 1 am per¬ fuaded, never will» Think of me, there¬ fore, as kindly as you can, and write to me if you arc allowed, Adieu, Heaven blefs you!*' nri,:. ¿ lii.»
This u nafte Red note, in which no at¬ tempt was made to excite compaftion, no weak lamentations poured forth, and no bittcrnefs of complaint indulged, gave Sophia the utmoft pleafure ; and would have been alone fufficient, bad ihe not already in her own mind exculpated her friend, to have convinced her that the perfon who could write ib temperately at fuch a moment, muft be fupported by an internal confeioufnefs of rectitude, and a firm perfuafion of her own innocence. Meeting Emma upon the ftairs, flie aiked her how long Ciarentine had been gone ? 64 Not a quaiter of an hour," anfwercd the child; " Madame d'Arzele came for her fooner than ihe expected : but as ihe never had her cloatbs oif the whole night, and only lay down a little while on the outfide oí the bed, flie was ready in a moment." Then lowering her voice with an air of myfter), ihe added, 44 i don't know what waj the matter, but flie uicd Ldly as ihe was going awav, •intl when 1 wiihed ha good by. held me
în her arms, and kiiïcd me, without bein^ able to fpeak a lingle word." Sophia, extrcînely affecìed by this ac- count, fcarcely had power to refrain from tears herfclf. The characier of Ciaren¬ tine, " jealous in honour," and full of fe η fi bil i ty as it was, lhe knew too well, uot to feel deeply for the diftrefs of heart ihe muil endure, when quitting the houfe under imputations fo difgraccful, unfup- ported by the Toothing expectation of ever being entirely abfolvcd, and even uncer¬ tain whether her return to it would 'ever be permitted. Yet, notwith(landing the conviction her note brought to the mind of Sophia, fhe ventured not to communicate it to her mother 5 fince, to one who believed her guilty, it might appear too much to bor¬ der upon a f pi ri t of independence and pride, moderate as it was; and lìnee no¬ thing, fire was certain, but the extreme ft humility and the deepeft contrition could now gain her any indulgence. For this reafon, therefore, fhe carefully concealed its contents, and deferred anfwering it till evening, when being rclcafed by Harriet from her attendance upon her brother, fhe
Ilie fhut herfelf up in her own room, and 'wrote as follows ; MISS DEÎAIfNcnON, <c You judge rightly, deareft Ciaren¬ tine, when you fay, my hevt can never be againft yon! What are appearances> com¬ pared to a life blumclefs as yours has been for 17 years? Such a life ought alone to eftabliih confidence, and preclude fuf¬ picion. As far mc, you will f hope eafily credit me, when 1 tell you, I believed you innocent from the moment I heard the charge brought againft you; and were the whole world to raife its voice in your aceufation, till its authority w T as ren¬ dered unqueftionable by pofitive proof I never ftiould put any faith in its report. «Why ftiould an unblemiihcd reputation, a fair and fpotlefs character be coveted, ii) upon trial, neither will avail to ihicld us from injuftice ? 'i bofe who have chear- fully practifed all the dudes of their fta¬ tion, who far years bave poife fled, and merited the approbation and с fleem ofall who knew them, deferve not furely, that on the firft equivocal action of their hves, furprife ftiould be converted into doubt— and doubt into determined condemnation! < 6 But
u But let me not dwell longer upon íliis ungrateful fubjeft. We underftand e ich other too well for it to be neccftary, 1 fhould lofe time in telling you how ut¬ ile í fufpcČt you; or you ftiould fpend ) ouïs in ufelefs vindication; I aik for none«-! require none: but İ fliould bc bjoicod above meafure, were you to wii.e to me fuch an account, plain 9 fim« pie, and undifguifed, of ihi.s ft range bu- iiiiLÍs, as I could fafcly ihew my mother. You know her,my Ciarentine; you know hov open her liberai mind is to convic¬ tion; how ready her «renerous heart is to i^rgct and pardon. That ihe certainly i\ at prefent, uncommonly incenfed, í will not pretend to conceal from you. Had the circumftances of the cafe been even lefs fufpicious than they were, the pains that hrv been« and hourly are taken § to préjudice her againft you, could hardly haw: hiľh'd in thur eífeťt; ünce, as you will btlkvc, no malicious aggravations are fpatcd, no unfavourable interpreta¬ tions omitted, that can conduce towards cikriually ercidıCutiuiî you from her heart. Yet feat not, my own Ciarentine —that heait ftill whifpers many kind thin «15
things to her in your behalf; and truth and innocence ш//?, in the end, prevail ï <c You may wonder perhaps, and na¬ turally, that for the derail I foîicit, î ap¬ ply not to Edgar himfelf. Blame him noi however, too raihly; nor, for one mo¬ ment, believe fo ill of him, as to imagine, he would have neglected doing you all the juftice, and making you all the repa¬ ration in his power, had he been in a fitu¬ ation to have undertaken the explanation î afle— -Alas! my dear Ciarentine--— ï know not even if, írom bim 3 it can ever be ob¬ tained î Judge of my mother's—judge of our affli&ion ! By turns fpcechleis or de¬ lirious, hc now lies in a ragi n q fever, un¬ confeious of our diftrefs, and infcnfible of his own danger. The phyfician who vilited him this morning, on hearing of the patty he was engaged in y cft e t day, attributed his illncik to what he termed, tii e:yfs oj' conv.i y'tiy^ and gave us to underftand, it was chk ih owing to his having firft heated his blood b) di Inking more than he was accuftomed to, and then bv haul riding. Perhap', thefe two cauk.s might toi.ui- bute, m fame degree, to pioJuce the elled wc lb much huncut; bm that they wei v
were the fele caufes, it is impoffible-, knowing the extreme agitation he after¬ wards underwent, to believe. A mode» rate degree of attachment, a very cool head, and a more unfeeling heart would, I fufpeel, notwithftanding the excedes he is fuppofed to have run into, have better preferved him from the fufferings he now endures, than the temperance 1 every moment hear fo warmly extolled ; fince hs limits were fo (lightly infringed, that f, who faw and fpoke to him, before I left the parlour, fcarcely perceived that he \¥as at all difardered. €f As for my mother, I am convinced that in her heart, ¡he puts no more faith in this opinion than / do, though ihe en¬ deavours, and finds a fpecies of confo¬ lation in attempting it, to perfuadé us fhe does. 1 own myfelf, it is much pleafanter io believe his illnefs ari fes from circum* fiances merely accidental, fuch as will give way to proper attendance, and medical ikill, than to acknowledge its germ lies in bis heart, and its cure in her power ! " Lady Julia means to write to you to-morrow; in your anfwer, my Claren» tiney
line, forbear, I befecch you, to give her the ilighteft hint concerning any thing that has paffed. ît is thought right here to keep her in profound ignorance upon the f uh jecl; our Supérieure ha.s fa decreed it, and ieems to think, if the projected alliance can but be brought to bear, it is of very little conféquence upon what terms ~—wilh how much anguifh to one party, or with what profpects to the other.-«« Very humane policy, it muft be afa lowed I и \y c heard from my brother Fiede- rick to-day. He is no longer in the fame fhip with Mr. Somerfet, which he ieems to lament extremely. 1 hey parted foon after Somerfet was made poft-captain, and Frederick, who is now ftationed in the Mediterranean, knows not exactly where his friend has been os dered, but believes he is iu the Welt indies. i; Adieu, deareft Ciarentine. My heart is very fad, and my letter not very lon- falatory ; but in fach a houfe« and under fuch iinpreiìions it would be difficult to write wdth higher fpirits. 6i A thoufand loves to Madame d'Ar¬ sele, and compliments to the Chevaüer. W lie n
When does hc return? Send your an¬ fwer by him, and beg he will feize the firft opportunity of delivering it to me pri¬ vatei}'. After that, I will let you know whether you may fafcly write to me in the ufual way, by poft. žé Once more, my Ciarentine, adieu. . δέ S. IV s The three firft days that fucceeded the writing this letter, were marked by no material change i in Sir Ed^ar, and no circumftances of moment in the family. On t lie morning of the fourth, however, the Chcvalier de Valcour, in his way from Sidmouth to Welwyn Park, ftopped for a few minutes at Delmington, and found means, beiore he left the houfe, of delivering the following letter to Sophia* ir-.iV.icnlh, July 13. MISS S. DMjNÍING'ION'. u The charge of fecrecy with which you conclude your affectionate letter, my ever-kind Sophia, alarms mc fo much on vour account, thai ï now anfwer it with the moft fearful miihuft and appre¬ henfion,
lıenfion» You own it not; yet, ï can have no doubt you were prohibited from holding any correspondence with me,— Oh why, my deareft girl! for one who is deemed undeferving fuch an indulgence, why incur fuch a riik? Had not the ap¬ prehenfion of appearing to you ungrate¬ ful, or negligent urged me, even in op* pofition to my own judgment, too ftrongly to be refuted, believe me, I never fliould have found courage, after fuch a vaudon, to have addreiied you, by any conveyance whatever« Pray Heaven I may not be involving you in any portion of my own difgrace, by ven¬ turing upon fo ha?ardou.i an experi¬ ment! it Aould quite break my le ut, were that to be the cafe! Write to me no more, therefore, I befecch you.*— Tempt me not again to engage \ ou in fach danger, to have forborne anfwer* ing lo friendly a letter as your lafl would have been imp-/fible; and yd 1 tiemble ïo think what,you ¡nay infla by mv duiw^ 4i I fie, my Sophia, noi \\ ith (landing the generous anxiety wiih which \ ou en¬ deavour to chear ше viih better hopv;, 1 lee
î fee plainly, I am now become an utter exile from your houfe f I have loft the only tie that could ever bind me to your mother's heart, her good opinion ; and I fear, irrecoverably loft it; at leafi% if ï m u ft depend for its reftoration on my own juftification; fince, at lucha mo» ment as this, while your unhappy brother lies in the dreadful fiate you defcribe to me, no felli fli confidcratións upon earth, no profpect of perfonal advantage, how¬ ever great, could induce mc to enter the lifts as his accufer. Let my vindication, therefore, reft where it is, for the prefent ; and fuffer me at leaft to delay entering upon the fubjcct, till I bear better tidings of Sir Edgar, and can do it with lefs pain to his mother's feelings« At this time there would be a hardened infenfibility, a want of decency, in beginning fuch an explanation, I fhudder hut to think of; nor could I do it, even to regain wdiat I moil prize in the world, Lady Dclming- toďs cfteem! It would feem to mc, al¬ moft like raking up'the \хИ\сь of the dead. ït would be unpardonable, it would be cruel ! ι €ζ Madame
u Madame d'Arzele, whofe tendernefs and whofe near affinity give her a fart of tdaim to the moil unlimited confidence, has wrung from me, reluctant as 1 was to make fach a difclofure, even to her, every circumftance of this heart-breaking -affair. She law me depreifed, and wretched, beyond all power of conceal« merit ; and fa deeply partook in, fa foothingly compaftionated my affliction, that I found a fpecies of confolation in pouring out all my forrows into her af¬ fectionate bofam. She bas fortified and calmed me; given mc courage, I think, to bear with réfignation whatever fen« 'tence is to be pronounced againft me; and taught me, I hope, with thankful nefs far the paft, to fu b mit unrepiningly to tlie future. u 1 have thought much, as you will believe, of my own fituation, and thought of it with the moft ferions anxiety. It would be madneís, í fear, let my future defence have what effect it may* to expect that my refidence in your family fliould, during the prefent fiate of affairs, be again allowvd. My requeft therefore is 5 that whenever the decree of bamihment, I Vol. i. О look
look forward to with fuch dread, is pro¬ nounced, I may be permitted to go to Mr. 1 enham's, whom î have every rea-» fon to hope wili 9 at leaft for a time, ad¬ mit me* If Lady Delmington, however, lias other views for me, flie mav reft aik lured of my humbleft concurrence: but it ieems far more probable, ihe will re¬ joice, amidft fo many other cares, to bc exempted from any additional one, and that confequently, I may reiy upon her giving a ready fa u Шоп to mv petition. 4,4 Tins morning, I received a kind, but melancholy letter from Lady Julia, Whilil I pcrufed it, how did I blefs heaven that I had it itili in my power to read the expreffions of attachment and confidence with which íhe honours me, with unbluihing cheeks, and a confeiouf- nefs of not having forfeited by ill-conduct the fricndíhip íhe has hitherto profeifed for me. To a guilty mind, every partial k nti nee ihat fell írom her pen would have been a flab; to me, my deareft Sophia, they were as balm, my wounded Ipint required; and the tears I ihed over the whi îe letter, were literally tears of luxurv and enjoyment. Si I am
cí 1 am rejoiced to find you have heard from Frederick. At fach a period as this, how welcome to his mother's heart muft have been the tidings of his health and lafety, míne hounded with pleafure, for her fake, at the news. tv Would to heaven, I too could hear from Mr. Somerfet ! Might he not have written to me, dearSophia, before he em¬ barked upon fo diftant an expedition? Will he alfo, do you think, caft me off— forget all his paft regard, and concern himfelf about me no more ? Alas 1 this is not the time hc ihould have chofen for fuch a defcrtion ! when every word of kindnefs is fo precious, I can lefs bear than ever to lofe the confolation his rc- membrance would have afforded me. Often, often have I thought of him, fince I left your houfe. How are all his pre¬ dictions verified. Oh ! could hc but know what an unerring prophet he has proved, with what regret, unlefs hc has changed indeed, would he reflect upon the additional farrow his neglect muft oc¬ cafion me ! " But my deareft Sophia, î ou glu to apologize far theie irrational murmurs- О 2 Unhappinels,
linbappinefs, í believe, makes cgotifts of us ail ι and as íhe friend of the unhappy^. you muft learn to bear with their iniir- imties-, I will give way to fuch gloomy ictlcciions, however, no ionger, buthaftca to а lefs unplcafdiu fubjecL ^ Our fweet little Eugenie begins al- bvtdy 9 1 think, to find benefit from the change of air. She has- bathed twice imce our arrival, and bore it extremely wtil. Jier dear mother views her im- pbA'cd looks, with a degree of tranfpont I van give jou no idea of; and but foie íhe dejection I involuntarily caft over k f ours would be the moll chearful little fo» ciety in the world* u The С te valier has promifed to give us fréquent accounts of Sir Edgar, 1 im¬ plored he wouId r kft røy mukty ref« peütng him, overpowering my own fcru- pics, fliould induce me to write again to you for intelligence, u î venture nal f 'm the clandeßjne mannet 1 now addrefs you, to recom¬ mend myfelf tø your honoured mother, nor even to include my good wifhes to our fifters ι my prayers are all 1 dare offer yp s cither far them^ orfor bu Edgar ι àuã
and that tbey may bc accepted is the moft fervent wiíh of my heart. éi And now, my bell Sophia, fa re wel ; probably, <( a long fare wel." Love me; think of me fometimcfs, however diftant ; and bc ail'ured of the tendereit, and mod grateful aife Шоп, of 44 Your own, * ; Clare ν τ ϊ n ľ D t l m r n g r ox," Deeply aíIVded by the contents of a letter, in many places, fo generous, in all fa iimpleand lo touching, ; ophia could not refill the lirons impuHc fhe felt, the fn M moment Sir Edgar's amended ilate ot health allov cd her to enter upon the fub- jeft, to communicate it to her mother. She was pei fuaded that the pallate in par¬ ticular, which accounted for Clarentine's filence with regard to her own vindica¬ tion, could not fail making the moil ί\·η~ fible impreftion upon Wich a mind as í ady Delmington^; and might conduce more towaids rcinftating her in her heaif, dim the ftrongeft iiifi'vetations, or even the deareft proofs of innocences unfcafanably brought forwaic^ O j In
în this opinion íhe found herfelf fully juftificd by the event. Lady Delming- ion, overcome by the delicacy, the gentlenefsof fpirit that breathed through¬ out the whole letter, wept over it with mingled fenfatîons of tendernefs and ad« miration ; and when ilie came to ¿ts con« clufion, warmly exclaimed— βί Amiable, and excellent girl! oh, where (hall I find courage, after this, to go through the painful taik 1 am enjoined, to announce to her the décifion that ha» been pall ?" a V\ hat décifion, deareft Madam ľ 9 fearfully enquired Sophia; &( ís it pofti» ble, have you really confentcd ?" £ê Afk me no queftions, Sophia," in¬ terrupted Lady Delmington, " î canno! revoke the relučlant promifes ï have given§ nor can í bear to dwell longer upon the fubjeft. I^eave me then for the prefent, 1 filali write to your poor friend this evenings and ihew you my letter before it goes. Let thai anfwer all your obj celions/' Sophia retired with a heavy and fore¬ boding heart; and early the following morning was fummoned to her mother's dre fling-
drefting-room, to hear the dreaded fen¬ tence fhe had been taught to expect MISS DELMINGTON. Delmmgtoiì-Houfc; July 6th, u The fight of my hand-writing will, 1 doubt not, equally aito ni fh and alarm you : but divert yourfelf of ail appré¬ henfions, Ciarentine ; it is as little my purpofe to fhock you by ufelefs recrimi** nations, as to mifiead you by delufive promifes! ï write with a determination of fpeaking openly and frankly 10 you ; and of putting an end at once to a ilate of uncertainty, 1 know fo well how to pity* u Now, therefore, let me own, my ftill· dear Ciarentine, that the unfortunate paflion of my fan, however the violence with which it at lait burft forth may have diftreífed, has not, for one moment, fur¬ prifed me. î have long entertained a vague fufpicion of this nature, winch being ftrcngthened by the infinuations of otheis, almoft a rofa at one time to po¬ fitive conviclion. Then, you will i\ıy ş would have been the proper iea fon to have deviled fame eifetlual check to its fui ther
further progrefs; +rue : but we are nor always aware of the danger of procrafli- naiion, and your cxtieme youth at that period; the féparation thai ihortly after ■I j look place between you and Fdgai ; othei Сагсь; and above all, the difficulty of finding a more eligible abode far you, diverted me from my defign, and led me to filence, as groundlefs, every intruiive apprehenfion. u Edgar's conduit ever after, whether dictat«, d by acquired caution, or refuking iioni natural referve, was fa aíloniíhingly guarded; \иъ b*, haviour to you betrayed io little of the ïovei , I may almoft add, i)f the 'rieud. that till this extraordinary dif» cove ι)- hud his hcaï't open before ws^ 1 quvdhon if a tingle individual of my fa- mil·,, Mis. Harrington and myfelf alone ew. med* had ever conceived the ili übte it uiva of his attachment. ,ς lhe caie ь now changed; and hc л\1ю, when a mother's watchful eye fear» f ni î -ν f;bi4r\ed him, had íuíhcient com¬ ma* vi í/ver Lis pa ilions, to conceal and icflrain tnem, in one ungual dt d moment, v, mn aii chiti nd was over, and all vigi- ialine at an end s turned traitor to hun- icH*
felf, and wantonly betrayed his ozvn^ and, ah Ciarentine! i greatly icar, jø/// fecret alio! 44 Put of this 1 have no right, no wiih to be informed. As circumftances now (land, fach a confa ffion would only add to my concern far you, without enabling me to flatter you with the mo it diftant hope. í might lament over you : but as I cannot fai ve you, leave rne, at leaft, the confutation ofa d^vbt upon this fub]* ct* ^ Favoured, and befovod u¡> \ ou have ever been by Lady Julia Ley burne, I cannot fuppofe flie wholly concealed from you the treaty that wás in agitation be¬ tween her father and myfelf, I may therefore venture to fpeak to you of it $ without difguife. 40 Independant of the nobie income Lady Julia will bring my fan, an income which, confidcring the narrow limits of his own, and the large deductions from it that muft be made in order to pay hb lifters 1 fortunes, becomes almoft indifpen* fable to the eafe and comfort of his re¬ maining life. She is the woman whom, amidit thou&ndS) I would have fdeüed^
as the one moft likely to render him happy, 46 Allowing for the natural timidity of her temper, the domeflic education ihe has îeceived, and the life of unvaiying retirement flic has led, ï obferve in her the feeds of eveiy good quality that can be defired. The hclplefs indolence that formerly marked her difpofition gives place to greater energy every day. She is fincere, generous, and benevolent; and by the placid meeknefs that charattcrifes her, feem s to me, of all others, the wife heft fuited to one, who already announ¬ ces a temper fo impetuous and ardentas Edgar. u Thus far then, ï am juftificd in wiih¬ ing for this match. ît en fures affluence and independence to himfelf; the cer¬ tainty of being able to provide hand- fomcly for his lifters; the profpect of becoming heir to Mrs. Harrington; and the faireft hopes, if reafoned gently into compliance, of his enjoying, ever after^ a flate of domeftic peace and fercnity. " Now, fuffer me to reverie the pic¬ ture; fuffer me to trace a faint iketch of the evils that, in my opinion, \sould fol¬ low
low his union with you; nor imagine, dear Ciarentine, that my purpofe is to wound or infult you by the comparifon. Far be fuch an intention from my heart. No, my love ; to warn and caution you is all ï have in view. My language would be the fame to either of my own daughters, in the fame circumftances. t£ To fpeak firft, therefore, of the dif- fimilarity of your tempers; Edgarit irri¬ table, though foon iubdued; often cap» tiotb, violent, and unrcafonable, would make the tormqntofyour life; fince clear- fighted, and penetrating as you are, his fiait s of irrational palfion could never efcape you nor confequently, ever fail either grieving, or alarming you, Not fo Lady Julia. Abfent in converfation; fcldom animated enough to be fenfihle of what is paffing around her, his caufelefs refont meiu, unlefs dii ceded againft her¬ felf, would fcarcely awaken her attention, and never reach her heait. injuftice, lite has not difcrimiuation fufficient to diftin- guifh, nor expostulation, courage enough to hazard ; by hci, theiefoic, lie would efcape uncondemnned ; ami by him, fhe would live undiltmbed. His kindnefs to 'i hcifelf
herfclf would be all íhe would require ι and indifferent to his general conduci, nothing would wound, becaufe nothing would ftrike her except his neglect u Would this Ciarentine-—aik your own heart—would this be your cafe Ρ é * Tremblingly alive all o'er," would not you feel аь fc ufi bly for others as for your- felf? Could you, an unconcerned witnefs of this iiafcibility, endure to fit tamely by, without attempting, either by reafon or fupplication, to moderate and appeafe him? No, you could not; and what would be the conféquence Ρ By feeking to rcítrain, you would inflame him ; and by uttering.« or even looking difapproba» tion, however acÏcrvea^ you would bring down upon your own head the wrath originally aimed at others. From an ob- jeÜ paffîonately beloved, reproof, though only implied by a geíiure 5 ora glance, is hauler to be borne, and fink« deeper into the heart, than from any other quarter; and Edgar, naturally enclincd to jealoufy, aüxíous for your cfteem, and but too ready to take alarm at the fligbteft ap¬ pearance of its fallut would fuffer him¬ felf, and impofe upon you, every torment that
ihat apprehended indifference, or con¬ tempt, could inflt8. 64 I have been thus explicit, my deareft girl, with regard to my doubts concern¬ ing the probable event of a marriage which, to Edgar at leaft, now appears fa defirable, in the hope of proving to you, that all my objctlions to it are not the rcful t of ambitious and intcrefted con- federations. Heaven preferve me from ever wiihing to aggrandize or enrich my family at the expence of his or your lafting mifery! He ihali be al¬ lowed time for mature deliberation, be fore ï again urge, or even converfe with him upon the fubjeft; and the only thing I .aik of him or of you is, that from this time forward to the period of his coming of age, you will forbear holding any corre- fpondence with, and avoid every oppor¬ tunity of meeting each other. Mean¬ while, as it would appear to me diiho- nourable in the exticmc to deceive Lord Wclwyn in an affair of fo much confé¬ quence to himfelf, as well as his daugh¬ ter, í purpofe laying frankly beiore him the exact ftatc of the cafe; leaving it to him to decide whether he choofes ftill to vol. ι, P adhere
adhere to his engagement, and wait die moment of my fan's final décifion before he enters into any other, or whether he prefers, at once, breaking off the match. u My firm opinion is, that his par¬ tiality in Edgar's favour is fo great, that nothing but abfolute neceffity will induce him to withdraw his word. ï may be røiftaken ; уец at all events Ciarentine, we muit whilft this negotiation is depend- ing-— we mull be feparated. Lady Julia nay never be my daughter : but itilip alas! fuch is the rigorous duty my iitu¬ ation and røy judgment enjoin me, that I dare not give an appearance of fuch en¬ couragement to Edgar's love 3 as hc might naturally imply from your being conti- mied under the fame roof with him, after his attachment to you has been made public, H My heart bleeds for you, my gentle Ciarentine, whilil í compel myfelf to perform this unwelcome part. The day perhaps may come, however, when even you will acknowledge I have a8ed right; and when, having preferved Edgar from the commiffion of an a£t of injuilice to¬ wards his fiilcrs) and you from confé¬ quent
quent felf-reproachj 1 may be thought to merit bleifings, where now I feem only to deferve condemnation. cc Your requeft of being allowed to repair to Mr, Lenham 's meets with my fuileft approbation. Write to him, my love, to enquire whether he can admit you, and to fettle with him the tenib of your board; whatever thofe terms mav be, I fliall unhefitatingly comply with them, and beg you will tranfmit to me his an¬ fwer the moment it arrives. " As I ihali endeavour to the utmoft of my power to conceal from my ion the place of your future abode, you would effentialiy oblige me by deferring to communicate it to Lady Julia, till I can be affured he will make no attempt to fid« low you. By requeuing her letters may be direaed to you, under coyer to any third perfon you may choofe to appoint for that purpofe, after y, {lv arrival in town, this may be eafily eifacfad, and may perhaps uve me from much perplexity and diftrefs. To Sophia, as 1 ¿лп ίο entirely depend upon her, you have my readieft confent to write as often as )ΟΪ1 wifli; yet—oh! forgive thefe too ne- 1 ccíLiry
ceiìàry precautions—yet, even to her, left accident fliould betray what I fo anxi¬ oufly defire to keep fecret, I would re~ commend to you always to fend your letters inclofed to Madame d'Arzele. éé ît is time now, my deareft Ciaren¬ tine, I ftiould come to the conclufion of this long, and í fear you will think un» friendly explanation, İ grieve to be ob¬ liged, for one inftant, to give paie to your generous heart; nor сап^уэо feel deeper regret on receiving, than î do in announcing, this fentence of temporary bani fli ment. Let one circumftance, how¬ ever, be your confolation; I acquit you, as well from my knowledge of your paft rectitude, as from the teftimony of Edgar himfelf, and the fentiments contained 'm your letter to Sophia, oí every í'pecleñ of blame, and of every fufpicion inju, rious to your character; and rejoice in being able to affure you, that you have not at this moment in the world a friend, who thinks more highly of your principles and worth, than your fincere, and ever moft truly affectionate, 4C f L Dllmìngton/*
END OF VOL, I,
